

By  this  agreement  the  Chief  of  Sohar  became  independent.  As 
the  general  engagements  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave  trade  in  the 
Persian  Gulf  were  concluded  while  the  relations  of  Sohar  to  Muscat 
were  still  undefined,  a  formal  agreement  had  not  been  concluded  with 
Syud  Hamood.  But  in  1848  he  was  invited  to  enter  into  the  general 
arrangements,  and  accordingly  a  Treaty*  (No.  LXIL)  similar  to  those 
concluded  with  the  other  maritime  states  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave 
trade,  was  concluded,  on  22nd  May  1849,  with  his  son  Syud  Saif,  who 
was  then  in  possession  of  the  government.  Syud  Saif,  who  had  usurped 
his  father's  authority,  was  soon  afterwards  put  to  death  by  him. 

The  Treaty  concluded  in  1839  between  Muscat  and  Sohar  contained 
no  Article  by  which  the  British  Government  undertook  to  guarantee  its 
conditions.  But  the  very  formal  manner  in  which  it  was  negotiated  was 
considered  to  make  it  more  than  usually  binding  on  both  parties.  Not- 
withstanding this,  Syud  Thowaynee,  who  governed  Muscat  during  his 

*  An  Act  of  Parliament,  10  and  17  Vic,  Chap.  16,  was  passed  to  carry  this  Treaty  into 
effect.     See  Appendix.  « 


208  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

PERSIAN    father's  absence  at  Zanzibar,  treacherously  seized  Syud  Hamood  at  a 

<11  '•' •        friendly  conference  ami  laid  Beige  (SO  Sohar  by  land  and   sea..      Failing   in 

No.  LI.      his  attempts  to  take  the  fort,  he  returned  to  Muscat,  carrying  his  prisoner 

X[Mcai.      with  him.     Syud  Hamood  died  from  the  rigour  of  his  confinement  on 

23rd  April  1850.     Syud  Ghes,  his  brother,  took  up  arms  to  avenge  his 

death,  and,  with  the  help  of  the  Joasmees,  took  Sliinas  and  several  other 

forts.      The  Imam,   however,  returning  from  Muscat,  gained  over  the 

Joasmees  to  his  side,  and  defeated  Syud  Ghes,  from  whom  he  took  Sohar, 

leaving  to  him  Roostak  and  Hebee,  and  assigning  him  a  monthly  stipend 

of  200  crowns. 

On  the  death  of  Syud  Saeed,  his  son  Syud  Toorkee,  who  had  been 
placed  in  the  government  of  Sohar,  made  several  unsuccessful  attempts 
to  make  himself  independent  of  his  elder  brother  Syud  Thowaynee  and 
to  create  a  rebellion  in  Oman. 


No.  LI. 

Translation  of  the  Cowlnamah,  or  written  Engagement  from  the   Imam  of 

Muscat. 


Deed  of  Agreement  from  the  State  of  the  Omanian  asylum,  under  the  approbation 
of  the  Imam,  the  Director,  Syud  Sultan,  whose  grandeur  be  eternal !  to  the  high 
and  potent  English  Company,  whose  greatness  be  perpetuated !  as  compre- 
hended in  the  following  articles  : — 


Article  1. 

From  the  intervention  of  the  Nawab  Etmandi  Adowla  Mirza 
Mehedy  Ally  Khan  Bahadoor  Hurhmut  Jung  never  shall  there  be  any 
deviation  from  this  Cowlnamah. 