

Article  8. 
If   a  subject  of   His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  should  resist 
or  evade  payment  of  his  just  debts  to  a  British  subject,  the  authorities 


220  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

TERSIAN    of   His  Highness  shall  afford  to  the  British  subject  every  aid  and  facility 
WW      in  recovering  the  amount  due,  and  in  like  manner  the  British  Consul  or 


No.  L1V.     Resident  Agent  shall  afford  every  aid  and  facility  to  subjects  of  His  High- 
NiBcat,      ness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  in  recovering  debts  justly  due  to  them  from 
a  British  subject. 

Article  9. 

No  duty  exceeding  5  per  cent,  shall  be  levied  at  the  place  of  entry 
in  the  dominions  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  on  any  goods, 
the  growth,  produce,  or  manufacture  of  the  dominions  of  Her  Britannic 
Majesty  imported  by  British  vessels,  and  this  duty  shall  be  deemed  to  be 
a  full  payment  of  all  import  and  export  and  tonnage  duties  of  license 
to  trade,  of  pilotage  and  anchorage,  and  of  any  other  charge  by  govern- 
ment whatever  upon  the  vessels  or  upon  the  goods  so  imported  or  ex- 
ported. Nor  shall  any  charge  be  made  on  that  part  of  the  cargo  which 
may  remain  on  board  unsold  ;  and  no  additional  or  higher  duty  shall  be 
levied  upon  these  goods  when  afterwards  transported  from  one  place  to 
another  in  the  dominions  of  His  Highness ;  but  the  above-mentioned 
duty  having  once  been  paid,  the  goods  may  be  sold  by  wholesale  or  retail 
without  any  further  duty.  No  charge  whatever  shall  be  made  on  British 
vessels  which  may  enter  the  ports  of  His  Highness  for  the  purpose  of 
refitting  or  for  refreshments,  or  to  enquire  about  the  state  of  the  market. 

Article  10. 

No  articles  whatever  shall  be  prohibited  from  being  imported  into  or 
exported  from  the  territories  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  but 
the  trade  between  the  dominions  of  Her  Britannic  Majesty  and  those 
of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  shall  be  perfectly  free,  subject  to 
the  above-mentioned  duty  upon  goods  imported,  and  to  no  other;  and 
His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  hereby  engages  not  to  permit  the 
establishment  of  any  monopoly  or  exclusive  privilege  of  sale  within  his 
dominions  except  in  the  articles  of  ivory  and  gum  copal  on  that  part 
of  the  east  coast  of  Africa  from  the  Port  of  Tangate  situated  in  about 
five  and  a  half  degrees  of  south  latitude  to  the  Port  of  Quila  lying  in 
about  seven  degrees  south  of  the  equator,  both  ports  inclusive ;  but  in 
all  other  ports  and  places  in  His  Highnesses  dominions  there  shall  be  no 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


221 


monopoly  whatever,  but  the  subjects  of  Her  Britannic  Majesty  shall  be 
at  liberty  to  buy  and  sell  with  perfect  freedom  from  whomsoever  and  to 
whomsoever  they  chose,  subject  to  no  other  duty  by  government  than 
that  before  mentioned. 