

Bated  lOtk  Showal  1255  a.   h.,  corresponding  to  the  17 1 A  Bccemler 
a.  d.  1839. 


Seal  of 

Syud  Bin 

Sultan. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUD8, 


227 


No.  LVI. 

Agreement  between  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  . 
Britain  and  Ireland   and   His    Highness   Syud   Saeed  bin  Sultan,   "tho 
Sultan  of  Muscat,"  for  the   termination   of   the  export   of  slaves   from   the 
African  Dominions  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat. 

Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland  being  earnestly  desirous  that  the  export  of  slaves  from  the 
African  dominions  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  should  cease, 
and  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  in  deference  to  the  wishes  of 
Her  Majesty  and  of  the  British  nation,  and  in  furtherance  of  the  dictates 
of  humanity  which  have  heretofore  induced  him  to  enter  into  engage- 
ment with  Great  Britain  to  restrict  the  export  of  slaves  from  his  domi- 
nions, being  willing  to  put  an  end  to  that  trade,  and  Her  Majesty  the 
Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  and  His 
Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  having  resolved  to  record  with  due  form 
and  solemnity  this  further  restriction  of  the  export  of  slaves,  and  Her 
Majesty  having  given  due  authority  to  Captain  Hamerton,  Her  Repre- 
sentative at  the  Court  of  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  to  conclude  an  agree- 
ment with  His  Highness,  accordingly  His  Highness  Saeed  Syud  bin 
Sultan,  for  himself,  his  heirs  and  successors,  and  Captain  Hamerton,  on 
behalf  of  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  her  heirs  and  successors,  have  ag-reed  upon  and  concluded  the 
following  Articles  :  — 

Article  1. 

His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  here  engages  to  prohibit,  under 
the  severest  penalties,  the  export  of  slaves  from  his  African  domi- 
nions, and  to  issue  orders  to  his  Officers  to  prevent  and  suppress  such 
trade. 

Article  2. 

His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  further  engages  to  prohibit, 
under  the  severest  penalties,  the  importation  of  slaves  from  any  part  of 
Africa  into  his  possessions  in  Asia,  and  to  use  his  utmost  influence  with 
all  the  Chiefs  of  Arabia,  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  Persian  Gulf,  in  like 
manner,  to  prevent  the  introduction  of  slaves  from  Africa  into  their 
respective  territories. 


PERSIAN 

GULF. 

No.  LVI 

Muscat-. 


.   - 


Tl< KATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


PERSIAN 
GULF. 

No.  LVI. 

Uutcot. 


Article  3. 

His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  grants  to  the  ships  of  Her 
Majesty's  Navy,  as  well  as  to  those  of  the  East  India  Company,  permis- 
sion to  seize  and  confiscate  any  vessels,  the  property  of  His  Highness 
or  of  his  subjects,  carrying  on  slave  trade,  excepting  only  such  as  are 
engaged  in  the  transport  of  slaves  from  one  port  to  another  of  his  own 
dominions  in  Africa  between  the  port  of  Lamoo  to  the  north  and  its 
dependencies,  the  northern  limit  of  which  is  the  north  point  of 
Kuyhoor  Island  in  1°  57'  (one  degree  and  fifty-seven  minutes)  South  Lati- 
tude, and  the  port  of  Kulvva  to  the  south  and  its  dependencies,  the 
southern  limit  of  which  is  the  Songa  Manora  or  Pagoda  Point  in  9°  2' 
(nine  degrees  and  two  minutes)  South  Latitude,  including  the  Islands  of 
Zanzibar,  Pemba,  and  Monfea. 