

Article  14. 

Should  a  vessel  under  the  British  flag  enter  a  port  in  the  dominions 
of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  in  distress,  the  local  authorities 
at  such  port  shall  afford  all  necessary  aid  to  enable  the  vessel  to  refit 
and  to  prosecute  her  voyage,  and  if  any  such  vessel  should  be  wrecked  on 
the  coast  of  the  dominions  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  the 
authorities  of  His  Highness  shall  give  all  the  assistance  in  their  power  to 
recover  and  to  deliver  over  to  the  owners  all  the  property  that  can  be  saved 
from  such  vessel.  The  same  assistance  and  protection  shall  be  afforded 
to  vessels  of  the  dominions  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  and 
property  saved  therefrom  under  similar  circumstances  in  the  ports  and 
on  the  coasts  of  the  British  dominions. 

Article  15. 

His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  hereby  renews  and  confirms 
the  engagements  entered  into  by  His  Highness  with  Great  Britain  on 
the  10th  of  September  1822  for  the  entire  suppression  of  slave  trade 
between  his  dominions  and  all  Christian  countries;  and  His  Highness 
further  engages  that  the  ships  and  vessels  of  war  belonging  to  the  East 
India  Company  shall  be  allowed  to  give  full  force  and  effect  to  the 
stipulations  of  the  said  Treaty,  agreeably  with  the  conditions  prescribed 
therein,  and  in  the  same  manner  as  the  ships  and  vessels  of  Her  Britannic 
Majesty. 

Article  16. 
It  is  further  acknowledged  and  declared  by  the  high  contracting 
parties  that  nothing  in  this  Convention  is  intended  in  any  way  to  inter- 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


223 


fere  with,  or  rescind  any  of  the  rights  or  privileges  now  enjoyed  by  the 
subjects  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  in  respect  to  commerce 
and  navigation  within  the  limits  of  the  East  India  Company's  Charter. 

Article  17. 
The  present  Convention  shall  be  ratified,  and  the  ratifications  thereof 
shall  be  exchanged  at  Muscat  or  Zanzibar  as  soon  as  possible,  and,  in  any 
case,  within  the  space  of  fifteen  months  from  the  date  hereof. 

Bone  on  the  Island  and  at  the  Town  of  Zanzibar  this  thirty-first  day 
of  May  in  the  year  of  Christ  eighteen  hundred  and  thirty-nine,  correspond- 
ing with  the  seventeenth  of  the  month  Rubbee-ul-Awul  of  the  VI  Hegira 
twelve  hundred  and  fifty-five. 


PERSIAN 
GULF. 

No.  LIV. 

Muscat, 


Fobm  of  Declaration  made  on  the  part  of  the  British  Government  previous 
to  exchange  of  the  ratifications. 

The  undersigned  Samuel  Hennell,  Esq.,  a  Captain  in  the  Mili- 
tary Service  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  Resident  in  the  Persian 
Gulf,  appointed  on  behalf  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United 
Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  to  exchange  Her  Majesty's  rati- 
fication of  the  Treaty  of  Commerce  concluded  at  Zanzibar,  on  the  31st 
May  1839,  by  Robert  Cogan,  Esq.,  a  Captain  in  the  Naval  Service  of 
the  East  India  Company  on  the  part  of  Her  said  Majesty,  and  by  Hassan 
bin  Ebrehim,  and  Mahabat  Ali  bin  Nasir,  on  the  part  of  His  Highness 
the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  against  the  ratification  of  the  same  Treaty  by 
His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  is  commanded  by  the  Queen,  in 
order  to  avoid  any  possible  misunderstanding  as  to  the  meaning  of  the 
words  contained  in  the  ninth  Article  of  the  said  Treaty,  u  any  other 
charge  by  government  whatever,"  to  declare  to  Syud  Mahomed  Ibin  Syud 
Shurruf,  appointed  by  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  to  exchange 
His  Highnesses  ratification,  that  the  aforesaid  words  are  by  Her  Majesty 
taken  and  understood  to  mean  "  any  other  charge  whatever  made  by  the 
government,  or  by  any  local  authority  of  the  government." 