


Article  4. 

Subjects  of  the  dominions  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat, 
actually  in  the  service  of  British  subjects  in  those  dominions,  shall  enjoy 
the  same  protection  which  is  granted  to  British  subjects  themselves,  but 
if  such  subjects  of  the  dominions  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat 
shall  be  convicted  of  any  crime  or  infraction  of  the  law  requiring  punish- 
ment, they  shall  be  discharged  by  the  British  subject  in  whose  service 
they  may  be,  and  shall  be  delivered  over  to  the  authorities  of  His  High- 
ness the  Sultan  of  Muscat. 

Article  5. 

The  authorities  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  shall  not 
interfere  in  disputes  between  British  subjects  or  between  British  subjects 
and  the  subjects  or  citizens  of  other  Christian  nations.  When  differences 
arise  between  a  subject  of  the  dominions  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of 
Muscat  and  a  British  subject,  if  the  former  is  the  complainant,  the  cause 
shall  be  heard  by  the  British  Consul  or  Resident  Agent,  who  shall  admi- 
nister justice  thereupon.  But  if  the  British  subject  is  the  complainant 
against  any  of  the  subjects  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  or 
the  subjects  of  any  other  Mahomedan  power,  then  the  cause  shall  be 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


219 


decided  by  the  highest  authority  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat, 
or  by  persons  nominated  by  him,  but  in  such  case  the  cause  shall  not  be 
proceeded  in  except  in  the  presence  of  the  British  Consul  or  Resident 
Agent,  or  of  some  person  deputed  by  one  or  other  of  them,  who  shall 
attend  at  the  Court  House,  or  where  such  matter  shall  be  tried.  In 
causes  between  a  British  subject  and  a  native  of  the  dominions  of  His 
Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  whether  tried  before  the  British  Consul 
or  Resident  Agent,  or  before  the  above-mentioned  authority  of  His  High- 
ness the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  the  evidence  of  a  man  proved  to  have  given 
false  testimony  on  a  former  occasion  shall  not  be  received. 


PERSIAN 
GULF. 

No.  LIV. 

Muscat. 


Article  6. 

The  property  of  a  British  subject  who  may  die  in  the  dominions  of 
His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  or  of  a  subject  of  His  Highness  the 
Sultan  of  Muscat  who  may  die  in  the  British  dominions,  shall  be  delivered 
over  to  their  heirs,  or  executors,  or  administrators  of  the  deceased,  or  to 
the  respective  Consul  or  Resident  Agent  of  the  contracting  parties,  in 
default  of  such  heirs,  or  executors,  or  administrators. 


Article  7. 

If  a  British  subject  shall  become  bankrupt  in  the  dominions  of  His 
Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  the  British  Consul  or  Resident  Agent 
shall  take  possession  of  all  the  property  of  such  bankrupt,  and  shall  give 
it  up  to  his  creditors  to  be  divided  among  them.  This  having  been  done, 
the  bankrupt  shall  be  entitled  to  full  discharge  of  his  creditors,  and  he 
shall  not  at  any  time  afterwards  be  required  to  make  up  his  deficiency, 
nor  shall  any  property  he  may  afterwards  acquire  be  considered  liable 
for  that  purpose.  But  the  British  Consul  or  Resident  Agent  shall  use 
his  endeavors  to  obtain,  for  the  benefit  of  the  creditors,  any  property 
of  the  bankrupt  in  another  country,  and  to  ascertain  that  every  thing 
possessed  by  the  bankrupt  at  the  time  when  he  became  insolvent  has 
been  given  up  without  reserve. 