

Article  11. 

If  any  disputes  should  arise  in  the  dominions  of  His  Highness  the 
Sultan  of  Muscat  as  to  the  value  of  goods  which  shall  be  imported  by 
British  Merchants  and  on  which  the  duty  of  5  per  cent,  is  to  be  levied, 
the  Custom  Master,  or  other  authorized  Officer  acting  on  the  part  of 
government  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  shall  be  entitled  to 
demand  one-twentieth  part  of  the  goods  in  lieu  of  the  payment  of  5 
per  cent.,  and  the  Merchant  shall  be  bound  to  surrender  the  twentieth 
part  so  demanded  whenever,  from  the  nature  of  the  articles,  it  may  be 
practicable  to  do  so ;  but  the  Merchant  having  done  so,  shall  be  subject 
to  no  further  demand  on  account  of  customs  on  the  other  nineteen- 
twentieths  of  those  goods  in  any  part  of  the  dominions  of  His  High- 
ness the  Sultan  of  Muscat  to  which  he  may  transport  them.  But  if 
the  Custom  Master  should  object  to  levy  the  duty  in  the  manner  afore- 
said by  taking  one-twentieth  part  of  the  goods,  or  if  the  goods  should 
not  admit  of  being  so  divided,  then  the  point  in  dispute  shall  be  referred 
to  two  competent  persons,  one  chosen  by  the  Custom  Master  and  the 
other  by  the  importer,  and  a  valuation  of  the  goods  shall  be  made,  and 
if  the  referees  shall  differ  in  opinion,  they  shall  appoint  an  arbitrator^ 
whose  decision  shall  be  final,  and  the  duty  shall  be  levied  according  to 
the  value  thus  established. 

Article  12. 

It  shall  not  be  lawful  for  any  British  Merchant  to  expose  his  goods 
for  sale  for  the  space  of  three  days  after  the  arrival  of  such  goods,  unless, 
before  the  expiration  of  such  three  days,  the  importer  and  Custom 
Master  shall  have  agreed  as  to  the  value  of  such  goods.  If  the  Custom 
Master  shall  not  within  three  days  have  accepted  one  of  the  two  modes 
proposed  for  ascertaining  the  value  of  the  goods,  the  authorities  of  His 
Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  on  application  being  made  to  them  to 
that  effect,  shall  compel  the  Custom  Master  to  choose  one  of  the  two  modes 
by  which  the  amount  of  the  customs  to  be  levied  is  to  be  determined. 


PERSIAN 
GULP. 

No.  LIV. 

Muscat. 


222  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIAN  Article  13. 

If  it  shall  happen  that  either  the  Queen  of  England  or  His  High- 
No.  LIV.  nesg  fjjg  suitan  of  Muscat  should  be  at  war  with  another  country,  the 
subjects  of  Her,  Britannic  Majesty  and  the  subjects  of  His  Highness 
the  Sultan  of  Muscat  shall  nevertheless  be  allowed  to  pass  such  country 
through  the  dominions  of  either  power  with  merchandize  of  every  de- 
scription except  warlike  stores,  but  they  shall  not  be  allowed  to  enter  any 
port  or  place  actually  blockaded  or  besieged. 