

Article  4. 

This  agreement  to  commence  and  have  effect  from  the  (1st)  first 
day  of  January  1847,  (one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty-seven)  of 
the  year  of  Christ,  and  the  15th  day  of  the  month  of  Mahaneerun  1263, 
(twelve  hundred  and  sixty-three)  of  the  Hegira. 

Done  at  Zanzibar  this  Ind  (second)  day  of  October  1845,  (one 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty-Jive)  of  the  year  of  Christ,  and  29M 
day  of  Ramzan  1261  (twelve  hundred  and  sixty -one)  of  the  Hegira. 

(Signed)         Atkins  Hamerton, 

Captain. 

On  behalf  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  her  heirs  and  successors. 


Seal  of 

Captain 

Hamebton. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


229 


No.  LVIL 

Rules  established  by  His  Highness  the  Imam  of  Muscat,  in  April  1846,  in 
regard  to  the  duties  to  be  hereafter  charged  on  the  cargoes  of  vessels 
putting  into  His  Highness's  ports. 

In  a  letter  dated  the  13th  April  1846,  Captain  Atkins  Hamerton, 
Her  Majesty's  Consul,  and  Honourable  Company's  Agent  in  the  dominions 
of  His  Highness  the  Imam  of  Muscat,  reported  that  His  Highness  the 
Imam  of  Muscat  had  ordered  the  following  Rules  to  be  henceforth 
observed  in  regard  to  the  landing  or  transhipment  of  the  cargoes 
of  vessels  putting  into  Muscat  or  into  any  of  His  Highness's  other 
ports : — 

Article  1. 

That  the  full  duty  of  five  per  cent,  shall  be  levied  on  all  articles 
transhipped  from  one  vessel  into  another  in  all  the  ports  and  harbours 
belonging  to  His  Highness  the  Imam. 


PERSIAN 
GULP. 

No.  LVIL 

Muscat. 


Article  2. 

That  a  vessel  of  any  nation  being  obliged  to  put  into  any  of  His 
Highness's  ports  through  stress  of  weather,  or  for  the  purpose  of  refit, 
shall  not  be  required  to  pay  duty  on  any  part  of  her  cargo  which  may 
be  landed  and  stored  during  the  repair  of  the  vessel  provided  it  be 
re-embarked  in  her. 

Article  3. 

That  no  duty  shall,  under  any  circumstances  whatever,  be  levied 
on  stores  the  property  of  the  British  Government  when  landed  at  any 
of  His  Highness's  ports. 


BSI  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

~i\N  No.  LVIII. 


GULF. 


Muscat. 


Deed  of  Cession  of  the  Koria  Moria  Islands  executed  by  Hrs   Highness  the 
No.  LVIII.  Imam  of  Muscat  in  the  presence  of  Captain   Fremantle,   Commanding   Her 

Majesty's  Ship  Juno,  under  date  the  14th  June  1854. 

From  the  humble  Saeed  bin  Sultan,  to  all  and  every  one  who  may 
see  this  paper,  whether  Mahomedans  or  others — 

There  has  arrived  to  me  from  the  powerful  nation  (England) 
Captain  Fremantle,  belonging  to  the  Royal  Navy  of  the  Great  Queen, 
requesting  from  me  the  (Jesair  i  bin  Colfaim)  Koria  Moria  Islands, 
viz.,  Helaneea,  Jibleea,  Soda,  Haski,  and  Gurzond;  and  I  hereby  cede 
to  the  Queen  Victoria  the  above-mentioned  Islands,  to  be  her  possessions, 
or  her  heirs  and  successors  after  her.  In  proof  whereof  I  have  hereunto 
affixed  my  signature  and  seal,  on  behalf  of  myself  and  my  son  after  me, 
of  my  own  free  will  and  pleasure,  without  force,  intimidation,  or  pecu- 
niary interest  whatsoever. 