


PERSIAN 
GULF. 

No.  LIV. 

Muscat. 


Translation  of  the  ratification  of  His  Highness  the  Imam  of  Muscat  to  the 

Treaty  of  Commerce. 

We  having  duly  considered  the  Treaty  above  drawn  out  have  ap- 
proved, accepted,  and  confirmed  the  several  Articles  and  Clauses  therein  set 
forth,  and  by  this  document  do  hereby  approve,  accept,  and  confirm  the 
same  for  ourselves,  our  heirs  and  successors.  Accordingly  we  do  by  our 
word  promise  and  engage  sincerely  and  faithfully  to  perform  all  and 
every  thing  set  forth  and  contained  in  the  aforesaid  Treaty,  and  further 
that  to  the  utmost  of  our  power  we  will  allow  no  one  to  violate  and 
infringe  this  engagement  in  any  way  whatsoever.  In  witness  whereof 
we  have  directed  our  seal  to  be  affixed  to  this  document,  which  we  have 
signed  with  our  own  hand  in  this  our  Port  of  Muscat  this  22  nd  day  of 
Jemmadee-ul-Awul  a.  h.  1256,  according  to  22nd  July  1840  of  the 
Christian  era. 


L.  S. 


VOL.    VII. 


(Signed)         Syud  Saeed. 
2/ 


226  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

PERSIAN  No.    LV. 

Translation    of  additional  Articles  regarding  the  suppression  of  the    foreign 
No.  LV.  slave  trade,  entered  into  by  His  Highness  Saekd  Syud  bin  Sultan,  the  Imam 

Muscat.  of  Muscat. 

I  agree  that  the  following  Articles  be  added  to  the  above  Treaty 

concluded  by  Captain  Moresby  on  the  aforesaid  date  : — 

Article  1. 
That  the  government  cruizers,  whenever  they  may  meet  any  vessel 
belonging  to  my  subjects  beyond  a  direct  line  drawn  from  Cape  Delgado, 
passing  two  degrees  seaward  of  the  Island  of  Socotra  and  ending  at 
Pussein,  and  shall  suspect  that  such  vessel  is  engaged  in  the  slave  trade, 
the  said  cruizers  are  permitted  to  detain  and  search  it. 

Article  2. 
Should  it  on  examination  be  found  that  any  vessel  belonging  to 
my  subjects  is  carrying  slaves,  whether  men,  women,  or  children,  for 
tale  beyond  the  aforesaid  line,  then  the  government  cruizers  shall  seize 
and  confiscate  such  vessel  and  her  cargo.  But  if  the  said  vessel  shall 
pass  beyond  the  aforesaid  line  owing  to  stress  of  weather,  or  other  case 
of  necessity  not  under  control,  then  she  shall  not  be  seized. 

Article  3. 
As  the  selling  of  males  and  females,  whether  grown  up  or  young, 
who  are  "  Hoor"  or  free,  is  contrary  to  the  Mahomedan  religion,  and 
whereas  the  Soomalees  are  included  in  the  Hoor  or  free,  I  do  hereby 
agree  that  the  sale  of  males  and  females,  whether  young  or  old,  of  the 
Soomalee  tribe,  shall  be  considered  as  piracy,  and  that  four  months 
from  this  date,  all  those  of  my  people  convicted  of  being  concerned  in 
such  an  act  shall  be  punished  as  pirates. 