

And  be  the  same  known  to  all  to  whom  these  presents  may  come. 

Done  at  Muscat  the  YltJi  day  of  the  month  Showal  1270,  14>th 
July  1854. 

Given  under  my  hand, 


Seal. 


(Signed  by  the  Imam.) 


Done  in  the  presence  of  me, 

(Signed)         Stephen  G.  Fremantle, 

Captain,  II.  M.'s  Ship  "  Juno.' 
Muscat,  the  lkth  July  1854. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


231 


No.  LDL 
Lbtteb  to  His  Highness  Stud  Thowaynee  bin  Saeed  bin  Sultan,  of  Muscat.  . 
Beloved  and  esteemed  Friend  ! 

I  address  your  Highness  on  the  subject  of  the  unhappy  differences 
which  have  arisen  between  yourself  and  your   Highnesses  brother  the 
ruler  of  Zanzibar,  and  for  the  settlement  of  which  your  Highness  has 
engaged  to  accept  the  arbitration  of  the  Viceroy  and   Governor  General  • 
of  India. 

Having  regard  to  the  friendly  relations  which  have  always  existed 
between  the  Government  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  and  the  Govern- 
ment of  Oman  and  Zanzibar,  and  desiring  to  prevent  war  between  kins- 
men, I  accepted  the  charge  of  arbitration  between  you,  and  in  order  to 
obtain  the  fullest  knowledge  of  all  the  points  in  dispute,  I  directed  the 
Government  of  Bombay  to  send  an  Officer  to  Muscat  and  Zanzibar  to 
make  the  necessary  enquiries.  Brigadier  Coghlan  was  selected  for  this 
purpose,  an  Officer  in  whose  judgment,  intelligence,  and  impartiality  the 
Government  of  India  reposes  the  utmost  confidence. 

Brigadier  Coghlan  has  submitted  a  full  and  clear  report  of  all  the 
questions  at  issue  between  your  H  ighness  and  your  brother. 

I  have  given  my  most  careful  attention  to  each  of  these  questions. 

The  terms  of  my  decision  are  as  follows  : — 

1st. — That  His  Highness  Syud  Majid  be  declared  ruler  of  Zanzibar 
and  the  African  dominions  of  His  late  Highness  Syud  Saeed. 

2nd. — That  the  ruler  of  Zanzibar  pay  annually  to  the  ruler  of 
Muscat  a  subsidy  of  40,000  crowns. 

3rd. — That  His  Highness  Syud  Majid  pay  to  His  Highness  Syud 
Thowaynee  the  arrears  of  subsidy  for  two  years,  or  80,000  crowns. 

I  am  satisfied  that  these  terms  are  just  and  honourable  to  both  of  you ; 
and  as  you  have  deliberately  and  solemnly  accepted  my  arbitration,  I 
shall  expect  that  you  will  cheerfully  and  faithfully  abide  by  them,  and 
that  they  will  be  carried  out  without  unnecessary  delay. 

The  annual  payment  of  40,000  crowns  is  not  to  be  understood  as 
a  recognition  of  the  dependence  of  Zanzibar  upon  Muscat,  neither  is  it 
to  be  considered  as  merely  personal  between  your  Highness  and  your 


PERSIAN 
GULF. 

No.  LIX. 

Muscat. 


23£  TK KATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

PERSIAN  brother  Syud  Majid.  It  is  to  extend  to  your  respective  successors,  and 
GULF.  is  to  be  held  to  be  a  final  and  permanent  arrangement,  compensating'the 
Ho.  LIX.  ruler  of  Muscat  for  the  abandonment  of  all  claims  upon  Zanzibar  and 
adjusting  the  inequality  between  the  two  inheritances  derived  from  your 
father  His  late  Highness  Syud  Saeed,  the  venerated  friend  of  the  British 
Government,  which  two  inheritances  are  to  be  henceforward  distinct 
and  separate. 