


PERSIAN 
GULP. 

No.  LIV. 

Muscat. 


Article  1. 

The  subjects  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  shall  be  at 
liberty  to  enter,  reside  in,  trade  with  and  pass  with  their  merchandize 
through  all  parts  of  Her  Britannic  Majesty's  dominions  in  Europe  and 
in  Asia,  and  shall  enjoy  in  those  dominions  all  the  privileges  and 
advantages,  with  respect  to  commerce  or  otherwise,  which  are  or  may  be 
accorded  therein  to  the  subjects  or  citizens  of  the  most  favored  nations ; 
and  the  subjects  of  Her  Britannic  Majesty  shall,  in  like  manner,  have  full 
liberty  to  enter,  reside  in,  trade  with  and  pass  with  their  merchandize 
through  all  parts  of  the  dominions  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Mus- 
cat, and  shall  in  those  dominions  enjoy  all  the  privileges  and  advantages, 
with  respect  to  commerce  or  otherwise,  which  are  or  may  be  accorded 
therein  to  the  subjects  or  citizens  of  the  most  favored  nation. 

Article  2. 

British  subjects  shall  be  at  liberty  to  purchase,  sell,  or  hire  land  or 
houses  in  the  dominions  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat. 

The  houses,  ware-houses,  or  other  premises  of  British  subjects,  or  of 
persons  actually  in  the  service  of  British  subjects  in  the  dominions  of 
His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  shall  not  be  forcibly  entered,  nor 
on  any  pretext  searched  without  the  consent  of  the  occupier,  unless 
with  the  cognizance  of  the  Consul  or  British  Resident  Agent.  But 
such  Consul  or  Resident  Agent,  on  just  cause  being  adduced  by  the 
authorities  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  shall  send  a  competent 
person,  who,  in  concert  with  the  Officers  of  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of 
Muscat,  shall  conduct  the  search,  and  shall  prevent  the  use  of  unneces- 
sary violence  or  of  improper  resistance. 

VOL.    VII.  2  6 


218 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


PERSIAN 
GULF. 

No.  L1V. 

Muscat. 


Article  3. 

The  two  high  contracting  parties  acknowledge  reciprocally  to  each 
other  the  right  of  appointing  Consuls  to  reside  in  each  other's  dominions 
wherever  the  interests  of  commerce  may  require  the  presence  of  such 
Officers,  and  such  Consuls  shall  at  all  times  be  placed  in  the  country  in 
which  they  reside  on  the  footing  of  the  Consuls  of  the  most  favored  nations. 
Each  of  the  high  contracting  parties  further  agrees  to  permit  his  own 
subjects  to  be  appointed  to  consular  offices  by  the  other  contracting  party, 
provided  always  that  the  persons  so  appointed  shall  not  begin  to  act 
without  the  previous  approbation  of  the  sovereign  whose  subjects  they 
may  be. 

The  public  functionaries  of  either  government  residing  in  the 
dominions  of  the  other  shall  enjoy  the  same  privileges,  immunities,  and 
exemptions  which  are  enjoyed  within  the  same  dominions  by  similar 
public  functionaries  of  other  countries. 