

Muscat,  this  twenty-second  day  of  July  1840. 


L.  S. 


(Signed)         S.  Hennell. 


t  !  I 

.-  .-   r 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


TERSIAN 

cii.f. 

No.  LIV. 

Muscat. 


Fobm  of  Declaration  made  on  the  part  of  the  Muscat  Government  previous  to 
exchange  of  the  ratifications. 

The  undersigned  Syed  Mahomed  Ibin  Syud  Shurruf,  appointed  by 
His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  to  exchange  His  Highnesses  ratifica- 
tion of  the  Treaty  of  Commerce  concluded  at  Zanzibar,  on  the  31st  May 
1839,  by  Robert  Cogan,  Esq.,  a  Captain  of  the  Naval  Service  of  the 
East  India  Company  on  the  part  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the 
United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  and  by  Hassan  bin  Ebre- 
him,  and  Mahabat  Ali  bin  Nasir,  on  the  part  of  His  Highness  the 
Sultan  of  Muscat,  against  the  ratification  of  the  same  Treaty  by  Her 
Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 
having  received  from  Samuel  Hennell,  Esq.,  a  Captain  in  the  Military 
Service  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf, 
appointed  to  act  in  this  matter  on  behalf  of  Her  said  Majesty,  a  declara- 
tion stating  that,  in  order  to  avoid  any  possible  misunderstanding  as  to 
the  meaning  of  the  words  "  any  other  charge  by  government  whatever/' 
contained  in  the  ninth  Article  of  the  said  Treaty,  the  aforesaid  words  are  by 
Her  Majesty  taken  and  understood  to  mean  "  any  other  charge  whatever 
made  by  the  government,  or  by  any  local  authority  of  the  government," 
the  undersigned  Syud  Mahomed  Ibin  Syud  Shurruf,  being  duly  authorised 
by  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  hereby  accepts  and  adopts  the 
said  declaration  in  the  name  and  on  the  behalf  of  His  Highness  the 
Sultan  of  Muscat. 


Muscat,  this  twenty-second  day  of  July  1840. 


L.  8. 


(Signed)       Syud  Mahomed  Ibin  Syud  Shurruf. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


225 


Form  of  Certificate  signed  on  the  exchange  of  the  ratifications. 

The  undersigned  having  met  together  for  the  purpose  of  exchang- 
ing the  ratifications  of  a  Treaty  of  Commerce  between  Her  Majesty  the 
Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  and  His 
Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  concluded  and  signed  at  Zanzibar  on  the 
31st  day  of  May  1839,  and  the  respective  ratifications  of  the  said  instru- 
ment having  been  carefully  perused,  the  said  exchange  took  place  this 
day  in  the  usual  form. 

In  witness  whereof  they  have  signed  the  present  Certificate  of 
exchange  and  have  affixed  thereto  their  respective  Seals. 

Done  at  Muscat,  the  twenty-second  clay  of  July  1840. 


L.  S. 


(Signed)       S.  Hennell. 


L.  S. 


Syud  Mahomed  Ibin  Syud  Shurruf. 