


(Signed)         W.  Grant  Keir, 

Major  General. 


L. 

S. 

L. 

s. 

The  signature  of  Hassun  bin  Rahmah 


Copy  of  the  Articles  between  the  General  and  Hossun  bin  Rahmah. 
Witness  my  hand  and  seal. 


(Signed)         W.  Grant  Keir, 

Major  General. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNTJDS.  245 

Tbanslation  of  the  preliminary  Treaty  with  the  Sheikh  of  Duhey.  MARITIME 

In  the  name  of  God,  the  merciful,  the  compassionate !  TRIBES. 

Know  all  men  that  Mahomed  bin  Haza  bin  Zaal,  a  minor,  accom-  lxiv. 

panied  by  Ahmed  bin  Futeiss,  has  been  in  the  presence  of   General  Sir  Preliminary, 
William  Grant  Keir,  and  there  have  passed  between  them  the  following 
stipulations : — 

Article  1. 

The  people  of  Dubey  shall  surrender  to  the  General  the  vessels 
which  are  in  Dubey  and  its  dependencies  and  the  guns  which  are  in  the 
town  and  in  the  towers.  The  General  will  leave  the  boats  which  are  for 
the  pearl  fishery  and  fishing  boats. 

Article  2. 

The  people  of  Dubey  shall  give  up  all  the  Indian  prisoners  if  any 
such  are  in  their  possession. 

Article  3. 

The  General  will  not  allow  the  troops  to  enter  the  town  to  lay  it 
waste,  and  further,  as  a  mark  of  consideration  towards  His  Highness  the 
Imam  Saeed  bin  Sultan  on  the  part  of  the  General,  he  will  not  demolish 
the  fort  and  towers. 

Article  4. 

After  the  execution  of  these  engagements,  Mahomed  bin  Haza  bin 
Zaal  and  his  followers  shall  be  admitted  to  the  same  terms  of  peace  as 
the  remainder  of  the  friendly  (literally  the  "  pacificated")  Arabs. 

On  these  conditions  there  is  a  cessation  of  hostilities  between  the 
British  and  Mahomed  bin  Haza  bin  Zaal  and  his  followers,  with  the 
exception  that  their  boats  are  not  to  go  to  sea. 

Done  at  Basal  Khyma  on  the  2$rd  of  the  month  of  Rabe-ul-Awul, 
in  the  year  1235,  corresponding  to  the  9th  of  January  1820. 


(Signed)         W.  Grant  Keir, 

Major  General. 


210 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


MARITIME 

TRinr.s. 

No.  LXIV. 
Preliminary. 


Seal  of 
Ahmed  Futeis. 


Witnessed  by  the  signature  of  Sheikh  Hamza  bin  Mahomed  bin 
Zubu  al  Moyzzine,  Sheikh  of  Kishme,  with  his  own  hand. 

Copy  of  the  Articles  between  the  General  and  Mahomed  bin  Haza 
bin  Zaal. 

"Witness  my  hand  and  seal. 


(Signed)         W.  Grant  Keir, 

Major  General. 


Thanslatios  of  the  preliminary  Tbeatt  with  Sheikh  Shahbout,  of  Abou 

Dabyee. 

In  the  name  of  God,  the  merciful,  the  compassionate ! 

Know  all  men  that  Sheikh  Shahbout  bin  Dhyab  al  Talahij  has  been 
in  the  presence  of  General  Sir  William  Grant  Keir,  and  there  have 
passed  between  them  the  following  stipulations  : — 


Article  1. 

If  in  Abou  Dabyee  or  any  other  of  the  places  belonging  to  Sheikh 
Shahbout  there  are  any  of  the  vessels  of  the  piratical  powers  which 
have  been  attached  or  may  be  hereafter  attached  by  the  General  during 
the  present  war  against  the  pirates,  he  shall  deliver  such  vessels  to  the 
General. 