Article  4. 

And  in  the  event  (which  God  forbid)  of  any  of  my  subjects  or 
dependants  committing  an  act  of  aggression  or  trespass  on  the  said 
telegraphic  lines  and  stations,  or  other  telegraphic  material,  I  will 
immediately  punish  the  offender,  and  proceed  to  afford  full  redress  upon 
the  same  being  brought  to  my  notice. 

Article  5. 
Nothing  in  these  Articles  shall  be  held  as  conferring  any  dominion 
or  sovereign  right  on  the  part  of  the  British  Government  over  the 
territory  of  Muscat  through  which  the  line  may  pass,  neither  of  any 
additional  dominion  or  right  on  my  part  as  Sultan  of  Muscat  over 
territory  which  I  may  hold  in  lease  from  the  Shah  of  Persia. 

Article  6. 

In  like  manner,  nothing  in  these  Articles  shall  be  held  as  invalidat- 
ing or  derogating  from  the  title  of  the  British  Government  to  the 
station  of  Bassadore,  that  station  having  been  freely  granted  to  the 
British  Government  by  my  late  illustrious  father,  of  blessed  memory, 
the  late  Imaum  Syed  Saeed  bin  Sultan,  on  behalf  of  himself,  his  heirs, 
and  successors. 

VOL.   VII.,   PAGE   234. 


No.  LXA 

Muscat. 


234$ 


TREATIES,  ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   8UNNUD8. 


PKK8IAN 
GULF. 

No.  LS.A. 


No.  LXB. 


AETICLE   7. 

Nothing  in  these  Articles  shall  be  held  as  invalidating  any  Article 
of  any  Treaty  entered  into  by  myself  or  forefathers  with  our  ancient  and 
faithful  ally,  the  British  Government,  from  the  year  1798  downwards. 

Dated  Birka,  Muscat,  17th  November  1864.  Signed  in  our  pre- 
sence by  Syed  Thoweynee  bin  Saeed,  Sultan  of  Muscat,  this  17th  day 
of  November  1864,  and  sealed  in  our  presence  by  His  Highness's 
Minister,  Hajee  Ahmed,  at  Muscat,  this  18th  day  of  November  1864. 

(Sd.)         Lewis  Pelly,  Lieut.-Col., 

H.  B.M.'s  Poltl.  Resdt.,  Persian  Gulf. 

(Sd.)         Herbert  Disbrowe,  Lieut.-Col., 

H.  B.  M.'s  Poltl.  Agent,  Muscat. 


Seal. 


Agreement  of  the  Imaum  of  Muscat  relative  to  the  slave-trade,  Zanzibar,  dated 

May  6th,  1850. 

From — Sxun  Saeed,  Sultan  of  Muscat. 
To — The  British  Consul  and  Agent. 

After  compliments, — Your  excellent  letter  has  reached,  and  your 
friend  understood  all  you  have  mentioned;  and,  with  reference  to  the 
people  of  that  quarter,  from  Sarga  Manara  to  Tenghe,  you  say  you  wish 
permission  for  the  ships-of-war  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  England 
to  enter  the  creeks,  rivers,  and  harbours  of  those  who  deal  with  the  slave 
hunters. 

My  dear  friend,  we  and  all  belonging  to  us,  even  our  countries,  are 
at  the  disposal  of  Her  Majesty,  and  should  the  men-of-war  of  Her 
Majesty  the  Queen  of  England  require  to  enter  the  creeks,  rivers,  and 
ports,  we  are  willing  they  should  enter  ;  we  object  not,  and  all  ships  or 
vessels  found  in  those  places  to  whomsoever  belonging,  if  engaged  in  the 
slave-trade,  may  be  seized,  and  all  barracoons  or  places  erected  for  carry- 
ing on  the  slave-trade  may  be  burned  or  destroyed.  We  have  no  wish 
to  the  contrary  of  yours,  and  with  respect  to  the  banian,  we  will  send 
and  have  him  seized.  Whatever  you  require  of  us  we  are  ready.  The 
sign  is  with  you. 