

Article  3. 

That  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  shall  afford  protection 
to  the  best  of  his  ability  to  the  lines  of  Telegraph,  the  Telegraph 
Stations,  and  the  persons  employed  in  their  construction  and  main- 
tenance. 

vol.  vii.  2  g 


284 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


PERSIAN 
GULF. 

NcLX. 

Muscat. 


Article  4. 

Should  any  disagreements  arise  in  the  possessions  of  the  Sultan  of 
Muscat,  situate  near  Arabia,  between  the  Telegraph  officials  and  the 
subjects  of  His  Highness,  the  said  disagreements  shall  be  referred  to  the 
British  Political  Officer  at  Muscat,  if  they  cannot  be  satisfactorily 
settled  on  the  spot. 

Article  5. 

In  like  manner,  should  any  disagreements  arise  in  the  possessions  of 
the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  situate  in  Mekran,  between  the  Telegraph  officials 
and  the  subjects  of  His  Highness,  the  said  disagreements  shall  be 
referred  to  the  Assistant  British  Political  Officer  at  Gwadur,  if  they 
cannot  be  satisfactorily  settled  on  the  spot. 


Article  6. 
This  Convention,  together  with  any  supplementary  Articles  that  may 
hereafter  thereunto  be  added,  is  to  be  considered  dependent  for  completion 
and  effect  upon  the  approval  of  the  British  Government. 

Done  at  Muscat  this  nineteenth  day  of  January  in  the  year  of  Christ 
one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty-five,  corresponding  with  the  twentieth 
day  of  the  month  Shaban  of  the  Hegira  one  thousand  two  hundred  and 
eighty-one,  day  of  the  week  Thursday. 

(Signed)         Herbert  Disbrowe,  Lieut.  Colonel, 

II.  B.  M.'s  Pol.  Agent  at  Muscat, 
on  the  part  of  the  British  Govt. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND    SUNNUDS. 


234  a 


No.  LXA. 

Articles  of  Agreement  agreed  to  before  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis  Pelly,  . 
Her  Britannic  Majesty's  Political  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Herbert  Disbrowe,  Her  Britannic  Majesty's  Political 
Agent  at  Birka,  Muscat,  by  His  Highness  Syed  Thoweynee  bin  Saeed  bin 
Sultan,  tbe  Sultan  of  Muscat, — under  date  this  17th  day  of  November  1864. 

Article  1. 
My  ancient  and  faithful  ally,  the  British  Government,  is  at  liberty 
to  construct  one  or  more  lines  of  telegraphic  communication  anywhere 
within  the  territories  appertaining  to  the  State  of  Muscat. 

Article  2. 
The  British  Government  is  further  at  liberty  to  construct  one  or 
more  lines  of  telegraphic  communication  in  any  territories  which  I  may 
bold  in  lease  from  the  Shah  of  Persia. 

Article  3. 

I    engage,   for  myself,  my  heirs,  and  successors,  to  respect  and 

abstain   from  all   and   every    interference   with   telegraphic   operations 

carried   on  by  the  British   Government  in  or  near  the  territories  of 

Muscat. 

