

■    Article  7. 

In  the  event  of  an  enemy  arising  against  Syud  Humood  and  making 
war  upon  him,  His  Highness  Syud  Saeed  is  to  support  him  in  every  way 
to  the  utmost  of  his  power  and  ability. 

These  are  the  conditions  upon  which  this  engagement  has  been 
made  on  both  sides  and  with  the  consent  of  both  parties,  and  to  this  the 
Almighty  is  a  witness. 

Dated  Muscat,  the  Yttli  Showal  1255,  a.  ii.,  corresponding  with  the 
IZrd  December  a.  d.  1839. 


The  Seal  of 

Stud  Humood 

bin  Azan. 


The  Seal  of 
Syud  Saeed 
bin  Sultan 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


237 


No-  LXII. 

Muscat. 
(Sohar.) 


No.   LXII.  PERSIAN 

Translation  of  an  Engagement  entered  into  by  Stud  Syf  bin  Humood,  Chief '__ 

of  Sonar,  for  the  abolition  of  the  African  slave  trade  in  his  ports. 

It  having  been  intimated  to  me  by  Major  Hennell,  the  Resident  in 
the  Persian  Gulf,  that  certain  conventions  have  lately  been  entered  into 
by  the  Ottoman  Porte  and  other  powers  with  the  British  Government 
for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  exportation  of  slaves  from  the  coast 
of  Africa  and  elsewhere,  and  it  having,  moreover,  been  explained  to  me 
that,  in  order  to  the  full  attainment  of  the  objects  contemplated  by  the 
aforesaid  Conventions,  the  concurrence  and  co-operation  of  the  Chiefs  of 
the  several  ports  situated  on  the  Arabian  coast  of  the  Persian  Gulf  are 
required,  accordingly  I,  Syud  Syf  bin  Humood,  Chief  of  Sohar,  with 
a  view  to  strengthen  the  bonds  of  friendship  existing  between  me  and 
the  British  Government,  do  hereby  engage  to  prohibit  the  exportation  of 
slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa  and  elsewhere  on  board  of  my  vessels 
and  those  belonging  to  my  subjects  or  dependants,  such  prohibition  to 
take  effect  from  the  29th  Rujut  1265,  or  the  21st  June  a.  d.  1849. 

And  I  do  further  consent,  that  whenever  the  cruizers  of  the  British 
Government  fall  in  with  any  of  my  vessels,  or  those  belonging  to  my 
subjects  or  dependants,  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  the  slave  trade, 
they  may  detain  and  search  them,  and  in  case  of  their  rinding  that  any 
of  the  vessels  aforesaid  have  violated  the  engagement  by  the  exportation 
of  slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa,  or  elsewhere,  upon  any  pretext  what- 
ever, they  (the  Government  cruizers)  shall  seize  and  confiscate  the  same. 

Bated  this  20th  day  of  Jemmadeeood  Akhir  a.  h.  1265,  or  22nd  day 
of  May  1819. 


L.  S. 


Syud  Syf  bin  Humood. 


Approved  by  the  Government  of  Bombay  on  4th  August  1849. 


MARITIME  TRIBES. 

The  so-called  maritime  Chiefs  of  the  Persian  Gulf  with  whom  the 
British  Government  have  concluded  Treaties  are  the  Joasmee  Chief  of 
Ras-ool-Khyma  and  Shargah,  the  Chief  of  the  Beniyas  tribe  of  Abootha- 
bee  or  Boo  Debaye,  the  Chief  of  the  Boo  Filasa  tribe  of  Debaye  a  branch 
of  the  Beniyas,  and  the  Chiefs  of  Amalgavine  and  Ejman.  The  posses- 
sions of  these  Chiefs  extend  from  Ras-ool-Khyma  along  the  coast  west- 
ward beyond  the  Island  of  Bahrein.  They  all  pay  tribute  to  the  Waha- 
bee  Chief  of  Nejd,  but  are  really  independent. 