

Article  1. 

Sultan  bin  Suggur  shall  surrender  to  the  General  towers,  guns, 
and  vessels  which  are  in  Shargah,  Imam,  Umin-ul  Gyuyn,  and  their 
dependencies.  The  General  will  leave  the  boats  which  are  for  the  pearl 
fishery  and  fishing  boats,  and  the  remainder  of  the  vessels  shall  be  at  the 
disposal  of  the  General. 

Article  2. 

Sultan  bin  Suggur  shall  give  up  all  the  Indian  prisoners  if  any  such 
are  in  his  possession. 

Article  3. 

The  General  will  not  allow  the  troops  to  enter  the  towns  to  lay 
them  waste. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


243 


Article  4. 
After  the  execution  of  these  engagements,  Sultan  bin  Suggur  shall 


MARITIME 
TRIBES. 


be  admitted  to  the  same  terms  of  peace  as  the  remainder  of  the  friendly   No.^LXIV. 

("  or  pacificated")    Arabs.  Preliminary. 

On  these  conditions  there  is  a  cessation  of  hostilities  between  the 
General  and  Sultan  bin  Suggur  and  his  followers,  with  the  exception 
that  their  boats  are  not  to  go  to  sea. 

Bone  at  Basal  Khyma  on  the  twentieth  of  Rabee-ul-Awul,  in  the 
year  1235,  corresponding  to  the  sixth  of  January  one  thousand  eight  hun- 
dred and  twenty. 


L.  S. 


L.  S. 


(Signed)         W.  Grant  Keir, 

Major  General. 

Sultan  bin  Suggur 
with  his  own  hand. 


Copy  of  the  Articles  entered  into  with  Sultan  bin  Suggur.     Wit- 
ness my  hand  and  seal. 


L.  S. 


(Signed)         W.  Grant  Keir, 

Major  General. 


Translation  of  the  preliminary  Tbeaty  with  Hassun-bin  Rahmah. 

In  the  name  of  God,  the  merciful,  the  compassionate ! 

Know  all  men  that  Hassun  bin  Rahmah  has  been  in  the  presence 
of  General  Sir  William  Grant  Keir,  and  there  have  passed  between  them 
the  following  stipulations  :— 

Article  1. 

The  town  of  Rasal  Khyma  and  Maharra,  and  the  towers  which  are 
in  the  date  groves  near  the  town,  shall  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  British 
Government. 


MARITIME 
TRIHKS. 


'2  |  i  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 

Article  2. 

If  any  of  the  vessels  of   Hassun  bin  Rahmah  are  in  Shargah  or 

No.  LXIV.    Umin-ul  Gyuyn  or  Imam,  or  any  other  of  the  places  to  which  the  Gen- 

Prtliminary.  eral  shall  go  with  the  force,  they  shall  be  surrendered  to  the  General,  and 

the  General  will  leave  those  which  are  for  the  pearl  fishery  and  fishing 

boats. 

Article  3. 

Hassun  bin  Rahmah  shall  give  up  all  the  Indian  prisoners  if  any 
such  are  in  his  possession. 

Article  4. 

After  the  execution  of  these  engagements,  Hassun  bin  Rahmah 
shall  be  admitted  to  the  terms  of  the  general  Treaty  with  the  friendly 
(literally  the  pacificated)  Arabs.     End  of  the  Articles. 

Issued  at  Basal  Khyma  in  the  forenoon  of  Saturday,  the  twenty- 
second  of  the  month  of  Rahe-ul-Awul,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  one 
thousand  ttco  hundred  and  thirty-five,  corresponding  to  the  eighth  of 
January  1820. 