

The  Joasmees,  who  have  occupied  the  Province  of  Seer  from  the 
earliest  times,  carried  on  a  vigorous  and  profitable  trade  by  sea,  till,  in 
1805,  they  succumbed  to  the  influence  of  the  Wahabees  and  were  drawn 
into  the  piratical  projects  of  that  turbulent  sect.  Under  their  influence 
the  Joasmees  plundered  two  British  vessels  and  treated  the  Commanders 
with  great  cruelty.  An  expedition  was  sent  to  the  Persian  Gulf 
to  punish  them  for  this  aggression  and  to  co-operate  with  the  Imam  of 
Muscat,  who  was  then  at  war  with  them.  The  expedition  resulted  in  the 
conclusion  of  a  Treaty  (No.  LXIII.)  on  6th  February  1806,  binding  the 
Joasmees  to  respect  the  flag  and  property  of  the  British  and  to  assist 
vessels  touching  on  their  coast.  This  Treaty  appears  to  have  been  con- 
cluded without  reference  to  the  Wahabees. 

The  spread  of  the  Wahabees  in  Oman  soon  threatened  the  Imam 
of  Muscat  with  destruction,  and  the  British  Government  determined  to 
support  him  and  to  destroy  the  piratical  fleets  as  the  only  means  of  pre- 
serving the  peace  of  the  Gulf.  A  strong  force  was  despatched  in  1809, 
which  took  Ras-ool-Khyma,  Linga,  Luft,  and  Shinas,  and  destroyed  the 
boats  of  the  pirates.  No  Treaty  could  at  this  time  be  concluded  with  the 
Joasmees,  whose  government  had  been  completely  overthrown  by  the 
Wahabees,  nor  were  any  permanent  measures  taken  to  secure  the  advant- 
ages gained  in  1809 ;  consequently  piracy  soon  re-appeared.  In  1814 
the  Joasmees  professed  a  desire  to  be  at  peace  with  the  British  Govern- 
ment, provided  they  were  left  at  liberty  to  make  war  on  the  neighbouring 
Arab  tribes.    They  even  expressed  themselves  ready  to  abstain  from 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  239 

molesting-  their  Arab  neighbours  if  the  British  Government  would  gua-  MARITIME 
rantee  them  protection  from  the  vengeance  of  the  Wahabee  Chief.  But  TRIBES. 
they  were  quite  unable  to  make  good  their  professions.  Even  after  the 
negotiation  of  preliminary  Articles  of  peace  with  the  Resident  at  Bushire, 
the  Joasmees  attacked  and  plundered  British  vessels.  Other  tribes  were 
soon  drawn  under  the  Wahabee  influence,  and  piracy  increased  beyond 
endurance.  An  expedition  under  Sir  W.  Grant  Keir  was  therefore  des- 
patched to  the  Persian  Gulf  in  1819  for  the  purpose  of  completely  crush- 
ing them.  Ras-ool-Khyma  was  taken  on  9th  December,  and  engagements 
(No.  LXIV.)  were  made  with  the  Arab  Chiefs  preliminary  to  the  conclu- 
sion of  a  general  Treaty  (No.  LXV).  The  object  of  the  preliminary 
engagements  was  to  include  all  matters  of  a  temporary  or  individual 
character,  so  as  to  reserve  the  general  Treaty  exclusively  for  arrangements 
of  a  permanent  nature  common  to  all  the  Arab  Chiefs  who  might  be 
disposed  to  subscribe  it. 