

In  1864  the  maritime  Chiefs  bound  themselves  (No.  LXXI.)  to 
prevent  their  subjects  from  interfering  with  the  telegraphic  operations  in 
or  near  their  territories. 

*  An  Act  of  Parliament  12  and  13  Vic.  Chap.  LXXXIV.  was  passed  to  give  effect  to 
these  engagements.    See  Appendix. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  241 

No.    LXIII.  MARITIME 

TRIBES. 
Coulnamah  or  Agreement  between  Sheikh  Abdulla  bin  Ceoosh,  on  the  part  of ■ 

Sheikh-ul  Mus  Sheikh  Ameer  Sultan  bin  Suggue,  Bin  Kashid,  Joasmee,    No'  I'XIII. 

and  Captain  David  Seton,  on  the  part  of  the  Honourable  East  India     Joasmees. 

Company.     In  Bunder  Abbass,  this  6th  day  ef  February  1806. 

Article  1. 

There  shall  be  peace  between  the  Honourable  East  India  Company 
and  Sultan  bin  Suggur,  Joasmee,  and  the  whole  of  his  dependants  and 
subjects  on  the  shores  of  Arabia  and  Persia,  and  they  shall  respect  the 
flag  and  property  of  the  Honourable  East  India  Company,  and  their  sub- 
jects wherever  and  in  whatever  it  may  be,  and  the  same  the  Honourable 
East  India  Company  towards  the  Joasmee. 

Article  2. 

Should  the  Joasmee  infringe  the  above,  they  shall  be  liable  in  the 
sum  of  dollars  30,000,  and  on  this  condition  Captain  David  Seton  agrees 
to  receive  from  Ameer  Sultan  bin  Suggur  the  Brig  now  laying  at 
Muscat,  and  to  drop  the  claims  to  the  cargo  guns,  &c,  of  the  said 
vessel  and  the  Shannon. 

Article  3. 

Whatever  British  property  shall  be  found  in  the  Sorie  fleet  shall 
be  restored. 

Article  4. 

Should  any  British  vessel  touch  on  the  coasts  of  the  Joasmee  for 
wood  or  water,  or  be  forced  on  shore  by  stress  of  weather,  or  any 
other  cause,  the  Joasmee  shall  assist  and  protect  the  said  vessel  and 
property,  and  permit  it  to  be  disposed  of  or  carried  away,  as  their  owners 
shall  see  fit,  without  claim  or  demand. 

Article  5. 

Should  Johood  compel  the  Joasmee  to  infringe  this  peace,  they 
shall  give  three  months'  previous  notice  in  all  places. 

vol.  vii.  2  h 


242  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

MARITIME  Article  6. 

When  the  above  is   confirmed  and  ratified   by  both   parties,  the 

Noe.  LXIII    Joagmee  gh^l  frequent  the  English  ports  from  Surat  to  Bengal  as  before. 
k  LXIV. 

Preliminary.  (Signed)  DAVID  SETON. 

(Sealed)         Abdullah  bin  Croosh. 

Signed,  sealed,  and  confirmed. 

Sultan  Bin  Suggur. 

Approved  and  sanctioned  by  the  Governor  General  in  Council  on 
29th  April  1806. 


No.  LXIV. 

Translation  of  the  preliminary  Treaty  with  Sultan  bin  Suggitb. 
In  the  name  of  God,  the  merciful,  the  compassionate ! 

Know  all  men  that  Sultan  bin  Suggur  has  been  in  the  presence 
of  General  Sir  William  Grant  Keir,  and  there  have  passed  between 
them  the  following  stipulations  : — 