

I  am  your  Highnesses 

Fort  "William  1  Sincere  Friend  and  well  wisher, 


j/ ..,.-..•.'. 


1 


The  2nd  April  1861.         )  (Signed)         Canning. 


To  His  Exalted  Excellency   Loed  Canning,    Governor   General  of  India, 

&c,  &c,  &c. 

In  the  name  of  the  Great  God  ! 

After  Compliments. — At  a  most  propitious  and  favourable  time  we 
were  honoured  with  the  receipt  of  your  esteemed  letter  and  were  highly 
gratified  with  its  contents.  What  your  Excellency  has  stated  is  most 
satisfactory  to  us,  more  especially  as  regards  your  award  betwixt  us  and 
our  brother  Majid.  We  heartily  accept  the  same,  and  are  at  a  loss 
how  to  express  our  regret  for  having  occasioned  you  so  much  trouble, 
and  our  appreciation  of  the  kindness  which  has  been  manifested  towards 
us  in  this  matter.  We  thank  God  for  your  efforts  on  our  behalf,  praying 
also  that  your  good  will  may  be  rewarded  and  that  you  may  never  cease 
to  be  our  support.  We  further  pray  that  our  sincere  affection  may 
always  be  towards  the  Great  (British)  Government  and  that  it  may 
increase  continually  :  moreover,  that  your  exalted  affection  and  noble 
solicitude  may  always  be  exercised  towards  us,  and  that  we  may  never 
be  deprived  thereof.  As  regards  our  brother  Majid,  we  pray  God  during 
our  life  time  he  may  never  experience  any  thing  from  us  but  kindness 
and  hearty  good.  will.  Furthermore,  we  rely  implicitly  on  your  arbitra- 
tion between  us  (being  carried  out) . 

What  your  exalted  Excellency  may  require  in  any  way  from  your 
attached  friend,  a  hint  alone  will  suffice  for  its  accomplishment,  and 
we  shall  feel  honoured  in  executing  it. 


TREATIES;    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


233 


We  pray  finally  that  you  may  be  preserved  to  the  highest  honours  PERSIAN 

and  in  the  most  perfect  health.     We  send  you  the  salutation  of  peace  as  GULF. 

the  best  conclusion.  Nos-  LIX 

From  your  truly  sincere  friend,  the  servant  of  God,  who  confides  &LX» 

in  him  as  the  Giver  of  all  good.  Muscat. 
(Sd.)        Thowaynee  bin  Saeed  bin  Sultan. 

Uh  of  Eb-Kaada  1277. 
Voth  Mag  1861. 


No.  LX. 

Convention  between  the  British  Government  and  His  Highness  Syud  Thowaynee 
bin  Saeed  bin  Sultan,  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  for  the  extension  of  the 
Electric  Telegraph  through  the  dominions  subject  to  the  sovereignty  of  His 
Highness  in  Arabia  and  Mekran. 

Article  1. 

That  the  British  Government  shall  be  at  liberty  to  construct  one 
or  more  Telegraphic  lines,  and  to  erect  Telegraph  Stations,  in  any 
portion  of  territory  subject  to  the  sovereignty  of  His  Highness,  both  in 
Arabia  and  Mekran,  which  shall  be  most  convenient  to  them. 

Article  2. 

That  the  cost  of  materials,  landing  charges,  labour,  housing,  provi- 
sions, &c.,  &c,  shall  be  paid  by  the  British  Government,  who  will  make 
any  arrangement  they  consider  most  convenient  regarding  their  own 
supplies,  labour,  &c,  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  undertaking  that  no  impedi- 
ment of  any  sort  shall  be  thrown  in  their  way  in  collecting  them;  on  the 
contrary,  that  every  protection  and  assistance  shall  be  given  on  his  part. 