

Dated  23rd  Jamadel  Akier  1266,  equivalent  to  the  6th  May  1850. 


L.  S. 


(Sd.) 


ELHAKIR  EL  FAKIR  SAEED. 


Note. — In  the  above,  the  clerical  errors  contained  in  the  translation  given,  or  the 
Admiralty  instructions,  are  corrected,  and  one  sentence  slightly  modified  otherwise 
identical.— (Signed)  John  Kirk, 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

No.  LXI. 


235 


Translation  of  a  Tbeaty  of  Peace  between  His  Highness  Syud  Saeed  bin  . 
Sultan,  the  Imam  of  Muscat,  and  Syud  Humood,  the  Chief  of  Sohar. 

Praise  be  to  Him  who  has  caused  peace  to  be  the  means  of  adjust- 
ing the  affairs  of  mankind,  and  who  is  the  Promoter  of  friendship  in 
every  class  of  life. 

The  object  of  writing  this  paper  and  these  words  of  truth  is,  that 
peace  has  been  established  between  His  Highness  the  Imam  of  Muscat, 
Syud  Saeed,  the  son  of  Syud  Sultan,  and  the  Chief  of  Sohar,  the  Honour- 
able Syud  Humood,  the  son  of  Syud  Azan,  through  the  mediation  of 
Captain  Hennell,  the  British  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  this  17th 
day  of  Showal  a.  h.  1255,  corresponding  with  the  23rd  December 
a.  d.  1839,  upon  the  following  conditions  : — « 


PERSIAN 
GULF. 

No.  LXI. 

Muscat. 
{Sohar.) 


Article  1. 

That  from  this  day  there  shall  be  a  perfect,  lasting,  and  established 
peace  between  the  two  contracting  parties. 


Article  2. 

That  the  subjects  of  the  two  contracting  parties  shall  carry  on  a 
free  intercourse  with  each  other's  territory  for  purposes  of  trade  without 
hinderance  or  molestation. 

Article  3. 

Whenever  subjects  of  either  of  the  two  contracting  parties  remove 
voluntarily  from  the  territories  of  the  one  and  take  up  their  residence 
in  those  of  the  other,  no  blame  shall  attach  to  the  ruler  of  the  territory 
in  which  they  settle,  and  moreover  it  shall  not  be  incumbent  upon  him 
to  cause  them  to  return  to  their  original  country  unless  he  thinks  proper 
to  do  so. 

Article  4. 

That  neither  of  the  two  contracting  parties  shall  commit  any  sort 
of  aggression  upon  the  territories  of  the  other,  neither  openly  nor 
secretly,  and  shall  not  excite  others  to  do  so. 


236 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


PERSIAN 
GULP. 

No.  LXI. 

Unseat. 
(Sohar.) 


Article  5. 
In  the  event  of  either  of  the  two  contracting  parties  proceeding  to 
punish  any  rebellious  person  among  his  own  subjects,  the  other  shall  not 
assist  or  support  such  rebel  either  openly  or  secretly,  nor  shall  encourage 
him  in  his  rebellion  by  word  or  by  letter. 


Article  6. 

As  the  district  of  Roostak,  which  belongs  to  Syud  Humood  bin 
Azan  is  surrounded  by  the  territory  of  His  Highness  Syud  Saeed  bin 
Sultan,  the  communication  and  road  between  the  aforesaid  district  and 
the  other  territories  of  Syud  Humood  shall  not  be  interrupted  or  closed. 