

By  the  9th  Article  of  the  Treaty  of  1820  the  carrying  off  of  slaves 
from  the  coasts  of  Africa  or  elsewhere,  and  the  transporting  them  in 
vessels,  was  declared  to  be  plunder  and  piracy.  This  was  not  interpreted 
as  forbidding  traffic  in  slaves,  but  as  prohibiting  kidnapping  only. 
A  very  extensive  trade  in  slaves  was  carried  on  from  the  ports  of 
the  Red  Sea  and  Persian  Gulf  with  Kattywar,  Kutch,  and  the  native 
States  on  the  west  coast  of  India,  which,  under  the  interpretation 
put  on  the  Treaty  of  1820,  the  British  Government  had  no  power 
to  interfere  with.  In  April  1838,  under  instructions  from  Govern- 
ment, the  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf  obtained  from  the  maritime  Chiefs 
of  Ras-ool-Khymah,  Ejman,  Debaye,  and  Aboothabee  an  Agreement 
(No.  LX  VI.)  giving  to  British  cruizers  the  right  to  detain  and  search 
vessels  suspected  of  being  employed  in  carrying  off  slaves,  and  to  confis- 
cate the  vessels  if  found  so  employed.  In  the  following  year  the  Chiefs 
of  Ras-ool-Khyma,  Debaye,  Aboothabee,  and  Amalgavine  entered  into 
an  Agreement  (No.  LXVII.)  of  three  Articles ;  the  first  and  second  of 
these  Articles  gave  to  the  British  Government  the  right  to  search  and 
confiscate  slave  vessels  found  beyond  a  line  from  Cape  Delgado,  on  the 
African  coast,  passing  two  degrees  east  of  Socotra,  and  ending  at  Cape 
Guadel,  on  the  Mekran  coast,  unless  driven  beyond  that  line  by  stress 
of  weather  or  other  necessity.     By  the  third  Article  the  sale  of  persons 


240  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

MARITIME  of  the  Somalee  tribe  was  declared  to  be  piracy.  The  same  Chiefs  and 
TRIBES.  aig0  the  Chiefs  of  Ejman  and  Bahrein  entered  into  Engagements* 
(No.  LXVIII.)  in  1847,  binding  themselves  to  prohibit,  from  and  after 
10th  December  1847,  the  exportation  of  slaves  from  the  African  coast,  or 
elsewhere,  in  vessels  belonging  to  themselves  or  their  subjects,  and 
authorizing  British  cruizers  to  confiscate  vessels  found  engaged  in  the 
forbidden  traffic. 

The  Treaty  concluded  with  the  maritime  Arab  Chiefs  in  1820  did 
not  limit  the  right  of  the  Chiefs  to  carry  on  acknowledged  war  with  each 
other  by  sea,  that  is  to  say,  war  proclaimed  and  avowed  by  one  Chief 
upon  another.  Ail  other  hostile  aggressions,  however,  were  declared  to  be 
piratical.  But  under  the  name  of  acknowledged  war,  many  acts  of 
piracy  were  committed,  especially  during  the  season  of  the  pearl  fishery. 
The  Chiefs  were  therefore  induced,  in  1835,  to  bind  themselves  by  a  mari- 
time truce,  not,  under  any  circumstances,  to  engage  in  hostilities  by  sea  for 
a  period  of  six  months,  on  the  understanding  that  the  British  Govern- 
ment would  not  interfere  with  their  wars  by  land.  The  effects  of  this 
truce  were  so  marked  that  the  Chiefs  were  easily  persuaded  in  the  follow- 
ing year,  and  again  in  1837  to  renew  it  for  eight  months.  Thereafter  it 
was  renewed  annually  till  1843,  when  it  was  prolonged  (No.  LXIX.)  for 
ten  years.  On  the  expiry  of  the  ten  years'  truce  in  1853,  a  Treaty 
(No.  LXX.)  of  perpetual  peace  was  concluded,  which  provided  that 
there  should  be  a  complete  cessation  of  hostilities  at  sea  between  the 
subjects  of  the  subscribing  parties ;  that  in  the  event  of  aggressions  on 
any  one  by  sea,  the  injured  tribe  should  not  retaliate,  but  refer  the  mat- 
ter to  the  British  authorities  in  the  Persian  Gulf;  and  that  the  British 
Government  should  watch  over  the  peace  of  the  Gulf  and  ensure  at  all 
times  the  due  observance  of  the  Treaty. 