

Slat*  Trade.  ARTICLE   3. 

As  the  the  selling  of  males  and  females,  whether  grown  up  or  young, 
who  are  "  Hoor"  or  free,  is  contrary  to  the  Mahomedan  religion,  and 
whereas  the  Soomalee  tribe  is  included  in  the  "Hoor"  or  free,  I, 
Sultan  bin  Suggur,  do  hereby  agree  that  the  sale  of  males  and  females, 
whether  young  or  old,  of  the  Soomalee  tribe,  shall  be  considered  as 
piracy,  and  that  after  four  months  from  this  date,  all  those  of  my  people 
convicted  of  being  concerned  in  such  an  act  shall  be  punished  the  same 
as  pirates. 


Seal  of 

Sultan  bin 

Suggub. 


Note. — A  similar  agreement  to  the  above  was  entered  into  by  Sheikh  Khu- 
leefa  bin  Shakbout  on  the  1st  July  1839,  and  by  Sheikh  Muktoom,  of  Debaye, 
and  Sheikh  Abdoola  bin  Hashed,  of  Amalgavine,  on  the  2nd  of  the  same  month. 


No.  LXVIII. 

Translate  of  an  Engagement  entered  into  by  Sheikh  Sultan  bin  Suggub,  Chief 
of  Kas-ool-Khymah  and  Shargah,  for  the  abolition  of  the  African  slave  trade 
in  his  ports. 

It  having  been  intimated  to  me  by  Major  Hennell,  the  Resident  in 
the  Persian  Gulf,  that  certain  conventions  have  lately  been  entered  into  by 
His  Highness  the  Imam  of  Muscat  and  other  powers  with  the  British  Gov- 
ernment for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  exportation  of  slaves  from  the 
African  coast  and  elsewhere,  and  it  having,  moreover,  been  explained  to 
me  that,  in  order  to  the  full  attainment  of  the  objects  contemplated  by 
the  aforesaid  conventions,  the  concurrence  and  co-operation  of  the  Chiefs 
of  the  several  ports  situated  on  the  Arabian  coast  of  the  Persian  Gulf 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  257 

are   required,  accordingly  I,  Sheikh  Sultan  bin  Suggur,  Chief  of  the  MARITIME 
Joasmee   tribe,   with    a   view   to    strengthen    the   bonds   of  friendship     TRIBES. 
existing  between  me  and  the  British  Government,  do  hereby  engage  to  No.  LXVIII. 
prohibit  the  exportation  of  slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa  and  else-  slave  Trade. 
where  on  board  of  my  vessels  and  those  belonging  to  my  subjects  or 
dependants ;  such  prohibition  to  take  effect  from  the  1st  day  of  Mohur- 
rum  a.  h.  1264,  (or  10th  December  a.  d.  1847.) 

And  I  do  further  consent  that  whenever  the  cruizers  of  the  British 
Government  fall  in  with  any  of  my  vessels,  or  those  belonging  to  my 
subjects  or  dependants,  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  slave  trade,  they 
may  detain  and  search  them ;  and  in  case  of  their  finding  that  any  of 
the  vessels  aforesaid  have  violated  this  engagement,  by  the  exportation 
of  slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa,  or  elsewhere,  upon  any  pretext 
whatever,  they  (the  government  cruizers)  shall  seize  and  confiscate 
the  same. 