

Article  3. 

That  in  the  event  of  an  act  of  aggression  being  committed  at  sea  by 
any  of  those  who  are  subscribers  with  us  to  this  engagement  upon  any 
of  our  subjects  or  dependants,  we  will  not  proceed  immediately  to  reta- 
liate, but  will  inform  the  British  Resident  or  the  Commodore  at  Bas- 
sidore,  who  will  forthwith  take  the  necessary  steps  for  obtaining  repara- 
tion for  the  injury  inflicted,  provided  that  its  occurrence  can  be  satis- 
factorily proved. 

We  further  agree  that  the  maintenance  of  the  peace  now  concluded 
amongst  us  shall  be  watched  over  by  the  British  Government,  who  will 
take  steps  to  ensure  at  all  times  the  due  observance  of  the  above  Articles, 
and  God  of  this  is  the  best  witness  and  guarantee. 


L. 

S. 

L. 

s. 

(Signed)        Abdoolla  bin  Hashed, 

Chief  of  Amalgavine. 
„  Hamed  bin  Hashed, 

Chief  of  Ejman. 
„  Saeed  bin  Butye, 

Chief  of  Debage. 
„  Saeed  bin  Tahnoon, 

Chief  of  the  Beniyas. 
„  Sultan  bin  Suggur, 

Chief  of  the  Joasmees. 


Approved  by  the  Governor  General  in  Council  on  24th  August  1853. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


261 


No.  LXXI. 

Additional  Articles  for  the  protection  of  the  Telegraph  line  and  stations,  agreed 
to  before  Lieutenant  Colonel  Lewis  Pelly,  Acting  Political  Eesident, 
Persian  Gulf,  and  appended  to  the  Treaty  of  Peace  of  the  4th  May  1853. 

Whereas,  under  date  25th  Rujjub  1269  (4th  May  1853),  we,  Chief  of 
the  Joasmees,  Chief  of  the  Beniyas,  Chief  of  Amalgavine,  Chief  of 
Ejman,  Chief  of  Debaye,  did  agree  to  a  perpetual  Treaty  of  Peace  at  sea, 
and  whereby  our  vessels  have  been  respected  and  our  commerce  increased ; 
and  whereas  the  British  Government,  in  the  further  interests  of  commerce 
and  of  the  general  peace,  are  preparing  telegraphic  lines  and  stations  at 
various  points  in  or  near  the  Persian  Gulf,  we  do  hereby  engage  for 
ourselves,  our  heirs  and  successors,  to  respect  and  abstain  from  all  and 
every  interference  with  the  said  telegraphic  operations  that  may  be 
carried  on  by  the  said  British  Government  in  or  near  our  territory. 

And  in  the  event  (which  God  forbid)  of  any  of  our  subjects  or 
dependents  committing  an  act  of  aggression  or  trespass  on  the  said 
telegraphic  lines  and  stations  or  other  telegraphic  material,  we  will 
immediately  punish  the  offender  and  proceed  to  afford  full  redress  upon 
the  same  being  brought  to  our  notice. 

The  telegraphic  line  being  intended  for  the  common  good,  our 
subjects  and  dependents  shall  be  permitted  to  send  messages  by  the 
Telegraph  at  such  rates  of  payment  as  may  be  paid  by  British  subjects. 


MARITIME 
TRIBES. 

No.  LXXI. 

Telegraph. 


BAHREIN. 

