

Article  2. 

If  any  individual  of  the  people  of  the  Arabs  contracting  shall  attack 
any  that  pass  by  land  or  sea  of  any  nation  whatsoever,  in  the  way  of 
plunder  and  piracy  and  not  of  acknowledged  war,  he  shall  be  accounted 
an  enemy  of  all  mankind  and  shall  be  held  to  have  forfeited  both  life  and 
goods.  And  acknowledged  war  is  that  which  is  proclaimed,  avowed,  and 
ordered  by  government  against  government;  and  the  killing  of  men  and 
taking  of  goods  without  proclamation,  avowal,  and  the  order  of  a  govern- 
ment, is  plunder  and  piracy. 

Article  3. 

The  friendly  (literally  the  pacificated)  Arabs  shall  carry  by  land  and 
sea  a  red  flag,  with  or  without  letters  in  it,  at  their 
option,  and  this  shall  be  in  a  border  of  white,  the 
breadth  of  the  white  in  the  border  being  equal  to  the 
breadth  of  the  red,  as  represented  in  the  margin, 
(the  whole  forming  the  flag  known  in  the  British 
Navy  by  the  title  of  white  pierced  red,)  and  this 
shall  be  the  flag  of  the  friendly  Arabs,  and  they 
shall  use  it  and  no  other. 

Article  4. 

The  pacificated  tribes  shall  all  of  them  continue  in  their  former 
relations,  with  the  exception  that  they  shall  be  at  peace  with  the  British 
Government,  and  shall  not  fight  with  each  other,  and  the  flag  shall  be  a 
symbol  of  this  only  and  of  nothing  further. 

VOL.    VII.  2    i 


MARITIME 
TRIBES. 

No.  LXV. 

General. 


250 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


MARITIME 
TRII'.l.s. 

No.  LXV. 

General. 


Article  5. 

The  vessels  of  the  friendly  Arabs  shall  all  of  them  have  in  their 
possession  a  paper  (Register)  signed  with  the  signature  of  their  Chief, 
in  which  shall  be  the  name  of  the  vessel,  its  length,  its  breadth,  and  how 
many  Karahs  it  holds.  And  they  shall  also  have  in  their  possession 
another  writing  (Port  Clearance)  signed  with  the  signature  of  their 
Chief,  in  which  shall  be  the  name  of  the  owner,  the  name  of  the 
Nacodah,  the  number  of  men,  the  number  of  arms,  from  whence  sailed, 
at  what  time,  and  to  what  port  bound.  And  if  a  British  or  other  vessel 
meets  them,  they  shall  produce  the  Register  and  the  Clearance. 

Article  6. 

The  friendly  Arabs,  if  they  choose,  shall  send  an  envoy  to  the  British 
Residency  in  the  Persian  Gulf  with  the  necessary  accompaniments,  and 
he  shall  remain  there  for  the  transaction  of  their  business  with  the  Resi- 
dency ;  and  the  British  Government,  if  it  chooses,  shall  send  an  envoy 
also  to  them  in  like  manner ;  and  the  envoy  shall  add  his  signature  to 
the  signature  of  the  Chief  in  the  paper  (Register)  of  their  vessels^ 
which  contains  the  length  of  the  vessel,  its  breadth,  and  tonnage ;  the 
signature  of  the  envoy  to  be  renewed  every  year.  Also  all  such  envoys 
shall  be  at  the  expense  of  their  own  party. 