

Article  7. 
If  any  tribe,  or  others,  shall  not  desist  from  plunder  and  piracy, 
the  friendly  Arabs  shall  act  against  them  according  to  their  ability  and 
circumstances,  and  an  arrangement  for  this  purpose  shall  take  place 
between  the  friendly  Arabs  and  the  British  at  the  time  when  such  plun- 
der and  piracy  shall  occur. 

Article  8. 

The  putting  men  to  death  after  they  have  given  up  their  arms,  is  an 
act  of  piracy  and  not  of  acknowledged  war  ;  and  if  any  tribe  shall  put 
to  death  any  persons,  either  Mahomedans  or  others,  after  they  have 
given  up  their  arms,  such  tribe  shall  be  held  to  have  broken  the  peace; 
and  the  friendly  Arabs  shall  act  against  them  in  conjunction  with  the 
British,  and,  God  willing,  the  war  against  them  shall  not  cease  until  the 
surrender  of  those  who  performed  the  act  and  of  those  who  ordered  it. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


251 


Article  9.  maritime 

TRIRFS 

The  carrying  off  of  slaves,  men,  women,  or  children  from  the  coasts  . ___ 

of  Africa  or  elsewhere,  and  the  transporting1  them  in  vessels,  is  plunder    No.  LXV. 
and  piracy,  and  the  friendly  Arabs  shall  do  nothing  of  this  nature.  General. 

Article  10. 

The  vessels  of  the  friendly  Arabs,  bearing  their  flag  above  described, 
shall  enter  into  all  the  British  ports  and  into  the  ports  of  the  allies  of 
the  British  so  far  as  they  shall  be  able  to  effect  it ;  aud  they  shall  buy 
and  sell  therein,  and  if  any  shall  attack  them,  the  British  Government 
shall  take  notice  of  it. 

Article  11. 

These  conditions  aforesaid  shall  be  common  to  all  tribes  and  persons, 
who  shall  hereafter  adhere  thereto  in  the  same  manner  as  to  those  who 
adhere  to  them  at  the  time  present.     End  of  the  Articles. 

Issued  at  Ras-ool-Khyma,  in  triplicate,  at  mid-day,  on  Saturday,  the 
twenty -second  of  the  month  of  Rabe-ul-Awul,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira 
one  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty -Jive,  corresponding  to  the  eighth  of 
January  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  tioenty,  and  signed  by  the  con- 
tracting parties  at  the  places  and  times  under  written. 

Signed  at  Ras-ool-Khyma  at  the  time  of  issue  by 

(Signed)         W.  Grant  Keir, 

Major  General. 


(Signed)  Hassun  bin  Rahmaii, 

Sheikh  of  Hatt  and  Falna,  formerly  of 
Ras-ool-Khyma. 

(Signed)         Razib  bin  Ahmed, 

Sheikh  of  Jourat  al  Kamra. 

(An  exact  Translation) 
(Signed)         J.  P.  Thompson,  Captain, 
ltth  Light  Dragoons  and  Interpreter. 


L. 

S. 

L. 

s. 

L. 

s. 

252 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND    SUNNUDS. 


MARITIME  Signed  at  Ras-ool-Khyma,   on  Tuesday,  the  twenty-fifth  of   the 

TRIPES,     month  of  Rabe-ul-Awul,   in   the    year  of  the    Hegira    one    thousand 
No.  LXV.    two  hundred  and  thirty-five,  corresponding  to  the  eleventh  of  January 