


(Signed)         Rashed  bin  Hamid, 

Chief  of  Ejman. 


Signed  at  Faleia,  at  noon,  on  Wednesday,  the  twenty-ninth  of  the 
month  of  Jemmadee-ool-Awul,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  one  thousand  two 
hundred  and  thirty-five,  corresponding  to  the  fifteenth  of  March  1820. 


(Signed)         Abdoolla  bin  Rashid, 

Chief  of  Amalgavine. 

(Signed)         W.  Grant  Keie, 

Major  General. 


No.  LXVI. 

Abticle  of  Agbeement  entered  into  by  Sheikh   Sultan  bin  Suggtjb,  dated 
Shargah,  the  22nd  Mohurrum  a.  h.  1254,  or  17th  April  a.  d.  1838. 

In  the  event  of  vessels  connected  with  my  ports,  or  belonging  to 
my  subjects,  coming  under  the  suspicion  of  being  employed  in  the 
carrying  off  (literally  stealing)  and  embarkation  of  slaves,  men,  women, 
or  children,  I,  Sultan  bin  Suggur,  Sheikh  of  the  Joasmee  Tribe,  do  hereby 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS;    AND    SUNNUDS.  255 

agree  to  their  being  detained  and  searched,  whenever  and  wherever  they  MARITIME 
may  be  fallen  in  with  on  the  seas,  by  the  cruizers  of  the  British  Gov-     TRIBES, 
ernment ;  and  further  that   upon  its  being  ascertained  that  the  crews    Nos.  LXV I 
have  carried  off  (literally  "  stolen")  and  embarked  slaves,  their  vessels     &  LXV11- 
shall  be  liable  to  seizure  and  confiscation  by  the  aforesaid  cruizers.  Slave  Trade. 


Sealed  by 

Sultan  bin 

Sugoue. 


Sealed  by  Sultan  bin  Suggur. 


Similar  agreements  signed  by  Sheikh  Eashed  bin  Hamid,  of  Ejman ;  Sheikh 
Muktoom  bin  Bctye,  of  Debaye ;  Sheikh  Khuleefa  bin  Shakbout,  of 
Aboothabee. 


No.  LXVII. 

Translation  of  an  Agreement   entered  into  by  SnEiKH  Sultan  bin  Suggur, 
Chief  of  Eas-ool-Kliymah,  dated  off  Eas-ool-Khymah,  3rd  July  1839. 

I,  Sultan  bin  Suggur,  Sheikh  of  the  Joasmee  Tribe,  do  hereby 
declare  that  I  bind  and  pledge  myself  to  the  British  Government  in  the 
following  engagements  : — 

Article  1. 

That  the  government  cruizers,  whenever  they  may  meet  any  vessel 
belonging  to  myself  or  my  subjects  beyond  direct  line  drawn  from  Cape 
Delgado,  passing  two  degrees  seaward  of  the  Island  of  Socotra,  and  end- 
ing at  Cape  Guadel,  and  shall  suspect  that  such  vessel  is  engaged  in  the 
slave  trade,  the  said  cruizers  are  permitted  to  detain  and  search  it. 

Article  2. 

Should  it  on  examination  be  proved  that  any  vessel  belonging 
to  myself  or  my  subjects  is  carrying  slaves,  whether  men,  women, 
or  children,   for  sale  beyond  the  aforesaid  line,  then   the  government 


2 50  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

MARITIME  iTiiizers   shall  seize  and  confiscate  such  vessel  and  her  cargo.     But  if 
TRIBES.     tije  aforesaid  vessel  shall  pass  beyond  the  aforesaid  line  owing  to  stress 
No*  LXVH  of  weather,  or  other  case  of  necessity  not  under  control,  then  she  shall 
A  LXVIII.   not  ijg  geized. 