The  Island  of  Bahrein,  owing  to  the  richness  of  its  pearl  fisheries, 
was  long  a  field  of  contention  between  the  different  powers  that  towards 
the  end  of  last  century  strove  for  supremacy  in  the  Persian  Gulf.  In 
the  year  1799,  after  having  often  changed  masters,  it  was  conquered  by 
the  Uttoobee  tribe,  by  whom  it  has  ever  since  been  held  under  allegiance 
at  one  time  to  Muscat  and  afterwards  successively  to  the  Wahabees,  to 
Turkey  and  to  Persia,  and  now  in  independence. 

In  1820,  after  the  capture  of  Ras-ool-Khyma  by  the  expedition  sent 
against  the  piratical  tribes  in  the  Gulf,  the  two  Chiefs,  Abdoolla  bin 
Ahmed  and  Suleiman  bin  Ahmed,  who  then  ruled  Bahrein  conjointly, 
signed  a  preliminary  engagement  (No.  LXXII.)  not  to  permit  in 
Bahrein  the  sale  of  property  procured  by  plunder  and  piracy,  and  to  re- 
store all  Indian  prisoners  then  in  their  possession.  They  also  subscribed 
the  general  Treaty  (No.  LXV.)  for  the  pacification  of  the  Persian  Gulf. 

The  Chiefs  of  Bahrein  were  not  parties  to  any  of  the  agreements 
concluded  after  1820  with  the  Arab  Chiefs  except  the  engagement 
(No.  LXVIII.)  in  1847  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave  trade.  This  was 
signed  on  8th  May  1847  by  Mahomed  bin  Khuleefa.  This  Chief  was 
the  grandson  of  Suleiman  bin  Ahmed,  who  had  signed  the  general  Treaty 
in  1820.  Suleiman  died  in  1825,  and  his  son  Khuleefa,  who  had  succeeded 
to  his  share  in  the  government,  died  in  1834.  Mahomed  bin  Khuleefa 
for  some  years  was  kept  out  of  power  by  his  grand-uncle  Abdoolla  bin 
Ahmed,  but  in  1843  he  succeeded  not  only  in  recovering  his  rights,  but 
in  expelling  Abdoolla  bin  Ahmed  from  Bahrein.  The  latter,  who  found 
refuge  in  Demam,  made  several  unsuccessful  attempts  with  the  help  of  the 
Wahabees  and  the"  Chief  of  Koweit,  to  recover  his  power.  He  died  in 
1848,  but  his  son  Mahomed  bin  Abdoolla  continued  the  feud.  His 
warlike  preparations  and  his  piracies  so  endangered  the  peace  of  the  Gulf, 
that  in  1859  he  was  declared  a  public  enemy  and  expelled  from  Demam 
by  a  British  force.  No  sooner  was  this  done,  than  Mahomed  bin 
Khuleefa  of  Bahrein  commenced  to  levy  forceable  imposts  on  Wahabee 
vessels  and  to  carry  off  their  property.     On  being  remonstrated  with, 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  263 

he  ostensibly  put  himself  under  allegiance  first  to  Persia  and  then  to  BAHREIN. 
Turkey,  The  policy  of  the  British  Government,  however,  as  guardians  of  No.  LXXII. 
the  general  tranquillity  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  required  that  Bahrein  should 
be  considered  independent.  Early  in  the  year  1861,  therefore,  when  the 
Chief  of  Bahrein,  in  violation  of  his  Treaty  engagements,  again  block- 
aded the  Wahabee  ports,  he  was  forced  by  the  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf 
to  withdraw  the  blockade,  and  was  required  to  conclude  a  perpetual  Treaty 
(No.  LXXIII.)  of  peace  and  friendship,  binding  himself  to  abstain  from 
war,  piracy,  and  slavery  by  sea  on  condition  of  protection  against  similar 
aggressions,  and  to  permit  all  British  subjects  to  trade  with  Bahrein  on 
payment  of  an  ad  valorem  duty  of  5  per  cent,  on  their  goods. 