


TREATIES;   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


247 


Article  2. 


MAKITIME 


Sheikh  Shahbout  shall  be  admitted  to  the  terms  of  the  sreneral     1RIBES- 


Treaty  with  the  friendly  Arabs.  No.  LXIV. 

Bone  at  Basal  Khyma  on  the  twenty-fifth   of  the  Rabee-ul-Awul,  in  Preliminary, 
the  year  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty-five,  corresponding  to  the 
eleventh  of  January  1820. 


(Signed)    W.  Grant  Keir, 

Major  General. 


(Signed)     Shahbout. 


Copy  of  the  Articles  between  the  General  and  Sheikh  Shahbout. 
Witness  my  hand  and  seal. 

(Signed)     W.  Grant  Keir, 

Major  General. 


Tbanslation  of  the  preliminary  Tbeatt  with  Hassun  bin  All 
In  the  name  of  God,  the  merciful,  the  compassionate ! 
Know  all  men  that   Hassun  bin  Ali  has  been  in  the  presence  of 

General  Sir  William  Grant  Keir,  and  there  have  passed  between  them 

the  following  stipulations  : — 

Article  1. 

If  any  of  the  vessels  of  Hassun  bin  Ali  are  in  Shargah,  or  Umul 
Gyuyn,  or  Imam,  or  Abou  Dabyee,  or  any  other  of  the  places  to  which 
the  General  shall  go  with  the  force,  such  vessels  shall  be  surrendered  to 
the  General,  and  the  General  will  leave  those  which  are  for  the  pearl 
fishery  and  fishing  boats. 


248 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


MARITIME 
THINKS. 


Article  2. 

Hassun  bin  Ali  shall  give  up  all  the  Indian  prisoners  if  any  such 
No.  LXIV.   are  in  his  possession. 
Preliminary.  ARTICLE   3. 

After  this  Hassun  bin  Ali  shall  be  admitted  to  the  terms  of  the 
general  Treaty  with  the  friendly  (literally  the  "  pacificated")  Arabs. 
End  of  the  Articles. 

Issued  at  Basal  Khyma  in  the  forenoon  of  Saturday,  the  twenty- 
ninth  of  the  month  of  Rabe-ul-Awul,  in  the  year  one  thousand  two  hundred 
and  thirty-five,  corresponding  to  the  15th  of  January  1820. 


(Signed)        W.  Grant  Keir, 

Major  General. 


(Signed)        Hassun  bin  Ali. 


Copy  of  the  Articles  entered  into  between  the  General  and  Hassun 
bin  Ali  in  the  forenoon  of  Saturday,  the  twenty-ninth  of  Rabe-ul-Awul, 
in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty-five, 
corresponding  to  the  15th  of  January  1820. 

Witness  my  hand  and  seal. 


(Signed)         W.  Grant  Keir, 
Major  General. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


249 


No.  LXV. 

Tbanslation  of  the  general  Tbeaty  with  the  Arab  Tribes  of  the  Persian  Gulf. 

In  the  name  of  God,  the  merciful,  the  compassionate  ! 

Praise  be  to  God,  who  hath  ordained  peace  to  be  a  blessing  to  his 

creatures.     There   is   established   a  lasting   peace  between   the   British 

Government  and  the  Arab  tribes,  who  are  parties  to  this  contract,  on 

the  following  conditions : — 

Article  1. 

There  shall  be  a  cessation  of  plunder  and  piracy  by  land  and  sea  on 
the  part  of  the  Arabs,  who  are  parties  to  this  contract,  for  ever. 