

General.       1820. 


(Signed)         Shakbout, 
Sheikh  of  Abooshabee. 


Signed  at  Ras-ool-Khyma,  at  mid-day,  on  Saturday,  the  twenty- 
ninth  of  the  month  Rabe-ul-Awul,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  one  thousand 
two  hundred  and  thirty-five,  corresponding  to  the  fifteenth  of  January 
1820. 


(Signed)  Hassun  bin  Ali, 

Sheikh  of  Zyah. 


The  seal  is  Captain  Thompson's,  as  Sheikh  Hassun  bin  Ali  had 
not  a  seal  at  the  time  of  signature. 

Copy  of  the  general  Treaty  with  the  friendly  (literally  the  "  pacifi- 
cated")  Arabs,  with  the  signatures  attached  to  it,  up  to  the  fifteenth  day 
of  January  1820  inclusive.     Given  under  my  hand  and  seal. 


(Signed)         W.  GraNt  Keir, 

Major  General. 

(Signed)         T.  P.  Thompson,  Captain, 
llth  Light  Dragoons,  and  Interpreter. 


Ratified  by  theG  oevrnor  General  in  Council  on  2nd  April  1820. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


253 


Signed  for  Mahomed  bin  Haza   bin  Zaal,  Sheikh  of  Debaye,    a  MARITIME 

minor,  at  Shargah,  on  Friday,  the  twelfth  of  the  month  of  Rubee-oos-  TRIBES. 

Sanee,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty-  No.  LXV. 

five,  corresponding  to  the  twenty-eighth  of  January  1820.  General. 


(Signed)         Saeed  btn  Syf, 
Uncle  of  Sheikh  Mahomed. 


Signed  at  Shargah,  at  mid-day,  on  Friday,  the  nineteenth  of  the 
month  of  Rubee-oos-Sanee,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  one  thousand  two 
hundred  and  thirty-five,  corresponding  to  the  fourth  of  February  1820. 


(Signed)         Sultan  bin  Suggur, 

Chief  of  Shargah. 


Signed,  at  Shargah,  by  the  Vakeel  on  the  part  of  the  Sheikhs 
Suleman  bin  Ahmed  and  Abdoolla  bin  Ahmed,  in  his  quality  of  Vakeel 
to  the  Sheikhs  aforesaid,  on  Saturday,  the  twentieth  of  the  month  of 
Rubee-oos-Sanee,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  one  thousand  two  hundred 
and  thirty-five,  corresponding  to  the  5th  of  February  1820. 

(Signed)     Syud  Abdool  Jabel  bin  Syud  Yas, 

Vakeel  of  Sheikh  Suleman  bin  Ahmed  and 
Sheikh  Abdoolla  bin  Ahmed,  of  the  family 

of  Khalifa,  Sheikhs  of  Bahrein. 

Signed  and  accepted  by  Suleman  bin  Ahmed,  of  the  house  of  Kha- 
lifa, at  Bahrein,  on  the  ninth  of  Jemmadee-ool-Awul,  in  the  year  of  the 
Hegira  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty-five,  corresponding  to  the 
twenty-third  of  February  1820. 


254 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


MARITIME  Signed  and  accepted  by  Abdoolla  bin  Ahmed,  of  the  house  of  Kha- 

TRIBES.  ijfa^  a^  Bahrein,  on  the  ninth  of  Jemmadee-ool-Awul,  in  the  year  of   the 

s  -  i.w  [legira  one  khoaMkdi#o  tuufoed  and  thirty-five,  coweqwnding  to  tBe 

*  LXYi.  twenty -third  of  February  1820. 

Start  Trade. 


Signed  at  Faleia,  at  noon,  on  Wednesday,  the  twenty-ninth  of  the 
month  of  Jemadee-ool- Awul,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  one  thousand  two 
hundred  and  thirty-five,  corresponding  to  the  fifteenth  of  March  1820. 