


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


259 


Article  4. 
That  on  the  termination  of  the  month  of  May  1853,  by  God's  bless- 
ing, we  will  endeavour  to  arrange  either  an  extension  of  this  truce,  or  a 
firm  and  lasting  peace ;  but  in  the  event  of  our  being  unable  to  come  to 
a  satisfactory  adjustment  regarding  our  respective  claims,  we  hereby  bind 
ourselves  to  give  notice,  on  or  about  the  above  date,  to  the  British  Resi- 
dent, of  our  intention  to  renew  hostilities  after  the  expiration  of  the  term 
now  fixed  upon  for  this  truce,  viz,,  the  end  of  the  month  of  May  1853. 

Signed  as  in  the  preamble. 


MARITIME 
TRIBES. 

Nos.  LXIX 
&  LXX. 

Perpetual 
Truce. 


No.  LXX. 

Teeaty  of  Peace  in  perpetuity  agreed  upon  by  the  Chiefs  of  the  Arabian  coast 
in  behalf  of  themselves,  their  heirs  and  successors,  under  the  mediation  of 
the  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf. 

We,  whose  seals  are  hereunto  affixed,  Sheikh  Sultan  bin  Suggur, 
Chief  of  Ras-ool-Khyma,  Sheikh  Saeed  bin  Tahnoon,  Chief  of  Aboo- 
thabee,  Sheikh  Saeed  bin  Butye,  Chief  of  Debaye,  Sheikh  Hamid 
bin  Rashed,  Chief  of  Ejman,  Sheikh  Abdoolla  bin  Rashed,  Chief  of 
Amalgavine,  having  experienced  for  a  series  of  years  the  benefits  and 
advantages  resulting  from  a  maritime  truce  contracted  amongst  ourselves 
under  the  mediation  of  the  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf  and  renewed 
from  time  to  time  up  to  the  present  period,  and  being  fully  impressed, 
therefore,  with  a  sense  of  the  evil  consequence  formerly  arising  from 
the  prosecution  of  our  feuds  at  sea,  whereby  our  subjects  and  dependants 
were  prevented  from  carrying  on  the  pearl  fishery  in  security,  and  were 
exposed  to  interruption  and  molestation  when  passing  on  their  lawful 
occasions,  accordingly,  we,  as  aforesaid,  have  determined,  for  ourselves, 
our  heirs  and  successors,  to  conclude  together  a  lasting  and  inviolable 
peace  from  this  time  forth  in  perpetuity,  and  do  hereby  agree  to  bind 
ourselves  down  to  observe  the  following  conditions  :— 

Article  1. 
That  from  this  date,  viz.,  25th  Rujjub  1269,  4th  May  1853,  and 
hereafter,  there  shall  be  a  complete  cessation  of  hostilities  at  sea  between 
our  respective  subjects  and  dependants,  and  a  perfect  maritime  trace  shall 
endure  between  ourselves  and  between  our  successors,  respectively,  for 
evermore. 


260 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


MARITIME 
TRIBES. 


Perpetual 
Truce. 


Article  2. 

That  in  the  event  (which  God  forbid)  of  any  of  our  subjects  or 
Na  LXX.    dependants  committing  an  act  of  aggression  at  sea  upon  the  lives  or  pro- 
perty of  those  of  any  of  the  parties  to  this  agreement,  we  will  immediately 
punish  the  assailants  and  proceed  to  afford  full  redress  upon  the  same 
being  brought  to  our  notice. 