

,,"77        British   Government  agree  to  the  same.     Sultan  M.  Houssain  and  all 

Abdalees  ° 

LLahrj).     interior  Sultans  agree  to  this,  and  I  am  responsible,  all  those  even  on  the 

roads  to  the  interior  shall  be  kept  from  molesting  any  one  by  me,  as  they 

were  when  Sultan  M.  Houssain  possessed  Aden.     This  is  agreed  upon 

between  me  and  Commander  Haines  on  the  part  of  government,  and 

I  promise  to  do  even  more  than  I  have  hitherto  done,  please  God.     I 

require  respect  from  Commander  Haines  in  return,  and  more  than  before 

if  possible. 

(Signed)     Sytjd  M.  Houssain  West. 

17th  Zilkadah,      -)  „  Hassan  Cateef. 


,} 


2nd  February  1839.   J  „  S.  B.  Haines. 


Copt  of  a  Tbeaty  between  Sultan  M.  Houssain  and  his  children  and  the  English 
through  his  accredited  Agent. 

This  Treaty  is  formed  between  Syud  Mahomed  Houssain  and  Has- 
sun  Cateef  on  account  of  the  Sultan  of  Lahej  and  Commander  Haines, 
the  Agent  to  the  Government. 

On  the  word  and  promise  of  Sultan  M.  Houssain,  I  promise  that 
no  insult  or  molestation  shall  take  place  on  the  road,  or  between  the 
English  and  my  people,  and  that  all  shall  be  peace  and  quietness ;  and  I 
agree  that  between  my  people  and  your  people  there  shall  be  no  differ- 
ence or  oppression,  and  that  the  English  agree  that  all  shall  be  peace,  and 
that  all  merchants  shall  be  free  to  trade  without  oppression. 

The  witnesses  to  this  are — 

Rashed  Abdoolla. 
Hadjee  M.  Houssain. 
Shah  Montee. 
Hadjee  Jaffer. 

(Signed)     Syud  M.  Houssain  bin  West. 
„  Houssain  bin  Abdoolla  Cateef. 

Uh  February  1839.  „  S.  B.  Haines. 


Approved  by  the  Bombay  Government  on  23rd  February  1839. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  277 

NO.   LXXVI.  ADEN. 


Tbanslation  of  a  Bond  entered  into  by  Sultan  M.  Houssain  Fudthel  and  Lis  No.  LXXVI. 

sons  Sultan  Ahmed  Af .  Houssain  Fudthel,  Ali,  Abdoolla,  and  Fudthel,         

with  Commander  Haines,  the  Political  Agent  at  Aden. 

{Lahej). 

Sultan  M.  Houssain  Fudthel  and  his  sons  named  above  agree,  with 
a  view  to  the  tranquillity  of  their  territory,  the  protection  of  the  poor 
and  weak,  the  security  of  their  tribe,  and  the  safety  of  the  roads,  that 
the  Sultan  shall  be  answerable  for  any  outrages  committed  by  his  people 
on  the  roads,  and  that  they  shall  not  offer  any  opposition  to  the  British 
Government ;  that  the  interests  of  both  shall  be  identical.  The  claim 
for  the  stipends  due  to  Foodheli,  Yaffaee,  Hooshabee,  and  Ameer  tribes 
shall  be  upon  the  British  Government.  Sultan  M.  Houssain  and  his 
children,  in  perpetuity,  and  from  generation  to  generation,  shall  receive 
from  the  British  Government  a  stipend  of  6,500  dollars  annually,  to 
begin  from  the  month  of  Zilkad  Hegira  1254  (January,  February  1839). 
The  land  from  Khoor  Muksa  to  Lahej,  as  far  as  it  is  known  to  belong 
to  the  Abdallee  tribe,  is  under  the  authority  of  the  Sultan.  In  case 
of  any  attacks  upon  Lahej  or  the  Abdallee  tribe,  or  upon  Aden  or 
the  British  troops,  we  (the  Sultan)  and  the  British  shall  make  a  common 
cause.  Any  of  our  subjects  entering  Aden  must  be  obedient  to  the 
British  laws,  and  any  of  the  British  subjects,  when  in  Lahej,  must 
submit  to  our  authority.  If  I  (the  Sultan)  or  my  children  proceed  to 
and  from  Aden,  we  shall  not  be  liable  to  any  customs. 