

fees,  by  the  Sultan  or  any  of  his  Officers. 

Article  3. 

After  the  aforesaid  term  of  ten  years  is  expired,  then  the  duties  are 
to  be  raised  to  three  per  cent,  and  never  to  be  made  higher  by  the  Sultan, 
his  heirs  and  successors,  on  pain  of  forfeiting  the  friendship  and  commer- 
cial intercourse  of  the  British  nation.  The  Sultan  also  binds  himself 
not  to  make  any  other  charges  whatever,  of  anchorage,  weighing,  or  cus- 
tom-house fees,  under  the  penalty  before  mentioned. 

Article  4. 

The  same  duties  of  two  per  cent,  for  the  first  ten  years,  and  three 
per  cent,  for  ever  after,  are  also  to  be  paid  on  all  goods  exported  from 
Aden,  which  are  the  produce  of  the  Sultan's  territories,  or  the  country 
surrounding  them  ;  and  no  other  charges  or  demands  whatever  are  to  be 
made  on  those  goods  by  the  Sultan  or  any  of  his  Officers. 

Article  5. 
If,  however,  any  goods  are  purchased  by  the  Honourable  the  Company, 
or  any  British  subjects  in  the  town  or  the  port  of  Aden,  the  produce  of 
Africa,  Abyssinia,  or  any  other  country,  not  in  the  possession  of  the 
Sultan,  then  no  duty  is  to  be  paid,  as  it  is  to  be  considered  that  such 
goods  have  paid  a  duty  on  their  first  being  landed,  and  consequently  the 
Sultan  agrees  that  they  shall  not  pay  duty  a  second  time. 

Article  6. 
The  British  subjects  who  use  the  ports  of  Aden  shall   have  the  pri- 
vilege of  transacting  their  own  business,  and  not  be  obliged  to  commit  it 
to  the  arrangement  of  any  other  person,  nor  forced  to  use  any  broker 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  273 

or  interpreter  whatever,  unless  they  shall  please  to  do  so ;  and  then  such      ADEN. 


broker  or  interpreter  to  be  a  person  of  their  own  choice,  and  not  subject  No.  LXXIV. 
to  any  control  on  the  part  of  the  Sultan.  Abdalees 


(Lahef). 


Article  7. 

It  shall  be  lawful  and  free  for  the  subjects  of  the  British  nation  to 
make  over  their  property  to  whomsoever  they  please,  without  any  control, 
either  in  health  or  in  sickness ;  and  if  any  person,  being  a  British  subject, 
should  die  suddenly  and  without  a  will,  then  the  whole  of  his  property, 
after  paying  his  just  debts  to  the  subjects  of  the  Sultan,  is  to  be  vested 
in  trust  in  the  hands  of  the  British  Resident,  to  be  transmitted  by  him  to 
the  Supreme  Government,  or  any  other  Presidency,  for  the  benefit  of  his 
family  and  his  lawful  heirs. 

Article  8. 

That  no  dispute  may  hereafter  arise  about  the  person  claiming  the 
protection  of  the  British  flag,  whether  European  or  Native,  a  Register 
shall  be  kept  of  all  the  British  subjects  residing  at  Aden,  where  every 
person  having  a  certificate  from  either  of  the  Presidencies  in  India  shall, 
by  that  certificate,  be  registered  in  the  Offioe  of  the  Cadi  and  the  British 
Resident,  and  if  he  fails  to  register  himself,  he  shall  not  be  entitled  to 
the  benefits  contained  in  the  seventh  Article. 