


No.  LXXII. 
Tbanslation  of  the  preliminary  Treaty  with  the  Sheikhs  of  Bahrein. 
In  the  name  of  God,  the  merciful,  the  compassionate ! 

Know  all  men,  there  hath  come  into  the  presence  of  General  Sir 
William  Grant  Keir  the  Saeed  Abdool  Jalil,  Vakeel  on  the  part  of  the 
Sheikhs  Suleiman  bin  Ahmed  and  Abdoolla  bin  Ahmed,  and  there  have 
passed  between  the  General  and  the  said  Abdool  Jalil,  on  the  part  of  the 
above  named,  the  following  stipulations  : — 

Article  1. 

That  the  Sheikhs  shall  not  permit  from  henceforth,  in  Bahrein  or 
its  dependencies,  the  sale  of  any  commodities  which  have  been  procured 
by  means  of  plunder  and  piracy,  nor  allow  their  people  to  sell  any  thing 
of  any  kind  whatsoever  to  such  persons  as  may  be  engaged  in  the  practice 
of  plunder  and  piracy ;  and  if  any  of  their  people  shall  act  contrary  hereto, 
it  shall  be  equivalent  to  an  act  of  piracy  on  the  part  of  such  individuals. 

Article  2. 
That  they  shall  deliver  up  all  the  Indian  prisoners  who  may  be  in 
their  possession. 


£64  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 

uaiirkin.  Article  3. 

No..  LXXII  The  Sheikhs  Suleiman  bin  Ahmed  and  Abdoolla  bin  Ahmed  shall 

A  LXXIII.    Ijc  admitted  to  the  terms  of  the  general  Treaty  with  the  friendly  Arabs. 
End  of  the  Articles. 

Issued  at  Shargah  in  triplicate,  on  Saturday,  the  twentieth  of  the 
month  of  Rabe-ool-Thany ,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  one  thousand  two 
hundred  and  thirty-Jive,  corresponding  to  the  fifth  of  February  one  thou- 
sand eight  hundred  and  twenty. 

(Signed)         W.  G.  Keir, 

Major  General. 


L.  S. 


The  above  Articles  accepted  by  me  in  quality  of  Vakeel  of  the 
Sheiks  named  above. 

(Signed)        Saeed  Abdal  Jalil  bin  Saeed  Yasal  Tabatabay. 


No.  LXXIII. 

Teems  of  a  friendly  Convention  entered  into  between  Sheikh  Mahomed  Bin 
Khuleefa,  independent  ruler  of  Bahrein,  on  the  part  of  himself  and  succes- 
sors, and  Captain  Felix  Jones,  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Navy,  Political  Kesi- 
dent  of  Her  Britannic  Majesty  in  the  Gulf  of  Persia,  on  the  part  of  the  Bri- 
tish Government. 

Preliminary. — Considering  the  tribe  disorders  which  arise  and  are 
perpetuated  from  maritime  aggressions  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  I,  Sheikh 
Mahomed  Bin  Khuleefa,  independent  ruler  of  Bahrein,  on  my  own  part 
and  on  that  of  my  heirs  and  successors,  in  the  presence  of  the  Chiefs 
and  elders  who  are  witnesses  to  this  document,  do  subscribe  and  agree  to 
a  perpetual  Treaty  of  peace  and  friendship  with  the  British  Government, 
having  for  its  object  the  advancement  of  trade  and  the  security  of  all 
classes  of  people  navigating  or  residing  upon  the  coasts  of  this  sea  :— 

Article  1. 