

Article  9. 

The  benefit  resulting  from  the  seventh  Article  is  to  be  considered  as 
extending  to  any  travelling  merchants,  or  supra  cargoes,  being  subjects 
of  the  British  Government,  and  the  crews  of  all  the  ships  navigating 
under  the  British  flag,  upon  a  certificate  being  produced  from  the  Com- 
mander of  such  ships  to  which  they  belonged  at  the  time  of  making  a 
will,  or  dying  without  one. 

Article  10. 

The  Sultan  binds  himself,  his  heirs  and  successors,  to  give  every 

assistance  in  his  power  to  recover  the  debts  due  from  any  of  his  subjects 

to  the  British  subjects  ;  and  that  after  three  months  from  the  time  that 

any  British  subject  shall  send  his  demand  to  the  Cadi  for  his  assistance 

vol.  vii.  2  ?n 


i;i  TKF.ATIKS,    F,NC\i;KMI:NTS,    AND    STJNNUDS. 

ADBN.      and  prove  a  just  debt,  that  then,  if  it  is  not  paid,  the  Cadi  shall,  have  the 

\     1.XX1V.  power  to  order  the  property  of  the  debtor  to  be  seized  and  sold  for  the 

— —        benefit  of  the  creditor ;  but  if  the  person  owing  the  debt  to  the  British 

(Ln^rf)      SVLtyeet  nas  no  property,  then  the  Cadi  shall  confine  him  in  gaol  till  some 

arrangement  is  made  which  is  satisfactory  to  the  British  Government. 

Article  11. 

If  any  disputes  arise  between  registered  British  subjects,  they  are 
to  be  referred  to  the  British  Resident,  who  is  to  give  his  award  according 
to  the  best  of  his  judgment,  founded  on  the  laws  of  his  own  country. 
This  award  to  be  final  in  any  case  not  exceeding  two  thousand  dollars  ; 
but  above  that  sum  it  is  to  be  subject  to  an  appeal  in  the  different  Presi- 
dencies of  India.  If,  however,  either  party  refuses  to  comply  with  this 
award,  then  the  Sultan  is  to  give  power  to  the  Cadi  to  imprison  the 
party,  according  to  the  request  of  the  Resident.  This  Article  is  intro- 
duced for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the  most  perfect  regularity  and 
harmony  between  the  registered  subjects  of  the  British  nation  and  those 

of  the  Sultan. 

Article  12. 

All  disputes  between  the  subjects  of  the  Sultan  and  those  of  the 
British  nation  are  to  be  settled  by  the  established  laws  of  the  country. 

Article  13. 

The  Sultan  agrees,  for  the  consideration  of  dollars,  to   give 

over  a  piece  of  ground  on  the  west  side  of  the  town,  of  yards  by 

yards,  for  the  use  and  purpose  of  the  British  nation,  on  which 
the  Company  may  erect  any  house  or  building,  and  completely  wall  it  in, 
if  it  shall  be  judged  necessary  to  do  so ;  and  the  Sultan  agrees  to  prevent 
any  building  whatever  from  being  made  within  twenty  yards  in  front 
of  the  said  Company's  wall,  or  fifteen  yards  on  either  side. 