

Other  Tribes. — After  the  conquest  of  Aden,  the  efforts  of  the  Poli- 
tical Agent  were  chiefly  directed  to  the  establishment  of  friendly 
relations  with  the  Arab  tribes  in  the  neighbourhood,  with  several  of 
whom,  the  Hooshabees,  Yaffaees,  Subeihees,  and  others,  engagements 
(Nos.  LXXXVI.  to  XCIII.)  were  concluded. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  271 

The  following  is  a  list  of  Aden  Chiefs  who  receive  stipends  from  the      ADEN. 


British  Government : — 


Names. 

Annual  amount 
of  Stipends. 

Sultan  Ahmed  bin  Abdoolla  Foodhelee,  of  Foodhelee  tribe         

Sultan  Foodhel  Ali  Mahsin  of  Lahej,  of  £he  Abdalee  tribe 

Sheikb  Abdool  Babadoor  Mehdi,  Akrabee  Chief  ... 

Sultan  Obaid  bin  Yehia,  of  the  Hooshabee  tribe... 

Sheikh  Salleh,  of  the  Allowee  tribe 

Sultan  Mahomed  Syud,  of  the  Ameer  tribe 

Sultan  Ali  Ghoolab,  of  the  YafFaee  tribe  ... 

Sheikh  Widjedeen  D'bene    .  • 

Sheikh  Allidulla  Rugaee,  of  the  Subeihce  tribe 

Rs.  A.    P. 

782  15    0 

14,119  IS     0 

782     15     0 

1,409     6     2 

130     7  11 

108  11   11 

543  11    11 

91     5     7 

26     1     7 

No.  LXXIV. 

Abdahea 
(LdhejJ. 


No.  LXXIV. 

His  Excellency  the  Most  Noble  the  Marquis  Wellesley,  Knight  of 
the  Most  Illustrious  Order  of  St.  Patrick,  one  of  His  Majesty's  Most 
Honourable  Privy  Councillors  over  all  the  British  Possessions  in  the  East 
Indies,  being  desirous  of  entering  into  a  Treaty  of  amity  and  commerce 
with  Sultan  Ahmed  Abdool  Kureem,  Sultan  of  Aden  and  its  dependen- 
cies, has  named,  on  his  part,  Sir  Home  Popham,  Knight  of  the  Most 
Sovereign  Order  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  and  Ambassador  to  the  States 
of  Arabia ;  and  the  said  Sultan  has  named  Ahmed  Basaib,  Prince  of  Aden, 
who  having  both  met,  and  being  satisfied  with  each  other's  powers,  have 
agreed  to  the  following  Articles  for  the  mutual  benefit  of  their  respective 
nations,  but  subject  to  the  final  ratification  of  His  Excellency  the  Most 
Noble  the  Governor  General  of  India : — ■ 


Article  1. 

That  there  shall  be  a  commercial  union  between  the  Honourable  the 
East  India  Company,  or  such  British  subjects  as  may  be  authorized  by 
the  Governor  General  of  India,  and  the  subjects  of  Sultan  Ahmed 
Abdool  Kureem. 


272  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

ADEN.  Article  2. 


No.  LXXiv.  The  Sultan  agrees  to  consider  the  ports  of  Aden  as  open  for  the 

Abdaleea     reception  of  all  goods  brought  on  British  ships,  which  goods  or  merchan- 

(Lahfj).     dizc  are  to  pay  a  duty  of  two  per  cent,  and  no  more,  for  the  space  of  ten 

years,  on  the  invoice  or  manifest  of  the  goods,  and  no  other  charges 

whatever  are  to  be  exacted  for  anchorage,  weighing,  or  custom-house 