

Article  14. 
The  British  nation  not  to  be  subject  to  any  indignities,  and  to  have 
free  permission  to  enter  the  town  by  any  gate  or  direction,  and  ride, 
or  use,  without  the   least  molestation  whatever,  either  horse,  mule,  ass, 
or  any  other  beast  which  they  may  think  proper. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  275 

Article  15.  ADEN. 

If  any  soldier  or  British  subject,  not  being-  a  Mahomedan,  should  Nos  lxxiv^ 
desert  and  go  to  the  Cadi  or  other  Officer  of  Government  and  offer  to    &  lxxv. 
embrace  the  Mussulman  religion,  then  the  Cadi  is  to  make  a  report  to  the     Ahdalee 
Resident,  that  he  may  claim  him  as  a  British  subject ;   but  if  no  claim  is      {Lahej). 
made  after  the  expiration  of  three  days  from  the  time  the  report  is  made 
by  the  Cadi,  or  other  Officer,  he  is  to  act  as  he  pleases  with  the  person  who 
so  deserts  from  his  own  country. 

Article  16. 
The  Sultan  to  give  over  a  piece  of  ground  as  a  public  burying  place 
for  all  the   British  subjects  who  may  die  in  the  territories  of  the  Sultan, 
and  no  charge  to  be  made  for  the  interment  of  any  person  except  such 
as  shall  be  agreed  on  for  those  who  assist  in  the  funeral. 

Article  17. 

Any  other  Articles  which  may  be  proposed  by  either  of  the  parties 
and  mutually  agreed  on  may  be  hereafter  entered  in  this  Treaty,  and  the 
Ambassador  on  the  part  of  the  British  Government  is  ready  to  convey  any 
further  proposition  from  the  Sultan  to  the  Governor  General,  or  enter 
into  a  contract  for  the  purchase  of  any  quantity  of  coffee,  or  the  deli- 
very of  any  British  goods,  on  the  prices  which  may  be  mutually  agreed  on. 

The  above-written  seventeen  Articles  of  Treaty,  having  been  read 

and  maturely  considered  by  the  plenipotentiaries  on  both  sides  and  the 

Sultan,  the  Sidtan  has  put  his  hand  and  seal  to  a  true  copy  in  Arabic, 

and  the  British  Ambassador  has   set  his  hand  and  seal  to  this  English 

copy,  on  board  of  His  Majesty's  Ship  the  Ranney  in  Aden  Roads  this 

6th  day  of  September  1802. 

(Signed)         Home  Popham. 


No.  LXXV. 

Copy  of  a  Treaty  of  friendship  between  the  Abdallees  and  English  signed  by- 
Sultan  M.  Houssain's  accredited  Agent  and  son-in-law. 

Bismillah  Rehmaan  Rehim  Bemenet  Alia ! 

From  this  day  and  the  future,  Syud  M.  Houssain  bin  West  bin 
Hamed  Suffrain  gives  this  promise  to  Commander  Haines,  gentleman, 
on  his  own  head,  in  the  presence  of  God,  that  there  shall  be  friendship, 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

ADEN,      and  peace  and  every  thing  good  between  the  English  and  Abdalees.     I 

is    i.wv.   promise  no  wrong  or  instiM  >liall  bedonej  bul  it  shall  be  peace  and  the 