

*  At  pages  282  and  283  of  a  Collection  of  Treaties  published  by  Mr.  Hughes  Thomas 
in  1851  under  the  authority  of  the  Government  of  Bombay,  an  extract  from  a  letter  of  the 
Sultan  of  Lahej,  dated  25rd  January  1 838,  is  given,  which  purports  to  complete  and  conclude 
the  transaction  for  the  transfer  of  Aden  to  the  British  Government.  The  facts,  however, 
are,  as  stated  in  the  text,  that  in  the  sequel  of  the  letter  the  Sultan  desired  that  the 
negotiations  should  be  broken  ofr  if  his  jurisdiction  in  Aden  were  not  admitted;  and  the 
bargain,  owing  to  the  subsequent  course  of  events,  was  never  concluded.  The  title  of  the 
British  Government  to  Aden  rests  exclusively  on  conquest,  and  not  on  purchase. 


TREATIES^   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  269   . 

him  and  his   heirs  6,500  German  crowns  a  year,  and  likewise  to  pay  the       ADEN. 

stipends  which  the  Sultan  was   bound  to  give  to  the  Foudhelee,  YafFaee, 

Hooshabee,  and  Ameer  tribes.     Peace,  however,  was  soon  after  broken, 

by  an  unsuccessful  attempt  which    Sultan   Mahsin   made  in  November 

1839   to  retake   Aden,  and  the  payments  were  therefore  stopped.     A 

second  attack  made  in  May  1840  was  also  unsuccessful,  and  the  repulse  of  a 

third  attack  in  July  of  the  same  year  completely  disheartened  the  Arab3 

for  a  time.     In  1843  Sultan  Mahsin  came  to  Aden  and  sued  for  peace. 

An   engagement    (No.  LXXVII.)  was  made   on  11th   February    1843, 

which   the  British  Government  considered  in  the  light  of  an  agreement 

to  be  observed  between  the  Political  Agent  and  the  Sultan,  but  not  of  a 

Treaty  to  be  formally  ratified.     In  February  1844  a  monthly  stipend 

of  541  crowns  was  restored  to  the    Sultan  with  a  year's  arrears,   and 

before  paying  it,  another  agreement   (No.  LXXVIII.)    was  taken  from 

him,  binding  him  faithfully  to  observe  his  engagements. 

Sultan  Mahsin,  Chief  of  the  Abdalee  tribe,  died  on  30th  November 
1847,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Ahmed,  who  died  on  18th  January 
1849,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Ali  Mahsin.  Shortly  after  his 
accession,  a  Treaty  (No.  LXXIX.)  of  peace,  friendship,  and  commerce 
which  was  under  negoeiation  with  his  predecessor  was  concluded  with 
him.  Among  its  other  provisions  this  Treaty  stipulated  for  the  restora-r 
tion  of  the  -  monthly  stipend  which  had  been  stopped  in  consequence 
of  the  share  taken  by  Sultan  Mahsin  in  an  attack  on  Aden  in  August 
1846. 

Ali  Mahsin,  Sultan  of  Lahej,  died  on  7th  April  1863.  His  son 
Foodhel  Ali  Mahsin  was  elected  by  the  tribes  and  elders  to  succeed  him 
in  the  government.  The  stipend  enjoyed  by  his  father  has  been  con- 
tinued to  him. 