

I  recognize  as  valid  and  in  force  all  former  Treaties  and  Conventions 
agreed  to  between  the  Chiefs  of  Bahrein  and  the  British  Government, 
either  direct  or  through  the  mediation  of  its  representatives  in  this  Gulf. 


treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds.  265 

Article  2.  Bahrein: 

I  agree  to  abstain  from  all  maritime  aggressions  of  every  descrip-  No.  LXXIII. 
tion,  from  the  prosecution  of  war,  piracy  and  slavery  by  sea,  so  long  as 
I  receive  the  support  of  the  British  Government  in  the  maintenance  of 
the  security  of  my  own  possessions  against  similar  aggressions  directed 
against  them  by  the  Chiefs  and  tribes  of  this  Gulf. 

Article  8. 
In  order  that  the  above  engagements  may  be  fulfilled,  I  agree  to 
make  known  all  aggressions  and  depredations  which  may  be  designed, 
or  have  place  at  sea,  against  myself,  territories,  or  subjects,  as  early  as 
possible,  to  the  British  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  as  the  arbitrator 
in  such  cases,  promising  that  no  act  of  aggression  or  retaliation  shall 
be  committed  at  sea  by  Bahrein,  or  in  the  name  of  Bahrein,  by  myself 
or  others  under  me,  on  other  tribes  without  his  consent  or  that  of  the 
British  Government,  if  it  should  be  necessary  to  procure  it.  And  the 
British  Resident  engages  that  he  will  forthwith  take  the  necessary  steps 
for  obtaining  reparation  for  every  injury  proved  to  have  been  inflicted, 
or  in  course  of  infliction  by  sea  upon  Bahrein,  or  upon  its  dependencies 
in  this  Gulf.  In  like  manner,  I,  Sheikh  Mahomed  bin  Khuleefa,  will 
afford  full  redress  for  all  maritime  offences,  which  in  justice  can  be 
charged  against  my  subjects,  or  myself,  as  the  ruler  of  Bahrein. 

Article  4. 
British  subjects  of  every  denomination,  it  is  understood,  may  reside 
in,  and  carry  on  their  lawful  trade  in  the  territories  of  Bahrein,  their  goods 
being  subject  only  to  an  ad  valorem  duty  of  5  per  cent,  in  cash  or  in  kind. 
This  amount  once  paid  shall  not  be  demanded  again  on  the  same  goods 
if  exported  from  Bahrein  to  other  places ;  and  in  respect  to  the  treat- 
ment of  British  subjects  and  dependants,  they  shall  receive  the  treatment 
and  consideration  of  the  subjects  and  dependants  of  the  most  favoured 
people.  All  offences  which  they  may  commit,  or  which  may  be  committed 
against  them,  shall  be  reserved  for  the  decision  of  the  British  Resident, 
provided  the  British  Agent  located  at  Bahrein  shall  fail  to  adjust  them 
satisfactorily.  In  like  manner,  the  British  Resident  will  use  his  good 
offices  for  the  welfare  of  the  subjects  of  Bahrein  in  the  ports  of  the  mari- 
time Arab  tribes  of  this  Gulf  in  alliance  with  the  British  Government. 
VOL.  vii.  2  I 