


m 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  SUNNUDS. 


uaii rein.  Article  5. 

No  LXXIII.  Those  Articles  of  alliance  shall  have  effect  from  the  date  of  ratifi- 

cation or  approval  by  the  British  Government. 

Done  at  Bahrein  this  twentieth  day  of  Zilkad,  in  the  year  of  the 
Hegira  1277,  corresponding  with  the  thirty -first  day  of  May  1861. 


Signature  and  Seal  of  Felix  Jones, 
Political  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf 


Seal  of  Sheikh 

Mahomed, 

Ruler  of  Bahrein. 


Seal  of  Sheikh 

Ali  bin  Khuleefa, 

Brother  of  the  above. 


Seal  of  Sheikh 

Hamid  bin  Mahomed, 

Cousin  of  Sheikh 

Mahomed. 


8 

a 

Seal  of  Sheikh  Ahmed 

1 

bin  Mubarek,  Cousin 

§ 

of  Sheikh  Mahomed. 

a 

<u 

o 

Seal  of  Sheikh  Khuleefa 

E 

bin  Mahomed  Cousin 

w 

of  Sheikh  Mahomed. 

Approved  by  His  Excellency  the  Governor  General  in  Council  on 
the  9th  October  1861,  and  ratified  by  the  Government  of  Bombay  on 
25th  February  1862. 


PART    III. 

TREATIES,  ENGAGEMENTS,  AND  SUNNUDS 


RELATING   TO   THE 


ARABIAN  AND  AFRICAN  COASTS. 


ADEN. 


On  the  expulsion  of  the  Turks  in  1630,  the  greater  part  of  Southern 
Arabia  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Imams  of  Senna.  In  1735  the  latter 
were  in  turn  expelled  from  Aden  and  other  districts  by  the  native  Arab 
tribes  who  assumed  independence. 

Abclalees  {Lahej). — Aden,  Lahej,  and  some  villages  to  the  north  of 
Aden,  with  the  country  round  them,  were  occupied  by  the  Abdalee  tribe. 

The  first  political  intercourse  with  the  Chiefs  of  Aden  took  place 
in  1799,  when  a  naval  force  was  sent  from  Great  Britain  with  a  detach- 
ment of  troops  from  India  to  occupy  the  Island  of  Perim  and  prevent 
all  communication  of  the  French  in  Egypt  with  the  Indian  Ocean  by 
way  of  the  Red  Sea.  The  Island  of  Perim  was  found  unsuitable  for 
troops,  and  the  Sultan  of  Lahej,  Ahmed  bin  Abdool  Kureem,  received  the 
detachment  for  some  time  at  Aden.  He  proposed  to  enter  into  an 
alliance  and  to  grant  Aden  as  a  permanent  station,  but  the  offer  was 
declined.  A  Treaty  (No.  LXXIV.),  however,  was  concluded  with  the 
Sultan  in  1802  by  Admiral  Sir  Home  Popham,  who  was  instructed  to 
enter  into  political  and  commercial  alliances  with  the  Chiefs  on  the 
Arabian  Coast  of  the  Red  Sea. 

From  that  time  there  was  little  or  no  intercourse  with  Aden  till 
1837,  when  attention  was  drawn  to  the  plunder  and  maltreatment  of  the 
crews  of  British  vessels  wrecked  on  the  Aden  Coast.  The  most  notable 
case  was  the  plunder  of  the   Deria  Dowlut,  the  crew  of   which  were 


268  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

ADEN,  stripped  and  most -barbarously  treated.  Captain  Haines,  who  was  then 
employed  in  the  survey  of  the  Arabian  Coast,  was  instructed  to  demand 
satisfaction.  He  was  at  the  same  time  to  endeavour  to  purchase  Aden 
as  a  coaling  depot  for  the  steamers  plying  between  India  and  the  Red 
Sea.  The  Sultan  Mahsin,  who  had  succeeded  his  uncle  Sultan  Ahmed  in 
1827,  at  first  denied  all  participation  in  the  plunder,  but  finding  the 
British  Commissioner  firm  in  his  demands,  he  eventually  consented  to 
give  up  part  of  the  property,  and  paid  compensation  for  the  rest.  A 
draft  Treaty  for  the  cession  of  Aden  was  laid  before  the  Sultan,  to  which 
he  verbally  gave  his  consent  and  promised  formally  to  agree  after  con- 
sulting his  Chiefs.  In  this  draft  the  amount  of  compensation  to  be  paid 
for  Aden  was  left  undetermined,  but  it  was  afterwards  arranged  that  an 
annual  payment  of  8,700  crowns  should  be  made.  On  22nd  January 
1838  Sultan  Mahsin  sent  a  letter  under  his  seal,*  engaging,  after  two 
months,  to  make  over  Aden,  but  stipulating  that  the  Sultan's  authority 
over  his  people  in  Aden  should  be  maintained  after  the  cession.  To  the 
continuance  of  the  Sultan's  jurisdiction  the  British  Agent  objected. 
The  Sultan  replied  that  he  was  willing  to  abide  by  the  terms  first  offered, 
but  if  these  were  not  accepted,  his  letter  of  22nd  January  should  be 
returned  to  him.  Negotiations  were  at  this  stage  when  a  plot  was  laid  by 
Ahmed,  the  Sultan's  son,  to  seize  the  Agent  and  rob  him  of  his  papers. 
Delivery  of  the  property  stolen  from  the  wreck  of  the  Deria  Dowlut'was 
also  refused ;  preparations  were  therefore  made  to  coerce  the  Sultan.  On 
19th  January  1839  Aden  was  bombarded  and  takon,  and  the  Sultan  and 
his  family  fled  to  Lahej.  On  2nd  February  peace  (No.  LXXV.)  was 
made  in  the  Sultan's  name  by  his  son-in-law,  and  on  18th  June  the 
Sultan  himself  signed  a  Bond  (No.  LXXVI.)  engaging  to  maintain 
peace  and  friendship  with  the  British  Government,  who  agreed  to  pay 