

Foodhelees. — The  Sultans  of  Lahej  had  been  in  the  habit  of  paying 
annually  sums  of  money  to  the  neighbouring  tribes  through  whose 
territory  the  trade  of  the  country  passed,  and  these  payments  were 
continued  by  the  British  Government  on  condition  of  the  Chiefs  remain- 
ing in  friendly  alliance.  From  the  weakness  of  the  character  of  Ali 
Mahsin,  through  whom  it  was  the  early  policy  of  the  Agent  to  transact 
all  business  with  the  Arabs  of  Aden,  the  neighbouring  tribes  ventured 
for  some  years  to  perpetrate  a  series  of  atrocities  upon  individual  British 
Officers  and  others,  which  the  Sultan  was  quite  unable  to  prevent  or 


270  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

ADEN,  punish.  His  efforts,  indeed,  to  procure  compliance  with  the  demands  of 
~  the  British  Government  for  satisfaction  for  these  outrages  brought  on 
him  the  hostility  of  his  rivals  the  Foodhelee  tribe,  who  had  sheltered  some 
of  the  murderers,  and  who  endeavoured  to  stir  up  some  of  the  neighbour- 
ing tribes  to  hostility  with  the  British.  The  Foodhelees,  with  whom  an 
engagement  (No.  LXXX.)  was  concluded  after  the  capture  of  Aden, 
are  one  of  the  most  powerful,  fanatical,  and  warlike  tribes  near  Aden. 
Their  possessions  lie  immediately  to  the  east  of  that  Settlement.  The 
stipend  of  the  Foodhelee  Chief  was  stopped  till  he  should  expel  the  crimi- 
nal who  had  taken  refuge  with  him.  This  he  did,  and  on  the  restoration 
of  his  stipend,  he  voluntarily  signed  an  agreement  (No.  LXXXI.)  to 
protect  the  roads  from  Aden  through  his  territory.  The  powerlessness 
of  the  Sultan  of  Lahej,  however,  to  prevent  or  punish  these  crimes  led 
to  a  change  in  the  policy  of  dealing  with  the  tribes,  and  to  the  com- 
mencement of  intercourse  with  the  Chiefs  direct  instead  of  through  the 
Sultan  of  Lahej. 

Akrabees. — The  Akrabee  tribe  are  a  sub-division  of  the  Abdalces, 
who,  under  Sheikh  Mehdi,  threw  off  allegiance  to  Abdool  Kureem  of 
Lahej  and  became  independent.  Their  residence  is  at  Bir  Ahmed  and 
the  harbour  of  Little  Aden.  An  engagement  (No.  LXXXII.)  was  con- 
cluded with  them  after  the  capture  of  Aden.  In  1857  the  Chief  of  the 
Akrabee  tribe  renewed  (No.  LXXXIII.)  his  profession  of  peace  and  good 
will.  In  1863  an  agreement  (No.  LXXXIV.)  was  made  with  him,  in 
which,  for  an  immediate  payment  of  3,000  dollars  and  a  monthly 
stipend  of  30  dollars,  he  engaged  not  to  sell,  mortgage,  or  give  for  occu- 
pation, save  to  the  British  Government,  any  portion  of  the  Peninsula 
of  Little  Aden. 

Oulakees. — This  tribe  occupies  the  coast  from  the  borders  of  Hud- 
ramat  westwards  about  fifty-five  miles,  and  about  two  hundred  miles 
inland.  The  tribe  is  divided  into  two  sections,  the  upper  and  the  lower 
Oulakee,  each  under  an  independent  Chief.  In  1855  an  engagement 
(No.  LXXXV.)  was  made  with  them  for  the  prohibition  of  slavery. 