

Bated  Tuesday,  6th  Rubeeoosanee  Hegira  1255,  18^  June  1839. 


Seal  of 

M.  Houssain 

Fudthel. 


"Witnesses : 

(Signed)         Jaffer,  Vakeel  of  Commander  Haines. 
„  Hassan  Abdoolla  Ali  Cateef. 

„  Abdool  Suffer  bin. 

„  Abdoolla  Rubee. 

„  Ali  be  Abdoolla. 

„  Ali  Ahmed. 

Ratified  by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General  of  India 
on  the  24th  of  October  1839. 

(Signed)         T.  H.  Maddock, 

Offg.  Secy,  to  the  Govt,  of  India, 
with  the  Governor  General. 


278  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

ADEN.  No.  LXXVII. 


No.  LXXVII.  iphifl  Xbbatt  is  made  by  Sultan  M.  Houssain  Fudthel,  his  heirs  and  successors, 
A'.'i'iUes  the  tribes    of  the  Azeibee  and  Sellamee,  on  their  visit  to  Aden  on  Saturday, 

(Lakej).  the  27th  day  of  Shar  el  Hadjel  Haram  1258. 

Being-  anxious  to  make  peace  with  the  British  Government,  Captain 
Stafford  Bettesworth  Haines,  in  the  name  of  the  British  Government,  has 
given  his  consent  and  has  made  peace  with  Sultan  M.  Houssain  Fudthel 
and  his  adherents,  and  on  this  Treaty  has  Sultan  M.  Houssain  Fudthel 
placed  his  seal,  and  Captain  Stafford  Bettesworth  Haines,  on  the  part 
of  the  British  Government,  has  set  his  seal.  Inasmuch  as  peace  is  good 
and  desirable  for  both  parties,  the  Sultan  M.  Houssain  Fudthel  of  Lahej, 
in  the  name  of  himself,  heirs,  successors,  and  the  tribes  of  Sellamee  and 
Azeibee,  and  Captain  Stafford  Bettesworth  Haines,  on  the  part  of  Her 
Most  Gracious  Majesty  Queen  Victoria  1st,  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 
have  made  this  holy  agreement,  that  between  the  two  governments  shall 
exist  a  firm  and  lasting  friendship  that  shall  never  be  broken  from  the 
beginning  unto  the  end  of  all  things,  and  to  this  agreement  God  is 
witness. 

Article  1. 

In  consideration  of  the  respect  due  to  the  British  Government, 
Sultan  M.  Houssain  Fudthel  agrees  to  restore  the  lands  and  property  of  all 
kinds  belonging  to  the  late  Hassan  Abdoolla  Khuteeb,  Agent  to  the 
British  at  Lahej,  after  such  property  shall  be  proven.  But  the  Sultan 
M.  Houssain  expects  in  return  that  certain  revenue  and  territorial 
books  styled  Deiras,  said  to  be  in  the  possession  of  the  Khuteeb  family, 
should  be  restored  to  the  government  of  Lahej,  and  then  their  per- 
sons shall  be  safe,  should  they  wish  to  go  inland. 


Article  2. 

The  Sultan  will,  on  the  same  consideration,  and  has,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  witnesses,  settled  all  claims  made  by  Shumaiel,  the  Jew,  and  he 
will  also  attend  to  all  claims  that  may  be  brought  against  him  during 
his  fifteen  days'  residence  in  Aden, 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  279 

Article  3.  ADEN. 


Such  transit  duties  as  shall  be  hereafter  specified  shall  be  exacted  No.  LXXVII. 
by  the  Sultan,  who  binds  himself  not  to  exceed   them.     The   Sultan     Abdalees 
will  also,  by  every  means  in  his  power,  facilitate  the  intercourse  of  mer-      {Lahej). 
chants,  and  he  shall  in  return  be  empowered  to  levy  a  moderate  export 
duty. 