

In  consideration  of  which  act  of  friendship,  the  said  Sheikh  Abdoolla 
Bahaidarah  Mehdi  has  received  from  Brigadier  William  Marcus 
Coghlan,  Governor  of  Aden,  an  immediate  payment  of  three  thousand 
(3,000)  dollars,  and  shall  also  receive  from  the  said  Brigadier  Coghlan 
or  his  successors  a  future  monthly  subsidy  of  thirty  (30)  dollars,  it 
being  understood  that  this  stipend  imposes  an  obligation  on  the  part  of 
Sheikh  Abdoollah  Bahaidarah  Mehdi,  his  heirs  and  successors,  to 
protect  all  traders  and  British  subjects  who  pass  through  or  reside  in  the 
Akrabee  territory,  and  also  for  preserving  terms  of  peace  and  friendship 
betwixt  the  Akrabee  tribe  and  the  Governor  of  Aden,  representing  the 
Government  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  England. 

In  token  of  this  honourable  engagement,  the  Brigadier  William 
Marcus  Coghlan  and  Sheikh  Abdoolla  Bahaidarah  Mehdi  do  severally 
affix  their  hand  and  seal  at  Aden  on  Friday,  the  twenty-third  day  of 
January,  in  the  year  of  Christ  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty- 
three,  corresponding  with  the  third  day  of  Shaban  in  the  year  of  the 
Hcgira  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  seventy-nine. 

(Signed)         Abdoolla  Bahaidarah  Mehdi, 
„  W.  M.  Coghlan,  Brigadier, 

Political  Resident,  Aden, 
In  presence  of 

(Signed)         Mahomed  Bahaidarah. 
„  Allowi  bin  Zain  Alaidroos. 

„  Aidroos  bin  Zain. 

„  H.  Rassam, 

Assistant  Political  Resident,  Aden, 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

No.  LXXXV. 


291 


Witnessed  by  Syud 
Mahomed  bin  Abder 
Rahman  el  Tifferi. 


i 


*     Signatures. 
C  Snlfcan  Manasir  bin  Boo   Bekr   bin  Mehdi, 
the   Oulaki,  done   at    Hour,   dated    14th 
October  1855. 
Sultan  Aboo    Bekr  bin  Abdoolla  bin  Mehdi 
(^      the  Oulaki ;    same  date  and  place. 

f  Similar  engagements  entered  into  by  Ali 
Mahomed  Zaid,  elder  of  the  Habr  Ger- 
hagis,  tribe  of  Soomalees,  at  Mait ;  done 
the  5th  Suffer  1272,  corresponding  with 
the  17th  October  1855. 
Hirsee  Ali  Mahomed,  elder  of  the  Habr 
Gerhagis,  tribe  of  Soomalees,  at  Mait; 
done  the  5th  Suffer  1272,  corresponding 
with  the  17th  October  1855. 

Mahmood  Mahomed,  elder  of  the  Habr  Taljala  tribe,  at  Hais ; 
5th  Suffer  1272,  corresponding  with  17th  October  1855. 

Aboo  Bekr  bin  Mahomed,  elder  of  the  Habr  Taljala  tribe,  at 
Racooda;  done  the  5th  Suffer  1272,  corresponding  with  the  17th 
October  1855. 


Witnessed  by  Omar 
bin  Ahmed  bin  Syud 
Ba-Shitioh. 


-: 


I 


ADEN. 


In  the  name  of  the  Most  Merciful  God,  and  Him  we  implore. 

The  reason  of  writing  this  Bond  is,  that  influenced  by  motives  of 
humanity  and  by  a  desire  to  conform  to  the  principles  on  which  the 
great  English  government  is  conducted,  we  lend  a  willing  ear  to  the 
proposals  of  our  sincere  friend  Brigadier  W.  M.  Coghlan,  Governor 
of  Aden,  that  we  shall  covenant  with  him  and  with  each  other  to  abolish 
and  prohibit  the  exportation  of.  slaves  from  any  part  of  Africa  to  any 
other  place  in  Africa  or  Asia  or  elsewhere  under  our  authority. 