

Article  4. 

The  Sultan  engages  to  permit  British  subjects  to  visit  Lahej  for 
commercial  purposes  and  to  protect  them,  allowing  toleration  of  religion, 
with  the  exception  of  burning  the  dead. 

Article  5. 

Should  any  British  subject  become  amenable  to  the  law,  he  is  to  be 
made  over  to  the  authorities  at  Aden,  and  in  like  manner  are  the  subjects 
of  the  Sultan,  to  be  made  over  to  his  jurisdiction. 

Article  6. 

The  bridge  at  Khore  Muksa  is  English  property,  and  as  such  shall 
be  kept  in  order  by  them ;  but  should  it  be  proved  that  it  is  destroyed 
by  the  followers  of  the  Sultan,  he  shall  repair  it. 

Article  7. 

The  Sultan  binds  himself,  as  far  as  he  can,  to  keep  the  roads  clear 
of  plundering  parties  and  to  protect  all  merchandize  passing  through 
his  territories. 

Article  8. 

British  subjects  may,  with  the  permission  of  the  Sultan,  hold  in 
tenure  land  at  Lahej,  subject  to  the  laws  of  the  country,  and  in  like 
manner  may  the  ryots  of  the  Sultan  hold  property  in  Aden  subject  to 
the  British  laws. 

Aeticle  9. 

Such  articles  as  the  Sultan  may  require  for  his  own  family  shall 
pass  Aden  free  of  duty,  and  in  like  manner  all  presents  and  all  govern- 
ment property  shall  pass  the  territories  of  the  Sultan  free  from  transit 
duty. 


AlH'.N. 


280  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 

Article  10. 

No*  LXXVII  With  regard  to  the  stipend  of  the  Sultan,  it  entirely  rests  with 

L  LXXVIII.  Captain  Haines  and  the   British  Government.     The    Sultan    considers 

AhdaL*     the  British  his  true  friends,  and  likewise  the   British  look  upon  the 

{Lakej).      Sultan  of  Lahej  as  their  friends. 

This  Treaty  is  concluded  on  the  11th  day  of  Shar  Mohurrum  liar  am 
Ashoor,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  1258,  11th  February  1843. 


Seal. 


Seal. 


(Signed)     S.  B.  Haines,  Captain,  I.  N.,  Sfc, 

Political  Agent,  Aden. 


No.  LXXVIII. 

The  following  further  Bond  was  entered  into  by  the  Sultan  of  Lahej  on  the 
20th  February  1844,  previous  to  the  renewal  by  government  of  payment  of 
his  monthly  stipend  of  five  hundred  and  forty-one  German  crowns,  which 
had  been  stopped  in  consequence  of  his  having  broken  his  former  engage- 
ments. 

Article  1. 

The  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General  of  India  having  been 
graciously  pleased  to  grant  to  me  a  monthly  salary  of  541  German 
crowns,  so  long  as  I  continue  to  act  honestly  and  amicably  towards  the 
British,  in  every  respect  adhering  to  the  terms  of  my  late  Bond,  dated 
11th  February  1843,  especially  sworn  and  delivered  to  Stafford  Bettes- 
worth  Haines,  Esq.,  Captain  in  the  Indian  Navy,  and  Political  Agent 
at  Aden. 

Article  2. 

I  hereby  solemnly  attest  the  religious  sincerity  thereof,  and  more- 
over declare  that  in  all  things  relating  to  the  peace,  progress,  and  prosperity 
of  Aden,   I  will  use  every  effort  to  avert  calamity,  and  lend  my  utmost 