

Article  1. 

The  work  of  the  aqueduct  to  be  entirely  carried  out  by  the  British 

Government,  and  in  the  first  instance  everything  to  make  the  scheme 

complete,   including  camels  for  the  Persian  wheels,  to  be  given  by  the 

British  Government. 

Article  2. 

When  the  aqueduct  has  been  finished  and  it  has  been  put  into 
complete  working  order,  its  future  maintenance  to  rest  with  the  Sultan 
of  Lahej,  cost  of  repairs  and  renewal  of  stock  being  paid  for  by  him  out 
of  his  share  of  the  profits  realized  by  sale  of  the  water. 

Article  3. 

The  works  at  Sheik  Othman   or  at  Dhurub,  if  the  aqueduct  is 

extended  to  the  latter  place,  as  well  as  the  whole  line  of  aqueduct  from 

those  places  to  Aden,  to  be  watched  and  protected  by  the  Sultan  of 

Lahej. 

Article  4. 

The  remains  of  the  old  aqueduct  to  be  given  free  for  use  in  the 
construction  of  the  new  work.     In  return  for  the  use  of  the  water  and 

what  he  binds  himself  to  perform,  the  Sultan 
*  Sale  price,  l  rupee  per  ioo     of  Lanej    to  receive   half   of    the   amount* 

realized  by  the  sale  of  the  water  in  Aden; 
account  to  be  rendered  and  amount  to  be  paid  over  monthly. 

Article  5. 

Repairs,  when  necessary,  to  be  executed  through  the  Resident,  who 
will  then,  before  payment  of  monthly  profits  to  the  Sultan  of  Lahej, 
deduct  the  whole,  or  a  portion,  of  the  cost  thereof,  as  he  deems  right. 

VOL.  VII.,  PAGE  285. 


285  4  treaties,  engagements,  and  sonnuds. 

aden,  Article  6. 

T  A 11 RJ 

A  good  road,  45  feet  broad,  clear  and  level,  to  be  made  by  the 


No.  LXXIX A.  Suitan  of  Lahej  out  of  the  profits  from  the  Khore  Muksa  to  Sheik 
Othman  and  on  to  Dhnrub  if  the  aqueduct  be  extended  there.  The 
road  may  be  made  under  the  direction  of  the  Resident,  who  will  recover 
the  cost  in  the  same  manner  as  for  repairs. 

Article  7. 

The  British  Government  to  make  a  similar  road  from  the  Khore 
Muksa  into  Aden. 

Article  8. 

The  above  to  be  binding  on  Sultan   Fadhil  bin   Mahsin  Abdulla, 
Sultan  of  Lahej,  and  his  successors. 

(Sd.)         Fadhil  bin  Mahsin, 

Sultan  of  Lahej. 

„  W.  L.  Merewether,  Lient.-CoL, 

Resident,  Aden. 


Seal. 


(Signed)         S.  B.  Haines,  Captain,  I.  N., 

Political  Agent. 


Ratified  by  the  Most  Noble  the  Governor   General  of  India  on  the 

30th  October  1849. 

(Signed)         H.  M.  Elliot, 

Secy,  to  the  Govt,  of  India, 

with  the  Govr.  Genl. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  285 

persons  of  his  tribe,  or  those  in  authority  under  him,  or  in  his  pay,  or  by       ADEN", 
any  means  connected  with  this  government,   or  under  his  jurisdiction,   No  lxxix 
or  should  one  or  any  one  of  the  aforesaid  persons  be  in  any  manner  con-        