

Inasmuch  as  peace  and  commercial  intercourse  and  prosperity  is 
good  and  desirable  among-  all  nations,  and  particularly  advantageous  to 
the  powers  above  named,  the  Sultan  Ali  M.  Houssain  Fudthel  of  Lahej, 
in  the  name  of  himself,  heirs,  successors,  and  all  tribes  under  his  govern- 
ment, control,  and  authority,  and  Captain  Stafford  Bettesworth  Haines, 
on  the  part  of  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General  of  India,  make 
this  agreement,  that  between  the  two  governments  shall  exist  a  firm 
and  lasting  friendship  which  shall  never  be  broken,  and  both  parties  agree 
to  and  ratify,  under  seal  and  signature,  the  following  Articles  : — 


Article  1. 

In  consideration  of  the  respect  due  to  the  British  Government,  Sul- 
tan Ali  M.  Houssain  Fudthel  binds  himself  to  secure  to  the  rightful  owners 
all  ground,  household  or  other  property  that  may  be  within  the  limits  of 
his  territory  belonging  to  the  British  subjects  of  Aden,  and  that  their 
persons  or  agents  shall  he  safe  and  respected,  should  they  proceed  inland 
to  look  after  and  collect  the  rente  of  such  property,  or  for  any  other 
correct  purpose. 

Article  2. 

Sultan  Ali  M.  Houssain  Fudthel  engages  to  permit  British  subjects 
and  all  inhabitants  of  Aden  to  visit  Lahej  or  any  part  of  his  territory, 
for  either  commercial  purposes  or  pleasure  excursions ;  he  will  ensure  them 
protection,  and  full  toleration  of  religion,  with  the  exception  of  burning 
the  dead. 


I 


tkeaties,  engagement!!,  and  sunnuds. 
Article  3. 


283 


ADEN. 


Should  any  British  subject  become  amenable  to  the  law,  he  is  to  be  No.  LXXIX. 


made  over  for  trial  and  punishment  to  the  authorities  at  Aden. 

AltTICLE  4. 

British  subjects  may,  with  the  permission  of  the  Sultan  of  Lahej, 
hold  in  tenure  land  at  Lahej  or  other  towns,  or  villages  in  his  terri- 
tory, subject  to  his  law,  and  in  like  manner  may  the  ryots  of  the  Sultan 
of  Lahej  hold  property  in  Aden,  subject  to  Bx-itish  law  and  jurisdiction. 

Article  5. 

The  bridge  of  Khore  Muksa,  and  the  plain  between  it  and  the 
Mountains  of  Aden  forming-  the  Isthmus,  is  British  property,  and  no 
farther  north. 

Article  6. 

Sultan  Ali  M'Houssain  Fudthel  binds  himself  to  keep  the  roads  lead- 
ing to  Aden  clear  of  plundering  parties,  and  to  protect  all  merchandize 
passing  through  his  territory,  punishing,  if  in  his  power,  all  who  plunder, 
molest,  or  injure  others. 

Article  7. 

• 

Such  articles  as  the  Sultan  of  Lahej  may  personally  require  for 
his  own  household  shall  pass  Aden  free  of  all  custom  duty,  and  in  like 
manner  all  government  property  shall  pass  the  territories  of  the  Sultan 
free  from  transit  duty. 