

If  the  English  wish  to  enter  the  Akrabee  territory  they  shall  be 
respected  and  received  with  kindness,  for  they  are  friends.  If  any 
disturbance  should  take  place  between  the  subjects  of  either  country, 
the  culprit,  if  English,  is  to  be  given  over  to  the  laws  of  Aden ;  if 
Akrabee,  to  the  laws  of  the  Sultan,  for  punishment. 

In  witness  of  the  agreement,  in  the  presence  of  God. 

Dated  Aden,  the  Uh  February  1839. 

(Signed)         Sultan  Hydra  bin  Mehdi. 


Witnesses  : 
(Signed) 


Sytjd  Alooe. 
Rashed  Abdoolla. 
Jaffer  bin  Moolla  Abool. 
S.  B.  Haines. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  289 

No.   LXXXIII.  ADEN. 


Praise  be  to  God,  who  is  worthy  of  Praise  !  No.LXXXIII. 

Attestation  and  agreement  from  the  Sheikh  Abdoolla  Bahaidarah  -Mrabees. 
Mehdi  and  all  the  elders  of  the  Akrabees  whose  names  are  set  below : 
we  have  covenanted  with  His  Excellency  the  Governor,  William  Coghlan 
Sahib,  ruler  of  Aden,  upon  everlasting  sincerity  and  the  repelling  of 
sedition  in  their  (own)  limits,  and  upon  purity  of  friendship.  We  will 
do  all  in  our  power  (agreeably  to  friendship)  to  protect  (the  interest)  the 
English  government  and  its  subjects,  and  if  any  of  the  English  wish  to 
come  out  to  Bir  Ahmed  for  recreation,  they  must  inform  us,  and  upon  us 
rests  the  (their)  perfect  reverence  and  protection ;  any  want  the  Governor 
may  require,  we  are  (his)  soldiers  day  or  night.  Our  country  and  our 
property  are  in  the  service  of  the  British  Government,  and  may  our  Lord 
continue  the  friendship.  Ultimately  we  have  covenanted  according  to 
what  we  have  explained  above,  and  we  beg  God  to  confirm  us  in  the  ful- 
filment of  the  faithful  covenants. 

This  is  done  on  the  l%th  of  Shaban  1273,  \Wi  April  1857. 

(Signed)        Abdoolla  Bahaidarah  Mehdi. 

„  Saleh  Bahaidarah  Mehdi. 

„  Abd  Al  Kureem  Silaii  Meiidi. 

„  Hadj  Obaid  Ali  Yehia. 

„  Ali  bin  Ahmed  Ali. 

Witnessed  by 

Syud  Mahomed  bin  Zain  Allaidroos. 
Syud  Aidroos  bin  Zain  Alaidroos. 
Sheikh  Ali  im  Ahmed  Baabdallah  Azab. 
In  presence  of 

(Signed)        Allowi  im  Zain  Alaidroos. 


vol,  VII. 


290  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    STTNNTTDS. 

aim,n  No.  LXXXIV. 

N.>. LXX XI V.  Praise  be  to  God  alone  ! 

~  Tlio  object  of  writing  tbis  lawful  Bond  is,  that  it  is  hereby  cove- 

nanted and  agreed  betwixt  Sheikh  Abdoolla  Bahaidarah  Mehdi,  Chief  of 
the  Akrabee  tribe,  on  the  one  part,  and  Brigadier  William  Marcus  Coghlan, 
Governor  of  Aden,  on  behalf  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  England,  on 
the  other  part,  that  the  said  Sheikh  Abdoolla  Bahaidarah  Mehdi  doth 
pledge  himself,  his  heirs  and  successors,  by  this  agreement  never  to  sell, 
mortgage,  or  give  for  occupation,  save  to  the  British  Government,  any  por- 
tion of  the  Peninsula  called  Jibbel  Ihsau,  including  the  Khore  of  Bir  Ahmed, 
Alghadeer,  Bundar,  Fogum,  and  all  the  intermediate  coast  and  inlets. 