

J  r  J  Abdalees 

victed  of  having  been  privy  to  or  accessory  to  such  breach  of  faith,  or  (Lahef) 
trespass  on  the  Treaty,  or  of  committing  any  act  of  plunder  on  the  roads 
leading  to  Aden  through  his  territory,  to  take  the  whole  responsibility  on 
himself  and  to  be  answerable  to  the  British  Government.  Further,  if  he, 
or  any  other  above  mentioned,  either  openly  or  by  secret  machination, 
protect  any  offender,  and  do  not  render  entire  satisfaction  to  the  British, 
and  for  any  breach  of  the  above  Articles,  he  freely  and  solemnly  swears 
to  relinquish  all  claims  to  the  salary  (hereafter  mentioned)  granted  by 
the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General  of  India  and  declares  himself 
a  perjured  man. 

Article  11. 

Stafford  Battesworth  Haines,  Captain  in  the  Indian  Navy,  and 
Political  Agent  at  Aden,  being  duly  authorized,  does  hereby  solemnly 
promise,  in  the  name  of  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General  of 
India,  to  pay  to  Sultan  AH  M.  Houssain  Fudthel,  his  heirs  and  successors, 
the  sum  of  five  hundred  and  forty-one  German  crowns  per  month,  so 
long  as  he  or  they  continue  to  act  with  sincerity,  truth,  and  friendship 
towards  the  British,  and  in  every  respect  strictly  adhering  to  the  terms 
of  this  Treaty. 

This  Treaty  is  concluded  and  agreed  to  this  seventh  day  of  March,  in 
the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty -nine. 

In  witness  whereof  we  have  set  our  seal  and  signature. 


2S0  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

ADEN.  No.   LXXX. 

No.  LXXX-  Translation  of  a  Bond  from  Sultan  Ahmed  Bin  Abdoolla  Foodhelee. 

Sultan  Ahmed  bin  Abdoolla  Foodhelee,  his  brothers  Saleh,  Nasir,  and 
Fudl,  and  his  cousius,  do  hereby  agree,  that  they  enter  into  an  agreement 
■with  their  tribe,  and  those  dependent  upon  them  and  those  upon  the 
latter,  as  before  arranged  with  Commander  Haines,  who  agrees  to  pay  to 
these   people   the  stipend    which    they    used   to   receive   from  Sultan 
M.  Houssain  Fudl  Abdalee.     The  agreement  which  has  passed  between 
them  (the  Sultan  and    Commander  Haines)    is,  that  whatever  belongs 
to  the    Sultans   of  Abdalee,    former   and    succeeding,    and   to    those  of 
Foodhelee,  former  and  succeeding,  shall  be  theirs ;   that  the  Abdalee  shall 
be  responsible,  as  stipulated,  for  all  injuries  or  outrages  perpetrated  in 
Lahej,  its  vicinity,  or  within  its  limits,    or   in   Aden,   its   roads,    or   its 
limits ;  and  the  above  Sultan  Ahmed,  for  all  acts  of  excess  on  the  part  of 
any  of  the  Foodhelee,  their  clans,   or  those   dependent  upon  them.     In 
case   Sultan  Ahmed  afford  any  assistance  to  any  other  Sultan  or  tribe, 
this  agreement  shall  be   null  and  void.     Our   (Sultan   Ahmed's)    hand 
and  Sultan  M.  Houssain's  hand  is  one  and  the  same.     Our  friends  and 
his   friends   are   identical.      If   any   of  the    above    tribe    commit    any 
plunder  or  depredation  on  the  roads  or  in  Lahej,  the  Bond  that  we  pos- 
sess shall  be  null,   until  we  shall  recover    and   restore  the  plundered 
property.    Should  any  assault  or  murder  be  committed  in  Lahej  or  Aden, 
or  on  their  roads,  and  should  the  act  be  brought  home  to  any  of  the 
Foodhelee  or  their  tribe,  he  shall  be   seized  and  is  to  be  considered  an 
offender.     This   Bond  is  always  binding,  and  shall  never  become  a  dead 
letter.     We  shall  draw  the  settled  stipend  every  six  months,  and  whenever 
there  shall  be  any  pressure  of  necessity,  Government  shall  pay  us   a  part 
(intermediately).      The  payment  is   to  commence  from  the   month  of 
Zilkad  Hegira  1254  (January,  February  1839).    Whatever  is  fixed  for  the 
above  people  shall  be  received  by  them  through  us  or  Sultan  M.  Hous- 
sain or  his  children.     These  are  the  stipulations  agreed  to  by  Sultan 
Ahmed  Foodhelee,  and  which  are   mediated  by  Salim  bin  Sheikh  and 
Syud  bin  Sulah,  who  are  the  Vakeels  of  Sultan  Ahmed.     This  agree- 
ment is  consented  to  on  Monday,    the   26th  day  of  Rubbee-ool-Akhir 
Hegira    1255   (8th   July   1839).     The  half-yearly  allowance  which  we 