


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  281 

aid  to  support  the  interests  of  the  British  flag ;  and   I  will  conform  in       ADEN. 


all  intention  and  purpose  to  the  Articles  specified  in  my  late  Bond  dated  No.LXXVllI. 
11th  February  1843.  ^~e. 

Article  3.  (Lahef). 

I  further  bind  myself  by  oath,  that  should  any  breach  of  faith,  or 
trespass  on  the  aforesaid  Bond,  either  as  concerning  myself,  children, 
Chiefs,  or  any  other  person  or  persons  of  my  tribe,  or  those  in  my  pay, 
or  any  individual  whomsoever  in  any  way  or  by  any  means  connected 
with  my  government  or  under  my  jurisdiction,  or  should  one  or  any  of  the 
aforesaid  persons  be  in  any  manner  convicted  of  having  been  privy  to  or 
accessary  to^  such  breach  of  faith,  or  trespass  on  the  Treaty,  or  of  com- 
mitting any  act  of  plunder  whatever  on  the  roads  leading  into  Aden 
from  the  interior,  to  take  the  whole  responsibility  on  myself  and  to  be 
answerable  to  the  British ;  and  if  I  or  other  above  mentioned,  either 
openly  or  by  secret  machination,  protect  any  offender,  and  do  not  render 
entire  satisfaction  to  the  British,  I  freely  and  solemnly  swear  to  relin- 
quish all  claim  to  the  salary  granted  by  the  Right  Honourable  the 
Governor  General  of  India  and  declare  myself  perjured  before  all  men. 

Article  4. 

I  further  swear  that,  if  I  do  not  strictly  abide  henceforth  by  the 
Bond  dated  11th  February  1843  and  the  above-mentioned  conditions,  all 
claim  I  may  have  on  the  kindness,  friendship,  and  generosity  of  the 
British  Government  is  rendered  null ;  and  consequently,  for  any  breach 
of  truth  or  aggression  on  my  part  for  the  future,  I  render  myself  open 
to  the  severest  retribution. 

Dated  the  20 tk  February  1844. 

(Signed)         Sultan  M.  Houssain  Fudthel. 


Seal 

of  the 

Sultan. 


S.  B.  Haines,  Captain,  I.  N., 
and  Political  Agent  at  Aden. 


vol.-  vn.  2  n 


2*2 


A  I' IN. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDSv 

No.  LXXIX.      . 


.s<».  I. XXIX.  »£«0  gecure  commercial  advantages  with  friendly  intercourse,  good  will,  and  a  lasting 
AbJalees  peace  to  both  powers,  this  Treaty  is  made,  agreed  to,  sealed  and  signed  by 

{Lahej).  those  possessing  full  power  and  authority,  viz.,  Sjultan  Ali  Ibn  M.  Houssain 

Fcdthkl,  for  himself,  his  heirs  and  successors,  also  for  the  Azzabee  and  Sala- 
mee  tribes,  and  all  other  tribes  and  divisions  of  tribes  under  his  government, 
authority,  or  control,  and  Stafford  Betteswokth  Haines,  Esq.,  Captain  in 
the  Indian  Navy,  and  Political  Agent,  Aden,  being  invested  with  full  power 
bo  to  do  from  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General  of  India,  but  it 
must  be  subject  to  the  final  ratification  of  the  Government  of  India. 