


/ 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  287 

shall  receive   from  government  is  182£  Cooroosh,  half  of  which  is  91£.       ADEN. 


The  provisions  which  the  above  people  are  accustomed  to   receive  must   N03.  LXXX 
be  given  to  them  at  Lahej  through  the  Sultan  or  his  children.  &  LXXXI. 

(Signed)         Sultan  Ahmed  bin.  Foodheiee*. 

Abdool  bin  Ahmed  Foodhelee. 
"Witnesses : 

Moolla  Jaffer,  Vakeel  of  Commander  Haines. 
Ali  bin  Abdoolla  Ahmed. 
Salim  bin  Nasir,  Arab. 
Cazee  Abdool  Ruzak  bin  Ali. 


No.  LXXXI. 


Seal  of  Ahmed 

bin  Abdoolla,  the 

Foodhelee. 


An  honourable  Bond  and  a  great  wi-iting  ! 

I,  whose  name  and  seal  are  set  herein,  have  covenanted  to  the  beloved 
Alowi  bin  Zain  Alaidroos  upon  peace  and  friendship  between  us  and 
the  Governor,  William  Coghlan  Sahib,  the  ruler  of  Aden,  and  also 
upon  the  safety  of  the  road  and  security  of  the  poor  from  Lahej  to 
Aden.  I  am  responsible  for  every  sedition  that  may  take  place  on 
the  road  on  the  part  of  all  the  Foodhelee  tribes,  either  inhabitants  of  the 
hills  or  coast.  I  am  answerable  for  it  for  all  what  goes  to  them  on  the 
roads  of  Ibian  and  Aden.  Whatever  plunder  may  take  place  upon  our 
subjects  on  the  coast,  I  will  call  upon  Syud  Alowi,  and  the  Governor 
of  Aden  has  the  interposition. 

If  God  should  decree  a  quarrel  between  the  Foodhelee  and  the 
Abdalees,  each  would  know  his  own  friend,  and  the  English  should  not 
interfere  amongst  Arabs.  Each  would  go  on  according  .to  his  rule  and 
covenant,  and  if  any  one  should  try  to  make  mischief  betwixt  us  (Food- 
helee and  English),  the  saying  of  such  enemies  must  not  be  listened  to. 


288 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


.     ADEN.  The  Governor  of   Aden  should  abolish  the  invention  which  they 

Nob.  LXXXI  nave  established  at  the  gate  of  Aden  upon  the  poor  of  our  subjects  and 

&  LXXXII.   others ;  for   the  sake   of  the   good   condition   of  the  needy,  we  and  the 

jj^ifeei     English  are  friends  upon  sincerity  and  good  will  between  them  and  us, 

and  protection  for  our  said  friends  (subjects) . 

I  have  covenanted  to  the  beloved  Alowi  and  he  will  covenant  on  my 
behalf  to  the  Governor,  William  Coghlan. 

In  the  presence  of 

Saleh  bin  Abdoolla. 
Nasir  bin  Abdoolla. 

FoODHEL  BIN  ABDOOLLA. 

Ali  bin  Ahmed  Azab. 


No.  LXXXII. 


Engagement  of  peace  and  friendship  entered  into,  on  the  4th  February  1839,  by 
Sultan  Hydra  bin  Mehdi,  of  the  Akrabees,  and  Sheikh  Abdool  Kukeem 
bin  Sallah  Mehdi,  Sheikh  Fcdthel  bin  Hydea  bin  Ahmed,  of  Sela, 
Akrabee  Chiefs,  with  Commander  Haines,  of  the  Indian  Navy,  on  behalf 
of  the  Honourable  East  India  Company. 

Between  the  British  and  Akrabees  there  shall  be  peace  and  lasting 
friendship.  Aden,  belonging  to  the  English,  and  the  Akrabee  tribe, 
shall  be  at  peace  and  firm  friends.  If  the  subjects  of  either  wish  to 
have  free  intercourse  in  each  other's  territory,  they  shall  be  welcome,  and 
receive  neither  molestation  nor  insult. 