

Yaffaccs,  and  tho  accredited  Agent  from  the  ancient   Chieftain  Sultan  Ali 

Ghalib,   of  the  Yaffaecs,  with  Commander  Haines,  of  the  Indian  Navy,  on 

behalf  of  the  Honourable  East  India  Company. 

We  agree  that  there  shall  be  peace  and  friendship  between  us,  and 
that  the  English  at  Aden  shall  be  at  peace  with  us.  Should  the  subjects 
of  either  country  enter  the  other's  territory,  they  shall  not  be  molested 
or  insulted,  but  be  considered  as  friends. 

If  Kafelas  from  the  Yaffaee  district  wish  to  enter  Aden  by  the  Gar 
Wallah  territory  for  trade,  they  shall  not  be  molested,  but  the  property 
respected  by  both  parties,  and  the  owners  allowed  free  intercourse  and 
barter.     They  may  export  from  Aden,  and  they  shall  be  respected. 

Dated  Aden,  the  21st  February  1839. 

(Signed)         Sheikh  Hasil  bin  Hadee  bin  Ahmed. 

Witness  : 
(Signed)         Ali  Abdoolla  Syud  Alooe. 


Litebal  Tbanslation  of  a  Treaty  concluded  by  Sultan  Ali  Ghalib  and  his  son 
Ahmed  bin  Ali  Ghalib,  of  the  tribe  of  Yaffaee  al  Efefee. 


In  the  name  of  God,  the  merciful,  the  clement 


We  faithfully  agree,  on  the  part  of  ourselves  and  those  who  are 
subordinate  to  them,  those  of  the  tribe  of  Yaffaee  and  those  who  are 
dependent  on  them,  and  of  the  tribe  of  Mureedea  and  Sayeedeh  and 
those  dependent  on  them,  and  for  Commander  Haines,  Governor  of 
Aden,  for  all  and  every  belonging  to  them,  on  Sultan  Moohsum  Fuzil 
Obaid  Ali,  Commander  Haines,  Governor  of  Aden,  and  representative 
of  the  Company,  and  in  the  manner  that  went,  the  Sultan  Obaid  Ali, 
past  and  future,  and  those  of  the  tribe  who  are  gone  and  are  coming, 
that  they  shall  possess  their  own  property,  and  that  whatever  they  have 
shall  be  theirs,  and  whatever  loss  is   occasioned  to   them  in   Lahej    or 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  295 

round  about  it,  or  in  its  environs,  or  in  Aden,  or  on  the  road  of  Aden,  are  ADEN, 
included  in  the  same  Treaty  concluded  by  Obaid  AH,  and  if  any  injury  No.LXXXVIl 
is  occasioned  by  the  tribe  of  Yaffaee  or  by  its  dependants  Ali  Ghalib  vMvTribet 
shall  be  responsible,  and  if  at  any  time  Ali  Ghalib  will  render  assistance 
to  any  one  of  the  Sultans,  or  any  one  of  the  other  tribes,  the  Treaty 
confirmed  by  God  will  be  violated  between  us  and  him,  and  our  hand 
and  the  hand  of  Sultan  Moohsum  shall  be  as  one,  and  our  friends  and  the 
friends  of  the  Sultan  shall  be  the  same.  If  any  of  the  above  shall  be 
plundered  on  the  road  of  Lahej,  the  Treaty  will  be  infringed ;  and  if  any 
thing  which  we  have  is  broken  or  taken  away,  and  if  any  one  makes  war 
in  Lahej,  or  kills  any  one  in  Lahej,  or  in  Aden,  or  on  the  road  of  Aden, 
and  it  shall  be  known  that  that  man  is  of  the  tribe  of  Yaffaee  or  one  of  its 
dependants,  he  (Sultan  Ali  Ghalib)  will  be  responsible.  This  Treaty 
of  God  which  we  have  will  never  become  old,  but  be  always  held  to  be 
new.  We  shall  take  what  is  agreed  upon  every  six  months,  commencing 
the  1st  Zilkad  1254  Hegira  (18th  January  1839),  and  what  is  agreed 
upon  will  be  taken  by  us,  or  by  the  Sultan,  or  by  his  son.  This  is  what 
has  been  agreed  upon  and  settled  by  Sultan  Ali  Ghalib  and  his  son 
Ahmed  bin  Ali  Ghalib,  and  has  been  agreed  to  by  their  representatives 
Hasil  bin  Ahmed  bin  Hadee  and  Hyder  bin  Ahmed,  who  have  been  sent 
by  them,  and  they  are  the  representatives  of  Ali  Ghalib,  and  this  is  con- 
cluded this  25th  day  of  Rubbee-ool-awul  1255  Hegira  (8th  June  1839). 