


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNIDS.  293 

clans,  and  all  those  dependent  upon  them,  the  Chief  of  M.  Haroorooluwa-       ADN\ 


jeer,  and  the  whole  Hooshabee,  as  before  arranged  with  Commander  No.  LXXXVI. 
Haines,  Governor  of  Aden,  who  sincerely  agrees  to  pay  the  allowances  re-  p  ,f~ZTh 
ceived  by  them  from  Sultan  M.  Houssain  Fudl  Abdalee.    What  has  been 
arranged  between  them  (Commander  Haines  and  the  Sultan)  is  that  what- 
ever belongs  to  the  Sultans  of  Abdalee,  former  and  succeeding,  and  to  those 
of  the  Hooshabee,  former  and  succeeding,  shall  be  theirs  respectively. 

The  Abdalee  shall  be  responsible,  as  is  agreed  upon,  for  all  outrages 
committed  in  Lahej,  its  neighbourhood,  or  within  its  limits,  or  in  Aden, 
its  roads,  or  within  its  boundaries,  and  Maneh  bin  Sulam  for  those  perpetra- 
ted by  the  Hooshabee,  their  clans,  or  those  subject  to  them.  In  case  Maneh 
render  any  assistance  to  any  other  Sultan  or  tribe,  this  Bond  is  to  be  con- 
sidered null  and  void.  Our  (Sultan  Maneb/s)  hand  is  the  same  as  that 
of  Sultan  M.  Houssain  Fudl,  and  our  friend  is  identical  with  Sultan 
M.  Houssain.  In  the  event  of  any  plunder  by  any  of  the  above  tribes  on 
the  roads  or  in  Lahej,  the  Bond  which  we  have  shall  be  considered  null 
until  we  make  restitution  of  whatever  may  be  carried  away.  Should  any 
one  commit  an  assault  or  murder  in  Lahej  or  Aden,  or  on  the  roads,  and 
should  such  person  be  proved  to  be  one  of  the  Hooshabee  or  of  their 
clans,  he  shall  be  seized  and  considered  an  offender.  This  Bond  is  bind- 
ing and  lasting.  We  shall  receive  our  allowance  from  government  every 
six  months,  or  a  part,  if  necessary,  after  two  months.  This  is  to  com- 
mence from  the  month  of  Zilkad  Hegira  1254  (January,  February  1839)* 
The  above  people  shall  receive  the  allowance  fixed  for  them  through  us, 
or  the  Sultan  (M.  Houssain),  or  his  children.  These  are  the  stipulations 
agreed  upon  by  Sultan  Maneh  bin  Sulam  and  Sulam  bin  Maneh,  and 
which  are  mediated  by  Abee  M.  Houssain  bin  Wugees  bin  Kassim 
Suffeean,  who  is  Vakeel  of  the  Hooshabee.  These  points  are  agreed  to 
on  Friday,  the  2nd  Rubee-oo-sanee,  Hegira  1255  (14th  June  1839). 
The  allowance  fixed  for  the  Hooshabee  is  628  Cooroosh  Fransa  per 
annum,  half  of  which  is  314  Cooroosh. 

Witnesses : 

M.  Houssain  Wugees  Suffeean  Jaffek,  Translator. 
Kazee  Abdool  Ruzak  bin  All 
Ali  bin  Abdoolla  All 


I'.l  I  I  1. ! .  v  I  1 1-.-.     I  \«.  \<  MOMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

ADEN.  No.  LXXXVII. 


No.LXXXVII  Engagement  of  friendship  and  peace  entered  into,  on  the  12th  February  1839, 

Pett~TriU*  ky  Sheikh  Ausel  mn  Hydee  bin  Ahmed  Musaidee,  of  a  district  of  the 