

(Signed)         Sheikh  Sallah  Ammoidee. 
Witness : 
(Signed)        Abdool  Russook,  Cazee. 

(Signed)        S.  B.  Haines. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  299 

NO.   XCIII.  ADEN. 


Engagement  of  friendship  and  peace  entered  into,  on  the  10th  March  1839,  by    No.  XCIII. 

Aottn  bin  Yoosoof  Shebzebee,  with  Captain  Haines,  of  the  Indian  Navy,   „^    ~. 

__  '  ■"   Petty  Tribes. 

on  behalf  of  the  Honourable  East  India  Company. 

This  paper  is  my  witness,  and  is  written  by  Sheikh  Kasim  bin  Syud 
Sherzebee,  and  the  interpretation  is  good.  I  am  a  friend,  and  a  great 
friend  with  the  English ;  it  is  true  and  permanent  friendship.  I  trust  in 
God  that  it  will  never  be  otherwise,  and  that  nothing  wrong  shall  ever 
take  place,  not  even  the  slightest  insult.  My  people  shall  enter  your 
territory,  and  yours  mine,  as  friends.  Whatever  the  English  please  shall 
be  done,  and  there  shall  never  be  two  words.  I  will  always  act  upon 
your  seal,  whatever  it  may  be.  Our  friendship  is  known  to  God,  and  He 
is  witness  to  it. 

Bated  \Mh  March  1839. 

(Signed)         Aoun  bin  Yoosoof  Sherzebee. 

Witnesses : 
(Signed)         Syud  Alooe  bin  Zein  bin  Sub-Hydroos. 
„  Jaffer  Hadee  Sheikh  Othman. 

(Signed)         S.  B.  Haines, 

Political  Agent. 


SENNA. 

/     ///  PI  affair's  I  it  dory  of  Yemen  and  Papers  in  the  Foreign  Office. 

About  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  the  English  obtained 
a  Firman  from  the  Governor  of  Mokha  for  the  establishment  of  a  factory, 
and  permission  to  trade  on  payment  of  a  duty  on  goods}  not  exceeding 
3  per  cent.  This  deed  was  confirmed  by  the  Turkish  Pasha  of  Yemen. 
About  the  same  time  the  Dutch  established  a  factory  at  Mokha,  which 
was  then  the  great  depot  for  the  trade  of  Southern  Arabia,  and  a  cen- 
tury later  a  factory  was  also  opened  by  the  French.  After  the  expulsion 
of  the  Turks  in  1630,  the  whole  of  Yemen  came  under  the  government 
of  the  Imams  of  Senna ;  but  at  the  time  of  Carsten  Neibuhr's  visit  to 
Senna  in  1763,  the  Native  Arab  tribes  of  the  Provinces  of  Aden,  Aboo 
Areesh,  Taez,  and  others  had  thrown  off  allegiance  to  the  Imams.  In 
1799,  when  the  British  Government  took  measures  to  oppose  the  expected 
invasion  of  India  by  the  French,  and  to  revive  the  lost  trade  of  the  Red 
Sea,  Dr.  Pringle  was  deputed  to  Senna  with  presents  from  the  Governor 
General,  and  obtained  from  the  Imam  Ali  Munsoor  orders  to  the  Governors 
of  Mokha,  Hodeida,  and  Lohaia  to  give  every  facility  to  trade.  Two 
years  afterwards  an  effort  was  made  by  Sir  Home  Popham,  who  had  been 
constituted  Ambassador  to  the  States  of  Arabia,  to  negotiate  a  commer- 
cial Treaty  with  Senna ;  but  he  was  insulted  by  the  Governor  of  Mokha, 
and  the  terms  of  the  proposed  Treaty  were  rejected  by  the  Imam. 