

We  whose  names  and  seals  are  set  to  this  Bond  do  therefore  in  the 
sight  of  God  and  of  men  solemnly  proclaim  our  intentions  to  prohibit 
the  exportation  of  slaves  from  Africa  by  every  means  in  our  power ;  wo 
will  export  none  ourselves,  nor  will  we  permit  our  subjects  to  do  so,  and 
any  vessel  found  carrying  slaves  shall  be  seized  and  confiscated  and  the 
slaves  shall  be  released. 


Peace. 


No.  LXXXV. 
Oulakees. 


Petty  Tribe*. 


292  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   STJNNUDS. 

ADEN.  Abdoo  Omar,  elder  of  the  Habr  Taljala  tribe,  at  Unkor ;  done  the 

Nos.  LXXXV  ^tu  ^ay  °^  Suffer  1272,  corresponding  with  the  18th  October  1855. 
ALXXXU.  Ali  Ahmed,  elder  of  the  Habr  Taljala  tribe,  at  Unkor;  done  the  6th 

Suffer  1272,  corresponding  with  the  18th  October  1855. 

Hassun  Yousef,  elder  of  the  Habr  Taljala  tribe,  at  Kurrum ;  done 
the  6th  day  of  Suffer  1272,  corresponding  with  the  18th  October  1855. 
Mahomed  Leban,  Chief  of  the  Habr  Taljala  tribe,  at  Kurrum ;  done 
the  6th  Suffer  1272,  corresponding  with  the  18th  October  1855. 

Yousef  Othman,  elder  of  the  Habr  Taljala  tribe,  at  Ain  Tarad ;  done 
the  7th  Suffer  1272,  corresponding  with  the  19th  October  1855. 

Ahmed  Aboo  Bekr  Mahomed  Leban,  elder  of  the  Habr  Taljala  tribe, 
at  Ain  Tarad;  done  the  7th  Suffer  1272,  corresponding  wTith  19th  Octo- 
ber 1855.  

No.  LXXXVI. 
Copt  of  a  Tbeatt  of  friendship  and  peace  between  the  English  and  Hazzabee  Tribe. 

Bismillah  Rehman  Rehim  Bemenet  Alia ! 

Tin's  agreement  is  between  tlfe  Hazzabees  for  peace.  On  the  part  of 
Sheikh  Abdoolla  Hazzaab,  Sheikh  Hamed  bin  Abdoolla  Hazzeel  Mukee 
Hazzabee,  and  Commander  Haines,  the  English  Agent,  on  the  part  of 
government.  We  are  now  friends,  and  promise  peace  and  friendship, 
great  and  lasting  friendship,  and  that  our  hearts  and  wishes  are  one. 

Further,  that  there  shall  be  peace  and  friendship  with  Aden,  and  that 
any  of  our  subjects  or  the  subjects  of  Britain  pass  into  each  other's  territory; 
neither  party  shall  be  insulted,  or  injured ;  we  are  one.  If  the  subjects  of 
either  do  wrong,  they  are  to  be  given  over  for  punishment  by  their  own  laws. 

In  the  presence  of 

(Signed)     Syud  Alooe  bin  Hydkoss  Ali  bin 

BOOKEETER  RaSHID  ABDOOLLA. 

„  Sheikh  Mahomed  bin  Abdoolla 

15th  Zilkadeh,    ")  Huzzeeb  Mukee  Hazzabee. 


..} 


3UI  January  1839.  )  (Signed)     S.  B.  Haines. 


Tbanslation  of  a  Bond  entered  into  by  Sultan  Maneh  bin  Sulam  of  the 
Hooshabee,  and  his  son  Sulam  bin  Maneh,  of  the  Hooshabee. 

Sultan  Maneh  bin  Sulam  of  the  Hooshabee,  and  his  son  Sulam  bin 
Maneh,  of  the  Hooshabee,  declare  of  their  own  accord  that  they  enter  into 
an  agreement  with  all  those  under  them,  belonging  to  Hooshabee,  their 