

Witnesses  : 

(Signed)        Syed  Mahomed  bin  Zein  bin  Boobukurs. 

„  Kazee  Abdool  Ruza  bin  Ali  Saad  bin  Musuood. 

„  Hasil  bin  Ahmed  bin  Wadee,  of  the  tribe  of  Mooredee, 

Vakeels  of  Ali  Ghalib. 

„  Mahomed  Ali  Yehia. 

„  Jaffer  Moonshee,  of  the  Company's  Government. 

„  Hyder  bin  Ahmed  Yaffaee,  Vakeel  of  Ali  Ghalib. 


290 


ADEN. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

No.  LXXXVIII. 


No.          Engagement  entered  into,  on  the  19th  February  1839,  by  Sheikh  Mahomed  Syud 

:  \WV11I.  Musaideb,  and  Sheikh  Jwas  Abdoolla,  Sheikh  Mahomed  bin  Ahmed, 

Sheikh  Koiei,  of  the  Musaidee  territory  of  the  Subeihees,  and  Commander 

Haines,  of  the  Indian  Navy,  on  behalf  of  the  Honoubable  East  India 

Company. 

Between  us  there  shall  be  friendship  and  lasting  peace ;  our  wishes 
shall  be  one  of  kindness.  Aden  shall  be  at  peace  with  us,  and  the 
subjects  of  both  countries  shall  be  at  peace.  No  molestation  or  insult 
shall  be  offered  in  their  intercourse  with  each  other. 


Dated  19 th  February  1839. 


Signed  by  the  Chieftains. 


Witnesses  : 
(Signed)      Abdool  Russook,  Cazee  of  Aden. 
Jaffer  bin  Moolla  Abool. 


Engagement  of  peace  and  friendship  entered  into,  on  the  20th  February  1839,  by 
Sheikh  Mahomed  bin  Am  Busalee,  of  the  Southern  Sub-division  of  the 
Subeihee,  with  Commander  Haines,  of  the  Indian  Navy,  on  behalf  of  the 

HONOUBABLE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY. 

Between  us  there  shall  be  lasting  friendship  and  peace,  and  we  agree 
to  it  in  the  presence  of  God.     Our  friendship  shall  be  as  one. 

There  shall  be  peace  with  Aden,  and  the  subjects  of  my  tribe  and 
the  subjects  of  the  British  shall  have  free  intercourse,  and  not  be  molested 
or  insulted  in  either^  territory. 

Any  breach  of  this  Treaty,  or  of  the  roads  to  the  Red  Sea  being 
infested  with  robbers,  shall  be  on  the  head  of  Sheikh  Mahomed  bin  Ali, 
and  he  will  be  answerable  that  no  Kafelas  shall  be  molested.  This 
Sheikh  Mahomed  bin  Ali  not  only  promises  in  his  own  district,  but 
in  that  of  the  tribe  of  Artefee,  whom  he  also  controls. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  297 

If  property,  either  from  Aden  or  from  the  Subee  territory,  wishes      ADEN", 
to  pass  through  the  other  territory,  it  shall  be  respected  and  protected ;         Nos 
and  for  any  infringement  Sheikh  Mahomed  Busalee  shall  be  answerable.  LXXXVlir, 


Dated  20M  February  1839. 


LXXXIX 

&XC. 

(Signed)         Sheikh  Mahomed  bin  Ali  Busalee. 
Witnesses  :  VeU*  THbes- 

(Signed)         Syud  Alooe. 

„  Ali  bin  Abdoolla. 

„  Sheikh  Arsel  Musaidee. 

(Signed)         S.  B.  Haines. 


No.  LXXXIX. 

Copy  of  a  Treaty  between  Syud  Mahomed  Jaffeb  bin  Sytjd  Hydboos,  Chief  of 
Waheet  and  all  under  him,  and  Commander  Haines,  Agent  of  Government. 