

At  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  Imam  Ali  Munsoor  suffered 
severely  at  the  hands  of  the  Wahabees,  who  overran  and  wrested  from 
him  some  of  the  best  districts  of  his  dominions.  In  1816,  however, 
Mahomed  Ali  Pasha,  after  he  had  destroyed  the  Wahabee  power,  restored 
these  districts  to  Ahmed,  the  son  and  successor  of  Imam  Ali  Munsoor,  in 
consideration  of  an  annual  tribute  of  one  hundred  thousand  dollars. 
Ahmed  was  succeeded  in  1817  by  his  son  Abdoolla,  who  was  unable  to 
retain  the  provinces  which  had  been  restored  to  his  father. 

In  1817,  in  consequence  of  a  dispute  in  which  an  Arab  had  been 
temporarily  detained  at  the  factory  at  Mokha,  the  Residency  was 
attacked  and  plundered,  and  a  British  Officer  was  dragged  before  the 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  oOl 

Governor,  by  whom  he  was  subjected  to  the  most  brutal  insults.  After  SENNA. 
some  delay  a  British  squadron  was  sent  to  demand  satisfaction  for  this  ~ 
outrage.  On  26th  December  1820  the  fort  of  Mokha  was  taken,  and 
shortly  afterwards  a  public  apology  was  made  for  the  insult  offered  to  the 
British  Government,  and  a  Treaty  (No.  XCIV.)  was  signed  by  the  Imam 
of  Senna  and  his  Council,  defining  the  rights  to  be  enjoyed  by  British 
subjects,  and  reducing  the  export  duty  on  trade  to  2£  per  cent. 
This  Treaty  was  framed  in  the  most  slovenly  and  discreditable  way, 
and  it  was  afterwards  discovered  that  serious  discrepancies  existed 
between  the  English  version  and  the  Arabic  counterpart.  The 
Imam  refused  to  allow  any  modification.  To  preserve  friendly  relations, 
the  British  Government  yielded  every  point,  except  one  in  the  sixth 
Article.  The  clause  in  the  English  version  of  that  Article,  which  stipu- 
lated that  the  servants  of  the  factory  should  be  amenable  only  to  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  Resident,  was  altogether  omitted  in  the  Arabic.  The 
Imam  was  informed  that  all  other  points  were  conceded,  but  that  if  he 
attempted  to  seize  or  punish  any  person,  of  whatever  nation,  in  the  ex- 
clusive employment  of  the  Resident,  the  Resident  would  withdraw,  and 
such  further  measures  would  be  adopted  as  might  seem  to  the  British 
Government  to  be  expedient. 

In  1840  a  commercial  Treaty  was  concluded  with  the  Governor 
of  Mokha  by  Captain  Moresby,  similar  to  that  concluded  in  the  same 
year  with  the  Chief  of  Zaila."*  Shortly  afterwards  the  British  flag  was 
cut  down,  and  the  duties  levied  from  British  subjects  were  raised  to  9 
per  cent.  As  Mokha  had  by  this  time  fallen  under  the  government 
of  the  Sublime  Porte,  it  was  doubtful  whether  Sheriff  Hossein  had  any 
right  to  conclude  a  Treaty  as  a  principal.  The  British  Government 
also  objected  to  certain  exclusive  clauses  in  the  Treaty,  which  were  directed 
against  the  trade  of  other  European  nations.  The  dispute  was  amicably 
adjusted  through  Her  Majesty's  Ambassador  at  Constantinople. 