

Of  late  years  the  country  of  Senna  has  fallen  into  absolute  an- 
archy. In  1832  Mokha  and  all  the  sea  coast  fell  under  the  suzerainty  of 
the  Turks.  It  was  afterwards  recovered  for  a  time,  but  again  finally  lost 
in  1848.  Ali  Munsoor,  who  succeeded  his  father  as  Imam  of  Senna  in 
1834,  was  deposed  three  years  after.     But  he  again  succeeded  to  power  in 

*  Sec  below,  Zaila. 


SOS  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

SENNA.  181  A,  on  the  death  of  his  uncle,  only  to  be  again  deposed  in  1845  by  Ma- 
No.  XCIV.  homed  Yehia,  a  distant  relative  of  the  family.  Mahomed  Yehia,  in  1849, 
swore  allegiance  to  the  Porte,  and  agreed  to  hold  Senna  as  a  vassal  of  the 
Sultan,  paying  to  him  half  the  revenues  and  receiving  a  Turkish  garrison 
in  his  capital.  This  so  incensed  the  inhabitants,  that  they  rose  upon  the 
Turks,  massacred  them,  and  reinstated  Ali  Munsoor,  who  ordered  Maho- 
med Yehia  to  be  put  to  death.  Within  a  few  months  Imam  Ali  Munsoor 
fell  into  the  hands  of  Ghalib,  the  son  of  Mahomed  Yehia.  The  people 
of  Senna,  however,  refused  to  acknowledge  the  authority  of  Ghalib,  and 
elected  a  Governor  from  among  their  own  body.  For  some  time  Ghalib 
lived  a  profligate  drunkard  in  an  obscure  village  a  few  miles  from  Senna, 
till  1858,  when  he  was  recalled  and  reinstated  in  the  government  with 
only  nominal  power.  During  the  internal  revolutions  in  Senna  and  the 
desultory  warfare  with  the  Turks,  the  Imams  repeatedly  endeavoured  to 
enlist  the  aid  and  advice  of  the  British  Government  in  their  cause. 
A  rigid  abstinence,  however,  was  maintained  from  all  interference  in  their 
affairs. 


No.  XCIV. 
Tbeaty  concluded  with  the  Imam  of  Senna  on  15th  January  1821. 

In  explanation  of  the  Articles  which  were  settled  between  the  Umeer 
Futtuh-oolla,  the  Agent  for  the  Imam  Mehdi,  the  Chief  of  Senna, 
the  City  of  Sam,  and  between  the  Agent  of  the  English  Government, 
Agha  Mr.  Bruce  Khan,  in  the  year  1236,  and  from  the  birth  of 
Jesus  1821  :— 

English  Version.  Translation  of  the  Arabic 

Counterpart. 

Article  1.  Article  1. 

That  the  Resident  shall  have  a  That  the  Resident  (Vakeel)  who 
guard  of  the  same  strength  as  is  may  be  stationed  on  the  part  of  the 
allowed  at  Bagdad,  Bussorah,  and     English  Government  at  the  port  of 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


303 


Bushire,  of  thirty  men,  to  support     Mokha  shall   have  with  him   {lit.      SENNA. 


his  respectability. 
(Signed) 


there    shall   be   with   him)    thirty 

Military  from  out  of  their  army, 

Wm.  Bruce,  like  the    Residents    (Vakeels)    at 

Govt.  Agent.       Busrah,  Bagdad,  and   Ubooshuhur 

(Busheer.) 

