

We  agree  to  lasting  peace  and  friendship. 

Aden  is  open  for  our  free  intercourse  and  friendship,  and  so  is  our 

country  to  each  other,  and  both  parties  agree  there  shall  be  no  oppression 

or  insult. 

(Signed)         Syud  Mahomed  Jaffer  bin  Syud  Hydroos. 

Dated  2nd  February  1839. 


No.  XC. 

Engagement  entered  into,  on  the  18th  February  1839,  between  Sheikh  Jwas  bin 
Sallaam  el  Abbadee  and  his  tribe  with  Commander  Haines,  of  the  Indian 
Navy,  on  behalf  of  the  Honoubable  East  India  Company. 

Between  our  respective  territory  there  shall  be  peace  and  friendship, 
and  Aden  shall  be  at  peace  with  the  Abbadees. 

A  free  intercourse  for  barter  shall  be  permitted  without  insult  or 
oppression ;  and  in  proof  of  the  faith  of  this,  Sheikh  Jwas  bin  Sallaam 
agrees  that  his  people  shall  not  molest  or  plunder  on  the  roads  leading  to 
Aden,  and  if  any  such  misdemeanor  occurs,  he  will  be  answerable. 

Dated  YbtK  February  1839. 

(Signed)         Jwas  bin  Sallaam  el  Abbadee. 
Witness : 

(Signed)        Syud  Alooe. 

(Signed)         S.  B.  Haines. 

vol.  vh.  2  p 


Petty  Tribes. 


298  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

ADEN.  NO.   XCI. 

Nc*.XCI     Engagement  of  peace  and  friendship  entered  into,  on  the  18th  February  1839,  by 
&  XCII.  Sheikh  Mehdi  bin  Ali  Zababee  with  Commander  Haines,  of  the  Indian 

Navy,  on  behalf  of  the  Honourable  East  India  Company. 
Between  us  and  our  countries  there  shall  be  peace  and  friendship ; 
it  shall  be  lasting ;  our  interest  shall  be  one. 

We  agree  that  Aden  and  the  English  shall  be  at  peace  with  my 
tribe,  and  that  the  subjects  of  either  may  enter  the  other's  territory,  and 
shall  neither  be  oppressed  nor  insulted,  but  treated  with  friendship.  This 
we  promise  on  both  sides. 

"Whoever  may  enter  Aden  of  Sheikh  Mehdi's  tribe  shall  be  respected 
and  allowed  free  intercourse,  attending,  of  course,  to  the  laws. 

If  robbery  on  the  roads  takes  place,  either  by  Sheikh  Mehdi's  tribe 
or  any  other  within  his  district,  he  will  be  responsible. 

Dated  the  \Uh  February  1839. 

(Signed)         Sheikh  Mehdi  bin  Ali. 
Witnesses  : 
(Signed)  M.  Houssain  Shah  Montee. 

„  Syud  Alooe. 

(Signed)         S.  B.  Haines. 


No.  XCII. 

Engagement  entered  into,  on  the  18th  February  1839,  by  the  Sheikh  of  Zaidee, 
Sheikh  Sallah  Ammoidee,  with  Commander  Haines,  of  the  Indian  Navy,  on 
behalf  of  the  Honoubable  East  India  Company. 

Between  our  respective  countries  there  shall  be  peace  and  friendship, 
and  Aden  be  at  peace  with  us.  The  subjects  of  either  may  enter  the 
other's  territory  without  being  subject  to  insult  or  oppression,  merely  at- 
tending to  the  laws. 

Bated  18^  February  1839. 