


.110  treaties,  enciaok.mexts,  and  sunnuds. 

zaii.v  Article  6. 

Sultan  Mahomed  bin  Mohummed,  of  Tajowra,  engages  to  protect 
and  respect  any  British  subject  residing  in  his  territories,  provided  the 
sanction  of  his  Government  be  previously  obtained,  the  British  guaran- 
teeing the  same  privilege  to  the  people  of  Tajowra  and  its  dependencies. 


No.  XCVII. 


Article  7. 

In  entering  into  any  Bond  or  Treaty,  or  trading  with  either  Euro- 
pean or  other  powers,  Sultan  Mahomed  bin  Mohummed  engages  that  no 
Bond  or  Treaty  shall  be  acceded  to  or  acquiesced  in  by  him  which  will, 
either  at  the  present  or  at  any  future  period,  prove  detrimental  or  injuri- 
ous to  the  interests  of  the  British,  either  in  a  political  or  commercial 
point  of  view,  and  in  return  for  such  agreement,  the  English  promise 
that  they  will  act  in  no  manner  which  may  have  an  evil  tendency 
towards  the  States  of  Tajowra. 

Article  8. 

We,  Sultan  Mahomed  bin  Mohummed  and  Captain  Robert  Moresby, 
of  the  Indian  Navy,  having  met,  and  being  mutually  satisfied  with  each 
others  powers,  have  ratified  the  above  Articles  for  the  benefit  of  both 
powers. 

In  witness  whereof  we,  this  V&th  day  of  August,  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty,  corresponding  with  the  22nd 
day  of  Jemmadi-el-Akhar,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  one  thousand  two 
hundred  and  fifty-six,  have  attached  our  seals  and  signatures. 


Tbanslation  of  the  Deed  of  Sale  of  the  Island  called  Mussa,  granted  by 
Sultan  Mahomed  bin  Mohummed  to  the  British  Government. 

In  the  name  of  the  Most  Merciful  God ! 

The  virtue  of  this  writing  is,  that  I,  Sultan  Mahomed  bin  Mohum- 
med, Governor  of  Tajowra,  I,  for  myself  and  posterity,  bargained  and 
granted  the  Island  called  "  Mussa "  to  the  British  Government  for  ten 
bags  of  rice.  I  agreed  to  and  sold  the  said  Island  for  the  said  quantity 
of  rice,   and  it  is  belonging   and  pertaining  to  British  Government. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUD.S.  317 

In  the  presence  of  the  undersigned  witnesses,  and  God  is  also  witness      ZAILA 
between  us,   this  22nd  Jemmadi-el-Akhar,  in   the  year  one  thousand        AND 
two  hundred  and  fifty-six  (1256)  Hegira,  or  19th  day  of  August  1840.      TAJ0WRA- 

Nos.  XCVII 

(Signed)         Sultan  Mahomed  bin  Mohummed.    &  xcviii. 
Witnesses :  • 

(Signed)         Bemtha  eben  Mahomed,  Minister. 
„  Aboobacker  Murjan. 

„  Shomakee  bin  All 

„  Hajee  Abdool  Russool, 

British  Agent  at  Mocha. 

„  Robert  Moresby,  Captain,  I.  N., 

Commanding  H.  C.'s  Steam  Frigate  "  SesostrisJ" 

The  \Uh  August  1840. 


No.  XCVIII. 

Commercial  Treaty  entered  into  between  Syud  Mahomed  Bae,  Governor  of 
Zaila,  for  himself  and  posterity,  and  Captain  Moeesby,  of  the  Indian  Navy, 
on  the  part  of  the  Hon oue able  East  India  Company. 