

"  We  have  reduced  the  duties 
three  quarters  of  a  dollar  per  cent, 
out  of  three  dollars,  and  this  is  upon 
all  goods  imported  into  the  port  in 
the  name  of  the  English  Sirkar  and 
their  merchants;  there  is  not  (to 
be)  more  (required)  from  them  than 
two  and  a  quarter  dollars  per  cent., 
alone,  both  upon  goods  imported 
and  on  goods  exported,  and  this  is 
as  a  mark  of  our  regard  and  respect 
for  the  said  two  (the  English  gov- 
ernment and  their  merchants),  and 
for  the  preservation  of  the  inter- 
course and  friendship  between  us 
both,  as  was  (the  case)  with  those 
who  existed  before  us  (in  former 
times) . 

"Dated  Rubbee-oo-sanee  1236  of 
five  Ilegira  a.  d.  1821)." 


SENNA. 
No.  XCIV. 


Signed  b//  the  six  members. 


MACULLA  AND  SIIUHUR. 

Maculla  and  Shuhur  are  the  two  principal  slave  ports  on  the 
southern  coast  of  Arabia.  The  slaves  from  Zanzibar  and  the  Somali 
and  Donkali  coasts  were  annually  brought  there.  On  14th  May  1863, 
Brigadier  Coghlan,  the  Political  Resident  at  Aden,  concluded  an  En- 
gagement (No.  XCV.)  with  Nukeeb  Silah  bin  Mahomed  of  Maculla 
and  Nukeeb  Ali  Najee  of  Shuhur  in  which  they  agreed  to  abolish  and 
prohibit  the  export  and  import  of  slaves. 


No.  XCV. 
Ik  the  name  of  the  Most  Merciful  God,  and  Him  we  implore. 

The  reason  of  writing  this  Bond  is  that  influenced  by  motives  of 
humanity  and  by  a  desire  to  conform  to  the  principles  on  which  the 
great  English  Government  is  conducted,  we  lend  a  willing  ear  to  the 
proposals  of  our  sincere  friend,  Brigadier  William  Marcus  Coghlan, 
Governor  of  Aden ;  that  we  shall  covenant  with  him  to  abolish  and  pro- 
hibit the  export  or  import  of  slaves  from  or  to  any  part  of  our  territory 
to  any  other  place  in  Africa,  or  in  Asia,  or  elsewhere. 

Therefore  I,  whose  name  and  seal  are  set  to  this  Bond,  do  in  the 
sight  of  God  and  of  men  solemnly  proclaim  my  determination  to  pro- 
hibit the  export  or  import  of  slaves  by  every  means  in  my  power.  I  will 
neither  export  nor  import  any  myself,  nor  will  I  permit  any  subjects  to 
do  so ;  and  any  vessel  belonging  to  my  subjects  found  carrying  slaves 
shall  be  seized  and  confiscated  by  me  or  by  any  ship  belonging  to  Her 
Majesty  the  Queen  of  England,  and  the  slaves  shall  be  released.     Peace. 


SHUHUR. 
No.  XCV. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  309 

This  covenant  is  to  have  effect  at  the  expiration  of  one  year  from   MACULLA 
this  date.     Peace.  AND 

(Signed)         Silah  Mahomed. 

„  W.  M.  Cogiilan, 

Political  Resident,  Aden, 
At  Macnlla,  Ut/i  May  1863. 

Witnesses : 
(Signed)         Omar  ba  Salim  Kaisan. 
„  H.  Rassam, 

Assistant  Political  Resident. 