

Article  13. 

That  with  a  view  to  the  promotion  and  encouragement  of  reciprocal 
intercourse  between  the  respective  subjects  of  the  two  nations,  no  hinder- 
ance  or  molestation  be  offered  to  British  travellers,  whether  residing 
witliin  the  territories  of  Shoa,  or  visiting  the  countries  beyond. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


313 


Article  14.  .  SHOA. 

That  the  effects  of  such  travellers,  not  intended  for  sale,  shall  be    No.  XCVI. 
liable  to  no  duty  of  any  sort,  and  shall  in  every  respect  be  held  personal 
and  inviolable. 

Article  15. 

That  in  like  manner,  no  subject  of  Shoa  shall  meet  with  any  hinder- 
ance  or  obstruction  whilst  residing  in  any  part  of  the  dominions  of  Her 
Most  Gracious  Majesty  Queen  Victoria,  nor  shall  he  be  prevented  from 
proceeding  beyond  them  at  pleasure. 


Article  16. 

And,  lastly,  that  a  strict  reciprocal  observance  of  all  the  foregoing 
Articles  and  conditions  shall  be  regarded  as  a  proof  of  the  continued 
desire  on  the  part  of  both  the  contracting  Sovereigns  for  a  lasting  and 
permanent  friendship. 

Made  and  concluded  at  Angollallah,  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  of 
Shoa}  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  month  Hedar  one  thousand  eight  hundred 
and  thirty-four  of  the  Abyssinian  aera,  corresponding  with  the  sixteenth 
day  of  November,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and 
forty-one,  being  the  twenty-ninth  of  the  reign  of  His  Majesty  Sahela 
Selassie  and  the  fifth  of  Her  Majesty  Queen  Victoria. 

(Signed)         W.  C.  Harris. 


(Signed)     Sahela  Selassie, 


Who  is  King 

of  Shoa,  Efat,  and 

the  Galla. 


VOL.   VII. 


lr 


ZAILA  AND  TAJOWRA. 

In  1839,  after  the  capture  of  Aden,  it  was  deemed  necessary  to 
secure  command  of  the  harbours  of  Zaila  and  Tajowra  on  the  Donkali 
coast.  These  ports  are  on  the  African  coast,  nearly  opposite  to  Aden, 
and  are  the  principal  outlets  of  the  trade  of  Southern  Abyssinia. 
Tajowra  is  a  dependency  of  Zaila,  and  both  places  were  subject  to  the 
Imams  of  Senna,  but  during  the  revolutions  at  Senna,  the  Chiefs  of 
Zaila  and  Tajowra  had  assumed  independence.  A  Treaty  (No.  XCVII.) 
was  concluded  with  the  Chief  of  Tajowra  on  the  19th  August  1840,  by 
which  the  Mussa  Islands  were  ceded  to  the  British  Government,  and  in 
September  1840  a  Treaty  (No.  XOVIII.)  of  the  same  tenor  was  signed  by 
the  Sultan  of  Zaila,  who  ceded  the  Island  of  Aubad.  The  British  Gov- 
ernment suggested  a  modification  of  these  Treaties  and  the  omission  of 
all  clauses  of  an  exclusive  nature  directed  against  the  trade  of  other 
nations,  but  owing  to  the  distracted  state  of  Yemen  and  its  dependencies, 
the  alteration  of  the  Treaties  was  not  effected.  Zaila  and  Tajowra  sub- 
sequently fell  under  the  Government  of  the  Turks. 