

Bated  Woth  Ahee  AlcTcada  1279. 

A  precisely  similar  Engagement  was  concluded  on  the  same  date 
with  Ali  bin  Najee,  the  Nukeeb  of  Shuhur. 


Approved  and  ratified  by  the  Viceroy  and  Governor  General  on 
29th  June  1863. 


SHOA. 

In  1840,  Sahela  Selassie,  King  of  Shoa  in  southern  Abyssinia, 
expressed  a  desire  to  cultivate  the  friendship  of  the  British  Government 
and  wrote  to  the  Government  of  Bombay  asking  to  be  furnished  with 
guns  and  warlike  stores.  Shoa  was  then  one  of  the  most  powerful  and 
important  provinces  in  Abyssinia.  It  is  inhabited  by  the  Galla  tribe. 
At  the  time  when  Sahela  Selassie  made  these  advances,  the  steam  navi- 
gation of  the  Red  Sea  had  given  an  exaggerated  importance  to  the  trade 
of  Abyssinia.  It  was  therefore  determined  to  send  a  mission  to  the 
Court  of  Shoa,  with  which  country  the  French  also  appeared  anxious  to 
establish  friendly  connections.  A  commercial  Treaty  (XCVI.)  was  con- 
cluded with  the  King  on  15th  November  1841. 


No.  XCVI. 

Treaty  of  amity  and  commerce  made  and  concluded  between  His  Majesty  Sahela. 
Selassie,  King  of  Shoa,  Efat  and  the  Galla,  on  the  one  part,  and  Captain 
William  Cobnwallis  Hakbis,  under  the  authority  of  His  Excellency  the 
Governor  of  Bombay,  in  the  name  and  on  the  behalf  of  Her  Most  Gracious 
Majesty  Victobia,  Queen  of  Great  Britain,  Ireland,  and  the  Indies,  on  the 
other  part. 

Whereas  commerce  is  a  source  of  great  wealth  and  prosperity  to  all 
those  nations  who  are  firmly  united  in  the  bonds  of  reciprocal  friendship, 
and  whereas  the  conclusion  of  a  Treaty  of  perpetual  amity  and  com- 
merce betwixt  Shoa  and  Great  Britain,  which  has  already  been  desired 
by  their  respective  Sovereigns,  would  tend  to  the  mutual  advantage  of 
both  nations,  and  whereas  tokens  of  amity  and  good  will  have  been 
mutually  exchanged  between  His  Majesty  of  Shoa  and  Her  Britannic 
Majesty,  and  whereas  it  is  desirable  that  the  Articles  and  conditions 
should  be  specified,  whereupon  the  desired  commercial  intercourse  betwixt 
the  two  nations  should  be  conducted  :  Now  it  is  hereby  declared,  done, 
and  agreed  as  follows  : — 

Article  1. 

That  a  firm,  free,  and  lasting  friendship  shall  subsist  between  His 
Majesty  Sahela  Selassie,  King  of  Shoa,  Efat,  and  the  Galla,  and  His  lineal 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  311 

successors,  and  between  Her  Most  Gracious  Majesty  Victoria,  Queen  of      SHOA. 
Great  Britain,  Ireland,  and  India,  and  Her  lineal  successors.  "7:    XCVI 

Article  2. 
That  for  the  purpose  of  preserving  and  maintaining  the  friendly  re- 
lations subsisting  between  the  two  nations,  His  Majesty  of  Shoa  and 
His  lineal  successors  shall  receive  and  cherish  any  ambassador  or  envoy 
whom  Her  Britannic  Majesty  and  Her  lineal  successors  may  see  fit  to 
appoint,  and  shall  preserve  inviolate  all  his  peculiar  rights  and  privileges. 