

peace  and  friendship  may  be  lasting  between  us  :    In  witness  whereof  we 

have  set  our  names  and  seals. 

(Signed)         B.  Moresby,  Captain, 

Commanding  II.  C.'s  Steam  Frigate  "  Sesostris" 


MOKHA, 

The  2>rd  September  1840 


! 


SOMALEES. 

The  Ilabr  Owul. — In  1827  a  British  vessel  trading  at  Berbera  was 
attacked  and  plundered  by  the  Habr  Owul  tribe  of  Somalees.  Berbera 
is  a  port  to  the  east  of  Zaila  and  Tajowra  and  nearly  opposite  to  Aden. 
In  consequence  of  unhealthy  winds  it  is  deserted  for  six  months  every 
year.  During  the  rest  of  the  year  it  is  visited  by  caravans  of  different 
tribes  from  the  interior  of  Africa.  A  vessel  of  war  was  sent  to  punish 
the  tribe  for  the  outrage  which  they  had  committed.  On  6th  February 
1827  a  Treaty  of  peace  and  commerce  (No.  XCIX.)  was  signed  by  the 
elders  of  the  tribe. 

An  expedition  was  sent  in  1854-  to  explore  the  country  between 
Berbera  and  Zanzibar.  On  the  18th  of  April  1855  the  party  were 
suddenly  attacked  by  Somalees  of  the  El  Moosa  tribe;  two  British 
Officers  were  wounded,  one  was  killed,  and  the  entire  property  of  the 
expedition  was  carried  off.  A  demand  was  at  once  made  on  the  Habr 
Owul  tribe  for  the  surrender  and  punishment  of  the  chief  offenders  and 
the  demand  was  enforced  by  the  blockade  of  Berbera.  The  elders  of 
the  tribe  did  their  best  to  comply  with  the  demand,  but  were  unable  to 
apprehend  the  actual  murderers,  who  took  refuge  in  the  interior.  The 
British  Government  at  last  consented  to  withdraw  the  blockade  on  the 
Somalees  binding  themselves  by  a  Treaty  (No.  C.)  to  use  their  utmost 
endeavour  to  deliver  up  the  murderers,  to  allow  free  trade  with  their 
territories,  to  abolish  traffic  in  slaves,  and  to  treat  with  respect  any 
British  Agent  who  might  be  deputed  to  see  that  the  conditions  of  the 
Treaty  were  observed. 

Other  Tribes. — In  1855  the  elders  of  the  Habr  Gerhagis  and 
the  Habr  Taljala  tribes  of  Somalees  entered  into  an  Engagement 
(No.  LXXXV.)  with  the  Political  Resident  at  Aden  to  prohibit  the 
slave  trade. 


I  I  TO&TOS,   ES&ACEMEX1S,  AKD  STSSTISS. 

stTOLLLEKS.  No.   XC1 X . 


&•  XCUL    inms  of  Hiiiniiiif  a*d  iimiiii  uair  btUuia  J.  J.  Gaums  Barare*, 
Bsa,  c  b-  Cfcfteht  of  H»  Britannic  Majwlya  Skip  Tamar,  re]*eMtnsr  the 
i  Korlham  Africa,  aid  the  Shak*  of  the  tribe  of  Habr  OnL 


Asncxx  1. 

It  is  agreed  that  fiat  lienceforth  these  shall  be  peace  and  friend- 

ship  between  the  subjects  of  His  Majesty  the  King  of  England  and 

the  Shafts  of  the  Habr  Oral  tribe  and  their  men,  and  all  other  in. 

of  the  coast  of  Africa  over  which  they  have  authority  and 


Akhtjlb  2. 
It  k  agreed  that  any  vessels  bearing-  the  English  flag  which  may 
come  to  the  port  of  Berbera,  (or  any  other  port  under  the  authority  of 
the  Shafts  of  the  Habr  Owul  tribe,)  for  the  jmrpore  of  trafe  shall  not  be 
mnhjitul  or  injured,  but  shall  receive  every  protection  and  support  from 
the  said  Sheiks,  that  they  shall  be  at  liberty  to  enter  into  any  trade 
they  may  think  fit  to  choose,  and  that  they  shall  be  at  liberty  to  depart 
from  the  said  port  at  their  plcaimie  without  impediment,  injury,  or 