

Article  3. 
That  for  the  like  purpose,  Her  Britannic  Majesty  and  Her  lineal 
successors  shall  in  the  same  manner  receive  and  cherish  any  ambassador 
or  envoy  whom  His  Majesty  of  Shoa  and  His  lineal  successors  may  see 
fit  to  appoint,  and  shall  equally  preserve  inviolate  all  His  peculiar  rights 
and  privileges. 

Article  4. 

That  under  the  following  conditions  a  commercial  intercourse  be 
allowed  and  encouraged  betwixt  the  subjects  of  Shoa  and  the  countries 
beyond  that  kingdom  and  the  subjects  of  Great  Britain. 

Article  5. 
That  an  import  duty  of  five  per  cent.,  and  no  more,  shall  be  levied 
and  received  by  His  Majesty  of  Shoa  and  His  lineal  successors  upon  all 
British  goods  and  merchandize  imported  into  the  kingdom,  whether  for 
sale  therein,  or  in  the  countries,  beyond. 

Article  6. 

That  this  import  duty  of  five  per  cent,  shall  be  assessed  upon  the 
current  value  of  the  merchandize  at  the  market  place  of  Alio  Amba,  and 
shall  be  paid  either  in  kind  or  in  specie  at  the  option  of  the  merchant. 

Article  7. 
That  the  said  import  duty  having  been  first  duly  discharged,  the 
merchant  shall  be  at  full  liberty  either  to  dispose  of  his  goods  within, 
the  territories  of  Shoa,  without  prohibition  to  the  buyer,  or  to  convey 
them  elsewhere  without  restraint  or  molestation. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNTJDS. 

SHOA.  Article  8. 

No.  XCVL  That  British  merchants  shall  be  at  liberty  to  purchase  within  the 

territories  of  Shoa  all  such  commodities  as  they  may  think  proper,  whe- 
ther the  produce,  of  those  territories,  or  imported  from  the  countries 
beyond  them,  and  export  the  same  without  the  payment  of  any  duty 
whatsoever. 

Article  9. 

That  the  goods  and  merchandize  of  all  subjects  of  Shoa  who  may 
visit  Great  Britain  shall  in  like  manner  be  liable  to  no  greater  duties 
than  are  already  levied,  or  may  hereafter  be  levied,  upon  the  immediate 
subjects  of  Great  Britain. 

Article  10. 

That  in  view  to  the  augmentation  and  promotion  of  commerce 
lxjtween  Shoa  and  Great  Britain  His  Majesty  of  Shoa  and  His  lineal 
successors  shall  encourage  all  merchants  to  bring  the  produce  of  the 
interior  of  Africa  through  the  dominions  of  Shoa,  and  especially  such 
articles  as  are  best  suited  to  the  British  market. 

Article  11. 

That  with  a  like  view,  Her  Britannic  Majesty  and  Her  lenial  suc- 
cessors will  encourage  British  merchants  to  import  into  Shoa  such 
articles  as  will  prove  most  acceptable  within  the  same. 

Article  12. 

That  for  the  better  security  of  merchants  and  their  property,  His 
Majesty  of  Shoa  and  His  lineal  successors,  and  Her  Britannic  Majesty 
and  Her  lineal  successors,  will,  respectively,  to  the  utmost  of  their  power, 
endeavour  to  keep  open  and  secure  the  avenues  of  approach  betwixt 
the  sea  coast  and  Abyssinia. 