


AjmcLE  3. 

It  is  agieed  that  in  like  manner  any  vessels  or  persons  belonging  to 

the  said  Sheiks  of  Habr  Owul  tribe  which  shall  come  into  any  post 

•to  His  Majesty  the  King  of  r^nglandshaB  receive  protection  and 

I  be  treated  in  all  respects  the  same  as  other  vessels  or  persons 

trailing  to  those  ports. 

AlTSCLE  4. 

It  is  agreed  that  as  an  equivalent  for  the  value  of  the  British  Brig 
Mmmmme  and  her  cargo,  which  was  plundered  in  the  port  of  Berbera, 
there  shall  be  paid  by  the  said  Sheiks  of  the  Habr  Owul  tribe  to  the 
said  Captain  X.  J.  Gordon  Bremer,  c.  b.,  or  to  some  person  duly  autho- 
rncd  by  him  to  reeerre  it,  the  sum  of  fifteen  thousand  Sparush  Hollars, 
or  produce  to  the  same  amount,  in  three  equal  payments,  that  is  to  sav, 
five  thousand  Dollars,  or  produce  to  that  amount,  this  year  1827  and  of 
the  Hegira  1242,  and  the  same  sum  in  each  of  the  two  following  years, 
that  is  to  say,  on  or  before  the  conclusion  of  the  trading  season  in  the 
of  April,  or  two  hundredth  day  of  the  Xowrox. 


TMMXTfm,  KSGAGKMEXTt,  AID   SOnTTDS.  feg] 

AtTLCLE  5.  SOU  JXEES. 

Two  Lascars  belonging  to  the  British  Brig  Marianne  having  been    rttIai" 
killed  when  the  raid  vessel  was  plundered  and  destroyed,  the  Sheiks  «f       AC 
the  Habr  Owul  tribe  do  hereby  agree  to  pay  the  earn  of 
Dollars  for  the  support  of  the  families  of  the  nuudeied  men,  n  muling 
to  the  Mahomedan  law  in  sneh  eases. 

Confirmed  and  tealtd  at  Berber*,  in  Africa,  vn  tie&i  dm$  of February 

in  tie  year  o/onr  Lord  Jen*  CkrUt  1827  and  of  tie  Begirt  1242,  tie  9ti 

dan  of  tie  moon  Bnjnb. 

v.:.  J.  J.  Gobdov  Bmzmex, 


JL  £.  Bagsold, 


Witness :  PU.  Agent,  WUmet*. 

Shttbmasjlly  Ali  Sauleh. 
(Signed)  by  Ismail  GeQa  for  himself,  and  Omar  Kadim  Hussin 
Ban  and  Ismail  Goled,  Sheiks  of  Habr  Ownl  tribe. 


Approved  by  the  Bombay  Government  on  10th  Hay  1S27. 

Xo.  C. 

AancxES  of  peace  and  friendship  eosrisded  belneea  the  Hair  Chnd  tribe  ef 
fiwilrri  an  the  one  part,  sad  Bsxsimsn  WnuiM  ILlsccs  Coonx**,  PeB- 
tieal  TteaJdrnt  at  Aden,  on  behalf  of  the  Hoxocxasxs  East  Ism*.  Coxr ajtt, 
on  the  other. 

Whereas  on  the  19th  of  April  1S55,  corirsponding  with  the  1st  of 

Shaban  1271,  a  treaeherons  attack  and  murder  was  perpetrated  at  the 

port  of  Berbera  by  a  party  of  the  Habr  Ownl  tribe  upon  a  party  of 

British  Officers  about  to  travel  in  that  country,  with  the  ^■■■fii  and 

under  the  protection  of  the  elders  of  the  tribe,  in  nomcqnrmc  of  which 

outrage  certain  demands  were  made  by  the  Government  of  India  and 

enforced  by  a  blockade  of  the   Habr  Ownl  coast,  and  wlsaeaa  it  has 

become  apparent  that  the  said  tribe  has  fulfilled  those  conditions  to  the 