


No.  XCVII. 

Commebcial  Treaty  entered  into  between  Sultan  Mahomed  bin  Mohttmmed,  of 
Tajowra,  and  Captain  Bobeet  Mobesby,  of  the  Indian  Navy,  on  the  part  of 
the  Honoubable  East  India  Company. 

It  being  advantageous  to  both  parties  to  enter  into  a  Treaty  of 
peace  and  commerce,  and  that  a  mutual  good  understanding  should 
exist  between  each  other,  more  especially  so,  since  Aden  has  become  a 
British  port,  we,  Sultan  Mahomed  bin  Mohummed  and  Captain  Robert 
Moresby,  of  the  Indian  Navy,  (being  fully  authorized  so  to  do,)  agree 
to  the  following  capitulations  and  Articles  : — 

Article  1. 
That  friendship  and  peace  shall  be  lasting  between  the  State  of 
Tajowra  and  its  dependencies  and  the  British  Government. 


treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds.  315 

Article  2.  ZAJla 

AND 
That  the  English  nation,  and  all  vessels  lawfully  sailing  under  the   tajowra 

British  flag,  having  merchandise  of  any  description  on  board,  shall  be  — : r  T(%VTf 

respected  and  permitted,  without  the  slightest  prejudice  or  molestation 

to  their  persons  or  effects,  to  enter  and   trade   in   the  port  of,  and  all 

ports  under  the  Government  of  Tajowra,  paying  a  duty  of  five  per  cent. 

upon  all  produce.     The  subjects  of  the  Sultan  of  Tajowra  shall  also  be 

permitted  the  same  privileges  at  all  British  ports. 


Article  3. 

The  port  of  Tajowra  and  the  adjacent  ports,  under  the  Government 
of  Sultan  Mahomed  bin  Mohummed,  are  to  be  open  for  the  introduction 
and  reception  of  all  goods  brought  in  ships  or  vessels  lawfully  trading 
under  the  British  flag ;  further,  the  Sultan  of  Tajowra  will  endeavour 
all  in  his  power  to  introduce  British  produce  into  the  interior  States 
of  Eiffatt,  Shoa,  and  Abyssinia,  and  in  return  the  Authorities  at 
Aden  will  endeavour  to  encourage  interior  export  trade  through 
Tajowra. 

Article  4. 

Sultan  Mahomed  bin  Mohummed,  of  Tajowra,  engages  at  all  times 
to  respect  and  regard  the  friendly  advice  of  any  authorized  person 
belonging  to  the  British  Government,  and  agrees  not  to  enter  into  any 
other  Treaty  or  Bond  with  any  other  European  nation  or  person  without, 
in  the  first  instance,  bringing  the  subject  to  the  notice  of  the  Govern- 
ment Authorities  at  Aden,  so  that  the  same  may  in  no  ways  prove  detri- 
mental to  his  friends,  the  English,  or  their  commerce.  In  return  for 
these  conditions,  the  British  Government  will  observe  the  interests  of 
the  State  of  Tajowra,  and  do  all  in  their  power  to  assist  in  improving 
their  commercial  resources. 

Article  5. 

Any  subject  of  either  power  having  committed  crime  or  offence  is 
to  receive  sentence  awarded  by  their  own  Laws  and  Regulations. 