

It  being  advantageous  to  both  parties  to  enter  into  a  Treaty  of 
peace  and  commerce,  and  that  lasting  friendship  and  good  will  should 
exist  between  each  other,  we,  Syud  Mahomed  Bar,  Governor  of  Zaila, 
and  Captain  Robert  Moresby,  of  the  Indian  Navy,  on  account  of  the 
Honourable  East  India  Company  being  fully  authorized  to  do  so,  agree 
to  the  following  capitulations  and  Articles  :— 

Article  1. 

That  the  English  nation  and  all  vessels,  ships  and  boats  lawfully 
sailing  under  the  British  flag,  commanded  by  European  or  Native  sub- 
jects of  the  English,  having  merchandize  of  any  description,  shall  be 
respected  and  permitted,  without  the  slightest  prejudice  or  molestation 
to  their  persons  or  effects,  to  enter  and  trade  in  the  port  of  Zaila  and 
all  other  ports  under  the  Governor  of  Zaila,  paying  a  duty  of  5  per  cent, 
upon  all  produce.  The  subjects  of  the  Governor  of  Zaila  shall  also  pay 
the  same  duty  in  all  English  ports. 


318  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 

zaila  Article  2. 

and  rjr^Q  Governor  of  Zaila  will  endeavour  all  in  his  power  to  introduce 

British  property  and  merchandize  into  the  interior  State  of  Zaila,  and 

No.  XCVIII.  engages  at  all  times  to  protect,  respect  and  regard  the  person  or  persons 

of  English  and  their  subjects  and  friendly  advice  of  any  authorized  person 

or  Agent  belonging  to  the  British  Government,  who  while  at  Zaila  to 

be  respected  and  regarded.     The  English  on  their  part  allow  the  same 

to  be  done  in  their  port  of  Aden,  or  elsewhere,  and  to  assist  the  trade 

from  Zaila. 

Article  3. 

The  Governor  of  Zaila  engages  not  to  enter  into  any  Treaty  or 
Bond  with  any  other  European  nation  or  person,  or  allow  other  Euro- 
peans to  settle  in  his  territories,  or  pass  through  in  any  numbers,  without 
bringing  the  subject,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  notice  of  the  British 
Government  at  Aden,  so  that  the  same  may  be  in  no  manner  detrimental 
to  his  friends  the  English  or  their  commerce,  in  return  for  which  the 
English  will  do  all  in  their  power  to  assist  the  Governor  of  Zaila  in 
improving  his  commercial  resources. 

Article  4. 

Any  subjects  of  either  power  having  committed  crime  or  offence  are 

to  be  punished  by  their   own  laws  and   customs   of  the  countries  they 

belong  to.  • 

Article  5. 

Syud  Mahomed  Bar  makes  over  the  Island  called  Aubad  near  Zaila 
to  the  English  Government  for  the  harbour  of  their  ships  and  vessels 
without  any  prohibition  whatever. 

We,  Syud  Mahomed  Bar,  Governor  of  Zaila,  and  Captain  Robert 

Moresby,  of  the  Indian  Navy,  on  the  part  of  the  English  Government 

of  India,  do  ratify  and  agree  to  keep  faithfully  the  above  Articles  that 