

accept  and  am  satisfied  with  the  terms  of  the  decision,  and  they  are  ZANZIBAR. 


binding-  on  me,  and  it  is  the  desire  of  the  British  Government  (Javabel  NoTciT 
Sircar)  that  each  of  us,  that  is,  myself  and  my  brother  Thowaynee, 
shall  be  independent  of  each  other  in  his  own  dominions  and  Sultan  over 
his  own  subjects,  that  is  to  say,  that  Zanzibar  and  the  Islands  (Pemba 
and  Monfea),  and  the  dominions  on  the  continent  of  Africa  dependent 
upon  it,  shall  be  subject  to  me,  and  that  Muscat  and  its  dependencies, 
with  the  land  of  Oman,  shall  be  subject  to  my  brother  Thowaynee  bin 
Saeed,  and  that  we  should  dwell  in  peace  and  friendly  alliance  the  one 
with  the  other,  as  is  customary  between  brothers.  I  pray  that  it  may 
be  so,  if  it  please  God.  I  feel  very  much  obliged  to  the  British  Govern- 
ment for  all  its  kindness  and  favour,  and  for  having*  averted  from  my 
dominions  disorders  and  hostilities.  During  my  life-time  I  shall  never 
forget  the  kindness  which  it  has  shown  to  me.  And  now  what  I  desire 
from  you  is  this,  that  you  will  mention  to  His  Lordship  the  Governor 
General  of  India  that  he  should  kindly  determine  that  the  payment  of 
the  40,000  crowns  per  annum  to  my  brother  Thowaynee  shall  be  settled 
as  follows,  viz.,  that  20,000  crowns  shall  be  due  and  payable  each  year 
at  the  "  Monsim,"  (about  April,  when  the  south-west  monsoon  sets  in,) 
and  that  the  other  20,000  crowns  shall  be  due  and  payable  each  year 
at  the  **  Daman,"  (about  September,  October,  when  the  annual  accounts 
are  made  up,  and  the  revenue  from  the  customs  is  paid,)  in  like  manner 
as  I  before  agreed  to  do  when  I  made  the  arrangement,  through  my 
cousin  Mahomed  bin  Salim,  to  pay  40,000  crowns  annually  to  Muscat. 

And  respecting  the  80,000  crowns,  arrears  for  two  years,  that  it 
shall  be  paid  as  soon  as  I  can  possibly  do  so. 

This  I  desire,  in  order  that  there  may  be  no  ground  of  dispute 
hereafter. 

This  is  what  I  wish  for  from  the  friendship  of  the  Government. 

And  for  whatsoever  you  may  desire  from  me  the  sign  is  with  you. 

From  the  confiding  slave  in  God's  mercy,  Majeed  bin  Saeed. 

Written  on  the  \Wi  day  of  the  month  of  Zilhej,  in  the  year  1277 
of  the  Hegira,  corresponding  to  the  29th  June  a.  d.  1861. 


Ho.  CI. 


323  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

ZANZIBAR.  From  the  Sultau  of  Zanzibar,  to  the  Eight  Honourable  the  Governor  General, 
dated  Zilhej  a.  h.  1267,  corresponding  with  25th  June  1861. 

After  usual  Compliments, — My  chief  object  in  addressing*  this 
friendly  letter  to  your  Excellency  is  to  enquire  after  your  health.  May 
the  Almighty  always  protect  your  Excellency  from  all  evils.  As  to 
myself,  who  am  under  great  obligations  to  your  Excellency,  I  beg  to 
state  that  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  under  your  auspices,  I  am  in  the 
enjoyment  of  good  health.  I  offer  my  prayers  to  the  Almighty  for  your 
long  life  and  for  the  destruction  of  your  enemies.  Your  Excellency's 
kind  letter  reached  me  at  an  auspicious  time,  and  I  have  become  fully 
acquainted  with  its  contents.  When  I  referred  to  your  Excellency  for 
settlement  the  dispute  which  long  existed  between  myself  and  my  bro- 
ther Syud  Thowaynee  bin  Saeed,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  act  up  to  any 
award  which  you  might  pass  on  the  case.  I  agree,  as  directed  by  your 
Excellency,  to  pay  to  my  said  brother  the  sum  of  40,000  crowns  annually, 
and  80,000  crowns  on  account  of  arrears  for  the  last  two  years. 