

Brigadier  Coghlan  has  submitted  a  full  and  clear  report  of  all  the 
questions  at  issue  between  your  Highness  and  your  brother. 

I  have  given  my  most  careful  attention  to  each  of  these  questions. 

The  terms  of  my  decision  are  as  follows  : — 

1st. — That  His  Highness  Syud  Majeed  be  declared  ruler  of  Zanzibar 
and  the  African  dominions  of  His  late  Highness  Syud  Saeed. 


326  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

ZANZIBAR.  2nd. — That   the   ruler  of  Zanzibar   pay  annually   to   the   ruler  of 

No.  CL      Muscat  a  subsidy  of  40,000  crowns. 

3rd. — That  His  Highness  Syud  Majeed  pay  to  His  Highness  Syud 
Thowaynee  the  arrears  of  subsidy  for  two  years  or  80,000  crowns. 

I  am  satisfied  that  these  terms  are  just  and  honourable  to  both  of 
you ;  and  as  you  have  deliberately  and  solemnly  accepted  my  arbitration, 
I  shall  expect  that  you  will  cheerfully  and  faithfully  abide  by  them,  and 
that  they  will  be  carried  out  without  unnecessary  delay. 

The  annual  payment  of  40,000  crowns  is  not  to  be  understood  as  a 

recognition  of  the  dependence  of  Zanzibar  upon  Muscat,  neither  is  it 

to  be  considered  as  merely  personal  between  your  Highness  and  your 

brother  Syud  Thowaynee.     It  is  to  extend  to  your  respective  successors, 

and  is  to  be  held  to  be  a  final  and  permanent  arrangement,  compensating 

the  ruler  of  Muscat  for  the  abandonment  of  all  claims  upon  Zanzibar 

and  adjusting  the  inequality  between  the  two  inheritances  derived  from 

your  father,  His  late  Highness  Syud  Saeed,  the  venerated  friend  of  the 

British   Government,  which  two  inheritances   are  to  be  henceforward 

distinct  and  separate. 

I  am, 

Your  Highness* 

Fort  William,  ")  Sincere  friend  and  well  wisher, 

The  2nd  April  1861.     )  (Signed)         Canning. 


Tbanslation  of  an  Arabic  letter  from  His  Highness  Stud  Majeed  bin  Saeed, 
Sultan  of  Zanzibar,  to  Lieutenant  Colonel  C.  P.  Higby,  Her  Majesty's 
Consul  at  Zanzibar,  dated  Zanzibar,  the  19th  day  of  the  month  of  Zilhej,  in 
the  year  1277  Hegira,  corresponding  to  the  29th  June  1861. 

After  Compliments, — I  desire  to  inform  you  that  I  have  been  very 
much  gratified  by  the  receipt  of  the  letters  from  His  Lordship  the 
Governor  General  of  India  and  His  Excellency  the  Governor  of  Bombay, 
conveying  to  me  the  intelligence  of  the  settlement  of  the  disputes  which 
existed  between  myself  and  my  brother  Thowaynee  bin  Saeed.  And, 
regarding  the  decision,  that  I  shall  pay  to  my  brother  Thowaynee  the 
sum  of  40,000  crowns  annually,  and  also  the  sum  of  80,000  crowns  on 
account   of   arrears  for  two  years,    I  agree  to  pay  these  sums,  and  I 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  327 