

The  Zanzibar  dominions  extend  from  Cape  Delgado  about  1,100 
miles  northward  along  the  coast.  In  1844  Syud  Saeed  of  Muscat 
appointed  his  son  Syud  Khaleed  as  his  deputy  and  successor  in  Zanzibar 
and  his  son  Syud  Thowaynee  in  Muscat.  Syud  Khaleed  died  in  1854, 
and  the  Imam  appointed  a  younger  son  Syud  Majeed  to  succeed  him. 
On  the  Imam's  death  in  1857,  Syud  Thowaynee,  being  ruler  of  Muscat 
laid  claim  to  Zanzibar.  He  concluded  an  engagement,  however,  with 
his  brother  Syud  Majeed,  by  which  the  latter  was  left  in  possession  of 
the  African  dominions,  subject  to  an  annual  payment  of  40,000  crowns. 
A  dispute  soon  arose  regarding  the  nature  of  this  payment  and  whether 
it  implied  the  dependence  of  Zanzibar  on  Muscat.  War  was  threatened 
but  both  parties  were  persuaded  to  refer  the  question  to  the  arbi- 
tration of  the  Governor   General  of  India  and   to   abide   by  his  deci- 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  325 

sion.  A  Commission  was  appointed  to  investigate  the  case.  On  the  ZANZIBAR, 
evidence  obtained  by  this  Commission,  Lord  Canning-  gave  an  award  NoTciT" 
(No.  CI.)  to  which  both  parties  agreed,  viz.,  that  Syud  Majeed  should 
be  declared  ruler  of  Zanzibar  and  the  African  dominions  of  the  late 
Syud  Saeed  and  be  subject  to  an  annual  payment,  with  arrears,  of  40,000 
crowns  in  perpetuity  to  Muscat,  which  payment  was  not  to  be  consi- 
dered as  implying  the  dependence  of  Zanzibar  on  Muscat. 

The  Sultan  of  Zanzibar  is  of  course  bound  by  those  Articles  of  the 
Treaties  concluded  with  his  late  father  which  refer  to  Zanzibar.  He  has 
recently  prohibited  the  transport  of  slaves  from  one  port  in  his  dominions 
to  another  during  the  slave  season,  that  is,  from  1st  January  to  30th 
April  in  each  year. 


No.  CI. 

Letter  to  His  Highness  Syud  Majeed  bin  Saeed,  of  Zanzibar. 

Beloved  and  Esteemed  Friend, — I  address  your  Highness  on  the 
subject  of  the  unhappy  differences  which  have  arisen  between  yourself 
and  your  Highness'  brother  the  Imam  of  Muscat,  and  for  the  settlement 
of  which  your  Highness  has  engaged  to  accept  the  arbitration  of  the 
Viceroy  and  Governor  General  of  India. 

Having  regard  to  the  friendly  relations  which  have  always  existed 
between  the  Government  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  and  the  Govern- 
ment of  Oman  and  Zanzibar,  and  desiring  to  prevent  war  between 
kinsmen,  I  accepted  the  charge  of  arbitration  between  you,  and  in  order 
to  obtain  the  fullest  knowledge  of  all  the  points  in  dispute,  I  directed 
the  Government  of  Bombay  to  send  an  Officer  to  Muscat  and  Zanzibar 
to  make  the  necessary  enquiries.  Brigadier  Coghlan  was  selected  for  this 
purpose,  an  Officer  in  whose  judgment,  intelligence,  and  impartiality  the 
Government  of  India  reposes  the  utmost  confidence. 