

utmost  of  its  ability  and  has  prayed  to  be  relieved  from  the  blockade: 

Therefore  it  is  agreed — 

Ajmcii  1. 

That  the  elders  of  the  Habr  Owul  will  use  their  best  endeavours  to 

deliver  up  Ou  Ali,  the  murderer  of  lieutenant  Stroyan. 

vol.  Tit  2  t 


szz  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 

soma  lei  Article  2. 


No.  C.  That  until  this  be  accomplished,  the  sub-tribe  Esa  Moosa,  which 

now  shelters,  and  any  other  tribe  which  may  hereafter  shelter,  harbour, 
or  protect  him,  the  said  Ou  Ali,  shall  be  debarred  from  coming  to  Aden. 

Article  3. 

That  all  vessels  sailing  under  the  British  flag  shall  have  free  per- 
mission to  trade  at  the  port  of  Berbera,  or  at  any  other  place  in  the 
territories  of  the  Habr  Owul,  and  that  all  British  subjects  shall  enjoy 
perfect  safety  in  every  part  of  the  said  territories,  and  shall  be  permitted 
to  trade  or  travel  there  under  the  protection  of  the  elders  of  the  tribe. 
In  like  manner  shall  the  members  of  the  Habr  Owul  tribe  enjoy  similar 
privileges  at  Aden  or  any  other  part  of  the  British  possessions. 

Article  4. 

The  traffic  in  slaves  throughout  the  Habr  Owul  territories,  including 
the  port  of  Berbera,  shall  cease  for  ever,  and  any  slave  or  slaves  who, 
contrary  to  this  engagement,  shall  be  introduced  into  the  said  terri- 
tories shall  be  delivered  up  to  the  British,  and  the  Commander  of  any 
vessel  of  Her  Majesty's  or  the  Honourable  East  India  Company's  Navy 
shall  have  the  power  of  demanding  the  surrender  of  such  slave  or  slaves, 
and  of  supporting  the  demand  by  force  of  arms  if  necessary. 

Article  5. 

The  Political  Resident  at  Aden  shall  have  the  power  to  send  an 
Agent  to  reside  at  Berbera  during  the  season  of  the  fair,  should  he  deem 
such  a  course  necessary,  to  see  that  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement  are 
observed,  and  such  Agent  shall  be  treated  with  the  respect  and  consider- 
ation due  to  the  representative  of  the  British  Government. 

Article  6. 

That  on  a  solemn  promise  being  given  by  the  elders  of  the  Habr 
Owul  faithfully  to  abide  by  the  Articles  of  this  Agreement  and  to  cause 
the  rest  of  the  tribe  to  do  so  likewise,  and  to  deliver  up  to  the  Political 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  323  a 

No.   C  A.  SOMALIS. 

Engagement  concluded  between  Lieutenant-Colonel  W.  L.  Mekewethetc,  c.  b., 
Political  Resident,  Aden,  and  Sultan  Mahmood  bin  Yoqsoof,  Chief  of  the 
Mejerteyu  tribe  of  Somalis  and  elders  of  the  said  tribe. 

Influenced  by  motives  of  humanity  and  by  a  desire  to  conform  to 
the  priuciples  on  which  the  great  Euglish  Government  is  conducted, 
we  lend  a  willing  ear  to  the  proposals  of  our  friend,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
William  Lockyer  Merewether,  c.  B.,  Political  Resident  at  Aden,  that  we 
should  covenant  with  him  and  each  other  to  abolish  and  prohibit  the 
exportation  of  slaves  from  any  one  part  of  Africa  to  any  other  place  in 
Africa  or  Asia  or  elsewhere  under  our  authority.  We  whose  names  and 
seals  are  set  to  this  bond,  as  therefore  in  the  sight  of  God  and  of  men, 
solemnly  proclaim  our  intention  to  prohibit  the  exportation  of  slaves 
from  Africa  by  every  means  in  our  power  :  we  will  export  none  ourselves, 
nor  permit  our  subjects  to  do  so,  and  any  vessel  found  carrying  slaves 
shall  be  seized  and  confiscated  and  the  slaves  shall  be  released. 