


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


335 


AND 

COSSYAH 

HILL 
TRIBES. 

No.  CI  1 1. 

Moleem. 


Longdo  lands  of  Nongseh  from  the  Raj  land  and   the  land  purchased    JYNTEAH 

from  Oo  Reang-Karpang  of  Nongseh  and  will  go  between  the  two  last 

on  the  east  side  of  a  hill  by  a  path  till  the  boundary  stone  of  the  Longdo 

of  Nongseh  at  the  head  of  a  water-course  is  met.     It  will  then  follow 

that  water-course  to  the  junction  of  it  with  the  Oom  Soorpee,  leaving  the 

hill  with  the  Longdo  jungle  of  fir  trees  on  it  to  the  left  or  north  and 

west  side.     The  boundary  will  then  cross  the  Oom  Soorpee  River  and 

ascend  by  a  ravine  opposite  inclining   somewhat  to  the  right  hand  to 

monumental  stones  (Mowshin  Ram),  near  one  of  which  a  peg  and  pile 

of  stones  is  placed.     The  boundary  will  then  descend  the  hill  backwards 

towards  the  point  of  Youdoe  Hill,  that  is,  the  hill  on  which  the  Youdoe 

Bazar  is  held,  to  a  pile  of  stones  and  a  peg  not  far  from  the  government 

road  which   it  crosses  and   not  far  from  the  Oom  Soorpee  River.     The 

boundary  thence  turns  north-east  by  ascending  the  hollow  to  the  ridge 

which  divides  the  water-flow,  on  which  is  a  mark,  to  the  hollow  to  the 

north-east,  which  it  follows  by  the  water  to  the  Oom  Kra  River,  leaving 

the  Youdoe  Bazar  hill   and  the   village  of  Mao  Kra  on  the  left  hand. 

The  boundary  thence  turns  eastward,  following  the  base  of  the  hills  and 

excluding  all  cultivation  in  the  plains,  including  within  it  the  hill  lands 

given  to  the  government  by  Oo  Beh  till  the  lands  of  Oo  Dor  given  to 

government  are  met,  whence  the  boundary,  in  the  same  way,  follows  the 

base  of  the  hills  excluding  the  cultivation  in  the  plains  till  the  River 

Poinding  Neyam  is  met.     Opposite  a  cave  at  the  mouth   of  this  stream, 

when  it  enters  the  plain,  a  peg  and  pile  of  stone  is  met.     The  boundary 

thence  follows  the  same  stream  to  its  head  in  the  rice  lands  of  Oo  Beh 

aforesaid,  thence  it  follows  the  foot  of  the  hills,  leaving  the  village  of 

Limera  to  the  left  or  east  side,  and  excluding  the  rice  cultivation  of  Oo 

Beh,  but  including  the  hill  land  given  by  him  to  government,  till  it 

reaches  the  head  of  the  said  rice  cultivation,  where  it  turns  sharply  to  the 

left  or  east  between  two  hills  till  it  reaches  the  banks  of  the  stream  Oom 

Pongteng  Kom,  the  downward  course  of  which  it  follows  till  the  junction 

of  the  same  water,  now  called  Oom  Soorpee,  with  the  Oom  Jussaci  is 

reached.     This  river  is  the  boundary  till  its  source  is  reached  from  a  pile 

of   stones,  near  which,  marking  the  boundary  of  land  purchased  from 