

Bated  Z2nd  July  1862,  corresjionding  with  1th  Srawun  1269  B.  S, 


JYNTEAH 

ANT> 

COSSYAH 

HILL 
TRIBES. 

No.  on. 

Nusteng. 


Sunnud  conferring  the  title  of  Rajah  Bahadoor  upon  Dun  Singh,  the  elected 
ruler  of  Nusteng,  dated  the  26th  January  1863. 

Whereas  you  have  been  elected  to  be  ruler  of  Nusteng,  I  do  hereby 
confer  upon  you  the  title  of  Rajah  Bahadoor  on  condition  of  your  faith- 
fully and  fully  observing  the  conditions  specified  in  the  agreement 
made  with  you  on  22nd  July  1862,  corresponding  with  7th  Srawun 
1269  B.  S.  . 

(Signed)         Elgin  and  Kincardine. 


ITEM,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


JVNTKMl 

AXD 

COSMAH 

HILL 
TRIBES. 

No  CHI. 

IMeem. 


No.  CIII. 

Whereas  it  was  stipulated  in  the  Agreement  entered  into  by  me, 
Melay  Sing,  Rajah  of  Moleem,  under  date  19th  March  1861,  with  the 
British  Government,  that  the  right  of  establishing  civil  and  military 
'  sanitaria,  posts,  and  cantonments  within  my  country  should  remain 
with  the  British  Government;  whereas  Lieutenant-Colonel  J.  C.  Haugh- 
ton,  Agent  to  the  Governor  General,  North-East  Frontier,  under  the 
instructions  of  the  said  government,  has  selected,  for  the  purpose  of 
civil  and  military  sanitaria,  &c,  the  land  hereinafter  described,  I 
hereby  renounce,  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  my  Muntrees  and  the 
Heads  of  my  people,  all  sovereign  and  personal  rights  therein  to  Her 
Majesty  the  Queen  of  England  and  the  British  Government.  It  is, 
however,  stipulated,  should  the  proprietors  of  any  of  the  land  within 
the  limits  hereinafter  described  be  unwilling  to  sell  or  part  with  their 
land  to  the  British  Government,  the  said  persons  shall  continue  fully  to 
enjoy  the  same  without  impost  or  taxation  as  heretofore,  but  that  in  all 
other  respects  the  jurisdiction  and  sovereignty  of  Her  Majesty  the 
Queen  of  England  and  of  the  British  Government  and  the  Officers  of 
Government  duly  appointed  shall  extend  over  the  said  land  and  over  all 
persons  residing  thereon  and  to  all  offences  committed  therewithin  :— 

Boundary. — The  boundary  of  the  lands  of  Oo  Don  Sena  to  the 
south  and  east  of  the  Oom  Ding  Poon  stream  which  have  been  pur- 
chased ;  the  boundary  of  the  lands  of  Ka  Stang  Rapsang,  south  of  the 
stream  south  of  the  Oom  Ding  Poon  adjoining  the  village  of  Sadoo  which 
have  been  purchased.  The  boundary  of  the  lands  of  Oo  Bat  Khaobakee 
touching  the  Oom  Ding  Poon  stream  which  have  been  purchased.  The 
boundary  of  the  lands  of  Ka  Doke  adjoining  the  last  named  which  have 
been  purchased ;  the  boundary  of  the  land  of  Sooakfi  adjoining  the  last 
named  which  have  been  purchased ;  the  boundary  of  the  Shillong  lands 
which  have  been  purchased,  from  which  point  the  boundary  will  follow 
the  north  and  west  sides  of  the  present  government  roads  till  the  bound- 
ary of  the  lands  of  Borjon  Muntree,  which  have  been  purchased,  is  met ; 
it  will  then  follow  the  boundary  of  the  said  Borjon's  land  till  the  bound- 
ary of  the  said  land  again  meets  the  government  road  now  existing, 
which  it  will  follow  till  the  boundary  of  the  Raj  lands  purchased  are  met. 
It  will   follow   the  boundary   of  the   Raj    lands   till  that   dividing   the 