

Considering  me  as  a  sincere  friend,  your  Excellency  will  not,  I 
hope,  forget  me,  and  I  will  cheerfully  execute  any  commissions  which 
shall  be  entrusted  to  me  by  your  Excellency. 


To  His  Highness  Syud  bin  Saeed,  Sultan  of  Zanzibar. 

Beloved  and  Esteemed  Friend, — I  have  received  with  much  satis- 
faction your  friendly  letter  dated  15th  Zilhej  a.  h.  1277.  I  am  grati- 
fied to  learn  that  my  award  for  the  settlement  of  the  disputes  which 
long  existed  between  yourself  and  your  brother  Syud  Thowaynee  bin 
Saeed,  the  ruler  of  Muscat,  has  given  satisfaction  to  your  Highness. 

The  terms  of  the  arbitration  will  be  fulfilled  if  the  sum  of  40,060 
crowns,  payable  to  your  brother  annually,  be  paid  by  two  instalments, 
viz.,  the  first  at  the  Monsim  and  the  second  at  the  Daman. 

I  beg  to  express  the  high  consideration  I  entertain  of  your  High- 
ness, and  to  subscribe  myself. 

Your  Highness*  sincere  friend, 

The  22nd  August  1861.  (Signed)         Canning. 


SUPPLEMENT 


CONTAINING 


VARIOUS  TREATIES  AND  ENGAGEMENTS  CONCLUDED 


SUMUDS    ISSUED    SINCE    THIS    COLLECTION   WAS    COMMENCED. 


VOL.   VII.  2  t 


JYNTEAH  AND  COSSYAH  HILL  TRIBES. 

{Vol.  I.,  pages  82—120.) 

Agreements  have  been  concluded  with  the  Chiefs  of  the  following  States  in  the 
Jynteah  and  Cossyah  Hills : — Nusteng,  Moleem  and  Khyrim,  Lungree  and 
Mahram. 

Nusteng. — Moot  Sing,  the  Rajah  of  this  petty  State,  expressed  a 
desire  to  enter  into  an  engagement  defining  the  conditions  of  his  subor- 
dination to  the  British  Government.  He  died,  however,  before  the 
engagement  was  concluded.  Dun  Sing  was  elected  his  successor,  and  he 
was  recognized  by  the  British  Government  and  received  the  title  of 
Rajah  Bahadoor  on  his  signing  an  engagement  (No.  CII.)  of  allegiance 
and  fidelity. 

Moleem  and  Khyrim. — In  1862  it  was  deemed  expedient  to  estab- 
lish a  military  cantonment  and  sanitarium  at  Shillong,  in  the  Moleem 
country,  instead  of  at  Cherra  Poonjee.  The  Rajah  of  Moleem  was  bound 
by  his  engagements*  to  give  up  whatever  lands  might  be  required  for 
such  purposes ;  still  it  was  considered  expedient  to  grant  him  compen- 
sation, which  he  desired  should  take  the  form  of  a  cession  of  lands  of 
equal  value  south  and  east  of  the  River  Oomean  or  Bogapanee.  The 
subjection  of  British  subjects  to  the  rule  of  a  Native  Chief,  however, 
being  deemed  objectionable,  the  Rajah  was  required  to  cede  (No.  CIII.) 
all  his  sovereign  and  personal  rights  in  the  land  for  a  sum  of 
Rupees  2,000,  and  the  rights  of  the  private  proprietors  were  bought  up 
for  Rupees  6,325  and  an  annual  payment  of  Rupees  108. 

Rajah  Rabon  Sing,  of  Khyrim,  having  an  interest  in  some  portions 
of  the  land  conjointly  with  the  Rajah  of  Moleem,  was  also  required  to 
sign  the  Deed  of  Sale. 