

Oo  Don  Sena,  the  boundary  crosses  over  south-westerly  to  the  point 

where  the  Oom  Shillong  makes  a  bend,  at  that  point  stones  have  been 


336 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


JYXTEAH 

AKD 

006SYAH 
HILL 

IK1BES. 

No.  cm. 


placed  opposite  ten  fir  and  five  oak  trees  on  the  spur  of  a  hill.  The 
boundary  then  follows  the  Oom  Shillong  till  the  boundary  of  Oo  Don 
Sena's  land  is  met,  which  it  follows  the  point  from  whence  it 
started  is  reached.  I  agree  that  the  government,  or  the  possessor  of  the 
land  within  named,  as  well  as  the  Shillong  lands,  shall  have  the  joint 
right  of  turning  off  all  water  adjoining  the  said  land  for  use,  subject  to 
such  rules  as  the  government  may  prescribe.  I  promise  also,  as  far  as 
in  me  lies,  to  preserve  the  sacred  groves  whereon  the  water  supply  is 
dependant,  and  to  punish  any  of  my  subjects  found  cutting  the  trees  of 
the  said  groves  and  to  deliver  up  for  punishment  any  British  subject 
found  so  offending. 

(Signed)     Melay  Sing  Rajah  +  His  mark. 
Lormiet  Montang  +  His  mark. 
Shillong, 
The  10/A  December  1863. 


,1 


Witness  : 
(Signed)         U.  Joymonee, 

Interpreter. 


Before  me,  this  18th  December  1863,  explained  in  Cossyah  and 

signed. 

(Signed)        J.  C.  Haughton. 


"Witnesses  present  not  called  on  to  sign,  being  unable  to  write. 


Oo  Ram,  Muntree. 

Oo  Son a        „ 

Oo  Jee  „ 

Oo  Don  Sena,  Muntree. 

Rajah  Singh  Koonwer. 

Kunrace,  of  Khyrim. 


Oo  Don  Koonwur. 
Oo  Jon  Sirdar. 
Purbut,  Interpreter. 
Tama  Koonwur. 
Alop  Koonwur. 


I,  Melay  Sing,  having,  on  behalf  of  myself  and  my  Muntrees, 
and  all  others  concerned,  ceded  the  Raj  rights  and  title  in  the  land  at 
Shillong,  known  as  the  Shillong  lands ;  the  Raj  lands  south  of  the  Oom 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


337 


Soorpee,  known  as  the  Kurkontong  Nongseh  land ;  the  land  near  Youdoe,  JYNTEAH 
known  as  the  Shillong  Labang  land ;  hereby  renounce  all  right  and  title 
thereto,  resigning  the  same  to  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  England  with 
the  trees,  water,  and  all  things  thereon  or  therein,  and  hereby  ac- 
knowledge to  have  received,  in  full  satisfaction  therefor,  the  sum  of 
Rupees  2,000  (two  thousand)  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Haughton, 
Governor  General's  Agent,  North-East  Frontier. 


AND 

COSSYAH 

HILL 
TRIBES. 

No.  CIII. 

Moleem. 


(Signed)         Melay  Sing  His  mark. 

„  Rajah  Rabon  Sing  His  mark. 


Youdoe, 
The  Stk  December  1863. 


Rajah  Rabon  hereby  acknowledges  to  have  ceded  all  right  on  part 
of  himself  and  his  people. 

(Signed)         J.  C.  Haughton, 

Witness :  Offg.  Govr.  Gent's  Agent,  N.  E.  F. 

(Signed)     U.  Joymoonee,  Sree  Arradiiun  Doss, 


Interpreter. 