

Lungree. — The  Chief  of  Lungree  died  in  December  1862.  His 
elected  successor,  Oomit,  was  recognized  by  the  British  Government  and 
received  the  title  of  Rajah  on  his  signing  an  engagement  (No.  CIV.) 
of  submission  and  fidelity. 

*  See  Vol.  L,  page  102. 


332 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


JYNTEAH 

ASH 

COSSTAH 

HILL 
TRIBES. 

No.  CI  I. 


Mahram. — In  October  1864,  Oo  Sai  Sing  was  elected  Chief  of  Mah- 
ram  in  succession  to  Oo  Sep  Sing.  He  was  recognized  by  the  British 
Government  on  his  signing  the  usual  engagement  (No.  CV.)  of  alle- 
giance and  submission. 


No.  CII. 

Translation  of  the  Agreement  entered  into  by  Dun  Singh,  Rajah  of  Nusteng, 
with  the  Deputy  Commissioner  of  Cherra  Poonjee,  in  the  Cossyah  Hills. 

I,  Dun  Singh,  Rajah,  son  of  Oola  Beang  Koonwur,  of  Nusteng,  in 
the  Cossyah  Hills,  having  been  appointed  ruler  of  Nusteng,  do  hereby 
agree  and  promise  to  conduct  myself  agreeably  to  the  following  Rules  :- — 

Article  1. 

I  consider  myself  under  the  general  control  and  authority  of  the 
Political  Officer  at  Cherra  Poonjee.  All  disputes  between  myself  and 
Chieftains  of  other  Cossyah  States  shall  be  referred  for  trial  and  decision 
to  the  British  Court. 


Article  2. 

I  shall  always  reside  in  the  Nusteng  ilaka,  and  decide  without  par- 
tiality, in  open  Durbar,  with  the  assistance  of  my  Muntrees,  Sirdars  and 
elders,  according  to  the  ancient  and  established  customs  of  the  country, 
all  civil  suits  and  criminal  cases  occurring  there  that  are  beyond  the 
cognizance  of  the  Police  in  which  only  the  people  of  that  ilaka  may  be 
concerned.  All  cases  in  which  Europeans  and  inhabitants  of  the  plains, 
or  of  other  Cossyah  States,  are  parties,  are  to  be  tried  by  the  Political 
Officer  at  Cherra  Poonjee. 

Article  3. 

I  shall  obey  all  orders  issued  to  me  by  the  Political  Officer  at  Cherra 
Poonjee,  and  make  over,  on  demand,  to  the  local  Authorities,  all  refugees 
and  civil  and  political  offenders  coming  to,  or  residing  in,  my  ilaka. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


333 


Article  4. 

I  shall  furnish  full  information  regarding  my  State  and  its  inhabi- 
tants whenever  I  may  be  required  to  do  so  by  Government  Officers.  I 
shall  always  endeavour  to  promote  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  my  sub- 
jects, give  every  help  and  protection  in  my  power  to  Government  Officers " 
and  travellers  passing  though  my  country,  or  to  settlers  residing  there ; 
and  use  my  best  endeavours  to  facilitate  free  intercourse  and  trade 
between  the  people  of  my  country  and  British  subjects  and  the  people  of 
other  Cossyah  States. 

Article  5. 

The  British  Government  reserves  to  itself  the  right  of  establishing 
military  and  civil  sanataria,  cantonments  and  posts,  in  any  part  of  my 
ilaka  where  they  may  be  required,  full  compensation  being  given  for  the 
lands  thus  occupied  for  these  or  other  government  purposes,  and  of 
opening  roads  in  any  direction  through  the  country,  in  which  matter  I 
must  render  my  utmost  assistance  when  requisite. 