


Mohurir. 


Present : 

(Signed) 

Oo  Ram,  Muntree. 

» 

Oo  Jee            „ 

)> 

Oo  Soobah      „ 

i> 

Oo  Sonah        „ 

» 

Oo  Raimon    „ 

» 

Oo  Bamon      „ 

a 

Oo  Mooik  Longskoe. 

a 

Oo  Sonkha  Longdo. 

1 


^Moleem  Poonjee. 


Khyrim  Poonjee. 


1 


J 


(Signed)        J.  C.  Haughton, 
Offg.  Govr.  Gent.'s  Agent,  N.  E.  F. 


VOL.   VII. 


%  K 


338 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   STJNNUDS. 


.1  VST  F.  A II 

>YAH 
HILL 

TRl 

No.  CIV. 

I.  II II  M 


No.  CIV. 
Engagement  executed  by  the  Chief  of  Lungree. 
I,  Oomit  Sing,  having  succeeded  to  the  Raj  of  Lungree  on  the  death 
of  Soonder  Sing,  my  uncle,  late  Rajah,  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
country,  and  with  the  approval  of  the  Chiefs  and  elders,  and  also  with 
the  sanction  of  the  Viceroy  and  Governor  General  of  India,  promise  to 
be  faithful  in  allegiance  to  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  England,  her 
Heirs  and  Successors,  and  I  bind  myself  to  the  following  Articles  : — 

Abticle  1. 
That  I  shall  consider  myself  under  the  general  control  and  authority 
of  the  Deputy  Commissioner  in  the  Cossyah  and  Jynteah  Hills,  or  such 
other  Officer  as  may  be  from  time  to  time  appointed  by  government,  to 
whom  I  shall  refer  all  disputes  between  myself  and  the  Chieftains  of 
other  Cossyah  States,  and  that  I  clearly  understand,  I  hold  my  appoint- 
ment under  authority  from  the  British  Government,  which  reserves  to 
itself  the  right  of  removing  me  from  office,  and  appointing  another 
Chieftain  in  my  stead,  if  I  should  fail  to  give  satisfaction  to  the 
British  Government  and  the  people  of  the  district. 

Article  2. 
That  I  shall  reside  in  the  Lungree  district,  and  decide  in  open 
Durbar,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Muntrees,  Sirdars,  and  the  elders, 
according  to  ancient  and  established  custom  of  the  country,  all  civil 
and  criminal  cases,  not  of  a  heinous  nature,  in  which  the  inhabitants 
of  the  said  district  only  are  concerned.  I  agree  to  refer  to  the  Deputy 
Commissioner  in  the  Cossyah  and  Jynteah  Hills,  or  other  Officer  ap- 
pointed for  the  purpose  by  government,  all  cases,  civil  or  criminal,  in 
which  Europeans  or  other  foreigners,  including  the  inhabitants  of  the 
plains,  are  concerned  j  also  all  cases  in  which  inhabitants  of  other  Cossyah 
States  are  concerned,  and  all  heinous  criminal  cases. 

Article  3. 
That  I  shall  obey  all  orders  issued  to  me  by  the  Deputy  or  other 
Officer  appointed  to  the  charge  of  the  Hill  districts,  and  make  over,  on 
demand,  to  the  local  Authorities,  all  refugees,  and  civil  and  political 
offenders,  coming  to,  or  residing  in,  the  Lungree  district. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


339 


Article  4. 
That  I  shall  furnish  full  information  regarding  the  Lungree  dis- 
trict and  its  inhabitants  whenever  I  may  be  required  to  do  so  by  gov- 
ernment Officers,  will  render  every  assistance  in  developing  the  re- 
sources of  the  country,  will  give  every  help  and  protection  in  my  power 
to  Government  Officials  and  travellers  passing  through  the  country,  or 
to  settlers  residing  there,  and  will  use  my  best  endeavours  to  facilitate 
free  intercourse  and  trade  between  the  people  of  the  country  and  the 
British  subjects  and  the  people  of  other  Cossyah  States. 