


352  Ti.l.ATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

BHOOTAN.  the  death  of  the  leader  of  the  freebooters.  In  May  1835  an  attaek  was 
~  made  on  Nowgong,  in  Zillah  Kamroop,  from  the  Bijnee  Doar,  and  in 
November  of  the  same  year  another  incursion  was  made  into  the  Durrung 
District  from  the  Kulling  Doar. 

Two  months  afterwards,  in  January  1836,  another  daring  in- 
cursion attended  with  loss  of  life  and  property  was  made  from  the 
Banska  Doar  into  the  Kamroop  District,  headed  by  an  influential  Talook- 
dar,  who  took  refuge  with  the  Dewangiri  Rajah ;  thereupon  the  Banska 
Doar  was  temporarily  occupied.  The  Dewangiri  Rajah  did  not  surrender 
the  offenders  till  after  he  had  been  defeated  in  battle  :  eventually,  at  the 
humble  entreaty  of  the  Bootiahs,  the  Doar  was  restored. 

The  unsatisfactory  state  of  affairs  on  the  frontier  determined 
government  to  send  a  friendly  mission  to  the  Bhootan  Court,  and,  if 
practicable,  to  Lassa :  Captain  Pemberton  was  appointed  envoy.  Besides 
procuring  information  and  statistics  of  the  nature  and  resources  of  the 
country,  and  its  political  relations  with  Nepal  and  China,  the  chief 
object  of  the  mission  was  to  establish  our  frontier  relations  with  Bhootan 
on  an  improved  footing,  and  to  provide  for  the  punctual  payment  of  the 
tribute  which  had  fallen  into  arrears  to  the  extent  of  about  Rupees  45,500. 
This  object  was  to  be  secured,  if  possible,  by  inducing  the  Bhootan 
government  to  make  over  the  Doars  to  the  management  of  the  British 
Government  in  consideration  of  such  annual  payment  as  might  be 
agreed  upon,  or  by  the  commutation  of  tribute  to  a  cession  of  land. 
Subsidiary  to  this  political  object  was  the  improvement  of  commercial 
intercourse  with  Bhootan.  The  mission  reached  Poonakha  on  1st  April 
1838,  where  it  was  well  received ;  but  Captain  Pemberton  utterly  failed 
in  coming  to  any  satisfactory  understanding  with  the  Bhootan  government. 
The  country  was  suffering  from  the  effects  of  a  recent  revolution.  The 
new  Deb  Rajah,  who  had  a  short  time  previously  succeeded  to  office  by 
the  deposition  of  his  predecessor,  was  scarcely  established  in  power,  and 
the  deposed  Deb  still  held  possession  of  Tassisudon.  The  Paro  Pillo, 
who  governed  the  Bengal  Doars,  and  the  Tongso  Pillo,  who  governed 
the  Doars  of  Assam,  had  established  themselves  in  positions  of  virtual 
independence,  while  the  latter  had  considerably  strengthened  his  authority 
by  inducing  the  priesthood  to.  recognize  in  his  son  the  regeneration 
of  the  Dhurm  Rajah. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  35$ 

Under  these  circumstances  the  mission  withdrew  on   9th   May,  UIIOOTAN. 
and  the  British   Government  had  no  course  left  but  to  take  its^own 
measures  for  the  protection  of  the  frontier. 