

Article  1. 
I  consider  myself  under  the  general  control  and  authority  of  the 
Deputy  Commissioner  in  the  Cossyah  and  Jynteah  Hills,  or  such  other 
Officer  as  may  be  from  time  to  time  appointed  by  government,  and  I 
will  refer  all  disputes  between  myself  and  the  Chieftains  of  other  Cossyah 
States  to  the  Deputy  Commissioner  aforesaid,  and  I  clearly  understand 
that  I  hold  my  appointment  under  authority  from  the  British  Govern- 
ment, which  reserves  to  itself  the  right  of  removing  me  from  office  and 
appointing  another  Chieftain  in  my  stead,  if  I  should  fail  to  give  satisfac- 
tion to  the  British  Government  or  to  the  people  of  Mahram. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  SXJNNUDS. 


341 


Article  2. 
I  agree  to  reside  in  the  Mahram  district,  and  promise  to  decide,  in 
open  Durbar,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Muntrees,  Sirdars,  and  the  elders, 
according  to  ancient  and  established  custom  of  the  country,  all  civil  and 
criminal  cases,  not  of  a  heinous  nature,  in  which  the  inhabitants  of  the 
said  country  only  are  concerned.  I  agree  to  refer  to  the  Deputy 
Commissioner  in  the  Cossyah  and  Jynteah  Hills,  or  to  any  other  Officer 
appointed  by  government  for  the  purpose,  all  cases,  civil  and  criminal,  in 
which  Europeans  or  other  foreigners,  including  the  inhabitants  of  the 
plains,  are  concerned,  as  also  all  cases  in  which  subjects  of  other  Cossyah 
States  are  concerned,  and  all  heinous  criminal  cases. 

Article  3. 

I  bind  myself  to  obey  all  orders  issued  by  the  Deputy  Commissioner 

or  other  Officer  appointed  to  the  charge  of  the  Hill  districts,  and  to  make 

over,  on  demand,  to  the  duly  constituted  Authorities  all  refugees  and 

civil   and  political  offenders  coming  to,   or  residing  in,  the  Mahram 

district. 

Article  4. 

I  also  agree  to  supply  full  information  regarding  the  Mahram 
district  and  its  inhabitants  whenever  I  may  be  required  so  to  do  by  the 
Officers  of  government.  I  will  also  render  assistance  in  developing  the 
resources  of  the  country,  and  I  will  give  aid  and  protection  to  Govern- 
ment Officials  and  travellers  passing  through  Mahram  as  also  to  settlers 
residing  therein,  and  will  use  my  best  endeavours  to  facilitate  free  inter- 
course and  trade  between  the  people  of  the  country  under  me  and  British 
subjects  and  people  of  other  Cossyah  States. 

Article  5. 
The  British  Government  will  have  the  right  of  establishing  military 
and  civil  sanataria,  cantonments,  and  posts,  in  any  part  of  the  Mahram 
district  under  my  control,  and  I  agree  to  give  all  lands  required  for  such 
purposes  on  the  understanding,  when  the  land  or  lands  do  not  belong  to 
the  Raj,  that  the  proprietors  shall  receive  compensation. 