

Article  4. 

The  British  Government  may  take  up  positions  in  the  frontier,  in 
the  plains,  may  establish  stations,  post  guards,  or  construct  forts,  or 
open  roads,  as  may  be  deemed  expedient,  and  the  Abors  will  not  take 
umbrage  at  such  arrangements  or  have  any  voice  in  such  matters. 

Article  5. 
The  communication  across  the  frontier  will  be  free  for  the  Abors 
and  for  residents  in  the  British  territory  going  to  the  Abor  villages  for 
the  purpose  of  trade  or  other  friendly  objects. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  349 

Article  6.  ASSAM. 


The  Abors  shall  have  access,  as  heretofore,  to  markets  and  places  of    n0.  CVIL 
trade  in  the  British  territory  they  may  think  fit  to   resort  to ;  but  when 
trading,  they,  the  Abors,  engage  not  to  come  armed  with  their  spear, 
bows,  and  arrows,  but  merely  to  carry  their  daos. 

Article  7. 
Any  Abors   settling  or  occupying  lands  in  the  British  territory 
engage  to  such  revenue  to  government  as  may  be  fixed  upon ;    the 
demand,  in  the  first  instance,  to  be  light. 

Article  8. 

The  Abors  engage  not  to  cultivate  opium  in  the  British  territory 

or  to  import  it. 

Article  9. 

In  event  of  the  Abors  having  any  grievance,  or  in  case  of  any 
dispute  arising  between  them  and  British  subjects,  the  Abors  will  refrain 
from  taking  the  law  into  their  own  hands ;  but  they  will  in  all  cases 
appeal  to  the  Deputy  Commissioner  and  abide  by  his  decision. 

Article  10. 
To  enable  the  Abors  of  the  clans  or  communities  mentioned  in  the 
preamble  to  keep  a  Police  for  preventing  any  marauders  from  resorting 
to  the  plains  for  sinister  purposes,  and  to  enable  them  to  take  measures 
for  arresting  any  offenders,  the  Deputy  Commissioner,  on  behalf  of  the 
British  Government,  undertakes  that  the  Abor  communities  referred  to 
shall  receive  yearly  the  following  articles : — 

One  hundred  iron  hoes. 
Forty  maunds  of  salt. 
One  hundred  bottles  of  ram. 
Two  maunds  of  tobacco. 

Article  11. 
The  articles  referred  to  above,  which  will  be  delivered  for  the  first 
year  on  the  signing  of  this  engagement,  will  hereafter  be  delivered  from 
year  to  year  to  the  representatives  of  the  communities  or  clans  named 
in  the  preamble. 


NaCVlI. 


350  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 

Article  12. 

On  the  occasion  of  the  yearly  meeting  of  the  Deputy  Commissioner 
and  the  Abors,  the  usual  exchange  of  offerings  and  presents  will  take 
place. 

Article  13. 

In  event  of  the  Abors  failing  to  act  up  to  the  provisions  of  this 
engagement,  it  will  be  null  and  void. 

Article  14. 

The  original  of  this  engagement,  which  is  drawn  up  in  English, 
will  remain  with  the  Deputy  Commissioner  of  Luckhimpoor,  Upper 
Assam,  and  a  counterpart  or  copy  will  be  furnished  to  the  representatives 
of  the  Abor  communities  aforesaid. 