


No.  CVI. 

Whereas  it  is  expedient  to  adopt  measures  for  maintaining  the  integ- 
rity of  the  British  territory  in  the  District  of  Luckhimpoor,  Upper 
Assam,  on  the  Meyong  Abor  Frontier,  and  for  preserving  peace  and 
tranquillity,  and  whereas  by  virtue  of  a  letter  No.  11  of  11th  October 
1862,  from  the  Officiating  Commissioner  of  Assam,  transmitting  orders 
from  the  Government  of  Bengal,  conveyed  in  a  letter  No.  265  T.,  dated 
8th  August  1862,  from  the  Officiating  Junior  Secretary  to  the  Govern- 
ment of  Bengal,  the  Deputy  Commissioner  of  Luckhimpoor  has  been 
authorized  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  an  Engagement  to  the  following 
effect  has  been  entered  into  with  the  Meyong  Abors  this  5th  day  of 
November,  a.  d.  1862,  at  Camp  Lalee  Mookh  : — 

Article  1. 

Offences  committed  by  the  Meyong  Abors  in  a  time  of  hostility 
towards  the  British  Government,  and  for  which  the  assembled  heads  of 
villages  have  sued  for  pardon,  are  overlooked  and  peace  is  re-established. 


:;m  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 

ASSAM.  Article  2. 


I  i  The  limit  of  the  British  territory,  which  extends  to  the  foot  of 

Abort.       the  hills,  is  recognized  by  the  Meyong  Abors,  who  hereby  engage  to 
respect  it. 

Article  8. 

The  British  Government  will  take  up  positions  on  the  frontier  in 
the  plains,  will  establish  stations,  post  guards,  or  construct  forts,  or 
open  roads,  as  may  be  deemed  expedient,  and  the  Meyong  Abors  will 
not  take  umbrage  at  such  arrangements,  or  have  any  voice  in  such 
matters. 

Article  4. 

The  Meyong  Abors  recognize  all  persons  residing  in  the  plains  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  Meyong  Hills  as  British  subjects. 

Article  5. 

The  Meyong  Abors  engage  not  to  molest  or  to  cross  the  frontier  for 
the  purpose  of  molesting  residents  in  the  British  territory. 

Article  6. 

The  communication  across  the  frontier  will  be  free  both  for  the 
Meyong  Abors  and  for  any  persons,  British  subjects,  going  to  the  Meyong 
villages  for  the  purpose  of  trading  or  other  friendly  dealings. 

Article  7. 

The  Meyong  Abors  shall  have  access  to  markets  and  places  of  trade 
which  they  may  think  fit  to  resort  to ;  and  on  such  occasions  they  engage 
not  to  come  armed  with  their  spears  and  bows  and  arrows,  but  merely  to 
carry  their  daos. 

Article  8. 
Any  Meyong   Abors  desiring  to   settle   in,  or  occupy  lands  in  the 
British  territory  engage  to  pay  such  revenue  to   government  as  may  be 
fixed  upon  by  the   Deputy  Commissioner  j  the  demand,   in   the  first 
instance,  to  be  light. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  345 

Article  9.  ASSAM. 

The  Meyong  Abors  engage  not  to  cultivate  opium  in  the  British     No.  CVI. 
territory,  or  to  import  it. 