

Article  10. 

In  event  of  any  grievance  arising,  or  any  dispute  taking  place  be- 
tween the  Meyong  Abors  and  the  British  territory,  the  Abors  will  refrain 
from  taking  the  law  into  their  own  hands,  but  they  will  appeal  to  the 
Deputy  Commissioner  for  redress  and  abide  by  his  decision. 

Article  11. 

To  enable  the  Meyong  Abors  of  the  eight  khels  or  communities, 
who  submit  to  this  engagement,  to  keep  up  a  Police  for  preventing  any 
marauders  from  resorting  to  the  plains  for  sinister  purposes,  and  to  en- 
able them  to  take  measures  for  arresting  any  offenders,  the  Deputy  Com- 
missioner, on  behalf  of  the  British  Government,  agrees  that  the  commu- 
nities referred  to  shall  receive  yearly  the  following  articles  :— 

100  iron  hoes  (one  hundred). 
30  maunds  of  salt  (thirty). 
80  bottles  of  rum  (eighty). 

2  seers  of  Abkaree  opium  (two). 

2  maunds  of  tobacco  (two). 

Article  12. 

The  articles  referred  to  above,  which  will  be  delivered  for  the  first 
year  on  the  signing  of  this  engagement,  will  hereafter  be  delivered  from 
year  to  year  to  the  representatives  of  the  eight  khels  or  communities  of 
the  Meyong  Abors  as  aforesaid  on  their  meeting  the  Deputy  Commis- 
sioner at  Lalee  Mookh,  or  at  any  other  convenient  place  on  the  Meyong 
Doar  side. 

Article  13. 

On  the  occasion  of  meeting  the  Deputy  Commissioner,  the  Meyong 
Abors,  in  earnest  of  their  continued  friendly  feeling,  engage  to  make  a 
tribute  offering  of  a  mithun,  pigs,  and  fowls,  in  exchange  for  which  they 
will  obtain  usual  suitable  acknowledgments. 

VOL.  vii.  v  2  w 


ASSAM 


346 


treaties,  engagements,  and  stjnnuds. 
Article  14. 


In  event  of  Meyong  Abors  infringing  or  failing  to  act  up  to  any  of 
the  provisions  of  this  engagement,  it  will  be  considered  null  and  void 
and  will  no  longer  have  effect. 


Article  15. 

The  original  of  this  engagement,  which  is  drawn  up  in  English, 
will  remain  with  the  Deputy  Commissioner  of  Luckhimpoor,  Upper 
Assam,  and  a  counterpart  or  copy  will  be  furnished  to  the  subscribing 
Meyong  Abors. 

Article  16. 

In  ratification  of  the  above  engagement  contained  in  fifteen  para- 
graphs, the  Deputy  Commissioner  of  Luckhimpoor,  Assam,  on  behalf 
of  the  British  Government,  puts  his  hand  and  seal,  and  the  recognized 
headmen  or  Chiefs  of  the  eight  khels  or  communities  of  the  Meyong 
Abors  affix  their  signatures  or  marks,  this  5th  day  of  November  a.  d. 
1862. 


Signed)         H.  S.  Bivar,  Major, 
Depy.  Commr.,  1st  Class,  Luckhimpoor, 
and  Agent,  Govr.  Genl,  North-East  Frontier. 


On  behalf    of    the     community    of 
Munkoo. 


Lomiur   Gham,  his  mark    X 
Taukoor       „ 
Yabang        „  >f 

Chapeur       „  fj 