

Article  6. 
Lastly,  I  bind  myself,  my  heirs  and  successors,  to  the  terms  of  the 
agreement  entered  into  with  the  government  of  British  India  by  the  late 


JYNTEAH 

AND 

COSSYAH 

HILL 
TRIBES. 

No.  CV. 

Mahram. 


Ml 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


JYXTFAH  Rajah  Oo  Sep  Sing  on  the  22nd  September  1859,  by  which  he  ceded,  in 
consideration  of  receiving  half  the  profits  all  his  mineral  rights  (except 
those  connected  with  the  Mahram  tracts  leased  to  the  late  Mr.  Henry 
Inglis  up  to  1283  B.  S.),  and  all  the  waste  lands  not  paying  revenue 
which  are  not  being  brought  under  cultivation  by  the  people  of  Mahram, 
and  by  which  they  will  not  be  sufferers. 
Bated  Youdce  (fifth)  Uh  October  1864. 

0  Oo  Sai  Singh,  Rajah, 


COSSVAH 

HILL 
TRIBES. 

NaCV. 

Mahram, 


Witnessed  by 
Grish  Chunder  Bose. 

»/  Mark  of  Ram  Sing,  Muntree. 

IS  Mark  of  Oo  Sugi,  „ 

3  Mark  of  W.  Tar,  „ 

|  Mark  of  W.  Sar  Sing,  Gooshtee. 

rri  Mark  of  Suntoo,  „ 


His  Seal  and  mark. 


I  Mark  of  Tor  Sai,  Muntree. 
>5>  Mark  of  W.  Sona,       „ 
O   Mark  of  W.  Saih,       „ 
m,  Mark  of  U.  Ram,  Gooshtee. 
1T£  Mark  of  Khalaet  Vasued. 


Signed  and  sealed  in  my  presence  the  5th  day  of  October  1864, 
when  it  was  explained  to  the  Rajah  that  a  Sunnud  and  Khillut  would 
be  furnished  on  receipt  of  the  orders  of  government. 

(Signed)         H.  S.  Bivar, 
Depy.  Commr.,  Cossyah  and  Jynteah  Hills. 


Sunnud  confirming  the  election  of  Oo  Sai  Sing  to  be  Eajah  of  Mahram. 
Whereas  you  have  been  elected  by  the  chief  men  and  people  of 
Mahram  to  succeed  the  late  Rajah  Oo  Sep  Sing  in  the  Chieftaincy, 
I  hereby  recognize  and  confirm  your  election  to  be  Rajah  of  Mahram. 

Be  assured  that  so  long  as  you  remain  faithful  in  your  allegiance 
to  the  British  Crown,  and  fully  and  faithfully  fulfil  your  engagements 
with  the  British  Government,  the  State  of  Mahram  will  remain  to  you 
in  undisturbed  possession. 

(Signed)        John  Lawrence. 

Dated  Uh  December  1864. 


ASSAM.  Assam. 

{Vol.  /.,  pages  126—141.)  N°'  CVI* 

The  Abors. — In  the  end  of  1861  the  Meyong  Abors  attacked  and 
plundered  a  village  in  British  territory.  Preparations  were  being  made 
to  take  permanent  military  command  of  the  Abor  country  on  the 
border  of  the  Assam  valley,  when  the  tribe  expressed  a  desire  to  renew 
friendly  relations,  and  begged  that  their  offences  might  be  overlooked. 
On  the  5th  November  1862,  an  agreement  (No.  CVI.)  was  made 
with  them  binding  them  to  respect  British  territory.  The  same  en- 
gagement was  subscribed  on  16th  January  1863  by  the  Kebang  Abors. 

On  8th  November  1862  a  similar  engagment  (No.  CVII.)  was 
concluded  with  the  Abors  of  the  Dihang  Dibang  Doars. 