

Article  15. 

In  ratification  of  the  above  engagement  contained  in  fourteen  para- 
graphs, the  Deputy  Commissioner  of  Luckhimpoor,  Upper  Assam,  puts 
his  hand  and  seal,  and  the  representatives  of  the  Abor  communities  affix 
their  marks  or  signatures,  this  eighth  day  of  November  J.862. 

(Signed)         H.  S.  Bivar, 

Deputy  Commissioner. 


On  behalf  of  Meyboh 

On  behalf  of  Padoo  

On  behalf  of  Silookh       

On  behalf  of  Bomjeon 

On  behalf  of  the  Bor  Abors 

On  behalf  of  the  Bor  Silookh  Abors 

On  behalf  of  Toomkoo  Padoo  Abors 


Popang  Ghana,  his  mark 

Toomkur       „         „ 

Moskokh       „         „ 

Joloong         „         „ 

Junbang       „        „ 

Karmood,  son  of  Onoo  Gham,  his 

mark  x 

Meyong  Gham,  his  mark  x 


BHOOTAN. 

{Vol.  L,  pages  142—150.) 

The  Districts  of  Bhootan  between  the  hills  and  the  British  frontier 

are  known  as  the  Doars,  and  take  their  names  from  the  different  passes 

which  lead  through  the  hills  into  Bhootan.    Besides  the  Kooreapara  Doar, 

formerly  governed  by  the  Twang  Raiah,  who 
Bengal  Doabs.  .    J  &  J  s      J     ' 

„,      d  v  v  +  was  immediately  dependent  on  Lassa,  there 

2.  Zamerkote.  are  in  all  eighteen*  Doars,   eleven   on  the 

4.  Lukhee.  Bengal  frontier  and  seven  on   the   frontier 

g  g"^  of  Assam.     Over  the  Bengal  Doars,  which 

7.  Bara.  extend  from  the  Teesta,  on  the  eastern  boun- 

9.  Reepoo.  dary  of  Sikhim,  to  the  Monas,  the  Bootiahs 

1*    SghSinef66*  have  for  lonS  7ears  held  sovereign  dominion ; 

and  previous  to  the  annexation  of  Assam  bv 
Assam  DoAsa.  *    •     ,      -,  , 

Kamroop  Doars.  the   Bntlsh    Government  during   the  first 

12.    Ghnrkola.  Burmese  war,  the  Bootiahs  had  also  wrested 

li     Chappagoree.  {oxa    of  the    Assam  Doars   from  the    Native 

15.  Cbappakhamar.  government,  while   the    other    three    were 

16.  Bijnee.  . 

held  on  a  sort  of  joint  tenure  by  the  Bootiahs 

and  Assamese.  How  long  this  state  of  things 

17.  Booree  Gooma.  .  ° 

18.  Knlling.  had  existed  is  not  precisely   known.     The 

Bootiahs  paid  to  the  Assam  government  for  the  Doars  a  tribute  of 
Rupees  3,049,  partly  in  money  and  partly  in  goods ;  and  after  the  an- 
nexation of  Assam,  the  tribute  was  paid  to  the  British  Government,  who 
also  continued  the  system  of  joint  occupation  of  the  three  Doars  of 
Kooreapara,  Booree  Gooma,  and  Kulling,  holding  them  for  four  months 
every  year,  and  making  them  over  to  Bhootan  for  the  other  eight  months. 
In  1828  the  Bootiahs  began  the  long  series  of  outrages  on  the 
British  frontier,  which  has  ended  in  the  annexation  of  all  the  Doars. 
The  first  attack  was  on  Chatgaree,  in  the  Durrung  Zillah,  by  freebooters 
from  the  Booree  Gooma  Doar,  and  was  followed  by  the  occupation  of 
the  Doar  by  the  British  Government  till  31st  July  1834,  when  it  was 
restored  on  evidence  being  given,  afterwards  ascertained  to  be  false,  of 