

Article  5. 
The  British  Government  shall  have  the  right  of  establishing  military 
and  civil  sanataria,  cantonments,  and  posts,  in  any  part  of  the  Lungree 
district  where  they  may  be  required.  I  agree  to  give  all  lands  required 
for  such  purposes,  the  possessors,  where  the  land  does  not  belong  to  the 
Raj,  being  duly  compensated  therefor. 

Article  6. 
Lastly,  I,  my  heirs  and  successors,  will  abide  by  the  terms  of  the 
agreement  entered  into  with  the  government  by  the  late  Rajah  on 
the  22nd  September  1859,  by  which  he  ceded,  in  consideration  of  re- 
ceiving half  the  profits,  all  his  mineral  rights,  except  those  connected 
with  the  limestone  tracts,  leased  to  the  late  Mr.  Henry  Inglis  up  to 
1283  B.  S.,  and  all  the  waste  lands  not  paying  revenue,  which  are  not 
being  brought  into  cultivation  by  the  people  of  Lungree,  and  by  which 
being  brought  into  cultivation  they  will  not  be  sufferers. 

Bated  Cherra  Poonjee,  %hth  January  1864. 

Seal  and  mark  of 
Oomit  Sing, 

Rajah  of  Lungree. 
Witnessed  by 

J.  B.  Shadwell, 

Assistant  Commissioner  in  charge. 

©  Mark  of  Scidee,  Muntree,  of  Lauring. 

0  Mark  of  Oowan,  Muntree,  of  Lauring. 

zfz  Mark  of  Oosam,  Muntree,  of  Lauring. 

ru.  Mark  of  Oo  Ramsing,  Muntree,  of  Lauring. 


JYNTEAH 

AND 

COSSYAH 

HILL 
TRIBES. 

No.  CIV. 

Lungree. 


a  n 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


JTNTEAH 

COSSYAH 

HILL 

TRIBES. 

Not.  CIV 
ACV. 

Lmmyrte  4' 
Mainm. 


Sealed  and  signed  in  my  presence  on  the  25th  day  of  January 
1864,  when  it  was  explained  to  the  Rajah  that  a  Sunnud  and  Khillut 
would  be  forwarded  by  the  Viceroy  and  Governor  General. 

(Signed)         J.  B.  Shadwell, 
Assistant  Commissioner  in  charge. 


Sunxud  conferring  the  title  of  "  Rajah"  upon  Oomit  Sing,  the  Chief  of  Lungree. 

Whereas  you  have  been  elected  to  be  ruler  of  Lungree,  I  do  hereby 

confer  upon  you  the  title  of  Rajah   on  condition  of  your  faithfully  and 

fully  observing  the  conditions  specified  in  the  agreement  made  with  you 

on  the  25th  January  1864. 

(Signed)         John  Lawrence. 
Bated  1th  June  1864. 


No.  CV. 
Engagement  executed  by  the  Rajah  of  Mahram. 
I,  Oo  Sai  Sing,  resident  of  Mahram,  according  to  the  custom  of 
country,  and  with  the  approval  of  the  Chiefs  and  elders  of  Mahram, 
being  the  lawful  heir  and  successor  to  the  late  Oo  Sep  Sing,  Dhollah 
Rajah  of  Mahram,  in  anticipation  of  being  duly  created,  under  the 
orders  of  the  Viceroy  and  Governor  General  of  India,  Dhollah  Rajah  of 
Mahram,  do  hereby  promise  to  be  faithful  in  allegiance  to  Her  Majesty 
the  Queen  of  Great  Britain  and  its  dependencies,  Her  heirs  and  succes- 
sors, and  I  bind  myself  to  the  following  Articles : — 