


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  357 

The  enquiries  made  by  the  Bengal  Government  established  the  impres-  BHOOTAN. 
sion  that  the  Central  government  of  Bhootan  at  Tassisudon  does,  under  ~~ 
ordinary  circumstances,  exercise  an  effective  control  over  the  subordinate 
provincial  Governors  or  Soobahs,  but  that  the  degree  of  control  varies 
with  the  state  of  parties  at  Court,  and  had  of  late  been  weakened  by 
contentions  for  the  office  of  Deb  Rajah.  It  was  reported  that  the  Deb 
Rajah,  a  usurper,  had  recently  died,  and  been  succeeded  by  a  new  ruler 
with  the  entire  consent  of  the  party  of  the  Dhurm  Rajah,  a  change 
which  was  considered  to  be  favorable  to  the  cause  of  good  order  on  the 
frontier,  where  the  authority  was  divided  between  the  Tongso  Pillo  in 
the  Eastern  Doars,  the  Paro  Pillo  in  the  Western,  and  the  Deb  Rajah 
himself  in  the  Central  Doars,  each  Doar,  however,  being  directly  under 
a  Soobah  or  local  Governor.  Under  these  circumstances,  having  regard 
to  the  change  which  had  taken  place  in  the  persons  composing  the  gov- 
ernment of  Bhootan,  and  apparently  in  the  temper  of  those  authorities, 
it  was  determined  not  to  proceed  at  once  to  coercion,  but  to  make  one 
more  demand  on  the  Dhurm  and  Deb  Rajahs,  with  the  warning  that,  if 
the  demand  should  fail  of  success,  the  Government  of  India  would  take 
measures  at  its  own  pleasure  for  enforcing  it.  The  measures  suggested 
were  the  seizure  in  permanent  possession  of  the  tract  of  country  which 
the  Bhootan  government  held  on  this  side  of  the  Teesta,  which  was  ceded 
to  them  more  than  seventy  years  ago,  and  was  held  by  the  British  Govern- 
ment in  farm ;  and  if  this  did  not  prove  sufficient,  the  occupation  and 
retention  of  the  Julpesh  District  beyond  the  Teesta,  but  not  reaching  to 
the  Doars. 

The  outbreak  of  the  mutinies  prevented  the  execution  of  these 
measures.  But  on  15th  April  1859,  the  Bengal  Government  submitted 
a  list  of  the  aggressions  committed  by  the  Bootiahs  since  1857  :  it 
showed  a  total  of  thirty-three  cases,  in  which  45  persons  had  been  carried 
off  by  the  Bootiahs,  of  whom  27  had  been  released,  1  had  made  his 
escape,  and  17  remained  in  captivity.  In  one  case  the  Bootiahs  had  also 
carried  off  property  to  the  value  of  Rupees  20,936.  With  reference  to 
these  occurrences,  the  Governor  General  in  Council  decided  that  the  time 
for  coercion  had  arrived.  The  territory  known  as  the  Ambarree  Falla- 
cottah,  on  this  side  the  Teesta,  which  was  held  in  farm  from  Bhootan, 
was  taken  possession  of;  a  letter  was  addressed  to  the  Deb  Rajah,  stating 


35S  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 