

BHOOTAN.  categorically  the  circumstances  of  each  case  of  outrage,  and  requiring  not 

only  the  restoration  of  captives,  but  the  punishment  of  the  guilty  parties, 

and  informing  the  Rajah  that  the  territory  would  not  be  given  back 
till  full  reparation  should  be  made. 

In  the  mean  time  the  outrages  in  British  territory  and  the  terri- 
tories of  the  Rajahs  of  Cooch  Behar  and  Sikhim  had  not  ceased.  The 
marauders  in  these  fresh  dacoities  belonged  chiefly  to  the  Balka,  Sediee, 
and  Cheerung  Doars.  During  the  negotiations  with  Sikhim  at  the  close 
of  the  Sikhim  war,  the  Bhootan  government  repeatedly  attempted  to  pro- 
cure, through  the  Superintendent  of  Darjeeling  and  through  the  envoy 
to  Sikhim,  the  payment  of  the  rent  of  Ambaree  Fallacottah,  and  after 
the  conclusion  of  the  Sikhim  Treaty,  the  Bhootan  Authorities  had  been 
threatening  Sikhim,  on  the  pretence  that  it  was  owing  to  the  rupture 
between  the  British  Government  and  Sikhim  that  the  Ambaree  Falla- 
cottah rents  had  been  withheld.  The  Deb  Rajah,  however,  was  informed 
that  the  stoppage  of  the  rents  was  owing  solely  to  the  refusal  of  the 
Bhootan  government  to  comply  with  the  just  demands  of  the  British 
Government.  But  as  it  was  doubtful  whether,  in  consequence  of  the 
usurpations  of  the  frontier  Governors,  the  letters  to  the  Central  gov- 
ernment of  Bhootan  were  not  intercepted,  the  Government  of  Bengal 
proposed  to  send  a  mission  to  Bhootan  and  permanently  to  locate  a  Bri- 
tish Agent  at  the  Court  of  the  Deb  Rajah. 

The  Government  of  India,  with  the  approval  of  the  Secretary  of 
State  in  Council,  determined  that  a  mission  should  be  sent  to  explain 
what  the  demands  of  the  British  Government  were  and  what  would  be 
done  if  they  were  not  conceded,  and  also  to  make  our  engagement  with 
Sikhim  clearly  understood  to  the  Bootiahs.  But  the  expediency  or  other- 
wise of  placing  an  Agent  in  Bhootan  was  to  be  left  for  consideration 
after  the  result  of  the  mission  was  known. 

A  messenger  was  despatched  with  a  letter  to  the  Deb  and  Dhurm 
Rajahs,  informing  them  of  the  intention  to  send  an  envoy  and  enquir- 
ing by  what  route  the  Bhootan  government  would  wish  him  to  proceed. 
On  11th  October  1862,  the  Government  of  Bengal  urged  that  the 
mission  should  start  not  later  than  the  25th  of  December  1862,  and 
should  proceed  from  Darjeeling  across  the  Teesta  into  Bhootan,  and 
march  direct   by  the  best    and   shortest   route   to   Tassisudon   or  to 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  359 

Poonakha,  if  the  Durbar  had  not  left  its  winter  quarters  by  the  time  BHOOTAN. 
the  mission  arrived  there.  They  suggested  that  another  special  mes-  "" 
senger  should  be  sent  to  announce  the  appointment  of  the  envoy  by 
name  and  the  route  by  which  he  would  march.  But  as  the  selection  of 
the  route  of  the  mission  had  been  left  to  the  Deb  and  Dhurm  Rajahs, 
the  Governor  General  in  Council  resolved  to  await  the  answer  to  be 
brought  by  the  special  messenger.  He  arrived  towards  the  end  of  1862 
with  an  evasive  letter  from  the  Deb  Rajah,  who  expressed  himself  ready 
to  receive  the  Agent  to  the  Governor  General,  to  converse  about  the 
Assam  Doars ;  asked  for  payment  of  the  Ambaree  Fallacottah  rents ; 
intimated  that  the  Dhurm  Rajah  was  averse  to  an  interview,  and  that 
Zinkaffs  would  be  deputed  to  adjust  the  disputes  when  the  season  would 
permit. 