


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  3G3 

or  in  part,  and  had  you  received  my  envoy  in  the  manner  suited  to  his  BHOOTAN. 

rank  as  my  representative,  and  as  by  the  usages  of  nations  he  ought  to    Ko.  CVIH 

have  been  received,  but  declared  your  inability  to  accede  to  the  demands* 

of  the  British  Government,  this  rejection  of  my  proposals,  however  much 

to  be  regretted  as  forcing  the  British  Government  to  coercive  measures 

for  the  protection  of  the  persons  and  property  of  its  subjects,  would  not 

in  itself  have  been  an  offence. 

But  you  are  aware  that  not  only  have  the  just  demands  of  the  Bri- 
tish Government  been  refused,  but  they  have  been  refused  in  a  manner 
disgraceful  to  yourself  and  to  your  Durbar  and  insulting  to  the  British 
Government.  Not  only  has  the  envoy  deputed  to  your  Court  not  been 
received  with  the  dignity  due  to  his  rank;  he  has  not  even  received  that 
protection  from  personal  insult  and  violence  which  is  extended  to  an 
envoy  by  the  laws  of  all  nations  save  the  most  barbarous.  By  the 
Tongso  Pillo  and  his  coadjutors  in  Council  the  letter  addressed  to  you  on 
the  part  of  the  British  Government  has  been  treated  with  contumely ; 
my  envoy  was  publicly  insulted  and  derided  in  your  own  presence,  and 
has  been  compelled  under  threats  of  personal  violence  to  sign  an  engage- 
ment agreeing"  to  restore  the  Assam  Doars. 

This  engagement  I  entirely  repudiate,  not  only  because  it  was  be- 
yond Mr.  Eden's  instructions  to  agree  to  any  such  terms,  but  because  the 
engagement  was  extorted  from  him  by  personal  violence  and  threats  of 
imprisonment.  The  treatment  to  which  the  mission  which  was  deputed 
to  your  Court  to  remove  all  causes  of  dispute  by  peaceful  negotiation  was 
subjected,  has  been  so  disgraceful,  that  the  British  Government  cannot 
allow  the  government  of  Bhootan  to  go  unpunished. 

I  am  aware  that  your  authority  has  been  usurped  by  the  Tongso 
Pillo  and  other  Chiefs,  but  it  cannot  be  permitted  that,  for  the  insubordi- 
nation of  your  Chiefs  and  the  internal  distractions  which  weaken  the 
government  of  Bhootan,  the  subjects  of  the  British  Government  should 
suffer  and  the  envoy  of  the  British  Government  should  be  insulted  anil 
maltreated. 

I  therefore  inform  you  that  the  district  of  Ambaree  Fallacottah, 
heretofore  held  in  rent  from  the  Bhootan  government,  is  permanently 
annexed  to  the  British  dominions,  and  that  all  payments  of  rent  from 
that   district   and  of  revenues  from   the  Assam   Doars   to  the  Bhootan 


£64  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

n  II OOTAN.  government  have  ceased  for  ever.  You  have  been  informed  both  in  writ- 
No*.  CVIII  mg  and  by  my  envoy  that  all  British  subjects  of  Cooch  Behar  and  Sikkim, 
&  CIX.  *bf  whom  there  are  said  to  be  more  than  three  hundred,  who  are  now  held 
captive  by  your  Chiefs  and  in  your  monasteries,  or  are  detained  in 
Bhootan  against  their  will,  must  be  released,  and  that  the  property  which 
has  been  carried  off  from  British  territory,  or  Cooch  Behar,  or  Sikkim 
within  the  last  five  years,  must  be  restored.  I  now  warn  you  that,  unless 
these  demands  are  fully  complied  with  by  the  1st  day  of  September  next, 
that  is,  three  months  from  this  date,  I  shall  take  such  further  measures 
to  enforce  these  demands  as  may  seem  to  me  to  be  necessary. 