

In  the  mean  time  outrages  on  the  frontier  did  not  cease.  In  1839 
the  Bootiahs  carried  off  twelve  British  subjects,  some  of  whom  they 
murdered.  The  aggressions  were  committed  less  from  the  Western  Doars 
under  the  Paro  Pillo  than  from  the  Eastern  under  the  Tongso  Pillo,  and 
the  Kooreapara  Doar  under  the  Twang  Rajah,  an  immediate  dependent 
on  the  government  of  Lassa;  a  distinction  in  the  policy  pursued  towards 
the  frontier  Governors  of  Bhootan  was  therefore  deemed  necessary.  In 
October  1839  the  Kulling,  Booree  Gooma,  and  Kooreapara  Doars  were 
attached,  and  the  Bhootan  government  were  informed  that  they  would 
not  be  given  up  till  the  kidnapped  subjects  of  the  British  Government 
were  released,  all  arrears  of  tribute  paid,  and  till  the  British  Government 
were  satisfied  that  the  Central  government  in  Bhootan  were  able  to  con- 
trol their  frontier  Officers. 

The  deputation  of  another  mission  was  suggested  in  1841.  The 
Deb  Rajah  was  believed  to  be  willing  to  farm  all  his  Doars  to  the 
British  Government;  but  as  Bhootan  was  at  the  time  in  a  state  of 
anarchy,  no  good  result  could  be  expected  from  further  negotiation.  A 
letter  was  therefore  addressed  to  the  Deb  Rajah  on  the  14th  of  June, 
warning  him  that,  should  the  country  continue  much  longer  in  a  state 
of  anarchy  and  our  frontier  be  violated,  the  British  Government  would 
be  compelled  to  occupy  the  remaining  Doars.  This  letter  produced  no 
effect ;  and  as  the  measures  already  taken  had  been  approved  by  the 
Court  of  Directors,  the  Agent  to  the  Governor  General  was  authorized, 
on  6th  September  1841,  to  attach  the  remaining  Assam  Doars  as  he 
might  see  to  be  proper  and  expedient. 

The  occupation  of  the  three  Doars  in  1839  had  been  confessedly 
only  temporary ;  but  as  the  demands  of  the  British  Government  had 
not  been  complied  with  up  to  September  1841,  and  the  possible  restora- 
tion of  the  Doars  to  Bhootan  prevented  the  repopulation  and  improve- 
ment of  the  districts,  the  Agent  to  the  Governor  General  suggested 
that  the  permanent  annexation  of  the  districts  should  be  proclaimed, 
and  that  a  share  of  the  net  revenues  from  one-third  to  one-half  should 
be  allowed  to  the  Bhootan  government.  The  permanent  annexation  of 
the  Doars  was  agreed  to,  not  only  on  grounds  of  policy  and  humanity, 

VOL.   VII.  2  x 


354 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND    SUNNUDS. 


BHOOTAN.  but  also  on  the  ground  that  the  tenure  on  which  the  Doars  had  been  held 
by  the  Bootiahs  for  a  certain  portion  of  each  year  gave  them  no  title  to 
claim  them  as  their  own  territory.  The  right  of  supremacy,  it  was 
asserted,  had  remained  with  the  rulers  of  Assam,  by  whom  the  use  of  the 
Doars  for  certain  months  of  the  year  had  been  granted  to  the  Bootiahs 
as  the  price  of  their  forbearance  from  plundering;  and  all  that  the 
Bootiahs  had  any  pretension  to  was  an  equivalent  for  the  value  of  the 
Doars  to  them  previous  to  their  resumption.  This  compensation 
was  to  be  given  on  condition  of  abstinence  from  all  marauding 
encroachments  on  British  territory,  on  a  calculation  of  the  average 
profit  which  the  Bootiahs  had  derived  from  the  Doars  for  a  period 
of  five  or  ten  years  before  their  attachment.  No  data,  however, 
existed  on  which  to  base  such  a  calculation,  and  on  8th  March  1843, 
Government  agreed  to  pay  to  the  Bootiahs  one-third  of  the  net 
revenues.  At  first  the  Bhootan  Durbar  refused  to  accept  it,  and  the 
Deb  and  Dhurm  Rajahs,  and  the  Tongso  Pillo,  in  September  1843,  sent 
a  deputation  to  Calcutta  to  demand  the  restoration  of  the  Doars.  This 
deputation  departed  without  attaining  its  object,  and  eventually  the 
Bhootan  government  accepted  the  arrangement.  The  first  payment  made 
to  Bhootan  was  Rupees  8,334  only  on  the  Assam  Doars,  exclusive  of  a  pay- 
ment of  Rupees  5,000  on  the  Kooreapara  Doar  under  a  separate  engage- 
ment.* This  sum  of  Rupees  8,334  was  calculated  to  be  one-third  of  the 
net  revenues  as  they  stood  in  1844,  viz. : — 