

The  Tongso  Pillo  then  addressed  a  threatening  letter  to  the  British 
Frontier  Officers,  demanding  the  payment  of  half  the  fine  inflicted  on  him 
by  the  Deb  Rajah  and  the  surrender  of  some  of  the  Bootiah  offenders,  who 
had  been  seized  by  the  British  Officers  and  were  under  trial.  It  was  also 
reported  that  the  Dewangiri  Rajah  was  building  forts,  opening  roads,  and 
apparently  preparing  to  harass  our  frontier.  Precautions  were  at  once  taken 
for  the  protection  of  the  frontier,  and  the  permanent  annexation  of  the 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUD9. 

bhootan.  Bengal  Doars  was  not  only  threatened  but  was  ordered  in  the  event  of 
""  any  repetition  of  aggressive  movements  on  the  part  of  Bhootan.  The  Deb 
Rajah  was  informed  that  although  he  might  be  ostensibly  well  disposed 
toward  the  British  Government,  yet  if  he  was  unable  or  unwilling,  or 
remiss  in  his  endeavours,  to  restrain  his  subordinate  Chiefs,  it  could  not  be 
permitted  that,  for  this  want  of  power,  or  want  of  will,  or  want  of  energy, 
the  subjects  of  the  British  Government  should  suffer,  and  that  he  must 
share  in  the  penalty  due  to  the  delinquencies  of  those  who  owned  his 
authority,  and  for  whose  acts  of  aggression  on  British  territory  he  must 
be  considered  responsible. 

The  Dhurm  and  Deb  Rajahs,  the  Tongso  Pillo  and  the  Dewangir 
Rajah,  all  apologized  for  their  previous  misconduct.  Meanwhile,  however, 
another  outrage  had  been  committed  in  the  Gowalpara  District.  Arung 
Sing,  the  hereditary  Zemindar  of  the  Gooma  Doar,  who  had  taken  refuge 
in  British  territory  from  a  cruel  imprisonment,  was  carried  off  from  his 
residence  in  Mouza  Pettah  by  a  party  of  armed  Bootiahs.  A  demand 
was  made  on  the  Bhootan  government  for  the  punishment  of  the  offenders, 
and  an  apology  for  the  acts  of  their  dependants.  This  demand  was  accom- 
panied with  a  warning  that  if  atonement  were  not  made  for  this  new 
aggression,  the  Government  of  India  would  hold  itself  free  to  take  per- 
manent possession  of  the  Bengal  Doars.  On  the  other  hand,  if  full  satis- 
faction should  be  offered  for  the  aggression  committed  in  carrying  off  Arung 
Sing,  correspondence  with  the  Tongso  Pillo  was  to  be  resumed,  and  the 
Bootiah  share  of  the  Doar  revenue  was  to  be  raised  to  Rupees  12,000. 

No  reply  to  the  remonstrance  was  received  from  the  Dhurm  Rajah 
at  all,  while  that  of  the  Deb  Rajah,  not  only  in  the  case  of  Arung  Sing, 
but  in  answer  to  the  demand  for  the  surrender  of  parties  charged  with 
dacoity  and  the  murder  of  a  British  subject  at  Shaftabari,  in  Rungpore, 
was  evasive  and  unsatisfactory.  Further  outrages  also  were  reported : 
A  British  merchant,  named  Saligram  Asaval,  who  had  gone  to  Myna- 
goree  to  trade,  was  seized,  and  his  release  was  refused.  Two  men  also, 
with  their  wives,  were  forcibly  carried  away  from  Cooch  Behar.  A 
corps  of  observation  was  moved  to  the  frontier,  but  before  putting  into 
execution  the  threatened  annexation  of  the  Doars,  the  Government  of 
India  desired  to  have  full  information  on  the  political  condition  of 
Bhootan,  in  regard  to  which  their  information  was  curiously  imperfect. 