

(Signed)         John  Lawrence. 


The  same  to  the  Dhurm  Kajah. 

No.  CIX. 
PROCLAMATION. 


FOREIGN  DEPARTMENT. 
POLITICAL. 

Fort  William,  the  \%th  November  1864. 

For  many  years  past  outrages  have  been  committed  by  subjects  of 
the  Bhootan  government  within  British  territory,  and  in  the  territories 
of  the  Rajahs  of  Sikkim  and  Cooch  Behar.  In  these  outrages  property 
has  been  plundered  and  destroyed,  lives  have  been  taken,  and  many  in- 
nocent persons  have  been  carried  into  and  are  still  held  in  captivity. 

The  British  Government,  ever  sincerely  desirous  of  maintaining 
friendly  relations  with  neighbouring  States,  and  specially  mindful  of  the 
obligations  imposed  on  it  by  the  Treaty  of  1774,  has  endeavoured  from 
time  to  time  by  conciliatory  remonstrance  to  induce  the  government  of 
Bhootan  to  punish  the  perpetrators  of  these  crimes,  to  restore  the  plun- 
dered property,  and  to  liberate  the  captives.  But  such  remonstrances 
have  never  been  successful,  and,  even  when  followed  by  serious  warning, 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SFNNUDS.  365 

have  failed  to  produce  any  satisfactory  result.     The  British  Government  BHOOTAN. 
has  been  frequently  deceived  by  vague  assurances  and  promises  for  the     No.  CIX. 
future,  but  no  property  has  ever  been  restored,  no  captive  liberated,  no 
offender  punished,  and  the  outrages  have  continued. 

In  1863  the  Government  of  India,  being  averse  to  the  adoption  of 
extreme  measures  for  the  protection  of  its  subjects  and  dependent  allies, 
despatched  a  special  mission  to  the  Bhootan  Court,  charged  with  pro- 
posals of  a  conciliatory  character,  but  instructed  to  demand  the  surrender 
of  all  captives,  the  restoration  of  plundered  property,  and  security  for 
the  future  peace  of  the  frontier. 

This  pacific  overture  was  insolently  rejected  by  the  Government  of 
Bhootan.  Not  only  were  restitution  for  the  past  and  security  for  the 
future  refused,  but  the  British  envoy  was  insulted  in  open  Durbar,  and 
compelled,  as  the  only  means  of  ensuring  the  safe  return  of  the  mission, 
to  sign  a  document  which  the  Government  of  India  could  only  instantly 
repudiate. 

For  this  insult  the  Governor  General  in  Council  determined  to 
withhold  for  ever  the  annual  payments  previously  made  to  the  Bhootan 
government  on  account  of  the  revenues  of  the  Assam  Doars  and  Am- 
baree  Fallacottah,  which  had  long  been  in  the  occupation  of  the  British 
Government,  and  annexed  those  districts  permanently  to  British  terri- 
tory. At  the  same  time,  still  anxious  to  avoid  an  open  rupture,  the  Gov- 
ernor General  in  Council  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Deb  and  Dhurma 
Rajahs,  formally  demanding  that  all  captives  detained  in  Bhootan  against 
their  will  should  be  released,  and  that  all  property  carried  off  during  the 
last  five  years  should  be  restored. 