

dominions    the    seven*   Assam  Doars, 

a  measure  which,  it  was  believed,  would  convince  the  Bhootan  government 
that  British  territory  cannot  with  impunity  be  persistently  and  wantonly 
violated.  Nevertheless,  the  British  Government,  willing  to  believe  in 
the  friendship  of  your  government,  and  careful  only  to  secure  an  undis- 
turbed frontier  and  to  live  at  peace  with  the  people  of  Bhootan,  paid  to 
your  government  annually  a  sum  of  Rs.  10,000  from  the  revenues  of 
these  Doars. 

vol.  vii.  2  y 


*  Ghurkola. 
Banska. 
Cliappagoonee. 


362  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

BIKX>  But  even  this  moderation  on  the  part  of  the  British  Government, 

S  t  \  in.  Qiia  sign  of  its  anxiety  above  all  things  for  peace,  was  misunderstood. 
Outrages  did  not  cease.  Precautions  had  to  be  taken  for  the  defence 
of  the  British  Frontier,  and  not  only  the  Deb  and  Dhurma  Rajahs,  but 
the  local  Governors  on  the  frontier,  particularly  the  Tongso  Pillo,  had 
to  be  distinctly  warned  that,  unless  these  insults  to  the  British  Govern- 
ment were  put  a  slop  to,  the  British  Government  would  have  no  alter- 
native but  to  resort  to  further  measures  of  retribution. 

These  warnings  were  ineffectual ;  it  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  the  nu- 
merous acts  of  aggression  to  which  the  British  Government  patiently 
submitted,  and  the  further  remonstrancs  which  were  addressed  to  your 
government  before  they  carried  their  threats  into  execution  by  the  stop- 
page of  the  rent  of  Rupees  2,000  a  year  for  the  Ambaree  Fallacottah,  which 
the  British  Government  held  in  farm.  Of  the  reasons  which  forced  the 
British  Government  to  this  measure,  your  government  were  duly  in- 
formed, and  you  were  warned  that  the  rents  of  Ambaree  Fallacottah  would 
not  be  paid  until  full  reparation  should  be  made,  captives  released,  and 
the  guilty  parties  punished.  These  measures  also  proved  ineffectual;  and 
as  the  British  Government  were  unwilling  to  be  committed  to  a  course 
of  retributive  coercion,  it  was  deteraiined  to  make  one  effort  more  by 
■  peaceful  negotiation  and  the  dispatch  of  a  friendly  mission  to  explain 
fully  the  demands  of  the  British  Government  and  to  put  the  relations 
of  the  two  governments  on  a  satisfactory  footing.  Of  this  intention 
the  Bhootan  government  were  informed  in  1862  by  a  special  messenger, 
who  carried  letters  to  the  Deb  and  Dhurma  Rajahs,  and  by  more  recent 
letters  addressed  to  you  by  the  Honourable  the  Lieutenant  Governor  of 
Bengal.  The  mission,  under  the  conduct  of  the  Honourable  Ashley  Eden, 
a  high  functionary  of  the  British  Government  and  my  envoy  and 
plenipotentiary,  reached  your  Court  at  Ponaka  on  13th  March  1864. 
Mr.  Eden  was  the  bearer  of  a  Draft  Treaty  which  he  was  instructed  to 
negotiate  with  you.  The  terms  of  that  Treaty  were  so  just  and  reason- 
able, and  so  favorable  to  the  best  interests  of  both  governments,  that  I 
did  not  anticipate  its  rejection,  more  especially  as  Mr.  Eden  had  full 
discretion  to  modify  any  of  the  details  not  inconsistent  with  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  Treaty  to  meet  the  wishes  of  the  Bhootan  government.  It 
was,  of  course,  optional  with  you  to  accept  or  reject  this  Treaty  in  whole 