

With  reference  to  this,  the  Bengal  Government  urged  that,  instead 
of  waiting  for  the  Zinkaffs,  the  mission  should  be  dispatched  at  once, 
as  it  was  impossible  for  the  questions  in  dispute  to  be  settled  satisfac- 
torily in  any  other  way.  But  the  Governor  General  was  of  opinion 
that  as  the  Bhootan  government  had  been  asked  to  point  out  the  route 
which  the  mission  to  Bhootan  was  to  follow,  it  would  not  be  advisable 
at  so  late  a  period  in  the  cool  season  to  raise  a  new  question  by  selecting 
a  route  without  waiting  for  the  formal  reply  from  the  Bhootan  rulers. 

Up  to  the  19th  March  1863  nothing  more  was  heard  of  the  pro- 
mised deputation  of  the  Zinkaffs,  and  as  the  messengers  who  had,  as 
usual,  come  down  to  receive  their  share  of  the  revenues  of  the  Assam 
Doars,  knew  nothing  of  any  intention  on  the  part  of  the  Bhootan  gov- 
ernment to  send  the  deputation,  it  was  finally  determined  that  the  envoy 
should  proceed  from  Darjeeling  after  the  rains  of  1863,  furnished  with 
instructions,  which  were  approved  by  Her  Majesty's  Government,  and 
with  a  Draft  Treaty  which  he  was  to  negotiate. 

Before  the  mission  commenced  their  journey,  information  was  received 
of  the  outbreak  of  a  revolution  in  Bhootan,  headed  by  the  Soobah  of 
Poonakha,  who  was  supported  by  the  Tongso  Pillo,  the  Soobahs  of  East 
Bhootan,  and  the  Dalimkote  Soobah,  and  some  of  the  western  Chiefs, 
to  overthrow  the  Deb  Rajah,  whose  cause  was  espoused  by  the  Paro  Pillo, 
the  Soobah  of  Tassisudon,  and  a  few  of  the  western  Soobahs.  The 
revolution  was  successful,  and  as  the  envoy  reported  that  he  did  not 


MO  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

hiiootan.  think  that  any  serious  difficulties  would  be  placed  in  the  way  of  the 
~  mission,  and  that  the  Soobah  of  Dalimkote  had  promised  to  give  all  the 
assistance  in  his  power  on  the  way  to  Tassisudon,  the  mission  was,  on 
21st  December  1863,  authorized  to  start  on  their  journey.  The  envoy 
reached  Poonakha  on  the  13th  of  March,  where  he  found  the  Deb  and 
Dhurm  Rajahs  were  puppets  in  the  hands  of  the  Tongso  Pillo,  the 
successful  head  of  the  late  insurrection.  By  this  man,  who  refused 
to  treat  except  on  condition  of  the  restoration  of  the  Assam  Doars 
the  mission  were  subjected  to  gross  outrage  and  insult ;  with  difficulty 
they  obtained  permission  to  return  after  the  envoy  had  signed  under 
compulsion  an  agreement  that  the  British  Government  would  re-adjust 
the  whole  boundary  between  the  two  countries,  restore  the  Assam  Doars, 
deliver  up  all  run-away  slaves  and  political  offenders  who  had  taken 
refuge  in  British  territory,  and  consent  to  be  punished  by  the  Bhootan 
and  Cooch  Behar  governments  acting  together  if  they  ever  made 
encroachments  on  Bhootan.  The  envoy  resolved  to  sign  this  document 
after  considering  in  concert  with  the  other  Officers  of  the  mission  and 
rejecting  as  more  embarrassing  to  government  every  other  course  which 
appeared  open  to  him. 