

The  engagement  which  had  been  extorted  from  the  envoy  was  at 
once  repudiated  by  the  British  Government,  and  as  a  punishment  for 
the  outrageous  treatment  to  which  the  mission  had  been  subjected 
the  Ambaree  Fallacottah  was  declared  (No.  CVIIL)  to  be  permanently 
annexed  to  the  British  dominions,  and  the  payment  of  revenue  to  Bhootan 
from  the  Assam  Doars  was  stopped  for  ever,  and  the  Bhootan  government 
were  informed  that  if  the  demands  of  the  British  Government  were  not 
complied  with  by  1st  September  1864,  such  further  measures  would  be 
taken  to  enforce  these  demands  as  might  appear  to  be  necessary.  No 
steps  having  been  taken  within  the  time  specified  to  comply  with  these 
demands,  the  Bengal  Doars  were  permanently  annexed  (No.  CIX.)  to 
the  British  territories,,  and  the  districts  were  occupied  in  force  by  British 
troops. 


No.  CVIII. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  361 

No.   CVIII.  BHOOTAN. 

Khureeta  to  His  Highness  the  Deb  Rajah, — (dated  Simla,  the  9th  June  1864.) 

You  are  well  aware  that  for  many  years  past  wanton  outrages  have 
been  committed  by  your  subjects  within  the  territories  of  the  British 
Government  and  within  the  territories  of  the  Rajahs  of  Sikkim  and 
Cooch  Behar,  who  are  under  British  protection.  "  Men,  women,  and 
children  have  been  kidnapped  and  sold  into  slavery;  some  have  been 
put  to  death ;  others  have  been  cruelly  wounded ;  and  much  valuable 
property  has  been  carried  off  or  destroyed.  These  outrages,  it  is  well 
known,  are  not  the  act  of  individual  criminals,  who  set  the  laws  of 
Bhootan  at  defiance ;  they  are  perpetrated  with  the  knowledge  and  at  the 
instigation  of  some  of  the  leading  Chiefs  of  Bhootan.  Over  a  period  of 
thirty-six  years  these  aggressions  have  extended.  Many  remonstrances 
have  been  in  vain  addressed  to  the  Bhootan  government,  and  the  British 
Government  has  been  compelled,  in  its  own  defence  and  the  defence  of 
its  protected  and  subordinate  allies,  to  have  recourse  to  measures  of  retri- 
bution. In  1828  and  1836  the  British  Government  were  most  re- 
luctantly forced  to  occupy  the  Booree  Gooma  and  the  Banska  Doars,  but 
these  districts  were  subsequently  restored  to  the  Bhootan  government  in 
the  hope  that  the  Bhootan  government  would  fulfil  the  offices  of  friend- 
ship towards  their  neighbour  by  restraining  their  subjects  from  the  com- 
mission of  such  aggressions  for  the  future. 

This  hope  proved  illusory,  and  after  the  British  Government  had 

in  vain  endeavoured  to  secure  a  better  understanding  with  the  Bhootan 

government    by   means   of  a  friendly 

BS?khamar'        mission,   it  became  necessary  in  1841 

Booree  Gooma.         to  annex  permanently  to  the  British 
Kulling.  l  ' 