

Having  taken  into  consideration  the  position  of  yourself  and  rela- 
tives in  consequence  of  the  death  of  your  late  brother  Nawab  Jumalood- 
deen, I  hereby  confer  on  you  the  fief  of  Mumdote  and  the  title  of 
Nawab,  with  succession  to  your  male  issue,  according  to  the  rules  of 
primogeniture. 

This  grant  is  subject  to  the  following  conditions : — 

Article  1. 

You  and  your  successors  in  the  fief  must  provide  a  reasonable  main- 
tenance for  your  relations,  the  descendants  of  yourself  and  Jumalooddeen. 


Article  2. 

You  will  exercise  no  magisterial  authority  within  the  fief,  nor  will 
you  interfere  in  the  management  of  the  estate.  You  will  behave  properly 
to  the  proprietors  and  cultivators  so  far  as  you  may  have  intercourse 
with  them. 


Article  3. 
You  will  not  interfere  with  the  pensions  of 

Annually. 

1.  Beclxic  Ranee,  widow  of  Kootubooddeen  and 

mother  of  Jumalooddeen  and  Jelalooddeen  Rs.    1,200 

2.  Booboo  Taleb,  widow   of  Kootubooddeen,  a 

stsp-mother  of  the  above         ...  ...     „        600 

3.  Parsa  Begum,  widow  of  the  late  Nawab, 

and  mother  of  his  children       ...  ...     „      1,200 

4.  Mussamut  Tajan,  widow  of    ditto    (lias  no 

children)     ...  ...  ...  ...     „        600 

5.  Booboo  Shah,  daughter  of  Kootubooddeen, 

and  sister  of  the  late  Nawab    ... 


Total  Rs.     ... 

6.  Khan  Bahadoor     6,000  (Sons of  the  late) 

7.  Mahomed  Khan    4,000  (     Nawab       ...J 

Total      .. 


1,200 

4,800 
„    10,000 

Rs.  14,800 


the  parties  named  in 
the  margin,  which  will 
be  paid  through  Offi- 
cers of  the  British 
Government,  but  you 
will  receive  the  benefit 
of  all  lapses  or  reduc- 
tions in  pensions  to  the 
issue  of  present  incum- 
bents which  may  be 
sanctioned  by  the 
Governor  General  of 
India  in  Council. 


treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds.  381 

Article  4.                                                  cis-SUTLEJ 
The  Government  demands  on  the  fief  of  Mumdote  arc  fixed  at  one- 


third  the  income  of  the  estate  in  lieu  of  all  claim  for  expenses  of  manage-     No-  cxv- 
ment,  commutation  for  service,  Police  charges,  and  the  like,  to  commence 
from  the  beginning  of  the  next  Fusly  year. 

Article  5. 

You  will  at  all  times  conduct  yourself  as  a  good  and  faithful  subject 
of  the  British  Crown,  and  will,  when  required,  render  service  to  the 
satisfaction  of  the  British  Government. 

Be  assured  that  so  long  as  the  above  conditions  are  fully  and  faith- 
fully fulfilled,  the  fief  of  Mumdote  will  remain  to  yourself  and  your 
male  issue  a  perpetual  possession. 

(Signed)         J.  Lawrence. 

Bated  hth  December  1864. 


1IILIi  HILL  STATES. 

STATFS 

{Vol.  II.,  pages  315—354.) 

No.  CX\  1. 