

Article  1. 

The  Burmese  and  British  rulers  have  for  a  long  time  remained  at 
peace  and  in  friendship ;  peace  shall  now  be  extended  to  future  genera- 
tions, both  parties  being  careful  to  observe  the  conditions  of  a  firm  and 
lasting  friendship. 

VOL.   VII.  2  z 


370  TU  KATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    A^D   SUNNUDS. 

i;i  i:mah.  Aeticle  2. 


No.  CXII.  In  accordance  with  the  great  friendship  existing  between  the  two 

countries,  traders  and  other  subjects  of  the  Burmese  government,  who 
may  travel  and  trade  in  the  British  territory,  shall,  in  conformity  with 
the  custom  of  great  countries,  be  treated  and  protected  in  the  same 
manner  as  if  they  were  subjects  of  the  British  Government. 


■  Article  3. 

Traders  and  other  subjects  of  the  British  Government,  who  may 
travel  and  trade  in  the  Burmese  territory,  shall,  in  accordance  with  the 
custom  of  great  countries,  be  treated  and  protected  in  the  same  manner 
as  if  they  were  subjects  of  the  Burmese  government. 


*  Article  4. 

When  goods  are  imported  into  Rangoon  from  any  British  or  foreign 
territory,  and  declared  to  be  for  export  by  the  Irrawaddy  River  to  the 
Burmese  territory,  the  English  ruler  shall,  provided  bulk  is  not  broken, 
and  he  believes  the  manifest  to  be  true,  charge  one  per  cent,  on  their 
value,  and  if  he  so  desires,  shall  allow  them  to  be  conveyed  under  the 
charge  of  an  Officer  until  arrived  at  Maloon  and  Mehla.  The  tariff 
value  of  goods  shall  be  forwarded  yearly  to  the  Burmese  ruler.  If  such 
goods  are  declared  for  export  to  other  territories,  and  not  for  sale  in  the 
Burmese  territories,  the  Burmese  ruler  shall,  if  he  believes  the  mani- 
fest to  be  true,  not  cause  bulk  to  be  broken,  and  such  goods  shall  be  free 
of  duty. 

Article  5. 
When  goods  are  imported  into  Burmah  by  persons  residing  in  the 
Burmese  or  any  foreign  territory,  and  declared  to  be  for  export  by  the 
Irrawaddy  River  to  Rangoon,  the  Burmese  ruler  shall,  provided  bulk  is 
not  broken,  and  he  believes  the  manifest  to  be  true,  charge  one  per  cent. 
on  their  value,  and  if  he  so  desires,  shall  allow  them  to  be  conveyed 
under  the  charge  of  an  Officer  to  Thayet  Myo,  and  the  tariff  value  of 
such  goods  shall  be  forwarded  yearly  to  the   British   ruler.     If  such 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  371 

I 

goods  are  declared  for  export  to  other  territories,  and  not  for  sale  in  Bri-  BURMAH 
tish  territory,  such  goods  shall  be  free  according  to  the  Customs  ^o.  CXII 
Schedule,  but  goods  liable  to  sea-board  duty  will  pay  the  usual  rate. 


Article  6. 

Traders  from  the  Burmese  territory  who  may  desire  to  travel  in  the 
British  territory,  either  by  land  or  by  water,  through  the  whole  course  of 
the  Irrawaddy  River,  shall  conform  to  the  customs  of  the  British  territory, 
and  be  allowed  to  travel  in  such  manner  as  they  please,  without  hindrance 
from  the  British  ruler,  and  to  ptirchase  whatever  they  may  require. 
Burmese  merchants  will  be  allowed  to  settle  and  to  have  land  for  the 
erection  of  houses  of  business  in  any  part  of  the  British  territory. 