

1st.  That  due  notice  of  the  confinement  of  the  prisoner,  the 
offence  with  which  he  is  charged,  and  the  date  of  the  intended  trial,  be 
given  to  the  Resident  Councillor  at  Singapore,  with  a  view  to  his 
affording  the  prisoner  any  necessary  aid,  and  should  he  deem  it  advisable, 
deputing  an  Officer  of  government  to  watch  the  proceedings  of  the  trial. 

3rd.  That  a  certified  copy  of  the  proceedings,  with  translation, 
be  forwarded  to  this  government. 

3rd.  That,  in  the  event  of  the  prisoner  being  found  guilty,  the 
punishment  awarded  be  not  excessive  or  repugnant  to  English  law. 


37  I  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

MALAYAN  No.   CXIIL 

These  arc  to  certify  that  a  Treaty  of  friendship,  alliance,  and  mutual  support,  which 

NaCXIII.  is  to  endure  for  ever,  has  been  entered  into  between  His  Highness  Datoh 

Tumongong  Abubakae  Sbi  Mahabajah  Ibini  Datoh  Tumongong  Daing, 
Ibbahim  Sbi  Mahabajah,  sovereign  of  Johore,  of  the  one  part,  and  His 
Highness  Datoh  Bandahaba  Ton  Kobais  Sbi  Mahabajah  Ibini  Rajah 
Bandahaba  Ton  Tahie  Sbi  Mahabajah  of  Pahang,  of  the  other  part ;  both 
parties  being  in  perfect  accord  and  consenting  in  order  to  regulate  the  coun- 
tries of  Pahang  and  Johore,  their  boundaries,  jurisdictions,  and  governments, 
to  prevent  disputes  hereafter,  to  strengthen  each  other,  and  to  perpetuate  the 
amity  existing  between  them,  it  is  agreed  and  declared  as  follows  : — 

AllTICLE    1. 

There  shall  be  perpetual  peace  and  friendship  between  the  parties 
to  this  Treaty  and  their  descendants  and  the  countries  of  Johore  and 
Pahang. 

Article  2. 

Should  the  country  of  Johore  or  any  of  its  dependencies  be  attacked 
by  enemies  at  any  time  hereafter  either  from  without  or  within,  His 
Highness  Dato  Bandahara  Ton  Korais  Sri  Maharajah  Ibini  Rajah  Ban- 
dahara Ton  Tahir  Sri  Maharajah  of  Pahang  and  his  successors  shall,  with 
all  speed  and  with  whatever  number  of  followers  and  materials  of  war 
he  may  be  able  to  command,  hasten  to  the  assistance  of  His  Highness 
Datoh  Tumongong  Abubakar  Sri  Maharajah  Ibini  Datoh  Tumongong 
Daing  Ibrahim  Sri  Maharajah  of  Johore  and  his  successors,  and  shall 
continue  to  aid  him  by  all  the  means  in  his  power  until  such  enemies 
shall  have  been  overcome,  expelled,  or  suppressed. 

Article  3. 

In  like  manner,  should  the  country  of  Pahang  or  any  of  its  depend- 
encies be  attacked  at  any  time  hereafter  by  enemies  either  from  without 
or  within,  His  Highness  Datoh  Tumongong  Abubakar  Sri  Maharajah 
Ibini  Datoh  Tumongong  Daing  Ibrahim  Sri  Maharajah  of  Johore  and 
his  successors  shall,  with  all  speed  and  with  whatever  number  of  followers 
and  materials  of  war  he  may  be  able  to  command,  hasten  to  the  assist- 
ance of  His  Highness  Datoh   Bandahara  Ton  Korais    Sri   Maharaja^ 