

To  this  demand  the  government  of  Bhootan  has  returned  an  evasive 
reply,  from  which  can  be  gathered  no  hope  that  the  just  requisitions  of 
the  Government  of  India  will  ever  be  complied  with,  or  that  the  secu- 
rity of  the  frontier  can  be  provided  for  otherwise  than  by  depriving  the 
government  of  Bhootan  and  its  subjects  of  the  means  and  opportunity  of 
future  aggression. 

The  Governor  General  in  Council  has  therefore  reluctantly  resolved 
to  occupy  permanently  and  annex  to  British  territory  the  Bengal  Doars 
of  Bhootan,  and  so  much  of  the  Hill  Territory,  including  the  Forts  of 
Dallingkot,  Pasakha,  and  Dewangiri,  as  may  be  necessary  to  command 


168  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

BHOOTaN.  the  passes,  and  to  prevent  hostile  or  predatory  incursions  of  Bhootanese 

No.  C1X.     *n*°  ^ne  Darjeeling  District  or  into  the  plains  below.     A  Military  Force 

amply  sufficient  to  occupy  this  tract  and  to  overcome  all  resistance,  has 

been  assembled  on  the  frontier,  and  will  now  proceed  to  carry  out  this 

resolve. 

All  Chiefs,  Zemindars,  Munduls,  Ryots,  and  other  inhabitants  of 
the  tract  in  question  are  hereby  required  to  submit  to  the  authority  of 
the  British  Government,  to  remain  quietly  in  their  homes,  and  to  render 
assistance  to  the  British  troops  and  to  the  Commissioner  who  is  charged 
with  the  administration  of  the  tract.  Protection  of  life  and  property  and 
a  guarantee  of  all  private  rights  is  offered  to  those  who  do  not  resist,  and 
strict  justice  will  be  done  to  all.  The  lands  will  be  moderately  assessed 
and  all  oppression  and  extortion  will  be  absolutely  prohibited. 

The  future  boundary  between  the  territories  of  the  Queen  of  Eng- 
land and  those  of  Bhootan  will  be  surveyed  and  marked  off,  and  the  au- 
thority of  the  government  of  Bhootan  within  this  boundary  will  cease 
for  ever. 

By  order  of  the  Governor  General  in  Council, 

H.  M.  DuitAND,  Colonel, 
Secy,  to  the  Govt,  of  India. 


COOCH  BEHAR.  cooch 

BEHAR. 
{Vol.  I.,  pages  151—153.-)  No#  cx# 

On  11th  March  1862,  Rajah  Nurinder  Narain  received  a  Sunnud 
(No.  CX.)  guaranteeing  to  him  the  right  of  adoption.  He  died  in 
August  1863,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  infant  and  only  legitimate  son 
Nirp  Indur  Narain.  A  British  Officer  has  been  appointed  Commissioner 
to  conduct  the  administration  during  the  minority.  The  abolition  of 
slavery  in  Cooch  Behar  has'  been  formally  proclaimed. 


No.  CX. 

Copy  of  Sunnud  to  Bajah  of  Cooch  Behar,  dated  11th  March  1862. 

Her  Majesty  being  desirous  that  the  governments  of  the  several 
Princes  and  Chiefs  of  India  who  now  govern  their  own  territories  should 
be  perpetuated,  and  that  the  representation  and  dignity  of  their  Houses 
should  be  continued,  I  hereby,  in  fulfilment  of  this  desire,  convey  to  you 
the  assurance  that,  on  failure  of  natural  heirs,  the  adoption  by  yourself 
and  future  rulers  of  your  State  of  a  successor  according  to  Hindoo  law 
and  the  customs  of  your  race  will  be  recognized  and  confirmed. 