

Article  1. 

That  His  Highness  Dato  Tumongong  Abubakar  Sri  Maharajah, 
for  himself,  his  heirs  and  successors,  doth  hereby  for  ever  renounce, 
release,  and  make  over  unto  the  British  Government  all  claim  and 
demand  whatsoever  to  the  said  sum  of  fifteen  thousand  Spanish  Dollars. 

Article  £. 

That  it  is  mutually  stipulated  and  agreed  between  the  parties  hereto 
that  Articles  sixth  and  seventh  of  the  aforesaid  Treaty,  so  far  as  they  relate 
vol.  vn.  3  a 


378  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

MALAYAN  to  any  claims  or  rights  between  the  British  Government  and  His  Highness 
ri.N INSULA  Dato   Tumongong  Abubakar   Sri   Maharajah,  his   heirs  or  successors 
No.  CXIV.    shall  be  considered  as  abrogated  and    annulled  by  this  agreement,  an 
they  are  hereby  abrogated  and  annulled  accordingly. 

Bone  and  concluded  at  Singapore  the  nineteenth  day  of  December  in 
the  year  of  the  Christian  era  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixth-two 
corresponding  with  the  twenty-eighth  day  of  the  month  of  Jemmadee- 
ool-Akhir  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  one  thousand  two  hundred  and 
seventy-nine. 


CIS-SUTLEJ  STATES. 
(Vol.  IL,  pages  273—314.) 

Mumdote. — The  Chief  of  Mumdote  was  not  brought  under  British 
protection  with  the  other  Cis  Sutlej  States  in  1809,  but  remained  a 
feudatory  of  the  Lahore  Durbar,  to  whom  he  furnished  a  contingent  of 
one  hundred  horse.  The  Mumdote  contingent  fought  on  the  side  of  the 
Seikh  Army  during  the  Sutlej  campaign,  but  towards  the  close  of  the 
war,  the  Chief  Jemalooddeen  deserted  to  the  side  of  the  British  and  sub- 
sequently rendered  good  service,  for  which  he  received  the  title  of  Nawab, 
and  his  contingent  was  reduced  to  fifty  horse  in  time  of  peace  and 
seventy-five  in  war.  No  enquiry  seems  to  have  been  made  regarding  the 
status  of  the  Chief,  nor  were  his  relations  to  the  British  Government 
defined. 

The  Nawab  so  grievously  misgoverned  his  State  and  misused  his 
powers,  that  in  1856,  after  deliberate  enquiry,  the  British  Government 
declared  his  sovereign  powers  to  be  forfeited  for  ever,  reduced  the  State 
to  the  position  of  a  mere  jaghire,  and  removed  the  Nawab  to  Lahore, 
where  he  continued  to  receive  the  surplus  revenues  of  Mumdote  after 
the  expenses  of  its  management  by  British  Officials  were  defrayed. 

In  1863  the  Nawab  died,  and  the  British  Government  considered 
themselves  bound  to  reviye  the  fief  in  the  person  and  family  of  his 
brother  Jelalooddeen,  who  has  been  recognized  as  Nawab  of  Mumdote, 
with  powers  carefully  restricted  by  Sunnud  No.  CXV. 


380 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


CIS-situm 

STATES. 
No.  CXV. 


No.  CXV. 

Sunnttd  conferring  the  fief  of  Mumdote  upon  Nawab  Jelalooddeen. 