

Be  assured  that  nothing  shall  disturb  the  engagement  thus  made  to 
you  so  long  as  your  House  is  loyal  to  the  Crown  and  faithful  to  the 
conditions  of  the  Treaties,  grants,  or  engagements  which  record  its  obli- 
gations to  the  British  Government. 

(Signed)        Canning. 


i  ack  CUTTACK  TRIBUTARY  MEHALS. 

TRIBUTAUY 
MEHALS.  {Vol.  I.,  pages  184 — 198.) 


No  CXI. 


On  11th  March  1862,  Sunnuds  (No.  CXI.)  guaranteeing  the  right 
of  adoption  were  conferred  on  the  Chiefs  of  the  sixteen  Tributary 
Mehals. 


No.  CXI. 
Copt  of  a  Sunnud  to  sixteen  Tributary  Mehals  of  Cuttack,  dated  11th  March  1862. 

Her  Majesty  being  desirous  that  the  governments  of  the  several 
Princes  and  Chiefs  of  India  who  now  govern  their  own  territories  should 
be  perpetuated,  and  that  the  representation  and  dignity  of  their  Houses 
should  be  continued,  in  fulfilment  of  this  desire  this  Sunnud  is  given  to 
you  to  convey  to  you  the  assurance  that  on  failure  of  natural  heirs,  the 
British  Government  will  permit  and  confirm  any  adoption  of  a  successor 
made  by  yourself  or  by  any  future  Chief  of  your  State  that  may  be  in 
accordance  with  Hindoo  law  and  the  customs  of  your  race. 

Be  assured  that  nothing  shall  disturb  the  engagement  thus  made  to 
you  so  long  as  your  House  is  loyal  to  the  Crown  and  faithful  to  the  con- 
ditions of  the  Treaties,  grants,  or  engagements  which  record  its  obliga- 
tions to  the  British  Government. 

(Signed)         Canning. 


No.  CXII. 


BURMAH.  BURMAH. 

{Vol.  L,  pages  199—221.) 

In  May  1862  the  Chief  Commissioner  of  British  Burmah  was 
instructed  to  visit  Ava  for  the  purpose  of  coming  to  an  understanding 
with  the  Court  of  Burmah  on  several  questions,  more  especially  relating 
to  matters  of  commercial  importance,  which  were  then  under  discussion. 
On  10th  November  1862  he  concluded  a  Treaty  (No.  CXII.)  for  the 
protection  of  trade  and  the  establishment  of  free  intercourse  with 
Burmah.  An  Agent  to  the  Chief  Commissioner  was  appointed  to  reside 
at  Mandalay  to  prevent  misunderstandings  arising  as  to  the  provisions 
of  the  Treaty. 


No.  CXII. 

Teeaty  with  the  King  of  Burmah,  dated  the  10th  November  1862. 

On  the  10th  day  of  November  1862,  answering  to  the  5th  day  of 
the  waning  moon  Tatshoungmon  1224,  Lieutenant  Colonel  A.  P.  Phayre, 
Chief  Commissioner  of  British  Burmah,  having  been  duly  empowered 
by  His  Excellency  the  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of  Elgin  and  Kincar- 
dine, k.  t.  and  g.  c.  b.,  Viceroy  and  Governor  General  of  India,  and 
Woongyee  Thado  Mengyee  Maha  Menghla-thee-ha-thoo,  having  been 
duly  empowered  by  His  Majesty  the  King  of  Burmah,  concluded  the  fol- 
lowing Treaty : — 