

Bussahir. — In  1864  the  Rajah  of  Bussahir  leased  (No.  CXVI.)  the 
forests  in  his  State  to  the  British  Government  for  a  period  of  fifty  years, 
receiving  a  counter-engagement,  which  contained  a  pledge  in  respect  to 
the  system  of  forest  management  to  be  pursued. 


No.  CXVI. 

The  Rajah  of  Bussahir  having  found  the  management  of  his  forests 
troublesome,  desires  to  lease  them  to  the  British  Government  for  a  term 
of  fifty  years,  and  requests  the  Superintendent  Hill  States  to  submit  the 
following  proposals  for  the  approval  of  the  Punjab  government  :— 

Article  1. 

I  make  over  the  entire  control  of  the  whole  forests  of  Bussahir  to 
the  British  Government,  who  will  appoint  an  English  Officer  to  take 
charge  of  the  said  forests. 

Article  2. 

No  contractor  or  other  person  shall  be  permitted  to  cut  timber  in 
any  forest  of  my  dominions,  except  in  places  and  under  conditions  speci- 
fied by  the  Officer  appointed  to  be  Conservator  of  Forests. 

Article  3. 

For  every  tree  felled  in  the  forests  of  Bussahir  by  authority  of  the 
Conservator,  the  British  Government  shall  pay  at  the  following  rates  : — 

Deodar  (Kelu)       ...   ■      3  8  0 

Walnut  (Akhrot) 2  0  0 

Birch  (Bhojputea) 1  8  0 

Other  kinds  2  0  0 


treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 
Article  4. 


383 


The  accounts  shall  be  made  up  quarterly  or  half-yearly  and  ren- 
dered, and  payments  made  at  the  above-mentioned  rates  quarterly  or 
half-yearly. 

Article  5. 

I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  establishments  appointed  by  the 
Forest  Officer.  The  British  Government  will  defray  all  expenses  con- 
nected with  the  conservancy  of  the  forests,  felling  and  transporting  tim- 
ber to  the  Sutlej,  and  floating  down  to  the  depots. 


HILL 
STATES. 

No.  CXVI. 


Article  6. 

I  agree  that  the  Officer  appointed  to  the  forest  should  have  power 
of  a  Subordinate  Magistrate,  1st  Class,  defined  in  Section  23  of  Act  XXV 
1861,  to  try  and  decide  cases  of  offences  against  property  and  property 
marks. 

Article  7. 

I  will  give  every  assistance  required  by  the  Conservator  in  the 
exercise  of  the  above  powers  for  apprehending  offenders,  or  supposed 
offenders,  and  for  confirming  the  penalties  awarded  by  him. 


Article  8. 

I  hereby  grant  to  the  British  Government  a  lease  of  the  forests 
of  Bussahir  for  50  (fifty)  years,  commencing  from  such  date  as  the 
government  may  confirm  the  lease. 


Article  9. 

I  will  furnish  an  Indent  to  the  government  for  any  timber  I  may 
require,  specifying  the  amount  and  kinds  of  wood  and  the  purpose  for 
which  it  is  to  be  applied. 


Ill  1.1. 

STATES. 


384  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnttds. 

Article  10. 
The  Zemindars  shall  be  permitted  to  cut  timber  for  fuel,  charcoal, 
No.  CXM.    housebuilding,  and  vine  frames.     They  are  not  to  be  prohibited  from 
cutting  down  the  inferior  forests  for  purposes  of  cultivation. 