

Article  7. 

Traders  from  the  British  territory  who  may  desire  to  travel  in  the 
Burmese  territory,  either  by  land  or  by  water,  through  the  whole  extent 
of  the  Irrawaddy  River,  shall  conform  to  the  customs  of  the  Burmese 
territory,  and  shall  be  allowed  to  travel  in  such  manner  as  they  please, 
without  hindrance  by  the  Burmese  ruler,  and  to  purchase  whatever  they 
may  require.  British  merchants  will  be  allowed  to  settle  and  to  have 
lands  for  the  erection  of  houses  of  business  in  any  part  of  the  Burmese 
territory. 

Article  8. 

Should  the  British  ruler,  within  one  year  after  the  conclusion  of 
this  Treaty,  abolish  the  duties  now  taken  at  Thayet  Myo  and  Toungoo, 
the  Burmese  ruler,  with  a  regard  to  the  benefit  of  the  people  of  his 
country,  will,  if  so  inclined,  after  one,  two,  three,  or  four  years,  abolish 
the  duties  now  taken  at  Maloon  and  Toungoo  (in  the  Burmese  territory) . 

Article  9. 

People  from  whatever  country  or  nation  who  may  wish  to  proceed  to 
the    British  territory,  the  Burmese  ruler  shall  allow  to  pass  without 


872  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

BURMAH.    hindrance.     People  from  whatever  country  who  may  desire  to  proceed  to 


No.  CXII.    the  Burmese  territory,  the  British  ruler  shall  allow  to  pass    without 
hindrance. 

(Signed)  Arthur  Purves  Phayre,  Lieut. -Colonel 3 

Appointed  by  the  Viceroy  and  Govr.-Genl. 

(Signed)    Woongyee  Thado  Mengyee  Maha  Menghla- 

thee-ha-thoo, 
Plenipotentiary  to  His  Majesty  the  King  of  Burmah. 


Ratified  by  the  Viceroy  and  Governor  General  of  India  in  Council 
this  day  the  13th  of  December  1862. 

Fort  William,  -v  (Signed)         H.  M.  Durand, 

The  \Uh  December  1862.  J  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India. 


MALAYAN  PENINSULA. 

{Vol.  L,  pages  223—300.) 

Jo/wre. — In  1862  the  Tumongong  of  Johore,  with  the  sanction  of 
the  British  Government,  entered  into  a  Treaty  (No.  CXIII.)  of  mutual 
defence  and  protection  with  the  Bandahara  of  Pahang,  under  the  sixth 
Article  of  which  all  disputes  between  them  are  to  be  referred  to  the 
arbitration  of  the  British  Government,  without  whose  knowledge  and 
consent  neither  party  is  to  maintain  correspondence  with  any  foreign 
power. 

The  position  of  the  Tumongong,  with  reference  to  the  lands  left  him 
in  Singapore  under  the  sixth  and  seventh  Articles  of  the  Treaty  of  1824, 
was  very  unsatisfactory.  By  a  Treaty  (No.  CXIV.)  concluded  on  19th 
December  1862,  these  Articles  were  abrogated  so  far  as  they  relate  to 
any  claims  or  rights  between  the  British  Government  and  the  Tumon- 
gong,  his  heirs  or  successors. 

The  following  regulations  have  been  established  for  the  trial  of 
British  subjects  or  persons  enjoying  British  protection  within  the 
territories  of  the  Tumongong  : — 