


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  375 

Ibini  Rajah  Bandahara  Ton  Talfir  Sri  Maharajah  of  Pahang  and  his  MALAYAN. 
successors,  and  shall  continue  to  aid  him  by  all  the  means  in  his  power  PENINSULA 
until  such  enemies  shall  have  been  overcome,  expelled,  or  suppressed.  No.  CXIII. 

Article  4. 
Whereas  doubts  have  been  expressed  by  others  as  to  the  boundary 
between  the  two  countries  of  Johore  and  Pahang,  it  is  hereby  declared 
that  the  River  Endow  has  been  heretofore  and  shall  continue  hereafter 
to  be  the  boundary  on  the  main  land,  and  that  the  Island  of  Pulo  Tioman, 
and  all  islands  to  the  south  of  the  latitude  of  its  northern  extremity, 
are  and  shall  be  portions  of  the  territory  of  Johore,  and  all  islands  to  the 
north  of  that  latitude  are  and  shall  be  portions  of  the  territory  of  Pahang. 

Article  5. 
The  subjects  of  each  of  the  contracting  parties  shall  be  entitled  to 
trade  in  the  territory  of  the  other,  and  to  export  or  import  merchandise, 
upon  the  same  terms  and  with  the  same  privileges  as  the  subjects  of 
such  territory,  and  neither  party  nor  their  respective  successors  will 
impose  heavier  taxes,  imports,  or  duties  at  any  time  hereafter  upon  the 
subjects  or  goods  of  subjects  of  the  other  than  upon  his  or  their  own 
subjects  or  the  goods  of  his  or  their  own  subjects. 

Article  6. 

The  parties  hereto  agree  that  subjects  of  the  British  Government 
shall  be  entitled  to  trade  in  their  respective  territories  upon  the  same 
terms  and  with  the  same  privileg-es  as  the  subjects  of  the  said  parties 
hereto. 

Article  7. 

The  parties  hereto  agree  and  declare  for  themselves  and  their  res- 
pective successors  that  should  any  dispute  or  difference  arise  between 
them  or  their  successors  at  any  time  hereafter,  either  with  regard  to  this 
Treaty  or  the  matters  contained  in  it,  or  with  regard  to  any  other  matter 
or  thing  whatever,  whether  national,  political,  or  private,  the  same  shall 
be  and  is  hereby  referred  to  the  friendly  mediation  and  settlement  of  the 
British  Government,  whose  award  or  decision  shall  be  final  and  binding- 
on  both  parties. 


37G  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    StINNTDS. 

MALAYAN  ARTICLE*  8. 

PENINSULA  ,pjic  pgjUgg  hereto  agree  and  engage  eaeh  witli  the  other  and  their 

No*.  C.\ I II   Puccessors  that  neither  shall  enter  into  any  alliance   or  maintain  any 
c  oonwpondonoo  with  any  foreign  power  or  potentate  whatsoever  without 

the  knowledge  and  consent  of  the  other  and  of  the  said  British  Govern- 
ment. 

Bone  at  Singapore  this  nineteenth  day  of  Bole  Haijah  in  the  Maho- 
medan  year  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  seventy-eight,  corresponding  with 
the  seventeenth  day  of  June  in  the  Christian  year  one  thousand  eight  hundred 
and  sixty-two,  in  presence  of  the  Honourable  Colonel  Orfeur  Cavenagh, 
Governor  of  Prince  of  Wales'  Island,  Singapore,  and  Malacca. 