

That  should  the  Government  of  India  at  any  time  and  for  any  rea- 
son or  cause  decide  on  withdrawing  the  garrison  of  British  troops,  in 
such  case  the  fort  would  be  occupied  by  myself  in  such  force  as  is 
deemed  sufficient  for  its  security. 

That  with  reference  to  this  subject,  I  have  requested  Major  Meade 
Agent  Governor  General,  and  Major  Hutchinson,  the  Political  Agent, 
to  submit  certain  requests  to  your  Excellency,  which  I  hope  may  meet 
with  favorable  consideration. 

May  I  always  be  considered  a  well-wisher,  and  occasionally  be  fa- 
vored with  accounts  of  your  Excellency's  welfare. 


To  the  Maharajah  of  Gwaliob. 

My  honoured  and  valued  Friend, — I  have  received  with  pleasure 
your  Highnesses  friendly  letter,  dated  29th  March  1864,  conveying,  on 
certain  conditions,  your  written  and  formal  consent  to  the  occupation  of 
the  fort  of  Gwalior  by  British  troops  as  long  as  the  Government  of 
India  may  deem  such  to  be  advisable. 

I  aoree  to  these  conditions,  viz.,  1st,  that  your  Highness'  flag  shall 
continue  to  fly  from  the  ramparts  of  the  fort,  and  that  your  Highness 
will  be  saluted  from  its  guns  according  to  established  custom ;  Znd,  that 
if  the  Government  of  India  should  at  any  time  and  for  any  reason  or 
cause  decide  on  withdrawing  the  garrison  of  British  troops  from  the 
fort,  in  such  case  the  fort  will  be  occupied  by  your  Highness'  troops  in 
such  force  as  may  be  deemed  sufficient  for  its  security. 

In  consideration  of  your  Highness  having  consented  to  the  above 
arrangement  and  of  the  friendship  which  the  British  Government  enter- 
tatains  for  you,  I,  provided  it  be  decided  to  retain  the  British  troops 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  393 

at  Morar,  will  agree  to  modify  the  ninth  Article  of  the  Treaty  concluded     SINDIA. 


with  your  Highness  on  12th  December  I860,  so  far  as  to  increase  the    n0.  CXIX. 
number   of    guns  which  your    Highness   is   permitted  to  possess,  from 
thirty-six   (36),  which  is  the  number  fixed  in  Article  nine  of  the  above 
Treaty,  to  forty-eight  (48). 

Fort  William,  Your  Highness'  Sincere  Friend, 

The  lZtA  April  1864.     J  (Signed)         J.  Lawrence. 


To  the  Mahabajah  of  Gwalioe. 

My  honoured  and  valued  Friend, —  I  regret  that  it  has  not  been  in 
my  power  to  convey  to  you  sooner  a  definite  decision  on  the  subject  of 
the  fort  of  Gwalior.  As  I  have  now  resolved  to  maintain  a  cantonment 
at  Morar,  and  definitely  to  accept  your  Highness'  offer  of  the  retention  of 
the  fort  of  Gwalior  by  British  troops,  I  hasten  to  fulfil  the  promise  made 
to  you  in  my  letter  of  12th  April,  and  to  inform  you  that  I  consent  to 
modify  the  ninth  Article  of  the  Treaty  concluded  at  Benares  on  12  th 
December  1860,  which  shall  in  future  be  read  as  follows  : — 