

Article  3. 

The  Chief  of  Bughat  shall  respect  the  revenue  settlements  which 
were  made,  and  the  rights  of  the  under-tenants  which  were  re- 
cognized, by  the  British  Government  while  the  estate  of  Bughat  was 
under  its  administration. 

Be  assured  that  so  long  as  you  and  your  successors  remain  loyal  to 
the  British  Crown  and  faithful  in  the  discharge  of  your  obligations  to 
the  British  Government,  the  estate  of  Bughat  shall  remain  to  your  House 
a  perpetual  possession. 

(Signed)         John  Lawrence. 
Bated  \Uh  July  1864. 


No.  CXIX. 


SINDIA.  •  SINDIA. 

{Vol.  IV. ,  pages  199—280.) 

After  the  capture  of  Gwalior  by  the  force  under  Sir  Hugh  Rose 
in  1858,  the  fort  of  Gwalior  continued  to  be  occupied  by  British  troops. 
During  the  negotiations,  however,  which  ended  in  the  Treaty  of  12  th 
December  1860,  Lord  Canning  promised  that  the  fort  should  be  restored 
to  Sindia,  when  this  could  with  safety  be  done.  This  promise  was 
repeated  to  Sindia  by  Lord  Elgin.  Its  fulfilment  depended  on  the 
withdrawal  of  the  British  force  from  Morar  to  some  more  eligible  sta- 
tion, which  was  at  that  time  contemplated.  It  was  finally  decided  in 
1864  that  the  cantonment  of  Morar  should  be  maintained,  and  it  there- 
fore became  necessary  that  the  Gwalior  fort  should  continue  to  be  gar- 
risoned by  British  troops.  Sindia  agreed  (No.  CXIX.)  to  give  up  his 
right  to  the  restoration  of  the  fort  on  receiving  an  increase  of  twelve  guns 
to  his  Artillery,  and  on  condition  that  his  flag  should  fly  on  the  ramparts 
of  the  fort ;  that  he  should  be  saluted  from  its  guns ;  and  that  if  at  any 
time  the  British  Government  should  withdraw  from  its  occupation,  he 
should  be  allowed  to  occupy  it  with  his  own  troops.  The  documents 
recording  these  arrangements,  viz.,  Sindia's  letter  of  29th  March,  and 
the  Governor  General's  letters  of  12th  April  and  21st  December  1864, 
which  modify  the  ninth  Article  of  the  Treaty  of  1860,  are  held  to 
constitute  supplementary  Articles  of  that  Treaty. 


No.  CXIX. 

Translation  of  a  Khttbeeta  from  His  Highness  Maharajah  Sindia,  k.  s.  i.„  to 
the  address  of  His  Excellency  the  Right  Honourable  Sir  John  Lawrence, 
<j.  c.  b.,  k.  8.  i.,  Viceroy  and  Governor  General  of  Iudia,  dated  29th  March 
1864. 

After  the  usual  compliments. — Your  friend  has  become  aware  that 
your  Excellency  would  wish  to  continue  the  occupation  of  the  fortress 
of  Gwalior  by  a  British  garrison  in  the  event  of  the  maintenance  of 
the  Morar   cantonment  as   the  Head  Quarters  of  the   subsidiary  force, 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

SINDIA.  and  thai,  with  reference  to  intimation  given  to  your  sincere  friend  by 
No  CXIX~  Lords  Canning-  and  Elgin,  the  late  Viceroys  and  Governors  General,  that 
the  fort  should  be  made  over  to  your  affectionate  friend,  notwithstand- 
ing these  assurances,  it  is  the  free  wish  of  my  heart,  and  I  hereby  convey 
my  written  and  formal  consent  to  the  occupation  of  the  fort  of  Gwalior  by 
British  troops  as  long  as  the  Government  of  India  may  deem  such  to  be 
advisable,  on  the  condition  that  my  flag  continues  to  fly  from  the  ram- 
parts, and  I  am  saluted  from  its  guns  according  to  established  custom. 