

Done  at  Zanzibar  this  second  day  of  October,  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  forty -five  of  the  year  of  Christ,  and  twenty -nine  day  of 
Rumzan  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  sixty-one  of  the  Hegira. 

(Signed)         Seid  Saeed  Bin  Sultan, 

Imaum  of  Muscat. 
(Signed)         Atkins  Hameeton,  Captain, 
On  behalf  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  Her  Heirs  and  Successors. 

And  whereas  it  is  expedient  and  necessary  that  effectual  provision 
should  be  made  for  carrying  into  execution  the  provisions  of  the  said 
agreement:  be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  Queen's  most  excellent  Majesty, 
by  and  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  Lords  spiritual  and  temporal 
and  Commons  in  this  present  Parliament  assembled,  and  by  the  authority 

Power    to    Commander,    of      of  the   same>   tliat  {t  sha11  be  lawful  foj  the 
drips  of  war  and  of  the  East     Commander  and  other  Officers  of  Her  Ma- 

India  Company  to  visit  vessels       .  ,,.  n  ».»*»_*.  <r    a; 

belonging  to  subjects  of  the  Im-     jesty  s  ships   of  war   or   of  the   East  India 

aum  of  Muscat,  within  certain      n  ,        •  •,  j    j   •    •       •       

limits,  suspected  of  being  en-     Company  to  visit   and  detain  in   any  seas, 

gaged  in  the  slave  trade.  except  within  the  limits  exempted  by  the 

terms  of  the  third  Article  of  the  said  agreement,  any  merchant  vessel 
belonging  to  the  subjects  of  the  Imaum  of  Muscat  whjch  shall  upon 
reasonable  grounds  be  suspected  of  being   engaged  in  the  export  of 


APPENDIX.  V 

slaves  from  the  African  dominions  of  the  Imaum  of  Muscat,  or  the  im-  MUSCAT, 
portation  of  slaves  from  any  part  of  Africa  into  his  possessions  in  Asia, 
excepting  such  only  as  are  engaged  in  the  transport  of  slaves  from  one 
port  to  another  of  his  own  dominions  in  Africa,  between  the  port  of 
Lamoo  to  the  north  and  its  dependencies,  the  northern  limit  of  which  is 
the  north  point  of  Knyhoo  Island  in  1°57'  south  latitude,  and  the  port 
of  Keelwa  to  the  south  and  its  dependencies,  the  southern  limit  of 
which  is  the  Songa  Manara  or  Pagoda  Point  in  9°2'  south  latitude,  in- 
cluding the  Islands  of  Zanzibar,  Pemba,  and  Monfea,  or  any  vessel  fitted 
out  for  that  purpose,  and  to  send  or  carry  away  such  vessel,  together 
with  its  masters,  sailors,  passengers,  slaves,  and  cargo,  for  the  purpose  of 
such  vessel  being  brought  to  adjudication  as  hereinafter  mentioned. 

II.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  High  Court  of 
As  to  the  trial  of  vessels  en-     Admiralty  of  England,  and  for  all  Courts  of 

gaged  in  the  slave  trade.  Vice- Admiralty  in  any  dominions  of  Her  Ma- 

