

,T     ,        ,        ,  .  ,       , ,      demned  as  aforesaid  may  be  taken  into  Her 
Vessels  condemned  to  he  sold  ]  J 

for  Her  Majesty's  service,  or     Majesty's  service,  upon  payment  of  such  sum 

as  the  Lord  High  Admiral  or  the  Lords 
Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty  shall  deem  a  proper  price  for  the  same, 
or  if  not  so  taken,  shall  be  broken  up  and  demolished,  and  the  materials 
thereof  shall  be  publicly  sold  in  separate  parts,  and  the  proceeds  thereof 
shall  be  paid  to  such  person  or  persons  as  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Ma- 
jesty's Treasury  may  appoint  to  receive  the  same. 

VI.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  where  any  ship  or  vessel  employed  or 

engaged  in  such   illicit  traffic  in   slaves,  in 
Captors  of  vessels  shall,  after         •  i  *.•  p  n.  -j       _  ±        iiik 

the  same  are  condemned,  he  en-     violation  of  the   said   agreement,    shall  be 

titled  to  the  proceeds  belong-  seized  by  any  ship  or  vessel  belonging  to 
ing  to  Her  Majesty.  jjr  o     o 

Her  Majesty    or  the  East  India  Company 

and  afterwards  condemned,  there  shall  be  paid  to  the  captors  the  net  pro- 
ceeds to  which  Her  Majesty  is  entitled,  the  same  to  be  distributed  in  the 
manner  hereinafter  directed  for  the  distribution  of  bounties  on  slaves 
taken  on  board  the  said  vessels. 


APPENDIX.  Vll 

VII.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  there  shall  be  paid  to  the  Commander,    MUSCAT. 

Officers,  and  crews  of   Her  Majesty's  ships, 

A  bounty    of  £5    for    every  '  J    /  1  » 

slave  found  on  board  of  vessels     or  the  Commander,  Officers,  and  crews  of 

seized  and  condemned.  ^  ghips  of    the  Eagt    India     Company,    a 

bounty  of  five  pounds  for  every  man,  woman,  and  child  slave  seized  and 
found  on  board  any  ship  or  vessel,  taken  and  condemned  in  pursuance 
of  the  provisions  of  the  said  agreement  and  of  this  Act ;  such  bounty  to 
be  issued  and  paid  by  order  from  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's 
Treasury,  and  to  be  distributed  to  and  amongst  the  captors  aforesaid  in 
such  manner  and  proportions  as  Her  Majesty  shall  think  fit  to  order  by 
any  order  in  Council,  made  or  to  be  made,  or  by  any  proclamation  for 
that  purpose. 

VIII.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  where  any  ship  or  vessel  which  shall 

have  been  seized  and  condemned  under  the 

A  bounty  to  be  paid   on   ton-  .  .  ,1111 

nage  of  slave  sbips  captured  and  provisions  ot  the  said  agreement  shall  have 
dcmolisbed.  ^ecn  ^r  g^^  ^Q  demolished,  and  the  materials 

thereof  publicly  sold  in  separate  parts,  as  well  as  her  cargo,  there  shall 
be  paid  to  the  Commanders,  Officers,  and  crews  of  Her  Majesty's  ships, 
or  of  those  of  the  East  India  Company,  in  addition  to  the  amount  of 
the  proceeds  of  such  sale  as  hereinfore  mentioned,  a  further  bounty  on 
the  tonnage  of  such  ship  or  vessel  at  the  rate  of  thirty  shillings  for 
every  ton  of  such  tonnage. 