

(Signed)     Joalla  Doss,  Vuzeer. 

„  SURJEET,  „ 


futtehram,         „ 
Heeranund,         „ 
Joalla  Doss, 
goverdhun  doss. 
Petumber  Doss. 


(Signed)     Sham  Shere  Sing, 
Rajah  of  Bussahir  and 

Rampore. 
Simla,  28lk  June  1864. 

In  presence  of 
Lt.  Col.  R.  C.  Lawrence,  c.  b., 
Supdt.,  Hill  States, 
and  Dr.  Cleghorn,  m.  d., 
Conservator  Genl.  of  Forests. 


TRANS    SUTLEJ   STATES.  trans 

SUTLEJ 
{Vol.  II, pages  370—385.)  states. 

Chumba.— In  1861  the  Rajah  of  Chumba  leased  (No.  CXVII.)  all 
the  forests  in  his  territories  to  the  British  Government. 

Bughat. — By  the  Sunnud  granted  to  the  Chief  of  Bughat  on  31st 
January  1862,*  the  tribute  of  Rupees  2,000  was  secured  by  reserving  lands 
yielding  a  gross  rental  of  Rupees  2,500,  including  the  estates  of  General 
Innes.  The  family,  however,  complained  of  the  total  loss  of  vassalage  and 
cesses  to  which  they  were  subjected  by  this  arrangement ;  and  as  General 
Innes  engaged  to  pay  the  revenue  on  his  estates,  viz.,  Rupees  1,002-15, 
without  cost  to  government,  the  British  Government  consented  to  retain 
only  those  estates  and  to  restore  the  other  lands  to  Bughat,  receiving  the 
balance  of  the  tribute,  Rupees  997-1,  in  money.  These  new  arrange- 
ments were  embodied  in  a  fresh  Sunnud  (No.  CXVIII.)  dated  18th  July 
1864,  in  which  also  an  additional  clause  was  inserted,  binding  the  Chief 
to  respect  the  revenue  settlements  made  and  the  rights  of  the  under- 
tenants recognized  while  the  estate  was  under  British  administration. 


No.  CXVII. 

Draft  of  an  Agreement  for  the  lease  of  the  Chumba  Forests. 

The  Rajah  of  Chumba  finding  great  difficulty  in  arranging  for  the 

preservation  of  the  forests  in  his  territory  has  requested  the  aid  of  the 

British  Government  and  has  agreed  to  give  to  the  British  Officer  whom 

the  government  may   appoint  for  this  purpose  the  sole  control  of  the 

forests   in  the  territory  of  Chumba.     To  give  effect,  therefore,  to  the 

wishes  of  the  Rajah,  the  following  arrangements  are  agreed  to  by  the 

Rajah  of  Chumba  on  the  one  hand  and  by  and   on  behalf  of  the  British 

Government  on  the  other  hand  : — 

Article  1. 

The  sole  control  of  all  forests  in  the  territory  of  Chumba  is  vested 
in  the  British  Government,  who  shall  appoint  an  Officer  to  be  Conserv- 
ator of  the  same. 

*  See  Vol.  I.,  page  347. 
vol.  vii.  3  b 


386  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS.,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

TRANS  AKTICLE    2. 

SUTLEJ 
STATES. 


No.  CXVII. 


Tlie  British.  Government  shall  he  at  liberty  to  place  under  strict 
conservancy  management  such  forest  tracts  as  it  shall  from  time  to  time 
select,  and  to  lay  down  such  general  rules  as  it  thinks  proper  for  the 
control  of  all  forests. 