

Article  7. 

The  British  Government  shall  manage  the  Chumba  forests  in 
accordance  with  the  general  system  of  forest  management  which  may  be 
in  force  for  similar  forests  within  the  territories  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment, and  for  the  preservation  of  the  same  shall  maintain  such  estab- 
lishments as  it  shall  consider  suitable  in  each  case.  The  British  Govern- 
ment will  defray  all  the  expenses  of  these  establishments  connected  with 
the  conservancy  of  forests  except  as  provided  for  in  paragraph  5,  Clauses 
2  and  3. 

Article  8. 

The  British  Government,  or  the  contractors  employed  by  it,  will 
defray  all  expenses  of  felling  and  transporting  the  timber,  and  they  shall 
be  at  liberty  to  dispose  of  it  by  sale  or  otherwise  at  their  pleasure,  subject 
to  no  other  claim  from  the   Rajah  than  the  payments   referred  to  in 


388  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

TRANS      paragraph  5  of  the  present   Agreement ;  and  it  is  distinctly  understood 
KJ     that  any  former  or  customary  charge  on  the  employes  of    the  British 
STATES.     Qovernment^  such  as  "  Dulalee,"  &c,  is  now  abolished. 
No-CXVII. 

Article  9. 

All  timber  passing  down  the  Rivers  Chenab  and  Ravee  across  the 
boundary  of  the  Chumba  territory,  unless  covered  by  a  pass  from  the 
Conservator  and  duly  marked  in  the  manner  described  in  the  pass,  shall 
be  presumed  to  be  the  property  of  the  British  Government,  and  may  be 
taken  possession  of  as  such  by  the  Conservator  or  his  Agents,  and  the 
onus  of  proving  the  timber  to  belong  to  any  other  person  shall  rest  upon 
such  person. 

Article  10. 

The  Conservator  shall  be  authorized  to  exercise  within  the  Chumba 
territory  the  powers  of  a  Subordinate  Magistrate  of  the  1st  Class,  as 
described  in  Act  XXV  of  1861,  for  the  trial  of  offences  against  property, 
and  relating  to  property  marks,  mischief,  assaults  and  contravention  of 
such  forest  rules  as  may  from  time  to  time  be  in  force  in  the  territories 
under  the  government  of  the  Punjab. 

Article  11. 
The  Rajah  engages  to  render  every  aid  required  by  the  Conservator 
in  the  exercise  of  the  above  powers  for  apprehending  offenders  or  sup- 
posed offenders  and  for  enforcing  the  penalties  awarded  by  him. 

Article  12. 
This  agreement  shall  continue  in  force  for  a  period  of  twenty  (20) 
years  from  the  1st  of  May  1864,  but  on  the  expiry  of  that  term  shall 
be  renewable  at  the  pleasure  of  the  British  Government  for  a  further 
period  of  (20)  twenty  years,  and  shall  then  be  again  renewable  in  like 
manner  until  the  term  of  ninety-nine  (99)  years  from  the  original  date 
(1st  May  1864)  shall  have  expired.  At  the  expiry  of  that  period  it 
shall  be  at  the  option  of  the  Rajah  to  renounce  the  agreement  or  enter 
into  a  fresh  one. 