

Article  3. 

Such  exemption  from  these  rules  shall  be  granted,  or  such  other 
arrangements  shall  be  made  as  shall  be  necessary  to  prevent  interference 
with  any  acknowledged  or  established  rights  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Chumba  to  cut  wood  for  their  own  use. 


Article  4. 
No  contractor  or  other  person  shall  be  allowed  to  cut  timber  in  any 
of  the  forests  within  the  Rajah's  territories,  except  with  the  express 
permission  of  the  Conservator,  and  on  the  rates  and  under  the  conditions 
fixed  by  him. 

Article  5. 

For  every  Deodar  (Kelu)  true  felled  on  the  Chenab  and  its  tribu- 
taries and  within  the  Chumba  territory  by  authority  of  the  Conservator, 
the  British  Government  shall  pay  to  the  Rajah  of  Chumba  four  (4)  Ru- 
pees, and  on  the  Ravee  and  its  tributaries  for  each  Deodar  (Kelu)  five  (5) 
Rupees,  and  for  other  trees  as  follows : — 

Akhrot  Walnut  three  (3)  Rupees  per  tree. 

Boorj  Birch  one  Rupee  eight  annas  (1-8-0)  per  tree. 

Susoon  Ash  and  all  other  descriptions,  including  inferior  sorts  of 
pine,  two  (2)  Rupees. 

The  above  rates  shall  be  understood  to  refer  to  trees  above  six  (6) 
feet  in  girth,  measured  at  man's  height  from  the  ground ;  for  trees  of  a 
similar  size  half  rates  shall  be  paid. 

Out  of  this  sum  one  (1)  Rupee  per  tree  is  to  be  set  aside  for  conser- 
vancy purposes,  of  which  the  following  is  to  be  considered  a  detail : — 

I. — Planting  trees,  fencing  in  young  plantations,  and  arboriculture 
generally. 


STATES. 
No.  CXVII. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  387 

II. — For  local  -daks.  TRANS 

The  expenditure  for  such  conservancy  to  be  entirely   under  the  con-     SUTLEJ 
trol  of  the  Conservator,  and  that  of  the  daks  under  the  Rajah's  agency. 

III. — The  balance  from  this  fund  after  paying  expenses  as  above  to 
be  divided  evenly  between  the  Forest  Department  and  the  Rajah,  and  to 
be  expended  at  the  description  of  each  on  the  construction  and  improve- 
ment of  roads  and  communication  generally. 

IV. — That  for  each  of  the  two  official  years,  namely,  1864-65  and 
1865-66,  the  Rajah  will  receive  from  the  Conservator  of  Forests  the  sum 
of  Rupees  one  thousand  (Rupees  1,000)  in  lieu  of  all  his  claims  to  waif  tim- 
bers on  the  Ravee  within  his  territories,  and  that  after  that  period  and 
during  the  currency  of  this  lease  he  will  receive  five  hundred  (Rupees  500) 
per  annum  on  this  account,  all  such  timber  becoming  from  date  of  said 
lease  the  property  of  the  British  Government. 

Article  6. 

The  accounts  shall  be  made  up  half-yearly  to  30th  April  and 
31st  of  October,  and  shall  be  rendered  to  the  Rajah,  and  the  payments 
made  at  the  above-mentioned  rates  half-yearly  in  the  months  of  May 
and  November. 