

Article  9. 

"  The  Military  force  of  all  arms  hereafter  to  be  maintained  by  His 
Highness  shall  at  no  time  exceed — 

"  Artillery. — Forty-eight  (48)  guns,  with  four  hundred  and  eighty 
(480)  gunners/'  / 

11  Infantry.— Five  thousand  (5,000)  drilled  Soldiers." 

"  Cavalry. — Six  thousand  Sowars." 

I  have  directed  that  two  complete  9-pounder  batteries  shall  be 
given  to  your  Highness  from  the  Agra  Magazine. 


Fort  William,  Your  Highness'  Sincere  Friend, 

The  %\st  December  1864.    J  (Signed)         J.  Lawrence. 


vol.  VII.  2  c 


APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX. 


11  and  12  Vic,  Cap.  CXXFIIL 

An  Act  for  carrying  into  effect  the  Agreement  between  Her  Majesty  and  the    MUSCAT 

Irnaum  of  Muscat  for  the  more  effectual  suppression  of  the  Slave  Trade,  dated 

15th  September  1848. 

Whereas  on  the  second  day  of  October,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty- five,  an  agreement  was  concluded  and 
signed  at  Zanzibar  between  Captain  Atkins  Hamerton,  of  Her  Majesty's 
Royal  Navy,  on  behalf  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  King- 
dom of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  and  His  Highness  Seid  Saeed  Bin 
Sultan,  the  Imaum  of  Muscat,  whereby  it  was  agreed  as  follows  :  — 

Article  1. 

His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  hereby  engages  to  prohibit, 
under  the  severest  penalties,  the  export  of  slaves  from  his  African  domi- 
nions, and  to  issue  orders  to  his  Officers  to  prevent  and  suppress  such 
trade. 

Article  2. 

His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  further  engages  to  prohibit, 
under  the  severest  penalties,  the  importation  of  slaves  from  any  part  of 
Africa  into  his  possessions  in  Asia,  and  to  use  his  utmost  influence  with 
all  the  Chiefs  of  Arabia,  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  Persian  Gulf,  in  like 
manner,  to  prevent  the  introduction  of  slaves  from  Africa  into  their  res- 
pective territories. 

Article  3. 

His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  grants  to  the  ships  of  Her 
Majesty's  Navy,  as  well  as  those  of  the  East  India  Company,  permission 
to  seize  and  confiscate  any  vessels  the  property  of  His  Highness  or  of 
his  subjects  carrying  on  slave  trade,  excepting  such  only  as  are  engaged 
in  the  transport  of  slaves  from  one  port  to  another  of  his  own  dominions 


iv  APPENDIX. 

MUSCAT,  in  Africa,  between  the  port  of  Lamoo  to  the  north  and  its  depen- 
""  dencies,  the  northern  limit  of  which  is  the  north  point  of  Knyhoo 
Island  in  1°57'  south  latitu4e,  and  the  port  of  Keelwa  to  the  south  and 
its  dependencies,  the  southern  limit  of  which  is  the  Songa  Manara  or 
Pagoda  Point  in  9°2'  south  latitude,  including  the  Islands  of  Zanzibar, 
Pemba,  and  Monfea. 

Aeticle  4. 

This  agreement  to  commence  and  have  effect  from  the  first  day  of 
January  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty-seven  of  the  year  of 
Christ,  and  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month  of  Mohurrum  one  thousand 
two  hundred  and  sixty-three  of  the  Hegira. 