


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  389 

Provided  that  any  revision  or  modification  of  the  rates  and  mode      TRANS 
of  payment  described  in  Clauses  5,  6  and  13  that  shall  be  agreed  to  by     SUTLEJ 

^sY  A  T 1?  CS 

both  contracting  parties  may  take   place  at  any  time  without  affecting  , 1. 

the  continuance  of  the  agreement  or  any  of  its  provisions.  No#  CXVI1- 

Article  13. 

In  order  to  secure  to  the  Rajah  a  fixed  moderate  income  from 
his  forests,  the  British  Government  agree  that  a  minimum  payment  of 
Rupees  twenty  thousand  (Rupees  20,000)  per  annum  be  fixed,  and  that 
in  the  event  of  its  not  cutting  wood  to  that  amount  in  any  year,  the 
Rajah  will  still  receive  from  the  said  government  this  sum  as  rent,  and 
in  event  of  the  value  of  annual  cutting  being  in  excess  of  twenty 
thousand  (Rupees  20,000)  the  British  Government  agree  to  pay  amount 
at  the  rates  fixed  and  as  in  this  lease. 

Executed  this  the  tenth  (10^)  day  of  September  1864  (eighteen 
hundred  and  sixty  four) ,  27  th  Badon  1921,  at  Dalhousie ,  in  presence  of 
the  undersigned. 

(Signed)         C.  V.  Jenkins,  Asst.  Commr.,    . 
Offg.  Supdt.  of  Chumba  State. 
Signature  of  Rajah  fixed  in  my  presence. 

(Signed)         Edward  Prinsep,  Settlement  Commr. 
(Signed)         George  McAndrew,  Major, 

Depy.  Inspr.  Genl.  of  Police. 
Certified  that  the  word  additional,  and  as  noted  in  the  terms  of  this 
lease  and  in  paragraph  13,  having  been  erroneously  entered  in  this  and 
13th  para,  of  this  lease,  is  hereby  erased  by  me  and  altered  as  above, 
and  in  compliance  with  docket  memo.  No.  3761,  Public  Works  Depart- 
ment, dated  19th  November  1864,  Lahore. 


Chumba, 
November  llnd,  1864. 


(Signed)         C  V.  Jenkins,  Asst.  Commr., 

Offg.  Supdt.  of  Chumba. 

) 


390  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

TRANS  No.    CXVIIL 

SI'TLEJ 

Sunnud  granted  to  Dulekp  Sing,  of  Bughat. 
STATES. 

«    cxviii  ®n  *ne  death  of  Beejah  Sing,  the  last  Chief  of  Bughat,  without 

issue,  the  estate  lapsed  to  the  British  Government.  It  was,  however, 
the  gracious  intention  of  Her  Majesty's  Government  to  restore  the 
estate  in  perpetuity  to  Sirdar  Oomeid  Sing,  cousin  of  Beejah  Sing,  and 
his  descendants,  on  certain  conditions.  Oomeid  Sing  died  before  this 
intention  could  he  fulfilled,  and  I  now  hereby  confer  on  you  his  legiti- 
mate son,  and  on  the  heirs  of  your  body  in  perpetuity,  the  estate  of 
Bughat,  subject  to  the  following  conditions  : — 

Article  1. 

The  estate  of  Bughat  shall  be  chargeable  with  an  annual  tributa 
of  Rupees  2,000. 

Article  2. 

So  much  of  the  estate  of  Bughat  as  has  been  acquired  by  Major 
General  Innes  and  is  assessed  at  Rupees  1,002-15  a  year  shall  be  retained 
in  perpetuity  by  the  British  Government  in  payment  of  so  much  of  the 
tribute,  and  the  remainder  of  the  tribute,  viz.,  Us.  997-1,  shall  be  annually 
paid  by  the  Chief  of  Bughat  in  cash  to  the  British  Government. 