

III.  Every  person  who    shall  wilfully  and  corruptly  give  false 

Persons  giving  false  evidence     evidence  in   any  examination   or  deposition 
deemed  guilty  of  perjury.  had    Qr   affidavit    taken    in    any    proceeding 

under  the  said  engagement  or  this  Act  shall  be  deemed  guilty  of  per- 
jury, and  being  thereof  convicted  shall  be  subject  and  liable  to  all  the 
punishments,  pains,  and  penalties  to  which  persons  convicted  of  wilful 

,  .  ...       and  corrupt  penury  are  liable  :  and  every  such 

In   case  of    prosecution    in  *■  *    *     i  J 

England,  venue  may  be  laid  in    person  may   be   tried  for  any  such  perjury, 

either  in  the  place  where  the  offence  was 
committed,  or  in  any  colony  or  settlement  of  Her  Majesty  near  thereto 


APPENDIX.  Xlll 

in  which  there  is  a  Court   of  competent  jurisdiction  to  try  any  such     SOHAR. 
offence,  or  in  Her  Majesty's  Court  of  Queen's  Bench  in  England,  and  ~ 
that  in  case  of  any  prosecution  for  such  offence  in  Her  Majesty's  said 
Court  of  Queen's  Bench,  the   venue  may  be   laid  in  the  County  of  Mid- 
dlesex. 

IV.     The  pendency   of  any  suit   or  proceeding  instituted   for  the 
.  Pendency  of  suits  to  be  a  bar     condemnation  or  restitution  of  any  ship  or 

t^r!:^ry7\CtZt  «*&•  °r  sI»™s>  <■*»,  seized,  or  detained 
detained.  by  virtue  of  the  said  agreement,  or  the  final 

adjudication,  condemnation,  or  judgment  or  determination  thereupon, 
may  be  pleaded  in  bar  or  given  in  evidence  under  the  general  issue,  and 
shall  be  deemed  in  any  Court  whatever  to  be  a  complete  bar  in  any 
action,  suit,  or  proceeding,  whether  instituted  by  any  person  or  persons 
for  the  recovery  of  any  such  ship,  vessel,  or  cargo,  or  of  any  damage  or 
for  any  injury  sustained  thereby,  or  by  the  persons  on  board  the  same, 
in  consequence  of  any  capture,  seizure,  or  detention,  or  any  thing  done 
under,  or  in  purstiance  of,  the  provisions  of  the  said  agreement. 

V.  Any  ship  or  vessel  which  shall  be  condemned  as  aforesaid  may 

„  be   taken   into  Her  Maiestv's   service,  upon 

vessels    condemned    to    be  J  . 

sold  for  Her  Majesty's  service     payment   of    such    sum    as  the   Lord    High 

Admiral,  or  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the 
Admiralty,  shall  deem  a  proper  price  for  the  same,  or  if  not  so  taken, 
shall  be  broken  up  and  demolished,  and  the  materials  thereof  shall  be 
publicly  sold  in  separate  parts,  and  the  proceeds  thereof  shall  be  paid 
to  such  person  or  persons  as  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Trea- 
sury may  appoint  to  receive  the  same. 

VI.  Where  any  ship  or  vessel  employed  or  engaged  in  such  illicit 

Captors  of  vessels  shall,  after  traffic  in  slaves,  in  violation  of  the  said  agree- 