

under  the  provisions  of  this  Act,  or  of  any 
Parties  claiming  benefit  under 
this  Act  may  resort  to  the  Court  share  of  the  proceeds  of  any  vessel  confis- 
cated in  pursuance  of  the  provisions  of  the 
aforesaid  agreement,  may  resort  to  the  High  Court  of  Admiralty  for 
the  purpose  of  obtaining  the  judgment  of  the  said  Court  in  that  behalf; 
and  that  it  shall  be  lawful '  for  the  Judge  of  the  said  High  Court  of 
Admiralty  to  determiue  thereon,  and  also  to  hear  and  determine  any 
question  of  joint  capture  which  may  arise  upon  any  seizure  made  in 
pursuance  of  this  Act,  and  also  to  enforce  any  decrees  or  sentences  of 
the  said  Vice-Admiralty  Courts  relating  to  any  such  seizure. 

XV.  All  the  provisions,  rules,  regulations,  forfeitures,  and  penalties 
Regulations  and  penalties  res-     respecting   the   delivery   by  Prize  Agents  of 

E^Sb^XfaTSS  .•*»»"*■  for  ">**•>»*>*,  and  the  distribu- 
this  Act.  tion  of  prize  money,  and  the  accounting  for 

and  paying  over  the  proceeds  of  prize  and  the  percentage  due  thereon 
to  Greenwich  Hospital,  shall  be  extended  to  all  bounties  and  proceeds 
to  be  distributed  under  the  provisions  of  this  Act  to  the  Officers  and 
crews  of  any  of  Her  Majesty's  ships  and  vessels  of  war. 

XVI.  Where  any  ship  or  vessel  belonging  in  whole  or  in  part  to 

„  ,  the  before-mentioned  Chief  or  his  subjects  or 

Treasury  may  order  payment  J 

of  costs  awarded  for  vessels  de-  dependants  shall  have  been  detained  and 
tained,  but  not  condemned.  ■,  i.j         j«    t     i-        i  ^m  n 

brought  to  adjudication  by    any  Officers  of 

Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  or  of  those  of  the 
East  India  Company,  and  the  said  ship  shall  be  restored  by  sentence  of 
the  Court,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's 
Treasury,  by  warrant,  to  direct  payment  to  be  made  out  of  the  Consoli- 
dated Fund  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  of 
any  costs  or  damages  which  may  be  duly  awarded :  provided  always, 
that  nothing  herein  contained  shall  exempt  such  Officer  from  his  liability 
to  make  good  the  payments  so  made  when  lawfully  called  upon  either 
by  the  parties  interested  therein  or  by  order  of  the  said  Commissioners 
of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury. 


APPENDIX.  XVU 

XVII.     When  any  seizure  shall  be  made  by  any  of  the  Command-      SOHAR. 
Treasury  may  repay  to  the    ers,   Officers,  and  crews   of  Her  Majesty's  ~ 

seizor  of   any  vessel   not  con-       j-  f  ^  f    ^     E     t   j   ^      c 

demned  the  expenses  incurred  *  *  ^  w"* 

by  him.  pany,  and  judgment  shall  be  given  against 

the  seizor,  or  when  such  seizure  shall  be  relinquished  by  him,  it  shall  be 