

Copy    of  sentence  of    con-  j  j 

dcmnation  to  be  produced  to     on  slaves,  the  number  of  men,  women,  and 
reasury.  children  so  taken,  delivered  over,  and  con- 

demned, shall  be  proved  to  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury 
by  producing  a  copy,  duly  certified,  of  the  sentence  or  decree  of  con- 
demnation, and  also  a  certificate  under  the  hand  of  the  proper  Officer 
or  Officers,  Military  or  Civil,  who  may  be  appointed  to  receive  such 
slaves. 


•  APPENDIX.  IX 

XIV.     And  be  it  enacted,  that  where  any  slaves,  or  persons  treated    MUSCAT. 


as  slaves,  shall  be  seized  on  board  any  ship 
In  certain     cases    Treasury- 
may  order  one  moiety  of  the     or  vessel  taken  and  condemned  in  pursuance 

ep  of  the    said    agreement    and  of   this    Act, 

but  who  shall  not  have  been  delivered  over  in  consequence  of  death,  sick- 
ness, or  other  inevitable  circumstance,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  said 
Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury,  if  to  their  discretion  it  shall 
seem  meet,  to  direct  payment  of  one  moiety  of  the  bounty  which  would 
have  been  due  in  each  case  respectively  if  the  said  slaves  had  been 
delivered  over. 

XV.  Provided  also,  and  be  it  enacted,  that  any  party  or  parties 

„     .  ...         ,      -^     claiming    any   benefit    by  way    of  bounty 

Parties       claiming      benefit  °  J  . 

under  this  Act  may  resort  to  under  the  provisions  of  this  Act,  or  of  any 
the  Court  of  Admiralty.  .  '     ,,  ,         _  ,  _ 

share  of  the  proceeds  ot  any  vessel  co uns- 
eated in  pursuance  of  the  provisions  of  the  aforesaid  agreement,  may 
resort  to  the  High  Court  of  Admiralty  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining 
the  judgment  of  the  said  Court  in  that  behalf,  and  that  it  shall  be  lawful 
for  the  Judge  of  the  said  High  Court  of  Admiralty  to  determine  thereon 
and  also  to  hear  and  determine  any  question  of  joint  capture  which  may 
arise  upon  any  seizure  made  in  pursuance  of  this  Act,  and  also  to  enforce 
any  decrees  or  sentences  of  the  said  Vice- Admiralty  Courts  relating  to 
any  such  seizure. 

XVI.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  all  the  provisions,  rules,  regulations 

forfeitures,   and     penalties     respecting    the 

■Regulations  and  penalties  to-,,.  i         ■*%  •         * *._    .m  p 

which  Prize  Agents Tare  liable,     delivery  by    Prize   Agents  of    accounts  for 

extended  to  bounties,  &c,  under  exammati0n  and  the  distribution  of  prize 
this  Act.  .         ■  . 

money,  and  the  accounting  for  and  paying 

over  the  proceeds  of  prize  and  the  percentage  due  thereon  to  Greenwich 

Hospital,  shall  be  extended  to  all  bounties  and  proceeds  to  be  distributed 

under  the  provisions  of  this  Act  to  the  Officers  and  crews  of  any  of 