

lawful  for  the  said  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury,  if  to  their 

discretion  it  shall  seem  meet,  by  warrant,  to  direct  payment  to  be  made 

out  of  the  Consolidated  Fund  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain 

and  Ireland,  of  such  costs  and  expenses  as  the  seizor  may  have  incurred 

in  respect  of  such  seizure,  or  any  proportional  thereof. 


12  and  13    Victoria,  Cap.  LXXXIV. 

TERSIAN     ^n  ^  *or  canyiEg  iQto  effect  Engagements  between  Her  Majesty  and  certain 
GULF.  Arabian  Chiefs  in  the  Persian  Gulf  for  the  more  effectual  suppression  of  the 
Slave  trade,  dated  1st  August  1849. 

Whereas  on  the  thirtieth  day  of  April,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty-seven,  an  engagement  was  concluded 
between  Major  S.  Hennell,  the  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  on  behalf 
of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  and  Sultan  Bin  Sugger,  Shaik  of  Ras-el-Khyma  and  Shar- 
gah  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  the  Chief  of  the  Joasmee  Arabs,  whereby  it  was 
agreed  as  follows : — 

"  I,  Shaik  Sultan  Bin  Sugger,  Chief  of  the  Joasmee  tribe,  with  a 
view  to  strengthen  the  bonds  of  friendship  existing  between  me  and 
the  British  Government,  do  hereby  engage  to  prohibit  the  exportation  of 
slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa  and  elsewhere  on  board  of  my  vessels 
and  those  belonging  to  my  subjects  or  dependents,  such  prohibition  to 
take  effect  from  the  1st  day  of  Mohurrum  a.  h.  1264  (or  10th  De- 
cember a.  d.  1847). 

"  And  I  do  further  consent,  that  whenever  the  cruizers  of  the  Bri- 
tish Government  fall  in  with  any  of  my  vessels,  or  those  belonging  to 
my  subjects  or  dependents,  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  the  slave  trade, 
they  may  detain  and  search  them ;  and  in  case  of  their  finding  that  any 
of  the  vessels  aforesaid  have  violated  this  engagement,  by  the  exporta- 
tion of  slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa  or  elsewhere,  upon  any  pretext 
whatsoever,  they  (the  government  cruizers)  shall  seize  and  confiscate 
the  same." 

And  whereas  on  the  said  thirtieth  day  of  April  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  forty-seven,  an  engagement  was  also  concluded  between 
Major  S.  Hennell,  the  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  on  behalf  of  Her 


APPENDli.  XIX 

Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ire-    PERSIAN 
land,  and  Muktoom  Bin  Buttye,  Shaik  of  Debaye,  whereby  it  was  agreed       GULF, 
as  follows  : — 

"  I,  Muktoom  Bin  Buttye,  Shaik  of  Debaye,  with  the  view  to 
strengthen  the  bonds  of  friendship  existing  between  me  and  the  British 
Government,  do  hereby  engage  to  prohibit  the  exportation  of  slaves 
from  the  coasts  of  Africa  and  elsewhere  on  board  of  my  vessels  and  those 
belonging  to  my  subjects  or  dependents,  such  prohibition  to  take  effect  from 
the  1st  day  of  Mohurrum  a.  ii.  1264  (or  10th  December  a.  d.  1847). 