

"  And  I  do  further  consent,  that  whenever  the  cruizers  of  the 
British  Government  fall  in  with  any  of  my  vessels,  or  those  belonging  to 
my  subjects  or  dependants,  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  the  slave 
trade,  they  may  detain  and  search  them,  and  in  case  of  their  finding  that 
any  of  the  vessels  aforesaid  have  violated  this  engagement,  by  the  expor- 
tation of  slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa  or  elsewhere,  upon  any  pre- 
text whatever,  they  (the  government  cruizers)  shall  seize  and  confiscate 
the  same." 

And  whereas  it  is  expedient  that  effectual  provision  should  be  made 
for  carrying  into  execution  the  provisions  of  the  said  agreement,  be  it 
therefore  enacted  by  the  Queen's  most  excellent  Majesty,  by  and  with  the 
advice  and  consent  of  the  Lords  spiritual  and  temporal  and  Commons  in 
this  present  Parliament  assembled,  and  by  the  authority  of  the  same — 


SOHAR. 


xii  APrENDIX. 

SOHAR.  j     "pij^  ft  shall  be  lawful  for  the  Commanders  and  other  Officers 

of   Her  Majesty's  ships   of  war,  or  of  the 
Power    for    Commanders    of      _      .  T    ...     ~  .        ...         -   -  ,    .      . 

ships  of  war,  &c,  to  visit,  &c,     East  India  Company,   to  visit  and  detain,  m 
Teasels  belonging  to  the  Chief  of  vesgel  belonging  to  Syed  Syf 

Sonar,   or  of  Ins   subjects,  bus-  J  *         J  .00  j  j 

looted  of  being  engaged  in  the     Bin  Hamood,  the  Chief  of  Sohar,  in  Arabia, 

or  to  any  of  his  subject  or  dependants,  which 
shall  upon  reasonable  grounds  be  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  the  traffic 
in  slaves,  or  having  been  fitted  out  for  that  purpose,  and  to  send  or  carry 
away  such  vessel,  together  with  its  master,  sailors,  passengers,  slaves 
and  cargo,  for  the  purpose  of  such  vessel  being  brought  to  adjudication 
as  hereinafter  mentioned. 

II.  It  shall  be  lawful  for  the  High   Court  of  Admiralty  of  Eng- 

land, and  for  all  Courts  of  Vice- Admiralty  in 
As  to  the  trial  and  condemna-  #   ,  »«•■»«•• 

tion  of  vessels  engaged  in  the     any  dominions  of  Her  Majesty  beyond  the 

seas,  including  those  Courts  of  Vice-Ad- 
miralty within  the  territories  under  the  Government  of  the  East  India 
Company,  to  take  cognizance  of  and  try  any  such  "vessel  which  shall  be 
detained  or  captured  for  the  violation  of  the  said  agreement,  and  to 
condemn  any  such  vessel  to  Her  Majesty,  and  adjudge  as  to  the  slaves 
found  therein,  in  like  manner,  and  under  such  and  the  like  rules  and 
regulations  as  are  contained  in  any  Act  or  Acts  of  Parliament  in  force 
in  relation  to  the  suppression  of  the  slave  trade  by  British  owned  ships, 
as  fully  as  if  all  the  powers  and  provisions  contained  in  such  Acts  were 
re-enacted  in  this  Act  as  to  such  High  Court  of  Admiralty  or  Courts  of 
Vice- Admiralty. 