

the  same  are  condemned,  be  ment  ^^  j>e  seize(J  ty  any  ship  or  vessel 
entitled  to  the  proceeds  belong-  *  j         j         r 

ingto  Her  Majesty.  belonging  to   Her  Majesty  or  the  East  India 

Company  and  afterwards  condemned,  there  shall  be  paid  to  the  captors 
the  net  proceeds  to  which  Her  Majesty  is  entitled,  the  same  to  be  dis- 
tributed in  the  manner  hereinafter  directed  for  the  distribution  of 
bounties  on  slaves  taken  on  board  the  said  vessels. 


Xiv  APPENDIX. 

BORAS.  VII.     There  shall  be  paid  to  the  Commanders,  Officers,  and  crews 

of  Her  Majesty's  ships,  or  the  Commanders, 
Tajmcnt^unty  for  slaves     officers,  and  crews  of  the  ships  of  the  East 

India  Company,  a  bounty  of  five  pounds 
for  every  man,  woman,  and  child  slave  seized  and  found  on  board  any 
ship  or  vessel  taken  and  condemned  in  pursuance  of  the  provisions  of  the 
Mid  agreement  and  of  this  Act;  such  bounty  to  be  issued  and  paid 
by  order  from  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury,  and  to  be 
distributed  to  and  amongst  the  captors  aforesaid  in  such  manner  and 
proportions  as  Her  Majesty  shall  think  fit  to  order  by  any  order  in 
Council  made  or  to  be  made,  or  by  any  proclamation  for  that  purpose. 

VIII.  Where  any  ship  or  vessel  which  shall  have  been  seized  and 

condemned  under  the  provisions  of  the  said 

Additional  bounty  on  tonnage  f 

of  slave  ships  captured  and  de-  agreement  shall  have  been  or  shall  be  demo- 
lished, and  the  materials  thereof  publicly 
sold  in  separate  parts,  as  well  as  her  cargo,  there  shall  be  paid  to  the 
Commanders,  Officers,  and  crews  of  Her  Majesty's  ships,  or  of  those 
of  the  East  India  Company,  in  addition  to  the  amount  of  the  proceeds 
of  such  sale  as  hereinbefore  mentioned,  a  further  bounty  on  the  tonnage 
of  such  ship  or  vessel  at  the  rate  of  thirty  shillings  for  every  ton  of  such 
tonnage. 

IX.  Where  any  ship  or  vessel  having  no  slaves  on  board  shall 

have  been  seized  and  condemned  under  the 

Where  no  slaves  are  on  board  •  •  »     , i  •  -i  ,        ,, 

a  ship  seized  and  condemned,  an     provisions   of    the    said    agreement,    there 

addition^  bounty  on  tonnage     snar|  ]jC  pai(i  to  the  Commanders,  Officers, 
to  be  paid.  *  *  .  r 

and  crews  of  Her  Majesty's  ships,  or   those 

of  the  East  India  Company,  an  additional  bounty  upon  the  tonnage  of 

such  ship  or  vessel  at  the  rate  of  four  pounds  for  every  ton ;  and  the 

tonnage  of  all  such  vessels  shall  be  ascertained  according  to  the  mode  of 

ascertaining  the  admeasurement  of  British  vessels,  either  by  the  principal 

Officer  of  the  Customs  at  the  port  where  the  vessel  may  be  at  the  time 