

"  And  I  do  further  consent,  that  whenever  the  cruizers  of  the 
British  Government  fall  in  with  any  of  my  vessels,  or  those  belonging 
to  my  subjects  or  dependents,  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  the  slave 
trade,  they  may  detain  and  search  them;  and  in  case  of  their  find- 
ing that  any  of  the  vessels  aforesaid  have  violated  this  engagement,  by 
the  exportation  of  slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa  or  elsewhere,  upon 
any  pretext  whatsoever,  they  (the  government  cruizers)  shall  seize  and 
confiscate  the  same." 

And  whereas  on  the  first  day  of  May,  in  the  said  year  one  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  forty-seven,  an  engagement  was  also  concluded  between 
the  said  Major  S.  Hennell,  on  behalf  of  Her  Majesty,  and  Abdool  Azeez 
Bin  Rashid,  Shaik  of  Bginan,  whereby  it  was  agreed  as  follows  :— 

"  I,  Abdool  Azeez  Bin  Rashid,  Shaik  of  Eginan,  with  the  view  to 
strengthen  the  bonds  of  friendship  existing  between  me  and  the  British 
Government,  do  hereby  engage  to  prohibit  the  exportation  of  slaves  from 
the  coasts  of  Africa  and  elsewhere  on  board  of  my  vessels  and  those  belong- 
ing to  my  subjects  or  dependents,  such  prohibition  to  take  effect  from 
the  1st  day  of  Mohurrum,  a.  h.  1264  (or  10th  December  a.  d.  1847). 

"  And  I  do  further  consent,  that  whenever  the  cruizers  of  the  Bri- 
tish Government  fall  in  with  any  of  my  vessels,  or  those  belonging  to 
my  subjects  or  dependents,  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  the  slave  trade, 
they  may  detain  and  search  them ;  and  in  case  of  their  finding  that 
any  of  the  vessels  aforesaid  have  violated  this  engagement,  by  the  expor- 
tation of  slaves  from  the  coats  of  Africa  or  elsewhere,  upon  any  pretext 
whatsoever,  they  (the  government  cruizers)  shall  seize  and  confiscate  the 
same." 


XX  APPENDIX. 

PERSIAN  And  whereas  on  the  said  first  day  of  May,  an  engagement  was  con- 

GULF.  eluded  by  the  said  Major  S.  Hennell,  on  behalf  of  Her  Majesty,  and 
Shaik  Abdullah  Bin  Rashid,  Shaik  of  Amulgavine,  whereby  it  was 
agreed  as  follows : — 

"  I,  Abdullah  Bin  Rashid,  Shaik  of  Amulgavine,  with  a  view  to 
strengthen  the  bonds  of  friendship  existing  between  me  and  the  British 
Government,  do  hereby  engage  to  prohibit  the  exportation  of  slaves  from 
the  coast  of  Africa  and  elsewhere  on  boagri  of  my  vessels  and  those 
belonging  to  my  subjects  or  dependents;  such  prohibition  to  take 
effect  from  the  1st  day  of  Mohurrum  a.  h.  1264  (or  10th  December 
a.  d.  1847)/' 

"And  I  do  further  consent,  that  whenever  the  cruizers  of  the 
British  Government  fall  in  with  any  of  my  vessels,  or  those  belonging 
to  my  subjects  or  dependents,  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  the  slave 
trade,  they  may  detain  and  search  them ;  and  in  case  of  their  finding 
that  any  of  the  vessels  aforesaid  have  violated  this  engagement,  by  the 
exportation  of  slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa  or  elsewhere,  upon  any 
pretext  whatsoever,  they  (the  government  cruizers)  shall  seize  and  con- 
fiscate the  same." 