

Her  Majesty's  ships  and  vessels  of  war. 

XVII.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  where  any  ship  or  vessel   belonging 

„,  ,  in  whole  or  in  part  to  subjects  of  the  Imaum, 

Treasury  may  order  payment  *  "  ' 

of  costs  awarded  for  vessels  de-  of  Muscat  shall  have  been  detained  and 
taincd,  but  not  condemned.  T  ,,  J-    j-     *•       i  r\a*  n 

brought  to  adjudication  by   any  Officers  of 


X  APPENDIX. 

MUSCAT.  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  or  of  those  of  the 
East  India  Company,  and  the  said  ship  shall  be  restored  by  sentence  of 
the  Court,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's 
Treasury,  by  warrant  signed  by  any  three  or  more  of  them,  to  direct 
payment  to  be  made  out  of  the  Consolidated  Fund  of  the  United  King- 
dom of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  of  any  cost  or  damages  which  may 
be  duly  awarded ;  provided  always  that  nothing  herein  contained  shall 
exempt  such  Officer  from  his  liability  to  make  good  the  payments  so 
made  when  lawfully  called  upon  either  by  the  parties  interested  therein, 
or  by  order  of  the  said  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury. 

XVIII.    And  be  it  enacted,  that  when  any  seizure  shall  be  made  by 

any  of  the  Commanders,  Officers,  and  Crews 

Jr^Tl^io*  c£     of  Her  Majesty's  ships  or  of  those  of  the  East 

demned  the  expenses  incurred     India  Company  and  judgment  shall  be  given 

by  him.  .  . 

against  the  seizor,  or  when  such  seizure  shall 
be  relinquished  by  him,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  said  Commissioners  of 
Her  Majesty's  Treasury,  if  to  their  discretion  it  shall  seem  meet,  by 
warrant  signed  by  any  three  or  more  of  them,  to  direct  payment  to  be 
made  out  of  the  Consolidated  Fund  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland  of  such  costs  and  expenses  as  the  seizor  may  have 
incurred  in  respect  of  such  seizure,  or  any  proportional  part  thereof. 


1G  and  17  Vic,  Cap.  XVI. 

An  A.ct  for  carrying  into  effect  the  Engagement  between  Her  Majesty  and  Sted 
Syf  bin  Hamood,  the  Chief  of  Sohar,  in  Arabia,  for  the  more  effectual  suppres- 
sion of  the  Slave  Trade,  dated  9th  May  1853. 

Whereas  on  the  twenty-second  day  of  May,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord 
one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty-nine,  an  engagement  was  concluded 
between  Major  Hennell,  the  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  on  behalf 
of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  and  Syed  Syf  Bin  Hamood,  Chief  of  Sohar,  in  Arabia, 
whereby  it  was  agreed  as  follows  : — 

"  I,  Syed  Syf  Bin  Hamood,  Chief  of  Sohar,  with  a  view  to  strengthen 
the  bonds  of  friendship  existing  between  me  and  the  British  Govern- 
ment, do  hereby  engage  to  prohibit  the  exportation  of  slaves  from  the 
coasts  of  Africa  and  elsewhere  on  board  of  my  vessels  and  those 
belonging  to  my  subjects  or  dependants ;  such  prohibition  to  take  effect 
from  the  twenty-ninth  Rujjub  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  sixty- 
five,  or  the  twenty-first  day  of  June  a.  d.  one  thousand  eight  hundred 
and  forty-nine. 