

IX.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  where  any  ship  or  vessel  having  no 
Where  no  slaves  are  on  board     slaves  on  board  shall  have  been  seized  and 

a  ship  seized  and  condemned  an     con(iemned  under  the  provisions  of  the  said 

additional  bounty  to  be  paid  on  r 

tonnage.  agreement,  there  shall  be  paid  to  the  Com- 

manders, Officers,  and  crews  of  Her  Majesty's  ships,  or  those  of  the  East 
India  Company,  an  additional  bounty  upon  the  tonnage  of  such  ship 
or  vessel  at  the  rate  of  four  pounds  for  every  ton,  and  the  tonnage  of  all 
such  vessels  shall  be  ascertained  according  to  the  mode  of  ascertaining 
the  admeasurement  of  British  vessels,  either  by  the  principal  Officer 
of  the  customs  at  the  port  where  the  vessel  may  be  at  the  time  of  con- 
demnation, or  in  default  thereof  by  the  best  evidence  which  can  be 
obtained:  provided  always,  that  in  every  case  in  which  any  ship  or 
vessel  shall  be  seized  with  slaves  on  board  in  which  the  bounty  calculated 


viii  APPENDIX. 

MUSCAT,    upon  the  number  of  slaves  shall  be  less  than  the  bounty  calculated  upon 

"  the  tonnage,  the  Commanders  of  Her  Majesty's  ships,  or  of  those  of  the 

East  India  Company  making  the  seizure,  may  elect  to  take  the  bounty 

calculated  according  to  tonnage,  instead  of  the  bounty  which  would  be 

payable  upon  the  number  of  slaves  on  board. 

X.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  all  bounties  payable  under  this  Act 

Bounties  to  be  paid  out  of     sna11  De  Pai(l  out  of   tne  Consolidated  Fund 
the  Consolidated  Fund.  of  the  United  Kingdom   of  Great   Britain 

and  Ireland  to  the  Commanders,  Officers,  and  crews  of  Her  Majesty's 
ships,  and  of  the  ships  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  such  bounties 
shall  be  issued  and  paid  by  order  from  the  Commissioners  of  Her 
Majesty's  Treasury. 

XI.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  the  said  bounty,  as  also  all  bounties 
Bounties  not  liable  to  pay-     payable  under  any  of  the  Acts  for  the  aboli- 

ment  of  fees.  ^ion  or  suppression  of  the  slave  trade,  shall 

not  hereafter  be  charged  with  Treasury  fees  or  Exchequer  fees  of  any 
description. 

XII.  Provided  always,  and  be  it  enacted,  that  in  order  to  entitle 
Captors  entitled  to  bounty  to     tne  captors  to  receive  the  said  bounty  money, 

give  proof  of  tonnage.  fl^  tonnage  of  the  ship  or  vessel  so  seized 

and  condemned  shall  be  proved  to  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's 
Treasury  by  producing  a  copy,  duly  certified,  of  the  sentence  or  decree 
of  condemnation,  or  by  such  documentary  or  other  evidence  as  they  may 
deem  satisfactory. 

XIII.  Provided  always,  and  be  it  enacted,  that  in  order  to  entitle 

_  .  the  captors  to  receive  the  said  bounty  monev 