

of  condemnation,  or,  in  default  thereof,  by  the  best  evidence  which  can 

be  obtained :  provided  always,  that  in  every  case  in  which  any  ship  or 

vessel  shall  be  seized  with  slaves  on  board,  in  which  the  bounty  calculated 

upon  the  number  of  slaves  shall  be  less  than  the  bounty  calculated  upon 


APPENDIX.  XV 

the  tonnage,  the  Commanders  of  Jler  Majesty's  ships,  or  of  those  of  the      SOIIAI?. 
East  India  Company,  making  the  seizure,  may  elect  to  take  the  bounty  — 
calculated  according  to  tonnage,  instead  of  the  bounty  which  would  be 
payable  upon  the  number  of  slaves  on  board. 

X.  All  bounties  payable  under  this  Act   shall  be  paid  out  of  the 

Consolidated  Fund  of  the  United  Kingdom 
thcCon8didatcdbFundd  0Ut  °f  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  to  the  Com- 
manders, Officers,  and  crews  of  Her  Majesty's 
ships,  and  of  the  ships  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  such  bounties 
shall  be  issued  and  paid  by  order  from  the  Commissioners  of  Her 
Majesty's  Treasury. 

XI.  In  order  to  entitle  the  captors  to   receive  the   said  bounty 

„     .  .  -.  money,  the  tonnage    of  the  ship    or  vessel 

Proof  of  tonnage.  .  &  * 

so  seized  and  condemned  shall  be  proved  to 

the   Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury  by  producing  a  copy, 

duly  certified,  of  the  sentence  or  decree  of  condemnation,  or  by  such 

documentary  or  other  evidence  as  they  may  deem  satisfactory. 

XII.  In  order  to  entitle  the  captors  to  receive  the  said  bounty 

Copy  of  sentence  of  con-  money  0n  slavcs'  tne  number  of  mcn> 
domination  to  be  produced  to  women,  and  children  so  taken,  delivered 
the  Treasury. 

over,  and  condemned  shall  be  proved  to  the 

Commissioners    of    Her    Majesty's    Treasury  by    producing  a     copy, 

duly  certified,  of  the  sentence  or  decree  of  condemnation,  and  also  a 

certificate  under  the  hand  of  the  proper  Officer  or  Officers,  Military  or 

Civil,  who  may  be  appointed  to  receive  such  slaves. 

XIII.  Where  any  slaves,  or  persons  treated  as  slaves,  shall  be 
One  moiety   of  the  bounty     seized  on  board  any  ship  or  vessel  taken  and 

only  to  be  paid  in  certain  cases,  condemned  in  pursuance  of  the  said  agree- 
ment and  of  this  Act,  but  who  shall  not  have  been  delivered  over  in 
consequence  of  death,  sickness,  or  other  inevitable  circumstance,  it  shall, 
be  lawful  for  the  said  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury,  if  to 
their  discretion  it  shall  seem  meet,  to  direct  payment  of  one  moiety  of 
the  bounty  which  would  have  been  due  in  each  case  respectively  if  the 
said  slaves  had  been  delivered  over. 


XVI  APPENDIX. 

SOHAU.  XIV.     Any  party  or  parties  claiming1  any  benefit  by  way  of  bounty 