

And  whereas  on  the  third  day  of  May,  in  the  said  year  one  thou- 
sand eight  hundred  and  forty-seven,  an  engagement  was  concluded  by 
the  said  Major  S.  Hennell,  on  behalf  of  Her  Majesty,  and  Shaik  Saeed 
Bin  Tahnoon,  Chief  of  Aboothabee,  whereby  it  was  agreed  as  follows : — 

"  I,  Saeed  Bin  Tahnoon,  Shaik  of  the  Bin  Yas,  Chief  of  Aboothabee, 
with  view  to  strengthen  the  bonds  of  friendship  existing  between  me 
and  the  British  Government,  do  hereby  engage  to  prohibit  the  exporta- 
tion of  slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa  and  elsewhere  on  board  of  my 
vessels  and  those  belonging  to  my  subjects  or  dependents,  such  prohibi- 
tion to  take  effect  from  the  1st  day  of  Mohurrum  a.  h.  1264  (or  10th 
December  1847). 

"  And  I  do  further  consent,  that  whenever  the  cruizers  of  the  Bri- 
tish Government  fall  in  with  any  of  my  vessels,  or  those  belonging  to 
my  subjects  or  dependents,  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  the  slave  trade, 
they  may  detain  and  search  them ;  and  in  case  of  their  finding  that  any 
of  the  vessels  aforesaid  have  violated  this  engagement,  by  the  exporta- 


APPENDIX.  XXI 

tion  of  slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa  or  elsewhere,  upon   any  pretext    PERSIAN 
whatsoever,  they  (the  government  cruizers)  shall  seize  and  confiscate  the      GULP, 
same." 

And  whereas  on  the  eighth  day  of  May,  in  the  said  year  one  thou- 
sand eight  hundred  and  forty-seven,  an  engagement  was  concluded  by 
the  said  Major  S.  Hennell,  on  behalf  of  Her  Majesty,  and  Shaik 
Mahomed  Bin  Khuleefa  Bin  Subman,  Chief  of  Bahrein,  whereby  it  was 
agreed  as  follows : — 

"  I,  Mahomed  Bin  Khuleefa  Bin  Subman,  Chief  of  Bahrein,  with 
the  view  to  strengthen  the  bonds  of  friendship  existing  between  me  and 
the  British  Government,  do  hereby  engage  to  prohibit  the  exportation 
of  slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa  and  elsewhere  on  board  of  my 
vessels  and  those  belonging  to  my  subjects  or  dependents,  such  prohi- 
bition to  take  effect  from  the  1st  day  of  Mohurrum  a.  h.  1264  (or  10th 
December  a.  d.  1847). 

"•And  I  do  further  consent,  that  whenever  the  cruizers  of  the 
British  Government  fall  in  with  any  of  my  vessels,  or  those  belonging  . 
to  my  subjects  or  dependents,  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  the  slave 
trade,  they  may  detain  and  search  them ;  and  in  case  of  their  finding 
that  any  of  the  vessels  aforesaid  have  violated  this  engagement,  by  the 
exportation  of  slaves  from  the  coasts  of  Africa  or  elsewhere,  upon  any 
pretext  whatsoever,  they  (the  government  cruizers)  shall  seize  and 
confiscate  the  same." 

And  whereas  it  is  expedient  that  effectual  provision  should  be  made 

Officers  Commanding  ships  of     for   carrying  into  execution    the   provisions 