

Her  Majesty,  as  well  as  those  of     0f  fa  sajd  several  agreements,   be  it  there- 

the  East  India  Company,  autho-  ^3  * 

rized  to  visit  vessels  belonging  fore  enacted  by  the  Queen's  most  excellent 

to  the  before-mentioned  Chiefs,  ,r  .  ,  ,      ..      ,         ,    . 

or  to  any  of  their  subjects  or  Majesty,  by  and  with  the  advice  and  consent 

dependents.  of    the   Lords   spiritual   and  temporal   and 

Commons  in  this  present  Parliament  assembled,  and  by  the  authority 
of  the  same,  that  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  Commanders  and  other 
Officers  of  Her  Majesty's  ships  of  war,  or  of  the  East  India  Company, 
to  visit  and  detain  in  any  seas  any  vessel  belonging  to  either  of  the  said 
respective  Chiefs,  Shaik  Sultan  Bin  Sugger,  Chief  of  the  Joasmee  tribe, 
Muktoom  Bin  Buttye,   Shaik  of  Debaye,  Abdool  Azeez  Bin  Rashid, 


XX  ii  APPENDIX. 

TERSIAN  Shaik  of  Eginan,  Abdullah  Bin  Rashid,  Shaik  of  Amulgavine,  Saeed 
i;iLF.  Bin  Tahnoon,  Shaik  of  the  Bin  Yas,  Chief  of  Aboothabee  Mahomed 
Bin  Khuleefa,  Bin  Subman,  Chief  of  Bahrein,  or  to  any  of  their  subjects 
or  dependents,  which  shall  upon  reasonable  grounds  be  suspected  of  being 
engaged  in  the  traffic  in  slaves  or  having  been  fitted  out  for  that  purpose, 
and  to  send  or  carry  away  such  vessel,  together  with  its  masters,  sailors, 
passengers,  slaves,  and  cargo,  for  the  purpose  of  such  vessel  being  brought 
to  adjudication  as  hereinafter  mentioned. 

II.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  High  Court 
The  trial  of  vessels  engaged     of  Admiralty  of  England,  and  for  all  Courts 

in  the  slave  trade.  0f  Vice -Admiralty  in  any  dominions  of  Her 

Majesty  beyond  the  seas,  including  those  Courts  of  Vice-Admiralty 
within  the  territories  under  the  government  of  the  East  India  Company, 
to  take  cognizance  of  and  try  any  such  vessel  which  shall  be  detained 
or  captured  for  the  violation  of  the  said  agreements,  and  to  condemn 
any  such  vessel  to  Her  Majesty,  and  adjudged  as  to  the  slaves  found 
therein,  in  like  manner  and  under  such  and  the  like  rules  and  regulations 
as  are  contained  in  any  Act  or  Acts  of  Parliament  in  force  in  relation 
to  the  suppression  of  the  slave  trade  by  British  owned  ships  as  fully  as 
if  all  the  powers  and  provisions  contained  in  such  Acts  were  re-enacted 
in  this  Act  as  to  such  High  Court  of  Admiralty  or  Courts  of  Vice-Ad- 
miralty. 

III.  And  be  it   enacted,  that  every  person  who  shall    wilfully  and 
Persons  giving  false  evidence     corruptly  give   false  evidence  in  any  exami- 

deemed  guilty  of  perjury.  nation  or   deposition  had  or  affidavit  taken 

in  any  proceeding  under  the  said  engagements  or  this  Act  shall  be 
deemed  guilty  of  perjury,  and  being  thereof  convicted  shall  be  subject 
and  liable  to  all  the  punishments,  pains,  and  penalties  to  which  persons 
convicted  of  wilful  and  corrupt  perjury  are  liable;  and  every  such  person 
may  be  tried  for  any  such  perjury,  either  in  the  place  where  the  offence 
was  committed,  or  in  any  colony  or  settlement  of  Her  Majesty  near 
thereto  in  which  there  is  a  Court  of  competent  jurisdiction  to  try  any 
such  offence,  or  in  Her  Majesty's  Court  of  Queen's  Bench  in  England, 
and  that  in  case  of  any  prosecution  for  such  offence  in  Her  Majesty's 
said  Court  of  Queen's  Bench,  the  venue  may  be  laid  in  the  County  of 
Middlesex. 