


APPENDIX.  XX111 

IV.  And  be  it  enacted;  that  the  pendency  of  any  suit  or  proceeding    PERSIAN 
Pendency  of  suits  to  be  a  bar     instituted  for  the  condemnation  or  restitution       GULF. 

to  any  proceedings  instituted  for       of  g]  •     Qr  Qr  gl  tak         geized 

the  recovery  of  the  vessels  de-  j         r  o   >  7  >  > 

tained.  or  detained  by  virtue  of  the  said  agreements, 

or  the  final  adjudication,  condemnation,  or  judgment  or  determination 
thereupon,  may  be  pleaded  in  bar  or  given  in  evidence  under  the  general 
issue  and  shall  be  deemed  in  any  Court  whatever  to  be  a  complete 
bar  in  any  action,  suit,  or  proceeding,  whether  instituted  by  any  person 
or  persons  for  the  recovery  of  any  such  ship,  vessel,  or  cargo,  or  of  any 
damage,  or  for  any  injury  sustained  thereby  or  by  the  persons  on  board 
the  same,  in  consequence  of  any  capture,  seizure,  or  detention  or  any 
thing  done  under,  or  in  pursuance  of,  the  provisions  of  the  said  agree- 
ments. 

V.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  any  ship  or  vessel  which  shall  be  con- 

, .    ,  '  demned  as  aforesaid  may  be  taken  into  Her 

Vessels  condemned  to  be  sold 

for  Her  Majesty's  service  or  Majesty's  service,  upon  payment  of  such  sum 
broken  up<  as  the  Lord  High  Admiral  or  the  Lords  Com- 

missioners of  the  Admiralty  shall  deem  a  proper  price  for  the  same,  or  if 
not  so  taken,  shall  be  broken  up  and  demolished,  and  the  materials  thereof 
shall  be  publicly  sold  in  separate  parts,  and  the  proceeds  thereof  shall  be 
paid  to  such  person  or  persons  as  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's 
Treasury  may  appoint  to  receive  the  same. 

VI.  And  be  it  enacted,   that  where  any  ship  or  vessel  employed  or 

engaged  in   such  illicit   traffic   in  slaves,  in 

of^SS^ft.'S  ™M™  »f  th«  "M  agreements,  shall  be 
titled  to  the  proceeds  belonging  seized  by  any  ship  or  vessel  belono-ing-  to 
to  Her  Majesty.  .  & 

Her   Majesty   or  the  East  India  Company 

and  afterwards  condemned,  there  shall  be  paid  to  the  captors  the  net  pro- 
ceeds to  which  Her  Majesty  is  entitled,  the  same  to  be  distributed  in  the 
same  manner  hereinafter  directed  for  the  distribution  of  bounties  on  slaves 
taken  on  board  the  said  vessels. 

VII.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  there  shall  be  paid  to  the  Commander, 

Officers,   and  crews  of  her  Majesty's  ships, 
Bounty  for  slaves  captured.  ■,        j^m  1 

or  the  Commander,  Officers,  and  crews  of  the 

ships  of  the  East  India  Company,  a  bounty  of  five  pounds  for  every  man 


XXIV  APPENDIX. 

PERSIAN  woman,  and  child  slave  seized  and  found  on  board  any  ship  or  vessel  taken 
GULF.  and  condemned  in  pursuance  of  the  provisions  of  the  said  agreement 
and  of  this  Act,  such  bounty  to  be  issued  and  paid  by  order  from  the 
Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury,  and  to  be  distributed  to  and 
amongst  the  captors  aforesaid  in  such  manner  and  proportions  as  Her 
Majesty  shall  think  fit  to  order  by  any  order  in  Council  made  or  to  be 
made,  or  by  any  proclamation  for  that  purpose. 