

Commodore. 
Commander-in-Chief,  I.  N. 


Form  No.  1. 

Certificate  containing  a  list  of  papers  to  be  made  out  in  duplicate,  one  copy  to  be 
delivered  to  the  master  placed  in  charge  of  a  detained  vessel  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible after  seizure,  the  other  to  be  delivered  to  be  kept  with  a  view  to  its 
production  in  the  Court  before  which  the  vessel  is  taten  for  adjudication. 

I,  the  undersigned  hold  the  rank  of  in 

the  Indian  Navy,  and  Commanding  the  Honourable  Company's  ship 

do  hereby  certify  that  on  the  day  of 

being  the  latitude  and   longitude  of 

Greenwich,  seized  the  whereof  is  Tindal, 

and  that  she  had  on  board  at  time  of  capture 
slaves,  namely — 

If  no  slaves  be  on  board,  state  the  fact. 
Females. 

Total. 

I  further  certify  that  the  papers  which  I  have  numbered  1  to 
inclusive  are  the  whole  of  the  documents,  letters,  and  writings  seized  on 
board,  which  are  hereunder  specified  and  described,  namely,— 

Here  specify  and  describe  No.  1 

the  papers  found  on  board  „   £ 

according  to  number  „    3  &c. 

Signed  by  me  the        day  of       •  1850. 

Commanding  II.  C.  .S/</j>. 


xxxy  APPENDIX 

_  VVK  Form  No.  2. 

TRAPE-  Declaration  to  be  made  by  the  Commander  of  the  Honourable  Company's  ship  at 
the  time  of  tho  seizure  and  delivered  to  the  Court  before  which  the  vessel  is 
taken  for  adjudication. 

I  the  undersigned  holding  the  rank  of 

in    the  Indian  Navy,  and   Commanding  the   Honourable   Company's 
ghjp  duly  authorized  by  the  Act*  of  Parliament  for   the 

suppression  of  the   slave  trade  as  therein  provided,   do   hereby  declare 
that  on  the  day  of  being  in 

latitude  and  longitude  of  Greenwich, 

I  seized  the  whereof 

is  Tindal,   for  having  violated  the  said  and  I 

further  declare  that  the  vessel  had  on  board  at  the  time  of  seizure  a  crew 
of  persons  passengers  and  slaves 

as  follows : — 

Males 
Females 

Total 

Here    insert    any    particulars    worthy    of  And    I    do    also  declare   that    I 

notice,  as  to  the  state  in  which  the  vessel  was  f        d  ^  vesgel  in  the   following 

found,  and  any  facts  as  to  the   circumstances  ° 

.     or  causes  of  seizure.  state  : — 

Given  under  my  hand  this  day  of  1850. 

Commanding  IJ.  C.  Skip, 


Approved  by  the  Most  Noble  the  Governor  General  of  India  on 
the  17th  July  1850. 

*  If  the  seizure  he  under  the  Act  of  XI  and  XII  Vic,  Cap.   128,  insert  it;  if  under 
XII  and  XIII  Vic,  Cap.  84,  state  it  accordingly. 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


JX 

916 

1862 

V.7 

c.l 

ROBA 


?v?v 


W) 


!■■■■■■ 


