

V.  You  will  visit  and  detain  in  any  seas  any  vessel  belonging  to 
either  of  the  said  respective  Chiefs,  Shaik  Sultan  Bin  Suggur,  Chief  of 
the  Joasmee  tribe,  Muktoom  Bin  Buttye,  Shaik  of  Debaye,  Abdool  Azeez 

*  See  note  in  margin  of  previous  page. 


APPENDIX. 

Hiii  Rashid,  Shaik  of  Ejman,  Abdullah  Bin  Rashid,  Shaik  of  Amulgavine, 
1  ■  vm  ••  S:uvd  Bin  Tahnoon,  Shaik  of  the  Bcni  Yas,  Chief  of  Aboothabee,  Ma- 
homed Bin  Khuleefa  Bin  Subman,  Chief  of  Bahrein,  or  to  any  of  their 
subjects  or  defendants,  which  shall  upon  reasonable  grounds  be  suspected 
of  being  engaged  in  the  traffic  in  slaves  or  having  been  fitted  out  for 
that  purpose,  and  to  send  or  carry  away  such  vessel,  together  with  its 
masters,  sailors,  passengers,  slaves,  and  cargo,  for  the  purpose  of  such 
vessel  being  brought  to  adjudication,  as  in  the  Act  of  XII  and  XIII 
Vic.  mentioned. 

VI.  On  detaining  any  vessel  visited  by  you  under  the  aforesaid 
provisions  of  either  of  the  said  two  Acts  and  of  these  instructions,  you 
will  take  possession  of  the  ship's  papers,  making  a  list  thereof  according 
to  Form  No.  1,  and  certifying  the  same  by  your  signature. 

VII.  You  will  also  draw  out  a  declaration  according  to  Form  No.  2 
stating  the  circumstances  attending  the  capture,  and  mentioning  the  date 
when  and  in  the  place  where  it  was  made,  and  you  will  certify  the  same 
by  your  signature. 

VIII.  In  sending  or  carrying  away  such  vessel  with  its  masters, 
sailors,  passengers,  slaves,  and  cargo  for  the  purpose  of  adjudication,  you 
will  do  so  without  delay,  and  send  or  carry  her  with  them  to  the  nearest 
port  or  place  where  a  British  Court  of  Vice-Admiralty  may  be  established, 
and  on  your  arrival  at  such  port  or  place  you  shall  duly  report  your  ar- 
rival and  deliver  up  to  the  proper  Authorities  there  the  vessel,  with  its 
master,  sailors,  passengers,  slaves,  and  cargo,  to  be  dealt  with  according 
to  law,  and  you  shall  abide  such  further  instructions  on  the  subject  as 
shall  be  given  you. 

IX.  The  Officer  in  charge  of  the  slave  vessel  is  at  the  same  time 
of  delivering  up  the  vessel  to  the  proper  Authorities  to  deliver  also  the 
ship's  papers  and  certificates  thereof  and  the  captor's  declaration  of 
capture. 

X.  The  circumstances  attending  the  seizure  of  a  vessel  under 
either  of  these  Acts  of  Parliament  must  be  fully  reported  to  the  Officer 


.      APPENDIX.  (  XXxi 

under  whoso  orders  you  are  serving,  and  a  duplicate  of  the  report  must  slave 
be  sent  at  the  earliest  opportunity  to  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  trade. 
Indian  Navy  at  Bombay. 

Given  under  my  hand  at  Bombay  this  day  of  1850. 