

XVI.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  all  the  provisions,  rules,  regulations, 

forfeitures,  and  penalties  respecting  the   deli- 

extended  to  bounties,  &c,  under     animation,  and  the  distribution  of  prize  money 
this  Act.  1.1.''  •  t  .  . 

and  the  accounting  tor  and  paying  over  the 

proceeds  of  prize  and  the  percentage  due  thereon  to  Greenwich  Hospital, 

shall  be  extended  to  all  bounties  and  proceeds  to  be  distributed,  under 

the  provisions  of  this  Act,   to  the  Officers  and  crews  of  any  of  Her 

Majesty's  ships  and  vessels  of  war. 

XVII.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  where  any  ship  or  vessel  belonging 

in  whole  or  in  part  to  the  before-mentioned 

Commissioners    of  the  Trea-       .-,,  .  P  ...  *•   21  ■,  -,      .        ■,-,■, 

Bury  may   order    payment  of     ^niets,  or   their  subjects  or  dependents,  shall 

ed*tuTn^tdCconfaemeneSdl8  detaia"  have  been  detained  and  brought  to  adjudica- 
tion by  any  Officers  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  or  of  those  of  the  East  India  Company 
and  the  said  ships  shall  be  restored  by  sentence  of  the  Court,  it  shall  be 
lawful  for  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury,  by  warrant  signed 
by  any  two  or  more  of  them,  to  direct  payment  to  be  made  out 
of  the  Consolidated  Fund  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland  of  any  costs  or  damages  which  may  be  duly  awarded,  provided  al- 
ways, that  nothing  herein  contained  shall  exempt  such  Officer  from  his 


APPENDIX.  XXVU 

liability  to   make  good  the  payment  so  made,   when  lawfully  called  upon    PERSIAN 
either  by  the  parties  interested  therein  or  by  order  of  the  said  Commis-  ' 

sioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury. 

XVIIL     And  be  it  enacted,  that  when  any  seizure  shall  be  made  by 
_     „       .  .  „  ,,       any  of  the  Commanders,  Officers,  and  crews 

The   Commissioners    of  the  J 

Treasury  may  repay   to   the  of  Her  Majesty's   ships,    or  of  those  of  the 

seizor  of  any  vessel   not    con-  _,     .  —    ,.       ~.  ,    .    ,  iini 

demned  the  expenses  incurred  East  India  Company,  and  judgment  shall  be 

y  given  against  the  seizor,  or  when  such  seizure 

shall  be  relinquished  by  him,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  said  Commissioners 

of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury,  if  to  their  discretion  it  shall  seem  meet,  by 

warrant  signed  by  any  two  or  more  of  them,  to  direct  payment  to  be 

made  out  of  the  Consolidated  Fund  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great 

Britain  and  Ireland  of  such  costs  and  expenses  as  the  seizor  may  have 

incurred  in  respect  of  such  seizure,  or  any  proportional  part  thereof. 


INSTRUCTIONS  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA, 
RELATIVE  TO  THE  SLAVE  TRADE. 

The  Treaty  mentions  vessels  the  property  of  Vessels  belonging  to  the  Imaum 