

not  hereafter  be  charged  with  Treasury  fees  or  Exchequer  fees  of  any  des- 
cription. 

XII.  Provided   always,  and  be  it  enacted,  that  in  order  to  entitle 

the  captors  to  receive  the  said  bounty  money- 
Proof  of  tonnage.  .  .    "■ 
and  tonnage  ot  the  ship  or  vessel  so  seized 

and  condemned  shall  be  proved  to  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's 

Treasury  by  producing  a  copy,  duly  certified,  of  the  sentence  or  decree  of 

condemnation,  or  by  such  documentary  or  other  evidence  as  they  may 

deem  satisfactory. 

XIII.  Provided  always,  and  be  it  enacted,  that  in  order  to  entitle 

Copy  of  sentence  of  condem-  the  CaPtorS  to  reCeive  the  Said  b°Unt^  m0ney 
nation  to  be  produced  to  the  on  slaves,  the  number  of  men,  women,  and 
Commissioners  of  the  Treasury.  . 

children  so  taken,  delivered  over,  and  con- 
demned shall  be  proved  to  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury 
by  producing  a  copy,  duly  certified,  of  the  sentence,  or  decree  of  con- 
demnation, and  also  a  certificate  under  the  hand  of  the  proper  Officer 
or  Officers,  Military  or  Civil.,  who  may  be  appointed  to  receive  such 
slaves. 

XIV.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  where  any  slaves  or  persons  treated 
One  moiety  of  the   bounty     as  slaves  shall  be  seized  on  board  any  ship  or 

only  to  be  paid  in  certain  cases,  yegg^  taken  and  condemned  in  pursuance  of 
the  said  agreements  and  of  this  Act,  but  who  shall  not  have  been  deli- 
vered over  in  consequence  of  death,  sickness,  or  other  inevitable  circum- 
stance, it  shall  be  lawful  for  the   said  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's 

D 


XtVl  APPENDIX. 

TERS1AN    Treasury,  if  to  their  discretion  it  shall  seem  meet,  to  direct  payment  of 
GULF.      one  moiety  of  the  bounty  which  would  have  been  due  in  each  case  res- 
pectively if  the  said  slaves  had  been  delivered  over. 

XV.  Provided  also,  and  be  it  enacted,  that  any  party  or  parties 

„   ,.      ...       '     „,  claiming  any  benefit  bv  wav  of  bounty  under 

Parties  claiming  benefit  un-  °^      J  . 

der  this  Act  may  resort  to  the     the  provisions   of  this  Act,  or  of  any  share 

Court  of  Admiralty.  „    ,  ,        „  .  „    "       ,    . 

oi  the  proceeds  ot  any  vessel  confiscated  in 
pursuance  of  the  provisions  of  the  aforesaid  agreements,  may  resort  to  the 
High  Court  of  Admiralty  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the  judgment  of  the 
said  Court  in  that  behalf,  and  that  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  Judge  of 
the  said  High  Court  of  Admiralty  to  determine  thereon,  and  also  to  hear 
and  determine  any  question  of  joint  capture  which  may  arise  upon  any 
seizure  made  in  pursuance  of  this  Act,  and  also  to  enforce  any  decrees  or 
sentences  of  the  said  Vice-Admiralty  Courts  relating  to  any  such  seizure. 