

VIII.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  where  any  ship  or  vessel  which  shall 
Bounty  on  tonnage  of  slave     nave  been  seized  and  condemned  under   the 

ships  captured  and  demolished.  provisions  of  the  said  agreements,  shall  have 
been  or  shall  be  demolished,  and  the  materials  thereof  publicly  sold  in 
separate  parts,  as  well  as  her  cargo,  there  shall  be  paid  to  the  Commanders, 
Officers,  and  crews  of  Her  Majesty's  ships  or  of  those  of  the  East 
India  Company,  in  addition  to  the  amount  of  the  proceeds  of  such 
sale  as  hereinbefore  mentioned,  a  further  bounty  on  the  tonnage  of 
such  ship  or  vessel  at  the  rate  of  thirty  shillings  for  every  ton  of  such 
tonnage. 

IX.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  where  any  ship  or  vessel  having  no 

Where  no  slaves  are  onboard       slsWeS  0n  board    sha11  have    W   Seized   and 

a  ship  seized  and  condemned  an     condemned  under  the  provisions  of  the  said 

additional  bounty  to  be  paid.  ■ '  * 

agreements,  there  shall  be  paid  to  the  Com- 
manders, Officers,  and  crews  of  Her  Majesty's  ships  or  those  of  the  East 
India  Company  an  additional  bounty  upon  the  tonnage  of  such  ship  or 
vessel  at  the  rate  of  four  pounds  for  every  ton ;  and  the  tonnage  of  all 
such  vessels  shall  be  ascertained  according  to  the  mode  of  ascertaining 
the  admeasurement  of  British  vessels,  either  by  the  principal  Officer  of 
the  customs  at  the  port  where  the  vessel  may  be  at  the  time  of  condem- 
nation, or  in  default  thereof  by  the  best  evidence  which  can  be  obtained  : 
provided  always,  that  in  every  case  in  which  any  ship  or  vessel  shall  be 
seized  with  slaves  on  board  in  which  the  bounty  calculated  upon  the 
number  of  slaves  shall  be  less  than  the  bounty  calculated  upon  the  ton- 
nage, the  Commanders  of  Her  Majesty's  ships  or  of  those  of  the  East 
India  Company  making  the  seizure  may  elect  to  take  the  bounty  calcu- 
ated  according  to  tonnage,  instead  of  the  bounty  which  would  be  pay- 
able upon  the  number  of  slaves  on  board. 


APPENDIX.  XXV 

X.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  all  bounties  payable  under  this  Act  shall    PERSIAN 
Bounties  to  be  paid    out  of     De  Paid  out  of  tne  Consolidated  Fund  of  the       GULF- 

the  Consolidated  Fund.  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ire- 

land to  the  Commanders,  Officers,  and  crews  of  Her  Majesty's  ships  and 
of  the  ships  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  such  bounties  shall  be 
issued  and  paid  by  order  from  the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's 
Treasury. 

XI.  And  be  it  enacted,  that  the  said  bounty,  as  also  all  bounties 
Bounties  not  liable  to  pay-     payable  under  any  of  the  Acts  for  the  abo- 

ment  of  fees.  lition  or  suppression  of  the  slave  trade,  shall 