

the  Imaum  as  well  as  of  his  subjects,  but  the  0f     Muscat,     Or     to     any    of    his 

Statute  only  vessels  of  his  subjects.     The  in-  > 

structions,  however,  may  stand  as  here  headed.  subjects    belonging    to    either    01 

(Sd.)     A.  S.  LeMesst/bieb,  the  following  respective  Arabian 


A.  G. 


Chiefs  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  viz.- 


1. — Shaik  Sultan  Bin  Suggur,  Shaik  of  Rasel-khyma  and  Sharyah  in 
the  Persian  Gulf,  Chief  of  the  Joasmee  tribe  of  Arabs. 

2.— Muktoom  Bin  Buttye,  Shaik  of  Debaye. 

3. — Abdool  Azeez  bin  Rashid,  Shaik  of  Ejman. 

4. — Abdullah  Bin  Rashid,  Shaik  of  Amulgavine. 

5. — Saeed  Bin  Tahnoon,  Shaik  of  the  Beni  Yas,  Chief  of  Aboothabae. 

6. — Mahomed  Bin  Khuleefa  Bin  Subman,  Chief  of  Bahrein,  or  to  any 
of  their  subjects  or  dependants. 

Instructions. 

To  the  Commanders  of  the  Honourable  East  India  Company's  ships 
for  carrying  into  execution  the  provisions  of  the  Act  of  XI  and  XII  Vic. 
Cap.  128,  entitled  an  Act  for  carrying  into  effect  the  agreement  between 
Her  Majesty  and  the  Imaum  of  Muscat  for  the  more  effectual  suppression 
of  the  slave  trade,  also  for  carrying  into  execution  the  provisions  of  the 
Act  of  XII  and  XIII  Vic,  Cap.  84,  entitled  an  Act  for  carrying  into 
effect  engagements  between  Her  Majesty  and  certain  Arabian  Chiefs  in 
the  Persian  Gulf  for  the  more  effectual  suppression  of  the  slave  trade, 
copies  of  both  of  which  Acts  are  hereto  annexed. 

I.  You  are  required  to  make  yourselves  fully  accquainted  with  the 
different  provisions  of  these  Acts  of  Parliament  and  to  guide  yourselves 
accordingly  by  them  in  all  your  acts  when  you  meet  or  fall  in  with  any 
vessels  belonging  to  the  Imaum  of  Muscat,  or  any  of  his  subjects,  or 
with  any  vessel  belonging  to  any  or  either  of  the  Arabian  Chiefs  therein 


APPENDIX.  XXIX 

respectively  named,  or  any  of  their  subjects  or  dependants  engaged  in  the  SLAVE 
slave  trade,  or  fitted  out  for  the  purpose  contrary  to  the  provisions  of  trade. 
these  Acts. 

II.  Your  attention  is  to  be  directed  to  the  third  article  of  the  agree- 
ment with  the  Imaum,  dated  2nd  October  1845,  as  set  out  in  the  Act  of 
XI*  and  XII.  Vic,  Cap.  128. 

III.  And  also  to  the  provisions  of  the  first  Section  of  these  Acts, 
which  empower  the  Commanders  of  the  ships  of  war  of  the  East  India 
Company  to  visit  vessels  belonging  to  the  subjects  of  the  Imaum,  within 
the  limits  therein  specified,  and  also  to  visit  vessels  belonging  to  the 
Chiefs,  or  the  subjects  or  dependants  of  the  Chiefs  named  in  Act  XII  and 
XIII  Vic,  Cap.  84,  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  slave  trade. 

IV.  You  will  visit  and  detain  in  any  seas,  except  within  the  limits 
exempted  by  the  terms  of  the  third  article  of  the  said  agreement 
(contained  in  Act  XI  and  XII  Vic,  Cap.  128),  any  merchant  vessel 
belonging  to  the  subjects  of  the  Imaum  of  Muscat  which  shall  upon  reason- 
able grounds  be  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  the  export  of  slaves  from 
the  African  dominions  of  the  Imaum  of  Muscat,  or  the  importation  of 
slaves  from  any  part  of  Africa  into  his  possessions  in  Asia,  excepting 
such  only  as  are  engaged  in  the  transport  of  slaves  from  one  port  to 
another  of  his  own  dominions  in  Africa,  between  the  port  of  Lamoo 
to  the  north  and  its  dependencies,  the  northern  limits  of  which  is  the 
north  point  of  Khyhoo  Island  in  1°57'  south  latitude,  and  the  port  of 
Keelwa  to  the  south  and  its .  dependencies,  the  southern  limit  of  which 
is  the  Sonya  Manara  or  Pagoda  point  in  9°2'  south  latitude,  including 
the  Islands  of  Zanzibar,  Pemba,  and  Monfia,  or  any  vessel  fitted  out  for 
that  purpose,  and  to  send  or  carry  away  such  vessel,  together  with  its 
masters,  sailors,  passengers,  slaves,  and  cargo,  for  the  purpose  of  such 
vessel  being  brought  to  adjudication  as  in  the  Act  of  XI  and  XII  Vic 
mentioned. 