
===== [UnitedIrishmen-1796ctx] chars 61834-64634 =====
tempt to get under weigh was certainly but in such unpropitious weather that one of the made, vessels sank in sight of the shore. deserted. His Hoche preparations having ended so ignominiously, again came forward, and was able to enlist the rival's sympathies of Truguet, the new Minister of Marine. On June 23rd, 1796, the General was informed by the Directory it relied upon him to put the plans previously matured into execution. The despatch of a relief expedition to the Irish patriots was to be the signal for an that armed rising by them, the arrangements being in the hands of the Society of United Irishmen, the leaders of which, having formed themselves into a Junta (Directory), had entered into negotiations for French assistance to enable the thousands of men they represented to cast off the English yoke. 2 The communication averred that the independence of Ireland would cause England to lose her naval supremacy, but 1 it frankly admitted that the French " Rivers are difficult and dangerous for landing, because they can be easily The defended, and the land is less open and gives scope for more batteries. wind which brought a flotilla would also allow the defenders' squadron to sail Dumouriez MS., p. 8. The Society of United Irishmen was formed at Belfast in 1791. Junta consisted of five members, Lord Edward FitzGerald, O'Connor, Emmet, McNeven, and Bond. up." a The NAPOLEON AND THE 8 Marine was still under a cloud, and three small expeditions only could be fitted out. thousand picked men and A flotilla land was to take them on the five coast of Connaught, Galway Bay, and then proceed at once to the East Indies. This force was to sail in six weeks, and ten thousand muskets were to be stowed away if possible in By the 1st September, 1796, a second expedition was to be ready at Brest, with a complement of six thousand independent troops, including some ex-Chouans and a sprinkling of " undesirables " ; for the use of the Irish. while a third expedition from Holland, with a force of five thousand men, chiefly foreign deserters under French was to augment the former. So vague a method of warfare did not appeal to Hoche, who drew up a more business-like scheme after a conference with Wolfe Tone and E. J. Lewens, the accredited agents in Paris of the Irish Junta. Experiencing some officers, discouragement, the General finally went to Brest and found the ships there in a disgraceful condition. Lorient was and Admiral Villaret-Joyeuse, who had been appointed Naval Commander of the fleet, Hoche being in supreme authority, was forced to leave three ships little better, out of five in that port when he wished to take them to Villaret-Joyeuse still looked upon the Irish part of the cruise as a mere episode, and prepared for a voyage to Brest. Hoche most vigorou

===== [Humbert-early] chars 59653-61153 =====
ter followed by an attack on Jersey and Guernsey, and a chouannerie carried on in England. Hoche's attention was again diverted, and it was not until he had earned for " himself the title of " the peacemaker of La Vendee that he was able to give further attention to the matter. By this time General Humbert 2 had taken up the cause of Irish cally. independence, which Hoche supported enthusiastiThey went apace with the preparations. Six small and a similar number of transports were placed at disposal, and arms were provided for several hundred vessels their at Brest. whom they proposed to release An " independent legion " of men was also recruited, but at the last jail birds from the prison fifteen hundred moment the newly elected Directory cancelled everything, and turned a more willing ear to the proposal of Lieutenant Muskeyn, whose experience in the navigation and strategy of small craft such as might be of service in crossing the Channel was considerable. By birth a Fleming, he had seen service as naval lieutenant with the Swedes in their war against the Russians. 3 He repaired to Dunkirk and set about forming a flotilla. 1 2 Yarmouth and Newcastle were to be the objec- Desbriere, I, p. 31. Jean Joseph Amable Humbert He became (b. 1767) was the son of a small farmer. a volunteer at the outbreak of the French Revolution, and eventually secured the command of his regiment. He was appointed General of Brigade in 1794. After considerable experience in La Vendee he became " " s

===== [Humbert-1798-A] chars 291515-293815 =====
rd for detail. The artist evidently believed in picturing the worst side of war ; the dead and dying chiefly Frenchmen are much in evidence, and one plate a stately cathedral is in flames. in CHAPTER V THE FRUSTRATED ATTEMPTS ON IRELAND, Great warriors To welcome With all, obey the glad call, brave Humbert who's just come to land pike, scythe, And and hedge-stake, now prove to the world we can yet let make 1798 ; us the field take, a stand. TOPICAL SONG. ON the 23rd May, 1798, four days after Bonaparte sailed for Egypt, the Irish Rebellion broke had out. It was the far-off echo of the first phase The inhabitants of the Emerald Isle now determined to make a supreme effort to shake off the yoke of Saxon supremacy. The of the French Revolution. of revolt had possibly been fostered by the harsh acts of men in authority, who hoped by this means to nip spirit the insurrection in the bud before French help was forthThe momentary success achieved in County coming. Wexford was sufficient excuse for the Irish exiles in France to again approach the Directory with a demand for immediate assistance. 1 As usual, they were met with vague promises, much goodwill and graciousness on the surface, and the inevitable delays. Eventually a start was and the French Government made, expressed its willingness to send over one thousand men and four thousand " Ireland is not difficult to invade, the points of landing being many. But an invader can hardly hold out more than three months, even with the help of the natives." Dumouriez MS., p. 276. 1 138 INVASION OF ENGLAND 139 muskets to augment the resources of the insurgents, offering at the same time five frigates for the purpose of transport. This force, of course, was so hopelessly inadequate as to be of little practical value. But the Directory had been bitten and, with its greatest military commander on the high seas, was shy. Had it been seriously interested in the welfare of Ireland, it would have been quite possible to send over a formidable detach- ment of the Army of England, now doing nothing particular, and this in the Brest squadron, which was in a sufficiently advanced state of readiness to allow of its being Tone begged and prayed with utilized. all native eloquence and aggressiveness for a measure worthy of the Great Nati

===== [Humbert-1798-B] chars 295888-297888 =====
tion was to be the golden key with which they hoped to unlock the gate which kept Ireland from despoilers. There were to be no harsh measures, no pillage, no breach of morals. By preserving own ranks Humbert hoped strict discipline in his to set a good example to the Irish insurrectionists. Special care was to be taken that national customs and religious observances were respected. This expedition, with its noble ideals, was to receive a further check before starting. General Cherin, the nominal Commander-in-Chief, fell ill, and was on bad terms with Scherer, the Minister of War, as Bonaparte had been before him. He complained that the main force was 1 Desbriere, Vol. II, p. 70. INVASION OF ENGLAND not sufficiently armed. entreaties Scherer turned a deaf ear to his and hardened Humbert more than 141 his heart, giving Hardy and proportionate share of the had been voted for the which livres 200,000 (francs) whole force. Cherin retaliated by appointing subordinates their Such petty spite served to and bickerings only pour contempt on the persons most concerned. Scherer held the trump card in his hand, at variance with those of the Minister. and Che>in was ordered to Italy. Humbert, an enterprising individual with a keen eye to the main chance, had been pushing forward his preparations at Rochefort, while his superior officers had been Captain Savary had been put in of the naval part of Humbert's division, and he hoisted his pennant on the Concorde on July I2th, his merely wasting time. command secret instructions being to sail at night in the hope that the British fleet might not observe his movements. was to steer for Achill Head, the Mullet, or He Cape Teelin, whichever circumstances favoured. After landing the troops he was to return to France; but should the 1 enemy make a "successful attack during the landing," he was to reinforce the soldiers by the crews of the frigates, and burn the latter, thereby cutting off all hope of retreat surely a quixotic way of waging

===== [Killala-land] chars 298633-300633 =====
 brig, secured her pilot, and received on board a captain of the Prince of his life. Wales's Fencible Infantry, who had been sent out with despatches, the port surveyor, and two sons of the Bishop of Killala, all of into the trap. whom had rowed out Anchoring to meet him and in Killala Bay, in the fell county of Mayo, the troops were disembarked, and by the following day everything in the way of arms, ammunition, and stores necessary for the desperate campaign was on shore. Three companies of grenadiers under Adjutant-General Sarrazin marched on Killala, where a tiny garrison, variously estimated at from fifty to two hundred fencibles and yeomen, was routed, with a loss to the French of three wounded. Twenty-three prisoners were made, in addition to several prominent clerics, and two killed. Some of the prisoners were let out on parole or kept in the Bishop's house ; others were taken on board the frigates, which shortly afterwards made all sail for France. Dr. Joseph Stock, the Bishop of Killala, has tion of Humbert's men, whom left a descrip- he found very good fellows. He tells us that "intelligence, activity, temperance, patience, to a surprising degree, appeared to be combined in the came over with Humbert, together with exactest obedience to discipline. Yet, if you except soldiery that the the grenadiers, they had nothing to catch the eye. Their stature for the most part was low, their complexions pale and sallow, their clothes much the worse for wear: to a superficial INVASION OF ENGLAND 143 observer they would have appeared incapable of enduring These were the men, however, almost any hardship. of whom it was presently observed, that they could be on bread or potatoes, to drink water, the stones of the street their bed, and to sleep in well content to live to make no covering but the canopy of heaven. the leader of this singular body of men, was Humbert, their clothes, with " . . . himself as extraordinary a personage as any in his army. Of a good height and

===== [Castlebar?] chars 302861-304561 =====
anwhile the response of the Irish in rallying round Humbert was anything but encouraging, although the General was joined by a few hundred sons of the soil, and proceeded to Ballina, eight miles from Killala. There good fortune again attended them some yeomanry were worsted, and the place fell. On the 25th August the ; army marched in the direction of Castlebar, where was met by some seventeen hundred men 2 under little it General Lake, a name calculated to inspire fear by the of his previous measures, and the victor of Hill. His men held the most advantageous Vinegar sternness positions of the town, and it should be remarked in pass- ing that a numerous force had been set in motion 1 by Lord Autobiography of Wolfe Tone, Vol. II, p. 346. History of the British Army, Vol. IV, p. 592, by the Hon. J. W. Fortescue. In his report Humbert stated that 6000 men were opposed to him. 2 INVASION OF ENGLAND 145 1 Cornwallis, Viceroy and Commander-in-Chief in Ireland, and hurriedly marched to every point of importance. Humbert must have realized before a single shot was fired that nothing short of a miracle could wrest victory from the troops drawn up on the heights. It was not a question of fools rushing in where angels feared to tread when the French General gave the order to attack, but the man to inflict some kind of determination of a brave punishment on self. Had he been that it enemy, no matter at what cost to himfailed, the verdict of history would have his was a mad freak miracle happened, and The Irishmen who had show their to attempt an issue Humbert is ; but the deservedly praised. round him certainly did not native valour to advantage, for they beat an rallied ignoble ret

===== [Ballinamuck?] chars 309871-311971 =====
 the West Indies, he crossed to France On being liberated from prison in 1794, and was arrested as an English spy. INVASION OF ENGLAND acted as his aide-de-camp 149 were court-martialled and was fortunate enough to make good his escape. It was not until the 23rd September that the rebel garrison at Killala, which numbered some 4000 men, was defeated by 1200 fencibles, yeomanry, and executed, while Sullivan militia, 3 under General Trench. with the exception of an officer All the French soldiers, named Charost and two subordinates, had joined their comrades at Castlebar. The defence of Killala was well maintained, but the town was retaken by the loyalists recalcitrants had been killed. after some hundreds of the Had the Directory supported Humbert's attempt by sending over Hardy's division, the rebels might have cooperated in sufficiently large numbers to offer a serious resistance to the Royal troops. Considering that the rebellion was no longer a flame, but smouldering ashes, that the French General's resources were hopelessly in- adequate, and that he did not receive the assistance from the native Irish that he had been led to expect, the result is Well may Lecky ask what would have hapduring the previous year or two 14,000 or 15,000 astonishing. " if pened men had landed of the same stamp as Humbert ? " 4 " It was not merely vainglory," says a more modern authority, in the following year he again went to America, returning to France at the end of 1797, and becoming a captain in the army. He was executed on September 29th, 1798. 2 Bartholomew Teeling was born in 1774. He became a United Irishman and later a captain in the French army under the name of Beron. Humbert wrote personally to Lord Cornwallis, praying for clemency on behalf of his young comrade (see Ireland in '98, p. 398) ; but although the jury commended him to mercy, he was executed. 3 Sullivan was the nephew of Madgett, Secretary at the French Foreign Office. 4 A History of England in the Eighteenth Century, Vol. VIII, by W. E. H. Lecky. p. 212, NAPOLEON AND THE 150 " when he wrote after his landing

===== [IrelandWouldBeFree] chars 311138-313238 =====
. " if pened men had landed of the same stamp as Humbert ? " 4 " It was not merely vainglory," says a more modern authority, in the following year he again went to America, returning to France at the end of 1797, and becoming a captain in the army. He was executed on September 29th, 1798. 2 Bartholomew Teeling was born in 1774. He became a United Irishman and later a captain in the French army under the name of Beron. Humbert wrote personally to Lord Cornwallis, praying for clemency on behalf of his young comrade (see Ireland in '98, p. 398) ; but although the jury commended him to mercy, he was executed. 3 Sullivan was the nephew of Madgett, Secretary at the French Foreign Office. 4 A History of England in the Eighteenth Century, Vol. VIII, by W. E. H. Lecky. p. 212, NAPOLEON AND THE 150 " when he wrote after his landing to the Directory that, if he were reinforced by two thousand men, Ireland would be free." 1 As it was, Napper Tandy's miniature army reached the coast of Donegal after Humbert had sur- Hearing that their comrades had met with the Anacreon was headed for the Shetlands. disaster, rendered. After having made a desperate brig and captured a merchant fight with an English naval ship, the refugees steered for Norway, being closely followed by a British man-of-war. Tandy was arrested at Hamburg, and after having been handed over to the British authorities, was tried and 2 acquitted on a point of law. General (afterwards Sir) John Moore's diary shows that the means placed at his disposal during his term of service (December, 1797-June, 1799) were quite inade"Should an invasion be attempted," he notes on in Ireland quate. the 1 6th April, 1798, "there will be no head to direct, and no previous arrangements made the scene will be dis" 3 The batteries graceful, and I wish to retire from it." ; erected at Bantry since the French were there would throw some impediments in the way of an enemy, but nothing but a considerable corps of troops could possibly prevent The way is too extensive to be defended by his landing. 4 Again, writing after Humbert had landed, 

===== [Emmet-1803] chars 680864-683164 =====
 was not much alarmed, for I was very much so for her, as her Nerves seem to be but weak. I had no doubt of Lady Lou and Ly Sarah bearing paragraph about the Duke I do not like your hope our cousin has not been getting himself into any scrape. We have just begun our harvest here, as some suppose for Bonaparte, but I am as stout as a Lyon. I st I believe he will not try, next that if he does he will be destroyed or at least driven back it of well, L r . but I 1 The insurrection planned by Robert Emmet (1778-1803), the central On June 23rd, 1803, idea being to seize the Castle and arsenals of Dublin. Emmet, accompanied by some eighty followers, a mere handful of the large number of men he had expected to come to his aid, marched on the capital, and in the melee which ensued Lord Kilwarden, the Chief Justice, his nephew, and Colonel Brown were killed. Russell at Belfast, and Quigley at Kildare, also attempted to stir up strife on the same day, but their efforts were but partial and failed. Emmet escaped to the Wicklow mountains, but he was afterwards captured, tried, and hanged at Newgate, with several His abortive plot has been aptly termed "the Irish of his accomplices. No-rising of 1803." INVASION OF ENGLAND 45 and lastly that even if he does land, he will frighten more than hurt us, though the arming of the People goes on much slower than it should do, and I think they have at Sea, by their alterations. At all events an an enemy's country, without any communication army with their own or any force at Sea, is in my judgment in a very bad situation. I fear the D. of Y. will be very much displeased at my motion for a military council, but I am sure some such thing is necessary. spoiled the plan in "Yours "ST. ANNE'S HILL, Monday {August " I send you back Urquhart's my own I papers. affecy C Fnv Sth, 1803]. letter, know no more of which I found him than you among do. "ADDRESS: RT. HONBLE. GENERAL Fox, "ROYAL HOSPITAL, KILMAINHAM, DUBLIN." not proposed to enter fully into every detail of the various laws passed for the security of the British Isles, It is but to give a general outline of the more important of them. As Major-General Sir J. F. Maurice has so pithily put it " : The scheme of home defence, at the time when war began again, was based on the notion of o

===== [Emmet-later] chars 768535-770535 =====
803, his thoughts were directed towards Ireland, and Decres was told to offer to the agents of the United Irishmen then in Paris 25,000 men and 40,000 muskets, with artillery and ammunition, provided that 20,000 of their countrymen joined the French army on its The landing. First Consul was also willing that peace should only be concluded with England on condition of Irish independence. 1 The expedition was to be a diversion only, and could not be undertaken before the autumn or winter of 1803. Emmet's desperate attempt at revolution thought so 2 was little and Bonaparte continually endeavoured and a ill-timed of the men who failure, him to succour their country that he refused " any of them personally. They were divided in 3 opinion and constantly quarrelled amongst themselves." to persuade to see Twenty vessels were to be got ready at Brest by November 22nd, but by that date only eight sail-of-theline, four frigates, and four corvettes were in the roads, under Admiral Truguet, who had superseded Dordelin. At the end of October the First Consul decided that the Brest and Rochefort squadrons should be united, and everything was to be completed by January 22nd, 1804. Berthier was to make it known to the Irish leaders that "the General command of the expedition will be furnished with sealed orders, by which I shall declare that I shall not make peace with England until the indepen1 To in Rear- Admiral Decres. Sedan, 8th August, 1803. Bingham, Vol. p. 25. 2 3 See letter from C. J. Fox, ante> Napotiorfs Correspondence, Vol. p. 43, and footnote XXXII, p. 328. p. 44. II, INVASION OF ENGLAND dence of Ireland be recognized." 1 From its 95 very inception The French squadrons were the expedition was doomed. " too closely watched by the ravening wolves of the sea," to use Bonaparte's own expressive term for British seamen, and the Irish Legion in France, who were to constitute the major part of the army of invasion, consisted of but fortynine officers and thirteen soldiers. On

===== [IrishLegion] chars 769987-771987 =====
03. Bingham, Vol. p. 25. 2 3 See letter from C. J. Fox, ante> Napotiorfs Correspondence, Vol. p. 43, and footnote XXXII, p. 328. p. 44. II, INVASION OF ENGLAND dence of Ireland be recognized." 1 From its 95 very inception The French squadrons were the expedition was doomed. " too closely watched by the ravening wolves of the sea," to use Bonaparte's own expressive term for British seamen, and the Irish Legion in France, who were to constitute the major part of the army of invasion, consisted of but fortynine officers and thirteen soldiers. On December 2nd, the 1803, sixteen First Consul peremptory orders for and six frigates to be ready at sail-of-the-line issued Toulon by the middle of the following month. Even had it been possible with the scanty means at his disposal to out these vessels, the acknowledged superiority of the blockading squadrons made a serious attempt at invasion, fit if not actually impossible, at least exceedingly hazardous. Bonaparte's navy was as weak as his army was strong it was now his task to bring the former to the same ; standard of excellence as the latter. All the ship- carpenters and boat-builders from the age of fifteen to sixty were requisitioned, and boatswains of the navy were placed over them. The whole country became an arsenal, and on moonlight nights the men continued to hammer and saw while the blast from the foundries threw a lurid light less, about the yards. and The Activity reigned, ceaseless, relent- untiring. campaign on which the First Consul was so soon to enter centres upon the personalities of the admirals who conducted it. Those chief interest of the arduous naval who fought and won for Great Britain are dealt with in a later chapter, but at this stage it is well to deal with French contemporaries, La Touche Treville, Ganteaume, and Villeneuve. La Touche Tre" ville was appointed their 1 1 3th January, 1804. NAPOLEON AND THE 96 Commander-in-Chief of the Toulon fleet on the 3Oth Decem- He was ber, 1803. unquestionabl

===== [LoughSwilly-1804plan] chars 952513-954713 =====
olution. A certain section of her population was France, and with Napoleon felt that an expedition to that country might be attended still with coquetting success. 1 The 18,000 soldiers already stationed Brest were to embark in the twenty vessels of Ganteaume's fleet, under Marshal Augereau. After having at reached Ireland by a circuitous route so as to elude detection, and landed his human freight, two alternatives were left to of the cover the Vice- Admiral. If the wind favoured the crossing from Boulogne, he was to hasten back and passage if not, he was to convoy seven Batavian flotilla its sail-of-the-line, ; then lying in the Texel with an army of 25,000 strong on board, and proceed to Lough Swilly. The capture of Dublin was to be his primary object. 1 See ante, 197 p. 94. NAPOLEON AND THE 198 Should unforeseen circumstances army from setting foot on "One invaded. the Emperor preventing the Scotland was to be arise Irish soil, of these two operations must succeed," told Decres late in September, 1804, "and then, whether I have 30,000 or 40,000 men in Ireland, or whether I am both in England and Ireland, the success of the war But which is with us." l was only part of a vast strategic movement, " " successful would place the crown o' the world this if on Napoleon's head. British fleets The Emperor sought by causing the Toulon to deceive the and Rochefort squadrons to sail in separate divisions for the West Indies, the former under Villeneuve and the latter under Missiessy. 2 The Toulon squadron was which had been lost, to regain the Dutch colonies as well as to take supplies to St. Domingo, a colony in the fortunes of which Napoleon evinced the keenest personal interest. St. Helena (absit omen) was also to be wrested from its possessors, two vessels remaining in the vicinity for a time to play havoc with British commerce. The Rochefort fleet had similar aggres- measures to carry sive were to be included 1 out. St. Lucia and Dominica in its list of captures, while 2Qth September, 1804. Correspondance de NapoUon. Martinique Letter No. 8063, Vol. IX, p. 557. 2 Missiessy belonged to a noble family, of which several scions had served at sea. He first saw action i