                                                 14

                                MARKING TIME

T11r Emperor Nicholas I exemplified the militaristic spirit that came
naturally to the Romanovs. 1 His natural sympathy for legitimist principles, h
aversion to the ideas of nationalism and liberalism that were coming to ti
fore elsewhere in Europe, were fortified by the experience of the Decembri
revolt that marred his accession. The tsar exaggerated the dangers th
threatened his empire's security, and sought to re'.nforce it by applying simp
military solutions to complex problems. His fears were played on by office
of the Third Department and others in his entourage. In the first months of ti
reign the armed forces were subjected to a minor purge. This was followed t
measures of administrative centralization. Several leading posts were entrustc
to members of the ruling dynasty, while the emperor's personal adjutant
already referred to, played an important role as extraordinary inspectors an
controllers.
   Less defensibly, Nicholas maintained the tradition set by his immedia1
predecessors of taking an inordinately close interest in the minutiae of militar
service: staff tables, uniforms, decorations, and above all drill. It was no rarit~
a contemporary noted, to see 40,000 men on parade in St. Petersburg-indeL"
the capital's main square had room for more than twice that number. The ts<
was a past master in judging the finesse and precision of their movements ash
took the salute. Reputedly he had memorized and could imitate vocally each r
the bugler's calls. 2 There was something almost sensual about his infatuatio
with the parade-ground. From Voznesensk, where he attended manoeuvres i
1837, he wrote to his wife: 'I don't think there has ever been anything mor
splendid, perfect, or overwhelming since soldiers first appeared on earth.' .i\
one emotional moment during the spectacle 'tears welled up, he placed hi
hand on his heart, raised his eyes to Heaven and prayed aloud: "O Lord.
thank Thee that Thou hast given me such power. Grant me the strength nevc
to abuse it." ' 3
   Not sparing himself in the execution of his royal duties, Nicholas expectc•
equally high standards of his subordinates. He once spotted some men of th
Izmaylovsky regiment marching in disorderly fashion along a country road
The major-general in command was summarily despatched to the guardhou~
for a week and the case published in daily orders to the entire Guards Corps t•
  1 Thi~ theme is explored further in our '!\'Iii. Styk'.
  ! Bisman:k, Russ1sche Krie?,">mad11, pp. 12, 30, 37: \Oil Ha.xthau,cn, A.'negm1ad11 R11">slu11!1'
p. 119.
  J Schiemann, Geschichte, iii. 327-8.
