


4  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

danger  and  did  nothing  to  second  the  efforts  which 
were  made  to  save  them. 

The  princes  began  by  associating  with  them  in  the 
execution  of  their  plan  some  of  the  younger  and  more 
active    members    of  the    great    Polish    families — the 
Oginskis,  the  Poniatowskis,  and  the  Zamoyskis.     They 
thus  formed  a  strong  party  in  the  country,  which  by 
its   wealth  and  influence   was  able   to   give  effective 
support  to  the   Government  and   to  check  the  flood 
of  anarchy  which  was  rapidly  undermining  the  State. 
In  the  midst  of  the  general  indolence  and  disorganisa- 
tion, people   looked  up  with  respectful  awe  to  these 
self-denying  patriots  who,  in  the  midst  of  wealth  and 
luxury,  devoted  their  days  and  nights  to  the  improve- 
ment of  the  administration  and  the  strengthening  of 
the  position  of  their  country  with  regard  to  foreign 
powers.       Not    content  with   being  themselves    hard 
workers    in    the    cause,    the    two    princes    selected    a 
number  of  intelligent  and  able  young  men  whom  they 
trained    at   their    own    expense,    both   at   home    and 
abroad,  for  the  various  branches  of  the  public  service. 
Their  object  was,  above  all  things,  to  establish  a  strong 
and    orderly  government   in    Poland,   and  their  own 
conduct  of  affairs  was  a  model  on  a  small  scale  of  such 
a   government.       With    their    immense    wealth    and 
extensive  social  relations  all  over  the   country,  they 
constantly  stepped   in   to  remedy  the  defects  of  the 
existing  system,  protecting  the  poor  and  weak  against 
the  rich,  coming  forward  as  the  champions  of  order  in 
the  midst  of  the  incessant  conflict  of  opinion  in  the 
Diets,  and  setting  an  example  of  steady  work  and  high 
•  political  aims.       This   naturally  excited  the  jealousy 


INTRODUCTORY  5 

and  alarm  of  other  great  Polish  families,  such  as  the 
Potockis  and  the  Radziwills ;  but  they  persistently 
carried  out  their  scheme  of  action  in  the  face  of  all 
obstacles. 

Foreign  alliances  at  that  time  took  a  very  different 
shape  from  what  they  do  at  present.  In  1746  Eng- 
land, Austria  and  Russia  were  combined  against 
Frederick  the  Great,  who  was  supported  by  France 
and  Turkey.  The  Czartoryskis  sided  with  the  former 
powers,  the  Potockis  with  the  latter.  Poland  had 
sunk  into  such  a  state  of  anarchy  that  no  Polish 
statesman  could  gain  any  great  influence  among  his 
countrymen  unless  he  had  the  support  of  some  foreign 
ambassador,  and  it  was  therefore  necessary  for  the 
Czartoryskis  to  declare  themselves  openly  as  the 
partisans  of  one  of  the  great  powers  which  struggled 
with  each  other  for  leadership  in  the  moribund  Polish 
State,  especially  as  the  King  himself,  alarmed  at  their 
steadfast  and  uncompromising  honesty,  had  gone  over 
to  the  side  of  Prussia  and  France.  This  was  the 
beginning  of  the  alliance  of  the  Czartoryskis  with 
Russia — an  alliance  into  which  they  entered  with 
the  best  of  motives,  but  which  had  the  most 
disastrous  consequences.  The  first  fruit  of  the  alliance 
was  the  mission  of  Stanislas  Augustus  Poniatowski, 
the  nephew  of  the  Czartoryski  princes,  to  the  Russian 
Court  in  the  capacity  of  secretary  to  Sir  Hanbury 
Williams,  the  British  Ambassador.  Poniatowski, 
young,  handsome,  and  with  all  the  accomplishments 
of  a  courtier,  speedily  gained  the  favour  of  the  Grand- 
Duchess,  afterwards  Empress,  Catherine,  and  this 
greatly  strengthened  the  position  of  the  Czartoryskis 