


12        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSK1 

was  instructed  to  demand  that  the  disabilities  of  the 
dissenters  should  be   removed.     The  princes   replied 
that  in  the  then  existing  state  of  public  opinion   it 
would  be  impossible  to  carry  such  a  measure  in  the 
Polish  Parliament,  upon    which    Catherine    sent  her 
troops  into  the  country  to  ravage  the  estates  of  the 
Czartoryskis  and  the  King,  and  issued  a  proclamation 
condemning  the  new  policy  of  reform  and  promising 
that   the    Empress    would   take   all   those    who   had 
grievances  under  her  special  protection.     The  Czar- 
toryskis, in  no  way  cowed  by  these  barbarous  reprisals, 
undauntedly  stood  their   ground,  and    when    Repnin 
called  upon  them  to   resign  office,  replied  that  they 
did  not  hold  their  posts  from  the  Empress  of  Russia, 
but  from  the  King  of  Poland.*     Their  steadfastness 
and  the   abuses   committed   by  the  Russian  soldiery 
produced  such  a  reaction  in  their  favour  that  Repnin, 
hoping  thereby  to  paralyse  the  growing  opposition  to 
his  plans,  caused  some  of  the  principal  senators  to  be 
arrested  and  sent  into  the  interior  of  Russia.     Those 
who  remained,  threatened  with  a  similar  fate,  passed 
all  the  measures  that  Repnin  proposed  to  them.     The 
disabilities  of  the  dissenters  were  abolished,   and    a 
treaty  was  concluded  with  Russia  assigning  to  that 
Power  the   right  of  protecting  and    controlling  the 
Polish  administration.     But  the  great  majority  of  the 
Polish  nation  indignantly  refused  to  ratify   the    de- 
cisions of  its  intimidated  representatives.     On  the  29th 

*  '  Je  n'ai  pas  re^u  mon  emploi  de  S.  M.  Imperials,  ainsi  elle  me  pardonuera  si  je 
ne  veux  pas  m'en  defaire  a  sa  requete.  Je  suis  vieux,  tres-vieux ;  elle  me  fera 
tres-peu  de  mal  en  m'otant  le  peu  de  jours  qui  me  restent.  Mais  j'ai  trop  soil)  de 
ma  gloire  pour  ternir  la  fin  d'une  vie  qui,  j'ose  le  dire,  a  ete  passee  sans  tache  au 
service  de  ma  patrie,  par  un  acte  que  le  moude  avec  raison  condamnerait  comme 
lache  et  interesseV 


INTRODUCTORY  13 

of  February,  1768,  an  armed  confederation  was  formed 
at  Bar  to  rid  the  country  of  its  Russian  aggressors. 
Russia,  hampered  by  her  war  with  Turkey,  strove  in 
vain  to  induce  the  King  to   declare   himself  against 
the  confederates,  and  the  Czartoryskis  entered  into 
communication    with   them  in    order   to    extend   the 
movement  over  the  whole  country,  and  enable  Poland 
to  present  a  united  front  against  her  northern  neigh- 
bour.    These  efforts  failed  through  the  un popularity 
of  the    King   and   the  jealousy    of  the    other   great 
aristocratic  families.     Yet  the  confederation  stood  its 
ground  ;  its  principal  founder,  Joseph  Pulaski,  was  an 
old  retainer  of  the  Czartoryski  family ;  and  Repnin's 
successor  in  the  embassy,  Prince  Wolkonski,  reported 
to  Catherine  that  '  nothing  could  be  done  so  long  as 
the  Czartoryskis  remained  in  Warsaw.'     The  Russian 
Government  then   confiscated  their    property.      They 
persisted,  however,  in  their  patriotic  attitude,  declaring 
that  whatever  happened  they  would  remain  faithful 
to    their    country  ;  and  the    King,  feeling  that  they 
were  his  only  support  and  that  he  had  neither  the 
ability  nor  the  character  which  alone  could  in  such  a 
crisis    enable    him    to  maintain    himself,    refused    to 
abandon  them. 