

When  Augustus  III  was  called  to  the  Polish 
throne  in  1741,  Poland  was  enjoying  the  blessings  of 
peace,  while  the  surrounding  countries  were  desolated 
with  the  conflicts  of  hostile  armies ;  and  her  people 
presented  all  the  outward  signs  of  prosperity.  But  as 
a  State  she  was  powerless.  In  some  countries  it  is  a 
frequent  subject  of  complaint  that  the  people  do  riot 
take  sufficient  interest  or  part  in  politics,  and  that  the 
Government  consequently  falls  into  the  hands  of  pro- 


INTRODUCTORY  3 

fessional    politicians.       In    Poland,   not  to  take   part 
in  public  life  was  regarded  almost  as  a  crime.     Nearly 
every  voter*  was  an  active  politician ;   but  this  pro- 
duced  an    exaggerated   sense    of    the    importance    of 
individuals   in  the    State.      Each    man   had  his  own 
opinions,  and  refused  to  be  bound  by  those  of  others ; 
the    liberum    veto,    originating     in    times    when    the 
principle    of   government   by   majority   had   not   yet 
been  discovered,  was  regarded  as  a  palladium  of  liberty. 
Under    such    circumstances   government  was  impos- 
sible.t     The  Diets  had  repeatedly  to  be  dissolved  with- 
out passing  the  measures  necessary  for  administration, 
and  a  wide  field  was  opened  for  the  intrigues  of  foreign 
powers  and  ambitious  magnates,  especially  as  the  old 
principle  of  elective  monarchy  was  still  retained.     The 
two  Czartoryski  princes  set  themselves  to  the  task  of 
restoring  order  in  this  chaos,  of  combining  and  directing 
the  national  forces  which  were  dissipating  themselves 
in  futile  individual  effort,  and  of  enabling  Poland  to 
resume  her  position  among  the  independent  States  of 
Europe.     But  the  difficulty  of  the  task  was  greatly 
increased  by  the  fact  that  the  Poles  did  not  see  their 

*  It  is  a  common  mistake  among  Englishmen  to  talk  of  Poland  as  '  an  aristocratic 
republic. '  The  so-called  nobles  did  not  form  an  aristocracy  in  our  sense  of  the  term, 
but  consisted  of  all  those  who  had  political  privileges.  In  the  eighteenth  century 
they  numbered  one-fifth  of  the  population — a  proportion  considerably  greater  than 
that  of  the  electorate  to  the  population  in  England,  even  after  the  first  Reform  Bill. 

t  Another  cause  of  the  weakness  of  Poland  as  a  State  is  thus  indicated  by  Mr 
Lecky  (History  of  England  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  vi.  chap.  xxii.  p.  104) : — 
'  The  objects  of  Governments  are  not  only  various,  but  in  some  measure  incompatible, 
and  the  Dutch  constitution,  like  the  old  constitutions  of  Poland,  being  mainly  con- 
structed with  the  object  of  opposing  obstacles  to  the  encroachments  of  the  central 
power,  had  left  the  country  wholly  incapable  of  prompt  and  energetic  action  in  times 
of  public  danger.  No  augmentation  of  the  military  or  naval  forces,  no  serious 
measure  of  defence,  could  be  effected  without  the  separate  assent  of  all  the  provinces, 
and  the  forms  that  were  required  by  law  were  so  numerous  and  so  cumbrous  that  it 
was  probably  chiefly  its  more  favourable  geographical  position  that  saved  the  United 
Provinces  from  the  fate  of  Poland. ' 