

d'offrir  tout  mon  appui  aux  princes  Czartoryski  et  a  leurs  amis  et  de  ne  rien  negliger 
en  tout  ce  qui  leur  peut  procurer  surete,  appui,  et  profit.  Je  vous  fais  cette  lettre  a 
ce  sujet,  vous  assurant  d'ailleurs  de  mon  affection.  Moscou,  ce  13  Octob.  1762. 
Catherine. ' 


8          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  Biron  as  Duke  of  Courland ;  to  regulate  the 
frontier  between  Poland  and  Russia ;  and  to  give  the 
Empress  satisfaction  for  the  insult  which  had  been 
inflicted  upon  her.  That  the  Czartoryskis,  mistaken 
and  disastrous  as  their  policy  has  proved,  were 
sincere  in  their  professions  of  disinterestedness  and 
wished  only  for  the  good  of  their  country,  was  uni- 
versally acknowledged  at  the  time,  and  even  Herr 
Benoit,  the  Prussian  Ambassador,  wrote  to  Frederick 
the  Great  that  '  they  were  too  patriotic  to  seek  the 
throne  for  themselves  so  long  as  Augustus  III  was 
alive,  and  only  thought  of  the  regeneration  of  their 
country.'  Their  only  object  was  to  establish  a  strong 
arid  orderly  system  of  government  in  Poland ;  and 
finding  that  they  could  not  obtain  sufficient  support 
for  carrying  out  this  object  among  their  own  country- 
men, they  unhappily  trusted  in  the  apparent  liberalism 
and  justice  of  the  young  Empress  of  Russia. 

The  hesitation  of  Catherine,  and  the  death  of 
Augustus  III  in  1763,  necessarily  postponed  the 
execution  of  their  projects.  The  Empress,  who  had 
been  gradually  entering  into  friendly  relations  with 
Frederick  the  Great,  wrote  to  him  that  she  agreed  in 
his  opinion  that  the  crown  of- Poland  should  not 
be  retained  by  the  House  of  Saxony,  and  that  it 
should  be  given  to  a  Pole  ;  and  she  suggested  that 
Poniatowski  should  be  elected  king,  as  having  the 
least  right  to  the  crown,  he  would  be  most  under 
obligation  to  the  two  powers  that  helped  him  to  it. 
Frederick  readily  consented,  and  a  treaty  was  accord- 
ingly concluded  between  the  two  sovereigns  binding 
them  to  joint  action  with  regard  to  Poland.  This 


INTRODUCTORY  9 

alliance  opened  the  eyes  of  the  Czartoryskis  to  the 
danger  which  threatened  their  country  :  their  nephew 
Poniatowski  was  fully  aware  of  their  plans  and  had  so 
far  supported  them,  but  he  was  totally  unfitted  to 
occupy  the  throne  of  Poland  at  so  critical  a  period 
of  her  fortunes,  and  it  seemed  only  too  evident  that 
Russia  and  Prussia  intended  to  use  him  merely  as  a 
tool  for  establishing  their  influence  in  Poland  and 
perhaps  destroying  her  independence.  What  they 
most  dreaded,  however,  was  a  civil  war,  which  they 
were  convinced  could  only  precipitate  the  dangers  by 
which  Poland  was  threatened ;  and  they  accordingly 
persisted  in  the  course  of  policy  on  which  they  had 
started.  When  the  Diet  was  convoked  they  came 
supported  by  a  large  Russian  force  ;  their  opponents 
protested,  and  left  the  House ;  and  the  Czartoryskis 
at  once  took  the  opportunity  of  introducing  the  reforms 
for  which  they  had  laboured  so  long.  The  system 
under  which  the  high  State  dignitaries  were  indepen- 
dent of  each  other  and  of  the  King,  which  was  one  of 
the  chief  causes  of  the  anarchy  into  which  Poland  had 
fallen,  was  abolished,  and  replaced  by  an  organisation 
of  Ministers  appointed  by  the  sovereign  and  responsible 
to  the  Diet ;  all  classes  of  the  population  were  made 
equal  before  the  law  ;  and  a  multitude  of  smaller 
reforms,  all  in  the  same  spirit  of  liberty  and  order, 
became  part  of  the  Polish  constitution.  Rulhiere,  the 
historian  of  the  Saxon  party,  could  not  restrain  his 
admiration  at  the  Czartoryskis  having  '  in  six  weeks 
carried  out  reforms  which  the  French.,  kings  had  only 
executed  in  six  centuries.'* 