


6          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

at  the  Russian  Court.  Finding  themselves  abandoned 
by  the  King,  they  looked  more  and  more  to  St 
Petersburg  for  support,  and  the  accession  to  the 
Russian  throne  of  the  Empress  Catherine  in  1762 
seemed  at  length  to  hold  out  a  prospect  of  the  realisa- 
tion of  their  hopes.  In  a  long  letter  announcing  the 
event  to  Poniatowski,  she  informed  him  that  she 
would  at  once  send  Count  Keyserling  to  Warsaw  to 
make  Poniatowski  King  after  the  death  of  the  reigning 
sovereign  ;  or,  if  this  should  not  be  possible,  to  endea- 
vour to  obtain  the  election  to  the  throne  of  Prince 
Adam  Casimir  Czartoryski,  the  son  of  Prince  Augustus 
and  the  father  of  the  writer  of  the  following  Memoirs.* 
Catherine  was  thought  at  that  time  to  be  a 
sovereign  of  liberal  ideas,  who  would  give  her  people 
a  constitution,  and  would  introduce  a  new  era  of 
freedom  and  universal  justice.  These  illusions  were 
so  general  that  even  such  experienced  and  sagacious 
politicians  as  the  Czartoryski  princes  were  deceived  by 
them  ;  they  thought  that  the  regeneration  of  Poland, 
for  which  they  had  worked  thirty  years,  was  at  hand. 
But  King  Augustus's  favourite  Minister,  Brlml,  did 
his  utmost  to  foil  their  plans.  The  chief  dignities 
in  the  country  were  taken  from  the  Czartoryskis  and 
their  adherents  and  given  to  their  adversaries,  and 
scandalous  scenes  were  got  up  in  the  Diets  with  the 
object  of  decrying  thorn  in  the  eyes  of  the  public.! 

*  '  J'envoie  incessamment  le  Comte  Keyserling  ambassadeur  en  Pologne  pour  vous 
faire  roi,  apres  le  deces  de  celui-ci,  et  en  cas  qu'il  ne  puisse  re"ussir  pour  vous,  qxie  ce 
soit  le  Prince  Adam.'  Memoires  de  Stanislas  Auguste  Pouiatowski  et  sa  corres- 
pondance  avec  Catherine  II.  Posen,  1862. 

t  The  following  letter,  of  which  there  is  a  copy  in  the  Czartoryski  archives,  was 
addressed  on  this  subject  by  the  Empress  Catherine  to  her  ambassador  Count 
Keyserling :  '  M.  le  Comte  de  Keyserling :  Je  viens  d'apprendre  que  la  diete  en 
Pologne  est  rompue  et  que  vos  amis  ont  pense"  etre  massacres.  Je  vous  recommande 


INTRODUCTORY  ^ 

This  brought  matters  to  a  crisis.     The  two  heads  of 

o 

the  Czartoryski  family  were  growing  old,  and 
Catherine  was  showing  an  inclination  to  conclude  an 
alliance  with  Frederick  the  Great ;  it  seemed  to  them 
that  if  they  did  not  at  once  take  decisive  action,  all  the 
fruit  of  their  life-labour  might  be  lost.  The  occasion 
was  afforded  by  the  candidature  of  Prince  Charles  of 
Saxony,  the  favourite  son  of  the  King  of  Poland,  for 
the  dukedom  of  Courland.  The  Russian  candidate, 
Biron,  was  supported  by  the  Czartoryskis,  but  the 
majority  of  the  senate  declared  itself  in  favour  of 
Prince  Charles,  and  a  note  asserting  his  claims  and  in- 
timating doubts  as  to  the  legitimacy  of  Catherine  was 
addressed  by  the  Ministry  to  the  Russian  ambassador. 
This  was  equivalent  to  a  rupture  with  Russia,  and 
the  Czartoryskis  proposed  to  Catherine  that  they 
should  form  an  armed  confederacy,  not  against  the 
King  of  Poland,  but  against  his  Minister  Bruhl, 
recalling  the  words  of  the  Due  de  Gramont  to  Louis 
XIV  :  '  We  make  war  against  Cardinal  Mazarin,  but 
we  serve  your  Majesty.'  The  confederacy  was  to 
take  the  government  of  the  country  into  its  own 
hands,  restore  order  and  reform  abuses,  and  after 
the  death  of  Augustus  III  give  up  the  throne  to  a 
prince  whose  election  should  be  agreeable  to  Russia. 
In  order  to  avoid  a  civil  war,  the  Czartoryskis  asked 
that  Russia  should  send  an  overwhelming  force  into 
the  country  to  support  them,  and  in  return  they 
promised  to  recognise  Catherine  as  Empress  of  Russia, 