

*  A  French  edition,  with  a  preface  by  M.  Charles  de  Mazade,  of  the  French 
Academy,  was  published  in  Paris  in  May,  18S7  by  M.  M.  Plon,  Nourrit,  &  Co. 


viii  PREFACE 

who  had  made  Prince  Adam  his  Minister  and  con- 
fidential friend.  Of  the  remainder  of  his  busy  and 
eventful  life  no  detailed  history  has  yet  appeared. 
It  is  not  attempted  in  the  present  work  to  furnish  such 
a  history,  but  only  to  supplement  the  Memoirs  by 
diplomatic  papers,  and  other  matter  hitherto  unpub- 
lished, which  are  of  especial  interest  to  an  English 
reader.  The  documents  and  extracts  from  private 
letters  and  diaries  have  been  copied  or  translated  from 
the  originals  in  the  archives  of  the  Czartoryski  family, 
the  introductory  chapter  is  based  on  facts  taken  from 
the  late  M.  B.  Zaleski's  excellent  biography  of  the 
Prince,  unfortunately  unfinished,  and  the  account  of 
his  stay  in  England  after  the  collapse  of  the  Polish 
Revolution  of  1830-1  is  derived  from  a  manuscript 
work  now  in  preparation,  which  has  been  kindly  placed 
at  my  disposal  by  M.  L.  de  Gadon,  secretary  to  Prince 
Ladislas  Czartoryski,  the  son  of  Prince  Adam  and 
the  present  head  of  the  family.  In  order  to  elucidate 
the  text,  the  Memoirs  and  other  papers  have  been 
arranged  in  order  of  date,  and  are  connected  by  a  brief 
narrative  of  the  incidents  to  which  they  refer,  thus 
presenting,  it  is  hoped,  a  clear,  if  incomplete,  survey  of 
the  career  of  a  statesman  whose  distinguished  abilities, 
lofty  virtue,  and  ever-fervent  patriotism  mark  him 
out  as  one  of  the  noblest  and  most  striking  figures  of 

the  century. 

A.  G. 


JHtmoirs  of  prince  Jltmm  QUariorgsfei 


CHAPTER  I 

INTRODUCTORY    TO    THE    MEMOIRS. 

THE  Czartoryskis  come  of  an  old  Lithuanian  family, 
related  to  the  royal  dynasty  of  the  Jagiellons.  In 
1569,  John  and  Alexander  Czartoryski  took  a  promi- 
nent part  in  bringing  about  the  union  of  Poland  with 
Lithuania,  and  during  the  seventeenth  century  various 
other  members  of  the  family  distinguished  themselves 
by  their  valour  in  battle  and  their  ability  a,s  politicians 
and  churchmen,  but  it  did  not  attain  the  height  of  its 
celebrity  until  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  centur}^ 
when,  in  the  words  of  Mickiewicz,  it  became  the  only 
private  family  in  Europe  that  had  a  political  history. 
The  heads  of  the  house  were  at  that  time  the  Princes 
Michael  and  Augustus.  Michael,  the  eldest,  a  man 
of  remarkable  talents  and  energy,  received  an  excellent 
training  in  statesmanship  under  his  friend  Count 
Fleming,  the  Minister  of  King  Augustus  II,  and 

VOL.  I.  A 


2          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

rapidly  rose  to  a  position  of  almost  unexampled  in- 
fluence among  his  countrymen.  Augustus,  his  brother, 
proud  and  reserved  in  character,  but  ambitious  and 
passionate,  chose  the  military  career.  He  became  a 
Knight  of  Malta,  and  took  part  in  the  capture  of 
Belgrade  under  Prince  Eugene,  who  presented  him 
with  a  sword  of  honour  in  recognition  of  his  bravery  on 
the  occasion.  In  1729,  he  became  a  Major-General 
in  the  Polish  army,  and  in  1731,  after  a  duel  with  one 
of  his  rivals  for  the  hand  of  Madame  Denhoff,  a  lady 
of  rare  intelligence  and  immense  wealth,  she  selected 
him  out  of  a  crowd  of  suitors,  among  whom  were 
various  foreign  princes,  such  as  the  Duke  of  Braganza, 
the  Prince  of  Charolais,  and  the  Duke  of  Holstein. 
Prince  Augustus  thus  became  one  of  the  wealthiest 
men  in  Europe,  and  by  good  management  he  not  only 
paid  the  debts  on  his  wife's  estates,  but  doubled  her 
income.  At  the  end  of  the  first  year  after  their 
marriage,  he  sent  to  her  a  number  of  boxes  full  of 
gold  pieces,  representing  the  revenue  from  her  estates, 
which  she  at  once  ordered  to  be  returned  to  him ; 
and  this  ceremony  was  repeated  annually  during  the 
forty  years  of  their  married  life. 