

Even  Catherine  was  impressed  by  this  noble 
courage  and  perseverance.  She  restored  to  the 
Czartoryskis  their  confiscated  estates,  and  appointed  a 
new  ambassador  to  Warsaw,  Count  Saldern,  who 
treated  the  King  and  his  Ministers  in  a  conciliatory 
spirit  very  different  from  that  of  his  predecessors. 
But  Prussia,  alarmed  at  the  apparent  reconciliation 
between  Russia  and  the  King,  now  sent  her  troops 


14         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

into  Poland.  The  confederation  of  Bar  was  crushed, 
and  the  first  partition  was  arranged  with  Kussia  and 
Austria  by  Frederick  the  Great. 

Michael  and  Augustus  Czartoryski  did  not  long 
survive  the  fall  of  their  country,  for  which  they  had 
laboured  so  much  and  so  well.  The  former  died  on 
the  13th  of  August  1775  ;  the  latter,  on  the  4th  of 
April  1782,  leaving  an  only  son,  Adam  Casimir, 
to  whom  Catherine  had  assigned  the  throne  of 
Poland  in  the  event  of  its  not  being  accepted  by 
Poniatowski.  Like  the  rest  of  his  family,  Prince 
Adam  Casimir  maintained  frequent  relations  with 
England,  and  he  studied  English  institutions  when  a 
young  man  in  the  house  of  his  father's  friend,  Lord 
Mansfield,  then  Lord  Chief  Justice.  His  amiable 
character,  wit,  and  accomplishments  made  him 
universally  popular,  and  he  would  certainly  have 
been  elected  King,  and  perhaps  have  averted  some 
of  the  misfortunes  of  his  country,  if  Catherine  had 
not  supported  the  candidature  of  his  cousin  Poni- 
atowski. The  Prince  de  Ligne,  a  man  well  acquainted 
with  the  various  European  courts,  calls  him  in  his 
Memoirs  '  the  most  distinguished  man  of  the  four 
quarters  of  the  world.'  Joseph  II  of  Austria  fre- 
quently corresponded  with  him,  and  Frederick  the 
Great  was  the  first  promoter  of  the  negotiations  which 
resulted  in  the  marriage  of  his  relative,  Prince  Louis 
of  Wlirtemberg,  with  Prince  Adam  Casimir's  second 
daughter  Marie.  As  Commandant  of  the  Lithuanian 
Guard  and  of  the  Corps  of  Cadets,  the  Prince  showed 
remarkable  ability  and  zeal,  and  some  of  the  most 
eminent  Polish  patriots,  including  Kosciuszko,  were 


INTRODUCTORY  15 

trained  under  his  immediate  superintendence.  His 
services  in  the  promotion  of  national  education  were 
equally  valuable  and  untiring.  As  a  judge,  his 
impartiality  was  such  that  he  sentenced  some  of  the 
most  powerful  dignitaries  in  the  country,  including 
his  own  father,  for  acts  of  oppression  committed  by 
their  stewards  on  their  poorer  tenants. 

Prince  Adam  Casimir  married  on  the  19th 
September  1761,  the  Countess  Elizabeth  Fleming, 
daughter  of  the  celebrated  minister  of  Augustus  II ; 
they  had  five  children,  two  boys  and  three  girls. 
The  eldest  son,  Adam  George,  the  author  of  the 
following  Memoirs,  was  born  at  Warsaw  on  the  14th 