

My  mother  was  at  this  time  confined  to  her  bed, 
and  gave  birth  to  a  little  girl,  my  sister  Gabrielle,  who 
only  lived  a  few  days. 

It  was  necessary  to  conceal  from  my  mother  the 
death  of  my  eldest  sister  ;  she  was  always  asking  to 
see  her,  but  Dr  John,  who  was  her  physician,  did  not 
allow  her  to  leave  her  bed.  Every  day  she  wrote  to 
her  daughter  and  insisted  on  her  being  allowed  to 
come  into  her  room,  so  that  at  length  Dr  John  was 
obliged  to  tell  her  the  truth.  The  news  brought  on 

*  In  the  Czartoryski  Museum  at  Cracow  there  is  a  little  book  of  24  pages  con- 
taining a  poem  on  the  death  of  this  princess,  entitled  "Therese  Czartoryska,'  by  J 
K.  L.  (supposed  to  be  Lavater),  and  published  at  Zurich  on  the  22nd  of  September 
1780. 


PRINCES  AND  PRINCESSES  ON  THE  STAGE       25 

an  attack  of  paralysis  of  the  side,  and  for  a  long  time 
afterwards  my  mother  had  to  walk  with  crutches.  It 
was  only  by  the  application  of  electricity  that  she  re- 
covered the  use  of  her  leg. 

I  also  was  recovering  from  a  serious  illness  which 
caused  much  anxiety.  For  some  time  my  sister's 
death  was  concealed  from  me,  and  my  man-servant, 
who  pretended  to  ask  for  news  of  my  sister,  told  me 
that  she  continued  in  the  same  state.  I  was  deeply 
attached  to  her,  and  when  I  learnt  the  truth  I  for  the 
first  time  shed  tears  of  real  grief.  I  still  often  think 
of  her,  so  good,  so  amiable,  and  with  so  fine  a  soul 
that  her  parents  and  the  younger  members  of  the 
family  were  deeply  attached  to  her. 

My  father  was  at  this  time  at  Wilna,  where  he 
was  President  of  the  Judicial  Court.  When  he  came 
back  to  Warsaw  for  the  holidays  he  did  not  know 
anything  of  what  had  happened.  As  he  was  crossing 
the  Vistula  on  the  ferry-boat  between  Praga  and 
Warsaw,  he  asked  the  ferryman  for  the  news,  and  was 
told  of  my  sister's  death.  My  father  refused  to  believe 
him,  but  was  convinced  when  further  details  were 
given  him  by  my  grandfather  Augustus.  He  nearly 
fainted,  leaning  for  support  against  the  wall  of  the 
room ;  and  I  saw  a  flood  of  tears  flow  from  his 
eyes. 

My  sister's  cottage  was  moved  into  the  wood,  and 
was  kept  there  in  remembrance  of  her.  Each  Thurs- 
day, the  day  of  her  death,  was  for  a  long  time  given 
up  to  mourning  and  pious  meditation,  and  my  mother 
consecrated  it  by  a  good  action. 

The  Princess    Anna   Sanguszko,  daughter  of  the 


26        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Princess  Sapieha,  Chanceliere  of  Lithuania,  also  be- 
longed to  the  colony  at  Powonzki,  and  later  on  it  was 
joined  by  Madame  Sewerin  Potocka.  My  mother 
often  went  into  their  house,  where  there  were  amuse- 
ments of  all  kinds.  There  was  a  performance  of  an 
opera  called  Zemire  et  Azor,  in  which  two  of  my 
sisters  and  Mademoiselle  Narbutt  appeared  in  an 
enchanted  palace,  striving  to  calm  the  grief  of  Ze'mire. 
After  my  sister's  death  this  opera  was  performed  at 
the  Warsaw  theatre  ;  my  mother  wished  to  be  present, 
but  she  was  so  affected  at  the  scene  above  described 
that  she  had  to  quit  the  theatre  in  a  fit  of  despair,  in 
spite  of  the  efforts  of  the  Princess  Sanguszko  to 
console  her.  I  was  a  witness  of  this  painful  inci- 
dent. 