

O  7 

prevent  it,  as  it  was  considered  a  very  advantageous 
one.  Some  time  after,  my  mother  entirely  recovered 
her  health,  and  soon  became  celebrated  for  her  beauty. 

The  main  building  at  Woloczyn  was  of  wood,  and 
the  outbuildings  of  stone.  I  remember  the  portraits 
of  Charles  XII,  Augustus  II,  and  Poniatowski,  the 
King's  father ;  there  was  a  large  garden  crossed  by  a 
long  and  wide  canal,  at  the  end  of  which  was  a  statue 
of  Neptune  and  his  attendants,  in  the  French  style 
then  in  fashion,  imitated  from  the  statues  in  the 
gardens  of  Versailles. 

There  were  some  brilliant  fetes  at  Woloczyn,  at 
which  the  guests  were  amused  by  music  and  theatri- 
cals. Once  there  was  a  swimming  race,  in  which  the 
swimmers  were  dressed  as  tritons,  and  among  them 
the  one  who  was  most  remarked  was  General  Count 
Briihl. 


20        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

My  mother  taught  me  French.  One  day  she  told 
me  to  learn  by  heart  some  verses  of  Racine  which  we 
had  read  together,  and  in  which  Mithridates  discloses 
to  his  children  his  plans  against  the  Romans.  I  have 
never  forgotten  these  verses,  as  I  was  punished  for 
not  having  learnt  them  by  being  obliged  to  stop  at 
home,  while  the  other  people  at  the  palace  went  on  an 
excursion  to  a  neighbouring  village  with  a  spring,  in 
a  very  picturesque  spot,  which  my  mother  had  de- 
corated with  flowers.  These  expeditions  were  very 
merry  and  noisy,  and  I  was  bitterly  disappointed  at 
not  being  allowed  to  go. 

My  first  recollections  of  Warsaw  are  very  vague. 
One  of  the  incidents  which  struck  me  the  most  was 
the  general  mourning  which  followed  the  death  of  my 
father's  uncle,  Prince  Michael ;  *  all  the  inhabitants 
of  the  '  blue  palace 't  were  dressed  in  black. 

I  also  recollect  the  shame  and  grief  which  I  felt 
one  day  when  I  cast  the  blame  of  some  fault  I  had 
committed  upon  one  of  the  running  footmen  employed 
in  the  palace.  This  man's  name  was  Anthony,  and  he 
was  so  stout  that  his  place  was  practically  a  sinecure. 
He  came  dressed  as  for  a  journey,  with  a  sheepskin 
coat  on,  and  reproached  me  with  having  been  the 
cause  of  his  dismissal,  upon  which  I  at  once  admitted 
that  I  was  the  culprit.  I  learnt  afterwards  that  the 
story  of  his  dismissal  was  an  invention  ;  but  it  pro- 
duced a  salutary  effect. 

Shortly  after,  I  became  seriously  ill.  There  were 
several  physicians  at  ray  grandfather's,  including  one 

*  On  the  13th  of  August,  1775,  when  the  author  of  the  Memoirs  was  five  years 
old.     (See  preceding  Chapter). 

t  The  residence  of  the  Czartoryskis  at  Warsaw. 


FA  MIL  Y  RECOLLECTIONS  2 1 

named  Bart ;  they  all  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that 
my  recovery  was  hopeless.  My  mother  begged  them 
to  remain  in  attendance  upon  me,  but  none  of  them 
would  take  the  responsibility.  A  friend  of  my  parents 
then  brought  Dr  Bekler,  physician  to  King  Stanislas 
Augustus,  and  he  restored  me  to  health. 