

He  died  simply  and  naturally,  without  the  least 
desire  to  attract  remark.  Every  day  after  dinner  he 
used  to  play  at  a  game  called  '  tryset,'  which  was  very 
like  whist,  and  was  played  by  four  people ;  the  Pope's 
Nuncio  generally  joined  in  the  game.  The  Prince 
kept  up  this  habit  to  the  last,  and  although  he  was 
very  weak,  he  had  himself  dressed  to  go  to  the  card- 
table.  On  the  very  day  of  his  death  he  came  as 
usual,  bowed  to  the  Bishop  Archetti  (who  afterwards 
became  a  cardinal),  and  apologised  for  coming  a  little 
late.  As  his  sight  was  failing,  he  asked  why  they 
had  not  lit  the  candles,  although  the  room  was  lighted 
up  as  usual.  Meanwhile  the  Princess  Lubomirska 
was  in  her  apartments  in  deep  grief,  and  could  not 
come  down  into  the  room,  where  my  mother  was  with 
the  whole  family.  All  the  people  of  the  house,  down 
to  the  lowest  servant,  were  assembled  in  profound 
silence.  The  Prince,  who  was  in  an  invalid  chair, 
turned  to  Dr  Bart,  who  never  left  him,  and  asked 
him  in  German :  '  Wie  lange  wird's  dauern '  (How 
long  will  it  last)  ?  The  doctor  felt  his  pulse,  and 
replied :  '  Another  half-hour,  I  think.'  The  Prince 
then  apologised  for  not  being  able  to  play  any  longer 

*  On  the  4th  of  April,  1782.     (See  preceding  Chapter). 


A  CRIMINAL  PRIEST  29 

with  the  Nuncio,  and  had  himself  taken  into  the 
bedroom ;  the  prelate  followed  him,  and  began  to 
read  the  psalms  for  the  dying.  While  he  was  reading 
he  held  the  Prince's  hand,  and  as  he  spoke  the  words 
of  the  Psalmist :  '  My  God,  I  give  up  my  soul  to 
Thee,'  the  Prince  pressed  his  hand  and  gave  up  his 
last  breath.  The  crowd  which  had  penetrated  into 
the  palace,  hitherto  respectfully  silent,  then  burst  into 
tears  and  sobs. 

At  the  time  of  my  grandfather's  death,  my  father 
was  still  at  Wilna,  where  he  was  for  the  second  time 
President  of  the  Chief  Tribunal  of  Lithuania.  He 
entirely  devoted  himself  to  his  functions  in  this 
capacity.  Several  magistrates  were  accused  of  having 
done  injustice  to  individuals  either  through  indul- 
gence for  others,  or  from  motives  of  personal  re- 
venge. I  heard  people  say  that  while  my  father 
was  in  office,  an  action  was  brought  against  my 
grandfather  by  a  gentleman  who  had  a  claim  on 
his  estate,  and  that  my  grandfather  was  condemned 
in  costs. 

There  was  much  talk  at  this  period  about  a  crime 
which  had  been  committed  some  years  earlier,  but 
the  author  of  which  could  not  be  discovered.  By  a 
singular  accident  the  first  trace  of  the  criminal  was 
found  in  1781,  and  it  drew  suspicion  upon  a  man 
named  Ogonowski,  who  had  become  a  priest  and  was 
protected  by  the  Bishop  of  Wilna,  Massalski,  well 
known  for  his  dissolute  life.  My  father,  who  was 
then  President  of  the  Court,  used  all  his  influence  to 
have  the  culprit  brought  to  trial. 