

The   Abbe    Ogonowski,   who   had  rapidly  passed 


30        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  various  ecclesiastical  grades  which  lead  to  final 
ordination  as  a  priest,  hearing  that  he  was  in  danger, 
took  refuge  in  a  convent,  under  the  protection  of 
Bishop  Massalski.  A  detachment  of  troops  belonging 
to  the  Lithuanian  Guard,  of  which  my  father  was  in 
chief  command,  was  ordered  to  surround  the  con- 
vent during  the  night,  and  succeeded  in  getting 
the  doors  opened,  notwithstanding  the  resistance  of 
the  priests.  Ogonowski  was  found  with  some  diffi- 
culty in  a  cell,  and  taken  to  prison  in  spite  of  his 
protests  and  those  of  the  clergy.  He  was  convicted 
of  murder  and  other  offences,  after  a  very  long  and 
careful  trial,  and  was  condemned  to  death  and 
executed. 

Several  old  cases  were  settled  while  my  father  was 
in  office,  and  the  procedure  became  much  more  regu- 
lar than  had  previously  been  the  case.  He  finally 
withdrew  from  his  post  in  1782,  and  hastened  to 
return  to  Warsaw  to  take  part  in  the  Diet  which  had 
been  opened  under  the  presidency  of  Colonel  Krasinski. 
This  was  the  first  meeting  of  the  Diet  at  which  I 
was  present.  My  tutor  and  myself  frequently  went 
both  to  the  senate  and  to  the  Chamber  of  Deputies. 
I  was  struck  by  the  grave  and  imposing  presence 
of  Prince  Lubomirski,  Marshal  of  the  Crown, 
who,  as  I  have  heard  other  people  say,  wTas  emi- 
nently fitted  to  keep  order  at  the  meetings  of  both 
Houses. 

The  most  important  matter  that  was  considered 
at  this  Diet  was  the  withdrawal  by  the  chapter  of  the 
Cathedral  at  Cracow  (with  the  support  of  Prince 
Poniatowski,  Bishop  of  Plock)  of  Monsignor  Soltyk, 


THE  POLISH  DIET  31 

Bishop  of  Cracow,  from  the  adminstration  of  that 
diocese,  on  the  pretext  of  mental  incapacity. 

The  anti-Russian  party  defended  the  bishop,  who 
had  been  one  of  the  most  valiant  members  of  the 
Confederation  of  Bar.*  The  party  of  the  King  and 
of  Russia  strove  to  maintain  and  justify  the  act  of 
violence  committed  against  Monsignor  Soltyk,  and 
being  the  most  numerous,  succeeded  in  obtaining  a 
majority  in  favour  of  the  measure. 

The  opposing  parties  spoke  with  much  passion, 
endeavouring  to  prove  on  the  one  hand  that  the 
Bishop  of  Cracow  was  perfectly  sane,  and  on  the 
other  that  he  was  rnad.  One  of  the  most  moving 
and  eloquent  of  the  speeches  was  that  of  the  Castellan 
Ankwicz,  who  was  at  that  time  regarded  as  an 
exemplary  patriot,  but  afterwards  passed  over  to  the 
Muscovite  party.  He  was  one  of  the  victims  of 
Kosciuszko's  revolution  ;  the  people  of  Warsaw 
themselves  executed  the  sentence  which  had  been 
pronounced  against  him. 