

After  a  time  everything  resumed  its  usual  course, 
as  generally  happens  in  this  world ;  the  fetes  were 
revived  and  new  members  were  admitted  into  the 
colony.  A  great  friend  of  my  mother's,  the  Countess 
Tyszkiewicz,  nee  Kinska,  daughter  of  the  Princess 
Poniatowska,  and  niece  to  the  King,  was  received 
with  great  ceremony.  She  had  lost  an  eye  through  an 
illness  in  early  youth,  and  had  replaced  it  by  one  of 
glass ;  still  she  was  very  pretty,  and  was  fond  of 
active  sports,  such  as  hunting  and  riding. 

Being  desirous  of  returning  my  mother's  polite- 
ness, the  Countess  Tyszkiewicz  had  a  comedy  played 
in  her  house  under  the  title  of  *  L'amoureux  de  Quinze 
Ans.'  She  herself  took  the  part,  dressed  in  man's 
costume,  of  the  lover,  and  my  second  sister  played 
the  heroine.  The  theatre  was  in  the  sheepfold,  and 
the  Countess  went  to  it  on  horseback,  in  the  costume 


PRINCES  AND  PRINCESSES  ON  THE  STAGE        27 

in  which  she  was  to  act.  After  the  play  there  was 
a  collation. 

There  were  also  theatrical  representations  in  the 
house  of  the  Chanceliere  Princess  Sapieha.  One  of 
the  pieces  that  were  played  there  was  an  opera,  '  La 
Colonie,'  in  which  the  performers  were  the  Princess 
Radziwill,  nee  Przezdiecka,  who  often  came  to 
Powonzki  and  had  a  fine  voice ;  my  mother ;  M. 
Wojna,  who  wras  afterwards  ambassador  at  Rome ; 
and  General  Briihl,  of  the  artillery. 

On  another  occasion  they  played  '  Andromaque.' 
The  leading  part  was  taken  by  the  young  Princess 
Sanguszko,  who  had  just  married ;  she  was  very 
pleasant  and  good-natured,  but  a  little  frivolous,  and 
she  had  taken  lessons  of  a  celebrated  tragic  actress 
from  Paris.  The  part  of  Hermione  was  played  by 
another  Princess  Sanguszko,  who  was  afterwards 
Princess  of  Nassau ;  that  of  Orestes,  by  Prince 
Casimir  Sapieha  ;  that  of  Pyrrhus,  by  a  Swiss  named 
Glaize  ;  and  that  of  his  confidant,  by  Prince  Calixtus 
Poninski.  This  tragedy  did  not  produce  any  impres- 
sion upon  me  ;  I  only  recollect  that  Prince  Sapieha 
was  dressed  in  a  Greek  costume,  and  M.  Glaize  in  a 
Roman  one. 

When  we  were  at  Warsaw  I  was  often  sent, 
according  to  the  custom  of  that  time,  to  assist  at  my 
grandfather's  toilet.  When  I  went  to  him  they  had 
to  put  pomatum  on  my  hair,  and  to  powder  and  curl 
it,  which  was  very  unpleasant  to  my  mother,  who  did 
not  like  to  see  me  thus  disfigured.  On  one  of  these 
visits  it  was  Corpus  Christi  day,  and  there  was  an 
altar  in  the  courtyard.  The  Bishop,  a  protege  of  my 


28       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

grandfather's,  was  under  the  canopy,  and  my  grand- 
father assisted  at  the  mass.  Shortly  after  my  grand- 
father died,*  and  all  amusements  ceased.  He 
was  buried  in  the  church  of  the  Holy  Cross,  and 
his  death  caused  general  regret — especially  to  his 
daughter,  the  Princess  Lubomirska,  who  was  at 
Warsaw  at  the  time,  and  did  not  leave  him  until  the 
last  moment. 