

O  7 

of  January  1770,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  he  describes 
his  impressions  from  a  very  early  age.  His  mother, 
who  in  later  years  was  looked  up  to  with  attachment 
and  respect  by  the  whole  Polish  nation,  is  frequently 
referred  to  by  him  in  terms  of  warm  affection,  and 
before  proceeding  to  the  perusal  of  his  Memoirs  the 
reader  may  be  interested  in  the  following  description 
of  her  appearance  and  character  taken  from  her 
'portrait,'  written  by  herself  in  her  thirty-seventh 
year : — 

'  I  was  never  handsome,  but  I  have  often  been 
pretty ;  I  have  beautiful  eyes,  and  as  all  my  feelings 
are  reflected  in  them,  the  expression  on  my  face  is 
often  interesting.  My  complexion  is  white  enough 
to  be  almost  brilliant  when  I  blush ;  a  smooth 
forehead  does  not  make  my  face  ugly,  and  my  nose 
completes  the  symmetry  of  my  features.  My  mouth 
is  large,  my  teeth  white,  my  smile  amiable,  and 
the  shape  of  my  face  a  graceful  oval.  I  have  enough 


1 6         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

hair  to  make  an  easy  and  becoming  head-dress  ;  it  is 
dark,  like  my  eyebrows.  I  am  rather  tall  than  short : 
my  figure  is  elegant,  my  bust  perhaps  too  thin,  my 
hands  ugly,  but  my  feet  charming  ;  and  there  is  much 
grace  in  my  movements.  I  have  an  extreme  desire  to 
please,  and  am  skilful  in  showing  both  my  physical  and 
my  mental  qualities  to  the  best  advantage.  Though 
vain  and  ill-tempered,  I  am  endowed  with  such  tact 
that  I  very  seldom  do  anything  which  does  not  either 
give  pleasure  or  inspire  lively  interest.  I  am  most 
warm  and  constant  in  my  friendships  ;  nothing  can 
abate  my  confidence  in  those  I  love,  and  I  always 
look  up  to  them  as  superior  to  myself.  My  predom- 
inent  passion  is  the  love  of  my  country.  This  is  a 
sort  of  religion  with  which  all  my  future  is  bound  up, 
and  which  my  husband  and  children  and  my  own 
disposition  have  made  the  dearest  and  most  indispens- 
able sentiment  of  my  life.' 

( The  Memoirs  of  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,  with 
some  notes  and  other  supplementary  matter  illustrative 
of  the  text  ivhich  have  been  added  l)ij  the  Editor,  begin 
in  the  next  Chapter.) 


CHAPTER  II 

1776-1782 

EARLY  YOUTH. FAMILY  RECOLLECTIONS. LIFE  IK  A    POLISH  COUNTRT- 

HOUSE. PRINCES    AND    PRINCESSES    ON    THE    STAGE. A  CRIMINAL 

PRIEST. THE    POLISH    DIET. 

MY  recollections  of  the  days  of  my  childhood  pass 
before  my  eyes  like  a  landscape  in  which  some  objects 
stand  out  here  and  there  in  clear  and  definite  forms, 
while  others  disappear  in  a  mist  or  in  the  distance. 

The  first  place  of  which  I  have  any  precise  remem- 
brance is  Kozanka,  on  the  river  Bug,  where  there  was 
an  old  stone  mansion,  with  numerous  underground 
cellars  containing  excellent  old  wines. 