

This  was  in  the  year  1776.  My  father,  then  com- 
mander of  a  regiment  of  the  Lithuanian  Guard,  had 
taken  his  detachment  to  Rozanka  during  the  summer 
in  order  to  train  his  troops  in  some  military  man- 
oeuvres which  he  wished  to  introduce  into  Poland. 
He  obtained  some  good  soldiers  from  Prussia,  and 
sent  young  Poles  there  to  learn  the  Prussian  system 
of  drill. 

I  well  remember  the  tents  which  were  pitched  on 
the  green  meadow,  and  the  officers  of  the  Guard  who 
used  to  assemble  there  for  dinner,  with  a  monk  of  St 
VOL.  i.  B 


1 8        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 
Bernard,  who  was  the  almoner  of  the  regiment — a 

'  O 

tall,  stout  man,  very  popular  with  the  officers  on 
account  of  his  merry  conversation. 

I  also  recollect  the  hetman  Branicki,  who  was  for 
many  years-  my  father's  intimate  friend,  coming  to 
Rozanka.  At  that  time  the  hetrnans  had  entirely 
recovered  their  former  authority,  and  M.  Branicki 
was  accordingly  received  with  all  the  official  honours 
as  well  as  with  the  hospitality  always  accorded  to  a 
guest.  The  whole  regiment  was  in  parade  uniform, 
and  seemed  to  me  a  large  army,  though  it  was  only 
composed  of  two  battalions.  My  father's  man-servant 
was  at  that  time  in  attendance  upon  me.  He  was  a 
Frenchman  named  Boissy,  a  native  of  Pontoise,  near 
Paris ;  a  worthy  and  intelligent  man,  who  by  his 
democratic  spirit  had  preserved  me  from  the  influence 
of  the  habits  of  grandeur  which  at  that  time  were 
pretty  generally  prevalent  in  Poland.  His  example 
induced  me  to  develop  from  my  earliest  youth  a  spirit 
of  activity  and  independence. 

At  this  time  my  parents  were  in  the  habit  of  pass- 
ing the  summer  at  Woloczyn,  some  miles  from 
Rozanka,  and  my  later  recollections  are  connected 
with  the  vast  palace  of  Woloczyn,  which  was  then 
occupied  by  the  Chancellor  Michael  Prince  Czar- 
toryski,  my  father's  uncle.  It  was  there  that  my 
mother  was  educated  under  the  supervision  of  the 
Chancellor's  wife,  and  she  was  also  married  there  to 
her  maternal  uncle,  the  son  of  my  grandfather 
Augustus. 

The  two  old  princes  were  very  favourable  to  the 
match,  but  it  was  vehemently  opposed  by  the  Princess 


EARLY  YOUTH  19 

Lubomirska,  my  father's  sister.  The  chief  reason  of 
her  opposition  was  this.  Shortly  before  her  marriage, 
my  mother  went  to  see  one  of  the  peasants  on  the 
estate,  and  found  in  the  cottage  a  child  suffering  from 
a  very  severe  attack  of  smallpox.  This  gave  her  a 
great  shock,  as  she  had  lost  several  of  her  sisters  from 
the  same  illness  ;  and  she  caught  the  infection  so 
dangerously  that  her  life  was  despaired  of.  Directly 
she  recovered,  her  parents  hastened  the  marriage,  and 
she  came  to  the  altar  with  her  face  covered  with  marks 
of  the  disease  and  a  wig  on  her  head,  as  she  had  lost 
all  her  hair.  The  Princess  Lubomirska  was  much 
grieved  to  see  so  ugly  a  woman  given  in  marriage  to 
her  brother  ;  but  though  she  used  all  her  influence 
with  her  father  against  the  match,  she  could  not 