

From  this  date  I  began  a  new  life.  Colonel 
Ciesielski  was  appointed  niy  tutor ;  great  care  was 
taken  of  my  health,  and  I  resided  sometimes  at 
Powonzki,*  sometimes  at  Warsaw.  Impromptu  fetes, 
in  which  I  and  my  two  sisters  took  part,  used  at  that 
time  to  be  given  in  the  '  blue  palace,'  and  there  were 
several  Frenchmen  \vho  contributed  in  a  material 
degree  to  these  entertainments.  M.  Dorigny,  a  very 
efficient  dancing  master,  formerly  attached  to  the 
opera  in  Paris,  and  ballet-master  at  Stuttgart,  where 
the  Duke  of  Wiirtemberg  ruined  himself  in  theatrical 
performances,  presided  over  the  dancing ;  M.  Patonar 
directed  the  music,  and  M.  Norblin  designed  the 
costumes  and  the  scenery. 

One  day  a  fire  broke  out  after  one  of  these  fetes, 
just  as  the  last  guest  had  gone.  It  began  in  the  wing 
of  the  building  where  iny  sisters  lived.  The  actors, 
who  still  had  their  costumes  on,  were  the  first  to  help. 
One  of  them  had  red  silk  stockings,  and  while  he  was 
occupied  in  extinguishing  the  flames,  a  servant  threw 
a  large  pailful  of  water  on  his  legs,  thinking  they 
were  on  fire.  My  sisters  and  their  governess,  Made- 1 
moiselle  Petit,  had  to  escape  to  the  other  side  of  the 
building  with  their  friends,  the  Miss  Narbutts. 

Meanwhile  the    flames  continued  to  spread,  and 

*  A  villa  near  Warsaw. 


22       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

had  covered  the  whole  of  the  wing.  The  fire  did  not, 
however,  penetrate  the  main  body  of  the  building,  and 
my  sisters  established  themselves  there.  A  third 
sister,  Sophia,  was  born  at  this  time.  My  health  was 
still  delicate,  and  it  was  thought  necessary  to  teach 
me  riding,  which  gave  me  great  pleasure. 

My  rides  were  usually  taken  in  the  direction  of 
Powonzki ;  and  the  time  I  passed  there  was  the 
happiest  in  my  life.  The  estate  was  a  sort  of  green 
oasis,  whose  verdure  was  the  more  attractive  as  it  was 
surrounded  by  a  sea  of  sand.  Each  of  the  children 
had  a  cottage  and  a  garden,  and  in  the  centre,  on  a 
hillock,  was  a  larger  house  inhabited  by  my  mother, 
with  a  wood  on  each  side  of  it,  and  looking  down  on  a 
little  lake,  wrhose  waters  flowed  into  a  stream  that 
bathed  all  the  plantations  of  the  estate.  My  mother 
also  had  some  artificial  ruins  erected,  after  the  fashion 
of  the  time,  to  complete  the  attractions  of  the  place. 
There  were  an  island  in  the  lake,  a  mill,  a  grotto  on  the 
island,  stables  in  the  shape  of  a  classical  amphitheatre, 
and  a  large  courtyard  with  a  great  many  hens  and 
pigeons  which  we  used  to  feed. 

We  seldom  received  strangers  ;  but  living  as  we 
did  for  each  other — our  mother  for  her  children  and 
we  for  her — our  life  was  a  very  happy  one.  It  was 
like  an  eclogue — a  true  picture  of  rustic  poetry. 