

Madame  Oginska  was  very  fond  of  playing  at 
cards,  and  invited  the  best  players  to  Siedlce.  This 
was  not  perhaps  very  praiseworthy,  but  it  con- 
tributed to  our  amusement  for  part  of  the  day.  In 
the  evening  there  was  dancing  and  drawing-room 
games  ;  in  the  summer  we  walked  about  in  a  large 
garden  which  was  called  Alexandria,  and  which 
Madame  Oginska  had  decorated  in  the  English 
fashion  ;  in  the  autumn  we  went  out  shooting,  and 
she  used  to  join  our  party,  firing  from  her  place  at 
the  birds  as  they  flew  by. 

It  was  difficult  to  suffer  from  ennui  at  Siedlce, 
and  the  natural  consequence  was  that  romantic 
adventures  frequently  occurred,  in  which  I  sometimes 
played  a  part.  I  had  found  some  books  which  fired 


VISITS  TO  ENGLAND  49 

my  imagination  ;  I  read  them  during  several  nights, 
when  I  should  have  done  better  to  devote  the  time 
to  study.  One  of  the  young  ladies  at  Siedlce, 
Mademoiselle  Marie  Niezabitowska,  became  the  object 
of  my  '  sighs/  which  I  did  not  venture  to  communicate 
to  her  without  great  hesitation.  To  enter  into  the 
young  ladies'  room  was  beyond  my  power,  and  often  I 
used  to  stand  near  the  door,  fearing  to  cross  the 
threshold.  At  length  I  got  over  my  timidity,  and  my 
usual  place  was  on  a  box  in  the  young  ladies'  room. 

To  make  love  or  fall  in  love  was  the  lot  of  every 
young  man  at  Siedlce,  and  I  had  some  rivals,  among 
whom  was  Niemcewicz.  Mademoiselle  Niezabitowska 
was  one  of  the  prettiest  of  the  young  ladies  there,  and 
she  was  also  endowed  with  other  qualities  by  Nature 
which  distinguished  her  from  other  women  during 
her  long  life.  Poets  wrote  verses  to  her,  and  I 
remember  that  one  of  these  effusions  ended  by 
deploring  her  severity  to  those  who  surrounded  her. 
It  was  indeed  difficult  to  secure  her  good  graces,  and 
she  treated  her  admirers  with  much  rigour. 

Some  cases  of  scarlet  fever  having  broken  out  in 
the  ladies'  apartments,  my  mother  recalled  me  to 
Pulawy. 


[Here  there  is  a  break  in  the  Memoirs,  which  are 
not  resumed  until  the  3^ ear  1795,  when  Prince  Adam 
Czartoryski  proceeded  with  his  brother  Constantino 
to  St  Petersburg.  In  1789,  when  he  was  nineteen 
years  of  age,  he  went  with  his  mother  to  Paris  and 
then  to  London,  where  he  stayed  for  some  weeks 
VOL.  i.  D 


5o        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

with  Lord  Mansfield,  to  complete  his  political  educa- 
tion by  studying  the  English  constitution.     During 
this  time  he  witnessed  the  trial  of  Warren  Hastings  ; 
and  afterwards  he  visited  Scotland  and  the  principal 
manufacturing  towns  in  England.     One  of  his  English 
acquaintances  of  that  period,  Dr  Currie  of  Liverpool, 
thus  describes,  in  a  letter  to  Mr  F.   Creevy,   M.P., 
dated  the  31st  of  October,   1803,  his  impressions  of 
the  Prince  in  1790: — 'I  dined  yesterday  by  special 
invitation  with  Prince  William  of  Gloucester.     There 
was  a  good  deal  of  talk  about  the  Northern  coasts, 
where  the  Prince  and  several  of  his  suite  were  last 
year,  and  I  was  a  good  deal  interested  to  hear  that 
the    politics    of  Russia    were    led    by    Prince    Adam 
Czartoryski,    the    Secretary  of    State.     The    Prince 
said  that  he  was  a  most  agreeable,  accomplished  man, 
but  decidedly  in  the  French  interest,  a  Jacobin,  etc. 
etc.,  and   that   his   influence  was   the   great   bar    to 
England  resuming  her  proper  weight  at   the    Court 
of  St  Petersburg.      Now  you  must  know  this  Czar- 
toryski is  an  old  acquaintance  of  mine — was  a  cor- 
respondent, and  might  have  been  so  yet,  but  for  my 
own  neglect,  for  he  wrote  me   several  letters   since 
I  ceased  to  write  to    him.      He  made    the   tour    of 
the  island  along  with  his  mother  in  grand  style,  some 
time  in  the  earlier  and  better  stages  of  the  French 
Revolution.     He  was  then  about  twent}T  or  twenty- 
one,  and  a  very  fine  young  man  indeed,  full  of  great 
expectations   of  happy   changes    in   society ;    full    of 
ardour,  benevolence,  and  adventure.     He  had  passed 
the  preceding  winter  at  Paris,  in  close  attendance  on 
the  National  Assembly  in  the  most  brilliant  days  of 