


CHAPTER  IV 

1784-1787 

PULAWY. EDUCATION  AND  STUDIES. 

AT  Pulawy  we*  began  an  existence  which  was  entirely 
new  to  us,  and  we  entered  on  our  studies  seriously 
and  regularly. 

Up  to  that  time  we  had  only  been  taught  elemen- 
tary knowledge,  and  our  lessons  were  frequently 
interrupted,  while  now  they  became  almost  our  sole 
occupation.  M,  Lhuillier  taught  us  mathematics  and 
universal  history ;  Colonel  Ciesielski,  the  history  of 
Poland ;  Kniaznin,  literature  and  Latin.  Our  clas- 
sical master  was  at  first  a  Dane  named  Schow,  and 
afterwards  Groddeck,  who  subsequently  became  a 
professor  at  the  University  of  Wilna. 

I  do  not  quite  remember  whether  it  was  then  or 
later  on  that  rny  father  appointed  as  our  tutor  M. 
Dupont  de  Nemours,  a  member  of  the  National 
Assembly,  who  was  much  esteemed  in  France  for  his 
ability  and  character.  He  had  with  him  a  secretary 
named  Noyer,  a  very  importunate  man  who  paid 

*  The  author  and  his  brother  Constantino.  The  Bohemian  traveller  Tanner, 
writing  in  1G78,  says  of  this  magnificent  country  seat  of  the  Czartoryski  family  : — 
'  Prospeximus  hie  a  dextra  numinis  parte  Pulavii  castrum  splendidum,  efc  a  circum- 
jacentium  hortorum  amzenitate  deliciosum.' 


EDUCATION  AND  STUDIES  43 

marked  attention  to  Madame  Petit.  One  day  he 
knocked  at  her  door,  and  not  knowing  any  other  way 
to  get  rid  of  him,  she  told  him  she  was  not  at  home. 
M.  Dupont  did  not  stay  long  with  us  ;  he  returned  to 
France,  and  I  saw  him  in  Paris  at  the  time  of  the 
Restoration.  He  introduced  himself  to  me  as  my  old 
tutor,  but  I  had  entirely  forgotten  him. 

There  was  a  fencing-master  at  Pulawy  who  gave 
us  a  lesson  every  morning  in  the  garden  after  we  got 
up,  which  was  very  early,  and  then  we  passed  to  other 
studies.  The  company  used  to  be  very  large  at 
dinner,  as  all  the  persons  in  the  service  of  the  family 
were  present. 

Besides  our  studies,  we  had  various  pleasures,  such 
as  hunting,  excursions  to  the  house  of  M.  and  Madame 
Filipowicz,  the  steward  of  the  Pulawy  estates  at 
Konska  Wola,  country  rides,  and  especially  coursing. 
I  was  very  fond  of  this  pastime  ;  in  a  wood  in  the 
vicinity  there  were  hares  on  the  hills,  and  a  brood  of 
foxes  which  we  amused  ourselves  by  driving  out  of 
their  holes  with  dogs. 

This  was  for  us  children  what  I  may  call  'the 
Pulawy  period.'  My  father's  stay  in  Lithuania  at- 
tracted to  our  house  a  great  number  of  citizens  of  that 
province  ;  several  young  men  also  came  from  Lithuania 
to  be  educated  at  our  house,  and  they  amused  the 
company  during  the  hours  which  were  not  given  up 
to  study. 

Our  daily  fencing-lessons  took  place  in  the  garden 
during  the  summer.  Although  accustomed  to  the  use 
of  the  foil  at  the  school  of  Cadets,  Rembilinski,  one  of 
our  tutors,  was  once  hit  in  the  eye,  and  on  another 