

We  stopped  on  our  way  at  the  houses  of  several 
landowners,  many  of  whom  joined  our  party,  which 
increased  the  number  of  our  led  horses  and  carriages ; 
we  had  also  brought  some  camels  with  us,  as  my  father 
wished  to  introduce  them  into  general  use.  The 
caravan  stopped  at  Klewan,  the  first  of  my  father's 
estates  in  Volhynia.  We  next  arrived  on  the  property 

*  A  Polish  mile  is  equal  to  five  English  miles. 


JOURNEY  TO  VOL1IYNIA  AND  PODOLIA  35 

of  Prince  Sapieha,  who  received  us  with  the  amplest 
hospitality.  The  Prince  suffered  much  from  gout,  and 
this  was  attributed  to  the  custom,  which  at  that  time 
was  very  general,  of  always  drinking  with  a  visitor. 
Prince  Sapieha  came  every  evening  leaning  on  a  cane 
to  look  at  the  brilliant  illuminations  in  the  garden. 
Our  next  halting-place  was  Mikolajew,  in  Podolia. 
There  were  not  enough  rooms  here  for  the  whole  of 
our  party,  which  had  become  very  numerous,  and 
many  of  us  slept  in  tents. 

Among  the  many  friends  who  accompanied  us  on 
this  journey  was  Niemcewicz,*  my  father's  aide-de- 
camp.  Opportunities  were  frequently  taken  of  em- 
barking on  various  love  adventures,  in  allusion  to 
which  one  of  the  poets  of  our  party  wrote  a  song  of 
which  the  first  couplet  was  as  follows  : 

'  Beautiful  Tomira,  this  is  probably  the  last  of  our 
pleasant  evenings  ;  I  am  with  you  to-day — to-morrow 
I  shall  be  alone,  and  woods  and  streams  will  separate 
us.  But  when  I  shall  no  longer  be  there,  remember  I 
was  the  first  to  love  you.' 

Niemcewicz  was  very  assiduous  in  his  attentions 
to  the  sex.  One  of  the  houses  where  we  stayed  the 
longest  was  that  of  M.  Onufry  Morski.  This  gentle- 
man had  a  very  important  position  in  Podolia,  and 
was  a  friend  of  my  father's,  for  whom  he  had  a 
great  liking.  He  had  a  very  handsome  wife,  of  whom 
he  was  jealous,  and  he  did  not  trust  the  friendship  of 
Niemcewicz.  One  day  the  comedy  of  '  Le  Joueur? 
which  my  father  had  translated  from  the  French,  was 

*  An  eminent  Polish  writer,  best  known  for  his  '  Historical  Songs '  and  his 
excellent  translations  from  various  English  poets.  He  was  born  in  1757,  and  died 
n  exile  at  Paris  in  1841. 


36        MEMOIRS  OF  I' HINGE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

performed  at  his  house,  and  his  wife  took  a  part  in  it. 
He  himself  played  the  hero,  and  had  to  address  her 
in  a  speech  full  of  ardent  love,  to  which  she  listened 
with  the  greatest  coldness,  as  I  remarked  at  each 
performance.  Morski's  younger  brother  was  after- 
wards the  ambassador  of  the  King  of  Saxony  and 
Grand-Duke  of  Warsaw  at  Madrid.  His  elder  brother, 
the  canon,  was  passionately  fond  of  dancing ;  I  still 
remember  with  what  entrain  he  danced  the  mazurka 
at  a  masked  ball  at  Siedlce,  and  he  was  not  a  man 
of  very  rigid  morals. 