


40        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

then  ventured  to  look  at  the  man  who  had  called 
my  daughter  an  angel.  To  my  surprise  I  saw  not  a 
giant,  but  a  little  man,  shorter  than  myself,  rather 
crooked,  and  in  a  shabby  uniform  covered  with  snuff. 
He  had  beautiful  blue  eyes,  a  mild  but  penetrating 
glance,  and  a  manner  which  inspired  confidence. 
Seeing  that  I  was  looking  at  him,  but  that  I  did  not 
yet  venture  to  open  my  lips,  he  continued  :  "  Your 
angel  will  always  find  in  me  a  friend.  She  has 
married  my  nephew,  but  I  must  plainly  tell  you  that 
they  are  not  made  for  each  other,  she  is  an  angel  and 
he* —  The  King  did  not  finish  the  phrase,  but  added, 
"  Anyhow  you  know  him  and  will  do  him  justice ;  all 
I  will  say  now  is  that  this  cannot  last,  but  let 
her  boldly  come  to  me  whenever  she  finds  it 
necessary."  These  words  calmed  my  anxiety,  arid 
there  remained  only  a  feeling  of  gratitude  which  it  was 
easy  for  a  mother  to  express  when  speaking  of  her 
daughter.  The  interview  lasted  over  an  hour. 
Frederick  II  afterwards  spoke  of  many  other  things. 
He  asked  me  about  Poland  and  our  King.  This 
was  a  very  delicate  subject,  as  he  had  only  recently 
plundered  our  King  with  the  help  of  his  allies,  who 
had  shared  in  the  spoil.  Among  the  questions  he 
addressed  to  me  I  remember  his  asking  whether 
Stanislas  Augustus  wore  a  military  uniform.  I  felt 
the  irony  of  this  question,  as  our  army  had  at 
that  time  been  so  reduced  that  we  hardly  had  any 
troops  at  all.  I  answered,  as  was  the  fact,  that 
the  King  wears  the  uniform  of  the  School  of  Cadets. 

Prince  Louis  of  Wiirtemberg  was  afterwards  deprived  of  his  command  in  the 
Polish  army  for  declining  to  fight  against  Russia,  and  his  wife,  the  Princess  Marie, 
then  refused  to  live  with  him. 


INTERVIEW  WITH  FREDERICK  THE  GREAT       41 

"He  is  right,"  observed  Frederick;  " cest  vraiment 
un  roi  d  I'ecole"  I  felt  indignant  at  this  remark,  which 
seemed  to  me  quite  uncalled  for.  I  turned  red,  the 
tears  again  rose  to  my  eyes,  and  I  exclaimed  without 
thinking  :  "  Sire,  vous  lid  avtz  donne  une  legon  cruelle 
et  pen  meritee."  When  I  came  in  I  did  not  dare  to 
raise  my  eyes  to  him ;  afterwards,  when  he  began 
to  speak  of  my  daughter,  I  felt  bolder,  and  I  was 
thoroughly  roused  when  he  spoke  slightingly  of  my 
unhappy  country  and  King,  whom  he  had  humiliated 
after  plundering  him.  After  I  had  spoken  I  felt 
frightened,  but  Frederick  thus  went  on,  as  if  he  had 
not  heard  what  I  said  :  "I  have  often  remarked  that 
in  Poland  women  should  govern  ;  if  they  did,  every- 
thing would  be  better  there,  and  our  conversation 
to-day  has  confirmed  me  in  that  belief."  He  then 
bowed  to  me  politely  and  respectfully,  again  saying 
that  my  daughter  could  always  reckon  on  his  protec- 
tion ;  and  with  this  our  first  interview  ended.'] 