


38        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

From  Kamieniec  we  went  to  Chocim,  which  at 
that  time  belonged  to  Turkey,  and  where  the  officer 
in  command  was  a  pasha  who  displayed  much  luxury 
and  politeness  in  receiving  my  father  as  general  of  the 
Podolian  territories.  After  handing  round  chibouks 
and  coffee,  the  pasha's  son,  a  tall  young  man,  ap- 
proached me  and  my  brother  and  invited  us  to  visit 
the  harem  with  his  father's  permission.  We  followed 
him,  a  portiere  was  raised  and  then  drawn  down 
behind  us,  and  we  entered  the  seraglio. 

I  saw  through  the  doors  of  the  rooms  looking  into 
a  passage  some  women,  who  seemed  much  astonished 
and  alarmed  at  our  presence.  We  went  to  a  place 
where  was  the  young  man's  mother,  the  pasha's  wife, 
surrounded  by  several  female  attendants ;  this  was  a 
sort  of  kiosk  erected  in  a  corner  of  a  rectangular 
garden.  We  did  not  like  these  women,  and  thought 
them  very  untidily  dressed.  They  received  us  very 
amiably,  examined  us  with  much  curiosity,  and  asked 
us  some  questions ;  but  the  conversation  was  neither 
long  nor  animated. 

We  returned  to  Miendzyboz,  which  was  the  last 
stage  of  our  journey,  for  to  tny  great  regret  we  did 
not  go  as  far  as  Cracow. 

We  travelled  through  Galicia,  and  after  stopping 
at  Oleszyce,  Sieniawa,  and  Jaroslaw,  we  arrived  at 
Pulawy,  where  we  finally  took  up  our  residence. 

[On  the  27th  of  October,  1784,  Prince  Adam's 
sister  Marie  was  married  to  Prince  Louis  of  Wiirtem- 
berg,  the  brother  of  the  wife  of  the  Grand-Duke  Paul 
of  Russia  (afterwards  the  Emperor  Paul)  and  a 
relative  of  Frederick  the  Great.  The  newly-married 


INTERVIEW  WITH  FREDERICK  THE  GREAT       39 

pair  went  to  Berlin,  and  soon  after  Prince  Adam's 
mother  paid  them  a  visit.  Here  she  had  an  inter- 
view with  Frederick,  which  she  thus  graphically 
describes  in  a  manuscript  diary  preserved  in  the 
Czartoryski  archives  :-— 

1  The  King  of  Prussia  always  lived  at  Potsdam, 
and  only  received  on  certain  days  which  were  fixed 
beforehand.  It  was  not  without  a  certain  degree  of 
fear  that  I  made  myself  ready  to  visit  him.  Having 
from  my  childhood  constantly  been  told  of  his  genius 
and  great  deeds,  I  had  formed  in  my  mind  so  high  an 
idea  of  him  that  I  felt  timid.  I  hoped  I  would  be 
admitted  to  his  presence  with  many  others,  and  be 
lost  in  the  crowd  ;  but  Madame  Voss,  the  Queen's 
lady-in-waiting,  took  me  alone  into  the  drawing-room, 
and  directly  I  entered,  the  door  opposite  me  opened, 
and  the  King  came  in  also  alone.  Madame  Voss 
merely  mentioned  my  name  and  withdrew.  I  thus 
remained  tete-a-tete  with  a  man  who  filled  me  with 
fear,  and  whom  I  believed  to  far  exceed  in  genius  and 
learning  all  those  whom  I  had  yet  seen.  I  was  so 
dazed  that  if  I  had  at  once  left  the  room,  I  could 
have  sworn  that  Frederick  was  at  least  six  feet  high. 
He  took  my  hand  kindly,  and  said  :  "  I  am  old,  and 
my  sight  is  bad ;  allow  me,  Princess,  to  take  you  to 
the  window,  so  that  I  may  have  a  good  look  at  you." 
This  completed  my  confusion  ;  tears  were  in  my  eyes, 
and  I  trembled  like  a  leaf.  The  King,  no  doubt 
to  give  me  courage,  then  himself  began  the  conversa- 
tion, still  holding  my  hand.  "  You  have  given  us 
an  angel,  Princess,"  he  said.  "  I  saw  her  yesterday, 
and  she  inspires  me  with  the  greatest  interest."  I 