


44         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYXKI 

occasion,  as  he  was  fencing  with  me,  iny  foil  pierced 
his  mask  and  wounded  him  in  the  mouth.  He  was 
much  frightened,  and  his  first  thought  was  to  ascertain 
whether  his  second  eye  had  not  been  hurt.  I  was 
profuse  in  my  apologies,  and  thanked  God  that  my 
awkwardness  had  not  had  any  more  serious  con- 
sequences. 

We  used  to  hold  meetings  like  those  of  the  Diets, 
at  which  we  discussed  public  questions.  I  recollect 
that  at  one  of  these  meetings  the  question  discussed 
was,  which  was  the  best  government,  one  in  which 
political  power  was  distributed  among  the  people,  or  a 
government  in  which  all  power  proceeded  from  a 
central  authority.  I  advocated  the  greatest  possible 
liberty,  while  to  my  great  surprise  Rembilinski  de- 
clared himself  in  favour  of  a'  central  and  paternal 
government.  His  speech  was  so  eloquent  that  I 
could  not  find  words  to  answer  him,  which  greatly 
dissatisfied  me.  I  was  beaten,  but  not  convinced. 


CHAPTER  V 

1786 

A    HOLIDAY    IX    GERMANY. — WIELAND. — -GOETHE. — A    POLISH 
CARNIVAL. — -VISITS  TO  ENGLAND. 

IN  1786,  I  first  went  to  travel  abroad  ;  I  was  accom- 
panied by  ray  tutor,  who  had  been  ordered  to  take 
the  waters  at  Carlsbad.  Madame  Oginska,  the 
hetman's  wife,  my  father's  cousin  and  my  mother's 
aunt,  started  for  Carlsbad  at  the  same  time  as  we 
did,  accompanied  by  a  numerous  suite,  as  was  then 
the  custom.  We  visited  several  German  towns  where 
I  came  into  contact  with  many  eminent  men.  I  can- 
not say  that  I  made  their  acquaintance,  for  my  mind 
was  as  yet  not  sufficiently  developed ;  but  I  still 
remember  having  met  them. 

My  father  had  invited  to  Pulawy  a  professor  of 
Latin  and  Greek  who  had  been  recommended  to  him 
by  Steine,  the  celebrated  professor  of  Gottingen. 
He  was  a  young  Dane  and  an  enthusiastic  admirer 
of  the  beauties  of  ancient  literature,  like  all  who 
came  from  that  university.  I  shared  this  enthusiasm 
—a  little  childishly,  but  very  sincerely— under  the 
influence  of  Kniaznin,  who  taught  us  Polish  and 


46        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Latin  literature.  I  neglected  the  tedious  though 
indispensable  study  of  grammar,  and  tried  to  under- 
stand the  classic  poets,  which  gave  me  the  appearance 
of  knowing  much  more  than  I  did  in  reality  ;  and  I 
paraded  my  knowledge  in  the  presence  of  the  German 
savants  whom  I  met  on  my  travels.  At  Prague  I 
made  the  acquaintance  of  Meissner,  professor  of  Greek 
literature  and  author  of  several  German  works. 
His  reputation,  which  at  that  time  was  very  great, 
did  not  survive  him.  I  recollect  with  pleasure  the 
conversations  I  had  with  him,  and  I  was  much 
astonished  to  find  that  I  was  able  to  quote  to  him 
from  memory  some  verses  from  the  Greek  poets. 