


VISITS  TO  ENGLAND  51 

Mirabeau.  He  had  afterwards  been  a  close  attendant 
on  the  debates  in  our  own  Parliament,  at  that  time 
so  interesting.  He  seemed  to  me  extremely  capable 
of  appreciating  the  great  talents  then  displayed  on 
the  theatres  of  both  nations,  and  was  very  fond  of 
comparing  the  statesmen  and  orators  of  France  and 
England.  Mirabeau  and  Fox  were  his  heroes — but 
he  preferred  the  latter.  He  was  absolutely  as  great 
an  idolater  of  Fox  as  you  are  of  the  General  [Sir 
John  Moore],  and  seemed  to  me  to  have  that  sim- 
plicity and  elevation  of  soul  which  is  necessary  to 
appreciate  our  incomparable  Charley.  I  took  to 
Czartoryski  extremely,  and  he  used  to  ride  out  with 
me  and  walk  with  me  during  the  fortnight  he  stayed 
here,  as  you  do.  He  is  an  English-looking  man,  a 
black  fellow,  very  tall  and  handsome — spoke  our 
language  and  loved  our  country.  I  had  several 
letters  from  him  during  his  tour  in  Scotland  (where  I 
introduced  him)  and  mean  to  have  a  search  for  them. 
He  was  very  deeply  interested  in  the  Revolution  in 
Poland,  in  which  I  think  his  mother  played  a  prin- 
cipal part.  She  was  with  him,  and  took  the  direction 
of  him — a  woman  then  still  handsome,  and  said  to  be 
of  great  address  of  every  kind,  but  perfectly  intel- 
ligible and  feminine.  When  I  revolve  all  these  things, 
Sheridan's  scheme  of  sending  Fox  to  St  Petersburg 
struck  me  as  a  noble  thought.  Depend  upon  it,  if  it 
could  be  accomplished,  that  his  influence  there  would 
be  speedily  felt.  For  this  Czartoryski  is  a  virtuous 
man,  and,  if  we  knew  how  to  approach  him,  neither  is 
nor  can  be  the  tool  of  Bonaparte.' 

Prince   Adam   returned   to  Poland  in  1791,    and 


52         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

entered  the  army  under  the  command  of  his  brother-in- 
law,  the  Prince  of  Wiirtemberg.  It  was  in  this  year 
that  the  famous  Reformed  Constitution  of  the  3rd  of 
May,  which  was  afterwards  made  by  Russia  and  Prussia 
the  pretext  for  a  second  partition  of  the  country,  was 
passed  by  the  Grand  Diet  (known  as  '  the  Four  Years' 
Diet ')  at  Warsaw.*  This  Constitution  was  regarded 

*  'It  was  the  deliberate  and  systematic  policy  of  Russia  and  Prussia  to  maintain 
anarchy  in  Poland,  in  order  that  it  might  never  rise  to  prosperity  or  power  or  ' 
independence.  With  this  object  they  agreed,  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of 
Stanislas  Poniatowski,  that  they  would  maintain  by  force  the  existing  Constitution, 
and  oppose  any  attempt  to  abolish  the  Lib^ru/n  Veto,  or  to  make  the  monarchy 
hereditary.  A  strong  and  earnest  effort  was,  notwithstanding,  made  to  effect  the 
former  object,  and  the  reform  was  so  powerfully  supported  that  it  would  have 
undoubtedly  succeeded  had  not  Russia  again  interfered,  and  re-established,  with  the 
concurrence  of  Prussia,  Liber  urn  Veto  in  its  full  stringency.  The  jealousy  of  three 
great  powers  alone  for  a  time  saved  Poland.  At  last  they  agreed  upon  their  share  of 
the  spoil.  In  1772  they  signed  'in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity,'  treaties  for  the 
plunder  of  Poland,  and  in  a  few  months  the  first  partition  was  easily  effected.  It 
was  justified  at  the  time,  and  has  been  defended  by  some  later  historians  on  the 
ground  of  that  very  anarchy  which  it  had  been  for  many  years  a  main  object  of  two 
of  the  plundering  powers  to  foment  and  to  perpetuate.  Prussia  solemnly  guaranteed 
the  integrity  of  Poland.  She  promised  to  assist  her  against  all  hostile  attacks,  and 
all  interference  with  her  internal  concerns.  The  King  of  Prussia  not  only  fully 
recognised  the  right  of  the  Polish  people  as  an  independent  nation  to  revise  their 
Constitution,  but  he  also  strongly  urged  them  to  do  so. 