

We  passed  through  Gotha,  where,  thanks  to  a 
letter  of  introduction  from  my  father,  we  made  the 
acquaintance  of  Baron  Frankenburg,  Minister  to  the 
Duke  of  Gotha.  He  was  an  intelligent,  amiable,  and 
cultivated  man,  and  he  placed  us  in  relations  with 
other  celebrated  and  interesting  persons.  He  gave 
us  letters  with  which  we  went  to  Weimar,  already 
known  as  the  German  Athens,  where  I  saw  Wieland 
and  Herder,  with  whom  my  father  kept  up  a  corres- 
pondence. 

Wieland's  appearance  was  anything  but  poetical  ; 
he  was  short,  rather  stout,  somewhat  advanced  in 
years,  wrinkled,  and  wearing  a  sort  of  nightcap  which 
he  seldom  took  off. 

Baron  Frankenburg  also  enabled  us  to  make  the 
acquaintance  of  Goethe,  and  I  was  admitted  with  my 
tutor  to  a  private  house  where  the  poet  read  to 
some  friends  his  play  of  '  Iphigenia  in  Tauris,'  which 
he  had  just  finished.  I  listened  with  great  en- 


GOETHE  47 

thusiasm.  Goethe  was  then  in  the  brightest  period 
of  his  youth  ;  he  was  tall,  and  his  face  was  handsome 
and  imposing,  with  a  piercing  look,  sometimes  a  little 
disdainful,  as  if  he  were  looking  down  upon  the 
horizon  of  humanity.  This  slight  tinge  of  arrogance 
was  also  visible  in  the  smile  on  his  beautiful  mouth. 
He  hardly  remarked  the  admiration  of  a  youth 
like  myself,  for  this  was  a  homage  to  which  he  was 
accustomed.  When  he  afterwards  became  Minister 
to  the  Grand-Duke  of  Weimar  he  no  longer  showed 
the  same  disregard  of  official  favours  and  decorations  ; 
but  he  always  retained  in  his  face  and  demeanour  a 
sort  of  grandeur  which  made  people  compare  him  to 
Phidias's  statue  of  the  Olympian  Jove. 

At  length  we  arrived  at  Carlsbad,  where  we 
found  Madame  Oginska,  whose  presence  greatly 
contributed  to  our  pleasure.  She  had  with  her 
several  young  ladies,  the  daughters  of  her  major- 
domo  Siedlecki,  and  also  Dr  Kittel,  who  was  young 
and  very  handsome,  and  was  consequently  much  in 
request  with  ladies  whose  health  required,  or  seemed 
to  them  to  require,  a  doctor's  care. 

There  was  at  that  time  at  Carlsbad  a  very  bril- 
liant casino,  where  the  whole  society  of  the  place 
assembled,  and  where  there  was  dancing  almost  every 
evening.  One  of  the  ladies  was  said  to  be  much 
admired  by  the  Archduke  Leopold,  whose  weakness 
for  the  sex  was  notorious,  and  who  ascended  the 
throne  some  years  later.  I  was  struck  by  the  beauty 
of  the  features  of  this  lad}1",  and  especially  by  the 
extraordinary  vivacity  of  her  movements. 

We  returned  home  in  the  autumn,  and  the  winter 


48         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

of  178G  to  1787  was  passed  partly  at  Pulawy,  partly 
at  Siedlce.  We  continued  our  studies  at  Pulawy 
without  much  regularity,  but  with  great  interest  and 
diligence,  and  passed  the  carnival  at  Siedlce,  where 
there  was  a  numerous  and  brilliant  gathering  of 
visitors.  Madame  Oginska,  who  held  her  Court 
there,  was  very  pious,  but  her  sole  anxiety  was  to 
amuse  her  guests  and  make  them  merry.  She  had 
in  her  house  a  great  many  charming  young  ladies 
belonging  to  noble  families.  When  her  toilet  was 
over,  her  guests  were  admitted  into  her  apartments, 
and  these  young  ladies  were  to  be  seen  taking  to  her 
some  article  of  dress — a  flower,  a  ribbon,  a  veil,  or  a 
bonnet — which  was  to  be  worn  in  the  course  of  the 
day.  Afterwards  everybody  went  into  the  drawing- 
rooms,  where  amusements  of  all  kinds  were  constantly 
going  on. 