

During  his  year's  residence  in  Lithuania,  my 
father  had  gained  the  sympathies  of  the  citizens 
of  that  province,  and  he  thought  that  he  would  have 
the  majority  of  the  Lithuanian  votes  at  the  Diet 
in  favour  of  the  party  of  which  he  was  one  of  the 
chiefs ;  but  the  fear  of  Russia  and  the  King's 
presents  decided  otherwise.  Many  of  the  Deputies 
found  reasons  to  avoid  the  inconvenient  results  Avhich 

*  The  originators  of  the  Confederation  of  Bar  were  two  bishops,  Soltyk  and 
Krasinski.  The  object  of  the  Confederation,  which  was  formed  by  Casimir  Pulaski 
on  the  29th  of  February,  1708,  was  to  deliver  Poland  from  the  domination  of  Russia. 
The  confederates  maintained  their  ground  by  extraordinary  feats  of  arms  against 
the  Russian  troops  for  five  years,  and  were  finally  crushed  by  Souvaroff  in  1772,  a 
few  months  before  the  first  partition  of  Poland.  (See  the  previous  Chapter). 


32        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

would  ensue  from   an   open   rupture   with    the    King 
and  the  Russians. 

The  Diet  having  thus  come  to  a  close  in  so 
unfavourable  a  way  for  our  party,  my  father  deter- 
mined to  visit  the  estates  which  he  had  inherited 
in  Volhynia  and  Podolia. 


CHAPTEK  III 

1783 

JOURXEY    TO    VOLHYNIA    AND    PODOLIA. INTERVIEW    WITH    FREDERICK 

THE    OREAT. 

BEFORE  leaving  for  Volhynia,  I  went  with  ray  tutor 
to  pay  a  visit  to  Prince  -Lubomirski.  This  was  the 
lasktime  that  I  saw  him  ;  he  did  not  long  enjoy  the 
fortune  which  his  wife  had  inherited,  and  died  in 
the  same  year,  universally  regretted.  He  lived  in 
the  palace  which  afterwards  became  that  of  the 
Tarnowskis,  and  belonged  by  right  to  the  Czarto- 
ryskis.  The  Princess  and  her  husband  were  very 
sensible  people,  but  as  often  happens  in  the  marriages 
of  great  families,  their  characters  were  not  suited 
to  each  other.  The  Prince  left  heavy  debts  which 
his  widow  admitted  and  scrupulously  paid.  His 
sallies  and  repartees  were  characteristically  Polish. 
My  mother  esteemed  him  greatly,  and  he  was  a  true 
friend  to  her.  I  do  not  know  on  what  occasion  he 
once  said  to  her  that  he  would  come  to  see  her  after 
his  death,  and  for  a  long  time  she  feared  he  would 
keep  his  word.  These  apprehensions  recurred  nightly, 
when  everybody  was  asleep ;  the  slightest  noise  re-^ 
called  to  her  the  promise  of  her  deceased  friend. 
VOL.  T.  c 


34        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

We  left  for  the  estates  in  Podolia  with  a  large 
suite.  My  father  at  that  time  had  a  very  numerous 
court,  chiefly  composed  of  noblemen's  sons,  many  of 
whom  came  even  from  Lithuania.  The  rendezvous 
was  at  Pulawy,  from  which  place  we  started.  Dozens 
of  carriages  followed  each  other  in  line,  and  we 
travelled  at  the  rate  of  not  more  than  six  miles*  a 
day.  After  breakfast  we  proceeded  to  the  next  stage, 
where  we  dined  ;  the  food  and  wine  always  preceded 
us.  There  were  a  great  many  led  horses,  and  we 
often  mounted  them  to  get  over  a  stage  more  quickly. 
One  of  the  principal  officials  of  the  court  always  went 
on  beforehand  to  get  our  quarters  ready.  We  were 
accompanied  by  several  young  pages  dressed  after  the 
Polish  fashion  ;  and  before  we  left  Warsaw,  the  majoi'- 
domo  thought  proper,  as  a  prudential  measure,  to 
administer  some  corporal  discipline  to  them.  My 
father,  as  he  was  coming  out  of  the  house,  perceived 
traces  of  tears  and  vexation  on  their  faces,  and  asked 
what  was  the  matter.  '  See  how  the  major-domo  has 
punished  us,'  they  answered.  My  father  then  asked 
the  major-domo  what  they  had  done,  to  which  the 
latter  rejoined  that  it  was  a  good  thing  to  prepare 
them  in  this  way  for  their  journey. 