

Among  the  more  intimate  guests  at  my  father's 
house  was  Colonel  Molski,  a  wag  fond  of  bon-mots  and 
good  eating.  He  once  made  a  bet  that  he  would  eat 
an  enormous  dish  of  piroyi*  alone,  without  hurting 
himself.  He  gained  his  bet,  and  drank  some  punch 
to  wash  the  pirogi  down. 

At  Miendzyboz  we  met  a  large  detachment  of 
Gossacks,  which  gave  us  the  idea  of  constructing  a 
sort  of  fortress  and  feigning  attacks  upon  it.  My 
tutor  shut  himself  up  in  the  fortress  with  my  brother  ; 
the  besiegers  were  under  the  command  of  Colonel 
Molski,  to  whom  I  acted  as  aide-de-camp.  When  the 
day  for  the  attack  came,  there  was  much  noise  and 
fighting  on  horseback.  M.  Siehen,  mounted  on  a  very 
spirited  horse  and  riding  at  full  gallop,  encountered 
one  of  the  Cossacks,  and  the  shock  was  so  violent  that 
Siehen  fell  from  his  horse  and  became  insensible. 
When  he  recovered  consciousness,  he  had  completely 
lost  his  memory,  and  he  did  not  recollect  what  had 
happened  until  several  days  afterwards.  The  Cossack 

*  Small  meat  puddings. 


JOURNEY  TO   VOLHYNIA  AND  PODOLIA  37 

escaped  with  a  few  contusions.  Soon  after  there  was 
almost  a  real  battle  between  the  Cossacks  and  the 
inhabitants  of  the  village,  a  detachment  of  whom  were 
in  the  fortress  where  we  were  to  breakfast.  The  be- 
sieged at  last  ate  the  food  that  had  been  prepared  for 
us,  and  an  arrangement  was  then  made  to  prevent 
further  accidents.  I  assisted  at  this  fight  on  horse- 
back, and  it  greatly  interested  me. 

From  Miendzyboz  we  went  to  Kamieniec,  where 
was  M.  Witt,  the  father  of  General  Witt,  whose  wife 
was  the  beautiful  Greek  that  afterwards  married  Felix 
Potocki.  At  that  time  she  was  in  all  the  freshness  of 
her  beauty,  and  shortly  after  she  travelled  all  over 
Europe,  her  charms  attracting  universal  admiration. 
She  did  us  the  honours  of  her  house  at  Kamieniec,  sur- 
rounded by  people  distinguished  by  their  youth,  their 
birth,  or  their  talents.  All  paid  her  implicit  obedience, 
and  besides  her  beauty  she  attracted  by  a  sort  of 
originality  proceeding  either  from  a  feigned  naivete  or 
from  ignorance  of  the  language.  I  was  told  that 
when  people  admired  her  beautiful  eyes,  or  when  she 
spoke  of  them  herself,  she  used  to  say  in  French  : 
'  mes  beaux  yeux,'  thinking  that  this  was  a  single 
word. 

M.  Witt  took  me  and  my  tutor  over  the  ramparts 
of  the  fortress  to  show  us  that  it  was  impregnable. 
The  rock  on  which  it  is  built  is  surrounded  by  a 
moat,  on  the  other  side  of  which  is  another  rock, 
containing  vast  casemates  to  hold  troops  for  the 
defence  of  the  place.  The  only  channel  by  which  the 
inner  rock  communicates  with  the  outer  one  is  very 
narrow,  and  is  provided  with  very  solid  ramparts. 