

*  Iu  Galicia,  now  the  country  residence  of  Priiice  Ladislas  Czartoryski. 


5 8        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

either  to  save  his  country  or  to  perish  in  fighting  for 
her. 

Since  my  first  arrival  at  St  Petersburg  my  feelings 
have  never  changed,  but  their  outward  expression  has 
necessarily  been  modified  by  events.  The  same 
juvenile  ardour  which  made  us  regard  our  departure  as 
a  heroic  sacrifice  to  paternal  affection,  made  the  detested 
position  in  which  we  were  placed  more  tolerable. 
When  one  is  young,  there  are  few  things  that  cannot 
be  borne  ;  one  is  strong  enough  to  contend  with  every 
kind  of  adversity  and  even  of  misfortune.  New 
scenes,  new  impressions,  though  painful,  yet  hitherto 
unknown,  always  distract  the  mind  in  the  end  even 
if  they  do  not  change  it. 

We  were  received  in  St  Petersburg  society  with 
much  consideration  and  good-will.  Our  father,  who 
had  lived  in  the  Russian  capital  at  the  time  of 
Elizabeth,  of  Peter  II,  and  of  the  accession  of 
Catherine,  was  well  known  and  respected  there  by 
the  older  inhabitants.  His  letters,  which  we  brought 
with  us,  procured  us  a  favourable  reception.  The 
injustice  with  which  we  had  been  treated  by  the 
Cabinet,  elicited  a  sympathy  in  our  favour  which  was 
not  entirely  barren,  as  it  was  openly  and  fearlessly 
expressed.  I  have  no  doubt,  remembering  the  com- 
pliments which  were  paid  to  us,  that  the  courtiers 
of  whom  St  Petersburg  society  was  at  that  time 
almost  entirely  composed,  knew  beforehand  that  their 
politeness  to  the  disinherited  of  Poland — the  foster- 
children  of  liberty — could  not  compromise  them  at 
Court.  Perhaps  they  had  even  received  a  hint  that 
this  conduct  on  their  part  would  be  pleasing  to  the 


RUSSIAN  SOC11ETY  59 

Empress.  After  a  few  weeks  we  had  made  many 
acquaintances,  and  we  received  invitations  every  day 
from  the  members  of  the  aristocracy.  Dinners,  balls, 
concerts,  soirees,  private  theatricals,  succeeded  each 
other  without  intermission. 

We  were  everywhere  accompanied  by  M.  James 
Gorski,  who  had  been  requested  by  our  father  to  be 
our  friend  and  guide,  and  to  assist  us  by  his  advice. 
No  better  mentor  could  have  been  selected.  Easy- 
going, merry,  tolerant,  a  genial  and  witty  companion, 
and  at  the  same  time  scrupulously  honourable  and 
never  hesitating  to  tell  an  unpleasant  truth,  he  was 
the  very  man  to  keep  us  in  the  right  way  without 
alienating  us  by  excessive  severity.  We  were  very 
happy  in  the  society  of  this  excellent  friend,  and  I 
only  satisfy  the  demands  of  my  conscience  in  here 
expressing  our  gratitude  to  him  and  our  grief  at  his 
unexpected  loss.  He  encouraged  us  to  take  advan- 
tage of  the  friendly  reception  given  to  us,  by  entering 
into  relations  with  the  persons  who  were  ultimately 
to  bring  about  the  restitution  of  our  fortune.  Gorski 
spoke  French  with  a  strong  Polish  accent,  but  this 
did  not  in  any  way  disconcert  him.  All  he  said  and 
did  was  marked  by  a  laconic  precision  which  was 
thoroughly  in  accordance  with  his  character  and  ap- 
pearance. He  held  his  head  high,  and  had  a  proud 
manner  and  a  brief  and  decided  way  of  speaking, 
always,  however,  within  the  limits  of  politeness. 
Although  he  did  not  much  esteem  the  majority  of  his 
acquaintances,  they  were  devoted  to  him.  He  was 
very  fond  of  pleasure  and  good  living,  and  persuaded 
us  to  go  into  society,  which  perhaps  our  melancholy, 