

«/  O 

sanguinary  beings,  with  whom  we  were  to  avoid  every 
contact,  and  whom  we  could  not  even  meet  without 
disgust — that  these  Russians  were  much  like  other 
people  ;  that  there  were  among  them  young  men  who 
were  witty  and  courteous,  and  even  kind,  so  far  at 
least  as  could  be  judged  from  their  words  ;  that 
Russian  ladies  were  very  amiable  ;  that,  in  a  word,  one 
could  live  among  Russians  without  repulsion,  and 
even  sometimes  feel  obliged  to  give  them  one's 
friendship  and  gratitude. 


62        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORY8KI 

I  only  make  these  self-evident  remarks  to  show 
that  we  were  in  no  way  prepared  for  the  transition, 
and  that,  passing  so  suddenly  from  one  extreme  to 
the  other,  we  felt  as  if  we  had  been  cast  from  a  preci- 
pice on  a  sea  where,  not  being  able  to  land,  we  were 
obliged  to  direct  our  course  as  best  we  could.  We 
were  young,  and  we  met  with  dangerous  and  insidious 
acquaintances  and  amusements.  The  society  of  St 
Petersburg  was  on  the  whole  brilliant,  animated,  and 
full  of  variety.  Many  houses  of  different  kinds  were 
open  to  us,  and  strangers  were  everywhere  received 
with  eagerness. 

The  salons  of  the  Princess  Basil  Dolgoroukoff  and 
those  of  the  Princess  Michael  Galitzin,  both  of  whom 
have  since  become  well  known  in  Paris,  were  dis- 
tinguished by  their  elegance.  These  two  ladies 
rivalled  each  other  in  wit,  beauty,  and  amiability. 
It  was  said  that  both  had  been  admired  by  Prince 
Potemkin.  The  unfortunate  adorer  of  the  Princess 
Dolgoroukoff  was  at  that  time  Count  de  Cobentzel, 
the  Austrian  ambassador,  while  the  Princess  Galitzin 
had  enchained  Count  de  Choiseul-Gouffier,  known  by 
his  mission  to  Constantinople  and  the  narrative  of 
his  travels  in  Greece.  He  had  converted  the 
Princess's  palace  into  a  sort  of  art  museum,  though 
she  herself  did  not  much  care  for  art. 

The  Narishkin  palace  was  of  quite  a  different 
kind.  With  all  its  anachronisms,  it  was  a  true 
Russian  building  of  the  Asiatic  type,  and  the  young 
ladies  there,  who  were  less  looked  after  than  they 
usually  are  in  Russia,  were  said  to  have  been  also 
distinguished  by  Prince  Potemkin.  The  doors  were 


J2USSIAX  SOCIETY  63 

open  to  everybody,  and  Cossacks,  Tartars,  Cir- 
cassians, and  other  Asiatics  were  among  the  guests. 
The  owner,  Leo  Narishkin,  gay,  affable,  good- 
natured,  an  old  favourite  of  Peter  III,  and  after- 
wards a  courtier  of  the  Empress  Catherine,  always 
ready  to  please  her  favourites,  with  all  of  whom  he 
was  on  good  terms,  spent  enormous  sums  as  Grand 
Equerry  in  balls  and  receptions,  and  yet,  though  he 
had  been  doing  this  for  ten  years,  did  not  manage  to 
get  through  his  fortune.  I  do  not  know  if  his  heirs, 
who  had  the  same  taste  for  lavish  expenditure,  have 
been  more  successful. 