

At  the  Grolowin  palace  there  were  not  daily 
soirees,  as  elsewhere,  but  little  coteries  like  those  got 
up  in  Paris,  to  perpetuate  the  ancient  traditions  of 
Versailles.  The  mistress  of  the  house,  whose  two 
daughters  have  since  married  MM.  Fredro  and 
Potocki,  was  very  witty,  talented,  sentimental,  and 
fond  of  art. 

Another  house  which  had  a  peculiar  character  of 
its  own  was  the  palace  of  Count  Strogonoff.  The 
Count  had  lived  for  a  long  time  in  Paris,  and  had 
contracted  habits  there  which  were  in  singular  con- 
trast to  the  old  Muscovite  customs.  He  and  his 
friends  talked  of  Voltaire,  of  Diderot,  of  the  Parisian 
stage,  and  discussed  the  merits  of  the  pictures  of  the 
old  masters,  of  which  the  Count  had  a  rich  collection; 
and  while  this  conversation  was  going  on,  a  huge 
table  was  laid,  with  a  barbaric  disorder  betraying  the 
origin  of  his  Siberian  riches,  at  which  people  dined 
without  being  invited  and  were  waited  upon  by  a 
crowd  of  serfs. 


64        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

I  will  not  sketch  in  detail  the  society  of  St  Peters- 
burg ;  I  have  to  speak  of  more  serious  subjects.  I 
will  only  add  that  Russian  society  was  at  that  time, 
as  it  probably  is  still,  only  a  reflection  of  the  Court. 
It  might  be  compared  to  the  vestibule  of  a  temple, 
where  no  one  has  eyes  or  ears  for  anything  but  the 
divinity  within.  Every  conversation,  I  had  almost 
said  every  phrase,  always  ended  in  a  reference  or 
question  relating  to  the  Court — what  was  said  or  done 
there,  or  what  was  intended  to  be  done.  Every 
important  impulse  came  from  the  Court ;  this  de- 
prived society,  it  is  true,  of  any  distinctive  character, 
yet  it  seemed  to  be  animated  and  gay. 

The  Empress  Catherine,  the  immediate  author  of 
the  ruin  of  Poland,  whose  very  name  inspired  us  with 
horror,  and  who  was  cursed  by  everyone  with  the 
heart  of  a  Pole — who,  in  the  opinion  of  people  outside 
her  capital,  neither  had  virtue  nor  even  womanly 
decency — had  nevertheless  succeeded  in  gaining  the 
veneration  and  even  the  love  of  her  servants  and 
subjects.  During  the  long  years  of  her  reign  the 
army,  the  privileged  classes,  arid  the  administrators 
had  their  days  of  prosperity  and  lustre.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  since  her  accession  the  Russian 
Empire  had  gained  in  prestige  abroad  and  in  order  at 
home  far  more  than  during  the  preceding  reigns  of 
Anne  and  Elizabeth.  People's  minds  were  still  full 
of  the  ancient  fanaticism  and  of  a  servile  feeling  of 
adoration  for  autocrats.  The  prosperous  reign  of 
Catherine  had  confirmed  the  Russians  in  their  servility, 
though  some  gleams  of  European  civilisation  had 
already  penetrated  among  them.  Thus  the  people, 