

In  1793,  he  again  went  to  England,  and  entered 
into  close  relations  with  nearly  all  the  politicians  of 
note  in  that  country.*  It  was  while  he  was  still 
staying  there  in  1794  that  the  Kosciuszko  insurrection 
broke  out.  Directly  he  heard  the  news,  he  hurried 
back  to  join  the  insurgents,  but  was  stopped  at 
Brussels  and  put  in  arrest  under  orders  from  the 
Austrian  Government.  Meanwhile  the  insurrection 
was  suppressed,  and  the  third  partition  of  Poland  took 
place.  Soon  after  the  Prince  rejoined  his  parents  at 
Vienna,  where  the  Emperor  Francis  intervened  with 
the  Empress  Catherine  of  Russia  to  cancel  the  confis- 

also  seen,  he  had  resolved  as  early  as  March  1792,  not  only  to  break  his  word  and  to 
betray  his  trust,  but  also  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  partition  of  the  defenceless 
country  which  he  had  bound  himself  in  honour  to  protect.'  (Lecky,  History  of 
England  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  Vols  V  and  VI. ) 

*  Tliere  are  in  the  Czartoryski  archives  several  bulky  manuscripts  written  by  the 
Prince  during  his  stay  in  England  at  this  time.  Two  of  these,  in  the  English 
language,  are  treatises  on  English  law  and  on  the  system  of  police  and  civil 
administration  generally ;  a  third,  in  Polish,  is  on  the  judicial  administration  in 
England. 


54 

cation  of  the  estates  of  the  Czartoryski  family,  ordered 
by  her  in  consequence  of  their  participation  in  the 
insurrection.  The  Empress  insisted,  as  a  condition  of 
her  entering  into  negotiations  on  this  subject,  that  the 
two  young  princes  should  go  to  St  Petersburg  to 
enter  the  Russian  service,  and  after  much  deliberation 
at  a  family  council  this  condition  was  accepted.] 


CHAPTEK  VI 

1794-1795 

JOURNEY     TO     ST     PETERSBURG. — HEADING      PERSONAGES  IN      RUSSIAN 

SOCIETY     UNDER      THE      EMPRESS     CATHERINE. THE     ZUBOFFS. 

CATHERINE. — HER      COURT. THE      YOUNG     PRINCES  ENTER     THE 

RUSSIAN    SERVICE. 

IT  was  the  12th  of  May  1795,  when  my  brother  and  I 
arrived  at  St  Petersburg.  In  order  to  form  an  idea 
of  our  feelings  on  entering  that  city,  it  is  necessary  to 
know  the  principles  in  which  we  were  brought  up. 
Our  education  had  been  entirely  Polish  and  Republican. 
The  study  of  ancient  history  and  literature,  and  of  the 
history  and  literature  of  our  country,  had  occupied 
the  years  of  our  adolescence.  Our  minds  were  full  of 
Greeks  and  Romans,  and,  following  the  example  of 
our  ancestors,  we  thought  only  of  perpetuating  the 
ancient  virtues  on  the  soil  of  our  fatherland.  With 
regard  to  political  liberty,  more  recent  examples, 
taken  from  the  history  of  England  and  France,  had 
up  to  a  certain  point  rectified  our  ideas,  without  in 
any  way  diminishing  their  energy.  The  love  of  our 
country,  of  its  glories,  its  institutions,  and  its  liberties 
had  been  inculcated  into  us  by  our  studies,  and  by 
everything  we  had  seen  or  heard  around  us.  I  should 