

'  The  Prussian  policy  of  detaching  Poland  from  Russia  was,  however,  perfectly 
successful,  and,  relying  on  Prussian  support,  the  Polish  Diet,  which  first  met  in 
September  1788,  and  which  was  confederated  for  the  emergency,  carried  a  series  of 
reforms  which  totally  changed  the  constitution  and  condition  of  Poland.  It  was 
decreed  that  the  army  should  be  raised  from  20,000  to  100,000  men.  The  system  of 
taxation  was  thoroughly  revised.  A  considerable  representation  was  given  to  the 
trading  towns.  The  excessive  powers  of  the  Dietines  were  abolished.  The  Liberum 
Veto  was  swept  away,  and  finally  on  May  3,  1791,  a  new  Constitution  was  voted,  in 
which,  after  the  reigning  King,  the  crown  was  offered  to  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  and 
to  his  heirs  for  ever.  It  was  certain  that  Russia  would  resist  bitterly  what  was 
done,  and  she  early  announced  to  the  Diet  that  she  would  permit  no  change  what- 
ever in  the  Constitution  of  1775.  The  King  of  Prussia  expressed  his  satisfaction  at 
what  had  occurred,  to  the  Polish  Minister  at  his  Court,  to  the  King  of  Poland,  and 
the  Elector  of  Saxony.  He  urged  the  Elector  to  accept  the  Polish  crown  :  lie 
offered  him  his  warm  alliance,  and  he  professed  himself  fully  determined  to  fulfil 
his  own  treaty  obligations. 

'  As  for  the  policy  of  Russia  towards  Poland,  it  was  one  of  cynical,  undisguised 
rapacity.  The  course  of  events  depended  largely  on  the  King  of  Prussia.  That 
sovereign,  as  we  have  se*en,  had  first  induced  the  Poles  to  assert  their  independence 
of  Russia.  He  had  himself  urged  them  to  amend  their  constitution.  He  had  been 
the  first  to  congratulate  them  on  the  constitutional  reform  of  May  1791.  He  had 
bound  himself  before  God  and  man,  by  two  solemn  and  recent  treaties,  to  respect 
the  integrity  of  Poland  ;  to  defend  the  integrity  of  Poland  against  all  enemies  ;  to 
oppose  by  force  any  attempt  to  interfere  witli  her  internal  affairs.  Yet,  as  we  have 


VISITS  TO  ENGLAND  53 

by  the  greatest  statesmen  and  political  writers  of  the 
time  as  the  highest  step  yet  attained  in  the  science 
of  government.  Burke  said  that  it  was  '  a  glory  to 
humanity'  and  '  the  noblest  and  greatest  benefit  shed 
upon  the  human  race.'  Fox  described  it  as  '  a  work  to 
which  all  the  friends  of  freedom  should  be  sincerely 
attached,'  and  Volney  remarked  that  Poland  was  the 
only  country  of  Northern  Europe  which  had  amelio- 
rated the  hard  lot  of  its  peasantry. 

In  1792,  Prince  Adam  took  part  in  the  campaign 
against  the  Russians,  who  had  invaded  Poland  in  con- 
sequence of  the  issue  of  the  new  constitution  ;  he 
fought  in  the  battle  of  Granno,  and  was  decorated  by 
the  King  for  his  bravery. 