


RUSSIAN  SOCIETY  67 

at  once  put  on  an  air  of  seriousness  and  submission. 
There  were  no  more  smiles  or  jests ;  no  one  dared 
even  to  murmur  a  complaint  or  a  reproach,  as  if  the 
most  unjust  and  outrageous  actions,  when  committed 
by  her,  were  decrees  of  fate,  to  be  accepted  with  re- 
spectful submission. 

Catherine  was  ambitious,  spiteful,  vindictive,  ar- 
bitrary, and  shameless  ;  but  her  ambition  was  com- 
bined with  love  of  glory,  and  although  when  her 
personal  interests  or  passions  were  concerned  every- 
thing had  to  give  way,  her  despotism  was  in  no  way 
capricious.  Her  passions,  disorderly  as  they  were, 
were  dominated  by  her  reason  and  her  abilities.  Her 
tyranny  was  not  the  fruit  of  impulse,  but  of  calcula- 
tion. She  did  not  commit  crimes  which  were  of  no 
advantage  to  her.  She  even  consented  sometimes  to 

o 

be  equitable  in  matters  to  which  she  was  indifferent, 
in  order  that  the  glory  of  justice  might  increase  the 
splendour  of  her  throne.     Moreover,  being  jealous  of 
every  kind    of  fame,   she   aspired   to   the  title    of  a 
legislator,  in  order  to  give  herself,  at  least  in  the  eyes  of 
Europe  and  of  history,  a  reputation  for  statesmanship. 
She  knew  only  too  well  that  sovereigns  cannot  dis- 
pense with  appearing  just,  even  if  they  are  not  so  in 
reality.      She  was  anxious  to  gain  over  public  opinion 
to  her  side  so  long  as  it  did  not  run  contrary  to  her 
views  ;   otherwise  she  disregarded  it.      The  political 
crimes  which  she  committed  in  Poland,  she  explained 
as  necessary  for   the   security  of  the    State   and  as 
adding  to  its  military  glory.     She  seized  the  estates 
of  the   Poles  who  had  shown  most  zeal  for  the  in- 
dependence of  their  country,  but  in  distributing  these 


68         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

estates  she  benefited  the  great  Russian  families,  and 
the  bait  of  an  illicit  gain  induced  all  around  her  to 
flatter  her  taste  for  a  criminal,  pitiless,  and  conquering 
policy. 

Much  astonishment  was  expressed  when  General 
Fersen,  the  winner  of  the  battle  of  Maciej^o vice,*  re- 
fused the  confiscated  estates  of  the  Czacki  family,  and 
asked  as  his  reward  some  bonds  of  the  Imperial 
domains.  No  one  else  would  have  ventured  to  make 
so  legitimate  a  request,  as  every  order  of  the  Empress 
was  received  with  blind  submission.  Her  wish,  even 
if  it  entailed  a  revolting  act  of  injustice,  was  not  to  be 
discussed:  to  do  so  would  have  been  a  proof  of  un- 
exampled boldness.  People  held  that  her  acts  were 
not  to  be  judged  by  ordinary  standards,  and  that  even 
the  principles  of  equity  were  subject  to  her  decrees. 

I  will  quote  an  example  of  this  which  made  some 
noise  at  the  time.  The  Princess  Schakoffskoy,  who 
had  a  colossal  fortune,  had  married  her  daughter  to 
the  Duke  of  Aremberg.  This  had  happened  abroad. 
Catherine,  indignant  at  her  consent  not  having  been 
asked,  ordered  the  princess's  goods  to  be  confiscated. 
The  mother  and  daughter  came  to  implore  the 
Empress's  pardon,  but  Catherine  was  deaf  to  their 
prayers.  She  cancelled  the  marriage,  saying  that  it 
was  invalid,  as  it  had  been  contracted  without  her 
permission.  The  mother  and  daughter  quietly  sub- 
mitted, and  the  public  took  this  iniquitous  decision  as 
a  matter  of  course  ;  at  least  nobody  said  a  word  about 
it.  Some  time  after,  the  young  princess  was  per- 