


56        MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTOKYSKI 

add  that  this  feeling,  which  penetrated  the  whole  of 
our  moral  nature,  was  accompanied  by  an  invincible 
aversion  to  all  who  had  contributed  to  the  ruin  of  the 
fatherland  which  we  so  much  loved. 

This  two-fold  sentiment  of  love  and  hatred  domi- 
nated me  so  entirely,  that  I  could  not  meet  a  Russian 
either  in  Poland  or  elsewhere  without  feeling  a  rush  of 
blood  to  the  head — without  blushing  or  turning  white 
with  anger — for  every  Russian  seemed  to  me  an 
author  of  the  misfortunes  of  my  country. 

My  first  task  was  promptly  to  replace  on  a  satis- 
factory footing  the  affairs  of  my  father.  Three- 
fourths  of  his  fortune,  all  consisting  of  land  situated 
in  the  provinces  seized  by  Russia,  had  been  seques- 
trated. These  estates  were  mortgaged  to  a  consider- 
able extent,  so  that  not  only  my  father's  own  property, 
but  also  that  of  a  great  number  of  our  countrymen, 
was  in  question.  The  representations  made  in  my 
father's  favour  by  the  Court  of  Vienna  had  had  no 
result.  Catherine  was  provoked  by  the  patriotism  of 
my  father  and  mother,  and  their  sympathy  with 
the  Kosciuszko  insurrection.  '  Let  their  two  sons 
come  to  me,'  she  said,  'and  then  we  will  see.'  She 
wished  to  keep  us  as  hostages. 

Our  departure  for  St  Petersburg  was  thus  indis- 
pensable. Our  father,  kind  and  considerate  as  ever, 
did  not  venture  to  demand  this  sacrifice  from  us ;  and 
it  was  the  fact  of  our  knowing  this  that  prevailed 
over  every  other  consideration.  Our  fatherland  was 
lost :  were  we  also  to  condemn  our  parents  to  want, 
and  make  it  impossible  for  them  to  discharge  their 
debts  ?  We  did  not  hesitate  an  instant.  At  the  same 


JOURNEY  TO  ST  PETERSBURG  57 

time  we  knew  well  that  to  go  to  St  Petersburg, 
far  from  all  our  connections — to  give  ourselves  up 
as  prisoners,  so  to  say,  into  the  hands  of  the  most 
detested  of  our  enemies,  of  the  executioners  of  our 
country — was  in  our  situation  the  most  painful  sacrifice 
we  could  make  to  paternal  affection  ;  for  to  do  this  it 
was  necessary  to  act  in  opposition  to  all  our  senti- 
ments, all  our  convictions,  all  our  plans— to  every- 
thing that  was  nearest  to  our  hearts  and  minds. 

I  described  with  all  the  ardour  of  a  youthful  poet 
my  state  of  mind  at  this  time,  in  some  verses  entitled 
'  The  Song  of  the  Bard,'  which  I  composed  during  my 
stay  at  Grodno.  When  I  left  that  town  I  sent  the 
manuscript  to  our  friend  Kniaznin,  and  it  was  often 
read  with  tears  of  sympathy  by  my  family. 

We  bade  adieu  to  our  parents  (who  at  that  time 
were  residing  at  Vienna),  in  the  month  of  December 
1794.  After  sadly  passing  a  few  days  at  ^ieniawa,* 
wre  proceeded  on  our  journey  at  the  beginning  of 
January,  and  stopped  at  Grodno  (where  the  King 
Stanislas  Augustus  then  lived  under  the  surveillance 
of  Prince  Repnin),  until  we  received  permission, 
which  did  not  arrive  till  the  following  spring,  to  go 
on  to  St  Petersburg.  The  Empress  at  first  refused 
to  give  this  permission,  and  we  were  shown  a  note  in 
her  own  hand  in  which  she  stated  as  the  reason  of  her 
refusal  that  my  mother  had,  as  in  the  story  of 
Hamilcar  and  Hannibal,  made  us  swear  eternal  hatred 
to  Russia  and  her  sovereign.  While  at  Grodno  we 
often  went  to  see  the  King,  and  we  were  witnesses  of 
his  grief  and  bitter  self-reproaches  at  not  being  able 