


60        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  also  a  little  natural  indolence,  would  otherwise 
have  prevented  us  from  doing.  He  never  lost  sight 
of  the  object  of  the  journey  we  had  undertaken,  and 
he  never  neglected  any  means  calculated  to  achieve 
it.  He  always  urged  us  to  pay  visits  and  take  steps 
which  were  inexpressibly  disagreeable  to  us,  and  it 
was  to  his  persistence  in  this  respect  that  our  success 
was  mainly  due. 

This  period  of  our  youth  was  a  decisive  one  for 
the  rest  of  our  career  :  for,  thus  suddenly  introduced 
into  a  state  of  things  entirely  foreign  to  us  and 
contrary  to  our  ideas,  we  saw  all  our  plans  disappear 
and  our  future  changed  and  broken  in  opposition  to 
our  wishes  and  our  convictions.  As  regards  myself 
this  phase  of  my  life  produced  deep  and  painful 
results.  The  misfortunes  of  my  country,  of  my 
parents,  and  of  many  others  of  my  countrymen,  the 
defeat  of  justice  and  the  triumph  of  violence  and 
crime,  had  unhinged  my  mind.  I  began  to  doubt 
the  ways  of  Providence.  I  saw  only  contradictions 
and  aimless  struggles ;  nothing  seemed  to  me  to 
deserve  any  serious  attention  ;  I  was  absorbed  by 
a  feeling  of  scepticism,  of  cold  and  despairing  indiffer- 
ence. I  have  since  more  than  once  relapsed  into  these 
attacks  of  despair.  But  although,  seeing  nowhere 
any  solid  basis  of  action,  and  suspecting  everybody, 
I  looked  upon  men  and  things  with  contempt,  an 
interior  voice  suggested  to  my  reason  that  virtue 
and  charity  were  indubitable  realities  that  were  worth 
living  for,  and  that  even  if  this  were  not  the  case, 
they  were  to  be  preferred  to  anything  else.  This 
debate  of  niy  conscience  alone  saved  me  from  the 


RUSSIA  N  SOCIETY  6 1 

fatal  effects  of  universal  doubt.  The  first  germs  of 
belief,  though  weakened,  still  remained  in  my  soul. 

Compliments  and  pleasures  always  produce  their 
effect  on  a  youthful  mind,  though  they  do  not 
prevent,  and  indeed  sometimes  promote,  a  feeling  of 
scepticism.  Our  souls  retained  their  wounds,  but  we 
felt  some  change  on  the  surface.  We  found  that, 
according  to  the  proverb,  the  devil  is  not  so  black  as 
he  is  painted,  especially  if  he  makes  himself  amiable  ; 
that  it  was  not  just,  notwithstanding  the  outrages 
that  had  been  committed  on  our  country,  to  accuse 
the  whole  Russian  nation  of  them — to  include  in  our 
detestation  of  the  Government,  individuals  who  had 
nothing  in  common  with  it ;  that  the  appearances  of 
things  chano-e  according  to  the  condition  and  status  of 

o  o  ~ 

persons,  and  that  to  arrive  at  a  sound  judgment  of 
their  private,  and  still  more  of  their  public,  conduct, 
one  should  put  one's  self  in  their  place  and  have  regard 
to  the  circumstances  by  which  they  are  surrounded. 
By  degrees  we  came  to  the  conviction  that  these 
Russians,  whom  we  had  instinctively  learnt  to  hate— 
whom  we  indiscriminately  classed  as  malignant  and 