

*  The  battle  in  which  Kosciuszko's  insurrection  was  finally  suppressed,  and 
Kosciuszko  himself  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner  (10th  of  October  1794). 


RUSSIAN  SOCIETY  69 

suaded  to  contract  a  second  marriage  ;  but  being 
sincerely  attached  to  her  first  husband,  and  stung  by 
remorse,  she  killed  herself. 

There  was  also  an  analogy  between  the  Court  of 
the  Empress  Catherine  and  that  of  Louis  XIV  in  so 
far  that  his  mistresses  played  exactly  the  same  part  at 
Versailles  as  her  favourites  did  at  St  Petersburg.  As 
to  the  immorality,  the  license,  the  intrigues,  and  the 
baseness  of  the  Court  of  St  Petersburg,  they  are 
rather  to  be  compared  to  what  we  read  of  the  courts 
of  the  Byzantine  Emperors  ;  while  for  a  parallel  to  the 
submission  and  the  veneration  of  the  people  we  must 
look  to  the  fascination  exercised  upon  the  English 
nation  by  Queen  Elizabeth,  who,  equally  cruel  and 
ambitious,  was  endowed  with  greater  talents  and  a 
masculine  energy. 

Even  the  libertine  spirit  of  Catherine,  which  often 
prompted  her  to  improvised  amours,  was  of  service  to 
her  with  the  army,  the  Court,  and  the  privileged 
classes.  Every  subaltern,  every  young  man  who 
possessed  physical  attractions,  aspired  to  the  favours 
of  his  sovereign  ;  and  although  she  descended  from 
her  Olympus  only  too  often  to  visit  ordinary  mortals, 
her  subjects  did  not  the  less  respect  her  power 
and  her  authority  ;  on  the  contrary,  they  were 
always  admiring  her  discretion  and  cleverness.  Those 
who  approached  her,  of  whatever  sex,  and  who  had 
enjoyed  her  benefits,  were  truly  attached  to  her,  and 
were  never  weary  of  praising  her  goodness  and 
amiability. 

For  some  time  we  were  forbidden  to  see  this  source 
of  favour  and  power,  whose  rays  dazzled  all  eyes.  In 


70        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

other  words,  we  had  not  received  permission  to  present 
.ourselves  at  the  Imperial  Court,  which  as  usual 
occupied  the  Tauris  Palace  from  the  beginning  of 
spring.  The  only  members  of  the  Imperial  family 
we  had  seen  were  the  young  princes,  who  were  in  the 
crowd  on  the  day  of  our  arrival,  the  1st  of  May 
according  to  the  Russian  calendar,  when  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  population  goes  to  the  promenade  of 
Catherinenhoff.  Some  time  after,  when  we  were 
already  received  in  society,  we  were  invited  to  assist 
at  a  fete  which  was  to  last  about  twenty-four  hours, 
for  it  was  to  begin  with  a  breakfast,  to  continue  with 
a  dance,  walks,  and  the  theatre,  and  to  end  with  a 
supper.  This  fete  was  given  by  the  Princess  Galitzin 
in  honour  of  the  'young  court.'  We  had  not  been  as 
yet  presented  ;  but  the  Princess  Galitzin,  following 
the  instructions  she  had  received  from  the  Countess 
Schouvaloif,  her  mother,  who  had  been  given  a  hint 
by  the  Empress,  had  invited  us,  and  this  gave  us  a 
certain  position  in  society.  It  would  be  impossible  to 
see  a  handsomer  couple  than  the  Grand-Duke 
Alexander,  who  was  then  eighteen,  and  his  wife,  who 
was  only  sixteen.  Both  beamed  with  youth,  grace, 
and  goodness. 