

i/ 

when  we  were  passing  our  time  at  balls  and  entertain- 
ments, the  most  heroic  of  our  countrymen  were  in 
prison.  It  was  very  difficult  and  dangerous  to  get 
news  of  them  ;  but  fortune  favoured  us  in  this  respect. 
After  the  second  partition,  when  part  of  the  Polish 
army  in  Podolia  and  the  Ukraine  was  forced  to  enter 
the  Russian  service,  two  young  men  put  on  the 
Russian  uniform  and  managed  to  obtain  places  in  the 
service  of  Plato  Zuboff.  One  of  these  was  Komar, 


777^  ZUBOFFS  81 

afterwards  the  possessor  of  millions  in  Podolia,  who 
was  not  unknown  to  us,  as  his  father  had  been 
employed  by  my  grandfather  to  manage  his  affairs  ; 
the  other  was  Poradowski,  afterwards  a  valiant 
general,  killed  in  the  war  of  1812. 

Poradowski  had  been  an  officer  in  the  regiment  of 
my  brother-in-law,  the  Prince  of  Wiirtemberg  ;  we 
were  thus  old  acquaintances.  These  two  gentlemen, 
Poradowski  especially,  found  means  of  obtaining  some 
news  for  us  about  the  prisoners.  We  learnt  in  this 
way  that  Niemcewicz,  Konopka,  and  Kilinski  were 
shut  up  in  the  casemates  of  the  fortress ;  that 
Kosciuszko  had  been  removed  from  them  and  con- 
fined somewhere  else,  and  that  he  was  treated  with 
every  consideration  and  generally  respected.  He  was 
placed  in  charge  of  Major  Titoff,  who  was  much 
attached  to  him  and  related  various  anecdotes  of  him 
which  were  very  insignificant  (the  Major  was  very 
rough  and  ignorant),  but,  being  about  such  a  man  as 
Kosciuszko,  were  repeated  from  mouth  to  mouth, 
Potocki,  Zakrzewski,  Mostowski,  and  Sokolnicki  were 
confined  in  a  house  in  Liteina  Street.  Not  being:  able 

o 

to  do  anything  for  them,  wre  at  least  gave  ourselves 
the  pleasure  of  often  going  through  this  street,  either 
in  a  carriage  or  on  foot,  in  the  hope  of  seeing  them. 
Sometimes  we  succeeded  in  catching  a  glimpse  of 
them  passing  like  shadows  before  our  eyes ;  but  they 
probably  never  perceived  us,  as  the  house  was  very 
strictly  guarded  both  within  and  without.  Our  hearts 
beat  fast,  however,  when  we  raised  our  eyes  to  the 
windows  behind  which  the  prisoners  were  confined. 
Except  Marshal  Potocki,  they  were  not  personally 
VOL.  i.  F 


82         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

known  to  us  ;  but  they  had  become  dear  to  the  heart 
of  every  good  Pole  by  the  great  deeds  which  they 
were  being  made  to  expiate  by  sufferings  equally  cruel 
and  unjust. 

When  we  came  back  in  the  evening  we  used  to 
talk  of  the  impressions  of  the  day.  Our  worthy 
friend  Gorski  did  not  spare  his  epithets  with  regard 
to  those  whom  he  had  been  obliged  to  treat  with 
consideration  in  public.  Whenever  the  name  of  any 
of  these  people  (except  a  few  whom  he  realty  re- 
spected) was  pronounced,  he  immediately  added : 
'  Yes,  he  is  a  villain,  a  rascal,'  and  so  on.  These 
expressions  he  used  particularly  with  regard  to  Poles 
of  an  equivocal  or  tarnished  reputation.  People  un- 
fortunately were  to  be  found  daily,  who  thought  that 
their  indifference  to  the  fate  of  their  country  and 
their  treasonable  practices  would  gain  them  the  favour 
of  the  Ministers  and  the  Court.  If  their  former 
services  did  not  seeui  to  them  to  have  been  suffi- 
ciently rewarded,  they  tried  to  show  themselves  more 
base  in  order  to  get  a  larger  reward.  We  had  more 
than  once  to  blush  at  this  disgraceful  conduct  on  the 
part  of  some  of  our  countrymen.  We  were  not,  how- 
ever, confounded  with  them ;  the  Poles  at  St  Peters- 
burg were  divided  into  two  classes,  entirely  distinct  by 
their  qualities,  their  manners,  and  their  sentiments. 