

In  the  opinion  of  the  Russians,  however,  Valerian 
Zuboff  was  a  young  man  of  loyal  and  noble  senti- 
ments. All  that  was  said  against  him  was  that  he 

*  See  note  on  page  42. 


THE  EMPRESS  CATHERINE  73 

was  too  fond  of  pleasure  ;  his  honour  was  believed  to 
be  untarnished.  He  was  at  that  time  engaged  in  a 
love  intrigue  with  Madame  Prot  Potocka,  who  had 
followed  him  to  St  Petersburg,  where  she  lived  in 
concealment :  this,  however,  did  not  prevent  him  from 
making  other  liaisons.  He  had  lost  a  leg  in  a 
skirmish,  before  Praga*  was  taken  by  assault,  and 
his  crutches  seemed  to  add  to  his  charms  in  the  eyes 
of  the  Empress  and  other  ladies.  On  examining  him 
more  closely  one  saw  the  nonchalance  of  a  young 
man  spoiled  by  fortune  and  by  women.  His  rooms 
were  always  full  of  flatterers  of  all  kinds.  In  the 
interest  of  our  parents,  our  worthy  friend  Gorski 
took  us  there  also,  much  against  our  will.  When,  by 
repeating  our  visits,  our  relations  had  developed  into 
a  sort  of  familiarity,  we  still  felt  them  to  be  inex- 
pressibly tedious  ;  there  were  no  points  of  sympathy 
between  us,  and  it  was  impossible  to  enter  into  any 
conversation.  Count  Valerian  usually  began  by 
assuring  us  that  he  and  his  brother  did  not  possess 
anything  like  the  influence  they  were  supposed  to 
exercise  over  Catherine's  mind,  and  that  very  often 
she  did  the  very  opposite  to  that  which  they  wished 
her  to  do.  I  believe,  however,  that  Count  Valerian 
Zuboff  was  the  only  one  who  had  our  interests  at 
heart.  Whether  as  a  matter  of  conscience,  or  from 
a  desire  to  retrieve  his  reputation,  he  urged  his 
brother  to  help  us,  and  he  pleaded  warmly  to  the 
Empress  in  our  behalf. 

The    principal    favourite    acted    very   differently. 

*  A  suburb  of  Warsaw,  captured  in  1795  by  Souvaroff,  who  put  its  inhabitants 
to  the  sword.  This  event  was  followed  by  the  capitulation  of  Warsaw,  the  abdica- 
tion of  King  Stanislas  Augustus,  and  the  third  partition  of  Poland. 


74        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Count  Plato  Zuboff,   as   I   said  above,   had   granted 
us  the  honour  of  a  special  audience,  and,  like  other 
applicants,  we  had  to  remind  his  Excellency  of  our 
existence  in   order  to   obtain  his  protection.     Every 
day  about  eleven  o'clock  he  had  a  levee,  in  the  literal 
sense  of  the  word.     An  immense  crowd  of  petitioners 
and   courtiers  of  all  ranks   hastened  to  assist  at  his 
toilet.     The  street  was  full  of  carriages  with  four  or 
six   horses,   exactly  as   at    the    theatre.     Sometimes, 
after  a  long  period  of  waiting,  the  crowd  was  informed 
that  the  Count  would  not  see  them  on  that  day,  and 
they  then  dispersed  to  come  again   on   the   morrow. 
If  Zuboff  was  disposed  to  see  them,  the  folding  doors 
were   opened,  and   generals,  high  civil  functionaries, 
Circassians,  and  merchants  with  long  beards,  crowded 
into    the   room.     Among  the   applicants  were   many 
Poles   who  came  to    claim    the    restoration    of  their 
estates,  or  redress  for  some  grievance.     One  of  these 
was    Prince    Alexander    Lubomirski,    who    intended 
to  sell  his  estates  in  order  to  save  the  remains  of  his 
fortune,  which  had  been  involved  in  the  ruin  of  the 
country.     There   was  also   the    Metropolitan    of  the 
United  Greeks,*  named  Sosnowski,  who  came  to  bow 
his  venerable  head  to  the  favourite  in  order  to  obtain 
the  restitution  of  his  property  and  save  his  church, 
which  the   Russian   Government  had  already  begun 
cruelly  to  persecute.     M.  Oskierko,  a  young  man  of 
interesting  appearance,  came  to  ask  for  an  amnesty 
for  his  father,  who  had  been  imprisoned  or  banished 
to  Siberia,  and  whose  fortune  had   been   confiscated. 