

There  was  no  Pole  whose  society  we  enjoyed  more 
than  that  of  Prince  Alexander  Lubomirski.  He  was 
a  good  patriot  and  a  wise  and  worthy  man  ;  the  turn 
of  his  mind  was  both  tranquil  and  gay,  so  that  he 
sometimes  evoked  merriment  out  of  the  saddest 
events.  He  often  went  with  us  on  our  visits. 


CATHERINE  83 

Between  one  visit  and  another  we  gave  free  course  to 
our  observations  and  criticisms,  as  sometimes  happens 
when  men  who  are  tired  of  concealing  their  thoughts, 
and  of  feigning  to  agree  by  a  gesture  to  what  they  do  not 
approve,  can  afterwards,  when  they  are  in  the  society 
of  people  with  whom  they  are  intimate,  freely  express 
their  true  opinions,  and  thereby  compensate  them- 
selves for  the  constraint  and  humiliations  they  have 
been  obliged  to  suffer. 

Notwithstanding  these  moments  of  confidential 
talk,  the  sad  necessity  of  concealing  our  sentiments 
and  our  bufferings,  of  dissimulating  our  thoughts, 
the  impossibility  of  declaring  aloud  what  we  felt — 
were  most  painful  to  us ;  and  they  influenced  my 
character  and  my  intellectual  faculties  in  the  most  disas- 
trous manner.  This  clog  on  my  frankness  made  me 
sombre,  extremely  silent,  and  reserved,  and  I  seldom 
made  any  remark  except  to  myself.  It  may  be  that 
I  was  by  nature  inclined  to  reticence,  but  more 
propitious  circumstances  would  perhaps  have  made 
this  inclination  disappear  or  might  have  diminished 
it,  while  my  position  at  St  Petersburg  only  aggra- 
vated it.  During  the  whole  of  my  life  I  have  not 
been  able  to  master  this  tendency,  imposed  on  my 
youth  by  an  inevitable  fate. 

At  length,  after  waiting  for  several  months,   we 

O  '  *-J 

were  informed  that  we  were  to  be  presented  to  the 
Empress  at  Tsarskoe-Selo,  the  summer  residence  of 
the  Court.  This  was  a  decisive  moment  for  us,  for 
until  that  time  we  had  not  had  the  slightest  idea  of 
what  was  to  be  the  result  of  my  father's  memorial 
announcing  that  he  had  sent  us  to  St  Petersburg  and 


8<j         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

I 

asking  for    the  restitution  of  his  estates.     We  were 
advised   to    come    early :    the    presentation    was    to 
take   place   after    church.       Meanwhile    we    went    to 
General   Branicki.  who    was    married   to   a    niece    of 
Potemkin's,    and    had     rendered    great     service     to 
Catherine  in  the  affairs  of  Poland  ;  he    was  still    in 
high  favour  with  her,  and  an  apartment  was  reserved 
for  him  in  all  the   Imperial  Palaces.      It   was  very 
unfortunate  that  he  should  have  degraded  himself  by 
assisting    in   the    ruin    of  his   country.       A   courtier 
stained   with   misdeeds,    ambitious,  unprincipled,  and 
greedy   of    wealth,    he   yet   felt   himself    a    Pole    at 
heart,  notwithstanding  his  family  relations  with  the 
Russians ;  and  he  would  have  preferred  to  satisfy  his 
tastes  and  his  ambition  in  Poland  rather  than  in  any 
other  country.     He  was  still  proud  of  the  Poland  he 
had  lost ;  he  regretted  her  and  suffered  at  her  humilia- 
tion.    He  detested  the  Russians,  whom  he  knew  well, 
and  he  revenged  himself  upon  them  by  silent  contempt 
and  mockery  of  their  faults.     On  the  other  hand,  his 
heart  was  open  to  some  old  friends  to  whom  he  could 
speak  without   fear.      His   lively,   essentially   Polish 
mind  and  his  witty  remarks  made  his  conversation  gay 
and  interesting.     Though  very  fond  of  describing  his 
experiences,  he  avoided  all  allusion  to  the  fatal  league 
of  Targowitza.*     He  also  liked  to  talk  of  old  times, 
and  then  he  assumed  a  grand  seigneur  air  which  entirely 
disappeared   when  he  was  in  the  crowd  of  courtiers 
whose  nothingness  he  felt,  or  in  the  presence  of  Cathe- 
rine, who  often  invited  him  to  play  cards  with  her. 