

Our  reception  by  the  Empress  and  the  society  of 
St  Petersburg  was,  considering  our  age  and  position, 
evidently  only  the  last  echo  of  old  traditions  relative 
to  Poland — of  the  high  opinion  still  held  by  the 


CATHERINE'S  COURT  87 

Muscovites  as  to  our  leading  men.  Our  family 
especially,  which  during  the  previous  century  had 
unfortunately  been  forced  into  frequent  relations  with 
Russia,  was  better  known  than  the  others.  My 
grandfather  and  my  father  were  generally  respected 
in  Russia,  and  we  met  at  St  Petersburg  the  two 
Narischkins  and  their  wives,  who  had  known  my 
father  when  he  was  in  great  favour  with  Peter  III, 
and  with  Catherine  at  the  time  of  her  accession. 

We  were  presented  on  the  same  day  to  the  Grand- 
Dukes.  Paul  received  us  coldly,  but  with  dignity  ; 
his  wife,  the  Grand-Duchess  Maria,  showed  us  much 
consideration,  chiefly  on  account  of  her  brother,  whom 
she  wished  to  reconcile  with  our  sister.*  The  younger 
Grand-Dukes  received  us  frankly  and  graciously. 

The  wealthier  classes  at  St  Petersburg  pass  the 
summer  in  country-houses  in  the  vicinity.  Every 
great  nobleman  has  one,  and  lives  in  it  as  luxuriously 
as  in  the  capital.  As  the  fine  season  is  short,  every 
one  tries  to  use  it  to  the  best  advantage,  so  that  for 
some  months  the  town  is  deserted.  Our  visits  conse- 
quently had  to  be  paid  in  the  country,  and  as  we 
were  always  travelling  we  often  returned  to  town 
very  late.  There  is  scarcely  any  night  in  the 
summer,  and  the  recollection  of  our  moonlight  nights 
in  Poland  made  us  sad.  Gorski  allowed  us  no 
breathing  time ;  we  had  to  renew  our  journeys  daily, 
and  neglect  no  opportunity  of  multiplying  our  rela- 
tions. This  was,  indeed,  the  only  means  of  attaining 
our  object,  for  in  spite  of  our  flattering  reception  at 
Court,  and  the  repeated  recommendations  of  people 

*  See  note  ou  page  40. 


88        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

in  power,  our  business  was  still  in  suspense.  Catherine, 
who  was  well  informed  as  to  everything  that  was 
going  on,  knew  that  we  were  popular  in  the  capital, 
and  the  praise  that  was  lavished  upon  us  could  not 
fail  to  produce  a  good  impression  upon  her. 

Besides  our  journeys  to  the  country  villas,  which 
were  in  themselves  very  fatiguing,  we  had  to  go 
every  other  Tuesday  and  on  each  holiday  to  Tsarskoe- 
Selo  to  assist  at  ZubofFs  toilet.  Having  been  pre- 
sented, we  were  also  qualified  to  go  to  the  Palace,  and 
on  these  occasions  we  were  usually  invited  to  dine  at 
the  principal  table.  At  the  head  of  this  table  sat  the 
Empress  and  the  Imperial  family,  but  people  of  all 
the  higher  classes  were  admitted  to  it.  We  were 
also  advised  to  take  part  in  the  evening  entertain- 
ments, which  in  fine  weather  took  place  in  the  garden. 
The  Empress  walked  there  with  the  whole  of  her 
Court,  or  sat  on  a  bench  surrounded  by  the  older 
courtiers,  while  the  young  Grand-Dukes  and  Grand- 
Duchesses,  with  the  younger  ladies  and  gentlemen 
of  the  Court,  played  at  various  games  before  her  on 
the  grass.  The  Grand-Duke  Paul  never  took  part 
in  these  amusements,  for  when  divine  service  or 
dinner  was  over  he  went  to  his  residence  at  Pavlovsk. 
While  playing  at  these  games  we  became  more  closely 
acquainted  with  the  Grand-Dukes,  who  were  most 
amiable  to  us. 