

*  The  union  of  the  Roman  and  Greek  churches  in  Poland  was  effected  in  the 
1434. 


CATHERINE'S  COURT  75 

The  number  of  persons  who  had  been  thus  treated 
was  immense  ;*  the  proportion  of  them  who  would  be 
able  to  avail  themselves  of  the  doubtful  chances  of 
the  so-called  amnesty  was  very  small.  Some  were  in 
chains,  others  in  Siberia;  and  it  was  not  every  one 
who  could  get  permission  to  go  to  St  Petersburg. 
All  complaints  were  suppressed,  and  the  Government 
officials,  who  constituted  a  hierarchy  of  fabulous 
extent,  did  not  give  the  required  permission  unless 
they  themselves  derived  some  advantage  from  it. 
And  even  when  all  difficulties  had  been  overcome, 
and  the  petitioner  had  obtained  admission  to  the 
Russian  Court,  the  usual  answer  was  that  given  to 
the  Metropolitan  of  the  United  Greeks — that  the 
Empress's  decrees,  whether  just  or  unjust,  were 
irrevocable,  that  complaint  was  useless,  and  that  W7hat 
had  been  done  could  not  be  undone — especially  as 
official  avidity  closed  the  doors  to  every  appeal. 

To  return  to  the  assemblages  in  the  favourite's 
rooms.  Each  suitor  showed  in  his  face  what  he 
wanted.  Some  expressed  grief  and  a  simple  desire  to 
defend  their  property,  their  honour,  and  their  exist- 
ence ;  others  betrayed  a  design  to  seize  somebody 
else's  property,  or  to  keep  it  if  they  had  already 
obtained  it.  Thus  some  were  led  by  misfortune, 
others  by  greed.  Others  again  only  came  to  pros- 
trate themselves  before  the  rising  star.  It  seemed 
almost  impossible  to  be  humiliated  on  finding  one's 
self  in  a  crowd  composed  of  the  h'rst  dignitaries  of  the 

*  Many  of  these  exiles,  being  deprived  of  all  means  of  communication  with  their 
friends  and  relatives  in  Poland,  remained  in  Siberia  for  the  rest  of  their  lives. 
There  are  thousands  of  Polish  families  now  in  Siberia  which  are  descended  from  the 
confederates  of  Bar  and  men  who  took  part  in  subsequent  Polish  insurrections. 


76        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Empire,  men  of  the  most  illustrious  names,  and  generals 
in  command  of  our  provinces,  who  placed  everybody 
in  their  districts  under  tribute  and  inspired  universal 
fear,  and  who,  after  coming  in  all  humility  to  bow  their 
heads  before  the  favourite,  either  went  away  without 
obtaining  a  look  from  him,  or  stood  waiting  like  mes- 
sengers while  he  changed  his  dress  reclining  on  a  sofa. 
The  following  was  the  usual  course  at  these  recep- 
tions. When  the  folding-doors  were  opened,  Zuboff 
slowly  entered  the  room  in  a  dressing-gown,  with 
scarcely  any  underclothing,  and  after  nodding  slightly 
to  the  suitors  and  courtiers,  who  stood  respectfully  in 
a  circle,  began  his  toilet.  The  servants  approached 
him  to  dress  his  hair  and  powder  it.  Meanwhile 
other  applicants  came  in  ;  they  also  were  honoured 
by  a  nod  when  the  Count  perceived  them;  all  watched 
carefully  for  an  opportunity  to  catch  his  eye.  We 
were  among  those  who  were  always  received  with  a 
gracious  smile.  Everybody  remained  standing,  and 
none  dared  to  speak.  It  was  by  his  gestures,  by  an 
eloquent  silence,  that  each  person  advocated  his  cause 
before  the  all-powerful  favourite.  Only  those  spoke 
to  whom  the  Count  addressed  himself,  and  on  these 
occasions  he  never  talked  of  the  subject  of  the  applica- 
tion. Often  he  did  not  say  a  word,  and  I  do  not 
remember  his  having  ever  offered  anybody  a  seat 
except  Field  Marshal  Soltykoff,  who  was  the  chief 
personage  at  Court,  and  had,  it  was  said,  made  the 
Zuboffs'  fortune  ;  it  was  through  his  intervention  that 
Count  Plato  had  succeeded  Mamonoff.  The  despotic 
pro-consul  Toutoulmin,  who  at  that  time  was  the 
terror  of  Podolia  and  Volhynia,  having  been  invited 