

The  military  service  in  the  Guards'  regiments  was 
at  that  time  much  neglected,  but  it  was  necessary  to 
attend  drill  at  least  once  a  year.  Some  officers  really 
liked  the  service  and  performed  it,  but  this  was 
because  they  chose  to  do  so,  and  their  zeal  was 
thought  rather  ridiculous  by  young  men  of  fashion. 
The  generals  who  commanded  us  did  not  take  any 
pains  to  make  us  work.  We  were  seldom  on  guard 
in  the  palace,  and  my  turn  only  came  once.  As  to 
my  brother,  being  an  infantry  officer,  he  was  on  duty 
with  a  detachment  of  his  regiment,  which  always  had 
to  guard  the  castle  at  night.  The  Empress  having 
perceived  him,  said  that  now  he  was  on  guard  she 
would  sleep  in  peace. 

An  amusing  adventure  happened  at  this  time  to 
my  friend  Gorski.  The  ukase  relating  to  my  father's 
family  had  been  published,  but  the  order  for  handing 
over  the  property  to  us  had  not  yet  appeared.  Plato 


9 6         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Zuboff  was  entrusted  with  the  task  of  communicating 
the  order  to  the  Governor-General  Toutoulmin,  who 
was  then  at  St  Petersburg,  hoping  to  participate  in 
the  act  of  spoliation  and  to  derive  illicit  advantages 
from  it ;  but  Zuboff  did  not  hurry.  We  were  there- 
fore obliged  to  continue  to  assist  at  his  toilet.  One 
day  the  favourite,  who  had  on  his  shoulders  a  white 
towel,  beckoned  to  Gorski  to  come  to  him.  The 
latter  came  up  at  once,  and  listened  with  such 
attention  to  Zuboff  that  he  allowed  some  snuff  to  drop 
from  his  nose  and  stain  the  favourite's  towel.  The 
audience  expected  some  tragical  denotement,  but 
Gorski,  who  never  lost  his  presence  of  mind,  finished 
what  he  had  to  say  and  returned  to  his  place  as  if 
nothing  had  happened. 

On  New  Year's  Day  we  were  appointed  Gentle- 
men of  the  Chamber.  Court  appointments  were  at 
that  time  held  in  much  higher  estimation  than  they 
are  now.  Ranks  at  Court  stood  on  the  same  footing 
as  corresponding  ranks  in  the  army,  and  took  preced- 
ence of  ranks  in  the  civil  service ;  the  consequence 
was  that  families  with  a  great  name,  or  with  great 
interest,  always  placed  their  sons  in  the  Guards,  and 
tried  at  the  same  time  to  obtain  for  them  an  appoint- 
ment at  Court.  Being  thus  raised  in  the  hierarchy 
of  the  tchin,  they  afterwards  passed  into  the  civil  or 
military  service  with  the  rank  to  which  they  had 
been  promoted. 

Catherine  wished  the  Grand-Duke  Constantine  to 
marry  while  she  was  still  living,  and  all  preliminary 
preparations  were  made  for  the  establishment  of  his 
household.  People  intrigued  for  places  either  for 


MARRIAGE  OF  THE  GRAND-DUKE  CONSTANTINK    97 

themselves  or  for  others,  and  lists  were  formed  of  the 
gentlemen  of  the  chamber  and  the  chamberlains,  the 
former  with  the  rank  of  brigadier,  and  the  latter  with 
that  of  major-general.  The  Duchess  of  Saxe-Coburg, 
accompanied  by  her  three  children,  had  just  appeared 
at  St  Petersburg,  and  it  is  from  that  time  that  the 
elevation  of  this  princely  family  began.  Whenever 
a  princess  was  wanted  at  Moscow,  a  diplomatic  agent 
was  sent  to  the  capitals  of  the  small  German  princes 
who  had  pretty  daughters  to  marry,  and  made  a 
detailed  report  on  the  qualities  of  these  princesses, 
and  the  moral  character  and  blood-relations  of  their 
parents.  After  reading  these  reports,  the  Empress 
designated  the  princesses  whom  she  wished  to  see 
at  St  Petersburg,  in  order  to  make  her  selection. 
She  had  in  her  time  herself  undergone  an  examina- 
tion of  this  kind,  and  did  not  think  that  she  was 
inflicting  any  humiliation  on  these  ladies  by  subject- 
ing them  to  the  same  ordeal.  Indeed  all  the  German 