

o 

both  German  and  both  far  from  their  respective 
families,  they  were  naturally  inclined  to  a  mutual 
confidence  which  might  be  their  consolation  in  case 
of  adversity,  and  might  double  their  happiness  if 
their  marriages  should  prove  a  success.  The  Grand- 
Duchess  Elizabeth,  who  was  destined  to  a  more 
elevated  position,  and  was  incomparably  more-  fortu- 


MARRIAGE  OF  THE  GRAND-DUKE  CONSTANTINE    105 

nate  in  the  character  of  her  husband,  seemed  to  be 
the  supporter  and  protectress  of  her  sister-in-law, 
and  a  substitute  for  her  mother  and  sisters,  who  were 
soon  to  leave  St  Petersburg.  The  inequality  of  their 
respective  positions  drew  the  bonds  between  them 
still  closer. 

When  the  fetes  were  over,  and  the  Coburg 
family  had  gone,  the  Court  resumed  its  normal  life. 
Sledging  parties  were  organized  ;  the  Empress  some- 
times wished  them  to  take  place  in  the  morning,  and 
the  Gentlemen  of  the  Chamber  who  were  on  duty 
were  then  called  to  accompany  her.  On  one  of  these 
occasions  I  saw  Catherine  in  a  morning  neglige  and 
Zuboff  coming  familiarly  out  of  her  room  in  a  pelisse 
and  kid  boots — which  did  not  disconcert  either  the 
Empress,  her  favourite,  or  the  bystanders. 

In  the  Winter  Palace,  so  called  because  the  Court 
inhabited  it  at  that  season,  the  evening  assemblies 
used  to  take  place  in  a  room  known  as  the  salle  des 
diamants,  because  the  crown  jewels  were  kept  in  it 
in  glass  cupboards.  This  room  communicated  on  one 
side  with  the  bedroom  and  other  private  rooms  of  the 
Empress,  and  on  the  other  with  the  rooms  allotted 
to  her  servants.  The  throne-room,  which  was  re- 
garded as  belonging  to  the  private  apartments, 
separated  the  servants'  rooms  from  the  drawing-rooms 
beyond.  The  chevaliers-gardes,  a  detachment  of 
officers  selected  for  their  stature  and  merit,  used  to 
sit  at  the  entrance  to  the  throne-room.  They  were 
the  direct  descendants  of  the  famous  company  of 
grenadiers  who  had  placed  the  Empress  Elizabeth  on 
the  throne,  and  had  been  rewarded  for  this  service  by 


io6      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

all  of  them  who  were  soldiers  being  promoted  to  the 
rank  of  officer  and  made  her  private  guard.  This 
guard  was  maintained  on  the  same  footing  until 
Catherine's  death,  and  it  always  kept  its  rich  costume. 

The  ordinary  Court  assemblies  used  to  take  place 
in  the  salle  des  diamante;  one  only  saw  there  people 
who  were  on  intimate  terms  with  the  Imperial  family 
and  officers  on  duty.  The  Empress  used  to  play 
cards  with  Zuboff  and  other  dignitaries.  It  was 
remarked  that  the  favourite  did  not  pay  much  atten- 
tion either  to  his  sovereign  or  to  the  game  ;  he  was 
often  absent-minded,  and  his  eyes  were  constantly 
turned  to  the  table  where  the  two  Grand-Duchesses 
were  with  their  husbands.  It  was  surprising  that 
the  Empress  did  not  notice  what  was  evident  to 
every  one  else.  These  evenings  would  have  been 
terribly  dull  in  any  other  place,  and  even  in  the 
Empress's  salon  people  were  glad  they  were  so  short. 
The  Empress  did  not  wait  for  supper,  but  used  to 
leave  early  and  withdraw  into  her  room.  She  bowed 
with  dignity  to  the  princesses  and  the  members  of 
the  Court,  the  folding-doors  of  her  room  opened,  and 
then  Zuboff,  bowing  like  the  Empress,  used  to  go 
in  with  her  and  the  doors  were  shut.  The  Grand- 
Dukes  and  Grand-Duchesses  withdrew  at  the  same 
time  as  the  Empress. 