

At  length  came  the  long-expected  ukase  announc- 
ing the  decision  of  the  Government  as  to  the  confiscated 
estates.  Catherine  distributed  a  whole  mass  of  them 
among  her  favourites,  her  Ministers,  her  generals, 
governors  of  provinces,  and  even  subaltern  officials; 
also  among  some  Poles  who  were  traitors  to  their 
country.  She  did  not  restore  my  parents'  estates,  but 
without  mentioning  them  she  made  a  present  of  their 
fortune  (amounting,  according  to  the  Russian  mode  of 
calculation,  to  42,000  souls)  to  my  brother  and  myself. 
The  estates  of  Latyczew  and  Kamieniec,  which 


94         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

formerly  belonged  to  my  father,  fell  to  the  lot  of 
Count  Markoff.  The  ukase  did  not  mention  my 
sisters ;  but  this  arbitrary  and  illegal  act  having 
always  been  regarded  by  my  family  as  invalid,  it 
remained  without  result  both  with  regard  to  my 
sisters  and  my  parents.  The  property  really  went 
back  to  them,  as  all  we  had  to  do  was  to  send  my 
father  full  power  to  dispose  unconditionally  of  the 
fortune  which  had  been  ceded  to  us. 

There  had  been  so  much  uncertainty  as  to 
Catherine's  final  decision  in  this  matter,  that  the 
result  was  received  in  society  with  general  satisfac- 
tion. We  were  told  that  the  loss  of  Latyczew  and 
Kamieniec  should  be  regarded  as  a  fine,  and  that 
we  had  no  reason  to  complain.  We  thanked  Catherine 
with  one  knee  on  the  ground,  as  required  by  the 
etiquette  of  the  Court,  and  almost  immediately  after 
we  had  our  uniforms  on.  Mine  was  that  of  the 
cavalry  of  the  guard ;  my  brother's,  that  of  the 
Ismailoff  regiment  of  infantry. 

It  would  not  have  been  proper  abruptly  to  cease 
our  visits  to  the  favourite,  and  Gorski  was  too  much 
a  man  of  the  world  to  allow  it.  We  also  received 
several  invitations  to  the  concerts  in  the  Tauris 
Palace,  which  was  regarded  as  an  extraordinary  favour 
for  officers  of  the  guard  who  do  not  form  part  of  the 
Court.  These  were  further  signs  of  the  Empress's 
good-will ;  but  they  all  ceased  directly  the  Court 
moved  to  the  Winter  Palace.  We  were  then  classed 
as  officers  of  the  guard,  who  only  go  to  the  palace 
on  Sundays  and  holidays,  when  they  have  to  stand 
at  a  door  next  to  the  diplomatic  corps  as  the  Empress 


ENTERING  THE  RUSSIAN  SERVICE  95 

goes  by.  She  merely  gratified  us  with  a  look  as  she 
went  to  the  chapel  and  returned  from  it.  The  Grand- 
Dukes  always  bowed  to  us  with  much  grace. 

It  was  for  these  dress  receptions,  which  were 
repeated  on  every  Sunday  and  holiday,  that  the 
dandies  of  the  barracks  put  on  their  best  uniforms, 
tightened  their  waists,  put  pomatum  on  their  hair, 
and  placed  themselves  in  line  with  the  hope  of 
attracting  the  eyes  of  the  Empress  and  fascinat- 
ing her  with  their  tall  stature  and  broad  shoulders. 
It  is  said  that  some  of  them  used  in  days  gone 
by  to  be  promoted  to  her  favour  on  these  occa- 
sions ;  but  she  was  now  too  old  to  indulge  in  such 
fancies. 