

In  this  manner  the  summer  season  of  1795  passed 
away.  In  the  autumn  the  Court  returned  to  the 
Tauris  Palace,  and  our  morning  visits  to  the  favourite 
recommenced  with  more  frequency  than  ever,  as  the 
day  was  approaching  when  our  case  was  to  be  de- 
cided. The  Zuboffs  constantly  repeated  to  us  that 
their  good-will  was  not  sufficient,  and  that  they  could 
not  do  all  they  wished.  No  good  augury  wras  to  be 
discovered  in  these  words.  Meanwhile,  the  suitors 
became  more  and  more  pressing  :  some  sought  to 
recover  their  estates,  while  many  others  set  every 
engine  in  motion  to  obtain  part  of  the  sequestrated 
estates  for  themselves.  From  the.  highest  to  the 
lowest,  each  wished  for  a  share  of  the  spoil :  for 
Catherine^had  not  yet  said  anything  as  to  what  she 
would  do  with  the  immense  private  estates,  crown 
domains,  and  church  property,  which  she  had  seized. 


CATHERINE'S  COURT  91 

The  crisis  was  very  interesting,  and  its  solution 
was  looked  forward  to  on  all  sides  with  anxiety. 
How  many  Russians  founded  upon  it  their  hopes  of 
enlarging  their  estates  and  increasing  the  number  of 
their  serfs  or  '  souls,'*  as  they  called  them  !  This  gave 
a  new  stimulus  to  sycophancy,  not  only  with  regard 
to  the  favourite,  but  to  his  secretaries,  who  aped  his 
ridiculous  morning  receptions,  and  rehearsed  his 
arrogance  before  the  stupid  mob  that  crowded  their 
ante-chambers.  Among  the  speculators  who,  like 
pillagers  on  a  battlefield,  sought  to  enrich  themselves 
at  the  expense  of  the  vanquished,  there  were  unfortu- 
nately some  Poles  unworthy  of  the  name  they  bore. 
Appealing  to  their  services,  to  their  treason  to  the 
fatherland,  they  chose  their  victims  among  those  who 
had  been  convicted  or  even  suspected  of  patriotism. 
The  more  they  increased  the  number  of  these  victims, 
the  greater  were  their  chances  of  plunder. 

Our  parents,  pressed  by  their  creditors,  and 
anxious  about  their  fate,  were  still  more  so  for  us,  as 
at  the  time  when  we  were  informing  them  of  the 
friendly  receptions  we  had  met  with  at  St  Petersburg 
my  mother  had  received  an  anonymous  letter,  written 
in  excellent  French,  describing  in  exaggerated  language 
the  effect  we  had  produced  in  society  and  our  favour- 
able reception  at  Court,  but  adding  that  what  was 
most  to  our  credit  was  that,  insensible  to  all  cajoleries, 
we  remained  steadfast  in  our  love  for  our  country  and 
our  hatred  for  the  Empress  Catherine.  As  it  was 
known  that  all  letters  to  my  family  were  opened  at 

*  Serfage  properly  so  called,  i.e.,  the  rigLt  of  selling  a  peasant  as  part  of  one's 
property,  never  existed  in  Poland  ;  it  was  a  purely  Russian  institution. 