

O 

princesses  were  very  glad  to  get  a  summons  of  this 
kind  for  any  of  their  daughters,  and  felt  very  flattered 
when  one  of  them  was  chosen  as  the  bride  of  a  Grand- 
Duke.  During  the  past  century  Russia  had  perhaps 
more  prestige — in  Germany  at  least — than  she  has 
now,  and  the  young  princesses  who  were  destined  for 
that  country  looked  forward  to  a  life  the  prospect  of 
which  singularly  pleased  their  old  mothers.  They 
were  like  the  Circassian  women  who  think  their 
fortunes  made  when  they  are  taken  as  slaves  to 
inhabit  the  harems  of  Turkish  pashas.  The  mothers 
looked  upon  the  brilliant  position  of  Catherine  as  a 
presage  for  their  daughters,  and  were  not  repelled  by 

VOL.   I  G 


93        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

any  thought  of  possible  sacrifices,  or  else  only  looked 
upon  them  as  difficulties  from  which  the  young 
Grand-Duchesses  could  easily  extricate  themselves, 
and  which  therefore  need  not  cause  them  any  anxiety. 
It  was  Baron  Budberg,  then  a  diplomatic  agent,  and 
afterwards  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  who  procured 
for  the  Duchess  of  Saxe-Coburg  the  happiness  of 
bringing  her  three  daughters  to  St  Petersburg. 

The  Duchess  was  very  clever,  and  her  daughters 
were  all  pretty.  It  was  painful  to  see  this  mother 
offering  her  daughters  like  goods  for  sale,  and  watch- 
ing anxiously  to  discover  on  which  of  them  would  fall 
the  eye  of  the  Empress  and  the  handkerchief  of  the 
Grand-Duke  Constantine.  There  was  something  so 
humiliating  in  this  conduct  that  we  tried  not  to  notice 
it,  especially  as  the  Duchess  and  her  daughters  were 
in  all  other  points  very  amiable  and  worthy  of  respect. 
Various  anecdotes  about  the  Grand-Duke  Constantine 
were  current  which  were  far  from  confirming  the  hope 
that  the  match  would  be  a  happy  one.  These  stories 
ought  to  have  opened  the  eyes  of  the  daughters  and 
their  mother,  but  perhaps  they  thought  that  as  they 
had  come  from  so  far  it  was  too  late  to  go  back,  or 
maybe  their  eyes,  fascinated  by  the  splendour  of 
greatness,  did  not  see  things  in  their  right  light. 

Catherine  had  received  the  mother  and  her 
daughters  with  open  arms ;  she  was  continually  with 
them,  and  while  she  talked  with  the  mother,  her 
grandsons  had  plenty  of  opportunities  of  becoming 
acquainted  with  the  daughters,  as  there  were  fetes, 
soirees,  balls,  and  promenades  every  day.  The  Grand- 
Duke  Constantine  had  received  orders  from  his  grand- 


MARRIAGE  OF  THE  GRAND-DUKE  CONSTAXTINE    99 

mother  to  marry  one  of  these  princesses ;  he  was  only 
allowed  to  choose  from  among  the  three.  Constantine 
was  then  seventeen  years  old.  When  he  was  older, 
and  indeed  during  the  whole  of  his  career,  he  always 
proved  by  his  conduct  that  his  passions  were  indepen- 
dent both  of  his  will  and  his  reason.  It  was  not 
therefore  probable  that  at  so  early  an  age  he  should 
have  consulted  either ;  he  simply  obeyed  the  orders 
of  his  all-powerful  grandmother. 