

It  was  thought  in  the  capital  (we  did  not  yet 
belong  to  the  Court)  that  the  Grand-Duke  would 
select  the  youngest  of  the  three  sisters.  The  eldest 
had  managed  to  withdraw  by  frankly  declaring  that 
her  heart  was  not  free  ;  and  she  was  the  only  one  who 
could  congratulate  herself  on  her  courage.  She  had 
accepted  the  addresses  of  a  young  Austrian  officer 
(afterwards  a  general) ;  her  parents,  not  wishing  to 
oppose  her  inclinations,  finally  gave  their  consent,  and 
she  alone  of  the  three  sisters  was  happy. 

The  appointments  of  officers  of  the  Guards  and  of 
Gentlemen  of  the  Chamber  were  both  sinecures.  At 
the  same  time  this  combination  of  military  rank  in 
the  Guards  regiments,  to  which  no  duty  was  attached, 
and  of  honorary  rank  in  the  Court,  was  not  without 
its  advantages.  It  furnished  a  career  of  adventure 
and  emotion  to  young  men  who  were  ambitious,  rich, 
and  fond  of  pleasure.  They  were  admitted  to  the 
games,  dances,  soirees,  and  theatrical  performances  of 
the  Court — into  the  interior  of  that  sanctuary  in  the 
midst  of  which  people  who  had  real  duties  to  perform 
could  not  penetrate  unless  they  had  attained  the 
highest  ranks.  It  seemed  strange  that  men  without 


ioo      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTO-RYSKI 

any   personal    merit    should    find   the   gates    of   the 
palace  open  to  them,  while  generals  of  long  service 
mixed  with  the  crowd  in  the  ante-chambers.     We  had 
at   least   some    satisfaction    in   seeing     the     terrible 
Governor-General  of  a  province  totally  eclipsed  in  the 
capital,  barely  obtaining  a  look    from  the  favourite, 
and  not  daring  to  show  himself  in  any  distinguished 
society.       There    was  some   sweetness    in    this   little 
revenge  ;  but,  the  sentiment  of  social  superiority  apart, 
all  other  relations  remained  the  same ;  for  this  governor, 
who    was    treated    with    contempt    in    the    capital, 
indulged   in  the   same  tyranny  as  before  directly  he 
returned  to  his  province  :  he  compensated  himself  over 
and  over  again  for  the  humiliations  he  had  had  to  put 
up  with,  and,  sure  of  impunity,  inflicted  rapine  and 
persecution    on   the    members    of  families    which   he 
dared  not  visit  at  St  Petersburg.     It  was  difficult,  if 
not  impossible,  to  obtain  justice  with  regard  to  the 
permanent  abuses  of  discretionary  power,  so  long  as 
these  abuses  were  not  too  revolting — revolting  in  a 
country  where  nothing  shocks  ! — and  were  covered  by 
certain  forms.     In  the  provinces  everything  was  done 
by   officials   and    secretaries   who    had    no    access   to 
society,  still  less  to  the  Court,  and  who  decided  every 
case  in  the  name  of  their  chiefs,  most  of  whom  were 
either  indolent  or  stupid.     To  have  on  one's  side  the 
clerks  was  a  sure  way  of  success,  for  the  provincial 
oppressors  and  pillagers  kept  up   so  close  an  under- 
standing with  the  underlings  of  the  senate  and  the 
ministerial  departments  that  the  truth  could  not  come* 
out  any  where. 