


92         MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORY8KI 

the  post-office,  my  mother's  distress  on  receiving  this 
communication  may  easily  be  imagined.  It  was  evi- 
dent that  the  anonymous  letter  had  only  been  written 
with  the  intention  of  awakening  Catherine's  suspicions, 
and  preventing  the  restitution  of  my  father's  estates. 
It  will  be  recollected  that  during  our  stay  at  Grodno, 
Prince  Repnin  had  shown  us  the  autograph  of  a  note 
from  Catherine,  with  regard  to  an  oath  of  hatred  to 
Russia  and  the  Empress  which  I  was  supposed  to 
have  taken  before  my  mother.  This  story  was  pro- 
bably also  manufactured  by  one  of  our  countrymen  ; 
it  was  absurd  to  suppose  that  such  a  theatrical  demon- 
stration should  be  necessary  to  inspire  us  with  hatred 
for  such  enemies. 

The  only  means  left  to  us  for  obtaining  the  re- 
covery of  our  parents'  estates  was  to  resign  ourselves 
to  entering  the  Russian  service.  This  was  the  sine 
qua  non,  the  completion  of  our  sacrifice,  the  inevitable 
consequence  of  our  journey  to  St  Petersburg.  At 
one  of  our  evening  visits  to  Tsarskoe-Selo,  Zuboff  had 
told  us  that  the  Empress  intended  to  give  us  commis- 
sions as  officers  of  her  guard  ;  and  that  it  was  the 
greatest  piece  of  good  fortune  that  could  happen  to 
us  that  we  should  thus  become  part  of  a  glorious  and 
irresistible  army,  which  was  strong  enough  to  march 
across  the  world  without  being  stopped  by  any 
obstacle.  This  was  indeed  the  prevalent  idea  among 
the  officers  in  the  Russian  army,  and  they  could  not 
as  yet  rid  themselves  of  it.  Although  we  were  pre- 
pared for  the  proposal,  our  hearts  failed  us  when  it 
was  made  officially.  It  was  impossible,  however,  to 
refuse  it,  and  moreover,  having  once  determined  to 


CATHERINE'S  COURT  93 

give  ourselves  up  to  the  Russians,  the  form  which 
the  sacrifice  should  take  was  a  matter  of  very  little 
importance.  We  considered  that  it  would  be  unworthy 
of  us  to  propose  the  slightest  compromise,  or  to  show 
the  least  anxiety  to  obtain  any  higher  position.  The 
highest  rank  would  be  as  insupportable  to  us  as  the 
lowest ;  any  discussion  on  this  point  would  show  that 
we  attached  importance  to  the  proposal,  while  the 
fact  was  that  it  was  to  us  a  matter  of  perfect 
indifference. 

With  bowed  heads,  feeling  like  victims,  we  were 
ready  to  accept  any  suggestion  that  might  be  made  to 
us,  without  enquiry  into  its  consequences.  A  traveller 
suddenly  placed  by  some  chance  in  Central  Africa, 
would  not  attach  the  least  importance  to  the  forms, 
distinctions,  or  honours  used  among  the  savages,  and 
this  was  precisely  our  case.  Thrown  out  of  our  natural 
sphere  by  misfortune,  surrounded  by  violence  and 
compulsion,  filled  with  disgust  and  despair,  we  thought 
it  our  duty  not  to  express  any  wish  whatever  :  it  was 
not  worth  while. 