

Besides  our  political  discussions,  and  the  ever-wel- 
come topic  of  the  beauties  of  nature,  and  the  dream  of 
a  quiet  country  life  after  the  destinies  of  free  Russia 
should  have  been  secured,  Alexander  had  also  a  third 
object  to  which  he  ardently  devoted  himself,  and 


120       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

which  was  not  at  all  in  accordance  with  the  others, 
namely,  the  army,  which  was  his  hobby,  as  it  was 
that  of  his  father,  the  Grand-Duke  Paul.  This 
prince  lived  during  the  summer  in  his  country-house 
of  Pavlovsk,  half-a-league  from  Tsarskoe-Selo.  The 
Empress  Catherine  had  allowed  him  to  keep  there  for 
his  amusement  some  battalions  of  marines.  He  was 
Grand-Admiral,  and  this  honorary  title  gave  him 
certain  privileges.  The  Empress  pretended  not  to 
perceive  that  Paul  made  too  large  a  use  of  them,  and 
that  following  the  example  of  Peter  III,  his  unfor- 
tunate father,  he  had  created  for  himself  a  sort  of 
little  army,  which  he  clothed  and  endeavoured  to  drill 
according  to  the  system  he  had  observed  in  Prussia 
when  he  visited  Frederick  the  Great  at  Berlin.  This 
army  was,  I  believe,  composed  in  all  of  twelve  very 
small  battalions,  some  cuirassiers,  dragoons,  and 
hussars,  and  some  guns ;  and  all  promotions  in  this 
force  were  in  the  Grand-Duke's  hands.  The  uniforms 
were  very  eccentric  in  cut,  and  were  in  striking 
contrast  to  the  uniforms  of  the  Russian  army  in  this 
respect ;  they  were  a  caricature  of  the  uniforms  of  the 
troops  of  the  Great  Frederick.  Many  'people  of 
society  and  of  the  Court  had  obtained  permission  to 
wear  these  uniforms,  and  they  were  the  only  courtiers 
whom  Paul  allowed  to  attend  at  his  country-houses. 
Among  them  was  M.  Rostopchin,  who  played  an 
important  part  after  Paul  became  Emperor,  and  was 
afterwards  much  talked  about  at  the  time  of  the  fire 
of  Moscow.  These  courtiers  took  their  uniforms  with 
them  whenever  they  went  to  Pavlovsk  or  to  Gatchina, 
another  country-house  belonging  to  the  Grand-Duke, 


THE  GRAND-DUKE  PAUL  AND  HIS  80  SS         121 

or  oven  to  his  soirees  in  the  Winter  Palace,  for  Paul 
never  went  to  his  mother's  in  the  evening.  People 
only  appeared  in  this  costume,  however,  in  Paul's 
apartments;  everywhere  else  it  was  tabooed  so  long 
as  Catherine  lived,  and  people  laughed  at  it  with 
impunity. 

The  two  young  Grand-Dukes  had  commands  in 
Paul's  army.  They  gave  themselves  up  to  their 
duties  with  the  zeal  of  young  men  who  are  for  the 
first  time  given  something  to  do,  and  the  Court  and 
the  public  compared  them  to  children  playing  at 
soldiers.  This,  however,  produced  no  impression 
upon  them  ;  all  they  thought  of  was  to  obey  the 
wishes  and  even  the  eccentricities  of  their  father. 