

Our  Polish  sentiments,  our  wishes,  our  inexperi- 
ence— our  faith  in  the  ultimate  success  of  justice  and 
liberty — will  explain  how  at  that  moment  we  aban- 
doned ourselves  with  joy  to  the  most  seductive  illu- 
sions. For  some  days  after  this  remarkable  conver- 
sation we  had  not  an  opportunity  of  talking  with  the 
Grand-Duke  ;  but  whenever  he  met  us  we  exchanged 
friendly  words  and  sympathetic  gestures. 

Soon  after,  the  Court  left  for  Tsarskoe-Selo.  All 
the  cavalry  officers  of  the  guard  had  to  go  there  on 
Sundays  and  holidays  to  attend  at  mass,  at  dinner, 
and  in  the  evening  ;  some  even  resided  there,  either 
in  one  of  the  very  inconvenient  little  houses  which 
surrounded  the  courtyard  opposite  the  palace,  or  in 
the  village,  where  the  discomfort  was  equally  great, 
but  where  the  officers  were  less  under  constraint. 

Alexander  at  first  urged  us  to  come  often,  and 
then  to  stay  at  Tsarskoe-Selo,  in  order,  as  he  said,  to 
have  an  opportunity  of  being  more  with  him.  He 
liked  our  society  and  wished  for  it,  as  it  was  only 
with  us  that  he  could  speak  unreservedly.  We 
had  a  right  to  come  into  the  Imperial  apartments 
when  the  Empress  went  there  in  the  evening,  to  take 


CONVERSATIONS  WITH  ALEXANDER  115 

part  in  the  promenades  and  games  which  took  place 
every  fine  day,  and  to  join  the  courtiers  who  met  under 
the  colonnade,  a  part  of  the  palace  which  the  Empress 
liked  best,  and  which  was  close  to  her  apartments. 
The  officers  did  not  on  ordinary  days  dine  at  the 
Empress's  table  unless  they  were  on  duty.  This 
happened  to  me  once  ;  I  was  placed  opposite  to 
Catherine  and  had  to  wait  upon  her,  which  I  did 
with  some  awkwardness. 

We  often  returned  to  Tsarskoe-Selo,  and  soon 
after  we  settled  there  for  the  season.  Our  relations 
with  Alexander  naturally  aroused  much  interest : 
it  was  a  kind  of  freemasonry,  but  the  Grand-Duchess 
was  let  into  the  secret.  An  intimacy  whose  object 
was  at  that  time  so  recent  and  so  ardently  discussed 
furnished  material  for  conversations  which  were  sus- 
pended only  to  be  resumed  on  the  next  opportunity. 
Political  opinions  which  now  seem  trite  and  hack- 
neyed were  at  that  time  startling  on  account  of  their 
novelty,  and  the  mystery  we  had  to  preserve,,  the 
idea  that  we  were  expressing  these  opinions  under 
the  eyes  of  a  Court  encrusted  with  the  prejudices  of 
absolutism  and  of  Ministers  puffed  up  with  their 
supposed  infallibility,  added  interest  and  piquancy  to 
these  relations,  which  grew  more  frequent  and 
intimate  every  day. 

The  Empress  Catherine  looked  favourably  upon 
the  connection  which  was  establishing  itself  between 
her  grandson  and  ourselves ;  she  approved  it,  of 
course  without  guessing  at  its  true  motive  or  at  its 
probable  consequences.  Probably,  with  her  old  ideas 
as  to  the  splendour  of  the  Polish  aristocracy,  she 