

There  occurred  at  the  parades  and  manoeuvres  of 
this  miniature  army  grave  events,  defeats,  ups  and 
downs  of  favour,  misfortunes  or  successes,  which 
sometimes  caused  the  deepest  consternation,  at  others 
the  greatest  joy.  I  heard  of  them  from  the  two 
brothers,  who  took  a  pleasure  in  relating  all  the 
vicissitudes  of  the  Court  of  Pavlovsk.  To  these 
young  princes  it  was  an  active  life  which  gave  them 
importance,  in  a  restricted  circle  no  doubt,  but  where 
they  played  a  part  which,  while  it  nattered  their 
\7anit3%  contented  their  juvenile  activity  without 
much  expenditure  of  thought.  The  regulated  uni- 
formity of  their  grandmother's  Court,  on  the  other 
hand,  where  they  had  no  serious  occupation,  was 
often  inexpressibly  tedious  to  them.  Their  bodily- 
fatigues,  the  necessity  of  keeping  out  of  the  way  of 
their  grandmother  when  they  returned  tired  from 
their  drill,  in  a  dress  which  they  had  to  take  off  at 


122       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

once — even  their  father's  scoldings,  which  they  greatly 
feared — gave  attractions  to  this  mode  of  life,  which 
was  very  different  from  the  one  which  the  public 
of  St  Petersburg  and  the  views  of  Catherine  had 
marked  out  for  them. 

The  Empress  did  not  know  how  to  appeal  to  the 
imagination  of  her  grand-children  or  how  to  give 
them  active  and  varied  occupation.  Their  father  was 
more  successful,  and  this  was  a  great  evil  which  had 
unfortunate  consequences.  The  young  Grand-Dukes 
thought  themselves,  and  were  in  reality,  more  a  part 
of  the  army  of  Gatchina  than  of  the  Russian  army. 
Gatchina  was  Paul's  favourite  Palace  and  his  resi- 
dence during  the  autumn ;  he  was  there  at  some 
distance  from  St  Petersburg,  and  could  give  himself 
up  without  constraint  to  his  hobbies.  The  Grand- 
Dukes  regretted  not  to  be  able  to  go  there,  but  they 
liked  to  imitate  the  manners  of  Paul's  troopers,  and, 
in  speaking  of  what  was  done  in  his  little  army,  to 
say,  '  That  is  our  way,  after  the  fashion  of  Gatchina ' 
(Po  naszemu,  po  Gatcldnski). 

I  recollect  that  the  Empress  one  day  thought  of 
sending  Alexander  with  General  Kutuzoff,  to  inspect 
the  fortresses  on  the  Swedish  frontier.  The  young 
Prince  did  not  seem  to  like  the  idea,  and  it  was 
consequently  abandoned.  The  minutiae  of  the  mili- 
tary service  and  the  habit  of  attaching  extreme 
importance  to  it  gave  an  unfortunate  turn  to  Alex- 
ander's mind  ;  he  took  a  liking  for  it  of  which  he 
could  not  afterwards  rid  himself,  even  after  he  had 
perceived  its  absurdity.  During  the  whole  of  his 
reign  he  had  a  mania  for  parade  which  made  him 


THE  GRAND-DUKE  PAUL  AND  HIS  SONS         123 