


n6       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

thought  it  would  be  useful  to  attach  an  influential 
family  to  her  grandson.  She  in  no  way  suspected 
that  this  friendship  would  confirm  him  in  the  opinions 
which  she  detested  and  feared — that  it  would  be  one 
of  the  thousand  causes  of  the  progress  of  liberty  in 
Europe,  and  of  the  re-appearance — only  for  a  time, 
alas  ! — of  Poland,  which  she  had  thought  she  had 
buried  for  ever,  on  the  political  scene.  Her  approval 
of  the  marked  preference  shown  us  by  Alexander 
closed  the  mouths  of  all  objectors,  and  encouraged 
us  in  continuing  our  relations,  which  were  so  attractive 
to  us  in  all  respects. 

The  Grand-Duke  Constantine,  from  a  spirit  of 
imitation,  and  seeing  that  his  doing  so  pleased  the 
Empress,  now  made  great  professions  of  friendship  to 
my  brother,  invited  him  to  his  rooms,  and  admitted 
him  to  the  intimacy  of  his  family  ;  but  there  was  no 
question  of  politics  in  this  connection.  My  brother 
was  not  in  this  respect  as  fortunate  as  I  was  ;  none 
of  the  motives  which  had  bound  us  to  Alexander 
existed  in  the  case  of  Constantine,  and  his  capricious 
and  violent  character,  not  admitting  any  impression 
but  that  of  fear,  rendered  all  intimacy  with  him 
undesirable.  Alexander,  however,  requested  my 
brother  to  take  Constantine's  overtures  in  good  part, 
at  the  same  time  charging  him  not  to  reveal  the 
secret  of  our  political  conversations. 

At  first  Alexander  was  quartered  in  the  palace, 
and  did  not  yet  live  in  the  separate  building  in  the 
park  which  the  Empress  had  ordered  to  be  built 
for  him,  and  which  had  just  been  completed.  We 
used  to  go  there  for  our  afternoon  walks  until 


S  TA  Y  A  T  TSA  RSKOE-SEL  0  117 

Alexander  established  himself  in  the  new  building, 
when  he  was  much  more  free  to  see  us.  He  often 
had  either  my  brother  or  myself  to  dinner,  and  a  day 
seldom  passed  but  one  of  us  supped  with  him  also, 
when  the  rooms  at  the  palace  were  quite  finished. 
In  the  morning  we  used  to  take  long  walks  together  ; 
the  Grand-Duke  was  very  fond  of  walking  and  of 
visiting  the  villages  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  it  was 
especially  on  these  occasions  that  he  used  to  talk  of 
his  favourite  subjects.  He  was  under  the  charm  of 
early  youth,  which  creates  images  and  dwells  upon 
them  without  being  checked  by  impossibilities,  and 
which  makes  endless  projects  for  a  future  which  seems 
to  it  eternal. 

His  opinions  were  those  of  one  brought  up  in 
the  ideas  of  1789,  who  wishes  to  see  republics  every- 
where, and  lool^  upon  that  form  of  government  as 
the  only  one  in  conformity  with  the  wishes  and  the 
rights  of  humanity.  Although  I  was  myself  at  that 
time  very  enthusiastic— although  born  and  brought  up 
in  a  Republic  where  the  principles  of  the  French 
Revolution  had  been  accepted  with  ardour — yet  I 
had  constantly  to  moderate  the  extreme  opinions 
expressed  by  Alexander.  He  held,  among  other 
things,  that  hereditary  monarchy  was  an  unjust  and 
absurd  institution,  and  that  the  supreme  authority 
should  be  granted  not  through  the  accident  of  birth 
but  by  the  votes  of  the  nation,  which  would  best 
know  who  is  most  capable  of  governing  it.  I  repre- 
sented to  him  the  arguments  against  this  view,  the 
difficulty  and  the  risks  of  an  election,  jvhat  Poland 
had  suffered  from  such  an  institution,  and  how  little 