

Among  the  motives  which  attracted  the  young 
Grand-Dukes  to  their  father  was  one  that  was  more 
noble  and  sensible  than  those  above  mentioned. 
They  were  painfully  impressed  by  the  cruelty  of 
Catherine  in  not  allowing  her  sons  and  their  wives 
to  enjoy  the  company  of  their  children  even  in  ex- 
treme youth.  As  soon  as  the  Grand-Duchess  Maria 


BIRTH  OF  NICHOLAS  125 

could  leave  her  bed,  her  child  was  taken  away  from 
her  to  be  brought  up  with  his  brothers  and  sisters 
under  the  eyes  of  their  grandmother.  Not  one  of 
them  was,  so  long  as  Catherine  lived,  left  to  the 
care  of  its  parents  or  remained  with  them.  Such 
injustice  revolted  the  young  princes  and  alienated 
them  from  the  Empress.  Moreover,  Alexander's 
views  as  to  his  grandmother's  policy  did  not  make 
him  disposed  to  follow  her  wishes  when  he  could  do 
otherwise.  He  always  found  some  objection  to  raise, 
and  showed  nothing  but  ennui  and  indifference  when 
he  was  called  upon  to  take  part,  however  little,  in  a 
government  which  was  not  at  that  time  at  all  in 
accordance  with  his  opinions.  Constantine,  who  did 
not  share  his  brother's  liberal  views,  yet  agreed  with 
him  in  his  disapproval  of  the  manners  and  character 
of  Catherine.  I  have  heard  him  more  than  once 
speak  about  his  grandmother,  even  after  she  was 
dead,  with  outrageous  rudeness  and  in  the  coarsest 
terms. 

The  stay  of  the  Court  at  Tsarskoe-Selo  was  draw- 
ing to  a  close.  This  gave  us  a  feeling  of  sadness  :  we 
regretted  our  unceremonious  meetings,  our  daily 
conversations,  our  long  walks  in  the  gardens  and  in 
the  country.  We  had  gathered  the  first  flower  of 
youthful  and  confiding  affection — we  had  enjoyed  the 
dreams  with  which  it  is  soothed.  Whatever  we  may 
do,  we  do  not  a^ain  find  sensations  so  strong  and 

7  O  O 

fresh  ;  as  we  advance  in  life  they  become  more  and 
more  rare. 

The  Court  proceeded  as  usual  to  the  Tauris  Palace 
for  the  season  which  precedes  the  winter.  Alexander 


126       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

was  not  so  often  visible,  and  could  not  have  us  so 
often  with  him  at  his  meals.  Yet  our  relations,  the 
partial  interruption  of  which  caused  us  much  regret, 
continued  to  be  the  object  of  our  constant  pre-occu- 
pations. 


CHAPTER   VIII 


1796 


THE    FATE    OF    THE    PRISONERS. REFLECTIONS    ON    ALEXANDER'S     EDU- 
CATION.— -ARRIVAL   OF  THE    KING    OF    SWEDEN. FAILURE    OF    THE 

NEGOTIATIONS      FOR     HIS     MARRIAGE     WITH     THE     GRAND-DUCHESS 
ALEXANDRA. DEATH    OF    CATHERINE. 

OUR  friendship  with  Alexander  had  not  helped  us  to 
improve  the  condition  of  our  countrymen  who  were 
imprisoned  in  the  town  or  the  casemates  of  the  fortress. 
We  often  talked  of  them  and  of  Kosciuszko;  Alexander 
always  spoke  with  enthusiasm  of  the  devotion  and 
the  great  deeds  of  these  martyrs  of  patriotism,  and 
was  indignant  at  the  unjust  tyranny  of  which  they 
were  the  victims.  But,  bound  by  his  position,  and 
timid  from  a  consciousness  of  his  youth  and  inex- 
perience, he  took  no  part  in  affairs  of  State,  and  did 
not  even  think  he  ought  to  seek  to  interfere  in  them. 
He  accordingly  had  no  influence  or  even  contact  with 
those  who  had  the  management  of  affairs. 