


CONVERSATIONS  WITH  ALEXANDER  m 

doctrines  of  the  Cabinet  and  the  Court ;  and  that  he 
was  far  from  approving  the  policy  and  conduct  of  his 
grandmother,  whose  principles  he  condemned.  He 
had  wished  for  the  success  of  Poland  in  her  glorious 
struggle  and  had  deplored  her  fall.  Kosciuszko,  he 
said,  was  in  his  eyes  a  man  who  was  great  by  his 
virtues  and  the  cause  which  he  had  defended,  which 
was  the  cause  of  humanity  and  of  justice.  He  added 
that  he  detested  despotism  everywhere,  no  matter  in 
what  way  it  was  exercised ;  that  he  loved  liberty,  to 
which  all  men  had  a  right ;  that  he  had  taken  the 
strongest  interest  in  the  French  Revolution,  and  that 
while  condemning  its  terrible  excesses,  he  wished  the 
French  Republic  success  arid  rejoiced  at  its  establish- 
ment. He  spoke  to  me  with  veneration  of  his  tutor, 
M.  de  la  Harpe,  as  a  man  of  great  virtue,  of  true 
wisdom,  of  strict  principles,  and  of  energetic  character. 
He  owed  to  him  all  he  knew  and  any  good  qualities 
he  might  possess — especially  those  principles  of  truth 
and  justice  which  he  was  happy  to  bear  in  his  heart 
and  with  which  M.  de  la  Harpe  had  inculcated 
him. 

While  we  were  walking  about  in  the  garden  we 
several  times  met  the  Grand-Duchess,  who  also  was 
taking  a  walk.  The  Grand-Duke  told  me  that  he 
confided  his  thoughts  to  his  wife,  that  she  alone  knew 
and  shared  his  sentiments,  and  that  I  was  the  only 
person  besides  herself  to  whom  he  had  dared  to  speak 
of  them  since  his  tutor  had  gone  ;  that  he  could  not 
mention  them  to  any  Russian,  as  none  were  as  yet 
capable  even  of  understanding  them  ;  and  that  I  must 
therefore  feel  how  great  a  pleasure  it  would  be  for 


ii2      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

him  to  have  in  future  some  one  with  whom  he  could 
talk  openly  and  in  entire  confidence. 

This  conversation  was,  as  may  be  imagined, 
occasionally  interrupted  by  demonstrations  of  friend- 
ship on  his  part,  and  of  astonishment,  gratitude,  and 
devotion  on  mine.  He  bade  me  farewell,  saying  that 
he  would  try  to  see  me  as  often  as  possible,  and  urging 
on  me  the  greatest  circumspection  arid  secrecy,  though 
at  the  same  time  he  authorised  me  to  communicate 
to  my  brother  the  subject  of  our  conversation. 

I  was  deeply  moved,  and  could  hardly  believe  my 
ears.  That  a  Russian  Prince,  Catherine's  successor, 
her  grandson  and  her  favourite  child,  whom  she 
would  have  wished  to  see  reigning  after  her  instead 
of  her  son,  and  of  whom  it  was  said  that  he  wrould 
continue  her  reign,  should  disavow  and  detest  his 
grandmother's  principles — should  repel  the  odious 
policy  of  Russia— should  be  a  passionate  lover  of 
justice  and  liberty — should  pity  Poland  and  wish  to 
see  her  happy — seemed  incredible.  And  that  such 
noble  ideas  and  great  virtues  should  be  able  to  grow 
and  flourish  in  such  an  atmosphere  and  with  such 
surroundings,  was  surely  little  less  than  a  miracle. 