

*  In  the  partitions  of  1773  and  1792. 


CHAPTER   VII 

1796 

CONVERSATIONS       WITH        ALEXANDER. STAY       AT        TSARSKOE-SELO. 

RELATIONS     BETWEEN     THE     GRAND-DUKE    PAUL    AND    HIS    SONS.— 
BIRTH    OF   NICHOLAS. 

BEFORE  the  break-up  of  the  ice  on  Lake  Ladoga, 
which  generally  occurs  towards  the  end  of  April,  St 
Petersburg  usually  has  a  few  days  of  fine  weather, 
with  bright  sun  and  a  moderate  temperature  ;  and  the 
quays  are  then  full  of  gaily  dressed  people  walking 
and  driving.  The  Grand-Duke  Alexander  was  often 
there  either  alone  or  with  his  wife  ;  and  this  was  an 
additional  incentive  for  high  society  to  assemble.  I 
used  also  to  come  with  rny  brother,  and  whenever  the 
Grand-Duke  met  one  of  us,  he  stopped  to  talk,  and 
showed  us  particular  attention. 

These  morning  meetings  were,  so  to  say,  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  Court  soirees,  and  our  relations  with 
the  Prince  daily  became  more  intimate.  In  the  spring 
the  Court  moved  as  usual  to  the  Tauris  Palace,  where 
the  Empress  Catherine  professed  to  live  in  greater 
retirement,  and  only  admitted  very  select  company  in 
the  evening.  The  Grand-Duke  still  came  occasionally 
to  the  quay ;  he  told  me  he  was  sorry  to  see  me  so 


no      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

seldom,  and  asked  me  to  come  to  him  to  the  Tauris 
Palace  for  a  walk  in  the  garden,  which  he  wished  to 
show  me.  Spring  had  already  begun,  and  as  generally 
happens  in  this  climate,  nature  had  made  up  for  lost 
time,  and  vegetation  had  rapidly  developed  itself  in  a 
few  days ;  the  trees  and  fields  were  green  and  covered 
with  flowers.  I  went  on  the  day  and  hour  fixed  by 
the  Prince.  I  am  sorry  I  did  not  take  note  of  the 
exact  date,  for  that  day  had  a  decisive  influence  on  a 
great  part  of  my  life  and  on  the  destinies  of  my 
country.  Thenceforward  I  became  devoted  to  the 
Grand-Duke,  and  I  may  say  that  our  conversation 
then  led  to  a  mutual  friendship,  followed  by  a  series  of 
fortunate  and  unfortunate  events,  whose  results  still 
make  themselves  felt  and  will  be  perceived  for  many 
years  to  come. 

As  soon  as  I  came  in,  the  Grand-Duke  took  me 
by  the  hand,  and  proposed  that  we  should  go  into  the 
garden,  in  order,  he  said,  that  he  might  enable  me  to 
judge  of  the  skill  of  his  English  gardener.  We  walked 
about  in  every  direction  for  three  hours,  keeping  up 
an  animated  conversation  all  the  time.  The  Grand- 
Duke  told  me  that  my  conduct  and  that  of  my  brother, 
the  resignation  we  showed  in  a  position  which  must 
be  painful  to  us,  and  the  calm  indifference  \vith  which 
we  had  received  both  the  smiles  and  the  frowns  of 
fortune,  had  gained  us  his  esteem  and  confidence  ;  that 
he  divined  and  approved  our  sentiments  ;  that  he  had 
felt  it  necessary  to  let  us  know  what  he  really  thought, 
and  that  he  could  not  bear  the  idea  that  we  should 
judge  him  otherwise  than  as  he  really  was.  He 
added  that  he  did  not  in  any  way  share  the  ideas  and 