

I  was  young,  full  of  exalted  sentiments  and  ideas ; 
extraordinary  things  did  not  long  astonish  me,  for  I 
readily  believed  in  anything  that  seemed  to  me  great 
and  virtuous.  I  was  subjugated  by  a  charm  which 
it  is  easy  to  understand  :  there  was  so  much  candour, 
innocence,  resolution  which  seemed  unshakeable,  and 
elevation  of  soul  in  the  words  and  countenance  of  this 
young  prince,  that  he  seemed  to  me  a  privileged 
being  whom  Providence  had  sent  to  this  wrorld  for 


CON  VERSA  TIONS   WITH  A  LEX  A  NDER  1 1 3 

the  happiness  of  humanity  and  of  my  country.  My 
attachment  to  him  was  boundless,  and  the  feeling 
with  which  he  inspired  me  at  that  moment  lasted 
even  after  the  illusions  which  had  given  birth  to  it 
successively  disappeared ;  it  resisted  the  attacks 
which  Alexander  himself  made  upon  it,  and  it  never 
died  in  spite  of  the  many  events  and  sad  misunder- 
standings which  might  have  destroyed  it.  I  told  my 
brother  of  our  conversation,  and  after  giving  a  free 
rein  to  our  surprise  and  admiration,  we  plunged  into 
reveries  of  a  radiant  future  which  seemed  to  be 
opening  before  us.  It  should  be  remembered  that  at 
that  time  so-called  liberal  opinions  were  much  less 
prevalent  than  they  are  now,  and  had  not  yet  pene- 
trated into  all  the  classes  of  society  and  even  into  the 
Cabinets  of  sovereigns.  On  the  contrary,  every- 
thing that  had  the  appearance  of  liberalism  was 
anathematised  in  the  Courts  and  salons  of  most  of  the 
European  capitals,  and  especially  in  Russia  and  at  St 
Petersburg,  where  all  the  convictions  of  the  old 
French  regime  were  grafted  in  an  exaggerated  form 
on  Russian  despotism  and  servility. 

It  was  assuredly  a  moVfc  fortunate  and  important 
incident  that  in  the  midst  of  these  elements  there 
should  be  a  prince,  the  future  ruler  of  Russia,  who 
would  necessarily  exercise  immense  influence  in 
Europe,  holding  such  decided  and  generous  opinions 
entirely  opposed  to  the  existing  state  of  things.  Now 
that  I  look  back,  forty  years  afterwards,  upon  the 
events  which  have  taken  place  since  that  conversation, 
I  see  only  too  well  how  little  they  have  realised  the 
picture  that  our  youthful  imaginations  had  drawn. 
VOL.  i.  H 


1 1 4       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZA K TOR YSKI 

Liberal  ideas  were  at  that  time  in  our  eyes  still 
surrounded  by  an  aureole  which  has  paled  since  they 
have  been  tested  by  experience  ;  their  realisation  had 
not  yet  produced  the  cruel  deceptions  which  have  so 
often  disheartened  us.  That  period,  in  the  years  1796 
and  1797,  was  the  most  brilliant  one  of  the  dawn  of 
liberal  ideas  :  the  cycle  of  the  French  Empire  had 
not  yet  chilled  and  dispersed  the  warmest  partisans  of 
the  Revolution. 