


i.8      ^fE^fOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Russia  was  adapted  to  or  prepared  for  it.  I  added 
that  now  at  any  rate  Russia  would  not  gain  anything 
by  the  change,  as  she  would  lose  the  man  who  by  his 
benevolent  and  pure  intentions  was  most  worthy  of 
accedino-  to  the  throne.  We  had  incessant  discussions 

o 

on  this  point.  Sometimes  during  our  long  walks  we 
talked  of  other  matters.  We  turned  from  politics 
to  nature,  of  whose  beauties  the  young  Grand-Duke 
was  an  enthusiastic  admirer.  One  had  to  be  a  great 
lover  of  nature  to  discover  its  beauties  in  the  country 
we  walked  in  ;  but  everything  is  relative  in  this 
world,  and  the  Grand-Duke  flew  into  ecstasies  about 
a  flower,  the  greenness  of  a  tree,  or  the  view  over 
an  undulating  plain.  There  is  nothing  uglier  or  less 
picturesque  than  the  neighbourhood  of  St  Petersburg. 
Alexander  loved  gardens  and  fields,  and  was  fond  of 
agriculture  and  the  rustic  beauty  rif  village  girls ; 
the  occupations  and  labours  of  the  country,  a  simple, 
quiet,  and  retired  life  in  some  -pretty  farm,  in  a  wide 
and  smiling  landscape — such  was  the  dream  he  would 
have  liked  to  realise,  and  to  which  he  was  always 
returning  with  a  sigh. 

I  knew  well  that  this  was  not  the  thing  best 
suited  to  him  ;  that  for  so  high  a  destiny  more  ele- 
vation, force,  ardour,  and  self-confidence  were  necessary 
than  Alexander  seemed  to  possess ;  that  it  was  not 
right  for  a  man  in  his  position  to  wish  to  rid  himself 
of  the  enormous  burthen  which  was  reserved  for  him, 
and  to  yearn  for  the  pleasures  of  a  quiet  life.  It  was 
not  enough  to  perceive  and  feel  the  difficulties  of 
his  position ;  he  should  have  been  filled  with  a 
passionate  desire  to  surmount  them.  These  reflec- 


STA  Y  A  T  TSAR8KOE-SBLO  1 1 9 

tions  occasionally  presented  themselves  to  my  mind, 
and  even  when  I  felt  their  truth,  they  did  not 
diminish  my  feelings  of  admiration  and  devotion  for 
Alexander.  His  sincerity,  his  frankness,  his  self- 
abandonment  to  the  beautiful  illusions  that  fascinated 
him,  had  a  charm  which  it  was  impossible  to  resist. 
Moreover,  he  was  still  so  young  that  his  character 
might  yet  gain  the  qualities  in  which  it  was  defective; 
circumstances  and  necessities  might  develop  faculties 
which  had  not  the  time  or  the  means  of  showing 
themselves;  and  although  he  was  afterwards  much 
changed,  he  retained  to  the  last  a  portion  of  the 
tastes  and  opinions  of  his  youth. 

Many  people — my  countrymen  especially — in  later 
years  reproached  me  for  having  placed  too  much  con- 
fidence in  Alexander's  assurances.  I  have  often 
maintained  against  his  detractors  that  his  opinions 
were  sincere.  The  impression  produced  by  the  first 
years  of  our  relations  could  not  be  effaced.  Assuredly, 
when  Alexander,  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  spoke  to  me 
with  an  effusiveness  which  relieved  his  mind,  about 
opinions  and  sentiments  which  he  concealed  from 
everybody  else,  it  was  because  he  really  felt  them, 
and  wished  to  confide  them  to  someone.  What  other 
motive  could  he  have  had  ?  Whom  could  he  have 
wished  to  deceive  ?  He  certainly  followed  the  inclina- 
tion of  his  heart  and  expressed  his  real  thoughts. 