

lose  much  precious  time  while  he  was  on  the  throne, 
and  prevented  him  during  his  youth  from  working 
usefully  and  acquiring  indispensable  knowledge.  This 
was  also  the  bond  of  union  between  Alexander  and 
Constantine,  and  it  often  gave  the  latter  too  great 

7  O  O 

an  influence  over  his  brother,  for  Constantine  was 
well  versed  in  military  science  so  far  as  mere  drill 
is  concerned,  and  his  brother  could  not  help  having 
a  great  idea  of  him  in  this  respect.  It  was  the 
constant  subject  of  their  most  animated  conversa- 
tions. 

The  Empress  Catherine  saw  the  understanding 
between  Paul  and  his  sons  with  displeasure,  though 
she  did  not  foresee  all  its  consequences,  for  if  she  had, 
she  would  probably  have  prohibited  it.  Alexander 
said  to  me  one  day  as  he  was  returning  from 
Pavlovsk  :  '  They  do  us  the  honour  of  fearing  us,' 
meaning  that  Catherine  was  beginning  to  be  anxious 
at  the  maintenance  of  the  troops  at  Pavlovsk,  and 
at  the  sort  of  concert  which  had  been  established 
between  Paul  and  his  sons.  Alexander  was  flattered 
at  the  thought  of  having  inspired  some  fear  in  the 
Empress ;  but  I  doubt  whether  she  really  felt  any 
such  sentiment ;  if  she  did  so  it  was  very  occasionally 
and  to  a  very  slight  extent.  Catherine  knew  too 
well  the  cowardly  spirit  of  her  son,  the  ridiculous 
appearance  of  his  troops,  and  the  disfavour  with 
which  they  were  regarded  by  the  public  and  the  rest 
of  the  army,  to  trouble  herself  by  fearing  them.  She 
remained  in  peace  under  the  protection  of  a  single 
company  of  Grenadiers,  while  Paul  was  manoeuvring 
with  his  little  army  half-a-league  off. 


i24       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

The  Empress  Elizabeth  had  done  the  same  at  Peter- 
hoft*  with  Peter  III,  who  lived  at  Oranienbaum,  sur- 
rounded by  a  corps  of  devoted  Holsteiners ;  she  also 
knew  the  extreme  pusillanimity  of  her  successor,  and 
perhaps  also  his  kind  heart.  Various  rumours  have 
been  current  as  to  the  legitimacy  of  Paul  I ;  but 
those  who  saw  the  extreme  resemblance  of  character 
and  conduct  between  him  and  Peter  III,  could  have 
no  doubt  that  he  was  really  Peter's  son. 

During  this  year  an  event  occurred  which  had 
vast  consequences  for  Europe  and  terrible  ones  for 
Poland.  The  Grand-Duchess  Maria  gave  birth  to 
a  son.  The  baptismal  ceremony  took  place  in  the 
chapel  of  Tsarskoe-Selo  ;  the  whole  Court  attended 
in  full  dress  in  the  spacious  hall  which  precedes  the 
chapel.  The  ceremony,  as  was  to  be  expected,  was 
a  most  sumptuous  one.  The  ambassadors  were 
present,  and  some  of  them  held  the  child  at  the 
baptismal  font  as  the  representatives  of  their  respec- 
tive sovereigns.  He  was  named  Nicholas  !  Looking 
at  him  then  in  his  swaddling  clothes  as  he  moved 
about  impatiently  while  the  long  baptismal  ceremony 
of  the  Russian  Church  was  being  performed,  I  little 
thought  that  this  weak  and  pretty  child  would  one 
day  become  the  scourge  of  my  country. 