

Soon  the  little  army  of  Gatchina  made  its  solemn 
entry  into  St  Petersburg.  It  was  to  be  a  model  for 
the  Guards  and  the  whole  Russian  army.  The  Grand- 
Dukes  were  much  agitated,  for  they  had  been  ordered 
to  place  themselves  at  the  head  of  these  troops  and 
take  them  to  the  capital.  They  had  to  appear  before 
a  public  which  had  hitherto  been  ill-disposed,  and, 
which  was  more  difficult,  to  give  satisfaction  to  the 
Emperor.  But  all  went  off  well.  The  Gatchina 
troops  were  placed  in  battle  array  on  the  great 
square  of  the  Winter  Palace,  in  the  midst  of  a  timid 
crowd  astounded  at  the  sight  of  soldiers  entirely 
different  from  those  it  had  been  accustomed  to  see. 
The  troops  defiled  in  good  order  before  the  Emperor, 
who  expressed  to  his  sons  his  satisfaction  at  the 
manner  in  which  they  had  carried  out  this  first 
manifestation  of  his  rule.  They  were  much  pleased 
at  the  Emperor's  words,  and  the  new  comers  were  at 
first  quartered  on  the  inhabitants,  who  hastened  to 
give  them  a  friendly  reception.  In  the  evening 
grenadiers  with  pointed  hats  like  Prussians,  whose 
hosts  had  freely  treated  them  with  wine  and  brandy, 
were  to  be  seen  staggering  about  dead  drunk  in  the 
streets. 

During  the  long  years  of  his  retirement  Paul  had 


1 4 2       ^fE^fOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADA ^f  CZA RTOR YSKI 

planned  out  everything  he  proposed  to  do  directly 
he  should  come  into  power.  Changes  and  novelties 
accordingly  succeeded  each  other  with  extraordinary 
rapidity.  The  men  of  Gatchina  were  divided  among 
the  three  regiments  of  foot  guards  and  the  regiment 
of  horse  guards.  The  regiment  of  cavalier  guards 
was  supplied  with  silver  helmets  and  cuirasses  which 
were  manufactured  for  the  occasion,  as  these  articles 
of  uniform  had  ceased  to  be  worn  in  the  Russian 
army.  The  officers  of  Gatchina  were  all  promoted, 
and  one  soon  saw  old  soldiers  and  courtly  officers  of 
the  Guards  obliged  either  to  retire  or  to  obey  the 
commands  of  ill-bred  braggarts,  whose  names  they 
had  never  mentioned  except  to  laugh  at  them. 

In  the  midst  of  all  that  was  eccentric  and  ridicu- 
lous about  the  first  acts  of  Paul's  reign,  there  was  an 
element  of  seriousness  and  justice  ;  thus  the  Emperor 
ordered  the  young  courtiers  to  choose  some  career 
and  devote  themselves  to  it.  No  one  was  allowed  to 
join  the  Guards  as  an  amateur;  and  the  service  became 
so  severe  that  most  young  men  preferred  a  civil 
career. 

Scarcely  had  Paul  come  into  power  when  his 
first  thought  was  to  render  a  striking  act  of  homage 
to  the  memory  of  his  father,  and  at  the  same  time  a 
sort  of  verdict  upon  those  who  were  guilty  of  his 
death.  During  the  first  few  days  after  the  death  of 
the  Empress  and  the  time  necessary  for  embalming 
her  body,  the  whole  of  the  Court,  including  ladies  and 
high  functionaries  of  State,  were  ordered  to  watch 
by  the  body  day  and  night  in  the  Imperial  apart- 
ments, and  soon  after  the  Emperor  directed  that  his 