

Besides  Count  Soltykoff,  each  of  the  two  princes 
had  a  special  director  of  studies  with  assistants.  The 
selection  of  the  two  directors  was  even  more  extra- 
ordinary than  that  of  the  chief  superintendent.  The 


i32      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

one  attached  to  Alexander  was  Count  Protasoff,  ] 
whose  only  merit  was  to  be  the  brother  of  the  ' 
demoiselle  d  portrait*  an  old  favourite  of  the  Empress 
as  to  whose  functions,  though  she  was  a  good  woman 
at  heart,  there  were  all  sorts  of  extraordinary 
anecdotes.  Constantino's  special  director  was  Count 
Sacken,  a  weak-minded  man  who  was  the  object  of 
incessant  ridicule  on  the  part  of  his  pupil.  Count 
Protasoff  may  justly  be  said  to  have  been  a 
complete  imbecile  ;  Alexander  did  not  laugh  at  him, 
but  he  had  never  the  smallest  esteem  for  him.  The 
assistant  directors  were  selected  solely  by  favour, 
with  the  exception  of  Mouravieff,  whom  Alexander 
when  he  ascended  the  throne  made  his  secretary  for 
petitions,  and  afterwards  appointed  curator  of  the 
schools  of  the  Moscow  district.  He  was  a  worthy 
man  and  was  said  to  be  well-informed,  but  he  was  so 
timid  as  to  be  almost  incapable  of  transacting  business. 
I  should  also  not  omit  Baron  Budberg,  who  some 
years  later  succeeded  me  as  Minister  of  Foreign 
affairs. 

Such  surroundings  could  only  produce  a  bad  effect 
on  the  young  princes,  and  the  qualities  displayed  by 
Alexander  are  the  more  astonishing  and  praiseworthy, 
as  he  developed  them  notwithstanding  the  education 
he  had  received  and  the  examples  which  were  before 
his  eyes. 

At  the  close  of  the  stay  in  the  Tauris  Palace  in 
179G,  the  last  year  Catherine  was  there  with  her 
Court,  the  chief  topic  was  the  approaching  arrival  of 

*  A  decoration  which  gives  the  rank  of  Field  Marshal.  Three  ladies  under 
Paul,  and  one  under  Nicholas,  obtained  this  rank. 


ARRIVAL  OF  THE  KING  OF  SWEDEN  133 

the  young  King  of  Sweden,  who  came  to  marry  the 
eldest  of  the  Grand-Duchesses.  The  Empress  directed 
the  ladies  of  the  Court  to  learn  the  French  contre- 
danse,  which  was  then  the  favourite  dance  at  the 
Court  of  Stockholm,  and  this  was  the  daily  occupation 
of  all  at  Court  who  were  dancers.  The  King  of 
Sweden  was  received  with  exquisite  politeness.  He 
came  with  the  Regent,  his  uncle,  Duke  of  Suder- 
mania,  and  with  a  numerous  suite.  The  Swedish 
costume,  which  resembled  that  formerly  worn  in 
Spain,  produced  a  fine  effect  at  the  receptions,  balls, 
and  other  fetes  which  were  given  to  the  young  King 
and  his  suite ;  all  the  Court  entertainments  were 
for  them.  The  Grand-Duchesses  only  danced  with 
Swedes,  and  never  did  a  Court  show  more  courtesy 
to  strangers. 