

It  is  certainly  astonishing  that  Catherine,  who 
took  pleasure  in  the  thought  that  Alexander  would 
continue  her  reign  and  her  glory,  did  not  think  of 
preparing  him  for  this  task  by  familiarising  him  in 
his  early  youth  with  the  various  branches  of  govern- 


i28       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

merit.  Nothing  of  the  sort  was  attempted.  Perhaps 
he  would  not  have  acquired  very  correct  information 
on  many  things,  but  he  would  have  been  saved  from 
the  want  of  occupation.  Yet  it  would  seem  that  either 
the  Empress  and  her  council  had  no  such  idea,  or  that 
the  former  did  not  at  least  insist  upon  its  being  carried 
out.  Alexander's  education  remained  incomplete  at  the 
time  of  his  marriage,  in  consequence  of  the  departure 
of  M.  de  la  Harpe.  He  was  then  eighteen  years  old  ; 
he  had  no  regular  occupation,  he  was  not  even  advised 
to  work,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  more  practical 
task  he  was  not  given  any  plan  of  reading  which 
might  have  helped  him  in  the  difficult  career  for  which 
he  was  destined.  I  often  spoke  to  him  on  this 
subject,  both  then  and  later.  I  proposed  that  he 
should  read  various  books  on  history,  legislation,  and 
politics.  He  saw  that  they  would  do  him  good,  and 
really  wished  to  read  them ;  but  a  Court  life  makes 
any  continued  occupation  impossible.  While  he  was 
Grand-Duke,  Alexander  did  not  read  to  the  end  a 
single  serious  book.  I  do  not  think  he  could  have 
done  so  when  he  became  Emperor,  and  the  whole 
burthen  of  a  despotic  government  was  cast  upon  him. 
The  life  of  a  Court  is  fatiguing  and  yet  idle.  It 
furnishes  a  thousand  excuses  for  indolence,  and  one 
is  constantly  busy  in  doing  nothing.  When  Alexander 
came  to  his  rooms  it  was  to  take  rest  and  not  to 
work.  He  read  by  fits  and  starts,  without  ardour 
or  zeal.  The  passion  of  acquiring  knowledge  was  not 
sufficiently  strong  in  him ;  he  was  married  too  young, 
and  he  did  not  perceive  that  he  still  knew  very  little. 
Yet  he  felt  the  importance  of  useful  study,  and 


REFLECTIONS  ON  ALEXANDERS  EDUCATION    129 

wished  to  enter  upon  it ;  but  his  will  was  not  suffi- 
ciently strong  to  overcome  the  daily  obstacles  presented 
by  the  duties  and  unpleasantnesses  of  life.  The  few 
years  of  his  early  youth  thus  passed  away,  and  he 
lost  precious  opportunities  which  he  had  in  abundance 
so  long  as  Catherine  was  alive,  and  of  which  he 
might  have  recovered  a  part  even  under  the  Emperor 
Paul. 

While  he  was  Grand-Duke,  and  even  during  the 
first  years  of  his  reign,  Alexander  remained  what  his 
education  had  made  him,  and  was  very  different  from 
what  he  became  later  on  when  he  followed  his  natural 
propensities.  It  must  be  concluded  that  nature  had 
endowed  him  with  rare  qualities,  as  notwithstanding 
the  education  he  had  received  he  became  the  most 
amiable  sovereign  of  his  age  and  the  cause  of 
Napoleon's  fall.  After  having  reigned  for  some  years, 
and  acquired  the  experience  entailed  by  the  necessity 
of  at  once  taking  the  management  of  important  affairs 
of  State  and  by  constant  intercourse  with  men  in 
office,  people  were  surprised  to  find  him  not  only  an 
accomplished  man  of  the  world,  but  an  able  politician, 
with  a  penetrating  and  subtle  mind,  writing  without 
assistance  excellent  letters  on  complicated  and  difficult 
subjects,  and  always  amiable,  even  in  the  most 
serious  conversations.  What  would  he  have  become 
had  his  education  been  less  neglected  and  more 
adapted  to  the  duties  which  were  to  occupy  his  life  ? 
M.  de  la  Harpe  was  the  only  man  that  can  be 
mentioned  with  praise  among  those  to  whom  the 
education  of  the  two  Grand-Dukes  was  entrusted.  I 
do  not  know  exactly  who  were  the  persons  directed 