


ACCESSION  OF  PAUL  I  145 

and  decorated   with   a  blue  ribbon  for   having  been 

o 

the  first  to  bring  Paul  the  news  of  his  accession. 
Changes  were  occurring  daily.  Nearly  all  that 
had  been  great  and  distinguished  under  Catherine 
became  neglected  and  insignificant  under  Paul.  New 
persons  were  constantly  coming  forward  and  being 
advanced  with  extraordinary  rapidity,  and  almost  all 
the  Ministers  were  changed. 

Plato  Zuboff,  who  looked  like  a  dethroned 
sovereign,  went  to  his  estates  in  Lithuania,  a  vast 
domain  which  Catherine  had  given  him  (arid  the 
desire  to  acquire  which  was  one  of  the  causes  of  the 
two  last  partitions  of  Poland),  sufficient  to  furnish 
him  with  ample  means  to  defray  the  expense  of  his 
travels.  He  visited  several  towns  in  Germany. 
Some  women  of  ready  wit  and  easy  virtue  made  him 
lose  that  air  of  languid  dignity  which  he  usually  wore. 
He  recognised  the  advantages  of  an  independent 
existence,  but  soon  his  ambition  and  vanity,  leading 
him  to  believe  that  he  was  destined  still  to  play  a 
great  part,  brought  him  back  to  St  Petersburg,  and 
rendered  him  more  guilty  and  unfortunate  than  he 
had  ever  been  before. 

The  only  one  of  Catherine's  Ministers  whom  Paul 
adopted  was  Count  Bezborodko ;  this  was  because  of 
his  remarkable  talents,  his  high  reputation,  and  per- 
haps also  because  he  had  neglected  Zuboff  when  he 
was  at  the  height  of  his  favour  with  the  Empress. 
Paul  felt  that  while  he  was  still  inexperienced  in  the 
art  of  government  he  needed  Bezborodko's  services, 
and  he  loaded  him  with  distinctions  of  all  kinds.  He 
made  him  a  prince,  consulted  him  when  he  wanted  to 

VOL.  I.  K 


146       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

carry  out  some  of  his  hobbies,  and  doubled  his 
property  by  grants  of  land  and  of  considerable  sums 
in  cash. 

The  Emperor's  choice  of  his  Ministers  was  always 
directed  by  one  dominant  idea— that  of  surrounding 
himself  with  servants  on  whom  he  could  entirely 
rely ;  for  from  the  moment  of  his  accession  he  fore- 
saw and  dreaded  a  Palace  revolution.  He  raised  to 
the  highest  positions  persons  who  were  quite  insig- 
nificant and  often  the  least  capable  of  performing 
their  new  duties.  They  were  chiefly  taken  from 
among  those  (or  their  descendants  or  relations),  whom 
he  had  employed  at  Gatchina,  and  who  had  given 
proofs  of  fidelity  to  his  father.  He  persecuted  and 
dismissed  those  who  had  been  in  favour  with  his 
mother ;  this  alone  made  him  suspect  them.  The 
fear  of  treason  was  continually  present  to  his  mind 
during  the  whole  of  his  reign.  He  erred  in  the 
selection,  and  especially  in  the  extent,  of  the  means 
which  he  employed  to  save  his  life  and  his  "power ; 
they  only  precipitated  his  deplorable  end.  Among 
the  men  whom  he  suspected,  he  persecuted  some 
with  implacable  rigour,  while  he  retained  others  at 
their  posts  and  endeavoured  to  secure  their  fidelity 
by  presents ;  this,  however,  only  made  them  ungrate- 
ful. Never  was  there  a  sovereign  more  terrible  in 
his  severity,  or  more  liberal  when  he  was  in  a  gener- 
ous mood.  But  there  was  no  certainty  in  his  favour. 
A  single  word  uttered  intentionally  or  by  accident 
in  a  conversation,  the  shadow  of  a  suspicion,  sufficed 
to  make  him  persecute  those  whom  he  had  protected. 
The  greatest  favourites  of  to-day  feared  to  be  driven 