

While  the  fetes  were  going  on  at  the  Winter 
Palace,  and  balls,  concerts,  and  montagnes  Russes 
were  daily  repeated  at  the  Tauris  Palace,  the  King  of 
Sweden  was  admitted  to  the  presence  of  the  Grand- 
Duchess  Alexandra  as  her  future  husband.  She  was 
of  rare  beauty  and  sweetness  of  character  ;  to  know 
her  was  to  admire  her,  and  his  daily  interview  with 
her  could  only  add  to  the  motives  which  seemed  to 
prompt  the  King  of  Sweden  to  unite  himself  by 
family  ties  with  the  House  of  Romanoff.  The  Duke 
of  Sudermania  was  strongly  in  favour  of  the  match, 
and  had  urged  his  nephew  to  go  to  St  Petersburg  so 
as  to  leave  no  doubt  as  to  his  intentions.  All  that 
remained  was  to  agree  as  to  forms  and  the  treaty 
to  be  drawn  up  between  the  two  powers ;  and  this 
did  not  seem  of  a  nature  to  cause  any  difficulty. 


13-1       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

As  both  parties  were  said  to  be  agreed,  no  negotiation 
seemed  requisite,  and  the  task  of  framing  the  neces- 
sary documents  was  entrusted  to  Count  Markoft', 
whom  the  Zuboffs  were  putting  forward  in  order  to 
eclipse  Count  Bezborodko,  who,  though  he  had  refused 
to  cringe  to  them,  yet  kept  his  place  and  his  credit 
with  the  Empress. 

After  some  gay  and  brilliant  weeks  the  day  of  the 
betrothal  was  fixed ;  the  ceremony  was  to  take  place 
in  the  evening.  The  Archbishops  of  St  Petersburg 
and  Novgorod,  with  a  numerous  suite  of  clergy,  went 
to  the  chapel  where  the  ceremony  was  to  take  place. 
The  whole  of  the  Court,  the  Ministers,  the  Senate, 
and  many  generals  were  assembled  in  the  waiting- 
room.  We  waited  for  several  hours.  It  was  getting 
late,  and  people  observed  whisperings  among  those 
who  were  likely  to  be  well  informed,  and  movements 
to  and  fro  of  persons  proceeding  to  the  Empress's 
apartments,  all  of  whom  came  out  at  a  quick  pace. 
At  length,  after  four  hours  of  suspense,  we  were 
told  that  the  ceremony  would  not  take  place. 
The  Empress  sent  to  apologise  to  the  Archbishops 
who  had  come  in  their  pontifical  robes,  to  the  ladies 
in  panniers,  and  to  the  rest  of  the  Court,  and 
announced  to  them  that  the  ceremony  had  been  post- 
poned owing  to  some  unexpected  difficulties. 

Soon  after  it  became  known  that  the  marriage  was 
broken  off.  Count  Markoff,  frivolous  through  self- 
sufficiency,  and  inattentive  through  pride  and  disre- 
gard of  all  but  himself,  was  persuaded  that  all  was 
arranged  without  troubling  himself  to  put  the  arrange- 
ment in  writing  and  get  it  signed.  It  was  when  the 


FAILURE  OF  MARRIAGE  NEGOTIATIONS          135 

signature  was  required  that  difficulties  arose.  King 
Gustavus  IV  wished  to  limit  the  liberty  which  the 
Russian  princess  who  was  to  be  his  queen  should 
enjoy  in  following  the  rites  of  her  religion.  The 
Swedes,  who  are  staunch  Protestants,  had  made 
objections  on  this  subject,  but  Count  Markoff  took  no 
notice,  and  proceeded  to  act  as  if  the  matter  had 
already  been  decided,  thinking  that  the  Swedes  would 
not  dare  to  withdraw  at  the  last  moment,  and  that 
the  Grand-Duchess's  beauty  would  succeed  where  the 
ability  of  the  Russian  Ministers  had  failed.  But  he 
was  wrong  in  his  calculations.  The  young  King  was 
the  most  zealous  Protestant  in  his  kingdom,  and  he 
would  never  consent  to  his  wife  having  a  public  Russian 
chapel  at  Stockholm.  His  Ministers,  his  Councillors, 
and  the  Regent  himself,  fearing  the  consequences  of 
an  affront  to  the  Empress,  pressed  him  to  yield  or  to 
seek  a  compromise,  but  in  vain.  Instead  of  inclining 
to  the  Russian  demands,  Gustavus  IV,  in  the  pro- 
longed conversations  which  he  had  with  the  Grand- 