


ACCESSION  OF  PAUL  I  143 

father's  remains  should  be  exhumed  and  carried  in 
ceremony  from  the  Nevski  convent  to  the  Winter 
Palace  to  be  deposited  by  the  side  of  Catherine.  There 
were  still  living  three  or  four  of  those  who  had  been 
accused  of  complicity  in  the  murder  of  Peter  III. 
They  were  at  that  time  privates  or  sub-officers  in  the 
Guards ;  they  were  now  great  nobles  with  large 
incomes.  Among  them  was  the  Court-Marshal, 
Prince  Bariatynski,  who  was  disliked  because  he  was 
rude,  ill-bred,  and  ill-tempered,  and  Passeyk,  Gover- 
nor-General of  White  Russia,  who  was  the  Empress's 
aide-de-camp.  There  were  very  few  who  possessed 
this  title,  and  it  gave  very  high  rank  and  great 
privileges.  When  the  Imperial  aide-de-camp  was 
present  he  alone  held  a  cane,  commanded  at  the 
palace,  and  watched  over  the  safety  of  his  sovereign. 
Passeyk  disappeared  on  the  day  of  Catherine's  death, 
and  Prince  Bariatynski  almost  died  of  fear.  He  and 
some  of  his  accomplices  were  forced  to  watch  at  the 
coffin  of  Peter  III  and  follow  his  body  in  the  funeral 
procession.  Count  Alexis  Orloff,  one  of  the  principal 
assassins  of  the  late  Emperor,  was  the  only  one  who 
walked  with  a  firm  step  and  a  countenance  apparently 
tranquil. 

The  Emperor  Paul  had  the  two  coffins  placed 
together  on  a  bier,  where  they  were  exposed  (that  of 
Catherine  was  open)  to  the  sight  of  the  crowd.  The 
high  functionaries  and  ladies  of  the  Court  continued 
their  service  by  the  side  of  the  bodies  night  and  day 
for  six  weeks  ;  this  gave  rise  to  singular  meetings, 
and  created  friendly  relations  among  people  who  had 
previously  been  almost  strangers.  Others,  after  pass- 


1.14       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ing  twenty-four  hours  together  at  a  stretch,  arid  find- 
ing each  other  amiable  and  pleasant  companions,  never 
saw  their  fellow-watchers  again. 

The  burial  of  Peter  and  Catherine  took  place  six 
weeks  after  ;  they  were  interred  in  the  same  vault  of 
the  Nevski  convent.  All  the  troops  of  the  garrison  of 
St  Petersburg  and  of  its  neighbourhood  accompanied 
the  procession,  and  all  who  belonged  to  the  Court  or 
Government  went  on  foot  to  the  convent,  which  is 
at  the  other  end  of  the  town.  Neither  the  men  nor 
the  women  were  allowed  to  wear  powder,  and  as  they 
had  not  altered  their  way  of  dressing  the  hair,  this 
was  very  unbecoming.  Mourning  was  strictly  pre- 
scribed and  observed ;  and  as  the  funeral  procession 
was  extremely  long,  the  ceremony  lasted  a  whole 
day. 

The  Emperor  kept  the  apartments  at  the  Winter 
Palace  which  he  had  occupied  when  he  was  Grand- 
Duke.  The  waiting-room  was  usually  filled  by  those 
who  were  admitted  to  his  presence.  People  some- 
times passed  the  whole  day  there,  and  went  as  if  to  a 
diverting  entertainment.  There  was  incessant  agita- 
tion and  excitement  :  footmen  and  aides-de-camp  in 
thick  boots  ran  about  knocking  against  each  other, 
some  carrying  the  Emperor's  orders,  others  looking 
for  some  one  they  were  sent  to  summon  to  his  pre- 
sence. Those  who  were  called  ran  up  breathless,  not 
knowing  what  was  to  be  their  fate  ;  many  entered 
the  room  and  left  it  immediately  after  with  radiant 
faces  and  a  red  or  blue  sash  across  their  chests.  One 
of  those  whom  I  saw  coming  out  of  the  room  was 
Count  Nicholas  Zuboff,  appointed  Grand-Equerry 