

It  was  November ;  the  weather  was  cold  and 
foggy,  and  harmonised  with  the  appearance  of  the 
Court  and  the  Winter  Palace  after  the  fetes  which 
had  animated  them.  Alexander  continued  his  walks 
on  the  quays,  and  one  day  he  met  my  brother.  After 
having  walked  for  some  time,  they  stopped  at  the 
door  of  the  lodgings  where  we  lived.  I  had  just  come 
down  and  we  were  talking  together,  when  a  footman 
of  the  Court  who  was  looking  for  Alexander  came  to 
tell  him  that  Count  Soltykoff  wished  to  see  him  as 
soon  as  possible.  Alexander  immediately  followed 
the  man,  not  guessing  the  cause  of  this  urgent 
message. 

The  Empress  had  had  an  apoplectic  stroke.  Her 
feet  had  for  sometime  been  much  swollen,  and  she  had 
not  done  anything  that  her  physicians  had  prescribed, 
but  had  taken  some  quack  remedies  which  her 
chambermaids  had  recommended  to  her.  The  humi- 
liation inflicted  upon  her  by  the  King  of  Sweden 


138       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

was  too  hard  a  blow  to  her  pride,  and  it  may  be  said 
that  Gustavus  IV  shortened  her  life  by  several  years. 
She  got  up  the  same  day,  to  all  appearance  in  good 
health,  and  remained  in  her  dressing-room  longer  than 
usual.  The  valet  in  waiting,  not  seeing  her  returning, 
went  to  the  door,  and  opening  it  softly  saw  the 
Empress  lying  unconscious.  When  Zuboff  came,  she 
opened  her  eyes,  placed  her  hand  on  her  heart  with 
an  expression  of  extreme  pain,  and  then  shut  them  for 
ever.  This  was  the  only  and  the  last  sign  of  life 
and  consciousness  which  she  gave.  The  physicians 
hastened  to  the  room  and  for  three  days  used  all  the 
resources  of  their  science,  but  in  vain. 

Next  day  the  news  of  the  Empress's  fatal  illness 
spread  in  the  town.  Those  who  had  the  entry  to  the 
Court  went  there  with  a  feeling  of  terror,  of  anxiety, 
and  of  doubt  as  to  the  future.  Both  the  town  and 
the  Court  were  in  the  greatest  confusion.  Most  of 
those  who  were  present  in  the  room  expressed  sincere 
grief;  the  pale  and  distorted  features  of  many  be- 
trayed a  fear  of  losing  the  position  they  enjoyed  and 
perhaps  of  being  obliged  to  render  an  account  of  their 
administration.  My  brother  and  myself  were  among 
the  spectators  of  this  scene  of  regret  and  of  terror. 
Zuboff,  with  his  hair  dishevelled  and  an  air  of  conster- 
nation on  his  face,  attracted  all  eyes.  Both  himself 
and  all  those  whose  fortunes  he  had  made  were 
naturally  in  despair.  At  one  time  he  was  busy 
burning  papers  which  might  have  compromised  him;  at 
others  he  came  to  see  if  the  remedies  tried  by  the 
physicians  gave  any  hope.  All  was  disorder,  and 
etiquette  was  abandoned. 