

o 

Duchess,  strove  to  convert  her,  and  almost  made  her 
promise  that  she  would  adopt  the  religion  of  her 
husband  and  of  the  country  in  which  she  was  to 
reside. 

The  King  obstinately  rejected  all  the  proposals 
which  Count  Markoff  made  to  him  with  the  view  of 
overcoming  the  difficulty  ;  he  was  told  in  vain  that 
he  would  expose  himself  to  a  war  with  Russia,  if  after 
having  gone  so  far,  he  broke  off  the  marriage  just 
as  it  was  about  to  be  concluded.  All  was  useless — 
even  the  fixing  of  the  day,  the  presence  of  Catherine 
in  her  Imperial  robes,  and  the  convocation  of  the 


136      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

clergy  and  the  whole  Court,  failed  to  move  the  Swedish 
King. 

The  young  sovereign's  obstinacy  at  first  made 
the  Swedes  anxious,  then  frightened  them,  but  finally 
pleased  them ;  they  were  proud  at  their  King  having 
shown  so  much  character.  As  for  the  Russians,  all 
the  excitement  produced  by  the  appearance  of  the 
King  of  Sweden  in  their  capital  was  changed  into 
a  sombre  silence  of  disappointment  and  vexation. 
The  next  day  was  the  birthday  of  one  of  the  little 
Grand-Duchesses  (afterwards  the  Queen  of  Holland), 
and  there  was  a  Court  ball  in  honour  of  the  occasion. 
The  Empress  appeared  with  her  eternal  smile,  but 
her  eyes  had  a  sombre  expression  of  sadness  and 
anger ;  people  admired  the  impassive  dignity  with 
which  she  received  her  guests.  The  King  of  Sweden 
and  his  suite  showed  constraint,  but  not  embarrass- 
ment ;  there  was  a  stiffness  of  manner  both  on  their 
part  and  on  that  of  the  Euipress  which  communicated 
itself  to  the  whole  company.  The  Grand-Duke  Paul 
expressed  great  irritation,  though  I  suspect  he  was  not 
really  displeased  at  the  blunder  made  by  the  Cabinet. 
As  for  Alexander,  he  was  indignant  at  the  insult 
which  had  been  offered  to  his  sister,  but  cast  the 
blame  of  it  on  Count  Markoff ;  and  the  Empress  was 
very  glad  to  see  her  grandson  share  her  indignation. 

The  Swedish  cloaks  and  plumes  seemed  no  longer 
to  float  in  the  air  with  the  same  grace  as  before  and 
shared  in  the  general  constraint ;  they  were  no  longer 
the  fashion.  Some  minuets  were  danced  with  even 
more  gravity  than  usual.  My  brother  was  one  of 
the  dancers,  and  he  acquitted  himself  very  well. 


DEATH  OF  CATHERINE  137 

Two  days  after  the  King  left  with  his  suite,  and  St 
Petersburg  remained  gloomy  and  silent.  People 
were  astounded  at  what  had  happened  ;  they  could 
not  believe  that  a  '  little  kinglet '  should  thus  dare 
to  insult  the  Sovereign  of  all  the  Russias.  What 
would  she  do  now  ?  It  was  impossible  for  Catherine 
II  to  pocket  the  affront  and  not  take  her  revenge. 
So  at  least  people  said.  As  for  the  Court,  the 
Grand-Duke  Paul  was  at  Gatchina,  while  the  Empress 
remained  in  her  apartments  ;  and  it  was  thought  that 
she  was  preparing  some  resolute  step  which  would 
make  the  King  of  Sweden  repent  his  obstinacy.  But 
it  was  Catherine  herself  that  succumbed. 