

VOL.  I.  I 


130       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

by  Catherine  to  select  their  tutors  ;  probably  they 
were  some  encyclopaedists  of  the  clique  of  Grimm  or 
the  Baron  d'Holbach. 

M.  de  la  Harpe  does  not  seem  to  have  directed 
Alexander  into  any  serious  course  of  study,  though  he 
had  acquired  so  much  influence  over  the  Grand-Duke's 
mind  and  heart  that  I  believe  he  could  have  made 
him  do  anything.  Alexander  derived  from  his 
teaching  only  some  superficial  knowledge  ;  his  infor- 
mation was  neither  positive  nor  complete.  M.  de  la 
Harpe  inspired  him  with  the  love  of  humanity,  of 
justice,  and  even  of  equality  and  liberty  for  all ;  he 
prevented  the  prejudices  and  flatteries  which  sur- 
rounded him  from  stifling  his  noble  instincts.  It  was 
a  great  merit  in  M.  de  la  Harpe  to  have  inspired  arid 
developed  these  generous  sentiments  in  a  Russian 
Grand-Duke,  but  Alexander's  mind  was  not  penetrated 
by  them  ;  it  was  filled  with  vague  phrases,  and  M.  de 
la  Harpe  did  not  sufficiently  make  him  reflect  on  the 
immense  difficulty  of  realising  these  ideas — on  the 
thorny  task  of  finding  means  to  obtain  possible 
results.  He  was,  however,  merely  charged  with 
Alexander's  literary  education  ;  the  choice  which  was 
made  of  those  who  were  to  look  after  his  moral 
training  was  extraordinary.  Count  Nicholas  SoltykofF, 
who  was  a  subaltern  during  the  Seven  Years'  War 
and  had  not  since  seen  any  active  service  (which  did 
not  prevent  him  from  attaining  the  highest  rank  in 
the  army),  was  the  superintendent  of  the  education  of 
the  two  Grand-Dukes.  Short,  with  a  large  head, 
affected,  nervous,  and  of  health  so  delicate  that  it 
required  constant  attention  (he  could  not  wear  braces, 


EFL  EC  TIONS  ON  AL  EX  A  ND  ER'S  ED  UCA  TION    1 3 1 

and  constantly  hitched  up  his  breeches  like  a  sailor) 
he  had  the  reputation  of  being  the  most  astute 
courtier  in  Russia.  When  Catherine  discovered  that 
her  favourite  Momonoff  had  formed  intimate  relations 
with  one  of  her  maids  of  honour,  she  ordered  the 
culprits  to  come  before  her,  had  them  married,  and 
then  expelled  them  from  her  Court;  after  which 
Soltykoff  at  once  introduced  to  her  Plato  Zuboff,  who 
speedily  became  Momonoft's  successor.  The  elevation 
of  Zuboff  so  angered  Prince  Potemkin  that  he  de- 
clared he  would  go  to  St  Petersburg  to  extract  this 
tooth  (zul)  means  tooth  in  Russian) ;  but  he  died 
before  he  could  carry  out  his  intention,  and  Soltykoff 
remained  in  high  favour  with  the  Empress.  He  was 
not  only  the  channel  by  which  her  messages  and 

«/  *J  O 

admonitions  were  conveyed  to  the  young  princes ;  he 
also  acted  as  intermediary  whenever  Catherine  had 
anything  to  communicate  to  the  Grand-Duke  Paul. 
Soltykoff  used  to  omit  or  soften  any  words  which 
seemed  too  disagreeable  or  severe  in  the  orders  or  the 
reproaches  of  his  Imperial  mistress,  and  he  did  the 
same  with  regard  to  the  replies  he  had  to  convev  to 
her.  This  gave  satisfaction  to  both  sides ;  he  alone 
knew  the  truth,  and  took  good  care  not  to  tell  it. 
There  wras  perhaps  some  merit  in  doing  this  success- 
fully, but  Count  Soltykoff  was  certainly  not  the  man  to 
direct  the  education  of  the  young  heir  to  the  throne, 
or  to  make  a  salutary  impression  on  his  character. 