


COURT  ETIQUETTE  155 

man  to  his  own  use  for  any  period  he  pleased,  while 
the  occupant  of  the  sledge  had  to  walk  home.  This 
once  happened  to  my  brother.  He  had  driven  out 
in  a  sledge  and  met  the  Emperor,  upon  which  he 
at  once  jumped  to  the  ground.  As  he  passed,  Paul 
cried  out  to  him,  'You  might  have  broken  your  neck.' 
On  his  return,  M.  Archaroff  sent  by  the  Emperor's 
orders  for  my  brother's  horses  and  his  sledge,  and 
used  them  for  a  week,  after  which  he  returned  them. 

Both  at  Court  and  at  parade  the  Emperor  wished 
to  establish  strict  exactitude  in  the  ceremonies,  in 
the  way  of  approaching  him  and  the  Empress,  and  in 
the  number  and  kind  of  salutations  to  be  made.  The 
Grand-Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  ISTatouyeff,  treated 
the  courtiers  like  recruits  who  do  not  yet  know  their 
drill  and  in  what  order  they  ought  to  march.  When- 
ever they  met  the  Emperor  they  had  first  to  make  a 
profound  bow,  and  then,  with  one  knee  on  the 
ground,  apply  a  sounding  kiss  to  the  Emperor's  hand 
while  he  kissed  them  on  the  cheek.  The  same  genu- 
flexion had  to  take  place  when  they  approached  the 
Empress,  after  which  they  had  to  withdraw  without 
turning  their  backs,  which  often  caused  confusion,  as 
they  trod  on  the  toes  of  the  other  courtiers  who  were 
coming  forward  to  perform  the  same  ceremony. 
Thanks  to  the  efforts  of  the  Grand-Master  of  the 
Ceremonies,  the  courtiers  at  length  learnt  to  go 
through  this  manoeuvre  without  a  hitch,  and  Paul, 
satisfied  at  the  look  of  fear  and  submission  which  he 
saw  on  their  faces,  then  made  the  etiquette  less  rigid. 
My  brother  and  I  had  to  go  through  this  ordeal,  and 
in  doing  so  we  nearly  fell  into  disgrace.  The 


i56       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Emperor  and  Empress  were  once  present  at  the 
christening  of  a  child  in  the  Chapel  of  the  Palace. 
We  were  on  duty  together  with  two  chamberlains, 
and  we  had  to  be  ready  to  precede  their  Majesties  as 
they  left  their  apartments.  We  were  late,  and  when 
the  time  for  the  ceremony  came  we  were  not  at  our 
posts.  Paul,  not  seeing  his  escort  as  he  came  out  of 
his  room,  flew  into  a  terrible  rage.  We  arrived 
breathless  with  haste,  and  found  all  the  courtiers 
assembled  at  the  closed  door  of  the  chapel,  anxious  to 
see  what  would  happen.  The  door  opened  ;  Paul  came 
out  and  passed  before  us  with  a  threatening  look, 
making  furious  gestures  and  breathing  hard  as  he 
generally  did  when  he  was  angry  and  wished  to  inspire 
terror.  Our  punishment,  however,  was  slight ;  we 
were  simply  ordered  to  remain  in  our  apartments  and 
not  leave  them  until  further  orders.  Alexander 
interfered  on  our  behalf,  explained  that  we  had  not 
received  our  orders  in  time,  and  pleaded  in  our  favour 
so  effectively,  with  the  assistance  of  KoutayschofF,* 
the  Emperor's  barber,  that  in  a  fortnight's  time  we 
were  free.  Soon  after  we  entered  the  army,  in  con- 
formity with  the  rule  that  every  officer  of  the  Court 
must  take  up  an  active  career. 