


COUNT  STROGONOFF  AND  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    163 

paper.  I  believe  Alexander  did  not  show  it  to  any- 
body, and  he  never  spoke  to  me  about  it  again.  I 
hope  he  burnt  it,  seeing  how  unreasonable  was  what 
he  had  asked  me  to  write — which  indeed  I  never 
doubted. 

While  we  were  talking  about  these  chimeras  a 
new  incident  gave  a  more  practical  character  to 
Alexander's  intentions.  Since  my  arrival  at  St 
Petersburg,  one  of  the  houses  which  I  most  visited 
was  that  of  Count  Strogonoff.  I  had  become,  so  to 
say,  part  of  his  family.  The  friendship,  indeed  the 
affection  shown  to  me  by  the  old  Count  has  left  nie 
recollections  which  will  be  always  dear  to  me,  and 
which  fill  me  with  gratitude.  I  was  on  intimate 
terms  with  his  son  Paul  and  his  friend  M.  de 
Novosiltzoff,  said  to  be  a  distant  relation  of  the 
family,  both  of  whom  were  of  about  the  same  age  as 
myself.  The  young  Countess  was  a  lady  of  much 
distinction,  good,  amiable  and  witty ;  without  being 
exactly  beautiful,  she  had  more  than  beauty,  the  gift 
of  pleasing  and  charming  all  who  came  near  her. 
The  old  Count  had  long  lived  in  Paris  under  Louis 
XV ;  like  most  Russian  noblemen,  he  wished  his  son 
to  be  brought  up  by  a  Frenchman.  He  even  sent 
him  to  France  with  his  tutor,  M.  Rename,  a  man  of 
ability,  and,  as  I  was  assured,  of  high  principle,  but 
an  enthusiastic  admirer  of  Rousseau.  He  proposed 
to  make  an  Emile  of  his  pupil,  a  plan  which  did  not 
displease  the  old  Count,  whose  generous  propensities 
and  loving  heart  had  inclined  him  to  some  of  the 
doctrines  of  the  philosopher  of  Geneva.  Count  Paul 
was  accordingly  placed  in  M.  Romrne's  charge,  and 


164       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  latter  made  him  go  on  walking  tours  and  en- 
deavoured to  give  him  an  education  in  which  Rous- 
seau's precepts  were  followed  and  perhaps  too  closely 
imitated.  When  the  French  Revolution  broke  out, 
and  the  revolutionists  boasted  that  they  were  follow- 
ing Rousseau's  teaching,  M.  Ronime  strongly  sympa- 
thised with  it,  and  wished  to  combine  what  he  regarded 
as  his  duties  as  a  citizen  with  those  which  he  had 
undertaken  with  his  pupil.  Frequent  occasions  pre- 
sented themselves  of  showing  him  in  practice  the 
principles  M.  Romme  had  inculcated  in  theory.  Both 
master  and  pupil  eagerly  took  part  in  the  revolutionary 
scenes  which  were  then  succeeding  each  other  in  France 
with  alarming  rapidity,  and  joined  the  Jacobin  club, 
whose  meetings  they  regularly  attended.  Count 
Strogonoff  was  informed  of  this  by  the  Russian 
embassy,  which  had  not  yet  left  Paris,  and  also,  I 
believe,  by  the  letters  of  M.  Romme  himself,  who 
thought  he  could  not  complete  the  education  of 
Count  Paul  more  effectively  than  by  making  him  take 
part  in  a  practical  course  of  his  teacher's  doctrines. 