


PAUL'S  CHARACTER  147 

from  Court  on  the  morrow,  and  banished  to  a  distant 
province.  Yet  the  Emperor  wished  to  be  just. 
Notwithstanding  his  capricious  and  disorderly  im- 
pulses, he  had  a  profound  feeling  of  equity,  which 
often  caused  him  to  perform  praiseworthy  actions. 
It  often  happened  that  after  he  had  dismissed  some 
one  whom  he  had  badly  treated,  he  called  him  back, 
embraced  him,  almost  asked  his  pardon,  confessed 
that  he  was  wrong,  that  he  had  unjustly  suspected 
him,  and  gave  him  presents  to  make  up  for  his  past 
severities.  He  inspired  all  the  officials  of  his  empire 
with  the  terrors  which  he  often  felt  himself,  and  this 
universal  fear  produced  salutary  effects.  While  at 
St  Petersburg  and  at  the  centre  of  Government  the 
uncertainty  of  the  morrow  tormented  and  agitated 
people's  minds,  in  the  provinces,  the  civil  governors, 
the  governors-general,  and  the  troops,  fearing  lest  the 
abuses  they  committed  should  reach  the  Emperor's 
ears,  and  they  should  some  day  be  suddenly  dismissed 
without  any  form  of  trial  and  banished  to  Siberia, 
paid  more  attention  to  their  duties,  treated  their 
subordinates  with  more  humanity,  and  refrained  from 
abuses  of  a  flagrant  kind.  In  the  Polish  Provinces 
especially  the  inhabitants  felt  the  change,  and  the 
reign  of  Paul  is  still  mentioned  there  as  a  period 
when  there  were  less  abuses  and  acts  of  oppression  and 
injustice  than  at  any  other  time  when  Poland  was 
under  foreign  rule. 

One  of  Paul's  first  and  most  generous  thoughts 
after  his  accession,  was  to  liberate  the  Polish  prisoners. 
Like  his  father,  when  he  visited  Ivan  VI  in  his  prison, 
Paul  went  himself  to  Kosciuszko  and  ordered  him  to  be 


148      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

treated  with  the  greatest  consideration,  telling  him 
that  if  he  had  been  on  the  throne  at  the  time,  he 
would  not  have  consented  to  the  partition  of  Poland, 
and  that  he  regretted  that  so  unjust  and  impolitic  a 
deed  had  been  committed  ;  but  that  it  was  not  now 
in  his  power  to  withdraw  it.  At  Kosciuszko's  request 
he  liberated  all  the  other  prisoners,  only  requiring 
them  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance.  Whenever  Paul 
did  not  grant  a  request  made  by  Kosciuszko  on  behalf 
of  his  countrymen,  he  excused  himself  by  alleging 
that  he  was  obliged  to  pay  attention  to  the  represen- 
tations of  his  Ministers,  who  prevented  him  from 
following  his  inclination  in  this  respect.  Kosciuszko, 
oppressed  by  a  feeling  of  sadness,  covered  with  wounds 
which  were  not  yet  healed,  and  bearing  on  his  face  an 
expression  of  despair,  of  touching  resignation,  almost 
of  remorse  at  being  still  alive  and  having  failed  to 
save  his  country,  greatly  interested  the  Emperor  and 
did  not  inspire  him  with  the  least  fear  or  suspicion. 
He  often  used  to  visit  Kosciuszko,  accompanied  by 
the  whole  of  the  Imperial  family,  which  showed  real 
interest  and  almost  affection  for  the  unfortunate 
patriot.  Alexander  no  doubt  felt  these  generous 
sentiments  more  than  anybody,  but  his  duties  at  that 
time  entirely  absorbed  him,  so  that  at  first  I  could 
hardly  see  him.  Since  Paul's  accession  our  relations 
had  become  more  rare  and  more  difficult,  and  his 
extreme  fear  of  his  father  prevented  him  from 
expressing  on  his  own  account  to  Kosciuszko  what  he 
had  long  felt  with  regard  to  him. 