


PRINCE  ADAM'S  RELATIONS  WITH  ALEXANDER     161 

uncertain  step — he  was  a  picture  of  what  Poland  had 
become.  No  satisfactory  or  consoling  word  came 
from  his  mouth.  Soon  after  his  return  to  his  home 
at  Minsk  he  died. 

The  death  of  Catherine  and  the  accession  of  Paul, 
which  brought  Alexander  nearer  to  the  throne,  had  so 
far  in  no  way  changed  the  latter's  political  opinions  ; 
on  the  contrary,  all  that  had  happened  since  these 
events  seemed  to  confirm  him  in  his  views,  and  the 
resolutions  he  thought  he  could  execute.  When  he 
had  a  few  moments  of  leisure  after  his  military 
labours,  to  which  he  devoted  himself  with  zeal  and 
with  a  desire  to  carry  out  the  wishes  of  his  father,  he 
always  spoke  of  his  plans  and  the  future  he  wished  to 
prepare  for  Russia.  The  despotism  of  his  father — 
sometimes  eccentric,  terrible,  and  even  cruel — and  its 
immediate  and  probable  effects,  produced  a  lively  and 
painful  impression  on  Alexander's  generous  mind, 
which  was  full  of  ideas  of  liberty  and  justice.  He  was 
at  the  same  time  appalled  at  the  extent  of  the  diffi- 
culties which  awaited  him  and  were  rapidly  advancing 
upon  him.  The  ceremonies  of  the  coronation,  which 
he  would  have  to  undergo  some  day,  and  which  were 
totally  opposed  to  his  principles  and  his  natural  tastes, 
contributed  to  strengthen  him  in  his  views. 

My  brother  and  myself  having  obtained  three 
months'  leave  to  see  our  parents  in  Poland,  Alexander 
was  uneasy  at  the  prospect  of  remaining  without  any 
one  who  could  understand  him  or  in  whom  he  could 
confide.  His  anxiety  increased  as  the  time  for  our 
departure  arrived.  He  asked  me  to.  leave  him  a  draft 
proclamation  expressing  his  resolutions,  in  case  he 
VOL.  i.  L 


62       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

should  be  called  to  the  throne  during  our  absence. 
In  spite  of  my  objections  he  insisted  upon  my  doing 
this,  arid  I  ultimately  complied  to  quiet  him.  My 
draft  set  forth  the  evils  of  the  regime  under  which 
Russia  had  up  to  that  time  existed,  and  the  benefits  of 
the  one  which  Alexander  proposed  to  introduce  ;  the 
blessings  of  liberty  and  justice  which  Russia  would 
enjoy  after  the  obstacles  to  her  prosperity  had  been 
removed  ;  and  his  resolution  to  abdicate  after  having 
accomplished  this  task,  in  order  that  some  one  more 
worthy  than  himself  to  be  in  power  should  be  called 
upon  to  consolidate  and  perfect  the  great  work  which 
he  had  inaugurated. 

I   need  not  say  how  little  all  these  reasonings  and 
fine  phrases,  which  I  endeavoured  to  bring  into  con- 
nection as  much  as  possible,  were  applicable  to  the 
true  state  of  affairs.     Alexander  was  delighted  at  my 
work,  which  satisfied  his  fancy  of  the  moment — a  very 
noble,  but  at  bottom  a  very  selfish  one,  as  while  wish- 
ing to  secure  his  country's  happiness  as  he  then  saw 
it,  he  at  the  same  time  desired  to  be  free  to  withdraw 
from  a  position  which  he  feared  and  disliked,  and  to 
live  quietly  in  retirement  where  he  would  enjoy  at  a 
distance  the  good  he  had  done.     Alexander  put  the 
paper  in  his  pocket  with  great  satisfaction  and  thanked 
me  effusively  for  my  work.     It  reassured  him  as  to  his 
future.     He  thought  that  with  this  paper  in  his  desk 
he  would  be  prepared  for  the  events  which  fate  might 
suddenly  bring  :  a  strange  and  almost  incredible  effect 
of  the  dreams  and  illusions  which   youth   cherishes 
even  in  circumstances  where  experience  soonest  chills 
the   heart !     I    do   not   know    what   became   of    the 