

We  were  each    called   to  the   palace  to  sign  an 
assurance  that  Marshal  Potocki  would  not  enter  on 


PAUL'S  CHARACTER  149 

any  enterprise  prejudicial  to  the  State,  and  to  be 
guarantees  for  his  conduct  at  our  own  risk.  This 
obligation  had  to  be  expressed  clearly  and  precisely  in 
writing.  The  meeting  was  a  numerous  one.  Prince 
Kourakin,  the  new  Vice -Chancellor,  was  present,  and 
was  directed  to  see  that  each  document  clearly  ex- 
pressed the  obligations  undertaken  by  the  signer  of  it. 
My  brother  and  I  signed  without  hesitation ;  we  had 
long  felt  too  much  esteem  and  family  attachment  for 
the  Marshal  to  hesitate  to  give  this  general  assurance 
which  alone  could  restore  him  to  liberty.  Some 
raised  difficulties,  others  went  away  directly  they 
learnt  the  object  of  the  meeting.  Among  the  latter 
was  Count  Irenoeus  Chreptowicz,  the  son  of  the 
Chancellor  of  that  name  who  had  done  the  most  to 
induce  King  Stanislas  Augustus  to  join  the  Con- 
federation of  Targowitza,*  and  who  soon  became 
entirely  Russian.  The  number  of  signatures,  how- 
ever, was  sufficiently  large  to  induce  the  Emperor  to 
liberate  Count  Potocki. 

One  may  imagine  how  happy  the  prisoners  were 
to  see  each  other  again  after  so  long  and  painful  a 
confinement,  though  their  happiness  was  mingled 
with  regret.  The  most  illustrious  members  of  the 
Grand  Diet  of  l788-92t  were  assembled  there  :  Count 
Potocki,  Count  Thaddeus  Mostowski,  Julian  Niem- 
cewicz ;  Zakrzewski,  mayor  of  Warsaw,  known  by 
his  integrity,  his  patriotism,  and  his  great  courage  ; 
General  Sokolnicki,  who  voluntarily  went  to  prison 
with  him,  not  wishing  to  leave  him ;  and  Kilinski  and 

*  See  page  84. 

t  The   Diet  which  passed  the  famous  Constitution   of  the   3rd   of  May   1791 
(see  page  52). 


150      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Kapostasz,  worthy  citizens  of  Warsaw,  the  first  a 
master  bootmaker,  and  the  second  a  money-changer, 
who  exercised  great  influence  over  the  population  of 
that  city.  We  saw  them  every  day.  After  having 
had  the  happiness  of  being  liberated  from  prison  and 
of  seeing  each  other,  they  had  to  disperse  in  different 
directions.  The  Emperor  lavished  presents  of  money 
on  Kosciuszko  to  make  him  independent,  and  the 
latter  was  obliged  to  accept  them.  When  he  arrived 
in  America,  however,  he  sent  them  back  with  a 
letter  expressing  his  gratitude  and  that  of  the  other 
prisoners. 

On  Twelfth-day,  one  of  the  most  solemn  festivals 
of  the  Russian  Church,  there  was  a  great  military 
parade  in  the  Russian  fashion,  and  the  Emperor 
wished  the  day  to  be  celebrated  with  all  possible 
pomp.  The  Guards  and  all  the  regiments  in  the 
neighbourhood  were  posted  on  the  banks  of  the  Neva, 
between  the  Winter  Palace  and  the  Admiralty.  The 
Imperial  family  alighted  there,  and  the  Emperor  took 
the  command  of  the  troops  in  person  ;  he  liked  to 
put  himself  forward  on  these  occasions.  He  defiled 
at  the  head  of  the  army  together  with  the  Grand- 
Dukes  before  the  Empress  and  the  Princesses.  I 
thought  this  inarch  past  would  never  end.  The  cold 
was  intense,  and  we  were  in  Court  dress,  with  silk 
stockings ;  although  we  wore  warm  coats,  we  were 
almost  frozen.  My  arms  and  legs  were  numbed,  and 
I  and  several  others,  feeling  that  our  lives  were  in 
danger,  stamped  our  feet  and  moved  our  arms  about 
to  keep  up  the  circulation.  I  could  not  stand  this 
martyrdom,  and  went  home,  where  it  took  me  some 