

Our  rank  in  the  army  was  that  of  brigadier,  the 
one  usually  given  to  gentlemen  of  the  chamber  ;  and 
by  a  special  favour  due  to  the  preference  shown  to  us 
by  the  Grand-Dukes,  I  was  appointed  aide-de-camp 
to  Alexander  and  my  brother  to  Constantine.  These 
appointments  greatly  pleased  us,  as  they  attached  us 
more  closely  to  the  Grand-Dukes  and  relieved  us  of 

See  page  184. 


THE  EMPEROR'S  CORONATION  AT  MOSCOW      157 

the  functions  of  the  Court,  for  which  we  had  no 
vocation.  Our  duties  consisted  in  accompanying  the 
Grand-Dukes  at  military  parades,  and  in  standing 
behind  them  when  the  Emperor  passed  the  officers 
in  review.  He  used  to  address  his  sons  by  the  title 
of  Mohseigneur,  and  then  returned  to  place  himself  in 
the  midst  of  the  officers  and  superintend  the  drill 
which  usually  preceded  the  regular  parade. 

We  constantly  saw  the  Grand-Dukes  in  our 
capacity  of  aides-de-camp.  Both  of  them  were  ab- 
sorbed by  their  Court,  family,  and  military  functions, 
and  by  endless  details  connected  with  their  command 
of  the  two  regiments  of  the  Guards.  The  whole 
morning  was  taken  up  by  these  occupations,  which 
involved  more  bodily  fatigue  than  mental  work,  al- 
though great  attention  was  necessary  not  to  omit  any 
of  the  minute  details  of  the  service.  Alexander 
almost  always  dined  with  the  Emperor.  The  after- 
noon was  the  only  time  when  one  could  speak  to  him 
more  freely,  but  he  was  generally  too  tired  by  his 
work  of  the  morning,  and  he  took  some  rest  until 
the  evening,  when  he  had  to  go  to  the  Empress. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  spring  of  1797  the  Emperor 
went  to  Moscow  for  his  coronation.  All  the  society 
of  St  Petersburg  followed  him.  It  was  still  very 
cold,  and  the  habitues  of  the  salons  of  St  Petersburg 
were  to  be  seen  passing  each  other  on  the  roads, 
wrapped  up  in  furs  and  reclining  in  sledges,  all 
hastening  to  the  ancient  capital  of  the  Empire. 
Moscow  had  at  that  time  a  characteristic  appearance, 
which  must  have  greatly  changed  since  it  was  burnt 
down  and  rebuilt.  It  was  like  a  collection  of  towns 


i58      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

communicating  with  each  other  not  only  by  gardens 
and  parks,  but  by  vast  fields.  People  often  had  to 
drive  for  an  hour  to  pay  a  visit  in  another  part  of  the 
city.  Everywhere,  by  the  side  of  ugly  huts,  were 
sumptuous  palaces,  inhabited  by  the  Galitzins,  the 
Dolgoroukis,  and  other  families  with  historic  names — 
great  noblemen  who  consoled  themselves  by  the 
luxury  in  which  they  lived  for  the  vexations  and  dis- 
appointments they  had  experienced  at  Court.  In  the 
midst  of  this  vast  city  was  the  Kremlin,  a  sort  of 
fortress  surrounded  by  a  crenelated  wall,  outside 
which  the  tradesmen  had  their  principal  shops  in  a 
series  of  bazaars.  The  ancient  residence  of  the 
Muscovite  Grand-Dukes,  full  of  old  associations,  was 
the  place  where  the  ceremony  of  coronation  was  to  be 
performed.  It  lasted  several  days.  Paul  had  stopped 
for  the  night  outside  the  barriers  of  the  town,  and 
made  his  solemn  entry  into  the  Kremlin  on  the  follow- 
ing day,  with  an  immense  suite.  He  first  went  to  the 
cathedral,  where  Plato,  Archbishop  of  Moscow,  who 
was  regarded  as  the  ablest  and  most  learned  prelate  of 
the  Russian  Church,  complimented  the  Emperor  in 
biblical  language.  Then  took  place  the  coronation, 
the  return  to  the  palace  with  the  same  solemnity,  and 
finally  the  Imperial  banquet,  at  which  the  sovereigns 
and  their  families  were  served  on  a  raised  platform  and 
under  a  magnificent  canopy  by  the  high  officers  of  the 
Crown.  Various  minor  ceremonies  took  place  during 
the  following  days.  The  Emperor  appeared  in  them 
all ;  he  was  passionately  fond  of  display,  and  was 
proud  of  his  figure  and  his  grace.  Whenever  he 
appeared  in  public  he  walked  with  a  measured  step, 