

*  Michael  Wiszniowiecki,  King  of  Poland  from  1069  to  1C75. 


ARRIVAL  OF  KING  STANISLAS  AUGUSTUS        153 

of  Wiszniowiec  ;  but  there  was  no  talk  of  Stanislas 
returning  to  his  kingdom,  except  perhaps  that  the 
Emperor  told  him,  as  he  had  done  to  Kosciuszko, 
that  it  was  impossible  to  undo  what  had  been  done, 
however  unjustly,  by  the  Empress  Catherine. 

The  first  years  of  Paul's  reign  were  marked  by  a 
curious  confusion  ;  they  were  a  series  of  moving 
incidents  and  of  singular  and  ridiculous  scenes,  which 
seemed  to  foreshadow  the  reversal  of  the  existing 
state  of  things  arid  the  establishment  of  a  new  one,  not 
radically,  but  only  in  outward  form.  The  civil  officials 
and  generals  were  constantly  changed,  and  promotion 
was  given  without  any  enquiry  as  to  the  capacity  of 
those  whom  seniority  placed  in  ranks  to  which  they 
had  never  hoped  to  attain. 

The  Emperor's  only  consideration  in  the  decisions 
he  gave,  was  that  his  will,  although  the  fruit  of  im- 
pulse and  not  of  reflection,  should  at  once  be  executed. 
The  terror  which  he  inspired  ensured  submission  to 
his  most  unexpected  and  most  eccentric  commands. 
The  parades  daily  gave  rise  to  singular  and  provoking 
incidents.  Generals  and  other  officers  of  rank  received 
for  mere  trifles,  degradations  or  distinctions  which 
only  unpardonable  faults  or  great  services  to  the  State 
could  have  justified. 

Paul  had  forbidden  round  hats,  which  he  regarded 
as  a  sign  of  liberalism.  If  a  poor  man,  with  an  old 
round  hat  on  his  head,  showed  himself  in  the  crowd 
which  witnessed  the  parades,  an  aide-de-camp  imme- 
diately pursued  the  culprit,  who  fled  to  avoid  being 
bastinadoed  at  the  first  guard-house.  The  chase  was 
often  continued  in  the  streets,  to  the  great  amuse- 


154       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ment   of  the   people,   who   hoped   the   unhappy   man 
would  succeed  in  making  his  escape. 

Lord  Whitworth,  the  British  Ambassador,  was 
obliged  to  have  a  hat  of  peculiar  shape  made  for  him, 
so  as  to  be  able  to  walk  about  in  the  morning  without 

O 

contravening  the  Emperor's  orders. 

Paul  drove  through  the  town  daily  in  a  sledge 
or  an  open  carriage,  accompanied  by  one  of  his  aides- 
de-camp.  When  he  met  a  carriage  it  stopped,  the 
coachman  and  footmen  had  to  take  off  their  caps, 
and  the  persons  in  the  carriage  had  to  alight  and 
make  a  profound  bow  to  the  Emperor,  who  observed 
whether  it  was  sufficiently  respectful.  Sometimes 
women,  with  their  children  trembling  with  fright, 
were  seen  descending  into  the  snow  in  a  hard  frost, 
or  into  the  mud  during  a  thaw,  to  accomplish  this 
salutation.  Paul  always  thought  that  people  wished 
to  slight  him  as  they  did  when  he  was  Grand-Duke ; 
he  liked  everywhere  to  meet  with  marks  of  fear  and 
submission.  When  people  went  out  into  the  streets 
in  carriages  or  on  foot,  all  took  care  to  avoid  meeting 
their  Imperial  master ;  they  fled  at  his  approach  and 
went  down  a  side  street  or  hid  under  a  gateway. 
Another  dangerous  person  to  meet  was  the  terrible 
Archaroff,  Grand-Master  of  Police,  who  also  drove 
through  the  town  to  see  that  everything  was  being 
done  according  to  his  orders.  He  prohibited  rapid 
driving  in  sledges,  which  is  one  of  the  greatest 
pleasures  of  a  Russian  ;  and  when  he  perceived  a 
sledge  which  seemed  to  go  at  a  forbidden  pace  he 
at  once  ordered  it  to  be  seized,  had  the  coachman 
flogged,  and  then  appropriated  both  sledge  and  coach- 