


THE  EMPEROR'S  CORONATION  AT  MOSCOW      159 

and  tried  to  look  tall  and  majestic,  though  he  was  really 
short;  it  was  only  when  he  entered  his  apartments  that 
he  showed  the  fatigue  which  his  efforts  had  cost  him. 
Each  ceremony  was  preceded  by  a  dress  rehearsal,  in 
order  that  everybody  should  know  where  to  place 
himself  and  what  to  do.  My  brother  and  myself  of 
course  had  to  take  part  in  the  ceremonies  as  aides-de- 
camp to  the  Grand-Dukes.  The  Emperor  was  as 
active  and  busy  as  a  stage  manager,  and  looked  after 
the  smallest  details  of  costume  and  decoration.  He 
liked  to  appear  to  the  best  advantage  before  the 
ladies,  and  once  he  stood  at  the  head  of  his  favourite 
battalion  of  the  Guard  with  a  halbert,  to  do  honour 
to  the  Empress,  whom  he  had  crowned  with  his  own 
hand. 

Paul  ordered  the  King  of  Poland  to  follow  him  to 
Moscow,  and  insisted  on  his  being  present  at  all  the 
solemnities  of  the  coronation.  He  had  to  join  the 
brilliant  suite  which  surrounded  the  Emperor  and  his 
family — a  sad  part  for  a  King  to  play.  During 
divine  service  and  the  ceremonies  which  preceded  the 
coronation,  and  were  very  long  and  tedious,  Stanislas 
Augustus  was  so  tired  out  that  he  sat  down  in  the 
tribune  which  had  been  assigned  to  him.  Paul  at 
once  remarked  this,  and  sent  a  messenger  to  tell  him 
to  stand  up  so  long  as  they  remained  in  the  church  ; 
and  the  poor  King  had  no  alternative  but  to  submit. 

When  the  ceremonies  were  over,  the  Emperor  and 
his  family  left  the  Kremlin  to  go  to  a  more  spacious 
residence,  called  the  Petrovski  Palace,  in  another 
quarter  of  the  town.  He  gave  up  the  rest  of  his  time 
at  Moscow  to  fetes,  parades,  and  military  exercises. 


1 60       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

There  were  fireworks  and  public  banquets  both  at 
Moscow  and  at  St  Petersburg,  and  the  nobility  gave 
the  Emperor  a  ball  in  a  vast  hall  where  they  usually 
met.  These  fetes  were  somewhat  tedious,  and  did 
not  give  satisfaction  either  to  Paul  or  to  his  hosts. 
Numerous  deputations  from  all  the  provinces  of  the 
empire  were  ordered  to  salute  the  Emperor  and 
present  addresses  of  submission.  The  delegates  from 
the  Polish  provinces  had  an  air  of  great  constraint 
and  depression.  All  of  them  had  been  citizens  of  an 
independent  Poland  ;  all  had  distinguished  themselves 
either  in  their  palatinates,  at  the  last  Diet,  or  in 
appointments  of  State.  They  saw  their  King 
relegated  to  a  side  gallery,  and  had  to  pass  him  to 
kneel  before  a  foreign  prince  and  declare  themselves 
his  subjects.  I  met  several  of  my  acquaintances,  but 
could  not  feel  any  pleasure  at  seeing  them  again  under 
such  circumstances.  I  was  struck  by  the  change  in 
their  appearance ;  they  looked  confused  and  humili- 
ated. Among  the  delegates  from  Lithuania  was 
Bukaty,  who  had  for  several  years  occupied  the  post  of 
Polish  Minister  in  England.  He  was  a  man  of  simple 
manners  and  great  good  sense,  and  had  acquired  the 
esteem  of  the  English  people  and  their  Government. 
Several  of  his  English  friends  gave  as  a  token  of  their 
friendship  their  names  to  his  children  at  their 
christening.  I  had  often  dined  with  him  in  London 
with  my  mother.  He  was  at  that  time  stout,  in  good 
health,  and  in  excellent  spirits.  He  was  now  thin, 
his  face  was  pale  and  haggard,  his  clothes,  which  in 
England  fitted  tight  to  his  body,  now  hung  about  him 
in  loose  folds ;  he  walked  with  bent  head  and  an 