

M.  de  Novosiltzoff  was  then  sent  to  Paris  to  with- 
draw his  young  friend  from  the  charge  of  a  tutor 
whose  zeal  had  become  so  dangerous,  and  he  acquitted 
himself  of  his  commission  with  great  skill.  He 
managed  to  overcome  the  resistance  of  M.  Romme, 

o 

and  his  regret  at  the  separation  of,  as  he  said,  two 
friends  who  understood  each  other  so  well.  Notwith- 
standing the  attachment  of  the  young  Count  for  his 
tutor,  he  was  persuaded  to  return  to  St  Petersburg, 
where  he  was  soon  made  to  perceive  the  danger  to 
which  he  had  been  exposed.  His  opinions  changed 


COUNT  STROGOSOFF  AND  M,  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    165 

entirely,  but  he  always  retained  in  his  character  and 
his  principles  of  action  some  traits  of  his  first  educa- 
tion. 

The  general  tone  of  conversation  in  Count 
StrogonofFs  house  had  always  been,  so  to  say,  liberal 
and  somewhat  critical ;  the  doings  of  the  Court  were 
a  favourite  topic.  Yet  the  old  Count  was  always  on 
good  terms  with  the  Empress  Catherine.  She  liked 
to  see  in  him  a  man  who  had  known  her  old  friends 
the  encyclopaedists,  and  who  was  not  a  stranger  to 
any  of  the  doctrines  or  sayings  of  that  sect.  This 
permitted  him  sometimes  to  speak  frankly  even  to 
herself  or  in  her  presence.  He  has  often  told  rne 
that  being  admitted  to  the  Empress's  toilet,  a  privi- 
lege granted  only  to  the  most  distinguished  noblemen 
of  the  Court,  he  was  once  there  when  she  was  prepar- 
ing to  give  an  audience  to  a  deputation  from  the 
Confederation  of  Targowitza,  which  had  come  to  thank 
her  for  the  '  signal  benefits '  she  had  conferred  upon 
Poland  (in  depriving  her  of  the  constitution  of  the 
3rd  of  May,*  and  soon  after  taking  her  finest  pro- 
vinces at  the  second  partition).  When  it  was 
announced  that  the  deputation  had  arrived,  and  that 
the  Empress  was  about  to  enter  the  throne-room  to 
listen  to  the  false  speeches  which  were  to  be  addressed 
to  her,  Count  Strogonoff  laughed  and  said  :  '  Your 
Majesty  will  not  have  any  difficulty  in  replying  to 
the  eloquent  thanks  of  these  gentlemen  ;  all  you  can 
say  is  that  really  they  have  nothing  to  thank  you  for.' 
This  remark  did  not  please  the  Empress.  She  took 
it  in  cold  silence,  and  went  out  to  receive  homages 

*  See  page  52. 


1 66       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSK1 

the  absurdity  of  which  she  probably  felt.  Despotic 
sovereigns  should  spare  those  whom  they  oppress  the 
necessity  of  telling  them  falsehoods  by  which  nobody 
is  deceived. 

The  service  rendered  by  M.  de  Novosiltzoff  to  the 
Strogonoif  family,  by  bringing  back  the  young  Count 
to  Russia,  had  strengthened  the  friendship  for  him 
both  of  the  father  and  the  son.  He  became  the 
adviser  of  the  family  in  all  circumstances,  and  took  a 
pride  in  having  an  independent  character,  in  acting 
according  to  fixed  principles,  and  in  not  tolerating  any 
unjust  constraint.  He  had  been  attached  as  aide-de- 
camp to  the  Prince  of  Nassau  when  he  was  charged 
with  the  command  of  the  Russian  fleet  against  the 
Swedes,  and  he  had  also  accompanied  him  at  the  siege 
of  Warsaw  in  1794.  He  thought  he  had  deserved 
the  military  cross,  and  he  indignantly  refused  the  civil 
cross  of  Vladimir  with  which  the  Empress  wished 
to  decorate  him.  He  insisted  on  sending  it  back,  and 
it  was  only  with  great  difficulty  that  he  was  appeased 
on  being  shown  the  risks  he  would  run  by  taking  such 
a  step.  He  finally  consented  to  wear  the  cross,  when 
a  knot  of  ribbon  wTas  added  to  it,  signifying  that  it 
was  the  reward  of  military  prowess. 