


ARRIVAL  OF  KING  STANISLAS  AUGUSTUS        151 

hours  to  get  warm.     My  fingers  have  since  that  day 
lost  all  feeling  whenever  there  was  the  slightest  cold. 

Our  King,  Stanislas  Augustus,  with  whom  we  had 
dined  during  our  six  months'  stay  at  Grodno,  was 
invited  by  Paul  immediately  after  his  accession  to 
come  to  St  Petersburg.  During  Paul's  journey 
abroad  (in  1785  I  think)  with  his  wife,  they  had 
passed  through  Southern  Poland,  and  King  Stanislas 
Augustus  had  left  Warsaw  to  meet  them.  The 
principal  reception  took  place  in  the  Palace  of 
Wisznioviec,  which  belonged  to  Count  Mniszek, 
Grand  Marshal  of  the  Crown.  This  palace  was  a 
princely  abode  that  had  belonged  to  the  Wiszniowiecki 
family,  now  extinct,  whose  last  heir  had  married  a 
Mniszek,  the  descendant  of  the  one  whose  daughter 
was  for  some  time  seated  on  the  throne  of  the  Russian 
Czars.*  The  apartments  of  the  palace  were  full  of 
valuable  historical  portraits.  Among  them  was  that 
of  the  famous  Marina  and  of  Dirnitri ;  there  were 
also  pictures  representing  their  consecration  at 
Moscow. 

It  was  in  this  beautiful  palace  that  the  King  of 
Poland  welcomed  the  Grand-Duke  of  Russia  to  his 
kingdom.  Stanislas  Augustus  had  the  gift  of 
amiability,  and  Paul  took  a  liking  to  him  ;  he  also 
made  himself  agreeable  to  the  Grand-Duchess  Maria. 
They  had  several  confidential  interviews,  at  which 
perhaps  promises,  or  at  least  hopes,  which  were  never 
realised,  were  expressed  that  when  Paul  should  come 
into  power,  he  would  repay  to  his  host  a  hundredfold 
the  splendid  reception  given  him  in  Poland.  It  is 

*  Marina  Mniszek,  married  to  '  the  false '  Dimitri  18  May  1603. 


i52       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

said  that  Marshal  Mniszek  at  that  time  hoped  that 
the  goodwill  of  Catherine's  successor  might  one  day 
bring  them  even  to  the  throne,  to  which  he  might 
perhaps  have  thought  he  had  a  claim  as  the  heir  of 
Wiszniowiecki  *  and  the  descendant  of  the  father  of 
the  celebrated  Czarina.  The  story  goes  that  in  the 
course  of  a  familiar  conversation  with  him  the  Grand- 
Duchess,  showing  her  diamonds  to  make  her  hosts 
remark  the  beauty  of  a  diadem  in  precious  stones 
which  was  in  her  jewel-box,  placed  it  on  the  head  of 
the  King's  niece,  and  then  on  that  of  the  Grand 
Marshal.  '  I  accept  the  augury,'  said  the  latter, 
carried  away  by  an  impulse  of  naivete  or  of  empty 
vanity  which  he  probably  regretted  immediately 
afterwards. 

By  inviting  to  his  Court  the  prisoner-King  from 
his  confinement  at  Grodno— an  invitation  in  which  the 
Empress  Maria  heartily  concurred — Paul  made  some 
return  for  the  hospitality  he  had  received,  and  gladly 
found  an  opportunity  of  showing  himself  more  gener- 
ous than  his  mother  had  been.  The  King  was 
received  at  St  Petersburg  with  all  the  honours  due  to 
a  sovereign.  On  approaching  the  capital  he  was  met 
by  chamberlains  and  other  high  dignitaries,  who  compli- 
mented him  on  behalf  of  the  Emperor  and  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Imperial  family.  Paul  offered  him  one  of 
his  palaces,  furnished  it  magnificently,  and  did  all  he 
could  to  make  the  King's  stay  at  St  Petersburg 
agreeable.  There  were  mutual  receptions  and  ban- 
quets, and  at  first  no  cloud  obscured  the  friendly 
relations  which  seemed  to  be  a  continuation  of  those 