

*  They  have  since  been  published  at  Poseu  (in  1862)  under  the  title  '  Memoires 
de  Stanislas  Auguste  Poniatowski  et  sa  correspondance  avec  Catherine  II.' 


DEATH  OF  STANISLAS  AUGUSTUS  177 

in  vain.  The  King  lay  on  his  bed  unconscious,  the 
persons  of  his  suite  stood  round  him  in  tears,  and 
Trembecki,  who  had  come  to  have  a  last  look  at  his 
sovereign,  fled  into  his  room  with  a  gesture  of  despair. 
The  Emperor  also  came  with  the  Imperial  family. 
Baciarelli  has  painted  this  sad  scene  in  a  picture  in 
which  he  has  represented  with  remarkable  talent  the 
likenesses  of  all  those  who  were  present.  The  King 
was  buried  with  suitable  pomp  in  the  Roman  Catholic 
Church  of  the  Dominicans  at  St  Petersburg. 

o 

Stanislas  Augustus  was  only  mourned  by  those 
whose  existence  depended  on  his  own ;  and  he  had 
no  cause  to  regret  life  so  far  as  his  happiness  was 
concerned.  His  conduct  as  a  King  had  been  such 
that  no  one  looked  upon  him  as  a  representative  of 
Poland,  and  his  end  made  no  change  either  in  her 

'  O 

destinies  or  her  hopes.*  There  were  some  people 
who,  in  view  of  the  great  expense  which  he  had  caused 
to  the  Imperial  Treasury,  thought  his  death  had  been 
accelerated  for  reasons  of  State.  This  no  doubt  is 
possible,  but  none  of  the  circumstances  of  his  illness 
seem  to  confirm  such  a  suspicion,  which,  unhappily 
for  Russia,  always  arises  at  the  death  of  any  illustri- 
ous personage  in  that  country. 

*  Stanislas  Augustus  Poniatowski,  the  son  of  the  famous  statesman  and  soldier 
who  twice  saved  the  life  of  Charles  XII  and  with  the  two  Czartoryskis  governed 
Poland  during  the  reign  of  Augustus  III,  went  with  the  English  Minister  Sir  Hanbury 
Williams  to  St  Petersburg  in  1755  and  there  became  the  favourite  of  the  Empress 
Catherine,  then  Grand-Duchess  of  Eussia.  Through  the  influence  of  the  Russian 
Government,  which  had  concluded  a  secret  alliance  with  Prussia  (21st  April  1764) 
pledging  the  two  powers  to  prevent  '  by  force  of  arms,  if  necessary,'  the  establish- 
ment of  hereditary  monarchy  in  Poland,  Stanislas  Augustus  was,  on  the  death  of 
Augustus  III,  ele<  !M  King  (7th  September  1764).  Although  at  first  be  endeavoured 
to  act  independently  of  Russia,  he  was  easily  outwitted  by  the  superior  abilities  and 
greater  force  of  character  of  the  Muscovite  diplomatists,  and  after  Poland  had  been 
thrice  partitioned,  he  was  held  in  confinement  by  the  Russians  at  Grodno,  and  after- 
wards at  St  Petersburg,  where  he  died  as  above  described  (see  Chapter  I.) 

VOL.  I,  M 


178       MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Things  now  seemed  to  be  settling  down :  the 
Emperor's  manias  had  diminished  under  the  com- 
bined influence  of  the  Empress  and  her  friend,  and 
the  public  also  had  become  accustomed  to  Paul's 
way  of  acting  by  fits  and  starts.  The  life  we  led  at 
Gatchina  or  at  St  Petersburg  would  have  been  well 
adapted  for  study,  if  we  had  known  how  to  profit  by 
it.  Our  time  was  regulated,  and  there  was  only  one 
indispensable  occupation  during  the  day — the  mili- 
tary parade ;  after  passing  an  hour  or  two  in  this 
duty  every  morning,  we  had  the  whole  day  at  our 
disposal  except  Sundays  and  holidays,  when  certain 
Court  functions  had  to  be  performed.  These 
wrere  regarded  as  so  important,  that  they  liber- 
ated us  from  all  social  conventions  arid  duties, 
so  that  there  was  plenty  of  time  for  other  occupa- 
tions, but  unfortunately  I  did  riot  avail  myself  of 
the  leisure  thus  afforded  me.  Being  attached  to 
Alexander's  person  as  aide-de-camp,  my  service 
obliged  me  to  attend  him  at  military  parades,  and 
I  used  to  go  to  his  apartments  every  afternoon  to 
take  his  orders ;  this  was  our  time  for  intimate  con- 
versation. It  is  also  from  that  period  that  dates  my 
acquaintance  with  Prince  Peter  Volkonski,  adjutant 
of  the  Semenofsky  regiment  of  the  Guards,  of  which 
Alexander  was  colonel.  His  position  placed  Prince 
Peter  on  a  footing  of  familiarity  with  Alexander,  and 
he  afterwards  became  his  aide-de-camp,  then  major- 
general,  and  finally  grand  chamberlain,  which  post  he 
continued  to  occupy  under  the  Emperor  Nicholas. 
Without  possessing  brilliant  or  very  superior  faculties, 
Volkonski  was  very  systematic  and  persistent  in  his 