

'  O 

should  by  its  resources  and  prosperity  disgust  the 
Russians  with  the  task  of  being  the  tormentors  and 
gaolers  of  neighbouring  countries. 

At  Moscow,  which  was  the  first  place  to  which 
the  Emperor  went,  there  was  a  considerable  assem- 
blage of  troops,  which  he  reviewed  and  ordered  to 
perform  some  manoauvres.  They  were  regiments  of 
the  line  which  had  not  been  trained  like  the  Guards, 
and  had  not  had  time  to  obtain  instruction  in  the  new 
system.  The  infantry  was  divided  into  two  lines 
which  marched  in  two  columns,  at  the  head  of  each  of 
which  was  placed  one  of  the  Grand-Dukes.  They 
were  to  deploy  at  a  given  signal,  and  I  remember  with 
pleasure  the  activity  with  which  we  executed  this 
movement,  which  was  successful  beyond  our  hopes, 
without  any  crowding  or  spreading  out  of  the  lines, 


AN  IMPERIAL  PROGRESS  TO  KAZAN  183 

each  of  which  was  composed  of  from  twelve  to  fifteen 
battalions.  The  Emperor  was  highly  satisfied  at  the 
order  in  which  the  troops  marched,  and  liberally 
distributed  rewards  among  the  officers. 

From  Moscow  we  went  by  way  of  Nijni  Novgorod 
to  Kazan.  The  country  between  these  places  is  fine, 
and  might  be  rich  through  the  fertility  of  its  soil  and 
the  navigable  streams  which  cross  it  in  all  directions, 
but  it  is  little  inhabited.  Some  of  the  inhabitants 
are  still  half-savage  tribes,  apparently  of  the  Finnish 
race — Tchouvasches  and  Tcheremisses  who  have  pre- 
served their  odd  national  costumes.  I  made  sketches 
of  them,  which  I  gave  to  my  old  friend  M.  Wiesi- 
olowski.  At  Kazan  there  are  still  many  Tartars  who 
have  also  preserved  their  ancient  dress  arid  customs, 
but  I  do  not  think  they  have  any  strong  national 
spirit,  any  more  than  our  Tartars  of  Lithuania.  It  is 
only  further  east,  among  the  Nogais  and  the  popula- 
tions adjoining  the  steppes  of  Great  Tartary  or  the 
slopes  of  the  Caucasus,  that  this  spirit  shows  itself 
and  is  accompanied  by  a  warlike  disposition. 

The  journey  was  performed  with  a  rapidity  which 
deprived  it  of  the  practical  advantage  that  might  have 
been  gained  if  the  Emperor  had  seen  with  his  own 
eyes  what  was  going  on  in  the  country.  We  returned 
without  passing  through  Moscow,  and  our  last  stage 
was  Schlusselburg,  the  fortress  which  was  rendered 
famous  by  the  catastrophe  of  the  unhappy  Ivan.* 
Paul  embarked  on  the  Lake  of  Ladoga,  and  while  we 
were  on  the  boat  he  called  my  brother  and  myself 

*  Ivan  VI,  killed  in  1764  in  attempting  to  escape  from  the  fortress  of  Schlussel- 
burg, where  he  had  been  confined  since  1741. 


184       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  decorated  us  with  the  Order  of  St  Anne  of  the 
second  class  as  a  reward  for  our  services  during  the 
journey.  This  was  the  only  honourable  distinction 
I  ever  received  in  Russia. 