

There  were  sometimes  select  balls  at  Court,  at 
which  the  etiquette  was  not  so  strict  as  usual.  The 
Emperor  appeared  at  one  of  these  balls  in  a  dresscoat, 


AN  IMPERIAL  PROGRESS  TO  KAZAN  181 

which  he  never  wore  on  other  occasions  ;  it  was  of  dark 
red  velvet  and  of  an  old-fashioned  shape.  He  danced 
that  evening  with  Mdlle.  Nelidoff.  It  was  a  curious 
sight,  which  stills  dwells  in  my  memory.  The  Emperor 
Paul,  short,  with  very  large  shoes,  placed  himself  in 
the  third  position,  rounded  his  arms,  and  bent  his  body 
in  the  manner  then  taught  by  dancing  masters,  while 
opposite  him  was  a  lady  of  equally  short  stature,  who 
thought  it  her  duty  to  respond  to  the  would-be  grace- 
ful airs  and  harmonious  movements  of  her  partner. 

In  May,  1798,  the  Court  proceeded  to  Pavlovsk, 
the  property  and  creation  of  the  Empress  Maria, 
which,  considering  the  general  appearance  of  the 
environs  of  St  Petersburg,  was  a  pleasant  and  gay 
place.  The  buildings  arid  gardens  had  been  enlarged 
under  the  superintendence  of  the  Empress.  She 
attempted  to  entertain  her  guests  by  assembling  them 
after  dinner  to  listen  to  a  reading  of  a  French  trans- 
lation of  Thomson's  '  Seasons.'  The  Emperor  did  not 
assist  at  these  readings,  and  the  idea  was  not  a 
success  ;  everyone  tried  to  escape  what  was  generally 
voted  to  be  a  dull  and  somniferous  entertainment. 

The  Emperor  Paul  wished  this  year  to  make  a 
progress  through  part  of  his  Empire.  The  Grand- 
Dukes  took  part  in  the  journey,  and  my  brother  and 
myself  accompanied  them.  The  Emperor  visited  the 
Canal  which  joins  the  Volga  to  the  Neva,  thereby 
establishing  a  communication  between  the  Caspian 
Sea  and  the  Baltic.  This  work  of  Peter  the  Great, 
which  does  great  credit  to  his  genius  and  activity, 
passes  in  a  diagonal  line  through  the  whole  of  the 
interior  of  Russia.  Paul  went  to  see  the  fleet  of  boats 


T82       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

on  the  canal,  some  of  which  started  for  St  Petersburg 
and  others  for  Astrakhan.  M.  de  Sivers,  notorious  for 
the  odious  manner  in  which  he  carried  out  the  second 
partition  of  Poland,  was  charged  with  the  Works  De- 
partment. Being  on  a  so-called  tour  of  inspection,  he 
went  to  meet  the  Emperor.  He  looked  old,  thin,  pale, 
and  depressed,  without  any  energy  or  distinction.  The 
very  cold  reception  accorded  to  him  by  the  Emperor 
showed  him  that  he  would  not  long  remain  at  his  post. 
We  passed  by  Tver  on  our  way  out,  and  on  our 
return  by  Yaroslav  and  Vladimir.  These  provinces 
are  rich  and  populous,  with  an  air  of  abundance  and 
prosperity  which  strikes  all  who  travel  through  them. 
It  is  in  the  interior  of  Russia  that  her  true  strength 
lies ;  if  it  were  well  administered  by  a  government 
concentrated  within  reasonable  limits,  this  region 