


PRINCE  VOLKONSKI  I79 

duties,  and  fulfilled  them  to  the  Emperor's  entire 
satisfaction  ;  he  also  acquired  information  indispens- 
able to  an  officer  of  high  military  rank.  He  was  good- 
tempered,  his  advice  was  always  sensible,  and  he  did 
not  hesitate  to  give  it  even  when  it  caused  dis- 
pleasure ;  moreover,  he  was  always  ready  and  willing 
to  do  a  service.  We  passed  much  time  together,  and 
I  constantly  received  from  him  proofs  of  good-will  to 
which  I  gladly  bear  testimony  after  an  interval  of 
more  than  half-a-century,  when  our  relations  have 
been  interrupted  by  forty  years  of  separation  and  by 
revolutions  and  other  events. 

His  wife,  the  Princess  Sophia,  who  belonged  to 
another  branch  of  the  Volkonski  family  that  had  been 
more  favoured  by  fortune,  had  a  quicker  temper  and 
a  more  generous  heart,  and  she  often  showed  herself 
a  true  friend  to  me,  even  since  my  total  withdrawal 
from  the  Russian  service — for  which  I  am  sincerely 
grateful  to  her.  She  never  pardoned  the  Emperor 
Nicholas  for  having  kept  her  brother  for  thirty 
years  in  the  mines  of  Siberia  ;  he  became  old  there, 
and  was  not  restored  to  his  sister  and  his  family  until 
the  coronation  of  Alexander  II.  Her  sorrow  had 
separated  the  Princess  Sophia  from  the  Russian 
Court  during  the  whole  of  Nicholas's  reign. 

Among  the  young  men  of  the  Court  there  was 
only  one  who  was  received  into  Alexander's  intimacy  : 
this  was  Prince  Alexander  Galitzin,  one  of  the 
Gentlemen  of  the  Chamber.  He  was  called  '  Little 
Galitzin '  on  account  of  his  short  stature,  and  pleased 
Alexander  by  his  amusing  gossip  and  his  wonderful 
powers  of  mimicry,  which  enabled  him  closely  to 


i8o      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

imitate  the  appearance  and  the  voice  of  every  member 
of  the  Court.  When  we  were  alone  without 
Alexander,  he  used  to  imitate  the  Emperor  Paul 
with  such  accuracy  that  we  feared  lest  he  should  be 
arrested  and  punished.  He  had  been  a  passionate 
admirer  of  the  Empress  Catherine,  and  notwithstand- 
ing her  advanced  age  he  would  have  gladly  become 
one  of  her  favourites.  When  I  knew  him  he  was  a 
thorough  epicurean,  devoting  much  calculation  and 
reflection  to  all  possible  enjoyments  of  every  kind  ; 
but  after  Alexander's  accession  he  determined  to 
enter  on  a  more  serious  mode  of  life,  and,  encouraged 
by  the  Emperor,  became  Procurator  to  the  Senate. 
Afterwards,  probably  under  the  inspiration  of  Alex- 
ander's piety,  he  became  very  devout,  saw  visions 
with  M.  de  Kocheleff,  and  was  finally  appointed 
Minister  of  Public  Instruction,  a  post  which  I  should 
never  have  thought  him  qualified  to  fill.  His  appoint- 
ment did  not  take  place,  I  think,  until  the  year  1822, 
when  I  was  still  Curator  of  the  University  of  Wilna. 
Remembering  '  Little  Galitzin  '  as  I  had  known  him, 
I  could  not  picture  him  to  myself  as  a  Minister 
directing  the  public  instruction  of  the  Empire,  as  he 
did  not  seem  to  possess  any  talent  but  that  of  amusing 
people  and  making  them  laugh.  He  was  totally 
without  personal  animosity — which  did  not,  however, 
prevent  crying  abuses  from  occurring  at  Wilna  while 
he  was  Minister,  the  result  of  which  was  that  I  was 
obliged  to  resign  my  post  of  Curator. 