


THE  GRAND-DUKE  CONSTANTINE  175 

amply  compensated,  however,  for  the  tediousness  and 
melancholy  of  the  Court,  and  we  did  not  complain.  I 
recollect  having  had  some  very  warm  disputes  with 
the  Grand-Duke  Constantine,  in  which  I  did  not  give 
way  to  him  either  in  words  or  in  gestures,  and  one 
day  I  had  a  struggle  with  him  in  which  we  both  fell 
to  the  ground.  I  think  it  was  the  recollection  of 
these  familiarities  of  our  youth  that  impelled 
Constantino  to  treat  me  with  consideration  even  at 
times  when  he  was  all-powerful  in  Poland,  and  deeply 
irritated  at  my  opposition.  He  attempted  to  cultivate 
similar  relations  with  my  brother  to  those  which 
existed  between  Alexander  and  myself;  but  his 
intolerable  temper  made  his  company  much  less 
agreeable  than  that  of  Alexander,  though  it  had  the 
advantage  of  keeping  my  brother  and  myself  together. 
While  we  were  at  Gatchina  we  made  the  acquaintance 
of  Baron  Wintzingerode,  a  young  officer  of  much 
nobility  of  character,  a  protege  of  the  princes  of  Saxe- 
Coburg,  whom  Constantine  had  made  his  aide-de-camp. 
Our  friendship  with  him  never  varied,  and  lasted 
until  his  death. 

At  the  end  of  the  autumn,  the  Court  returned  to 
St  Petersburg  for  the  winter.  (I  may  mention  here 
that  during  the  years  I  passed  in  Russia  the  only 
interesting  events  that  I  witnessed  happened  in  Court 
circles,  and  I  am  therefore  obliged  to  be  always 
speaking  of  the  Court).  Our  King  Stanislas  Augustus 
was,  I  believe,  located  with  his  suite  at  the  house 
known  as  the  Marble  Palace,  and  lived  magnificently 
at  the  expense  of  the  Government.  His  niece,  the 
Countess  Mniszek,  was  attached  to  his  suite  with  her 


176       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

husband.  He  also  had  a  certain  number  of  chamber- 
lains, among  whom  was  Trembecki  the  poet.  We 
often  went  to  present  our  respects  to  his  Majesty,  who 
received  us  with  pleasure  at  all  times.  I  have  often 
seen  him  in  the  morning  in  his  dressing  grown,  writing 
what  I  was  afterwards  told  were  his  memoirs.  I 
never  could  learn  what  had  become  of  this  work,  which 
must  have  been  very  voluminous.  All  I  could 
recover  was  the  first  volume,  which  only  contained  an 
account  of  his  embassy  to  Russia  at  the  time  of 
Augustus  III ;  the  other  volumes,  which  must  have 
been  much  more  interesting,  were  either  destroyed  or 
so  well  concealed,  that  so  far  as  I  know  no  trace  of 
them  has  been  found.* 

This  unfortunate  prince  seemed  to  me  to  accept 
his  position  too  patiently.  He  strove  to  make  himself 
agreeable  to  his  masters  who  had  dispossessed  him, 
and  to  indulge  the  capricious  fancies  of  the  Emperor, 
who  pretty  frequently  came  with  the  Imperial  family 
to  dine  with  him.  His  dinners  were  exquisite  and 
served  to  perfection,  thanks  to  the  skill  of  his  famous 
maitre  d'  hotel,  Fremeau,  who  alone  reminded  him  of 
his  past  existence.  The  King  and  his  suite,  in  order 
to  vary  the  entertainments  he  was  able  to  offer  to  the 
Emperor  and  Empress,  were  preparing  a  soiree  with 
private  theatricals,  when  he  was  struck  down  by  an 
attack  of  apoplexy  on  the  2nd  of  February,  1793. 
The  news  at  once  spread  through  the  town,  and  we 
hastened  to  the  palace.  Dr  Bekler  had  bled  the 
patient  and  employed  all  the  resources  of  "*is  art,  but 