

M.  de  Novosiltzoff  had  wit,  penetration,  and  great 
aptitude  for  work,  but  an  extreme  love  of  pleasure 
and  sensual  enjoyments ;  this  had  prevented  him  from 
reading  many  books,  and  from  acquiring  any  sound 
knowledge  of  law,  of  legislation,  or  of  political  economy, 
though  he  had  studied  all  these  subjects.  He  had  a 
facile  philosophy  which  strove  to  be  free  from  all  pre- 
judice, but  which  did  not  seem  to  impair  the  clear  and 


COUNT  STBOGONOFF  AND  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    167 

decided  qualities  of  his  mind.  These  qualities  were 
reflected  as  in  a  glass  in  the  young  Count  Strogonoff. 
The  opinions  and  feelings  of  these  two  young  men  had 
a  spirit  of  justice,  of  sincerity,  of  European  enlighten- 
ment which  at  that  time  was  scarcely  ever  to  be 
found  in  Russia,  and  which  was  the  foundation  of  the 
intimate  friendship  and  reciprocal  confidence  between 
us  of  which  I  have  spoken.  They  often  asked  me 
questions  about  Alexander  ;  and  I  thought  that  while 
maintaining  a  certain  reserve,  I  could  without  indis- 
cretion communicate  to  them  some  of  the  statements 
he  had  made  to  me,  and  the  generous  projects  which 
he  entertained.  They  fully  appreciated  the  extreme 
importance  of  what  I  told  them. 

I  spoke  of  my  two  friends  to  Alexander ;  he  had 
already  remarked  Count  Paul,  and  I  told  him  that 
their  convictions  resembled  his  own,  that  he  could 
rely  on  their  sentiments  and  their  discretion,  and  that 
they  wished  to  see  him  in  private,  to  offer  him  their 
services,  and  to  ascertain  what  would  have  to  be  done 
to  carry  out  his  noble  impulses.  Alexander  consented 
to  their  being  informed  of  his  secret  plans  and 
associated  in  his  designs.  I  spoke  to  them  on  the 
subject  at  St  Petersburg,  immediately  after  Paul's 
accession,  but  the  arrangement  was  not  finally  com- 
pleted until  after  the  coronation  at  Moscow.  It  was 
agreed  that  we  should  meet  on  a  certain  day  and 
hour  in  a  retired  spot,  and  that  Alexander  should 
join  us.  Novosiltzoff  prepared  himself  for  the  con- 
ference by  translating  into  Russian  a  fragment  of  a 
French  work  whose  title  I  do  not  remember,  which 
related  to  advice  given  to  a  young  prince  about  to 


1 68       ME  MO  IRS- OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ascend  the  throne,  and  desirous  of  making  his  country 
happy  and  of  knowing  how  to  set  about  it.  The 
portion  which  Novosiltzoff  translated  was  only  the 
introduction,  where  the  subject  was  treated  generally, 
each  special  branch  of  Government  being  dealt  with 
in  detail  in  the  body  of  the  work.  He  was  to  trans- 
late the  rest  of  the  book,  but  he  never  did  so.  The 
succinct  review,  however,  of  the  obligations  of  the 
head  of  a  State  and  the  labours  which  should  occupy 
him  was  listened  to  by  Alexander  with  much  attention 
and  satisfaction.  It  contained  well-chosen  views  and 
general  deductions  as  to  the  foundations  of  national 
prosperity,  with  a  scheme  of  the  measures  necessary 
for  promoting  it.  The  author  had  introduced  some 
eloquent  passages  which  went  straight  to  the  young 
prince's  generous  and  patriotic  heart.  Novosiltzoff 
wrote  .Russian  with  elegance  ;  his  style  was  clear  and 
seemed  to  me  harmonious.  Alexander  praised  him 
highly,  and  assured  both  him  and  Count  Paul  that 
he  adopted  the  principles  expressed  in  the  work, 
which  were  indeed  his  own.  He  urged  Novosiltzoff 
to  complete  the  translation  and  then  forward  it  to 
him,  in  order  that  he  might  be  able  more  maturely 
to  consider  its  contents  and  some  day  put  its  theories 
into  practice.  From  that  day  the  young  Count 
Strogonoffand  Novosiltzoff  shared  in  the  confidence 
which  Alexander  had  bestowed  upon  me,  and  were 
admitted  to  our  understanding,  so  long  kept  a  secret. 
This  afterwards  produced  serious  results,  and  the 
admission  of  two  zealous  Russian  patriots  to  Alex- 
ander's confidence,  naturally  began  to  dissipate  the 
illusions  of  our  first  dreams — so  attractive  to  me  as 