

We  passed  the  remainder  of  the  summer  at 
Pavlovsk,  and  then  moved  to  Gatchina  for  the 
autumn.  This  palace,  which  had  recently  been  en- 
larged, looked  like  a  prison  ;  it  is  built  on  a  perfectly 
level  plain,  without  trees  or  fields.  The  park  had  a 
sombre  and  melancholy  air ;  the  sun  seldom  shines 
there,  and  it  was  so  cold  and  rainy  that  we  had  no 
temptation  to  walk.  Military  parades  or  manoeuvres 
in  the  morning,  and  the  French  or  Italian  theatre  in 
the  evening,  did  but  little  to  relieve  the  prevailing 
dulness.  This  latter  part  of  the  year  1798,  and  the 
beginning  of  1799,  brought  much  trouble  and  unex- 
pected change  into  the  situation  of  the  persons  who 
composed  the  Russian  Court. 

At  the  time  of  the  capture  of  Kutaysk  and  the 
massacre  of  its  inhabitants,  a  Turkish  child,  after- 
wards named  Kutayschoff,  who  had  escaped  with  his 
life,  was  adopted  by  Paul,  who  had  him  educated, 
and  then  made  hirn  first  his  barber,  and  afterwards 
his  principal  valet.  At  the  beginning  of  Paul's  reign 
I  saw  Kutayschoff  bring  some  broth  to  his  master 
at  the  training  school,  where  the  infantry  and  cavalry 
drilled  during  the  winter.  He  was  in  his  barber's 
dress,  of  middle  size,  a  little  stout,  but  alert  and  quick 
in  his  movements,  very  dark,  always  smiling,  with 
Eastern  eyes  and  a  countenance  displaying  a  sensual 
joviality.  In  this  costume  he  looked  a  sort  of 
Figaro ;  but  he  was  already  the  object  of  obsequious 


A  PALACE  PLOT  185 

salutations  and  hand-shakings  on  the  part  of  most  of 
the  generals  and  other  persons  who  took  part  in 
the  drill.  Soon  his  influence  with  his  master  made 
him  a  dignitary  of  the  Empire  and  an  all-powerful 
favourite.  This  metamorphosis  was  accomplished  by 
the  autocratic  wand  of  Czarism.  In  less  than  a  year 
he  rose  from  a  barber  and  a  valet  to  be  Grand-Equerry, 
and  astonished  the  Russians  by  appearing  successively 
with  the  Orders  of  St  Anne,  St  Alexander,  and  St 
Andrew,  accompanied  by  extensive  grants  of  land 
and  money.  He  was  not,  however,  promoted  to 
these  honours  all  at  once,  and  he  would  not  have 
got  them  so  rapidly  if  the  Empress  and  Mdlle. 
de  Nelidoff  had  continued  to  retain  their  influence 
over  the  Emperor's  mind.  It  was  difficult,  sometimes 
impossible,  for  aspiring  officials  to  get  what  they 
wanted  so  long  as  the  influence  of  the  Empress 
and  her  friend  was  preponderant,  and  this  was  the 
principal  cause  of  their  defeat.  Ambitious  people 
now  made  overtures  to  the  favourite  valet  in  order 
to  advise  him  and  take  advantage  of  the  almost 
magnetic  power  which  he  was  able  to  exercise  over 
his  master.  The  instigator  and  prime  mover  of  this 
plot  was  Count  Rostopchin.  He  had  been  removed 
from  the  post  of  Minister  for  War,  succeeded  by  M. 
Nelidoff,  the  nephew  of  the  demoiselle  d  portrait,* 
and  even  banished  to  Moscow,  for  Paul  always  acted 
in  extremes  both  with  regard  to  people  whom  he  liked 
and  those  who  no  longer  enjoyed  his  favour.  Ros- 
topchin  was  not  the  man  to  forgive  such  a  slight, 
and,  determined  to  have  his  revenge  upon  those  who 