


PULAWT  173 

was  then  used  by  the  Cossacks  as  a  bath.  When  we 
arrived,  people  were  still  employed  in  cleaning  the 
ruins,  rebuilding  damaged  walls  or  partitions,  and 
repairing  the  library.  In  the  middle  of  the  vast 
courtyard  before  the  Palace  there  was  a  little  hill, 
a  sort  of  Monte  Testacio,  composed  of  debris  covered 
with  earth.  When  our  parents  returned  to  their 
home  they  had  some  difficulty  in  finding  rooms  fit  to 
live  in,  and  the  works  of  restoration  were  not  com- 
pleted when  we  left. 

About  this  time  we  lost  our  friend  Gorski,  who 
died  of  an  apoplectic  stroke.  I  found  him  one  morn- 
ing complaining  of  pains  in  the  head  and  difficulty  of 
speech ;  a  surgeon  was  called  to  bleed  him,  and  he 
was  put  to  bed.  Dr  Goltz,  who  was  absent  at  the 
time,  came  too  late  to  save  him.  Gorski  remained 
unconscious,  talked  incoherently,  and  only  complained 
of  the  pain  in  his  head.  He  recognised  me  and  I 
remember  his  smile  with  gratitude.  I  did  not  leave 
him  ;  he  died  on  the  same  day  late  in  the  evening, 
without  pain.  I  felt  his  loss  deeply.  He  was  a 
true  man,  with  nothing  but  justice  and  sincerity 
in  his  heart.  He  had  often  expressed  a  desire 
for  a  good  and  short  life :  his  wish  was  accom- 
plished. 

Our  three  months'  leave  had  now  expired,  and  we 
returned  to  St  Petersburg.  We  were  sorry  to  leave 
our  parents  and  our  home,  but  we  were  anxious  to  see 
Alexander  again  and  resume  our  relations  with  him. 
The  letters  I  had  received  from  him  during  our  stay 
at  Pulawy  proved  to  me,  if  I  had  had  any  doubt  on 
the  subject,  that  he  had  not  changed.  We  found  him 


i74       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  same  as  before,  both  as  regards  his  feelings  and 
his  opinions. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  year  1797,  the  follies  and 
eccentricities  which  had  agitated  the  Court  of  the 
Emperor  Paul  were  succeeded  by  a  period  of  compara- 
tive calm,  which  looked  as  if  it  were  likely  to  last. 
When  he  was  Grand-Duke  he  had,  during  his  stay  at 
Pavlovsk  and  Gatchina,  conceived  a  passion  for  Mdlle. 
Nelidoff,  rnaid-of-honour  to  his  wife.  This  sentiment, 
which  was  entirely  platonic,  had  continued  to  exist 
since  his  accession.  Mdlle.  Nelidoff  had  remarkable 
qualities  of  heart  and  mind,  and  had  captivated  the 
affection  and  confidence  of  the  Empress.  The  latter 
thought  she  had  nothing  to  fear  from  her  rivalry,  as 
she  was  tall,  fair  and  handsome,  while  Mdlle.  Nelidoif  s 
figure,  complexion,  and  features  were  in  no  way 
attractive ;  her  only  charms  were  her  sparkling  smile 
and  her  animated  conversation.  The  two  women  had 
a  perfect  understanding  with  each  other,  and  the  result 
was  that  the  Emperor's  conduct,  his  selection  of  high 
officials,  and  even  his  policy,  became  less  changeable  and 
confused,  and  more  consequent,  than  they  had  been 
before.  Unfortunately  this  salutary  influence  did  not 
last  long.  On  the  return  of  the  Court  from  the  corona- 
tion, it  went  to  Gatchina,  where  Paul  liked  to  pass  the 
autumn.  His  presence  added  to  the  naturally  depress- 
ing effect  produced  by  this  season  of  the  year  in  Russia, 
as  it  is  foggy  and  rainy,  and  the  cold,  though  less 
intense,  is  more  disagreeable  than  in  winter.  The 
friendship  and  the  extreme  confidence  shown  to  us  by 
Alexander,  and  the  familiarity  which  he  and  his 
brother  allowed  us  to  use  in  our  relations  with  them, 