


COUNT  STROGONOFF  AND  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    169 

holding  out  the  prospect  of  the  independence  of  my 
country,  and  to  Alexander  as  leading  him  to  believe 
in  the  possibility  of  tranquil  retirement  from  State 
affairs.  These  dreams  were  not,  however,  at  once 
abandoned ;  we  adhered  to  them  in  spite  of  hard 
facts  which  gradually  destroyed  them.  Alexander  con- 
stantly reverted  to  his  plans,  seeking  in  them  con- 
solation for  a  near  future  whose  approach  and  whose 
burthens  he  already  felt.  He  could  not  make  up  his 
mind  to  lose  the  hope  of  another  future,  more  distant 
and  more  in  conformity  with  his  wishes ;  his  imagina- 
tion presented  it  to  him  under  such  attractive  colours, 
that  it  was  even  after  the  conversation  which  I  have 
described  that  he  insisted  upon  having  the  draft 
proclamation  which  I  mentioned  above. 

Alexander's  new  friends  perceived  his  inclination 
for  a  quiet  life,  relieved  of  the  cares  which  the  Crown 
would  impose  upon  him ;  they  said  with  justice  that 
this  could  neither  promote  his  fame  nor  the  happiness 
of  his  country,  which  should  be  his  sole  object.  They 
took  every  occasion  of  opposing  these  egotistical 
leanings,  while  pretending  riot  to  know  of  them.  I 
understood  Alexander's  views,  and  I  could  not  entirely 
condemn  them,  though  I  did  not  conceal  from  him  my 
belief  that  they  were  impracticable.  The  consequence 
was  that  his  confidence  in  me  grew  stronger.  It 
continued,  after  many  vicissitudes,  for  a  considerable 
time,  and  did  not  cease  until  after  I  had  left  St 
Petersburg. 

At  the  conference  which  took  place  during  the 
coronation  it  was  decided  that  Novosiltzoff,  who  was 
in  bad  odour  on  account  of  the  opinions  he  was  sup- 


170 

posed  to  hold  and  his  known  independent  spirit, 
should  leave  Russia  until  it  should  be  possible  to 
recall  him,  and  that  he  should  pass  the  interval  in 
England.  Alexander  obtained  a  passport  for  him 
through  Rostopchin,  the  Minister  for  War,  who  was 
beginning  to  be  in  high  favour  with  the  Emperor. 
This  Minister  had  been  one  of  his  most  assiduous 
courtiers  at  Gatchina  and  Pavlovsk  before  his  accession 
to  the  throne.  He  was,  I  think,  the  only  able  man 
who  had  attached  himself  to  Paul's  person  before  he 
became  Emperor.  Alexander,  who  during  Catherine's 
reign  was  devoted  to  his  father,  had  remarked 
Rostopchin,  and  had  felt  great  esteem  and  friendship 
for  him.  These  relations  were  afterwards  converted 
by  Court  intrigues  into  coldness  and  opposition  ;  but 
at  that  time  they  still  existed,  and  Rostopchin  was 
also  on  friendly  terms  with  Novosiltzoff,  for  both  had 
found  fault  with  the  Government.  Although,  how- 
ever, he  had  promised  Novosiltzoff  a  passport,  he  did 
not  at  once  carry  out  his  promise,  and  when  I  re- 
minded him  of  it,  he  expressed  impatience  and  sus- 
picion at  the  political  importance  which  he  said 
appeared  to  be  attached  to  this  journey.  The  pass- 
port came  at  last,  and  Novosiltzoff  proceeded  to  St 
Petersburg  and  thence  to  England,  where  he  remained 
during  the  whole  of  the  period  of  Paul's  reign.  He 
completed  his  studies  there,  and  entered  into  relations 
with  English  statesmen  which  were  afterwards  very 
useful  to  him. 