

Our  leave  having  been  granted,  my  brother  and 
myself,  accompanied  by  Gorski,  left  for  Pulawy,  where 
our  parents  were  impatiently  expecting  us  after  an 


PROPOSED  A  U STRIA  N  A  NNEXA  TION  OF  GA  LICIA     \  7 1 

absence  of  two  years  which  had  given  them  much 
anxiety  and  care.  The  time  we  passed  with  them,  in 
the  place  where  we  had  lived  in  our  happy  youth,  was 
one  of  great  joy  to  us,  though  it  was  somewhat 
marred  by  the  prospect  of  having  soon  to  go  back 
again  to  St  Petersburg,  where  we  knew  that  fresh 
trials  and  troubles  were  awaiting  us.  We  talked  of 
nothing  but  Alexander's  good  qualities  arid  the  hopes 
we  had  of  him.  Our  parents  listened  with  astonish- 
ment, anxiety,  and  doubt.  I  received  at  Pulawy 
several  letters  from  Alexander  full  of  friendly 
expressions ;  they  were  brought  by  various  persons, 
among  others  by  the  Archduke  Palatine,  who  had 
just  married  the  Grand-Duchess  Alexandra.  This 
obtained  for  me  a  friendly  reception  from  the  Arch- 
duko  when  I  passed  through  Pesth  in  1812. 

My  mother  was  anxious  for  our  safety.  She  feared 
lest  we  should  be  denounced  and  the  object  of  our 
relations  with  Alexander  be  betrayed.  This  was  the 
topic  of  all  our  conversations. 

The  Governor  of  Galicia,  Count  Erdody,  came  at 
this  time  to  pay  my  father  a  visit.*  A  Hungarian  by 
birth,  he  was  preoccupied  with  an  idea  which  he  was 
constantly  talking  about.  He  wished  to  prove  to  the 
Poles  that  the  best  thing  that  could  happen  to  them 
would  be  to  be  united  to  Hungary ;  for,  he  said,  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  had  only  put  forward  his  claims 
to  Galicia  as  King  of  Hungary.  This  language  on 
the  part  of  a  high  Austrian  functionary  proved  how 
much  strength  the  Magyar  element  still  possessed. 

*  Pulawy  then   formed  part  of  Austria,  together  with  Lublin,  Sandomir,  and 
Cracow. 


The  annexation  of  Galicia  to  Hungary,  if  it  had  been 
possible,  would  doubtless  have  brought  great  material 
advantages  to  Galicia,  would  have  conferred  upon  her 
a  free  government,  and  would  especially  have  pro- 
tected her  againsb  the  many  evils  which  she  suffered 
during  the  fifty  years  which  preceded  the  year  1848. 
What  would  have  been  the  immediate  result  of  such 
an  annexation  at  that  period  it  is  difficult  to  guess. 
In  any  case  the  Poles  would  have  gladly  fraternised 
with  the  Hungarians ;  yet  public  opinion  and  the 
Polish  national  spirit  would  probably  have  been 
opposed  to  such  a  measure,  besides  which  I  do  not 
think  the  Austrian  Government  of  that  time  would 
ever  have  agreed  to  it. 

Pulawy  was  just  then  recovering  from  a  two-fold 
pillage  to  which  it  had  been  subjected  during  the 
war  of  Kosciuszko.  The  first  occurred  under  the 
command  of  Count  Bibikoff,  and  its  results  were  long 
felt  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  village ;  the  second, 
which  was  chiefly  directed  against  the  Palace,  was 
carried  out  by  the  advanced  guard  of  a  corps  under 
the  orders  of  Count  Valerian  Zuboff.  The  Palace 
was  completely  sacked.  All  the  ornaments  were 
broken  and  destroyed.  Valuable  pictures  were  cut 
in  pieces ;  the  books  of  the  library  were  stolen  and 
dispersed  in  various  parts  of  the  Empire,  and  the 
only  room  that  was  spared  was  one  which,  as  it  had 
gilt  wainscots  and  pictures  by  Boucher  over  the 
doors,  the  Cossacks  thought  was  a  chapel.  All 
the  provisions  in  the  house — oil,  wine,  sugar,  coffee, 
spirits,  preserved  meats,  &c. — were  thrown  pell-mell 
into  a  basin  in  the  middle  of  the  courtyard,  which 