

O  7 

increasing  aggravation  during  the  remainder  of  Paul's 
reign.  Mdlle.  Nelidoff  behaved  with  much  pride  and 
dignity.  She  left  the  Court,  showed  no  desire  to 
remain  there,  and  did  not  attempt  to  return.  She 
said  with  marked  disdain  to  all  who  would  listen  to 
her,  that  nothing  was  more  tedious  than  a  Court  life, 
and  that  she  was  glad  at  last  to  have  left  it. 

Paul  had  a  new  hobby  which  sometimes  diverted 
him  from  his  fanciful  suspicions  and  the  rigours  which 


i88      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

followed  them.  He  wanted  to  become  Grand  Master 
of  Malta.*  Political  considerations  had  probably  con- 
tributed to  this  wish,  as  of  all  the  Powers  that  might 
have  protected  or  possessed  Malta,  England,  who  had 
taken  it,  was  the  one  that  Europe  liked  least.  Paul 
was  at  that  time  in  intimate  relations  with  the  British 
Cabinet,  which  attached  great  importance  to  the 
active  co-operation  of  Russia  against  France,  and  he 
may  have  thought  that  under  these  circumstances 
England  would  perhaps  not  refuse  to  cede  to  him  a 
territory  which  she  had  only  provisionally  occupied 
with  the  express  promise  to  return  it  to  the  Order  of 
St  John,  to  whom  it  belonged,  and  to  place  it  under 
the  protection  of  a  power  which  should  be  designated 
by  Europe.  Paul  was  full  of  the  idea  of  himself 
becoming  Grand  Master  of  Malta,  and  of  uniting  in 
his  person  both  a  title  so  famous  in  history  and  the 
power  necessary  for  the  protection  of  the  independence 
of  so  important  a  station  in  the  Mediterranean.  Politi- 
cal considerations  were  less  concerned  in  this  idea  than 
the  vanity  of  posing  as  a  hero  of  chivalry  before  the 
Princess  Lapoukin.  Being  the  supreme  chief  and 
defender  of  the  Russian  Church,  he  saw  no  difficulty  in 
placing  himself  at  the  head  of  the  principal  Order  of 
the  Roman  Catholic  Church.  The  combined  Cabinets, 
with  the  exception  of  England,  carefully  abstained 

*  The  Order  of  St  John,  which  had  obtained  possession  of  Malta  in  1530  from 
the  Emperor  Charles  V,  was  divided  into  eight  'languages,'  each  of  which  had  its 
prior.  The  first  Russian  Knight  of  Malta  was  Sheremetieff,  who  was  sent  to  the 
island  in  16'JS  by  Peter  the  Great  to  learn  naval  warfare,  and  diplomatic  relations 
were  then  opened  by  the  Order  with  the  Court  of  St  Petersburg.  In  1774,  a  new 
priory  of  the  Order  was  established  in  Poland,  with  six  commanderships,  each  of 
which  was  to  be  held  by  a  Pole.  The  property  of  the  Order  in  Poland  was  trans- 
ferred to  Russia  at  the  second  partition,  and  this  led  to  the  selection  by  the  Grand 
Master,  Rohan,  of  M.  de  Litta  as  plenipotentiary  to  arrange  with  the  Russian 
Government  as  to  the  disposal  of  this  property. 