

When  I  was  at  Vienna  in  1790  Kaunitz  was  still 
living.  His  place  was  occupied  by  Thugut,  whom  I 
had  known  at  Brussels,  and  who  was  now  all  powerful. 
He  professed  to  be  a  friend  of  my  father's,  and  when 
he  was  Ambassador  at  Warsaw  he  held  his  own 
against  adverse  pretensions  so  firmly,  that  he  even 
offended  the  King.  He  was  of  humble  birth,  and 
that  he  should  have  been  placed  at  the  head  of  the 
Government  was  astonishing  in  a  country  like  Austria. 
Thugut  was  an  unshaken  partisan  of  war,  and  gave  up 
his  portfolio  after  the  Battle  of  Hohenlinden,  to  the 
Emperor  Francis's  great  regret,  as  he  possessed  his 
entire  confidence.  He  had  extraordinary  firmness  of 
character,  perseverance,  and  power  of  work.  While 
he  was  Minister  he  scarcely  ever  went  out,  ate  no 
meat,  and  lived  entirely  on  fish  and  vegetables. 
When  I  afterwards  saw  him  in  1820,  his  sole  occupa- 
tion was  to  go  every  evening  to  the  Kasperle  theatre, 
and  his  faithful  friend,  Count  Ossolinski,  was  the  only 
one  that  did  not  abandon  him. 

On   my  journey  to    Sardinia    I   was    particularly 


204       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

struck  by  the  miserable  appearance  of  the  villages  of 
Northern  Italy  as  far  as  Verona.  I  paid  a  hurried 
visit  to  the  principal  buildings  of  Verona,  Venice,  and 
Mantua,  having  but  little  time  to  give  myself  up  to 
the  meditations  to  which  those  celebrated  cities  have 
always  given  rise  in  my  mind.  It  is  impossible  for 
one  who  knows  something  of  the  arts  and  literature 
of  antiquity  not  to  feel  their  influence.  In  passing  by 
these  cities  and  their  fields  festooned  by  vines,  my 
thoughts  were  full  of  Virgil  and  Shakespeare,  of 
Othello  and  Romeo  and  Juliet.  The  country  was  in 
a  pitiable  state  ;  it  had  been  the  theatre  of  war,  and 
had  passed  from  one  conqueror  to  another.  Its  in- 
habitants, who  were  formerly  citizens  of  the  Cisalpine 
Republic,  were  accustomed  to  French  successes  and 
reckoned  upon  them  ;  now  that  the  French  had  been 
defeated,  they  were  despondent  and  helpless.  It  was 
a  melancholy  season  of  the  year,  and  the  roads  were 
almost  impracticable.  At  the  first  stage  beyond 
Mantua  my  carriage  stuck  in  the  mud,  and  we  had 
to  get  oxen  to  extricate  us.  On  arriving  at  Bene- 
detto, an  inhabitant  of  the  place  offered  me  supper, 
saying  that  he  had  shot  a  bird  which  was  unknown 
in  that  country.  He  at  the  same  time  complained  of 
the  hardness  of  the  times,  watching  me,  like  the  rest 
of  his  countrymen,  as  he  spoke,  to  find  out  what  party 
I  belonged  to,  and  what  opinions  it  would  be  safe  for 
him  to  express.  He  gave  me  some  excellent  soup, 
but  the  bird  was  thin,  black,  and  with  an  enormous 
head  and  beak  ;  I  think  it  must  have  been  a  crow.  I 
passed  twenty-four  hours  under  his  roof,  and  this 
Lombard,  who  in  his  heart  sympathised  with  the 