


RUSSIA,  ENGLAND,  AND  MALTA  189 

from  contradicting  him.  Count  Litta  and  his  brother, 
the  Papal  Nuncio  at  St  Petersburg,  who  afterwards 
became  a  Cardinal,  readily  fell  in  with  the  Emperor's 
plan  and  encouraged  him  in  it.  In  Poland  there 
were  still  some  commanderships  of  the  Order,  notwith- 
standing the  bad  repute  into  which  it  had  fallen  among 
us  by  Prince  Poninski  having  trafficked  in  its  property 
and  been  condemned  by  the  Diet  after  the  first  parti- 
tion ;  and  Paul  created  other  commanderships  in 
Russia  without  troubling  himself  about  differences  of 
creed  Count  Litta  framed,  in  accordance  with  the 
ancient  rite,  the  ceremonial  of  a  Grand  Chapter  of  the 
Order,  in  which  the  new  Grand  Master  was  to  enter 
on  his  dignities.  The  Emperor  appeared  several 
times  on  his  throne  in  the  costume  of  Grand  Master, 
with  the  cross  of  the  Order,  which  had  been  sent  him 
from  Rome.  Paul  was  passionately  fond  of  cere- 
monies ;  he  wished  that  people  taking  part  in  them 
should  preserve  an  imperturbable  gravity  and  should 
attach  great  importance  to  them.  My  brother  and 
myself  were  appointed  Commanders  of  the  Order,  and 
had  to  put  on  the  ancient  costume,  consisting  of  long 
cloaks  of  black  velvet,  with  belts  and  embroidered 
crosses.  There  had  been  some  rehearsals  of  the  cere- 
mony of  offering  the  Grand  Mastership  to  the  Emperor, 
and  the  whole  business  had  an  appearance  of  theatrical 
masquerading  which  made  the  spectators  and  even  the 
performers  smile,  with  the  single  exception  of  the 
Emperor,  who  was  thoroughly  identified  with  his 
part.  The  secretary  to  the  Chapter  was  an  old 
acquaintance  of  ours,  M.  de  Maisonneuve,  a  French- 
man who  when  young  had  sought  his  fortune  in 


1 9o       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYXKI 

Poland,  had  had  some  success  with  the  ladies,  and 
had  obtained  through  them  rank  in  the  army  and  the 
Cross  of  Malta.  He  came  to  Russia  in  his  old  age  to 
restore  his  fortune,  which  he  had  squandered  twice 
over.  Count  Litta  appointed  him  his  secretary,  and 
in  this  capacity  M.  de  Maisonrieuve  gave  entire  satis- 
faction, as  he  wrote  fluently  and  was  well  acquainted 
with  legal  and  diplomatic  phraseology. 

This  hobby  of  the  Emperor's  produced  a  quarrel 
with  England,  who,  without  giving  any  definitive 
reply,  refused  under  various  pretexts  to  give  up 
Malta.  The  only  result  of  his  assuming  the  rank  of 
Grand  Master  was  the  marriage  of  Count  Litta,  who 
was  relieved  from  his  vow  of  chastity  by  the  Pope, 
and  became  the  husband  of  the  Countess  Skovronsky, 
the  favourite  niece  of  Prince  Potemkin,  still  a  hand- 
some woman,  though  not  in  her  first  youth,  who  when 
Alexander  became  Emperor  procured  for  her  husband 
a  large  fortune  and  the  important  position  of  Grand 
Chamberlain,  which  he  held  until  his  death.  Her 
daughter-in-law  was  the  Princess  Bagration,  whose 
estates  Count  Litta  administered  with  much  regularity 
arid  zeal. 