

*  See  page  132. 


1 86       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

had  caused  his  fall,  allied  himself  with  Kutayschoff. 
In  order  to  divert  Paul  from  his  attachment  to 
Mdlle.  Nelidoff,  and  to  make  him  quarrel  with 
his  wife,  it  was  insinuated  that  he  was  in  leading- 
strings,  and  that  all  Russia  was  convinced  that  the 
two  women  reigned  in  his  name.  The  plotters 
brought  him  a  younger  and  prettier  woman  than 
Mdlle.  Nelidoff,  without  her  decided  character. 
She  was  the  daughter  of  Lapoukin,  who  had  been 
Director  of  Police  at  Moscow  under  Catherine  ;  Paul 
made  her  his  mistress,  and  rewarded  her  father  for 
his  complaisance  by  making  him  a  Prince  and  giving 
him  the  blue  ribbon.  Rostopchin  was  then  appointed 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  all  the  high  function- 
aries who  belonged  to  the  Empress's  party— the 
Princes  Kourakin  and  their  relatives,  the  chief  of 
whom  was  the  old  Prince  Repnin — lost  their  places 
and  were  banished  to  Moscow.  The  break-up  of  the 
party  was  complete  ;  it  was  enough  for  any  one  to  be 
suspected  by  the  Emperor  of  having  been  protected 
or  liked  by  the  Empress  to  ensure  his  dismissal  and 
banishment  from  the  Court. 

Paul  now  became  more  suspicious  than  ever.  He 
thought  his  sons  were  not  sufficiently  devoted  to  his 
interests,  and  that  his  wife  wanted  to  reign  in  his 
place.  All  who  approached  the  Court  were  in  constant 
fear  and  uncertainty,  being  exposed  at  any  moment  to 
be  addressed  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  Court  by 
the  Court-Marshal  with  some  insulting  message  from 
the  Emperor,  and  then  to  be  sent  into  exile.  It  was 
like  the  Reign  of  Terror.  The  balls  and  Court  festivals 
were  arenas  where  each  man  risked  his  position  and 


A  PALACE  PLOT  187 

his  liberty.  The  Emperor  constantly  fancied  that 
sufficient  respect  was  not  shown  to  some  person  who 
was  the  object  of  his  favour,  or  to  the  relations  of 
that  person,  and  that  this  neglect  was  inspired  by  the 
Empress,  and  in  such  cases  he  at  once  ordered  the 
supposed  culprit  to  be  dismissed  from  the  Court. 
His  fancies  and  his  decisions  were  equally  sudden,  and 
were  at  once  carried  out. 

Other  sovereigns,  after  a  fit  of  anger  or  extreme 
rigour,  sometimes  become  calm  and  strive  to  soften 
the  effects  of  their  first  decisions.  This  was  not  the 
case  with  the  Emperor  Paul.  Usually,  after  giving  a 
severe  order  with  regard  to  a  man  who  had  displeased 
him,  the  punishment  did  not,  after  reflection,  seem  to 
him  sufficient,  and  he  often  augmented  it.  All  who 
belonged  to  the  Court  or  came  before  the  Emperor 
wei-o  thus  in  a  state  of  continual  fear.  No  one  was 
sure  that  he  would  remain  in  his  place  at  the  end  of 
the  day,  and  in  going  to  bed  it  was  quite  uncertain 
whether  during  the  night  or  in  the  early  morning  some 
policeman  would  not  come  with  a  kibitka  to  drive  you 
off  at  once  to  Siberia.  This  state  of  affairs  began  with 
the  disgrace  of  Mdlle.  Nelidoff,  and  continued  with 