

Penetrated  with  these  grandeurs  of  the  past,  I 
thought  of  nothing  else  during  my  stay  in  the  Holy 
City.  I  determined  to  visit  every  trace  of  its  antiquity, 
and  by  examining  the  ruins  and  studying  all  that  had 
been  written  on  the  streets  and  buildings  of  ancient 
Rome,  to  construct  the  plan  of  the  city  as  it  appeared 
at  different  epochs.  My  idea  was  to  make  not  only 
general  plans,  but  a  series  of  drawings  of  portions  of 
Rome,  such  as  the  Tiber,  the  seven  hills,  arid  the 
edifices  built  upon  them,  so  far  as  imagination  can 
picture  them — beginning  with  the  first  foundation  of 
Rome  on  the  Palatine  hill  and  the  Capitol,  then  show- 


BO  ME  213 

ing  her  as  she  was  under  the  Kings  and  in  the  various 
phases  of  the  Republic,  when  she  was  still  built  of 
brick,  and  finally  under  Augustus,  when  she  became  a 
city  of  marble.  Each  of  these  drawings  was  to  repre- 
sent something  characteristic  of  the  epoch.  The  above 
plan,  which  to  me  was  new,  had  been  conceived  by 
others,  but  it  has  never  been  thoroughly  executed. 
The  drawings  representing  the  open  spaces,  the 
temples,  and  the  forts  of  the  city  divided  into  seventeen 
districts  (regioni)  occupied  me  during  the  whole  period 
of  my  stay.  I  wished  my  work  to  be  exact  and  con- 
scientious, and  to  make  it  so  required  much  time, 
expense,  and  research.  It  was  necessary  to  consult  a 
multitude  of  authors,  to  check  their  statements,  to 
employ  antiquaries,  architects  and  draughtsmen.  I 
did  not  finish  the  work ;  all  I  could  do  was  to  begin 
it.  I  had  a  very  good  plan  and  two  water-colour 
drawings  made  of  the  city.  One  represented  the 
Forum  as  it  was  at  the  time  of  the  Republic,  with  a 
crowd  of  people  opposite  the  Palatine  hill,  as  was 
usual  in  stormy  times ;  an  orator  above  the  rostra ; 
and  the  via  sacra  with  the  edifice  where  the  voting 
was  to  take  place.  The  other  drawing,  which  was  of 
large  size,  also  represented  the  Forum,  but  on  the  side 
opposite  the  Capitol.  The  subject  was  the  triumph 
of  Germanicus.  All  the  temples  on  the  slope  of  the 
Capitoline  hill  were  there,  and  Tiberius,  his  face  dis- 
torted with  hatred  and  rage,  was  represented  as 
coming  out  of  one  of  them  accompanied  by  the 
members  of  the  Senate.  A  third  drawing,  which  I 
ordered  to  be  made  during  my  absence,  was  to  repre- 
sent the  grottoes  on  the  Tiber  near  the  Palatine  hill 


214      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

during  the  first  period  after  the  foundation  of  Rome  ; 
but  it  did  not  in  any  way  carry  out  my  idea. 

My  enforced  absence  from  my  country,  my  family, 
and  my  friends,  and  the  fact  that  my  position  was  un- 
congenial and  without  aim,  plunged  me  into  a  sort  of 
lethargy  similar  to  that  which  had  oppressed  me  on 
my  first  arrival  at  St  Petersburg,  and  the  gravest  and 
most  unexpected  events  could  not  rouse  me.  During 
the  whole  of  my  life  the  sole  motive  of  my  actions 
has  always  been  one  exclusive  and  dominating  senti- 
ment— the  love  of  my  country.  That  which  did  not 
in  some  way  promote  the  welfare  of  my  fatherland  or 
of  my  fellow-countrymen  had  no  value  in  my  eyes, 
while  the  most  futile  matters  relating  to  Poland 
interested  me.  Thus  at  Warsaw  there  was  a  good 
French  theatre  and  a  very  indifferent  Polish  one  ;  yet 
I  went  to  the  latter  much  oftener  than  to  the  former. 