

While  I  was  staying  at  Florence  Alfieri  enjoyed 
robust  health,  and  occupied  the  greater  part  of  his 
time  in  Ions:  walks.  While  he  was  walking  he  used 

o  >  o 


ALFIEKI 


209 


to  declaim  aloud  verses  from  his  tragedies  without 
paying  the  slightest  attention  to  passers-by  or  to  the 
objects  which  surrounded  him.  In  the  evening  he 
looked  tired  and  exhausted,  and  directly  he  returned 
from  his  rambles  he  used  to  sit  down  to  a  game  of 
chess.  His  youth  had  been,  as  he  himself  says  in  his 
memoirs,  a  very  stormy  one.  It  was  Madame 
d' Albany,  to  whom  he  was  warmly  attached,  who  had 
advised  him  to  write  the  tragedies  and  other  works 
which  even  during  his  lifetime  had  rained  him  a 

c>  o 

great  reputation.  Some  years  before  I  had  met  him 
in  Paris.  At  first  he  was  an  ardent  admirer  of  the 
principles  of  the  French  Revolution,  but  afterwards, 
disgusted  by  its  excesses,  he  looked  upon  France  with 
horror,  and  devoted  all  his  zeal  to  the  cause  of  King 
Emmanuel,  strongly  blaming  himself  for  not  having 
been  constantly  faithful  to  it.  When  some  years  later 
a  sudden  illness  had  deprived  him  of  the  means  of  con- 
tinuing his  usual  walks,  he  concluded  that  he  would 
soon  die,  and  he  passed  away  in  a  few  days.  He  was 
a  man  of  great  merit,  and  looked  upon  events  from  a 
truly  elevated  point  of  view  ;  but  he  was  the  slave  of 
an  exalted  imagination,  and  was  subject  to  illusions. 

The  inertia  into  which  the  Sardinian  Court  and 
the  society  of  Florence  were  plunged,  was  too 
monotonous  to  be  interesting  ;  the  days  followed  each 
other  without  bringing  anything  new.  Under  these 
circumstances  I  decided  to  go  to  Pisa  to  see  M. 
Francis  Rzewuski,  formerly  Marshal  of  the  Polish 
Court.  He  was  a  friend  of  my  parents,  and  I  and 
my  mother  had  lived  in  his  house  during  our  stay  in 
Paris.  He  received  me  with  great  cordiality,  though 
VOL.  i.  o 


210       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

he  was  in  pain  ;  he  had  already  been  attacked  by  the 
malady    which    ended    in    his   death.       He  was  very 
impatient  as  regards  suffering,  and  always  relieved  it 
by  taking  opium.     He  did  this  with  the  approval  of 
a  physician  who  was  a  professor  in  the  university  of 
Pisa ;  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  by  taking  so  much 
opium  he  hastened  his  end,  and  that  it  did  not  prevent 
him   from   suffering    horribly.     We    had    known    and 
loved   M.    Rzewuski    since    we    were    children.       He 
always  had  some  sweets  for  us,  and  we  used  often  to 
go  from  Powonski  to  his  house  at  Marimont,  which 
he  had  fitted  up   with   much   luxury  and  taste.     He 
was  a  man  full  of  good  qualities — amiable,  beneficent, 
scrupulously  honest,   but  too  fond   of  ease ;   he   was 
generous  and  a  great  nobleman  in  the  true  sense  of 
the  word,  of  a  race  which  is  now  extinct.     Sometimes 
he  would  not  show  himself  to  his  guests,  though  he 
treated  them  with  munificent  hospitality.     When  he 
was  in  good  health  he  liked  to  come  down  to  his  meals, 
and  was  very  fond  of  conversation,  which  he  made  very 
interesting  by  relating  a  number  of  anecdotes.     One 
of  these  referred  to  his  stay  at  St  Petersburg.     He 
had  been  sent  there  by  the  King  after  his  accession, 
and  was   on   very  friendly  terms  with  Count  Pariin, 
Chancellor  of  the  Empire,  and  tutor  to  the  Grand- 
Duke  Paul.     Being  one  day  at  the  Count's  house  he 
took  the  young  prince  on  his  knees,  when  the  latter 
had  a  fit.     'I  was  never  so  frightened  in  my  life,'  he 
said,  '  and   I  took  good  care  not  to  play  again  with 
this  sickly  child,  who  might  have  died  in  my  arms.' 
He  knew  all  the  scandalous  gossip  of  Warsaw  and  St 
Petersburg  by  heart,  and  was  much  attached  to   the 