

The  King  of  Sardinia  reminded  one  a  good  deal — 
theological  erudition  apart — of  James  I  of  England  as 
he  has  been  described  in  history,  and  especially  by 
Scott.  The  branch  of  Savoy,  descended  from  an 
English  princess,  the  daughter,  if  I  am  not  mistaken, 
of  James  I,  was  the  oldest  of  the  branches  of  the 
Hanoverian  line.  The  King  did  not  like  business, 
and  though  very  pious,  was  fond  of  telling  good 
stories,  for,  like  his  predecessor  James,  he  had  a 
turn  for  buffoonery.  His  wife,  Queen  Clotilda,  was 
one  of  the  sisters  of  Louis  XVI ;  she  used  to  be 

*  See  page  73. 


THE  KING  OF  SARDINIA  207 

called  at  Versailles  le  gros  Madame,  on  account  of 
her  enormous  size,  but  when  I  was  presented  to  her, 
she  was  extremely  thin.  Her  eyes  were  still  very 
beautiful,  and  her  face  and  the  sound  of  her  voice 
had  an  expression  of  sweetness  and  melancholy. 

The  diplomatic  body  of  which  I  formed  part  was 
composed  of  myself  and  Mr  Wyndham,  brother  to 
Lord  Wyndham,  a  celebrated  member  of  the  House 
of  Lords ;  he  was  a  stout  Englishman  who  looked 
more  like  a  brewer  or  butcher  than  a  diplomatist. 
We  both  used  to  go  to  the  King's  residence  on  every 
Sunday  and  holiday.  He  occupied  one  of  the  palaces 
of  the  Grand-Duke  of  Tuscany ;  it  was  outside  the 
town,  and  afterwards  became  one  of  his  most  splendid 
residences.  We  were  always  introduced  by  Count 
Chalembert,  who  was  the  so-called  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs.  The  Count  presented  us  to  the  King 
and  Queen,  the  conversation  usually  turned  on  insig- 
nificant subjects,  and  it  did  not  last  longer  than  twenty 
minutes.  After  some  jocular  remarks  the  King  would 
dismiss  us,  sometimes  imitating  the  person  of  whom 
he  had  been  speaking,  which  he  did  in  a  very  comic 
way.  The  Queen  used  to  bow  to  us  with  a  melan- 
choly smile.  There  was  also  a  hungry  subordinate 
diplomatist  who  did  not  go  to  Court ;  his  name  was 
Winterhalter,  and  he  was  Charge  d' Affaires  of  Prussia. 
This  poor  wretch  was  so  badly  paid  that  he  hardly 
had  enough  for  his  living ;  but  though  his  clothes 
were  threadbare,  he  was  constantly  moving  about  and 
insinuating  himself  everywhere.  He  chatted  inces- 
santly, and  in  order  not  to  lose  his  wretched  pay  he 
doubtless  filled  his  daily  report  with  endless  gossip. 


208       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Though  almost  destitute,  he  had  a  big  stomach  and  a 
face  like  a  full  moon,  and  he  was  not  devoid  of 
political  ability. 

Only  a  few  Piedmontese  families  had  followed 
their  sovereign  ;  they  lived  in  complete  isolation  and 
did  not  see  or  receive  anybody.  M.  Bailly  de  Saint- 
Germain,  formerly  tutor  to  the  King,  was  supposed 
to  be  the  Court  Chamberlain,  but  no  one  ever  saw 
him  or  did  business  with  him.  He  once  gave  a  dinner, 
and  this  was  the  only  official  function  he  performed. 
M.  Dunoyer,  Count  Chalembert's  right  hand ;  M. 
de  Lamarmora  (uncle,  I  believe,  of  the  General  of 
that  name)  ;  M.  de  la  Tour,  Governor  of  Piedmont 
at  the  time  of  the  Austrian  occupation  ;  and  a  noble- 
man from  Sardinia,  completed  the  number  of  the  re- 
presentatives of  Piedmont.  Among  the  Florentines 
only  the  Marquis  Corsi  used  to  visit  the  Piedmontese, 
and  he  also  called  upon  me.  Another  house  which 
was  an  exception  to  the  general  rule  was  that  of 
Madame  d' Albany,  who  had  been  divorced  from  the 
Pretender,  and  was  now  the  wife  of  Alfieri.  She 
often  gave  dinners  to  which  strangers  were  invited. 
The  painter  Fabre  was  frequently  at  her  house  ;  I 
knew  him  long  after  at  Montpellier,  his  native 
town,  where  he  had  established  a  museum  of 
pictures  and  curiosities  collected  by  Alfieri  and  left 
by  the  latter  to  the  Countess  of  Albany,  who  gave 
them  to  Fabre  and,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  married 
him. 