


A  RUSSIAN  LOTHARIO  221 

on  intimate  terms.  The  worthy  Englishman  doubtless 
thought  he  had  deposited  his  treasure  in  safe  hands, 
but  the  temptation  was  too  strong.  The  lady  was 
like  a  rosebud,  and  Borozdin  had  with  the  husband's 
permission  located  her  in  the  house  where  he  himself 
lived,  on  the  plea  that  he  would  thereby  be  able  to 
take  better  care  of  her.  The  result  may  be  imagined. 
When  the  panic  of  a  French  invasion  was  over,  the 
Consul  returned,  took  back  his  wife,  and  could  not 
sufficiently  express  his  gratitude  to  his  friend  for  the 
service  he  had  rendered  him.  Shortly  after,  when  I 
left  Naples  to  go  back  to  Rome,  the  General  accom- 
panied me.  He  was  in  very  good  spirits,  and  did  not 
speak  any  more  about  the  Consul's  wife,  whom  he  had 
doubtless  soon  forgotten. 


,     CHAPTER  XI 

1801 

ASSASSINATION    OP    THE    EMPEROR    PAUL. 

THE  news  of  the  death  of  the  Emperor  Paul  suddenly 
fell  upon  us  like  a  clap  of  thunder  in  a  summer  sky. 
The  first  result  of  the  unexpected  news  was  astonish- 
ment accompanied  by  a  sort  of  fear,  but  these  senti- 
ments were  soon  followed  by  others  of  joy  and  relief. 
Paul  had  never  been  loved  even  by  those  whom  he 
had  benefited.  He  was  too  fantastic  and  capricious ; 
no  one  could  ever  rely  upon  him.  The  messenger 
who  brought  the  news  to  the  legation  looked  as  if  he 
were  deaf  and  dumb  ;  he  did  not  answer  any  questions, 
and  merely  uttered  unintelligible  sounds.  He  was 
terrified,  and  had  been  ordered  to  keep  silence.  All 
he  did  was  to  convey  to  me  a  few  words  from  the 
Emperor  Alexander,  who  asked  me  to  come  to 
St  Petersburg  at  once. 

[The    following    is   a   translation    of    Alexander's 

letter :— 

March  17  tk  1801. 

YQU  have  already  heard,  dear  friend,  that  owing 
to  the  death  of  my  father,  I  am  at  the  head  of  affairs. 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL        223 

I  do  not  mention  any  details,  as  I  wish  to  give  them 
to  you  by  word  of  mouth.  I  write  to  ask  you  at  once 
to  hand  over  all  the  affairs  of  your  mission  to  the 
next  senior  member  of  it,  and  to  proceed  to  St 
Petersburg.  I  need  not  tell  you  with  what  impatience 
I  am  waiting  for  you.  I  hope  heaven  will  watch 
over  you  during  your  journey  and  bring  you  here 
safe.  Adieu,  dear  friend,  I  cannot  say  more.  I 
enclose  a  passport  for  you  to  show  at  the  frontier. 

ALEXANDER.] 

This  order  gave  me  immense  pleasure.  Italy  is 
undoubtedly  a  delicious  country,  full  of  interest, 
especially  for  those  who  have  leisure  to  study  it.  The 
wars  which  had  ravaged  it  had  at  this  period  deprived 
.it  of  some  of  its  charms,  though  the  ravages  were  in 
themselves  not  without  interest.  But  I  was  far  from 
my  country,  my  family,  and  all  I  loved  ;  I  was  sad 
and  solitary  ;  I  was  never  quick  to  make  acquaint- 
ances ;  much  time  and  peculiar  circumstances  were 
necessary  to  break  the  ice  which  separated  me  even 
from  people  whom  I  saw  often.  My  old  friendships, 
though  not  numerous,  are  dear  to  me,  and  I  do  not 