


ROME 


211 


King,  though  after  being  for  a  long  time  his  Minister 
he  at  once  abandoned  the  Court  when  he  perceived 
that  the  King  was  not  faithful  to  his  engagements. 

I  profited  by  my  leisure  at  Florence  in  visiting  the 
masterpieces  of  art  in  the  galleries,  and  in  studying 
the  Italian  language.  I  read  Dante  with  a  priest 
who  was  remarkable  for  his  extreme  cowardice,  and 
was  constantly  repeating  the  expression  '  ho  paura/ 
which  at  that  time  people  were  not  ashamed  to  use. 
The  Italians  have  greatly  changed  since  then. 

This  tranquil  and  monotonous  existence  lasted  all 
the  winter ;  in  the  spring  people's  faces  began  to 
lengthen,  they  talked  in  whispers,  and  signs  of  great 
anxiety  followed  the  placid  security  of  the  previous 
months.  At  length  we  all  had  the  news  of  the  cross- 
ing of  the  Alps  by  Buonaparte  and  of  the  battle  of 
Marengo  and  its  results.  Sommariva  disappeared 
with  his  troops,  and  the  King  of  Sardinia  with  all  his 
Court,  myself  included,  hastily  packed  our  things  to 
go  to  Rome. 

o 

The  impression  produced  by  the  sight  of  Rome, 
when  one  comes  there  for  the  first  time,  is  indefinable. 
One  gathers  together  all  one's  recollections,  one 

O  O  ' 

strives  to  remember  all  one  has  learnt,  read,  and 
heard  of  this  ancient  capital  of  the  world,  and  to  com- 
bine all  these  echoes  of  the  soul  to  make  them  more 
sonorous.  It  is  difficult  to  realise  the  idea  that  you 
are  really  at  the  spot  where  such  great  events  have 
occurred,  that  you  tread  the  soil  trodden  by  such 
great  men.  At  the  age  especially  when  one  has  just 
completed  the  study  of  the  classic  writers  who  tell 
you  what  has  passed  and  give  you  the  names  of  those 


212       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

who  have  lived  at  Rome,  the  very  name  of  the  Holy 
City  raises  up  a  multitude  of  thoughts.  You  do  not 
see  things  as  they  really  are,  but  by  a  magical  effect 
of  imagination  you  see  them  as  they  were  formerly ; 
the  present  puts  on  the  pomp  and  the  colours  of  the 
past.  Directly  I  had  alighted  from  my  carriage  I 
hurried  to  the  Capitol  and  the  Palatine  Hill.  I  could 
not  subdue  my  impatience — I  could  not  sufficiently 
occupy  my  eyes  and  my  imagination  with  the  sight  of 
the  places  which  had  witnessed  such  great  actions. 
1  Is  it  possible,'  I  said  to  myself,  '  that  it  was  here 
that  lived  the  Scipios,  the  Catos,  the  Gracchi,  the 
CaBsars,  that  it  was  here  that  Cicero  thundered  and 
that  Horace  sang  ? '  and  I  recalled  to  my  memory  all 
that  had  since  my  infancy  been  the  object  of  my 
admiration  and  my  sympathies,  all  that  history  and 
the  poets  had  taught  me.  I  regret  much  that  at  the 
time  of  which  I  am  speaking  the  Christian  antiquities 
of  Rome  did  not  interest  me  as  greatly  as  they  do  now  ; 
all  my  dreams  were  only  of  heroic  but  pagan  Rome. 