

The  period  of  my  stay  in  Rome  was,  however,  by 
no  means  barren  of  events.  Pius  VI,  who  had  been 
elected  Pope  at  Venice,  entered  the  Holy  City  while 
it  was  still  suffering  from  the  excesses  committed  by 
the  French  troops.  I  recollect  that  at  a  reception  of 
Romans  and  foreigners  at  the  house  of  Monsignor 
Consalvi,  who  had  just  been  promoted  cardinal,  the 
Russian  Consul,  wishing  to  pay  him  a  compliment, 
awkwardly  predicted  that  he  would  become  Pope,  and 
that  Consalvi  very  sincerely  protested  against  the 
idea.  I  may  say  in  passing  that  in  my  official  reports 
I  did  not  hesitate  to  censure  the  French  for  their 
conduct.  This  seemed  greatly  to  astonish  M. 
Karpoff,  the  first  secretary  of  the  legation,  an  old 
Russian  official  who  had  probably  been  instructed  to 


QUARREL  BETWEEN  RUSSIA  AND  AUSTRIA     215 

watch  my  movements.  Knowing  the  sympathy 
generally  felt  by  the  Poles  for  France,  he  almost 
reproached  me  for  my  severity  ;  but  I  replied  that  if 
the  French  behaved  badly  I  could  not  speak  well  of 
them.  All  men,  whether  French  or  not,  lose  on  a 
nearer  view  much  of  the  prestige  and  enthusiasm 
which  they  inspire  at  a  distance. 

The  friendly  relations  which  had  existed  between 
the  Emperor  Paul  and  Austria  began  about  this  time 
to  grow  cool.  There  were  various  reasons  for  this  ; 
I  will  give  some  which  are  not  generally  known. 
The  Grand-Duchess  Alexandra,  the  eldest  of  Paul's 
daughters,  who,  as  I  stated  in  a  previous  chapter,  was 
intended  by  Catherine  to  marry  the  King  of  Sweden, 
became  the  wife  of  the  Archduke  Joseph,  Prince 
Palatine  of  Hungary.  This  union  was  contracted  at 
a  period  when  the  Courts  of  St  Petersburg  and 
Vienna  were  on  the  best  terms  with  each  other, 
and  at  the  time  when  Souvaroff  had  gained  his  vic- 
tories in  Italy.  The  Archduchess  was  of  uncommon 
beauty ;  her  features  resembled  those  of  her  brother 
Alexander,  she  was  most  graceful,  and  she  possessed 
all  the  moral  qualities  which  are  the  highest  orna- 
ments of  her  sex.  When  she  came  to  Vienna,  she 
inspired  universal  admiration,  respect,  and  enthusiasm, 
without  in  any  way  seeking  it.  Her  popularity  ex- 
tended from  the  highest  classes  of  the  capital  to  the 
most  populous  districts  of  Vienna.  This  displeased 
the  Neapolitan  wife  of  the  Emperor  Francis  II,  a 
woman  of  jealous  and  eccentric  character  and  of  ex- 
traordinary habits.  She  loved  monsters,  and  filled 
her  gardens  with  burlesque  statues.  There  was 


something  underhand  and  cunning  in  her  manner, 
and  she  never  looked  one  straight  in  the  face.  The 
only  persons  with  whom  she  was  intimate  were  her 
servants,  who  never  ventured  to  rival  her  in  beauty 
or  wit ;  she  gave  them  bizarre  banquets  and  private 
theatricals  in  which  she  played  herself,  and  her 
husband,  whose  mind  was  also  not  very  brilliant  or 
suited  to  a  more  distinguished  society,  used  to  take 
part  in  these  entertainments,  of  which  singular  stories 
were  related  at  Vienna.  The  Archduke  Joseph's 
beautiful  and  amiable  wife  was  regarded  by  the 
Austrian  Empress  as  a  rival,  and  she  rendered  the 
Archduchess's  life  so  intolerable  that  the  latter 
had  to  withdraw  with  her  husband  to  Ofen.  She 
was  Paul's  favourite  child,  and  when  he  learnt 
how  she  had  been  treated  he  flew  into  a  rage, 
demanded  that  she  should  be  sent  back  to  St 
Petersburg,  and  even  threatened  war.  Her  death, 
which  happened  almost  simultaneously  with  that  of 
her  father,  rendered  any  further  action  useless,  but  it 
plunged  the  whole  of  St  Petersburg  in  deep  mourn- 
ing, while  Austria,  having  re-established  herself 
in  Italy,  had  begun  to  treat  the  Russian  Cabinet 
with  less  deference.  The  Austrians  had  sent  away 
SouvarofF  with  little  ceremony,  and  thinking  them- 
selves already  masters  of  the  country,  they  were 
glad  to  rid  themselves  of  an  inconvenient  and 
haughty  ally.  Then  came  the  defeats  of  the 
Russians  in  Holland  and  Switzerland,  which  con- 
tributed still  further  to  estrange  Paul  from  Austria. 
Buonaparte,  taking  advantage  of  this  change,  hastened 
to  send  back  to  Paul  all  the  Russian  prisoners,  clothed 