


RAPPROCHEMENT  WITH  FRANCE  217 

in  new  uniforms  and  well  provided  in  every  respect. 
This  friendly  step  on  the  part  of  the  First  Consul  gained 
the  Emperor's  heart,  and  he  declared  to  his  Ministers 
and  the  people  with  whom  he  was  intimate  that 
Russia  had  been  too  lavish  of  her  blood  and  money 
for  Austria,  who  only  repaid  her  by  ingratitude. 
He  enlarged  on  Buonaparte's  '  noble  conduct,'  and 
interpreted  it  as  a  sign  that  he  sincerely  wished  for 
the  alliance  of  Russia  ;  he  had,  Paul  said,  suppressed 
anarchy  and  the  demagogues,  and  there  was  no  good 
reason  why  Russia  should  not  come  to  an  under- 
standing with  him.  Paul  accordingly  sent  General 
Levaschoff  to  Naples  to  mediate  between  the  French 
Government  and  that  of  the  two  Sicilies.  In  passing 
through  Rome  the  General  gave  me  a  letter  from 
Count  Rostopchin,  the  Foreign  Minister — the  first  I 
had  received  from  him — introducing  General  Levas- 
chofF  to  me  and  instructing  me  to  give  him  my 
services.  I  did  this  readily,  for  the  General  was  not 
only  a  good  companion,  but  was  very  friendly.  Soon 
after  I  received  a  second  missive  from  Count  Rostop- 
chin informing  me  that  the  Emperor,  not  being 
satisfied  with  the  conduct  of  the  Sardinian  Court, 
wished  me  to  leave  it  under  the  pretext  of  visiting 
Naples. 

I  was  delighted  at  this  order,  and  left  for  Naples 
at  once.  The  Court  was  not  there  ;  its  only  repre- 
sentative was  the  Chevalier  Acton,  an  all-powerful 
Minister,  who  had  left  Sicily  to  govern  the  kingdom. 
Though  Naples,  thanks  to  its  brilliant  sun  and  its 
unequalled  position,  cannot  be  otherwise  than  beauti- 
ful, it  had  at  that  time  a  very  melancholy  appearance. 


218      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

M.  Italinsky,  afterwards  envoy  at  Constantinople 
and  then  at  Rome,  a  Ruthenian  and  formerly  a 
surgeon,  had  for  some  years  been  at  Naples  on  a 
diplomatic  mission.  He  was,  or  at  least  he  tried  to 
be,  a  learned  man.  He  studied  archaeology  and 
physics,  and  knowing  how  to  do  his  own  business 
people  concluded  that  he  would  also  know  how  to  do 
that  of  others.  In  ordinary  matters  he  certainly 
acquitted  himself  very  well,  but  he  was  never  very 
successful,  either  from  want  of  capacity  or  of  good 
fortune,  in  dealing  with  affairs  of  greater  importance. 
He  owed  his  favour  with  Catherine  to  some  letters 
on  the  eruptions  of  Mount  Vesuvius,  and  he  always 
stated  at  the  end  of  his  despatches  that  he  had  blotted 
them  with  some  of  the  volcanic  ash  that  had  fallen 
upon  Pompeii  eighteen  centuries  before.  He  was 
also  helped  in  his  career  by  his  ill-health.  He  suffered 
from  a  sort  of  aneurism  which  obliged  him  to  lead  a 
very  regular  life,  but  it  lasted  many  years. 