

The  Court  of  Naples  sought  to  take  advantage 
of  the  friendly  relations  which  had  been  established 
between  Paul  and  Buonaparte.  It  solicited  the 
Emperor's  intervention  against  the  advance  of  the 
French,  which  people  thought  would,  after  Marengo, 
be  continued  to  the  most  southerly  point  of  the 
peninsula.  Italinsky  proceeded,  at  the  instigation 
of  the  Chevalier  Acton,  to  Florence,  where  Murat 
then  was,  to  obtain  some  favourable  conditions  for 
Naples ;  but  his  efforts  produced  no  result.  He 
started  before  my  departure  from  Rome,  and  M. 
Karpoff,  my  first  secretary,  being  jealous  of  Italinsky, 
and  wishing  to  revenge  himself  for  his  sarcasms, 


THE  NEAPOLITAN  COURT  219 

called  this  fruitless  journey  'The  Italinsky  Pilgrim- 
age.' 

On  my  arrival  at  Naples  I  requested  Italinsky 
to  present  me  to  the  Chevalier  Acton.  We  found 
him  at  a  table  covered  with  papers.  He  was  a  thin, 
sickly-looking  man,  with  a  gaunt  and  sallow  counten- 
ance and  black  eyes.  His  demeanour  showed  at  every 
movement  the  ravages  of  time  ;  he  walked  with  a 
stoop,  and  constantly  groaned  under  the  weight  of 
his  labours  and  misfortunes.  Yet  he  was  said  to  be 
the  favourite  lover  of  the  Queen  Caroline,  who  was 
the  absolute  mistress  of  her  husband  and  the  kingdom. 

O 

Nothing  was  done  except  by  her  will,  and  even  official 
letters  bore  her  signature  by  the  side  of  the  King's, 
to  show  that  they  governed  together.  She  had  all 
the  activity  of  her  brother,  the  Emperor  Joseph  ;  this 
was  sufficiently  proved  by  her  sparkling  glance,  her 
quick  movements,  and  her  shrill  voice.  I  saw  her 
at  Leghorn  when  she  was  disembarking  with  her 
daughters,  one  of  whom,  the  Princess  Amelie,  after- 
wards married  Louis-Philippe.  Maria  Theresa  had 
fashioned  her  daughter's  mind  to.  domination  long 
before  she  was  married  to  King  Ferdinand.  This 
habit  of  governing  afterwards  became  her  passion. 
She  also  had  a  succession  of  favourites  ;  her  tiery 
temperament  was  stimulated  by  the  Neapolitan 
climate,  and  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  believe 
her  boast  that  she  had  never  had  a  child  of  whom 
Ferdinand  was  not  the  father,  if  there  were  not  an 
unfortunate  likeness  between  them  and  Ferdinand — 
not  only  as  regards  personal  appearance,  which,  in  his 
case,  was  anything  but  attractive,  but  also  as  to 


220       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

character  and  mind.  Queen  Amelie  was  the  only 
exception  to  this  ;  her  rare  moral  qualities  were  in 
strong  contrast  to  the  characteristics  of  Caroline's 
other  children. 

The  Russian  army  corps  which  then  occupied 
Naples  was  under  the  command  of  General  Borozdin, 
the  eldest  of  three  brothers.  There  was  at  one  time 
some  idea  of  pushing  on  the  combined  forces  as  far  as 
Rome  in  order  to  check  the  French  advance,  and  the 
General  had  himself  gone  to  Rome  with  this  object. 
But  he  could  not  come  to  an  understanding  with 
General  Roger  de  Damas,  the  commander  of  the 
Neapolitan  troops,  as  to  who  was  to  have  the  general 
command,  and  the  plan  was  dropped,  fortunately  for 
the  two  generals,  who  would  otherwise  have  inevitably 
been  defeated.  General  Borozdin  was  a  dandy  of  the 
time  of  Catherine ;  he  was  very  amiable  in  society, 
but  his  military  talents  were  doubtful.  Being  in  the 
most  voluptuous  of  climates  and  furnished  with  ample 
means, by  the  Neapolitan  Government,  which  reckoned 
on  the  Russian  troops  more  than  on  its  own,  Borozdin 
had  all  a  Russian  can  desire — display  and  enjoyment. 
To  complete  his  pleasures,  fortune  had  also  placed  in 
his  hands  a  conquest  which  he  valued  more  highly 
than  any  other.  A  British  Consul  who  had  married  a 
young  and  charming  lady  had  thought  fit  to  escape 
from  Naples  directly  he  heard  of  the  defeat  of  the 
Austrians  at  Marengo  and  the  victorious  march  of 
the  French  towards  Florence  and  the  south.  In 
order  not  to  expose  his  young  wife  to  the  dangers  of 
a  precipitous  journey,  he  determined  to  place  her  in 
the  charge  of  General  Borozdin,  with  whom  he  was 