

O  '  ' 

feel  inclined  to  contract  new  ones.  It  was  with 
inexpressible  pleasure,  therefore,  that  I  made  my 
preparations  for  departure ;  but  I  could  not  leave 
Naples  without  visiting  Vesuvius,  Herculaneum, 
Pompeii  and  Portici.  As  I  was  ascending  Mount 
Vesuvius,  I  stumbled  and  began  to  slip  down  towards 
the  crater,  when  the  guide  ran  up,  gave  me  his  hand, 
plunged  his  iron-shod  staff  into  the  moving  debris, 
and  thus  saved  my  life.  The  idea  of  death  was  at 


224      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORY8KI 

that  moment  very  painful  to  me ;  I  was  about  to 
return  to  my  people,  and  to  exchange  a  passive  for  an 
active  existence.  I  felt  that  I  was  more  attached  to 
life  than  ever,  as  radiant  visions  of  hope,  not  yet  dis- 
pelled by  experience,  were  floating  before  my  eyes. 

On  the  day  following  that  on  which  the  news  of 
the  death  of  the  Emperor  Paul  was  communicated  to 
us,  the  messenger  sent  from  St  Petersburg  by  the 
Neapolitan  Ambassador  brought  us  a  circumstantial 
account  of  the  catastrophe.  It  did  not  astonish  me, 
as  I  saw  before  my  departure  that  the  whole  of  the 
Court  was  planning  a  conspiracy  against  the  Emperor. 
At  Naples  the  general  impression  was  one  of  joy 
almost  exceeding  the  bounds  of  decency.  On  the 
second  day  after  the  messenger's  arrival,  General 
Borozdin  gave  a  ball  to  which  he  invited  the  best 
society  of  the  town.  The  dancing  was  kept  up  all 
night,  and  the  General  encouraged  by  his  example 
public  demonstrations  of  a  gaiety  which,  to  say  the 
least,  was  ill-timed.  The  wife  of  the  British  Consul 
was  conspicuous  at  this  fete  in  a  pink  dress. 

My  companion  on  the  journey  from  Rome  to 
Florence  was  General  Levaschoff;  he  was  very 
amiable  and  full  of  anecdote.  He  had  been  sent  to 
Naples  with  the  secret  intention  of  negotiating  an 
armistice  between  the  belligerents.  The  Emperor 
Paul,  who  had  withdrawn  from  the  coalition,  wished 
by  this  means  to  avoid  all  reproach  ;  and  General 
Levaschoff  had  been  despatched  immediately  after  the 
defeats  in  Holland  and  Switzerland  on  the  pretext  of 
visiting  Italy  for  his  pleasure.  His  instructions  were 
drawn  up  by  Count  Rostopchin,  then  Foreign 


MURAT 


225 


Minister,  who  was  shortly  after  deprived  of  his  port- 
folio and  retired  to  Moscow,  upon  which  Paul  broke 
off  his  relations  with  Austria,  declared  war  against 
England,  and  prepared  to  enter  into  a  cordial  alliance 
with  Buonaparte.  All  this  happened  during  my 
absence,  and  although  I  was  on  good  terms  with 

O  cj 

Kutaysehoff,*  I  never  could  learn  the  exact  details 
either  of  Levaschoft's  mission  or  of  Rostopchin's 
dismissal.  LevaschofFs  negotiations,  which  he  was 
authorised  by  the  Cabinet  to  continue  after  Paul's 
death,  were  not  successful.  The  French  negotiators 
at  once  suspected  that  Alexander  would  not  be  so 
easy  to  manage  as  Paul  had  been.  This  was  doubtless 
also  Murat's  opinion,  for,  without  waiting  for  instruc- 
tions from  Paris,  he  occupied  the  whole  of  Tuscany, 
and  continued  his  advance.  The  more  he  suspected, 
however,  the  more  loudly  he  proclaimed  his  belief  in 
the  maintenance  of  a  friendly  understanding  between 
France  and  Russia.  He  occupied  the  palace  of  the 
Duke  of  Tuscany,  where  he  gave  me  and  General 
Levaschoff  a  splendid  dinner  to  which  all  the  generals 
and  the  principal  people  of  Florence,  comprising  some 
sixty  persons,  were  invited.  We  sat  on  each  side 
of  Madame  Murat,  who  was  very  slim  and  pretty. 
Murat,  who  sat  opposite,  paid  us  constant  attention, 
and  was  more  amiable  than  his  wife.  He  proposed 
the  health  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  and  afterwards 
drank  the  health  of  both  of  us.  When  the  General 
went  to  see  him  in  his  box  at  the  play  he  observed 
that  above  his  head  were  the  Russian  and  French 
flags  crossing  each  other. 