


THE  KING  OF  SARDINIA  205 

French,  but  feared  the  Austrians.  made  a  strong 
impression  upon  me.  The  King  of  Sardinia,  who, 
expelled  from  the  Italian  Peninsula  by  the  French, 
had  been  forced  to  take  refuge  in  the  Island  of 
Sardinia,  had  taken  advantage  of  Souvaroff s  victories 
to  return  and  establish  himself  at  Florence ;  he  was 
encouraged  to  do  this  by  the  Court  of  St  Petersburg, 

«/  o " 

which  had  taken  him  under  its  protection.  He  could 
not  yet  venture  as  far  as  Piedmont,  where  the  armies 
were  standing  opposite  each  other.  The  Battle  of 
Novi  had  been  fought,  but  Buonaparte  was  already 
coming  back  from  Egypt,  and  Massena  had  shut 
himself  up  in  Genoa.  The  Court  of  Vienna,  too,  was 
doing  its  utmost  to  prevent  the  King  of  Sardinia 
from  returning  to  his  dominions.  At  first  it  feared 
that  his  presence  might  interfere  with  its  military  and 
political  plans,  and  the  two  Courts  had  long  been 
estranged.  Austria  did  not  care  for  anybody  but 
herself.  Selfishness  is  no  doubt  common  both  among 
States  and  individuals,  but  Austria  was  more  passion- 
ately and  evidently  selfish  than  any  other  Power,  and 
this  exclusive  sentiment  prevented  her  from  having 
any  generous  impulse,  or  a  friendly  and  sincere,  or 
even  honest  policy  towards  others. 

I  arrived  at  Florence  in  the  winter  of  1798-9. 
On  the  night  of  my  arrival  there  was  a  terrible  storm, 
accompanied  by  thunder  arid  lightning,  which  re- 
minded me  of  other  similar  natural  phenomena  that 
preceded  some  of  the  gravest  events  of  my  life.  My 
diplomatic  occupations  as  the  Russian  Minister  at  the 
Court  of  King  Emmanuel,  which  consisted  only  of  a 
few  faithful  partisans,  were  not  very  arduous,  My 


206      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

task  was  to  restore  courage  to  this  unfortunate  prince 
by  assuring  him  of  the  friendly  sentiments  and  the 
protection  of  the  Emperor  Paul,  and  to  send  to  my 
Cabinet  at  least  once  a  month  a  report,  which  it  was 
difficult  to  make  very  interesting,  as  other  Ministers 
were  posted  nearer  to  the  places  where  great  events 
were  occurring  than  I  was.  I  was  limited  to  a  certain 
kind  of  news,  and  yet  I  was  expected  to  invest  it  with 
interest.  The  task  was  especially  difficult  to  me,  as 
since  my  arrival  in  Russia,  I  had  felt  nothing  but 
indifference  with  regard  to  all  I  was  required  to  do. 
This  indifference  enabled  me  to  bear  numerous  trials 
with  firmness  and  equanimity,  and  it  was  especially 
necessary  in  my  new  appointment,  as  I  had  to  regard 
as  a  success  what  I  could  only  consider  a  calamity.  I 
had  to  keep  up  a  correspondence  with  Souvaroff  and 
forget  the  massacre  of  Praga,*  and  I  had  to  write  at 
the  end  of  each  of  my  despatches  to  the  Emperor : 
'Your  faithful  subject  and  slave  (rab),'  according  to 
the  formula  then  laid  down  by  him. 