


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         235 

he  was  arrested  on  the  day  after  his  master's  death, 
letters  were  found  in  his  pocket  revealing  the  objects 
of  the  conspiracy,  the  time  when  it  was  to  be  executed, 
and  the  names  of  the  conspirators.  But  he  never 
opened  his  letters  directly  he  received  them.  His 
favourite  saying  was  '  business  to-morrow/  and  he  put 
these  important  letters  in  his  pocket  in  order  not  to 
interrupt  his  pleasures  that  evening. 

Paul  had  just  finished  the  construction  at  immense 
expense  of  the  palace  of  St  Michael.*  This  building 
was  erected  after  his  own  designs,  and  was  a  sort  of 
fortified  castle  where  the  Emperor  thought  his  life 
would  be  safe.  'I  never  felt  happier  or  more  at  ease/ 
he  said  when  he  took  up  his  residence  in  this  palace, 
and  he  became  more  self-indulgent  and  -autocratic 
than  ever. 

Although  everybody  sympathised  with  the  con- 
spiracy, nothing  was  done  until  Alexander  had  given 
his  consent  to  his  father's  deposition.  The  men  who 
undertook  to  carry  out  the  plan  were  Pahlen  arid  the 
two  Zuboffs,  whom  Paul  had  recalled  from  exile  and 
loaded  with  favours,  thinking  he  had  nothing  to  fear 
from  them  now  he  was  in  his  new  castle.  Their  first 
step  was  to  induce  a  number  of  Generals  and  other 
officers  of  rank  who  were  their  friends  to  come  under 
various  pretexts  to  St  Petersburg ;  and  this  was 
rendered  more  easy  by  the  fact  that  Paul  himself  had 
invited  many  high  functionaries  and  Generals  to  be 

*  The  swindling  which  took  place  at  the  erection  of  this  building  is  almost 
incredible.  The  chief  architect,  B  .  .  .,  was  an  Italian  foreman,  whom  Count 
Stanislas  Potocki  had  brought  from  Italy,  and  who  passed  from  Warsaw  to  the 
service  of  the  Grand-Duke  Paul  at  Gatchina.  B  .  .  .  's  commissions  on  the  work 
he  performed  were  enormous,  and  he  left  a  large  fortune  to  his  daughter's  husband 
and  their  children,  who  became  Russian  diplomatists. 


236      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

present  at  the  fetes  he  was  about  to  give  on  the 
marriage  of  one  of  his  daughters.  Pahlen  and  the 
Zuboffs  took  steps  to  enlist  the  services  of  some  of 
the  more  eminent  of  the  Generals,  without  stating 
positively  what  they  intended  to  do.  But  it  was 
necessary  to  act  at  once,  for  the  slightest  imprudence 
or  revelation  might  place  the  Emperor  in  possession 
of  their  secret,  and  he  was  already  so  suspicious  that 
he  might  at  any  moment  take  some  step  which  would 
be  their  ruin.  It  was  not  known  whether  he  had 
already  sent  for  Araktcheyeff  and  Rostopchin.  The 
former  lived  at  twenty-four  hours'  journey  from  St 
Petersburg  and  might  come  at  any  moment.  Doubt- 
less he  and  Rostopchin  would  endeavour  to  moderate 
the  Emperor's  excesses,  but  their  influence  would 
probably  not  be  sufficient  to  put  a  stop  to  the  severities 
he  wished  to  exercise  with  regard  to  several  members 
of  the  Imperial  family.  It  was  evident  that  any 
further  delay  or  vacillation  would  be  most  dangerous, 
and' miff ht  be  the  cause  of  incalculable  calamities; 