


228       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

together  with  information  communicated  to  me  by 
other  actors  in  the  tragedy.  As  regards  the  matters 
which  had  formerly  absorbed  our  attention,  and  as 
to  which  I  wished  to  ascertain  how  far  his  feelings 
had  been  changed  by  his  sudden  elevation  to  the 
throne,  I  found  him  much  as  I  expected ;  not  quite 
aroused  from  his  past  dreams,  to  which  he  still  always 
returned,  but  already  in  the  iron  hands  of  reality ; 
yielding  to  force,  and  not  yet  knowing  the  extent  of 
his  power  or  how  to  use  it. 

Alexander  told  me  that  the  first  man  who  spoke 

to  him  about  the  plans  of  the  conspirators  was  Count 

Panin,  and   he  never  forgave  him.     This  personage 

seemed  destined   more  than   anyone  else  to  play  an 

important  part  in  the  affairs  of  the  Empire,  and  he 

had   all  that  was  wanted   for  such  an  undertaking ; 

a    celebrated    name,    uncommon    talents,    and    much 

ambition.     While  still  young  he  had  made  a  brilliant 

career.       He    was    appointed    Russian    Minister    at 

Berlin,    from    which    post   he   was    recalled    by   the 

Emperor  Paul  to  be  a  member    of  the    Council    of 

Foreign  Affairs  under  the  orders  of  Prince  Alexander 

Kourakin,    his    maternal    uncle    and    Paul's    faithful 

friend,  the  companion  of  his  infancy  and  youth,  who 

alone  of  the  leading  men  at  the  Imperial  Court  had 

escaped  the  Emperor's  caprices  and  remained  steadily 

in     favour.       Besides     his     relationship     to     Prince 

Kourakin,  Count  Panin  was  the  son  of  the  eminent 

General  of  that  name,  and  the  nephew  of  the  Minister 

who  had  been  the  Grand-Duke  Paul's  tutor.     These 

antecedents   gave  Count  Panin  a   certain    assurance 

and  air  of  importance.     He  was  a  tall,  reserved-looking 


COUNTS  PANIN  AND  PAHLEN  229 

'man,  and  wrote  in  excellent  French;  his  despatches 
were  perfect  in  every  respect  both  as  regards  matter 
and  style.  He  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  man  of 
great  talent,  energy,  and  good  sense,  but  of  dry  and 
imperious  character.  After  remaining  for  some 
months  in  the  Foreign  Office,  he  displeased  the 
Emperor,  who  deprived  him  of  his  appointment  and 
sent  him  back  to  Moscow.  As  will  be  seen  further 
on,  Panin  was  one  of  the  chief  leaders  of  the  con- 
spiracy which  brought  about  Paul's  death,  though  he 
did  not  actually  take  part  in  it.  During  my  previous 
stay  in  the  Russian  capital  I  had  never  met  him,  for 
having  entered  the  diplomatic  career  at  an  early  age, 
he  scarcely  ever  came  there.  His  wife,  a  Countess 
Orloff,  did  not  follow  him  abroad ;  she  was  good  and 
amiable,  and  had  been  very  kind  to  me.  When  I 
returned  to  St  Petersburg  she  insisted  on  bringing 
me  and  her  husband  together,  and  did  everything 
in  her  power  to  make  us  friends,  but  without  success. 
Apart  from  other  reasons,  the  Count's  exterior  would, 
I  think,  almost  have  alone  been  sufficient  to  make 
this  impossible.  I  have  often  been  struck  by  his 
icy  expression ;  his  impassive  countenance,  on  a  body 
as  straight  as  a  spike,  did  not  induce  one  to  address 
him.  I  saw  him  but  little,  however,  and  my  judgment 
of  his  character  might  have  been  erroneous  and  even 
unjust. 