

The  two  Counts  Panin  and  Pahlen  were  at  that 
time  the  strongest  heads  of  the  Empire.  They  saw 
further  and  more  clearly  than  the  other  members  of 
Paul's  Council,  to  which  both  of  them  belonged ;  and 
they  agreed  to  initiate  Alexander  into  their  plans. 


230      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

It  would  not  have  been  prudent  to  attempt  anything 
without  being:  assured  of  the  consent  of  the  heir 'to 

c5 

the  crown.  Devoted  fanatics  or  enthusiasts  might  no 
doubt  have  acted  otherwise.  By  not  implicating  the 
son  in  the  dethronement  of  his  father,  by  exposing 
themselves  to  a  certain  death,  they  would  have  better 
served  both  Russia  and  the  prince  who  was  to  be 
called  upon  to  govern  her  ;  but  such  a  course  would 
have  been  almost  impracticable,  and  it  would  have 
demanded  an  audacity  and  antique  virtue  which  in 
these  days  very  few  men  possess.  Pahlen,  as 
Governor  of  St  Petersburg,  had  easy  means  of  access 
to  the  Grand-Duke,  and  obtained  from  him  a  secret 
audience  for  Panin ;  their  first  interview  took  place 
in  a  bath.  Panin  represented  to  Alexander  the  evils 
from  which  Russia  was  suffering  and  would  continue 
to  suffer  if  Paul  continued  to  reign.  He  said  that 
Alexander's  most  sacred  duty  was  to  his  country,  and 
that  he  must  not  sacrifice  millions  of  people  to  the 
extravagant  caprices  and  follies  of  a  single  man,  even 
if  that  man  was  his  father ;  that  the  life,  or  at  least 
the  liberty,  of  his  mother,  of  himself,  and  of  the  whole 
of  the  Imperial  family  was  threatened  by  Paul's 
inconceivable  aversion  for  his  wife,  from  whom  he  was 
entirely  separated  ;  that  this  aversion  increased  from 
day  to  day,  and  might  prompt  him  to  the  most  out- 
rageous acts ;  and  that  it  was  therefore  necessary  to 
save  Russia,  whose  fate  was  in  Alexander's  hands,  by 
deposing  Paul,  which  would  be  the  only  means  of 
preventing  him  from  inflicting  greater  calamities  on. 
his  country  and  his  family,  and  securing  to  him  a 
quieter  and  more  happy  life.  This  speech  produced 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         231 

a  great  impression  on  Alexander,  but  it  did  not  con- 
vince him.  It  required  more  than  six  months  to 
enable  his  tempters  to  obtain  his  consent  to  their 
plans.  Pahlen  had  at  first  left  all  the  speaking  to 
Panin,  who  was  an  adept  at  specious  arguments ;  but 
when  the  latter  was  sent  to  Moscow,  Pahlen  completed 
the  work  of  his  colleague  by  hints  and  allusions,  in- 
telligible only  to  Alexander  himself,  which  were  so 
skilfully  introduced,  with  a  military  frankness  which 
he  made  almost  as  effective  as  eloquence,  that  Alex- 
ander became  more  and  more  persuaded  that  the 
aims  of  the  conspiracy  were  just  and  good.* 