

Pahlen,  who  seems  to  have  lost  his  way  in  the 
garden,  came  to  the  palace  with  his  band  imme- 
diately after  the  deed  had  been  consummated.  It  is 
said  that  he  had  delayed  his  arrival  on  purpose,  so  as 
to  be  able  to  profess  to  have  come  to  the  Emperor's 
assistance  in  case  his  colleagues  should  have  failed. 
Be  this  as  it  may,  he  was  extremely  active  directly 
he  arrived,  giving  the  necessary  orders  during  the 
rest  of  the  night,  and  omitting  nothing  which  could 
give  him  a  claim  to  reward  as  the  prime  mover  and 
commander  of  the  enterprise. 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         2^3 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  narrative  how  easy 
it  would  have  been  for  the  undertaking  to  have  been 
foiled  by  an  accident,  notwithstanding  the  precautions 
\vhich  had  been  taken  to  ensure  its  success.  The 
conspiracy  had  the  sympathies  of  the  higher  classes 
and  most  of  the  officers ;  but  not  of  the  lower  ranks 
of  the  army.  The  persons  who  suffered  from  Paul's 
insane  fits  of  rage  and  severity  were  usually  the 
higher  military  and  civil  officials ;  his  caprices  very 
seldom  affected  men  of  the  lower  ranks,  who,  more- 
over, were  continually  receiving  extra  pay  and  rations 
of  bread,  wine,  and  brandy  when  they  were  on  drill 
or  on  a  parade.  The  punishments  to  which  the 
officers  were  exposed  did  not  therefore  produce  any 
unpleasant  impression  on  the  common  soldier ;  on  the 
contrary,  they  were  a  sort  of  satisfaction  to  him  for 
the  blows  and  ill-treatment  he  constantly  had  to 
endure.  Moreover,  his  pride  was  flattered  by  the 
great  importance  attached  to  his  calling,  for  to  Paul 
nothing  could  be  more  important  than  a  foot  raised 
too  soon  on  the  march,  or  a  coat  badly  buttoned  on 
parade.  It  amused  and  pleased  the  soldiers  to  see 
their  Emperor  dispensing  endless  punishments  and 
severities  among  the  officers,  while  he  took  every 
opportunity  to  afford  to  the  men  ample  compensation 
for  the  work  and  trouble  that  was  required  of  them. 
The  soldiers  of  the  Guard,  many  of  whom  were 
married,  lived  with  their  families  almost  in  opulence, 
and  both  they  and  those  of  the  other  regiments 
were  satisfied  with  and  attached  to  their  Emperor. 
General  Talyzin,  one  of  the  principal  conspirators, 
who  was  very  popular  among  the  soldiers,  had  under- 


244      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

taken  to  bring  to  the  palace  one  of  the  battalions  of 
the  first  regiment  of  the  Guard  which  was  under  his 
command.  He  assembled  the  men  after  leaving 
Zuboffs  supper,  and  began  to  tell  them  that  their 
fatigues  were  about  to  cease,  and  that  the}'  would 
now  have  an  indulgent  and  kind  sovereign  who 
would  not  impose  upon  them  the  rigorous  duties 
they  had  hitherto  had  to  perform.  He  soon  per- 
ceived, however,  that  his  words  were  not  listened  to 
with  favour ;  the  soldiers  preserved  a  gloomy  silence, 
their  faces  had  a  sombre  expression,  and  some  mur- 
murs were  heard.  The  General  cut  short  his  speech, 
uttered  in  a  sharp  tone  of  command  the  words  '  Right 
wheel — march,'  and  the  battalion,  which  had  now 
again  become  a  machine,  marched  to  the  palace,  all 
the  outlets  from  which  it  occupied. 