


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         241 

palace  and  of  the  Imperial  family.  He  had  only  just 
gone  out  at  the  door  when  a  terrible  scene  began. 
The  unfortunate  Paul  remained  alone  with  men  who 
were  maddened  by  a  furious  hatred  of  him,  owing 
to  the  numerous  acts  of  persecution  and  injustice 
they  had  suifered  at  his  hands,  and  it  appears  that 
several  of  them  had  decided  to  assassinate  him,  per- 
haps without  the  knowledge  of  the  leaders  or  at  least 
without  their  formal  consent.  The  catastrophe,  which 
in  such  a  case  was,  in  a  country  like  Russia,  almost 
inevitable,  was  doubtless  hastened  by  the  cries  above 
referred  to,  which  alarmed  the  conspirators  for  their 
own  safety.  Count  Nicholas  Zuboff,  a  man  of  her- 
culean proportions,  was  said  to  be  the  first  that  placed 
his  hand  on  his  sovereign,  and  thereby  broke  the  spell 
of  imperial  authority  which  still  surrounded  him. 
The  others  now  saw  in  Paul  nothing  but  a  monster,  a 
tyrant,  an  implacable  enemy— and  his  abject  sub- 
mission, instead  of  disarming  them,  rendered  him 
despicable  and  ridiculous  as  well  as  odious  in  their 
eyes. 

One  of  the  conspirators  took  off  his  official  scarf 
and  tied  it  round  the  Emperor's  throat.  Paul 
struggled,  the  approach  of  death  restoring  him  to 
strength  and  speech.  He  set  free  one  of  his  hands 
and  thrust  it  between  the  scarf  and  his  throat,  crying 
out  for  air.  Just  then  he  perceived  a  red  uniform, 
which  was  at  that  time  worn  by  the  officers  of  the 
cavalry  guard,  and  thinking  that  one  of  the  assassins 
was  his  son  Constantine,  who  was  a  colonel  of  that 
regiment,  he  exclaimed  :  '  Mercy,  your  Highness, 
mercy !  Some  air,  for  God's  sake  ! '  But  the  con- 
VOL.  i.  Q 


242       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

spirators  seized  the  hand  with  which  he  was  striving 
to  prolong  his  life,  and  furiously  tugged  at  both  ends 
of  the  scarf.  The  unhappy  Emperor  had  already 
breathed  his  last,  and  yet  they  tightened  the  knot 
and  dragged  along  the  dead  body,  striking  it  with 
their  hands  and  feet.  The  cowards  who  until  then 
had  held  aloof,  surpassed  in  atrocity  those  who  had 
done  the  deed.  Just  at  that  time  General  Bennigsen 

O 

returned.  I  do  not  know  whether  he  was  sincerely 
grieved  at  what  had  happened  in  his  absence  ;  all 
he  did  was  to  stop  the  further  desecration  of  the 
Emperor's  body. 

Meanwhile  the  cry  '  Paul  is  dead  ! '  was  heard  by 
the  other  conspirators,  and  filled  them  with  a  joy 
that  deprived  them  of  all  sentiment  of  decency  and 
dignity.  They  wandered  tumultuously  about  the 
corridors  and  rooms  of  the  palace,  boasting  to  each 
other  of  their  prowess ;  many  of  them  found  means 
of  adding  to  the  intoxication  of  the  supper  by  break- 
ing into  the  wine  cellars  and  drinking  to  the  Emperor's 
death. 