

At  the  Zuboffs'  house  the  guests  had  become  so 
convivial  that  time  went  fast.  At  midnight  the  con- 
spirators set  out  for  the  Emperor's  palace.  The 
leaders  had  drunk  but  moderately,  wishing  to  keep 
their  heads  clear,  but  the  majority  of  those  who  fol- 
lowed them  were  more  or  less  intoxicated ;  some 
could  even  hardly  keep  their  legs.  They  were  divided 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         239 

into  two  bands,  each  composed  of  some  sixty  Generals 
and  other  officers.  The  two  Zuboffs  and  General 
Bennigsen  were  at  the  head  of  the  first  band, 
which  was  to  go  to  the  palace  direct ;  the  second 
was  to  enter  through  the  garden,  and  was  under 
the  command  of  Pahlen.  The  aide-de-camp  in  waiting, 
who  knew  all  the  doors  and  passages  of  the  palace, 
as  he  was  daily  on  duty  there,  guided  the  first  band 
with  a  dark  lantern  to  the  entrance  of  the  Emperor's 
dressing-room,  which  adjoined  his  bedroom.  A 
young  valet  who  was  on  duty  stopped  the  con- 
spirators and  cried  out  that  rebels  were  coming  to 
murder  the  Emperor.  He  was  wounded  in  the 
struggle  which  ensued,  and  rendered  incapable  of 
further  resistance.  His  cries  waked  the  Emperor, 
who  ofot  out  of  bed  and  ran  to  a  door  which  communi- 

O 

cated  with  the  Empress's  apartments  and  was  hidden 
by  a  large  curtain.  Unfortunately,  in  one  of  his  fits 
of  dislike  for  his  wife,  he  had  ordered  the  door  to  be 
locked  ;  and  the  key  was  not  in  the  lock,  either  because 
Paul  had  ordered  it  to  be  taken  away  or  because  his 
favourites,  who  were  opposed  to  the  Empress,  had 
done  so,  fearing  lest  he  should  some  day  have  a  fancy 
to  return  to  her.  Meanwhile  the  conspirators  were 
confused  and  terrified  at  the  cries  of  Paul's  faithful 
defender,  the  only  one  he  had  at  a  moment  of  supreme 
danger  when  he  believed  in  his  omnipotence  more 
than  ever  and  was  surrounded  by  a  triple  line  of  walls 
and  guards.  Zuboff,  the  chief  of  the  band,  lost  heart 
and  proposed  to  retire  at  once,  but  General  Bennigsen 
(from  whom  I  obtained  some  of  these  details)  seized 
him  by  the  arm  and  protested  against  such  a  dangerous 


24o      MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

step.  '  What  ? '  he  said,  '  You  have  brought  us  so 
far,  and  now  you  want  to  withdraw  ?  We  are  too  far 
advanced  to  follow  your  advice,  which  would  ruin  us 
all.  The  wine  is  drawn,  it  must  be  drunk.  Let  us 
inarch  on.' 

It  was  this  Hanoverian  that  decided  the  Emperor's 
fate  ;  he  was  one  of  those  who  had  only  that  evening 
been  informed  of  the  conspiracy.  He  placed  himself 
at  the  head  of  the  band,  and  those  who  had  most 
courage,  or  most  hatred  for  Paul,  were  the  first  to 
follow  him.  They  entered  the  Emperor's  bedroom, 
went  straight  to  his  bed,  and  were  much  alarmed  at 
not  finding  him  there.  They  searched  the  room  with 
a  light,  and  at  last  discovered  the  unfortunate  Paul 
hiding  behind  the  folds  of  the  curtain.  They  dragged 
him  out  in  his  shirt  more  dead  than  alive ;  the  terror 
he  had  inspired  was  now  repaid  to  him  with  usury. 
Fear  had  paralysed  his  senses  and  had  deprived  him  of 
speech ;  his  whole  body  shivered.  He  was  placed  on 
a  chair  before  a  desk.  The  long,  thin,  pale,  and 
angular  form  of  General  Bennigsen,  with  his  hat  on 
his  head  and  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand,  must  have 
seemed  to  him  a  terrible  spectre.  *  Sire,'  said  the 
General,  '  you  are  my  prisoner,  and  have  ceased  to 
reign ;  you  will  now  at  once  write  and  sign  a  deed  of 
abdication  in  favour  of  the  Grand-Duke  Alexander.' 
Paul  was  still  unable  to  speak,  and  a  pen  was 
put  in  his  hand.  Trembling  and  almost  unconscious, 
he  was  about  to  obey,  when  more  cries  were  heard. 
General  Bennigsen  then  left  the  room,  as  he  has  often 
assured  me,  to  ascertain  what  these  cries  meant, 
and  to  take  steps  for  securing  the  safety  of  the 