

It  was  a  thousand  pities  that  a  prince  so  anxious 
and  so  well  qualified  to  be  a  benefactor  to  his  country 
did  not  hold  entirely  aloof  from  a  conspiracy  which 
resulted  almost  inevitably  in  his  father's  assassination. 
Russia  certainly  suffered  much  under  the  almost 
maniacal  Government  of  Paul,  and  there  are  no  means 
in  that  country  of  restraining  or  confining  a  mad 
sovereign ;  but  Alexander  felt  and  exaggerated  in  his 
own  mind  all  his  life  the  sombre  reflection  of  the 
crime  committed  on  his  father,  which  had  fallen  on 
himself,  and  which  he  thought  he  could  never  wipe 
out.  This  ineffaceable  stain,  although  it  was  brought 
about  solely  by  his  inexperience  and  his  total  and 
innocent  ignorance  of  Russian  affairs  and  the  Russian 
people,  settled  like  a  vulture  on  his  conscience, 
paralysed  his  best  faculties  at  the  commencement  of 

*  Pahlen  had  the  reputation  of  being  one  of  the  most  astute  men  in  Russia. 
There  was  no  one  like  him  to  get  out  of  a  difficulty,  and  to  advance  his  interests  in 
spite  of  all  obstacles.  He  fell,  however,  just  at  the  moment  when  he  seemed  to  have 
nothing  to  fear.  He  came  from  Livonia,  where  they  used  to  say  of  him  :  '  Er  hat  die 
Fiffologie  studiert '  (he  was  a  student  of  Fiffology— from  the  German  word,  fiffig 
cunning). 


232       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

his  reign,  and  plunged  him  into  a  mysticism  some- 
times degenerating  into  superstition  at  its  close. 

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  admitted  that  the 
Emperor  Paul  was  precipitating  his  country  into 
incalculable  disasters  and  into  a  complete  disorganisa- 
tion and  deterioration  of  the  Government  machine. 
Paul  governed  intermittently,  without  troubling  him- 
self about  the  consequences,  like  a  man  who  acts 
without  reflection  according  to  the  impulse  of  the 
moment.  The  higher  classes,  the  principal  officials, 
the  generals  and  other  officers  of  rank — all,  in  a 
word,  who  thought  and  acted  in  Russia — were  more 

'  O 

or  less  convinced  that  the  Emperor  had  fits  of 
mental  alienation.  His  reign  became  a  rule  of  terror. 
He  was  hated  even  for  his  good  qualities,  for  at 
bottom  he  desired  justice,  and  this  impulse  sometimes 
led  him  to  do  a  just  thing  in  his  outburst  of  rage ; 
but  his  feeling  of  justice  was  blind,  and  struck 
at  all  without  discrimination  of  circumstances  ;  always 
passionate,  often  capricious  and  cruel,  his  decrees 
were  constantly  suspended  over  the  heads  of  the 
military  and  civil  officers,  and  made  them  detest  the 
man  who  thus  filled  their  lives  with  uncertainty  and 
terror.  The  conspiracy  had  the  sympathy  of  all,  for 
it  promised  to  put  an  end  to  a  regime  which  had 
become  intolerable.  A  sovereign  may  commit  grave 
mistakes,  bring  evils  on  his  country,  cause  its  wealth 
or  its  power  to  decline,  without  exposing  himself  to 
death  as  a  punishment  for  his  misdeeds.  But  when 
the  sovereign  authority  weighs  at  every  moment  on 
each  individual  in  the  State,  and  continually  disturbs 
like  a  fever  the  peace  of  families  in  the  ordinary 