

*  The  Emperor's  barber.     See  page  184. 
VOL.   I  P 


226       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Before  leaving  Italy  I  went  to  Leghorn  to  bid 
farewell  to  Marshal  Rzewuski,  whom  I  found  very 
ill.  I  met  at  his  house  several  of  my  countrymen  ; 
among  them  was  Sokolnicki,  a  very  active  officer  of 
engineers  whom  I  had  known  in  Lithuania  during  our 
campaign  of  1792,*  and  Rozniecki,  who  was  with  me 
in  the  camp  of  Golomb  and  in  the  skirmish  at  Granno. 
Both  heartily  shook  me  by  the  hand,  recalling  with 
emotion  the  events  we  had  witnessed  together. 
Rozniecki  told  me  that  he  had  introduced  into  the 
Polish  legions  the  system  of  drill  practised  at  Golomb, 
which  made  the  Polish  cavalry  of  the  republican  army 
superior  in  rapidity  of  movement  to  the  French 
cavalry.  I  left  Rzewuski  with  a  heavy  heart,  and 
this  illustrious  man,  proved  friend,  and  worthy  citizen 
passed  away  soon  afterwards.  He  is  buried  in  the 
Campo  Santo  at  Pisa.  His  family  intended  to  erect 
a  monument  to  his  memory,  but  I  believe  they  did 
not  carry  out  their  intention. 

After  staying  two  days  at  Vienna,  I  went  on  to 
Pulawy,  where  I  found  the  whole  of  my  family ;  but 
much  as  they  wished  me  to  stay,  they  felt  that  it  was 
necessary  I  should  go  on  at  once.  I  travelled  day 
and  night  until  I  reached  St  Petersburg,  where  my 
brother  joined  rne  soon  after. 

I  approached  the  Russian  capital  with  mixed 
feelings  of  joyful  impatience  to  see  the  persons  to 
whom  I  was  attached,  and  of  uncertainty  as  to  the 
changes  which  time  and  new  circumstances  mio-ht 

o  o 

have  produced  in  them.     A  messenger  met   me   at 
Riga  with  a  friendly  note  from  the  Emperor  and   a 

*  See  page  53. 


RETURN  TO  ST  PETERSBURG  22 j 

written  order  for  post-horses  to  accelerate  my  journey. 
The  note  was  addressed  to  me  in  the  Emperor's  own 
hand,  and  gave  me  the  title  of  Privy  Councillor, 
which  gives  the  rank  of  General.  I  was  surprised  at 
this  rapid  promotion,  which  I  decided  not  to  accept. 
When  I  arrived  at  St  Petersburg  I  showed  Alex- 
ander the  envelope,  and  he  admitted  that  he  had 
given  me  the  title  in  a  moment  of  forgetfulness,  but  I 
could  have  taken  advantage  of  the  mistake  had  I 
wished  to  do  so.  I  never  received  any  rank  or 
honorary  distinction  in  Russia  than  that  which  had 
been  conferred  upon  me  by  the  Emperor  Paul. 

The  first  impression  produced  upon  me  by  the 
Emperor  Alexander  confirmed  my  presentiments. 
He  had  just  come  back  from,  parade,  and  was  pale 
and  tired.  He  received  me  cordially,  but  with  a  sad 
and  depressed  air,  as  if  he  were  under  a  feeling  of 
constraint.  Now  he  was  the  master,  I  thought  I 
observed  in  him — perhaps  wrongly — a  tinge  of  re- 
serve and  embarrassment  which  pained  me.  He  took 
me  into  his  room.  '  You  have  done  well  to  come/ 
he  said  ;  '  our  people  expect  you  with  impatience ' — 
alluding  to  some  persons  who  he  thought  were  more 
enlightened  and  liberal  than  the  rest,  whom  he  re- 
garded as  his  particular  friends,  and  in  whom  he 
placed  entire  confidence.  '  If  you  had  been  here/ 
he  added,  '  things  would  not  have  turned  out  as  they 
did ;  I  should  never  have  been  led  away  if  I  had 
had  you  by  my  side.'  Then  he  spoke  to  me  of  his 
father's  death  with  inexpressible  grief  and  remorse. 
We  often  returned  to  this  subject,  and  Alexander 
gave  me  full  details  of  it  which  I  shall  repeat  below, 