

I  never  heard  any  details  of  the  first  interview 
between  the  Empress  and  her  son  after  Paul's 
assassination.  Subsequently  they  came  to  an  under- 
standing with  each  other ;  but  during  the  first 
terrible  moments  Alexander  was  so  absorbed  by  his 
remorse  that  he  seemed  incapable  of  saying  a  word 
or  thinking  of  anybody.  His  mother,  on  the  other 
hand,  was  in  a  passion  of  grief  and  animosity  ;  the 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL        247 

only  member  of  the  Imperial  family  that  retained  her 
presence  of  mind  was  the  young  Empress.  She  did 
her  utmost  to  console  Alexander  and  give  him  courage 
and  self-reliance.  She  did  not  leave  him  during  the 
whole  of  the  night,  except  when  she  went  for  a  few 
moments  to  calm  her  mother-in-law  and  persuade 
her  to  stop  in  her  room  and  not  expose  herself  to  the 
fury  of  the  conspirators.  While  in  this  night  of 
trouble  and  horror  some  were  intoxicated  with  triumph 
and  others  plunged  in  grief  and  despair,  the  Empress 
Elizabeth  alone  exercised  a  mediatory  influence 
between  her  husband,  her  mother-in-law,  and  the 
conspirators. 

During  the  first  years  of  his  reign,  Alexander's 
position  with  regard  to  his  father's  murderers  was  an 
extremely  difficult  and  painful  one.  For  a  few 
months  he  believed  himself  to  be  at  their  mercy,  but 
it  was  chiefly  his  conscience  and  a  feeling  of  natural 
equity  which  prevented  him  from  giving  up  to  justice 
the  most  guilty  of  the  conspirators.  He  knew  that 
there  was  a  general  sympathy  for  the  objects  of  the 
conspiracy,  and  that  those  who  had  personally  taken 
part  in  their  realisation  had  only  decided  to  do  so 
when  they  were  assured  of  his  consent.  It  would 
have  been  difficult  under  these  circumstances  to  dis- 
tinguish between  degrees  of  guilt ;  every  member  of 
the  society  of  St  Petersburg  was  more  or  less  an 
accomplice  in  the  fatal  deed,  for  those  who  wished 
Paul  to  be  deposed  must  have  known  that  his  de- 
position, if  resisted,  might  have  involved  his  death. 
If  the  assassins  alone  had  been  brought  to  trial,  they 
would  certainly  have  accused  the  other  conspirators 


248      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  have  referred  to  Alexander's  consent  in  justifica- 
tion of  their  action,  though  the  crime  had  been  com- 
mitted against  his  express  wish.  Moreover,  he  did 
not  for  many  years  know  who  they  were,  as  all  the 
conspirators  were  interested  in  keeping  the  secret. 
The  assassins  all  perished  miserably,  including  Count 
Nicholas  Zuboff,  who,  not  daring  to  show  himself  at 
Court,  died  in  retirement,  consumed  by  illness,  by 
remorse,  and  by  disappointed  ambition. 

Although  Alexander's  mother  continually  urged 
him  to  proceed  against  his  father's  murderers,  it  was 
not  possible  for  him  to  do  so  by  the  ordinary  and 
public  legal  means.  He  looked  with  horror  upon 
those  who  had  led  him  to  give  his  consent  to  the 
conspiracy,  and  he  used  every  other  means  in  his  power 
to  discover  and  punish  the  assassins.  General 
Bennigsen  was  removed  from  his  post  of  Governor- 
General  of  Lithuania,  which  was  given  to  General 
Kutuzoft',  and  it  was  not  until  the  year  1806  that 
Bennigsen's  military  reputation  compelled  Alex- 
ander to  place  him  at  the  head  of  the  army  which 
fought  at  Eylau  and  Friedland.  Prince  Plato  ZubofF, 
the  ostensible  chief  of  the  conspiracy,  failed,  notwith- 
standing all  his  efforts,  to  obtain  any  appointment, 
and  feeling  that  his  presence  was  disagreeable  to  the 
Emperor,  he  retired  to  his  estates,  married  a  hand- 
some Polish  woman,  and  then  went  abroad.  His 
bad  reputation,  however,  everywhere  preceded  him, 
and  he  died  obscure  and  unregretted. 