

The  understanding  between  us  had,  as  I  have 
shown,  begun  at  the  coronation  of  the  Emperor  Paul 
at  Moscow,  and  we  had  for  a  long  time  been  on 
intimate  terms,  as  we  met  daily  at  Count  Strogonoff  s. 
The  fourth  member  admitted  by  the  Emperor  to  the 
Secret  Council  was  Count  Kotchoubey.  Being  the 
nephew  of  Count  Bezborodko,  a  Minister  who  had 
been  held  in  high  esteem  by  the  Empress  Catherine, 
he  was  sent  when  still  very  young  to  the  embassy  at 
Constantinople,  and  was  recalled  under  the  Emperor 
Paul  to  give  place  to  M.  Tarnara.  While  at  Constanti- 
nople he  conducted  himself  to  the  satisfaction  of  his 
Government,  and  was  perhaps  the  only  Russian  who 


THE  SECRET  COUNCIL  259 

was  well  treated  in  the  capital.  This  was  at  the 
time  of  our  grand  Diet,*  and  during  the  reign  of 
Leopold,  when  Russians  used  to  be  received  by  ladies 
in  drawing-rooms  in  a  manner  anything  but  flattering. 
I  remember  the  Countess  Caroline,  afterwards  Lady 
Guildford,  being  asked  by  Count  Tchernitcheff  to  insult 
him  in  order  to  enable  him  to  gain  a  wager,  upon 
which  she  said  :  '  You  are  a  Russian.'  But  to  return 
to  Count  Kotchoubey.  He  had  acquired  a  certain 
European  varnish  and  grand  manners  which  made 
him  a  favourite  in  society.  Vanity,  a  general  defect 
among  men,  and  especially  among  Russians  and  Slavs 
of  all  kinds,  exposed  Kotchoubey  to  sarcasms  from 
other  vain  people,  but  he  was  too  good-natured  to 
resent  them.  He  was  also  accustomed  to  business, 
but  he  had  not  much  knowledge ;  his  intelligence  was 
clear,  but  not  deep,  and  he  had  more  good-nature  and 
sincerity  than  are  usually  found  in  Russians.  This 
did  not  save  him  from  certain  weaknesses  characteris- 
tic of  his  nation — a  great  wish  for  place,  for  dis- 
tinction, and  especially  for  a  fortune  to  cover  his 
expenses  and  those  of  his  family,  which  had  become 
very  numerous.  He  showed  an  extreme  readiness 
to  adopt  any  opinion  that  might  be  in  fashion  and  to 
follow  any  lead  imposed  upon  him  by  a  superior  will 
or  by  the  conventions  of  society.  When  he  was  with 
us  he  professed  liberalism,  though  with  a  certain 
reserve,  as  it  was  not  to  be  reconciled  with  his  real 
opinions.  His  vanity  was  such  that  it  betrayed  it- 
self when  he  strove  most  to  conceal  it,  which  ex- 

*  The  Diet  which  passed  the  Constitution  of  the  3rd  of  May,  1791.     It  sat  for 
four  years,  from  1788  to  1792.     (See  page  52). 


260       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

posed  him  to  the  satire  of  iny  two  colleagues.  I  did 
not  join  in  their  jokes,  as  he  had  estimable  qualities 
and  showed  me  much  friendly  feeling,  of  which  I  had 
strong  evidence  some  years  later. 