


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         253 

confirmed  by  the  attachment  which  the  Count  pro- 
fessed (I  think  sincerely)  to  have  for  the  Emperor 
personally,  and  also  by  his  indolence,  his  unwillingness 
to  take  appointments  to  which  onerous  duties  were 
attached,  and  especially  by  his  amours,  which  occupied 
nearly  the  whole  of  his  time. 

The  punishment  of  Pahlen  and  .the  other  leaders 
of  the  conspiracy  was  the  most  painful  that  could  have 
been  inflicted  on  them,  and  Alexander  punished  him- 
self with  more  severity  than  the  others.  His  grief 
and  the  remorse  which  he  was  continually  reviving 
in  his  heart  were  inexpressibly  deep  and  touching. 
In  the  midst  of  the  pomp  and  the  festivals  of  the 
coronation,  the  young  Emperor  was  reminded  of  the 
similar  ceremonies  which  had  been  passed  through 
by  his  father,  and  he  saw  in  imagination  Paul's 
mutilated  and  blood-stained  body  on  the  steps 
of  the  throne  which  he  was  now  himself  to  ascend. 
This  brilliant  display  of  supreme  power,  instead 
of  rousing  his  ambition  or  flattering  his  vanity, 
increased  his  mental  tortures,  and  he  was  never, 
I  think,  more  unhappy.  He  remained  alone  for 
hours,  sitting  in  silence  with  fixed  and  haggard 

/  O  oo 

looks. 

With  me,  as  the  confidant  of  his  secret  thoughts 
and  troubles,  he  was  most  at  his  ease,  and  I  sometimes 
entered  his  room  when  he  had  been  too  long  under 
the  painful  influence  of  these  fits  of  despair  and 
remorse.  I  tried  to  recall  him  to  his  duties ;  he 
acknowledged  that  a  painful  task  was  before  him, 
but  the  severity  of  his  condemnation  of  his  own 
conduct  deprived  him  of  all  energy.  He  replied  to 


254       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

all  my  exhortations  and  words  of  encouragement  and 
hope :  '  No,  it  is  impossible,  there  is  no  remedy.  I 
must  suffer.  How  can  I  cease  to  suffer  ?  This  can- 
not change.' 

Those  who  approached  him  often  feared  that  his 
mind  would  be  affected,  and  as  I  was  then  the  only 
person  who  could  speak  to  him  freely  I  was  constantly 
urged  to  do  so.  I  think  I  was  of  some  use  in  pre- 
venting Alexander  from  succumbing  under  the  weight 
of  the  terrible  thought  that  pursued  him.  Some 
years  later,  the  great  events  in  which  he  took  a 
leading  and  glorious  part  gave  him  some  consolation 
and  for  a  time,  perhaps,  absorbed  all  his  faculties  ;  but 
I  am  certain  that  towards  the  end  of  his  life  it  was 
the  same  terrible  thought  that  so  depressed  him, 
filling  him  with  a  disgust  of  life  and  a  piety  which 
was  perhaps  exaggerated,  but  which  is  the  sole 
possible  and  real  support  in  the  most  poignant  grief. 
When  we  returned  to  this  sad  topic,  Alexander  often 
repeated  to  me  the  details  of  the  plan  he  had  formed 
to  establish  his  father  in  the  Palace  of  St  Michael  and 
afterwards  to  enable  him  as  much  as  possible  to  reside 
in  the  Imperial  Palaces  in  the  country.  '  The  Palace 
of  St  Michael,'  he  said,  '  was  his  favourite  residence, 
and  he  would  have  been  happy  there.  He  would 
have  had  the  whole  of  the  winter  garden  to  walk  and 
ride  in.'  Alexander  intended  to  attach  a  riding- 
school  and  a  theatre  to  the  palace,  so  as  to  bring 
together  within  its  precincts  everything  that  could 
have  amused  the  Emperor  Paul  and  made  his  life 
happy.  He  judged  of  his  father  by  himself.  There 
was  always  in  his  noble  character  a  feminine  ele- 