


262       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Emperor's  ukases.  His  special  department,  however, 
was  at  first  to  deal  with  promoters  of  public  under- 
takings, who  are  sometimes  men  of  talent,  but  more 
often  adventurers  of  very  doubtful  honesty  who  flock 
to  Russia  from  abroad  at  the  beginning  of  each 
new  reign.  This  was  a  duty  for  which  he  was 
qualified  by  his  varied  knowledge  in  matters  of 
finance  and  industry,  and  it  was  at  the  same  time 
a  school  which  did  much  to  form  his  character. 
I  must  not  here  forget  the  fifth  member  of  the 
Secret  Council,  M.  de  la  Harpe,  Alexander's  tutor, 
who  had  come  on  a  visit  to  his  former  pupil.  He  did 
not  take  part  in  the  after  dinner  meetings,  but  he 
used  to  have  private  conversations  with  the  Emperor, 
and  frequently  handed  to  him  memoranda  reviewing 
all  the  branches  of  the  administration.  These  memo- 
randa were  first  read  at  the  secret  sittings,  and 
afterwards  passed  on  from  one  member  of  the  Council 
to  the  other  to  be  considered  at  leisure,  as  they  were 
interminably  long.  M.  de  la  Harpe  was  at  that 
time  about  forty-four  years  of  age ;  he  had  been  a 
member  of  the  Swiss  Director}7,  and  always  wore  the 
uniform  of  that  appointment,  with  a  large  sword  fastened 
to  an  embroidered  belt  outside  his  coat.  We  were 
all  of  opinion  that  he  did  not  merit  his  high  reputation 
and  the  esteem  in  which  Alexander  held  him.  He 
belonged  to  the  generation  of  men  nourished  with  the 
illusions  of  the  last  part  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
who  thought  their  doctrine  a  sort  of  philosopher's 
stone,  or  universal  remedy  which  removed  all 
difficulties  to  the  regeneration  of  society.  M.  de  la 
Harpe  had  his  own  particular  panacea  for  Russia,  and 


THE  SECRET  COUNCIL  263 

he  explained  it  in  such  diffuse  papers  that  Alexander 
himself  had  not  the  courage  to  read  them.  One  of 
his  favourite  phrases  was  organisation  reglementaire  • 
an  important  idea  no  doubt,  but  he  used  to  repeat  it 
so  often  and  with  such  emphasis  that  it  was  at  last 
attached  to  him  as  a  sort  of  nickname. 

The  Emperor,  perhaps  without  admitting  it  to 
himself,  began  to  think  less  of  the  capacity  of  his 
former  tutor,  though  he  was  always  seeking  reasons 
for  raising  him  in  our  esteem  ;  his  character  he  always 
continued  to  value  highly.  He  did  not  like  us  to  cast 
ridicule  on  the  inanity  of  M.  de  la  Harpe's  papers, 
and  he  was  always  much  pleased  when  we  praised 
any  of  his  former  tutor's  suggestions.  But  in  truth 
M.  de  la  Harpe  had  little  or  no  influence  on  the 
reforms  which  Alexander  afterwards  introduced.  He 
had  the  good  sense  to  hold  aloof  from  our  meetings, 
and  the  Emperor  himself  preferred  this,  in  order,  I 
suppose,  to  avoid  the  scandal  which  might  have  been 
produced  by  an  ex-director  of  the  Swiss  Republic 
and  a  recognised  revolutionist  preparing  reforms  for 
the  Russian  Empire.  He  was,  however,  recognised 
as  one  of  our  colleagues ;  there  was  always  a  chair 
ready  for  him  at  our  meetings,  and  when  he  left  St 
Petersburg  he  assured  us  that  he  would  still  in  spirit 
take  part  in  our  deliberations. 