

We  were  privileged  to  dine  with  the  Emperor 
without  a  previous  invitation,  and  we  used  to  meet 
two  or  three  times  a  week.  After  coffee  and  a  little 
conversation,  the  Emperor  used  to  retire,  and  while 
the  other  guests  left  the  palace,  the  four  members  of 
the  Secret  Council  entered  through  a  corridor  into  a 
little  dressing-room,  which  was  in  direct  communica- 
tion with  the  private  rooms  of  their  Majesties,  and 
there  met  the  Emperor.  Various  plans  of  reform 
were  debated ;  each  member  brought  his  ideas,  and 
sometimes  his  work,  and  information  which  he  had 
obtained  as  to  what  was  passing  in  the  existing 
administration  and  the  abuses  which  he  had  ob- 
served. The  Emperor  freely  expressed  his  thoughts 
and  sentiments,  and  although  the  discussions  at  these 
meetings  for  a  long  time  had  no  practical  result,  no 
useful  reform  was  tried  or  carried  out  during  Alex- 
ander's reign  which  did  not  originate  in  them.  Mean- 
while the  Official  Council,  namely,  the  Senate  and  the 
Ministers,  governed  the  country  in  the  old  way. 
Directly  the  Emperor  left  his  dressing-room  he  came 
under  the  influence  of  the  old  Ministers,  and  could 
do  nothing  of  what  had  been  decided  upon  in  the 
Secret  Council ;  it  was  like  a  masonic  lodge  from 
which  one  entered  the  practical  world. 

This  mysterious  Council,  which  was  not  long  con- 
cealed from  the  suspicions,  or  ultimately  from  the 
knowledge,  of  the  Court,  and  was  designated  '  the 


26l 

young  men's  party,'  grew  impatient  at  not  obtaining 
any  result  whatever  from  its  deliberations  ;  it  pressed 
the  Emperor  to  carry  out  the  views  he  had  expressed 
to  us  and  the  proposals  he  considered  desirable  and 
necessary.  Once  or  twice  an  attempt  was  made  to 
induce  him  to  adopt  energetic  resolutions,  to  give 
orders  and  make  himself  obeyed,  to  dismiss  certain 
superannuated  officials  who  were  a  constant  obstacle 
to  every  reform  and  to  put  young  men  in  their  place. 
But  the  Emperor's  character  inclined  him  to  attain 
his  end  by  compromises  and  concessions,  and  more- 
over he  did  not  yet  feel  sufficiently  master  of  the 
position  to  risk  measures  which  he  thought  too 
violent.  In  our  Council  Strogonoff  was  the  most 
ardent,  Novosiltzoff  the  most  prudent,  Kotchoubey 
the  most  time-serving,  and  I  the  most  disinterested, 
always  striving  to  curb  undue  impatience.  Those 
who  urged  the  Emperor  to  take  immediate  and 
severe  measures  did  not  know  him.  Such  a  pro- 
posal always  made  him  draw  back,  and  was  of  a 
nature  to  diminish  his  confidence.  But  as  he  com- 
plained of  his  Ministers  and  did  not  like  any 
of  them,  an  attempt  was  made  in  the  Council, 
before  inducing  him  to  change  them,  to  discuss 
the  matter  in  a  practical  spirit,  apart  from  the 
abstract  considerations  of  reform  which  had  pre- 
viously occupied  us.  Strogonoff  accepted  the  post  of 
Procurator  of  the  First  Department  of  the  Senate  ; 
and  Novosiltzoff  was  appointed  one  of  the  Emperor's 
secretaries,  a  place  which  gave  him  many  advantages, 
as  every  letter  addressed  to  the  Emperor  passed 
through  his  hands,  and  he  had  a  right  to  publish  the 