

Not  having  any  wish  to  take  a  prominent  part  in 
Russian  affairs,  and  often  losing  the  hope  which  had 
sustained  me   of  being  able  to  serve  my  country,    I 
continually  had  fits  of  depression  and  did  not  conceal 
my  wish  to  go  back  to  my  parents.     The  Emperor, 
to  fulfil  his  old  promises  and  prove  to  me  that  he  had 
not  changed,  generously  determined  of  his  own  initia- 
tive to  give  the  inhabitants  of  the  Polish  provinces  he 
governed   proofs    of  his   good-will.     This    sometimes 
raised  my  spirits  and  consoled  me  for  the  impossibility 
of    realising    brighter    hopes    whose    disappointment 
became  the  regret  and  torment  of  my  life.     In  the 
two    first    years    of    Alexander's   reign    I    had   the 
happiness    of    rendering    services     to    many   of    my 
countrymen  who  had  been  sent  to  Siberia  either  by 
Catherine  or  by  Paul,  and  had  been  forgotten  in  their 
banishment ;    these    were  restored    by  Alexander   to 
their   liberty   and    their    families.      Their   sentences 
were  cancelled,  their  confiscated  estates  were  given 
back  to  them,  either  in   land  or  in  money,  and  the 
refugees  who  had  served  in  France  or  in  the  legions 
were   allowed  to   come   back   without  any  difficulty. 
The  Emperor  also  interfered   on  behalf  of  the  Poles 
confined  in  the  fortress  of  Spielberg  and  other  foreign 


276      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

prisons,  and  his  wishes  were  zealously  carried  out  by 
Kotchoubey,  Panin's  successor  at  the  Russian  Foreign 
Office.  The  abbe  Kollontay,  who  was  regarded  as 
the  most  revolutionary  of  the  Poles,  was  set  free 
and  came  to  live  and  die  in  the  part  of  Poland  which 
was  under  Alexander's  rule.  Count  Oginski  and 
several  others  were  also  invited  to  return  ;  they  were 
received  with  distinction  and  were  given  back  their 
fortunes,  which  were  in  several  cases  considerable. 
The  days  of  persecution,  of  political  trials  and  en- 
quiries, of  suspicious  precautions,  had  gone  by,  and 
for  some  time  the  Poles  were  trusted  and  left  at 
peace  by  their  Russian  rulers. 

The  Emperor  also  wished  to  improve  the  admin- 
istration and  regularise  the  course  of  justice  in  the 
Polish  provinces.  He  looked  for  Poles  capable  of 
filling  the  principal  posts,  which  had  previously 
been  occupied  by  Russians.  Trials  were  expedited 
and  made  more  equitable,  both  on  the  spot  and  in 
the  third  department  of  the  Senate  of  St  Petersburg, 
which  was  the  final  Court  of  Appeal  charged 
with  cases  arising  in  the  Polish  provinces.  These 
acts  deserved  our  gratitude,  but  could  not  com- 
pensate us  for  the  loss  of  our  national  existence,  and 
they  were  far  from  realising  the  hopes  expressed  in 
the  conversations  of  our  youth.  While  consoled  from 
time  to  time  by  the  advantages  which  were  granted 
to  my  countrymen,  I  could  not  see  what  more  I  could 
obtain  for  my  country.  My  life  was  one  continuous 
struggle  between  the  consolation  of  having  done  some 
good  and  the  regret — not  to  say  the  self-reproach — of 
never  being  able  to  reach  the  object  of  my  wishes  and 