

So  long  as  Panin  remained  at  St  Petersburg  he 


268       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

was  surrounded  by  spies,  and  the  Emperor  every  day 
received  reports  from  the  secret  police  stating  in  detail 
all  that  Panin  had  done  from  the  morning  till  the 
evening,  where  he  had  been,  whom  he  had  spoken  to 
in  the  street,  how  many  hours  he  had  passed  out  of 
doors,  who  had  visited  him,  and  as  far  as  possible 
what  he  had  said.  These  reports  were  read  in  the 
Secret  Council,  and  were  drawn  up  in  the  mysterious 
style  affected  by  police  agents  to  give  a  certain 
interest  to  the  most  insignificant  circumstances. 
They  did  not  really  contain  anything  remarkable, 
but  the  Emperor  was  extremely  anxious,  and  was 
always  suspecting  Panin  of  new  plots.  He  had  no 
peace  till  Panin  had  left  St  Petersburg,  which  he  did 
soon  after,  knowing  that  he  was  everywhere  pursued 
by  spies,  and  that  his  presence  was  disagreeable  to 
the  Emperor.  He  subsequently  received  orders 
never  to  show  himself  in  any  town  where  the 
Emperor  might  be  staying,  and  passed  the  rest  of  his 
life  in  retirement  at  Moscow  or  in  the  country. 

In  this  way  three  of  '  ours,'  as  the  members  of  the 
Secret  Council  were  called  by  the  Emperor,  were 
placed  in  the  sphere  of  practical  affairs,  and  obtained 
experience  of  the  difficulties  and  obstacles  which  are 
met  with  directly  one  becomes  a  wheel  in  the  govern- 
ment machine.  As  for  me,  I  had  no  ambition  to 
serve  Russia ;  I  was  there  merely  by  accident,  like  an 
exotic  plant  in  a  foreign  land,  with  sentiments  which 
could  not,  as  regards  their  full  scope,  be  brought  into 
entire  accord  even  with  the  intimate  opinions  of  the 
friends  whom  accidental  and  quite  ordinary  circum- 
stances had  given  me ;  and  I  remained  the  only 


THE  SECRET  COUNCIL  269 

member  of  the  Secret  Council  that  had  held  aloof 
from  practical  life,  and  was  glad  not  to  enter  it.  I 
was  often  tired  of  my  position,  and  yearned  after 
my  country  and  my  parents  ;  I  wished  for  nothing 
so  much  as  to  go  back  to  them,  and  the  only  thing 
that  retained  me  was  my  personal  attachment  to  the 
Emperor  and  the  wish  to  be  able  to  serve  my  country 
through  my  influence  with  him.  But  this  hope  often 
seemed  entirely  to  disappear.  The  dreams  of  my 
early  youth  had  vanished  like  the  morning  mists 
before  the  sun's  rays,  and  whose  was  the  blame  ? 
Could  I  expect  of  men  more  than  they  can  or  know 
how  to  give  ?  Those  whose  pretensions  and  hopes  are 
in  advance  of  realities  and  possibilities  in  this  short 
life  of  ours  are  doomed  to  cruel  disappointment ;  but 
when  one's  illusions  have  gone,  one  hopes  at  least  not 
to  be  deprived  of  some  prospect  of  happiness,  and  this 
was  in  many  respects  denied  me.  I  accordingly  often 
thought  of  leaving  St  Petersburg.  The  Emperor 
spoke  to  me  of  Poland  at  more  and  more  prolonged 
intervals ;  when  he  found  me  anxious  and  discouraged, 
he  returned  to  the  subject,  but  no  longer  in  the  same 
way.  He  used  to  console  me  vaguely  or  keep  silence 
on  a  matter  with  which  he  found  it  more  and  more 
difficult  to  deal,  though  it  was  the  only  real  bond  of 
connection  between  us.  At  the  same  time,  while 
avoiding  precise  explanations,  he  wished  me  always 
to  believe  that  on  this  point  as  on  many  others  he 
had  not  changed  his  opinions  or  his  intentions.  But 
in  his  position  what  could  he  do  and  what  could  I 
reasonably  ask  for  ? 