

Immediately  after  the  Emperor's  accession  the 
Margravine  of  Baden,  mother  of  the  Empress 
Elizabeth,  hastened  to  St  Petersburg,  being  happy 
and  impatient  to  see  again  a  beloved  daughter  from 
whom  she  had  been  separated  for  seven  years.  She 
was  accompanied  by  the  Margrave  of  Baden,  her 


264      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

husband,  son  of  the  reigning  Grand-Duke,  arid  the 
Princess  Amelia,  the  eldest  of  their  children.  These 
visitors  represented  an  influence  totally  opposed  to 
the  principles  which  were  at  that  moment  being 
advocated  by  M.  de  la  Harpe  at  St  Petersburg.  The 
Margravine  was  the  sister  of  the  first  wife  of  the 
Emperor  Paul,*  who  died  in  Russia  while  still  young 
and  beautiful,  and  was  more  regretted  by  the 
Empress  Catherine,  her  family,  and  the  whole  Court 
than  by  her  husband,  who  discovered  after  her  death 
from  some  letters  which  she  had  imprudently  kept 
that  he  was  not  the  sole  possessor  of  her  heart.! 

The  Margravine  was  tall,  with  a  grand  air  and 
much  dignity  in  her  movements,  and  it  was  evident  that 
in  her  youth  she  must  have  been  beautiful.  She  had 
justly  obtained  a  high  reputation  for  wisdom,  pru- 
dence, and  wit,  which  placed  her  far  above  the 
generality  of  German  princesses  of  similar  rank.  The 
Empress  Dowager,  instead  of  rejoicing  at  the  prospect 
of  the  Margravine's  influence  counteracting  that  of 
M.  de  la  Harpe,  took  umbrage  at  it ;  the  two 
princesses  were  too  unlike  each  other  to  agree. 
Moreover,  the  Margravine  had  brought  about  the 
marriage  of  her  youngest  daughter  with  the  King  of 
Sweden,  who  had  refused  the  Grand-Duchess  Alex- 
andra.! This  marriage,  which  at  that  time  was 

*  A  third  sister  was  married  to  the  Grand-Duke  of  Saxe-Weimar ;  she  had  a 
daughter  who  was  married  to  the  Duke  of  Mecklenburg,  and  became  the  mother  of 
the  Duchess  of  Orleans.  I  recollect  that  when  the  Duchess  of  Orleans  arrived  in 
Paris  I  was  struck  by  her  likeness  to  the  members  of  her  family  whom  I  had  known 
in  Russia.  (Note  by  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski.) 

t  The  gentleman  who  had  attracted  the  Grand-Duchess's  attention  was  Count 
Andrew  Razumovski,  then  young  and  strikingly  handsome.  He  made  so  many 
conquests  among  the  ladies  of  St  Petersburg  that  he  was  sent  as  ambassador  to  Stock- 
holm, and  afterwards  to  Naples,  where  he  gained  the  favour  of  the  Queen.  (Note  by 
Prince  Adam  Czartoryski.)  t  See  page  135. 


THE  MARGRAVINE  OF  BADEN  265 

regarded    as    the    most   brilliant   in    Europe,    was    a 
triumph  of  which  the   Margravine   was  very  proud, 
and    did    not   contribute    to    reconcile   her   with   the 
Empress    Dowager,   especially  as   the    eldest   of  the 
daughters  of  the  House  of  Baden,  the  twin  sister  of 
the  Princess  Amelia,  had  married  the   Elector,  who 
afterwards  became  King  of  Bavaria,  while  none  of  the 
Russian   Grand-Duchesses  had   attained  so  elevated 
a  position.     On  the  other  hand,  the  Margravine  was 
disappointed  to  see  that  the  Empress  Dowager  re- 
tained   all   the    advantages    of  a   reigning    sovereign 
and  had  not  given  up  any  of  them  to  her  daughter- 
in-law.     When  Alexander  ascended  the  throne,  being 
desirous  above  all   to   appease  the  continual  regrets 
of  his  mother  since  the  catastrophe  which  had  made 
him    Emperor,  he    left  her   the  dower   of  a    million 
roubles  which  Paul  had  assigned  to  her  at  the  begin- 
ning of  his  reign,  and  added  nothing  to  the  moderate 
allowance  of  which  his  wife  was  in  receipt  as  a  Grand- 
Duchess.     The  latter  readily  and  graciously  accepted 
this  arrangement,  which  afterwards  placed  her  in  a 
painful   position,  and   deprived   her   of  the   means  of 
responding  to  the  numerous  applications  for  assistance 
which  were  addressed  to  her.     The  Empress  Dowager 
continued  to  have  the  sole  direction  of  various  char- 
itable, educational,  and  even  manufacturing,  establish- 
ments with  which  she  had  been  charged  during  the 
preceding  reign,  while  the   Margravine  would    have 
liked  her  daughter   to   take    a   more    active    part  in 
affairs    and    to    be    in    a    position    to    distribute    the 
largesses  and  benefits  which  one  has  a  right  to  ex- 
pect from  the  wife  of  the  sovereign. 