

Count  Panin,  who  was  then  Foreign  Minister,  had 
concluded  a  convention  with  Duroc  which  did  not 
mention  any  of  the  difficulties  that  had  long  sown 
discord  between  the  two  countries,  and  had  prevented 
them  from  being  at  peace  with  each  other.  In  this 
convention  there  was  only  one  remarkable  article, 
and  it  was  directed  against  Poland  and  the  Poles. 
VOL.  i.  s 


274       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Russia  and  France  engaged  reciprocally  not  to  protect 
political  refugees,  and  not  to  help  them  in  their  efforts 
against  the  order  of  things  established  in  their 
respective  countries.  This  article  was  aimed  by 
France  against  the  Legitimists,  and  by  Russia  against 
the  Poles.  Thus  Alexander's  first  public  act  was  an 
abandonment  of  the  sentiments  which  had  united  us. 
He  did  not  tell  me  anything  of  it,  and  it  was  doubt- 
less a  very  natural  arrangement  to  make  between  two 
countries  that  wished  to  be  on  good  terms  with  each 
other ;  it  was  the  necessary  consequence  of  an  agree- 
ment between  Russia  and  France,  which  must  be 
always  fatal  to  the  Poles.  I  made  this  remark  with 
some  sadness  to  the  Emperor,  who  answered  with 
embarrassment  that  the  article  had  no  real  signifi- 
cance, that  he  could  not  avoid  accepting  it,  as  it  had 
been  proposed  by  France  and  agreed  to  by  Count 
Panin,  that  it  was  a  mere  formality  which  ought  not 
to  cause  me  any  anxiety,  and  that  the  destinies  of 
Poland  were  as  dear  to  him  as  ever.  The  best  and 
most  powerful  man  can  do  nothing  if  circumstances 
do  not  permit  him  to  act  and  to  keep  his  promises ; 
and  it  may  safely  be  asserted  that  Alexander  was  the 
only  sovereign  of  that  time  who,  without  publicly 
admitting  it,  still  remembered  and  busied  himself 
about  the  future  of  Poland.  She  had  for  the  moment 
been  forgotten  by  all  Europe,  with  France  at  its  head. 
Since  the  treaty  of  Luneville  there  had  not  been  any 
Polish  troops  in  France ;  the  legions  were  either 
broken  up  or  sent  to  St  Domingo  never  to  return.* 

*  The  Polish  legions  were  formed  in  Italy  by  Dombrovski  in  1797,  with  the 
object  of  restoring  Poland  to  her  former  independence.  They  rendered  great  services 
to  France  in  her  Italian  campaigns,  but  were  afterwards  abandoned  by  Napoleon, 
who  did  not  wish  to  offend  the  partitioning  powers. 


MISSION  FROM  NAPOLEON  TO  ALEXANDER      275 

Our  patriots,  having  lost  all  hope  for  their  country, 
had  retired  from  the  French  service,  and  the  glorious 
fall  of  Kosciuszko  and  the  massacre  of  Praga  had 
been  effaced  by  the  misfortunes  we  had  suffered  in 
other  countries.  No  one  thought  of  us,  and  it  is  not 
surprising  that  this  general  oblivion  should  have  had 
some  influence  on  Alexander's  disposition  in  our 
behalf. 