

This  system  was  somewhat  similar  to  that  advo- 
cated by  the  English  radicals.  The  idea  is  plausible 
and  not  without  a  basis  of  truth,  but  it  has  the 
disadvantage  of  reducing  to  insignificance  and  humi- 
liation the  State  which  follows  it  too  literally,  as  by 
so  doing  it  incurs  the  risk  of  becoming  the  vassal  and 
tool  of  more  enterprising  and  active  States.  More- 
over, a  consistent  adherence  to  such  a  system  would 
require  much  tact  and  firmness  to  avoid  damaging  com- 
promises, which,  in  the  then  existing  state  of  European 
relations,  would  have  become  almost  inevitable.  This 
is  what  happened  to  the  Emperor  Alexander  in  the 
case  of  the  Memel  interview. 

The  Prussian  and  Russian  sovereigns  had  both 
expressed  a  wish  to  meet  each  other.  The  former 
thought  this  would  be  a  means  of  facilitating  to  his 
advantage  the  question  of  indemnities  in  Germany, 
which  at  that  time  was  being  dealt  with  under  the 
influence  of  France,  while  Alexander's  sole  object  was 


ALEXANDER  AND  FREDERICK  WILLIAM  III    281 

to  become  personally  acquainted  with  his  neighbour 
and  relative.  He  had  a  liking  for  the  Prussians  and 
their  King  which  arose  from  his  military  education  at 
Gatchina,  and  he  looked  forward  to  seeing  the 
Prussian  troops,  of  whom  he  had  a  great  idea ;  he 
would,  moreover,  get  an  opportunity-  of  augmenting 
his  knowledge  of  drill,  uniform,  and  parades,  to  which 
he  attached  great  importance.  He  also  wished  to 
make  the  acquaintance  of  the  beautiful  Queen  of 
Prussia,  and  to  appear  before  her  and  her  Court  as 
the  Emperor  of  Russia.  For  all  these  reasons  he 
started  on  his  journey  with  much  anticipation  of 
pleasure,  and  he  was  accompanied  by  Kotchoubey  as 
Foreign  Minister,  Novosiltzoff  as  Secretary,  and 
Count  Tolstoi,  who  had  administered  the  affairs  of  his 
house  when  he  was  Grand-Duke,  as  Marshal.  Tolstoi 
was  sincerely  attached  to  the  Emperor,  and  was  very 
zealous  in  his  service ;  but  he  possessed  little  intelligence 
or  instruction,  and  was  often  laughed  at  by  Alexander, 
though  he  placed  implicit  trust  in  his  fidelity. 

At  Memel,  where  the  same  sovereigns  had  after- 
wards to  meet  in  very  different  circumstances,  there 
were  many  parades,  reviews,  and  balls.  The  Emperor 
contracted  a  personal  friendship  for  the  King  of 
Prussia  to  which  the  latter  afterwards  owed  the  pre- 
servation of  his  monarchy,  and  the  King  hastened  to 
take  advantage  of  the  good  impression  he  had  made 
on  Alexander  to  secure  his  consent  and  support  for 
the  arrangements  which  were  then  preparing  between 
Prussia  and  France  with  the  object  of  withdrawing 
Germany  from  the  influence  of  the  Church.  Kotch- 
oubey had  been  opposed  to  the  interview,  whose 