

On  my  return  to  St  Petersburg,  I  had  no  longer 


270       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

found  there  Buonaparte's  aide-de-camp,  Duroc,  who 
had  come  with  another  officer  to  compliment  Alex- 
ander on  his  accession.  Paul's  death  was  a  severe 
blow  to  the  First  Consul ;  he  had  hoped  much  from  a 
sovereign  who  would  never  admit  that  what  he  ordered 
was  impossible.  Fortune  had  favoured  Buonaparte  in 
his  efforts  to  gain  the  good-will  of  the  Emperor  Paul. 
The  news  of  the  Russian  prisoners  who  had  been  clothed 
and  sent  back  to  their  country  by  France,  and  that 
of  other  advances  skilfully  made  to  Russia,  had 
arrived  at  St  Petersburg  at  the  moment  when  Paul 
was  in  a  violent  rage  with  Austria  and  England, 
partly  on  account  of  the  defeat  of  the  Russian  armies 
in  Switzerland  and  Holland,  which  Paul  attributed  to 
the  lukewarm  ness  of  the  allies,  and  partly  because  of 
the  capture  of  Malta,  which  Buonaparte  had  offered 
Paul,  and  which  the  English,  now  masters  of  the 
island,  had  refused  to  give  up  to  him,  although  he 
had  already  been  appointed  Grand-Master  of  the 
Order.  Under  these  circumstances,  Paul,  always 
passionate  and  impulsive,  took  a  violent  fancy  to 
Napoleon  and  the  French  Government,  whom  he  had 
detested,  and  an  equally  violent  dislike  for  the  allies, 
who  had  been  the  particular  objects  of  his  affection 
and  zealous  support.  As  usual  with  him,  his  likes  and 
dislikes  became  stronger  as  time  went  on.  After  the 
chivalrous  challenge  which  I  have  already  mentioned,* 
he  concluded  a  maritime  alliance  with  Denmark  and 
Sweden  with  trie  object  of  closing  the  Baltic  to  the 
English,  and  maintaining  the  inviolability  of  neutral 
flags.  France,  Spain,  and  Holland  were  to  join  their 

*  See  page  192. 


EUROPEAN  COALITION  AGAINST  ENGLAND      271 

fleets  to  those  of  the  Northern  powers  in  order  to 
destroy  the  maritime  supremacy  of  England.  Paul 
had  ordered  the  whole  of  the  Don  Cossacks  to  march 
at  once  to  India  under  the  command  of  their  attaman 
Platoff;  and  although  this  order  had  spread  consterna- 
tion among  the  Cossacks,  and  their  chief  did  not  know 
how  to  execute  it,  he  was  preparing  to  obey  it. 

What  would  have  happened  if  Paul  had  continued 
to  reign  it  is  not  easy  to  say.  Nelson's  expedition  to 
Copenhagen  had  certainly  foiled  the  plan  of  a  naval 
combination  against  England,  but  its  success  had  been 
almost  entirely  due  to  Nelson's  boldness  and  good 
fortune.  If  the  Danes  had  had  the  courage  to  persevere, 
this  rash  enterprise  might  have  ended  very  differently. 
So  great,  however,  was  the  terror  inspired  by  Paul 
that  the  Danes  adhered  to  his  alliance  in  spite  of 
their  defeat.  He  had  ordered  his  coasts  and  his 
harbours  to  be  placed  in  a  state  of  defence,  and  I 
doubt  whether  the  British  fleet  could  without  con- 
siderable reinforcements  have  attempted  an  attack 
upon  Cronstadt  or  Revel ;  if  not,  time  would  have 
been  given  for  reforming  and  strengthening  the 
alliance  of  the  naval  powers. 