


266      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

I  was  very  amiably  received  by  the  Margravine, 
and  afterwards  she  honoured  rne  for  many  years  with 
marks  of  her  kindness.  She  often  spoke  to  me  about 
the  Emperor  with  the  most  lively  interest.  She 
feared  that  the  reforms  he  was  contemplating  would 
prove  ill-timed,  hurtful,  and  dangerous,  and  wished 
him  to  be  dissuaded  from  introducing  them  ;  she 
did  not  approve  his  tendency  to  diminish  the 
ceremonial  and  the  splendour  of  the  Court,  and 
she  especially  objected  to  his  assumed  simplicity  of 
manner,  which,  she  said,  made  those  who  approached 
him  and  whose  duty  was  to  obey  him  too  familiar, 
thereby  giving  his  Court  an  appearance  ill-suited  to 
the  greatness  of  the  Empire.  She  pointed  to  the 
example  of  Buonaparte,  who,  she  said,  was  better 
acquainted  with  mankind  and  with  what  was  neces- 
sary to  obtain  its  respect,  its  obedience,  and  its 
admiration ;  who  surrounded  himself  by  pomp  and 
magnificence,  and  neglected  nothing  that  could  aug- 
ment the  prestige  without  which  supreme  authority 
cannot  be  maintained.  She  wished  to  rouse  Alex- 
ander's ambition,  to  make  him  profit  by  the  lessons 
which  so  great  a  genius  was  then  giving  to  the  world, 
and  to  induce  him  to  become  Napoleon's  rival  without 
being  his  enemy,  so  that  the  acts  of  his  Government, 
like  those  of  the  First  Consul,  should  be  continual 
proofs  of  greatness,  of  strength,  and  of  decided  will. 
The  Russians,  she  said,  want  such  a  Government  quite 
as  much  as  the  French.  I  communicated  these  conver- 
sations to  the  Emperor  ;  I  thought  some  of  the  things 
said  by  the  Margravine  were  just  and  true,  and  that 
they  might  strike  him  and  be  of  use  to  him.  But  they 


THE  SECRET  COUNCIL  267 

made  no  impression  whatever.  He  admired  Napoleon, 
but  did  not  think  himself  capable  of  imitating  him. 
They  were  two  opposite  natures,  and  their  lines  of  action 
were  different.  It  was  not  till  many  years  after  that 
a  supreme  danger,  the  boundless  ambition  of  the  ruler 
of  France,  and  his  incredible  blunders,  gave  Alex- 
ander an  opportunity  of  showing  great  though  always 
defensive  qualities,  which  enabled  him  to  conquer  his 
rival.  After  some  months'  stay,  the  Baden  family  left 
St  Petersburg  to  visit  the  Queen  of  Sweden,  the 
youngest  sister  of  the  Empress  Elizabeth,  at  Stock- 
holm. During  this  journey  a  great  misfortune  hap- 
pened: the  Margrave  died  in  consequence  of  a  carriage 
accident.  This  made  it  impossible  for  the  Margravine 
to  reign  over  the  Grand-Duchy,  and  had  fatal  con- 
sequences for  her  family. 

During  the  summer  of  1801  the  Secret  Council 
continued  to  meet.  The  only  measure  it  decided  upon 
before  the  coronation  was  the  dismissal  of  Count 
Panin,  whose  participation  in  the  conspiracy  which 
brought  about  the  death  of  Paul  filled  Alexander 
with  dislike  and  suspicion.  After  much  discussion  it 
was  resolved  that  Panin  should  be  succeeded  as 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  by  Count  Kotchoubey, 
but  should  be  allowed  to  remain  at  St  Petersburg. 
The  Emperor,  wishing  to  avoid  disagreeable  scenes, 
treated  Panin  as  a  Minister  up  to  the  last  moment, 
and  this  again  was  interpreted  as  a  sign  of  duplicity. 
The  Emperor's  will  was  notified  to  Panin  by  letter, 
and  Kotchoubey  entered  upon  his  duties  to  the  great 
satisfaction  of  Alexander  and  of  our  council. 