

Paul's  sudden  death  at  once  dissipated  all  the 
difficulties  of  the  coalition,  and  created  new  ones  for 
Napoleon,  as  it  lost  him  a  powerful  friend.  In  his 
infatuation  for  the  First  Consul,  Paul  had  persuaded 
himself  that  it  did  not  matter  whether  the  ruler  of 
France  were  legitimate  or  not,  so  long  as  he  could 
make  himself  obeyed.  He  had  accordingly  expelled 
Louis  XVIII  from  his  dominions,*  and  encouraged 

*  Louis  returned  to  Russia  after  Paul's  death. 


272       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Napoleon  in  his  ambition  to  become  Emperor  of 
France.  His  death  changed  everything.  The  naval 
alliance  lost  its  strength  and  value,  there  was  no 
further  necessity  for  fortifying  the  coasts  and 
harbours,  and  trade,  which  had  been  suspended  in 
Russia  to  the  great  detriment  of  the  proprietors  of 
mines  and  land,  resumed  its  ordinary  course,  while 
the  Don  Cossacks,  who  had  already  proceeded  on  a 
day's  march  towards  the  Caucasus,  turned  their 
horses'  heads  homewards  and  crossed  themselves  in 
gratitude  for  the  abandonment  of  Paul's  insane  enter- 
prise. 

The  immediate  result  of  Paul's  death,  so  far  as 
European  politics  were  concerned,  was  an  arrange- 
ment between  Russia  and  England.  The  state  of 
war  which  Paul  had  maintained  against  that  power — 
which  had  long  been  Russia's  best  customer  for  iron, 
corn,  wood  for  building,  sulphur,  and  hemp — was  one 
of  the  principal  grievances  of  the  Russian  people 
against  their  Emperor,  and  immediately  after  his 
death  the  Government  hastened  to  effect  an  arrange- 
ment with  England  which  showed  how  eager  Russia 
was  to  effect  a  reconciliation  at  any  price.  The 
interests  of  her  maritime  allies  were  not  sufficiently 
considered,  and  essential  points  on  the  question  of 
the  neutral  flag  were  either  passed  over  in  silence  or 
left  in  doubt.  The  cessation  of  hostilities  was  the 
great  object  aimed  at.  Alexander  had  in  reality 
no  great  sympathy  for  England.  His  education  had 
given  him  ideas  and  inclinations  totally  different 
from  those  of  the  policy  of  Pitt ;  and  Napoleon's  aide- 
de-camp  Duroc  was  accordingly  received  by  him  with 


MISSION  FROM  NAPOLEON  TO  ALEXANDER      273 

a  sincere  cordiality  which  was  hardly  to  be  expected 
in  a  moment  of  reaction  against  Paul's  infatuation  for 
the  First  Consul.  Duroc's  reception  was,  indeed,  the 
result  of  Alexander's  secret  and  personal  sympathy 
for  the  principles  of  1789,  which  had  been  inspired  in 
him  by  M.  de  la  Harpe.  Alexander  was  glad  to  see 
at  last  Frenchmen  of  the  famous  Revolution,  who  he 
supposed  were  still  Republicans  ;  he  regarded  them 
with  curiosity  and  interest,  having  talked  and  thought 
so  much  about  them.  Both  he  and  the  Grand- 
Duke  Constantine  took  great  pleasure  in  addressing 
them  as  '  citizens,'  thinking  that  the  title  was  one  they 
were  proud  of.  This  was  a  great  mistake,  and 
Napoleon's  envoys  had  repeatedly  to  point  out  that 
the  term  had  gone  out  of  fashion  in  France  before 
Alexander  and  his  brother  ceased  to  use  it.  Napoleon's 
chief  motive  in  sending  his  confidential  aide-de-camp 
to  St  Petersburg  was  to  sound  the  young  Emperor  as 
to  his  feelings  with  regard  to  a  French  alliance.  I 
was  told  that  Duroc  wrote  to  Napoleon  that  there 
was  no  cause  for  either  hope  or  fear  ;  this  statement 
was  at  the  time  perfectly  accurate,  and  was  founded 
on  an  exact  knowledge  of  Alexander's  character  at 
the  beginning  of  his  reign  ;  but  later  on  it  was  belied 
by  events. 