


284       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

origin  and  the  results  of  which  she  could  hardly  ap- 
prove. Kotchoubey  was  much  distressed,  and  in  the 
salons  people  talked  of  the  insignificant  part  Russia 
had  been  made  to  play.  France,  on  the  other  hand, 
boasted  of  her  triumph,  and  the  Prussian  Ministers 
were  delighted.  In  order  to  gild  the  pill  for  Russia, 
Napoleon  offered  sonic  advantages  to  the  houses  of 
Wiirteinberg  and  Baden,  which  were  allied  with  her ; 
but  these  States  felt  that  their  fate  must  ultimately 
depend  on  the  good-will  of  France,  and  not  on  the 
power  of  Russia.  "  As  for  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg, 
the  Empress  Dowager's  son-in-law,  he  complained  of 
the  prejudicial  effect  of  the  treaty  upon  his  estates, 
but  he  could  not  obtain  any  redress  :  Napoleon  had 
been  offended  by  his  strong  German  feeling  and  his 
stiff  manners. 

The  meetings  of  the  Secret  Council  were  now 
resumed,  and  they  had  become  the  more  important  as 
three  of  its  members — Kotchoubey,  Novosiltzoff,  and 
Strogonoff — were  now  in  the  service  of  the  State. 
Novosiltzoff's  ante-chamber  began  to  fill ;  men  with 
new  ideas  sought  and  obtained  employment.  Many 
matters  passed  through  his  hands  and  were  influenced 
by  his  liberal  leanings.  The  Emperor  found  him 
useful  for  giving  Russian  forms  to  his  European 
aspirations.  We  were  also  supported  by  some  of  the 
older  and  more  distinguished  functionaries  of  the 

O 

Empire.  One  of  these  was  the  father  of  Count  Paul 
Strogonoff,  who  had  passed  the  greater  part  of  his 
life  in  Paris  at  the  time  of  Louis  XV.  He  had  been 
in  the  society  of  Grimm,  d'Holbach,  and  d'Alembert ; 
he  had  been  a  frequent  visitor  in  the  salons  of 


THE  STROGONOFFS  285 

celebrated  women,  where  the  greatest  noblemen  used 
to  meet  men  of  letters ;  his  conversation  was  full  of 
the  anecdotes  and  good  sayings  of  that  day,  and  he 
had  in  many  things  adopted  its  opinions.  He  was 
very  impulsive  and  enthusiastic,  but  the  slightest 
obstacle  sufficed  to  cool  his  enthusiasm.  He  was  a 
singular  mixture  of  the  encyclopaedist  and  the  old 
Russian  boyard.  His  mind  and  his  language  were 
French,  his  manners  and  customs  Russian ;  he  had  a 
great  fortune  and  many  debts,  a  large  elegantly 
furnished  house,  a  good  picture  gallery,  of  which  he 
had  himself  drawn  up  a  catalogue,  and  an  immense 
number  of  servants  (including  some  French  valets) 
whom  he  treated  as  slaves,  though  with  great  kind- 
ness. He  was  surrounded  by  disorder,  and  his 
servants  robbed  him ;  but  he  did  not  care.  He  kept 
open  house,  and  anybody  could  come  to  meals  on 
certain  days  in  the  week.  The  society  was  less  mixed, 
and  included  more  learned  men  and  artists,  than  at 
the  house  of  the  Grand  Equerry  Narishkin,  and  the 
complete  absence  of  etiquette,  together  with  the 
Count's  extreme  amiability,  made  his  house  very 
pleasant.  He  had  taken  a  great  liking  to  me,  and 
was  angry  when  I  did  not  come  to  his  dinners ;  he 
treated  me  as  one  of  the  family. 