

VorontzofFs  brother  Simon  had  also  arrived  at  St 
Petersburg  after  a  long  absence.  He  had  very  fixed 
opinions  and  sentiments,  and  was  always  a  blind  and 
passionate  partisan  of  any  idea  he  adopted,  or  any 
man  he  chose  as  his  idol.  During  the  revolution 


288      MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

which  placed  Catherine  II  on  the  throne  he  was  a 
subaltern  officer  in  the  grenadiers,  and  loudly  declared 
himself  in  favour  of  the  unfortunate  Peter  III,  which 
did  not  prevent  him  from  being  afterwards  employed 
by  Catherine  and  appointed  Ambassador  in  London. 
It  is  known  that  one  of  VorontzofFs  sisters  was  Peter 
Ill's  mistress,  while  another  was  a  confidante  of  the 
Empress  Catherine.  The  zeal  he  had  shown  in  his 
youth  for  Peter  III,  induced  the  Emperor  Paul  to 
recall  him  from  London  to  St  Petersburg,  and  offer 
him  the  first  posts  in  the  Empire,  but  he  refused 
them  all  and  asked  to  be  left  in  London.  He  had 
acquired  friends  in  England  by  his  noble,  frank,  and 
determined  character,  and  had,  so  to  say,  taken  root 
in  the  country.  England  had  quite  fascinated  him  ; 
he  loved  her  more  than  the  most  bigoted  of  Tories, 
and  he  adored  Pitt  to  such  an  extent  that  he  looked 
upon  the  slightest  criticism  or  even  doubt  as  to  his 
policy  and  doctrines  as  simple  nonsense,  and  as  show- 
ing an  inexcusable  perversion  of  mind  or  heart.  Be- 
sides his  worship  of  England  and  Pitt,  he  cultivated 
another  which  was  more  natural  and  of  older  date- 
that  of  his  elder  brother.  He  considered  him  the 
ablest  and  most  virtuous  man  in  Russia,  and  his 
decisions  were  to  him  oracles.  His  devotion  to  his 
brother  was  indeed  touching,  for  it  was  quite  spon- 
taneous and  sincere.  The  two  brothers  were  so 
united  that  they  did  not  even  divide  the  property  left 
them  by  their  father.  Alexander,  who  managed  the 
property,  gave  his  brother  his  share,  and  there  was 
never  the  slightest  altercation  between  them  on  the 
subject. 


THE  VORONTZOFFS  289 

Novosiltzoff,  during  the  years  he  had  passed  in 
England  while  Paul  was  on  the  throne,  had  been  a 
frequent  visitor  to  Simon  Vorontzoff  s  house,  to  which 
he  had  been  introduced  by  Count  Strogonoff;  he  had 
gained  his  intimacy  and  confidence,  and  thus  became  a 
sort  of  bond  between  Alexander  Vorontzoff  and  the 
'young  men's  party.'  Simon's  arrival  at  St  Peters- 
burg1 made  these  relations  more  intimate  and  effec- 

o 

tive.  His  Tory  opinions  were  regarded  in  Russia  as 
extremely  Liberal,  and  they  had  considerable  influence 
on  his  brother,  through  whom  they  were  transmitted 
to  the  Emperor,  who  was  already  elaborating  a  plan 
of  reform.  Alexander  Vorontzoff  was  in  no  way 
opposed  to  certain  Liberal  ideas ;  on  the  contrary,  he 
was  inclined  to  adopt  and  support  them,  and  this 
inclination  was  fostered  by  the  traditions  of  the  old 
Russian  aristocracy  which  had  wished  to  limit  the 
power  of  the  Empress  Anne  when  she  was  called  to 
the  throne.  He  once  told  me  that  in  passing  through 
Warsaw  in  his  youth,  during  the  reign  of  Augustus 
III,  to  make  a  tour  in  Europe,  he  had  thought  that 
nothing  could  have  been  better  or  more  fortunate  for 