


282       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

consequences  he  foresaw  ;  he  endeavoured  to  dissuade 
the  Emperor  from  going  to  Memel,  and  went  there 
himself  very  unwillingly.  To  interfere  in  the  affair 
of  the  indemnities  would  be  contrary  to  the  principle 
of  non-intervention  adopted  in  the  Secret  Council, 
and  would  be  playing  into  Prussia's  hands.  What 
especially  displeased  Kotchoubey  in  the  proposed 
arrangements,  and  made  him  wish  not  to  take  part 
in  them,  was  that  the  disposal  of  the  indemnities 
was  left  entirely  to  Napoleon's  good  pleasure,  and 
that  the  latter  might  consequently  be  regarded  as  the 
prime  mover  in  the  whole  business.  But  the  two 
sovereigns  settled  the  matter  personally,  without  con- 
sulting their  Ministers — a  bad  way  of  dealing  with 
political  affairs,  as  it  necessarily  makes  dupes  of  those 
who  are  straightforward,  disinterested,  and  generous. 

It  was  also  at  this  first  interview  at  Memel  that 
began  the  Platonic  coquetry  between  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  and  the  Queen  of  Prussia — a  sort  of  connection 
which  was  especially  pleasing  to  Alexander  and  to 
which  he  was  always  ready  to  sacrifice  much  time. 
It  very  seldom  happened  that  the  virtue  of  the  ladies 
to  whom  Alexander  paid  his  attentions  was  really  in 
danger.  The  Queen  was  always  accompanied  by  her 
favourite  sister,  the  Princess  of  Sal  in,  now  Duchess 
of  Cumberland,*  about  whom  there  was  much  scandal- 
ous gossip.  She  relaxed  the  Court  etiquette,  made 
conversation  more  merry,  and  introduced  more 
familiarity  into  intimate  society.  She  was  thoroughly 
informed  of  her  sister's  secret  thoughts,  and  would 
have  been  of  her  secret  actions  if  there  had  been  any. 

*  Afterwards  Queen  of  Hanover. 


ALEXANDER  AND  FREDERICK  WILLIAM  III    283 

After  one  of  his  interviews  the  Emperor,  who  then 
had  transferred  his  affections  to  some  one  else,  told  me 
he  was  seriously  alarmed  at  the  distribution  of  the 
rooms  which  communicated  with  his,  and  that  at 
night  he  used  carefully  to  lock  his  bedroom  door  to 
prevent  his  being  surprised  arid  led  into  dangerous 
temptations  which  he  wished  to  avoid.  He  even  said 
this  plainly,  with  more  frankness  than  gallantry,  to 
the  Queen  of  Prussia  and  her  sister. 

On  returning  from  Memel,  the  Emperor  made  a 
tour  in  Lithuania,  and  showed  that  he  took  an  in- 
terest in  the  Poles  by  distributing  some  favours  and 
repairing  some  acts  of  injustice,  and  at  the  same  time 
holding  out  the  prospect  of  further  benefits.  All  this 
was  very  hurriedly  done,  as  is  usually  the  case  during 
the  tour  of  a  sovereign  in  his  dominions.  When  he 
arrived  at  St  Petersburg,  the  treaty  relative  to  the 
indemnities  was  made  public,  and  it  turned  out  to  be 
a  general  distribution  of  ecclesiastical  property  in 
which  Prussia  had  the  largest  share.  In  Paris  the 
property  was  sold  by  auction  :  the  First  Consul  took 
the  leading  part  in  the  arrangements,  but  Talleyrand 
was  entrusted  with  the  details  of  the  distribution, 
and  as  a]  rule  the  highest  bidder  got  the  property. 
Right  had  little  chance  unless  it  had  money  to  back 
it.  Germany  was  parcelled  out  for  the  advantage  of 
Prussia — whose  favour  the  First  Consul  wished  to 
gain — and  of  the  distributors  in  Paris.  The  import- 
ance of  France  was  sensibly  increased,  while  that  of 
Russia  was  greatly  diminished ;  she  played  a  second- 
ary part  and  was  led  into  giving  her  assent  to  an 
arrangement  which  was  far  from  honourable  in  its 