

The  object  of  the  reform  was  to  establish  a  system 
somewhat  similar  to  those  adopted  in  most  other 
European  States  by  separating  the  departments,  defin- 
ing their  limits,  assembling  in  each  department  matters 
of  the  same  kind,  centralising  their  management,  and 
thereby  augmenting  the  responsibility  of  the  principal 


PLANS  OF  REFORM  297 

functionaries  of  State.  It  was  hoped  among'  other 
things  that  this  would  be  an  efficacious  means  of 
checking  the  numberless  abuses  and  frauds  which  are 
the  curse  of  Russia.  The  Emperor  accordingly 
created  for  the  first  time  Ministries  of  the  Interior 
and  of  Police,  of  Finance,  of  Justice,  of  Public  In- 
struction, of  Commerce,  of  Foreign  Affairs,  of  War, 
and  of  the  Navy.  As  to  the  War  Department, 
Alexander  continued  the  system  adopted  by  his  father, 
insisting  that  everything  relating  to  the  army,  down 
to  the  smallest  appointment,  should  emanate  direct 
from  the  sovereign,  and  that  the  army  should  know 
it.  The  post  of  aide-de-camp  charged  with  the  man- 
agement of  the  personnel  of  the  army  became  gradually 
converted,  in  imitation  of  Napoleon,  into  that  of 
Major-General,  so  as  to  show  that  Russia  always 
considers  herself  in  a  state  of  war,  and  wishes  to  be 
in  a  position  to  make  war  at  any  moment.  In  the 
manifesto  establishing  the  changes  above  referred  to, 
it  was  stated  that  all  the  Emperor's  ukases  were  in 
future  to  be  countersigned  by  one  of  the  Ministers— 
an  attempt  to  introduce  the  principle  of  responsibility 
— and  the  Ministers  were  directed  to  meet  in  a 
council,  in  which  they  were  to  discuss  the  most 
important  questions  of  State.  This  was  a  new 
administrative  machine  superior  to  the  Senate,  which 
retained  all  its  functions  and  was  invested  with  new 
ones  ;  but  those  which  related  to  administration 
properly  so  called,  became  in  its  case  almost  purely 
formal.  By  the  creation  of  the  new  Ministers  the 
administrative  authority  of  the  Government  was 
concentrated,  while  hitherto  it  had  not  had  any  legal 


298       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

or  definite  status  except  in  the  person  of  the  sovereign. 
The  Council  of  State  also  was  not  changed,  although 
some  of  its  most  eminent  members  became  Ministers. 
The  Emperor  continued  occasionally  to  refer  to  this 
Council  various  disagreeable  or  complicated  questions, 
in  order  to  give  it  something  to  do,  and  not  let  it  die 
too  soon  ;  but  it  speedily  perished  through  its  insigni- 
ficance, and  Alexander  afterwards  created  another 
Imperial  Council  on  quite  a  different  and  much  more 
extensive  plan. 

These  changes,  which  elsewhere  would  seem  the 
very  A  B  C  of  politics,  seemed  at  that  time  to  the 
Russians  novel  and  immense.  The  manifesto  made 
much  noise  in  the  whole  Empire  and  especially  in  the 
salons  of  St  Petersburg  and  Moscow  ;  each  man  had 
his  own  opinion  of  it,  and  the  majority  judged  it  not 
by  its  intrinsic  merits  or  the  benefits  it  might  confer 
on  the  State,  but  by  the  effect  it  would  be  likely  to 
have  on  their  own  advancement.  Those  who  obtained 
places  approved  it,  while  those  who  remained  in  the 
cold  criticised  the  juvenile  infatuation  that  wished  to 
change  the  old  and  venerable  institutions  under  which 
Russia  had  become  great.  The  personages  high  in 
office  who  had  not  been  consulted,  and  did  riot  expect 
so  considerable  a  change,  were  taken  by  surprise, 
finding  themselves  eclipsed  by  those  who  during  the 
reign  of  Paul  and  the  beginning  of  that  of  Alexander 
had  held  aloof.  They  strove  to  vent  their  disappoint- 
ment by  smiling  with  pity  at  the  young  men  who 
were  trying  to  reform  the  Empire,  and  at  the  foolish- 
ness of  some  older  men  who  consented  to  be  the 
instruments  of  a  servile  and  awkward  imitation  of 