

o 

himself  and  his  country  than  that  he  should  be  a  great 
nobleman  like  those  of  Poland,  with  the  same  rights 
and  privileges.  The  Russian  aristocratic  spirit  of 
one  of  the  brothers  and  the  pure  Toryism  of  the  other 
both  looked  to  the  Senate  for  a  solution  of  the  problem. 
The  basis  and  the  source  of  all  reforms  should,  they 
thought,  be  found  in  the  Senate ;  by  that  body  alone 
could  they  be  carried  out  without  danger.  Yet,  though 
various  plans  were  discussed  in  the  Secret  Council, 
nothing  was  done.  This  discontented  the  Vorontzoffs, 
VOL.  i.  T 


2 9o       MEMOIRS  OF  PR1SCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  they  agreed  with  the  '  young  men's  party  '  to  take 
a  decided  step  to  draw  the  Emperor  out  of  the  timid 
inertia  in  which  he  had  entrenched  himself. 

The    country  house  of  Kamienny  Ostrog,  where 
the    Emperor   then    lived,    was    separated  from    that 
of  Count   Strogonoff  by  the  river  Neva,  over  which 
there  was  a  bridge.     The  Emperor  and  Empress  went 
to  dine  at   Count   StrogonofFs,  and   the   Vorontzofts 
were  also  there.     After  we  had  got  up   from  table, 
the    Emperor  walked  in    the    garden  and  went   into 
one  of  the    pavilions,   where  he  found    Novosiltzoff ; 
we  all  followed  him,  and   entered  into  conversation. 
Simon  Vorontzoif  had  been  chosen  as  the  speaker  on 
this  occasion,  as,  having  only  just  come  from  England, 
and    being   a   stranger   to    what   had    passed   at    St 
Petersburg,  he  had  a  right  to  be  regarded  as  impartial 
and  to  state  his  views  freely.     His  speech  was  not  as 
eloquent  as  we  had  expected  ;  the  Emperor,  who  was 
very  clever   in  raising  objections  and   difficulties,  re- 
peatedly disconcerted    both   Simon  and   his  brother. 
They  tried  to  prove  to  him  that  it  was  necessary  to 
do  something,  that  improvements  were  expected  of  a 
new  reign,  and  that  both  Russia  and  Europe  generally 
expected  them,  especially  of  him.     These  were  only 
vague  phrases ;  and  when  the   Emperor  asked  what 
line  the  improvements  should  take  and  how  he  was  to 
proceed,  the  Vorontzoffs  could  only  answer  that  if  the 
authority  of  the  Senate  were  re-established  all  diffi- 
culties would  be  removed.     They  held  that  this  body, 
if  restored  to  its  power  and  dignity,  would  possess  all 
the  safeguards  and  the   means  necessary  for  bringing 
about  the  projected  improvements.     Each  sentence  in 


PLANS  OF  REFORM  291 

Simon  VorontzofFs  speech  began  and  ended  with  the 
Senate,  and  when  he  did  not  know  what  to  say  or 
answer  he  simply  repeated  the  word.  This  affectation 
was  somewhat  awkward  and  ridiculous,  and  was  more 
likely  to  chill  the  Emperor  than  to  rouse  him.  The 
Senate  had  certainly  much  changed  since  its  establish- 
ment by  Peter  I,  and  it  could  no  longer  be  said  even 
to  have  the  power  it  enjoyed  in  the  reigns  which 
immediately  succeeded  that  of  the  founder  of  modern 
Russia.  In  all  difficult  questions  the  Senate  was 
al  ways  referred  to,  but  it  was  nothing  but  a  name ;  it 
was  composed  of  men  who  were  for  the  most  part 
incapable  and  without  energy,  selected  for  their  insig- 
nificance, and  it  could  not  therefore  act  as  a  mediator 
between  parties  or  be  of  any  weight  either  on  one 
side  or  the  other. 