

By  natural  inclination  and  by  his  French  training 
the  Count  was  liberal  so  far  as  his  words  and  desires 
were  concerned.  He  wished  to  give  happiness  and 
liberty  to  everybody ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  was  a 
thorough  courtier,  and  the  favour  and  consideration  of 
his  sovereign  was  to  him  a  necessity.  He  was  not 
ambitious  or  desirous  of  place  ;  but  a  cold  reception  or 


286      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

a  frown  from  the  Emperor  made  him  unhappy  and 
deprived  him  of  all  energy  and  rest.  He  had  been 
liked  by  Catherine,  by  Paul,  and  by  the  Empress 
Maria,  and  he  was  especially  so  by  Alexander.  The 
latter  was  his  son's  friend,  and  was  very  fond  of  the 
young  Countess,  who  by  her  amiable  character  had 
obtained  a  great  influence  over  him.  At  the  old 
Count's  he  felt  in  his  element,  for  he  used  to  meet 
people  who  understood  and  appreciated  those  modern 
and  liberal  ideas  which  were  at  that  time  Alexander's 
secret  passion. 

The  special  favour  enjoyed  by  the  Strogonoff 
family  at  the  beginning  of  Alexander's  reign  gave  the 
old  Count  more  weight  than  he  had  ever  had  before, 
and  as  he  was  a  senator,  and  his  Russian  manners  had 
gained  him  much  popularity  among  the  nobility  of  the 
district  of  which  he  was  Marshal,  his  enthusiastic 
approval  of  the  new  ideas  which  were  supposed  to  be 
entertained  by  Alexander  and  the  members  of  the 
Secret  Council  was  very  valuable  to  the  latter.  An 
even  more  important  supporter  was  Count  Alexander 
Vorontzoff,  who  was  regarded  in  Russia  as  one  of  her 
ablest  statesmen.  He  and  Count  Zavadovsky  had 
been  Count  Bezborodko's  friends ;  they  used  to  come 
to  see  him  to  talk  about  public  affairs,  and  it  is  said 
that  when  they  left  Bezborodko  used  to  have  the 
doors  and  windows  opened,  and  to  wander  about  the 
rooms  panting,  fanning  himself,  and  saying,  '  Thank 
God,  the  pedagogues  have  gone,'  as  they  were  con- 
stantly reproaching  him  for  his  indolence  and  his 
yielding  temper.  They  were,  however,  true  friends. 
I  do  not  know  what  induced  Count  Vorontzoff  to 


THE   VORONTZOFFS  287 

withdraw  from  public  affairs  during  the  reign  of 
Catherine.  He  used  to  have  fits  of  bad  temper,  and 
his  ambition  was  riot  easily  satisfied.  While  Paul 
was  on  the  throne  the  Count  had  the  good  sense 
to  remain  in  retirement,  although  Paul  was  very  well 
disposed  towards  the  Vorontzoff  family  on  account  of 
the  liaison  of  Peter  III  with  one  of  their  sisters.  It 
was  only  at  the  time  of  the  new  Emperor's  accession 
that  Vorontzoff  reappeared  at  St  Petersburg,  with 
the  reputation  he  had  enjoyed  during  the  reign  of 
Catherine  still  further  increased  by  his  having  so 
long  and  so  wisely  remained  in  retirement.  He  did 
not  join  the  old  Ministers,  most  of  whom  were  in- 
ferior to  him  in  knowledge  and  judgment,  and  whom 
it  would  have  been  necessary  to  dismiss  in  order  to  find 
a  place  for  him.  The  position  he  assumed  was  a  more 
elevated  one  ;  he  undertook  the  task  of  reconciling 
the  Emperor's  ideas  with  those  of  the  old  Russian 
routine,  of  moderating  the  changes  which  he  foresaw 
might  arise  from  Alexander's  inclinations.  It  was 
easy  to  adopt  and  at  the  same  time  to  guide  them, 
and  thereby  to  gain  favour  and  power.  Vorontzoff 
accordingly  entered  the  '  young  men's  party,'  feel- 
ing that  in  order  to  rise  it  was  necessary  to  free  one's 
self  from  the  old  traditions,  and  that  in  any  new 
arrangement  the  first  place  would  be  secured  to 
him. 