

The  new  Finance  Minister  was  Count  Vasilieff,  a 
capable  and  honest  official  who  had  in  financial 
matters  been  the  right  hand  of  Prince  Viaziemskoy, 
the  only  Procurator-General  who  had  been  mentioned 
with  praise  at  the  time  of  the  Empress  Catherine. 


PLANS  OF  REFORM  301 

In  the  various  changes  which  had  taken  place  since 
the  Prince's  death  in  1794,  M.  Vasilieff,  as  treasurer 
of  the  Empire,  had  been  indispensable ;  he  was  a 
steady  worker,  appreciated  new  ideas,  and  adopted 
them  when  he  thought  they  were  opportune.  All 
the  branches  of  the  public  revenue,  the  brandy  traffic, 
the  Imperial  Bank,  etc.,  were  comprised  in  this  depart- 
ment, to  which  was  added  the  mines  department, 
which  had  been  reorganised  on  a  larger  scale. 

The  functions  of  Minister  of  Justice  were  united 
to  those  of  Procurator-General  of  the  Senate. 
General  Beklescheff  did  not  wish  to  stop  in  this 
department,  as  it  had  been  deprived  of  the  greater 
part  of  its  functions  by  the  creation  of  the  Ministers 
of  the  Interior  and  of  Finance ;  and  he  was  succeeded 
by  the  Senator  Dzierzanin.  He  was  the  personal 
choice  of  the  Emperor,  without  communication  with 
the  Secret  Council.  A  worthy  man,  and  the  writer  of 
some  much  admired  lyrics  which  were  full  of  swing 
and  passion,  he  was  imperfectly  educated  and  knew 
no  language  but  Russian.  The  Emperor  had  been 
attracted  to  him  by  his  ardent  sentiments  and  poetic 
dreams,  not  being  able  to  resist  fine  phrases ;  the 
vaguer  they  were  the  better  they  pleased  him,  as  he 
could  then  easily  assimilate  them  to  his  hopes,  which 
also  were  not  very  clear.  He  liked  expressions  of 
energetic  liberalism,  and  was  especially  attracted  by 
admiration  of  himself  when  it  was  couched  in  the 
language  of  devotion  to  the  cause  of  humanity. 

The  Emperor  had  direct  and  special  relations  with 
certain  persons  whom  he  himself  introduced  at  our 
meetings ;  he  liked  to  patronise  them  and  defend 


3o2       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

them  against  objections  raised  sometimes  by  people 
who  knew  them  more  intimately.  It  gave  him 
pleasure  to  have  these  relations  without  the  know- 
ledge of  his  friends,  who  already  at  that  time  had 
begun  to  displease  him  because  they  were  so  united 
among  themselves.  Yet  it  was  absolutely  necessary 
to  introduce  members  of  '  the  young  men's  party ' 
into  the  administration,  for  all  Alexander's  hopes 
rested  upon  them  for  the  zealous  continuation  and 
accomplishment  of  the  reforms  he  had  at  heart. 
Kotchoubey  was  provided  for,  but  what  was  to  be 
done  with  the  others  ?  It  would  be  too  much  to 
make  them  Ministers,  and  it  was  accordingly  decided 
that  assistants  to  the  Ministers  should  be  appointed  ; 
in  this  way  the.  Emperor's  friends  would  be  able 
to  direct  their  chiefs  in  accordance  with  the  Emperor's 
views,  and  to  keep  him  fully  acquainted  with  what 
was  going  on. 