


3io      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

confined  himself  to  establishing  a  faculty  of  philo- 
sophy, with  the  special  object  of  training  professors  of 
the  exact  sciences,  of  administration,  and  of  literature, 
This  faculty  began  brilliantly  by  turning  out  some 
distinguished  pupils,  but  they  did  not  afterwards 
realise  the  hopes  that  had  been  formed  of  them,  and 
the  institution  perished  without  leaving  any  durable 
results.  A  university  with  privileges  and  endow- 
ments would  have  better  maintained  itself,  as  was 
shown  by  the  universities  of  Moscow  and  Kharkoff, 
which,  though  they  declined,  were  still  active  in  the 
midst  of  the  indifference  and  oblivion  by  which  they 
were  long  surrounded. 

Count  Zavadovsky  was  appointed  Minister  of 
Public  Instruction.  He  had  been  secretary  to  Count 
Romantzoff  at  the  same  time  as  Prince  Bezborodko, 
and  they  had  remained  friends  ever  since.  Count 
Romantzoff  had  presented  them  both  as  secretaries 
to  the  Empress  Catherine,  and  this  was  the  origin  of 
their  brilliant  fortunes.  Bezborodko,  to  whom  I  have 
already  referred,  soon  rose  by  his  great  capacity  for 
work ;  he  enjoyed  the  confidence  of  his  sovereign  and 
attained  to  the  highest  dignities.  Zavadovsky's 
success  was  obtained  by  other  means.  The  Empress 
made  him  her  favourite ;  he  became  attached  to  her 
and  was  very  unhappy  when  after  six  months  had 
elapsed  he  was  dismissed.  His  friends  Bezborodko 
and  Vorontzoff  endeavoured  to  console  him,  and  the 
presents  which  Catherine  always  lavished  on  a  dis- 
missed favourite  were  in  his  case  richer  than  usual, 
as  she  recognised  in  him  other  merits  than  those 
which  had  merely  attracted  her  fancy.  He  after- 


STATE  OF  EDUCATION  IN  RUSSIA  311 

wards  married,  and  continued  to  be  well  received 
at  Court.  His  friendship  with  Vorontzoff,  and  the 
reputation  for  writing  pure  Russian  which  he  had 
gained  by  certain  manifestoes  that  he  had  written  for 
the  Empress  Catherine,  obtained  him  the  post  of 
Minister  of  Instruction.  He  was  a  man  of  just  and 
benevolent  character,  but  of  somewhat  stolid  mind. 
He  was  not  quick  of  intelligence,  and  did  not  perceive 
shades  of  meaning,  while  at  the  same  time  he  wished 
to  understand  new  ideas,  and  not  to  be  reckoned 
among  those  who  could  neither  learn  nor  forget  any- 
thing. Yet  he  possessed  in  a  high  degree  one  of 
the  most  marked  traits  of  a  Russian  administrator — 
profound  submission  to  everything  that  comes 
from  superior  authority.  He  was  enthusiastic  in 
his  admiration  of  classic  writers  and  was  fond  of 
quoting  the  passages  he  remembered.  The  literature 
of  his  own  country  also  greatly  interested  him.  By  a 
singular  accident  he  had  learnt  Latin  in  one  of  the 
Polish  schools  managed  by  the  Jesuits ;  he  had  not 
forgotten  his  Polish,  and  he  prided  himself  on  his 
knowledge  of  that  language,  speaking  with  much 
admiration  of  our  ancient  poet  John  Kochanowski,* 
some  fragments  of  whose  poems  he  knew  by  heart. 
All  this  gave  him  a  certain  predilection  for  Poland  and 
the  Poles ;  as  was  shown  even  at  his  dinners,  which 
always  consisted  of  Polish  dishes. 