


3o8       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

regard  to  the  Poles.  The  University  of  Kazan  was 
to  look  after  the  instruction  of  the  Tartars  and  of 
Siberia  generally.  Each  university  had  its  curator, 
and  the  curators  formed  a  council  of  public  instruction, 
the  President  of  which  was  the  Minister.  The 
persons  appointed  to  these  posts  by  the  Emperor  were 
such  as  to  give  a  hope  that  the  work  of  public  instruc- 
tion would  be  pushed  forward  with  zeal  and  success. 
General  Klinger,  commandant  of  one  of  the  cadet 
corps,  was  appointed  curator  of  Dorpat.  He  was  a 
distinguished  German  author,  with  liberal  opinions 
which  might  almost  be  called  Utopian,  although  he 
had  been  in  the  service  of  the  greatest  despots  ;  his 
intentions,  however,  were  good,  and  he  was  full  of 
zeal  for  the  advancement  of  science  and  instruction. 
His  eccentric  and  dreamy  views  were  expressed  with 
a  German  bluntness  which  gave  him  an  appearance  of 
frankness  and  energy,  and  all  this  had  gained  him 
Alexander's  favour.  Count  Severin  Potocki  was 
appointed  Curator  of  the  University  of  Kharkoff, 
which  was  the  centre  of  a  district  the  inhabitants  of 
which  were  strongly  desirous  of  obtaining  the  means 
of  instruction.  Count  Severin,  as  a  Pole,  had  been 
treated  with  great  consideration  by  Alexander  when 
he  was  Grand-Duke ;  he  had  been  admitted,  like  my 
brother  and  myself,  into  his  familiar  circle,  and  was 
one  of  his  most  enthusiastic  admirers.  The  Emperor 
appointed  him  not  only  curator  of  Kharkoff,  but  also 
senator  of  the  third  department  of  the  Senate,  which 
issued  decisions  on  appeals  against  measures  taken  by 
the  administrations  of  the  Polish  provinces.  Count 
Severin  obtained  some  celebrity  in  Russia  as  a  senator, 


STATE  OF  EDUCATION  IN  RUSSIA  309 

and  in  his  capacity  of  curator  he  showed  zeal  and 
perseverance. 

The  universities  which  were  most  progressive 
were  Wilna,  Dorpat,  and  Kharkoff.  The  nobility  of 
Livonia,  Esthonia,  and  Courland  did  not  look  with 
favour  upon  the  University  of  Dorpat,  which  had 
declared  itself  the  protector  of  the  peasants  and  the 
bourgeoisie.  One  of  the  professors  of  this  univer- 
sity was  named  Parot ;  he  was  a  worthy  man  who 
expressed  boundless  attachment  to  the  Emperor 
Alexander,  and  was  very  anxious  about  his  health. 
Once  Madame  Parot  sent  a  waistcoat,  woven 
by  herself,  which  she  said  would  preserve  the 
Emperor's  life.  Parot  begged  him  to  wear  it,  and 
by  such  manifestations  of  affection  he  gained  Alex- 
ander's favour,  and  had  private  conferences  with  him 
during  his  frequent  journeys  to  St  Petersburg.  The 
Curator  of  Moscow  was  M.  de  MouraviefF,  one  of  the 
gentlemen  formerly  attached  to  Alexander's  service 
when  he  was  Grand-Duke,  and  also  his  former  secre- 
tary. He  was  a  worthy  man,  but  excessively  timid 
and  quite  devoid  of  energy.  The  Emperor  appointed 
him  assistant  to  the  Minister  of  Instruction  in  order 
that  it  should  not  be  said  that  young  men  only  per- 
formed the  duties  of  assistant,  and  that  these  posts  were 
created  only  for  the  members  of  the  Secret  Council. 
NovosiltzofF  was  appointed  Curator  of  St  Petersburg. 
As  there  was  already  in  that  capital  a  faculty  of 
medicine  dependent  on  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior, 
and  a  faculty  of  law  could  not  be  established  before 
the  commission  for  the  revision  of  the  laws  had  ter- 
minated its  labours,  Novosiltzoff  for  the  present 