

This  great  undertaking  was  begun  methodically 
and  pursued  for  some  time  with  activity  ;  Novosiltzoff 
was  allowed  by  the  Minister  of  Justice  to  make  it  his 
exclusive  occupation.  The  classifications  were  pre- 
pared by  Baron  Rosenkampf,  and  so  long  as  they 
were  adhered  to  the  work  progressed ;  but  it  did  not 
produce  the  results  which  were  expected  of  it.  This, 
is  usually  the  case  in  Russia  ;  if  there  is  no  immediate 
result,  the  persons  entrusted  with  the  execution  of 
the  work  are  changed,  and  it  has  to  be  begun  over 
again. 

I  was  the  only  member  of  the  Secret  Council  who 
remained  without  employment.  Alexander  offered 
me,  with  Count  VorontzofFs  concurrence,  the  post  of 
assistant  to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  all 
my  friends,  the  Emperor  especially,  pressed  me  to 
accept  the  offer.  I  hesitated  for  a  long  time,  feeling 
how  much  surprise  and  dissatisfaction  such  an  appoint- 
ment would  cause  in  Russia.  The  Emperor  observed 
that  during  my  mission  to  the  King  of  Sardinia  I 
had  made  myself  favourably  known  by  my  despatches, 
and  that  iny  nomination  to  the  Foreign  Office  ought 


APPOINTED  ASSISTANT  FOREIGN  MINISTER        305 

not  therefore  to  be  a  matter  of  astonishment, 
besides  which  Count  VorontzofF,  who  alone  had 
a  right  to  be  consulted  on  the  subject,  had  consented 
to  my  becoming  his  assistant.  I  replied  that  he 
(the  Emperor)  knew  more  than  anyone  my  feeling-s 
with  regard  to  my  country ;  that  they  could  never 
change,  and  that  I  had  some  reason  to  fear  that  they 
might  be  incompatible  with  the  duties  of  the  appoint- 
ment he  wished  to  give  me ;  the  safest  and  most 
proper  course,  therefore,  would  be  for  me  not  to  accept 
it.  To  this  Alexander  rejoined  that  he  did  not  at 
present  anticipate  any  such  contradiction  as  that 
which  I  feared ;  that  I  should  always  be  at  liberty  to 
give  up  my  post  if  such  a  contradiction  were  to  arise  ; 
and  that,  on  the  contrary,  he  thought  that  events 
would  occur  which  would  be  favourable  to  my  views. 
He  added  some  very  flattering  expressions  with  regard 
to  my  qualifications  for  the  post.  It  is  every  man's 
duty,  he  said,  to  pay  his  debt  to  humanity ;  when  one 
has  talents  one  must  not  refuse  to  employ  them  in  the 
most  useful  way.  I  still  declined,  but  Alexander  was 
bent  on  my  taking  the  appointment ;  this  was  one  of 
his  irresistible  fancies  which  nothing  could  induce  him 
to  abandon  until  they  were  satisfied.  His  persistence 
and  kindness  to  me  were  such  that  at  length  I 
yielded,  on  the  express  condition  that  I  should 
be  allowed  to  resign  the  appointment  directly 
its  functions  should  become  incompatible  with  my 
feelings  as  a  Pole.  My  chief  object  in  this  was,  by 
spending  some  years  in  the  Emperor's  service,  to 
prove  to  him  my  sincere  attachment  and  my  grati- 
tude for  his  friendship  and  confidence.  I  accepted 
VOL.  i.  u 