


306       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSK1 

with  some  sadness,  as  by  so  doing  I  was  entering  on 
a  new  career  full  of  pitfalls  which  would  retain  me  at 
St  Petersburg,  where  I  was  always  like  an  exotic 
plant  which  could  not  take  root ;  I  felt  I  could  not 
enjoy  life  unless  I  were  with  my  own  people. 

I  will  not  pretend  that  I  had  more  foresight  and 
prudence  than  was  really  the  case.  In  accepting  the 
post  which  was  offered  me,  I  was  determined  not  to 
do  anything  which  might  exercise  an  injurious  in- 
fluence on  the  destinies  of  my  country ;  but  I  had 
no  clear  or  decided  idea  as  to  the  nature  of  the  ser- 
vices I  might  be  called  upon  to  render  to  Poland  in 
my  new  position.  In  this  respect,  a  substantial  bait 
was  offered  me  as  a  reward  for  having  at  length  yielded 
to  the  Emperor's  wishes.  He  entrusted  to  me  the 
direction  of  the  schools  in  the  eight  Polish  pro- 
vinces, which  at  that  time  constituted  the  whole 
of  that  portion  of  Poland  which  belonged  to  his 
dominions. 

The  creation  of  a  Ministry  of  Public  Instruction 
was  a  remarkable  innovation  in  Russia  which  was 
fruitful  of  great  and  salutary  results,  and  posterity 
will  owe  gratitude  both  to  Alexander  and  to  the 
young  men,  then  so  much  criticised,  who  supported 
him  in  his  plans  and  gave  them  practical  shape  by 
dividing  into  special  branches  the  confused  organisa- 
tion which  was  then  in  existence.  Nothing  could  be 
more  wretched  or  insufficient  than  public  instruction 
in  Russia  up  to  the  reign  of  Alexander.  There  was 
an  Academy  of  Sciences  at  St  Petersburg  which 
owed  its  only  celebrity  to  the  presence  of  some 
learned  men  whom  the  Government  had  brought  to 


STATE  OF  EDUCATION  IN  RUSSIA  307 

the  Russian  capital  from  abroad.  Euler  came  when 
he  was  already  an  old  man,  and  died  there  soon  after. 
The  transactions  of  this  Academy  were  for  the  most 
part  written  in  the  French  and  German  languages ; 
it  had  no  relations  whatever  with  the  country,  and 
exercised  no  influence  on  its  progress.  At  Moscow 
there  was  a  university  which  was  equally  isolated,  and 
was  attended  by  not  more  than  a  hundred  students 
maintained  at  the  expense  of  the  Government.  The 
only  other  educational  establishments  in  Russia  proper 
were  the  so-called  '  National  Schools.'  The  teaching 
in  these  schools  was  bad  and  extremely  meagre ;  the 
teachers  were  poor  wretches  whom  idleness  and  ennui 
had  rendered  drunkards,  and  no  respectable  person 
sent  his  children  to  them.  The  establishment  of 
the  Ministry  of  Public  Instruction  completely  changed 
all  this.  The  existing  universities  of  Moscow,  Wilna, 
and  Dorpat  were  better  endowed,  and  three  new 
ones  were  created — those  of  St  Petersburg,  Kharkoff, 
and  Kazan, — each  forming  an  educational  centre  for  a 
prescribed  district,  in  which  it  directed  all  the  educa- 
tional arrangements.  The  University  of  Wilna  was 
exclusively  Polish,  and  during  the  next  few  years  the 
whole  of  Russian  Poland  was  covered  with  schools  in 
which  Polish  feeling  freely  developed  itself.  This 
University,  to  which  I  appointed  the  njost  distin- 
guished literary  and  scientific  men  of  the  country,  and 
some  eminent  professors  from  abroad,  directed  the 
movement  with  admirable  zeal  and  intelligence,  and 
its  consequences,  which  the  Russians  afterwards 
deeply  regretted,  seemed  at  that  time  to  flow 
naturally  from  the  Emperor's  generous  intentions  with 