


FOREIGN  AMBASSADORS  319 

had  formed  of  the  Prussian  army.  This  perseverance, 
which  was  often  blamed  at  St  Petersburg1,  was  never- 

O  ' 

theless  of  great  advantage  to  Russia,  as  she  managed 
thereby  to  attract  Prussia  to  her  side  and  make  her 
a  sort  of  satellite. 

England  had  just  concluded  the  peace  of  Amiens. 
Her  ambassador  at  St  Petersburg  was  Sir  John  Warren, 
an  excellent  admiral,  but  an  indifferent  diplomatist. 
He  was  a  perfect  representative  of  the  nullity  and 
incapacity  of  the  Addington  Ministry  which  had 
appointed  him.  In  those  days  the  English  Government 
was  seldom  happy  in  its  choice  of  ambassadors.  The 
diplomatic  service,  though  much  sought  after,  contained 
few  able  men  ;  the  most  important  posts  were  given 
by  favour  or  through  party  arrangements,  either  to 
satisfy  some  supporter  of  the  Ministry  or  to  obtain 
a  few  more  votes  in  the  House  of  Commons.  Other 
promotions  were  entirely  by  seniority  ;  want  of  know- 
ledge or  of  intelligence  was  no  disqualification.  It 
was  generally  remarked  at  that  time  that  there  was 
neither  ability  nor  zeal  among  the  great  majority  of 
English  diplomatists.  All  this  is  entirely  changed ; 
the  English  diplomatists  are  now  among  the  ablest 
in  Europe. 

General  Hedouville  represented  France.  He  had 
obtained  a  reputation  as  a  General  by  his  pacification 
of  La  Vendee,  but  he  did  not  seem  very  likely  to 
sustain  the  reputation  of  French  diplomacy,  whose 
cleverness  and  general  ability  seemed  even  to  increase 
under  the  Consulate  and  the  Ministry  of  Talleyrand. 
In  selecting  a  Minister  so  benevolent  and  quiet,  not 
to  say  tedious,  in  manner  and  conversation,  the  French 


320       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Government  probably  intended  to  reassure  and  tran- 
quillise  those  whose  friendship  it  wished  to  gain.  He 
represented  one  of  those  dead  calms  which  in 
diplomacy  follow  or  precede  a  storm. 

There  was  nothing  important  or  even  interesting 
in  the  relations  of  Russia  with  the  other  great 
Powers  ;  they  reduced  themselves,  so  far  as  I  re- 
member, to  an  exchange  of  rounded  phrases  the  drift 
of  which  was  :  '  Let  us  be  quiet  and  avoid  all  embar- 
rassments and  conflicts.'  This  feeling  was  shared 
even  by  the  Governments  which  had  suffered  from  the 
peace  ;  they  would  have  been  glad  to  strike  another 
blow  in  the  hope  of  regaining  what  they  had  lost,  but 
they  did  not  dare  to  confess  it.  Even  England  did 
not  expect  a  speedy  rupture.  Austria  groaned  only 
in  secret,  and  when  she  thought  she  could  complain 
without  compromising  herself;  while  Prussia  congratu- 
lated herself  on  her  constant  neutrality  and  looked 
upon  it  as  a  source  of  prosperity  and  progress. 
France,  too,  seemed  to  have  turned  all  her  attention 
to  internal  affairs.  The  First  Consul  was  organising 
the  administration  and  the  laws  of  the  country  ;  but 
all  eyes  were  still  turned  to  this  vigorous  sap  which 
could  not  long  be  satisfied  with  the  immense  terri- 
tories it  had  already  fertilised.  All  continental 
Europe  feared  France,  while  Russia,  although  she 
was  both  pacific  and  inoffensive,  assumed  a  tone  which 
denoted  a  consciousness  of  equal  power  and  a  feeling 
of  independence.  The  relations  of  the  Chancellor  with 
General  Hedouville  showed  a  friendliness  based  on 
mutual  consideration.  A  convention  of  no  great 
significance  was  concluded,  and  the  Chancellor  took 