

Count  Paul  Strogonoff  was  at  his  request  ap- 
pointed assistant  to  the  Minister  of  the  Interior,  and 
Novosiltzoff  obtained  the  post  of  assistant  to  the 
Minister  of  Justice,  retaining  his  former  appointment 
of  Secretary  to  the  Emperor.  This  gave  Novosiltzoff 
the  most  important  place  in  the  administration,  as  it 
was  through  him  that  the  Emperor  was  to  begin  the 
work  of  reforming  jurisprudence  and  the  existing 
laws.  He  was  well  qualified  for  the  task,  as  he  had 
studied  jurisprudence  and  political  economy  in  Eng- 
land, arid  had  made  good  use  of  the  opportunities 
thereby  afforded  him  of  becoming  conversant  with 
those  subjects.  No  one  in  Russia  was  at  that  time 
his  superior  in  that  administrative  knowledge  which 


PLANS  OF  ME  FORM  303 

was  then  only  to  be  obtained  by  reading  French  and 
English  works.     His  practical  mind  rejected  all  vain 
theories  ;    he   possessed  skill  and  tact  in  dealing  not 
only  with  individuals,  but  with   the   Russian  public, 
which   he   knew  thoroughly.     He   had  bad  qualities 
also  ;    but    these  had   not  yet  developed  themselves. 
One    of  his    greatest    merits   was    that   he    seconded 
Alexander's  wishes   as    to   the    improvement   of  the 
condition    of    the    peasants,    and    he    drew    up    the 
first  ukase   on   this    subject.     He   also   reconstituted 
the  commission  for  the  revision  of  the  law.     This  com- 
mission had  been  formed  by  the  Empress  Catherine, 
who   thereby    gained    the   flattering   appreciation    of 
Voltaire  and  the  Diderots  ;  but  the  only  result  was 
the  publication  of  the  philanthropic  and  philosophical 
instructions  addressed  by  Catherine  to  the  commission. 
It  was  dissolved  soon  after,  and  its  proceedings  were 
never  made  public.     The  new  commission  was  organ- 
ised by  Novosiltzoff  with  the  assistance  of  a  German 
jurist,   Baron  Rosenkampf,  on  a  vast  and  well-con- 
ceived plan.     It  was  directed  to  codify  all  the  exist- 
ing   Russian    laws,   which  were    very    numerous  and 
often  contradicted  each  other,  classifying  them  accord- 
ing to  subjects,  omitting  such   as  were  obsolete,  and 
adding  new  ones  when  necessary,  but  taking  care  to  re- 
tain in  the  new  codes  all  that  had  entered  for  many 
years  into  the  life  of  the  Russian  people,  even  if  not 
quite  reconcilable  with  the  ideas  of  modern  jurisprud- 
ence.    The  system  adopted  was  somewhat  similar  to 
that  of  Justinian  ;  but  the  task  of  the  Russian  codifiers 
was  far  more  difficult  than  that  of  the  Roman  ones. 
The  latter  merely  had  to  select  and  classify  out  of  a 


304       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

somewhat  confused  mass  of  laws,  most  of  which  were 
admirable  examples  of  wisdom  and  legislative  science, 
while  in  Russia  the  laws  were  not  only  confused,  but 
in  many  respects  defective  and  insufficient.  For  such 
a  work  not  only  jurists,  but  real  legislators  were 
wanted.  A  similar  code  was  to  be  prepared  for  the 
outlying  provinces  of  the  Empire,  such  as  Livonia, 
Esthonia,  Courland,  and  the  Polish  provinces  of 
Little  Russia,  each  of  which  had  its  own  particular 
language,  laws,  and  customs. 