


THE  CHANCELLOR  VORONTZOFFS  POLICY      317 

ceived.  There  was  at  that  time  in  the  two  capitals 
among  the  civil  officials  and  in  the  army — the  class 
which  afterwards  formed  the  elements  of  public 
opinion — a  vague  desire  of  improvement,  or  rather  of 
events  which  should  be  more  interesting,  more  profit- 
able, and  especially  more  flattering  to  their  vanity. 
It  must  be  admitted  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  did 
not  at  that  time  have  public  opinion  on  his  side,  and 
this  was  indeed  but  seldom  the  case  during  the  whole 
of  his  reign.  At  that  period  especially  his  conduct 
was  too  natural,  his  views  too  pure  and  too  much  in 
conformity  with  the  welfare  of  the  great  majority  of 
his  subjects,  to  be  appreciated  by  a  country  whose 
upper  classes  had  tasted  of  a  corrupt  civilisation  and 
had  been  excessively  indulged  in  their  avidity  and 
vanity.  The  goodness,  the  kindness,  and  the  pure 
intentions  of  Alexander  as  he  then  was  did  not  suffice 
to  make  him  popular.  Notwithstanding  all  the 
Chancellor's  efforts,  no  great  satisfaction  was  expressed 
at  the  advantage  gained  by  him  over  an  adversary  of 
such  little  importance  as  Sweden  ;  on  the  contrary, 
the  old  Minister  was  reproached  for  attempting  to 
throw  dust  in  the  eyes  of  the  public  and  take  advan- 
tage of  its  vanity. 

Count  Sauvan  was  then  the  Austrian  Ambassador  ; 
he  used  always  to  come  to  the  Chancellor  in  full  dress, 
and  conferred  with  him  in  a  very  solemn  manner. 
The  policy  of  Austria  was  at  that  time  lachrymose 
and  sentimental.  The  peace  of  Luneville  had  only 
lately  been  signed,*  and  the  Vienna  Cabinet  sought 
for  consolation.  Russia  did  not  reject  its  mournful 

*  On  the  29th  of  February,  1801. 


3i8       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

representations,  but  only  replied  by  assurances  of 
interest  and  good-will  which  meant  nothing.  Prussia 
was  represented  by  Count  Goltz ;  the  only  qualities 
which  had  obtained  him  advancement  were  a  good 
memory,  a  knowledge  of  routine,  and  a  kind  heart, 
and  he  was  completely  under  the  domination  of  his 
wife,  remarkable  for  a  somewhat  noisy  and  brusque 
vivacity.  When  Prussia,  perfidiously  violating  the 
treaties  of  the  past  ten  years,  took  her  share  of  the 
plunder  of  Poland,  he  succeeded  M.  Lucchesini  as 
Ambassador  at  Vienna.  He  treated  me  with  a  defer- 
ence which  betrayed  a  feeling  of  regret,  almost  of  shame, 
at  the  conduct  of  his  Government  towards  my  country. 
His  predecessor  at  St  Petersburg  was  M.  Tauentzien, 
afterwards  known  as  one  of  the  ablest  of  the  Prussian 
generals.  While  my  mother  was  at  Berlin  on  the 
occasion  of  my  sister's  marriage  with  the  Prince  of 
Wiirtemberg,  he  was  an  officer  of  the  Guards,  and 
often  came  to  her  house,  wrhere  he  was  deeply  smitten 
by  Mdlle.  Constance  Narbutt  (afterwards  Madame 
Denbowska).  She  refused  his  offer  of  marriage,  but 
the  only  result  was  that  during  his  stay  at  St  Peters- 
burg he  often  asked  me  and  my  brother  to  dinner. 
The  relations  of  Russia  with  Prussia  were  purely 
personal  between  the  two  sovereigns,  as  there  was  no 
sympathy  between  the  Cabinets,  the  armies,  or  the 
people  of  the  two  States.  Prussia's  equivocal  conduct, 
her  base  submission  to  France,  and  the  acquisitions 
which  she  obtained  by  it,  were  much  disapproved  by  the 
Russians,  who  did  not  spare  their  sarcasms  on  the  sub- 
ject. The  Emperor,  however,  remained  faithful  to  his 
friendship  with  the  King,  and  to  the  high  opinion  he 