


THE  CHANCELLOR  VORONTZOFFS  POLICY      315 

had  been  pending  for  some  time,  and  the  Chancellor 
resolved  to  cut  the  knot.  He  addressed  Sweden  in  a 
dry  and  imperious  tone,  and  I  was  very  glad  that  I 
was  not  asked  to  write  the  despatches  on  this  matter, 
which  were  in  Russian  ;  my  abstinence  afterwards 
obtained  for  me  proofs  of  confidence  on  the  part  of  the 
King  of  Sweden  and  his  Government.  At  the  same 
time  Russia  seemed  to  prepare  for  a  rupture,  and 
Russian  generals  were  sent  to  inspect  the  Swedish 
frontier.  The  Emperor  himself  went  there,  and  I 
accompanied  him  with  Strogonoff  and  Novosiltzoff. 

We  passed  along  the  greater  part  of  the  frontier 
on  horseback.  The  soil  mostly  consists  of  a  slight 
layer  of  earth  on  a  substratum  of  granite,  and  there 
is  some  extraordinary  scenery,  with  magnificent 
water-falls,  but  the  country  was  not  populous,  and  we 
often  had  to  sleep  in  thinly  scattered  villages,  at  the 
houses  of  the  clergy,  some  of  whom  knew  no  other 
language  than  the  Finnish.  The  villages  and  parson- 
ages were  surrounded  by  meadows,  but  the  general 
appearance  of  the  country  was  melancholy  and  arid. 
I  refer  here  only  to  the  portion  of  Finland  which  at 
that  time  belonged  to  Russia,  as  other  portions  are 
rich  and  abound  in  corn.  Beyond  the  town  of  Abo 
the  country  looked  more  cultivated,  and  the  people 
seemed  more  prosperous.  We  visited  the  disputed 
island,  and  the  fortress  and  harbour  in  its  vicinity, 
which  in  case  of  war  were  to  form  the  basis  of  our 
operations.  General  Suchtelen,  then  commander  of 
the  engineers,  and  afterwards  Russian  Minister  in 
Sweden,  was  having  some  works  constructed  in  this 
fortress  according  to  a  new  system  of  his  own  inven- 


3i6      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

tion ;  it  was  more  simple,  he  said,  than  those  of 
Vauban  and  Coehorn,  which  it  combined  and  made 
more  effective. 

The  King  of  Sweden  was  very  obstinate  in  his 
resistance  to  the  demands  we  had  made  in  so  imperious 
a  tone.  Count  Stedingk,  the  Swedish  Ambassador 
at  St  Petersburg,  often  expressed  to  me  his  astonish- 
ment on  this  subject,  and  shrugged  his  shoulders  in 
speaking  of  the  offensive  way  in  which  Russia  dealt 
with  a  matter  which  in  reality  was  quite  unimportant. 
Sweden  resisted  for  a  long  time,  and  we  continued 
preparations  for  war.  She  had  to  give  way  at  last, 
but  the  conditions  imposed  upon  her  were  insignificant, 
and  Sweden  could  not  be  mad  enough  to  make  war  on 
account  of  them.  The  Chancellor  was  very  proud 
of  his  victory,  but  it  might  easily  have  been  obtained 
without  humiliating  Sweden — which  I  think  would 
have  been  preferable.  The  conduct  of  Russia  left  a 
bitter  feeling  in  the  mind  of  a  neighbour  which  had 
already  been  often  ill-treated,  and  which,  notwith- 
standing its  relative  weakness,  might  on  occasion  do 
much  harm.  But  Vorontzoff  knew  Russia,  or  at  least 
those  who  spoke  in  her  name.  He  knew  that  every 
demonstration  of  power,  even  if  unjust,  pleases  the 
Russians ;  that  to  domineer,  to  command,  to  crush  is 
a  necessity  of  their  national  pride.  Not  being  able 
to  overcome  the  strong,  the  Chancellor  attacked  the 
weak,  hoping  thereby  to  bring  into  prominence 
the  }7oung  Emperor's  government.  I  am  con- 
vinced that  this  was  one  of  the  motives  which 
induced  him  loudly  to  proclaim  his  pretended  victory 
over  Sweden ;  but  the  Russian  public  was  not  de- 