

The  Emperor  had  made  it  a  maxim  to  respect 
other  people's  opinions,  and  not  to  punish  anybody  for 
expressing  them,  so  that  no  great  courage  was  required 
to  criticise  the  sovereign  and  tell  him  unpleasant 
truths.  Full  advantage  was  taken  of  this  privilege, 
especially  in  the  salons  of  the  two  capitals.  Every- 
thing that  the  Government  did  was  found  fault  with, 
and  these  criticisms,  growing  like  the  waves  of  a 
heavy  sea,  used  in  the  same  way  to  subside  and  grow 
again  at  the  least  breath  of  wind.  Such  was  the 
constant  state  of  opinion  in  Russia  during  the  first 
year  of  Alexander's  reign.  The  old  courtiers  used  to 


THE  PRINCE  BECOMES  UNPOPULAR  AT  COURT    329 

say,  in  order  to  calm  the  anxiety  of  the  young  ones, 
that  all  new  reigns  began  in  the  same  way,  and  that 
the  first  years  of  the  reign  of  Catherine  were  marked 
by  the  same  pre-occupations.  What  people  most  ob- 
jected to,  however,  in  the  case  of  Alexander,  was 
my  presence  at  his  Court,  and  my  appointment  as 
assistant  to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs.  ^A 

o 

merely  honorary  title  would  not  have  shocked  the 
Russians,  but  they  could  not  accustom  themselves  to 
see  me  at  the  head  of  the  department :  a  Pole  enjoying 
the  confidence  of  the  Emperor,  and  initiated  into  all  the 
secrets  of  State,  was  to  them  an  intolerable  innovation.* 
This  was  a  fertile  subject  of  suspicion  and  calumny 
in  the  Russian  salons.  My  parents  had  always  been 
averse  to  Russian  influence,  and  their  fortune  had 
been  confiscated  on  account  of  their  participation  in 
Polish  revolutions.  That  their  son,  who  had  never 
concealed  his  enthusiastic  devotion  to  his  country's 
cause,  who  had  often  loudly  proclaimed  it,  and  proved 
it  by  the  national  spirit  in  which  he  promoted  public 
instruction  in  the  Polish  provinces,  should  be  the 
intimate  and  confidential  adviser  of  the  sovereign,  was 
naturally  the  subject  of  much  comment.  It  was  easy 
to  imagine  that  I  betrayed  the  interests  of  Russia, 
and  that  I  would  at  any  moment  prove  false  to  my 
duties  as  a  Minister  and  a  friend  in  order  to  advance 
the  cause  of  Poland.  All  the  ambitious  men  who 
thought  themselves  more  worthy  of  the  Emperor's 
confidence  than  a  stranger — all  the  young  men  of 

*  '  Prince  Czartoryski, '  says  Lord  Whitworth  in  a  despatch  to  Lord  Hawkesbury 
(in  the  Record  Office),  dated  January  4,  1803,  'for  some  years  past  the  intimate  and 
most  confidential  friend  of  the  present  Emperor  of  Russia,  ...  is  now  second  in 
point  of  precedency,  but  perhaps  first  in  point  of  influence,  in  the  Foreign  Depart- 
ment.' 


330      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Alexander's  Court — were  agreed  on  this  point.  But 
their  suspicions  were  unfounded.  I  do  not  think  I 
have  ever  been  more  zealous  and  devoted  than  I  was 
in  the  Emperor's  service.  He  knew  better  than  any- 
one my  attachment  to  my  country,  and  it  was  this 
knowledge  which  was  the  first  basis  of  our  intimate 
relations  and  the  source  of  the  esteem  and  friendship 
with  which  he  honoured  me.  He  did  not  at  that 
time  think  that  the  welfare  of  Russia  was  really 
incompatible  with  that  of  Poland.  Perhaps  he  did 
not  have  a  very  clear  idea  of  that  grave  question,  and 
as  its  solution  appeared  distant,  he  did  not  think  it 
necessary  to  go  very  deeply  into  it.  Meanwhile  he 
accepted  the  services  which  I  cordially  rendered  him, 
and  he  thought  it  just  and  proper  to  reward  them  by 
giving  me  a  certain  liberty  of  action  in  regard  to  the 
Polish  provinces  under  his  rule.  I  of  course  availed 
myself  of  this  concession ;  I  reorganised  public  in- 
struction in  Poland  on  a  larger  and  more  national 
basis,  and  made  it  more  conformable  with  modern 
ideas.  The  Russians  could  not  understand  my  rela- 
tions with  Alexander,  and  indeed  they  were  only  to 
be  explained  by  the  fact  that  we  were  both  very  young 
and  had  become  friends  at  an  age  when  generous 
impulses  are  stronger  than  reflection.  The  Russians, 
however,  attributed  our  connection  to  personal  ambi- 
tion and  dissimulation  on  my  part  and  silly  good- 
nature on  that  of  Alexander.  They  imagined  that  I 
secretly  favoured  France,  and  that  I  wished  to  bring 
Alexander  under  the  fascination  of  Buonaparte's  genius. 
It  was  to  my  influence  that  they  ascribed  the  some- 
what colourless  policy  adopted  by  the  Emperor  in 