

If  it  had  been  in  the  nature  of  man  to  be  satisfied 
with  what  is  practicable,  Alexander  ought  to  have 
satisfied  the  Russians,  for  he  gave  them  a  tranquillity, 
a  prosperity,  and  even  a  degree  of  liberty  which  were 
unknown  before  his  reign.  But  the  Russians  wanted 
something  else.  Like  the  gambler  who  seeks  violent 
emotions,  they  were  tired  of  the  monotony  of  their 
prosperity.  They  did  not  like  their  }Toung  Emperor : 
he  was  too  simple  in  his  manners,  too  averse  to  pomp, 
too  disdainful  of  etiquette.  The  Russians  regretted 
the  brilliant  Court  of  Catherine  and  its  abuses,  the 
opening  which  it  gave  to  so  many  passions,  struggles^ 


ALEXANDER'S  POLICY  AND  THAT  OF  NAPOLEON     327 

intrigues  and  successes.  They  regretted  the  days  of 
the  Imperial  favourites,  and  the  possibility  of  gaining 
colossal  positions  and  fortunes  like  those  of  Orloff  and 
Potemkin.  The  courtiers  had  no  ante-chambers  to  go 
to,  and  sought  in  vain  for  an  idol  before  which  they  could 
burn  their  incense ;  their  platitude  was  condemned 
to  inaction,  and  there  was  no  one  to  whom  they  could 
cringe  and  bow.  The  grumblers  at  Moscow,  too,  did 
not  like  the  Court  because  it  no  longer  afforded  food 
for  their  censure,  while  it  did  not  offer  them  any  of 
the  advantages  which  they  valued.  Their  liberalism, 
moreover,  was  very  different  from  that  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander ;  he  inclined  rather  to  the  democratic  and 
levelling  ideas  of  the  Emperor  Joseph  of  Austria, 
though  in  a  milder  form. 

Only  the  Empress  Dowager  attempted  to  main- 
tain the  customs  and  the  brilliancy  of  the  old  Court. 
Alexander's  Court  was  of  an  exaggerated  simplicity, 
totally  devoid  of  etiquette,  and  he  met  his  courtiers  only 
on  intimate  and  familiar  terms.  The  Emperor  and  his 
family  only  appeared  in  full  dress  on  Sundays  and 
holidays,  when  they  went  to  church.  Dinners  and 
soirees  were  mostly  given  in  the  private  apartments, 
and  were  quite  different  from  what  they  had  been  in  the 
preceding  reigns.  Later  on,  Alexander  became  more 
sumptuous  in  his  receptions,  but  at  the  beginning  of 
his  reign  he  was  not  sufficiently  so.  While  Napoleon 
surrounded  himself  with  a  pomp  and  ceremonial  re- 
vived from  the  times  of  the  monarchy,  Alexander 
liked  to  eclipse  himself  and  to  behave  like  an  ordinary 
citizen.  His  friends  found  fault  with  him  for  this — 
especially  the  Margravine  of  Baden,  his  mother-in- 


328      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

law,  who  wanted  to  give  the  young  Emperor  every 
possible  quality  and  success.  She  endeavoured  to 
stimulate  him  by  the  example  of  Napoleon,  but  in 
vain.  The  two  Emperors  went  in  opposite  directions 
in  everything ;  one  demolished,  while  the  other  re- 
stored, old  ideas ;  and  the  comparison  made  between 
them  was  not  to  Alexander's  advantage  in  the  eyes 
of  the  very  Russians  for  whom  he  was  working.  He 
was,  in  fact,  not  at  all  popular  during  the  first  few 
years  of  his  reign,  although  he  was  never  more  devoted 
than  he  was  then  to  the  good  of  his  country.  But 
men  want  to  be  dominated  and  fooled,  and  this  neces- 
sity is  nowhere  so  much  felt  as  in  Russia.  At  the 
beginning  of  his  reign,  Alexander  did  not  know  how 
to  do  this  ;  he  learnt  it  later,  but  even  then,  and 
notwithstanding  his  great  success,  he  never  attained 
the  popularity  and  the  moral  power  of  his  grand- 
mother, who  could  have  said  of  the  Russians,  as 
Buonaparte  said  of  the  French,  that  they  were  in  her 
pocket. 