

The  progress  of  internal  reform  in  Russia  was 
abruptly  stopped  by  an  unexpected  incident.  Count 
Severin  Potocki,  who,  as  I  said  above,  was  a  great 
admirer  of  the  Emperor,  often  addressed  memoranda 
to  him  on  various  subjects.  The  Senate  had  received 
from  the  Emperor,  among  other  important  preroga- 
tives, the  right  of  making  representations  to  him,  but 
it  had  hitherto  not  made  any  use  of  this  right.  Count 
Severin  naturally  thought  the  Emperor  was  sincere 


ALEXANDERS  LIBERALISM  PUT  TO  THE  TEST     323 

in  his  liberal  opinions  ;  the  Emperor  himself  thought 
so ;  and  the  Count  therefore  imagined  it  would  be  a 
good  thing,  and  would  please  his  Imperial  master,  if 
the  Seriate  were  prompted  to  exercise  its  preroga- 
tives. For  this  an  opportunity  soon  presented  itself. 
Although  almost  every  noble  in  Russia  entered  the 
army,  he  was  not  obliged  to  do  so,  and  could  leave 
it  when  he  thought  proper.  This  double  privilege 
was  granted  by  Peter  III  in  an  ukase  for  which 
many  blessed  his  memory.  Alexander,  however, 
restricted  the  privilege  to  nobles  who  held  the  rank  of 
officer ;  those  below  that  rank  were  obliged  to  serve 
for  twelve  years.  This  was  looked  upon  as  an  attack 
on  the  guaranteed  rights  of  the  nobility,  and  pro- 
duced a  deep  and  painful  sensation.  The  Minister  of 
War,  an  old  military  bureaucrat  of  low  origin,  was  said 
to  be  the  author  of  the  new  ukase,  and  Count  Severin 
Potocki  proposed  to  the  Senate  that  it  should  address 
representations  to  the  Emperor  on  this  violation  of 
the  nobles'  charter.  His  proposal  was  read  to  the 
general  assembly  of  all  the  departments,  and  the 
senators,  seeing  that  one  of  the  confidential  advisers 
of  the  Court  was  taking  the  initiative  in  the  matter, 
and  that  his  opinion  was  warmly  supported  by  Count 
Strogonoff,  thought  they  could  safely  vote  in  its  favour. 
They  gladly  did  this,  under  the  impression  that  by  so 
doing  they  could  without  danger  assume  an  air  of 
independence  in  a  matter  to  which  it  was  believed  the 
Emperor  did  not  attach  any  serious  importance. 
Count  Severin's  proposal  was  adopted,  notwithstand- 
ing the  opposition  of  the  Procurator-General  (Minister 
of  Justice),  which  was  supposed  to  be  feigned  in  order 


324      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

to  give  more  appearance  of  reality  to  the  little  scene 
which  it  was  believed  had  been  got  up  for  the  occasion. 
Count  Strogonoff,  who  was  deputed  with   two  other 
senators  to  take  the  representations  of  the   Senate  to 
the  Emperor,  readily  set  out  on  his  mission  ;  but  the 
deputation   was  received  by  Alexander   very  coldly, 
and  Strogonoff,  disconcerted  and   not  knowing  what 
to  say,  withdrew.     The  Emperor  sharply  reprimanded 
the   Senate,   ordered   it   not   to    meddle  with  things 
which  did  not  concern  it,  and  directed  it  by  a  new 
decree  to  carry  out  the  very  ukase  against  which  it 
had   appealed.       To    my  great   astonishment   it  was 
Novosiltzoff  who  was   the   agent   of  the    Emperor's 
unjust  anger  in  this  matter.     This  failure  of  the  first 
move   of  the   Senate   in   the   direction    of  liberalism 
sufficed   to  discourage  people  whose  generous  aspira- 
tions  were    not,   it   must   be  admitted,  very  strong. 
The  Senate  did  not  again  attempt  any  independent 
action,  and  its  rights  became  a  dead  letter.     At  my 
first  interview  with  the  Emperor  after  this  incident,  I 
could   not   help    smiling   at    his    extreme    alarm     in 
presence    of  the   new  attitude    of  the   Senate.     My 
jocular  remarks   on    this  point  were   ill  received  by 
Alexander,   and    I   believe  they  left  in    his   mind   a 
certain    anxiety  as   to    my   liberal    tendencies   which 
afterwards  came  back  to  him.     This  was  an  indication 
of  Alexander's  true  character,  which  then  appeared  to 
ine  in  a  novel  and  unfortunately  too  real  light.    Grand 
ideas  of  the  general  good,  generous  sentiments,  and 
the  desire  to  sacrifice  to  them  part  of  the    Imperial 
authority,  and  resign  an  immense  and  arbitrary  power 
in  order  the  better  to  secure  the  future  happiness  of 