


THE  PRINCE  BECOMES  UNPOPULAR  AT  COURT     331 

European  politics,  which  they  thought  arose  from  my 
connivance  with  France.  This  was  also  the  Empress 
Dowager's  opinion,  and  she  propagated  it  among  the 
young  officers  of  the  army. 

My  position  was  not  an  easy  one.  The  part 
played  by  Russia  was  certainly  not  so  brilliant  or 
preponderant  as  might  have  been  desirable,  and  was 
not  at  all  in  accordance  with  Russian  vanity  or 
Russian  pretensions.  Alexander  was  eclipsed  by 
Napoleon,  who,  at  the  pinnacle  of  military  glory, 
introduced  into  diplomacy,  hitherto  so  discreet,  that 
bluntness  and  rapidity  of  decision  which  were  the 
secrets  of  his  success  on  the  battlefield.  He  took  the 
initiative  in  every  European  question,  and  daily  gained 
ground,  increased  his  preponderance,  and  showed  that 
he  intended  to  become  the  arbiter  of  Europe.  I 
constantly  heard  Russians  complain  of  the  weakness 
and  want  of  dignity  of  their  Cabinet ;  and  if  I  had 
ascribed  these  faults  to  Alexander's  character  and 
opinions,  I  would  have  cast  the  whole  blame  upon  him. 
Among  the  most  active  and  ambitious  of  the  malcon- 
tents was  the  young  Prince  Dolgorouky.  He  was  the 
prime  mover  of  the  Russian  party,  and  his  passionate 
vexation  at  seeing  a  stranger  occupy  a  post  which  he 
considered  should  have  been  given  to  him  made  him 
witty,  much  to  the  surprise  of  his  friends.  Being 
one  of  the  Emperor's  aides-de-camp,  he  was  con- 
tinually at  Court,  and  I  often  met  him,  on  which 
occasions  he  used  to  pursue  me  with  reproaches  and 
sarcasms  on  the  indolence  of  the  Russian  Foreign 
Office.  He  provoked  me  so  far  that  I  once  told 
him  he  should  address  his  remarks  to  the  Chancellor, 


332       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

who  was  the  head  of  the  department.  He  replied 
that  he  knew  well  there  was  an  understanding 
between  the  Chancellor  and  myself  to  refer  matters 
from  one  to  the  other  in  order  to  avoid  the  diffi- 
culty of  a  precise  answer.  The  discussion  almost 
became  a  quarrel,  and  the  Emperor  had  to  interfere 
to  put  a  stop  to  Dolgorouky's  remarks.  We  no 
longer  spoke  to  each  other,  but  he  continued  his  in- 
trigues with  more  animosity  than  ever.  Under  the 
reign  of  Paul  we  had  been  on  very  good  terms,  and 
he  had  shown  me  much  confidence  in  an  affair  of 
honour  which  he  had  with  M.  de  Wintzingerode,  a 
worthy  German,  very  stiff  and  punctilious.  Having 
quarrelled  with  Dolgorouky,  he  challenged  him,  and 
both  agreed  to  take  me  as  the  only  witness  of  the 
duel.  The  scene  of  the  encounter  was  a  garden,  and 
I  loaded  the  pistols  and  placed  the  adversaries  in 
such  a  way  as  to  make  it  exceedingly  difficult  for 
them  to  hit  each  other.  The  result  was  that  both 
missed,  and  the  incident  was  closed  by  a  complete 
reconciliation. 