


ALEXANDERS  LIBERALISM  PUT  TO  THE  TEST   325 

the  people,  had  really  occupied  the  Emperor's  rnind 
and  did  so  still,  but  they  were  rather  a  young  man's 
fancies  than  a  grown  man's  decided  will.  The 
Emperor  liked  forms  of  liberty  as  he  liked  the 
theatre ;  it  gave  him  pleasure  and  flattered  his  vanity 
to  see  the  appearances  of  free  government  in  his 
Empire  ;  but  all  he  wanted  in  this  respect  was  forms 
and  appearances ;  he  did  not  expect  them  to  become 
realities.  In  a  word,  he  would  willingly  have  agreed 
that  every  man  should  be  free,  on  the  condition  that 
he  should  voluntarily  do  only  what  the  Emperor 
wished. 

Alexander  never  forgot  Count  Severin's  indiscre- 
tion ;  he  was  still  received  at  Court  on  the  same 
footing  as  heretofore,  but  he  no  longer  shared  the 
confidence  and  favour  of  his  sovereign.  The  incident 
gained  him  great  credit  at  Moscow  and  in  the  ancient 
provinces  of  the  Empire,  where  he  was  regarded  as  a 
true  Russian  patriot  and  a  generous  defender  of  the 
immunities  of  the  nobility.  This  wave  of  popularity 
had  so  much  charm  for  the  Count  that  it  made  him 
forget  his  old  Polish  sentiments.  In  his  youth,  at 
the  diet  of  the  3rd  of  May,  he  had  been  an  ardent 
Polish  patriot ;  in  his  old  age  he  forgot  his  country, 
thought  only  of  augmenting  his  fortune  and  living 
pleasantly,  and  amused  himself  by  opposing  the 
Russian  Government.  He  got  into  the  habit  of  travel- 
ling continually  between  his  estates  and  the  Senate, 
reading  much  on  the  journey,  and  preparing  the 
speeches  which  he  made  every  year  either  at  Moscow 
or  at  St  Petersburg.  His  mind  tended  rather  towards 
doubt  than  action ;  he  seldom  expressed  any  positive 


326       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

opinion,  and  sentiment  did  not  in  any  way  affect  his 
decisions,  which  were  invariably  prompted  by  con- 
siderations of  personal  interest.  His  self-love  was 
greater  than  his  fear,  which  could  not  indeed  be  very 
great,  as  Alexander,  at  that  time  especially,  never 
persecuted  anybody,  and  his  displeasure  could  be  in- 
curred without  danger.  Count  Severin  retained  as 
long  as  he  liked  his  appointments  of  senator  and 
curator,  which  gave  him  a  circle  of  activity  that 
pleased  him.  He  was  able  and  well  informed,  but 
made  light  of  everything  except  what  touched  his 
material  interests,  and  had  no  religious  sentiments 
whatever.  Such  a  man  was  destined  to  end  his  days 
without  friends  or  sympathy.  I  did  not  see  him 
again.  Alexander  had  given  him  the  use  of  a  con- 
siderable estate  for  fifty  years ;  I  had  done  my  best 
to  arrange  the  matter,  and  later  on  I  did  some  service 
to  his  son  Leo.  All  this  established  a  reciprocity  of 
good  feeling  between  us  which  lasteM  as  long  as  I  was 
in  Russia,  and  afterwards  gradually  died  out. 