


THE  FOREIGN  AMBASSADORS  321 

the  opportunity  of  offering  to  the  French  Minister 
the  usual  present  of  4000  ducats  and  a  gold 
snuff  box  adorned  with  diamonds  and  the  Emperor's 
portrait.  The  Chancellor  was  ill,  and  received 
the  Ambassador  in  bed  while  the  ratifications  were 
being  exchanged.  The  presents  were  laid  out  on 
the  bed,  and  I  never  saw  a  face  so  beam  with  pleasure 
as  did  the  General's  when  he  saw  the  bags  of  ducats. 
Forgetting  all  decorum  and  the  little  speech  he  should 
have  delivered  on  the  Emperor's  portrait,  his  eyes 
were  fixed  on  the  money-bags,  and  he  carried  them 
away  with  an  expression  of  delight  which  was  quite 
comic.  He  was  a  very  worthy  man,  however,  and 
everyone  would  have  been  glad  to  see  him  so  happy 
if  he  had  been  a  little  more  dignified  in  showing  his 


Among  the  members  of  the  diplomatic  body  the 
most  remarkable  was  Baron  Stedingk,  the  Swedish 
Ambassador.  He  was  distinguished  both  by  his 
wisdom  and  by  his  noble  sentiments  ;  with  a  simple 
exterior,  his  conduct  also  was  marked  by  simplicity, 
by  tact,  and  by  perfect  loyalty,  and  was  strictly 
honourable  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word.  He  had 
that  rare  perspicacity  which  always  appreciates  both 
men  and  events  at  their  true  value.  In  his  youth  he 
had  served  with  distinction  against  the  English  in  the 
American  war,  and  had  been  decorated  with  the  cross 
of  St  Louis,  which,  being  a  Protestant,  he  wore  with 
a  blue  ribbon.  Afterwards,  being  honoured  with  the 
confidence  of  Gustavus  III,  he  distinguished  himself 
at  the  head  of  the  army  corps  which  fought  the 
Russians  in  1789  and  1790.  When  peace  was  signed 

VOL.  i.  x 


322 

he  was  appointed  Ambassador  at  the  Court  of  St 
Petersburg,  where  he  was  already  known  by  his 
military  successes.  He  remained  at  this  post  during 
three  consecutive  reigns,  serving  his  country  in  the 
most  difficult  emergencies,  without  ever  losing  any  of 
the  high  consideration  he  had  acquired.  Of  all  the 
men  I  ever  met  he  seemed  to  me  one  of  the  best  and 
the  most  worthy  of  confidence  ;  he  was  a  man  whom 
one  could  not  help  liking,  and  whom  one  would  wish 
always  to  have  for  a  friend.  I  think  he  was  mine,  so 
far  as  he  could  be  in  view  of  our  different  positions, 
which  afterwards  entirely  separated  us.  As  second  in 
the  Ministry,  I  was  not  obliged  to  take  an  active  part 
in  the  difficulty  which  had  arisen  between  Russia  and 
Sweden,  and  the  Chancellor  wished  to  conduct  the 
matter  himself  in  order  to  gain  the  merit  of  having 
brought  it  to  a  triumphant  conclusion.  His  insulting 
affectation  of  superiority,  and  the  way  in  which  he 
deprived  a  weaker  power  of  a  worthless  island  which 
was  only  taken  to  humiliate  her,  inspired  me  with  pro- 
found repugnance,  and,  as  I  have  already  remarked, 
this  gained  for  me  marks  of  gratitude  and  confidence 
from  the  Swedes. 