

The  Chancellor's  health  now  began  to  break  down. 
He  was  several  times  seriously  ill,  and  he  often 
thought  of  temporarily  retiring  to  his  estates  near 
Moscow,  though  he  had  no  wish  to  withdraw  from 
political  life  altogether.  One  day  when  he  was  ill 
I  was  seated  by  his  bed ;  he  was  in  a  high  fever,  and 
speaking  with  much  animation,  though  somewhat 
delirious,  he  said  several  times :  '  These  young  men 
wish  to  govern  everything,  but  I  will  not  allow  it ;  I 
alone  will  remain  at  the  head  of  affairs.'  I  thought  it 
probable  that  some  one  had  led  him  to  suspect  those 


THE  CHANCELLORS  ILLNESS  333 

who  were  called  the  Emperor's  friends ;  perhaps  these 
suspicions  had  spontaneously  arisen  in  his  mind.  I 
am  convinced,  however,  that  he  never  distrusted  me, 
or  listened  to  the  insinuations  which  people  made 
against  me.  The  extreme  and  entire  confidence  which 
he  showed  me  lasted  to  the  end  of  his  life,  which  is 
surprising,  as  so  many  people  had  an  interest  in 
making  us  quarrel.  He  gave  his  confidence  and 
friendship  to  very  few  people ;  his  sentiments  were 
delicate  and  noble,  and  although  they  were  not  based 
on  strict  principle,  they  showed  that  he  was  kind- 
hearted  and  sensitive.  Always  inclined  to  render  a 
service,  he  judged  others  with  great  indulgence,  and 
even  at  times  when  he  spoke  his  mind  most  freely,  I 
have  never  detected  in  him  any  feeling  of  hatred  or 
desire  for  revenge.  The  Emperor,  however,  had  an 
invincible  dislike  for  him,  which  increased  every  day. 
His  somewhat  old-fashioned  manners,  his  voice,  his 
deliberate  way  of  speaking,  even  his  gestures,  were 
antipathetic  to  him.  During  his  frequent  attacks  of 
illness,  the  Chancellor  used  to  send  me  with  his  papers 
to  the  Emperor,  and  the  latter  expressed  his  joy  at 
not  being  obliged  to  see  him.  In  spite  of  all  I  said  in 
his  behalf,  he  used  to  ridicule  the  old  Minister,  and 
often  told  me  he  would  like  to  be  rid  of  him.  I  was 
at  this  time  in  high  favour  with  the  Emperor,  and  he 
spoke  with  marked  approval  of  my  drafts  of  despatches 
and  rescripts.  He  in  no  way  opposed  the  Chancellor's 
wish  for  rest ;  on  the  contrary,  he  encouraged  it  in 
every  way. 

The  friendly  relations  which  had  hitherto  existed 
between  Russia  and  France  began  about  this  time  to 


334       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

be  disturbed.  Count  Markoff,  supposed  to  be  the 
ablest  man  in  Russia,  and  the  prototype  and  almost 
the  last  living  representative  of  the  diplomacy  of 
Catherine,  had  been  sent  as  Ambassador  to  Paris. 
When  Paul  became  Emperor  Markoff  fell  into 
disgrace,  and  was  banished  to  Podolia,  on  one  of  my 
father's  confiscated  estates.  After  Alexander's  acces- 
sion he  hastened  back  to  the  capital,  and  Count 
Panin,  who  was  then  Foreign  Minister,  fearing  in 
him  a  dangerous  rival,  decided  to  send  him  on  a 
mission  abroad.  The  most  important  task  in  foreign 
affairs  was  at  that  time  the  renewal  of  friendly 
relations  with  France,  and  for  this  it  \vas  necessary 
to  send  Napoleon  an  Ambassador  capable  of  controlling 
and  restraining  his  policy,  and  sustaining  the  dignity 
of  Russia.  Markoff,  who  was  selected  for  this  post, 
accepted  it  with  eagerness,  for  he  knew  Alexander 
did  not  like  him,  and  he  was  pleased  at  the  idea  of 
playing  an  important  part  in  a  capital  where  Napoleon 
and  other  personages  already  celebrated  were  influenc- 
ing the  destinies  of  the  world.  He  did  not,  however, 
justify  his  reputation,*  which  had  already  been  impaired 
by  his  extraordinary  want  of  tact  in  the  affair  of  the 
proposed  marriage  of  the  King  of  Sweden  with  the 
Grand  Duchess  Alexandra,  which  was  the  cause  of 
Catherine's  death.  Notwithstanding  his  aversion  for 
Napoleon  and  his  Ministers,  Markoff  did  not  succeed 
in  preventing  the  dismemberment  of  Germany  to 
compensate  the  princes  who  had  lost  part  of  their 