

*  Lord  Whitworth,  then  English  Ambassador  in  Paris,  says  of  him  :  '  He  has 
not  the  talent  of  inspiring  confidence,  and  indeed  his  conduct  here  is  such  as  to 
render  any  confidential  intercourse  with  him  extremely  dangerous. '  (Despatch  to 
Lord  Hawkesbury  of  November  1C,  1802,  in  the  Record  office). 


NAPOLEON  AND  THE  RUSSIAN  AMBASSADOR    335 

dominions,  and  to  indulge  the  avidity  of  Prussia.     The 
Convention  was  sent  to  the  Emperor  for  his  approval 
after  it  had  been  concluded,  and  when  it  was  too  late 
to  make  any  change  in  it.     A  more  favourable  result 
would    no    doubt   have  been  difficult  to  obtain,  but 
Markoff  did  not  even  attempt  to  do  so ;  he  did  not 
give   the   Cabinet   of  St   Petersburg   the    necessary 
time  to  state  and  defend  its  opinions,  and  compelled 
it  to  accept  the  Convention  like  a  child  forced  to  obey 
orders.     He  was  a  creature  of  the  Zuboffs,  and  he 
had  voted  with  them  for  the  partition  of  Poland  ;  he 
was  the  incarnation  of  an  unscrupulous   State  policy 
and  a  diplomacy  without  justice  or  pity ;  very  extra- 
vagant, he  was  inflexible  in  money  affairs,  and  though 
fond  of  presents,  he   would  not  take  them  if  by  so 
doing  his  pride  w^ould  suffer.     His  face,  seamed  with 
the  smallpox,  constantly  expressed  irony  and  scorn  ; 
his  round  eyes  and  his  mouth,  depressed  at  the  corners, 
resembled  those  of  a  tiger.     Though  he  had  adopted 
the   language   and   the   grand   airs  of  the   Court  of 
Versailles,  his  manners  were  haughty  and  rude.     He 
spoke,  excellent  French,  but  what  he  said  was  gener- 
ally harsh,  trenchant,  disagreeable,  and  totally  devoid 
of  feeling. 

Such  wras  the  pearl  of  Russian  diplomatists  sent 
to  Napoleon  by  Russia  in  evidence  of  her  desire 
to  be  on  good  terms  with  him.  He  was  at  first 
received  with  much  distinction,  and  he  satisfied  the 
First  Consul  by  his  complaisance  in  the  matter  of  the 
indemnities  ;  but  after  a  time  his  scornful  manner  and 
his  sarcasms  irritated  Napoleon  and  gave  rise  to 
violent  scenes.  One  evening  the  latter  looked  about 


336       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

for   a  Pole  to  give  him  an   opportunity  of   venting 
his  bile  on  the    Russian    Ambassador,   thinking  thia 
would  be   the   best   way  of  mortally   offending  him. 
Seeing  M.  Z.  .  .,  a  stupid   and  insignificant  person- 
age who  happened  to  be  present,  he  took  him  by  the 
button  of  his  coat,  moved  him  forward  into  the  middle 
of  the  room,  and  after  asking  him   whether  he  was  a 
Pole,  violently  condemned  the  partition  of  Poland  anc, 
the  Powers  which  had  committed  and  allowed  it,  aftei 
which  he  left  without  taking  any  notice  of  Markoff 
Shortly  after,  the  French  Government  sent  a  despatcl, 
to  St  Petersburg  complaining  of  MarkofFs  conduct , 
but  the  Chancellor,  feeling  the  necessity  of  demonstra 
tively  asserting  the  dignity  of  Russia,   proposed 
the  Emperor  that  Markoff  should  be  invested   wii 
the  ribbon  of  St  Andrew,  which  he  had  long  desire 
The  Emperor  entirely  approved  of  this  proposal,  an 
Markoff  appeared  at  his  next  audience  of  Napoleo 
decorated  with  the  order,  and  looking  more  proud  an 
satisfied  than  ever.     This  time  the  First  Consul  IK 
not  the  laugh  on  his  side ;  but  Markoff  did  not  thir 
it  right  to  remain  in  Paris  after  his  triumph,  and  r. 
was  recalled  at  his  own  request. 