6 P. E. TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

‘great, but think how bad things could have been if x or y had occurred”) or
“upward” counterfactuals to inspire greater effort (“Do not be complacent
about the present, think how good things could have been and, by implica-
tion, could yet become”).

(4) Need for cognitive consistency: The well-documented aversion to im-
balanced or dissonant couplings of events should motivate people to rule out
counterfactuals that link bad causes (like Stalin) to good outcomes (like ac-
celerated economic growth) or that link good causes (like foreign aid) to bad
‘outcomes (like increased dependency and corruption of recipient regimes).
Pressures for cognitive consistency should also motivate people to defend
“core beliefs.” For example, people who believe that “evil is avoidable”
should be strongly motivated to generate counterfactuals that undo moral
catastrophes. But people of different political persuasions may define moral
catastrophe differently. For many conservatives, the root of evil in Soviet
history goes straight back to the Bolshevik revolution of 1917 (which should
be a focal point of “if only” speculation); for many social democrats, a noble
socialist experiment was corrupted by Stalinist tyranny (which should be a
focal point of “if only" speculation). ‘These predictions fare reasonably well
against the evidence (Chaper 3, Breslauer).

‘The list is a lengthy and unparsimonious one. Here we simply want to add
that there are always two levels at which motives may influence counterfac~
tual reasoning: private thought (affecting what we truly believe) and public
posturing (affecting what we say we believe and want to induce others 10
believe). Most psychologists think that the motives listed here do indeed
shape privately held plausibility judgments of counterfactuals, but few
would deny that public impression management is also at work (Tetlock and
Manstead 1985)—a judgment with which most of our contributors seem to
concur. This volume contains suggestive evidence that the closer we get to
prescriptive policy debates, the greater the temptation to use counterfactual
arguments as rhetorical tools to justify either what one plans to do or has
‘already done (Chapter 3, Breslauer; Chapter 5, Lebow and Stein; Chapter 6,
Herrmann and Fischerkeller).

How should we respond to this extended list of cognitive and motivational
threats to the validity of thought experiments? We urge a middle-ground
response between arrogance and despair. The arrogant response is, of
course, to argue that although mere mortals may fall prey to these biases,
serious professionals are surely immune. We judge this response arrogant
because there is already abundant evidence that a wide range of profes-
sionals working on important tasks are susceptible to many of the effects
sussed here (Dawes 1991). Moreover, some of our contributors report
evidence of certain hypothesized biases in the scholarly literature (Chapter
3, Breslauer, Chapter 8, Kiser and Levi). The despairing response is, of
‘course, to argue that the biases identified by psychologists are inevitable—

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS, 7

that they have hopelessly contaminated all counterfactual arguments ad-
vanced thus far and will contaminate all counterfactuals advanced into the
foreseeable future. The former response is too dismissive of the psychologi-
cal literature; the latter takes it too literally. The appropriate response in our
view is to acknowledge cognitive biases and to make good-faith efforts to
hold each other accountable to standards of evidence (such as those sketched
in this chapter) that check the most serious and pervasive of these biases
(Tetlock 1992b). All research methods are subject to contamination and mis-
interpretation; it is only prudent to beware of potential biases in the most
subjective of all methods of inquiry, the counterfactual thought experiment.

Conclusion

‘There is something about the topic of counterfactual thought experiments in
world politics that makes people feel a bit uneasy, even defensive. To be
blunt, it feels like epistemological slumming. As social scientists, we are all
too familiar with the prestige hierarchy for methods of drawing causal infer-
ence. At the top of the scientific pecking order is experimentation in which
‘we can manipulate hypothesized causes and then either hold everything else
constant or randomize extraneous influences across treatment conditions.
Experimental control of this sort is obviously out of the question for most
questions in world politics. We cannot rerun the tape of history: splicing a
Gorbachev in or out, delaying or accelerating key technological develop-
ment, or tinkering with this or that aspect of macroeconomic policy.

Social scientists often resort to statistical control when experimentation is
ethically or practically problematic. But statistical arguments themselves of-
ten rest on counterfactual assumptions (Fearon 1991) and are, in any case,
extraordinarily difficult to make for many issues that loom large in security
debates. For example, what kind of regression or time series analyses will
allow us to estimate the causal contribution of nuclear weapons to the “long,
peace” between the United States and Soviet Union between 1945 and 19917
There are simply too many confounding variables—a problem we can alle-
viate but not eliminate through judicious selection of comparison cases and
meticulous process-tracing of decision-making protocols,

So where does that leave us? Probably still feeling uneasy: we seem to be
stuck with quite literally a third-rate method, counterfactual thought experi-
mentation. The control groups exist—if indeed “exist” is the right word—in
the imaginations of political analysts who are left with the daunting task of
reconstructing how history would have unfolded if causal variables of the
past had taken on different values from the ones they actually did. The
whole exercise starts to look hopelessly subjective, circular, and nonfalsifia-
ble. What is to stop us from simply inventing counterfactual outcomes that

