

If the right hon. gent. thinks proper to go more at large into this subject at a future period, and to add to the papers which he has just placed on the table the Reports of medical men and others, relative to the state of the prison at the period alluded to, and the situation in which it is built, I am prepared to meet him even upon that point, which he has imprudently pitched upon as a feature of my inconsistency; although it will be in the recollection of the House, that the notice I gave was solely, that I should move for papers.

I may add to my other reasons for relinquishing my intention, that I received assurances that the situation of the prisoners would be immediately attended to. I shall abstain from remarking on the manner in which the right hon. gent. has taken me by suprize, and wrested from me these facts in my own defence. Had I brought this matter forward voluntarily, I do assure the House that it was my intention to have cleared the Gallery, to prevent publicity.

observed, that by the noble lord's own statement, the circumstances of the prison were altered. There had been a mortality among the prisoners in the spring of 1810, from the arrival of some French from the West Indies, in a very dirty state. Those mea brought fever into the prison, but it was soon got under. The Chancellor of the Exchequer then succinctly answered the other statements, and concluded by expressing his surprise that if the noble lord had known of all those charges, he had never brought them forward before. The prisoners were at this moment in a state of comfort unequalled in any military prison, and in a state of health which was not exceeded by that of the healthiest district of England.

§

felt himself obliged to make some observations on what had fallen from the noble lord. He had taken the pains of making many enquiries into the state of the prisoners, and he must say, that all his enquiries were satisfactorily answered. There had been a fever in the prison, from infection; that was got over. As to the assertions, that there was a difficulty of corresponding with the Transport Board, be had happened to have a good deal of correspondence with 639 the Board on the subject of those very French prisoners, and he would say, that he was surprised, not merely at the quickness of their returning an answer, but at the minute information which they gave of every prisoner. He had observed, in one of his visits, that there was a want of clothing among the prisoners, but the reply was nearly satisfactory. Some of those prisoners possibly had reason to complain, that enough clothes had not been furnished to them lately; but of others, it was known, that if they had three rags, they would gamble away two of them. The situation of the prisoners at Dartmoor seemed as comfortable as the situation of a prisoner could be.

said the malignant fever was in January, and that in April, out of 5,000 prisoners, there were but 60 sick.

§

said that to his certain know-ledge the water at Dartmoor was excellent.