excluding India in lines 1 to 5 are calculated at British ports with reasonable allowance for carrying
earnings and mercantile profits, always including net British inflows on legal and illegal trade with
each area and British re-exports of the respective commodities to the rest of the world. The most
uncertain figures oftotal contraband trade are grounded in Cole's independent estimate for 1776-83;
any conceivable resurgence after the sharp reductionin tea smugglingin 1784 could hardlyhave kept
18
pace with the massive growth in British legal trade. In so far as the total value of contraband trade
remained relatively small, we may safely ignore the inevitable errors in the regional allocation of
illegal imports. Nor is the argument sensitive to reasonable variation in the given orders of
magnitude for net inflows from the slave trade (line 6) and for British war expenses abroad through
1775-1812 (line 8).
With these qualifications, Table 4 highlights the relative size of net inflows from India by
reference to the better documented components of the British balanceof payments as specifiedin the
preceding paragraph. The net balances on trade and services in lines 1-6 underscore the importance
of Britain's colonial involvement excluding Indian and Irish transfers: whereas the largest British
deficits through 1776-1812 were incurred in Continental Europe and in Ireland, the bulk of the
offsetting credits on re-exports of American commodities, on freight and insurance, and on
mercantile profits, most frequently originated in the West Indian trades.xxxvii Despite major
additional inflows from the United States in the neutrality period 1793-1807, the total net credits on
"trade and services excluding India" could not have sustained Britain's war expenses in Continental
Europe since 1793. The net inflows from India in line 11 by themselves might have paid for almost
all such expenses through 1793-1807, and for nearly one third of the massive sums not covered by
other trade balances in 1808-12. Net transfers from Ireland may also have been substantial, but the
conjectural estimates of rental payments to absentee landlords residing in Britain (line 13) must be
regarded with extreme caution.
Of these contributions to the British balance of payments, those from Indiawere arguablythe
least dispensable. Unlike other British imports, those purchased with Indian revenue came home as
unilateral transfers at little or no cost in domestic goods or bullion. It should be recalled here that the
total net inflows from India in line 11 are meant to include those on government account, after
19
subtracting all outflows to India for both commercial and military purposes. The transfer
component of net inflows from India resembles the Irish rental payments to absentee landlords
residing in Britain in that both types of gains arose from the direct exercise of military and political
power. But the Indian sums involved appear to have been larger, and India's contribution to other
branches of British trade possibly exceeded the British profits on Irish exports to British America in
line 12. The net inflows from the slave trade in line 6 arguably owed much to the cargoes of Indian
textiles that only British merchants could supply to West African middlemen at cut-throat prices.
Britain's privileged Indian connection would thus have extended its beneficial influence, throughits
likely impact on the growth of the British slave trade, to the profitable triangular trades across the
Atlantic.xxxviii Here again, Ireland also contributed vital food supplies to the slave plantations and to
Britain itself. While the British tonnage employed in the India route seldom surpassed three per cent
of the worldwide total, however, the import and re-export values of Indian goods during the French
wars often rivaled, and at times exceeded, those of West Indian commodities. As an added bonus,
Britain's trade deficits with China, and the related tasks of aggression and defence in the Far East,
were defrayed largely with Indian territorial revenue and with Indian commodities. A broad
counterfactual analysis predicated on free western access to Indian wealth, or on fair market
exchange in India for British commodities and bullion, would have to account for a consequent
strengthening of Britain's European and North-American competitors. For all these reasons, a
substantial reduction in India transfers in particularcould not so readilyhave been offsetby diversion
of resources within Britain's military and commercial ventures.
The changing importance of India's contributions through 1762-1812 would be further
specified if we could lend some credence to the remaining figures in Table 4. As noted, the
postulated course of Britain's external position through 1764-1812 must remain conjectural despite
20
its consistence with the proposed benchmarks for 1775 and 1815. For the sake of argument,
however, it is worth recalling that Britain is thought to have been heavily indebted to foreigners in
the 1770s and to have enjoyed an external surplus of ,10 million in 1800.xxxix Ralph Davis was bold
enough to add that Indian wealth probably "supplied the funds that brought [the] national debt back
from the Dutch and others".xl The annual figures underlying Table 4 support Davis's statement and
place the decisive turning point in the late 1790s. In subsequent years, mounting British net gainson
trade and services alone would have been compounded, for the first time, with positive returns on
foreign investment. This turn of events would help to explain the apparent decline of contemporary
concern for Indian remittances. In 1799, Henry Dundas was still writing of his hopes "for the
payment of tribute to this country, through the medium of a beneficial and encreasing commerce".xli
Soon thereafter, his successors' attention would be drawn from the East India Company's role as the
safest channel of remittance to the potentially wider benefits of the Indian connection under free
trade.
5. Company and private trade with Asia
Did the East India Company's "regulated monopoly" effectively serveBritishcommercial and
industrial interests while allowing reasonable room to private initiative? Were contemporaries
unfairly one-sided in decrying the Company'sdetrimental use of its privileges? Anyfreshgroundsfor
positive answers to these questions would help to reinforce incipient challenges to long-standing
wisdom. As noted, recent work has revindicated the Company's conductof its China trade;it has also
qualified the perception that the Company's seemingly insignificant exports to Asia made little
contribution to British industry in the late eighteenth century. It will be added here that British
overall trade with Asia was more dynamic than might appear from cursory examination of the
21
available figures. It will be further suggested that the real constraints faced by private traders
should be weighed against the external economies and scale advantagesrendered by the Companyto
a wider range of British interests.
Consideration of these issues requires a closerlook at the traderecordthan that undertaken so
far. No single periodization of the annual figures can identify the key points of inflection in the often
conflicting cycles of imports and exports. The choice of period averages in Table 1 was meant to
highlight the close interaction that eventually developed between the various transfer channels
involved. In what follows the focus is placed on relative trade performance over the long run.
[ Figure 1 ]
For this purpose it is worth noting that the trade values at current prices in Table 1 understate
the physical volume of British imports and overstate export volumes from the late 1780s to the mid
1800s. The three series in Figure 1 are Fisher "ideal" indices of import and export prices at British
ports. The prices of most import goods, notably those of Indian textiles and Bengal and Chinese raw
silk, fell in the late 1780s and remained below 1784 levels to the end of the period. On the export
side woollens prices remained relatively stable, but those of ferrous and non-ferrous metals
seemingly soared to the mid-1800s and fell thereafter. As a result the net barter terms of trade with
Asia, and those with India in particular, would have risen strongly in Britain's favor from 1783 to
1805. This picture contrasts with Britain's worldwide terms of trade, wheresoaringexports of cotton
textiles at falling prices, and growing shortages ofEuropeanraw materials,appear to have made for a
far milder upward trend until the mid 1800s.
[ Table 5 ]
The distortion caused by the use of trade values at market prices is illustrated in Table 5 with
reference to British re-exports of Indian textiles. The unit values by geographical areas have been
22
calculated as total export values at current prices over total "pieces" at British ports of departure.
The current values of white and colored calicos gradually fell from 1790-92 to 1807-12, to a total of
18 percent. In real terms, however, the number of exported calicos more than doubled in 1801-03
and remained 25 percent above the 1790-92 levels at the end of the period. Similar considerations
could have applied to muslin exports, but here the Company's fabrics did not withstand competition
from their British-made counterparts. The re-export totals also conceal major shifts in the
geographical destination of white and coloured calicos, most notably from Northern and Western
Europe to Southern Europe and Levant. These trends suggest that the main branch of the Company's
trade with India remained viable to the end of the period.
[ Figure 2 ]
More generally, when reckoned at British ports in constant prices of 1784 the volumes of
British trade with Asia convey a rosier picture than might be inferred from the claims of
contemporary critics. The import and export volumes with India and China withstand a severe test
when they are expressed as percentages of the British worldwide totals as in Figure2. To be sure, the
pattern of faster than average growth in import volumes from Indiabreaksdown in the 1800s;but the
share of these imports in the worldwide totals stands at 21 percent in both 1784 and 1806-12. On the
export side the relevant point of reference is Britain's worldwide domestic exports, because foreign
goods were worth less than 5 percent of the total shipped to Asia. Out of worldwide domestic
exports, the Asian share shows an upward trend through 1764-81 and 1784-1812. Britishdirecttrade
with China grew at a faster pace than average until the mid-1780s and retained some of the acquired
gains to the end of the period.
[ Figures 3 and 4 ]
The private component of British direct trade with Asia was far from stagnant. Figures3 and
23
4 trace the real values of British imports and exports on Company and private account. The
private imports in Figure 3 include those from India under the 1793 Act, "privilege" cargoes in
Company ships from both India and China, and estimates of Asian goods brought to Britain in
foreign vessels. Since the 1793 Act did not allow private trade between Britain and China, this total
is most closely comparable with the Company's imports from India.Here againthe long-term pattern
is one of rise and decline, but total private imports soared at the turn of the century and remained
well above those on Company account from India through much of 1802-12. The export volumeson
private account in Figure 4 indicate strong overall growth since 1797 despite a prolonged setback in
1803-07.
The apparently mixed fortunes of private trade with Britain during the 1800s should be
weighed against the widening opportunities afforded by Asian marketswithinthe Company's formal
trade monopoly. Since the late 1790s, British private initiative had increasingly turned to the interAsian "country" trade. This prosperous business appears to have become the most profitable outlet
