Partial answers to these questions are organized as follows. Section 2 draws on new annual
estimates of British net transfers from India to document the East India Company's continued ability
to fulfil Dundas's principal goal beyond 1793. The largest transfers appear to have been made on
Company account -- at first directly from India but increasingly in the form of China goods sent to
London; but the new figures also point to a significant surge in private transfers in 1803-07 and to
growing interaction among the Asian transfer channels involved. Section 3 further suggests that
British total inflows from re-exports of Indian commodities alone most frequently doubled, and at
times tripled, those arising from net India transfers including government flows. Section 4 builds on
these and other findings to examine the place of India within the British commercial system; it will
be suggested that British net inflows from India were relatively substantial and arguably the least
dispensable. Section 5 draws on import and export values at constant prices of 1784 to show that
British overall trade with Asia was more dynamicthan might appearfrom cursoryexamination of the
available figures. It will be further suggested that the real constraints faced by private traders should
7
be weighed against the scale advantages and external economies rendered by the Company to a
wider range of British interests.
2. British net transfers from India, 1757-1812
How large were British transfers from India between the battle of Plassey (1757) and the end
of the East India Company's monopoly of Britain's direct trade with India (1813)? Partial answers to
this question can be found in the extensive literature on the India "drain". Unfortunately the best
available estimates are variously specified and cover different periods. Marshall's calculations were
limited to private remittances to Britain from Bengal alone up to 1784.viii Furber focused on
commodity and bullion flows, carefully distinguishing between the "drain" to Europe and British
overall returns from involvement in India; but his detailed calculations were confined to the period
1783-92.ix As noted in the Appendix, other "drain" estimates are far less specified and seemingly
overlook a wealth of annual figures in the extant records. The analysis that follows rests on new
annual series of British net transfers from India through five separate channels, on a consistent basis
through 1762-1812.
The mechanisms of transfer to Britain were well known to contemporaries and have been
exhaustively studied. One such mechanism involved funds accumulated in Calcutta and elsewhere
from the "country trade" between India, the Eastern Archipelago, and China: the English Company
drew on these funds, against bills payable in London, to cover its own deficits in the Canton trade.x
Victory at Plassey in 1757 opened an era of corruption and plunder by Companyofficials and British
administrators that did not begin to be checked until the late 1780s.xi Some of the local fortunes
were remitted to Britain in bullion and diamonds, but most unilateral transfers involved since 1765
are thought to have been made in the form of Indian commodities purchased with Indian revenue. In
8
the 1760s, the Company's trade was explicitly organized to secure large surpluses of commodity
imports into London over total exports of goods and bullion to India. To this end the Company
remained free to benefit from coercion over Indian weavers, from barriers to entry of potential
competitors in India,xii from local judicial control, and from monopoly or taxingpowersin saltpetre,
rice, salt, cotton, raw silk, and opium.xiii The Company's ships also carried small "privilege" cargoes
on the account of commanders and officers. Additional tonnage allotments in Company ships were
granted in 1793 to independent private traders. Since 1798, British private interests were at times
allowed to use Indian teak vessels.xiv Other local surpluses were channeled to Britain, at times with
British encouragement, through foreign companies and neutral shipping also trading in India and
China.
The closest approximation to the concept of net India transfers in the balance of payments
sense was succinctly formulated by Furber: "the only true drain resulting from contactwith the West
was the excess of exports from India for which there was no equivalentimport".xv Furber'suse of the
term "drain" in this context is debatable, but his unusually well specified calculations of commodity
and bullion flows in 1783-92 can be replicated and arguably improved upon.
Objections to Furber's procedure pivot around his reliance on invoice values of British
exports and imports.xvi Such invoice valuations are not strictlycomparable with one anotherbecause
they were made in distant locations under different market conditions. WhereasBritishexportswere
invoiced in England, presumably at fair competitive cost, valuations of outward cargoes in India
incorporate unfathomable bias owing to the English East India Company's ability to retain a degree
of monopoly and monopsony power. Nor is it clear that Furber's approach for 1783-92 can be safely
applied to the inflationary period 1793-1812, because the invoice values of British imports exclude
substantial carrying costs to Britain at widely fluctuating rates of freight and insurance. Most
9
ominously, after 1790 the prime-cost data from which the invoice values were calculated were said
to incorporate arbitrary adjustments by the Company's account Inspectors.xvii Other concerns over
Furber's procedure turn out to be less worrisome. To be sure, the invoice values of British outward
cargoes also exclude freight and insurance, merchants' profits, and the Company's "charges on
merchandise" -- thus understating receipts from non-British subjects in India. Judging from the
present calculations, however, British carrying costs on exports remained relatively small and the
Company's export profits were most often negative.xviii
[ Table 1 ]
A plausible account of net transfers to Britain through various channels, excluding
government flows, is outlined in Table 1. The net commoditytransfers on Company,"privilege",and
private account in panels A, B, and C are here defined, following Furber and others, as British
imports from India minus British exports of goods and bullion to India. To avoid reliance on the
questionable invoice values and rates of exchange used by Furber, and on the British official trade
statistics for "Asia", the adopted figures of imports and exports are those given in the Company's
records. Since the Company's figures were valued in Britain at British market prices, they meet the
conventional definitions of CIF import values (including cost, freight, and insurance) and FOB
export values (free on board). For Table 1 the given trade figures at British ports have been adjusted
to approximate the value of the goods in India, at the points of exchange with non-British residents.
Thus the estimated British import values "FOB India" are meant to exclude, and the British export
values "CIF India" to include, all payments by British nationals to the British Treasury, to British
shippers and insurers, and to the English East India Company on account of "charges".The resulting
net import values in panels A, B, and C should thus approximate net commodity transfers to Britain
for balance of payments accounting. The same can be said of the additional returns from the inter-
10
Asian "country trade" in panel D, which are uncertainly proxied here with the value in Canton of
those British imports of China goods that were not covered with British commodities and bullion.
The rationale for this approach is that these British trade deficits were financed with surpluses
accumulated by "country" merchants in India and with Indian goods directly exported to Canton by
the Company. The additional transfers to Britain through foreign East India companies and neutral
ships will be examined with some detail in connection with Table 2.
It is argued in the Appendix that the new estimates of net commodity transfers to Britain in
Company ships may be regarded as minimum estimates on the given sources. It is pertinent to add
here that the British debits on Company bullion transfers to India in 1798-1805 are likely to be
overstated. The average for 1803-07 in Table 1 incorporates, as a debit item, ,832 thousandper year
(,4.16 million) recorded as "bullion" exports to India in the official source adopted here.xix But we
also know that bullion worth ,4.2 million, sent to India by the Company Directors in 1803-05, was
diverted by Wellesley for war purposes.xx We cannot discard the hypothesis that these sizeable
remittances are not included in the officially recorded totals; but the presumption remains that little
or no British bullion was used in this period for Company purchases of Indian commodities. Similar
considerations apply to the period 1798-1800, when more than ,2.5 million worth of Company
bullion exports were also spent on warfare.xxi In one of several efforts to underestimate total net
transfers to Britain, the ,6.7 million in question have been debited twice: as Company bullion
exports to India in Table 1, and as bullion transfers to India on government account in Table 3.
With these qualifications, by far the largest transfers to BritaininTable1 appearto have been
made on Company account -- at first directly from India but increasingly in the form of China goods
sent to London. The British private trade also turned positive transfers from India at various times
since 1793, but the one significant surge in 1803-07 was short lived. One limiting factor here
11
stemmed from the tonnage allotments granted to "privilege" and private traders in Company
ships. These allotments were larger for exports than for imports and thus biased non-Company
commodity flows against net imports from Asia. A second factor favoring higher export values and
lower transfers to Britain is that "privilege" and private traders were keen to secure the largest
possible returns for their British cargoes to finance their growing involvement in the prosperous
inter-Asian "country trade". Certainly the Company's commanders and officers,who aloneenjoyeda
share of the silver-hungry China trade in Company ships, had a known preference for low-volume,
high-value goods including bullion in their export cargoes.xxii
The new estimates in Table 1 also point to growing interaction among the Asian transfer
channels involved. Through 1793-1807 private imports and net transfers from India into London
grew by leaps and bounds, eventually at the Company's expense. This pattern was reversed in 1808-
12 with the contraction of European markets for Indian commodities at the height of Napoleon's
Continental System. At this time the Company regained its role as the principal transfer agent, and
the inter-Asian "country" trade appears to have become the most profitable outlet for privatecapital.
It will be noted in Section 5 that private traders may also have secured growing shares of China
goods with the complicity of Company "servants". By reference to Table 1, it is perhaps significant
that the first positive net transfers from China to London on "privilege" account in 1808-12
coincided with a sharp rise in British private exports to India.
[ Table 2 ]
Foreigners participated in the carrying trade to Britain by taking advantage of untapped
opportunities, conflicts among British decision makers, and lower transport costs. Estimates of
transfers to Britain through various foreign channels are specified in Table 2. French and Dutch
inroads had a long standing and prospered in the 1760s through private agreement with British
12
subjects in India, often at French initiative.xxiii The French and Dutch Companies, and the
Spanish Philippine Company, received British official encouragement in the late 1780s through the
