for private capital at the height of Napoleon's Continental System. The contraction of European
markets at first detracted from direct private shipments to Britain; but it also fostered a triangular
Asian trade increasingly centered on China. Direct exports from Canton to Britain should have been
less vulnerable than those from India to the consequences of European blockade: Chinese tea was
more easily smuggled than Indian textiles and was largely consumed in Britain. In these
circumstances private interests had a strong incentive to despatch their growing Asian surpluses to
Europe, either in neutral vessels or in Company ships with the complicityof Company"servants". To
be sure, Company employees were barred from direct involvement in private trade as well as from
receiving "presents" from Indians;xlii but some of them had been known to overcharge their
employer for supplies purchased on its behalf, to lend the proceeds of secret commissions to the
24
increasingly indebted Company, and to enter into collusive contracts with British and foreign
private merchants.xliii The officially recorded "privilege" exports from China to Britain certainly
soared from still modest levels during the 1800s to an average of ,1.3 million in 1810-12. The
required purchasing power to sustain expanding business would have been provided, in part, by the
profits of the inter-Asian trade, and in part by the unsteady but substantial growth in private
shipments to India at a time of stagnant or shrinking return cargoes along this route.
To be sure, British private traders did much better once the Company's privileges in trade
with India were abolished in 1813.xliv It is thus reasonable to wonder whether a similar measure in
1793 might have been of greater benefit to British interests as a whole. Here again, however, any
conclusions from trade figures alone must be tempered with wider considerations. One central
requirement of counterfactual analysis is that the alternative scenariosto be considered shouldbe the
most plausible. We may reasonably assume that Dundas's perception of Britain's national interest
would have remained focussed on maximizing those imports of Indian commodities -- largely
textiles-- that were defrayed with Indian territorial revenue. If so, the alternative CharterAct of 1793
would not have included the punitive tariffs on Indian textiles enteringBritain, and the lowerdutyon
British manufactures into Bengal, that precipitated the demise of the Indian industry after 1813. We
may further assume that such Crown interest in India transfers as remained by the late 1800s would
have been met by the Company's local purchases, by its effective monopoly of the China trade, and
by the enhanced activity of British private merchants.xlv The shipping quotas granted to private
traders in the Charter Act of 1793 certainly left room for additional imports-- witnessthe substantial
cargoes carried to Britain by neutral shipping until the late 1800s; Dundas himself later recognized
that some of this foreign business might have been captured by British privatetraders.xlvi And ample
opportunity to purchase additional textiles in India remained open in some areas by weavers'
25
resistance to the Company's strict requirements and lower prices.xlvii
There is reason to doubt, however, that private traders would have brought to Britain a much
larger volume of Indian commodities at much lower cost while shouldering additional burdens. The
Company's commanders and officers, and those private traders whose wares were also carried in
Company ships since 1793, enjoyed extensive warehousing facilities, brokerage services ensuring
minimum prices of Indian commodities in London,and the relative safetyof heavilyarmed Indiamen
and convoy protection against French privateers in the Eastern seas. On the latter count it has been
argued that had the Asian trade been widely open to British private shipping there would have been
heavy losses in the 1800s.xlviii Evidence on actual developments also suggests that comparable
vessels might not have been readily forthcoming; that conflicting Britishinterestsmight have sought
similar monopoly rights to those imposed by the Company's shipping contractors; and that freight
rates on India-built ships might not always have been lower.xlix Nor is it clear that British private
merchants would have successfully competed with highly efficient neutral shipping that paid lower
insurance rates and did not require convoy protection.
The potential benefits of additional private trade should also be weighed against the external
economies and scale advantages rendered by the Company to a wider range of British interests. We
may reasonably expect that the Company would have retained its rights of sovereignty in exchange
for military containment of French-backed inroads and for continued assistance in the transfer to
London of surplus funds and commodities. It seems less likelythat it would have been able to sustain
the full range of additional services that spilled over to all participants. As early as the 1780s, debt
levels had grown to the point that the Company's purchases in India, and even its day to day
operations, could not be carried out without the assistance of a tangled web of private interests
centered in the Indian agency houses.l Meanwhile, as noted in Section 2 foreign traders in India and
26
in China took advantage of untapped opportunities, conflicts among British decisionmakers, and
lower transport costs. The Charter Act of 1793 and the French wars compounded the ailing
Company's burdens with new dents to its formal trade monopoly and with non-commercial costs.
The Company regularly supplied the Navy with East Indiamenand trainedsailorsat its own expense;
it also devoted cargo space to troops and military "stores".li The "stores not for sale" entered in
Tables 1 and 3 together amount to 41 per cent of commodity exports to Indiaon Companyaccount in
1762-97 -- and to 86 per cent in 1798-1812. Not all these burdens were borne out of commercial
profits, but the efficiency loss involved in a substantial reduction of the Company's trading volume
would have raised the overall costs of long-distance commerce under prolonged warfare.lii On the
benefit side some British consumers and manufacturers might have enjoyed larger and cheaper
supplies, but the development of new Indian staples did not become a national priority until the late
1800s (Webster, 1990). In the likely absence of the stern fiscal measures adopted in 1813, the Indian
share of British industrial exports would have remained insignificant. There is thus reasonto believe
that conceivable relaxation of the Company's privileges well before 1813 would have fallen short of
expectations with no clear net benefit to Great Britain as a whole.
6. Conclusion
27
This article has suggested that the Crown's Asian trade policy more effectively served
Britain's national interest than might be inferred from contemporary complaints and recent
scholarship. The size of British unilateral transfers from India, and their course and fluctuations
through more than 50 years, have been ignored in recent surveys. Yet Henry Dundas's perception of
the importance of these transfers to the British balance of trade was well grounded in the realities of
the 1780s and was borne out by subsequent developments. British net inflows from India remained
substantial through 1765-1812 and were arguably least dispensable; those from re-exports of Indian
commodities alone most frequently doubled, and at times tripled, those arising from net India
transfers including government flows. When reckoned at British ports in constantprices of 1784, the
volumes of British trade with Asia on both Company and private account through 1765-1812 most
frequently grow at a faster pace that the worldwide totals and retain some of the acquiredgains to the
end of the period. Private traders enjoyed access to non-British channels of remittance and widening
opportunities in the inter-Asian trade within the Company's formal trade monopoly. The real
constraints they faced in direct trade with Britain should also be weighed against the external
economies and scale advantages rendered by the Company to a wider range of British interests.
28
7. Appendix: British net transfers from India 1757-1812: sources and procedures
The new annual calculations of British import and export values through 1762-1812 rest for
the most part on the East India Company records (British Library), on the British Parliamentary
Papers, and on the Board of Trade accounts. Unlike the British official trade values in the Customs
volumes of the Public Record Office (London), the adopted figures are given at current prices and
often distinguish between India and China; many of the extant accounts, particularly those for 1793-
1811, also provide vital information on "privilege" and private trade, on customs revenue,on freight
costs, and on mercantile profits. Further precision and detail may still be gained from systematic
work on ships' cargo manifests.
As a point of departure, annual data on British imports and exports at British market prices
have been selected from the relevant sources. It is recognized that such import values incorporate,
and such export values exclude, often substantial carrying costs, mercantile charges, customs
payments, and mercantile profits. For balance of payments accounting, any such settlements among
British residents must be subtracted from the sale values of British imports in London, and added to
British exports at British prices, to approximate the value of the goods at the points of exchange, in
India, between British and non-British residents.
[ Appendix table 1 ]
The conversion of Company import values CIF in London into prime cost in India is
specified in the upper section of Appendix Table 1. The importvaluesCIF(cost +insurance +freight)
include the Company's proceeds at the London sales and the estimated value of saltpetre that was
annually delivered at fixed prices to the Board of Ordnance. The Company's "profit and loss"
accounts specify payments for freight and demorage, customs duties, and charges in London, but
they ignore other transport costs and separate charges incurred in India. The Companydid not insure
29
its cargoes,liii but ship losses and captures appear to be well documented;liv the British costs
incurred on this account have been estimated as import values times market insurance rates. All the
documented charges have been deducted from the sale proceeds of Indian goods in London to
approximate their "free on board", "FOB India" value (line 9).
The middle section of Appendix Table 1 specifies the reverseprocedure to convertCompany
export values FOB in London into full "CIF India" costs. Here the point of departure is the prime
cost of Company exports at British market prices, including goods and three descriptions of "stores"
but excluding "naval and garrison stores". Furber correctly accounted for the larger items in his
calculations for 1783-92, but his methodology led him to ignore customs payments and other
relevant settlements among British merchants and shippers. The sum total of Company exports plus
all these charges is described in line 17 as "Exports 'CIF India' at Indian ports".
[ Appendix table 2 ]
Net transfers to Britain on direct trade with India are defined here as British net imports of
goods and bullion at Indian ports, excluding government flows.In AppendixTable1, bullionexports
on Company account are subtracted from the difference between imports "FOB India" and
commodity exports "CIF India". Similar transfer estimates on "privilege" and private account are
given in Appendix Tables 2 and 3. The total of all three tables for 1782-93 (,587 thousand per year)
is most closely comparable with Furber's partial estimate of "direct drain" to Britain in Company
