joint efforts of the English Company's London interest and of Henry Dundas -- then the most
influential senior Commissioner for India affairs.xxiv No data have been found on French and Dutch
participation since 1791, but the relevant Asian territories fell under British control in the 1790s and
were not returned until 1815-16. Feldbaeck's figures of net transfers to Britain under the Danish flag
through 1772-1808 are said to be minimum estimates since 1787. Since 1795, the neutral trade
between the United States and British India was predominantly engaged in remitting fortunes of the
English Company' "servants" to Europe, despite provisions to the contrary in the looselyworded Jay
Treaty of 1794. This "clandestine" or "illicit" trade at times exceeded the English Company's by
taking advantage of cheaper ships, lower freight and insurance costs, and the ability to sail without
convoy protection; it also was encouraged by British agency houses and by British private traders in
India. Despite a setback in 1804, a complete stoppage during Jefferson's embargo of 1808, and
renewed British attempts to encroach upon the rights of neutrals since the springof 1806, transfersto
Britain under the United States flag appear to have remained substantial until 1810.xxv
3. Total net inflows into Britain on India account, 1765-1812
The net transfers from India in Table 1 represent positive contributions to the Britishbalance
of payments in so far as they gave rise to net inflows of foreign exchange or to other claims on
foreigners. New estimates of such net inflows are given in Table 3. It will be recalled that, for the
purpose of calculating unilateral transfers, British importsof Indiancommodities have been adjusted
to approximate their current value in India, at the points of exchange with non-British residents.The
costs of transport to London in Company ships do not belongin Britain'sexternal balancebecause all
13
the payments involved were settled among British nationals. One relevant component of British
inflows is the CIF value of re-exported Indian goods beyondthe publicauctionsin London,inclusive
of transport and profits at the points of delivery to foreign merchants in British or foreignports (total
of lines 1-6). Some of the imported Indian commodities were re-exported as such to Continental
Europe and elsewhere; others were embodiedas raw materialsin Britishdomesticexports; most such
re-exports afforded British residents additionalforeign exchangein the form of carrying earningsand
mercantile profits. A second component of British inflows is the savings of foreign exchange on
account of Indian goods for home consumption that would otherwise have been imported from
elsewhere (lines 7-9). On the debit or cost side, British outflows should include the total "CIF India"
value of British exports and re-exports to India on Company, private, and government account(lines
10, 12-13). The totals in line 14 suggest that the British net inflows involved most frequently
doubled, and at times tripled, those reckoned in the preceding Section as net transfers directly from
India.
[ Table 3 ]
Some of the re-export values of Indian commodities in Table 3, lines 1-6 are minimum
estimates or are arguably understated. The values of non-textiles in line 2 are calculated at "in-bond"
import prices and thus exclude mercantile charges within British territory and customs duties not
returned as drawbacks upon re-export. The value of Indian commodities embodied in British
domestic exports must remain uncertain. Around 1750, close to 60 per cent of the calicos printed in
London were most likely Indian.xxvi The Indian share in the total supply of calicos in Britain
decreased in 1775-83;xxvii but retained imports of the Indian fabrics sharply rose from the late 1780s
up to 1803. The calculations for "Indian calicos embodied in domestic exports" (line 4) rest on the
assumption that the physical share of Indian calicos in the exported yardsof cottontextilesprintedin
14
Britain successively fell from 35 per cent in 1764-73 to 5 per cent in 1794-1803 -- and to zero
thereafter. There is an uncontrolled margin for error here, but not all the cotton fabrics finished for
export in Britain from Indian calicos may have been entered as printed goods in the customsrecords.
British textile exports also incorporated Indian dyes and fibers. India supplied 79 per cent of the
indigo used in Britain in 1791-1811 and 45 per cent at least of the raw silk in 1764-1812; nearly 8
per cent of British cotton imports in 1793-1812 came from India.xxviii Perhaps conservatively, the
values of "other Indian goods embodied in domestic exports" (line 5) are reckoned at 20 and 10 per
cent of retained imports of Indian indigo and raw silk respectively.
Conceivable overstatement in the uncertain estimates of Britishcarrying earningsand profits
would not substantially alter the overall picture. The mercantile profitsin line 6 have been calculated
at a constant rate throughout 1765-1812, on the assumption that falling returns on re-exports of
Indian muslins and calicos since the 1790s were offset by higher margins on the substantial
shipments of non-textiles during the French wars. The constant profitrate has been set at one half the
10 per cent allowed by Nash for English re-exports in 1770.xxix Imlah placed the re-export rate in
1816-18 at 5.5 per cent, but he appears to have suspected that profits had been higher during the
French wars.xxx In any event, there are some grounds for believing that profits on Indian textiles
were larger than average. In economists' parlance, profit levels are directly related to the degree of
market imperfection. The bewildering variety of Indian calicos, muslins, and coloured piece goods
allowed for product differentiation in recipient markets. It will be noted in Table 5 that the product
composition and the geographical destination of British textile cargoes varied significantly --
presumably to maximize returns by catering to the particular needs, tastes, and purchasing power of
different consumers. The competitive edge afforded to Britishmerchants by the Company's abilityto
impose lower prices on some Indian weavers should have been enhanced when French and Dutch
15
Asian territories fell under British control in the 1790s.xxxi Seemingly unavailable data on
individual textile fabrics by geographical destination might also point to the presence of price
discrimination, in the sense that higher prices would have been charged in those sub-markets where
demand was relatively inelastic.
The imputed values in lines 7-9 are proxies for British savings of foreign exchange on
account of Indian and Chinese goods for home consumption that would otherwise have been
imported from elsewhere. To be sure, had the means of obtaining large quantities of Indian calicos
not existed through the exercise of Imperial power import substitution by British producers might
have proceeded at a faster pace. But the bulk of Indian commodities retained in Britain was made up
of cotton, Bengal raw silk, coffee, rice, saltpeter,white pepper,and cinnamon.The imputedvaluesof
"net transfers of China goods" in line 9 are meant to include only those Chinese commodities that
were financed with surpluses accumulated by "country" merchants in India and with Indian goods
directly exported to China by the Company. Most such commoditieswould have been importedfrom
less distant locations in America or in the Mediterranean, but those brought in foreign ships would
have involved a net loss in British foreign exchange on account of transport cost differentials.
Moreover, some of the Indian and Chinese commodities in question were cheaper than their
American and European counterparts. Perhaps conservatively, the British savings of foreign
exchange on all three counts are imputed in lines 7-9 at four-fifths of the Asian goods' CIF value at
British ports of arrival excluding customs duties.
The costs of procuring those Indian goods that were not purchased with Indian revenue
represent debit items in the British balance of payments. The private component of these British
outflows is proxied in line 10 with the total "CIF India" value of British exports of goods,stores,and
bullion on Company, "privilege", and private account.Further entrieson Britishgovernment account
16
recognize the indirect contribution of those war expenses in India that were not financed with
Indian revenue. As noted in Section 2, the bullion exports charged in Table 1 to the Company's
transfers to Britain seemingly include the ,6.7 million that were diverted to Indian warfare in 1798-
1800 and in 1803-05. At the risk of duplication, the full ,6.7 million have again been debited in line
12 of Table 3 ("Bullion transfers to India on government account"). Still thereis no guarantee that all
bullion shipments to India are covered under "Exports 'CIF India' to India" and "Bullion transfers to
India on government account" (Table 3, lines 10 and 12), but no reason has been found to question
the officially recorded totals adopted for Table 1.xxxii The "Bullion transfers to India on government
account" debited in line 12 also include a credit of nearly ,1.9 million in bullion said to have been
shipped from India to Britain in 1812.xxxiii The allocation of "stores" to Company or government
account is a matter of guesswork, but the "exports of 'naval & garrison stores'" debited in line 13
include only those "stores not for sale" that are not debited to the Company's transfers to Britain in
Table 1.
4. Contributions to the British balance of payments
What did Henry Dundas have in mind when he describedthe Company's regulated monopoly
as "a current which is turning the greatest wheel of British commerce"? In the early 1790s Britain's
direct trade with India cannot have appeared substantial: the British tonnage employed in the India
route, and the market value of the import and export cargoes, had seldom surpassed 3 percent of the
respective worldwide totals. But Company officials had stressed that re-exports of Indian goods
played a strategic role in the British balance of trade. Dundas's preoccupation with securing a steady
flow of Indian transfers beyond 1793 suggests that he regardedIndian commoditiesas a major link of
a clearing mechanism to balance external payments. It will be argued here that such a perception
17
would have been justified at the time and was borne out by the subsequentcourse of eventsduring
the French wars.
[ Table 4 ]
A conjectural context for this argument is laid out in Table 4. Despite massive expenses
abroad at the height of the Napoleonic wars, Britain's external position is thought to have improved
from a net foreign indebtedness of some ,13 million in 1775 to a net credit of ,10 millionexcluding
Ireland by 1815.xxxiv For the sake of consistence we may further infer, admittedly from scant
evidence, that British claims over Ireland are included in the 1775 benchmark and stood at ,20
million in 1815.xxxv The course of Britain's external position after 1775 may be reckoned by
combining the net balance of total payments in each subsequent year with the worldwide debt or
credit accumulated so far. The annual figures underlying the period averages in Table 4 represent a
particular set of payments that yield a net British credit of ,30 million by 1815; additional estimates
for 1764-74 have been generated through backward extrapolation from the 1775 benchmark (-,13
million). In the absence of firm evidence on many of the entries involved, let alone on the
particularly weak benchmark for Britain's net credit in 1815, we can take little comfort from the fact
that the long-term pattern is consistent with a range of alternative assumptions.xxxvi
The broad picture conveyed by Table 4 must remain conjectural, but only the relatively
sounder figures bear directly on the central argument proposed here. The partial net balances
