Cuore          |
               Bandits cs :
Adventurers in Spain
     1808-1814




   USTON PU

 HONG                 1
 33 477 003 352 3le   i       a   he
Fighting Napoleon                               |
Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers
in Spain,    1808-1814
Charles J. Esdaile

Alongside the Spanish army in the
campaign against Napoleon (1808-1814)
was an assortment of freebooters, local
peasants and bandits, who were organised
into ad hoc regional private armies. These
‘guerrillas’ — a term introduced to the
English language during the Peninsular
War -— ambushed French convoys, attacked
French encampments, and pounced upon,
dodged and fought French columns, often
with extreme brutality. This book
investigates for the first time the irregular
Spanish forces and their role in resisting
Napoleon.
Delving deeply into previously untapped
archival resources, Charles Esdaile arrives
at an entirely new view of the Spanish
guerrillas. He shows that the Spanish war
against Napoleon was something other
than the great popular crusade of legend,
that many guerrillas were not armed
civilians acting spontaneously, and that
guerrillas were more often driven by
personal motives than high-minded
ideology. Tracking down the bandit armies
and assessing their contributions, Esdaile
offers important insights into the famous
‘little war’ and the motives of those who
fought it.
          Digitized by the Internet Archive
              in 2022 with funding from
              Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/fightingnapoleon0000esda
Fighting Napoleon
            Fighting Napoleon
Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers in Spain, 1808-1814




                CHARLES     J, ESDAILE




                   Yale University Press
                 New Haven and London
Copyright © 2004 by Charles J. Esdaile

All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, in any form
(beyond that copying permitted by Sections 107 and 108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and
except by reviewers for the public press), without written permission from the publishers.

The right of Charles J. Esdaile to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by
him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

For information about this and other Yale University Press publications, please contact:
US. Office: sales.press@yale.edu yalebooks.com
Europe Office: sales@yaleup.co.uk www.yaleup.co.uk

Set in Ehrhardt by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed in Great Britain by St Edmundsbury Press Ltd, Bury St Edmunds

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Esdaile, Charles J.
      Fighting Napoleon: guerrillas, bandits, and adventurers in Spain, 1808-1814 / by
   Charles J. Esdaile.—x1st ed.
         Dy chi
   Includes bibliographical references and index.
      ISBN 0—300—10112-0 (CL.: alk. paper)
   1. Peninsular War, 1807-1814.      2. Guerrilla warfare—Spain—History—1oth
century.    3. Spain—History—Napoleonic Conquest, 1808-1813.       4. Wars of
Liberation, 1813-1814—-Spain.      5. France—History, Military—1789-1815.   6.
Spain—History, Military—rgth century. I. Title.
      DC231.E833     2004
      940.2'742'0946—dc22

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
For Alison, in love and gratitude
fig atew wh toad Can
 Or ee Vnbeoween
hy             SO                                         ey Ratton              eo eas,         \4
‘We pl              0 2) Oh De Aer eee: pee, Ooian

Ty       Baw            / WP                 > byte woie Ennaas
Te       @ areas                         ele rq Eranateg™. ogee ww


Pe @|.6 & OS                        Cumce           lela         Oks Tati
  ee
                                                                                                              t
     p         :                Pidfi          A    vas       far pei’                                    7
          :                                                                              F            :
                    2           8            £2 Ope          Teese                           -
                                    (=       bd tos DyClap teceny Peau Udy Oey Gi
                                                                               dane
                            i                  anig              oe Te
                                                             © Ui,                   ¢
                                                                                                                      _


                                                   er                     eT
                                                   *


                                             Lerten:              et lem
              aka                                  oat)   ath Sry
                        :                «     Cave    han          Arerin.   omen :

                                              2              any Aaltrdn, Cacpere,
                                               ‘ae           2   View      Stee                                   7
                                                       Gam,           1    Tey
                                  Contents




List of Illustrations
Preface
Map: The Iberian Peninsula, 1808-1814

1     The Guerrilla in History

2     The Guerrillas at War

      The Guerrillas in Context

      The Origins of the Guerrillas

      The Reality of the Guerrillas

nH
non
WH
>     The End of the Guerrillas

Conclusion


Abbreviations
Notes
Glossary
Bibliography
Index
                            Tllustrations




Louis Francois Lejeune, The skirmish at Guisando, in the ‘col d’Avis’ mountain passage
of the Guadarama in Castille on 11 April (© Photo RMN - G. Blot / J. Schormans)
Louis Francois Lejeune, The attack by General Min’s guerillas in France on the convoy
carrying the ladies of King Foseph’s court near Salinas, 25 May 1811.
(© Photo RMN - G. Blot / J. Schormans)
Denis Dighton, Spanish Army. General Officer of Cavalry with Guerrillas and
Lancers, 1815 (The Royal Collection © 2004, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II)
Denis Dighton, The Brigand Crosa, Guerrilla      Chief  of Catalonia, 1813 (The Royal
Collection © 2004, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth I)
Bacler d’Albe, Scenes of action against the guerrillas in the Aoiz valley (Musée de
l Armée, Paris)
Bacler d’Albe, Scenes of action against the guerrillas in the Aoiz valley (Musée de
lArmée, Paris)
Bacler d’Albe, Block-house on the road between Hernani and Tolosa (Musée de
P Armée, Paris)
Felix Phillippoteaux, General Franceschi-Delonne captured by ‘El Capuchino’s’ gang
Francisco de Goya, Nobody knows why
Francisco de Goya, The Same
                                  Preface




In both Britain and Spain the most well-known aspect of the Peninsular War
— the great struggle that convulsed the Iberian Peninsula between 1808 and
1814 following its invasion by Napoleon Bonaparte — is beyond doubt the par-
ticipation in the fighting of large numbers of irregular bands of armed civil-
ians. Renowned for having given the English language the word ‘guerrilla’, these
forces are generally agreed to have inflicted huge damage on the invaders, and
it has often been argued that their activities rendered the conquest of the Penin-
sula a task that was beyond the capacities even of Napoleon. Yet in neither
England nor Spain (nor, indeed, anywhere else) has any attempt ever been made
to write a detailed analysis of the guerrilla war. Nor, meanwhile, has any sys-
tematic attempt ever been made to make use of the wealth of material that exists
on the subject in the Spanish archives (indeed, it has rather been assumed that
the ‘people’s war’ cannot have left a footprint in the documents in an age when
the vast majority of the populace was illiterate). In brief, this work seeks to
remedy both wants, and at the same time to take account of the growing body
of scholarship that has led the academic community to question traditional
arguments in respect of popular responses to war, occupation and mobilisation
in other parts of Napoleonic Europe. As such, it may certainly be deemed an
exercise in revisionism: for too long has treatment of the subject been domi-
nated by myth and propaganda. That said, it is only a beginning: extraordinary
riches remain untapped in the Spanish archives (not to mention those of France
and Portugal), whilst there is clearly much scope for regional studies of the
sort that Jorge Sanchez Fernandez has so admirably pioneered in respect of
Valladolid. Whatever else may be said of it, then, let us hope that this work is
never called the last word on the subject.

As usual, the acknowledgements are by far the nicest lines that I have to write.
At the top of the list, of course, come the various sources of research funding
x     Preface


on which I have drawn — in this case, the Leverhulme Trust, from whom I was
lucky enough to obtain a two-year research fellowship for the period 2000-2,
and the University of Liverpool, which provided me with considerable assis-
tance from its Research Development Fund. In this context, however, I should
also like to mention two institutions in Spain in the form of the Universidad
Auténoma de Barcelona, whose kindness in inviting me to present a staff
seminar funded a productive visit to the Catalan archives, and, above all, the
Real Colegio de San Albano in Valladolid, whose boundless hospitality enabled
me to make full use of the vital materials housed in the Archivo General
de Simancas. At the head of the list of people, perhaps, comes Christopher
Allmand, whose wise counsel and gentle prompting during his years as my
Head of Department at the University of Liverpool constitute the spark that
gave life to this work. At A.M. Heath Literary Agents, Bill Hamilton has been
a loyal friend who has worked tirelessly to ensure its appearance on the market,
whilst at Yale University Press I should like to thank Robert Baldock. The staff
of all the libraries and archives at which I have worked have without exception
been kindness and helpfulness themselves, but in this context I should partic-
ularly like to thank Christopher Woolgar, Karen Robson, Sue Donnelly and
Mary Cockerill at the University of Southampton; Ian Jackson at the
University of Liverpool; Nieves Sanchez Hidalgo, Estrella Valentin-Fernandez
Fernandez, Inmaculada Martin Mufioz, Amalia Jiménez Morales, Ana Sanz
Robles, Jess Rodriguez Izquierdo, Maribel Baenas Perez, Paqui Mateo Macias
and Yolanda Ruiz Esteban at the Biblioteca Nacional; and Pilar Bravo Lledo of
the Archivo Historico Nacional. Also pivotal was the generosity of a number
of people who helped me stretch my limited resources by receiving me into
their homes, amongst whom I should especially like to mention Esther and
Mari-Cruz de Carlos, and Francisco Varo and Araceli Mufioz. Other good
 friends have included, as before, Leopoldo Stampa of the Ministerio de Asuntos
 Exteriores, Concha Bocos, Rafael Agasagasti, William and Sonia Chislett,
 Emilio de Castro, Dolores Schilling, Jo Klepka, Enrique Mardones, Fernando
 Fanjul, Antonia Rodriguez, Jesus Maroto, Jose Maria Espinosa de los Mon-
 teros, Santiago Nistal and Maribel Piqueras. My fellow researchers David
 Alonso, Azucena Pédraz Marcos, Leonor Hernandez Enviz, Grahame Harri-
 son, Susan Lord, Marta Ruiz Jiménez and Satoko Nakajima have provided me
 with insight and relaxation alike. And, finally, amongst my fellow peninsulares
 and Napoleonists, I should like to thank Rory Muir, Arsenio Garcia Fuertes,
Jorge Sanchez Fernandez, Vittorio Scotti-Douglas, John Tone, Alicia Laspra
 Rodriguez, Esteban Canales, Lluis Roura, Antonio Moliner Prada, Franciso
 Carantofia Alvarez, Antonio Carrasco Alvarez, Javier Maestrojuan, Herminio
 Lafoz Rabaza, Mike Broers and Alan Forrest, all of whom have at one time or
 another offered me help and encouragement. Of these good people, I should
                                                                   Preface     XL


like to make particular mention of Rory Muir, who has, as with all my works,
subjected every word of this manuscript to a stern eye. Needless to say, however,
such errors as may have crept into its pages are the fault of no one but the
author.
   It is, of course, to my family that my debts are greatest. Over the past two
years Alison, Andrew, Helen, Maria-Isabel and Bernadette have endured
absences on my part that have been as continuous as they have been prolonged:
that I am grateful, they know, but it is always good to record the happy home
background that lies at the heart of any success I may have achieved.

                                                           Liverpool, June 2003
             ne               /                                                                           Bay      of Biscay
    La Coruna AFerrol                  |                    OR                       Santander
                          Mondonedo               , 5 re) a4 Dans                                   e
              Betanzos
                                                        tai @                        n      Mt          s Bilbao        ,                 San.
                                   eLugo          © *                                       a ers .e               Zornoza Sebastian
                  eSantiago
                                                                                                        apices     Vitoria                   Pamplona
              GALICIA                        Villafranca        Leon                                       :                          NAVARRE
               Pontevedra                     ©     APonferrada ® J Saldaiia                                                      Estella®                                            ANDORRA    LL
             Cp Orense
                                  R. Mito            Astorga                                                                                     Tafalla Sangiesa a
               Vigo
                                              _nRenave ice
                                                                ne            Medina                               Az                                             « Monzone               C AT   ALL, OEN)   T AS
                                                                             ede Rio Seco
                                                                                   N     OLD CASTILLE                                                                                Cervera Mahresa yee°Hostalrich:
                                                                                        a Aranda  a,                                              Zaragoza”                  Leridae
                                                                                Aiailad ide      Soria                                             Wins             oa          ences net Mali Ne
                                                                                Tordesillas                        R.           Duet?                                   ~o

                                                                           Rutda                  oe                    a                  Calatavud             *Belchit                   ovate
                                                           ~ Salamanca ‘3
                                                                        Arévalo                         eSomosierra                                          s        eg      re
                                                                                                                                                                            Alcaniz
                                                                             Segoviae%sS Ildefonso Villa Viciosa
                                                  A aes              ‘Alba de        Avil                Brihuega®                                       x
                                                    Kans,            Tormes      @/Avila                             5
                                                                                                   Alcala, ® Guadalajara
                                                                                         MADRID @    RY,                                             Teruel
                                                  SsPlasencia             P                         yy
                                                                                                 A wy                                    F                        N
                                             Cora               OropesagTalavera Toledo@Atanjuez                                        Cuenca
                                                    Almaraz                                             Oéana
                                                                                     Almonacide
Torres   Q           °
                                           Alcantara     SEODIEPOMy Wale
                                                     eTrujillo
                                                                               KGHARS THLLE
Vedras 296 6.                                EXTREMADURA           5 of Toledo
                    S                  /Arroyomolinos de Montanchez                              pnGul?
                                                                                                  s Manzanares              ‘
                                                                                  Ciudad                           a                              Alsunsae
                                                                                               Lae                                                                   2
                                                                                          Real   Valdepefias                                         Yeclae       ®Villena
                                                                                                                                  MURCIA Cyctailt


                                  @Paymogo                  -                Cérdoba              Jaén
                          Charen                                                 L         U       s           u
                                                                                     Granadae
                                                                                                   Sierra Nevay,

                                                                     Ronda       Malag: a
                                                                       e




                                               Str of Gibrab Sarita
                                                                     Ceuta




                                                                         The Iberian Peninsula, 1808-1814
                                         I

                    The Guerrilla in History




The guerrillas who opposed the Napoleonic conquest of Spain have occupied
a central role in the historiography of the Peninsular War ever since 1814. For
Spanish historians of all shades of opinion they have been at one and the same
time proof positive of the heroism that the people of Spain had displayed in
fighting off the armies of Napoleon, clear evidence that the conflict had been
a ‘national’ war that had seen an entire people confront an alien invader, and a
sure defence against wounding British accusations that the Spaniards had
played little part in their own liberation. For French historians eager to defend
and attack Napoleon alike, they fulfilled an important function, for they could
be used to argue both that the emperor’s every step was dogged by ignorance
and superstition, and that he was in the end brought down by his refusal to take
account of the will of the people. And finally for British historians they pro-
vided a means of paying lip-service to the Spanish struggle that subtly emphas-
ised the superiority of British arms and of the British national character:
peasants skulking in the shelter of rocks and bushes might be useful allies, but
gallant soldiers standing shoulder to shoulder in the famous ‘thin red line’ con-
veyed a much more manly image; equally, whilst the raids and skirmishes of /a
guerrilla killed more Frenchmen than ever perished at the hands of Welling-
ton, they could hardly match the drama of such victories as Salamanca and
Vitoria.
    If emphasising the importance of the guerrillas fitted in with a variety of
national needs and preoccupations, it was also convenient in another sense, for
it dovetailed all too neatly with the laziness and incapacity that have often char-
acterised the historiography of the Peninsular War. Let us take, for example,
the many British writers who have essayed accounts of the conflict. With some
exceptions — the outstanding examples are Robert Southey and Sir Charles
Oman — either mere hacks or military men with little interest in anything other
2     Fighting Napoleon


than the campaigns of the Duke of Wellington, they have frequently been either
unfamiliar with Castilian or unable to travel to Spain. Restricted to British
and French sources alone (and very often only published ones at that), they
found that the only aspect of the wider conflict on which they had plenty
of material was the guerrilla war, and in consequence persuaded themselves
that the gaps in their account could be filled in by this alone. This attitude,
meanwhile, was reinforced by a certain unwillingness to delve beneath
the service of the Spanish war effort: even Oman,.it may fairly safely be said,
confined his researches in this respect to such obvious secondary sources as the
Conde de Toreno and José Gémez de Arteche. For the Spaniards themselves,
of course, the position was somewhat different, but even so, particularly
for academic historians unwilling to get to grips with the nuts and bolts of
military history, emphasising the importance of the guerrillas was an attractive
option that got them off a variety of ‘hooks’ and fitted in with changing
historical perceptions (it was, for example, easy to ally the guerrillas’ role
with the strongly Marxist currents of thought prevalent by the 1960s).
   The ability of modern Spanish historians to reconcile traditional views of
the guerrillas with Marxian theories of history is most ironic, for the insur-
gents’ appeal is in fact deeply bound up with images of Spain that are strongly
romantic — that are, in fact, the work of Romanticism. Thus, /a guerrilla of
legend is the Spain of the bandit, the bullfighter and the flamenco dancer at
war, just as its protagonist is the Spaniard as untameable individual and natural
anarchist. Visually, too, the guerrilla that we know is a Romantic creation, as
witness, for example, such French paintings as Lejeune’s depiction of Espoz y
Mina’s victory at the Puerto de Arlaban in 1811. Amidst a mythologised land-
scape of soaring peaks and shady groves the Spaniards are rushing forward clad
in shirts and breeches, with scarves tied round their heads and brandishing
daggers and blunderbusses, when sober reality would have had them fighting
in lines and columns, dressed in army-style uniforms and armed with muskets
and bayonets.’
    In short, the traditional view of /a guerrilla is a creation that is deeply arti-
ficial, if not wholly spurious. In fairness to the Romantics, however, it must be
said that they did little but embellish the propaganda characteristic of the war
itself. In innumerable pamphlets, newspapers and works of commentary and
analysis the guerrillas were established as heroes of the struggle against the
French. Typical, perhaps, were the efforts of an Augustinian friar named
Salmon, who between 1812 and 1814 produced what may be regarded as the
very first general history of the Peninsular War. Thus, angered by French
efforts to decry the guerrillas as bandits, Salmon was determined to show that
they were, rather, legitimate combatants who had the right to be treated as sol-
diers should they be taken prisoner by the enemy. Underpinning his work,
                                                    The Guerrilla in History     3

however, there was also a strong political purpose. Bitterly hostile to the maxims
of the French Revolution, he also wanted to prove, first, that the Spanish people
were unanimous in their rejection of liberty, equality and fraternity; second,
that they had thrown themselves into the struggle against the French absolutely
wholeheartedly; and third, that they had throughout remained loyal to the
established political and social order. The result was a picture of the guerrillas
that is wholly positive. The product of action on the part of the Spanish state
— in this respect great importance was accorded to the various decrees issued
by successive governments with respect to the formation of guerrilla bands —
the guerrillas had, it was claimed, ‘truly kept up the enthusiasm of the nation,
whilst doing more damage to the enemy than... large armies’.? As Salmon
continued:
  They were... true defenders of their fatherland . . . who had been autho-
  rised by their government to harass the common enemy subject to the captain
  or commandant-general of the province in which they resided . . . partidas
  that religiously .. . respected the humblest peasant, constantly persecuted
  ...all those who strayed from the path of right... spared no means to
  avenge the... orphans and widows who wept for the fathers and husbands
  torn from their sight by the insatiable ambition of the most inhuman
  hangman ...and ravaged the enemies of humanity, making head against
  them... in such terms that no convoy, dispatch rider or senior officer could
  move a step without an escort of hundreds or even thousands of soldiers.*

In this conflict, moreover, many thousands of Spaniards took part, Salmon
talking of the participation of ‘immense multitudes’ of heroes ‘from every
corner of the... peninsula’.* As for the commanders of the individual bands,
he could not be more complimentary:

   In every history of the world the name of El Empecinado will be famous.
   An obscure man with... no more knowledge than the sort to be expected
   of a poor artisan, he . . . kept the whole of the enemy’s Army of the Centre
   in constant movement and did not allow it a moment’s rest by day or night.
   What glories will not be told... of the imperturbable Espoz y Mina, that
   other military genius . . . who overnight abandoned the plough for the bat-
   tlefield? Is there any praise of which the sometime sergeant Brigadier Julian
   Sanchez is not worthy? Is there any honour which the doctor of Villaluenga,
   Don Juan Palarea, does not merit?”
   From all this it followed that to call the guerrillas bandits was unjust in the
extreme, and all the more so as they had proved to be a great help when it came
to upholding law and order. As Salmon wrote, indeed, ‘They clean the roads
and countryside of the vile rabble . . . that infest them with more energy and
4       Fighting Napoleon


success than do the French themselves, and ensure that they pay with their lives
for their robberies and other excesses.” Needless to say, meanwhile, their con-
tribution to the war effort had been enormous:

    It is not possible to paint a full picture of the debt which the nation owes to
    these valiant partidas. Although they cannot decide its fate with a single blow,
    they keep up its hopes and... inspire those who are afraid or in despair
    ... with strength, constancy and patience. At the same time, they never cease
    to fatigue the enemy, destroying him little by little in petty combats and
    reducing his domination to the ground which he physically occupies. Who
    can number the dead, wounded and prisoners that they have inflicted in the
    short time that has gone by since their . . . organization?’

   Such an impression was commonplace. Let us take as a further example the
anonymous Historia de la Revolucién Espanola, published in Valladolid during
the brief period when it was occupied by the Allies in the summer and autumn
of 1812. Thus:

    In the year 1809 there began to appear the famous guerrillas, the units of
    mounted and dismounted volunteers who, aided by their perfect knowledge
    of the terrain, have made themselves so feared by the enemy on account of
    their valour and indefatigable activity. Amongst the large number who have
    seen action, the most important have been those of El] Empecinado in the
    vicinity of Madrid... Mina in Navarra... Longa in Alava... the Mar-
    quesito in Asturias, Don Julian Sanchez in the province of Salamanca . .
    Starting with only a handful of men, many of these commanders in less than
    a year managed to raise divisions of between 2,000 and 4,000 men...
    Attacking small detachments and weak garrisons and intercepting convoys
    ... and dispatches, they have so troubled the French that for a long time they
    have not dared to travel even main roads except in caravans escorted by at
    least 1,000 men.®

   The impact of this hero worship was beyond doubt very great, a good
example being the attention that was heaped upon the famous Juan Martin
Diez. To quote Salmon, for example:

    To the astonishment of some and the dread of others, the name of El
    Empecinado began to resound in every province of the Peninsula and even
    in Paris and London. So much was this the case, in fact, that in both London
    and Cadiz subscriptions were opened to provide this valiant leader with uni-
    forms, saddles and armament, whilst many English ladies made a point of
    adorning their . . bosoms with his image.”
                                                   The Guerrilla in History   &

If El Empecinado became the centre of a major personality cult, it is hardly
surprising. Typical of the effusions of which he was the subject was the fol-
lowing ode that appeared in the Cadiz newspaper E/ Conciso:

            Who is this who rides so proudly by,
            Bathed in the blood of Spain’s enemies. . .
            Armed with pistol, blunderbuss and knife. . .
            And ready to kill Frenchman, Saxon, Italian, Bavarian
            . . Swiss, Russian, Pole or Spanish renegade?
          - Is it... another Duke of Alba?
            Not a bit of it: it is someone quite different,
            The immortal and most worthy El Empecinado."°
As early as 1811, meanwhile, there appeared a life of El Empecinado of whose
tenor the following is an excellent example:

  His memorable actions inspired the French with such fear that they ceased
  to hope for any success whatsoever unless they managed to capture this
  gallant leader. Yet El Empecinado mocked their efforts, and punished their
  foolhardiness every time they tried to surprise him: though all the resorts of
  their perfidy were set in motion, they were facing a brave Spaniard who did
  not know how to turn his back on a fight and wrecked the miserable schemes
  dreamed up by their treachery . . . The rapidity of his marches and counter-
  marches never ceased to amaze the legions of the tyrant. Over and over again
  they would think that the troops of El Empecinado were far away, only to
  find that they were suddenly set upon and destroyed. Nothing, indeed, got
  in the way of his daring."
Thanks to such efforts, there were by 1812 parts of Spain in which all the guer-
rillas were referred to as empecinados.
    Another leader who became a living legend, meanwhile, was Francisco Espoz
y Mina. About him, too, bad poetry was soon being written, whilst his native
cunning enabled him to exploit the enthusiasm of the liberals who dominated
the cortes of Cadiz and win much support for his demands for greater govern-
ment recognition.” For a good example of how he was seen we have only to
turn to the work of José Clemente Carnicero, a resident of Madrid who
recorded his experiences of the war in a three-volume chronicle published in
1814. Writing, for instance, of the reports from the battlefronts that reached
Madrid in the course of 1811, he remarked that ‘those which had most impact
_. . were the ones that spoke of the famous Mina’, and remembered that he and
his friends were particularly impressed with the manner in which, having cap-
tured a large French convoy near Vitoria, Espoz y Mina contrived to march all
6       Fighting Napoleon


his prisoners to the sea through the very midst of the enemy armies and load
them aboard British ships."
    Amongst British observers, too, there was much excitement about the guer-
rillas. As a somewhat unusual example, we might cite Robert Brindle, a young
seminarian who was caught by the events of 1808 at the English College in
Valladolid, and the following year escaped on foot to Portugal with the aid of
El Empecinado. Thus:
    An insurrection... sudden and universal baffled every stratagem of the
    French. Even their vast armies were found insufficient to restore quiet. If
    small parties were detached, they were infallibly cut to pieces by the Spanish
    peasantry. If large bodies marched out, they found no enemy to encounter.
    The lawless conduct of the French had frequently excited the just anger of
    the Spaniards, and before the quarrel became national, hundreds had fallen
    in the perpetration of the most enormous crimes, victims to the stiletto. But
    when something like a pretence for violence was offered, they gave full scope
    to their wantonness and brutality, and the activity of the stiletto increased in
    proportion. The Spaniards, at length aware of the treachery and base designs
    of the French, thought no mode of extermination unlawful. A French com-
    missary general declared that they lost 500 men every week by private
    assassination, exclusive of those who fell in the field or were kidnapped by
    the guerrillas. Hence we may form some estimate of the enormous waste
    of French troops in Spain, which according to the most exact calculation
    amounted during the whole war to at least 700,000 men."
Particular testimony to the influence of Espoz y Mina, meanwhile, may be
found in the memoirs of the cavalry officer William Bragge:

    Navarre is a most delightful province and... certainly the most loyal and
    patriotic in Spain. Their great leader is [Espoz y] Mina, who is a wonderful
    man. About three years since this man (who was then a farmer) adopted his
    nephew’s name, took the command of a battalion which he had raised and
    by a continual succession of bold, skilful and daring enterprises has worsted
    the French . . . increased his own force to a legion of 10,000 or 12,000, who
    are all volunteers, and the best-organised troops in Spain, well-paid, fed and
    clothed.’

And lastly one might cite the words of Edward Cocks, an intelligence officer
who spent much of the war on missions that took him deep into occupied Spain:
‘The Spanish guerrillas have annoyed the enemy very much; they are very
useful because they oblige the enemy to form so many detachments in order to
secure his communication and command in some measure the resources of the
country.’”°
                                                     The Guerrilla in History     T,


   By 1814, then, a very positive image of the guerrillas had been created
in Britain and Spain alike, and in both countries it was this current that came
to dominate the historiography. In Spain, for example, their cause was given
solid support by the Conde de Toreno, a leading liberal who played a major
part in the cortes of Cadiz and went on to serve as prime minister in 1835.
Founded as his Historia de Levantamiento, Guerra y Revolucion de Espata was
on a determination to justify the gaditano revolution and identify it with
the cause of the Spanish people, it was only natural that the guerrillas should
have played a major part in his story. Indeed, Toreno himself remarked on
the amount of time that he had given to the myriad skirmishes of such
figures as El Empecinado and Espoz y Mina. For this, however, he made no
apology:

  These actions will to some people seem as boring as they are unimportant.
  It is quite true that, viewed in isolation, they at first sight look trivial, but
  ...taken in the round they in large part produced the marvellous...
  defence of Spain’s independence that will forever serve as a guide for all those
  peoples that wish to conserve their own freedom.””
   Somewhat later in the nineteenth century, meanwhile, the only history of the
War of Independence that has ever been written with the guerrillas as its main
theme struck an even more positive note. Thus the message of Enrique
Rodriguez Solis’ Los Guerrilleros de 1808: Historia Popular de la Guerra de la
Independencia is absolutely unequivocal. Napoleon, Solis claimed, had lost some
500,000 men in Spain, of which only some 200,000 could be accounted for by
the war’s formal battles and sieges; the 300,000 that were left had, by implica-
tion, fallen to the guerrillas. Looked at in this fashion, he maintained, it could
be argued that these ‘popular heroes of eternal memory’ had actually won the
war, whilst it was certainly true that the decisive factor in the conflict had been
the absolute refusal of the Spanish people to abandon the struggle. And, if they
had refused to surrender, it was because they were inspired by dreams not just
of independence but of political regeneration — a point that allowed Rodriguez
Solis to claim for the guerrillas the revolutionary politics which he himself
espoused (the son of a radical who had been banished for his part in the rising
of 1848, Rodriguez Solis was active both in the overthrow of Isabel II in 1868
and in the establishment of the First Republic in 1873).'* But if the guerrillas
were a revolutionary phenomenon, they were also a Spanish one, and Rodriguez
Solis went so far as to maintain that ‘it is no exaggeration to affirm that with
the Spaniard there was born the guerrilla’, and, further, that much of Spain’s
military history had in fact been centred on guerrilla warfare (thus we learn
that even Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar, better known as El Cid, had to all intents
and purposes been a guerrilla!).'? Entirely spontaneous in their origins, the
&       Fighting Napoleon

irregulars had no other purpose than to fight for the fatherland, in which capac-
ity they proved to have no equal. In short:

    The guerrillas were the nation in arms. They fought in the morning and
    worked in the afternoon. They were both soldiers and citizens. . . . The guer-
    rillas were the champions of our independence for seven years of incessant
    struggle ... Though beaten from time to time, they were never tamed...
    They had no other roof than the heavens, no other bed than the ground.
    They did not... tire; they did not sleep. They were the eternal shadow of
    the invader, his constant nightmare, an ever-present menace. They aban-
    doned family and home and gave their lives for the fatherland with . . . joy
    in their hearts. They left their homes with the loving kisses... of their
    beloved wives still warm on their lips... to die a few hours later on some
    lonely road, all that they asked of their fatherland . . . being a tender memory,
    a patch of earth and a simple cross.”
    In Britain no less than in Spain historians were inclined to laud the guer-
rillas. First in the field was Robert Southey, whose account of the Peninsular
War is larded with visions of popular resistance. Beginning with his account of
the uprising, this stresses the role of the people and is adamant that they acted
spontaneously, without direction, and with no other idea than to fight for their
king, their independence, their religion and their ancient traditions. For them-
selves, by contrast, they wanted nothing. Angered by the submissive attitude
of most of their superiors, the populace, it was true, turned on them, and the
result was a short period of ‘dreadful anarchy’ in which ‘the unreasonable
people were sometimes hurried into excesses by their own blind zeal, some-
times seduced into them by wretches who were actuated by the desire of
plunder or of private revenge’.”! Yet what occurred was no revolution. Thus:

    The people had no desire to break loose from the laws and the habits of sub-
    ordination; the only desire which possessed them was to take vengeance for
    their murdered countrymen, and to deliver their country from the violent
    usurpation which was attempted. If any obstruction was offered to this gen-
    erous feeling, they became impatient and ungovernable: otherwise, having
    always been wont to look to their rulers . . . their very zeal displayed itself in
    the form of obedience; they were eager to obey any who would undertake to
    guide them, and no person thought of stepping beyond his rank to assume
    the direction.”

   So much, then, for the general character of the Spanish insurrection. With
the populace united in its detestation of the French, it followed that there was
immense enthusiasm for the war. Large numbers of recruits came forward for
the new armies being formed by the assortment of provincial authorities that
                                                    The Guerrilla in History     9

now ruled Spain; the new levies clamoured to be led against the French; the
inhabitants of Gerona, Zaragoza and Valencia stood to arms and repelled a
series of assaults on their walls; and, above all, the first stirrings began to be
witnessed of guerrilla warfare. Particularly important in Catalonia, where the
existence prior to 1808of the local home guard known as the somatén facili-
tated the emergence of this phenomenon, it was also witnessed in La Mancha
and Andalucia. As Southey wrote of the march of the two divisions dispatched
to reinforce the column of troops that had been marching on Cadiz when the
uprising broke out:

  In passing through La Mancha they found that the sick, whom Dupont had
  left at Manzanares, had been killed. .. . When the advanced guard attempted
  to pass the Sierra Morena, they found an irregular force well posted and
  entrenched in the tremendous defiles of that great line of mountains, and
  they were compelled to fall back upon the main body. Notwithstanding this
  warning, the French entered upon the pass without precaution. . . . The first
  brigade and the cavalry were allowed to pass an ambush, which was laid
  among the trees and rocks in advance of the entrenchment; a fire was then
  opened upon the second; and the French suffered three discharges before
  they were ready to act in return.”
   Faced with the problem of explaining the dichotomy between the supposed
enthusiasm of the first days of the war and the apathy that characterised the
period that separated the Spanish triumph at Bailén and the onset of the great
French counter-offensive in November, Southey attributed the situation to the
misguided tactic of boosting the confidence of the populace by minimising the
threat posed by the enemy.” Examples of popular resistance at the moment of
occupation, meanwhile, were cited as evidence that the people were in fact as
staunch as ever, whether it was the inhabitants of Villacafias fighting off the
forage parties that had descended on them for five days or those of El
Escorial going down bravely in a desperate struggle outside the gates of the
town.”> Not until he comes to his account of the second siege of Zaragoza
and the Galician insurrection, however, is Southey able finally to rid himself of
the problem. Thus, with regard to the former much is made of the continued
patriotism of the inhabitants, who are claimed to have refused to leave the city,
to have been utterly convinced that the Virgin of the Pillar would grant them
victory over the enemy, and to have fought with the utmost gallantry (it is
claimed, indeed, that no fewer than 600 women and children died fighting the
French).”° Of more importance for our purposes, however, is the account that
Southey gives of events in Galicia. Invaded by the French as they followed up
the retreat of the army of Sir John Moore, the Galicians had initially, as
Southey admits, remained quiet. However, in the weeks that followed the arrival
10       Fighting Napoleon


of the imperial forces, moved by ‘true feelings of loyalty and patriotism .. .
honest, enthusiastic ardour [and] cool and determined courage’, the country-
side erupted in revolt.”” There followed a bloody conflict:

     Into whatever town or village [the French] entered, not a living soul was to
     be found, except those who from infirmity were unable to follow their coun-
     trymen. They who had arms had gone to join the army; the others, with the
     women and children, had taken refuge in the wild parts of that wild region
     and were on the watch for every opportunity of weakening their invaders by
     putting a straggler to death.... That sort of war was kept up which...
     tended to the sure destruction of the invaders. The Spaniards never exposed
     themselves, and never lost an opportunity of harassing the enemy. They
     availed themselves of their perfect knowledge of the country to profit by
     every spot that afforded cover to their marksmen; and, leaving their fields to
     be ravaged, their property to be plundered, and their houses to be destroyed,
     they applied themselves with a brave recklessness of everything except their
     duty to the great object of ridding the country of its invaders. ...The
     utmost efforts of the French were ineffectual against the spirit which had
     now been raised in Galicia . . Accustomed as the invaders were to the work
     of destruction, they were baffled by a people who dispersed before a supe-
     rior force could reach them, and reunited as easily as they had separated.”
And, it is implied, thanks to this war, Galicia was evacuated, it being claimed
that the French became ‘eager to get out of a province where the people were
able and determined to take such vengeance as their invaders had provoked’.”
Important though events in Galicia were, Southey is careful to show that they
were in no sense isolated or out of the ordinary. The inhabitants of the moun-
tainous Valles district of Catalonia, for example, are singled out for the courage
which they displayed in bidding defiance to the French, whilst those of the
Sefiorio de Molina, we are told, ‘took arms, trusting in themselves and the
strength of the country: for want of better weapons some of them used slings
... and they made wooden artillery, so light that a single man could carry one
of these pieces up the heights and yet strong enough to bear from fifteen to
twenty rounds’. Most weight of all, however, is placed on events in Navarre,
where Mariano Renovales, one of the erstwhile defenders of Zaragoza, is
described as having effected his escape from French captivity and, in the
company of a group of fellow fugitives, raised the inhabitants of the Roncal
valley in revolt and beat off two attempts to suppress his insurrection. Even-
tually overwhelmed though he was, he nevertheless put up a fierce fight that
supposedly cost the French over 1,000 casualties and at the same time won
much renown by the suitably defiant answers that he returned to the attempts
of the French authorities to get him to change sides.*!
                                                     The Guerrilla in History    II

   For Southey, however, 1809 was chiefly important as the moment when ‘that
system of warfare began which soon extended throughout Spain, and occa-
sioned greater losses to the French than they suffered in all their pitched
battles’.*” Amongst the first leaders to be noted are Juan Diaz Porlier and El
Empecinado, but the most successful and effective as far as Southey was con-
cerned was clearly Martin Javier Mina, of whom he remarked, ‘It was in vain
that the French made repeated efforts to crush this enterprising enemy; if his
troops dispersed upon the appearance of a formidable detachment, it was only
to reunite, and, by striking a blow in some weak point or distant quarter, render
themselves more formidable than before’.* If guerrilla warfare spread, mean-
while, it was because it touched a chord in the popular psyche. Thus:

  Frustrated as [the people’s] expectations of immediate deliverance had been,
  their confidence was not shaken; the national temper led them to think lightly
  of every disaster, but to exaggerate every trifling success; and the defeats at
  Arzobispo and Almonacid were less felt or thought of by the body of the
  people than the successful exploits of those predatory bands who, under the
  name of guerrillas, were now in action everywhere. The government partook
  of this disposition, and... the official . . . journals published every adven-
  ture of this kind more fully and circumstantially than some of those actions
  wherein their armies had disappeared. The example which Mina and the
  Empecinado had set was followed with alacrity and tempting success, rich
  opportunities being offered by the requisition of plate from churches
  and from individuals which the intrusive government was at this time
  enforcing.**

    In the face of this offensive the French are portrayed as being helpless.
Efforts to form bands of counter-guerrillas proved a universal failure, whilst
reprisals of the sort that General Marchand threatened in Leon in the face of
the raids of Julian Sanchez — another commander whom Southey singles out
for early mention — merely provoked indignant letters of defiance. As for the
wholesale executions in which the French engaged, they were utterly ineffec-
tual: the victims went to the garrote, scaffold or firing squad with a mixture of
pride and indifference. Nor were the invaders’ periodic battues any more suc-
cessful, since these were frustrated both by dispersion and the guerrillas’ keen
knowledge of the countryside and of their enemies’ movements.” As we shall
see, Southey was by no means unaware of the problems thrown up by the guer-
rillas. However, all such nuances are lost in his overall assessment of the subject.
As an example, we might quote his assessment of their motivation:

   Many were influenced by the deepest feelings and strongest passions which
   act upon the heart of man: love of their country which their faith had
I2       Fighting Napoleon


     elevated and strengthened; and hope which that love and that faith had ren-
     dered inextinguishable; and burning hatred, seeking revenge for the most
     wanton... injuries that can be inflicted on humanity . . . [And] the greater
     number were men who, if circumstances had permitted, would have passed
     their life usefully and contentedly in the humble stations to which they were
     born; labourers, whom there were none now to employ; retainers who
     partook of the ruin of the great families to which they and their ancestors
     had been attached; owners or occupiers of land; whose fields had been laid
     waste, and whose olive yards were destroyed; and the whole class of provin-
     cial tradesmen, whose means of subsistence were cut off, happy if they had
     only their own ruin and their country’s quarrel to revenge, and not those
     deeper injuries of which dreadful cases were continually occurring wherever
     the enemy were masters. Monks, also, and friars, frocked and unfrocked,
     were among them: wherever the convents wre suppressed ... which was
     done in all the provinces that the French overran, the young took arms.*°
As for the importance of the guerrillas, of this too he had no doubt:

     The French were no sooner masters of the field than they found themselves
     engaged in a wearing, wasting contest wherein discipline was of no avail, and,
     by which, in a country of such extent and natural strength, any military
     power, however great, must ultimately be consumed ... They were never
     safe except when in large bodies or in some fortified place. Every day some
     of their posts were surprised, some escort or convoy cut off, some detach-
     ment put to death. Dispatches were intercepted, plunder was recovered,
     and, what excited the Spaniards more than... all other considerations,
     vengeance was taken by a most vindictive people for insupportable wrongs
     ... There was nothing in their dress to distinguish them from the peasantry;
     everyone was ready to give them intelligence or shelter; they knew the
     country perfectly; each man shifted for himself in time of need; and when
     they reassembled at the appointed rallying place, so far were they from being
     dispirited by the dispersion that the ease with which they had eluded the
     enemy became a new source of confidence.*”

Beyond this, of course, the guerrillas served also to restrict collaboration.
Southey reported several cases where prominent afrancesados were seized and
executed or where the populace was threatened with the most savage punish-
ment if they obeyed any orders issued by the French authorities.*®
   In order to give substance to all this, recourse is chiefly had to the story of
Espoz y Mina, whose exploits are regaled at great length and whose leadership
iS praised to the skies.” Curiously enough, however, little attempt is made to
draw a direct link between the operations of the guerrillas and Wellington’s
victory at Vitoria, and it was left to William Napier and, above all, Sir Charles
                                                    The Guerrilla in History   i

Oman, to make the connection. An officer of Wellington’s army who had fought
in the famous Light Division, between 1828 and 1840 Napier published a six-
volume history of the Peninsular War whose chief characteristic was rooted
hostility to the Spaniards. As we shall see, this work was extremely sceptical
about the early history of the guerrillas, but, viewing the activities of Espoz y
Mina in particular, even Napier could not deny that by 1813 some of the par-
tidas had become a major force in the struggle. As he wrote of the French sit-
uation at the end of 1812:

  The French troops were... only relieved from the crushing pressure of
  Wellington’s operations to struggle in the meshes of guerrilla and insurrec-
  tional warfare. Nor was its importance now to be measured by former efforts.
  The chiefs... possessed fortified posts and harbours, their bands were
  swelling to the size of armies, their military knowledge of the country and
  of the French system of invasion were more matured, their depots better
  hidden, and they could at times bear the shock of battle on nearly equal terms
  ... The [French] contributions could no longer be collected, the magazines
  could not be filled, the fortresses were endangered, the armies had no base
  of operations, the . . . troops, sorely pressed for provisions, were widely dis-
  seminated and everywhere occupied, and each general was averse to con-
  centrate his own forces or aid his neighbour. In fine, the problem was become
  extremely complicated.”
   Although it is impossible not to draw the appropriate conclusions from his
account, to the end Napier remained unwilling overtly to admit the contribu-
tion made by Espoz y Mina and the other guerrillas of northern Spain to
Wellington’s victories. To establish their importance, we therefore have to turn
to Oman. Writing his History of the Peninsular War, as he did, over a period of
nearly thirty years, Oman was naturally influenced by the changing circum-
stances of his times. A military historian, he could not have been unaware of
the theories of the ‘indirect approach’ that were circulating in the wake of the
First World War. By the 1920s — the period when he was writing the volumes
of his history that cover the later years of the Peninsular conflict — he may
therefore have been predisposed to stress the importance of the guerrillas."' At
all events, in his sixth volume, published in 1922, Oman waxes lyrical about
what he called ‘the northern insurrection’, and makes it the very sine qua non
of Wellington’s victory at Vitoria (whereby the French forces were evicted from
the whole of Spain with the exception of part of Catalonia and a few scattered
fortresses in the Basque provinces, Navarre and the Levant), arguing that so
many troops had to be pulled back from the Portuguese frontier that not enough
were left to hold back the Anglo-Portuguese army.” Yet even in earlier volumes
Oman is much kinder in his judgements than Napier. Time and again the guer-
rillas are given credit for starving the French of information, hampering them
14       Fighting Napoleon

in their operations or diverting forces that might otherwise have been used
against Wellington or the regular Spanish armies. The praise showered upon
the guerrillas, indeed, is anything but sparing. For example:

     Old Castile, Navarre and the lands of the upper Ebro were kept in a con-
     stant turmoil by a score of guerrilla chiefs ...On the whole, there were
     probably never more than 20,000 guerrilleros in arms at once in the whole
     region between the Sierra de Guadarrama and the . . . Bay of Biscay. They
     never succeeded in beating any French force more than two or three bat-
     talions strong, and were being continually hunted from corner to corner. Yet
     despite their weakness in the open field . . . they rendered good service...
     by pinning down . . . twice their own numbers of . . . French troops.*

   In so far as the Anglo-Saxon historiography was concerned, Oman’s magis-
terial conclusions set the seal of approval on the guerrillas. On all sides the
many populists who chose to write about the Peninsular War leapt to acknowl-
edge the exploits of the guerrillas. To quote Longford, for example:

     Spain was to be saved .. . not by grape-shot, greybeards and grandees, but
     by hardy guerrillas and the sudden flash of the knife. These peasants spon-
     taneously organised themselves into small do-or-die bands... headed by
     folk-heroes . . . Even the basic force of 200,000 veterans which Napoleon was
     compelled to keep, year after year, in Spain would never be safe from the
     noon-day ambush and things that went bump in the night.*

So enthusiastic were these writers that they were soon seeing the entire Spanish
war effort in terms of the guerrillas, as witness the extraordinary account of
the battle of Bailén — a wholly conventional field action fought entirely by
regular troops of the old Bourbon army — that we must now quote from Richard
Humble:

     As soon as Dupont put his demoralised troops on the march out of Andtjar
     the Spaniards closed in and harried them. A running fight escalated into a
     full-scale engagement at Bailén...Dupont’s soldiers had been all right
     during the march on Cordoba, but now they were on the receiving end
     against an enemy who did not bother to attack them when they formed
     square, but only when they were least ready.»
Curiously, this refusal to believe that Bailén could be the work of regular troops
resurfaced in the course of the Spanish Civil War. To quote the Austrian jour-
nalist Borkenau:

     The French general Dupont . . . was stopped on his way to Andalusia, forced
     to retreat, and finally surrounded and forced to capitulate by the peasants at
                                                     The Guerrilla in History    15

  Bailén. The Spanish general Castafios claimed the glory of the day. But, in
  reality, one look at the battlefield, a large open plain of olive groves, is con-
  vincing as to the real situation. It was impossible to surround the French
  there with a small army. Only a rising of all the villages could and did bar
  the way.”

   It was not just the writers of popular history who echoed the general refrain,
however. Amongst British historians Oman’s theories have been accepted
without question and even pushed to fresh lengths. ‘It was above all’, wrote
David Chandler, ‘the interaction of Wellington’s operations with those of the
guerrilla bands that . . . made the French problem wholly intractable . . . Even
with 320,000 men the marshals could not both contain the diffuse . . . “war of
the flea” and... meet Wellington’s latest foray deep into their territory.” So
enthusiastic, indeed, is Chandler that he sometimes makes it appear as if the
guerrillas were among Wellington’s first concerns. Thus:

  As for Wellington, he appreciated that he had to preserve England’s only
  field army and at the same time give maximum possible assistance to
  Portuguese and Spanish resistance — especially the popular kind. Having
  established a safe base at Lisbon... he conducted forays into enemy-held
  territory to divert French attention and thus ease the pressures on the...
  partisans; then, in 1812... he began a systematic reconquest of Spain by
  conventional means.

   Nor have British historians been the only ones to underline the guerrillas.
Since the 1960s, for example, a succession of American and Canadian histo-
rians have laid great stress on their contribution to the struggle. For Gabriel
Lovett

   The War of Independence did not produce on the Spanish side great gen-
   erals... The true giants . . . must be sought elsewhere. They could be found
   _. .in the craggy mountains, among the barren hills, in the forbidding gorges
   _.. They were the leaders of those intrepid bands that almost from the very
   beginning made the war in Spain a nightmare for the Napoleonic armies.
   Swooping down from their mountainous hideouts .. . they never let the
   invaders forget . . . that Spain had not given up the fight. It is not an exag-
   geration to say that these bands . . . made history. They carried on the war
   _.. when there were few regular Spanish forces left to continue the strug-
   gle, and... . must be given a large . . . share of the credit for the emperor’s
   failure in the Peninsula.”

In his detailed account of the ‘little war’ in Aragon —a study rendered the more
                                                                                —
valuable by the fact that it rests on detailed research in the French archives
16        Fighting Napoleon


Alexander argues that the ‘combination of conventional resistance, galvanised
by Wellington’s army, and the irregular opposition of the partidas proved
irresistible’; that ‘the partidas could probably have sustained resistance indefi-
nitely’; and even that ‘the partisan leaders were able to forge from the spirit of
opposition an army that managed to exploit French military difficulties and lib-
erate Aragon’.”’ And, finally, for John Tone, whose study of the guerrillas of
Navarre is by far the most detailed work that the English language boasts on
the subject:                                      ‘

     Armed peasants made chaos of French communications and performed
     other tasks of value to both English and Spanish regular forces. Partisans
     scoured the countryside for French spies and sympathisers and brought a
     continuous stream of information to the Allies. The guerrillas also effected
     a kind of psychological warfare in which the French had to be constantly on
     the alert, while the Allied armies could rest securely in the midst of a vigi-
     lant peasantry. The guerrilla war was a long and demoralising nightmare for
     France. In the regions of insurgency, where each peasant was a potential
     guerrilla, there could be no campaigning season, no safe havens, no truces.
     Everywhere and always there existed the possibility of a hostile encounter
     ... In guerrilla country, the French governed only where they could actu-
     ally have troops in place. When these troops were withdrawn, the territory
     reverted to the guerrillas, becoming valueless to the French, if not a positive
     drain on their resources. War in Spain did not pay Napoleon as it had in
     other parts of Europe. On the contrary, guerrilla action made the occupation
     of Spain a constant burden and made the Spanish war unwinnable.”!
    Less inclined towards military history in their treatment of the subject
though they have been, Spanish and French historians have been no less appre-
ciative. For Miguel Artola, for example, ‘An analysis of the war which attempts
to give more weight to the death and destruction inflicted on the enemy than
to the description of field battles cannot but suggest very strongly that the guer-
rillas were more important than the regular armies of either Britain or Spain.”
Equally, for Manuel Espadas Burgos:

     The guerrilla war was an undoubted success. It did not have the momentary
     brilliance of a great victory in the open field like . . . Bailén, but its constant
     action kept up year after year without a moment’s rest, without a moment’s
     dismay, ended up by grinding down the morale of the French army. For all
     of Europe the guerrilla was an unbeatable lesson in resistance.*

As representatives of modern French historiography, meanwhile, we may cite
Jean-René Aymes, Gérard Dufour and Richard Hocquellet. ‘The more the mass
                                                   The Guerrilla in History   17

of the population was alienated from political affairs, the more it participated
in the war against the invader, its concrete enemy’, wrote Aymes. ‘The regular
army being a matter for nobles and professional soldiers, through their inde-
pendent instincts and ignorance of the traditions of the art of war the people
invented a genuine form of struggle: /a guerrilla.” For Dufour, too, the ‘little
war’ was crucial:

  The many French soldiers who wrote their memoirs after the conflict all
  coincided in underlining the decisive role of /a guerrilla, whilst Napoleon
  himself .. . confessed that he had been beaten in Spain by the people rather
  than by the army . . Its first characteristic was that it was... a war fought
  by the people and with its complicity: those who did not fight . . . assisted
  the combatants when they had to flee pursuit.”
Last but not least, we have Hocquellet:

  As a result of their diffuse character, the guerrillas never engaged the impe-
  rial columns. No decisive battles can be attributed to them, but the state of
  permanent insecurity with which they imbued the Napoleonic armies had
  such an impact on morale that the high command was forced to take them
  very seriously. The memoirs of soldiers of the empire who served in Spain
  all insist on the constant air of menace: they could never be certain of their
  surroundings.”
   Such, then, is the traditional version of events. From the very beginning,
however, there was another side to the story. Whilst the French and their sup-
porters were quite prepared to acknowledge the impact that the ‘little war’ had
had on their operations and activities, they attempted to assuage their bitter-
ness by denigrating the partisans as cowards, savages and murderers.’ Linked
to this was an insistence that the central problem had been one of brigandage.
‘Brigand’, indeed, was a term habitually used by the invaders to describe
bandits and guerrillas alike — a habit that greatly complicates the task of the
historian — whilst they generally insisted that the bands either stemmed from
the swarms of bandits and smugglers with which the Iberian Peninsula was
so afflicted prior to 1808, or were made up of deserters from the armies of the
French and their opponents. Hatred of the invaders was recognised by some
writers as a motive for resistance, whilst others believed that the cruelty and
greed that they held to be inherent in the Spanish character had been inflamed
by a clergy desperate to forestall the religious reforms certain to be imposed in
the wake of French conquest; but the possibility that the guerrillas might be
inspired by genuine political or ideological motives was in almost every case
denied. As for the propaganda of the jose/fino state, it never ceased to ram home
18        Fighting Napoleon

the message that the partidas were the enemies of not just property and the
social order, but also of life and limb. To quote the Gazeta de Sevilla, for
example:

     The guerrillas commit all the robberies imaginable: nobody is free of their
     plundering. Spanish, French, English, all alike are victims of their wicked-
     ness; priests, mayors, labourers, muleteers, nobody is spared . . . Such are the
     instruments that presently serve perfidious Albion... Not being able to
     conquer, by means of these men [the British] oppress those whose indepen-
     dence they feign to protect.”
   This sort of thing is exactly what one would expect from observers
favourable to Napoleon: the emperor, after all, always maintained that his
rule stood for the defence of landed property, and, further, that he was the
champion of a civilising mission whose central aim was to eradicate the
violence, ignorance and superstition of the masses. Yet this line has still
proved remarkably influential. For one thing it was impossible to deny that the
subject threw up serious difficulties. Writing of the aftermath of the French
evacuation of Galicia, for example, Southey remarked, ‘Men who had done
their part in driving out the enemy, having now no means of providing for them-
selves, roamed about in armed parties, so that the condition of the helpless
inhabitants was little better than when they were under the French yoke.”
Equally, he admitted that attempts to regulate the guerrillas were only observed
‘where the government had sufficient authority to enforce them, which was only
where they had armies on foot’.” And, if this was so, it was in part because
‘some were mere ruffians, who if the country had been at peace would have
lived in defiance of the laws, as they now defied the force of the intrusive
government’, and others men ‘attracted by the wildness and continual excite-
ment attendant upon a life of outlawry and adventure, to which in the present
circumstances .. . honour, instead of obloquy, was attached’.® As he wrote,
indeed:

     For, as in times of pestilence and earthquake, wretches are found obdurate
     enough in wickedness to... enrich themselves by plunder, so now, in the
     anarchy of Spain, they whose evil disposition had been restrained... in
     some degree by the influence of settled society, abandoned themselves . . . to
     the impulses of their own evil hearts.”
   Some of the worst offenders are named by Southey. There was, for example,
José Pedrazuela, a sometime actor from Madrid, who embarked on a reign
of terror in Extremadura; Echevarria, whose band was largely composed of
German deserters; and Martina, a woman of whom no other details are given,
who led a gang of bandits on the frontiers of Vizcaya and Alava.® Southey was
                                                     The Guerrilla in History    19

in no doubt that the consequences for Spanish society in the long term could
not but be dreadful:

  The restraints... which the soldier is compelled to learn. . . counteract
  the demoralizing tendencies of a military life, and compensate for its heart-
  hardening ones. The good soldier becomes a good citizen when his occupa-
  tion is over, but the guerrillas were never likely to forego the wild and lawless
  course in which they were engaged, and, therefore, essential as their services
  now were, thoughtful men looked with the gloomiest forebodings to what
  must be the consequence of their multiplication whenever this dreadful
  struggle should be ended.”

   Despite these doubts, Southey in the end refused to let them colour his
judgement of the guerrillas. Other writers, however, have been less charitable.
A great admirer of Napoleon, for example, Napier was uncritical in his accep-
tance of the imperial line. The guerrilla bands, he wrote, ‘were many, because
every robber who feared a gaol or could break from one... was to be found
either as chief or associate in a partida’, whilst, not satisfied with this, he saw
one of the chief reasons for their initial emergence as ‘the hope of intercepting
the public and private plate which under a decree of Joseph was being brought
to Madrid’.” Napier being profoundly prejudiced against all things Spanish,
his views are only to be expected, but doubts were also entertained by Spanish
historians. We come here to the views of the nineteenth-century writers José
Mufioz Maldonado and José Gomez de Arteche. Beginning with the former’s
Historia Politica y Militar de la Guerra de la Independencia contra Napoleon
Bonaparte desde 1808 a 1814, we find much praise for the guerrillas. For
example:

  Nothing was safe from the activity, audacity and perseverance of . . . the par-
  tidas, and .. . they harassed the French armies so incessantly that the latter
  were forced . . . to be always on the look-out. Even if it could not bring deci-
  sive results, implemented with constancy and, above all valour, this form of
  warfare ended up by weakening the enemy very considerably.”
   Mufioz Maldonado, however, was by no means the uncritical observer that
these words suggest. At various points, for example, he was keen to stress the
importance of regular troops in /a guerrilla: the partisan operations that so
harassed the unfortunate Dupont in the campaign of Bailén are ascribed to
the flying columns of Murgeon and Valdecafias, both of which were composed
of troops who were, if not regulars, then at least men who had been formally
embodied under the command of regular officers.” Just as interesting is the
fact that Mufioz Maldonado mentions a number of incidents in which guer-
rilla bands resisted the imposition of a greater degree of militarisation, as, for
20     Fighting Napoleon

example, when the followers of Juan Diaz Porlier mutinied rather than allow
their commander to march them to Galicia for a period of intensive training.”
As he also provides an-account of the uprising in Galicia that is devoid of all
mention of the a/armas and speaks of popular participation only in connection
with occasions when the people-in-arms could clearly be shown to have been
acting under the command of the army, it is clear that Mufioz Maldonado too,
was driven by an agenda that dictated a cautious approach with regard to the
guerrilla.”                                         ‘
   None of this is at all surprising. A staunch supporter of Fernando VII who
was possessed of close links with the court, Mufioz Maldonado was writing at
a time when the monarch and his administration were increasingly being chal-
lenged by the so-called apostélicos. Soon to become known as Carlism, this ultra-
traditionalist movement drew its rank-and-file support from an agricultural
populace that was in many areas ever more disaffected and mutinous. In 1826,
indeed, there had already been a serious insurrection in Catalonia known as the
guerra de los agraviados. With many of the likely leaders of revolt men who had
led guerrilla bands, to draw attention to the populace’s ability to organise itself
was hardly politic, and it is notable that in his account of the emergence of
the guerrillas Mufioz Maldonado laid much stress on the role played by the
Junta Central and its agents in bringing the phenomenon to fruition. Nor was
the darker side of Ja guerrilla forgotten: guerrilla warfare, the populace was
reminded, was likely to involve them in terrible sufferings, especially as the par-
tidas were a force that might all too easily turn on its own progenitors. A graphic
description, therefore, is provided of the manner in which Burgos was pillaged
by undisciplined irregulars in September 1812, and it is specifically pointed out
that at the end of the war many guerrilla bands had to be hunted down and
tried as bandits.”
   José Gomez de Arteche, meanwhile, was even more hostile. A general
regarded as the leading military writer of Restoration Spain, Arteche’s view of
the Peninsular War was at the very least ambiguous. However much he praised
Spanish heroism — the fourteen-volume history of the conflict that he penned
between 1868 and 1903 is very much the story of how Spain won the war with
some incidental help from the British and Portuguese — Arteche the soldier
could not forget that in reality the Peninsular War had been something of a
calvary for his forebears. From the very beginning the army had come under
attack from civilian society, and its operations had constantly been impeded by
a whole range of factors, not the least of which had been the guerrillas. These
had challenged the army’s monopoly of armed force, undermined its strength
and provided the anti-militarism that was a powerful element in the politics
of Patriot Spain with much useful ammunition. In consequence, Arteche put
forward a view of the war that stressed the military’s political priorities
                                                    The Guerrilla in History    21

(maintenance of order and national unity, and the defence of the army’s pres-
tige) emphasised the role of regular soldiers in the defeat of Napoleon and
downplayed the contribution of armed civilians. In part, such a stance was rein-
forced by the political context. Like most of the senior officers of his day,
Arteche was deeply enmeshed in the highly conservative political order that
had grown up in Spain since the 1840s. Centred on the protection of property,
this could not but look askance at the disorder that had been such a feature of
the uprising, not to mention the manner in which contemporary radicals found
inspiration in the struggle against Napoleon. For Arteche as for many others,
then, the Peninsular War was a deus ex machina that had injected Spain with
‘discord’ (by which was meant a threat to the ruling classes).
   The result of all this was a strong prejudice against the guerrillas. Much
praise is heaped on the popular heroism of the first days of the war, and con-
siderable detail provided on the achievements of the partidas. Yet from an early
point Arteche appears anxious to point out that the picture was not quite as
flattering as his extravagant language might have suggested. Thus, his praise
for the somatenes involved in the famous French defeat at El Bruch (in which
a column marching on Lérida was ambushed on a mountain pass and forced to
retreat) was qualified by allegations that much more might have been achieved
if only they had combined their operations and been prepared to operate
outside the immediate vicinity of their home villages.” Driven, one suspects,
by deep suspicions of the Catalan nationalism that had begun to emerge in the
late nineteenth century, Arteche returned to the issue of the somatenes’ relia-
bility again and again.”* His disapproval, however, was not directed just at the
Catalans; and in his treatment of the revolt that took place in the Serrania de
Ronda following the invasion of Andalucia in January 1810, the various cabecil-
las of the district are portrayed as having fallen out not only with one another,
but also with the army officers sent from Cadiz to organise the inhabitants and
the junta that had been established at Jimena. Serious though the difficulties
posed by the revolt remained, the result was that the Serrania remained ‘unable
to realise the results that might have been expected from the enthusiasm of its
inhabitants and the difficulties imposed on the enemy . . . by their inability to
take Cadiz and their need to guard their flanks and rear against the armies of
La Romana and Blake’.””
   Mention of the regular armies brings us to another theme in Arteche’s work,
in that it is clear that for him much of the ‘little war’ was not to be attributed
to civilians at all, but rather to Spain’s much maligned soldiers. As he pointed
out, many of the so-called guerrilla leaders were regular officers and their bands
organised commands of regular troops, with the result that they could not really
be regarded as guerrillas at all, if ‘guerrilla’ was taken to mean only a fighter
sprung from the people.” Still more, for Arteche there was no difference
22       Fighting Napoleon


between the host of minor campaigns engaged in by the regular army and, say,
the attacks of Espoz y Mina in Navarre. Indeed, as far as he is concerned, such
disturbances as the revolt of the Serrania de Ronda were clearly of far less
import than the operations of, say, General Ballesteros, whose division of
regular troops was currently harassing the French in the more remote parts of
the present-day province of Huelva.”
   Not content with redefining /a guerrilla so as to reduce its popular content,
Arteche also drew strong links between irregular ?esistance and the breakdown
of law and order. The guerrillas, he stressed, had played a very important part
in the defeat of the French. As he remarked:

     The genuine representatives of people’s war for the most part belonged
     to the classes who, for want of education, were those that were most hostile
     to the ideas of order and military discipline, and, at the same time, those
     whom the strength acquired through work in the fields had made most fitted
     to endure hunger, fatigue, bad weather and the horrors of war. To look to
     such people for harmony and subordination is the purest chimera: when they
     do not have an enemy to fight, they quarrel amongst themselves . . . whilst
     their patriotism is manifested chiefly through the pursuit of vengeance.”
   This, of course, is not quite the same as saying that all those guerrillas who
were not regular soldiers, or who did not at least adopt military forms, were
brigands. Indeed, great emphasis is placed on the efforts that were made by
such commanders as Espoz y Mina to put down any band that overstepped the
bounds of discipline.” But for Arteche evil was never far away. The provoca-
tion, true, was great but, even so, popular resistance had ‘a savage character’
that was ‘truly extraordinary and on every count lamentable’. And, as he was
not slow to suggest, efforts to impose discipline were not always entirely suc-
cessful, since many of the bands that had to be suppressed by Espoz y Mina
and the rest were composed of guerrillas who had-run away rather than submit
to the imposition of military discipline.*!
   At the heart of all this was Arteche’s belief that the guerrillas reflected the
individualism that he saw as being central to the supposed Spanish national
character. Content to fight the French, Spaniards wanted to do so alone, or, at
least, as masters of their own fate.*’ In doing so, moreover, they naturally grav-
itated to environments and procedures which they understood. As the general
remarked: “The better to execute this individualistic strategy, patriots took the
hills as their favourite haunt, rocks and scrub as their best shelter, the roads as
their battleground, and shepherds’ huts as . . . their headquarters.’*’ But from
this there flowed a number of alarming consequences, as the lowliest Spaniard
had been presented with a model of resistance that he could twist to his
own purposes. The most obvious beneficiary of this development being the
Carlist movement, it followed that /a guerrilla had done much to precipitate the
                                                    The Guerrilla in History   23

civil wars of the nineteenth century, but there was also the question of social
revolution. In the mid-nineteenth century republican partidas occasionally
appeared, whilst lurking beneath the surface of the general’s thoughts was also
undoubtedly the rise of the anarchism that was to prove so powerful a strand
of the Spanish labour movement: hence his denunciation of the guerrillas’
encouragement of personalismo and resistance to authority, and his veiled crit-
icisms of the way in which the war against the French had raised certain leaders
above their station in life and fuelled their personal ambition.
   Explicit in the historiography of /a guerrilla, then, is an important debate
that was perplexing observers even at the time of the conflict. As the British
diplomat Thomas Sydenham put it:

  It is very difficult to know what to say about the guerrillas. That some of
  them have been of eminent use during the progress of the war cannot be
  denied. They obliged the French to fortify themselves in every village and
  town in the country; they harassed the parties who were spread through the
  provinces either to subsist themselves, or to procure supplies for the enemy’s
  magazines; they murdered all stragglers and sometimes intercepted convoys
  of prisoners and stores; they rendered the communications of the enemy
  very difficult and hazardous, and often cut them off for weeks together and
  finally they assisted in keeping alive the spirit of resistance against the
  invaders. On the other hand they doubled the calamities inflicted by the
  French. The inhabitants were compelled to feed the enemy with one hand
  and the guerrillas with the other. They plundered many towns with as little
  mercy as the French, and where the French preceded them, they generally
  carried off all which the French left. Many of them under the pretence of
  patriotism and of serving against the enemy became regular freebooters and
  subsisted on the pillage of the country. It will probably become necessary
  one of these days to establish a new Santa Hermandad to clear Spain of these
  bands of robbers. They prevented the recruiting of the regular armies, for
  every Spanish peasant would naturally prefer rioting and plunder and living
  in free quarters with the guerrillas to being drilled and starved in the regular
  army. While some of them kept alive the spirit of resistance . . . others com-
  pelled the inhabitants to look to the French for protection, for the inhabi-
  tants would at length prefer the systematised pillage . . . of the enemy to the
  wasteful, capricious, uncertain and merciless plundering of their own coun-
  trymen. On the whole, therefore, it may be said that the guerrillas did as
  much mischief to the country as they did to the French, but, in as much as
  they certainly did considerable damage to the enemy, they were on the whole
  useful to the common cause.*

   Lengthy as this quotation is, it admirably sums up the problem faced by the
historian. Were the guerrillas heroes who fought their country’s enemies and
24      Fighting Napoleon


played a major part in expelling them from the Peninsula, or were they, by con-
trast, bandits whose real interest lay in personal gain, and who merely used the
struggle as a cover for their depredations? To put this another way, was their
motivation ideological or was it economic? That the question is an important
one, there is no doubt, as witness the extensive literature that has emerged with
regard to brigandage and rebellion in France in the same period.*° With regard
to the comparable Spanish example no such literature exists, however: what is
striking, indeed, is the extent to which the whole issue has been allowed to fall
by the wayside. Analytical articles by Artola and Aymes that might have been
looked to as a launch pad for debate are disappointing: the former confines itself
to theory, whilst the latter’s interesting discussion of the efforts of the Patriot
authorities to subject the guerrillas to their control is spoiled by its failure fully
to examine the problems that gave rise to the regulations that resulted, not
to mention its stubborn refusal to abandon the notion of a popular crusade
against the French.*’ As for the questions raised by the current author in
several attempts to address the issue, they have largely gone unanswered —
Hocquellet’s recent book, for example, claims to be about resistance and revo-
lution in Napoleonic Spain but, in fact, spends the bulk of its time looking at
such issues as the composition of the provincial juntas, the concept of /a patria
and the establishment of the cortes of Cadiz. By contrast, all that Hocquellet
can spare for the armed struggle that might have been expected to constitute
the heart of his work is a mere eight pages.*®
    Hardly discussed as yet, the revisionist view still awaits its day: indeed, the
prominence of authors writing a century or more ago in this discussion is itself
suggestive of the failure of the academic community to address the issues raised
by the guerrillas. However, the penetrating analysis offered by Sydenham
quoted above is quite enough to suggest that the doubts of writers such as
Napier, Mufioz Maldonado and Arteche cannot be ignored. The fruit of posi-
tions that were clearly parti pris, they nevertheless were — as will be seen —
founded on a reality for which there is abundant evidence in the archives. At
the very least further debate is wanted, whilst there is clearly a need to address
many of the gaps in the existing literature. Who, for example, were the guer-
rillas? Why, too, were they fighting? And was the image of a Spanish crusade
against Napoleon reflected in the grim realities of recruitment and mobilisa-
tion? All these questions remain to be answered, as do many others, but it is
 not to be expected that finding a satisfactory response will be easy. As Avesty
has written:

     The eagle . . . is perplexed. The peace of the high mountains has been shat-
     tered. ... Some men have come and startled her from her nest. Who are
     these men? None of the animals knows. . . . Are they smugglers trying to save
                                                     The Guerrilla in History   25

  their goods . . . bandits fleeing some robbery . . . or guerrillas defeated in a
  skirmish . . . Who are these men? Guerrillas, smugglers or bandits? Nobody
  knows, and they do not stop to provide us with the answer.”

   For all Avesty’s whimsy, the fact that the guerrillas are shrouded in ambigu-
ity cannot be denied. Generally portrayed as either villains or heroes, they were
in reality an extremely complex phenomenon. Thus, bandits who preyed on the
French and their supporters might legitimately assume the status of freedom
fighters, just.as the most patriotic guerrilla leaders might find themselves at the
head of men who aspired only to pillage and highway robbery. As Goya cap-
tioned the engraving in his ‘Desastres de la Guerra’ showing the execution of
eight malhechores by the garrotte, ‘One cannot find out the reason.’
   Even working out who the guerrillas actually were is a problem: not only was
the guerrilla, as we shall see, a phenomenon that embraced forces that ranged
from entire divisions of the regular army to handfuls of armed civilians, but
the very nomenclature of the period often makes it very hard to pin down
exactly what is being referred to in any given document. The word guerrilla,
for example, can refer to a guerrilla band or to irregular operations, but it
can also mean a picket of regular troops or be used to describe the use of skir-
mishers on the battlefield; by the same token, the word partida can stand not
just for a guerrilla band but also for a detachment of soldiers.”
   To add to the problem, the guerrillas — or, to be more precise, the phenom-
enon of the Spanish people in arms — were recorded far more from outside their
ranks than they were from within. Many of the better-known leaders left much
evidence of their activities in the archives (it is therefore incorrect to speak of
la guerrilla as an episode beyond the reach of empiricism). But it is the case
that, beyond those elements of the movement that were both literate and pos-
sessed of links with the Patriot authorities, there was a much wider circle of
individuals whose activities were only recorded by the representatives of prop-
erty and order, whether French or Spanish. The consequence, of course, is that
the archives tell a story that is weighted by a whole series of prejudices and
value judgements. On the whole this may be assumed to have worked against
the guerrillas, but, against this, we have the boasting and exaggeration engaged
in by those cabecillas who did document their own activities. In short, no source
is entirely to be trusted: we can no more, say, accept the words of Francisco
Espoz y Mina as gospel than we can those of his opponents Reille and Abbe.
   The difficulties thrown up by the skewed nature of the documentation relat-
ing to the guerrillas lead us on to another question. On the whole, those who
have expressed doubts with regard to the ‘official’ version of /a guerrilla have
been historians of a progressive bent whose strong desire it is to re-insert the
people into the historical process. Eager to extol popular heroism, they have
26     Fighting Napoleon


accepted unreservedly the idea that the Spanish people flung themselves into
the struggle against Napoleon, and have interpreted all moves to regulate or
control the partidas as attempts to protect the social order. Inherent in this view
is the issue of the ‘primitive rebel’, the armed peasant who sought redress for
the grievances of both himself and his neighbours through forms of violence
traditional in rural society. With Spain the home of anarchism — the earliest
movement of organised agrarian protest in European history — there is clearly
a strong desire to identify the guerrillas with socialrevolt. To quote the Marxist
J.S. Pérez Garzon, for example, the guerrillas were ‘disinherited peasants .. .
plunged by a disamortizing bourgeoisie into an implacable process of proletar-
ianization’.’! Such views, meanwhile, have been echoed by the equally Marxian
Eric Hobsbawm, whose Age of Revolution observes that ‘the spontaneous
movements of popular resistance against French conquest cannot be denied
their social-revolutionary component, even when the peasants who waged them
expressed it in terms of militant church-and-king conservatism’.””
    Since no archival evidence has ever been presented to support these claims,
yet another area of the subject presents itself for exploration and debate. Given
 the obvious tensions that mark the historiography of /a guerrilla, the conclu-
 sion is obvious: in the absence of any up-to-date analysis of popular resistance
 in Napoleonic Spain, a new study is needed that will re-examine the issues
 raised in this chapter in the light of the contents of the Spanish archives.
 Yet the prospect is a daunting one. As we shall see, when Thomas Sydenham
 remarked that it was very difficult to know what to say about the guerrillas, he
 never wrote a truer word, the difficulties that face the historian being such as
 to give the expression ‘the Spanish mousetrap’ a whole new meaning.
                                          2

                       The Guerrillas at War




The military history of /a guerrilla is not a subject for the faint-hearted. For
some five years those parts of Spain that were in the hands of the French wit-
nessed an incessant series of marches, counter-marches, raids and skirmishes
that are almost impossible to document in their entirety.
    Even were it possible to chronicle all the operations of the guerrilla, the result
would be less than satisfying for, wherever one looks, the picture is more or less
the same: whether it was in Castile or Catalonia, Aragon or Andalucia, the guer-
rillas — according to the traditional version, at least — spent their time ambush-
ing French couriers, convoys and foraging parties, attacking French posts and
encampments, and pouncing upon, dodging or fighting off the French columns
sent to hunt them down. Given the see-saw nature of events, indeed, the general
effect would be to confuse the reader, and obscure the main outlines of the
subject. Recognising this problem, all previous writers who have sought to go
beyond broad generalisations have attempted to resolve matters by focusing on
the narratives of the most prominent guerrilla commanders. Yet this approach
does not help either. Setting aside the risk of hagiography arising from the
myth-making and self-aggrandisement typical of many memoirs and contem-
porary accounts, the result must inevitably be to reinforce a variety of stereo-
types and undermine both context and perspective.
    Elaborating an alternative treatment of the conflict will not be an easy task,
but it is one that cannot be shrunk from, for it is only by subjecting the mili-
tary history of the ‘little war’ to close analysis that the way can be cleared for
fresh thinking. Putting the issue at its most simple, it is impossible to dodge
the fact that the French faced an abnormal situation in Spain. In the campaigns
of 1805-7 French armies had swept across Germany, Austria, Bohemia and
Poland with scarcely a thought for the safety of their couriers, foraging parties
and lines of supply, whereas in Spain Napoleon’s troops had to garrison every
28     Fighting Napoleon


square inch of the territory they conquered and even then could not sleep
safe in their beds. Unless this issue is addressed, there is no room for revision,
for any challenge to the image of the guerrillas as the heroic defenders of dios,
rey y patria (‘God, king and fatherland’) would have an obvious riposte.
Find an answer to this question, by contrast, and the picture changes dramat-
ically. Hence the need for a chapter that is unashamedly military in its
preoccupations.
    Before proceeding with our analysis of Ja guerrilla, let us first devote a little
time to thinking about the geo-strategic problems faced by the French in the
conquest of the Iberian Peninsula. As is constantly restated, both Spain and
Portugal are countries ideally suited to guerrilla warfare. Not only are there
wide regions that are extremely rugged, if not downright mountainous — one
thinks especially here of Galicia, Leon, Navarre, Catalonia, the Maestrazgo,
south-eastern Andalucia and Beira — but chains of mountains such as the Sierra
Morena, the Montes de Toledo and the Sierra de Guadarrama criss-cross Spain
in particular, thereby ensuring that time after time even main roads are forced
to cross precipitous mountain passes or to run through lengthy gorges of the
most terrifying nature. Perhaps the most well-known of these defiles, and one
of the ones most feared by the French, was that of Pancorbo, between Burgos
and Miranda de Ebro, where the main road from Madrid to the French fron-
tier wound its way between towering saw-toothed peaks, but similar spots were
to be found in many parts of the Peninsula. Indeed, many mountain pueblos can
only be reached via defiles that are miles long, walled in by sheer cliffs and only
a few feet wide. Competing with such places as potential bases, meanwhile, were
the many monasteries perched on towering crags in the sierras, of which a prime
example was the Catalan fastness of Nuestra Sefiora de Monserrat. It is not
just a matter of mountains, however. Even where the country is not particu-
larly elevated, it is in many areas covered with the dense scrub known as mator-
ral, or thickly dotted with pines and holm oaks. And, last but not least, in many
parts of the country human settlement is relatively infrequent, with the result
that it is difficult to establish an adequate network of garrisons and police posts.
    Staying with notions that have already been widely publicised, we next come
to the condition and habits of the populace. Nineteenth-century writers, of
course, were all too ready to see the origins of the guerrilla in some invented
 Spanish national character. Thus, for French observers, Spaniards were cruel,
savage and xenophobic, just as for Spanish ones they were proud, noble and
heroic, the point being that, whichever the case, they were likely to hurl them-
selves upon an invader with the utmost ferocity. From the twentieth-century
 point of view this is so much dross, but there are still strong grounds for arguing
 that there were environmental factors that gave the idea of partisan activity a
 peculiar resonance. Thus, large parts of the populace were either habituated to
                                                       The Guerrillas at War     29

violence or long familiar with notions of irregular resistance. Across wide
regions of the country the intense poverty of the rural masses ensured that ban-
ditry was commonplace, whilst the many internal customs barriers and state
monopolies encouraged the emergence of powerful bands of smugglers. To deal
with this problem, the Bourbon authorities had raised a variety of local secu-
rity forces, which were known collectively as the resguardo, and the result was
that many provinces witnessed incessant skirmishes which schooled both sides
in the techniques of raid and ambush. As if this was not enough, meanwhile,
certain parts of the country — above all, Galicia, the Basque provinces and
Catalonia — possessed home guards consisting of all the male inhabitants, who
were supposed to turn out in the case of invasion under the leadership of local
notables (in Galicia officers involved in the War of Independence included
senores such as Juan Bernardo Quiroga, Diego Nufiez de Millaroso and Joaquin
Tenreiro, magistrates such as Ignacio Herbon and Manuel Cordido, and local
officials such as Cayetano Limia and Joaquin José Marquez). Known in Galicia
as alarmas, in the Basque provinces as migueletes and in Catalonia as somatenes,
in the last two instances they had even seen much service against the French
in the course of the Revolutionary War of 1793-95. Of this conflict there were
bitter memories in most border districts, but throughout the country its effect
had been to confirm views of the French as ‘the other’ that were strengthened
by the inflammatory language used in sermon and pamphlet during the war
against the Convention.!
    A country that was both physically suited to guerrilla warfare and accus-
tomed to its concepts, Spain was therefore conditioned to hate the French. Also
important was the pattern that military operations in the Peninsula were certain
to take. Thus, thanks to the Pyrenees, there were only two roads across the
French frontier that were practicable for large armies, of which the first entered
Spain at Hendaye on the Bay of Biscay and the other at Port Bou on the
Mediterranean. Of these, however, the second was of only limited utility, for
it in practice led only to Barcelona (there were, of course, roads from Barcelona
to the rest of the country, but they were for many reasons not very convenient).
In consequence, the main axis of conquest was always likely to be the Hendaye
road, especially as Bayonne was a much better depot than Perpignan. Yet from
this followed certain consequences. As this highway led to Madrid, in all like-
lihood the French would find themselves having to conquer the Peninsula from,
so to speak, the inside out. With the Spanish army unlikely to be able to stop
them at the frontier or on the Ebro, the French would in effect be sucked deep
into the interior. Madrid would fall soon enough, doubtless, and with it the
plains of Old and New Castile, but the invaders would be denied immediate
control of the coast. Strike out for it in all directions they certainly would, but
for most of its length it was protected by high chains of mountains. As for
30     Fighting Napoleon


Portugal, she was hard to penetrate, for the main routes across the frontier were
all covered by imposing fortresses. All round the northern, western and south-
ern periphery of the country, then, there would be the potential for small forces
of regular troops to sally out and attack the French. At the same time, of course,
the deeper the French advanced into the Peninsula, the more vulnerable they
became to such attacks, whilst even breaking through to the coast did not
resolve the problem, in that there was always the chance of raiding forces being
landed from the sea.                                  ss
    Viewed in detail, the matter appears even more complex. Thus, a French
invasion based on the Hendaye road would be unlikely even to overrun the
whole of the interior of the country. With the two Castiles and the capital would
almost certainly go much of Aragon, for there was little to stop Napoleon’s
armies pouring down the valley of the Ebro and overrunning the steppes that
surrounded Zaragoza. Separating Old Castile and La Mancha from central
Aragon, however, is a broad strip of hills and mountains that all but runs from
the Bay of Biscay to the Mediterranean. At its northern end its proximity to
the French frontier and the fact that it was pierced by the Madrid—Hendaye
road meant that it could be kept under some semblance of control, but to the
south and east it was a different matter. There being little likelihood that it
would be penetrated straight away, Spanish forces would therefore be able to
maintain themselves deep inside the hinterland of the country. The problem
was not insuperable — if the invaders could take Tarragona and Valencia, the
region might ultimately be isolated and overcome — but it nevertheless made
an already difficult situation still worse.’
    All this was, as we shall see, to become a matter of some importance in /a
guerrilla: above all, in fact, the scene was being set for a scenario in which the
French would be harassed not just by bands of guerrillas but also by substan-
tial forces of regular troops. At the beginning of the war, however, it was seem-
ingly the stereotype that ruled. Thanks to the divisions in the Spanish court
and Napoleon’s own astuteness, the French did not have to fight for Madrid
and Barcelona: rather, they were let in unopposed, still other forces being
 allowed to march all the way to Lisbon. No fighting was expected — it was
 assumed that the armed forces would rally to the Napoleonic takeover — but in
 case of British raids a division was sent to occupy Cadiz under General Dupont.
 At this point, however, revolt broke out all round the country, and Dupont’s
 division found itself cut off from Madrid by parties of insurgents who fell upon
 the convoys, detachments of soldiers and hospitals it had left scattered in its
 wake. All the inmates of a makeshift hospital at Manzanares were massacred,
 for example, whilst a band of peasants led by the alcalde of Montoro, Juan de
 la Torre, overpowered the seventy-strong guard that Dupont had left to hold
 the Puente de Alcolea. Other attacks took place at Santa Cruz de la Mudela,
                                                      The Guerrillas at War   jl

where the escort of a convoy of biscuit was put to flight after losing a third of
its strength, and La Carolina, where the French general René was taken, along
with his wife and secretary. Very soon, indeed, the whole district between
Cordoba and the Sierra Morena was swarming with guerrilla bands led by such
figures as the priest Ramon Argote. Indeed, sent down from Madrid to assist
Dupont, the divisions of Vedel and Jacques-Nicholas Gobert only got through
the Sierra Morena, as we have seen, by dint of some hard fighting. And every-
where murder was commonplace, French soldiers being pushed down wells,
poisoned or knifed in their beds.’
   According to all accounts, the attacks were accompanied by scenes of the
utmost cruelty. Doubtless the tales grew in the telling, but it is clear that a
number of those who fell into the hands of the insurgents met a horrible end.
Perhaps the most often repeated of these stories concerns René, who was
stabbed to death by a mob at Las Correderas after being taken prisoner some
days earlier, but there are also reports of men being stoned to death, boiled in
oil, sawn in half or buried up to their necks in the ground and left to die of
thirst.* Nor was La Mancha the only setting for irregular resistance. In Cat-
alonia the somatenes routed an enemy column sent to occupy Lérida at the pass
of El Bruch (as we have seen), seriously molested the operations of other
French forces and blockaded Barcelona, whilst the Junta of Gerona took into
its service a friar named Francisco Rovira, who had formed a number of peas-
ants armed with fowling pieces and pitchforks into a guerrilla band.’ Near
Aranda an obscure peasant named Juan Martin Diez led his three brothers and
a number of other men in a series of attacks on French couriers and distin-
guished himself by capturing the wife of Marshal Moncey at the village of
Carabias, whilst the road from Toledo to Madrid became the beat of a young
doctor from Villaluenga de la Sierra named Juan Palarea.° In the vicinity of
Madrid itself, a resident of Carabanchel named Pedro Serrano formed a partida
and attacked a number of couriers.’ In Aragon a wealthy clothier from Illueca
named Fidel Mallén established a roo-strong band that harassed the French
rear during the first siege of Zaragoza.* And finally, in Navarre still more par-
tidas were raised by Andrés Eguaguirre, the lawyer Luis Gil and the priest
Andrés Galdiroz.’
   By the summer of 1808, then, guerrilla warfare was firmly established as a
feature of the Peninsular War. With much of Spain evacuated in the wake of
the battle of Bailén and the remaining pockets of French occupation crammed
with troops who had been pulled back from Madrid, Burgos and Zaragoza,
there was for the time being little scope for partidas to operate. However, in
Catalonia such irregulars as Rovira, José Mans6 and Francisco Milans del
Bosch continued to play an important part in events, with insurgents blockad-
ing Figueras, harassing the imperial forces sent to take the defiant fortress of
32     Fighting Napoleon


Gerona and even raiding the French frontier. Typical were the activities of
Milans del Bosch, who in September alone attacked the French at the Coll de
Moncada, Badalona and San Felid.'° Nor was it long before /a guerrilla was back
in the limelight. Furious at the setbacks suffered by his troops, Napoleon
poured heavy reinforcements into Spain, and in a whirlwind campaign defeated
most of the Spanish armies and recaptured Madrid. Yet his very success meant
that the French were once again vulnerable to guerrilla warfare. All around
them, indeed, there swarmed bands of fugitive Spafish soldiers, not to mention
angry civilians who had seen their homes plundered and destroyed and their
families murdered, the French counter-attack having been marked by conduct
of the utmost brutality. To quote just one example, from December onwards a
time-expired soldier from Pozal de Gallinas named Jeronimo Saornil launched
a number of successful attacks at such places as Madrigal de las Torres and
Fuentesatico.'! Also active at this time, meanwhile, was a guerrilla band that
had been established in the Tagus valley under Pablo Morillo, an erstwhile
sergeant of the regular army who had been commissioned as a sub-lieutenant
in a new regiment entitled the Voluntarios de Llerena.””
   In memoir after memoir, indeed, we find evidence that isolated Frenchmen
were even at this early stage going in fear of their lives, whilst there were stories
that men who fell by the wayside out of exhaustion were shooting themselves
rather than take the risk of falling into the hands of the Spaniards.’ For a good
example of the nightmares that plagued the invaders we have only to turn to
the experiences of the aide-de-camp Marbot. Carrying the dispatches from
Tudela to Madrid in December 1808 via the present-day province of Soria,
with a small escort, he first encountered a French cavalry officer who had been
nailed head downwards to a barn door and left to roast over a slow fire, and was
then attacked by a party of armed civilians. These were driven off without dif-
ficulty, but a further attack was launched on Marbot and his men by five sol-
diers, and the Frenchmen were only saved by the providential arrival of a rescue
party. Wounded and exhausted, a chastened Marbot later recalled the affair as
‘one of the most terrible experiences of my military career’.'*
   If things were bad in 1808, in 1809 they got still worse. Faced once again
with enemy troops, such early partidas as those of El] Empecinado emerged from
the shadows in which they had spent the summer and autumn of 1808, whilst
many new bands also began to appear. In alliance with that of El Empecinado,
for example, there came that of Jeronimo Merino, the semi-literate parish priest
of the tiny village of Villoviado, near Lerma, who was soon attacking French
couriers and convoys travelling between Madrid and Burgos, and making life
uncomfortable for the garrison of Lerma.’ Also active in Old Castile, mean-
while, were Bartolomé Amor, an erstwhile private in the Burgos provincial
militia regiment, and the friars Lucas Rafael and Julian Délica.’° Joining them
                                                     The Guerrillas at War    33


in the north of the region were Juan Diaz Porlier, a young officer of marines
who had obtained a command in the provincial militia following the uprising
and escaped with a handful of his men into the hills in the wake of the Spanish
defeat at Gamonal in November 1808; Francisco Longa, a blacksmith from
Puebla de Arganzon who had got into trouble with the occupying forces; and
Juan Lopez Campillo, who in 1808 had been an officer in the resguardo in the
province of Santander. And finally, in the east, Soria and Logrofio saw a host
of minor bands take to the field under such leaders as the noted smuggler
Ignacio Alonso (known as Cuevillas) and the Benedictine monk Jacobo
Alvarez.””
    Nor was Old Castile alone in being affected by Ja guerrilla. On all sides,
indeed, the French found themselves in similar difficulties. In the Tagus valley
and La Mancha the chief leaders — not counting Palarea, who had initially con-
fined himself to sporadic sallies from his home village — were Toribio Busta-
mente, a postal courier from Medina de Rio Seco; Camilo Gomez, who was a
wealthy /abrador with lands in the vicinity of Talavera de la Reina; and José
Pedrazuela, who had originally been an actor in Madrid. In Vizcaya and
Guiputzcoa there emerged partidas headed by such figures as the /abrador Juan
Fernandez Echevarri, the law student Juan José de Abecia (who had fought as
a volunteer in the defence of Zaragoza before managing to escape capture and
flee to his home town of Marquina), and, most interestingly of all, a young
woman named Maria Martin de Ibaibarriaga, whom family legend holds to have
taken to the hills following the murder of her parents by French soldiers.'® In
Aragon we see the formation of bands under such figures as the prosperous
labradores Miguel Sarasa and Fidel Mallén, the erstwhile smuggler Anselmo
Alegre, and the mule contractor Miguel Domper.”” In Catalonia there were
bands led by the wealthy customs official Sebastian Gotti and the friar
Francisco Rovira, who had now got together a group of refugees from the occu-
pied district of the Ampurdan known as the Battalion of Expatriates.” And
finally, in Navarre, at least a dozen bands were roaming the province in the
spring of 1809. That of the priest Galduroz we have already met, whilst the
leaders of the others included another parish priest, named Hermenegildo
Garcés de los Fayos, a bandit who had escaped from gaol in the confusion of
the uprising named Andrés Ochotorena, a schoolteacher named Francisco
Antonio Zabaleta, a smuggler named Félix Sarasa, a butcher named Pascual
Echeverria and a day-labourer named Juan Lizarraga. By the autumn, mean-
while, they had been joined by a still more dangerous foe in the person of the
university student Martin Javier Mina y Larrea, a young man who was not only
energetic and talented but also enjoyed the full support of the military
and political authorities (commissioned to take on the task of fomenting
resistance in Navarre by the Spanish general Areizaga, Mina had won vital
34      Fighting Napoleon


financial backing from the improvised provincial junta that had been established
at Ujué under the leadership of its parish priest, Casimir-Javier de Miguel
e Irujo).”!
   All this was the source of much trouble to the French. On 25 June 1809
Délica scored a considerable coup by capturing the French general Franceschi
in an ambush, whilst on 28 June Merino massacred the guard of a French
convoy at Quintana del Puente. On 6 July Miguel Sarasa attacked a French
force at Fuentes de Sarsa; on 19 July the same commander attacked Sanguesa,
and on 28 July Ignacio Alonso and Juan Lopez Campillo wiped out a French
detachment at Santo Domingo de la Calzada. On 6 August Logrofio was tem-
porarily occupied by the partidas; on 8 August Haro was raided and a foraging
party destroyed at Maella by Santiago Pérez; on 14 August a large party of
Spanish troops who had been taken prisoner the day before at the battle of
Almonacid was liberated by Isidoro Mir and Ventura Jiménez; on 18 August a
column of 150 Frenchmen that was marching from El Burgo de Osma to Soria
was ambushed at Villar del Ciervo with the loss of a third of its strength; on
20 August Pérez beat 600 Frenchmen betweeen Alcafiiz and Caspe; on 23
August Sarasa fell on another force heading from Zaragoza for Navarre; and on
24 August Porlier demonstrated against the walls of Palencia, inflicting a
number of casualties on a party of French troops sent out to chase him off. On
5 September Toribio Bustamente and Mariano Ricafort swept into Torrejon-
cillo in a surprise attack that cost the French garrison fifteen dead and twenty-
six prisoners; on 6 September Rovira routed a French column near Montaut;
and on 16 September El Empecinado beat another one at Fontanar. Striking
again at Casar de Talamar on the penultimate day of the month, the same com-
mander killed seventy of the enemy, and was driven off only when the sur-
vivors opened fire with a cannon and badly wounded his second-in-command,
Saturnino Abuin. On 5 October Francisco Sanchez overwhelmed a party of
eighty Frenchmen at La Guardia, and Merino overcame a small French force
at Santa Maria del Campo six days later; still other columns were attacked by
Sarasa at Lasiero on the 17th and Abecia at Marquina on the 28th. On 5
November Sarasa infiltrated the walled town of Sos under cover of the fact that
it was market day and, in a sudden coup de main, drove out the garrison and
seized a large quantity of plate, grain and livestock. On the 7th Merino won
another victory at Quintana de la Puente; and on the 8th Mina attacked Tafalla.
On 12 November El Empecinado raided Guadalajara and retired with a large
 quantity of woollen cloth; on 13 November Domingo Sabiron seized 400 goats
 from their French guards near Carifiena; and on 15 November José Velasco took
 prisoner a party that had been sent to reconnoitre the mines of Almadén. On
 18 November Mina gained what, for the guerrillas, was a major success at
 Sansol; on 26 November Abecia captured a French courier at Armifion; and on
                                                      The Guerrillas at War    35

29 November     Mina   raided   Tudela   in company   with Alonso     and Lopez
Campillo.”
   “This small-scale warfare’, wrote Joseph Bonaparte’s friend and confidant
Miot de Melito, ‘quietly undermined us. We only possessed the ground actu-
ally occupied by our armies, and our power did not extend beyond it. The busi-
ness of administration ceased, and there was neither order, nor justice, nor
taxation.” For the invaders actually caught up in the fighting, meanwhile, the
impressions left by the insurrection were still stronger. Among the garrison of
Aragon, for example, was the Prussian officer Heinrich von Brandt, who was
serving in the French-organised Polish force entitled the ‘Legion of the
Vistula’, and who later recorded his impressions in one of the first serious
attempts at an analysis of /a guerrilla. Thus:

  Local causes, added to hatred, revenge and other passions . . . brought the
  mountaineers together . . . From corps thus formed . . . the boldest and most
  determined stepped forward as leaders . . . As long as the guerrillas were thus
  constituted, they made no appearance as a body, but were nevertheless
  extremely dangerous to the French. They formed the basis of an actual arma-
  ment of the people, and were soon upon every road and path . . . and eagerly
  seeking for plunder... They rushed with the utmost rapidity upon their
  booty, or placed themselves in order of battle according to the nature of the
  undertaking . . . As soon as the enterprise was completed everyone went his
  own way, and armed men were scattered in all directions . . . Thus the com-
  munication on all roads was closed. Thousands of enemies were on the spot,
  though not a single one could be discovered; no courier could be dispatched
  without being taken; no supplies could set off without being attacked... At
  the same time, there existed no means of striking out against a combination
  of this kind. The French were obliged to be constantly on their guard against
  an enemy who, while continually flying, always reappeared, and who, without
  actually being seen, was everywhere. It was neither battles nor engagements
  which exhausted their forces, but the incessant molestations of an invisible
  enemy who, if pursued, became lost among the people, out of which he reap-
  peared immediately afterwards with renewed strength. The lion in the fable,
  tormented to death by a gnat, gives us a true picture of the army at that
  period.”

Serving with the Second Hussars, meanwhile, was Albert de Rocca:

  In these mountainous provinces in the north of the Peninsula the French,
  although always conquerors where the . . . Spaniards showed themselves in
  battle, were not . . . the less assailed by clouds of armed mountaineers, who,
  never coming near to fight in closed ranks, or body to body, retreated from
36       Fighting Napoleon


     position to position, from rock to rock, on heights, without ceasing to fire
     even in flying. It sometimes required entire battalions to carry an order...
     to another distant one; The soldiers wounded, sick or fatigued who remained
     behind the French columns, were immediately murdered. Every victory pro-
     duced only a new conflict. Victories had become useless by the persevering
     and invincible character of the Spaniards, and the French armies were con-
     suming themselves . . . in continual fatigues . . . and anxieties.”°

   Things did not get any better for the French in1810. In the first place, it
seemed that they were powerless to make any headway against the guerrillas.
Here and there one cabecilla or another was picked off and his band scattered:
examples include Délica in Old Castile, Francisco Sanchez in La Mancha and
Mina in Navarre. But no sooner had one leader been dealt with than another
sprang up to take his place: Mina, for instance, was replaced by his distant
kinsman Francisco Espoz Ilundain, and Sanchez by his neighbour Manuel
Hernandez. Equally, by dint of very great efforts, it sometimes proved possi-
ble to force back the partidas, and all but clear them from a province. By the
end of 1809, for example, the French commander in Aragon, Louis Suchet,
had succeeded in defeating many of the bands that had been threatening his
dominions. But unless action was co-ordinated with the garrison of neigh-
bouring provinces victory was never final, for there was nothing to stop the
guerrilla leaders from slipping across the frontier in search of both a quieter
life and fresh targets. And it was useless simply to mount great sweeps against
the insurgents: territory had to be cleared, certainly, but it also had to be thor-
oughly garrisoned, and this the French rarely had the troops to manage.
Ordered to launch an offensive against such strongholds as Lérida and Tortosa
in an attempt to pave the way for the conquest of Valencia, for example, Suchet
saw the bulk of his Aragonese conquests overrun by the partidas once more.”
    For the French, then, campaigning against the guerrillas was as exhausting
as it was frustrating, as witness, for example, Bigarré’s account of his experi-
ences as temporary governor of Aranjuez in 1811:

     The guerrilla leaders Morales and El Abuelo [i-e., Manuel Hernandez] were
     constantly making incursions in the vicinity . .. One extremely hot day the
     sentries stationed at the Ocafia gate were taken by surprise, and these two
     chieftains . . . galloped down the street that led to the main square . . . shout-
     ing, ‘Long live Fernando VIL!’, followed by 500 of their men. Warned of
     what was going on by one of the sentries, I jumped on my horse, and charged
     them with such impetuosity that they took flight ...and dispersed in the
     countryside . . . Seeing that [El Abuelo] was only a short distance ahead of
     me, I rode out to get him followed by my aides-de-camp and about twenty
     chasseurs ... With my horse going at top speed, I suddenly found myself
                                                         The Guerrillas at War    27

  faced by a canal eighteen feet wide. This I attempted to leap, but my horse
  was not good enough to make such a jump, and I was thrown right into the
  middle, along with my aides-de-camp and four of the light horsemen... I
  felt the effects of the fall for some months, but I was not going to let El
  Abuelo . . . get away with it... .On 6 June I heard . . . that El Abuelo and his
  guerrillas were going to spend the night of the 7th at Uclés... Ata quarter
  to ten, 400 infantry .. . and twenty-five light horse . . . arrived outside the
  town... Charging into the town, they met no resistance . . Having been
  shown the house where El Abuelo stayed whenever he spent the night at
  Ucles, I ordered it to be surrounded. Several shots were fired at us... but
  in the same instant the doors were forced by some voltigeurs .. . Rushing
  inside, they killed four guerrillas ... but El Abuelo, who had been in bed
  with his wife, saved himself by scrambling out of an attic window in his
  nightshirt and jumping down into the garden. Although more than twenty
  shots were fired at him, he then managed to gain the safety of the open
  country.”
   Nor was it just that fighting was incessant. If anything, the problem was
inclined to get worse rather than better. Every French advance, for example,
created fresh guerrillas. Thus, the arrival of the French in Andalucia in 1810
sparked off a new wave of resistance. None of the leaders is as well known as
those that had appeared in the previous two years in the north and centre of
Spain, but they were nonetheless extremely numerous. In the province of
Seville the men involved included Pedro Zaldivar, Miguel Lopez, Antonio Veas,
Salvador Sierra and two anonymous cabecillas known only as Palmetin and El
Mantequero. In Cordoba we find Lorenzo Diaz, Juan Antonio Marmol, Juan
Lorenzo Rey and Mariano Rodriguez. And in Jaén prominent names were
Antonio Calvache, Jerénimo Moreno, Pedro Alcalde and Mateo Gomez. In the
same way, when Suchet finally conquered Valencia in 1812, he was challenged
by such figures as the peasant Gregorio Martinez, the well-known bandit Jaime
Alfonso and the Franciscan friar Agustin Nebot.”
   As the war went on, then, the number of guerrillas may be said to have mul-
tiplied dramatically. But it was not just that there were more opponents for the
French to face; the fact is that there was also a steady intensification of the chal-
lenge. Thus, in the beginning most partidas consisted of no more than a handful
of men, whilst their members were equipped with whatever weapons they could
improvise or capture from the enemy, dressed in civilian costume and entirely
ignorant of the art of war. The free and easy spirit of the first days is captured
extremely well by Francisco Espoz y Mina:

  In the beginning, and for some time afterwards, the guerrillas of Navarre
  .. . operated as they wished . . . The only tactic was to go wherever enemies
38       Fighting Napoleon


     were to be found that could be attacked with some hope of success . . . and
     these expeditions were captained by the wisest and most valiant.”

   In many bands this situation remained unchanged throughout the war, but
from fairly early on there was a tendency for at least some partidas to grow in
size. In part this was the result of a process of concentration: not only were the
more ambitious cabecillas eager to take over the forces of rival commanders, but
it was soon found that a multiplicity of small partidas was a recipe for chaos.
Thus in 1810, for example, most of the guerrillas in the province of Soria were
united under the command of a colonel of the regular army named José Joaquin
Duran y Barazabal, who had escaped imprisonment at the hands of the
French.’ But, in part, too, it was also simply that success bred success, for the
more dynamic the band the more recruits it got, and the less likely it was to
suffer from desertion. And, by the same token, the more recruits a band got,
the more likely it was to be successful.
    More men, however, meant that for both logistical and operational reasons
it became necessary to adopt structures that reflected the new situation. Bat-
talions of infantry and squadrons of cavalry therefore began to supplant the
partida, and these in time multiplied and allowed commanders who had started
out with a handful of followers to lay claim to the command of brigades and
even divisions. And, very soon, the picturesque style of the early days was being
abandoned. Uniforms — generally brown breeches and jackets topped off with
round black hats — took the place of peasant dress; muskets and bayonets
replaced knives and blunderbusses; and lines and columns supplanted the
crowd of individuals fighting as the fancy took them. Let us quote, for example,
the account of Espoz y Mina’s forces given by a prisoner of war rescued by
them in 1811:

     His cavalry are chosen men and... are dressed as hussars in blue... His
     infantry . .. wear rope-soled sandals, half-gaiters, breeches and jackets; their
     muskets . . . fire well, whilst their bayonets are kept very sharp . . . The sol-
     diers receive one rea/ per day, together with an abundant ration of bread,
     meat and wine . . . Their tactics are confined to firing on the enemy and then
     charging home in various combinations of line or column.”!

   Underlying this transformation was in part the combination of the military
superiority of the French and the sheer efficacy of conventional models of
tactics and organization. Thus, as partidas grew bigger and more permanent,
they presented the French with an easier target, and, what is more, one on
which it was easy to inflict terrible damage. Caught in the open at Belorado in
La Rioja in November 1810, for example, Espoz y Mina’s infantry were over-
whelmed by a force of 7,000 Frenchmen and all but destroyed.*” Shocked by
                                                         The Guerrillas at War    39

this defeat, the Navarrese leader, who only escaped death or capture on account
of an earlier bullet wound in the leg, which had forced him to abandon his
command for the safety of his native hills, responded not, as Tone claims, by
limiting himself to guerrilla-style operations but by demanding that his men
should learn to fight as regular troops. As he says, ‘This was the moment when
the regiments began to receive military instruction... From then on the
greater part of their time .. . was spent doing drill.’ And, once the decision
to fight in a regular style had been taken, there was no space for a specific tactica
guerrillera. Espoz y Mina had already learned that sniping at the French from
the hillsides was to be avoided in favour of charging home, and his troops were
now schooled in methods of fighting similar to those of Wellington’s army.
When three of his infantry regiments were attacked at Aibar in December 1810,
for example, they were ordered to give the enemy a single volley at close range
and then launch a bayonet charge.**
   It was not just the pressures of operating against the French that drove the
larger partidas to adopt military forms, however. For commanders with neither
military training nor formal education it was a vital means of legitimising
themselves in the eyes of hostile generals of the regular army, whilst for all
cabecillas it was a way of cementing their own positions by invoking the prin-
ciples of hierarchy and giving themselves access to important sources of
patronage, not to mention fresh recruits. This could result in recognition from
the government and that brought with it shipments of arms and supplies, the
prospect of regular pay, access to the privileges of the military estate and
the possibility of further promotion. As members of the armed forces, they
could free themselves of the political interference sometimes engaged in
by such provincial juntas as managed to maintain themselves in the occupied
territories. And, last but not least, possession of a regular commission or mem-
bership of a regular-style unit offered some protection, for captured soldiers
were granted prisoner-of-war status rather than simply being executed out of
hand.®
   Many bands went through this process of development. As early as the end
of 1809, for example, Porlier’s partida had been organised into the Primer
Cantabro and Castilla infantry regiments and the Husares de Cantabria cavalry
(also under command was the Laredo infantry regiment, but this was in fact a
unit of the pre-war army that had been assigned to Porlier to bolster his forces).
Other northern guerrilla bands transformed in this fashion eventually included
those of Longa, with the First, Second, Third and Fourth Iberia infantry regi-
ments, and the Husares de Iberia cavalry; and Jauregui with the First, Second
and Third Guipuzcoa infantry regiments. As witness the record of Duran’s
‘Division de Soria’, these forces often developed into powerful opponents. Thus
on 28 May 1812 Duran stormed Tudela and pillaged a large convoy that had
4o      Fighting Napoleon


stopped in the town for the night, whilst on 14 June he launched a surprise
attack on Aranda de Duero that saw his forces scale the walls and force the
defenders to take shelter in the bishop’s palace. Having been equipped with a
number of 12-pounder guns by Wellington, meanwhile, in the autumn of 1812
Duran and his men twice beat the French at Fuenmayor, besieged Calatayud
and, deprived of victory by a French relief force that evacuated the garrison in
the nick of time, vented their spleen on the castle of Borja, which was quickly
bombarded into surrender.”                           .
   However, the powerful force-multiplier that the combination of increased
strength and militarisation represented is best studied through the medium of
Francisco Espoz y Mina’s ‘Divisi6n de Navarra’. Thus, in 1810 the then
Francisco Espoz Ilundain was a volunteer serving in the partida of his kinsman
Martin Javier Mina. After escaping from the disaster that saw the capture of
his commander on 31 March 1810 — an episode to which we shall return — he
set up as a cabecilla himself, and, though initially supported by only a handful
of companions, succeeded in uniting many of his old comrades under his
leadership, in part because of his crafty assumption of the name Espoz y Mina.
A series of minor successes brought in many fresh recruits, whilst the new com-
mander was careful to give his forces a sound logistical base by levying customs
duties on all goods crossing the French frontier and, later on, securing control
of the administration of the properties expropriated as bienes nacionales by
order of the cortes of Cadiz. In this manner the need to live off the civilian
population was reduced to a minimum, whilst Espoz y Mina earned further
plaudits by suppressing many bandits. Establishing a monopoly of armed force
— any partida that resisted his authority was crushed without mercy — he was
able not only to establish an efficient civil administration but also to create an
effective army that was able to offer the civilian population at least some
measure of protection.*’ All this brought growing military success, most notably
at the Puerto de Arlaban on 25 May 1811. Thus, a large French convoy that
had just left Vitoria en route for France was wending its way through the pass
when it was attacked from both sides by Espoz y Mina’s men. As one contem-
porary account had it:

     The battle began between five and six o’clock in the morning, and Espoz y
     Mina’s troops loaded and fired with such skill that two or three volleys threw
     the French into consternation... The fruit of this brilliant action . . . has
     been the death of 300 Frenchmen . .. the capture of 700 or 800 more and
     the release of some 800 . . . Spanish prisoners who armed themselves there
     and then with the muskets of their oppressors . .. The booty also included
     more than 4,000,000 reales.**
   Such successes were often exaggerated: in his own report Espoz y Mina more
than doubled the size of the escort, for example. But, skilfully publicised, such
                                                     The Guerrillas at War   41

victories secured recognition in Cadiz, and with it further authority, with the
consequence that Espoz y Mina was able to form still more units, of which
many were recruited from beyond the borders of Navarre. By 1813, indeed, his
 forces had grown to nine regiments of infantry and one of cavalry. Repeated
French attacks proved unavailing, and eventually the situation got quite out of
hand. With the garrison of Navarre and Aragon stretched unmercifully by the
need to make up for the losses of the Russian campaign, and Espoz y Mina
armed with artillery landed by the British from the sea, the French position
became impossible. Strongpoint after strongpoint was taken by the guerrillas;
the forces of two or three thousand men that were all that the harassed French
commanders could scrape together to take on the guerrillas in the open field
 were repeatedly beaten; and those few garrisons that remained too strong to be
attacked were blockaded and threatened with the spectre of starvation (for a
more detailed account of these operations, see pp. 135-6). To say that Espoz y
Mina liberated Navarre on his own would be to go too far: had the French been
able to concentrate all their forces against the Navarrese commander, there is
little doubt that they would in the end have overcome his troops. Yet the fact
remains that militarisation and dictatorship had between them created a situa-
tion that had no equal.”
    By the end of the war forces such as those of Duran and Espoz y Mina
had obviously come a long way from the tiny groups in which they had
their origin. Yet on the surface the guerrillas remained a popular phenomenon.
Even when they could lay claim to the status of army officers, for example,
most of the chieftains affected nicknames that at first sight both perpetuated
and asserted their civilian status. Thus Espoz y Mina was ‘Uncle Frank’ (Tio
Francisco) or the ‘King of Navarre’ (Rey de Navarra); Mina was ‘the lad’ (El
Mozo); Merino ‘the priest’ (El Cura); Alegre ‘the potter’ (El Cantarero); Délica
‘the Capuchin’ (El Capuchino); Porlier ‘the little marquess’ (El Marquesito);
Palarea ‘the doctor’ (El Médico); Juan Martin ‘Stick-in-the-Mud’ (El Empeci-
nado); Rodriguez Valdés ‘the cook’ (El Cocinero); Orué ‘the little lawyer’ (E]
Abogadillo); Abad ‘Jerkin’ (Chaleco); Abuin ‘One-Hand’ (El Manco); Alonso
‘Caves’ (Cuevillas); Principe ‘Bourbon’ (Borbon); Bustos ‘the brigand’ (El
Brigante); Fernandez “Two Hairs’ (Dos Pelos); Gaston “Titch’ (El Chiquito);
Jauregui ‘the shepherd’ (El Pastor); Marafion ‘the Trappist’ (El Trapense);
Manuel Hernandez ‘the grandfather’ (E1 Abuelo); Francisco Sanchez ‘Frankie’
(Francisquete); and Santos Gonzalez ‘the black’ (El Negro).”
   With nicknames common in popular parlance — even today Spanish foot-
ballers and bullfighters often use such apodos — no statement could be clearer:
the guerrillas were, quite literally, the people in arms. If anything more was
needed to make the point, meanwhile, it is the image that they frequently
affected. As Robert Brindle wrote of his meeting with El] Empecinado in the
summer of 1809, for instance:
42       Fighting Napoleon


     Though elevated at this time to the rank of colonel, [El Empecinado] had
     not cast aside the dress of the peasant. His hat was the same as that worn in
     many places by the peasants, with a small crown and broad brim, and was
     fastened under his chin by an old ribbon . . . A carbine was fastened to his
     side by a silk handkerchief and he had a sword on the opposite side [and] a
     brace of pistols . . . and a large knife in a sash tied round his middle.*!

   A year and a half later, meanwhile, it seems that his persona was but little
changed: all his letters were signed ‘El Empecinado’, whilst an archdeacon who
met him in Cuenca in February 1811 compared him to the proverbial ‘rough
diamond’.” Such an image, meanwhile, is very much that conveyed by Dennis
Dighton’s 1813 painting of ‘the brigand Croza’, one of the very few contem-
porary pictures of a cabecilla drawn from the life that has come down to us. It
shows a ferociously moustachioed figure with a sinister face, clad in peasant
costume, complete with broad-brimmed hat and rope-soled sandals, who is
pointing out some unseen enemy to two equally grim-looking followers with a
dagger.”
   And, beyond doubt, even the unmilitarised bands gave the French much
trouble. Patrols and forage parties were likely to be set upon, and stragglers to
be murdered out of hand. To get through to their destinations, couriers had to
be escorted by hundreds of troops, whilst, by the same token, the transport of
supplies had to be undertaken through the medium of convoys that were as
large as they were well protected. And even the strongest parties could expe-
rience serious difficulties, for many cabecillas evolved ways of fighting that were
suited to the capacities of their men. It was, for example, Espoz y Mina’s boast
that, to make up for their lack of training, ammunition and proper firearms, he
encouraged his men to fire a single volley and then to charge home immedi-
ately."* Most of the Navarrese guerrillas fought on foot, but on horseback the
irregulars were even worse. To quote an aide-de-camp of General Hugo:

     They appear... at the gallop, disorder our columns with their murderous
     blunderbusses, and then take advantage of the confusion to ride in and cut
     down the men. If they see that our forces are too strong for them, they fire
     a single volley . . . and then ride to the rear whilst they load their arms, which
     they can effect with great speed even on the move. If we follow them, they
     turn back and fire at us again, causing us still more casualties . . . and in this
     fashion they make their escape, whilst laughing all the while at our efforts to
     catch them.”

    As a result of all this, immense resources had to be devoted to dealing with
 the problem. Amongst the more ingenious strategies adopted was to hide small
 cannon (in fact, probably over-sized muskets designed to be fired from special
                                                        The Guerrillas at War    43

pivots built into fortress parapets) in covered wagons in the style of the famous
‘Qships’ of the First World War.*° Along some main roads, too, the French
built chains of blockhouses in which squads of soldiers and gendarmes could be
housed and victims of guerrilla attacks take refuge.’ But above all the issue was
one of manpower. For reasons that will become clear, the large garrisons that
the French had to maintain in all the provinces which they occupied were not
there solely to maintain law and order. That said, however, if the situation was
not to get completely out of hand, thousands of soldiers had to be dispersed
across the country in ‘penny packets’. Still worse, meanwhile, many units found
themselves deprived of reinforcements: sent across the frontier from Bayonne
and Perpignan in temporary detachments known as bataillons du marche, thou-
sands of conscripts found themselves seized upon as garrisons and convoy
guards by the overstretched governors of such towns as Pamplona and
Figueras. To deal with the situation, Napoleon created a large force of gen-
darmes, and encouraged the formation of civic guards and anti-guerrilla units
of various sorts. As early as April 1809, meanwhile, the comisario regio respon-
sible for the Basque provinces ordered the formation of no fewer than seven
companies of coast guards to prevent raids on the coast of Guipuzcoa. But there
were never enough of the gendarmes d’Espagne to go round — though the initial
establishment alone consisted of twenty squadrons — whilst the various jura-
mentados were by no means wholly reliable. And of course the programme
added greatly to the costs of occupation, thereby increasing the pressure on the
populace and propelling them further in the direction of resistance.*
   There is, then, no smoke without fire: there was a popular guerrilla move-
ment that fought the French in Spain between 1808 and 1814; not only that,
meanwhile, but it also secured much success, and developed tactics that were
very effective. But this is not the whole story of /a guerrilla. Even popular resis-
tance to French occupation is not to be measured solely by reference to par-
tidas. There were many spontaneous acts of individual resistance, such as that
which took place in Yepes on 30 December 1809, when a juramentado who had
had too much to drink and started boasting about the money he was getting
from the French was shot in the back in the main square.” And in Vizcaya in
August 1808, Galicia in February—June 1809, the Navarrese valley of Roncal
in March—August 1809 and the Serrania de Ronda in March—August 1810
resistance rather took the form of peasant revolt. In each case the pattern was
the same, improvised local militias taking up arms under a variety of leaders —
in Galicia and Vizcaya local notables, in the Roncal escaped prisoners of war,
and in Ronda a mixture of local notables and agents dispatched by the central
authorities — and harassing the French columns sent against them. Some of the
tactics used by the insurgents were reminiscent of those of guerrilla warfare —
the Roncal even witnessed the formation of a number of partidas — but on the
44       Fighting Napoleon


whole the phenomenon was quite different, the combatants remaining close to
their villages and dispersing to their homes after every combat. As Southey
noted, their efforts were ‘more properly a national than a guerrilla warfare, the
work of destruction being carried on less by roving parties than by the settled
inhabitants who watched for every opportunity of revenge’.”’
   To illustrate what Southey means, we can do no better than turn to the
account of the French cavalryman Rocca, whose unit was part of the garrison
of Ronda:                                            :

     The most popular pastime among the labourers of Ronda was to sit on the
     rocks among the olive groves . . . and smoke cigars while they fired upon our
     vedettes. In the morning they would go out of the town with their tools as
     if they were going out to work in the fields, but there or at the farmhouses
     they found their guns, and returning them at night they would come back to
     the town and sleep in the midst of us. It not infrequently happened that our
     hussars recognised their hosts among their enemies . . . The women, the old
     men and even the children were against us, and served as spies for the
     enemy.”
It will be noted that there is no mention of any guerrilla band here. This is not
to say, of course, that there were no partidas in the region. The first opposition
the French met in the district of Casares, for example, came from a group of
goatherds who armed themselves with fowling pieces and attacked a party of
thirty-six Frenchmen who had come looking for horses, whilst the serrania in
general became the haunt of such cabecillas as Vicente Moreno, José Fajardo,
José Ruiz Falcon, José Aguilar and José Villalobos.” But the model described
by Rocca was very different, what we see rather being an ad hoc home guard
tied to its own pueblos. As he implies, there was at first no organisation, but as
time went on, so the men of each village were grouped into loose companies,
and these in turn were eventually organised into four infantry battalions known
as the cazadores patriotas of Casares, Jurique, Gaucin and Cortés.’ Called out,
as these were, only in times of danger, what we see is rather a reliance not on
guerrilla bands but on people’s militias in the style of the a/arma and the
somaten.
   The value placed on this model of military organisation is evident from
events in various parts of Spain. Thus, threatened by the forces of Marshal
Victor, on 21 March 1809 the Junta of Extremadura ordered the enlistment in
a militia of every man between the ages of seventeen and fifty, the intention
being that this force should engage in guerrilla operations against the French.
However, as was only to be expected given its long traditions of self-defence,
it was Catalonia that proved to be the chief exponent of this home-guard model.
As witness the events of the autumn and winter of 1809, the guerrilla was at
                                                       The Guerrillas at War    45

least as vigorous in Catalonia as it was in other parts of Spain: on 16 October
Juan Clarés attacked a French convoy at Monroig; on 26 November José Mans6
chased the French from San Boy; and on 18 December 1809 no less a person
than the commander of the French forces in the region, Marshal Augereau, was
attacked near Figueras whilst returning to his headquarters following a
brief visit to France.** Whilst there were, as we have seen, a number of Catalan
partidas, in all of these operations most of the irregular element of the Patriot
forces was provided by the somatén, for which each community was expected
to raise and maintain a certain number of its inhabitants.
    The somatenes remained in action throughout the war. In the summer of
 1811, for example, large numbers of them were used to harass the forces besieg-
ing Tarragona.” But not all the Catalan forces, and still less those which were
engaged in guerrilla-style operations, were composed of irregulars. Even in
1808 many of the most active resistance fighters had in fact been soldiers from
the garrison of Barcelona who had fled the city after it was taken over by the
French: the first recruits of Juan Claros, for example, included men from both
the Spanish and Walloon guards and the Extremadura line infantry regiment.”
In 1809 much of the south and west of Catalonia was still in the hands of the
Spanish Army of the Right, commanded by General Blake, and it was in fact
troops from this force that bore the brunt of the fighting in the operations we
have mentioned. Many of them, it is true, were little more than irregulars in
appearance and attitude, especially in the case of the forty regiments of
migueletes that the Junta of Catalonia had raised as a gesture to local feeling in
preference to imposing conscription to the regular army. In brief, these units
were enlisted wholly from volunteers, paid a substantial bounty, allowed to elect
their own officers and guaranteed their liberty at the end of the war.* Promi-
nent among them were such supposed guerrillas as Juan Clarés, Juan Baget,
José Mansé and Francisco Milans del Bosch but, despite the fact that they had
all been civilians in 1808, to none of them can the term really be applied. Their
troops may have been of poor quality — at the beginning, indeed, arms were in
such short supply that many of the men had to be armed with pikes — but they
fought alongside and in the same style as the regulars, and cannot be separated
from them. And, in the same way, the regulars cannot be separated from the
guerrilla. For example, a particularly prominent role in the incessant raids and
skirmishes that took place around the besieged city of Gerona was played by
Enrique O’Donnell, a brigade commander who in 1808 had been an officer of
the Ultonia infantry regiment. Thus, having broken into the city with a supply
convoy on 1 September, twelve days later he broke out again in spectacular
fashion, storming the sleeping camp of General Souham, running off all his
horses and baggage animals and forcing the officer concerned to take flight
dressed in his nightgown.”
46     Fighting Napoleon

   Events after the fall of Gerona on 11 December 1809 demonstrate still more
clearly the vital role played by the regular army in the ‘little war’ in Catalonia.
With the siege out of the way, Marshal Augereau’s next objective was the relief
of Barcelona, which had been closely blockaded by Catalan forces (both regular
and irregular) and was facing starvation. Moving on the capital via the roads
that ran through Vich and Hostalrich, the French troops that had been con-
centrated around Gerona found that their every movement was harassed by
clouds of sharpshooters, that passes such as that of El Grao could only be
cleared by heavy fighting and, further, that Rovira and other commanders con-
tinued to be active in their rear: at the Arroyo de Masanet, for example, General
Verdier, who was responsible for the district between Gerona and the frontier,
lost some 400 men in an ambush.
   Worse was to come, however. The Army of the Right had just been placed
under the command of the energetic O’Donnell, who proceeded to launch a
series of attacks on the French. On 12 January 1810 a French reconnaissance
was routed at the pass of Collsuspina, just north of Centellas. Reinforcements
having been called up, O’Donnell hastily fell back on Manresa, only to re-
appear suddenly ten days later and fall upon a French brigade stationed around
Granollers. Taken completely by surprise, the invaders lost 1,000 men, and,
whilst the survivors, who had barricaded themselves in a convent, were rescued
by a relief column led by Augereau himself, the Catalan troops got clear away.
There followed a brief lull in the fighting, but on 19 February O'Donnell
appeared yet again, this time attacking the French division that had been left
to hold Vich and badly wounding its commander.” Thanks to the superiority
of the French cavalry, the Spaniards were in the end defeated at Vich, but
O’Donnell was undaunted. The Spanish general first thwarted an attempt on
the part of Marshal Augereau to capture Tarragona by attacking the garrisons
that had been dropped off at Villafranca and Manresa to keep open communi-
cations with Barcelona (both were all but destroyed); and then joined with the
local somatenes in harassing the would-be besiegers’ retreat on the capital. Much
aided by Augereau, who to Napoleon’s fury decided to pull most of his troops
back to Gerona on the grounds that the population of Barcelona could not be
fed at the same time as a large field army, O’Donnell then marched west to assist
Lérida, which had in April been besieged by troops dispatched from Aragon
under Suchet. In this he failed — over-confidence and want of caution led him
to march into a clever trap at Margalef that cost him several thousand casual-
ties — but the French were too preoccupied with the siege of Lérida (and, after
that of Mequinenza and Tortosa), not to mention the perennial task of getting
convoys of food into Barcelona, to follow up their success. As a result, the
Spanish general was accorded a breathing space, which he used to rebuild his
battered army, whose divisions were deployed in a great horseshoe in the
                                                       The Guerrillas at War    47


mountains of central Catalonia in positions that allowed them to keep up the
blockade of the capital, harass convoys moving along the high road from
Gerona to Barcelona and impede Suchet’s attempts to move on Tortosa and
Tarragona from the west.°' At the same time, meanwhile, the somatenes were
called to make a major effort. Thus:
  All the inhabitants of the districts of Tarragona, Tortosa and Lerida capable
  of doing so should leap to arms. Having elected experienced commanders of
  proven courage and patriotism, they should mass at Falset and Tibisa.. .
  and intércept the enemy’s communications. And let no pueblo provide our
  perfidious foe with aid of any sort: any that does so will be treated as an
  enemy by its own brothers.”

   There followed a further spate of minor actions, with small forces of regular
troops attacking the enemy at such places as Tibisa and Balaguer, the guerrilla
bands of Narciso Gay and Francisco Rovira operating along the main roads and
raiding such garrisons as that of Besali, and the migueletes of Clarés, Manso
and other commanders skirmishing with the French around Barcelona and
Gerona and even striking across the border into France.” In September,
meanwhile, O’Donnell attempted his most daring operation yet: picking up his
northernmost division from its base of Cardona, he struck eastwards towards
the sea, and fell on a German brigade whose task it was to watch the coast in
the vicinity of Gerona. Aided both by further troops that had been sent up
from Tarragona by sea and a number of irregulars, the Spanish commander
gained a complete victory: taken by surprise, the Germans were overwhelmed
and taken prisoner.
    As the war went on, meanwhile, the tendency of the Catalan forces to engage
in small-scale operations increased still further, particularly in the wake of the
fall of Tarragona in June 1811. The defenders of Catalonia, now known as the
First Army, had suffered terrible casualties, been cut off from the sea and driven
back into the poor and thinly populated hinterland of the province. In this sit-
uation all that could be done was to launch the occasional raid, a good example
of which was the attack launched by the First Army’s new commander, General
Luis Lacy, on a large French convoy that was travelling from Gerona to
Barcelona near Igualada on 7 October 1810. The details of this affair are of
some interest, for they are little different from those of, say, Espoz y Mina’s
attacks on similar convoys travelling along the main road from Madrid to the
French frontier. Thus, it was decided that a strong force of troops under
the Baron de Eroles should attack the column from the front whilst Lacy cut
the road in its rear and, further, that the attack should go in at night whilst the
French were in camp. The Spaniards having spent the previous day holed up
at Manresa, the first the French knew of the attack was when some 300 enemy
48     Fighting Napoleon


cavalry charged into their encampment at three o’clock in the morning. Many
French soldiers were killed or wounded in the first rush, but the remainder fled
into a nearby convent, where they held out stoutly. Unable to take this redoubt
for want of artillery, Lacy eventually had to retreat, but it had still been a very
successful raid: at least seventy Frenchmen lay dead, whilst the Spaniards’
booty included 150 mules loaded with flour and 700 head of cattle.”
   The Catalan example has been discussed at some length because it shows not
just how local militias could be just as important in /a yuerrilla as partisan bands,
but also how the regular army played an integral part in its operations. Indeed,
this was a feature of the fighting in a number of provinces. In Galicia, for
instance, the uprising of the first months of 1809 was lent added bite by the
presence of the Marqués de la Romana’s Army of the Left, which, though
much battered after the campaigns of the autumn and winter of 1808, remained
in being and in March 18009 sallied out to capture the French strongpoint of
Villafranca del Bierzo.
   For an even better example, however, we might turn to Asturias. Isolated
behind its mountains, that province had been stripped of most of its regular
troops in the summer of 1809, and in early 1810 seemed ripe for invasion. On
31 January, then, the division of General Bonnet occupied Oviedo. The mere
occupation of the capital did not put an end to resistance, however. Most of the
garrison had fallen back to positions in the west of the province, and from there
a number of officers sallied out to raise the populace, who had previously been
organised into an alarma modelled on that of Galicia. At the same time, mean-
while, the forces of Juan Diaz Porlier, which by this time consisted of a flying
column of regular troops, moved into a position from which they could threaten
Bonnet’s communications with Leon. There followed a series of minor actions:
Porlier, for example, attacked a French detachment near Infiesto and captured
many prisoners; Barcena, the regular commander, defeated another small force
at Puente de Soto; and various small groups of irregulars closed in on the
capital. With his communications completely cut — many of his dispatches fell
into the hands of the Spaniards — on 12 February Bonnet was constrained to
evacuate the capital and start to fall back on Santander.
    At this point, however, the Spaniards behaved in such a manner that the
French general was afforded the chance of a counter-stroke. Unable to resist
the temptation of staging a triumphal entry into the city, Porlier and Llano
Ponte (the commander of the division that had originally held the eastern part
of the province) descended on Oviedo, along with large numbers of irregulars,
and settled down to enjoy the fruits of victory. Realising that he was not being
pursued, Bonnet turned back and, taking advantage of snow and thick fog,
inflicted a shattering defeat on the Spaniards two days later. With Oviedo once
more occupied, the Asturian forces again fell back on the River Nalon, where
                                                       The Guerrillas at War    49

they were reconstituted with the aid of a small force of regular troops dis-
patched from Galicia under a Lieutenant-Colonel Luis Diaz. With Bonnet soon
in exactly the same straits as before, by the middle of March the way seemed
open for a counter-offensive. Some 5,000 troops were therefore placed in
motion for Oviedo, and on 19 March the latter’s outnumbered garrison was
defeated in a sharp action at the Puente de Pefiaflor, with the result that Bonnet
once again abandoned the capital and retreated, this time, to Cangas de Onis.
   Barely a week had passed before he was back again, however. Having received
reinforcements from Santander, he retraced his steps and attacked the
Spaniards, who had re-entered Oviedo. Largely composed of raw troops, badly
armed and lacking in cohesion — one of the battalions sent from Galicia was a
provisional unit composed of fragments of no fewer than four different regi-
ments — the defenders fled with little resistance, leaving the French to enter
Oviedo for the third time in two months. Yet this profited them not at all.
Bonnet lacked the troops to force the line of the River Naloén, to which the
Spaniards had once again withdrawn, and from the safe base that this afforded
them detachments of partisans and regular troops were soon sallying out to
harass the French. Not, indeed, till the fall of Astorga permitted the dispatch
of substantial reinforcements to Bonnet in late April was the stalemate broken.
Only then were the French able to cross the Nalon and occupy much of the
west of the province.”
   Yet the French offensive of 1810 did not bring the fighting in Asturias to an
end. Whereas it had previously been used merely as a base for guerrilla warfare,
the principality now became a theatre for its operations. Once again, however,
we see that the partidas were not alone in the struggle. Porlier, it is true, for
some months held out in the mountains in the south of the province, whilst
other irregulars continued to raid Bonnet’s lines of communication with Leon
and Santander, but other elements also played their part. Amongst these
were the alarma, who took part, for example, in Porlier’s raid on Santofia in
July 1810 (see below). But from the summer onwards naval power played
an increasingly important part in the equation. Thus, the month of July saw
Porlier come down to the coast, take ship with the British squadron stationed
in the Bay of Biscay and seize the town of Santofia in the neighbouring province
of Santander. Forced to abandon this conquest in the face of overwhelming
numbers, he then spent some time cruising up and down the coast harassing
the French and picking up recruits for his command. Returning to Asturias, on
17 October he attacked Gijon, where he was joined by a brigade of regular
troops that had been dispatched from La Corufia under Mariano Renovales
along with 800 British marines. The French troops in the vicinity being heavily
outnumbered, Oviedo was quickly retaken in addition to Gij6n, but it was not
to be held, for a vengeful Bonnet was soon bearing down on the city with every
50    Fighting Napoleon


man that he could muster. Whilst Porlier headed for the hills once more,
Renovales therefore re-embarked and sailed for Santander; further mischief
was put a stop to only when a violent storm wrecked the expedition, sinking
many of the Allied ships and resulting in the death of some 800 troops.”
   By the end of 1810, then, the fighting in Asturias had settled into a pattern
that blended regular and irregular warfare. Nor did 1811 bring much change,
the importance of the guerrillas being, if anything, inclined to decline. An
attempt on the part of Mariano Renoyales to establish a force at Potes on the
lines of that commanded by Porlier in the hope of raising the Basque provinces
in revolt went badly wrong, whilst the first part of the year saw the latter com-
mander experience not only repeated defeats, but also a major mutiny amongst
his men.” August, it is true, saw Porlier redeem himself by making a forced
mach on Santander, which enabled him to raid the city and take most of the
garrison prisoner; but, if Asturias was evacuated in June, it was not because of
the guerrillas, but rather because the Spanish forces in Galicia essayed a cau-
tious offensive that secured a minor victory at Cogorderos and forced all the
French troops in north-west Spain to march against them. This in turn gave
renewed life to the partidas of Old Castile and Leon — it was at this time, for
example, that one Lorenzo Aguilar de Toro, an escaped prisoner of war who
had got back to his home territory of Zamora, is supposed to have killed no
fewer than seventy-one Frenchmen in just four days — but again it is clear that
the regular army was as much a combatant in /a guerrilla as the partidas.”
   If this was true of the north of Spain, it was also true of Andalucia. As we
have seen, when the French moved south in January 1810 they soon encoun-
tered much irregular resistance. To quote an anonymous intelligence report
sent to the Patriot government from Seville, for example: ‘In a word, the
ferment is spreading to every pueblo: war is following the French like a fury,
and death and destruction are mounting by the day.’”’ On occasion this
resistance reached considerable heights: an ill-judged raid on Murcia that
required the use of most of the troops used to garrison the kingdom of Granada
allowed the ‘mountain flies’, as the French called them, to threaten many minor
posts and even temporarily to occupy Malaga. The serious nature of the
problem is suggested by the draconian decree issued by Marshal Soult (the
head of the French forces that had invaded southern Spain) on 8 May 1810.
According to this, pueblos that failed either to establish a civic guard to defend
themselves as the French had ordered, or to put up a fight in the event of the
arrival of a partida, were made liable to heavy fines, and it was further
announced that all those taken in arms would be shot out of hand.” Mean-
while, Algodonales and Grazalema were singled out as particularly troublesome
centres of resistance and, having been occupied by punitive columns, subjected
                                                      The Guerrillas at War   51

to sack and massacre — so thorough was the destruction of the former, indeed,
that Joseph’s comisario regio in Seville boasted that it would forever after be a
desert.”
   Yet the real threat to the invaders came not from the efforts of the serranos
but rather from the regular forces that continued to be scattered around the
periphery of the region. Of the forces that had been defeated in the Sierra
Morena when the French had burst through the passes there was little enough
to be feared (though a few fugitive units ended up in the serrania and supported
the insurrection there). However, a division of veteran Asturian troops had been
sent down from the headquarters of the Army of the Left at Badajoz into the
present-day province of Huelva and, under the enterprising leadership of its
commander, General Ballesteros, it was soon causing major problems for the
French. Thus, defeating columns under Beauregard and Gazan at Ronquillo
and Valverde, Ballesteros moved to attack the French forces who had occupied
the Condado de Niebla. Furthermore, although he was himself defeated at
Zalamea la Real on 15 April, he got away without any great difficulty and estab-
lished himself in the wilds of the Sierra de Aracena, from whence for many
months he was to continue to harass the French. Nor were his men alone. A
7oo-strong detachment of troops consisting of fragments of half a dozen dif-
ferent units that had managed to escape capture when the French took Seville
had succeeded in reaching Ayamonte, where it was taken over by General Fran-
cisco Copons y Navia, who had been sent round from Cadiz. Aided by some
hastily organised local militias, these men embarked on a series of raids and
skirmishes in the Condado de Niebla. And, having again landed from the sea,
a full division under General Luis Lacy first struck into the Serrania de Ronda
from San Roque, and then re-embarked and sailed round to Huelva, where it
drove off the French garrison and advanced some way inland before returning
to Cadiz.”
   All these troops were regulars: Lacy’s division, for example, consisted of the
line infantry regiments of Murcia and Canarias, the light infantry regiments of
Valencia and Campo Mayor, the Ciudad Real regiment of provincial militia and
a composite battalion drawn from the Spanish and Walloon Guards.” Yet it is
clear that their activities belonged entirely to the realm of Ja guerrilla: the
Spanish attack at Valverde, for example, had been launched at midnight. As
Salmon wrote of Copons’ activities in the Condado de Niebla:

  There were... no pitched battles between full-scale armies because such
  forces did not exist, but raids and skirmishes were to be found in abundance.
  Fiercely contested and very bloody, they showed the French that the spirit
  and valour that has always characterised Spaniards were not dead . . . As for
52       Fighting Napoleon


     taking control of the district, the enemy could never do so, there being no
     point within its bounds where they could post themselves without being
     immediately set upon, harassed and overcome.”

   For a good example of the sort of action to which Salmon was referring, one
might cite the attack launched by Brigadier Miguel de Alzega at the pueblo
of Castillo de las Guardas on 21 August 1810. The commander of the light
infantry regiment known as the Cazadores de Barbastro, Alzega marched his
men through the night and fell upon the French at dawn. Bursting into the
streets, the Spaniards chased the garrison into the castle, but the defenders
showed no signs of giving in and so Alzega ordered a withdrawal, having lost
one man killed and another four wounded.”
   The situation in Andalucia in 1810 is especially interesting because it again
raises the question of the limits that can be set to /a guerrilla. On the frontiers
of Galicia we have already seen the deployment of an entire Spanish army in
a role that is at the very least closely related to the guerrilla war. And, as for
Galicia, so for Andalucia. Around Badajoz there remained in being the Spanish
Army of the Left under the Marqués de la Romana. Renamed the Fifth Army
in the course of 1810, it engaged in frequent skirmishes with the French troops
facing it and in August and September twice struck southwards in the direc-
tion of Seville, only to be beaten in minor combats at Villagarcia and Fuente
de Cantos. Similar demonstrations, meanwhile, were engaged in by the Spanish
forces — the Third Army — that had gathered around Murcia under Blake, at
first with rather greater caution, but eventually with an over-confidence and
carelessness that produced a substantial defeat at Baza on 4 November.’”* Such
petty campaigns are hardly to be equated with the great strategic movements
of the war, but they are intimately related to the doings of the partidas, the
marches and counter-marches of the Third Army once again affording great
freedom of action to the insurgents of the Serrania de Ronda and the Alpu-
jarras. Thus, in the absence of the large numbers of troops who had to be
sent to deal with Blake, the serranos captured Almunécar and Motril, thereby
opening fresh communications with the sea, and even went so far as to attack
the city of Granada. More typical of their activities, however, were those
engaged in by the followers of José Ruiz Falcon, José Aguilar and José Villalo-
bos: on 3 September Falcon captured a small convoy on the road to Malaga;
on 21 October Aguilar defeated a French force outside Ronda; and on 30
October Villalobos wiped out an outpost of forty Polish troops at Alameda de
Baza.”
   To make matters even more complicated, at this point British troops also
became involved in /a guerrilla. At the suggestion of the prominent Spanish
general and nobleman the Duque del Infantado, a number of British officers
                                                       The Guerrillas at War   53

had already been sent into the interior in an attempt to produce a greater degree
of organisation among the peasantry. But now the governor of Gibraltar,
General Campbell, agreed to a request from the Spanish government to provide
troops for an expedition to the coast of Malaga. Along with a Spanish regiment
from Ceuta, one and a half battalions of redcoats of the Gibraltar garrison were
therefore embarked, together with a provisional battalion of foreign deserters,
the plan being for them to land at the little port of Fuengirola and then to seize
Malaga. Commanding the whole was Lord Blayney. With a little imagination
and foresight on Blayney’s part much might have been achieved, but he allowed
himself to get bogged down in the siege of Fuengirola’s insignificant castle. To
make matters worse, rather than hastening to take ship again as soon as the
large force of troops that the French sent to relieve the garrison hove into view,
he stood and fought, despite the fact that his only complete British battalion
had still not landed. With the enemy consisting of some 3,000 men, not to
mention the garrison of the castle, which also joined in the fight by means of
a violent sally, the result was never in doubt: outnumbered and outfought,
Blayney and 200 of his men were captured.”
   Disastrous though it was, the Fuengirola expedition was the harbinger of
many other British raids on stretches of coast occupied by the French. Of par-
ticular note in this respect was the naval component of the campaign of
Salamanca in the summer of 1812. Whilst aware of the actions of the Spanish
guerrillas, Wellington was not inclined solely to trust to their assistance when
it came to reducing the considerable numerical superiority that the armies to
which he was opposed always possessed in relation to his own forces. To tie
down the French Army of the North, he therefore took up the suggestion of
the British naval officer Sir Home Popham, that a seaborne guerrilla should be
waged against the enemy garrisons that dotted the coast of Santander and the
Basque provinces. On 17 June 1812, then, a squadron of warships put out from
La Corufia under Popham with two battalions of marines. Aided by the forces
of the Spanish Seventh Army — the name that had been given to the irregulars
of the region — for the next two months Popham launched attack after attack
on the French. Lequeitio, Guetaria, Castro-Urdiales, Portugalete, Santander
and Bilbao were all assaulted, and in most cases taken, whilst the enemy troops
in the region were exhausted by endless marches and counter-marches, for
Popham could easily appear before one stronghold, bombard it for a few days
and then take ship for another as soon as a relief force hove into view. Despite
the occasional defeat, meanwhile, Allied casualties were minimal and, in a
development vital for the campaign of 1813, Santander was retained as a per-
manent base.”
   Nor were amphibious raids of this sort the only occasions when British forces
fought in the ‘little war’. In the period 1811—12, indeed, entire divisions were
54    Fighting Napoleon


employed in raids that took them deep into the hinterland of Spain. The first
of these was the surprise of Arroyomolinos de Montanchez of 28 October 1811.
Hearing that a reinforced French division commanded by General Girard had
advanced to the Extremaduran town of Caceres, and thus placed itself far
beyond the reach of any possible support, the British General Hill, who was
guarding the southern frontier of Portugal with a much larger force, resolved
to take the enemy napping. Supported by a few troops from the Spanish Fifth
Army, he therefore led 8,000 British and Portuguese regulars across the fron-
tier in a forced march on Girard’s communications. In the event the French
commander escaped being surrounded, as Hill had hoped, for, discovering that
Allied troops were in the area, he withdrew from Caceres in the nick of time.
However, the invaders’ retreat was not quick enough, and in the early morning
of 28 October they were attacked in camp at the village of Arroyomolinos de
Montanchez. Taken completely by surprise, the French were routed with the
loss of many prisoners and all their baggage.** Meanwhile, it was Hill, too, who
was the chief protagonist of the Anglo-Portuguese army’s other great raid: it
was he who, in May 1812, led a powerful striking force to destroy the vital
bridge across the River Tagus at Almaraz, an operation that he accomplished
with consummate skill.*°
   In one way or another, then, considerable forces of both Spanish and Anglo-
Portuguese troops were drawn into /a guerrilla. In most instances this was on a
purely temporary basis: Hill’s corps, for example, had by the autumn of 1812
once more adopted a role that was purely conventional. But amongst the
Spaniards in particular, circumstances led a number of regular soldiers to
acquire a place amongst the ranks of the guerrillas that was all but permanent.
   We must here in the first instance turn once again to the division of General
Ballesteros. This force we last met fighting a long series of actions in the moun-
tains of western Andalucia in the first months of 1810, and it in fact contin-
ued to engage the French in this district for the next year: early in 1811, for
example, Ballesteros seriously embarrassed Marshal Soult by suddenly appear-
ing on his flank and rear just as he was marching northwards from Seville to
attack Badajoz. Large forces were detached by the French commander to hunt
him down, but the Spanish general — in 1808 a mere officer of the customs
guard — skilfully evaded them and drew his pursuers nearly as far as the Por-
tuguese frontier before finally stopping to fight at Villafranca de los Castillejos.
The action that followed was no disgrace to the Spaniards, and they then
slipped away to Alcoutim, leaving their weary opponents no choice but to
retrace their steps in search of Soult, whose attack on Badajoz had in the mean-
time been much delayed. No sooner had they gone than Ballesteros reappeared,
this time defeating the small French garrison left in the Condado de Niebla and
briefly threatening Seville.
                                                       The Guerrillas at War    5G,


   May 1811 saw a brief return to full-scale campaigning when Ballesteros took
part in the bloody battle of Albuera, but his presence there was purely for-
tuitous, its only reason being that a French force under General Maransin had
driven the Spanish general far to the north and forced him to take refuge with
the Allied army that had come up to retake Badajoz (Soult’s attack had been
successful and the fortress had surrendered on 10 March). Returning to
Andalucia with the rest of the Spanish forces that had fought at Albuera, Balles-
teros then sailed from Ayamonte to Algeciras, where he plunged into the
Serrania de Ronda and embarked on a fresh series of raids and skirmishes.
Large numbers of French troops being sent against him, he then took shelter
at Gibraltar, only to sally out again as soon as the danger was past and pounce
on one of the retreating French columns at Bornos, forcing the surrender of
an entire battalion of juramentados in the process.
   After wintering on the coast, having been reinforced by two extra divisions,
in April Ballesteros struck north again and again headed for Seville, only to fall
back in great haste at what turned out to be a false report of superior French
forces heading his way. Self-respect having been restored by the destruction of
a small French column at Alhaurin on 14 April, he then again returned to
Gibraltar, this time with the enemy very much in hot pursuit. Within weeks,
however, he was on the march again: as the French had fallen back for want of
provisions, he first engaged in some skirmishes around Ronda and then
marched north-west to Bornos, where he fell on the reserves of the troops
engaged in the fruitless blockade of Cadiz and gave them a very considerable
fright before finally being driven off with some loss. Falling back on his usual
refuge of Gibraltar, he licked his wounds for a while, and then set out on a long
march through the mountains to Malaga, whose garrison he took completely
by surprise and drove into the castle. Tarrying for just long enough to strip the
town of such recruits, money and supplies as it could offer, he then tried to get
back to the shelter of Gibraltar, only to find that the way was blocked by a large
force of French troops. With more enemies coming up in the rear, there was
only one hope and that was to head west towards the valley of the Guadalquivir,
which move he turned to his advantage by launching a surprise attack on the
garrison of Osuna. Having secured yet more plunder, he then marched for the
sea again and, getting round the flank of the troops sent to cut him off, by 1
August he was back in touch with Gibraltar.”
   As Andalucia was evacuated by the French very soon afterwards, the rest of
Ballesteros’ military career need not concern us. But his operations in the
period 1810-12 have been discussed in some detail because they are in reality
almost impossible to distinguish from the operations, say, of the division of
Espoz y Mina in Navarre. Ballesteros rarely commanded more than 5,000 men,
after all, and his tactics throughout were those associated with guerrilla warfare.
56       Fighting Napoleon


Ruses, dawn attacks, surprises, night marches, petty combats, ambushes and the
use of rough terrain allfigured in his campaigns, and it is also very much the
case that he fought only when he enjoyed the advantage of superior numbers.
It is, indeed, almost impossible to count the number of times he fell back into
Portugal or retired on Gibraltar rather than risk battle with a stronger enemy.
Although the soldiers Ballesteros commanded were all regulars, his operations
therefore occupy a definite place in the history of the ‘little war’. Lowly customs
guard as he was, he also had far more in common with many guerrilla com-
manders than with most of his fellow generals. Indeed, in Juan Lopez Campillo,
a fellow resguardo officer from the neighbouring province of Santander, he pos-
sessed almost an exact counterpart in their ranks, whilst his own elevation to
the ranks of the generalato was entirely owing to the prodigality with which the
Junta of Asturias had showered commissions on its adherents in 1808. And,
last but not least, both the general and his men shared many of the proclivities
that we shall come to associate with their more irregular counterparts. To quote
a British liaison officer who served with Ballesteros’ division:

     Of all the unworthies produced by Spain during this war (and God knows
     there were plenty of them), this man was the greatest impostor and
     charlatan . . . He certainly kept a body of men together, but they proved only
     a curse to the inhabitants . . . [and] appeared to be composed of the debris
     of defeated and dispersed armies, men who would not fight, yet reassembled
     to obtain food because they were too idle or too dissipated to work. When-
     ever the French retired, the Spaniards followed, composing and reciting
     songs of victory, but at too respectable a distance to disquiet the enemy. If
     the French . . . attempted to pursue them, they soon found how vain was the
     undertaking.”

   To separate Ballesteros from the ‘little war’ is therefore impossible, but, for
all that, neither he nor his men can really be described as guerrillas: regular sol-
diers, they had simply been detached from their normal duties for a while and,
with the French gone from Andalucia, they were soon to return to more con-
ventional operations. And even in the course of their normal duties, soldiers
might easily become involved in guerrilla warfare. In a few instances, such as
the case of Juan Diaz Porlier, who received the assistance of the old Laredo
provincial militia regiment, regular units were formally assigned to the com-
mand of guerrilla commanders in an attempt to boost their potential.
    But let us look at the far more common experiences of the sort encapsulated
by the skirmishes that took place in the district of Extremadura known as the
Tierra de Barros in May 1810. On g May a detachment of soldiers drawn from
the garrison of the town of Feria ambushed a French force that had been sent
to pick up a consignment of supplies from the town of Fuente del Maestre.
Caught unawares and attacked from both sides, the Frenchmen beat a hasty
                                                      The Guerrillas at War    a4

retreat, leaving the road strewn with their dead and wounded.® In response the
French drove the Spaniards from Feria, but the commander of the garrison,
Pablo Morillo, immediately counter-attacked, forcing the enemy troops to with-
draw into the castle and burning such of their supplies as he could not carry
away, before finally beating a hasty retreat in the direction of Jerez de los
Caballeros.*’ With the French making no effort to pursue him, a week later he
attacked again with much the same result.** A month later Morillo was back in
action again, this time at Burguillos, where he attacked a French column
advancing from Zafra and succeeded in forcing it to retreat.*” And finally, after
a long night march in pouring rain, at dawn on 7 September Morillo attacked
Fuente Ovejuna at the head of two battalions of line infantry. The details of
this fight are worth recording as they show the similarity between the modus
operandi of the guerrillas and that of the regulars. Morillo and his men charged
into the town to discover that the French garrison of 108 men were barricaded
inside a large house and the town’s granary. Unable to storm the buildings,
Morillo piled numerous barrels of wet straw against them and ordered them to
be set on fire. Driven out by the choking smoke, the French then made a dash
for the parish church and managed to get inside, only for the latter to be fired
as well, whereupon they surrendered, having lost fourteen dead and sixteen
wounded.”
    At least Morillo did at one point early in the war command a band of irregu-
lars. Many other figures who are generally represented as having been guerril-
las, however, never merited the description at all. Pride of place here must
probably go to the Leonese leader, Julian Sanchez Garcia: in frequent contact
with Wellington’s army, he is inevitably the cabecilla who figures most promi-
nently in British memoirs. A peasant from the pueblo of Mufioz on the road
from Ciudad Rodrigo to Salamanca, Sanchez was thirty-four in 1808 and had
served from 1793 to 1801 as a soldier in the Mallorca line infantry regiment.
For reasons of which we know nothing, on 15 August 1808 he enlisted in the
militia that had been raised to defend Ciudad Rodrigo in the aftermath of the
uprising. Soon promoted to the rank of sergeant, he was given command of a
small picket of cavalry. The arrival of French troops in the vicinity of the
fortress early in 1809 therefore involved him in a series of minor skirmishes
that brought him a commission as an alférez. By the summer he was in
command of a full squadron of cavalry — the genesis of what was to become
the First Regiment of Lancers of Castile — and at the head of these men on 21
June he defeated a much stronger party of French dragoons at Almeida de
Sayago. Many other such raids followed, with Sanchez, who was now a brevet
captain, undoubtedly enjoying a great deal of independence.
   Range far and wide though he and his men did, however, there was never
any question as to Sanchez’s dependence on the army that was now based at
Ciudad Rodrigo under the Duque del Parque: indeed, when Del Parque
58     Fighting Napoleon

went on the offensive in October, Sanchez and his lancers were called in to
assist with reconnaissance and outpost duty. Badly beaten at Alba de Tormes,
Del Parque then went into winter quarters on the borders of Leon and
Extremadura, and Sanchez in the meantime busied himself with such tasks as
rounding up deserters, gathering in supplies and skirmishing with the French
forces based at Salamanca. In the spring, though, Del Parque was replaced by
La Romana, who took the army south to Badajoz. Left behind, Sanchez and
his men were formally attached to the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo, in which
capacity they fought a series of actions with the enemy troops now closing in
on the city. Here and there minor successes were obtained, but no amount of
skirmishing could prevent the French from commencing siege operations.
As cavalry were of only limited use in this situation, the governor, Andrés
Pérez de Herrasti, ordered Sanchez to break out of the city, which he did
by means of a sudden charge launched at one o’clock in the morning on 23
June 1810.”!
   The army to which he had belonged having completely left the area, Sanchez
was effectively a law unto himself for most of the next year, and as such it might
be thought that he now had to all intents and purposes become a guerrilla. He
took part in no regular campaigns, but rather confined himself to harassing the
communications of the French army that had invaded Portugal under Marshal
Massena following the fall of Ciudad Rodrigo. To quote an anonymous staff
officer attached to the headquarters of the Spanish Fifth Army in the spring
of 1811, for example: ‘The bands that are at the orders of Don Julian Sanchez
in Castile have made . . . a continuous massacre of the unfortunate Frenchmen
who have been trying to escape from Portugal.”” Raids and ambushes were very
much the order of the day, whilst the troops whom the Anglo-Portuguese army
encountered when they arrived back on the frontier in March 1811 had all the
appearances of being an irregular force. ‘A more verminous-looking set of
fellows you never beheld’, wrote William Bragge; whilst Charles Boutflower
remarked, ‘A Spaniard well-known by the name of Don Julian was here yes-
terday . . . His followers sometimes amount to 1,000; at others he cannot muster
fifty. They make a great deal by plunder, and absent themselves for the purpose
of spending their money, which having done they again join his standard.”
Such, too, is very much the impression that is obtained from French accounts.
Marbot, for example, describes his men as ‘irregular bands . .. who were quite
unfit to resist troops of the line’.”* But the reality was rather different. Whilst
Sanchez’s style was certainly that of an irregular — nicknamed El Charro, he
affected a French shako with the imperial eagle worn upside down — he
throughout remained both an officer of the regular army and an agent of La
Romana, who in fact ordered him to raise a second regiment of cavalry, pro-
vided him with a troop of horse artillery and eventually secured him the rank
                                                     The Guerrillas at War    59


of brigadier. At the same time, the independent role of earlier years vanished:
although outpost duty and reconnaisance remained the roles in which his troops
were most commonly employed, Sanchez’s brigade fought with Wellington in
the Salamanca campaign and ended the war as part of the garrison of Ciudad
Rodrigo.”
   If the forces of El Charro constitute the best-known example, various other
partidas also turn out in reality to have been composed of troops belonging
to the regular army. For two further examples we have only to turn to Aragon.
Set up in the summer of 1809, for example, the band of Pedro Villacampa
is at first sight hard to distinguish from, say, those of El Empecinado or
Espoz y Mina. Typical of its actions, for example, was its attack on Teruel on
8 March 1810, together with the fighting that followed. Suddenly appearing
outside the town, Villacampa drove the garrison back into the complex of
fortified convents that it had converted into a makeshift citadel. Leaving some
of his men to pin down the defenders, he then turned north and annihilated
a small relief column that he encountered at Caudé, before finally pouncing
on the garrison of Alventosa.”° Villacampa even referred to himself as a
guerrilla, as witness, for example, a call for volunteers that he issued in the
spring of 1810.” Yet in reality he was a regular officer who had been taken
prisoner in the siege of Zaragoza. After managing to escape, he had been sent
out by the local Spanish commander, General Blake, to foment popular resis-
tance in Aragon. His forces consisted of the regiment of which he was himself
colonel, the remnants of the line regiments of Soria and La Princesa, which
had escaped a Spanish defeat at Santander and made an epic march across
occupied Spain in search of safety, and a unit of new levies raised by the Junta
of Molina.”
   Even more dubious, meanwhile, is the case of another Aragonese com-
mander, Felipe Perena. Villacampa might just qualify as a guerrilla — he was
sent out specifically to conduct irregular operations — but the same cannot be
said of Perena. Perena was a regular officer who had in 1808 been chasing
bandits, and had been appointed by José Palafox to be the governor of Huesca.
Although he joined Ja guerrilla in the wake of the fall of Zaragoza, it was for
want of strength to do anything else. In the raids and skirmishes that followed
he showed some talent — true, it was forces under his command that in May
1809 succeeded in capturing 600 French troops who had become trapped on
the wrong side of the River Cinca by a sudden flood — but his “band” turns out
to have been none other than a regiment of volunteers raised in 1808. Indeed,
it was as regular troops that his men met their end: caught up in the French
offensive against Lérida in 1810, they were overwhelmed at Balaguer, and the
few men who remained in the ranks after this defeat were marched into
captivity when the fortress finally surrendered.”
60     Fighting Napoleon

   The distinction between the regular and irregular elements of /a guerrilla is
often blurred. For example, regular units involved in the struggle might very
easily pick up recruits from the same sources as the partidas. This was particu-
larly true of units that disappeared into the hills for long periods. As a senior
official in the Ministry of State wrote to his chief, Bardaji, ‘A great part of
Zayas’ deserters are with the insurgent Ballesteros.’ Yet such points of con-
gruence should not be exaggerated. By 1812 Ballesteros’ division may have
come to resemble that, say, of Espoz y Mina, but in essence they remained dif-
ferent phenomena. On the other hand, however, they were also engaged in the
same struggle. Nor is this surprising, for by 1811 the regular army had been so
ground down that, as one British officer put it, it was ‘unfit for anything more
than mere guerrilla warfare’.'”’ From this point — the realisation that /a guer-
rilla was the work not just of bands of armed civilians, but of a wide range of
forces that included elements of the regular armies of Britain, Spain and Por-
tugal alike — it follows that it is possible to reassess the popular struggle against
the French without being constantly tripped up by arguments that the guer-
rillas played a vital role in the defeat of the Napoleonic invaders. Favoured by
factors of strategy and geography that rendered the French zone of occupa-
tion uniquely vulnerable to attack, the ‘little war’ per se may well have played
such a role, but proof.of the involvement of many different forces in the
struggle means that it is no longer necessary to pay unreserved homage to all
its different participants. No longer can it be taboo to suggest that Espoz y
Mina, El Empecinado and the rest were anything but pillars of Spain’s inde-
pendence. And, by the same token, no longer can admirers of the guerrillas
bolster their arguments by reference to actions for which in reality their heroes
can take no credit. If room has thereby been created for a reassessment of the
guerrillas, the doubts, concerns and divisions of opinion that have already been
revealed in our survey of the historiography suggest that that reassessment
cannot come too soon. Add to these the many contradictions in the Spanish
struggle against Napoleon that will be revealed in the next chapter, and the
need for such a reassessment will come to seem still greater.
                                         3
                    The Guerrillas in Context




   Patriotism . . . resounds from the high Pyrenees to the coasts of Andalucia
   ... Thousands of combatants are coming forward... greed and egotism
   have been silenced, and a thousand sacrifices are providing riches for the
   needs of the state.!

These words encapsulate one of the abiding images of the history of modern
Spain: the idea that when Napoleon overthrew the Bourbon dynasty in 1808,
he found himself confronted by the resistance of the proverbial people numer-
ous and armed, and, what is more, a people numerous and armed that threw
itself into battle with a ferocity and determination that have rarely been sur-
passed. To quote Gabriel Lovett, ‘All the energies of unoccupied Spain were
directed toward one objective, beating back the invaders.” So often has this idea
been repeated, indeed, that it is impossible to find a work on either Napoleon,
the Peninsular War or the history of modern Spain that does not simply take
it as read. At the same time, it is, of course, the very foundation of the ‘heroic’
view of the guerrillas, for, without total popular support for the struggle, the
partidas would neither have come into being nor survived for very long. And,
by the same token, like the operational history of the ‘little war’, it is a theme
that must clearly be opened up for discussion if the guerrillas are to be prop-
erly reassessed: if the Spanish people really were panting for war and revenge,
it would clearly be difficult to bring into question the patriotism of the par-
tidas. Yet it would be surprising if the traditional view were to prove convincing.
Indeed, in line with developments in the treatment of other areas of Europe,
the historiography of Napoleonic Spain has begun to undergo something of a
revolution. Thus, a new generation of writers has already begun to generate a
picture of the struggle against Napoleon that is very different from its tradi-
tional predecessor.’ According to such authors, popular enthusiasm for the war
62      Fighting Napoleon


was minimal, although as yet their work has largely been confined to regional
analyses. What is lacking is a study on a national scale, and it is this that the
following chapter will seek to provide.
   In embarking on a critical reassessment of the Spanish war effort, the histo-
rian is immediately faced with a major problem in that the struggle began with
a series of episodes that appear to confirm the idea that the populace rushed
into battle against Napoleon. In La Mancha, for example, the invaders found
themselves assailed on all sides by bands of angry peasants who committed the
most appalling atrocities against any Frenchmen unlucky enough to fall into
their hands. In Catalonia the popular militias known as the somatenes flocked to
arms and inflicted an embarrassing reverse on the French at the pass of El
Bruch. And, above all, at Zaragoza the armed citizenry manned the walls, beat
back a major assault and refused to give in even when the French finally
penetrated their defences.’ Images of heroism, then, were to be found in abun-
dance, but, whilst the problem cannot just be ducked, it would be wrong to
allow these episodes to stand in the way of attempts at revision. Particularly
helpful here is what Raymond Carr called ‘a political great fear’.°
   The origins of this phenomenon may be traced to the revolt of 2 May 1808
in Madrid. In this affair it was the Spaniards who struck the first blows, but
this was not the story that reached the rest of the country. Carried by terrified
fugitives seeking shelter with friends and family in the provinces, the tale grew
in the telling until it was believed that the French had not only slaughtered
thousands of innocent civilians, but also that they had deliberately set out to
massacre the populace. For an example of the spirit in which the news was
received, one might cite the city of Zaragoza, whose experience of the first three
decades of the nineteenth century was chronicled in great detail by one
Faustino Casamayor. Thus for 5 May 1808 his journal read as follows:

     Today’s post brought the disagreeable news of the misfortunes suffered by
     the gallant inhabitants of Madrid on account of the inhuman fury of the
     French commander, Murat... No sooner had it arrived than there was
     an extraordinary meeting of the town council, at which it was decided to
     warn the public of what had taken place and in addition to take precautions
     against the chance of anything of the sort happening at Zaragoza. All this
     plunged the populace into great fear, and whipped up great anger against
     ... the French.°

With many people already unsettled by the absence of the royal family (in
whose protection the humbler elements of the population reposed much faith),
taking up arms seemed an immediate necessity. Typical, perhaps, was the
response of Ciudad Rodrigo, where news of the Dos de Mayo led the populace
to man the walls in panic in expectation of an immediate attack. When nothing
                                                    The Guerrillas in Context   63


happened, the excitement subsided, but even so, the junta formed in the wake
of the uprising had no difficulty in becoming a new militia consisting of five
battalions of infantry, three companies of artillery and a regiment of cavalry.’
   This Spanish ‘great fear’ was reinforced by a number of other factors. Not
the least of these was the influence of religion, the atmosphere of crisis pro-
ducing outbreaks of veritable hysteria. Thus, in the Asturian shrine of
Covadonga large drops of sweat were seen to trickle down the face of Our Lady
of Battles, whilst at Santiago de Compostela the shrine of Saint James was
heard to ring with the clash of arms.* It is, however, Zaragoza that provides us
with the most direct evidence of the phenomenon:

  At about twelve o’clock [on 17 May]...a number of people began to say
  that they could see a palm tree surmounted by a crown in the sky above the
  dome of the shrine of Nuestra Sefiora del Pilar . . . At this stupendous news
  everyone began to invoke Our Lady and cry, ‘A miracle! A miracle!’, whilst
  at the same time it was claimed that a similar sight had been seen inside the
  shrine itself. At this the excitement grew even greater, and the santa capilla
  was soon resounding to the cry of people imploring the powerful assistance
  of the Virgin.”
   As the days passed so the hysteria grew, reaching its climax in the wake of
the national revolt provoked by the news that Fernando VII had been dethroned
by Napoleon. Fear of massacre was not the only cause, however. In Manresa,
for instance, the rising was precipitated by fears that ‘we were going . . . to end
up not only stripped of Church and King but serving [Napoleon] God knows
where’.!° Also instrumental was the Spanish Church, much of which was
bitterly opposed to Revolution and emperor alike. As the French apothecary
Sebastian Blaze remembered:

  The monks skilfully employed the influence which they still enjoyed over
  Spanish credulity . . . to inflame the populace and exacerbate the implacable
  hatred with which they already regarded us . . . In this fashion they encour-
  aged a naturally cruel and barbarous people to commit the most revolting
  crimes with a clear conscience. They accused us of being Jews, heretics,
  sorcerers .. . As a result, just to be a Frenchman became a crime in the eyes
  of the country."
   Although the sermon was probably mightier than the pen when it came to
lambasting the French, mention should also be made here of the blizzard of
pamphlets, letters, poems, odes, manifestos, exhortations, proclamations and
calls to arms that was called forth by the insurrection. The themes of this cam-
paign — hymns to Spanish heroism, panegyrics on Fernando VII, denunciations
of Napoleon and the hated royal favourite Manuel de Godoy, mockery of
64       Fighting Napoleon

Joseph Bonaparte, promises of rapid victory and stories of French atrocities —
are so well known that to detail them here seems pointless. But, in brief, there
was plenty to stir the fear of the populace, Napoleon being portrayed as a new
Attila the Hun, the French army as a bloodthirsty rabble and the Dos de Mayo
as the acme of massacre. The mamelukes of the Imperial Guard who formed
Murat’s personal bodyguard, for example, were supposed to have stripped
eleven prisoners naked, thrown them in a pit and then hacked them to pieces.”
   Not surprisingly, then, by the end of May the streets and squares had been
gripped by panic. At Ronda the house of the nephew of the victor of Bailén,
General Castafios, was stormed on the pretext that a guillotine had been hidden
there; at the Galician town of Villalba, 8 June saw rumours suddenly surface
to the effect that 8,ooo Frenchmen were marching on the town, burning and
killing everything they came across, with the result that the entire population
stood to arms with whatever weapons they could muster; at La Corufia news
that the French were landing from the sea brought an attempt to lynch some
prisoners incarcerated in the town’s gaol on the grounds that they were trai-
tors; and at Ribadeo stories that 6,000 enemy troops had sacked nearby
Castroverde produced threats that the mob would burn down the homes of the
local junta unless it was allowed to kill a solitary French aide-de-camp who had
just arrived in the town.'? Spy mania, too, was common: an unfortunate Italian
mercenary was thrown in prison for no better reason than the fact that he had
served the French as an interpreter. Meanwhile, one officer, sent to raise the
upper Pisuerga valley in revolt, only saved himself from being lynched by the
mob by climbing on to the roof of the inn in which he was staying, from which
predicament he was somewhat ignominiously rescued by the fortuitous arrival
of a French cavalry patrol.'t Enemy citizens, too, were put to death, as, for
example, in Malaga, where the French consul was killed on 20 June 1808, and
Valencia, where an ambitious friar named Baltasar Calvo instigated the murder
of no fewer than 380 French merchants and their families.'* Most revealing of
all, though, are the demands that confronted the alcalde mayor of Almaraz:

     We want to kill someone, Sir. They have killed one person in Trujillo, one
     or two more in Badajoz and someone else in Mérida, and we do not want to
     be left behind. Sir, we want to kill a traitor.'®

   With feelings so inflamed, we do not need to look very far to explain the des-
perate resistance that the French encountered when they first appeared before
the walls of certain towns (caution is needed with regard to such stories,
though: the heroic attempt to defend Zamora in January 1809 mentioned by
both Gomez de Arteche and Oman was in 1913 shown by a conscientious local
historian to have been a fabrication got up by the aywntamiento to ingratiate
itself with Fernando VII'’). Thus, the populace genuinely thought that their
                                                    The Guerrillas in Context    65


last hour had come, whilst the defence of their own homes was a cause that was
easy to understand and identify with.
   It is worth pointing out, however, that such acts of mass resistance were often
carefully choreographed: in Zaragoza — by far the most dramatic case — as
dictator of the city José Palafox from the start adopted a demagogic manner
that became ever more accentuated, whilst he was careful to surround himself
with popular heroes such as Jorge Ibort, Santiago Sas and Agustina Zaragoza
Domenech. At the same time mention might be made of the persistent stories
that were in circulation concerning the use of terror to keep the defenders at
their posts. In addition, the scenes witnessed in Zaragoza became increasingly
rare as the war wore on, for the terror that the French evoked in the first months
of the war proved short-lived. Despite desperate efforts on the part of the Junta
Central to organise every pueblo for house-to-house defence in the style of
Zaragoza, when the French stormed across the Sierra Morena in January 1810
the response was almost everywhere one of apathy. A call for volunteers to
defend the town of Huelva, for example, produced just thirty-six men, whilst
in Jaén a similar appeal failed to secure a single man."
   Even when there existed a willingness to defend hearth and home, this was
not the same as identification with the war. There was some voluntary enlist-
ment in the ranks of the army and the new regiments being established by many
of the provincial juntas, but neither patriotism nor fear seems to have played
much part in bringing in recruits. The only exception to the rule were students:
in Santiago de Compostela, for example, the entire university presented itself
to the town’s newly formed junta and asked to join up, whilst other cities pro-
vided many individual recruits (examples include a young Galician studying in
Madrid named José Salgado, a doctor’s son from Lecifiena named Matias Calvo,
the future Carlist leader Tomas de Zumalacarregui and, most famously, the
guerrilla commander Martin Javier Mina y Larrea).'” But most of the men who
came forward did so for reasons that had nothing to do with the political
situation.
   One factor was clearly compulsion on the part of the amo. On 21 July 1808,
for example, the Junta of Vigo reported that it had issued a call for volunteers
that had secured 147 young men, of whom many were dependants of leading
citizens of the town.”” Also important was poverty. Spain, as we shall see, was
in desperate straits in 1808, whilst the rising had occurred at a point in the agri-
cultural year when most day-labourers were out of work. Nor did it help that
in March and April unseasonably heavy rain had reduced the work available in
the fields and done much damage to the crops. Military service was therefore
a welcome opportunity to earn a few days’ pay, especially as the money on offer
was frequently extremely generous. As Sir Brent Spencer observed of Seville,
for example, ‘The pay allowed these new levies . . . is perhaps imprudently
66       Fighting Napoleon

large. I understand they have daily . . . four reales, which is more than double
what the old regular troops receive.” Nor was this an end to the largesse avail-
able, for recruits were also sometimes paid a substantial bounty. As Casamayor
noted in his journal on 14 November 1808, “Today saw the publication of an
order issued by the new Duke of Hijar in which he promised the sum of two
reales to any of his vassals who would take up arms.””
   But taking up arms was clearly an activity embarked upon only with
certain provisos. Service was envisaged in the first place as being only a short-
term commitment, in the second as something that would very much be
restricted to hearth and home, and in the third as an experience that would not
put the recruit on the same level as the despised and hated soldiery of the
Bourbon army. There was, indeed, a sense of play-acting about the whole busi-
ness. Let us quote, for example, the comandante de armas of Marin, Eugenio
Iglesias:

     On the morning of the 4th the post arrived with the news... that on all
     sides volunteers were coming forward ... to fight in the war that had just
     been declared against France. At about ten o’clock a group of inhabitants
     appeared in front of my house with a drum and a flag bearing the arms of
     Spain, and obliged me to accompany them to the fort of San Fernando, where
     they raised the flag with due ceremony . . . Leaving it flying there, they then
     marched out . . . to the sound of the drum amidst repeated cheers for Fer-
     nando VII, having told me that they would come back at four o’clock . . . Just
     as they had said, they came back in the afternoon armed with muskets,
     fowling pieces and blunderbusses, and, taking the flag, asked me to place
     myself at their head, after which we marched through the streets to the
     church of the Virgen del Pilar, where the flag was laid upon the altar and the
     rosary recited by all those present with the greatest devotion.”

   All too soon, however, the excitement began to wear off. To the horror of
the volunteers, indeed, they discovered that fighting the French meant some-
thing other than drawing their pay, parading through the streets of their home
towns and hunting down spies and traitors — that, in short, the unspoken
assumptions concerning their enlistment would not be honoured. In conse-
quence, the war had hardly started before desertion became an issue.”* In any
case, there were never enough volunteers, particularly in provinces such as
Galicia, where military service was habitually identified with local home guards
(in June 1808, for example, the a/arma of Orense alone amounted to 15,680
men organised into 147 companies; by contrast, so few recruits came forward
for the army that it was only possible to raise two new regiments”). As a result,
the new authorities who had emerged from the uprising were very quickly
forced to move to conscription. Broadly speaking, all men between sixteen and
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   67


forty were declared to be eligible for military service, regardless of status (an
important concession since, as we shall see, the existing conscription regula-
tions exempted all Spain’s million-strong nobility). However, it was promised,
first, that married men would not be taken until the supply of bachelors and
widowers without children had been exhausted; and second, that any volun-
teers produced by a pueblo would be set against its quota.”° As for the number
of men that were needed, as one example we might take Galicia, where 4 June
1808 saw the announcement of a quinta of 40,000 men.”’ Nor was relief to be
sought from the new central government formed at Aranjuez, known as the
Junta Central, for in October it announced the call-up of an unprecedented
400,000 men.”®
   These measures place the massive propaganda campaign that accompanied
the war against Napoleon in a new light. Thus, the populace was not just being
energised to fight the French, but also conditioned to accept measures that the
Bourbons would not even have dreamed of. As Godoy wrote of the war against
France of 1793-95, for example, “The idea of a general levy of troops was not
adopted and could never have entered a rational mind, first, because no civilised
nation had set such an example and, second, because the encumberance and
enormous expense of such a multitude set in motion would have at one and the
same time paralysed them and endangered their efficiency.” Recognising the
extreme nature of their demands, the Patriot authorities therefore did every-
thing that they could to encourage support for the struggle. Their propaganda
was often tailored, however crudely, to a popular audience — one might cite here
the use of the style known as costumbrismo, and the constant stress that was
placed on the idea that Napoleon’s chief intention was to conscript all Spain’s
young men into his armies — whilst events of public importance called forth
large-scale celebrations that included comic operas, bullfights and firework
displays. On occasion, such was the largesse displayed by the authorities that
it amounted to almost open bribery: on receipt of the news of the victory of
Talavera, for example, the governor of Ayamonte ordered the distribution of
20 reales to every prisoner in the town’s gaol, threw a dinner for twelve beggars,
had his staff give 4 reales to every member of the town’s poor and threw money
from his balcony to the crowd.”
    According to the official line, all was well: the people were lined up behind
the struggle and incapable of riot and disorder.” But, in fact, the authorities
were living a nightmare. As Salmon put it, ‘When the populace is out of control,
there are no reins that can control it, the contagion of licence and disorder
spreading with such speed that the common people come to be the sole dicta-
tor. What ills did we not suffer as a result of this upset!” Thus, in many regions
the rising was accompanied by outbreaks of rioting that, whilst ostensibly the
result of hatred of the French, were redolent of a more general attack on
68       Fighting Napoleon

wealth, privilege and authority. ‘Very soon’, warned one observer, ‘the poor will
be sovereign, and eliminate rich and French alike.’** Indeed, the panic that
marked the first days of the war was often a cover for, or at least intimately con-
nected with, something else altogether. Arrested as a traitor after the battle of
Bailén on the specious allegation that he had plotted with one of Castafios’ divi-
sional commanders to effect the escape of the French, the alcalde mayor of
Mengibar was found by an official enquiry to have been persecuted on account
of ‘an excess of the... temerity and pride [typical] of a man of wealth and
prominence’.* And in Galicia the ayuntamiento of El Ferrol complained, ‘On
the pretext of a variety of rumours, both real and invented, [the mob] has
reached the extreme of attacking and insulting the chief authorities, and com-
mitting robberies, murders and other lamentable actions of the sort that are
always produced by any outbreak of tumult.’ In the words of the Junta of
Santiago de Compostela, meanwhile:

     On a number of occasions when rumours have gone round that the French
     were about to attack us... . the people have rioted. We have no doubt that a
     number of these stories, all of which have been both silly and unfounded,
     had their origin in Spaniards who are French at heart and by these means
     wanted to frighten the populace and spread disorder.”

   Such stories of French agents deluding simple countryfolk might have com-
forted some of the more vapid members of the juntas, but they hardly reflected
the truth. In fact, the populace was on the move. Examples of unrest are wide-
spread, but perhaps the most dramatic comes from Castellon de la Plana:

     On 19 June [1808] . . . a gang of malcontents assembled . . . in the town, and
     ran through the streets, shouting, ‘Long live the King, the Fatherland and
     the Faith! Death to the traitors!’, and disturbing the public peace. Having
     murdered the governor, Coronel Don Pedro Lobo, and a landowner named
     Félix de Jiménez, they followed these execrable excesses with an attempt on
     the life of the commissary, Don José Ramon de Santi. . . In addition, the
     insurgents broke into the Capuchin nunnery, and freed all the prisoners in
     the public gaols by force.**

Nor did the troubles subside. To take just two examples, in Oviedo and Don
Benito the autumn saw fully fledged agrarian risings. Of events in the latter
pueblo we have a particularly interesting description:

     The town of Don Benito . . . has been in the most deplorable condition ever
     since ...a number of discontented porters, day-labourers and artisans —
     men whose ignorance and immorality always incline them to the worst —
     launched a furious attack. ..on the... town council at the very moment
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   69


  when the list of those eligible to be chosen for the defence of the fatherland
  was being drawn up, demanding land and crying that only the people with
  anything to lose should go to war. This outrage, which ended in the precip-
  itate flight of the . . . council, which would otherwise have been murdered,
  has been followed by others which have caused respectable inhabitants the
  utmost consternation. Continually insulted ...by these malignants, they
  have had to watch them . . . occupying the pastures rented out by their neigh-
  bours in the most disorderly fashion ...These they have ploughed and
  harrowed; whilst in the meantime threatening anyone who opposed them
  with death.”

    To understand these issues, we need to think a little more about both Spanish
society at the end of the antiguo régimen and the background to the struggle
against Napoleon. Radicalised by a disastrous war that had wrought consider-
able damage on large sections of the economy, a series of epidemics and natural
disasters, a variety of structural problems that were undermining the livelihood
of different segments of its ranks and a programme of reform that had not only
produced much disruption in the countryside but also threatened a wide range
of popular customs, the populace had been becoming more and more restive
prior to 1808. This was particularly the case, given the fact that the lot of the
common people was extremely harsh at the best of times: in the countryside,
for example, the vast majority of campesinos were either landless day-labourers
who earned miserable wages, endured long periods of seasonal unemployment
and were in general utterly at the mercy of the caciques, or desperately poor
tenant farmers who suffered from a range of problems embracing such issues
as usury, rack-renting and insufficient land. Particularly in Valencia, where the
tensions that it provoked were especially strong, sefiorialismo was being chal-
lenged by many communities, whilst there had been numerous bread riots and
peasant risings.*” In consequence, the sudden succession to the throne of Fer-
nando VII in March 1808 had been greeted with great excitement, just as his
overthrow by the French had caused genuine dismay, but this did not in itself
mean that the populacho were necessarily devoted to the person of the new
monarch, nor to the antiguo régimen. Fernando having been presented to them
by Godoy’s opponents as a kind of latter-day Prince Charming who would put
all things to rights and usher in a golden age of peace and prosperity, their real
loyalty was rather to a paradise in which they would no longer be subject to the
demands of Church, state and sefor. Willing enough to riot against the repre-
sentatives of godoyismo, they therefore had no desire to be marched off to fight
against the French, especially as military service had always been particularly
hated.*! Indeed, as one perceptive British officer noted of the Spanish peas-
antry, ‘had they been permitted to live in peace, it would have been a matter of
70     Fighting Napoleon


the greatest indifference to them whether their king was Joseph, Ferdinand or
the ghost of Don Quijote’.” As for the propertied classes, they had become so
alienated that on occasion the rest of the populace actually joined with the
French soldiery in the sack of their homes, an excellent example of such an
incident occurring after the battle of Medina de Rio Seco in July 1808.*%
   What made this situation all the more dangerous was the fact that the Patriot
authorities were drawn almost entirely from /os de siempre. Thus the structure
of power and authority had been little altered by the uprising. Indeed, in local
and provincial juntas alike, the Bourbon élites remained firmly in control: in
Murcia, for instance, the junta consisted of the bishop, an archdeacon, two
priors, seven members of the old ayuntamiento, two of the city’s magistrates,
five prominent members of the local aristocracy and five serving or retired army
or navy officers, all of them of high rank. In Ciudad Rodrigo the junta com-
prised nine serving officers, including the pre-war deputy governor and the
commanders of all the units that had made up the garrison, five retired offi-
cers, of whom two were brigadiers and one an erstwhile regidor perpetuo, a local
nobleman possessed of a position at court, the local Intendente del Ejército,
two officials of the old consejos and eighteen members of the local clergy, includ-
ing the bishop. And the junta in Zamora comprised two representatives of the
ayuntamiento, the three most senior officers of the garrison, the dean of the
cathedral, the prior of the monastery of San Jeronimo, two representatives of
the nobility and two representatives of the vecinos honrados.“ In a few places
lip-service was initially paid to the need to grant some representation to the
populace through the co-option of de facto ‘tribunes of the people’, but the
figures who secured the positions concerned were for the most part unsavoury
adventurers, and within a matter of weeks they had almost all been picked off
and in some cases imprisoned.”
   Absolutely terrified, the elites embarked on a programme of repression:
indeed, it is quite clear that in a number of cities the only reason that they had
established juntas was fear of the mob.*° All round the country, then, we see
frantic efforts to maintain order, as in Galicia, where the juntas established
police commissions and armed security forces, and issued strict orders that no
one should be allowed to travel without first obtaining a passport; in Granada,
where a proclamation of 24 June 1808 banned all public gatherings, forbade the
carrying of arms of any sort and threatened anyone who challenged the author-
ities with the death penalty; and in Valencia, where special militia companies
were set up to maintain order, the existing anti-bandit company increased by
400 men, the use of firearms banned except on official service, and all house-
holders admonished to make certain that no one for whom they were respon-
sible disturbed the public peace.” At the same time even tiny numbers of
regular troops were regarded as valuable allies, several of Galicia’s local juntas
making desperate efforts to hang on to detachments of soldiers that happened
                                                    The Guerrillas in Context   is


to be near by at the time of the uprising.* And finally, the Junta Central not
only ordered the formation of a nationwide milicia honrada that was recruited
from the propertied classes, placed under the control of the local authorities
and charged with the task of patrolling the countryside, guarding the streets
and repressing outbreaks of disorder, but issued the most draconian orders with
respect to the treatment of rioters.”
   Whilst trying to overawe the populace, the new authorities at the same time
made great efforts to force it to accept its station in life. Nowhere is this more
visible than in Cadiz, where one observer decribed ‘the lower class of the
people’ as ‘layabouts who are lacking in industry and... much inclined to
disturb the peace’. Thus, in a proclamation of 16 January 1809, whilst
enjoining the population to be assiduous in the practice of its religion and the
education of its children and moral in its lifestyle, the junta announced that
‘habitués of prohibited games... layabouts... women of no pride... blas-
phemers, malcontents, drunks, and those who constantly engage in indecent
talk’ would be fined, imprisoned or sent to penal colonies.”' Following serious
riots in February 1809 (see below, p. 76), meanwhile, the ecclesiastical author-
ities were instructed to enlighten ‘the common people of this town, which is
... governed on the one hand by agitators and on the other by drunkenness,
robbery and other detestable disorders’.*” Some days earlier, meanwhile, the
alcalde mayor had issued an order stating, first, that all minors of either sex who
were found alone on the streets on whatever pretext, begging included, were
to be arrested, and with them their parents, and, second, that any woman who
was involved in any sort of disorderly gathering was to be placed in solitary
confinement, the very fact that she had seen fit to be present clearly showing
that she could not be ‘a lady worthy of appreciation and respect’.* And, last
but not least, we have a very similar proclamation that appeared in July of the
same year that ordered the immediate arrest of not just all ‘idlers, layabouts,
vagrants ... women of no repute, and suspicious persons’, but also ‘all those
who try to hide their vagrancy by pretending to be peddlars or hawkers’. As
if all this was not enough, meanwhile, blasphemy, indecency, seditious talk,
gaming and the possession of knives and pistols were all strictly prohibited; the
strictest regulations imposed on such activities as letting rooms, and taverners
enjoined not to let their customers sit around for too long.**
   In a country where many regions were characterised by chronic under-
employment, and where normal economic life had all but broken down, this
programme was at the very least dangerously provocative: to attack pedlars and
vagrants, for example, was to attack some of the few means by which the poor
could hope to make a living. But, as if all this was not bad enough, fuel was
added to the flames by the use that the pudientes made of their power. Perhaps
typical was isolated Paymogo, of which a commissioner sent by the Junta
Central wrote:
72         Fighting Napoleon


       Governed by a number of young men... at the say-so of those elements
       who can play the role of caciques, the town has been reduced to the most
       dreadful chaos... Your Majesty must understand that the original sin of
       such places consists of three points: who is going to rule, who is going to rob
       the most, and who is going to pay the least.”
Had the caciques proved willing to sacrifice themselves for the patria, then, some
of the edge might have been taken off the situation, but this was not the case.
On the contrary, in many pueblos, such as Socuéllamos, there were complaints
of ‘the bad example that has been set by the . . . poderosos, who . . . are living
...a      life of leisure and . . . impropriety’. By all accounts, indeed, abuses of
power were widespread. The commonalty could, for example, be blackmailed:
one officer involved in the recruitment process was arrested for demanding 64
reales from one of the inhabitants of Osuna, on pain of conscription.’ There
were many instances of corruption: at Leon the father of a fugitive Guardia de
Corps sold his son’s horse — the property of the Spanish state — to the local
provincial junta for 2,000 reales; at Molina de Aragon the local junta was
accused of embezzlement; at La Corufia the secretary of the Junta of Galicia
was supposed to have obtained up to 1,600,000 reales from the sale of public
offices by October 1808 alone; and from Alhaurin el Grande it was reported
that the deputy corregidor was skimming off public funds, engaging in whole-
sale extortion, selling off the grain reserves kept for years of dearth, making
huge profits from fraudulent public works contracts, appropriating intestate
property that should have passed to the state, imposing illicit levies on the
populace and extracting sexual favours from pretty girls whose husbands,
brothers or sweethearts had been conscripted. And, at least as far as those
who could pay were concerned, place-seekers had a field day: on offer were
hundreds of commissions in the new regiments being formed by many of
the Patriot authorities and thousands of administrative posts and special
commissions of all sorts, the men concerned often giving cause for great
scandal. To quote one complaint that was sent to the Junta Central from Cadiz,
for instance:

       A change in the senior personnel of the Customs House . . . would save the
       state many millions... The officials concerned . . . get rich with no other
       source of income than their salaries, have balconies at the playhouse . . . keep
       fine tables . . . and enjoy every sort of luxury . . . How can there not be some
       sort of malversation going on?”

Not surprisingly, then, the most colourful language was soon being used in con-
nection with the juntas. Let us take as an example, the following description of
the Junta of Badajoz:
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   73


  It being clear that the spark that . . . lit the flame of patriotism throughout
  the kingdom was the work of divine providence, all good Spaniards accepted
  the juntas that were formed in all the provincial capitals... But that
  of Badajoz has been abusing its powers... Many of its members are vain,
  ignorant and vicious egotists, and from this there stems. ..a multitude
  of excesses. It is very frequent to find military ranks and enormous salaries
  heaped on the unworthiest of people, and all to accommodate relatives and
  clients. Sometimes the motive is money, but sometimes even darker forces
  are at work: it is said that ranks have even been given to prostitutes in
  exchange for members of the junta being allowed to enjoy their favours.”

   All this caused immense offence. Of all the abuses of the juntas, however, by
far the most serious were those relating to the recruitment of the army. Before
going any further, we ought first to consider the system of conscription that
was in use in Spain. Known as the sorteo or quinta, it had been introduced in
1770 with the intention that it should be imposed on an annual basis. Such was
the hostility with which it was regarded, however, that in 1777 it had been
decided to use it only in emergency. Since then, indeed, it had only been
employed in 1793 and 1795, and the army had instead relied on voluntary enlist-
ment and the impressment of criminals and the destitute. In theory, the sorteo
worked by setting an overall target for the country as a whole, whereupon each
pueblo was assigned a quota in accordance with its population. This having been
done, a list of eligible recruits was then drawn up, and the men required selected
by ballot (recruits were to be aged from sixteen to thirty-six, unmarried, in good
physical health and with a minimum height of 5 feet). So far so good, but the
whole system was in fact shot through with unfairness. The nobility and clergy
were exempt, together with the inhabitants of various regions with special priv-
ileges, such as the Basque provinces, students, professionals of all sorts, uni-
versity graduates, town councillors, magistrates, alcaldes, officials and couriers
of the postal service, clerks in government offices and men engaged in a wide
range of specialised activities (examples include sailors, gunsmiths, stock-
breeders and skilled workers in most aspects of industry and agriculture). Not
all the exemptions were quite so privileged in character — a real attempt was
made, for example, to protect sole breadwinners — but the general effect was to
ensure that the brunt of the burden fell on the poorest sections of society and,
in particular, the agricultural labourer. The inherent injustice to which all this
gave rise was reinforced by the numerous possibilities that existed for men
with money and influence to subvert the system and buy themselves out of
trouble.”
   In theory, 1808 brought radical change. Whilst the existing regulations were
retained in so far as the actual administration of conscription was concerned,
74     Fighting Napoleon


the provincial juntas suppressed all grounds for exemption other than those
designed to protect sole breadwinners, whilst generally extending the upper
limit of the age range to forty or even forty-five. Accepted and codified by the
Junta Central, these reforms gave Spain a system of universal military service.
In theory, this was both fair and humane, but in practice the reality was very
different, since the pudientes were quite shameless in their determination to
avoid having to go to war. The ayuntamiento of Murcia, for example, requested
that its members be exempted even from service in the milicias honradas, whilst
one proposal for the introduction of the principle of substitution maintained
that herederos made very cowardly soldiers on account of the fact that, unlike
the poor, they had something to lose.”
   Let us here look at some concrete examples of the sort of fraud in which the
propertied classes and their allies engaged. The first priority, of course, was to
ensure that they and their sons were never entered in the draw. As the Junta
Central put it, ‘There have repeatedly been very serious complaints... on
account of the many men who have been escaping service in the army by
claiming that they are exempt.’ Thus, in Cordoba it was noted that there were
many men falsely passing themselves off as the only support of aged parents,
whilst in Vivero and Cuenca others got off on grounds of nobility.°* Such
dodges implied the use of bribery — in Granada the cost appears to have been
between 300 and 400 reales — though it may be that blackmail was also
employed.” Just as illicit, meanwhile, was the common practice of openly
buying exemption by means of patriotic donations (in 1808-9 the going rate
was a fully accoutred horse and a minimum of 4,000 reales, whilst by 1811
it had risen to 20,000 reales). And finally, there was a rush to obtain bolt-holes
of one sort or other. In Valencia, for example, there was an increase in admis-
sions to the university, whilst the rush for public office was partly explained
by a desire to ‘avoid going off to fight’.
    Most of the time such devices were enough to get the pudientes out of trouble
but, on the rare occasions that they failed, all was not lost: at Sallent, for
example, there were allegations that the presiding tribunal had refused a request
from the men who had been declared liable for service, to check that the names
of all the potential conscripts had actually been put in the urn. The point of
such complaints is revealed when we discover that at Puebla de Guzman several
men had been omitted who had no exemption whatsoever.” And should things
still go wrong, there were always grounds for appeal: named as somatenes, José
Viladerau appealed for exemption on the grounds that he had already given
generously to the cause and sent two of his employees to join up; Francisco
Feliu claimed that he was nearly blind in his right eye and had only been put
on the list ‘in consequence of the intrigue and enmity that characterise small
towns’; and Francisco de Paula Aragonés argued that service in the field was
incompatible with his job.” And, lamentably, when combined with bribery, such
                                                    The Guerrillas in Context      75


tactics often worked: conscripted into the army in the autumn of 1808, a
prosperous inhabitant of Turienso named Francisco Castellanos suddenly
reappeared in his native village claiming that he had been released from the
ranks.”” ‘Half of those who are called up are allowed to go free,’ wrote one
observer, ‘some thanks to money, others thanks to blackmail, and still others
thanks to a thousand different tricks and frauds.”
   As examples of the sort of thing that went on, let us cite a few individual
cases. To return to Alhaurin el Grande, great anger was caused by the case of
one Eusebio Guerrero. The nephew of the corrupt deputy corregidor whose
crimes have already been outlined, Guerrero was beyond doubt liable for con-
scription. Yet, although conscripted in the sorteos of both 1808 and 1809, on
each occasion he escaped, the first time by submitting a totally false statement
of his circumstances, and the second by deserting. Still worse, despite the fact
that he was known to have taken refuge with his parents, no attempt was made
to round him up and send him back to his regiment.” In Cumbres de en Medio
(a village situated in the north of the present-day province of Huelva), mean-
while, the two alcaldes, Juan Dominguez and Juan de Barajar, had managed to
save their three sons from the guinta by pretending that one was already serving
in the army, having the second one claim that he could not bite open cartridges
because of problems with his teeth, and hastily arranging for the third one to
get married.”
   With money, indeed, it was even possible to play at being a soldier without
ever having to experience the rigours of life in the field. One variant on this
theme was the formation of ‘guerrilla bands’ in areas that were hundreds of
miles from the nearest Frenchmen, a good example being the ‘company of
mounted smugglers’ extolled by the Junta of Ayamonte as being ‘the terror
of the French’ in August 1809.” Another was the numerous corps of “distin-
guished volunteers’ that sprang up all over Patriot Spain. Thus, in exchange
for paying the cost of their uniform and equipment, men could enlist in units
whose only duties were to mount guard on city walls, inject civic life with a
certain degree of military pomp, add a degree of lustre to the new authorities
and maintain the prerogatives of the propertied classes. Hardly surprisingly,
these units soon acquired an evil reputation. The Voluntarios Distinguidos de
Cadiz — a force later lauded to the skies by liberals eager to find a model for a
new army — was described as ‘battalions of cupids’ composed of ‘a multitude
of infamous men of evil habits who . . . possess neither merit, nor subordina-
tion, nor inclination to the true object for which their arms were created’.”
As for the Junta Central’s personal guard — the grandiloquently                 named
Voluntarios de Honor de la Universidad de Toledo — it was written:

   If it is wished to put things right . . . these soldiers . . . should be expelled
                                                                                 has
   from the city... There is not a married woman who because of them
76       Fighting Napoleon


     not fallen out with her husband, not a widow who has not emptied her house
     to take up with them, not a maiden who has not abandoned .. . honour at
     their instigation . . . They have neither king nor religion, and spend day and
     night alike in the tavern.”

   Even service in the privileged conditions that these units offered, it seemed,
was too much trouble. There is much evidence that many of the men involved
tried to avoid such commitments, paid substitutes to do their duties for them
or quickly tired of the whole business altogether.” If the milicia honrada failed
to get off the ground in most provinces, then, we need hardly be surprised.”
As for fighting, as one cynic remarked, “These caciques are only brave... in
the main squares of their home towns.”” Indeed, fearing that they might be
sent to the front, in February 1809 the Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cadiz even
instigated an insurrection whose main goal was to extract a promise that they
would never have to serve beyond the walls of the city.*° And, of course, the
Patriot authorities themselves were most unwilling to see the departure of their
protéges and bodyguards, as witness the bitter protests provoked by the arrival
of orders stripping Catalonia’s local juntas of the special companies of
migueletes that they had kept back to quell the mob.*!
   The impact of the pudientes’ behaviour on the structure of the Patriot army
was all too predictable. In theory universal, liability to military service in prac-
tice fell on precisely the same groups as before. Thus, if we look at the 152 men
called up in Manresa in 1810, we find that 141 of them are listed as being either
of littie fortune or of none at all, and that of the remaining eleven, only four
are deemed as being wealthy: and, equally, observing a column of prisoners
taken by the French when they defeated Joaquin Blake at Baza in November
1811, the captured British general Lord Blayney observed that ‘one third of the
privates were... half-starved boys from fourteen to sixteen; another third
infirm old men, just able to crawl; [and] the last third .. . men of a tolerable
appearance, [who] could alone have opposed . . . the French’.®? And when, later
in the war, desperate efforts were made to find fresh troops by combing out
the lists of those who had earlier been exempted, in Santa Coloma de Queralt,
at least, the only men taken were five artisans of various sorts and twelve
peasants.”
   In the Spain of the early nineteenth century nothing could have been more
unfortunate than the perception of injustice that all this produced. To quote a
retired army captain who dispatched an angry protest to the Junta Central:

     It is obvious that nothing can be more damaging to our sacred cause than
     ... angering the people by extending undue favours and privileges. . .
     on account of family relationships, clientage or bribery . . . The mass of the
     populace is convinced of the need to fight for its freedom, but when it sees
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   Wi}


  the multitude of conscripts who, on account of private favour, are released,
  allowed to remain in their homes, or posted to positions that could be filled
  by men who have been exempted from service, the danger that it must suffer
  ... becomes repugnant to it, and it loses its enthusiasm.

   To understand why feelings of patriotism could not hope to overcome such
resentment, we need to turn to some recent works on the growth of national
consciousness. In Spain, as we have seen, the Patriot authorities made great
efforts to swing the populace behind the struggle against Napoleon. But, as
Linda Colley has shown in her seminal work Britons, modern nationalism
depends on the completion of a series of social processes, including historical
acculturalisation, urbanisation, the collapse of rural insularity and the spread
of popular literacy.* As Broers has pointed out, meanwhile, in their absence
the demands of modern war were certain to be faced with massive resistance.*°
Spain, however, was very much a ‘backward’ state, on which the impact of
enlightened absolutism and the processes analysed by Colley had alike been
minimal, whilst, even in the narrow confines of the intellectual élite, the idea
that a Spanish nation even existed had hardly ever been mooted.” In conse-
quence, it would always have been hard to persuade the pueblo to make the
gigantic efforts called for by the war against Napoleon. Thanks to the pudientes,
however, the task was all but impossible. Always likely to be hostile, Spanish
society reacted with immense violence, and matters were made worse still not
only by the fact that the authorities’ efforts to keep control, hunt down
bandits, round up deserters and render the quinta effective were often exploited
as a means of escaping military service, but also by the fact that the special
forces raised to achieve these goals became ever more oppressive and
burdensome.™
  Given the problems caused by these improvised security forces, they are
worth considering in more detail. Of particular interest in this respect is
the situation that pertained in Malaga. Since the countryside was overrun by
deserters and bandits, the authorities eventually sanctioned a proposal that,
in effect, a thief be set to catch a thief, and allowed its author to go round the
local gaols picking out repentant bandits to act as the nucleus of a force of
poachers turned gamekeepers. Only later, however, did somebody notice that
the enterprising pretendiente whom they had just taken on was none other than
a renowned local chieftain named Matias Hispano, and, still worse, that the men
he had selected were all members of his old gang who had been caught by the
local justices.’ This, perhaps, was an extreme case, but even so the general
reputation enjoyed by these forces was very poor. From Llerena, for example,
came complaints that the security patrol Manuel Mufioz Vaca had been per-
mitted to establish by the Junta of Badajoz had proved to be little more than a
78       Fighting Napoleon

scheme aimed, first, at securing him a substantial salary; second, at allowing
him to escape front-line service; and, third, at giving him the power of patron-
age (service in such anti-bandit patrols was for obvious reasons very popular).”°
   The evidence of violent hostility to authority is overwhelming. In the words
of one of the numerous comisionados sent out by the Junta Central to whip up
patriotic feeling, round up deserters and draft-dodgers, and accelerate the
quinta, for example:
                                                        ~


     When I arrived at Paymogo I found the most horrible picture that I could
     possibly outline to Your Majesty. I did not dare to do so from there, because
     my letter would inevitably have been intercepted, thereby putting me at risk
     of falling victim to the . . . violence of a populace that has never known either
     subordination or respect for authority. All my fiery spirit had to be exchanged
     for humility, sweetness and generosity . .. The whole area presents the most
     lamentable sight. It is a confused anarchy in which the entire body politic is
     undone. On every side one sees ferment, disorder, intrigue and the spirit of
     faction.”!

In Asturias, meanwhile, General Ballesteros was complaining of the ‘disobedi-
ence of the . . . inhabitants of this territory, unaccustomed as they are to being
punished for their crimes’, whilst from Malaga a despairing official told the
Junta Central’s secretary-general, Martin de Garay, that the ‘insubordination
... Of these pueblos has left me so frustrated that I have no option but to
trouble Your Excellency in the hope that your intervention might reduce them
to submission and respect’.”
   There were, doubtless, other factors in the equation, not least among them
the outrage and despair that were felt at the inability of the Spanish army to
hold back the French in the campaign of the winter of 1808, and, prior to that,
the false hopes engendered by the boasting and vainglory that had filled the
Patriot press following the battle of Bailén.” Nor did it help that lack of fore-
sight in the expansion of the army in 1808 had given rise to many supernu-
merary officers." Left with nothing to do, such men naturally gravitated to
cities such as Seville and La Corufia, where they were joined by still other men
who had simply abandoned their regiments, and, as one British officer put it,
together they ‘served only to make a military appearance in the streets and
gaming houses’.”” Even when they were with their units, meanwhile, Spanish
officers had an evil reputation. The Duke of Wellington remarked, for example,
that ‘Subordination and habits of obedience ... can be acquired by soldiers
only in proportion as they have confidence in their officers, and they cannot
have confidence in officers who have no knowledge of their profession . . . have
no subordination among themselves, and never obey an order.’”°
                                                    The Guerrillas in Context   79


   All this, of course, only served to swell the mood of social unrest, not least
because many of the more exalted liberals fanned the flames by trumpeting
demands for a renewal of the officer corps on the basis of ‘new’ men made in
the revolution. How far such radicalism awoke a popular echo, it is hard to say,
but there is no doubt that it reflected feelings in the pueblo. In the words of one
anonymous letter sent to the Junta Central:

  With the exception of a few of the better commanders, all the officers of our
  armies are loud-mouthed braggarts . . . If we are to win, we must make our
  privates into sergeants, our corporals into captains, and our sergeants into
  colonels.”

In certain parts of Spain, too, even among the common people there may have
been traces of an incipient regionalism. For a variety of reasons — not least folk
memories of armed revolt — this was particularly strong in Catalonia. As the
Marqués de Lazan warned General Blake, for example:

   Garrisoning Lérida . . . with the Catalan legions that are being formed would
   be very dangerous. It is not for me to meddle with your . . . plans, nor still
   less change them . . . But, even so, I know the Catalans, and, for all its walls
   and towers, I would not answer for Lérida if it was held by Catalan troops
   ... The people of the area are most barbarous, and the soldiers would
   certainly take their side if there was any sort of riot.”

   As the years went by, growing anti-British feeling amongst men of letters
and the civil and military authorities may also have rubbed off on the people.
Following the abortive campaign of Barosa, for example, quarrels in Cadiz
between the British commander, Sir Thomas Graham, and his Spanish coun-
terparts produced rumours that the British had seized Cadiz and decapitated
Generals Zayas and La Pefia, whilst there were many stories to the effect that
the British intended either to commandeer the Spanish army for their own pur-
poses or to force the populace to enlist under Wellington.” But the central issue
remained conscription. Throughout the eighteenth century this had always
been hated and feared by all concerned. Few young men relished being torn
away from the bosom of the families to an uncertain fate, and few families could
contemplate the loss of their labour with any equanimity. Meanwhile, military
service was associated with vice and ultimately beggary, since those men who
eventually returned to their homes generally did so as drunken misfits. The
Patriot régime having utterly failed to awaken an echo among the populace,
there was no chance that these feelings would be swept away by the events of
1808, and, by the same token, every chance that the populace would seek to
defend itself.'””                      ;
So       Fighting Napoleon

   In this situation resistance took many forms. Crudely written, poorly spelt
and very often anonymous, denunciations of the local authorities were soon
being received by the Junta Central by the sackload. For example:

     The Junta... of Ciudad Real... is not the work of... the people... Its
     members are Godoys, traitors, egoists and thieves who clubbed together so
     that the people would . . . not get at their money . . . The province is scan-
     dalized, for everybody knows that they are malignant rogues.”
Also well to the fore were complaints on the subject of conscription. One cor-
respondent from Guadix demanded the formation of a cuerpo preferente (liter-
ally, ‘regiment of the privileged’) that would bring together all those who had
managed to have themselves exempted on fraudulent grounds, together with
all public employees under the age of fifty, and a number of letters may also be
found calling for the immediate conscription of all members of the clergy apart
from those who were absolutely indispensable for the celebration of the sacra-
ments.” Typical enough is the following example from Galicia:
     Is there any reason why every single noble . . . should not be sent off to war
     in the space of three days? Is there any reason why they should not be fol-
     lowed by all priests, friars and clerks in minor orders under the age of forty
     ... by all tax officials of whatever rank . . . by all writers of whatever sort?!”

   For most families, however, the action to be taken was more practical. Patriot
Spain therefore began to experience precisely the same problems visible in
Revolutionary and Napoleonic France. All over the country men tried desper-
ately to avoid being subjected to the sorteo. There were, for example, hundreds
of petitions for exemption.'* Meanwhile, as the British officer John Patterson
noted, ‘Married men being . . . exempt from the contributions required to fill
up the ranks, all the youthful fellows in the neighbourhood espoused them-
selves in order to avoid the Junta’s levies’ (in one pueblo in Cordoba it was
reported that there were nineteen marriages in a single day).'® In the coastal
districts of Catalonia a frequent dodge was to obtain false papers stating that
the holder was enrolled in the navy’s list of sailors, and therefore in ordinary
circumstances exempt from conscription to the army.'’° Another favourite
choice was to flee or go into hiding. ‘In this city’, complained the Junta of
Santiago, ‘the young men who have been conscripted into the army can often
be heard complaining of the large number of their fellows who have fled to
. . Portugal in order to avoid being enlisted.’"”’ Even more interesting, mean-
while, is the situation in Ecija, where flight from conscription clearly meshed
with agrarian discontent. Thus: ‘A considerable number of the young men who
are eligible for service have fled into the countryside, where they have pillaged
many properties and estates without their owners being able to do a thing about
                                                     The Guerrillas in Context   SI


it.”'°’ And, last but not least, it was always possible to fake illness or physical
handicap: the village of Paymogo saw eleven men redeem themselves in this
fashion in the period 1808—9.'” For most of those who took this way out, the
basis of their claims lay in childhood accidents or illnesses that had supposedly
left them unfit to fight, but the really desperate might pull their front teeth out,
chop their trigger fingers off so as to make it impossible for them to fire a
musket, or, still worse, simulate the effects of syphilis by applying caustic
substances to their genitals.'”°
    The impact of such tactics was immense. In many parts of Spain the preva-
lence of migrant labour meant that for much of the year the number of poten-
tial conscripts in any given district was much smaller than was theoretically the
case. Ordered to find sixty men for the somatén in December 1809, for example,
the chief magistrate of the mountainous district of Tosas reported that most
of the young men in the area who had not already been called up were absent
working at jobs in the fertile coastal plain.''’ This phenomenon was bad enough,
but in some areas so many men were exempted from service that the burden
on the remainder became quite intolerable. Of this a good example may be
found in the Catalan district of Arens de Mar, which in June 1811 was ordered
to find 450 fresh conscripts. At first all seemed well, as there were reported to
be 2,780 men of military age in the area, but of these 1,939 were either married
men or widowers with children, 324 medically unfit and 390 disqualified from
serving on account of having been declared to be sole breadwinners. ‘This left
just 126 men out of the 841 bachelors and widowers without children who
formed the first category of the call-up. In some of the district’s pueblos, indeed,
the situation was even worse. Overall, something less than one man in every
seven of those theoretically available for service would have to take his chances
in the sorteo, but of Malgrat’s sixty candidates just one was left in the draw, of
Palafolls’ twenty-nine just one, and of Arens de Mar’s thirty-four just four.'"*
Hardly is it surprising, then, to find that the Junta Central as early as May 1809
agreed to reduce the minimum height required of a soldier from the already
diminutive 5 feet to the still more tiny 4 feet ro inches.'"
   Such problems, of course, served only to stiffen the resistance of the popu-
lace. As a miguelete officer sent to Arens de Mar to get things moving com-
plained, ‘Without armed men, it is impossible to obtain a single recruit . . . The
only means of making oneself obeyed is to use force.’''* The populace, however,
was undaunted. As in Don Benito, the ballot that actually determined who
should serve in the army might be disrupted by riot or mutiny: on 8 June 1808
proceedings at the Galician town of Mesia had to be abandoned when a shout
went up that the French were coming; on the very same day three miles east of
El Ferrol an angry crowd stormed the courthouse at Neda at the very moment
that the ballot was taking place, before going on to force the arrest of a number
82       Fighting Napoleon

of alleged spies, ransack the tax offices and pillage the homes of various local
notables; and in October 1811 Arens de Mar’s conscripts refused to leave for
the army unless they were accompanied by one Miguel Buch, who they claimed
was being protected by relatives with positions on the Junta of Gerona (which
was at that point based at Arens).''? Meanwhile, there were also periodic
attempts to coerce the authorities. In La Mancha, for example, the mayor of
Miguelturra was murdered. In Catalonia the first day of 1809 witnessed a
violerit revolt in Lérida whose victims numbered the commander of one of the
tercios de miqueletes which the Catalan authorities were currently trying to form
as a substitute for recruitment to the regular army. In Jerez de la Frontera on
27 February 1809 a large crowd gathered on the main square to protest at the
way in which many men were being unfairly exempted from the quinta. And,
finally, in Murcia the provincial junta’s efforts to round up deserters provoked
a major rising that was used by its enemies to bring about its overthrow.'"®
   Nor did resistance cease once men had been drafted into the armed forces.
Given the reverential treatment that has customarily been accorded to the resis-
tance put up by Catalonia even by British historians, the evidence that we have
from that province is particularly interesting. Far from being the heroes of
legend, the somatenes and migueletes proved to be extremely reluctant to do their
duty. It is particularly indicative that in March 1809 the Junta of Granollers
was forced to reissue the orders alerting the local somatén to be ready for action
and laying down the procedure under which they were to be called out.!!” From
all sides, indeed, there came complaints of every sort. The somatenes, wrote
Enrique O’Donnell, ‘impede the army’s recruitment and get in the way of its
operations’, whilst the Marqués de Portazgo blamed the fall of Olot on the
failure of the garrison’s many men of this sort to put up a fight.''® Rather than
face battle, many men ‘break their muskets . . . whilst others throw them away
... or sell them’.'”” And still others simply went home. On 19 January 1810,
for example, Francisco Rovira reported that it was useless sending him groups
of somatenes as they disappeared as soon as they arrived, whilst much the same
sentiment had been expressed some months earlier by Joaquin Blake:

     Only a little while ago General Casamayor saw 2,000 of these armed peas-
     ants disappear the moment that the assembly was sounded . . . whilst a few
     nights back 3-4,000 fled from the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Juan
     Clarés. Let them come and give new proofs of their constancy by all means,
     but, when it comes to attacking the enemy, I will place no trust in such
     people.'”
   As if this was not enough, the Catalan militias also took out their wrath on
the homes of the more prosperous inhabitants. To quote one petition sent to
the Junta of Catalonia:
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   83


  With the greatest regret, the justices of the Valles district cannot avoid
  informing Your Excellency of the many disturbances, robberies, assaults and
  other crimes that the migueletes are committing in the homes of the /abradores
  ...the number of their crimes being as numerous as that of the houses
  which they come across. As for the owners, they can do nothing to stop this
  execrable behaviour, for... the men... threaten to shoot them unless they
  are allowed to have their way.'”!
Such complaints were widespread. On 16 September 1809 Blake told the Junta
Central that the only reason the somatenes came together was ‘to devastate the
province’; and on 31 December of the same year one José Roset wrote from
‘Tarrasa:

  The somatenes think they have the right to engage in insubordination and lib-
  ertinage, whilst at the same time having first call on the precious resources
  that could save us from the slavery that threatens us. Enormous gangs of men
  ... pass though this town all the time. Most of them are armed, and the
  majority with muskets at that. What they are up to, I do not know, but I
  fear that putting such weapons into the hands of the mob is tantamount
  to turning each one of them into an enemy who is far worse than any
  Frenchman.!”

But most scathing of all was a young Andalusian officer named Francisco de
Paula Guervos, who had been sent to Catalonia with a division of reinforce-
ments. Thus:

  Every day I hate these people more: they have no God but money, and for it
  would sell their fatherland, their families, their saints and anything else that
  comes to hand... Much vaunted though it is, the Army of Catalonia is
  nothing but a collection of bands of thieves who under the name of somatenes
  enter the towns and villages in almost the same manner as the French. . .
  the only difference being that they are rather more skilful when it comes to
  robbing them.'”

    As we have seen, resistance to the war effort in Catalonia may have been
intensified by a variety of factors that were peculiar to the province. Yet there
is no reason to believe that things were much better anywhere else. In Jaca,
Santander and Oviedo officers who attempted to bring their troops to order and
subject them to the rigours of drill found that they were accused of trying to
stifle their patriotic spirit.'** And throughout Spain soldiers engaged in various
forms of evasion. As in other conflicts, one means of escape was the self-
inflicted wound, but by far the most popular was desertion.'” As early as 31
May 1808 the Junta of Seville was complaining that many of its alistados were
34     Fighting Napoleon

seemingly unwilling to serve even as local militiamen, let alone regular soldiers,
and further that the substantial regular army that it had been able to amass was
experiencing serious desertion, whilst on 24 June the Junta of Zamora had to
give orders for the conscripts of the pueblo of Argusino to be placed in the
charge of an armed guard.’”° Moving on, in January 1809 it was reported that
there were many deserters in the district of Rubia in Galicia; in March that
over 100 men had deserted in a single night from one Galician regiment; in
April that infinitos dispersos were hiding in the rough country that lined the
south bank of the River Tagus; in May that no fewer than forty-eight
deserters had been picked up in the city of Malaga alone in the course of the
past three months, and that in Galicia many men were hiding in their homes;
and in June that the district of Socuéllamos was full of deserters who ignored
every attempt to appeal to their better feelings and had to be dragged back to
the army by force.'’” Losses often peaked when regiments were marched away
from their home provinces, but such issues were merely incidental: even when
in their own part of Spain the men kept running away. Catalonia, for example,
saw at least one third of its soldiers desert, despite the fact that Catalan regi-
ments rarely served beyond the boundaries of the principality.’** Rounded up
by detachments of loyal troops sent out for the purpose, most dispersos — the
crowds of fugitives and stragglers who escaped from the ranks after every battle
— simply absconded again as soon as their captors’ backs were turned.’”? And,
still more extraordinarily, there were cases of men who had been captured by
the French refusing to effect their escape when they were offered the chance
of doing so, on the grounds that they would rather be prisoners of war than go
on facing life in the army.'*”
    That desertion was so prominent a phenomenon is hardly surprising. Above
all, it was an easy option. The lack of marching discipline off the battlefield
and the frequent routs upon it made it simple for a soldier to slip away from
the ranks. Runaways could pass unnoticed because clothing shortages meant
that many units were dressed in a style little different from that of the civilian
population.’ A proclamation of 3 January 1809 had laid down the most savage
penalties for deserters and all those who helped them, but there was a marked
reluctance to shoot men who had gone absent for no other reason than the fact
that they were starving.'*’ And there was always somewhere to run to: just as
town councils and justices in the Patriot zone were often prepared to turn a
blind eye to the presence of deserters, so the French were quite content to
let men whose pued/os lay in areas that they happened to control live quietly in
their homes, always providing, of course, that they had no truck with the
insurgents.*
   In traditional accounts of the war the act of desertion has often been por-
trayed as having stemmed from a desire to perpetuate the struggle by means
that were more efficacious than those being employed by the regular army. To
                                                     The Guerrillas in Context    SS

put it another way, deserters were patriots whose only crime was to decide that
they could serve the patria more effectively as guerrillas than as regular sol-
diers. This, however, is dangerously disingenuous. That there were deserters in
the ranks of the guerrillas is obvious — out of 1,166 men identified as having
served in their ranks thus far, forty were either certainly or almost certainly
deserters — but at only 3 per cent the number uncovered is surprisingly small,
whilst several of the men concerned only joined the partidas in which they
served some time after they deserted and as a result of either poverty or force
majeure. Most deserters, then, may rather be assumed to have fled their posts
in order to go home or, alternatively, to have found some means of subsistence
that was more profitable and less burdensome than the army (an intention, as
we shall see, that was by no means incompatible with a decision to join some
band of insurgents). All the more was this the case, meanwhile, given the ter-
rible conditions endured by many soldiers, the army being notoriously ill-paid,
ill-clothed and ill-fed.'*
   And, as in Catalonia, hand in hand with the question of resistance to the war
effort went that of law and order. Thus, from the vicinity of Cadiz one comi-
stonado reported that the whole area was swarming with ‘bad Spaniards, who,
having either deserted or fled from the draft, have necessarily become thieves
and wrongdoers, robbing passers-by . . . sacking farms, and [oppressing] the
[inhabitants] with more inhumanity than the... French’, whilst the military
governor of Santiago complained of ‘a plague of deserters who march from
crime to crime’.!*° Even when they returned to their native pueblos, indeed,
many deserters had no option but to resort to extortion: from La Carolina, for
example, came complaints that a group of soldiers from the area were hiding
in the hills outside the town and bombarding the ayuntamiento with demands
for food and clothing.'*°
   In the face of all this violence even the more responsible local authorities felt
completely helpless. To quote the Junta of Villafranca:

  Given .. . the general scorn with which our measures are looked upon, not
  to mention the fact that the town has neither garrison, nor governor,
  nor commandant . .. we do not know . . . what to do. Despised, surrounded
  by wrongdoers . . . [and] continually threatened with fresh incursions on
  the part of the enemy... we can neither fulfil our own obligations, nor
  make anybody else fulfil theirs: our authority is neither respected nor
  feared.'*’

Confronted with a populace that was armed and mutinous, and with roving
bands of outlaws who were not only wreaking havoc on all sides but capable of
taking the most savage revenge on anyone who crossed them, many juntas were
understandably prepared to let sleeping dogs lie. As the bishop of Ciudad
Rodrigo complained:
&6       Fighting Napoleon


     We are in what approaches a state of anarchy here . . . because the junta and
     its president are obsessed with fear of the people, and do not dare to dis-
     pense justice with regard to either delinquents or deserters... In eight
     months of horrible events we have not seen a single punishment . . . and as
     a result . . . it is the people who are in command.'*

Desperate not to provoke any more trouble than they could help, the local
authorities therefore often themselves resisted the guinta. Thus, the Junta of
Vizcaya refused to form any regular units at all, and chose instead to rely upon
bands of irregulars in the style of the Catalan somatenes; the Junta of Molina
alleged that one of the town’s ancient privileges was to provide for its own
defence (which meant, of course, that no men could be sent to the army); the
Junta of Cartagena took refuge in both an outbreak of yellow fever and the fact
that much of the male population was either registered for sea service or
employed in the city’s important naval arsenal; the Junta of Mallorca blamed
the absence of the captain-general of the Balearic Islands on the campaign in
Catalonia; the ayuntamiento of El Ferrol made out that all of its men were
needed for the defence of the town; the Junta of Ayamonte seized on ambigu-
ities in the conscription legislation to pretend that all married men and wid-
owers were completely exempt from conscription; and, finally, the Junta of
Galicia tried to impede progress by querying a number of minor contradictions
in the orders that it had received.” Alternatively they sought to concentrate
their efforts on marginalised groups within the community — in Andalucia, for
example, it appears that many migrant labourers were pressed as tramps and
beggars — or ensured that the men who were sent were the weak, the unfit and
the undersized, and therefore those whose labour would be least missed by their
families.'*’ Finally, still another scheme, and one that had the added benefit of
killing two birds with one stone, was to offer free pardons to every convict,
bandit, smuggler or deserter who would agree to join up, or even to conscript
men directly from the gaols: in Zamora, for example, on 21 June 1808 the junta
voted to send off to the army the convicted murderers Juan Lopez, Manuel
Lopez, Diego Salvador and Baltasar de la Torre.'*!
   The central authorities were not, of course, unaware of these problems.
Indeed, as the war went on, they made strenuous attempts to force their provin-
cial counterparts to implement conscription in a fair and efficient manner
through the dispatch of comisionados in the style of the représentants en mission
of the French Revolution. Rather more tepidly, perhaps, some of the provin-
cial juntas adopted the same expedient with regard to the juntas de partido and
local justices: on 28 October 1808, for example, the Junta of Zamora sent out
a circular to no fewer than fourteen different pueblos informing them that an
inspector would be visiting them with a view to discovering what had happened
                                                     The Guerrillas in Context   87


to a large number of missing conscripts.'” But, whilst a few individuals were
deprived of their positions, in the end little was achieved, for the intervention
of outsiders was often met with resentment and obstruction, if not open hos-
tility.'** And that the local authorities were right to be careful, there was no
doubt, for efforts to hurry things along often led to still more violence.'** Recog-
nising the weakness of their position, the comisionados sent by the Junta Central
therefore often backed off in their turn, in some cases indulging in more or less
specious excuses and in others admitting that they were just plain beaten.'*
    In consequence, recruitment languished. By November 1808 the number of
men under arms had risen by fewer than 100,000 men, whilst wide areas of
Patriot Spain presented an extraordinary spectacle. As one British observer
wrote of Granada:

  In this province there is positively nothing: one squadron of cavalry is
  forming, and one battalion of foreign infantry is doing duty in the town, but
  beyond that there is not a soldier, no depot of recruits, no provision of any
  sort for keeping up the armies at their present force, or in any way carrying
  on the war. All seems at rest. The hordes of deserters that are known to
  be about are not meddled with, and indeed the encouragement given
  to deserters by that means is so great that... numbers of families are
  sending for their sons from the armies, assuring them that they will not be
  punished.”
For the troops of the Duke of Wellington and Sir John Moore, all this came as
a great shock. To quote the commissary Augustus Schaumann, for example:

  The more one sees of the Spaniards, the more discouraged one gets. Every-
  thing that has been so blatantly trumpeted in the papers about their enthu-
  siasm, their great armies and the stampede to join them is simply lies. It often
  looks as if Spain were not even willing to defend herself. In all the hamlets,
  villages and towns, the inhabitants . . . lounge about in their hundreds, com-
  pletely apathetic, indifferent and gloomy, and sunk in their idleness. Is this
  the daring, patriotic and impetuous race about which the press have raved so
  bombastically?!*”
   What the solution to the problem was few could envisage. It is all too easy
to state the obvious: that the people of Spain had to be given something tan-
gible to fight for, or, to put it another way, that the millenarian hopes that had
been awoken by the accession to the throne of Fernando VII should be trans-
lated into reality. Reform of the sort that was needed, however, was something
that was far beyond the imagination of most of the leaders of Patriot Spain,
and, in the case of the liberals — the force that dominated its politics between
1810 and 1814 — directly contrary to their ideology. Anxious to drive through
&8    Fighting Napoleon

their agenda, the liberals did repeatedly make use of the argument that the
enthusiasm of 1808 had been squandered by the failure of the Junta Central to
consolidate the revolution of that year.'** However, with the exception of a few
far-sighted individuals, they did not interpret reform in terms of the interests
of the populace, and persuaded themselves that their own private objectives
were consonant with those interests. Indeed, even the cortes of Cadiz’s much-
vaunted abolition of feudalism proved a bitter disappointment, as the peasants
had in many cases to go on paying the dues that they had owed to their old
senores in the form of rent. Only very rarely, then, do we find a recognition of
the truth. One such instance comes from General Abadia, who, sent to the
Campo de Gibraltar in 1810, decided that the only way to put an end to the
agrarian discontent that was rocking the area would be to parcel out plots of
uncultivated land and distribute them amongst the local yunteros, and another
from José O’Donnell, who as commander of the Spanish forces in Valencia and
Murcia in March 1812 issued stringent orders against grain speculation.'”
However, even such initiatives as these did not make very much difference to
the overall picture, for, whilst liberal support for disamortisation ensured that
much land changed hands in the course of the War of Independence, very little
ended up in the hands of the rural lower classes (in theory, half the lands of
the municipalities were set aside for distribution to veterans of the war, but the
principle was not acted upon). Amazingly, meanwhile, not until the very end
of the war did the cortes think to make any provision for men who had been
incapacitated in the fighting, and even then its thinking on the subject was
hardly generous: all that was done was to order the establishment of a depdsito
de inutilizados in each province and to lay down that the men concerned should
be assigned the same pay as they had been receiving at the time that they were
wounded.'”°
    It may, then, be taken as read not only that the bulk of the population had
little interest in the war, but also that such littlé interest as it possessed was
squandered by the corruption and short-sightedness of a local élite that had
maintained its position intact in the face of the so-called Spanish revolution.
Inspired by a mixture of panic, millenarian excitement and black propaganda,
the populace was initially prepared to lend itself to acts of mass resistance, and
particularly so when the élites flattered its vanity and reached out to it through
the use of interlocutors capable of speaking the language of the streets. But,
for all that, all is not what it seems. Despite a massive propaganda effort that
has to this day created the impression that the Spanish struggle against
Napoleon was a new people’s crusade, the populace on the whole wanted
nothing to do with the war. Far from rushing to the colours, indeed, they had
rather to be forced to take up arms, and even then did so with the utmost unwill-
ingness. At the same time, terrified by popular violence, the authorities them-
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   &9

selves backed away from the idea of employing the nation-in-arms against
Napoleon. For the reasons why all this was so we must turn to the ‘want of
patriotism’ so complained of by British observers. Patriotism in the modern
sense did not exist in Spain, and, what is more, could not exist, for the country
had not gone through the processes that were the sine qua non of such feelings.
But if this is the case, then, we must also seek alternative explanations for the
decision of many men of humble origins to take up arms against the French.
Partidas there may have been, but in the light of the conditions that we have
discussed in the present chapter it would be absurd to argue that they were acti-
vated solely by love of dios, rey y patria. Having established, however, that /a
guerrilla was a phenomenon that rested on a far broader spectrum of forces than
just the people in arms, this presents us with few difficulties: if bands of armed
civilians were only a small part of the ‘little war’, there is obviously room for
an alternative agenda of the sort that will now be opened up for discussion.
                                       4
                The Origins of the Guerrillas
                                                   ~




From what has gone before it is quite clear that the way is open for a complete
re-evaluation of the guerrillas. Many of the men we know by this name, it turns
out, were not armed civilians at all, but rather regular soldiers who were either
detailed to carry out irregular operations or forced by circumstances to make
them their modus vivendi. As for the populace, though hardly enamoured of the
French, it was at best uninterested in the war effort and deeply hostile to the
caciques who everywhere had a monopoly of political power. There were areas
of Spain, clearly, where the arrival of the invaders or the experience of French
occupation proved sufficiently traumatic to overcome this initial ambivalence.
At the same time, fighting in a guerrilla band close to home and family was not
the same as being marched off to the other end of the country as a conscript,
just as fighting to defend home and family was a concept that carried more
weight than fighting to defend the fatherland, the Church or the rights of
Ferdinand VII. Yet, for all that, it is no longer possible simply to accept the
bald claim that /a guerrilla was a popular crusade. That some men — many men,
even — took up arms is certain, but the reasons why they did so are open to
question. Just as interesting, meanwhile, are the issues of identity, organisa-
tion and leadership. Who, we may ask, were the guerrillas? How did the
phenomenon of guerrilla warfare actually emerge? And, finally, how far did
the cabecillas who headed the individual guerrilla bands genuinely spring from
the Spanish people?
   The importance of these questions is reinforced by the manner in which they
have often been answered by reference to examples of dubious value. Let us
take, for instance, the case of Navarre. Well documented and superficially
attractive, the figures of Martin Javier Mina y Larrea and Francisco Espoz y
Mina seem the very epitome of popular caudillos. As for the resistance move-
ment they headed, on the surface it was both very strong and deeply ideologi-
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   gI


cal. Over and over again, then, we find Navarre used as an epitome for the
guerrilla in the whole of Spain. Yet, in fact, Navarre is a very special instance
that has little relevance to the rest of the country. In Francisco Espoz y
Mina, in particular, it had a military commander of some talent. Able to win
battles against the French, he at the same time possessed both the utmost ruth-
lessness and considerable political acumen: whilst he stopped at nothing
to eliminate all his rivals in the province and unite the resistance movement
under his leadership, he also strove hard not just to live off the backs of
the inhabitants. Aided by the numerous mistakes made by the occupying forces,
the growing numbers of recruits brought in by his successes, the social struc-
ture of the Navarrese montana and the rugged terrain by which he was
 surrounded, he was also able to offer the people a greater measure of protec-
 tion against enemy reprisals and requisitioning than was generally the case
 elsewhere. But, above all, the socio-economic situation was all but unique.
 Unlike in most of the rest of Spain, in northern and central Navarre — the areas
 that provided both Mina and Espoz y Mina with the bulk of their support —
 the populace were reasonably satisfied with their lot. Homes were generally
 owned rather than rented, whilst the substantial farmhouses that characterised
 the region were positively palatial when compared with the miserable cabins
 and tenements that were the usual lot of campesinos. With land easy to obtain,
 smallholdings were large enough to keep a family and were either owned out-
 right or held on reasonable terms (rents, indeed, were extremely low, and had
 generally not been raised for generations). Farming was mixed and labour-
 intensive, thereby ensuring employment throughout the year, whilst good rain-
 fall and rich soil kept yields high and food prices low. Social divisions were
 limited, and feudalism all but non-existent thanks to the fact that up to 80
 per cent of the population could claim noble status. As for the Church, it was
 no burden. Given the relative absence of great religious houses in the moun-
 tains of Navarre, the clergy owned few estates and had almost no feudal fiefs.
 The parishes were small and their priests recruited from amongst the villagers
 whom they served, and such land as the Church did possess was rented out to
 the peasantry for sums that were for the most part purely nominal. Thanks to
 the province’s traditional fueros, too, taxation was low, whilst customs of village
 democracy ensured that it was imposed on a reasonably equitable basis.
 And, last but not least, the fweros — an immediate target, be it said, for French
 reform — were also economically beneficial to the peasantry, enshrining
                                                                                 that
 traditions of paternalism, protecting the common lands and ensuring
                                                                                  was
 there was no obstacle to the export to France of wool and hides that
 an important part of the montana ’s economy and         offering many  possibilities
                                                                          from the
 for smuggling (the key factor here was Navarre’s exclusion
Spanish customs frontier).
92     Fighting Napoleon


   Unlike, say, on the great estates of Andalucia, the populace therefore had
something to fight for, but at the same time they also had something to fight
against. Hard up against the Pyrenees, they could not but entertain notions of
the French as ‘the other’, whilst they had also bitter memories of the war of
1793-95, in which the armies of the Convention had stormed across the
province. Close to their clergy, they were in addition more likely to be influ-
enced than many other Spaniards by pamphlets and sermons excoriating the
French as the spawn of the devil (it may also be of significance that many of
the French priests and religious who had fled to Spain had settled in the
frontier provinces). And, on top of all this, they also had a tradition of taking
up arms in their own defence, having always been required to form irregular
militias in time of war and invasion (farming techniques and practices in the
hillier parts of Navarre were such that young men could be spared for part-
time military service with relative ease).'
   With these conditions mirrored only in the Basque provinces, if at all, there
is no way that the example of Navarre can be regarded as a model for the whole
of Spain. Indeed, even in Navarre they did not hold good for the entire region:
in contrast to the montana of the north, the ribera of the south —a land of rolling
steppes, clerical dominance, great estates and densely populated ‘agro-towns’
such as Corella and Tudela — was marked by the poverty, feudalism and deep-
rooted social division characteristic of a region in which the majority of the
populace were either day-labourers or tenant farmers burdened by high rents
and constant insecurity. So great were the problems experienced by the ribera
that the residual benefits conveyed by the fueros could do little to offset them
— there were, indeed, arguments that they were an obstacle to its prosperity —
and it is in consequence no surprise to find that recruitment to Espoz y Mina’s
forces was far less successful there: of 3,477 men listed in a census of the vol-
unteers who joined his forces commissioned by the provincial authorities after
the return of Fernando VII in 1814 only one quarter hailed from the ribera.?
From such areas, too, come reports that make it clear that the guerrilla com-
mander’s relations with the civilian population were not always as smooth as
was the case in the north of Navarre. ‘The guerrillas’, wrote Heinrich von
Brandt, ‘cared even less about their compatriots than we did and certain chiefs
held sway over the countryside by terror alone. When they intercepted requi-
sitioned cattle, it was in order to confiscate them for their own profit. When
they themselves requisitioned something, it was usually upon pain of death.”
Elsewhere, meanwhile, Von Brandt was even more scathing, writing, ‘The
country was made to suffer dreadfully to satisfy this man’s absolute will and
selfish ambition.”
   The question of Espoz y Mina is one to which we shall return. Much more
important for the time being is the identification of positive engagement in the
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   93


struggle with a satisfaction with pre-war society suggested by the case of the
Navarrese montana. The claim that enthusiasm for the guerrillas was strength-
ened by possession of a reasonable degree of security and status is reinforced
by reference to the social composition of the guerrillas. Extensive work in
primary and secondary sources has produced a list of some 322 members of
guerrilla bands whose occupation in 1808 is known. Of these, no fewer than
204 may be said in one sense or other to have been the representatives of
property, power and social success as students, professionals, landowners or
wealthy tenant farmers, serving or retired army officers, or members of the
clergy (the remaining 118 include taverners, butchers, stall-holders, municipal
employees, muleteers, peasants, day-labourers, artisans, common soldiers,
smugglers, bandits and deserters from the imperial army).
   Too much emphasis should not be placed on such figures, for members of
the Church, the army or the propertied classes were far more likely to leave a
trace in archive or written record than members of the populacho but the figure
is still an arresting one. In all, 1,166 individual guerrillas were identified in the
research that produced this work, and, even if every single one of the 844 names
whose occupation remains a mystery were to turn out to be peasants, day-
labourers, servants and the like, we would still have a situation in which groups
representing fewer than 10 per cent of the population provided 17 per cent
of the guerrilla movement. Also significant, meanwhile, is the identity of men
who at one time or another commanded a partida, for, out of the 371 such
leaders who have been identified, 103 came from the middling or upper
echelons of society, and only 37 from the populacho (the remaining 222 were
unknown).”
   We therefore have a movement that appears to have had strong support
amongst groups that were in one way or another beneficiaries of the antiguo
régimen. At the same time, when hacendados such as the Marqués de
Barriolucio or Esteban Pascual y Casas took the field, there seems little reason
to doubt that they did so to uphold the old order.° That said, however, the mere
fact that 137 members of the clergy have been identified amongst the 322 guer-
rillas whose occupations we know is in itself meaningless, and certainly not
enough to sustain the traditional French charge that /a guerrilla was the work
of a Church intent on blocking enlightened reform. If the famous Jeronimo
Merino — in 1808 parish priest of the tiny village of Villoviado, near Lerma —
was to become a convinced defender of absolutism and, in his latter days, a
Carlist, the Valencian leader Agustin Nebot was a rebel who began his career
by running away from his convent and was to fight just as determinedly for the
liberals. And what, too, is one to make of cases such as those of the friar Julian
                                                                               fol-
Crespo, who fought under Espoz y Mina as a corporal, was imprisoned
                                                                                 of
lowing the rising of 1814, sought secularisation under the liberal regime
94     Fighting Napoleon


1820-23 and, when this was denied, ran away from his convent to join an absol-
utist partida? Then there was Nicolas Uriz, a Navarrese friar whose chequered
career under first El Empecinado and then Espoz y Mina culminated in his
going over to the French rather than face charges of corruption, and the parish
priest of Fuentespina, Bernardo Mayor, who formed a partida of fifty men but
behaved in so oppressive a fashion that he was arrested by Empecinado, only
to escape from custody and go over to the French. And, finally, we might here
also cite Antonio Temprano, a friar of the Order of Mercy who early in 1809
joined a band commanded by one José Armengol, only to abscond and set up
his own band, at the head of which he committed numerous misdeeds (these
he later tried to excuse with the engaging remark that the time had arrived
‘when one can do whatever one likes’).’ Notable here, too, are complaints of the
drunkenness and disorderly conduct of young ecclesiastics who had been given
permission to join guerrilla bands, whilst, even when ideological motives were
seemingly paramount, closer observation frequently suggests a different story.
Merino started killing Frenchmen not because he feared what Napoleon might
do to the Spanish Church, but rather in revenge for being pressed into service
as a porter by some French soldiers in January 1809; furthermore, he might not
have become a cabecilla at all but for the fact that he was a harsh and unbend-
ing character who was unlikely to suffer insults lightly, and a keen huntsman
who was used to life in the open air and knew the local countryside like the
back of his hand.* Indeed, would any of the many monks and friars to be found
amongst the irregulars have taken up arms but for the fact that the closure of
their convents by the French had left them homeless and without support? For
a pattern here we might take the figure of Antonio Jiménez. A monk from
Medina Sidonia who headed a partida in the Condado de Niebla in 1810,
Jiménez makes it quite clear that he fled to Cadiz and sought a career in the
employ of the government only because of the eosin of the community of
which he had been a member.’
    Similar problems are to be found with regard to most of the other explana-
tions that have been put forward with regard to the motivation of the guerril-
las. Many cabecillas, we are told, took up arms out of sheer disgust at the events
of the Dos de Mayo and the overthrow of Fernando VII: examples of such men
include Juan Palarea and Juan José de Abecia, a student at the University of
Zaragoza who fought in the defence of the city in 1808 and 1809 and then
returned to his home town of Marquina to form a partida."° And such at least
was the reason put forward by many of the men involved themselves"!
However, a desire to defend the fatherland might easily mask other interests.
Thus Martin Javier Mina may or may not have been a sincere patriot, but he
was certainly the very archetype of the nineteenth-century pretendiente — the
young man anxious to secure patronage and preferment in government service.
                                                   The Origins of the Guerrillas   95

If he threw himself into liberal politics after 1814, it was not just out of con-
viction but because there was no other way for him to make his way in the
world, and the impression of opportunism that one is left with after consider-
ing his career is strengthened still further by the fact that his captivity in France
at one point actually saw him offer his services to Joseph Bonaparte. For such
men the guerrilla bands offered a golden opportunity, and it is worth turning
aside to consider two of them in more detail.’”
   Of these, the first is the fascinating figure of Mariano Renovales. A junior
officer in-the colonial militia, he had just returned to Spain after many years in
America when the war broke out. After joining Palafox at Zaragoza, he had
quickly secured a commission as a brigadier, and gained some repute in the
defence of first Zaragoza and then the Valle del Roncal, to which he managed
to escape whilst he was being sent to France as a prisoner of war. After travel-
ling to Cadiz in 1810, he had then succeeded in persuading the government of
the virtues of a wild scheme to raise the inhabitants of the Basque provinces
in revolt. As he wrote to the captain-general of Galicia, Nicolas Mahy:

   My command . . . extends to the Basque provinces, La Rioja and Santander,
   and in so far as these points are concerned, I have already sent orders to the
   soldiers and guerrillas stationed in them... to molest the enemy without
   risking a general action... Colonel Miguel Eraso is in the province of
   Burgos with 1,500 men; there are 2,000 Navarrese in the area of Vitoria
   under the command of their chiefs . . Gast6n and Hosca; the commandant,
   Miguel Horno, is near Bilbao with another thousand men; and there are
   strong partidas lurking in the vicinity of . . . Santander.'°
When this scheme proved so much hot air, Renovales soon fell out of favour
with the commanders of the Spanish forces of Galicia and Asturias, whilst the
cadre of professional officers attached to his command became so disgruntled
at his posturing and incapacity that they eventually placed him under arrest.'*
Thoroughly disgraced, Renovales then took no part in the war until Allied
forces threatened the French hold on Biscay in 1812, whereupon he rushed to
claim his satrapy, only to fall by sheer ill luck into the hands of the enemy (a
fate that he turned to good account by striking an attitude of such defiance that
he was eventually confined in the fortress of Joux — the Napoleonic equivalent
of being sent to the Second World War German ‘bad boys’ camp’ of Castle
Colditz). After going into exile in 1814 rather than return to the Spain of
Fernando VII, he drifted into liberal politics in London and, as we have seen,
                                                                               to
became involved in a scheme to raise a revolt in Mexico. Supposed
                                                      betrayed  the whole scheme
be its leader, he lost heart at the last minute and
                                                                            so as
to the authorities, at whose behest he agreed to turn agent provocateur
to ensure a clean sweep of the conspirators."”
96     Fighting Napoleon


    Few sensible observers would ever claim that Renovales was much of a hero,
but this was not the case with our other example, who is none other than
Francisco Espoz y Mina. According to the Navarrese leader’s own account of
events, outraged at the French invasion in general, and the behaviour of the
French soldiery in particular, he rushed to enlist in the Patriot army, in which
he served as a private in a newly raised Aragonese unit entitled the Tiradores
de Doyle. Stationed in Jaca as part of its garrison, he then found himself in
danger of becoming a prisoner of war, for the town’s governor decided to
surrender without a fight as soon as enemy troops arrived following the fall
of Zaragoza in February 1809.Having slipped away in the nick of time, he then
returned to Navarre, where he enlisted in the partida of his distant relative
Martin Javier Mina y Larrea, with whom he served until the latter’s capture in
March 1810.'°
    There are, however, a number of problems with this account. Let us set aside
the fact that Espoz y Mina’s enlistment in the Tiradores de Doyle did not follow
the uprising against the French quite as swiftly as he makes out (there is a story
that for a while he actually took service with the French as a groom). Much
more important is the fact that he claims to have heard of Mina’s activities when
he was at Jaca, although the latter did not take the field until several months
after the fortress surrendered, and, even more important, that a later aside
suggests that he only joined his relative’s band after he killed a bandit-cum-
guerrilla who had tried to pillage his home.'’ If patriotism was absent from
his decision to enlist, self-interest most certainiy was not. To judge from his
later conduct and public persona, Espoz y Mina was a deeply ambitious man
determined to throw off the shackles imposed on him by his position as a
younger son of a peasant household in a remote hamlet in Navarre. No record
exists of his inner thoughts at this time, but Von Brandt describes him as an
‘excellent macchiavellist’, whilst a remarkable pamphlet written in 1813 paints
a picture that is all too plausible. Thus, this suggests that the then Francisco
Espoz Ilundain was inspired by the model of Napoleon to seek his fortune on
the battlefield, and, in particular, to form a ‘legion of the damied’ composed
of outcasts of all sorts — smugglers, bandits, fugitives from the Spanish
armies and the urban and rural poor — that would provide him with a loyal
power base and make him a power in the land.'®
   If this seems a little fanciful, it can only be observed that all of Espoz y
Mina’s actions after succeeding to the command of the forces of his predeces-
sor conformed to just such a programme. As we have seen, all his rivals were
wiped out, usually on the pretext that they were behaving like bandits and
causing more harm to the populace than they were to the French, whilst in at
least one instance even emissaries of the central government appear to have
been eliminated.’’ Also got rid of was the self-proclaimed leader of the insur-
rection in Navarre, Casimir de Miguel e Irujo, who in 1810 had travelled to
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   97


the new capital of Cadiz, and, on the strength of having been of some assis-
tance to Mina at the time he had been organising his band, secured the grandly
named position of ‘commander-in-chief of the guerrillas of Navarre’.”” And
before all this there is the question of just how Espoz y Mina came to take
command of the band originally commanded by Mina. Well before the end of
the war rumours were circulating that the latter had been betrayed, and, whilst
nothing can be proved against him, the account that Espoz y Mina gives of the
affair is at the very least deeply suspicious. Thus:

  Hardly had we arrived in Labiano when a column of 3,000 enemy troops
  appeared in the vicinity. Seeing what was going on, I rode out with a few
  horsemen to take a look at them, whilst my nephew [sic: see below, note 21]
  had a rest. Seeing that they were heading straight for the village, I sent a
  message warning everybody who was there to get clear, and tried to slow
  down the enemy by having my men fire at them with their carbines, only gal-
  loping clear when the French had got within pistol-shot of us. Believing that
  [Mina] had by now got clear away, I then retired . . . only to find that . . . he
  had either believed that the danger was not as immediate as was actually the
  case, or wanted to give an example of courage, and been betrayed by his own
  daring. When he finally mounted his horse, the French had already entered
  the village . . . Shooting his mount, they quickly surrounded him, and took
   him prisoner.”

   Reading between the lines of this account, it is impossible not to suspect that
Espoz y Mina either deliberately provoked the French into attacking Mina at
a moment when he knew that the latter could be taken unawares, or simply
betrayed him outright.” Whatever the truth of the matter, there is little doubt
as to what happened next. As Espoz y Mina himself provides few details as to
how he persuaded the survivors of Mina’s forces to accept his command, let us
quote the harangue cited by the anonymous author of the pamphlet cited above:

   Well, lads, if you are not careful, you will find that the French will have left
   you no option but to get an honest job, for, what with requisitioning, looting
   and imposing fines, they will soon have grabbed all the swag. . . . All the gold,
   all the silver, all the jewellery, in fact all the good things in life, will end up
   in their hands if you do not . . . resist them to the death. Do not be afraid: I
   will be your leader, and if you obey me you will . . . cover yourselves in glory.
   Unable to show your face in any town, until now you have had to work by
   night and make do with lonely roads and isolated houses as your targets.
   Lacking a legitimate reason to live off. . . other people’s property, mean-
   while, you have been persecuted by all and sundry. But from now on you will
   be respectable. As the French are the enemy, if you kill them you will be able
   to enrich yourselves not just with their money, but also with everybody else’s
98       Fighting Napoleon

     ... You will be called defenders of the fatherland, and as such seen as men
     of honour. You will be able to enter without fear not just small places, but
     also towns and cities, whilst you will be able to... demand all the food you
     could eat and all the money you could possibly desire... And if anyone
     resists you, you will be able to deal with them . . . Indeed, you will be able
     to flog the very justices who once persecuted you without anyone daring to
     say a word for fear of being. . . punished as a traitor... At the beginning
     Bonaparte was no more than a lowly [junior] officer . . . and yet now he is an
     emperor who is . . . troubling the entire world. All I ask for is obedience: for
     the rest you may rely on me.”
   What this says about the nature of Espoz y Mina’s forces is something that
is best left to another moment. The important point here is simply to note that
we cannot trust most stories about why individual guerrilla commanders took
up arms. For another example, let us look at the issue of revenge as personi-
fied by the unknown combatant who figures in the memoirs of the British
officer Joseph Sherer:

     In a village about three leagues from Pamplona . . . Imet with . . . a guerrilla
     ... L asked him where he lived and under whom he served. ‘Sefior,’ said he,
     ‘I have no home, no relations, nothing save my country and my sword. My
     father was led out and shot in the market place of my native village; our
     cottage was burned; my mother died of grief; and my wife, who had been
     violated by the enemy, fled to me, then a volunteer with Palafox, and died in
     my arms in a hospital in Zaragoza. I serve under no particular chief: I. . .
     feel too revengeful to support the restraint of discipline and the delay of
     manoeuvre . . . But I have sworn never to dress a vine or to plough a field till
     the enemy is driven out of Spain.”

   All this seems plausible enough, especially as British, French and Spanish
observers are agreed that the appalling behaviour engaged in by the invaders
played a major role in stirring up popular resistance. As a British general cap-
tured in an unsuccessful raid on Fuengirola wrote of an incident that occurred
whilst he was passing through Jaén, for example:

     The fact .. . is that at the commencement the Spaniards were lukewarm in
     their own cause, and would probably still have remained so had not the
     cruelties and excesses of the French roused them to resistance and revenge.
     ... While at dinner I learned that Major Ropach had been sent with a
     detachment to destroy a village about twelve miles distant where some
     French soldiers had been murdered the preceding night, for it is a general
     order that the inhabitants of the place where such a crime is committed are
     put to the sword, without exception of age or sex, and their habitations
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   99

  burned to the ground... By this system of terror and extermination the
  French have created the bands that they name brigands, for the inhabitants
  of a village who are fortunate enough to escape from these military execu-
  tions, having no place of refuge, join the first armed party they meet, and,
  urged by revenge and desperation, commit the greatest cruelties on the
  enemies who fall into their hands.”

To back up this observer, meanwhile, we might cite the Frenchman Captain
Elzéar Blaze and the Spaniard Salmon. Referring to the plunder of Spain’s
churches, for example, the former wrote, ‘Had some of our amateurs of fine
art... been picked out and shot, the war would not have become national . . .
These dilapidations were the cause of the war to the death that the Spaniards
waged against us.””° And finally, it was Salm6n’s view that the ‘cruelty and ter-
rorism that the French saw as the most effective means of limiting the growth
of the partidas served only to multiply their numbers and give them greater
vigour’.””
   To substantiate these arguments, case after case may be cited of cabecillas
who are supposed to have joined the struggle against the French after the latter
had injured them in some way or another. One such was Francisco Abad
Moreno (Chaleco), a shepherd from Valdepefias whose mother and brother
were killed when the French sacked his home town in June 1808. This case is
well documented, and there seems little doubt that Abad was genuinely com-
mitted to the struggle: thanks to the patronage of General Castafios, at the end
of the war he was a colonel, whilst he also earned the praise even of men who
were normally sceptical of the guerrilla popular.*
   In other instances, however, there is room for doubt. Thus, revenge was sup-
posedly the motivation of the Franciscan friar Lucas Rafael, the prosperous
labrador Camilo Gomez, the post-rider Toribio Bustamente and the wealthy
nobleman Ventura Jiménez (in brief, it is claimed that Rafael’s father was exe-
cuted by the French for refusing to swear loyalty to Joseph Bonaparte; that
Gémez’s wife and daughters were violated by French troops who had sacked
his home and seized his livestock; that Bustamente’s wife and son were mur-
dered when the French sacked his home town of Medina de Rio Seco in July
1808; and that Jiménez’s wife was raped by soldiers quartered in his home). Yet
how far can we trust these stories? The fact that Jiménez’s own version of events
makes no mention of his wife’s violation is not encouraging: he rather says that
he had to flee his home after acting as a guide for some passing Spanish troops.”
Equally, the only evidence for the story relating to the murder of Rafael’s father
                                                                                 is
comes from a pamphlet that is couched in such exaggerated language that it
hard to take anything that it says at face value.” In at least two further instances,
meanwhile, they can be shown to be nonsense, the first of these being that of
roo ~—-Fighting Napoleon


the famous Juan Martin Diez. According to Rodriguez Solis, El Empecinado
went to war to avenge the death at the hands of French troops of the son of a
local cacique, who had shown him much favour, whilst the English seminarian
Brindle has a still more dramatic story:

   On the eruption of the French, the town of Aranda de Duero suffered in
   common with the other places visited by the enemy, but the family of John
   Martin [ssc] had a more than equal share of those sufferings. His wife was
   killed before his own eyes; his daughters were treated in the most brutal and
   shocking manner, his property was plundered and destroyed, and from a state
   of affluence he was reduced to the greatest want without wife or child to
   console him in his misfortunes.”!

All this, alas, is invention pure and simple (aside from anything else, El
Empecinado’s wife survived the war). To get a plausible story we must there-
fore turn rather to El Empecinado’s twentieth-century biographers, who are
agreed that he killed a French soldier over a girl and had in consequence to take
flight. Perhaps this is the truth, and, then again, perhaps it is not. Why, though,
was the Frenchman killed? Was El Empecinado trying to protect the girl’s
honour, as his admirers suggest, or did he quarrel with the enemy soldier in a
fit of jealousy? We shall, of course, never know, but it is impossible not to
suspect that what actually happened is very different from the stuff of legend.”
    Very different from the stuff of legend, too, is the real story of how Martin
Javier Mina became a cabecilla. The son of a landowner with a seat in the
provincial estates, according to Southey, Mina had been a student in Pamplona
when the war broke out. Struck down by illness, he was forced to retire to his
father’s estates, and there he might well have remained but for the fact that one
night his home was plundered by French troops. Having armed himself with
a musket, he went to the nearest village and invited anyone who cared do so to
join him in taking to the hills. Twelve men answered the call, and together they
ambushed a small party of French artillerymen who were marching from
Zaragoza to Pamplona. Yet this tale, too, is a fabrication, for Mina had been a
student at Zaragoza rather than Pamplona, and is suggested to have spent the
first year of the war working for a Navarrese general named Areizaga, who had
supposedly been given the task of whipping up resistance in his home province
by the Junta Central and eventually commissioned him to raise a partida. Even
this may not be the whole story: according to some French sources, Mina was
actually expelled from university for misconduct, after which he took up with
a gang of bandits. We shall never know the truth, doubtless, but it does at least
seem clear that the traditional version of events is not to be trusted.*
   The question of official involvement in the formation of the guerrilla bands
is one to which we shall return in due course, and all that needs to be noted for
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   — ror


the time being is the extent to which the origins of the partidas have become
shrouded in myth. In reality, like Espoz y Mina, El Mozo, as he became known,
was little more than an adventurer, whilst in case after case what emerges is a
picture in which patriotism plays little part. Thus, in the Condado de Niebla,
Juan Santana Bolafios appears as a mere hireling taken on by the local caciques
Vicente Letofia and Atanasio Rodriguez when the latter decided to finance and
equip a partida in the hope of insuring themselves against charges of collabo-
ration.’ In other cases economic necessity was replaced by happenstance, with
the cabecillas including a number of men who seem to have become guerrilla
commanders more by accident than by design. One such was an erstwhile
Guardia de Corps named Ramon de Murillo, who was dispatched to the
province of Soria in the aftermath of the Spanish defeat at Gamonal in Novem-
ber 1808 to round up fugitives from the battle, only to find himself issued with
a commission by an insurgent junta that had been established at Najera.** Still
another was the well-known manchego leader, Manuel Hernandez (El Abuelo),
who only took up arms when a delegation of his neighbours requested that he
fill the place left vacant when Francisquete — in 1808 a fellow inhabitant of the
town of Madridejos — was killed in action in 1810.*° And a third was Juan Diaz
Porlier, who became a guerrilla when he was cut off at Gamonal and found
himself isolated in the mountains with a handful of fugitives.*”
   In still other instances, as with Mina and Espoz y Mina, the dominant impres-
sion that one is left with is one of opportunism. Few commanders, perhaps, were
quite as blatant in their motives as a resguardo officer in the service of the French
from Sanlicar de Barrameda named Julian Fernandez, who turned up in the
Patriot zone asking for a commission as a cabecilla for no better reason than that
he had not been paid for months.** But even so, self-interest was often buried
only a short way beneath the surface, a case in point being that of the Aragonese
cabecilla Fidel Mallén. Having placed himself under the orders of the newly
arrived Pedro Villacampa, in November 1809 he asked if he could recruit a new
partida from the many deserters sitting out the war in those parts of Aragon
occupied by the French. So far, so good, but then came the sting in the tail:
claiming that the Junta Central’s guerrilla ordinances (see below, pp. 105-7)
were ruining his plans, weakening his forces and limiting his powers of inde-
pendent action, he demanded that they be waived. In justification of this
demand he pointed out that he had seen his house destroyed, his goods con-
fiscated and his business ruined, all of which entitled him, or so he argued, to
some consideration. But in doing so, of course, he simply gave the game away:
underlying the whole proposal was nothing more than a desire for plunder.”
   What use Mallén made of the independence that he claimed we unfortu-
nately do not know, but one figure whose misdeeds are all too well chronicled
is Antonio Piloti. Of Italian origin, in 1808 Piloti was a gunsmith in Madrid.
102.   ~—-Fighting Napoleon


Claiming to have handed out many weapons to the populace at the time of both
the Dos de Mayo and Napoleon’s assault on the capital in December 1808, in
June 1809 he wrote to the Junta Central asking permission to implement a
scheme that he had evolved for the establishment of bands of sharpshooters in
La Mancha, Old Castile and Vizcaya with the help of a number of other gun-
smiths.*” Permission was immmediately granted, and by the late summer he
had acquired a small group of followers and travelled to the vicinity of the town
of Cuenca, where, on 22 September, the Junta of Aragon announced that, at
the head of a band 4oo-strong, he had just taken prisoner a small French
detachment at Perales de Tajufia.* Yet the reality was very different. In fact,
Piloti never possessed more than seventeen men, of whom most seem to have
been runaway friars, whilst he terrorised the countryside, showered commis-
sions and appointments on all sides and engaged in suspicious contacts with
the French. These the gunsmith tried to pass off as attempts to encourage
desertion amongst the enemy, but it was to no avail: despite an abortive attempt
on the part of his men to defend him, on 22 September he was arrested by the
governor of Cuenca, the Marqués de las Atalayuelas.” Nothing if not resource-
ful, Piloti tried to talk his way out of trouble — ‘My services on behalf of the
Spanish nation are as patent as they are obvious... The desertion of the
greater part of the garrison of the capital was very close, all that was needed
being for me to get to Alcala [de Henares] and give the word’® — and, fortu-
nately for him secured the backing of the Duque del Infantado, a singularly
vapid individual who had been one of his original sponsors.** What happened
next is unknown, but at all events Piloti escaped punishment, for in November
1810 he turned up at El Empecinado’s headquarters in Sigiienza. The reason
for his visit was clear to all and sundry — that he was out to enveigle Martin
into giving him some troops, and rumours immediately spread that Piloti was
going to be given the command of the Tiradores de Sigiienza, one of the regi-
ments that by now made up the latter’s command. Convinced that he was about
to be demoted, the unit’s commander, one Nicolas Maria de Isidro, accosted El
Empecinado in the street and shouted that he had formed the regiment himself
and was not going to let anyone take it away from him. After fleeing to his quar-
ters, the famous guerrilla was besieged by a mob of angry soldiers, whilst the
erstwhile gunsmith decided to leave town in a hurry.” There follows another
gap in the record, but in 1813 Piloti resurfaces again, this time being arrested
in an inn in Ciudad Rodrigo on two charges of banditry. Even then he was not
finished — there followed two dramatic gaolbreaks — but in January 1815 he
finally commenced a ten-year prison sentence.”
   Whether Piloti actually set out to become a bandit is another matter — it is,
in fact, more likely that he was rather a would-be Espoz y Mina whose ambi-
tions came to naught — but there are a number of instances where it is quite
                                                The Origins of the Guerrillas   103

clear that a life of crime was central to the decision to become a cabecilla. Let
us take, for example, the case of Antonio Valdivielso Morguecho. A member of
the so-called “Compania de Contrabandistas de Ayamonte’, in September 1810
he suddenly went absent without leave and turned up in Cadiz with a highly
dubious story to the effect that he was dissatisfied with his current unit on
account of the fact that it was not doing enough to fight the French. Needless
to say, he wanted to be allowed to form his own partida, having chosen for his
area of operations the environs of Seville, where he claimed to have ‘a great
number ‘of friends’, whilst for good measure he also wanted to take as many
men from his old band with him as could be persuaded to come along.”
Whether all this was the attempt to rebuild some pre-war cuadrilla that it looks
like we shall probably never know, but in Old Castile in particular we have a
number of cases where banditry was certainly the mainspring in the formation
of particular partidas. Of these the most prominent cases are those of Principe
and Saornil.
   Known as ‘Borbén’ on account of his service with the cavalry regiment of
that name, Tomas Principe was in 1808 a deserter on the run from the law who
had already had to turn to crime to make his living, whilst Jeronimo Saornil
had actually been awaiting trial for banditry, but had been saved by the upris-
ing of May 1808. With crime their only means of support, both men had soon
gathered together bands that were in reality, exactly as the French claimed,
nothing more than gangs of highway robbers. Little better, meanwhile, were
the various deserters who became cabecillas, such as José Fombella, a cavalry-
man who fled his unit and, in the words of a Patriot army officer, ‘set himself
up as the captain of a gang, composed in part of men of his regiment whom
he had incited to desert and in part of a variety of other thieves and ne’er-do-
wells, at the head of which he has sacked many villages and committed the
greatest atrocities’.
   Conscious of the need to camouflage their real aims, many self-appointed
leaders were careful to obtain the sanction of the authorities: the murder of a
French courier in December 1808, for example, was used by Saornil as a pretext
to ask for a commission to form a guerrilla band, a ploy rewarded with confir-
mation of his command and the rank of a/férez.” Even more enterprisingly, an
infantry captain named Vicente Moreno who abandoned his regiment to strike
out on his own as a cabecilla in the Serrania de Ronda appears to have forged
orders from the Marqués de la Romana (then far away in Extremadura) to form
a partida from the dispersos of the district, and then made use of these papers
to secure genuine documents from the general who had been appointed as
nominal head of the insurrection.”
   But these stratagems should not fool us. Indeed, stripping bare the claims
of the horde of petitioners who requested a command is often an interesting
104    Fighting Napoleon


experience: one José Gonzalez Cobos, for example, turns out to have been a
deserter who had just been ejected from the ‘Compania de Guerrilla de Aya-
monte’ for misconduct.’ In a letter that he dispatched to General Castafios,
meanwhile, Pablo Morillo was quite explicit as to what had been going on:

  You say, Your Excellency, that you are doubtful whether much benefit is to
  be obtained from the guerrillas. For my part, I would either assimilate them
  into the army or suppress them altogether. If you will pardon me for saying
  so, you have been too trusting and ingenuous: the men you have appointed
  to command them have included too many unknown adventurers who have
  got round you with a mixture of lies and false promises. One such is Félix
  Salmeiro, an inhabitant of Caceres of the most irregular conduct to whom
  you awarded ... all the trappings of an officer, only for him since to have
  attracted much censure. And, even if we set Salmeiro aside, the fact is that
  many of the men who came to you did so with no other aim than the
  devastation of this province... It is all very well to place one’s trust in
  individuals of some repute such as...the doctor, Juan Peralta [i.e.,
  Palarea], but giving credit to men whose criminal conduct has horrified the
  whole of... Extremadura has so increased the number of bandits that
  it will take a century to get rid of them.”

   Yet in a sense such doubts are irrelevant. Whatever may have been the moti-
vation of their commanders, one cannot deny that plenty of partidas sprang up
without any intervention on the part of the authorities, nor wish away the
numerous petitions from men eager to set themselves up as cabecillas. Suffi-
cient space has already been devoted to the former phenomenon, but of the
latter let us take a few examples from 1809. On 30 April Juan del Castillo, a
supernumerary cavalry officer who until then had been employed rounding up
deserters, approached the Junta Central with a proposal for the formation of a
unit of cavalry, at the head of which he proposed to raise the whole of
Catalonia in revolt. On 1 June Francisco Javier de Segura, an official in the
administration of the state’s tobacco monopoly from Tafalla who had fought as
a voluntario distinguido at the siege of Gibraltar in 1782, asked for a commis-
sion to return to Navarre ‘with the sole aim of exciting the spirits of the inhab-
itants and . . . getting them to take up arms... against the enemy’. On 30
September Manuel Jiménez Guazo, an official of the Ministry of Grace and
Justice, who claimed (without much plausibility) to have distinguished himself
in the first siege of Zaragoza, sought permission to form a partida.* On 27
October an inhabitant of Miraflores de la Sierra named          Francisco Aznar
Moreno, who claimed to have lost his father in the Dos de Mayo, asked for ‘the
title of comandante . . . and the power of being allowed, through my particular
                                                The Origins of the Guerrillas   105


knowledge of both the inhabitants and the lands of the two Castiles, to get
together a guerrilla band composed of anyone capable of carrying out the sort
of actions necessary to harass the enemy .. . in the domains in which he has
intruded’. And, finally, towards the close of the year, a chaplain of the
monastery of Santo Domingo de Silos named Policarpio Romeo petitioned the
government to be allowed to form ‘a 400-strong corps entitled the Legion of
Extermination whose purpose would be to act as light troops throughout the
Sierra de Alcafiiz’.*” And, when they were not willing to fight themselves, there
were plenty of individuals who were anxious to promote the virtues of organ-
ising partidas, or to make use of them as a means of publicising their patrio-
tism. Thus, in February 1809 one Luis Valero sent a memorandum on guerrilla
warfare to the Junta Central, in which he wrote, “The more the guerrillas
multiply, the easier it will be to kill a lot of the enemy at little cost, and the
more will they become exhausted and demoralised.’* And in January 1810 the
Marqués de Villafranca y los Vélez issued a proclamation in Murcia calling for
volunteers for a new partida entitled ‘La Cruzada Murciana’, which was to
consist of sixty priests and religious aged between eighteen and forty-five whom
he promised to equip in splendid uniforms consisting of helmets, brown jackets
with scarlet collars and cuffs and light blue piping, white breeches and riding
boots.”
   We may, then, say that the partidas owed a large part of their existence to
individual action — that they had, in fact, a life outside the state. But the for-
mation of the guerrilla bands was never left solely to the ambition, energy and
initiative of men such as Juan Martin Diez or Francisco Espoz y Mina. From
the very beginning, indeed, the Patriot authorities took it upon themselves to
organise partidas that could harass the enemy. Thus, the irregulars that so
troubled Dupont in the weeks that preceded the battle of Bailén were in many
instances in the pay of the Junta of Jaén, whilst in Old Castile General Cuesta
—a commander who made himself odious to many admirers of the guerrillas
by having El Empecinado arrested as a bandit in the summer of 1808 — had no
sooner declared against the French than he had dispatched one of his officers
to encourage guerrilla resistance amongst the inhabitants of the districts that
lay between his headquarters in Valladolid and French-occupied Burgos.” As
the French regained the upper hand in the struggle in the winter of 1808-9
following the set-back that they had suffered after Bailén, so interest in the
subject gained fresh impetus. On 21 January 1809, for example, we find the
Conde de Tilly, one of Seville’s two representatives to the Junta Central,
suggesting the revival of the Moros Mogataces de Oran, a unit of Moorish
irregular cavalry that had until the 1790s been attached to the garrison of the
African outpost of Oran. As he wrote:
106 ~—s-Fighting Napoleon

  It is clear that their style of fighting is most appropriate for guerrilla warfare
      . whilst it would certainly be very damaging to the French: the speed of
  their horses, their ability to fire their muskets at the gallop, and the courage
  with which they face danger make them terrible opponents.”

   If this idea was hardly practical, the Junta Central more than saw the point.
Thus, on 28 December 1808 a decree appeared authorising the formation of
bands of irregulars up to 100-strong under the leadership of cabecillas respon-
sible to the military authorities, whilst on 25 February 1809 a second order —
the so-called decree of the corso terrestre — stipulated that any money and other
valuables seized from the French and their supporters would automatically
become the property of the men who had taken it.” Alongside this legitimisa-
tion of highway robbery, there also appeared general calls for revolt along the
lines, say, of that addressed to the population of Old and New Castile on 28
April 1809:

  Castilians! Now or never! If we all unite, then we shall all be saved. The
  enemy... are few in number, and if we all fall on them at once, they will
  without doubt succumb ... What do you have to lose? Risk your lives for
  liberty like good men and true!

These decrees and proclamations, meanwhile, were backed by measures of a
more practical sort. Thus, in May 1809 a captain of the Cazadores de Zafra
infantry regiment named José Crivell was given thirty men and sent off to raise
a company of tiradores in the Montes de Toledo, whilst the following month
saw the erstwhile second-in-command of the resguardo of Navarre, Manuel
Loynaz, ordered to travel to his home province and whip up popular resistance
there.“ And in both Old Castile and Aragon special commissioners were
appointed whose brief included the ae otpee:fresh partidas and galvanis-
ing those that were already in existence.°
   Government action, meanwhile, was mirrored in a series of local initiatives.
Threatened by French attack, in December 1808 the Junta of Badajoz formed
a number of partidas in an effort to stave off the French, of which one was
commanded by Pablo Morillo, a sergeant in the Regimiento de Infanteria de
Marina and veteran of the battle of Trafalgar who had in June 1808 obtained
a commission in one of the new regiments formed by the Junta of
Extremadura.” Appointed in the same month to head the provinces of Galicia,
Leon and Asturias, the Marqués de la Romana inaugurated his command by
ordering the entire male populace to be formed into large numbers of partidas
on the grounds that, until the Spanish armies were ready to undertake major
operations, the only thing to be done was ‘to harass the enemy without cease
and defeat him in detail’ (so strong was La Romana’s interest in the subject,
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   107


indeed, that one of his staff officers produced a pamphlet that set out to instruct
the populace in how they might take on the French, whilst the newspaper pub-
lished by his army’s headquarters consistently urged the Junta Central to hold
back its troops in the shelter of the chains of mountains that ringed the areas
then held by the French whilst relying on the guerrillas to contain and wear
down the invaders).” In the Levant the summer of 1809 saw the captain-general
of Valencia, José Caro, transform the urban militias that had been formed
throughout the region into ready-made guerrilla bands that would be ready to
take the field as soon as the French made an appearance (interestingly, whilst
the propertied classes were expected to serve for nothing, the peasantry were
promised an allowance of 5 reales per day). Not satisfied with the response,
meanwhile, in March 1810 he ordered the immediate enlistment with the guer-
rilla bands of the interior of the large number of peasants and day-labourers
who had flocked to the city of Valencia in search of work, food and shelter.®
Similar efforts to set up guerrilla bands in readiness for a French invasion were
made in the province of Murcia in 1809 by a commissioner dispatched there
by the Junta Central named Antonio Saenz de Vizmanos.” And, finally, a
succession of generals proved more than willing either to confirm existing
cabecillas in their commands or to appoint fresh chieftains. Thus, setting aside
the case of Mina (which we have already examined), in September 1809 the
Conde de Cartaojal — then commander of the Army of the Centre — appointed
an inhabitant of Algecilla named Manuel de la Calzada to head a new partida
in the district known as the Alcarria, whilst in May 1810 Nicolas Mahy took
Francisco Longa, who had until then been operating under the orders of the
Marqués de Barriolucio, under the wing of the Army of the Left.” And, last
but not least, in May 1812 the new comandante general of the province of
Valencia, Francisco Copons, authorised a friar named Luis Rovira to raise a
force of irregulars under the name of the Division de ‘Tiradores Honrados.”!
   So much, then, for the leadership of the guerrillas. As we have seen, driven
by a variety of motives, a large number of individuals either formed partidas
on their own initiative without involving the authorities at all, or offered them-
selves to the latter as prospective cabecillas. As for the Spanish juntas and
generals, threatened with complete disaster, they gladly availed themselves of
partisan warfare as a means of staving off the French and weakening their
forces. What, though, was the popular response to these efforts? In the eyes of
tradition, of course, moved by hatred of the French and love of e/ rey deseado,
                                                                                  for
the populace rushed to join the partidas. According to Rodriguez Solis,
example, sixty men had joined Merino      within  days  of his taking   to the hills,
whilst Palarea had only to announce his intention of forming a band for ‘all the
sons of the province [of La Mancha] to believe themselves obliged to second
                                                                                   by
him’.” And, if we are to believe Espoz y Mina, ‘My little army was swelled
108   ~~ Fighting Napoleon

new volunteers every day, men coming forward in no small numbers in the hope
of sharing the privations and glories of the soldiers who were fighting for the
honour and glory of the Fatherland at my orders.’ At the same time a well-
known list of some twenty-two guerrilla bands put together in 1812 claims that
these alone numbered some 38,520 men.” This is all very well, but, whilst the
fact of considerable popular involvement in the guerrilla is impossible to deny,
the vision that is thereby conjured up clearly flies in the face of the lack of
interest in the war that was so evident in the unoccupied parts of the country.
Why, then, did so many Spaniards enlist with the guerrillas? On the surface,
the French had to do no more than appear in a district for attitudes to the war
to be transformed, but, as we shall see, this was not in fact the case. Setting
aside the exception of parts of Navarre and the Basque provinces, where a set
of absolutely unique circumstances did produce a reaction that more or less
corresponded to the traditional stereotype, we must therefore look for fresh
models of popular involvement.
   For those addicted to the idea of an anti-French crusade, the suggestion that
the populace showed no willingness to join the guerrillas may be a shocking
one, but it is nevertheless one that cannot be gainsaid. Let us take, for example,
the case of the thousands of dispersos to be found throughout the occupied
provinces. Men who had run away or become separated from their regiments
and fled to their homes, they were, it was generally observed, impervious to
every effort to get them to return to their duty. As two commissioners sent out
by the Junta of Catalonia observed to General Lacy in 1811:
  Given the critical nature of the situation, we have no option but to inform
  Your Excellency . . . that the province is in a state of semi-anarchy and the
  people dominated by ideas of a most sinister character. Catalonia is lost
  unless we change our maxims. Eroles, Milans, Manso and all the other agents
  who have been sent out to collect the dispersos will not bring in even a tenth
  part of them by the military means which they have adopted. They have been
  working at the task for more than a month, and, for all the good that they
  have achieved, they might as well not have bothered. Terror is all very well,
  but ...in this respect it has produced the very opposite effect to the one
  desired.”

    With a great deal of effort some men were got in, such as the eighty-eight
stragglers, fugitives, convalescents and deserters assembled by a Valencian
captain named Reig sent out by Francisco Copons from his headquarters in
Alicante in the spring of 1812.” But the populace as a whole generally showed
little enthusiasm for the struggle. Let us take, for example, the Cantabrian dis-
trict of the Liebana, which Mariano Renovales spent the winter of 1810-11
trying to galvanise in favour of his projected guerrilla army. As Renovales’
replacement, José Aburruza, wrote to General Mahy after the former’s arrest:
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   109


  Your Excellency writes that I should stay on here to foment and support the
  insurrection . . . but for the sake of truth I have no option but to tell you that
  everyone is living quietly at home, and that I do not believe that there will
  be any insurrection at all until the enemy actually appears. In so far as I can
  see, at no time since we arrived here has anyone done anything but work in
  the fields.”

   As confirmation of this indifference to the war amongst the peasantry of the
Cantabrian mountains, we might take a proclamation issued by the Junta of
Asturias in September 1810, which accused the inhabitants of the province of
having been taken in by the efforts of the French ‘to establish a ruinous indif-
ference . . . by means of hypocrisy and feigned benevolence’.” Also suggestive
is the fact that, at about the same time, Porlier was complaining bitterly that he
could not get the inhabitants of Asturias to carry letters for him, let alone
provide him with information on the movements              of the French.” And
the problem was the same elsewhere. Appointed commandant of the district
known as the Tierra de Barros in Extremadura in April 1810, Morillo found
that his attempts to form a home guard amongst the populace were stymied
by highly implausible claims of a want of arms." From La Mancha it was
claimed in March 1812 that there were sufficient dispersos in the provinces of
Cuenca, Guadalajara, Molina de Aragon, Soria and Aragon — the very heart-
land of the war of Duran, El Empecinado and Villacampa — to form an army
of 30,000 men.*' From Catalonia it was being reported by 1811 that the
populace was not only in a state of complete apathy, but refusing to fight in the
somatén.” And at about the same time a government spy in French-occupied
Seville wrote, ‘In this city and its surroundings there are many dispersos. Much
rigour is needed to deal with the problem... The parents of the men
concerned should be held responsible, and a number of examples made
amongst them.”
   One could continue in this vein ad infinitum, but rather than simply listing
example after example, let us take the case of the modern-day province of
Huelva. Penetrated by the French for the first time in February 1810, the area
had never been in any sense a hub of the Spanish war effort. Conscription had
languished, and the only sign of military activity had been the formation of a
so-called ‘company of guerrillas’ which was largely formed of deserters and
seems in practice to have been little more than the private army of the Junta of
Ayamonte (alongside this there was an even more dubious force consisting of a
collection of bandits and smugglers who had been hired as a kind of Frezkorps).
Enthusiasm for the struggle, meanwhile, was notable only by its absence,
particularly as the local authorities appear to have been particularly corrupt in
the administration of the guinta. On arriving in the province to take command
of the handful of troops who had escaped thither from the fall of Seville,
110 ~—-Fighting Napoleon


Francisco Copons therefore encountered a depressing picture. As the chroni-
cler of his operations wrote:

  All energy and patriotism were gone. The egoism of many landowners. . .
  the fear and ignorance of the mass of the people and the sagacity of the
  enemy, who had been both buying the hearts of the rich and. . . terrifying
  the spirits of the poor, ensured that many pueblos submitted to the yoke of
  the rey intruso. As for those places that remained free, they suffered from the
  same egotism, their justices acting in an arbitrary manner that recognised
  ... no other law than that of their caprice .. . From this it followed that in
  every pueblo many stragglers and deserters were hidden without either the
  justices or, much less, their parents... making any attempt to get them to
  return to their regiments.™*

   As for Copons himself, he was close to despair. No sooner had he arrived at
Ayamonte than he was complaining, ‘The pueblos of the Condado de Niebla
lack the patriotic ardour that once moved them. Although they sigh for their
liberty and cry out for the enemy to be defeated, nobody is doing anything.’®
Nor did the situation improve. Notwithstanding frequent incursions on the part
of the French, there were few signs of resistance.*° Exhorted by the Junta of
Cadiz to carry the war to the French, a frustrated Copons could only stamp his
feet in rage: ‘Whip up revolt! Nothing is more impossible! Time goes by and
yet in every pueblo there are men who... . exhort their fellows to remain quiet
so as not to attract the ire of the enemy.”*” Recruitment meanwhile fell into a
state of complete stagnation. To quote a report sent by Copons to the Regency
in September 1810:

  Thus far . . . the only men who have left this county to defend the cause of
  Your Majesty have been the first class of recruits, and even then it is only
  the poorest that have had to go . . . Protected by their less fortunate fellows,
  thousands of men continue to live quietly at home, and they are seemingly
  quite happy to see the country lost. The second class of recruits is the one
  that embodies most vices: the possession of a property worth a few reales is
  quite enough to give the householders who form its backbone a way out.
  Their homes are valued at a price which they do not merit, and because of
  this whole multitudes have been exempted. Amongst them are to be found
  men with five sons who have managed to buy out the lot. Yet, whilst their
  boys sit at home, their poorest neighbours go out to fight, including many
  lads who have had to leave behind widowed mothers living in a state of indi-
  gence. Another problem group, meanwhile, are the many clerks in minor
  orders ... who have also been exempted. Amongst them are to be found
  many men who are barely able to read. Many marriages have also been faked,
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   = 111


  and the fact is that the whole time for most people the aim is to find a shield
  that will protect them from the draft. And the result of all this is, first, that
  ... Your Majesty is not getting the men that have been called upon to assist
  in the explusion of the enemy . . . and, second, that amongst the populace
  ... nothing is heard but laments, not to mention complaints that only the
  needy have to serve Your Majesty.

   It was not just Copons who noted the dichotomy that almost everywhere
opened between hatred of the invaders and a willingness actually to join the
struggle against them. Similar comments may also be noted in British sources.
To quote a diplomat who travelled with Wellington’s army across northern
Spain in the autumn of 1812, for example:

  The feelings of all the provinces through which I have passed are decidedly
  inimical to the French and favourable to the common cause. . . At the same
  time... the patriotic feelings of the lower classes are of little use to their
  country. It is a passive feeling which murmurs under the oppression and
  tyranny which it suffers without exerting itself to remove or diminish what
  it complains of. The people pay their contributions and deliver up their
  mules, grain and provisions whenever they are demanded . . . by the enemy.
  Of course they complain of these exactions and are happy to see the English
     But... it does the enemy no harm nor us any good.”
Much the same point, meanwhile, was made by the British general Robert
Long. Thus:

  The people, alternately in the power of friends and foes, show indifference
  to both. They cannot take a part without danger to themselves; they prefer
  consequently personal security to a display of unseasonable loyalty or
  patriotism. In their hearts I believe they hate the French, but they have at
  the same time no great love for us.”
And finally, when Lord Blayney landed at Fuengirola in 1810, hopes that his
handful of troops would be supported by the inhabitants of the neighbouring
Serrania de Ronda proved unfounded, despite the fact that the whole area had
seemingly taken arms against the French. Thus:

   Previous to marching I had some conversation with Captain Miller of the
   Ninety-Fifth Regiment, who, with several other officers, had been latterly
   employed in organising the Spanish peasants. He informed me that a con-
   siderable quantity of arms and ammunition had been distributed amongst
   them, and consequently that I might expect a number to join me immedi-
   ately. In this, however, I was entirely disappointed, not more than ten or
   twelve making their appearance.”
112         ~Fighting Napoleon


   The civilian population was not entirely indifferent to the war. When three
members of Mina’s band appeared in Pamplona to hand over a group of French
prisoners who were being exchanged for two of his followers who had fallen
into French hands, for example, they were mobbed by a cheering crowd and
plied with food and drink.” And there were wild celebrations in both Madrid
and parts of La Mancha in late July 1809, when exaggerated reports of the
French defeat at Talavera set off rumours that Joseph Bonaparte had been
captured with his entire army.’’ For a few of the mén who followed the cabecil-
las it is even possible that traditional stereotypes hold good. Setting aside the
inhabitants of Espoz y Mina’s heartlands, this is especially true of the various
priests and other religious who fought with the partidas. ‘They were already
our implacable enemies’, wrote Sebastian Blaze. ‘Forced back into the world,
they became even more dangerous. Those who were young and active hung up
their habits and became . . . brigands, it being to them that we owe the forma-
tion of those bands that became most famous for their cruelty.’* Yet how
numerous these holy warriors were it is impossible to say: although one or two
bands seem to have had quite a number of clerics, the general impression
one is left with is that their numbers have been exaggerated.” And such was
the strength of popular aversion to the struggle that it is impossible to
place much weight on the importance of patriotism or ideology as factors in
the motivation of most recruits. The most obvious alternative is revenge. Like
the leaders of the partidas, the rank and file of the guerrillas have often been
painted as men driven by such feelings. Thus, Saturnino Abuin — an early
subordinate of El Empecinado who earned the sobriquet El Manco when he
lost a hand in combat — and his two brothers are supposed to have joined the
struggle after their home was burned down during the sack of Tordesillas by
the French in December 1808.” Then there is the case of one Juan Gomez, a
blacksmith from Bahabon de Esgueva, who reputedly joined the partida of
Cura Merino after strangling a French soldier whom he caught molesting his
daughter.” But there is much to mistrust here. Abuin, for example, may have
been from Tordesillas, but that is about all that is true in the story that we have
just retailed: in reality he was a bandit whom the uprising found in prison await-
ing trial for murder, and who, like many other men on the wrong side of the
law, only became a guerrillero because it was the safest means of reverting to his
old ways. Hence his eventual decision to abandon El Empecinado and join the
French as a counter-guerrilla, Juan Martin’s determination to discipline his
forces obviously constituting a major obstacle to Abuin’s dreams of a reign of
terror.”®
   Whilst noting the possibility that some of the rank and file may have been
motivated by hatred of the French (whether ideological or personal), it is there-
fore probably better to look for other factors when it comes to explaining why
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   113


men sought out the partidas. One of these is a sense of adventure. Such, at least,
is the tradition associated with Juan Fermin Leguia, a sergeant in Espoz y
Mina’s forces who on 13 March 1813 scaled the walls of the castle of
Fuenterrabia at the head of a small party of men, overpowered the garrison,
spiked its guns and threw all its powder and ammunition into the River Bidasoa:
a peasant from Vera, we are told that, being of a somewhat wayward disposi-
tion, he simply became bored with life in his parents’ caserio and ran off to join
Espoz y Mina’s men.” This, perhaps, is just a pious tale, but some credibility
is lent to it by an incident in Madrid in August 1810 in which a scandalised
father complained that his son and two other boys, all three of them aged
about thirteen, had been seduced into setting off to join the forces of
El Empecinado.'”
    Given the hatred that attached to military service, however, the number of
children eager for some desperate glory cannot have been very great. Despite
all the tales of patriotism, boyish enthusiasm and hatred of the French, it is
clear that, outside Navarre, a decision to volunteer for the guerrillas was the
product of more mundane factors. Let us take, for example, the case of the
various bands that stemmed from the motley collection of gendarmes and
customs guards known as the resguardo that had had the responsibility of fight-
ing banditry and smuggling in Bourbon Spain. Accustomed to life in the wild
and chasing malhechores of all sorts across the length and breadth of the country,
 the various components of this force were an obvious source of recruits for the
 guerrillas. Indeed, some bands seem to have come straight from its ranks, such
 as that commanded by Alejandro Fernandez in La Mancha in 1810: in 1808
 Fernandez had been a police corporal, and his initial followers consisted of six
 of his men.!°' Once again, however, the reasons why such men fled are open to
 doubt. We do not know why Fernandez becamme a cabecilla, but many of his
 fellows were initially quite happy to serve the josefino régime. As time went by,
 however, e/ rey intruso found it harder and harder to pay his followers, and thus
 it was that gaps began to appear in the ranks of the resguardo and, with them,
 new recruits for the partidas. Setting aside the case of Julian Fernandez noted
 above, as one afrancesado official wrote from Zafra, ‘Some members of the...
 resguardo of this town have fled to the partidas that have been infesting the
region on the pretext that they have nothing to live on?
   If lack of pay was one incentive for joining the guerrillas, another was the
                                                                                   as
prospect of captivity in France, or, still worse, of being shot by the wayside
                                                                       starving  and
a result of being unable to keep up with the long columns of
                                                                           the wake
disease-ridden prisoners that slowly made their way to the border in
                                               of war were therefore  an  importan t
of every Spanish defeat. Escaped prisoners
                                                                  a  soldier  of  the
source of recruits. One such was Pascual Ralla y Miravete,
                                                                                   in
Regimiento de Fieles Zaragozanos, who was taken prisoner in Catalonia
114.   ~Fighting Napoleon


January 1810, but succeeded in escaping and eventually making his way
back to his home town of Calatayud, where he fell in with the forces of
E] Empecinado and enlisted in their ranks, and another was Justo Prieto, a
volunteer from Villaluenga de la Sagra who fled to the band of Juan Palarea
after being taken prisoner at the battle of Ocafia in November 1809. Also
captives of the French were the future Carlist leader Zumalcarregui and Espoz
y Mina’s trusted subordinate Gregorio Cruchaga, both of whom were taken by
the French at Zaragoza only to slip away and enlist in the first instance in the
ranks of the insurgents of the valley of the Roncal.'°’ How many recruits were
obtained in this fashion it is impossible to say, but the number certainly ran into
many hundreds, if not thousands. Thus, in the two famous attacks that he
launched on French convoys at Arlaban in May 1811 and April 1812 alone,
Espoz y Mina rescued over a thousand Spanish prisoners, almost all of whom
ended up in the ranks of his forces.'** Meanwhile, actions such as that of
Arlaban also tapped into a fresh source of recruits in the form of soldiers taken
prisoner from the enemy. For such men joining the guerrillas was often the only
chance of saving their lives - General Hugo, in fact, specifically says that many
prisoners were offered the choice of enlistment or the firing squad — and this
applied with still more force to Spanish soldiers who had chosen to fight for
the French, such as for example, one Pedro Crespo, a sometime member of
Joseph’s ‘Regimiento Real Irlandés’, who was taken prisoner fighting with a
guerrilla band in the summer of 1811.!%°
   Joining the guerrillas to escape a fate that was even worse was clearly very
common. Particularly if it involved French soldiers, brawling was likely to incur
the harshest of penalties: hence the presence in the ranks of the partidas of both
an ex-soldier from Lerma named Julian de Pablos, who joined Merino after a
drunken spree ended in a fight with the local constables, and Espoz y Mina’s
henchman Félix Sarasa, who had to flee to the perians after he came to blows
with some French soldiers in Pamplona.
   Also out to escape were a variety of men who had fallen foul of the law.
Amongst the men who served with Moreno in Andalucia, for example, was
Francisco Herrera, a young man from Vélez Malaga who had been in gaol
awaiting trial for murder when the French arrived in January 1810. Still incar-
cerated seven months later, on 13 July he was released when Moreno raided the
town, and, naturally enough, decided to join his liberators.!” Little better off,
meanwhile, was Prospero Marco, a 24-year-old graduate who had had to flee
his home in Lerma early in 1808 after a fight over a girl and for a while lived
as a bandit before eventually ending up in the partida of Jeronimo Merino,!
Draft evasion, too, was common: in October 1810, for example, a band appeared
at Alajar under one Andrés Charlan that quickly attracted large numbers of
mozos faced with the prospect of service in the Spanish army.'”
                                                The Origins of the Guerrillas   115


   And, last but not least, still other men left their homes for fear of conscrip-
tion to the French forces. In contrast to many other parts of the empire, this
was never imposed in Spain, but even so concerns of this sort were never far
away (hence, indeed, the prominence of the issue in the great propaganda
campaign that had accompanied the uprising of 1808). In consequence, even
the most limited measures caused panic. Thus, when the de facto French viceroy
of Andalucia, Marshal Soult, issued orders in May 1810 for all those dispersos
who had been serving soldiers in 1808 to report to his headquarters in Seville
on the grounds that, as members of the Spanish armed forces, they in theory
owed allegiance to e/ rey intruso, the results were dramatic:

  Hearing that Marshal Victor [sic] was out to enlist them, the young men of
  Jerez and the other pueblos of the district abandoned their homes. . . and,
  rounding up as many horses as they could from farm and pasture, joined
   together and took up arms against their oppressors.'”°
Needless to say, such fears were ruthlessly exploited by the Patriots, a good
example being events in the Serrania de Ronda, where the rising against the
French appears in part to have been the work of agents who spread rumours
that occupation would be followed by the conscription of the entire male
populace and put it about that the invaders had brought with them whole
wagon-loads of manacles for this purpose."
   Many of the guerrillas, then, were in essence runaways, an impression
reinforced still further if we consider the linked questions of draft evasion
and desertion. As the British diplomat Thomas Sydenham put it, by their very
existence the partidas ‘prevented the recruiting of the regular armies, for every
Spanish peasant would naturally prefer rioting and plunder and living in free
quarters to being drilled and starved with the regular army’.'” As we have seen,
meanwhile, not only did soldiers desert from the army in large numbers, but
many of those concerned ended up with the partidas (albeit faute de mieux:
maay, it seems, would have been content to stay at home had they not been
picked up by one or other of the parties of regular troops sent out to round
them up and forced to make a break for it).''’ Whatever the motives of such
recruits, plenty of partidas were composed almost entirely of men of this sort:
                                                                     example,
when Vicente Moreno was captured by the French in August 1810, for
                                                                          regi-
his thirty-three men included eighteen soldiers from the Reina infantry
 ment, ten from that of Vélez Malaga and two from the Walloon Guards.'"
                                                                           to con-
    On occasion there may have been, as tradition claims, a determination
                                                                    regular  army.
 tinue the struggle by other means than fighting and dying in the
                                                                     r 1810 two
 Thus, after the Spanish defeat at Alba de Tormes in Novembe
                                                    who   had  been  cut off from
 officers of the Toro provincial militia regiment
                                                                           of Manuel
 their unit gathered together a group of fugitives and joined the band
116 ~~ Fighting Napoleon


Echavarria.''* Equally, Bartolomé Amor, a sergeant in the Burgos provincial
militia regiment who escaped from the battlefield of Gamonal with Juan Diaz
Porlier, seems to have been a dedicated soldier who merited the command that
he eventually earned of the cavalry regiment known as the Dragones de Soria."
But all too often the real motive for desertion was very different. We shall never
know precisely why Nicolas Maria de Isidro, a common soldier in one of the
regiments that had been sent to Denmark under the Marqués de la Romana
and a native of the province of Guadalajara, had no sooner got back to Spain
than he fled to join the forces of El Empecinado.''’ But Manuel Sarasa, a veteran
infantryman from Navarre who also escaped from Denmark but fought on in
the ranks until he was captured at the battle of the River Gebora in March
1811, has much to say on the subject:

   Had I...copied the misconduct of the many men who fled the army,
   returned to their home provinces and joined the guerrillas, I would surely
   have obtained promotion and suffered a lot less. As is well known, it is much
   harder to distinguish oneself in a field army than it is in a guerrilla band,
   just as the privations suffered in the former are never experienced in the
   latter.''®

Even more explicit was a report sent by an anonymous staff officer attached to
the headquarters of the Fifth Army to the Chief of the General Staff in Cadiz
in June 1811: ‘Given that the guerrillas are always dressed in the greatest
comfort and never lack fistfuls of doubloons with which to treat themselves,
one really has to be the greatest of patriots to serve in the army.’ As this sug-
gests, the pious tales that have come down to us of men coming to the conclu-
sion that they could fight the invaders more effectively as irregulars than they
could in the ranks of the regular army should be regarded with the utmost sus-
picion. Much more to the point is the story of Vicente Hernandez, a soldier of
the Voluntarios Imperiales de Toledo who deserted early in 1810, and fought
on-and-off with the partidas of Isidoro Mir, Ventura Jiménez and Camilo
Gomez before eventually setting up as a bandit and ending up on a French
scaffold.'?”
   And it was not just Spanish soldiers who deserted, for the partidas were also
joined by many refugees from the French forces. How many such men came
over to the guerrillas in this fashion it is impossible to say, but they were by no
means infrequent. Large numbers certainly fought with the Navarrese insur-
gents: wounded in action under Espoz y Mina at Sangiiesa on 5 February 1812
was a Prussian named Jochiim Flich, whilst ‘the King of Navarre’ was joined
by a steady trickle of deserters from the garrison of Pamplona, and, on one
occasion, no less than half a battalion of Italians.'2! Nor was this an isolated
instance. In July 1811 El Empecinado was reported to have recruited so many
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   117


Germans that he was thinking of organising them into entire companies.'” So
numerous were the foreign components of some bands, indeed, that they at
times outnumbered the Spaniards: in July 1810 no fewer than fifty-eight of the
eighty-three followers of the erstwhile smuggler Ignacio Alonso were Germans
or Italians.'”* Indeed, there even seem to have been bands composed of nothing
but foreign deserters: travelling from Segovia to Valladolid, the convoy of which
Andrew Blayney was a part was attacked by ‘brigands commanded by a German
captain who had deserted with his company from Santa Maria de Nava, of
which he had been commandant’.'”
   But by far the most important positive reason for enlistment was the hope
of gain. For example, even Gomez de Arteche admits that, if El] Empecinado
was quickly able to gather a band of men around him, it was not so much
because of his charisma as because he was able to offer both a wage and the
chance of booty, whilst Tone, too, is prepared to admit that it was the solid
funding enjoyed by Mina that allowed him to build up his partida so quickly.”
And, if it was Von Brandt’s opinion that the chief reason for enlistment was
‘the hope of plunder’, the British observers Sydenham and Larpent saw the
bands as ‘regular freebooters [who] subsisted on the pillage of the country’ and
‘a sort of banditti’.’*° Let us quote, too, Luis de Villaba, an artillery officer who
served in the siege of Zaragoza:

   The guerrillas who go by the name of Patriots should be exterminated: they
   are gangs of thieves with carte blanche to rob on the roads and in the villages.
   If some of them have brought benefits, the damage that others have wrought
   is one thousand times greater ... Those who believe these bands . . . to be
   very useful are many, but if they meditate on the desertion from the enemy
   that has not occurred for fear of being murdered . . . the burnings and other
   disasters suffered by the villages... the many highwaymen and bandits
   who carry out their crimes under this pretext, and finally the manner in
   which their disorder and independence have caused all kinds of evil, they
   will understand how far the disdvantages outweigh the benefits.'”
    To quote a famous catch-phrase of the time, then, ‘Long live Ferdinand and
let’s go robbing!’!”* What rendered the lure of gain all the stronger was the des-
perate situation into which Spain had been plunged by the war. The country,
as we have seen, had always been characterised by great poverty and social
inequality, and matters were not improved by the inflation, wars, natural dis-
asters and harvest failures of the period 1796-1808. But with the French there
came absolute ruin. Not only was the burden of French requisitioning and
                                                                                  to
taxation extremely heavy, but the propertied classes proved only too eager
                                                                          example,
save themselves at the expense of the poor (French levies were, for
                                         taxes on basic  foodstuffs) . As a further
frequently funded by imposing extra
118 ~~Fighting Napoleon


means of raising money, meanwhile, many municipalities sold off considerable
amounts of common land, thereby depriving many of the humbler elements of
the community of firewood, pasturage, food and raw materials (chestnuts and
wild asparagus came from the commons, as did the esparto grass used in such
activities as basket-weaving). As most municipalities had also rented out parts
of the common lands in small parcels at reasonable rents, there also disappeared
many vital tenancies. In such places as the Navarrese montana, where the land
was sold off in minifundia, this policy was softened in its effects, but all too
often it went in large units for which the peasants could not compete, with the
result that the oligarchy consolidated its control of the local economy still
further. A good example is Guiptizcoa, where a study of nine pueblos has shown
that 14 per cent of the 1,458 purchasers got 71 per cent of the arable land
(and, still worse, that a mere twelve purchasers took almost one fifth of the
properties involved). Thanks to the requisition of so many draft animals
and carts by the contending armies, in many areas agriculture seems virtually
to have come to a standstill, whilst nature was no more kind to Spain in the
period 1808-14 than she had been in the years before the war. The harvest
of 1811 was particularly disastrous and wheat prices shot up dramatically (in
Burgos, for example, wheat rose from 80 reales a fanega in June 1811 to 244
reales by the close of the'year). Yet the populace were in no condition to respond
to the crisis. With the French imposing strict limits on movement and clamp-
ing down on many traditional aspects of street life, opportunities to find alter-
native sources of employment were limited — it was, for example, impossible
for the inhabitants of poverty-stricken mountain districts such as the Serrania
de Ronda to migrate in search of the seasonal work that had once been their
salvation — especially as industry was at a standstill, and many sefores unable to
pay their existing retainers and domestic servants, let alone take on fresh hands.
On the roads, meanwhile, little could move, whilst the French had generally
only to arrive in a port for its trade to collapse. In short, hunger and despair
reigned on all sides.!”
   As every account of life in the French zone makes clear, the common people
were tried beyond all endurance. Thus, passing through Malaga as a prisoner
of the French, Andrew Blayney found a scene of misery:

  Though    [Malaga]      still retains some   external   appearance   of its former
  prosperity, it is but the insubstantial shadow of departed reality. The total
  cessation of commerce and the losses consequent on the war have produced
  innumerable bankruptcies and universal distress; the port... has lost all
  appearance of commercial life, some fishing boats alone being seen in move-
  ment, while a few . . . feluccas and other smaller vessels are laid up rotting.
  What a contrast with the former flourishing commerce of this city, whose
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   119


  annual exports were valued at half a million sterling ...Such have been
  the desolating effects of the unprovoked and unjustifiable invasion of the
  French."

In Zaragoza, too, life was grim in the extreme. As Faustino Casamayor wrote
in his journal on 31 January 1812:
  This month the weather has been a continuous round of cold and ice...
  whilst foodstuffs have been so scarce and expensive that there is no one who
  can remember the like . . . Bread has cost just as much as it did last month,
  and the contributions demanded by the French have been so excessive . . .
  that they are not to be borne... . As for the misery of the common people,
  it has been so great that in the streets one sees nothing but beggars."*
But for sheer horror, there was nothing to beat Madrid. Let us here quote the
account of Clemente Carnicero:
  There were so many unfortunates in the streets . . . that it was impossible to
  walk them without the stoniest heart being wrung and saddened . . . Some
  people could be heard complaining that it was three o’clock in the afternoon
  and they had still not broken their fast; others had death clearly written in
  their faces; others were fainting from want; and still others had just breathed
  their last . . At one spot one saw a group of abandoned children crying out
  for bread; at another a number of tearful widows surrounded by their little
  ones; and at still a third some young girls assuring passers-by that they were
  begging so as not to prostitute themselves. On the first corner there would
  be a cluster of priests humbly asking for alms, and on the second persons
  of the highest character... doing exactly the same. So many were the
  poor . . . that however much they wandered the streets . . . they could not get
  enough to get them through the day . . . Going back to their homes . . . they
  therefore quietly . . . lay down to die.'”
With the city’s troubles worsened by a terrible gambling epidemic that drained
away money that many families desperately needed to buy food, deaths from
starvation in the winter of 1811-12 alone amounted to a minimum of 20,000,
and the British entered the city in August of the latter year to find the most
affecting scenes. To quote George Hennell:

   The poor are very numerous here, and many are most wretched objects. In
   the great streets you are stopped every five or six yards, and frequently by
   six or seven at once . . . I have seen children five or six years of age lying on
   the pavement with scarcely one ounce of flesh on their bones and making a
   piteous moaning. After dark they lie down against a door doubled almost
   together . . . some sleeping, others crying.
120.   ~=—-Fighting Napoleon


   The consequences of all this are scarcely difficult to foresee. Writing from
the Extremaduran district of La Serena, a josefino official named Juan Maria
Ponce de Leén informed his superiors that the area’s aspect was such as ‘to
move the most unfeeling man to compassion’ and, further, that the local inhab-
itants had been reduced to such a state of ‘miserable nakedness’ that many were
leaving their homes. As he went on to remark:

   All those who can get together a little money are crossing the River
   Guadiana into Portugal, leaving all those who cannot to wander about . .
   and try to feed and clothe themselves from what they can take from those
   bold enough to travel the roads of this ruined country.'™*
For another example let us look at Valladolid. The province was hit by both
particularly oppressive French requisitioning and an ‘extraordinary contribu-
tion’ of 1,000,000 reales, and by the summer of 1812 even the propertied classes
had been reduced to ruin, which, as one official warned the governor, meant
not just penury for all those who depended on them but also wholesale flight
and with it ‘more recruits for the cuadrillas’.'*
   Nothing, then, could be clearer. At the roots of /a guerrilla popular lay not
heroism but hunger, not daring but despair. But joining a partida was not the
only remedy for want of food. Thus, in one respect the coming of the French
had made little difference to Spanish society. Beset by chronic poverty many
regions of the country had long been the haunt of bandits. In Galicia, for
example, the first years of the nineteenth century were marked by the activities
of such gangs as those of Manuel Carvajal, Juan Manuel Varela, Ignacio Cobas,
Manuel Ventura Dominguez and José Rodriguez de Requeija, whilst in
Andalucia important chieftains had included Francisco Mateos Ponton, Diego
Corrientes, Pablo de Reina and Bartolomé Gutiérrez.'*° According to legend,
for such men the French had only to appear for them to turn patriot. ‘Never
had the roads been so safe’, enthused one writer. ‘In echo of the clarion call to
defend the fatherland, even wrongdoers and professional criminals had become
men of good will.’'*’ This version of events, however, is quite untrue. Bandits
such as the Valencian Jaime Alfonso (El Barbudo) or the vallesoletano leader
Vitoriano Diez (Chagarito) were happy to turn their attentions on the invaders:
after all, French saddle bags contained just as much money as Spanish ones,
whilst there was often much profit to be had from collaborating with the British
or Spanish military authorities (in order to speed up the recruitment of enemy
deserters, for instance, bounties were offered for every imperial soldier who was
safely handed over to the Allied armies).
   Nor were afrancesados likely to be spared for, generally being prominent local
notables, they offered rich pickings. As a result activity that might be seen
as ‘anti-French’ was commonplace. On the night of 7 June 1811, for example,
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   121

four bandits named Manuel Camacho, Francisco Pérez, Juan de la Haza and
Antonio del Arahel attacked a farm that had been acquired by an officer of the
garrison of Seville named Deschamps, mistreated those of his employees who
had the misfortune to be present and made off with seventy-two horses.'** From
Guadalajara, meanwhile, came complaints of bandits selling the guerrillas
information or killing isolated couriers and selling the dispatches that they were
carrying.'*’ From Vizcaya it was reported that the older brother of one of the
members of the Junta Criminal Extraordinaria had been dragged from his home
at Balzola-at the end of a rope by a twice-pardoned bandit named Pedro de
Amorrostu, stabbed to death and then cut up with an axe.'*” From both Madrid
and Vizcaya come reports of bandits murdering isolated imperial soldiers.
And, finally, eager for booty or unwilling to be taken without a fight, bandit
gangs might even be found joining regular troops or guerrilla bands in raids
against the French or defending themselves against columns of enemy troops
who had managed to corner them.'”
   But to think that patriotism played any part in these men’s motivation would
be naive in the extreme. As Blaze wrote of Chagarito, for example, “This chief
... after making war upon the French, turned his arms against the Spaniards
in his leisure moments to keep his hand in. He... struck such terror into
Castile that the Spaniards . . . joined the French to endeavour to take him.’
Such men, indeed, were as likely to be found fighting for the French as against
them: shot as ‘infamous and sacrilegious thieves and traitors’ were Pablo
Albenagorta, Juan Ruiz and Ignacio Donato, all three of whom were malhechores
who had been taken fighting with the French at Cuenca in October 1811, whilst
one of the leading josefino counter-guerrillas was a Catalan bandit named José
Pujol, who placed his band at the service of the invaders and was allowed to
use it as the basis of a unit entitled the Cazadores Distinguidos de Catalufia."*
And, even when bandits did not actually fight alongside the invaders, they were
still not averse to preying on forces associated with the Patriot cause: in October
1810 a five-man patrol of Spanish cavalry was surprised and robbed at Lepe;
in March 1813 a courier travelling from Wellington to Espoz y Mina was
attacked by men under the command of the cabecilla Marquinez, and in June
1813 the great Aragonese heroine Agustina Zaragoza Domenech was set upon
by bandits whilst riding to join the Spanish forces fighting with Wellington’s
army in the Vitoria campaign.'”
   Before his very eyes, then, every starving Spaniard had an alternative model
of salvation. In brief, why join a force committed to fighting a war in which he
had no interest, and, still worse, tolerate the pretensions of some would-be
general, when it was possible to seek the same rewards in conditions of greater
                                                                               the
freedom and at little greater risk? Nor was obtaining arms a problem, for
                                         that had been seized  in the uprising  of
countryside was awash with weapons
122        ~+Fighting Napoleon

1808, seized from isolated Frenchmen, thrown away in the confusion of battle
or sold by starving Spanish soldiers.'** For cover, meanwhile, there was always
the war against the French: time and again we hear of gangs of marauders,
and sometimes even isolated individuals, entering unsuspecting pueblos and
demanding money, horses or rations on the pretext that that they were agents
dispatched by some local general or cabecilla, whilst many supposed guerrilla
raids turn out to have been nothing more than attempts to spring captured
bandits from French captivity, the first action of any partida that occupied a
town or village generally being to empty the local gaol.'*’ In short, as the Junta
Criminal Extraordinaria de Jaén proclaimed, “The so-called guerrilla bands are
in reality no more than highwaymen who pillage the towns and villages and
murder their fellow countrymen, the only reason that they have adopted the
garb of freedom fighters having been to disguise their crimes and give them-
selves greater scope for their activities.’
   The result of all this was that the areas occupied by the French were soon
swarming not just with guerrillas but with fresh bandits. As the Junta Crimi-
nal of Guadalajara complained to Joseph’s Minister of Justice in January 1812:

      The Junta... has no option but to inform you of the... fatal state of this
      province, inundated on all sides, as it is, by thieves who keep up a constant
      assault on the highways and are so confident of their strength that they
      are not afraid of falling on town and village as well. For some time hardly
      a day has gone by on which this tribunal has not received the report of some
      robbery or other: indeed, moved by the hope that we might finish with
      this plague, the local justices rush to report them. The public interest
      demands the erection of a scaffold that will contain these excesses: unless
      the malefactors responsible for them are checked by the use of the most
      exemplary punishment, the security of the entire province will be put at
      risk.'”

Lest it be thought that this is nothing but the fruit of afrancesamiento, let us
quote the following lines taken from a letter written by the Patriot comisionado,
Rafael Gutiérrez:

      An enormous number of partidas are ranging across La Mancha. . . . They
      do so under the name of guerrillas, but in fact many are simply gangs of
      thieves and deserters given over to every type of crime. Armed with docu-
      ments that have been forged or stolen... they infest the countryside,
      pillaging everything in sight and holding up every wayfarer that they
      encounter.”
In one or two instances the cuadrillas concerned attained a measure of both size
and notoriety — the most notorious was the band known as the ‘Siete Nifios de
                                                The Origins of the Guerrillas   123


Ecija’’' — but the most common pattern was for them to be few in member-
ship and ephemeral in existence. That said, however, they were all-pervasive,
and the number of men involved must have run into many thousands. Some-
thing of the extent of the problem may be judged from the number of bandits
executed by the French. Of Granada, for example, Blayney wrote:

  In the centre of the [Plaza del Triunfo] is a large gallows, with a staircase to
  ascend by, and on the right a garrote, the mode of execution by which
  deserves notice. On a platform are placed a number of stools with a perpen-
  dicular post behind each; the criminal being seated on the stool, an iron collar
  is placed round his neck, and the executioner by the turn of a screw puts an
  end to his existence in a moment... Scarce a day passes without several
  similar executions.!”

Scarce a day, indeed. Work on the issue is still in its infancy, but 178 bandits
have thus far been revealed as having been executed by the French and their
allies in the period 1809-12 alone. These figures, however, are but the tip of
the iceberg, for not all those who came before the courts perished, whilst others
were never caught at all. Much better, then, to quote the fact that in April
1812 the prison of Segovia contained no fewer than thirty-two prisoners
awaiting trial on charges of banditry, or that between the rith and 23rd of
the same month the chief prison in Madrid saw the admission of forty-two men
in relation to the same offence.’ And, as need hardly be said, many of these
malhechores were deserters. To quote a correspondent of the Junta of
Catalonia:

  I cannot refrain from pointing out to Your Excellency the enormous numbers
  of deserters who have come together in large bands, and... have been
  robbing, killing and committing the most dreadful cruelties. There is neither
  traveller, muleteer, peasant, country house or hamlet that is safe, for they rob
   and maltreat everything alike.’”
   The populace, then, possessed interests other than the fight against the
French. That this was the case is suggested very strongly by the fact that there
was a constant haemorrhage of men away from the guerrilla bands. This was
precipitated by a variety of factors — Toribio Bustamente, for example, found
that his men began to slip away whenever he ran short of the money needed
for their pay! — but the important point to note is that it was almost invari-
                                                                            or
ably linked with moves in the direction either of banditry pure and simple,
of service with the juramentados. Of the former tendency there is much evi-
dence. Setting aside the case of Vicente Hernandez that we have already noted,
the district of Villarejo de Salvanés saw four soldiers from E] Empecinado’s
                                                                      his men
forces commit many robberies, whilst in June 1811 several more of
124    Fighting Napoleon


were apprehended by the cabecilla Juan Abril near Torrelodones after they stole
500,000 reales from a courier travelling from Salamanca to Madrid; in July 1811
an amnestied partisan from Usillos named José Delgado who had turned to
banditry was sentenced to five years’ imprisonment by the Junta Criminal
Extraordinaria of Valladolid; on 2 October 1811 two deserters from the partida
of Ugarte were sent before a firing squad after a reign of terror in which they
and a number of other ma/lhechores had committed numerous murders, rapes
and other excesses around the town of Olabarrieta; on 29 December 1811 three
of Manuel Hernandez’s men stole 95,000 reales from a resident of Chinchon
named Gregorio Montero; and amongst the men executed by the French in
Navarre in 1811 for banditry were two deserters from the troops of Espoz y
Mina.’ For service with the French we might recall the already cited case of
Abuin, but there is in fact no need to do so: in November 1810 the second-in-
command of the ‘Compania de Guerrilla de Ayamonte’ deserted to the French
after having first helped himself to the entire contents of the unit’s pay-chest;
in July 1811 one Nicolas Garcia deserted from El Empecinado’s forces and was
rewarded with a commission in King Joseph’s army; in September 1811 a
Patriot spy reported that several bands of irregulars had gone over to the
French at Cordoba; in March 1812 two madrilenos named Tiburcio Ballesteros
and Diego Yebenes fled the forces of Palarea and tried to enlist in a special anti-
bandit force that was then being raised in the capital; and on 19 April 1812 two
members of the partida headed by Luis Gutiérrez appeared in Madrid and
enlisted in King Joseph’s cavalry.'””
   An interesting question here is whether this attempt, however inchoate, to
pursue a separate agenda on the part of the populace possessed a conscious
social content @ /a Hobsbawm. This, however, seems unlikely. Some areas of
Spain, it is true, seem to have been more in the grip of a jacquerie than of a
guerrilla insurrection. Nowhere is this more true than the Serrania de Ronda.
The disturbances that broke out in the area after it was occupied in February
1810 aroused much hope amongst the Patriot authorities. ‘The uprising of the
Serrania de Ronda is a glorious affair’, wrote General Castafios. ‘Put on the
right footing, it could be of major help to future operations.’* However, sent
to get the serranos together in order to use them to assist the operations of a
division that was to be disembarked from the sea under Luis Lacy, Ambrosio
de la Cuadra found that ‘the right footing’ was not something that was to be
attained with any ease. In the first place an interview with the supposed leader
of the rebels proved a depressing experience:

  [Serrano] Valdenebro arrived today. He is very gloomy about the state of
  affairs in the Sierra, and foresees all sorts of difficulties about assembling the
  peasants. In a word . . . the serranos do not want to leave their villages, and
  are not doing anything of any use.”
                                                The Origins of the Guerrillas   125


As La Cuadra observed, then, ‘We cannot count on any aid from the Sierra,
whether in terms of men, mules or anything else.’ The inhabitants would
defend their villages from French foraging parties and punitive expeditions,
and fall upon unprotected parties of civilians, but they would not take part in
formal military operations. But this was not the end of the problem. As the
Spanish general continued, “The state of anarchy that prevails amongst the
inhabitants ought to alarm us rather than give us hope.”'® As to what he meant,
this is best approached through the experiences of Albert de Rocca, a young
French hussar officer who formed part of the garrison of Ronda. Particularly
suggestive is his account of the events that transpired when the French briefly
gave up the town only a month after it had been occupied:

  The very day .. . we left Ronda, the mountaineers entered it . . . shouting
  with joy and discharging their pieces exultingly in the streets. The inhab-
  itants of each village arrived together marching without order, and...
  loaded their asses with whatever they found... till the poor beasts were
  ready to sink under the weight of the booty . . . The prisons were forced, and
  the . . . criminals they contained ran instantly to take revenge on their judges
  and accusers. Debtors obtained receipts from their creditors by forcible
  means, and all the public papers were burned in order to annul the mort-
  gages that the inhabitants of the town had upon the mountaineers.'”
Nor is any of this surprising. To quote an afrancesado official who fell into the
hands of a gang of about sixty insurgents near Antequera in May 1810, ‘As I
afterwards discovered, all of them were given over to dissolution, whilst many
had previously been given gaol sentences.”'®
   Setting aside immediate self-defence — a factor that was as likely to lead to
violence against Allied marauders as it was to violence against French ones!™
— such genuine popular involvement in the war as may be found was therefore
closely linked with agrarian unrest. Yet it would be wrong to take this argu-
ment too far, and especially to pursue the mirage of the ‘social bandit’. Whilst
more work is certainly needed on the question of banditry in Spain in the early
nineteenth century, the very few archivally based works to have been published
on the subject so far do not hold out much hope in this respect. Thus, if we
turn to Lopez Moran’s Bandolerismo Gallego en la Primera M itad del Siglo XIX,
we find that the Galician bandits of which the author writes neither stood up
for the people, nor were admired by the people, nor concentrated their attacks
on enemies of the people. Universally feared and loathed, indeed, they seem to
have been interested in nothing more than staying alive and can never once be
found to have divided up their spoils Robin-Hood fashion with the poor.'® On
occasion, indeed, an outraged populace turned on malhechores with the sort of
ferocity that the legend reserves for the French. Thus, at Medina de Rio Seco
on 16 March 1811 a group of men who had been drinking in a tavern fell upon
126   ~—-Fighting Napoleon


two bandits who had appeared in the town, took them prisoner and handed
them over to the authorities, whilst on Christmas Day the same year three
bandits named Manuel Diaz, Francisco Rodriguez and José Gonzalez, who had
entered a village in the province of Guadalajara to demand food, were attacked
by the inhabitants and once again taken prisoner.'® Nor should we be surprised
by such incidents. More often than not the victims of the bandits were them-
selves humble folk — shepherds and muleteers were, for obvious reasons, regular
targets — whilst the frequent use of torture and even more gratuitous forms of
violence were hardly calculated to endear the robbers to the populace. Very
occasionally bandits who entered a pueblo with the intention of robbing some
local dignitary appear to have whipped up the populacho against them, the aim
being, one presumes, to protect themselves against the possibility of the people
siding with the pudientes.'*’ With some bandoleros little more than psychopaths,
it would not in fact be for some time — generally, in fact, not until they had been
all but eradicated as an effective force by the coming of the Guardia Civil — that
myths of honour and generosity began to take hold in the popular mind.'™
Becoming a bandit might have been one strategy for survival in a time of trial,
then, but it was one that carried with it not just considerable danger but also a
high price in terms of social solidarity.
   Strong though it was, the risk of becoming an outcast was evidently not suf-
ficient to prevent many men from embarking on /a vida a salto de mata. In doing
so, of course, they reduced the already limited pool of manpower available to
the partidas and forced the latter to engage in a variety of measures that served
only to alienate them still further from the populace. One early band, for
example, seems to have been recruited entirely by trickery in that its com-
mander, Valero Ripol, simply hired some men on the same basis as he would
have done had he needed them as day-labourers, without telling them what he
really wanted them for.'” But for many of the rank and file there was no choice
in the matter at all. Thus, conscription and impressment were widespread, in
respect of which a variety of methods were employed. One such was economic
pressure: Miguel Sarasa, for example, formed his first band on the basis of
what Rodriguez Solis calls ‘a number of his household servants and various
labourers of the district’ — in short, men who were economically dependent on
him and had little option but to follow his lead.'”’ Just as effective, meanwhile,
was fear of the noose: whilst the ringleaders of bandit gangs suppressed by such
commanders as E] Empecinado and Espoz y Mina were executed or handed
over to the authorities, their followers were generally given the chance of a new
career as freedom fighters.'’' On occasion some recourse might be had to the
regulations for conscription: in Horcajo de los Montes, José Crivell succeeded
in forming a guerrilla band overnight by the simple method of assembling all
those inhabitants liable for military service and threatening to march off to the
                                                The Origins of the Guerrillas   127


army any man who did not volunteer to fight with him.'” And finally,
deserters too could with some reason expect to be pressed into service: amongst
the men captured by the French with the Valencian leader Romeu in 1812 were
two dispersos who saved their lives by proving that they had been compelled to
serve by force, whilst on 14 June 1810 the partida of Pedro Alcalde entered
Alcala la Real and demanded a list of all the dispersos in the town.'”’ Examples
of the recruits gained by such methods are legion. From Almagro, for example,
we hear of the case of one Justo Barba, a conscript who had fled back home
only to be snapped up by a partida that also arrested his father.'’* From Morata
we learn that in August 1811 fifty men in uniform descended on the town and
seized one Miguel Gomez as a deserter and, in addition, the father of another
man named Lucio Tominaya, whom they could not locate.'” And from
Zaragoza there is the case of Ram6n Galindo, a disperso obliged to enlist in one
of the regiments of José Joaquin Duran following the city’s liberation from the
French in July 1813.'”
   At least such men as Barba, G6émez and Galindo were liable to the quinta,
and generally guilty of desertion to boot. But usually there was little in the way
of either ceremony or pretext. Descending on a town, chieftains would simply
round up every man that they could find and force them to enlist: having
occupied Cabezon de la Sal in June 1809, for example, Porlier ordered the
immediate enlistment of all males between seventeen and forty-five, whilst
much the same tactics were employed by Merino when he entered Lerma in
June 1809.” Accompanying such tactics was often the utmost brutality —
attempts at resistance or flight were met by hostage-taking, floggings and even
executions — and matters were made still worse by the fact that pueblos were
frequently visited by several bands in succession, all of whom would behave in
exactly the same fashion.'”® Nor was anyone spared: amongst those taken were
licenciados — soldiers of the regular army who had served out their terms of
enlistment — the medically unfit and even men in government service.'”
   It is probable that the bulk of the guerrillas’ Spanish conscripts were
acquired in this fashion. A single foray into Aragon in 1812, for example, was
reported to have gained El Empecinado several hundred men.'*’ However, when
all else failed, there was always the weapon of kidnap. Thus, large numbers of
men appear to have been simply seized at random as they were working in the
fields or travelling from one pueblo to another. Press-ganged in the town of Veo,
for example, were the peasants José Peris, F rancisco Ballester, Vicente Bo and
                                                                               El
Bautista Marti, whilst between January and May 1812 forces belonging to
Empecinado kidnapped men at Barajas, Torrejon de Ardoz and Cubillo."*' And,
to the fury of many Spanish generals, commanders such as Porlier were not
                                                                         to
averse to forcing small detachments of regular troops that they happened
come across to take service with them as well.’
128   ~~‘Fighting Napoleon


    As we have seen, such methods could not but undermine the partidas’ claims
to be a popular movement. On the contrary, rather than serve with the guer-
rillas, many men fled their homes and headed for parts of Spain still in the
hands of the Patriots: from both Ciudad Rodrigo and La Corufia, for example,
it was reported that large numbers of mozos were arriving from districts in the
French zone.'*’ Sometimes, too, there were riots: at Navahermosa the Junta
Central’s agent, Crivell, found himself the target of an angry mob.'™ But most
common of all was probably the response of the Castilian peasant Gregorio
Gonzalez Arranz, who, fearing that he would be seized by the forces of
Jeronimo Merino and desiring only to be left to cultivate his smallholding, took
a wife, and in addition scraped together enough money for his family to be able
to buy him out of trouble should the partidas snap him up nonetheless (as they
eventually did).'®
   But the issue was not just that of military service. Conceived in the tradi-
tional historiography as a force that lived amongst the people — indeed, in
symbiosis with the people — in fact the guerrillas came more and more to lead
a separate existence from the populace, and, in general, to live off the sweat of
their brow: as we shall see, their requisitioning was just as ruthless as that of
the French. Far from offering the civilian population any protection, mean-
while, they rather increased their danger, since a succession of French decrees
threatened any pueblo that assisted the partidas, allowed itself to be plundered
of men or supplies without putting up any resistance, or was found to have men
serving with the guerrillas with the most dire punishment.'** These orders per-
mitted a variety of measures — generally speaking, heavy fines of one sort or
another — but in addition French commanders often resorted to outright ter-
rorism: in Navarre, for example, we find General Reille shooting large numbers
of hostages chosen from amongst the families of the guerrillas, and the goy-
ernor of Tudela threatening literally to decimate the male populace unless he
received information as to the identity of the killer of a single French sentry.'*”
It was, of course, Espoz y Mina’s boast that this brutality had no effect what-
soever other than to increase the number of men who came forward to join his
forces, but no less plausible are French claims that the reverse was true. As
Marshal Suchet wrote, for example:

  The Aragonese . . . felt a growing affection for the... troops . . . ‘Los nue-
  stros’ they always said when speaking of us . . . They considered our steady
  and regular occupation as a means of escaping the frequent inroads of [Espoz
  y] Mina and Villacampa, which, from the very circumstances of their being
  transitory, were attended with disorder and only left evil consequences
  behind them without being productive of any salutary result.'*
  This, perhaps, is to go too far but, for all that, the traditional image of the
Spanish guerrillas can be seen to be very hard to sustain. Neither in their origins
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   129

nor in their composition do the partidas conform to the stereotype, in fact. In
so far as they were directed against the French at all, they were the work either
of representatives of the state and its allies, or, still worse, of opportunists and
adventurers who saw the crisis of 1808 as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity that
was to be seized with both hands. As for the rank and file, with certain excep-
tions they were but little interested in the defence of dios, rey y patria. Refugees
from military service, poverty, noose or prison camp, mercenary hirelings, or
unwilling conscripts who had been pressed into the ranks of some partida or
other, their interest lay in survival and personal gain, and these were goals that
could be pursued just as easily in company with the bandits who covered the
face of the Peninsula as they could in company with the guerrillas. Given the
choice, then, many men headed not for the guerrilla but the cuadrilla, whilst,
disillusioned with a cause that offered them nothing, many others sought only
to live quietly at home, hoping that the great turmoil would pass them by. To
talk of some great people’s crusade is therefore absurd. How, then, could
Copons write of Valencia, ‘Every pueblo, or at least the vast majority, is in a
state of insurrection’?! There is, however, no difficulty here. What seemed at
first sight to be resistance to the French was rather a state of general turmoil
occasioned by a mixture of resentment, poverty and despair as the rural popu-
 lace at one and the same time sought to protect itself against the demands of
 friends and enemies alike, pursued long-standing hatreds and struggled des-
 perately to survive. In the process some few Frenchmen were killed, doubtless,
 but then so were marauders from the British, Portuguese and even Spanish
 armies. Equally, if some of the sefiores who were the enemies of the people per-
 ished, so did many of the bandits whom Marxist romantics have seen as their
 friends. And, all this being the case, it follows that we should not be surprised
 if the contribution of the partidas to the defeat of the French proves to be rather
 less dramatic than has often been made out to be the case.
                             5
                The Reality of the Guerrillas
                                                     ~




The image of the guerrillas that has emerged thus far is one that could not be
more contradictory. On the one hand, we see the bands of heroic freedom
fighters lauded in the traditional historiography as having sustained the fight
against the French through thick and thin, causing them heavy casualties
and paving the way for the eventual triumph of the Anglo-Portuguese army of
the Duke of Wellington, whilst on the other we see the gangs of adventurers,
malhechores and deserters suggested by a revisionist reading of the Spanish
sources. Which of these two images is the more accurate still awaits verifica-
tion, but it is quite clear that it is the latter that enjoys the greater degree of
plausibility. Does this matter, however? The motivation of the partidas may not
have been that of the patriotic legend, but they still preyed on the French: after
all, money was on offer for bringing in captured dispatches and enemy prison-
ers, whilst the invaders’ packs and saddle-bags were often bulging with plunder.
Is there, in short, room to conciliate the old historiography with the new?
    To answer this question, it is necessary to review the capacity and achieve-
ments of the guerrillas in military terms and, in addition, to say something
more about the behaviour of the partidas. For as long as traditional images of
the invaders — being constantly harassed by an enemy that was at once every-
where and nowhere, and supported by a populace whose only wish it was to
serve their every desire — go unchallenged, the process of revision that is so
sorely needed will be able to make little progress.
   Let us begin, however, by examining the verdict of military theory. Shaken
by their failure in the Peninsula, a number of Napoleonic veterans who pro-
duced treatises on the art of war in the years after Waterloo placed great weight
on the contribution made by the guerrillas. Not the least of these was the Swiss
staff officer Henri de Jomini, who, having served under Marshal Ney in Spain
and Russia and later gone over to the Russians, was to dominate military
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   131

thought right up until the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71. Let us quote his
most famous work, The Art of War:

  An invasion against an exasperated people . . . is a dangerous enterprise, as
  was well proved by the war in Spain .. . Each armed inhabitant knows the
  smallest paths . . . he finds everywhere a relative or friend who aids him. The
  commanders also know the country, and, learning immediately the slightest
  movement on the part of the invader, can adopt the best movements to defeat
  his projects, while the latter... is like a blind man: his combinations are
  failures, and when, after the most . . . rapid and fatiguing marches, he thinks
  he is about to. . . deal a terrible blow, he finds no sign of the enemy . . . so
  that while, like Don Quijote, he is attacking windmills, his adversary is on
  his line of communications ...and carries on a war so disastrous for the
  invader that he must inevitably yield after a time.’

Jomini did not quite go so far as to imply that the whole reason for Napoleon’s
defeat in Spain lay with the guerrillas — on the contrary, he also laid much stress
on Allied control of the sea, the geography of the theatre of operations, the
existence of regular armies (both Spanish and Anglo-Portuguese) that could
help and sustain the insurgents, and the failure of the French to commit suffi-
cient troops to the Peninsula — but there were other observers who threw
caution to the winds in this respect. One such was Jean Le Miére de Corvey,
an officer who had fought not just in Spain but also against the Vendean insur-
rection of 1793, and therefore felt himself peculiarly qualified to write a study
of guerrilla warfare. Published in 1823 as Des Partisans et des Corps Trreguliers,
this was absolutely unequivocal in its admiration. Thus:

   One hundred and fifty guerrilla bands scattered all over Spain had sworn to
   kill thirty or forty Frenchmen a month each: that made six to eight thousand
   men a month for all the guerrilla bands together... As there are twelve
   months in the year, we were losing about 80,000 men a year, without [count-
   ing] any pitched battles. The war in Spain lasted seven years [sic], so over
   500,000 men were killed.’
   Such opinions were, it would seem, widely shared.’ How far are the claims
advanced by those who sought to make the guerrillas a central pillar of the
Allied war effort justified, however? Even amongst those who had fought the
irregulars opinion was mixed. Let us take, first of all, the swarms of irregular
bands of no great size that are seen by many observers as the very acme of /a
                                                                                 a
guerrilla. Small groups of men lacking training and discipline, armed with
                                                                   to knives and
variety of different weapons ranging from muskets and bayonets
fowling pieces, they could pick off the odd straggler, courier or foraging party,
but they could not hope to withstand considerable parties of enemy troops,
132     ~+Fighting Napoleon

attack well-protected convoys or force the surrender of enemy garrisons.
Indeed, even such attacks as they were able to launch were not always very effec-
tive. To quote Marbot, for example:

   I went on my way without incident as far as . . . Briviesca, but between that
   place and Burgos we saw twenty mounted Spaniards appear suddenly around
   a low hill. They fired several shots at us without effect; then my escort [six
   gendarmes], my servant and I drew our swords> and went forward without
   deigning to reply to the enemy, who, judging from our resolute attitude that
   we were the kind of people to defend ourselves vigorously went off in
   another direction . . . Between Palencia and Duefias I fell in with an officer
   and twenty-five men of the Young Guard escorting a chest of money for
   the garrison at Valladolid. The . . . guerrilleros of the neighbourhood were
   just attacking the detachment. On seeing my escort galloping up... they
   stopped short . .. But one of them. . . called out that no French troops were
   in sight, whereupon the brigands advanced boldly towards the tempting trea-
   sure wagon. I naturally took command and bade the officer of the guard not
   to fire until I gave the word. Most of the enemy had dismounted . . . and
   ... many had only pistols. I had placed my infantry behind the wagon, and
   as soon as the Spaniards were within twenty paces I made them come out
   and gave them the order to fire. This was obeyed with terrible precision: the
   leader and a dozen of his men dropped. The rest bolted at full speed towards
   their horses.*

Marbot is anything but a reliable witness. Yet such views are confirmed by the
supposed leader of the insurrection in the Serrania de Ronda, José Serrano
Valdenebro. Already deeply perturbed by the wayward nature of his followers,
he was not much reassured by their fighting abilities. Thus:
  Although war is being waged in these mountains in the style of Viriato,
  flattering results cannot be expected ... The peasants are little more than
  unmanageable. There is little union or regularity... in their movements.
  This is not to be surprised at: amongst troops who have not been fashioned
  by the strictest discipline they cannot be achieved . . . Valiant in skirmishing,
  they do not understand that shock action is the chief weapon on the battle-
  field . . . So long as troops do not realise that battles are won by the sword
  and bayonet, all is lost. Fire is only a chimera. .. . Advancing on the enemy
  with union and bravery . . . is what brings victory.°
  And, of course, if mere gangs of armed civilians were of limited use when
the French were in the open, in other circumstances they were still more help-
less. If it was not already protected by medieval walls or Vauban-style fortifi-
cations, or if, as in, say, Seville, the perimeter of the existing defences was too
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   133


extensive to be held by the normal garrison, every town and city that was occu-
pied by the French was given an improvised citadel into which the garrison
could retire to fight off attack or await relief. In Madrid, for example, this func-
tion was fulfilled by a large earthwork fort built around the royal porcelain
factory situated on the heights occupied by the present-day Parque del Retiro;
in Seville by the monastery of La Cartuja; in Teruel by the same complex of
churches and convents in the centre of the city that defied the Republican forces
in the Spanish Civil War; in Tudela, Burgos, Zaragoza and Jaen by convenient
medieval castles; and in Salamanca by three convents that stood on the bluffs
overlooking the bridge across the River Tormes. Though the various buildings
concerned were all strengthened by earthworks and ditches and, where neces-
sary, as in Salamanca, afforded a clear field of fire by the demolition of whole
swathes of buildings, they were in no case strong enough to withstand a regular
siege (the castle of Burgos did, in fact, succeed in defying Wellington in
October 1812, but this was only because he tried to take it without a proper
siege train). But against them the more irregular bands stood no chance even
had they had any interest in attacking them, which they did not. As a British
naval officer who fought in northern Spain observed, indeed, ‘When acting
offensively, they never can follow up their success as the enemy invariably
retreat to and entrench themselves in the nearest village from whence they
cannot be dislodged by musketry.”°
   Yet, it would seem that the larger forces that coalesced around such figures
as Juan Martin Diez, José Joaquin Duran and Francisco Espoz y Mina also had
their deficiencies. Until 1813, for example, they generally had no more chance
of storming the French citadels than, say, Francisquete or El Abuelo. On occa-
sion success was achieved by the use of desperate expedients, as at Aguilar del
Campéo in June 1809, when Porlier succeeded in forcing the surrender of the
garrison by occupying a belfry that overlooked the convent in which it had taken
refuge, heaving enormous rocks up the stairs and then dropping them through
the roof of the enemy strongpoint.’ And there was, too, scope for daring com-
mando-style raids of the sort that in March 1813 saw a handful of Espoz y
Mina’s men scale the walls of the castle of Fuenterrabia, overcome the
garrison and throw all the cannons and powder in the place into the River
Bidasoa.® But in the ordinary course of events the only hope was to attempt to
undermine the walls or to mount a blockade in the hope that the defenders would
run out of food. Both tactics were tried from time to time, but they obviously
required many days to be successful, and in consequence generally proved
abortive, the French almost always being able to scrape together a relief force
before too long. For a good example here, we might cite the attack mounted by
Duran on the city of Soria in March 1812. A surprise attack on the walls
launched from four directions at once proved too much for the defenders to cope
134    Fighting Napoleon


with and they withdrew into the castle, leaving Duran free to demolish much of
the outer defences and plunder the garrison’s stores. But without artillery the
castle was impregnable, whilst the week that it took for a relief force to appear
was not sufficient to exhaust the defenders’ supply of food and water, and
the Division de Soria therefore had no option but to withdraw.’ And if the
forces involved were not properly speaking guerrillas, but rather the regular
troops of Pedro Villacampa’s ‘Division de la Izquierda de Aragon’, much
the same experience was had by the Spaniards when they attacked Teruel in
May 1810. As Villacampa ruefully remarked, the seminary that constituted the
French citadel could not be bombarded for want of artillery, blown up for want
of engineers or set alight for want of combustibles. The garrison’s only weak-
ness was that it lacked its own well, but even when the attackers cut the aquaduct
that supplied water to the part of the city in which it was situated, a relief force
once again arrived before the citadel was seriously inconvenienced."
   For a more general view of the case, let us turn to the experienced and
thoughtful Heinrich von Brandt. Thus:

  As long as the guerrillas . . . constituted [an actual armament of the people],
  they ... were...extremely dangerous to the French... But even in the
  first year of the rise of these bands, they lost this character and absurdly aped
  the regularity ...of the military profession. They lost, in particular, the
  activity which they had shown in the earlier part of their formation and gave
  to their enemies...a thousand opportunities of combating them with
  success. hey ceased to become the concern of whole districts, and fell into
  the hands of a few leaders who made such use of them as was most suitable
  to their own views. . . . Rendered incapable by their great numbers to conceal
  themselves from the observation of a vigilant enemy and suddenly to disap-
  pear from him without giving battle as they had formerly done, they were
  now frequently overtaken, surprised, defeated and dispersed, and disabled
  for a time from offering further molestation . . . One great advantage to the
  French was the assembling of the enemy’s troops in detached parts of the
  country: whole districts were entirely freed from them, the communication
  of supplies was interrupted, and even couriers travelled without escorts.
  Provisions and other necessaries were regularly supplied, whilst good order
  prevailed in the army. Wherever the enemy was seen concentrating his
  troops, the French advanced on them and dispersed them, by which means
  ... movements on both sides became more decisive, but not to the advan-
  tage of Spain since the tactics of the French always procured them the
  victory. Even the most hazardous engagements terminated in the French
  becoming masters of the field, provided no infinite superiority of numbers ren-
  dered this honour a matter of doubt."
                                                  The Reality of the Guerrillas   135


    Had Von Brandt been present in Aragon and Navarre in 1812 and 1813,
rather than, as was actually the case, being recalled with his regiment for service
in the Russian campaign, he might have been less sanguine, for the latter years
of the conflict saw guerrilla commanders such as Espoz y Mina and Duran
repeatedly defeat substantial French columns. But for these defeats he had, as
suggested by the last few words of the quotation we have just cited, a ready-
made explanation, and, what is more, one that was entirely plausible. Having a
few months earlier committed his armies to an offensive strategy designed to
bring about the conquest of Valencia, at the end of 1811 Napoleon simultane-
ously withdrew well over 25,000 men from Spain, whilst at the same time effec-
tively cutting off the constant stream of replacements and reinforcements that
had hitherto sustained the march of French conquest in the Peninsula. Stripped
to the bone, the garrisons of Navarre and Aragon found themselves quite
unable to hold their own against Espoz y Mina and his fellows, especially as the
latter were by now equipped with a number of artillery pieces that had been
landed by the British on the coast of the Basque provinces and laboriously
transported into the heartlands of Ja guerrilla.
     For the French the result was that life became quite impossible. The guer-
rillas were now able to muster thousands of men — in this respect it greatly
 helped that the advance of the Anglo-Portuguese army on Burgos following the
 fall of Madrid in August 1812 had forced the French to concentrate most of
 their forces in northern Spain against Wellington, thereby allowing Espoz y
 Mina much greater opportunities to recruit his forces — and use conventional
 tactics on the battlefield. In consequence, no force could venture out to gather
 in supplies or relieve beleaguered garrisons that was not itself powerful enough
 to fight a divisional-level action. Nor, meanwhile, could garrisons that were
 attacked by the guerrillas trust to their walls to protect them as they always had
 in the past, for the partidas could now bring up their guns and blast holes in
the defences.
   There followed, then, a dramatic series of successes. Communications with
France were badly disrupted, whilst in February 1813 Espoz y Mina forced the
surrender of the French garrison of Tafalla, having first defeated a column of
over 3,000 troops that had been sent to relieve it. An attack on the town of Sos
was beaten off, but the French nevertheless decided to evacuate the garrison
and almost suffered the destruction of the column sent to its relief when Espoz
y Mina attacked it at Castiliscar. In response to this activity the French Army
                                                                                   its
of the North launched a powerful counter-offensive. To ensure its success,
                                                         of   Portugal  (which    had
commander was authorised to draw upon the Army
been watching Wellington’s army in Leon), and five of this force’s six infantry
                                                                            were not
divisions were eventually sucked into the struggle. Yet the guerrillas
destroyed. Communications with France were placed       on  a  more  secure  footing,
136 ~=—-Fighting Napoleon


and many of the depots that Espoz y Mina had established in the shelter of the
Pyrenees laid waste, but the bulk of the Spanish forces got away into Aragon
and even managed to inflict considerable damage in the process, two French
battalions being annihilated at Lerin. Still worse, whereas the garrison of
Aragon had hitherto been holding its own, Espoz y Mina’s arrival coincided
with the dispatch of some of the troops stationed there to Valencia in response
to fears of a fresh Allied offensive in that direction. The result was still more
mayhem, with attacks both on the town of Huesca and on various convoys
travelling to and from Zaragoza.”
    All this constituted a vital contribution to Allied victory in the Peninsular
War for, by pulling so many troops away from Leon, Espoz y Mina opened the
way for Wellington to advance once more into the hinterland of Spain. What
is more, this time there was no mistake: whereas in 1812 Wellington had wasted
both time and troops on Madrid, in 1813 he kept his army together and con-
centrated on the decisive victory on the battlefield duly obtained at Vitoria on
21 June. Yet it cannot be stressed too strongly that the situation in Arag6n and
Navarre was wholly exceptional and, furthermore, that it stemmed not from
any special virtue of the guerrillas but rather from Napoleon’s decision to
invade Russia, and thereby to destabilise the position of his forces in northern
Spain. Indeed, if anything, the fighting that took place in Navarre in the first
five months of 1813 illustrated the vulnerability of the guerrillas, for the French
had only to concentrate superior forces against them for the realm of the ‘King
of Navarre’ (as Espoz y Mina was now sometimes known) to be overrun. Many
more men were needed to consolidate the French triumph than even the com-
bined Armies of the North and Portugal could deploy, but the fact is that in
its very heartlands the strongest and most enthusiastically backed partida in the
whole of Spain had been vanquished. As Wellington wrote, indeed:

  Independent small bodies operating upon the enemy may be extremely
  useful when these operations are connected and carried on in concert with
  those of a large body of troops which . . . occupy the whole of the enemy’s
  attention . . . but when the enemy is relieved from the pressure of the larger
  body, the smaller body must discontinue its operations or be destroyed."
    For much of the time, in fact, the more militarised partidas seem to have been
little more of a threat than their wholly irregular counterparts. Let us here again
quote Heinrich von Brandt:

  One circumstance that greatly operated to the disadvantage of the guerrillas
  was that the cultivation of their talents did not keep pace with the increase
  of their strength. During the whole war, and under all circumstances, their
  tactics remained unaltered . . An ambush, placed with great caution for the
                                                  The Reality of the Guerrillas   137


  purpose of surprising the advanced guard, opened the day. Generally, after
  the first attack, these enfants perdus . . . fell back upon the main body, which
  as soon as it was perceived by our troops, raised a dreadful cry and usually
  commenced a sharp fire without paying any regard to the distance which
  might separate it from us... When the ground favoured the operation, the
  French always made an impetuous charge upon their opponents, who gen-
  erally retreated after a feeble resistance.'*
This is a little exaggerated, perhaps, but even so it is clear that even the larger
partidas were not to be relied upon in combat. The troops of which they were
composed often had only a sketchy grasp of battlefield tactics and lacked the
solidity of veteran soldiers, whilst their commanders were little more than ama-
teurs: ‘El Empecinado’, wrote one observer, ‘is possessed of more valour and
energy than I can possibly express... but he needs instruction in how to
manage his forces.”!> Particularly if caught in the open or attacked by superior
numbers, they could therefore be broken without too much difficulty.
    In this respect mention has already been made of the serious reverse inflicted
on Espoz y Mina’s forces at Belorado in November 1810, when the Division
de Navarra was caught in the open on its way back to the montana from an
unsuccessful foray against the French stronghold of Tarrazona and suffered
 the loss of one third of its men. But this was not the only disaster suffered by
 Espoz y Mina, for in July 1811 most of his men were again caught by the French
 in the open, this time in the plains of southern Navarre at Lerin. Outnum-
 bered, exhausted after a long night march, short of ammunition on account of
 a torrential summer storm that had soaked their cartridges and, be it said, aban-
 doned by their commander, who clearly saw which way the wind was blowing
 and made off with a few companions before the battle began, the guerrillas had
 no chance and lost 600 casualties.'° Nor was Espoz y Mina the only comman-
 der who experienced disaster: in an action at Torralva in January 1811 Duran
 and Merino were heavily defeated after the latter’s cavalry broke in panic.'’ To
quote Juan Diaz Porlier, then:

   We will continue... to find it hard to obtain any result from the troops
   unless they are organised as they ought to be... I say this on account of
   what happened in the last action: I would have lost half my men, had not the
   cavalry saved everyone. It was impossible to contain the infantry’s disorder
   _.   or remedy their confusion and fear."*

   None of this is especially surprising, for the partidas were rarely made up of
good troops. General Walker, for example, described the troops of Renovales
as ‘a wretched rabble . . . attended by numerous corps of officers equally igno-
rant of military duty as the men, who were all raw recruits not exercised above
138    Fighting Napoleon


eight days and the greater part not even knowing how to load and fire’.!? Nor
was it just a matter of training. To quote Walker’s aide-de-camp, ‘What these
chiefs mostly complain of is the great want of clothing and shoes, their troops
being in general very ragged and barefooted.’ Having been defeated, more-
over, the guerrillas were as prone to scattering over the countryside as the con-
scripts of the regular army: many of the troops who survived the débdcle at
Lerin appear to have deserted, whilst, defeated at Villaconejos in August 1811,
El Empecinado had to send out officers in all directions with proclamations
pardoning all those who had run away and calling them back to their ranks.”
   Things were not much better when matters went well for the guerrillas.
When El Empecinado occupied Cuenca in May 1812, for example, the
garrison and their afrancesado supporters were allowed to take refuge in
the castle virtually unmolested, whilst their assailants ‘spent more time engag-
ing in sack and robbery than they did in the use of their weapons’.” Given that
there was little that the guerrillas could have achieved against the defenders
in this instance, in military terms the results of this day’s work were not too
bad, but this was not the case when Tudela was attacked by a combined
force consisting of the partidas of Lopez Campillo, Alonso and Mina on 29
November 1809. Caught by surprise, the French garrison was quickly driven
into the castle, whereupon the guerrillas fell to sacking the town. With
their lust for plunder satisfied, by midday the attackers were on the road for
Corella, but on the way the three bands fell to squabbling over the spoils. The
unedifying scenes that ensued were chronicled by an official report supplied
to the Junta Central:

  The arguments became so fierce that shots were exchanged . . . Being greater
  in number, Cuevilla’s band chased that of Mina all the way to Corella, in
  which pueblo a number of men were killed and various others stripped of
  everything they had and taken prisoner. With things in this state of anarchy,
  a shout went up that the French were coming, whereupon . . . 500 enemy
  troops appeared and put the whole lot to flight.”
   Nor were things much better when Porlier succeeded in briefly re-
occupying Oviedo in February 1810. Opinions of Porlier amongst those who
had dealings with him were less than flattering — he was variously described as
‘a mere boy who is . . . ambitious and easy to deceive’ and ‘at the best but chief
of a band of robbers who can by no means be said to be under his command’*
— and on this occasion he appears to have behaved with great foolishness.
Thus, apparently entertaining dreams that he might be nominated to command
all the Spanish forces in Asturias, he failed to march in pursuit of the F rench,
but rather prolonged his stay in Oviedo, getting up grateful deputations
from amongst the citizenry and picking quarrels with the other Spanish
                                                The Reality of the Guerrillas   139


commanders.” Hence in part the successful French counter-attack that we have
already detailed. Yet Porlier, it seems, did not learn his lesson. A month after
this affair we therefore find the Spanish staff officer Juan Moscoso writing:

  I advise you to proceed cautiously with regard to Porlier. He still has not
  either responded to the captain-general’s dispatch or given an account of his
  [most recent] operations... A very sharp order has just arrived from the
  Regency with regard to the ranks which he has conceded . . . This should
  give him a better idea of his duty [but]. . . it is still necessary for you to
  impose your authority. He is badly advised, and surrounded by people who
  maintain his followers in liberty and disorder.”

Nor, it seems, did Porlier relish having his authority challenged. On 8 April,
for example, an open quarrel between the guerrilla commander and Moscoso
almost led to armed conflict, whilst the very next day the regular commander,
Pedro de la Barcena, had to beg him to restrain himself and set aside his swollen
ego: ‘It is necessary . . . to keep calm . . . and work against the common enemy.
In these circumstances personal quarrels damage us; for the moment Spaniards
should have no enemies other than the French.” As for limiting the bounds of
his operations to a reasonable compass, this, too, was too much to expect: for
example, the autumn of 1809 saw forces that owed him their allegiance appear
in southern Logrofio demanding food and clothing from the insurgent junta
that had been established in Soto en Cameros before going on to take part in
the attack on Tudela that we have just detailed.”
   As was inevitable when there were such figures as Porlier in the field, there
were endless disputes and jealousies between the different chieftains. ‘We found
them’, wrote Captain Christian, ‘irritable, very jealous of each other, and it
required some management to prevail upon one chief to afford us any assis-
tance in the execution of... orders that did not relate immediately to
himself.2? One such area of friction was that which existed between the
manchego leader Martinez de San Martin and El Empecinado. Thus, according
to the government agent Rafael Gutiérrez, the former sought to engineer the
                                                                               had
latter’s defeat in an action at Checa by failing to appear with his men as he
promised, and then deliberately snubbed El Empecinad       o when   he brought  his
                                                                              As  a
troops to Cuenca to join forces with Martinez’s much smaller band.
bystander wrote to Gutiérrez:
                                                                                ,
   I have always taken San Martin for a boor and a boastful good-for-nothing
                                                                      eous.  The
   but I never thought that he could be so underhanded and discourt
                                                                         cobblers
   fault belongs to those who neither choose horses for courses nor tell
                                         we  try, we shall never be able  achieve
   to stick to their lasts: however hard
   anything with such people.”
140    Fighting Napoleon


   Elsewhere, meanwhile, matters were even worse. In Soria and Logrofio, for
example, 1809 was marked by a furious dispute between forces loyal to the
Marqués de Barrioiucio and José Antonio Colmenares, of whom the former
had been appointed to take charge of the guerrillas of Old Castile and the latter
of those of southern Aragon. The details of this dispute are as complicated as
they are tedious, but, in brief, carelessness in the drafting of their instructions
had left it very unclear as to where the authority of one leader ended and that
of the other began. Matters were not helped by the fact that the local notables
to whom Barriolucio and Colmenares turned to consolidate their position were
greedy for influence and prestige. As a petition sent to the Junta Central from
Logrofio put it, “The various juntas that control the province all regarding
themselves as being equal, they act as they see fit without agreeing any plan or
system and in consequence frequently fall foul of one another.”*' The result was
chaos. Thus, with both commanders blatant empire-builders bent on estab-
lishing themselves as all-powerful provincial satraps —- Colmenares, for example,
appears to have exploited the confusion prevalent in the Junta Central’s capital
of Seville to obtain powers far greater than it had ever been intended he should
be given” — bands of guerrillas loyal to Barriolucio and Colmenares regularly
clashed with one another, arrested local officials loyal to their opponents,
poached the loyalty of rival cabecillas or sequestered men and resources claimed
by the other side.” Particularly serious were the scenes witnessed in the city of
Logrofo itself, whose temporary evacuation by the French in November 1809
was followed by violent bickering as the two guerrilla armies jockeyed for posi-
tion and sought to monopolise the resources of the inhabitants.**
   Both sides, meanwhile, traded insults and accusations thick and fast.
Colmenares’ men, we learn, had spent so much time enjoying the fleshpots of
the provincial capital that they had earned the nickname of the ‘Regimiento
Fijo de Logrofio’ (Fixed Regiment of Logrofio), whilst those of Barriolucio
‘do not think of anything but. . . seizing resources that ought to belong to
the whole of the nation . . . requisitioning whatever quantity of rations takes
their fancy, and hanging around places far from the enemy in great crowds,
oppressing the inhabitants and in many cases committing repeated disorders’.>
To make matters still more complicated, meanwhile, on the one hand some of
Colmenares’ men who had penetrated the southernmost parts of Navarre found
themselves challenged by Mina, whilst on the other Barriolucio arrested a
group of riders sent out by Francisco Longa to seize the proceeds of the salt
monopoly in the district of Miranda de Ebro.” Tired of the blizzard of paper
that all this generated, the Junta Central eventually reprimanded both Bar-
riolucio and Colmenares and ordered that the affairs of Soria and Logrofio
should be handled by a new junta made up of one representative of each of
various local bodies set up by the two warring commissioners. Yet even this did
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   141


not put a stop to the violence, and finding out that some of his men had deserted
to join the forces which it was establishing, Jeronimo Merino — an ally of Bar-
riolucio who seems to have provided him with most of his armed strength —
threatened to come and get them by force.*”
   But nothing that these incessant skirmishes produced was the equal of the
extraordinary events that took place at Medina de Pomar on 6 July 1810. In
brief, what appears to have occurred is that Francisco Longa decided to rid
himself of a rival band headed by the erstwhile smuggler Ignacio Alonso. For
this there was a perfect pretext — like many other cabecillas, Alonso could be
accused of banditry — but the real reason was revenge: in December 1809 Longa
and his men had been seized by Alonso and forced to join his forces, the
Vizcayan leader being beaten and publicly humiliated when he tried to escape.
Eventually turned loose with a few followers who had remained loyal to him,
Longa was then almost immediately attacked by French forces he believed to
have been tipped off by Alonso as to his movements, losing seventeen men
killed, wounded or taken prisoner and only narrowly escaping death or capture
himself.** By now chief of far more men than he had had before, Longa was
therefore delighted to encounter Alonso with fewer than roo followers at
Medina de Pomar on 2 July 1810. Having invited Alonso and his officers to a
meal, he duly surrounded them with armed men and placed them under arrest.
Four days later, however, there turned up another partida under Juan Lopez
Campillo, who had been sent by Porlier to rescue Alonso on the grounds that
he had been acting at his orders. Unaware of what this new force wanted, Longa
agreed to a meeting with Campillo, at which the latter maintained that all he
asked was the surrender of the booty that Alonso and his men had amassed.
To this Longa agreed, and even had Alonso brought out to certify that the
 goods being handed over were correct. Whilst this had been happening
 Campillo’s men had managed to release Alonso’s men without anyone raising
 the alarm, but at length a fight broke out between Campillo’s adjutant and a
 sentry, whereupon Campillo drew a pistol and bundled Alonso out of the house.
 The two men left the town on horseback, but Longa’s men sallied out in
 pursuit, and a fierce fight followed in which a number of men were killed and
 wounded and most of Alonso’s men recaptured.” But this was not an end to
 the matter: hearing of what had gone on, a furious Porlier sent a further detach-
                                                                                  to
 ment of troops under the commander of his cavalry, Juan José de la Riba,
                                                                 the two  sides  did
 deal with Longa, and it seems clear that the only reason that
 not engage in a full-scale conflict was that the commander of the Spanish forces
                                                                                him
 in northern Spain, General Mahy, sent an angry letter to La Riba ordering
to desist from his activities at once.”
                                                                              y
   The net result of such quarrels, of course, was that operational efficienc
                                                                      borders
was greatly reduced, particularly in the region that encompassed the
142    Fighting Napoleon

of the two Castiles and Aragon, traversed as this was by the regular troops of
Pedro Villacampa, the partidas of Duran and El Empecinado and a variety of
smaller bands under such men as Martinez de San Martin. To quote
Gutiérrez, for example, ‘Unless something is done, things are going to go very
ill. The division of Villacampa and the forces of San Martin and El
Empecinado together make up almost 9,000 men, and yet. . . the rivalry that
exists between them has meant that they have done no more than devastate the
countryside and then go their own way.”"' Nor was this the only problem. Thus:

  Although each commander has no more than 500 men, they do not like
  joining forces with anyone of higher rank, and yet they cannot achieve any-
  thing by themselves for want of numbers. The result is that their men do
  nothing. Bored with inaction, they loaf about, fall prey to vice and run away.”

These issues proved all but intractable. Though a variety of measures were
taken to improve the situation, a full year later the same observer could write:

  I enclose a letter I have just received from General Bassecourt. It will inform
  Your Excellency of the lack of union, system and order that reigns among
  the various commanders . . . to be found in this region . . . Given that they
  have 10,000 men, many of them cavalry, it is very sad that the divisions of
  Bassecourt, Montijo, Villacampa, José Duran and Juan Martin have achieved
  so little. Indeed, far from fighting side by side, they deliberately avoid
  combat, all that they have done being to lay waste the countryside . . . whilst
  at the same time letting the enemy come and go as he will.”
   Why all this was so is clear enough. Let us quote, for example, the Duque
del Parque. As he wrote to the Minister of War in the course of his command
of the Spanish forces in Old Castile in the summer and autumn of 1809:

  From the enclosed papers Your Excellency will learn of the dissension that
  reigns amongst the guerrillas of this province, not to mention the lack of
  respect which they have for their superiors . . . I have let them have all the
  rewards ordered by His Majesty in accordance with the services that they
  have rendered, and have even gone a little further than the arrangements that
  have been laid down for them, but they have not listened to reason and must
  be prevented from carrying out any more of the robberies and other outrages
  that they have perpetrated in our pueblos. Every member of the rank and file
  wants a band of his own, and if the Junta Suprema Gubernativa del Reino
  . . does not punish those men who with this end in mind abandon the com-
  manders who have been appointed to head the bands, all these people will in
  the end turn into gangs of bandits with whom it will be necessary to come
  to blows before they can be brought to heel.
                                                  The Reality of the Guerrillas   143

For an even more explicit view, meanwhile, we can turn to the Prussian exile
Schepeler. As he wrote of the chaos that continued to bedevil Aragon:
  If Duran, Espoz y Mina and El Empecinado . . . had possessed the highest
  patriotic virtue — the ability to sacrifice their own ambition to the interests
  of the Fatherland — Arag6én would have been delivered by their united forces
  ... But none of the three wanted to obey an outsider, let alone one of his
  rivals.”
    For a good example of the sort of thing to which this ambition and self-love
led, we have only to turn to the events that took place in La Mancha and south-
ern Aragon in the winter of 1811-12. Desperate to get the guerrillas to co-
operate with one another, as commander of the Spanish Second Army — the
force to which Villacampa, Duran and El Empecinado all in theory belonged —
Joaquin Blake had appointed Bassecourt to act as commandant-general of all
the forces in the region, and had in addition dispatched a small division under
the Conde de Montijo to bolster resistance to the French. In doing so, however,
he had not taken account of the pride of Villacampa, Duran and El Empeci-
nado, none of whom was disposed either to co-operate with the others or to
work with Montijo with the result, as Gutiérrez complained, that ‘the coun-
tryside is being devastated by a small enemy army that is able to make a mockery
of the substantial forces that are opposed to it, and could do a great deal if only
their commanders would set aside their ideas of de tanto soy yo’.*° Yet this they
would not do. Thus, Montijo tried to get Duran and El] Empecinado to co-
operate with him in an attack on Soria, but neither cabecilla showed up at the
appointed rendezvous, with the result that Montijo was defeated with the loss
of 300 casualties and forced to retreat into Aragon.” What makes this incident
 significant, however, is its context. In the autumn of 1811 the French had
 launched a great offensive against Valencia, and it had soon become clear to
 Blake — the commander responsible for its defence — that the only hope of
 saving the city was to use the partidas to stir up trouble in the French rear. Some
 damage was done, certainly, but not enough to check the French onset, and thus
 it was that on 8 January 1812 Valencia fell into the hands of the invaders in
 what was to prove one of the most costly Spanish disasters of the entire war.
    The guerrillas, though, were blind to the big picture. In the remote hills of
 Aragon, the main cabecillas continued to refuse to recognise the need to work
 together, with the result that the French continued to win the occasional victory
 even as late as the dark days of the winter of 1812—13. ‘Thus on 25 December
 1812 the Italians of General Phillippe Severoli caught Villacampa and certain
 elements of the division of Duran at La Almunia and inflicted heavy casualties
                                                                              far from
 upon them after they had failed to co-ordinate their operations. And,
                                                                                   do
 accepting the principle of outside control, so determined was El Empecina
144    Fighting Napoleon

to protect his independence that he threatened the life of the local representa-
tive of the government and seized the saddle-bags of his dispatch riders.” It
was not just on the frontiers of Old Castile, La Mancha and Aragon that such
issues were a problem, however, for bad news also reached Gutiérrez from the
region of Burgos, where Longa and Merino were reported to be in dispute with
the commander of the Spanish Seventh Army, General Gabriel de Mendizabal
(even if it should in fairness be noted that British observers claimed that
Mendizabal, who was at best lacklustre, had ‘entirely lost the confidence of
everybody’). And from Asturias, Moscoso complained:

  This place is a tangle of confusions . . . No one is trying to wage war on the
  enemy except in accordance with his own particular hopes and aspirations
  ... You can see for yourself . . . that nobody has the force that he claims he
  does, and that it is impossible to count on anybody or anything . . . Every-
  body goes about things in their own way... and thinks of nothing but his
  own interest and convenience. In short, Asturias will only ever be recovered
  by an army from beyond its frontiers.”

   It was not just operational efficiency that was damaged by the endless squab-
bling. A further casualty was enthusiasm for the war. Let us here quote a gov-
ernment agent in the province of Guadalajara named Antonio de Capetillo:

  I am afraid to say that there is disunion amongst the authorities, discord
  amongst the generals . . . vice amongst the soldiery, and egotism in one and
  all, not to mention an unbridled greed for ranks and honours that are quite
  unmerited. Still worse, the disillusion with our forces that has stemmed from
  the quarrels of the commanders is spreading a decadent apathy amongst the
  populace. Look at Villacampa, for example. Once the terror of the enemy
  ... he has completely changed, and has not won a victory [for months] with
  the result that his splendid division of 5,000 gallant soldiers has been reduced
  in strength by more than half and is now wandering from one village of this
  province to the next, having completely abandoned Aragén to the enemy.
  As for El] Empecinado’s division, its commander and his officers are clearly
  very discontented at having been placed under the command of General
  Bassecourt, whilst civil war is raging in its ranks with all sorts of
  calumnies and accusations flying about... All this the inhabitants regard
  with great displeasure, whilst they are also fed up both with the requisition-
  ing to which they are subjected and the commanders’ lack of skill . . The
  quinta that should have been carried out two years ago is therefore still
  pending . . . whilst there has been no attempt to implement the one that the
  Commandant-General ordered to be carried out in Cuenca some months
  ago.”
                                                The Reality of the Guerrillas   145


Just as telling are the complaints voiced by an anonymous Aragonese. Thus:

  Everyone wants to command and none to obey. Even the soldiery and the
  common people have got wind of this. Nor is this surprising. All that they
  have to go on are the events that surround them, and these have consisted of
  little else but devastation, disobedience and a complete want of respect for
  property and authority alike . . Hence the disorder, desertion and disaffec-
  tion that we have witnessed.”

   Mired in the petty disputes and rivalries of their home provinces as they
were, the guerrillas could also not be counted on when it came to elaborating
wider strategic combinations. Indeed, attempts to call upon the services of
guerrilla formations outside the districts in which they were accustomed to
operate generally ended in failure. In part this was because of the attitude of
the local political authorities, in that they frequently regarded troops raised in
their localities as having been raised for the purposes of home defence only, and
in consequence struggled hard to ensure that they remained in the vicinity of
their strongholds. But the real cause lay with the guerrillas themselves. More
often than not the political problem could be overcome: E] Empecinado, for
example, had no difficulty in shrugging off the tutelage of the Junta of
Guadalajara. What could not be thrown off so easily was the general opposi-
tion to marching off to some other part of Spain, for this entailed all sorts of
dangers. Important sources of income might be lost; unfamiliar terrain meant
greater vulnerability; and there was nothing to say that the end-result would
not be assimilation into the regular army. Attempts to involve guerrilla forces
in wider strategic combinations could therefore lead to great tension. In April
 1811, for example, a short-lived French march on Valencia caused panic in the
city and led to orders being sent to E] Empecinado to march his forces down
to the coast. This message drove the Castilian commander to fury — ‘What the
devil have the Valencians been doing all this time?’, he is supposed to have
shouted, ‘Where are all the thousands and thousands of men who have been
doing nothing but laze about and eat their rations?’ — and he responded in the
most niggardly fashion possible, taking with him a mere 300 men.” In the event
he was not needed, and the order was cancelled, but on 11 July a second
summons was received. There being no reprieve on this occasion, the result
was disaster. As a government agent reported:

   The division of El Empecinado has almost entirely disintegrated. An order
   from General O’Donnell for it to march on Valencia threw it into confusion.
   It split up into rival parties in the vicinity of the pueblo of Torralba, shots
   were exchanged and it finally dispersed, all that its commander has left being
   some 200 men who are now with him in Cuenca . . . This is a very bad affair,
146    Fighting Napoleon


  for the division was over 4,500 strong, whilst it was much feared by the
  French.”
   But this was not the end of the story. In the midst of the chaos a large force
of French troops turned up, and took at least 600 men prisoner at the village
of Alcocer, such few troops as remained with the colours being forced to take
refuge at Sigiienza.”*
    Implicit in these troubles is another problem that was inherent in the guer-
rillas. El Empecinado himself blamed the general lack of enthusiasm on the
corruption typical of many Patriot officials. As he wrote of the commissaries
whom he employed to feed his troops:

  For none of the comisionados . . . have I either respect or love. I have written
  to the government about some of them to see if I can get rid of them, whilst
  I have placed others under arrest . . . The vices of such men are all too clear
  ... The evil is widespread, having its origins, as it does, in. . . the utter cor-
  ruption of our customs produced by twenty years of the vices of Godoy. At
  the present time one needs a powerful telescope to find a single honest man.”

But the fault did not lie with just a few corrupt officials. On the contrary, the
partidas were extremely burdensome to the populace. Little more than gangs
of bandits, many oppressed the populace quite unmercifully, supporting them-
selves by pillage and rapine. Complaints on this score were numerous, there
being reports of such cases from all over occupied Spain. Let us take, for
example, the Levant. Here the autumn of 1812 saw groups of guerrillas led
by Manuel Aparici and a priest named Manchon troubling the districts
of Villajoyosa and Crevillente.” In May, meanwhile, General Copons had
complained, ‘Since my arrival in this province, I have received an infinity of
complaints about the guerrilla bands. Their excesses are incessant: they only
occupy themselves in robbery and never attack the enemy.” Particularly blatant
in this respect were the events that had taken place in the pueblo of San Juan
in the present-day province of Alicante, where a partida headed by one Pascual
Gil had frightened the populace into taking flight with tales that a large French
column was heading straight for the village, and then settled down to pillaging
its deserted homes.”
   Just as telling is the situation of Navarre in the two years that passed before
it was taken over by Espoz y Mina. Determined to emphasise his own impor-
tance, e/ tio Francisco did all that he could to stress the chaos that reigned in
the province before he established a monopoly of force within its frontiers.
Thus:

  It is simply not possible to paint an adequate picture of the horrifying want
  of morals that had come to characterise . . . the guerrilla bands. The only
                                               The Reality of the Guerrillas   147


  exception was that of my nephew [sic] Mina, which was a little more regular
  ...In the other bands all the outsiders in the province had found protec-
  tion. There were men who had fled to Navarre to avoid some problem
  at home, to escape from justice, or to... give themselves over to a life of
  libertinage in a place where they were not known. There were French, Swiss,
  Polish, Italian and German deserters... And on top of them were to be
  found many Navarrese who had either escaped from prison... or were
  known in their home villages for their evil way of life.”

As to what these guerrillas achieved, the picture that Espoz y Mina draws is
not an encouraging one. Describing them as ‘gangs of thieves and malcontents
who under the guise of patriots sacrificed everything they came across to their
vices’, he claimed that they were typified by the band commanded by a butcher
from Corella named Pascual Echeverria: later suppressed by Espoz y Mina, this
force ‘did nothing but wander about the province, committing a thousand
disorders’.
   All this was very convenient for Espoz y Mina, of course, but for once the
Navarrese leader was not exaggerating. Let us take, for example, the view of
Navarre’s representatives in the Patriot government:

  Free from the control of any army, [the guerrillas]... range across the
  province in a disorderly fashion, seizing large numbers of mules, demand-
  ing such rations as they feel like and extorting pay at a rate of 10 reales per
  day for each cavalryman and 6 reales per day for each foot soldier. In addi-
  tion to all this, further payments have been extracted wherever they have not
  been given bales of cloth for the fabrication of uniforms.”

Also interesting in this respect is the report of the resguardo officer sent
to Navarre by the Junta Central in the summer of 1809 to foment popular
resistance:

  Who would believe that, in addition to the continual vexations that they
  experience at the hands of the French, these loyal... vassals of Your
  Majesty are experiencing others just as bad at the hands of .. . the so-called
  guerrilla bands that have been infesting this unfortunate kingdom, along with
  the neighbouring districts of Castile? The disorder which these men commit
  is such that it is impossible to portray it without feeling a sense of horror.
  The least they do is to demand exhorbitant rations . . . They all ride about
  on the horses that they have stolen from unfortunate peasants who need them
  for their labours. As I myself have experienced, no respectable citizen can
  ride from one pueblo to another without being robbed . . . Almost all the
  leaders... are men long known for their misconduct . . . and the conse-
  quence is that they wage war on the richest pockets.”
148       Fighting Napoleon


   As in the Levant and Navarre, so in other parts of Spain. From the frontiers
of Galicia and Old Castile, then, comes the case of Manuel Maria Vazquez de
la Torre. Known as Salamanquino, his speciality appears to have been round-
ing up deserters and then charging exhorbitant ransoms for their release. As an
inhabitant of Orense wrote to General Mahy, ‘His sole pretension is . . . to suck
the lifeblood from every town and village . .. Every pueblo that knows what he
is like is very angry, and such is the inhabitants’ desire for revenge that they are
capable of almost anything.” From Asturias we learn of ‘Francisco Collar, alias
Burracan, .. . [who] has been taking pains to make his conduct more repre-
hensible by the day, robbing, sacking, bullying and even killing in all the pueblos
that he enters’. From Catalonia we hear of one Felii Rovira y Galceran, a
peasant who used the small band of irregulars that he raised to fight the French
in 1808 to establish a protection racket whereby he levied tolls on convoys
heading for French-occupied Barcelona.” And, last but not least, there was the
rather more engaging case of Francisco Salazar, it supposedly being the custom
of this worthy to billet himself in the house of the prettiest woman in town
and then send out her husband to spy on the French.”
     Lest it be thought that these remarks applied only to the less militarised guer-
 rilla bands, it is quite clear that the problem was much more generalised. In
 fairness to the leaders of the guerrilla bands, many of them did attempt to
 maintain some sort of order amongst their followers and, in addition, to sup-
 press cuadrillas that could be considered to be mere gangs of bandits. Thus,
 there are cases of guerrilla commanders handing over their own men to the
josefino authorities for trial and execution, whilst Espoz y Mina, in particular,
 makes much of the ruthless manner in which he dealt with such bands as those
 of Echevarria, the latter being executed by firing squad at Estella on 9 July 1810
 after his men had been taken by surprise and disarmed.” But it is impossible
 not to suspect that such actions were the fruit of ambition rather than
 altruism. The better commanders realised that looting was both bad for dis-
 cipline and likely to land them in trouble with the authorities, whilst every
 cabecilla had an obvious interest in establishing a monopoly of force in his own
 locality. There were, however, repeated complaints with regard to the conduct
 of bands that are normally regarded with some respect, a particularly good
 example here being that of the northern leader Francisco Longa. In the words
 of one petitioner:

      We beg Your Excellency to come and console these aflicted pueblos, which
      you will find in the hands of the partida of Longa .. . Should you do so, you
      would find that these so-called soldiers degrade the military profession in
      the most horrible fashion, seeing in it no other object but the satisfaction of
      their sordid passions. They ride roughshod over justice, outrage humanity,
      act like tyrants and seize all the rights that should belong to our august
1. Louis Francois Lejeune, The skirmish at Guisando, in the ‘col d’Avis’ mountain passage of the Guadarama in
Castille on 11 April 1811. In this picture, the partida of Juan Palarea strip and massacre the survivors of a French
column. A few of the Spaniards appear in hussar-style busbies: as a veteran of the Peninsular War, Lejeune
would have been aware of the militarisation of the partidas, though his treatment of the subject suggests that he
was unwilling to let this get in the way of his desire to project a romantic image of the guerrillas.




2. Louis Francois Lejeune, The attack by General Mina’s guerrillas in France on the convoy carrying the
ladies of King Foseph’s court near Salinas, 25 May 1811. Though based on a real incident, this work by
                                                                                                        men,
Lejeune is inaccurate in almost every detail. At bottom left, Espoz y Mina is seen urging on his
                                                       freed  by the  Spaniards.  Interestingly, with a  gesture
whilst on the right some British prisoners are being
of great disgust, one of them  appears  to be refusing the  weapon   he  is being offered.
3. Denis Dighton, Spanish army.
General Officer of Cavalry with
Guerrillas and Lancers, 1815.
Drawn from the flesh by such
figures were to be found in many
of the more militarised bands.




4. Denis Dighton, The Brigand
Crosa, Guerrilla Chiefof
Catalonia, 1813. The archetypal
guerrilla of legend, this figure
typifies the ambiguity which
characterises many leaders of the
‘little war’.
                                                      5. Bacler d’Albe, Scenes of action against the
                                                      guerrillas in the Aoiz valley. Head of the French
                                                      army’s topographical service under Napoleon,
                                                      Louis Albert Bacler d’Albe accompanied
                                                      Napoleon to Spain in 1808. It is not clear,
                                                      however, whether the incident depicted here is
                                                      anything other than the fruit of his imagination.




6. Bacler d’Albe, Scenes of action against the
guerrillas in the Aoiz valley. Trapped at the edge
of a cliff, French troops hurl themselves to their
deaths rather than let themselves be taken by the
guerrillas. Although this incident may be
imaginary, there are documented examples of
cornered imperial soldiers shooting themselves
when faced by capture.




                                                                      A base of the ‘gendarmerie
7. Bacler d’Albe, Block-house on the road between Hernani and Tolosa.
                                                                          had to put into keeping open
d’Espagne’, this imposing structure typifies the effort which the French
their communications in Spain.
(a a    8. Felix Phillippoteaux, General
  i    Franceschi-Delonne captured by
        ‘El Capuchino’s’ gang. The work
       of a well-known French
       illustrator born in 1815, this
       engraving depicts the capture of
       a French cavalry general by the
       band of El Capuchino in 1810
       and is typical of traditional
       views of the guerrillas. Note the
       romanticised appearance of the
       Spaniards, who look as if they
       have stepped straight from the
       stage of Carmen.


        g. Francisco de Goya, Nobody
        knows the reason. Resident in
        Madrid during the Peninsular
        War, Goya probably witnessed
        such a sight many times in the
        period 1808 to 1813. Kept in the
       building that is today occupied
       by the Spanish Foreign
       Ministry, malefactors such as
       these were led the short
       distance to the Plaza de la
       Puerta Cerrada and garrotted
       at the spot now marked by the
       Cruz de los Caidos. Death was
       instantaneous but the corpses
       were left exposed for the rest
       of the day with an account of
       their crimes and the weapons
       they had used hung round
       their necks. As the title
       implies, however, it was —
       and remains — very difficult
       to judge whether the victims
       were heroes or villains.




       10. Francisco de Goya, The
       same. The rather obscure title
       of this engraving refers to the
       caption given to the preceding
       scene in The Disasters of War
       which is With reason or
       without? In short, who were
       the combatants, and why were
       they fighting?
                                                The Reality of the Guerrillas   149


  law courts. The least of their members swill down between four and six
  cuartillos of wine a day, whilst they also get one and a half pounds of bread
  and two pounds of meat.”
Nor, it seems, did Longa mend his ways. Something over two years later the
Regency that now ruled Spain received an anonymous representation from a
group of ‘loyal Castilians’ making further accusations of pillage and arbitrary
conduct. Thus:

  From the beginning of 1810, many men deserted from the various partidas
  that had been formed in Castile after the battle of Espinosa de los Monteros
  so as to enlist in the one led by Longa in the belief that it offered them more
  freedom and less exertion. Never more than 500 strong, this band has ever
  since monopolised the revenues of the saltworks of Poza and Rosio. . . and
  the tercios reales payable on the estates of both the Archbishop [of Burgos]
  and the religious houses . . . All this ought to have been enough to . . . equip
  an army of 10,000 men, and yet the partida has still found it necessary to live
  off the inhabitants, whom it has treated with the greatest despotism . . . that
  it is possible to imagine. There has been no order: libertinage has reigned
  unchecked; every soldier has behaved as if he was free to demand whatever
  he liked; and everyone who has tried to protest . . . or failed to accede to the
  guerrillas’ demands has been sorely punished.”
   Not all commanders tolerated such excesses, of course, but it was not just
the commanders who have to be taken into consideration. As Espoz y Mina
supposedly remarked to a priest who came to plead for the life of a man who
had been condemned to death for some act of violence:

  You do not know the sort of people that I have under my command: I find
  myself, indeed, in the sad situation of having to count my existence by
  moments, and when I am alone am beset by the image of a dagger striking
  for my heart.”
   Except when they were under the direct control of their officers, then, the
rank and file simply could not be trusted. Sent out in small parties to gather
supplies and recruits, they frequently ran amok and had to be hunted down by
regular troops, as was the case with some of the detachments sent out by
Renovales from his base at Potes in the winter of 1810-11.” In response to
attempts to discipline them, meanwhile, they were quite capable of attempting
to overthrow their cabecillas, or simply of running away: the Andalusian leader
Jiménez found himself flung into prison on charges of treason after arresting
his second-in-command on ‘charges of robbery, falsification . . . lack of subor-
dination and other excesses’, whilst many of Duran’s men deserted to ‘various
bands in which there was more freedom . . . better rations and less work’.”®
150    ~+=~Fighting Napoleon


   To counter this spate of accusations, apologists for the guerrillas can make
use of a number of arguments. There were, doubtless, many afrancesados and
members of the propertied classes who possessed good reason to claim that the
guerrillas were nothing more than bandits. As El Empecinado complained, for
example:

  The parish priests . . . paint the activities of the soldiers who are sent out to
  collect the tercios reales . . . in the worst colours. This is not the case with all
  of the clergy, but you know perfectly well that selfishness is deeply engrained
  amongst them. Amongst the magistrates and the wealthier inhabitants, too,
  there are many who are quick to spot the motes in the eyes of other people,
  and not the beams in their own. Self-preservation leads them to give the
  French all they need, but love of the fatherland gets nothing out of anybody.”
It might, too, be objected that, operating deep inside the French zone of occu-
pation, the guerrillas had no option but to live off the country. As Porlier put
it in a letter written to General Mahy in March 1810, ‘My division has very
little of the resources that it needs to survive. It has not received any money
for some time.’”* Furthermore, if they behaved badly, they were no worse than
the soldiers of the regular army: in the dark days of December 1808 and January
1809 the fleeing Spanish armies pillaged many towns and villages, whilst in
January 1811 the commander of the Spanish forces in Asturias accused his sub-
ordinate, Francisco Gonzalez de Castejon, of allowing his men to engage in a
regime of pillage and rapine.”
   But there is a problem here. Plenty of instances may be cited of even the
most undisciplined guerrilla bands attacking the French. Bandit though he
was, then, on 2 May 1809 Saornil led his men in an attack on a detachment of
fifty French soldiers at Fuentesatico that ended in the death of sixteen of them
and the capture of thirty-four others.*’ Equally, though regarded by the mili-
tary as a bandit, on 1 June 1811 the Andalucian’ cabecilla Saldivar rode into
Sanlucar de Barrameda and killed eleven Frenchmen along with a wealthy
afrancesado who had been decorated by King Joseph for the help he had given
the invaders."' And finally, from Ciudad Real we learn that on 15 February 1809
a party of French troops was attacked and put to flight by a gang of smugglers
at Madridejos.”
   Yet such attacks were actually rather fewer than might at first have been
thought. It is, for example, significant that an ordinance issued in Asturias in
May 1810 specifically laid down that each partida should attack the enemy at
least once every four days.** There is, too, the fact that Porlier and his men
clashed with the invaders on no more than half a dozen occasions between
March 1809 and January 1810, a number of even these skirmishes only coming
to pass because the guerrillas were caught by French columns and forced to
                                                The Reality of the Guerrillas   151


turn and fight.** Much the same, meanwhile, appears to be true of the manchego
leader José Gonzalez de la Torre, whose copious reports submitted to the gov-
ernment contained hardly a mention of fighting the French. As for Camilo
Gomez, he spent most of the summer of 1809 enjoying the fleshpots of Seville
and eventually had to be ordered to leave the city immediately.*° This was an
extreme case, perhaps, but the fact is that raids and ambushes did not figure at
all highly on the agenda of many bands. What mattered was the comparatively
peaceful business of requisitioning: after suddenly making an appearance in
some unoccupied pueblo, a partida would strip it of such food, manpower,
money and horses as it could extract from the inhabitants and then move on in
search of fresh victims.*” Also common, meanwhile, were acts that constituted
little more than extortion and highway robbery: in August 1809 fifteen inhab-
itants of Mansilla de las Mulas were sequestered and held to ransom by Porlier,
whilst in March 1810 a deputation that had been sent by the ayuntamiento of
Alcaudete to congratulate Joseph Bonaparte on his conquest of Andalucia was
held up by a group of guerrillas near Alcala la Real and stripped of its horses.
   We have, then, a picture that is profoundly negative. This impression, mean-
while, is confirmed by the course of the war. For the Allies the key to victory
in the Peninsular War was the survival of the Patriot cause in Spain: were Spain
ever to have been conquered, it would have been hard for Wellington to hold
out in Portugal, let alone carry the war across the frontier and win a decisive
battle in the style of the one that actually took place at Vitoria on 21 June 1813.
But, if the Spanish cause was to survive, it was essential that the Patriot gov-
ernment should hold on to a substantial area of territory, for only then could
it hope to secure the men and money that it needed to keep the war alive. This
was especially true after 1810, moreover, for in that year the outbreak of revo-
lution in Spanish America slashed Spain’s colonial revenues to the bone, whilst
at the same time presenting the Patriot government with a ‘second front’ that
it could ill afford to neglect. It will here be claimed, of course, that the guer-
rillas were sufficient in themselves to keep the war going in Spain or, to put it
another way, that every French advance in Spain was irrelevant. Spanish armies
might topple like ninepins, and Spanish fortresses be snapped up by the dozen,
but the Spanish people would keep fighting and the ‘Spanish mousetrap’
remain as intractable as ever. This, however, is little more than nonsense. The
concept of a Spanish ‘people’s war’ is impossible to sustain, and, besides, the
guerrillas could not have survived without a network of strategic bases. From
these bases, too, there could operate forces of regular troops of the sort com-
manded by Ballesteros and Copons that could disrupt operations against the
guerrillas by taking the offensive themselves (one returns here to Wellington’s
views on the need to support the operations of guerrilla bands with formations
of regular troops).
152    Fighting Napoleon


   The validity of these views can be upheld by reference to a number of
episodes in the Peninsular War. As we have already seen, in the spring and early
summer of 1813 Espoz y Mina was almost crushed by a massive French offen-
sive from whose effects he was only saved by the advance of Wellington’s army.
The previous year, meanwhile, he had been seriously inconvenienced by the fall
of Valencia. Indeed, as the Navarrese commander makes clear, this was a dis-
aster for his forces:

  The loss of Valencia did me a great deal of damage. In this respect the worst
  problem was the manner in which it deprived me of a point to which I could
  turn for munitions, and in fact these immediately began to run short. At
  the same time I feared that some of the enemy troops that had taken part in
  the conquest of the city would... fall on the area in which I had been
  operating.”
Traditionally, it has been supposed that the guerrillas could always look to the
Anglo-Portuguese army for salvation, but this, in fact, was not the case. Indeed,
the fact that Wellington happened to save Espoz y Mina’s forces from disaster
in 1813 should not be taken to mean that such operations were a primary objec-
tive of British strategy. As the British commander himself said, for example,
‘I cannot adopt plans to forward the operations of such a corps as that of
Ballesteros or even that of Galicia.”
   Much, then, depended on the operations of such forces as those of
Ballesteros and Copons. In Andalucia the Allies’ possession of a string of
coastal towns and fortresses including Cadiz, Ayamonte, Tarifa and Gibraltar
allowed these commanders to operate with some degree of safety. But let us
look at the contrasting case of Catalonia. Here, the fall of Tarragona in June
1811 reduced the Patriot cause to a state of near paralysis. No sooner had the
fortress been taken, indeed, than the Junta of Catalonia was exuding despair:
  Catalonia has .. . lost the only port that remained to her... The most...
  fertile part of the principality is in possession of the enemy... and the
  mountainous parts alone must support the burden of the war .. . Thanks to
  the loss of its artillery and the very great want of ammunition in that part
  of the country which remains free, the army is incapable of undertaking
  military operations. As for the enemy . . . they will no doubt advance without
  the least delay, and very soon become masters of the whole province.”!

If the Junta’s worst fears were never realised — thanks to Napoleon’s invasion
of Russia, the French never had enough troops to overrun the whole of
Catalonia — the Catalan war effort never recovered from the loss of Tarragona.
Driven back into the interior of the province, the First Army suffered terribly:
a British report of March 1813 remarked on ‘much deficiency of accoutrements
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   153


... very bad clothing... and...a complete want of shoes’, whilst in May of
the same year the Lérida infantry regiment had only 220 men fit for service out
of 490 present with the colours, and of these it was written that their only
uniform was ‘misery and nakedness combined with a complete want of clean-
liness’.”” Desertion, then, was very high, particularly as the French made a point
of allowing deserters to remain quietly in their homes.” Had the Spaniards been
capable of raiding the French zone, the situation in this respect might not have
been quite so serious, but partisan activity was all but at an end, whilst, hard
pressed to man the defensive positions behind which it sheltered, the army itself
was too weak to spare the parties of troops needed to round up its fugitives.
Indeed, it was too weak to attempt anything at all: reduced by the spring of
1813 to a force of 7,000 men, it lacked the transport it needed to take the field,
whilst the soldiers were ill-armed, lacking in the most basic items of equipment
and incapable of fighting in a regular fashion.” But from this there stemmed
a vicious circle: the First Army could not attack without obtaining more
resources, and yet it could not obtain more resources without attacking. In sum,
then, as a British liaison officer reported, ‘Without an additional force of 6,000
or 8,000 men, nothing offensive can be undertaken.”
   The predicament in which the First Army found itself by the beginning of
1813 is symptomatic of the relationship that existed between the guerrillas and
the Spanish war effort as a whole. In this respect, the basic point at issue was
made by Sir Thomas Graham:

   There are points where it is of infinite consequence . . . that there should be
   armies, for, useful and important as the guerrillas are, that is not enough, let
   them be ever so spread out over the face of the country. They can never stop
   the march of a considerable body of the enemy.”

   This, alas, was all too true. Guerrillas or no guerrillas, between 1810 and
1812, with Wellington pinned down in Portugal, the French continued to
expand their territories. In January 1810 the whole of Andalucia was occupied,
and thereafter, one by one, Lérida, Oviedo, Astorga, Ciudad Rodrigo, Tortosa,
Badajoz, Tarragona and Valencia all fell into the hands of the enemy. Spanish
casualties were very heavy, and, in the end, the Patriot armies were left fit for
nothing but glorified guerrilla warfare. And, so far as the guerrillas were con-
cerned, their best efforts had proved unavailing to stop the rot. As a pamphlet
that was published in Cadiz in 1810 remarked:

   As a method of waging war, popular insurrection is almost always... far
   more costly than the use of regular forces. When protected by a regular army,
   at the right moment the former can reinforce the latter, but otherwise the
   only result is momentary success avenged later with great sacrifice .. . Is it
154    Fighting Napoleon

  still doubted that the kingdom is lost if we do not raise large armies? Let us
  suppose that Spain becomes the tomb of 20,000 soldiers every year...
  Napoleon has to subjugate Spain or lose his reputation . . . and, now that
  [Austria] is quiet . . . it is not difficult for him to send 100,000 .. . It is held
  that our arms cannot match those of the enemy when both sides are fight-
  ing in large forces. From here stems the foolish idea that, instead of increas-
  ing our armies, we should rely solely on the use of partidas and the defence
  of towns [by their inhabitants] when the war that we are waging on the con-
  trary demands large armies that are capable of imposing themselves on the
  enemy . . . It is true that Madrid was defended heroically by its own people,
  that La Mancha has devoured many Frenchmen without the aid of many
  troops, and that the enemy was expelled from Galicia by the peasantry alone.
  Nevertheless, Madrid is occupied by the enemy and La Mancha in reality
  controlled by them, whilst Galicia would also fall into their hands if there
  was not a large army to protect it. Little by little the French extend their
  dominions whilst we celebrate a riot in some village or an attack by some
  guerrilla band.”

   What made all this doubly serious, of course, was that the guerrillas were
one of the chief factors in the erosion of the regular armies that were, as
Graham noted, the only hope of holding back the French. And, if the guer-
rillas could not stop the march of the French armies, they could do even less
to push them back. Unable, as we have seen, to make headway against the
fortresses and strong points that studded the French dominions, they were,
until the last year of the war, for the most part incapable of beating even the
smallest French forces in the open field. To quote Serrano Valdenebro:

  A band of patriots situated in mountains that are almost inaccessible will
  hold off the bravest soldiers. However, should the latter fall back to more
  accessible terrain, the picture changes... The peasant wages a petty war
  . . How can this man fight in a terrain where infantry can press upon him
  or cavalry ride him down?”

    How indeed? Yet this is precisely what the view that the heroic Spanish
people liberated themselves from the French yoke by means of the adoption of
guerrilla warfare requires us to believe. Few observers would go so far, of
course, but what about the view that the Allied victory in the Peninsular War
was the product of the combination of regular and irregular warfare, or, to put
it another way, that Wellington made the guerrillas an integral part of his plans
for the defeat of the French? Here, too, there is every reason to doubt the tra-
ditional version of events. When he advanced into Spain in both 1812 and 1813
Wellington made use of diversionary tactics to prevent the French from con-
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   = 155


centrating against him in overwhelming force, and it is often implied that the
key factor in his plans was the guerrillas. This is, however, at best a half-truth.
In 1812, in particular, considerable prominence was given to Gabriel de
Mendizabal’s Seventh Army, which consisted of such more or less militarised
partidas as those of Porlier and Longa, but even in that year chief reliance was
placed on regular formations of one sort or another. In 1813, meanwhile, even
less trust was reposed in the guerrillas. Wellington, in fact, had never been a
fan of the partidas. As he wrote to Lord Castlereagh as early as 5 September
 1808, it was his view that, although ‘very formidable and efficient in their own
country’, the Spanish insurgents could neither operate nor be ‘reckoned upon’
outside their home provinces, and were in want of ‘arms, ammunition, money,
clothing and military equipment of every description’; above all, however, ‘no
officer could calculate a great operation upon such a body’, let alone ‘estimate
the effect of their efforts’.”” As time passed, so he admittedly became more
aware of the partidas as a factor in the war, but his planning for his first inva-
sion of Spain — the Talavera campaign of July 1809 — took no account of the
contribution that they might make to the fighting. On the contrary, despite the
 favourable reports that had begun to arrive of the guerrillas, his thinking was
 centred on conventional operations. As he wrote to the British ambassador, ‘I
 am convinced that the French will be in serious danger in Spain only when a
great force shall be assembled which will oblige them to collect their troops.”"”
The events of the campaign did nothing to change this belief for, guerrillas or
no guerrillas, the French were able to concentrate against Wellington’s troops
in overwhelming numbers. In the long and gloomy exchange of views that fol-
lowed the retreat of the British army, the partidas were therefore ignored:
warning against any plans for further offensives in Spain, on I September 1809
Wellington informed his brother, Lord Wellesley, “he enemy has it in his
power to collect his whole force in Castile and Extremadura at any point north
of the Tagus and can dispose of the parts of it . . . as he thinks proper."
   Clearly, then, there is no sense here that the guerrillas could distract the
French from turning upon Wellington’s army, and in fact the British com-
mander seems to have been bent on decrying the concept of people’s war
altogether. As he wrote to Lord Castlereagh, ‘People are very apt to believe that
enthusiasm carried the French through their revolution and was the parent of
those exertions which have nearly conquered the world; but if the subject is
nicely examined, it will be found that enthusiasm was the name only . . . [and]
that force was the instrument which brought those great resources which first
stopped the allies.””’ The conclusion was obvious: ‘I only beg that those who
                                                                           of
have to contend with the French will not be diverted from the business
raising, arming, equipping and training regular bodies by any notion that the
people, when armed and arrayed, will be . . . of much use to them.”
156    Fighting Napoleon


   As operations of the guerrillas gathered pace in the course of the winter of
1809-10, Wellington was forced to modify his views. Thus: ‘The accounts
which I receive from all quarters mention the great activity of the parties of
guerrillas throughout the country. Some of these accounts are certainly exag-
gerated, but I have no doubt that there is some foundation for them.’ Equally:
‘I have no doubt that the spirit of resistance . . . is general throughout all the
provinces [of Spain], that it breaks out into open acts of violence whenever
opportunity offers, that instances of its existence have been frequent lately, and
that the confidence of the Spaniards . . . in the final success of these exertions
has lately become greater than it had been.’!™
   When the opportunity arose for a fresh advance into Spain in 1812,
Wellington was therefore well aware of the partidas as a factor in operations
in the Peninsula. Indeed, at first sight he was positively enthusiastic. As he
wrote to Lord Liverpool:

  These parties continue to increase, and their operations become every day
  more important. Saornil has lately interrupted the communications of the
  army in Portugal in upper Castile near Medina del Campo. He took about
  100 prisoners in that town, and the party of Cuesta attacked a body of French
  infantry which crossed the Tietar and obliged them to retire with consider-
  able loss.'”°
Yet trust the guerrillas he could not. In 1810 all the activity of the partidas had
not prevented the French from massing a large army against Portugal.'’” And
there was, too, still the issue of what the partidas could actually achieve:

  I am apprehensive that I can place no reliance on the effect to be produced
  by these troops. The guerrillas, although active and willing, and although
  their operations in general occasion the utmost annoyance to the enemy, are
  so little disciplined that they can do nothing against the French troops unless
  the latter are very inferior in numbers, and if the French take post in house
  or church of which they only barricade the entrance, both regular troops and
  guerrillas are so ill-equipped . . . that the French can remain in security till
  relieved by a larger body.'™
   In this context the events of the summer and autumn of 1812 were a
disaster. As his own forces had advanced into Old Castile following the battle
of Salamanca on 22 July, Wellington discovered that, viewed in close-up, the
guerrillas were not as active as he had been led to expect. As the government
agent Rafael Gutiérrez complained the day before Wellington entered Madrid,
for example, ‘Don José Duran was in Calahorra on the sixth whilst on the ninth
Don Pedro Villacampa was in Molina and Don Juan Martin between Tarancon
and Cuenca, but none of them has done anything to incommode the enemy.”!
                                                The Reality of the Guerrillas   157

Eager to share in the glory of entering the capital, El] Empecinado at the last
minute rode for its gates, and actually managed to enter the city ahead of the
Anglo-Portuguese army. But of pursuit of the enemy there was litle sign, and
the British commander actually complained that the guerrillas were spending
their time ‘getting quietly into the large towns and amusing themselves or col-
lecting plunder’.' Still worse, when the Allied troops reached Burgos in
October a horde of irregulars rushed into the city and, in the words of one
British officer, ‘destroyed almost everything’.'! Small wonder, then, that, by
the time he had once again retired to the frontiers of Portugal in November,
Wellington was writing scathingly of ‘a few rascals called guerrillas [who] attack
one quarter of their numbers and sometimes succeed and sometimes not’.'””
And small wonder, too, that his plans for the campaign of 1813 made
almost no mention of the guerrillas. On the contrary, with Wellington now
commander-in-chief of the Spanish armies, the plan was rather to rely entirely
on such regular troops as the Patriot forces could field (in brief, the Spanish
armies in Andalucia and the Levant would move on the French from the south,
whilst their counterparts in Galicia and Le6n advanced in company with
Wellington’s own Anglo-Portuguese troops to envelop the enemy’s right flank
and rear). Most strikingly, indeed, no attempt seems to have been made to get
in touch with Espoz y Mina until the very eve of the battle of Vitoria. The
general impression that one is left with therefore is that, whilst any help
rendered by the guerrillas would be gratefully received, there was no intention
whatsoever of trusting to their efforts. In the event, matters did not work out
quite as Wellington planned, for Espoz y Mina was able to make a far greater
contribution to events than the British commander ever expected, whilst the
British commander found himself quite unable to make use of the Spanish
armies in the manner that he had desired. But that is no justification for ex post
facto rationalisation: by 1813 there were clearly few observers on the Allied side
who had time for notions of /a guerrilla as people’s crusade.'"*
   This is not to say that the guerrillas played no part in the liberation of Spain
in 1813. On the contrary, setting aside the vital role played by the forces of
Duran and Espoz y Mina in the French rear in the spring and early summer,
Longa made up for his earlier misdeeds by distinguishing himself at the battle
of Vitoria. Indeed, quite remarkably for Spanish troops, his men even suc-
ceeded in impressing some British observers with their bearing. To quote
Larpent, ‘I saw Longa in the streets, a stoutish man, well dressed in a sort of
hussar uniform, and looking civilised enough . . . The party of cavalry were all
regularly dressed, and seemed to be more regular than most of the Spanish
regulars; they wore scarlet jackets and were not unlike some of our yeomanry
cavalry, but they had an air of consequence that was amazing.”''* But there is
still one more problem to address. The victory of 1813 was above all a triumph
158    Fighting Napoleon

for the Anglo-Portuguese army. The guerrillas had played their part, certainly,
but Wellington was able to get far less use out of the Spanish regular army than
he had planned: out of a total of some 167,000 Spaniards under arms, only
some 23,000 were present at Vitoria. Still worse, meanwhile, when the Allied
armies actually invaded France in October 1813 most of the Spanish forces had
to be sent back across the frontier in disgrace.''* Intensely humiliating as all this
was for the Spanish officer corps, the result was, first, that the military coup
that restored Fernando VII to the throne as absolute ruler of Spain was a
resounding success and, second, that the army was given a considerable nudge
in the direction of the sustained propensity towards political intervention that
was ultimately to lead to the terrible civil war of 1936—39.'"°
   To hold up the guerrillas as the only villains in this situation would be mani-
festly absurd (the doctrinaire anti-militarism of the liberals who dominated the
cortes of Cadiz was at least as important, for example). But there is no doubt
that the partidas did accelerate the estrangement of the regular army from the
political system that was established in Patriot Spain. Setting aside the manner
in which idealised guerrilla folk heroes could be set up in contradistinction to
the generals of the regular army, and the guerrillas themselves eulogised as the
model for a new form of military organisation, at the heart of all the army’s
problems in the campaign of 1813 was the question of logistics. Spain was a
ruined land, and in consequence quite unable to equip its armies with the basic
necessities that it needed to take the field. Once again, the general devastation
could hardly be laid entirely at the door of the guerrillas, but the fact was that
they had demonstrably made things far worse than might otherwise have been
the case: in Old Castile, for example, they drained the countryside of what little
remained of its labour.''’ And, of course, there was the question of desertion
since it was widely recognised that the guerillas continued by their very exis-
tence to encourage men to flee the army,!"®
   Even when the French were driven out, meanwhile, the guerrillas made it
very difficult to realise the resources of the liberated territories. What made the
problem still worse, however, was the complete anarchy into which the partidas
had plunged large parts of the country. For a good example we have only to
look at Aragon. Following the fall of Zaragoza in February 1809 a provincial
junta had been established at Teruel, but this had been forced to lead an
extremely peripatetic existence, whilst its authority had in any case been chal-
lenged by rival bodies based at Sigiienza and Molina de Aragon. At the same
time, military authority in the province had been even more bitterly contested,
things having eventually reached the point at which no fewer than eight inde-
pendent commanders were squabbling over the region’s resources whilst at the
same time generally behaving as if the Aragonese were inhabitants of an enemy
province. This was a low point, true — authority in the province was eventually
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   159


formally divided between Espoz y Mina and Duran — but even so the result
was that Aragon had been reduced to little more than a wasteland.'”
   To conclude, then, the impact of the Spanish guerrillas was much less
impressive than has generally been thought to be the case. If by ‘guerrillas’, we
mean the irregular forces that emerged from outside the ranks of the regular
army and its auxiliaries — the new regiments formed in the course of the upris-
ing in 1808 and such local militias as the Catalan somatenes — we find that in the
case of the smaller and less militarised bands contact with the invaders was
infrequent and, further, that the military capacities of such forces were very
limited. Nor is this surprising: it is not going too far to suggest that the primary
objective of men such as Principe and Saornil was not war at all, but rather
robbery, pillage and extortion. Rather more effective, and certainly more dedi-
cated to the struggle, were the larger and more organised partidas that emerged
under the command of such figures as Juan Martin Diez, Francisco Espoz y
Mina, José Joaquin Duran y Barazabal and Juan Diaz Porlier. But even here
there are many problems: the rank and file frequently did not share the prior-
ities of their leaders, whilst the latter were often as much adventurers as they
were patriots, and in consequence allowed themselves to be distracted by
their own private interests. On top of all this, even the most developed of the
irregular forces had only a limited amount to offer in a military sense: always
vulnerable to defeat in the field, they also acquired only the most limited offen-
sive capacity. If this seems to fly in the face of the genuine achievements of the
guerrillas — and, in particular, their de facto liberation of much of Navarre and
Aragon — it should be pointed out that they were not operating in a vacuum.
To put it another way, if Espoz y Mina triumphed, he did so because Napoleon
invaded Russia. At the same time, the guerrillas were quite incapable of pre-
venting either the conquest by the French of fresh territory or the concentra-
tion of overwhelming forces against the Anglo-Portuguese army of the Duke
of Wellington. If anything, indeed, the irregulars appear rather as a negative
influence in the Allied war effort: consuming disproportionate quantities of
food, revenue and other resources, they sapped the strength of the Spanish
regulars whilst increasing the discontent and alienation of the populace. To say
that the partidas accomplished nothing would be to go to far, but even so we
therefore have a picture that clearly differs vary radically from the traditional
historiography.
                                          6
                    The End of the Guerrillas




Having reassessed both the nature and motivation of Ja guerrilla popular and its
contribution to the Spanish war effort, we now need to examine the relation-
ship that existed between the partidas and the Spanish state. From everything
that has gone before it will be appreciated that this was extremely ambivalent.
On the one hand the civil and military authorities were anxious to foment
popular resistance as an adjunct to the operations of the regular army, but on
the other they were determined to ensure that it did not threaten the estab-
lished social and political order or interfere with the conduct of the war. From
the very beginning, then, attempts to encourage the formation of fresh partidas
were to be inextricably entangled with attempts to regulate their conduct, and,
still more so, to subordinate the cabecillas to the control of the generals and
juntas that formally headed the resistance in the Spanish provinces. Opposed
as this process was to the interests and outlook of most of the insurgent leaders,
relations between the Patriot cause and its more irregular supporters were
always likely to be troubled, and it is not difficult to foresee that in the end those
groups that did not allow themselves to be fully assimilated with the military
estate would be cast out from the fold altogether. Yet, just as the guerrillas did
not operate in a military vacuum, nor did they do so in a political one. Thus,
seemingly a personification of the principle of the nation-in-arms that was as
effective as it was dramatic, the guerrillas were for a time able to benefit from
the patronage of powerful interests within the Patriot body politic. Yet in the
end, killed off by the guerrillas’ own misdeeds and the changing circumstances
of the war, this support fell away, whilst the partidas in any case soon found
themselves exposed to the infinitely more hostile climate represented by the
restoration of absolutism. For some fortunate individuals this was not the end,
but for most of the guerrillas the choice facing them in 1814 was to be bleak
indeed.
                                                    The End of the Guerrillas   161


   The first point to make in connection with this chapter is that at no time
were the partidas ever envisaged as an independent force. Even in the very first
days of the fighting this principle was already well enunciated. Thus, the for-
mation of guerrilla bands was seen as the prerogative of the civil and military
authorities. Supernumerary army officers, prominent local notables or men who
had by one means or another managed to ingratiate themselves with the new
organs of government were issued with commissions to raise groups of armed
men, and held responsible for their actions. In short, they were regarded as
agents of.a state that in the end remained keen to enforce its monopoly of vio-
lence. By the same token, meanwhile, men who acted on their own initiative
were likely to find themselves the object of at the very least great suspicion:
hence the arrest of El Empecinado in the wake of the battle of Bailén by the
infamous General Gregorio Garcia de la Cuesta.' And it is notable, too, that in
the beginning the authorities were keen to inform the populace that they were
not to move against the French except via the medium of bodies that they them-
selves had sanctioned. On 28 May 1808, for example, the captain-general of
Andalucia issued a proclamation instructing the inhabitants of Cadiz on no
account to leave the city in search of Frenchmen that they might kill, but rather
to remain in their homes and enlist in the units that would be established for
this purpose under the command of officers appointed by the city’s authori-
ties.? And in June of the same year, if the Junta of Seville called for ‘a war of
partidas in which the enemy armies will constantly be embarrassed by the denial
of supplies’, it proclaimed its faith in the populace embracing this enterprise
not only with ardour, but also ‘guided in due form’.°
    As we have seen, this attempt to keep the formation of guerrilla bands within
the purview of the élites soon foundered. For one thing, the formation of par-
tidas was, for whatever reason, a popular way of engaging with the war effort;
for a second, the successes of the somatenes, in particular, provided the leaders
of the Patriot cause with valuable propaganda material; and, for a third, the
rapid deterioration of the military situation in the autumn and winter of 1808
encouraged a willingness both to contemplate unorthodox means of waging war
and to accept the help of anyone who was prepared to take up arms in favour
of the common cause. But this does not mean that the ideal of political and
military control of the partidas was surrendered. On the contrary, nothing could
be further from the truth. Thus, men who wished to take on the role of cabecil-
las were encouraged to apply to the new authorities for authorisation to do so
by means of the generous exercise of patronage, whilst men who had estab-
lished guerrilla bands on their own initiative had only to proffer their allegiance
to the Patriot hierarchy to be confirmed in their positions and rewarded with
regular commissions (in the first instance generally as cornets of cavalry). Asa
prime example of this process, we might cite El Empecinado, whose willing-
162 ~~ -Fighting Napoleon

ness to collaborate with the Spanish generals operating in his locality on 4 April
1809 brought him the rank of lieutenant.*
   Hardly surprisingly, it was not long before the principles stuck to by the civil
and military authorities found official enunciation. Thus, the decree of 28
December 1808 — the first attempt on the part of the Patriot government to
give form to the guerrilla movement — was not just a measure aimed at encour-
aging the populace to take up arms against the French. Rewards of various sorts
were certainly offered to anyone who was prepared either to form a guerrilla
band or to enlist as a follower of one cabecilla or another. Thus, volunteers were
promised generous wages (6 reales per day for a foot soldier, and ro for a
mounted one), the value of any horses that they brought with them when they
joined up, a fair share in any booty that they took from the enemy and posts in
government service (as doormen and the like) should they be permanently dis-
abled as a result of action against the enemy. As for the cabecillas, the decree
guaranteed them the rank of cornet, implied that they would have the right to
appoint their own subordinates and contained a firm assurance that, providing
all went well, they could in due course expect promotion. But this was not an
end to the story. The object of the decree being stated as the creation of ‘a new
type of militia’, it was clear that the aim was to assimilate irregular resistance
with the rest of the armed forces, especially so as great care was taken to specify
the organisation that was to be given to each partida (there was to be a com-
mandant with the rank of cornet and a second commandant with the rank of
first sergeant, and two sections of fifty men apiece, the one mounted and the
other dismounted, each of which was to be led by a sergeant and a corporal).
And, above all, whilst pious references were made to the need to allow the par-
tidas as much freedom as possible, certain facts of life were made very clear:

  In so far as the relationship of one rank to another is concerned, the same
  rules will be observed as in the regular army, any misdemeanours in this
  respect being punishable in accordance with the terms of the Royal Ordi-
  nances. .. . In order to avoid disorders and facilitate operations against the
  enemy, every partida will be attached to a division of one of the field armies
  under the command of the corresponding general, each of whom will
  appoint an officer of the appropriate rank and disposition to take charge of
  the partidas assigned to his command.°
  As early as the end of 1808, then, the pretensions of the Patriot authorities
had been laid bare. This, moreover, was well before the dimensions of the prob-
lems thrown up by the issue of irregular resistance had become fully apparent:
at the time that the decree was issued the number of cabecillas engaged in oper-
ations against the French was still relatively small, and they often commanded
no more than a handful of men. Not surprisingly, as time went on, opinion
                                                    The End of the Guerrillas   163


hardened. To cure the problem of men deserting from established guerrilla
bands and then approaching some general or junta with a proposal to form a
partida of their own, in September 1809 the Junta Central ordered that hence-
forward no authority was to entertain any approach from individual partisans
unless they had the sanction of their commanders.’ And, as the Duque del
Parque wrote in November 1809, ‘I neither recognise, nor will I recognise Don
Juan Diaz Porlier, nor any of these independent chiefs who have not subordi-
nated themselves to me.”’
    The anger of generals such as Del Parque was not directed just at the guer-
rillas. Also in the firing line were their sponsors. For a good instance of this
development we might turn to Asturias, where the officer appointed to
command the regular forces in the province in 1810, Francisco Javier Losada,
was soon locked in battle with its ruling junta. As he complained to his supe-
rior, General Mahy:

  I have already informed you of the letter that the Junta [of Asturias] sent me
  when I tried to publish the proclamation concerning the collection of strag-
  glers and deserters . . . If we tolerate these ridiculous pretensions . . . it will
  be impossible to discipline the soldiery, maintain a half-decent army, or put
  an end to the troops’ habit of running away every other moment, nor still
  less to prevent the guerrillas from indulging their habit of constantly chang-
  ing partidas so as to avoid punishment for the . . . scandalous excesses for
  which they are responsible . . . In entertaining them, the Junta has clearly
  had other objects than the national interest . . . In June last year it published
  an ordinance regulating the guerrilla bands, and yet for whatever reason it
  has consistently chosen commandants who afterwards have almost all turned
  out to merit the accusations of banditry with which the French have sought
  to ridicule the partidas. Having with the greatest indiscretion . . . conferred
  ranks and appointments of all sorts on every type of person .. . it has also
  made its interest in defending them very clear. When the incessant protests
  and complaints of the suffering populace forced me to arrest the partidario
  Francisco Collar, it wrote to me praising his supposed heroism . . . with such
  vigour that I was left with no option but to suspend my proceedings against
  him... But there are issues with regard to which the Junta has been even
  more remiss . . . If Your Excellency had not already been in this province, I
  would here have spent some time outlining not only the lack of order ..’.
  that I found to prevail among these troops, but also their . . . want of every-
  thing that they need. The latter is the fault of the Junta, for it distributes
  _.. clothing, footwear and armament in accordance with nothing more than
  its own whims .. . The first in the queue are always the most bare-faced of
  the cabecillas, and especially those which are known to have links with
164    Fighting Napoleon


  members of the Junta. . . and they carry off the lot, whilst the men actually
  fighting the enemy end up with nothing. From the day I arrived here I have
  struggled to put an end to this scandal... but the Junta... has gone on
  exactly as before, and has even ordered supplies to be distributed to . . . par-
  tidas that I have specifically told them ought to be disbanded and forced to
  join the army on account of the fact that they are entirely made up of desert-
  ers... And by issuing supplies without any regard for whether they were
  actually needed and without any requirement for them to be accounted for
  to men of neither birth nor reputation . . . the Junta has left the army in the
  same state of want and nakedness as ever whilst at the same time surround-
  ing themselves with a crowd of rogues who not only make a living but even
  enrich themselves from this species of robbery. Of the little there is, not a
  tenth part reaches the army, and the result is that it cannot fight and is in
  the worst state imaginable.®
   All sorts of interesting questions are raised here with regard to the relation-
ship that existed between the partidas and the local notables. What Losada
appears to be suggesting, indeed, is that — as certainly occurred later on in the
nineteenth century — banditry could sometimes enjoy the patronage and pro-
tection of prominent caciques, who in turn received a share of its profits. Such
things, however, are difficult to pin down. In consequence, let us here confine
ourselves to noting that the demand that some sort of control ought to be
imposed on the guerrillas was not just limited to government ministers and
army commanders. On the contrary, criticism of the partidas was a regular
feature of the Patriot press. In April 1811, for example, an anonymous article
in the strongly liberal Semanario Patridtico stated:

  The concentration of the partidas is an important objective. As they have by
  divers means acquired a multitude of fine horses, subjected to proper disci-
  pline and given good officers, they could be transformed into excellent hussar
  regiments. Whilst serving the cause in the same way, such units would not
  be prone to the evils that have so greatly diminished the utility of the guer-
  rilla bands.’

A year later, meanwhile, the official mouthpiece of the newly created general
staff was writing:

  The patriotic guerrilla bands are without doubt of great use, many illustri-
  ous Spaniards having covered themselves in glory in their ranks. However, it
  is unfortunately true that some partidarios have deviated from this noble path
  and augmented the ills of the fatherland. It is therefore necessary to reward
  ... some bands and reform others, whilst placing them all under a unified
  system."
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   165

   Not surprisingly, the growing concern soon produced legislative action,
whilst there were also other signs that the guerrillas no longer enjoyed the over-
whelming official favour of 1808. Thus, on 22 April 1810 an investigation into
the affairs of Porlier, who had just formed a number of partidas into the Husares
de Cantabria regiment, led the newly installed regency of General Castafios to
order that henceforth no mounted unit organised by the guerrillas was to
consist of more than a single squadron. The point of this was to protect their
manoeuvrability and at the same time prevent the accumulation of the large
numbers. of non-combatants associated with the proliferation of regimental
headquarters.'! Just over a month later, meanwhile, the Junta of Asturias issued
a long and detailed set of regulations in which it attempted to address the worst
evils of the partidas (it was in fact this document that Losada accused the Junta
of exploiting for its own purposes). In brief, no one could assume the role of
commandant without first securing the sanction of the junta; no band could
stop in a settlement without officially informing the local authorities of its
presence, giving them proof that it was there on official business and provid-
ing evidence of its strength; no band could leave a settlement without securing
a good-conduct certificate; no commandant was to have fewer than thirty men
or more than 100; bands had to attack the enemy at least once every four days;
regular returns of strength were to be sent in to the local military commander;
and no band was to accept deserters, draft evaders or men already serving in
another partida.”” Also in the north, Mariano Renovales issued a proclamation
threatening to treat any villagers that gave food to ‘the disorderly gangs that
wander in our territory’ as collaborators, and promising to punish the families
of any men found to be absent with such groups.” And finally in Cadiz it is
noticeable that the Regency proved extremely reluctant to sanction the com-
missions that Espoz y Mina had issued to many of his subordinates, the matter
having eventually to be raised in the cortes."*
   But far more important than all this was the new ordinance that the Regency
brought before the cortes in August 1811. Curiously enough, in view of what
was to follow, this was originally an initiative of the liberal deputy José Mejia,
who on 6 October 1810 had proposed that the standing committee of the cortes
that oversaw the work of the Ministry of War should elaborate a document that
would encourage the formation of fresh partidas by laying down the precise
framework under which they should operate.’ What emerged, however, was
certainly not the sort of code that Mejia had envisaged, the draft ordinance that
resulted actually bidding fair to outlaw much of the guerrilla movement alto-
gether. Thus, dividing its members into three categories — larger forces such as
that of El Empecinado, small bands with a proven record of fighting the French
(such as that of Juan Palarea) and small bands who were clearly no more than
criminals — it suggested that the first category should be assimilated into the
166   ~~‘Fighting Napoleon


army, the second deprived of their autonomy and the third wiped out as
enemies of society.'°
    To the liberals who had come to dominate the cortes of Cadiz such a docu-
ment was anathema. This is not the place to discuss their views and ideology
in any detail but, in so far as the conduct of the war was concerned, they were
committed to doctrines that could not but place great emphasis on the guer-
rillas. At the same time, it had already shown much indignation at the Regency’s
reluctance to confirm the commissions issued by Espoz y Mina. To quote the
deputy Gonzalez:

  I am afraid that it seems to me as if from the beginning of our holy revolu-
  tion, instead of fomenting patriotism, we have rather sought to quench it.
  Sadly, those who have worked hardest for our cause have been the people
  who have been most persecuted, or who have at least received fewest thanks.
  ... Many have come here from Madrid after swearing allegiance to King
  Pepe...and have still received promotions, appointments, salaries... .
  Others have from the beginning spent the war dodging the bullets, and yet
  they have been decorated and given . . . higher rank than the men who have
  been shedding their blood for us.”

   Not all the deputies were quite so critical — there was, for example, some
recognition that commissions could not just be handed out to all and sundry —
and it is noteworthy that in the end what carried the day was the argument that
Espoz y Mina’s forces had already been recognised as part of the regular army.
That said, however, for the liberals it was axiomatic that Spain was fighting a
people’s war. In 1808, they argued, the Spanish people had risen not just to
fight the French but to throw off centuries of despotism, and it was this process
that they now claimed to be espousing. As justification for their efforts, mean-
while, they could cite the partidas’ supposed heroism, the only possible expla-
nation for this phenomenon in their view being the continued yearning for
liberty. But the guerrillas were not just living proof of the liberals’ theory of
revolution. At the same time they were also the harbinger of an entirely new
form of military organisation. Convinced that regular armies were of necessity
the enemies of freedom, the liberals believed that Spain should in consequence
rely on a national militia, or, to put it another way, on the people-in-arms.'®
And what were the guerrillas if not the Spanish people-in-arms and, still more
so, an answer to those who claimed that only regular armies could save the
country? As Alvaro Florez Estrada proclaimed:

  The people swore to avenge the outrages that it had suffered from a perfid-
  ious invader; it formed a government and charged it with the formation of
  powerful armies. But did the latter make it desist from its first endeavour?
                                                    The End of the Guerrillas   167

  Woe on us had this been the case. No: it is not the armies that have destroyed
  the barbarous legions of our enemies; it is not the armies that have discon-
  certed and upset the plans of the tyrant. It is the people. They and only they
  have been the . . . authors of these prodigies . . . If the pueblos remained tran-
  quil, if their inhabitants resolved to accept the law of conquest, what would
  become of the Nation? Our war would be a cabinet war. As for our armies,
  they are as a general rule unable to match the consistency and vigour of their
  opponents. In consequence, they would sooner or later be destroyed, in
  which case who would replace them?”
    But this was not the end of the fascination the guerrillas held for the liber-
als. Just as the partidas as a whole proclaimed to the world the ability of the
armed people to defend the fatherland, so figures such as Juan Martin Diez and
Francisco Espoz y Mina showed that birth was not a prerequisite of military
prowess or leadership in society, thereby short-circuiting the desperate efforts
of the forces of reaction to uphold the privileges of the nobility. For the most
radical thinkers, indeed, they even provided grounds for dreams of social
revolution. To quote £/ Patriota:

  The shameful madness . . . of believing that only the old generals have . .
  the knowledge needed to command armies has done us the most terrible
  damage . . . In a new situation, everything must be new, and in consequence
  the only commanders we should employ are men who are formed — indeed,
  almost born — in the revolution. Obviously, I would not place myself wholly
  on the side of the new commanders, for there are men among them who are
  just as wretched . . . as their predecessors, but, if we take the commanders
  of the revolt in Catalonia, when did many of them embark on their military
  careers? And in what military school . . . did the immortal [Espoz y] Mina
  learn .. . how to maintain himself for three years in the midst of the enemy
  _. . almost without communication with the government? Could any of the
  generals of the old army have achieved as much?”

   Not surprisingly, then, the result was a lively debate in the cortes when the
matter was brought before the assembly on g August 1811, with deputy after
deputy rising to warn the government that the new ordinance would be certain
to ruin the guerrillas, and even that it hid a deliberate attempt to destroy them
altogether. There was, true, a general willingness to accept that any band proved
to have used the war as a cover for a career of banditry should be exterminated
and, further, that no deserters should be allowed to serve with the guerrillas,
but beyond that most of the deputies would not go, despite a staunch defence
of the ordinance by the Conde de Toreno, a leading liberal who had been a
member of the committee that had actually framed the document.
168 — Fighting Napoleon


   Whilst the arguments raised against the decree were many and varied, they
basically fell into two groups. On the one hand there was the claim that any
attempt to regulate the partidas would necessarily discourage the populace. And
on the other there was the pretence that such a move would undermine the
irregulars’ efficacy. In this latter respect, particular emphasis was placed on the
manner in which the bands were to be subordinated to the control of the regular
army (many of the partidas were henceforth to be commanded by regular offi-
cers, whilst they were to be placed under the command of the generals respon-
sible for the provinces in which they were operating and subjected to regular
inspection by special officers appointed for the task). It was argued, first, that
regular officers would be less likely to know the country than cabecillas raised
in the district; second, that regular officers would be hamstrung in their oper-
ations by inappropriate notions of honour that might, for example, lead them
to fight a superior enemy who ought rather to have been avoided; and, third,
that subjecting the bands to interference on the part of distant generals and
their representatives might easily cause them to miss some opportunity for
striking a blow against the invaders. Also objected to in this context were the
ordinance’s demands that the guerrillas should surrender any horses in their
possession that could be used by the regular cavalry. There was, in general, a
tendency to minimise the extent of the irregulars’ depredations and to pretend
that the men and resources which they absorbed could never have reached the
army on account of the occupation of the districts from which they stemmed
by the French. Typical of the rhetoric employed was that of Joaquin Capmany:

  This ordinance tends towards the complete destruction of the guerrillas, for
  it threatens to annihilate the useful partidas with the same rules that are
  intended to destroy the harmful ones . . . At the same time, it will in effect
  place all the guerrilla bands in a state of tutelage as if they were mere novices
  in the art of war, when they have in reality stopped being children: they are
  now adults, and, what is more, adults who are much too grown up to have
  any need for leading reins. We are speaking, after all, of the guerrillas: men
  who are as honourable as they are valiant; men who have grown in number
  in proportion with the opportunity that they have had to fight the enemy;
  and men who continue every moment to pursue their heroic resolution to
  harass the invaders. The fluid war that they maintain in the midst of the
  enemy has been called disorderly, but it has to be disorderly if it is to have
  any chance of success . . . Subjecting these intrepid defenders of the father-
  land to controls of so rigorous and narrow a nature would be to bind them
  hands and feet.”!

Perhaps inevitably — he was the greatest speaker in house — the ‘divine’ Agustin
Arguelles was also a vocal participant in the debate:
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   169


  The bands which have been the seed corn of the insurrection in the midst
  of the enemy — the sort of bands that conduct their operations in accordance
  with the circumstances of the moment without any sort of planning or prepa-
  ration, are composed of . .. men completely removed from the military pro-
  fession, and commanded by civilians who are driven solely by patriotism and
  good will — should never in my opinion by subjected to an ordinance of a
  type that must destroy the partidas that are already in existence and prevent
  the formation of fresh groups... The class of service which they perform
  is very important, but it is not one of a sort that can be regulated by a formal
  military code ... We should not let ourselves be deluded into thinking that
  it is possible to obtain a perfection which is compatible with neither the
  nature of these forces nor their mode of operation.”

These arguments were augmented by the liberal army officer Evaristo Pérez de
Castro. Thus:

  The good guerrillas . . . are of the greatest importance, for they are the pecu-
  liar weapon of our insurrection, and cannot be copied or counterfeited by
  the enemy, whose energy and martial skills will always come to grief when
  confronted by this singular and most original product of national sentiment
  ... Such a weapon does not need much in the way of regulation. Multiply
  the partidas in such a manner that the enemy .. . finds himself constantly
  distracted and harassed in front, flank and rear by small groups that make
  surprise attacks, appear and disappear as if by magic, and that pick his men
  off one by one day and night . . . and Spain will in a few months become the
  tomb of the invader . . . In consequence, terror of the enemy as it is, let us
  look after this special weapon most carefully; let us attempt, indeed, to make
  the guerrillas as numerous as grains of sand on a beach. And, to ensure that
  we achieve this, let us elaborate fewer ordinances of a sort that can only
  quench the fires of patriotism and leave us reliant on the much slower and
  more difficult remedy offered by the organisation . . . of mass armies.”

   In the face of such rhetoric, the proponents of control were helpless, and the
assembly in the end voted unanimously to reject the ordinance. Yet the issue
did not go away. Even the most enthusiastic supporters of the guerrillas had
agreed that a more appropriate document should be elaborated in place of the
one rejected by the cortes. At the same time, such was the situation on the
ground that the loyalties even of elements whom the partisans might have
regarded as their natural supporters were soon under considerable strain.
Indeed, within months of the debate of August 1811 the Semanario Patriotico
was admitting that, even though the harm wrought by the partidas was out-
weighed by the damage that they had done to the enemy, it would still be a good
170 ~—-Fighting Napoleon


idea to place them under some form of inspectorate and, for good measure, to
form units of cazadores rurales that could suppress those who refused to toe the
line.”* Just as critical, meanwhile, was the renegade cleric José Blanco White.
Thus:

  In so far as the... guerrillas are concerned, I have always believed them
  to be most useful, but also most dangerous. When the bands become small
  divisions headed by accredited commanders such as Mina, El Empecinado
  and Sanchez, the advantages they bring cannot be numbered . . . but the ones
  that have remained mere handfuls of men headed by captains who show
  neither subordination nor... responsibility and generally act like bandit
  chiefs need very great reform. Because they have killed twenty or thirty
  Frenchmen one day, they think they have the right to burn a Spanish village
  and commit 1,000 disorders the next.”
   Yet another voice raised in protest, meanwhile, was that of Luis Baccigalupi,
a priest of strongly liberal views, who had fought with the somatenes in Catalo-
nia and published a pamphlet that, if it did not deny the partidas a separate
identity, still called for them to be given a regular military organisation on a
nationwide scale. In brief, the bands were to be grouped into ‘flying legions’
consisting of a general staff, four battalions of infantry, a regiment of lancers
and a company apiece of engineers and scouts. However, Baccigalupi envisaged
that most of the time the ‘mixed brigades’ that his plan called for would fight
split up into smaller units, the essence of his thinking being an attempt to retain
the flexibility and high mobility associated with the guerrillas with the disci-
pline and reliability supposed to characterise regular troops.”°
   With Blanco White going so far as to argue that those partidas that refused
either to militarise themselves or to enlist in the ranks of one of the ‘regular’
bands should be suppressed as bandits, the new guerrilla ordinance finally came
into force on 11 July 1812. Less drastic than it had-been in its original form,
this nonetheless made it quite clear that the days of freedom and tolerance were
at an end. In brief, all guerrilla bands were henceforth to be subordinate to the
army commander responsible for the district in which they were operating,
whilst the generals concerned were each to appoint an inspector whose task it
would be to keep a check on their activities, sanction all promotions within their
ranks, punish individual wrongdoers, suppress those partidas whose behaviour
did not come up to scratch, and look into all proposals for the establishment of
fresh bands. No new bands would be permitted without the sanction of the
authorities; prospective cabecillas would henceforth be expected to give proofs
of their patriotism and good conduct; the recruitment of deserters and men
liable to conscription was forbidden; and the guerrillas were to be subjected to
military discipline. And, on top of all this, the decree was to be retrospective,
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   171

in that the inspectors appointed by the generals were given the power to inves-
tigate the past conduct of each band and to strip them of any men who ought
to be serving in the regular army.”’ Yet even without this decree in many parts
of Spain the military had already begun to take action. Arriving in Algeciras,
for example, General Ballesteros gave short shrift to the inhabitants of the
Serrania de Ronda:
  The .. . guerrilla bands that infested the region were one of the objects that
  called for my consideration. Not only had questions been raised as to the
  services that they had rendered, but the pueblos of the district were loudly
  complaining of their excesses . . . | examined the truth of these representa-
  tions in person . . . Convinced that the partidas existing in the district under
  my command were both militarily useless and prejudicial to the nation, I
  immediately ordered their disbandment.”
   At about the same time that Ballesteros was acting in this fashion, a slightly
different tack had been adopted in Leon, where Julian Sanchez had formed a
second regiment of his Lanceros de Castilla by pressing a number of minor
bands that had been active in the area.”’? Similar measures, meanwhile, had
already been carried out in Old Castile and Extremadura by Juan Diaz Porlier
and Pablo Morillo. Thus, in a move sanctioned by his superior, General Mahy,
in September 1810 Porlier ordered the commander of his cavalry, José de la
Riba, to incorporate all the independent partidas that he could in his Husares
de Cantabria, whilst in May 1811 Morillo, who now commanded a division
of the Spanish Fifth Army, arrested a guerrilla band led by one Manuel
Cardenas, consisting entirely of deserters, on the grounds that it had been
making extortionate demands for rations.’ And in the Ronda area, too, they
were nothing new: sent to support the insurrection with 3,000 men in 1810,
Luis Lacy had eventually expelled the insurgents from his camp and arrested
most of their chiefs, whilst he would doubtless have approved of the solution
adopted by Ballesteros, which was to form the serranos into the formal home
guard that we have already noted.”!
   But by far the best evidence we have for this process comes from the south-
ern part of the province of Valencia. The French having had too few troops to
occupy the area following the occupation of the capital in January 1812, it had
become home to swarms of partidas. Based in Alicante, however, were the
Spanish generals José O’Donnell and (albeit from May 1812 only) Francisco
Copons, neither of whom had a good word to say for his neighbours.
Bombarded with appeals for help from the local populace, the two commanders
therefore launched a sustained offensive against the guerrillas. First to move
was O’Donnell, who was at the head of the Spanish forces who had escaped
                                                                             he
Valencia when the city fell in January 1812. Thus, on 18 March 1812
172 ~~ ~Fighting Napoleon


appointed Colonel Francisco Samper ‘Interim Commandant General of the
Patriotic Guerrilla Bands of the Kingdom of Valencia’, and gave him the task
of ‘consolidating the establishment of the guerrillas whilst at the same time
giving them a form that will both ensure the success of their enterprises and
prevent them from becoming prejudicial to the common cause’. Samper’s
instructions were copious: amongst other things he was to ensure that no
deserters enlisted in the partidas, that no cabecillas were allowed to operate
unless they had first received authorisation from the commandant-general of
the province, that all the bands were to base themselves in territory occupied
by the French, that any deserters or draft dodgers who had already joined
the guerrillas should be surrendered forthwith, that all disorders were to be
punished with the utmost severity, and that the various chieftains should submit
weekly reports and maintain a minimum strength of fifty men.*’ And finally a
captain of the First Regiment of Cazadores de Valencia named Fernando Reig
was sent out with a handful of sergeants to round up such deserters as he could
find, his task in the meantime being made somewhat easier by the fact that he
was allowed to promise prospective recruits that they would be retained in the
province as a security force rather than being returned to their units.**
   On arriving in Alicante at the beginning of May, however, Copons found that
matters had not much improved. As O’Donnell complained, indeed:

  Ever since I placed the... partidas under the command of . . . Samper, I
  have been hearing of the disorders that they have been committing, and I
  have in consequence never ceased to press your predecessor as commandant-
  general of Valencia . . . on the need to put these bands in order and subject
  them to the sort of discipline needed to secure the punishment of any com-
  mander who acts in an arbitrary fashion, or is responsible for disorders of
  any sort.*

Already angry at what he had seen as commandant-general of the Condado
de Niebla, Copons set to work with a will. Promising O’Donnell his fullest
support, he immediately ordered Samper to withdraw the commissions of a
number of cabecillas who had been accused of banditry, appointed a Lieutenant-
Colonel Juan Barrera to act as inspector of guerrillas and authorised a priest
named Rovira to establish a special partida whose task it would be to hunt down
deserters.” As to his intentions, he made these very clear:

  A retired lieutenant-colonel who says that he is the second-in-command of
  a guerrilla band has just presented himself to me. However, I did not need
  what he had to say to inform myself of the disorder that reigns among the
  partidas. Their wretched commanders, the sort of men from which they are
  recruited and the little use which they are to the fatherland in comparison
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   173

  with the harm that they inflict . . . on the inhabitants of this kingdom are all
  well known to me. Great evils necessitate dramatic remedies. The combina-
  tion of the powers that you have been given... make me confident that
  within a matter of hours my desires will be realised. As to what these are,
  they are that all the commandants should be men of proven probity; that
  there should not be a single deserter in any of the bands; that any which are
  found should be sent to this city [i.e., Alicante], along with any criminals who
  have been released from gaol or men of ill-repute; that... the partidas
  should only be made up of men who are exempt from conscription; and that
  any horses that the guerrillas have to which they have no right . . . should be
  collected up and. . . sent to me here.*”

   For all Copons’ good intentions, however, it was difficult to make progress.
Samper, for example, was found to be at best a man of little energy, and at worst
an accomplice of the partidas, whilst many of the cabecillas refused to recog-
nise Barrera’s authority and the latter complained that without an escort of
armed men he would be able to achieve little.“* Nor, meanwhile, did it help that
Copons’ counterpart in La Mancha, General Bassecourt, arrested Reig as a
bandit when he travelled to Almansa to arrest the cabecilla Aparici.” At the
same time, no sooner was the heat turned on one band or another than its
members melted away: as Reig complained, it was sometimes impossible to find
any guerrillas at all.” All the same, the campaign for the restoration of order
was not without its successes. Various partidas were suppressed, whilst the par-
ticularly violent chieftain José Puchau was arrested after he had murdered a
rival cabecilla." This latter affair illustrated all too well the difficulties the
authorities were up against: Puchau had essayed defiance — at one point, indeed,
it appeared that he was about to attack Barrera — and had thrown himself on
the mercy of the Aragonese commander Pedro Villacampa, who allowed
himself to be enveigled into riding to his support with a detachment of troops
in return for the promise of the allegiance of the Valencian cabecilla. In the end,
Villacampa decided to back off and Puchau was duly arrested, but as he was
being taken to Alicante his brother attempted to rescue him with the aid of
thirty of his followers.”
   As it happened, Puchau was very shortly recaptured and imprisoned, but the
reality of dealing with the guerrillas at close quarters had not been such as to
lessen the concerns of the military authorities. As Barrera wrote to Copons,
indeed, ‘In God’s name I beg you not to allow any civilian to command a partida
unless you are very sure of him. The cabecillas are the worst thieves that I have
ever come across. I swear that they are driving me mad.’ There was, it seemed,
no way forward unless they were got rid of altogether: as soon as a group
of stragglers and deserters were got together, for example, they would be
174     ~+Fighting Napoleon


encouraged to take flight once again by emissaries of such leaders as Agustin
Nebot (who certainly does not seem to have deserved the admiring coverage
that he received in the liberal press). To quote Barrera again:

   So long as there are . . . guerrilla bands commanded by men of neither scru-
   ples nor instruction with no links with the rest of society, there will be no
   progress with regard to the restoration of order. At the same time, public
   opinion will continue to be cast down, whilst wrongdoers who wish to avoid
   joining the army or give full rein to their passions will always find a refuge.
   And how can this be otherwise when the partidas are either commanded
   by men such as El Fraile and his subalterns or unworthy sergeants and
   corporals who have fled their colours and are the scandal of our military
   system?*
   Pressing though such concerns were, annihilation was not the only policy
pursued by the authorities with regard to the partidas. In La Mancha, for
example, E] Empecinado was very keen for the large number of minor bands
that were swirling around his forces to be placed under his command.** This
was in part blatant empire building, but it was also a solution favoured by other
observers. Amongst the latter was the government’s chief agent in the area,
Rafael Gutiérrez, who suggested that the cuadrillas might be bribed into offer-
ing E] Empecinado their allegiance.” As time went by, however, Gutiérrez, who
had come to realise that the famous guerrilla leader was not quite the hero of
legend, switched his support to the alternative plan of having a new comman-
der sent in from outside. “The state of these provinces’, he wrote, ‘would be
flourishing . . . if only the government would send them the firm, wise and
incorruptible officer who could give them the impulse that is needed, and, in
particular, get into action the . . . thousands of men who have become disgusted
at the quarrels of their leaders and used them as a pretext to return to their
homes.”* For still other correspondents the way forward was simply to ensure
that all the bands were militarised in terms of their organisation and
discipline.”
   But in a sense such nuances are irrelevant. By the end of 1812 the writing
was on the wall. Unless the guerrillas surrendered their autonomy, accepted
full militarisation and submitted to the norms imposed on them by the Patriot
state, they could expect to be treated as outlaws. As yet, there was still some
hope that those who behaved with due docility might find a permanent place
in the armed forces. In the course of 1813 even those hopes were killed,
however. Thanks to the campaigns of 1812 the French had been permanently
ejected from Andalucia, New Castile, Extremadura and Asturias. If ever the
guerrillas were to prove their devotion to the national cause, then this was the
moment for them to do so. By abandoning their old haunts and closing in on
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   175


the increasingly beleaguered imperial forces, the guerrillas of these provinces
might have shown beyond all doubt that they were motivated by hatred of the
invaders and the desire to fight for dios, rey y patria, but the opportunity was
never grasped. In New Castile, E] Empecinado seems to have spent all his time
chasing the bands of such rival leaders as ‘Puchas’ and ‘Borbon’, whilst of Juan
Palarea we hear that he ‘has remained in a state of inactivity, and, despite the
favourable nature of the country, made no exertion whatever to harass the small
foraging parties which the enemy have... sent into the mountains’.” In the
north, bent on personal aggrandisement, Porlier had eschewed taking any part
in the fighting since the fall of Santander in August 1812, the bulk of his ener-
gies having rather been directed towards attempting to wrest control of the
province from the commander of the Seventh Army, General Mendizabal.”
And on the frontiers of Portugal the forces of Julian Sanchez were in a state
of considerable disorder, large numbers of his lancers having deserted rather
than accept the fact that they had become regular troops.” As Schaumann
complained, meanwhile, the behaviour of those who remained was quite
insufferable:
   They were very much feared . . . Let me give just one example of this. One
   of my muleteers had a young and extraordinarily pretty girl with him
   (whether she was his wife or not I do not know)... One afternoon...a
   guerrilla dashing past suddenly halted and scrutinised the group with some
   attention; then, calling the girl to him, he peremptorily commanded her to
   jump up behind him on the horse’s back, and galloped away with her. The
   parted couple did not dare to protest against this treatment by uttering even
   one syllable of complaint!”

   Nor did things get very much better in the months that followed. Palarea
presented himself to a Spanish divisional commander and requested Bead
sion to transform his 300 horsemen into a regiment of regular cavalry.** Mean-
while, Longa accepted assimilation into the ranks of the newly renumbered
Spanish Fourth Army and, as we have seen, fought alongside the Anglo-
Portuguese army in the campaign of Vitoria. But most of the guerrillas effec-
tively withdrew from the struggle, and finally showed themselves in their true
colours. As Wellington’s forces advanced into Spain, for example, their rear ele-
ments were preyed upon incessantly which caused William Keep to complain
of constantly coming across ‘dead bodies . . . where misfortunes had happened
or deeds of rapine by the native robbers committed on stray travellers (particu-
larly officers’ servants with baggage), and this even in the paths of so numer-
ous a body of men’.® At the same time, meanwhile, thanks to the guerrillas,
who had eaten up everything that had not been taken by the French, they
discovered that food could only be gleaned from the countryside with great
176 ~~Fighting Napoleon


difficulty.*° And finally, Allied couriers were waylaid and killed in a manner
no different from the fate that had overtaken so many of their French
counterparts.”
    But it is not just British sources that tell the story. From all over Spain,
indeed, came complaints of pillage and rapine. A band of renegades from
Sanchez’s forces terrorised the inhabitants of the villages between Salamanca
and Avila; the partidas of Principe and Marquina ravaged the district between
Salamanca and Ciudad Rodrigo; and the district’ around Guadalajara was
plagued by hundreds of men who had fled the troops of El Empecinado.” As
one of Wellington’s correspondents put it, in short, ‘Every day the guerrillas
do less good and cause more damage.’ Given what has been revealed in the
course of this study, there is nothing surprising about this statement: the par-
tidas, indeed, were behaving exactly as everything that we know about their
composition and motivation would lead us to expect. But the point is nonethe-
less an important one. According to apologists for the guerrillas, the failure to
follow up the invaders was the product of a pronounced parochialism or, to put
it another way, of a tendency to see the struggle solely in terms of the defence
of hearth and home. To quote John Tone’s discussion of the aftermath of the
French evacuation of Galicia in the summer of 1809:
   Instead of following Ney and Soult as they retreated into Leon... the
   Galicians disbanded. The truth is that in Galicia, as in . . . every other centre
   of guerrilla warfare, people were not terribly committed to liberating Spain.
   The objective... was... to prevent requisitions, tax collections and vio-
   lence by French soldiery . . . The cause likely to arouse Galicians for a fight
   was... Galicia, not Spain. . . Galicians could be made to fight only for
   Galicia... Spanish guerrillas did not fight for their nation, but for their
   homes, valleys, districts and, at best, provinces.”

But this flies in the face of reality. Setting aside the very real questions that
exist as to whether most Spaniards actually fought the French at all, 1813 clearly
shows the defenders of hearth and home ravaging the very hearths and homes
that they are supposed to have defended.
   Let us not return, however, to the issue of what the Spanish ‘people’s war’
was about. What is clear is that the liberals were finally shaken out of their com-
placency. As late as February 1813 figures such as Agustin Nebot were contin-
uing to receive enthusiastic coverage in the liberal press. On 15 January, for
example, E/ Conciso described how he had raised a force of 3,000 men,
established a liberated area ruled by its own local junta and set up a number of
workshops to fabricate uniforms and mend weapons and equipment, whilst
remitting the revenues of his district to the government and inflicting a number
of important reverses on the enemy.”' Similarly, on 11 February the Diario de
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   177


Gobierno de Sevilla reported that Nebot had put down a number of bandits who
had pretended to be operating under his command.” Thereafter, however,
support for the partidas was limited to only the most radical elements in the
Patriot camp. For a good example we might turn to the mouthpiece of the
leading radical Alvaro Florez Estrada. Thus:

  The partisan warfare that is typical of our character kept up the enthusiasm
  of the populace at a time when neither the Spanish government, nor /a
  Carlota,” nor the august offshoots of her family could reach them, and when
  misfortune had banished all hope of liberty. In the midst of French domi-
  nation, love of fatherland, noble ambition and inherited valour gave birth to
  the partidas and armed them with the very arms of the enemy, whilst pre-
  serving hopes of vengeance, tying down considerable forces of the tyrant and
  contributing most effectively to the success of the holy cause for which we
  are fighting. As for the evils attributed to the cwerpos francos, these are to a
  certain extent inevitable given the sort of war that they have been fighting,
  whilst they are of little moment when set alongside the benefits they have
  conveyed. Without them, indeed, we would have had to surrender to the
  usurper. Let us not forget that the greater part of the partidas harass the
  enemy in the areas that he occupies, and this reflection alone ought to be
  enough to dispel the opposing arguments.”

   But Florez Estrada was now very much a lone voice. In the session of 5
October a motion had already been passed enjoining the Regency to take steps
to ensure that the ayuntamientos fulfilled the duty imposed on them by the con-
stitution to maintain order. The pressure was now redoubled, however. The
liberal press applauded vigorously when Principe was surprised by the French
at Fuentecén with the loss of a number of prisoners, with one Granada news-
paper remarking that ‘the death of these soldiers means almost as much to us
as does that of the troops of the enemy’.” On 1 April, meanwhile, an extremely
forthright article printed in the radical E/ Conciso condemned the guerrillas out
of hand:

   If it is true that we have a constitution, if... there exists a government
   charged with its execution, if the rights of man in society are not a chimera
   _.. why do we hesitate in casting aside the thick veil that has until now
   covered the atrocities, outrages and insatiable rapacity of these gangs of
   bandits who so unjustly usurp the respectable name of ‘patriot’? And what
   is the fatherland? Is it composed only of the soil on which we tread? Perhaps
   so, for nothing else is respected by those who call themselves its defenders.
   The law, the government, the honour, life and property of their fellow citi-
   zens are for them mere playthings which they insult with the most insolent
178 ~~ Fighting Napoleon


  daring ... Disabuse yourself, Mr Editor: all these things are incompatible
  with the existence of these bands, and we must therefore annihilate them or
  renounce our rights. There is always great indignation in Cadiz at infrac-
  tions of the constitution, and yet ears are closed to the complaints made
  against the guerrillas. Why so? Because they kill Frenchmen? Could they not
  do this at less cost? For how long must we remain blind? Woe on us if our
  salvation must come from such a source. Did Lord Wellington liberate
  Portugal with the aid of partidas? Did he defeat'Marmont with them? And
  what have we achieved with them but to complete our ruin, strip the
  provinces of their resources, set back public spirit, disorganise our armies,
  fill hundreds of families whose only crime was to have money or pretty
  daughters with shame and sorrow, and plunge entire pueblos into the black-
  est desperation. Patriots of Cadiz, to you are directed the pitiful cries of the
  patriots of Old Castile. Your opinion is horribly mistaken: the majority . . .
  of those you believe to be heroes are no more than infamous bandits without
  law, discipline or feeling . .. Uniting your voice with theirs, demand . . . the
  extermination of these executioners of our compatriots, of these bands that
   ... are the shame of the nation and the scourge of humanity.”

   According to the Marxist Pérez Garzon, all this was to be explained solely
in terms of the rankest cynicism: the guerrillas had served their purpose and,
as a threat to property and the social order, were now to be suppressed. But,
although partly true, this misses the point. The guerrillas did not represent a
threat just to law and order, but also to the very authority of the state. Thanks
in large part to their activities, large parts of the liberated territories were com-
pletely beyond the control of the government, whilst the need to put an end to
this situation had led Wellington to insist on the imposition of rule by the army
at the local level, and thus to threaten many of the principles that the liberals
held most sacred. British commander As the wrote:

  We must not conceal from ourselves that there is but little authority of any
  description whatever in the provinces which have been occupied by the
  enemy, and [that] even that little depends on the exercise of military power.
  It is vain to expect that a gentleman called an intendant will exercise the
  power to realise the resources of the country... without the assistance
  of a military force... I am aware that it is wrong in principle to invest
  military men with civil powers, but when the country is in danger that
  must be adopted which will tend most directly to save it... whatever
  may be the constitutional principles which may be invaded by those
  measures.”

   In fairness, the problem was not just the fault of the the guerrillas: across
large parts of the liberated territories the rural populace was in a state of
                                                    The End of the Guerrillas   179


ferment over the question of feudalism. Incensed at the failure of the cortes
either to rescue them from the clutches of the seviores or to address the ques-
tion of land reform, many peasants, indeed, were on the brink of revolution.
Meanwhile, the regime’s problems were complicated still further by its efforts
first, to raise money through the sale of the common lands and, second, to
impose a new system of taxation that, whilst ostensibly much fairer, in practice
led to a huge increase in the amount of money that had to be found by many
provinces. And, on top of all this, liberation meant a return to conscription,
which in turn produced a fresh wave of flight and desertion. Last but not least,
in a number of regions such as Galicia and the Basque provinces the interests
of many local notables had been seriously affected by particular aspects of gov-
ernment policy, the result being that they joined reactionary elements of the
Church in whipping up resistance to the jefes politicos and intendants appointed
by Cadiz.”
    In the context of all this the cabecillas were very worrying figures, especially
when they proved willing to defy the writ of the regime. For a very good
example of the sort of chaos that this development could inflict we have only
to turn to Aragon, and in particular Zaragoza. With no regular Spanish forces
 in the vicinity, the only troops available to occupy the city as the armies of King
Joseph fell back in the wake of the battle of Vitoria were those of Espoz y Mina
 and Duran. For a brief moment the garrison of General Paris looked as if it
 might try to hold on to the city, but a day of fierce fighting which saw elements
 of the two guerrilla commanders’ men advance to its very gates led the gover-
 nor to think again. In consequence, the night of 8/9 July saw the bulk of Paris’
 men file out over the bridge across the Ebro. A small force stayed behind in the
 Aljaferia castle, which the French had turned into a citadel, to slow down the
 pursuit, but otherwise the city was the Spaniards’ for the taking: at dawn,
 indeed, a delegation of the town council presented itself at Duran’s outposts
 in token of surrender. From the beginning, however, things did not go well.
 Commander of only the northern half of Aragon, Espoz y Mina had at first
 been unwilling to send any troops to re-occupy Zaragoza for, positioned as it
 was on the southern bank of the Ebro, the city lay in the domain of Duran,
 who was comandante militar of the southern half of the province. It may have
 been that the Navarrese caudillo was hoping that his much weaker rival’s men
 would be repulsed, leaving him to pick up the pieces and acquire all the bene-
 fits of re-taking it for himself. His hand forced by the French collapse, Espoz
 y Mina had in the end had no choice but to appear before the city, but he was
 sullen and unco-operative, giving Duran no help with the siege of the Aljaferia
 and taking the bulk of his men off in pursuit of Paris.’ And there was worse
 to come. Shortly after Zaragoza was occupied, Duran was sent off to join the
 Spanish Second Army in its pursuit of the F’rench forces that were retreating
 from Valencia, Espoz y Mina being given control of the whole of Aragon and
180   —-Fighting Napoleon


allowed to strip the Division de Soria of several of its best units. In late
September, however, he heard that the Regency was planning to make the
commander of one of the regiments concerned, Ramon Gayan, governor of the
city. The results were spectacular, to say the least. In the words of Casamayor:

  28 September: at the orders of General Don Francisco Espoz y Mina, the
  commander of the Carifiena infantry regiment, Don Ramon Gayan, who had
  been acting as interim governor of the city, was taken under arrest to the
  town of Egea de los Caballeros. For this purpose there came a captain...
  and 400 cavalry, the first thing that they did being to disarm such soldiers as
  Gayan could muster, and then take them to the castle. At the same time they
  occupied his house and let no one approach, let alone go inside. Sentries were
  posted at every street corner along the Coso, parties of cavalry were sent out
  to patrol the city, and the whole of the Fifth Regiment of Navarre was placed
  under arms. It was just as if we were under attack. Round about one o’clock
  in the afternoon, Gayan came out in a sedan chair escorted by an armed
  guard, and was taken out of the city on the Zuera road. The whole affair
  caused much talk among the people and gave rise to a great sensation.”
   Extraordinary as it was, this coup was very much in keeping with Espoz y
Mina’s administration of his Aragonese domains. There were stories — angrily
denied by the general, of course — that he had sold the effects he had captured
in the castle of the Aljaferia for his own benefit.” Complaints of his arbitrary
behaviour and failure to respect the constitution of 1812, which was proclaimed
in few of the towns he liberated, were numerous, and one example was a pam-
phlet penned by an inhabitant of the town of Barbastro. According to this
observer, Espoz y Mina’s accession to the command of Alto Aragon had at first
been welcomed, for until then the region’s only defenders had been

  Sartos, Domper, Pesoduro . . . Baella, El Malcarado, commanders who... ©
  were unequal to the grand task of reconquering the country and yet laid
  down the law as if they were sovereigns . . . fugitives who . . . abusing our
  credulity and imprudent simplicity, entered even fair-sized towns with a
  handful of men to seize those unfortunates they supposed to be rich, and
  then led them to desolate wildernesses, where they sacrificed anyone who
  could not pay the immense sums they demanded in exchange for their lives
  and liberty to their heathen greed.”

Espoz y Mina, then, had appeared as ‘a Moses sent to liberate us from a slavery
that was worse than Egyptian’, but all was far from well:

  If the sublime code of the constitution was published in Barbastro, the events
  that followed have proved to us that this supposedly sacred ceremony had
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   181

  little other object than a military parade. Who would have thought that . . .
  at the very time that . . . the liberty of the Spanish nation was being estab-
  lished . . . the north of Aragon would be groaning under the harshest oppres-
  sion, the Aragonese threatened with prison, confiscation and even death at
  the merest whim of military commandants... priests and magistrates
  arrested on frivolous pretexts and detained for long and arbitrary periods,
  and the respectable discharge of neither sacred ministry nor public respon-
  sibility any defence against . . . being flung in a cell or strung up from an
  olive tree.”

Little more encouraging, meanwhile, is the account of Espoz y Mina given by
Augustus Schaumann, a German commissary attached to Wellington’s army
who had dealings with him after the battle of Vitoria. Thus:

  One day the famous General Francisco Espoz y Mina passed the town [Olite]
  ... The whole town went out to meet him, and the people kissed his hands,
  the hem of his garment and his sword. Very much inflated with his pride at
  all these attentions, his behaviour all too frequently betrayed his lowly origin
  and his total ignorance of decent manners and decorum. Once I sent one of
  my convoy leaders to him with a respectful and courteous letter begging him
  to send one of his commissaries to see me. This man had overrun the whole
  country and had been guilty of many acts of violence ... and I wished to
  come to an understanding with him concerning the boundaries of the dis-
  tricts in which we should have the right to forage. In this way I hoped to put
  an end to all strife. Not only, however, did the general not answer this letter,
  but he dismissed my convoy leader, a Spaniard, with the threat that, if he
  ever dared to come again with such a letter, even if it were written by Lord
  Wellington himself, he would lay him across a bundle of straw and have him
  soundly thrashed by two corporals.””

   This story, perhaps, is exaggerated, but Espoz y Mina was certainly not pre-
pared to tolerate the presence of rivals in his patch. Nor should any of this sur-
prise us, for relations between the Navarrese leader and the Regency had for
some time suggested that the former envisaged himself as an independent
satrap. In the summer of 1812, for example, he had refused to allow the gov-
ernment to send an officer to his division to act as its chief-of-staff: though
common practice in the army since the creation of the General Staff in 1810,
such an appointment would clearly have threatened Espoz y Mina’s indepen-
dence.” At the same time he had also been deeply angered when the Regency
had appointed an intendant for the whole of Aragon early in 1813, thereby once
again challenging his autonomy (in September 1812 he had been given
command of that part of the province north of the River Ebro).”
182.   Fighting Napoleon

   To return to Zaragoza, the behaviour of Espoz y Mina’s troops proved to be
appalling. In his memoirs the Navarrese commander tried hard to maintain that
the trouble stemmed not from his own men but from those he had inherited
from Duran, not to mention the swarms of deserters and bandits who con-
tinued to range the countryside. In this he had a point: it was apparently troops
from Gayan’s Regimiento de Carifiena who staged a riot in the city’s theatre on
g October in the course of which they pelted the actors with stones and other
missiles and defied the representatives of the civil authorities.” But there is
clear evidence from Sos del Rey Catolico that the town had been mercilessly
sacked when the ‘Division de Navarra’ attacked it in March 1813, and as early
as 29 July there had been complaints that Espoz y Mina’s men were molesting
women in the street.*’ Furthermore, many of the bandits of which Espoz y
Mina complained were deserters from his own regiments, as witness the captain
of the ‘Husares de Navarra’ captured at the head of a gang of fifty armed men
at Herrera in late November.*' As for what followed, it was little short of a reign
of terror. For a month Espoz y Mina’s forces robbed innumerable passers-by,
breaking into many houses and levying tolls on anyone who attempted to intro-
duce goods into the city from the north bank of the Ebro (they had established
their chief headquarters in the transpontine suburb known as the Arabal).
Despite the fact that Espoz y Mina had recently been explicitly stripped of the
power that he had hitherto exercised over the dienes nacionales in his domains,
meanwhile, his representatives brazenly sold off the properties of the Arabal’s
Carthusian monastery at public auction. As Casamayor recorded in his journal
at the end of October:

   This month has been very vexatious for the inhabitants on account of . . . the
   fear and terror imposed by the soldiers of the Fifth Regiment of Navarre,
   who, being in garrison, every night robbed everyone they could lay their
   hands on and beat up anyone who resisted or proved to have no money. So
   bad have things become that nobody dares to go out except on the most
   urgent business. People have complained to the justices, but nothing has been
   done to contain them, and they carry on robbing just the same.”
   Nor did the attitude adopted by Espoz y Mina himself make matters any
easier. In the face of the protests sent him by the ayuntamiento he maintained
an air of the most studied innocence, pretending that the only reason that his
men were lingering in the city was that he had not received any orders for their
removal, and maintaining — with tongue firmly in cheek — that the troops still
in Zaragoza were habitually well behaved and under the strictest orders to cause
no trouble.*
   On 1 November some relief was obtained when, having been confirmed in
his position by Wellington, Gayan returned to the city as governor, and ordered
                                                     The End of the Guerrillas   183

all those men belonging to Espoz y Mina’s division to leave the city immedi-
ately.** Most complied apart from the garrison of the castle, which first hung
on for a few more days and then deliberately fired the building and all its con-
tents. This, however, was the parting shot of the ‘Division de Navarra’: on 14
November Espoz y Mina’s troops finally left the Arabal and departed for the
Pyrenees, where they were to spend the rest of the war blockading the petty
fortress of St Jean-Pied-de-Port. In the meantime the general’s political control
of his dominions was weakened still further by the appointment — much to his
disgust — of jefes politicos in both Navarre and Aragon. Deprived of the chance
to lord it over Pamplona, which finally fell to the Allies after a prolonged block-
ade at the end of October, Espoz y Mina was left angry and frustrated: hence
the famous incident in which he had a copy of the Constitution of 1812 exe-
cuted by firing squad.*° As for Navarre and northern Aragon, they remained in
a state of chaos. As Espoz y Mina admitted:

  With the Allied armies gathering for the invasion of France, Napoleon
  ordered a levy of 500,000 men; the war, it seemed, was to go on forever. When
  this news reached the ears of our soldiers, desertion began to affect all the
  units of the army, including those of my division . . . for the men were weary
  of constant labour. To collect up the deserters and stragglers that resulted,
  it was necessary to order very severe measures to be taken, whilst the gov-
  ernment made matters worse by ordering the conscription of all single men
  aged between seventeen and forty. Believing that the retreat of the French
  meant that the war was over, the inhabitants refused to give up the fugitives,
  and the officers that I had commissioned for the task were in a number of
  cases forced to proceed against certain local magistrates who failed to co-
   operate with some vigour.”

   In Navarre, in particular, conditions were rendered still worse by the impact
on the already war-torn province of the arrival of the Allied armies. “The beau-
tiful valleys begin to look dull’, wrote the British light infantry officer George
Hennell. He continued:

   All the corn is gone; the apple trees [were] stripped long ago. The walnuts
   were scarce ripe before all were gone and the chestnuts are going fast. You
   can have no idea what destruction and waste an army carries with it. We are
   like locusts: every place we halt at . . . bears marks of it, and, although orders
   and punishments abound, it is impossible to prevent pillage. If a soldier
   wants a piece of wood to boil his kettle, and there is beautiful peach or apple
   by the side of a chestnut or oak, I do not believe he would go a yard to choose.
   I have seen fellows knock down a peck of unripe plums for the sake of five
   or six.®®
184    Fighting Napoleon

But nowhere were conditions very different, the fact being that the whole of
Spain was in turmoil. As the Duke of Wellington wrote to the Minister of War,
General O’Donoju, in a repeat of a lament that he had first penned a year
earlier:
  The wants of the troops and the state in which the army is are to be attrib-
  uted to the deficiency of public authority in the provinces . . . The fact is,
  Sir, that the intendants of the provinces are unable or unwilling to perform
  their duty. All authority has been annihilated in Spain, and at the moment
  the greatest exertions are required to form and maintain armies to save the
  state: there is no authority in existence capable of enforcing the most simple
  order of the government. That is the truth, and, till a remedy is applied, the
  evil will become worse.”

One might here, too, cite a petition that reached the cortes from Avila in January
1814, painting a dismal picture of the situation that had prevailed in the wake
of the province’s liberation:

  By the time that the French were driven from Avila, public morality had been
  reduced by the occupation to a most deplorable condition. Authority was
  looked upon with indifference and disobeyed with impunity; there was no
  respect for parish priests or the heads of religious houses; crops and farm
  animals were constantly being stolen . . . and there were constant infractions
  of both our laws and our social customs. On top of all this robbery, pillage
  and even murder were all common on every road, much to the suffering of
  the populace and the general scandal of one and all.””

   Faced by these increasingly gloomy reports, even the most die-hard liberals
accepted that action had to be taken to restore order. By no means all the more
regular elements of the guerrillas had proved as unruly as the forces of Espoz
y Mina — when troops from El Empecinado’s division entered Madrid in June
in the wake of the retreating French, for example, they behaved with the utmost
decorum”! — but it was clear that they were not be trusted. As for the rest of
the partidas, meanwhile, they had now put themselves beyond the pale. In fact,
efforts to restore order had been intensifying since at least midsummer. Such
bandits as could be apprehended were shown no mercy: on ro June, for instance,
Rafael Pidilla, Antonio Toral, Francisco Martinez and Francisco del Rio were
shot by firing squad in Jaén as ‘thieves, deserters, murderers and members of
the criminal gang that has been infesting the . . . paths and roads around the
pueblos of Quesada, Pozo Alcon, Cazorla, Hinojares and Belerda’ (in this respect
it helped enormously that on ro August Wellington used his authority as
commander-in-chief of the Spanish armies to order the immediate dissolution
of all those bands that had not been formally incorporated into the armed
                                                     The End of the Guerrillas   185


forces).” Also arrested and put on trial was the Castilian leader Saornil,
although the latter eventually succeeded in escaping justice by bribing his
gaolers into turning a blind eye to his plans for a daring gaolbreak.” And, fol-
lowing the receipt of an alarming missive from the Minister of Grace and
Justice that painted a graphic picture of the havoc being wrought in many
provinces by the guerrillas, on 3 July a plan was laid before the assembly calling
for the establishment in each municipality of an armed volunteer security force
mustered at a strength of one man for every 100 inhabitants.”* Debated in the
sessions of g and 14 July, this plan was initially thrown out on the grounds that
militias of the sort proposed by the Regency had on the whole proved worse
than useless. Yet there was little attempt to defend the guerrillas per se, and it
was therefore agreed that, whatever practical problems were thrown up by
the plan, the Regency should still be authorised to take such measures as it
thought fit.
    In consequence, after further protests in the cortes at the general disorder —
on 18 October, for example, the deputy Pérez Pastor proclaimed: ‘In the greater
part of the provinces of the interior public safety is in the most lamentable state.
 ... Not only are farms, roads and country estates the scene of constant rob-
beries, murders and other outrages, but even large towns are not free from
danger, the problem having acquired such dimensions that gangs of bandits
have been entering them to free the prisoners from the gaols and carry out other
disorders”? — in November the scheme was reintroduced in full. Thus,
acknowledging both ‘the robberies, murders and crimes of every sort that are
committed with impunity on every road’ and ‘the innumerable demands for the
adoption of radical measures aimed at the extermination of the many bands of
thieves, deserters and wrongdoers of every type that infest almost every corner
of the Peninsula’, the Regency announced the formation of a nationwide force
of escopeteros voluntarios (‘volunteer shotgunners’), whose task it would be to
patrol the highways and generally maintain order.”
   As yet we are not talking about a gendarmerie in the style of the Guardia
Civil for the rank and file of the new force were all to remain civilians, to equip
themselves at their own cost, to serve on a part-time basis, and to be respon-
sible not to the military authorities but to the ayuntamientos, whilst the liberals
also refused to tolerate the establishment of a police administration modelled
on the one that had been set up by the government of Joseph Bonaparte, on
the grounds that such a move could not but threaten civil liberty.”’” Nor is this
surprising: setting aside the scruples occasioned by the prospect of copying
Napoleonic models, the liberals saw law and order as the responsibility of the
ayuntamientos and they were at the same time pinning their hopes on the estab-
lishment of the national militia also prefigured by the constitution (primarily
envisaged as a bulwark of Spain’s political freedom, this force also had a clear
186       Fighting Napoleon

anti-bandit mandate, and it is therefore no coincidence that, after months of
inaction, the cortes now moved to accelerate its formation).”* In a debate held
in November 1812 the cortes had in fact specifically rejected a proposal put
forward by the Regency for the creation of three companies of celadores
(‘watchmen’) in each province, on the grounds that such a force would both
represent a breach of the constitution and tend to usurp the role of the national
militia.” But the idea would not go away: not only did various individuals
request commissions in such companies, should they be formed, but the idea
was resurrected in a number of petitions received by the cortes.'”
   When finally established on 15 April 1814, the national militia was certainly
put forward as an answer to banditry, the royal decree that set it up specifically
stating that its duties would include hunting down deserters and other wrong-
doers.’ At this stage, however, this force could make no difference. Less
than three weeks later Fernando VII was back in Madrid as absolute ruler of
Spain, and it is not in fact clear that any units of the militia were ever actually
embodied, nor, still less, that they caught even a single bandit. Though it
might be pointed out that liberal policies with regard to the restoration of
order were never fairly tested, the chief weight of the problem therefore fell
upon the shoulders of the bureaucratic absolutism represented by the regime
of Fernando VII. Faced as it was by a problem of enormous dimensions, it was
never likely that this would act with anything other than cold ferocity. The end
of the guerrillas, indeed, was not long in coming. On 26 July 1814 there duly
appeared a royal decree on the subject, which was characterised by a mixture
of fear, contempt and lack of generosity. In brief, any officer of the partidas who
could prove his right to the commission that he held would be assimilated into
the milicias urbanas — companies of town guards maintained by the old Bourbon
army and now restored by Fernando VII — and it was also agreed that any
member of the bands who had been wounded would be accorded the pay and
status of members of the army’s corps of invalids: Beyond that, however, the
news was very bad: the highest rank available to any officer was that of cornet
of cavalry, whilst all priests and religious were ordered to return to their normal
vocations and all deserters to rejoin their regiments. In short, the partidas were
to be broken up forthwith, and given almost nothing in the way of credit for
their efforts. As for the consequences of resistance, they were at best grim: any
band that tried to stay together or maintain itself in arms would be treated as
a gang of bandits and put to the sword.'” Notably absent from the provisions
of the decree, however, were the ‘Division de Navarra’, the ‘Division de Soria’
and the other militarised partidas. As Best says:

      Whether they were still guerrillas or not may well be questioned. The gov-
      ernment of their country had succeeded in their cases in doing what all gov-
                                                    The End of the Guerrillas   187


  ernments must wish to do, and all professional military men wished to do. It
  had brought society’s violence-potential under its own control.’

   Needless to say, this decree was honoured more in the breach than in the
observance. With agriculture, trade and industry in ruins, their homes in many
cases burned-out shells, many provinces wracked by terrible epidemics of
yellow fever and other diseases and the regime likely to impose conscription to
raise the men it needed to fight the rebellions that had broken out in Mexico
and South America in 1810, there was little incentive for the partidas to lay
down their arms and fade away. In consequence, banditry remained a massive
problem which the regime combated without mercy, setting up many special
tribunals and making use of large number of regular troops (at one stage 4,000
men were said to be pursuing the so-called ‘seven boys of Ecija’ alone).'* But
there is again no way that the upsurge in banditry that followed the end of the
war can be regarded as in any sense a consciously political phenomenon. Indeed,
the most well-known of the popular leaders to have followed this course after
1814 — the Valencian Jaime Alfonso — fought for the absolutists in the guerrilla
insurrection that assailed the liberals when they once again seized power in the
revolution of 1820.'°° Poverty and despair bred bandits, certainly, but, as before,
la vida a salto de mata remained at best a survival strategy whose victims were
as likely to be the poor as they were the pudientes. In Galicia, the only province
of which we have much knowledge, the proportion of the victims of banditry
represented by the clergy actually seems to have fallen slightly between 1814
and 1820, whilst the populace as a whole continued to loathe the cuadrillas,
denouncing many of their members to the authorities and on occasion hurling
themselves upon gangs who appeared in their midst with whatever weapons
that came to hand.! And, as before, though the rich were targeted, it was
simply because they were rich rather than because they were the enemies of the
people: when an Italian deserter who was the chief of a small gang that oper-
ated in the vicinity of Barbastro kidnapped a wealthy local proprietor and
informed his family that they would be sent a piece of his body every day until
they paid a ransom of 30,000 francs, he was acting in the manner not of Robin
Hood but of Al Capone.'”” Nor, meanwhile, is there any real evidence of ‘social
banditry’ in Extremadura, where the ‘boys of Santibafiez’ were joined after
1814 by the much feared ‘gang of Melchor and Merino’.
   What little we know of the fate of the wilder fringes of /a guerrilla popular
after 1814 tends to confirm a sceptical view of the insurgents’ motivation in the
struggle against the French. And if this is so of the more obscure elements of
the movement, it is certainly the case with their leaders. For many years it was
almost an article of faith in works on nineteenth-century Spain that, having
fought for national independence in the struggle against Napoleon, the
188   — Fighting Napoleon

guerrilla commanders were drawn ineluctably into support for the cause of
liberalism after 1814. To quote Pablo Casado, for example, ‘Having reached
high ranks in the army thanks to their spectacular actions and the powers which
the cortes had given them, the guerrillas were with rare exceptions opposed to
the absolutist regime, in which respect we might take Espoz y Mina, Diaz
Porlier or Palarea as their exemplars.’"” Much the same idea was expressed by
Gabriel Lovett: ‘It has not been proven that officers with a guerrilla background
who... harboured liberal sympathies were more numerous than those with
absolutist ideas, but this is more than likely since these men had risen to high
rank thanks to their deeds and not to their family background or wealth.’'”
   The exceptions to which Casado refers, however, were more numerous than
he admits: setting aside the obvious example of Merino, who, as we have already
seen, in later life fought as a Carlist, we might here cite Francisco Longa, who
in 1814 was appointed by Fernando VII as governor of Bilbao, before going on
to fight against the liberals in the civil war of 1822—3. Also on a much humbler
level, out of nineteen Valencian cabecillas identified by Ardit, five fought for the
absolutists and only two for the liberals.''' Indeed, one might go much further
here. Many of the most famous guerrilla leaders certainly sided with the liberal
cause after 1814: Espoz y Mina was the first military commander to ‘pronounce’
against Fernando; Porlier staged a revolt in La Corufia in 1815 and died before
a firing squad; Mina and Renovales both became mixed up in revolutionary pol-
itics in Latin America (like Porlier, indeed, the former was eventually executed);
having been taken prisoner by the absolutists in 1823, El Empecinado was hung
in Roa on 19 August 1824, though not before he had made a last-minute bid to
escape from the very foot of the scaffold; and finally, having first been impli-
cated in the plots of 1814-20 and having then fought for the liberals in 1822-3,
Francisco Abad Moreno (Chaleco) went to the scaffold in Granada in Septem-
ber 1827. Unfortunately, however, these post-war heroics have been accorded
more dignity than they deserve, for they can be explained by thwarted ambi-
tion as much as by political idealism. In this respect we might quote Stanley
Payne: ‘Only a few months were needed .. . to show that ex-guerrilla chiefs
were viewed by the court circle as upstarts . . . Having virtually held the power
of life and death in their districts for years, these young commanders would
inevitably feel snubbed.’!”
    In short, we return to the issue of self-interest. Payne, however, does not go
far enough. Implied in his words is an assumption that there was no place at
all for the guerrillas in the Spanish military establishment after 1814, or, to put
it another way, that Fernando VII was unwilling to offer them adequate rec-
ompense for their sacrifices, just as the generals of the regular army were
unwilling to accept them as their equals. But this is at best only partly true.
The regiments that had made up the forces of commanders such as Longa,
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   189


Duran, El Empecinado and Espoz y Mina were certainly reduced in number,
but they were not wiped out. Taking infantry units alone, listed in the official
almanac for 1815 are the Primer de Iberia, Segundo de Iberia, Tercero de Iberia
and Cuarto de Iberia regiments from Longa’s command; the Voluntarios de
Rioja, Voluntarios Numantinos and Carifiena regiments from Duran’s
command; the Tiradores de Sigtienza, Voluntarios de Madrid, Cazadores de
Cuenca and Voluntarios de Guadalajara regiments from El Empecinado’s
command; and the Primero Cantabro, Primero Tiradores de Cantabria,
Segundo Tiradores de Cantabria and Tercero Tiradores de Cantabria regi-
ments from Porlier’s command.''’ And the guerrillas were not the only part of
the armed forces to suffer since their fate was shared by the vast majority of
the new regiments that had been created in the course of the war.'’* As for the
guerrillas’ commanders, all was far from lost. As the example of Longa shows,
space for them could sometimes be found even in the straitened financial cir-
cumstances that characterised Spain’s situation in the immediate post-war
period (and although they are not strictly speaking guerrillas, other cases that
come to mind here are those of the ex-sergeant Pablo Morillo, who commanded
the expeditionary force sent to Venezuela in 1814, and Julian Sanchez, who was
showered with decorations and appointed president of the ‘permanent council
of war’). Indeed, even more minor figures could secure generous settlements
of one sort or another: the Miguel Sarasa who in 1809 raised a partida from his
tenants and household servants was in 1817 appointed to the command of a
light infantry regiment, whilst junior officers such as Manuel Alegre (the
brother of the Aragonese leader E] Cantarero) were given posts in the resguardo,
the tax administration or the tobacco monopoly.'” In short, there was no
vendetta against the guerrillas as such, but rather a financial squeeze that could
not but produce a number of casualties, added to a political climate that was
unlikely to be favourable to anyone who could be tarred with the brush of
liberalism.''°
   What follows from this is that opposition to Fernando VII amongst the guer-
rillas was at least as much the product of circumstance as it was that of con-
viction. Let us take as examples the cases of Espoz y Mina, Porlier and El
Empecinado. In 1814, as we have seen, Espoz y Mina led the first of a series of
military revolts against the absolutist regime that was in the end to bring about
the restoration of the liberals in the revolution of 1820. But this was not for
love of the constitution of 1812. On the contrary, the Navarrese commander
had for some time been deeply at odds with the political leadership of Patriot
Spain, and initially rallied to Fernando VII with enthusiasm. One by one,
however, he found that his goals — nomination to the viceroyalty of Navarre,
the survival of his division as an independent command and the perpetuation
of both his powers of patronage and, by extension, the various administrative
190    Fighting Napoleon

and judical organs that he had established to govern his domains — were to be
denied him, whilst a particularly unfortunate episode saw him publically
snubbed by Fernando VII when he visited the court to try to press his claim.
Why he should have been treated in this fashion is unclear, but it is probable
that the king had simply been put off by his general air of bombast, come to
see him as dangerously self-serving or been influenced against him by the
chaotic situation in Navarre, where the local élites were protesting bitterly at
his constant demands for food and money and his troops more or less running
wild. Desperate to save his position, Espoz y Mina rushed back to Navarre and
sought to mobilise what remained of his forces for a coup. There was no support
for the general, however. Few men rallied to his cause, and when he finally
attempted to seize the citadel of Pamplona on the night of 25 September 1814
the result was a fiasco that within a few hours had him fleeing for the frontier.'"”
As to what Espoz y Mina was trying to achieve, no attempt was made to pro-
claim the constitution of 1814, and it is probable that the affair’s only goal was
a show of force designed to persuade the king to recognise his claims. At all
events there followed years of exile, punctuated by a fresh period of govern-
ment service in the trienio liberal of 1820-23. In the fighting of 1822—23 the
Navarrese commander showed something of his old ferocity but, for all that,
his liberalism was never more than skin-deep, and his conduct in the exile com-
munity in London was marked by a repellent mixture of egotism and duplic-
ity, and there were even fears among his fellow refugees that he was aiming at
a revolutionary dictatorship.'"
   Moving on to Juan Diaz Porlier, El Marquesito was at least arrested by
Fernando VII in 1814. But the fact that he was in prison does not make him
a liberal: Porlier had, like Espoz y Mina, been out of favour with the liberal
authorities, and his arrest seems to have been motivated by nothing more than
the fact that he had married the sister of the leading liberal politician the Conde
de Toreno. Nor did he give full support to the regime of the war years when
he broke out of gaol and rose in revolt in 1815: the need for a cortes was pro-
claimed, certainly, but it was specifically stated that the new assembly should
have the right to amend the constitution of 1812 as it thought fit.''? And what,
meanwhile, of El Empecinado? !n April 1814 he had willingly rallied to the
absolutist standard, whilst in October of the same year Fernando VII had
rewarded his loyalty by promoting him to the rank of mariscal de campo. Two
years later there followed decoration with the Cruz Laureada de San Fernando,
and two years later again the grant of noble status for himself, his brothers (who
had all fought under him) and his descendants. Although he did not have an
appointment at this time, it is therefore clear that he was well thought of by
the regime and he seems to have had nothing to do with the cause of revolt (a
long manifesto that he is supposed to have sent to Fernando in September 1815
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   191

in protest at the king’s policies is now generally reckoned to have been a forgery
made up by his hagiographers). This, however, did not stop him from joining
the rebellion of 1820, or being rewarded with the post of military governor of
Zamora. But even an E] Empecinado was helpless in the face of the calamities
that assailed the liberal regime as a French army stormed across the frontier to
assist the rebels who had already sprung up to fight for the absolutist cause in
the interior. Captured at Olmos in the last stage of the fighting, the erstwhile
partisan had therefore backed the wrong horse, and it was not long before he
was, aS we have seen, on trial for his life at the hands of a vengeful Fernando
Vila”
   To conclude, then, the guerrillas ended, much as they had begun, in ban-
ditry and opportunism. Always primarily the product of the poverty and social
disruption brought about by the impact of war, invasion and economic collapse
on a society whose resources were at the best of times very sparse, the partidas
were motivated by what contemporary observers called ‘greed’ as much as they
were by a desire to fight the French. To put it another way, the men who flocked
to their ranks saw this action as the only means of getting bread for themselves
and their families, and loyalty to Fernando VII, love of the Catholic religion
and even hatred of the French counted for very little when it came to per-
suading them to take up arms. As for their leaders, much the same applies,
except that in their case there was also a measure of ambition, such men as
Francisco Espoz y Mina, Juan Martin and Juan Diaz Porlier being adventurers
who appreciated that their best interests lay in forcing the bands that they had
established to adopt military forms and take an active part in the struggle
against the French. So long as much of Spain was under enemy occupation,
these problems were camouflaged by the facts, first, that, whether they were
called guerrillas or bandits, the mere existence of bands of armed civilians was
enough to cause tremendous problems to the invaders, and second, that even
the most nefarious of actions could easily be presented as a blow in favour of
the Patriot cause. From 1812 onwards, however, the situation began to change.
As province after province fell into the hands of the Allies, so it became more
and more apparent that the real order of the day was not resistance and heroism
but pillage and self-aggrandisement. Every step that the French retreated
stripped away a little more of the glamour that had bedazzled so many observers
for so long, whilst the chaos that characterised the liberated areas intensified
the process of repression and control that had gradually been reducing the
freedom of operation enjoyed by the partidas since the beginning of the war.
For some time this process was resisted by liberal ideologues anxious to promote
the concept of a people’s war and alarmed at the threat of military despotism,
but by 1812 so great was the weight of evidence against the guerrilla popular
that the bulk of its allies had fallen away, especially as many of the liberals’
192    ~=Fighting Napoleon


heroes had emerged as threats to the constitutional order rather than bastions
of its defence. As a result, except in the case of those units that had been assim-
ilated with the rest of the armed forces, by the end of 1813 Patriot Spain was
effectively at war with the guerrillas. All over the country bands were being dis-
banded and their members executed, and the return of Fernando VII ended
the last vestiges of their existence. With many of the units that had made up
the commands of the guerrilla generals also gone thanks to cuts in the size of
the army, and relations with the state worsened still further by the decision of
some few cabecillas to back the liberals in their struggle with Fernando VII —a
decision that for the most part smacks still further of opportunism and frus-
trated ambition — the guerrillas were no more.
                                Conclusion




Let us recapitulate. This work has presented a highly revisionist picture of the
participation of the Spanish people in the Peninsular War of 1808-14. At the
same time it has shed fresh light on the popular guerrillas that remain the most
famous aspect of Spain’s war effort. As a starting-point in this process, the his-
toriography relating to the guerrillas was shown to have contained many ambi-
guities. On the whole it is favourable to them — so much so, indeed, that it verges
on the hagiographic — but a succession of writers nonetheless expressed con-
cerns that were suggestive of an alternative approach to the question. However,
the pursuit of this alternative approach was immediately confronted by serious
problems. Thus, the idea that the defeat of the French in Spain was the product
of a combination of regular and irregular warfare has remained a constant that
remains alive to this day.’ At the same time, like it or not, the French were never
able to conquer the Peninsula despite the application of overwhelming numbers
of troops, and they themselves paid tribute to the importance of the Spanish
guerrillas in their defeat. How, then, was it possible to take views seriously that
argued, in effect, that the ‘people’s war’ had been a phenomenon whose impor-
tance had been greatly overestimated and, further, that the guerrillas had in
many respects been damaging to the Spanish war effort?
   The answer was to approach the question as one of definition. “Little war’ —
the ambushes, raids, skirmishes and minor operations of all sorts known in the
eighteenth century as the guerre des postes — had clearly been of immense impor-
tance in the defeat of the French, but to what extent had its achievements in
fact been the work of bands of armed civilians? Not very much, it seems. In
most cases, the key figure was rather the regular soldier. Much aided by the
geography of the Iberian Peninsula, in Catalonia, Asturias, Galicia and
Andalucia, Spanish troops were able to cling on in the face of French conquest
and mount a series of damaging coups de main. In Aragon and Leon units of
194    Fighting Napoleon

regular troops — the supposed partidas of Julian Sanchez, Felipe Perena and
Pedro Villacampa — actually operated as guerrilla bands. Along the Portuguese
frontier troops of the Anglo-Portuguese army of the Duke of Wellington reg-
ularly sallied forth to attack isolated detachments of French soldiers or elimi-
nate important strongpoints. And from the ports of Cadiz and La Corufia
bodies of troops that ranged in size from a few hundred men to entire divisions
were embarked on ships and sent along the coast to disembark behind enemy
lines and generally cause fear and confusion in their ranks. Supplementing these
troops in some parts of Spain, meanwhile, were a variety of militias and home
guards that might on occasion engage in guerrilla-style operations but must yet
be regarded as part of the armed forces of the state. This is not to say, of course,
that traditional guerrilla bands — defined in this respect as independent groups
of armed civilians — did not exist. On the contrary, in Navarre, Aragon, the
Basque country, Asturias, the two Castiles, Extremadura, Andalucia and the
Levant they at the very least enjoyed a high profile. But it does mean that it is
possible to address the subject in a different light, and, in particular, to reassess
the doings of the partidas.
   That this is a necessary exercise we need be in no doubt, for the traditional
view of a great crusade in favour of dios, rey y patria has become ever harder
to sustain. In the first place, the picture that has emerged of Bourbon Spain in
the years leading up to the Peninsular War — a society that was desperately poor,
riven by social and economic unrest and shattered by the impact of war — is
difficuit to reconcile with a vision of an urban and rural poor eager to immo-
late itself in defence of the antiguo régimen. In the second, there is substantial
evidence to suggest that the populace were, in fact, deeply hostile to the war
against the French. And in the third, a growing weight of historical writing has
made it clear that popular resistance is a subject that is open to general reassess-
ment. ‘Thus, taking an example from outside Europe, Harry Ward has shown
that in the American War of Independence many of the partisans who fought
for each side were roving bands of robbers who ravaged the civilian populace
without mercy.” Meanwhile, if we look at Napoleonic Italy, the American
authors Grab and Finley have shown that banditry was central to the ‘people’s
war’ intermittently faced by the French. Thus, for Grab, in the domains of the
Milan-based Kingdom of Italy, banditry and opposition to the Napoleonic
ruler were one and the same: ‘Brigandage constituted . . . the most extreme
form of resistance of the Italian countryside to the growing power of the
Napoleonic state, its increasing intrusiveness and mounting pressure, partic-
ularly in the realms of taxation and conscription. Indeed, many of the brigands
were deserters who were afraid to go home and survived by robbing and
smuggling.” Equally, for Finley, ‘The Calabrian guerrillas... were simply
brigands.”*
                                                                 Conclusion   195


   But all this serves to deepen the difficulty. For one thing, any identification
of the guerrilla bands with brigandage cannot but echo and, in a sense, sub-
stantiate the constant Napoleonic claim that the Spanish partidas were in the
end nothing but bandits motivated solely by their lust for plunder. And, for
another, if the guerrillas were indeed bandits, then great doubts must surface
with regard to their contribution to the struggle. And what, too, are the impli-
cations for those such as Jean-Réné Aymes, who have tended to see the guer-
rilla bands as a force that consciously stood outside the norms of state and
army? For example, ‘The chieftains known by their real names... are less
numerous than those referred to by their nicknames . . . Whilst placing com-
manders and soldiers on the same level, these nicknames . . . do not in any sense
imply an absence of respect, what they stand for being rather the formal rejec-
tion of the traditional military hierarchy.”
    In many ways, then, pressure has been mounting for a reassessment of the
guerrillas. Who, though, do we mean when we use this term? Certainly not
regular soldiers or militiamen who found themselves temporarily fighting in the
‘little war’. By ‘guerrilla’, then, we have here meant civilians who took up arms
and became members — and sometimes leaders — of semi-permanent groups of
combatants that, whilst sometimes adopting military forms and being assimi-
lated into the ranks of the regular army, had their origins outside the forces of
the Spanish state, whether regular or auxiliary. Such a definition may well be
deemed rather narrow, but it is the only way to make a reassessment of the guer-
rilla popular a practical possibility. And it is certainly one that coincides with
popular practice. To quote Gabriel Lovett:

  When we think of the Spanish guerrillas of 1808-1813, we have in mind
  mainly those bands of men that arose in several areas of Spain almost from
  the start of the conflict under the leadership of fearless civilians who...
  settled accounts with Napoleon’s armies in their own manner.°

   The need to strip away ‘false’ guerrillas is not the only difficulty, however.
The combatants we are talking about were, in the majority at least, very far
from being an élite group, and it is probable that most of them came from small
towns and villages rather than cities such as Madrid, Barcelona, Seville or
Zaragoza. From this it follows that they were on the whole illiterate: in 1808
no more than 20 per cent of the population were even marginally lettered.
Even amongst literate Spaniards, meanwhile, there seems to have been little of
the impulse to record their experiences of the war against Napoleon that pro-
duced the vast numbers of journals, memoirs and collections of letters that
eventually came to chronicle the Anglo-French picture of the struggle. In con-
sequence, we therefore simply do not have the wonderful sources that have
196   ~~‘Fighting Napoleon

recently allowed Alan Forrest to produce a detailed study of motivation and
morale in the French army.’
    From this there arises the question of bias. Setting aside a mere handful of
memoirs, most of which date from long after the fighting had become a thing
both of distant memory and great romanticisation, and the often problematic
correspondence of the guerrilla commanders themselves, we are therefore
forced back on documents that originated outside the ranks of the partidas. But
this, too, presents us with many problems. For many members of the Church
and the propertied classes and, by extension, many of the political and military
leaders of Patriot Spain, the idea that the populace might take up arms inde-
pendently of the authorities was a nightmare that carried with it the spectre of
wholesale anarchy. Though not opposed to popular resistance per se, it is there-
fore arguable that they were only too ready to ‘talk up’ stories of pillage and
rapine in the hope that this would push the regime into acting against the par-
tidas and reasserting the state’s monopoly of force. In the case of generals and
other regular officers, meanwhile, there was also both a certain degree of jeal-
ousy and a natural desire to camouflage the inadequacies of the Spanish army.
As for British and French observers of the guerrillas, neither could view irreg-
ular combatants who scorned the normal rules of warfare without a measure
of repulsion, whilst for the French it was also necessary both to explain away
their defeat and to back the accepted nostrums of the Napoleonic empire (of
which one, as we have seen, was to portray any civilian who fought the emperor
as a bandit, and another was to attribute all popular resistance to the supersti-
tion and fanaticism of the Catholic Church).
    To return to the question of our knowledge of the guerrillas themselves,
when it comes to the question of identities, it has to be admitted that our infor-
mation is fragmentary in the extreme. With the exception of a few well-known
cabecillas, most of the guerrillas whose personal details we know something
about are encountered in no more than a single document. Even then, details
are often scanty: trial reports, for example, generally provide brief accounts of
the crimes with which the men concerned had been charged, but often tell us
little more than the names of the accused. Building up a coherent picture of
the partidas is therefore hardly an easy task. Also worth pointing out, mean-
while, is the fact that even when information is more plentiful, it is by no means
always reliable, as witness, for example, the numerous myths, legends and
downright inventions that have crept into the stories of men such as Martin
Javier Mina and El Empecinado.
    And finally there is the question of ambiguity. On 31 December 1809, we
are told, the guerrilla leader Juan Tapia sent the government a copy of a procla-
mation he had just issued in the town of Alcaraz in La Mancha. ‘It is not enough
to say, “I am a good Spaniard” to save Spain’, the handbill announced. ‘It is
                                                                  Conclusion    197


also necessary to dispense with one’s most cherished possessions.” As an
admirer of the guerrillas, Gabriel Lovett tells this story with great approval,
but he seems blind to the fact that it can be read in quite another sense. Under
the cover of such demands, Tapia and the rest of the cabecillas could milk the
populace unmercifully without anyone being any the wiser. And certainly for-
tunes were made. To quote General Castafios, ‘As I have not been a guerrilla,
I do not have any money, but rather only debts.” Also described by Lovett,
meanwhile, is an incident in Malaga in which a wealthy landowner organised a
banquet for a number of enemy generals after the French arrived in 1810, only
to find a little while afterwards that his country estate had been attacked and
much of his crops ruined.'® Was this the work of a guerrilla band? If so, was it
a political act — the just and fitting punishment of a collaborator — or an expres-
sion of social unrest? Or was it again simply the fruit of the coincidental visi-
tation of some gang of bandits? And, if it was, indeed, the work of bandits,
 were they motivated by nothing more than love of pillage or were they really
 ‘primitive rebels’ out to avenge the ills of rural society? On these matters and
 others like them, historians have not been slow to offer their opinions.
 ‘Guerrilla warfare... was a rural phenomenon, like Carlism an aspect of
 peasant hatred for urban civilization . . . It had undertones of social war’, wrote
Raymond Carr.'! For Burdiel, too, ‘The guerrilla phenomenon was not driven
solely by anti-French phobia and the pressure of ecclesiastical ideology . .
There were guerrilla bands... who... mixed guerrilla activity with the tra-
ditional conflict against the owners of the land.’!” More sceptical, at least on
the question of banditry, is Geoffrey Best: ‘Spain, in fact, was not rich in the
“Robin Hood” type social bandits who became national resistance leaders in
the Balkans and southern Italy. It is significant that, of the enduringly famous
[guerrilla] leaders, none had begun as a bandit.’’® Well, perhaps. But we cannot
be certain, and in the end can do no more than speculate.
   This is a problem, of course, that has not been lost on historians. Yet it has
not prevented even the most honest amongst them from offering the most pos-
itive assessments of the guerrillas. Let us take Aymes (who, for what it is worth,
rejects the argument that the guerrillas were motivated by the struggle against
the propertied classes with precisely the same vigour as Carr and Burdiel put
it forward). Contained in his Guerra de la Independencia is a more or less tra-
ditional hymn of praise to these forces. ‘Thus:

   The further removed the mass of the population was from political affairs,
   the more fully it participated in the struggle against the invaders . . . Unlike
   the French, who concentrated on dominating the cities, the guerrillas ranged
   rapidly across the countryside and launched surprise attacks on the French
                                                                                 the
   _.. The guerrillas also unleashed a war of attrition that ground down
198     Fighting Napoleon

   enemy’s economic potential... Aside from a few greedy or ambitious
   cabecillas, the civilian guerrillas did not seek to enrich themselves, their reli-
   gious sentiment serving to moderate their actions.'*

As with all such descriptions of the guerrillas, one cannot say that this view is
either right or wrong, and this is not in fact something that preoccupies the
author in question. As he continues: ‘In reality it does not matter how far the
guerrillas corresponded to this warm description. What matters is that, thanks
to the guerrillas, the War of Independence ennobled the name of the people.’
    This, however, is not good enough. The material on the guerrillas available
 in the archives may be skewed, inadequate and ambiguous, but it cannot just
 be ignored, particularly as it is extremely copious. And, however uncomfort-
 able his findings may be, it is the job of the historian to produce a view of the
 subject that takes it into account. What has emerged in the pages of this work
 is obviously a vision of the partidas that is diametrically opposed to the one that
 has been put forward by Aymes and the tradition in whose footsteps he has fol-
 lowed. Indeed, it is one that will be virtually unrecognisable to many observers.
 Far from appearing as the fruit of a great popular upsurge against the French,
 the guerrillas are seen rather to have been an artificial creation. In part this was
 the work of agents of the state (or at least the ruling authorities), supplemented
by that of a variety of individuals whose sectional interests were bound up with
the defence of the antiguo régimen. But in part, too, it was the work of oppor-
tunistic, ambitious and unscrupulous adventurers whose only redeeming
feature was the recognition by some of their number that their goals were best
served by adopting the approach of the regular soldier and, in short, becom-
ing professionals themselves. As for the rank and file, voluntary enlistment was
limited to deserters, draft evaders and men who had been rescued from French
captivity or were in trouble with the authorities, not to mention the hungry and
desperate. Patriotism, meanwhile, is notable only by its absence: the bulk of
those who served with the partidas, indeed, were almost certainly forced to
enlist at gunpoint, and the only areas where this was not so were parts of
Navarre and the Basque provinces, where peculiar local conditions had created
a contented rural populace whose economic interests were clearly threatened
by French rule. And even these exceptions must be questioned: critical work
on the response of Navarre to absolutist military mobilisation in the post-war
period has suggested the devotion to the old order highlighted by Tone and
other historians has been exagerrated.°
    Co-existing with the guerrillas was the phenomenon of banditry. Already on
the increase in 1808 thanks to the economic disruption of the pre-war years,
this problem was converted by the arrival of the French into a phenomenon of
                                                                      Conclusion    199


epidemic proportions. How far, however, was it connected with resistance to
the invaders? This is another question that is almost impossible to answer, but
it is clear that, although the complete identification of the guerrilla with the
bandit that is one of the major themes of the French memoir literature is
unfounded, the two were nonetheless very closely linked. Many cuadrillas con-
tinued to ply their trade regardless of the French invasion, but in the process
they saw no reason not to attack isolated Frenchmen or churchmen, officials
and proprietors connected with the occupation authorities, and in that sense
became a part of the guerrilla struggle. At the same time a variety of men who
had been imprisoned or on the run in 1808 found refuge with the guerrillas or
even established guerrilla bands of their own. Despite romantic claims that in
 1808 Spain’s bandits turned Patriots overnight, this course of action meant
nothing other than that /a vida a salto de mata was henceforth to be coated with
a veneer of respectability and, what is more, a veneer of respectability that was
 tested to destruction as soon as the wave of French conquest receded. And,
 turning to the partidas, we find that there were also links working in the oppo-
 site direction, in that many of their recruits clearly only joined them in the
 expectation that by doing so they would be guaranteed easy opportunities for
 plunder. Nor was their commitment to the cause anything other than condi-
 tional, meanwhile: should their hopes in any sense be betrayed, whether
 through the sudden imposition of military discipline or the failure of their
 leaders to provide adequate booty, they were quick to join bands that had no
 pretensions to be anything other than bandits or simply to set up as bandits on
their own account.
   None of this is to say that no irregular ever pulled a trigger against a French-
men. Although there is considerable evidence that many bands saw action on
only a very infrequent basis, it cannot be denied that, taking such groups as a
whole, they took part in many fights and skirmishes. Indeed, the more com-
mitted leaders — the men who saw that their long-term advancement depended
on carving out a name for themselves as successful soldiers — waged war on the
French with unremitting ferocity. Yet the lack of motivation evident amongst
much of the movement, not to mention the poor armament, insufficient
                                                                                      its
training and want of solidity of many of its adherents, could not but reduce
                                                                                       to
impact. Setting aside the many bands that were mere parasites that appear
have existed solely to feed themselves at the expence      of  the  populace,   all  the
                                                                              halt the
efforts of those partidas that were willing to fight the French could not
                                                                                    was
march of Napoleonic conquest, still less roll it back. When success
                                          was only  thanks  to  mistakes  on  the   part
achieved, as it was in 1812 and 1813, it
                                                                                all the
of Napoleon — in particular, his foolhardy invasion of Russia — whilst
                                                                               on the
evidence suggests that the Duke of Wellington relied far less heavily
200    ~=Fighting Napoleon


guerrillas’ ability to distract the French than has often been claimed. No one
would claim that the irregulars caused the French no difficulties at all: one
might here place particular emphasis on the supply difficulties in which they
involved the invaders, not to mention the growing demoralisation and fear
visible amongst the officers and men sent to the Peninsula. Yet the general
impression is highly negative. In brief, the guerrillas can be seen to have under-
mined the Spanish army whilst putting nothing in its place. At the same time,
it is even possible to question the role of the guerrillas in keeping up the spirit
of resistance that was supposedly so important to the struggle. Far from living
amongst the populace, the guerrillas lived off it, terrorising it mercilessly and
bringing down endless woes on its head.
    In fact, few scholars would now give the same weight to the guerrillas in
analyses of the struggle as was once the case. It is agreed that the guerrillas
were important, certainly, but there is at least now a clear recognition that in
the last resort they were a secondary factor in the Allied triumph. ‘The liber-
ation of Spain’, writes Rothenberg, ‘was the result of Wellington’s victory, one
to which they had contributed much.’”” In some quarters, indeed, there is a
willingness to go even further:
  In the Tyrol and Calabria .. . popular revolts had in time been smothered
  through the application of overwhelming military power. By 1812 the impe-
  rial forces had come very close to achieving this in Spain, too; despite heavy
  losses in their attritional contest with the partisans, they had made consid-
  erable headway, and the Spaniards were palpably feeling the strain."
Let us here cite, too, Stuart Woolf:
  Spanish historiography has long interpreted this dramatic episode in the
  country’s history as a nationalist war; for conservative writers, it is usually
  also regarded as a Catholic crusade for Church and altar... . But the evi-
  dence of this prolonged struggle... argues against any identity of view
  between the guerrillas . . . and either the constitutionalists or the Church . . .
  As the considerable number of . . . peasants and fishermen who habitually
  practised contraband were joined by soldiers from the former Spanish armies
  ... deserters from the French armies . . . outlaws of all types, the blurring
  of the distinction between collective resistance and brigandage upheld by the
  French became ever more realistic. Indiscipline, desertions and highly per-
  sonal motivations were intrinsic to the . . . bands, whose presence was often
  far from welcome to local villagers.’
   The conclusion that we have reached, then, is not one that is out of line with
current historical writing on the Napoleonic period. That said, however,
honesty dictates the admission of a number of serious problems. We return
here, above all, to the question of ambiguity. As has already been pointed out,
                                                                    Conclusion    201


much of the evidence that has been put forward in support of traditional dis-
cussions of the guerrillas is susceptible to interpretations that are diametrically
opposed to those in whose cause they are advanced. Nor, clearly, can much
reliance be placed on many of the documents and memoirs on which they are
based. René Chartrand, for example, describes the memoirs of Espoz y Mina
as ‘a primary document in the study of the Spanish guerrillas which established
[Espoz y] Mina’s claims to have pinned down tens of thousands of troops which
would otherwise have been deployed against Wellington,’ when it is clear that
they are at best partial and at worst a tissue of lies.”” But the very same objec-
tions can be made to the evidence put forward in support of the revisionist view.
To every document found in the archives complaining of sons conscripted by
roving guerrilla bands, it may rightly be objected that submitting such a doc-
ument was an obvious way of staving off retribution on the part of the author-
ities, whether French or Spanish. By the same token, every complaint of pillage
and rapine on the part of some partida may just as plausibly be answered by
 the argument that such protests are not to be trusted on account of the fact
 that they were the equally obvious resort of afrancesados punished for their
 treason or army officers anxious to defend the prerogatives of the military.
 There is, too, the issue of libel: whilst ferocious attacks on Espoz y Mina may
 have been uncovered in the archives in Zaragoza, say, there is nothing to show
 that they were not the fruit of personal vendettas. And finally, if Espoz y Mina
 ruthlessly suppressed a number of rival cabecillas, why should we immediately
 assume that his objective was self-aggrandisement rather than accepting
 his claims that all he was trying to do was to save the populace from the threat
of banditry?
   To these arguments there is no real answer, no way that the evidence can be
made to stick in favour of either side. In consequence, the thesis advanced in
this book must be recognised to be as artificial in its construction as the argu-
ments that it has been put forward to challenge. That said, however, it does
seem that there are issues which the traditional view of the guerrillas simply
does not address. Most prominent here is the question of popular engagement
with the struggle. Whilst there are many matters about which we cannot be
certain, the one issue on which there can be no doubt at all is the refusal of the
Spanish people to rally to the war against Napoleon. Thus, after the very special
circumstances of the summer of 1808, on all sides there was nothing to be seen
but draft evasion, desertion and anti-conscription riots. Amply recorded in both
                                                                                    no
British and Spanish sources, this simply cannot be wished away, and it is
good trying to explain the problem in terms of the localism talked of         by ‘Tone
                                                                               Catalan
and others since precisely the same problem is visible with regard to the
                                             were never  required   to  serve  beyond
migueletes and somatenes, even though they
the frontiers of their home province. What is needed, then,      is  an   explanation
202.    ~=Fighting Napoleon


 of the guerrillas that seeks to mould itself to this reality rather than airily pro-
 claiming its faith in a people’s crusade which never existed. Needless to say, it
 is precisely this need that the current work attempts to address.
    To conclude, what impact did the guerrillas have on the future of Spain? In
 so far as this subject is concerned, there has been a general willingness to draw
 a direct line from the events of 1808-14 to the terrible civil wars that ravaged
 Spain between 1822 and 1876 and then again between 1936 and 1939. To quote
 Lovett, for example, ‘The... Spanish people acquired the habit of . . . taking
 to the hills, a habit that was to become an ingrained national characteristic.
 Henceforward a favourite reaction to an unwelcome political situation would
 be . . . echarse al monte [take to the hills].””' This, however, is too facile an extra-
 polation, for, as Jeremy Black has shown, the irregular band was nothing new
 in Spain, partidas of armed civilians having taken an active role in the War of
 the Spanish Succession of 1701-14.” The most that can be said in this respect
 is that rebel forces — and by this one means primarily the Carlists — unable to
 establish control of sufficient territory to wage regular campaigns against the
 government, were provided with an alternative model of military organisation
 that allowed them at least to keep their cause alive. In this they were aided in
 the wars of 1822-3, 1827 and 1833-9 by the presence of many combatants who
 had actually fought with the guerrillas either as cabecillas — Jeronimo Merino,
Jaime Alfonso — or as members of the rank and file — Tomas de Zumalacar-
regui (in reply to which it could be said that the liberals had their own
War-of-Independence weapon in the form of the national militia). But
Carlist strategy was always in essence a regular one based on the formation of
field armies, whilst there is little evidence that the legacy of the partidas was
of much importance in stirring up popular revolt amongst the Carlist rank
and file.
    More work is needed here, but it is not clear that popular movements on the
left looked back to the struggle against the French for their inspiration when
it came to asserting themselves against the establishment either. In this respect,
one would have to disagree with Alexander Grab, who has argued that in Italy
the peasant unrest of the late nineteenth century, and ultimately the rural wing
of the Italian labour movement, was the direct descendant of the brigandage
of the Napoleonic Wars.” Very occasionally, radical or even republican partidas
may be encountered in histories of Spanish revolutionary movements in the
nineteenth century, but the guerrilla band was not to become a tool of the left
until the aftermath of the Spanish Civil War. For radicals, in fact, the tradi-
tional weapon was rather the urban rising and, above all, the barricade (which
is not to say that the war against the French was not devoid of symbols that
could be made use of by the progressive camp: one thinks here of the Dos de
Mayo and the sieges of Zaragoza). Nor, indeed, did the guerrillas ever consti-
tute anything more than an escape route for the most desperate so far as the
                                                                       Conclusion     203


populace was concerned. As we have seen, there was little identification
between partida and pueblo, whilst out-and-out bandits were often fallen upon
by lynch mobs or denounced to the authorities: one returns here to the belief
of Best and Lopez Moran that the bandoleros were anything but the champions
of the commonalty dreamed of by romantic Marxists such as Hobsbawm. If
the Spanish War of Independence has any links at all with the future Spanish
left, then, it is rather in the revolt against feudalism of 1813-14, when hun-
dreds of villages either physically attacked their sevtores or sought to challenge
their privileges in the courts.”* Also important here was the resistance to the
sale of the common lands ordered by the cortes as a means of paying for the
war: in November 1813, for example, the ayuntamiento of Cartaya complained
that its disamortisation of the lands concerned was being challenged by two of
the peasants who had formally rented them out.”
   If some of the more obvious ways in which the guerrillas could have made
their mark on the later development of Spanish history can therefore be ruled
out, this is not to say that they are of no relevance whatsoever to later develop-
ments. On the contrary, to the extent to which the guerrilla struggle greatly
fuelled banditry — between 1800 and 1810 there were 153 cases of banditry in
Galicia, whereas between 1810 and 1820 there were 305”° — the insurgents are
of immense importance. By plunging the countryside into anarchy, they set
Spain on the road to the creation in 1844 of the militarised police force known
as the Guardia Civil, which was be one of the chief factors in the polarisation
of society that ultimately led to the civil war of 1936-39: modelled on the
Napoleonic Gendarmerie d’Espagne, the Guardia Civil was originally even uni-
formed in the style of its imperial predecessor.” At the same time and, in some
ways, still worse, the guerrillas also intensified the army’s tendency to inter-
vene in politics. In this they were not the only factor — there were in fact many
ways in which the War of Independence encouraged the officer corps to con-
flate the national interest with its own desires and aspirations — but the partidas
constituted a particularly painful memory. Thus, not only had their much
vaunted triumphs, many of them exaggerated or even non-existent, humiliated
                                                                                       had
the military estate and provided ammunition for its enemies, but they
sapped the army of men, horses and money and thereby directly contributed
                                                                                         of
to its prostration. With these sins compounded by the later identification
                                                                    became     fixated   by
guerrilla warfare with the Carlists, the army in consequence
                                                                                 of social
the need to maintain law and order and deeply opposed to all forms
                                                                           factor in this
unrest in the countryside. Again the guerrillas were not the only
                                             said to  have  played  an   important     role
process, but in this respect they may be
                                                                   so   strong    was   the
in conquering the army for social conservatism. Indeed,
                                                                    it is not going     too
military’s hatred for the concept of the people in arms that
                                            squads   of  1936  were   in some respects
far to say that the victims of the firing
paying for the sins of the partidas of 1808-14.”
204    Fighting Napoleon


    And last but not least, it must be noted that the guerrillas or, more broadly,
popular resistance to Napoleon, ushered in a new age. The experiences of
 1808-14 did not in themselves politicise the people of Spain, any more than
they imbued them with an inherent urge to take to the hills. In this respect,
Burdiel’s claims that the conflict was ‘a powerful mechanism of political
apprenticeship for the population as a whole, the lessons of which were not
easily forgotten’ are in the short term nonsense.” But they did establish them
as a political presence, and to return to Aymes’ remarks, ‘ennoble’ them. This
latter concept should not be interpreted in any literal sense: as we have seen,
the guerrilla struggle was a murky affair characterised by as much vice as virtue.
However, no longer could the populace simply be swept aside as the populacho
or the canalla vil. In contrast, whatever politicians and generals might think of
them in private, they were now a force to which it was necessary to pay lip-
service and to whom competing political movements could appeal for legiti-
macy. Even before the war had ended, the liberals had set themselves up as
veritable tribunes of the people, whilst after 1814 it was a key part of the abso-
lutist case that their enemies had usurped the people’s sovereignty and gov-
erned in despite of the popular will rather than in accordance with its dictates.
‘In effect’, proclaimed one diatribe, ‘from the moment that the ordinary cortes
was established [the liberals] made a complete mock of the people, whom they
called sovereign, and obliged them to obey their orders, however much they
were contrary to the will of the greater part of the nation.’ This is hardly to
say, of course, that Spain was in any sense democratised by the war. But for lib-
erals and absolutists, as later for conservatives and progressives, there was a
strong sense that the ‘real’ people of Spain had spoken, and that, given the
appropriate formula, they could be brought to speak once more.
   So much for the legacy of partisan warfare. Let us, however, return to the
central point at issue. We have here a new analysis of the Spanish guerrillas.
Rather than the freedom-fighters of legend, they appear rather as a highly
complex phenomenon whose military impact has been greatly exaggerated by
a combination of muddled thinking, political bias and failure to make use of
the full range of primary sources that is available to the historian. Nor have
matters been helped by an over-concentration on the highly atypical example
of Navarre at the expense of the far more helpful examples constituted by such
provinces as Aragon and La Mancha. To claim that this work is the last word
on the subject would be foolish — a great wealth of material remains to be tapped
in municipal archives all over Spain — but it is at least the product of a sub-
stantial programme of research. Whilst it will certainly be challenged, the issues
that it has raised will not go away. The debate, then, will go on, but it will most
assuredly not go backwards.
                     — Abbreviations




BHS     Bulletin of Hispanic Studies
BUM     Boletin de la Universidad de Madrid
CHF     Cambridge Historical Fournal
CIH     Cuadernos de Investigacion Historica
CREP    Consortium on Revolutionary Europe Proceedings
EHQ     European History Quarterly
EHR     English Historical Review
EM      Espana Moderna
ESR     European Studies Review
HAHR    Hispanic American Historical Review
Hf       The Historical Journal
HT      History Today
IHR     International History Review
JEH     Journal of Economic History
FLAS    Journal of Latin American Studies
JMH     Journal of Modern History
JSAHR   Journal of the Society for Army Historical Research
QFE     Quarterly Journal of Economics
RHM     Revista de Historia Militar
RP      Review of Politics
                                          Notes




1 The Guerrillas in History
  ils    A reproduction of Lejeune’s painting may be found in J. Tulard (ed.), L’Histoire
         de Napoléon par la Peinture (Paris, 1991), p. 239.
  2. Padre        Maestro Salmon, Resumen Histérico de la Revolucién de Espana
         (Cadiz—Madrid, 1812-14), II, pp. 16-17, Servicio Histérico Militar, Coleccién
         Documental del Fraile (hereafter SHM. CDE) CMXXXIIL-IV.
      . Ibid., pp. 18-19.
     . Ibid., TI, pp. 226-7.
     . Ihid., I, pp. 20-4.
     . Lbid., p. 26.
     . Ibid., p. 234.
     .
  conAnon., Historia de la revolucién de Espana o sea rapida ojeada sobre
  BW
  AM
                                                                                 los principales
         sucesos de la peninsula desde fines de 1807 hasta septiembre de 1812 y perdida de los
        franceses en ella (Valladolid, 1812), Colegio de Santa Cruz (Valladolid), 65/3914.
    . Salmén, Resumen Histérico, I, p. 249.
    . Cit. E. Rodriguez Solis, Los Guerrilleros de 1808: Historia Popular de la Guerra de
         la Independencia (Madrid, 1887), II, ii, p. 27.
Ni fy F. Alonso y Ruiz de Canizares, Resumen histérico militar de los
                                                                             principales y mas
        gloriosos hechos del Senor Brigadier Don Juan Martin, Comandante de la Quinta
        Division del Segundo Ejército desde fines de junio de mil ochocientos ocho hasta abril
        de ochocientos once (México, 1811), Biblioteca Nacional, Coleccion Gémez Imaz
        (hereafter BN. CGI.) R820673, pp. 6-10.
12. Cf. Diario de Sesiones de las Cortes Generales y Extraordinar
                                                                        ias (Cadiz, 1810-13;
        hereafter DC), 11 March 1811. The real name of this commander was Francisco
        Espoz Ilundain, but, for reasons that will become clear, in 1810 he adopted the
        name Espoz y Mina, although he is often referred to simply as ‘Mina’. For the
        sake of familiarity, and to avoid confusing him with his distant relative Martin
        Javier Mina y Larrea, he will be referred to throughout this account as Espoz y
        Mina.
13% J. C. Carnicero, Historia Razonada de los Principales Sucesos de la Gloriosa Revolu-
        cién de Espana (Madrid, 1814), III, pp. 62-3, SHM. CDE CMXLII.
                                                            Notes to pages 6-15    =207


. R. Brindle, ‘Memoirs: a brief account of travels, etc., in Spain’ (MS), p. 8, Real
         Colegio de San Albano, Valladolid.
. S. Cassels (ed.), Peninsular Portrait, 1811-1814: the Letters of Captain Wilham
         Bragge, Third (King’s Own) Dragoons (London, 1963), p. 114.
 . J. Page (ed.), Intelligence Officer in the Peninsula: Letters and Diaries of Major the
         Honourable Edward Charles Cocks, 1786-1812 (Tunbridge Wells, 1986), pp. 134-5.
 . J. Queipo de Llano (Conde de Toreno), Historia del Levantamiento, Guerra y Rev-
         olucion de Espana, ed. Biblioteca de Autores Espafioles (Madrid, 1954), p. 349.
  . Cf. Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, Il, xi, pp. 39-47 passim, details of the
         author’s life and politics may be found in E. Rodriguez Solis, Memorias (Madrid,
          1930).
   . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, 11, p. 27.
   . Tbsd.,. 1, ii, p.29.
   ._ R. Southey, History of the Peninsular War (London, 1823-32), I, p. 266.
   wd bidspe270:
    . Ibid., pp. 371-2.
    SU bd p.:720:
    . Ibid., pp. 739-46 passim.
    . Ibid., Il, pp. 104-40.
     . Ibid., pp. 167-70, 204-7.
     . Ibid., pp. 328-9.
     i Tbid.y p.332-
     . Ibid., pp. 364-6. An example of one of these wooden cannon may be viewed in
          the Army Museum in Madrid.
      . Tbid., pp. 383-02.
      . Thid., p. 383.
      . Ibid., p. 394.
       . Ibid., pp. 503-4.
       . Ibid., pp. 504-5; ibid., III, pp. 43-59 passim.
       . Ibid., pp. 42-5.
       . Lhid., pp. 42-3.
       . Ibid., pp. 51-2, 55, 62.
 . Ibid., pp. 65-7, 259-77, 338-45, 476-7, 602-5.
 . W. Napier, History of the War in the Peninsula and in the South of France from the
   Year 1807 to the Year 1814 (London, 1828-40), V, pp. 38-9.
 . Chief exponent of the theory of the ‘indirect approach’ was Basil Liddell
   Hart. For an example of his thinking on the Peninsular War, cf. B. Liddell
                                                                               1929),
   Hart, The Decisive Wars of History: a Study in Strategy (London,
    pp. 104-16.
 _ Cf. C. Oman, A History of the Peninsular War (Oxford, 1902-30), VI, pp. 252-74.
 . Ibid., U1, pp. 488-92.
 _ E. Longford, Wellington: the Years of the Sword (London, 1969), pp. 247-8.
 _ R. Humble, Napoleon’s Peninsular Marshals (London, 1974), p- 70.
                                                                       Political and
 _ Cf. L. Borkenau, The Spanish Cockpit: an Eye-Witness Account of the
    Social Conflicts of the Spanish Civil War (London, 1937)s PP: 3-4:
                                                                                onal
  _D. Chandler, ‘Wellington at war: regular and irregular warfare’, Internati
   History Review, XI, no. 1 (February, 1989), p- 9.
 _ Times Literary Supplement (4 July 1986), p. 742-
208   Notes to pages 15-22


 49        G. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain (New York, 1965), II,
           pp. 665-7.
        . D. Alexander, Rod of Iron: French Counter-Insurgency Policy in Aragén during the
          Peninsular War (Wilmington, Delaware, 1985), pp. 239-41.
       . J. Tone, The Fatal Knot: the Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon
          (Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 1994), p. 5.
       . M. Artola, Historia de Espana Alianza Editorial, V: la Burguesia Revolucionaria,
           1508-1874 (Madrid, 1990), p. 33.
       . M. Espadas Burgos and J. R. de Urquijo Goitia, Historia de Espana Gredos, XI:
           Guerra de la Independencia y Epoca Constitucional, 1808-1939 (Madrid, 1990),
          pp. 21-2.
      . J. R. Aymes, La Guerra de la Independencia en Espana, r808-1814 (Madrid, 1975),
          p. 56.
      . G. Dufour, La Guerra de la Independencia (Madrid, 1999), p. 96.
      . R. Hocquellet, Résistance et Révolution durant l’Occupation Napoléonnienne en
          Espagne, 1808-1812 (Paris, 2001), p. 176.
     . Cf. R. Farias, Memorias de la Guerra de la Independencia Escritas por Soldados
          Franceses (Madrid, 1919), pp. 317—20.
     . Cf. J. R. Aymes, ‘La guerrilla espafiola en la literatura testimonial francesa’,
          in J. A. Armillas (ed.), La Guerra de la Independencia: Estudios (Zaragoza, 2001),
          PP. 23-4.
    . Gazeta de Sevilla (7 January 1812), p. 8, Hemeroteca Municipal de Madrid (here-
          after HMM.) RVP.20.
    . For a detailed discussion of these issues, cf. R. Holtman, Napoleonic Propaganda
          (Baton Rouge, 1950).
   . Southey, Peninsular War, Il, p. 336.
   bid Ill p. Ar.
   . Lbid., pp. 42-3.
  . Ibid., pp. 52-3.
  . Ihid., pp. 53-4, 65.
  . Ihid., p. 68.
  . Napier, Peninsular War, Il, p. 142.
  . J. Mufioz Maldonado, Historia Politica y Militar de la Guerra de la Independencia
     de Espana contra Napoleon Bonaparte (Madrid, 1833), II, p. 270.
  Wl bidandi psi:
    . Lbid., 1, p. 106.
    - For Mufioz Maldonado’s remarks on Galicia, cf. ibid., II, pp. 176-83.
    . Ibid., I, pp. 307-8, 395.
    . J. Gomez de Arteche y Moro, Guerra de la Independencia: Historia Militar de
      Espana de 1808 a 1814 (Madrid, 1868-1903), II, p. 97.
   . E.g. ibid., VII, pp. 462-3; ibid., VII, pp. 221-2.
   . [bid., VII, pp. 195-7.
   . Ibid., VIV, pp. 360-1.
   . Lbid., VII, pp. 185-88.
   . dbid., VILspro:
  . E.g. ibid., XIV, p. 354.
  . Lbid., VII, p. 67.
  . Ibid., XIV, p. 354.
                                                             Notes to pages 22-6   =209


  . Ihid., VU, pp. 6-7.
  Tn Sp 7:
  . Ibid., XIV, pp. 366-8.
   . T. Sydenham to H. Wellesley, 10 October 1812, University of Southampton,
     Wellington Papers (hereafter US.WP.) 1/361.
   . In brief, a succession of historians has struggled to establish whether the armed
     gangs that terrorised much of rural France in the 1790s and early 1800s were brig-
     ands royaux rather than just brigands. No firm conclusion has been reached — the
     pattern, indeed, is one of great ambiguity — but in the south and west in partic-
     ular there seems little doubt that the unrest was at least in part an expression of
     popular alienation from the Revolution. For a brief overview, cf. D. Sutherland,
     France, 1789-1815: Revolution and Counter-Revolution (London, 1985), pp.
     286-92. Local studies include: G. Lewis, ‘Political brigandage and popular
     disaffection in the south-east of France, 1795-1804’ in G. Lewis and C. Lucas
     (eds), Beyond the Terror: Essays in French Regional and Social History, 1794-1815
     (Cambridge, 1983), pp. 195-31; D. Sutherland, The Chouans: the Social Origins
      of Popular Counter-Revolution in Upper Brittany, 1770-1796 (Oxford, 1982); and
      G. Daly, Inside Napoleonic France: State and Society in Rouen (Aldershot, 2001),
    pp. 65-80.
$7. Cf. M. Artola, ‘La guerra de guerrillas’, Revista de Occidente, X (1964),
    pp. 12-43, and J. R. Aymes, ‘La guérilla dans la lutte espagnole pour l’indépen-
    dance, 1808-14: amorce d’une théorie et avatars d’une pratique’, Bulletin His-
    panique, XCVIII, nos 3-4 (July-December, 1976), pp. 325-49.
88. For early writings of the author on the subject, cf. C. Esdaile, “Heroes or villains?
    The Spanish guerrillas in the Peninsular War’, History Today, XXXVIII, no. 4
    (April 1988), pp. 29-35; C. Esdaile, ‘“Heroes or villains” revisited: fresh
    thoughts on /a guerrilla’, in I. Fletcher (ed.), The Peninsular War: Aspects of
    the Struggle for the Iberian Peninsula (Staplehurst, 1998), pp. 93-114. On all this
    Hocquellet’s only comment is a two-line footnote: cf. Hocquellet, Résistance et
    Révolution, p. 176.
89. M. de Avesty, La Vida a Salto de Mata: Guerrilleros, Bandoleros y Contrabandistas
    (Barcelona, 1962), pp. 17-22.
go. A good example of this linguistic confusion is offered by a treatise sent to the
    Spanish general Joaquin Blake in June 1809 by one M. Delcastel. Entitled ‘Instruc-
    cién provisional para la guerrilla’, it begins by defining the word guerrilla as
    meaning ‘the methodical deployment of a body of troops in open order, whether
    it is to fight in broken terrain where close-order formations cannot operate, to
    cover the advance of a body of men formed in close order, or to act as pickets
    for a column of troops on the march’. Cf. Servicio Histérico Militar, Coleccion
     General Blake (hereafter SHM. CGB.) 2/14.
gl. J.  S. Pérez Garzon, Milicia Nacional y Revolucion Burguesa: el Prototipo Madrileno,
     1808-1874 (Madrid, 1978), p. 80.
                                                                                      107.
92. E. Hobsbawm, The Age of Revolution, 1789-1848 (London, 1977), p.
                               of Hobsbawm ’s   views on  banditry   and  agrarian unrest,
     For general statements
                                                                                Movement
     cf. E. Hobsbawm, Primitive Rebels: Studies in Archaic Forms of Social
                                                                                       m,
     in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries (Manchester, 1959), and E. Hobsbaw
                                                      any  attention  given to Napoleon ic
     Bandits (London, 1969). In neither, however, is
    Spain.
2I0     Notes to pages 29-32


2 The Guerrillas at War

  i       For two discussions of the impact of the war of 1793-95, cf. R. Herr, The
          Eighteenth-Century Revolution in Spain (Princeton, 1958), pp. 297-315, and J. R.
          Aymes, ‘La “Guerra Gran” (1793-95) como prefiguracién de la “Guerra del
          Francés” (1808-14) in J. R. Aymes (ed.), Espana y la Revolucién Francesa (Madrid,
          1989), pp. 311-66. Information on the local militias of the pre-war period is scanty,
          but for some details of the Galician example, cf: Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de
          1808, I, v, pp. 35-40.                               ~
       . For an excellent introduction to the military geography of the Iberian Peninsula
          at the beginning of the nineteenth century, cf. Oman, Peninsular War, I, pp. 72-88.
       . Gomez de Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia, Il, pp. 214-18; Mufioz
          Maldonado, Guerra de la Independencia, I, pp. 293-5, 312-13; Rodriguez Solis,
          Guerrilleros de 1808, I, ii, pp. 10-11; Anon., ‘Memoria sobre la entrada de los
          franceses en Andalucia’ (MS.), Archivo Histérico Nacional, Seccién de Estado
          (hereafter AHN. Estado) 52—F, no. 404.
      . Mufioz Maldonado, Guerra de la Independencia, 1, p. 313; L. F. Gille, Mémoires
          d'un Conscrit de 1808, ed. P. Gilles (Paris, 1893), pp. 75-84; J. de Haro, Guerra de
          la Independencia: Bailén — Diarios y Memorias (Ciudad Real, 1999), pp. 196-200.
      . Gomez de Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia, Il, pp. 85-123, 589-636 passim;
          Mufioz Maldonado, Guerra de la Independencia, 1, pp. 231-4; ibid., II, pp. 68-71;
          Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, ii, pp. 3-9; memorial of F. Rovira, 21
         November 1814, Servicio Histérico Militar, Coleccion de la Guerra de la
          Independencia (hereafter SHM. CGI.) 4/8.
     . Gomez de Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia, VII, pp. 14-15; Rodriguez
         Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, ii, pp. 31-8; Mufioz Maldonado, Guerra de la Inde-
         pendencia, Il, p. 266-9; A. Cassinello, Juan Martin, ‘El Empecinado’, 0 el Amor a
         la Libertad (Madrid, 1995), pp. 51-7; for an early account of the operations of
         Juan Martin Diez at this time, cf. Anon., Apuntes de la Vida y Hechos Militares del
         Brigadier Don Juan Martin Diez, El Empecinado, por un Admirador de Ellos (Madrid,
          1814), pp. 6-9, Servicio Histérico Militar, Depésito de la Guerra (hereafter SHM.
         DG.) 1811/5.
    . Informe of D. Argiiero, 5 July 1810, Archivo General de Simancas, Seccién de
         Gracia y Justicia (hereafter AGS. GJ.) 1076.
    . Memorial of F Mallén, 19 November 1809, AHN. Est. 61-N, no. B17:
   . J. M. Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Guerrillero (Madrid, 1965), pp. 50-1.
   - Mufioz Maldonado, Guerra de la Independencia, I, pp. 281-4; ibid., II, pp. 68-70;
         Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, iii, pp. 43-4.
   . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, v, p. 20.
   . Petition of P. Morillo, 6 February 1810, cit. A. Rodriguez Villa, E/ Teniente General
         Don Pablo Morillo, Primer Conde de Cartagena, Marqués de la Puerta (1778-1837):
         Estudio Biografico (Madrid, 1908), II, pp. 8-11.
   . T. Simmons (ed.), Memoirs of a Polish Lancer: the Pamietniki of Dezydery
         Chlapowski (Chicago, 1992), p. 47.
14. M. de Marbot, The Memoirs of Baron de Marbot, late Lieutenant General in the
         French Army, ed. A. Butler (London, 1892), I, PP. 335-45.
15. J. M. Codon, Biografia y Cronica del Cura Merino (Burgos, 1986), pp. 27—30;
         P. Marco, El Cura Merino, 1808-1813: Memorias de un Contempordaneo (Madrid,
      1899), pp. 9-12.
                                                              Notes to pages 32-8   = 211

16. Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia, VII, pp. 40-1; Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros
    de 1808, I, v, pp. 18-22; J. Sanchez Fernandez, jNos Invaden! Guerrilla y Repre-
    sion durante la Guerra de la Independencia Espanola, 1808-1814 (Valladolid, 2000),
    p. 30. For Lucas Rafael, cf. Relacién de los hechos de los méritos y proezas de Fray
    Lucas Rafael, religioso Sacerdote de San Francisco, Teniente-Capitan de los reales
    ejércitos, y juntamente comandante de una partida de guerrilla (Seville, 1809), BN.
    CGI. R62302.
a Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, 1, vi, pp. 22-5; ibid., viii, pp. 27-30; ibid.,
    ix, pp. 40-I.
18. Ibid., 1, viii, pp. 16-18; Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Guerrillero, pp. 308-11.
19. For details on most of these figures, cf. R. Guirao, Guerrilleros y Patriotas en el
    Alto Aragon, 1808-1814 (Huesca, 2000), pp. 54-96.
20. Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, viii, pp. 12-14; F. Rovira to Junta of
     Catalonia, 6 June 1810, Archivo de la Corona de Aragon, Seccién Junta Superior
     de Catalufia (hereafter ACA. JSC.) 76.
21. Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Guerrillero, pp. 62-8; M. Ortuiio, Xavier Mina: Guer-
     rillero, Liberal, Insurgente (Pamplona, 2000), pp. 42—69.
22. In the absence of a general military history of the guerrillas, these details have
     been obtained from Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, 1, v—viii passim. For some
     accounts of individual partidas, cf. Cassinello, Juan Martin, pp. 73-87; Ortuno,
     Xavier Mina, pp. 69-84; Cod6n, Cura Merino, pp. 33-8; R. de Barthélemy, ‘E/
     Marquesito’: Juan Diaz Porlier, General que Fue de los Ejércitos Nacionales,
     1788-1815 (Santiago de Compostela, 1995), I, pp. 94-160.
23. A. Miot, Mémoires du Comte Miot de Melito, Ancien Ministre, Ambassadeur, Con-
    seilleur d’Etat et Membre de I’Institut (Paris, 1858), Ili, pp. 56-8.
24. H. von Brandt, The Two Minas and the Spanish Guerrillas (London, 1825),
      pp. 54-8.
25. A. de Rocca, Memoirs of the War of the French in Spain, ed. P. Haythornthwaite
      (London, 1990), p. 89.
26. Suchet’s own account of the fighting in Aragén in the second half of 1809 and
      the first months of 1810 may be found in L. G. Suchet, Memoirs of the War in
      Spain from 1808 to 1814 (London, 1829), I, pp. 42-109; for a detailed modern
      account, cf. Alexander, Rod of Iron, pp. 21-41.
a     A. Bigarré, Mémoires du Général Bigarré, Aide-de-Camp du Rot Joseph, 1775-1813
      (Paris, 1903), pp. 284-7.
28.   For the growth of guerrilla resistance in Andalucia, cf. Rodriguez Solis,
      Guerrilleros de 1808, 1, x, 1-11; ibid., 1, xi, pp. 9-17. For Valencia, cf. M. Ardit,
      Revolucion Liberal y Revuelta Campesina: un Ensayo sobre la Desintegracion del
      Régimen Feudal en el Pais Valenciano, 179 31840 (Barcelona, 1977), pp. 211-17.
29.   E Espoz y Mina, Memorias del General Don Francisco Espoz y Mina, Escritas por
      El Mismo, ed. J. M. de Vega (Madrid, 1851), I, pp. 16, 39-40.
30.   L. Picado Franco, Historia del origen, acontecimientos y acciones de guerra de la
      Sexta Division del Segundo Ejército (0 sea de Soria) durante nuestra sagrada lucha
      al mando del Excmo. Senior Don José Joaquin Duran y Barazabal, Mariscal de Campo
      de los reales ejércitos (Madrid, 1817), I, pp. 44-6, Biblioteca del Senado, Coleccion
      Gomez de Arteche (hereafter BS. CGA.) 039809.
BEE   Cit. El Redactor General (25 October 1811), p. 513, HMM. 6/3. According to an
      undated memorandum in the papers of General Castafios, Espoz y Mina’s cavalry
      _ the Husares de Navarra — wore blue dolmans with red collars and cuffs, grey
212    Notes to pages 38-42

       pelisses trimmed with grey fur and white frogging, grey overalls with a red stripe,
       and bell-topped shakos adorned with red cockades, loops, cords and pom-poms.
       For some good depictions of the sort of uniforms adopted by units such as those
       of Espoz y Mina, cf. J. M. Bueno, Uniformes Militares de la Guerra de Indepen-
       dencia (Madrid, 1989), pp. 157-9.
 42) Tone, Fatal Knot, pp. 106-7; for some acute remarks on the greater vulnerability
       of larger and more elaborate partidas to French attack, cf. Von Brandt, The Two
       Minas, p. 59.
 33: Espoz y Mina, Memorias, I, p. 87.
                                                           ~



 34. Ibid., 1, p. 90; those wishing to contrast the tactics used by Espoz y Mina at Aibar
       with the practice of Wellington’s army will find much of use in P. Griffith (ed.),
       Forward into Battle: Fighting Tactics from Waterloo to Vietnam (Chichester, 1981),
       pp. 12-42.
 35. These issues are discussed at greater length in Esdaile, ‘Heroes or Villains’, p. 33.
       For some examples of the desire of at least some guerrillas to acquire the status
       of regular troops, cf. Picado Franco, Sexta Divisién, Il, pp. 53-4; F Longa to Lord
       Wellington, 20 October 1813, US. WP.1/378. In view of the behaviour of some
       regular officers, their eagerness is perfectly comprehensible: when the cabecilla
       Saornil dined at Wellington’s headquarters in February 1813, General O’Lalor
       ‘treated him like a child [and] told him what to eat’: G. Larpent (ed.) The Private
      Journal of Fudge-Advocate F. S. Larpent, Attached to Lord Wellington’s Headquar-
       ters, 1812-14 (London, 1853), I, p. 81.
 36. Gomez de Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia, XII, pp. 402—13; for a partial
      account of these operations, cf. F Duran to Wellington, 18 and 28 August 1812,
      US. WP. 1/349. An example of the sort of cannon supplied to the guerillas may
      be found in the Army Museum in Madrid.
    . Cf. Mina, Memorias, I, pp. 19-51 passim; Tone, Fatal Knot, pp. 99-125 passim.
    . Anon. to J. F Caballero, 29 May 1811, AHN. Est. 3146. Espoz y Mina’s own
      account of this affair may be found in Espoz y Mina, Memorias, 1, pp. 124-7, and
      may be contrasted with Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Guerrillero, pp. 256-70.
39. For the campaigns of Espoz y Mina in the latter part of the war, cf. Tone, Fatal
      Knot, pp. 131-45; Alexander, Rod of Iron, pp. 189-220.
40. These nicknames are not always easy to translate. Perhaps the worst case is that
      of El Empecinado. The word from which the nickname comes — pecina — is the
      name given to a particularly black and sticky type of mud associated with the dis-
      trict from which Juan Martin Diez hailed, and it has often been assumed that a
      comparison was intended with the guerrilla commander’s rather swarthy com-
      plexion — hence some sources’ use of ‘Inky Face’. However, comparison with the
      rather similar case of Julian Sanchez suggests a different rendition. Thus, Sanchez
      was known as El Charro, a term applied to all the inhabitants of the province of
      Salamanca. But a charro is also a rustic, a boor or a backwoodsman — hence ‘Stick-
      in-the-Mud’ for El Empecinado.
41. Brindle, ‘Memoirs’, pp. 46-7.
42. Anon. to R. Gutiérrez, 12 February 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
43: For a reproduction of this picture, which is housed in the Royal Collection, cf.
      Esdaile, ‘Heroes or Villains’, p. 29. This, however, should be contrasted with the
      Goya portait of El Empecinado shown in the same work on p. 31, this clearly illus-
      trating the way in which fashions of dress had often changed by 1814.
                                                             Notes to pages 42-8     213

   . Espoz y Mina, Memorias, I, p. 41.
   . Cit. Salmon, Resumen Histérico, U1, pp. 246-7.
   . Cf. V. Malibran to E. Bardaji, 22 March 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
   . For a contemporary depiction, cf. H. Lachouque and others, Napoleon’s War in
      Spain: the French Peninsular Campaigns, 1807-1814 (London, 1982), p. 115.
   . For the formation of the Guiptizcoa coastguards, cf. decree of F Amoros, 26 April
      1809, AGS. GJ. 1076, whilst the gendarmes d’Espagne are covered in J. Elting,
      Swords around a Throne: Napoleon’s Grande Armée (New York, 1988), pp. 415-16.
49. J. Echegaray to P. Chevalier, 31 December 1809, AGS. GJ. 1076.
50. Southey, Peninsular War, Ill, pp. 46-9. For a detailed account of the rising in
      the Serrania de Ronda, cf. Anon., Villa de Casares, ano de 1813: expediente que com-
      probard los heroicos servicios hechos a la patria por la villa de Casares en la
      gloriosa sublevacion de la sierra contra los franceses desde el ano de 1810 hasta el
      presente (Algeciras, 1813), Servicio Historico Militar, Coleccion de la Guerra de
      la Independencia (hereafter SHM. CGI.) 2/2; for the Roncal, meanwhile, cf.
      Anon., Relacién remitido al gobierno desde el Reino de Navarra que manifiesta los
      descalabros que alli han sufrido los enemigos por aquellos naturales al mando del
      Bgdr. Don Mariano de Renovales desde principios de mayo hasta principios de
      septiembre del presente ano (Seville, 1809), AHN. Est. 33—B, no. 182.
51. Rocca, Memoirs, p. 154.
62. Anon., Villa de Casares, pp. 5-6; Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, 1, x1,
      pp. 9-12.
53: Ibid., pp. 32-5.
54: For all this, cf. Junta of Badajoz to Junta Central, 20 April 1809, AHN. Est. 41—B,
      no. 8; J. D. Pacheco to M. de Garay, 24 April 1809, AHN. Est. 41—F, no. 183.
55. Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, viii, pp. 4-12 passim; for the attack on
      Marshal Augereau, cf. Gazeta Militar y Politica del Principado de Catalunya (26
      December 1809), AHN. Est. 38—D, no. 44.
56. Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, Il, i, pp. 34-5.
57: J. Claros, Representacién del Coronel de los reales ejércitos y gobernador militar y
      politico interino del corregimiento de Gerona, Don Juan Claros, a S.A. el Consejo de
      la Regencia sobre la exposicién que contra el hizo el Marques de Castroverde (Vich,
       1812), p. 26, SHM. DG. 1811/4.
58. Southey, Peninsular War, 1, pp. 648-9. The name miguelete is a reference to a band
       of mercenaries commanded by a sixteenth-century Catalan soldier named Miguel
       de Prats. Confusingly, the same name was also applied to the regular home guard
      that operated in the Basque provinces.
                                                                                account of
59. Oman, History of the Peninsular War, III, p. 53; for a contemporary
       O’Donnell’s exploits in the autumn of 1809, cf. ‘Diario de operaciones de las
       unidades a las ordenes del General Enrique O’Donnell’ (MS.), SHM. CGB. 3/5.
    . Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia, VIII, pp. 219-49; Munoz Maldonado, Guerra
      de la Independencia, Ul, pp. 315-24.
    . For Enrique O’Donnell’s own account of operations in Catalonia in the wake of
       the battle of Vich, cf. E. O’Donnell to F. Eguia, 27 March 1810, SHM. CGI. 2/10.
    . Cit. Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia, IX, p. 252.
    . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, 1x, pp. 26-30.
    . Oman, Peninsular War, Il, pp. 497-9.
    _ L. Lacy to Junta of Catalonia, 6 October 1811, SHM. CGI. 4/23.
214      Notes to pages 49-58

      . Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia, VIII, pp. 120-44; Barthélemy, E/ Marquesito,
        I, pp. 164-78.
      . Cf. J. Diaz Porlier to N. Mahy, 1 July 1810, Servicio Historico Militar, Coleccion
        Duque de Bailén (hereafter SHM. CDB.) 17/21/67.
      . Oman, Peninsular War, Ill, pp. 485-7; Gomez de Arteche, Guerra de Inde-
        pendencia, IX, pp. 424-6; Barthélemy, E/ Marquesito, I, pp. 185-237 passim.
      . Mufioz Maldonado, Guerra de la Independencia, Ill, pp. 105-6.
      . Oman, Peninsular War, III, pp. 465-72; Gomez welArteche, Guerra de la Indepen-
        dencia, IX, pp. 410-14.
      . Anonymous report, n.d., AHN. Est. 2994.
      . Proclamation of Marchal Soult, 8 May 1810, cit. Gazeta Extraordinaria de Sevilla
        (10 May 1810), pp. 317-19, AHN. Est. 2994.
      . Proclamation of B. de Aranza, 8 May 1810, cit. thid., pp. 314-17.
      . Gomez de Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia, VII, pp. 185-7; Oman,
        Peninsular War, Ill, pp. 214-15, 326-30; for a modern account of the campaigns
        of Ballesteros and Copons, cf. M. A. Pefia, E/ Tiempo de los Franceses: La Guerra
        de la Independencia en el Suroeste Espanol (Huelva, 2000), pp. 24-31.
      . Gazeta Extraordinaria de la Regencia (30 August 1810), p. 595, Real Academia de
        Historia (hereafter RAH.) 9:6968.
      . Salmon, Resumen Historico, Ill, pp. 108-9.
      . M. de Alzega to F Copons, 21 August 1810, RAH. 9:6968.
      . Oman, Peninsular War, Ill, pp. 330-5, 337-8.
      . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, xi, pp. 9-12.
      . Oman, Peninsular War, II, pp. 335-7; A. Blayney, Narrative of a Forced Journey
        through Spain and France as a Prisoner of War in the Years 1810 to 1814 (London,
        1814), I, pp. 1-36.
      . Oman, Peninsular War, V, pp. 550-7.
      . Ibid., TV, pp. 599-605.
      . Lbid., V, pp. 314-32.
      . Ibid., pp. 274-6, 521-2. An interesting account of the action at Villafranca de los
        Castillejos is contained in F. Ballesteros to Lord Wellington, 27 January 1811, US.
        WP.1/342.
      . T. Bunbury, Reminiscences of a Veteran, being Personal and Military Adventures in
       Portugal, Spain, France, Malta, Norfolk Island, New Zealand, Anderman Islands and
       India (London, 1861), I, pp. 111-12.
    . P. Morillo to La Romana, 9 May 1810, cit. Rodriguez Villa, Pablo Morillo, pp. 56-8.
    . P. Morillo to Marqués de la Romana, 20 May 1810, cit. ibid. pp. 62-4.
    . P. Morillo to Marqués de la Romana, 27 May 1810, cit. ibid. pp. 64—5.
    . P. Morillo to Marqués de la Romana, 29 June 1810, cit. ibid. pp. 68-70.
    . P. Morillo to Marqués de la Romana, 9 September 1810, cit. ibid. pp. 76-80.
    . N. Horta-Rodriguez, D. Julién Sanchez, ‘El Charro’, Guerrillero y Brigadier
      (Ciudad Rodrigo, 1986), pp. 28-64 passim.
    . Anon. report, 26 April 1811, SHM. CGI. 3/33. For an account stemming from
      one of Sanchez’s own subordinates, cf. ‘Parte dado por la Primera Legién de
      Castilla’, 12 April 1811, US. WP.1/346.
 93. Casals: Peninsular Pinal p. 57; C. Boutflower, The Diary of an Army Surgeon
      during the Peninsular War (Manchester, 1912), p. 54.
 94. Marbot, Memoirs, I, p. 162.
                                                              Notes to pages 59-63    = 215

 95. Horta Rodriguez, Julian Sanchez, pp. 67-93 passim.
 96. Proclamation of L. Bassecourt, 15 March 1810, AHN. Est. 2994.
 97. Proclamation of P. Villacampa, n.d., AHN. Est. 2994.
 98. Guirao, Guerrilleros y Patriotas, pp. 74-6.
 99. Lbid., pp. 41-4, 83-4; for an eyewitness account of this affair, cf. J. North (ed.), Jn
     the Legions of Napoleon: the Memoirs of a Polish Officer in Spain and Russia,
     1808-1813 (London, 1999), pp. 73-4.
too. A. de Rojas to E. Bardaji, 12 April 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
tor. J. Skerret to W. Cooke, 8 November 1811, PRO. WO.1/252, ff. 544—5.


3 The Guerrillas in Context
  1. Regeneracion de Espana (Seville, n.d.), n.p., BN. CGI. R60292-3.
  2. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain, pp. 329-30.
  3. For some examples of revisionist writing, cf. E. Canales Gil, ‘La desercion en
     Espafia durante la Guerra de la Independencia’, Bi-centenari de la Revolucid
     Francesa (1789-1989): Le Jacobinisme (Barcelona, 1990), pp. 211-30; E. Canales,
     Patriotismo y Desercion durante la Guerra de la Independencia en Cataluna (Coimbra,
     1988); C. Esdaile, ‘Rebeldia, reticencia y resistencia: el caso gallego de 1808’,
     Trienio, no. 35 (May, 2000), pp. 57-80.
  4. For discussions of events in La Mancha and Zaragoza, cf. J. de Haro, Guerra de
     la Independencia: La Mancha, 1808 — Diarios, Memorias y Cartas (Alcazar de San
     Juan, 2000), pp. 95-117, and R. Rudorff, War to the Death: the Sieges of Saragossa,
     1808-1809 (London, 1974), pp. 87-96. For a contemporary account of the action
     at El Bruch, cf. F Sola Montafia (ed.), Els Manresans al Bruch: Relacions del Capdill
     en Maurici Carrié Referents a la Batalla del Bruch, 6 de Juny de 1808 (Barcelona,
      1908), pp. 35-6.
  5. R. Carr, Spain, 1808-1975 (Oxford, 1982), p. 88.
  6. E Casamayor, ‘Afios politicos y histéricos de las cosas mas _particulares
     occuridas en la imperial, augusta y siempre herdica ciudad de Zaragoza’, XXV
     (1808), f. 33, Biblioteca de la Universidad de Zaragoza (hereafter BUZ.), MS.131.
     As with a number of other documents relating to Zaragoza, I owe my knowledge
     of Casamayor’s chronicle to my good friend and colleague Francisco-Javier
     Maestrojuan of the University of Navarre, whose help in this respect I am
     delighted to acknowledge.
  7. Anon., Manifiesto de las ocurrencias mds principales de la plaza de Ciudad Rodrigo
     desde la causa formada en el real sitio del Escorial al Serenisimo Senor Principe de
     Asturias, hoy nuestro amado soberano, hasta la evacuacion de la plaza de Almeida
     por los franceses en el dia 1° de octubre de 1808 (Salamanca, 1808), AHN. Est. 65—G,
     no. 264, pp. 9-10, 27.
  8. M.S. Foy, History of the War in the Peninsula under Napoleon (London, 1827), II,
     p. 200. Both shrines were of immense significance in the context of 1808: Cov-
     adonga was regarded as the birthplace of the reconquest of Spain from the Moors,
     whilst Saint James was known as the ‘Moorkiller’ thanks to a legend that he had
     appeared in a battle against the Moors and led the Spaniards to victory.
  g. Casamayor, ‘Afios politicos y histéricos’, XXV (1808), ff. 35-6, BUZ. MS.131;
     the palm tree was a symbol of purity, and, by extension, one of the mother of
     Christ as well.
216     Notes to pages 63-6

 10. Sola, Manresans al Bruch, p. 33.
 LateS. Blaze, Mémoires d’un Apothécaire sur la Guerre d’Espagne pendant les Années 1808
     a 1814 (Paris, 1828), I, pp. 72-3.
 12. For a representative collection of Patriot propaganda, cf. S. Delgado (ed.), Guerra
     de la Independencia: Proclamas, Bandos y Combatientes (Madrid, 1979), whilst
     horror stories of the Dos de Mayo may be found in Anon., Resumén de los hechos
     mas notables que fijan la conducta del ejército francés durante su existencia en la
     capital de Espana y relacién circunstanciada de todo lo ocurrido en la escena del
     dia dos de mayo (Madrid, 1808), BN. R60398—2. ~
 Fy: P. Girén, Memorias de la Vida de Don Pedro Agustin Giron, ed. A. Berazaluce
     (Pamplona, 1978), I, p. 217; M. de Cova to Junta of Galicia, 11 June 1808, AHN.
     Est. 74—-C, no. 314’; FE de Leon to Junta of Galicia, ro June 1808, ibid., no. 322;
     M. A. Belo to Junta of Galicia, 13 June 1808, ibid., no. 337; Junta of Ribadeo to
     Junta of Galicia, 20 June 1808, ibid., 74—A, no. 116.
 14. Memorial of S. Riggi, 6 March 1810, AGS. GJ. 1078; M. Garcia del Barrio, Sucesos
     de Galicia en 1809 y operaciones en la presente guerra del Coronel D. Manuel Garcia
     del Barrio, comisionado del gobierno para la restauracion de aquel reino y electo
     Comandante General por las patriotas gallegos (Cadiz, 1811), pp. 8-12, Servicio
     Historico Militar (hereafter SHM. CDF.) CIX.
 15. Petition of J. Schumacher, 22 February 1810, AGS. GJ. 1078; Anon., Causa contra
     el Canénigo Calvo (Valencia, 1808), BN. CGI. R60087—-11.
 16. J. Blanco White, Cartas de Espana, ed. V. Llorens and A. Garnica (Madrid, 1972),
     pager
 17. R. Gras y de Esteva, Zamora en la Guerra de la Independencia, 1808-14 (Madrid,
      1913), pp. 126-36.
 18. Petia, Tiempo de los Franceses, p. 62; M. Lopez Pérez and I. Lara, Entre la Guerra
     y la Paz: Jaén, 1808-1814 (Jaén, 1993), p. 272.
 19. For the students of Santiago, cf. Anon., Coleccién general de interesantes e instruc-
     tivos discursos literarios publicados en el reino de Galicia, donde se incluye lo
     ocurrido en las activas y prontas disposiciones dadas por el dicho reino para el arma-
     mento del ejército y sus diferentes posiciones contra el enemigo del mundo (Madrid,
      1808), pp. 104-8, BN. CGI. R60624; for Salgado, cf. petition of José Salgado,
      19 August 1809, AHN. Est. 77—A, no. 67; for Zumalacarregui, cf. B. Jarnés,
     Zumalacarregui: el Caudillo Romantico (Madrid, 1972), p. 22. For Calvo, cf. J. J.
     Marcén (ed.), E/ Manuscrito de Matias Calvo: Memorias de un Monegrino durante
     la Guerra de la Independencia (Zaragoza, 2000), p. 105; finally, the case of Mina is
     discussed below.
 20. Junta of Vigo to Junta of Galicia, 21 July 1808, AHN. Est. 74—A, no. 191.
 21. B. Spencer to Lord Castlereagh, 21 June 1808, Public Record Office, War Office
     Papers (hereafter PRO. WO.) 1/226, f. 478.
 22. Casamayor, ‘Afios politicos y historicos’, XXV (1808), f. 99, BUZ. MS.131.
 23. E. Iglesias to A. Filanghieri, 6 June 1808, AHN. Est. 74—B, no. 238.
 24. ‘Resumen de la exposicion que desde Moya dirigié a la Junta Central el Teniente
     Coronel del Segundo Batallon de Barcelona, Don Miguel de Haro, dando
     cuenta del estado de las cosas en Barcelona’, AHN. Est. 80-T, no. 261;
     proclamation of the Junta of Seville, 12 June 1808, BN. CGI. 60034—11; J. Rico,
     Memoria historica sobre la revolucién de Valencia (Cadiz, 1811), p. 1 to, BN.
     CGI. 61075.
 25. Junta of Orense to Junta of Galicia, 8 June 1808, AHN. Est. 75-E, no. 309.
                                                             Notes to pages 67-70-2217

26. For some examples of these regulations, cf. proclamation of Junta of Granada, 6
     June 1808, SHM. CDF. DCCCLXIV, no. 50; proclamation of Junta of Santander,
     16 August 1808, PRO. WO.1/2209, ff. 55-7.
aa Proclamation of Junta of Galicia, 4 June 1808, AHN. Est. 74—A, no. 9.
28. Royal Decree, 7 October 1808, AHN. Est. 46—A, f. 2.
29. M. de Godoy, Cuenta dada de su Vida Politica por Don Manuel de Godoy, Principe
     de la Paz, 0 sea Memorias Criticas y Apolegéticas para la Historia del Reinado del
     Senor Carlos IV de Borbén (Madrid, 1836-46), I, p. 136.
30. For some examples of what was done on the occasion of the installation of the
     Junta Central in September 1808, cf. T. de Morla to Conde de Floridablanca, 11
     October 1808, Archivo del Congreso de Diputados, Serie General (hereafter ACD.
      SG.), 1, no. 4; Ayuntamiento of La Corufia to Conde de Floridablanca, 12 October
      1808, ibid., no. 5.
ai. J. Giron y Montezuma to M. de Garay, 7 August 1809, AHN. Est. 61—T, no. 420.
32, E.g. Anon., E/ templo del heroismo consagrado a nuestro muy amado monarca,
      Fernando VII, y a la valiente fidelisima nacién espanola (Malaga, 1808), p. 18,
      BN. CGI. R6o0124-2; pastoral letter of the Bishop of Leon, 22 September 1808,
      BN. CGI. R60378.
   . Salmon, Resumen Histérico, 1, p. 100, SHM. CDF. CMXXXII.
   . Anon. to Junta Central, n.d., AHN. Est. 52—G, no. 312.
   . Conde del Pinar to M. de Garay, 16 April 1809, AHN. Est. 30—E, no. 79.
   . Petition of ayuntamiento of El Ferrol, 25 June 1808, AHN. Est. 74—A, no. 60.
   . Junta of Santiago to Junta of Galicia, 12 June 1808, AHN. Est. 74—A, no. 140.
   . Petition of Marqués de Usategui, 27 March 1809, AHN. Est. 83—N, no. 395.
   . Anon. to Conde de Floridablanca, 12 November 1808, AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 85.
   . For a discussion of these issues, cf. C. Esdaile, From Constitution to Civil War:
      Spain in the Liberal Age, r808-1939 (Oxford, 2000), pp. 4-10; C. Crowley, ‘Luces
      and Hispanidad: Nationalism and Modernization in Eighteenth-Century Spain’,
      in M. Palumbo and W. Shanahan (eds), Nationalism: Essays in Honour of Louis
      L. Snyder (Westport, Connecticutt, 1981), pp. 87-102; and B. Barreiro, ‘La
      conflictividad social durante el reinado de Carlos IV’ in P. Molas (ed.), La Espana
      de Carlos IV (Madrid, 1991), pp. 81-9. M. Garcia Ruipérez, Revueltas Sociales en
      la Provincia de Toledo: la Crisis le 1802-1805 (Toledo, 1999), is a helpful regional
      study, whilst the example of Valencia is discussed in Ardit, Revolucién Liberal y
      Revuelta Campesina, pp. 77-119. Meanwhile, general discussions of the nature of
      Spanish society may be found in Carr, Spain, pp. 1-37, and J. Lynch, Fourbon
      Spain (Oxford, 1989), pp. 198-246.
4I. Cf. R. Herr, ‘Good, evil and Spain’s rising against Napoleon’, in R. Herr and H.
      Parker (eds), Ideas in History: Essays Presented to Louis Gottschalk by his Former
      Students (Durham, North Carolina, 1965), pp. 157-81.
42. J. Kincaid, Adventures in the Rifle Brigade (London, 1909), p. 86.
43. Anon. report, 3 September 1810, AGS. GJ. 1076.
44. E Jiménez de GregSrio, Murcia en los dos primeros aos de la Guerra de la Inde-
     pendencia (Murcia, 1947), pp. 14-15; Manifiesto de las ocurrencias mas principales
      de la plaza de Ciudad Rodrigo, pp. 36-8; Gras, Zamora en la Guerra de la Inde-
     pendencia, p. 51. For a general discussion of the membership of the juntas, cf.
      Hocquellet, Résistance et Révolution, pp. 145-54.
                                                                       who had just been
45. The sevillano Tap y Nufiez, for example, was a smuggler had           fled his convent.
      released from prison, and the   Valencian Juan Rico a friar who
218    Notes to pages 70-4


 46. Cf. petition of B. Pena, 5 July 1808, AHN. Est. 74—A, no. 91; Junta of Ribadeo to
     Junta of Galicia, 16 June 1808, Est. 74—A, no. 115.
 47. Memorandum of Junta of Lugo, 12 September 1808, AHN. Est. 75—C, no. 176;
     decree of the Junta of Galicia, 15 July 1808, AHN. Est. 75—B, no. 63; decree of
     Junta of Granada, 24 June 1808, AHN. Est. 78—A, no. 4; Rico, Memoria Historica,
     pp. 71-2.
 48. E.g. Junta of Betanzos to Junta of Galicia, 17 and 18 June and 9 July 1808, AHN.
     Est. 75—A, nos 7, 8, 9.
 49. Real Orden, 18 November 1808, SHM. CDF. DGCCLXIV, p. 69; Real Orden, 3
     February 1809, AHN. Est. 31—C, no. 78.
 50. J. de Miranda to M. de Garay, 19 March 1809, AHN. Est. 16-3’, f. 58.
 Si Proclamation of Junta of Cadiz, 16 January 1809, BN. CGI. R60002—4.
 52. Proclamation of Vicario Capitular of Cadiz, 6 March 1809, AHN. Est. 62—G,
     no. 272.
 53. Proclamation      of Alcalde Mayor of Cadiz, 28 February 1809, BN. CGI.
     R60002-11.
 54. Proclamation of Comisario General of Isla de Leon, 18 July 1809, BN. CGI.
     R60002-29.
 55. L. Gomez Romero to M. de Garay, 18 April 1809, AHN. Est. 16~7, f. 37.
 56. J. de San Miguel to Marqués de Astorga, 22 June 1809, AHN. Est. 81-R,
     no. 242.
 57- Junta Central to A. Cornel, 14 June 1809, AHN. Est. 82—C, no. 356.
 58. Anon. to Junta Central, 11 November 1808, AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 111; anon. to
     Junta Central, 18 November 1808, AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 114; memorial of J.
     Ovalle, 31 December 1808, AHN. Est. 15-2’, ff. 42-5; P. de Mendoza to Conde
     de Floridablanca, 29 October 1808, AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 97; anon. to Junta
     Central, 1 August 1809, AHN. Est. 52—-F, no. 275.
 59. Anon. to Junta Central, AHN. Est. 52—G, no. 306.
 60. Anon. to Junta Central, AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 13; for a somewhat similar view of
     the Junta of Mallorca, cf. anon. to M. de Garay, 18 July 1809, AHN. Est. 62-B,
     no. 78.
 61. For all this, cf. Real Ordenanza en que S.M. establece las reglas que inviolablemente
     deben observarse para el re-emplazo del ejército, 27 October 1800, BS. CGA. 039950.
 62. Ayuntamiento of Murcia to Junta Central, 22 July 1809, AHN. Est. 83—A, no. 22;
     petition of L. Palou, 5 July 1809, ACA. JSC. 74.
 63. Cf. Junta Central to A. Cornel, 27 February 1809, AHN. Est. 82-C, no. 302.
 64. Anon. to Junta Central, 9 March, 1809, AHN. Est. 52—E, no. 266; petition of M.
     Caval and others, 28 June 1808, AHN. Est. 74—A, no. 207; ‘El verdadero espanol’
     to Junta Central, n.d., AHN. Est. 52—E, no. 218.
 65. For the cost of exemption in Granada, cf. anon. to Junta Central, n.d., AHN. Est.
     52-G, no. 353.
 66. Junta of Molina to Junta Central, 31 January 1809, AHN. Est. 80—N, no. 170;
     Diario de las Cortes Generales y Extraordinarias de Espana (Cadiz, 1810-13; here-
     after DC.), II, p. 1491.
 67. C. La Hoz to Junta Central, n.d., AHN. Est. 52—D, no. 186; anon. to Junta Central,
     n.d., AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 110.
 68. Petition of J. Ginesta, M. Riera and J. Puig, 8 December 1809, ACA. JSCsFi:
     report of M. de Garay, 6 March 1809, AHN. Est. 82—-C, no. 310.
                                                                Notes to pages 74-7     219

69. Petitions of J. Viladerau, F Feliu and FE Aragonés, 30 November 1808, 13
      August 1809 and 27 August 1811, ACA. JSC. 71; Viladerau was a prosperous
      merchant, Feliu was the son of a landowner, and Aragonés an official of the
      state lottery.
70. Anon. to Junta Central, 11 November 1808, AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 111.
7%. Anon. to Junta Central,.n.d., AHN. Est. 52—G, no. 403; for some concrete exam-
      ples from Jimena de la Frontera, cf. anon. to Conde de Altamira, 8 January 1809,
      AHN. 52-E, no. 257.
IP Anon. to Junta Central, 1 August 1809, AHN. Est. 52—F, no. 275.
73- L. Gomez Romero to M. de Garay, 25 March 1809, AHN. Est. 16-7, f. 12.
74: Junta of Ayamonte to Junta Central, 11 August 1809, AHN. Est. 61—T, no. 426;
      cf. also M. Galindo to Junta Central, 14 April 1809, AHN. Est. 81—N, no. 315. At
      the time that the Junta of Ayamonte, a town in the most remote corner of south-
      west Spain, made its boast the nearest Frenchmen lay on the River Tagus, whilst
      no enemy forces had ever come closer to the junta than Badajoz.
    . Anon. to Junta Central, n.d., AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 27.
    . Anon. to the Junta Central, n.d., AHN. Est. 52—G, no. 367; cf. also to Junta
      Central, n.d., sbid., no. 104.
    . Proclamation of commanding officer of the Voluntarios Distinguidos de
      Cadiz, 18 January 1809, BN. CGI. R60002-5; proclamation of V. Escalante, 12
      September 1809, BN. CGI. R6o0002—32; proclamation of F. Venegas, 27
      November 1809, BN. CGI. R60002-40; proclamation of Junta of Cadiz, 22
      September 1810, BN. CGI. R60002-71.
 78. A. Toribio Sanchez to Junta Central, 25 February 1809, AHN. Est. 62—A, no. 3;
      anon. to Junta Central, 30 July 1809, AHN. Est. 40—A, no. 25. For an example of
      the objections of the propertied classes to service in the milicias honradas, cf. anon.
      to Junta Central, AHN. Est. 52—-E, no. 230.
 79: Anon. to Junta Central, n.d., AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 128.
 80. Accounts of this affair may be found in J. Mackenzie to J. Cradock, 24 February
       1809, PRO. WO.1/240, ff. 41-6; Marqués de Villel to M. de Garay, 22 February
       1809, AHN. Est. 31—C, no. 39°; F. Jones to M. de Garay, 22 and 24 February 1809,
       Est. 31-C, nos 39! and 43°; Marqués de Villel to T. Reding, 28 February 1809,
       AGA: JSG: 4.
 81. E.g. Junta of Manresa to Junta of Catalonia, 4 October 1809, ACA. JSC.
     rae
82. ‘Lista de los Quintos que han Caido en el actual Sorteo en este Corregimiento de
     Manresa’, 24 March 1810, ACA. JSC. 76; Blayney, Narrative of a Forced Journey,
     I, pp. 124-5.
   . Anon. report, 25 September 1812, ACA. JSC. 43.
   _ M. Galindo to M. de Garay, 14 April 1809, AHN. Est. 81—N, no. 315.
   _ For a brief summary of Colley’s argument, cf. L. Colley, Britons: Forging the
     Nation, 1707-1837 (New Haven, Connecticut, 1992), pp. 364-75.
   _ Cf. M. Broers, Europe under Napoleon, 1799-1815 (London, 1996), pp. 103-4.
   _ For a discussion of the state of popular nationalism at the time of the war against
                                                                                          m
     Napoleon and, more to the point, of the manner in which Spanish nationalis
                     of the struggle, rather than its motor, cf.  J. Alvarez  Junco,  Mater
     was a product
                                                                                        and
     Dolorosa: la Idea de Espana en el Siglo XIX (Madrid, 2002), pp. 119-49,
                                                                 a  more  traditional  view,
     Hocquellet, Résistance et Révolution, pp. 117-40. For
220      Notes to pages 77-80

     cf. E. Goodman, ‘Spanish nationalism in the struggle against Napoleon’,
     Review of Politics, XX, no. 2 (July 1958), pp. 330-46.
 88. Cf. M. Galindo to M. de Garay, 14 April 1809, AHN. Est. 81—N, no. 315; A. de
     Cortabarria to M. de Garay, 11 April 1809, AHN. Est. 16—3', ff. 22-3; F. Gil de
     la Parra to Junta Central, 18 June 1809, AHN. Est. 62—E, no. 167.
 89. A. de Cortabarria to M. de Garay, 11 April 1809, AHN. Est. 16-3’, ff. 22-3.
 go. Petition of Junta of Llerena, 30 August 1809, AHN. Est. 80—D, no. 44.
 gl. L. Gomez Romero to M. de Garay, 10 April 1809, AHN. Est. 16~-7, ff. 25-6.
 92. F. Ballesteros to N. Mahy, 2 August 1809, SHM. CDB. 7/10/26; M. Pinto to M.
     de Garay, 24 July 1809, AHN. Est. 62—F, no. 168; C. O’Donnell to Junta Central,
     29 October 1808, AHN. Est. 62—H, no. 368.
 93. For some examples of despair at the performance of the Spanish generals, cf.
     anon. to Junta Central, 29 November 1808, AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 40; anon. to Junta
     Central, AHN. Est. 30—E, 13 January 1809, no. 237; B. Monzon to M. Serra, 12
       January 1809, AHN. Est. 40—A, no. 6’.
 94. Cf. C. Esdaile, The Duke of Wellington and the Command of the Spanish Army,
      1812-14 (London, 1990), p. 89.
 95. J. Walker to Lord Liverpool, 18 September 1810, PRO. WO.1/261, f. 42; cf. also
      proclamation of the Junta Central, 11 March 1809, BN. CGI. R60002-15);         J. Diaz
      Porlier to N. Mahy, 25 March 1811, SHM. CDB. 25/35/24; El Redactor General
      (23 August 1811), p. 267, HMM. 6/3.
    . Lord Wellington to H. Wellesley, 14 May 1812, US. WP.12/1/5.
    . Anon. to Junta Central, 25 November 1808, AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 37.
    . Marqués de Lazan to J. Blake, n.d., SHM. CDB. 2/19.
    . Anon. report, 26 March 1811, AHN. Est. 3146; anon. report, 16 June 1811, AHN.
      Est. 3010; anon. report, 23 August 1811, AHN. Est. 3146. For the disputes under-
      lying these garbled stories, Esdaile, Duke of Wellington and the Command of the
      Spanish Army, pp. 16-19 passim. Good examples of the sort of anti-British pro-
      paganda that had begun to circulate include Anon., Carta de un valenciano amigo
      de su pais a sus compatriotas (Valencia, 1813), AHN. Est. 3010, and Anon., Rep-
      resentacion de las damas espanolas a Forge Tercero, Rey de Inglaterra, sobre los vagos
      rumores acerca de la conducta del gobierno inglés y de sus ejércitos en la guerra de
     Espana (Cadiz, 1811), SHM. CDF. CXII.
100. For a discussion of popular attitudes to conscription in Spain in the reigns of
     Carlos III and Carlos IV, cf. C. Esdaile, The Spanish Army in the Peninsular War
     (Manchester, 1988), pp. 9-13. Cf. also C. Borreguero, E/ Reclutamiento Militar por
     Quintas en la Espana del Siglo XVIII: Origenes del Servicio Militar Obligatorio
     (Valladolid, 1989), pp. 317-28.
Iol. Anon. to Junta Central, n.d., AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 82.
102. Anon.    to Junta Central, n.d., AHN. Est. 52—G, nos 303, 315, 334. Brindle,
     ‘Memorrs’, f. 12. It is interesting to note that in the course of the uprising in
     Valladolid in 1808 rioters had threatened the seminarians of the English college
     with death unless they too joined the army.
103. Anon. to Floridablanca, 30 December 1808, AHN. Est. 52-E, no. 256.
104. For some Catalan examples of pleas for exemption, cf. petitions of V. Cendra, J.
     Morera and J. Lazaro, 30 November 1808 and 5 and 24 January 1809, ACA. JSC.
     70
105. J. Patterson, The Adventures of Captain John Patterson (London, 1837), p. 216;
     anon. to Junta Central, n.d., AHN. Est. 52-G, no. 403.
                                                              Notes to pages 80-4   = 221

106. T. Garcia to Junta of Catalonia, 18 August 1811, ACA. JSC. 88.
107. Junta of Santiago to Junta of Galicia, 16 December 1808, AHN. Est. 74—B, no.
      272. Cf. also. P. de Burgos to Junta of Galicia, gNovember 1808, AHN. Est. 77—-C,
      no. 140.
108. Junta of Ecija to Junta of Seville, 13 June 1809, AHN. Est. 82—C, no. 335.
109. ‘Lista de los mozos de Paymogo en quienes se ha advertido colusion y por cuya
      causa se desertaron los quarenta y tantos mozos alistados’, AHN. Est. 16-17,
      ff. 20-1.
110. No cases of this phenomenon have been encountered in the archives, but the
      prevalence of the practice in other states makes it safe to assume that it also took
      place in Spain.
ELEY. F. Ribas to Junta of Catalonia, 16 December 1809, ACA. JSC. 71.
I12. ‘Estado general de todos los solteros, viudos sin hijos, casados y viudos con
      hijos existentes en este partido de marina [i.e. Arens de Mar]’, 12 June 1811,
      AGAS JSC. 16.
Tales Junta Central to Junta of Seville, 13 May 1809, AHN. Est. 82—C, no. 329.
114. J. Claros to Junta of Catalufia, 29 June 1811, ACA. JSC. 16.
RUS: Junta of Mesia to Junta of Santiago, 11 June 1808, AHN. Est. 74-A,
      no. 112°; petition of G. Menéndez de la Vega, 9 June 1808, AHN. Est. 74—B,
      no. 247; R. Clausell and J. Vila to Junta of Catalonia, 6 October 1811, ACA.
      JSC. 16.
116. J. Onate to Junta Central, 28 December 1808, AHN. Est. 80—U, no. 262; F de
      Le6n to Junta Central, 27 January 1809, AHN. Est. 31-G, no. 150; J. Castro de
      Lavalle to T. Reding, 18 January 1809, ACA. JSC. 4; Junta of Catalonia to Junta
       Central, 15 February 1809, AHN. Est. 31-F, no. 136; Anon. Noticias de Lérida
       (Lérida, 1809), BN. CGI. R60292-7; J. Mergelina to Junta Central, 28 February
       1809, AHN. Est. 31-E, no. 127; Junta of Jerez de la Frontera to Junta Central, 1
      March 1809, AHN. Est. 31—E, no. 129; C. de Campos to Junta Central, 3 and 7
      January 1809, AHN. Est. 31—-H, nos 172-3; J. M. de Retamosa to Junta Central,
      7 January 1809, AHN. Est. 31-H, no. 183.
biz Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, v, p. 17.
118. E. O’Donnell to Junta Central, 28 January 1810, SHM. CGB. 3/18; Marqués de
      Portazgo to J. Jorda, 27 December 1809, ACA. JSC. 76.
119g. Junta of Mataré to Junta of Catalonia, 24 January 1809, ACA. JSC. 4.
120. E Rovira to Junta of Manresa, 19 January 1810, ACA. JSC. 76; J. Blake to Junta
       of Catalonia, 15 September 1809, AHN. Est. 38—E, no. 386°.
121. ‘Memorial de las justicias de los pueblos del Valles’, 29 August
                                                                              1809, ACA.
      jSGi7t:
122. J. Blake to Junta Central, 16 September 1809, SHM. CGB. 3/4;
                                                                         J. Roset to Junta
       of Catalonia, 31 December 1809, ACA. JSC.       74.
123. E. Guervos to his parents, 18 November 1808, RAH. 11:9003.
124. B. Spencer to Lord Castlereagh, 17 June 1808, PRO. WO.1/226, f. 464; F. Garcia
       Marin, Memorias para la Historia Militar de la Revolucion Espanola (Madrid, 1817),
       pp. 26-7, BS. CGA. 040731; Alvarez Valdés, Memorias, pp. 55-6.
125. For evidence of self-inflicted wounds, cf. J. Encinas Lago to Junta Central, 25
       November 1809, AHN. Est. 33—A, no. 97.
126. Proclamations of the Junta of Seville, 31 May, 12 June and 4 July 1808,
                                                                                     SHM.
       CDF DCCCLXIV, no. 45; BN. CGI. R60034-11/12; Gras, Zamora en la Guerra
     de la Independencia, p. 67.
222     Notes to pages 84-7

127 J. M. Carvajal to N. Mahy, 22 January 1809, SHM. CDB. 5/8/3; J. Mascarefias
     to N. Mahy, 10 March 1809, SHM. CDB. 5/8/g; J. Gomez de la Torre to M. de
     Garay, 16 April 1809, AHN. Est. 16-18, ff. 76-7; ‘Lista de los Desertores que el
     Resguardo de este Capital ha Capturado’, AHN. Est. 80-F, no. 108; M. Valbuena
     to N. Mahy, 8 May 1809, SHM. CDB. 7/10/25; J. de San Miguel to Marqués de
     Astorga, 22 June 1809, AHN. Est. 81-R, no. 342.
128. For some examples of soldiers trying to remain in their home provinces, cf. F.
     Ballesteros to N. Mahy, 4 and 28 August 1809, SHM. CDB. 7/10/26. Figures for
     the desertion of Catalan soldiers are discussed in Ganales, Patriotismo y Desercion,
      PP. 277-9.
129. E.g. P. Morillo to Marqués de la Romana, g April 1810, cit. Rodriguez Villa,
       Morillo, Il, pp. 37-8; J. Gonzalez de la Torre to P. Rivero, 24 November 1809,
       AHN. Est. 40-F, no. 235.
     . J. Gonzalez de la Torre to P. Rivero, 26 November 1809, AHN. Est. 40-F,
       no. 187.
    . E.g. Lord Wellington to Lord Wellesley, 8 August 1809, US. WP. 1/274.
     . E.g. Gazeta del Gobierno (27 January 1809) HMM. AH17-2 (2925bis); Duque del
       Infantado, Manifiesto de las operaciones del Ejército del Centro (Seville, 1809),
       pp. 83-4. For the penalties laid down for desertion, cf. proclamation of Junta
       Central, 3 January 1809, BN. CGI. 60002-2.
     . E.g. F Adam to J. Murray, 24 March 1813, US. WP.1/368.
     . For a general discussion of the conditions endured by the Spanish army in the
       Peninsular War, cf. Esdaile, Spanish Army, p. 140.
     . S. Rodriguez to M. de Garay, 16 February 1809, AHN. Est. 46—B, no. 56;J.Espina
       to Junta of Galicia, 16 September 1808, AHN. Est. 75-B, no. 69.
    . Petition of M. de la Herrera, J. del Campo and J. Navarrete, 19 March 1810, AGS.
       GJ. 1078.
    . Junta of Villafranca to Junta of Catalonia, 29 March 1810, ACA. JSC. 76.
    . Bishop of Ciudad Rodrigo to G. M. de Jovellanos, 10 February 1809, AHN. Est.
       65—-G, no. 287.
139. Cf. J. Lefevre to J. Leith, 25 October 1808, PRO. WO.1/229, f. 451; Junta of
       Molina to J. Ovalle, 26 December 1808, AHN. Est. 15-2°, ff. 22-5; report of A.
       Saenz Vizmanos, n.d., AHN. 15-7’, ff. 38-9; Junta of Mallorca to Junta Central,
        10 December 1808, AHN. Est. 62—B, no. 24; petition of ayuntamiento of La
       Corufia, 6 June 1808, AHN. Est. 74—A, no. 30; Junta of Ayamonte to F Copons,
       RAH. 9:6967; Junta of Galicia to F. J. Caro and M. M. Avyalle, 31 December 1808,
       AHN. Est. 72—B, no. 209.
140. E.g. Anon. to Junta Central, n.d., AHN. Est. 52—G, no. 343; Junta of Mallorca to
       Junta Central, 10 December 1808, AHN. Est. 62—B, no. 24; J. Pinto y Palacios to
       M. de Garay, 24 July 1809, AHN. Est. 62—F, no. 168; J. O’Donnell to N. Mahy,
       18 February 1809, SHM. CDB. 5/8/9; M. Modet to M. de Garay, 4 April 1810,
       AHN. Est. 16-9, ff. 29-30.
I4I. Proclamations of Junta of Seville, 6 and 30 June 1808, SHM. CDE DCCCLXIV,
       ff. 50, 63; Gras, Zamora en la Guerra de la Independencia, p. 67.
142. Gras, Zamora en la Guerra de la Independencia, p. 109.
143. E.g. R. Gomez Aguado to N. Mahy, 1 May 1809, SHM. CDB. 5/8/9; F. de Leon
       to Junta Central, 27 February 1809, AHN. Est. 31-G, no. rs8.
144. E.g. M. Modet to M. de Garay, 4 April 1810, AHN. Est. 16-9, ff. 29-30.
                                                              Notes to pages 87-94      223

145. M. Nujiez to N. Mahy, n.d.. SHM. CDB. 7/10/25; L. Gomez Romero to M. de
       Garay, 10 April 1809, AHN. 16-17, ff. 23-4.
    . Lord Burghersh to Lord Wellington, 18 October 1809, Supplementary Despatches,
       Correspondence and Memoranda of Field Marshal Arthur, Duke of Wellington, ed.
       Second Duke of Wellington (London, 1858-72), VI, p. 406.
     . A. Ludovici (ed.), On the Road with Wellington: the Diary of a War Commissary
       in the Peninsular Campaigns (New York, 1925), pp. 79-80.
     . For some examples of this thinking, cf. E/ Observador (27 July 1810), p. 63,
       SHM. CDE. CX; Diario Redactor de Sevilla (9-11 December 1812), SHM.
       CDF CXXXII; El Tribuno del Pueblo Espanol (g March 1813), p. 179,
       HMM. AH1-4 (no. 121); El Espanol (30 April 1810), p. 14, HMM. AH4-2
       (no. 710).
149. E. de Bardaji to F Abadia, 8 July 1810, AHN. Est. 2994; proclamation of J.
       O’Donnell, 21 March 1812, RAH. 9:6971.
150. Royal Decree, 13 March 1814, ACD. SG. 1/60. For a general assessment of the
       social policy of the cortes, cf. C. Esdaile, The Peninsular War: a New History
       (London, 2002), pp. 403-5, 438-9.


4 The Origins of the Guerrillas
  Te For all this, cf. Tone, The Fatal Knot, pp. 9-41 passim. The impact of proximity
     to France on notions of identity with relation to the rather different Catalan
     district of La Cerdafia is discussed in P. Sahlins, Boundaries: the Making of France
     and Spain in the Pyrenees (Berkeley, California, 1989). For the impact of émigré
     religion, cf. Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution in Spain, pp. 298-302.
  2. Cf. Tone, Fatal Knot, pp. 166-8.
  3. J. North (ed.), Jn the Legions of Napoleon: the Memoirs of a Polish Officer in Spain
     and Russia, 1808-1813 (London, 1999), p. 89.
  4. Von Brandt, The Two Minas, p. 29.
  5. In arriving at these figures the greatest problem was what to do with the fifteen
     men whose occupations were given as Jabradores or ganadores. The meaning of
     these terms being simply ‘farmer’ (in the former case arable, and in the latter pas-
     toral), in the absence of additional information it is impossible to assess their social
     standing with any certainty. Although the words were applied to men of a wide
     range of income, they have in this instance all been classified as peasants — in other
     words, tenants or owner-occupiers working plots of land with, for most of the
     time, no more aid than that of their immediate family. This slightly underesti-
     mates the number of members of the ‘establishment’ that have been positively
     identified: the number of pudientes should probably be raised to at least 206. The
     information on which these figures are based is in due course to be published in
     electronic form as part of a much larger data base that is currently being elabo-
     rated with the aid of funding received from the Arts and Humanities Research
         Board and the British Academy.
       _ For the case of Pascual y Casas, a prosperous landowner from Badalona who raised
         a guerrilla band at his own cost in 1808, cf. petition of E. Pascual y Casas, 26
         October 1809, AHN. Est. 65—A.
       . For Crespo and Uriz, cf. J. M. Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Liberal (Madrid, 1967),
         pp. 127-33; for Mayor, cf. Anon., Apuntes de la vida y hechos militares del
224    Notes to pages 94-9

        Brigadier Don Juan Martin, el Empecinado (Madrid, 1814), p. 29, SHM. DG.
        1811/5. To round off Uriz’s story, be it said that, after a murky period as an abso-
        lutist double agent in which he collaborated with the almost equally unsavoury
        Mariano Renovales in securing the collapse of an expedition to Mexico, he reap-
        peared in Spain in 1820 in the guise of an ardent liberal and attempted to black-
        mail Espoz y Mina into securing a government post for him. For Temprano’s
        defence of his actions, cf. A. Temprano to Junta Central, 22 September 1809,
        AHN. 41-C, no. 69.
    . Cod6n, Cura Merino, pp. 23-30; Marco, Cura Merino, pp. 8-9; Rodriguez Solis,
        Guerrilleros de 1808, I, ii, pp. 33-6. For an example of the sort of complaints that
        were voiced at the conduct of clerical guerrillas, cf. M. Traggia to P. Rivero, AHN.
        Est. 41-C, no. 73.
     . A. Jiménez, Queja de un patriota al supremo consejo nacional en que manifiesta la
        alevosta conque se persigue a las partidas de guerrilla y a los defensores mas celosos de
        la patria (Cadiz, 1811), BN. CGI. R61148.
     . Mufioz Maldonado, Guerra de la Independencia, Il, p. 267; Rodriguez Solis,
        Guerrilleros de 1808, 1, ii, pp. 36-7; tbid., I, viii, p. 17.
     . E.g. Memorial of F. Rovira, 21 November 1814, SHM. CGI. 4/8.
     . For an account of Mina’s captivity, cf. J. R. Aymes, La Déportation sous le Premier
        Empire: les Espagnols en France, 808-1814 (Paris, 1983), pp. 353-6.
     . M. Renovales to N. Mahy, 7 September 1810, SHM. CDB. 16/20/58.
     . Cf. EF Losada to N. Mahy, 16 November 1810, SHM. CDB. 16/20/58; J.
        Aburruza to Mahy, 28 March 1811, SHM. CDB. 16/20/58.
      . For details of Renovales’ career in the latter years of the war and afterwards, cf.
        Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Liberal, p. 132; Aymes, La Déportation sous le Premier
        Empire, pp. 342-3.
      . Espoz y Mina, Memorias, 1, pp. 7-11.
      » Ibid pi 25:
      . Anon., ‘Algarabia, 0 noticia al publico de un pozo sin suelo, boca de una mina
        de oro y plata, dada a luz quien la ha observado atentamente y penetrado sus
        interiores’ (MS.), pp. 13-15, Archivo Municipal de Zaragoza (hereafter AMZ.)
        27-22. For Von Brandt’s views on Espoz y Mina’s character, cf. Von Brandt, The
         Two Minas, p. 25.
 19g. For this affair, cf. Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Guerrillero, pp. 214-16.
 20. For the doings of the man whom Espoz y Mina insultingly refers to as ‘Don
        Fulano de Miguel’, cf. Espoz y Mina, Memorias, I, pp. 54-7. Whilst it is probably
        true that Miguel was a pompous and self-seeking incompetent who alienated all
        those with whom he came into contact and fled at the first sign of the French, it
        is quite clear that Espoy y Mina turned the troops against him and effectively
        engineered his downfall.
 PS     Espoz y Mina, Memorias, I, p. 181. Despite his claims, Espoz y Mina was not
        Mina’s uncle, but rather a distant cousin, the former’s great-aunt being the latter’s
        great-grandmother.
 22. For a contemporary example of rumours that Mina was betrayed, cf. Salmon,

        Resumen Historico, Ul, p. 277.
 23: ‘Algarabia’, pp. 2-9.
 24. J. Sherer, Recollections of the Peninsula (London, 1825), p. 248.
 25. Blayney, Narrative of a Forced Journey, I, p. 139.
                                                            Notes to pages 99-103      225

26. P. Haythornthwaite (ed.), Life in Napoleon’s Army: the Memoirs of Captain Elzéar
       Blaze (London, 1995), p. 194.
   . Salmon, Resumen Histérico, I, p. 277.
28. Haro, La Mancha, p. 102; A. Merlo, ‘El 6 de junio de 1808 en Asturias’ in J. Garcia
       Prado and others, Estudios de la Guerra de la Independencia (Zaragoza, 1964-7),
       pst                  ,
   . Petition of V. Jiménez, n.d., AHN. Est. 41—E, no. 162.
30. Relacion de los méritos y proezas de Fray Lucas Rafael.
oa Brindle, ‘Memoirs’, p. 44; for Rodriguez Solis’s version of events, cf. Rodriguez
       Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, 1, i, pp. 55-6.
    . For the story that El Empecinado became a guerrilla after killing a French soldier
       in a quarrel, cf. F Hernandez Girbal, Juan Martin, El Empecinado, terror de los
       franceses (Madrid, 1985), pp. 72-3.
    . Ortufio, Xavier Mina, pp. 42-59; Von Brandt, The Two Minas, pp. 8-11. For the
       traditional version of events, cf. Southey, Peninsular War, Il, pp. 392-3.
    . Pefia, Tiempo de los franceses, p. 49.
     . Petition of R. de Murillo, 7 January 1810, AHN. Est. 15', f. 46.
     . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, Il, iti, pp. 43-5.
     . Barthélemy, E/ Marquesito, 1, pp. 42-4.
     . Anon. report, 15 November 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
     . Petition of F Mallén, 19 November 1809, AHN. Est. 61—N, no. 317.
     . Petition of A. Piloti, 23 June 1809, AHN. Est. 41-E, no. 188.
     . Proclamation of the Junta of Aragon, 22 September 1809, AHN. Est. 61—N,
        no. 263.
42. Marqués de las Atalayuelas to M. de Garay, 22 September 1809, AHN. Est. 41-E,
        no. 193; cf. also A. Cornel to M. de Garay, 20 October 1809, AHN. Est. 41-E,
        no. 200.
43. A. Piloti to M. de Garay, 30 September 1809, AHN. Est.41—E, no. 195.
44. Duque de Infantado to M. de Garay, 31 December 1809, AHN. Est. 41-E,
        no. 202. Infantado’s frivolity and want of common sense are well recorded. For
        some examples, cf. H. R. Holland, Foreign Reminiscences, ed. H. E. Holland
        (London, 1857), p. 110; J. Garcia de Leén y Pizarro, Memorias de la Vida del Excmo.
        Sr. D. José Garcia de Leon y Pizarro Escritas por El Mismo, ed. A. Alonso (Madrid,
     1894), I, p. 229.
45. ‘Noticia puntualizada de la ocurrencia que en la tarde de 26 de noviembre de
      1810 acaecié en esta ciudad de Sigiienza con los oficiales, comandantes de partidas
      y batallén de infanteria que hasta ahora han obrado bajo las ordenes del Brigadier
      D. Juan Martin Diez, El Empecinado’, n.d., AHN. Est. 3010.
    _ Lowe this information on the latter half of Piloti’s career to the generosity of my
      good friend Jorge Sanchez Fernandez.
    _ Petition of A. Valdivielso Morguecho, 29 September 1810, RAH. 9:6968.
    _ Cit. F. Carantofia, La Guerra de la Independencia en Asturias (Oviedo, 1983), pp.
      168—9. For Principe and Saornil, cf. Sanchez Fernandez, Nos Invaden!, pp. 32-6.
49.   Rodriguez   Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, v, p. 20.
50. Cf. report of Junta Criminal Extraordinaria de Granada, 10 August 1810, AGS.
      GJ. 1086. For a highly coloured version of Moreno’s career based largely on
      the claims made by his wife after his execution in August 1810 in the hope of
      obtaining compensation from the cortes, cf. R. Fernandez de Castro, Apuntes
226      Notes to pages 104-9

         Histérico-Biograficos del Insigne Patriota, Capitén de Infanteria, Don Vicente
         Moreno, Héroe de la Independencia (Melilla, 1908), pp. 61-159.
      . Junta of Ayamonte to F. Copons, 22 July 1810, RAH. 9:6967.
      . P. Morillo to F. J. Castafios, n.d., cit. Rodriguez Villa, Morillo, Il, pp. 156-8.
      . Petition of J. del Castillo, 30 April 1809, ACA. JSC. 74.
      . Memorial of E J. de Segura, 1 June 1809, AHN. Est. 15-2", f. 52.
      . M. Jiménez Guazo to M. de Garay, 30 September 1809, AHN. Est. 41—E, no. 167.
      . Petition of F Aznar Moreno, 27 October 1809, AHN. Est. 41—-E, no. 188.
       . Junta General Militar to A. Cornel, 11 December r809, AHN. Est. 61-N, no. 352.
       . L. Valero to Junta Central, 8 February 1809, AHN. 52—D, no. 203.
       . Proclamation of Marqués de Villafranca y los Vélez, 23 January 1810, SHM.
       CDB. 3/28.
      . Garcia del Barrio, Sucesos de Galicia, p. 8; Lopez Pérez and Lara, Entre la Guerra
         y la Paz, pp. 85-90.
      . Conde de Tilly to M. de Garay, 21 January 1809, AHN. Est. 39—D, no. 254.
      . Royal Decree, 28 December 1808, cit. Gazeta del Gobierno (3 February 1809),
         pp. 82-7, HMM. AH17-2(z925bis); Royal Decree, 25 February 1809, cit. Diario
         de Badajoz (10 March 1809), pp. 261-2, HMM. AH14—1(2457).
       . Proclamation of M. de Garay, 28 April 1809, AGS. GJ. 1147.
       . A. Cornel to J. Crivell, 12 May 1809, AHN. Est. 16-5’, f. 4; M. de Garay to C.
       Areizaga, 15 June 1809, AHN. Est. 15-2', f. 55.
    . Cf. B. Hermida to J. A. Colmenares, 13 May 1809, AHN. Est. 61—N, no. 229.
    . A. de Arce to M. de Garay, 3 December 1808, AHN. Est. 38—C, no. 129; petition
        of P. Morillo, 6 February 1809, cit. Rodriguez Villa, Mori/lo, Il, pp. 8-11.
    . Proclamation of Marqués de la Romana, n.d., AHN. Est. 17-7, ff. 3-4; Marqués
        de la Romana to J. Blake, 26 September 1810, SHM. CGB. 3/25; J. Moscoso,
        Reflexiones sobre la guerra de Espana e instrucciones para la guerra de partidas o de
        patsanos (Cadiz, 1809) BS. CGA. 040325; Memorial Militar y Patriotico del Ejército
        de la Izquierda, 6 April 1810, pp. 2-3, HMM. AH3-3(no. 536bis).
 68. Mufioz Maldonado, Guerra de la Independencia, Il, p. 265; anon. to Junta Central,
        n.d., AHN. Est. 52—A, no. 25; proclamation of José Caro, 7 March 1810, Archivo
        Municipal de Zaragoza, Coleccion General Palafox (hereafter AMZ. CGP.)
        08174/19-8/15.
     . A. Saenz de Vizmanos to M. de Garay, 22 June 1809, AHN. Est. 15'~7, ff. 44-7.
     . Duque de Infantado to M. de Garay, 5 September 1809, AHN. Est. 41—E, no. 149;
        proclamation of N. Mahy, 27 May 1810, SHM. CDB. 17/21/65.
     . Cf. proclamation of F. Copons, 17 June 1812, RAH. 9:6971.
     . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, 1, v, p. 20; ibid. I, vi, p. 11.
     . Espoz y Mina, Memorias, I, p. 53.
     . Diario Redactor de Sevilla (5 November 1812), SHM. CDE CXXXII.
      . E. Pages and J. Battle to L. Lacy, 6 August 1811, ACA. JSC. 88.
      . FE Reig to F Copons, 20 May 1812, RAH. 9:6971.
      . J. Aburruza to N. Mahy, 28 March 1811, SHM. CDB. 16/20/58.
      . Proclamation of the Junta of Asturias, 3 September 1810, SHM. CDB. 19/23/90.
      . J. Diaz Porlier to N. Mahy, 18 and 25 July 1810, SHM. CDB. 16/20/60.
      . P. Morillo to Marqués de La Romana, 12 April 1810, cit. Rodriguez Villa, Morillo,
        II, p. 42.
        R. Gutiérrez to Regency, 4 March 1812, AHN. Est. 3010.
                                                            Notes to pages 109-14      227

82 . J. Battle to E. Pages, 24 July 1811, ACA. JSC. 16; J. Ciervo to Junta of Catalonia,
      28 July 1811, ibid.
83. Anon. report, 22 July 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
84. J. Ibafiez, Diario de operaciones de la divisién del Condado de Niebla que mandé el
      Mariscal de Campo, Don Francisco de Copons y Navia, desde el dia 14 de abril de
      1810, que tomé el-mando, hasta el 24 de enero de 1811, que paso este general al
      Quinto Ejército (Faro, 1811), pp. 3-4, SHM. CDE CCCXLII.
85. F. Copons to F. Eguia, 14 April 1810, RAH.9:6966; in view of the lacklustre per-
      formance of the Condado de Niebla hitherto, the reference to patriotic ardour may
      seem puzzling, but Copons was probably referring not to the Napoleonic period
      but to that of /os reyes catélicos, many towns in the district having played a leading
      role in the voyages of Christopher Columbus.
   . E.g. EF Copons to ayuntamiento of Trigueros, 7 May 1810, RAH. 9:6966.
   . E Copons to Junta of Cadiz, 18 May 1810, RAH. 9:6966.
   . E Copons to Junta of Regency, 20 September 1810, RAH. 9:6968.
   . T. Sydenham to H. Wellesley, 12 September 1812, US. WP.1/36r.
   . T. McGuffie (ed.), Peninsular Cavalry General: the Correspondence of Lieutenant
      General Robert Ballard Long (London, 1951), pp. 96-7; for further examples of
      British complaints at the passivity of the populace in the occupied regions, cf. T.
      Pakenham (ed.), The Pakenham Letters, 1800 to 1815 (London, 1914), p. 111; W.
      Thompson (ed.), An Ensign in the Peninsular War: the Letters of John Aitchison
      (London, 1981), p. 162.
gl. Blayney, Narrative of a Forced Journey, 1, pp. 13-14. NB. according to Blayney
      the presence of Miller and the other officers, of whom the most prominent
      appear to have been two lieutenant-colonels named Basset and Warrington, was
      the work of the Duque del Infantado, the latter having prevailed on the British
      government to send a number of British officers to organise the serranos. [bid.,
      pp. 26-7.
    . Report of Junta Criminal Extraordinaria de Pamplona, AGS. GJ. 1085.
    . Report of Junta Criminal Extraordinaria de Guadalajara, 1 August 1809, AGS.
      GJ. 1081; Carnicero, Historia Razonada, Il, pp. 78-80.
    . Blaze, Mémoires, U, pp. 86-7.
    _ For evidence of a band in which clerical participation was strong, cf. petition of
      L. de Najera, 5 November 1809, AHN. Est. 41-E, no. 98; however, cf. also Tone,
      Fatal Knot, pp. 150-1.
    . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, iv, p. 24.
    . Codon, Cura Merino, p. 28.
    . For Abuin, cf. Sanchez Fernandez, Nos Invaden!, pp. 24-6.
    . Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Liberal, pp. 44-5.
    . Report of A. Revenga, 29 August 1810, AGS. GJ. 1148.
    . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, 1, x, p. 37:
    _ J. M. Ponce de Leon to Marqués de Almenara, 12 March 1810, AGS. GJ.
      1163.
    . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, 1, x, pp. 22, 255 Barnés, Zumalacarregut, pp.
      24-5; Tone, Fatal Knot, p. 75.
104. Tone, Fatal Knot, pp. 120, 135.
105. L. Guimbaud (ed.), Mémoires du Général Hugo (Paris, 1934), p. 180; G. O’Farrill
     to P. Romero, 18 August 1811, AGS. GJ. 1083.
228     Notes to pages 114-20


106. Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, iii, pp. 19-20; Espoz y Mina, Memorias,
      I, pp. 35-6.
107. L. Guerrero to M. Romero, 25 January 1811, AGS. GJ. 1082.
108. Marco, Cura Merino, pp. 8-9.
109. Junta of Ayamonte to F. Copons, n.d., RAH. 9:6167.
IIo.  Anon. report, n.d., AHN. Est. 2994; for the caution of the josefino administration
      with regard to any mention of military service, cf. circular of G. O’Farrill, 24
      March 1810, AGS. GJ. 1163.
1 U88 Informe of M. J. Martinez Valcarcel, 4 August 1810, AGS. GJ. 1078; anon. informe,
      29 August 1810, zbid.
112. T. Sydenham to H. Wellesley, 10 October 1812, US. WP.1/361.
Tey E.g. H. Balsa to J. Elio, 19 September 1810, AMZ. CGP. 08174/19-8/70.
II4. E.g. FE Castafio to E Copons, 5 July 1810, RAH. 9:6967; report of Junta
      Criminal Extraordinaria of Granada, 10 August 1810, AGS. GJ. 1086.
115. F. Taboada to N. Mahy, 27 June 1810, SHM. CGB. 17/24/98.
116. Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1508, 1, v, p. 27.
ge Tbid., I, vi, p. 23.
118. J. M. Sarasa, Vida y Hechos Militares del Mariscal de Campo, Don Juan Manuel
      Sarasa, Narrados por El Mismo, ed. J. del Burgo (Pamplona, 1952), p. 16.
11g. Anon. report, 28 June 1811, SHM. CGI. 3/34.
120. Informe of Junta Criminal Extraordinaria de Toledo, n.d., AGS. GJ. 1082.
121. F. Espoz y Mina to G. de Mendizabal, 7 February 1812, AHN. Est. 3010; Tone,
      Fatal Knot, pp. 170-1.
1227 R. Gutiérrez to E. Bardaji, 17 July 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
123. ‘Inventario de Todos los Efectos Hecho por el Sr. Longa a la Partida Llamada de
      Voluntarios de Castilla’, 3 July 1810, SHM. CDB. 17/21/61.
124. Blayney, Forced Journey, I, p. 354.
125: Cf. Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia, VII, p. 14; Tone, Fatal Knot, p. 75.
126. Von Brandt, The Two Minas, p. 54; T. Sydenham to H. Wellesley, 10 October 1812,
      US. WP.1/361; Larpent, Private Journal of Judge-Advocate F S. Larpent, I,
     p. 132.
127. L. Gonzaga de Villaba, Zaragoza en su segundo sitio (Palma de Mallorca, 1811),
     p. 77, SHM. DG. 1811/6.
128. A. von Schepeler, Histoire de la Révolution d’Espagne et de Portugal ainsi que de la
     Guerre qui en Résulta (Liege, 1829-31), II, p. 430.
129. The social history of the War of Independence remains to be written. However,
     helpful regional texts include P. Fernandez Albadalejo, La Crisis del Antiguo
     Regimen en Guipuzcoa, 1766-1833: Cambio Econémico e Historia (Madrid, 1975)
     and F. Miranda, La Guerra de la Independencia en Navarra: la Accion del Estado
     (Pamplona, 1977).
130. Blayney, Forced Journey, I, pp. 57-8.
Tote Casamayor, ‘Afios politicos’, XXIX, f. 22, BUZ. MS.135.
132% Carnicero, Historia Razonada, Ul, pp. 121-2.
138: M. Glover (ed.), 4 Gentleman Volunteer: the Letters of George Hennell from the
     Peninsular War (London, 1979), p. 52.
134. J. M. Ponce de Leon to Marqués de Almenara, 28 April 1810, AGS. GJ. 1163.
135. Petition of M. Ortiz Ortafiez, 18 May 1812, AGS. GJ. 1079.
136. B. Lopez Moran, E/ Bandolerismo Gallego en la Primera Mitad del Siglo XIX (La
                                                              Notes to pages 120-5     229

      Corufia, 1995), pp. 32-4; J. Santos, E/ Bandolerismo en Andalucia, I: Sevilla y su
      Antiguo Reino (Seville, 1991), pp. 149-97 passim.
137. J. Ortega, Historia de las Escuadras de Catalufia: su Origen, sus Proezas, sus Vicisi-
      tudes Intercalada con la Vida y Hechos de los Mas Célebres Ladrones y Bandoleros
      (Barcelona, 1968), p. 192.
    . Proclamation of M.-J. Solano, 11 January 1812, AGS. GJ. 1080.
    . Cf. report of R. Moyano, 19 February 1812, AGS. GJ. 1087.
    . Petition of S. de Bernaola, 12 November 1811, AGS. GJ. 1082.
   . Report of Ministerio General de Policia, 16 February 1810, AGS. GJ. 1078; Z. J.
     Garrido to Junta Criminal Extraordinaria de Vizcaya, 5 December 1809, AGS. GJ.
       1076.
    . E.g. proclamation of Junta of Aragon, 1 December 1809, AHN. 61-N, no. 322;
       F. Reig to F Copons, 7 May 1812, RAH. 9:6971.
    . Haythornthwaite, Life in Napoleon’s Army, p. 57.
    . A. Bassecourt to N. Mahy, 18 October 1811, SHM. CDB. 24/33/0; Santos,
       Bandolerismo en Espana, pp. 210-11.
     . A. Caballero to EFCopons, 5 October 1810, RAH. 9:6167; F Espoz y Mina to F-
       J. de Castafios, 12 March 1813, US. WP.1/368; J. Donaldson, Recollections of the
       Eventful Life of a Soldier (Edinburgh, 1852), pp. 206-7.
     . E.g. J. Moscoso to N. Mahy, 25 February 1810, SHM. CDB. 16/20/52; Conde
       de Norofia to P. de Rivero, n.d., AHN. Est. no. 77—A, no. 106.
     . E.g. report of F Martinez, 24 May 1811, AGS. GJ. 1081; report of F. de Echavarri,
        12 March 1812, AGS. GJ. 1087; G. Valdés to P. Romero, 15 August 1811, AGS.
       GJ. 1083.
     . Proclamation of the Junta Criminal Extraordinaria of Jaén, 13 August 1811, AGS.
       GJ. 1083.
149. Junta Criminal Extraordinaria de Guadalajara to P. Romero, 5 January 1812, AGS.
       GJ. 1087; for some Patriot complaints in similar vein, cf. Junta of Matar6 to Junta
       of Catalonia, 11 September 1809, ACA. JSC. 71; Junta of Vich to Junta of
       Catalonia, 5 December 1811, ACA. JSC. 16.
150. R. Gutiérrez to Regency, 30 April 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
I5I. Cf. Santos, Bandolerismo en Andalucia, pp. 216-25.
BE2; Blayney, Narrative of a Forced Journey, I, pp. 73-4.
153. Report of A. Picatoste, 6 April 1812, AGS. GJ. 1087; various reports, AGS. GJ.
     1151.
154. E Mesone to Junta of Catalonia, 26 June 1811, ACA. JSC. 16.
Pes T. Bustamente to M. de Garay, 7 May 1809, AHN. Est. 80—L, no. 164.
156. Report of J. C. Lopez, n.d., AGS. GJ. 1145; Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1508,
     Il, p. 44; report of P. Garcia Triguero, 3 May 1812, AGS. GJ. 1087; report of J,
     R. de Zamalloa, 2 October 1811, AGS. GJ. 1084; report of J. Sanchez Mendoza,
     g January 1812, AGS. GJ. 1150; Espoz y Mina, Memorias, I, p. 178.
1572 J. Heredia to F Copons, 21 December 1810, RAH. 9:6967; R. Gutiérrez to I. de
     la Pezuela, 13 August 1812, AHN. Est. 3010; anon. report, 25 September 1811,
     AHN. Est. 3146; report of A. Amat de la Fortuna, 24 March 1812, AGS. GJ. 11453
     report of J. Ibarrola, 21 April 1812, AGS. GJ. 1151.
158. E J. de Castafios to J. Blake, 28 March 1810, SHM. CGB. a/ 28:
159. A. de la Cuadra to J. Blake, 13 June 1810, SHM. CGB. 4/12.
160. A. de la Cuadra to F. Abadia, 13 June 1810, tid.
230    Notes to pages 125-8

161. Thid.
162. Rocca, Memoirs, pp. 150-1.
163. R. de Mazariegos to-A. Romero Valdés, 19 May 1810, AGS. GJ. 1086.
164. For some examples of attacks on British soldiers, cf. C. ONeill, The Military
       Adventures of Charles O'Neill, who was a Soldier in the Army of Lord Wellington
       during the Memorable Peninsular War and the Continental Campaigns from 1811 to
       1815 (Worcester, Massachusetts, 1851), pp. 139, 145; W. Hay, Remniscences under
       Wellington, 1808-1815, ed. S. Wood (London, 1901), p. 70; Ludovici, On the Road
       with Wellington, p. 88; E. Costello, The Adventures of a Soldier, or Memoirs of
       Edward Costello, K.S.F. (London, 1841), pp. 220-1.
165. Lopez Moran, Bandolerismo Gallego, pp. 357-70.
166. Report of F Martinez, 24 May 1811, AGS. GJ. 1081; report of R. Moyano, 25
       January 1812, AGS. GJ. 1180.
    . E.g. proclamation of Junta Criminal Extraordinaria de Sevilla, 30 January 1813,
       AGS. GJ. 1079.
    . For an example of a bandit with clear psychopathic tendencies, cf. Ortega,
       Escuadras de Cataluna, pp. 195-297.
    . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, v, p. 5.
    BIE. MG, Niky jos ey
    . E.g. J. Martin Diez to Marqués de Zayas, 25 July 1811, AHN. Est. 3010; Espoz y
       Mina, Memorias, I, p. 48.
    . J. Crivell to M. de Garay, 5 September 1809, AHN. Est. 16-5’, f. 40.
    . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, II, v, p. 20; report of G. Valdés, 17 June 1810,
       AGS. GJ. 1076.
     . Petition of M. Garcia, 7 December 1811, AGS. GJ. 1080.
     . Report of Ministerio de Policia General, 5 August 1811, AGS. GJ. 1146.
     . Petition of M. Soribas, 22 August 1813, Archivo Municipal de Zaragoza, Serie
       General (hereafter AMZ. SG.) 869.
     . P. Palurcio to T. Garcia Galindo, 7 June 1809, AGS. GJ. 1147; R. Santillan, Memo-
       rias de Don Ramon Santillan (1808-1856), ed. A. Berazluce (Madrid, 1996), p. 50.
     . D. Martinez to J. Martin Diez, 13 April 1811, AHN. Est. 3010; J. R. Ruiz y
       Darmengol to M. Romero, 28 June 1811, AGS. GJ. 1082; P. Darripe to P. Arribas,
       5 January 1812, AGS. GJ. 1151; P. Darripe to P. Arribas, 6 March 1811, AGS. GJ.
        1146.
     . Cf. anon. to R. Gutierrez, 1 April 1812, AHN. Est. 3010; A. Begines de los Rios
       to A. Gonzalez Salmon, to July 1811, AHN. Est. 3146; petition of FE. Mateo, 21
       June 1812, RAH. 9:6971.
180. Anon. to R. Gutiérrez, 23 March 1812, AHN. Est. 3010.
181. Petition of P. Cortes, 10 September 1812, AGS. GJ. 1080; petition of J.
       Coronado, 15 January 1812, AGS. GJ. 1150; petition of J. Martin, 27 January 1812,
       ibid; report of Junta Criminal Extraordinaria de Guadalajara, 31 May 1812, AGS.
       GJ. 1080. For some earlier cases, cf. petition of M. J. Micha, 9 July 1811, report
       of P. de Mora, 3 September 1811, AGS. GJ. 1150, and report of P. Garcia
       Triguero, 3 May 1812, AGS. GJ. 1087.
182. E.g. F. Flevia to N. Mahy, 17 November 1809, SHM. CDB. 7/10/27.
183. Cf. Junta of Ciudad Rodrigo to Junta Central, 30 January 1809, AHN. Est. 41—E,
       no. 223; M. Renovales to the Junta of La Corufia, 24 August 1810, SHM. CDB.
        16/20/58.
                                                           Notes to pages 128-39   =.23


184. J. Miguel and others to M. de Garay, 5 October 1809, AHN. Est. 16—5°, ff. 4—5.
    . E. Alonso (ed.), Memorias del Alcalde de Roa, Don Gregorio Gonzdlez Arranz,
     1785-1840
        (Roa, 1995), pp. 23-4.
186. For some examples, cf. proclamation of General Kellermann, 12 February 1811,
      SHM. CDB. 19/23/83; Royal Decree, 7 August 1811, AGS. GJ. 1084; procla-
      mation of General Dorsenne, 24 November 1811, BN. CGI. R60002—105.
    . Espoz y Mina, Memorias, 1, pp. 147-55; Captain Berry to Ayuntamiento of Tudela,
      g July 1809, Archivo Municipal de Tudela, Seccion de Cartas Historicas,
      1809:5C-17.
    . Suchet, Memoirs, I, pp. 272-4. Cf. also Guimbaud, Mémoires du Général Hugo, p.
      179.
189. F. Copons to J. O'Donnell, 10 May 1812, RAH. 9:6971.


5 The Reality of the Guerrillas
  1. Cit. G. Chaliand, The Art of War in World History: from Antiquity to the Nuclear
       Age (Berkeley, California, 1994), pp. 733-4.
  2. Cit. ibid., pp. 664.
    . E.g. Bigarré, Mémoires, p. 278; Rocca, Memoirs, p. 89; Miot, Mémoires (Paris,
       1858), III, pp. 56-8.
    . Marbot, Memoirs, Il, pp. 70-1.
    . J. Serrano Valdenebro to J. M. Carvajal, 4 April 1811, cit. Diario de Algeciras (24
       April 1811), pp. 357-61, HMM. AH227.
    _ H. Christian to C. Cotton, 26 August 1811, PRO. WO.1/261, ff. 386-7.
    . Barthélemy, £7 Marquesito, I, pp. 75-6.
    . Tone, Fatal Knot, pp. 142-3.
    . J. A. Pérez-Rioja, ‘Soria en la Guerra de la Independencia’, in Garcia Prado,
       Estudios de la Guerra de la Independencia, 1, pp. 261-2.
     . D. Gascon, La Provincia de Teruel en la Guerra de la Independencia (Madrid, 1908),
     PP. 241-5.
   . Von Brandt, The Two Minas, pp. 56-67 passim. Author’s italics.
   . For all this, cf. Espoz y Mina, Memorias, Il, pp. 10-46; Alexander, Rod of Iron,
     pp. 203-23; Oman, Peninsular War, V1, pp. 252-74; Tone, Fatal Knot, pp. 141-5.
   . Lord Wellington to J. Villiers, 20 November 1809, PRO. WO.1/242, ff. 420-2.
   . Von Brandt, The Two Minas, pp. 68-9.
   _ R. Gutiérrez to E. de Bardaji, 1 October 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
   . Tone, Fatal Knot, p. 123.
   . Picado Franco, Sexta Division, I, p. 70.
   . J. Diaz Porlier to N. Mahy, 25 March 1811, SHM. CDB. 25/36/24.
   _ G. Walker to Lord Liverpool, 1 November 1810, PRO. WO.1/261, f. 114.
   . J. Johnston to G. Walker, 6 September 1811, PRO. WO.1/261, ff. 415-16; cf. also
     H. Douglas to Lord Liverpool, 7 September 1811, PRO. WO.1/261, f. 436.
   _ Proclamation of El Empecinado, 14 August 1811, AGS. GJ. 1082.
   _ A. Castillo to Minister of Police, 11 May 1812, AGS. GJ. 1080.
   . J. A. Colmenares to M. de Garay, n.d., AHN. Est. 16-2’, f. 88.
   . J. Moscoso to N. Mahy, 14 February 1810, SHM. CDB. 16/20/52; G. Walker to
     Lord Liverpool, 1 November 1810, PRO. WO.1/261, ff. 115-16.
   . J. Moscoso to N. Mahy, 14 February 1810, SHM. CDB. 16/20/52.
232    Notes to pages 139-44


 26   J. Moscoso to N. Mahy, 11 March 1810, SHM. CDB. 16/20/52.
 27 J. Moscoso to N. Mahy, 8 May 1810, SHM. CDB. 16/20/52;
                                                                     P. de la Barcena to
      J. Diaz Porlier, 9 April 1810, AMZ. CGP. 08187/26-1/545.
 28 J. A. Colmenares to P. Rivero, 25 November 1809, AHN. Est. 41—E, no. 120.
 29 H. Christian to C. Cotton, 26 August 1811, PRO. WO.1/261, f. 386.
 30 R. Gutiérrez to E. Bardaji, 1 March 1811, AHN. 3146; anon. to R. Gutiérrez, 28
      February 1811, zbid.
 35; P. del Canto and B. Bonifaz to Junta Central, 4 December 1809, AHN. Est. 41—E,
      no. 127.                                             n
 Bz Cf. A. Cornel to M. de Garay, 30 August 1809, AHN. Est. 61—N, no. 206.
 33- For some examples, cf. Junta of Quintana de la Sierra to Junta Central, 9
      September 1809, AHN. Est. 65—-G, no. 313; G. M. Ortiz de Najera y Cordoba
      to Junta of Soto en Cameros, 8 November 1809, AHN. Est. 41—E, no. 105; J. B.
      Guergués to J. A. Colmenares, 2 November 1809, AHN. Est. 41—E, no. 107);
      J. Arbizu to Marqués de Barriolucio, 20 November 1809, AHN. Est. 41—-E,
      no. 114.
 34. Cf. Report of E. Lopez Blanco, 12 November 1809, AHN. Est. 41—E, no. 109;
      J. A. Colmenares to P. Rivero, 12 November 1809, AHN. Est. 41-E, no. 108.
 35. ‘Oficio sobre los excesos cometidos por la comision de Soto y sus subdelegados’
       (MS.), AHN. Est. 41—E, no. 116’; Junta of Soto en Cameros to J. A. Colmenares,
       14 November 1809, AHN. Est. 41—E, no. 110.
 36. Cf. P. M. Garcés de los Fayos to J. A. Colmenares, 18 November 1809, AHN. Est.
       41-E, no. 112;J.A. Colmenares to P. Rivero, 23 November 1809, AHN. Est. 41-E,
       no. 122.
 37: P. Rivero to F. Saavedra, 14 and 17 December 1809, AHN. Est. 82—F, nos. 362-3;
       Picado, Sexta Division, I, p. 17.
 38. For all this, cf. petition of F Longa, 11 July 1810, SHM. CDB. 14/19/41.
 39- ‘Villarcayo: informacion hecha por instancia del Sr. D. Francisco de Longa,
       comandante de la partida de voluntarios de Castilla autorizado por el Excmo. Sr.
       D. D. Nicolas Mahy, Teniente General de los reales ejércitos, sobre los acaec-
       imientos en dicha villa con la partida al mando del titulado Campillo’ (MS.),
       SHM. CDB. 4/19/41; I. Alonso to J. J. de la Riba, 2 July 1810, SHM. CDB.
       17/21/62.
 40. J. J. de la Riba to F Longa, 21 July 1810, SHM.CDB. 17/21/62; N. Mahy to
      J. J. de la Riba, 3 August 1810, zbid.
 4I. R. Gutiérrez to E. de Bardaji, 12 February 1811, AHN. Est. 3010.
 Pee R. Gutiérrez to Regency, 8 August 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
 43. R. Gutiérrez to E. de Bardaji, 27 February 1812, AHN. Est. 3010.
 44. Cit. A. Cornel to M. de Garay, 24 September 1809, AHN. Est. 41—C, no. 70.
 45- Schepeler, Histoire de la Révolution Espagnole, I, p. 464.
 46. R. Gutierrez to Regency, 4 March 1812, AHN. Est. 3010. ‘De tanto soy yo’ defies
       translation: the literal meaning is ‘how great I am’.
 47. Pérez-Rioja, ‘Soria en la Guerra de la Independencia’, pp. 260-1.
 48. Suchet, Memoirs, I, p. 281; Picado Franco, Sexta Division, V1, pp. 130-5.
 49. R. Gutiérrez to J. Garcia de Leon y Pizarro, 30 May 1812, AHN. Est. 3010.
  50. R. Gutiérrez to I. de la Pezuela, 7 July 1812, AHN. Est. 3010; H. Popham to
       Lord Wellington, ro October 1812, US. WP.1/262. For these problems, cf. also
       Schepeler, Histoire de la Révolution Espagnole, Ill, p. 338.
  51 J. Moscoso to N. Mahy, 8 May and 16 June 1810, SHM. CDB. 16/20/52.
                                                            Notes to pages 144-50      233


   . A. de Capetillo to E. de Bardaji, 6 March 1811, AHN. Est. 3010.
   . Anon. to Rafael Gutiérrez, 23 March 1812, AHN. Est. 3010.
   . E.g. J. Martin Diez to Marqués de Zayas, 22 July 1811, AHN. Est. 3010.
    . FE. M. Guerra to R. Gutiérrez, 6 April 1811, AHN. Est. 3010.
    . Anon. The Military Exploits of Don Juan Martin Diez, the Empecinado, who first
         Commenced and then Organised the System of Guerrilla Warfare in Spain (London,
         1823), pp. 85-6, BS. CGA. 032589.
    . A. de Capetilla to E. de Bardaji, 16 July 1811, AHN. Est. 3010.
    . R. Gutiérrez to E. de Bardaji, 17 July 1811, ibid; El Redactor General (2 August
         1811), p. 183, HMM. 6/3.
     . J. Martin Diaz to R. Gutiérrez, 23 April 1811, AHN. Est. 3146; cf. also petition
         of M. Ibarra, J. C. Lopez and F. Martinez, 21 August 1811, zbid.
     . Marqués de Vivot to F. de Copons, 21 October 1812, RAH. 9:6972; D. O’Daly to
         E de Copons, 1 November 1812, sid.
     . FE Copons to J. O'Donnell, 2 May 1812, RAH. 9:6971.
      . F Reig to F Copons, 27 April 1812, RAH. 9:6971.
     . Espoz y Mina, Memorias, 1, pp. 23-4.
      . tha spp 2; 10.
      . Petition of M. de Valenza and C. Amatria, 18 October 1809, AHN. Est. 41—D,
         no. 78.
      . M. Loynaz to P. Rivero, 22 November 1809, AHN. Est. 15-2", ff. 70-4. It is worth
         comparing both these remarks and the ones that precede them with the complaints
         received by the French authorities; cf. petition of the ayuntamiento of Estella, 28
         October 1809, AGS. GJ. 1078.
      . J. Moscoso to N. Mahy, 20 January 1811, SHM. CGB. 24/33/7; cf. also Junta of
         Orense to N. Mahy, 27 February 1811, sid.
      . EJ. Losada to Junta of Asturias, 12 November 1810, SHM. CDB. 14/19/42.
      . Junta of Villafranca to Junta of Catalonia, 29 March 1810, ACA. JSC. 76.
      . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1808, I, viii, p. 33.
       . E.g. memorandum of P. Arribas, 7 April 1812, AGS. GJ. 1079; report of P. A.
         Calva, 2 January 1812, AGS. GJ. 1150; J. Sanjurjo to P. Arribas, 5 May 1812, bid;
         for the execution of Echevarria, cf. Espoz y Mina, Memorias, I, p. 48.
qe. G. de Bustamente and others to J. J. de la Riba, 14 July 1810, SHM. CDB.
         17/21/62; cf. also Junta of Villarcayo to J. J. de la Riba, 15 July 1810, SHM. CDB.
         17/21/62.
       . ‘Manifiesto de los leales castellanos’, 9gNovember 1812, US. WP.1/364; cf. also
         Lord Wellington to F Longa, 20 January 1813, US. WP.1/364.
       . Cit. Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Guerrillero, p. 158.
       . E.g. FE Taboada to N. Mahy, 1 January 1810, SHM. CDB. 19/24/98.
       . Jiménez, Queja de un patriota; Picado, Sexta Division, I, pp. 59-60.
       . J. Martin Diez to R. Gutiérrez, 23 April 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
       . J. Diaz Porlier to N. Mahy, 23 March 1810, SHM. CDB. 16/20/56.
       . FJ. Losada to N. Mahy, 28 January 1811, SHM. CDB. 24/33/6.
       . Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 1508, 1, v, p. 21.
       . Anon. report, 3 June 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
       _ A. Sdenz to Junta of Ciudad Real, 15 February 1809, AHN. Est. 4o—A, no. 21.
       . ‘Ordenanza que se habia de observar en el principado de Asturias por todos los
         comandantes de partidas sueltas a quienes habilite el gobierno de el para obrar
         ofensivamente sobre el enemigo’, 29 May 1810, SHM. CDB. 19/23/31.
   Notes to pages 151-7

. Barthélemy, E/ Marquesito, pp. 76-160.
. Cf. AHN. Est. 40-C, no. 61-263.
. M. de Garay to A. Cornel, 30 September 1809, AHN. Est. 41—E, no. 154.
. For some examples, cf. report of G. Valdés, 17 June 1810, AGS. GJ. 1046;
  report of P. de Mora, 6 April 1811, AGS. GJ. 1150; report of P. de Mora, 24
  September 1811, AGS. GJ. 1146; report of Comisario General de Policia of
  Toledo, 19 June 1812, AGS. GJ. 1146; report of J. Paulon, 26 July 1812, AGS. GJ.
     1149.
. M. de Garano to P. Arribas, 23 August 1809, AGS. GJ. 1147; petition of T. J.
     Nuceta, 14 March 1810, AGS. GJ. 1163.
. Espoz y Mina, Memorias, 1, p. 237.
. Lord Wellington to H. Wellesley, 10 March 1812, US. WP. 12/1/5.
. Junta of Catalonia to C. Cotton, 6 July 1811, US. WP.1/343.
. E Adam to J. Murray, 24 March 1813, US. WP.1/368; memorandum of A. Puig,
     4 May 1813, RAH. 9:6973.
 . Memorandum of C. Zehnpfenning, 1 January 1813, US. WP.1/368.
 . E Copons to L. Wimpffen, 13 March 1813, RAH. 9:6973; Baron de Eroles to Lord
     Wellington, 5 February 1813, US. WP.1/366.
 . C. Zehnpfenning to Lord Wellington, 17 March 1813, US. WP.1/367.
 . T. Graham to H. Bunbury, 27 October 1810, PRO. WO.1/247, f. 629.
 . Anon., Medios de salvar el reino (Cadiz, 1810), pp. 5-9, BS. CGA. 038158.
 . J. Serrano Valdenebro to J. M. Carvajal, 4 April 1811, cit. Diario de Algeciras (24
     April 1811), pp. 357-61, HMM. AH227.
 . Lord Wellington to Lord Castlereagh, 5 September 1808, US. WP.1/214.
 . Lord Wellington to J. H. Frere, 24 April 1809, US. WP.1/257; for an example of
     the sort of news that was being received of the guerrillas by the British in the
     summer of 1809, cf. J. H. Frere to G. Canning, 26 June 1809, Public Record Office,
     Foreign Office Papers 72/73, ff. 247-53.
  . Lord Wellington to Lord Wellesley, 1 September 1809, US. WP.1/277.
  . Lord Wellington to Lord Castlereagh, 25 August 1809, US. WP.1/275.
  . Memorandum of Lord Wellington, 11 November 1809, PRO. WO.1/242,
     ff. 416-22.
  . Lord Wellington to Lord Liverpool, 11 April 1810, PRO. WO.1/244, f. 62.
  . Lord Wellington to Lord Liverpool, 19 April 1810, PRO. WO.1/244, ff. 69-71.
  . Lord Wellington to Lord Liverpool, 19 February 1812, US. WP.12/1/5; cf. also
     Lord Wellington to Lord Liverpool, 13 May 1812, US. WP.12/1/5.
   . Cf. Lord Wellington to Lord Liverpool, 11 July 1810, PRO. WO.1/245, ff. 61-2.
   . Lord Wellington to Lord Liverpool, 18 June 1812, US. WP.1/347.
   . R. Gutiérrez to I. de la Pezuela, 11 August 1812, AHN. Est. 3010; for a less jaun-
     diced view, cf. Marqués de Monsalud to Lord Wellington, 28 July 1812, US.
     WP.1/345.
   . Lord Wellington to H. Wellesley, 23 August 1812, US. WP.1/347.
   . I. Fletcher (ed.), For King and Country: the Letters and Diaries of John Mills, Cold-
     stream Guards, 1811-14 (Staplehurst, 1995), p. 231; Mufioz Maldonado, Guerra
     de la Independencia, UI, pp. 308-10.
   . Lord Wellington to W. Cooke, 25 November 1812, US. WP.1/351.
   . For two discussions of these matters, cf. Esdaile, The Duke of Wellington and the
      Command of the Spanish Army, pp. 74-134 passim; C. Esdaile, ‘Wellington and the
                                                           Notes to pages 157-70   =.235,

      Spanish guerrillas: the campaign of 1813’, Consortium on Revolutionary Europe
      Proceedings, XXI (1991), pp. 298-306.
114. Larpent, Journal, I, p. 234.
115. For this affair, cf. Esdaile, The Duke of Wellington and the Command of the Spanish
      Army, pp. 161-3.
116. For a discussion of these issues, cf. Esdaile, Spanish Army, pp. 177-200
      passim.
117. ‘Manifiesto de los leales castellanos’, 9 November 1812, US. WP.1/364.
118. E.g. ‘Informe de la Regencia anterior a las Cortes sobre la desercién’, 5 March
       1813, US. WP.1/382.
119g. ‘Exposicion dirigida a las Cortes Generales y Extraordinarias sobre el estado de
      Aragon en junio de 1813’, cit. El Tribuno del Pueblo Espanol (29 October 1813),
      HMM. AHr1~—4 (no. 123).


6 The End of the Guerrillas
    . For this affair, cf. Military Exploits of Don Juan Martin Diez, pp. 11-12.
    . Proclamation of Marqués del Socorro, 28 May 1808, SHM. CDF. DCCCLXIV.
    . Proclamation of Junta of Seville, n.d., SHM. CDF. DCCCLXIV.
    . Cassinello, Juan Martin, pp. 70-1.
       Royal Decree, 28 December 1808, SHM. CDF. DCCLXXXVIII.
       A. Cornel to M. de Garay, 24 September 1809, AHN. Est. 41—C, no. 70.
       Duque del Parque to N. Mahy, 4 November 1809, SHM. CDB. 5/8/4.
    . EJ. Losada to N. Mahy, 25 November 1811, SHM. CDB. 14/19/45.
     _ Semanario Patridtico (11 April 1811), HMM. AH1-6 (no. 197).
 DN
 H   _ El
  ANAW
  CY
  OC
 Lal      Periddico Militar del Estado Mayor General, no. 13, cit. El Redactor General (9g
       April 1812), p. 1176, HMM. 6/3. Hussar regiments were traditionally used for
       such duties as skirmishing, raiding and reconnaissance.
 1 ie Cf. El Redactor General (15 December 1812), HMM. 6/3.
 12. ‘Ordenanza que se habia de observar en el Principado de Asturias por todos los
       comandantes de partidas sueltas a quienes habilite el gobierno de el para obrar
       ofensivamente sobre el enemigo’, 29 May 1810, SHM. CDB. 19/23/81.
 13. Proclamation of M. Renovales, n.d., AGS. GJ. 1146.
 14. DC, 2 and 7 March 1811; for Espoz y Mina’s own version of this affair, cf. Espoz
       y Mina, Memorias, I, pp. 108-17.
 rs: DC, 6 October 1810.
 16. Cf. ibid., 2 August 1811.
 t7. Ibid., 2 March 1811.
 18. For the liberals’ views on the Spanish army and the need for people’s war, cf.
       Esdaile, Spanish Army, pp. 158-9, 168~70.
 19. EI Tribuno del Pueblo Espatiol (22 December 1812), pp. 206-7, HMM. AH1-4
       (no. 120).
 20.   EI Patriota, no. 1, HMM.   AH.1—5 (no. 158).
 2%,   DC, to August 1811.
 ozs   Ibid.
 2S:   Thid.
 24.   Semanario Patriético (31 October 1811), pp. 337-49, HMM. AH. 1-6 (no. 198).
 25.   EI Espanol (30 March 1812), HMM. AH4-2 (no. 713).
236    Notes to pages 170-6

 26. L. Baccigalupi, Indicaciones acerca de la organizacién de las columnas volantes
     (Cadiz, n.d.), BS. CGA. 041970.
 27. ‘Reglamento para las partidas de guerrilla’, 11 July 1812, SHM. DG. 1812/4.
 28. F. Ballesteros, Respetuosos descargos que el Teniente General Don Franciso Balles-
     teros ofrece a la generosa nacion espanola en contestacién a los cargos que S.A. la
     Regencia del Reino se ha servido hacerle en su manifiesto del 12 de diciembre del ano
     pasado de 1812 dirigido a la misma para su inteligencia (Cadiz, 1813), pp. 21-2,
     SHM. CDF. CLIV.
 29. ‘Creacién de nuevos cuerpos de caballeria’ (MS, SHM. CDB. 3/4/31; for a
     protest at actions of this sort, cf. E/ Redactor General, HMM. 6/3.
 30. Proclamation of N. Mahy, 3 July 1810, SHM. CDB. 17/21/62; J. Diaz Porlier to
     J. de la Riba, 12 September 1810, SHM. CDB. 19/23/87; P. Morillo to Consejo
     Permanente de Guerra, 4 June 1811, SHM. CDB. 3/6/34.
 31. Oman, Peninsular War, Ill, p. 328; Villa de Casares, p. 32.
 32. J. O'Donnell to F Samper, 18 March 1812, RAH. 9:6971.
 33. ‘Instruccion que debera observar bajo la mas estrecha posibilidad las partidas de
     guerrillas’, n.d., ibid.
 34. Cf. E Reig to F Copons, 20 May 1812, ibid.
 35. J. O'Donnell to F Copons, 3 May 1812, ibid.
 36. FE. Copons to J. O'Donnell, 6, 10 and 14 May 1812, «bid.
 37. E Copons to J. J. Barrera, 20 May 1812, ibid.
 38. J. J. Barrera to F Copons, 5 June 1812, ibid.
 39. EF. Reig to F Copons, 23 June 1812, sid.
 40. F Reig to F Copons, 17 July 1812, zbid.
 41. J. J. Barrera to F Copons, 29 June and 18 July 1812, sid.
 42. J. J. Barrera to F Copons, 22 July 1812, ibid.
 43. J. J. Barrera to F Copons, 8 August 1812, ibid.
 44. j. J. Barrera to F Copons, 14 September 1812, ibid.
 45. J. J. Barrera to F Copons, 13 September 1812, ibid.
 46. E.g. J. Martin Diez to R. Gutiérrez, 16 March 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
 47. R. Gutiérrez to Regency, 30 April 1811, AHN. Est. 3146.
 48. R. Gutiérrez to E. de Bardaji, 4 March 1812, AHN. Est. 3010.
 49. E.g. M. Cano to E. de Bardaji, 4 April 1812, AHN. Est. 3or0.
 50. Military Exploits of Don Juan Martin Diez, pp. 135-6; A. Leith-Hay to R. Hill,
     24 January 1813, US. WP.1/364.
 51. Barthélemy, E/ Marquésito, I, pp. 329-35.
 52. E. Mejia to Lord Wellington, 7 December 1812, US. WP.1/354; Lord Wellington
     to J. M. de Carvajal, 11 December 1812, US. WP.1/363.
 53. Ludovici, On the Road with Wellington, p. 324.
 54. Conde de Penne Villemur to Lord Wellington, 28 February 1813, US. WP.1/366.
 55. I. Fletcher (ed.), In the Service of the King: the Letters of William Thornton Keep
      at Home, Walcheren and in the Peninsula, 1808-1814 (Staplehurst, 1997), p. 144.
 56. Cf. Junta of Burgos to Lord Wellington, 9 June 1813, US. WP.1/37r.
 57. E.g. F Espoz y Mina to F. J. Castafios, 12 March 1813, US. WP.1/368.
 58. R. Escobeda to Lord Wellington, 8 March 1813, US. WP.1/367; A. Guillén to
     Lord Wellington, 27 February 1813, US. WP.1/382; Diario de Gobierno de Sevilla
     (22 March 1813), pp. 769-70, SHM. CDE CXL.
 59. R. Escobeda to Lord Wellington, 12 March 1813, US. WP.1/367.
                                                           Notes to pages 176-83      237

60 . J. Tone, ‘The Peninsular War’, in P. Dwyer (ed.), Napoleon and Europe (London,
    2001), pp. 240-1.
61. El Conciso (15 January 1813), HMM. AH.2-5 (no. 348).
62. Diario de Gobierno de Sevilla (11 February 1813), SHM. CDF. CXXXIX.
63. ‘La Carlota’ was the nickname of Fernando VII’s elder sister Carlota Joaquina,
      who was married to the heir to the throne of Portugal, Prince Joao, and in con-
      sequence possessed the title Princess of Brazil. A bitter opponent of revolution,
      she became the chief hope of the enemies of the liberal cause in Spain, and was
      much favoured by them as the head of a reactionary regency that could steer the
      Patriot cause in a direction opposed to the one which it had taken since 1810.
   . El Tribuno del Pueblo Espanol (23 March 1813), HMM. AH.1-4 (No. 121).
   . DC (5 October 1812).
   . Diario Critico y Erudito de Granada (10 March 1813), pp. 37-8, HMM. AHs5-5
      (no. 1046); El Redactor General (12 March 1813), p. 2561, HMM. 6/3.
   . El Conciso (1 April 1813), pp. 3-5, HMM. AH2-s (no. 351).
   . Pérez Garzon, Milicia Nacional y Revolucion Burguesa, p. 80.
   . Lord Wellington to J. M. de Carvajal, 4 December 1812, US. WP.1/355.
    . For the situation of Spain in the winter of 1812-13, cf. Esdaile, Peninsular War,
    PP 431-9.
  . For all this, cf. L. Picado Franco, Memorias sobre la reconquista de Zaragoza,
     conservacion de la plaza y rendicion de su castillo por las tropas espanolas en julio
     de 1813, donde se evidencia lo mucho que se equivoco el autor de la comedia
     titulada ‘Zaragoza reconquistada por Don Francisco Espoz y Mina’, como también
     otros autores que han dado toda la gloria a este general (Madrid, 1815), pp. 31-65,
     BUZ. 52/1037; Picado Franco, Sexta Division, Il, pp. 192-8.
  . Casamayor, ‘Afios Politicos y Hist6ricos’, XXX (1813), f. 255, BUZ. MS.136.
  . Espoz y Mina, Memorias, Il, pp. 73-0.
  . Anon., Resumen Historico de los Sacrificios y Desgracias de Aragon, Principalmente
     en su Orilla Izquierda del Ebro desde la Rendicioén de Zaragoza hasta su Reconquista
     (Zaragoza, 1813), pp. 12-15 passim, AMZ. G5757.
  . Ibid., pp. 18-27 passim.
  . Ludovici, On the Road with Wellington, pp. 386-7.
   . Espoz y Mina, Memorias, I, pp. 292-3.
   . Ihid., 0, pp. 15-16.
   _ Cf. AMZ. Ayto. Actas del Ilustrisimo Ayuntamiento de Zaragoza, Vol. 119
     (July-December, 1813), f. 170; Ayuntamiento de Zaragoza to J. M. Colubri, 11
     October 1813, AMZ. Ayto. Serie General, Caja 869.
   _ Cf. Anon. Relacién de los sucesos ocurridos en Sos del Rey Catélico durante la Guerra
     de la Independencia, n.d., AMZ. CGP. 08145/1—10/6; AMZ. Ayto. Actas, Vol. 119,
     f. 96.
   . Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Liberal, pp. 156-7.
   . Casamayor, ‘Afios Politicos e Historicos’, XXX, f. 272.
   . FE Espoz y Mina to ayuntamiento of Zaragoza, 21 Ocotber 1813, AMZ. Ayto. 869.
   _ Ibid., f. 273; L. Wimpffen to Lord Wellington, 26 October 1813, US. WP.1/389.
   . Casamayor, ‘Afios politicos e historicos’, XXX (1813), f. 278, BUZ. MS.136.
   . Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Liberal, pp. 193-6.
   . Espoz y Mina, Memorias, U, p. 102.
   . Glover, Gentleman Volunteer, p. 133.
        Notes to pages 184-90

    . Lord Wellington to J. O’Donoju, 7 December 1813, US. WP.1/38r.
    . Petition of J. L. Fernandez, 31 December 1813, ACD. SG. 19, No. 35.
    . F Diz to J. O’Donoju, 15 June 1813, SHM. CGI. 4/32.
    . Proclamation of the commandant-general of Jaén, 15 June 1813, BN. CGI.
       R60016—23.
    . Sanchez Fernandez, Nos Invaden!, pp. 34-6.
    . DC (3 July 1813).
     . DC (18 October 1813).
     . Royal Decree, 26 November 1813, cit. El Imparciak Diario Politico y Militar de la
       Ciudad de Alicante (27-29 December 1813), SHM. CDF. CCLV.
     . M. Ballbé, Orden Publico y Militarismo en la Espana Constitucional, 1812-1983
       (Madrid, 1985), p. 57.
     . For the formation of the National Guard, cf. Esdaile, Spanish Army, p. 173; Pérez
       Garzon, Milicia Nacional y Revolucion Burguesa, pp. 81-4.
     . DC (24 November 1812).
100. E.g. petitions of F Sanchez Tercero and A. Carabantes, 13 March 1813, ACD.
       SG. 17, no. 38"; petitions of J. Guerra and A. Luque, 14 February 1813,
       ACD. SG. 17, no. 38"; petition of ayuntamiento of Carmona, 21 February 1813,
       ACD. SG. 17, no. 38".
IOI.   Royal Decree, 15 April 1814, ACD. SG. 1, No. 60/III-73.
102.   Royal Decree, 28 July 1814, cit. Espoz y Mina, Memorias, II, pp. 158-61.
103.   Best, War and Society in Revolutionary Europe, p. 174.
104.   M. Pintos Vieites, La Politica de Fernando VII entre 1814 y 1820 (Pamplona, 1958),
       pp. 256-7.
105. Ardit, Revolucion Liberal y Rebeldia Campesina, pp. 229-40.
106. Lopez Moran, Bandolerismo Gallego, pp. 55-7, 173-209 passim.
107. C. Garcia Rodriguez, Historias de Bandoleros Aragoneses (Huesca, 2000), p. 33.
108. F. Flores, E/ Bandolerismo en Extremadura (Badajoz, 1992), pp. 15-42, 141-51
     passim.
109. P. Casado, Las Fuerzas Armadas en el Inicio del Constituctonalismo Espanol (Madrid,
      1982), p. 90.
110. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain, p. 720.
III. L. Fernandez Martin, E/ General Don Francisco de Longa y la Intervencion Espanola
     en Portugal, 1826—27 (Bilbao, 1954), p. 42; Ardit, Revolucion Liberal y Rebeldia
     Campesina, pp. 213-17.
112. S. Payne, Politics and the Military in Modern Spain (Stanford, California, 1967),
     Do» P73
rig. ‘Estado militar de Espafia; afio de 1815’ in Kalendario Manual y Guia de
     Forasteros en Madrid para el Ano de 1815 (Madrid, 1815), BS. CGA. 016638.
114. Ibid.
115. For Sarasa and Alegre, cf. Guirao, Guerrilleros y Patriotas, pp. 66-7, 119-20.
116. For a discussion of the financial problems faced by the regime of Fernando VII,
     cf. J. Fontana, La Quiebra de la Monarquia Absoluta, 1814-1820: la Crisis del
     Antiguo Régimen en Espana (Barcelona, 1971), pp. 51-70.
117. Tone, Fatal Knot, pp. 172-6; for some interesting contemporary remarks, cf.
     A. Berazaluce (ed.), Memorias de la Vida de Don Pedro Agustin Girén (Pamplona,
      1978), II, pp. 14-17; F Whittingham (ed.), A Memoir of the Services of Lieutenant
      General Sir Samuel Ford Whittingham (London, 1868), p. 367.
                                                           Notes to pages 190-203      239

118. For an excellent discussion of Espoz y Mina’s role in the exile community, cf. I.
      Castells, La Utopia Insurreccional del Liberalismo: Torrijos y las Conspiraciones
      Liberales de la Década Ominosa (Barcelona, 1989), pp. 113-65 passim.
119g. Barthélemy, E/ Marquesito, I, pp. 375-424; ibid., Il, pp. 427-90; E. Gonzalez
      Lopez, Entre el Antiguo y el Nuevo Régimen: Absolutistas y Liberales — el Reinado
      de Fernando VII en Galicia (La Corufia, 1980), pp. 38-56 passim.
120. Cassinello, Juan Martin, pp. 253-310 passim.


Conclusion
  1. For some up-to-the-minute examples, cf. G. Rothenberg, The Napoleonic Wars
     (London, 1999), pp. 154-5;J.Black, Western Warfare, 1775-1882 (London, 2001),
     pp. 48-9; Tone, “The Peninsular War’, pp. 235-42.
  2. Cf. H. Ward, Between the Lines: Banditti of the American Revolution (London,
     2002).
  3. A. Grab, ‘State power, brigandage and rural resistance in Napoleonic Italy’,
     European History Quarterly, XXV, no. 1 (January, 1995), p. 40.
  4. M. Finley, Most Monstrous of Wars: the Napoleonic Guerrilla War in Southern
     Italy, 1806-1811 (Columbia, South Carolina, 1994), p. 147.
  5. Aymes, Guerra de la Independencia (Madrid, 1975), p. 57.
  6. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain, Il, p. 672.
  7. Cf. A. Forrest, Napoleon’s Men: the Soldiers of the Revolution and Empire (London,
     2002).
  8. Cf. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain, Il, p. 677.
  g. FJ. Castafios to Lord Wellington, 27 June 1813, US. WP.1/371.
 10. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain, Ul, p. 691.
 11. Carr, Spain, 1808-1975, p. 109.
 12. I. Burdiel, ‘The liberal revolution, 1808-1843’ in J. Alvarez Junco and A. Shubert
     (eds), Spanish History since 1808 (London, 2000), p. 20.
 13. Best, War and Society in Revolutionary Europe, pp. 175-6.
 14. Aymes, Guerra de la Independencia, pp. 56-63 passim.
 15. Ibid., p. 64.
 16. Cf. R. del Rio, Los Origenes de la Guerra Carlista en Navarra, 1820-1824
       (Pamplona, 1987), pp. 57-65.
 17.   Rothenberg, Napoleonic Wars, p. 155.
 18.   D. Gates, The Napoleonic Wars, 1803-1815 (London, 1996), p. 190.
 19.   S. Woolf, Napoleon’s Integration of Europe (London, 1991), pp. 233-5.
 20.   For Chartrand’s remarks, cf. R. Chartrand, ‘The guerrillas: how Wellington
       underestimated the role of irregular forces’, in P. Griffith (ed.), 4 History of the
       Peninsular War, IX: Modern Studies of the War in Spain and Portugal, 1808-1814
     (London, 1999), p. 162.
 21. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain, I, p. 720, cf. also Carr, Spain,
     p. 109.
 22. J. Black, European Warfare, 1660-1815 (New Haven, Connecticut, 1994), pp.
     232-3.
 23. E.g. Grab, ‘State power, brigandage and rural resistance’, p. 64.
 24. Cf. F J. Hernandez Montalban, La Abolicion de los Senorios en Espana, 1811-1837
     (Valencia, 1999), pp. 161-81; Ardit, Revolucion Liberal y Revuelta Campesina, pp.
240     Notes to pages 203-4


      219-25; A. Bernal, La Lucha por la Tierra en la Crisis del Antiguo Régimen (Madrid,
      1979), p. 118; S. de Moxo, La Disolucién del Régimen Senorial en Espana (Madrid,
      1965), pp. 56-60.
 Py. Petition of ayuntamiento of Cartaya, 6 November 1813, ACD. SG. 15/59.
 26. Lopez Moran, Bandolerismo Gallego, p. 173.
 Pif Ballbé, Orden Publico y Militarismo, p. 141.
 28. For a discussion of the impact of the War of Independence on the political outlook
     of the Spanish army, cf. Esdaile, Spanish Army, pp. 194-200.
 29. Burdiel, ‘Liberal revolution’, p. 19.                ~
 30. Anon., Observaciones sobre los atentados de la Cortes Extraordinarias de Cadiz contra
     las leyes fundamentales de la monarquia espanola y sobre la nulidad de la constitucton
     que formaron (Madrid, 1814), p. 15, BS. CGA. 041437.
                              Glossary




afrancesado           literally, ‘frenchified one’; supporter of Joseph Bonaparte
afrancesamiento       literally, ‘frenchification’; sympathy with, or an attempt
                      to implement, French models, especially those of the
                      Napoleonic empire
alarma                Galician home guard
alcalde mayor         local magistrate
alférez               ensign
alistados             recruits
amo                   landlord; boss
antiguo régimen       ancien régime; old order
apodo                 nickname
apostolicos           hardline traditionalists (post 1823)
ayuntamiento          town hall; town council; municipality
bienes nacionales     literally, ‘national properties’; property expropriated
                      from the Church, the municipalities or, more rarely, poli-
                      tical opponents
cabecilla             bandit or guerrilla chieftain
cacique               landowner or other local notable possessed of sufficient
                      economic power to be able to exert political influence in
                      his locality
campesino             literally, ‘countryman’; in practice, a generic term used to
                      describe all those sectors of the rural lower classes
                      engaged in agriculture
canalla vil           scum; rabble
caudillo              leader; commander
cazadores rurales     literally, ‘country riflemen’; one of many terms used by
                      the French to describe their irregular Spanish auxiliaries
cédula de crédito     credit bond issued under Joseph Bonaparte
comandante de armas   military commandant
242        Glossary


comisario regio       royal commissioner
comistonados          agents; commissioners
consejo               council (usually administrative)
contribucion unica    literally, ‘the single contribution’; new system of taxation
                      introduced by the cortes of Cadiz
corregidor            city governor-cum-chief magistrate appointed by the
                      monarch prior to 1808
cortes                parliament                     .
cuadrilla             gang, especially of bandits
desamortizacion       expropriation and/or sale of entailed land
dispersos             stragglers
fuero militar         privileges enjoyed by Bourbon officer corps prior to 1808
fueros                traditional rights/privileges/codes of justice
gaditano              inhabitant of/ pertaining to Cadiz
godoyismo             term of abuse associated with the royal favourite, Manuel
                      de Godoy; corruption; decadence; vain-glory
guerrilla, la         literally, ‘little war’; the guerrilla struggle against the
                      French
guerrillero           guerrilla
 hacendados           landowners; used colloquially, the rich in general
 herederos            property owners
Jefe politico         literally, ‘political head’; provincial governor appointed
                      under the constitution of 1812
Josefino              supporter of Joseph Bonaparte; pertaining to Bonaparte
                      Spain
junta                 committee of government or administration
junta militar         advisory council of generals established by the Junta
                      Central
juramentado           literally, ‘sworn one’; Spanish official or, more usually,
                      soldier in the service of Joseph Bonaparte
labrador              landowner; prosperous tenant farmer
licenciados           graduates
madrileno             inhabitant of/pertaining to Madrid
malagueno             inhabitant of/pertaining to Malaga
malhechor             literally, ‘wrongdoer’; criminal bandit
mariscal de campo     major-general (often mistranslated as field marshal)
migueletes            in Catalonia, volunteer infantry regiments raised by the
                      provisional junta in 1808; in the Basque provinces, an
                      irregular local home guard
milicias honradas     urban militia recruited solely from the propertied classes
                      by order of the Junta Central
minifundia            very small farms typical of Galicia
montana               literally, ‘the mountain’; the name given to northern
                      Navarre
                                                                       Glossary     243

mozo                     young unmarried man of military age
partida                   guerrilla band
partidartos               alternative term for guerrillas
personalismo              politics resting wholely on clientage or personal ambition
poderoso                  literally ‘powerful one’; bigwig; local notable
populacho                ‘literally, ‘the mob’; the lower classes
pretendiente              office-seeker
pudtente                  local notable; cacique
pueblo                    town or village, but also the people
quinta                    conscript; levy of conscripts
 real                     basic unit of Spanish currency prior to 1870
 regidor perpetuo         hereditary town councillor for life
 resguardo                locally organised pre-1808 anti-bandit security forces
 rey deseado, el          literally, ‘the desired king’; i.e., Fernando VII
rey intruso, el           literally, ‘the intrusive king’; i.e., Joseph Bonaparte
ribera                    literally, ‘the riverside’; that part of Navarre lying in the
                          Ebro valley
senorialismo              Spanish feudal system
serrania                  mountainous district
serrano                   literally, ‘mountaineer’; term applied to the inhabitants of
                          the Serrania de Ronda
sevillano                 inhabitant of/pertaining to Seville
siempre, los de           literally, ‘the same ones as always’; i.e., the established
                          local oligarchy
somatén                   Catalan home guard
sorteo                    ballot for military service
tercios reales            literally, ‘royal thirds’; share of the title claimed by the
                           Spanish state
valenciano                 inhabitant of/pertaining to Valencia
vallesoletano              inhabitant of/pertaining to Valladolid
vecino                     literally, ‘neighbour’; propertied tax-payer
vecinos honrados           literally, ‘honourable inhabitant’; householder
vida a salto de mata       literally, ‘a life of jumping out from behind bushes’; a life
                         of crime
voluntario distinguido   literally, ‘distinguished volunteer’; recruit funding the
                         cost of his own uniform and weapons
yunteros                 landless labourer possessed of a yoke of oxen or mules
zaragozano               inhabitant of/pertaining to Zaragoza
                                Bibhography
                                                    ~




A. Archival Sources

Archivo del Congreso de Diputados, Madrid

Serie General, Legajos 1, 15, 17, 19, 30
Serie de Papeles Reservados de Fernando VII, Vol. 52


Archivo de la Corona de Aragon, Barcelona

Seccion de la Junta Superior de Catalufia, Legajos 4, 16, 43, 68, 71, 74, 76, 88


Archivo General de Simancas

Seccion de Gracia y Justicia, Legajos 1076-87, 1145-51, 1163


Archivo Histérico Nacional, Madrid

Seccion de Estado, Legajos 5, 15-17, 30-1, 33, 38-41, 46, 52, 60, 62, 65, 70, 72,
  74-5, 77, 80-3, 2959, 2994, 3010, 3146, 3566

Archivo Municipal de Tudela

Seccion de Cartas Historicas, 1809:5C-17


Archivo Municipal de Zaragoza

Actas Municipales, Vol. 119
Serie General, Cajas 27, 868-70
Coleccion General Palafox 08145, 08147, 08165, 08174, 08179, 08187
                                                                Bibliography    245

Biblioteca Nacional, Madrid

Coleccion Gomez Imaz, Vols R60002, R60034, R60124, R6o129, R6o140, R62280,
   R63078, R63928


Biblioteca del Senado, Madrid

Coleccion   Gomez   de Arteche, Vols 011166, 011634, 011867, 011961, 016544,
  017057, 028477, 029083, 031030, 032589, 032605, 032675, 035255, 038158,
  039809, 039854, 040126, 040270, 040325, 040458, 040733, 041437, 041478,
  041970, 041996, 042062, 042070, 042092, 042094, 043523


Bibhoteca de la Universidad de Zaragoza
F. Casamayor, ‘Afios politicos y historicos de las cosas mas particulares occuridas
   en la imperial, augusta y siempre herdica ciudad de Zaragoza’, MSS. 106—42


British Library, London

Additional MSS. 37286-9, 37291-3, 37314, 38243-4, 38246-7, 38249-55, 64131

Public Record Office, Kew

(a) War Office Papers, Series 1, Vols 226-7, 229-52, 260-1
(b) Foreign Office Papers, Series 72, Vols 71, 73, 75, 108, 112, 121, 128, 131-3,
    142-7, 150-5, 159-60

Real Academia de Historia, Madrid
Legajos 9:6964—73; 11:9003


Real Colegio de San Albano, Valladolid

R. Brindle, ‘Memoirs: a Brief Account of Travels, etc., in Spain’ (MS)


Servicio Historico Militar, Madrid

(a) Coleccion Documental    del Fraile, Vols XXVII,       XXXII-XLI,    CX,
    CxIVeCX VIL, CX SIECEXY,           CXCL” CCLX,”      CCLEM-CCLX VITL,
    CCCXXXVECCCLI, CDLIIL-CDLXVII, DXL, DCXLVII-DCCLXII,
    DCCLXXXIX, DCCXCI, DCCCLXIV, CMVIII, CMXXII
(b) Coleccion Duque de Bailén, Carpetas 1/2/2, 1/2/8, 3/2/4, 3/4/23-4,
    3/4/28, 3/4/32, 3/6/34, 4/2/10, 4/7/25, 5/8/ 1-10, 7/10/25-7, 12/16/11,
    13/17/29-30, 14/10/41-5, 14/18/38, 16/20/51-3, 16/20/56, 16/20/58,
    16/20/60,   17/21/61,   17/21/65,   17/21/67,    18/22/71-9,  19/23/81,
246     Bibliography

      19/23/83,   19/23/85,  19/23/87,  19/23/89-90,   19/24/94,  19/24/96,
      19/24/98, 24/33/0, 24/33/6-8, 25/34/24, 32/49/21, 32/49/23, 33/53/59,
      34/52/53, 36/54/1
(c) Coleccion General Blake, Carpetas 1/19, 2/14, 2/21, 2/23—-4, 3/2-4, 3/12,
    3/18, 3/25, 3/28, 4/12, 4/17, 4/26
(d) Coleccion Guerra de la Independencia 2/1-3, 2/10, 3/30-4, 4/8, 4/22-3,
      4/28, 4/32-4, 4/36-43

University of Southampton
Wellington Papers, Vols 1/205, 1/207-14, 1/216, 1/264—7, 1/269, 1/274-7,
   1/284, 1/290-5, 1/297-8, 1/311, 1/315, 1/331-2, 1/341-56, 1/358-83,
   1/387—-420, 1/439-45, 1/447, 12/1/1-3, 12/1/5, 12/2/3


B. Published Contemporary Sources

(a) Official Publications, Documentary Collections, etc.

Constitucion Politica de la Nacion Espanola (Cadiz, 1812)
Correspondance de Napoléon I publiée par ordre de l’Empéreur Napoléon III (Paris,
   1858-69)
The Croker Papers: the Correspondence and Diaries of the Right Honourable Fohn
   Wilson Croker, LL.D, F-R.S., Secretary to the Admiralty from 1809 to 1830, ed. L.
   Jennings (London, 1884)
Diario de las Sesiones y Actas de las Cortes Generales y Extraordinarias (Cadiz,
   1810-13)
The Dispatches and Correspondence of the Marquess Wellesley during his Mission to
   Spain as Ambassador Extraordinary to the Supreme Junta in 1809, ed. M. Martin
   (London, 1838)
The Dispatches of Field Marshal the Duke of Wellington during his various Campaigns
   in India, Denmark, Portugal, Spain, the Low Countries and France from 1789 to
   1815, ed. J. Gurwood (London, 1852)
Estados de la Organizacion y Fuerza de los Ejércitos Espanoles Beligerantes en la Penin-
   sula durante la Guerra de Espana contra Napoleon Bonaparte Arreglados por la
   Seccion de Historia Militar en 1821 (Barcelona, 1822)
Guerra de la Independencia: Proclamas, Bandos y Combatientes, ed. S. Delgado
   (Madrid, 1979)
Kalendario Manual y Guia de Forasteros en Madrid (Madrid, 1807, 1815)
Mémoires et Correspondance Politique et Militaire du Roi Joseph, ed. P. du Casse
   (Paris, 1853-4)
Ordenanzas de S.M. para el Régimen, Disciplina, Subordinacién y Servicio de sus
   Ejercitos (Madrid, 1768)
Supplementary Despatches, Correspondence and Memoranda of Field Marshal Arthur,
   Duke of Wellington, ed. Second Duke of Wellington (London, 1858-72)
                                                                Bibliography    247

(b) Newspapers, Gazettes, etc
Atalaya de la Mancha en Madrid (Madrid, 1813-14)
Correo de Murcia (Murcia, 1809)
Correo de Valencia (Valencia, 1811)
Diario Critico y Erudito de Granada (Granada, 1813)
Diario de Badajoz (Badajoz, 1808-9)
Diario de Gobierno de Sevilla (Seville, 1812-13)
Diario de Granada (Granada, 1808-9)
Diario de la Tarde (Cadiz, 1813)
Diario de Malaga (Malaga, 1808-9)
Diario Mercantil de Cadiz (Cadiz, 1813)
Diario Redactor de Sevilla (Seville, 1812-13)
EI Censor General (Cadiz, 1812)
El Ciudadano por la Constitucién (La Corufia, 1813)
El Conciso (Cadiz, Madrid, 1812-14)
El Duende de los Cafées (Cadiz, 1813)
El Espanol (Cadiz, London, 1810-14)
El Espanol Libre (Cadiz, 1813)
El Fanal (Seville, 1812)
El Imparcial (Alicante, 1813)
El Patriota (Cadiz, 1812-13)
El Redactor General (Cadiz, 1811-14)
El Tio Tremendo o los Criticos del Malecén (Cadiz, 1813)
El Tribuno del Pueblo Espanol (Cadiz, 1812-13)
 Gazeta de La Coruna (La Corufia, 1808)
 Gazeta de la Junta Superior de la Mancha (Cuenca, 1811-12)
 Gazeta de la Regencia de Espana e Indias (Cadiz, Madrid, 1810-14)
 Gazeta del Gobierno (Madrid, Seville, 1808—10)
La Abeja Espanola (Cadiz, 1812-13)
Los Amigos de Ballesteros (Isla de Leon, 1813)
Los Ingleses en Espana (Seville, 1813)
Memorial Militar y Patridtico del Ejército de la Izquierda (Badajoz, 1810)
Semanario Patriético (Madrid, Seville, Cadiz, 1808-12)
Semanario Politico, Histérico y Literario de La Coruna (La Corufia, 1809-10)



(c) Memoirs, Diaries and Contemporary Accounts

A. Alcaide, Historia de los Dos Sitios que Pusieron a Zaragoza en los Anos de 1808 y
   180g (Madrid, 1830)
A. Alcala Galiano (ed.), Memorias de D. Antonio Alcala Galiano (Madrid, 1886)
A. Alcala Galiano, Recuerdos de un Anciano (Madrid, 1907)
E. Alonso (ed.), Memorias del Alcalde de Roa, Don Gregorio Gonzdlez Arranz,
   1788-1840 (Roa, 1995)
248    Bibliography


A. Alvarez Valdés, Memorias del Levantamiento de Asturias en 1808, ed. M. Fuertes
   Acevedo (Oviedo, 1889)
Anon., The Military Exploits of Don Juan Martin Diez, the Empecinado (London,
   1825)
Anon., Memoirs of a Sergeant Late in the Forty-Third Light Infantry Regiment, pre-
   viously to and during the Peninsular War (London, 1835)
A. Argiielles, La Reforma Constitucional de Cadiz, ed. J. Longares (Madrid, 1970)
C. Atkinson (ed.), ‘A Light Dragoon in the Peninsular War: extracts from the
   letters of Captain Lovell Badcock, Fourteenth Light Dragoons, 1809-14’,
  JSARR, XXXIV, no. 138, pp. 70-9
C. Atkinson (ed.), ‘A Peninsular brigadier: letters of Major General Sir F. P.
   Robinson, K.C.B., dealing with the campaign of 1813’, JSAHR, XXXIV, no.
   140, pp. 153-70
G. Bankes (ed.), The Autobiography of Sergeant William Lawrence, a Hero of the
   Peninsular and Waterloo Campaign (London, 1886)
R. Batty, Campaign of the Left Wing of the Allied Army in the Western Pyrenees and
   the South of France in the Years 1813 and 1814 under Field Marshal the Marquess
   of Wellington (London, 1825)
M. de Baudus, Etudes sur Napoléon (Paris, 1841)
G. Bell, Rough Notes of an Old Soldier, ed. B. Stuart (London, 1956)
N. Bentley (ed.), Selections from the Reminiscences of Captain Gronow (London,
  1977)
A. Berazaluce (ed.), Recuerdos de la Vida de Don Pedro Agustin Giron (Pamplona,
  1978)
A. Bigarré, Mémoires du Général Bigarré, Aide de Camp du Roi Joseph, 1775-1813
   (Paris, 1903)
J. Blanco White, Cartas de Espana, ed. V. Llorens and A. Garnica (Madrid, 1972)
A. Blayney, Narrative of a Forced Journey through Spain and France as a Prisoner
   of War in the Years 1810 to 1814 (London, 1814)
S. Blaze, Mémoires d’un Apothécaire sur la Guerre d’Espagne pendant les Années 1808
   a 1814 (Paris, 1828)
C. Boutflower, The Journal of an Army Surgeon daitne the Peninsular War (Man-
   chester, 1912)
H. von Brandt, The Two Minas and the Spanish Guerrillas (London, 1825)
E. Buckham, Personal Narrative of Adventures in the Peninsula during the War in
    1812-1813 by an Officer late in the Staff-Corps Regiment of Cavalry (London,
    1827)
R. Buckley (ed.), The Napoleonic War Journal of Captain Thomas Henry Browne
   (London, 1987)
T. Bunbury, Reminiscences of a Veteran, being Personal and Military Adventures in
   Portugal, Spain, France, Malta, Norfolk Island, New Zealand, Anderman Islands
   and India (London, 1861)
C. Cadell, Narrative of the Campaigns of the Twenty-Eighth Regiment since their
   Return from Egypt in 1802 (London, 1835)
                                                                   Bibliography    249

J. Canga Argiielles, Observaciones sobre la Historia de la Guerra de Espanta que
    Escribieron los Setores Clarke, Southey, Londonderry y Napier (Madrid,
    1833-6)
J. C. Carnicero, Historia Razonada de los Principales Sucesos de la Gloriosa Revolu-
    ction de Espana (Madrid, 1814)
F. Carr Gomm (ed.), Letters and Journals of Field Marshal Sir William Maynard
    Gomm, G.C.B., Commander-in-Chief of India, Constable of the Tower of London,
    etc., etc., from 1799 to Waterloo, 1815 (London, 1881)
S. Cassels (ed.), Peninsular Portrait, 1811-1814: the Letters of Captain William
    Bragge, Third (King’s Own) Dragoons (London, 1963)
J. Cooper, Rough Notes of Seven Campaigns in Portugal, Spain, France and America
    during the Years of 180g—10—11—12—13—14-15 (London, 1869)
E. Costello, The Adventures of a Soldier, or Memoirs of Edward Costello, K.S.F
    (London, 1841)
J. Dellard, Mémoires Militaires du Général Baron Dellard (Paris, n.d.)
J. Donaldson, Recollections of the Eventful Life of a Soldier (Edinburgh, 1852)
R. Douglas (ed.), From Valmy to Waterloo: Extracts from the Diary of Captain
    Charles Francois, a Soldier of the Revolution and Empire (London, 1906)
F. Espoz y Mina, Memorias del General Don Francisco Espoz y Mina, Escritas por El
    Mismo, ed. J. M. de Vega (Madrid, 1851)
W. Fernyhough, Military Memoirs of Four Brothers (Natives of Staffordshire)
    Engaged in the Service of their Country as well in the New World and Africa as on
    the Continent of Europe by the Survivor (London, 1829)
 I. Fletcher (ed.), For King and Country: the Letters and Diaries of John Mills, Cold-
    stream Guards, 1811-14 (Staplehurst, 1995)
 I. Fletcher (ed.), In the Service of the King: the Letters of William Thornton Keep
    (Staplehurst, 1997)
M. Foy, History of the War in the Peninsula under Napoleon (London, 1827)
J. Garcia de Leon y Pizarro, Memorias de la Vida del Excmo. Senor D. Fosé Garcia
    de Leon y Pizarro Escritas por El Mismo, ed. A. Alonso Castrillo (Madrid, 1894)
 L. Gille, Les Prisonniers de Cabrera: Mémoires d’un Conscrit de 1808 (Paris,
   1893)
G. Gleig, The Subaltern (London, 1825)
M. Glover (ed.), 4 Gentleman Volunteer: the Letters of George Hennell from the Penin-
   sular War, 1812-13 (London, 1979)
W. Grattan, Adventures of the Connaught Rangers from 1808 to 1814 (London, 1847)
J. Green, The Vicissitudes of a Soldier’s Life, or a Series of Occurrences from 1808
    to 1815 (London, 1815)
L. Guimbaud (ed.), Mémoires du Général Hugo (Paris, 1934)
J. Hale, Journal of James Hale, late Sergeant in the Ninth Regiment of Foot (London,
    1826)
B. Hall, Corcubion, ed. J. Alberich (Exeter, 1975)
J. Harley, The Veteran, or Forty Years in the British Service, comprising Adventures in
    Egypt, Spain, Portugal, Belgium, Holland and Prussia (London, 1838)
250       Bibliography


P. Hawker, Journal of a Regimental Officer during the Recent Campaigns in Portugal
   and Spain under Viscount Wellington (London, 1810)
W. Hay, Reminiscences under Wellington, 1808-1815, ed. S. Wood (London,
   1901)
P. Haythornthwaite (ed.), Life in Napoleon’s Army: the Memoirs of Captain Elzéar
   Blaze (London, 1995)
P. Hayward (ed.), Surgeon Henry’s Trifles: Events of a Military Life (London, 1970)
R. Herr (ed.), Memorias del Cura Liberal, Don Juan Antonio Posse, con su Discurso
   sobre la Constitucion de 1812 (Madrid, 1984)
C. Hibbert (ed.), The Recollections of Rifleman Harris (London, 1985)
C. Hibbert (ed.), 4 Soldier of the Seventy-First (London, 1975)
C. Hibbert (ed.), The Wheatley Diary: a Journal and Sketchbook kept during the
   Peninsular War and the Waterloo Campaign (London, 1964)
E. Holland, The Spanish Journal of Elizabeth, Lady Holland, ed. Ear| of Ilchester
   (London, 1910)
H. R. Holland, Foreign Reminiscences, ed. H. E. Holland (London, 1850)
D. Horward (ed.), The French Campaign in Spain and Portugal: An Account by Jean
   Jacques Pelet (Minneapolis, 1973)
Lady Jackson (ed.), The Diaries and Letters of Sir George Jackson (London, 1872)
W. Jacob, Travels in the South of Spain (London, 1811)
B. Jones (ed.), Napoleon’s Army: the Military Memoirs of Charles Parquin (London,
      1987)
L. Junot, Mémoires du Madame la Duchesse d’Abrantes (Paris, 1831-5)
J. Kincaid, Adventures in the Rifle Brigade (London, 1909)
L. Knowles (ed.), The War in the Peninsula: Some Letters of Lieutenant Robert
   Knowles of the Seventh, or Royal, Fusiliers, a Lancashire Officer (Bolton,
      1913)
G. Larpent (ed.), The Private Journal of Judge-Advocate F. S. Larpent, attached to
   Lord Wellington’s Headquarters, 1812-14 (London, 1853)
J. Leach, Rough Sketches in the Life of an Old Soldier (London, 1831)
A. Leith-Hay, Memoirs of the Late Lieutenant General Sir James Leith, G.C.B., with
   a Précis of Some of the Most Remarkable Events of the Peninsular War (London,
    1818)
L. Lejeune, Memoirs of Baron Lejeune, Aide-de-Camp to Marshals Berthier, Davout
   and Oudinot, ed. A. Bell (London, 1897)
G. L’Estrange, Recollections of Sir George L’Estrange (London, 1873)
H. Lewin, The Life of a Soldier: a Narrative of Twenty-Seven Years’ Service in
    Various Parts of the World (London, 1834)
B. Liddell Hart (ed.), The Letters of Private Wheeler, 180g—1828 (London,
      1951)
J. Llorente, Memorias para la Historia de la Revolucion Espanola (Paris, 1814)
A. Ludovici (ed.), On the Road with Wellington: the Diary of a War Commissary in
   the Peninsular Campaigns (New York, 1925)
                                                                  Bibliography   = 251

E. Macdonald, Recollections of Marshal Macdonald, Duke of Tarentum, ed. C.
   Rousset (London, 1892)
T. McGuffie (ed.), Peninsular Cavalry General: the Correspondence of Lieutenant
   General Robert Ballard Long (London, 1951)
H. Mackinnon, A Journal of the Campaign in Portugal and Spain containing Remarks
   on the Inhabitants, Customs, Trade and Cultivation of those Countries from the Year
   1809 to 1812 (Bath, 1812)
J. Marcén (ed.), E/ Manuscrito de Matias Calvo: Memortas de un Monegrino durante
   la Guerra de la Independencia (Zaragoza, 2000)
P. Marco, “El Cura Merino, 1808 a 1813: Memorias de un Contemporaneo (Madrid,
   1899)
J. Maurice (ed.), The Diary of Sir John Moore (London, 1904)
M. de Mesonero, Memorias de un Setentén (Madrid, 1880)
A. Miot, Mémoires du Comte Miot de Melito, Ancien Ministre, Ambassadeur,         Con-
   seilleur d’Etat et Membre de I’Institut (Paris, 1858)
S. Monick (ed.), Douglas’s Tale of the Peninsula and Waterloo (London, 1997)
W. Napier, History of the War in the Peninsula and in the South of France from the
    Year 1807 to the Year 1814 (London, 1828-40)
A. Neale, Letters from Portugal and Spain comprising an Account of the Operations
   of the Armies under Their Excellencies Sir Arthur Wellesley and Sir fohn Moore
   from the Landing of their Troops in Mondego Bay to the Battle at Corunna
   (London, 1809)
J. North (ed.), In the Legions of Napoleon: the Memoirs of a Polish Officer in Spain
   and Russia, 1808-1813 (London, 1999)
C. Ompteda, In the King’s German Legion: Memoirs of Baron Ompteda, Colonel in
   the King’s German Legion during the Napoleonic Wars (London, 1894)
J. Page (ed.), Intelligence Officer in the Peninsula: Letters and Diaries of Mayor the
   Honourable Edward Charles Cocks, 1786-1812 (Tunbridge Wells, 1986)
T. Pakenham (ed.), The Pakenham Letters, 1800 to 1815 (London, 1914)
J. de Palafox, Memorias, ed. H. Lafoz (Zaragoza, 1994)
J. Patterson, The Adventures of Captain John Patterson (London, 1837)
V. Pina, Paginas de 1808: Memorias de un Patriota (Zaragoza, 1959)
R. Porter, Letters from Portugal and Spain Written during the March of the British
    Troops under Sir John Moore (London, 1809)
M. de Pradt, Mémoires Historiques sur la Révolution d’Espagne (Paris, 1816)
J. Queipo de Llano (Conde de Toreno), Historia del Levantamiento, Guerra y
    Revolucion de Espana (Madrid, 1835-7)
A. de Rocca, Memoirs of the War of the French in Spain, ed. P. Haythornthwaite
   (London, 1990)
P. Rodriguez Fernandez (ed.), La Guerra de Independencia en Asturias: Correspon-
   dencia de General Bonet, 1809-1812 (Gijon, 1991)
I. Rousseau (ed.), The Peninsular War Journal of Sir Benjamin D’Urban (London,
   1930)
252       Bibliography


R. Roy (ed.), ‘The memoirs of Private James    Gunn’,   SAAR, XLIX, no. 198, pp.
   go-120
E. Sabine (ed.), Letters of Colonel Sir Augustus Simon Frazer, K.C.B., Command-
   ing the Royal Horse Artillery in the Army under the Duke of Wellington Written
   During the Peninsular and Waterloo Campaigns (London, 1859)
L. Saint-Cyr, Mémoires (Paris, 1831)
E. de Saint-Hilaire, Souvenirs Intimes du Temps de l’Empire (Paris, 1860)
L. de Saint Pierre (ed.), Les Cahiers du Général Brun (Paris, 1953)
Padre Maestro Salméon, Resumen Historico de la Revolucion de Espana
    (Cadiz—Madrid, 1812-14)
R. Santillan, Memorias de Don Ramén Santillan (1808-1856), ed. A. Berazluce
    (Madrid, 1996)
J. Sarrazin, History of the War in Spain and Portugal from 1807 to 1814 (London,
    1815)
A. von Schepeler, Histoire de la Révolution d’Espagne et de Portugal ainsi que de la
    Guerre qui en Résulta (Li€ge, 1829-31)
J. Sherer, Recollections of the Peninsula (London, 1825)
E. Shore (ed.), An Engineer Officer under Wellington in the Peninsula: the Diary
    and Correspondence of Lieutenant Rice Jones, R.E., during 1805—g—-10-11-12
    (Cambridge, 1986)
T. Simmons (ed.), Memoirs of a Polish Lancer: the Pamietniki of Dezydery
    Chlapowski (Chicago, 1992)
EF. Sola Montajfia (ed.), Els Manresans al Bruch: Relacions del Capdill en Maurici
    Carrié Referents a la Batalla del Bruch, 6 de funy de 1808 (Barcelona, 1908)
R. Southey, History of the Peninsular War (London, 1823-32)
M. Spurrier (ed.), ‘Letters of a Peninsular War commanding officer: the letters
    of Lieutenant Colonel, later General, Sir Andrew Barnard, G.C.B.’, JSAHR,
    XLVII, no. 191, pp. 131-48
Earl of Stanhope, Notes of Conversations with the Duke of Wellington, 1831-1851
    (London, 1889)
 C. Steevens, Reminiscences of my Military Life from.1795 to 1818, ed. N. Steevens
    (Winchester, 1878)
W. Stothert, 4 Narrative of the Principal Events of the Campaigns of 1809, 1810
    and 1811 in Spain and Portugal (London, 1812)
J. Sturgis (ed.), 4 Boy in the Peninsular War: the Services, Adventures and Experi-
    ences of Robert Blakeney, Subaltern of the Twenty-Eighth Regiment (London,
      1899)
L. Suchet, Memoirs of the War in Spain from 1808 to 1814 (London, 1829)
W. Swabey, Diary of the Campaigns in the Peninsula for the Years 1811, 12 and 13,
   ed. F Whinyates (London, 1984)
D. Thiebault, The Memoirs of Baron Thiébault (late Lieutenant General in the French
   Army) (London, 1896)
W. Thompson (ed.), An Ensign in the Peninsular War: the Letters of John Aitchison
   (London, 1981)
                                                                 Bibliography   253

J. Tomkinson (ed.), The Diary of a Cavalry Officer in the Peninsular and Waterloo
   Campaigns, 1809-1815 (London, 1894)
C. Vaughan, Narrative of the Siege of Saragossa (London, 1809)
A. Viesse de Marmont, Mémoires du Maréchal Marmont, Duc de Raguse, de 1792 @
   1841 (Paris, 1857)
R. Verner (ed.), Reminiscences of William Verner, 1782-1871 (London, 1965)
W. Verner (ed.), A British Rifleman: Journals and Correspondence [of George
   Simmons] during the Peninsular War and the Campaign of Waterloo (London,
   1899)
J. Villanueva, Mi Viaje a las Cortes (Madrid, 1860)
J. Villanueva, Vida Literaria de Don Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva, ed. G. Ramirez
   Aledon (Alicante, 1996)
C. Vivian (ed.), Richard Hussey Vivian, First Baron Vivian: a Memoir (London,
   1897)
F Wellesley (ed.), The Diary and Correspondence of Henry Wellesley, First Lord
    Cowley, 1790-1846 (London, 1930)
V. Wellesley (ed.), The Conversations of the First Duke of Wellington with George
    William Chad (Cambridge, 1956)
F, Whinyates (ed.), Letters Written by Lieutenant General Thomas Dyneley, C.B.,
    R.A., while on Active Service between the Years 1806 and 1815 (London, 1895)
FE. Whittingham, A Memoir of the Services of Lieutenant General Sir Samuel Ford
    Whittingham (London, 1868)
R. Wollocombe (ed.), With the Guns in the Peninsula: the Peninsular War Journal of
    Captain William Webber, Royal Artillery (London, 1991)
G. Wood, The Subaltern Officer: a Narrative (London, 1825)
L. Woodford (ed.), 4 Young Surgeon in Wellington’s Army: the Letters of William
    Dent (Old Woking, 1976)
H. Wylly (ed.), A Cavalry Officer in the Corunna Campaign, 1805-1809: the Journal
    of Captain Gordon of the Fifteenth Hussars (London, 1913)


C. Secondary Sources
Anon., Historia de la Guerra de la Independencia Espanola: Anos de 1808 a 1814
    (Madrid, 1879)
R. Abella, La Vida y Epoca de José Bonaparte (Barcelona, 1997)
R. Aldington, Wellington (London, 1946)
D. Alexander, ‘The impact of guerrilla warfare in Spain on French combat
    strength’, CREP, V (1975), pp. 91-8
D. Alexander, Rod of Iron: French Counter-Insurgency Policy in Aragon during the
   Peninsular War (Wilmington, Delaware, 1985)
M. Alonso, E/ Ejército en la Sociedad Espanola (Madrid, 1971)
J. Alvarez Junco, Mater Dolorosa: la Idea de Espana en el Siglo XIX (Madrid, 2002)
M. Ardit, Revolucién Liberal y Revuelta Campesina: un Ensayo sobre la Desintegracion
   del Régimen Feudal en el Pais Valenciano, 1793-1840 (Barcelona, 1977)
254       Bibliography

J. A. Armillas (ed.), La Guerra de la Independencia: Estudios (Zaragoza, 2001)
M. Arriazu (ed.), Estudios sobre Cortes de Cadiz (Pamplona, 1967)
M. Artola, Los Afrancesados (Madrid, 1976)
M. Artola, Historia de Espana Alianza Editorial, V: la Burguesia Revolucionania,
  1808-1874 (Madrid, 1990)
M. Artola, La Espana de Fernando VII (Madrid, 1999)
M. Artola, ‘La guerra de guerrillas’, Revista de Occidente, X (1964), pp. 12-43
M. Artola, Los Origenes de la Espana Contemporanea (Madrid, 1959)
M. de Avesty, La Vida a Salto de Mata: Guerrilleros, Bandoleros y Contrabandistas
   (Barcelona, 1962)
J. Aymes, La Déportation sous le Premier Empire: les Espagnols en France, 1808-1514
    (Paris, 1983)
J. Aymes, La Guerra de la Independencia en Espana, 1805-1814 (Madrid, 1975)
J. Aymes, ‘La guérilla dans la lutte espagnole pour lindependence, 1808-14:
    amorce d’une théorie et avatars d’une pratique’, Bulletin Hispanique, XCVIII,
    nos 3—4 (July-December, 1976), pp. 325-49
J. Aymes, Espana y la Revolucion Francesa (Madrid, 1989)
M. Ballbé, Orden Publico y Militarismo en la Espana Constitucional, 1812-1953
    (Madrid, 1985)
R. Barahona, Vizcaya on the Eve of Carlism: Politics and Society, 1800-1533 (Reno,
    Nevada, 1989)
R. Barahona, ‘The Napoleonic occupation and its political consequences in the
    Basque provinces, 1808-1813’, CREP, XV (1985), pp. 101-16
 R. G. de Barthélemy, ‘E/ Marquesito’: Juan Diaz Porlier, General que fue de los
    Ejércitos Nacionales, 1788-1815 (Santiago de Compostela, 1995)
 R. Bayod, Suministros Exigidos al Pueblo Aragonés para el Ejército Napolénico-Frances
    (Zaragoza, 1979)
 R. Bayod, El Reino de Aragon durante el Reino Intruso de los Napoleon (Zaragoza,
      1979)
E. Becerra and F. Redondo, Ciudad Rodrigo en la Guerra de la Independencia (Ciudad
   Rodrigo, 1988)
N. Benavides and J. Yaque, E/ Capitan General D. Joaquin Blake y Foyes, Regente
   del Reino y Fundador del Cuerpo de Estado Mayor (Madrid, 1960)
A. Berkeley (ed.), New Lights on the Peninsular War: International Congress on the
   Iberian Peninsula, 1780-1840 (Lisbon, 1991)
A. Bernal, La Lucha por la Tierra en la Crisis del Antiguo Régimen (Madrid,
      1979)
A. Bernal, La Propiedad de la Tierra y las Luchas Agrarias Andaluzas (Barcelona,
      1974)
G. Best, War and Society in Revolutionary Europe, 1770-1870 (London, 1982)
J. Black, European Warfare, 1660-1815 (New Haven, Connecticut, 1994)
J. Black, Western Warfare, 1775-1882 (London, 2001)
A. Blanch, Historia de la Guerra de la Independencia en el Antiguo Principado
   (Barcelona, 1861)
                                                                     Bibliography    255

R. Blanco, Rey, Cortes y Fuerza Armada en los Origenes de la Espana Liberal,
   1808-1823 (Madrid, 1988)
C. Borreguero, E/ Reclutamiento Militar por Quintas en la Espana del Siglo         XVIII:
    Origenes del Servicio Militar Obligatorio (Valladolid, 1989)
M. Broers, Europe under Napoleon, 1799-1815 (London, 1996)
A. Bryant, The Age of Elegance, 1812-22 (London, 1950)
A. Bryant, The Great Duke, or the Invincible General (London, 1971)
A. Bryant, Years of Victory, 1802-1812 (London, 1944)
J. M. Bueno, Uniformes Militares de la Guerra de la Independencia (Madrid, 1989)
W. Callahan, Church, Politics and Society in Spain, 1750-1874 (Cambridge,
    Massachusetts, 1984)
W. Callahan, ‘The origins of the conservative Church in Spain, 1789-1823’, ESR,
    X, no. 2 (April, 1980), pp. 199-223
C. Cambronero, E/ Rey Intruso: Apuntes Historicos Referentes a Fosé Bonaparte y a
   su Gobierno en Espana (Madrid, 1909)
E. Canales, ‘La deserci6n en Espafia durante la Guerra de la Independencia’,
    Bi-centenari de la Revolucié Francesa (1789-1989): Le Facobinisme (Barcelona,
    19Q0), pp. 211-30
E. Canales, Patriotismo y Desercién durante la Guerra de la Independencia en Cataluna
    (Coimbra, 1988)
F. Carantofia, Revolucion Liberal y Crisis de las Instituctones Tradtcionales Asturianas
    (Gijon, 1989)
F. Carantofia, La Guerra de la Independencia en Asturias (Oviedo, 1983)
P. Casado, Las Fuerzas Armadas en el Inicio del Constucionalismo Espanol (Madrid,
    1982)
A. Cassinello, Juan Martin, ‘El Empecinado’, 0 el Amor a la Libertad (Madrid, 1995)
I. Castells, La Utopia Insurreccional del Liberalismo: Torryos y las Conspiraciones
    Liberales de la Década Ominosa (Barcelona, 1989)
I. Castells and A. Moliner, Crisis del Antiguo Régimen y Revolucion Liberal en Espana,
    1789-1845 (Barcelona, 2000)
 C. de Castro, La Revolucién Liberal y los Municipios Espanoles, 1812-1868 (Madrid,
   1979)
J. Cepeda, El Ejército en la Politica Espanola, 1787-1843: Conspiraciones y Pronun-
   ciamientos en los Comienzos de la Espana Liberal (Madrid, 1990)
M. Chamorro, 1808/1936: Dos Situaciones Histéricas Concordantes (Madrid, 1973)
D. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon (London, 1966)
D. Chandler (ed.), Napoleon’s Marshals (New York, 1987)
D. Chandler, On the Napoleonic Wars: Collected Essays (London, 1994)
D. Chandler, ‘Wellington at war: regular and irregular warfare’, JHR, XI, no. 1
   (February, 1989), pp. 2-13
E. Christiansen, The Origins of Military Power in Spain, 1800-1854 (Oxford, 1967)
J. M. Codon, Biografiay Cronica del Cura Merino (Burgos, 1986)
O. Connelly, The Gentle Bonaparte: Biography of Joseph, Napoleon ’s Elder Brother
   (New York, 1968)
256       Bibliography

O. Connelly, Napoleon’s Satellite Kingdoms (New York, 1965)
C. Crowley, ‘Luces and hispanidad: nationalism and modernization in eighteenth-
    century Spain’, in M. Palumbo and W. O. Shanahan, Nationalism: Essays im
   Honour of Louis L. Snyder (Westport, Connecticut, 1981), pp. 87-102
N. Cruz, Valencia Napolednica (Valencia, 1968)
J. Cuenca, La Iglesia Espanola ante la Revolucion Liberal (Madrid, 1971)
G. Desdevises du Dézert, L’Espagne de l’Ancien Régime (Paris, 1897-1904)
A. Dominguez Ortiz, Sociedad y Estado en el Siglo XVIII Espanol (Barcelona, 1976)
G. Dufour, La Guerra de la Independencia (Madrid, 1999)
P. Dwyer (ed.), Napoleon and Europe (London, 2001)
G. Ellis, The Napoleonic Empire (London, 1991)
J. Elting, Swords around a Throne: Napoleon and his Grande Armée (New York, 1988)
C. Esdaile, The Duke of Wellington and the Command of the Spanish Army, 1512-14
    (London, 1990)
C. Esdaile, ‘The Duke of Wellington and the Spanish revolution, 1812-14’, in C.
    Woolgar (ed.), Wellington Studies, II (Southampton, 1999), pp. 163-87
C. Esdaile, The French Wars (London, 2001)
C. Esdaile, ‘Heroes or villains? The Spanish guerrillas in the Peninsular War’, H7,
    XXXVIII, no. 4 (April, 1988), pp. 29-35
 C. Esdaile, The Peninsular War: a New History (London, 2002)
 C. Esdaile, ‘Rebeldia, reticencia y resistencia: el caso gallego de 1808’, Trienio, no.
   35 (May, 2000), Pp. 57-80
C. Esdaile, The Spanish Army in the Peninsular War (Manchester, 1988)
C. Esdaile, ‘War and politics in Spain, 1808-1814’, H7, XXXI, no. 2 (April 1988),
   PP. 295-317
C. Esdaile, The Wars of Napoleon (London, 1995)
C. Esdaile, ‘Wellington and the military eclipse of Spain, 1808—1814’, /HR, XI, no.
   1 (February, 1989), pp. 55-67
C. Esdaile, ‘Wellington and the Spanish guerrillas: the campaign of 1813’, CREP,
   XXI (1991), pp. 298-306
M. Espadas and J. R. de Urquijo, Historia de Espana Gredos, XI; Guerra de la Inde-
   pendencia y Epoca Constitucional, r8oS—1939 (Madrid, 1990)
A. Espinar, Malaga durante la Primera Etapa Liberal, 1812-1814 (Malaga,
      1994)
R. Farias, Memorias de la Guerra de la Independencia Escritas por Soldados Franceses
   (Madrid, 1919)
P. Fernandez Albaladejo, La Crisis del Antiguo Régimen en Guiptuzcoa, 1766-1833:
   Cambio Economico e Historia (Madrid, 1975)
F. Fernandez Bastarreche, El Eyército Espanol en el Siglo XIX (Madrid, 1978)
V. Fernandez Benitez, Carlismo y Rebeldia Campesina: un Estudio sobre la Conflic-
   tividad Social en Cantabria durante la Crisis Final del Antiguo Régimen (Madrid,
   1988)
V. Fernandez Benitez, Burguesia y Revolucion Liberal: Santander, 1812-1840
   (Santander, 1989)
                                                                  Bibliography    257

L. Fernandez Martin, El General Don Francisco de Longa y la Intervenciin Espanola
   en Portugal, 1826-27 (Bilbao, 1954)
R. Fernandez de Castro, Apuntes Histérico-Biograficos del Insigne Patriota, Capitan
   de Infanteria, Don Vicente Moreno, Héroe de la Independencia (Melilla, 1908)
E. Fernandez de Pinedo and others, Centralismo, Ilustracién y Agonta del Antiguo
   Régimen, 1715-1833 (Barcelona, 1980)
M. Figueroa, La Guerra de la Independencia en Galicia (Vigo, 1992)
I. Fletcher (ed.), The Peninsular War: Aspects of the Struggle for the Iberian Penin-
   sula (Staplehurst, 1998)
F. Flores; E/ Bandolerismo en Extremadura (Badajoz, 1992)
J. Fontana, La Quiebra de la Monarquia Absoluta, 1814-1820: la Crisis del Antiguo
   Régimen en Espana (Barcelona, 1971)
A. Fugier, La Junta Superior de Asturias y la Invasion Francesa (Gijon, 1989)
L. Garcia Guijarro, La Guerra de la Independencia y el Guerrillero Romeu (Madrid,
    1908)
P. Garcia Gutiérrez, La Ciudad de Leén en la Guerra de la Independencia (Leon,
   1991)
J. Garcia Mercadel, Palafox, Duque de Zaragoza, 1775-1847 (Madrid, 1948)
J. Garcia Pérez and others, Historia de Extremadura (Badajoz, 1985)
J. Garcia Prado and others, Estudios de la Guerra de la Independencia (Zaragoza,
   1964-7)
C. Garcia Rodriguez, Historias de Bandoleros Aragoneses (Huesca, 2000)
M. Garcia Ruipérez, Revueltas Sociales en la Provincia de Toledo: la Crisis de
   1802-1805 (Toledo, 1999)
D. Gascon, La Provincia de Teruel en la Guerra de la Independencia (Madrid, 1908)
N. Gash, Wellington: Studies in the Military and Political Career of the First Duke
   of Wellington (Manchester, 1990)
D. Gates, The Napoleonic Wars, 1803-1815 (London, 1996)
D. Gates, The Spanish Ulcer: a History of the Peninsular War (London, 1986)
G. Girod de Ain, Joseph Bonaparte, le Roi Malgré Lui (Paris, 1970)
M. Glover, Legacy of Glory: the Bonaparte Kingdom of Spain (New York,
   1971)
M. Glover, The Peninsular War: a Concise Military History (London, 1974)
M. Glover, Wellington as Military Commander (London, 1968)
J. Gomez de Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia: Historia Militar de Espana de 1808
   a 1814 (Madrid, 1868—1903)
M. Gomez Bajo, La Guerra de la Independencia en Astorga, 1805-1514 (Astorga,
    1986)
E. Gonzalez Lopez, Entre el Antiguo y el Nuevo Régimen: Absolutistas y Liberales —
   el Reinado de Fernando VII en Galicia (La Corufia, 1980)
E. Goodman, ‘Spanish nationalism in the struggle against Napoleon’, RP, XX,
  no. 3 (July, 1958), pp. 330-46
R. Gras, Zamora en la Guerra de la Independencia, 1808-14 (Madrid, 1913)
A. Grasset, Mélaga, Provincia Francesa, 1811-1812 (Malaga, 1996)
258       Bibliography


P. Griffith (ed.), Forward into Battle: Fighting Tactics from Waterloo to Vietnam
   (Chichester, 1981)
P. Griffith (ed.), A History of the Peninsular War, IX: Modern Studies of the War
   in Spain and Portugal, 1808-1814 (London, 1999)
P. Griffith (ed.), Wellington-Commander: the Iron Duke’s Generalship (Chichester,
   1986)
P. Guedalla, The Duke (London, 1931)
R. Guirao, Guerrilleros y Patriotas en el Alto Aragon, 1808-1814 (Huesca, 2000)
R. Guirao and L. Sorando, E/ Alto Aragén en la Guerra de la Independencia
   (Zaragoza, 1995)
M. L. Guzman, Mina el Mozo, Héroe de Navarra (Madrid, 1932)
E. Hamilton, ‘War and inflation in Spain, 1780-1800’, OFE, LIX, no. 1 (Novem-
  ber, 1944), pp. 36-77
E. Hamilton, War and Prices in Spain, 1651-1800 (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1947)
B. Hamnett, La Politica Espafiola en una Epoca Revolucionaria (México City, 1985)
J. de Haro, Guerra de la Independencia: Bailén — Diarios y Memorias (Ciudad Real,
      1999)
J. de Haro, Guerra de la Independencia:    La Mancha,    1808 — Diarios, Memorias,
   Cartas (Alcazar de San Juan, 2000)
P. Hayman, Soult: Napoleon’s Maligned Marshal (London, 1990)
F. Hernandez Girbal, Juan Martin, el Empecinado, Terror de los Franceses (Madrid,
      1985)
EF Hernandez Montalban, La Abolicién de los Senorios en Espana, 1811-1837
   (Valencia, 1999)
R. Herr, The Eighteenth-Century Revolution in Spain (Princeton, 1958)
R. Herr, ‘Good, evil and Spain’s uprising against Napoleon’, in R. Herr and H.
   Parker (eds), Ideas in History: Essays Presented to Louis Gottschalk by his Former
   Students (Durham, North Carolina, 1965), pp. 157-81
R. Herr, Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain at the End of the Old Régime
   (Berkeley, California, 1989)
C. Hibbert, Wellington: a Personal History (London, 1997)
E. Hobsbawm, The Age of Revolution, 1789-1848 (London, 1977)
E. Hobsbawm, Bandits (London, 1969)
E. Hobsbawm, Primitive Rebels: Studies in Archaic Forms of Social Movement in the
   Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries (Manchester, 1959)
R. Hocquellet, Résistance et Révolution durant l’Occupation Napoléonienne en
   Espagne, 1SoS—1812 (Paris, 2001)
R. Holtman, Napoleonic Propaganda (Baton Rouge, 1950)
N. Horta Rodriguez, D. Julian Sanchez, ‘El Charro’, Guerrillero y Brigadier (Ciudad
   Rodrigo, 1987)
R. Humble, Napoleon’s Peninsular Marshals (London, 1974)
J. M. Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Guerrillero (Madrid, 1965)
J. M. Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el Liberal (Madrid, 1967)
L. James, The Iron Duke: a Military Biography of Wellington (London, 1992)
                                                                 Bibliography    259

B. Jarnés, Zumalacarregui: el Caudillo Romantico (Madrid, 1972)
F. Jiménez de Gregorio, Murcia en los Dos Primeros Anos de la Guerra por la Inde-
   pendencia (Murcia, 1947)
H. Lachouque and others, Napoleon’s War in Spain: the French Peninsular Cam-
   paigns, 1807-1814 (London, 1982)
H. Lafoz, La Guerra de la Independencia en Aragon: del Motin de Aranjuez a la Capit-
   ulacion de Zaragoza (Zaragoza, 1996)
H. Lafoz, José Palafox y su Tiempo (Zaragoza, 1992)
B. Liddell Hart, The Decisive Wars of History: a Study in Strategy (London, 1929)
E. Longford, Wellington: the Years of the Sword (London, 1969)
B. Lopez Moran, E/ Bandolerismo Gallego en la Primera Mitad del Siglo XIX (La
   Corufia, 1995)
M. Lopez Pérez and I. Lara, Entre la Guerra y la Paz: Jaén, 1808-1814 (Granada,
   1993)
L. Lorente, Agitacién Urbana y Crisis Econémica durante la Guerra de la Indepen-
   dencia, 1808-1814 (Cuenca, 1993)
L. Lorente, ‘Coyuntura econémica y presiOn social en la Espafia ocupada: el
   modelo tributario francés en Toledo, 1811-1813’, in E. de Diego and others
   (eds), Repercusiones de la Revolucién Francesa en Espana (Madrid, 1990), pp.
   403-19
L. Lorente, Poder y Miseria: Oligarcas y Campesinos en la Espana Senonal,
   1760-1868 (Madrid, 1994)
G. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain (New York, 1965)
G. Lovett, ‘The Spanish guerrillas and Napoleon’, CREP, V (1975), pp. 80-90
J. Lynch, Bourbon Spain, 1700-1808 (Oxford, 1989)
J. Marshall-Cornwall, Massena (Oxford, 1965)
E. Martinez Quinteiro, ‘Coyuntura econémica y liberalismo, 1788-1810’,
   Hispania, XLII, no. 155 (September, 1983), pp. 581-08
E. Martinez Ruiz (ed.), JJ Seminario Internacional sobre la Guerra de la Indepen-
   dencia: Madrid, 24-26 de Octubre de 1994 (Madrid, 1995)
J. Mercader, Catalunya i I’Imperi Napoleonic (Montserrat, 1978)
J. Mercader, José Bonaparte Rey de Espana, 1808-13: Historia Externa del Reinado
   (Madrid, 1971)
J. Mercader, José Bonaparte, Rey de Espana, 1508-13: Estructura del Estado Espanol
   Bonapartista (Madrid, 1983)
E Miranda, La Guerra de la Independencia en Navarra: la Accién del Estado
   (Pamplona, 1977)
P. Molas (ed.), La Espana de Carlos IV (Madrid, 1991)
A. Moliner, ‘La conflictividad social en la Guerra de la Independencia’, Triento, no.
   35 (May, 2000), pp. 81-115
A. Moliner, ‘La peculiaridad de la revolucion espafiola de 1808”, Hispania, no. 166
  (May, 1987), pp. 632-46
A. Moliner, ‘Las juntas corregimentales de Catalufia en la Guerra del Frances’,
  Hispania, no. 158 (September, 1984), pp. 549-82
260       Bibliography


A. Moliner, Revolucién Burguesa i Movimiento Juntero en Espana (Lérida, 1997)
R. Montes, El Bandolerismo en la Region de Murcia durante el Siglo XIX (Murcia,
      1998)
M. Moran, Poder y Gobierno en las Cortes de Cadiz (Pamplona, 1986)
M. Moran, Revolucién y Reforma Religiosa en las Cortes de Cadiz (Madrid, 1994)
I. Morant, El Declive del Seforio: los Dominios del Ducado de Gandia, 1705-1837
    (Valencia, 1984)
M. Moreno, Los Espafioles durante la Ocupacién Napoleonica: la Vida Cotidiana en
    la Voragine (Malaga, 1997)
M. Moreno, Sevilla Napoleonica (Seville, 1995)
S. de Moxo, La Disolucién del Régimen Senorial en Espana (Madrid, 1965)
F. Moya and C. Rey, El Ejército y la Armada en las Cortes de Cadiz (Cadiz, 1913)
J. Mufioz Maldonado, Historia Politica y Militar de la Guerra de la Independencia
    contra Napoleon Bonaparte desde 1808 a 1814 (Madrid, 1833)
B. Narbonne, Joseph Bonaparte, le Roi Philosophe (Paris, 1949)
A. Ollero, Palencia durante la Ocupacién Francesa, 1808-1814: Repercusiones Sociales
   y Economicas (Valladolid, 1983)
C. Oman, A History of the Peninsular War (Oxford, 1902-1930)
J. Ortega, Historia de las Escuadras de Cataluna: su Origen, sus Proezas, sus Victst-
    tudes Intercalada con la Vida y Hechos de los Mas Célebres Ladrones y Bandoleros
    (Barcelona, 1968)
M. Ortufio, Xavier Mina: Guerrillero, Liberal, Insurgente (Pamplona, 2000)
A. Pacho, Del Antiguo Régimen a la Espana Moderna: Manuel Traggia (de S. Tomas)
    OCD, Protagonista e Interprete del Transito (Burgos, 1979)
P. Pascual, Curas y Frailes Guerrilleros en la Guerra de la Independencia: las Partidas
    de Cruzada Reglamentadas por el Carmelita Zaragozana, P. Manuel Traggia
    (Zaragoza, 2000)
D. Pastor, E/ Bandolerismo Social en Espana: Cinco Siglos de Desequilibrio Social y
    de Bandolerismo (Barcelona, 1979)
 S. Payne, Politics and the Military in Modern Spain (Stanford, California, 1967)
M. A. Pena, El Tiempo de los Franceses: la Guerra de la Independencia en el Suroeste
   Espanol (Huelva, 2000)
J. Perez Garzon, Milicia Nacional y Revolucion Burguesa: el Prototipo Madrileno,
   1805-1874 (Madrid, 1978)
M. Pérez Regordan, E/ Bandolerismo Andaluz, I: desde los Origenes a la Muerte de
    Tragabuches (Arcos de la Frontera, 1987)
M. Pintos, La Politica de Fernando VII entre 1814 y 1820 (Pamplona, 1958)
J. Priego, Como fue la Guerra de la Independencia (Madrid, 1936)
J. Priego, Guerra de la Independencia, 1808-1814 (Madrid, 1972-2000)
P. Prieto, E/ Grande de Espana, Capitan General Castanos, Primer Duque de Bailén y
   primer Marques de Portugalete (Madrid, 1958)
M. Ramisa, Els Catalans i el Domini Napoleonic (Montserrat, 1995)
M. Ramisa (ed.), Guerra Napoleonica a Catalunya, 1808-1814: Estudis 1Documents
   (Montserrat, 1996)
J. Read, War in the Peninsula (London, 1977)
                                                                  Bibhography     261


R. del Rio, Los Origenes de la Guerra Carlista en Navarra, 1820-1824 (Pamplona,
  1987)
C. Rodriguez Lopez-Brea, Frailes y Revolucion Liberal (Toledo, 1996)
E. Rodriguez Solis, Los Guerrilleros de 1808: Historia Popular de la Guerra de la
   Independencia (Madrid, 1887)
A. Rodriguez Villa, E/ Teniente General Don Pablo Morillo, Primer Conde de Carta-
   gena, Marques de la Puerta (1778-1837): Estudio Biografico (Madrid, 1908)
M. Ross, The Reluctant King: Foseph Bonaparte, King of the Two Sicilies and Spain
   (London, 1976)
G. Rotheriberg, The Napoleonic Wars (London, 1999)
R. Rudorff, War to the Death: the Sieges of Saragossa, 1805-1809 (London, 1974)
P. Sahlins, Boundaries: the Making of France and Spain in the Pyrenees (Berkeley,
   California, 1989)
S. Saiz, ‘Lerma en el levantamiento guerrillero de la Guerra de la Independencia’,
   RHM, no. 63 (July, 1987), pp. 161-77
J. Sanchez Fernandez, ‘El Ejército contra las guerrillas: la jefatura militar frente al
   fenomeno guerrillero durante la Guerra de la Independencia’, RHM, no. 87 (
  July, 1999), pp. 149-74
J. Sanchez Fernandez, La Guerrilla Vallesoletana, 1808-1814 (Valladolid, 1997)
J. Sanchez Fernandez, ‘Las Juntas Criminales Extraordinarias en el reinado de José
    Bonaparte en Espafia: el caso vallesoletano’, Aportes: Revista de Historia Con-
    tempordnea, no. 40 (February, 1999), pp. 31-7
J. Sanchez Fernandez, jNos Invaden! Guerrilla y Represion en Valladolid durante la
    Guerra de la Independencia Espanola, 1808-1814 (Valladolid, 2000)
J. Santos, El Bandolerismo en Andalucia, I: Sevilla y su Antiguo Reino (Seville, 1991)
J. Santos, El Bandolerismo en Espana: una Historia Fuera del Ley (Madrid, 1995)
 S. M. de Soto (Conde de Clonard), Historia Organica de la Armas de Infanteria y
   Caballeria Espanolas (Madrid, 1851-62)
J. Tone, The Fatal Knot: the Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon
   (Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 1994)
J. Tone, ‘Napoleon’s uncongenial sea: guerrilla warfare in Navarre during the
   Peninsular War, 1808-14’, EHQ, XXVI, no. 3 (July, 1996), pp. 355-81
J. Tone, ‘The pacification of Navarre’, in W. D. Phillips and C. R. Phillips (eds),
   Marginated Groups in Spanish and Portuguese History (Minneapolis, 1989), pp.
   I11—26
J. Tulard (ed.), L’Histoire de Napoléon par la Peinture (Paris, 1991)
A. Uffindell (ed.), On Wellington: the Duke and his Art of War by Jac Weller (London,
   1998)
R. Vidal, Historia de la Guerra de la Independencia en el Campo de Gibraltar (Cadiz,
   1975)
P. Vilar, Hidalgos, Amotinados y Guerrilleros: Pueblo y Poderes en la Historia de
   Espana (Barcelona, 1999)
J. Weller, Wellington in the Peninsula, 1808-14 (London, 1962)
S. Woolf, Napoleon’s Integration of Europe (London, 1991)
                                              Index




NOTE: Compound Spanish surnames appear under the first element. Prefixes in a name are
transposed, e.g. Cuadra, Ambrosio de la, apart from a definite article alone, e.g. La Miére de
Corvay, Jean. Page numbers followed by 7 and a number refer to information in the Notes.

Abad Moreno, Francisco (Chaleco) 41, 99,           Alvarez, Jacobo 33
     188                                           Alzega, Miguel de 52
Abadia, Francisco Javier de 88                     American historians 15-16, 194
Abecia, Juan José de 33, 34, 94                    Amor, Bartolomé 32, 116
Abogadillo, El see Orué, Miguel                    Amorrostu, Pedro de 121
Abril, Juan 124                                    anarchism 26
absolutist regime 186, 188; opposition to          anarchy in regions 158-9, 178
      189-91, 192                                  Andalucia 50-2
Abuelo, El see Hernandez, Manuel                   Anglo-Portuguese army 157-8, 194; see also
Abuin, Saturnino (El Manco) 34, 41, 112                  regular troops
Aburruza, José 108-9                               Aparici, Manuel 146, 173
afrancesados 12, 120, 150                          apostolicos see Carlism
agrarian unrest 43-4, 68-9, 80-1, 88, 125,         Aragon: anarchy in 158-9; garrison yields
     179, 203                                            135, 136; guerrilla command 179-83
agricultural life 69, 91                           Aragonés, Francisco de Paula 74
Aguilar, José 44, 52                               Arahel, Antonio del 121
Aguilar de Toro, Lorenzo 50                        Aranjuez 36-7
Aguilar del Campoo 133                             Ardit, Manuel 188
alarmas 29, 48, 49, 66                             Areizaga, Juan Carlos de 100
Albenagorta, Pablo 121                             Arens de Mar 81, 82
Albuera, battle of 55                              Argote, Ramon 31
Alcalde, Pedro 37, 127                             Argiielles, Agustin 168
Alegre, Anselmo (El Cantarero) 33, 41              Armengol, José 94
Alegre, Manuel 189                                 Army of the Left 48, 52
Alexander, Donald 15-16                            Arroyomolinos de Montanchez 54
Alfonso, Jaime 37, 120, 187, 202                   Artola, Miguel 16, 24
Algodonales 50-1                                   Asturias 48-50, 78, 144, 163
Almaraz 54                                         Augereau, Pierre Frangois Charles 45, 46
Alonso, Ignacio (Cuevillas) 33, 34, 35, 41,        Avesty, Manuel de 24-5
      117, 138; Longa’s revenge 141                Avila 184
                                                                                 Index        263

Aymes, Jean-René 16-17, 24, 195, 197-8,           Bourbon forces 14, 66
     204                                          Boutflower, Charles 58
Aznar Moreno, Francisco 104-5                     Bragge, William 6, 58
                                                  Brandt, Heinrich von 35, 92, 96, 117, 134,
Baccigalupi, Luis 170                                   136-7
Badajoz 54, 55; corruption 72-3; security         brigandage see banditry
     force 77-8               ;                   Brigante, El see Bustos, Juan
Baget, Juan 45                                    Brindle, Robert 6, 41-2, 100
Bailen, battle of 14, 19                          British forces: anti-British feeling 79; in
Ballester, Francisco 127                                guerrilla operations 52-4; Vitoria
Ballesteros, Francisco 51, 54-6, 60, 78, 152,           success 157-8; Wellington’s strategy
     Vr                                                 154-7; see also Anglo-Portuguese army;
Ballesteros, Tiburcio 124                               regular troops; Wellington, Arthur
banditry: bandit gangs 120-3, 125-6, 187;               Wellesley
      Bourbon measures against 29; execution      British historians 1-2, 6, 8-15, 23-4; anti-
      of bandits 123, 184; by guerrillas 103,           Spanish sentiment 13, 19; praise for
      117, 123-4, 146-50, 151, 176, 182;                guerrillas 13-14
      guerrillas’ links with 194-5, 198-9, 203;   Broers, Michael 77
     in historical accounts   17-19, 22, 23-5;    Bruch, El 21, 31
      official action against 184-6, 187;         Buch, Miguel 82
      official tolerance 164; in popular          Burdiel, Isabel 197, 204
      mythology 125-6; as popular resistance      Burgos 20, 133
      194; reasons for 99; recruitment            Burguillos 57
      methods 126~7; see also pillage and         Burracan 148
      rapine                                      Bustamente, Toribio (Caracol) 33, 34, 99,
Barajar, Juan de 75                                     123
Barba, Justo 127                                  Bustos, Juan (El Brigante) 41
Barbastro 180-1, 187
Barcelona: blockade 31, 46; occupation            cabecillas see guerrilla leaders
      30                                          CAdiz: abolition of feudalism 88; corruption
Barcena, Pedro de la 48, 139                            72; law and order 71, 85; Voluntarios
Barrera, Juan 172, 173, 174                             Distinguidos 75
Barriolucio, Marqués de 140-1                     Calvache, Antonio 37
Bassecourt, Luis Alejandro 142, 143, 144,         Calvo, Baltasar 64
     173                                          Calvo, Matias 65
Battalion of Expatriates 33                       Calzada, Manuel de la 107
Best, Geoffrey 186-7, 197, 203                    Camacho, Manuel 121
Bigarré, Auguste Julien 36~7                      Campbell, Alexander 53
Black, Jeremy 202                                 Canadian historians 15
                                                  Cantarero, El see Alegre, Anselmo
Blake y Joyes, Joaquin 45, 52, 59, 76, 143,
      209.90; on somatenes 82, 83                 Capetillo, Antonio de 144
Blanco White, José 170                            Capmany, Joaquin 168
Blayney, Andrew, Lord 53, 76, 111, 117,           Capuchino, El see Delica, Julian
      118-19, 123                                 Caracol, see Bustamente, Toribio
Blaze, Elzear 99                                  Cardenas, Manuel 171
Blaze, Sebastian 63, 112, 121                     Carlism 20, 22-3, 202
Bo, Vicente 127                                   Carnicero, José Clemente 5-6, 119
Bonaparte see Napoleon I                          Caro, José 107
Bonnet, Jean Pierre Frangois 48-50                Carr, Raymond 62, 197
‘Borbon’ see Principe, Tomas                      Cartaojal, Conde de 107
Borbon, Maria Carlota de, Princess of Brazil      Carvajal, Manuel 120
     (la Carlota) 177                             Casado, Pablo 188
Borkenau, Franz 14-15                             Casamayor, Faustino 62, 66, 82, 119, 180, 182
264      Index

Castafios, Francisco Xavier      15, 99, 104, 124,   corruption: of command in regular forces
      165, 197                                             146; and conscription 72, 73-7, 80-2; of
Castellanos, Francisco 75                                  juntas 72-3, 146, 163-4
Castellon de la Plana 68                             costumbrismo 67
Castile: guerrilla operations 32-3                   counter-guerrillas 11
Castilla infantry 39                                 Covadonga shrine 63
Castillo, Juan del 104                               Crespo, Julian 93-4
Castillo de las Guardas 52                           Crespo, Pedro 114
Catalonia: guerrilla operations 31-2, 44-7;          Crivell, José 106, 126-7, 128
      nationalism 21; occupation saps morale         Croza (‘brigand’): painting 42
      152-3; regionalism 79; resistance to war       Cruchaga, Gregorio 114
      effort 82-3; see also somatenes                cruelty of guerrillas 31, 32
Catholic Church 63, 200                              ‘Cruzada Murciana, La’ 105
Cazadores de Barbastro 52                            Cuadra, Ambrosio de la 124
Cazadores Distinguidos de Catalufia 121              Cuenca 138
cazadores patriotas 44                               Cuevillas see Alonso, Ignacio
cazadores rurales 170                                cult figures 4-5
Chagarito see Diez, Vitoriano                        Cura, El see Merino, Jeronimo
Chandler, David 15
Chaleco, El see Abad Moreno, Francisco               Del Parque, Duque 57-8, 142, 163
Charlan, Andrés 114                                  Delcastel, M. 2097.90
Charro, El see Sanchez, Garcia Julian                Delgado, José 124
Chartrand, René 201                                  Deélica, Julian (El Capuchino)   32, 34, 36,
Chiquito, El see Gaston Luis                               41
Cid, El see Diaz de Vivar Rodrigo (El Cid)           deserters 66-7, 75, 83-5; as bandits 123;
Ciudad Rodrigo 62-3, 70, 85-6                              from guerrilla forces 123, 124, 138, 144;
civil wars 202, 203                                        from regular troops 153; join guerrilla
Claros, Juan 45, 47, 82                                    forces 84-5, 115-17, 172, 173, 174
clergy: afrancesados 150; as guerrilla               Diario de Gobierno de Sevilla 176-7
      members 93-4, 105, 112, 186; see also          Diaz, Lorenzo 37
      Merino, Jeronimo; Rovira, Francisco            Diaz, Luis 49
Cobas, Ignacio 120                                   Diaz, Manuel 126
Cocks, Edward 6                                      Diaz de Vivar, Rodrigo (El Cid) 7
El Cocinero see Rodriguez Valdés, José               Diaz Porlier, Juan (El Marquesito) 4, 11, 33,
collaboration    12, 101                                  34, 56, 109; Aguilar del Campoo 133;
Collar, Francisco 148, 163                                arrest 190; banditry 151; on conditions
Colley, Linda 77                                          for troops 150; death 188; delusions of
Colmenares, José Antonio 140                              grandeur 138-9, 175; forced enlistment
Conciso, El 5, 176, 177-8                                 of troops 127; incorporation into
conscription 66~7, 68-9, 78, 144; corruption              regular troops 189; incorporation of
      and unpopularity 72, 73-7, 79-82,                   independent partidas 171; on
      I10—I1; evasion       114; exemptions 73-4,         indiscipline of troops 137; infrequency
      80-1; guerrilla forces 126-7; height                of action 150-1; military operations 48,
      requirement 81; junta resistance                    49-50; nickname 41; origins as guerrilla
      measures 86-7                                       leader 101; political sympathies 190;
contemporary accounts 2-8, 41-2                           regulation of forces 19-20, 39, 165;
Copons y Navia, Francisco 51-2, 107, 108,                 rescues Alonso 141
     129, 152; on guerrilla bands 146; lack of       Diez, Juan Martin see Martin Diez, Juan
     support in Condado de Niebla 109—11;            Diez, Vitoriano (Chagarito) 120
     regulation of guerrilla bands in Alicante       Dighton, Dennis 42
     171, 172-3                                      dispersos 108, 109, 127; see also desertion
Cordido, Manuel 29                                   ‘distinguished volunteer’ corps 75—6
Corrientes, Diego     120                            Division de la Izquierda de Aragon 134
                                                                                  Index      265

Division de Navarra 40-1, 182, 186                     in historical accounts 3, 4, 40; Aragon
Division de Soria 39-40, 179-80, 186                      command 180-1; British accounts
Division de Tiradores Honrados 107                        13; disciplinary problems 22;
Dominguez, Juan 75                                        legendary figure 5-6, 7, 12
Dominguez, Manuel Ventura 120                          Lejeune’s victory painting 2
Domper, Miguel 33                                      memoirs: informality of early days
Don Benito: agrarian uprising 68-9                        37-8; introduction of military
Donato, Ignacio 121                                       discipline 38-9, 148, 183; on loss of
Dos de Mayo revolt 62, 64                                 Valencia 152; on Mina’s capture 97;
Dufour, Gérard 16, 17                                     on rogue guerrilla bands 146-7, 148,
Dupont, Pierre-Antoine 9, 14-15, 19, 30,                  182; unreliable evidence 201
      ions                                             Navarre origins go—1, 92
Duran y Barazabal, José Joaquin 38, 127;               regular military career 96
      criticism of 156; defeats 137;                   ruthless ambition 96-7
      indiscipline of men 149; rivalry with       Espoz y Mina, Francisco see Espoz Ilundain,
      other guerrillas 142, 143, 158-9; success        Francisco
      against French 39-40, 133-4, 179            Extremadura: bandit gangs 187

Echavarria, Manuel 115-16                         Fajardo, José 44
Echevarria, Pedro de 18                           Feliu, Francisco 74
Echeverria, Pascual 33, 147, 148                  Feria 56-7
Ecija 80-1, 122-3                                 Fermin Leguia, Juan 113
Eguaguirre, Andrés 31                             Fernandez, Alejandro 113
élite classes: avoidance of military service      Fernandez, Julian 101
      73-7; corruption 72-3; juntas 70            Fernandez, Sebastian (Dos Pelos) 41
Empecinado, El see Martin Diez, Juan              Fernandez Echevarri, Juan 33
empecinados 5                                     Fernando VII, king of Spain 20, 63, 69-70;
English College, Valladolid 6, 2417.102                 opposition to absolutist regime 189-91,
enlistment: in guerrilla forces 107-8, 112-17,          192; restoration 158, 186; see also
       126~7, 162, 198; in regular forces 65-6;         absolutist regime
      see also conscription                       Fifth Army 52
Eroles, Baron de 47, 108                          Finley, Milton 194
escopeteros voluntarios 185                       First Army 47, 152-3
Escorial, El 9                                    Flich, Jochim 116
Espadas Burgos, Manuel 16                         Florez Estrada, Alvaro 166-7, 177
Espoz Ilundain, Francisco as guerrilla leader:    Fombella, José 103
      arrogance of Aragon command 179-83;         Forrest, Alan 196
      confirmation of commissions 165, 166;       Franceschi, Fraile, El see Nebot, Agustin
      criticisms of 201; defeats 137, 152;             34
      deployment by Wellington 157;               Francisquete, Jean-Baptiste 1o1
      disrespect for government orders            French forces: accounts of debilitating
       179-83, 189; and French occupiers 128;          warfare 35-7; garrison advantages
      liberal sympathies 188, 189-90; military          132-4, 138; losses 6, 7; as occupiers
      operations 40-1, 133; nicknames 41,               117-21; propaganda and reports of
       136; opposition to absolutist regime            atrocities 63-5, 98-100; protects
       189-90; origins of Division de Navarra          Spanish deserters 153; requisitioning
      40; origins of guerrilla career 96-9;             117-18; strategies to combat guerrillas
      recruitment 107—8, 114; rivalry 143,             42-3, 128, 134; vulnerability in Spain
       158~9, 179-80; as socialist role model          32
       167; succeeds Mina 97-8; success           French historians   1, 16-18, 24, 193
      against French 135-6, 179; troops turn      Fuengirola 53
      to banditry 124, 182; vagaries of           Fuente Ovejuna 57
      leadership 149                              Fuenterrabia 133
266       Index


gaditano revolution 7                          guerrilla bands 37-8, 75-6, 146-7
Galdiroz, Andrés 31, 33                        guerrilla forces: arms supplies 135; bandit
Galicia: accounts of insurrection 9—10, 18,          links 194—5, 198-9, 203; banditry by
      20; bandit gangs 120, 187; guerrillas’         103, I17, 123-4, 146-50, 151, 176, 182;
      parochial concerns 176; home guard             danger of supporting 128; deserters
      29, 66; security measures 70-1                 from 123, 124, 138, 144; deserters in
Galindo, Ramon 127                                  84-5, 115-17, 127, 172, 173, 1745
ganadores as guerrillas 2237.5                      disbandment 171, 184-5, 185-6;
Garay, Martin de 78                                 enlistment 107-8, 112-17, 126-8, 162,
Garcés de los Fayos, Hermenegildo 33                198; foreigners in 116~—17; in historical
Garcia, Nicolas 124                                accounts 1-26, 193; idiosyncracy as
Garcia de la Cuesta, General Gregorio 105,         advantage 168-9; incorporation into
      161                                          regular troops 171, 174, 186, 188-9;
garrisons 132-5, 136, 138; see also sieges         indiscipline and insubordination lead to
Gaston, Luis (El Chiquito) 41                      downfall 173-6; inexperience and
Gay, Narciso 47                                    indiscipline lead to defeat 132, 136-8;
Gayan, Ramon 180, 182-3                             infighting 139-45, 158-9, 175;
Gazan, Honoré Theodore Maxime            51          informality of early guerrilla bands
Gazeta de Sevilla (newspaper) 18                     37-8; legacy for Spain 202-4;
gendarmes d’Espagne 43                               legislation on 165-9, 170-1; military
geographical terrain 28, 29, 193                     operations 27-60, 150-1, 199-200;
Gerona: sieges of 45-6                               military strengths and weaknesses
Gibraltar 55                                         130-59; ‘mixed brigades’ proposal 170;
Gijon 49-50                                          origins and motivation g0—129, 179,
Gil, Luis 31                                         191, 195-6, 197-8; payment and illicit
Gil, Pascual 146                                     gain 103, 117; pillage and rapine 138,
Girard, Jean-Baptiste 54                             146-50, 151, 176, 182; political
Gobert, Jacques-Nicholas 31                          condemnation 176-9; recruitment
Godoy, Manuel de 63, 66, 69                          methods 126-8; regular troops in 19,
Gomez, Camilo 33, 99, 151                            21-2, 44, 45-60, 113, 115-16, 127;
Gomez, Juan 112                                      regulation of forces 38-40, 105-7,
Gomez, Mateo 37                                      160-92; rogue guerrilla bands 146-7,
Gomez, Miguel 127                                    148, 170; role alongside regular troops
Gomez de Arteche y Moro, José 19, 20-3,              136, 151, 152-8, 159, 168-9; Romantic
     24, 64, 117                                     view of 2, 196, 203; successful
Gonzalez, José 126                                   operations 135-6, 150; supplies
Gonzalez, Santos (El Negro) 41                       shortages 138, 163-4, 199-200
Gonzalez Arranz, Gregorio 128                  guerrilla leaders: indiscriminate patronage
Gonzalez Cobos, José 104                             for 163-4; (lack of) cooperation with
Gonzalez de Castejon, Francisco 150                  regular forces 107, 139, 140, 142-5,
Gonzalez de la Torre, José 151                       173, 174—5; as liberal supporters 187-8,
Gotti, Sebastian 33                                  19-2; nicknames 41, 195; Opposition to
government see Patriot government                    absolutist regime 189-90, 192; origins
Goya y Lucientes, Francisco de 25, 42                and motivation 31, 32, 33, 37, 93-4,
Grab, Alexander     194, 202                         g6—105, 191, 195-6; political sympathies
Graham, Sir Thomas        79, 153, 154               187-8, 189-90; popular appeal 41-2;
Granada    70, 87                                    post-war positions 188, 189; rank in
Grazalema 50-1                                       regular forces 161-2, 190; reliability of
Guardia Civil 203                                    memoirs 27, 196, 201; rivalry between
guerra de los agraviados 20                         139-45, 158-9, 173, 175, 179; tenuous
guerre des postes 193                               command of troops 137-43
Guerrero, Eusebio    75                        Guervos, Francisco de Paula 83
guerrilla: definitions and meanings 25, 195    Guiptizcoa 39, 118
                                                                                    Index      267

Gutiérrez, Bartolomé 120                        Jomini, Henri de 130-1
Gutiérrez, Luis 124                             Junta Central: conscription 67, 73-7, 78,
Gutiérrez, Rafael 122, 139, 142, 143, 144,            79-82, 86-7; and guerrilla origins 20;
     156, 174                                         milicia honrada 71; regulation of
                                                      guerrilla forces 105-7, 163; Voluntarios
Hart, Basil Liddell 2077.41                           de Honor 75-6
Haza, Juan de la 121        ,                   juntas: composition under Patriots 70;
Hennell, George 119, 183                              conscription resistance measures 86-7;
Herbon, Ignacio 29                                   corruption 72-3, 146, 163-4; law and
Hernandez, Manuel (Ei Abuelo) 36-7, 41,              order 70-2, 85-6; security forces 70-1,
     IOI, 123                                        77-8
Hernandez, Vicente 116                          juramentados 43
Herrera, Francisco 114
Hijar, Duque de 66                              Keep, William     175
Hill, Rowland 54                                kidnap 127
Hispano, Matias 77
Historia de la Revolucion Espanola 4            La Carolina 85
Historia de Levantamiento, Guerra y             La Pefia, Manuel 79
     Revolucion de Espana 7                     La Romana, Marques de see Romana,
histories 1-26, 193; accounts of banditry             Marqués de la
     17-19, 22, 23-5; contemporary accounts     La Serena 120
     2-8, 41-2; lack of primary sources         labradores as guerrillas 2237.5
     on guerrillas 195-7; problems of           Lacy, Luis 47-8, 51, 171
     interpretation 25-6, 200-1                 land sales 117-18
Hobsbawm, Eric 26, 203                          Laredo infantry 39, 56
Hocquellet, Richard 16, 17, 24                  Larpent, Francis Seymour 117, 157
home guards 29, 44-5, 66; ‘distinguished        law and order: and deserters 85-7, 123, 174;
     volunteer’ corps 75-6; guerrilla tactics         measures against bandits 184-6, 187;
     194; incorporation of guerrilla forces           suppression of uprisings 70-2; see also
     171; see also alarmas; migueletes,               banditry
     somatenes                                  Lazan, Marqués de 79
Huelva 109-10                                   Le Miére de Corvey, Jean 131
Hugo, Abel 114                                  legislation on guerrilla forces 165-9, 170-1
Humble, Richard 14                              Lérida: siege of 46
Husares de Cantabria 39, 165                    Lerin 137,138
Husares de Iberia 39                            Letofia, Vicente 101
Husares de Navarra 182, 211—-127.31             Levant: pillage and rapine 146
                                                libel 201
Iberia infantry regiments 39                    liberals 87-8, 158, 204; guerrilla support for
Ibort, Jorge 65                                        187-8, 189-90, 191-2; and legislation on
Iglesias, Eugenio 66                                  guerrillas 165, 166; support for popular
illiteracy 195-6                                      war 166-7
indirect approach 13                            Limia, Cayetano 29
Infantado, Duque del 52~—3, 102, 227n.91        Lisbon: occupation 30
irregular troops see guerrilla forces           literacy 195-6
Isabel II, queen of Spain 7                     Lizarraga, Juan 33
Isidro, Nicolas Maria de 102, 116               Llano Ponte, Nicolas de 48
Italy: ‘popular war’ in 194, 202                local security forces 70-1, 77-8
                                                 localism 79, 201
Jauregui, Gaspar (El Pastor) 39, 41              Logrofio 139, 140-1
Jiménez, Antonio 94, 149                         Long, Robert 111
Jiménez, Ventura 34, 99                          Longa, Francisco       4, 33, 39; complaints about
Jiménez Guazo, Manuel 104                             148-9; governor of Bilbao 188, 189;
268      Index


      incorporation into regular troops 107,           regulation of forces 145-6; rivalry with
      189; rivalry with other leaders 140, 141,        other guerrillas 139, 142, 143-4, 175;
      144; Vitoria success 157, 175                    support for Fernando VII 190-1; troops
Longford, Elizabeth 14                                 turn to banditry 123-4, 176
looting see pillage and rapine                    Martina, La see Martin de Ibaibarriaga,
Lopez, Miguel 37                                       Maria
Lopez Campillo, Juan 33, 34, 35, 56, 138,         Martinez, Francisco 184
      141                                         Martinez, Gregorio 37
Lopez Moran, Beatriz 125, 203                     Marxist historians 2, 26, 203
Losada, Francisco Javier 163-4, 165               Massena, Andrés 58
Lovett, Gabriel 15, 61, 188, 195, 197, 202        Mateos Ponton, Francisco 120
Loynaz, Manuel 106                                Mayor, Bernardo 94
                                                  Médico, El see Palarea, Juan
Madrid: Dos de Mayo revolt 62, 64;                Mejia, José 165
     occupation 30, 119, 133; relief of 156-7     Mendizabal, Gabriel de 144, 155, 175
Mahy, Nicolas 107, 108-9, 141, 171                Merino, Jeronimo (El Cura) 107, 114, 128,
Malaga 53, 55, 78, 197; bandit security force           141, 188, 202; defeats 137; ecclesiastical
     77; desolation under French 118—19                origins as guerrilla 32, 93, 94; military
Mallen, Fidel 31, 33, 101                              operations 34, 127; nickname 41;
Manchon (priest) 146                                    rivalry 144
Manco, El see Abuin, Saturnino                    Miguel e Irujo, Casimir-Javier de 34, 96
Manso, José 31-2, 45, 47, 108                     migueletes 29, 45, 47, 201
Mantequero, El (cabecilla) 37                     Milans del Bosch, Francisco 31-2, 45, 108
Maranon, Antonio (El Trapense) 41                 milicias honradas 71, 76
Maransin, Jean Pierre 55                          milicias urbanas 186
Marbot, Jean-Baptiste Antoine Marcellin de        military operations 27—60; at sea 53; cruelty
     Bn Gtaly UR)                                       of guerrillas 31, 32; discipline and
Marchand, Jean Gabriel 11                               training 38-9; guerrilla tactics 193-4;
Marco, Prospero 114                                     limited activity of guerrillas 150-1,
Marmel, Juan Antonio 37                                  156-7; and regular troops 45-60; role of
Marquesito, El see Diaz Porlier, Juan                   regular and irregular forces 152-8, 159,
Marquez, Joaquin José 29                                 168-9
Marquinez, Benito 121                             military service: corrupt practices 72, 73-7;
Marti, Bautista 127                                     generous pay 65—6; voluntary
Martin de Ibaibarriaga, Maria (La Martina)              enlistment 65-6, 162, 198; see also
      18, 33                                            conscription; deserters; home guards
Martin Diez, Juan (El Empecinado) 6, 11,          military theory on guerrillas 130-59
     31, 32, 34, 142, 196; on afrancesados        militias: milicia honrada 71, 76; national
      150; appearance 41-2; arrest 161, 191;            militia 185-6, 203; see also home guards;
     conscription methods 127;                          security forces
     contemporary accounts 3, 4-5, 7, 41-2;       Mina, Francisco Espoz y see Espoz Ilundain,
     cooperation with regular forces 144,               Francisco
      161-2; criticism of 156—7; cult figure      Mina y Larrea, Martin Javier (El Mozo) 36,
     4-5; death 188; discipline of troops              65, 117, 140; capture by French 97; and
      112; Germans in troops 116—17;                   Espoz y Mina 96, 97-8; historical
     incorporation into regular troops                 accounts praise 11; indiscipline of
     189; incorporation of independent                 troops 138; liberal sympathies 188;
     partidas 174, 175; inexperience and               motivation 94-5, 100-1; Navarre origins
     indiscipline of troops 137, 138;                  90, 91; nickname 41; official approval
     motivation for guerrilla career 100;              33-4; success against French     34-5;
     nickname 41, 2127.40; paintings of                unreliable evidence on 196
     212n.43; and Piloti 102; political           Miot de Melito, André Frangois 35
     sympathies 190-1; resistance to              Mir, Isidoro 34
                                                                                  Index      269

miracles 63                                     Orueé, Miguel (El Abogadillo) 41
‘mixed brigades’ proposal 170                   Oviedo: French occupation 48-9, 49-50;
Moncey, Bon Adrien Jannot 31                          Porlier’s occupation 138-9; uprising
Montijo, Conde de 142, 143                            68
Morales (cabecilla) 36
Moreno, Jeronimo 37                             Pablos, Julian de 114
Moreno, Vicente 44, 103, 115                    paintings 42
Morillo, Pablo 32, 57, 104, 106, 109, 171,      Palafox y Mercy, José Rebolledo de 59, 65
      189                                       Palarea, Juan (El Medico) 3, 31, 33, 41, 94,
Moros Mogataces de Oran 105-6                         107; deserters from 124; inactivity of
Moscoso, Juan 139, 144                                 175
motivation of guerrillas go—129, 191, 197-8;    palm tree vision 63
      ambition 94-7; desertion 115-17, 144,     Palmetin (cabecilla) 37
      172; lack of evidence 195-6; mercenary    Paris, Marie August 179
      motives 117-24; opportunism 101-3;        parochialism 176
      parochialism 176; revenge 98-100, 112     Parque, Duque del see Del Parque, Duque
mountainous terrain 28, 29                      partida: definition and meaning 25; see also
Mozo, El see Mina y Larrea, Martin Javier             guerrilla forces
Mufioz Maldonado, José 19-20, 24                Pascual y Casas, Esteban 93
Mufioz Vaca, Manuel 77-8                        Pastor, El see Jauregui, Gaspar
Murat, Joachim 62, 64                           Patriot forces see regular troops
Murcia: junta composition 70                    Patriot government: and antiguo régimen 70;
Murgeon, Juan de la Cruz 19                           condemnation of guerrillas 176-9;
Murillo, Ramon de tor                                 conscription orders 67, 73-7, 78, 79-82,
                                                       86-7; decree of 1808 162; lack of
Napier, William 12-13, 19, 24                          support for 78; legislation on guerrilla
Napoleon I, emperor of France: measures to             forces 165—9, 170-1; measures against
      combat guerrillas 43; propaganda                bandits 184-6, 187; provincial
      against 64; withdrawal of troops from            authorities in disarray 182-4; regulation
      Spain 135, 136, 199                              of guerrilla forces 160-92; see also Junta
national character 28-9                                Central
nationalism 77; in Catalonia 21                 Patriota, El 167
naval forces 53                                 patriotism as alien concept 61-2, 77, 78, 89,
Navarre: garrison yields 135, 136; guerrilla           198
      origins in 90-3; liberation and           Patterson, John 80
      aftermath 41, 183-4, 190; pillage and     Paymogo 71-2, 78, 81
      rapine in 146—7; popular support for       Payne, Stanley 188
      war gI-2; regional differences 92, 204;    peasant revolts 43-4, 68-9; see also agrarian
      Renovales resistance in 10                       unrest
Nebot, Agustin (El Fraile) 37, 93, 174, 176-7    Pedrazuela, José 18, 33
Negro, El see Gonzalez, Santos                   ‘people’s war’ see popular support for war
nicknames 41, 195                                Pendencias see Puchau, José
Nujiez de Millaroso, Diego 29                    Perena, Felipe 59, 194
                                                 Pérez, Francisco 121
occupations of guerrillas 93                     Pérez, Santiago 34
Ochotorena, Andrés 33                            Pérez de Castro, Evaristo 169
O’Donnell, Enrique 45, 46, 47, 82, 145           Pérez de Herrasti, Andrés 58
O’Donnell, José 88, 171, 172                    Pérez Garzon, Juan Sisinio 26, 178
officers 78-9                                   Pérez Pastor, deputy 185
O’Lalor, General 2127.35                        Peris, José 127
Old Castile: guerrilla operations 32-3          Pidilla, Rafael 184
Oman, Sir Charles 1, 2, 12-13, 13-14, 15,       pillage and rapine 138, 146-50, 151, 170,
                                                       176, 182; see also banditry
     64
270      ~=Index

Piloti, Antonio    101—2                                  incorporation of guerrilla forces 171,
police force 185                                           174, 186, 188-9; in local security forces
Ponce de Leon, Juan Maria 120                             70-1; morale 152-3; pillage and rapine
Popham, Home 53                                           by 150; reputation of officers 78-9;
popular histories 14-15                                   shortage of supplies 152-3, 158; see also
popular support for war 61-89; based on fear              military service
      of French 62-5, 68; enlistment as             Reig, Fernando 108, 172, 173
      guerrillas 107-8, 112-17, 126~7, 162; as      Reille, Honoré Charles Michel Joseph 128
      fallacy 151; indifference and resistance      Reina, Pablo de 120
      to war effort 82-8, 108-12, 124-5, 194,       religion: clergy as guerrilla members 93-4,
      201-2; liberal politics 166-7, 191-2,                105, 112; incitement to hatred 63;
      204; local uprisings 62-72, 124-5; in               miracles 63; see also Catholic Church
      Navarre 91-2; resistance to conscription      René, Jean Gaspard 31
      73-7, 79-82, 86-7, 110-11; Wellington’s       Renovales, Mariano 108-9, 165, 188; as
      view of 155, 156; see also guerrilla forces         flawed leader 95-6; indiscipline of
Porlier, Juan Diaz see Diaz Porlier, Juan                 troops 137-8, 149; military operations
Portazgo, Marqués de 82                                  10, 49-50
Portugal: military geography 29-30                  requisitioning 117-18
Portuguese forces see Anglo-Portuguese              resguardo 29, 113, 147
      army; regular troops                          revenge as guerrilla motivation g8—100,
Prats, Miguel de 2137.58                                  112
press-gangs 127                                     Revolutionary War (1793-95) 29
priests see clergy                                  Rey, Juan Lorenzo 37
Prieto, Justo 114                                   Riba, Juan José de la 141, 171
Primer Cantabro 39                                  Ricafort, Mariano 34
‘primitive rebel’ 26                                Rio, Francisco del 184
Principe, Tomas (‘Borbon’) 41, 103, 159,            riots 62-72
      176, 177                                      Ripol, Valero 126
prisoners: as conscripts 86; as guerrillas 112,     Rocca, Albert de 35-6, 44, 125
      113-14                                        Rodriguez, Atanasio 101
propaganda: fuelling popular support 63-4,          Rodriguez, Francisco 126
      67; josefina state 17-18                      Rodriguez, Mariano 37
provincial authorities in disarray 182-4            Rodriguez de Requeija, José 120
Puchau, Jose (Pendencias) 173                       Rodriguez Solis, Enrique 7, 100, 107, 126
Puerto de Arlaban 40                                Rodriguez Valdés, José (El Cocinero) 41
Pujol, José 121                                     Romana, Marques de la 48, 52, 58-9, 103,
                                                         106-7 .
quinta 73; see also conscription                    Romeo, Policarpio 105
Quiroga, Juan Bernardo 29                           Ronda 44, 64
                                                    Roset, José 83
Rafael, Lucas 32, 99                                Rothenberg, Gunther 200
Ralla y Miravete, Pascual 113-14                    Rovira, Francisco 31-2, 33, 34, 46, 47, 1723
recruitment see conscription; enlistment                  on somatenes 82
regiments 39                                        Rovira, Luis 107
regionalism 79, 201                                 Rovira y Galceran, Felit 148
regular troops: and British forces 79, 157-8;       Ruiz, Juan 121
      command of irregular forces 161, 168;         Ruiz Falcon, José 44, 52
      deserters 84-5, 115-17, 153, 172, 173,        Russian conflict 135, 136
      174; guerrilla tactics 193-4; as guerrillas
      19, 21-2, 44, 45-60, 104-5, 113, 115-16,      Sabirén, Domingo 34
      127; guerrillas’ role alongside 136, 151,     sacking see pillage and rapine
      152-8, 159, 168-9; guerrillas’ working        Saenz de Vizmanos, Antonio 107
      relations with 107, 139, 140, 142-5, 173;     St James’ shrine, Santiago de Compostela 63
                                                                                 Index      271

Salamanca 53, 133                                Souham, Joseph 45
Salamanquino 148                                 Soult, Nicholas Jean-de-Dieu 50, 54,
Salazar, Francisco 148                                115
Saldivar (cabecilla) 150                         Southey, Robert 1, 8, 9-12, 44; accounts of
Salgado, José 65                                      banditry 18-19; on Galician
Salmeiro, Félix 104                                   insurrection 9—10, 18; on Mina
Salmon, Padre Maestro (friar) 2-4, 51-2, 66,          100
      99                                         Spain: civil wars 202, 203; geographical
Samper, Francisco 172, 173                            terrain 28, 29, 193; guerrillas’ legacy
San Martin, Martinez de 139, 142                      202-4; hatred of French 29; josefina
Sanchez, Francisco 34, 36, 41, 101                    propaganda 17—18; national character
Sanchez Garcia, Julian (El Charro)   171, 176,        28-9; regional differences 92, 204;
     189; attachment to regular troops 57-9,          Romantic views of 2
     175, 193-4; contemporary accounts 3,        Spanish Civil War 202, 203
     4, 11; nickname   2127.40                   Spanish forces see regular forces
Santana Bolafios, Juan ror                       Spanish historians 1, 2-6, 7-8, 19-23, 24;
Santander 53                                           Gomez de Arteche’s ambivalence 20-2;
Santiago de Compostela: deserters 85;                  Salmon 2-4
     popular uprisings 68; St James’ shrine      Spencer, Brent 65-6
     63                                          spy mania 64
Saornil, Jerénimo 32, 103, 150, 156, 159,        starvation 119
      212n.35; arrest and trial 185              students: enlistment 65
Sarasa, Félix 33, 114                            Suchet, Louis 36, 37, 46, 47, 128
Sarasa, Manuel 116                               Sydenham, Thomas 23, 26, 115, 117
Sarasa, Miguel 33, 34, 126, 189
Sas, Santiago 65                                 Tafalla 135
Schaumann, Augustus 87, 175, 181                 Tapia, Juan 196-7
Schepeler, Andreas von 143                       Tarragona 47, 152-3
security forces 70-1, 77-8, 185-6; see also      Temprano, Antonio 94
      home guards; militias                      Tenreiro, Joaquin 29
Segura, Javier de 104                            Teruel 133, 134
Semanario Patristico 164, 169-70                 Third Army 52
Serrania de Ronda 21, 22, 39, 43, 52,            Tierra de Barros 56-7
     124-5                                       Tilly, Conde de 105-6
Serrano, Pedro 31                                Tiradores de Doyle 96
Serrano Valdenebro, José 124, 132, 154           Tominaya, Lucio 127
serranos 52, 171                                 Tone, John 16, 39, 117, 176, 198, 201
Seventh Army 53, 155                             Toral, Antonio 184
Severoli, Phillippe 143                          Toreno, Conde de 7, 167, 190
Seville: French garrison 133                     Torralva 137
Sherer, Joseph 98                                Torre, Juan de la 30
sieges 9, 45-6; see also garrisons               Trapense, El see Marafion, Antonio
Sierra, Salvador 37                              Tudela     138
Siete Nifios de Ecija 122-3
social class of guerrillas 93, 167               uniforms: of guerrillas 38, 42; lack of aids
social revolution 26, 167                             desertion 84
somatenes 9, 29, 31, 161, 201; conscription      Uriz, Nicolas 94
      problems 81; criticism of 21; military
      operations 44-7; reluctance to fight 82;   Valdivielso Morguecho, Antonio 103
      unruly behaviour 82-3                      Valencia: French occupation 143, 145—6, 152,
Soria 133-4, 140-1                                     171; peasant uprisings 69; regulation of
sorteo 73                                              guerrilla forces 171-2; security
Sos del Rey Catélico 182                              measures 70
272         ~=Index

Valero, Luis 105                                Walker, George 137-8
Valladolid: English College 6, 220.102;         Ward, Harry 194
      ruined by French 120                      weapons 135
Varela, Juan Manuel 120                         Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, Duke of:
Vazquéz de la Torre, Manuel Maria 148                disbands irregular troops 184-5;
Veas, Antonio 37                                     engages French in North 135; guerrilla
Vedel, Dominique 31                                  tactics of troops 194; and guerrillas’
Velasco, José 34                                     role 136, 151, 154-7, 178, 199; historical
Verdier, Jean Antoine 46                             accounts 12-13, 15; on provincial
Vich 46                                              deficiencies 184; seaborne guerrilla 53;
Victor, Marshal 44                                   on Spanish officers 78; Vitoria victory
Viladerau, José 74                                    12-13, 136, 157
Villaba, Luis de 117                            Woolf, Stuart 200
Villacampa, Pedro 101, 142, 194; criticism of
     142, 144, 156; military operations 59,
                                                Yebenés, Diego 124
     134; and Puchau’s arrest 173; rivalry
      143
Villacafias 9                                   Zabaleta, Antonio Francisco 33
Villafranca: law and order 85                   Zaldivar, Pedro 37
Villafranca y los Vélez, Marqués de 105         Zamora: junta composition 70
Villalobos, José 44, 52                         Zaragoza: defence of 62, 64, 65; life under
Vitoria: guerrillas’ contribution 136, 157-8,         French occupation 119; life under
      175; in historical accounts 12-13               guerrilla command 179-80, 182-3;
Voluntarios de Honor de la Universidad de             palm tree vision 63; siege 9
      Toledo 75-6                               Zaragoza Domenech, Agustina 65,
Voluntarios de Llerena 32                             121
Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cadiz 75            Zayas, José de 79
voluntary enlistment 65-6, 162, 198             Zumalacarregui, Tomas de 65, 114, 202
 Sheds + ws Fin Lares A a
 Thhed.. 64
          &               «>
 a                ee           aa,         tS;
       the   whee      ocean          ©             :
- Piimatipeio   in Chante 's (tarda            he
       so         ¢,

 tt                                       ee
 Yadueryms (Paingreta
                   & Otae                  5
   alt eee      am:     85.4.   )\%   “
*
i
DATE DUE




    ESDAILE, CHARLES J.
        FIGHTING NAPOLEON :
        GUERRILLAS, BANDITS
    CENTRAL LIBRARY
 Charles J. Esdaile is reader in history,
 School of History, University of Liverpool.
 Among his many publications on the
 Napoleonic wars is A New History of The
 Peninsular War (2002).




Jacket illustrations:
front   Louis Francois Lejeune, The attack by
        General Mina’s guerrillas in France on the
        convoy carrying the ladies of King Joseph's
        court near Salinas, 25 May 1811 (detail).
        © Photo RMN - G. Blot / J. Schormans
back    Felix Phillippoteaux, General Franceschi-
        Delonne captured by ‘El Capuchino’s’ gang.
. NENT University New                      Haven and London
 _ -yeleb coks.com   wwanyalebooks.co.uk   ~




Feset
  ea
