

And that implied that in grappling with the core issues an empirically-based argument could never take one very far; one had to go into the problem more deeply and focus on more basic conceptual questions—not, for example, on how common balancing behavior is, but on more fundamental issues having to do with the basic neorealist conception of how international politics works.[15]

And those more basic issues did not turn on how the historical question of how important the balance of power mechanism had been in the past was to be answered. It was not even clear how that question related to the most fundamental neo-realist claims about the international political system. Even the Elmans had admitted that Schroeder’s “main achievement” in the “Historical Reality vs. Neo-Realist Theory” article was to provide “evidence that, in the aggregate, states do not balance and that balances do not generally form in the international system”; this, they said, was “a noteworthy and important finding,” at odds with one of Waltz’s main arguments in his most important book.[16] But so what? Waltz’s more basic claim was that in an anarchic world—that is, a world characterized by the absence of overarching authority—states were pushed into conflict with each other. Neorealist theory, he said, showed that a “state of war”—often latent, sometimes active—would exist even if all the actors in the system sought “only to ensure their own safety.” That theory might not explain why particular wars broke out. But, according to Waltz, it did “explain war’s dismal recurrence through the millennia.” He insisted, in other words, that the “recurrence of war” was to be understood in structural terms: “The origins of hot wars lie in cold wars, and the origins of cold wars are found in the anarchic ordering of the international arena.”[17]

But demonstrating the weakness of the balance of power mechanism did not really get at that more basic claim. Indeed, if that mechanism had been as powerful as people sometimes said, it should have been a strong force for stability—that is, it would have been an effective peace-generating mechanism—and the more effective it was, the less need there would be for war to maintain the balance. What role, then, could the balance of power argument possibly play in supporting a theory that purported to “war’s dismal recurrence through the millennia”? Note especially in this context Robert Jervis’s paraphrase of Waltz’s own version of the balance of power theory, in a short piece commenting on one of Schroeder’s most important articles about the balance of power:

The growth of a nation’s power, if it becomes great enough to menace other strong states, will be at least partially self-defeating; the attempt to dominate the international system will call up a counter-balancing coalition that will restrain the state. According to balance of power theory, restraint and stability are not goals of national leaders but are by-products of the pursuit of narrow self-interest. More precisely, as long as states seek to survive, can ally with any other state in response to external incentives, and are willing to resort to war if need be, then none will be able to dominate and the other forms of restraint and stability will occur.[18]