

Beatrice de Graaf is Professor in the History of International Relations/Distinguished Professor at the Faculty of the Humanities, Utrecht University. She is principal investigator of a research group (ERC grant) on “Securing Europe, Fighting its Enemies. The Making of a Security Culture in Europe and Beyond, 1815-1914.” In 2018, De Graaf was awarded the Stevin Prize, the highest distinction in Dutch academia. Together with Brian Vick and Ido de Haan she published the edited volume Securing Europe after Napoleon. 1815 and the New European Security Culture (Cambridge University Press, 2018), and her monograph, Fighting Terror after Napoleon was published by Cambridge in 2020. She is the author of many other works on terrorism and security, including Evaluating Counterterrorism Performance: A Comparative Study (Routledge, 2011). She is an editor of Journal for Modern European History and of Terrorism and Political Violence.

Jack S. Levy is Board of Governors’ Professor of Political Science at Rutgers University and Senior Research Scholar at the Saltzman Institute of War and Peace Studies at Columbia University. He is past president of the International Studies Association and of the Peace Science Society. His most recent book is The Outbreak of the First World War: Structure, Politics, and Decision-Making, co-edited with John A. Vasquez (Cambridge University Press, 2014).

T.G. Otte is Professor of Diplomatic History at the University of East Anglia. His latest book is Statesman of Europe: A Life of Sir Edward Grey (Allen Lane, 2020).

John A. Vasquez is the Mackie Scholar in International Relations at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. His books include The War Puzzle (Cambridge University Press, 1993); The Power of Power Politics: From Classical Realism to Neotraditionalism (Cambridge University Press, 1998); The Steps to War (Princeton University Press, 2008) (with Paul Senese); Territory, War, and Peace (Routledge, 2011) (with Marie Henehan); What Do We Know about War? (Rowman and Littlefield, 2021) (Third edition, co-edited with Sara McLaughlin Mitchell), and most recently Contagion and War: Lessons from the First World War (Cambridge University Press, 2018). He has published over forty-five articles in major journals. He has been President of the Peace Science Society (International) and the International Studies Association. He is currently working on a book with Andrew P. Owsiak on War and Diplomacy: Lessons for World Politics.

# Personal Comment by Robert Jervis, Columbia University

Paul Schroeder: Bringing Moderation, Morality, and Progress Back In

The symposium on Paul Schroeder’s scholarship was worthy of its subject, who made so many contributions to our understanding of international history and international politics. I would like to draw on these essays to make a few observations, some of them based on conversations with him, which I wish had been more frequent. Because some of what I say is influenced by these personal contacts, I will take the liberty of referring to him by his first name.