

And yet, as it turned out, he did not turn his back on the theorists; he continued to try to come to terms with the arguments made even by neo-realists like Waltz. The reason had a good deal to do with the episode Vasquez talks about in his comment. When he first read the “Historical Reality vs. Neo-Realist Theory” article, Vasquez tells us, it hit him “like a bombshell.” It confirmed what he had long suspected, namely, “that realist theoretical lenses were driving what scholars were seeing and that a more critical perspective would see things more precisely.” Schroeder’s piece, he writes, thus played a central role in his “philosophy of science critique of the neo-realist research program.”[12] And part of the reason that article was important was that it provoked a very interesting response from Waltz himself, which is called “Evaluating Theories.” A theory, Waltz argued in that piece, is not supposed to mirror reality; for theories to be of any value, they have to present a stylized picture of the real world; a gap between theory and reality is therefore to be expected, meaning that by showing that the theory does not conform to historical reality one was not proving that the theory is worthless. Waltz’s claim was not that theory and reality exist in entirely separate worlds, and that theory could be as disconnected from reality as the theorist wants. He did not take the view that what the historian saw going on had no bearing whatsoever on what the theorist claimed. It was just that the connection was more tenuous, less straightforward, than one might think: “Evaluating a theory,” Waltz argued, “requires working back and forth between the implications of the theory and an uncertain state of affairs that we take to be the reality against which the theory is tested.”[13]

Schroeder took this line of argument very seriously. As he pointed out in a brief comment he published in International Security in the same year in which the Vasquez and Waltz articles appeared, one of the reasons that interacting intellectually with the theorists could be of real value to historians is that it obliges them “to think through their own methodological and epistemological presuppositions more carefully.”[14] He understood the force of Waltz’s argument in his “Evaluating Theories” piece and eventually reached the conclusion that by stressing the point that the balancing mechanism did not count for nearly as much in international politics as the neo-realists seemed to think, he was not really getting at the heart of the problem. As he pointed out in an article he published in 2010—and this shows how fresh, how alive, his thinking continued to be, even at age 83—the critique he had developed in the “Historical Reality vs. Neo-Realist Theory” article did not go far enough. That line of argument, he wrote:

invites the general reply that such criticism fails to understand the basic difference between theory and history and/or between social science and history, or how to use and do theory and social science, or what constitutes proof and disproof in them. It likewise prompts the response that neorealist theory is not intended to explain foreign policy or particular international actions and developments and their particular outcomes, much less solve questions of their historical interpretation and significance, but to establish the theoretical structure within which all such questions can be comprehended. How historians and other scholars deal with these and whether they find neorealist theory useful or not makes little difference so far as the theory is concerned. Realist political scientists may further argue that they are not ignoring or distorting historical facts but simply stylizing and operationalizing them in ways that many historians find difficult and uncongenial, in pursuit of social scientific purposes and ends that make historians uncomfortable. Finally, given the notoriously undefined, virtually boundless and inexhaustible nature of the historical record, the multiplicity of cross-cutting and often irreconcilable narratives, viewpoints, and interpretations within it, and the unavoidable subjectivity and endless controversy that attend historiographical debate on every important issue in which historians engage, to argue simply on empirical grounds that neorealist theory unacceptably distorts history is to invite an interminable dispute over whose “facts,” arguments, or interpretations are correct and decisive.