

But if the balance of power mechanism was a source of “restraint and stability,” showing how weak that mechanism was in practice would scarcely discredit Waltz’s basic claim about how the anarchic international system was inherently prone to war—which, it turns out, was the part of the Waltz theory that Schroeder most strongly disagreed with. But the key point here is that one could not challenge that fundamental notion about how war was built into the system—that it always had been and always would be—by showing that the balance of power mechanism was a lot weaker than people thought. Why then should critics like Schroeder focus to the extent they had on neo-realist arguments about the balance of power? Were they really getting at the heart of the problem?

What made this issue even more confusing was that Schroeder himself took the view that, to the extent that it did play a role in international political life, balance of power thinking was actually destabilizing—the exact opposite of the way Waltz (as Jervis’s paraphrase shows) saw the balance of power mechanism operating. Schroeder had in mind here above all the unbridled pursuit of power political advantage, justified in “balance of power” terms, which he saw in the late eighteenth century. But when he made this argument, he was not thinking only of that period, and he in fact condemned balance of power thinking in very general terms. He took the line (especially in his most important book) that all policies that were rooted in balance of power thinking, even the most moderate ones, were sources of instability—so that if there was stability, it was not because the balance of power mechanism, let alone conscious balance of power thinking, had come into play, but because a very different sort of system had taken shape. The story of international politics, not just in the late eighteenth century but in other periods as well, he claimed, “refutes the notion that balancing practices and techniques promote equilibrium, limit conflict, and preserve the independence of essential actors, or can do so.” And he said explicitly that the British policy of promoting a balance of power on the continent was a “potential danger to peace,” even when British goals “were moderate, as they were most of the time.” He made this argument despite the fact that he understood, for example, that the Britain’s ability in the 1830s to work with Austria to balance Russian power served to hold Russia back and thus tended to stabilize the status quo.[19] Why then the presumption that such policies are inherently destabilizing?

Schroeder’s rejection of balance of power thinking struck me as odd when I read The Transformation of European Politics shortly after it came out in 1994.[20] I was particularly struck by the fact that Schroeder, in making that argument, seemed to be turning his back on an approach to international politics which he had earlier found very attractive. In his extraordinary first book, The Axis Alliance and Japanese-American Relations, 1941—a book which had a profound impact on my own understanding of the origins of the Pacific War, and indeed on international politics more generally—Schroeder was quite critical of U.S. policy in 1941. The Americans, in his view, were too rigid and moralistic; if the U.S. government had adopted a policy more in line with realist principles, the war, he thought, could and should have been avoided.[21] And in his interpretation of the origins of the First World War (as put forward in his famous “Galloping Gertie” article in 1972), he had taken the view that a failure to pursue policies rooted in balance of power thinking was a major source of instability. “One of the few incontestable points” in the balance of power theory, he wrote, “is that preserving the system means preserving all the essential actors in it,” and that included Austria; the unwillingness of the Entente powers to pursue a “real balance-of-power policy,” a policy sensitive to the importance of maintaining Austria as a great power, paved the way to disaster, since Germany could not allow its only great power ally to go under without a struggle.[22] The clear implication was that balance of power thinking was not necessarily destructive—indeed, that it could instead be a key part of a stable international order.