

A similar argument could be made about how we explain and judge Austrian and perhaps German policy in June and July 1914.

Some aspects of Paul’s moral stance may have been rooted in his broader outlook. In reading his obituary I learned that before he became an historian he was an ordained Lutheran minister and throughout his life remained very active in his church.[44] Of course our lives are often segmented, but it is not implausible to see his view of the historians’ duty as flowing from his beliefs about the moral imperatives of living in a society. Perhaps his religious outlook also contributed to his sympathy for the weaker states in the international system and his appreciation of their vital role. It probably contributed to his counterpart suspicion of the powerful states, a perspective that was shared by his IR nemesis Ken Waltz.

If the claim that we should render moral judgments about international behavior was heresy to Realists and many others in the IR discipline, his argument that international politics actually progressed rather than remaining constant or simply repeating itself was even further beyond the pale for them. Indeed, although he had come to this conclusion much earlier, he only made this argument late in his career.[45] He told me that the original draft of his critique of Waltz contained a concluding section on progress, but that he had cut it because he feared that it might discredit the rest of his argument.

On this as on so many of Paul’s arguments there is ample room for dispute. I trust that the scholarly community and perhaps the interested public will continue to grapple with the issues he raised. I know my own research and understanding of the world would have been much simpler and cruder without his scholarship and conversation. He was a treasure and will be sorely missed.

# Essay by Beatrice de Graaf, Utrecht University

Paul Schroeder opened my eyes for the lure of classical diplomatic history, and for the manifold possibilities of building bridges to other, adjacent disciplines, such as imperial history, political history, international relations and security studies. In fact, Schroeder stood at the apex of sound, traditional diplomatic history as it had been practiced during the twentieth century, from classic historians such as Harry Hinsley, via the English school of Herbert Butterfield, to the neorealist conjunctions of a Henry Kissinger.[46] Yet, Schroeder was also the bridge towards the opening up of the field into New Diplomatic History, Global History, and the study of cultural practices, norms, institutions and more constructivist approaches to international relations.

But the first thing I learned from his articles and then pivotal monograph The Transformation of European Politics[47], is how a historian should and could work on intricate pattern of international relations and diplomatic interventions around the Age of Revolutions. Schroeder went against the grain of employing abstract notions about the balance of power, did not develop grand theories on the great power system, but traced the intricate diplomatic settlement in and beyond Europe from 1763 to 1848. He discarded any essentialist reading of diplomatic key concepts such as the ‘balance of power,’ since by doing so, ‘any outcome’[48] in foreign relations could be computed equally well. Instead, Schroeder anticipated a more constructivist and linguistic approach to international relations by trying to follow the way in which ‘principles,’ ‘rules,’ and ‘discourse’ were developed through time. In short, with his seminal The Transformation of European Politics he waved goodbye to the ahistorical and oftentimes anachronistic understanding of the ‘states system,’ and opened up new vistas into deconstructing genealogies of state interests and international alliances.