

As is often the case, I first ‘met’ Paul through his writings. I can’t remember exactly when I read The Axis Alliance and Japanese-American Relations, 1941, but I was immediately taken with the depth of the research and the skill of the analysis that led to a conclusion that I was, and still am, reluctant to accept (i.e., that the U.S. kept demanding more in response to Japan’s major concessions).[28] What was equally striking was the unwillingness of a number of scholars of East Asian international politics to engage with the argument when I raised it with them. In a fleeting conversation towards the end of his life, Paul said that he had modified his views, but unfortunately, I did not ask why, and the basic argument was picked up and extended by the scholar who introduces our symposium, Marc Trachtenberg.[29]

Reading Paul’s book not only shook up my beliefs about how was the U.S. entered World War II, but led me to be on the lookout for anything else he wrote. Somehow, and again I can’t remember exactly how, I stumbled on an unpublished paper laying out his basic argument about why the nineteenth-century international system was different from what came before or after, and how this had been misinterpreted by most scholars.[30] The relevance for political scientists studying international relations was clear to me, and so I urged him to publish the article in an IR journal rather than one in his own discipline. The referees and editors of World Politics agreed with me and ran it is the lead piece, and this introduced Paul to members of my own field and opened the path for continuing interaction. (His interest in IR scholarship pre-dated this and was demonstrated in his strong criticisms of the work of Richard Rosecrance and his students on late nineteenth-century European international politics).[31] As is illustrated by his later exchange with Ken Waltz, which is quoted in Trachtenberg’s introduction, Paul was ambivalent about these interactions. On the one hand, he saw the overlap between his interests and IR and, unlike many of his colleagues, saw things in the latter discipline that were worthy of consideration. On the other hand, the wrong-headedness he perceived as dominating IR provoked his scorn and sometimes led him to wonder if engagement was worthwhile. I think it says a lot about Paul that although he sometimes complained, the attraction of exchange always won out.

The contributors to the symposium do a fine job of covering many of his ideas and so here I would like to pick out what I think were Paul’s main themes. I must immediately note, however, that Paul probably would be unhappy with this because of the degree of simplification and flattening it involves. My excuse is that I am after all a political scientist.

Most importantly for IR scholars, Paul thought that we had placed too much stress on what is now called ‘hard power,’ especially military power. This was true in two senses. First, IR scholars, or at least Realists like Waltz, believed that the international system was kept in equilibrium largely through the threat or use of force and that world-wide hegemony was suppressed through the eventual formation of a counterbalancing military coalition. Second and related, the system could be preserved by states taking narrowly self-interested stances without being inhibited by moral restraints or considerations of the good of the wider community. According to Paul, an examination of the historical record showed that these two key arguments were simply wrong. On the first point, Paul argued that bandwagoning (i e., siding with the stronger power) and hiding (i.e., forms of neutrality) were common responses to a rising hegemon.[32] Like his fellow historian Paul Kennedy, he believed that policies of appeasement were not only common, but often efficacious.[33] Relatedly, states often tried to curb threats by following a mantra attributed to gangsters: “hold your friends close and hold your enemies closer,” or what he called “grouping.”[34] Of course he did not deny that force was often used or claim that Napoléon Bonaparte could have been tamed by other means, but argued that this was not the common pattern and the other great powers would have been willing to live with a system dominated by France had Napoleon not reached further and sought to crush them.[35] As John Vazquez notes, in Paul’s reading of history, hegemonies can be durable if the dominant power shows a modicum of respect for the interests of others. (To this Waltz would reply that the temptations to abuse power are so great that unless states are checked by external forces, they will eventually overreach).[36]