

This gets to Paul’s second point: a world in which states gave pride of place to military power and, like Adam Smith’s actors, looked out for their own narrow interest without considering the health of the system as a whole would tear itself to pieces. This is just what happened at the end of the late eighteenth century and again in the early twentieth century. If the coalitions that formed to defeat Napoléon and the German-led alliance in 1914 represent the operation of the balance of power, as argued by conventional IR, the world was brought to these calamities by states abandoning all self-restraint and pursuing narrow self-interest in the fullest. A pure struggle for power without also seeking the construction of order will eventually degenerate into mayhem and chaos, and because leaders, unlike realist IR theorists, understood this, they rarely pursued such policies.[37]

If hegemony is blocked only by force, then it makes sense for scholars to focus on the strongest states who are most likely to lead the counter-balancing coalition. But for Paul, this focus is misplaced and also falsely paints these countries in heroic colors. Actually, what is crucial are the weaker states, which cannot stand on their own, whose health is necessary to maintain a system with a modicum of order and who often play key roles in maintaining equitable norms and avoiding excessive violence. Thus, Paul’s preoccupation and sympathy with Austria, which, as T.G. Otte notes, is a thread that runs through his work and that gives some ground for criticism.

The other side of the coin, which follows from taking the perspective of weaker but still essential states, is Paul’s criticism of stronger ones that fail to see that the relatively peaceful operation of the system depends on the security of its weaker members. In the nineteenth and early twentieth century Russia was actively guilty on this count by seeking to expand its influence in the Balkans in a way that would eventually bring Austria to its knees. This view is not uncommon among historians; what is much more unusual is that Paul held Great Britain accountable for its errors of omission: even if it did not actively care about Russia, it remained passive in the face of the breaking of the old norms and rules of the game.[38] Whereas most historians saw Britain in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as the “holder of the balance’—that is, the key member of the system that held it together and prevented anyone from dominating, Paul argued that Britain was self-interested and self-righteous and refused to do what was necessary to maintain a peaceful and moderate system. This stress on the responsibility and the indeed duty of the leading powers sets his analysis apart from those of most of his colleagues and conflicts with the perspective of Realism and much of Liberalism. It also gives his analysis a moral punch, as I will discuss below.

One of Paul’s best-known contributions was his argument that, far from restoring the old world, the Congress of Vienna established a very different one based on a balance of interest rather than a pure balance of power. Unlike the system that prevailed before the French Revolution and Napoléon, states explicitly watched over the health of the system as a whole and knew that they shared norms and understandings that all the major powers and those entities that constituted what Paul called intermediary bodies had to be conciliated.[39] My comment on Paul’s summary of how the Congress of Vienna and the subsequent Concert of Europe operated draws out the contrast between his view, a purely Realist one, and my own middle ground.[40]