

Ad fontes

Conspicuously missing in the work of Schroeder, but at the same time completely understandable, is the lack of new archival evidence to support his far-reaching claims and findings. In researching the eight immensely dynamic decades of 1763 until 1848, the decision to rely on secondary literature and printed sources is almost inevitable. Yet, by doing so, as an historian, Schroeder did miss some seminal archival clues that would have substantiated some of his claims, but subvert others. He did not go back to the archives to look at who exactly sat around the green baize tables to discuss the new alignments of power and the resettlement of territories. He did not find out how exactly reparations and indemnities were negotiated, and who pulled the strings there. He did not close in on the letters, diaries, and memoirs that would have revealed the role of the women that also contributed to this new culture of peace and security. Nor did he excavate the severe impact of the trauma of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars on the state of mind of the men and women who had tried to rebuild their societies after 1815, and how these emotional reverberations informed the notions of balance, moderation, and redress.

Archival research into the negotiating of the Treaty of Paris and the Quadruple Alliance Treaty, for example, would have uncovered the role of the Allied Council that convened in Paris between July 1815 and 1818 and proved to be the hothouse for the formation of a new security culture in Europe.[56] It would also have exposed the extent to which the post-war international settlements were entangled with attempts to pacify and secure the domestic front. To my utmost astonishment, for example, the Allied Council ran a pan-European security agency (led by Prussian Police director Justus von Gruner, who reported to Arthur Wellesley/the Duke of Wellington, Prince Klemens von Metternich/the Austrian Foreign Minister, and Prince Karl August von Hardenberg/Prime Minister of Prussia), and with the help of French Prime Minister, the Duc de Richelieu, composed black lists of unwanted Bonapartist, émigrés, and terrorists who had to be expelled from France, the Netherlands, the German lands, and Poland, and made to live in the countries of the Quadruple Alliance only. The transformation of European politics was indeed even more transformative than Schroeder had envisaged.

My colleague Ozan Ozavci, in turn, went to the Ottoman Archives, and discovered that contrary to Schroeder’s remark that Britain floated the idea of “including the Ottoman empire under the guarantee of the Vienna treaties”[57], the empire was rather banned from the negotiations amongst the four major power. These were emphasizing Europe’s identity as a community of ‘civilized’ and ‘Christian’ nations, and, in so doing, implicitly considered the Ottoman Empire fair game for their inter-imperial ambitions.[58] For example, they served as hunting grounds for the various Spanish, Dutch, French, and British interventions against the Barbary pirates in the late 1810s, as Erik de Lange has demonstrated.[59] In fact, the Porte did indeed receive an invitation to dispatch observers to Vienna, but no formal guarantees or diplomatic respect were demonstrated. More importantly, the Porte was not considered a first-rank power, and therefore Ottoman leaders decided not to participate at the Vienna Congress at all. These Vienna Congress reverberations that went beyond the European shores, and directed interventions in the Mediterranean, the Ottoman Empire, the Americas, and in the South East Asian overseas colonies. Schroeder did hint at these outcomes, but again, left open for future generations to unpack, reconstruct, and understand them in more depth and detail.[60]