

How then, did this transformation of European politics play out? Here, as well, Schroeder offered substantial clues and tips for future historians. He pointed to the mechanisms of alliance building, and identified patterns of demanding indemnities and negotiating reparations, all of which functioned as rules and principles of the international state system that could, and should, be historicized, rather than taken as abstract terms. As Jonathan Kwan argues, Schroeder taught new generations of international and diplomatic historians that it had been a ‘new grammar for diplomacy based on mutual restraints, negotiation, and co-operation’ that helped to bring about a the ‘European concert’ after 1814.[49] According to Schroeder, this post-1815 system did not qualify as an era of ‘restoration’ since there had been no “turning back of the clock.” Instead, “the spirit and essence, the fundamental principles and operation, of the international system [..] were anything of backward looking, were instead progressive, oriented in practical, non-Utopian ways to the future.”[50] This statement of Schroeder’s grabbed my attention, and prompted me to look again at this immediate post-1815 period that in many textbooks still is being described as stale and repressive. But was it really?

Missing the ‘how’

Obviously, far more was going on in and around the post-Napoleonic period, and Schroeder had made that clear. Yet, at the same time, while delving into the slew of publications[51] that came out in 2013 (due to the bicentenary of the Dutch kingdom, which very much a product of the new European concert) and 2015 (the bicentenary of the Congress of Vienna), I could not help wondering on how the ‘how’ of Schroeder’s transformative approach exactly and concretely played out ‘on the ground,’ that is, in the mundane efforts of the men (and women!) in the field back then. Many books since then have indeed stressed the element of transformative norms and rule-making, and the collective learning processes that occurred around the Congress of Vienna.[52] They have pointed to the importance of understanding the new, post-1815 mentalité,[53] or to the consumerist and cultural underpinnings of this new European system, as rendered visible by the marvelous work of Brian Vick.[54] Others started to inquire about the contributions of the precise actors: was it only the sovereigns, princes, and star diplomats that ran the show? Or should we look behind the curtains and identify the manifold middlemen, salonnières, engineers, and officers that also sang their tune in this new concert? Glenda Sluga and Christine Haynes crucially contributed to inserting new – female – actors, and new sites of action (the occupied territories of France after 1814) into our visualization of this transformative period.[55]

Yes, Schroeder’s work did display lacunae, and they mostly pertain to this seminal question that historians should always ask: how exactly did this transformation come about? Even so, he offered great and distinct leads for future historians of international relations to follow as they waded deeper into the intricacies of diplomatic histories. Let me elaborate on two of these lacunae that inspired my own research and that of my group: the omission of new archival research, and the binary understanding of the Congress system as a hegemonic power system resting on the preponderance of Great Britain and Russia.