

In so far as Schroeder’ systemic approach is feasible; it is so principally because it is circumscribed by the geographical limitations of Europe. The truly European range of his work is one of its undoubted strengths, even though, in practice, Central European developments tend to be prioritized, unsurprisingly, perhaps, given the regional focus of Schroeder’s own research interests.[144]

There is an unspoken assumption at work in his work that the “shared rules and understandings” that underpinned the European system had global application. That assumption is never really tested, however. Nor did Schroeder probe its implications for the viability of his thesis of a dual Anglo-Russian hegemony that supported the Vienna equilibrium. His assertion that the two powers “left each other alone in their respective spheres” is an elegant way of skirting over some awkward analytical problems. Anglo-Russian relations outside Europe were far from passive. They were characterized by their own dynamic of containment and expansion, focused on two key geostrategic points, the Turkish Straits and their terrestrial equivalent, the Khyber Pass in Central Asia. It did not preclude intermittent cooperation if the stability of Europe was at stake, for instance at the turn of 1825-6 in connection with the Greek question. But neither then, nor during the later Mehmed Ali and Rhine crises, was it a case of two hegemonic powers colluding to maintain leadership in their respective spheres.[145] The logical corollary to this would have been a general understanding on Central Asian affairs, as proposed by the Russian Foreign Minister, Count Nesselrode.[146] This never happened.

***

Lest I be accused of having indulged in Beckmesser-like pedantry, the above is intended to acknowledge the ambitious intellectual scope of Paul Schroeder’s conceptualization of international history, and the profundity of thought and reflection that underpins it. Moreover, his cogent argument concerning the centrality of international relations is one which historians of all stripes ignore at their peril. In both its achievements and its limitations his “systemic approach” is productive of great insights. Whether one agrees with it or not, whether in toto or in part only, grappling with it can only stimulate further insight and understanding. If nothing else, Paul Schroeder has made “as good a case as has been made in recent years for treating international history as an important discipline in its own right.”[147] And that is no small achievement – far from it.

# Essay by John A. Vasquez, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign

Paul Schroeder was a major figure in diplomatic history, but he also had an important impact on political scientists. This essay seeks to review his contributions to International Relations (IR) theory and peace research and provide a guide to reading.[148] What attracts political scientists to his work is that, like all great historians, he is highly theoretical; he reflects critically on the concepts used to analyze history and the theoretical use made of historical narratives to make larger claims. He challenges facile causal inferences often made in historical accounts. For instance, he challenged the claim that war weariness was a factor in explaining why the 1815 settlement was so durable, asking why war weariness after other great wars in 1648, 1713-14, 1763, 1919, and 1945 did not have the same effect.[149] Besides this general analytical stance, his work is of interest to debates in IR theory because he is critical of realist concepts and generalizations used by political scientists and historians.