

By the same token, his important theory of “buffer-states” as a form of shock-absorbers between the great powers implies that the system itself was real and material.[136] Furthermore, Schroeder frequently could not resist the urge to chide some governments – more often than not British ones – for pursuing a course of action that did not conform with the system.[137] Contemporary diplomatists, such as Friedrich von Gentz, Metternich’s amanuensis, regarded Britain as “le pivot de la fédération Européenn’,” as it had been constituted after the fall of Napoleon.[138] Not so Schroeder, for whom it occupied a “special, eccentric position in the European states system,” and that circumstance continually caused him problems.[139] It was almost as if he viewed the nineteenth-century international landscape from the windows of the Ballhausplatz.

This implicit neo-Metternichian perspective relates to another, at least to this writer’s mind, problematic aspect of Schroeder’s systemic approach. His emphasis on prudence and his praise for restraint against aggression are implicit value judgments. However laudable these virtues might be (and who could disagree that they are laudable?), they allow moral categories to slip into scholarly analysis by the backdoor. Any account that rests on a dichotomy of aggression and moderation invites the treatment of history as a morality tale because politics and morality are not differentiated. In this manner, restraint becomes simultaneously an analytical device and a moral category of judgment. Like Edward Gibbon, but not as explicitly as he, Schroeder focuses on the “political virtues of prudence and courage.”[140] It reinforces the often-moral tone of his assessments. It lends them a special power. But it also encourages his tendency towards vituperation whenever individual powers are seen to have deviated from the correct, system-conforming course of action.

There is also a degree of inconsistency in the treatment of the balance of power. At one level Schroeder baulks at the often unthinking and uncomprehending use of the term by historians. Yet the term had a very precise meaning for a whole generation of diplomats and statesmen, for whom it stood for the territorial balance arrived at in 1815. Indeed, Schroeder himself was compelled by the force of his own analysis repeatedly to return to the notion of a balance.[141] His concern with the workings of the system also makes him treat states as if they were single entities, rather like “black boxes,”[142] hermetically sealed against their surroundings but somehow interacting with them by some mysterious process. What is needed is “a language and terminology which reflects more accurately the realities of power, influence and responsibility”[143] inside these black boxes; and of this language Schroeder had an insufficient command. Political history, and international history more especially, is saturated with human agency. To develop the techniques needed would, ironically, equip the historian also to appreciate the “political virtues of prudence and courage” without turning the writing of history into a morality tale.