

The use of alliances as instruments for restraining allies and for influencing their foreign and domestic policies feeds nicely into Schroeder’s interpretation of the nineteenth century concert system. The historical puzzle Schroeder aimed to answer is the historically unprecedented nature of the long peace after the Congress of Vienna, which endured until the Crimean War. Schroeder notes that the Vienna settlement was the most successful European peace settlement from Westphalia in 1648 to the end of World War II.[99] For several decades after Vienna, there was no great-power war or even a serious threat of major war. Lesser conflicts were settled quickly and generally peacefully, and state boundaries remained unchanged. Schroeder argued that that this outcome “would have been inconceivable in any other era of European history.”[100]

His answer to this puzzle constitutes his most influential and enduring contribution to historiography and perhaps to international relations theory. He argued that the governing rules, norms, and practices of a competitive and conflictual eighteenth-century balance of power system were supplanted by the new rules and norms of a nineteenth-century concert system. The Congress of Vienna marked a revolutionary transformation to a new international system of “political equilibrium” based on mutual consensus on the norms, rules, and the legitimacy of the system, and on a “balance … of rights, security, status, claims, duties, and satisfactions rather than power.”[101] This political transformation was driven by a “transformation of political thinking” based on learning from the experience of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars and on the institutionalization of those lessons in the Concert of Europe. The new thinking involved an appreciation of the security dilemma and recognition that the pursuit of short-term security gains would only inhibit future cooperation necessary to achieve long-term interests. Beginning with the Congress of Vienna, Schroeder argued, political leaders “would rather compromise or yield on their particular demands than destroy the foundation of the new system: respect for rights and the rule of law.”[102]

Schroeder rejected conventional interpretations of the Vienna system as a “restoration” of a balance of power system after a generation of general warfare, arguing that in structural terms the European system was not much different in 1815 than it was in 1763.[103] He also rejected the common argument that the new system was a “Holy Alliance” to preserve the existing political and socio-economic order against a transnational, class-based threat of revolution fueled by a postwar economic depression and by the spread of the liberal ideas of the French Revolution. He asserted that “No major European government was ever threatened with overthrow by the ideas, propaganda, and subversion of the French Revolution, nor were many minor ones. What did destroy many minor thrones and sent those in Berlin, Vienna, and St. Petersburg reeling was war…”[104]