

What sets Schroeder’s work apart from that of other historians of his and earlier generations was his openness to approaches and concepts developed in the cognate discipline of International Relations.[128] Until then, all too often, it was – and sometimes still is – the much cherished belief of historians that, in Political Science, facts serve principally ornamental purposes; that they are selected with eye to a predetermined design or theoretical construct; and that they are not allowed to speak for themselves. This is not the place to serve up another helping of that old epistemological chestnut about nomothetic PolSci methods versus the ideographic inclinations of historians. Suffice it to say that Schroeder’s interest in theoretical approaches and perspectives turned him into an exotic bird amongst his historical colleagues who tend, for the most part, to sport less colourful conceptual plumage.

According to Schroeder it is crucial to consider international history in a systemic context that includes the system’s internal dynamics as much as the manner in which individual states operated within the system. He directed the attention of his fellow-toilers in the field to the dominant ethos of the system. Central to his analysis is the insight that, in order to pursue diplomatic objectives without major conflict, there needs to be mutual awareness and restraint between states and within the international system. Such a sense of restraint, he claimed, was not fully developed in the eighteenth century. Contemporary balance-of-power ideas served principally to diminish lesser powers by fostering the notion of equivalence in any gains for the stronger ones. During the eighteenth-century powers rose or declined with bewildering speed. Established great powers – Spain, Sweden, and the Netherlands – ceased to be great, and one of the largest entities of the period, the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, ceased to exist altogether. Their places were taken by hitherto negligible Brandenburg-Prussia and far-distant Russia.

The experiences of the French revolution and Napoléon Bonaparte’s near-hegemony of Europe changed attitudes. In Schroeder’s reading, the Congress of Vienna ushered in a better world, only to be undermined, at least in parts, by the middle of the nineteenth century. At Vienna, the eighteenth-century “conflict and competition balance of power” gave way to equilibrist thinking. According to Schroeder, this change in international relations was more profound than any changes wrought by the Atlantic, French, or Industrial Revolutions. In a sense this was a real ‘revolution,’ though Schroeder himself avoided use of that word, weighed down as it is by either intellectual sloppiness (especially in the English-speaking world where any change is in danger of being labelled a ‘revolution’) or by ideological baggage. This is the hard core of Schroeder’s argument, uncompromising and unyielding. Once the full implications are understood, its truly ‘revolutionary’ meaning stands revealed: historical scholarship must restore the study of past international relations to the central place they once held in European history.