

Similarly, the way he wrote his history, such as the important book on the Crimean War, made it clear that conceptions of the national interest as objective and universal are wanting because of the severe divisions regarding the term in 1853-1854 England. By looking at specific decision makers he opened the black box that realists keep closed by treating countries as unitary actors, and showed there is no single England but at least three decision makers who struggled to control policy.

For peace research, these contributions have tremendous import because they demonstrate that the realist generalizations about European history (what constructivist would later call the realist narrative) did not in Schroeder’s words reflect the “actual course of history.”[238] Three elements were involved in this critique. First, European history and in particular the relations among great powers were not a cyclical power politics struggle and a constant balancing of power. The practices of states were much more varied than that, and realists obfuscated that variegated behavior. Likewise, alliances were not used solely or even primarily for capability aggregation after 1815. Schroeder showed that they were also tools of management to restrain certain great powers and maintain the peace.[239] Indubitably the greatest tool of management was the Concert of Europe itself, which was a “transformation of international politics,” something which is impossible in realism.

These points led Schroeder to criticize neorealist scholars, first Waltz and then Mearsheimer, for their portrayals of not only the 1815-1945 period, but also the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, which were supposed to be the hallmarks of power politics. Meanwhile, these points were picked up by critics of realism, and Schroeder was drawn into the paradigm debates within IR in the late 1990’s. For peace researchers, including quantitative peace scientists, Schroeder’s view of European history provided a clear alternative to the conventional history that many had many grown up with. Realism and Neorealism survived these challenges, but their dominance was weakened within IR, especially as the democratic peace grew in ascendance.

For a new generation of IR scholars, Schroeder’s work is still worth reading not only because it pointed out the deficiencies of many of our assumptions about European history, but because of the way Schroeder described and explained how states conducted their affairs with each other over time.

Notes

[1] Paul W. Schroeder, The Axis Alliance and Japanese-American Relations, 1941 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1958); Paul W. Schroeder, Metternich’s Diplomacy at Its Zenith, 1820-1823 (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1962); Paul W. Schroeder, Austria, Great Britain, and the Crimean War: The Destruction of the European Concert (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1972); and Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics, 1763-1848 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994).