

Subsequently, he claimed that this transformation meant that history was not cyclical, but radically “open.”[203] It is not pre-determined but can be changed into something new and different, and this can be done by creating a new structure that will change the behavior of the units. Nonetheless, the nature of history does not mean that it does not evolve in a particular way, which for him was toward more order.[204]

Although Schroeder did invoke Waltz while criticizing him,[205] he did not pursue the implications of his analysis for Waltz’s discussion of anarchy. His claim about the transformation of international politics during the Vienna settlement showed that institutions can reduce anarchy and can create order, much like the English School and Hedley Bull argued,[206] demonstrating his further influence on IR theory.

In his “Not Even,” essay, however, he raised the question of anarchy when he extended his critique of neorealism to include John Mearsheimer[207] and the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. These two centuries would seem to be “difficult or hard” cases for critics of realism, but “easy” ones for Mearsheimer and Waltz, since power politics and balance of power thinking were thought to be more dominant there. Schroeder argued that in fact not even in these two centuries did neorealism provide an accurate portrayal of the historical record. Yes, one can find a cyclical pattern of the struggle for power, but what neorealists missed is that states also responded to anarchy with a quest for order.[208] He then showed how this early history evolved to create the transformation he had identified in his The Transformation of European Politics book as occurring in 1815. His main point was that the struggle for power had always been intertwined with a search for and construction of order. This conclusion made this piece an extension of Schroeder’s criticism of realist international history as inaccurate and theoretically misleading.[209] But this extension was in many ways deeper than the earlier piece because it covered two more centuries and added an evolutionary element. In addition, as always, the analysis had a wealth of history to buttress its claims.

His criticism of a cyclical recurring history of war made him see that peace was not only possible but far from rare. When asked to bring a historical perspective to the question of whether major war was waning, he pointed out that the history of international politics had not been dominated by war.[210] He documented seven instances of “long peace” involving dyads (not his word), like the Anglo-American, Anglo-French, and Anglo-Russian peace; sub-regional peace systems, like that among the Baltic states and the Low Countries; and the very important three-party peace among Austria, Germany, and Russia 1763-1914.[211]

Realism and the Realist paradigm, although not as dominant today as they were in the two decades after Waltz wrote his masterpiece,[212] continue to influence IR scholars. Those who still see European diplomatic history through that lens would do well to study these articles by Schroeder, as well as his important text on The Transformation of European Politics, 1763-1848.