

These articles constitute some of the key studies that make a contribution to IR theory and peace research. Many of them are collected in his Systems, Stability, and Statecraft, edited by David Wetzel, Robert Jervis, and Jack S. Levy, which is the best place to start for those who are interested in reading Schroeder’s articles. That collection also contains many of his classic historical studies that political scientists would benefit from reading. These include his sharp indictment of Napoléon, whom Schroeder saw as shaping the way the Concert of Europe was constructed.[231] This is the lead article in Part I of the collection that includes many of his best articles on the Concert such as the important studies on Austria’s Eastern policy, the loss of intermediaries due to the Franco-Prussian War (an article which is quite relevant to those interested in conflict resolution), an unconventional comparison of British Prime Minister William E. Gladstone and Chancellor Otto von Bismarck, and a discussion of how Russia was restrained (of interest to those seeking an in-depth treatment of the use of grouping in alliances).[232] For those wanting a secondary discussion of Schroeder’s work, the introduction to the book is exemplary, as is Levy’s exposition of the theoretical foundation of Schroeder’s work.[233]

No review of Schroeder’s work in terms of its relevance to political science would be complete without at least a mention of his comments and analyses of American foreign policy. This should come as no surprise, since Schroeder believed that one of the differences between historians and political scientists is that the former are more inclined to make moral judgments about history (and according to Schroeder they must necessarily do so).[234] What may be more surprising is that these appeared in conservative magazines like The National Interest and The American Conservative,[235] but not too surprising because Schroder took on liberal American interventionism, although at the time this was also the position of neo-conservatives. He raised questions about the War in Iraq because it involved an intervention that violated an important rule in the Westphalian system regarding the non-intervention in the internal affairs of a sovereign state. He broadened this analysis to include a criticism of pre-emptive and preventive wars in general.[236] Although Schroeder’s commentary on American foreign policy came after many of his analytical contributions, it was not a new interest in that his first book was focused on Japanese-American relations and the eve of the Second World War in the Pacific.[237]

Conclusion

Paul Schroeder’s main contributions are to European diplomatic history, but these are so significant and have such important theoretical implications that he also made major contributions to IR theory and peace research as well. Among the former, the key were his critique of the concept of the balance of power and his replacement of it with the idea of a political equilibrium. The latter looms large for IR theory because it is linked with his analysis of the Concert of Europe and this supports the idea of the English School that the international system is not a perennial anarchy but can and has had forms of order based on rules and institutions. Such institutions in turn are associated with peace.