

Chapteu  VI. 

PRICES. 

Effect  of  prices  upon  Consumption — Cost  of  Ship-building  in  1805  compared  with  the 
Cost  in  1836 — Prices  of  Beef  and  Mutton — Of  various  Articles  of  Clothing — Prices 
of  Dress  at  Chelsea  Hospital  .........     587 


SECTION  VI.— ACCUMULATION. 

Chapter  I. 

Conditionsunder  which  Accumulations  occur — Proofs  of  increasing  Wealth — Greater 
Power  of  Accumulation  in  Peace  than  in  War,  because  of  the  Difference  of  the  Public 
Expenditure  under  the  two  Conditions — Probable  present  State  of  England  in  this 
respect  if  we  had  avoided  the  Wars  with  our  North  American  Provinces,  and  with 
the  French  Republic  and  Empire    .........     592 

Chapter  II. 
INCREASE  OF  PERSONAL  AND  REAL  PROPERTY. 

Forms  in  which  the  National  Accumulations  appear — Amount  of  Property  Insured 
at  different  Periods — Moral  and  Economical  Effects  of  Insurances — Accumulations 
iu  Life  Assurance  Offices— Property  devised  in  respect  of  which  Legacy  Duty  has 
been  paid  affords  an  insufficient  Test  of  the  Amount  of  Accumulations — Estimate 
of  Personal  Property  in  the  Kingdom  at  different  Periods— Capital  on  which 
Legacy  Duty  was  paid  in  Fifty- two  Years  to  1849— Yearly  Average  Amount,  com- 
pared with  the  Year  1848,  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland— Savings  invested  in 
the  Security  of  Real  Estates,  and  in  their  Improvement— Assessments  on  Real 
Property,  shovjing  its  Value  at  various  Periods-  Savings  Banks  .  .  .596 


CONTENTS.  Mil 

ClIAPTEU  III. 
INVESTMENTS  OF  ACCUMULATION  FOR  PUBLIC  OBJECTS. 

PAOE 

Buildings  for  Public  Worship  in  England  and  Scotland — By  Parliamentary  Grants 
— By  Corporate  Bodies — By  Individuals — Bridges — Colleges — Hospitals,  &c. — 
Improvement  of  Towns  —  Liverpool  —  Neivcastle-on-Tyne  —  Docks  —  Canals — 
Railways — Turnpike-roads — Gas  Works  .  .  .  .  .  .  .017 

Chapter  IV. 

INVESTMENTS  FOR  COMMERCIAL  PURPOSES. 

Steam-Engines  in  Birmingham — Shipping — Steam- Vessels — Investments  in  Foreign 
Countries — Loans — Mines,  &c.,  in  British  Colonies — Investments  of  Foreigners  in 
our  Public  Funds  withdrawn,  and  replaced  by  Savings  of  British  Subjects — Live 
Stock — Investments  for  Improvemeut  of  Landed  Estates    .....     G25 


SECTION  VII.— MORAL  PROGRESS. 

Chapter  I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Has  our  Moral  kept  pace  with  our  Material  Progress? — Diminution  of  Gross  and 
Sensual  Vice — General  prevalence  of  Selfishness— Wretchedness  of  our  Poor  Popu- 
lation— Multiplication  of  Criminal  Offenders — Reasons  for  expecting  Amendment 
in  this  respect       ............     630 

Chapter  II. 
CRIME. 

Multiplication  of  Crimes  against  Property — Diminution  of  Crimes  of  Violence — 
Number  of  Offenders  in  England  and  Wales,  1S05  to  1849,  and  Number  of  execu- 
tions— Increased  Proportion  of  Convictions  in  the  later  Years — Severity  of  our 
Criminal  Code  and  consequent  Impunity  of  Offenders — Reforms  in  the  Criminal 
Law — Historical  Sketch  of  their  Progress — Classification  of  Offences — Comparison 
of  1805  with  1841  in  respect  of  Criminals  and  Population  in  each  County — Com- 
parison of  Agricultural  with  Manufacturing  Counties — Classification  of  Offenders 
with  regard  to  ages — Increase  of  Juvenile  Offenders — Reformatory  Prison  at 
Parkhurst — Classification  according  to  Intellectual  Condition — Proportion  of  Sexes 
— Proportion  of  Educated  Offenders  to  Population  —  Analysis  of  Offences  com- 
mitted by  educated  Persons— False  Conclusions  drawn  from  French  Criminal 
Returns  concerning  the  Effects  of  Instruction.  Scotland  :  Superiority  of  its 
Criminal  Jurisprudence — Offenders,  1830  to  1849 — Classification  according  to 
Offences— Sex  and  Intellectual  Condition — Proportion  of  Convictions — Ages  of 
Offenders — Juvenile  Offenders — Analysis  of  Crimes  committed  by  educated  Per- 
sons. Ireland:  Educated  Offenders  not  distinguished  as  in  England  and  Scot- 
land—Comparative  Morality  of  different  Classes — Offenders  in  Ireland,  1805  to 
1812 — Proportion  of  Convictions— Offenders,  1822  to  1834,  and  Number  executed 
in  those  Years — Committals  and  Convictions  classified,  1835  to  1849,  and  Number 
executed — Extraordinary  Fluctuations  of  Numbers  in  different  Years — Propor- 
tionate Ages  of  Offenders — Incompleteness  of  Irish  Criminal  Returns — Numbers 
and  Proportions  of  Offenders  wholly  Ignorant,  and  who  could  read  and  write — 
Proportions  of  Juvenile  Offenders,  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland— Improvements 
in  Prison  Discipline      ....•...>••     C33 