

Chapter  IV. 
PAUPERISM. 

Origin  and  progress  of  Poor  Laws — Act  43rd  Elizabeth — Amount  expended  at 
various  periods  for  relief  of  poor — Injurious  tendency  of  the  system — Means  em- 
ployed for  its  amendment — Sums  expended  for  poor  in  England  and  Wales  in  each 
year  of  the  present  century — Proportion  of  paj-ments  to  population  at  each  decen- 
nary enumeration — Results  of  law  of  1834 — Poor  Law  of  Ireland— Of  Scotland — 
Methods  followed  in  various  countries  for  relieving  the  poor — In  Norway — In 
Sweden — In  Denmark — In  Mecklenburgh — In  Prussia — In  Wiirtemberg — In  Ba- 
varia— In  the  Canton  of  Berne — In  France — In  Holland — In  Belgium — Labourers' 
earnings  in  England,  &c.        ..........       8G 

Chapter  V. 

EMIGRATION. 

Circumstances  under  which  Emigi-ation  may  be  desirable — Habit  of  non-interference 
on  the  part  of  Government — Private  associations  for  promoting  Emigration — Set- 
tlement in  South  Africa — Number  of  Emigrants  from  this  Kingdom,  1820-1849 — 
Arrivals  of  Emigrants  at  Quebec  and  New  York,  1829-1843 — Distribution  of 
Emigrants — Transportation  of  Criminals  to  New  South  Wales — Suggestion  for 
their  employment  in  British  America — Number  of  Convicts  transported,  1825-1841 
— Convict  establishment  in  the  Bermudas         .  .  .  .  .  .  .126 


SECTION  II —PRODUCTION. 

Chapter  I. 
AGRICULTURE. 

llmpossibilit}-  of  importing  any  large  proportion  of  Food  for  the  Population — Import- 
ations of  Wheat,  1801  to  1849— Comparative  smallness  of  its  amount — Numbers 
fed  with  Wheat  of  Home  and  of  Foreign  Growth— Increased  Productive  Power  of 
Great  Britain— Means  whereby  this  increase  has  been  effected— Deficiency  of 
statistical  information  connected  with  Agriculture  in  England — Improvements  in 
Scotland—  Inclosure  Bills  and  Average  Prices  of  Wheat  since  1760 — Com  Law  of 
1815— Conflicting  testimony  as  to  Agricultural  Distress  given  to  the  Committee 
in  1833 — Increased  Rents  since  1790 — Adaptation  of  the  Steam-Engine  to  the 
Draining  of  Fens— Effect  upon  Agriculturists  of  the  restoration  of  a  Metallic  Cur- 
rency—Land brought  under  Cultivation  since  1760— Compared  with  Increase  of 


CONTENTS. 


Population  since  18U1 — Surface  of  cultivated,  uncultivated,  and  unprofitable  Land 
in  each  division  and  County  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  182 7 — Proportion  of  culti- 
vated Land  to  the  Population  at  diffei-ent  periods  during  the  present  century — 
Probability  of  Population  outstripping  the  productive  powers  of  the  soil — Supposed 
influence  upon  this  question  of  the  extensive  construction  of  Railroads — Estimate  of 
the  Number  of  Horses,  the  employment  of  which  may  by  that  means  be  rendered 
unnecessary  ............     133 

ChAI'TER  II. 
MANTJFACTURES.— Woven,  &c..  Fabrics. 