

Manufacturing  skill  of  England — Its  political  consequences  during  the  last  war — 
Introduction  of  woollen  manufacture — Prohibition  to  export  English  wool — Re- 
moval of  prohibition,  and  its  consequences — -Woollen  goods  exported — Number  of 
Woollen  Factories — Foreign  wool  imported — Production  of  wool  in  England  in 
1800,  1828,  and  1844 — Stuff  trade — Cotton  manufacture — Cotton  imported  since 
1800 — Cotton  goods  exported  since  1820 — Decreasing  cost  of  yarn — Advantages  of 
power-looms — Cost  of  weaving — Number  of  power-looms — Hand-loom  weavers — 
Labour  employed  in  spinning  and  weaving  factories — Diminished  proportion  re- 
quired to  produce  equal  effects  —  Increased  proportion  of  power-weaving— Progres- 
sive extension  of  cotton  factories — Power-looms  in  various  manufactures— Cotton- 
printing — Effect  of  removing  duty  on  printed  goods — Hosiery — Bobbin-net — Extent 
and  value  of  cotton  manufactures  in  1833 — Silk  manufacture — Its  progress  during 
and  since  prohibition — Export  of  silk  goods — Distribution  of  silk  factories,  and 
number  of  persons  employed  in  1835  and  1839 — Effect  of  high  duties  in  promoting 
smuggling — Linen  manufacture — Quantities  exported — Flax-spinning— Prices  of 
yam  and  canvas  at  difi'erent  periods — Wages — Improvements  in  spinning — Import- 
ations of  flax — Distribution  of  flax  factories,  and  number  of  persons  employed  in 
183',  and  1839 167 

Chapter  111. 

MANUFACTURES.— Woven  Fabrics. 

Progress  in  various  Foreign  Countries. 

France — Woollen  manufacture — Imports  and  production  of  wool — Protection  against 
foreign  manufactures — Cotton  manufacture — Disadvantages  through  the  duties 
on  foreign  coal  and  iron — Extent  of  manufacture — Quantity  of  cotton  imported 
since  1787 — Export  of  woollen  and  cotton  goods — Silk  manufacture — Its  extent 
and  progress — Exports — Germany — Cotton  manufactures — Prussian  commercial 
league — Russia — Swiss  Cantons      .........     234 

Chapter  IV. 

MANUFACTURES.— Iron— Steel— Brass— Copper— Plated  Wares— Glass — 

Hardwares. 

Increase  of  population  of  Birmingham — Fall  in  cost  of  goods — Quantities  exported, 
and  value  of  the  same — British  iron  exported — Quantity  and  value  of  brass 
and  copper  goods  exported — System  of  manufactures  pursued  in  Birmingham — 
Increase  of  population  of  Shefiield — Conversion  of  iron  into  steel — Quantity  of 
steel  exported — Value  of  plated  goods  exported — Glass  manufacture — Causes  which 
have  prevented  its  extension — Quantity  retained  for  consumption — Effect  of  high 
duties  in  limiting  consumption — Illicit  manufacture  ......     245 


vi  CONTENTS. 

Chapter  V. 

MANUFACTUKES.— Machinerv. 

v\as 
Importance  of  perfect  tools  and  inipiemeuts — Kecent  progress  of  manufacturing  skill 
in  their  production — llabbage's  calculating  machine — Foreign  mechanical  inven- 
tions perfected  and  adopted  in  England — Policy  of  allowing  the  exportation  of 
machinery — Impossibility  of  confining  the  knowledge  of  improved  machines  to  our 
own  countiy — Impolicy  of  the  attempt — Laws  restraining  artisans  from  going 
aboad — Their  repeal — Footing  upon'which  the  limited  exportation  of  machinery  is 
now  permitted — Progress  of  the  prohibitive  system — Value  of  machinery  exported     258 