


r»o.f; 


Chapter  III. 

Male  Servants  :  Number  kept  in  different  Years — Expenditure  thus  occasioned — 
Number  of  Female  Servants,  and  Expense  of  maintaining  them,  in  1S31 — Number 
of  Servants  kept  in  Ireland,  and  Cost  of  their  Maintenance.  Carriages  :  Number 
kept  in  different  Years — Rate  of  Increase — Number  let  for  Hire — Expenditure 
under  these  Heads.  Horses:  Number  charged  with  Duty,  in  1838,  1840,  and 
1849 — For  Pleasure — For  Trade — Number  exempt  from  Dut}-.  Gold  and  Silver 
Plate  :  Quantities  made  during  the  War,  and  since — Improvement  in  quality 
of  Plated  Goods  a  probable  cause  of  the  lessened  use  of  Silver  Articles  .         .     529 


Chapter  IV. 

Food:  Want  of  information  concerning  the  Quantity  consumed  of  chief  Articles  of 
Human  Subsistence — Evils  resulting  from  this  Ignorance — Means  employed  for 
ascertaining  the  Produce  of  the  Soil  in  Belgium.  Sugar  :  Quantity  consumed  at 
various  periods  in  England  and  Ireland,  and  Revenue  thereon — Consumption  easily 
affected  by  Price — Diminished  Shipments  from  British  Colonies — Necessity  for 
enlarging  the  Market  of  Supply — Cost  to  the  Nation  of  the  protecting  Duty,  and 
consequent  Loss  to  the  Kevenue.  Coffee:  Quantitiesconsumed— Effect  of  Reduction 
of  Duties — Consumption  checked  by  Protective  Duties — Contrivance  for  lessening 
their  Amount.  Tea  :  Quantities  consumed — Past  History  of  the  Tea  Trade,  and 
Effect  of  Duties  upon  Consumption.  Malt  :  Consumption  at  various  Periods — 
Checked  by  Duties  and  by  Monopoly  of  Home-growers  of  Barley.  Spirits  :  Con- 
sumption of  Home-made  Spirits — Temperance  Movements  in  Ireland — Foreign  and 
Colonial  Spirits  consumed — Excessive  Duties  and  their  Consequences.  Wine: 
Quantities  consumed — Rates  of  Duty — Consumption  of  Wine  in  France.  Beer: 
Quantity  consumed,  and  Produce  of  Duty         ....... 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter  Y. 

rAOE 

Tobacco  :  Consumptiou  at  diftercnt  Periods — Effects  of  increased  Duties — Encourage- 
nieut  to  Suuigiiling — Complaints  of  liigh  Duty  on  the  part  of  the  Producers  iu  the 
United  States  of  America — Tlireatened  Retaliation — Probable  Consequence  of  such 
a  Course.  Paveu  :  Quantity  made  for  use  at  difl'erent  periods — Injudicious  Nature 
of  the  Tax  on  this  Article— Growing  Use  of  Paper— Effect  of  Reduction  of  Duty 
— Rapid  Extension  of  Sale  by  Repealing  the  Duty  on  Almanacs.  Soap  :  No  means 
of  distinguishing  its  Use  for  Personal  Purposes  from  that  caused  by  Manufacturing 
Processes — Frauds  caused  by  the  Duty — Impolicy  of  imposing  a  Duty  on  Soap — 
Mischief  of  Excise  Regulations — Annual  Consumption  of  Soap  at  various  Periods. 
Candles  :  Cotton  Manufactcues  :  Estimated  Consumption.  Silk  Manufac- 
ture: Estimated  Consumption — Linen  and  Woollen  Manufactlkes  :  Diffi- 
culty of  estimating  the  Value  used.  Ikon  :  Increased  Use  of  this  Material  for 
Ship-building.  Copper  :  Quantity  used.  Tin  :  Timber  :  Quantity  imported 
for  use  in  different  Years  afford  insufficient  data  for  estimating  the  use  of  Timber 
generally — Consumption  of  the  Metropolis— Cattle — Sheep — Coals — Gas  Lighting 
— Consumption  of  Food  in  Private  Families     .......     565 