

Being  called  upon,  twelve  months  ago,  to  prepare  a  new  edition 
of  this  work,  I  liave  been  made  sensibly  to  feel  the  truth  of  these 
remarks.  To  render  the  volume  in  any  degree  worthy  of  acceptance 
on  the  part  of  the  public,  it  has  been  necessary  to  revise  the  whole, 
and  to  bring  down  the  information  which  it  gives  to  the  latest  prac- 
ticable period  of  time.  This  has  proved  a  work  of  much  labour,  and 
required  for  its  speedy  accomplishment  a  greater  portion  of  time 
than  could  be  taken  from  the  performance  of  other  and  more  onerous 
duties.  During  the  year  in  which  I  have  been  thus  engaged,  and 
in  which  these  sheets  have  been  passing  througli  the  press,  changes 


xviii  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION. 

of  the  most  momentous  character,  affecting  our  commercial  relations, 
liave  been  crowned  with  legislative  sanction.  The  protective  system, 
which  only  a  few  years  ago  appeared  to  be  so  interwoven  w^ith  all  our 
habits  and  interests,  that  any  man  who  should  venture  to  raise  his  voice 
against  it  was  stigmatised  as  a  visionary  and  a  theorist,  has  suddenly 
yielded  to  the  force  of  argument,  and  is  abandoned  by  every  one  having 
valid  pretensions  to  guide  the  opinions  or  to  govern  the  decisions  of  the 
legislature. 

If  this  sudden  change  could  have  been  foreseen,  some  of  the  argu- 
ments might  possibly  have  been  spared  that  appear  in  the  following 
pages,  and  that  were  levelled  against  positions  which,  at  the  time,  were 
by  most  persons  deemed  impregnable,  but  which  are  now  and  for  ever 
given  up  as  no  longer  tenable  ;  for  it  is  not  to  be  conceived  that  a 
victory  so  signal  over  deep-rooted  prejudices,  and  which  has  been  gained 
by  changing  the  convictions  of  the  great  majority  of  those  by  whom  they 
were  entertained,  can  ever  be  reversed,  nor  that  circumstances  can  here- 
after arise  to  call  for  a  repetition  of  the  means  by  which  that  victory 
has  been  achieved. 

Since  the  first  appearance  of  this  work,  the  fifth  decennial  enumera- 
tion of  the  population  has  been  completed,  and  if  no  other  indication 
of  the  prosperity  of  the  country  were  to  exist,  we  might  justify  our 
assertion  of  that  prosperity,  by  the  simple  fact,  that  our  numbers  have 
increased  from  16,338,102,  in  1801,  to  27,041,031,  in  1841,  or  65^ 
per  cent.,  being  1^  per  cent,  per  annum.  This  rate  of  increase  could 
assuredly  not  have  been  maintained  without  a  concurrent  increase  in 
the  powers  of  production.  The  extent  to  which  our  progress  in  this 
respect  has  been  carried,  is  strikingly  seen  in  continually  increasing 
harvests,  raised  for  provisioning  the  people,  and  which  are  the  result  of 
progressive  applications  of  capital  to  the  land.  Great  as  has  been 
the  effect  thus  produced,  there  is  reason  for  believing  that  we  shall  see 
far  greater  results  from  the  same  cause  in  future  years.  When  our 
agriculturists  shall  have  been  made  to  feel  that  their  chief  dependence 
for  prosperity  must  be  upon  their  own  skill  and  "industry,  they  will  find 
that,  hke  their  fellow-subjects  employed   in  trading  and  manufacturing 