


xxvi  PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION. 

foreign  Govcrnmonts  to  follow  a  course  thus  recommended  by  its  results 
to  their  adoption. 

In  one  important  brant-li  of  international  intercourse,  the  convictions  of 
the  connnunity  upon  the  subject  of  free-trade  have  outrun,  in  point 
of  time,  the  expectations  of  its  partisans.  Our  Na\'igation  Law, 
dating  from  the  time  of  the  Commonwealth,  and  regarded  by  suc- 
cessive generations  as  a  monument  of  human  wisdom,  had  indeed,  at 
various  times  since  the  year  1822,  been  subjected  to  modifications,  some 
of  which  were  of  an  important  character  ;  but  up  to  the  time  when  a  Com- 
mittee of  the  House  of  Commons  was  appointed,  in  1 847,  to  inquire  into 
its  ])olicv  and  operation,  few  persons  had  been  sanguine  enough  to  hope 
for  its  entire  removal  from  the  Statute-book.  The  light  thrown  upon 
the  subject  by  witnesses  examined  before  that  Committee,  and  before  a 
Committee  of  the  House  of  Lords,  appointed  with  the  same  object  in 
the  following  year,  served  to  show  how  void  of  all  real  advantage  to  the 
trading  interests  of  the  country  were  the  remaining  restrictions  imposed 
by  that  long-cherished  law,  and  has  led  to  its  speedy  abandonment.  On 
the  1st  day  of  January,  1850,  it  ceased  to  be  illegal  to  bring  to  our 
shores  for  consumption,  from  European  ports,  such  produce  of  the  other 
three  quarters  of  the  globe  as  we  might  require  ;  and  our  merchants 
are  now  empowered  to  convey  their  property  in  the  ships  of  any  country 
to  and  from  any  part  of  the  world,  as  well  as  to  buy  their  ships 
wherever  they  are  to  be  had  best  and  cheapest. 

Among  the  results  of  this  measure,  not  the  least  valuable  is  this, 
that  it  has  served  to  convince  foreign  Governments  that  our  previous 
commercial  reforms  were  adopted  by  us  in  good  faith,  and  with  full 
confidence  in  their  wisdom.  Already  this  conviction  has  produced 
considerable  effects.  The  Dutch,  against  whose  naval  power  our 
Navigation  Law  was  originally  and  chiefly  directed,  have  bastened  to 
place  their  system  in  agreement  with  our  own,  and  other  less  formidable 
rivals  have  promptly  followed  their  example.  The  Navigation  Law  of 
the  United  States  was  adopted  simply  as  a  measure  of  retaliation 
against  this  country,  and  has  naturally  and  necessarily  conformed  itself 
to   our  change  of  system.     Other  St<ates,  which   had  not  adopted  our 


PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION.  xxvii 

rule  of  rostric'tion  against  foreign  shipping,  have  been  led  by  onr  recent 
legislation  on  the  subject,  to  forego  the  intention  they  had  plainly 
intimated  of  following  that  rule,  and  thus,  a  most  undoubted  injury 
to  our  shipping  interest  has  been  averted. 