


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.  xix 

pursuits,  they  too  are  able  successfully  to  compete  with  those  engaged 
in  the  same  pursuit  with  themselves  in  other  lands.  It  would,  indeed, 
be  difficult  to  show  why,  when  an  equal  degree  of  skill  and  energy,  and 
a  greater  amount  of  capital  are  employed  in  the  manufacture  of  wheat, 
our  farmers  should  not  be  able  to  undersell  the  foreigner,  as  we  now  are 
able  to  undersell  him  in  manufactures  of  cotton  and  hardwares.  This 
question  must  shortly  now  be  put"  to  the  proof,  and  I,  for  one,  have  no 
misgivings  as  to  the  result. 

It  was  felt,  that  when  legislative  protection  should  be  withdrawn  from 
the  cultivators  of  land,  it  could  not  long  be  continued  to  any  other  class 
of  producers.  Some  few  branches  of  industry  are  still,  although  in  a 
modified  degree,  subjected  to  this  "  bane."  The  progress  of  improve- 
ment in  our  silk  manufacture  is  still  impeded  by  a  protecting  duty  of 
15  per  cent.,  laid  upon  foreign  productions,  and  our  tariff  continues  to 
present  some  other  deformities,  although  more  has  been  done  in  the 
removal  of  such  during  the  past  few  years,  than  could  reasonably  have 
been  hoped.  Among  the  most  important  of  these  reforms,  is  one  which 
has  been  adopted  by  the  legislature  since  the  last  of  the  following  pages 
passed  through  the  press.  The  producers  of  sugar  in  our  colonies  and 
dependencies^  are  no  longer  secured  in  the  possession  of  a  home  market 
closed  against  foreign  rivals,  and  will  be  forced  in  a  very  few  years  to 
compete  with  these  on  equal  terms.  As  might  have  been  expected,  the 
cry  of  ruin  has  been  loudly  raised  by  our  colonists  against  this  measure 
of  justice  to  the  consumer,  yet  it  may  be  safely  predicted,  that  they  will 
manage  to  withstand  the  shock,  and  by  the  adoption  of  more  scientific 
and  economical  processes  in  the  cultivation  of  their  plantations,  and  the 
manufacture  of  their  products,  will  be  able  to  meet,  on  equal  terras,  the 
slave-gi'own  produce  of  Cuba  and  Brazil.  A  very  significant  fact  in  sup- 
port of  this  prediction,  is  seen  in  the  subsequent  formation  of  joint-stock 
associations  for  the  production  of  sugar,  in  our  intertropical  dependen- 
cies, promoted  by  men  practically  acquainted  with  the  subject,  and  who 
expect,  by  the  application  of  adequate  capital  and  the  substitution  of 
machinery  and  skilled  labour  for  a  part  of  the  mere  animal  drudo"ery 
hitherto  employed,  to  establish  such  a  degree  of  economy  in  their  pro- 


XX  rREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION. 

cesses,  as  will  enable  them  to  undersell  in  the  markets  of  Europe,  the 
rivals  so  much  dreaded  by  the  old  race  of  planters,  many  of  whom  have 
neither  capital  nor  mental  resources  adequate  to  the  conflict. 