

This  important  reform  redounds  much  to  the  credit  of  an  adminis- 
tration whose  advent  to  power  was  occasicmed  by  the  boldness  of  their 
predecessors  in  dealing  with  other  monopolies,  and  thus  bringing  upon 
themselves  the  political  hostility  of  those  whom  they  had  successfully 
combated.  Fearless  as  the  late  Government  were  in  striving  against 
the  prejudices  of  the  large  and  powerful  class  who  believed  themselves 
benefited  by  the  corn-laws,  they  yet  avoided  an  encounter  with  colo- 
nial interests,  strengthened,  as  these  were  sure  to  be,  by  the  honest 
but  most  mistaken  prejudices  of  the  Anti-Slavery  Association  and  its 
numerous  supporters.  AVithout  any  apparent  sacrifice  of  principle,  a 
change  in  our  sugar  duties  might  have  been  postponed  to  a  future 
session,  and  perhaps  to  a  future  Parliament.  A  bolder  and  a 
wiser  course  was  chosen.  Relying  upon  a  principle,  which  had  al- 
ready been  successfully  carried  out  in  dealing  with  our  external  corn- 
trade,  the  newly-appointed  Government  lost  no  time  in  testifying  to 
its  firmness  and  sincerity  by  placing  in  a  course  of  speedy  adjust- 
ment a  question  which,  by  a  more  timid  policy,  would  assuredly  have 
been  compromised ;  but  which,  thus  manfully  undertaken,  passed 
through  the  Legislature  with  scarcely  more  than  a  mere  semblance 
of  opposition.  The  corn  duties  and  the  sugar  duties  being  thus 
disposed  of  in  a  manner  fatal  to  the  continuance  of  monopolies,  it 
may  now  be  looked  upon  as  certain,  that  the  principle  contended 
for  in  the  following  pages— that  of  not  imposing  any  Customs'  duties, 
except  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  revenue — must,  ere  long,  be  uni- 
versally acted  upon  by  Parliament.  When  this  shall  be  done,  the 
efltect  upon  our  foreign  commerce,  and,  therefore,  upon  the  sum  of  our 
comforts  and  conveniences,  must  needs  be  great  and  beneficial.  Our 
imports  being  increased  of  such  articles  as  we  can  buy  more  cheaply 
than  we  can  produce  them,  a  greater  amount  of  capital  will  be  dis- 
posable for  the  production  of  such  other  articles'  as  we  can  make  more 
cheaply  than  we  can  buy  ihem,  and  which  will  then  be  exported  in  pay- 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.  xxi 

inont  for  our  increased  purchases.  By  this  means  labour  will  be 
economised  and  rendered  more  effective ;  so  that  we  shall  obtain  an 
equal  amount  of  comforts  and  conveniences  with  a  lessened  a])plication 
of  labour,  or,  what  is  better,  shall  command  a  greater  amount  of  them 
through  an  equal  expenditure  of  toil. 

Great  as  are  the  reforms  that  since  the  first  appearance  of  this  work 
have  been  adopted  in  our  commercial  legislature,  it  is  not  to  these 
alone  that  we  must  look  for  proofs  of  progress.  A  great  and  growing 
interest  has  been  evinced  during  the  past  ten  years  in  all  that  relates 
to  the  moral  condition  of  society  in  this  country  ;  which  direction  of 
the  public  mind  has  contributed  in  a  very  great  degree  to  the  attain- 
ment of  that  measure  of  success  which  has  attended  the  efforts  made  for 
bettering  the  physical  condition  of  the  labouring  class.  The  fact  that 
crime  is,  to  a  great  extent,  a  consequent  of  indigence,  was  urged  with 
effect  by  a  late  Minister  of  the  Crown  in  favour  of  relaxations  in 
our  fiscal  system,  as  affording  means  whereby  that  indigence  might  be 
modified  or  removed  ;  and  the  testimony  of  our  criminal  returns  has 
stood  in  proof  of  this  position.  It  has  further  been  demonstrated,  that 
the  effect  of  want  in  leading  to  criminality  is  greatly  aggravated  by 
ignorance,  which  in  itself  is  a  great  cause  of  want;  and  from  these 
considerations  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  ruling  class  have,  at  length, 
been  awakened  to  the  duty  and  the  necessity  of  making  provision  for 
the  education  of  the  people. 