


xvj  C'ONTENTS. 

Chapter  V. 

DEPENDENCIES  IN  AFRICA. 

PAOK 

Cape  of  Good  Hopk  :  Popuhitiou— Imports  and  Exports— Shipping— Productions — 
Wine  — Whalo  Fishery— Stock  —  Farm  Produce  —  Timber— Harbours.  St.  He- 
lena :  Population — Imports— Shipping.  Ascension  :  Products.  Sierra  Leone  : 
Population — Emancipated  Slaves — Unhealthiness  of  Climate — Imports  and  Ex- 
ports— Shipping.  Settlement  on  the  Gambia:  Population — Trade.  Settlements 
ou  the  Gold  Coast:  Cape  Coast  Castle:  Accra:  DixCove:  Annamabok: 
Trade — Population.     Fernando  Po  :  Population 77.3 

Chapter  VI. 
BRITISH  AMERICA. 

Canada  :  Population,  Lower  Canada — Increase  by  Immigration — Population  of 
Upper  Canada  —  Imports  and  Exports — Shipping  —  Ship-building  —  Fisheries — 
Agriculture  —  Manufactures  —  Mills  —  Internal  Navigation.  New  Brunswick: 
Area — Population  —  Imports  and  Exports  —  Shipping  —  Sliip-building.  Nova 
Scotia  :  Population — Inequality  in  the  Numbers  of  the  two  Sexes — Imports  and 
Exports  —  Shipping — Ship-building  —  Fisheries — Harbours  —  Live  Stock.  Cape 
Breton:  Population — imports  and  Exports  —  Coals  —  Ship-building.  Prince 
Edward's  Island  :  Population — Imports  and  Exports — Tenure  of  Land — Stock — 
Ship-building.  Newfoundland  :  Area  —  Fisheries  —  Population  —  Imports  and 
Exports  —  Shipping  —  Ship-building.  Hudson's  Bay  Territory  :  Boundaries  — 
Extent.  Bermudas:  Population  —  Imports  and  Exports  —  Ship-building  —  Ship- 
ping   ..............     783 

Chapter  VII. 
WEST  INDIA  ISLANDS  AND  SETTLEMENTS. 

General  Description — Names  of  Colonies — Population — Imports  and  Exports — Trade 
with  the  United  Kingdom — Shipping — Productions — Slave  Trade ;  its  Abolition — 
Abolition  of  Slavery — Compensation  to  Slave-owners — Successful  Result  of  the 
Measure — General  List  of  the  Colonies  and  Dependencies  of  England;  the  Date 
and  Mode  of  Acquisition — Population — Forms  of  Government — Trade  with  the 
United  Kingdom — Proportion  which  the  Colonial  Trade  bears  to  the  whole  Trade 
of  the  Kingdom — Colonial  protective  System ;  its  injurious  consequences      .         .     799 


rHEFACE 


SECOND     EDITION. 


A  BOOK  which  professes  to  mark  the  progress  of  this  United  Kingdom, 
in  which  all  the  elements  of  improvement  are  working  with  incessant 
and  increasing  energy,  requires  to  be  from  time  to  time  brought  under 
revision,  in  order  to  the  proper  fulfilment  of  the  object  wliich  it  so 
professes. 

It  has  been  said,  that  any  work  which  should  faithfully  record  the 
onward  progress  of  England,  must  partake  of  the  nature  of  a.  periodical, 
so  great  are  the  changes  which  occur,  and  so  rapidly  are  they  found 
to  succeed  each  other.  This  remark  may  be  applied  with  peculiar 
propriety  to  the  present  time,  in  which  the  m.ost  zealous  advocates 
of  progress  may  see  their  hopes  outstripped,  and  their  most  sanguine 
wishes  brought  within  the  reach  of  accomplishment. 