


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.  xxiii 

indefinitely  prolonged.  All  honour  to  the  men  who,  supported  by  their 
convictions,  when  in  pursuit  of  that  which  they  held  to  be  right  and 
just,  disregarded  the  powerful  array  brought  against  them,  and  per- 
severed in  their  objects.  At  a  future  time,  but  upon  other  grounds, 
the  Government  was  more  successfully  opposed ;  and  those  who  but 
two  years  before  would  have  negatived  the  course  proposed  for  pro- 
moting national  education,  quietly  and  honestly  applied  themselves 
to  carry  it  forward.  They  had,  doubtless,  in  the  interval,  been 
brought  to  reconsider  their  opinions,  and  to  understand  how  deeply 
the  public  conviction  was  engaged  on  behalf  of  this  all-important 
question.  That  conviction  has  since  been  strengthened ;  so  that  we 
may  now  feel  assured  that  the  cause  of  enlightenment  is,  humanly 
speaking,  placed  beyond  reach  of  injury  from  the  conflicts  of  party. 
That  all  obstacles  will  now  be  withdrawn  from  the  extension  of  public 
education  in  this  country,  and  to  its  being  conducted  upon  principles  of 
justice,  separating  it  from  all  sectarian  objects,  and  giving  to  it  a  truly 
national  character,  is  more  than  we  can  expect ;  but  with  the  experience 
of  the  last  few  years,  showing  that  in  the  furtherance  of  a  good  cause, 
firmness  offers  the  surest  promise  of  success,  we  may  confidently  predict 
that  the  measures  to  be  brought  forward  for  rendering  public  edu- 
cation less  "  lamentably  imperfect "  than  it  now  is,  will  be  such  as  to 
satisfy  the  minds  of  all  who  see  the  necessity  for  such  a  course,  and 
that  they  will  be  so  supported  as  to  ensure  their  adoption  by  the  Legis- 
lature. 

G.  R.  P. 

London, 

30  November,  1846. 


PREFACE 


THIRD      EDITION. 


The  call  for  another  edition  of  this  volume  enables  me  again  to  appear 
before  the  public  with  a  detail  of  the  further  progress  of  the  United 
Kingdom. 

The  tables  by  which  that  progress  is  shown  in  the  following  pages 
are  mostly  brought  down  to  the  end  of  1849,  and — so  far  as  time  has 
hitherto  permitted — will  be  seen  to  bear  out  to  their  full  extent  the 
most  sanguine  expectations  of  those  who  expected  good  from  the 
changes  which  have  of  late  years  been  adopted  in  our  commercial 
policy. 

The  experiment  of  protection,  so  long  persisted  in,  has  at  length  been 
wholly  abandoned  in  principle,  and  to  a  great  degree  in  practice  also, 
by  the  Legislature,  a  change  which  has  been  received  by  the  great  bulk 
of  the  community  in  a  spirit  which  must  serve  to  convince  every  one 
of  the  hopelessness  of  any  effort  to  reimpose  the  shackles  which  were 
so  long  placed  upon  the  industry  of  the  nation.  The  evidences  of 
general  prosperity  brought  forward  in  the  following  pages,  are  indeed 
as  clear  and  conclusive  in  favour  of  a  free -trade  policy  as  any  of 
its  warmest  advocates  could  have  hoped  to  witness ;  and  it  is  not 
therefore  too  much  to  expect,  that  the  light  thus  thrown  upon  the 
subject  will  lead  to  the  early  abandonment  of  all  remaining  vestiges  of 
restriction  imposed  under  mistaken  views  by  our  ancestors,  while  these 
evidences  of  our  prosperity  may  have  the  further  good  effect  of  leading 