

Another,  and  a  permanent  benefit  to  commerce,  has  been  gained  by 
the  repeal  of  a  law  which,  by  giving  a  fancied  security  to  our  ship- 
owners against  the  competition  of  foreigners,  took  away  from  them  the 
strongest  incentive  to  exertion,  and  to  the  adoption  of  measures  of 
economy,  as  well  in  the  management  of  their  business  as  in  the  con- 
struction of  their  ships.  In  this  last-named  particular,  a  great  saving 
may  now  be  made  by  them  in  some  of  our  chief  ship-building  ports, 
upon  the  cost  of  vessels  built  during  the  period  of  restriction  ;  and  it  is 
not  hazarding  much  to  predict,  that  by  these  means,  and  through  the 
operation  of  some  recent  measures  for  improving  the  character  and 
condition  of  the  masters  and  officers  to  whose  care  their  property  is 
intrusted,  the  shipping  interest  of  England  will  at  least  retain  that 
pre-eminence  over  the  commercial  marine  of  all  other  countries  which 
it  has  hitherto  enjoyed. 

In  the  spring  of  the  year  upon  which  we  have  now  entered,  a  sixth 
decennary  enumeration  of  the  population  of  the  United  Kingdom  will 
be  made.  So  soon  thereafter  as  the  result  can  be  known,  it  is  proposed 
to  issue  a  supplement  to  this  volume,  giving  the  numbers  ascertained, 
accompanied  by  remarks  and  calculations  upon  the  subject,  corre- 
sponding with  those  which  have  already  been  offered  in  relation  to 
each  previous  census. 

G.  R.  P. 

London, 

1  January,  1851. 


THE 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


INTRODUCTION. 

It  miist,  at  all  times,  be  matter  of  great  interest  and  utility  to  ascertain 
the  means  by  which  any  community  has  attained  to  eminence  among 
nations.  To  inquire  into  the  progi'ess  of  circumstances  which  have 
given  pre-eminence  to  one's  own  country  would  almost  seem  to  be  a 
duty.  If  this  remark  may  be  applied  with  propriety  to  any  people  and 
to  any  age,  assuredly  it  may  be  so  applied  to  this  country  and  to  the 
present  generation,  by  which  have  been  made  the  greatest  advances  in 
civilization  that  can  be  found  recorded  in  the  annals  of  mankind. 

The  task  here  pointed  out  has  usually  been  left  to  be  executed  by 
the  historian,  writing  in  some  age  subsequent  to  that  embraced  in  his 
inquiries,  and  it  has  been  urged  in  support  of  this  practice,  that  it  is 
only  after  events  have  been  cleared  from  the  mists  in  which  they  are 
too  commonly  enveloped  by  party  feelings  or  personal  interests,  that  a 
sober  and  dispassionate  estimate  can  be  formed  of  their  importance  and 
tendency.  To  a  certain  extent,  and  within  some  limitations,  this 
opinion  is  doubtless  well  founded,  and  if  the  inquiry  which  it  is  pro- 
posed to  pursue  in  the  following  pages  were  connected  with  party 
feelings  or  opinions,  or  if  the  results  were  made  to  rest  for  confirmation 
upon  deductions  drawn  from  abstruse  or  fanciful  theories,  very  little 
l)ractical  utility  could  be  expected  to  attend  the  task.  Such,  however, 
is  not  the  intention  of  this  work,  nor  are  such  the  means  by  which  its 
object  is  proposed  to  be  accomplished. 