


xn  CONTENTS. 

Chapter  TIT. 
MANNERS. 

PAGE 

Imperfect  \'iews  in  former  Times  conceruing  the  Means  proper  for  repressing 
Offenders — Drnukenness — Its  prevalence  in  1736 — Means  taken  for  its  suppression 
— Failure  of  those  Means — Quantity  of  Ardent  Spirits  consumed  then  compared 
•with  the  present  Time — Drunkenness  not  confined  formerly  to  the  Working 
Classes — General  Coarseness  of  Conversation,  and  in  Popular  Writers — Anecdote 
related  by  Sir  Walter  Scott— State  of  Morals  and  Manners  fifty  Years  ago,  as  stated 
in  evidence  before  the  House  of  Commons — Progressive  Improvement  occasioned 
by  the  general  spread  of  Information — Increased  Temperance  not  extended  to  Scot- 
land— Evidence  of  Sheriff  Alison — Infrequency  of  Prize-fighting  compared  with 
former  Times — Greater  refinement  of  the  Public  Press — General  Improvement  in 
personal  Morality  .         .         .         .  .         .         .         .         .         .     G73 


Chapter  IV. 

EDUCATION. 

Neglect  of  Public  Provision  for  Education  in  England— Consequent  Social  Evils 
— Duty  of  Government  to  provide  for  Instructing  the  People ;  enforced  by  Exer- 
tions of  Individuals  — Remedy  for  Inconveniences  of  increasing  Population — 
Absence  of  Crime  in  Mell-instructed  Communities  of  Nova  Scotia  and  Iceland — 
Joseph  Lancaster,  his  early  DiflSculties  and  subsequent  Success — His  Exertions  and 
Sacrifices — Committee  of  Council  for  Education — Opposition  to  the  Scheme  in  both 
Houses  of  Parliament — Number  of  Children  without  Instruction — Recent  Progress 
of  Public  Opinion  on  the  Subject  of  National  Education — Educational  Statistics — 
Imperfect  manner  in  which  the  Instruction  of  the  Poor  has  been  conducted — 
Statistical  Societies  of  Manchester  and  London — Normal  School  at  Battersea — Pro- 
portion of  Marriage  Registers  signed  with  Crosses  in  different  parts  of  England 
and  Wales — Education  in  Scotland,  18-25  and  1837 — National  Schools  of  Ireland 
established  in  1831 — Nature  of  opposition  offered  to  the  System— Former  Plans; 
their  Insufiiciency— Charter  Schools— Kildare  Street  Society— Children  taught  in 
National  Schools  of  Ireland,  1834  to  1849— Social  Benefits  of  the  System  to  Ireland     682 


Chapter  V. 
POSTAGE,  ETC. 

Legislative  Sanction  of  Mr.  Rowland  Hill's  Plans— Rapid  Progress  of  Public  Opinion 
regarding  them— Stationary  Condition  of  Post-oflSce  Revenue— Illicit  Convey- 
ance of  Letters— Number  of  Letters  that  passed  through  the  Loudon  General  and 
District  Post-offices  in  1839-40  and  1841  to  1849— Estimated  Number  of  Letters 
posted  in  the  United  Kingdom  before  and  after  the  Reduction  of  the  Rates,  and 
per-centage  Increase— Increased  Revenue  from  Post-office  in  1842 — Progress  of 
Post-office  Revenue,  1758  to  1849— Rates  of  Postage  charged  in  England,  Scot- 
land, and  Ireland  from  1710  to  1840— Effect  upon  the  Net  Revenue  of  successive 
Alterations  of  the  Rates— Newspapers— Excessive  Stamp  Duty  thereon  encouraging 
unstamped  Papers— Reduction  of  Duty  and  suppression  onilegal  Publications- 
Circulation  of  Newspapers,  and  Revenue  therefrom,  ISOl  to  1842— Number  of 
Papers  published  in  different  Divisions  of  the  Kingdom,  and  their  Circulation, 
1839  to  1849 709 