

A  strong  proof  of  what  is  here  advanced  may  be  seen  in  the  address 
wTitten  by  the  First  Minister  of  the  Crown  when  recently  he  offered 
himself  for  re-election  as  representative  for  the  city  of  London.  In 
former  times,  and  on  such  occasions,  we  have  always  seen  prominently 
brought  forward  points  of  sectional  interests  and  matters  of  party  differ- 
ence, as  grounds  for  soliciting  suffrages ;  and  it  should  afford  matter 
for  the  greatest  satisfaction  that  recourse  must  now  be  had  to  higher 
and  nobler  motives  on  the  part  of  those  to  whom  the  great  task  of 
Government  is  confided.  In  his  address  of  last  July  to  the  citizens 
of  London,  Lord  John  Russell  thus  calls  attention  to  matters  in  the  fur- 
therance of  which  all  are  concerned,  and  as  to  which  none  can  pretend 


-\xii  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION". 

to  have  any  peculiar  interest : — '*  Great  social  im])rovements  are  re- 
quired :  public  education  is  lamentably  imperfect ;  the  treatment  of 
criminals  is  a  problem  yet  undecided ;  the  sanitary  condition  of  our 
towns  and  villages  has  been  grossly  neglected.  Our  recent  discussions 
have  laid  bare  the  misery,  the  discontent,  and  outrages  of  Ireland : 
they  are  too  clearly  authenticated  to  be  denied ;  too  extensive  to  be 
treated  by  any  but  the  most  comprehensive  measures.  Should  you 
again  elect  me  your  member,  it  will  be  my  duty  to  consider  all  these 
important  matters  in  conjunction  with  those  whom  Her  Majesty  shall 
be  pleased  to  call  to  her  councils." 

In  the  front  rank  of  this  array  of  subjects  stands  the  imperfection  of 
public  education.  Nor  should  it  excite  surprise  to  find  the  importance 
of  this  matter  so  fully  recognised  by  one  who,  through  a  somewhat 
lengthened  public  career,  has  never  ceased  to  give  the  sanction  of  his 
name  and  character,  and  the  benefit  of  his  strenuous  exertions,  to 
jiromote  the  enlightenment  of  the  people.  The  consistency  of  conduct 
thus  evinced,  and  the  pledge  so  emphatically  and  so  recently  offered 
for  its  continuance,  should  give  the  greatest  hopes  to  those  who  have 
laboured  in  the  same  cause,  that  the  Minister  will  be  found  boldly  and 
worthily  to  complete  that  which,  as  a  private  citizen,  he  so  laboured  to 
accomplish. 

Nor  are  the  sanguine  hopes  of  the  advocates  for  national  education 
bounded  by  their  reliance  upon  the  declarations  and  implied  en- 
gagements of  men  in"  power.  The  plan  brought  forward  by  the 
Government  in  1839,  for  placing  under  the  control  of  a  Committee 
of  the  Privy  Council  the  expenditure  of  the  money  voted  by  Par- 
liament for  the  promotion  of  education,  was  all  but  defeated  in  the 
House  of  Commons ;  while,  in  the  PIousc  of  Lords,  an  adverse  address 
to  the  Throne,  proposed  by  the  Primate  of  all  England,  supported  by 
other  eminent  prelates,  and  enforced  by  the  head  of  the  Conservative 
party,  was  carried  by  an  overwhelming  majority.  If  on  that  occasion 
the  opposition  had  proved  successful,  and  power  had  passed  into  other 
hands,  as  the  result  of  the  hindrance  given  to  this  plan,  there  is  reason 
to  fear  that  the  reign  of  ignorance  in  this  country  might  have  been 