

1.  Population. 

2.  Production — agricultural  and  manufacturing.    . 

3.  Interchange";  including  internal  communication  and  trade,  ex- 
ternal communication  and  commerce,  currency,  wages,  &c. 

4.  Public  revenue  and  expenditure. 

5.  Consumption  ;  under  which  head  will  be  considered  the  expendi- 
ture of  individuals  for  their  personal  enjoyment,  and  of  societies  or 
combinations  of  individuals  for  promoting  the  general  convenience,  as 
well  as  the  quantities  and  value  of  commodities  consumed. 

6.  Accumulation — as  shown  by  the  increase  of  national  works  and 
buildings,  of  commercial  and  agricultural  stock,  and  of  articles  which 
minister  to  the  comfort  and  convenience  of  individuals. 

7.  Moral  progress  ;  exhibiting  the  state  of  the  kingdom  in  regard  to 
crime,  its  amount,  prevention,  and  punishment,  and  the  progress  of 
education. 

8.  The  extent  and  condition  of  our  Colonies  and  foreign  depen- 
dencies. 

Towards  the  illustration  of  these  various  points,  parliamentary  and 
other  oflBcial  records  have  been  used  as  far  as  practicable,  and  these 
records  fortunately  are  sufficient  in  number,  extent,  and  variety,  to 
afford  data  upon  nearly  all  the  subjects  embraced.  The  extensive 
inquiries  that  have  been  instituted  from  year  to  year  by  the  Imperial 
Parliament,  upon  almost  every  branch  of  the  national  interests,  have 
made  available  to  our  purpose  an  amount  of  testimony  drawTi  from  the 
most  intelligent  and  experienced  quarters,  such  as  no  other  country  or 
government  in  the  world  has  ever  brought  together.     Individual  mera- 

B  2 


4  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 

bers  of  the  legislature  have  likewise  been  accustomed  to  call  upon  our 
public  depart uients  for  the  production  of  various  details,  with  the  view 
of  elucidating  all  matters  that  in  any  way  affect  either  the  interests 
of  particular  classes  of  their  constituents,  or  those  of  the  community 
at  large.  And,  recently,  the  executive  government  has  established  a 
department  for  the  collection  and  systematic  arrangement  of  informa- 
tion for  the  use  of  the  legislature  and  the  public,  which  has  been  in- 
strumental in  bringing  to  light  and  classifying  a  considerable  amount  of 
information  upon  nearly  every  topic  that  is  connected  with  the  apparent 
condition  of  society. 

These  various  channels  of  information  have  been  diligently  explored, 
and  freely  used,  wherever  they  could  be  made  available  to  the  purpose 
in  view ;  nor  has  recourse  been  had  to  any  less  conclusive  testimony, 
except  where  official  records  are  wanting,  or  for  the  purpose  of  cor- 
roborating those  records  in  cases  where  they  might  seem  to  call  for 
confirmation. 


[     5     ] 


