SECTION  I. 
POPULATION 


CHAPTER  I. 

Uncertainty  of  information  previous  to  present  century — Summary  of  Population  in  Great 
Britain,  1801,  1811,  1821,  1831,  and  1841— In  Ireland,  1821,  1831,  and  1841— Rate  of 
increase — Proportion  of  Males  and  Females — Population  of  England  and  Wales  during 
the  18th  century — Ages  of  Population,  1821  and  1841 — Population  of  France,  and  rate 
of  its  increase — Births,  Deaths,  and  Marriages,  in  England  and  Wales — In  various 
countries — Mortality  of  young  persons — jMortality  in  the  Metropolis — In  Manchester — 
In  Middlesex — In  England  and  Wales — Mortalitj'  with  reference  to  ages  in  England — 
In  Ireland — Baptisms,  Burials,  and  Marriages  in  England,  1801-1849 — Proportions  in 
dilferent  Counties — Mortality  in  Tavistock,  1779-1836. 

The  information  tliat  existed  respecting  the  numbers  of  the  inhabitants 
of  this  country  was  exceedingly  vague  and  imperfect  up  to  the  end  of 
the  18th  century.  Till  then,  indeed,  all  knowledge  upon  the  subject 
of  our  population  was  little  more  than  conjecture.  In  the  course  of 
the  17th  century  the  value  of  correct  information  upon  this  interesting 
head  of  inquiry  began  to  be  felt  and  acknowledged,  and  in  the  follow- 
ing century  attempts  were  made  to  deduce  the  increase,  or  otherwise, 
of  the  population  from  the  difference  between  the  births  and  burials 
which  had  occurred  in  each  decennary  period,  commencing  from  the 
year  1700.  It  is  clear  that  this  plan  alone,  even  if  followed  with  abso- 
lute accuracy,  could  not  at  any  time  be  relied  on  for  exhibiting  the 
actual  numbers  of  the  people,  since  one  chief  element  of  the  computa- 
tion, the  number  of  people  existing  at  the  date  from  which  the  com- 
putation commenced,  was  unascertained.  But  it  is  well  known,  also, 
that  a  considerable  portion  of  the  people  in  England  have  never  been 
accustomed  to  avail  themselves  of  the  system  of  voluntary  registration 
of  their  children.  Hence  computations  from  such  materials  could  be 
considered  as  approximations  only  towards  the  establishment  of  data 
upon  this  leading  branch  of  social  economy. 

Previous  to  the  census  of  1801,  there  existed  no  official  returns  of 


6  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

the  population  of"  either  England  or  Scotland,  and  the  earliest  enumera- 
tion in  Ireland  took  place  in  1813.  The  answers  obtained  under  the 
I'opulation  Acts  which  have  been  put  in  force  during  the  present  cen- 
tury, have,  however,  rescued  the  question  of  the  amount  of  our  popula- 
tion from  the  obscurity  in  which  it  was  previously  involved,  and  have 
furnished  data  of  the  most  valuable  kind  as  the  ground-work  for  various 
pol  i  t  i  cal  cal  c  ula  t ions. 