


2  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX. 

To  point  out  the  progress  of  the  nation, — not  of  this  or  that  section 
of  its  inhabitants,  but  the  progress  of  the  whole  social  system  in  all  its 
vanous  departments,  and  as  affecting  all  its  various  interests, — is  the 
object  proposed,  while  the  means  employed  for  its  accomplishment  have, 
as  far  as  possible,  been  sought  for  in  well-authenticated  facts,  and  the 
conclusions  which  these  suggest  are  supported  by  principles,  the  truth 
of  which  has  in  general  been  recognised. 

Many  circumstances  concur  in  pointing  out  the  advantage  of  adopting 
the  commencement  of  the  present  century  as  the  point  of  time  whence 
to  begin  the  inquiries  thus  set  on  foot. 

This  limitation  has  been  principally  influenced  by  the  fact  of  the 
legislative  union  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  having  taken  effect 
from  the  firet  day  of  the  century  ;  an  event  by  which  the  different  divi- 
sions of  the  United  Kingdom  were  first  brought  under  one  uniform 
system  of  government,  so  far  at  least  as  to  enable  writers  upon  public 
economy  to  consider  the  two  islands  as  one  comitry,  each  being  thence- 
forth necessarily  and  immediately  affected  by  the  situation  and  progress 
of  the  other. 

Another  motive,  which  has  had  considerable  weight  in  thus  limiting 
the  period  of  inquiry,  will  be  found  in  the  fact,  that  the  materials  which 
can  be  brought  in  aid  of  a  labour  of  this  kind,  and  which  relate  to  the 
occurrences  of  the  present  century,  are  vastly  superior  in  amount  and 
value  to  those  that  are  to  be  collected  from  any  existing  records  of 
earlier  date.  In  support  of  this  assertion,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  mention 
the  decennary  enumerations  of  the  population,  the  earliest  of  which, 
as  regards  Great  Britain,  was  made  in  1801.  These  returns  have 
supplied  an  amount  of  information  far  greater  than  any  before  possessed, 
upon  a  subject  the  consideration  of  which  enters  more  or  less  into  every 
question  connected  with  national  affairs. 

If  the  foregoing  circumstances  had  not  been  sufficient  to  determine 
the  propriety  of  thus  limiting  the  proposed  inquiries  in  point  of  time, 
the  fact  that  one-third  of  the  period  chosen  was  passed  in  a  state  of 
war,  while  in  the  other  two-thirds  this  country"  has  enjoyed  profound 
peace,  would  equally  have  led  to  the  adoption  of  that  limit  as  affording 


INTRODUCTION.  3 

nil  opportunity  for  making  a  comparison  between  the  tendency  of  such 
opposite  conditions  of  social  existence  to  promote  or  retard  the  progress 
of  society  in  its  various  relations,  whether  commercial,  financial,  poli- 
tical, or  moral. 

It  is  proposed,  then,  to  consider  what  has  been  the  progress  of  the 
nation  from  the  commencement  of  the  nineteenth  century,  under  eight 
general  heads  of  inquiry.     These  are — 