

The  accuracy  of  the  enumeration  of  the  people  which  was  made  in 
1801  was  at  fir?t  impugned  by  several  writers;  but  although  it  is  pro- 
bable that  in  this  first  attempt  to  perform  an  arduous  operation  some 
errors  would  be  committed,  we  are  warranted,  by  the  result  of  subse- 
quent enumerations,  in  believing  that  the  census  of  1801  was  not  far 
from  correct.  The  presumption,  indeed,  would  be  that  any  errors  that 
might  have  been  made  would  be  errors  of  omission,  whereas  the  objec- 
tions all  went  to  charge  the  enumeration  with  inaccuracy  in  an  opposite 
direction.  The  agreement  that  has  been  established  by  subsequent 
enumerations  in  the  progressive  rates  of  increase  during  successive 
decennary  periods  affords  the  best  evidence  of  which  the  subject  is 
capable  in  favour  of  the  general  accuracy  of  the  first  account. 

In  noticing  the  controversy  here  alluded  to,  Mr.  Rickman  gives  the 
following  explanation  in  the  preface  to  his  Abstract  of  the  Answers  and 
Returns  made  under  the  Act  of  1831  : — 

"  Throughout  England  and  Wales  the  questions  were  issued  to  the 
'  Overseers  of  the  Poor'  (an  office  established  in  the  year  1752,  and 
too  well  known  for  explanation  to  Englishmen),  in  the  administration 
of  which  office  these  overseers  are  bound  to  relieve,  at  the  expense  of 
their  several  parishes  or  townships,  all  the  poor  who  can  substantiate 
their  claim  to  such  relief.  A  considerable  scarcity  had  occurred  in  the 
year  1795-6,  and  this  was  aggravated  almost  to  famine  in  the  year 
1800-1 ;  that  is  to  say,  the  defective  harvest  of  1800  raised  the  price 
of  wheat  to  110s.  per  quarter,  whereas  the  average  price  of  the  preced- 
ing ten  years  had  been  54^.  per  quarter.  The  poor,  therefore,  applied 
in  augmented  numbers  to  the  overseers,  and  as  relief  was  usually 
afforded  according  to  the  number  of  children  maintainable  by  each 
applicant,  the  overseers  could  not  fail  to  be  informed  of  the  full  number 
of  every  family,  infants  included,  in  March,  1801  (the  time  when  the 
Enumeration  Act  of  1800  was  carried  into  effect)  ;  and  in  parishes  not 
unusually  large,  were  almost  able  to  state  the  population  from  their 
personal  knowledge — certainly  able  to  detect  any  attempt  at  falsehood 
in  answering  the  inquiry  made  by  themselves,  from  house  to  house ; 
while  in  families  above  the  necessity  of  applying^or  relief,  the  number 
of  children  and  servants  is  too  well  known  to  be  falsified  with  success, 
did  any  conceivable  temptation  exist  for  misrepresentation.     Add  to 


cii.vr.  :.]  rOrULATIOX.  7 

tills,  that  the  overseers  acted  under  tlie  oljligatinn  of  an  oath  to  make 
returns  according  to  the  best  of  their  knowledge  and  belief,  and  that  in 
most  cases  there  are  two  or  more  overseers  in  each  parish  who  must  be 
])resumed  to  concur  in  wilful  falsehood,  before  the  truth  of  their  returns 
I  an  be  fairly  questioned.  It  is  almost  needless  to  add,  that  the  expense 
of  relieving  the  poor  in  England  and  Wales,  which  in  the  year  1800 
approached  the  sum  of  four  millions  sterling,  had  become  six  millions 
in  1811,  and  exceeded  that  sum  in  1821  ;  and  in  the  year  ending 
March,  1831  (ten  weeks  before  the  enumeration  took  place),  the  relief 
of  the  poor  had  amounted  to  6,800,000/.,  so  that  the  overseers  of  the 
})oor  have  had  but  too  much  reason  to  exercise  habitual  vigilance  as  to 
the  number  of  the  children  ever  since  the  Population  Acts  became 
decennial. 