

The  superiority  of  this  country,  in  respect  of  the  comparative  rates 
of  mortality,  may  be  seen  in  the  following  statement  of  the  annual  pro- 
portions of  deaths  to  the  whole  population  in  the  different  countries 
named,  which  was  communicated  to  Mr.  Rickman  by  Sir  Francis 
D'lvernois,  a  gentleman  who  has  devoted  his  attention  for  many  years 
to  the  elucidation  of  various  phenomena  relating  to  the  law  of  mor- 
tality : — 

England  and  Wales,  one  death  in        59* 

Sweden  and  Denmark,  „  43 

Holland  and  Belgium,  „  43 

France „  40 

United  States  of  America,  „  37 

Prussia „  36 

Wurtemburg       .     .     .  „  33 

In  the  following  statement,  extracted  from  a  table  inserted  by  Mr. 
Senior  in  his  excellent  preface  to  the  "  Foreign  Connnunications,"  sent 
to  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners,  are  given,  on  competent  authority, 
generally  official,  various  particulars  relative  to  the  population  of  coun- 
tries in  most  parts  of  the  world. — See  p.  22. 

The  proportionate  number  of  children  born  in  any  country  cannot  be' 
taken  as  a  test  of  the  condition  of  the  people.  It  is  well  known  that  in 
climates  where  the  waste  of  human  life  is  excessive  from  the  combined 
causes  of  disease  and  poverty  affecting  the  mass  of  the  inhabitants,  the 
number  of  births  is  proportionately  greater  than  is  experienced  in  com- 
munities more  favourably  circumstanced.  Frequently,  and  indeed 
almost  always  in  old  settled  countries,  the  proportionate  number  of 
births  decreases  with  the  advance  of  civilization,  and  the  more  general 
difiusion  of  the  conveniences  and  luxuries  of  life.  In  fact,  the  popula- 
tion does  not  so  much  increase  because  more  are  born,  as  because 
fewer  die. 

The  bills  of  mortality  for  various  parishes  of  the  cities  of  London  and 
Westminster,  and  some  out-parishes  in  Middlesex  and  Surrey,  have 
been  ke])t  with  a  great  degree  of  accuracy  for  a  long  series  of  years, 
and  afford  the  means  for  testing  this  view  of  the  subject  by  giving  in 

*  Now  seen  to  be  incorrect. 


22 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


certain  classes  the  ages  at  which  persons  have  died  in  every  year.  An 
examination  of  tliese  annual  bills  will  show  not  only  that  the  total 
number  of  deaths  has  decreased  in  a  most  remarkable  degree,  relatively 
to  the  amount  of  population,  but  also  that  the  proportion  of  persons 
under  twenty  years  of  age  in  the  whole  number  buried  has  been  pro- 
gressively (liminisliing. 


PLACES. 


Proportion  of 

Annual  Deaths 

to  the  wliole 

Population. 


AMERICA. 

Massachusetts  .     .     .      1  in  40 

Boston 1  in  41  7j 

New  York  (City)  .     .      1  in  30 
Carthagena  deColumbia   6  to  8  in  100 