

In  1780  the  deaths  under  20  years  of  age  were  1  in  76^ 
1801        „  „  „  1  „    96i 

1830        „  „  „  1  „  l-24a 

1S33        „  ,,  „  1  ,,  137 

being  not  ranch  more  than  one-half  of  the  proportion  who  died  under 
twenty  half  a  century  ago. 

In  noticing  the  subject  of  the  mortality  of  children,  Sir  Francis 
D'lveraois  observes,*  "If  the  different  States  of  Europe  were  to  keep 
and  publish  every  year  an  exact  account  of  their  population,  carefully 
stating,  in  a  separate  column,  the  precise  ages  at  which  children  have 
died,  that  separate  column  would  exhibit  the  relative  merits  of  the 
governments,  as  indicated  by  the  comparative  happiness  of  their  sub- 
jects. A  simple  statement  of  figures  would  then  be  more  conclusive 
upon  this  point  than  any  other  arguments  that  could  be  adduced."  It 
is  to  be  remembered,  however,  first,  that  a  government  cannot,  with 
reason,  be  held  to  be  the  source  of  all  the  circumstances,  favourable  and 
unfavourable,  which  affect  the  happiness  of  a  country ;  and  secondly,  that 
the  proposed  comparison  would  at  best  only  furnish  an  indication  as  to 
the  conduct  of  the  actual  government  of  any  country,  not  as  to  the  per- 
manent excellence  of  the  constitution. 

It  cannot  be  necessary  to  multiply  evidence  in  order  to  prove  that  the 
number  of  births  has  decreased,  and  is  still  decreasing,  in  proportion  to 
the  amount  of  population  in  this  kingdom.  The  abstracts  of  parish 
register  returns,  made  with  so  much  care  and  ability  by  Mr.  Rickman, 
and  continued  by  the  Census  Commissioners  of  1841,  may  be  taken  as 
conclusive  proofs  of  the  fact. 

It  was  for  a  long  time  the  practice  with  political' calculators  to  consider 
a  great  proportion  of  births  among  the  people  as  being  one  of  the  surest 

*  Tableau  des  Pertes,  &c.,  ch.  ii.,  p.  16. 


CHAP.  I.] 


POPULATION. 


25 


si<ms  of  a  country  being  in  a  flourishing  condition.  Under  certain  cir- 
cumstances there  can  be  no  doul)t  that  an  increase  of  numbers  thus 
brought  about  is  a  favourable  symptom.  In  thinly-peoj)h;d  but  fertile 
countries,  and  in  newly-settled  states,  this  will  generally  l)e  the  case  ;  but 
it  appears  an  error  to  consider  a  large  proportion  of  l)irths  as  necessarily 
a  symptom  of  improvement  in  well-peopled  territories  ;  and  it  might  with 
more  truth  be  asserted  that  the  contrary  condition  of  a  small  proportion 
of  births  is  indicative  of  ])rosperity  in  the  mass  of  the  people.  In  Ireland 
population  increases  almost  as  fast  as  in  England,  yet  the  people  improve 
but  little  in  their  condition.  Circumstances  which  have  increased  the 
rate  of  mortality  have  always  tended  to  increase  likewise  the  number 
of  births  ;  an  effect  which  is  produced  by  the  rise  in  the  wages  of  labour 
following  necessarily  from  a  diminution  in  the  number  of  labourers,  the 
class  which  for  the  most  part  furnishes  the  increased  proportion  of  deaths. 