

The  disadvantage  of  our  present  state  of  ignorance  upon  this  subject 
has  been  well  stated  by  Dr.  Hawkins  in  the  following  words: — "  No 
one  can  be  more  deeply  aware  than  myself  of  the  difficulties  and  even 
dangers  of  the  subject ;  of  the  dubious  authenticity  and  frequent  fluc- 
tuation of  the  necessary  details ;  and  of  the  precarious  nature  of  any 
general  principles  attempted  to  be  fi-amed  out  of  facts,  which  have,  for 
the  most  part,  endured  the  test  of  only  a  few  years,  and  which  have  only 
recently  become  the  object  of  inquiry  or  scrutiny.  But  an  extensive 
assemblage  and  classification  of  such  facts  possess  an  historical  and  local 
value,  whatsoever  may  be  the  fate  of  the  reasonings  deduced  from  them. 
Independently  of  the  light  which  this  study  throws  upon  medical  science, 
it  affords  the  most  valuable  illustrations  of  the  history,  manners,  and 
customs  of  mankind,  and  a  just  criterion  of  the  progressive  or  retrograde 
movements  of  society." 

The  foregoing  remarks  appear  necessary,  in  order  to  account  for  the 
unsatisfactory  amount  of  information  which  it  is  possible  to  bring  together 
in  the  present  work  upon  this  interesting  branch  of  inquiry.  Small  as 
that  amount  in  reality  is,  it  is  yet  greater  in  quantity,  and  more  precise 
in  its  details,  than  is  to  be  found  in  any  work  hitherto  published — a  cir- 
cumstance which  is  owing  to  the  ready  and  kind  assistance  that  has  been 
afforded  by  the  governors  and  medical  officers  of  some  of  the  hospitals 
in  the  metropolis  and  cliief  provincial  towns. 

The  introduction  of  vaccination  as  a  substitute  for  variolous  inocula- 
tion is  an  improvement  which  properly  belongs  to  the  present  century. 
The  discovery,  that,  by  thus  inducing  a  very  mild  complaint,  the  means 
of  escaping  a  most  formidable  disease  would  be  secured,  if  not  to  abso- 
lute certainty,  yet  to  such  a  degree  as  to  remove  from  the  mind  all 
dread  of  its  visitation,  was  made  in  1798,  but  although  the  attention  of 
the  medical  world  was  immediately  excited  in  the  most  intense  degree 
to  the  subject,  it  required  several  years  of  experience  before  the  value 
of  the  discovery  was  fully  recognised  by  medical  practitioners,  and  before 
the  public  were  sufficiently  weaned  from  their  previous  prejudices,  to 
avail  themselves  to  any  extent  of  the  blessing.  "It  was  not  until  1808, 
ten  years  after  the  first  introduction  of  the  vaccine  practice,  that  the 
medical  officers  of  the  Small  Pox  Ilosjjital  in  London  ceased  to  inoculate 


CU.Vl".    II.] 


MEDICAL  STATISTICS. 


39 


out-patients  for  the  small-pox  ;  and  so  slowly  did  tho  perfect  conviction 
of  the  value  of  the  suhstitute  make  its  way  in  their  minds,  that  it  was 
not  until  June,  1822,  almost  a  quarter  of  a  century  after  Dr.  Jenner's 
discovery,  that  the  practice  of  inoculating  was  discontinued  within  the 
walls  of  that  hospital. 