

It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that,  up  to  the  present  period,  the  subject 
of  medical  statistics  in  this  country  has  been  little  attended  to — it 
might  almost  be  said,  wholly  neglected.  In  the  volume  published  in 
1829  by  Dr.  Bisset  Hawkins,  under  the  title  of  "  Elements  of  Medical 
Statistics,"  many  scattered  facts  bearing  upon  the  subject  have  been 
collected  together  with  industry  and  ability ;  but  the  extent  of  the 
materials  available  for  the  writer's  purpose  was  so  limited  that  the  work 
cannot  be  considered  as  at  all  affording  any  satisfactory  exposition  of 
the  subject.  The  principal  value  of  Dr.  Hawkins's  labours  will  perhaps 
be  found  to  consist  in  his  having  awakened  attention  to  the  subject,  so 
that  persons  who  possess  the  opportunity  may  undertake  the  registration 
of  facts  in  a  manner  which  will  enable  them  at  some  future  time  to  make 
a  valuable  addition  to  the  sum  of  our  economical  knowledge. 

The  hospitals  of  this  country,  so  numerous  and  so  liberally  supported, 
are  among  the  most  honourable  of  our  national  monuments.  The  feel- 
ings of  benevolence  which  prompted  their  erection  and  endowment  have 
been  shared  in  an  eminent  degree  by  the  members  of  the  medical  pro- 
fession, who  have  always  been  ready  to  devote  their  time  and  skill  to 
the  relief  of  the  miseries  of  such  of  their  fellow-creatures  as  are  found 
within  their  walls.  These  institutions  are  also  highly  esteemed  as  schools 
for  surgical  and  medical  practice  ;  so  that  whenever  any  medical  office 
attached  to  an  hospital  is  vacant,  it  it  usually  made  an  object  of  honour- 
able contest  who  shall  fulfil  its  gratuitous  duties ;  and  by  this  means  it 
most  commonly  happens  that  hospital  physicians  and  surgeons  in  this 
country  are  among  the  most  skilful  practitioners  of  the  age. 

For  this  reason,  the  records  of  our  public  hospitals  and  infirmaries,  if 
kept  with  regularity  and  upon  any  uniform  plan,  could  not  fail  to  afford 
a  fair  and  perfect  view  of  the  progress  of  the  curative  science  in  this 
country  ;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  being  made  aware  by  means  of  Dr. 
Hawkins's  volume,  as  well  of  the  value  of  such  information  as  of  its 
present  scanty  amount,  those  who  have  the  direction  of  these  establish- 


38  PKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

ments  will  be  careful  to  supply  the  deficiency  by  every  means  in  their 
power.  AVith  very  few  exceptions,  hospitals  in  this  country  derive  their 
origin  and  draw  their  support  from  private  sources,  for  which  reason 
they  are  under  no  sort  of  control  on  the  part  of  the  Government ;  and 
although  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  readiness  of  those  by  whom 
their  affairs  are  conducted  to  communicate  freely  whatever  information 
may  come  within  their  reach,  it  is  cert<\in  that  there  is  no  authority  to 
direct  any  record  of  facts  according  to  a  prescribed  fomi,  by  which  means 
alone  the  full  value  can  be  given  to  information  of  that  nature. 