

25,623 

1,816 

7-09 

28,545* 

2,079 

7-28 

The  small  variation  observable  in  the  rate  of  mortality  among  the 
patients  in  this  hospital  during  the  whole  of  the  above  period,  extending 
to  more  than  half  a  century,  is  very  remarkable,  and  does  not  certainly 
warrant  any  conclusions  favourable  to  the  progress  of  the  curative  art 
in  general  during  that  interval.  In  the  latter  periods,  however,  a  large 
number  of  the  milder  cases  have  probably  been  sent  to  dispensaries, 
which  were  not  common  formerly.  Many  patients  are  also  now  treated 
at  their  own  houses,  from  want  of  room  in  the  hospitals,  in-patients 
being  only  admitted  in  the  more  serious  cases. 

The  returns  obtained  from  other  general  hospitals  and  medical  insti- 
tutions do  not  embrace  a  sufficiently  long  space  of  time  to  admit  of  any 
conclusions  being  drawn  from  them  as  to  the  progress  of  the  curative 
art.  Tliey  are  curious,  however,  as  presenting  results  very  different 
from  each  other  with  respect  to  the  mortality  of  their  patients.  That 
difference  is  no  doubt  capable  of  satisfactory  explanation,  for  it  would 
be  absurd  to  suppose,  that  if  the  regulations  and  other  circumstances 
attending  the  practice  of  different  hospitals  in  the  same  city  were  alike, 
the  rate  of  mortality  should  from  year  to  year  be  so  different.  The 
fair  inference  is,  that  the  regulations  are  not  the  same,  or  tiiat  they  are 
better  in  some  hospitals  than  in  others. 

We  have  seen  that  in  St.  B  irtholomew's  Hospital  the  rate  of  mortality 
has  never  been  greater  on  the  av(>rage  of  five  years  than  830  per  cent. ; 
in  sixty  years,  from  1790  to  1849,  the  average  "was  7-59  per  cent., 


*  In  addition  to  this  number,  there  were  admitted  in  1849,  478  cholera  patients,  of  whom 
198  died,  being  in  the  proportion  of  41*42  per  cent. 


CHAP.    II.] 


MEDICAL  STATISTICS. 


43 


and  in  the  concluding  five  years  of  the  series,  the  avernge  has  been  only 
7"28  per  cent  ;  whereas,  in  otlier  general  liospitals  of  this  metropolis, 
which  enjoy  the  advantage  of  medical  and  surgical  skill  on  the  part  of 
their  officers  in  nowise  inferior  to  that  of  the  officers  of  St.  Bartholo- 
mew's, the  average  rate  of  mortality  has,  in  the  period  of  fifteen  years, 
exceeded  9  J  per  cent.,  being  in  the  proportion  of  nearly  three  deaths  to 
two.  On  the  other  hand,  the  mortality  during  the  same  period  in  the 
Infirmary  of  Liverpool  has  been  evi>n  smaller  than  that  of  St.  Bartho- 
lomew's Hospital :  the  average  being  only  6"91  per  cent. 


> 

< 
s 
« 

Proportion 
of  l)eatli!* 
per  Cent. 

C  i^  —  >~.  « 

•  ao  'f  «  CO  «3 

Tf  O  O  irt  CO 

r-         (M  CI  W  t^  -H 