

^ 

in 

0 

00     0     !M 

to 

"  2   * 

a>    t~    00 

0 

t- 

cT  -f  en 

Cr.     CT5     -^ 

1 

i 

0 

CI 

eo" 

eo" 

- 

•      •      • 

fl 

. 

•3 

• 

-3       •    -3 
0             » 

IS 

M   0  ^ 
111 

W     !?    CO 

2 

0 

A 

56  PROGRESS  OF  TIIP:  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  proportion  of  males  20  years  of  age  and  up- 
wards is  greater  in  families  employed  in  agriculture  than  in  the  remain- 
ing classes  or  divisions,  and  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  population  does 
not  increase  so  rapidly  in  proportion  to  its  numbers  among  agi-icultural 
families  as  among  the  remaining  portions  of  the  people  — an  etFect  which 
may  probably  be  owing  in  some  degree  to  greater  longevity,  caused  by 
the  superior  healthfulness  of  the  country  ;  still  more,  perhaps,  to  the  less 
exciting  nature  of  country  employments  which  occasion  less  wear  and  tear 
to  the  animal  frame  than  is  experienced  in  towns,  where  the  interests  of 
men  bring  them  more  directly  into  collision,  and  where,  if  the  satisfaction 
attendant  upon  success  is  more  attainable,  the  harassings  and  disappoint- 
ments of  life  are  more  frequently  experienced  ;  but  in  addition  to  those 
causes  comes  the  fact,  that  there  is  a  constant  tendency  of  the  rural 
population  to  seek  employment  in  towns,  so  soon  as  that  period  of  life  is 
attained  at  which  occnpation  is  assumed,  while  there  is  no  tendency  on 
the  part  of  young  persons  born  in  towns  to  seek  employment  in  country 
districts. 

The  following  more  elaborate  table  of  the  occupations  of  the  popula- 
tion of  Great  Britain,  as  ascertained  in  1841,  has  been  compiled  from 
the  Reports  of  the  Census  Commissioners.  It  affords  the  best  abstract 
that  has  hitherto  been  attainable  upon  this  important  branch  of  political 
arithmetic. — See  pp.  57,  58. 

It  may  be  interesting  to  know  the  proportions  in  regard  to  occupations 
into  which  the  population  of  each  county  in  England  is  divided,  and  the 
variations  in  this  respect  which  each  has  undergone  during  the  thirty 
years  that  have  elapsed  between  1811  and  1841.  For  this  purpose  the 
following  two  tables  (pp.  59  and  60)  have  been  constructed.  The  first  of 
them  shows  the  centesimal  proportion  which  each  class  bore  to  the 
other  two  classes  at  the  several  enumerations  of  1811,  1821,  1831, 
and  1841 ;  while  the  second  table  shows  the  numerical  order  in  which 
each  county  stood  at  those  periods  relatively  to  the  other  counties. 
For  this  latter  purpose  the  population  has  been  divided  into  only  two 
classes,  viz. — agriculturists  and  others.  The  reason  for  this  classifica- 
tion will  be  at  once  apparent  on  inspection  of  the  first  table.  The 
glaring  discrepancies  observable  in  the  proportions  at  different  periods 
of  the  third  or  miscellaneous  class  of  the  population,  render  it  .evident 
that  no  very  precise  rule  has  been  used  for  determining  into  which  of 
the  two  non-agricultural  classes  a  considerable  number  of  families 
should  be  placed.  By  adopting  only  two  divisions  or  classes,  this  diffi- 
culty is  removed,  and  a  greater  degree  of  certainty  upon  the  subject 
is  attained.  The  persons  appointed  to  prepare  the^  returns  might  easily 
fall  into  errors  in  classing  traders  and  followers  of  professions ;  but 
could  hardly  fail  to  distinguish  from  all  others  those  families  who  drew 
their  support  from  agricultural  occupations. 