


CHAP.  III.]  OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  G3 

Increased  productive  power  on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  any 
country  is  in  itself  an  evidence  of  the  progress  of  the  people  in  civiliza- 
tion. In  times  when  the  greater  part  of  the  productive  labour  of  a 
country  is  required  for  raising  the  necessaries  of  life,  the  means  of  ob- 
taining conveniences  or  the  productions  of  other  climates  must  be 
extremely  limited.  In  countries  where  the  labour  of  a  man,  applied  to 
the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  should  be  capable  of  producing  only  a  bare 
subsistence  for  himself,  it  is  plain  that  society  could  never  advance  in 
the  scale  of  civilization.  But  if,  by  means  of  improved  implements  or 
better  methods  of  culture,  the  labour  of  two  men  could  be  made  to 
provide  for  the  subsistence  of  three,  the  labour  of  the  third  man  would 
be  set  free  for  the  production  of  surplus  articles,  which  would  add  to  the 
sura  of  the  general  convenience.  It  is  long  before  communities  arrive  at 
such  a  state  of  improvement  as  will  admit  of  so  considerable  a  number  as 
one-third  of  the  population  being  spared  from  the  cultivation  of  the  soil. 
Ireland  is  not  much  advanced  beyond  tliis  state  at  present.  In  the 
absence  of  all  precise  information  in  regard  to  the  produce  of  the  soil 
in  this  kingdom,  only  an  approximation  to  the  truth  can  be  attained. 
Taking  the  best  data  that  can  be  had,  it  appears  that  the  labour  of  19 
families  is  required  to  produce,  annually,  1160  quarters  of  all  kinds 
of  grain,  being  at  the  rate  of  61  quarters  for  each  family.  Applying 
this  rule  to  the  case  of  Ireland,  it  will  appear  that  the  labour  of  42,737 
families  is  required  in  order  to  raise  the  average  quantity  of  grain  that 
has  been  annually  sent  to  England  and  Scotland  during  the  20  years 
fi'om  1825  to  1844.  If  this  number  of  families  be  deducted  from  the 
entire  number  who  are  employed  in  agriculture  in  Ireland,  it  will  be 
found  that  the  labour  of  931,451  families,  being  632  in  every  1000,  is 
required  for  raising  food  for  the  use  of  the  native  population.  Some 
abatement  must  indeed  be  made  from  this  large  proportion  on  account 
of  the  number  of  animals  reared  and  converted  into  food  for  the  con- 
sumption of  England  and  of  other  countries.  No  means  exist  for  ascer- 
taining the  precise  number  of  these  animals  ;  but  admitting  that  number 
to  be  very  considerable,  it  cannot  materially  alter  the  proportion  here 
stated. 

The  advantage  of  being  able  to  classify  and  compare  the  numbers  of 
the  population  who  have  applied  themselves  at  different  periods  to  dif- 
ferent pursuits  is  exceedingly  great,  as  enabling  us  to  estimate  and  to 
mark  the  progress  of  the  country.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  attempt 
at  this  classified  enumeration,  which  was  made  at  the  census  of  1801, 
was  so  far  unsuccessful  that  it  would  be  wrong  to  build  any  argument 
upon  it.  On  this  subject,  Mr.  Rickman,  in  his  interesting  preface  to  the 
abstract  of  the  returns  of  1831  (page  ix),  says,  "  The  question  of  1801, 
relating  to  the  occupation  of  persons,  was  found  in  practice  to  produce 
no  valuable  result.     In  some  cases  a  householder  seemed  to  understand 