


cii.vp.  III.]  OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  TEOrLE.  61 

divisions  of  England  have  changed  their  rank  in  the  opposite  direction. 
As  regards  Monmouthshire,  the  alteration  has  been  occasioned  by  the 
great  increase  in  the  number  of  coal  mines  and  in  the  smelting  and 
manufacturing  of  iron  ;  and  the  change  that  has  taken  place  in  Sussex 
is  owing  to  the  rapid  growth  of  its  watering-places,  Brighton,  A\''orthing, 
and  Hastings. 

In  addition  to  the  general  divisions  of  the  people  into  three  great 
classes,  as  already  explained,  an  attempt  was  made  in  1831  to  subdivide 
the  males  20  years  of  age  and  upwards  ;  and  to  some  extent  that  attempt 
was  successful.  Among  the  males  employed  in  agriculture  a  very 
important  distinction  was  drawn  between  occupiers  of  land  who  employ 
labourers,  other  occupiers  of  land  who  cultivate  their  holdings  without 
such  assistance,  and  labourers  who  are  employed  by  occupiers  in  the 
first  subdivision.  The  proportion  of  the  population  in  Ireland,  which  is 
engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits,  is  more  than  double  the  proportion  so 
employed  in  Great  Britain  ;  but  the  subdivision  just  noticed  exhibits  in 
a  yet  more  striking  point  of  view  the  wide  difference  that  exists  in  the 
customs  and  condition  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  two  islands.  In  Great 
Britain  about  two-sevenths  of  the  agriculturists  were  in  1831  occupiers 
of  laud,  and  these  were  divided  in  nearly  equal  proportions  into  those 
who  do  and  those  who  do  not  employ  labourers :  the  agricultural 
labourers  form  the  remaining  five-sevenths  of  the  class.  In  Ireland 
only  about  one-thirteenth  part  of  the  agriculturists  above  twenty  years 
of  age  were  occupiers  employing  labourers,  while  the  remaining  twelve- 
thirteenths  were  divided  almost  equally  into  occupiers  without  labourers, 
and  labourers  for  others  who  are  not  occupiers.  The  average  number 
of  ^labourers  to  each  occupier  employing  them  is  by  no  means  equal  in 
the  two  parts  of  the  kingdom,  being  at  the  rate  of  4f  labourers  to  each 
employing  occupier  in  Great  Britain,  and  as  high  as  5  J  labourers  to 
each  employing  occupier  in  Ireland. 

The  course  adopted  by  the  Census  Commissioners  for  Ireland,  of 
ascertaining  the  occupations  of  the  people  in  families,  and  of  also  stat- 
ing the  employment  of  adult  males,  affords  another  element  for  the 
elucidation  of  questions  connected  with  the  progress  of  the  population. 
The  variance  between  the  Irish  and  the  English  returns  as  respects  the 
age  at  which  occupations  are  stated — viz.,  15  in  Ireland  and  20  in 
England — prevents  that  close  comparison  between  the  condition  of  the 
two  populations  wliich  it  would  be  interesting  to  make.  The  numbffi' 
of  families  in  Ireland  in  1841,  was  1,472,787,  of  w^hom  974,188,  or 
66*15  per  cent.,  were  engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits.  The  number 
of  males  15  years  old  and  upwards,  was  2,341,895,  of  whom  1,643,082, 
or  70*16  per  cent.,  were  employed  in  producing  food,  so  that  each  1000 
of  the  whole  number  of  families  furnished  1115  adult  males  to  the 
ranks  of  agi'iculture,  while  each  1000  famihes  in  those  ranks  furnished 