


CUAP.    Ill 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  rEOrLn. 


67 


preceding  the  day  of  enumeration  ;  but  if  we  assume  that  the  whole 
number  were  unemployed,  they  and  persons  of  independent  means 
amount  to  no  more  than  82  in  each  1000  of  the  male  adult  population. 

Tiie  specification  given  in  the  population  returns  of  Ibol,  of  the  retail 
trades  and  handicrafts  followed  by  the  families  in  Great  Britain,  who 
were  represented  by  1,159,867  males  20  years  of  age  and  upwards, 
{see  p.  55),  was  not  calculated  to  throw  any  light  npon  the  inquiry 
wherein  we  are  engaged  ;  nor  could  it  in  any  considerable  degree  be 
made  useful  in  statistical  investigations.  That  s])ecification  would  lead 
to  many  erroneous  conclusions,  in  consequence  of  some  one  branch  of  a 
man's  trade  being  frequently  given,  to  the  exclusion  of  others  as  impor- 
tant. It  will  sufficiently  justify  this  objection  to  state  a  very  few  of  the 
anomalies  which  the  statement  presents.  Thus  there  were  in  England, 
according  to  this  specification,  5030  coach-makers,  and  but  1  coach-spring 
maker.  The  whole  kingdom  is  stated  to  give  employment  to  only  3 
coffin-makers,  each  of  whom  would  therefore  be  called  upon  to  provide 
about  300  coffins  daily  throughout  the  year.  One  drug-grinder  alone 
appears,  while  the  druggists  whom  he  is  to  supply  amount  in  number  to 
5423.  It  cannot  be  necessary  to  go  further  into  this  alphabet  of  trades 
in  order  to  show,  from  internal  evidence,  the  little  dependence  to  be 
placed  upon  it,  but  having  been  induced  to  test  the  list  in  some  of  its 
particulars  by  means  of  another  statement  which  cannot  be  otherwise 
than  accurate,  the  result  is  here  given. 

The  number  of  licenses  issued  by  the  Commissioners  of  Excise,  upon 
every  one  of  which  a  duty  is  levied,  affords  as  sure  an  indication  as  can 
well  be  had  upon  the  subject.  Some  men  may  carry  on  a  trade  for 
which  a  license  is  legally  necessary,  without  taking  one  from  the  office, 
but  it  may  be  presumed  that  nobody  will  pay  for  a  license  who  does  not 
pursue  the  calling  for  which  it  qualifies  him. 

The  following  list  of  the  number  of  excise  licenses  issued  to  certain 
classes  of  traders  in  1831,  the  year  to  which  the  specification  of  trades 
relates,  is  taken  from  the  Official  Tables  of  the  revenue,  &c.,  compiled 
by  the  Board  of  Trade.  By  its  side  we  have  placed  the  numbers  of 
persons  who,  according  to  the  population  abstract,  follow  the  several 
callings  mentioned. 


Description  of  Dealers. 


Brewers 
Maltsters    . 
Soap-makers    . 
Spirit-dealers  . 
Tea-dealers      . 
Tobacco-dealers 
"Wine-dealers  . 


Js  umber  of  Excise 
Licenses  issued. 


