

"  The  number  of  those  employed  in  retail  trade  and  handicraft,  as 
distinguished  from  manufacture,  appears  in  the  next  column  ;  this  was 
supposed  to  be  capable  of  subdivision,  and  after  much  consideration  and 
correspondence  with  the  members  of  Parliament  who  had  constituted  the 
Committee  on  the  Population  Bill,  a  list  was  issued  with  each  schedule, 


ciiAi'.  HI.]         OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  65 

containing  100  of  the  most  usual  denominations  of  retail  trade  and 
handicraft. 

"  This  list  was  known  to  contain  far  less  than  the  entire  numher  of 
trades  in  large  towns,  especially  in  the  metropolis,  where,  in  the  result, 
no  less  than  426  sidjdivisions  of  trade  were  found  to  exist ;  but  a  greater 
number  than  100  would  have  been  inapplicable  and  even  perplexing  in 
rural  parishes,  and  the  space  left  at  the  bottom  of  the  list,  as  well  as  the 
list  itself,  was  so  attentively  and  correctly  filled,  that  the  defective  spe- 
cification does  not  exceed  one  in  112  males  uj)wards  of  20  years  of  age 
employed  in  retail  trade  or  handicraft ;  the  lists  returned  by  all  the 
parishes  constituting  the  metropolis  do  not  present  a  single  defect :  a 
remarkable  instance  of  accuracy." 

In  the  table  last  inserted,  showing  the  numerical  order  in  which  the 
counties  of  England  stood  relatively  to  each  other  as  regarded  the  occu- 
pations of  their  inhabitants  in  1811,  1821,  and  1831,  the  population  was 
divided  into  only  two  classes — agriculturists  and  others,  and  a  reason 
was  given  for  the  adoption  of  this  division  in  preference  to  that  made  in 
the  population  returns,  grounded  upon  the  degree  of  uncertainty  that 
accompanied  the  division  of  other  classes,  and  which  rendered  abortive 
all  attempts  to  separate  the  proportions  of  those  employed  in  "  trade, 
manufactures,  and  handicraft,"  from  the  division  comprehended  under 
the  description  of  "  all  other  families." 

That  degree  of  uncertainty  is  clearly  shown  in  the  "  Comparative 
statement  of  the  numbers  and  occupations  of  families,"  {see  page  53,) 
where  the  centesimal  parts  exhibited  by  the  three  divisions  were  stated 
to  have  been  as  follows  at  the  three  last  enumerations  in  Great 
Britain : — 


Years. 

Agriculture. 

Trade. 

Otliers. 

1811 

35-2 

44-4 

20-4 

100 

1821 

33-2 

45-9 

20-9 

100 

1S31 

2S-2 

42- 

2'J-8 

100 

It  would  appear  from  this  calculation  that  a  very  considerable  part 
of  the  population — 4  out  of  40 — had  withdrawn  themselves,  between 
1821  and  1831,  from  the  pursuits  of  trade,  manufactures,  and  handi- 
craft, a  circumstance  well  known  to  be  altogether  at  variance  with  the 
fact.  The  summary  of  the  returns  of  1831,  respecting  the  occupations 
of  males  20  years  of  age  and  upwards,  throws  considerable  light  upon 
the  subject,  by  exhibiting  them  under  several  subdivisions.  The  males 
belonging  to  the  families  included  in  the  non-agricultural  and  non- 
manufacturing  classes  were  then  given  under  four  distinct  heads  of 
description,  viz. :  — 