


86  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

PAUPERISM. 

Origin  and  progress  of  Poor  Laws — Act  43rd  Elizabeth — Amount  expended  at  various 
periods  for  relief  of  Poor— Injurious  tendency  of  the  sj'stem — Means  employed  for  its 
amendment — Sums  expended  for  Poor  in  England  and  AVales  in  each  year  of  the  present 
century — Proportion  of  Paj-ments  to  Population  at  each  decennary  enumeration — Results 
of  Law  of  iS.'U— Poor  Law  of  Ireland — Of  Scotland— Methods  followed  in  various 
countries  for  relieving  the  Poor — In  Norway — in  Sweden — In  Denmark — In  Mecklenburgh 
— In  Prussia — In  AViirtcmberg — In  Bavaria — In  the  Canton  of  Berne — In  France — In 
Holland — In  Belgium — Labourers'  earnings  in  England,  &c. 

The  system  of  compulsory  maintenance  for  the  poor,  which  has  been  in 
operation  hi  England  and  Wales  since  the  43rd  year  of  the  reign  of 
Elizabeth,  has  at  various  times  afforded  occasion  for  warmer  controversy 
than  almost  any  other  matter  affecting  the  internal  condition  of  this 
country. 

The  attention  of  the  English  legislature  was  indeed  drawn  to  the  sub- 
ject of  the  maintenance  of  the  poor  more  than  two  hundred  years  before 
the  period  just  mentioned.  So  early  as  1388,  an  Act  was  framed  and 
passed,  providing  "  that  a  convenient  sum  shall  be  paid  and  distributed 
yearly  out  of  the  fruits  and  profits  of  the  several  churches,  by  those  who 
shall  have  the  said  churches  in  proper  use,  and  by  their  successors,  to 
the  poor  parishioners  in  aid  of  their  living  and  sustenance  for  ever." 
Until  the  era  of  the  Reformation,  when  so  many  richly-endowed  re- 
ligious establishments  were  seized  by  the  crown  and  appropriated  to 
secular  uses,  the  poor  had  generally  found  in  them  a  source  of  relief 
from  their  distresses.  It  would  appear;  however,  that  the  claims  of 
indigence  must,  even  before  the  suppression  of  religious  houses,  have 
exceeded  the  means  or  the  will  for  their  relief  on  the  part  of  the  possessors 
of  ecclesiastical  revenues,  for,  by  the  Act  27  Henry  VIII.,  the  officers 
of  towns  are  directed  to  collect  alms  for  the  pui'pose  of  keeping  "  sturdy 
vasabonds  and  valiant  beggars  "  to  continual  labour.  This  Act  further 
directs  "  every  preacher,  parson,  vicar,  and  curate,  to  exhort,  move, 
stir,  and  provoke  people  to  be  liberal  for  the  relief  of  the  impotent,  and 
for  keeping  and  setting  to  work  the  said  sturdy  vagabonds."  By  another 
clause  it  was  provided  "  that  a  sturdy  beggar  is  to  be  whipped  for  the 
first  offence,  his  right  ear  cropped  for  the  second  ;  and,  if  he  again  offend, 
to  be  sent  to  the  next  gaol  till  the  quarter  sessions,  there  to  be  indicted 
for  wandering,  loitering,  and  idleness  ;  and,  if  convicted,  shall  suffer 