

A  feeling  had  long  pre\  ailed,  that  the  injurious  teridency  of  our  system 
of  poor  laws  was  aggravated  by  the  mode  of  their  administration,  and 

*  The  quantitj"  of  foreign  wheat  brought  into  consumption  in  the  two  j'ears,  1817  and 
1818,  exceeded  2,G0(),0tW  quarters. 


CHAP.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  89 

inquiries  of  a  partial  nature  had  from  time  to  time  been  undertaken  by 
tiie  legislature,  with  the  hope  of  palHatinp;  the  mischief,  and  of  finding 
out  some  method  of  mitigating  the  evils  of  pauperism,  without  abandoning 
the  dictates  of  humanity.  Little  or  no  good  was  found  to  result  from 
those  inquiries.  The  subject  was  so  vast,  and  the  practical  evils  attend 
ing  it  were  so  widely  spread  and  deeply  seated,  that  it  required  an  inves- 
tigation far  more  laborious  and  minute  than  could  be  completed  by  any 
committee  of  Lords,  or  Members  of  the  House  of  Commons,  who  had  other 
and  pressing  calls  upon  their  attention.  Under  these  circumstances  it  was 
])erhaps  the  wisest  plan  that  could  be  adopted  by  the  Government  to 
appoint  a  Board  of  Commissioners,  wbo  should  make  "  a  diligent  and 
full  iuijuiry  into  the  practical  operation  of  the  laws  for  the  relief  of  the 
poor,  and  into  the  manner  in  which  those  laws  are  administered."  The 
Commissioners  thvis  appointed  were  persons  whose  education,  experience^ 
and  station  in  society,  eminently  qualified  them  for  carrying  on,  zealously, 
judiciously,  and  effectually,  the  laborious  task  intrusted  to  them.  The 
mass  of  information  which,  in  a  comparatively  short  space  of  time,  they 
collected  and  embodied,  affords  the  best  testimony  that  can  be  offered 
in  favour  of  their  fitness  for  the  undertaking.  The  report  which  was 
presented  to  the  Government  by  the  Commissioners  in  February,  1834, 
Mas  so  widely  circulated,  and  so  freely  canvassed,  that  it  cannot  be 
necessary  to  enter  upon  the  examination  of  its  various  details,  nor  could 
it  be  attended  with  any  profitable  result  to  discuss,  at  much  length, 
the  propriety  of  the  various  remedial  measures  which  it  proposed,  and 
which  were  in  great  part  adopted  by  the  legislature.  It  will  be  suflicient 
here  to  state,  that  the  opinion  before  so  generally  held  as  to  the  desirable- 
ness of  a  radical  change,  at  least  in  the  mode  of  administering  the  laws 
for  the  relief  of  the  poor,  was  strengthened  by  means  of  the  Report  of 
the  Commissioners  into  a  conviction  of  the  necessity  of  that  change  in 
order  to  arrest  the  rapid  and  total  demoralization  of  the  working  classes, 
which  was  fatally  counteracting  all  the  efforts  of  philanthropists  for  en- 
lightening the  minds  and  improving  the  condition  of  the  labouring  poor. 
The  Act  "  for  the  Amendment  and  better  Administration  of  the  Laws 
relative  to  the  Poor  in  England  and  Wales,"  received  the  Royal  assent 
on  the  14th  of  August,  1834,  but  although  it  has  now  been  for  more  than 
sixteen  years  in  operation,  it  is  not  yet  possible  to  judge  dispassionately 
the  effects  of  a  measure  which  is  hardly  second  in  importance  to  any  of 
the  legislative  reforms  brought  about  since  the  year  1830. 