


CHAP.  IV.]  rAUTERISM.  87 

execution  as  a  felon  and  an  enemy  of  the  commonwcaltli."  The  inun- 
dation of  mendicancy  which  appears  at  this  time  to  have  overspread  the 
country,  had,  in  all  prohahility,  chiefly  originated  out  of  the  first  great 
breaking  up  of  the  feudal  system,  by  the  permission  given  in  the  pre- 
ceding reign  to  the  great  landed  proprietors  to  dispose  of  their  estates, — 
a  change  which  speedily  occasioned  the  dispersion  of  all  those  numerous 
bands  of  retainers  which  used  to  be  fed  by  every  lord  of  the  soil.  This 
state  of  things  could  not  but  be  aggravated  by  the  subversion  of  the 
religious  establishments  in  1539,  from  which  time,  until  the  close  of  the 
reign  of  Elizabeth,  many  statutes  were  passed  relative  to  vagrancy  and 
mendicity. 

The  reasons  already  offered,  when  viewed  in  connexion  with  the  then 
existing  condition  of  society,  will  perhaps  account  for  the  extent  of  the 
evil,  and  may  be  received  in  extenuation  of  the  harshness  of  the  law  by 
which  it  was  sought  to  provide  a  remedy.  Unhappily,  it  is  by  no  means 
peculiar  to  the  times  of  the  last  of  our  Henries,  and  his  immediate  suc- 
cessors, that  in  seeking  to  remove  a  pressing  evil,  the  symptoms  only 
should  be  dealt  with,  leaving  untouched  the  causes  of  the  mischief.  In 
our  own  day  we  are  forced  to  acknowledge,  that  the  same  unstatesman- 
like  and  unchristian  mode  of  dealing  with  this  subject  has  been  adopted 
by  us  as  was  pursued  300  years  ago  by  legislators  who  were  without 
the  experience  by  which  we  should  be  guided.  The  object  of  legisla- 
tion at  both  periods  has  been  the  management  of  paujjers,  while  the 
adoption  of  a  system  for  the  removal  of  pauj)erism  has  been  neglected. 
If,  instead  of  visiting  with  punishment  of  the  severest  kind,  those  who 
fell  into  a  condition  which  they  had  little  or  no  means  of  avoiding,  our 
Ancestors  had  set  themselves  to  provide  those  means  by  the  imparting  of 
knowledge,  and  the  inculcation  of  principles  of  independence,  as  well  as 
by  forbearing  to  place  shackles  upon  the  skill  and  industry  of  the  people, 
although  we  might,  no  doubt,  have  still  had  am.ple  opportunity  for  the 
exercise  of  benevolence  in  solacing  misfortune,  it  may  be  confidently 
believed,  that  the  legislature  of  our  day  would  have  been  relieved  from 
all  necessity  for  considering  any  system  of  poor  laws. 

It  is  to  the  Act  43rd  of  Elizabeth  that  we  owe  the  system  which,  till 
very  recently,  has  provided  in  England  and  Wales  for  the  compulsory 
maintenance  of  the  poor.  That  the  system  then  introduced  has  since 
been  greatly  abused  and  applied  to  purposes  which  did  not  enter  into  the 
contemplation  of  the  legislature  of  that  day  cannot  be  doubted.  The  chief 
provisions  of  the  Act  of  Elizabeth  gave  to  the  overseers  of  the  poor  power 
to  levy  upon  the  inhabitants  of  their  respective  parishes,  "  such  sums  as 
should  be  necessary  to  support  the  aged  and  infirm  parishioners,  and  for 
setting  to  work  all  persons  using  no  ordinary  and  daily  trade  of  life  to 
get  their  living  by."  Confined  within  this  limit,  laws  for  the  maintenance 
of  the  poor  appear  to  be  in  agreement  with  the  plainest  principles  of 
humanity,  which  enjoin  upon  every  one  the  duty  of  relieving  the  unde- 