


cii.vr.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  99 

through  their  uiiduo  severity,  the  })enalty  of  transportation  heing  awarded 
under  the  mere  autliority  of  a  Grand  Jury  presentment ;  l)ut  the  idea 
of  removing,  by  any  general  legishitive  provision,  the  necessity  for  acts 
of  vagrancy,  was  not,  until  the  date  above  mentioned,  acted  upon  by 
the  state.  County  infirmaries,  fever  hospitals,  dispensaries,  and  lunatic 
asylums  were  indeed  established  and  suppoi'ted,  in  whole  or  in  part,  by 
means  of  assessments  ordered  by  the  Grand  Juries.  There  were,  too, 
and  there  still  are,  many  charities  maintained  by  private  benevolence, 
unaided  by  either  general  or  local  taxation,  and  these  have  been  most 
liberally  supported,  chiefly  by  the  middling  and  even  the  poorer  classes. 
One  who  spoke  from  an  extensive  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  the 
subject — Dr.  Doyle — stated  in  evidence  before  a  Select  Conunittee  of 
the  House  of  Commons  that  sat  in  1830, — "  If  I  were  to  speak  till  the 
sun  went  down,  I  could  not  convey  a  just  picture  of  the  benevolence 
prevailing  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  middling  classes  of  Ireland  ; 
but  it  is  sufficiently  proved  by  this,  that  the  poor  are  almost  supported 
exclusively  by  them,  although  they  form  a  class  not  over  numerous,  and 
subject  to  great  pressure  ;  still,  of  the  million  and  a-half,  or  two  millions 
now  expended  to  support  the  Irish  poor,  nearly  the  entire  falls  on  the 
farmers  and  other  industrious  classes."  By  the  word  farmers  we  must 
not  understand  the  generally  substantial  class  passing  under  that  name 
in  England,  but  persons,  for  the  most  part,  renting  and  cidtivating  with 
their  own  hands  from  two  to  ten  acres  of  land,  with  little  or  no  capital, 
and  too  often  subsisting  themselves  and  their  families  upon  the  lowest 
description  of  food. 

The  various  committees,  by  whom  this  subject  was  from  time  to  time 
considered,  appear  to  have  shrunk  from  the  responsibility  of  recom- 
mending for  adoption  in  Ireland  the  vmreformed  system  of  poor-laws 
as  administered  in  England  ;  but  in  the  session  of  1838,  when  some 
experience  had  been  gained  of  the  working  of  the  amended  law^  of 
1834,  an  Act  was  passed  "for  the  more  effectual  relief  of  the  destitute 
poor  in  Ireland,"  based  upon  the  provisions  of  the  reformed  English 
law,  and  conforming  to  it  as  nearly  as  the  different  circumstances  of  the 
country  would  permit,  the  administering  of  the  law  being  placed  under 
the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  of  England,  one  of  whom  is  to  reside  in 
Ireland. 

Some  opposition  to  the  execution  of  this  law  was  to  be  expected  at 
first,  where  rates  were  compulsively  levied  for  an  object  which  all  did 
not  equally  acknowledge  to  be  one  of  duty  and  necessity,  but  this  has 
now  almost  entirely  ceased,  and  the  law  is  administered  with  regularity, 
and  with  equal  advantage  to  all  classes  of  the  community.  In  the  lltli 
Report  of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  (dated  1st  May,  1845),  it  was 
stated  that  out  of  130  Unions  of  parishes  into  which  Ireland  is  divided 