

One  of  the  greatest  evils  which  had  grown  up  under  the  administra- 
tion of  the  old  poor  law,  was  the  practice  of  paying  the  wages  of  labour 
partly  out  of  rates  levied  for  the  relief  of  the  indigent  poor.  The  injus- 
tice of  this  i)ractice  is  now  fully  acknowledged.  It  was  unjust  towards 
those  persons  who  contributed  to  the  rates,  and  who,  if  even  they  gave 
employment  to  labourers,  could  not,  or  did  not,  adopt  that  method  of 
lessening  wages  ;  but  it  was  far  more  unjust  towards  the  labourers  them- 
selves, inflicting  upon  them  evils,  both  moral  and  physical,  which  were 
reflected  back  u])on  society  in  a  thousand  ways.     Under  such  a  system, 


cjiAi'.  IV.]  PAUrERISM.  93 

a  labourer  iti  an  agricultural  district  was  inevitably  rendered  a  pauper ; 
he  was  deprived  of  all  means  for  exercising  the  virtue  of  ])rudenee,  and 
became  almost  necessarily  imj)rovident ;  he  was  brought  to  hjok  upon  the 
parish  allowance  as  his  freehold  ;  and  if,  under  such  circumstances,  any 
spark  of  independence  remained  unextinguished  in  his  breast,  it  should 
have  been  received  as  evidence  of  a  de^rree  of  innate  virtue  deserving: 
of  the  highest  admiration. 

The  system  in  question  awarded  payment  for  labour,  not  according  to 
the  value  of  services  performed,  but  with  reference  to  the  number  of  the 
family  to  be  maintained,  whence  it  frequently  happened  that  in  order  to 
keep  down  the  rates,  employment  was  given  to  the  man  who,  by 
means  of  his  large  family,  was  a  burthen  upon  the  parish,  while  the 
prudent  and  industrious  man,  who  had  avoided  that  evil,  was  con- 
demned to  pass  his  days  in  idleness.  Payment  for  services  when  thus 
awarded,  were  kept  down  to  the  lowest  level  at  which  nature  could  be 
sustained,  and  at  seasons  when  it  no  longer  suited  the  former  to  give 
employment,  the  whole  labouring  part  of  the  rural  population  might  be, 
and  often  was,  thrown  for  subsistence  upon  the  parish  rates.  It  was 
clearly  not  in  the  power  of  any  individual  employer  to  act  upon  a 
ditFerent  system.  If  he  should  have  paid  his  labourers  a  rate  of  wages 
for  the  time  they  were  employed,  sufficient  for  the  decent  maintenance 
of  themselves  and  their  families  during  the  whole  year,  he  would  have 
been  found  also  to  pay,  in  the  form  of  poor  rates,  a  part  of  the  wages  of 
the  labourers  employed  by  his  neighbours,  which  would  have  been  un- 
just and  ruinous.  To  meet  this  evil  what  has  been  called  the  loork- 
house  test  was  adopted.  This  consisted  in  the  oiFer  to  give  relief  out  of 
the  parish  fund  only  ti.  those  applicants  and  their  families  who  would 
become  inmates  of  workhouses.  In  the  face  of  this  offer  the  farmer  has 
been  compelled  to  pay  the  labourer  the  full  amount  of  wages  needed 
for  his  continued  subsistence.  In  practice  it  has  been  found,  that  the 
farmer  who  should  dismiss  his  labourers  at  the  slack  season  has  but  a 
poor  chance  of  securing  their  services  at  other  times,  and  he  has  con- 
sequently been  induced  to  give  permanent  employment  to  the  more 
deserving  and  industrious  among  them. 