

The  Act  above  cited  received  the  Royal  assent  on  the  4th  of 
August,  1845.  An  examination  of  its  provisions  leads  to  the  belief  that 
it  was  framed  with  a  greater  leaning  towards  the  prejudices  and  sup- 
posed interests  of  the  rich,  than  towards  the  wants  and  social  rights  of 
the  poor  ;  and  it  appears  probable,  that  at  no  distant  day  the  legisla- 
ture must  be  called  upon  to  remedy  some,  at  least,  of  its  deficiencies. 

It  is  a  common  error  to  suppose  that  the  institution  of  Poor  Laws  is 
peculiar  to  England.  Monsieur  de  Chateauvieux,  whose  "  RecJiercJins 
sur  la  situation  comparative  des  Pauvres  en  France  et  en  Amjletcrre^'  is 
contained  in  the  (Appendix  F)  to  the  Report  of  the  Commissioners  on 
the  Poor  Laws,  remarks  on  this  head,  that  "  the  existence  of  a  tax  in 
favour  of  the  poor  under  one  form  or  another,  may  be  recognised  in 
almost  every  fully-peopled  country."  He  instances,  in  support  of  this 
position,  the  distribution  of  wheat  in  consular  Rome  ;  and,  in  more 
recent  times,  the  alms  enjoined  by  the  Christian  religion  ;  the  bequests 
made  to  the  clergy  by  persons  in  order  to  ease  their  consciences,  and 
which  bequests  were  very  commonly  declared  by  the  donors  to  be  in- 
tended for  distribution  among  the  poor  ;  the  hospitals  and  infirmaries 
endowed  at  the  period  of  the  Crusades  ;  and  the  institutions  of  a  still 
later  period  for  the  maintenance  of  foundlings  and  for  supporting  and 
educating  the  children  of  the  poor. 

The  instances  here  cited  are,  however,  widely  different  in  their  cha- 
racter from  the  English  Poor  Laws,  either  as  regards  their  original 
object  or  their  modern  mode  of  administration.  AVhatever  sums  were 
given  or  bequeathed  under  the  different  forms  mentioned  by  Mons.  de 
Chateauvieux  were  voluntary  offerings,  sometimes  the  fruit  of  com- 
punctious visitings,  but  more  frequently  the  offspring  of  benevolent 
feelings,  and  the  objects  designated  for  relief  do  not  in  any  case  appear 
to  have  been  healthy  able-bodied  labourers,  or  their  families. 

Instead  of  endeavouring  to  institute  any  comparison  between  con- 
ditions of  society  so  dir^similar  to  our  own  as  those  here  referred  to,  it 
will  be  more  profitable  to  state  briefly  the  methods  at  present  employed 
in  various  civilized  communities  for  the  relief  of  their  distressed  poor, 
and  to  point  out,  as  well  as  the  limited  means  of  information  permit. 


102  PIIOGIIESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

the  apparent  effect  of  those  methods  upon  the  population  of  the  different 
countries. 

We  learn  from  returns  transmitted  by  English  Consuls,  in  conse- 
quence of  inquiries  made  through  Lord  Palmerston  by  the  Poor  Law 
Commissioners,  that  in  the  following  countries  of  Europe  the  poor  are 
acknowledged  to  possess  a  legal  claim  to  relief  from  the  rest  of  the 
community,  viz.,  Norway,  Sweden,  Russia,  Denmark,  Mecklenburg, 
Prussia,  Wurtemburg,  Bavaria,  and  the  Canton  of  Berne. 