

The  power  steadily  enforced  upon  all  fitting  occasions  for  refusing 
relief  to  the  able-bodied,  except  within  the  workhouses,  has  'had  an 
effect  for  the  extent  of  which  it  is  difficult  fully  to  account,  in  converting 
the  idle  to  habits  of  industry,  and  by  that  means  increasing  the  demand 
for  labour,  since  employers  can  now  rely  upon  obtaining  its  value  for 
the  money  which  they  so  disburse.  The  following  extract  from  a 
letter  written  by  ]N[r.  WooUey,  formerly  a  land-agdnt,  now  an  Assistant- 
Commissioner  for  the  Commutation  of  Tithes,  and  addressed  to  Mr.  Gul- 
son,  one  of  the  Assistant  Poor  Law  Commissioners,  states  the  advantages 
to  the   labouring  population   of  a  measure  which   some  persons  have 


ciiAr.  IV.]  TAUPERISM.  95 

ventured  to  stigmatise  as  replete  with  cruelty  ;  and  draws  from  his  oh- 
servation  a  conclusion  which  cannot  but  be  gratifying  to  every  candid 
and  generous  mind  : — 

"  I  wanted  to  talk  with  you  on  the  almost  magical  effect  I  find  produced 
by  the  new  poor  laws  in  the  south.  There  I  had  seen  the  evil  in  its 
'riotings.'  I  saw  no  chance  but  ruin  or  change — prompt,  effectual, 
decided,  radical  change.  I  began  to  fear  the  thing  had  been  pushed 
too  far,  the  remedy  too  long  deferred  ;  but  I  am  perfectly  delighted  to 
find  that  I  was  mistaken.  The  change  has  been  nuide,  and  the  effect  is 
more  than  any  one  could  have  hoped.  I  have  in  my  professional  en- 
gagement as  Assistant  Tithe  Commissioner,  been  much  in  Sussex  and 
the  Weald  of  Kent.  I  have  seen  the  effect  on  the  poor-rates,  the 
character  of  the  population,  the  improvement  of  the  land — such  a 
change  !  I  have  talked  with  all  sorts  of  persons,  of  all  sorts  of  opinions 
on  other  subjects,  and  have  heard  but  one  opinion  on  this — that  the 
measure  has  saved  the  country. 

"  I  am  sick  of  the  pitiful  cry  attempted  to  be  raised  against  the 
measure,  and  especially  at  the  supposed  inhumanity  of  it.  Let  any 
man  see  the  straightforward  walk,  the  upright  look  of  the  labourer,  as 
contrasted  with  what  was  before  seen  at  every  step  in  those  counties. 
The  sturdy  and  idle  nuisance  lias  already  become  the  useful  industrious 
member  of  society.  No  man  who  has  not  looked  well  into  human  nature 
and  the  practical  working  of  the  wretched  system  of  pauperism,  can  form 
an  idea  how  different  is  sixpence  earned  by  honest  industry,  and  six- 
pence wrung  from  the  pay-table  of  a  parish  officer.  I  am  fully  con- 
vinced that  the  measure  has  doubled  the  value  of  property  in  many 
parts  of  the  kingdom. 

"  This  is  important ;  but  'pounds,  shillings,  and  pence  will  not  mea- 
sure the  value  of  the  change  in  character  which  is  already  visible,  and 
which  I  am  well  convinced  will  develop  itself  more  and  more." 