


CHAP.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  107 

through  the  assistance  of  relation.'^,  has  a  chiim  for  support  on  tlic  ])arlih 
in  which  he  has  the  right  of  a  hurgher  or  a  heisitzer.  If  a  man  is  too 
poor  to  purchase  the  right  of  a  heisitzer,  he  is  assigned  as  such  hy  the 
police  of  some  parish,  without  payment  of  any  fine  of  admission.  The 
care  of  the  poor  is  carried  by  the  government  to  such  an  extent,  that  if 
in  times  of  scarcity  any  person  shouUl  perish  through  the  negh'ct  of  the 
overseers,  the  officers  guilty  of  that  neglect  would  be  prosecuted  with 
rigour. 

"  A  large  proportion  of  the  parishes  throughout  the  kingdom  possess 
a  fund  called  jjium  corpus,  arising  partly  from  voluntary  contributions 
and  other  casual  receipts,  but  principally  from  funds  which,  before  the 
Reformation,  had  been  employed  for  the  purposes  of  the  Roman  Catholic 
worship,  and  instead  of  being  confiscated  by  the  government,  as  was  the 
case  in  England,  were  directed  to  be  employed  for  charitable  purposes. 
In  the  year  1817,  and  during  the  dearth  that  prevailed  at  that  time,  an 
old  law  which  had  fallen  into  desuetude  was  revived,  according  to  which 
the  opulent  who,  after  having  been  applied  to  for  voluntary  contributions, 
should  not  come  forward  in  a  manner  suitable  to  their  property,  are  to 
be  taxed  by  the  magistrates  in  a  sum  conformable  to  their  income,  and 
according  to  all  the  circumstances  of  their  situation," 

Able-bodied  persons  who  claim  support  from  the  public  funds  are 
compelled  to  work  for  moderate  wages.  It  is  sometimes  difficult  to  find 
employment  for  the  poor,  on  which  account  there  are  in  the  capital  and 
some  other  places  public  establishments  for  employing  them  in  spinning 
and  similar  work.  In  most  of  the  towns  there  are  poor-houses  into 
which  aged  and  infii-ra  people  are  received  ;  and,  where  such  places  of 
refuge  are  not  provided,  the  poor  are  received  at  all  the  houses  in  the 
town  in  turn,  or  else  are  put  out  to  board  permanently  at  some  private 
house,  the  cost  of  their  maintenance  being  defrayed  out  of  the  local 
funds. 

Tlie  statement  from  which  the  foregoing  particulars  have  been  derived 
was  drawn  up  by  order  of  the  Wurtemberg  government  in  1834,  at  the 
request  of  the  English  minister.  At  the  conclusion  of  this  statement  we 
find  the  following  remarks,  which  seem  to  favour  the  opinion  that  the 
evils  which  have  been  experienced  in  this  country  are  inseparable  from 
the  system  of  establishing  a  legal  claim  for  relief  on  the  part  of  the  able- 
bodied  poor. 

"  If  we  now  compare  the  situation  of  one  of  the  poorest  of  the  "Wur- 
temberg poor  who  support  themselves  independently  by  their  labour, 
with  that  of  one  of  the  more  favoured  among  the  "Wurtemberg  poor  who 
lives  by  public  charity,  for  instance  the  inmate  of  a  hospital  and  even  of 
a  prison,  it  might  certainly  appear  that  the  condition  of  the  latter  is 
preferable  to  that  of  the  former. 