

The  aged  and  helpless  poor  are  provided  for  in  houses  of  iwurishment. 
Other  paupers,  who  are  incapable  of  working,  but  who  yet  do  not  re- 
quire any  extraordinary  care,  obtain  relief  in  money,  which,  however, 
is  not  given  without  complete  proof  of  want  being  brought  forward  ;  the 
amount  is  made  to  depend  upon  the  price  of  provisions.  The  able- 
bodied  paupers  are  maintained  in  buildings  which  are  strictly  work- 


cuAF.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  109 

houses  ;  bad  conduct  and  idleness  on  tlicir  part  are  piuiislied  by  the 
magistrates.  Marriage  is  not  allowed  between  jjcople  without  capital, 
unless  with  the  previous  permission  of  those  who  manage  the  poor  insti- 
tution of  the  district.  Clergymen  who  marry  such  people  without  that 
permission  are  liable  for  their  maintenance  in  case  of  their  becoming 
chargeable.  This  restriction  is  assigned  as  one  great  cause  of  the  want 
of  any  excess  of  population  in  Bavaria,  and  of  the  general  absence  of 
extreme  poverty  and  misery  in  that  country. 

Labourers  are  paid  at  the  rate  of  Sd.  per  day  in  the  country,  and 
from  8(/.  to  Is.  Ad.  in  the  towns. 

The  Canton  of  Berne  is  the  only  other  community  in  Europe  in  w  hieh 
the  inhabitants  have  a  legal  claim  to  support  when  in  poverty.  So  early 
as  the  17th  century,  it  there  became  the  law,  that  every  one  w\as  entitled 
to  receive  such  support  out  of  the  public  property  of  the  commune  to 
which  he  belonged ;  and,  if  this  property  should  fall  short  of  the  required 
amount,  then  from  the  landed  proprietors  of  the  commune,  as  well  as 
from  contributions  levied  upon  the  possessors  of  personal  property. 

The  abuses  which  have  grown  up  under  this  system  are  numerous 
and  serious.  Vagabondage,  improvidence,  imprudent  marriages,  and 
the  illicit  commei'ce  of  tlie  sexes,  have  all  been  favoured  by  the  prospect 
which  the  people  have  of  being  able  to  devolve  the  consequences  of  these 
delinquencies  upon  others.  All  means  of  obtaining  instruction  in 
general  knowledge,  and  of  acquiring  any  useful  art,  have  been  neg- 
lected ;  the  physical  and  intellectual  faculties  of  the  people  have  been 
deadened,  and  their  sense  of  honest  pride  has  been  so  blunted,  that  no 
one  blushes  at  being  know^n  to  live  upon  the  public  benevolence.  Expe- 
rience has  clearly  shown  that  the  number  of  poor  has  increased  in  pro- 
portion as  the  number  and  amount  of  the  resources  for  their  relief  have 
been  multiplied,  and  that  in  those  communes  which  possess  the  largest 
revenues  applicable  to  that  purpose,  the  population  is  the  most  back- 
ward, and  the  least  industrious.  In  the  answer  given  to  the  queries 
of  our  Poor  Law  Commissioners  by  the  government  of  the  Canton,  we 
find  it  stated  that  "  numerous  examples  might  be  cited  where  whole 
families  have  lived  in  dependence  upon  the  commune  from  year  to  year, 
and  even  from  generation  to  generation,  and  who  have  found  in  that 
resource  their  means  of  existence,  while  examples  of  a  contrary  nature 
are  extremely  rare." 