

It  appears  that  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the  funds  raised  for  charit- 
able purposes  is  disbursed  in  the  towns.  The  total  amount  of  money 
thus  raised  in  1833,  in  the  different  departments,  was  14,560,183  francs 
(582,407/.),  of  which  sum  nearly  three-fourths  were,  as  we  have  seen, 
appropriated  to  the  poor  in  the  principal  towns,  the  population  of  which 
is  to  the  rural  population  in  the  proportion  of  7  to  25,  According  to 
Mens,  de  Chateauvieux,  the  greater  part  of  the  mt)ney  raised  in  the 
departments  for  the  maintenance  of  the  poor,  and  wliich  is  not  disbursed 
in  the  large  towns,  is  applied  in  the  small   towns  and  villages  to  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  1 1  I 

support  of  lunatic  asylums  and  foundling  hospitals.  With  this  partial 
exception,  France  is  without  any  public  provision  for  the  relief  of  its 
rural  poor,  and  it  becomes,  therefore,  highly  interesting  to  inquire  in 
what  manner  so  large  a  number  of  our  fellow-creatures  are  enabled  to 
meet  the  ills  and  accidents  of  life. 

In  order  to  pursue  this  inquiry  to  any  satisfactory  result,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  explain  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  wdiich  the  agrieultural 
population  is  placed  by  the  operation  of  the  law  which  ordains  the 
division  of  landed  property  among  all  the  children  of  the  family.  In  the 
"  Documents  Statisques  '  of  the  French  government,  it  is  stated  that 
the  total  number  of  proprietors  throughout  the  kingdom  is  10,896,682, 
giving  an  average  of  about  4^  hectares,  or  llj  English  acres  for  each 
proprietor.  But  there  is  reason  for  supposing  that  the  number  thus 
given  is  greatly  exaggerated  by  the  custom  of  registering  proprietors  for 
each  separate  commune  in  which  they  possess  property,  by  which  means 
the  same  person  may  be  reckoned  several  times  over.  It  is  besides 
obvious  that,  as  the  soil  is  not  equally  distributed  among  the  whole  body 
of  proprietors,  and  some  of  them  are  in  possession  of  estates  of  consider- 
able extent,  many  others  must  have  even  less  than  the  small  share  which 
would  result  from  its  equal  division.  In  fact,  it  will  be  found  that  the 
great  majority  are  unable  to  draw  from  their  possessions  sufficient  for 
the  subsistence  of  their  families.  Hence  it  arises  that  a  very  large  pro- 
portion of  proprietors  let  their  land,  and  hire  themselves  as  farm- 
servants  to  others,  or  follow  some  trade  or  handicraft  in  the  towns.  It  is 
also  common  among  the  families  of  these  peasant  proprietors,  that  on 
the  death  of  a  father  leaving  several  children,  among  whom  the  law 
provides  for  the  equal  distribution  of  the  land,  an  arrangement  is  made, 
under  which,  although  the  whole  number  are  registered  as  proprietors, 
which  it  is  their  pride  to  be,  the  management  of  the  property  is  left  in 
the  hands  of  one,  by  whom  a  pecuniary  allowance  is  made  to  the  rest 
according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case. 