

It  appears  that  under  the  existing  system  pauperism  has  increased  in 
Sweden  in  a  greater  ratio  than  the  population,  and  it  is  feared  that  the 
moral  efTeft  produced  upon  the  labouring  class  by  the  existence  of  a  fund 
upon  which  they  have  a  legal  claim  has  occasioned,  although  not  in  an 
equal  degree,  many  of  those  evils  which  the  same  system  has  brought 
about  in  England.  The  daily  wages  of  artisans  are  Is.  Id.,  and  of 
skilled  agricultural  labourers  Id.  or  8c?.,  while  the  unskilled  obtain  no 
more  than  ^d.  or  4f/.  Famihcs  can  subsist  upon  their  earnings.  Agri- 
culturists m  the  southern  provinces  live  upon  salt  fish  and  potatoes  ; 
in  the  northern  provinces  porridge  and  rye-bread  form  their  food. 
Artisans  sometimes  are  able  to  procure  a  little  meat.  The  annual 
expenditure  in  the  family  of  a  small  farmer  is  stated  by  Mr.  Liddell, 
the  English  consul  at  Gottenburg,  at  10/.  I85.  lOc/.  In  an  agricultural 
family  the  disbursements  are  about  two-tliirds  of  this  amount. 

The  social  condition  of  Russia,  where  the  great  bulk  of  the  people 
are  kept  in  a  state  of  serfdom  by  the  owners  of  the  soil,  is  so  little 
analogous  to  that  of  England,  that  it  would  throw  but  little  light  upon 
our  subject  to  explain  the  regulations  enforced  in  that  country  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  poor. 

In  Denmark  each  Kiobstaed,  or  market  town  (of  which  there  are  65 
in  the  kingdom),  and  each  parish  in  the  country,  forms  a  district  for  the 
management  of  its  own  poor.  All  persons  are  considered  entitled  to 
relief  "  who  are  unable  with  their  own  labour  to  earn  the  means  of 
subsistence,  and  thus,  without  the  help  of  others,  would  be  deprived  of 
the  absolute  necessaries  of  life." 

The  persons  to  whom  relief  is  given  are  divided  into  three  classes  : 
first — aged,  sick,  and  infirm  persons ;  second — oi'phans,  foundlings,  de- 
serted children,  and  the  children  of  parents  who  are  unable  to  support 
them ;  third — families  or  single  persons  who  are  unable  to  earn  a  suf- 
ficiency for  the  support  of  themselves  or  their  children. 

Paupers  of  the  first  class  are  provided  with  food,  lodging,  clothing, 
and  medical  attendance,  either  in  private  dwellings  or  in  establishments 
belonging  to  the  parishes.  Children  are  placed  in  private  families, 
wliere  they  are  brought  up  and  educated  at  the  expense  of  the  parish 
until  they  can  be  apprenticed  or  otherwise  placed  out  in  life.  Paupers 
of  the  third  class  are  so  relieved  that  they  may  not  be  without  the 
absolute  necessaries  of  life,  but  they  are  compelled  to  work  to  the  best 
of  their  ability  for  their  maintenance.  It  is  part  of  the  duty  of  those 
by  whom  the  system  is  administered  to  find  work  for  the  poor  at  the 