


cuAi'.  IV]  PAUPERISM.  lO-j 

Avitli  dislike  and  reluctance."  Among  the  disadvantages  attendant  upon 
the  system  of  compulsory  relief,  !Mr.  Browne  mentions  the  weakening  of 
principles  of  frugality,  the  encouragement  of  early  and  thoughtless 
marriages ;  the  hringing  up  of  children  with  examples  of  indolence  and 
inactivity  continually  before  their  eyes,  and  the  w(;akening  of  the  natural 
dependence  and  affection  of  parent,  children,  and  other  relatives.  "  The 
child  feels  his  parent  comparatively  needless  to  him,  he  obtains  support 
elsewhere,  and  the  parent  feels  the  obligation  to  support  his  child  greatly 
diniinished.  In  short,  being  comparatively  independent  of  each  other, 
the  affections  must  inevitably  become  blunted." 

A  man,  with  a  wife  and  four  children,  who  work  every  day  of  the 
week,  including  Sunday,  earn  among  them  about  twelve  shillings  sterling 
per  W'cek.  The  principal  food  of  the  labouring  people  is  rye-bread, 
groats,  potatoes,  coffee,  butter,  cheese,  and  milk  ;  provisions  are  cheap, 
and  with  prudence  and  economy,  the  earnings  of  a  family  are  sufficient 
for  their  subsistence. 

In  Mecklenburg,  also,  every  pauper  has  a  legal  claim  to  assistance. 
The  old  and  impotent  are  provided  with  food,  lodging,  and  fuel,  and 
able-bodied  persons  can  claim  to  have  work  and  a  dwelling  provided 
for  them.  Every  inhabitant  able  to  do  so  is  obliged  to  pay  poor-rates. 
In  towns,  the  subscriptions  are  called  voluntary,  but  if  these  should  fall 
short  of  what  the  overseers  consider  proper,  they  can  demand  more  :  the 
overseers  are  appointed  by  the  magistrates.  The  wages  of  artisans  vary 
from  7s.  to  10s.  6r/.  per  week  in  towns,  and  are  about  a  third  less  in  the 
country.  In  addition  to  money-wages,  working  men  are  boarded  and 
lodged  by  their  employers.  Labourers  in  the  country  are  paid  3*.  Q)d. 
per  week,  and  have  found  for  them  a  dwelling  with  a  garden,  pasture 
for  a  cow  and  two  sheep  in  summer,  and  provender  for  them  in  winter. 
With  these  advantages  they  are  enabled  to  procure  a  sufficiency  of  good 
sound  food,  and  occasionally  to  indulge  in  the  use  of  meat,  which  falls 
to  the  lot  of  the  working  classes  in  very  few  of  the  countries  on  the  con- 
tinent of  Europe. 

In  Prussia,  the  law  prescribes  that  every  town  and  every  village  com- 
munity must  support  its  own  members  when  in  distress,  provided  there 
are  no  relations  able  to  do  so.  The  owners  of  estates  are  under  a  similar 
obligation ;  so  that  the  sick,  and  those  who  are  impotent  through  age, 
have  all  their  absolute  wants  satisfied.  Each  town  and  village  is 
governed  by  its  own  particular  laws  and  customs,  with  regard  to  the 
management  of  the  poor.  The  only  point  in  which  all  these  communities 
can  be  said  to  agree,  is  in  the  appointment  of  a  body  called  the  armcii- 
direction,  or  society  for  the  poor,  who  undertake  the  collection  and 
distribution  of  the  funds,  and  of  the  different  sub-committees  to  whom, 
under  the  armcndirection,  the  care  of  the  poor  is  confided.     The  sub- 