


106  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [sec.  i. 

committees  are  formed  of  burgliers  chosen  from  different  districts  called 
armcnbczirhc,  into  ^vhicll  tlie  town  is  divided  for  that  purpose. 

The  necessary  funds  arc  obtained  principally  by  means  of  donations 
and  private  charity.  Every  householder,  every  inhabitant  of  a  floor,  or 
of  a  single  room,  is  visited  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  subscriptions 
by  the  sub-committees.  These  donations  are  collected  monthly,  and 
thoir  amoimt  depends  entirely  upon  the  means  and  disposition  of  the 
donor.  No  rate  or  fixed  table  exists  by  which  the  sum  to  be  given  is 
regulated.  There  is  not  any  law  in  Prussia  which  authorizes  the  com- 
pulsory raising  of  funds  for  the  maintenance  of  the  poor ;  but  when  the 
olferings  of  private  charity  are  insuflacient  for  the  purpose,  the  general 
government  advances  money  from  funds  destined  to  other  purposes,  such 
as  paving,  lighting,  or  the  construction  of  roads. 

The  particular  circumstances  of  every  one  applying  for  relief  being 
almost  necessarily  known  to  some  of  the  members  of  the  sub-committee 
of  the  district  in  which  the  applicant  must  be  resident,  false  or  fraudulent 
applications  are  easily  detected ;  every  one  is  examined  by  a  medical 
man,  with  respect  to  his  bodily  and  mental  ability  to  maintain  himself, 
and  in  cases  where  this  ability  exists,  the  applicant  is  required  by  the 
police  to  -work.  Failing  to  comply  with  this  demand,  he  is  sent  to  the 
poor  workhouse  of  the  province,  where  he  is  compelled  to  be  hidustrious, 
and  is  taught  to  earn  a  livelihood.  Each  province  in  Prussia  contains 
one  of  these  workhouses,  in  which  paupers  are  employed  at  various  kinds 
of  work  and  service,  according  to  what  each  is  capable  of  performing. 
The  statements  given  in  the  Appendix  to  the  Report  of  the  Poor  Law 
Commissioners,  relative  to  the  effects  of  the  institutions  that  have  been 
described,  are  not  in  strict  agreement  with  one  another  ;  it  appears, 
however,  to  be  pretty  well  established,  "  that  the  pauper  possesses  a  legal 
right  to  assistance,  although  that  right  is  seldom  enforced,  because  the 
impotent  are  voluntarily  provided  for,  and  the  able-bodied  would  pro- 
bably be  sent  to  a  penal  workhouse." 

The  kingdom  of  Wurtemberg  is  among  the  countries  whose  inha- 
bitants possess  a  legal  claim  to  be  provided  with  the  necessaries  of  life 
from  the  general  funds  of  the  community.  The  population  is  divided 
into  the  two  classes  of  burgliers  and  settled  non-freemen,  or  heisitzers, 
in  the  proportions  of  about  nine-tenths  of  the  former,  and  one-tenth  of 
the  latter.  Burghers  become  so  by  inheritance  or  by  purchase,  and 
enjoy  the  right  of  participating  in  the  revenues  of  proj)erty  held  by  the 
particular  district  or  parish  to  which  they  belong.  Persons  may  become 
beisitzers  by  payment  of  a  smaller  sum  than  is  required  to  obtain 
hurgcrrccld^  but  they  do  not  by  that  means  acquire  any  interest  in  the 
property  just  alluded  to.  Every  person,  however,  Who  cannot  obtain 
the  necessaries  of  life  from  his  property,  his  labour,  or  his  trade,  nor 