


ItJi  riiOGllESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [siic.  .i 

usual  rate  of  Wciges  ;  where  the  amount  earned  is  insufficient,  assistance 
is  afforded,  not  in  money,  but  in  articles  of  food  and  clothing. 

The  Danish  law  has  established  the  principle,  ihat  every  person 
receiving  relief  under  the  Poor  Laws  is  bouad,  either  with  his  property 
or  his  labour,  to  refund  the  amount  disbursed  for  him.  On  relief  being 
afforded  to  a  pauper,  an  inventory  and  appraisement  of  his  effects  are 
made,  and  these,  after  having  been  marked  with  a  stamp,  are  delivered 
over  to  him  for  his  use  ;  any  person  who  receives  goods  so  marked,  either 
by  way  of  purchase  or  pledge,  must  restore  them  or  pay  their  value, 
and  is  besides  subject  to  fine.  The  parish  has  also  a  claim  upon  pro- 
l)erty  acquired  subsequent  to  the  granting  of  relief,  and  is  the  legal  heir 
to  the  effects  of  every  one  for  whom  it  is  under  advances.  Whenever 
a  person  refuses  to  pay  his  debt  to  the  parish  by  instalments,  he  may  be 
compelled  to  work  for  the  benefit  of  the  same,  and  if  he  attempts  to 
leave  the  parish  he  is  imprisoned.  The  amount  of  these  instalments  is 
awarded  in  proportion  to  the  means  of  the  pauper,  by  commissioners. 
Begging  is  prohibited,  and  when  committed  is  punished  by  imprisonment. 

The  money  required  for  relieving  paupers  is  contributed  to  a  paro- 
chial fund  by  householders,  landowners,  tradesmen,  and  even  by  servants 
and  labouring  mechanics ;  in  short,  by  all  persons  who  are  not  them- 
selves receiving  parish  aid,  and  who  can  contrive  to  pay  anything  without 
depriving  themselves  of  the  necessaries  of  life. 

The  introduction  of  this  system  into  Denmark  is  of  recent  date :  it 
did  not  come  into  operation  until  1803.  The  means,  therefore,  are  in 
our  hands  for  drawing  a  comparison  between  the  condition  of  the  poor 
and  of  the  country  generally  as  affected,  by  poor-laws,  and  that  condition 
as  it  existed  previous  to  their  adoption. 

It  is  stated,  that  before  the  introduction  of  the  present  Poor  Law 
system,  distress  among  the  poor  was  much  gi-eater  than  it  has  been 
since,  and  that  begging,  which  is  now  prevented,  was  then  quite  common 
throughout  the  country,  and  was  carried  on  in  the  most  rapacious  and 
importunate  form,  so  as  to  amount  to  a  heavy  exaction  on  the  peasantry, 
as  well  as  a  most  intolerable  annoyance  ;  for  "  the  beggars,  when  their 
demands  were  not  satisfied,  had  recourse  to  insolence  and  threats,  nay, 
even  to  acts  of  criminal  vengeance.  This  is  no  longer  the  case,  and  in 
so  far,  therefore,  the  present  system  has  been  beneficial."  ISlr.  Browne, 
our  Secretary  of  Legation  at  the  Court  of  Copenhagen,  gives,  however, 
a  not  very  satisfactory  account  of  the  working  of  the  system,  and  states 
that  it  has  produced  a  most  injurious  effect  upon  the  industry  of  the 
people  ;  that  it  has  lowered  the  middle  men  to  be  poor  men,  and  that 
it  has  converted  the  labouring  poor  into  paupers.  "  It  tends,"  says  Mr. 
Browne,  "  to  harden  the  heart  of  the  poor  man,  who  demands  with  all 
that  authority  with  which  the  legal  right  to  provision  invests  him. 
There  is  no  thankfulness  for  what  is  gotten,  and  what  is  given  is  afforded. 