

"  In  fact,  we  often  see  such  hospital  inmates,  and  even  prisoners, 


108  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

attain  tlic  most  advanced  age,  while  many  a  poor  day-labourer  and 
artisan  sinks  at  a  much  earlier  age  under  the  weight  of  his  cares  and 
the  want  of  necessaries.  Many  an  inmate  of  a  hospital  and  many  a 
prisoner,  even  with  bodily  infirmities  and  sufTorings,  still  seems  to  find 
his  condition  quite  comfortable,  and  shows  himself  thankful  for  the  good 
he  enjoys,  while  many  a  day-labourer  or  artisan,  in  the  enjoyment  of 
good  bodily  health,  feels  himself  miserable  and  curses  his  existence  ;  in 
fact,  many  a  one  seeks  admission  into  the  hospital  wlio  would  be  very 
well  able  to  provide  himself  with  necessaries  by  his  work  at  homo.  Tiie 
man  often  separates  from  his  wife,  or  the  wife  from  her  husband  or  from 
the  children  to  be  received  into  the  hospital.  Many  a  one  does  not 
economise,  but  squanders  what  he  has,  and  does  not  work  in  order  to 
earn  something,  because  he  thinks  that  he  always  has  the  right  of  being 
received  into  the  hospital  as  a  last  resource.  In  many  places,  where 
there  are  rich  hos])itals  and  other  foundations,  the  number  of  the  poor  is 
proportionally  greater  than  in  places  where  less  is  done  for  their  support ; 
many  a  one  continues  to  beg  and  to  steal  w^ho  has  already  been  fre- 
quently imprisoned  for  these  offences,  because  he  finds  his  situation  in 
the  workhouse  very  tolerable  in  comparison  with  the  laborious  life  of  a 
poor  man  at  liberty." 

The  wages  of  artisans  are  in  towns  from  1  to  2g  florins  {Is.  8d.  to 
45.  2c?.),  and  in  the  country  from  4rd  of  a  florin  to  1  florin  (6|c?.  to  Is.  8d.) 
per  week,  in  addition  to  food  and  lodging.  Labourers,  who  are  likewise 
most  commonly  fed  and  lodged  by  their  employers,  receive  in  towns 
from  50  to  60  florins  (4/.  3s.  4d.  to  5^.)  and  in  villages  from  20  to  40 
florins  {11.  ISs.  Ad.  to  3/.  Qs.  Sd.)  per  annum.  AVhen  they  provide 
themselves  with  food  and  lodging,  they  receive  150  florins  (12/.  10^.) 
per  annum  ;  in  addition  to  which  they  are  furnished  with  food  and  fuel 
in  the  winter  under  the  market  price.  The  wife  and  children  may  earn 
from  40  to  50  florins  more.  With  these  means  they  can  provide  a 
sufficiency  of  wholesome  food,  including  meat  once  or  twMce  in  the  week. 

Every  town  and  village  in  Bavaria  must  have  an  institution  for  the 
relief  of  the  poor,  with  this  exception,  that  if  several  neighbouring 
villages  join  to  support  one  establishment  for  that  purpose  in  common, 
every  encouragement  is  given  to  them  for  that  end.  All  the  inhabitants 
are  bound  to  contribute  to  the  support  of  the  poor  in  their  district  ac- 
cording to  their  ability ;  every  one  is  also  bound  in  the  same  manner  to 
su])port  his  poor  relations. 