

In  Norway  relief  is  furnished  to  the  "  impotent  through  age,  cripples, 
and  others  mIio  cannot  subsist  themselves,  and  who,  in  the  country 
districts,  are  billeted  or  quartered  on  such  of  the  inhabitants  (house  and 
land-holders  in  the  parish)  as  have  the  means  of  providing  for  them. 
By  them  these  distressed  objects  are  furnished  with  clothing  and  food, 
and  they  are  in  return  expected  to  perform  such  light  services  as  they 
can.  Li  the  distribution  respect  is  had  to  the  extent  or  value  of  the 
different  farms,  and  to  the  number  of  the  indigent,  which  varies  greatly 
in  different  parishes.  In  some  they  have  so  few  poor,  that  only  one 
pauper  falls  to  the  lot  of  five  or  six  farmers,  who  then  take  him  in  rota- 
tion ;  whilst  in  other  parishes  they  have  a  pauper  quartered  on  every 
f^irm  or  estate  all  the  year  round,  and  on  the  larger  ones  several."  The 
wages  of  artisans  vary  from  55.  4c?.  to  7s.  2d.  per  week,  and  of  agricul- 
tural labourers  from  3d.  to  5hd.  per  day ;  in  the  former  case  food, 
lodging,  and  tools,  and  in  the  latter  case,  food  only  being  supphed  by 
the  employers.  In  ordinary  cases,  families  can  subsist  upon  their  earn- 
ings. They  consume  very  simple  food,  salt  herrings,  oatmeal  porridge, 
potatoes,  and  coarse  oatmeal  bread,  forming  the  greatest  part  of  their 
diet ;  once  or  twice  in  the  week  they  may  obtain  a  piece  of  bacon  or  salt 
meat,  and  those  who  live  on  the  coast,  or  near  to  rivers  and  lakes,  pro- 
cure fresh  fish.     Corn- brandy  is  in  general  use. .' 

Every  parish  in  Sweden  is  bound,  as  in  England,  to  support  its  OMm 
poor,  but  the  fund  for  that  purpose  is  supplied  by  voluntary  contribu- 
tions (a  large  portion  of  which  is  made  up  of  legacies  and  endowments), 
by  the  produce  of  certain  fines  and  penalties,  and  by  rates  levied  on  the 
inhabitants  in  proportion  to  their  means  of  contributing.  Mons.  de 
Hartsmandorf,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Ecclesiastical  Affairs,  has  stated 
that  the  number  of  persons  who  received  relief  in  1829  was  63,348,  out 
of  a  population  of  2,780,132,  or  about  1  in  42.  Colonel  Forsell,  on 
the  other  hand,  affirms  that  in  1825  the  number  relieved  amounted  to 
544,064,  or  about  1  in  5.  Considering  that  in  the  city  of  Stockholm 
alone  there  are  83  separate  and  independent  boards  for  affording  relief 
to  the  poor,  the  estimate  of  Colonel  lorsell  appears  the  more  probable  of 
the  two.  The  law  is  severe  against  able-bodied  men  who  seek  relief, 
and  who,  if  they  are  without  property  and   employment,  and  neglect  to 


ciiAr.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  103 

provide  themselves  with  any,  or  to  ohtain  sureties  for  the  payment  of 
their  taxes,  are  denominated  unprotected.  Such  persons  are  ]daced 
almost  at  the  disposal  of  the  police,  who  allow  them  a  fixed  period  in 
which  to  ohtain  employment.  If  they  fail  in  this  object  they  are  made 
to  labour  on  ])ublic  works. 