


120  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

The  revenues  of  all  those  situated  in  the  same  commune  were  united 
into  one  fund  for  the  connnon  sup})ort  of  the  whole,  and  in  every  commune 
there  were  appointed  one  or  more  hnrcaux  dc  hievfaisance,  for  adminis- 
tering relief  to  the  poor  in  their  own  houses.  The  administration  of 
each  of  these  bureaux  was  intrusted  to  five  persons,  and  the  funds  placed 
at  their  disposal  consisted  of  a  tax  of  ten  per  cent,  upon  all  public 
exhibitions  made  within  the  commune,  together  with  whatever  voluntary 
contributions  they  could  obtain. 

No  change  of  any  importance  appears  to  have  been  made  by  the  late 
or  present  government  of  Belgium  with  respect  to  the  management  of 
almshouses  or  bureaux  de  bienfaisance.  The  regulations  decreed  by 
the  French  Convention  for  the  repression  of  mendicity  and  vagrancy 
have  received  some  modifications  in  regard  to  the  law  of  settlement,  but 
it  is  not  necessary  to  state  the  particulars  here.  Those  regulations 
provided  that  every  person  found  begging  should  be  sent  to  his  ])lace  of 
domicile  ;  if  he  could  not  prove  any  domicile,  he  was  to  be  imprisoned 
for  a  year  ;  and  if  at  the  end  of  his  imprisonment  his  domicile  were 
still  unascertained,  he  was  to  be  transported  to  the  colonies  for  not  less 
than  eight  years.  A  person,  who  after  being  removed  to  his  domicile 
should  again  be  found  begging,  was  to  be  imprisoned  for  a  year,  and 
on  a  repetition  of  the  offence  the  punishment  was  to  be  doubled.  During 
imprisonment  he  was  to  be  set  to  work,  and  receive  monthly  one-sixth 
of  the  produce  of  his  labour,  and  at  the  end  of  his  imprisonment  another 
sixth :  the  remaining  two-thirds  was  to  belong  to  the  establishment  in 
which  he  was  confined.  For  the  third  offence  beggars  were  to  be  trans- 
ported. A  person  transported  was  to  work  in  the  colonies  for  the  benefit 
of  the  nation,  at  one-sixth  the  average  rate  of  wages  of  the  colony.  No 
person  was  to  be  transported  under  18  or  above  60  years  of  age.  Those 
under  18  were  to  be  detained  until  they  arrived  at  that  age,  when  they 
were  to  be  transported  ;  and  those  above  60  were  to  be  imprisoned  for 
life.  By  another  provision  every  person  convicted  of  having  given  any 
species  of  relief  whatever  to  a  beggar  was,  for  the  first  offence,  to  forfeit 
the  value  of  two  days'  labour,  and  on  the  repetition  of  the  offence,  this 
forfeit  was  to  be  doubled. 

As  might  have  been  expected,  the  provisions  of  this  decree  were 
found  too  severe  for  execution ;  and  after  having  remained  inoperative 
during  15  years,  the  law  was  replaced  by  the  imperial  decree  of  the  5th 
of  July,  1808. 