


1  18  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

Netherlands,  which  in  1827  included  a  population  of  6,166,854,  con- 
tained, at  that  time,  11,440  charitable  institutions,  which  contributed  to 
the  support  of  1,214,055  individuals,  being  only  a  very  small  fraction 
less  than  one-fifth  of  the  entire  population.  The  sum  expended  for  the 
relief  of  the  poor  in  the  same  year  amounted  to  12,821, 395  florins 
(1,068,450/.).  The  population  of  Holland  in  1827  was  2,307,661,  and 
assuming  that  the  circumstances  of  the  people  were  the  same  in  the 
Dutch  as  in  the  Belgian  provinces,  the  number  who  received  relief  from 
charitable  funds  would  be  454,304,  or  67  times  the  number  then  residing 
in  the  pauper  colonies.  The  number  of  1,214,055,  above  stated,  in- 
cludes the  ])auper  children  wdio  were  receiving  instruction,  and  some 
other  recipients  of  the  bounty  of  their  fellow-citizens,  whom  in  this 
country  we  should  not  exactly  class  as  paupers ;  but  when  allowance  is 
made  for  these,  the  amount  of  pauperism  will  still  remain  of  frightful 
magnitude. 

The  "  pauper  colonies  "  are  described  by  Mr.  Senior  as  "  large  agri- 
cultural workhouses,  and  superior  to  the  previous  workhouses,  only  so 
far  as  they  may  be  less  expensive,  or,  without  being  oppressive,  objects 
of  greater  aversion." 

"  It  is  scarcely  possible,"  he  continues,  "  that  they  can  be  less  ex- 
pensive. The  employing  persons  taken  indiscriminately  from  other 
occupations  and  trades,  almost  all  of  them  the  victims  of  idleness  and 
misconduct,  and  little  urged  by  the  stimulus  of  individual  interest,  in 
farming  the  worst  land  in  the  country — land  so  worthless  that  the  fee- 
simple  of  it  is  worth  only  24.9.  an  acre — at  an  expense  for  outfit,  exclusive 
of  the  value  of  the  land,  of  more  than  130/.  per  family,  and  under  the 
management  of  a  joint-stock  company  of  more  than  20,000  members, 
cannot  but  be  a  ruinous  speculation.  Nor  does  the  institution  appear 
to  have  repressed  pauperism  by  the  disagreeableness  of  the  terms  on 
which  it  offers  relief ;  we  have  seen,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  has  not 
prevented  its  steady  increase." 

The  details  respecting  the  "pauper  colonies"  of  Holland  have  been 
here  given  at  greater  length  than  would  otherwise  have  been  thought 
necessary,  from  the  sanguine  expectations  formed  by  many  persons  in 
England  of  their  success,  and  of  the  advantage  that  might  follow  the 
adoption  of  a  similar  system  in  this  country. 

^Vith  the  exception  of  the  canton  of  Berne,  some  particulars  relating 
to  which  have  been  given,  Holland  appears  to  have  been,  after  our  own 
country,  in  the  worst  position  of  any  nation  in  Eui'ope  in  regard  to  the 
state  of  pauperism.  To  what  is  this  attributable  ?  The  country  is 
densely  peopled,  not  so  densely  as  England  or  Irelanjl  indeed,  but,  with 
the  exception  of  these  countries,  of  some  of  the  Italian  states,  of  Belgium, 
and  of  the  Rhenish  provinces  of  Prussia,  more  thickly  than  any  other 
European  country.     It  is  not  to  this  circumstance,  however,  that  we  are 