

"  What,  in  the  whole,  might  an  average  labourer,  obtaining  an 
average  amount  of  employment,  both  in  day-work  and  in  piece-work, 
expect  to  earn  in  a  year,  including  harvest-work,  and  the  value  of  all 
his  advantages  and  means  of  living? — A  common  labourer  alone  earns 
yearly,  all  advantages  included,  540  francs  (21/.  12a-.).  Owin"-  to  the 
scarcity  of  labourers,  no  distinction  as  to  wages  is  made  between  an 
able-bodied  and  a  common  labourer. 

"  What,  in  the  whole,  might  a  labourer's  wife  and  four  children,  ao-ed 
14,  11,  8,  and  5  years  respectively  (the  eldest  a  boy),  expect  to  earn  in 
a  year,  obtaining,  as  in  the  former  case,  an  average  amount  of  employ- 
ment ? — A  labourer's  wife  and  four  children  can  earn  by  labour  about 
300  francs  (12Z.)  per  annum,  viz. — 

Francs. 

The  wife 120 

Eldest  boy 80 

Child  11  years  old      .     .     .       50 
Child  8        „  ...       30 

Child  5        „  ...       20 

300 

"  Could  such  a  family  subsist  on  the  aggregate  earnings  of  the  father, 
mother,  and  children  ;  and  if  so,  on  what  food  ? — Certainly.  The  food 
varies   in  ditferent    districts.      Throughout   the   district  called   Landcs 


£. 

s. 

d. 

4 

16 

0 

3 

4 

0 

2 

0 

0 

1 

4 

0 

0 

16 

0 

12 

0 

0 

114  PllOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

(licatli),  occupying  about  one-third  of  this  department,  the  food  consists 
of  rye-bread,  soup  made  of  millet,  cakes  made  of  Indian  corn,  now  and 
then  some  salt  provisions  and  \egetables,  rarely,  if  ever,  butcher's  meat ; 
their  drink,  water,  which  for  the  most  part  is  stagnant.  In  the  other 
parts  of  the  department  the  peasantry  live  better.  They  eat  wheaten 
bread,  soup  made  with  vegetables  and  a  little  grease  or  lard,  twice  a 
day,  potatoes  and  other  vegetables,  but  seldom  butcher's  meat ;  their 
drink  is  wine  or  piquette. 

"  Could  it  lay  by  anything,  and  how  much  ? — It  is  certain,  that  a 
iiimily  composed  as  above,  could  lay  something  by  from  their  gains  at 
the  end  of  the  year,  as  the  wants  of  the  lower  classes  are  much  fewer 
than  in  England ;  in  fact,  the  luxuries  of  tea,  &c.,  are  quite  unknown. 
For  the  causes  above  alluded  to  (extreme  carelessness  and  absence  of 
frugality),  few  of  the  peasants  have  any  surplus  at  the  end  of  the  year  ; 
on  the  contrary,  they  are  mostly  in  debt.  The  few  exceptions  may, 
with  ])roper  care,  have  6/.  to  SI.  in  advance  :  this  is  generally  employed 
in  the  purchase  of  a  bit  of  land." 

Those  among  the  labouring  population  of  England  who  have  been 
able  through  industry  and  frugality  to  save  something  out  of  their 
earnings,  have  a  readier,  and,  as  regards  the  community,  a  far  better 
opportunity  for  the  profitable  employment  of  their  money  than  is  oflered 
by  the  "  purchase  of  a  bit  of  land."  The  Savings  Banks,  wliichare  always 
open  to  take  the  smallest  sums,  whenever  they  can  be  spared,  and  to  make 
a  moderate,  but  certain  return  of  interest  on  the  deposits,  offer  a  much 
greater  incentive  to  prudence  than  would  generally  be  found  in  the 
desire  of  acquiring  a  rood  of  ground  ;  besides  which,  the  laws  which 
regulate  the  transfer  and  possession  of  real  property  in  this  kingdom 
are  so  complex  in  their  operation,  and  surrounded  by  so  many  diificul- 
ties,  that  it  would  be  quite  incompatible  with  prudence  for  any  ])oor 
man  to  venture  upon  so  uncertain  a  speculation  as  the  validity  of  a  title, 
if  even  the  expensiveness  of  the  deeds  rendered  such  a  course  possible 
to  him.  The  Savings  Bank,  on  the  contrary,  can  never  involve  those  who 
there  deposit  their  savings  in  any  expense  ;  the  safety  of  the  money  is  for 
the  most  part  guaranteed  by  its  investment  in  public  securities  :  so  long 
as  the  money  continues  in  deposit  it  produces  revenue  to  the  owner,  unac- 
companied by  any  contingencies  of  seasons  ;  and  at  any  moment,  when  the 
amount,  or  any  part  of  it,  is  required  to  meet  any  extraordinary  exigency, 
it  is  forthcoming  without  being  subject  to  any  chai"ge  for  management,  or 
to  deduction  of  any  kind  whatever.  The  degree  in  which  the  labouring 
classes  in  this  country  are  willing  to  avail  themselves  of  this  institution 
is  shown  by  the  fact  that  on  the  '20th  November,  1844,  out  of  1,012,475 
depositors  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  the  large  proportion  of  564,642 
had  made  deposits  under  20/.  The  greater  part  must  indeed  have 
been  depositors  of  very  small  sums,  since  the  amount,  if  equally  divided 