

These  cases  occur  to  so  great  an  extent  throughout  the  kinn-dom 
that  it  is  probable  M.  de  Chatcauvieux  is  correct  in  the  opinion  ex- 
pressed by  him  in  the  paper  so  often  quoted,  that  the  number  of  pro- 
prietors in  actual  possession  and  administration  of  the  soil  does  not 
exceed  four  millions,  representing,  with  their  families,  a  population  of 
twenty  millions,  and  that  of  this  number  of  proprietors,  about  five- 
sixteenths  (1,243,200),  representing  a  population  of  6,126,000  indivi- 
duals, are  owners  of  small  parcels  of  land,  not  any  one  of  which  is 
of  greater  extent  than  two  hectares  (5  acres).  A  farm  of  this  extent 
is  wholly  inadequate  to  the  support  of  a  family,  and  it  is  more  than 
probable,  that  if  France  had  adopted  a  system  of  poor-laws  similar 
to  those  lately  in  force  in  this  country,  these  proprietors  would  speedily 
have  sunk  into  the  rank  of  paupers.  The  means  by  which,  in  the  absence 


112  PROGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [.sec.  i. 

of  such  a  system,  they  have  been  and  are  enabled  to  struggle  through 
life,  are  thus  described  byM.de  Chateauvieu.x : — "The  same  village 
includes  ])roprietors  of  different  grades,  and  in  different  social  positions. 
This  difference  is  observable  between  next-door  neighbours,  and  often 
between  those  even  who  dwell  under  the  same  roof.  The  proprietor 
of  10  liectares  is  the  friend,  the  brother-in-law,  the  uncle,  or  the  nephew 
of  one  who  possesses  only  two.  The  day-labourer  lodges  with  the  opu- 
lent cultivator  by  whom  he  is  employed,  and  the  necessity  which  ti)us 
arises  throughout  the  country  for  mixing  and  communicating  with  each 
other  brings  about  a  connexion  between  them.  Under  these  circum- 
stiinces,  the  wife  of  the  proprietor  of  20  hectares  will  not  leave  her  poor 
neighbour  without  help  at  her  lying-in  ;  her  trunks  being  well  provided 
with  linen,  she  will  lend  it ;  her  saucepan  is  well  fdled,  and  she  will 
provide  her  poor  neighbour  with  broth,  she  will  give  potatoes  to  her 
children,  and  even  bread  if  they  are  without  it.  These  helps,  distri- 
buted in  quantities  which  escape  statistical  remark,  and  througliout  all 
the  rural  districts  of  France,  are  not  given  in  the  form  of  charity,  but  as 
sin-ns  of  aood  neighbourhood  :  they  never  take  the  form  of  money,  but 
onlv  of  articles  needed  at  the  moment.  Those  who  have  been  the  objects 
of  these  good  offices,  return  them  to  the  donors  in  kind  and  according 
to  what  they  possess,  that  is,  with  their  labour  and  their  good  will.  If 
a  proprietor  stands  in  need  of  assistance,  either  for  removing  a  large 
piece  of  timber,  or  to  house  his  sheaves,  when  the  storm  threatens,  in  a 
moment  the  shoemaker  and  the  saddler  quit  their  shops,  and  all  run  to 
place  their  exertions  at  the  disposal  of  the  farmer,  who,  by  this  means, 
stores  his  harvest  in  safety,  a  glass  of  cider  sufficing  as  payment  for  the 
service. 