

"  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  even  the  smallest  proprietors  have 
each  a  home  which  is  their  own  ;  that  their  bit  of  land,  however  limited, 
will  always  produce  some  fruits  and  vegetables  for  the  family  use ;  that 
they  can  generally  keep  a  goat,  and  very  frequently  rear  a  few  vines, 
])ossessing,  in  fact,  as  much  which  is  their  own  property,  as  the  peasant 
in  Ireland  can  only  procure  for  a  rent  of  five  guineas.  Notwithstand- 
ing the  breaches  which  the  Revolution  has  made  in  the  property  of  the 
communes,  many  of  these  still  possess  woods  and  commons,  which  are 
devoted  to  the  use  of  the  inhabitants. 

"  It  is  a  very  general  custom  throughout  France,  to  give  day-labourers 
small  plots  of  ground  to  cultivate  with  green  crops,  on  the  condition  of 
yielding  half  the  produce  to  the  proprietors,  the  expenses  of  cultivation, 
with  the  exception  of  the  labour,  being  contributed  in  equal  proportions. 
The  plan  most  usually  adopted  is  to  give  up  the  land  in  the  winter  to 
the  labourers^  under  the  condition  of  its  being  restored  in  the  beginning 
of  October  in  a  condition  to  be  sown  with  corn.  The  advantage  of  the 
proprietor  in  this  practice  is,  that,  sacrificing  half  a  crop,  he,   without 


cii.vr.  iv]  PAUPERISM  113 

any  trouble  to  hinisolf,  receives  his  land  carefully  cleaned  and  weeded 
ready  for  employment." 

This  system  doubtless  has  its  advantages,  and  it  is  not  anions'  the 
least  of  them,  that  it  enables  the  poorer  classes  of  the  rural  population 
to  struggle  through  existence  without  the  kind  and  degree  of  help  which 
is  atibrded  by  the  Poor  Law  system  of  England.  These  advantages 
are,  however,  accompanied  by  the  very  serious  drawback,  that  they  tend 
to  make  and  to  keep  the  people  poor.  In  this  country,  durin"-  the  last 
half  century,  we  have  seen  a  totally  different  plan  pursued ;  the  num- 
ber of  smaller  proprietoi-s  is  everywhere  greatly  lessened,  and  in  some 
districts  they  have  entirely  disappeared ;  the  yeoman,  if  he  has  not  by 
prudence  and  industry  been  enabled  to  advance  his  position  in  society, 
lias  sunk  into  the  labourer,  and  the  labourer  has  too  fre([uently  deo-ene- 
rated  into  the  pauper  ;  still  it  cannot  be  doubted  that,  by  thus  throwing 
together  several  small  holdings,  and  administering  them  as  one  property, 
the  productiveness  of  the  land  has  been  increased,  and  the  expense  of 
its  cultivation  lessened. 

Independently  of  the  constant  tendency  of  the  law  in  France  to  sub- 
divide the  land  into  minute  portions,  there  appears  to  be  another  power- 
ful cause  working  to  the  same  end  in  the  disposition  and  desires  of  the 
people.  This  fact  is  rendered  strikingly  apparent  by  the  Ibllowino-  re- 
plies given  by  Mr.  Scott,  the  British  Consul  at  Bordeaux,  to  the  queries 
circulated  at  the  instance  of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  : — 