

By  that  decree  each  department  was  directed  to  establish  a  depot  de 
mendicite,  to  which  all  persons  found  begging  were  to  be  arrested  and 
taken.  If  common  vagrants,  they  were  to  be  taken^to  prison.  While 
in  the  depot,  they  were  to  be  kept  under  severe  discipline,  and  made 
to  work  at  wages  to  be  regulated  by  the  prefect  of  the  departnKMit, 
two -thirds  of  their  earnings   Ijelonging   to  the  establishment,  and  the 


CHAP.  iv.J  PAUPERISM.  121 

roinaining  tliinl  to  be  ]);ii(l  to  tliem  on  quitting  the  depot.  The  expense 
of  these  depots,  which  was  at  first  shared  between  the  department  and  tiie 
general  government,  has  since  been  thrown  entirely  iij)on  the  department, 
which,  on  the  other  hand,  receives  the  cost  of  supporting  mendicants  from 
tlic  different  communes  in  which  they  have  their  settlement  (domicile  de 
secours). 

There  are  now  in  Belgium  six  depots  de  mendicite,  one  in  each  of  the 
provinces  of  Antwerp,  Brabant,  Flanders,  and  Hainault;  one  for  Naniur 
and  Luxemboiu'g,  and  one  for  Liege  and  Linibourg.  Almshouses  fur 
the  old  and  indigent,  and  hospitals  for  the  sick,  are  very  numerous,  and 
each  commune  possesses  its  bureau  de  bienfaisance  for  the  distribution 
of  out-door-relief.  The  annual  income  of  these  bureaux  amounted,  in 
1832,  to  212,325/.,  and  of  the  almshouses  to  165,835/.,  making  alto- 
gether 378,160/.  We  have  not  any  data  whence  to  calculate  the  whole 
sum  expended  for  relief  of  the  poor  in  Belgium,  nor  the  number  who 
receive  relief,  nor  are  there  any  means  of  determining  with  accuracy 
the  general  progress  or  diminution  of  pauperism  in  Belgium. 

The  Societe  de  Bienfaisance  Beige  was  established  in  1823,  on  the 
model  of  the  society  which  existed  in  Holland,  for  the  establishment  of 
agricultural  colonies,  and  contracted  with  the  government  to  receive 
1000  paupers  at  the  annual  sum  of  35  florins  (2/.  18^.  M.)  for  each. 
In  consequence  of  this  arrangement  beggars  were  sent  by  the  local 
authorities  either  to  these  colonies  or  to  the  dej)6ts  de  mendicite,  and  of 
late,  if  their  begging  was  unaccompanied  with  aggravating  circum- 
stances, the  previous  imprisonment  adjudged  by  the  penal  code  has  not 
been  inflicted. 

At  first  the  families  sent  to  the  colonies  founded  by  the  Societe  de 
Bienfaisance  were  placed  each  in  a  separate  farm,  on  which  were  a  house, 
barn,  and  stable,  two  cows,  sometimes  sheep,  furniture,  clothes,  and 
other  stock,  of  the  estimated  value,  including  the  land  (about  7i  statute 
acres),  of  133/.  65.  8^/.  sterling,  which  was  charged  against  them  as  a 
debt  due  to  the  society.  The  occupants  were  bound  to  work  at  fixed 
wages,  to  wear  a  uniform,  to  conform  to  certain  rules,  and  not  to  quit 
the  precincts  of  the  colony  without  leave.  A  part  of  their  wan-es  was 
retained  to  pay  the  advance  made  by  the  society,  a  further  portion  to 
pay  for  necessaries  furnished  from  time  to  time  by  the  society,  and  the 
remainder  was  paid  to  them  in  base  coin,  current  only  within  the  colony 
and  which  could  be  expended  only  in  shops  established  by  the  society 
within  its  limits.  It  was  soon  found  that  this  plan  could  not  be  persisted 
in.  The  land  was  badly  cultivated,  and  the  cattle  were  lost  for  want  of 
proper  food  and  attention.  The  society,  therefore,  in  1828,  took  back 
the  surviving  cattle,  and  throwing  all  the  farms  into  one,  employed  all 
the  colonists  indiscriminately  in  its  cultivation.  "  From  this  time,"  says 
Mens.  Ducpe'tiaux,  in  a  report  drawn  up  by  him  in  1832,   "  bound  thus 