


CH.u'.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  llo 

among  the  number  just  mentioned,  would  average  no  more  than 
Gl.  9^.  8d.  for  each.  The  regulations  under  which  Savings  Banks  are 
placed  limit  to  200/.  the  amount  that  can  be  deposited  by  any  one 
individual ;  and,  in  fact,  93  out  of  every  100  depositors  are  entitled  to 
balances  under  100/.,  the  aggregate  sum  of  their  savings  forming  more 
than  two-thirds  of  the  deposits  invested.  The  great  number  of  these 
small  depositors,  and  their  rapid  increase,  forms  one  of  the  best  features 
in  the  apparent  state  and  prospects  of  the  labouring  classes  in  this 
coimtry.  The  progress  of  deposits  in  Savings  Banks,  both  generally 
and  in  respect  of  this  class  of  depositors,  during  the  last  eighteen  years, 
will  be  found  in  the  sixth  section  (Chapter  TI.)  of  this  volume. 

The  following  statement  of  the  regulations  ado})ted  in  Holland, 
relative  to  the  support  of  the  poor,  is  derived  from  an  official  paper 
drawn  up  towards  the  close  of  the  year  1833,  by  order  of  the  Minister 
of  the  Interior  at  the  Hague,  and  communicated  to  the  ]^riti.<h  Minister 
at  that  court. 

At  the  time  of  the  incorporation  of  the  Netherlands  with  the  French 
empire,  the  laws  of  France,  including  those  relating  to  charitable  insti- 
tutions and  hospitals,  were  declared  to  be  in  force  in  the  Dutch  de- 
partments, but  were  only  partially  adopted  ;  and  on  the  separation 
of  the  Netherlands  from  France  in  1814,  a  royal  decree  was  made, 
replacing  the  French  laws  by  others  more  in  accordance  with  the  ancient 
institutions  of  the  country.  The  following  sketch  exhibits  the  i)rincii)al 
features  of  this  system,  as  it  existed  at  the  above-mentioned  date. 

The  principle  invariably  acted  upon  is  that  of  making  the  charge  of 
the  poor  rest,  in  the  first  place,  ui)on  the  different  religious  sects  to 
which  they  belong  in  each  parish.  When  the  means  possessed  by  the 
different  congregations  are  insufficient  for  this  purpose,  the  poor  may 
apply  for  assistance  to  the  local  civil  authorities,  by  whom  relief  is 
generally  affi)rded,  if,  after  due  investigation,  the  parties  applying  are 
found  deserving  objects.  In  several  cities  and  parishes,  a  separate 
administration,  responsible  to  the  municipal  authorities,  is  established 
for  that  portion  of  the  poor  who  are  not  members  of  any  religious 
sect;  in  other  towns  and  parishes  relief  is  afforded  either  by  the 
burgomaster  or  by  an  overseer  of  the  poor  nominated  by  that 
functionary. 

The  hospitals^  and  orphan-houses  are,  for  the  greater  part,  govern- 
ment establishments.  Some  few  are  maintained  either  wholly,  or  in 
part,  by  their  own  revenues.  All  are  admitted  inmates  of  these  esta- 
blishments, without  distinction  as  to  religion.  Foundlings  and  abandoned 
children  are  maintained  at  the  expense  of  the  place  wherein  they  are 
abandoned.  There  are  three  local  workhouses :  one  at  Amsterdam, 
one  at  Middleburgh,  and  one  in  the  commonalty  Nieuwe  Pekel  A,  in 
the   province  of  Groningen,    in   which    paupers  are    received  on  their 