


cuAi:  v.]  EMIGRATION.  133 

There  can  be  no  question  that,  by  ridding  the  community  at  home  of 
its  pestilent  members,  a  great  benefit  is  conferred  upon  all  the  ancII- 
disposed  members  of  society  ;  but  it  by  no  means  follows  that  all  the 
good  is  thus  attained  which  the  operation  might  be  made  to  yield.  It 
is  of  great  and  manifest  advantage  to  remove  from  cities  the  noxious 
matters  which  are  continually  accumulated  within  them  ;  but  we  should 
think  very  little  of  the  wisdom  which  simply  carried  away  the  mass  to 
a  situation  beyond  tlie  point  of  immediate  injury  to  the  inhabitants,  and 
which  there  left,  in  a  profitless  and  inert  condition,  an  agent  susceptible, 
under  other  circumstances,  of  contributing  to  the  support,  the  conve- 
nience, and  the  wealth  of  the  people.  And  yet,  what  more  has  hitherto 
been  done  with  regard  to  that  small  part  of  the  criminals  of  these  king- 
doms wliich  has,  at  an  enormous  expense,  been  sent  to  the  other  side  of 
the  globe?  Although  their  absence  has  doubtless  been  a  blessing  to 
society  in  this  country,  and  in  some  degree  also  a  benefit  to  the  colony 
which  has  received  them,  it  might  be  easily  shown  that,  by  pursuing 
a  different  plan,  the  system  of  transporting  convicts  might  have  been 
made  to  yield  advantages  much  gn;ater  than  it  has  ever  yet  realized. 

The  circumstances  which  must  first  strike  any  person  as  extraordinary 
in  regard  to  the  expatriation  of  criminals  from  this  country  is  the  choice 
of  the  station  to  which  they  have  been  sent.  That  a  country  which, 
like  England,  is  possessed  of  an  almost  boundless  tract  of  unsettled 
fertile  lands  within  four  weeks'  sail  of  her  own  shores,  should  in  pre- 
ference send  her  criminals  to  a  territory  which  cannot  be  reached  in  less 
than  as  many  months,  thus  swelling  the  expense  of  their  conveyance, 
is  a  course  which  requires  for  its  justification  some  better  reasons  than 
have  ever  yet  been  brought  forward.  The  safe  custody  of  convicts  is 
not  more  surely  attained  by  this  increase  of  distance  ;  and  it  may  even 
be  held,  that  a  body  of  them,  if  conveyed  some  hundred  miles  into  the 
interior  of  America,  would  find  it  as  difficult  to  escape  thence  as  they 
do  now  from  Australia,  where  they  are  necessarily  located  near  to  the 
shore.  It  remains  then  to  be  considered,  what  advantage  beyond  that 
of  safe  custody  attaches  to  New  South  Wales  as  a  criminal  settlement, 
which  would  not  be  realized  in  a  far  greater  degree  by  transporting 
offenders  to  the  interior  of  Canada. 

According  to  present  appearances,  and  the  knowledge  we  have 
obtained  concerning  the  nature  of  the  country,  it  does  not  appear  pro- 
bable that  Australia  can  ever  become  an  agricultural  country.  The 
long-continued  droughts  to  which  it  is  subject,  and  the  nature  of  the 
greater  part  of  the  soil,  seem  to  preclude  that  result.  It  can  never 
therefore  be  thickly  inhabited ;  and  although,  from  the  vast  extent  of 
the  territory,  many  more  settlers  than  at  present  reside  in  the  colony 
may  be  able  to  locate  themselves,  and  to  provide  employment  for  their 
convict  labourers,  with  some  advantage  to  themselves  as  individual.-,  it 