

A  skilled  artisan  in  Belgium  may  earn  in  summer  from  Is.  2d.  to 
Is.  6d.  per  day,  and  in  winter  from  lOd.  to  Is.  2d.  If  unskilled,  arti- 
sans will  earn  little  more  than  half  these  rates.  With  these  wages, 
joined  to  what  mciy  be  earned  by  the  wife  and  children,  a  family  may 
subsist  on  rye-bread,  potatoes,  and  milk.  It  is  but  rarely  that  they  can 
procure  meat.    In  towns  where  manufactures  are  carried  on,  the  situation 


121  FKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

of  artisans  is  better  than   that  just  described.     Agricultural  labourers 
are  generally  boarded  by  the  farmer  with  whom  they  work. 

The  hasty  sketch  which  has  here  been  given  of  the  system  of  poor- 
laws  and  their  results  in  other  countries  of  Europe  has  been  derived 
from  section  F  of  the  Appendix  to  the  Report  of  the  Commissioners  for 
inquiring  into  the  administration  and  practical  oj)eration  of  the  Poor 
Laws,  and  from  the  interesting  Preface  to  that  section  by  Mr.  Senior. 
It  does  not  appear  to  be  within  the  purpose  of  this  work  to  enter  more 
fully  into  a  description  of  the  condition  of  the  poor  in  other  countries. 
The  reader  who  is  desirous  of  acquiring  more  detailed  information  upon 
the  subject  is  referred  to  the  work  just  mentioned,  from  which  the  fol- 
lowing table  is  borrowed,  with  the  view  of  showing  the  comparative 
state  of  comfort  in  which  the  poor  in  our  own  country,  and  those  in  other 
European  communities,  are  able  to  live.  Among  the  questions  sent  to 
the  various  parishes  in  England,  it  was  asked, — "  What  in  the  whole 
mio-ht  an  average  labourer,  obtaining  an  average  amount  of  emjdoy- 
ment,  both  in  day-work  and  piece-work,  expect  to  earn  in  the  year, 
includinn-  harvest-work,  and  the  value  of  all  his  other  advantages  and 
means  of  living,  except  parish  relief?  and  what  in  the  whole  might  a 
labourer's  wife  and  four  children,  aged  14,  11,  8,  and  5  respectively 
(the  eldest  a  boy),  expect  to  earn  in  the  year,  obtaining,  as  in  the  former 
case,  an  average  amount  of  employment  V" 

The  answers  to  these  queries  from  85G  parishes  give,  for  the  annual  £.    s.   d. 

earnings  of  the  man,  an  average  of 27  17  10 

And  the  answers  from  668  parishes,  give,  as  tiie  annual  earnings  of 

the  wife  and  children,  an  average  of 13  19  10 

Annual  average  income  of  the  family £•11   17     8 

To  the  further  question — "  Could  such  a  family  subsist  on  the  aggre- 
gate earnings  of  the  father,  mother,  and  children,  and  if  so  on  what 
food  ? — xVnsvvers  were  returned  from  899  parishes  to  the  effect  exhibited 
in  the  following  table  : — 


COUNTIES. 


Number  of 
Parishes 
answerinj;. 


Bedford  . 
Berks 
Bucks 