


CK.vr.  IV.]  PAUPERISM,  123 

(^ominissioncrs,  gives  us  reason  to  believe  that  in  this  respect  also  these 
colonics  have  failed  in  producing  any  good  result,  lie  says, — "  A  mono- 
the  colonists  there  were  a  few  whose  previous  habits  and  natural  dispo- 
sitions disposed  them  to  avail  themselves,  to  tlie  best  of  their  ability,  of 
tlie  benevolent  provisions  thus  offerecl  for  their  relief,  and  who  had  worked 
industriously,  and  conducted  themselves  well,  during  their  residence  in 
the  colony.  Their  land  was  cultivated  to  the  extent  of  their  means,  and 
their  dwelling-houses  had  assumed  an  appearance  of  greater  comfort, 
order,  and  civilization  than  the  rest.  But  these  were  too  few  in  number, 
and  the  result  too  trilling  to  offer  the  stimulus  of  emulation  to  others. 

"  Those  farms  that  I  examined,  with  the  above  exceptions,  were  not 
encoiu'aging  examples  ;  there  were  few  evidences  of  thrift  and  provi- 
dence, the  interior  of  the  dwellings  being,  in  point  of  comfort,  little,  if 
at  all,  removed  from  the  humblest  cottage  of  the  most  straitened  con- 
dition of  labourers  in  this  country. 

"  A  clause  in  the  regulations  allows  certain  of  the  colonists,  whose 
good  conduct  and  industry  have  obtained  them  the  privilege,  to  barter 
with  the  neighbouring  towns  for  any  article  they  may  want. 

"  The  nearest  towns  to  the  establishment  of  any  note  are  Hoogstraten 
and  Tournhout :  but  on  inquiry  I  could  not  find  that  any  intercourse  was 
maintained  with  them,  and  the  country  round  offered  no  evidences  of  the 
existence  of  a  thriving  community  in  the  centre,  exercising  an  influence 
on  its  traffic  or  occupations.  In  the  winter,  I  should  think  the  roads  to 
the  colonies  scarcely  practicable  for  any  description  of  carriages. 

"  From  what  I  saw  of  the  social  condition  of  the  colonists,  I  am  dis- 
posed to  insist  much  upon  the  inexpediency  of  assembling,  in  an  isolated 
position  especially,  a  large  connnunity  of  paupers  for  this  experiment. 

"  Admitting  the  physical  difficulties  to  have  been  much  less  than 
they  are,  and  the  prospect  of  pecuniary  advantage  much  greater  and 
more  certain,  the  moral  objections  to  the  system  woidd  outweigh  them. 
AV^ithout  the  example  of  the  better  conditions  of  society,  there  can  be 
no  hope  of  such  a  community  gi'adually  acquiring  those  qualities  that 
would  fit  the  members  of  it  for  a  better  condition  also.  One  or  two 
families,  established  in  the  neighbourhood  of  an  orderly  and  industrious 
community,  would  find  the  stimulus  of  shame,  as  well  as  emulation, 
acting  on  their  moral  qualities  and  exertions  ;  but,  as  in  the  present 
case,  where  all  are  in  a  condition  of  moral  debasement,  both  of  those 
powerful  stimuli  are  wantins;." 