

as  Kingston,  included 3,000 

District  of  Newcastle  and  Township,  in  the  vicinity  of 

the  Bay  of  Quinte 1,800 

Toronto  (late  York)  and  the   Home  District,  excluding 

settlements  round  Lake  Simco 2,000 

Hamilton,   Guelph,   and    Huron    Tract,    and    situations 

adjacent 2,500 

Kiagara  Frontier  and  District,  including  the  line  of  the 

"VVelland   Canal,  and  round  the  head  of  Lake  Ontario 

to  Hamilton 2,000 

Settlements    bordering    on    Lake    Erie,    including    the 

London  District,  Adelaide  Settlement,  and    to   Lake 

Saint  Clair 5,000 


4,000 


Deaths  at  Marine  Hospital 92 

Gone  to  United  States 1,509 


16,300 


1,601 

Total 21,901 

K  2 


132  PHOGRESS  of  the  nation.  [sec.  I. 

It  was  estimated  by  the  very  active  and  intelligent  agent  of  the 
British  o-overnment  in  Canada,  Mr.  Buchanan,  who  possessed  the  best 
opportunities  for  forming  a  correct  judgment  on  the  subject,  that  the 
capital  conveyed  into  the  province  of  Canada  in  the  year  1834  by 
settlers,  amounted  to  at  least  1,000,000/.  of  sterling  money.  Several 
a^-icnlturists  took  with  them  superior  breeds  of  horses  and  cattle  ;  one 
iir  particular,  who  settled  near  Bytown,  on  the  Ottawa  River,  had  fifty 
head  of  cattle  of  the  most  approved  English  breeds. 

The  whole  of  the  labouring  portion  of  the  emigrants  are  reported  to 
have  found  immediate  occupation,  with  prospects  of  a  cheering  nature, 
so  that  nothing  but  industry  and  sobriety  on  their  own  part  would  be 
wantino;  to  render  their  future  course  as  free  from  worldly  cares  and 
ri^ks  as  can  be  hoped  for  in  this  life. 

If  we  assume  Mr.  Buchanan's  calculation  for  1834  to  be  applicable 
to  the  whole  number  of  persons  who  have  emigrated  during  the  25  years 
embraced  by  the  table  already  given,  the  amount  of  capital  taken  by 
them  from  the  United  Kingdom,  must  have  been  equal  to  40  millions 
sterling. 

A  larcje  proportion  of  the  emigrants  from  this  kingdom,  who  land  at 
New  York,  do  not  remain  in  the  United  States,  but  take  that  route  to 
Upper  Canada,  in  order  to  avoid  the  river  St.  Lawrence,  the  navigation 
of  which,  and  of  the  coast  near  its  mouth,  is  tedious  and  dangerous  in 
the  late  autumnal  months.     The  returas  of  Mr.  Buchanan  show  the 
number  of  vessels  wrecked  in  the  season  of  1834  to  have  been  17,  and 
the  lives  lost  to  have  amounted  to  731.     One  reason  assigned  for  this 
larse  proportion  of  losses,  and  for  the  comparative  safety  which  accom- 
panies the  voyage  to  New  York,  is  the  excessive  use  of  ardent  spirits, 
in  which  the  seamen  who  navigate  English  vessels  are  accustomed  to 
indulfTc,  and  to  which  the  sobriety  maintained  in   American  shipping 
affords  a  striking,  and,  for  our  countrymen,  a  very  humiliating  contrast. 
The  expatriation  of  criminals  is  a  species  of  emigration  of  a  character 
altogether  different  from  that  which  takes  place  through  the  voluntary 
movements  of  individuals.     Besides  the   great  end  of  all   punishment, 
the  deterring  of  offenders,  almost  the  only  object  kept  in  view  by  the 
o-overnment  in  the  establishing  of  penal  settlements,  has  been  that  of 
removing  out  of  the  way  of  perpetrating  further  mischief  against  .their 
fellow-citizens,  a  class  of  people  whose  energies,  if  api)lied  in  a  right 
direction,  might  tend  to  the  advancement  of  society.     Having  performed 
what  is  necessary  for  the   end  immediately  proposed,  the  government 
has  rested  satisfied,  as  though  it  had  done  all  that  was  demanded  of  it ; 
and  if,  in  the  course  of  events,  the  settlements  thus  peopled  by  English 
convicts  have  come  to  be  important  colonies,  the  result  has  happened 
without  any  direct  interference  of  the  government,  and  at  best  with  its 
permission  only. 