


136  PllOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec  i. 

each  100  of  these  relapsed  criminals,  56  have  appeared  once  before  at 
the  bar  of  criminal  justice  ;  20  have  appi^ared  twice  before  ;  D  have 
appeared  three  times  before  ;  and  15  have  previously  appeared  four  times 
or  more  to  answer  for  offences. 

The  fact  that  so  many  ill-disposed  persons  are  continually  let  loose 
upon  society  to  prey  upon  the  honest,  and  to  corrupt  the  weak  and 
ignorant,  is  a  circumstance  which  loudly  calls  for  remedy  on  the  part 
o1"  government,  which  would  surely  be  justified  in  removing  the  pesti- 
lena\  and  indeed  would  seem  to  be  under  an  obligation  of  duty  to  do 
so.  The  deo-ree  in  which  this  duty  is  incumbent  upon  the  government 
was  placed  in  a  very  strong  light  by  the  highest  criminal  judge  in 
the  kingdom,  when  he  expressed  a  doubt  whether  any  government 
is  fully  justified  in  awarding  punishments  for  crimes,  unless  it  has 
previously  taken  every  moral  precaution  within  its  power  for  their 
prevention. 

Accordin<T  to  the  Gaol  Returns  for  1834,  the  number  of  persons  who 
became  inmates  of  prisons  in  England  and  AVales  during  that  year, 
amounted  to  within  a  very  small  fraction  of  100,000,  of  whom  15,270 
had  on  one  or  more  previous  occasions  been  subjected  to  punishment. 
Many  of  the  offences  for  which  this  large  number  of  persons  were  com- 
mitted were  of  a  comparatively  trivial  character.  Vagrancy,  assaults, 
w  ant  of  sureties  arising  out  of  cases  for  breaches  of  the  peace,  trespasses, 
acts  of  petty  pilfering,  poaching,  offences  against  the  revenue  laws,  dis- 
orderlv  acts  on  the  part  of  apprentices  and  workmen,  and  various  other 
ofl'euces  for  which  magistrates  have  the  power  of  passing  summary 
sentences  of  imprisonment  for  periods  varying  from  a  week  to  twelve 
months — these  form  the  large  majority  of  the  causes  of  confinement ; 
but  even  these  offences — it  would  be  harsh  and  unjust  to  call  them 
crimes — are,  through  a  culpable  want  of  care  on  the  part  of  those  in 
authority,  unintentionally,  it  is  true,  but  unavoidably  visited  with  the 
severest  deo"ree  of  punishment,  in  the  destruction,  by  confinement  in  a 
prison,  of  all  those  moral  and  religious  restraints  which  chiefly  prevent 
men,  whose  natural  good  feelings  have  not  been  strengthened  by  educa- 
tion from  becoming  nuisances  to  society. 

The  Gaol  Returns  of  1844  show  that  in  10  years  there  has  been 
an  increase  of  more  tlian  25  per  cent,  to  the  number  of  persons  pg.ssing 
throuf^h  the  prisons  of  England  and  Wales ;  the  numbers  for  that  year 
havino-  been  126  000,  of  whom  28,841  had  on  one  or  more  previous 
occasions  been  committed  to  a  prison,  an  increase  of  nearly  90  per  cent, 
upon  the  number  of  regidives  in  1834.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  this  pro- 
gress is  caused,  in  part  at  least,  by  more  vigilant  police  arrangements. 
AVe  have,  at  any  rate,  the  satisfaction  of  knowing,  from  the  reports  of 
the  chaplains  and  governors  of  some  of  the  principal  gaols,  that  a  great 
improvement  in  their  discipline  has  been  brougbt  about,  and  that  cou- 