


CHAP,  v.]  EMIGRATION.  137 

finemcnt  in  a  prison  is  not  so  certain  now  as  it  was  formerly  to  consum- 
mate the  ruin  of  those  who  enter  it. 

If  the  contagion  of  bad  example  and  vicious  instruction  could  be 
avoided,  the  restraint  of  a  prison  might  perhaps  prove,  when  applied  to 
minor  offences,  as  good  a  corrective  as  any  other  punishment  ca])able  of 
general  application,  and  especially  when  a  system  of  irksome  labour  is 
engrafted  on  it.  The  suggestion  already  made  of  sending  away  crimi- 
nals to  labour  in  situations  where  none  would  be  within  the  noxious 
influence  of  their  evil  precepts  or  example  would  take  away  from 
imprisonment,  when  inflicted  on  less  grave  offenders,  the  reproach  to 
which  it  is  now  liable,  and  which  renders  it  the  most  imfit  instrument 
that  can  possibly  be  employed  for  correction,  both  as  regards  the  indi- 
viduals upon  whom  it  is  inflicted  and  society  at  large. 

Since  the  year  1824,  a  considerableestablishment  of  convicts  has  been 
kept  up  in  the  Bermudas,  employed  in  constructing  a  breakwater,  and 
in  perfecting  some  fortifications  at  Ireland  Island.  The  number  at 
present  so  maintained  is  about  1000.  The  works  upon  which  they  are 
employed  will,  it  is  expected,  be  shortly  completed,  when  the  couvicts 
will  be  withdrawn,  as  it  is  not  intended  to  make  the  Bermudas  a  penal 
settlement.  The  suffgestion  that  has  been  offered  in  remn-d  to  the 
employment  of  convict  labour  on  the  continent  of  North  America  is 
thus  not  unsupported  by  precedent,  although  the  nature  of  the  labour 
upon  which  the  Bermuda  convicts  have  been  engaged  is  somewhat  dif- 
ferent from  that  suggested  as  desirable  in  the  back-woods  of  Canada 
or  New  Brunswick.  If  good  has  been  found  to  result  from  this  experi- 
ment on  the  part  of  the  government,  there  can  be  no  reason  to  doubt 
that  an  equal  benefit  would  follow  the  plan  now  recommended,  as  a 
means  both  of  saving  a  considerable  expense  and  of  producing  a  good 
moral  effect  upon  the  idle  and  dissolute  among  the  lower  classes  in  this 
country. 


138  PROGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec. 


SECTION  IL—rRODUCTION. 


CHAPTER  I. 

AGRICIJLTURE, 

Impossibility  of  importing  any  large  proportion  of  Food  for  the  Population— Importations 
of  Wheat,  1801  to  1840^  Comparative  smallness  of  its  amount  —  Numbers  fed  with 
"Wheat  of  Home  and  of  Foreign  Growth — Increased  Productive  Power  of  Great  Britain 
—Means  whereby  this  increase  has  been  efl'ected — Deficiency  of  statistical  information 
connected  with  Agriculture  in  England — Improvements  in  Scotland — Inclosure  liills 
and  Average  Prices  of  "Wheat  since  1760— Corn-Law  of  1815 — Conflicting  testimony  as 
to  Agi-icultural  Distress  given  to  the  Committee  in  1833— Increased  Rents  since  1790 — 
Adaptation  of  the  Steam-Engine  to  the  Draining  of  Fens — Effect  upon  Agriculturists  of 
the  restoration  of  a  ^letallic  Cm-rency — Land  brought  under  Cultivation  since  1760 — 
Compared  ^^ith  Increase  of  Population  since  1801 — Surface  of  cultivated,  uncultivated, 
and  unprofitable  Land  in  each  division  and  County  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  1827 — 
Proportion  of  cultivated  Land  to  the  Population  at  different  periods  during  the  present 
century— Probability  of  Population  outstripping  the  productive  powers  of  the  soil 
— Supposed  influence  upon  this  question  of  the  extensive  construction  of  Railroads — 
Estimate  of  the  Number  of  Horses,  the  employment  of  which  may  by  that  means  be 
rendered  unnecessary. 