

In  every  country  the  condition  of  its  agriculture  must  be  a  subject  of 
the  very  first  importance.  An  inconsiderable  state  or  colony  may,  it  is 
true,  without  much  danger  or  inconvenience,  exist  under  circumstances 
which  oblige  it  to  be  habitually  dependent  upon  the  soil  of  other 
countries  for  the  food  of  its  inhabitants  ;  but  a  very  little  inquiry,  and  a 
very  simple  calculation,  would  suffice  to  convince  us  that  this  can  never 
be  the  case  with  a  numerous  people.  To  supply  the  United  Kingdom 
with  the  single  article  of  wheat  would  call  for  the  employment  of  more 
than  twice  the  amount  of  shipping  which  now  annually  enters  our  ports, 
if  indeed  it  would  be  possible  to  procure  the  grain  from  other  countries 
in  sufficient  quantity  ;  and  to  bring  to  our  shores  every  article  of  agri- 
cultural produce  in  the  abundance  we  now  enjoy,  would  probably  give 
constant  occupation  to  the  mercantile  navy  of  the  whole  world. 

These  are  assertions  which  every  one  can  in  a  moment  verify  or  dis- 
prove, by  estimating  the  average  consumption  of  each  inhabitant  of  the 
lvin""dom,  and  multiplying  its  annual  amount  by  the  numbers  of  the 
population.  If  they  are  true,  it  must  be  equally^  true  that  every 
country  which  makes  great  and  rapid  progress  in  population  must  make 
equal  progress  in  the  production  of  food.  A  trifling  addition  to  the 
number  of  the  people  might  be  met  either  by  importations  from  abroad 


ClIAP.    I.] 


AGRICULTURE. 


139 


or  by  a  diminution  of  the  proportion  of  food  which  they  consume.  But 
the  first  of  these  expcnlients  is  impossible  when  any  great  accession  is 
made  to  the  popuhition  ;  and  it  is  a  proposition,  the  truth  of  which 
will  hardly  be  questioned,  that  where  the  people  are  deprived  of  any 
considerable  proportion  of  their  accustomed  supply  of  food,  it  is  highly 
improbable  that  tlieir  numbers  should  increase. 

It  has  been  shown  in  the  previous  section  how  greatly  and  how 
rapidly  the  population  of  the  United  Kingdom  has  increased  since  the 
beginning  of  the  present  century.  During  the  forty  years  that  inter- 
vened between  the  census  of  1801  and  that  of  1841,  that  increase 
amounted  to  10,700,000  souls,  and  at  the  present  time  (1850)  may 
have  reached  13,000,000,  a  number  probably  equal  to  the  entire  popu- 
lation of  Great  Britain  in  1811. 

This  increase  of  inhabitants  would  be  sufficient,  as  already  remarked, 
to  contradict  the  idea  of  any  great  inadequacy  in  the  quantity  of  food, 
if  the  observation  and  experience  of  every  one  did  not  enable  him 
otherwise  to  disprove  such  a  position ;  and  as  it  is  equally  impossible  to 
believe  that  the  increasing  wants  of  the  people,  during  the  above-men- 
tioned period  of  forty  years,  were  in  any  material  degree  met  by  sup- 
plies from  without,  the  conviction  is  irresistibly  forced  upon  us  that  a 
most  important  increase  in  the  amount  of  agricultural  products  must 
have  taken  place  within  the  kingdom.  It  is  not  necessary  for  us,  how- 
ever, to  rest  satisfied  upon  this  point  with  reasonings  and  calculations, 
however  convincing,  since  we  are  enabled  to  ascertain  with  precision, 
fi-om  custom-house  returns,  the  entire  quantity  of  grain  that  has  been 
imported  into  the  kingdom  for  each  one  of  a  long  series  of  years.  It  is 
equally  unnecessary  to  load  these  pages  with  numbers  and  lengthened 
tables  of  figures,  in  order  to  make  good  the  position  that  has  been  here 
advanced.  The  following  short  statement  of  the  quantity  of  wheat  and 
wheat  flour  that  has  been  imported  for  consumption  in  each  year  of  the 
present  century  will  suffice  to  show  how  insignificant,  when  compared 
with  the  wants  of  the  community,  have  been  the  supplies  which  we  have 
drawn  from  foreign  countries  : — 