

During  the  last  nine  years  of  the  series,  viz.,  from  1841  to  1849,  the 
average  quantity  of  foreign  and  colonial  wheat  and  wheat  flour  taken 
for  home  use  advanced  to  2,588.706  quarters  per  annum,  which  quan- 
tity, divided  equally  among  the  increased  number  of  consumers,  would 
afford  nearly  6  gallons  per  annum  for  each  person. 

It  will  be  fresh  in  the  memory  of  most  persons  that,  in  addition  to 
several  years  of  somewhat  deficient  grain  harvests,  wg  have,  during  the 
period  included  in  these  nine  years,  been  visited  by  one  of  the  severest 
calamities  arising  from  the  influence  of  seasons  which  it  has  been  our  mis- 
fortune ever  to  encounter.    The  famine  caused  in  Ireland  by  the  destruc- 


cuAP.  I.]  AGRICULTURE.  I  11 

tion  of  the  potato  croj)  in  1847  will  long  be  reinembcred  with  feelings  of 
horror  by  all  who  were  by  any  eireumstances  brought  to  a  pergonal  know- 
ledge of  its  effeets,  and  will  ever  remain  as  a  dark  page  in  our  hi.-tory. 
During  its  continuance  food  of  various  kinds  was  sought  in  every  mar- 
ket open  to  us ;  the  laws  regulating  its  importation  were  suspended,  and 
our  navigation  law  was  placed  in  partial  abeyance.  It  must  be  clear 
that  under  such  circumstances  it  would  be  idle  to  attempt  to  draw  any 
fair  comparison  between  this  and  other  periods. 

The  foregoing  calculations  show  in  how  small  a  degree  this  country 
has  hitherto  been  dependent  upon  foreigners,  in  ordinary  seasons,  for 
a  due  supply  of  our  staple  article  of  food.  It  is  not,  however,  with  this 
view  that  those  calculations  are  brought  forward,  but  rather  to  prove 
how  exceedingly  great  the  increase  of  agricultural  production  must  h:ive 
been  to  have  thus  effectively  kept  in  a  state  of  independence  a  popula- 
tion which  has  increased  with  so  great  a  degree  of  rapidity.  To  show 
this  fact,  the  one  article  of  wheat  has  been  selected,  because  it  is  that 
which  is  the  most  generally  consumed  in  England ;  but  the  position  ad- 
vanced would  be  found  to  hold  equally  good  were  we  to  go  through  the 
whole  list  of  the  consumable  products  of  the  earth.  The  supply  of 
meat,  during  the  years  comprised  in  the  inquiry,  has  certainly  kept  pace 
with  the  growth  of  population  ;  and,  as  regards  this  portion  of  human 
food,  our  home  agriculturists,  during  the  largest  portion  of  the  whole 
period,  enjoyed  a  strict  monopoly. 

The  consumption  of  wheat  in  this  country  has  been  variously  esti- 
mated by  diflerent  writers.  Some  have  supposed  the  average  quantity 
used  by  each  inhabitant  to  be  eight  bushels  in  the  year,  while  others 
have  assumed  only  six  bushels  as  the  yearly  consumption  of  each  per- 
son. Using  the  foregoing  figures,  and  applying  them  to  each  of  these 
quantities,  we  may  find  in  what  degree  the  soil  has  been  rendered  in- 
creasingly productive  for  the  sustenance  of  our  growing  numbers.  In 
the  closing  years  of  the  last  century  there  occurred  a  succession  of  de- 
ficient harvests,  which  caused  a  considerable  importation  of  corn  into 
this  country  ;  but  previous  to  that  time  the  production  of  wheat  had 
been  about  adequate,  taking  one  year  with  another,  for  the  feeding  of 
the  inhabitants.  If  we  assume  this  state  of  things  to  have  lasted  up 
to  1801,  it  will  be  easy  to  find  in  what  degree  our  increasing  numbers 
have  been  fed  hy  means  of  importations,  and  therefore  in  w  hat  degree 
our  growing  wants  have  been  met  through  the  extension  of  agricidture 
and  by  improvements  in  its  processes. 