

In  this  state  of  things  the  cry  of  distress  among  the  owners  and  occu- 


ciiAr.  I.]  AGRICULTURE.  151 

piers  of  land  became  exceedingly  urgent,  and  the  Houses  of  Parliament 
so  fully  sympathized  with  them  as  to  pass  an  Act  in  1815,  by  which  the 
monopoly  of  the  home  market  was  secured  to  the  British  grower  of  corn 
until  the  average  price  of  wheat  shoidd  reach  80*.  per  quarter,  and  that 
of  other  grain  should  attain  a  proportionate  elevation. 

For  some  time  but  little  opportunity  was  given  for  judging  of  the 
efficacy  of  this  law.  A  deficient  harvest  in  181 G  caused  prices  to  rise 
so  high  as  to  render  the  Act  inoperative.  In  1817  the  harvest  was  again 
bad  ;  during  that  year  and  1818  more  than  2,500,000  quarters  of  wheat 
were  imported,  and  the  prices,  although  not  nominally  so  high  as  they 
had  been  in  previous  years,  were  extremely  burdensome  to  the  people, 
owing  to  the  operation  of  the  restoration  of  the  currency,  which  was 
then  in  progress. 

The  previous  occasions  of  deficient  harvests  which  have  been  noticed 
were  always  followed  by  the  application  of  additional  capital  for  bringing 
waste  or  common-field  lands  into  arable  cultivation ;  and  it  may  in 
some  measure  be  owing  to  the  circumstance  of  those  previous  inclosures 
having  greatly  reduced  the  quantity  of  waste  land  applicable  to  this 
purpose,  that  the  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  has  since  been  materially 
diminished. 

The  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  passed  in  the  ten  years  between  1820 
and  1830  was  only  205,  not  one-fourth  part  of  the  number  passed  in  the 
preceding  period  of  the  like  duration — a  disproportion  which  is  the 
more  remarkable  from  these  circumstances  : — that  the  increase  of  popu- 
lation, which  between  1811  and  1821  amounted  to  2,G45,738,  was 
3,113,261  between  1821  and  1831  ;  and  that  the  foreign  supply  during 
the  first  of  these  intervals  was  nearly  double  that  obtained  in  the  latter 
period.  The  disproportion  betw'een  the  average  prices  experienced  in 
the  two  divisions  of  time  was  not  so  great  in  reality  as  in  appearance, 
owing  to  the  depreciation  of  the  currency  already  noticed  ;  but  still  when 
full  allowance  has  been  made  for  this  consideration,  it  will  be  found  that 
the  fall  of  price  was  nearly  25  per  cent.  The  periods  of  ten  years 
chosen  for  making  the  comparison  are  suflficiently  long  for  avoiding  the 
objection  that  the  seasons  were  less  genial  in  the  one  case  than  in  the 
other ;  and  it  would  be  impossible  even  without  other  evidence  of  the 
fact,  to  arrive  at  any  other  conclusion  than  that  a  larger  amount  of  pro- 
duce has  been  continually  drawn  from  a  given  portion  of  gi'ound  than 
was  obtained  in  general  at  the  beginning  of  the  century. 