

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  in  this  country,  rich  as  we  are  in  the 
possession  of  facts  connected  with  many  branches  of  social  economy,  we 
are  almost  wholly  uninformed  with  regard  to  the  statistics  of  agricul- 
ture. The  knowledge  we  have  upon  that  most  important  subject,  the 
quantity  of  land  in  cultivation  within  the  kingdom,  is  entirely  due  to  the 
industry  of  an  indi\'idual  whose  estimates  have  never  been  either  con- 
firmed or  questioned.  What  proportion  of  the  cultivated  land  is  applied 
to  the  production  of  any  one  article  of  food,  it  has  never  been  attempted 
to  ascertain.     We  know  every  rood  of  ground  that  is  employed  for  the 

been  found  to  possess  most  important  fertilising  properties.     The  number  of  tons  of  this 
fertiliser  that  arrived  in  our  ports,  in  each  year  from  1841  to  1849,  was  as  follows: — 


Years. 

Tons. 

1841 

2,881 

1842 

20,398 

1843 

3,002 

1844 

104,231 

1845 

283,300 

Years. 

Tons. 

1846 

89,203 

1847 

82,392 

1848 

71,414 

1849 

83,438 

146  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

cultivation  of  hops,  because  of  the  direct  financial  interest  which  the 
government  has  in  ascertaining  the  fact ;  but  it  docs  not  appear  to  be 
snlficiently  understood  how  the  national  interest  can  be  concerned  in  any 
kind  of  knowledge  that  does  not  yield  money  to  the  exchequer ;  and 
there  is  reason  to  believe,  that  if,  in  the  absence  of  compulsory  powers 
conferred  by  the  legislature,  any  comprehensive  measure  were  adopted 
by  the  government,  with  a  view  to  ascertain  the  actual  condition  of  the 
country,  as  regards  its  agriculture,  so  much  jealousy,  and  so  many 
groundless  fears  would  be  excited  in  the  minds  of  the  persons  from 
whom  the  information  must  be  sought,  that  the  returns  obtained  would 
be  extremely  erroneous,  or  so  incomplete  as  to  be  of  little  value. 

An  endeavour  to  obtain  a  part  of  this  knowledge  was  made  about  40 
years  ago  in  Scotland,  by  a  spirited  individual,  the  late  Sir  John  Sinclair, 
by  whom  the  clergy  of  that  part  of  the  island  were  induced  to  prepare 
those  accounts  of  their  respective  parishes,  the  collection  of  which  is  well 
known  imder  the  name  of  the  "  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland."  The 
property  of  this  work  was  generously  made  over  by  Sir  John  to  the 
Society  established  in  Scotland  for  the  benefit  of  the  sons  and  daughters 
of  the  clergy ;  and  the  managers  of  that  Society  have  since  undertaken 
to  produce  a  new  "  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,"  for  the  preparation 
of  which  they  secured  the  assistance  of  the  parochial  clergy — a  body  in 
every  w^ay  qualified  for  the  correct  performance  of  the  task.  This  inte- 
resting work  has  been  recently  completed,  and  from  an  examination 
of  its  contents,  it  must  be  allowed  that  the  superintending  committee 
are  fully  justified  in  the  announcement  made  in  their  advertisement, 
that  "  they  now  present  not  merely  a  new  statistical  account,  but,  in  a 
great  measure,  the  statistical  account  of  a  new  country."  There  has 
not  been  a  single  parish  described  in  which  improvements  of  some  kind 
or  other,  and  in  many  cases,  to  a  great  extent,  are  not  stated  to  have 
been  accomplished.  A  few  extracts  have  been  taken  at  random  from 
the  work,  and  are  here  inserted  to  illustrate  the  various  forms,  as  well 
as  the  degree,  in  which  those  improvements  have  shown  themselves. 