

Jedburgh^  RoxhurgJishire. — "  Since  the  period  when  the  last  statis- 
tical account  was  written,  the  state  of  the  parish  has  been  much  im- 
proved ;  farms,  which  were  entirely  pastoral,  now  bear  luxuriant  crops, 
the  fields  have  been  neatly  inclosed  with  hedges,  waste  ground  has  been 
planted,  the  style  of  dwelUng-houses  is  now  vastly  superior,  the  means 
of  communication  have  been  greatly  enlarged,  the  population  has  been 
nearly  doubled,  and  all  classes  seem  to  enjoy  a  large  share  of  the  com- 
forts of  civilized  society." 

Melrose,  Roxhurghsliire. — "The  chief  circumstance  in  which  the  pre- 
sent differs  from  the  past  state  of  the  parish,  is  the  general  enlargement 
of  the  farms.  Except  in  the  case  of  a  carrier  or  miller,  who  rents  a  few 
acres  to  furnish  fodder  for  his  horses,  a  small  farm  is  nearly  unknown. 


CHAP.  1.]  AGRICULTURE.  147 

The  displacing  of  the  old  small  tenants  was  at  first  viewed  with  deep 
regret;  but  the  introduction  of  a  better  and  more  spirit(>d  style  of  agri- 
culture which  innaediatidy  followed,  the  rapid  improvement  of  the 
country,  which  in  a  limited  ])eriod  has  raised  the  rental  of  this  parish 
from  4000/.  nearly  to  20,000/.  a-ycar,  besides  the  improved  condition 
of  the  agricultural  labourers,  seem  to  show  that  it  was  a  change  for  the 
better.  The  land  is  divided  into  a  limited  number  of  great  farms,  and 
the  tenants,  men  of  capital  and  intelligence,  are  enabled  to  give  the  best 
effect  to  the  virtues  of  the  soil,  and  the  great  body  of  the  people  live 
quietly  under  them  as  farm  servants  and  hired  labourers,  having  no  care 
but  to  do  their  work  and  receive  their  wages." 

Parish  of  Kinnettles,  Forfarshire. — "  There  is  not  only  a  greater 
extent  put  under  corn  crop,  green  crop,  and  artificial  grasses,  but  the 
same  extent  yields  a  produce  very  much  superior,  both  in  quantity  and 
quality,  to  the  produce  of  former  times.  Indeed,  it  may  with  safety  be 
said,  that  the  produce  of  grain  and  green  crop  is  about  double  of  what 
it  was  in  1792.  Since  that  period  the  progress  of  agriculture  has  been 
rapid." 

Moffat,  Dumfries-shire. — "  In  the  cultivation  of  the  arable  soils,  a 
very  great  improvement  has  been  made  ;  and  by  removing  obstructions, 
duly  manuring  and  working  the  lands,  observing  a  proper  improved 
rotation,  and  keeping  down  or  destroying  noxious  weeds — and  further, 
by  cultivating  the  most  valuable  crops — it  is  not  too  much  to  say,  that 
within  forty  years  the  returns  of  the  arable  soils  have  become  far  better, 
as  well  as  more  abundant. 

"  Let  any  one  now  look  into  the  cottages,  and  he  will  find  them  nearly 
or  fully  as  comfortable  as  the  farm-houses  were  forty  years  ago ;  and 
let  him  compare  the  dress  of  the  cottagers  and  their  mode  of  living 
with  that  of  the  formers  at  the  above  distance  of  time,  he  will  find 
that  at  present  they  are  not  greatly  inferior." 