


*  The  use  of  crushed  bones  as  a  manure  was  first  introduced  in  ISOO;  but  the  practice  has 
not  been  extensively  adopted  until  within  the  last  twenty-five  years.  The  application  of  this 
manure  to  light  soils  is  now  very  general,  and  the  result  has  been  such  as  to  raise  the  value 
of  such  lands  most  materially.  The  increasing  demand  causes  large  quantities  of  bones  to 
be  imported  from  foreign,  and  sometimes  distant,  countries.  The  numerous  herds  of  cattle 
that  roam  in  a  state  of  nature  over  the  plains  of  South  America,  used  formerlj'  to  be  slaugh- 
tered for  the  sake  of  their  hides,  tallow,  and  horns,  which  were  brought  to  Europe.  Their 
bones  were  left  to  whiten  on  the  plains,  but  these  are  now  carefully  collected  together,  and 
ships  are  regularly  despatched  to  be  loaded  with  them  for  the  use  of  our  farmers.  Since 
1840  an  extensive  trade  has  been  carried  on  in  an  article  called  Guano — the  deposits  of 
birds  on  certain  islands  la  the  Pacific  and  ofi"  the  Coast  of  Africa ;  which  substance  has 


CHAP.  I.]  AGRICULTURE.  H.5 

through  tlie  use  of  improved  implements  of  husbandry,  and,  above  all, 
through  the  eniployment  of  a  better  system  of  cropping  by  rotation.  Nor 
should  we  omit  to  notice,  among  the  most  elfective  causes  of  tliis  im- 
proved condition  of  agriculture,  the  help  that  has  been  borrowed  from 
men  of  science.  In  particidar,  the  researches  of  Davy,  undertaken  at  the 
instance  of  the  Board  of  Agriculture,  about  the  beginning  of  the  present 
century,  and  the  more  recent  investigations  of  Liebig,  may  be  mentioned 
as  having  produced  the  happiest  results,  by  showing  the  various  resources 
we  can  command,  through  the  application  of  chemical  knowledge,  for 
remedying  the  defects  and  improving  the  natural  capabilities  of  diiferent 
soils.  It  may  bo  added,  that  the  great  agricultural  improvements  which 
have  taken  place  since  the  peace,  and  which  are  still  in  progress,  while 
they  negative  the  notion  of  an  uninterrupted  series  of  losses  on  the  part 
of  cultivators,  are,  in  a  great  degi-ee,  the  consequence  of  the  stimulus  to 
exertion  supplied  by  low  prices.  Had  prices  continued  high,  the 
farmers  would,  perhaps,  have  gone  on  in  their  old  course  ;  but  with  so 
considerable  a  fall  as  they  have  experienced  in  the  value  of  their  produce, 
such  a  course  would  have  been  attended  with  certain  ruin,  and  in  this 
way  the  improvements  they  have  made  may  be  said  to  have  been  forced^ 
upon  them. 

It  would  be  necessary  to  write  a  voluminous  treatise  on  husbandry, 
minutely  to  describe  the  steps  by  which  all  the  improvements  here 
pointed  out  have  been  attained,  and  to  show  how  they  have  combined 
for  the  production  of  the  good  effects  which  are  now  witnessed.  Our 
present  object  will  be  better  answered  by  describing  results  generally 
experienced  throughout  the  country,  than  by  any  minute  detail  of  pro- 
cesses, some  of  which  may  not,  even  yet,  meet  the  universal  assent  of 
practical  agriculturists. 