

In  the  next  period  of  ten  years,  from  1790  to  1799,  England  ceased 
to  be  an  exporting  country  for  wheat.    In  1792  the  price  fell  to  41^.  9d., 

*  In  the  year  1689  an  Act  was  passed  allowing  a  bounty  of  fiv  (,■  shillings  per  quarter  upon 
all  British-grown  wheat  exported  when  the  home  price  did  not  exceed  48s.  per  quarter. 
This  Act  was  modified  in  177o,  so  that  the  bounty  was  not  payable  after  the  average  price 
cxccctled  44s.  per  quarter,  and  in  1815  the  bounty  was  repealed.  In  point  of  fact,  no  bounty 
could  liave  been  claimed  in  any  year  after  1792,  when  the  average  jjricc  for  the  wiiole  year 
was  only  41s.  'Jd. 


150  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

and  a  considerable  quantity  was  shipped  abroad  ;  bnt  this  was  the  hist 
occasion  on  which  our  farmers  found  relief  in  foreign  markets  for  an 
over-abundant  stock  of  grain.  The  war  of  the  French  Revolution 
immediately  followed,  and  in  1795  a  scries  of  deficient  harvests  began, 
^\  liicli  forced  up  the  prices  of  agricultural  produce,  and  caused  a  great 
additional  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  to  be  passed. 

The  deficiency  was  aggravated  to  a  dearth  in  1800  and  1801  ;  the 
price  of  wheat  was  driven  up  to  the  then  unprecedented  height  of 
libs.  lid.  per  quarter  ;  and  a  considerable  breadth  of  land  was  addition- 
ally brought  under  the  plough,  the  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  passed 
during  the  ten  yeare  from  1800  to  1809  reaching  to  847.  A  trifling 
export  of  wheat  in  1808,  during  which  year  the  average  price  of  that  grain 
was  785.  lid.  per  quarter,  was  not  the  consequence  of  any  commercial 
demand  from  other  countries,  but  was  occasioned  by  military  operations 
in  the  Peninsula.  In  1810,  the  first  year  of  the  next  decennary  period, 
we  experienced  the  effects  of  another  deficient  harvest,  and  imported  a 
million  and  a  half  quarters  of  wheat.  This  fact  is  worthy  of  remem- 
brance, as  being  in  a  remarkable  degree  illustrative  of  the  axiom,  that 
no  difficulties  interposed  by  governments  are  adequate  to  prevent  the 
transmission  of  goods  to  a  profitable  market.  A  large  proportion  of  the 
foreign  grain  at  that  time  brought  for  consumption  to  this  country  was 
the  produce  of  the  soil  of  our  then  bitterest  enemy  ;  and  it  surely  should 
be  sufficient  for  us  to  call  to  mind  this  fact,  coupled  with  the  remem- 
brance of  the  deadly  character  then  assumed  by  the  contest  betw'een 
France  and  England,  to  be  convinced,  that  so  long  as  we  possess  the 
means  of  paying  for  the  food  which  other  countries  can  spare,  we  never 
need  be  without  an  adequate  supply  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  The 
average  price  of  wheat  in  1810  was  103*.  Sd.  per  quarter ;  but  this  rate, 
owing  to  the  then  depreciated  state  of  our  currency,  was  not  equal  to 
more  than  about  90^.  if  paid  in  gold.  In  1812  the  price  advanced  to 
122^.,  but  the  depreciation  of  the  currency  was  then  still  greater;  and 
tlie  real  price  was  not  beyond  5/.  per  quarter — a  price  sufficiently  high, 
however,  to  cause  the  application  of  much  additional  capital  to  agricul- 
tural pursuits,  so  that  in  this  year  133  Inclosure  Bills  were  passed, 
being  the  largest  number  on  record  in  any  one  year.  The  impulse  thus 
given  continued  to  operate  for  some  time.  It  will  be  seen  by  inspection 
of  the  table,  that  853  Inclosure  Bills  received  the  Royal  Assent  in  the 
ten  years  between  1810  and  1820;  but  the  increased  production  thus 
brought  about,  together  with  the  much  diminished  cost  of  transport 
from  foreign  countries,  caused  so  great  a  reaction  in  the  markets  for 
grain,  that  the  average  price  of  wheat  for  the  year  1814  fell  to  a  rate 
which,  measured  by  the  standard  price  of  gold,  was  not  more  than  54^. 
per  quarter. 