


ciiAv.  I.]  AGRICULTURE.  153 

a  diminution  of  produce  from  them  necessarily  establishes  the  fact  that 
the    rate  of  production    generally  is    diminished.     In   answer   to   this 
assertion  it  may  be  observed,  that  during  the  last  half  century  a  great 
revolution   has   taken  place  in  the  management  of  land,  and  that  by 
proper  attention   to  the    rotation  of  crops,    and   by  the  application  of 
capital  to  other  descriptions  of  soil,  these  soils  have  been  brought  to  a 
state  which  enables  the  farmer  to  draw  from  them  a  better  return  than 
would  follow  the  application  of  the  same  amount  of  labour  to  the  old 
wheat  lands.     If  reference  be  made  to  the  evidence  given  before  the 
Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  to  wdiich  the  numerous  petitions 
complaining  of  agricultural  distress  were  referred  in  1821,  it  will  be 
seen  that  at  that  time  almost  the  only  grain  produced  in  the  fens  of 
Cambridgeshire  consisted  of  oats.     Since  then,  by  draining  and  manur- 
ing, the  capability  of  the  soil  has  been  so  changed  that  these  fens  now 
produce  some   of  the  finest  wheat  that  is  grown  in  England  ;  and  this 
more  costly  grain  now  constitutes  the  main  dependence  of  the  farmers 
in  a  district  where,  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  its  production  was  scarcely 
attempted.      It  was  pretty  generally  understood  at  the  time  that  the 
appointment  of  the  Committee  of  1833  was  a  concession  made  to  those 
members  of  the  House  of  Commons  who  fancied  themselves  interested 
in  the  continuance  of  the  present  system  of  corn-laws,  and  accordingly 
the  whole  tendency  of  the  evidence  given  appears  to  have  been  to  make 
out  the  existence  of  distress  among  agriculturists,  the  amount  of  which 
would  be  aggravated  by  any  alteration  of  the   law.     Under  these  cir- 
cumstances, every  kind  of  testimony  which  would  bring  to  light  a  state 
of  things  adverse    to    the    continuance    of   protection  against  foreign 
importation,    was,  if  not    purposely  kept    back,  certainly  allowed    to 
appear  with    reluctance ;    and  yet  a    body  of  evidence  which   proves, 
from  facts  which  cannot  be  controverted,  that  all  is  not  barrenness  and 
desolation  in  our  fields,  is  to  be  found  in  almost  every  page  of  that 
voluminous  Report.     Everywhere,  the  condition  of  agricultural  labourers 
is  stated  to  be  visibly  amended  ;  while  towns  in  agricultural  districts, 
which  are  dependent  upon  the  farming  interests,  have  uniformly  improved 
in  extent,  and  in  every  other  circumstance  which  indicates  prosperity. 
Nor  has  the  situation  of  the  landowner  been  less  materially  improved, 
so  far  at  least  as  his  condition  depends  upon  the  rent  which  he  receives 
for  his  land.     With  scarcely  any  exception,  the  revenue  drawn  in  the 
form  of  rent,  from  the  ownership  of  the  soil,  has  been  at  least  doubled 
in  every  part   of  Great    Britain  since  1790.      This  is  not  a  random 
assertion,  but,  as  regards  many  counties  of  England,  can  be  proved  by 
the  testimony  of  living  witnesses,  while  in  Scotland  the  fact  is  notorious 
to  the  whole  population.      In    the    county  of  Essex,  farms    could  be 
pointed  out  which  were  let  just  before  the  war  of  the  French  Revolution 
at  less  than  10^.  per  acre,  and  which   rose  rapidly  during  the  progress 