

Between  1830  and  1844,  a  period  of  15  years,  only  202  Inclosure 
Bills  were  passed,  being  on  the  average  nearly  30  per  cent,  fewer  than 
in  the  preceding  10  years,  and  only  about  one-sixth  of  the  yearly  num- 
ber passed  between  1810  and  1820.  In  the  meanwhile,  the  population 
has  advanced  with  accelerated  rapidity,  while  the  importations  of  foreign 


152  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  n. 

^vlloat  liave  kept  pace  with  tliat  advance,  as  is  shown  by  the  tahle  at 
page  143  of  this  volume. 

The  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  which  sat  in  1813 
to  inquire  into  the  state  of  the  corn  trade,  stated  in  their  Report,  that 
through  the  extension  of,  and  improvements  in,  cultivation,  the  agri- 
cultural produce  of  the  kingdom  had  been  increased  one-fourth  during 
the  ten  years  preceding  the  time  of  their  inquiry. 

Earl  Fitzwilliam,  whose  practical  acquaintance  with  the  subject  of 
agriculture  few  persons  will  question,  has  expressed  unequivocally  his 
belief  that  the  land  has  of  late  years  been  made,  by  means  of  better 
farming,  to  yield  an  increased  quantity  of  produce.  The  following 
passage,  in  which  this  opinion  is  given,  occurs  in  his  "  Second  Address 
to  the  Landowners  of  England  on  the  Corn  Laws,"  published  in  April, 
1835  : — "  It  is  somewhere  about  twenty  years  since  we  began  to  hear 
prophetic  annunciations  of  this  approaching  abandonment  of  the  soil. 
That,  in  the  years  which  intervened  between  1810  and  the  peace, 
wheat  was  extracted  by  a  sort  of  hot-bed  cultivation  from  soils  whose 
uatiu-al  sterility  has,  under  the  diminished  pressure  of  necessity,  and 
the  influence  of  more  genial  seasons,  rescued  them  from  the  plough, 
I  entertain  not  a  doubt  ;  but  I  must  confess  that  I  have  watched  in 
vain  for  any  extensive  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy.  On  the  contrary,  I 
am  satisfied  that  the  breadth  of  land  under  the  plough  (taking  that  as 
the  criterion,  though  it  is  none,  and  I  only  take  it  in  deference  to  those 
with  whom  I  am  arguing)  is  greater  than  it  was  in  1814,  and  that  the 
2>roduce  of  equal  surfaces  of  ploughed  land  has  increased  in  a  still  greater 
ratio^ 

The  opinion  thus  confidently  expressed  as  to  the  increased  produc- 
tiveness of  the  soil  of  late  years,  was  very  decidedly  contradicted  by 
various  agriculturists  who  were  examined  before  a  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons  in  1833.  On  that  occasion  some  of  the  witnesses 
stated,  that  owing  to  a  deficient  application  of  capital  to  the  land,  its 
annual  produce  had  fallen  oft"  in  quantity  from  one-sixth  to  one-fourth 
— one  gentleman,  indeed,  said  as  much  as  one-third — compared  with 
former  periods.  It  would  have  been  difficult,  under  any  circumstances, 
to  believe  that  such  a  state  of  things  could  possibly  be  found  existing, 
to  any  extent,  in  connexion  with  the  facts  of  an  opposite  character 
which  have  been  brought  forward  in  these  pages ;  but  a  slight  exami- 
nation of  the  evidence  given  befoi'e  the  committee  is  sufficient  to  explain 
the  apparent  inconsistency.  It  w'ill  be  evident  from  that  examination, 
that  in  every  case  where  diminished  production  is  asserted,  the  wit- 
nesses have  spoken  of  the  same  description  of  soil  —  "cold  clay  lands;" 
and  it  is  rather  illogically  argued,  that  because  these  lands  have  from 
time  inmiemorial  been  employed  for  the  production  of  wheat,  therefore 