


154  niOOrvESS  of  the  nation.  [sec.  II. 

of  that  contest,  until  in  1812,  the  rent  paid  for  them  was  from  455.  to 
505.  per  acre.  This  advance  has  not,  it  is  true,  been  maintained  since 
the  return  of  peace  :  in  1818  the  rent  was  reduced  to  355.,  and  at  the 
present  time  is  only  20^.  per  acre,  which,  however,  is  still  more  than 
double  that  which  was  paid  in  1790.  In  Berkshire  and  Wiltshire 
there  are  farms  which  in  1700  were  let  at  145.  per  acre,  and  which  in 
1810  produced  to  the  landlord ^i  rent  of  705.,  being  a  five-fold  advance. 
These  farms  were  let  in  1820  at  505.,  and  at  this  time  pay  305.  per 
acre,  being  114  per  cent,  advance  upon  the  rent  paid  in  1790.  In 
Staffordshire  there  are  several  farms  on  one  estate  which  were  let  in 
1790  at  85.  per  acre,  and  which  having  in  the  dearest  time  advanced  to 
35s.,  have  since  been  lowered  to  205.,  an  advance,  after  all,  of  150  per 
cent,  within  the  half  century.  The  rents  here  mentioned  as  being  those 
for  which  the  farms  are  now  let,  are  not  nominal  rates  from  which 
abatements  are  periodically  made  by  the  landlord,  but  are  regularly 
paid,  notwithstanding  the  depressed  prices  at  which  some  kinds  of 
agricultural  produce  have  been  sold. 

In  Norfolk,  Suffolk,  and  Warwickshire,  the  same,  or  nearly  the 
same,  rise  has  been  experienced  ;  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  it 
has  been  general  throughout  the  kingdom.  During  the  same  period 
the  prices  of  most  of  the  articles  which  constitute  the  landlord's  expen- 
diture have  fallen  materially  ;  and  if  his  condition  be  not  improved  in 
a  corresponding  degree,  that  circumstance  must  arise  from  improvidence 
or  miscalculation,  or  habits  of  expensive  living  beyond  what  would  be 
warranted  by  the  doubling  of  income  which  he  has  experienced  and  is 
gtill  enjoying. 

The  opinion  that  has  been  stated  in  regard  to  the  altered  system  of 
farming,  and  which  has  caused  light  soils  to  be  applied  to  uses  for 
which,  in  former  times,  the  heavy  lands  alone  were  considered  fit,  is 
corroborated  by  a  communication  made  to  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners 
from  Worcestei-shire,  and  inserted  in  the  Appendix  (C.  p.  419)  to  their 
Report : — "  Looking  to  the  rent-rolls  (land-tax  and  other  documents) 
of  former  times,  it  will  be  found,  that  whilst  stiflf  (wheat  and  bean)  land 
has  stood  still,  or  is  rather  deteriorated  in  value,  the  light,  or  what  is 
called  poor  land,  from  an  improved  system  of  cropping,  has  risen  most 
considerably.  I  should  say,  proportionally,  that  where  stiff  land  yields 
a  rent  of  22s.  to  255.  an  acre,  the  light  land  will  bring  from  305.  to  355.  ; 
and  what  makes  the  latter  more  sought  after  now-a-days  is,  that  it  re- 
quires fewer  horses,  and  those  of  inferior  strength,  less  manual  labour 
to  keep  it  clean,  and  the  farmers  can  '  get  upon  it '  in  all  weathers,  and 
thereby  secure  more  regular  crops." 