

*  This  calculation  proceeds  upon  the  supposition  that  not  any  of  the  land  inclosed  waa 
previously  cultivated ;  which,  however,  is  far  from  having  been  the  case. 

M 


162  PROGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  u. 

of  men  possessed  of  both  capital  and  intelligence,  as  well  as  by  the  pro- 
bable discovery  of  still  sujierior  metliods  of  cultnre,  through  the  labours 
of  experimentalists  and  the  researches  of  men  of  science.  It  has  been 
affirmed,  that  in  Wales  the  land  does  not  produce  half  of  what  it  is 
capable  of  producing  ;  and  that  if  all  England  were  as  well  cultivated 
as  Northumberland  and  Lincoln,  it  would  produce  more  than  double 
the  quantity  that  is  now  obtained.  We  have  seen  that  out  of  :236,343 
males,  20  years  of  age,  who  were  occupiers  of  land  in  England  in  1831, 
the  large  proportion  of  94,883  employed  no  labourers,  while  the 
remaining  number  of  occupiers  (141,460)  employed  among  them  only 
744,407,  being  in  the  proportion  of  Sj-  labourers  to  each  farmer.  This 
shows  that  a  considerable  number  of  their  holdings  must  have  been  of 
small  extent,  and  that  consequently  the  amount  of  capital  and  know- 
ledge requisite  for  the  full  development  of  the  powers  of  the  soil  was 
not  applied  to  it.  The  proportion  of  labourers  required  for  the  efficient 
cultivation  of  a  given  extent  of  land  must  of  course  vary  with  local  cir- 
cumstances, such  as  the  natvu'o  of  the  soil  and  the  uses  to  which  it  is 
applied.  It  has  been  stated  by  a  good  practical  authority,  that  "  three 
labourers  to  100  acres  are  a  full  complement,"  but  that  many  persons 
whose  means  are  circumscribed  do  not  employ  more  than  two  labourers 
for  tilling  that  extent  of  land. 

In  Scotland,  where,  within  the  experience  of  the  present  generation, 
the  most  marked  improvement  has  been  effected  in  agriculture,  the  evil 
just  pointed  out  still  exists  in  a  much  greater  degree  than  in  England. 
In  1831,  of  79,853  males,  20  years  of  age,  occupiers  of  the  soil, 
53,966,  being  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  number,  did  not  employ 
labourers,  while  the  25,887  who  did  not  depend  wholly  upon  the  labour 
of  their  own  hands  for  tilling  the  land,  gave  employment  to  no  more 
than  87,292  labourers,  being  only  31  labourers  to  each  holding.  In 
Ireland,  the  system  of  parcelling  out  the  land  to  numerous  cottiers, 
whose  scanty  means  do  not  enable  them  to  grow  more  than  suffices  for 
their  own  consumption,  while  the  stipulated  rent  is  frequently  ])aid  by 
liibour  and  not  in  money,  prevails  to  an  extent  which  renders  it  the  most 
fruitful  source  of  misery  to  that  country.  Out  of  108,608  males,  20 
years  old,  occupying  land  in  Ireland  in  1831,  more  than  three-fourths 
(87,819)  came  under  the  class  just  described.  On  the  other  hand, 
those  few  farmers  who  em})loy  the  labour  of  others  do  so  to  a  gr'eater 
extent  on  the  average,  than  English  farmers,  the  proportion  being 
7y  labourers  to  each  farmer. 