

It  is  the  fashion  among  persons,  in  and  out  of  Parliament,  who  com- 
plain of  the  distressed  state  of  the  agricultural  interest,  to  inveigh  against 
the  measure  adopted  in  1819  for  regulating  the  restoring  of  the  metallic 
currency,  as  one  which  has  brought  ruin  and  desolation  among  the 
farmers.     That  measm-e,  in  conjmictiun  with  the  law  of  1826,  which 


156  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [sec.  ii. 

prohibited  the  issue  of  notes  for  less  sums  than  5/.,  is  said  to  have 
deprived  the  occupiers  of  kmd  of  the  resource  they  previously  had  in 
the  country  banker,  who  was  always  willing  to  accommodate  them  with 
the  loan  of  his  notes.  Let  us  suppose  that  those  who  thus  complain 
should  succeed  in  their  endeavours  to  procure  the  repeal  or  modification 
of  these  alleged  injurious  laws — what  would  be  the  best  result  they 
could  anticipate  ?  They  might  not  be  forced  to  bring  their  produce  so 
early  to  market,  and,  by  keeping  it  back,  might  for  a  time  raise  the 
price  and  check  consumption.  Let  us  imagine  that  this  effect  is  pro- 
duced to  the  extent  of  one-tenth  of  their  crops.  In  the  next  year  this 
operation  would  be  repeated,  and  the  surplus  on  hand  would  amount  to 
one-fifth,  and  even  more,  because,  by  the  ap])lication  of  the  banker's 
capital,  larger  harvests  would  be  obtained.  It  is  but  little  likely  that 
with  so  large  a  surplus  produce  on  hand,  prices  could  be  so  long  main- 
tained above  their  natural  level ;  but  let  us  suppose  that  all  the  farmers 
in  the  kingdom  should  act  upon  this  system  for  ten  years,  in  what  respect 
would  their  situation  be  benefited  at  the  end  of  that  time  ?  They  would 
have  in  their  rick-yards  produce  equal  to  at  least  one  year's  consump- 
tion beyond  the  ordinary  stock,  and  this  surplus  would  be  actually  and 
purely  surplus,  and  altogether  unsaleable,  except  at  prices  which  would 
create  markets  for  it  in  other  countries. 

The  result  here  supposed  appears  to  be  that  which  would  necessarily 
follow  a  re-enactment  of  the  Bank  Restriction  Act,  from  placing  ficti- 
tious capital  in  the  farmers'  hands,  if  such  a  measure  could  be  adopted 
without  at  the  same  time  influencing  prices  generally  throughout  the 
country.  But  it  is  idle  to  suppose  that  the  efi'ect  of  making  any  great 
permanent  addition  to  the  currency  would  be  limited  to  agi'icultural 
produce.  Theory  and  experience  unite  in  showing  that  a  general  rise 
of  prices  must  unavoidably  follow  any  such  addition.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances, the  only  person  to  be  benefited  is  the  man  who  has  pecuniary 
obligations  to  discharge,  the  amount  of  his  gain  being  the  unerring 
measure  of  his  creditor's  loss.  This  effect,  besides,  can  have  no  opera- 
tion except  upon  engagements  contracted  before  the  enlargement  of  the 
circulation  ;  all  future  operations  would  be  governed  by  the  new  state 
of  things ;  and  thus,  for  the  sake  of  procuring  relief  for  a  limited  class 
of  persons,  certain  injustice  is  to  be  committed  upon  others,  our  foreign 
commerce  is  to  be  subjected  to  hazardous  experiments,  the  employments 
of  our  artisans  are  to  be  circumscribed,  and  the  whole  relations  of 
society  disarranged. 