

The  distinction  drawn  in  1831  between  the  occupiers  of  land  who  do 
and  those  who  do  not  employ  labourers  was  not  made  at  either  previous 
census,  so  that  we  have  no  means  of  judging  by  su(?h  an  indication  of 
the  progress  of  agricultural  improvement ;  but  it  is  well  known  that  the 
tendency  of  late  years — at  least  in  England  and  Scotland — has  been  to 


cuAP.  I.]  AGllICULTUKE.  1G3 

enlarge  the  size  of  farms,  and  to  place  tliem  under  tlic  charge  of  men 
possessed  of  capital,  who  have  enjoyed  a  degree  of  instruction  heyond 
that  which  fell  to  the  lot  of  farmers  in  those  days,  the  departure  of 
which  is  deplored  by  the  poet, 

"When  every  rood  of  ground  maintain'd  its  man." 

By  the  employment  of  means  such  as  have  here  been  indicated,  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  for  a  much  longer  period  than  twenty  years,  the 
soil  of  these  islands  will  continue  to  yield  the  largest  proportion  of  the 
food  of  the  inhabitants ;  and  when  at  length  the  increase  of  population 
shall  have  passed  the  utmost  limit  of  production,  there  can  be  no  reason 
to  doubt  that  we  shall  still  obtain,  in  full  sufficiency,  the  food  that  we 
shall  require.  The  limited  extent  of  cultivable  land  necessarily  limits 
also  the  number  of  labourers  employed  upon  it ;  the  additional  hands 
will  consequently  have  to  betake  themselves  to  the  manufacture  of 
articles  desired  in  other  countries,  where  a  different  order  of  things  will 
exist,  and  those  hands,  while  there  exists  no  obstacle  to  the  admission 
of  foreign  grain,  will  be  as  effectually  engaged  in  producing  food,  when 
employed  in  the  cotton-mills  of  Lancashire,  and  the  iron-mines  of 
Yorkshire  and  Staffbrdsliire,  as  if  their  industry  were  applied  directly  to 
the  cultivation  of  the  soil. 

It  has  been  seen  that  the  meadows  and  pastures  of  the  United  King- 
dom amount  to  27,000,000  of  acres,  or  about  three-fifths  of  the  land 
hitherto  brought  under  cultivation.  The  whole  of  this  meadow  and 
pasture  land,  with  the  exception  of  that  part  required  for  the  production 
of  fodder  and  pasturage  for  horses  used  for  pleasure  or  for  trading 
])urposes,  is  used  equally  with  arable  laud  for  the  production  of  human 
food. 

A  very  general  opinion  now  prevails,  that  by  means  of  the  extension 
of  railroads  throughout  the  country,  a  large  proportion  of  the  pasture 
land  here  spoken  of,  as  well  as  that  important  portion  of  the  arable  land 
which  at  present  is  employed  in  raising  grain  for  horses,  will  be  rendered 
more  directly  available  than  at  present  for  the  service  of  man.  It  is 
said  that  the  successful  establishment  of  the  railroad  between  Liverpool 
and  Manchester,  a  distance  of  little  more  than  30  miles,  has  had  the 
effect  of  dismissing  from  that  particular  emplo}Tnent  1000  horses.  Tlie 
great  extent  and  peculiar  nature  of  the  traffic  between  the  two  towns 
here  mentioned  will  not  justify  the  expectation  of  a  similar  saving 
through  the  establishment,  in  other  quarters,  of  railroads  of  the  like 
extent ;  but  the  saving  fi-ora  this  source  might  certainly  be  productive 
of  some  effect,  in  placing  at  a  somewhat  greater  distance,  than  would 
otherwise  be  the  case,  the  time  when  the  United  Kingdom  will  cease  to 
produce  the  principal  part  of  the  food  of  its  inhabitants.  It  is  not 
necessary  for  us,  in  order  to  convince  ourselves  of  this,  to  adopt  any  of 