

m2 


1G4  PEOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

the  extravagant  calculations  wliioh  have  been  offered  upon  the  subject. 
The  tendency  towards  exaggeration  in  the  estimate  of  prospective  ad- 
vantage is  at  all  times  great,  and  it  appears  to  amount  almost  to  a 
moral  necessity  that  projectors  should  deceive  themselves  upon  such 
p.i.its.  Against  the  effects  of  such  exaggerations  proceeding  from 
persons  of  that  class,  the  public  mind  is  usually  pretty  well  preserved, 
but  the  mischief  becomes  of  a  more  serious  nature  when  extravagant 
estimates  are  advanced  and  supported  by  such  a  body  as  a  Committee 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  the  members  of  which  are  called  upon  to 
form  a  calm  and  reasonable  judgment  on  the  testimony  brought  before 
them  by  interested  or  over-sanguine  parties,  while  their  knowledge  of 
the  subjects  submitted  to  their  investigation  ought  to  be  such  as  should 
at  least  preserve  them  from  the  adoption  and  advocacy  of  any  very 
glaring  absurdities.  In  a  Report  presented  by  a  Committee  appointed 
to  inquire  into  the  subject  of  railroads,  it  is  gravely  stated  that  the 
effect  of  constructing  railroads  between  the  principal  towns  of  the 
kingdom,  would  be  to  render  unnecessary  no  fewer  than  a  million  of 
horses.*  A  very  slight  examination  of  the  documents  bearing  upon 
this  question,  within  their  reach,  would  have  sufficed  to  ])reserve  the 
Committee  from  hazarding  so  extravagant  an  assertion.  The  extent  of 
turnpike-roads  in  Great  Britain,  as  they  existed  in  1829,  amounted  to 
24,541  miles ;  and  if  the  whole  of  these  roads  were  converted  into 
railroads,  and  the  traffic  upon  every  part  of  them  were  fully  equal  to 
that  already  mentioned  as  the  estimate  for  the  Liverpool  and  Man- 
chester line,  the  number  of  horses  that  would  by  such  means  be  ren- 
dered superfluous  would  amount  to  only  785,312.  It  would  be  greatly 
beyond  the  mark  to  estimate  the  saving  at  one-fourth  of  this  number,  or 
less  than  one-fifth  of  the  million  stated  in  the  Committee's  Report. 
But  much  more  direct  means  of  testing  the  accuracy  of  the  Committee's 
estimate  were  at  hand,  furnished  by  detailed  returns  made  from  the  Tax 
Office  of  the  number  of  horses  in  respect  of  which  assessed  duties  were 
charged  in  1832,  and  which,  including  horses  used  in  trade  and  that 
description  of  farm  horses  not  wholly  used  in  husbandry,  upon  which 
the  duty  is  still  retained  (124,076),  amounted  to  no  more  than  340,678. 
However  much  the  railroad  system  may  be  extended,  it  is  certain  that  a 
very  large  proportion  of  these  animals  must  still  be  kept.  Nearly  all 
those  employed  for  pleasure,  and  for  the  internal  trade  of  towns,  as' well 
as  the  whole  of  those  used  on  farms,  would  be  continued. 