

Among  the  agents  employed  for  the  improvement  of  agriculture  we 
have  now  to  mention  the  steam-engine.  The  fens  in  Cambridgeshire, 
Lincolnshire,  and  other  eastern  counties  in  which  the  low  lands  known 


cii.vr.  1.]  AGllICULTURE.  155 

as  the  Bedford  Level  occur,  were  formerly  very  imperfectly  relieved 
from  their  surplus  water  by  means  of  windmills,  and  to  a  considerable 
extent  tliey  are  so  still.  Where  this  is  the  case,  the  fanuer  has  some- 
times to  witness  the  frustration  of  all  his  hopes  for  the  year,  almost  at 
the  very  period  of  their  expected  accomplishment.  It  frequently 
happens,  that  when  rain  falls  in  large  quantities  near  the  time  of 
harvest  there  is  not  a  breath  of  wind  to  move  the  sails  of  his  mill, 
and  the  field  in  which  the  yellow  grain  was  waving  is  speedily  con- 
verted into  a  lake.  Some  of  the  land  thus  circumstanced  is  among  the 
most  fertile  in  the  kingdom,  consisting  of  a  bed  of  decomposed  vege- 
table matter  thirty  feet  in  depth,  and  yielding  crops  of  from  four  to  five 
quarters  of  wheat  per  acre.  By  the  substitution  of  steam-power  for 
the  uncertain  agency  of  wind,  the  crop  is  now  secured  from  the  disaster 
we  have  mentioned.  The  expenditure  of  a  few  bushels  of  coals  places 
it  at  all  times  in  the  farmer's  power  to  drain  his  fields  of  all  superfluous 
moistm'e,  at  a  comparatively  inconsiderable  cost.  It  has  been  found 
that  an  engine  of  the  power  of  ten  horses  is  sufficient  for  draining  1000 
acres  of  land,  and  that  on  the  average  of  years  this  work  may  be 
performed  by  setting  the  engine  in  motion  for  periods  amounting,  in 
the  aggregate,  to  20  days  of  12  hours  each,  or  240  hours  in  all. 
Several  engines  have  been  erected  for  this  purpose  within  the  last  three 
or  four  years,  some  of  them  having  the  power  of  60  or  70  horses  ;  each 
of  these  large  engines  is  employed  in  draining  from  6000  to  7000  acres 
of  land.  The  cost  of  the  first  establishment  of  these  engines  is  stated  to 
be  1/.  per  acre,  and  the  annual  expense  of  keeping  them  at  work  '2s.  Gd. 
per  acre.  This  plan  is  found  to  bring  with  it  the  further  advantage,  that, 
in  the  event  of  long-continued  drought,  the  farmer  can,  without  appre- 
hension, admit  the  water  required  for  his  cattle  and  for  the  purpose  of 
irrigation,  secure  in  the  means  he  possesses  of  regulating  the  degree  of 
moisture,  if  the  drought,  as  is  frequently  the  case,  should  be  followed  by 
an  excess  of  rain. 

The  assertion  made  by  many  persons  who  were  examined  before  the 
Committee  in  1833,  that  the  capital  engaged  in  agricultural  pureuits 
has  of  late  years  been  much  diminished  through  the  losses  of  farmers, 
and  that  its  amount  is  now  inadequate  to  the  proper  development  of  the 
powers  of  production,  may  well  be  questioned  in  the  circumstances  of 
abundance  which  have  to  so  great  a  degree  kept  down  the  necessity  for 
importing  foreign  grain  to  supply  the  demands  of  our  constantly-in- 
creasing and  fully-employed  population. 