


CHAP.  I.]  AGRICULTURE.  161 

])ro()f  of  the  generally  increased  productiveness  of  the  soil  during  the 
last  few  years. 

The  land  in  cultivation  at  the  beginning  of  the  century,  computed 
from  Mr.  Couling's  statement,  in  connexion  with  the  number  of 
Inclosure  Bills,  was  42,881,880  statute  acres,  and  the  population  having 
at  that  time  been  16,338,102,  the  proportion  of  cultivated  land  was 
260  statute  acres  for  each  100  inhabitants. 

The  additions  since  made,  by  computation,  to  the  cultivated  land* 
and  to  the  population  have  been  4,129,777  acres  and  12,669,107  inhabit- 
ants ;  so  that  for  every  100  individuals  added  to  the  population  only 
32  acres  have  been  brought  into  cultivation,  being  about  a  rood  and  a 
quarter  for  each  person.  If  the  whole  breadth  of  land  now  in  cultiva- 
tion were  divided  equally  among  the  population,  one  acre  and  two-thirds 
of  an  acre  would  fall  to  the  lot  of  each.  It  thus  appears  that  10,000 
acres  of  arable  and  pasture  land,  v/hich,  as  cultivated  in  1801,  sup- 
ported 3810  inhabitants,  do,  at  the  present  day,  owing  to  the  improve- 
ments brought  about  iu  the  art  of  agriculture,  support  5997  inha- 
bitants. 

If  the  division  of  the  cultivated  land  into  arable  and  pasture,  made 
by  Mr.  Couling,  be  correct,  the  number  of  statute  acres  at  present 
luider  cultivation  by  the  spade  and  plough  in  the  United  Kingdom  is 
about  two-fifths  of  the  whole  cultivated  land  of  the  country.  Supposing 
the  same  j)r»)portion  to  be  preserved,  if  the  whole  of  the  improvable  land 
now  uncultivated  were  brought  to  its  full  use,  an  addition  would  be 
made  to  the  arable  and  garden  land  of  6,000,000  of  acres ;  and  if  the 
scale  of  productiveness  were  continued  at  its  present  amount,  this  quan- 
tity would  furnish  food  for  8,726,000  people — a  number  which,  at  its 
present  rate  of  progression,  will  have  been  added  to  our  population  in 
less  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  from  the  present  time.  It  is  certain, 
however,  that  the  land  which  has  hitherto  lain  neglected  is  not  of  the 
average  fertility,  and,  in  the  case  assumed,  of  no  further  improvements 
being  brought  about  in  the  processes  of  agriculture,  the  limit  of  pro- 
duction would  be  overtaken  by  the  population  at  an  earlier  ])eriod  than 
that  now  mentioned.  This,  however,  is  a  state  of  things  by  no  means 
likely  to  arrive.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  every  reason  to  hope  and  to 
expect  that  the  improvements  which  of  late  years  have  been  begun  in 
the  processes  of  husbandry,  are  very  far  from  having  reached  their 
\itmost  limit.  Even  in  England,  where  the  advances  hitherto  made 
have  been  so  great  as  to  place  our  farmers  before  those  of  many  other 
countries,  much  may  yet  be  done  by  introducing  the  profitable  practices 
of  some  districts  into  the  remaining  parts  of  the  kingdom,  and  by  the 
consolidation  of  small  holdings  into  farms  of  greater  size,  in  the  hands 