

Tlie  manufacture  of  woollen  goods  is  said  to  have  been  introduced 
into  this  country  by  the  Romans ;  but  the  tradition  is  not  confirmed  by 
any  certain  records.  There  is  no  doubt  that  broad-cloths  were  made 
in  England  as  early  as  the  close  of  the  twelfth  or  besiinninfif  of  the 
thirteenth  century  ;  but  the  Flemings  were  at  that  time  far  more 
advanced  in  the  art  than  our  countrymen,  and  a  considerable  part  of 
the  cloths  then,  and  for  a  long  time  afterwards,  worn  in  this  country, 
were  made  in  Flanders  from  wool,  the  produce  of  English  flocks. 

From  a  very  early  period  the  woollen    manufacture   has  been    an 

object  of  the  especial  protection  of  the  English  government.     Originally, 

indeed,   the  freest    exportation   of  British  wool   was  allowed ;  but   in 

1660  it  was  strictly  prohibited,  and  this  law  remained  in  force  until 

1825.     The  prohibition  w^as  grounded  upon  the  belief  that  the  long- 

i  staple  or  combing  wool  of  England  is  superior  for  some  manufacturing 

purposes  to  that  of  any  other  country,  and  that  by  keeping  the   raw 

(■/material  at  home  we  should  secure  to  ourselves  the  exclusive  manu- 

''  facture  of  certain  fabrics.     The  mistaken  policy  of  this  selfish  system  has 

been  rendered  fully  apparent  since  its  abandonment.     No  sooner  were 

the  French  manufacturers  able  to  procure  the  combing  wool  of  England, 

than  they  set  their  ingenuity  at  work  to  profit  fully  from  the  concession, 

and  produced  new  stuffs  from  English  wool  superior  to  any  that  we  had 


CHAP.  II  ]  MANUFACTURES,  16'9 

ever  ])rodiiced  in  this  country.  Thus  stimulated,  our  manufacturers 
also  aj)plied  themselves  to  the  discovery  of  superior  processes,  and  in  the 
course  of  a  very  few  years  have  produced  merinos  and  other  stuffs 
in  every  resi)ect  equal  to  the  fabrics  of  France.  By  this  means  our 
stuff  manufacture  has  received  an  important  impetus.  In  tiie  five  years 
from  1820  to  1824,  while  the  prohibition  to  export  English  wool  wa.^ 
still  in  force,  the  average  annual  shipments  of  that  description  of  woollei. 
goods  amounted  to  1.064,441  pieces.  In  the  five  years  following,  during 
which  the  removal  of  the  restriction  occurred,  the  average  annual  export 
of  such  goods  amounted  to  1,228,239  pieces  ;  and  in  the  uext  quin- 
quennial period,  from  1830  to  1834,  the  average  rose  to  1,505,993 
pieces  ;  between  1835  and  1839,  the  average  export  was  1,429,057 
pieces  ;  and  during  the  five  years,  1840  to  1844,  it  reached  2,128,212 
pieces,  being  exactly  double  the  quantity  exported  during  the  last  five 
years  in  which  the  prohibition  existed :  thus  furnishing  a  satisfactory 
answer  to  those  persons  who  predicted,  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  a 
departure  from  a  restrictive  policy,  the  absolute  ruin  of  that  branch  of 
our  export  trade.  In  1337,  with  the  intention  of  insuring  to  the  manu- 
fticturers  the  full  advantage  of  the  home  market,  an  Act  was  passed 
forbidding  any  one  to  wear  cloths  of  foreign  manufacture  ;  but  this  law, 
which  was  never  very  strictly  enforced,  was  soon  after  repealed. 