

England  has  long  stood  pre-eminent  for  the  skill  of  its  inhabitants  in 
manufactures  of  various  kinds.  But  for  that  skill,  and  the  extraordinaiy 
degree  of  development  which  it  has  experienced  during  the  past  half 
century,  it  is  not  possible  to  conceive  that  this  country  could  have 
made  the  financial  efforts  which  enabled  us  to  carry  on  the  long,  and, 
beyond  all  precedent,  the  expensive  war  of  the  French  Revolution.  It 
has  been  a  common  assertion  with  a  very  powerful  class  in  the  com- 
munity, that  the  extraordinary  efforts  here  alluded  to  were  principally, 
if  not  entirely,  made  at  the  expense  of  the  proprietors  of  the  soil. 
This  position  can  only  be  rendered  tenable  by  showing  that  the  condi- 
tion of  those  proprietors  during  the  war  was  one  of  privation  and 
sacrifice,  whereas  it  is  notorious  that  the  direct  contrary  of  such  a  state 
of  things  was  experienced  ;  that  through  the  enhanced  prices  of  all 
kinds  of  agricultural  produce,  rents  were  more  than  doubled  ;  and 
that  the  landlords  were  then  enabled  to  assume  a  scale  of  expensive 
living,  to  continue  which,  after  the  return  of  a  more  natural  order  of 
things,  they  had  recourse  to  restrictions  upon  the  importation  of  food, 
which  were  long  felt  as  an  injury  by  all  other  classes,  although  tliey 


168  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

may  not  have  been  equally  successful  in  perpetuating  high  rents  and 
prices. 

It  is  to  the  spinning-jenny  and  the  steam-engine  that  we  must  look 
as  having  been  the  true  moving  powers  of  our  fleets  and  aruiies,  and 
the  chief  support  also  of  a  long-continued  agricultural  prosperity. 
The  views  developed  in  the  preceding  pages  go  far  to  show  that  it  was 
owing  to  the  effects  of  these  powerful  agents  in  providing  employment 
for  a  large  proportion  of  our  rapidly  increasing  population,  that  the 
system  under  which  the  introduction  of  human  food  into  this  country  was 
regulated  or  restricted,  was  capable  of  producing,  in  any  degree,  that 
higher  scale  of  prices,  as  compared  with  other  countries,  which  the 
agi'iculturists  of  Great  Britain  received  for  their  produce.  Restore  to 
their  former  proportions  the  numbers  of  the  people  who  live  by  agri- 
cultural employments,  and  of  those  who  live  by  manufacturing  industry, 
while  at  the  same  time  you  retain  the  increased  productiveness  of  the 
soil,  and  it  would  not  be  long  before  the  prices  of  farming  produce 
would  fall  at  least  to  the  level  of  the  prices  of  surrounding  countries. 
So  long  as  the  disproportion  of  the  two  classes  is  maintained  at  its 
present  rate,  it  is  probable  that  England  will  continue  a  non-exporting 
country  in  regard  to  provisions,  and  that  the  prices  of  food,  while  even 
the  utmost  freedom  of  importation  is  allowed,  will  always  be  greater  here 
than  in  neighbom-ing  kingdoms,  by  all  the  cost  of  transport,  enhanced 
by  the  ordinary  profits  of  trade. 