

A  curious  trade  has  of  late  years  been  introduced,  that  of  importing 
foreign  woollen  rags  into  England  for  the  purpose  of  re-manufacture. 
These  are  assorted,  torn  up,  and  mixed  with  English,  or  more  commonly 
with  Scotch  wool  of  low  quality,  and  inferior  cloth  is  made  from  the 
mixture  at  a  price  sufficiently  moderate  to  command  a  sale  for  exportation. 

By  this  means  a  market  is  obtained  for  wool  of  a  very  low^  quality, 
which  might  otherwise  be  left  on  the  hands  of  the  growers. 

The  best  blankets  are  made  from  unmixed  British  wool,  and  this  trade 
has  experienced  a  very  great  increase.  The  tow-n  and  parish  of 
Dewsbury,  at  which  carpets  are  made,  has  increased  in  population, 
between  1801  and  1841,  from  11,752  to  23,806,  or  102  per  cent. 

The  great  and  continually  iucreasing  cheapness  of  cotton  manu- 
factured goods  has  caused  them  in  a  great  degree  to  supersede  the 
lower  qualities  of  woollen  cloths  among  the  labouring  population  of 
England  ;  and  as  we  are  less  able  to  rival  continental  manufacturers  of 
woollens  than  to  maintain  our  superiority  in  the  spinning  and  weaving 
of  cotton,  it  is  not  probable  that,  unless  new  markets  shall  be  opened, 
any  very  rapid  extension  will  in  future  be  given  to  our  manufacture  of 
woollen  cloths.  As  regards  worsted  and  stuff  goods  the  case  is  different ; 
and  it  has  of  late  been  an  increasingly  prevailing  opinion  among  the 
more  intelligent  persons  engaged  in  that  branch,  that  our  present  amount 
of  trade  in  those  goods  is  trifling  compared  to  vvhat  it- is  likely  to  become 
hereafter. 

The  rise  and  progress  of  the  cotton  manufacture  in  Great  Britain 
f 


CHAP.  ii.J  MANUFACTURES.  HI 

form  perhaps  tlie  most  extraordinary  page  in  the  annals  of  human 
industry.  It  is  not  necessary  on  this  occasion  to  trace  its  early  growth, 
or  to  descrihe  the  mechanical  inventions  by  means  of  which  it  has  come 
to  exercise  so  powerful  an  influence  upon  the  destinies  of  the  civilized 
world.  It  will  be  suflficient  here  to  describe,  by  their  effects,  the  gigantic 
strides  which  have  been  made  in  the  cotton  manufacture  since  the 
beginning  of  this  century,  referring  those  persons  who  wish  for  earlier  or 
more  detailed  accounts  to  the  Memoir  of  Mr.  Kennedy,*  the  History  of 
Mr.  Baines,f  and  the  Essay  of  Dr.  Ure.J 

In  the  year  1800,  the  quantity  of  cotton  imj)orted  for  use  into  the 
United  Kingdom  was  50,010,732  pounds,  having  been  only  31,447,605 
pounds  in  1790,  and  17,992,882  pounds  in  1785.  The  total  value  of 
manufactured  cotton  goods  exported  in  1800  was,  5,406, 501Z.,  having 
been  1,662,369/.  in  1790.  At  the  earliest  of  these  two  dates.  Sir 
Richard  Arkwright's  inventions  had  very  recently  been  thrown  open  to 
the  public  by  the  setting  aside  of  his  patent  in  the  Court  of  King's 
Bench.  The  first  steam-engine  constructed  for  a  cotton-mill  was  made 
by  Mr.  Watt  in  1785,  and  put  to  use  at  Papplewick  in  Nottinghamshire  ; 
it  was  four  years  later  that  the  application  of  steam  power  to  the  same 
purpose  was  first  made  in  Manchester.  In  the  year  1800,  the  number 
of  such  engines  in  that  town  had  increased  to  32,  the  aggregate  power 
of  which  was  estimated  as  equal  to  the  labour  of  430  horses.  This 
increase  shows  that  a  great  impulse  had  been  given  to  the  manufacture, 
which  already  was  considei'ed  to  be  a  thing  of  great  national  importance. 
If,  however,  we  measure  its  amount  at  that  time  in  comparison  with 
the  extension  which  it  has  since  received,  the  cotton  trade  of  1800 
dwindles  into  insignificance.  At  that  time  the  application  of  the  im- 
proved machinery  was  confined  to  the  production  of  yarn  ;  for  although 
Dr.  Cartwright's  power-loom  was  invented  as  early  as  1787,  the  first 
practical  application  of  his  machine  was  not  made  until  1801,  when  a 
weaving  factory  was  erected  by  Mr.  Monteith,  at  Pollockshaws,  near 
Glasgow,  and  furnished  with  200  self-acting  looms.  Nor  was  it  imtil 
after  several  years  had  elapsed,  that  the  imperfections  and  difficulties 
attendant  upon  this  new  speculation  were  overcome,  and  that  this 
interesting  invention  was  rendered  a  profitable  instrument  in  the  hands 
of  that  enterprising  gentleman. 