

The  circumstance  that  will  first  strike  any  person  who  consults  the 


cuAP.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  179 

foregoing  table,  is  the  comparative  sluggishness  of  the  trade  from  the 
beginning  of  the  century  until  the  return  of  peace.  It  has  been  seen 
that  the  eflect  of  the  general  adoption  of  Arlcwright's  invention  for  spin- 
ning was  to  treble  the  manufacture  in  15  years.  At  this  point  it  may 
almost  be  said  to  have  stopped,  and  in  fact  the  quantity  of  raw  material 
manufactured  in  each  of  the  last  two  years  of  the  war  was  smaller  than 
that  consumed  in  1801.  No  sooner  had  peace  returned,  however,  than 
new  life  was  infused  into  the  trade.  In  five  years  the  quantity  of  cotton 
spun  was  trebled  ;  in  another  five  years  it  was  four  times  what  it  had 
been  in  the  last  year  of  war  ;  at  the  expiration  of  another  period  of 
equal  duration,  more  than  five  times  that  quantity  passed  through  the 
manufacturers'  hands,  and  the  same  rate  of  progression  has  been  since 
continued,  the  quantity  used  in  1835  having  been  fully  six  and  a  half 
times  greater  than  that  used  in  1813,  while  in  the  following  nine  years 
there  has  been  an  increase  of  two-thirds,  or  66  per  cent.,  upon  the 
quantity  of  1835,  so  that  our  manufacturers  have  worked  up  eleven 
times  the  quantity  spun  in  1813. 

The  progress  of  the  export  trade  in  cotton  goods  has  been  more 
regular  throughout  the  period  embraced  in  the  table.  Judging  from 
the  "  official  value,^'  under  which  every  yard  or  pound  is  estimated  at 
an  unvarying  rate,  it  appears  that  the  quantity  of  these  goods  exported 
was  nearly  three  times  as  great  at  the  close  of  the  war  as  it  had  been  at 
the  beginning  of  the  century — a  fact  which  seems  to  prove  that  the 
capability  of  the  population  of  this  country  to  command  the  purchase  of 
this  the  cheapest  kind  of  clothing,  must  have  diminished,  the  increased 
exports  having  left  a  much  smaller  quantity  for  the  use  of  a  population 
increased  in  the  meanwhile  by  more  than  two  millions  of  souls. 

It  is  only  of  late  years  that  the  accounts  have  been  so  given  as  to 
show  the  actual  quantities  of  the  different  descriptions  of  cotton  goods 
exported.  The  following  statement  contains  the  summary  of  the  ship- 
ments in  each  year  from  1820  to  1849  : — See  page  180. 

If  the  first  and  last  lines  of  this  table  are  compared,  it  will  be  seen, 
that  while  the  number  of  yards  exported  in  1849  is  greater  by  430  per 
cent,  than  the  number  exported  in  1820,  the  increase  in  the  declared 
value  is  only  42  per  cent ;  the  average  price  per  yard,  which  in  1820  was 
12|^/.,  having  fallen  in  1849  to  Sf^.  The  quantity  of  twist  exported 
has  increased  during  the  same  period  in  the  proportion  of  6  to  1,  while 
the  increase  in  the  declared  value  is  only  in  the  proportion  of  about  5  to  2. 
The  average  price  of  twist  in  1820  was  2s.  D^d.,  and  in  1849  was  little 
more  than  lOld.  per  pound.  If,  in  addition  to  these  values,  we  take 
account  of  the  reduction  that  has  occurred  in  the  price  of  raw  cotton, 
we  may  be  enabled  to  form  some  judgment  as  to  the  economy  which  has 
been  introduced  into  the  process  of  manufacture  during  the  last  30 
years,  and  be  besides  able  to  apportion  the  degrees  of  that  economy 