

"  The  subsequent  calculation  does  not  aim  at  fixing  the  whole  num- 
ber of  operatives  dependent  upon  the  cotton  trade  for  subsistence,  but 
only  of  that  part  of  the  operative  body  which  earns  a  livelihood  in  cotton 
factories,  moved  by  iwicer,  and  is  employed  in  carrying  on  the  preparing, 


1S8  PROGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

spinning,  weaving,  and  accessary  mechanical  departments  within  the 
walls  of  them. 

"  It  does  not  comprehend  hand-loom  weavers,  printers,  bleachers, 
dyers,  cotton -tiu'cad  lace-makers  (an  enormons  and  growing  branch  of 
the  cotton  manufacture),  and  many  other  branches  of  manufacture,  either 
arising  out  of,  or  immediately  dependent  upon,  the  spinning  of  cotton  by 
power.  It  comprehends  those  operatives  alone  who  habitually  work  in 
cotton  factories.  It  shows  their  body  to  consist  of  212,800  persons,  and 
to  earn  annually  the  enormous  sum  of  5,777,434/. 

"  The  total  quantity  of  cotton  consumed  in  the  spinning  of  yarn,  in 
Great  Britain,  in  1832,  as  stated  in  '  Burn's  Conimercial  Glance,'  was 
277,260,490  lbs.;  and  of  this  quantity,  27,327,120 lbs.  was  consumed 
in  Scotland,  leaving  for  the  consumption  of  Elngland  249,933,370  lbs. 

"  The  net  loss  of  cotton  in  spinning  is  estimated  variously  by  different 
individuals.  In  the  calculations  of  Mr.  Kennedy,  made  use  of  by  him 
in  a  paper  published  in  the  'Transactions  of  the  Manchester  Literary 
and  Philosophical  Society,'  it  is  taken  at  1^  oz.  per  lb.  ;  while  Mont- 
gomery, in  his  '  Theory  and  Practice  of  Cotton-Spinning,'  computes  it 
at  14  oz.,  and  Burn  at  If  oz. ;  but  as  the  amount  taken  by  Mr.  Kennedy 
is  that  which  appears  to  be  generally  considered  correct,  it  is  adopted 
in  these  calculations. 

"  If,  then,  from  the  quantity  given  above,  we  deduct  1^  oz.  per  lb., 
or  23,431,253  lbs.,  we  shall  have  the  total  weight  of  yarn  produced 
226,502,117  lbs. 

"  The  average  number  of  hanks  in  each  pound  of  yarn  spun  is  con- 
sidered, by  apparently  a  majority  of  persons  conversant  with  the  subject, 
to  be  40.  Montgomery  takes  the  average  counts  spun  in  Great  Britain 
at  50,  which  taking  into  account  the  finer  average  numbers  spun  in  Scot- 
land than  in  England,  would  fix  the  counts  nearly  as  above  stated. 

"  The  returns  made  to  the  Lancashire  forms  of  inquiry,  as  given  in 
previous  tables,  show  an  average  of  finer  counts  than  40,  but,  as  the 
returns  were  better  made  from  the  fine  mills  than  from  the  coarse,  and 
from  jNIanchester,  where  the  finer  yarn  is  spun,  than  from  the  country, 
it  is  evident  that  lower  numbers  ought  to  be  taken  than  those  shown  in 
the  returns ;  and  as  the  general  opinion  appears  to  be  in  favour  of  40, 
this  average  is  adopted. 