

It  does  not  appear  likely  that  any  considerable  addition  will  in  future 
be  made  to  the  number  of  hand-looms  employed  for  cotton -weaving  ; 
whereas  the  machine -makers  of  Lancashire  have  at  different  periods  been 
engaged  to  the  full  extent  of  their  power  in  constructing  power-looms ; 
so  that  their  number  increases  continually.  AVe  should  be  wrong,  how- 
ever, if  we  inferred  that  hand-looms  are  lying  unemployed.  Power- 
looms  have  not  hitherto  been  found  generally  applicable  to  the  prod uc- 


cii\r.  II.]  MANUFACITJIIES.  187 

tion  of  fine  cloths,  or  what  are  called  fancy  goods.  The  demand  for 
■  these  fluctuates  considerably,  and  is  at  times  greater  than  can  be  readily 
supplied.  In  the  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  appointed  in  the  summer  of  1834,  to  examine  the  numerous 
petitions  presented  by  the  hand-loom  weavers,  we  find  a  statement  given 
in  evidence  by  Mr.  Makin,  a  manufacturer  of  Bolton,  to  the  following 
effect : — "  I  know  that  there  is  at  present  no  surplus  of  weavers.  I  go 
nine  miles  fi-om  the  seat  of  my  manufacture  on  one  side  to  get  weavers, 
and  I  am  putting  out  work  nine  miles  across  the  country  in  another 
part  to  get  weavers  ;  and  if  I  knew  where  I  could  get  a  certain  descrip- 
tion of  weavers,  by  going  nine  miles  another  way,  I  should  go.  But  it 
is  a  strange  fact,  that,  whilst  the  demand  for  hand-loom  cloth  is  greater 
than  the  production,  yet  the  wages  do  not  rise  ;  and  in  about  two  months 
from  this  time  (July,  1834)  I  know,  from  the  experience  of  past  years, 
that  there  will  be  demands  for  thousands  of  weavers  more  than  can  be 
obtained." 

The  fact  stated  by  Mr.  Makin,  although  seemingly  at  variance  with 
the  ordinary  law  of  demand  and  supply,  may  admit  of  this  solution  ; — 
that,  when  they  can  be  furnished  within  a  certain  limited  price,  hand- 
loom  cloths  meet  with  an  extensive  sale ;  but  that,  when  that  limit  is 
passed,  other  goods  of  home  production,  or  similar  goods  of  foreign  make, 
come  into  successful  competition  with  them  ;  so  that  the  manufacturers 
are  not  enabled,  by  the  most  extensive  demand,  to  increase  the  rate  of 
■wages  paid  to  the  weavers. 

A  considerable  amount  of  very  valuable  and  authentic  information 
respecting  the  amount  of  labour  employed  in  the  spinning  and  weaving 
factories  of  this  kingdom,  was  embodied  in  their  reports  by  the  Com- 
missioners appointed  to  collect  information  as  to  the  employment  of 
children  in  tactories,  and  subsequently  by  the  gentlemen  ap})ointed  as 
Inspectors,  under  the  Act  of  1833,  for  regulating  the  labour  of 
children. 

The  following  calculation,  made  by  Mr.  Stan  way,  under  the  direction 
of  Mr.  Cowell,  one  of  the  Commissioners,  and  inserted  in  the  Supj)le- 
mentary  Report  of  the  Factory  Commissioners  (Part  I.,  pp.  137,  138), 
is  perhaps  as  near  an  approximation  to  the  truth  as,  from  the  nature  of 
the  subject  (the  numbers  continually  fluctuating),  it  is  reasonable  to 
expect.  Being  founded  upon  actual  and  extensive  returns,  the  state- 
ment may  be  received  as  substantially,  although  not  perhaps  minutely, 
correct. 