

An  effect  such  as  has  just  been  described  can  only  be  produced  while 
the  trade  is  in  a  course  of  rapid  extension.  If  the  productive  power  of 
the  machines  were  doubled  without  a  corresponding  increase  in  the 
demand,  it  is  clear  that  the  operative  spinners  could  not  receive  a  greater 
amount  of  weekly  earnings,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  many  of  them 
would  be  thrown- out  of  work,  and  a  competition  for  employment  would 
thence  arise  which  must  occasion  a  reduction  in  their  actual  receipts. 
Considered  in  this  point  of  view,  the  prosperity  of  this  branch  of  national 
industry  becomes  a  subject  of  the  greatest  importance — an  importance 
far  beyond  all  calculation  of  mere  shillings  and  pence.  The  tendency 
of  all  improvements  in  the  various  processes  of  the  cotton  manufacture 
is  the  abridgment  of  human  labour,  but  hitherto,  such  has  been  the 
gigantic  progress  of  the  trade,  as  to  give  full  employment  to  the  hands 


198  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  n. 

who,  in  a  less  prosperous  state  of  things,  would  have  been  thrown  out 
of  work.  Nor  is  this  all.  The  assistants  of  the  spinners,  who,  from 
their  occupation  in  joining  the  threads  broken  in  the  sjnnning,  are  called 
jnecers,  and  who  are  much  more  numerous  than  the  spinners  themselves, 
are,  while  thus  employed,  qualifying  themselves  to  become  spinners 
when  they  grow  up.  llitherto  the  demand  for  workmen  of  that  kind 
has  been  sulliciently  great  to  absorb  all  who  have  thus  been  qualified, 
.and  to  cause  them  to  receive,  as  spinners,  adequate  and  even  liberal 
wages.  Piecers  are  generally  employed  in  the  proportion  of  four  to  one 
spinner,  but  one  of  these  four  is  generally  a  girl,  who  does  not  in  after- 
life become  a  spinner,  but  is  transferred  to  some  other  department  of  the 
mill.  It  is  further  probable  that,  of  the  three  boys,  one  may  cease  to 
work  in  a  factory,  but  even  then  the  number  of  candidates  for  employ- 
ment as  spinners  will  be  continually  doubled  in  the  course  of  a  few 
years,  and  if  we  had  no  other  means  for  ascertaining  the  progressive 
extension  of  the  manufacture,  the  fact  of  the  continual  absorption  of 
these  fresh  hands  would  prove  how  great  that  extension  must  be — that 
it  must  have  continued  with  a  constantly  accelerated  speed  in  order  not 
to  lower  the  earnings  of  the  operative  spinners,  whose  ranks  are  thus 
increased  in  a  geometrical  ratio. 

Provided  nothing  shall  occur  to  prevent  the  cotton  manufacture  of 
this  country  from  developing  itself  in  the  same  extraordinary  manner  as 
it  has  dt)ne  during  the  last  thirty  years,  the  new  candidates  for  employ- 
ment will  of  course  receive  the  same  encouragement  as  those  have 
experienced  who  have  preceded  them.  But  this  is  a  state  of  things 
liable  to  be  deranged.  There  are  many  causes  which  might  contribute 
to  this  derangement.  A  war,  however  much  on  other  grounds  to  be 
deplored,  might  in  this  respect  be  among  the  least  fatal  of  the  checks 
to  our  manufacturing  industry,  since  it  would  offer  another  employment 
in  the  place  of  those  which  would  be  abridged.  The  closing  of  foreign 
markets  through  the  increasing  skill  or  the  jealousy  of  manufacturers 
in  other  countries,  and  a  falling  off  in  the  hitherto  continually  augmented 
supply  of  the  raw  material,  are  among  the  more  obvious  of  those  adverse 
circumstances.  The  closing  against  us  of  some  accustomed  channels  of 
trade  has,  at  various  times,  been  experienced  ;  but  the  degree  of  distress 
which  it  would  otherwise  have  occasioned  has,  in  a  short  time,  been 
removed  by  the  demands  of  new  customers,  who  have,  in  a  measure, 
been  compelled  to  become  such  by  the  continually  diminishing  prices  of 
our  coods.  It  will  be  seen,  in  a  future  section  of  this  work,  in  how 
great  a  degree  these  counteracting  causes  have  operated  during  the  last 
forty-five  years  ;  but  although  hitherto  the  favourable  have  always  more 
than  counterbalanced  the  unfavourable  circumstances  that  have  affected 
the  demand  for  our  products,  it  can  hardl}-  be  hojjcd  that  the  same  good 
fortinie  will  always  attend  us  :  that  "  new  worlds  "  are  to  be  continually 