

Yards. 

The  quantity  printed  in  ITSG  was     .     .     .       20,621,797 

In  1800,  it  had  increased  to 32,869,729 

In  1814,  it  had  further  increased  to  .      .      .     12-1,61.3,472 
And  in  1830,  it  had  reached  to    ....     .347,4.")0,2a9 

being  more  than  ten  times  the  quantity  printed  at  the  beginning  of  the 
century,  w^hile  on  the  other  hand  it  is  less  by  104,973,292  yards  than 
the  quantity  exported  in  1849.  The  quantity  printed  in  1830,  after 
providing  199,799,466  yards  for  exportation,  left  147,650,833  yards 
for  use  at  home. 

This  great  increase  must  be  ascribed  to  the  improved  contrivances  and 
processes  which,  in  the  interval  have  been  introduced.  By  some  of 
these,  processes  w  hich  formerly  occupied  many  weeks  are  now  performed 
in  a  few  hours,  effecting  a  great  saving  of  labour  and  in  the  amount  of 
capital  required.  The  substitution  of  metallic  cylinders  on  which  the 
patterns  are  engraved,  in  place  of  wooden  blocks,  was  first  practised 
about  1785,  and  at  once  effected  a  great  saving.  The  process  of 
engraving  the  entire  surface  of  these  large  cylinders  was,  however,  a 
very  expensive  operation  ;  it  was  consequently  a  more  important  im- 
provement when  the  system  was  introduced  of  engraving  the  pattern 
upon  a  small  steel  cylinder,  and  thence  transferring  it  by  pressure,  first 
to  softened  steel,  and  then,  this  being  hardened,  to  copper  cylinders ; 
in  the  manner  which  has  since  been  used  for  multiplying  plates  used  for 
printing   bank-notes.     By  this  means  the    engraved   patterns   can    be 


202  PliOGllESS  OF  Tim  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

transferred  to  almost  an  indefinite  nnmber  of  cylinders  at  a  trilling 
expense.  The  small  cylinder  npon  which  the  engraving  is  first  snnk 
is  called  the  die,  the  second  cylinder  to  which  the  pattern  is  transferred 
in  relief  is  called  the  7nill.  This,  when  hardened,  will  give  the  required 
imj)ression  to  a  great  number  of  cylinders  made  of  the  softer  metal,  and 
as  the  die  can  likewise  be  made  to  give  up  its  pattern  to  several  mills, 
a  sufficient  number  of  cylinders  can  always  be  produced  from  one 
engraving. 

The  introduction  of  this  great  improvement  took  place  about  1H08, 
and  has  had  a  powerful  effect  in  extending  the  trade  of  the  country. 
At  this  time,  cylinders  thus  made  and  engraved,  after  the  novelty  of  the 
pattern  is  gone  by  in  England,  are  exported  to  various  parts  of  Europe 
and  America. 

The  policy  of  subjecting  such  an  article  as  printed  cottons  to  the 
burthen  and  restrictions  of  the  excise  laws  w'as  always  much  questioned. 
To  preserve  our  export  trade,  it  was,  of  course,  necessary,  during  the 
continuance  of  the  duty,  to  grant  a  drawback  upon  shipment  equal  to 
the  amount  of  the  duty.  The  net  revenue  derived  from  the  tax,  on  an 
average  of  the  ten  years  preceding  its  repeal,  was  a  little  more  than 
600,000/.  per  annum  ;  but  in  order  to  realize  this  sum  to  the  Exchequer, 
the  gross  amount  of  duty  levied  during  the  same  time  averaged 
1,850,000/.  per  annum,  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  same  being  repaid 
as  drawback  upon  quantities  exported.  This,  in  itself,  was  a  great  and 
acknowledged  evil :  it  held  out  temptation,  and  opened  the  door  to 
frauds,  which,  it  is  w'ell  known,  were  committed  to  a  considerable  extent ; 
and  besides  this  crying  evil,  the  interference  of  revenue  regulations 
placed  many  obstacles  in  the  way  of  experiments  and  improvements  as 
we  have  since  happily  been  able  to  ascertain.  Without  entering  into 
any  minute  explanations  upon  the  subject,  it  may  be  stated,  in  proof  of 
this  assertion,  and  upon  the  authority  of  a  gentleman  thoroughly  and 
intimately  conversant  with  all  the  details  of  calico  printing,  that,  upon 
the  same  premises,  with  the  same  capital,  and  employing  the  same 
amount  of  labour,  double  the  quantity  of  cloths  are  now  printed  which 
were  printed  previous  to  the  repeal  of  the  duty,  and  to  the  consequent 
removal  of  the  revenue-oflficers  from  the  print  works. 