

Another  very  great  improvement  has  been  effected  of  late  years. .  At 
first,  only  one  colour  could  be  imparted  to  the  pattern  on  the  cylinder ; 
and  if  more  than  one  colour  were  required,  it  was  necessary  to  resort 
to  a  different  process,  and  to  print  the  several  colours  by  different 
operations.  This  disadvantage  was  at  length  partially  got  over  ;  so 
that,  five  years  ago,  printers  were  enabled  to  impart  two,  and  even  three 
colours  by  means  of  cylinders  ;  and  it  is  now  common  to  print  five  colours 
at  one  operation.  The  vast  improvement  which  has  latterly  been 
produced  in  the  style  and  execution  of  printed  cotton  goods  is  matter  of 


CH.vp.  ii]  MANUFACTURES.  203 

such  common  observation,  that  it  cannot  bo  necessary  to  enlarge  upon  it 
here  :  but  for  it,  the  cotton  manufacture  could  not,  in  this  branch,  have 
stood  against  the  powei'ful  rivalry  to  which  it  has  of  late  been  subjected 
by  our  silk  manufacture.  -This  improvement  has  been  assisted  by  the 
discovery  of  a  method  for  imparting  to  cotton  fabrics  the  brilliant  red 
colour  of  cochineal,  which  was  previously  applied  to  woollens  only.  This 
is  eflectcd  by  simply  passing  a  current  of  steam  on  to  cloth  to  which  the 
cochineal-dye  has  previously  been  applied,  that  process  having  the  effect 
of  fixing  the  colour. 

It  is  not  possible  to  make  any  very  satisfactory  estimate  of  the  growth 
and  progress  of  the  manufacture  of  hosiery.  The  greater  part  of  our 
knowledge  concerning  it  is  due  to  the  personal  exertions  of  Mr.  Fclkin, 
a  merchant  of  Nottingham,  the  carefulness  and  accuracy  of  whose 
investigations  are  generally  recognised.  These,  however,  a})ply  only  to 
recent  years,  and  we  cannot  put  e({ual  faith  in  the  results  offered  by 
previous  inquirers. 

The  chief  seats  of  the  hosiery  manufacture  are  the  counties  of  Derby, 
Nottingham,  and  Leicester,  in  the  last  named  of  which  nearly  all  the 
frames  in  which  wool  is  employed  are  to  be  found,  while  Nottingliam 
contains  the  largest  number  of  frames  for  the  production  of  cotton 
hosiery.  The  use  of  silk  in  this  branch  of  manufactiu'e  is  almost  wholly 
contined  to  Derby  and  Nottingham. 

Blackner  estimated  that  in  1812  there  were  29,590  stocking  frames 
at  work  in  all  the  branches.  Thirty  years  before  that  time  the  number 
had  been  estimated  at  20,000.  If  we  are  to  judge  from  the  localities 
assigned  to  the  frames  in  1812,  it  would  appear  that  rather  more  than 
one-third  were  employed  in  producing  cotton  hose,  and  that  about 
one-half  were  used  for  woollen  goods,  l)ut  no  very  accurate  estimate  of 
the  proportions  can  be  formed  from  the  locality  of  the  machines.  In 
1833,  a  meeting  was  held  of  delegates  from  the  frame-work  knitters, 
when  a  resolution  was  formed  for  dividing  the  seat  of  the  hosiery 
manufacture  into  districts,  with  the  view  of  obtaining,  among  other 
things,  exact  details  of  the  number  and  description  of  frames,  the  amount 
of  labour  employed  in  them,  and  such  further  particulars  as  might 
enable  the  workmen  to  co-operate  for  the  more  effectual  protection  and 
advancement  of  their  interests.  The  resolution  tluis  formed  was  not, 
indeed,  carried  into  effect  in  the  manner  nor  with  the  objects  proposed  ; 
but  was  of  advantage,  by  its  having  been  the  means  of  drawing  the 
attention  of  Mr.  Felkin  to  the  subject,  who  drew  up  an  estimate  of  the 
extent  of  the  manufacture  in  its  various  branches,  which  was  believed 
to  present  a  sufficiently  accurate  approximation  to  the  condition  of  the 
trade  at  that  time  to  answer  all  practical  purposes.  The  following  is 
Mr.  Felkin's  estimate  for  1833. — See  page  20-1. 