


cu.vr.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  199 

"  called  into  existence  "  as  fast  as  the  improvement  of  our  spinning  and 
weaving  machinery  may  require  new  customers ;  or  tliat  another  India 
will  offer  a  market  in  which  we  can  undersell  the  native  manufat.-tures 
of  fahrics,  the  raw  material  for  which  is  grown  upon  their  own  soil,  and 
which  from  time  immemorial  have  been  among  the  chief  staples  of  their 
country. 

The^e  forebodings  might,  it  is  true,  have  been  advanced  with  appa- 
rently equal  reason  at  any  time  during  the  period  in  which  the  cotton 
manufacture  of  England  has  been  attaining  to  the  magnitude  which  it 
lias  now  reached,  and  which  it  has  been  endeavoured  faintly  to  sketch. 
According  to  present  appearances  there  has,  indeed,  hardly  ever  been  a 
time  in  which  those  forebodings  might  not  have  been  lu-ged  with  greater 
reason  than  now,  when  the  real  demands  of  consumers  in  almost 
every  part  of  the  world  are  giving  unremitted  employment  to  every 
spindle  and  loom  throughout  the  kingdom  He  must,  however,  have 
read  the  page  of  history,  and  especially  of  commercial  history,  to  very 
little  purpose  who  has  not  perceived  that,  when  least  dreaded  and 
expected,  changes  will  sometimes  arise  which  no  foresight  could  predict, 
no  prudence  or  exertion  avert.  The  better  understanding  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  trade  on  the  part  of  those  to  w  horn  the  business  of  legislation 
is  confided  will,  we  may  hope,  do  much  to  prevent  the  dreaded  reverses  ; 
an  increasing  degree  of  enlightenment  among  the  rulers  of  other  countries, 
leading  them  to  a  greater  encouragement  of  commercial  intercourse,  may 
do  more  ;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  and  expected  that  the  example  in  this 
respect  set  within  the  last  few  years  by  England,  in  abandoning  restric- 
tions which  were  so  long  and  pertinaciously  held  by  her,  may  overcome 
those  prejudices  in  the  minds  of  foreigners,  which  our  commercial  suc- 
cess in  spite  of  those  restrictions  has  fostered,  and  that  a  spirit  of 
lil)erality  between  nations  will  be  henceforward  acknowledged  as  the 
truest  means  for  promoting  the  prosperity  of  each.  When  all  this  shall 
be  accomplished,  however,  constant  vigilance  will  be  required,  not  indeed 
for  what  is  called  the  protection  of  our  great  manufacture,  but  to  avert 
or  to  remove  obstacles  as  they  may  present  themselves,  and  especially  to 
relieve  the  springs  of  industry  from  those  which  yet  remain  of  the 
shackles  by  which  its  energy  has  in  former  times  been  cramped.  Much 
has  been  done  to  this  end  already  during  late  years,  by  reforming  our 
tariff,  and  we  may  confidently  hope  that  whatever  remains  to  be  effected 
in  this  respect  will  be  completed  by  following  out  the  same  enlightened 
policy  under  which  so  many  reforms  have  already  been  brought  about 
in  oiu"  commercial  system.  Any  further  observations  on  this  branch 
of  the  subject  may,  with  more  propriety,  be  deferred  to  that  part  of 
this  work  which  will  be  devoted  to  the  consideration  of  our  external 
connnerce. 