


214  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ti. 

prohibited  in  1765,  and  this  system  continued  in  force  during  a  long 
series  of  years,  such  goods  being  expressly  excluded  from  the  benefit  of 
the  treaty  of  commerce  concluded  with  France  in  1786. 

By  this  prohibitory  law,  the  English  silk  manufacturers  were  legally 
secured  in  the  exclusive  possession  of  the  home  market,  from  which,  in 
the  then  imperfect  condition  of  the  manufacture,  they  would  otherwise 
have  been  driven  by  the  superior  fabrics  of  foreign  looms.  Protected 
trades  arc,  ahnost  invariably,  carried  on  without  that  regard  to  economy 
in  the  processes  which  is  necessary,  in  order  to  provide  for  their  exten- 
sion, by  bringing  the  protected  article  within  the  reach  of  a  larger 
number  of  consumers.  Hence  it  arose  that  silk  goods  came  to  be  looked 
upon  as  mere  luxuries,  the  use  of  which  must  be  confined  to  the  richer 
classes ;  and  this  state  of  things  was  aggravated  by  their  being  thence 
considered  fit  objects  of  taxation.  Heavy  duties  were  imposed  upon 
the  importation  of  raw  and  thrown  silk  ;  the  manufactured  goods  made 
of  a  material,  the  cost  of  which  was  thus  enhanced,  continued  beyond 
the  reach  of  the  multitude,  and  the  manufacturers  were  consequently 
liable  to  considerable  and  violent  vicissitudes  from  every  change  of 
fashion.  On  the  other  hand,  those  manufacturers  feeling  themselves 
secure  in  the  legal  monopoly  of  the  home  market,  were  without  the 
necessary  stimulus  to  improvement,  and  additional  temptations  were 
consequently  held  out  to  tlie  smuggler  to  introduce  the  superior  pro- 
hibited goods  of  France.  The  slow  progress  made  in  this  branch  of 
manufacture  in  England,  under  this  system  of  duties  and  restrictions, 
may  be  seen  from  the  following  table  of  the  quantities  of  raw  and  thrown 
silk  imported  at  various  times  into  the  kingdom,  from  the  year  1765, 
when  the  prohibition  of  foreign  silk  goods  was  enacted,  until  the  end 
of  lS4:d.—See  page  215. 

During  all  the  period  embraced  in  this  table,  up  to  1824,  the  silk 
trade  of  England  was  one  continued  alternation  of  prosperity  and  dis- 
tress. That  the  former  condition  prevailed  is  proved,  however,  by  the 
increasing  amount  of  the  manufacture,  comparing  one  period  with 
another  ni  the  course  of  years.  In  1824  the  system  here  described  was 
wholly  changed.  The  high  duties  of  5^.  Qd.  per  lb.  imposed  vipon  raw 
silk,  and  of  lis.  Sd.  per  lb.  upon  thrown  silk,  were  reduced ;  the  former 
to  dd.,  and  the  latter  to  7s.  Qd.  per  lb.  These  rates  were  afterwards 
further  reduced;  that  on  raw  silk  to  Id.,  and  that  on  thrown  silk  to 
Ss.  Gr/.  per  lb. :  a  regulation  of  the  Custom-house  permitting  the  latter 
duty  to  be  drawn  back  upon  the  exportation  of  the  goods  into  which 
foreign  thrown  silk  is  converted  ;  and  in  1845  the  duties  on  importation 
were  wholly  repealed.  In  1824  the  system  of  prohibition  against  the 
importation  of  foreign  manufactured  silk  goods  was  prospectively  re- 
,pealed,  and  a  scale  of  duties  adopted,  under  which  such  goods  might  be 