

For  some  time  before,  and  after  the  opening  of  our  markets  to  the 
fabrics  of  other  countries,  it  was  firmly  believed,  and  loudly  asserted,  by 
many  persons  experienced  in  the  trade,  that  such  a  measure  would  bring 
certain  ruin  upon  the  silk  manufacturers  of  England,  who,  being  accua- 


2 IS  PHOGRESS  OF  THE  NATIO?^.  [sec.  ii. 

tomed  to  work  for  only  the  higher  ranks  of  society,  had  constantly 
experienced  the  evils  attendant  upon  a  limited  market,  and  had  been 
kept  in  dread  of  competition  from  without ;  the  successful  adventures  of 
contraband  dealers  having,  under  such  circumstances,  been  frequently 
productive  of  temporary  stagnations,  which  involved  the  manufacturers 
and  their  workmen  in  distress.  The  experience  of  twenty-five  years 
has  now  served  to  show  how  groundless  were  these  fears  ;  that  by  reducing 
the  prices  of  their  goods,  which  they  were  enabled  to  do  through  the 
reduction  of  thx3  duty  and  the  improvements  in  their  machinery,  the 
market  would  be  so  extended  as  to  include  among  their  customers  a  far 
larger  part  of  the  population  ;  and  that,  stimulated  by  the  rivalry  of 
foreign  manufacturers,  such  improvements  would  be  effected  in  the 
quality  of  our  fabrics,  as  would  fit  them  for  successful  competition  with 
the  most  beautiful  productions  of  foreign  looms.  It  is  strictly  correct 
to  assert,  that  with  free  permission  to  import  upon  even  a  high  scale  of 
duties,  our  silk  manufacturers  suffer  less  at  present  from  foreign  compe- 
tition, than  they  did  in  the  days  of  prohibition,  when  the  quantity  of 
smuggled  goods  amounted  to  only  a  small  proportion  of  that  now  legally 
imported.  In  1810,  when  the  smuggler's  difficulties  were  increased  by 
the  war,  the  quantity  of  contraband  silks  brought  into  consumption  in 
this  country  was  felt  to  be  so  injurious  to  the  manufacturers,  that  they 
formed  themselves  into  an  association  for  the  prevention  of  smuggling. 
Again,  in  1818  and  the  following  year,  numerous  petitions  were  pre- 
sented to  Parliament  by  the  silk -weavers  of  Spitalfields  and  of  Coventry, 
complaining  of  this  illegal  competition,  and  stating  that,  by  means  of 
it,  "  The  demand  for  manufactured  goocls  had  for  some  time  past  so  de- 
creased, as  to  afford  serious  ground  of  alarm  to  the  manufacturers,  and 
to  threaten  the  existence  of  the  silk  manufacture  of  this  country."  In 
one  of  these  petitions,  it  was  stated,  that  operative  weavers  who  used  to 
earn  from  30s.  to  40^.  per  week,  were  at  that  time  able  to  earn  no  more 
than  lO.s.  or  ll.?. 

The  fact  last  stated  was  by  no  means  peculiar  to  the  time  embraced 
in  the  petition.  The  system  under  which  the  trade  bad  been  regulated 
for  more  than  half  a  century  had  familiarized  the  country  with  the 
complaints  of  the  silk-weavers,  who  were  constantly  liable,  on  any 
change  of  fashion,  to  be  thrown  out  of  employment;  and  the  high. rate 
of  whose  wages  when  fully  employed,  being  unaccompanied  by  prudent 
preparation  for  a  fall  in  wages,  only  served,  by  multiplying  their  wants, 
to  render  the  reverse  more  distressing  when  it  came. 