

£.  £. 

Say 700,000 

Fixed  capital  in  45  factories 90,000 

„  1750  steam  power  machines,  1  .-,o(^  Q,^r> 

averaging  l.'i  (quarters  wide  J  "     ' 
,,  1450  hand  machines,  average  1  ,  -,,  nnn 

10  quarters  wide       .      .  °.  p^O-OOO 
Floating  capital  in  rough  goods  in  process  of)  rnn  nnft 

making j  "^     ' 

„  process   of   embroidering  1  „^  ^^ 

and  finishing       ...  J         ' 

1,320,000 

Total  capital  employed  in  the  trade     .     .     ,£2,080,000 


"The  only  improvement  introduced  since  1833  in  the  machinery  for 
making  plain  nets  has  consisted  in  a  contrivance  for  obtaining  greater 
speed  in  the  working.  Several  patents  have  been  taken  out  for  im- 
provements in  the  style  of  the  goods  produced,  and  for  modes  of  adapting 
the  jacquard  frame.  The  main  object  sought  by  the  patentees  has  been 
the  introduction  of,  patterns  in  close  imitation  of  pillow  lace,  and  espe- 
cially of  Netherland  lace,  and  their  success  in  this  object  has  been  very 
great. 

"  The  cheapness  of  these  beautiful  fabrics  is  calculated  to  excite 
astonishment.  A  yard  in  length  of  12-quarter  wide  plain  net,  may  now 
be  bought  for  one  shilling.  A  yard  of  platt  net,  of  the  same  width,  is 
worth  from  20s.  to  5/.  The  machine  employed  to  make  the  former 
would  cost  in  its  construction  250/,,  while  tlie  platt  net  machine  would 

p 


210  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NAIION  [sec.  ii. 

cost  from  500Z.  to  lOOOZ.  Fancy  goods  of  all  qualities,  from  one 
farthing  to  '20s.  per  yard,  are  at  all  times  being  made,  and  often  in  the 
same  establishment. 

"In  1837,  the  fancy  productions  of  Nottingham  were  so  far  out  of 
favour  with  the  public,  that  the  embroiderers  were  reduced  to  one-third 
of  their  former  number,  and  those  employed  were  earning  miserable 
wages  ;  but  during  the  last  three  or  four  years  so  great  has  been  the 
improvement  in  the  taste  and  style  of  those  goods,  that  the  demand  for 
them  has  been  continually  increasing  at  rising  prices,  and  the  wages 
of  the  workjjeople  have  risen  proportionally.  This  result  has  principally 
been  owing  to  the  application  of  the  jacquard  machine  to  this  branch  of 
manufacture ;  a  result  which  has  not  been  accomplished  without  great 
difficulty. 

"  The  tcarp-Iace  manufacture  is  usually  carried  on  separately  from  the 
bobbin-net  branch.  The  machinery  engaged  in  it,  is  chiefly  employed 
by  15  firms  in  the  town  of  Nottingham  and  the  neighbourhood. 

"  The  warp  machine,  which  is  a  very  beautiful  modification  of  the 
stocking  fi-ame,  is  used  for  the  production  of  articles  of  the  most  varied 
texture,  from  the  stoutest  cloth  to  the  lightest  gossamer  net-work. 
There  are  either  plain  or  fancy  goods ;  for  the  latter  kind,  the  jacquard 
machine  is  connected  with  it,  and  very  splendid  patterns  are  thus  pro- 
duced. At  this  time  (September,  1845)  800  warp-frames  are  employed 
in  making  lace  goods,  300  being  worked  with  silk,  and  500  with  cotton 
yarn.     These  frames  would  cost  in  their  construction,  about  100,000/. 