


216  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

of  throwing-inills  in  different  parts  of  the  country  was  raised  from  175 
to  ■2C^(),  and  the  number  of  spindles  from  780,000  to  1,180,000  ;  yet 
notwithstanding  this  additional  productive  power,  it  was  not  possible  for 
the  throwsters  to  keep  pace  with  the  demands  of  the  weavers,  who  were 
frequently  kept  w-aiting  during  whole  months  for  silk  to  enable  them  to 
complete  the  orders  which  they  had  in  hand. 

This  full  tide  of  prosperity  was  checked  by  the  commercial  panic 
which  occurred  at  the  close  of  1825;  and  as  the  admission  of  foreign- 
made  silk  goods  first  took  place  during  a  time  of  general  depression,  a 
great  clamour  was  raised  on  the  part  of  the  home  manufacturers  against 
the  relaxation,  which  was  said  to  be  the  chief,  if  not  the  only  cause  of 
the  distress  that  had  overtaken  the  trade.  This  distress,  however,  soon 
passed  away,  so  that  in  the  year  1827  a  larger  quantity  of  silk  was 
manufactured  in  this  country  than  had  ever  before  passed  in  an  equal 
time  through  our  looms.  It  is  not  by  selecting  a  single  year  that  a 
proper  judgment  can  be  formed  upon  such  a  subject,  but  the  foregoing 
table,  which  details  the  importations  of  thirty-six  years,  t'in  of  which 
were  years  of  unqualified  prohibition,  is  sufficiently  extensive  to  afford 
means  for  deciding  the  degree  of  advantage  which  has  attended  the 
relaxation.  It  will  be  seen  from  this  table,  that,  in  the  ten  years  pre- 
ceding 1824,  the  quantity  of  raw  and  thrown  silk  used  by  our  manufac- 
turers amounted  to  18,823,117  lbs.,  being  an  average  of  1,882,311  lbs. 
per  annum  ;  that,  in  the  ten  years  immediately  following  the  change  of 
system,  the  quantity  used  was  36,780,009  lbs.,  or  3,678,001  lbs.  per 
annum,  being  an  increase  over  the  average  of  the  former  period  of  95 
per  cent. ;  and  that,  in  the  sixteen  years  ending  with  1849,  the  consump- 
tion was  66,376,645  lbs.,  or  4, 148,540  lbs.  per  annum,  being  an  increase 
of  120  per  cent,  upon  the  quantity  used  under  the  restrictive  system. 

It  is  further  remarkable  that,  notwithstanding  the  great  increase  in 
the  quantity  of  silk  employed  in  our  looms,  the  quantity  of  thrown 
silk  imported  has  not  at  all  augmented  during  the  last  sixty  years, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  has  sensibly  diminished.*  The  spur  of  competition 
has  driven  forward  the  manufacture  in  both  its  branches.  Improved 
machinery  has  been  introduced  into  our  throwing-mills,  the  effect  of 
which  has  been  to  lessen  most  materially  the  cost  of  the  process ;  and, 
by  the  adoption  and  improvement  of  the  ingenious  machinery  of 
Jacquard,  our  weavers  are  now  enabled  to  produce  fancy  goods,  the 
quality  of  which  is,  with  a  few  exceptions  of  little  importance,  fully 
equal,  and,  as  regards  some  sorts  superior,  to  the  quality  of  goods 
made  in  France,  although  the  cost  of  production  is  not  yet  reduced  to 
the  level  of  that  country. 