

*  An  exception  to  this  remark  is  furnished  by  the  importations  of  184S,  when,  owing  to 
the  troubled  state  of  the  continental  scats  of  the  silk  manufacture,  England  afforded  th6 
only  market  to  which  foreign  throwsters  could  witli  safety  send  their  goods. 


cjiAP.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  217 

The  charge  made  by  English  throwsters,  previous  to  1824,  for  con- 
verting raw  silk  into  organzine  was  about  10s.  per  lb.  At  that  time 
the  duty  imposed  upon  foreign  organzine  was  145.  Sd.,  or  ds.  2d.  beyond 
the  duty  upon  raw  silk,  and  yet  a  much  larger  proportion  of  the  material 
used  in  our  silk  looms  was  then  thrown  abroad  than  has  since  been  the 
case.  In  the  ten  years  preceding  1824,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  weight 
of  thrown  silk  imported  was  equal  to  23|  per  cent,  of  the  weight  of  raw 
silk,  whereas  the  quantity  imported  in  this  state  of  preparation  during 
the  ten  years  ending  with  1844,  has  not  exceeded  7|  per  cent,  of  the 
weight  of  the  silk  thrown  in  the  mills  of  this  country  ;  and  at  this  time 
we  are  exporters  of  British  thrown  silk  to  Germany,  thus  proving  the 
ability  of  our  throwsters  to  meet  their  Continental  rivals  in  third 
markets. 

Now  that  our  throwsters  have  been  for  more  than  twenty  years  exposed 
to  competition  with  foreigners,  they  have  succeeded  in  bringing  down  their 
charge  from  lO^.  to  from  3s.  to  5*.  per  lb  ,  the  rate  depending  upon  the 
quality  of  the  silk.  The  better  the  (juality  the  lower  the  charge  :  a  fact 
which  arises  chiefly  from  the  throwster  making  good  the  waste  which 
occurs  in  the  process,  and  which  is  greatest  when  the  quality  of  the  silk 
is  worst. 

When  the  prohibition  to  the  importation  of  foreign  silk  goods  was 
removed,  a  duty  was  imposed  of  30  per  cent,  ad  valorem,  which  was 
soon  after  altered  to  specific  rates  per  pound,  so  calculated  upon  different 
kinds  of  goods  as  to  be  equal,  in  most  cases,  to  30  per  cent,  upon  the 
presumed  value,  this  rate  being  assumed  as  the  maximum  of  protection 
which  in  any  case  it  was  desirable  to  afford  to  the  English  manufacturers. 
Apart  from  all  considerations  of  a  maximum  as  between  the  consumers 
and  manufacturers  in  this  country,  however,  it  was  found  impossible  to 
adopt  any  higher  scale  of  protection,  on  account  of  the  encouragement 
which  would  thereby  be  given  to  smugglers,  and,  in  fact,  while  arranging 
the  specific  duties  chargeable  on  the  weight  of  the  goods,  it  was  on 
this  account  found  necessary  to  fix  the  rate  upon  plain  goods  on  a  scale 
equal  to  no  more  than  25  per  cent,  on  the  value,  while  the  higher  per 
centage  was  retained  upon  other  goods,  the  smuggler's  charge  on  which 
was  higher.  The  reason  why  this  charge  was  less  upon  plain  than  upon 
fancy  fabrics  was  this — the  latter,  being  made  to  answer  the  immediate 
demands  of  ever-varying  fashion,  were  required  by  the  purchasers  to  be 
delivered  to  them  without  delay,  while  plain  goods,  which  would  be 
equally  valuable  at  all  times,  could  be  kept  back  by  the  smuggler  to  a 
more  favourable  opportunity  for  eluding  the  government  officers. 