

Total .     .     . 

10,647  1  22,82.3 

•  • 

..   '216 

.547 

in.SG3 

23.370 

33,470 

7 

G3 

34,233 

of  their  manufecture,  must  be  attributed,  may  be  instanced  the  kind  of 
education  which  they  receive,  and  by  means  of  which  so  many  among 
those  who  are  engaged  in  the  labour  of  weaving — an  operation  which 
among  us  is  mere  drudgery— are  enabled  to  contribute  to  the  perfect- 
ing of  their  art,  by  the  invention  of  new  patterns.  As  regards  the 
texture  only  of  silk  fabrics,  English-made  goods  are  now  fully  equal  to 
the  best  that  are  produced  by  our  neighbours.  The  greater  cheapness 
of  the  necessaries  of  life  in  France,  as  compared  w  ith  England,  gives  an 
advantage,  in  point  of  price,  to  the  French  weaver  over  his  English  com- 
petitor ;  and  this  advantage  is  of  course  the  greater  in  those  descrip- 
tions of  go(Kls  into  the  cost  of  which  labour  enters  in  the  greatest  pro- 
portion— such  as  gauzes,  and  other  light  and  fancy  fabrics.  We  have 
seen,  however,  that  as  regards  other  kinds  of  silk  goods,  our  manufac- 
turers are  already  enabled  to  compete  with  their  formidable  rivals  in 
markets  which  are  equally  open  to  both,  and  that  we  are,  in  fact^  ex- 
porting continually  the  produce  of  our  silk-looms  to  France  itself. 

It  will  scarcely  be  affirmed  that,  in  this  respect,  the  manufacturers  of 
England  would  have  stood  in  so  advantageous  a  position,  had  the  old 
prohibitory  system  been  maintained.  Up  to  the  very  moment  of  the 
legal  admission  of  foreign  silk  goods  no  improvement  was  perceptible  in 
tlu»  quality  or  fashion  of  our  own  :  by   the  most  cursory  glance,   the 


222  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

difference  between  the  fabrics  conkl  be  distinguished,  and  yet,  notwith- 
standing the  facility  thus  afforded  for  the  detection  of  contraband  goods, 
the  ingenuity  of  the  smuggler  was  at  all  times  successful  to  insure  their 
introduction  ;  and  this  irregular  competition  was  the  more  ruinous,  as 
the  forei2;n  goods  had  not  been  subjected,  in  the  country  of  manufacture, 
to  the  lieavy  impost  then  placed  upon  the  raw  material  in  England. 
It  was  a  bold  measure  on  the  part  of  the  government  of  that  day,  in  the 
face  of  so  much  prejudice  as  existed,  to  remove  the  prohibition  to 
import  foreign  silk  goods,  which  prohibition  had  always  been  declared 
indispensable  to  the  existence  of  the  manufacture  in  England.  The 
good  effect  of  the  change  was  made  immediately  apparent  by  the  in- 
creased quantity  of  the  material  employed  ;  and  at  the  present  time  it 
may  be  affirmed  that,  through  the  extension  of  the  use  of  silks  to  nearly 
all  classes,  the  manufacture  is  rendered  in  a  great  measure  safe  from  the 
ruin  with  which  it  was  formerly  threatened  at  every  change  of  fashion. 
Its  condition  would  long  since  have  been  still  more  favourable  if,  instead 
of  the  enormous  protecting  duty  of  30  per  cent,  imposed  upon  the 
importation  of  foreign  silk  goods,  a  reasonable  rate  of  duty  had  been 
adopted  ;  and  even  if  our  silk  manufacturers  had  been  left  without  the 
so-called  "  protection  "  of  any  duty  at  all,  there  does  not  appear  reason 
to  doubt  that  it  would  not  only  have  stood  its  ground  among  our 
principal  branches  of  industry,  but  that  the  skill  of  our  artisans  would 
have  enabled  them  successfully  to  rival  those  of  other  countries. 