

In  1814  protection  was  continued  to  the  manufacturers,  with  the  under- 
standing that  the  prohibition  should  remain  for  no  longer  than  two 
years  ;  that  time  being  considered,  under  the  altered  circumstances  of 
the  commercial  world,  necessary  for  the  establishment  of  their  prosperity. 
Twenty  years  of  strict  monopoly  have  since  passed^,  and  the  complaints 
of  the  manufacturers  are  as  pressing  as  they  were  in  1814.  The  reason 
for  this  continued  state  of  adversity  in  regard  to  branches  of  industry 


CHAP.  Ill]  MANUFACITRES.  237 

for  which  France  enjoys  every  facility,  is  thus  stated  in  the  Report 
of  Messrs.  Villiers  and  Bowring,  on  the  Commercial  Relations  l)ct\vei'n 
France  and  England  : — "  Raw  produce  being  protected,  at  the  demand 
of  the  French  producer,  and  all  articles  necessary  to  existence  at 
the  demand  of  the  French  agriculturist,  high  prices  have  lessened 
consumption,  while  the  external  demand  has  been  considerably  dimi- 
nished. There  are  scarcely  any  protected  articles  in  which  France  can 
now  sustain  a  competition  with  other  countries  ;  and  the  improvement 
resulting  from  competition,  which  is  as  valuable  to  the  manufacturer 
as  it  is  to  the  public  at  large,  is  completely  checked.  The  manu- 
facturers themselves,  however,  have  in  their  turn  become  the  victims ; 
for  protection  does,  in  fact,  destroy  the  very  market  which  it  intends 
to  monopolize.  It  has  introduced  great  distress  among  six  millions 
of  inhabitants  of  the  wine  districts,  who  would  naturally  be  large 
consumers  of  home  produce.  In  France  the  agricultural  is  by  far  the 
most  numerous  class ;  and  if  the  sale  of  their  produce  is  prevented 
by  the  exclusion  of  what  other  countries  have  to  offer  in  payment,  the 
means  of  ultimately  dealing  with  the  manufacturer  are  destroyed. 
To  whatever  article  inquiry  is  directed,  the  results  will  be  found 
analogous." 

The  cotton  manufacture  in  France  labours  under  a  considerable 
natural  disadvantage  as  compared  with  that  branch  of  industry  in 
England,  arising  from  the  comparatively  high  price  of  fuel.  Another 
circumstance,  equally  unfavourable  to  the  French  manufacturer,  is  the 
high  price  of  iron,  and  consequently  of  machinery.  The  first  of  these 
evils  is  aggravated  by  the  imposition  of  a  duty  on  the  introduction  of 
coals  into  that  country,  for  the  protection  of  the  owners  of  forests  ;  and 
the  dearness  of  iron  is  chiefly  occasioned  by  a  similar  fiscal  absurdity, 
for  the  advantage,  first,  of  the  owners  of  forests,  the  value  of  whose 
property  would  suffer  if  encouragement  were  withdrawn  fi'om  the  iron- 
masters, who  are  their  customers  to  a  great  extent ;  and,  secondly,  for 
the  supposed  benefit  of  those  iron-masters,  who  would  be  unable  to  carry 
on  their  works  in  the  face  of  foreign  importation. 