

The  raw  silk  of  France  is  of  very  excellent  quality.  This  arises 
principally  from  the  nature  of  the  soil,  which  is  favourable  to  the  pro- 
motion of  that  degree  of  vigom'  in  their  vegetation,  which  gives  to  mul- 
berrv  leaves  a  quality  that  imparts  to  the  silk  produced  a  great  degree 
of  fineness,  joined  to  a  brilliant  colour.  The  dealers  have 'besides 
adopted  a  system  which  proves  an  effectual  security  against  fraud  in 
the  sale  of  silk.  AVhen  reeled,  it  is  sent  to  an  establishment  called  the 
condition,  in  which,  by  exposure  to  a  high  temperature,  all  superfluous 
moisture  is  evaporated,  and  the  true  weight  ascertained.  It  is  upon 
certificates  of  this  weight,  signed  by  the  officers  "of  the  establishment, 
that  sales  are  effected.  A  very  careful  investigation  of  this  subject 
carried  on  at  Lyons,  leads  to  the  belief  that,  by  this  means,  the  purity 


citAi-.  Ill]  MANUFACTURES.  243 

of  the  material  is  tested  with  very  great  accuracy.  Until  a  recent 
period,  the  exportation  of  native  raw  silk  was  forbidden  by  the  French 
Government,  under  the  belief  that  their  manufacturers  were  thereby 
secured  in  the  possession  of  an  advantage  over  their  rivals  in  other 
countries.  This  circumstance  formed  a  subject  of  complaint  on  the  part 
of  our  silk-weavers,  who  were  'thus  placed  at  a  disadvantage  in  com- 
])eting  with  goods  made  of  a  better  material  than  they  were  able  to 
procure.  This  cause  of  complaint  has  now  been  removed.  Yielding 
to  the  representations  made  by  the  Commercial  Commissioners  of  this 
country,  the  French  Government  has  legalized  the  exportation  of  native 
silk,  both  raw  and  thrown,  at  a  moderate  rate  of  duty  ;  a  concession 
which,  by  promoting  production,  is  of  advantage  to  the  agi-icultural 
interest  in  the  south  of  France,  without  inflicting  any  real  injury  on  the 
manufacturers  of  that  country. 

A  considerable  impulse  has  been  given  to  manufacturing  industry  in 
ditFerent  parts  of  Germany  within  the  last  twelve  years,  and  especially 
since  the  formation  of  the  Prussian  Commercial  League.  In  Prussia 
itself  many  cotton-spinning  mills  have  been  erected  since  1833,  and 
large  capitals  have  been  invested  in  machinery.  In  Saxony,  the  manu- 
facture of  hosiery  has  become  considerable  in  amount,  and  the  goods 
produced  are  so  low  in  price  that  exports  have  sometimes  been  made  to 
England  in  the  face  of  a  consumption  duty  of  10  per  cent,  on  the  value. 
The  cotton  manufacture  has  also  been  successfully  undertaken  in  Bavaria, 
in  Wiirtemberg,  and  in  some  others  of  the  states  included  within  the 
league.  These  attempts,  however,  are  for  the  most  ])art  of  such  recent 
origin,  that  it  is  hardly  possible  to  form  any  certain  estimate  as  to  their 
ultimate  results.  At  present  it  is  only  through  the  imposition  of  a 
considerable  import  duty  in  the  German  States,  that  their  cotton  goods 
generally  are  able  in  any  way  to  compete  with  English  fabrics ;  but  it  is 
altogether  impossible  to  say  how  long  this  state  of  things  may  continue, 
and  it  may  reasonably  be  expected,  that  the  German  artisans  will  in 
time  acquire  a  degree  of  skill  and  experience,  which,  aided  by  the  lower 
cost  of  subsistence  in  Germany,  as  compared  with  England,  will  render 
their  rivalry  formidable  to  Manchester  and  Paisley,  at  least  in  neigh- 
bouring countries,  if  not  in  more  distant  parts  of  the  world. 