

It  has  long  been  the  policy  of  the  Russian  Government  to  afford  pro- 
tection to  its  own  manufacturers  by  prohibiting  the  goods  of  other 
countries.  At  present  nearly  the  whole  amount  of  the  exports  from 
this  kingdom  to  Russia  consists  of  cotton  yarn,  which  is  there  woven 
into  all  kinds  of  fabrics,  from  the  coarsest  fustians  to  fine  cambrics. 
The  establishments  for  this  purpose  are  under  the  immediate  patronace 
of  the  Russian  government,  and  it  is  said  that  the  goods  produced  are 
so  good  in  quality  as  to  equal  those  of  English  make ;  but  in  regard  to 
the  cost  of  production,  the  advantage  is  still  greatly  with  us,  and  so  it 

R  2 


244  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

■svill  probably  remain  so  long  as  Russia  sliall  maintain  the  policy  of  pro- 
tecting its  artisans  from  tlie  competition  of  other  countries. 

In  several  of  the  Cantons  of  Switzerland  the  manufacture  of  woven 
fabrics  has  been  steadily  and  prosperously  pursued  of  late  years.  So 
little  of  what  is  called  protection  has  been  accorded  to  the  Swiss  manu- 
facturer, that  until  this  time  there  has  not  been  any  Custom-houses  in 
the  Cantons  from  which  to  obtain  returns  of  imports  and  exports,  where- 
by to  ascertiiin  the  comparative  progress  of  these  branches  of  industry. 
Free  trade,  in  the  fullest  extent  of  the  term,  has  been  tried  in  these 
Cantons,  and  although,  as  already  observed,  we  are  luiable  to  bring 
forward  an  array  of  figures  in  proof  of  its  success,  we  know  that  in  spite 
of  the  disadvantages  of  geogra])hical  position,  and  notwithstanding  the 
comparative  scarcity  of  capital,  the  raw  cotton,  which  is  obtained  by  a 
tedious  and  expensive  land  carriage,  is  converted  into  febrics  which  com- 
pete successfully  in  every  market  with  the  products  of  our  looms  ;  and 
that  the  silk  and  linen  goods  of  Switzerland,  which  are  excluded  by  fiscal 
regulations  from  neighbouring  countries,  find  customers  in  a  wider  and 
more  profitable  field  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic.  If  we  take  into 
account  the  small  natural  resources  of  the  Swiss  manufacturers,  it  may 
with  truth  be  asserted  that  no  people  have  made  greater,  or  even  as 
great,  progress  as  they  have  done  during  the  last  twenty-five  years. 
Switzerland  has  been  strongly  lu-ged  to  join  the  Prussian  Commercial 
League,  and  by  that  means  to  secure  twenty-four  millions  of  consumers 
for  its  cheap  manufactures  ;  but  satisfied  with  their  present  condition  and 
future  prospects,  and  jealous  as  to  the  possible  effect  of  permitting 
foreigners  to  interfere  in  any  way  with  their  concerns,  the  Cantons  have 
hitherto  declined  to  accept  the  proffered  advantage. 