


cuAi'.  iv.J  M.VNUFACTUliES.  215 


CHAPTER  IV. 

JI  A  N  IT  F  A  C  T  U  R  E  S. 

Iron^Steel — Brass — Copper — Plated  Wares — Glass — IIardwares. 

lucrease  of  population  of  Birmingham — Fall  in  cost  of  goods— Quantities  exported,  and 
value  of  the  same — British  iron  exported — Quantity  and  value  of  brass  and  copi)er  goods 
exported — System  of  manufactures  pursued  in  Birmingliam — Increase  of  population  of 
Sheffield — Conversion  of  iron  into  steel — Quantity  of  steel  exported — Value  of  plated 
goods  exported — Glass  manufacture  —  Causes  which  have  prevented  its  extension — 
Quantity  retained  for  consumption — Effect  of  high  duties  in  limiting  consumption — 
Illicit  manufacture. 

There  are  ranny  branches  of  manufocturing  industry  in  this  country 
which  are  of  considerable  importance  from  tlie  number  of  hands  to  whom 
they  give  employment,  but  as  to  the  amount  or  progress  of  which  it  is 
not  p(;ssible  to  form  any  other  than  a  conjectural  or  at  best  an  approxi- 
mative ophiion. 

Among  the  manufactures  thus  circumstanced  may  be  mentioned  those 
of  hardware,  plated  goods,  and  earthenware.  The  materials  of  which 
these  articles  are  made  are  for  the  most  part  produced  at  home ;  and 
as  the  goods  manufactured  have  never  been  subjected  to  duty,  no  means 
exist  whereby  to  judge  of  the  increase  or  otherwise  of  their  quantity.  It 
was  atone  time  thought  practicable  to  estimate  the  progress  of  the  manu- 
facture carried  on  at  the  Potteries  in  Staffordshire,  by  ascertaining  the 
quantity  of  raw  material  conveyed  into  the  district  on  the  canals ;  but 
attempts  which  have  been  made  to  procure  a  statement  of  the  tonnage 
so  conveyed,  have  not  hitherto  met  with  any  success,  owing  probably  to 
a  misconception  on  the  part  of  the  managers  of  the  canals  as  to  the  mo- 
tive which  has  prompted  the  inquiry.  In  proportion  as  the  value  of  such 
information  to  tiie  community  becomes  better  known,  we  may  hope  that 
the  avenues  to  it  will  be  less  jealously  giiarded,  and  that  a  general 
willingness  to  communicate  information  will  ere  long  take  the  place  of 
that  feeling  which  seeks  advantage  from  concealment. 

^Vith  regard  to  the  manufacture  of  hardwares,  we  can  have  no  doubt 
as  to  its  extension  if  we  compare  the  population  of  Birmingham  as  given 
at  each  census. 

In  1801  it  consisted  of   73,670  souls. 
1811  „  85,755     „ 

1821  ,,  100,722     „ 

18;U  „  146,986      „ 

1841  „  181,116      ,, 


246 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  II. 


So  that  the  number  has  been  increased  by  nearly  150  per  cent,  in  forty 
years.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  increase  which  occurred  during  the 
ten  years,  from  1821  to  1831,  amounted  to  upwards  of  54  per  cent,  upon 
the  population  as  it  existed  at  the  beginning  of  the  century. 