

The  greater  part  of  the  articles  most  commonly  manufactured  at 
Birmingham  are  not  produced  in  extensive  factories  in  which  largo 
capitals  must  be  employed  for  the  erection  of  machinery.  Almost  all 
the  small  wares  of  the  district  are  made  by  workmen  who  undertake, 
each  one  in  his  particular  line,  to  execute  orders  received  by  the  mer- 
chants and  agents  settled  in  the  town.  The  profitable  performance  of 
their  contracts,  however,  calls  for  the  employment  of  a  cheaper  kind  of 
power  than  is  at  the  command  of  men  who,  like  these  workmen,  hav(; 
little  or  no  capital ;  and  this  course  of  business  has  opened  a  channel 
for  the  employment  of  money  in  the  town,  in  a  manner  which  is  found  to 
be  profitable  to  those  who  engage  in  it,  and  advantageous  to  the  suiall 
manufacturer.  The  ])lan  alluded  to  is  this.  A  building  containing  a 
gi'eat  number  of  rooms  of  various  sizes,  is  furnished  with  a  steam-enijine, 
working  shafts  from  which  are  placed  in  each  apartment  or  workshop, 
which  is  likewise  furnished  with  a  lathe,  benches,  and  such  other  conve- 
niences as  are  suited  to  the  various  branches  of  manufacture  for  which 
the  rooms  are  likely  to  be  needed.  When  a  workman  has  received  an 
order  for  the  supply  of  such  a  quantity  of  goods  as  «ill  occupy  him  a 
week,  or  a  month,  or  any  other  given  time  for  their  completion,  he  hires 
one  or  more  of  these  rooms,  of  sizes  and  with  conveniences  suited  to  his 
particular  wants,  stipulating  for  the  use  of  a  certain  amount  of  steam- 
power.  He  thus  realizes  all  the  advantage  that  would  accompany  the 
possession  of  a  steam-engine  ;  and  as  the  buildings  thus  fitted  up  are 
numerous,  competition  on  the  part  of  their  owners  has  brought  down  the 
charge  for  the  accommodation  they  offer  to  the  lowest  rate  that  will 
ensure  to  them  the  ordinary  rate  of  profit  on  the  capital  employed. 

Before  the  introduction  of  this  system,  the  trade  of  Birmingham  was 
for  the  most  part  carried  on  by  men  of  large  capital,  who  employed  jour- 
neymen, and  gave  a  considerable  credit  to  the  merchants  who  dealt  with 
them.  At  present  those  merchants  themselves  employ  the  workmen,  who 
can  give  no  credit,  but  receive  pa)  ment  in  ready  money  at  the  end  of 
every  week  for  such  part  of  their  goods  as  they  can  then  deliver  in  a 
finished  state. 

In  this  way  the  proiit  of  the  intermediate  dealer  is  saved,  and  this 
circumstimce  will,  in  part,  account  for  the  great  diminution  that  has 


2-30  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

occurred  in  the  prices  of  the  different  articles  contained  in  the  table 
already  given. 

The  prosperous  state  of  the  manufacture  of  cutlery  may  be  fairly  in- 
ferred from  the  increase  in  the  population  of  Sheffield,  from  which  town 
proceeds  nearly  all  the  cutlery  which  is  made  in  this  kingdom,  including 
a  great  part  of  the  "London  made''  knives  and  razors,  stamped  with 
the  names  of  metropolitan  cutlers,  who  avail  themselves  of  a  prejudice 
on  the  part  of  the  public,  to  charge  an  exorbitant  ])rofit  on  their  "  town- 
made  "  goods. 