


256  rnOGIlESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  n. 

and  consoquently  in  the  produce  of  the  duty  during  the  six  years  in 
■svliich  the  high  rate  had  been  levied,  the  duty  on  that  description  of 
gUiss  was  lowered  from  4/.  I85.  per  cwt.  to  3/.  per  cwt.  The  (juantity 
made  annually,  on  the  average  of  three  years  preceding  18U),  was 
4905  cwt.,  yielding  24,035/.  to  the  revenue;  whereas  in  the  three  years 
following  that  in  whicli  the  reduction  was  made,  the  average  quantity 
amounted  to  9415  cwt.,  yielding  to  the  revemie  28. 244Z.  Since  that 
time  the  average  annual  consunij)tion  has  reached  24,000  cwts.,  pro- 
ducing upwards  of  75,000/.  annually  to  the  Exchequer. 

The  pernicious  effect  of  the  glass  duties  was  apparent  from  the  con- 
trast exhibited  by  this  manufacture  to  others  not  subjected  to  similar 
disadvantages  ;  and  it  cannot  be  necessary  to  do  more  than  point  to 
this  contrast  as  an  argument  in  justification  of  the  abandonment  of  the 
impost. 

There  were,  however,  other  reasons,  distinct  from  the  direct  o])era- 
tions  that  have  been  pointed  out,  which  rendered  the  system  under  whicli 
the  glass  duties  were  levied  peculiarly  pernicious.  The  free  progress 
of  invention  and  improvement  was  by  this  means  prevented,  not  only  in 
the  manufacture  of  glass,  but  also  in  many  other  arts  and  sciences  to 
which  glass  is  subsidiary.  A  manufacturer  who  by  his  skilful  combina- 
tions had  succeeded  a  few  years  since  in  making  great  improvements 
in  the  quality  of  bottle  glass,  was  stopped  in  his  operations  by  the 
Excise  officers,  on  the  plea  that  the  articles  which  he  produced  were  so 
good  in  quality,  as  not  to  be  readily  distinguished  from  flint  glass,  to 
which  description  a  higher  rate  of  duty  attached ;  the  danger  to  the 
revenue  being,  that  articles  made  of  the  less  costly  and  less  highly  taxed 
ingredients,  would  be  used  instead  of  flint  glass.  In  every  other  coun- 
try but  this,  and  since  1845  in  this  also,  manufacturers  are  at  liberty 
to  make  any  article  of  glass  out  of  that  particular  material  or  com- 
position which  will  best  answer  their  purpose  ;  and  consequently  many 
articles,  the  making  of  which  it  was  contrary  to  the  Excise  regulations 
to  permit  in  our  glass-houses,  were  necessarily  imported  from  the 
Continent,  notwithstanding  the  heavy  rate  of  duty  to  which  they  were 
subjected  at  our  Custom-houses,  Among  these  may  be  mentioned 
glass  for  optical  instruments,  which  has  hitherto  been  almost  wholly 
imported,  because  the  regulations  enforced  by  the  Excise-office  so 
long  prevented  the  carrying  forward  of  processes  necessary  for  im- 
parting to  it  that  property  upon  which  its  excellence  must  altogether 
depend. 