

"  A  manufacturer  of  Stockport  being,  not  long  ago,  about  to  mount 
200  power-looms  in  his  mill,  fancied  he  might  save  a  pound  sterling  in 
the  ])rice  of  each  by  having  them  made  by  a  neighbour  machine-maker, 
instead  of  obtaining  them  from  Messrs.  Sharp  and  Roberts,  in  Man- 
chester, the  principal  constructors  of  power-looms.  In  order  to  give 
his  fabricator  every  chance  of  success,  the  economist  surreptitiously  pro- 
cured iron  patterns  cast  from  one  of  the  looms  of  that  Company,  which, 
in  its  perfect  state,  costs  no  more  than  9/.  155.  His  200  looms  were  ac- 
cordingly constructed  at  Stockport,  supposed  to  be  fac-similes  of  those 
regularly  made  in  Manchester,  and  they  were  set  to  work.  Hardly  a 
day  passed,  however,  without  one  part  or  another  breaking  down, — in- 
somuch that  the  crank  or  tappet-wheels  had  to  be  replaced  three  times, 
in  almost  every  loom,  in  the  course  of  twelve  months.  The  fabric  of 
the  cloth  was  also  indifferent.  The  proprietor,  perplexed  beyond  mea- 
sure, inquired  of  a  neighbour  who  worked  similar  power-looms  made  by 
the  Manchester  machinicians,  whether  his  wheels  likewise  went  to  pieces 
every  other  day,  and  learned  to  his  mortification,  that  not  one  of  them 
had  broken  in  the  course  of  working,  but  that  the  four  or  five  spare 
onesj  originally  sent  from  Manchester  along  with  his  236  power-looms, 
were  unused  and  quite  at  his  service.  The  old  proverb  of  '  Penny  wise 
and  pound  foolish'  never  had  a  better  illustration.     His  weaving  fac- 

s  2 


260  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  n. 

tory  had  been  most  irregular  and  unproductive,  while  that  of  his  neigh- 
bour had  been  uniformly  prosperous." 

The  circumstances  that  have  just  been  mentioned  seem  naturally  to 
lead  to  a  consideration  of  the  policy  which  so  long  prevailed,  of  prohibit- 
ing the  exportation  of  machinery  from  this  country.  It  may  be  conceded 
that,  in  cases  where  an  individual  or  a  nation  is  in  the  possession  of 
sui)erior  manufacturing  processes  whereby  greater  profits  can  be  realized, 
it  is  natural  to  use  every  fair  means  for  keeping  those  advantages  out  of 
the  hands  of  foreign  competitors.  It  is  clear  that  these  competitors  could 
have  no  just  reason  for  complaining,  if  we  preferred  our  own  profit  to 
theirs.  Neither  would  the  inventors  of  the  machinery  have  much  cause 
for  complaint,  if  the  legislature  should  pass  laws  under  which  the  manu- 
facturers of  this  country  would  be  secured  in  the  monopoly  of  home  in- 
ventions. Machine-makers  have,  so  far,  a  contrary  interest  to  the  manu- 
facturers,— that  they  are  benefited  by  the  extension  of  the  use  of  their 
machines,  while  the  apparent  advantage  of  the  manufacturers  consists 
in  confining  that  use  to  themselves.  To  prohibit  the  exportation  of  his 
wares  may  therefore,  at  first  sight,  appear  to  be  as  great  a  hardship  upon 
the  machinist  as  it  would  be  upon  the  weaver  of  cotton,  if  his  produc- 
tions were  confined  to  the  home  market ;  but  the  cases  are  not  in  all 
respects  parallel.  By  the  restriction  last  supposed,  the  extension  of 
the  weaver's  trade  would  be  in  a  great  measure  limited  to  the  slow 
natural  increase  of  the  people  in  the  country  of  production ;  whereas 
the  confining  to  that  country  of  a  machine,  by  means  of  which  better 
or  cheaper  goods  can  be  made,  will  be  followed  by  nearly  the  same 
effect  as  if  the  exportation  of  the  improved  machines  were  allowed, 
since  the  greater  quantity  of  goods  produced  by  their  means,  and  for 
which  in  consequence  of  their  superiority  or  cheapness,  a  foreign  demand 
would  be  kept  up,  must  cause  a  gi-eater  number  of  the  machines  to 
be  used  at  home,  and  it  can  be  of  no  moment  to  the  maker  of  those 
machines,  whether  his  customers  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom,  or  in 
France  or  Germany. 