

The  great  importance  of  this  fact  to  a  manufacturing  people  scarcely 
needs  to  be  insisted  on.  Without  superior  tools  and  implements,  how 
many  valuable  inventions  now  used,  and  which  minister  extensively, to 
the  advantage  and  comfort  of  society,  must  have  remained  unapplied, 
if  they  had  even  at  all  suggested  themselves  to  the  minds  of  the  inge- 
nious men  by  whom  they  have  been  conceived  !  How  many  elaborate 
pieces  of  mechanism,  without  which  those  inventions  could  not  be  car- 
ried into  practical  operation,  must  have  remained  unconstructed  for 
want  of  the  equally  elaborate  tools  necessary  for  their  production,  and 
for  those  nice  adjustments  upon  w'hich  the  success  of  the  inventions 
depends ! 

The  calculating  machine  of  Mr.  Babbage,  the  conception  and  perfect- 
ing of  which  afford  proofs  of  genius  and  perseverance — rare  in  their  de- 
gree, and  still  more  rare  in  their  combination — jhat  would  cast  lustre 
upon  any  age  or  country,  could  not  have  been  executed  by  means  of 
the  imperfect  tools  which  even  a  very  few  years  ago  were  in  the  hands 
of  our  most  able  machinists.     To  the  efforts  made  for  the  completion  of 


CHAP,  v.]  MANUFACTURES.  259 

this  machine,  the  world  is  iiuU'bted  for  the  possession  of  some  of  the 
most  beautiful  tools  hitherto  invented  ;  and  if  no  other  benefit  should  re- 
sult from  this  triumph  of  human  thought,  the  time,  and  money,  and  talent 
bestowed  upon  the  work  will  have  been  amply  productive  to  the  coun- 
try, althouiih,  as  is  too  frequently  seen,  the  recompense  of  the  inventor 
may  be  limited  to  a  barren,  and  in  its  highest  degree,  even  to  a  post- 
humous fame. 

Some  part  of  our  cotton-spinning  machinery  is  of  foreign  invention  ; 
but  the  state  of  the  mechanical  arts  not  being  sufficiently  advanced  for 
that  purpose  in  their  own  countries,  the  inventors  have  been  obliged  to 
resort  to  English  workshops  for  the  means  of  perfecting  their  conce])- 
tions,  and  our  factories  ottering  at  the  same  time  the  largest  and  most 
})rofitable  field  for  the  employment  of  these  machines,  our  cotton  manu- 
factiu'c  has  thus  fairly  profited  from  ingenuity  which  it  has  mainly  con- 
tributed to  foster.  One  of  the  most  successful  spinning  fi-ames  used  in 
the  factories  of  Lancashire,  was  the  invention  of  a  citizen  of  the  United 
States  of  America,  and  has  been  thus  made  available  for  the  more  pro- 
fitable conversion  of  a  material,  our  largest  supply  of  which  is  derived 
from  that  country. 

The  necessity  for  the  employment  of  a  high  degree  of  skill  in  the  ad- 
justment of  machinery  for  manufacturing  purposes,  has  been  illustrated 
by  J)r.  Ure  in  his  work,  "  The  Philosophy  of  Manufactures,"  by  the 
following  anecdote  :  — 