

Tliere  was  yet  another  reason  for  abandoning  the  duty  upon  home- 
made glass.  The  ingredients  of  which  glass  is  composed  are  exceed- 
ingly cheap,  and  the  art  is  at  the  same  time  so  simple,  and  calls  for  the 
use  of  so  few  accessaries,  that  it  can  be  successfully  followed  by  almost 
any  person  of  ordinary  aptitude  for  manual  operations,  working  with 


cjfAP.  IV.]  MANUFACTURES.  257 

simple  and  uncostly  implements.  The  facility  with  which  glass  can  he 
niaclc  upon  a  snuill  scale  is  greater  now  than  formerly,  and  is  continually 
increasing,  through  the  advance  of  chemical  knowledge.  In  former 
times  the  preparation  of  alkalis  used  for  the  manufacture  required  pre- 
mises of  considerahle  dimensions,  hut  the  alkali  now  ahundantly  oh- 
tained  from  common  salt  is  admirably  qualified  by  its  purity  for  the 
purpose,  and  it  is  well  known  that  flint-glass  was  fraudulently  made  in 
great  abundance  in  small  attics  and  cellars,  to  the  injury  alike  of  the 
revenue  and  of  the  fair-dealing  manufacturer.  While  the  temptation 
was  suffered  to  remain,  it  was  altogether  impossible  to  put  a  stop  to  this 
illicit  manufacture,  and  nothing  short  of  the  total  repeal  of  the  duty 
could  have  proved  effectual  to  that  end. 

The  measure  thus  advocated  was  adopted  by  the  legislature  in  the 
Session  of  1845.  Thenceforward  the  manufacturers  of  glass,  in  all  its 
forms,  were  relieved  from  the  payment  of  duty,  and  from  the  inter- 
ference of  revenue  officers.  Of  the  advantageous  result  of  this  measure 
there  cannot  exist  any  doubt  whatever.  The  manufacturers  immediately 
reduced  their  prices,  in  all  cases,  to  the  full  amount  of  the  duty,  and  in 
many  cases  beyond  it,  and  it  may  be  confidently  predicted,  that  through 
the  employment  of  this  beautiful  material  for  objects  which  its  price  for- 
merly forbade,  the  manufacture  must  experience  a  great,  immediate, 
and  permanent  extension. 


258  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 


CHAPTER  V. 

MANUFACTURES. 
MAcniNERr. 

Importance  of  perfect  tools  and  implements— Recent  progress  of  manufacturing  skill  in 
their  production — Babbage's  calculating  machine — Foreign  mechanical  inventions  per- 
fected and  adopted  in  England — Policy  of  allowing  the  exportation  of  macliinery — 
Impossibility  of  confining  the  knowledge  of  improved  machines  to  our  own  country — 
Impolicy  of  the  attempt — Laws  restraining  artisans  from  going  abroad — Their  repeal — 
Footing  upon  wluch  the  limited  exportation  of  machinery  is  now  permitted— Progress 
of  the  prohibitive  system — Value  of  machinery  exported. 

In  no  branch  of  manufacturing  skill  has  more  important  and  rapid  pro- 
gress been  made  of  late  years  in  this  country,  than  in  the  production  of 
manufacturing  implements  and  machinery.  The  extent  to  which  this 
progress  has  been  carried,  is  such  as  to  make  it  difficult  to  point  out 
any  leading  mechanical  process,  the  details  of  which  have  not  been,  by 
this  means,  simplified,  and  the  article  produced  brought  nearer  to  perfec- 
tion. 