

It  is  besides  more  than  probable  that  the  system  which  has  been 
adopted  only  with  the  view  of  protecting  manufactures  may,  like  other 
l)rotective  enactments,  be  actually  prejudicial  to  the  interest  which  it 
was  designed  to  benefit.     The  objects  as  to  which  prohibition  continued 


26=4  rUOGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [sr.r.  ii. 

to  the  last  to  bo  enforced  were  principally  connected  with  the  spinning 
and  weaving  of  cotton,  wool,  antl  tlax,  branches  of  mannfacture  in  whicli 
improvements  are  continually  going  forward.  The  importance  of  these 
mprovenients  will  be  at  once  understood  when  it  is  stated  that  many 
anumg  them  are  calculated  to  introduce  an  economy  into  the  process 
amounting  to  from  2i  to  5  per  cent,  upon  the  cost  of  the  fabric.  This 
advantage  it  would  of  course  be  the  object  of  every  manufacturer  to 
realize  as  speedily  as  possible  ;  but  except  in  the  case  of  those  who 
possess  large  capitals,  none  will  care  to  throw  away  or  to  sell  at  the  mere 
worth  of  the  materials  their  old  machines  which  have  cost  considm-able 
sums,  and  they  continue  therefore  to  use  them  at  a  disadvantage  ; 
whereas,  if  the  markets  of  the  continent  of  Euro])e  were  open  to  them,  in 
which  they  might  find  purchasers  for  the  machines  of  which  they  are 
now  in  a  manner  compelled  to  continue  the  use,  they  would  not  hesitate 
at  once  to  place  themselves  in  the  most  advantageous  position^  for 
carrying  on  their  processes.  Their  discarded  machinery,  having  the 
recommendation  of  cheapness,  and  being  at  the  same  time  equal,  if  not 
superior,  to  that  in  general  use  abroad,  would  doubtless  meet  with  ready 
buyers  there. 

Ttie  first  Act  passed  by  the  English  Parliament  for  preventing  the 
exportation  of  machinery  is  dated  in  1696.  This  Act  prohibited  the 
exportation  of  Lee's  stocking-frame,  a  machine  which  was  invented  in 
1600.  The  next  in  order  among  these  restrictions  was  passed  in  1750, 
and  consequently  after  an  interval  of  more  than  half  a  centui'y.  It  is 
worthy  of  remark,  that  this  Act  was  intended  for  the  protection  of  the 
woollen  and  silk  manufactures.  The  first  of  these  branches  of  industry 
had  previously  flourished  in  England  for  more  than  250  years  without 
this  protection ;  and  as  to  the  silk  manufacture,  the  tools  and  utensils 
employed  in  which  were  prohibited  from  being  exported  in  this  Act,  it 
was  then  only  in  its  infancy  among  us,  and  it  never  took  firm  root  as  one 
of  the  branches  of  the  national  industry  until  the  mounds  and  fences 
raised  up  by  the  legislature  for  its  protection  had  been  all  removed,  and 
it  was  left  to  work  its  way  exposed  to  competition  from  the  then  more 
accomplished  artisans  of  France.  Another  interval  of  twenty-four  years 
passed  before  any  further  Act  of  the  same  nature  was  passed.  The  next 
law  passed  in  1774,  prohibited  the  exportation  of  certain  tools  used  in  the 
cotton  and  linen  manufacture.  From  that  time  the  system  of  prohibition 
appears  to  have  been  in  great  favour  with  the  legislature  ;  the  Acts  which 
were  passed  forbidding  the  exportation  of  implements  having  followed 
each  other  with  rapidity,  and  descending  some  of  them  to  objects  of  a  very 
trifiiiig  nature,  such  as  "  presses  and  dies  for  horn  buttons,"  "  engines 
for  covering  whips,"  "tools  for  pinching  of  glass"  —  in  fact,  anything  for 
which  it  appears  to  have  been  thought  worth  while  on  the  part  of  any 
class  of  manufacturers  to  seek  what  they  considered  protection  at  the 