

I^'he  laws  prohibiting  the  exportation  of  machinery  from  this  country 
have  been  of  late  years  very  considerably  relaxed,  and  at  length  have 
been  repealed.  Previous  to  1825,  the  jealousy  of  our  legislature  in 
regard  to  the  progress  of  foreign  manufactures  was  extended  so  far  as 
to  interfere  with  the  natural  riiiht  even  of  workino;  artisans  to  transfer 


262  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [skc.  ii. 

their  industry  to  countries  wliere  it  could  be  most  profitably  exerted. 
Any  man  who  had  acquired  a  practical  knowledge  of  manufacturing 
processes  was  thereby  rendered  a  prisoner  in  his  own  country ;  and  not 
only  might  the  arm  of  the  law  be  interposed  to  prevent  his  quitting  his 
native  shore,  but  heavy  penalties  were  imposed  upon  all  persons  who 
should  abet  the  expatriation  of  one  of  our  artisans.  This  disgraceful 
law  has  hapj)ily  been  expunged  from  our  Statute-book.  Its  futility  and 
impolicy  were  well  described  in  the  following 

"  Resolutions  of  the  Committee  appointed  to  inquire  into  the  state  of 
the  Law  of  the  United  Kingdom,  and  its  consequences,  respecting 
Artisans  leaving  the  Kingdom  and  residing  abroad,  &c.  Reported 
to  the  House  of  Commons,  21st  May,  1824. 

"  1.  That  it  appears  by  the  evidence  before  this  Committee,  that 
notwithstanding  the  laws  enacted  to  prevent  the  seduction  of  artisans  to 
go  abroad,  many  able  and  intelligent  artisans  have  gone  abroad  to  reside, 
and  to  exercise  their  respective  arts  in  foreign  countries  ;  and  that  it  is 
extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  in  this  country,  by  any  mode  of 
executing  the  present  laws,  or  by  any  new  law,  to  prevent  artisans  who 
may  be  so  determined  from  going  out  of  the  country. 

"  2.  Tiiat  although  the  penalties  which  the  laws  inflict  on  artisans  who 
disobey  them,  are  not  distinctly  understood  by  the  workmen,  yet  an 
unfavourable  opinion  is  generally  entertained  by  them  of  the  partial  and 
oppressive  operation  of  these  laws,  as  preventing  them  from  taking  their 
labour  and  art  to  the  best  market ;  whilst  all  other  classes  of  the  com- 
munity are  permitted  to  go  abroad,  and  to  take  their  capital  with  them 
wherever  they  think  proper. 

"  3.  That  it  appears  also  by  evidence,  that  many  British  artisans  residing 
abroad  have  been  prevented  from  returning  home,  from  an  erroneous 
opinion  that  they  have,  by  going  abroad,  violated  the  laws  of  their  country, 
and  con?C(juently  incurred  penalties  under  them. 

"  4.  That  in  the  opinion  of  this  Committee,  it  is  both  unjust  and 
impolitic  to  continue  these  laws ;  they  therefore  recommend  their  entire 
repeal,  and  that  artisans  may  be  at  liberty  to  go  abroad  and  to  return 
home  whenever  they  may  be  so  disposed,  in  the  same  manner  as  other 
classes  of  the  community  now  go  and  return." 