

In  and  after  1825,  permission  might  be  had  for  the  exportation  of  all 
the  more  common  articles  of  machinery.  A  long  list  was  given  of  various 
articles  or  classes  of  machinery  the  exportation  of  which  was  prohibited, 
but  a  discretionary  power  of  relaxing  the  law  was^given  to  the  Board  of 
Trade,  the  branch  of  the  government  to  which  it  seems  most  fitly  to 
belong,  and  which  decided  upon  each  application,  as  it  was  made  by  the 
persons  seeking  to  export,  according  to  the  merits  of  each  particular  case. 


CHAP,  v.]  MANUFACTURES.  263 

rndor  tliis  system,  the  practice  was  uniform  in  regard  to  so  many  articles, 
that  hut  Httle  difficulty  was  cx])ericiiced  hy  the  merchants,  who  in 
general  know  as  to  what  machines  or  implements  the  indulgence  would 
he  extended,  and  from  what  it  would  he  withheld,  with  nearly  as  much 
certainty  as  they  would  have  known  if  each  ohject  had  hcen  scheduled 
in  an  Act  of  Parliament.  The  principal  advantage  of  this  discretionary 
power  vested  in  the  Board  of  Trade  consisted  in  its  leaving  to  that  Board 
the  power  of  regulating  the  matter  according  to  the  changing  interests 
of  commerce. 

The  policy  of  restricting  this,  which  might  hecomc  an  important  l)ranch 
of  trade,  was  the  suhjcct  of  lahorious  investigation  hy  Committees  of  the 
House  of  Commons  which  sat  in  1824  and  1825.  The  concluding 
])aragraph  of  the  report  made  by  the  Committee  in  1825  explains  the 
reasons  why  it  was  thought  expedient  to  leave  the  list  of  j)rohihition3 
unrepealed,  and  shows  that  the  result  of  their  inquiry  left  no  doubt  on 
the  minds  of  the  members  of  the  Committee  as  to  the  inexpediency  of 
the  existing  system.     The  paragraph  here  alluded  to  is  as  follows: — 

"  Although  your  Committee  are  impressed  with  the  opinion  that  tools 
and  machinery  should  be  regulated  on  the  same  principles  as  other  articles 
of  manufocture,  yet  inasmuch  as  there  exist  objections  in  the  mind  of 
many  of  our  manufacturers  on  this  subject  which  deserves  the  attention 
of  the  legislature,  and  as  it  is  possible  that  circumstances  may  exist  which 
may  render  a  prohibition  to  export  certain  tools  and  machines  used  in 
some  particular  manufactures  expedient,  your  Committee  beg  to  recom- 
mend that  until  an  alteration  can  be  made  in  the  laws  on  this  subject, 
II.  M.  Privy  Council  should  continue  to  exercise  their  discretion  in 
permitting  the  exportation  of  all  such  tools  and  machinery  now  prohibited 
as  may  appear  to  them  not  likely  to  be  prejudicial  to  the  trade  or  manu- 
factures of  the  United  Kingdom." 

England  is,  beyond  all  other  countries,  interested  in  the  most  perfect 
freedom  being  given  to  this  as  well  as  to  every  other  branch  of  commerce. 
Placed  beyond  all  comparison  at  the  head  of  civilization  as  regards 
manufacturing  skill,  with  capital  far  more  ample  than  that  possessed  by 
any  other  people,  with  cheap  and  inexhaustible  supplies  of  iron  and  fuel, 
and  with  institutions  every  way  favourable  to  the  utmost  development  of 
the  industry  and  ingenuity  of  her  citizens,  she  must  always  be  able  at 
least  to  maintain  her  superiority  of  position  where  circumstances  are  in 
other  respects  equal  ;  and  be  ready  to  turn  to  the  utmost  advantage 
every  improvement  which  may  reach  her  in  common  with  less  powerful 
rivals. 