

From  the  very  earliest  period  to  whieli  record  or  even  tradition  can 
reach,  this  country  has  been  celebrated  for  its  mineral  treasures.  It  is" 
not  intended  to  carry  back  our  inquiries  to  the  time  when  the  Plioenicians 
traded  to  "  the  tin  islands  of  Britain,"  described  by  Herodotus  under 
the  name  of  Cassiterides,  or  to  discuss  whether  the  rings  and  money  of 
iron  which  Caesar  states  to  have  been  in  the  possession  of  the  Britons,  at 
the  time  of  the  Roman  invasion,  were  really  the  produce  of  this  country, 
or  whether,  as  some  persons  have  supposed,  they  w^ere  acquired  in  barter 
for  tin.  Our  inquiry  into  the  progress  of  raining  as  a  source  of  national 
wealth  must  necessarily  be  limited  to  a  period  comparatively  recent,  and 
to  statements  of  the  results. 

No  statement  has  ever  been  made  which  pretends  to  perfect  accuracy 
in  regard  to  our  production  of  iron. 

The  quantity  made  in  England  and  Wales  in  1740  was  estimated  at 
17,350  tons,  the  produce  of  fifty-nine  furnaces,  in  which  only  charcoal 
was  used.  Between  that  time  and  1788  the  plan  of  smelting  iron-ore 
by  means  of  coke  was  introduced,  and  in  the  latter  year  there  were  in 
England,  Wales,  and  Scotland,  eighty-five  furnaces,  producing  annually 
68,300  tons  of  iron,  of  which  quantity  55,200  tons  were  smelted  with 
coke.  In  1796,  in  consequence  of  a  tax  projected  by  Mr.  Pitt,  upon 
coals  at  the  pit,  but  which  was  not  imposed,  a  careful  inquiry  was  made 
as  to  the  condition  and  extent  of  the  iron-works  that  would  liave  been 
affected  by  such  a  measure.  On  this  occasion  it  appeared  that  there 
were — 


2ti8 


niOGIlESS  OF  THE  XATIOX. 


[sec.  II. 


Tons  of  Tron. 
In  England  and  Wales  10 1  furnaces,  producing  108,793 
„    Scotland    ...        17         „  „  16.086 


Total 


121 


124,879 


In  1802  it  was  fiirthor  estimated  tliat  forty  additional  furnaces  were 
in  use  in  England  and  Wales,  and  seven  in  Scotland — the  total  annual 
production  of  iron  amounting  to  170,000  tons  in  the  year.  In  180G  a 
Bill  was  introduced  into  the  House  of  Commons  by  the  Minister  for 
imposing  a  duty  of  21.  ])er  ton  upon  all  pig-iron  made  in  the  kingdom. 
This  Bill  was  afterwards  withdrawn,  but  the  attempt  occasioned  in(juirics 
to  be  set  on  foot  respecting  the  quantity  of  metal  produced,  and  it  was 
stated  then  to  amount  to  250,000  tons  annually. 

The  following  estimate,  beginning  with  1823,  is  said  to  have  been  made 
with  great  care  by  the  manager  of  one  of  our  largest  iron  smelting  esta- 
blishments. The  tables  already  given  of  the  consumption  of  foreign  iron, 
and  the  exportation  of  that  of  home  manufacture,  when  coupled  with  the 
undoubted  fact  that  this  metal  is  used  in  the  kingdom  to  a  continually 
growing  extent,  and  that  it  is  now  used  for  purposes  to  which  it  was  never 
before  applied,  sufficiently  attest  the  increasing  productiveness  of  our 
iron-works  : — 