

The  state  of  things  which  has  been  here  supposed  cannot,  however, 
have  any  existence  in  reality.  It  has  never  been  found  practicable  to 
adopt  regulations  whereby  the  exportation  of  machinery  can  be  wholly 
prevented.  Where  the  invention  is  the  object  of  a  patent,  an. accurate 
and  complete  drawing  and  description  can  be  procured  by  any  one 
without  trouble  ;  and  by  the  transmission  of  these,  any  engineer  of  ordi- 
nary capacity  can  in  most  cases  construct  a  machiue  which  will  at  least 
answer  as  a  very  tolerable  substitute  for  that  made  under  the  inspection 
of  the  inventor.  In  more  complicated  inventions,  it  mostly  happens 
that  the  only  part  of  the  machine  which  is  difficult  of  execution,  is  of 
small  dimensions,  and  it  is  consequently  easy  to  convey  it  illicitly  out  of 
the  kingdom.     Under  these  circumstances,  it  appears  to  be  the  most 


civr.  v.]  MAXUFACTUr.ES.  2h'l 

prudent  course  to  legalize  the  trade,  and  thereby  to  secure  for  a  part 
of  the  community  a  profitable  source  of  employment.  Nor  would  the 
manufacturers  in  this  kingdom  have  any  right  to  complainof  the  facilities 
thus  given  to  their  foreign  rivals.  The  inventions  which  they  would 
seek  to  retain  for  their  own  advantage  have  cost  them  neither  labour  nor 
expense.  In  fact,  they  can  in  no  case  have  any  plea  for  such  a  restric- 
tion, except  that  of  the  general  advantage  of  the  community,  and  the 
eases  can  be  but  very  few  in  which  that  plea  can  be  successfully  urged. 
'J'he  interest  of  the  bulk  of  the  people  uuist,  on  the  contrary,  always  be 
best  promoted  by  that  policy  which  gives  the  utmost  freedom  to  industry, 
and  which  tends  to  lower  the  prices  of  articles  of  consumption.  Laws 
which  prohibit  the  communication  of  facilities  and  improvements  are 
liable  to  be  imitated  by  other  nations,  either  in  a  spirit  of  retaliation, 
or  possibly  from  a  belief  in  their  wisdom,  and  both  these  reasons  may 
be  expected  to  ojjerate  most  freely  when  the  example  has  been  set  by  a 
successful  and  powerful  nation.  Let  us  imagine  that  the  American 
(vongress,  impressed  with  the  wisdom  of  our  old  system  of  restrictions, 
or  stung  with  a  feeling  of  jealousy  of  our  manufacturing  superiority,  had 
passed,  and  could  have  enforced  a  law  forbidding  the  communication  to 
foreigners  of  the  inventions  of  American  citizens,  so  that  the  machines 
already  spoken  of  as  being  derived  from  that  country  must  have  been 
brought  into  operation  there  and  there  only.  It  is  far  from  being  certain 
that  while  by  the  adoption  of  this  course,  England  would  have  sustained 
a  considerable  injury,  the  American  people  vi^ould  have  derived  any  sub- 
stantial benefit.  In  the  fair  and  legitimate  course  of  dealing  between 
two  people,  it  is  so  far  from  being  true  that  what  one  of  them  gains  the 
other  must  necessarily  lose,  that  on  the  contrary,  few  things  are  more 
certain  than  that  both  may  be,  and  almost  universally  will  be,  gainers 
by  their  transactions.  But  neither  does  it  follow,  that  in  unprofitable 
dealings,  what  one  loses  must  be  gain  to  the  other ;  both,  on  the  con- 
trary, may  lose,  and  in  the  long  run,  this  is  almost  sure  to  be  the  result. 
In  the  case  supposed,  America  would  lose  an  excellent  customer  for  a 
large  amount  of  her  raw  produce,  and  her  citizens  would  consequently 
be  deprived  of  many  articles  of  English  manufacture,  which  they  cannot 
procure  so  good  nor  at  so  cheap  a  rate  elsewhere.  The  capital  required 
for  caiTving  on  the  cotton  manufacture  upon  a  large  scale  would  be 
withdrawn  by  them  from  other  pursuits  in  which  it  is  profitably  embarked, 
and  while  a  few  might  possibly  be  gainers,  the  many  would  be  subjected 
to  certain  loss. 