

T 


274  PROGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [sec.  n. 

If,  on  the  one  hand,  our  gi-oat  mechanical  inventions  owe  so  much  to 
the  abundance  and  consequent  cheapness  of  our  fuel,  it  is  no  less  true 
that  some  of  these  inventions  have,  on  the  other  hand,  materially  assisted 
of  late  years  in  bringing  about  that  abundance.  But  for  the  invention 
of  the  steam-engine,  a  large  proj)ortion  of  the  coal  mines  now  profitably 
worked  could  not  have  been  opened,  or  must  have  been  abandoned.  It 
is  well  known  that,  by  the  consumption  of  one  bushel  of  coals  in  the  fur- 
nace of  a  steam-boiler,  a  power  is  produced  which  in  a  few  minutes  will 
raise  20,000  gallons  of  water  from  a  depth  of  350  feet ;  an  effect  which 
could  not  be  produced  in  a  shorter  time  than  a  whole  day,  through  the 
continuous  labour  of  twenty  men  working  with  the  common  pump.  By 
thus  expending  a  few  pence,  an  amount  of  human  labour  is  set  free,  to 
employ  which  would  have  cost  50^\  ;  and  yet  this  circumstance  is  so  far 
from  having  diminished  the  demand  for  human  labour,  even  in  the  actual 
trade  where  the  economy  is  produced,  that  it  has  certainly  caused  a  much 
f^reater  number  of  persons  to  be  employed  in  coal-mhiing  than  could 
otherwise  have  been  so  set  to  work.  Another  advantage  which  coal- 
miners  more  especially  have  received  from  the  hand  of  science  is  derived 
from  the  safety-lamp  of  Davy — a  discovery  which,  if  estimated  by  the 
amount  of  the  actual  good  it  has  done,  must  be  considered  one  of  the 
o-reatest  made  in  our  age  and  country.  Many  productive  mines  are  now 
wrought,  and  old  collieries  have  been  re-opened,  which  must  have  lain 
useless  but  for  the  invention  of  the  Davy  lamp. 

The  science  of  mining  m  all  its  branches  has,  besides,  made  great 
advances  within  the  present  century.  It  was  stated  by  the  Rev.  Adam 
Sedgwick,  Woodwardian  Professor  of  Geology  in  the  University  of 
Cambi'idge,  in  his  examination  in  1830  before  a  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons,  that  "  a  great  deal  of  coal  appears  formerly  to  have 
been  left  under  ground,  in  consequence  of  a  want  of  general  plans  or 
maps  of  the  underground  workings  ;  a  number  of  excavations  have  taken 
place,  independently  of  each  other,  and  the  consequence  is,  there  is  a 
great  number  of  piers  or  large  barriers  between  the  old  coal -works, 
some  of  which  it  may  be  almost  impossible  to  remove."  It  was  likewise 
the  custom  in  working  the  mines,  to  leave  large  pillai-s  of  coal,  in  order 
to  support  the  roof;  so  that  at  the  depth  of  100  fathoms,  little  more  than 
40  per  cent,  of  the  coal  was  abstracted,  and  the  remainder  was  given 
up  as  lost.  In  1795  an  attempt  was  made  to  substitute  wooden  pillare 
for  a  part  of  the  coal  previously  left,  and  this,  to  a  certain  extent,  was 
successful.  At  that  time  it  was  not  attempted  to  remove  more  than 
one-half  of  each  alternate  pillar  of  coal,  still  leaving  between  40  and  50 
per  cent,  of  the  coal  in  the  mine.  In  1810  an  improvement  in  this  sys- 
tem was  introduced,  by  means  of  which  every  intermediate  pillar  was 
wholly  removed,  and  a  part  of  the  adjoining  pillars  was  likewise  taken 
away  ;  and  by  working  thus,  about  80  or  90  parts  out  of  every  100  were 
brought  to  market.     It  was  in  the  year  1815  that  Sir  Humphry  Davy 