


282  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION,  [sec.  ii. 

possibly,  a  foiirrh  pit  were  sunk,  at  an  enormous  expense,  and  without 
the  smallest  intention  of  their  being  used.  A  like  wasteful  expenditure 
was  made  for  the  erection  of  useless  steam  power,  and  to  complete  and 
give  an  appearance  of  consistency  to  the  arrangements,  instead  of  building 
200  cottages  for  the  workmen,  double  that  number  were  provided.  In 
this  manner  a  capital  of  160,000/.  to  200,000/.  might  be  invested  for 
setting  in  motion  a  colliery  allowed  to  raise  and  sell  only  such  a  quantity 
of  coal  as  might  be  produced  by  means  of  an  outlay  of  one-fourth  or 
one-fifth  of  that  amount.  By  this  wasteful  course,  the  end  of  the  colliery 
owners  was  attained  ;  they  got  their  basis  fixed — if  a  large  concern,  as 
is  here  supposed — say  at  50,000,  and  this  basis  probably  secured  for 
them  a  sale  of  25,000  chaldrons  during  the  year,  instead  of  100,000 
chaldrons,  which  their  extended  arrangements  would  have  enabled  them 
to  raise.  The  Newcastle  committee  met  once  a  fortnight,  or  twenty-six 
times  in  the  year,  and,  according  to  the  price  in  the  London  market, 
determined  the  quantity  that  might  be  issued  during  the  following 
fortnight.  If  the  London  price  was  what  is  considered  high,  the  issue 
was  increased,  and  if  low  diminished.  If  the  "  issue  "  wei'e  twenty  on 
the  1000,  the  colliery  here  described  would  have  been  allowed  to  sell 
(20  X  50)  1000  chaldrons  during  the  ensuing  fortnight.  The  pit  and 
establishment  might  be  equal  to  the  supply  of  3000  or  4000  chaldrons  ; 
orders  might  be  on  the  books  to  that  extent  or  more  ;  ships  might 
be  waiting  to  receive  the  largest  quantity,  but  under  "the  regulation  of 
the  vend,"  not  one  bushel  beyond  the  1000  chaldrons  could  be  shipped 
until  a  new  issue  should  be  made.  By  this  system  the  price  was  kept 
up  ;  and  as  regards  the  colliery  owners,  they  thought  it  more  for  their 
advantage  to  sell  25,000  chaldrons  at  305.  per  chaldron,  than  to  sell 
100,000  chaldrons  at  the  price  which  a  free  competition  would  have 
brought.  If,  under  this  system  of  restriction,  any  undue  profit  was 
obtained,  nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  that  competition  for  a  portion 
of  this  undue  profit  would  cause  the  opening  of  new  collieries  until  the 
advantage  should  be  neutralized  ;  and  this  result  of  the  system  at  length 
became  apparent.  Lvery  new  colliery  admitted  into  the  "  vend  "  took 
its  share  in  the  '•  issues,"  and  to  some  extent  limited  the  sales  of  all  the 
rest.  The  disadvantage  during  all  this  time  to  the  public  at  large  is 
incontestable.  The  great  staple  manufactures  of  the  country,  being 
located  in  inland  coal  districts,  happily  did  not  suffer  from  this  combi- 
nation ;  but  in  other  innumerable  processes  which  require  the  aid  of  heat, 
and  which  are  carried  on  in  cities  and  places  where  coal  is  not  found,  the 
addition  to  the  cost  of  fuel  thus  occasioned  placed  the  manufacturers  at 
a  great  disadvantage,  while  the  other  inhabitants  of  those  cities,  and 
especially  the  poor,  were  very  greatly  injured  by  it.  The  loss  to  the 
.  community  at  large,  through  the  unprofitable  investment  of  unnecessary 
capital,  no  one  can  dispute. 