

There  was  another  consequence  resulting  from  this  limitation  of  the 


CHAP  VI.]  MINING.  283 

home  coal  trade  vvliich  it  is  necessary  to  state,  as  it  was  productive  of 
great  national  evil. 

The  owners  of  collieries  being  restricted  in  their  fortnightly  issues  to 
quantities  which  their  establishments  enabled  them  to  raise  in  three  or 
four  days,  were  naturally  desirous  of  finding  for  their  men  during  the 
remainder  of  the  time  some  employment  which  should  lessen  the  ex|)ense 
of  maintaining  them  in  idleness,  and  spread  over  a  larger  quantity  of 
product  the  fixed  expenses  of  their  establishments  and  their  dead  rents. 
To  this  end  coals  were  raised  which  must  find  a  sale  in  foreign  countries; 
and  it  practically  resulted  that  the  same  quality  of  coals  which,  if 
shipped  to  London,  were  charged  at  305.  ^d.  per  Newcastle  chaldron, 
were  sold  to  foreigners  at  I85.  for  that  quantity,  giving  a  preference  to 
the  foreign  buyer  of  40  per  cent,  in  the  cost  of  English  coal.  By  this 
means  the  finest  kinds  of  coal  used  in  London,  at  a  cost  to  the  consumer 
of  about  3O5.  per  ton,  might  be  had  in  the  distant  market  of  St.  Peters- 
burg for  155.  to  I65.,  or  little  more  than  half  the  London  price.  Nor 
was  this  the  worst  effect  of  the  system.  In  working  a  colliery,  a  great 
proportion  of  small  coul  is  raised.  The  cost  to  the  home  consumer, 
under  the  system  of  limitation,  being  exaggerated,  and  the  freight  and 
charges  being  equally  great  upon  this  article  as  upon  round  coal,  very 
little  small  coal  would  find  a  market  within  the  kingdom,  except  on  the 
spot  where  it  was  raised ;  and  as  the  expense  of  raising  it  must  be 
incurred,  the  coal-owners  were  forced  to  seek  elsewhere  for  a  market  at 
any  price  beyond  the  mere  cost  of  putting  it  on  board  ship.  By  this 
means,  "  nut-coal,"  which  consists  of  small  pieces,  free  from  dust,  which 
have  passed  through  a  screen,  the  bars  of  which  are  five-eighths  of  an 
inch  apart,  were  sold  for  shipment  to  foreign  countries  at  the  low  price 
of  35.  per  ton.  The  intrinsic  quality  of  this  coal  is  quite  as  good  as 
that  of  the  round  coal  from  the  same  pits ;  it  is  equally  suitable  for 
generating  steam,  and  for  general  manufacturing  purposes ;  and  thus 
the  manufacturers  of  Denmark,  Germany,  Russia,  &c.,  obtained  the 
fuel  they  required,  and  without  which  they  could  not  carry  on  their 
operations,  at  a  price  not  only  below  that  paid  by  English  manufacturers, 
but  for  much  less  than  the  cost  at  which  it  was  raised.  The  coal-owner 
might,  it  is  true,  have  sold  this  small  coal  at  home  at  a  better  price  than 
he  obtained  from  his  foreign  customer,  but  every  ton  so  sold  would  have 
taken  the  place  of  an  equal  quantity  of  large  coal,  upon  which  his  profit 
was  made,  and  by  such  home  sale  he  would  by  no  means  have  lessened 
his  sacrifice,  but  the  reverse. 