

In  the  whole  range  of  the  science  of  public  economy  there  is,  per- 
haps, no  principle  more  easily  or  more  clearly  demonstrable  than  the 
advantage  of  possessing,  at  the  cheapest  possible  rates,  the  raw  materials 
of  manufacture,  and  it  may  with  equal  facility  be  shown,  that  of  all  those 
materials,  there  is  not  one — unless,  indeed,  food  may  be  so  considered, 
which  is  of  more  universal  importance  than  iron.  In  the  first  Report 
of  Messrs.  Villiers  and  Bowring  on  the  Commercial  Relations  between 
France  and  Great  Britain,  the  following  curious  calculation  is  given,  in 
order  to  show  how  severe  a  loss  is  entailed  by  the  high  price  of  iron 
upon  one  class  of  persons  in  France — the  cultivators  of  the  soil : — "  The 
lands  cultivated  in  France  are  supposed  to  amount  to  22,818,000  hec- 
tares, equal  to  57,045,000  acres  English,  and  it  is  calculated  that  a 
team  of  oxen  would  cultivate  15  hectares  ;  hence  the  quantity  of  ploughs 
employed  in  France  is  estimated  at  about  1,500,000.  M.  de  la  Roche- 
foucault  represents  the  annual  use  and  waste  of  iron  at  40  kilogrammes 


"5 

CHAP.  I.]  INTERNAL  COMMUNICATION.  289 

per  team,  but  it  has  been  more  frequently  estimated  at  50  kilogrammes, 
making  for  the  whole  consumption  75,000,000  kilogrammes  of  iron, 
which,  at  90  francs  per  100  kilogrammes,  consumes  67,500,000  francs, 
equal  to  2,700,000/.  sterling.  Now,  though  this  estimate  is  too  high 
for  an  average  calculation,  it  is  undeniable  that  the  iron  could  be  im- 
ported from  foreign  countries  at  half  the  price,  and  the  loss  to  agricul- 
ture alone  must  be  taken  at  above  one  million  sterling  per  annum." 
This  calculation  is  probably  excessive,  since  it  is  well  known  that  the 
primitive  mode  of  cultivation  adopted  through  a  great  part  of  France 
does  not  call  for  the  use  of  the  plough,  nor  admit  of  the  employment  of 
teams  of  oxen  or  horses ;  but  this  circumstance  does  not  materially 
affect  the  argument,  since  the  proportionate  loss  is  as  great  upon  farms 
where  the  better  modes  of  culture  prevail,  and  it  is  further  probable 
that  the  excessive  price  of  iron  may  act  in  preventing  the  adoption  of 
those  better  modes  of  culture  in  other  situations.  In  whatever  way  the 
case  may  be  considered,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  high  price  of  iron  acts 
directly  to  enhance  the  cost  of  food,  and  thus  is  detrimental  to  the  whole 
community. 

In  another  way,  more  immediately  connected  with  this  branch  of  our 
subject,  the  high  price  of  this  article  of  prime  necessity  acts  detriment- 
ally to  the  community.  It  was  given  in  evidence  before  the  Committee 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  which  sat  in  1833,  to  inquire  as  to  the  tolls 
to  be  placed  on  steam  carriages,  that  every  coach  which  travelled  be- 
tween London  and  Birmingham  distributed  about  eleven  pounds  weight 
of  wrought  iron  along  the  line  of  road  between  those  two  places.  This 
line  of  road  being  more  than  ordinarily  level,  and  being  kept  in  a  state 
of  the  most  perfect  repair  at  all  times,  may  be  supposed  to  cause  as 
little  wear  to  the  wheels  of  carriages  and  the  shoes  of  horses  as  can  well 
be  experienced  upon  a  common  road,  and  far  less  than  would  be  expe- 
rienced on  the  roads  of  France.  If  it  were  possible  to  estimate  the 
number  of  miles  travelled  over  by  the  various  wheel  carriages  used  in 
that  country,  where  almost  all  locomotion  is  carried  forward  upon  the 
roads,  the  amount  of  loss  arising  from  this  source  must  needs  be  found 
enormous.  If  the  wear  were  no  greater  than  upon  the  hard  and  level 
road  between  London  and  Birmingham,  the  loss  of  iron  upon  every 
journey  performed  between  Marseilles  and  Paris  would  amount  to 
twenty-five  kilogrammes,  one-half  of  the  cost  of  which  might  be  saved 
by  freely  admitting  the  iron  of  other  countries. 