


cjiAP.  I.]  INTERNAL  COMMUNICATION.  287 


SECTION  III.— INTERCHANGE. 

CHAPTER  I. 

INTERNAL  COMMUNICATION. 

Great  facility  afforded  for  Transport  in  Great  Britain — Advantages  thence  resulting^ 
Jealousy  on  this  account  of  Foreign  Countries,  and  Commercial  Restrictions  for  which 
it  is  made  the  pretext  —  Consequent  injury  to  those  Countries  —  Improvements  in 
Locomotion  projected  in  France. 

There  is  not  any  circumstance  connected  with  the  internal  condition 
of  England  which  more  strongly  excites  the  admiration  and  tlie  envy  of 
foreigners  than  the  degree  of  perfection  to  which  we  have  hrought  our 
means  of  internal  communication.  The  skill  and  labour  that  have  been 
applied  to  this  object  are  among  the  chief  exciting  causes  of  that  high 
degree  of  activity  which  characterises  and  pervades  the  productive 
classes  in  every  part  of  the  country.  The  perfection  to  which  we  have 
carried  the  means  of  transporting  persons  and  property  from  one  part 
of  the  kingdom  to  another  has  indeed  become  one  of  our  national 
characteristics. 

Placed,  by  its  insular  condition,  in  circumstances  which  render  efforts 
of  that  kind  less  indispensable  than  would  have  been  necessary  if  our 
country  had  formed  part  of  the  interior  of  a  continent,  we  have  done 
more  than  any  other  nation  of  Europe,  for  facilitating  communications 
from  and  to  every  nook  and  corner  of  the  land.  If  we  examine  the  map 
of  England,  we  shall  find  that,  as  regards  one  mode  of  public  commu- 
nication, there  is  not  any  spot  south  of  the  county  of  Durham  at  a 
greater  distance  than  fifteen  miles  from  water  conveyance.  In  the 
largest  part  of  the  area  thus  described,  that  distance  is  not  greater  at 
any  spot  than  ten  miles,  while  in  that  portion  which  is  the  principal  seat 
of  our  manufactures,  canals  have  been  constructed,  or  rivers  rendered 
navigable,  so  as  to  provide  means  for  cheap  and  easy  communication 
from  the  very  heart  of  each  town  to  every  other  part  of  the  kingdom, 
and  to  our  chief  commercial  ports.  By  this  means,  the  raw  materials 
of  manufactures  are  delivered,  unencumbered  with  heavy  charges,  at 


288  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

the  doors  of  our  factories,  and  tinished  goods  are  carried  away  from 
them  with  the  utmost  fticility  and  economy,  for  distribution  to  the  dif- 
ferent markets  of  the  civilized  world. 

The  advantages  to  a  commercial  people  of  roads  u})on  which  they 
can  pass  at  all  times  with  comfort  and  celerity  between  distant  markets 
can  hardly  be  appreciated  too  highly.  By  this  means  the  peculiar  wants 
and  capabilities  of  every  part  of  the  community  come  to  be  understood, 
and  arc  supplied  on  the  one  hand,  or  made  available  on  the  other,  to  a 
degree  which  could  never  be  attained  by  correspondence  with  local 
agents,  whose  information  would,  in  general,  be  limited  to  the  circum- 
stances of  the  spots  upon  which  they  reside.  The  extent  of  our  facilities 
in  this  respect  has  been  viewed  by  our  continental  neighbours  as  one 
great  cause  of  our  commercial  superiority,  and  has  been  brought  for- 
ward by  their  public  economists  as  some  justification  of  that  degree  of 
commercial  jealousy  which  leads  them  to  maintain  a  system  of  restric- 
tions, sufficiently  inconvenient  to  us,  but  far  more  hurtful  to  the  coun- 
tries by  which  it  is  enforced.  This  dread  of  our  superiority  in  the  means 
of  internal  commmiication,  our  viahilite  immense,  has  been  brought  for- 
ward by  the  French  Minister  of  Commerce,  and  stated  in  a  public  docu- 
ment as  affording  a  sufficient  reason  why  our  coal  and  iron  should  not 
be  suffered  freely  to  compete  with  the  produce  of  the  mines  and  forges 
of  France,  not  considering  that  the  possession  of  abimdant  and  cheap 
supplies  of  these  minerals  would  effect  more  towards  the  rapid  removal 
of  all  existing  disparity  in  this  respect  between  the  two  countries,  than 
our  neighbours  could  reasonably  hope  to  accomplish  at  the  end  of  a  long 
series  of  vears  of  restrictions  and  prohibitions.  The  proper  understand- 
ing of  this  question  is  a  matter  of  so  much  importance,  that  it  is  desir- 
able to  offer  a  few  facts  drawn  from  the  circumstances  of  France,  in 
illustration  and  support  of  the  opinion  just  expressed. 