

*  Mr.  David  Mushet  has  stated  that  "  a  ton  of  iron  is  made  at  some  furnaces  under  three 
tons  of  coals,  and  at  others  eight  or  nine  tons  are  required  for  the  same  purpose."  Owing 
to  the  recent  employment  in  Scotland  of  heated  air  for  smelting  iron  ore,  it  is  said  that  one 
ton  of  iron  is  produced  by  the  heat  given  out  by  two  tons  eight  cwt.  of  coals. 


CHAP.  VI.]  MIXING.  281 

have  submittcul,  as  tlicy  did  without  a  inurmur,  for  three-quarters  of  a 
century,  to  the  imposition  of  a  virtual  tax  upon  their  fuel,  far  greater  in 
degree  than  it  is  likely  that  any  minister  would  ever  he  tempted,  even 
under  the  heaviest  financial  difficulties,  to  propose.  The  tax  to  which 
allusion  is  here  made,  was  not  less  a  tax  hecause  it  assumed  the  guise  of 
a  trade  regulation  ;  it  was  even  inoi-e  injurious,  hy  reason  of  the  uncer- 
tainty of  its  rate,  than  any  lixed  impost  could  have  heen.  This 
regulation  prohahly  existed  so  long,  hecause  of  the  ignorance  of  the 
public  concerning  its  operation,  which  ignorance  would  not  have  attended 
upon  the  imposition  of  a  direct  tax.  The  following  brief  description  of 
the  regulation  in  question,  which  ceased  only  in  the  year  1845,  will 
prove  interesting  to  the  reader. 

The  "  limitation  of  the  vend  "  existed,  with  some  partial  interruptions, 
from  the  year  1771.  This  arrangement  was  no  less  than  a  systematic 
combination  among  the  owners  of  collieries  having  their  outlets  by  the 
Tyne,  the  Wear,  and  the  Tees,  to  raise  the  price  of  coal  to  consumers 
by  a  self-imposed  restriction  as  to  the  quantity  supplied.  A  committee 
appointed  from  among  the  owners  held  its  meetings  regularly  in  the 
town  of  Newcastle,  where  a  very  costly  establishment  of  clerks  and 
agents  was  maintained.  By  this  committee,  not  only  was  the  price  fixed 
at  whicli  coals  of  various  qualities  might  be  sold,  when  sea  borne,  for 
consumption  within  the  kingdom,  but  the  quantity  was  assigned  which, 
during  the  space  of  the  fortnight  following  each  order  or  "  issue,"  the 
individual  collieries  might  ship.  The  manner  in  which  this  combination 
was  conducted,  and  the  effect  which  it  could  not  but  have  upon  the 
interests  of  the  consumers,  will  best  be  understood  by  describing  the 
course  pursued  upon  the  opening  of  a  new  colliery.  The  first  thing 
to  be  determined  in  that  case  was  the  rank  or  "  basis''  to  be  assigned  to 
the  colliery.  For  this  purpose,  one  referee  was  appointed  by  the  owners 
of  the  colliery,  and  another  by  the  coal-trade  committee,  who,  taking 
into  view  the  extent  of  the  royalty  or  coal-field  secured,  the  size  of  the 
pits,  the  number  and  power  of  steam-engines  erected,  the  number  of 
cottages  built  for  workmen,  and  the  general  scale  of  the  establishment, 
fixed  therefrom  the  proportionate  quantity  the  colliery  would  be  permitted 
to  furnish  towards  the  general  supply,  which  the  directing  committee 
from  time  to  time  authorized  to  be  issued.  The  point  to  be  attained 
by  the  owners  of  the  colliery,  was  to  secure  for  their  establishment 
the  largest  basis  possible  ;  and  with  this  view  it  was  common  for  them 
to  secure  a  royalty  extending  over  fi'om  five  to  ten  times  the  surface 
which  it  was  intended  to  work,  thus  burthening  themselves  with  the 
payment  of  possibly  5,000/  per  annum,  or  more,  of  "dead  rent"  to  the 
owner  of  the  soil,  who,  of  course,  exacted  such  payment  in  return  for  his 
concession,  although  his  tenants  nnght  have  no  intention  of  using  it. 
Instead  of  sinking  one  or  two  pits,  which  would  afford  ample  facility  for 
working  the  quantity  which  the  mine  was  destined  to  yield,  a  third,  and. 