

The  loss  entailed  upon  the  inhabitants  of  France,  through  the  bad- 
ness and  insufficiency  of  the  roads  in  many  parts,  may  be  exemplified  by 
the  fact,  which  is  stated  on  the  most  respectable  authority,  that  a  few 
years  ago,  in  a  part  of  the  department  of  Vaucluse,  the  price  of  wheat 
was  25  per  cent,  greater  than  the  price  at  the  nearest  market,  which  is 
only  twenty-two  English  miles  distant.     In  this  case  the  means  of  trans- 

u 


290  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sr.c.  in. 

port  were  so  imporfcct,  that  goods  of  all  kinds  were  conveyed  upon  the 
hacks  of  hoi-ses  or  mules. 

The  French  government  has  of  late  years  heen  engaged  in  the  pro- 
secution of  inquiries  with  a  view  to  the  estahlishing  of  various  lines  of 
railroads,  between  different  places  of  commercial  importance  within  the 
kingdom,  and  under  the  sanction  of  the  Legislative  Chambers,  several 
principal  lines  or  trunks,  with  various  branches,  have  been  constructed, 
and  others  undertaken. 

Besides  the  great  enhancement  of  its  cost  which  would  be  occasioned 
by  the  greater  use  of  French  iron,  it  is  quite  impossible  that  so  large  a 
quantity  of  the  material  as  would  be  required  for  carrying  out  these 
projects  should  be  supplied  without  having  recourse  to  foreign  supply. 
The  employment  of  French  iron  would  be  also  unadvisable  because  of 
its  quality,  which  is  not  so  well  adapted  for  making  rails  as  English  iron, 
and  would  therefore  occasion  a  greater  constant  expense  for  keeping  the 
lines  iu  repair. 


CHAP.  II.]  TURNPIKE  ROADS.  291 


CHAPTER  11. 


TURNPIKE    ROADS, 

Length  of  Turnpike-roads  in  Great  Britain  in  1818  and  1829 — Length  in  each  County  in 
1829— Improvement  of  Roads  in  Scotland — In  Ireland — Effect  upon  Society — Former 
Condition  of  Roads  in  England — Improvements  in  public  Carriages  and  greater  Speed 
in  Travelling — Traffic  upon  Roads  and  Canals  as  given  in  evidence  before  Parliament 
— Amount  of  Travelling  by  Stage-coaches  in  Great  Britain — Proportion  of  that  Amount 
connected  with  London— Number  of  Mail-coaches  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland. 

The  chief  improvement  made  of  late  years  in  England  in  regard  to 
turnpike-roads,  has  consisted  in  reconstructing  them  upon  more  scien- 
tific principles  than  were  previously  employed,  an  advantage  which  is 
mainly  owing  to  the  exertions  of  the  late  Mr.  M'Adam,  whose  plans 
have  been  adopted  generally  throughout  the  kingdom,  as  well  as  in 
several  foreign  countries.  England  had  long  been  provided  with  roads 
in  every  quarter  ;  yet  we  find,  from  Parliamentary  returns,  that,  between 
1818  and  1829,  the  length  of  turnpike-roads  in  England  and  "Wales 
was  increased  by  more  than  one  thousand  miles.  In  the  Report  of  the 
Select  Committee  on  the  Turnpike  Roads  and  Highways  of  England 
and  Wales,  which  sat  in  1820,  a  summary  of  the  extent  of  these  roads 
is  given  as  it  existed  in  1818.  That  summary  was  collected  fi-om 
16,955  returns  made  by  the  surveyors  of  highways  in  9822  parishes, 
5217  townships,  and  1916  hamlets  or  other  places,  leaving  a  deficiency 
of  returns  ft-om  only  120  places. 