


298  TKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

France  complain  of  the  slow  pace  of  the  diligence  in  that  country,  not 
remembering  that  it  is  equal  to  that  which  was  ordinarily  accomplished 
in  this  country  less  than  forty  years  ago.  On  all  the  principal  roads 
communicating  with  London,  the  rate  of  travelling  by  the  turnpike- 
roads  is  now  nearly  or  quite  ten  miles  an  hour,  nor  is  it  in  celerity 
alone  that  improvement  has  been  made.  It  might  have  been  supposed 
that,  to  attain  so  high  a  degree  of  speed,  the  personal  safety  of  passen- 
gers would  be  further  endangered,  but  the  very  contrary  is  the  fact,  so 
that,  notwithstanding  the  rapidity  with  which  we  are  whirled  along,  the 
number  of  accidents  is  actually  lessened,  a  result  produced  by  the  better 
construction  of  the  carriages,  the  greater  perfection  of  the  harness,  the 
absence  of  such  obstacles  as  were  described  by  Arthur  Young,  and, 
more  than  all,  by  the  superior  character  of  the  drivers,  a  steady,  well- 
conducted,  and  sober  class  of  persons  having  taken  the  place  of  men 
■with  habits  and  characters  the  very  reverse. 

If  previous  to  the  adoption  of  the  improvements  here  noticed  in  the 
construction  and  maintenance  of  our  turnpike-roads,  the  above  results 
had  been  anticipated,  the  prediction  would  have  been  thought  wild  and 
chimerical ;  but,  witnessing  as  we  do  those  results,  we  are  now  so  far 
from  considering  them  as  the  limit  of  our  onward  progress,  that  we  rea- 
sonably look  for  a  series  of  further  improvements  in  locomotion,  of  which 
railways  and  steam-carriages  may  be  only  among  the  first  steps,  and 
which  will  do  more  for  us  and  our  descendants  than  turnpike-roads  and 
railways  have  done  for  our  immediate  predecessors  and  ourselves  in  faci- 
litating intercourse  between  different  parts  of  the  kingdom,  in  opening 
distant  markets,  in  economising  the  cost  of  transport,  and  in  equalising 
the  prices  of  produce  throughout  the  kingdom,  for  the  general  benefit  of 
the  community. 

It  is  a  difficult  thing  to  obtain  accurate  estimates  of  the  amount  of 
traffic  upon  roads  or  canals.  In  ordinary  cases  no  one  is  interested  in 
keeping  an  account  of  the  number  of  vehicles  or  of  passengers,  or  the 
quantity  of  goods  conveyed  upon  the  roads  ;  and  as  the  property  in 
canals  belongs  to  individuals  or  to  private  associations,  it  is  judged  pru- 
dent to  conceal  such  facts,  lest  the  knowledge  of  them  should  encourage 
rivalry.  The  only  occasions  on  which  information  of  this  kind  is  col- 
lected and  made  public,  are,  when  the  promoters  of  some  new  under- 
taking are  desirous  of  making  out  a  case  in  favour  of  their  own  project, 
and  it  must  be  obvious  that  statements  thus  proffered  are  liable  to 
some  exaggeration,  and  must  be  received  with  caution.  In  the  way 
here  mentioned  much  information  has  been  given  in  evidence  before 
Committees  of  the  House  of  Commons,  appointed  to^examine  the  nume- 
rous railway  bills  brought  forward,  and  in  the  absence  of  more  extensive 
and  authentic  returns,  selections  from  the  information  thus  given  may  be 
interesting. 