


ciiAi'.  ir.J  TURNPIKE  llOADS.  295 

a  salt-work,  two  stores  for  oats,  and  a  considerable  traffic  in  linen  and 
yarn."  This  gratifying  statement  describes  only  the  first  beginning  of 
improvement.  When  seven  more  years  had  passed,  the  population 
amounted  to  more  than  1100  ;  in  1841  they  exceeded  1500  souls.  The 
twenty  houses  spoken  of  by  Mr.  Xinimo  were  increased  to  more  than  250, 
forming  the  flourishing  town  of  Cahirciveen,  which  is  the  centre  of  a 
considerable  import  and  export  trade.  These  advantages,  which  are 
still  only  beginning  to  develop  themselves,  have  originated  in  the  making 
of  about  seventy  miles  of  new  road,  on  a  level  line. 

It  is  stated  in  the  Reports  of  the  Commissioners  of  Public  Works  in 
Ireland,  a  Board  established  by  Act  of  Parliament  in  1831,  that  "the 
benefits  which  the  country  has  derived  from  the  construction  of  roads 
carried  by  the  aid  of  government  contributions  through  extensive  poor 
uncultivated  districts,  which  were  previously  without  means  of  communi- 
cation, continue  to  manifest  themselves  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner. 

"  The  very  great  benefit  which  the  country  has  derived  from  the 
formation  of  these  roads  has  been  repeatedly  represented;  nothing, 
however,  short  of  witnessing  the  effects  produced  can  give  an  adequate 
impression  of  their  value. 

"  These  roads  have  been  the  means  of  fertilising  the  deserts,  and  of 
depriving  the  lawless  disturbers  of  the  public  peace  of  their  place  of 
refuge,  affording  them  at  the  same  time  resources  for  an  active,  honest, 
industry,  of  which,  we  must  do  them  the  justice  to  observe,  they  have 
not  shown  any  indisposition  to  avail  themselves. 

"  In  traversing  a  country  covered  with  farms,  and  in  a  high  state  of 
cultivation,  showing  every  sign  of  a  good  soil,  and  of  amply-remune- 
rating produce,  it  becomes  difficult  to  credit  the  fact  that  ten  or  twelve 
years  since  the  whole  was  a  barren  waste,  the  asylum  of  a  miserable 
and  lawless  peasantry,  who  were  calculated  to  be  a  burthen  rather  than 
a  benefit  to  the  nation ;  and  that  this  improvement  may  entirely  be 
attributed  to  the  expenditure  of  a  few  thousand  pounds  in  carrying  a 
good  road  of  communication  through  the  district." 

Among  the  subjects  to  which  the  Commissioners  appointed  in  1835 
for  inquiring  into  the  condition  of  the  poorer  classes  in  Ireland  extended 
their  investigations,  the  state  of  the  public  roads  was  included.  From 
the  evidence  given,  the  roads  between  market  towns  are  in  good  repair, 
and  so  improved,  in  comparison  to  their  former  condition,  that  a  horse  is 
now  able  to  carry  to  market  twice  or  thrice  the  load  that  he  used  to 
draw  twenty  years  ago.  This  improvement  is  most  apparent  "  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  resident  proprietors'  seats,  and  through  their  estates, 
as  they  take  care,  by  means  of  their  local  influence,  to  have  the  county 
money  laid  out  on  the  roads  upon  and  near  their  own  property." 