

The  almost  magical  effect  ascribed  to  the  opening  of  the  new  roads 
in  Ireland  was,  at  a  i)eriod  not  very  distant,  experienced  in  England, 


296  jN)^  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

even  within  what  is  now  only  a  four  hours'  journey  from  London.  An 
inliabitant  of  Horsham,  in  Sussex,  hitely  living,  remembers,  when  a 
boy,  to  have  heard  from  a  person  whose  father  carried  on  the  business 
of  a  butcher  in  that  town,  that  in  his  time  the  only  means  of  reaching 
the  Metropolis  was  either  by  going  on  foot,  or  riding  on  horseback,  the 
latter  of  which  undertakings  was  not  practicable  at  all  periods  of  the 
year,  nor  in  every  state  of  i\w  weather — that  the  roads  were  not  at  any 
time  in  such  a  condition  as  to  admit  of  sheep  or  cattle  being  driven 
upon  them  to  the  London  markets,  and  that  for  this  reason  the  farmers 
were  prevented  sending  thither  the  produce  of  their  land,  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  being,  in  fact,  their  only  market.  Under  these  circum- 
stances, a  quarter  of  a  fat  ox  was  commonly  sold  for  about  15s.,  and 
the  price  of  mutton  throughout  the  year  was  only  five  farthings  the 
pound.  Horsham  is  oG  miles  from  London,  and  the  journey  between 
the  two  places  by  the  turnpike-road  now  occupies  less  than  four  hours  ; 
before  the  opening  for  traffic  of  the  Brighton  Railway,  more  than  30 
stage-coaches  travelling  at  this  rate  passed  through  Horsham  every  day, 
on  their  way  from  and  to  the  Metropolis,  in  addition  to  numerous  private 
carriages  and  post-chaises ;  the  traffic  of  goods — principally  coal  and 
agricultural  produce — carried  on  in  the  district  of  which  Horsham  is  the 
centre,  exceeded  40,000  tons  a  year,  besides  which,  the  road  was  con- 
stantly covered  with  droves  of  cattle  and  flocks  of  sheep. 

The  imperfection  thus  described  as  formerly  existing  in  Sussex,  was 
by  no  means  confined  to  that  county.  In  Arthur  Young's  "  Tour  in 
the  North  of  England,"  published  in  1770,  he  gives  the  following  de- 
scription of  the  turnpike-road  between  Preston  and  Wigan,  a  spot  which 
is  now  become  a  centre  for  railway  operations : — "  I  know  not,  in  the 
whole  range  of  language,  terms  sufficiently  expressive  to  describe  this 
infernal  road.  To  look  over  a  map,  and  perceive  that  it  is  a  principal 
one,  not  only  to  some  towns,  but  even  whole  counties,  one  would  natur- 
ally conclude  it  to  be  at  least  decent ;  but  let  me  most  seriously  cau- 
tion all  travellers  who  may  accidentally  purpose  to  travel  this  terrible 
county,  to  avoid  it  as  they  would  the  devil,  for  a  thousand  to  one  but 
they  break  their  necks  or  their  limbs  by  overthrows  or  breakings- down. 
They  will  here  meet  with  ruts,  which  I  actually  measured,  four  feet 
deep,  and  floating  with  mud,  only  from  a  wet  summer, — what,  there- 
fore, must  it  be  after  a  winter  ?  The  only  mending  it  receives  in  places 
is  the  tumbling  in  some  loose  stones,  which  serve  no  other  purpose  but 
jolting  a  carriage  in  the  most  intolerable  manner.  These  are  not  merely 
opinions,  but  facts,  for  I  actually  passed  three  carts  broken  down,  in 
these  eighteen  miles  of  execrable  memory." 