

-3 

i 

3    ? 

1 

o 
"3 

0-? 

d     •     *     •     •  K     •    • 

■At       £  s;     5 

^   o     .go     .   g. 

5     c3;3.575^ 

The  calculations  as  to  the  number  of  passengers  conveyed  by  stage- 
coaches upon  the  different  lines  of  road  embraced  by  the  foregoing 
estimates,  were  for  the  most  part  grounded  upon  information  furnished 
by  the  vStamp  Office  in  London,  in  which  department  the  necessary  par- 
ticulars are  registered,  upon  the  issue  of  the  license,  without  which  no 
person  is  allowed  to  convey  passengers  for  hire  from  one  part  of  this 
kingdom  to  another.  In  order  to  obtain  some  approximation  to  the  ex- 
tent of  travelling  by  such  means  in  England,  a  careful  calculation  has 


300  rilOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

been  made  upon  the  whole  of  the  returns  so  made  to  the  Stamp  Office, 
and  the  licenses  for  which  coaches  were  in  operation  at  the  end  of  the 
year  1834.*     The  method  followed   in  making  the  calculation  has  been 
to  ascertain  the  performance  of  each  vehicle,  supposing  that  perform- 
ance to  have  been  equal  to  the  full  amount  of  the  permission  conveyed 
by  the  license,  reducing  the  power  so  given  to  a  number  equal  to  the 
number  of  miles  which  one  passenger  might  be  conveyed  in  the  course 
of  the  year ; — for  example  :  a  coach  is  licensed  to  convey  15  passengers 
daily  from  London  to  Birmingham,  a  distance  of  112  miles.     In  order 
to  ascertain  the  possible  performance  of  this  carriage,  during  the  year, 
if  the  number  of  miles  is  multiplied  by  the  number  of  journeys,  and 
that  product  multiplied  again  by  the  number  of  passengers,  we  shall 
obtain,  as  an   element,  a  number  equal   to  the  number  of  miles  along 
which  one  person  might  have  been  conveyed :  viz.  112  X  365  x  15  = 
613,200.     In  this  case  the  number  of  miles  travelled  is  40,880,  along 
which  distance  15  persons  might  have  been  carried  during  the  year ; 
but,  for  the  simplification  of  the  calculation,  the  further  calculation  is 
made,  which  shows  that  amount  of  travelling  to  be  equal  to  the  convey- 
ance of  one  person  through  the  distance  of  613,200  miles.    Upon  making 
this  calculation  for  the  whole  number  of  stage-coaches  that  possessed 
licenses  at  the  end  of  the  year  1834,  it  appears  that  the  means  of  con- 
veyance thus  provided  for  travelling  were  equivalent  to  the  conveyance 
during  the  year  of  one  person,  for  the  distance  of  597,159,420  miles, 
or  more  than  six  times  the  distance   between  the   earth  and  the   sun. 
Obsen-ation  has  shown  that  the  degree  in  which  the  public  avail  them- 
selves of  the  accommodation  thus  provided  is  in  the  proportion  of  9  to 
15,  or  3-5ths  of  its  utmost  extent.     Following  this  proportion,  the  sum 
of  all  the  travelling  by  stage-coaches  in  Great  Britain  may  be  repre- 
sented by  358,295,652  miles ;  if  we  exclude  from  the  calculation  all 
very  young  children,  as  well  as  persons  who  from  their  great  age  and 
bodily  infirmities  are  unable  to  travel,  there  will  probably  remain  in 
England   10,000,000  of  persons  by  whom    that  amount  of  travelling 
might  be  accomplished  ;  but  it  is  well  known  that  a  very  large  propor- 
tion of  the  population  are  not  placed  in  circumstances  that  require  them 
to  travel,  and  if  even  it  were  otherwise,  that  they  would  not  avail  them- 
selves of  a  mode  of  conveyance  so  comparatively  costly  as  a  stage-coach. 
We  shall  probably  go  to  the  utmost  extent  in  assuming  that  not  more 
than   l-5th,  or  two  millions  of  persons,  travel  in  that  manner,  and  it 
places  in  a  strong  point  of  view  tiie  activity  which  pervades  this  country 
when  we  thus  arrive  at  the  conclusion,  that  each  of  those  persons  must 
on  the  average  have  travelled  on  land  by  some  public  conveyance  180 
miles  in  the  course  of  the  year  1834.     This  calculation  was  exclusive  of 