

Stirlingshire      .     r- 

158 

Wigtonshire 

51 

Total 


3,666 


CHAP.  II.]  TURNPIKE  llOADS.  293 

If  we  allow  150  miles  for  the  deficient  returns  of  1818,  and  which  is 
somewhat  ahove  the  average  given  by  the  16,1)55  returns  actually 
made,  we  .shall  find  an  increase  of  exactly  1000  miles  in  England  and 
Wales  ;  but  this  increase  is  of  little  importance  if  viewed  compara- 
tively with  the  improvements  introduced  into  their  construction  and 
management. 

As  regards  the  highways  of  Scotland,  we  have  more  precise  informa- 
tion given  in  the  Reports  of  the  Board  of  AVorks,  constituted  in  1^03, 
for  constructing  roads  and  bridges  in  the  uncultivated  districts  of  that 
country.  Since  its  formation,  that  Board  has  caused  the  construction  of 
1186  miles  of  roads,  and  more  than  1000  bridges. 

By  this  means,  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  late  Mr.  Telford,  o° 
whose  opportunities  for  forming  a  correct  judgment  upon  the  subject 
few  persons  will  question,'  we  have  advanced  civilization,  in  the  districts 
principally  affected,  by  at  least  one  hundred  years.  The  manner  in 
which  this  advancement  has  shown  itself  in  one  part  of  the  country  was 
thus  described  in  the  evidence  given  by  Mr.  Loch,  before  the  Select 
Committee  on  Public  Works  in  Ireland,  of  which  committee  he  was  a 
member,  and  which  sat  in  the  Session  of  1835  : — 

"  A\Tien  I  first  became  acquainted  with  the  Highlands,  the  great 
proportion  of  the  people,  in  place  of  being  immediate  tenants  of  the 
landlord,  held  of  the  different  tacksmen.  Since  then  almost  all  per- 
sons occupying  land,  and  I  do  not  confine  my  observations  to  Suther- 
land alone,  though  principally  to  it,  have  become  immediate  tenants  to 
the  landlord.  They  were  extremely  irregular  in  their  habits,  being 
poachers  on  the  river,  and  smugglers,  and  since  then,  in  Sutherland, 
they  have  given  up  both,  and  have  become  most  industrious  workmen 
in  every  class  of  agricultural  labour.  It  was  necessary,  at  the  period  I 
mention,  to  get  ploughmen  from  Elgin,  and  that  side  of  the  Moray 
Firth,  and  there  was  not  a  person  who  could  build  a  stone  wall,  the 
ordinary  mode  of  enclosing  land  in  that  country.  But  it  is  so  much  the 
reverse  at  the  present  moment,  that  almost  every  ploughman  in  the  county 
is  a  native,  and  they  are  now  the  best  builders  of  stone  walls  in  the 
North,  in  consequence  of  which  they  are  employed  in  all  the  adjacent 
counties.  A  great  improvement  has  taken  place  also,  arising  from  the 
greater  extension  of  the  English  language.  When  the  children  on  the 
coast-side  formerly  came  out  of  school,  though  they  were  taught  to  read 
English  in  the  school,  they  spoke  nothing  but  the  Gaelic  language  ;  now 
when  they  play  after  school  hours  on  the  coast-side,  they  all  speak  English. 
Nothing  has  tended  so  much  to  this  as  the  institution  of  Gaelic  schools, 
which  were  founded  with  the  object  of  preserving  that  language ;  but 
the  fact  is,  the  moment  persons  have  acquired  the  facility  of  reading 
Gaelic,  they  find  it  of  no  use,  and  immediately  leave  it,  and  ti.vich  them- 
selves English." 