


294  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [skc.  iii. 

The  moral  improvement  here  pointed  ont  is  ascribed  by  Mr.  Loch 
to  the  formation  of  roads  by  the  Government  since  1803,  and  a  like 
effect  has  been  experienced  in  at  least  an  equal  degree  in  Ireland, 
Mr.  Griffith,  speaking  upon  the  subject  in  1822,  thus  expresses  him- 
self:— 

"  The  fertile  plains  of  Lim.erick,  Cork,  and  Kerry,  are  separated 
from  each  other  by  a  deserted  country,  hitherto  nearly  an  impassable 
barrier.  Tliis  large  district  comprehends  upwards  of  900  square  miles  ; 
in  many  places  it  is  very  populous.  As  might  be  expected,  under 
such  circumstances,  the  people  are  turbulent,  and  their  houses  being 
inaccessible  for  want  of  roads,  it  is  not  surprising  that  during  the  dis- 
turbances of  1821  and  1822  this  district  was  the  asylum  for  whiteboys, 
smugglers,  and  robbers,  and  that  stolen  cattle  were  drawn  into  it  as  to 
a  safe  and  impenetrable  retreat.  Notwithstanding  its  present  desolate 
state,"  adds  Mr.  Griffith,  "  this  country  contains  within  itself  the  seeds 
of  future  improvement  and  industry." 

In  reporting  upon  the  state  of  the  same  district  in  1829,  only  seven 
years  after  the  above  unfavourable  description  was  given,  but  during 
which  interval  several  roads  had  been  opened  through  it,  the  same  intel- 
ligent gentleman  states  as  follows  : — 

"  A  very  considerable  improvement  has  already  taken  place  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  roads,  both  in  the  industry  of  the  inhabitants,  and  the 
appearance  of  the  country  ;  upwards  of  sixty  new  lime-kilns  have  been 
built ;  carts,  ploughs,  harrows,  and  improved  implements,  have  become 
common ;  new  houses  of  a  better  class  have  been  built,  new  enclosures 
made,  and  the  country  has  become  perfectly  tranquil,  and  exhibits  a 
scene  of  industry  and  exertion  at  once  pleasing  and  remarkable.  A 
large  portion  of  the  money  received  for  labour  has  been  husbanded 
with  care,  laid  out  in  building  substantial  houses,  and  in  the  purchase 
of  stock  and  agi'icultural  implements,  and  numerous  examples  might  be 
shown  of  poor  labourers  possessing  neither  money,  houses,  nor  land,  when 
first  employed,  w^ho  in  the  past  year  have  been  enabled  to  take  farms, 
build  houses,  and  stock  their  lands." 

In  a  report  made  in  the  year  1824,  by  the  late  Mr.  Nimmo,  a  gentle- 
man to  whom  Ireland  is  much  indebted  for  the  suggestion  and  execu- 
tion of  many  plans  of  enlightened  improvement,  it  is  stated  that  in  a 
part  of  the  county  of  Kerry,  "  a  few  years  ago  there  was  hardly  a 
plough,  car,  or  carriage  of  any  kind  ;  butter,  the  only  produce,  was 
carried  to  Cork  on  horseback ;  there  was  not  one  decent  public-house, 
and  only  one  house  slated  and  plastered  in  the  village  :  the  nearest  post- 
office  thirty  miles  distant.  Since  the  new  road  was  made,  there  were 
built  in  three  years  upwards  of  twenty  respectable  two-story  houses,  a 
shop  with  cloth,  hardware,  and  groceries ;  a  comfortable  inn,  a  post- 
office,  bridtiwell,  new  chapel,  a  quay  covered  with  limestone  for  manure, 