

The  benefits  which  resulted  from  the  improvement  of  roads  in  this 
and  other  parts  of  the  country,  were  not  confined  to  the  particular  spots 
where  those  improvements  have  been  made,  but  were  shared  by  the 


CdiJAr.  It]  TURNPIKE  IlOAli^.  '    ^ 


297 


country  generally.  This  fact  was  formerly  so  ill  understood,  that  when 
it  was  in  contemplation  to  extend  turnpike-roads  from  the  Metropolis  to 
more  distant  points  than  those  to  which  they  had  hefore  been  carried, 
the  fanners  in  the  metro])olitan  counties  petitioned  Parliament  against 
the  plan,  fearing  lest  their  market  being  invaded  by  so  many  compe- 
titors, who  would  sell  their  produce  more  cheaply,  they  should  be  ruined. 
The  comparative  rent  of  land  in  the  neighbourhood  of  London,  and  in- 
deed of  every  large  town,  now  that  so  much  more  facility  of  communi- 
cation has  been  attained,  is  a  sufficient  answer  to  the  apprehensions  then 
expressed.  Without  thus  increasing  the  means  of  supply,  it  is  mani- 
festly impossible  greatly  to  increase  the  population  of  towns  ;  by  restrict- 
ing their  population,  the  growth  of  commercial  and  manufacturing  iu;;^ 
dustry  would  be  arrested,  the  augmentation  of  the  capital  of  the  country 
would  proceed  but  slowly,  if  at  all,  and  the  nation  would  continue  sta- 
tionary, or  its  progress  would  at  best  be  hardly  perceptible.  In  such 
a  state  of  things  it  would  be  vain  to  expect  that  any  advances  should  be 
made  towards  the  attainment  of  rational  freedom,  or  the  improvement 
of  our  social  institutions;  and  if,  notwithstanding  these  circumstances, 
population  were  to  increase,  the  mass  of  the  people  must  continually  be- 
come poorer,  they  would  be  more  and  more  driven  to  the  habitual  use 
of  the  lowest  descriptions  of  food,  and,  instead  of  the  gratifying  spectacle 
now  exhibited,  of  a  people  steadily  advancing  in  the  attainment  of  the 
arts  and  the  blessings  of  civilization,  we  should  gradually  sink  into  a 
state  of  barbarism,  and  might  in  the  end  be  degraded  to  the  lowest  scale 
of  intelligence  compatible  with  human  nature. 

The  improvements  made  in  the  mode  of  constructing  roads,  and  the 
state  of  perfect  repair  in  which  they  are  maintained,  led  to  correspond-  i 
ing  improvements  in  the  form  and  construction  of  our  public  carriages, 
and  in  everything  connected  with  their  management  and  performance. 
Very  considerable  improvements  in  these  respects  had  been  made  in  the 
second  half  of  the  last  century.  In  1742,  the  one  stage-coach  that  tra- 
velled between  London  and  Oxford  began  the  journey  at  seven  in  the 
morning,  and  did  not  reach  its  destination  until  the  evenino-  of  the  fol- 
lowing day,  resting  at  High  Wycombe  during  the  intervening  night. 
The  same  journey  has  since  been  regularly  performed  by  coaches  in 
six  hours,  and  the  express  trains  of  the  Great  A^'estern  railway  now 
make  the  journey  in  less  than  an  hour  and  a  half.  It  will  serve  to 
show  the  degree  of  improvement  that  had  been  attained  at  the  close 
of  the  last  century,  to  state,  that  the  author  well  remembers  in  the 
summer  of  1798,  leaving  the  town  of  Gosport  at  one  o'clock  of  the 
morning  in  the  "  Telegraph,"  then  considered  a  "  fast  coach,"  and 
arriving  at  the  Golden  Cross,  Charing  Cross,  at  eight  in  the  evening, 
thus  occupying  nineteen  hours  in  travelling  eighty  miles,  being  at  the 
rate  of  rather  more  than  four  miles  an  hour.    Our  countrymen  who  visit 