

*  The  progressive  opening  of  railways  since  1834  would  interfere  materially  with  the 
correctness  of  any  calculation  based  upon  the  Stamp  Office  returns  of  later  years. 


CHAP.  II.]  TURNPIKE  ROADS.  301 

all  travelling  in  post-chaises,  in  private  carriages,  and  by  steam-vessels, 
the  amount  of  which  there  are  not  any  means  for  estimating. 

It  affords  a  good  measure  of  the  relative  importance  of  the  Metro- 
polis to  the  remainder  of  the  country,  that  of  the  above  number  of 
597,159,420,  the  large  proportion  of  409,052,644  is  the  product  of 
stage-coaches  which  are  licensed  to  run  from  London  to  various  parts 
of  the  kingdom.  The  licenses,  which  have  formed  the  groundwork  of 
the  calculations,  include  all  public  conveyances  proceeding  between  one 
part  of  England  and  another  part  of  England,  as  well  as  those  convey- 
ances which  travel  between  England  and  Scotland,  but  not  such  as  begin 
and  end  their  journeys  in  Scotland  ;  and  the  travelling  in  Ireland  is 
wholly  excluded. 

"^riiere  were  in  1837,  54  four-horse,  and  49  pair-horse  mail-coaches  in 
England.  The  greatest  speed  attained  by  any  of  these  was  10|  miles 
per  hour,  and  the  slovvest  speed  of  any  6  miles,  the  average  of  the  whole 
being  81  miles  per  hour.  There  were  besides  30  four-horse  mails  in 
Ireland,  and  10  in  Scotland.  The  number  of  stage-coaches,  including 
mails,  licensed  by  the  Commissioners  of  Stamps  at  the  beginning  of 
1837,  was  3026.  Of  this  number  about  one-half  (1507)  began  or 
ended  their  journeys  in  London. 


302  riiOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  m. 


CHAPTER  III. 


CANALS. 


Beginning  of  Canal-making  in  England — Utility  of  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater's  Canals — 
Length  of  Navigable  Kivers  and  Canals  in  England — Inland  Navigation  in  Ireland — 
Neglect  of  Natural  Facilities  in  that  Country  —Improvement  of  the  Shannon — Traffic 
on  Grand  and  Royal  Canals  and  River  Barrow  —  Ulster  Canal — Caledonian  Canal — 
Crinan  Canal — Canals  begun  and  finished  since  1801 — Canals  of  France — Of  America. 

The  greatest  era  of  caual -constructing  in  England  was  during  the  latter 
half  of  the  last  century.  Some  efforts  were  made  at  earlier  periods  for 
the  introduction  of  this  kind  of  inland  navigation,  but  were  without 
success  :  and  we  may  fairly  date  the  origin  of  English  canals  from  the 
Act  of  1755,  under  the  authority  of  which  a  canal  about  11  miles  in 
length  was  executed,  which  commences  in  the  river  Mersey,  at  the  mouth 
of  Sankey-brook,  alongside  which  it  runs  in  a  northerly  direction  to 
Gerrard's  Bridge  and  St.  Helen's. 

In  1759,  before  the  Sankey-brook  Canal  was  finished,  the  Duke  of 
Bridgewater  obtained  his  first  Act  of  Parliament,  empowering  him  to 
construct  those  stupendous  works  which,  from  the  boldness  of  their  de- 
sign and  the  masterly  manner  of  their  execution,  have  justly  obtained  for 
himself,  and  for  James  Brindley,  the  extraordinary  self-taught  genius 
by  whom  they  were  planned  and  executed,  a  renown  of  the  highest 
order.  These  works,  carried  forward  in  defiance  of  natural  diflliculties, 
which  were  at  that  time  deemed  insurmountable,  opened  a  new  era  in 
the  annals  of  inland  navigation,  and  though  they  may  since  have  been 
equalled,  have  never  been  surpassed. 