


CHAP.  HI.]  CANALS.  307 

struction  of  bridges,  during  their  progress,  give  employment  to  great 
numbers  of  labourers,  who,  in  proportion  as  these  works  are  completed, 
by  that  very  means  find  a  demand  for  their  labour  created  which  is  calcu- 
lated to  avert  some  of  the  difficulties  that  have  been  found  to  accompany 
the  early  stages  of  a  poor  law. 

The  Commissioners  for  Inquiring  into  the  Condition  of  the  Poorer 
Classes  in  Ireland,  proposed,  in  their  Third  Report,  the  appointment  of  a 
Board  of  Improvement,  which  should  have  power  "  to  enforce  improve- 
ments in  property  at  the  expense  of  the  property  improved,"  upon  the 
same  principle  as  that  adopted  in  the  laws  which  form  the  constitution 
of  the  Bedford  Level  Corporation  in  England  :  that  draining  and  fencing, 
wherever  necessary,  should  be  enforced  by  law  under  the  directions  of 
Local  Commissioners  to  be  appointed  in  every  district,  and  who  should 
be  under  the  control  of  the  Board  of  Improvement :  that  the  funds  re- 
quired for  carrying  on  such  works,  and  for  the  making  of  roads  and 
bridges,  might  be  advanced  by  the  issue  of  Government  Exchequer  Bills, 
the  interest  and  redemption  of  which  should  be  provided  for  by  means 
of  rates  made  upon  the  property  in  each  district :  and  that  in  order  to 
instruct  the  cultivators  in  the  best  methods  of  managing  their  land, 
model  farms  should  be  established  in  every  district,  and  each  farm  be 
placed  under  ihe  direction  of  a  person  competent  to  give  instructions,  and 
practically  to  exhibit  their  value,  by  introducing  the  most  approved  course 
of  cropping  upon  the  farm  under  his  care. 

Superadded  to  these  preparations,  the  Commissioners  strongly  recom- 
mended an  extensive  system  of  emigration,  "  not  by  any  means  as  the 
main  relief  for  the  evils  of  Ireland,  but  as  an  auxiliary  essential  to  a 
commencing  com'se  of  amelioration." 

Having  brought  these  preparations  into  operation,  the  Commissioners 
are  of  opinion  "  that  provision  should  be  made  by  law  towards  the  relief 
of  the  aged  and  infirm,  orphans,  helpless  widows  with  young  children, 
and  destitute  persons  in  general." 

Two  methods  are  pointed  out  in  the  Report  whereby  the  funds  for  this 
purpose  may  be  provided.  One  of  these— to  the  adoption  of  which  the 
majority  of  the  Commissioners  were  inclined — suggests  that  those  funds 
"  should  be  provided  in  part  by  the  public  through  a  national  rate,  and 
in  part  by  private  associations,  which,  aided  by  the  public,  should  be 
authorized  to  establish  mendicity  houses  and  alms-houses,  and  to  admi- 
nister relief  to  the  poor  at  their  own  dwellings,  subject,  however,  to  the 
superintendence  and  control  of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners."  The 
second  method  pointed  out  is,  that  "  the  whole  of  the  funds  should  be 
pro^'ided  by  the  public,  one  portion  by  a  national  rate,  and  another  by 
a  local  rate,  and  should  be  administered,  as  in  England,  by  the  Board 
of  Guardians  of  each  district." 