

„              up           .      ,  19,478  30,558 


Tons     .      .     271,074  435,187 


Showing  an  increase  of  traffic  in  ten  years  amounting  to  60  per  cent.^ 

*  There  does  not  appear  to  have  been  any  increase  in  the  traffic  since  1833. 


cuAF.  ui.J  CANALS.  300 

The  Grand  and  Royal  Canals  of  Ireland  were  constructed  upon  a 
scale  of  magnitude  far  greater  than  was  necessary,  and  consequently 
at  a  much  more  considerable  cost  than  would  have  sufficed  for  the 
attainment  of  the  objects  in  view ;  still  there  is  reason  to  hope  that  as  a 
money  speculation  they  might  be  brought  to  pay  the  proprietors,  when, 
as  we  may  hope,  the  resources  of  the  country  shall  be  further  developed 
than  they  are  at  present.  From  the  beginning  of  the  present  century  to 
the  year  1846  Parliamentary  grants  were  made  in  favour  of  public 
works  in  Ireland,  amounting  to  more  than  2,000,000/.,  and  expended 
chiefly  upon  undertakings  connected  with  this  branch  of  our  inquiry. 

It  appears  that  a  proper  appreciation  of  the  value  of  inland  navigation 
to  the  country  is  far  from  being  generally  felt  in  Ireland.  So  long  ago 
as  the  year  1824,  a  canal  was  projected,  and  an  Act  of  Parliament  ob- 
tained, at  the  instance  of  some  influential  noblemen  and  gentlemen 
connected  with  the  north  of  Ireland,  authorizing  the  formation  of  an 
incorporate  company  for  the  construction  of  the  necessary  -w  orks  to  con- 
nect Lough  Erne  with  Lough  Neagh,  and  thus  by  a  cutting,  forty-six 
English  miles  in  length,  to  render  available  a  continuous  navigation  of 
130  miles.  Tiie  navigation  as  proposed  would  intersect  Ireland  from  east 
to  west,  passing  through  populous  and  fertile  agricultural  districts,  where 
theretofore  the  only  practicable  method  of  conveying  the  produce  of  the 
soil  to  market,  or  to  the  ports  of  shipment,  was  the  tedious  and  expen- 
sive one  of  carriage  on  the  backs  of  horses.  The  whole  cost  of  the 
undertaking  was  under  200,000/.,  of  which  sum  Government  con- 
sented to  advance  three-fifths,  at  a  low  rate  of  interest ;  yet  it  has  only 
been  after  years  of  anxious  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  promoters,  that 
subscribers  could  be  found  willing  to  advance  the  remaining  two-fifths. 
This  work,  under  the  name  of  "The  Ulster  Canal,"  has  been  com- 
pleted according  to  the  plans  of  the  late  jN^'.  Telford,  and  promises  to  '^-^'^^^^ 
produce  great  advantages  to  the  counties  of  Fermanagh,  Tyrone, 
Donegal,  Leitrira,  and  Cavan.  It  was  partially  opened  for  use  in 
November,  1837,  and  completed  a  few  years  thereafter.*  During  its 
progress  this  work  proved  a  great  blessing  to  the  district  through  which 
it  passes ;  it  gave  constant  employment  at  fair  wages  to  a  great  number 
of  labourers,  and  was  the  means  of  reclaiming  many  among  them  from 
those  habits  of  reckless  indifference  and  that  passion  for  ardent  spirits 
which  are  so  fatal  to  the  happiness  of  the  working  classes  in  Ireland. 
AMtli  the  power  of  saving  out  of  their  wages,  the  habit  has  arisen.  The 
whiskey -shop  has  been  abandoned,  and  several  among  those  who  were 