

Through  an  imaccountable  want  of  enterprise  and  even  common 
worldly  forethought  on  the  part  of  those  landholders  whose  properties 
would  have  been  improved  by  following  up  the  recommendation  embodied 
in  the  foregoing  resolution,  nothing  eff(;ctual  to  that  end  was  done  during 
the  forty  years  that  followed  this  declaration.  In  the  three  years  fi-om 
1818  to  1820  Parliament  indeed  voted  21,000/.  for  making  or  repairing 
works  on  the  Shannon,  but  these  grants  appear  to  have  been  expended 
with  but  little  judgment. 

In  a  Report  addressed  to  the  Government  so  recently  as  the  30th  of 
April,  1833,  by  Colonel  Burgoyne,  the  Chief  Commissioner  of  the 
Board  of  Public  Works  in  Ireland,  the  neglect  here  mentioned  is  thus 
noticed :  "  It  is  indeed  surprising  to  find  so  noble  a  river,  running 
through  so  fine  a  country,  in  such  a  state  of  neglect.     The  soil  on  its 


CHAP.  III.]  CANALS.  305 

hanks  is  of  the  most  fertile  nature ;  iron,  marble,  slate,  and  various 
other  productions  of  superior  quality  are  also  to  be  found  in  abundance. 
Though  great  capabilities  exist  for  easy  intercourse,  a  perfect  stagnation 
unhapj)ily  prevails  ;  and,  where  forests  of  masts,  and  the  bustling  activity 
of  commerce  should  be  witnessed,  the  scene  is  desolate  and  only 
varied  occasionally  by  the  passage  of  some  straggling  boat,  which  with 
difficulty,  and  perha])s  with  only  half  a  cargo,  is  striving  to  make  its 
way  to  one  of  the  Dublin  canals.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  part  of  the 
British  dominions  where  such  an  opening  is  presented  for  prospective 
advantages." 

From  a  very  remote  period,  almost  the  only  use  made  of  this  river, 
through  a  great  part  of  its  course,  was  to  convert  it  into  a  fish-pond  ;. 
its  channel  was  artificially  obstructed,  and  rapids  were  created  in  order 
to  provide  "  eel  and  salmon  weirs,  which  were  established  at  pleasure, 
under  authority  of  the  proprietors  of  the  banks,  and  presented  the 
greatest  difficulties  in  the  way  of  navigation." 

At  length  the  improvement  of  this  river  w^as  taken  seriously  in  hand 
by  Government.  Accurate  surveys  of  the  whole  of  its  line  w'ere  made 
by  competent  engineers,  whose  reports  were  laid  before  Parliament : 
plans  were  formed  for  rendering  the  stream  navigable  throughout  its 
course,  from  Lough  Allen  in  the  county  of  Leitrim  to  its  mouth ;  and 
an  Act  was  passed  on  the  Uth  of  September,  1835  (5  &  6  Wm.  IV., 
c.  67),  authorizing  the  completion  of  the  necessary  works  under 
Commissioners  nominated  by  the  Treasury,  with  power  to  remove 
obstructions  and  to  annul  any  private  rights  that  might  exist  unfavour- 
able to  the  object,  making  compensation  for  the  same.  The  expense 
of  these  works  was,  in  the  first  instance,  to  be  wholly  defrayed  out  of  the 
public  revenue  ;  one-half  of  the  sum,  whatever  it  might  be,  to  be  made 
a  free  grant,  and  the  other  half  to  be  repaid  by  twelve  half-yearly 
instalments,  out  of  the  surplus  tolls  ;  and  in  the  event  of  these  being 
insufficient,  power  was  giveu  to  the  Commissioners  to  raise  the  defi- 
ciency by  a  local  rate  or  assessment  upon  the  adjoining  counties  and 
districts,  in  proportions  and  according  to  the  particular  extent  of  the 
benefits  which  each  may  be  supposed  to  have  derived  from  the  improve  - 
ments. 