

The  great  public  utility  of  these  canals  of  tlie  Duke  of  Bridgewater, 
and  the  immense  revenues  which  they  have  continued  to  produce  to  their 
proprietors,  have  acted  as  powerful  incentives  to  the  undertaking  of 
similar  works.  The  navigable  canals  used  for  the  transport  of  goods 
and  produce  in  England  alone  are  estimated  now  to  exceed  2200  miles 
in  length,  while  the  navigable  rivers  exceed  1800  miles,  making  together 
more  than  4000  miles  of  inland  navigation,  the  greatest  part  of  which 
has  been  created  or  rendered  available  during  the  last  eighty  years. 

In  the  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  on 
the  State  of  the  Poor  in  Ireland,  which  sat  in  1830,  it  was  with  truth 
remarked,  that  "  the  effect  of  opening  lines  of  inland  navigation,  when 


fUAP.  in.]  CANALS.  303 

formed  upon  proper  scientific  principles,  and  executed  with  due  economy, 
has  been,  on  the  concurrence  of  all  testimony,  the  extension  of  improved 
agriculture,  the  equalisation  of  prJces  of  fuel  and  provisions  in  difierent 
districts,  the  diminishing  the  danger  of  scarcity  in  both  of  these  neces- 
saries of  life,  and  advancing  the  general  improvement  of  the  condition 
of  the  people  by  the  creation  of  a  new,  vigorous,  and  continued  demand 
for  labour." 

^lost  of  the  works  of  this  kind  that  have  been  executed  have  produced 
to  the  adventurers  an  adequate  return  for  the  capital  expended.  This 
in  itself  may  be  considered  a  sufficient  test  of  their  iitility ;  but  even 
where  the  proprietors  have  not  reaped  a  fair  advantage  for  their  outlay, 
it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that,  as  regards  the  country  at  large,  the 
money  has  been  ill  bestowed.  On  this  head,  the  remarks  of  the  late 
Mr.  Nimrao,  upon  the  effects  of  the  canals  cut  in  Ireland,  will  be  found, 
with  some  modifications,  to  be  generally  applicable.  He  observes,  "  the 
inland  navigations  of  Ireland  are  chiefly  remarkable  for  being  undertaken, 
not  to  facilitate  any  existing  trade,  but  chiefly  to  promote  agriculture  in 
the  fertile  districts  of  the  interior,  to  create  a  trade  where  none  had 
previously  existed,  and  to  furnish  employment  for  the  poor.  The  success 
in  this  way  has  been  w'onderful,  and  though  the  adventurers  have  not  yet 
been  repaid,  and  perhaps  never  will  be,  the  benefit  to  the  public  and 
landed  property  of  the  kingdom  has  been  great  and  manifest.  The 
nation  has  been  saved  the  payment  of  a  bounty  of  100,000/.  per  annum 
for  bringing  corn  to  Dublin,  for  in  place  of  this  being  the  case  that  city 
has  now  become  one  of  the  first  corn-ports  of  Euro})e  ;  and  Ireland  in 
general,  which  half  a  century  ago  imported  corn  to  the  value  of  half  a 
million  annually,  has  now  a  surplus  produce  in  that  article  to  the  value 
of  4,000,000/.  per  annum,  while  the  whole  expenditure,  whether  in  public 
or  in  private  works  of  navigation,  even,  including  the  interest  paid  on 
loans,  hardly  amounted  to  3,000,000/. ">;Jv 