

The  advantages  thus  strikingly  brought  forward  by  Mr.  Nimmo  have 
resulted  from  means  of  internal  intercourse,  which,  when  contrasted  with 
those  accomplished  in  England,  must  appear  insignificant,  The  Mhole 
extent  of  navigable  canals  at  this  moment  available  in  Ireland  does  not 
exceed  300  miles,  and,  including  navigable  rivers,  the  entire  water- com- 
munication is  not  much  beyond  500  miles  for  the  whole  island.  ^Vhat 
the  condition  of  that  fertile  country  might  become  if  its  means  of  commu- 
nication were  placed  upon  an  equal  footing  with  those  of  the  midland  and 
southern  counties  of  England,  is  a  question  of  the  highest  interest  to 
every  one  who  has  at  heart  the  moral  and  intellectual  advancement  of 
the  Irish  people,  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  general  prosperity  of  the 
United  Kingdom. 

It  is  not  the  least  singular  part  of  the  case,  that,  while  so  much  luis 
been  done  in  England  to  supply  a  natural  deficiency  of  water-communi- 


304  rnoaHESS  of  the  nation.  [sec.  m. 

cation,  the  existing  facilities  for  executing  such  works  in  Ireland  liave, 
on  the  contrary,  been  of  the  most  encouraging  description.  The  neglect 
which  these  facilities  have  met  with  is-not  to  be  accounted  for  upon  the 
generally  operating  principle,  that  where  nature  has  done  much,  there 
human  ingenuity  is  less  called  forth.  The  nc^gl^ct  of  the  people  to  take 
advantage  of  the  boons  of  nature  has  for  the  most  part  been  such  as  to 
render  them  of  none  effect.  The  Shannon,  the  most  majestic  river  in 
the  United  Kingdom,  which,  with  its  lakes  and  lateral  branches,  receives 
the  drainage  of  a  considerable  portion  of  Ireland,  and  aj)pears  formed 
by  nature  to  act  as  the  great  artery  of  the  island,  for  facilitating  its 
agricultural  and  commercial  operations,  by  marking  out  a  line  for  the 
expeditious  and  cheap  conveyance  of  produce  and  merchandise,  required 
only  a  little  assistiince  from  art  to  bring  all  its  usefulness  to  bear  upon 
the  prosperity  of  the  country  ;  yet  this  little  was  long  withheld,  and  the 
grand  designs  of  nature  frustrated  through  the  apathy,  or  something 
even  less  excusable,  of  the  people  or  government,  so  that  this  river  was 
not  inaptly  compared  to  a  sealed  hook.  This  noble  stream  flows  during  its 
course  230  miles  through  the  centre  of  the  island,  and  may  be  said  to 
offer  the  blessings  of  commerce  and  its  civilizing  results  to  10  out  of  32 
of  the  counties  into  which  Ireland  is  divided. 

The  great  capabilities  of  the  river  Shannon  have  been  long  acknow- 
ledged. At  the  Summer  Assizes  of  1794,  the  Hish  Sheriffs  and  Grand 
Juries  of  the  counties  of  Roscommon,  Leitrim,  Mayo,  Galway,  Clare, 
Limerick,  King's  County,  and  Tipperary,  resolved  that  "  the  com- 
pleting of  the  navigation  of  the  river  Shannon,  and  the  great  rivers 
adjoining  thereto,  from  Lough  Allen  to  Limerick,  will  tend  effectually 
to  improve  and  open  the  home  and  foreign  markets  to  the  produce  of 
more  than  2,000,000  of  acres  of  land  in  the  heart  of  the  kingdom  ;  and 
that  the  execution  of  this  great  navigation  will  effectually  advance  the 
commerce,  manufactures,  agriculture,  and  population  of  this  kingdom, 
and  the  consequent  strength  of  the  empire  at  large." 