


*  The  Ulster  Canal  has  now  been  for  some  time  opened  for  traffic,  and  promises  to  be  of 
great  and  increasing  benefit  to  the  district  through  which  it  passes,  by  affording  an  outlet 
for  agricultural  produce.  It  was  of  great  use  in  1847  in  conveying  food  in  the  contrary 
direction  from  the  ports  to  the  interior  of  the  country.  It  has  not  hitherto  yielded  any 
revenue  to  the  shareholders. 


310  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  m. 

first  employed  laid  by  sufficient  money  to  enable  them  to  emigrate  to 
the  United  States  and  to  Canada,  where  they  have  constituted  them- 
selves proprietors,  and  have  before  them  the  certainty  of  future  comfort 
and  independence. 

Very  early  in  the  present  century  the  Caledonian  Canal  was  projected 
and  commenced.  This  truly  magnificent  work  consists  of  a  series  of 
canals  and  navigable  lochs,  extending  from  Corpach  Basin,  in  the  tide- 
way of  Loch  Eil,  at  the  north  end  of  Linnhe  Loch,  near  Fort  William, 
to  the  Moray  Firth,  on  the  west  side  of  Inverness.  The  total  length  of 
this  navigation  is  60.^  miles,  of  which  23  miles  are  artificial  cutting, 
and  the  remaining  37  miles  are  natural  lochs  or  lakes  wdiich  have  been 
rendered  navigable.  This  canal  being  projected  chiefly  with  a  view  to 
facilitate  the  trade  between  the  Baltic,,  the  western  ports  of  Scotland, 
and  Ireland,  is  15  feet  deep  throughout ;  its  surface  breadth  is  120  feet, 
and  its  breadth  at  bottom,  50  feet.  Its  summit  level  is  91  feet  above 
the  sea  at  low  water ;  it  has  28  locks,  which  are  each  172  feet  long. 
Eight  of  these  locks,  situated  at  the  eastern  side  of  this  navigation,  to 
which  the  name  of  Neptune's  Staircase  has  been  given,  are  considered 
to  be  works  of  the  very  first  order,  and  attest  the  skill  of  the  engineer, 
the  late  Mr.  Telford.  The  cost  of  this  canal,  according  to  the  Report  of 
the  Commissioners  appointed  for  superintending  its  execution,  has  been 
1,149,613/.  :  it  was  opened  for  traffic  in  October,  1822,  but  has  hitherto 
been  little  used,  and  as  a  speculation  may  be  considered  unprofitable; 
the  tolls  received  when  set  against  the  cost  of  maintaining  the  canal, 
leaving  a  deficiency  exclusive  of  any  charge  for  interest  on  the  capital 
expended.  This  result  has  been  in  part  attributed  to  the  discriminating 
duties  upon  European  timber  in  favour  of  our  North  American  colonies, 
which  materially  interfered  with  the  branch  of  trade  upon  which  reli- 
ance was  chiefly  placed  for  producing  an  adequate  return  for  the  capital 
expended. 

It  appears  from  the  Reports  made  by  the  Commissioners  to  whom  the 
management  of  this  canal  is  intrusted,  that  the  traflfic  upon  it  was  pro- 
gressively increasing.  In  the  winter  of  1836-37,  several  Baltic  trading 
vessels  passed  through,  and  the  further  employment  of  steam-vessels 
opened  a  considerable  traffic  in  sheep  and  black  cattle  between  the  High- 
lands and  Glasgow.  This  last-mentioned  object  is  greatly  facilitated 
by  the  Crinan  Ship  Canal,  a  cutting  9^  miles  in  length,  and  12  to  15 
feet  deep,  across  an  isthmus  in  Argyleshire,  lying  between  Loch  Crinan 
and  Loch  Gilp.  The  summit  level  of  this  canal  is  58  feet  above  the 
level  of  the  sea,  and  is  attained  by  means  of  15  locks.  The  distance 
which  by  this  short  cutting  is  saved  between  the,  termination  of  the 
Caledonian  Canal  at  Fort  William  and  Glasgow  is  70  miles.  Besides 
the  cattle  trade  already  mentioned,  the  number  of  passengers  by  steam- 
boats is  considerable,  and  constantly  increasing,  having  been  11,344 