

The  money  expended  by  the  Government  Commissioners  in  the  execution 
of  their  task  amounted,  at  the  end  of  1849,  to  upw^ards  of  500,000/.,  by 
means  of  which  various  improvements  have  been  made  in  the  navigation 
below  Limerick,  and  the  river  has  been  thrown  uninterruptedly  open 
between  that  city  and  Lough  Allen,  a  distance  of  143  miles  in  a  direct 
course  ;  so  that  this  noble  river  has  been  made  available  for  steam-boats 
and  other  vessels  of  considerable  burthen  from  its  mouth  to  Lough  Allen, 
opening  a  continuous  navigation  of  more  than  190  miles,  and  providing 

X 


306  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  in. 

an  excellent  water-communication  between  Limerick  and  Dublin,  and 
the  manufacturing  towns  in  the  north  of  England. 

It  is  questionable  whether  the  mode  adopted  for  obtaining  repayment 
of  half  the  cost  of  the  works  be  the  most  judicious  that  could  have  been 
found.  It  certainly  aj)pears  equitable  that  those  who  will  in  a  peculiar 
manner  benefit  by  the  improvements  should  repay  at  least  a  part  of  the 
cost :  and  if  the  proprietors  of  estates  thus  circumstanced  had  been 
called  upon  to  contribute  towards  the  gradual  extinction  of  the  debt 
incurred  to  the  public,  they  could  have  had  no  just  cause  of  complaint, 
since  they  would  liave  found  themselves  benefited  in  a  far  greater  degree 
than  could  be  counterbalanced  by  the  charge.  But  it  is  of  the  very 
gi-eatest  importance  that  the  high  roads  of  commerce,  and  especially 
where  a  traffic  has  to  be  created,  should  not  be  encumbered  with  heavy 
tolls.  Bv  biirthening  the  navigation  at  the  very  commencement,  when 
encouragement  is  most  needed,  with  so  heavy  a  sum  annually  as  one- 
twelfth  part  of  the  whole  expenditure,  it  is  much  to  be  feared  that  the 
rate  of  toll  must  be  fixed  so  high  as  to  act  as  a  considerable  discourage- 
ment. It  may  be  questioned  whether  it  would  not  be  more  for  the 
advantage  of  the  landowners  themselves  m  the  counties  through  which 
the  navigation  is  carried,  at  once  to  charge  themselves  with  the  gradual 
redemption  of  the  debt,  rather  than  attempt  to  throw  the  burthen 
upon  the  public  at  large.  The  course  proposed  may  place  an  obstacle 
in  the  way  of  that  free  intercourse  by  which  new  markets  might  be 
opened  for  their  products,  and  the  resources  of  the  soil  might  be 
rendered  capable  of  a  full  development,  through  the  ample  sup{)ly  of 
manures  essential  to  the  perfection  of  agricultural  labours,  and  which, 
although  lying  comparatively  at  their  doors,  had  previously  been  un- 
attainable through  the  absence  of  a  ready  and  especially  a  cheap  mode 
of  conveyance. 

There  are  considerations  connected  with  the  peculiar  circumstances 
in  which  the  popidation  of  the  south  and  west  of  Ireland  are  placed, 
which  seem  to  give  additional  cogency  to  the  reasons  here  urged  in 
favour  of  cheapening  the  means  of  transport.  What  is  principally 
wanted  towards  ameliorating  the  physical  condition  of  the  working 
classes  of  Ireland,  is  a  steady  market  for  their  labour.  It  was  the  want 
of  certain  employment  which,  until  the  establishment  of  a  poor  law,  drove 
them  of  necessity  into  the  system  of  hiring,  each  one  for  himself,"  one  or 
two  acres  or  even  a  few  roods  of  ground,  at  an  exorbitant  rent,  as  the 
only  resource  left  against  absolute  starvation.  Let  the  value  of  farms 
be  improved  by  the  means  above  stated,  and  there  can  exist  no  reason 
why  their  proprietors  should  not  retain  the  occupation  of  the  land,  and 
give  continuous  employment  to  an  adequate  numbdr  of  labourers.  The 
improvement  of  internal  navigation,  the  opening  of  roads,  and  the  con- 