

The  table  next  to  be  given  is  interesting,  because  it  exhibits  a  com- 
plete statistical  history  of  steam  navigation,  as  applied  to  commercial 
purposes  in  this  country,  from  its  first  adoption  to  the  end  of  1849. 
One  of  the  most  remarkable  circumstances  connected  with  this  history 
is  the  extraordinary  rapidity  of  its  development.  When  first  adopted, 
few  persons  were  so  sanguine  as  to  suppose  that  the  utility  of  steam- 
vessels  would  ever  be  experienced  except  in  inland  river  navigation,  or 
for  short  distances  along  the  coast ;  a  very  few  years  have  sufficed  for 
their  general  introduction  in  all  the  seas  and  rivers  of  Europe,  and  at 
this  moment  their  employment  serves  as  a  means  of  drawing  closer  the 
connexion  between  the  old  and  the  new  world.  Large  and  powerful 
steam-ships  are  now  constantly  passing  between  this  kingdom  and  the 
United  States  of  America,  introducing  thus  a  degree  of  certainty  into 
the  correspondence  between  the  two  countries  which  cannot  fail  to  be 
of  immense  advantage  to  the  most  important  branch  of  foreign  trade  in 
which  our  merchants  are  engaged.  Twice  in  each  month  mails,  pas- 
sengers, and  specie  are  conveyed  between  England  and  her  West 
Indian  colonies,  and  by  the  same  means  communications  are  kept  open 
with  ^lexico  and  a  great  part  of  South  America.  The  voyage  made 
in  1826  by  the  '  Enterprize '  to  Calcutta  was  considered  a  failure,  and 
doubtless  had  for  a  time  considerable  influence  in  deterring  our  mer- 
chants from  undertaking  distant  steam  voyages.  Other  experiments  of 
the  same  kind  have  since  been  made,  however,  and  with  perfect  success. 
The  years  that  have  elapsed  since  the  voyage  of  the  '  Enterprize '  was 
accomplished,  have,  as  might  reasonably  be  expected,  brought  forward 


3^0  PROGHESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

many  improvements,  in  what  was  then  an  infant  science  ;  and  altliongh 
we  may  not,  perhaps,  witness  in  oin*  day  the  establishment  of  a  line  of 
trading  packets  to  India,  rcnmd  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  this  will  be 
principally  owing  to  the  greater  facility  that  attends  the  communication 
through  the  Mediterranean,  and  not  because  the  other  route  is  imprac- 
ticable or  even  difficult. 

A  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  was  appointed  in  June, 
1837,  to  inquire  into  the  best  means  of  establishing  a  communication  by 
steam  with  India  by  way  of  the  Red  Sea.  The  inquiry  thus  begun  was 
cut  short  by  the  sudden  termination  of  the  session,  but  the  evidence  col- 
lected by  the  Committee  contained  information  of  great  interest,  tending 
to  show  the  advantages  to  commerce  that  must  result  from  the  great 
acceleration  of  correspondence  that  would  be  thus  accomplished. 