

The  facility  in  moving  from  place  to  place,  joined  to  the  great 
economy,  both  of  time  and  of  money,  that  has  accompanied  the  adop- 
tion of  this  mode  of  propelling  vessels,  has  excited  the  locomotive  pro- 
pensities of  the  English  people  in  a  most  remarkable  degree.  The 
countless  thousands  who  now  annually  pass  in  steam-packets  up  and 
down  the  river  Thames,  seem,  almost  wholly  to  have  been  led  to  travel 
by  the  cheap  and  commodious  means  that  have  been  thus-  presented 
to  them,  since  the  amount  of  journeying  by  land  is  by  no  means  lessened. 
The  number  of  passengers  conveyed  between  London  and  Gravesend  by 
steam-packets  in  1835  was  ascertained  by  the  collector  of  the  pier-dues 
at  the  latter  town  to  have  been  670,452,  not  one  in  a  hundred  of  whom 
would  have  been  induced  to  make  use  of  the  Dundee  boats  just  de- 
scribed. It  was  stated  in  evidence  before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of 
Commons  in  1836,  that  at  least  1,057,000  passengers,  including  those 
to  and  from  Gravesend,  pass  Blackwall  in  steam-vessels  every  year.  In 
confirmation  of  the  fact  that  the  establishment  of  additicmal  facility  in 
travelling  is  embraced  by  persons  who  would  not  otherwise  be  induced 
to  quit  their  homes,  we  may  refer  to  the  continually  increasing  number 
of  licenses  for  stage-coaches  issued  every  year  from  the  Stamp  Oflice, 
and  to  the  great  and  constantly-increasing  number  "of  omnibuses  which 
are  continually  traversing  the  great  thoroughfares  of  London  without 
displacing  the  hackney-carriages  which  were  previously  in  use.     The 


ciiAr.  IV.]  STEAM  NAVIGATION.  .'',19 

number  of  passengers  conveyed  by  the  Hull  and  Sclby  steam-packets 
in  the  12  months  which  preceded  the  opening  of  tlie  Leeds  and  Sulby 
Railway  was  33,882,  whereas  in  the  12  months  that  followed  that  event 
the  number  conveyed  was  62,105. 

Tlie  published  lists  of  steam-vessels  belonging  to  different  ports  in 
the  United  Kingdom  show  the  extent  to  which  this  new  mode  of  voy- 
aging is  adopted  by  the  public.  Scarcely  any  two  ports  of  consequence 
can  be  pointed  out  between  which  steam  communieation  is  not  main- 
tained as  well  for  the  conveyance  of  passengers  as  for  the  transmission 
of  goods.  Besides  tliis,  the  counnunication  is  regularly  maintained  with 
all  the  principal  neighbouring  ports  on  the  continent  of  Europe.  From 
London  vessels  proceed  to  the  French  coast  almost  every  day :  to  Hol- 
land three  times  a-week  ;  to  Belgium  as  frequently  ;  to  Hamburg  twice 
a-week,  and  to  Lisbon  and  (^adiz  every  week.  From  the  coast  of  Kent, 
Sussex,  and  Hampshire,  daily  departures  take  place  to  France.  From 
Hull  three  vessels  depart  every  week  for  Hamburg,  and  one  is  de- 
spatched to  Rotterdam  ;  the  greater  part  of  the  important  traffic  which 
formerly  was  carried  on  in  sailing-vessels  between  those  ports  is  now 
conveyed  through  the  more  quick  and  certain  agency  of  steam. 