

It  was  stated  to  this  Committee  by  Sir  John  Hobhouse,  then  Presi- 
dent of  the  Board  of  Control,  that  in  August,  1834,  the  Directors  of 
the  East  India  Company,  acting  in  furtherance  of  a  recommendation 
made  by  a  Connnittee  of  the  House  of  Conmions,  which  sat  in  that 
year,  sent  directions  to  the  Governor-General  of  India  to  despatch  a 
steam  ship  at  stated  periods  from  Bombay  to  Suez.  In  order  still  fur- 
ther to  expedite  the  transmission  of  mails  between  India  and  England, 
the  Governor  of  Bombay,  and  subsequently  the  home  authorities  in 
England,  established  a  dromedary  post  from  Bagdad  to  Damascus,  and 
thence  to  Beyrout,  on  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  to  which  port 
the  voyage  of  the  steam-vessel  that  before  plied  to  Alexandria  was 
extended. 

The  speedy  consequence  of  all  these  arrangements  was  a  much  more 
rapid  communication  with  India  than  had  ever  before  been  known  ;  in 
confirmation  of  which  fact,  and  ta  show  the  opinion  upon  this  impoi-tant 
subject  formed  by  the  most  competent  judges,  the  following  extract  is 
given  from  a  despatch  sent  in  September,  1836,  by  the  Government  of 
Bombay,  to  the  Court  of  Directors  : — "  We  beg  leave  to  offer  to  your 
Honourable  Court  our  congratulations  on  the  rapidity  with  which  your 
wishes  have  of  late  been  conveyed  to  all  parts  of  your  Indian  posses- 
sions. The  three  last  overland  mails  have  brought  despatches  from 
London  to  Bombay  in  58,  45,  and  64  days ;  and  those  intended  for 
Calcutta  have  been  forw^arded  in  10  days.  We  have  witnessed  the 
energetic  impulse  this  early  intelligence  has  given  to  the  mercantile  in- 
terest, and  the  unbounded  satisfaction  it  has  diffused  throughout  all 
classes  of  the  community.  It  is,  indeed,  undeniable,  that  a  quick  inter- 
change of  information  is  of  the  first  advantage  in  commerce,  and  in  the 
conduct  of  all  public  business,  while  it  is  equally  true  that  its  effect  on 
the  minds  of  those  who  serve  the  Honourable  Comjiany  long  and  faith- 
fully in  this  distant  land,  is  to  deprive  the  painful  feeling  of  separation 
from  their  homes  and  country  of  half  its  bitterness.     We  beg  respect- 


CHAP.  IV.]  STEAM  NAVIGATIOX.  321 

fully  to  press  those  reflections  on  the  notice  of  your  Honourable  Court, 
with  our  earnest  prayer  that  you  will  ere  long  grant  to  India  the  ninch- 
desired  boon  of  frecpicnt  and  regular  communication  with  Euroj)C  by 
the  employment  of  a  suificient  uumber  of  steam-vessels  for  that  pur- 
pose." The  despatch,  from  which  the  foregoing  extract  is  taken,  arrived 
in  England  early  in  the  year  1837,  and  no  time  was  lost  in  attempting 
to  carry  into  effect  the  recommendation  which  it  conveyed.  At  first  a 
negotiation  was  opened  with  some  private  indi^-id^als,  who  proposed  to 
perform  the  service  required  by  means  of  a  joint-stock  company  ;  but 
so  many  serious  objections  to  this  course  were  urged  by  different 
branches  of  the  Government  that  it  was  abandoned,  and  early  in  June, 
1837,  an  arrangement  was  concluded  between  the  Government  and  the 
Directors  of  the  East  India  Company  for  the  establishment  of  a  regular 
monthly  steam  communication  between  this  country  and  India,  by  way 
of  the  Red  Sea,  upon  the  following  basis  : — 