

"The  Government  undertakes  the  transmission  of  the  monthly  mails 
between  Great  Britain  and  Alexandria,  at  the  sole  charge  of  the  public, 
and  the  East  India  Company  undertakes  the  transmission  of  these  mails 
between  x\lexandria  and  Bombay,  upon  condition  that  one-half  of 
the  expense  incurred  in  the  purchase  and  navigation  of  steam-vessels, 
and  of  any  other  expense  incurred  in  the  service,  is  defrayed  by  the 
Government,  which  is  to  receive  the  whole  money  collected  for  postage 
of  letters  between  London  and  Bombay."  This  arrangement  was  to 
take  immediate  effect,  and  the  steam-vessels  belonging  to  the  East 
India  Company  were  ordered  to  be  employed  forthwith, — two  for  the 
conveyance,  on  alternate  months,  of  the  mails  from  Bombay  to  Mocha, 
and  the  third  for  their  further  conveyance  from  Mocha  to  Suez.  A 
further  economy  of  time  of  from  four  to  six  days  being  obtainable  by 
sending  the  mails  overland  to  Marseilles  instead  of  transmitting  them 
by  steam-packets  from  Falmouth  through  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  it 
was  arranged  that  on  the  6th  of  every  montli  a  Government  messenger 
should  be  sent  in  charge  of  the  India  mail  from  London  to  Marseilles, 
fi-om  which  port  steam -packets  are  despatched  three  times  every  month 
by  the  French  Government.  By  this  arrangement  the  distance  is 
shortened  to  the  extent  of  more  than  1000  miles  :  the  direct  distance  by 
way  of  Mar-^eilles  and  Malta  being  5238,  and  by  way  of  Falmouth  and 
Malta  6310  miles;  the  distance  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  is  10,580 
nautical  miles. 

The  mail  communications  between  this  kingdom  and  its  eastern 
empire  continued  on  the  above  footing  until  1841,  when  the  Govern- 
ment entered  into  a  contract  for  the  conveyance  of  the  mails  between 
England  and  Egy})t,  with  the  Peninsular  and  Oriental  Steam  Naviga- 
tion Company,  which  undertook  further  to  employ  powerful  steam- 
vessels  for  the  ciirrying  of  letters  and  passengers  between  Suez,  Ceylon, 

V 


322  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  in. 

Madras,  and  Calcutta,  towards  the  expenses  of  which  the  East  India 
Company  undertook  to  contribute  20,000/.  per  annum  for  live  years. 
When  this  arrangement  had  been  for  some  time  in  operation,  a  further 
extension  of  the  phin  was  found  necessary,  and  an  agreement  was  made, 
to  the  effect  that  the  Government  should  contribute  50,000/,  per  annum 
towards  the  expense  of  the  line  of  steam-packets  between  Bombay  and 
Suez,  115,000/.  per  annum  for  the  service  between  Calcutta  and  Suez, 
and  45,000/.  for  the  service  between  Ceylon  and  Hong-Kong,  making 
in  all  210,000/.,  of  which  sum  one-third,  or  70,000/.,  is  repaid  by  the 
East  India  Company. 