

It  would  be  unreasonable  to  limit  our  anticipations  of  improvement 
under  the  railway  system  to  results  equal  to  what  has  been  hitherto 
obtained.  The  first  work  of  the  kind,  which  has,  and  that  unexpectedly, 
produced  a  marked  economy  of  time  in  travelling,  was  opened  in  Sep- 
tember, 1830,  and  at  once  achieved  so  much  in  this  respect,  that  the 
highest  aim  on  the  part  of  the  projectors  of  most  similar  undertakings 
for  a  time  was  to  equal,  without  a  thought  of  siu-passing,  its  perform- 
ance. Already,  however,  have  the  able  engineers  engaged  upon  these 
works  contrived  means  for  throwing  that  performance  into  the  shade. 
The  distance  between  London  and  Exeter,  193|  miles,  is  now  constantly 
accomplished  in  four  hours  and  a  half,  and  it  forms  a  subject  of  com- 
plaint that  the  distance  between  London  and  Liverpool,  210  miles, 
occupies  so  long  a  time  as  six  hours  ! 

If  it  is  unreasonable  to  set  limits  to  the  amount  of  improvements  in 
those  particulars  which  have  been  here  considered,  it  must  be  equally 
unreasonable  and  indeed  impossible  to  limit  the  modes  in  which  this 
new  agent  in  civilization  may  be  brought  to  minister  to  the  profit  and 
convenience  of  society.  It  seems  scarcely  possible  to  assign  bounds  to 
the  good  that  will  follow  from  the  cheap,  easy,  and  rapid  communication 
it  will  offer  between  all  parts,  however  distant  from  each  other,  of  the 
kingdom.     Every  spot  will  by  this  means  obtain  a  wider  market  for  its 


332  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ni. 

productions,  and  have  a  wider  field  whence  to  draw  its  supplies.  A 
great  part  of  the  money  now  actually  expended  upon  the  conveyance  of 
persons  and  goods  will  be  saved  to  the  country,  and  become  available 
capital  for  the  extension  of  its  commerce,  and  the  completion  of  still 
further  improvements.  According  to  a  published  statement  of  the 
working  of  the  Liver))ool  and  Manchester  line,  it  appears  that  the  gain 
thus  produced  to  the  public  at  large  on  that  single  road  amounts  to  very 
little  short  of  a  quarter  of  a  million  annually,  viz.  : — 

£. 

2«.  6d.  each  on  500,000  passengers 62,500 

2s.  6rf.  per  ton  on  450,000  tons  of  merchandise 56,250 

2s.  Od.  per  ton  on  1,-240,(HX)  tons  of  coal  for  the  use  of  Liverpool  and 
ilanchester,  the  price  of  that  article  having  been  reduced  to  that 
extent  by  the  opening  of  the  railroad 124,000 

£242,750 

In  addition  to  this  saving,  it  is  fair  to  reckon  the  gains,  beyond  the 
ordinary  profits  of  stock,  yielded  to  the  proprietors  of  the  undertaking. 
The  gain  upon  other  and  longer  lines  will  be  greater  in  respect  of  pas- 
sengers, although  it  may  not  generally  prove  equal  to  what  is  here 
stated  with  reference  to  merchandise  ;  but  it  cannot  fail  to  be  every  way 
of  immense  importance,  and  to  add  most  materially,  in  the  course  of 
years,  to  the  available  resources  of  the  country.  / 