

A  preliminary  Report  was  made  by  the  Commissioners,  in  the  month 
of  March  following  their  appointment,  and  laid  before  Parliament,  in 
which  report  promise  was  given  to  present,  as  early  as  possible,  the  full 
result  of  their  investigations,  accompanied  by  statistical  information  of 
the  most  interesting  nature,  which  would  bring  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
public  various  circumstances  connected  with  the  condition  and  prospects 
of  Ireland,  as  to  which  no  sources  of  inquiry  have  previously  been 
opened. 

The  Report  thus  promised  was  presented  to  Parliament  in  1838,  and 
fully  accomplished  the  promise  of  its  authors.  It  was  at  once  ac- 
knowledged to  be  one  of  the  most  valuable  statistical  documents  ever 
produced  on  the  subject  of  Ireland,  and  has  since  been  continually  used 
as  a  great  storehouse  of  facts  connected  with  that  island,  not  only  as  re- 
gards its  wants  and  capabilities  for  the  development  of  the  railway 
system,  but  also  with  respect  to  its  general  resources,  and  the  degree  in 
which  these  had  been  made  available.  Various  circumstances  combined 
to  prevent  the  specific  recommendations  of  the  Commissioners  from  being 
adopted  by  the  Government,  and  the  long  season  of  commercial  diffi- 
culty which  followed  the  presentation  of  the  Report  equally  prevented 
the  employment  of  private  enterprise  to  that  end.  When,  however,  that 
season  of  gloom  had  disappeared,  the  Report  of  the  Irish  Railway  Com- 
missioners became  a  text-book  in  the  hands  of  speculators,  and  a  guide 


33G 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    III. 


in  various  ways  to  the  Govoniraont  and  to  the  Committees  of  the  Houses 
of  Parliament  to  which  railway  projects  in  Ireland  have  from  time  to  time 
been  referred. 

If  the  adoption  of  railway  travelling  has  been  the  means  of  depriving 
of  employment  many  per.^ons  who  were  previously  engaged  on  the  vari- 
ous turnpike  roads  of  the  kingdom,  it  has,  on  the  other  hand,  created  a 
considerable  amount  of  work  upon  the  several  lines.  The  following 
figures,  taken  from  a  Parliamentary  Return,  show  the  number  of  persons 
who  were,  in  various  capacities,  employed  by  railway  companies  on  the 
30th  June,  1849:— 


Secretaries  or  managers       .      .  156 

Treasurers 32 

Engineers 107 

Superintendents 314 

Storekeepers    120 

Accountants  or  cashiers       .     .  138 

Inspectors  or  timekeepers    .      .  490 

Station-masters 1,300 

Draughtsmen 103 

Clerks 4,021 

Foremen 709 

Engine-drivers 1,839 

Assistant  drivers  or  firemen     .  1,871 


Guards  or  breaksmen   .     .     .  1,631 

Artificers 10,803 

Switchmen 1,540 

Gate-keepers 1,361 

Policemen  or  watchmen    .     .  1,.508 

Porters  or  Messengers  .     .     .  8,238 