

Statement  of  Parliamentary  Expenses  incurred  in  obtaining  Acts  of  Incorporation  for  the  following 

undertakings : — 

£.  £. 


Birmingham  and  Gloucester  ,     .  22,618 

Bristol  and  Gloucester  .      ,      .     .  25,589 

,,          Exeter 18,592 

Eastern  Counties 39,171 

Great  Western 89,197 

„      North  of  England    .     .      .  20,526 

Grand  Junction 22,757 

Glasgow,  Paisley,  and  Greenock  .  23,481 

London  and  Birmingham  .     .     .  72,868 


London  and  South-Western    .     .  41,467 

JIanchester  and  Leeds .      .      .     .  49,166 

Midland  Counties 28,776 

North  Midland 41,349 

Northern  and  Eastern  .      .      .      .  74,166 
Sheffield,  Ashton-under-Lyne,  and 

Manchester 31,473 

South-Eastern 82,292 


In  some  cases  the  suras  here  given  contain  the  expenses  of  sui'veying 
and  other  disbursements,  which  necessarily  precede  the  obtaining  of  the 
Act  of  Incorporation.  On  the  other  hand,  they  exhibit  only  the  costs 
defrayed  by  the  proprietors  of  the  railway  to  the  exclusion  of  the  ex- 
penses incurred  by  the  different  parties  by  whom  the  applications  were 
opposed  in  Parliament.  It  is  understood  that  the  most  glaring  of  the 
above  cases  is  completely  eclipsed  by  the  charges  attending  the  contests 


CHAP,  v.]  RAILWAYS.  335 

of  tlie   various  lines  projected  to  Brighton.       No   statement  of  those 
expenses  has  hitherto  been  published. 

The  plan  above  alluded  to  was  taken  up  as  regards  Ireland,  and,  on 
the  motion  of  the  Marquess  of  Lansdowne,  an  Address  was  presented  to 
the  Crown  by  the  House  of  Lords,  in  compliance  with  which,  Commis- 
sioners were  nominated  in  October,  183G,  to  consider,  '■'■first,  as  to  a 
general  system  for  Railways  in  Ireland,  in  such  manner  either  by  caus- 
ing surveys  to  be  made  of  the  leading  lines,  or  otherwise,  as  may  best 
serve  to  guide  the  legislature  in  the  consideration  of  the  projects  that 
may  be  brought  before  it.  Secondli/,  as  to  the  best  mode  of  directing 
the  development  of  the  means  of  intercourse  to  the  channels  whereby 
the  greatest  advantage  may  be  obtained  by  the  smallest  outlay ;  taking 
into  c(msideration  not  only  the  existing  means  which  the  country  presents, 
but  those  which  may  be  anticipated  from  the  resources  which  may  in 
future  be  developed.  Thirdly,  to  inquire  as  to  the  port  or  ports  on  the 
west  or  south  coast,  whence  the  navigation  to  America  may  be  best 
carried  on  by  steam  or  sailing  vessels ;  and  to  investigate  particularly  the 
facilities  for  the  construction  of  lines  of  railroad  across  Ireland  to  such 
port  or  ports,  in  connexion  with  the  greatest  possible  collateral  benefits 
to  internal  communication.  K\\<\,  fourtldy ,  to  inquire  into  all  such  matters 
as  may  appear  essential  to  the  useful  prosecution  and  result  of  the  in- 
vestigations. 