

This  law,  which  came  into  operation  on  the  1st  of  January,  1826, 
failed,  during  the  nine  years  of  its  existence,  to  produce  a  satisfactory 
degree  of  uniformity  in  practice  throughout  the  kingdom  :  ic  proved, 
however,  in  a  high  degree  useful,  as  it  paved  the  way  for  the  more 
perfect  measures  adopted  in  1834  and  1835,  under  which  we  are  now 
acting,  and  which  could  probably  not  have  been  enforced  but  for  the 
preparation  of  the  public  mind  which  resulted  from  the  previous  step 
towards  improvement.  By  the  law  now  established,  a  very  high  degree 
of  simplification  has  been  attained.  The  units  of  weight  and  measure 
adopted  in  1824  are  continued,  and  their  universal  adoption  through 
the  kingdom  is  made  imperative.  Besides  this,  all  modes  of  measuring 
which  admitted  of  uncertainty  are  declared  illegal.  A  bushel  or  gallon 
of  some  kinds  of  articles  was  formerly  not  merely  the  quantity  which 
the  measure  would  contain  within  it,  but  a  superaddition  of  as  much 
more  as  could  be  heaped  upon  it  in  the  form  of  a  cone.  Other  articles 
were  measured  without  this  cone — the  first  mode  of  proceeding  being 
called  heap-measure,  and  the  second  strike-measure,  from  the  employ- 
ment of  a  roller  to  remove  or  strike  off  all  of  the  article  measured 
which  stood  above  the  level  of  the  rim  of  the  measure.  Strike-measure 
is  now  declared  to  be  the  only  legal  mode  for  determining  the  quantity 
of  all  descriptions  of  dry  goods  in  measures  of  capacity.  The  uncertainty, 
and  consequently  the  possible  unfairness,  of  heaped  measure,  was  de- 
monstrated by  the  clerk  of  Covent  Garden  Market,  who  stated,  in  his 
evidence  given  before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  that  he 
had  employed  two  different  persons  to  measure  each  a  peck  of  nuts,  and 


350  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

that  oue  of  them  put  eleven,  while  the  other  could  put  only  ten  quarts 
in  and  on  the  measure.  A  mode  of  ascertaining  (juantity,  which  thus 
admitted  of  variations  amounting  to  ten  per  cent.,  according  to  the 
skilfulness  of  the  measurer,  was  one  which  called  loudly  for  alteration, 
and  any  system  which  in  this  respect  had  left  people  at  liberty  to  con- 
tinue the  old  practice,  would  have  been  highly  unsatisfactory. 

All  local  or  customary  weights  or  measures  are  abolished  throughout 
the  kingdom,  under  heavy  penalties.  That  previously  uncertain  quan- 
tity, a  Stone,  is  now  invariably  14  imperial  pounds,  eight  of  which  form 
the  hundredweight ;  and,  with  the  exception  of  gold,  silver,  platina, 
diamonds,  or  other  precious  stones  (for  ascertaining  the  quantities  of 
which  Troy  weight  is  still  allowed),  all  articles  which  are  weighed  must 
now  be  sold  by  the  imperial  pound. 