

The  geographical  position  and  capabilities  of  England  furnish  her 
with  ad\  antages  for  the  prosecution  of  this  foreign  commerce  far  greater 
than  are  possessed  by  any  other  country  of  equal  extent.  To  these  ad- 
vantages we  have  added  a  spirit  of  industry,  fostered  l)y  our  free  insti- 
tutions, and  a  degree  of  commercial  enterprise,  beyond  those  of  any 


352  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

other  people  eltlier  ancient  or  modern,  with,  perhaps,  the  recent  excep- 
tion of  the  United  States  of  America.  But  although  the  amount  of  our 
foreign  trade  is  greater  than  that  of  any  other  country,  it  by  no  means 
follows  that  it  is  as  great  as  it  should  be,  or  as  it  would  long  since  have 
become,  if  left  to  its  own  free  course.  Considering  all  the  natural  and 
acquired  advantages  that  we  possess  for  this  purpose,  it  should  rather 
excite  regret  that  our  commerce  is  so  small,  than  engender  pride  be- 
cause it  is  so  large.  Requiring,  as  we  do,  so  many  of  the  productions 
of  other  climates,  and  capable  as  we  are  of  commanding  them  by  means 
of  our  own  products  and  manufactures,  wliich  are  objects  of  universal 
desire  in  almost  every  climate  ;  to  what  can  we  attribute  it,  but  to  the 
evil  consequences  of  wars  and  the  still  more  baleful  consequences  of  ill- 
considered  systems  of  commercial  laws,  that  we  have  not  commanded  the 
whole  habitable  world  for  our  market,  and  that  the  28,000,000  inhabit- 
ing the  British  Islands  should  furnish  a  more  important  array  of  cus- 
tomers than  all  other  civilized  communities,  even  when  we  include  with 
the  latter  the  inhabitants  of  our  many  colonies  and  populous  dependen- 
cies, of  the  direct  trade  with  which  we  so  long  reserved  to  ourselves 
the  monopoly  ? 

The  argument  in  favour  of  the  greater  comparative  value  to  a  country 
of  its  home  than  of  its  foreign  trade,  which  has  been  founded  upon  the 
greater  economy  and  celerity  with  which  the  operations  of  the  former 
are  conducted,  is  far  from  being  always  correct  when  applied  to  England. 
The  trading  communication  between  the  south  and  east  coasts  of  Great 
Britain  and  the  north  and  west  shores  of  many  European  countries,  is 
kept  up  with  greater  facility  and  economy  than  the  traffic  between  some 
of  our  distant  counties.  The  time  and  money  expended  in  conveying  a 
bale  of  goods  from  Manchester  to  London,  by  canal  or  by  the  ordinary 
road,  are  greater  than  are  required  for  its  conveyance  from  London 
to  Rotterdam,  and  the  charge  made  for  the  cartage  of  a  puncheon  of 
rum  from  the  West  India  Docks  to  Westminster  exceeds  the  charge 
that  would  be  made  for  conveying  the  same  puncheon  of  rum  from  those 
docks  to  Hamburg.  Even  in  those  branches  of  foreign  commerce  wdiere 
from  the  length  of  the  voyage  a  considerable  time  must  elapse  between 
the  shipment  of  goods,  their  reception  and  sale  abroad,  and  the  trans- 
mission of  returns  to  the  hands  of  the  shipper,  a  remedy  for  the  evil  of 
delay  has  been  found  in  the  operation  of  commercial  bankers,  whose 
dealings  consist  in  the  purchase  and  sale  of  bills  of  exchange,  and  are 
founded  upon  the  varying  necessities  of  different  individual  traders. 