

One  imperfection  has  been  allowed — inadvertently,  perhaps — to  creep 
into  the  new  system.  ^Mien  heaped  measure  was  used,  it  was  seen  to 
be  necessary  to  prescribe  by  law  the  shape  as  well  as  the  cubic  contents 
of  the  measure  used,  because  the  size  of  the  cone  heaped  above  the 
level  of  the  rim  depended  upon  the  area  of  its  base.  If  two  vessels 
were  made  having  the  same  cubic  contents,  but  one  of  which  was  more 
shallow  than  the  other,  the  quantity  heaped  upon  such  shallower  vessel 
would  of  course  be  greater  than  where  a  deeper  but  narrower  vessel  was 
used.  It  seems  to  have  been  considered  that  when  this  cone  was  no 
longer  permitted  to  be  added  to  the  measure,  the  form  became  imma- 
terial. This  is  found  to  be  incorrect.  Some  articles,  such  as  corn, 
are  made  to  lie  closer  together  when  subjected  to  pressure,  and  for  this 
reason  a  deep  vessel  will  hold  a  larger  quantity  than  one  having  the 
same  cubic  contents,  but  which  is  more  shallow  in  form.  It  has  been 
ascertained  by  experiments  carefully  conducted  by  Dr.  Anderson,  and 
given  in  evidence  before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  "  that 
wheat  measured  in  a  bushel-measure  which  was  11|  inches  deep, 
weighed  56  lbs.  6f  oz.  ;  and  that  the  same  wheat,  measured  under  the 
same  circumstances  in  a  bushel  8i  inches  deep,  weighed  no  more  than 
56  lbs.  0\  oz.,  making  a  deficiency  of  rather  more  than  one  in  150 — a 
loss  of  some  moment  where  large  quantities  are  delivered." 

The  use  of  any  soft  metal  or  alloy,  such  as  lead  and  pewter,  for 
making  weights,  is  forbidden,  because  of  the  facility  they  would  afford 
for  falsification,  and  the  loss  to  which  they  would  be  speedily  subjected 
in  use  through  abrasion. 


IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMEllCE.  351 


CHAPTER  IX. 

FOREIGN    COMMERCE. 

Dependence  of  various  Countries  upon  each  other  for  Comforts  and  Conveniences — Peculiar 
Advantages  of  England  for  prosecuting  Foreign  Commerce — Effect  of  M'ars  and  Com- 
mercial Systems  upon  Foreign  Trade — Growing  Importance  of  its  Commerce  to 
England,  arising_out  of  its  increasing  Pojjulatiqn — Influence  of  extended  Jlarkets  in 
preventing_ruiii9US_J:'luctuations-  Impossibility  of  long  maintaining  existing  Corn 
Laws — Progress  of  Forc^u  and  ColoniiU_Tradej_from  _1801_to  1849— Course  of  Trade 
Avith_yariQUS_3S>ljn tries  Opening  of  East  India  and  China  TTradcs — Discninlnafrng"" 
Duties  on  Sugar— On  Coffee — On  Timber— Continental  System — Return  of  Peace — 
Free-Trade  Petition  of  London  Merchants— Relaxation  of  Navigation  Acts— Reciprocity 
Treaties— Registered  Tonnage— Ships  built — Ships  Entered  and  Cleared  1801-1844. 

There  are  but  few  countries  so  circumstanced  with  regard  to  their 
natural  capabihties  of  soil  and  climate  as  to  be  independent  of  all  other 
countries  for  the  supply  of  many  of  those  productions  which  have  become 
necessary  to  the  comfort,  if  indeed  they  be  not  indispensable  requisites 
to  the  well-being,  of  their  inhabitants.  England  is  assuredly  not  one  i 
of  those  countries,  andforeign  commerce  is  to  its  inhabitants  a  thing  of  J 
social,  if  not  of  ])hysical,  necessity.  But  for  our  traffic  in  foreign  pro- 
ductions, even  the  home  trade  of  England  would  be  without  a  great  part 
of  the  activity  by  which  it  is  distinguished,  because,  as  regards  what  is 
yielded  by  our  own  soil,  each  part  of  the  kingdom  is  nearly  independent 
of  every  other  part.  The  South  has  no  need  to  draw  its  supplies  of  grain 
from  the  North,  nor  does  the  West  require  to  receive  the  cattle  bred  in 
the  East.  With  respect  to  our  minerals,  a  great  part  even  of  these  are 
found  in  different  and  distant  parts  of  the  island ;  so  that  in  almost  every 
case  that  part  of  the  produce  of  our  industry  which  exceeds  in  each  par- 
ticular branch  the  wants  of  the  population  engaged  for  its  supply  must 
seek  a  market  in  other  countries,  and  be  there  exchanged  for  such  articles 
of  conveniedce  as  Nature  refuses  to  yield  to  us  in  sufficient  cheapness 
or  abundance  from  our  own  soil. 