

Accordingly  nothing  further  was  attempted  on  this  head  until  1814, 
in  which  year  another  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  was  ap- 
pointed ;  but,  if  we  except  the  eliciting  of  opinions  upon  the  subject 
from  eminent  men — such  as  Dr.  Wollaston  and  Professor  Plaj^air — 
this  Committee  also  was  unproductive  of  good.  In  1818  a  Commission, 
consisting  of  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  Sir  George  Clerk,  Mr.  Davies  Gilbert, 
Dr.  Wollaston,  Dr.  Young,  and  Captain  Kater,  was  appointed  by 
Government  to  devise  some  practical  remedy  for  the  evil.  The  conse- 
quent labours  of  these  eminent  men  cannot  be  said  to  have  been  useless, 
because  their  investigations  led  to  scientific  discoveries  which  simplified 
the  question,  and  pointed  out  the  means  available  for  preserving  or 
restoring  accurate  standards  both  of  weight  and  measure.  The  inves- 
tigations of  the  Commission  did  not,  however,  lead  to  any  immediate 
legislative  act ;  and  it  was  not  until  four  years  had  elapsed  that  a  Bill 
to  regulate  weights  and  measures  was  introduced  into  the  House  of 
Commons  by  Sir  George  Clerk,  one  of  the  members  of  the  Commission. 
This  Bill  did  not  pass.  It  was  again  introduced  by  the  same  gentleman 
in  the  following  year  (1823),  when  it  passed  the  House  of  Commons, 
but  was  not  carried  through  its  stages  in  the  Lords.  A  better  fortune 
awaited  the  measure  in  1824,  when  an  Act  for  ascertaining  and  establish- 
ing Uniformity  of  Weights  and  Measures  received  the  Royal  Assent. 
By  this  Act,  the  old  standards  of  weight  and  linear  measure,  that  had  been 
long  in  use  in  England,  were  adopted  and  made  applicable  to  the  whole 
kingdom,  while  the  measures  of  capacity  were  changed  and  rendered 
uniform.  The  old  standard  IVine  Gallon  contained  231  cubic  inches  ; 
the  Ale  and  Beer  Gallon,  'I^^  cubic  inches  ;  the  Corn  Gallon,  268t 
cubic  inches  ;  and  the  Scots  Pint^  103|-  cubic  inches.  These  measures, 
wdth  all  other  local  measures  of  every  description,  were  abolished,  and 
instead  of  them  a  measure  called  an  Imperial  Gallon  was  established. 
This  gallon  was  declared  to  contain  ten  pounds  avoirdupois  weight  of 
distilled  water,  weighed  in  air,  at  a  temperature  of  ^2  degrees  of 
Fahrenheit's  thermometer — the  barometer  being  at  30  inches.  The 
content  of  the  Imperial  Gallon,  thus  computed,  is  found  to  be  277-274 
(rather  more  277i)  cubic  inches.  A  mode  of  verifying  this  measure, 
and  also  of  verifying,  by  its  means,  both  linear  measure  and  weight,  is 


CH.vr.  viii]  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.  319 

pointed  out  by  establishing  mutual  relations  between  the  three,  thus  :  — 
The  contents  of  the  cube  of  the  sixth  part  of  the  length  of  the  pendulum 
vibrating  seconds  in  the  latitude  of  London,  at  the  level  of  the  sea,  and 
in  a  vacuum  (which  has  been  made  the  element  for  establishing  linear 
measure),  is  so  very  near  the  contents  of  the  Imperial  Standard  Gallon, 
that  the  difference  is  only  three-tenths  of  a  cubic  inch  ;  the  cube  of  the 
sixth  part  of  the  length  of  the  pendulum  containing  277'578,  while  the 
Imperial  Gallon  contains  277"274  cubic  inches  ;  and  the  tenth  part  of 
the  weight  of  an  imperial  gallon  of  water,  at  a  temperature  exactly  one- 
sixth  part  of  the  distance  between  the  points  of  freezing  and  boiling,  is 
an  Imperial  Standard  Avoirdupois  Pound.  The  standards  of  both 
weights  and  measures  are  thus  rendered  so  far  invariable  in  future,  that 
they  are  found  to  be  independent  of  all  artificial  measurements  and 
graduations,  and  can  be  at  once  referred  "  to  nature  alone  for  their  pro- 
totypes." This  is  assuredly  a  great  improvement  over  the  old  system, 
which  made  a  grain  of  corn,  the  human  foot,  and  the  distance  to  which 
a  man  can  extend  his  arms— all  things  which  are  manifestly  liable  to 
considerable  diversity — the  elements  whence  to  determine  weight  and 
measure. 