


WEIGHTS    AND   MEASURES. 


Necessity  of  establishing  Legal  Standards — Inconvenience  of  Local  and  Customai-y  Weights 
and  Measures — Parliamentary  Investigations— Acts  of  1824— of  1834  and  of  1835,  for 
establishing  Uniformity  of  Weights  and  Measures  throughout  the  Kingdom. 

In  every  country  where  advances  have  been  made  towards  civilization, 
and  where  the  mode  of  traffic  among  the  people  has  gone  one  step  beyond 
the  rudest  system  of  barter,  it  has  been  found  necessary  for  the  Govern- 
ment to  interfere,  in  order  to  establish  standards  whereby  to  ascertain 
the  quantities  by  weight  or  measure  of  things  which  form  the  objects 
of  purchase  and  sale.  This  interference  is  necessary  in  order  to  prevent 
frauds  and  endless  disputes  ;  and  when  a  system  of  weights  and  measures 
has  been  adopted,  which  in  this  respect  introduces  certainty  into  the  deal- 
ings of  traders  and  consumers,  a  great  benefit  will  have  been  conferred 
upon  both  chisses.  It  has  commonly  happened  in  various  countries,  from 
the  subject  not  having  been  well  understood,  that  the  settlement  of  this 
important  point  has  been  delegated  by  the  general  government  to  various 
local  bodies  in  different  parts  of  the  same  country,  and  by  this  means 
a  want  of  uniformity  has  been  produced,  which  is  at  least  very  inconve- 
nient to  the  community  at  large.  The  introduction  of  such  a  state  of 
things  is  the  more  to  be  regretted,  because  of  the  great  pertinacity  Avith 
which  people  adhere  to  customs  of  this  kind,  when  once  they  have 
been  suffered  to  take  root.  At  the  very  beginning  of  the  French  Revo- 
lution, the  National  Convention  of  France  passed  a  decree,  with  the 
object  of  establishing  entire  uniformity  of  weights  and  measures  in  that 
country.  This  decree  was  recommended  to  the  cordial  acceptance  of 
the  people  as  one  of  the  greatest  benefits  which  the  legislature  could 
bestow  upon  the  citizens,  and  at  the  same  time  any  infringement  of 
the  law  was  declared  to  be  highly  penal ;  half  a  century  has  since 
elapsed,  and  although  during  the  whole  of  that  time  the  Govei-nment 
has  in  every  proper  way  sought  to  give  a  practical  effect  to  the  new 
system,  which  is  further  recommended  by  the  scientific  character  and  the 
simplicity  of  its  principles  and  arrangements,  yet  to  this  hour  weights 
and  measures  established  by  law  have  not  been  adopted  in  the  largest 
part  of  French  provincial  towns,  where  in  all  dealings  between  shop- 


348  niOGRESS  or  the  nation.  [sec.  m. 

keepers  and  their  customers,  the  old  modes  of  weighing  and  measuring 
are  still  pursueil. 

The  great  inconvenience  attending  such  a  want  of  uniformity  in  this 
country  had  long  been  acknowledged,  and  at  various  times  efforts  had 
been  made  for  remedying  the  evil.  A  Committee  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons was  appointed  in  1790  to  investigate  the  subject,  and  to  suggest 
a  remedy,  but  no  practical  result  followed  fi-om  the  inquiry.  In  seasons 
of  war  the  importance  of  such  questions  is  generally  forgotten  amidst 
more  pressing  calls  upon  the  attention  of  the  Government  and  the  public. 