


358  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

41,484,461/.  ;  from  1821  to  1830  the  annual  average  fell  to  30,507,623/. 
Since  that  time  the  amount  has  been  jn'ogressively  advancing,  and  in  the 
next  decennary  period  (1831  to  1840)  the  average  was  45,244,257/.; 
while  in  the  nine  years  that  close  the  series,  the  average  value  of  our 
exports  reached  55,896,021/. 

With  1831  were  begun,  under  the  auspices  of  the  late  Lord  Syden- 
ham, a  series  of  fiscal  reforms  far  too  numerous  to  be  particularised 
here.  In  the  eight  years  during  which,  excepting  one  short  interval  in 
1834-5,  he  officiated  as  Vice-President  and  then  as  President  of  the 
Board  of  Trade,  that  minister  carried  through  the  House  of  Commons 
reductions  and  modifications  of  duties  affecting  more  than  700  articles 
of  importation.  The  individual  effbct  of  these  reforms  may  not  have 
been  great,  but  in  their  aggregate  they  were  followed  by  the  happiest 
results.  Among  the  measures  here  alluded  to  were  several  which 
affected  our  commerce  with  France,  and  especially  the  equalising  of  the 
duties  u])on  wine,  the  produce  of  that  country,  with  the  rates  charged 
upon  other  foreign  wines.  During  subsequent  years,  and  until  this  time, 
the  legislatures  of  France  have  done  little  or  nothing  in  liberalising  its 
tariff;  but,  on  the  contrary,  duties  materially  affecting  the  industry  of 
England  have  been  increased  by  them  with  the  declared  intention  of 
discouraging  certain  branches  of  our  trade  ;  and  yet  (so  true  is  it  that  a 
nation  cannot  sell  without  buying),  their  augmented  sales  to  us  of 
French  produce  have  been  accompanied  by  continually  augmented  pur- 
chases from  us  in  return.  The  value  of  our  exports  to  France,  which 
in  1830  amounted  to  only  475,884/.,  has  since  reached  to  more  than 
six-fold  that  sum,  and  it  is  a  fair  presumption,  that  had  our  fiscal  reforms 
been  met  in  a  corresponding  spirit  by  the  French  legislature,  the  trade 
between  the  two  countries  would  by  this  time  have  reached  an  amount 
more  consistent  than  it  is  with  the  interests  of  the  two  people,  and  more 
in  proportion  to  the  wants  and  desires  of  upwards  of  sixty  millions  of 
people. 

The  imperfect  manner  in  which  the  Custom-house  accounts  were  for- 
merly called  for  by  Parliament,  and  the  subsequent  destruction  of  the 
Custom-house  by  fire,  do  not  allow  of  any  analysis  being  made  of  the 
foregoing  statement  for  all  the  earlier  years  of  the  series.  The  follow- 
ing abstract  (pages  359  and  360),  exhibiting  the  course  of  our  export 
trade  from  1805  to  1811,  and  from  1814  to  1849,  will  show  in  how  great 
a  degree  it  has  been  owing  of  late  years  to  the  enterprise  of  our  mer- 
chants in  seeking  new  and  distant  fields  for  commercial  operations  that 
the  money-value  has  been  maintained  of  the  produce  and  manufac- 
tures of  the  kingdom  which  have  been  exported,  and  that  we  have  been 
able  to  command  and  to  consume  to  a  greater  extent  than  formerly  the 
productions  of  other  countries. 