

If  the  population  of  this  region — and  there  are  many  others  to  which 
the  same  description  might  be  ajjplied — were  weaned  from  their  present 
habits  of  violence,  and  if  advantage  were  taken  of  their  desire  for  ob- 
taining some  kinds  of  European  manufactures,  to  engage  them  in  the 
cultivation  of  the  sttil,  can  it  be  believed  that  our  commercial  dealings 
with  them  would  continue,  as  it  is  at  present,  scarcely  greater  in 
amount  than  the  value  of  the  eggs  brought  annually  f^'om  Ireland  to  the 
single  port  of  Liverpool  ?  Among  the  objects  to  which  the  industry 
of  xVfricans  could  be  profitably  applied,  perhaps  the  most  important  is 


CHAP.  IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  3^)9 

the  article  of  gotten.  Its  cultivation  does  not  call  for  any  great  amount 
of  labour  ;  the  returns  are  speedily  obtained  ;  the  market  for  it  is  con- 
tinually being  extended  ;  and,  as  regards  this  country,  it  is  a  matter  of 
very  high  importance  that  the  million  of  persons  who  are  dependent  for 
their  daily  subsistence  upon  the  regular  supply  of  that  material,  should 
have  the  chances  of  disappointment  lessened,  as  far  as  possible,  by  ex- 
tending the  number  of  the  producers,  and  multiplying  the  regions  in 
which  they  are  found. 

There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  goods  exported  from  the  United 
Kingdom  to  our  North  American  Colonies  do  not  all  remain  for  the 
consumption  of  the  colonists,  but  that  a  portion  is  conveyed  across  the 
Saint  Lawrence  into  the  territory  of  the  United  States.  On  the  other 
hand,  some  shipments  made  apparently  to  the  United  States,  accompany 
English  settlers,  who  proceed  through  the  States  to  their  ultimate  des- 
tination in  Upper  Canada ;  but  the  value  in  both  these  cases  must  be 
comparatively  unimportant.  Of  the  exports  to  the  British  West  Indies, 
some  part  is  shipped  in  transitu,  and  goes  for  consumption  to  Cuba, 
and  to  ports  on  the  Mosquito  coast.  The  whole  amount  assigned  to 
Turkey  does  not  properly  belong  to  our  trade  with  that  country,  some 
part  being  sent  forward  to  Asia  Minor  and  Persia.  With  regard  to 
the  exports  to  our  West  India  Colonies,  it  may  further  be  observed, 
that  the  value  of  late  years  has  materially  fallen  off,  which  fact  is  pro- 
bably owing,  in  part,  to  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  population,  for  the 
supply  of  which  given  quantities  of  stores  and  clothing  wore  formerly 
required,  without  reference  to  their  cost  in  this  country  ;  so  that  the 
reduction  in  price  of  the  generality  of  articles  which  make  up  the  sum  of 
our  exports  has  not  been  followed  by  much,  if  any,  increased  consump- 
tion. Besides  this,  goods  were  in  former  years  sent  to  Jamaica,  intended 
for  the  supply  of  the  neighbouring  continent,  to  which  shipments  are 
now  made  direct  from  this  country- 
It  will  be  seen  that  the  value  of  our  exports  to  India  and  China  didS 
not  experience  any  increase  until  after  the  partial  opening  of  the  trader/ 
in  1814.  Since  that  time,  and  particularly  since  1826,  a  considerable 
improvement  has  taken  place  in  the  amount  of  our  commerce  with  India  ; 
so  that,  contrasting  its  amount  in  1849  with  that  in  1814,  there  is  found 
an  increase  of  more  than  190  per  cent.  The  recent  opening  of  the  trade 
with  China  is  calculated  to  add  still  more  importantly  to  the  value  of  our 
commerce  with  that  quarter  of  the  world.  Although  this  trade  at  first 
might  be  accompanied  by  losses  to  those  who  engaged  in  it  without  pos- 
sessing the  requisite  degree  of  knowledge,  it  could  not  be  doubted  that 
a  few  years'  experience  on  the  part  of  our  merchants  would  enable  them 
to  draw  very  great  advantages  from  commercial  intercourse  with  a  people 
so  enterprising  and  so  keenly  alive  to  the  benefits  resulting  from  foreign 
trade  as  the  Chinese  are  now  allowed  to  be.     Already  the  consumers 