


cu.vr.  IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  377 

still  more,  if  fiscal  obstacles  are  removed — draw  inexhaustible  supplies 
of  the  finest  \vood,  including  oak  of  the  largest  size,  and  at  prices  more 
advantageous  than  any  other  countries  have  ottered,  at  least  in  modern 
times. 

Under  these  circumstances,  we  are,  without  any  adequate  or  legiti- 
mate motive,  shutting  against  our  manufocturers  markets  which  were 
formerly,  and  would  be  again,  of  considerable  importance  to  them,  and 
are  at  the  same  time  giving  advantages  to  our  manufacturing  rivals,  of 
which  they  are  by  no  means  slow  to  avail  themselves.* 

The  official  value  of  goods  imported  has  a  nearer  agreement  with  the 
actual  value  than  has  been  maintained  between  the  official  and  the  actual 
values  of  British  manufactured  goods  exported.  The  greater  part  of 
our  importations  consists  of  produce  in  its  raw  or  unmanufactured  state,  » 
or  of  products  in  a  state  of  preparation  which  has  not  called  for  any  , 
great  amount  of  labour,  and  as  to  which  there  is,  consequently,  but  little 
room  for  economizing  the  cost.  Our  exports,  on  the  contrary,  consist  ^ 
in  great  part  of  goods  upon  the  preparation  or  manufacture  of  which 
a  great  amount  of  labour  has  been  expended  ;  and  as  the  mechanical 
inventions  of  the  last  fifty  years  have  introduced  the  most  important 
degrees  of  economy  into  nearly  every  process  of  manufacture,  the  prices 
of  such  goods  fixed  180  years  ago  have  become  exceedingly  wide  of  their 
true  value.  The  error  which  might  thus  have  been  exhibited  by  the 
Custom-house  returns,  has  been  rectified  by  the  plan  of  obliging  the  mer- 
chants at  the  time  of  shipment  to  declare  the  real  value  of  British  goods 
exported.  The  only  course  effectual  for  correcting  the  error  in  valua- 
tion in  the  case  of  foreign  goods  imported,  would  be  to  contrast  the  quanti- 
ties so  brought  into  the  country  at  various  periods.  Such  an  account  it  is 
impossible  to  present ;  if  even  it  were  procurable,  its  bulk  would  prevent 
its  insertion  in  these  pages,  and  to  render  it  a  fjiithful  record  it  would 
be  necessary  to  accompany  it  by  many  voluminous  explanatory  statements. 
/  The  opening  of  the  present  century  found  this  country  involved  in 
war,  but  at  the  end  of^lSOljhe  Peace  of  Amiens  was  signed,  and  it  will 
be  seen  (Table,  page  356)  that  the  value  of  British  goods  exported  in 
,  1802  exceeded  by  more  than  5,000,000/.,  or  13  per  cent.,  the  value 
exported  in  1801.  The  recurrence  of  war  in  1803  put  an  end  to  this 
improvement,  and  brought  our  exports  below  the  amount  of  1801.  We 
have  not  the  means  of  analyzing  our  foreign  commerce  in  any  year  earlier 
than  1805,  but  in  that  and  the  two  following  years  it  will  be  remarked 
y   that  rery  nearly  one-third  of  our  foreign  export  trade  was  carried  on 