

2  B  2 


372  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  in. 

measure,  the  construction  of  roads  in  India  would  prove  highly  advan- 
tageous. Their  cost  would  be  quickly  and  amply  repaid  by  the  improving 
revenues  of  the  country,  and  by  the  grateful  feelings  that  would  be  raised 
on  the  part  of  the  native  population.  The  inhabitant  of  Western  Europe, 
who  has  always  been  accustomed  to  have  brought  to  his  door  every  article 
that  he  can  desire,  and  that  his  means  can  purchase,  can  have  but  a 
faint  idea  of  the  various  privations  experienced  by  great  multitudes  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Hindustan,  and  it  may  be  confidently  said  that  the 
Government  that  should  place  within  the  reach  of  the  poor  cultivators 
an  ample  sui)ply  of  .^,— an  article,  the  obtaining  of  which  never  costs 
us  a  thought, — would  be  sure  to  receive  the  blessings  of  milhons.  It  has 
been  stated  by  a  gentleman,  acquainted,  by  long  residence  in  different 
parts  of  India,  with  the  practices  and  capabilities  of  the  country,  that 
the  difference  in  the  cost  of  transporting  goods  along  the  present  ill- 
formed  roads  in  the  rude  carts  or  hackerys  of  the  natives,  is  less  by  six- 
sevenths  than  the  cost  of  conveyance  on  the  backs  of  oxen — a  course  so 
commonly  rendered  necessary  tlu'ough  the  absence  of  everything  to 
which  the  name  of  a  road  can  be  applied.  In  the  level  plains  of  Can- 
deish,  and  in  many  other  parts  of  Hindustan,  cgtton-wool.  freed  from 
the  seed,  could  be  sold  on  the  spot  with  a  profit  to  the  cultivators  at  one 
penny  per  pound, — a  cost  which  is  trebled  or  quadrupled  by  the  expense 
of  conveyance  to  the  ports  of  shipment. 

A  discriminating  duty  at  the  rate  of  28i\  per  cwt.,  or  50  per  cent., 
Mas,  until  lately,  imposed  upon  ooiikc*.  the  growth  of  the  British  posses- 
sions in  India,  for  the  presumed  benefit  of  the  planters  in  our  Western 
Colonies.  L'ntil  1825,  this  discriminating  duty  amounted  to  56s.  per 
cwt.,  but  was  at  that  time  comparatively  but  httle  felt,  because,  owing 
to  the  excessive  duty  levied  upon  all  descriptions  of  coffee,  the  con- 
sumption of  the  kingdom  was  below  the  supply  obtained  from  our  West 
India  colonies,  and  as  the  surplus  had  to  seek  a  market  in  foreign 
countries,  the  prices  of  every  description  of  coffee  were  necessarily 
governed  by  the  demands  of  the  "world  in  general.  In  the  year  just 
mentioned  the  duties  previously  levied  upon  all  kinds  of  coffee  were 
reduced  to  one-half  The  produce  of  the  British  plantations  in  America, 
thenceforward  until  1842,  was  admitted  to  consumption  at  the  rate  of 
6cZ.  per  lb.,  or  56s.  per  cwt.  East  India  coffee  from  British  possessions 
was  charged  9c?.  per  lb.,  or  84s.  per  cwt.,  and  all  other  kinds'  were 
charged  Is.  M.,  or  140s.  per  cwt.,  amounting  to  a  prohibition  against 
their  consumption.  In  1842,  the  duty  on  coffee  from  all  British 
possessions  was  reduced  to  Ad.  per  lb.,  and  all  other  coffee  was  admitted 
at  %d.  per  lb.  until  1844,  when  the  duty  on  foreign  coffee  was  lowered 
to  6f?.  per  lb.  The  consequence  of  the  reduction  in  1825  was  to  increase 
/  the  annual  consumption  of  coffee  from  about  8,000,000  lbs.  in  1824  to 
"  22,000,000  lbs.  in  1830,  which  increase,  as  might  be  expected,  occurred 