

*  The  full  merits  of  this  very  important  question  may  be  learned  by  consulting  the 
evidence  given  before  the  Committee  of  1835,  referred  to  in  the  text,  and  also  from  an 
article  in  the  fourth  number  of  the  "  British  and  Foreign  Quarterly  Review,"  which  was 
written  by  one  of  the  most  intelligent  witnesses  examined  on  that  occasion — the  late 
Mr.  J.  D.  Hume. 


37  S  rnOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

■with  the  United  States^  of  America.  Under  the  then  existing  circum- 
stances of  the  country,  ^vith  tlie  ports  of  the  Continent  shut  against  us 
as  completely  as  the  power  of  Napoleon  enahled  him  to  accomplish  that 
ohject,  this  trade  was  of  peculiar  importance  to  us,  not  only  because  it 
gave  employment  to  our  manufacturing  population,  but  also  because  it 
]M-ovided  us  with  the  means  of  meeting  tlie  foreign  expenditure  of  the 
Government  occasioned  by  the  operations  of  the  war.  The  merchants  of 
the  United  States  were  at  that  time  accustomed  to  sell  their  produce  in 
the  continental  markets  to  a  much  greater  amount  than  their  purchases 
in  those  markets ;  while,  in  their  dealing  with  this  country,  the  practice 
was  directly  the  reverse,  and  they  had  every  year  a  large  balance  to  pay 
to  this  country.  The  means  of  liquidating  this  balance  were  furnished 
by  the  excess  of  their  continental  sales,  the  amount  of  which  was  paid  to 
the  agents  of  the  English  Government  for  bills  upon  the  Treasury,  which 
came  as  a  remittance  to  our  exporting  merchants,  and  thus  were  funds 
placed  at  the  disposal  of  our  armies,  and  the  payment  of  subsidies  was 
accomplished  which  must  otherwise  have  drained  this  country  of  every 
guinea  which  it  possessed.  At  the  end  of  IHOG,  Napoleon  aimed  an 
additional  and  severe  blow  at  this  country  by  means  of  his  famous 
liedia -diicree,  whereby  he  declared  all  the  ports  of  Great  Britain  in  a 
state  of  blockade,  and  forbade  all  trading  with  us  or  in  the  articles  of  our 
j)roduce  and  manufactures,  declaring  such  to  be  subject  to  seizure  and 
condemnation  wherever  they  were  found,  and  forbidding  the  importation 
into  the  countries  under  his  control,  which  then  included  nearly  all  con- 
tinental Europe,  of  any  goods  of  such  kinds  as  were  included  among  the 
liome  or  colonial  productions  of  this  country,  unless  they  should  be  ac- 
companied by  certificates  showing  their  origin  to  have  been  other  than 
British.  The  consequent  measures  of  retaliation  adopted  by  the  English 
government,  were  so  far  from  averting  the  evil  consequences  of  this 
Berlin  decree,  that  they  proved  directly  and  immediately  injurious  to 
our  trade,  in  a  greater  degree  than  all  the  efforts  of  the  enemy  would 
probably  have  succeeded  in  accomplishing.  Our  Orders  in  Council, 
issued  in  the  course  of  1807,  served  indeed  only  to  give  eflficacy  to  the 
])aper  blockade  of  Napoleon,  against  which  the  whole  trading  community 
of  the  world  would  have  been  arrayed  but  for  the  notable  expedient  of 
the  English  Govermnent.  By  these  Orders  in  Council  it  was  declared, 
as  the  only  condition  upon  which  neutrals  might  trade  with  countries 
not  at  peace  with  Great  Britain,  that  the  vessels  in  wliich  that  trade  was 
carried  on  should  touch  at  some  port  in  this  country,  there  to  pay  such 
amount  of  Customs  duties  as  should  be  imposed  by  the  British  Govern- 
ment, and  any  vessel  found  to  have  on  board  the  certificate  of  origin 
required  by  the  French  Government  was  declared  la\<ful  prize.  In  an- 
swer to  these  Orders  in  Council,  Napoleon  issued  his  decree  from  j\|ila.n, 
dated  27th  September,  1807,  in  which  it  was  declared  that  any  ship  that 