

If  the  sound  principles,  that  no  duties  should  be  levied  except  for 
purposes  of  revenue,  and  that  it  is  both  ynjust  and  unwise  to  tax  the 
whole  community  for  the  supposed  benefit  of  a  part,  were  recognised 
and  fully  acted  upon,  so  that  the  price  of  any  important  article  were  not 
enhanced  by  means  of  the  duty  in  a  greater  degree  than  the  actual 
amount  of  the  duty,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  advantages  that  would 


374  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  m. 

result  to  the   country  at   large,  through  all  its  various  intercuts,  by 
the  increased  activity  that  would  be  imparted  to  its  foreign  commerce. 

Much  has  been  done  during  the  last  few  years,  beyond  what  has  been 
already  particularly  noticed,"  to  simplify  our  tariff  and  to  reduce  or 
abolish  duties  charged  upon  the  raw  materials  of  manufacture,  and  there 
is  every  reason  for  believing  that  the  subsequent  extension  of  our  foreign 
trade  has  been  mainly  owing  to  that  cause.  There  is  still  something  to 
be  done  in  this  way.  The  two  great  monopolies  of  corn  and  timber,  the 
first  maintained  for  the  assumed  benefit  of  the  possessors  of  land,  the 
second  conceded  to  the  clamour  of  a  certain  class  of  ship-owners,  al- 
though importantly  modified  since  the  first  publication  of  this  work,  were, 
when  the  last  edition  of  it  appeared,  the  chief  remaining  obstacles  to  the 
growth  of  our  commercial  relations  with  European  nations.  The  most 
grievous  of  those  two  monopolies,  that  which  condemned  the  people  to 
pay  more  for  their  food  than  was  paid  by  the  inhabitants  of  other  coun- 
tries, has  at  length  been  swept  away,  and  there  are  strong  grounds  for 
belie^^ng  that  the  duty  on  timber,  which  is  essentially  a  raw  material  of 
the  greatest  importance  to  every  branch  of  manufacture,  must  shortly  be 
wholly  abolished  also. 

It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose,  as  generally  is  done,  that  the  high  discri- 
minating duty  upon  timber  was  originally  imposed  for  the  benefit  either 
of  the  North  American  colonists,  or  of  the  English  ship-owners  ;  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other  of  those  parties  was  thought  of  in  the  business  any 
further  than  as  they  might  be  made  the  means  of  relieving  the  con- 
sumers of  timber  in  this  country  from  the  evil  consequences  resulting  to 
them   through  our  exclusion  from  ports  in  the  Baltic.     The  discrimi- 
nating duty  was  not  intended  to  have  been  continued  after  the  necessity 
out  of  which   it  arose   should  have  passed  away  with    the    return  of 
peace.       The  duty  upon  a  load   (fifty  cubic  feet)  of  European  timber, 
which  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  had  been   6s.  Sd.,  was  raised  by  in- 
considerable steps  to  275.  2d.,  in  1806 ;  this  rate  was  doubled  in  1811, 
and  in  1813  the  duty  was  further  advanced  to  655.     Colonial  timber 
was  admitted  free  of  duty  up  to  1798,  when  it  was  subjected  to  3  per 
cent,  ad  valorem  ;  from  1803  to  1806  the  ad  valorem  rate  was  changed 
to  a  specific  duty  of  about  2s.  per  load,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  again 
altogether  removed.     In  1821,  in  consequence  of  the  recommendations 
of  Committees  of  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament,  the  system  was   so  far 
altered  that  the  rate  upon  European   timber  was  reduced  to  555.,  while 
upon  colonial  timber  a  duty  was  imposed  of  IO5.  per  load,  and  those 
rates  were  continued  to  the  year  1840,  when  I5.  6d.  per  load  was  added 
to  them  respectively.     In  October,  1843,  the  duties  were  reduced   to 
255.  per  load    on  foreign  timber,  and  325.  per  load  on  foreign  deals, 
and  to  I5,  per  load  on  timber,  and  25.  per  load  on  deals  the  produce  of 
British  possessions.     Further  modifications  of  the  duties  upon  foreign 