


cuAi'.  IX.]  FOllEIGN  COMMERCE.  379 

should  have  paid  any  tax  to  the  British  Government,  or  that  had  sub- 
mitted to  be  searched  by  any  British  authorities,  was  thereby  denation- 
alized, and  became  good  and  lawful  prize  ;  and  in  order  to  give  full 
effect  to  this  decree,  it  was  provided  that  any  person  on  board  a  foreign 
vessel  arriving  at  a  port  in  France,  who  should  notify  to  the  authorities  the 
fact  of  such  vessel  having  visited  an  English  port,  or  of  its  having  sub- 
mitted to  be  searched,  should  be  entitled  to  receive  one-third  of  the  net 
value  realized  from  the  sale  of  the  vessel  and  cargo.  Further  to  cir- 
cumvent the  designs  of  the  French  Government,  a  system  of  providing 
neutral  vessels  with  forged  papers,  by  means  of  which  they  might  elude 
the  vigilance  of  the  French  authorities,  was  encouraged  by  the  English 
Government ;  and  thus  in  spite  of  all  the  hazard  attending  this  course  of 
very  questionable  morality,  a  considerable  amount  of  trade  was  carried 
on  in  vessels  bearing  the  flag  of  Pappenburg,  Oldenburg,  and  other  petty 
continental  powers.  Such  an  expedient  was  clearly  not  one  which  the 
government  of  the  United  States  of  America  could  adopt  for  the  prose-  j 
cution  of  trade  with  Europe  ;  and  finding  that  the  American  flag  was 
thus  effectually  excluded  from  the  ports  of  the  Continent,  that  goveni- 
ment  interdicted  altogether  the  trade  of  its  subjects  with  either  of  the 
belligerents,  first,  by  blockading  her  own  ports,  and  next,  by  a  law  for- 
bidding intercourse  with  the  belligerents,  while  it  allowed  of  trade  with 
other  parts  of  the  world,  and  which  provided  for  the  renewal  of  trading 
relations  with  either  of  the  interdicted  nations  which  should  rescind  its 
obnoxious  regulations.  The  return  to  wisdom,  in  this  respect,  was  firstj 
evinced  by  Fj;ance,  and  war  was  declared  against  this  country  by  the 
United  States. 

It  will  be  clear,  from  the  preceding  recital,  that  the  great  advantages 
which  we  had  derived  from  our  trade  with  America,  as  already  described,  ' 
must  have  ceased  when  the  blockade  of  their  ports  was  enforced  ;  and  ■ 
accordingly  we  find  that  the  amount  of  our  exports  became  altogether 
inadequate  to  meet  our  public  expenditure  abroad,  the  foreign  exchanges 
turned  ruinously  against  this  country,  and  the  drain  of  the  precious 
metals  was  such  that  the  price  of  gold  rose  from  8O5.  per  oz.,  at  which 
price  it  had  been  stationary  during  the  six  preceding  years,  to  91s.  per 
oz.  in  1809,  to  ^Is.  6d.  in  1811,  to  105s.  in  1812,  and  to  110s.  in  1813 ; 
these  prices  being  respectively  14,  20,  25,  and  29  per  cent,  above  the 
Mint  price  of  77s.  lO^d.  per  oz.  During  this  period  the  evil  conse- 
quences of  this  state  of  things  was  aggravated  by  the  great  quantities  of  . 
foreign  goods,  beyond  the  wants  of  the  consumers,  that  were  accumulated 
in  our  warehouses,  and  for  which  no  market  could  be  found.  These 
goods  were  either  actually  the  property  of  English  merchants,  having 
been  received  in  return  for  manufactures  exported,  or  were  virtually  so 
through  advances  made  to  the  owners,  in  addition  to  the  freight,  in- 
surance, and  other  charges  which  had  been  incurred  upon  them.     Such 