


CHAi'.  IX.]  rOREIGN  COMMERCE.  381. 

of  British  and  colonial  goods.  Those  licenses,  which  were  given  to  some 
fjivoured  individuals  among  his  staff  and  court,  were  sold  to  the  mer- 
chants ;  and  it  has  been  stated,  that  as  much  as  a  million  of  francs  — 
40,000/. — has  been  realized  from  the  sale  of  one  of  these  commercial 
indulgences. 

It  has  been  often  brought  as  matter  for  reproach  against  the  ministry 
of  that  day,  that  in  the  negotiations  at  Vienna,  which  followed  the 
downfall  of  Napoleon,  the  commercial  interests  of  this  country  were  1 
heedlessly  abandoned.  It  can  hardly  be  denied  that  the  minister  by 
whom  England  was  represented  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  knew  but  ]x 
little,  and  cared  as  little,  about  commercial  matters  ;  and  that  certain 
of  the  better-informed  diplomatists  of  other  countries  were  not  backward 
to  take  advantage  of  his  ignorance  and  supineness.  Conquests,  which 
offered  wide  and  improving  fields  for  commercial  and  manufiicturing 
enterprise,  were  given  up  as  it  were  through  complaisance ;  and  the 
whole  subject  of  trade  was  abandoned,  apparently  lest  the  pursuit  of 
what  might  be  called  our  selfish  interest  should  tarnish  the  laurels  we 
had  gathered  in  the  fields  of  slaughter.  The  amount  of  the  sacrifices 
thus  made  it  would  be  impossible  to  estimate  ;  but  at  however  high  an 
I  amount  they  may  be  reckoned,  it  is  probable  that  we  have  since  sutferi'd 
)far  more  through  our  long  persistence  in  a  system  of  restriction  and  pro- 
\hibition.  This,  although  it  might  have  been  comparatively  inoperative 
during  the  period  of  war,  could  not  fail  to  be  viewed  with  jealousy  and 
anger  so  soon  as  peace  enabled  other  nations  to  turn  their  attention  to 
foreign  commerce.  The  pertinacity  with  which  we  so  long  adhered  to 
our  navigation  law^s,  and  the  numerous  anti-social  vices  that  were  suf- 
fered to  deform  our  tariff,  were  calculated  to  foster  this  spirit  of  jealousy 
on  the  part  of  others,  and  to  provoke  them  to  acts  of  retaliation,  from 
which  we,  as  the  most  commercial  nation,  were  sure  to  be  the  greatest 
sufferers.  The  ministry  of  that  time  was  supported  in  this  adherence 
to  a  system  of  restriction  by  many  commercial  men,  whose  modes  of 
business  being  adapted  to  that  system,  they  dreaded  lest  its  relaxation 
might  be  followed  by  personal  loss  to  themselves ;  and  it  was  their  en- 
deavour, in  which  they  too  well  succeeded,  to  persuade  the  Government 
and  the  legislature  that  any  change  of  system  must  tend  to  destroy  the 
foreign  commerce  of  the  country.  It  has  been,  unfortunately,  the  comA 
mon  practice  in  this  country,  when  legislating  upon  commercial  mattei's,! 
to  consider  the^  interests  of  the  merchants  actually  engaged  in  its  pro-/ 
secution,  and  not  the  advantage  of  the  trade  itself,  which  is  always  best' 
promoted  by  attention  to  the  interests  of  the  consumers,  rather  than  by 
assisting  the  merchants  to  obtain,  by  means  of  what  is  called  protec- 
tion, an  unnatural  rate  of  profit. 