


3?0  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

of  our  manufacturers  as  had  the  means  of  doing  so,  had  accumulated 
large  stocks  of  goods  in  their  stores,  but  one  after  another  their  means 
of  employing  workmen  fell  off,  so  that  in  the  beginning  of  1811  the  state 
of  dislress  among  all  the  trading  classes  had  arisen  to  a  most  alarming 
height ;  meetings  were  held  in  the  city  of  London  to  consider  as  to  the 
course  to  be  pursued  to  mitigate  the  evil,  and  a  Select  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons  was  appointed  with  the  same  view.  The  distress 
was  partially  alleviated  by  the  issue  of  Exchequer  bills  on  loan  to  the 
merchants,  but  effectual  relief  was  not  obtained  until  the  tide  of  pros- 
perity began  to  turn  away  from  the  ruler  of  France,  and  the  continental 
nations  casting  off  the  shackles  in  which  he  had  bound  them,  leagued 
i^^  together  in  alliance  with  England,  for  the  recovery  of  their  independ- 
1  ence :  their  ports  were  then  of  course  open  to  our  commerce,  and  the 
goods  which  had  been  accumulating  in  our  docks  and  warehouses  were 
distributed  to  willing  purchasers. 

The  desire  of  obtaining  British  manufactured  goods  and  colonial  pro- 
duce was  exhibited  on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Continent  in  a 
\/  remarkable  manner  during  the  years  which  immediately  followed  the 
promulgation  of  the  Berlin  decree.  This  scheme  for  the  destruction  of 
our  trade  was  not  confined  to  France,  but  was  adopted  likewise  by  the 
eovernments  of  Austria,  Prussia,  the  States  of  the  Germanic  Confede- 
ration, Russia,  Holland,  and  the  Italian  States,  then  leagued  with 
France  against  this  country  ;  and  neither  trouble  nor  precaution  was 
spared  in  order  to  ensure  its  complete  adoption.  So  great,  however, 
was  the  desire  of  obtaining  the  prohibited  articles,  that  all  the  efforts  of 
the  French  Commissioners  were  of  little  avail,  and  the  export  trade  of 
the  country  was  maintained  during  the  years  in  which  the  continental 
system  was  enforced,  at  a  level  nearly  as  high  as  it  had  previously  ac- 
quired. The  well-informed  author  of  a  pamphlet,  published  in  1835, 
entitled  '  England,  Ireland,  and  America,'  says,  when  speaking  on  this 
subject : — "  It  would  be  amusing,  and  full  of  romantic  interest,  to  detail 
some  of  the  ten  thousand  justifiable  arts  invented  to  thwart  this  un- 
natural coalition,  which,  of  necessity,  converted  almost  every  citizen  of 
Europe  into  a  smuggler.  Bouriennc,  who  was  himself  one  of  the  Com- 
missioners appointed  to  enforce  these  prohibitions  at  Hamburg,  gives 
some  interesting  anecdotes  in  his  Memoirs  under  this  head.  The  writer 
is  acquainted  wdth  a  merchant  who  was  interested  in  a  house  that  em- 
ployed 500  horses  in  transporting  British  goods,  many  of  which  were 
landed  in  Sclavonia,  and  thence  conveyed  overland  to  France,  at  a 
charge  of  about  28/.  per  cwt.,  more  than  fifty  times  the  present  freight 
of  merchandise  to  Calcutta  !"  In  the  plenitude  of  his  power,  Napoleon 
was  unable  to  prevent  the  clandestine  introduction  and  sale  of  English 
goods  in  the  very  capital  of  his  empire  ;  he  was,  besides,  led  occasion- 
ally to  relax  the  system  so  far  as  to  grant  licenses  for  the  introduction 