


376  niUGIlESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

under  this  head  to  the  Exchequer  is  lost  to  the  public,  its  only  use  being 
to  afford  cinployuient  to  a  number  of  old  and  worn-out  ships,  which  it 
would  be  more  advantageous  to  the  country  to  buy,  and  then  break 
them  up  and  sell  their  materials  for  fuel,  than  it  would  be  to  continue 
the  present  modified  system. 

Owing  to  the  mode  employed  up  to  1843  for  calculating  the  duties 
upon  planks,  deals,  and  battens,  which  were  taxed  by  the  great  hundred 
in  classes,  according  to  certain  specified  limits  of  dimension,  it  was  not 
easy  to  estimate  the  actual  quantity  of  w^ood  brought  for  consumption 
into  the  country.  Such  an  estimate  was  carefully  made  at  the  Custom- 
house with  reference  to  the  importations  of  1833,  and  from  this  it  ap- 
pears that  the  quantity  imported  that  year,  expressed  in  loads,  amounted 
to  1,163,518,  and  the  duty  collected  to  1,285,379/.,  being  at  the  average 
rate  of  22s.  lid.  per  load.  If  the  duty  upon  the  whole  of  this  quantity 
had  been  charged  at  the  rate  imposed  upon  European  timber,  the  pro- 
portion brought  from  the  colonies  would  no  doubt  have  been  reduced, 
and  the  supplies  from  the  Baltic  must  have  been  proportionally  increased, 
by  which  means  the  price  in  the  countries  of  production  would  have  been 
raised,  and  this  circumstance  would  so  far  have  acted  in  diminution  of 
the  advantage  accruing  to  the  country  through  the  greater  receipts  at 
the  Exchequer ;  but  when  an  ample  allowance  has  been  made  on  this 
account,  it  will  be  found  that  the  loss  to  the  .public  at  large,  through 
adherence  to  the  present  system,  amounted  to  nearly  or  quite  one  mil- 
lion and  a  half  of  money  in  that  one  year.  The  importations  in  the 
years  that  have  since  elapsed  have  been  much  greater  than  those  of  1833, 
and  the  loss  was  consequently  for  some  years  still  more  than  the  sum 
here  mentioned.  It  is  the  opinion  of  well-informed  men,  who  were  ex- 
amined before  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  which  sat 
in  1835  to  consider  this  subject,  that  by  a  return  to  a  more  wholesome 
state  of  the  trade,  the  price  in  the  countries  of  production  in  Europe 
would  be  raised  only  temporarily,  and  that  so  soon  as  time  had  allowed 
of  the  erection  of  new  saw-mills,  and  of  other  arrangements  necessary 
for  an  enlargement  of  the  trade,  the  price  would  again  subside  to  its 
former  and  natural  level,  the  supply  of  growing  timber  in  those  coun- 
tries being  equal  to  any  demand  that  could  possibly  arise  by  that  means. 

But  if  these  gentlemen  should  have  taken  too  sanguine  a  view  of  the 
capabilities  of  the  various  countries  to  which  we  have  hitherto  and  for- 
merly resorted  for  a  sup})ly  of  timber,  there  are  other  districts  to  be 
explored  into  which  the  woodman's  axe  has  never  yet  penetrated,  with 
a  view  to  the  supply  of  AV'estern  Europe,  whence  we  may  draw  supplies 
for  ages  to  come  of  a  quality  equal  to  everything  that  can  be  wished, 
and  adapted  to  purposes  which  it  is  now  difficult  to  satisfy.  From  the 
forests  of  Al])ania,  as  well  as  those  of  Circassia,  and  all  the  coasts  of 
the  Black  Sea  and  the  banks  of  the  Danube,  we  may — if  political,  and 