


CHAr.  IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  383 

other  production  to  which  our  situation  might  be  better  suited  ;  thus 
aflTortling  at  least  an  equal,  and  probably  a  greater,  and  certainly  a  more 
beneficial  employment  to  our  own  capital  and  labour. 

"  That  of  the  numerous  protective  and  prohibitory  duties  of  our  com- 
mercial code,  it  may  be  proved,  that  while  all  operate  as  a  heavy  tax 
on  the  community  at  large,  very  few  are  of  any  ultimate  benefit  to  the 
classes  in  whose  favoiu*  they  were  originally  instituted,  and  none  to  the 
extent  of  the  loss  occasioned  by  them  to  other  classes. 

"  That  among  the  other  evils  of  the  restrictive  or  protective  system, 
not  the  least  is,  that  the  artificial  protection  of  one  branch  of  industry  or 
source  of  production  against  foreign  competition,  is  set  up  as  a  ground 
of  claim  by  other  branches  for  similar  protection  ;  so  that  if  the  reason- 
ing upon  which  restrictive  or  prohibitory  regulations  are  founded  were 
followed  out  consistently,  it  would  not  stop  short  of  excluding  us  from 
all  foreign  commerce  whatsoever.  And  the  same  train  of  ai'gument, 
which,  with  corresponding  prohibitions  and  protective  duties,  should 
exclude  us  from  foreign  trade,  might  be  brought  fonvard  to  justify  the 
re-enactment  of  restrictions  upon  the  interchange  of  productions  (uncon- 
nected with  public  revenue)  among  the  kingdoms  composing  the  union, 
or  among  the  counties  of  the  same  kingdom. 

'"  That  an  investigation  of  the  effects  of  the  restrictive  system,  at  this 
time,  is  peculiarly  called  for,  as  it  may,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Petitioners, 
lead  to  a  strong  presumption  that  the  distress  v^hichnow  so  generally  pre- 
vails is  considerably  aggravated  by  that  system  ;  and  that  some  relief 
may  be  obtained  by  the  earliest  practicable  removal  of  such  of  the  re- 
straints as  may  be  shown  to  be  most  injurious  to  the  capital  and  industry 
of  the  community,  and  to  be  attended  with  no  compensating  benefit  to 
the  public  revenue. 

"  That  a  declaration  against  the  anti-commercial  principles  of  our 
restrictive  system  is  of  the  more  importance  at  the  present  juncture, 
inasmuch  as  in  several  instances  of  recent  occurrence,  the  mer- 
chants and  manufacturers  in  foreign  states  have  assailed  their  respec- 
tive governments  with  applications  for  further  protection  or  prohibitory 
duties  and  regulations,  urging  the  authority  and  example  of  this 
country,  against  which  they  are  almost  exclusively  directed,  as  a 
sanction  for  the  policy  of  such  measures.  And  certainly,  if  the  reason- 
ing upon  which  our  restrictions  have  been  defended  is  worth  anything, 
it  will  apply  in  behalf  of  the  regulations  of  foreign  states  against  "us. 
They  insist  upon  our  superiority  in  capital  and  machinery,  as  we  do 
upon  their  comparative  exemption  from  taxation,  and  with  equal  foun- 
dation. 