


300  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

attributed  their  losses  and  disappointments  to  the  reciprocity  treaties. 
/With  this  feeling  a  deputation  of  shipowners  waited  upon  Mr.  Huskis- 
\l  son,  when  President  of  the  Boiird  of  Trade,  to  remonstrate  against  the 
linjustice  of  the  new  system,  which  obliged  them  to  enter  unprotected 
iinto  competition  with  foreign    shipping  built  and   navigated  so  much 
more  cheaply  than  their  own.     To  meet  this  complaint  in  the  manner 
that  apjieared  most  obviously  fair  to  all  parties,  Mr.  lluskisson  proposed 
to  grant  to  the  builders  of  ships  in  this  country  a  drawback  equal  to  the 
full  amount  of  any  duty  that  bad  been  paid  upon  the  materials  used  in 
their  construction  and  equipment.     For  very  obvious  reasons,  this  pro- 
posal was  not  fovourably  received  by  the  complainants,  who  dreaded 
lest  the  Government,  by  acting  upon  Mr.  Iluskissou's  suggestion,  should 
give  a  fresh  stimulus  to  ship-building  at  home,  and  raise  up  new  com- 
petitors, who  would  be  able  to  rival  them  successfully  in  every  branch 
of  commerce. 

There  is  not  any  class  of  persons  in  this  country,  with  the  excejjtion 
/  perhaps  of  the  landowners,  which  has  made  such  loud  and  continued 
i  complaints  of  distress  as  the  shipowners  have  done  since  the  peace  in 
\  1815.  These  gentlemen  form  a  numerous,  wealthy,  and  influential 
body,  and  acting  as  they  do,  in  concert,  with  an  organized  committee  to 
watch  over  their  interests,  they  have  always  been  able  to  command  at- 
tention to  their  representations,  and  occasionally  to  defeat  such  measures 
of  Government  as  were  seemingly  opposed  to  their  interests.  It  is  not 
intended  to  question  here  the  importance,  in  a  political  point  of  view,  of 
our  mercantile  marine ;  that  importance  has  always  been  considered 
so  great  that  if  a  sacrifice  were  needed  on  the  part  of  the  nation,  in 
order  to  keep  up  the  number  and  eflSciency  of  our  trading-vessels,  there 
would  be  little  question  as  to  the  propriety  of  such  a  course.*  In  ad- 
mitting this,  it  is  by  no  means  intended  to  allow  that  any  such  sacrifice 
is  necessary,  or  that  the  activity  of  om*  merchants  would  not  furnish  an 
adequate  amount  of  employment  in  those  branches  of  commerce,  where 
British  vessels  can  be  advantageously  employed,  without  the  necessity 
for  inciting  them  by  discriminating  duties  to  embark  in  any  course  of 
trade  which  may  tend  to  injure  other  classes  of  the  community.  If  this 
position  be  correct,  it  would  be  difficult  to  show  why  ships,  the  tools 
merely  with  which  merchants  work,  should  be  more  considered  than 
the  traffic  itself  for  the  conveyance  of  which  they  are  constructed,  why 