

2  c 


380  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION,  [sec.  hi. 

\vill  not  allow  it  to  proceed  in  the  business,  until  the  loss  to  the  revenue 
may  have  reached  a  pitch  which  can  be  no  longer  borne.* 

AVhen  communities   in  general   shall  Ijecome    more   enlightened,  in 

^  regard  to  the  ])rinciples  that  should  regnlute  conunerce,  such  negotia- 
tions as  that  above  described  can  never  occur.  Connnereial  treaties 
will  then  be  unknown,  because  each  country  will  be  led  to  adopt  plans 
that  will  be  of  advant<ige  to  itself,  unchecked  by  the  consideration  that 
some  part  of  that  advantage  may  be  shared  by  others  ;  and  not  only  so, 
but  will  be  induced  the  more  readily  to  pursue  those  plans  for  the  very 
reason  that  others  wull  participate  in  tlie  benefit,  assured  that  the  pros- 
perity of  its  neighbours  must  always  have  a  beneficial  influence  upon  its 
own  condition. 

The  part  of  our  restrictive  system  which  was  viewed  with  the  greatest 
favour  among  all  classes,  was  embodied  in  the  measure  generally  known 
under  the  name  of  the  ^vigatioB.Act.  The  foundation  of  this  Act 
was  laid  during  the  Protectorate,  and  the  system  was  perfected  by  the 
I  12  Charles  II.,  chap.  18.  This  Act  provided,  that  no  merchandise  of 
)  either  Asia,  Africa,  or  America,  should  be  imported  into  Great  Britain 
;  in  any  but  English-built  ships,  navigated  by  an  English  commander, 
and  having  at  least  three-fourths  of  their  crew  English.  Besides  this 
exclusive  right  imparted  to  British  shipping,  discriminating  duties  were 
imposed,  so  that  goods  which  might  still  be  imported  in  foreign  ships 
from  Europe  were  in  that  case  more  highly  taxed  than  if  imported 
under  the  English  flag.  The  system  here  described  continued  to  be 
steadily  and  pertinaciously  maintained  during  more  than  16D  years, 
and  was  looked  upon  as  a  monument  of  wisdom  and  prudence,  to  which 
was  mainly  attributable  the  degree  of  commercial  greatness  to  which 
v/e  had  attained.  U  May  we  not  hope  that,  with  the  present  amount  of 
our  knowledge,  it  would  be  difficult  to  arrive  at  any  such  conclusion,  or 
to  believe  that  the  trade  of  any  country  could  possibly  be  promoted  by 

^  compelling  the  merchants  to  employ  diiai-  instead  of  cheap  ships  ?  The 
earliest  deviation  from  the  Navigation  Act  that  was  sanctioned  by  Par- 
liament, arose  out  of  the  treaty  with  the  United  States  of  America,  in 
18]Ji.     The  States,  soon  after  the  establishment  of  their  independence, 

s^  had  passed  a  navigation  law  in  favour  of  their  shipping,  similar  in  all 
its  main  provisions  to  the  English  law  ;  and  it  affords  an  instructive 
lesson,  that  the  practical  carrying  out  of  this  restrictive  system  to  its 
fullest  extent  by  the  two  nations  was  found  to  be  so  unproductive  of  all 
good  eflfect,  as  to  call  for  its  mutual  abandonment.  (  By  this  treaty,  the 