

*  It  seems  deserving  of  remark  that  the  importance  to  the  country  of  keeping  up  our 
mercantile  marine  "as  a  nurserj-  for  seamen"  to  man  the  national  fleet,  has  been  in  some 
degree  forgotten  when  encouragement  has  been  given  to  steam  navigation,  one  of  the  most 
certain  consequences  attending  that  great  invention  being  importantly  to  lessen  the  pro- 
portion of  seamen  required  for  carrying  on  a  given  amount  of  trdde.  On  tlie  other  hand, 
it  is  certain  that  in  tlie  event  of  war  breaking  out,  the  whole  system  of  naval  armaments 
will  be  changed  by  means  of  this  great  invention,  and  that  a  much  smaller  number  of 
vessels  and  of  seamen  than  have  formerly  been  required  would  need  to  be  employed. 


CH.vr.  ix.j  FOKEIUN  COMMERCE.  301 

they  should  be  looked  upon,  as  they  generally  have  been  in  this  country, 
not  as  the  means  of  commerce,  but  as  its  end. 

It  has  been  a  fruitful  source  of  complaint,  from  year  to  year,  on  the 
part  of  the  owners  of  British  ships,  that  a  large  and  increasing  amount 
of  foreign  tonnage  enters  the  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom,  and  tliey 
have  been  so  accustomed  to  look  with  jealousy  upon  these  foreign  rivals, 
that  they  cannot  forbear  complaining  of  the  competition  at  periods  when 
it  is  notorious,  and  even  acknowledged  by  themselves,  that  British  vessels 
find  full  employment  at  rates  of  freight  which  are  more  satisfactory  to 
themselves  than  beneficial  to  the  trading  interests  of  the  country.  In 
years  of  great  commercial  excitement,  when  the  demand  for  shippinr!-  is 
unusually  great,  it  is  of  great  advantage  to  British  shipowners  that  our 
merchants  should  be  able  to  employ  foreign  vessels.  If  the  tonnage 
under  British  register  were  sufficiently  great  to  answer  the  possible 
demands  of  any  extraordinary  year,  what  would  become  of  the  surplus 
of  that  tonnage  during  years  of  ordinary  employment  ?  Home  competi- 
tion would,  in  such  cases,  inevitably  bring  down  the  rates  of  freight 
below  the  scale  that  would  remunerate  the  owners ;  whereas  now  that 
the  merchants  are  free  to  supply  their  wants  in  foreign  parts,  they  will 
do  so  no  longer  than  necessity  obliges  them,  and  that  necessity  beino- 
over,  the  reasonable  amount  of  British  tonnage  finds  its  usual  employ- 
ment at  the  usual  scale  of  compensation.  In  years  when  the  employ- 
ment of  British  ships  is  greatest,  there  is  the  largest  proportionate  use 
of  foreign  shipping,  and,  on  the  contrary,  during  years  of  commei-cial 
depression,  the  proportionate  use  of  foreign  tonnage  is  always  found  to 
be  the  least. 

If  it  were  not  for  the  political  consideration  before  alluded  to,  which 
causes  us  to  look  to  our  mercantile  marine  more,  perhaps,  than  would  be 
necessary  if  a  good  system  were  adopted  for  recruiting  the  national  fleet, 
no  one  could  have  questioned  that  the  true  interests  of  commerce  would 
require  that  we  should  employ  the  ships  of  any  country  which  would 
best  and  cheapest  perform  the  office  of  conveying  merchandise  to  and 
from  our  shores.  It  is,  indeed,  no  longer  doubtful  whether,  all  restric- 
tions imposed  on  our  foreign  commerce  in  favour  of  our  own  flag  bein"- 
abolished  through  the  repeal  in  1849  of  our  navigation  laws,  English 
vessels  are  able  successfully — nay,  triumphantly — to  compete  with  the 
ships  of  every  other  country.  It  is  a  fact,  that  in  our  trade  with  the 
United  States  of  America,  a  continually-increasing  proportion  of  British 
tonnage  has  of  late  years  been  employed.  In  1821,  the  proportion  of 
British  vessels  which  entered  the  ports  of  the  United  States  was  7i  per 
cent.,  compared  with  the  American  tonnage  employed  in  the  foreign 
trade  of  the  States  ;  while,  in  1835,  that  proportion  was  increased  to 
39  per  cent.,  which  proportion  was  maintained  in  1844,  and  increased  in 