


cHAr.  ix.l  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  389 

sions  thus  made  met  with  only  a  feeble  opposition,  the  principal  Act 
having  passed  the  Commons  by  a  m.ajority  of  5  to  1. 

Under  the  authority  of  these  Acts  of  Parliament  reciprocity  treaties 
have  been  concluded  with  tin;  following  countries : — 


France. 

Austria. 

Russia. 

Sweden  and  Norway. 

Denmark. 

Netherlands. 

Prussia. 

Lubeck. 

Bremen. 

Hamburg. 

Hanover. 

Mecklcnl)urg  Srliwcrin. 

Mecklenburgh  Strclitz. 

Oldenburg. 

Frankfort. 


Portugal. 

Sardinia. 

Two  Sicilies. 

Greece. 

Turkey. 

United  States  of  America. 

Mexico. 

Texas. 

Uraguay. 

Bolivia. 

Venezuela. 

New  (Iranada. 

Escuador  (Equator). 

Rio  de  la  Plata. 

Brazil. 


( 


A  great  depreciation  has  undoubtedly  taken  place  in  the  value  of 
ships  in  this  country.  If,  while  the  prices  of  all  other  kinds  of  ])ro- 
perty  had  undergone  reduction,  the  price  of  ships  had  been  exempted 
from  alteration,  it  would  have  been  extraordinary,  and  a  circumstance 
by  no  means  favourable  to  commerce.  It  is  not  possible  to  estimate 
proportionally  the  degree  in  which  this  general  abatement  of  prices  has 
affected  shipping.  One  ship  differs  from  another  in  those  qualities 
which  determine  its  marketable  value  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  each  ship 
is  continually  undergoing  a  change  in  those  qualities.  It  may  be  fiiirly 
presumed,  however,  that  the  general  fall  of  prices  has  not  borne  harder 
upon  the  owners  of  ships  than  upon  the  holders  of  other  kinds  of  pro- 
perty, since  we  find  from  public  documents,  as  shown  in  this  volume, 
that  the  number  and  tonnage  of  vessels  built  since  that  fall  became 
matter  of  complaint,  have  been  greater  than  they  were  during  years 
which  are  now  pointed  out  as  periods  of  prosperity  by  the  shipping  in- 
terest. The  materials  of  which  ships  are  built  all  participated  in  the  fall 
— wood,  hemp,  iron,  copper,  sail-cloth, — every  article  that  can  be  men- 
tioned as  portions  of  a  ship  or  of  her  stores,  had  become  cheaper,  and  as 
new  ships  could  be  profitably  employed  upon  lower  terms  than  those  built 
in  dearer  times,  the  owners  of  the  latter  were  of  course  compelled  to 
accept  of  less  remunerative  rates  of  freight.  Their  value  in  the  market 
was,  of  course,  affected  by  the  same  circumstance,  and  as  no  man  likes 
to  see  his  property  made  less  valuable,  their  owners  became  discon- 
tented. Overlooking  the  obvious  cause  of  depression,  and  seeing  that 
not  only  were  they  underbid  by  the  owners  of  British  ships  built  with 
cheaper  materials,  but  also  by  the  foreign  shipowner,  whose  vessel  was 
built  still  more  cheaply,  they  forgot  the  circumstances  wliich  had  in  a 
manner  compelled  the  Government  to  relax  our  navigation  laws,  and 