

The  narrow  views  which  have  been  here  explained  were  not  univer- 
sally held  by  mercantile  men.    In  the  year  1.820  a  considerable  number 


3S2  PROGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  tii. 

of  the  most  wealthy  and  enterprising  houses  in  London  joined  in  a  peti- 
tion to  the  House  of  Commons,  embodying  principles,  the  justice  and 
liberality  of  which  will  assure  to  them  the  assent  at  all  times  of  en- 
lightened men,  and  reference  will  long  be  made  to  this  petition  as  to 
the  deliberate  opinions  of  practical  and  experienced  merchants  upon 
points  which  they  are  peculiarly  fitted  to  understand. 

This  petition  was  in  the  following  terms  : — 

"  To  the  Honourable  the  House  of  Commons  of  the  United  Kingdom 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland. 

"  The  humble  Petition  of  the  undersigned  Merchants  of  the  city  of 
London, 

"  Sheweth, — That  foreign  commerce  is  eminently  conducive  to  the 
wealth  and  prosperity  of  a  country  by  enabling  it  to  import  the  commo- 
dities for  the  production  of  w^hich  the  soil,  climate,  capital,  and  industry 
of  other  countries  are  best  calculated,  and  to  export  in  payment  those 
articles  for  which  its  own  situation  is  better  adapted. 

"  That  freedom  from  restraint  is  calculated  to  give  the  utmost  exten- 
sion to  foreign  trade,  and  the  best  direction  to  the  capital  and  industry 
of  the  country. 

"  That  the  maxim  of  buying  in  the  cheapest  market,  and  selling  in 
the  dearest,  which  regulates  every  merchant  in  his  individual  dealings, 
is  strictly  applicable  as  the  best  rule  for  the  trade  of  the  whole  nation. 

"  That  a  policy  foiuided  on  those  principles  would  render  the  com- 
merce of  the  world  an  interchange  of  mutual  advantages,  and  diffuse 
an  increase  of  wealth  and  enjoyments  among  the  inhabitants  of  each 
state. 

"  That,  unfortunately,  a  policy  the  very  reverse  of  this  has  been,  and 
is,  more  or  less,  adopted  and  acted  upon  by  the  Government  of  this  and 
of  every  other  country,  each  trying  to  exclude  the  productions  of  other 
countries,  with  the  specious  and  well-meant  design  of  encouraging  its 
own  productions ;  thus  inflicting  on  the  bulk  of  its  subjects,  who  are 
consumers,  the  necessity  of  submitting  to  privations  in  the  quantity  or 
quality  of  commodities  ;  and  thus  rendering  what  ought  to  be  the  source 
of  mutual  benefit  and  of  harmony  among  states,  a  constantly-recurring 
occasion  of  jealousy  and  hostility. 

"  That  the  prevailing  prejudices  in  favour  of  the  protective  or  restric- 
tive system  may  be  traced  to  the  erroneous  supposition  that  every 
importation  of  foreign  commodities  occasions  a  diminution  or  discou- 
rao"ement  of  our  own  production  to  the  same  extent ;  whereas  it  may 
be  clearly  shown,  that  although  the  particular  description  of  production 
which  could  not  stand  against  unrestrained  foreign  competition  Mould 
be  discouraged  ;  yet  as  no  importation  could  be  continued  for  any  length 
of  time  without  a  corresponding  exportation,  direct  or  indirect,  there 
would  be  an  encouragement,  for  the  purpose  of  that  exportation,  of  some 