

*  Mr.  Thomas  Tooke. 


CHAP.  IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  385 

degree  of  success  by  which  it  has  thus  been  foUowed,  uuist  make  it  a 
matter  of  great  regret  that  it  should  contain  anything  capable  of  being  ])cr- 
verted  to  an  opposite  end.  The  author  of  the  petition  would  be  amonfr 
the  first  to  disclaim  the  advocacy  of  any  disingenuous  diplomacy,  fortifying 
iiimself  in  this  disclaimer  by  the  whole  tenor  of  the  document,  and  espe- 
cially by  the  ([ualifying  clause  that  follows  the  objectionable  paragra])h. 
It  is  unfortunate,  however,  that  the  course  of  proceeding  which  it  sug- 
gests has  in  many  instances  been  since  adopted  by  the  English  Govern- 
ment. It  has  been  seen  on  these  occasions  that,  by  the  relaxation  of 
some  restriction,  or  the  abolition  of  some  protective  duty,  a  positives 
good  would  arise  to  the  trade  of  this  country ;  but  it  has  been  seen,  at 
the  same  time,  that  this  reform  would  be  also  beneficial  to  the  commerce 
of  some  other  country  ;  and  it  has  been  thought  desii-able  to  render  the 
relaxation  doubly  profitable  to  ourselves,  by  making  it  the  equivalent 
for  some  corresponding  relaxation  in  favour  of  English  commerce  on  the 
part  of  the  country  that  would  participate  in  the  improvement.  From 
some  cause  or  othei', — probably  the  misconception  of  our  motives,  or  the 
fear  of  being  overreached, — it  has  generally  happened  that  it  has  been 
thought  unwise  to  grant  the  price  we  have  demanded  for  the  alteration, 
and  we,  having  made  our  relaxation  dependent  upon  the  payment  of 
that  price,  no  longer  feel  oiu'selves  at  liberty  to  persevere  to  our  own 
profit  in  a  course  which  we  should  otherwise  be  glad  to  adopt. 

1o  illustrate  this  matter,  let  us  suppose  that  our  Government  shoidd 
become  convinced,  through  the  successful  operations  of  the  sniuc-nler, 
that  the  present  duty  (1838)  of  22^.  Qd.  per  gallon  upon  foreign 
spirits  is  injuriously  high — that  by  reducing  it  to  one-half  tliat  rate  the 
revenue  would  be  benefited,  and  the  foreign  trade  of  the  country  in- 
creased. Such  a  reduction  would  be  manifestly  to  the  advantao-o  of 
France,  and  our  Government  would  be  expected  and  urged  to  demand 
from  that  country  some  equivalent  concession — such,  for  example,  as 
the  admission  of  our  cotton  manufactures  at  moderate  rates  of  duty. 
A  negotiation  to  this  end  being  opened,  the  reduction  on  our  part  may 
be  made  to  depend  upon  our  obtaining  the  concession  demanded  of  the 
French  Government.  If  this  should  be  granted,  there  can  be  no  doubt 
but  that  the  joint  benefit  would  be  greater  than  that  to  be  drawn  from 
the  simple  reduction  of  the  duty  on  foreign  spirits  ;  but  how  many  cir- 
cumstances are  there  which  may  oppose  themselves  to  the  granting  of 
the  concession  demanded  fi-om  our  neighbours?  Their  Government  may 
be  indisposed  to  make  it,  from  imagining  that  the  war  of  the  smu^^ler 
against  our  revenue  would  of  itself  soon  compel  our  legislature  to  make 
the  proposed  reduction  ;  or  the  "  protected"  cotton-manufiicturers  of 
France  nuiy  prove  too  powerfnl,  and  may  influence  the  rejection  of  the 
treaty.  From  some  cause  or  other  the  restriction  a^-ainst  our  manufac- 
tures may  be  continued,  and  in  that  case  the  dignity  of  our  Government 