

2  c  2 


3SS  PROGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [sec.  hi. 

were  not  admitted  for  the  purposes  of  trade.  The  regulation  of  the 
trade  between  our  possessions  in  America  and  the  West  Indies,  and 
other  places  in  the  same  quarters,  was  the  object  of  the  IklLuUi  bill. 
It  permitted  the  importation,  subject  to  specified  duties,  into  certain 
ports,  of  various  articles  from  any  foreign  country  in  America,  or  port 
in  the  AVest  Indies,  either  in  Britisli  vessels,  or  in  vessels  belonging  to 
the  country  or  place  of  shipment,  and  the  goods  so  imported  might  be 
again  exported  to  any  other  colony,  or  to  the  United   Kingdom.     The 

.^^  bill  also  applied  to  the  regulation  of  the  trade  of  our  Western  colo- 
nies. By  its  principal  provision  it  was  made  lawful  to  export,  in  British 
ships,  from  any  colony  to  any  foreign  port  in  Europe  or  Africa,  any 
goods  that  have  been  legally  imported  into  the  colony,  or  which  were  of 
its  own  growth  or  manufacture  :  and  it  was  further  made  lawful  to 
export  certain  enumerated  articles,  in  British  ships,  to  any  such  colony 
fi'om  any  foreign  port  in  Europe  or  Africa.     By  means  of  these  relaxa- 

I  tions,    the    colonists   were   enabled    to    draw  their   supplies  from   any 
country  in  Europe,  Africa,  or  America,  and  to  send   their  produce  in 

I  return  to  such  markets  as  should  hold  out  the  greatest  inducements. 
In  the  year  following  that  in  which  these  Acts  were  passed,  a  notifica- 
tion was  made  to  our  Government  by  Prussia,  that  unless  and  until  some 
relaxation  of  our  system  was  made  in  favour  of  the  ships  of  that  country, 
heavy  retaliatory  duties  would  be  imposed  upon  English  shipping  that 
should  enter  any  Prussian  port.  It  is  surprising,  considering  the  suc- 
cessful stand  made  eight  years  before  by  the  United  States,  that  so  long 
a  time  should  have  been  allowed  to  elapse  before  the  continental  nations 
proceeded  to  force  us  into  the  adoption  of  a  more  liberal .  course,  by 
making  us  in  turn  the  victims  of  our  anti-social  system.  The  adoption  of 
this  natural  policy  on  the  part  of  Prussia  would  assuredly  have  been 
soon  followed  by  a  similar  movement  in  other  countries,  and  our  mer- 
chants and  shipownei's  became  immediately  clamorous  for  the  inter- 
ference of  the  Government  to  obtain  the  removal  of  the  duties  imposed 
by  Prussia.  It  was  under  these  circumstances  that  what  are  called  the 
iteciprocity  Acts  (4  Geo.  IV.,  c.  77,  and  5  Geo.  IV.,  c.  1)  were  passed. 
These  Acts  authorized  His  Majesty,  by  Order  in  Council,  to  permit  the 
importation  and  exportation  of  goods  in  foreign  vessels,  on  payment  of 
the  same  duties  as  were  chargeable  when  imported  in  British  vessels,  in 
favour  of  all  such  countries  as  should  not  levy  discriminating,  duties 
upon  goods  imported  into  those  countries  in  British  vessels ;  and  further 
to  levy  upon  the  vessels  of  such  countries,  when  frequenting  British 
ports,  the  same  tonnage  duties  as  are  chargeable  on  Britisli  vessels.  A 
power  was,  on  the  other  hand,  given  to  the  Crown  by  these  Acts  of  Par- 
liament, to  impose  additional  duties  upon  goods  apd  shipping  against 
any  countries  which  should  levy  higher  duties  in  the  case  of  the  employ- 
ment of  British  vessels  in  the  trade  with  those  countries.     The  conces- 