

"  That  nothing  would  more  tend  to  counteract  the  commercial  hos- 
tility of  foreign  states  than  the  adoption  of  a  more  enlightened  and  more 
conciliatory  policy  on  the  part  of  this  country. 


384  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

"  That  altliouyJi,  as  a  matter  of  mere  diflomacij,  it  may  sometimes  an- 
swer to  hold  out  the  removal  of  jmrticular  prohibitions,  or  high  duties,  as 
depcndiufj  vpon  corresjwndinq  coneessions  hy  other  states  in  our  fawmr,  it 
does  not  follow  that  we  should  maintain  our  restrictions  in  cases  ichere  the 
desired  concessions  on  their  part  cannot  he  obtained.  Oar  restrictions 
ivould  not  be  the  less  prejudicial  to  our  otcn  capital  and  industry,  because 
other  (jovernments  persisted  in  preserving  impolitic  regulations. 

"  That,  upon  tlie  whole,  the  most  liberal  would  prove  to  be  the  most 
politic  course  on  such  occasions. 

"  That  independent  of  the  direct  benefit  to  be  derived  by  this  country 
on  every  occasion  of  such  concession  or  relaxation,  a  great  incidental 
object  would  be  gained  by  the  recognition  of  a  sound  principle  or  stand- 
ard to  which  all  subsequent  arrangements  might  be  referred,  and  by 
the  salutary  influence  which  a  promulgation  of  such  just  views  by  the 
legiskiture,  and  by  the  nation  at  large,  could  not  fail  to  have  on  the 
policy  of  other  states. 

"  That  in  thus  declaring,  as  your  Petitioners  do,  their  conviction  of 
the  impolicy  and  injustice  of  the  restrictive  system,  and  in  desiring  every 
practicable  relaxation  of  it,  they  have  in  view  only  such  parts  of  it  as 
are  not  connected,  or  are  only  subordinately  so,  with  the  public  revenue. 
As  long  as  the  necessity  for  the  present  amount  of  revenue  subsists, 
your  Petitioners  cannot  expect  so  important  a  branch  of  it  as  the  Cus- 
toms to  be  given  up,  nor  to  be  materially  diminished,  unless  some  sub- 
stitute, less  objectionable,  be  suggested.  But  it  is  against  every  re- 
strictive regulation  of  trade  not  essential  to  the  revenue — against  all 
duties  merely  protective  from  foreign  competition — and  against  the 
excess  of  such  duties  as  are  partly  for  the  purpose  of  revenue,  and 
partly  for  that  of  protection, — that  the  prayer  of  the  present  Petition  is 
respectfully  submitted  to  the  wisdom  of  Parliament. 

"  Your  Petitioners  therefore  humbly  pray,  that  your  honourable 
House  will  be  pleased  to  take  the  subject  into  consideration,  and  to 
adopt  such  measures  as  may  be  calculated  to  give  greater  freedom 
to  foreign  commerce,  and  thereby  to  increase  the  resources  of  the 
State.'" 

AV'ith  the  single  exception  of  the  passage  printed  in  italics,  the  fore- 
going petition  is  highly  honourable  to  the  accomplished  economist*  by 
whom  it  is  imderstood  to  have  been  drawn  up,  and  to  the  many  eminent 
merchants  by  whom  it  was  subscribed.  It  may  be  fairly  admitted  that 
the  light  which  it  has  thrown  on,  and  the  attention  which  it  has  been  the 
^means  of  drawing  towards,  the  subject,  have  tended  in  a  powerful 
-  manner  to  bring  about  the  successive  relaxations  which,  since  its  pre- 
sentation to  Parliament,  have  been  made  in  our  conimercial  code.     Tlie 