

*  Since  183S,  the  duty  on  brandy  (having  been  intermediately  raised  to  22s.  lOrf.)  has 
been  (JMarch,  1846,)  reduced  to  15.?.  per  gallon,  and  the  consu^r.ption,  which  in  1838  was 
1,203,43,5  gallons,  yielding  1,3.J3,C14/.  to  the  revenue,  advanced  in  1849  to  2,187,500  gallons, 
producing  a  revenue  of  1,039,463/.,  not  any  equivalent  having  been  required  from  the 
Government  of  France. 


CH.vr.  IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  387 

ships  of  the  two  countries  were  placed  reciprocally  upon  the  same  footing 
in  the  ports  of  England  and  the  United  States,  and  all  discriminating 
duties  cliargoable  upon  the  goods  which  they  conveyed  were  mutually 
repealed.  It  adds  greatly  to  the  value  of  this  concession,  that  it  was] 
made  by  no  disciple  of  free-trade  doctrines,  but  was  forced  by  the  very! 
consequences  of  the  system  itself,  from  a  Government  strenuously' 
oj)posed  to  all  change;  in  the  direction  of  relaxation.  From  that  moment 
it  became  easy  to  foretel  the  abandonment  of  our  long-cherished  system 
of  protection,  since  every  country  that  desired  to  remove  the  disadvan- 
tage under  which  we  had  placed  its  trade  or  shipping,  had  it  thenc(!- 
forward  in  its  power,  by  ado])ting  our  plans  in  the  spirit  of  retahation, 
to  compel  us  to  a  relaxation  of  our  code.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that, 
amidst  all  the  complaints  that  have  been  made  by  British  shipowners, 
of  the  abandonment  of  their  interests  by  their  Government,  it  has  never 
been  attempted  to  question  the  propriety  of  the  American  treaty,  nor  to 
complain  of  its  results. 

With  the  exception  here  noticed,  the  restrictive  system  was  con- 
tinned  in  full  force  until  1822,  when  Mr,  A\'allace,  then  President  of 
the  Board  of  Trade,  introduced  five  bilfs  M'hicli  efltjcted  a  very  im- 
portant alteration.  Of  these  bills  (3  Geo.  IV.,  cc.  41,  42,  43,  44,  and 
46)  the  ^bject  of  the  firjit  was  to  repeal  various  obsolete  statutes  that 
were  enacted  in  relation  to  foreign  commerce  before  the  passing  of  the 
Navigation  Act.  The  secoiid  bill  repealed  various  laws  dating  .from 
the  Navigation  Act  downwards,  including  those  parts  of  the  Navigation 
Act  itself  whicii  enacted  that  goods  of  the  growth,  produce,  or  manu- 
facture of  Asia,  Africa,  or  America,  should  not  be  imported  into  this 
country,  except  in  British  ships  navigated  as  already  described,  and  that 
no  goods  of  foreign  growth,  production,  or  manufacture,  shall  be  brought 
into  England  from  Europe  in  any  foreign  ship,  except  from  the  jdace  of 
their  production,  or  from  the  ports  whence  they  are  usually  brought, 
and  in  ships  belonging  to  the  countries  of  production  or  accustomed 
shi])ment.  The  thijd  bill  was  intituled  "  An  Act  for  the  encourage- 
ment of  navigation  and  commerce,  by  regulating  the  importation,  of 
goods  and  merchandise,  so  far  as  relates  to  the  countries  or  places  from 
whence,  and  the  ships  in  which,  such  importation  shall  be  made."  By 
this  Act,  certain  enumerated  goods  were  allowed  to  be  brought  to  this 
country  from  any  port  in  Europe,  in  ships  belonging  to  the  port  of  ship- 
ment. Ships  belonging  to  Holland,  which,  by  the  Navigation  Act,  had 
been  forbidden  to  enter  English  ports  with  cargo,  were  placed  upon  the 
same  footing  as  the  ships  of  other  countries.  South  American  produce, 
which,  before  the  passing  of  this  Act,  could  be  brought  only  from 
certain  ports  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  were  now  permitted  to  be  imported 
direct  from  the  places  of  growth  in  ships  of  the  country,  the  only  ex- 
ception to  this  concession  being  against  places  to  which  British  ships 