


CHAP.  xi.J  PRUSSIAN  COilMEKCIAL  LEAGUE.  107 


CHAPTER  XI. 


PRUSSIAN  COMMERCIAL  LEAGUE. 


Declared  Object  of  the  League— States  of  which  it  is  composed— Motives  which  have  led 
to  its  adoption— Previous  Negotiations— Jealousy  of  English  Merchants  and  Manufac- 
turers—Effect of  the  League  on  the  Manufacturers  of  Saxony. 

There  is,  perhaps,  no  measure  connected  with  our  external  commerce 
that  has  occasioned  so  much  discussion  in  the  present  day  as  the  Prusso- 
Bavarian  League,  which,  under  the  name  of  the  Zoll  Verein,  has  united 
for  the  purposes  of  trade  many  of  the  otherwise  independent  states 
of  Germany.  The  arrangements  for  perfecting  this  Union  were  in 
progress  during  many  years,  and  it  came  into  practical  operation  at 
the  beginning  of  183jL  Previous  to  that  time,  the  states  of  which  the 
Union  is  composed  did  not  allow  of  the  introduction  of  merchandise 
across  their  respective  frontiers  without  the  payment  of  a  duty ;  and  in 
some  cases,  where  domestic  industry  was  to  be  "  protected,"  the  import- 
ation of  many  articles  was  prohibited.  The  principle  of  the  Commercial 
League  is  to  destroy  all  the  frontier  custom-houses  between  the  leagued 
states ;  to  allow  of  the  freest  intercourse  between  the  subjects  of  all 
the  different  states  composing  the  union  ;  and  thus  to  give  to  the 
inhabitants  of  each  the  fullest  advantage  to  be  derived  from  a  com- 
munity of  interest,  and  from  extending,  in  a  most  important  degree,  their 
market*  for  supply,  and  the  field  for  the  exercise  of  their  industry. 
Duties  on  the  introduction  of  merchandise  from  countries  not  comprised 
within  the  Union  have,  since  the  1st  of  January,  1834,  been  collected 
at  one  uniform  rate  at  custom-houses  established  on  the  exterior  boun- 
daries of  the  frontier  states ;  and  a  principle  for  dividing  the  amount 
of  the  duties  thus  collected  has  been  adopted  between  the  governments, 
without  any  consideration  as  to  which  is  the  country  for  whose  imme- 
diate use  the  importations  are  intended,  or  to  any  circumstance  other 
than  the  proportionate  amount  of  population. 

The  following  table  exhibits  the  names  of  the  different  States  com- 
posing the  league,  the  area  of  each,  the  number  of  its  inhabitants,  and 
the  proportionate  amount  which  each  is  entitled  to  receive  out  of  the 
entire  collections  made  in  the  custom-houses  of  the  frontier  states : — 


408 


TKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  hi. 


Area 

in 

ST.^TES  OF  German 

THE  CONFEDERATION.  Geographical 

Square 

Miles. 


Prussia    and    its    De-) 
pendencies     .     .     .J 

Bavaria 

Saxony    

'W'urtcmburg  . 
Electorate  of  Hesse  . 
Grand  Duchy  of  Hesse 
Thuringia  .... 
Grand  Duchy  of  Baden 
Duchy  of  Isassau  .     . 