

It  has  been  mentioned,  that  the  arrangements  for  establishing  the 
ZoU  Verein  were  in  progress  during  several  years.  Conferences  upon 
this  subject  were    held  in  Darmstadt  as   early  as  1820,   between  the 


410  PKOGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [sec. 


III. 


agents  of  Bavai-ia,  Wurtembuvg,  Baden,  Nassau,  feaxony,  and  some 
other  less  important  states  ;  and  these  conferences  were  renewed  from 
time  to  time,  but  were  finally  broken  off  in  April,  1823.  Four  years 
afterwards,  a  treaty  was  concluded  between  AVurtemburg  and  Bavaria, 
the  same  in  principle  as  that  subsequently  formed  between  Prussia  and 
the  States,  which  comprise  the  existing  Union.  Next  followed  the  treaty 
of  Prussia  with  Hesse,  in  February,  1828  ;  and  in  the  following  Sep- 
tember, while  the  former  country  was  endeavouring  to  make  terms  with 
Wurtemburg  and  Bavaria,  and  to  induce  them  to  adopt  her  tariff — 
points  in  which  she  succeeded — a  third  association,  mnder  the  name  of 
the  Mittel  Verein,  or  middle  association,  was  formed  at  Cassel  between 
Saxony,  Hanover,  Hesse  Cassel,  Brunswick,  Hamburg,  "Weimar,  the 
towns  of  Frankfort  and  Bremen,  and  some  of  the  minor  German  states. 
The  first  and  leading  conditions  of  this  association  will  serve  to  mark  the 
feeling  of  jealousy  with  which  the  designs  of  the  parties  to  the  other  two 
leagues  were  viewed.  It  provided  that,  during  six  years,  none  of  the 
contracting  parties  should  relinquish  their  commercial  alliance,  nor  treat 
with  either  the  Bavarian  or  the  Prussian  league.  Prussia  soon  found 
means,  however,  to  detach  some  of  its  members  from  the  Mittel  Yerein, 
and  although  the  remaining  members  entered  into  a  new  treaty  in  1829, 
by  which  they  bound  themselves  to  continue  in  alliance  until  1840, 
some  of  its  more  important  branches  fell  off  from  it,  and  the  Mittel 
Verein  was  dissolved.  The  negotiations  by  which  these  results  were 
produced  occupied  some  years  in  their  discussion ;  and  it  was  not  until 
the  1st  of  January,  1834,  as  already  stated,  that  the  Zoll  Verein  took 
the  consistent  form  which  it  has  since  maintained. 

Many  of  the  independent  states  in  the  north  of  Germany  have 
hitherto  withstood  the  temptation  offered  by  Prussia  to  bring  them 
within  the  league  :  among  these  are  Hanover,  Brunswick^  Mecklenburg- 
Schwerin,  Oldenburg,  and  the  free  towns  of  Hamburg  and  Bremen. 

The  tariff  of  Prussia  was  more  unfavourable  to  the  admission  of 
English  goods  than  that  of  the  other  states  vdth  whom  she  has  made  this 
league ;  for  which  reason  its  progress  was  watched  with  considerable 
jealousy  by  the  merchants  and  manufacturers  of  this  country,  who  feared, 
with  great  apparent  reason,  that  their  trade  would  suffer  in  every  case 
where  additional  rates  of  duty  were  imposed.  From  the  manner  in 
which  the  trade  accounts  are  kept  at  our  custom-houses,  it  is  not 
possible  to  enter  upon  any  minute  examination  of  this  question,  because 
they  afford  us  no  means  for  separating  the  trade  carried  on  with  the 
countries  that  form  the  league  from  that  maintained  with  other  parts  of 
Germany.  If  we  include,  as  we  therefore  must  do,  the  shipments  of 
British  produce  and  manufactures  made  to  all  Germany,  in  each  of  the 
twenty-three  years  from  1827  to  1849,  it  will  be  seen  that  their  average 
annual  value  has  been  5,475,020/.  while  their  average  annual   value 