


CKAi.  xn.]  CURRENCY.  415 

those  that  have  attended  it  either  before  or  since.  The  peculiar  opera- 
tion of  these  circumstances  was  besides  consideral)ly  exaggerated  by 
the  events  of  the  war,  and  by  the  peculiar  character  given  to  that  war 
during  the  seven  years  that  preceded  the  peace  of  Paris.  For  these 
reasons,  it  is  difficult  to  make  the  condition  of  the  currency,  as  marked 
by  the  price  of  gold  and  the  rate  of  the  foreign  exchanges  at  that  time, 
the  sole  test  of  the  soundness  of  the  practice  pursued  by  those  who 
managed  and  controlled  the  issue  of  cur  paper  currency.  During  the 
greater  part  of  the  period  alluded  to,  more  obstacles  were  opposed  to  the 
prosecution  of  our  foreign  trade  than  were  ever  at  any  other  time  put  in 
action.  Our  goods  were  excluded  from  almost  every  port  on  the  continent 
of  Europe,  and  the  difficulties  that  attended  the  importation  of  goods 
abroad  were  such  as  materially  to  enhance  the  cost  of  nearly  every 
article  brought  here  for  consumption.  At  the  same  time,  our  demand  for 
some  kinds  of  foreign  productions  was  increased  by  the  purchases  of  war- 
like stores  on  the  part  of  Government,  and  which  purchases  were  neces- 
sarily made  without  reference  to  their  prices.  As  an  instance  of  this, 
hemp  may  be  mentioned.  In  1793,  just  before  the  breaking  out  of  the 
war,  the  price  had  been  221  per  ton  ;  it  advanced  progi-essively  between 
that  time  and  the  peace  of  Amiens  to  86/.  per  ton,  but  in  1802  fell  to 
32/.  per  ton.  On  the  renewal  of  hostilities  the  price  again  advanced, 
and  in  1808  and  1809  reached  118/.  per  ton.  In  1815,  after  the  second 
overthrow  of  Napoleon,  the  price  fell  to  34/.,  and  it  has  since  gone  con- 
siderably below  that  rate.  On  the  other  hand,  all  those  descriptions  of 
goods  which  were  produced  by  us,  or  which  necessarily  came  here  from 
our  colonies  or  elsewhere,  in  quantities  beyond  our  own  wants,  were 
greatly  depressed  in  price.  At  the  same  time,  the  prices  on  the  Con- 
tinent of  the  goods  so  abundant,  and  so  depressed  in  our  markets,  were 
exorbitantly  high.  Gold  and  silver  were  the  only  articles  of  merchan- 
dise which  could  be  safely  taken  in  exchange  for  the  goods  of  which  we 
were  purchasers  from  the  Continent,  and  the  vessels  in  which  those  were 
brought  returned  from  our  ports  in  ballast,  while  the  prices  of  colonial 
produce  and  British  manufactured  goods  were  such  in  the  respective 
markets  as  would  have  rendered  their  introduction  into  continental 
])orts  profitable  to  a  most  exaggerated  degree.  These  circumstances, 
acting  in  conjunction  with  the  reasonable,  perhaps  unavoidable,  ten- 
dency of  the  Bank  Restriction  Act,  under  which  the  directors  of  that 
establishment  were  relieved  from  the  dangers  that  would  otherwise 
have  attended  any  departure  from  prudence  in  the  management  of  its 
issues,  caused  such  an  enhancement  of  the  prices  of  the  precious  metals, 
when  measured  by  the  paper  currency,  as  forced  all  our  metallic  money 
out  of  circulation.  In  times  of  war,  when  armies  are  to  be  kept  in 
motion,  gold  especially  is  greatly  in  requisition.  The  difference  in 
value  of  Bank  of  England  notes  and  gold,  estimated  at  the  Mint  price 