


CHAP,  xii.]  CURRENCY.  413 


CHAPTER  XII. 

CURRENCY. 

Bullion  Committee  of  1810 — Reasons  suggested  for  Disagreement  on  the  subject  of  Cur- 
rency between  the  "Economists"  and  the  "Practical  Men" — High  Prices  of  Gold 
ISOD-lSl") — Issues  of  Paper  Money  to  facilitate  Financial  Operations  of  Government^ 
Peel's  Act — Panic  of  1823— Formation  of  branches  by  Bank  of  England — Establishment 
of  Joint  Stock  Banks — Number  established,  1826-1836 — Advantages  of  having  only  one 
Bank  of  Issue — National  Bank — Influence  of  Currency  on  Prices — Plan  for  Estimating 
Rise  and  Fall  of  Prices — Effects  of  abundant  or  deficient  Harvests  upon  Currency  and 
Prices — Table  of  Notes  in  Circulation,  of  Bullion  held  by  the  Bank,  of  Exchanges  with 
Hamburg  and  Paris,  and  of  Comparative  Prices  of  Wlieat  and  Merchandise  generally,  in 
each  Month,  1833-1837. 

No  subject  of  public  and  general  interest  has,  during  the  last  thirty 
years,  been  more  frequently  or  earnestly  debated  and  examined  in  this 
country,  than  that  which  relates  to  our  system,  or  rather  our  practice — 
for  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  we  have  pursued  any  steady  system — as 
regards  currency  and  the  operations  of  banking.  Since  the  appoint- 
ment, in  1810,  of  the  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  which  has 
been  so  celebrated  as  Tlie  Bidliou  Committee,  this  subject  has  repeatedly 
forced  itself  upon  the  attention  of  the  mercantile  part  of  the  })ublic  and 
of  the  Government,  and  at  each  recurring  'period  when  the  distress 
attendant  upon  the  derangement  of  money  operations  has  been  expe- 
rienced, the  whole  subject  has  been  submitted  to  so  much  examination, 
and  has  occasioned  such  keen  controversy  between  public  economists 
on  the  one  hand,  and  what  are  called  practical  men  on  the  other  hand, 
that  it  is  surprising  we  have  not  long  since  arrived  at  conclusions 
respecting  it  which  can  be  recognised  as  correct  by  all  parties,  and 
which  would  lead  to  the  adoption  of  principles  and  practice  by  means  of 
which  the  ruinous  alternations  now  constantly  recurring  would  be  ren- 
dered impossible.  The  subject  is  certainly  involved  in  difficulty,  but 
not,  assuredly,  to  such  a  degree  as  should  render  its  solution  impossible. 
Why  then,  it  will  be  asked,  is  the  public  to  this  moment  in  so  much 
doubt  and  perplexity  concerning  it,  and  why  are  our  commercial  men 
so  ill-informed  upon  the  subject  as  to  be  continually  liable  to  mistake 
appearances  which,  if  understood  aright,  should  guide  them  as  to  the 
propriety  of  extending  or  contracting  their  undertakings  ?     "Where  so 


414  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iti. 

iiiHii}'  and  such  high  authorities  are  found  to  disagree,  it  might  perhaps 
be  considered  bold  to  offer  an  opinion  as  to  which  of  the  parties  in  the 
controversy  is  right.  It  may  be  thought  still  more  presuni})tuous  to 
hazard  the  suggestiou  that  both  may  be  in  some  degree  wrong,  and  to 
remark  that  our  "  practical  men "  have  erred  because  they  reasoned 
from  partial  and  insutficient  promises,  and  sought  for  the  solution  of  a 
general  question  in  the  particidar  circumstances  that  passed  under  their 
own  limited  observation ;  while  the  theorists,  or,  as  it  has  become  the 
fashion  to  call  them,  the  "  bullionists,"  have  erred  because  they  have 
made  little  or  no  allowance  for  disturbing  influences,  the  operation  of 
which  has  been  palpable  to  every  man  actually  engaged  in  commercial 
pursuits.  By  this  means  the  "  practical  men  "  have  been  confirmed  in 
their  total  disbelief  of  the  doctrines  put  forth  by  the  "  bullionists,"  and 
these,  on  the  other  hand,  seeing  that  what  they  hold  to  be  the  most 
incontrovertible  truths  are  set  at  nought  by  their  opponents,  may  liave 
been  rendered  unwilling  to  enter  anew  upon  their  inquiries,  with  the 
view  of  determining  the  modes  and  degree  in  which  their  abstract 
principles  are  liable  to  disturbance  through  the  circumstances  insisted 
on — perhaps  too  urgently — by  their  opponents.  It  would  be  out  of 
place  in  this  work,  if  even  the  author  were  competent  to  the  task,  to 
attempt  to  settle  this  much-controverted  question :  the  foregoing  re- 
marks seem  necessary,  however,  in  order  to  account  in  some  degree  for 
the  fact,  that  on  a  point  which  involves  such  important  consequences, 
and  where,  for  want  of  its  being  settled,  commercial  ccmimunities  have 
been  periodically  visited  with  wide-spreading  ruin,  so  little  advance  has 
hitherto  been  made  towards  reducing  the  subject  of  currency  to  scientific 
rules  and  principles.  On  each  occasion,  when  the  money-market  has 
been  subjected  to  one  of  these  paroxysms,  clever  men  have  put  them- 
selves forward  to  explain  the  causes,  and  to  point  out  how  the  evil  may 
in  future  be  avoided  ;  and  to  those  who  will  be  at  the  pains  to  examine 
the  arguments  and  assertions  used  on  both  sides  of  the  controversy,  it 
must  be  curious  to  observe  how  complete  an  identity  of  opinion  and 
almost  of  expression  there  is  between  the  writers  who  have  advocated 
the  same  side  of  the  question  at  different  periods,  so  that  the  pamphlets 
put  forth  in  1811  or  in  1826  would  be  found  to  embody  all  the  principal 
arguments,  and  to  have  reference  to  the  same  set  of  circumstances,  as 
formed  the  staple  of  the  pamphlets  written  in  1837.  This  affords,  at 
least,  prima  facie  evidence  that  the  subject  has  been  exhausted  as  far 
as  reasoning  is  applicable,  and  that  our  want  of  agreement  in  regard  to 
it  may  be  the  effect  of  prejudice,  which  withholds  either  party  from 
giving  due  weight  to  the  facts  and  arguments  adduced  by  its  opponents. 
The  measure  adopted  in  1797  of  restricting  thx?  Bank  of  England 
from  paying  its  notes  in  specie,  while  it  continued  in  oj)eration,  placed 
the  currency  of  this  country  under  circumstances  wholly  dissimilar  to 