


CHAP,  xii.]  CURRENCY.  417 

aware  of  the  approach  of  the  time  at  which  the  restriction  which  had 
heen  so  profitable  should  cease,  the  Directors  of  that  establishment 
made  a  large  provision  of  bullion,  which,  as  it  could  not  be  demanded 
in  payment  for  their  notes,  remained  in  their  coffers  uninfluenced  by 
the  rate  of  foreign  exchanges,  or  the  market  price  of  gold.  Had  this 
provision  been  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  diminution  of  their 
issues,  the  Directors  might  safely  have  pursued  the  course  which  they 
afterwards  unsuccessfully  adopted  in  anticipation  of  the  termination 
of  their  Restriction  Act ;  but  no  such  prudence  was  allowed  to  in- 
fluence their  conduct,  and  when  in  April  and  September,  1817,  notices 
were  given  to  pay  off  in  specie,  first  the  notes  in  circulation  dated  prior 
to  1816,  and  afterwards  those  issued  before  1817,  the  amount  of  the 
circulation  was  unusually  large,  and  the  price  of  gold  fully  3  per  cent, 
above  that  of  bank-notes.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  gold  was 
withdrawn  from  the  Bank  coffers,  so  that  in  August,  1819,  they  were 
nearly  exhausted,  and  it  was  necessary  to  hurry  through  Parliament  an 
Act  restricting  the  Directors  from  acting  any  further  in  conformity  with 
the  notices  they  had  given. 

In  the  same  year  (1819),  the  Act,  commonly  known  as  Mr.  Peel's 
Act,  was  passed,  which  provided  for  the  gradual  resumption  of  specie 
payments.  Under  the  provisions  of  this  law,  the  Bank  restriction  was 
continued  until  February,  1820,  from  which  time  till  October  in  the 
same  year,  the  public  was  entitled  to  demand  payment  of  notes  in 
l)ullion  at  the  rate  of  4/.  Is.  per  ounce.  From  October,  1820,  to  May, 
1821,  payment  might  be  demanded  in  bullion  at  the  rate  of  3/.  19s.  6d. 
per  ounce  ;  from  May,  1821,  to  May,  1823,  huUion  might  be  demanded 
at  the  Mint  price  of  3/.  17^.  \0^d.  per  ounce;  and  from  the  last-men- 
tioned date,  the  current  gold  coin  of  the  realm  might  be  demanded. 
The  provisions  of  this  Act,  as  regarded  the  periods  named,  were  anti- 
cipated, and  on  the  1st  of  May,  1821,  the  Bank  had  placed  itself  in  the 
position  to  meet  all  of  its  outstanding  engagements  that  should  be 
demanded  in  specie. 

Perhaps  there  never  was  in  the  whole  history  of  legislature  in  this 
country  any  measure  of  internal  policy  which  has  occasioned  such  warm 
and  long-continued  controversy  as  this  Act  for  the  resumption  of  specie 
payments.  Although  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  has  elapsed 
since  it  came  into  full  operation,  the  measure  is  still  assailed  with  viru- 
lence by  many  who  attribute  to  it  every  cloud  which  during  all  that 
time  has  obscured  the  commercial  horizon,  and  hitherto  scarcely  any 
session  has  been  suffered  to  pass  without  some  attempt  having  been 
made  to  induce  the  legislature  to  consent  to  its  repeal.  Mr.  Peel's  Bill 
in  reality  did  nothing  more  than  establish  certain  steps  or  gi'adations 
through  which  we  should  pass  in  order  to  arrive  at  that  which  had 
always  been  contemplated  and  declared  to  be  the  settled  purpose  of  the 