


CHAP.  xiT.]  CURRENCY.  419 

])er  cent.,  and  during  all  that  time  we  were  acting  witli  a  currency 
l)ased  upon  gold  at  the  same  standard.  Will  it  be  contended  that  if, 
during  the  same  period  our  currency  had  consisted  of  inconvertible 
paper  promises,  a  like  iluctuation  in  prices  would  liave  been  impossible  V 
Is  it  not,  on  the  contrary,  probable  that  the  fluctuation  would  iiave  been 
much  more  violent?  It  is  precisely  when  prices  are  low  that  the 
advocates  of  extended  issues  of  paper  money  are  the  most  clamorous, 
their  single  object  being  to  enhance  the  nominal  value  of  their  goods. 
They  do  not,  or  will  not  see,  that  it  is  only  during  the  period  in  which 
the  advance  is  going  forward  they  can  experience  the  advantages  which 
they  anticipate.  When  the  rise  shall  have  fully  taken  place,  and  prices 
shall  have  adjusted  themselves,  there  will  no  longer  be  any  benefit ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  will  be  considerable  and  constant  danger 
of  a  fall,  which  may  be  occasioned  by  various  circumstances  that  would 
be  inoperative  under  a  different  condition  of  things.  In  truth  there  is 
no  safety  from  commercial  disasters,  in  other  words,  there  can  be  no 
permanent  prosperity  for  the  trading  and  producing  classes,  but  in  low 
and  moderate,  and  therefore,  steady  prices. 

It  is  generally  held  that  the  commercial  crisis  or  "  panic,"  as  it 
is  usually  called,  which  occurred  towards  the  end  of  1825,  was  brought 
on  by  the  conjoint  operations  of  the  Government  and  the  Bank  of  Eng- 
land. It  was  the  object  of  the  Government,  when  peace  was  fully 
established,  to  make  money  abundant,  and  consequently  cheap,  in  order 
to  carry  through  various  arrangements  whereby  the  permanent  charge 
upon  the  public  income  might  be  lessened.  By  the  means  adopted  to 
this  end,  the  market  rate  of  interest  was  so  far  reduced  at  the  beginning 
of  1822,  that  the  5  per  cent.  Annuities  were  raised  to  6  or  8  per  cent, 
above  par,  under  which  circumstances  more  than  140,000,000/.  of  that 
stock  was  converted  into  an  annuity  at  4  per  cent.,  on  terms  by  which 
the  annual  charge  to  the  public  was  reduced  by  1,122,000/.  In  1824 
the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  was  enabled  to  effect  a  further  saving 
of  380,000/.  per  annum,  by  the  conversion  of  76,000,000/.  of  4  per  cent, 
into  3^  per  cent.  Annuities. 

If  the  fall  in  the  rate  of  interest  by  which  the  Minister  was  enabled 
to  effect  those  operations  had  occurred  through  natural  causes,  there 
could  be  no  question  as  to  the  propriety  of  the  step,  but  brought  about 
as  it  was  by  means  of  the  unnatural  and  forced  extension  of  bank 
issues,  it  is  hardly  to  be  doubted  that  the  mischief  resulting  from  that 
extension  has  been  productive  of  more  loss  to  various  classes  of  the 
community  than  can  have  been  compensated  to  the  nation  at  large  by 
the  saving.  With  a  reckless  disregard  of  consequences  to  a  degi*ee 
which  can  be  attributed  only  to  want  of  knowledge,  the  Directors 
of  the  Bank  of  England  forced  their  paper  into  circulation,  by  proffer- 
ing facilities  to  all  classes  of  the  community.    Money  was  lent  uj)on  the 