


412  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  in. 

probable  there  are  many  among  the  labouring  artisans  who  rarely,  if 
ever,  taste  animal  food.  The  quantity  of  cotton  hosiery  made  in  Saxony 
has  increased  greatly  of  late  years,  and  from  its  cheapness  has  not  only 
secured  the  monopoly  of  the  markets  afforded  throughout  the  Union, 
but  has  also  been  shipped  largely  to  the  United  States,  to  the  exclusion 
so  far  of  the  goods  made  at  Nottingham.  It  may  be  stated,  on  the 
respectable  authority  already  quoted,  that  cotton  gloves  are  furnished 
by  the  Saxon  manufticturers  as  low  as  six  groschen  or  i)(L  sterling  per 
dozen  pairs ;  stockings,  at  one  dollar  or  3*'.  per  dozen  pairs  ;  and  night- 
caps, at  eight  groschen  or  Is.  per  dozen.  Stout  cotton  caps,  which  are 
worn  by  the  carmen  and  common  people  in  that  part  of  Germany, 
having  stripes  in  six  different  colours  upon  a  black  ground,  cost  12 
groschen  per  dozen,  or  Ihd.  sterling  each. 

These  low  prices  are  not  the  result  of  the  same  cause  which  has 
gradually  reduced  the  cost  of  production  in  this  country.  Hitherto  the 
machinery  used  in  Saxony  has  been  of  the  commonest  sort,  so  that  the 
cheapness  of  the  manufactured  goods  has  been  owing  to  the  low  rate  of 
wages,  a  rate  which  compels  the  artisans  to  labour  long  and  diligently 
in  order  to  ensure  for  their  families  the  scantiest  supply  of  the  most 
common  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  The  capital  of  the  English  manufac- 
turer, which  empowers  him  to  employ  the  most  perfect  machinery,  joined 
to  his  greater  experience,  have  hitherto  enabled  him  to  compete  suc- 
cessfully in  most  branches  of  skilled  labour ;  but  these  are  advantages 
which  cannot  be  long  retained  in  competition  with  greatly  reduced 
wages.  The  profits  whicl;  the  Saxon  manufacturers  are  thence  enabled 
to  realize,  will  probably  lead  to  the  introduction  of  improvements  that 
will  place  our  dearer  processes  at  a  still  greater  disadvantage  ;  and  as 
it  is  anything  but  desirable  that  we  should  retain  our  present  relative 
position  through  the  increasing  hardships  of  our  operative  weavers,  there 
remained  but  one  course  open  to  us  in  order  to  avert  the  evil — that 
of  still  further  liberalizing  our  commercial  system,  and  especially  of 
lessening  the  cost  of  the  prime  necessaries  of  life,  by  abolishing  all 
restrictions  upon  the  importation  of  food. 

The  want  of  capital,  which  has  hitherto  been  the  chief  obstacle  to  the 
still  greater  extension  of  the  cotton  manufacture  in  Saxony,  would  in 
time  be  remedied  by  the  successful  operation  of  the  existing  establish- 
ments ;  but  the  manufacturers  in  that  country,  unwilling  to  wait-for  so 
gradual  a  development  of  their  resources,  _have  had  recourse  to  the 
expedient  of  establishing  joint-stock  companies.  The  total  capital  of 
associations  of  this  character  that  have  been  formed,  and  which  have 
proceeded  to  the  accomplishment  of  their  various  objects,  amounted  in 
October,  1837,  to  nearly  thirteen  millions  of  dollars^  about  two  millions 
sterling,  a  large  sum  for  that  country,  and  the  greater  part  of  which  is 
furnished  by  the  bankers  and  other  capitalists  of  Leipzig. 