

2  E  2 


420  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

mortgage  of  land  and  upon  the  deposit  of  stock,  in  addition  to  liberal 
advances  to  commercial  men,  through  the  more  legitimate  channels  of 
issue  ;  and  the  Directors,  at  the  same  time,  permanently  crippled  their 
means  of  controlling  the  currency  hy  investing  a  large  proportion  of 
their  issues  in  the  purchase  of  an  annuity  for  a  term  of  years,  known  as 
the  Dead  Weight  Annuity,  an  investment  which  must  always  be  least 
marketable  at  those  periods  when  it  would  be  most  desirable  that  the 
Bank  should  have  all  its  resources  at  command.  By  these  means 
speculation  was  excited,  the  business  transactions  of  the  country  were 
multiplied  unnaturally,  and  by  the  general  rise  of  prices  thus  occa- 
sioned, our  markets  became  overstocked  with  foreign  produce,  while 
the  export  trade  was  checked ;  the  quantity  of  mercantile  paper  thrown 
into  circulation  aggravated  the  evil. 

Between  the  beginning  of  1822,  and  the  month  of  April,  1825,  the 
Bank  had  increased  its  circulation  to  the  extent  of  four  millions.  At 
the  latter  date  it  was  possessed  of  bullion  and  coin  to  the  value  of  ten 
millions,  but  from  that  period  to  the  following  November,  the  drain 
upon  its  coffers  w'as  so  rapid  that  no  more  than  1,300,000/.  of  that 
amount  remained.  Alarmed  at  this  unequivocal  indication,  the  Direc- 
tors suddenly  diminished  the  circulation  to  the  extent  of  3,500,000/. :  a 
general  feeling  of  distrust  then  took  the  place  of  the  undue  confidence 
which  had  previously  pervaded  the  whole  country ;  the  notes  of  country 
bankers  were  returned  upon  them  to  such  a  degree  that  great  numbers 
failed ;  a  run  upon  several  London  bankers  was  followed  by  the  stop- 
page of  some  of  those  establishments ;  commercial  distress  of  the  most 
frightful  description  ensued  ;  and  such  w^as  the  want  of  confidence,  that 
the  wealthiest  merchants  were  driven  to  make  heavy  sacrifices  of  pro- 
perty in  order  to  provide  for  their  immediate  engagements.  To  use  a 
memorable  expression  of  Mr.  Iluskisson,  "  the  country  was  within  twenty- 
four  hours  of  a  state  of  barter."  In  this  state  of  things  there  was  no 
longer  any  evil  to  be  apprehended  from  increasing  the  paper  circulation, 
and  the  Bank  Directors  came  forward  with  promptitude  and  liberality 
to  the  assistance  of  the  trading  classes,  by  lending  money  upon  almost 
every  description  of  property  that  could  be  offered,  and  by  discounting 
bills  without  adhering  to  those  rules  by  which  they  have  ordinarily 
been  guided  in  conducting  this  part  of  their  business.  Between  the 
3rd  of  November  and  the  29th  of  December,  the  amount  of  mercantile 
bills  under  discount  at  the  Bank  of  England  was  increased  from  four 
millions  to  fifteen  millions ;  the  number  of  bills  discounted  on  one  par- 
ticular dav  having  been  four  thousand  two  hundred.  The  efforts  thus 
made  were  assisted  by  a  circumstance  purely  accidental.  A  box  con- 
taining one-pound  notes,  which  had  been  overlooked  at  the  time  when 
the  Bank  called  in  all  its  notes  under  five  poiinds,  was  discovered  at  the 
lucky  moment,  and  in  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Ilarman,  one  of  the  Directors 