

•2  E 


418  rilOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

legislature,  and  at  what  in  fact  would  have  become  law  by  the  simple 
cfHux  of  the  time  fixed  for  the  purpose  in  the  Bank  Restriction  Acts. 

The  most  fitting  and  best  time  for  recurring  to  a  legitimate  and 
wholesome  condition  of  the  currency  was,  as  we  have  seen,  suffered  to 
go  by  unimproved  ;  but  it  is  not  therefore  to  be  contended  that  our 
medium  of  exchange  was  for  ever  after  to  be  inconvertible  into  that  which 
it  professed  to  represent:  this  is  a  proposition  which  no  one  who  is  en- 
titled to  be  heard  with  attention  upon  this  subject  ever  ventured  to  put 
forth.  It  has  alw^ays  been  acknowledged,  on  all  hands,  that  at  some 
period  or  other  it  would  be  proper  to  employ  a  metallic  currency,  or 
that  which  is  equivalent  to  it,  paper  convertible  into  coin  or  bullion,  at 
the  pleasure  of  the  holder.  The  question  of  the  return  to  cash  pay- 
ments w^as  always  considered  to  be  one  of  time.  Whether,  now  that 
the  remedy  has  been  applied,  and  that,  choosing  to  attribute  to  its 
operation,  every  sinister  effect  that  has  since  attended  our  commercial 
progress,  the  advocates  who  w^ould  have  continued  the  restriction,  are 
disposed  to  adopt  the  use  of  inconvertible  paper  as  a  permanent  mea- 
sure, is  what  few  among  those  advocates  would  be  willing  to  avow, 
although  it  is  difficult  upon  any  other  ground  to  reconcile  their  subse- 
quent proceedings  with  common  sense.  Why  this,  the  richest  country 
in  the  world,  should  be  unable  to  effect  that  simplicity,  in  regard  to  its 
currency,  which  is  found  to  be  of  easy  attainment  by  the  poorest  states, 
is  an  enigma  very  difficult  of  solution.  Nothing  is  more  common  than 
to  hear  it  asserted  by  the  advocates  for  an  inconvertible  currency,  that 
if  the  statesmen  and  economists,  by  whom  the  return  to  cash  payments 
was  advocated  in  1819,  could  have  foreseen  the  consequences  which 
are  attributed — whether  justly  or  not,  is  the  question — to  that  measure, 
they  would  have  forborne  to  give  to  it  the  sanction  of  their  approval. 
In  particular,  Mr.  David  Ricardo  has  been  repeatedly  held  up  as 
having  recanted  the  opinion  expressed  by  him,  that  the  fall  in  prices  to 
be  brought  about  by  returning  to  a  metallic  standard  would  be  no  more 
than  the  difference  between  the  market  and  the  Mint  prices  of  gold, 
which  at  the  passing  of  Mr.  Peel's  Bill  did  not  exceed  4  per  cent. 
There  is,  in  truth,  no  w^arrant  whatever  for  this  assertion,  which,  like 
many  other  figments,  has  been  repeated  until  it  has  acquired  the 
authority  of  truth.  Mr.  Ricardo  never  did  assert,  and  never  could  have 
asserted,  that  when  we  should  return  to  specie  payments,  prices  would 
never  fall  more  than  4  per  cent,  below  their  level  at  the  time  the  bill 
was  under  discussion.  It  would  have  been  as  reasonable  to  affinn,  that 
if,  instead  of  returning  to  the  old  standard  price  of  gold,  31.  lis.  lO^d. 
per  ounce,  the  legislature  had  fixed  the  standard  at  the  actual  market 
price  of  the  time,  no  fluctuation  in  prices  would  ever  have  occurred  in 
future.  Between  June,  1833,  and  August,  1836,"  there  was  a  progres- 
sive rise  in  the  market  value  of  goods,  amounting,  in  the  whole,  to  35 