

*  Mr,  Thomas  Tooke. 


428  PKOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

shown,  grain,  which  in  respect  of  the  amount  of  money  involved  in 
buying  and  selling  it,  is  perhaps  of  more  importance  than  all  the  other 
articles  that  together  form  the  sum  of  our  commercial  dealings,  was  as 
constantly  and  regularly  falling  in  price.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the 
fact  being  as  here  stated ;  but  there  cannot,  on  the  other  hand,  be  any 
doubt  that  this  fall  in  the  price  of  the  principal  article  of  food  was  the 
effect  of  natural  causes,  such  as  have  already  been  adverted  to  above, 
and  in  a  former  section  of  this  work ;  and  which  causes  could  not  fail 
to  have  })roduced  their  natural  effect  in  driving  down  the  price,  unless 
checked  by  such  an  issue  of  paper  money  as  could  only  have  been  kept 
in  circulation  under  a  system  of  restriction  from  specie  payments.  The 
objection  raised  by  the  accomplished  author  of  the  History  of  Prices  is 
no  doubt  true  in  the  long  run,  where  no  bank  restriction  is  allowed  to 
interfere.  It  is  no  doubt  true  that,  in  the  end,  the  prices  of  all  com- 
modities are  governed  by  the  wants  and  capabilities  of  the  consumers, 
taken  in  conjunction  with  the  cost  of  production.  But  this  is  not  the 
question  at  issue.  That  question  is,  whether,  as  a  consequence — a 
natural  and  almost  a  necessary  consequence — of  any  excessive  amount 
of  currency,  a  speculative  demand  for  goods  is  not  created,  one  of  the 
evils  attendant  upon  which  is,  that  it  cannot  be  sustained,  but  when 
the  immediate  cause  through  which  it  was  produced  is  withdrawn,  gives 
place  to  a  revulsion  ?  Owing  to  the  stimulus  given  to  production,  and 
the  check  offered  to  consumption — both  of  which  are  necessary  con- 
sequences of  high  prices — that  revulsion,  when  it  arrives,  finds  us  with 
glutted  markets,  and  with  a  mass  of  commercial  engagements  greater 
than  the  ordinary  wants  of  trade  should  occasion  :  the  consequences 
of  which  state  of  things  it  cannot  be  necessary  to  describe.  The  fact 
adduced,  that  while  the  prices  of  imported  articles  have  risen,  grain 
became  cheaper  in  a  greater  ratio,  may  be  considered,  under  a  restric- 
tive system  of  corn-laws,  as  one  cause  of  that  general  enhancement  of 
prices.  Owing  to  the  custom  which  prevails  in  our  grain  markets  of 
making  sales  at  a  short  period  of  credit,  a  smaller  sum  of  currency  is 
needed  for  carrying  on  the  trade  in  corn  than  would  be  required  for  the 
purchase  and  sale  of  an  equal  value  of  foreign  goods,  where  longer 
credits  are  usually  given.  The  amount  of  money  engaged  in  the  corn- 
trade  must,  however,  be  exceedingly  great,  so  that  any  material  fall  in 
the  price  of  corn  must  have  an  effect  upon  the  currency  equivalent  to 
an  increased  emission  of  bank-notes.*  With  our  foreign  corn  trade 
free,  this  consequence  would  not  ha])pen,   because  we  should  be  pre- 