

being  advanced  to  130s.,  would  produce 4,550 

A  deficiency  of  four-tenths,  leaving  600  quarters  for  sale  at  190s.,  would 

produce 5,700 

A  deficiency  of  one-half  would  raise   the  price  to  275s.,  at  which  rate  500 
quarters  would  sell  for 6,875 

No  means  have  hitlierto  been  devised  for  ascertaining  the  actual  pro- 
duce of  com  in  the  country,  and  it  is  superfluous  to  say  that  the  above 
computation  can  be  at  the  best  only  a  reasonable  estimate.  Mr.  Tooke 
is  of  opinion  that  it  is  not  very  wide  of  the  truth,  "  from  observations  of 
the  repeated  occurrence  of  the  fact,  that  the  price  of  corn  in  this  country 
has  risen  from  100  to  200  per  cent,  and  upwards,  when  the  utmost  com- 
puted deficiency  of  the  crops  has  not  been  more  than  between  one-sixth 
and  one-third  of  an  average."  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  seen,  through 
the  consecutive  occurrence  of  three  favourable  harvests,  in  1833,  1834, 


430  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX,  [sec.  in. 

and  1835,  that  the  price  of  wheat  has  fallen  from  55^.  5c?.  to  3G*-.  0</. 
per  quarter,  although,  during  the  whole  of  those  years  every  branch  of 
industry  throughout  the  country  was  in  full  activity,  and  all  classes  of 
the  people  were  in  full  enjoyment  of  the  means  of  living.  It  is  to  the 
circumstances  that  ailect  the  labourers  and  artisans  of  the  country  that 
we  must  look  for  the  causes  that  influence  the  gi*eater  or  less  consump- 
tion of  corn.  The  classes  who  are  more  at  ease  in  their  circumstances 
subsist  in  a  far  greater  degi'ee  upon  more  costly  kinds  of  food,  and  do 
not  consume  more  bread  than  ordinary,  in  years  of  abundance.  This 
may  not  be  the  case  with  those  who  are  in  less  comfortable  circum- 
stances ;  but  with  regard  to  them,  even,  it  is  certain  that,  when  bread  is 
cheap,  they  do  not  increase  their  use  of  it  so  as  to  absorb  a  proportion 
of  their  earnings  equal  to  that  which  they  so  expend  in  scarce  or  ordi- 
nary seasons,  but  employ  a  greater  part  of  their  wages  in  the  purchase 
of  comforts  ;  and  this  consideration  renders  it  clear  why,  as  above 
stated,  so  large  an  amount  of  money  is  not  paid  for  an  increased  as  is 
paid  for  a  diminished  supply  of  this  first  necessary  of  life  ;  and  also 
why,  in  a  time  of  scarcity,  the  mass  of  the  town  population  being  driven 
towards  the  more  exclusive  use  of  bread — which  will  still  be  the  cheapest 
food  upon  which  they  will  subsist — the  demand  for  other  articles  of 
consumption  and  convenience  will  be  lessened,  and  their  prices  con- 
sequently diminished. 

AMierevcr  the  system  of  virtually  excluding  the  farming  produce  of 
other  countries  is  suffered  to  exist,  the  occurrence  of  a  harvest  of  more 
than  average  productiveness,  should  act  as  the  signal  to  those  who  have 
the  control  of  the  curreocy  to  be  more  particularly  on  their  guard 
against  the  consequences  of  redundancy,  which  should  be  prevented  by 
a  timely  lessening  of  the  sum  in  circulation.  This  doctrine  may  not 
be  very  palatable  to  those  who,  depending  upon  the  produce  of  the  soil, 
may  see,  as  its  practical  effect,  only  a  further  depression  in  the  price  of 
grain.  On  every  occasion  that  has  arisen  since  the  return  of  the  Bank  to 
specie  payments,  when  an  abundant  harvest  has  caused  great  depression 
in  the  prices  of  com,  it  has  been  the  fashion  to  attribute  the  consequent 
"  agi'icultural  distress "  to  a  deficiency  of  circulating  money,  and  a 
clamour  has  been  raised  against  the  law  which  prevents  the  issue  in 
England  of  notes  under  5/.  If,  on  such  occasions,  the  wish  of  these 
advocates  for  a  greater  abundance  of  paper  money  had  been  gratified, 
there  is  but  little  ground  for  believing  that  they  would  have  really  been 
benefited  as  they  desired  to  be,  at  the  expense  of  the  remaining  classes 
of  the  community,  because  the  same  system  which  tended  to  raise 
the  price  of  what  they  had  to  sell  would  equally  have  raised  the 
prices  of  all  they  required  to  buy ;  and  as  the  enhancement  of  prices 
would  in  all  cases  be  principally  the  effect  of  speculative  demand,  there 
is  reason  for  believing  that  speculators  would  not  choose,  as  an  object 