


126  niOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

feet.     With  regard  to  this  objection,  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  only  by  a 
practical  acquaintance  with  all  the  circumstances  by  which  markets  are 
temporarily  governed,  that  a  proper  allowance  can  be  made  for  every 
disturbing  cause.     With  the  possession  of  the  necessary  amount  of  prac- 
tical knowledge,  the  difficulty  of  course  ceases  ;  but  even  without  it,  if 
we  see  that  one  kind  or  a  few   kinds  of  goods  exhibit  a  tendency  in 
regard  to  price  different  from  that  exhibited  by  the  great  bulk  of  articles, 
it  must  be  easy  for  any  one  to  make  such  inquiries  into  the  facts  as  will 
qualify  him  to  correct  the  discrepancy  they  might  occasion,  or  to  show 
the  propriety  of  selecting,  from  among  the  list  of  articles  subjected  to 
examination,  those  which  from  extraneous  causes  would  interfere  with 
tlie  correctness  of  the  calculation.     There  is,  however,  another  difficulty 
to  be  surmomited  before  the  degree  of  fluctuation  in  prices  generally 
can  be  correctly  ascertained,  which  is  this : — Some  articles  of  merchan- 
dise are  sold,  and  their  prices  are  quoted  by  the  pound  or  gallon,  and 
others  are  quoted  by  the  hmidredweight  or  ton,  or  by  the  pipe,  while 
the  prices  upon  which  the  calculations  of  rise  or  fall  must  be  made  vary 
from  a  few  pence  for  some  articles,  to  more  than  one  hundred  pounds 
for  others.     How,  then,  it  has  been  asked,  can  any  conparison  be  made 
where  the   elements   or  data  for  that  comparison   exhibit  such  violent 
discrepancies  ?     This  difficulty  will  be  overcome  by  the  very  simple  ex- 
pedient of  reducing  to  one  common  element  the  price  of  every  separate 
article  in  a  long  list  of  articles,  whether  that  price  is  estimated  by  pence 
or  by  pounds,  and  then  calculating  the  fluctuating  price  of  each,  up  or 
down,  and  expressing  it  in  decimal  proportions.     In  this  manner  the 
rise  or  fall  of  a  halfpenny  in  the  price  of  a  pound  of  pepper,  quoted  at 
fivepence,  is  made  to  indicate  as  great  a  rise  or  fall,  and  to  exercise  as 
great  an  influence  in  the  scale,  as  a  rise  or  fall  of  5^.  in  a  quarter  of 
linseed,  quoted  at  bOs.,  or  of  10/.  in  a  ton  of  copper  quoted  at  100/.     In 
each  of  these  cases,  the  index  price,  whether  it  is  bd.,  bOs.,  or  100/., 
being  expressed  by  imity,  or  I'OOOO,  the  supposed  variations,  if  in  ad- 
vance, would  in  each  case  be  expressed  by  the  figures  I'lOOO— and  if 
in  reduction,  by  0*900.     Upon  this  principle  a  table   has  been   con- 
structed, taking  for  its  basis  or  index  the  prices  existing  in  the  first 
week  of  January,  1833,  and  exhibiting  at  the  beginning  of  every  sub- 
sequent month   the    average    fluctuations    that    have   occurred   in    the 
prices  of  each  one  of  50  articles  which   comprise  the  principal  kinds 
of  goods  that  enter  into  foreign    commerce.      The  sum  of  all  these 
prices  thus  ascertained  and  expressed  to  four  places  of  decimals,  when 
divided  by  the  number  of  articles  in  the  list,  will  exhibit  the   mean 
variation  in  the  aggregate  of  prices  from  month  to  month.    Such  a  table 
constructed   by  any   person    possessing  a  moderate    acquaintance  with 
the  general  state  of  trade  w ill,  it  is  thought,  exhibit  the  ^ariations  of 
prices  with  as  near  an  approach  to  accuracy  as  the  subject  admits,  and 