


CHAP,    XII. 


CURRENCY.  427 


the  result  will  be  altogether  free  from  any  of  those  specious  fallacies 
which  are  often  found  to  lurk  at  the  bottom  of  speculative  investiga- 
tions. 

In  the  construction  of  this  table  it  was  desirable  to  make  choice  of  a 
period  whence  to  commence  the  calculations,  in  which  prices  were  con- 
sidered to  be  at  or  near  their  natural  level,  and  in  which  the  mercantile 
commimity  in  this  kingdom  were  believed  to  be  principally  engaged  in 
their  regular  and  legitimate  business ;  a  period,  in  fact,  which  should 
be  free  from  any  undue  depression  on  the  one  hand,  and  without  the 
excitement  of  speculation  on  the  other.  With  this  view,  and  also  be- 
cause it  would  embrace  a  time  sufficiently  long  for  showing  the  possible 
utility  of  such  calculations,  w^ithout  too  far  multiplying  the  labour,  the 
beginning  of  1833  was  chosen.  It  will  be  seen,  on  inspection  of  the 
table  hereafter  inserted  (pages  431-2),  that  in  one  respect  at  least  the 
choice  of  this  period  has  been  judicious.  During  the  six  months  by 
which  it  was  immediately  followed,  there  may  be  said  to  have  been  no 
fluctuation  in  prices,  but  in  the  month  of  July  there  occurred  a  sudden 
rise  of  3|  per  cent.,  which  was  increased  to  7  per  cent,  in  August,  and 
to  10  per  cent,  in  September;  from  which  time  prices  were  again  re- 
markably steady,  at  that  higher  level,  until  the  middle  of  the  following 
year.  Another  rapid  advance  was  then  experienced,  which  continued 
until  February,  1835,  when  prices  had  reached  to  16  per  cent,  above 
the  index  price  of  January,  1833.  At  this  further  advance  there  was, 
again,  considerable  steadiness  for  six  months,  when  a  fresh  impulse  was 
given,  which  carried  the  average  price  rapidly  upward,  with  an  unva- 
ried progression,  until  August,  1836.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  average 
was  then  very  nearly  35  per  cent,  higher  than  in  the  beginning  of  1833. 
The  measures  adopted  by  the  Bank  of  England  in  July  and  September, 
1836,  of  raising  the  rate  of  their  discounts,  from  4  to  4^  and  then  to  5 
per  cent.,  and  further  of  throwing  discredit  upon  a  class  of  mercantile 
bills  which  at  that  time  represented  a  very  large  part  of  the  floating 
commercial  engagements  of  the  country,  acted  instantaneously  upon  the 
prices  of  goods,  and  a  fall  began  which  was  more  rapid  than  the  rise 
which  has  been  described. 

A  gentleman,*  whose  views  upon  such  subjects  are  entitled  to  be  re- 
ceived with  very  great  respect,  gives  it  as  his  opinion,  that  the  abundance 
or  scarcity  of  circulating  money  has  little  or  no  influence  upon  prices, 
but  that  tliese  are  regulated  by  the  wants  and  capabilities  of  the  great 
body  of  the  consumers,  who  cannot  at  any  time  be  expected  to  use  more 
of  any  articles  because  they  may  have  a  greater  facility  in  raising 
money  for  commercial  purposes.  In  support  of  this  position,  it  is  urged 
th.at,  while  prices  generally  were  advancing  in  the  degree  that  has  been 