


CHAP.  XII. J  CUKKENCY.  425 

sumed  extension  of  issues  on  the  part  of  joint-stock  and  private  bankers 
— an  extension  which  was  rendered  practicable  only  through  the  greater 
circulation  of  Bank  of  England  notes — was  quite  sufficient  to  give  that 
stimulus  to  commercial  dealings  which  has  been  mentioned. 

It  is  a  point  that  has  given  rise  to  much  controversy,  whether  under 
the  regime  of  a  circulating  medium,  convertible  at  pleasure  into  gold, 
any  issues  of  paper  can  be  made  and  kept  out  to  an  excess  that  will  tend 
to  raise  the  general  prices  of  goods.  Nor  is  the  point  at  all  settled  among 
writers  of  the  greatest  authority  upon  the  subject.  By  those  who  deny  the 
possibility  of  such  a  result,  it  is  urged,  that  at  times  when  the  currency 
lias  been  full  to  redundancy,  the  prices  of  many  important  articles  of 
consumption  have  fallen,  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  w^hile  the  circula- 
tion has  been  undergoing  a  process  of  contraction,  the  prices  of  some 
goods  have  risen.  The  reasoning  upon  the  subject,  in  the  Report  of  the 
Bullion  Committee  of  1810,  having  been  offered  when  the  notes  of  the 
Bank  of  England  were  inconvertible,  cannot  be  held  applicable  to  the 
present  altered  condition  of  things.  In  the  words  of  that  Report — "  An 
increase  in  the  quantity  of  the  local  currency  of  a  particular  country 
will  raise  prices  in  that  country  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  an  in- 
crease in  the  general  supply  of  precious  metals  raises  prices  all  over  the 
world."  Many  circumstances  may  arise  to  occasion  the  rise  or  fall  in 
the  prices  of  some  kind  of  goods,  but  a  general  alteration  of  prices  can 
only  be  occasioned  by  a  permanent  alteration  in  the  amount  of  circu- 
lating money.  An  increase  in  the  quantity  of  specie,  arising  from  the 
greater  productiveness  of  the  mines,  would  raise  prices  in  all  countries 
alike,  and  would  therefore  occasion  no  serious  derangement,  nor  be  fol- 
lowed by  any  revulsion ;  whereas,  a  rise  occasioned  by  the  undue  exten- 
sion of  a  local  and  inconvertible  currency,  will  be  confined  to  the  country 
in  which  it  is  issued,  and  must  derange  its  commercial  relations  with 
foreign  markets.  It  must  be,  therefore,  at  all  times  an  interesting  and 
a  valuable  question  to  determine,  under  such  circumstances,  whether 
prices  are  actually  rising  or  falling,  or  stationary  ;  and  to  ascertain  the 
degree  of  such  rise  or  fall,  as  an  indication  of  the  state  of  the  currency. 
A  rise  or  fall  thus  caused  will  generally — perhaps  always — precede  a 
variation  in  the  foreign  exchanges  ;  and  if  ascertained,  and  a  timely 
remedy  were  applied,  the  evil  might  be  corrected  before  it  could  reach 
a  point  that  would  be  indicated  by  any  such  disturbance  of  foreign 
trade  as  would  affect  the  rates  of  exchange.  This  truth  has  long  been 
felt  and  acknowledged ;  but  it  has  at  the  same  time  been  held  impos- 
sible to  determine,  with  the  necessary  degree  of  accuracy,  whether  any 
and  what  degree  of  fluctuation  is  shown  by  the  prices  of  commodities 
generally.  The  disturbing  causes  above  alluded  to,  when  affecting 
articles  with  which  the  inquirer  is  more  particularly  conversant,  may, 
unless  the  investigation  is  extended,  give  an  impression  contrary  to  the 