


CHAP.    XII.] 


CURRENCY. 


431 


for  purchase,  an  article  which  was  known  to  be  held  in  undue  abun- 
dance, wliilo  other  articles  were  to  be  found  against  which  so  strong  an 
objection  would  not  apply  ;  and  for  this  reason  the  rise  in  the  prices  of 
agricultural  produce,  if  experienced  at  all,  would  be  so  in  a  less  degree 
than  the  prices  of  other  commodities,  a  result  which  would  be  highly 
detrimental  to  agriculturists. 

If  the  suggestion  that  has  been  here  thrown  out  is  entitled  to  any 
consideration,  it  is  clear  that,  to  enable  us  to  judge  with  correctness 
whether  the  currency  be  at  any  time  redundant  or  otherwise,  we  require 
to  ascertain  other  facts  than  that  of  the  amount  of  bank  notes  in  circu- 
lation. There  is,  perhaps,  no  single  circumstance  more  pregnant  with 
instruction  on  this  subject  than  a  general  rise  or  fall  of  prices  when 
viewed  and  adjusted  in  combination  with  local  or  temporary  causes  of 
disturbances,  ^^'ith  this  end  in  view  it  would  be  highly  instructive  if 
tables  of  prices  were  made  and  recorded,  at  short  intervals,  accompanied 
by  remarks  explanatory  of  any  peculiarities  which  may  be  thought  to 
offer  disturbance  to  the  correctness  of  their  result.  It  is  not  meant  by 
this  to  recommend  a  mere  record  of  the  prices  of  goods,  such  as  would 
be  afforded  by  a  collection  of  prices- current,  but  a  calculation  conducted 
upon  the  plan  already  described,  or  some  other  that  should  be  equiva- 
lent to  it,  and  w^hich  would  afford,  on  inspection,  a  correct  comparative 
view  of  the  average  fluctuations  that  should  occur.  Such  tables  would 
not  be  without  benefit,  even  when  they  had  been  continued  for  only  a 
few  years  ;  but  when  they  should  have  been  carried  over  a  considerable 
period  of  time,  and  the  results  which  they  would  present  could  be 
studied  in  conjunction  with  actual  occurrences,  we  might  be  enabled  to 
read  the  signs  they  would  present,  so  as  to  secure  ourselves,  with  cer- 
tainty, from  those  alternations  which  now  so  frequently  bring  alarm  and 
ruin  to  commercial  men.  The  following  table  is  offered  as  the  com- 
mencement of  such  a  series  of  calculations.  The  details  would  occupy 
a  very  considerable  space,  without  yielding  an  adequate  advantage,  for 
which  reason  the  results  only  are  presented : — 

Table,  showing  tlie  Amount  of  Bank  Notes  in  Circulation,  the  Rates  of  Exchange  with  Hamburg 
and  Paris,  and  the  comparative  Prices  of  Wheat,  and  of  Fifty  Articles  of  Commerce  {including 
Wheat),  at  the  beginning  of  each  Month,  from  January,  1833,  to  December,  1837. 


nank  of  England 

BulUon  held 

1 

Nolc»  in  Circula- 

Country Bank 

by  the 