


*  Letter  to  Lord  Melbourne. 


CHAP.  X.I.]  CUKKEN'CY.  123 

circulate  the  notes  of  the  Bank  of  England,  under  an  agi-eemcnt  with 
that  corporation,  which  gives  to  them  certain  facilities  in  the  way  of 
discounts.  This  is  a  fact  well  known,  and  one  which  has  been  stated 
in  evidence  before  Parliamentary  committees  ;  but  it  is  not  so  well 
known  that,  in  making  these  arrangements,  the  Bank  of  England  does 
not  merely  give  permission  to  the  other  parties  to  send  bills  for  discount 
up  to  a  certain  sum,  but  stipulates  that  the  sum  so  required  shall  always 
reach  at  least  to  that  amount ;  providing  thus  for  the  extension  of  the 
issue  of  its  [own  paper,  whatever  may  be  the  wants  of  the  commercial 
world  or  the  rates  of  the  foreign  exchanges.  It  is  not  with  a  very  good 
grace  that  the  Bank  Directors,  while  thus  acting,  complain  of  the  ex- 
cessive issues  of  other  joint-stock  associations,  their  rivals  in  the  country 
districts.  There  is  no  doubt  that  a  competition  of  this  kind  is  likely  to 
have  an  injurious  effect,  and  that  the  spirit  of  competition  renders  all 
parties  less  prudent  than  they  might  otherwise  be  in  acting  upon  those 
indications  which  should  govern  the  amount  of  the  circulation.  In  the 
event  of  that  circulation  proving  redundant,  the  adoption  of  a  prudent 
course  by  one  or  more  establishments,  in  contracting  their  issues,  might 
only  offer  inducements  to  others  to  endeavour  to  turn  that  course  to  their 
own  peculiar  advantage,  by  filling  up  the  void  that  would  be  thus  occa- 
sioned. The  advantage  to  the  country  of  confining  to  one  establishment 
the  power  of  issuing  paper-money  has  of  late  .years  been  very  strongly 
insisted  on  by  a  principal  advocate  and  apologist  of  the  Bank  of  England. 
In  his  zeal  fur  the  interests  of  the  establishment  with  which  he  is  con- 
nected, that  gentleman  has  not  allowed  himself  to  express  a  doubt  as  to 
the  body  which  shall  be  intrusted  vnth  so  important  a  function.  The 
one  bank  of  issue  in  his  estimation  is,  without  doubt,  to  be  the  joint- 
stock  association  with  which  he  is  connected.  There  is,  however,  a 
third  alternative,  which  has  been  ably  advocated  by  the  late  iVIr- 
Ricardo,*  and  more  recently  by  Mr.  Clay,t  Colonel  Torrens,|  and  Mr. 
S.  Ricardo,§— that  of  the  establishment  of  a  National  Bank  "  under 
the  management  of  competent  functionaries,  qualified  by  the  possession, 
not  of  Bank  Stock,  but  of  economical  science ;  appointed,  not  by  the 
holders  of  Bank  Stock,  but  by  the  Government ;  responsible,  not  to 
their  co-proprietors,  but  to  Parliament ;  and  having  for  their  first  object 
and  primary  duty  the  protection  not  of  their  o\ni  corporate  property-, 
but  of  the  general  interest  of  the  nation."! 