

*  Plan  for  the  Establishment  of  a  >'ational  Bank,  by  the  late  David  Ricardo,  Esq.,  M.P., 
1824. 

t  Speech,  on  moving  for  a  Committee  on  Joint-Stock  Banks,  with  Reflections,  &c.,  by 
W.  Clay,  Esq.,  M.P.,  1836. 

X  Letter  to  Lord  Melbourne,  on  the  recent  Derangement  in  the  Money  Market,  and  on 
Bank  Reform,  by  R.  Torrens,  Esq.,  1837. 

§  A  National  Bank  the  Remedy  for  the  Evils  attendant  upon  our  present  System  of  Paper 
Currency,  by  Samson  Ricardo,  Esq.,  1838. 

11  Torrens'  Letter;  2nd  Edition,  page  64. 


421  niOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  m. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  enlarge,  in  these  pages,  upon  the  advantages 
that  might  be  derived  by  the  country  from  the  adoption  of  the  proposal 
here  mentioned.  Those  persons  who  are  alive  to  the  importance  of  the 
subject  will  not  satisfy  themselves  with  any  second-hand  arguments,  but 
will  of  course  refer  to  works  in  which  tlie  establishment  of  a  National 
Bank  is  advocated  by  men  whose  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  subject 
in  all  its  bearings  must  be  universally  acknowledged.  It  may  be  proper, 
however,  to  guard  against  misconception,  as  to  the  meaning  attached  to 
the  title  of  National  Bank.  It  is  not  meant  under  this  name  to  advo- 
cate the  establishment  of  a  bank  which  shall  be  subject  to  the  control  of 
the  minister  of  the  day,  which,  on  the  credit  of  the  country,  shall  issue 
notes  ad  libitum  to  meet  the  wants  or  wishes  of  the  Government,  or 
whose  paper  shall  be  inconvertible,  at  the  pleasure  of  the  holder,  into 
that  which  it  professes  to  represent ;  but  a  bank,  the  managers  of  which, 
although  appointed  by  the  Government,  shall  not  be  removeable  except 
by  a  vote  of  Parliament,  upon  proof  of  maladministration  ;  who  shall  be 
obliged  to  buy  or  to  sell  bullion  at  certain  fixed  prices,  which,  while 
they  would  yield  a  small  profit  to  the  establishment,  shall  not  hold  out 
any  inducement  to  speculative  sales  or  purchases  ;  and  who  shall  be  of 
ability  to  observe  and  to  understand  the  symptoms  of  any  approaching 
derangement  in  the  currency,  and  to  apply  the  necessary  remedies. 
All  experience  has  shown  the  mischief  that  results  from  the  operation  of 
banks  of  issue  in  connexion  with  executive  governments ;  and  the  bank- 
ing annals  of  our  own  country  afford  abundant  proofs  that  no  amount  of 
ability  employed,  in  conducting  the  operations  of  a  great  joint-stock 
association,  will  preserve  the  country  fi'om  mismanagement,  where  there 
is  any  private  interest  or  conflicting  duty  which  tempts  its  managers  to 
originate  or  to  tolerate,  and,  it  may  be,  to  aggi*avate  the  mischief. 

The  shock  given  to  mercantile  credit,  and  the  losses  encountered  by 
commercial  men,  in  1825,  were  of  a  nature  and  to  an  extent  not  likely 
to  be  soon  forgotten.  The  lesson  of  prudence  which  they  taught  was 
enforced  by  the  withdrawal  of  small  notes  from  circulation,  and  for  a 
considerable  time  speculation — at  least  in  any  extensive  degree — was 
unseen.  But  it  is  the  common  effect  of  long-continued  security  to  beget 
imprudence.  The  years  which  followed  the  panic  of  1825  were  marked, 
as  we  have  seen,  by  a  progressive  extension  of  our  chief  branches  of  in- 
dustry ;  the  operations  of  trade  and  manufactures  were,  with  some  fluc- 
tuations, accompanied  by  a  degree  of  general  prosperity  which  naturally 
engendered  the  desire  for  increasing  them,  and  this  desire  being  met, 
in  the  middle  of  1833,  by  some  relaxation  in  the  currency,  prices  began 
to  rise.  The  circulation  of  the  Bank  of  England,  which  throughout 
1832  had  been,  on  the  average,  18,139,000/.,  was  increased  to 
19,060,000/.  in  the  first  half  of  1833,  and  to  19,20t,000/.  in  the  second 
half  of  that  year ;  and  this  increase,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  pre- 