


422  TROGRESS  Of  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

partners  was  thought  to  be  entitled  legally  to  issue  notes — a  compromise 
was  made  with  that  establishment,  and  joint-stock  banks  of  issue  were 
not  permitted  to  carry  on  their  business  nearer  to  London  than  sixty- 
five  miles. 

If  the  views  of  the  legislature  had  been  directed  to  produce  a  system 
by  means  of  which  a  perfect  control  over  the  currency  would  be  secured, 
a  more  imlikely  method  of  attaining  that  object  than  the  establishment 
of  joint-stock  banks  could  hardly  be  imagined.  By  their  constitution, 
these  establishments  would  naturally  stand  high  in  the  public  estima- 
tion. AVith  large  paid-up  capitals  and  a  numerous  list  of  partners,  the 
more  ostensible  of  whom  were  usually  men  of  property  and  considera- 
tion, while  all  were  answerable  for  the  debts  of  the  company  to  the  full 
amount  of  their  fortunes,  the  public  would  take  their  paper  with  per- 
fect confidence,  and  as  considerable  local  influence  would  be  always 
exerted  in  their  favour,  the  case  must  be  extreme  indeed  which  would 
bring  on  a  run  against  them.  In  fact,  the  greater  the  degree  of  repu- 
tation and  credit  such  banks  enjoy,  the  greater  is  the  danger  of  their 
contributing  to  imsettle  the  currency.  It  has  been  shown  by  Colonel 
Torrens,*  that  except  these  banks  act  in  concert  with  the  Bank  of 
England,  their  influence  could  never  be  severely  felt,  for  otherwise  any 
over-issues  on  their  part  would  speedily  be  returned  upon  them  ;  but 
this  would  not  be  the  case  when  the  issues  of  the  Bank  of  England 
should  also  be  in  excess,  so  that  their  mismanagement  would  be  felt 
only  when  it  would  act  in  aggi'avation  of  the  mischief  caused  by  the 
great  regulator  of  the  currency. 

At  the  time  when  encouragement  was  given  to  the  formation  of  joint- 
stock  banks,  Parliament  took  measures  for  withdrawing  from  circulation 
all  notes  of  a  lower  denomination  than  5/. ;  the  granting  of  stamps  for 
smaller  notes  was  immediately  stopped,  and  fi-om  the  5th  of  April,  1829, 
it  was  declared  illegal  for  any  banker  to  issue  such.  The  policy  of  this 
measure  met  at  the  time  with  general  concurrence,  and  although  it  has 
since  been  clamorously  impugned,  both  in  and  out  of  Parliament,  the 
number  of  those  who  question  its  propriety  has  always  been  small. 

In  what  has  been  here  said  concerning  the  establishing  of  joint-stock 
banks  as  substitutes  for  other  banks  of  issue,  which  could  oflfer  less  satis- 
factory security  for  the  amount  of  their  engagements,  it  is  by  no  means 
intended  to  question  that  they  present,  in  that  respect,  great  advantages 
to  the  public.  But  it  may  well  be  doubted,  whether  those  advantages 
are  in  all  respects  such  as  were  in  contemplation  at  the  time  of  their 
formation.  Some  of  the  numerous  joint-stock  banks,  established  since 
1826,  are  not  new  establishments,  but  extensions  of  private  banks  pre- 
viously in  operation ;  others  of  them  do  not  issue  their  own  notes,  but 