

*  It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  of  the  whole  produce  of  grain,  a  portion,  which  has 
been  variously  estimated  at  from  a  half  to  two-thirds,,  is  never  brought  to  market  for  sale 
but  is  consumed  in  the  agricultural  districts,  and  employed  for  seed.  The  proportion  sold 
is,  however,  becoming  greater  every  year,  in  consequence  of  the  proportionatelj'  greater 
increase  of  the  non-agricultural  population,  and  the  greater  productiveness  of  the  soil. 


CHAP. 


ill.]  CURRENCY.  429 


served  from  those  violent  fluctuations  in  the  prices  of  farming  produce 
which  have  attended  upon  the  vicissitudes  of  seasons.  A  deficiency  in 
the  harvest  always  produces  a  more  than  equivalent  rise  in  the  price  of 
fanning  jjroduce  ;  so  that,  on  the  supposition  of  1000  (juarters  of  wheat 
being  re(juired  for  the  ordinary  wants  of  the  people,  if  the  supply  proved 
deficient  to  the  extent  of  100  quarters,  the  remaining  900  would  sell 
for  a  greater  amount  of  money  than  that  which  would  be  received  for 
1000  quarters  under  the  case  first  supposed ;  while  the  consec^uence  of 
an  increased  production  to  the  same  degree  would  be  so  to  depress 
prices,  that  1100  quarters  would  not  produce  so  great  an  amount  as 
the  900  quarters  in  the  one  case,  or  the  1000  quarters  in  the  other.  It 
would  be  incorrect,  therefore,  to  suppose  that  the  reduction  of  price  is 
compensated,  either  as  regards  the  receipts  of  the  growers,  or  as  it 
aflfects  the  money  value  of  the  entire  harvest,  by  the  increase  of  quantity, 
which  might  to  a  great  degree  be  the  case  if  the  trade  were  free  and 
prices  were  kept  more  effectually  than  now  at  their  natural  level,  by 
extending  the  markets  whence  to  supply  our  deficiency,  or  where  to 
send  our  superabundance. 

Mr.  Gregory  King,  in  his  computation  of  the  land  product  of  Eng- 
land, given  by  Dr.  Davenant,  states  that  a  defect  in  the  harvest  may 
raise  the  price  of  corn  in  the  following  proportions  : — 

Defect  of  1 -tenth,  raises  the  price  3-tenths. 
>»  ^11  »  "      » 

n  ^       5>  »  ^"       )) 

«  *      »  »i  28       „ 

>»  ^       „  ,,  45       „ 

If  we  adopt  these  proportions  as  the  basis  for  our  calculations,  it  will  be        £. 
found  that  1000  quarters,  when  the  supply  is  just  equal  to  the  wants  of  the 

consumers  will  sell — the  price  being  50s.  per  quarter — for 2,500 

If  the  harvest  should  prove  deficient  one-tenth,  the  remaining  nine-tenths, 

represented  by  900  quarters,  would  sell,  at  65s.,  for 2,925 

A  deficiency  of  one-fifth  would  leave  800  quarters,  which,  at  90s.,  would 

produce 3,600 

A  deficiency  of  three-tenths  would  leave   700  quarters,  which,  the  price 