


ciiAi'.  XII.]  OITRKENCY.  435 

Bank  sliould  ever  be  carried  so  far  as  to  reduce  its  outstaiidin"-  notes 
to  so  low  a  level  as  14,()0(),()()0/.  The  safety  of  the  Bank,  as  well  as 
that  of  the  public,  may  be  considered  as  secured,  so  far  as  the  question 
of  credit  is  at  stake.  It  remains,  however,  to  be  proved  whether,  under 
all  circumstances  that  may  arise,  the  security  of  the  public  is  thus 
equally  well  attained  as  respects  the  management  of  the  currency ;  and 
there  are  not  wanting  men  of  great  practical  experience  in  such  ques- 
tions, who  have  expressed  strong  doubts  upon  this  subject.  It  woidd 
be  out  of  place  to  enter  upon  the  controversy  here.  Those  who  desire 
to  know  the  opinions  to  which  reference  has  been  made,  will  naturally 
consult  the  writings  of  the  accomplished  men  wlio  have  published  their 
reasonings  uj)on  the  subject,  particularly  those  of  Mr.  Tooke  and  Mr. 
Loyd  (now  Lord  Overstone),  who  take  opj)osite  views  regarding  it,  and 
the  series  of  articles  written  by  Mr.  James  Wilson  on  "  Currency  and 
Banking,"  published  first  in  the  Economist  weekly  paper,  between 
March  and  May,  1845,  and  since  collected  in  an  octavo  volume.* 

It  must  be  evident  that  any  attempt  to  regulate  the  currency  by  con- 
trolling the  issues  of  the  Bank  of  England,  must  fail  of  its  object,  unless 
an  equal  control  were  exercised  over  the  issues  of  private  and  joint- 
stock  banks.  It  was  accordingly  provided  by  the  Act  of  1844,  that 
"no  person  other  than  a  banker,  who  on  the  6th  of  May,  1844,  was 
lawfully  issuing  his  own  notes,  shall  make  or  issue  bank-notes  in  any 
part  of  the  United  Kingdom."  The  privilege  of  such  issue  was  con- 
tinued to  those  persons  ;  but  the  amount  that  may  be  issued  in  each  case 
was  restricted  to  the  amount  which  constituted  their  actual  issues  upon 
the  average  of  the  two  preceding  years. 

Further,  the  most  perfect  publicity  was  provided  as  regards  the 
amount  of  issues  by  weekly  publications  thereof  in  the  London  Gazette. 

*  It  affords  a  strong  prima  facie  corroboration  of  the  view  taken  by  Mr.  Tooke  upon  this 
important  subject,  that  on  the  first  occasion  of  monetary  difficulty,  which  arose  in  1847, 
after  the  passing  of  the  Act  of  1844,  the  Bank  received  authority  from  the  Government  to 
disregard  the  restriction  which,  as  respects  its  issues,  was  imposed  by  the  existing  law. 


2  F  2 


436  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

COINAGE. 

Bad  State  of  the  Coinage  at  the  beginning  of  the  Centur)' — Disappearance  of  Coin — Bark 
Tokens — Moneys  coined  1801  to  1849 — Diminished  weight  of  Silver  Coins — Proposal  of 
Double  Standard— Copper  Coinage  1821  to  1849. 