

♦  Average  prices  of  wheat,  1812  122*.  8rf. 

1813  106«.  &d. 


442  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  in. 

many  labourers  were  idle  frmn  having  little  work,  in  consequence  of 
those  employed  doing  double  work.  I  desired  him  to  go  on  with  that 
labour  likewise,  and  he  actually  contracted,  for  very  large  ditches,  at 
Qd.  an  ell,  which  I  do  not  think  I  could  do  now  under  from  l.s-.  to  Is.  Gd., 
in  consequence  of  the  fall  in  provisions." 

If  the  cost  of  living  to  a  labourer's  family  were  permanently  increased, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  wages  must  rise  proportionally ;  but  as, 
comparing  one  with  another,  in  the  different  years  that  make  up  the  sum 
of  a  labouring  man's  existence,  there  can  be  no  permanence  or  steadi- 
ness in  the  prices  of  articles  dependent  for  their  abundance  or  scarcity 
upon  the  seasons,  it  must  often  happen  under  our  present  system  that 
the  bulk  of  the  people  will  be  exposed  to  violent  alternations  of  plenty 
and  misery,  the  remedy  for  which  must  be  of  a  purely  moral  nature, 
and  cannot  be  conveniently  discussed  on  this  occasion. 

The  most  extensive  register  which,  in  point  of  time,  we  have  of  the 
rates  of  wages,  is  found  in  returns  made  to  Parliament  by  Greenwich 
Hospital.  Unfortunately,  however,  the  descriptions  of  artisans  em- 
ployed in  that  establishment  are  few,  and  their  occupations  come 
altogether  under  the  description  of  skilled  labour.  Besides  this,  the 
returns  made  up  to  1805  are  given  only  at  intervals  of  five  years ;  while 
the  rates  published  are  those  paid  to  masters  who  contract  for  the  per- 
formance of  the  work,  and  are  not  the  sums  received  by  the  workmen. 

No  one,  unless  he  shall  have  made  the  attempt  to  obtain  information 
of  this  kind,  can  be  aware  of  the  difficulty  opposed  to  his  success.  After 
many  and  long-continued  efforts  to  that  end,  it  is  not  possible  here  to 
bring  forward  many  authentic  or  continuous  statements  of  the  rates  of 
wages  in  this  country.  The  following  tables  (pp.  443-51),  comprise, 
indeed,  nearly  all  that  can  be  offered  on  the  subject  with  confidence  to  the 
reader.  Some  details  of  the  rate  of  wages  paid  to  agricultural  labourers 
might  have  been  added,  but  owing  to  the  vicious  system  which  prevailed 
until  lately  through  almost  every  part  of  the  kingdom  of  paying  a  part 
of  the  wages  of  such  labourers  out  of  parochial  rates,  the  addition 
would  not  have  given  any  greater  value  to  the  statement.  The  last 
column  of  the  table  pp.  443-45  contains  the  annual  average  price  of  wheat 
in  each  of  t^he  years.  If  the  variations  in  the  weekly  earnings  of  artisans 
are  examined  in  connexion  with  the  variations  in  the  price  of  this  first 
necessary  of  life,  it  will  at  once  be  seen  what  violent  alternations  of 
misery  and  comparative  plenty  must  have  been  experienced  by  the  working 
classes  in  this  country,  and  an  additional  argument  will  be  thence 
afforded  in  justification  of  the  repeal  of  the  law  which,  by  virtually  ex- 
cluding grain  of  foreign  growth,  was  made  to  aggravate  such  alternations. 