


460  niOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sue.  iii. 

the  rate  of  freight  earned  hy  her,  which  was  always  diminished  in  pro- 
portion to  the  increased  cost  of  the  insurance  upon  the  goods.  Until  the 
year  1834  the  advancing  age  of  the  ship  was  always  held  to  he  conclu- 
sive evidence  as  to  her  deterioration,  so  that  a  vessel,  when  arrived  at  a 
certain  age,  was  invariahly  transferred  to  a  lower  class,  although,  from 
having  received  efficient  repairs,  she  might  be,  in  reality,  of  superior 
qualifications  to  those  she  held  at  the  time  of  the  first  survey  and  regis- 
tration. As  the  almost  inevitable  consequence  of  this  rule,  ships  were 
built  with  but  little  regard  to  durability,  and  if,  as  the  term  of  their 
highest  rank  elapsed,  repairs  became  necessary,  these  were  applied  as 
sparingly  as  possible  ;  and,  indeed,  it  usually  happened,  fi'om  the  faults 
of  their  original  construction,  that  they  were  undeserving  of  any  great 
expense  being  incurred  upon  them.  It  will  be  seen  how  greatly  this 
system  must  have  acted  in  aggravation  of  the  mischief  caused  by  the 
faulty  mode  of  admeasurement  just  described.  The  evil  at  length 
awakened  the  attention  of  a  few  spirited  individuals,  and  through  their 
exertions  the  system  has  been  thoroughly  reformed.  Ships  are  now  sub- 
jected to  frequent  surveys,  by  a  competent  body  of  able  and  well-paid 
officers,  and  they  are  classed,  not  according  to  the  time  that  has  elapsed 
suice  they  were  launched,  but  according  to  their  condition  at  the 
moment  of  the  survey.  By  this  means  a  sufficient  inducement  is  given 
to  build  them  of  good  materials  and  in  a  proper  manner,  and  further  to 
give  them,  as  often  as  is  needed,  thorough  and  substantial  repairs.  The 
underwriters,  who  formerly  could  place  but  little  confidence  in  the 
rating  of  a  ship  in  the  register,  now  have  full  reliance  upon  its  correct- 
ness, and  the  merchants  and  owners  share  the  advantage  in  the  lower 
rate  of  premium  demanded. 


CHAP,  xv:.]  WAREHOUSING  SYSTEM.  461 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

WAREHOUSING  SYSTEM. 

The  necessity  of  paying  Duties  on  Importation  unfavourable  to  Commerce — Productive  of 
Fraud — Warehousing  System  proposed  in  1733 — In  1750 — Introduced  in  1803 — Unfavour- 
able Conditions  when  first  established  —  Gradual  Improvements  —  Disadvantages  still 
resulting  from  the  original  Restrictions — Warehousing  Ports  in  England — Scotland 
—  Ireland  —  Prevention  of  Frauds  against  the  Revenue  by  means  of  Warehousing 
System. 

The  beginning  of  this  century  is  marked  by  an  exceedingly  great  im- 
provement in  our  Customs  regulations.  Previous  to  1803  it  was  required 
of  the  importers  that  they  should  pay  the  consumption  duties  upon 
almost  every  description  of  foreign  and  colonial  goods  at  the  time  of 
their  importation ;  a  system  which  tended  in  various  ways  to  limit  trade, 
by  crippling  the  resources  of  the  generality  of  our  merchants,  and  by 
giving  an  undue  advantage  over  others  to  the  few  who  had  the  command 
of  large  capitals.  By  this  system  the  prices  of  almost  all  goods  were 
increased  to  the  consumers,  who,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  profits  of 
trading,  had  to  pay  an  additional  profit  to  reimburse  the  merchant  for 
the  advance  of  the  duty.  Unless  the  disturbing  influence  of  war  should 
force  trade  into  unnatural  channels,  it  was  impossible  that  while  such  a 
system  was  continued,  the  carrying  trade  of  the  country  could  experience 
any  extension.  The  amount  of  duty  that  had  been  paid  on  importation 
was,  indeed,  in  most  cases  returned,  under  the  name  of  bounty  or  draw- 
back, upon  the  goods  being  subsequently  re-exported;  but  by  this 
means  a  door  was  opened  for  fraud  upon  the  revenue  to  a  large  amount, 
and  where  transactions  were  honestly  carried  on,  the  interest  upon  the 
amount  of  duties,  between  the  time  of  their  being  paid  by  and  returned 
to  the  merchant,^  was  in  most  cases  lost,  because  it  was  not  possible  in 
any  way  to  recover  it  from  the  foreign  consumer. 