


CHAI-.  XIV.]  WACJES.  153 

live  ill  tho  suburbs  employ  much  of  tlioir  leisure  time  in  the  cultivation 
of  flowers.  Before  the  repeal  of  the  heavy  duties  which  were  long  im- 
posed upon  raw  and  throwTi  silk,  and  when,  consequently,  silk  fal)rics 
were  too  costly  to  be  within  the  reach  of  any  but  the  easy  classes,  the 
hands  engaged  in  iheir  production  were  liable  to  be  affected  by  every 
change  of  fashion.  Periods  occurred  during  Mhich  for  many  months 
together  the  silk  weavers  of  Spitalfields  were  without  employment,  and 
their  condition  was  deplorable  in  the  extreme.  It  has  followed  from 
this,  that  many  benevolent  persons  have  at  various  times  established  cha- 
rities within  the  district,  which  have  had  the  effect  of  drawing  to  it 
great  numbers  of  the  labouring  poor,  and  it  has  accordingly  happened 
that  whenever  the  weavers  have  experienced  a  want  of  employment,  and 
the  public  sympathy  has  been  awakened  in  their  behalf,  a  considerable 
part  of  the  contributions  raised  for  their  relief  has  been  intercepted  by 
persons  following  other  employments,  and  who  have  found  it  no  difficult 
matter  to  impose  upon  the  persons  to  whom  the  distribution  of  relief  has 
been  intrusted.  The  inquiries  made  in  April,  1837,  by  Dr.  Kay,  in 
the  Spitalfields  district,  have  thrown  a  considerable  degree  of  light  upon 
the  subject  of  affording  extraneous  aid  in  periods  of  distress,  and  it  may 
!)e  well  to  state  here  very  briefly  some  of  the  results  of  his  investio-a- 
tions.  A  weaver  who  is  married  has  generally  two  looms,  one  for  him- 
self and  another  for  liis  wife ;  if  he  have  children,  these,  as  they  wrow 
up  to  be  seven  years  of  age  and  upwards,  are  set  to  assist  in  some  of  the 
auxiliary  operations  of  his  craft,  such  as  winding,  quilling,  and  picking 
the  silk,  and  at  the  age  of  twelve  or  thirteen  they  are  put  into  the  loom 
to  weave.  The  man  himself  may  be  employed  on  a  jacquard  loom,  and 
will  earn  on  an  average  255.  per  week,  or  on  a  velvet  or  rich  plain  silk, 
when  his  earnings  will  be  from  16s.  to  20s.  The  wife  will  cam  from 
10s.  to  125.,  and  the  gains  of  the  children  will  be  proportioned  to  their 
ages.  Altogether  the  man  who  is  master  of  four  looms  is,  in  ordinary 
times,  in  the  receipt  of  such  an  amount  of  wages  as  should  enable  him 
to  provide  against  at  least  the  ordinary  casualties  of  life,  and  the  fluc- 
tuations that  may  arise  in  the  demand  for  his  labour.  On  the  occurrence 
of  a  commercial  crisis, — for  the  silk  weavers  are  now  happily  not  so  de- 
pendent for  employment  as  formerly  upon  the  fashion  of  the  day, — the 
loss  of  work  occurs  first  amongst  the  least  skilful ;  the  children,  whose 
earnings  are  least,  are  the  earliest  put  out  of  work ;  next  the  wife  is 
without  employment,  and  it  must  be  an  extreme  case  which  takes  away 
any  considerable  part  of  the  man's  earnings.  Such  extreme  cases  may 
arise,  however,  and  it  may  be  well  to  inquire  in  what  degree  the  greatest 
probable  assistance  through  the  subscriptions  of  individuals  is  calculated 
to  repair  the  evil.  The  chief  manufacturers  are  of  opinion,  that  in 
times  of  ordinary  activity,  from  10,000/.  to  12,000/.  per  week  are 
usually  paid  as  the  wages  of  the  weaving  population  in  the  district.     At 