

2  G  2 


452  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION,  [sec.  hi- 

liands,  the  consumption  of  whiskey  was  jihsohitely  and  permanently 
diminished  in  the  district.  During  the  comparatively  short  period  in 
which  the  construction  of  this  canal  was  in  progress,  some  of  the  most 
careful  labourers,  men  who  most  probably  before  then  never  knew  what 
it  was  to  possess  five  shillings  at  any  one  time,  saved  sufficient  money 
to  enable  them  to  emigrate  to  Canada,  where  they  are  now  labouring 
in  independence  for  the  improvement  of  their  own  land. 

It  will  he  apparent,  fi-om  the  examination  of  the  foregoing  tables, 
that  although  at  certain  seasons  all  those  who  live  by  daily  wages  must 
have  suffered  privation,  yet  with  some  exceptions  tlieir  condition  has, 
in  the  course  of  years,  been  much  ameliorated.  The  exceptions  here 
alluded  to  arc  hand-loom  weavers,  and  others  following  analogous 
employments,  conducted  in  the  dwellings  of  the  workmen.  The  dimi- 
nution in  the  weekly  earnings  of  other  parties  has  been  but  small  in  any 
case,  and  certainly  not  commensurate  with  the  diminished  cost  of  most 
of  the  necessaries  of  life,  comprehending  in  this  list  most  articles  of  food, 
and  every  article  of  clothing.  By  this  means  they  have  acquired,  with 
their  somewhat  diminished  wages,  a  much  greater  command  than  for- 
merly over  some  of  the  comforts  of  life. 

It  is  true  that  the  necessity  under  which  most  labouring  men  are 
placed  of  purchasing  in  very  small  quantities  from  retail  dealers  who 
are  themselves,  perhaps,  unable  to  purchase  in  the  best  markets,  pre- 
vents their  deriving  in  every  case  the  full  advantage  of  diminished 
prices :  but  it  must  be  plain  to  everybody  that  at  least  in  one  respect 
the  condition  of  the  labouring  poor  is  greatly  mended.  The  reduction 
in  the  prices  of  all  kinds  of  manufactured  goods,  accompanied  as  it  is  by 
improvement  in  their  quality,  has  been  such  that  few  indeed  are  now  so 
low  in  the  scale  of  society  as  to  be  unable  to  provide  themselves  with 
decent  and  appropriate  clothing.  It  cannot  be  necessary  to  adduce  any 
evidence  in  support  of  this  fact,  which  is  obvious  to  every  one  who  passes 
through  the  streets  ;  so  great,  indeed,  is  the  change  in  this  respect,  that 
it  is  but  rarely  we  meet  with  any  one  that  is  not  in  at  least  decent  ap- 
parel, except  it  be  a  mendicant,  whose  garb  is  assumed  as  an  auxiliary 
to  his  profession.  Those  who  through  improvidence  or  misfortune  are 
unprovided  with  clothes  of  a  good  quality,  which  the  improving  customs 
of  the  people  have  made  necessary,  render  homage  to  the  feeling  whereby 
that  improvement  has  been  brought  about,  and  for  the  most  part  remain 
within  their  homes.  The  silk- weavers  of  London  who  are  located  in 
Spitalfields  and  Bethnal  Green  and.  their  vicinity,  are,  too  many  of 
them,  a  very  improvident  class  of  people,  so  that  many  are  unprovided 
with  any  other  clothing  than  their  working  dresses.  It  has  been  attri- 
buted to  this  circumstance  that  those  araono;  them  who  reside  in  the 
town  provide  themselves  with  amusement  by  keeping  pigeons,  great 
numbers  of  which  are  always  to  be  seen  in  Spitalfields,  while  those  who 