

Those  persons  who  have  been  bred  in  the  lap  of  ease,  and  whose  pas- 
sage through  life  has  been  unvisited  by  the  cares  and  anxieties  that 
attend  upon  the  children  of  labour,  are  very  inadequate  judges  of  the 
trials  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  the  means  of  surmounting  them  on  the 
other,  which  are  offered  to  those  who  must  always  form  the  most  nume- 


niAP.  XIV.]  WAGES.  455 

rous  class  in  every  community.  Happily  this  subject  has  been  cleared 
from  the  doubts  by  which  it  would  otherwise  be  obscured,  by  the  re- 
corded observations  and  opinions  of  men  who  themselves  have  struggletl 
successfully  against  those  difficulties,  and  have  made  the  most  of  the 
opportunities  yielded  by  a  life  of  labour.  One  of  these  prudent  and 
successful  men,  of  whose  labours  advantage  has  been  taken  in  a  former 
section  of  this  work,  Mr.  William  Felkin,  of  Nottingham,  thus  forcibly 
and  feelingly  gives  his  testimony  on  the  subject,  in  some  very  striking 
remarks  upon  the  appropriation  of  wages  by  the  working  classes,  which 
he  addressed  to  the  statistical  section  of  the  British  Association,  at 
its  meeting  in  Liverpool  : — 

"  If  any  one  intends  to  improve  his  condition,  he  must  earn  all  he 
can,  spend  as  little  as  he  can,  and  make  what  he  does  spend  bring  him 
and  his  ftimily  all  the  real  enjoyments  he  can.  The  first  saving 
which  a  working  man  effects  out  of  his  earnings,  is  the  first  step, 
and  because  it  is  the  first  step,  the  most  important  step  towards 
true  independence.  Now  independence  is  as  practicable  in  the  case 
of  an  industrious  and  economic,  though  originally  poor  workman,  as 
in  that  of  the  tradesman  or  merchant,  and  is  as  great  and  estimable 
a  blessing.  The  same  process  must  be  attended  to,  i.  e.,  the  entire 
expenditure  behig  kept  below  the  clear  income,  all  contingent  claims 
being  carefully  considered  and  provided  for,  and  the  surplus  held 
sacred  to  be  employed  for  those  purposes,  and  those  only,  which  duty 
and  conscience  may  point  out  as  important  or  desirable.  This  re- 
quires a  course  of  laborious  exertion  and  strict  economy,  a  little  fore- 
sight, and  possibly  some  privation.  But  this  is  only  what  is  common 
to  the  acquisition  of  all  desirable  objects.  And  inasmuch  as  I  know 
what  it  is  to  labour  with  the  hands  long  hours,  and  for  small 
wages,  as  well  as  any  workman  to  whom  I  address  myself,  and  to 
practise  self-denial  withal,  I  am  emboldened  to  declare  from  experience, 
that  the  gain  of  independence,  or  rather  self-dependence,  for  which  I 
plead,  is  worth  infinitely  more  than  all  the  cost  of  its  attainment ;  and 
moreover,  that  to  attain  it,  in  a  gi*eater  or  less  degree,  according  to 
circumstances,  is  within  the  power  of  far  the  greater  number  of  skilled 
workmen  engaged  in  our  manufactures.  Unhappily,  the  earnings  of  the 
industrious  workpeople  in  some  trades  have  been  at  times,  and  often  for 
a  long  time,  so  scanty  as  to  afford  scarcely  the  means  of  existence. 
The  hand-loom  weavers  and  common  stocking-makers  have  been  very 
distressing  cases  of  this  kind,  but  they  have  been  exceptions,  and  most 
powerfully  establish  the  general  position,  for  instances  have  not  been  of 
unfrequent  occurrence  in  both  these  trades,  of  workmen,  by  dint  of 
perseverance  and  economy,  emerging  from  the  mass  of  misery  around 
them,  and  placing  themselves  in  easy  and  happy  circumstances  " 