


ciiAP.  XV.]  CLASSING  OF  SlIirPING.  ^50 

bad  weatluM-  and  on  a  loc-slioro  ;  for  this  last  reason  the  loss  of  life  that 
has  been  occasioned  has  been  exceedingly  great.  It  has  been  asserted 
by  a  gentleman  who  took  a  deep  interest  in  procuring  an  alteration  in 
the  law  of  admeasurement,  as  the  result  of  his  inquiries,  that  if  it  had 
been  necessary  to  enforce  an  application  to  the  legislature  by  such 
means,  he  could  easily  have  procured  numerous  signatures  to  a  petition 
in  which  every  person  signing  it  should  have  occupied  the  relation  of 
widow  or  child  to  those  whose  lives  had  fallen  a  sacrifice  to  the  un- 
manageable qualities  of  British  merchant  ships. 

The  evils  here  described  were  long  felt,  and  the  desirableness  of  y)ro- 
viding  a  remedy  acknowledged.  For  this  purpose  a  committee,  of  wliich 
the  late  Dr.  Thomas  Young,  Captain  Kater,  and  Mr.  Davies  Gilbert, 
were  members,  was  a]ipointed  by  the  Admiralty  in  1821.  On  that  occa- 
sion upwards  of  fifty  ships,  of  different  sizes  and  descriptions,  were 
examined,  and  it  was  ascertained,  that  owing  to  their  faulty  proportions 
the  weight  of  goods  which  they  were  capable  of  carrying,  exceeded  the 
measurement  toimage,  on  the  average,  in  the  proportion  of  four  to  three. 
The  evils  of  the  system  were  fully  exposed  by  the  inquiries  of  this  com- 
mittee ;  but  because  the  members  of  which  it  consisted  were  unable  to 
suggest  any  plan  by  means  of  which  mathematical  accuracy  could  at  all 
times  be  ensured,  no  practical  good  resulted  from  their  labours.  After 
this  the  matter  rested  until  1834,  when  another  committee  was  formed 
for  the  purpose  by  the  Board  of  Admiralty.  The  principal  members  of 
this  committee  were  Mr.  Davies  Gilbert  and  Captain  Beaufort  of  the 
Royal  Navy,  the  able  hydrographer  to  the  Admiralty,  by  whom  the 
subject  was  taken  up  in  a  way  at  once  scientific  and  practical ;  and  in 
consequence  of  their  report,  and  of  the  active  exertions  of  the  President 
of  the  Board  of  Trade,  Mr.  Poulett  Thomson,  a  law  was  passed  by 
which  the  evil  has  been  checked,  and  placed  in  a  course  of  gradual 
amendment.  It  will  be  long  before  this  remedy  shall  have  produced 
its  full  effect,  as,  of  course,  the  ships  that  were  in  existence  before  the 
alteration  of  the  system  will  be  still  employed  ;  the  temptation  to  build 
what  are  called  "  burthensome"  vessels  is  however  destroyed,  and  the 
advantage,  as  regards  new  ships,  is  all  in  favoiu'  of  the  adoption  of 
better  and  safer  proportions  in  their  form. 

Another  circumstance,  which,  although  it  had  not  the  force  of  a 
legal  provision,  exerted  a  bad  influence  in  regard  to  the  proper  con- 
struction of  merchant  ships,  has  lately  been  remedied.  For  a  long 
series  of  years  a  committee  of  gentlemen  connected  with  Lloyd's  Coffee 
House,  has  superintended  a  registry  of  the  qualifications  of  ships,  which, 
upon  the  reports  made  of  them  by  surveyors,  were  placed  in  different 
classes,  and  according  to  the  rank  thus  assigned  to  each,  the  preference 
was  given,  with  regard  to  employment  and  to  the  rate  at  which  the 
vessel,  or  goods  shipped  in  her,  could  be  insured,  and  of  course  also  to 