

The  circumstances  that  gave  occasion  to  these  remarks  on  the  part 
of  Mr.  Felkin,  arose  out  of  the  commercial  pressure  which  bore  with 


456  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

peculiar  severity  upon  the  manufacturing  industry  of  Nottingham,  in 
the  early  part  of  1837.  To  relieve  in  some  degree  the  sufferings  of  the 
unemployed  workmen,  a  subscription  was  raised  amounting  to  5000/., 
and  expended  in  the  construction  of  a  road,  from  the  opening  of  which 
much  benefit  has  resulted.  The  account  which  Mr.  Felkin,  who  acted 
a  prominent  part  in  the  management  of  this  fund,  has  given  of  the 
result,  is,  in  many  respects,  highly  interesting.  Considerable  pains  were 
taken  to  ascertain  the  character  and  previous  condition  of  every  appli- 
cant for  employment,  and  complete  returns  were  obtained  with  regard 
to  1043  persons,  having  among  them  779  wives  and  2165  children, 
making  together  3987  persons.  Among  them  were  452  framework 
knitters,  whose  weekly  wages,  when  fully  employed,  averaged  11*-.  6H, 
and  176  of  the  wives  are  stated  to  have  earned  on  the  average  Is.  lOid. 
per  week.  There  were  496  lace-makers,  whose  weekly  earnings  had 
averaged  15^.  1^.,  while  182  of  their  wives  had  earned  on  the  average 
2s.  lirf.  per  week.  The  weekly  gains  of  the  remaining  93  persons 
employed  in  various  ways  had  averaged  16s.  4f/.,  and  34  of  their  wives 
had  earned  each  Is.  dd.  per  week.  The  average  weekly  earnings  of 
each  family  were  found  to  be  about  lis.  6d.,  as  given  by  themselves, 
but  it  is  known,  that  at  least  in  some  cases,  the  full  amount  was  not 
stated  by  them-  Among  all  these  cases  investigated,  "  eight  only  had 
been  pauperised  in  any  form."  The  average  period  during  which  the 
1043  families  had  been  only  partially  employed,  was  10  weeks  and  3 
days,  and  the  average  time  during  which  they  had  been  wholly  without 
work,  was  6  weeks  and  5  days.  Some  had,  of  course,  been  longer  un- 
employed than  others,  and  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  established  by  these 
inquiries,  "  that  men  with  five  or  six  children  supported  themselves  and 
their  families  under  the  circumstances  of  short  work  or  total  deprivation 
of  labour,  as  long  as  the  unmarried,  or  those  who  had  smaller  families." 
Not  one  of  the  1043  applicants  had  been  a  depositor  in  the  savings'  bank. 

The  circumstances  attending  the  condition  of  the  working  classes  in 
other  countries  differ  in  many  respects  from  those  which  influence  their 
condition  in  Great  Britain.  This  has  been  shown  already  in  a  former 
chapter,*  a  reference  to  which  will  sufficiently  explain  the  difficulty  of 
instituting  any  comparisons  on  the  subject. 