

,  . 

)) 

Labourers    . 

5d.  to  8c?. 

5) 

Without 

Ditto       .      .      , 

12ri. 

Without 

^j 

Tuscany     .     . 

Farm  Servants . 

40s. 

With 

With 

Labourers    . 

Gd. 

Without 

Without 

Tlie  usual  method  adopted  in  the  Venetian  States,  is  for  the  pro- 
prietor to  stock  the  land,  and  to  take  one-half  the  produce  for  his  rent, 
while  the  labourer  takes  a  portion  of  the  other  half  for  his  labour,  and 
this  portion  varies  according  to  the  nature  of  the  soil  and  the  circum- 
stances of  the  farm.  In  the  province  of  Venice  the  land  is  so  poor  as 
to  produce  only  six  measures  for  one  measure  of  wheat  sown.  In 
Friuli  the  produce  is  eight  for  one,  and  in  the  Polesine,  twelve  measures 
are  expected  fi-om  an  average  harvest.  The  returns  from  maize  are 
considered  to  be  double  those  obtained  from  wheat. 


458  PROGIIESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

MEASUREMENT  AND  CLASSING  OF  SHIPPING. 

Inaccurate  mode  of  Measuring  emploj-ed  from  1773  to  1835 — Various  consequent  evils — 
Remedy  attempted,  1821 — Accomplished,  1833— Imperfect  Classification  of  Ships — Bad 
consequences — Remedy  provided,  1S34. 

The  statements  inserted  in  Chap.  IX.  give  correctly  the  tonnage  of 
mercantile  vessels  built  in,  and  belonging  to  the  United  Kingdom,  as 
the  same  is  expressed  on  the  registers  of  the  ships,  and  recorded  at  the 
Custom-house  ;  they  likewise  afford  sufficiently  accurate  data  for  ascer- 
taining the  comparative  amount  of  our  mercantile  marine,  at  different 
periods,  throughout  the  years  to  which  the  statements  apply  ;  but  they 
do  not  by  any  means  supply  correct  information  of  the  aggregate  bur- 
then of  the  ships  at  any  one  epoch.  This  want  of  accuracy  is  owing  to 
the  barbarous  system  which,  up  to  a  very  recent  date,  was  followed  for 
the  admeasurement  of  ships,  and  which  enabled  their  builders,  at  the 
sacrifice  of  some  essential  good  qualities,  to  procure  the  official  measure- 
ment to  be  very  greatly  below  the  actual  cubical  capacity  of  the  hold  of 
the  vessel,  which  capacity  it  was  pretended  to  insert  in  the  register.  The 
absurdity  of  computing  the  burthen  of  a  vessel  by  the  admeasurement 
of  the  length  and  breadth,  without  taking  any  account  of  the  depth, 
does  not  need  to  be  enforced.  Occasions  have  arisen,  where  ships  had 
their  holds  deepened  by  building  upon  the  sides,  so  as  to  add  from  one- 
fourth  to  one-third  to  their  cubical  capacity,  and  where,  owing  to  some 
contraction  of  the  width,  at  the  point  of  measurement,  the  tonnage 
recorded  in  the  register  has  been  actually  lessened. 

The  method  here  described  was  established  in  1773-4,  and  would 
probably  have  proved  in  general  accurate,  if  it  had  not  offered  an  in- 
ducement— by  means  of  duties  charged  on  the  registered  tonnage — to 
construct  ships  out  of  proportion.  If  the  evasion  of  a  portion  of  those 
duties  had  been  the  only  consequence  of  the  faulty  rule  of  admeasure- 
ment, the  evil  would  have  been  trifling  when  compared  with  that  which 
it  has  really  occasioned.  Under  the  rule  described,  tlie  greater  part  of 
our  merchant  vessels  are  the  most  unsightly  in  Europe,  and,  what  is  of 
far  more  consequence,  they  sail  badly,  and  are  very  unmanageable  in 