


451  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

the  time  of  Dr.  Kay's  inquiry  it  was  believed  that  this  amount  was 
reduced  to  5000/.  or  6000/.  per  week.  The  depression  of  1825  6  was 
probably  greater  than  this,  and  extended  over  a  period  of  six  or  eight 
months ;  the  contributions  of  the  public,  which  amounted  to  30,000/., 
M'ould  therefore  not  supply  more  than  one-fifth  or  one-sixth  of  the  usual 
resources  of  the  population,  if  even  its  distribution  had  been  confined, 
which  it  was  not,  to  the  weaving  population.  In  1829  the  subscriptions 
amounted  to  about  10,000/.,  a  sum  scarcely  equal  to  the  deficiency  of 
two  weeks  as  experienced  in  the  beginning  of  1837.  Tiiis  considera- 
tion serves  to  show  how  important  it  is  that  we  should  endeavour  by 
every  legitimate  meaus  to  preserve  the  channels  of  labour  free  from 
obstructions,  and  in  how  great  a  degree  it  behoves  the  Government 
to  be  watchful  to  prevent  those  disturbances  and  alternations  in  the 
currency  which,  with  the  exception  of  a  state  of  war,  arc  the  most  ini- 
mical of  all  things  to  the  general  prosperity  of  the  trading  and  working 
classes. 

Want  of  providence  on  the  part  of  those  who  live  by  the  labour  of 
their  hands,  and  whose  employments  so  often  depend  upon  circumstances 
beyond  their  control,  is  a  theme  which  is  constantly  brought  forward  by 
many  whose  lot  in  life  has  been  cast  beyond  the  reach  of  want.  It  is, 
indeed,  greatly  to  be  wished,  for  their  own  sakes,  that  the  habit  were 
general  among  the  labouring  classes  of  saving  some  part  of  their  wages 
when  fully  employed,  against  less  prosperous  times ;  but  it  is  difficult 
for  those  who  are  placed  in  circumstances  of  ease  to  estimate  the  amount 
of  virtue  that  is  implied  in  this  self-denial.  It  must  be  a  hard  trial  for 
one  who  has  recently,  perhaps,  seen  his  family  enduring  want,  to  deny 
them  the  small  amount  of  indulgences,  which  are,  at  the  best  of  times, 
placed  within  their  reach.  The  habitual  exercise  of  forbearance  of  this 
kind  is  a  thing  which,  in  this  country  especially,  we  have  but  little  right 
to  expect  from  those  who  have  been  born  and  brought  up  under  a  law 
which  offered  a  premium  to  improvidence  ;  and  the  amount  of  savings 
deposited  in  provident  banks  by  the  poor  under  such  circumstances 
should  be  looked  upon  as  a  most  extraordinary  evidence  of  their  desire 
for  independence,  a  desire  which  cannot  be  too  anxiously  fostered  and 
encouraged  by  their  rulers.  We  have  seen  how  little  comparative 
relief  can  be  afforded  in  times  of  trial  by  even  the  most  liberal  assist- 
ance on  the  part  of  the  wealthy,  and,  indeed,  from  the  mode  of  it's  dis- 
tribution, this  help  is  often  productive  of  as  much  evil  as  good,  a  result 
from  which  the  providence  of  the  poor  is  altogether  free. 