

The  proposal  to  warehouse  some  descriptions  of  goods  without  ])ay- 
ment  of  duties  on  importation,  formed  part  of  the  Excise  scheme  brought 
forward  by  Sir  Robert  ^Valpole,  in  1733;  but  so  great  was  the  opposi- 
tion oftered  to  the  plan  by  the  ignorance  and  prejudices  of  party  men, 
and  probably  also  by  traders,  w^hose  schemes  for  defrauding  the  revenue 


462  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

would  by  its  means  have  been  frustrated,  that  the  intention  was  neces- 
sarily abandoned.  A  similar  proposal  was  afterwards  brought  forward 
and  ably  supported  by  Dean  Tucker,  in  1750,  but  in  vain.  Having  now 
for  nearly  50  years  experienced,  in  a  considerable  degree,  the  bene- 
fits of  the  warehousing  system,  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  account  for  the 
blindness  of  those  by  whom  it  was  so  long  successfully  opposed.  The 
advantages  which  we  now  derive  from  this  system  were  not  indeed  ex- 
perienced at  its  first  adoption.  Many  of  the  regulations  connected  with 
it,  which  now  impart  such  great  facilities  to  connnerce,  have  been  intro- 
duced progressively,  and  some  of  them  not  without  considerable  oppo- 
sition. For  a  long  time  after  the  passing  of  the  first  Warehousing  Act 
(43  Geo.  III.,  c.  132),  it  was  held  by  the  Government  to  be  a  boon 
especially  granted  to  the  mercantile  class,  and  every  application  made 
for  its  improvement,  or  for  obtaining  further  facilities  for  trade,  was  met 
and  resisted  in  this  spirit.  It  is  only  within  the  last  few  years  that  more 
enlightened  views  have  prevailed,  and  that  it  has  been  seen  and  acknow- 
ledged that  no  facilities  could  be  granted  to  the  general  body  of 
traders  that  would  not  prove  at  least  as  advantageous  to  the  country  at 
large.  An  account  is  always  taken  on  landing  of  the  weight  or  measure 
of  every  package  ;  and  until  within  the  last  few  years  it  was  rigidly 
exacted  from  the  merchants  in  every  case — with  the  exception  of  one 
article,  tobacco — that  the  duty  should  be  paid  not  upon  the  quantity 
remaining  at  the  time  of  the  goods  being  taken  for  consumption,  but 
upon  the  quantity  ascertained  at  lauding,  although  in  the  interim^  the 
packages  had  remained  in  the  sole  custody  of  the  revenue  officers, 
without  the  possibility  of  any  fraud  having  been  committed.  Further 
than  this,  if  the  goods,  instead  of  being  taken  for  consumption,  were 
exported  from  the  warehouses,  an  account  was  taken  of  the  weight  or 
measure  at  the  time  of  shipment,  and  the  merchant,  before  he  was 
allowed  to  remove  his  goods  from  the  custody  of  the  Crown,  was  com- 
pelled to  pay  the  full  consumption  duty  upon  such  part  as  had  wasted 
in  the  warehouse.  This  course  was  justified  under  the  plea  already 
mentioned,  that  the  privilege  of  warehousing  was  altogether  a  boon  to 
the  merchants ;  that  without  it  they  must  have  paid  the  duty  on  the 
full  quantity  imported,  and  would  have  been  entitled  to  drawback  only 
upon  the  part  actually  exported  ;  and  that  therefore  they  were  no  losers 
by  being  made  to  pay  the  duty  upon  the  quantity  deficient.  This  was 
a  specious  argument,  and,  being  held  by  those  who  had  the  power  of 
enforcing  their  opinions,  was  long  used  successfully.  A  minister  pre- 
pared to  take  a  more  enlarged  view  of  the  subject  at  length  broke 
through  the  rule.  He  saw  that,  but  for  the  privilege  of  warehousing 
without  payment  of  duties,  little,  if  any,  of  the  transit  trade  of  the 
country  would  have  existence  :  that  this  trade  offers  a  general  benefit 
to  the  community,  and  should  not  be  considered  a.s  profitable  only  to 