


CHAr.  I  ]  FINANCE.  460 

keep  faith  with  the  puhlic  creditors,  to  wiioiii  its  produce  had  heen  mort- 
gaged to  the  extent  of  56^  millions  of  3  per  cent,  stock,  additional  taxes 
were  imjiosed  upon  heer,  malt,  and  hops,  and  a  considerable  increase 
was  made  to  the  assessed  taxes,  besides  which  an  addition,  under  the 
name  of  a  moditication,  was  made  to  the  tax  on  imports  and  ex])ort&, 
pr(;vionsly  known  under  the  name  of  the  convoy  duty. 

At  this  time  the  aggregate  amount  of   permanent    taxes   was  SSk 
millions,  exactly  double  what  it  had  been  at  the  breaking  out  of  the  war 
in  17i)3.  During  those  nine  years,  taxes  to  the  amount  of  280,000,000/., 
exclusive  of  the  cost  of  collection,  had  been  levied  from  the  people  ;  and 
a  few  words  are  necessary  in  order  to  account  for  the  seeming  contra- 
diction implied  in  the  fact,  that,  notwithstanding  this  ruinous  rate  of 
expenditure,  many  of  the  great  interests  throughout  the  country  wore 
the   outward  appearance  of  ])rosperity.      A  nation  engaged  in  an  ex- 
pensive war,  which  calls  for  the  systematic  expenditure  of  large  sums 
beyond  its  income,  may  be  likened  to  an  individual  spendthrift  during 
his  career  of  riot  and  extravagance ;  all  about  him  wears  the  aspect  of 
})lenty  and  prosperity,  and  this  appearance  will  continue  until  his  means 
begin  to  fail,  and  those  who  have  fattened  upon  his  profusion  arc  at 
length  sent  away  empty.  The  enormous  expenditure  of  the  Government, 
joined  to  the  state  of  the  currency  (as  already   explained),  necessarily 
caused  a  general  and  great  rise  of  prices :  as  regarded  agricultural  pro- 
duce, this  effect  w\as  exaggerated  by  the  ungenial  nature  of  the  seasons. 
Rents  had  risen  throughout  the  country  in  a  far  greater  degree  than  the 
necessary  expenditure  of  the  land-owners,  who  thence  found  their  situa- 
tions improved,  notwithstanding  the  additional  load  of  taxation.     The 
great  number  of  contractors  and  other  persons  dealing  with  the  Govern- 
ment had  derived  a  positive  benefit  from  the  public  expenditure,  and, 
being  chiefly  resident  at  the  seat  of  Government,  they  were   enabled 
greatly  to  influence  the  tone  of  public  opinion.     The  greater  command 
of  money  thus  given  to  considerable   classes   occasioned  an  increased 
demand  for  luxuries  of  foreign  and  domestic  production,  from  which  the 
merchants  and  dealers  derived  advantage.     There  were,  besides,  other 
classes  of  persons  who  profited  from  the  war  expenditure.     These  were 
the  producers  of  raanutactured  goods,  and  those  wdio  dealt  in  them,  and 
who  found   their  dealings  greatly  increased  by  means  of  the  foreign 
expenditure  of  the  Government  in  subsidies  and  expeditions,  the  means 
for  which  were  furnished  through  those  dealings  :  the   manufacturers 
were  at  the  same  time  beginning  to  reap  the  advantages  that  have  since 
been  experienced  in   a  more   considerable  degree  from   the   series   of 
inventions  begun   by  Hargreaves  and  Arkwright,  and  which  acted  in 
some  degree  as  palliatives  to  the  evil  effects  of  the  Government  pro- 
fusion. 