


cH.vp.  XVI.]  WAREHOUSING  SYSTEM.  4G3 

those  by  whom  it  is  carried  on  ;  that  it  was  unjust  to  tlie  owners  of 
goods,  against  wliom  no  fraud  could  be  imputed,  to  visit  them  with 
penalties  because  of  the  waste  which  their  property  had  undergone  :  and 
that  to  require  the  payment  of  consumption  duty  upon  a  greater  quan- 
tity of  goods  than  was  actually  consumed,  was  in  so  far  to  substitute 
])i;nalties  for  taxation  ;  a  system  altogether  unequal,  and  therefore 
vicious.  From  that  time  to  the  present  the  Government  has  at  all  times 
been  willing  to  give  a  favourable  attention  to  the  representations  of  the 
merchants,  and  so  many  concessions  have  thus  been  made  from  time  to 
time,  that  our  Customs'  regulations,  as  adopted  in  some  ports,  are  now 
acknowledged  to  afford  almost  every  facility  to  the  trader  that  can  be 
made  compatible  with  the  due  security  of  the  revenue.  Among  the 
relaxations  that  have  been  thus  conceded  may  be  mentioned  not  only 
relief  from  the  payment  of  duties  on  deficiencies  ascertained  upon  re- 
exportation, but,  in  the  case  of  such  articles  as  are  subject  to  waste,  the 
duty  is  chargeable  only  upon  the  quantity  ascertained  to  exist  at  the 
time  it  is  taken  from  the  warehouse.  The  owner  may  "  sort,  separate, 
and  re-pack,"  any  goods  in  order  to  their  preservation,  or  to  effect  a  more 
ready  sale  or  shipment ;  wines  and  spirits  may  be  bottled  in  the  ware- 
house, without  payment  of  duty,  if  intended  for  subsequent  shipment ; 
and  woven  fabrics  imported  from  abroad  may  be  taken  out  of  warehouse 
without  payment  of  duty,  in  order  to  their  being  cleaned,  bleached, 
dyed,  or  printed,  upon  security  being  given  to  replace  the  same  under 
the  custody  of  the  revenue  officers.  In  fact,  the  principle  is  now  felt 
and  acknctwledged,  that  to  fiicilitate  in  every  way  the  operations  of 
honourable  commerce  must  prove  advantageous  to  the  community  at 
large. 

The  concessions  of  the  Government,  which  permitted  the  bringing  of 
certain  goods  into  consumption  upon  payment  being  made  of  the  duty 
upon  such  quantity  as  actually  exists  at  the  time  of  its  being  removed 
from  the  custody  of  the  revenue  officers,  was  occasioned  immediately 
by  the  circumstance  of  a  large  quantity  of  French  brandy,  9000  pun- 
cheons, having  remained  in  the  London  docks  so  long  that  the  strength 
and  quantity  were  diminished  in  such  a  degree,  that  the  duty  payable 
upon  the  portion  that  had  wasted  would  have  amounted  to  a  greater 
sum  than  the  market  value  of  the  brandy  remaining,  exclusive  of  the 
duty.  Under  these  circumstances,  although  the  improvement  in  quality 
occasioned  by  time  rendered  these  9000  puncheons  most  desirable  to 
the  consumer,  not  a  gallon  could  be  brought  into  use,  and  the  pro- 
prietors were  compelled  to  bring  over  supplies  of  brandy  which  had  not 
been  mellowed  by  age,  but  which  would  be  admitted  to  consumption 
upon  payment  of  duty  upon  the  quantity  of  spirit  which  each  cask  con- 
tained. The  folly  of  keeping  a  large  capital  thus  unproductively  locked 
up,  and  becoming  daily  less  valuable,  grew  at  length  so  apparent  to  the 