


470  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  it. 

As  in  the  case  of  the  spendthrift,  while  all  these  causes  were  in  opera- 
tion, there  was  an  appearance  of  prosperity,  and  those  who  were  pro- 
fiting ft'om  this  state  of  things  were  anxious  to  kee])  up  the  delusion. 
That  it  was  no  more  than  delusion  will  be  at  once  apparent  to  all  who 
examine  below  the  surface,  and  who  inquire  as  to  the  condition  of 
poverty  and  wretchedness  into  which  the  great  mass  of  the  people  were 
then  plunged.  In  some  few  cases  there  had  been  an  advance  of  wages  ; 
but  this  occun-ed  only  to  skilled  artisans,  and  even  with  them  the  rise 
was  wholly  incommensurate  with  the  increased  cost  of  all  the  necessaries 
of  life.  The  mere  labourer — he  who  had  nothing  to  bring  to  market 
but  his  limbs  and  sinews — did  not  ])articipate  in  this  partial  compensa- 
tion for  high  prices,  but  was,  in  most  cases,  an  eager  competitor  for  em- 
plo}Tnent,  at  the  same  or  nearly  the  same  wages  as  had  been  given 
before  the  war.  Nor  could  it  well  be  otherwise,  since  the  demand  for 
labour  can  only  increase  with  the  increase  of  the  capital  destined  for  the 
payment  of  wages  ;  and  we  have  seen  that  capital  was  so  far  from  being 
suffered  to  accumulate,  that  it  was  dissipated  by  the  Government  expen- 
diture more  rapidly  than  it  could  be  accumulated  by  individuals.  In 
London  and  its  vicinity  the  rates  of  wages  are  necessarily  higher,  be- 
cause of  the  greater  expense  of  living  than  in  country  districts ;  and  it 
is  asserted,  from  personal  knowledge  of  the  fact,  that  at  the  time  in 
question  there  was  a  superabundant  supply  of  labourers  constantly  com- 
peting for  employment  at  the  large  Government  establishments,  where 
the  weekly  wages  did  not  exceed  15s.,  while  the  price  of  the  quartern 
loaf  was  Is.  lOcL,  and  the  other  necessary  outgoings  of  a  labourer's 
family  were  nearly  as  high  in  proportion.  If  we  contrast  the  weekly 
wages  at  the  two  periods  of  1790  and  1800,  of  husbandry  labourers  and 
of  skilled  artisans,  measuring  them  both  by  the  quantity  of  wheat  which 
they  could  command,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  former  could,  in  1790, 
purchase  82  pints  of  wheat,  and  in  1800  could  procure  no  more  than  53 
pints,  while  the  skilled  artisan,  who  in  1790,  could  buy  169  pint5,  could 
procure  in  1800  only  83  pints,  To  talk  of  the  prosperous  state  of  the 
country  under  such  a  condition  of  things  involves  a  palpable  contradic- 
tion. It  would  be  more  correct  to  liken  the  situation  of  the  community 
to  that  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  town  subjected  to  a  general  conflagration, 
in  which  some  became  suddenly  enriched  by  carrying  off  the  valuables, 
while  the  mass  were  involved  in  ruin  and  destitution. 