


464  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  .      [sec.  hi. 

Government,  that  relief  was  aiForded  in  the  first  instance  to  the  owners 
of  these  specific  casks  of  spirits  ;  and,  the  door  having  been  thus  opened 
for  the  infraction  of  the  principle,  so  long  and  so  strenuously  defended, 
it  was  soon  after  abandoned,  and  the  rule  adopted  which  has  since 
been  followed,  and  which  is  more  in  consonance  with  a  just  and  liberal 
policy. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  full  advantages  of  which  the  ware- 
housing system  is  found  to  be  susceptible  were  not  recognised  at  the 
time  of  its  first  adoption.  The  Act  of  1803  specifically  permitted  the 
warehousing  of  the  most  important  articles  of  West  India  produce,  without 
payment  of  duty,  in  the  West  India  docks  ;  and  of  rice,  tobacco,  wine, 
and  spirits  in  the  London  docks :  besides  which,  the  permission  was 
given  to  warehouse  several  articles,  the  bulk  of  which  is  great  in  pro- 
portion to  their  value,  in  places  to  be  approved  by  the  Commissioners  of 
the  Customs,  and  a  more  numerous  assortment  of  goods  might  in  the 
same  way  be  deposited  in  wareiiouses  to  be  approved  by  the  Lords  of 
the  Treasury.  Although  the  Act  was  thus  confined  in  its  operation,  it 
contained  authority  to  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury  to  extend  its  pro- 
visions to  any  other  ports  in  Great  Britain,  and  also  to  the  warehousing 
of  goods  other  than  those  mentioned  in  its  various  schedules.  The 
power  thus  imparted  was  acted  upon  at  first  with  the  greatest  caution. 
The  construction  and  situation  of  the  warehouses  then  existing  in  the 
various  ports  of  the  kingdom,  and  which  had  been  built  without  refer- 
ence to  the  kind  of  security  required  by  the  Government,  were  such  that 
it  was  not  considered  consistent  with  the  interests  of  the  revenue  to  grant 
the  same  privileges  to  them  as  were  conceded  to  the  more  secure  ware- 
houses of  the  docks  in  London.  At  the  same  time  the  small  amount  of 
advantages  that  would  then  have  attended  the  construction  of  warehouses 
of  satisfactory  security  was  not  sufficient  to  induce  the  merchants  to 
make  any  efforts  for  obtaining  it ;  and  in  proportion  as  trade  increased, 
and  fresh  warehouses  were  needed,  these  were  built  on  the  old  plans, 
and  in  appropriate  situations,  to  meet  the  convenience  of  individual  mer- 
chants. Had  the  system  been  placed  at  once  upon  its  present  liberal 
footins:,  the  course  in  this  respect  pursued  at  the  outports  would  have 
been  different ;  warehouses  equally  secure  with  those  of  our  great  Lon- 
don establishments  would  have  been  at  once  erected,  instead  of  those 
just  described,  which  are  too  costly  to  admit  of  their  being  abandoned : 
and  the  effect  of  this  has  been  in  various  ways  injurious  to  commerce. 
The  merchants  at  the  outports,  feeling  jealous  of  those  in  London,  have 
always  importuned  the  Government  to  extend  to  themselves  the  indul- 
gences which  the  importers  in  the  metropolis  received,  and  to  which  they 
were  fairly  entitled  by  the  security  against  abuse  ^yhich  they  could  offer. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Government,  feeling  how  difficult  a  thing  it  is  to 
convince  any  body  of  men  of  the  reasonableness  of  distinctions  which 