


CHAP,  i]  FINANCE.  4G7 


SECTION  IV. 
PUBLIC  REVENUE  AND  EXPENDITURE. 

CHAPTER  I. 

FINANCIAL   SITUATION    OF    THE   KINGDOM   AT   THE    BEGINNING  OF  THE 

PRESENT  CENTURY. 

Financial  Condition  at  the  close  of  the  18th  Century — Triple  Assessment— Income-tax 
Imposed— Repealed  —  Enormous  Government  Expenditure —Fallacious  show  of  Pros- 
perity—Misery of  the  Working  Classes— Their  diminished  Command  of  the  Necessaries 
of  Life — Effect  of  Mechanical  Inventions  in  supporting  the  Country  under  DilBcultieg. 

In  order  to  give  an  intelligible  account  of  the  financial  state  of  the 
kingdom  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  it  is  necessary  to 
explain  briefly  the  system  which  had  been  brought  into  operation  by 
Mr.  Pitt  during  the  preceding  three  years. 

In  Xovcraber,  1797,  that  minister  had  recourse  to  what  he  was  pleased 
to  call  "  a  perfectly  new  and  solid  system  of  finance."  The  public 
expenditure  of  that  year  amounted  to  25 1-  millions,  of  which  sum  only 
6h  millions  were  provided  for  by  existing  unmortgaged  taxes,  leaving 
19  millions  to  be  raised  by  extraordinary  means.  In  the  then  condition  of 
the  money-market  it  was  felt  to  be  impossible  to  borrow  such  an  amount 
in  the  ordinary  manner,  that  is,  providing  by  new  taxes  for  the  payment 
of  only  the  permanent  annual  burthen  occasioned  by  the  increased  debt ; 
and  a  new  impost,  calculated  to  produce  seven  millions,  was  sanctioned 
by  Parliament,  which  impost  was  to  be  continued  until  it  should,  in  con- 
junction with  the  produce  of  the  sinking  fund,  repay  the  twelve  millions 
that  would  be  still  deficient.  This  new  svstem  of  finance  micrht  have 
been  entitled  to  the  character  given  of  it  by  Mr.  Pitt,  if  it  had  not  been 
probable — nay,  certain — that  in  the  following  years  an  equal  expendi- 
ture must  be  met  by  similar  means,  until  the  seven  millions  would  prove 
inadequate  even  for  the  payment  of  the  annual  interest  of  the  sums  for 

2  II  2 


4b".'^  rROGRF.SS  OF  TITF,  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

\Yhich  the  tax  was  imposed,  when  it  vrould  become  part  of  the  permanent 
burthens  of  the  country.  This  new  iuijjost,  to  which  tlie  name  of  "  triple 
assessment "  was  given,  was  in  fact  an  addition  made  to  the  assessed 
taxes,  "  in  a  triplicate  })roportion  to  their  previous  amount — limited, 
however,  to  the  tenth  of  each  person's  income," 

The  adoption  of  this,  or  some  similar  plan  of  financial  arrangement, 
was  hardly  a  matter  of  choice  with  the  m.inistcr,  by  whom  the  funding 
system,  as  ordinarily  practised,  could  not  have  been  any  further  pursued 
at  that  time.  Unfortunately  for  the  success  of  the  principle  which  it 
was  thus  sought  to  establish,  the  mode  in  which  it  Mas  proposed  to  raise 
the  seven  millions  of  additional  revenue  was  higlily  unpopular,  and 
indeed  it  has  always  excited  dissatisfaction  on  the  part  of  the  public  to 
be  called  on  for  the  payment  of  any  tax  from  which  they  have  not  the 
power  to  protect  themselves,  by  abstaining  from  the  use  of  the  taxed 
conunodity.  It  is  this  consideration  which  has  always  made  our  finance 
ministers  prefer  indirect  to  direct  taxation,  and  which  led,  during  the 
progress  of  a  long  and  expensive  war,  to  the  imposition  of  duties  that 
weighed  with  destructive  force  upon  the  springs  of  industry.  The  finan- 
cial diflBculties  by  w^hich  the  Government  was  then  embarrassed  may  be 
known  from  the  fact  that  a  loan  of  three  millions  was  raised  in  April, 
1798,  at  the  rate  of  200/.  3  per  cent,  stock,  and  55.  long  annuity  for 
each  100/.  borrowed,  being  at  the  rate  of  6^  per  cent.,  and  that  the  "  triple 
asesssment,"  which  was  calculated  to  produce  seven  millions,  yielded 
no  more  than  4^  millions.  In  the  following  December  the  triple  assess- 
ment was  repealed,  and  in  lieu  of  it  an  income-tax  was  imposed  at  the 
rate  of  10  per  cent,  upon  all  incomes  amounting  to  200/.  and  upwards, 
with  diminishing  rates  upon  smaller  incomes,  down  to  60/.  per  annum, 
below  which  rate  the  tax  was  not  to  apply.  This  tax  was  estimated  to 
produce  ten  millions  :  it  was  called  a  war  tax  ;  but  when  the  minister 
proceeded  to  mortgage  its  produce  to  defray  the  interest  of  loans  to  a 
large  amount,  such  a  name  appeared  to  be  little  better  than  a  delusion. 
Like  the  triple  assessment,  the  produce  of  the  income-tax  fell  greatly 
short  of  its  estimated  amount,  and  yielded  no  more  than  seven  millions,  a 
lai'ge  part  of  which  was  quickly  absorbed  to  defray  the  intei'est  of  loans 
for  which  it  was  successively  pledged.  In  1801,  after  deducting  the 
sums  thus  chargeable  on  it,  this  tax  produced  only  four  millions  towards 
the  national  expenditure.  In  proposing  a  loan  of  25^  millions  for  the 
service  of  that  year,  it  was  considered  inexpedient  to  mortgage  the 
income-tax  any  further,  and  new  taxes  were  imposed,  estimated  to  yield 
1,800,000/.  per  annum.  In  March,  1802,  peace  was  made  with  France, 
and  in  the  same  month  notice  was  given  by  the  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer, Mr.  Addington,  of  his  intention  to  repeal  the  income-tax, 
which  was  felt  to  be  highly  op])ressive,  and  had  become  more  and  more 
odious  to  the  people.     In  ellcctiug  this  repeal,  and  at  the  same  time  to 