


CHAP,  n  ]  INCOME  AND  EXPENDITURE.  479 

The  charge  of  inconsistency  on  the  part  of  our  finance  ministers  in 
those  (lays  is  fully  deserved  by  their  adoption  of  two  measures  having 
for  their  objects  results  exactly  opposed  to  each  other.  These  measures 
are,  first,  the  creation  of  what  is  called  the  dead-weight  annuity,  and 
secondly,  the  conversion  of  perpetual  annuities  into  annuities  for  lives 
or  for  terms  of  years  ;  the  efi'ect  of  the  first  being  to  bring  present  relief 
at  the  expense  of  future  years,  while  the  second  increases  the  present 
burthen  with  the  view  of  relieving  posterity.  When  the  measure  for 
commuting  the  half-pay  and  pensions  was  brought  forward  in  May, 
1822,  the  charge  upon  the  country  on  that  account  was  estimated  at 
about  five  millions.  This  was  necessarily  a  decreasing  charge,  and  from 
year  to  year  the  public  would  have  been  relieved  by  the  falling  in  of 
lives,  until  at  the  end  of  forty-five  years,  the  whole,  according  to  pro- 
bability, would  have  been  extinguished.  In  order  to  turn  to  present 
advantage  this  prospective  diminution  of  burthen,  it  was  attempted  to 
commute  the  whole  of  those  annually-diminishing  payments  into  an 
unvarying  annuity  to  last  during  the  whole  probable  term  of  forty-five 
years,  and  it  was  computed  that,  by  the  sale  of  a  fixed  annuity  of 
2,800,000/.,  funds  might  be  obtained  in  order  to  meet  the  diminishing 
demands  of  the  quarterly  claimants.  This  scheme  was  only  partially 
carried  into  execution  by  means  of  an  arrangement  made  with  the  Bank 
of  England,  under  which  that  corporation  advanced  to  the  Governm.ent, 
in  nearly  equal  payments,  during  the  six  years  from  1823  to  1828,  the 
sum  of  13,089,419/.  as  the  purchase-money  of  an  annual  annuity  of 
585,740/.  to  be  paid  until  1867.  The  result  of  this  operation  has  been 
to  save  the  immediate  payment  during  the  years  in  which  it  was  in  pro- 
gress of  9,574,979/.,  and  in  return  to  fix  upon  the  country  the  annual 
payment  for  thirty-nine  years  thereafter  of  585,740/. 

In  the  prosecution  of  the  opposite  plan  of  converting  perpetual  annui- 
ties into  annuities  terminable  at  stated  periods,  or  upon  the  occurrence 
of  certain  natural  contingencies,  the  amount  of  terminable  annuities  has 
advanced  from  1,888,835/.,  at  which  it  stood  at  the  end  of  the  war,  to 
3,755,099/.  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1850.  It  would  occupy  consi- 
derable space  to  exhibit  the  progress  of  this  conversion  from  year  to 
year  ;  and  it  will  probably  suffice  to  exemplify  the  result  of  the  operation 
during  one  year  (1834).  In  that  year  the  perpetual  annuities  received 
in  exchange  amounted  to  6,500,169/.  of  capital,  bearing  an  annual 
charge  of  202,831/.,  and  there  were  granted  in  lieu  of  the  same — 