

It  is  necessary  here  to  explain  briefly  the  financial  plans  which  have 
at  different  times  within  the  present  century  been  proposed  by  the 
Government  and  sanctioned  by  Parliament. 

At  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  in  1803,  it  became  necessary  to  meet 
as  far  as  possible  the  increased  expenditure  of  the  country  by  the  impo- 
sition of  new  taxes,  among  which  was  included  the  income  tax,  under 
the  name  of  a  property  tax.  The  greater  part  of  these  taxes  were  de- 
clared to  be  of  a  temporary  character,  and  were  to  cease  in  six  months 
after  the  re-establishment  of  peace.  It  soon  became  apparent,  however, 
that  to  adhere  to  this  stipulation  would  be  impossible,  since  the  exigen- 
cies of  the  country  required  the  contraction  of  loans,  the  interest  of 
which  could  not  be  provided,  except  by  the  gradual  appropriation  of 
one  portion  after  another  of  the  proceeds  of  the  war  taxes.  Under  these 
circumstances,  it  was  j)roposed,  in  1807,  by  Lord  Henry  Petty,  then 
riiancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  to  depart  from  the  usual  practice  of  con- 
fining the  financial  arrangements  to  the  current  year,  and  to  determine 
at  once,  as  far  as  was  possible,  the  amount  which  it  would  be  necessary 
to  raise  during  each  one  of  a  series  of  years,  providing  beforehand  the 
means  for  meeting  the  increasing  burthen.  It  was  assumed  that  the 
loans  to  be  raised  in  1807  and  the  two  following  years  should  be  each 
12,000,000/.;  that  for  1810  w^as  stated  at  14^000,000/.,  and  during 
each  of  the  ten  ensuing  years  the  amount  was  assumed  at  16,000,000/. 
It  was  calculated  that  the  interest  upon  those  loans  would  be  met,  uj) 
to  that  for  the  year  1811,  by  the  falling  in  of  annuities,  after  which, 
the  war  taxes  were  to  be  pledged,  at  the  rate  of  10  per  cent.,  upon  each 
loan  ;  5  per  cent,  to  pay  the  interest,  and  5  per  cent,  to  accumulate  as 
a  sinking  fund  for  discharging  the  principal.  The  deficiency  that  would 
be  occasioned  by  this  appropriation  year  by  year  of  the  war  taxes  was  to 
be  met  by  supplementary  loans,  for  the  interest  on  which,  and  to  provide 
a  sinking  fund  for  their  redemption,  it  would  be  necessary  to  impose 
new  taxes.     By  these  means   it  was  expected  that  the  country  would 

■2  I  2 


484  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

have  been  able  to  meet  the  charges  of  an  expensive  war  during  a  seiies 
of  years  with  only  a  moderate  addition  to  the  public  burthens.  The 
ministry,  of  which  Lord  Henry  Petty  formed  a  part,  having  gone  out 
of  office  before  the  next  annual  finance  arrangement  was  brought  for- 
ward, his  plan  was  abandoned,  and  no  attemj)t  has  since  been  made  by 
any  minister  to  form  financial  arrangements  embracing  the  circumstances 
of  future  years. 