

Between  1841  and  1849  taxes  on  consumption  were  repealed  and 
reduced  to  the  extent  of  8,501,225/. ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
income  tax,  assumed  to  yield  5,000,000/.,  has  been  imposed,  showing 
a  reduction  of  taxation  amounting  to  3,501,225/."  The  effect  of  these 
successive  reductions  is  very  significantly  indicative  of  the  situndness  of 
the  system  of  reducing  taxes  upon  articles  of  general  consumption,  the 


CHAP.  Ill  ]  PKODrCE  Ol'  TAXES.  491 

reveniu!  from  the  dilTbrent  sources  comprehendcMl  in  the  foregoing  table 
haviiio;  amounted  in  1H49  to  more  than  nine  millions  sterling  beyond 
th(^  computed  amount,  after  making  due  allowance  for  the  increase  of 
77^  per  cent,  to  the  number  of  consumers. 

At  each  of  the  periods  embraced  in  the  foregoing  calculations,  the 
produce  of  stamp  duties  was  materially  beyond  the  amount  which  they 
were  computed  to  yield,  and  even  beyond  that  which  they  should  have 
yielded,  taking  into  consideration  the  increase  of  the  population.  This 
result  is  no  doubt  ascribable  to  the  operation  of  the  probate  and  legacy 
duties,  which  are  collected  under  the  management  of  the  Stamp-office. 
It  is  in  the  nature  of  these  duties  to  be — more  than  almost  any  others — 
imavoidable.  If  a  heavy  tax  is  laid  upon  wine,  or  upon  male  servants, 
or  any  similar  object,  every  one  has  it  in  his  power  to  avoid  the  pay- 
ment, by  foregoing  the  use  of  the  taxed  article  ;  but  as  every  one  must 
die,  and  must  leave  his  property  behind  him,  and  as  few  persons  com- 
paratively, like  to  quit  the  world  without  making  such  a  disposition  of 
their  possessions  as  is  dictated  by  a  sense  of  justice,  or  by  feelings  of 
friendship  and  affection,  the  cases  will  be  few  in  number  wherein  pro- 
perty of  even  moderate  amount,  which  devolves  by  succession,  is  not 
brought  within  the  operation  of  these  duties.  The  motive  of  saving  to 
their  families  the  amount  of  the  legacy  duty,  which  might  otherwise 
influence  some  persons  to  omit  making  any  testamentary  disposition  of 
their  property,  is  removed  by  the  regulation  which  subjects  property  in 
such  cases  to  a  much  higher  rate  of  probate  duty  (generally  50  per 
cent.)  than  is  chargeable  when  a  will  is  proved.  If  we  except  those 
duties  which  operate  in  the  nature  of  moral  restraints — such,  for  in- 
stance, as  the  duty  upon  spirituous  liquors,  when  not  sufficiently  high 
to  excite  smuggling — there  are  not  any  taxes  to  the  effects  of  which 
some  social  evil  may  not  be  ascribed.  It  has  been  objected  to  the 
probate  and  legacy  duties,  that  falling  inevitably  upon  capital,  they  im- 
pair the  funds  applicable  to  the  maintenance  of  labour,  and  thereby 
diminish  the  future  production  of  the  country.  "  If,"  says  3Ir.  Ricardo, 
'•  a  legacy  of  lOOOZ.  be  subject  to  a  tax  of  100/.,  the  legatee  considers 
his  legacy  as  only  900/.,  and  feels  no  particular  motive  to  save  the  100/. 
duty  from  his  expenditure,  and  thus  the  capital  of  the  country  is  dimi- 
nished ;  but  if  he  had  really  received  1000/.,  and  had  been  required 
to  pay  100/.  as  a  tax  on  income,  on  wine,  on  horses,  or  on  servants, 
he  would  probably  have  diminished,  or  rather  not  increased,  his  expen- 
diture by  that  sum,  and  the  capital  of  the  country  would  have  been 
unimpaired."* 