


(HAP.  III.]  niODUCE  OF  TAXES.  501 

The  Government  has,  shiee  1840,  acted  upon  the  suggestion  here 
thrown  out,  of  re])eaUng  many  of  the  comparatively  unpro.luctive 
Customs  duties  which  then  swelled  the  taritf,  and  we  see  that  the 
money  collected  upon  the  remaining  more  important  articles  amply 
compensates  for  the  amount  given  up. 

The  evil  effects  of  high  duties,  as  regards  consumption,  will  be  better 
shown  in  the  section  especially  treating  on  that  branch  of  our  subject. 

It  would  have  been  a  favourable  circumstance  for  commerce,  and 
consequently  for  the  progi-ess  of  social  improvement,  if  governments  had 
never  imposed  any  duties  upon  foreign  productions  excc])t  with  the 
single  object  of  obtaining  revenue.  Duties  of  regulation,  whatever  may 
be  the  motives  for  their  adoption,  are  always  in  their  ultimate  effects 
productive  of  more  evil  than  good,  a  fact  which  has  been  kept  out  of 
view^  principally  because  the  good,  which  is  frequently  very  doubtful  at 
best,  is  enjoyed  by  individuals  through  whom  it  is  rendered  apparent, 
while  the  evil  has  partly  consisted  in  the  absence  or  rather  the  preven- 
tion of  good,  and  has  operated  silently  but  most  injuriously  upon  the 
welfare  of  the  community  at  large. 

Duties  have  too  frequently  been  imposed  in  the  spirit  of  retaliation, — 
an  unwise  and  unworthy  spirit,  whether  adopted  by  individuals  or  by  na- 
tions, and  which  was  long  ago  thus  ably  exposed  by  Dr.  Franklin  : — 

"  Suppose  a  country,  X,  with  three  manufactures,  as  cloth,  silk,  iron, 
supplying  three  other  countries,  A,  B,  C,  but  is  desirous  of  increasing 
the  vent  and  raising  the  price  of  cloth  in  favour  of  her  own  clothiers. 

"  In  order  to  do  this,  she  forbids  the  importation  of  foreign  cloths 
from  A. 

"  A,  in  return,  forbids  silks  from  X. 

"  Then  the  silk-workers  complain  of  a  decay  of  trade. 

"  And  X,  to  content  them,  forbids  silks  from  B. 

"  B,  in  return,  forbids  iron- ware  from  X. 

"  Then  the  iron-workers  complain  of  decay. 

"  And  X  forbids  the  importation  of  iron  from  C. 

"  C,  in  return,  forbids  cloth  from  X. 

"  What  is  got  by  all  these  prohibitions  ? 

"  Answer. — All  four  find  their  common  stock  of  the  enjoyments  and 
conveniences  of  life  diminished." 

In  levying  duties  of  regulation,  governments  legislate  for  the  benefit 
of  the  producers  only  of  the  country,  leaving  out  of  sight  the  interests 
of  the  consumers — the  universal  class — all  of  whom  are  thus  placed  at 
a  disadvantage  for  the  supposed  profit  of  a  few  among  their  number. 
The  minister  acts,  without  doubt,  in  accordance  with  the  feeling  of  the 
majority,  when,  in  return  for  the  imposition  by  a  foreign  government  of 
any  duty  which  tends  to  limit  the  trade  of  some  of  the  producers  in  his 