


( uAi-.  111.]  rnoDucE  OF  taxes.  603 

was  shown  very  forcibly  during  the  discussions  in  the  American  Con- 
nress  wliicli  pieccded  its  adoption  of  the  tariff  of  1824,  and  which  are 
thus  described  in  the  despatch  of  our  inini.-ter  at  AVashington  to  Mr. 
( 'anning,  dated  30th  May  in  that  year  :  — "  The  example  of  Great  Bri- 
tain," says  Mr.  Addington,  "  has  been  adduced  as  the  main  support  of 
the  arguments  u.sed  on  either  side,  both  parties  admitting  with  ecjual 
zeal  and  admiration  the  fact  of  her  unrivalled  prosperity,  but  each 
ascribing  it  to  those  grounds  which  best  suited  their  own  line  of  reason- 
ing. The  recent  measures  adopted  by  her  for  the  liberalization  of  her 
external  commercial  system,  and  her  emancipation  from  her  ancient 
system  of  restriction,  are  pretty  generally  ascribed  by  the  advocates  of 
the  tariflp  to  a  desire  to  inveigle  other  nations  into  an  imitation  of  her 
example,  with  the  Intention,  as  soon  as  they  shall  have  embarked  suth- 
eiently  deeply  in  her  schemes,  of  turning  short  round  upon  them,  and 
resuming  to  their  detriment  her  old  system  of  protection  and  prohibition. 
This  scheme,  they  affirm,  Great  Britain  will,  by  her  superior  means,  be 
enabled  to  execute  without  hazard  to  herself."  The  following  passage, 
taken  from  Mr.  Addington's  letter  on  this  occasion,  will  show  how  prac- 
tically mischievous  to  ourselves  are  the  restrictions  which  we  lay  upon 
the  Importation  of  foreign  produce  :  — "  I  have  only  to  add,  that  had  no 
restrictions  on  the  importation  of  foreign  grain  existed  in  Europe 
generally,  and  especially  in  Great  Britain,  I  have  little  doubt  that  the 
tariff  would  never -have  passed  through  either  House  of  Congress,  since 
the  great  agricultural  States,  and  Penn.'^ylvania  especially,  the  main 
mover  of  the  question,  would  have  been  inditferent  if  not  opposed  to  its 
enactment." 


501  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


AVAR     EXPENDITURE. 


Expenditure  in  last  years  of  War — Consequent  Exhaustion  and  Distress— Comparative 
Expenditure  in  War  and  Peace — Votes  for  Army,  Navy,  Ordnance,  1801  to  184:9 — Loans 
and  Subsidies  to  Foreign  States — Value  of  Stores  furnislied  to  our  Allies  in  1814. 

In  examining  the  details  of  the  public  expenditure,  we  cannot  fail  to  be 
struck  with  the  exceedingly  great  proportion  that  is  absorbed  by  the 
expense  attending  tbe  naval  and  military  force  which  circumstances  have 
made  it  necessary  for  us  to  maintain.  In  the  last  year  of  the  war  (1814) 
the  sums  expended  for  the  army,  navy,  and  ordnance  service,  amounted 
to  71,686,707/.,  and  if  to  this  sum  is  added  the  interest  of  the  debt,  all 
of  which  had  been  incurred  in  the  prosecution  of  wars,  it  will  be  seen 
that  these  branches  of  expenditure  amounted,  in  that  one  year,  to 
101,738,072/.,  a  large  part  of  which  was  expended  in  foreign  countries, 
and  consequently  was  abstracted  from  the  capital  of  the  nation.  The 
drain  upon  our  resources  which  had  been  thus  in  operation  for  a  con- 
tinuous series  of  years  affords  alone  quite  sufficient  explanation  of  the 
state  of  exhaustion  in  which  the  country  was  placed  during  the  first  few 
years  that  followed  the  restoration  of  peace,  without  our  being  required 
to  ascribe  any  part  of  the  evil  to  the  cause  so  vaguely  assigned  at  the 
time,  namely, — the  transition  from  war  to  peace.  In  an  opposite  state 
of  circumstances,  where  the  transition  should  be  from  peace  to  war,  it  is 
easy  to  conceive  that  such  a  destruction  of  property  might  be  encoun- 
tered as  would  bring  on  a  considerable  derangement  of  the  commercial 
dealings  of  the  country;  but  that  the  return  of  peace,  accompanied  as  it 
is  by  a  remission  of  taxes,  and  by  the  opening  of  various  channels  that 
had  before  been  closed  against  our  trade,  should  })roduce  evils  of  the 
nature  alluded  to,  appears  little  better  than  a  practical  contradiction. 
The  country  did,  indeed,  at  that  time  exhibit  all  the  signs  of  exhaustion, 
and  the  single  fact  of  that  exhaustion  appearing  after  the  restoration  of 
peace  was  received  as  sufficient  proof  that  it  was  caused  by  the  cessation 
of  war.  The  ceasing  of  a  war  demand  for  various  articles  consumed  by 
the  army,  or  which  were  exported  to  provide  payment  of  our  loans  and 
subsidies  to  foreign  countries,  may  have  occasioned  loss  to  the  compara- 
tively small  number  of  individuals  who  had  supplied  the  Government,  or 
had  conducted  certain  liranches  of  the  export  trade ;  but  those  persons, 
and  those  departments  of  business,  must  have  been  insignificant  when 