

The  whole  subject  of  taxation  is  one  of  the  highest  importance,  and 
yet  it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  principles  by  which  it  should  be  governed 
are  but  partially  understood.  If  even  our  finance  ministers  had  at  any 
time  conceived  plans  for  establishing  this  subject  upon  a  sounder  footing, 
they  would  probably  have  been  withheld,  by  the  situation  in  which  this 
country  is  placed  through  the  burthen  of  its  obligations  to  the  public 
creditor,  from  attempting  any  great  experimental  alteration  of  the 
existing  system.  So  long  as  this  check  to  improvement  shall  operate, 
it  may  be  hopeless  to  advocate  the  adoption  of  any  radical  change,  but 
it  must,  under  any  circumstances,  be  of  advantage  to  know  the  facts 
that  have  accompanied  the  course  pursued. 

Among  the  reductions  effected  from  1831  inclusive,  several  are  of 
duties  which  were  partial  and  unjust  in  their  operation,  while  others 
were  highly  impolitic  in  their  tendency,  and  prevented  the  extension  of 

2  K 


498  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

certain  branches  of  industry.  Among  the  former  may  be  mentioned 
the  duty  upon  coals  carried  coastwise,  which  acted  in  aggravation  of  the 
natural  disadvantage  experienced  by  the  inhabitants  of  those  parts  of 
the  country  to  which  fuel  was  conveyed  at  a  great  expense,  while  the 
districts  in  which  coal  abounds,  and  where,  consequently,  its  cost  is 
small,  were  exempt  from  the  tax.  Among  the  duties  to  which  tlie 
charge  of  impolicy  is  applied  was  that  upon  printed  cottons,  the  evil 
effects  of  which  have  been  sufficiently  explained  in  a  former  section. 
The  discriminating  duties  upon  sugar  and  coffee,  the  produce  of  British 
possessions  in  India,  have  also  been  removed,  a  measure  which  could 
not  fail  to  have  the  best  effects  upon  oiu'  commerce  with  tliat  part  of 
the  world,  and  a  long  list  of  articles,  the  revenue  derived  from  which 
was  insignificant  in  amount,  but  hurtful  in  its  effects  upon  various 
branches  of  the  national  industry,  have  either  been  removed  from  the 
tariff  or  the  duties  upon  them  reduced  to  rates  that  are  merely  nominal. 
The  Custom-house  accounts  exhibited  in  1842  a  list  of  190  articles 
upon  which  duties  were  levied,  independent  of  such  as  were  not  con- 
sidered worth  enumerating,  but  were  described  as  "  all  other  articles," 
and  the  duties  upon  which,  in  that  year,  amounted  to  73,351/.  It  is  a 
curious  fact,  that  out  of  this  long  array  of  substances,  the  net  produce 
of  the  duties  upon  which  amounted,  in  1840,  to  23,341,813/.,  the  large 
proportion  of  93i  per  cent.,  or  21.872,508/.,  was  collected  upon 
eighteen  articles,  as  shown  in  the  following  list.  By  extending  the  list 
so  as  to  comprise  all  articles  which  yield  annually  10,000/.  and  upwards, 
it  will  be  found  to  comprehend,  altogether,  only  forty-five  articles, 
yielding  22,742,601/.,  or  97^  per  cent,  of  the  whole,  leaving  145 
articles,  besides  all  those  unenumerated,  and  which  yielded  599,212/., 
or  2i  per  cent,  of  the  produce. 