


502  PROGRESS  OF  THE  XAllOX.  [sec  i^. 

own  country,  he  attempts  to  punish  the  oifending  nation  by  aiming  a 
similar  blow  at  some  branch  of  its  industry.  The  doctrine  of  "  an  eye 
for  an  eye  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth  "  is  never  more  fully  nor  more  fatally 
acted  upon  than  in  commercial  legislation,  although  in  the  present  day, 
and  in  our  own  country,  the  evil  tendency  of  this  anti-social  spirit  has 
been  demonstrated  until  it  has  become  hardly  possible  for  any  one  to 
hazard  an  argument  in  its  favour,  ^^'e  may  not,  in  every  case,  have 
imposed  retaliatory  duties  precisely  in  the  manner  supposed  by  Dr. 
Franklin,  but  our  adherence  to  the  principle  involved  in  them  is  still  but 
too  apparent,  and  especially  appears  whenever  it  is  proposed  to  remove 
or  relax  any  duty  upon  importation.  In  these  cases,  without  consider- 
ing whether  such  a  relaxation  will  be  beneficial  to  ourselves,  and  then 
adopting  it  accordingly,  we  have,  until  the  last  four  years,  sought  to 
render  the  measure  subservient  to  another  object,  that  of  producing 
a  corresponding  relaxation  on  the  part  of  the  foreign  country  of  pro- 
duction in  favour  of  some  branch  of  our  national  industry.  In  this 
endeavour  we  have  but  seldom  proved  successful.  The  feeling  of  com- 
mercial rivalry  too  generally  disposes  governments  to  imagine  that  any 
proposals  to  such  an  effect  must  have  some  covert  and  selfish  aim  ;  and, 
having  once  rendered  our  proposed  relaxation  contingent  upon  some 
corresponding  proceeding  on  the  part  of  another  country,  the  refusal  of 
our  offers  was  allowed  to  bind  us  to  the  continuance  of  a  course  known 
and  felt  to  be  prejudicial  to  ourselves.  The  course  which  we  have 
recently  adopted  of  taking  our  measures  on  these  subjects  independently 
of  the  conduct  or  policy  of  other  nations,  shows  greater  wisdom  and 
ma""nanimity,  as  well  as  greater  confidence  in  the  propriety  of  our  pro- 
ceedings, and  may  reasonably  give  us  the  full  assurance  that  the  course 
of  events  must  soon  lead  foreign  governments  to  the  willing  adoption  of 
principles  from  which  they  might  have  been  deterred  solely  through  mis- 
apprehension of  our  motives.  The  commercial  greatness  of  this  country 
was  achieved  under  the  prevalence  of  a  system  of  restriction  and  mono- 
poly, favoured  by  circumstances  altogether  diderent  from  those  in  which 
the  States  of  Europe  are  placed  at  this  time.  ^Ve  have  become  con- 
vinced that  a  rigid  perseverance  in  that  system  of  exclusiveness,  if  even 
it  were  practicable,  would  now  be  no  longer  profitable,  and  have  been  at 
much  pains  to  produce  this  conviction  in  the  minds  of  other  people  both 
by  means  of  the  press  and  by  negotiations,  but  we  too  long  left  compara- 
tively untried  the  strongest  argument  that  could  be  used  in  favour  of 
our  altered  views — that  afforded  by  our  unreserved  adoption  of  a  more 
liberal  policy.  The  success  that  accompanied  our  restrictive  regula- 
tions has  been,  not  unreasonably  perhaps,  mistaken  for  their  effect,  and 
it  was  required  from  us  that  we  should  give  to^  the  world  a  practical 
illustration  of  our  conversion  before  we  could  expect  to  produce  a  con- 
viction of  our  sincerity.     The  necessity  for  our  adoj)ting  such  a  course 