

The  Crown  is  entitled  to  certain  revenues  as  Duke  of  Lancaster,  and 
(while  there  is  no  heir  apparent)  as  Duke  of  Cornwall  also  ;  which 
revenues  have  not  hitherto  been  relinquished  to  the  public. 

The  difference  observable  between  the  amount  of  the  Civil  Li.-t 
granted  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign  to  William  IV.,  and  that  esta- 
blished in  1837,  was  occasioned,  first,  by  the  absence,  at  that  time,  of  a 
consort,  and  next,  by  the  new  arrangement  made  regarding  pensions. 
At  the  time  the  Civil  List  for  the  Queen  was  under  discussion,  it  had 
been  determined  to  examine,  by  means  of  a  Committee  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  into  the  propriety  of  continuing  the  various  pensions  there- 
unto paid  out  of  the  grant  of  75,000/.  per  annum.  As  it  could  not  be 
known  what  the  result  of  this  inquiry  might  be,  no  provision  could  pro- 
perly be  made  by  Parliament  for  meeting  the  charge  for  such  pensions 
as  it  might  be  thought  proper  to  continue,  and  the  point  was  reserved  to 
be  dealt  with  by  the  legislature,  as  might  be  thought  fit  at  a  future 
stage  of  the  proceeding,  when  the  needful  provision  would  have  to  be 
made  by  the  House  of  Commons.  The  arrangement  of  limiting  the 
amount  of  original  pensions  that  may  be  granted  in  any  one  year  to 
1200/.,  can  hardly  fail  to  prove  a  measure  of  economy  on  the  part  of  the 
public,  when  compared  with  the  arrangement  established  at  the  acces- 
sion of  AViiliam  IV.  On  the  suppo.sition  of  the  continuance  of  all 
existing  pensions  for  the   lives   of  the   individuals   by  whom  they  are 


512  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

enjoyed,  the  average  annual  reduction  from  mortality  would  not  be  less 
than  3000/.  })er  annum,  if  even  the  ages  of  the  recipients  were  so  low, 
on  the  average,  as  34  years,  which  is  certainly  much  under  the  actual 
average.  In  the  case  supposed,  there  would  therefore  be  a  progressive 
saving  from  year  to  year  of  1800/.,  until  tiie  death  of  the  existing  pen- 
sioners, when  the  amount  to  be  annually  provided  by  Parliament  would 
not  exceed  30,000/.  in  place  of  75,000/.  paid  under  the  former  arrange- 
ment. In  ])roportion  as  the  average  ages  of  the  pensioners  exceed  34 
years,  the  progressive  saving  will  be  greater,  and  the  ultimate  charge 
upon  the  public  less  than  here  stated. 

The  sums  included  in  the  foregoing  table  under  the  head  of  Mis- 
cellaneous Services  comprise  a  great  variety  of  objects,  and  necessarily 
differ  materially  from  year  to  year.  The  nature  of  these  services  will 
be  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  following  abstract,  which  is  taken  from 
th.e  Finance  Accounts  for  1849  : — 

£.  .0.  d. 

