

In  nothing  is  the  improvement  here  mentioned  more  apparent  than  in 
the  condition  of  the  dwellings  of  the  middle  classes.  As  one  instance, 
it  is  not  necessary  to  go  back  much  beyond  half  a  century  to  arrive  at 
the  time  when  prosperous  shopkeepers  in  the  leading  thoroughfares  of 
London  were  without  that  now  necessary  article  of  furniture,  a  carpet, 
in  their  ordinary  sitting-rooms :  luxury  in  this  particular  seldom  went 
further  with  them  than  a  well-scoured  floor  strewn  with  sand,  and  the 
furniture  of  the  apartments  was  by  no  means  inconsistent  with  this  pri- 
mitive, and,  as  we  should  now  say,  comfortless  state  of  things. .  In  the 
same  houses  we  now  see,  not  carpets  merely,  but  many  articles  of  furni- 
ture which  were  formerly  in  use  only  among  the  nobility  and  gentry : 
the  walls  are  covered  with  paintings  or  engravings,  and  the  a])artments 
contain  evidences  that  some  among  the  inmates  cultivate  one  or  more  of 
those  elegant  accomplishments  which  tend  so  delightfully  to  refine  the 
minds  of  individuals,  and  to  sweeten  the  intercourse  of  families. 

The  imj)rovement  here  noticed  has  not  hitherto  been  extended  in  an 


I 


CH.U-.  i.J  CONSUMPTION.  523 

equal  degree  to  the  dwellings  of  the  working  classes.  These,  especially 
in  large  towns,  are  still  for  the  most  part  comfortless,  and  even  unwhole- 
some, ill  furnished  and  ill  kept,  betraying  a  lamentable  want  of  jjelf- 
respect  in  their  inmates,  with  a  degree  of  recklessness  that  speaks  un- 
favourably for  their  moral  jjrogress.  The  inquiries  that  have  of  late  years 
been  made  on  the  subject  by  the  London  and  the  Manchester  Statistical 
Societies,  and  by  the  Central  Society  of  P^ducation,  have  brought  to  light 
an  amount  of  debasement  which  is  truly  appalling,  while  they  have 
served  to  indicate  the  means  through  which  the  evil  may  be  remedied, 
without  even  calling  for  any  great  pecuniary  sacrifice  on  the  part  of 
those  who  may  apply  themselves  to  the  good  work.  It  is  worthy  of 
remark,  that  this  comfortless  condition  of  the  dwellings  of  the  poor  is 
not  seen  in  all  localities.  In  some  places  where  no  other  appearances  in 
the  state  of  society  would  seem  to  indicate  it,  there  is  to  be  found  an 
extraordinary  degree  of  respectability  in  this  particular.  The  town  of 
Sheffield,  for  instance,  contains  a  large  manufacturing  population,  by 
no  means  remarkable  for  orderly  conduct.  The  town  itself  is  ill  built 
and  dirty,  beyond  the  usual  condition  of  English  towns ;  but  it  is  the 
custom  for  each  family  among  the  labouring  population  to  occupy  a 
separate  dwelling,  the  rooms  in  which  are  furnished  in  a  very  comfortable 
manner,  the  floors  are  carpeted,  and  the  tables  are  usually  of  mahogany  ; 
chests  of  drawers  of  the  same  material  are  commonly  seen,  and  so  in 
most  cases  is  a  clock  also,  the  possession  of  which  article  of  furniture 
lias  often  been  pointed  out  as  the  certain  indication  of  prosperity  and  of 
personal  repectahility  on  the  part  of  the  working  man.  It  would  be 
difficult  to  account  for  this  favourable  peculiarity  in  the  town  of  Sheffield, 
which,  in  this  respect,  offers  a  strong  contrast  to  other  manufacturing 
towns  in  the  same  county ;  but  it  is  greatly  to  be  desired  that  this  pe- 
culiarity should  be  made  to  cease  through  the  growing  desire  of  other 
communities  to  surround  themselves  with  the  like  comfortable  emblems 
of  respectahility.  In  large  towns,  whose  populations  are  in  a  great 
measure  made  up  of  workmen  and  their  families,  such,  for  instance,  as 
Leeds  or  Manchester,  the  progress  of  improvement  in  this  direction 
must  probably  be  left  to  the  operation  of  general  causes,  and  will  follow 
rather  than  lead  to  the  enlightenment  of  the  people  ;  but  in  the  seats  of 
our  principal  manufactures  there  are  to  be  found  many  villages  and 
small  towns,  the  greater  part  of  whose  inhabitants  are  engaged  in  the 
service  of  one  or  a  few  master  manufticturers,  and  whose  condition,  both 
physical  and  moral,  may  be  gi-eatly  influenced  by  their  employers.  A 
very  little  encouragement,  if  regard  be  had  to  the  feelings  of  those  who 
are  to  be  benefited,  and  especially  if  their  honest  pride  of  independence 
be  not  offended,  will  suffice  to  induce  habits  of  cleanliness,  order,  and 
propriety  in  their  families,  and  may  lead  to  a  degree  of  refinement  that 
will  wean  them  from  purely  sensual  indulgences,  which,  although  thev 