

Where  so  large  a  projiortion  of  persons  apply  themselves  to  pro- 
ductive labour  with  so  many  natural  and  acquii-ed  advantages  as  are 
offered  in  this  country,  the  sum  of  human  enjoyment,  so  far  as  the  same 
can  be  said  to  depend  upon  the  possession  of  the  necessaries,  conveniences, ' 
and  luxuries  of  life,  must  needs  be  very  great,  since  the  whole  of  what 
they  produce  beyond  what  is  wanted  to  replace  the  capital  expended  in 
that  production,  must  be  either  consumed  by  them  or  added  to  the 
capital  of  the  country,  and  in  this  way  will  be  made  to  increase  the 
power  of  production  in  future  years. 

In  the  division  among  the  people  of  the  produce  of  the  national 
industry,  a  great  amount  of  inequality  is  no  doubt  observable, — an 
amount  greater,  perhaps,  than  is  consistent  with  the  degree  of  perfection 
to  which  human  institutions  may  at  some  time  be  brought  :  but  there  is 
reason  to  believe  that,  great  as  this  inequality  now  is,  it  was  in  former 
times  much  greater ;    and  that   hereafter,    when   the  accumulation  of 


522  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sfx.  v. 

capital  will  probably  still  further  than  at  present  exceed  the  increase  of 
population,  the  division  must  necessarily  become  more  equal ;  the  rich 
and  powerful  will  in  such  case  still  have  made  additions  to  the  sum  of 
their  enjoyments,  but  the  labourers  will  have  added  in  a  still  greater 
degree  to  their  means  of  comfortable  subsistence.  Whether,  in  any 
country,  and  at  any  given  time,  the  accumulation  of  capital  proceeds  in 
a  quicker  ratio  than  the  increase  of  population,  is  a  question  hiirdly 
capable  of  being  decided  by  direct  proof.  It  has  been  argued,  by  high 
authorities,  that  there  is  under  all  circumstances  a  tendency  in  popula- 
tion to  press  upon  the  means  of  subsistence.  If,  however,  we  look  back 
to  the  condition  of  the  mass  of  the  people  as  it  existed  in  this  country, 
even  so  recently  as  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  and  then  look 
around  us  at  the  indications  of  greater  comfort  and  respectability  that 
meet  us  on  every  side,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  doubt  that  here,  in 
England  at  least,  the  elements  of  social  improvement  have  been  success- 
fully at  work,  and  that  they  have  been  and  are  producing  an  increased 
amount  of  comfort  to  the  great  bulk  of  the  people.  This  improvement 
is  by  no  means  confined  to  those  who  are  called,  by  a  somewhat  arbi- 
trary distinction,  the  working  classes,  but  is  enjoyed  in  some  degree  or 
other  by  tradesmen,  shopkeepers,  farmers, — in  short,  by  every  class  of 
men  whose  personal  and  family  comforts  admitted  of  material  increase. 
Higher  in  the  scale  of  society,  the  same  cause  has  been  productive  of 
increase  of  luxury,  of  increased  encouragement  to  science,  literature, 
and  the  fine  arts,  and  of  additions  to  the  elegancies  of  life,  the  indulgence 
in  which  has  acted  upon  the  condition  of  the  less-favoured  classes 
directly  by  means  of  the  additional  employment  it  has  caused,  and  indi- 
rectly also  by  reason  of  the  general  refinement  in  manners  which  has 
thus  been  brought  about. 