

Vagrants 10,807 

Prosecutions 34,218 

liieutenancy  and  Militia 16,976 

Constables 659 

Professional  Charges 8,990 

Coroners 8,153 

Salaries 16,315 

Incidental  Expenses 17,456 

Miscellaneous 15,890 

£315,805 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  foregoing  abstracts  that  the  expenses  occa- 
sioned by  criminal  prosecutions  and  by  the  maintenance  of  prisoners 
form  a  considerable  item  in  the  annual  disbursements.  This  was,  in 
1835,  a  subject  of  complaint  on  the  part  of  the  country  gentlemen, 
who  justly  contended  that  it  was  unfair  to  subject  them  to  the  cost  of 
repressing  crimes  committed  against  society  at  large.  It  will  be  seen, 
by  comparing  the  abstracts  above,  for  the  years  1792  and  1844,  that  the 
increase  in  this  branch  of  county  expenditure  has  been  out  of  all  pro- 
portion beyond  the  increase  of  the  population  ;  and  there  is  much 
reason  for  supposing  that  a  great  part  of  the  excess  has  been  occasioned, 
not  so  much  by  any  increase  in  the  number  of  prosecutions,  as  by  the 
want  of  an  efficient  control  on  the  part  of  the  magistrates.  In  support 
of  this  opinion,  it  may  be  stated,  on  the  authority  of  a  report  laid  before 
Parliament,  that  offences  prosecuted  in  the  borough  courts  in  Leeds, 
where  the  proceedings  are  properly  managed,  have  not  on  the  average 
exceeded  4/.  95.  Qd.  for  each  prosecution  ;  while  the  charge  for  prose- 
cuting the  like  offences  before  the  assizes  at  York,  have  amounted  on 
the  average  of  cases,  to  50/.  The  complaint  of  the  landowners  went 
to  the  principle,  as  already  explained,  and,  appearing  to  be  well 
founded,  a  vote  of  the  House  of  Commons  authorized  the  issue  of 
110,000/.  from  the  (Consolidated  Fund  to  defray  the  charges  that  might 
be  so  incurred  within  the  year.  This  sum,  owing  probably  to  the 
greater  \'igilance  induced  by  the  Parliamentary  inquiries,  was  found  to 
exceed  by  more  than  40,000/.  the  amount  required,  and  the  vote  was 
accordingly  reduced  in  the  following  year. 

As  regards  another  and  an  analogous  branch  of  expenditure — the 
repair  of  churches,  and  certain  expenses  attending  the  celebration  of 
public  worship  therein — no  means  exist  for  ascertaining  the  progressive 
amount  of  money  levied  in  various  parishes. 


520  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec. 


SECTION  v.— CONSUMPTION. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Small  Number  of  Persons  in  England  who  live  without  gainful  Employment— Consequent 
great  Means  for  Enjoyment  and  for  Accumulation  of  Capital— Unequal  Division  of  the 
Products  of  Labour — Growing  Improvement  in  this  respect — Increase  of  Luxuries  and 
Elegancies,  and  consequent  general  Refinement  of  Manners— Improvement  in  Dwellings 
of  Middle  Classes  seldom  extended  to  the  Houses  of  Artisans  and  Labourers— Exception 
in  this  respect  of  Sheffield. 