

In  every  community  the  power  of  consuming  must  be  measured  and 
controlled  by  the  power  of  producing.  The  extraordinary  degree  of 
producing  power  which  exists  in  this  kingdom  has  been  shown  in  the 
second  Section  of  this  work.  Not  only  is  the  proportion  of  persons  in 
the  community  who  pass  their  lives  in  active  industry,  labouring  with 
their  hands  or  their  heads,  greater  in  this  than  in  almost  every  other 
well-peopled  country  in  Europe,  but  the  amount  of  skilled  labour  per- 
formed in  a  given  time  by  any  given  number  of  our  countrymen  is  com- 
monly greater  than  that  accomplished  by  the  like  number  of  any  other 
people  in  Europe.  To  this  circumstance  it  is  in  great  part  owing,  that, 
with  a  hio-her  rate  of  daily  wages  paid  for  fewer  hours  of  toil  than  are 
required  in  other  countries,  our  manufacturers  have  been  able,  under 
otherwise  adverse  circumstances,  to  maintain  the  superiority  over  their 
rivals  Many  of  those  rivals,  both  in  France  and  in  Germany,  have 
contrived  to  possess  themselves  of  our  best  machines,  notwithstanding 
the  le2;al  prohibition  which,  until  lately,  existed  to  their  exportation  ; 
but  having  hitherto  been  unable  to  embue  their  workmen  with  the 
deo"ree  of  energy  and  skill  by  which  the  English  artisan  is  distinguished, 
are  in  general  unable  to  compete  with  us  in  any  but  the  commonest 
kinds  of  fabrics. 

The  proportion  of  persons  in  the  United  Kingdom  who  pass  their 
time  without  applying  to  any  gainful  occupation  is  quite  inconsiderable. 
Of  5,812,276  males,  twenty  years  of  age  and  upwards,  living  at   the 


cHAi-.  I.]  CONSUMPTION.  521 

time  of  the  census  of  1831,  there  were  said  to  be  engaged  in  some 
calling  or  profession  5,466,182,  as  under: — 

In  Agriculture •  2,470,111 

In  Trade  and  Manufactures 1,888,768 

In  Labour,  not  Agricultural 698,588 

In  Domestic  Service 132,811 

As  Bankers,  Clergymen,  Professional  Men,  &c.  .  275,904 

thus  leaving  unemployed  only  346,094,  or  rather  less  than  six  per  cent, 
of  the  whole,  which,  assuming  that  the  proportionate  number  at  each 
aac  continued  the  same  in  1831  that  it  was  found  to  be  in  1821,  is  not 
quite  a  quarter  per  cent,  beyond  the  number  living  in  1831  who  were 
70  years  of  age  and  upwards.  It  is  probable  that  this  number  of  unem- 
ployed persons  is  somewhat  understated,  and  that  noblemen  and  gentle- 
men residing  upon  their  estates,  many  of  whom  intrust  to  agents  everything 
connected  with  business  employment,  are  reckoned  among  the  number 
of  those  engaged  in  agriculture  ;  but  if  this  be  the  case,  it  cannot  very 
greatly  alter  the  calculation. 

At  the  last  census  (1841)  the  discrepancy  already  noticed  between 
the  returns  of  occupations  in  Great  Britain  and  in  Ireland — the  age 
selected  in  the  latter  division  of  the  kingdom  for  recording  employments 
being  15,  while  20  years  were  retained  for  that  record  in  Great  Britain — 
prevents  any  comparison  of  the  numbers  at  the  two  periods  for  the  whole 
kingdom ;  but  it  will  be  seen  on  referring  to  the  Table,  page  58,  in  this 
volume,  that  the  number  of  unemployed  adult  males  in  Great  Britain, 
in  1841,  was  only  274,482.  At  that  time  the  number  of  male  persons, 
70  years  old  and  upwards,  living  in  Great  Britain,  was  236,037,  the 
difference  between  the  two  numbers  forming  only  eight  persons  in  each 
IdOO  adult  males  under  70  who  could  then  be  designated  as  idle,  if  we 
assume  that  on  attaining  the  age  of  three-score  and  ten  there  was  a  cessa- 
tion of  employment. 