


•540  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

things,  when,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  every  member  of  the  House  of 
Lords  draws  liis  revenue  from  land,  and  a  great  majority  of  the  House 
of  Commons  are  similarly  circumstanced,  it  is  quite  absurd  to  suppose 
that  any  measures  inimical  to  the  interests  of  those  who  possess  or 
occupy  the  soil  would  be  attempted  by  them. 

The  impossibility  of  estimating  correctly  the  consumption  of  the 
country  in  the  common  kinds  of  food  does  not  extend  to  many  other 
articles  of  use.  These  are  for  the  most  part  imported  from  foreign 
countries,  while  some,  which  are  of  home  production,  are  subject  to 
Excise  regulations,  and  their  quantities  are  thus  made  known.  In  order 
to  trace  the  power  of  consumption  at  different  periods  in  this  kingdom, 
it  will  suffice  to  select  a  few  of  the  more  important  articles  in  these  two 
classes.  The  five  several  years  in  which  the  census  has  been  taken, 
have,  for  an  obvious  reason,  been  adopted  for  the  purpose  of  making 
this  comparative  statement.  Owing  to  the  deficiency  of  information 
upon  which  reliance  can  be  placed  with  regard  to  the  pO})ulation  of 
Ireland  previous  to  1821,  it  will  not  be  possible  in  all  cases  to  embrace 
that  part  of  the  kingdom  in  the  calculations. 

Sugar. — The  Parliamentary  returns  relative  to  this  article  of  con- 
sumption did  not  until  of  late  years  correctly  indicate  the  quantity 
retained  for  use  within  the  kingdom.  It  is  the  practice  in  the  annual 
statements  prepared  at  the  Custom-house,  to  consider  every  ton  of 
refined  sugar  that  is  exported  to  be  equal  to,  and  to  represent  34  cwts. 
of  raw  sugar ;  and  this  larger  weight  is  deducted  in  respect  of  each  ton 
so  exported  from  the  quantity  upon  which  duty  is  paid,  in  order  to 
arrive  at  the  quantity  actually  used.  This  proceeding  involves  a  great 
and  palpable  error,  through  which  the  apparent  home  consumption  is 
made  to  vary  according  to  the  amount  of  the  exports  of  refined  sugar. 
The  actual  loss  through  waste  in  the  operation  of  refining  does  not  ever 
amount  to  more  than  5  per  cent.,  and  seldom  reaches  that  rate :  it 
would  therefore  be  more  correct  to  consider  a  ton  of  refined  sugar  to 
represent  21  cwts.  of  the  unrefined  material,  and  this  course  has  been 
adopted  in  the  following  computations.  The  statement  would  be  in- 
complete if  molasses,  which  is  sugar  in  a  liquid  form  combined  with 
water,  were  not  included.  The  proportion  which  this  should  bear  to 
sugar  in  a  crystalline  state  has  been  assumed  on  the  average  to  be  as 
3  to  8,  the  duty  being  imposed  on  the  two  descriptions  in  that  ratio. 
The  quantity  of  molasses  upon  which  duty  was  paid  in  1811  is  there- 
fore added,  considering  24  cwts.  to  be  equal  to  9  cwts.  of  crystalline 
sugar.  Through  the  prohibition  to  employ  grain  in  the  distilleries,  and 
the  consequent  substitution  of  sugar,  its  use  was  greatly  increased  in 
1811.     The  quantity  thus  employed  in  that  year  appears  to  have  been 