

There  is  among  the  people  of  this  country  a  most  unaccountable  pre- 
judice against  the  adoption  of  any  organized  plan  on  the  part  of  the 
Government  for  obtaining  this  knowledge.  It  would  be  difficult  for  our 
farmers  to  point  out  any  mischief  that  could  result  to  them  from  such  a 
course,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  quite  unnecessary  to  explain 
the  kind  and   degree  of  advantage  which  the   country  generally,  and 


CHAT.    IV. J 


FARM  I'JIODI'CE.  539 


\\lilch  thoy  especially,  would  dorlve  from  the  possession  of  accurcate 
details  on  this  subject.  The  high  prices  to  which  corn  advanced  towards 
the  end  of  1838  were  of  but  little  advcUitage  to  fche  growers,  who  had 
fur  the  most  part  already  brought  their  stocks  to  market,  in  ignorance  of 
the  facts  which  afterwards  became  apparent  ;  so  that  the  benefit  of  the 
rise  was  almost  wholly  engrossed  by  the  importers  of  foreign  grain,  and 
this  would  certainly  not  have  been  the  case  if  any  accurate  estimate  of 
the  crop  of  1837  could  have  been  made. 

In  Belgium  every  kind  of  information  connected  with  the  production 
of  the  kingdom  is  obtained  with  considerable  accuracy,  by  means  of  a 
body  of  gentlemen  (usually  proprietors)  residing  in  different  localities, 
and  who  are  elected  in  the  respective  provinces,  for  purposes  of  local 
government,  by  the  same  persons  that  elect  deputies  to  the  legislative 
chamber.  The  functions  of  persons  thus  elected  are  in  many  respects 
similar  to  those  of  justices  of  the  peace  in  English  counties.  Having 
local  knowledge  concerning  the  condition  and  circumstances  of  the 
several  communes  in  their  districts,  they  are  enabled  readily  to  prevent 
or  to  detect  errors  in  the  returns  made  by  the  several  farmers  or  occu- 
) tiers,  and  there  is  therefore  every  reason  to  place  a  considerable  degree 
of  reliance  upon  the  accuracy  of  the  result.  This  result  is  annually 
presented  by  them  in  a  detailed  report,  which  is  printed  under  the 
authority  of  the  governor  of  the  province,  and  is  open  to  the  use  of  every 
one  of  the  inhabitants.  It  has  never  been  pretended  that  any  improper 
advantage  has  been  taken  of  the  knowledge  thus  acquired  ;  and  if  this 
can  be  said  of  Belgium,  w  here  the  members  of  the  legislative  chambers 
have  not  by  any  means  so  great  nor  so  direct  an  interest  in  the  landed 
property  of  the  kingdom  as  is  possessed  by  the  members  of  our  two 
Houses  of  Parliament,  there  cannot  surely  be  any  reason  to  dread  lest 
injury  should  thus  be  occasioned  in  England.  The  information  which  it 
appears  to  be  so  desirable  to  obtain  with  reference  to  the  whole  kingdom, 
is  already  procurable  with  the  greatest  facility  with  regard  to  each  in- 
dividual farm,  by  any  person  having  a  sufficient  interest  to  incite  him 
to  the  task.  The  landlord,  who  is  interested  in  extracting  a  due  pro- 
portion of  the  produce  of  a  farm  in  the  name  of  rent,  cannot  find  much 
ditficulty  in  correctly  estimating  that  produce.  A  similar  facility 
attends  the  operation  both  of  the  tithe-proctor  and  of  the  officers  of  the 
pari^^h.  The  information  is  therefore  already  procurable  by  every  one 
who  can  turn  it  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  farmer  :  and  all  that  is 
wanted  is  to  extend  it,  so  that  the  farmer  himself,  as  well  as  the  nation 
at  large,  may  be  enabled  to  profit  from  it.  If  the  members  of  our  two 
Houses  of  Parliament  belonged  exclusively  to  the  mercantile  and  manu- 
facturing classes,  there  might  be  some  appearance  of  prudence  in  con- 
cealment on  the  Dart  of  the  agriculturists,  but   in  the  actual  state  of 