

There  was  at  the  same  time  another  circumstance  in  operation  alto- 
gether opposite  to,  but  not  incompatible  with,  what  has  been  stated,  and 
which  probably  led  to  the  same  desire  of  investing  money  in  the  purchase 
of  gold  and  silver  plate.  The  gains  of  persons  engaged,  either  as  owners 
or  tenants,  in  the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  had  been  out  of  all  proportion 
great,  and  that  for  a  length  of  time,  which  gave  an  appearance  of  per- 
manency to  their  prosperity.  It  has  been  already  stated  in  how  great 
a  degree  the  rent  of  land  had  advanced  during  the  progress  of  the  war, 
at  the  same  time  that  the  worldly  condition  and  habits  of  the  occupiers 
had  undergone  the  most  marked  improvement.  There  are  no  classes  of 
men  so  remarkable  in  this  country  as  its  nobility  and  country  gentlemen 
for  the  importance  which  they  attach  to  the  possession  and  transmission 
of  family  plate  ;  and  with  respect  to  the  farmers,^  the  alteration  in  their 
circumstances  and  character  must  have  caused  a  great  demand  on  their 
part  for  such  luxuries.     In  those  days  it  scarcely  required  the  passing 


ciiAr.  111. J 


aul,U  AXJ)  SILVER  PLATi:. 


535 


away  of  a  generation  in  order  to  see  in  fjirniors'  dwellings,  on  tiie  same 
estates,  spoons  of  wood  or  of  horn  give  place  to  others  of  silver.  It 
must  further  be  considered  that  luxuries  of  this  class  are  not  of 
a  perishable  nature  ;  that,  except  for  the  indulgence  of  ostentation, 
they  are  provided  in  the  same  family  once  for  all,  and  wo  must  not 
therefore  expect  that  any  sudden  increase  in  their  ([uantity  will  lead  to 
further  and  equal  additions  when  that  immediate  demand  shall  l)e 
satisfied.  The  improvement  that  has  been  made  in  the  manufacture  of 
])lated  wares  has  had  a  further  influence  in  diminishing  the  sale  of 
articles  subject  to  the  plate  duty,  although  it  may  have  led,  and  in  all 
})robability  has  led,  to  the  increased  consumption  of  the  precious 
metals.  Except  in  very  wealthy  families,  it  is  now  usual  to  see  many 
articles,  such  as  candlesticks,  plated,  where  formerly  they  were  seen  of 
silver,  or,  if  the  expense  of  such  was  too  great,  of  brass. 

The  combination  of  these  various  causes  may  probably  be  thought 
sufficient  to  account  for  the  fact  exhibited  by  the  following  table  of  the 
comparative  decline  experienced  in  this  branch  of  consumption.  The 
yeare  1824  and  1825  are  well  remembered  as  years  of  great  commercial 
excitement  and  apparent  prosperity,  and  it  is  curious  to  observe  the 
degree  in  which  that  excitement  acted  in  promoting  the  desire  of 
possessing  gold  and  silver  utensils.  The  increased  quantity  retained 
for  home  use  in  the  year  1825,  as  compared  with  1823,  was  equal  to 
29  per  cent,  on  gold,  and  50  per  cent,  on  silver  plate  ;  the  difference  in 
favour  of  1825,  as  compared  with  1824,  was  10  per  cent,  on  gold  and 
24  per  cent,  on  silver  plate. 