


538  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

17,700,000,  and  the  difference  in  the  provision  needed,  according  as  the 
consinnption  eipials  one  or  other  of  the  quantities  named,  would  he 
4,425,000  quarters  per  annum.  In  former  times  a  still  farther  degree 
of  uncertainty  attended  the  estimate,  from  the  fact  of  a  considerahle,  but 
unascertained,  proportion  of  the  people  not  being  habitual  consumers  of 
wheaten  bi-ead.  Unless  in  years  of  scarcity,  no  part  of  the  inhabitants 
of  England,  except  perhaps  in  the  extreme  north,  and  there  only 
partially,  have  now  recourse  to  rye  or  barley  bread,  but  a  larger  and 
increasing  number  are  in  a  great  measure  fed  upon  potatoes,  and  it 
must  be  evident  that  any  computation  which  assumes  an  average  quantity 
in  a  case  liable  to  so  many  disturbing  influences,  must  be  at  best  only 
vague  and  unsatisfactory. 

The  importance  of  knowing  accurately  the  provision  made  for  the 
sustenance  of  the  people  is  surely  not  less  than  that  of  knowing  the 
yearly  produce  of  some  of  the  less  valuable  articles  of  commerce.  The 
condition  of  the  crop  of  indigo  in  Bengal  is  accurately  communicated  to 
the  merchants  in  London  at  the  earliest  moment  when  it  can  be  known, 
and  through  its  influence  upon  the  price  has  an  immediate  effect  in 
checking  or  in  promoting  the  consumption ;  but  as  regards  the  staple 
article  of  our  food,  no  systematic  attempt  has  ever  been  made  to  ascer- 
tain its  sufficiency  or  otherwise.  It  is  well  known  that  the  produce 
of  the  harvest  of  1837  was  so  far  below  the  average  consumption  of  the 
people,  that  before  the  grain  of  1838  could  be  brought  to  market  the 
stock  of  English  wheat  was  all  but  exhausted,  and,  but  for  the  supply  of 
foreign  corn  stored  in  our  granaries,  there  would  have  been  a  most  dis- 
tressing scarcity  before  any  fresh  importations  could  have  been  received. 
If  by  any  means  the  fact  of  this  deficiency  had  been  ascertained  when 
the  harvest  of  1837  was  got  in,  we  should  certainly  not  have  seen,  as  we 
did,  an  actual  fall  in  our  markets  immediately  following  that  harvest, 
nor  a  continuance  of  comparatively  low  prices  up  to  the  middle  of  1838. 
If  a  timely  warning  could  have  been  given,  a  moderate  but  still  an 
adequate  rise  in  price  would  have  been  the  immediate  consequence,  and 
the  consumption  would  have  been  by  that  means  so  influenced  that  we 
should,  in  all  probability,  have  avoided  in  a  great  degree  that  excessive 
rise  in  the  cost  of  bread,  which  was  then  productive  of  much  hardship 
to  our  labouring  classes,  and  which,  but  for  the  abundant  demand  for 
labour  throughout  the  kingdom,  would  immediately  have  occasioned 
general  and  wide-spread  distress. 