

4  J,  709 

62,688 

3J2,749 

337,479 

535,485         539,894         497,928 


Gold  and  Si'lvcj-  Plate. — It  might  l)e  thought  that  the  (juantity  of 
gold  and  silver  plate  manufactured  for  use  at  different  periods  would 
afford  a  good  measure  of  the  prosperity  of  the  country  ;  and,  judging 
from  the  tacts  already  brought  forward,  as  well  as  from  the  observation 
of  what  is  passing  around  us,  we  might  have  supposed  that  during  the 
last  quarter  of  a  century  there  must  have  been  a  marked  increase  in 
this  employment  of  the  precious  metals  in  this  kingdom.  It  is  certain 
that  during  that  interval  the  use  of  many  utensils  made  of  silver  has 
been  adopted  by  a  much  more  numerous  class  of  society  than  before  ;  a 
remark  which  will  be  sufficiently  corroborated  by  the  fact  that  within 
that  period  it  has  first  been  customary  to  find  silver  forks  at  the  tables 
in  the  generality  of  taverns.  Before  the  termination  of  the  war  in  1815, 
this  article  of  domestic  convenience  was  uniformly  made  of  steel,  except 
among  families  in  decidedly  easy  circumstances,  or  in  the  first-rate 
raverns  ;  whereas  at  present  there  is  hardly  a  family  to  be  found  above 
the  rank  of  artisans,  whose  table  is  not  furnished  with  forks  made  of  the 
more  costly  material.  It  will  be  matter  for  surprise,  under  these  cir- 
cumstances, to  find  that  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  plate  made  and 
retained  for  home  use  within  the  kingdom  was  greater  in  weight  during 
the  eight  years  that  preceded  the  peace  than  it  was  during  the  like 
period  from  1830  to  1837  inclusive.  During  the  first  period,  viz.,  1807 
to  1814,  the  quantities  so  retained  for  use  were — of  gold  plate  50,750 
ounces,  and  of  silver  plate  8,290,157  ounces  ;  and  in  the  eight  years, 
from  1830  to  1837,  the  quantities  v/ere — of  gold  48,432  ounces,  and  of 
silver  7,378,651  ounces.  This  falling  off  is  the  more  surprising,  because 
of  the  unprecedentedly  high  prices  of  bullion  during  a  great  part  of 
the  first  of  these  two  periods,  whereby  the  difference  in  the  money  value 
was  rendered  much  greater  than  the  difference  as  here  stated  in  the 
weight. 

Some  suggestions  have  been  offered  with  the  view  of  accounting  for  a 
circumstance  seemingly  so  much  at  variance  with  every  other  indication 
of  increased  means  and  enjoyments  on  the  part  of  the  people  :  they  are 
stated  here  only  as  suggestions,  however,  and  are  not  relied  on  as 
affording  a  sufficient  or  satisfactory  solution  of  the  difficulty. 


53  4  PHOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

First,  it  may  be  questioned  whether  the  fiict  of  the  depreciation  of 
paper,  wliile  it  enhanced  the  money  price  of  articles  made  of  gold  and 
silver,  did  not  also  occasion  many  persons,  as  a  measure  of  prudent  pre- 
caution, so  to  invest  a  part  of  their  wealth,  and  thereby  to  secure  the 
possession  of  a  certain  and  tangible  property  of  immediately  convertible 
value.  It  may  be  objected  that  persons  so  acting  were  prudent  over- 
much, and,  judging  from  the  course  which  events  have  since  taken,  such 
an  opinion  appears  well  founded  ;  but  any  one  who  can  recall  to  his 
recollection  the  dismal  aspect  then  ottered  by  the  political  horizon — when 
every  power  in  Europe  was  leagued  against  us,  and  the  necessary 
expenditure  of  the  country  was  carried  forward  upon  a  scale  which  it 
would  have  been  altogether  im])ossible  to  have  continued  for  even  a  few 
years  longer — will  hesitate  before  he  pronounces  such  a  precaution 
unwise.  Even  when  the  ambitious  designs  of  Napoleon  had  detached 
from  him  and  converted  into  enemies  the  allies  who  had  pursued  with 
hiui  the  object  of  destroying  the  power  and  resources  of  England,  there 
came  no  intermission  of  efforts  and  sacrifices  on  our  part ;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  every  ally  that  we  gained  in  the  field  helped  still  further  to 
exhaust  our  financial  means.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  battle  of  Waterloo 
had  been  lost,  or  even  that  it  had  been  less  decisive  in  its  results,  could 
the  public  expenditure  have  been  continued  on  anything  like  the  scale 
of  preceding  years,  while  at  the  same  time  faith  had  been  kept  with  the 
public  creditor  ?  Under  such  cii'cumstances  he  would  have  been  looked 
upon  as  a  man  of  forethought  and  wisdom  who  should  have  provided 
himself  with  a  species  of  convertible  property  that  was  independent  of 
the  stability  of  public  credit;  and  as  it  is  well  known  that  many  persons 
did  at  that  time  entertain  very  gloomy  forebodings  as  to  the  future  con- 
dition of  this  country,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  some  would 
be  led  to  the  precautionary  course  that  has  been  here  suggested. 