

culation  of  the  average  consumption  be  made  for  the  half-year  in  which 
that  diminution  was  experienced,  it  will  be  found  that  it  was  at  the 
rate  of  only  12 ^  lbs,  per  annum  for  each  individual,  or  40  lbs.  per  head 
for  those  in  easy  circumstances,  and  only  6  lbs.  per  head  for  all  other 
classes. 

This  result  occurred  under  our  strictest  protective  system,  and  was 
occasioned  by  short  production  in  the  \\'est  India  colonies.  The  im- 
portations thence,  which  in  1831  amounted  to  200,000  tons,  did  not 
in  1840  exceed  110,000  tons;  and  although  during  the  interval,  by  a 
partial  reform  in  our  tarilf,  which  now  admits  sugar,  the  produce  of 
Bengal,  at  the  same  rate  of  duty  as  West  India  sugar,  we  thence  re- 
ceived an  additional  supply  equal  to  12,500  tons,  yet  the  importations 
of  sugar  in  1840  fell  short  even  of  the  greatly -diminished  consumption 
by  22,000  tons. 

If  this  state  of  the  trade  could  have  been  viewed  as  likely  to  continue, 
it  is  clear  that  the  wants  of  the  consumers  and  the  deficiency  in  the 
revenue  together  would  sooner  have  compelled  the  Government  to  re- 
model the  system  of  sugar  duties,  so  as  to  let  in  for  consumption  a 
sufficient  quantity  of  foreign  sugar.  If  the  approach  to  a  right  system — 
made  when  the  produce  of  Bengal  was  admitted  at  the  British  plantation 
duty — had  been  delayed  for  only  a  few  years  longer,  so  that  we  had  not 
received  increased  supplies  from  that  quarter,  it  is  evident  that  some 
such  measure  of  relaxation  must  have  been  adopted  in  1840.  When- 
ever it  might  be  introduced,  such  a  step  was  certain  to  be  strongly 
opposed  by  our  West  India  sugar-planters,  and  by  many  other  persons 
also,  who,  without  much  consideration,  have  chosen  to  identify  a  high 
price  of  sugar  with  the  happiness  of  the  lately-emancipated  slave  popu- 
lation of  our  West  India  colonies.  They  are  of  opinion  that  the  pro- 
tection afforded  to  these  colonies  involves  a  great  moral  question — that 
its  maintenance  is  to  the  people  of  England  a  great  moral  duty — that 
the  success  of  the  measure  of  emancipation  ought  never  to  be  jeopardized 
for  any  money  consideration — that  we  have  purchased  the  freedom  of 
the  cultivators  of  sugar  at  the  cost  of  twenty  millions  of  money  ;  and 
that  having  thus  converted  them  from  slaves,  in  which  condition  their 
owners  were  bound  to  supply  their  wants,  into  freemen  who  must  toil 
for  their  own  support,  it  would  be  cruel  to  place  them,  in  the  outset  of 
their  career  of  responsibility,  in  a  worse  position  than  that  which  they 
legally  occupied  at  the  moment  before  you  gave  them  freedom.  The 
argument  is  specious,  but  a  slight  examination  of  facts  will  serve  to 
convince  us  that  it  is  without  any  solid  foundation. 