

In  what  respect,  it  may  be  asked,  is  the  freed  negro  placed  in  a 
worse  position  than  that  which  he  occupied  during  his  period  of  slavery? 
If  there  had  been  a  redundancy  of  labourers  for  whom  the  planter  was 
bound  to  provide,  irrespective  of  the  value  of  their  labour,  then  indeed 


CHAF.  IV.]  SUGAR.  547 

their  emancipation,  which  would  also  have  been  the  emancipation  of 
their  former  owners,  might  have  been  accompanied  by  the  evil  of  com- 
parative destitution.  But  the  reverse  of  this  position  is  notoriously  the 
fact,  and  it  is  because  of  the  insufficiency  of  labourers  and  the  high 
wages  which  they  are  consequently  .'djle  to  coiinnand,  that  the  planters 
have  been  so  loud  in  their  complaints,  for — hitherto  at  least — it  is  the 
planters  only  who  complain,  while  the  labourers  are  represented  as 
living  in  comparative  luxury.  Now,  as  well  as  before  the  emancipation, 
the  only  fund  from  which  the  negroes  must  be  supported  is  the  produce 
of  their  labour,  and  they  must  consequently  be  equally  well  off — plus 
their  liberty — as  they  were  before  their  freedom  was  granted.  When 
Parliament  so  munificently  voted,  and  the  nation  so  willingly  gave, 
twenty  millions  of  money  to  bring  about  this  blessed  change  in  their 
conditiun,  it  was  not  proposed  to  give  to  these  our  fellow-citizens  greater 
privileges  and  immunities  than  are  enjoyed  by  other  free  labourers  ;  but 
to  argue  that  a  higher  price  is  needed  for  the  products  of  their  labour 
than  the  price  at  which  the  same  products  are  yielded  elsewhere  and  by 
others,  is  to  affirm  that  something  more  than  freedom  was  designed  for 
them  by  the  generosity  of  the  nation. 

The  cost  to  the  people  of  this  country  of  the  diffi^-rential  duty  on 
sugar,  imposed  for  the  benefit  of  the  English  sugar  colonies,  had  become 
extremely  burthensome.  The  cost,  exclusive  of  duty,  of  3,764,710 
cwts.  retained  for  consumption  in  1840  was  9,156,872/.,  if  calculated  at 
the  Gazette  average  prices.  The  cost  of  a  like  quantity  of  l^razil  or 
Havana  sugar  of  equal  quality  would  have  been  4,141,181/.,  and  con- 
sequently we  paid  in  one  year  5,015,691/.  more  than  the  price  which 
the  inhabitants  of  other  countries  in  Europe  would  have  paid  for  an 
equal  quantity  of  sugar.  This,  how^ever,  is  an  extreme  view^  of  the  case. 
If  our  markets  had  been  open  at  one  rate  of  duty  to  the  sugar  of  all 
countries,  the  price  of  foreign  sugar  would  have  been  somewhat  raised, 
while  that  from  British  possessions  would  have  been  lowered,  but  it  may 
be  confidently  said  that  even  in  that  case  the  saving  would  have  been 
more  than  four  millions  of  money. 

