


5  1 1  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX,  [sec.  v. 

5th  of  April,  1846,  and  consequently  for  twelve  months  during  which 
the  reduced  duty  was  charged,  it  appears  that  the  average  quantity 
per  head  consumed  by  each  individual  of  the  population  was  21 'IB  lbs. 
Concurrently  with  the  reduction  in  the  rate  of  duty  chargeable  on 
sugar  the  produce  of  British  possessions,  a  reduction  was  also  made  in 
the  duty  upon  foreign  sugar,  the  product  of  free  labour,  from  63s.  and 
5  per  cent,  thereon  per  cwt.,  to  23s.  Ad.  per  cwt.  But  for  some  such 
modification  no  advantage  to  the  consumer  could  have  followed  any 
abatement  in  the  duty,  for  the  difference  would  have  been  simply  trans- 
ferred from  the  public  Exchequer  to  the  producers  of  British-grown 
sugar,  the  quantity  of  which  was  already  too  small  for  the  wants  of  the 
public.  The  limitation  of  this  change  in  the  manner  described  could 
not  be  justified  upon  any  correct  principle,  nor  was  it  probable  that  it 
could  be  long  maintained.  The  admission  of  all  foreign  sugar  at  the 
lessened  rate  of  duty  last  mentioned,  and  which  took  place  in  1846, 
caused  a  further  consumption,  and  consequently  an  increased  revenue, 
but  neither  the  sugar  trade  nor  any  other  trade  will  ever  be  placed  upon 
a  proper  footing  so  long  as  any  differential  duty  shall  continue  to 
deform  the  tariff.*  We  have  seen,  that  when  the  duty  charged  was  20.?. 
per  cwt.,  and  when  the  market  afforded  a  superabundant  supply  'admis- 
sible at  that  rate,  the  consmnption  of  Great  Britain  exceeded  30  lbs. 
per  head  in  the  year,  and  no  sufficient  reason  presents  itself  for  assuming 
that,  under  similar  conditions,  the  consumption  of  the  United  Kingdom 
would  exhibit  a  lower  average.  If  this  view  should  prove  correct,  the 
revenue  derived  from  sugar  at  20s.  per  cwt.  would  now  amount  to 
7,500,000/.  per  annum,  instead  of  3,574,4697.  as  in  the  year  1845. 

The  quantities  stated  in  the  foregoing  table,  as  the  yearly  consump- 
tion of  each  individual,  are  average  quantities,  calculated  on  the 
assumption  that  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  nobleman  and  the  beggar, 
fare  alike  in  their  use  of  this  condiment.  It  would  be  difficult  to  dis- 
cover with  accuracy  the  consumption  of  the  various  ranks  into  which 
the  community  is  divided.  There  are  of  course  many  whose  use  of 
sugar  is  not  governed  by  its  market  price,  so  far  at  least  as  any  fluctu- 
ations that  we  have  experienced  would  be  likely  to  affect  them.  The 
outlay  for  this  article  forms  so  small  a  part  of  the  household  expenses 
of  the  easy  classes,  that  whether  the  price  should  be  sixpence  or  a 
shilling  per  pound  might  have  no  influence  in  increasing  or  diminishing 
its  use.  The  decrease  or  increase  of  the  quantity  consumed  throughout 
the  country  is  therefore  evidence  of  a  very  great  degree  of  fluctuation 
in  its  use  by  all  other  classes.  From  inquiries  carefully  made,  it  ap- 
pears probable  that  in  the  families  of  the  rich  and  middle  ranks  the 
individual  yearly  consumption  of  sugar  for  all  purposes  is  40  lbs. ;  if 