

To  which  must  be  added  for  interest,  loss  of  weight,  and  deterioration 

of  quality,  including  risk  of  sea  damage,  on 

£.  s.   d.  £. 

7,080  tons  shipped  from  Europe     .      .     .      .  at   JJ    5    0  per  ton,     23,010 

10,740    „  „  West  Indies  and  Brazil,   -     2  10    0        „  26,850 

£177,180 


AP.  IT.]  COFFEE.  551 

In  estimating  the  cost  to  the  consumer  of  this  roundabout  operation, 
'  will  be  correct  to  assume  that  the  enhancement  of  price  upon  the 
iiole  quantity  used  is  governed  by  the  highest. rate  of  expense  to 
wiiich  any  part  is  subject,  since  it  is  evident  that  if  the  voyage  from 
lau"ope  were  not  undertaken,  the  coffee  might  be  as  advantageously 
M>lil  at  an  equivalent  reduction  in  price,  and  this  reduced  price  would 
(It'terniine  that  of  the  whole,  because  there  cannot  be  in  any  market 
two  prices  at  the  same  time  for  the  same  article.  It  appears,  therefore, 
that  the  price  of  all  the  coffee  used  in  this  country  in  1840  was  increased 
to  the  consumer  by  285.  per  cwt. — the  diff*erence  of  duty,  in  addition  to 
ISs.  Id.  per  cwt ,  the  expense  of  sending  coffee  from  Europe  to  the  Cape  of 
Good  IIoj)e  and  back.  This  increased  price  on  28,723,735  lbs.  amounted 
to  533,227/.,  bvit  the  higher  duty  was  received  on  14,228,404  lbs.,  givhig 
an  advantage  to  tlio  Exchequer  of  only  192,416/.  If  the  difference 
between  these  amounts  were  added  to  the  revenue  derived  from  coffee, 
it  would  make  the  rate  of  duty  equal  to  lO^c?.  per  lb.  upon  the  whole 
quantity  consumed,  and  it  is  clear  that  had  the  consumers  been  allowed 
to  pay  that  rate  of  duty  u])on  every  kind  of  coffee  that  comes  to  market, 
the  effect  to  them  woukl  have  been  the  same,  whila  the  revenue  would 
have  benefited  to  the  amount  of  340,811/.  If  there  had  been  no  dif- 
ferential or  protective  duty,  but  all  kinds  of  coffee  had  been  admitted 
at  the  duty  charged  on  that  of  the  British  plantations,  the  public  would 
have  had  the  means  of  expending  additionally  on  the  article  the  above- 
mentioned  sum  of  533,227/.,  which  w^ould  have  purchased  very  nearly 
twelve  millions  of  pounds,  and  thus  have  added  40  per  cent,  to  the  con- 
sumption, and  nearly  100,000/.  to  the  revenue. 

These  calculations  can  hardly  fail  to  convince  every  one  of  the  great 
importance,  commercially,  of  equal  and  moderate  duties ;  but  in  the 
particular  case  of  coffee  there  is  another  and  even  a  stronger  argument 
in  favour  of  such  a  system  of  duties.  It  was  given  in  evidence  before 
the  Committee  on  Import  Duties,  which  sat  in  1840,  that  since  the 
duty  on  British  plantation  coffee  was  reduced  to  6f/.  per  lb.,  there  have 
been  a  vast  number  of  coffee-shops  opened  in  London,  at  which  working 
men  are  served  at  a  low  price  ;  that  some  of  these  places  are  frequented 
daily  by  many  hundred  persons  who  used  formerly  to  resort  for  refresh- 
ment to  public-houses  ;  that  this  beneficial  change  in  the  habits  of  work- 
ing men  has  been  entirely  owing  to  the  cheapness  of  the  refreshment 
obtained,  and  that  any  advance  in  the  price  which  should  remove  this 
advantage  of  comparative  cheapness  would  have  the  effect  of  sending  the 
present  customers  of  coffee-shops  back  to  the  use  of  intoxicating  liquors. 