

2  o  2 


.364  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  y. 

The  duty  on  beer  in  Scotland  has,  since  the  Union  in  1707,  been  the 
same  as  was  charged  in  Enghmd  ;  but  the  consumption  in  that  part  of 
the  kingdom,  which  was  always  greatly  below  the  proportion  in  England, 
has  been  comparatively  insignificant  during  the  last  half  century.  The 
number  of  barrels  charged  with  duty  in  Scotland,  in  1829,  was  366,166, 
of  which  2-17,443  barrels,  or  two-thirds,  were  small  beer.  The  yearly 
consumption  of  both  qualities  amounted  therefore  to  5f  gallons  for  eacli 
inhabitant,  and  the  duty  paid  by  each  averaged  Sd.  It  has  been  shown 
that  the  ditference  in  this  respect  between  England  and  Scotland  is 
compensated  by  the  greater  use  of  spirits  in  the  latter  division  of  the 
kingdom.     No  duty  was  ever  charged  on  beer  in  Ireland. 

Since  1785  brewers  of  beer  for  sale  have  been  obliged  to  take  out  an 
Excise  license,  for  which  they  have  been  subjected  to  an  annual  pay- 
ment in  proportion  to  the  quantity  brewed.  This  system  of  obliging 
manufacturers  of,  and  dealers  in,  commodities  chargeable  with  Excise 
duties  to  take  out  licenses,  was  adopted  with  the  twofold  object  of 
bringing  the  parties  more  directly  under  the  survey  of  the  revenue 
oflScers  with  the  view  of  preventing  frauds,  and  of  adding  directly  to  the 
public  revenue  by  means  of  the  charge  made  for  the  license.  There 
have  been  so  many  changes  made  in  the  regulations,  whereby  additional 
classes  have  at  various  times  been  embraced,  and  the  charges  made  for 
licenses  have  been  so  altered,  that  it  would  not  afford  any  information 
concerning  the  progress  made  in  this  branch  of  manufacture  to  state  the 
number  of  licenses  that  were  taken  out  in  different  years.  Some  infor- 
mation on  this  subject  has  been  given  in  a  former  Section  of  this  work, 
when  treating  of  the  "  occupations  of  the  people.'"  * 

*  Pages  67  and  68. 


TCJBACCO.  55-0 


CHAPTER  V. 

Tobacco.  Consumption  at  different  Periods — Effects  of  increased  Duties — Encouragement 
to  Smuggling— Complaints  of  high  Duty  on  tlic  part  of  the  Producers  in  the  United 
States  of  America — Tiireatencd  Retaliation  —  Probable  conseciuence  of  such  a  course. 
Paper.  Quantity  made  for  use  at  different  periods— Injudicious  Nature  of  the  Tax  on 
this  Article— Growing  Use  of  Paper— Effect  of  Ueduction  of  Duty -Rapid  Extension  of 
Sale  by  Repealing  the  Duty  on  Almanacs.  Soap.  No  means  of  distinguisliing  its  Use 
for  Personal  Purposes  from  tliat  caused  by  Manufacturing  Processes — Frauds  caused  by 
the  Duty— Impolicy  of  Imposing  a  Duty  on  Soap— Mischief  of  Excise  Regulations  - 
Annual  Consumption  of  Soap  at  various  Periods.  Candles.  Cotton  Manlfactlres. 
Estimated  Consumption.  Silk.  Manufacture.  Estimated  Consumption — Linen  and 
Woollen  Manufactures.  Difficulty  of  estimating  the  Value  used.  Iron.  Increased 
Use  of  this  Material  for  Ship-building.  Copper.  Quantity  used.  Tin.  Timdek. 
Quantity  imported  for  use  in  different  Years  afford  insufficient  data  for  estimating  the 
use  of  Timber  generally— Consumption  of  the  Metropolis— Cattle— Sheep— Coals— Gas 
Lighting — Consumption  of  Food  in  Private  Families. 