


rj7G  PROGRESS  or  THE  XATTOX.  fsr.c.  v. 

The  length  of  this  vessel,  from  lier  figure-head  to  (he  taflcrel,  was  520  feet. 

The  breadth  of  beam Til       „ 

The  depth  of  her  hold .".l       „ 

Her  draft  of  water,  when  loaded,  was  calculated  to  be  .      .     .     .     IG       „ 

and  her  burden  3500  tons.  The  engines  had  a  force  equal  to  that  of 
1000  horses,  and  were  used  to  keep  in  action,  as  the  means  of  propulsion, 
an  Archimedean  screw.  Her  draft  of  water  did  not  exceed  that  of  a 
first-class  West  Indiaman.  The  loss  of  this  splendid  ship  in  Dundrum 
Bay  was  a  casualty  which  might  equally  have  happened  to  any  other 
vessel,  and  should  not  in  any  degree  lessen  our  estimate  of  the  genius 
and  skill  of  those  by  whom  she  was  projected  and  put  together. 

A  great  part  of  the  steam  navy  of  the  East  India  Company  consists 
of  iron  vessels,  25  of  which  are  now  in  use  in  India,  among  which  are 
the  "  Nemesis,"  the  "  Phlegethon,"  the  "  Ariadne,"  and  the  "  Medusa," 
— names  well  known  to  the  British  public  from  the  conspicuous  part 
which  the  vessels  performed  in  the  war  with  (]^hina. 

The  advantages  of  iron  over  timber,  for  naval  architecture,  are, — the 
absence  of  "  wear  and  tear  "  in  the  hull — no  necessity  for  caulking  or 
coppering — no  possibility  of  injury  from  dry  rot — greater  lightness  and 
increased  capacity — and,  what  is  of  even  far  more  importance,  greater 
safety.  This  last  point  has  sometimes  been  questioned,  but  not  by  any 
one  having  knowledge  on  the  subject.  When  a  timber-built  ship  takes 
the  ground  with  any  violent  shock,  the  whole  framework  of  the  vessel 
is  strained,  and  in  a  measure  dislocated, — so  that  by  the  mere  buffeting 
of  the  waves  she  will,  in  all  probability,  soon  be  made  a  complete 
wreck  ;  but  when  an  iron-built  vessel  strikes,  however  violent  the  blow, 
it  is  only  the  part  that  is  brought  into  collision  with  the  rocks  that  will 
be  injured.  The  plan  of  building  these  ships  in  water-tight  compart- 
ments then  proves  its  efficacy ;  for  should  the  injury  amount  even  to  the 
tearing  away  of  plates,  the  resulting  mischief  will  only  be  to  fill  with 
water  that  particular  compartment  of  the',  vessel  to  which  the  injury  has 
occurred,  so  that  the  ship  will  be  scarcely  less  buoyant  than  before ; 
experience  has  shown  that  damage  of  this  kind  is  easily  repaired. 

The  fii-st  cost  of  iron  vessels  is  somewhat,  but  not  much,  less  than 
that  of  timber-built  vessels  :  their  comparative  cheapness  results  from 
their  greater  durability  :  after  years  of  constant  employment  they  are 
found  to  be  as  sound  and  as  clean  as  Mdien  first  built.  Their  weight, 
u})on  which  depends  the  displacement  of  water,  is — as  a  genei'al  rule — 
three-fifths  the  weight  of  wooden  vessels  of  the  same  caj)acity.  The 
weight  of  metal  used  in  proportion  to  the  burden  of  the  ship  varies,  of 
course,  with  the  size.  A  sea-going  iron  steam-vessel  will  take  from 
nine  to  twelve  cwts.  of  iron  per  ton  register.  Boats  intended  for  river 
traffic,  which  do  not  require  an  equal  degree  of  strength,  of  course  take 
a  less  weight  of  metal. 