

It  is  impossible  to  estimate,  with  anything  approaching  to  exactness, 
the  consunij)tion  of  the  metropolis.  Accounts  are  given  of  the  number 
of  cattle  and  slieep  sold  in  the  markets,  but  we  should  greatly  mislead 
ourselves  by  taking  these  accounts  alone  as  our  guide  in  the  matter. 
A  large  quantity  of  slaughtered  meat  is  brought  for  sale  to  the  London 
markets  from  various  and  distant  parts  of  the  kingdom,  and  especially 
in  the  winter  months,  when  meat  killed  at  Newcastle  and  Edinburgh  is 
so  brought  in  great  abundance. 

The  quantitv  thus  conveyed  for  the  consumption  of  the  metropolis  by 
steam-vessels  during  the  cooler  season  of  the  year  has  been  ascertained 
to  be  as  follows  : — 

From  Bei-wick,     12  tons  weekly  for  6  months,  chiefly  mutton. 
Aberdeen,  10  „  G        „ 

Dundee,      17  ,,  0       „ 

Leith,  30  „  7        „ 

Glasgow,     20  „  7        „ 

Inverness,  50  tons  during  the  year. 

The  steam-vessels  from  Berwick,  Aberdeen,  Dundee,  and  Inverness, 
hrin"-  also  large  numbers  of  live  stock — oxen,  sheep,  and  swine ;  and 
further  numbers  of  these  animals  are  h.rought  by  sailing-vessels.  On 
one  occasion  a  steam-vessel  from  Aberdeen  has  brought  18JI  fat  bullocks 
to  London. 

Even  the  live  animals  which  arc  included  in  the  returns  do  not  com- 
prise all  which  are  brought  to  be  slaughtered,  many  both  of  oxen  and 
sheep  being  sold  in  I^ondon  and  the  immediate  suburbs  before  they 
reach  the  markets ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  butchers  who  carry  on 
their  business  in  some  of  the  neighbouring  towns  are  accustomed  to 
attend  at  Smithfield  market  to  make  their  purchases.  With  all  this 
uncertaintv,  it  would  be  idle  to  expect  that  any  accurate  statement  can 
be  offered  on  this  subject. 

This  difficulty  is  not  experienced  in  an  ec^ual  degree  with  regard  to 
many  towns  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  where  every  article  of  provi- 
sions that  enters  is  subjected  to  a  town-duty  or  octroi,  and  an  accurate 
account  of  the  quantities  must  be  kept  at  the  barriers.  But  even  in 
these  cases  the  record  cannot  be  relied  on  as  strictly  accurate  at  all 
times.  It  is  well  known  that  in  Paris,  in  time  of  scarcity,  when  it  is 
more  than  ordinarily  needful  for  the  labouring  portion  of  the  popu- 
lation to  economise  their  means  of  living,  many  fjimilies  go  beyond  the 
barriers  in  order  to  take  their  meals,  and  thu^  avoid  the  payment  of 
octroi  duties  altogether. 

The  accounts  ke])t  by  the  Excise  officers  of  the  quantities  of  different 


•J 


COALS. 


581 


articles  sent  by  permits  from  the  stocks  of  manufacturers  and  wholesale 
dealers,  might  be  supposed  to  give  some  idea  of  the  consumption  of  the 
district ;  but  the  fact  is,  that  London  dealers  supply  great  numbers 
besides  the  London  popvdation,  and  the  records  of  the  Excise  ofhcers 
therefore  give  a  very  exaggerated  view  of  the  consumption  of  the 
metropolis.  For  the  same  reason,  no  inference  should  be  drawn  from 
the  quantity  of  foreign  goods  cleared  for  consumption  at  the  London 
Custom-house,  a  gn^at  part  of  which  goods  are  afterwards  distributed  to 
dillcrent  places  in  the  kingdom. 