

Tliis  invention  wa?  first  applied  to  the  lighting  of  cotton-mills  and 
other  manufiictories,  but  was  soon  largely  adopted  in  London  and 
the  chief  provincial  towns  in  the  kingdom.  At  this  time,  altho\igh 
not  more  than  fortv  years  have  elapsed  from  its  first  successful  in- 
troduction, gas-lighting  is  employed  in  every  town  of  importance  in 
England  and  Scotland,  and  in  many  of  the  larger  towns  of  Ireland.  It 
has  not  been  possible  to  obtain  any  minute  data  for  estimating  the 
quantity  of  coals  now  applied  to  this  purpose  in  the  United  Kingdom, 
but  it  is  probably  within  the  truth  to  say  that  the  annual  consumption 
in  all  the  gas  establishments  amounts  to  between  500,000  and  G00,000 
(ons. 

It  appears  worthy  of  remark,  that,  notwithstanding  this  large  con- 
sumption, which  has  in  a  great  degree  superseded  the  use  of  oil  for 
street-lighting,  the  aggregate  consumption  of  whale  oil  has  very  mate- 
rially increased.  This  fact  is,  of  course,  referable  to  the  fashion  now 
become  very  general,  of  burning  table-lamps  in  the  place  of  candles  in 
our  dwellings ;  but  it  must  excite  surprise  in  the  mind  of  every  one 
when  first  made  acquainted  with  the  fact,  that  during  this  time  the  use 
of  candles  in  dwellings,  and  especially  of  wax  candles,  has  also  increased 
in  a  greater  proportion  than  the  population.  It  has  been  suggested, 
and  with  much  apparent  reason,  that  this  increase  may  be  consequent 
upon  the  greater  brilliancy  of  the  streets  since  they  have  been  lighted 
with  gas,  and  since  we  have  thus  been  made  dissatisfied  with  the 
quantum  of  light  previously  thought  sufficient  within  our  houses.  Cer- 
tain it  is,  that  our  apartments  are  much  more  brilliantly  lighted  now 
than  they  were  before  the  introduction  of  coal-gas,  whether  that  inven- 
tion be  chargeable  with  the  increase  or  not. 

During  the  first  few  years  after  its  adoption,  very  large  sums  were 
spent  in  making  experiments  with  the  hope  of  bringing  this  mode  of 
lighting  to  perfection,  and  to  a  certain  extent  those  experiments  were 
successful.  It  can  hardly  be  said  that  much  imj)rovement.has  been 
made  in  the  art  during  the  last  twenty  years,  although  the  spirit  of  in- 
vention is  by  no  means  quenched,  and  projectors  are  continually  offering 
plans  for  economising  the  cost  of  the  processes,  but  it  may  reasonably  be 
expected  that  the  invention  has  not  so  soon  after  its  adoption  reached 
the  utmost  limit  of  perfection. 

It  may  be  thought  an  easy  thing  to  ascertain  the  consumption  of  food 
by  families,  and  thence  to  determine  the  average  quantities  used  by  in- 


ciiAr.  V.J  CONSUMPTION  OF  FAMILIES,  ETC.  583 

(lividuals,  and  the  aggregate  for  the  whole  kingdom.  Any  one  who  may 
attempt  to  ])rocure  this  information  will,  however,  soon  find  greater 
ditKculties  in  his  way  than  he  lias  anticipated.  Very  few  persons  keep 
any  adequate  records  of  their  expenditure  ;  and  with  those  who  do  pre- 
serve them,  such  a  variety  of  circumstances  mus^t  be  taken  into  con- 
sideration before  the  experience  of  individual  families,  placed  in  some 
circumstances  or  other  of  peculiarity,  can  be  assumed  as  affording  a 
test  of  the  average  expenditure,  that  a  very  rough  approximation  to  the 
fact  is  all  that  we  can  reasonably  expect  to  attain. 