

The  quantities  of  our  linen  goods  that  are  used  within  the  kingdom 

*  Pa<rc  -2 15. 


.~)7  \  rKOGKESS  OF  'rilL  XATIOX.  [si:r.  r. 

CiUi  only  be  conjectured,  since  the  materials  employed  are  in  great  part 
of  domestic  ])roduction,  and  no  means  exist  for  determining  their 
quantity.  The  improvements  already  noticed  in  the  spinning  of  Hax 
have  most  importantly  reduced  the  price  of  our  linens  ;  but  as  a  reduction 
fully  as  great  has  been  effected  in  ti)e  cost  of  cotton  goods,  it  is  doubtful 
whether  the  use  of  linen  has  been  therefore  nuich  or  at  all  increased. 
There  is  from  year  to  year  an  increased  demand  on  the  part  of  our 
manufacturers  for  foreign-grown  flax ;  and  its  consequent  enhance- 
ment of  price  occasions  much  dissatisfaction  to  the  linen  weavers  of 
Belgium,  whence  our  chief  supply  of  fine  flax  is  drawn.  Concurrently 
with  this  state  of  things,  our  exports  of  linen  have  very  greatly  increased, 
and  may  have  absorbed  all  the  additional  quantity  of  material ;  but  this 
is  a  question  which  it  is  not  possible  in  any  way  to  determine. 

The  remarks  here  made  concerning  linen  apply  in  great  part  to  woollen 
goods  also.  There  is  a  continually  increasing  importation  of  the  rav/ 
material  from  abroad,  but  we  are  left  wholly  to  conjecture  concerning 
the  home  production.  As  in  the  linen  manufacture,  the  processes  used 
by  our  clothiers  have  also  been  economised,  and  the  prices  of  their 
goods  have  been  much  reduced ;  but  increased  consumption,  which, 
under  other  circumstances,  would  be  the  almost  necessary  consequence, 
may  not  have  been  experienced  'beyond  that  required  by  our  greater 
numbers,  because  of  the  still  greater  cheapening  of  other  articles  mIucIi 
may  be  in  great  part  substituted  for  woollen  garments. 

Iron. — The  increased  use  of  iron  in  this  country  during  the  present 
century  has  been  truly  extraordinary.  The  importations  of  this  metal 
at  the  beginning  of  this  century  amounted  to  about  40,000  tons  yearly, 
and  the  quantity  made  at  home  was  under  150,000  tons.  It  was  given 
in  evidence,  by  Sir  John  Guest,  before  the  Committee  of  1840  on 
Import  Duties,  that  in  the  year  1806  the  quantity  of  iron  made  in  the 
kingdom  was  increased  to  258,^00  tons;  that  in  1823  the  quantity 
produced  was  452,000  tons ;  in  1825  it  had  reached  581,000  tons ;  and 
in  1828  the  quantity  was  703,000  tons. 

A  fresh  impulse  has  since  been  given  to  this  branch  of  manufacture 
through  the  great  actual  and  projected  extension  of  railways.  There 
has  not  been  any  statement  put  forth  showing  the  quantity  of  iron  made 
in  England  in  1849  ;  but  a  careful  account  of  the  make  in  Scotland  has 
been  drawn  up,  from  which  it  appeared  that  there  were  then  113  furnaces 
in  blast,  producing  13,800  tons  of  iron  weekly,  or  at  the  rate  of  01)0,000 
tons  in  the  year  of  50  weeks. 