


PRICES.  587 


CHAPTER  VI. 


PIIICES. 


Effect  of  Prices  upon  Consumption— Cost  of  Ship-building  in  1805  compared  with  the  Cost 
in  1836— Prices  of  Beef  and  Mutton— Of  various  Articles  of  Clothing— Prices  of  Dress 
at  Chelsea  Hospital. 

The  effect  of  variations  in  price,  as  occasioned  by  additions  to  or  re- 
ductions of  duties  upon  the  consumption  of  particular  articles,  has  been 
sufficiently  shown  in  the  preceding  Chapter.  The  ultimate  limit  of 
consumption,  as  already  stated,  is  the  power  of  production ;  since  it 
must  1)6  quite  evident,  on  the  one  hand,  that  no  more  can  be  consumed 
than  is  produced ;  and  equally  evident,  on  the  other  hand,  that  men  will 
not  continue  to  produce  an  article  in  quantities  beyond  what  will  be 
demanded  at  a  price  sufficient  to  replace  the  cost  of  production,  together 
with  the  ordinary  rate  of  profit. 

Tiie  power  to  use  and  to  consume  has  always  been  practically  limited 
only  by  inability  to  command  the  means  of  purchasing — a  cause  which, 
in  some  degree  or  other,  has  been  always  in  operation  as  regards  the 
most  numerous  portion  of  every  community.  The  proportionate  con- 
sumption in  a  country  at  various  periods  forms,  therefore,  a  very  good 
help  by  which  to  estimate  its  comparative  prosperity. 

8ome  accidental  causes,  such  as  a  change  of  fashion,  may  occasion 
more  or  less  of  certain  commodities  to  be  used ;  but  this  will  not  affect 
the  general  consumption  of  all  commodities.  If  from  some  such  cause 
more  of  one  kind  are  purchased,  there  will  be  less  of  others ;  and  the 
variation  of  demand  thus  induced  will,  if  continued  for  a  sufficiently 
long  time,  determine  the  employment  of  a  greater  or  less  amount  of 
industry  for  the  production  of  the  articles  affected.  It  is  not  by  such 
means,  however,  that  permanent  variations  of  price  are  brovight  about. 
Except  in  a  modified  degree,  and  occasioned  by  other  causes,  into  which 
it  is  not  now  necessary  to  inquire,  such  variations  can  only  occur  through 
variations  in  the  cost  of  production  or  the  charges  of  distribution.  If 
(other  things  remaining  equal)  the  cost  of  producing  a  yard  of  cloth  be 
reduced  one-half  by  improvements  in  the  processes  of  manufacture, 
there  will  thenceforward  be  at  least  an  equivalent  increase  in  the  quan- 


5SS 


niOURESS  OF  THE  NATIOX. 


[sec 


tity  used,  not  so  nuich  because  every  wearer  of  cloth  will  he  less  careful 
of  his  garments,  as  because  a  larger  class  of  consumers  will  be  enabled 
to  purchase. 

intimate  of  the  E.vpense  of  Materials  and  Labour  for  Bttildmg  a  l-i-Gun  Ship,  of  X'OQ  Tons, 
given  to  the  A'iiry  Hoard,  oth  January,  1805,  hi/  Messrs.  Wells,  JBrent,  Jiamard,  and  Roberts, 
Dudmnn,  and  Pitcher,  compared  with  tlie  cost  in  1836. 