

*   Page  TjOj. 


niAP    I  ]  WAR  AND  rEATE  EXPENDITURE.  595 

ra])i(l  and  gigantic  nmst  have  been  its  growth  !  how  nnich  more  rapid 
and  gigantic,  too,  might  ha\'e  been  the  growth  of  the  North  American 
States  themselves,  if,  instead  of  being  drained  of  men  and  treasure  in 
supporting  the  revolt  into  which  they  were  driven  in  resistance  of  what 
lias  since  been  acknowledged  to  have  been  a  course  of  legislative 
tyranny,  they  had  continued  to  be  recipients  of  the  surplus  population, 
and  sharers  in  the  accumulating  capital  of  the  mother-country  !  Is  it 
likely,  it  may  even  be  asked,  could  it  possibly  have  happened,  in  such 
circumstances,  that  the  British  Empire  could  have  been  involved  in 
such  a  war  as  that  which  followed  the  breaking  out  of  the  French  revo- 
lution? Nay,  is  it  ])robable  that,  without  the  jiarticipation  of  France 
in  that  struggle  as  the  abettor  of  rebellion  and  the  ally  of  republicanism, 
the  French  revolution  would  have  occurred  when  and  as  it  did  occur  ? 
These,  it  is  true,  are  questions  of  speculation  rather  than  of  fdct,  and  it 
would  be  of  little  advantage  to  pursue  them  further  on  this  occasion. 


2  Q  2 


o06  PROORESP  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vi. 


CIIAPTEK  II. 

INCREASE  OF  PERSONAL  AM)  liEAL  PROPERTY. 

Forms  in  which  the  National  Accumulations  appear— Amount  of  Property  Insured  at 
ditFerent  Periods  -Moral  and  Economical  Effects  of  Insurances— Accumulations  in  Life 
Assurance  Offices— Property  devised  in  respect  of  which  Legacy  Duty  has  been  paid 
afi'ords  an  insufficient  Test  of  the  Amount  of  Accumulations— Estimate  of  Personal  Pro- 
perty in  tlie  Kingdom  at  different  Periods— Capital  on  which  Legacy  Duty  was  paid  in 
Fifty-two  Years  to  1840 — Yearly  Average  Amount,  compared  with  the  Year  1848,  in 
England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland— Savings  invested  in  the  Security  of  Ileal  Estates,  and 
in  their  Improvement.  Assessments  on  Real  Property,  showing  its  Value  at  various 
Periods— Savings'  Banks. 

It  must  be  sufficiently  evident,  from  the  circumstances  stated  in  the 
last  Chapter,  that  the  accumulation  of  capital  in  this  coimtry  since  the 
peace  has  been  exceedingly  great ;  but  it  will  place  the  fact  in  a  much 
stronger  light  to  bring  forward  in  evidence  some  of  the  forms  in  which 
that  accumulation  has  been  made  most  apparent. 

During  the  war,  the  surplus  profits  and  the  savings  of  individuals 
were,  to  a  great  degree;  swallowed  up  by  the  public  expenditure,  and 
went  to  supply  the  constant  drain  which,  without  those  savings,  would 
very  speedily  have  exhausted  the  whole  resources  of  the  nation.  The 
return  of  peace  soon  brought  the  expenditure  of  Government  nearer  to 
the  amount  of  revenue  realized  from  taxation,  and  in  time  loft  a  yearly 
surplus  of  income  to  be  applied  in  diminution  of  the  public  debt.  The 
loan  of  1836,  raised  for  the  payment  of  the  c()m})cnsation  for  slaves, 
can  be  considered  as  only  in  a  slight  degree  atl'ording  an  ojjportunity 
for  the  absorption  of  savings.  Unlike  the  produce  of  other  loans,  the 
amount  was  not  consumed  and  destroyed,  but  by  far  the  greatest  part 
of  it  went  to  the  payment  of  debts  due  to  merchants  in  England,  by 
whom  it  was  employed  as  capital,  and  thus,  as  far  as  the  nation  generally 
was  concerned,  ejected  only  a  change  from  one  hand  to  another, 
without  causing  any  material  alteration  in  the  aggregate  amount  of 
capital  in  the  country. 