


r.uw.  i]  WAR   AXn  PEACE  EXrENDITI'UE.  •")f)3 

cvor  Ix'tore  realizeil  l»y  poaceahlf  means,  and  l)y  any  coinuiunily  in  any 
equal  period  of  time.  It  is,  notwitlistanding,  by  no  means  iineonimoii 
still  to  hear  coni])laints  of  increasing  distress  anxl  anticipations  of  ap- 
])n)aeljing  national  ruin  ;  although  it  must  be  confessed  that  such 
gloomy  views  and  forebodings  are  less  frequently  brought  forward  now 
than  they  were  only  a  very  few  years  back — an  etfeet  which  may  be  in 
some  measure  attributable  to  the  signs  of  wealth  and  prosperity  among 
us  having  become  more  obvious  through  the  particular  dii-ection  that 
has  been  giscMi  to  the  employment  of  a  portion  of  the  general  savings  of 
the  community.  The  present  has  been  called  the  age  of  locomotion — 
not  of  locomotion  such  as  was  employed  by  our  forefathers,  who  were  in 
a  far  greater  degree  than  we  are  confined  to  the  use  of  their  own  bodily 
energies  for  the  means  of  conveying  themselves  from  place  to  place,  but 
of  loL'omotion  accelerated  and  stimulated  by  numerous  combinations  of 
men  who  work  through  the  employment  of  vast  masses  of  capital.  The 
arrangements  which  have  rendered  possilne  this  change  are  known  to 
have  caused  an  enormous  outlay  ;  and  as  no  evidence  can  be  found  of 
any  stinting  of  capital  for  other  and  ])reviously-pursued  objects,  the 
inference  is  unavoidable  that  the  new  call  nuist  have  been  answered 
from  increased  accumulations. 

If  a  comparison  be  made  between  the  public  expenditure  of  the 
United  Kingdom  in  the  23  years  from  1793  to  1815,  and  that  of  the 
like  period  of  23  years  from  1816  to  1838,^  it  will  be  found  that  it  was 
less  in  the  latter  than  in  the  former  period  by  332,090,640/.,  showino- 
an  average  annual  difference  of  14,438,722/.  It  matters  not,  for  the 
purpose  now  under  consideration,  what  part  of  the  sums  here  mentioned 
was  raised  from  taxation,  and  what  part  was  borrowed  ;  under  whatever 
guise  it  was  derived,  the  whole  was  provided  by  the  nation  at  large  ; 
and  if  the  greater  expenditure  of  the  war  period  was  so  provided  with- 
out diminishing  or  even  without  materially  impairing  the  capital  of  the 
nation,  it  must  needs  be  that  the  smaller  expenditure  of  the  second  or 
peace  period  has  left  an  enormous  increase  of  wealth  in  the  nation.  It 
will  place  this  matter  in  even  a  stronger  light  if  the  comparison  is 
made  between  the  last  10  years  of  the  war,  from  1806  to  1815,  and 
the  10  years  ending  with  1838.  The  expenditure  in  the  first  of  these 
periods  was  860,677,615/.,  and  in  the  last  478,122,345/.  ;  exhibiting  a 
difference  of  382,555,270/.,  or  an  average  of  381  millions  more  ex- 
])ended  during  eaclrof  the  last  10  years  of  war  than  during  each  of  the 
10  years  of  })erfect  peace.  It  further  appears,  from  this  comparison,  that 
the  aggregate  difference  has  been  greater  between  the  two  decennary 
periods  than  it  was  between  the  two  longer  periods  of  23  years — 
a  fact  that  has  resulted  from  the  progressively-increasing  charge  of 
the  national  debt,  which  was  for  greater  in  the  latter  years  of  the  war 
than  it  had  previously  l)cen,  and  from  the  consequent  increased  charge 