

2  a 


o94  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vr. 

upon  the  income  of  the  country,  wliich  has  been  in  great  part  continued 
to  tlie  pre.~ent  time.     This  portion  of  the  nntionnl  expenditure  was — 


^oars. 

£. 

In  1703 

9,437,802 

1S15 

31,576,074 

1^3S 

2-),260,23S 

Vcar^. 

i". 

In  1811 

29,4r)0,144 

184'J 

28,323,961 

It  is  probable  that,  owing  to  the  greater  deveh)pnient  of  the  resources 
of  the  country,  arising  from  the  extension  of  its  manufactures,  a  con- 
siderable addition  was  made  to  tlie  national  wealth  during  the  early 
part  of  the  war  begun  in  17l»o,  not\vit1i:~tnnding  the  large  expenditure 
tliit  it  occasioned  ;  but  this  could  no  longer  be  the  case  when  that 
expcMiditnre  vas  so  lavishly  increased  that,  as  already  shown,*  the 
war  charges,  added  to  the  interest  on  the  national  debt,  in  one  year, 
(181-1:)  exceeded  100  millions,  a  great  part  of  which  sura  being  ex- 
pended in  foreign  countries  was  wholly  abstracted  from  the  national 
capital.  Such  a  rate  of  exhaustion  could  not  possibly  have  been  con- 
tinued ;  its  disastrous  effects  were  made  sufficiently  apparent  during  the 
earlier  years  of  peace,  but  must  have  been  long  since  repaired. 

While  dwelling  on  these  circumstances,  it  seems  hardly  possible  to 
prevent  the  inquiry  arising  in  the  mind,  what  must  have  been  the  con- 
dition of  England  at  this  time  if  tlie  wars  which  caused  this  lavish,  this 
unexampled,  expenditure  could  have  been  avoided.  A  small  part  only 
of  that  expenditure  would  have  sufficed  to  pay  off  the  whole  of  the 
national  burthens  as  they  stood  in  1793;  we  should  then  assuredly 
have  heard  nothing  of  the  restrictions  upon  various  branches  of  trade  for 
Avhich  those  burthens  were  so  long  made  the  groundless  pretext,  and  an 
amount  of  prosperity  would  have  been  experienced  that  must  have  had 
the  happiest  effect  upon  tlie  physical  and  moral  condition  of  England 
first,  and  through  England  upon  that  of  the  whole  European  family. 

If  we  may  carry  back  our  inquiry  to  a  still  earlier  period — to  the 
years  that  followed  the  peace  of  Paris  in  1763,  and  before  the  breaking 
out  of  the  unfortunate  troubles  that  ended  in  the  loss  to  us  of  our 
North  American  plantations,  we  shall  find  cause  for  still  deej)er  regret. 
At  the  commencement  of  the  insurrectionary  war  in  America,  our  debt 
amounted  to  less  than  130  millions,  the  annual  charge  in  respect  of  the 
same  being  4?  millions,  or  less  than  one-sixth  of  its  present  amount. 
The  sources  of  our  national  wealth  which  have  since  been  discovered 
and  made  available,  were  none  of  them  l)rouoht  to  linht  or  fostered 
through  the  partial  dismemberment  of  the  British  Empire.  On  the 
contrary,  it  may  be  said  that  the  extent  to  which  they  have  been  carried 
was  importantly  limited  by  that  misfortune.  Had  the  case  been  other- 
wise— had  the  field  for  our  manufacturing  inventions  e([ually  embraced 
a  peaceful  and  flourishing  British  Empire  in  the  West,  how  much  more 