

It  has  l)(>en  already  stated,  that  a  consldcraljlc  amount  of  wcaltli, 
which  It  is  usual  to  consider  as  personal  ])roperty,  has  heen  invested  iu 
mortgages  on  real  estates,  and  partakes  therefore  of  the  nature  (jf  real 
j)roperty.  The  sums  thus  invested  consist  of  savings  or  accumulations 
made  by  the  lenders,  hut  ea))ital  thus  disposed  of  must  not  necessarily  be 
cousidi'red  as  additions  to  the  national  wealth,  since  the  loans  may  have 
l)een  required  through  the  extravagance  of  spendthrift  land-owners. 
'I'here  exists  no  genei-al  record  of  sums  thus  secured,  and  it  woidd  he 
difficult  to  make  any  satisfactory  estimate  of  the  amount.  Still  less 
would  it  be  possible  to  determine  the  sums  thus  advanced  to  the  pro- 
})rietors  of  real  estates  which  have  been  required  for  purposes  of  per- 
manent improvement,  and  w  hie  h  therefore  form  a  part  of  the  national 
aeeunudations.  The  savings  thus  disposed  of  have,  in  great  part, 
been  made  by  persons  engaged  in  commercial  and  professional  pursuits, 
but  there  must  be  another  and  a  far  larger  amount  thus  invested 
tin-ough  the  prudence  of  land-owners  themselves.  One  capital  instance 
of  this  nature  was  atlbrded  by  the  late  Earl  of  Jxnccster,  better  known 
as  Mr.  Coke  of  Norfolk,  who,  by  the  continued  application  of  capital 
to  improvements  in  the  coiu'se  of  his  long  and  useful  life,  converted  a 
sterile  domain  into  a  highly  productive  estate.  In  this  manner  Lord 
Leicester  is  said  to  have  invested  sums  amounting  in  the  aggregate  to 
at  least  half  a  million  of  money,  and  which  amount  has  thus  been  added 
to  the  productive  wealth  of  the  nation.  To  what  extent  the  example 
thus  given  may  have  been  followed  by  those  who  witnessed  the  success 
of  the  patriotic  owner  of  Hulkham  cannot,  of  course,  be  known ;  but 
as  men  are  seldom  slow  to  adopt  what  has  proved  itself  to  be  greatly 
and  notoriously  beneficial,  we  may  fairly  suppose  that  the  investments 
there  made  form  but  a  very  small  part  of  the  savings  and  accumulations 
eniployed  in  this  manner.  Nor  has  this  disposal  of  capital  been  con- 
fined to  the  owners  of  the  soil.  Among  the  more  intelligent  class  of 
tenants,  whose  interest  in  the  farms  they  have  occupied  has  been  secured 
to  them  by  means  of  leases  for  such  periods  as  would  justify  them  in  ex- 
pecting an  adequate  return,  there  must  have  been  many  whose  capital 
embarked  in  improvements  has  not  only  been  replaced  to  them  with 
proiit,  but  has  permanently  raised  the  value  of  the  estate,  and  in  this 
way  has  ailded  to  the  real  wealth  of  the  country. 

( )n  the  other  hand,  a  considerable  sura  has  of  late  years  been  trans- 
ferred from  the  form  of  real  to  that  of  personal  property  through  the 
appropriation  of  land  to  the  purposes  of  railway  construction.  AVhat 
the  amount  may  be  which  has  thus  passed  in  the  transfer,  it  is  not  pos- 
sible to  state,  nor  even  to  estimate  with  any  confidence  ;  and  indeed  it  is 
very  certain  that  if  we  could  ascertain  the  amount  of  money  which  has 
changed  hands  in  the  operation,  it  would  not  afford  us  any  certain 
information,  since   it  is  notorious  that  in  many,   or  most  cases,  other 