

In  the  metropolis,  as  might  reasonably  be  supposed,  the  investment  of 
capital  for  such  objects  by  Government,  by  various  municipal  and  chari- 
table bodies,  by  public  companies,  and  by  individuals,  has  been  to  a 
greater  extent.  For  the  construction  of  docks  alone  there  have  been 
expended  in  London,  since  the  beginning  of  this  century,  more  than 
8,000,000/.     The  four  bridges  built  during  the  same  time  have  cost 


CHAP.  HI.]  RAILWAYS.  021 

4,000,000/. ;   and    the    tunnel   under   the  Thames  at  Rotherbithe  luis 
absorbed  G14,000/.     The  new  Post  Office  has  cost  409,300/. 

The  greatest  number  of  the  canals  now  in  operation  in  England  were 
constructed  during  the  second  half  of  the  last  century,  when  the  spirit  of 
enterprise  was  so  much  exerted  in  this  direction  that  canals  were  opened 
in  almost  every  quarter  that  offered  sufficient  facilities  for  their  execution, 
and  that  promised  a  fair  remuneration  for  the  capital  expended.  The 
number  of  these  works  undertaken  since  the  beginning  of  the  present 
century  has  consequently  been  small  in  comparison  with  previous  under- 
takings, but  much  has,  nevertheless,  been  done  for  the  extension  and 
improvement  of  lines  previously  opened.  It  is  not  possible  to  ascertain 
with  exactness  the  amount  of  money  that  has  thus  been  invested  in  this 
description  of  property,  but  after  a  careful  examination  of  the  various 
Acts  of  Parliament  that  have  been  passed  since  the  beginning  of  1801, 
authorizing  the  raising  of  money  for  the  purpose,  it  may  be  stated  that 
the  amount  thus  invested  within  the  kingdom  has  not  been  less  than 
eleven  millions  of  pounds,  including  in  this  amount  sums  expended  for 
improving  navigable  rivers,  and  the  cost  also  of  that  truly  magnificent 
work  the  Caledonian  Canal,  which  alone  amounted  to  rather  more  than 
1,000,000/.  Of  the  whole  sum  invested  in  this  description  of  property, 
about  4,500  000/.  has  been  applied  to  the  construction  of  new,  and  about 
6,500,000/.  to  the  extension  and  improvement  of  old  works.  The 
amounts  here  stated  are  probably  much  within  the  truth,  as  they  include 
only  the  sums  which  the  different  adventurers  have  been  authorized 
to  raise  in  the  form  of  shares,  without  taking  any  account  of  the  further 
amounts  which  it  is  customary  to  allow  the  shareholders  to  borrow  on  the 
security  of  their  property,  and  of  which  permission  it  is  well  known  that 
a  great  proportion  of  the  companies  have  availed  themselves  to  the  full 
extent  of  their  authority. 

The  extension  that  has  been  given  to  the  railway  system  in  this 
country,  during  the  last  twenty  years,  has  called  for  the  investment  of 
far  larger  sums  than  have  been  absorbed  by  canals.  The  intention  of 
the  first  promoters  of  railways  was  to  provide  for  the  conveyance  of 
goods  by  a  cheaper  mode  than  was  offered  by  means  of  canals.  It 
is  singular  that  with  regard  to  both  these  expectations  the  results 
have  proved  them  to  be  without  foundation.  Hitherto  railroads  have 
not  been  found  to  act  in  injurious  competition  with  water  conveyance 
for  the  transmission  of  goods,  and  the  cost  of  their  construction  has 
been,  beyond  all  comparison,  greater  than  anything  known  in  the  history 
of  canal  cutting.  AVith  the  exception  of  the  great  coal-fields  of  England, 
in  which  railroad  conveyance  is  necessarily  used  in  preference  to  canals, 
it  is  not  often  found  profitable  to  substitute  land  for  water  conveyance. 