

Among  the  most  important  of  these  works  must  be  placed  buildings 
erected  for  public  worship.  Large  sums  have  of  late  years  been  ex- 
pended in  the  erection  of  such  buildings,  partly  under  the  direction  of 
Parliamentary  Commissions,  by  means  of  sums  voted  for  the  purpose  by 
the  House  of  Comraons,  viz.,  1,000,000/.  voted  in  1813,  and  500,000/. 
iu  1^24:.     It  ap})ears  from  a  return  made  to  Parliament  by  the  Com- 


CHAP.  111.]  rUBLIC  BUILDINGS.  GlQ 

missioners,  in  July,  1841,  that  up  to  that  time  there  had  been  com- 
pleted, by  means  of  their  help,  281  new  churches  and  chapels  in  England, 
and  that  sixteen  other  churches  were  then  in  progress  of  erection.  In 
these  works  they  iiad  spent  the  sum  of  2,001,289/.,  wbich  included 
484,800/.  raised  in  the  different  localities  by  voluntary  contributions, 
local  rates,  and  loans.  The  estimated  cost  for  the  completion  of  the 
sixteen  churches  and  cliapels  then  in  the  course  of  erection,  was  stated 
to  be  44,084/.  These  sums,  large  as  they  are,  do  not  comprise  the 
whole  of  what  has  been  expended  in  building  sacred  edifices  during  the 
])eriod  embraced  in  this  inquiry.  In  addition  to  the  sums  granted  by 
the  Parliamentary  Commissioners,  1,500,000/.  in  Exchequer  Bills  have 
been  advanced  on  loans  to  other  parties  for  the  same  purpose.  It  must 
not  be  imagined  that  the  duty  of  providing  places  for  the  public  worship 
of  our  rapidly-increasing  population  was  neglected  up  to  the  year  in 
which  the  aid  of  Parliament  was  first  given.  There  is  not  any  record 
kept  of  the  number  of  such  new  buildings ;  but  judging  from  what  has 
passed  under  his  own  observation,  every  one  who  is  old  enough  to  have 
borne  a  part  in  the  business  of  life  during  the  earlier  years  of  this 
century,  must  be  of  opinion  that  the  number  was  very  considerable. 
There  have  been  besides  very  many  cases,  both  before  and  since  the 
above-described  interference  of  Parliament,  in  wliich  churches  and 
chapel  shave  been  built  and  endowed  by  means  of  funds  raised  either 
by  voluntary  subscriptions,  or  under  the  powers  of  private  local  acts,* 
and  not  a  few  churches  have,  in  the  same  period,  been  erected  through 
the  munificence  and  piety  of  individuals,  but  of  all  these  not  any  estimate 
can  be  formed.  It  is  equally  impossible  to  ascertain  the  number  or  the 
cost  of  places  of  worship  built  by  various  denominations  of  worshippers 
not  in  commimion  with  the  national  church,  the  cost  of  which  buildino;s 
is  wholly  provided  by  the  voluntary  contributions  of  the  congregations. 
If  all  these  matters  are  duly  considered,  there  appear  to  be  grounds  for 
believing  that  the  capital  invested  in  these  sacred  edifices  has  fully  kept 
j)ace  with  the  increase  of  the  national  wealth. 