

It  will  not  be  correct,  on  the  other  hand,  to  consider  in  the  light  of 
current  expenditure  the  cost  of  all  works  constructed  in  substitution  for 
others,  and  this  is  especially  the  case  in  regard  to  such  a  structure  as 


bis  niOGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [sec.  vi. 

London  Bridge,  the  probable  duration  of  which  will  be  such  that  a  very 
inconsiderable  sura,  if  suffered  to  accumulate  at  interest,  would  sutfiee  to 
produce  its  fellow  w'henever  the  ravages  of  time  shall  render  its  renewal 
necesscirv-  If  it  were  recjuired  to  apportion  correctly  the  value  of  pub- 
lic buildings  of  this  character,  distinguishing  the  part  that  is  of  the 
nature  of  expenditure  from  the  part  which  is  accumulation,  it  would  be 
necessary  to  make  periodical  valuations  of  the  national  works  and  monu- 
ments; and  as  no  advantage  could  follow  from  such  an  undertaking  that 
would  be  adequate  to  the  labour  it  would  occasion,  we  may  conclude 
that  the  task  will  never  be  accomplished. 

Tlie  object  proposed  on  this  occasion  is  not  to  determine  with  any 
pretension  to  minute  accuracy  the  amount  of  the  national  accumulations, 
but  merely  to  take  a  rapid  view  of  some  of  the  more  important  objects 
to  which  they  have  been  applied.  Some  inquiry  on  this  subject  does 
indeed  appear  necessary,  in  order  to  meet  the  very  common  but  yet  very 
unaccountable  fallacy,  that  as  no  new  loans  have  been  for  some  time 
contracted  by  the  Government  in  order  to  supply  deficiencies  in  the  pub- 
lic revenue,  there  are  no  channels  open  for  the  employment  of  surplus 
gains.  Persons  who  argue  thus,  do  not  suffer  themselves  to  reflect 
sufficiently,  or  they  could  hardly  fail  to  perceive  that  the  fact  of  loans 
being  required  to  make  good  deficient  revenues,  affords  in  itself  an 
indication  that  the  power  of  accumulating  exercised  by  individuals  is 
limited  and  counteracted  by  the  exigencies  of  the  State,  which  thus  dis- 
burses, and  in  part  destroys,  that  which,  being  otherwise  employed  as 
capital,  would  in  various  ways  give  additional  energy  to  the  springs  of 
national  industry. 

A  very  large  sura  has  of  late  years  been  devoted  to  the  permanent 
improvement  of  the  land  in  the  kingdom.  The  yearly  value  of  land 
assessed  to  the  jn-operty  tax  in  1841  exceeded  the  value  assessed  in 
1815  by  19,081,669/.,  which,  computed  at  only  20  years'  purchase, 
gives  an  amount  of  380,000,000/.  in  26  years  ;  and  this  does  not  include 
the  suras  so  applied  in  Ireland.  A  very  large  proportion  of  this 
increased  value  has  been  given  to  the  land  by  raeans  of  the  capital 
bestowed  upon  it. 

We  can  do  little  more,  in  pursuing  this  inquiry,  than  take  a  rapid 
glance  at  the  works  of  a  permanent  character  that  have  been  paid  for 
out  of  the  public  revenue,  ^.  e.,  by  the  indirect  contributions  of  the  great 
body  of  the  people. 