

In  addition  to  the  sums  above  mentioned,  and  which  have  been 
expended  in  England,  a  parliamentary  grant  of  50,000/,  was  made  in 
1825,  for  building  churches  in  the  Highlands  and  Islands  of  Scotland ; 
and  various  grants  were  made  for  the  like  purpose  in  Ireland,  where, 
between  1801  and  1820,  there  was  thus  expended  of  the  public  money 
749,551/. 

The  following  list  of  some  of  the  principal  public  works  and  buildings 
erected  of  late  years  (chiefly  in  the  metropolis),  will  at  least  serve  to 
show  that  we  of  the  present  day  are  not  unmindful  of  the  propriety 
of  giving  to  those  who  are  to  succeed  us  in  this  world  some  evidence  of 

*  The  expenditure  of  the  corporation  of  Liverpool  for  building  churches  amounted  in  tho 
ton  years  ending  with  1832  to  more  tlian  120,000/. 


620  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sue.  vi. 

our  desire  to  be  favourably  remembered  for  the  splendour,  the  diu-a- 
bility,  and  the  practical  utility  of  works  which  have  engaged  our  attention, 
and  which  have  afforded  a  field  for  displaying  the  skill  and  genius  of 
our  architects  and  engineers  : — 

Queen's  Palace  at  Pimlico.  I  Custom  House,  London. 

Breakwater,  Plymouth.  Custom  House,  Liverpool. 

London  Bridge  and  approaches.  |  General  Post  Office,  London. 

Southwark  Iron  Bridge.  |  liational  Gallery,  Trafalgar  Square. 


Yauxhall  Iron  Bridge. 
Waterloo  Bridge. 
Menai  Suspension  Bridge. 
Hammersmith  Suspension  Bridge. 


London  University  CoUeg 
King's  College,  London. 
Bethlehem  Hospital. 
North  London  Hospital. 


Thames  Tunnel  at  Uotherhithe.  |  Charing  Cross  Hospital. 

The  Houses  of  Parliament.  '  The  Iloyal  Exchange. 

A  very  large  part  of  the  public  buildings  of  England  are  erected  at 
the  cost  of  local  bodies,  but  the  funds  out  of  which  their  cost  is  defrayed 
are  not  less,  therefore,  to  be  considered  as  savings  or  accumulations. 
Even  in  cases  where  money  is  borrowed  for  the  purpose,  it  must  be 
supplied  through  the  economy  of  individuals,  who  thus  find  a  profitable 
channel  for  the  employment  of  their  surplus  funds. 

Hardly  any  one  of  the  large  manufacturing  and  trading  towns  of 
the  kingdom  can  be  mentioned  which  does  not  afford  this  proof  of  the 
existence  and  the  employment  of  increasing  wealth.  In  the  town  of 
Liverpool  alone  there  has  been  expended,  during  the  last  half  century, 
upwards  of  1,600,000/.  "in  widening  streets,  and  in  erecting  churches, 
charity  schools,  markets,  and  other  public  buildings."  Liverpool  is  a 
very  wealthy  corporation,  having  an  income  of  upwards  of  320,000/. 
per  annum,  and  it  would  not  be  correct  to  cite  its  example  as  a  fair 
measure  of  what  has  been  done  in  other  places.  There  is,  however, 
another  town  in  the  northern  part  of  England,  where,  within  the  last  few 
years,  capital  to  even  a  greater  amount  than  that  expended  during  h^lf 
a  century  in  Liverpool,  has  been  employed  for  its  embellishment.  In  the 
very  heart  of  the  town  of  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  surrounded  by  buildings, 
and  concealed  from  general  view,  there  was,  within  the  last  few  years,  a 
large  unoccupied  space,  called  the  Nun's  Field,  and  described  as  a  "  most 
desolate  and  neglected  wilderness."  This  space,  through  the  genius 
and  enterprise  of  one  man,  has  now  been  converted  into  streets,  wliich, 
for  architectural  beauty,  may  challenge  comparison  with  anything  to  be 
found  in  any  city  of  Europe.  The  cost  of  this  unexampled  improvement 
is  said  to  have  amounted  to  above  2,000,000/. 