


622  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [skc.  vi. 

An  exception  must  also  be  made  in  tlie  pecnliar  case  of  the  Liverpool 
and  Manchester  Railway,  on  which,  irom  the  nature  of  the  trade 
between  the  two  towns,  time  often  forms  so  important  an  ingredient  that 
the  hi"her  rate  of  charoe  is  submitted  to  in  order  to  secure  the  more 
important  object  of  a  favourable  market.  But  even  in  this  case  not  any 
falling  ofi'has  been  experienced  in  the  tonnage  conveyed  upon  the  canal, 
which,  on  the  contrary,  has  even  increased, — the  growth  of  the  manu- 
factures of  Manchester  and  the  surrounding  district  having  been  so  great 
that,  but  for  the  facility  afforded  by  the  railroad,  it  would  have  been 
hardly  possible  to  convey  the  quantities  of  raw  materials  and  manufactured 
goods  which  now  pass  between  the  factories  and  the  port  of  shipment. 
The  advantage  of  this  line  of  railroad  for  the  conveyance  of  merchandise 
during  periods  of  frost  may  be  readily  imagined. 

It  may  be  seen,  by  referring  to  a  table  already  given  (page  327),  that 
the  number  of  railways  constructed  under  Acts  of  Parliament  before 
1826  was  only  2i),  and  that  the  capital  expended  upon  them  fell  some- 
what short  of  1,500,000Z.  The  works  undertaken  since  have  most  of 
them  been  of  far  greater  importance.  One  of  them,  that  between 
London  and  Birmingham,  has  cost  6,000,000/.  The  outlay  on  the 
Great  Western  Railway  has  greatly  exceeded  that  sum.  The  capital 
expended  in  railways  generally,  and  the  further  sums  of  which  the 
investment  has  been  authorized  by  Parliament  up  to  the  close  of  1849, 
have  already  been  stated  {see  page  327). 

The  system  of  management  employed  in  this  country  for  the  construc- 
tion and  maintenance  of  turnpike  roads,  renders  it  impossible  to  ascertain 
the  amount  of  capital  invested  in  that  branch  of  public  works.  The 
whole  service  is  performed  in  various  localities  or  sections,  under  the 
direction  of  trustees,  selected  generally  from  among  gentlemen  who 
reside  within  the  districts  through  which  the  roads  are  carried,  and  no 
general  superintendence  or  control  exists  which  would  afford  any  precise 
information  of  a  statistical  kind  on  the  subject.  The  result  of  inquiries 
made  by  direction  of  the  House  of  Commons  in  1818  and  1829,  has 
already  been  given  (Section  iii.  Chap,  ii.),  from  which  it  appears  that 
the  addition  made  to  our  turnpike  roads  between  these  two  years  was 
1000  miles.  If  the  same  rate  of  increase  had  been  realized  throughout 
the  years  that  have  elapsed  of  the  present  century,  there  would  now 
be  4,450  miles  more  of  turnpike  roads  in  England  and  Wales  than 
existed  at  the  beginning  of  1801 ;  and  assuming  that  the  cost  of  con- 
struction was  on  the  average  1760Z.  per  mile,  the  sum  mentioned  in 
evidence  before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  in  1836,  by 
Sir  James  M'Adara,  as  the  average  cost  of  road-making,  the  capital 
invested  in  their  construction  must  have  amounted  to  7,832,000/.  This, 
however,    is   not   one  of  the  subjects  upon  which  we  can  assume  the 