

With  the  return  of  peace  came  comparative  security  for  capital,  and 
increased  means  for  its  profitable  investment  abroad.  The  increased 
marketable  value  then  given  to  the  public  funds  enabled  the  foreign 


cii.vi'.  IV.]  INVESTMENTS  OF  FOllEIGNERS.  629 

holders  to  realize  a  considerable  profit  from  the  sale  of  their  investments. 
For  all  those  reasons  a  very  large  part  of  the  money  thus  |)laced  was 
withdrawn  from  England,  and  our  capitalists  found  in  this  circumstance 
means  for  the  investment  of  some  of  their  accumulations.  In  1815,  the 
first  year  of  peace  and  the  last  year  of  the  then  imposed  property-tax, 
the  amount  of  stock  belonging  to  foreigners  had  already  been  reduced 
by  the  sum  of  three  millions. 

The  property  invested  in  live  stock  in  this  kingdom  has  evidently 
increased  in  a  greater  proportion  than  the  population.  It  will  be  seen, 
by  referring  to  the  table  of  prices  paid  for  beef  and  mutton  at  St.  Tho- 
mas's Hospital,  that  they  have  fallen  considerably  since  the  beginning 
of  the  century.  This  fact  alone  proves  that  the  proportionate  supply  is 
greater  now  than  it  was  thirty  or  forty  years  ago,  and  that  the  improve- 
ments adopted  in  the  means  used  for  rearing  and  fattening  animals  for 
human  food  have  been  attended  with  much  saving.  The  greater  num- 
ber of  live  stock  has  further  tended  to  increase  the  abundance,  and  so 
to  diminish  the  cost,  of  other  kinds  of  agricultural  produce  by  affording 
greater  means  of  enriching  the  soil. 


630  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


SECTION  VIL— MORAL  PROGRESS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Has  our  Moral  kept  pace  with  our  Material  Progress  ? — Diminution  of  Gross  and  Sensual 
Vice  —  General  prevalence  of  Selfishness  —  AVretchedncss  of  our  Poor  Population  — 
Multiplication  of  Criminal  Offenders— Reasons  for  expecting  Amendment  in  this  respect. 

It  has  been  shown,  in  the  prececUng  Sections  of  this  volume,  that  since 
the  beginning  of  the  present  century  this  kingdom  has  made  the  most 
important  advances  in  population,  in  wealth,  and  in  the  various  arts  of 
life  which  are  capable  of  ministering  to  man's  material  enjoyments.  It 
is  now  proposed  to  consider  whether  equal  advances  have  been  made  in 
regard  to  his  moral  condition  and  to  the  general  tone  of  society.  If  our 
inquiries  on  this  head  do  not  admit  of  satisfactory  answers — if,  while 
wealth  has  been  accumulated  and  luxuries  have  been  multiplied,  vice 
has  been  thereby  engendered,  and  misery  increased — the  advantages  of 
our  progress  may  well  be  questioned.  It  were  better  (if  it  were  possi- 
ble) in  such  case,  that  we  should  return  to  the  condition  of  poverty, 
make  over  our  wealth-procuring  inventions  to  other  people,  or,  better 
still,  consign  them  to  annihilation,  and,  together  with  their  poverty, 
resume  the  simplicity  and  comparative  innocence  of  our  forefathers. 