


CRIME.  633 


CHAPTER  II. 

CRIME. 

Multiplication  of  Crimes  against  Propcrtj- — Diminution  of  Crimes  of  Violence — Xumlicr  of 
Offenders  in  England  and  Wales,  1S05  to  1849,  and  Number  of  Executions — Increased 
Proportion  of  Convictions  in  the  later  Years— Severity  of  our  Criminal  Code  and  con- 
sequent Impunity  of  Offenders — Reforms  in  the  Criminal  Law — Historical  Sketch  of 
their  Progress — Classification  of  Offences — Comparison  of  1805  with  1841  in  respect  of 
Criminals  and  Population  in  each  County— Comparison  of  Agricultural  with  Manufac- 
turing Counties — Classification  of  Offenders  with  regard  to  Ages— Increase  of  Juvenile 
Offenders — Reformatorj-  Prison  at  Parkhurst— Classification  according  to  Intellectual 
Condition — Proportion  of  Sexes — Proportion  of  educated  Offenders  to  Population — 
Analysis  of  Oflences  committed  by  educated  Persons — False  Conclusions  drawn  from 
French  Criminal  Returns  concerning  the  Effects  of  Instruction.  Scotland:  Superiority 
of  its  Criminal  Jurisprudence — Offenders,  1830  to  1849- — Classification  according  to 
Offences— Sex  and  Intellectual  Condition— Proportion  of  Convictions — Ages  of  Offenders 
— Juvenile  Offenders — Analysis  of  Crimes  committed  by  educated  Persons.  Ikelaxd  : 
Educated  Offenders  not  distinguished  as  in  England  and  Scotland — Comparative  Morality 
of  different  Classes — Offenders  in  Ireland,  1805  to  1812 — Proportion  of  Convictions — 
Offenders.  1822  to  1834,  and  Number  executed  in  those  Tears — Committals  and  Con- 
victions classified,  1835  to  1849,  and  Number  executed — Extraordinary  Fluctuations  of 
Numbers  in  different  Years — Proportionate  Ages  of  Offenders— Incompleteness  of  Irish 
Criminal  Returns- Numbers  and  Proportions  of  Offenders  wholly  ignorant,  and  who 
could  read  and  «Tite — Proportions  of  Juvenile  Offenders,  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland 
—Improvements  in  Prison  Discipline. 

There  is  a  constant  tendency  in  the  human  mind  to  magnify  the  im- 
portance of  all  that  belongs  to  the  present  moment ;  and  this  tendency 
is  peculiarly  active  as  regards  the  enls  by  which  we  may  be  assailed 
or  surrounded.  "We  read  of  the  vices  and  crimes  of  our  forefathers, 
and  especially  such  of  them  as  have  been  notably  diminished  in  our 
day,  without  any  of  those  feelings  of  personal  annoyance  which  make 
us  so  peculiarly  sensitive  while  dealing  with  the  faults  of  which  we  are 
the  witnesses  or  the  victims.  Much  research  is  necessary  before  we 
can  place  ourseh^es  in  the  condition  to  form  any  correct  judgment  on 
such  a  subject,  and  much  self-examination  before  we  can  be  certain  that 
our  verdict  is  just. 

If  we  consult  the  reports  of  Parliamentary  Committees,  or  other 
publications  upon  these  questions,  which  appeared  in  former  years,  we 
shall  see  that  society  then  found  as  much  cause  for  complaint  and  grief, 
through  the  prevalence  of  crime,  as  we  find  at  the  present  day ;  and. 