


634  PnOORESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

further,  wc  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the  fact,  that  however  prevalent 
oifenccs  may  now  be  against  property,  we  enjoy  a  far  greater  degree 
of  protection  from  personal  violence  than  our  foreftithers.  In  the 
early  part  of  last  century  it  was  no  uncommon  thing  for  persons  to 
be  knocked  down  and  robbed  at  noon-day  in  the  public  thoroughfares 
of  London,  while  the  roads  in  all  directions  were  infested  by  robbers  on 
foot  and  on  horseback,  who  were  ready  for  the  commission  of  any 
number  of  murders,  if  met  by  resistance  on  the  part  of  those  whom  they 
attacked.  Even  since  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  it  hap- 
pened to  a  physician,  who,  in  the  performance  of  his  professional  duty, 
was  frequently  obliged  to  cross  Blackheath  at  all  hours  of  the  night, 
that  for  the  preservation  of  his  own  life  he  at  different  times  found 
himself  under  the  necessity  of  shooting  highwaymen  by  whom  his  car- 
riage was  attacked.  The  highway  robberies  and  even  murders  com- 
mitted upon  what  was  then  Hounslow  Heath  were  of  such  frequcTit 
occurrence  that  they  seemed  almost  matters  of  course,  and  he  was 
considered  a  bold  man  who  would  venture  alone  to  cross  that  spot 
after  nightfall. 

The  author  has  been  told  by  gentlemen  now  living,  who  were  accus- 
tomed to  repair  after  business  hours  to  their  residences  in  the  environs 
of  London,  and  particularly  on  the  south  side  of  the  Thames,  at  Dul- 
wich  and  Norwood,  that  it  was  the  uniform  practice  with  them  to  appoint 
some  place  of  rendezvous  from  which  they  proceeded  in  a  body  for 
mutual  protection. 

These  things  have  passed  away  and  are  become  only  matters  of 
tradition.  One  cause  of  their  diminution  has  been  the  greater  use  of 
paper  money,  and  consequently  the  smaller  amount  of  coin  which  travel- 
lers carry  with  them,  by  which  means  the  risk  of  after  detection  is  greatly 
increased  ;  but  the  chief  means  of  suppression  are  found  in  our  im- 
proved system  of  police,  which,  while  it  has  succeeded  to  a  great  extent 
in  putting  down  these  graver  outrages,  has  brought  to  light  numerous 
minor  delinquencies,  and  placed  in  our  criminal  records  olfences  which 
previously  passed  unpunished,  or  were  summarily  dealt  with  by  the 
populace.  We  might  search  those  records  of  former  periods  in  vain  for 
the  evidence  of  many  offences  which  now  swell  the  calendar — not  that 
the  offences  were  unknown,  but  that  the  punishment  of  them  was  not 
reserved  for  the  magistrate.  The  pick})ocket,  for  example,  who  should 
be  detected  in  the  commission  of  his  offence,  was  dragged  by  the  mob 
to  the  nearest  pump,  half  drowned,  and  then  allowed  to  depart. 