

If  we  refer  to  our  criminal  returns,  it  will  be  found  that  in  England 
and  Wales,  the  number  of  persons  committed  for  trial  is  now  more  than 
five  times  as  great  as  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  century ;  while  in 
Ireland  the  proportionate  increase  has  been  even  more  appalling,  there 
having  been  in  1849  twelvefold  the  number  of  committals  that  were 
made  in  1805,  the  earliest  year  for  which  our  records  are  available. 
There  are  not  any  accounts  of  so  early  a  date  by  which  we  are  able  to 
make  a  similar  comparison  for  Scotland  ;  but  comparing  the  number  of 
committals  in  1815  with  those  in  1849,  we  find  that  in  those  thirty-four 
years  they  have  augmented  nearly  sevenfold. 

AVe  have  here  prima  facie  evidence  that  the  increase  of  crime  litis  far 
out5tripj)ed  the  increase  of  our  population,  and  without  doubt  of  our 
wealth  also,  great  as  their  increase  has  been ;  and  it  behoves  us  to  inquire 
seriously,  lionestly,  and  fearlessly,  how  far  those  fi'ightful  appearances 
are  founded  in  truth, — and,  if  they  be  so  founded,  whether  the  two 
conditions  are  necessarily  connected,  or  whether  their  simultaneous 
occurrence  be  not  rather  attributable  to  ill-considered  interference,  or  to 


63-2  PKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sfx\  vii. 

some  deficiency  or  neglect  on  the  part  of  those  whose  duty  should  have 
prompted  them  to  the  adoption  oi  measures  more  effectual  than  have 
been  used  for  the  correction  of  the  evil.  It  would  indeed  be  a  heart- 
sickening  prospect  if,  in  looking  forward  to  the  continued  progress  of 
our  country  in  its  economical  relations,  we  must  also  contemplate  the 
still  greater  multiplication  of  its  criminals.  The  nature  of  the  case  does 
not  indeed  admit  of  our  realizing  such  a  future  as  is  here  supposed, 
for,  ere  it  could  be  reached,  the  whole  physical  framework  of  society 
must  be  broken  up.  Neither  should  we  be  willing  to  admit — notwith- 
standing the  experience  of  the  last  forty  years — the  moral  possibility  of 
such  a  result.  The  growing  attention  that  is  bestowed  upon  this  subject 
in  England,  and  not  in  England  only  but  in  every  country  where  the 
like  result  had  been  experienced,  is  beginning  to  produce  its  legitimate 
fruit.  Governments  are  at  least  awakened  to  the  necessity  of  counter- 
acting the  evil  tendencies  that  have  made  such  fearful  progi'css.  It  is 
seen,  and  is  beginning  to  be  practically  acknowledged,  that  a  great 
part  of  the  moral  evil  under  which  societies  are  suffering  is  the  offspring 
of  ignorance,  and  that  without  insisting  upon  any  very  high  degree  of 
perfectibility  in  human  nature,  we  may  reasonably  hope  that  the  re- 
moval of  that  ignorance  will  do  much  towards  restoring  moral  health 
to  communities,  and  thus  fit  them  for  the  rational  enjoyment  of  bless- 
ings so  increasingly  offered  for  their  acceptance.  That  this  hope  is  not 
a  mere  vision  of  the  philanthropist,  but  is  founded  upon  the  knowledge 
of  what  is  daily  passing  around  us,  will  be  seen  when  we  come  to 
consider  the  intellectual  condition  of  those  who  have  been  made  to 
appear  at  the  bar  of  justice,  and  find  how  small  a  proporticm  among 
them  have  received  any  beyond  the  first  elements  of  instruction.  When 
we  are  thus  convinced  of  the  powerful  influence  of  instruction,  even  as 
hitherto  communicated,  in  restraining  from  the  open  violation  of  laws, 
what  may  we  not  reasonably  hope  will  be  the  power  of  that  moral 
training  which  it  is  now  felt  must  be  employed  to  stamp  its  proper  value 
upon  knowledge  ?  To  suppose  that  blessings  must  necessarily  be 
accompanied  by  countervailing  curses,  is  to  impute  a  capital  deficiency 
to  the  intentions  of  Providence,  and  amounts  to  a  practical  denial  of  the 
power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  the  Almighty. 