

2s  2 


628  PIIOGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [sec.  vi. 

through  the  progressive  sale  of  the  stuck  in  foreign  countries  at  higher 
than  the  contract  prices.  It  is  evidently  impossible  to  form  any  correct 
estimate  of  the  profit  or  loss  which  has  resulted  to  the  country  from 
these  various  operations  ;  the  general  impression  is,  that  hitherto  the 
losses  have  much  exceeded  the  oains. 

Amid  the  fever  of  speculation  that  arose  in  18:^4-5,  attention  was 
drawn  towards  the  mines  of  South  America  and  Mexico,  and  several 
companies  were  formed  with  large  capitals,  to  be  employed  in  once 
more  bringing  those  storehouses  of  the  precious  metals  into  productive 
operation.  The  capitals  embarked,  and  it  may  be  said  sunk,  in  a  few 
only  of  those  undertakings,  amounted  to  five  millions  sterling.  By  this 
means  the  supply  of  silver  and  gold  towards  the  general  circulation  has 
been  augmented,  but  at  an  expense  to  the  adventurers  so  much  greater 
than  the  returns,  that  the  capitals  originally  subscribed  may  in  most 
cases  be  considered  lost.  Investment  has  also  been  found  for  m.ore 
than  two  millions  and  a  half  of  money  by  joint-stock  associations  for  the 
purchase  and  sale  of  lands  in  our  North  American  and  Australian 
colonies. 

During  the  war  which  led  to  the  downfall  of  Napoleon,  a  general 
feeling  of  insecurity  pervaded  the  Continent,  and  large  sums  were 
invested  by  foreigners  in  the  public  funds  of  England  with  a  view  to 
safe  custody.  These  investments  were  very  convenient  to  us  while  such 
constant  and  great  additions  were  being  made  to  the  national  debt,  and 
no  doubt  tended  to  make  the  terms  of  borrowing  more  favourable  to 
our  Government  than  they  otherwise  might  have  been.  An  additional 
inducement  to  the  foreign  capitalist  to  place  his  money  thus  in  security 
was  offered  by  the  assurance  that  the  income  thence  arising  would  not  be 
subjected  to  deduction  by  taxation.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  in 
the  exemption  from  property-tax  then  extended  to  foreign  holders  of  a 
portion  of  our  public  funds,  any  favour  was  shown  to  them.  To  subject 
the  dividends  to  taxation  would  have  been  not  only  impolitic,  it  would 
have  been  unjust.  The  property-tax  was  collected  from  British  sub- 
jects, holders  of  stock,  at  the  times  when  the  dividends  were  paid, 
because  it  aflforded  a  convenient  opportunity  for  collecting  a  tax  imposed 
by  law,  not  upon  the  public  debt  of  the  state,  but  upon  the  incomes  of 
its  subjects.  In  the  Act  which  established  the  Income  Tax  in  1842,  the 
same  regard  has  not  been  paid  to  strict  justice. 

We  learn  from  the  claims  made  on  the  part  of  foreigners  to  this 
exemption  from  property-tax,  that  the  amount  of  stock  held  by  them  in 
1813  amounted  to  more  than  twenty  millions. 