

"  In  1816  Sir  S.  Romilly  carried  this  Bill  once  more  through 
the  House  of  Commons,  but  its  further  progress  was  again  stopped 
in  the  House  of  Lords.  In  introducing  his  Bill,  Sir  S.  Romilly 
brought  forward  the  fact,  that  in  the  year  1785,  no  less  than  ninety- 
seven  persons  were  executed  for  the  offence  of  shop-lifting  in  London 
alone. 

"  In  1818  Sir  S.  Romilly  again  carried  this  Bill— the  identical  Bill 
which  had  already  twice  passed  the  House  of  Commons  in  that  Parlia- 
ment, and  twice  in  its  predecessor,  the  only  opposition  offered  being  an 
amendment  proposed  by  the  Attorney-General,  on  the  third  readirg, 
to  the  declaration  in  the  preamble,  '  that  extreme  severity  was  calcu- 
lated to  produce  impunity  for  crimes.'  In  defeating  this  amendment, 
and  affirming  the  principle  for  which  he  contended.  Sir  S.  Romilly's 
exertions  for  the  amelioration  of  the  criminal  laws  of  his  country  ter- 
minated. He  died  at  the  close  of  the  year ;  and  though  he  liad  not 
been  enabled,  during  a  struggle  of  ten  years  with  the  ministry  of  that 
day,  which  opposed  all  his  propositions,  to  carry  many  of  the  measures 
he  so  zealously  advocated,  he  had  impressed  the  House  of  Commons 
with  their  justice,  and  at  least  put  a  stop  to  the  sanguinary  enactments 
which  were,  up  to  that  time,  constantly  being  a.dded  to  the  Statute 
Book,  at  the  same  time  that  he  aroused  the  attention  of  the  public  by 
his  eloquent  appeals  to  the  state  of  the  laws. 


cuw.  i\]  CRIMINAL  LEGISLATION.  641 

"In  1819  the  criminal  laws  and  their  administration  were  the  subject 
of  frequent  discussions. 

"  The  number  of  convictions  and  executions,  particularly  for  the 
iorging  and  uttering  of  bank  notes,  was  urged  as  a  ground  for  inquiry, 
and  petitions  from  most  of  the  large  towns  and  many  influential  bodies 
were  presented  to  Parliament  praying  that  serious  consideration  might 
be  given  to  the  subject.  Lord  Holhmd  presented  a  petition  to  this 
effect  from  the  Corporation  of  London  in  the  Upper  House,  and  earnestly 
supported  it ;  and  tl)e  sheriffs  presented  a  similar  petition  at  the  bar  of 
the  House  of  Commons.  Mr.  Wilberforce  presented  a  petition  from 
the  Society  of  Friends,  stating  that  at  their  annual  meeting  the  subject 
had  arrested  their  attention,  and  expressing  the  feelings  of  deep  com- 
miseration and  regret. 

"  Tiie  public  feeling  was  made  sufficiently  apparent  in  other  ways. 
Juries  seemed  determined  to  resist  by  their  verdicts  the  severe  enact- 
ments of  the  laws,  and  injured  parties  were  deterred  from  appearing  as 
prosecutors.  Sir  James  Mackintosh  now  appeared  as  the  active  advo- 
cate of  the  reforms  which  had  been  so  much  advanced  by  the  exertions 
of  his  friend,  and  moved  (in  March,  IblO)  the  appointment  of  a  select 
committee  '  to  consider  so  much  of  the  criminal  law  as  related  to  capital 
punishments,  and  to  report  their  observations  and  opinion  to  the  House.'* 
The  motion  was  opposed  by  Lord  Castlereagh,  supported  by  his  party 
— but,  after  a  lengthened  debate,  was  carried  by  a  majority  of  19  in  a 
house  of  275  members.  This  defeat  of  the  minister  was  welcomed 
with  'great  cheering.'  The  committee  was  appointed,  and  made  their 
report  at  the  end  of  the  session.  Li  the  next  year,  Sir  James  moved 
the  reappointment  of  the  committee,  and  brought  in  six  Bills  for  the 
Amendment  of  the  Criminal  Laws,  founded  on  their  report  presented  in 
the  previous  session.  These  Bills  proposed  to  abolish  capital  punish- 
ments— 