

2  T  2 


644  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

cattle  stealing,  and  larceny  in  a  dwelling-hoiise.*  He  was  opposed  by 
Sir  R.  Peel,  and  an  amendment  was  made  in  the  Lords  subjecting  these 
offences  to  the  fixed  penalty  of  transportation  for  life — at  the  same  time, 
ministers  brought  in  a  Bill  for  abolishing  capital  punishment  in  cases  of 
forgery.  This  Bill  was  introduced  into  the  Commons  by  the  Attorney- 
General,  and  into  the  House  of  Lords  by  the  Lord  Chancellor.  It 
passed  into  a  law,  but  an  amendment  was  made  in  the  House  of  Lords 
under  the  protest  of  the  Lord  Chancellor,  excepting  the  forgery  of 
wills  and  powers  of  attorney  to  transfer  stock,  which  offences  were  left 
capital. 

"  Li  1833  Mr.  Lennard  carried  his  Bill  for  abolishing  capital  punish- 
ment for  housebreaking,  executions  for  which  offence  were  continued 
down  to  1830. 

'•'  In  1834  Mr.  Ewart  carried  a  Bill  for  abolishing  capital  punishment 
for  returning  from  transportation  ;  and  in  the  following  year  for  sacri- 
lege and  letter-steahng. 

"This  was  the  state  of  the  criminal  law  when  Lord  John  Russell 
brought  in  his  Bills  for  its  mitigation,  founded  on  the  report  of  a  com- 
mittee wdiich  the  Government  had  appointed.  The  little  progress  which 
Sir  S.  Romilly  and  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  had  made  in  opposition  to  the 
Governments  of  their  day,  will  be  seen  by  the  foregoing  sketch — as  well 
as  the  extensive  and  salutary  changes  which  followed.  Lord  J.  Russell's 
Bills  effected  an  extensive  abolition  of  the  sentence  of  death  and  a 
mitigation  of  the  secondary  punishments.  He  was  enabled  to  abolish 
capital  punishments  in  all  cases  but — 

"  Murder  and  attempts  to  murder,  where  dangerous  bodily  injuries 

are  effected  ; 
"  Burglary  and  robbery,  when  attended  with  violence  or  wounds  ; 
"Arson    of  dwelling-houses,  where  life  is  endangered — and  six 
other  offences  of  very  rare  occurrence. 

"The  number  of  capital  convictions  in  1829  was  1385  ;  and  in  1834, 
three  years  after  the  extensive  abolition  of  capital  punishments,  the 
number  was  reduced  to  480. 

"  Only  four  years  have  elapsed  since  the  passing  of  these  Acts,  as  to 
which  we  as  yet  know  the  result,  and  the  Criminal  Tables  show  their 
very  important  operation  upon  the  criminal  procedure.  These  tables 
show  the  capital  convictions  under  the  existing  laws  to  have  been 
reduced,  if  w'e  deduct  the  number  of  offences  committed  in  1838,  before 

*  Executions  for  these  offences  were  common  up  to  1830.  In  the  three  preceding  years 
there  were  executed  for — 

Horse  stealing 22 

Sheep  stealing 9 

Larceny  in  dwelling-houses.      .  &-• 
In  the  following  two  years  which  intervened  before  the  abolition  of  the  capital  punishment, 
two  persons  only  were  executed  for  these  offences. 