

"  1st.  For  stealing  to  the  value  of  AOs.  in  dwelling-houses. 

"  2nd.   P^or  stealing  to  the  value  of  55.  privately  in  a  shop. 

"  3rd.  For  stealing  privately  on  a  river  to  the  value  of  40^. 

"  4th.  For  several  offences  of  the  nature  of  misdemeanors,  many  of 
them  obsolete. 

"  5th.  Repealed  parts  of  Acts  creating  capital  offences,  among  which 
were — abduction  of  women  of  property — maliciously  wounding  cattle — 
taking  a  reward  for  the  reco\ery  of  stolen  goods — destroying  trees — 
breaking  down  the  banks  of  rivers ;  and  several  offences  connected  with 
the  marriage  and  bankrupt  laws. 

"  6th.  Consolidated  and  amended  the  laws  relating  to  forgery,  and 


*  Sir  J.  ^Mackintosh   stated  that  a  similar  resolution  was  passed  in  1770,  when  authority 
was  delegated  to  a  commission  for  the  same  purpose. 

2  T 


642  niOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [skc.  vii. 

repealed  the  capital  punisliment  for  all  Jirst  offences  of  forging  and 
uttering — except  of  Bank  of  England  notes. 

"  The  Bills  relating  to  stealing  in  a  dwelling-house,  stealing  on  navi- 
gable rivers,  and  forging,  were  opposed  by  the  Government  of  the  day, 
and  abandoned  by  Sir  James  in  the  face  of  their  opposition.  The  other 
three  Bills  were  suffered  to  pass  into  laws — the  Lords  having  altered  the 
Shop-lifting  Bill,  leaving  it  capital  to  steal  in  shops  to  the  value  of  15/. 

"In  1821  Sir  James  Mackintosh  succeeded  in  carrying  the  second 
and  third  reading  of  his  Forgery  Bill  in  opposition  to  the  strenuous 
exertions  of  the  ministry.  On  the  question  that  the  Bill  do  pass,  some 
of  its  supporters  having  left  the  house,  Lord  Londonderry  tried  another 
division — and  by  this  parliamentary  stratagem,  which  was  warmly 
exclaimed  against,  succeeded  in  defeating  the  Bill — the  numbers  being 
121  to  115. 

"  Li  1822,  in  consequence  of  ill  health.  Sir  James  Mackintosh  con- 
fined his  exertions  to  the  obtaining  a  pledge  from  the  House  to  consider 
means,  in  the  following  session,  for  abating  the  rigour  of  the  criminal 
law.  This  resolution,  though  strongly  opposed  by  the  Government,  he 
carried  by  117  to  101. 

'•In   1823,  in   pursuance  of  the  resolution  which,  in  spite   of  the 
Government,  he  had  extorted  from  the  House,  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  pro- 
posed, in  a  series  of  resolutions,  that  it  was  expedient  to  abolish  the 
punishment  of  death  in  cases  of  larceny  from   shops,  from  dwelling- 
houses,  and  on  navigable  rivers — for  horse,  sheep,  and  cattle  stealing — 
for   forgery — returning    from  transportation,  and  other  offences  made 
capital  by  partiulcar  statutes.     These  resolutions  w^ere  oppsoed  by  Sir 
Robert  Peel,  then  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department,  who 
moved  the  previous  question,  and  promised  that  the  subject  should  be 
taken  up  by  the  Government.     Sir  Robert  Peel's  motion  was  carried, 
and  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  stated  that  '  he  should  not  take  upon  himself  to 
introduce  any  other  measures  for  amending  the  criminal  laws,  because 
he   must  foreknow  their  fate.'     In  conformity  with    his   promise.   Sir 
Robert  Peel  afterwards  brought  in  three  Bills  for  Abolishing  Capital 
Punishments,  which  were  passed,  an  ineffectual  attempt  being  made  by 
Sir  J.  Mackintosh  to  extend  their  provisions.     These  Bills  abolished 
capital  punishments  in  fifteen  distinct  offences ;  but  the  offences  were 
either  obsolete,  or  of  so  imfrequent  occurrence,  that  they  did  not  tend 
much  to  ameliorate  the  severity  of  the  criminal  code.     This  will  be  at 
once  obvious  from  the  fact,  that  in  the  two  years  preceding  the  passing 
of  these  Bills,  the  Criminal  Records  show  that  only  four  convictions  took 
place   under  their   enactments,  and  that  step    by  step  with  them  Sir 
Robert  Peel  carried  a  Bill  to  enable  Judges  to  record  instead  of  passing 
the  sentence  of  death,  in  order  to  avoid  the  farce  of  solemnly  passing  a 
sentence  which  no  one  who  heard  it  imagined  could  be  executed. 