

The  amount  of  guilt  and  of  wretchedness  which  might  fairly  be  im- 
puted to  the  carelessness  or  ignorance  of  the  British  Parliament  on  all 
matters  relating  to  the  repression  of  crime,  would,  if  any  estimate  could 
be  formed  on  the  subject,  prove  an  emphatic  warning  to  legislators. 
The  course  pursued  for  the  purpose  by  Parliament  was  for  a  long  period 
only  a  series  of  wretched  expedients.  When,  by  the  greater  frequency 
of  its  occurrence,  or  by  some  notorious  instance,  any  particular  offence 
forced  itself  upon  public  attention,  it  was  not  the  rule,  as  reason  would 
have  dictated,  to  examine  and  remove  the  causes  of  the  increase,  but 
to  multiply  the  terrors  of  the  law  to  a  degi*ee  out  of  all  proportion 
with  the  guilt  of  the  offenders.     By  this   severity,  or  possibly  through 

♦  Juries  frequently  forgot  their  oath,  "  to  find  a  true  verdict  according  to  the  evidence  " 
— iu  fact  perjured  thcuiselves— by  reducing  the  amount  sworn  to  as  the  value  of  stolen  pro- 
perty, in  order  to  avoid  the  capital  conviction. 


CHAP.  II.]  CRIMINAL  LEGISLATION.  637 

circumstances  distinct.  IVoiu  legislation,  the  tendency  to  commit  that 
particular  crime  may  have  been  lessened,  until  the  feeling  of  vengtanee 
under  which  tiie  law  w<is  made  would  pass  away  ;  its  execution  would 
then  be  rendered  impossible,  and  the  law  would  become  as  great  a 
nuisance  as  the  offence  against  which  it  was  enacted  through  the  im- 
punity consequent  upon  its  disproportionate  severity. 

This  is  no  longer  matter  for  speculation  or  conjecture.  Our  criminal 
code  has  now  been  for  some  years  relieved  from  a  great  part  of  the 
reproach  so  justly  charged  against  it^  and  we  can  refer  to  parliamentary 
returns  for  confinnation  of  the  views  here  expressed. 

We  learn  from  the  interesting  explanations  prefixed  to  the  Criminal 
Returns  for  England  and  Wales,  by  Mr.  Redgrave  of  the  Home  Office, 
that  although  between  1818  and  1824,  adopting  the  recommendation  of 
a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  caj)ital  j)unishinents  were 
abolished  for  twenty-one  offences,  but  little  effect  was  shown  in  the 
numbers  of  persons  sentenced  to  death  and  executed,  "  the  remission 
not  having  reached  any  of  the  larger  classes  of  offences,  and  some  of 
the  offences  having  indeed  become  obsolete.  In  1832  capital  punish- 
ment was  abolished  for  cattle -stealing,  horse-stealing,  sheep- stealing, 
larceny  to  the  value  of  5/.  in  a  dwelling-house,  coining,  and  forgery 
(except  of  wills  and  powers  of  attorney  to  transfer  stock)."  Cajiital 
punishment  was  removed  in  1833  from  house-breaking — in  1834  from 
returning  from  transportation — in  1835  from  sacrilege,  and  letter- 
stealing  by  servants  of  the  Post-office — and  in  the  first  year  of  the 
present  reign  (1837)  capital  punishments  were  abolished  in  respect  of 
all  offences,  with  the  exception  of — 