


tHAF.  n.J  CRIME.  645 

the  passing  of  the  Act  of  tliat  year,  to  a  mimber  not  exceeding  that  of 
the  executions  in  a  like  period  up  to  the  end  of  1829.  The  effect  on 
the  secondary  punishments  has  been  very  great-  The  proportion  sen- 
tenced to  transportation  for  hfe  was  reduced  from  1  in  20  to  1  in  86,  and 
the  effect  of  the  change  in  tlie  chief  punishments  lias  been  visible  down 
to  the  bottom  of  the  scale." 

Among  the  injurious  results  of  the  sanguinary  code  which  was  so 
long  allowed  to  disgrace  our  statute-book,  may  be  mentioned  the  im- 
pressions made  upon  the  minds  of  transgressors.  It  might  have  been 
supposed  that  at  least  one  salutary  effect  would  have  attended  upon 
severity, — that  the  terror  which  it  was  calculated  to  excite  would  have 
had  a  wholesome  influence  in  deterring  from  crime  :  but  it  is  well  known 
that  the  very  reverse  of  this  effect  was  produced,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Fry, 
whose  name  will  go  down  to  posterity  with  thnt  of  Howard,  and  who 
had  well  qualified  herself  for  being  heard  upon  this  question,  \\as 
examined  before  the  Committee  on  the  Police  of  the  Metropolis  in  1818, 
and  upon  this  point  gave  the  following  testimony : — 

"  As  an  illustration  of  the  effects  produced  among  the  prisoners  them- 
selves by  capital  punishments,  I  wish  to  read  a  note  which  was  taken  in 
the  prison  of  Newgate  soon  after  the  execution  of  a  woman  named 
Elizabeth  Fricker,  who  was  executed  for  admitting  a  man  to  rob  her 
mistress.  '  I  visited  Newgate  two  days  after  the  execution  of  Elizabeth 
Fricker,  and  instead  of  finding,  as  I  expected,  the  whole  of  the  criminals 
awfully  affected  by  what  had  passed,  I  found  a  spirit  of  pity  and 
lamentation  over  the  sufferers,  with  such  an  impression  that  the  punish- 
ment exceeded  the  crime,  that  it  excited  a  feeling  of  great  dis])leasure 
and  even  bitterness,  not  only  towards  our  laws  but  to  those  who  put 
them  into  execution  ;  and  so  far  from  softening  the  heart,  or  leading  it 
from  evil,  it  appeared  to  harden  them,  and  make  them  endeavour  to 
justify  their  own  criminal  conduct  as  well  as  that  of  those  who  suffered, 
and  even  to  fortify  themselves  through  unbelief  of  the  truths  of  reli"-ion, 
or  to  justify  themselves  and  those  who  suffered,  by  feeling  that  thev  were 
not  what  they  considered  justly  done  by.'  " 

Up  to  1834  there  was  not  any  classification  of  offences  made  in  our 
criminal  returns,  the  whole  being  arranged  alphabetically.  But  on 
and  after  that  year  crimes  have  been  ranged  under  six  principal  heads, 
viz. : — 

1.  Offences  against  the  person  ; 

2.  Offences  against  property,  committed  with  violence ; 