

"The  subject  then  slept  for  more  than  half  a  century,  until  in  1808 
Sir  JSamuel  Romilly  brought  forward  his  first  motion  for  the  Reform  of 
the  Criminal  Laws ;  and  a  Bill  which  he  introduced  for  abolishing  the 
capital  punishment  for  stcalinrj  jmvatehj  frovi  the  j)crson  to  the  value  of 
bs.  (picking  pockets)  passed  into  a  law  during  the  same  session. 

"  In  1810  Sir  S.  Romilly  obtained  leave  to  bring  in  three  Bills  for 
the  Abolition  of  Capital  Punishments  : — 

"  1st.  For  stealing  to  the  value  of  5^.  in  shops,  warehouses,  coach- 
houses, &c. 

"  2.  For  stealing  to  the  value  of  40a\  in  a  dwelling-house. 

"  3rd.  For  stealing  to  the  value  of  40^.  on  navigable  rivers,  &c. 

"  The  first  Bill  passed  the  House  of  Commons,  but  made  no  further 
progress ;  the  second  was  opposed  by  the  Government,  and  lost  by  a 
majority  of  two  in  a  thin  house  ;  the  third  Bill  was  dropped  for  the 
session. 

"  In  the  following  year  Sir  S.  Romilly  again  introduced  the  above 
Bills,  together  with  a  Bill  abolishing  capital  punishment  for  stealing 
from  bleaching-grounds,  and  was  enabled,  in  opposition  to  the  ministry 
of  the  day,  to  carry  his  four  Bills  through  the  House  of  Commons.    The 


610  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  tii. 

Bills  were  introdnceil  into  the  ILmso  of  Lords  by  Lord  Holland,  sup- 
ported by  Lord  Lansdowne,  and,  with  the  exception  of  the  Bill  relating 
to  bleaching-grounds  (which  was  passed  into  a  law),  were  strongly  op- 
posed by  the  Lord  Chancellor,  and  by  Lords  Liverpool  and  Ellen- 
borough,  and  were  lost  on  a  division.  Lord  Ellenborough,  on  this 
occasion,  said,  'These  Bills  went  to  alter  laws  which  a  century  had 
proved  necessary,  and  which  were  now  to  be  overturned  by  speculation 
and  modern  philoso])hy  ;'  and  again,  '  He  trusted  that  laws,  which  a 
century  had  proved  to  be  beneficial,  would  not  be  changed  for  the  illusory 
opinions  of  speculatists.' — Hansard,  vol.  xx. 

"  In  1812  Sir  S.  Rorailly  introduced  a  Bill  which  passed  into  a  law, 
repealing  an  Act  of  Elizabeth  which  constituted  it  a  capital  offence  in 
soldiers  and  sailors  found  begging  in  the  streets. 

"In  1813,  on  the  assembling  of  the  new  Parliament,  Sir  S.  Romilly 
again  introduced  his  Bill  abolishing  capital  punishment  for  shop-lifting. 
He  had  selected  this  Bill  as  having,  in  former  discussions,  been  con- 
sidered less  objectionable  than  the  others.  Mr.  Secretary  Ryder  and 
the  Solicitor-General  expressed  their  disapproval  of  the  Bill  on  its  in- 
troduction, and  ministers  opposed  it  on  the  third  reading  as  introducing 
an  innovating  spirit  into  the  criminal  legislation.  It  was,  however, 
carried  in  the  face  of  this  opposition  by  a  majority  of  38  in  a  house  of 
106  members,  but  thrown  out  in  the  House  of  Lords. 