

Murder  and  attempts   to   murder  when  accompanied  with  injuries 
dangerous  to  life  ; 

Rape,  and  carnally  abusing  girls  under  ten  years  of  age  ; 

Unnatural  offences ; 

Burglary,  when  attended  with  violence  to  persons  ; 

Robbery,  when  attended  with  cutting  and  wounding  ; 

Arson,  of  dwelling-houses  or  ships  ;  when    the   lives    of   persons 
therein  are  endangered ; 

Piracy  when  murder  is  committed  ; 

Showing  false  signals  to  cause  shipwreck  ; 

Setting  fire  to  Her  Majesty's  ships  of  war  ; 

Riot,  and  feloniously  destroying  buildings  ; 

Embezzlement  by  servants  of  the  Bank  of  England  ; 

High  treason. 
The  last  six  named  offences  are  of  very  rare  occurrence. 

A  further  relaxation  of  the  law  took  efic'ct  in  1841,  when  capital 
punishment  was  abolished  for  the  crimes  of  rape,  felonious  riots,  and 
embezzlement  by  servants  of  the  Bank  of  Eno-land. 


638 


mOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    VII. 


Mr.  Redgrave  gives  in  the  following  :-tiitonieut  a  strong  proof  of  one 
of  the  evils  already  noticed,  as  attending  upon  the  undue  severity  of 
our  criminal  code  in  former  years  :  — 

"  The  Acts  of  the  1  Victoria  have  had  a  very  heneficial  effect  upon 
the  result  of  prosecutions,  juries  heing  in  all  cases  less  unwilling  to 
convict  when  they  know  that  capital  punishment  will  not  follow.  By 
these  x\cts  capital  punishments  were  aholished  in  the  crimes  enumerated 
below,  for  which,  at  that  time,  executions  were  not  unusual ;  and  the 
greater  proportion  of  convictions  in  those  crimes  which  has  resulted 
from  the  alteration  in  the  law  is  very  remarkable.  In  the  following 
calculation,  a  comparison  is  made  of  the  centesimal  proportion  of  con- 
victions to  accusations,  in  respect  to  those  offences,  in  the  three  years 
preceding  the  abolition  of  the  capital  punishment,  and  in  the  three  years 
ending  with  1841  :" — 

Average  of 
1S35-G-T 
Attempts  to  murder  40-75 
Sacrilege  .  .  .  .  73-68 
Burglary  .  .  .  .  69-69 
Robbery  ....  56-08 
Arson 16-56 

It  is  still  more  satisfactory  to  be  able  to  state,  on  the  same  excellent 
authority,  "  that  in  the  majority  of  the  offences  for  which  capital  punish- 
ments were  repealed  there  has  been  a  decrease,  and  that  in  the  aggre- 
gate this  decrease  amounted  in  1841  to  4j  per  cent.,  while  commitments 
generally  had  increased." 

The  effect  of  the  successive  changes  made  of  late  years  in  our  cri- 
minal code  is  forcibly  stated  by  Mr.  Redgrave  as  follows  :  — 

"  The  magnitude  of  the  recent  changes  in  the  criminal  law  will  be 
strongly  exemplified  when  it  is  stated  that,  had  the  offences  tried  in 
1841  been  tried  under  the  laws  of  1831,  the  eighty  capital  sentences 
passed  would  have  been  increased  to  2172." 