

In  twenty  counties  of  England  and  Wales,  with  a  population  of 
8,724,338  persons,  there  were  convicted  fifty-nine  instructed  persons,  or 
one  to  every  147,870  inhabitants  ;  vhile  the  remaining  thirty-two  coun- 


oHAr.  II.]  CRIME.  G53 

ties,  with  a  population  of  7,182,491,  did  not  furnish  one  convict  who  had 
received  more  than  the  rudest  elements  of  instruction.  It  is  even  more 
worthy  of  remark,  that  Middlesex,  the  metropolitan  county,  with  its 
1,576,616  inhabitants,  among  whom  the  proportion  of  instructed  ])er- 
sons  is  at  least  equal  to  that  in  any  other  county,  did  not  furnish  one 
educated  convict — a  fact  which,  considering  the  diversity  of  conditions 
and  occupations,  and  the  amount  of  temptations  that  assail  its  in- 
habitants, it  would  be  most  ditficult  to  believe  upon  any  testimony  less 
certain  than  that  of  official  returns. 

The  sraallness  of  the  number  of  criminals  included  in  the  class  of 
educated  persons  might  lead  to  the  belief  that  a  high  standard  of  in- 
tellectual acquirement  is  adopted  as  a  qualification  for  admission  into 
that  class ;  but  it  has  been  found  upon  inquiry  that  the  reverse  of  this 
belief  is  true,  and  that — owing  probably  to  the  deficient  education  of 
some  among  the  officers  of  prisons  who  make  the  returns — some  have 
been  represented  as  superiorly  instructed  who  should  have  been  included 
"within  the  third  class,  ^iz. — those  who  read  and  write  well. 

Among  the  fifty-nine  instructed  persons  convicted  in  1840  were  four- 
teen political  otfences,  and  one  other,  whose  offence,  that  of  offering  a 
bribe  at  an  election  for  a  member  of  Parliament,  might  come  under 
the  same  description ;  one  for  manslaughter — a  lad  of  nineteen,  whose 
punishment  was  the  payment  of  a  fine  of  1007.  There  were  eight  in- 
structed persons  convicted  of  forgery  and  offences  against  the  currency 
out  of  430  persons  of  all  degrees  of  instruction  who  were  convicted  of 
those  offences — a  truly  satisfactory  result,  affording  a  sufficient  answer 
to  the  objection  urged  (it  is  true)  less  frequently  now  than  formerly, 
that  to  extend  instruction  would  be  to  multiply  the  crime  of  forgery ; 
three  were  cases  of  larceny  hy  servants,  and  fifteen  were  cases  of  simple 
larceny.  The  remaining  seventeen  were  cases  of  embezzlement,  fraud, 
assaults,  and  other  not  very  heinous  off*ences. 

That  the  offences  were  altogether  of  not  a  very  dark  character  will 
appear  from  a  description  of  the  punishments  awarded,  viz. : — 

Transportation  for  life       ...  3  Fined   100/ 1 

„                20  years    .      .  1  1         „        10/ 1 

„                15      „        .     .  1  I         „          5/ 2 