

It  is  a  common  remark,  that  in  every  community  we  must  look  to 
those  who  occupy  the  middle  rank  of  society  for  the  greatest  amount  of 
virtue  ;  and  we  may  believe  that  the  remark  would  not  have  received, 
as  it  has,  the  general  assent  of  society,  unless  it  had  been  supported  at 
least  by  appearances.  Is  it  true,  then,  that  a  condition  midway  between 
poverty  and  affluence  is  the  most  favourable  to  human  excellence,  mean- 
ing, by  that  term,  virtuous  conduct  proceeding  from  principle  ?  This 
may  well  be  doubted.  We  may  find  that  a  smaller  proportion  of  open 
profligacy  exists  among  persons  placed  in  that  condition  than  is  ap- 
])arent  among  the  richer  class,  and  in  the  ranks  of  the  poor,  without 
being  therefore  forced  to  admit  that  the  middle  class  is  governed  by  a 
nicer  sense  of  propriety  or  juster  views  of  duty  than  others.  May  it 
not  be,  that  the  greater  decency  of  their  conduct  is  the  result  of  circum- 
stances rather  than  of  principle  :  that,  being  removed  from  the  tempta- 
tions offered  by  idleness  and  oppt)rtunity  to  the  rich,  and  from  the  yet 
stronger  temptations  of  want,  from  which  there  is  no  escape  for  the 
uninstructed  poor,  they  are  constrained  to  pursue  a  routine  of  daily 
employment  which  leaves  but  little  time  for  the  indulgence  of  immoral 
pursuits  ?  The  judgment  of  men  upon  the  conduct  of  others  can  only  be 
formed  upon  a  view  of  their  outward  acts,  since  we  cannot  duly  appre- 
ciate their  motives  for  what  they  do,  nor  the  degree  of  fortitude  exercised 
in  what  they  resist ;  else  we  might  probably  find  that  good  dispositions 
are  pretty  equally  divided,  and  should  be  made  to  acknowledge  their 
existence  under  circumstances  apparently  the  most  unpromising. 

The  good  efl^ect  which  honest  employment  is  calculated  to  produce 
upon  even  the  worst  of  criminals,  and  under  apparently  the  most  un- 
favourable circumstances,  may  be  learned  from  the  following  testimony 
offered  by  the  Honourable  Grey  Bennet  to  the  Committee  on  the  State 

*  The  pi-oportion  of  offenders  in  England  and  Wales,  in  1841,  was  1  in  573  of  the  popu- 
lation ;  in  Scotland,  1  in  742 ;  a  difference  in  favour  of  the  latter  which  it  is  fair  to  attribute 
in  great  part,  if  not  entirely,  to  the  more  general  spread  of  instruction  as  compared  in  that 
respect  with  England. 


666  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii, 

of  thePolico  of  the  Metropolis,  \Yhich  sat  in  1817,  and  of  which  he  was 
chairman  : — 

"  I  had  been  there  (Newgate  prison)  a  few  weeks  before,  and  found 
it,  as  usual,  in  the  most  degraded  and  afflicting  state.  The  women 
were  then  mixed  all  together,  old  and  young — the  young  beginners  with 
the  old  offenders— the  girl  for  the  first  offence  with  the  hardened  and 
drunken  prostitute — the  tried  with  the  untried — the  accused  with  the 
condemned — the  transports  with  those  under  sentence  of  death ;  all 
were  crowded  together  in  one  promiscuous  assembhige,  noisy,  idle,  and 
])rofligate  ;  clamorous  at  the  gratings  soliciting  money,  and  begging  at 
the  prison  window  with  spoons  attached  to  the  ends  of  sticks.  In  little 
more  than  a  fortnight  the  whole  scene  was  changed,  through  the  humane 
and  philanthropic  exertions  of  Mrs.  Fry,  the  wdfe  of  a  banker  in  the 
citv.  In  the  first  yard  I  visited  were  seventy-eight  women  ;  sixty-live 
of  these  were  employed  on  needlew^ork  which  had  been  procured  for 
them.  In  one  fortnight  the  work  done  was  344  shirts,  64  shifts,  59 
aprons,  and  250  pinafores.  There  are  yet  no  proper  means  for  classi- 
fication and  arrangement  of  the  prisoners,  but  the  change  in  their 
appearance  was  most  striking.  The  bold  hardened  look  of  guilt  was 
none — the  impudent  system  of  begging  had  ceased — all  were  busy  and 
cheerful,  and  at  least  looked  contented  and  happy.  I  asked  in  all  the 
rooms  of  the  prisons  if  they  preferred  occupation  to  idleness,  and  if 
thev  approved  of  the  change  ?  The  answer  was  unanimously,  yes ; 
and  several  with  tears  in  their  eyes  said,  '  If  we  had  had  any  means  of 
aainins  our  bread,  we  should  not  have  been  here.' ' ' 