

•2  X 


G74  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  Police  of  the  Metropolis  in 
1816,  we  find  this  passage  : — "  On  or  about  the  years  1744  or  1745, 
when  multitudes  of  men  and  women   were    rolling  about  the  streets 
drunk  in  consequence  of  the  number  of  gin-shop?,  the  physicians  were 
consulted  upon  it,  and  an  Act  was  passed  that  no  persons  should  be 
entitled  to  a  spirit  licence  that  could  not  previously  produce  an  ale 
licence."     We  must  suppose,  from  his  approval  of  this  expedient,  that 
Dr.  Colquhoun  attributed  to  the  existence  of  gin-shops  the  disposition 
to  drunkenness  then  prevalent,  instead  of  looking  at  them  as  the  con- 
sequence of  the  prevailing  low  condition  of  morals.     How  this  evil  was 
to  be  remedied  by  obliging  the  publican  to  pay  a  few  pounds  additional 
for  an  ale  licence,  and  to  keep  a  few  gallons  of  ale   upon  his  premises 
f  >r  such  as  might  choose  to  ask  for  it,  does  not  appear ;  neither  is  it 
shown  why  physicians  were  consulted,  since  there  could  be  no  doubt  of 
the  injury  to  the  bodily  frame  from  halutual  drunkenness,  and  there 
was  no  thought  of  curing  the  propensity  by  administering  physic.     The 
state  of  things  as  described  by  Dr.  Colquhoun  to  exist  in  1745,  had  not 
then  newly  appeared.     Ample  time  had  then  been  afforded  for  con- 
templating the  evil,  and  for  attempting  its  cure.     The  addiction  of  the 
people  to  intoxicating  drinks  had  reached  such  a  point  in  1736  as  to 
occasion  continual  debates  in  Parliament,  and  to  call  for  remedies  of  a 
very  stringent  character.     It  was  then   the  practice  of  some  publicans 
to  entice  their  customers  with  a  notice  painted  on  a  board  outside  the 
house  to  this  effect : — "  Yon  may  here  get  drunk  for  a  penny,  dead 
drunk  for  twopence,  and  have  clean  straw  for  nothing."    The  legislators 
of  that  day,  thinking  that  the  cheapness  of  the  liquor  caused  the  abuse, 
proposed  a  duty  of  20^.  per  gallon,  and  to  prohibit  the  sale  of  spirituous 
liquors  by  retail,  a  measure  far  more  likely  to  attain  the  end  proposed 
than  that  of  obliging  the  publican  to  provide  himself  with  a  supplemental 
licence  ;  and  yet  it  signally  failed  in  its  purpose.     Coxe,  in  his  '  Life  of 
Walpole,'  speaking  of  it,  says,  "  The  Act  led  to  the  usual  proceedings  of 
riot  and  violence  ;  the  clandestine  sale  of  jxin  was  continued  in  defiance 
of  every  restriction";  the  demand  for  penalties  the  offenders  were  unable 
to  pay  filled  the  prisons,  and,   by  removing  every  restraint,    plunged 
them  into  courses  more   audaciously  criminal."     In  March,   1738,  a 
proclamation  Avas  issued  to  enforce  tlie  Gin  Act,  to  protect  the  oflBcers 
of  justice  in  their  efforts  to  that  end,   and  threatening  offenders  with 
punishment.    Within  less  than  two  years  from  its  passing,  12,000  people 
had  been  convicted  under  the  Act  within  the  Bills  of  Mortality,  of  whom 
5000  had  been  sentenced  to  pay  each  a  penalty  of  100/.,  and  3000 
people  had  paid  lOZ.  each  to  excuse  their  being  sent  to  Bridewell  house 
of  correction. 