

These  harsh  proceedings  failed  entirely.     It  wa^  given  in  evidence 
before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  in  1743,  that  the  quan- 


CHAP.  III.]  MANNERS.  G75 

tity  of  spirituous  liquors  made  for  consumption  in  England  and  Wales, 
was — 

In  173,1  10,500,000  gallons.   " 


1731 

13,500,000 

1740 

15,250,000 

1741 

17,000,000 

1742 

19,000,000 

These  quantities  were  consumed  by  a  population  not  exceeding  six 
millions,  giving  3^^  gallons  for  each  individual  m  1742.  One  century 
later,  and  we  find  a  po])ulation  increased  to  sixteen  millions  consuming 
8,166,985  gallons  in  the  year,  or  half  a  gallon  per  head,  showing  a 
diminished  consumption  of  more  than  five-sixths.  There  were,  in  1742, 
within  the  Bills  of  Mortality,  more  than  20,000  houses  and  shops  in 
which  gin  was  sold  by  retail. 

Nor  were  those  habits  of  drunkenness  confined  to  the  labouring 
classes.  What  would  now  be  called  drinking  to  excess  was  then  so  much 
the  custom  in  every  circle,  that  it  was  as  uncommon  for  any  party  to 
separate  while  any  member  of  it  remained  sober  as  it  is  now  for  any  one 
in  such  party  to  degrade  himself  through  intoxication.  This  habit, 
which  is  now  happily  banished  from  all  decent  society,  had  by  no  means 
dlsapi)eared  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  The  reformation 
was  then  only  begun  which  we  have  lived  to  see  nearly  perfected  ;  and 
who  that  personally  witnessed  the  scenes  of  riot  that  fifty  years  ago 
were  still  of  too  common  occuri'enee  even  among  reputable  people,  and 
contrasts  them  with  the  quiet  and  rational  enjoyment  that  attends  our 
social  meetings  at  the  present  day,  but  must  acknowledge  that  this 
habit  of  temperance  in  the  use  of  intoxicating  liquors  is  one  of  the 
greatest,  if  indeed  it  be  not  the  greatest,  reformation  that  society  has 
Avitnessed.  In  those  days  it  rarely  happened  that  men  holding  the  rank 
and  otherwise  bearing  the  character  of  gentlemen,  rose  from  the  table 
of  a  dinner  party  in  a  condition  to  enter  the  society  of  females,  and 
thus  all  were  debarred  from  the  sweetest  hours  of  rational  enjoyment 
which  now  spring  from  social  intercourse. 

It  was  the  fitting  concomitant  of  the  habit  of  personal  debasement, 
through  drinking  to  excess,  that  the  style  of  conversation  at  the  convivial 
parties  of  gentlemen  was  then  such  as  would  not  be  tolerated  in  any 
decent  society  at  present ;  nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  men  who 
would  designedly  "  put  an  enemy  into  their  mouths  to  steal  away  their 
brains"  should  exhibit  the  coarseness  of  their  minds  in  their  habitual 
conversation.  If  we  carry  back  our  inquiries  twenty  years  further,  we 
may  learn  that  coarseness  of  the  same  kind,  although  perhaps  not  in  the 
same  degi-ee,  was  exhibited  by  educated  females,  and  that  respectable 
women,  the  mothers  of  families  and  the  wives  of  respectable  tradesmen, 
were  accustomed  to  amuse  their  guests  by  singing  songs  that  no  reput- 
able musicseller  or  bookseller  would  now  admit  among  his  wares. 