

2x2 


676  PROGRESS  or  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

Remarking  upon  the  change  of  manners  in  this  respect  that  has  since 
heen  witnessed  in  this  country,  Sir  Walter  Scott  relates  the  following 
curious  anecdote  as  having  happened  to  himself: — 

"  A  granil-aunt  of  my  own,  Mrs.  Keith  of  Ravenstone,  who  was  a 
person  of  some  condition,  being  a  daughter  of  Sir  John  Swinton,  of 
Swinton,  lived  with  unabated  vigour  of  intellect  to  a  very  advanced  age. 
She  was  very  f(md  of  reading,  and  enjoyed  it  to  the  last  of  her  long  life. 
One  day  she  asked  me,  when  we  happened  to  be  alone  together,  whether 
I  had  ever  seen  Mrs.  Behn's  novels  ?  I  confessed  the  charge.  AVhether 
I  could  get  her  a  sight  of  them  ?  I  said,  with  some  hesitation,  I  believed 
I  could,  but  that  I  did  not  think  that  she  w^ould  like  either  the  manners 
or  the  language,  which  approached  too  near  that  of  Charles  the  Second's 
time  to  be  quite  ])roper  reading.  '  Nevertheless,'  said  the  good  old 
lady,  '  I  remember  their  being  so  much  admired,  and  being  so  much 
interested  in  them  myself,  that  I  wish  to  look  at  them  again.'  To  hear 
was  to  obey.  So  I  sent  Mrs.  Aphra  Behn,  curiously  sealed  up,  with 
'private  and  confidential'  on  the  packet,  to  my  gay  old  grand-aunt. 
The  next  time  I  saw  her  afterwards  she  gave  me  back  Aphra,  properly 
wrapped  up,  with  nearly  these  words — '  Take  back  your  bonny  Mrs. 
Behn,  and  if  you  will  take  my  advice  put  her  in  the  tire,  for  I  found  it 
impossible  to  get  through  the  very  first  novel.  But  is  it  not,'  she  said, 
'  a  very  odd  thing  that  I,  an  old  woman  of  eighty  and  upwards,  sitting 
alone,  feel  myself  ashamed  to  read  a  book  which  sixty  years  ago  I  have 
heard  read  aloud  for  the  amusement  of  large  circles,  consisting  of  the 
first  and  most  creditable  society  in  London?'  "* 

The  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  ap- 
pointed in  1835  to  inquire  into  the  state  of  the  education  of  the  people 
in  England  and  Wales,  contains  an  amount  of  information  concerning  the 
increased  and  increasing  decency  of  deportment  within  the  present  age 
which  is  of  the  highest  value.  Among  the  many  witnesses  examined  was 
Mr.  Francis  Place,  who  for  more  than  half  a  century  has  been  an  attentive 
observer  of  the  condition  and  conduct  of  the  working  people  in  London, 
and  to  a  considerable  extent  throughout  the  kingdom  generally.  Scenes 
and  events  which  he  relates  as  being  of  common  every-day  occurrence 
when  he  was  an  apprentice,  are  such  as  would  be  unbearable  now,  and 
have  wholly  ceased.  Speaking  of  the  habits  of  tradesmen  and  masters, 
he  says,  "The  conduct  of  such  persons  was  exceedingly  gross  as -com- 
pared with  the  same  class  at  the  present  time.  Decency  was  a  very 
different  thing  from  what  it  is  now  ;  their  manners  were  such  as  scarcely 
to  be  credited.  I  remember,  when  a  boy  of  ten  years  of  age,  being  at 
a  party  of  twenty,  entertained  at  a  respectable  tradesman's,  who  kept  a 
good  house  in  the  Strand,  where  songs  were  sung  wl^ich  cannot  now  be 