

*  '  Lockhart's  Life  of  Scott,'  vol.  v.,  pp.  136,  137. 


CHAP.  III.]  MANNERS.  Cul 

more  tlian  generally  described  from  their  nastiness,  such  as  no  meeting 
of  journeymen  in  London  would  allow  to  be  sung  in  the  presence  of 
their  fiimilies.  There  were  then  few  rational  employments  at  home  ; 
the  men  were  seldom  at  home  in  the  evening, 'excei)t  there  were  card- 
playing  and  drinking ;  they  spent  their  time  in  a  very  useless  and  but 
too  generally  a  mischievous  manner.  I  made  inquiries  a  few  years  ago, 
and  found  that  between  Temple-bar  and  Fleet-mai'kct  there  were  many 
houses  in  each  of  which  there  were  more  books  than  all  the  tradesmen's 
houses  in  the  street  contained  when  I  was  a  youth.  The  ballads  sung 
about  the  streets,  and  the  books  openly  sold,  cannot  be  adequately  de- 
scribed. I  have  given  you  in  writing  words  of  some  common  ballads 
which  you  would  not  think  fit  to  have  uttered  in  this  committee.  At 
that  time  the  songs  w^crc  of  the  most  indecent  kind ;  no  one  would 
mention  them  in  any  society  now ;  they  were  publicly  sung  and  sold  in 
the  streets  and  markets.  Books  were  openly  sold  in  shops  of  booksellers 
in  leading  streets  which  can  only  be  procured  clandestinely  now.  I  have 
seen  the  Prayer-book,  the  Racing  Calendar,  and  these  books,  l)ound 
alike,  side  by  side  in  very  respectable  shop-windows  in  the  leading 
streets.  Between  Blackfriars  and  Westminster-hall  there  w^cre  fourteen 
clubs  under  the  name  of  cock-and-hen  clubs.  I  attended  several  of 
them  when  I  was  an  apprentice.  There  was  one  in  the  Savoy,  where  a 
gii-1  used  to  sit  at  one  end  of  the  table  and  a  boy  at  the  other ;  I  have 
seen  the  chairs  placed  upon  the  table ;  the  amusements  were  smoking, 
drinking,  swearing,  and  singing  obscene  songs  ;  what  else  followed  you 
may  easily  conclude.  I  do  not  believe  there  has  been  a  club  of  the  sort 
for  many  years  past  within  the  same  space.  There  are  a  few  of  them 
still  in  London,  but  very  few ;  they  are  held  in  very  obscure  places, 
and  frequented  by  the  very  worst  of  the  community.  The  places  of 
public  resort,  the  tea-gardens,  were  formerly  as  notorious  as  they  were 
infamous.  The  Dog  and  Duck,  for  instance  ;  I  have  been  there  when 
almost  a  mere  boy,  and  seen  the  flashy  women  come  out  to  take  leave 
of  the  thieves  at  dusk,  and  wish  them  success.  The  Apollo  Gardens 
was  another  of  these  infamous  places  ;  it  was  opened  under  the  pretence 
of  musical  entertainments  ;  and  there  was  the  Temple  of  Flora  ;  it  w^is 
a  long  gallery  fitted  up  in  a  superb  manner,  and  when  lighted,  was  a 
very  fascinating  place  ;  there  were  boxes  where  boys  and  girls  and  men 
and  women  assembled  ;  there  wxn-e  also  close  or  })nvate  boxes.  Another 
of  these  places  was  the  Bull-in -the-Pound,  in  Spa-fields,  frequented  by 
thieves  and  dissolute  people.  In  Gray's-inn-lane  was  the  Blue  Lion, 
commonly  called  the  Blue  Cat ;  I  have  seen  the  landlord  of  this  place 
come  into  the  long  room  with  a  lump  of  silver  in  his  hand,  which  he  had 
melted  for  the  thieves,  and  pay  them  for  it.  There  was  no  disguise 
about  it ;  it  was  done  openly  :  there  is  no  such  place  now.  The  amuse- 
ments of  the  people  were  all  of  a  gross  nature.     We  hear  much  talk  of 