

The  establishment  of  the  present  metropolitan  police  force,  whicli 
occurred  in  1829,  a  measure  which  has  since  been  copied  in  most  of  our 
populous  towns,  has  substituted  an  efficient  and  respectable  body  of  men 
for  the  Townsends,  the  Vicarys,  and  the  Atkinses,  of  former  days, 
who  were  encouraged  by  the  system  then  in  use  to  become  the  associates 
of  thieves,  at  what  were  technically  called  "  Hash-houses,"  and  to  wink 
at  their  malpractices  until  they  should  have  been  led  on  to  the  commis- 
sion of  some  offence,  their  conviction  for  which  would  bring  a  substantial 
reward  to  the  thief-taker.  Under  such  a  system,  prevention  of  crime 
was  out  of  the  question  ;  its  punishment  only  was  thought  of,  and  this 
only  when  it  had  reached  to  a  point  of  enormity  which  induced  the  legis- 
lature to  give  large  premiums  for  detection.  Can  it  afford  cause  for 
wonder  that,  under  this  shocking  system,  our  criminals  have  been  multi- 
plied in  the  manner  W(^  have  witnessed  ? 


in.]  MANNERS.  GT. 


CHAPTER  III. 

MANNERS. 

Imperfect  Views  in  former  Times  concerning  the  Means  proper  for  repressing  Offenders^ — 
Drunkenness  —  Its  prevalence  in  1736  —  IMeans  taken  for  its  suppression  —  Failure  of 
those  Means — Quantity  of  Anient  Spirits  consumed  then  compared  witli  the  present 
Time — Drunkenness  not  confined  formerlj'  to  tlie  Working  Classes — General  Coarseness 
of  Conversation,  and  in  Pojiular  AVriters  — Anecdote  related  by  Sir  Walter  Scott — State  of 
Morals  and  Manners  fifty  Years  ago,  as  stated  in  evidence  before  the  House  of  Commons 
— Progressive  Improvement  occasioned  by  the  general  spread  of  Information — Increased 
Temperance  not  extended  to  Scotland — -Evidence  of  Sheriff  Alison — Infrequency  of 
Prize-fighting  compared  with  former  Times^Greater  refinement  of  the  Public  Press — 
General  Improvement  in  personal  ^Morality. 

The  result  of  the  examination  of  our  criminal  statistics,  contained  in 
the  preceding  chapter,  is  calcidated  to  excite  feelings  at  once  of  regret 
and  of  hope — of  regret,  that  the  science  of  government  in  this,  one  of 
its  most  important  branches,  has  hitherto  been  so  ill  understood,  or  so 
ineffectually  followed  out,  as  to  have  allowed  the  fearful  growth  of 
criminality  exhibited  by  parliamentary  returns — of  hope,  that  the  means 
of  arresting  and  in  a  great  degree  of  correcting  the  evil  having  dis- 
covered themselves  by  reason  of  the  classifications  of  offenders  which  of 
late  years  have  been  adopted,  eiforts  will  now  be  made  to  give  full 
efficacy  to  those  means.  Heretofore  the  growing  evil  has  been  dealt 
with  blindly,  and  in  a  spirit  of  empiricism — now,  and  hereafter,  we  may 
press  forward  in  the  work  of  reformation  with  a  full  comprehension  of 
the  disease,  with  confidence  in  the  means  of  cure,  and  with  some  assur- 
ance of  success.  AVe,  and  those  who  preceded  us,  have  formerly  been 
content  to  make  the  too  common  mistake  of  attacking  symptoms  instead 
of  seeking  out  and  combating  the  disease  at  its  source.  The  degree  of 
ignorance  upon  this  svtbject  which  has  prevailed  will  hardly  be  credited 
some  years  hence,  when,  as  may  now  be  reasonably  expected,  the 
desired  result  shall  be  accomplished.  Dr.  Colquhoun,  a  most  active 
and  intelligent  police  magistrate,  to  whom  society  is  much  indebted  for 
tlie  fearless  disclosures  made  by  him,  which  awakened  attention  to  the 
growing  evil,  had  yet  the  most  imperfect  conception  of  the  means  to  be 
used  for  arresting  it.     In  the  evidence  given  by  him  before  the  Select 