

The  subject  of  prison  discipline  is  one  which  has  of  late  years  claimed 
much  attention  on  the  part  of  the  Government  and  the  legislature,  and 
various  extensive  reforms  have  been  effected  in  the  management  of  pri- 
soners. Until  of  late  years,  the  only  quality  about  a  prison  that  seems 
to  have  been  thought  indispensable  was  its  strength  to  retain  its  in- 
mates ;  and  if  the  gaoler  was  possessed  of  activity  and  j)ersonal  courage, 
it  was  never  questioned  whether  he  were  ignorant  or  instructed,  humane 
or  brutal  in  disposition,  correct  or  dissolute  in  his  conduct.  Mr. 
Fielding,  one  of  the  magistrates  of  Queen-square  Police  Office,  when 
examined  before  the  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  Police 
of  the  Metropolis  in  1816,  respecting  the  sufficiency  of  prison  accommo- 
dation, is  reported  to  have  said — "  As  to  the  Coldbath-fields  prison,  I 
was  of  the  number  of  justices  who  voted  for  the  appointment  of  the 
man  (as  governor)  who  is  there  now — I  mean  Atkins,  who  I  thought 
the  best  suited  man  that  coidd  be  found  for  the  purpose,  being  a  man 
of  great  intrepidity,  which  is  the  greatest  quality  that  can  recommend 
such  a  man."  A  quarter  of  a  century  has  since  passed,  and  Me  have 
in  the  interval  come  to  the  belief  that  otlier  qualities  beyond  mere  per- 
gonal intrepidity  are  needed  to  fit  a  man  for  having  the  custody  an  J  con- 
trol of  criminals.  A  class  of  men  very  different  froui  those  among  whom 
Atkins,  the  Bow-street  runner,  was  selected,  are  now  placed  in  such 
situations,  and  somewhat  more  is  required  at  their  hands  than  that  they 
shall  keep  their  prisoners  in  subjection  by  brute  force. 

An  Act  was  passed  in  1835  for  effecting  greater  uniformity  of  prac- 


672  mOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

tice  in  the  government  of  prL^ons,  and  for  appointing  inspectors  of 
prisons  in  Great  Britain.  Under  this  Act  five  gentlemen  have  been 
appointed  to  visit  and  inspect  every  gaol,  bridewell,  house  of  correction, 
penitentiary,  or  other  prison  in  any  part  of  Great  Britain  ;  to  examine 
any  person  holding  office  in  the  same,  to  inspect  all  books  and  papers, 
and  to  inquire  into  all  matters  relating  to  such  prisons,  to  make  a  re- 
port in  writing  on  or  before  the  1st  of  February  in  each  year  as  to  the 
state  of  each  prison  visited,  and  to  transmit  the  same  to  the  Secretary  of 
State  for  the  Home  Department,  who  is  required  to  lay  it  before  Par- 
liament within  fourteen  days.  The  appointment  of  these  gentlemen,  and 
still  more  the  publication  of  their  Reports,  have  already  been  attended 
with  the  happiest  results  in  bringing  to  light  and  remedying  various 
abuses,  in  fixing  public  attention  to  the  subject,  and  in  causing  experi- 
ments to  be  undertaken  as  to  the  possibility  of  i-eforming  and  reclaiming 
criminals.  Under  their  inspection,  our  prisons  have  now,  for  the  most 
part,  ceased  to  be  schools  for  perfecting  in  villany  the  half-taught 
scoundrel,  and  are  converted  into  places  where  penitence  and  reforma- 
tion are,  at  least,  possible. 