


CS-2  I'KOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

EDUCATION. 

Neglect  of  Public  Provision  for  Education  in  England — Consequent  Social  Evils— Duty  of 
Government  to  pi'ovide  for  Instructing  the  people  ;  enforced  by  Exertions  of  Individuals 
— Remedy  for  Inconveniences  of  increasing  Population — Absence  of  Crime  in  well- 
instructed  Communities  of  Nova  Scotia  and  Iceland  —  Joseph  Lancaster,  his  early 
Difficulties  and  subsequent  Success— His  Exertions  and  Sacrifices — Committee  of  Council 
for  Education — Opposition  to  the  Scheme  in  both  Houses  of  Pai-liament — Z!sumber  of 
Children  without  Instruction  —  Recent  Progress  of  Public  Opinion  on  the  Subject  of 
National  Education — Educational  Statistics — Imperfect  manner  in  v,-hich  the  Instruction 
of  the  Poor  has  been  conducted  —  Statistical  Societies  of  Manchester  and  London  — 
Normal  School  at  Battersea — Proportion  of  Marriage  Registers  signed  with  Crosses  in 
different  parts  of  England  and  Wales — Education  in  Scotland,  1825  and  1837 — National 
Schools  of  Ireland  established  in  1831 — Nature  of  opposition  offered  to  the  System — 
Former  Plans ;  their  Insufficiency — Charter  Schools — Kildare  Street  Society — Children 
taught  in  National  Schools  of  Ireland,  1834:  to  1849— Social  Benefits  of  the  System  to 
Ireland. 

This  United  Kingdom,  which  boasts  itself  to  be  at  the  head  of  civili- 
zation, has  been  among  the  last  of  European  nations  to  make  any 
public  provision  for  the  instruction  of  the  people.  This  neglect  is  all 
the  more  extraordinary  from  the  fact,  that  of  all  civilized  countries  this 
is  the  one  in  which  ignorance  on  the  part  of  the  people  brings  with  it 
the  greatest  amount  of  danger.  From  their  number,  and  the  manner  in 
which  they  are  brought  together  in  our  large  manufacturing  and  trading 
towns,  the  labouring  classes  have  become  a  most  important  power  for  good 
or  for  evil,  and  exercise,  without  its  being  acknowledged,  a  very  powerful 
influence  over  the  deliberations  of  the  Senate  and  the  acts  of  the  Govern- 
ment. Their  situation  is  besides  widely  different  from  that  of  the 
labouring  classes  in  every  other  country,  where  the  great  majority  de- 
pend upon  agricultural  labour  for  their  support,  and  are  but  little  liable 
under  any  circumstances  to  be  thrown  out  of  employment.  In  England, 
on  the  contrary,  as  already  shown,*  the  great  and  rapid  increase  in  the 
population  is  all  of  it  thrown  for  the  means  of  earning  subsistence  upon 
pursuits  other  than  agricultural.  A  change  of  fashion,  or — what  is  to 
the  full  as  likely  to  occur  where  the  legislature  takes  upon  itself  to  in- 
terfere on  all  occasions  by  "  protections"  and  restrictions  with  the  course 
(if  industry — a  change  of  policy,  may  in  a  moment,  and  without  warning, 