


6/8  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  tsEc.  vii. 

the  desecration  of  the  Sabbath,  but  it  was  much  more  desecrated  for- 
merly. At  the  time  I  am  speaking  of,  there  were  scarcely  any  houses 
on  the  eastern  side  of  Tottenham  Court  Eoad  ;  there  and  in  the  Long- 
lields  were  several  large  ponds  :  the  amusements  here  were  duck-hunting 
and  badger-baiting ;  they  would  throw  a  cat  into  the  water  and  set 
dogs  at  her,  great  cruelty  was  constantly  practised,  and  the  most  abo- 
minable scenes  used  to  take  place.  It  is  almost  impossible  for  any 
person  to  believe  the  atrocities  of  low  life  at  that  time,  which  were  not, 
as  now,  confined  to  the  worst  paid  and  most  ignorant  of  the  populace. 
I  am  not  aware  of  any  new  vice  having  sprung  up  among  the  people  ; 
there  has  been  a  decrease  of  vice  in  every  respect,  and  a  great  increase 
of  decency  and  respectability." 

The  foregoing  })assages,  which  for  the  sake  of  brevity  have  been  put 
into  the  narrative  form,  are  faithfully  extracted  from  the  answers  made 
by  Mr.  Place  when  under  examination  by  the  committee.  The  only 
liberty  that  has  been  taken  is  the  suppression  of  some  of  the  more 
revolting  circumstances  brought  forward  by  Mr.  Place  in  illustration  of 
his  opinions. 

^Mien  asked,  "  To  what  do  you  principally  attribute  those  improve- 
ments?" Mr.  Place  answered — "To  information  I  you  will  find,  as 
the  working  people  get  more  information,  they  get  better  habits."  He 
added,  ""  Every  class  above  another  teaches  that  below  it ;  the  journey- 
man tradesman  is  above  the  common  labourer,  and  manners  descend 
from  class  to  class."  The  whole  of  the  evidence  given  by  Mr.  Place  on 
this  occasion  is  of  the  deepest  interest  to  all  who  wish  to  study  with  the 
aim  of  remedying  the  moral  evils  of  society  by  rational  and  therefore  by 
practicable  means. 

The  sobriety  which  among  educated  persons  has  taken  place  of  the 
contrary  habit  has  in  a  great  degree  been  adopted  by  the  labouring 
classes  also.  It  is  true  there  is  still  much  of  intoxication  among  us, 
and  much  of  other  vices  and  crimes  to  which  habitual  intoxication  surely 
leads  the  way ;  scenes  of  depravity,  however,  no  longer  court  the  public 
gaze,  but  in  a  great  degree  have  passed  away.  The  Apollo  Gardens, 
the  Dog  and  Duck,  and  other  places  of  popular  resort  in  those  days,  to 
which  those  who  remember  them  can  now  never  refer  but  with  disgust, 
exist  no  longer ;  they  would  no  longer  be  tolerated  among  us.  It 
might  be  expected  that  this  improvement  would  exhibit  itself  in  different 
degrees  in  various  localities.  Our  seaports  are  still  liable  to  the  old 
reproach  of  drunken  habits ;  and  the  reform  has  not  as  yet  made  any 
deep  impression  upon  the  working  people  of  Scotland.*  Mr.  Alison, 
the  sheriff  of  Lanarkshire,  in  his  evidence  given  before  the  Committee 
on  Combinations  of  Workmen  so  recently  as  1838,  speaking  of  the  habit 