

In  some  of  these  coffee-houses  chops  are  cooked,  and  cold  meat  and 
ham  may  be  had  at  a  moderate  charge,  but  not  any  intoxicating  drink 
is  to  be  bought. 

The  improvement  visible  in  the  habits  of  the  working  people  of 
England,  as  respects  intoxication,  is  accompanied,  as  ^ight  be  expected, 
by  an  abatement  of  coarseness  in  their  general  deportment,  and  by  a 
weaning  from  some  of  the    pursuits  which,  having  been  part  of  the 


ci(Ai>,  hi]  manners.  681 

favourite  pastimes  of  their  and  our  ininiediatc  predecessors,  are  now- 
looked  upon  as  evidences  of  a  brutal  temper.  The  practice  of  prize- 
fighting, if  it  have  not  ceased,  is  certainly  most  importantly  diminished 
in  frequency.  A  great  many  years  have  not  elapsed  since  in  every 
newspaper  was  to  be  seen  a  circumstantial  account  of  those  gladiatorial 
displays,  with  all  their  disgusting  details,  and  now  there  is  not  a  re- 
spectable daily  or  weekly  journal  that  will  prostitute  its  columns  by  the 
insertion.  This  is  in  itself  a  proof  of  altered  manners  on  the  part  of 
readers,  i.  e.,  of  society  at  large  :  but  the  evidence  of  this  fact  is 
strikingly  illustrated  by  the  follow  ing  paragraph,  which  appeared  on  the 
28th  of  February,  1838,  in  the  '  Morning  Advertiser,'  a  very  Avell-con- 
ducted  and  respectable  London  jouraal,  which  circulates  principally 
mong  publicans,  and  is  in  fact  the  property  of  a  part  of  that  body  : — 

"  We  beg  to  deny  the  truth  of  a  paragraph  inserted  in  '  Bell's  Life 
in  London '  on  Sunday  last,  to  the  effect  that  a  deposit  of  21.  aside  is  to 
be  made  at  Harry  England's,  Old  Kent-road,  on  Thursday  next,  for  a 
match  between  Delhunt  and  Mortlock.  The  paragraph  is  an  utter 
fobrication.  Mr.  England  is  a  most  respectable  man,  and  the  false 
charge,  implicating  him  in  so  disreputable  a  transaction  without  his 
sanction,  is  an  injury  as  well  as  a  scandalous  piece  of  impertinence.  It 
is  monstrous  that  the  feelings  of  honourable  men  are  to  be  hurt  by  such 
unwarrantable  statements." 

We  here  see  the  landlord  of  a  public-house  indignantly  denying  not 
only  any  participation  in,  but  any  countenance  of,  an  act  as  disreputable, 
which  only  a  few^  years  before  would  have  been  openly  abetted,  not  by 
})ublicans  only,  but  by  men  of  the  highest  rank  and  station  in  the 
kingdom. 

It  is  in  itself  a  proof,  of  no  slight  significance,  as  to  the  general 
refinement  of  manners,  that  in  a  work  of  this  nature  there  would  be 
found  an  impro])riety  in  describing  scenes  that  were  of  e very-day  oc- 
currence formerly,  and  without  which  description  it  is  yet  impossible 
adequately  to  measure  the  advance  that  has  been  made.  Enough  ha,s 
been  said,  however,  to  bear  out  the  assertion,  that  as  regards  personal 
morals  there  is  at  least  a  greater  amount  of  decency  than  formerly — 
that  profligacy  does  not  stalk  abroad  in  the  face  of  day  as  shamelessly  as 
it  was  wont  to  do,  and  that  brutality  has,  in  a  very  great  degree,  ceased 
to  obtain  the  countenance  of  the  educated  classes.  There  is,  it  is  true, 
much  yet  to  be  done  in  this  direction,  while  in  the  higher  branches  of 
morals  we  have  almost  everything  to  learn.  With  the  self-denying  doc- 
trines of  Christianity  upon  our  lips,  we  present  a  practical  denial  of 
them  in  our  lives,  which  are  given  up  in  a  greater  degree  than  ever  to 
self-aggrandizement,  in  the  pursuit  of  which  we  have  seemingly  lost  all 
proper  appreciation  of  our  duties  as  citizens,  until  patriotism  has  become 
a  i)yword  and  a  scoff,  and  national  honour  a  thimr  of  small  account. 