


684  rilOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

that  branch  of  knowledge  which  the  working  men,  if  educated  at  all, 
would,  be  sure  to  make  their  own,  since  it  intimately  concerns  their  daily 
comforts,  and  is  essential  to  the  welfare  of  their  families.  That  they 
would  do  so  we  have  the  evidence  of  experience  to  teach  us ;  for  have 
not  all  their  strikes  and  risings  had  for  their  object  the  attainment  of 
something  which  in  their  unenliglitened  reasoning  they  have  conceived 
to  be  their  right — mistakenly,  no  doubt— but  proving  thereby  how  deep 
is  the  interest  they  would  feel  in  securing  the  general  welfare,  from  the 
moment  they  should  come  to  know  how  completely  their  own  true  in- 
terests are  involved  in  it  "^ 

It  would  appear  to  be  the  duty  of  every  Government  to  see  that  its 
subjects  are  taught  their  duties  as  men  and  as  citizens,  and  thus  to  pro- 
vide for  the  security  of  all.  Lessons  to  this  end  have  indeed  been 
taught  by  the  Government  of  England,  but  to  whom  have  they  been  im- 
i^artcd,  and  by  what  agency  have  they  been  enforced  ?  To  be  adopted 
as  a  scholar,  a  man  must — at  least  up  to  a  comparatively  recent  period 
— have  qualified  himself  to  appear  as  a  criminal  at  the  bar  of  justice, 
and  his  chief  schoolmaster  would  have  been — the  hangman  !  If  one 
tithe  of  the  expense  that  has  been  incurred  to  so  little  purpose  during 
the  present  century  in  punishing  criminals  had  been  employed  for  pre- 
ventin<T  crime  by  means  of  education,  what  a  different  country  would 
Enoland  have  been  to  that  which  our  criminal  records  show  it  to  have 
been  I 

Thank  Heaven !  this  truth  at  length  is  making  its  way  to  the  con- 
victions of  our  rulers.  The  principle  is  recognised  that  the  people 
luust  be  instructed.  There  is  no  longer  any  party  found  to  question 
this  principle,  or  to  oppose  its  practical  application.  Differences  there 
are  and  will  be  as  to  the  best  mode  of  carrying  it  out,  but  those  differ- 
ences of  opinion  are  not  allow'ed  to  stay  the  progress  of  education,  w^hich 
will,  which  must,  go  forward,  and  perhaps  the  more  rapidly  by  reason  of 
the  discussions  that  arise  out  of  those  very  differences. 

We  are  as  yet,  however,  only  in  the  infancy  of  this  right  course. 
That  we  have  entered  upon  it,  is  due  to  the  zealous  and  enlightened 
exertions  of  men  who  toiled  amidst  difficulties  that  seemed  to  multiply 
as  they  proceeded,  but  who  rose  from  their  successive  defeats  with  a 
determination  to  succeed,  against  which  no  opposition  could  always 
prevail.  In  these  struggles  to  advance  the  best  interests  of  our  fellow- 
creatures,  circumstances  are  sometimes  witnessed  which  compensate  for 
past  defeats,  and  offer  encouragement  to  future  philanthropists.  One  of 
these  encouragements  is  known  to  have  well  repaid  the  long-continued 
and  louf-frustrated  efforts  for  the  recognition  by  Parliament  of  the  duty 
of  providing  for  the  instruction  of  the  people,  made  by  the  amiable  and 
accomplished  late  member  for  AVaterford.  No  man  had  laboured  more 
zealously,  more  intelligently,  more  benevolently,  but,  to  all  appearance, 