


CHAP.  IV.]  EDLX'ATIOX.  fiK5 

more  hopelessly,  to  this  end  tlian  Mr.  \\'yse.  It  was  with  ditliculty  even 
that  once  during  each  succeeding  session  of  Parliament  he  could  procure 
the  attendance  of  a  sufficient  number  of  members  to  make  "  a  house  " 
for  the  discussion ;  hut  at  length  his  efforts  were  crowned  with  success, 
and  it  was  among  his  earliest  official  acts,  after  taking  his  seat  at  the 
Treasury  Board,  to  affix  his  signature  to  the  warrant  for  30,000/.  whicli 
had  been  wrung  from  the  House  of  Commons  as  the  commencement  of  a 
scheme — imperfect  and  inadequate,  it  is  true,  to  the  occasion — for  a 
national  system  of  education. 

The  circumstance  that  has  been  cited  of  the  rapid  multiplication  of 
our  numbers  in  the  working  class,  whose  only  theatres  for  employment 
must  be  the  seats  of  manufactures,  where  they  are  consequently  drawn 
together  in  masses,  has  excited  alarm  of  no  ordinary  kind,  not  among 
the  unthinking  only,  but  on  the  part  of  individuals  also  to  whom  we  have 
been  accustomed  to  look  for  instruction  in  matters  relating  to  the  well- 
ordering  and  progress  of  society.  AMience  does  this  alarm  proceed  ;  on 
what  is  it  founded,  but  on  the  ignorance  of  those  on  whose  account  it 
arises?  It  is  felt  and  acknowledged  as  an  impossibility  to  meet  the 
difficulty  by  means  of  any  dirc^ct  legislative  interference.  To  impose  any 
restraints  upon  industry  which  should  check  the  continued  progress  of 
the  population,  would  be  to  insure  the  immediate  occurrence  of  the  very 
mischief  that  is  dreaded.  The  true  path  of  safety  will  be  found  in 
educating  the  people — in  teaching  them  to  discriminate  between  evils 
referable  to  the  imperfection  of  human  institutions,  and  therefore  reme- 
diable, and  such  as  arise  in  the  order  of  Providence.  "  Demagogues, 
and  the  workshop  agitators  so  frequently  met  with  in  the  manufacturing 
districts,"  and  who  now  "  never  fail  to  take  advantage  of  the  excitement 
produced  by  the  occurrence  of  distress  to  instil  their  poisonous  no.-trums 
into  the  public  mind,  to  vilify  the  institutions  of  the  country,  and  to  re- 
present the  privations  of  the  workpeople,  which  in  the  vast  majority  of 
cases  spring  from  accidental  and  uncontrollable  causes,  as  the  necessary 
consequences  of  a  defective  system  of  domestic  economy,  having  regard 
alone  to  the  interests  of  the  higher  classes  "* — such  mischief-makers 
would  no  longer  exist,  for  they  would  find'no  dupes  upon  whom  to  prac- 
tise. Under  the  condition  of  general  enlightenment  here  supposed,  the 
fallacies  which  have  been  so  long  allowed  to  fetter  the  industry  of  the 
nation  would  disappear  like  snow  before  the  sun ;  and  if  evils  should 
then  arise  to  disturb  the  general  prosperity,  the  last  thing  that  would 
enter  into  the  niinds  of  the  sufferers  would  be  to  proceed  to  measures 
of  violence,  the  only  issue  of  which  they  would  then  know  must  be  to 
increase  in  degree  and  to  prolong  in  duration  the  amount  of  their  trials 
and  privations. 