


CHAP.  IV.]  EDUCATION.  Gb7 

in  worldly  rank,  themselves  or  tlielr  immediate  descendants  occupying 
in  many  cases  the  very  highest  stations  in  the  land.  What  is  it  but 
education  that  has  imparted  to  them  this  power  of  sustaining  themselves 
and  their  families  in  the  struggle  amid  so  many  competitors  ?  It  is  true 
we  hear  a  constant  cry  about  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  suitable  employ- 
ment on  the  part  of  educated  youths  ;  but  the  same  cry  has  been  raised 
during  each  one  of  the  past  forty  years,  if  even  the  complaint  be  not 
of  much  older  origin,  and  it  is  not  more  true  now  than  it  was  when  it 
first  arose.  If,  then,  the  educated  among  us  have  found  room  for  their 
exertions  without  sinking  in  the  social  scale,  it  must  have  been  through 
their  having  created  employments  for  themselves,  and  in  a  considerable 
degree  for  others  also,  by  means  of  their  superior  intelligence ;  and 
when  the  great  body  of  the  people  shall  be  placed  in  the  same  favour- 
able circumstances,  why  should  not  the  individual  members  of  the 
community  at  large  be  as  successful  each  in  providing  for  his  own  wants 
in  the  station  which  he  occupies  ?  —and  if  this  be  reasonable  with  refer- 
ence to  our  present  numbers,  why  should  it  be  otherwise,  although 
these  numbers  were  doubled  ?  The  only  obstacle  that  could  arise  would 
be  found  in  the  absolute  insufficiency  of  food  for  the  sustenance  of  the 
greater  number,  the  perfect  remedy  for  which  difficulty  has  at  length 
been  recognised  and  adopted. 

The  view  here  offered  of  the  social  benefits  to  be  derived  by  the  nation 
at  large  from  the  general  spread  of  intelligence  is  no  new  doctrine.  It 
was  well  said  by  the  present  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  (Dr.  Sumner),  in 
his  '  Eecords  of  the  Creation,' — "  Of  all  obstacles  to  improvement,  igno- 
rance is  the  most  formidable,  because  the  only  true  secret  of  assistin"" 
the  poor  is  to  make  them  agents  in  bettering  their  own  condition,  and 
to  supply  them,  not  with  a  temporary  stimulus,  but  with  a  permanent 
energy.  As  fast  as  the  standard  of  intelligence  is  raised,  the  poor 
become  more  and  more  able  to  co-operate  in  any  plan  proposed  for  their 
advantage,  and  more  likely  to  listen  to  any  reasonable  suggestion,  and 
more  able  to  understand,  and  therefore  more  willing  to  pursue  it. 
Hence  it  follows,  that  when  gross  ignorance  is  once  removed,  and  right 
principles  are  introduced,  a  great  advantage  has  been  already  gained 
against  squalid  poverty.  Many  avenues  to  an  improved  condition  are 
opened  to  one  whose  faculties  are  enlarged  and  exercised  ;  he  sees  his 
own  interest  more  clearly,  he  pursues  it  more  steadily,  and  he  does  not 
study  immediate  gratification  at  the  expense  of  bitter  and  late  repent- 
ance, or  mortgage  the  labour  of  his  future  life  without  an  adequate 
return.  Indigence,  therefore,  will  rarely  be  found  in  company  with 
good  education."* 