

The  charge  made  at  these  houses  for  a  cup  of  excellent  coffee,  with 
sugar  and  milk,  varies  from  one  penny  up  to  threepence.  There  are 
many  houses  where  the  lowest  of  these  charges  is  made,  and  which  are 
each  frequented  by  700  to  800  persons  daily.  One  house  in  Shcrrard- 
street,  Haymarket,  is  mentioned  where  the  charge  is  three  halfpence, 
and  the  daily  customers  average  from  1500  to  1600  persons  of  "  all 
classes,  from  hackney  coachmen  and  porters  to  the  most  respectable 
classes,"  including  many  foreigners.     The  house  opens  at  half-past  five 


680  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vir. 

in  the  morning  and  closes  at  lialf-past  ten  at  night.     The  tem])tation  to 
frequent  these  houses  is  not  confined  to  the  coffee  or  tea  that  is  provided, 
hut  the  frequenters   are  furnished  with  a  variety   of  newspapers  and 
periodical  puhlications.     In  the  coffee-house  just  mentioned  there  are 
taken  forty-three  London  daily  papers  (including  several  copies  of  the 
leading  journals),  seven  country  papers,  six  foreign  papers,  twenty-four 
monthly  magazines,  four  quarterly  reviews,  and  eleven  weekly  periodi- 
cals.    The  proprietor  of  another  house  stated  to  the  committee  that  he 
had  paid  400/.  a  year  for  newspapers,  magazines,  and  binding.     He 
said,  "  I  have  upon  the  average  400  to  450   persons  that  frequent  my 
house  daily ;    they  are  mostly  lawyers'  clerks   and  commercial   men ; 
some    of  them    are  managing  clerks ;    and   there  are  many  solicitors, 
likewise  highly  respectable  gentlemen,  who  take  coffee  in  the  middle  of 
the  day  in  preference  to  a  more  stimulating  drink.     I  have  often  asked 
myself  the  question  where  all  that  number  of  persons  could    possibly 
have  got  their  refreshments  prior  to  opening  my  house.     There  were 
taverns  in  the  neighbourhood,  but  no  coffee-house,  nor  anything  that 
afforded  any  accommodation  of   the  nature  I  now  give  them ;    and  I 
found  that  a  place  of  business  like  mine  was  so  sought  for  by  the  public, 
that  shortly  after  I  opened  it  I  was  obliged  to  increase  my  premises  in 
every  way  I  could  ;  and  at  the  present  moment,  besides  a  great  number 
of  new^spapers  every  day,  I  am  compelled  to  take  in  the  highest  class  of 
periodicals.     For  instance,  we  have  eight  or  nine  quarterly  publications, 
costing  from  four  to  six  shillings  each,  and  we  are  constantly  asked  for 
every  new  work  that  has  come  out.     I  find  there  is  an  increasing  taste 
for  a  better  class  of  reading.     When  I  first  went  into  business,  many  of 
my  customers  were  content  with  the  lower-priced  periodicals  ;  but  I  find, 
as  time  progresses,  that  the  taste  is  improving,  and  they  look  out  now 
for  a" better  class  of  literature."     Another  of  these  parties  stated  : — "  I 
believe  we    may  trace    the    teetotal  societies  and    those  societies   that 
advocate  temperance  for  working  men  entirely  to  the  establishment  of 
coffee-houses,  because  a  few  years  ago  it  used  to  be  almost  a  matter  of 
ridicule  amongst  working  men  to  drink  coffee  ;  now  they  are  held  up  to 
emulate  each  other.     I  believe  that  not  one-third  of  my  customers  ever 
go  into  a  public-house   at  all.     I  have  never   heard  an  indecent  ex- 
pression, and,  with  two  exceptions,  have  never  seen  a  drunken  man  in 
my  house." 