

.♦  Page  54. 


cH.vr.  IV.]  EDUCATION.  (}f<3 

throw  tens  of  thousands  out  of  employment,  while,  as  we  have  sometimes 
witnessed,  a  succession  of  deficient  harvests  is  sure  to  brinf^  upon  the 
whole  class  the  severest  privations. 

How  necessary  then  it  is  that  these  masses,  so.  greatly,  so  increasingly 
influential,  should  not  be  suffered  to  remain  in  ignorance  of  their  true 
interests !  They  are  not  idiots  that  they  cannot  be  led  to  see  wherein 
those  true  interests  lie,  nor  to  admit  that  they  consist  in  upholding  the 
laws  and  respecting  the  institutions  of  their  country.  Neither  are  they 
knaves,  who,  to  secure  a  passing  advantage,  would  wantonly  invade  the 
rights  of  their  richer  fellow-citizens.  But  they  are  ignorant ;  and  in 
this  condition  all  manner  of  fallacies  may  be  made  to  pass  with  them  for 
truth.  To  what  but  to  ignorance  arc  we  to  ascribe  the  hostility  of  our 
operative  manufacturers  to  machinery,  and  their  lawless  crusades 
against  it?  How,  unless  means  for  teaching  them  are  adopted,  can 
they  be  expected  to  see  the  ultimate  consequences  to  them  of  a  machine 
the  introduction  of  w^hich  into  use  has  the  present  effect  of  throwing 
some  among  them  out  of  their  accustomed  employment  ? 

The  gi'cat  bulk  of  the  people,  they  whose  sole  dependence  for  their 
daily  bread  must  be  upon  their  daily  toil,  are  most  of  all  interested  in 
the  maintenance  of  order,  under  which  alone  they  can  have  any  assurance 
of  demand  for  their  labour.  This  truth,  which  they  should  be  taught 
to  recognise,  does  not  lie  upon  the  surface  ;  and  the  unlearned  may  well 
be  excused  for  not  embracing  it  when  they  see  men  Avho  have  had  the 
advantages  of  instruction  denied  to  themselves,  advocating  doctrines 
irreconcileable  Avith  it.  It  is  a  fact,  recognised  by  all  who  have  inves- 
tigated the  subject,  and  demonstrable  to  all,  that  the  introduction  of 
machinery  for  simplifying  manufacturing  processes  has  had  the  effect 
not  alone  of  increasing  the  comforts  of  the  great  body — the  consumers — 
but  also  of  multiplying  manifold  the  demand  for  labour  even  in  the  par- 
ticular branches  to  which  the  machinery  is  applied :  and  yet  how  com- 
mon is  it  to  hear  men  of  educated  minds,  but  who  have  not  allowed 
themselves  to  consider  this  class  of  facts,  inveighing  against  the  intro- 
duction of  a  new  machine  as  an  interference  with  the  rights  of  labour  I 
From  such  a  doctrine,  as  well  as  from  others  equally  false  and  equally 
pernicious,  there  are  no  means  of  preserving  the  people  but  by  edu- 
cating them. 

It  is  evident  that  the  kind  of  knowledge  which  will  preserve  from  such 
fallacies  will  not  be  the  result  of  instruction  in  the  mere  elements  of 
learning  ;  and  this  is  rendered  equally  clear  by  the  fact,  that  men  whose 
education  has  been  carried  far  beyond  the  elementary  dcgi'ee  have  failed 
to  acquire  right  views  concerning  points  wliich  the  general  safety  re- 
quires should  meet  the  practical  assent  of  all ;  but  this  presents  no 
difficulty.  The  educated  man  fails  to  recognise  the  truth  because  he  is 
but  partially  educated,  and  has  been  left  in  ignorance  with  regard  to 