

*  It  has  been  already  shown  (page  556)  how  importantly  the  good  work  has  been  for- 
warded in  Ireland,  throurrh  the  exertions  of  one  earnest  benefactor  of  his  race. 


ciiAv.  HI.]  MANXJ-KS.  679 

of  intemperance  in  Scotland,  said, — ''  I  know  opium  is  used  to  a  certain 
extent,  bnt  I  think  whiskey  there  supersedes  everytliing.  In  short,  I 
nmy  mention  one  fact  to  the  connuittee  which  .will  illustrate  the  extent 
to  which  the  use  of  whiskey  is  carried :  in  London,  the  proportion  of 
public-houses  to  other  liouses  is  as  one  to  fifty-six  ;  in  Glasgow,  it  is  as 
one  to  ten  ;  every  tenth  house  in  Glasgow  is  a  spirit  shop.  I  should 
say,  as  far  as  my  statistical  researches  have  gone,  that  the  proportion  of 
v.'hiskey  drunk  in  Glasgow  is  twice  or  thrice  as  much  as  in  any  similar 
population  upon  the  face  of  the  globe."  Being  asked  whether  the  pro- 
portion of  spirit -shops  mentioned  was  greater  than  it  was  fifteen  or 
twenty  years  ago,  Mr.  Alison  stated  that  it  was  considerably  increasing ; 
that  in  1824  every  fourteenth  house  was  a  public-house,  and  that  the 
proportions  since  and  at  different  times  ascertained,  have  been  one  in 
twelve,  one  in  eleven,  and  (as  already  stated)  in  1838,  one  in  ten. 
Mr.  Alison  gives  a  deplorable  account  of  the  moral  condition  of  the 
people  of  Glasgow.  He  says,  "  I  think  that  in  Glasgow  there  are 
80,000  people  (the  whole  population  is  257,000)  who  have  hardly  any 
moral  or  religious  education  at  all ;  they  have  hardly  any  education  in 
worldly  matters ;  and  though  they  can  most  of  them  read  and  write, 
they  are,  practically  speaking,  uneducated."  It  would  be  indeed  sur- 
prising if,  under  those  circumstances,  the  population  of  Glasgow  were  to 
exhibit  any  but  the  lowest  state  of  morals ;  and  the  various  particulars 
given  by  Mr.  Alison  of  their  coarseness  and  brutality  seem  to  follow  as  a 
necessary  consequence  from  the  neglect  of  which  they  are  thus  the  victims. 

It  is  at  once  a  consequence  of  the  comparative  sobriety  of  the  age, 
and  a  help  to  its  continuance,  that  great  numbers  of  houses  have  been 
opened  for  the  sale  of  cups  of  coffee  and  tea  at  low  prices.  It  is  said 
that  there  are  from  IGOO  to  1800  of  these  coffee-houses  in  the  metro- 
polis alone,  and  that  they  are  established  and  rapidly  increasing  all 
over  the  country ;  about  thirty  years  ago  there  were  not  above  a  dozen 
of  those  houses  to  be  found  in  London,  and  in  these  the  prices  charged 
for  the  refreshment  t!iey  afforded  were  such  as  to  limit  to  a  very  few 
the  number  of  their  customers.  Some  interesting  information  concerning 
these  establishments  was  given  before  the  Committee  of  1840,  which  was 
appointed  to  inquire  concerning  the  operation  of  the  several  duties  levied 
on  imports,  and  popularly  known  as  "  the  Import  Duties  Committee." 