

*  The  omissions  in  the  parliamentary  returns,  as  stated  in  the  reports  of  the  Statistical 

Society  of  Manchester,  were : — 

Scholars. 

In  the  three  townships  of  Manchester,  Chorlton,  and  Ilulme  .  10,347 

In  the  borough  of  Bury -"^fil 

In  the  borough  of  Liverpool 1^,.500 

or  about  one-third  of  the  numbers  ascertained  by  the  society. 


696  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  \it. 

was  1,276,947  ;  and  the  scholars  in  Sunday  schools  are  stated  to  have 
been  1,548,890— together  2,825,837.  In  that  year  (1833)  the  number 
of  persons  betwen  five  and  fifteen  years  old  was  3,432,023,  so  that  the 
proportion  then  left  wholly  uninstructed  was  not  qnite  one-third  of  what 
it  had  been  in  1818.  But  'it  is  known  that  in  1833  duplicate  entries 
were  made  of  Sunday  scholars,  who  also  attended  day-schools,  to  the 
amount  of  152,195  children,  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  num- 
ber actually  twice  reckoned  was  much  greater  than  was  ascertained ; 
besides  which  the  proportionate  number  of  infant  schools,  and  therefore 
of  scholars  under  five  years  of  age,  was  much  greater  in  1833  than  it 
had  been  fifteen  years  before,  which  facts  must  be  taken  in  diminution 
of  the  improvement  indicated  by  the  returns. 

It  must  be  evident  that  when  we  shall  have  procured  a  correct 
statement  of  the  number  of  schools,  and  of  children  attending  them,  we 
shall  possess  only  a  part  of  the  information  necessary  to  determine  the 
condition  or  progress  of  the  people  in  regard  to  their  education.  The 
reports  of  the  Statistical  Societies  of  Manchester  and  London  have 
shown  how  unworthy  of  the  name  of  education  is  the  result  of  what  is 
attempted  in  the  majority  of  schools  frequented  by  children  of  the 
working  classes,  and  which  are  frequently  kept  by  persons  "  whose  only 
qualification  for  this  employment  seems  to  be  their  unfitness  for  every 
other." 

A  lamentable  proof  of  the  correctness  of  this  remark  is  offered  in  the 
following  extract  from  the  report  for  1839,  of  the  chaplain  of  the 
Juvenile  Prison  at  Parkhurst  : — "  One  point  has  forcibly  struck  my 
attention,  and  that  is,  the  comparatively  large  amount  of  acquirement 
in  the  mechanical  elements  of  instruction  (the  art  of  reading  and  repe- 
tition from  memory)  contrasted  with  the  lamentably  small  degree  of 
actual  knowledge  possessed,  either  of  moral  duty  or  religious  principle. 
This  appears  mainly  to  have  arisen  from  the  meaning  of  the  words  read 
or  sounds  repeated  having  rarely  been  made  the  subjects  of  inquiry  or 
reflection.  The  following  digest  will  in  some  degree  illustrate  this 
position.  Your  Lordship  will  perceive  that,  although  fifty-eight  prisoners 
can  in  some  degree  read,  eighty-three  repeat  some  or  all  of  the  church 
catechism,  and  forty-three  possess  some  knowledge  of  Holy  Scripture, 
only  twenty-nine  (exactly  half  the  number  of  readers)  can  give  even  a 
little  account  of  the  meaning  of  words  read,  or  sounds  in  use  ;  and  of 
these  it  appears  very  often  to  be  the  strength  of  the  intellect  exercised 
at  the  moment,  and  not  the  result  of  prior  reflection,  that  leads  them  to 
the  raeanino;  of  a  word. 