


cHAr.  IT.]  EDUCATION.  693 

years  have  passed  since  every  effort  that  could  l)e  made  by  those  who 
were  themselves  awakened  to  the  necessity  of  establishing  a  system  of 
national  education  appeared  to  be  ho])elcssly  employed.  It  svas  so 
recently  as  February,  1839,  that  the  Government  first  adopted  the 
subject  of  education  as  one  of  the  objects  that  called  for  its  interference, 
and  constituted  a  Board  of  Education,  consisting  of  five  privy  council- 
lors, over  whom  the  President  of  the  Council  was  to  preside.  To  this 
board  was  confided  the  distribution  of  such  a  sum  as  should  be  voted  by 
Parliament  for  the  promotion  of  education,  and  it  was  especially  charged 
with  the  formation  of  normal  schools.  The  sum  proposed  to  be  })ut  at 
the  disposal  of  this  board  in  that  year  was  30,000/.,  and  in  the  month 
of  June  a  motion  to  that  effect  was  brought  forward  and  carried,  after 
a  debate  of  three  days,  by  a  majority  of  275  to  273,  the  latter  number 
having  voted  in  fiivour  of  an  Address  to  the  Queen,  by  w'ay  of  "  amend- 
ment," praying  Her  Majesty  to  revoke  the  Order  in  Council  by  which 
the  Board  of  Education  had  been  appointed.  On  the  5th  of  the  follow- 
ing month  a  similar  hostile  Address  was  moved  by  a  learned  prelate  in 
the  House  of  Lords,  and  carried  by  a  majority  of  229  to  118  against  the 
Government,  which  had  the  firmness,  nevertheless,  to  persist  in  its  plan. 

That  the  objections  then  taken  to  this  moderate  scheme  of  the 
Government  have  since  been  found  chimerical  we  have  the  best  pos- 
sible proof  in  the  fact  that  it  has  been  cordially  adopted  by  the  former 
opponents  of  that  Government,  and  that  every  vestige  of  that  opposition 
has  disappeared. 

It  was  shown  by  returns  obtained  from  the  workhouses  of  478  unions, 
that  at  Midsummer,  1838,  they  contained  42,7G7  children  under  16 
years  of  age  ;  and  if  this  is  a  true  proportion  for  the  whole  country, 
there  must  have  been  at  that  time  in  the  GOO  unions  into  which  England 
and  AVales  were  to  be  divided  53,682  pauper  children.  Under  the  old 
system  of  neglect  those  children  would  have  grown  up  without  having 
been  impressed  with  any  idea  of  moral  responsibility,  and  without  being 
provided  with  means  much  beyond  those  possessed  by  the  brute  creation 
for  procuring  an  honest  livelihood.  Should  it  then  occasion  surprise 
that  the  ranks  of  crime  have,  in  years  past,  received  so  many  recruits, 
and  have  we  any  right  to  com])Iain  of  this  consequence  of  our  own 
neglect  ? 

The  Government  plans  are  still  perhaps  too  recent,  and,  it  must  be 
added,  too  imperfect,  to  exhibit  any  very  striking  result ;  but  with  a 
knowdedge  of  the  enlightened  zeal  which  is  allowed  to  carry  out  the 
intentions  of  the  legislature,  it  is  not  too  much  to  hope  that  enough  of 
good  will  soon  be  made  apparent  to  show  the  desirableness  of  extending 
those  plans,  so  that  we  shall  soon  cease  to  be  the  lowest  among  the  Pro- 
testant kingdoms  of  Europe  as  respects  the  performance  of  our  duty  in 
promoting  the  education  of  the  people. 