

We  have  not  any  accurate  statements  of  the  amount  and  progress  of 
education  in  this  country.  An  attempt  was  made  in  1833,  by  the  late 
lamented  Earl  of  Kerry,  to  supply  this  deficiency,  but  the  result  of  the 
inquiry  then  made  w^as  very  unsatisfactory,  so  that'  it  has  been  looked 
upon  as  a  failure.     In  one    respect,  however,  the  returns  then   made 


CHAP.  IV.]  EDUCATION.  695 

have  been  productive  of  good,  since  by  their  very  incompleteness  tliey 
have  stimulated  private  parties  to  prosecute  inquiries  in  that  direction, 
and  have  thus  drawn  public  attention  to  the  subject  in  a  greater  degree 
than  might  otherwise  have  been  experienced.  It  was  the  feeling  that 
justice  was  not  done  in  those  returns  to  efforts  made  by  the  friends  of 
education  among  the  manufacturers  of  Lancashire,  that  incited  the 
.Statistical  Society  of  Manchester  to  set  on  foot  tlie  extensive  series  of 
inquiries  which,  with  their  results,  they  subsequently  gave  to  the 
public  ;*  and  it  was  mainly  owing  to  the  publication  of  these  results 
that  the  Statistical  Society  of  London  undertook  similar  investigations 
in  various  parts  of  the  metropolis.  The  reports  of  those  societies  have 
had  an  acknowledged  and  a  powerful  influence  on  the  deliberations  of 
Parliament,  by  laying  bare  the  moral  deformity  ol"  the  land,  and  pointing 
out  a  remedy. 

Having  thus  expressed  a  warning  against  receiving  these  parliamen- 
tary returns  as  accurate  records,  we  are  forced  to  use  them  as  the  only 
data  extant  on  the  subject  having  reference  to  former  years. 

It  appeared  from  returns  thus  made  to  the  House  of  Commons, 
pursuant  to  the  Address  to  the  Crown,  moved  by  Lord  Kerry,  in  May, 
1833,  showing  the  number  and  description  of  schools,  and  the  number 
of  scholars  at  that  time  taught  therein,  in  each  town,  parish,  chapelry, 
or  extra-parochial  place  in  England  and  Wales,  and  indicating  the 
increase  that  had  occurred  since  1818,  that  in  the  last-named  year  there 
were  in  England  and  Wales  U),326  infant  and  daily  schools,  with 
605,704  scholars,  and  5543  Sunday-schools,  with  425,493  scholars.  If 
these  latter  were  in  every  case  distinct  from,  and  additional  to,  the 
scholars  in  infant  and  daily  schools,  the  whole  number  receiving  in- 
struction in  schools  of  all  kinds  in  England  and  Wales  in  1818  was 
1,031,197.  The  population  of  that  part  of  the  kingdom  was  then  (by 
computation)  11,846,057,  and  the  ascertained,  proportion  living  between 
five  and  fifteen  years  old  amounted  to  2,843,053.  If,  making  no  allow- 
ance for  the  duplicate  entries  of  scholars  in  Sunday  and  daily  schools, 
nor  for  the  children  in  infant  schools  under  five  years  of  age,  we  assume 
that  their  numbers  conjointly  would  be  equal  to  those  of  young  persons 
receiving  instruction  under  the  paternal  roof,  it  would  appear  that  nine- 
fourteenths  of  the  children  in  England  and  Wales  were,  in  1818,  without 
any  means  of  instruction.  The  returns  for  1833  were  less  unfavourable. 
The  number  of  children  then  given,  as  being  under  daily  instruction, 