


CHAP.  IV.]  EDUCATION.  (i91 

the  expense  to  three  shillings  for  each  scholar.  The  subscriptions 
received  were  devoted  to  the  erection  of  the  necessary  buildinfrs,  and 
the  remaining  expenses,  including  the  simple  wants  of  Joseph  Lancaster 
himself,  were  defrayed  from  the  profits  of  his  publications,  many  thou- 
sands of  which  were  yearly  taken  by  the  j)ublic. 

Among  .Jose})h  Lancaster's  earhest  patrons  were  the  Duke  of  Bedford 
and  Lord  Somerville  ;  and  in   1805  the  King,  and  several  branches  of 
the  Royal  Family,  especially  the  noble-minded  father  of  our  gracious 
Queen,   gave  the  sanction  of  their  names  and  the  assistance   of  their 
subscriptions    for    carrying   his    plans  more  widely  into    effect.      This 
powerful  patronage  did  not  suffice,  however,  to  keep  the  author  of  these 
plans  out  of  pecuniary  difficulties  ;   so  little  at  that  time  did  the  public 
feeling  respond  to  the  benevolent  wishes  of  the  monarch  ;  so  indifferent 
was  the  public  mind  to  the  cause  to  which  this  zealous  apostle  of  edu- 
cation had  devoted  himself.     The  difficulties  against  which  he  had  then 
to  struggle  are  thus  simply  described  by  himself  in  a  report  drawn  up 
in  Ibll  : — "  I  was  not  insensible  of  the  heavy  responsibility,  yet  deter- 
mined to  succeed  or  sink  in  the  attempt,  committing  myself  to  the  pro- 
tection of  the  God  of  friendless  youth ;  and,  anticipating  final  success, 
I  persevered.     Had  I  not  done  so,  the  progress  of  the  work  would  have 
been  checked  for  several  years,  and  the  time  of  part  of  one  generation 
would  have  passed  aw^ay,  they  remaining  in  ignorance, — perhaps  the 
clouds  of  mental  night  enveloping  their  minds  to  the  end  of  their  lives. 
The  imposition  of  some  tradesmen  ;  the  deceit  of  a  personal  friend ;  the 
warm    professions   and    cold    support  of  one  professing  patron,  whose 
friendship  proved  to  consist  only  in  smiles,   but  who  left  me  to  bear 
the   expense   of  educating  all  the  children  of  his  poor  tenantry  ;    all 
heightened  the  expense  and  threatened  the  concern  with  ruin.     At  tliis 
juncture  (1808 )  I  providentially  received  the  zealous  support  of  my 
friend  Joseph  Fox,  who  became  attached  to  me   from  a  powerful  con- 
viction of  the  merit  of  my  system   of  education.     From  this  time  the 
debts  of  the  institution  were   put  into  a  state  of  liquidation,    to   the 
great  surprise  and  astonishment  of  some  who  were  expecting  a  contrary 
event." 

The  pecuniary  embarrassments  which  had  so  nearly  cut  short  his 
career  of  usefulness  arose  from  the  insufficiency  of  the  subscriptions  in 
aid  of  buildings,  and  which  amounted  only  to  G24Z.,  while  the  cost  of 
the  premises  erected  exceeded  3500/.  The  yearly  subscriptions  up  to 
the  time  here  mentioned  never  exceeded  600/.,  while  the  necessary  ex- 
penses of  the  school  were  double  that  sum.  To  relieve  Mr.  Lancaster 
from  pecuniary  difficulty,  and  to  enable  him  still  to  devote  his  energies 
to  the  furtherance  of  his  plans,  five  men,  embued  with  the  spirit  of  phi- 
lanthropy in  no  ordinary  degree,  took  upon  themselves  the  office  of 
trustees,  and  came  under  advances  to  the  following  amounts  : — 