

*  '  British  America,'  by  Jobn  M'Grcgor,  Esq.,  vol.  i.  page  405.     Second  edition. 

2    Y 


090  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  \ii. 

Every  account  of  these  people  that  has  been  published  agrees  in  de- 
scribing them  as  gentle  and  peaceable  in  their  dispositions,  sober,  moral, 
and  religious  in  their  habits.  Crimes  among  them  are  hardly  known. 
The  house  of  correction  at  Reickiavieh,  the  capital  of  the  island,  after 
having  stood  empty  for  years,  was  at  length  converted  into  a  residence 
for  the  o-overnor,  lay  whom  it  has  since  been  occupied.  The  island  is 
subject  to  the  penal  code  of  Denmark,  which  awards  the  penalty  of 
death  to  murder  and  some  other  heinous  offences.  It  is  said  that  only 
three  or  four  capital  convictions  have  occurred  during  the  last  two  cen- 
turies ;  the  last  of  these  happened  some  years  before  the  visit  of  Sir  G. 
Mackenzie  and  Dr.  Holland  in  1810  ;  it  was  of  a  peasant  for  the  mur- 
der of  his  wife,  and  on  that  occasion  it  was  not  possible  to  find  any  one 
on  the  island  who  could  be  induced  to  perform  the  office  of  executioner, 
so  that  it  became  necessary  to  send  the  man  to  Norway  that  the  sen- 
tence might  be  carried  into  effect.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  from 
the  first  settlement  of  the  island  by  a  Norwegian  colony  in  the  ninth 
century,  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  King  of  Norway,  and  during  the 
six  centuries  which  have  since  elapsed,  no  armed  force  has  ever  been 
raised  on  or  introduced  into  the  island. 

It  would  be  difficult  to  conceive,  if  we  had  not  the  facts  before  us, 
that  any  nation  calling  itself  civilized,  and  boasting  itself  to  walk  in  the 
lioht  of  Christianity,  could  have  so  totally  neglected  the  all-important 
subject  of  education,  as  did  the  rulers  of  England  up  to  the  beginning 
of  the  present  century.  There  was  then  no  provision  for  school-teach- 
ing besides  that  afforded  by  parochial  charity-schools,  in  which  the 
little  that  was  taught  had  nothing  in  it  that  was  useful,  and  the  then 
recent  institution  of  Sunday-schools,  which  chiefly  owe  their  existence  to 
Mr.  Raikes,  of  Gloucester,  and  in  which  the  instruction  given  was  neces- 
sarily confined  in  its  scope  and  limited  in  its  amount.  Besides,  even  the 
Sunday-school  system  was  then  far  from  being  generally  adopted. 

It  was  in  1798  that  Joseph  Lancaster  began  his  scheme  of  active 
benevolence  upon  a  very  humble  plan,  and  with  very  limited  means. 
To  use  his  own  words, ^"  The  undertaking  was  begun  under  the  hospi- 
table roof  of  an  affectionate  parent ;  my  father  gave  the  school-room 
rent  free,  and  after  fitting  up  the  forms  and  desks  myself,  I  had  the 
pleasure,  before  I  was  eighteen,  of  having  near  ninety  children  under 
instruction,  many  of  whom  I  educated  free  of  expense."  The  season 
of  scarcity  that  occurred  at  this  time  added  to  the  number  of  the 
scholars  whose  parents  were  unable  to  spare  the  price  of  their  children's 
schooling  ;  and  some  of  Lancaster's  private  friends  coming  to  his  assist- 
ance, the  school  came  more  and  more  to  take  the  character  of  a  free 
institution,  until  in  1804,  "  the  school  doors  were  thrown  open  for  all 
that  would  send  their  children  and  have  them  educated  freely."  The 
economical  plans  and  arrangements  adopted  in  the  school  brought  down 