

The  population  of  Nova  Scotia,  according  to  a  census  taken  in  1838, 
amounted  to  178,237  souls.  There  were  in  1841,  in  public  schools, 
chiefly  in  Halifax,  1902  scholars ;  in  colleges,  138 ;  but  in  addition  to 
these  there  were  "  more  than  600  connuon  schools,  and  thirty  combined 
common  and  grammar  schools,  at  which  upwards  of  20,000  children 
were  instructed.  These  schools  are  supported  partly  by  grants  of  the 
legislature,  and  partly  by  the  subscriptions  of  the  inhabitants.     The 

2 

*  Mr.  G.  R.  Young,  senior  Attorney-General  of  tlie  province. 


CHAP.  IV. J  EDUCATION.  089 

total  amount  contributed  by  the  province  in  1841  for  promoting  educa- 
tion exceeded  6000/.  The  revenues  of  the  province  in  that  year 
amounted  to  93,882/.  18.s\  2<l. 

If  the  contribution  of  the  Imperial  Parliament  for  the  promotion  of 
education  in  Great  Britain  were  on  the  same  scale  of  liberality  as  that 
adopted  in  Nova  Scotia,  taken  with  reference  to  poj)ulation,  the  yearly 
vote  would  amount  to  624,000/. ;  but  if  made  proportionally  to  the 
revenues  of  the  two  communities,  it  would  amount  to  more  than  five 
times  that  sum,  and  even  then  would  not  absorb  one-half  of  the  revenue 
derived  in  Great  Britain  from  the  consumption  of  ardent  spirits. 

In  a  work  of  great  authority,  published  several  years  ago,  we  find  the 
following  passage,  corroborative  of  the  facts  and  their  consequences  here 
brought  forward  : — "  It  is  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  more  general  and 
useful  knowledge  among  all  grades  of  the  population  can  be  discovered 
in  any  coimtry  than  will  be  found  to  prevail  in  this  province  (Nova 
Scotia).  Many  of  those  born  and  educated  in  it  have  distinguished 
themselves  not  only  at  home  but  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  and  the 
natives  generally  possess  a  ready  power  of  apprehension,  a  remarkably 
distinct  knowledge  of  the  general  affairs  of  life,  and  the  talent  of  adapt- 
ing themselves  to  the  circumstances  of  such  situations  as  chance,  direc- 
tion, or  necessity  may  place  them  in."* 

In  the  island  of  Iceland  tlierc  is  no  such  thing  to  be  found  as  a  man 
or  woman — not  decidedly  deficient  in  mental  capacity — who  cannot  read 
and  write  well,  while  the  greater  part  of  all  classes  of  the  inhabitants 
have  mastered  several  of  the  higher  branches  of  education,  including  a 
knowledge  of  modern  languages,  and  an  accjuaintance  with  classical 
literature. 

Placed  on  the  verge  of  the  arctic  circle,  the  Icelanders  are  subjected 
to  the  hardships  of  a  long  and  rigorous  winter,  during  which  there  are 
but  few  hours  of  the  day  in  which  it  is  possible  for  them  to  pursue  out- 
door occupations.  These  apparently  unfavourable  circumstances  they 
have  with  the  highest  degree  of  wisdom  rendered  productive  of  the 
choicest  of  human  blessings — the  enlightenment  of  their  minds  and  the 
raising  of  their  moral  characters.  Some  part  of  the  long  evening  is 
employed  in  teaching  the  children  of  the  family ;  and  so  universal  is 
this  practice  that  in  the  whole  island  there  is  but  one  school,  which  is 
exclusively  used  for  the  highest  branches  of  professional  education. 
After  this  part  of  the  family  duty  has  been  performed,  the  whole  house- 
hold is  assembled — servants  and  all — and  some  book  is  read  aloud, 
each  person  present  taking  his  turn  in  reading.  After  this  there  usually 
follows  a  discussion  relating  to  what  has  been  read,  and  in  which  all 
unreservedly  join,  and  the  evening  is  not  suffered  to  close  without 
engaging  in  religious  exercises. 