

"  Another  feature  of  the  moral  condition  of  the  Parkhurst  prisoners 
cannot  but  arrest  the  attention  strongly,  and  that  is,  the  very  large 
])roportion  that  have  received  instruction  for  a  considerable  period  of 
time  in  the  various  schools  wdth  which  our  country  abounds.     A  digest 


f 


CHAP,  n.]  EDUCATIOX.  697 

of  this  portion  of  the  general  table  will  show,  that  out  of  102  lads,  94 
have  attended  schools  ;  69  of  whom  have  been  (]<uj  scholars  for  terms 
longer  than  a  year,  eight  only  having  never  been  at  school. 

"  Read  tolerably •    .     20 

Head  indiflerently 38 


ly  at  all 
all    . 

14 

Read  not  at 

30 

Total  . 

.   102 

Of  those  there  attende 

d  school  from  8  to  12 

years  . 

2 

»                            » 

n                                  » 

5  „  8 
3  „  5 
1  „  3 
under  1  year 

'„       . 

5 

.     21 

.     44 

22 

'.    "s 

Total  . 

.   102 

This  result  will  not  in  any  degree  surprise  those  persons  who  have 
examined  the  reports  of  the  Statistical  Societies  of  Loudon  and  Man- 
chester, and  who  have  thus  become  acquainted  with  the  insufficient 
acquirements  of  a  large  proportion  of  persons  who  take  upon  themselves 
the  task  of  instruction. 

The  greatest  want,  now  that  the  public  mind  is  in  a  measure  aroused, 
to  exertion  in  this  direction,  is  felt  to  be  that  of  qualified  persons  as 
teachers.  This  is  a  want  which  it  must  be  the  work  of  years  effectually 
to  supply,  if  even  the  establishing  of  normal  schools  were  already 
accomplished  upon  an  adequate  foundation.  Imperfect  as  our  machinery 
for  education  now  is  in  this  essential  particular,  we  cannot  reasonably 
hope  to  derive  from  the  formation  of  schools  the  same  amount  of  advan- 
tage as  would  be  experienced  if  a  sufficient  number  of  qualified  teachers 
were  in  existence,  and  hence  some  over-sanguine  friends  of  education 
may  encounter  disappointment.  "  As  is  the  teacher,  so  is  the  school," 
is  an  axiom  fully  recognised  in  countries  where  the  want  of  which  we 
have  now  to  complain  has  been  made  to  disappear  through  a  more 
timely  attention  on  the  part  of  their  governments  to  this  essential  requi- 
site. The  effi3rts  of  the  Committee  of  Managers  of  the  British  and 
Foreign  School  Society  have  long  been  directed  to  this  object,  and 
institutions  for  training  teachers,  both  male  and  female,  are  now  also  in 
active  operation  under  the  managers  of  the  National  Society.  Grants 
of  money  for  this  purpose  have  been  made  by  Parliament  to  both  these 
institutions ;  but  the  utmost  that  they  can  eftect  will  bear  only  a  very 
insufficient  proportion  to  the  wants  of  the  country.  A  model  school, 
established  through  the  joint  exertions,  and  chiefly  at  the  expense,  of 
Sir  James  Kay  Shuttleworth  and  Mr.  E.  C.  TufFnell,  at  Battersea,  has 
formed  a  powerful  aid  by  means  of  the  plans  tested  under  the  inspection 
of  those  gentlemen,  and  which,  as  ftir  as  they  have  ])roved  successful, 
have  led  to  their  adoption  in  other  institutions. 