


654  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sfc.  tii. 

It  is  but  too  probable  that,  in  even  the  httle  it  has  done,  the  Govern- 
ment has  placed  itself,  where  indeed  it  should  mostly  be  found,  in 
advance  of  the  general  opinion.  In  a  report  made  to  the  Poor  Law 
Commissioners  by  ^Ir.  Edward  Twisleton,  one  of  their  Assistant  Com- 
missioners, bearing  the  date  of  April,  1840,  the  following  passage 
occurs : — "  It  is  impossible  to  shut  one's  eyes  to  the  fact,  that  a  cer- 
tain portion  of  the  upper  and  middle  classes  harbour  a  rooted  distrust  of 
any  plan  for  the  education  of  the  poor.  In  discharge  of  my  ordinary 
duties  I  have  often  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  this  feeling  manifested 
in  an  undisguised  form.  In  the  rural  unions  of  this  district  (Norfolk), 
it  fortunately  happens  that  religious  dissensions  are  almost  unknown, 
and  religious  scruples  have  only,  on  very  rare  occasions,  been  the  cause 
or  the  pretext  for  throwing  impediments  in  the  way  of  education.  Hence, 
the  chaplains,  in  the  majority  of  the  unions,  give  their  valuable  assist- 
ance in  the  improvement  of  the  schools, — a  fact  which  I  take  the  greater 
pleasure  in  acknowledging,  inasmuch,  as  in  some  unions  they  have 
almost  supplied  the  place  of  a  good  schoolmaster ;  and  it  has  only  been 
in  two  instances  that  the  slightest  opposition  has  been  experienced  from 
that  quarter.  But  amongst  many  small  farmers,  and  some  of  the 
gentry,  unwillingness  to  educate  the  poor  is  openly  defended  by  argu- 
ment ;  and  a  merchant  of  a  seaport  town  gravely  assured  me,  not  long 
ago,  that  an  agricultural  labourer  was  very  little  above  a  brute,  and  that 
to  educate  him  would  merely  have  the  effect  of  rendering  him  dissatisfied 
with  his  situation  of  life." 

The  feeling  thus  described  is  fast  giving  place  to  more  enlightened 
and  benevolent  views.  The  evils  anticipated  from  the  instruction  of 
the  poor  have  not  been  experienced.  It  is  seen  that  the  mind  can  be 
cultivated  without  developing  the  disposition  to  mischief,  or  engendering 
any  irrational  feelings  of  dissatisfaction  w-ith  their  lot ;  while,  on  the 
contrary,  instruction,  when  accompanied  with  moral  training,  is  felt  to 
exercise  a  powerful  influence  in  restraining  from  evil.  When  Lancaster 
began  his  labours,  it  was  a  common  remark,  that  if  he  succeeded  in  his 
object,  we  might  seek  in  vain  for  servants  who  would  clean  our  shoes, 
or  attend  upon  our  horses.  This  irrational  opinion,  which  w^as  founded 
on  the  })resumption  that  men  performed  their  duties  better  for  being 
kept  in  ignorance  regarding  them,  is  but  seldom  heard,  now  that  w^e 
have  proofs  of  the  greater  willingness  which  an  instructed  person  brings 
to  the  performance  of  his  labour,  and  of  the  greater  ability  with  which 
he  is  enabled  to  acquit  himself. 