

It  may  be  said  that  these  views,  however  reasonable  they  may  appear, 


*  Fourtli  edition,  vol.  ii.  page  333. 


G88  rnOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sr.c.  vji. 

arc  still  only  speculations,  formed  in  the  closet,  and  wanting  the  sanction 
of  experience  to  stamp  them  with  authority.  Happily  we  are  not 
without  this  sanction  also.  The  early  settlers  of  the  province  of  Nova 
Scotia  were  so  fully  impressed  with  the  necessity  of  imparting  instruc- 
tion to  the  people,  that  ample  provision  was  made  by  them,  and  has 
been  continued  by  their  descendants  to  the  present  day,  for  the  su})port 
of  schools,  so  that  not  a  child  is  brought  up  in  the  province  without 
receiving  a  considerable  amount  of  instruction  combined  with  moral 
training.  The  result  has  been  most  gratifying.  AVhen  conversing  Avith 
a  gentleman  from  Halifax,  a  barrister  and  member  of  the  provincial 
parliament,  and  a  most  intelligent  man,*  concerning  the  condition  in 
various  respects  of  the  Nova  Scotian  population,  a  question  was  put  to 
him  on  the  state  of  crime  within  the  province,  to  which  he  gave  this 
striking  answer, — "  Crime  !  we  have  no  crime."  When  urged  to 
explain  how  far  this  reply  was  to  be  received  in  a  literal  sense,  he  added, 
— "  I  do  not  mean  that  people  never  quarrel  in  Nova  Scotia  ;  brawls 
do  sometimes  occur,  although  not  very  frequently ;  but  as  to  crime, 
understanding  by  the  terra  oftences  for  which  men  are  brought  to  the 
bar  of  justice  in  England,  I  repeat  that  it  does  not  exist."  The  cause 
of  this  truly  enviable  state  of  society  was  made  apparent  when  he 
described  the  means  employed  for  imparting  universal  education,  and 
added,  as  a  consequence  of  the  high  degree  of  intelligence  thereby  de- 
veloped, that  every  person  could  find  employment,  and  could  support 
himself  and  his  family  upon  the  fruits  of  his  industry. 

Nor  do  these  facts  rest  upon  individual  or  private  testimony  only. 
The  return  made  to  the  Colonial  Office  in  London  of  the  condition  in 
various  respects  of  the  province  fully  bears  out  the  above  description. 
In  that  portion  of  the  volume  (known  officially  as  "  the  blue  book")  in 
which  forms  are  given  for  returns  under  the  head  of  gaols  and  prisoners, 
all  that  appears  is  the  following  note  : — "  No  account  is  kept  under 
the  heads  of  this  return,  which  are  wholly  inapplicable  to  the  gaols 
in  Nova  Scotia,  where  crimes  are  of  rare  occurrence,  and  imprisonment 
for  debt  is  infrequent.  There  is  at  least  one  gaol  in  each  county,  under 
the  jurisdiction  of  the  superior  court,  superintended  by  the  high  sheriff 
or  his  gaoler,  but  there  are  not  any  officers  of  prisons  appointed." 