

2  Y  2 


692  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec. 

Mr.  Joseph  Fox £1,895 

Mr.  William  Allen 1,232 

IMr.  Joseph  Foster 1,218 

Mr.  "William  Corston r)34 

John  Jackson,  Esq.,  M.P 522 

£5.401 


The  following  extract  from  the  minutes  of  the  trustees,  dated  28th 
March,  1811,  shows  the  extent  to  which  Mr.  Lancaster's  exertions  had 
then  been  successful,  and  the  amount  of  personal  effort  and  sacrifice  by 
which  that  success  had  been  attained.  No  word  of  commendation  is 
needed  to  do  honour  to  the  man  himself,  nor  to  the  friends  through 
whose  disinterested  philanthropy  his  success  was  rendered  possible  : — 

"  Tlie  trustees  examined  the  vouchers  produced  by  Joseph  Lancaster 
relative  to  the  expenditure  which  had  taken  place  prior  to  the  formation 
of  the  committee  in  1808,  and  have  the  satisfaction  to  find  that  they 
are  perfectly  correct,  and  most  satisfactorily  account  for  the  said  ex- 
penditure ;  and  they  find,  that  during  the  time  that  they  have  had  the 
care  of  his  affairs,  he  has  expended  above  1000/.,  the  produce  of  his 
lectures,  in  travelling  and  preparing  for  the  same  ;  that  he  has  main- 
tained himself  during  this  period  by  the  profits  of  his  publications  and 
printing  office  ;  and  in  having  educated  above  6000  children  free  of 
expense  ;  at  the  lowest  rate  of  payment  the  sum  of  7500/.  has  been  given 
to  the  education  of  the  poor." 

Many  years  had  elapsed  after  they  thus  had  taken  upon  themselves 
the  pecuniary  burthens  of  the  undertaking  before  the  contributions  of 
the  public  relieved  the  trustees  from  the  load,  themselves  being  among 
the  most  liberal  contributors ;  but  all  dread  of  failure  through  insuffi- 
ciency of  means  was  at  once  dissipated  by  their  management,  under 
which  the  British  and  Foreign  School  Society  has  been  the  chief  means 
to  wdiich  is  owing  all  that  has  since  been  done  towards  the  education  of 
the  poorer  classes  of  England. 

It  is  not  intended,  by  this  statement,  to  give  any  opinion  as  to  the 
value  of  the  particular  method  of  instruction  adopted  by  Mr.  Lancaster, 
nor  to  enter  upon  the  question  whether  he  or  the  late  Dr.  Bell  is  enti- 
tled to  the  merit  of  having  been  its  inventor,  but  simply  to  narrate  the 
steps  whereby  the  public  mind  in  this  country  has  been  directed  in  this 
all-important  matter ;  steps  which,  without  question  or  controversy, 
have  resulted  from  the  self-sacrifices  of  a  man  of  humble  birth,  without 
fortune  or  powerful  connexions,  and  whose  sole  reliance  for  success  was, 
for  years,  his  own  indomitable  spirit. 

It  is  only  by  comparing  the  actual  condition  of  England  upon  this 
subject  with  the  deplorable  state  of  darkness  in  which  it  was  when 
Joseph  Lancaster  began  his  labours,  that  we  can  eontemplate  the  pro- 
gress hitherto  made  with  any  degree  of  satisfaction.     Only  a  very  few 