


701  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  yii. 

Nothing  could  be  better  in  intention  than  the  legal  provision  made 
from  an  early  period  of  our  history  for  educating  the  youth  of  Ireland, 
and  nothing  could  well  be  worse  than  the  practical  result.  In  the  reign 
of  Henry  VIII.  a  statute  was  passed,  entitled  "  An  Act  for  the  English 
Order,  Habit,  and  Language,"  under  which  the  ecclesiastical  authori- 
ties were  directed  to  administer  an  oath  to  every  person  receiving  spi- 
ritual promotion,  "  That  he  would  teach  the  English  tongue  to  all  in 
his  cure  ;  that  he  would  bid  the  beads  in  the  English  tongue  ;  and 
further,  that  he  would  keep  or  cause  to  be  kept,  within  the  place, 
territory,  or  parish,  where  he  should  have  any  rule,  benefice,  or  promo- 
tion, a  school  to  learn  English,  if  any  of  the  children  of  the  parish 
should  come  to  him  to  learn  the  same,  taking  for  the  keeping  of  the 
same  school  such  convenient  stipend  or  salary  as  in  the  said  land  was 
accustomally  used  to  be  taken."  This  statute  was  confirmed  by  the 
7th  Act  of  Will.  III.,  and  is  still  unrepealed  ;  and  every  clergyman,  on 
his  induction  to  a  living  in  Ireland,  is  required  by  law  to  take  an  oatn 
in  the  following  terms : — "  I  do  sclemnly  swear  that  I  will  teach,  or 
cause  to  be  taught  an  English  school  within  the  vicarage  (or  rectory) 
of  *  *  *  as  the  law  in  that  case  requires."  The  performance  of  the 
duty  thus  solemnly  undertaken,  it  has  been  the  almost  universal  custom 
of  the  incumbents  of  parishes  to  confine  within  the  payment  of  forty  shil- 
lings per  annum  as  a  salary  to  a  schoolmaster,  which  act,  if  it  be  held 
to  discbarge  the  legal  obligation — which  is  very  doubtful — can  hardly 
be  thought  a  fulfilment  of  the  moral  duty  imposed  on  them  by  the  statute 
and  confirmed  by  their  own  oaths. 

By  the  Act  7.  Will.  III.,  it  was  made  penal  to  receive  any  other  than 
a  Protestant  education,  and  it  was  enacted  that  no  person  of  the  Romish 
religion  should  publicly  teach  a  school  under  a  penalty  of  20/.  and  three 
months'  imprisonment.  Where  schools  were  kept,  the  richer  papists 
would  not  send  their  children  to  them,  and  the  charge  made  was  so  high 
that  the  poorer  people  could  not  do  so. 

The  "  Incorporated  Society,"  already  mentioned,  was  founded  ex- 
pressly to  perform  the  work  of  proselytism,  for  which  purpose  the 
managers  found  it  necessai-y  to  cut  off  all  intercourse  between  the  pupils 
and  their  parents,  by  confining  them  within  the  walls  of  the  schools 
during  the  whole  period  of  their  education.  The  expense  attending 
these  schools  was  accordingly  great,  while  the  natural  repugnance  of 
the  parents  to  the  breaking  up  of  the  ties  between  themselves  and  their 
children  was  so  strong  that,  except  in  years  of  scarcity,  the  numbers 
which  the  schools  were  able  and  willing  to  receive  were  never  kept  up  ; 
and  although,  in  addition  to  the  munificent  grants  of  Parliament,  private 
benevolence  was  greatly  exercised  in  their  behalf,  the  society  was  at  no 
time  able  to  instruct  so  many  as  2000  scholars.  In  }784,  John  Howard, 
in    addition  to    his    inquiries    concerning   prisons,    applied   himself  to 