


ciiAv.  IV.]  EDUC^VnON.  705 

examine  tlie  state  of  the  cliarter  schools  of  Ireland,  his  account  of  which 
induced  the  Irish  House  of  Commons  to  appoint  a  committee  for  the 
fiM-ther  investigation  of  the  subject.  From  the  report  of  this  committee 
it  appeared  that  the  schools  were  out  of  repair  and  going  to  ruin  ;  that 
the  children  were  "  sickly,  pale,  and  such  miserable  objects  that  they 
were  a  disgrace  to  all  society ;  that  their  reading  had  been  neglected 
for  the  purpose  of  making  them  work  for  their  masters ;  that  they  were 
in  general  filthy  and  ill-clothed,  without  shifts  or  shirts,  and  in  such  a 
situation  that  it  was  indecent  to  look  on  ;  the  diet  was  insufficient  for 
their  support ;  and  in  general  they  had  the  itch,  and  other  eruptive  dis- 
orders." The  public  money  was  thus  shown  to  be  expended  "  for  the 
purpose  of  imprisoning,  starving,  beating,  diseasing,  destroying  the 
natural  affections,  and  letting  the  understanding  run  to  waste,  of  about 
1400  poor  children  annually,  under  the  pretence  of  instructing  and  con- 
verting the  young  generation." 

The  Irish  Parliament  contented  itself  with  thus  ascertaining  the  evils, 
and  continued  to  vote  the  public  money  to  the  society  without  making 
any  provision  for  their  prevention  ;  so  that  at  the  period  of  the  legisla- 
tive union  the  schools  continued  in  the  same  condition  of  neglect  and 
disorder,  although  the  yearly  expenditure  had  increased  to  20,000/. 
From  that  time  to  1825  the  Im})erial  Parliament  voted  for  the  charter 
schools  of  Ireland,  sums  amounting  to  675,707/.  in  addition  to  other 
sources  of  income,  and  the  expenditure  during  those  twenty-five  years 
amounted  to  884,739/.,  for  which  sum  they  maintained  on  the  average 
thirty-five  schools  and  1870  children,  so  that  the  yearly  cost  of  each 
school  was  1000/.,  and  of  each  scholar  18/.  18^.  In  1824,  when  the 
attention  of  a  parliamentary  commission  was  directed  to  the  subject, 
there  were  found  only  twenty-four  boarding-schools,  with  about  1700 
scholars.  In  the  course  of  that  year  500  infants  from  the  P'oundling 
Hospital,  an  institution  supported  by  parliamentary  grants,  were  trans- 
ferred to  the  charter  schools.* 

Notwithstanding  the  extravagant  outlay  for  these  charter  schools, 
the  advantages  derived  from  them  were  exceedingly  small,  if  indeed 
they  w'ere  productive  of  any  advantage  whatever.  This  remark  is  fully 
warranted  by  the  following  extract  from  the  First  Report  of  the  Com- 
missioners for  Inquiring  concerning  Education  in  Ireland,  presented  to 
Parliament  in  1825  : — 

"  We  are  convinced  that  if  a  thousand  children,  educated  in  charter 
schools,  were  to  l)e  compared  with  an  equal  number  who  had  remained 
in  apparently  wretched  cabins  inhabited  by  their  parents,  but  who  had 