


698  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  tii. 

Upon  the  whole,  if  the  progress  made  towards  the  systematic  educa- 
tion of  the  entire  people  be  not  so  great  as  is  desirable,  we  must 
acknowledge  it  to  be  as  much  as  could  reasonably  be  looked  for  in  the 
short  time  that  has  elapsed  since  the  subject  has  been  taken  under  the 
charge  of  the  Grovernment,  while  it  is  such  as  justifies  the  most  sanguine 
hopes  for  the  future. 

A  plan  has  been  adopted  by  the  Registrar- General  of  Births,  Deaths, 
and  Marriages  in  England  and  Wales,  whereby  the  marriage  registers 
are  made  available  as  a  test  of  the  proportion  of  the  people  to  whom 
instruction  has  been  imparted,  so  far,  at  least,  as  the  ability  to  write 
affords  such  a  test.  In  the  year  ending  30th  June,  1839,  returns 
were  first  made  of  the  number  of  persons  wdio,  from  the  want  of  this 
degree  of  instruction,  have  affixed  marks  instead  of  signatures  to  the 
registers.  In  the  report  made  by  Mr.  Lister  in  1840,  he  draws  atten- 
tion to  this  plan  by  the  following  remarks : — 

"  Almost  every  raari'iage  is  duly  registered,  and  every  register  of 
marriage  is  signed  by  the  parties  married  ;  those  who  are  able  writing 
their  names,  and  those  who  are  unable,  or  who  write  very  imperfectly, 
making  their  marks.  Therefore,  an  enumeration  of  the  instances  in 
which  the  mark  has  been  made  will  show  the  proportion  among  those 
married  who  either  cannot  write  at  all,  or  write  very  imperfectly. 

"  It  may  be  said  in  favour  of  this  criterion,  that  it  is  free  from  the 
disadvantage  of  selection,  including  alike  every  class  and  condition,  and 
every  age,  except  children  and  very  old  persons.  It  must  at  the  same 
time  be  remembered,  that  although  a  fair  average  is  thus  afforded,  the 
portion  of  the  whole  population  exhibited  in  the  yearly  returns  of 
marriages  is  small.  It  appears  that  there  are  usually  about  seven  or 
eight  marriages  to  every  1000  of  the  population.  If,  therefore,  it  be 
assumed  that  persons  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  sixty-five 
constitute  half  the  population  (which  the  enumeration  of  ages  in  1821 
shows  to  be  very  nearly  the  case),  it  will  follow  that  of  those  who  may 
be  considered  the  marriageable  portion  of  the  community,  about  30 
in  every  1000  (or  three  per  cent.)  are  married  yearly.  The  portion, 
therefore,  whose  signatures  appear  on  the  marriage  registers  of  a  single 
year  is  sufficiently  small  to  be  easily  affected  by  accidental  circum- 
stances ;  and  it  cannot  safely  be  asserted  that  the  30  in  1000,  from 
whose  signatures  we  would  draw  an  inference  respecting  the  other  970, 
may  not  happen  to  consist  of  more  than  the  proportionate  number  of 
uneducated  persons.  It  must  not,  therefore,  be  hastily  assumed,  upon 
the  evidence  aflTorded  by  the  returns  of  a  single  year,  that  the  inhabit- 
ants of  any  particular  county  or  district  are  less  educated  than  their 
neighbours.  The  experiment  must  be  repeated  often,  and  be  attended 
with  similar  results,  before  this  inference  can  be  drawn  with  safety  ;  and 
it  is  only  when  returns  of  the  same  description,  given  for  several  sue- 