

Under  this  Act  a  Treasury  Order  was  issued  on  the  12th  of  Novem- 
ber, 1839,  directing  that  all  letters  should  be  charged  by  weight  instead 
of  according  to  the  number  of  sheets  or  of  inclosures,  as  was  practised 
under  the  former  law,  and  directing  that  on  and  after  the  5th  of  Decem- 
ber in  that  year  the  single  postage  rates  between  places  in  the  United 
Kingdom  which  exceeded  fourpence  should  be  reduced  to  that  uniform 
rate  ;  on  the  10th  of  January,  1840,  the  uniform  rate  of  one  penny  per 
half-ounce  came  into  general  operation,  and  on  the  6th  of  May  follow- 
ing pre-pay ment  by  the  use  of  stamps  was  begun. 

In  estimating  the  probable  results  of  his  plans,  Mr.  Hill  assumed 
that  the  reduction  of  the  existing  rates  to  one  uniform  charge  of  a  penny 
per  half-ounce  would  put  an  entire  stop  to  the  contraband  conveyance 
of  letters,  which  was  carried  on  to  an  enormous  amount,  and  that  it 
would  produce  a  great  extension  of  the  actual  correspondence  ;  so  great, 
indeed,  as  in  a  few  years  to  restore  the  gross  revenue  of  the  Post-office 
to  the  amount  which  it  had  reached  under  the  old  system. 

The  great  extent  to  which  the  illicit  conveyance  of  letters  had  ex- 
tended was  clearly  brought  out  in  evidence  before  the  committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons.  As  one  instance,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  a  bag, 
containing  eleven  hundred  letters,  was  seized  in  a  carrier's  warehouse ; 
but  if  direct  evidence  of  this  fraudulent  practice  had  been  wanting,  the 
fact  of  its  existence  might  have  been  inferred  from  the  condition  of  the 


CIIA1-.  v.]  I'DSTAGK,  ET(.'.  711 

Post-oillcc  revenue,  wliieli  had  continued  nearly  stationary  durino;  a  great 
number  of  years,  while  the  population  had  been  rapidly  increasing,  and 
the  manufacturing  and  conmiercial  transactions  of  the  country  had  been 
making  gigantic  strides.  Such  a  reduction  of  the  rates  of  postage  as 
that  advocated  and  afterwards  ado])ted,  would  at  once  put  an  end  to  the 
illicit  conveyance  of  letters  as  a  trade,  and  cause  the  whole  correspond- 
{>nce  of  the  country  to  pass  through  the  Post-office,  Thisin  itself  would 
cause  a  large  increase  of  business,  without  reckoning  that  one  letter 
additional  should  be  written  because  of  the  cheapness  of  conveyance. 
But  all  experience  in  analogous  cases  gave  assurance  that  a  progressive 
and  very  great  increase  would  follow  from  such  a  wholesale  abatement  in 
the  charge  as  that  advocated.  It  was  shown  by  Mr.  Hill  that  a  sixfold 
increase  in  the  number  of  letters  sent  by  the  post  would  yield  as  laro-e 
a  revenue  to  the  State  as  the  highest  rates  charged ;  and  some  persons 
have  charged  that  gentleman  with  having  been  grossly  deceived  in  his 
expectations,  because,  in  two  years  from  its  adoption,  the  low  rate  of 
charge  did  not  produce  a  multiplication  of  correspondence  to  that 
amount.  It  is  not  convenient  or  necessary  to  go  into  an  examination 
of  the  circumstances  attending  this  branch  of  the  public  revenue  in 
order  to  obtain  grounds  for  adopting,  or  otherwise,  the  opinion  that  a 
sixfold  increase  would  so  immediately  follow  upon  the  change  of  system. 
Nothing  published  by  Mr.  Hill  justifies  us  in  charging  such  an  error 
against  him,  and  it  is  injustice  to  him  that  the  reader's  attention  is  re- 
quested to  the  following  extract  from  his  pam])hlet  upon  this  branch  of 
the  subject : — 