


England  and  Wales 

Scotland 

Ireland    .... 


Number 

or 

Papers. 


NLMBER  OF  STAMPS. 


392 

94 

117 


603 


Penny. 


Halfpenny. 


66,159,502 
6,288,205 
6,345,227 


10,309,2a3 

205,000 

38,843 


78,792,934         10,553,076 


76,468,735 
6,493,205 
6,384,070 


89,-346,010 


There  is  another  subject  intimately  connected  with  the  moral  progress 
of  the  United  Kingdom  which  it  would  be  desirable  to  investigate,  if 
any  method  could  be  adopted  for  that  purpose,  and  whereby  it  could  be 
treated  in  a  manner  analogous  to  that  hitherto  pursued  with  other 
subjects  in  these  pages.  That  branch  comprises  the  progress  made  in 
science,  literature,  and  the  arts.  It  is  plain,  however,  that  there  are 
no  recognised  standards  or  positions  from  which  that  progress  can  be 
measured,  and  that  any  opinion  that  might  be  expressed  regarding  it 
must  convey  only  the  views  of  an  individual,  unsupported  by  facts  that 
would  command  general  assent. 

No  one  who  has  been  a  careful  observer  of  what  has  been  and  is 
passing  around  him  will  for  a  moment  question  that  very  great  progress 
has  been  made  by  our  country  during  the  present  century  in  all  the 
various  branches  of  human  discovery  and  acquirement ;  but  the  precise 
amount  or  the  comparative  value  of  that  progress  cannot  possibly  be 
measured  by  the  advances  made  in  former  periods,  and  which  them- 
selves are  equally  without  a  standard  or  measure  of  comparison.  If, 
however,  this  difficulty  could  be  surmounted,  is  it  not  probable  that  we 
should  find — regard  being  had  to  the  superior  facilities  afforded  to  each 
succeeding  age  through  the  labours  of  its  precursors — that  the  efforts 
of  the  human  mind,  and  the  success  attending  those  efforts,  have  been 
much  the  same  at  all  periods ;  and  that,  consequently,  if  we  have  pro- 
fited as  well  of  our  opportunities  as  our  fathers  did  of  those  bequeathed 
to  them,  we  must  have  made  greater  and  more  rapid  strides  than  any 
who  have  gone  before  us  in  the  walks  of  science  and  all  other  branches 
of  intellectual  progress,  whereby  we  shall  have  prepared  the  way  for  a 
still  more  rapid  advance  on  the  part  of  those  who  will  succeed  us  ? 

If  this  reason  for  avoiding  the  discussion  should  not  be  considered 
satisfactory,  it  may  be  further  urged  that  the  subject  does  not  admit  of 
being  properly  treated  within  the  limited  space  that  could  be  devoted  to 
it  in  this  work  ;  a  large  volume,  indeed,  would  not  suffice  to  do  justice  to 
the  question. 


720  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 


SECTION  VJII. 
COLONIES  AND  FOREIGN  DEPENDENCIES. 


CHAPTER  I. 

ADVANTAGES  OF  COLONIES. 

Erroneous  Views  entertained  on  the  Subject — Whence  arising  —  Restrictive  Colonial 
Sj'stem  ;  Mischief  resulting  from  it — Advantages  of  granting  Commercial  Freedom  to 
Coionies — Field  for  profitable  Enterprise  ctfered  by  Colonies — Experience  necessary  for 
the  prudent  Government  of  Colonies — Frequent  Changes  of  Ministers  unfavourable  to 
this  end^Suggestions  for  establishing  a  permanent  Colonial  Council  under  the  Secretary 
of  State — Analogy  of  such  a  Plan  with  that  pursued  by  the  Government  of  India- 
Political  advantages  of  possessing  Colonies— Negative  Advantages  following  from  such 
possession. 