

Since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  the  Legislature 
has  sanctioned  the  plans  then  in  agitation  for  the  adoption  of  a  low  and 
uniform  rate  of  postage  upon  letters  passing  from  one  part  to  another  of 
the  United  Kingdom. 

Those  plans,  suggested  and  enforced  by  Mr.  Rowland  Hill  with  a 
high  degree  of  energy  and  ability,  were  at  first  received  by  the  public  as 
amusing  speculations,  but  little  likely  to  be  carried  into  practice.  The 
proposal  that  the  Government  should,  for  the  small  charge  of  a  penny, 
convey  a  letter  from  Penzance  to  the  Orkneys,  seemed,  before  the  matter 
was  fully  investigated,  and  its  practicability  demonstrated,  to  be  most 
unreasonable.  The  public  had  grown  up  in  the  belief  that  the  charge  for 
the  transmisssion  of  a  letter  was  fairly  required  as  payment  for  a  service 
performed  at  an  infinitely  cheaper  rate  than  would  defray  the  expense 
of  transmission  and  distribution,  if  undertaken  by  the  individual  writer. 
In  proportion,  however,  as  the  subject  was  examined,  and  as  Mr.  Hill's 
calculations  were  tested,  this  view  of  the  case  was  abandoned.  It 
appeared  that  the  actual  expense  to  the  Government  for  conveying  each 
letter  between  the  most  distant  points  of  the  kingdom  was  only  a  irac- 
tional  part  of  a  farthing ;  and  that  to  charge,  as  in  many  cases  was 
done,  more  than  480  times  the  actual  cost,  was  equivalent  to  the 
imposition  of  a  heavy  tax  upon  communications  of  all  kinds,  whether 
carried  on  for  purposes  of  business,  or  for  gratifying  the  sympathies  of 
family  afiection  and  friendship.      It  was  well  said  by  one  of  the  advo- 


710  ,  I'llUUKESS  UF  THE  NATION.  [siic.  vii. 

cates  of  "  postage  reform,"  that  "  if  a  law  were  passed  forbidding  parents 
to  speak  to  their  children  till  they  had  paid  sixpence  to  Government  for 
permission,  the  wickedness  would  be  so  palpable  that  there  would  be  an 
end  to  the  tax,  in  that  form  of  exaction,  in  twenty- four  hours.  Yet  what 
difference  is  there  in  principle  when  parents  are  prohibited  from  writing 
to  their  children,  and  children  to  their  parents,  unless  they  pay  that  tax 
under  the  name  of  postage  ?" 

In  a  short  time  from  the  first  publication  of  Mr.  Hill's  proposals,  their 
advantages  and  justice  were  made  so  apparent  that  numerous  petitions 
in  their  favour  were  presented  to  Parliament,  and  a  committee,  consist- 
ing of  some  of  the  most  influential  bankers,  merchants,  and  traders  in 
London,  was  formed  in  order  to. assist  in  procuring  their  adoption.  The 
matter  was  shortly  after  taken  up  by  the  House  of  Commons,  and  a 
committee  appointed  for  its  consideration  recommended  a  partial  adop- 
tion of  the  scheme.  Such,  however,  was  the  force  of  public  opinion  that 
the  Government  was  carried  beyond  the  recommendation  of  this  com- 
mittee, and  in  the  month  of  August,  1839,  an  Act  was  passed  sanction- 
ing the  reduction  of  the  rates  of  inland  postage  to  one  uniform  rate  of 
a  penny  on  every  letter  of  a  given  weight,  with  a  proportionate  increase 
for  greater  weights,  and  giving  authority  to  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury 
to  carry  this  change  into  effect  by  such  steps  as  they  should  think 
advisable. 