

If  called  upon  to  declare  the  circumstance  in  the  condition  of  England 
which,  more  than  all  other  things,  makes  her  the  envy  of  surrounding 
nations,  it  would  be  to  her  colonial  possessions  that  we  must  attribute 
that  feeling.  In  the  eyes  of  foreigners  those  possessions  are  at  once  the 
evidence  of  our  power  and  the  surest  indicant  of  its  increase.  A  very 
different  estimate  of  their  importance  is,  however,  made  by  many  among 
ourselves.  How  often  do  we  hear  the  value  of  those  possessions  depre- 
ciated ;  nay,  how  common  is  it  to  be  told  that  England  would  be  more 
prosperous  and  happy  without  colonies  ! 

Nor  is  this  doctrine  confined  to  the  common  herd  of  society  ;  it  Is  put 
forth  from  time  to  time  by  men  who  would  teach  us  by  their  writings, 
and  is  occasionally  heard  even  within  the  walls  of  the  Houses  of  Parlia- 
ment, where,  so  often  as  some  real  or  alleged  act  of  mismanagement  or 
extravagance  in  our  colonial  administration  is  brought  forward,  the 
occasion  is  used  for  displaying  to  the  world  how  small  a  portion  of  the 
science  of  government  may  be  possessed  by  men  who  take  upon  them- 
selves one  of  the  highest  functions  of  society — that  of  making  laws  for 
its  regulation.     "  Colonies  are  mismanaged — therefore  they  are  evils. 


ciiAr.  i]  COLONIES.  721 

Tlioy  are  the  source  of  ceaseless  ex})ense — therefore  it  would  he  wise  to 
rid  ourselves  of  the  incumhrance  !"  Such  has  heeu  the  cry  from  time 
to  time,  and  more  or  less  at  all  times,  of  men  who,  while  they  put  them- 
selves forward  as  heing  competent  to  assist  in  the  government  of  a 
nation,  are  unable  to  discern  the  difference  between  use  and  abuse,  or 
to  see  that  in  politics  as  well  as  in  all  other  branches  of  human  concerns, 
everything,  however  useful  or  even  necessary  to  hap])iness,  may  be  con- 
verted into  an  injury  by  our  unwise  mode  of  dealing  with  it. 

It  would  form  a  very  inconclusive  argument  against  the  value  of 
colonies  and  foreign  possessions,  that  under  bad  or  defective  systems  of 
government  they  had  always  been  productive  of  evil.  The  like  objec- 
tion might  as  reasonably  be  made  against  every  personal  and  every 
national  blessing.  "Wealth  may  be  abused,  intellectual  gifts  may  be 
perverted,  station  and  power  may  be  prostituted  to  serve  the  most 
unrighteous  purposes,  and  we  all  have  seen  these  things  happen  ;  but  do 
we  thence  find  occasion  to  denounce  the  pernicious  nature  of  riches,  or 
mental  endowments,  or  personal  and  national  influence,  and  to  renounce 
them,  together  with  the  good  they  are  calculated  to  yield  ?  It  would 
seem  to  require  but  one  moment's  reflection  to  be  convinced  that 
colonial  possessions  must  be  capable  of  adding  to  the  wealth,  the  power, 
and  the  resources  of  the  parent  State,  if  the  right  means  for  making 
them  so  shall  be  adopted  ;  and  that  if,  on  the  contrary,  they  have  tended 
to  our  weakness  and  impoverishment,  these  consequences  are  attribut- 
able not  to  anything  inherent  in  the  nature  of  those  possessions,  but  to 
unwise  legislation  or  to  unjust  government. 