

One  principal  advantage  which  a  State  may  fairly  and  properly  derive 
from  colonial  possessions  is  the  field  which  they  offer  for  profitable  enter- 
prise to  its  subjects.  AVithout  admitting  that  uufjer  an  enlightened 
system  of  legislation  there  would  be  an  imperative  necessity  for  sending 
forth  our  additional  numbers,  the  advantage  of  their  thus  going  forth 


CHAP.  I.]  COLONIES.  725 

cannot  be  denied  ;  nor  will  it  be  questioned  that  the  inducements  to  that 
step  would  be  far  greater  than  they  ever  yet  have  been,  if,  in  leaving 
the  home  of  their  birth  for  that  of  their  adojjtion,  they  were  not  made 
practically  to  feel  that  they  forfeit  some  of  their  ])rivileges  as  citizens, 
and  come  in  some  sort  to  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  foreigners  or  strangers. 
One  of  the  wisest  sentiments  ever  uttered  in  Parliament  on  the  subject 
of  the  government  of  colonies,  was  that  delivered  in  the  session  of  1842 
by  Sir  Robert  Peel,  to  the  effect  that  colonies  should  as  far  as  possible 
1)0  treated  as  though  they  were  integral  parts  of  the  kingdom.  If  this 
sentiment  was  carried  into  practice,  no  State  need  ever  fear  that  its  colo- 
nies would  seek  to  shake  off  its  supremacy  ;  such  a  course  would  then 
be  quite  as  improbable  as  that  the  parent  State  itself  should  seek  the 
dismemberment. 

To  bring  about  this  state  of  things  something  more  is  wanted  than 
enlightened  opinions.  It  is  necessary,  also,  that  the  government  of  the 
colonies  should  be  administered  by  men  who  have  a  perfect  knowledge  of 
their  condition,  and  wants,  and  capabilities.  Unfortunately  the  system 
of  government  established  in  England  is  adverse  to  this  end.  Any  man, 
however  high  his  intellectual  capacity,  and  however  extensive  his  attain- 
ments, would  be  unable  to  fulfil  those  conditions  until  he  should  have 
acquired  the  experience  of  years  devoted  to  the  task  ;  and  it  has  so  hap- 
pened that,  with  the  exception  of  the  analogous  office  of  President  of 
the  Board  of  Control,  the  ministry  of  the  colonies  has,  during  the  pre- 
sent century,  been  changed  more  frequently  than  any  other  of  the  great 
offices  of  state.  There  were  during  forty  years  eighteen  Secretaries  of 
State  for  this  department,  one  of  whom.  Earl  Bathurst,  held  the  seals  for 
fifteen  years,  so  that  the  average  tenure  of  the  remaining  seventeen  was 
under  eighteen  months.  On  the  occurrence  of  each  of  these  changes 
the  whole  system  of  our  colonial  policy  has  been  liable  to  alteration  ; 
although,  if  there  be  one  department  of  Government  which  more  than 
any  other  requires  to  be  conducted  upon  fixed  principles,  assuredly  it 
must  be  that  to  which  are  confided  the  variety  of  interests  involved  m 
the  colonial  dependencies  of  the  kingdom,  the  inhabitants  of  which  have 
no  voice  in  the  national  councils. 