

The  advantages,  to  a  State  possessing  colonies,  which  have  hitherto 
been  enumerated,  are  all  of  an  economical  description.  There  remain 
to  be  noticed  the  political  advantages  which  they  offer.  These  are  of 
two  kinds — positive  and  negative.  The  positive  advantages  obviously 
reside  in  the  additions  which  such  possessions  make  to  the  power  and 
resources  of  the  parent  State  ;  and  the  capacity  for  aftbrding  those  addi- 
tions never  can  be  fully  developed  except  under  an  enlightened  system 
of  government.  So  long  as,  with  the  design  of  profiting  some  particular 
interests  at  home,  their  trade  shall  be  shackled,  and  the  direction  of 
their  industry  controlled ;  so  long  as  their  offices  of  emolument  and 
honour  shall  be  filled  with  a  view  to  party  patronage,  and  without  duly 
considering  the  fitness  of  persons  appointed  ;  and  so  long  as  the  ma- 
nagement of  their  highest  interests  shall  be  intrusted  to  hands  continually 
changing,  we  may  be  certain  that  colonies  will  not  iulfil  the  beneficial 
ends  which  they  are  calculated  to  secure.  But  when  the  sentiment 
already  alluded  to,  of  placing  dependencies  upon  a  footing  of  perfect 


ciiAi'.  I.]  COLONIKS.  727 

equality  with  the  ])arcnt  country,  shall  he  earned  into  ])ractical  oj)cration  ; 
when  Canada  and  Jamaica  shall,  in  every  way  that  is  possible,  he  con- 
sidered and  treated  as  Yorkshire  or  Lancashire  is  treated,  they  will  he 
placed  in  tiie  condition  equally  with  those  counties,  of  adding  to  our 
l)ower.  Nor  does  there  seem  to  be  any  insurmountable  difficulty  to  the 
adoption  of  such  a  course.  The  chief  step  towards  its  accom})li8hment 
will  he  attained  whenever  its  wisdom  shall  be  practically  recognised  by 
the  legislative  and  the  executive  Government — the  will  to  admit  our 
dependencies  to  a  full  participation  of  the  privileges,  commercial  and 
political,  which  are  enjoyed  by  the  inhabitants  of  these  islands,  must  at 
once  bind  our  colonists  to  us  by  the  strongest  of  all  ties,  and  lead  to 
their  increasing  prosperity.  The  facilities  for  such  a  system  are  daily 
becoming  greater  through  the  extension  of  steam  navigation,  whereby 
distance  is  practically  and  importantly  lessened  for  every  purpose  of 
moral,  political,  and  commercial  intercourse. 

The  negative  advantages  offered  to  a  State  by  the  possession  of  its 
colonies  consist  in  this — that  their  power  and  resources  cannot  be  ren- 
dered available  against  it.  This  will  be  fully  understood  if  we  reflect 
upon  the  consequences  that  might  result  to  England  from  the  acquisition 
by  the  United  States  of  America  of  the  provinces  of  Nova  Scotia  and 
New  Brunswick.  At  present  these  possessions  yield  no  direct  revenue  to 
the  parent  State  ;  they  provide,  it  is  true,  a  few  posts  of  profit,  the 
bestowal  of  which  may  in  a  trifling  degree  be  of  advantage  to  the  minister 
of  the  day  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  one  of  them  has  been  in  great  part 
the  cause  of  an  ill-judged  fiscal  preference  which  has  long  acted  to  our 
injury  by  limiting  our  exchanges  w'ith  the  timber-producing  countries  of 
Europe,  wdiile  the  premium  thus  offered  to  the  lumberers  of  New 
Brunswdck  has  retarded  the  development  of  its  resources  in  more  im- 
portant branches  of  industry.  It  can  hardly  be  said  that  England  has 
hitherto  drawn  any  positwe  advantages  from  the  possession  of  these  pro- 
vinces, if  we  place  out  of  view  the  convenience  afforded  during  periods 
of  war  by  the  harbour  of  Halifax  ;  but  the  negative  advantages  from 
them  are  evident  if  we  consider  that  the  United  States  of  America  are 
greatly  deficient  in  good  harbours  on  the  Atlantic  coast,  while  Nova 
Scotia  possesses,  in  addition  to  the  magnificent  harbour  of  Halifax, 
eleven  ports  between  it  and  Cape  Canso,  with  sufficient  depth  of  water 
for  the  largest  ships  of  war,  besides  fourteen  other  harbours  capable  of 
receiving  merchant  vessels ;  and  although  New  Brunswick  is  not  equally 
well  provided  in  this  respect,  its  coast  funiishes  several  safe  and  capa- 
cious harbours,  including  those  of  St.  John  and  Miramichi,  with  the 
further  advantage  of  their  greater  proximity  to  Europe.  In  the  unhajjpy 
event  of  a  war  breaking  out  between  the  two  countries,  the  possession 
of  these  harbours  by  America  v  ould  furnish  her  with  means  of  annoy- 
ance to  our  counncrce  from  national   vessels  and  privateers,  the  mag- 