

Under  such  a  system  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  anvthino- 
like  consistency  of  action.  At  the  same  time  it  is  necessary,  in  order 
to  preserve  harmony  between  the  several  branches  of  the  general  govern- 
ment of  the  country,  that  the  colonial  minister  should  be  a  member  of 
the  cabinet,  and  therefore  subject  to  removal  from  office.  How  then  is 
it  possible  to  find  a  remedy  for  the  evil  ?  A  plan  to  this  end  has  been 
proposed,  which  seems  to  ofter  considerable  hope  of  success  ;  it  is  this: — 

Let  there  be  appointed  a  permanent  colonial  council,  the  members  of 
which  body  shall  be  chosen,  not  from  ]>arty  considerations,  but  for  their 
knowledge  of  colonial  interests  and  their  acquaintance  with  the  science 


726  niOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

of  Government.  The  general  accordanee  of  tliis  counell  with  the  policy 
of  the  administration  would  be  secured  by  the  nomination  of  a  chief 
councillor,  who  might,  as  now,  have  the  dignity  of  a  Secretary  of  State 
and  a  seat  in  the  cabinet,  while  the  colonists  would  be  secured  against 
any  capricious  or  ill-considered  changes  on  his  part  by  the  interposition 
of  a  majority  of  the  council.  It  would  add  greatly  to  the  efficiency  of 
this  body,  and  in  other  ways  would  be  advantageous,  if  a  large  propor- 
tion of  the  members  of  the  council  should  be  chosen  from  among  persons 
whose  fitness  for  performing  the  duties  of  the  office  has  been  evinced  by 
ability  previously  shown  in  the  more  important  of  our  colonies.  A  body 
thus  constituted  would  prove  a  bond  of  union  between  the  colonies  and 
the  parent  State,  through  personal  confidence  on  tlie  one  hand  and  local 
attachments  on  the  other.  A  future  seat  in  this  council  would  prove  an 
object  of  honourable  ambition  ;  and  for  each  one  who  could  succeed  in  its 
attainment  there  would  be  many  led  by  hope  to  undertake  studies  and 
to  make  exei'tions  whereby  to  prove  their  fitness  for  the  honour,  and  who 
could  expect  to  succeed  only  through  the  good  opinion  of  their  brother 
colonists  and  the  home  government,  obtained  as  the  consequence  of 
talent  and  jniblic  usefulness. 

It  can  hardly  be  said  that  this  plan  is  without  a  precedent  in  our  own 
time  and  country.  The  government  of  the  affairs  of  our  Indian  empire 
by  a  Court  of  Directors,  consisting  in  great  part  of  military  men  and 
civilians,  whose  fitness  for  the  office  has  been  gained  by  experience  in 
the  country  they  are  called  on  to  govern,  controlled  too  by  a  responsible 
minister  of  the  Crown,  is  a  case  as  nearly  analogous  as  possible  to  that 
under  consideration  ;  and  the  success  which  has  generally  attended  their 
government  should  give  hope  for  the  favourable  working  of  a  permanent 
colonial  council. 