

*  '  History  ofWcst  Indies,'  vol.  ii.,  p.  565. 


citvi'.  i]  COLOXLES.  723 

tliosc!  traders  luiglit  (ind  it  convonicnt  to  buy, — for  they  did  not  find  it 
convenient  to  buy  every  part  of  it.  Some  ])art.s  of  it  imported  into 
England  might  have  interfered  with  some  of  the  trades  which  they 
themselves  carried  on  at  home.  Those  particulai-  parts  of  it,  therefore, 
they  were  willing  that  the  colonists  should  sell  where  they  could — the 
further  oft*  the  better ;  and  upon  that  account  proposed  that  their  market 
should  be  confined  to  the  countries  south  of  Cape  Finisterre.  A  clause 
in  the  famous  Act  of  Navigatioo  established  this  truly  shopkee])er  pro- 
posal into  a  law. 

"  The  maintenance  of  this  monopoly  has  hitherto  been  the  principal, 
or,  more  properly,  perhaps,  the  sole  end  and  purpose  of  the  dominion 
wliich  Great  Britain  assumes  over  her  colonies.  In  the  exclusive  trade, 
it  is  supposed,  consists  the  great  advantage  of  provinces  which  have 
never  yet  afforded  either  revenue  or  military  force  for  the  support  of 
the  civil  Government,  or  the  defence  of  the  mother-country.  The 
monopoly  is  the  principal  badge  of  their  dependency,  and  it  is  the  sole 
fruit  which  has  hitherto  been  gathered  from  that  dependency.  AVhat- 
ever  expense  Great  Britain  has  hitherto  laid  out  in  maintaining 
this  dependency,  has  really  been  laid  out  in  order  to  support  this 
monopoly."  * 

In  order  to  reconcile  our  colonists  to  the  "  badge  of  their  depen- 
dency "  thus  fastened  upon  them,  the  legislature  of  England  has  sought 
to  give  them  compensation  at  the  expense  of  the  producers  in  other 
countries  and  the  consumers  in  this,  by  means  of  differential  duties  that 
admitted  the  productions  of  our  colonics  at  lower  rates  than  the  same 
j)roductions  brought  from  other  quarters.  Every  real  benefit  thus  im- 
parted to  the  colonist  must  be  at  the  CNpense  of  the  people  at  home ; 
first,  because  of  the  higher  price  which  we  pay  for  the  colonial  articles, 
and  without  which  higher  price  there  could  manifestly  be  no  advantage 
to  the  colonist ;  and  further,  because  of  the  retaliatory  measures  to 
which  this  system  is  sure  to  give  rise  on  the  part  of  countries  whoso 
produce  is  thus  placed  at  disadvantage  in  our  markets,  and  which 
measures  of  retaliation  are  levelled,  not  at  the  trade  of  our  colonies, 
which  indeed  they  cannot  reach,  but  against  that  of  the  mother-country. 

The  amount  of  injury  sustained  from  this  last-named  cause  cannot 
well  be  made  the  subject  of  calculation  ;  but  some  idea  may  be  formed 
of  the  ruinous  effect  of  differential  duties  upon  the  expenditure  of  this 
nation ,  by  showing  the  result  produced  in  one  year  by  the  prohibitory 
duty  upon  a  single  article  of  colonial  production — sugar.  A  statement 
to  this  effect  will  be  found  in  this  volume  (page  547),  where  it  is 
shown  that  we  paid  for  the  quantity  of  sugar  used  in  1840  more  than 
5,000,000/.  sterling  beyond  what  would  have  been  paid  for  tlie  same 