

Under  the  influence  of  these  perverse  causes,  colonies  may  be,  and  too 
frecpiently  have  been  and  are,  sources  of  weakness  rather  than  of  strength 
to  the  parent  State ;  and  probably  to  no  country  have  they  been  so  in 
the  same  degree  as  they  have  been  to  England.  The  principal  cause 
of  this  fact  it  is  not  difficult  to  point  out.  Until  a  recent  period  the 
trade  with  our  dependencies  has  been  converted  into  a  close  monopoly 
in  favour  of  England  ;  and  although  various  "relaxations  were  from  time 
to  time  made  in  this  selfish  system,  it  was,  until  quite  recently,  sought  to 
retain  a  great  share  of  the  supposed  advantages  of  monopoly  by  means 
of  differential  duties  chargeable  in  the  colonies  against  the  productions 
and  manufactures  of  foreign  countries.  Many  years  have  not  passed 
since  the  ports  of  our  colonies  were  closed  against  all  ships  save  those 
under  the  British  flag,  while  the  ships  of  those  colonies  were  prohibited 
from  trading  with  any  foreign  country.  Bryan  Edwards,  in  his  '  His- 
tory of  the  West  Indies,'  thus  plainly  describes  the  system : — "  The 
leading  principle  of  colonization  in  all  the  maritime  States  of  Europe 
(Great  Britain  among  the  rest)  was  commercial  monopoly.  The  word 
monopohj  in  this  case  admitted  a  very  extensive  interpretation.  It  com- 
prehended the  monopoly  of  supply,  the  monopoly  of  colonial  produce,  and 

o    A 


722  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION,  [sec.  viii. 

the  monopoly  of  mauufaeturo.  By  tlie  first,  the  colonists  were  prohi- 
bited from  resorting  to  foreign  markets  for  the  supply  of  their  wants ; 
by  the  second  they  were  compelled  to  bring  their  chief  staple  commodities 
to  the  mother-country  alone  ;  and  by  the  third,  to  bring  them  to  her  in 
a  raw  or  unmanufactured  state,  that  her  own  manufacturers  might  secure 
to  themselves  all  the  advantages  arising  from  their  further  improvement. 
This  latter  principle  was  carried  so  far  in  the  colonial  system  of  Great 
Britain  as  to  induce  the  late  Earl  of  Chatham  to  declare,  in  Parliament, 
that  the  British  colonists  in  America  had  no  right  to  manufactiu'c  even 
a  nail  for  a  horse-shoe."* 

We  have  the  further  testimony  on  this  point  of  Adam  Smith,  who 
thus  describes  the  origin  of  this  spirit  of  monopoly  with  regard  to  the 
trade  with  our  colonies : — 

"  To  found  a  great  empire  for  the  sole  purpose  of  raising  up  a  people 
of  customers  may  at  first  sight  appear  a  project  fit  only  for  a  nation  of 
shopkeepers.  It  is,  however,  a  project  altogether  unfit  for  a  nation  of  shop- 
keepers ;  but  extremely  fit  for  a  nation  whose  Government  is  influenced 
by  shopkeepers.  Such  statesmen,  and  such  statesmen  only,  are  capable 
of  fancying  that  they  will  find  some  advantage  in  employing  the  blood 
and  treasure  of  their  fellow-citizens  to  found  and  maintain  such  an 
empire.  Say  to  a  shopkeeper,  buy  me  a  good  estate,  and  I  shall  always 
buy  my  clothes  at  your  shop,  even  though  I  should  pay  somewhat 
dearer  than  what  I  can  have  them  for  at  other  shops,  and  you  will  not 
find  him  very  forward  to  embrace  your  proposal.  But  should  any  other 
person  buy  you  such  an  estate,  the  shopkeeper  will  be  much  obliged  to 
your  benefactor  if  he  would  enjoin  you  to  buy  all  your  clothes  at  his 
shop.  England  purchased  from  some  of  her  subjects  who  found  them- 
selves uneasy  at  home  a  great  estate  in  a  distant  country.  The  price, 
indeed,  was  very  small,  and  amounted  to  little  more  than  the  expense  of 
the  different  equipments  wliich  made  the  first  discovery,  reconnoitered 
the  coast,  and  took  a  fictitijous  possession  of  the  country.  The  land  was 
good,  and  of  great  extent,  and  the  cultivators  having  plenty  of  good 
ground  to  work  upon,  and  being  for  some  time  at  liberty  to  sell  their 
produce  where  they  pleased,  became  in  the  course  of  little  more  than 
thirty  or  forty  years  (between  1620  and  1660)  so  numerous  and  thriving 
a  people  that  the  shopkeepers  and  othi3r  traders  of  England  wished  to 
secure  to  themselves  the  monopoly  of  their  custom.  Without  pretending, 
therefore,  that  they  had  paid  any  part  of  the  original  purchase-money, 
or  of  the  subsequent  expenses  of  improvement,  they  petitioned  the  Par- 
liament that  the  cultivators  of  America  might  for  the  future  be  confined 
to  their  shop ;  first,  for  buying  all  the  goods  which  they  wanted  from 
Europe  ;  and  secondly,  for  selling  all  such  parts  of  tbeir  own  produce  as 