

♦  '  Wealth  of  Nations,'  book  iv.,  chap.  Tii. 

r,  A  2 


724  PllOGIlESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vm. 

quantity,  irrespective  of  duties,  by  any  other  people  of  Europe.  The 
total  value  of  our  manufactures  exported  in  that  year  to  our  sugar 
colonies  was  under  4,000,000/.,  so  that  the  nation  would  have  gained  a 
million  of  money  in  that  one  year  by  following  the  true  principle  of  buy- 
ing in  the  cheapest  market,  even  though  we  had  made  the  sugar-growers 
a  present  of  all  the  goods  which  they  took  from  us. 

It  must  be  idle  to  suppose  that  colonists  depend  for  their  existence 
and  progress  upon  such  prefei-ences.  Unless  prevented  through  the  in- 
terference of  legislative  restrictions,  they  will  certainly  be  able  to  aj)ply 
their  industry  in  some  profitable  channel.  The  very  fact  of  their  exist- 
ence indicates  that  the  inhabitants  of  colonies  are  in  possession  of  advan- 
tages, whether  of  soil  or  climate,  greater  than  are  afforded  by  the  country 
whence  they  have  emigrated ;  and  it  nnist  be  reckoned  among  the  evils 
produced  by  differential  or  protective  duties,  that  they  divert  capital  and 
industry  from  more  profitable  into  less  profitable,  and  sometimes  even 
into  hurtful,  branches  of  employment. 

It  is  not  necessary  here  to  enlarge  upon  this  topic.  Enough  has  been 
said  to  show  that  it  is  not  by  means  of  commercial  restrictions  and 
monopolies  that  colonies  can  be  made  valuable.  Emancipate  your 
colonies  from  all  the  shackles  with  which  your  sliopheqnng  spirit  has 
loaded  them ;  let  them  be  free  to  adopt  such  commercial  regulations 
as  each  may  find  best  suited  to  its  circumstances,  and  you  may  then 
safely  proceed  to  emancipate  yourselves  from  the  countervailing  shackles 
you  lia ve  imposed  upon  your  own  commerce.  Thenceforward  your  trade 
with  your  foreign  possessions  will  be  truly  profitable  to  the  nation.  The 
settlers  with  whom  it  is  carried  on  will  have  taken  with  them,  or  will 
have  inherited  from  their  fathers,  a  taste  for  the  manufactures  of  the  old 
country ;  and  as  they  will  for  the  most  })art  be  unable  themselves  to 
produce  those  manufactures,  they  will  have  every  inducement  to  buy 
them  from  their  countrymen  rather  than  resort  to  foreign  markets  for  a 
supply.  That  England,  which  boasts  of  its  power  of  competing  success- 
fully with  the  whole  world  in  so  many  branches  of  manufacture,  should 
have  thought  it  necessary  to  force  her  goods  by  fiscal  regulations  upon 
people  who  had  already  the  strongest  inducements  to  trade  with  her, 
seems  siich  an  absurdity  that  one  is  at  a  loss  to  imagine  how  it  could  ever 
have  been  conceived.  Such  a  course  of  legislation  was  not  simply  use- 
less, it  was  positively  mischievous,  by  interfei'ing  with  the  natural  -rights 
of  the  colonists,  and  inducing  the  feeling  that  there  could  be  a  diversity 
of  interest  between  themselves  and  the  parent  country. 