

The  island  is  thickly  inhabited,  its  numbers  being  about  2200.  The 
natives  are  of  Frisian  descent,  and  are  a  fine  race  of  people.  The 
climate  is  as  mild  as  that  of  the  midland  counties  of  England,  and  the 
air  is  considered  healthy.  Within  the  last  few  years  many  invalids 
from  Germany,  Poland,  and  Russia,  have  resorted  to  it  for  the  sake  of 
its  baths,  which  have  acquired  some  degree  of  celebrity. 


3   B 


738  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viit. 


CHAPTER  Til. 

DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA. 

Origin  and  Progress  of  our  Indian  Empire — Circumstances  under  which  its  Growth  has 
occurred — War  of  Aggression  against  AtTghanistan  ;  its  sinister  consequences— Trading 
Monopoly  of  the  East  India  Companj';  its  Kelaxatiou  and  subsequent  Abandonment — 
Amount  of  Trade  between  England  and  India — Quantities  Imported  of  various  Articles 
of  Indian  Produce  —  Great  Commercial  Resources  of  India — Probability  of  obtaining 
Supplies  of  Products  liitherto  procured  from  the  Baltic  ;  "Wool,  Flax,  Tallow,  Oil-seeds — 
Shipping — Trade  of  Bengal ;  of  Madras ;  of  Bombay— Public  Revenues  and  Expenditure 
of  British  India— Public  Debt— Constitution  of  Anglo-Indian  Government— Board  of 
Control ;  its  unlimited  Power — Successive  Acquisitions  of  Territory  in  India— "Wealth 
drawn  Yearly  from  India  to  England.  Ceylon:  its  Position  and  Acquisition — Popula- 
tion— Increased  production  of  Cofi'ee.  Cocoa-nut  Tree  :  its  various  Products  and  their 
Advantages.  Cinnamon:  Monopoly  Abolished  —  Pearl  Fishery — Gems  and  Metals — 
Manufactures — Trade.  Mauritius:  Population — Sugar  Production — Trade  with  Eng- 
land and  other  Countries. 

The  origin  and  progress  of  the  British  Empire  in  India  is  altogether  a 
case  without  precedent  in  the  history  of  nations.  It  would  be  interesting 
in  a  high  degree,  could  we  here  trace  that  progress,  so  important  in  its 
consequences  to  our  country ;  but  a  sliglrt  sketch  of  its  more  remarkable 
features  is  all  that  can  be  offered  in  this  volume. 

This  eastern  empire — now  so  vast  in  its  extent  and  so  important  in 
all  its  circumstances,  both  social  and  political — originated  in  the  sub- 
scriptions, trifling  in  amount,  of  a  few  private  individuals,  which  were 
advanced  for  the  prosecution  of  a  mercantile  adventure.  This  event 
took  place  in  1599.  The  capital  then  subscribed  amounted  to  no  more 
than  30,000/.,  and  was  divided  into  101  shares.  At  the  end  of  the  fol- 
lowing year  the  adventurers  obtained  a  royal  charter,  constituting  them 
a  corporation  for  fifteen  years,  and  under  which  the  management  of  the 
joint-stock  was  confided  to  twenty-four  members  chosen  by  the  pro- 
prietors from  among  their  own  body,  this  committee  being  rene"vved  by  a 
fresh  election  every  year. 