

3  B  2 


740  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

In  1775  Benares  was  ceded  to  the  Company;  and  in  August,  1778, 
Chandernagore,  Masulipatam,  and  Carical,  were  taken  by  us  from  the 
French :  later  in  the  same  year  Pondicherry  also  surrendered  to  the 
English.  In  1780  possession  was  taken  of  Ahmedabad,  the  capital  of 
Guzerat,  and  a  great  part  of  the  country  of  the  jNIahrattas.  In  1782 
the  island  of  Salsette,  near  Bombay,  was  ceded  to  the  Company.  In 
1792  one-half  of  his  dominions  was  wrested  from  the  Rajah  of  Mysore, 
and  divided  by  Lord  Cornwallis  between  the  Company,  the  Nizam,  and 
the  Peishwa, — Malabar,  Dindigul,  Salem,  and  Baramahal  falling  to  the 
lot  of  the  former.  On  the  fall  of  Seringapatam  and  the  death  of  Tippoo 
Sultan,  in  1799,  the  remaining  Mysore  territories  were  divided  between 
the  Nizam  and  the  English  ;  the  southern  portion  was  taken  by  the 
Company,  whose  territory  was  thus  made  to  reach  from  shore  to  shore 
of  the  Deccan.  In  the  following  year  the  part  of  Mysore  ceded  to  the 
Nizam  came  by  treaty  into  our  possession.  Rohilcund  and  the  Lower 
Dooab  were  obtained  for  the  Company  from  the  Soubahdar  of  Oude  in 
1801,  and  in  1802  Furruckabad  was  ceded  to  us  by  its  ruler  on  receipt 
of  a  pension.  In  the  following  year  we  acquired  by  conquest  Alighur, 
Delhi,  Agra,  Ahmednuggur,  Boorhanpore,  Gawilghur,  Baroach,  Pow- 
anghur,  Manickpatam,  and  Kuttack ;  and  in  1805  we  acquired  by 
cession  some  districts  in  Guzerat.  Several  years  of  peace  then  occurred, 
and  there  are  no  further  conquests  to  record  until  1815,  when  we 
obtained  as  the  result  of  a  successful  war  with  the  Nepaulese,  the  pro- 
vinces of  Kumaon  and  Gurwahl,  with  a  territory,  called  the  Terrace,  at 
the  foot  of  the  Nepaul  hills.  In  1817  we  gained  from  the  Peishwa, 
Sau<Tur,  Huttah,  and  Darwar ;  and  from  the  Guickwar  we  obtained 
Ahmedabad,  the  capital  of  Guzerat.  In  1818  we  got  possession  of  the 
provinces  of  Kandeish,  Ajmere,  Poonah  and  North  Konkun,  and  the 
South  Mahratta  country;  and  in  1820  further  obtained  the  Southern 
Konkun.  Early  in  1824  war  commenced  between  the  English  and  the 
King  of  Ava  ;  and  at  its  termination  two  years  after,  we  were  confirmed 
in  the  possession  of  Arracan,  Assam,  Martaban,  Tarvy,  and  Mergui, 
with  the  islands  of  Cheduba  and  Ramree. 

By  tracing  on  the  map  these  various  acquisitions  of  territory,  it  will 
be  seen  that  nearly  the  whole  of  the  peninsula  of  Hindostan  has  fallen 
under  our  dominion.  Of  the  parts  which  are  not  in  our  immediate 
possession,  all  which  by  their  geographical  position  are  important  to  our 
security  are  virtually  ours,  their  rulers  being  under  British  protection, 
or,  in  other  words,  under  British  direction  and  control.  Our  power  is 
in  effect  "paramount  over  every  native  state  from  the  Indus  to  Cape 
Cormorin,  since  no  dispute  can  arise  among  any  of  those  states  which  we 
are  not  by  treaty  authorized  to  arbitrate." 