

The  growth  of  this  empire  has  occurred  not  only  without  the  design 
of  those  under  whose  rule  it  has  been  effected,  but  even  in  opposition  to 


CH.vr.  in.]  DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA.  741 

their  positive  and  oft-ropcated  injunctions  to  their  servants  in  India. 
The  most  strenuous  and  repeated  inhibition  of  all  measures  that  niiglit 
increase  the  territorial  possessions  of  the  East  India  Company  has,  on 
almost  every  occasion,  been  conveyed  to  its  servants  by  the  Court  of 
Directors.  In  1768  that  Court  enforced  the  necessity  for  confining  the 
boundaries  of  their  possessions  within  the  limits  of  the  provinces  of 
Bengal,  the  Jaghire  of  Madras,  and  the  island  of  Bombay.  "  If,"  they 
observed,  "  we  once  pass  these  bounds,  we  shall  be  led  from  one  acqui- 
sition to  another  till  we  shall  find  no  security  but  in  the  subjection  of 
the  whole,  which,  by  dividing  the  British  force,  would  lose  us  the  whole, 
and  end  in  our  extirpation  from  Ilindostan."  The  first  part  of  this 
prediction  has  been  fully  verified,  but  its  forebodings  of  evils  do  not 
appear  likely  to  be  accomplished,  so  long  as  we  shall  limit  our  desires 
to  the  possession  of  India  itself,  applying  ourselves  to  call  forth  its 
resources  by  means  fully  within  our  power,  and  if  we  shall  let  our  rule 
over  its  hundred  millions  of  people  be  strictly  in  accordance  with  the 
spirit  of  justice  and  benevolence.  With  the  exception  of  our  short  and 
successful  but  severe  contests  with  the  Ameers  of  Scinde  and  in  the 
Punjab,  India  has  been  internally  at  peace  during  the  unusually  long 
period  of  more  than  twenty  years,  and  should  have  been  allowed  to  reap 
the  advantages  growing  out  of  that  condition ;  for  by  no" employment  or 
perversion  of  words  can  it  be  made  to  appear  that  our  irruption  into 
Affghanistan,  midertaken  for  no  Indian  object,  and  prosecuted  without 
the  sanction  of  the  recognised  rulers  of  India — nay,  for  a  long  time,  even 
without  their  knowledge — was  an  Indian  war.  Unhappily,  however, 
India  has  to  bear  many  of  the  evils  of  that  mysterious  invasion.  Not 
the  least  among  those  evils  is  the  waste  of  the  Company's  resources, 
whereby  a  check  has  been  given  to  various  plans  for  improving  the 
communications,  and  calling  forth  the  natural  wealth  of  the  country, — 
objects  of  the  deepest  importance,  not  to  India  only  but  to  the  whole 
British  empire. 

Up  to  the  year  1814  the  East  India  Company  had  a  monopoly  of  the 
trade  with  India.  In  that  year,  on  the  renewal  of  its  charter,  this 
privilege  was  taken  away,  and  the  trade  was  thrown  open  to  the  indi- 
vidual enterprise  of  British  merchants.  The  trade  with  China  remained 
wholly  in  the  hands  of  the  Company  until  1833,  when  its  charter 
was  last  renewed,  and  the  Company  was  restricted  from  carrying  on, 
upon  its  own  account,  any  commercial  operations  Avhatever.  The 
result  of  these  relaxations  has  been  highly  advantageous  to  the  trade 
of  England,  as  will  appear  from  an  examination  of  the  following 
statement. 