

The  objects  of  the  Company  were  at  first  strictly  confined  to  com- 
mercial adventure,  for  the  more  eflfectual  prosecution  of  which  the  capital 
was  enlarged  from  time  to  time,  imtil  in  1618  it  amounted  to  two 
millions.  The  Company  had  obtained  in  1611  from  the  Mogul  per- 
mission to  establish  factories  at  Surat,  Ahmedabad,  Cambaya,  and 
Goga  ;  in  return  for  which  indulgence  it  agreed  to  pay  to  him  an  export 


CHAP,  iii.l  DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA.  739 

duty  of  3^  per  cent,  on  the  value  of  all  its  shipments.  The  authority 
under  which  the  Company  first  exercised  any  of  the  functions  of 
government  was  conveyed  in  1624,  by  the  permission  of  the  King  of 
Englaiul,  to  punish  its  servants,  while  abroad,  either  by  civil  or  by 
martial  law. 

In  160 1  a  new  charter  was  granted  to  the  Company,  whereby  its 
})rivileges  were  confirmed,  and  authority  was  given  to  make  peace  with 
or  war  against  any  princes  and  people  "not  being  Christians.' 

Bombay,  which  came  into  the  hands  of  Charles  the  Second  as  part  of 
the  marriage  portion  of  Catherine  of  Portugal,  having  proved  a  costly 
appendage  to  the  Crown,  was  made  over  to  the  Company  in  1688,  with 
authority  to  exercise  all  the  powers  necessary  for  its  defence  and 
government ;  and  this  territory  it  holds  of  the  Crown  "  in  free  and 
common  soccage,  as  of  the  manor  of  East  Greenwich,  on  the  payment  of 
the  annual  rent  of  ten  pounds  in  gold  on  the  30tli  September  in  each 
year." 

In  1664  an  attack  made  by  the  chief  of  the  Mahrattas  on  Surat  was 
successfully  resisted  by  the  servants  of  the  Company  ;  and  this  was  the 
first  occasion  upon  which  the  Company  was  brought  into  hostile  collision 
with  any  of  the  native  powers  of  India. 

Nearly  a  century  elapsed  from  this  time  before  any  further  territorial 
acquisitions  were  made  by  the  Company.  In  1757  Masulipatam  was 
taken  by  its  forces ;  and  in  the  same  year  the  Nabob  of  Bengal,  Meer 
Jaffier,  ceded  to  it  a  district  in  the  vicinity  of  Calcutta  called  "  the 
Twenty-four  Pergunnahs  ;"  four  years  later  it  obtained,  by  cession  from 
Mahomed  Ali,  Nabob  of  the  Carnatic,  Madras,  Fort  St.  David,  some 
settlements  in  the  Northern  Circars,  and  a  district  near  Madras  called 
"  the  Seven  Magans." 

The  growth  of  our  political  power  in  India  up  to  this  period  is  chiefly 
attributable  to  a  grant  made  in  1652  by  the  Mogul  of  a  licence  to  carry 
on  an  unlimited  trade  throughout  the  province  of  Bengal  without  the 
payment  of  any  duties,  and  which  licence  was  obtained  at  the  insigni- 
ficant cost  of  3000  rupees,  through  the  influence  of  a  medical  gentleman 
whose  skill  had  been  successfully  employed  at  the  court  of  the  Mogul. 
A  far  more  important  step  was  gained  when,  on  the  12th  August,  1765, 
the  Mogul  Shah  Alluni  granted  to  the  Company  the  "  dewanny,"  or 
collection  of  the  revenue  of  Bengal,  Bahar,  and  Orissa.  This  grant 
gave  to  the  Company  the  virtual  sovereignty  of  those  extensive  provinces. 
A  further  grant  in  the  same  year,  by  that  sovereign,  of  the  Northern 
Circars,  was  at  first  resisted  on  the  part  of  the  Nizam  or  Soubahdar  of 
the  Deccan,  but  was  confirmed  by  that  ruler  on  the  12th  November, 
1766,  the  Company  agreeing  to  pay  him  seven  lacs  of  rupees,  or  70,000/. 
per  annum, — which  sum  was  redeemed  in  1823  by  the  payment  of 
1,070,000/. 