

The  flower-bud  or  spat/ia  of  this  tree  yields  toddy,  which,  when 
fermented  and  distilled,  furnishes  arrack  of  the  best  quality.  Another 
mode  of  treating  this  juice  produces  jagyery,  a  description  of  sugar, 


CHAP.  Ill]  DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA.  753 

which,  altliough  unfit  for  exportation,  is  well  acla])ted  for  Us^c  by  the 
native  |)(i])iilation.  The  fibrous  husk  in  whieh  the  nut  is  enveloped  is 
eonvcrtible  into  cordage  and  carpeting,  and  is  applicable  to  a  great 
variety  of  other  purposes.  The  kernel  of  the  nut  is  used  as  a  nutritious 
and  palatable  food  ;  and  a  large  quantity  of  fixed  oil,  applicable  to  a 
great  number  of  uses,  is  expressed  from  it.  Large  shipments  of  this 
oil  are  made  from  Ceylon  to  England,  where  it  is  used  for  illuminating 
purposes,  and  for  conversion  into  candles  and  soap.  The  leaves  of  this 
tree  are  woven  into  mats,  and  are  employed  for  the  roofing  of  houses, 
being  lighter  than  straw,  and  equally  strong  and  lasting.  The  oil, 
when  newly  made,  is  used  in  the  island  for  culinary  purposes.  Alto- 
gether, the  cocoa-nut  tree  has  been  considered  the  most  important 
vegetable  production  of  the  island. 

A  product  of  Ceylon,  better  known  as  such  in  Europe,  to  which 
quarter  the  great  bulk  of  it  is  shipped,  is  cinnamon.  The  Dutch,  when 
they  had  possession  of  Ceylon,  reserved  the  trade  in  this  spice  as  a 
Government  monopoly,  strictly  prohibiting  any  person  from  trading  in 
it,  and  sentencing  to  confiscation  any  ship  on  board  of  which  there 
should  be  found  more  than  twenty  pounds  of  cinnamon,  unless  sent  on 
board  by  authority  of  Government ;  and  heavy  fines  were  imposed  for 
any  quantity  less  than  twenty  pounds.  The  English  adopted,  and  for 
some  years  after  their  conquest  of  the  island,  adhered  to  the  system  as 
thus  established  by  the  Dutch.  A  Government  agent  resided  at 
Cdlombo  for  managing  the  trade,  and  under  his  direction  all  the  cin- 
namon collected  beyond  the  quantity  that  it  was  thought  could  be  sold 
in  Europe  at  a  monopoly  price  was  ordered  by  him  to  be  burnt !  This 
system  was  altered  by  the  English  Government  in  October,  1832,  when 
tiie  trade  in  cinnamon  was  declared  free,  save  that  it  was  subjected  to 
a  duty  on  exportation.  The  pearl  fishery  is  a  Government  monopoly. 
The  places  and  times  where  and  when  it  is  to  be  pursued,  and  the 
number  of  boats  allowed  to  engage  in  it,  are  announced  by  advertise- 
ment. One-fourth  part  of  the  pearl  oysters  raised  are  the  property  of 
tlie  divers ;  the  remaining  three-fourths  are  sold  at  public  auction. 
The  amount  derived  from  this  source  of  revenue  averages  about  14,000/. 
j)er  annum  ;  it  has  sometimes  reached  to  nearly  three  times  that  sum  ; 
in  nine  years,  from  1826  to  1834,  it  realized  145,000/. 