

The  rice  of  Bengal  has  hitherto  been  considered  very  inferior  to  that 
of  America,  and  was  unable  to  bear  successful  competition  with  it,  even 
under  a  "  protecting"  duty  of  a  penny  halfpenny  per  pound  ;  so  that 
when  it  was  proposed  by  the  tariff  of  1842  to  reduce  this  "  protection" 
by  8^.  Qd.  per  cwt.,  or  very  nearly  a  penny  per  pound,  it  was  confidently 
predicted  that  the  trade  would  be  annihilated.  To  avert  this  evil  an 
intelligent  and  enterprising  merchant  forthwith  took  measures  for  im- 
proving the  quality  and  appearance  of  the  shipments  from  Bengal  ;  and 
from  the  success  that  has  attended  his  first  efforts  in  that  direction  there 
is  every  reason  to  believe  that,  ere  long,  the  rice  of  India  will  be  in 

*  '  Essay  on  the  Productive  Resources  of  India,'  page  163.  f  Ibid.,  rage  140. 


niAr.  m.] 


DEPENDENX'IES  IN  ASIA. 


74-5 


every  respect  equal  in  appearance  to  that  of  Carolina,  and  that  it  will 
command  as  high  a  price  in  our  markets. 

Some  experiments  on  a  respectable  scale  have  recently  been  begun 
in  Burdwan  for  the  production  of  flax,  the  finer  qualities  of  which  are 
every  year  becoming  more  scarce  and  dear  in  Europe,  and  we  may 
hope  that  this  important  material  of  manufacture  will  ere  long  be  added 
to  the  list  of  our  importations  from  India.  Tallow  has  already  been 
imported  thence  of  so  good  a  quality  that  it  has  realized  within  10  per 
cent,  of  the  price  obtained  for  the  finest  St.  Petersburg  tallow.  Besides 
these  articles,  India  could  furnish  an  almost  unlimited  supply  of  seeds, 
yielding  oils  of  excellent  quality  for  food,  or  light,  or  manufacturing 
processes  ;  and  considerable  supplies  of  the  finest  timber  may  be  pro- 
cured from  Oude  and  Goruckpore,  the  coast  of  Malabar,  and  the  east 
coast  of  the  Bay  of  Bengal. 

By  opening  new  channels  of  communication,  and  by  improving  such 
as  already  exist,  the  intermil  and  external  commerce  of  our  Indian 
empire  may  be  almost  indefinitely  increased,  to  the  advantage  of  the 
millions  who  have  been  subjected  to  our  sway  by  the  sword,  and  to 
whom  we  owe  this  reparation  for  the  miseries  that  have  been  inflicted 
by  our  conquest, — a  reparation  which  must  at  the  same  time  bring 
equal  advantages  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  increasing  employment 
that  must  thus  be  afforded  to  our  continually-multiplying  artisans. 

The  number  and  tonnage  of  shipping  employed  in  the  trade  between 
the  United  Kingdom  and  its  dependencies  in  India  in  each  year  from 
1833  to  1849  have  been  as  follows  : — 


Inwards. 

Outwards. 

Inwards. 

Outwards. 

Sliips. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

