

70,838,515 

4,182,853 

It  will  be  seen,  on  comparing  the  quantities  brought  during  the  later 
years  of  the  series  with  the  earlier  importations,  how  great  an  increase 
has  been  made  in  almost  every  article.  Some  important  branches  of 
the  trade  may  be  said  to  have  been  created  since  the  year  in  which  the 
charter  of  the  East  India  Company  was  last  renewed,  and  when  its 
existence  as  a  commercial  body  was  made  to  cease  altogether.  Thus 
we  find  that  linseed,  rum,  tobacco,  and  sheep's  wool,  which,  previous 
to  1833,  did  not  enter  into  the  trade  between  India  and  England,  have 
now  become  articles  of  considerable  importance.  The  quantity  of  coffee 
is  nearly  trebled ;  but  the  greater  part  of  this  increase  proceeds  from 
the  extension  of  the  culture  of  coffee-trees  in  Ceylon,  which  followed 
upon  the  assimilation,  in  1835,  of  the  duties  upon  East  India  and  West 
India  coffee.  The  quantities  of  lac-dye  and  shellac,  respectively,  have 
been  quadrupled.  Hemp  is  more  than  doubled,  and  hides  are  increased 
threefold.  Indigo  has  not  undergone  any  material  alteration  :  but  the 
quantities  of  pepper  and  of  rice  are  doubled.     The  sugar  trade,  from 


744  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vni. 

being  quite  insignificant,  has  lately  become  one  of  the  most  important 
branches  of  commerce  ;  and  the  supply  of  cotton  has  augmented  with 
rapidity,  being  now  nearly  three  times  as  gi-eat  as  it  was  in  1833. 

Important  as  are  these  results,  there  is  good  reason  for  asserting  that 
we  shall  hereafter  arrive  at  a  far  more  satisfactory  condition  as  respects 
our  Indian  commerce.  It  would  appear,  from  recent  investigations, 
that  we  are  now  only  beginning  to  appreciate  at  anything  approaching 
to  their  just  value  the  material  resources  of  Hindostan.  The  idea  of 
obtaining  sheep's  wool  from  British  India  would,  a  very  few  years  ago, 
have  been  treated  as  an  idle  dream  ;  and  yet  we  see  that  in  1849  we 
imported  thence,  of  that  important  material  of  manufacture,  more  than 
four  millions  of  pounds.  It  has  usually  been  held  that  cold  climates 
are  best  suited  to  the  production  of  fine  wool,  but  this  belief  is  seen  to 
be  erroneous.  Dr.  Forbes  Royle  justly  remarks,  that  "  fine-wool 
countries,  such  as  Spain  and  Tibet,  Australia,  Van  ])iemen's  Land, 
and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  have  rather  dry  climates,  with  a  warm 
summer  and  a  cold  winter.*  The  coasts  and  plains  of  Bengal  are  not 
well  suited  to  the  production  of  wool,  but  "  the  table-land  of  the  penin- 
sula, beginning  with  the  Neelgherrie  hills,  and  proceeding  along  Mysore 
to  the  Deccan,  Candeish,  and  Guzerat,  presents  large  tracts  of  country 
affording  a  favourable  climate,  and  abundant  pastures  for  numerous 
flocks  of  sheep."  t  Marwar,  Malwa,  Rajpootana,  Hurriana,  and  the 
province  of  Delhi,  have  natural  pastures  which  support  numerous  herds 
of  cattle  and  flocks  of  sheep.  The  wool  of  the  latter  is  employed  by 
the  natives  in  making  blankets  of  different  degrees  of  fineness,  which 
form  a  considerable  article  of  commerce.  The  Himalaya  mountains 
likewise  support  on  their  southern  face  a  fine  breed  of  sheep.  The 
great  pastoral  countries  of  Gabool  and  Bokara  might  afford  an  almost 
unlimited  supply  of  fine  wool :  and,  although  not  the  produce  of  British 
industry,  its  collection  would  prove  an  important  branch  of  commerce 
to  our  merchants  in  the  western  districts  of  India,  while  payment  for  it 
would  doubtless  be  made  chiefly  in  British  manufactures. 