

The  government  of  India  is  ostensibly  confided  to  the  hands  of  twenty- 
four  gentlemen,  chosen  for  that  purpose  by  the  proprietors  from  among 
their  own  body,     Down  to  the  year  1773,  the  Court  of  Directors  thus 


C.IAP.  iii.l  DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA.  749 

chosen  were  the  uncontrolled  sovereigns  of  British  India  ;  hut  in  that 
year  Parliament  passed  an  Act,  under  which  a  Governor-General  was 
appointed  to  reside  in  Bengal,  and  a  supreme  court  of  judicature  was 
estahlished,  with  judges  ap])ointed  hy  the  Crown,  and  in  other  ways 
the  management  of  the  Directors  was  hrought  under  the  siu'veillance  of 
the  State.  In  1784  Mr.  Pitt's  India  Bill  was  passed,  which  brought  the 
government  of  India  more  completely  within  the  power  of  the  ministry 
by  the  establishment  of  a  Board  of  Control  for  the  Affairs  of  India, 
which  Board  is  composed  of  six  members  selected  by  the  Crown,  to 
superintend  the  territorial  concerns  (since  1833  the  only  concerns)  of 
the  Company.  The  Governor-General  of  India,  Presidents,  and  Mem- 
bers of  Council,  are  under  this  Act  appointed  by  the  Directors,  but  sub- 
ject to  the  approval  of  the  Government ;  and  the  Commander-in-Chief 
of  the  army  employed  in  India  is  chosen  by  the  Crown  without  any 
interference  on  the  part  of  the  Directors.  The  power  of  recalling  the 
Governor-General  was  subsequently  granted  to  the  Crown,  so  that  his 
appointment  is  virtually  and  substantially  the  act  of  the  ministry  of 
the  day. 

The  Board  of  Control,  although  by  Act  of  Parliament  it  is  composed 
of  six  members,  is  practically  an  office  administered  by  one  member,  its 
President,  who  has  a  seat  in  the  "  cabinet,"  and  is  essentially  a  Secre- 
tary of  State  for  the  Indian  Department.  This  important  functionary 
is,  in  ftict,  the  supreme  governor  of  India,  using  the  Court  of  Directors 
as  the  instruments  of  his  will,  and  exercising,  under  the  sanction  of  an 
Act  of  Parliament,  a  power  over  the  destinies  of  that  part  of  the  British 
empire,  greater  far  than  the  monarch  can  legally  exert  in  that  or  any 
other  quarter.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  President  of  the  Board  of  Control 
to  inspect  all  letters  passing  to  and  from  India,  between  the  Directors 
and  their  servants,  which  have  any  connexion  wath  territorial  manage- 
ment or  political  relations  ;  to  alter,  to  amend,  or  to  keep  back  de- 
spatches prepared  by  the  Directors,  and,  if  he  shall  see  fit,  to  transmit 
orders  to  the  functionaries  of  the  Company  in  India,  without  the  con- 
currence or  even  without  the  knowledge  of  the  ostensible  Governors  of 
India.  Any  orders  which  he  may  send  to  the  India  House  marked 
"  secret  and  political  "  are  seen  only  by  three  members  of  the  Court  of 
Directors,  who  form  a  "  Committee  of  Secrecy,"  and  who  are  sworn  to 
secrecy,  not  only  as  regards  the  public  at  large,  but  even  against  their 
own  colleagues.  This  secret  committee  is  further  bound,  immediately 
and  without  question,  to  transmit  those  orders' to  India,  and  the  ser- 
vants of  the  Company  are  bound  to  put  them  in  execution  also  without 
question  or  delay. 