

Some  valuable  gems  are  found  in  Ceylon  ;  among  these  the  ruby  and 
cat-eye  are  the  best;  topaz,  sapphire,  and  crystal  are  also  obtained. 
Iron  is  diffused  over  the  greater  part  of  the  island  ;  black  oxide  of 
manganese  is  found  ;  and  plumbago  (carbonate  of  iron)  is  obtained  in 
I'onsiderable  quantity,  and  exported.  Weaving  gives  employment  to 
many  persons.  The  articles  made  are  handkerchiefs,  table-cloths, 
napkins,  towels,  sail-cloth,  and  a  coarse  kind  of  cloth  used  for  their 
(hess  by  the  natives.     There  are   also   many   oil-mills   in   operation, 


754  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

chiefly  for  pressing  the  coco-nut  kernels.  The  island  contains  exten- 
sive forests,  in  which,  besides  the  more  ordinary  descriptions  of  timber, 
the  growth  of  those  latitudes,  there  is  a  great  variety  and  profusion  of 
beautiful  woods,  well  adapted  for  the  use  of  the  cabinet-maker. 

Among  the  animals  of  Ceylon,  most  of  those  found  on  the  opposite 
continent  are  native  to  the  island.  Elephants  are  numerous,  and  some- 
times do  great  injury  to  the  growing  crops.  Under  the  kings  of  Candy 
these  animals  were  trained  to  perform  the  office  of  public  executioners. 

The  trade  of  the  United  Kingdom  with  Ceylon  is  not  distinguished 
in  the  Custom-house  accounts  from  that  to  the  continent  of  India.  A 
trade  is  carried  on  with  Bengal,  to  which  presidency  it  exports  betel- 
nuts,  chank  shells,  cordage,  cocoa-nuts,  and  various  minor  articles; 
while  it  imports  from  that  quarter  cotton  piece  goods,  sugar,  rice, 
wheat,  and  gunny  bags. 

Mauritius*  commonly  known  as  The  Mauritius,  is  an  island  in  the 
Indian  Ocean,  about  120  miles  north-east  from  the  island  of  Bourbon, 
and  four  times  that  distance  east  of  Madagascar.  Its  greatest  length 
from  north  to  south  is  forty  miles,  and  its  greatest  breadth  is  thirty-two 
miles  ;  its  area  is  about  700  square  miles.  This  island  was  discovered 
early  in  the  sixteenth  century  by  a  Portuguese  navigator ;  and  in  1598 
a  Dutch  admiral  made  a  landing  upon  it,  and  gave  it  the  name  of 
Mauritius,  in  compliment  to  the  then  Prince  of  Orange.  Its  earliest 
inhabitants  were  pirates ;  but  no  serious  attempt  for  its  colonization 
w^as  made  until  1720,  when  it  was  occupied  by  some  settlers  frotn  the 
French  island  of  Bourbon.  Its  name  was  then  changed  for  that  of  Isle 
of  France,  and  the  property  in  it  was  given  by  the  King  of  France  to 
the  French  East  India  Company.  The  island  was  fortunate  in  being 
early  intrusted  to  the  government  of  a  very  intelligent  man,  M.  de  la 
Bourdonnais,  under  whom  it  made  great  progress  in  cultivation. 

Mauritius  was  taken  by  an  English  force  in  1810  :  its  possession  was 
ratified  to  us  at  the  peace  of  1814,  and  it  has  since  remained  under  the 
dominion  of  the  crown  of  England. 