


732  PllOGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX  [sicc.  viii. 

FaDtees  and  other  dwellers  on  tlie  coast,  who  have  most  probably  been 
demoralized  by  the  slave  trade  formerly  so  actively  pursued. 

Fernando  Po  is  an  island  in  the  Bight  of  Benin,  in  3'  25'  north  lati- 
tude, and  8°  50'  east  longitude  ;  it  is  of  volcanic  origin,  about  twenty- 
four  miles  long  and  sixteen  miles  broad,  and  about  twice  the  size  of  the 
Isle  of  Wight.  Its  surface  is  uneven,  and  in  one  part  rises  to  a  height 
of  3500  feet  above  the  sea,  to  which  circumstance  is  attributed  its 
comparative  healthiness.  The  island  was  discovered  in  1471  by  the 
Portuguese,  who  exchanged  it  with  Spain  for  an  island  off  the  coast  of 
Brazil.  In  1827  it  was  taken  into  the  possession  of  England  by  consent 
of  Spain.  The  position  of  this  island  opposite  the  Cameroons  river  and 
the  Amboises  makes  it  of  present  value  in  putting  down  the  slave  trade ; 
and  when  this  disgraceful  traffic  shall  be  suppressed,  and  the  inhabitants 
of  the  opposite  shores  shall  have  applied  themselves  to  commercial  pur- 
suits, Fernando  Po  will  acquire  a  greater  value  as  a  trading  station, 
where  Europeans  may  reside  with  less  danger  to  life  than  in  other  spots 
on  the  western  coast  of  Africa.  At  this  time  the  only  white  inhabitants 
are,  the  agent  of  the  AVest  African  Company,  a  surgeon  and  a  German 
settler.  The  black  population  is  variously  estimated  at  from  3000  to 
9000.  Part  of  these  are  from  Old  Calabar,  Bonny,  the  Cameroons,  and 
the  Gold  Coast,  together  with  some  Kroomen.  Tlie  English  settlement, 
Clarence  Town,  stands  on  a  headland  150  feet  above  the  sea,  which 
forms  the  entrance  to  Maidstone  Bay,  a  small  but  tolerably  secure  har- 
bour on  the  north  side  of  the  island. 

At  the  close  of  the  year  1849,  the  English  Government  obtained  from 
the  Crown  of  Denmark,  by  negotiation  and  purchase,  the  Danish  settle- 
ments on  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa,  viz.,  Tacia,  Quittah,  Ningo,  and 
Addah,  which  settlements  are  now  made  to  form  part  of  the  stations 
under  the  Lieutenant  Governor  of  the  previous  possessions  of  this  country 
upon  that  coast.  The  object  sought  through  this  purchase  is  that  of 
gaining  greater  facilities  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave  trade. 


iiAP.  VI.]  inUTlSlI  AMKIiK'A.  7Sc 


CHAPTER  VI. 

BRITISH    AMERICA. 

Canada:  Population,  Lower  Canada— Increase  by  Immigration  —  Population  of  Upper 
Canada —  Imports  and  Exports  —  Sliipping — -Ship-building —  Fislicries — Agriculture — 
Manufactures — Mills  —  Internal  Navigation.  New  Brunswick:  Area  —  Population — • 
Imports  and  Exports— Shipping— Ship-building.  Nova  Scotia:  Population — Inequality 
in  the  Numbers  of  the  two  Sexes— Imports  and  Exports  —  Shipping — Ship-building — 
Fisheries— Harbours — Live  Stock.  Cape  Bketon  :  Population — Imports  and  Exports — 
Coals — Ship-building.  Prince  Edward's  Island:  Population — Imports  and  Exports- 
Tenure  of  Land — Stock — Ship-building.  Newfoundland:  Area — Fisheries  —  Popu- 
lation—Imports and  Exports— Shipping — Ship-building.  Hudson's  Bay  Territory: 
Boundaries— Extent.  Bermudas:  Population — Imports  and  Exports— Ship-buildings 
Shipping. 