

It  was  at  that  time  confidently  predicted  by  those  who  had  resisted 
this  measure  that  it  must  insure  the  ruin  of  our  sugar  colonies.  May 
we  not  draw  from  the  signal  failure  of  this  prediction  a  well-gi'ounded 
hope  that  the  further  measure  of  justice  to  the  negro  perfected  by  the 
abolition  of  slavery  itself  throughout  the  British  dominions  on  the  1st  of 
August,  1838,  will  in  the  end  prove  as  little  productive  of  evil  to  those 
colonies  as  was  the  measure  of  1807  ? 

On  the  28th  of  August,  1833,  an  Act  was  passed  for  the  abolition  of 
slavery  throughout  the  British  colonies.  Under  this  Act  the  name  of 
slave  ceased  on  the  1st  of  August,  1834 ;  those  who  previously  stood  in 
that  relation  becoming  "  apprenticed  labourers"  to  the  persons  who  had 
been  entitled  to  their  services  as  slaves.  This  period  of  apprenticeship 
as  to  continue  in  the  case  of  household  slaves  until  the  1st  of  August 
1838,  but  in  the  case  of  prjedial  labourers,  comprising  all  usually  em- 
ployed in  agriculture,  the  apprenticeship  was  to^be  continued  until  the 
1st  of  August,  1840.  So  strongly,  however,  had  the  people  of  England 
become  convinced  of  the  sinfulness  of  holding  their  fellovr-creatures  in 


CHAl'.    VII.J 


WEST  INDIA  C.'OI.ONIKS. 


805 


bondage,  that  even  the  modified  condition  of  apprenticeship,  although  it 
had  taken  from  tlie  master  all  the  more  hateful  attributes  of  ownership, 
was  intolerable  to  them  ;  and  a  degree  of  moral  compulsion  was  used 
under  which  the  colonial  legislatures  were  induced  to  anticipate  the 
period  of  perfect  freedom,  and  the  labouring  ])opulation  throughout  our 
West  India  colonies  were  admitted  to  the  full  rights  of  citizi^nship  on 
the  1st  of  August,  1838. 

This  glorious  act  of  raising  770,000  human  beings  from  a  condition 
in  which  they  were  legally  considered  as  chattels,  and  could  be  bought 
and  sold  as  so  many  beasts  of  burden,  to  a  state  of  equality  before  the 
law  with  their  former  owners,  was  bought  for  them  at  the  pi'ice  of  twenty 
millions  sterling  by  the  British  nation,  who  thus  gave  unquestionable 
testimony  to  their  feelings  of  genuine  philanthropy,  while  they  proved 
their  sense  of  justice  by  compensating  those  who  would  otherw'ise  have 
suffered  individually  for  the  expiation  of  a  national  sin. 

The  number  of  slaves  in  respect  of  whom  their  owners  received  com- 
))ensation  by  means  of  this  Parliamentary  Grant  of  twenty  millions  was 
770,280,  of  whom  35,742  belonged  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  4026 
to  Bermuda,  and  60,613  to  Mauritius.  The  remaining  663,899  were 
located  in  the  several  West  India  colonies.  The  number  of  slaves  in 
each  colony,  with  the  average  rates  of  compensation  awarded  to  their 
former  owners^  and  the  amount  of  money  thus  distributed  to  the  several 
colonies,  were  as  follows  : — 