

It  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  that  a  great  social  revolution, 
such  as  the  act  of  emancipation  brought  about  in  these  colonies,  would 
pass  unaccompanied  by  some  inconvenience,  and  that  time  would  not 
be  required  in  order  to  the  right  adjustment  of  things  between  the 
different  classes  under  such  altered  circumstances.  The  inconveniences 
which  have  arisen  proved,  however,  much  less  formidable  than  the  most 
sanguine  fi'iends  to  the  measure  of  emancipation  ventured  to  expect ; 
and  whatever  those  inconveniences  were,  they  are  fast  disappearing. 
The  conduct  of  the  emancipated  negroes  has  been  most  exemplary. 
The  heaviest  charge  brought  against  them  is  that  of  demanding  exor- 
bitant rates  of  wages,  a  charge  which  calls  for  no  word  of  refutation, 
since  it  must  be  out  of  their  power  to  enforce  it,  or  to  insist  upon  any 
payment  beyond  that  which  circumstances  render  equitable.     It  is  no 


CHAI'.    VII.] 


BRITISH  COLONIES,  ETC. 


807 


more  In  their  power  than  it  is  in  tlie  power  of  the  farm-labourer  or  the 
hand-loom  weaver  in  EnG;land  to  fix  the  rate  of  waetes. 

The  very  great  dillvrence  in  the  sale-value  of  slaves  observable  in  the 
different  colonies  previous  to  emancipation  was  chiefly  the  result  of  a 
law  passed  for  the  registration  of  slaves,  and  which  forbade  their  transfer 
from  one  colony  to  another, — a  measure  framed  in  a  beneficent  spirit, 
but  the  wisdom  of  which  was  very  questionable.  In  the  Bahamas,  where 
the  slave  population  was  redundant,  labour  was  necessarily  cheap,  and 
the  value  of  those  by  whom  it  must  be  performed  was  low.  In  Guiana, 
on  the  other  hand,  and  in  Trinidad,  where  there  was  an  abundance  of 
fertile  land  to  be  reclaimed,  the  number  of  labourers  was  quite  inade- 
quate, and  their  value  proportionally  high.  There  would  have  been 
great  ad\antage  to  the  owners,  and,  under  proper  regulations,  no  hard- 
ship upon  the  negroes,  to  have  removed  them  from  places  where  their 
labour  was  not  needed  to  colonies  where  it  could  be  profitably  em- 
ployed. Since  the  measure  of  fi-eedom  has  been  consummated,  such 
changes  have  taken  place  to  a  great  extent,  and  with  mutual  advantage 
to  both  classes. 

The  inhabitants  of  Antigua,  in  which  island  there  was  an  abundance 
of  labourers,  so  that  their  average  sale-value  between  1822  and  1830 
was  only  32/.  12^.  lOd.  per  head,  quickly  perceived  the  advantages  they 
might  draw  from  the  measure  of  1833,  and  by  an  act  of  the  island 
legislature  granted  immediate  emancipation  to  their  slaves,  without  sub- 
jecting them  to  the  intermediate  step  of  apprenticeship.  This  island  is 
most  of  all  the  West  India  colonics  dependent  upon  the  seasons  for  the 
abundance  of  its  crops,  since  there  is  not  in  the  whole  of  its  area  a 
stream  or  spring  of  water  to  be  found.  With  this  fact  in  view  it  will  be 
seen  from  the  following  figures  that  its  harvests  have  not  fallen  short  by 
reason  of  tl)is  act  of  its  legislature. 