

Let  us,  in  order  to  test  the  wisdom  of  this  system  of  preferences,  take 
what  will  be  considered  the  most  important  article  of  colonial  produc- 
tion, sugar,  and  inquire  shortly  what  has  been  the  effect  to  the  kingdom 
generally,  and  to  the  sugar  colonies  themselves,  of  the  virtual  monopoly 
of  the  home  market  that  was  given  to  them  by  om-  tariff. 

First,  we  were  made  to  pay  for  the  sugar  consumed  in  the  United 
Kingdom  more  than  we  needed  to  pay  by  an  amount  exceeding  the  value 
of  all  the  goods  which  we  manufactured  for  the  AVest  India  colonies ;  it 
will  hardly  be  said  that  this  was  a  profitable  trade  for  us,  ^^hatever  it 
might  be  for  the  colonies.  It  might  be  some  consolation  to  us  to  know 
that  the  excessive  price  which  we  thus  paid  benefited  in  a  proportionate 
degree  those  to  whom  it  was  paid.  But  was  this  so?  If  the  millions  of 
money  for  which  we  thus  taxed  ourselves  did  go  to  swell  the  profits  of  the 
planters,  how  was  it  that  this  undue  rate  did  not  stimulate  production, 
an  effect  which  excessive  profits  never  fail  to  have  ?  It  is  neither  wise, 
reasonable,  nor  just,  that  the  people  of  England  should,  under  any  cir- 
.cumstances,  be  thus  heavily  taxed  for  the  benefit  of  any  class  of  their 
fellow-subjects,  however  respectable ;  but  when  we  see  that,  notwith- 
standing the  heavy  burden  we  thus  took  upon  ourselves,  the  planters 
were  continually  lamenting  over  their  ruined  condition,  what  words  can 
we  find  adequately  to  describe  our  folly  ? 

Let  us  suppose  that  the  differential  duty  upon  sugar  were  wholly 
abolished,  and  that  we  no  longer  had  to  pay  a  monopoly  price  for  that 
which  we  use,  and  it  is  certain  that  our  consumption  must  ver}'  greatly 
increase.  To  supply  our  wants  we  must  then  have  recourse  to  other 
markets,  and  in  payment  for  our  importations  must  send  to  the  producers 
that  alone  which  we  have  to  offer,  the  products  of  our  industry,  our 
manufactvires.  The  people  of  England  w  ould  clearly  be  gainers  by  this 
change,  since  they  would  eitlier  have  more  sugar  in  return  for  an  equal 
amount  of  labour,  or  they  would  retain  more  of  the  products  of  their 
toil  to  exchange  elsewhere  for  other  conveniences  or  luxuries. 


810 


PKO  GUESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  yih. 


A  Statemeyit  of  the  Date  and  Mode  oj  Acquisition,  the  Form  of  Government,  and  the  Population 
according  to  the  htest  Census,  of  each  Colony  or  Foreign  Possession  of  tlie  British  Crown. 


Date  and  Mode  c 

fits 

Form  of  Government, 

Acquisition, 

Population  according 

i  whether  having  Le^'islative 
Assemblies,  or  heinif 

Kame  of  Colony. 

whetlier  by  Capture. 

to  the  latest 