

13 The South German Customs Union was formed in 1828 and consisted of Wurttemberg and Bavaria.

Bavaria without a customs’ border (see Figure 3). The entry of Frankfurt 
DOORZHG PDQXIDFWXULQJ JRRGV WR ÀRZ IUHHO\ XS WKH 0DLQ 5LYHU WR 
Northern Bavaria in exchange for grain. Later on, Brunswick became a 
member of the Zollverein in 1841, Hanover in 1851, Oldenburg in 1852, 
Mecklenburg and Luebeck in 1867. Bremen and Hamburg only joined in 
DIWHU*HUPDQ\ KDG EHFRPHSROLWLFDOO\ XQL¿HG LQ 7KXV WKH 
SURFHVV RI FXVWRPV¶ XQL¿FDWLRQ XQIROGHG RYHU VL[ GHFDGHV IURP 
to 1888. 14 Latitude appears to have an important effect on the timing 
of Zollverein accession. By the year 1836, southern and central states 
had for the most part joined, whereas many areas in northern Germany 
stayed outside of the Zollverein until later in the nineteenth century. This 
provides relevant information for the motives of joining the Zollverein, 
to which we turn now in greater detail. 
Motives for Joining the Customs Union 
A number of arguments have been made about the composition 
and timing of Zollverein accessions. Broad accounts in William O. 
Henderson (1959) and Hans-Werner Hahn (1984), among others, argue 
WKDWWKHH[SHFWDWLRQRIPXWXDOHI¿FLHQF\JDLQV ORZHUSULFHV DQGKLJKHU 
welfare of Prussia (and joining states) were a priori the factors that deter 
mined the formation of the Zollverein. A counterargument is that it was 
the welfare of the feudal lord that counted, not the population at large, 
and these were not always the same. Although Prussia, as the largest 
state, may have had the ability to put political pressure on smaller states 
to join, states retained political sovereignty and Prussia could not force 
individual states to join against the will of the sovereign. It is well known 
WKDW HYHQ LQ IXOO\ ÀHGJHG GHPRFUDFLHV WKH JDLQV IURP IUHH WUDGH PLJKW 
be hard to reap, either because losers oppose the move to free trade or 
because gains from trade are dissipated in the political process through 
lobbying or rent-seeking. 
In addition, the primary motive driving when individual states joined 
the Zollverein were clearly idiosyncratic in certain cases. For example, 
Hanover joined relatively late in part because it was governed in personal 
union with England, which had no interest in a Prussian led customs union 
dominating the center of Europe. Other motives that have been proposed 
are systematic but inconsistent with the evidence (see Dumke 1976). For 
example, we can easily provide evidence against the argument that the 

14 Austria did not become a member of the Zollverein. Reasons for this include Austria’s relatively protectionist stance towards trade and her competition with Prussia.

1176 Keller and Shiue non-joiners preferred tariff rates higher than those Prussia proposed. In fact, Prussia’s tariffs on a range of goods, especially colonial goods such as tobacco, tea, and sugar, were higher than the tariffs of many German states before they joined the Zollverein (Dumke 1994, Part III, p. 72). Right before they entered the Zollverein in 1834, for instance, Bavaria and Wurttemberg had ad-valorem tariff rates of 47 percent on Genussmittel (non-essential consumption goods), whereas the tariff rate of the Prussia Hesse customs union for these goods was 74 percent (Dumke 1976, Table 3.16). Therefore the desire for more protection is unlikely to have been the main reason for not joining the Zollverein. Fiscal reasons are also unlikely to have been paramount. Certainly, it was noted at the time that some of the smaller states with a higher ERUGHUOHQJWKWRDUHDUDWLRZRXOG¿QGLWSURKLELWLYHO\FRVWO\WRHVWDEOLVK and enforce tariff borders have (Kuehne 1836). If this had been the case we should expect that smaller and highly indebted states would prefer joining the Prussian-led customs union because their fraction of the joint