stopped. He was none the less obliged to postpone the mission until after the alliance with
Austria.

But after his alliance with this power, and when it was almost certain that war with Russia was
inevitable, the Emperor said to his ministers assembled in council:

"The Poles not being the subject of the quarrel between Alexander and me, should not be an
obstacle to an arrangement between us; but in the meantime they prove to be an obstacle to an
arrangement between us; but in the meantime they can be, for me, a powerful means of war;
now, on the eve of such a great crisis, I will leave them neither without advice nor without
direction. I am therefore going to send a trusted envoy to Warsaw."

Forced to renounce M. de Talleyrand, Napoleon cast his eyes on a second-rate diplomat, for
whom he prepared the following instructions: "If the armed demonstration of our troops on the
Vistula intimidates the Russians to the point of stopping, in its germ, the diversion that England
is trying against us in the North, we will negotiate: after such a great development of forces, we
will have the right to claim compensation, and the reconstruction of Poland can become the
equivalent. If, on the contrary, the rupture breaks out, the Poles must not only join their arms to
ours, they must, on this great occasion, the last perhaps offered to them, decide to act on their
own. and for their own account. This war, which we are going to support in the North, should
only be considered by them as a means added to their own resources: it is well agreed that
France will be, for them, only a powerful helper. Let them prepare, from this moment, to make
the greatest efforts, and that as soon as circumstances permit, all Poland mounts on
horseback."*

*Baron Fain, Manuscript of 1812, tome Ist, chap. VII.

The envoy to whom this instruction was delivered was to stop at Dresden, see the King of
Saxony, and speak to him frankly of what was being prepared. Napoleon knew that this prince,
the most faithful of his allies, did not care much for the sovereignty of the Grand Duchy. The
King had even explained it several times without reserve; be that as it may, the envoy had to
assure him that none of the sacrifices he made would go unrewarded.

At the same time that Napoleon was regulating the part which Poland was to have in his designs,
he was attempting a step which might lead him quickly, and by the widest door, out of all the
present difficulties.

"Since the Russians," he said, "place themselves under the direction of England, since that power
has become the sovereign arbiter of peace and war on the Continent, let us address ourselves
directly to her. It will be for the fourth time I have taken the first steps. Let us try if it is possible
to avoid war, in spite of the Russians themselves, and cut the evil at its root."

The Duke of Bassano was accordingly instructed to write to Lord Castlereagh, and reduced the
causes of hostilities between France and Great Britain to the two points most difficult to
reconcile: the affairs of Spain and those of the Two Sicilies. The Duke of Bassano proposed an
arrangement based on the following conditions: the integrity of Spain guaranteed; renunciation
