"This regiment,” added the decree,” will receive the denomination of Regiment of the National
Guard of the Guard, and will be treated in all like the guard, etc." (See our History of the
Imperial Guard, book X, chap. I, page 321.)

This organization was never completed, even in the Emperor's liberal system; and when, two
years later, the need arose for the nation to rise en masse in order to defend its territory invaded
by all the nations of Europe, the National Guard failed.

Assured of the alliance of Prussia and Austria, Napoleon had no longer hesitated to give
publicity to his arming. The Minister for Foreign Relations read, in the senate, a report from the
Emperor, in which, after recalling the principles of maritime law and the attacks which had been
made upon them by England, he added that, in order to maintain this great system , it was
necessary to employ the powerful means permitted by the constitutions of the empire so that all
its available forces could go wherever the English pavilion wished to land.

The National Guard of the Empire was therefore divided into three bans, composed, the first of
men from twenty to twenty-six years old; the second, of all able-bodied men from twenty-six to
forty; and the third, or back ban, of able-bodied men from forty to sixty years of age. The men
composing the cohorts of the first ban had to be renewed by the sixth each year: the first ban
was not to leave the territory of the Empire; it was exclusively intended, as we have said, for the
guarding of the frontiers, for the interior police, and for the preservation of arsenals and
strongholds. A hundred cohorts of the first rank were immediately placed at the disposal of the
Minister of War.

Each cohort was composed of six fusilier companies, one of which was always to remain at the
depot, and one artillery company, the whole amounting to nine hundred and twenty-six men. Six
cohorts formed a brigade. Retired or discharged officers and non-commissioned officers had,
preferably, the jobs of officers or non-commissioned officers, after having been judged capable
of resuming active service. For pay, masses, dress, barracks, service, police, discipline, etc., the
cohorts were subject to the same regulations as the troops of the Young Guard.

It was thus that the whole virile population of the Empire had to be included in this immense
levy of men; it was thus that France grouped itself into myriads of bayonets called to support and
defend the sacred soil of the fatherland!

Although the motive for the creation of the cohorts had not been clearly developed, this great
defensive measure evidently announced an imminent war. Hearing the president of the senate,
Lacépède, speak of active armies, crossing the frontiers "to go and strike the imperial
thunderbolt at immense distances," it was not difficult, even if one had not been prepared for it,
to recognize that it was Russia.

Either at Paris or at Saint-Cloud, Napoleon continued to spend all the hours of the day and
sometimes even those of the nights calculating the needs required by the organization of a vast
military administration. The ministers of finance and of the treasury were constantly occupied,
under his eyes, in estimating the expenses which such a distant expedition must entail; finally,
the resources of the coffers of the extraordinary domain had been counted, and the Baron de La
