prudence had wounded his heart, because, for him, there was a need to be seen constantly
surrounded by his former comrades in arms. They had always followed him blindly and
enthusiastically: why wouldn't they finish what they had started so well with him? Perhaps he
also had to take into account the length of the services, the age, the positions; but, taking no
account of these considerations for himself, he did not think he had to concern himself with them
for others.

Of all the current questions which occupied the Emperor, that of the Poles was not the least
important. If the white eagle of Poland could no longer deploy its majestic flight under an azure
sky, it had at least preserved the powerful claws which, in the great epochs of the Jagiellon and
the Sobieski, had more than once, their bloody embraces, choked the Russian double-headed
eagle. Then, from our first campaigns in Italy, hadn't the Poles come to form legions around our
republican flags? From that time Napoleon had entertained the hope of repaying France's debt to
so many brave men, by a great benefit to their country, when the time came. He had presented
himself in 1807, that moment so desired; but in order not to delay the peace of Tilsit, the
Emperor had to confine himself to the institution of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw. It was a half-
measure, and it had all the disadvantages of it, because the Poles believed themselves authorized
to deserve more, and because Russia, whose anxieties had increased, retained an ulterior motive,
from the bosom of which a future war with France was to germinate; but as soon as this war
became imminent, would Poland at last emerge from the precarious state in which she had been
left? This was the question Napoleon had to solve.

As for the Poles, they ardently desired war, as it must necessarily bring about the resurrection of
their country. In 1812, Napoleon had no longer to fear opposition from Prussia for that portion
of Poland which had fallen to him by way of compensation; victories and treaties had put this
power out of the question. As for Austria, she had shown herself, by the treaty of 14 March,
disposed to cede her share in return for a large indemnity. Saxony was not in the way, it cared
little for the Grand Duchy of Warsaw, which placed it in a false position with regard to Prussia,
Russia and Austria; all the same, it was easy to indemnify it: so only Russia remained.

When the Emperor Alexander had begun to grow cold towards France, and had manifested his
fears on the subject of the re-establishment of Poland, Napoleon had made him the most
reassuring protestations: we have had the proof of it; but the war which, in fact, broke the
treaties, freed from any disturbance; the re-establishment of Poland was one more means against
Russia; it promised France a powerful auxiliary, and satisfied both the present policy of
Napoleon and the views which were supposed to him on the new organization of Europe.

And then, to prepare the great movement of Poland, to impress it and above all to direct it well,
when the circumstances were opportune, a man experienced in revolutions was needed. From
the end of 1811, Napoleon had cast his eyes on M. de Talleyrand, since the Spanish war a
stranger to business, but eager to return to it: the latter had accepted this mission which
reminded him to play an active role in politics. Although the secrecy of this affair had been
recommended to him above all else, it was nevertheless spread in Vienna, where it was most
important that he should be ignored, according to some, in order to abort the project, according
to others, because of financial speculation. Be that as it may, Napoleon, indignant, was on the
point of taking action against his former minister; but, at the moment of striking, his arm always
