As we see, everything had been planned by the Emperor to paralyze and enchain Prussia, and
prevent treason. He was blamed for treating one of his allies with so much severity; but in case
of reverse could he count on his fidelity? No! for we later had the sad experience of it.

At the time when the united military forces of the French Empire were about to be absorbed by
the bitter war which was continuing in the Peninsula, and by that which was being prepared
against Russia, prudence advised providing, by means other than conscription, for the tranquility
and safety of coasts and borders. This means had been found since the revolution of 1789: it was
the resurrection of the National Guard, the armed nation. Since he was at the head of the
government, Napoleon had let this fine institution fall into disuse. The soldiers were antipathetic
to her, they despised her, and made fun of her. However, as the war dragged on and consumed
men, the Emperor had foreseen that there might come a time when recourse would be had to the
National Guard, instituting and ranking it, this time, quite militarily. It was therefore imagined
to divide it into three bands intended to serve, the first, at the frontiers; the second, in the
department; and the third, in the commune. The project was discussed for a long time in the
Council of State, which was not favorable to it. It was objected that everyone would be alarmed
by this institution and would see in it, under the pretext of an internal defense, only a means of
sending to the armies the citizens included in the classification. Napoleon showed himself
offended by this suspicion:

"If I have a fault," he says on this subject, "it is not that of taking oblique paths in my proposals,
but of explaining myself too clearly. If I needed men, I would boldly address the senate, which
would grant them to me; and, if it refused them, I would address myself to the people, who would
march with me, despite the metaphysics of the fools and the malevolence of the salons of Paris;
for the people understand me, me! it loves me! And do you know why?...it's because I'm the
people-emperor!"

Napoleon then declared that he had no other view than the safety, peace and stability of France at
home:

"With the bans of the National Guard," he added, "we will have a nation built of lime and sand,
capable of defying men and centuries! Then I will raise this National Guard to the equal of my
Guard, on which it will take precedence; the old retired officers will be its leaders and fathers,
and you will see that they will solicit the ranks as much as others solicit the favors of the
court!"*

*Locré, Minutes of the Council of State, March 1812.

This idea of Napoleon's to assimilate the National Guard of the Empire to his guard, was not
new, since, already, in a decree of 1 January 1810, he had said: "Wishing to give a proof of my
satisfaction to the guards departments of the North, I order that there will be added to the
infantry regiments of my guard a regiment of four battalions, composed of men of good will,
drawn from the companies of national guards which contributed to the defense of the coasts of
Flanders and La Manche, etc."
