Prussia and her independence from all political ties directed against Russia, was indispensable to
the interests of that Empire. To arrive at a real state of peace with France, it was necessary that
there should be between her and Russia a neutral country which was not occupied by the troops
of either of the two powers. The first basis of all negotiation could only be the formal
undertaking of the complete evacuation of the states and strongholds of Prussia, a reduction of
the garrison of Danzig, the evacuation of Swedish Pomerania, and an arrangement with the King
of Sweden, which gave him full and complete satisfaction. On these conditions, the Emperor
Alexander, without derogating from the principles adopted by him for the commerce of his
States, and for the admission of neutrals to his ports, principles which he would never renounce,
bound himself, by an effect of his attachment for the alliance formed at Tilsit, to plead no change
in the prohibitive measures established in the empire, and hitherto strictly observed, against
direct commerce with England. He undertook, moreover, to agree with the Emperor of the
French on a system of licenses which, of course, would not increase, by its effects, the prejudice
already experienced by the commerce of Russia in the tariff of its customs; and finally, to
conclude a treaty of exchange of the Duchy of Oldenburg for a suitable equivalent. These
conditions were final, added Kurakin, and his master could not allow any modification.*

*Letter from Prince Kurakin. (See in the appendix (first part), the documents relating to the negotiation between
France and Russia.)

After the battle of Austerlitz, where the united army had been crushed, after the battle of
Friedland, where it had been destroyed, Napoleon had not held such an imperious language; and
then, far from being reduced to a situation which justified or even permitted such a demand, he
was in the fullness of his power: this letter was therefore in his eyes like a declaration of war.
To reject the conditions imposed by Russia was to hasten the rupture; if it were to take place, he
wanted at least to gain the time necessary to collect all his resources. To accept these conditions
was to accept, in substance and above all in form, a law far too harsh, especially for him who had
so often dictated it. He therefore concealed the offense, seemed to believe that Kurakin had
misunderstood the instructions given to him, and left him aside to speak once more, and directly,
to Alexander. Did Napoleon sincerely want to avoid a rupture? This is what no one can decide.
However, on 25 April, he sent his aide-de-camp, the Count de Narbonne, who was then in
Berlin, to Saint Petersburg. This entirely confidential mission was only the continuation of that
of M. de Chernishev, which one might rightly suppose had not been scrupulously fulfilled. The
communication to the Cabinet of St. Petersburg of the latest overtures made to England served as
a pretext for M. de Narbonne's journey. In a letter to the Count de Romanzoff, the Duke de
Bassano again recalled the grievances of France against Russia and renewed, as he had done
hitherto, the desire to reconcile the differences.

However, the month of May had begun. Napoleon could not forget the appointment he had given
to his father-in-law, the Emperor of Austria, in Dresden:

"The stay I am going to make in the capital of Saxony," he said, "will give M. de Narbonne time
to forestall hostilities."

But while seriously preparing for war, Napoleon nevertheless liked to believe that the Czar had
no well-defined goal in his preparations for aggression.
