by France of any extension on the side of the Pyrenees; the current dynasty declared
independent, and the government governed by a national constitution of the Cortes. The
independence and integrity of Portugal were also to be guaranteed; the house of Braganza would
reign there. The Kingdom of Naples would remain under Murat; the Kingdom of Sicily would
be handed over to the ancient dynasty of Ferdinand.

In consequence of its stipulations, Spain, Portugal and Sicily would be evacuated by English and
French troops by land and sea. As for the other subjects of discussion, they could be negotiated
according to this principle, which each power would keep what the other could not take away
from him.*

*Letter from the Duke of Bassano, 17 April 1812.

Before entering into an explanation of this opening, Lord Castlereagh asked that the precise
meaning of these words relative to Spain be fixed: "The present dynasty will be declared
independent, and Spain governed by a national constitution of the Cortes." If it was Joseph, and
the Cortes formed under his authority, he explicitly declared that existing commitments did not
allow this basis to be adopted; if it was a question of Ferdinand VII, and of the Cortes governing
in his name, we were ready to explain ourselves.*

*Ibidem, from 23rd.

By these words the present dynasty Napoleon meant that of his brother Joseph. The negotiation
was carried no further; but supposing he had yielded on this point, would England have made
peace? That is not probable, because she had had advantages in Spain, and things were too
advanced with Russia; on the other hand, Napoleon could not replace Ferdinand VII on the
throne without delivering Spain to England. The openess of the French government to Great
Britain could therefore have no other purpose than to be able to say that it had exhausted all
means to make peace with Great Britain before engaging in war with the Russians.

This negotiation lasted only eight days. Two sheets of paper sufficed to cover the
correspondence to which it gave rise*. And yet four more words: Joseph will give way to
Ferdinand, and the peace of the world was made; unfortunately, these words could not come out
of the mouth of a brother, when this brother was called Napoleon!

*See appendix (first part), the two letters relating to this negotiation.

Meanwhile, the Emperor Alexander's answer, so eagerly awaited, arrived from St. Petersburg. It
was the Baron de Serdobin, attached to the Russian legation, who brought it on 23 April to his
Ambassador Kurakin, who, after having read it, immediately went to communicate it to the Duke
of Bassano. The latter found it so imperious and offensive that he made no reply to the
ambassador. So the latter requested an audience from the Emperor, which was granted to him on
the 27th. It would seem that Napoleon avoided entering into an explanation with Kurakin, and
that he sent him back to the Minister of Foreign Relations to discuss the Russian proposals; but
at the same time he gave the Duke of Bassano the secret order to evade these explanations.
Kurakin, in desperation, decided to write to him. According to his letter, the preservation of
