                             Translated by Greg Gorsuch Part 14

                                         CHAPTER IV.


                QUESTION OF POLAND, NAPOLEON'S APPROACH TO
                       ENGLAND. RUSSIA'S ULTIMATUM.

                                            ________

Enthusiasm of military youth at the announcement of the Russian war. --Poland and the
Poles. —Napoleon's intentions with regard to them. --M. de Talleyrand; --Indiscretion. --
Project postponed. --Sending a French agent to Warsaw. --Instructions on this. --The King
of Saxony. --Napoleon's Approach to England. --Lord Castlereagh. --Aborted negotiations.
--Russia's ultimatum. --Conditions imposed on France by the Cabinet of St. Petersburg. --
The Duke of Bassano and Prince Kurakin. --Mission given to the Count of Narbonne.--
Appointment assigned, at Dresden, to the Emperor of Austria, by Napoleon. --Disposition
taken by the Emperor, before leaving Paris. --Raising of a National Guard organized in
three bans. --Reasons for this institution. --Discussion at the Council of State. --Words of
Napoleon. --Last preparations for war.--Movements of troops. --Marshal Victor and the
Prussian. --Recommendations of Napoleon to his ministers. --Savary, Clarke, Montalivet. --
The Arch-Chancellor Cambacérès charged with high authority, in the absence of the
Emperor. --Daily reports required by Napoleon. --The diamond chest. --The Postmaster
General and the Emperor's First Valet de Chambre. --Departure of Napoleon for Dresden.
--The Moniteur. --The expectation of a first victory.


From the end of March 1812, Napoleon no longer hesitated to speak aloud of the war which
threatened him, although the cabinet of St. Petersburg had not yet made known its final
intentions. He presented it to his lieutenants as a great enterprise which was to smile upon
warrior souls and put the crowning touch to the glory of the French arms. So people sought the
favor of serving in the Grand Army from all sides: "It is perhaps," they said, "the last campaign
that the Emperor will make in person." It was not only the generals employed in Spain who
asked to go to the North. The richest young people, the sons of the noblest families disputed the
patents of aides-de-camp and the lesser ranks in the general staff. Everywhere people spoke only
of the gigantic expedition which was preparing, and which, to use Napoleon's expressions,
"would make that of Egypt pale!..." Never, and at no time, could the imagination have more
strongly seconded the instinct which generally impels the French to rush wherever danger
promises them honor and glory! “We leave for Moscow, but we will be back soon!” Such were
the farewells of all those who received letters of service.

If the military youth looked upon the Russian expedition as a six-month hunting trip, the old
servants in Italy and Egypt did not see it in the same light. Napoleon, it is true, had noticed
sadness only on a small number of faces, on those which our Parisian conscripts called, in their
mocking language, the big bonnets and the feathered hats. Napoleon, we say, divined the
anxiety these old warriors felt when they saw him on the point of leaving again, and this
