"His armaments," he said, "are perhaps only a political game. We know how much I need to
maintain the state of peace to consolidate my immense edifice, and perhaps we seek to know how
far I can let myself be pushed. It's up to who will intimidate the other and uphold the challenge.
I confess, it would be painful to me if Alexander's friendship were only an illusion. Here in a few
days, my doubts will be cleared up; if I have been deceived, at least I would not be taken
unawares. Half measures are hardly my method, and I take my precautions with such a vast
plan. When the Russians see that Prussia, Austria, and probably Sweden are with me, and that
the Turks are revived under our influence,* I suppose that the cabinet of St. Petersburg are not
left easily at the thought of defying me.”

*Napoleon could not yet be aware of either the treaty signed on 24 March by Alexander and Bernadotte, or the
Peace of Bucharest, concluded in May following, between Russia and the Sublime Porte. This last treaty, as we
shall see later, remained unknown to the Emperor until 13 August, just as he did not learn that at the end of October,
and consequently after having left Moscow, that the Russian army of Moldavia was advancing towards Lithuania to
fight him. If we have made complete prematurely of the result of the negotiations opened by France with Sweden
and the Ottoman Empire, it is because intelligence of the facts demanded it .

In fact, from 16 to 20 February, the Italian troops had already left Bautzen; the Saxons assembled
at Guben, and the Bavarians set out. Oudinot, with the Second Corps, was between the Rhine
and the Elbe. In the first days of March, Ney, with the Third Corps, had crossed the Rhine, at
Mainz; Davout, with the First, was on the Oder. From the month of April, these various corps
marched forward: the First, on the Vistula; the Second, on the Elbe; the Third, on the lower
Oder; the Fourth, starting from Verona, had already crossed the Tyrol and penetrated into Silesia:
the Imperial Guard did not leave Paris until the 1st of April. Until the Emperor's arrival, Davout
was invested with the command: he was recommended to carefully avoid anything that might
militarily alarm the Russians. Napoleon wanted to be on his guard against an attack on their
part, but not to provoke it, because his desire was to maintain until the end the possibility of
understanding each other, and, if war became inevitable, to give the rest of his forces time to
arrive. The line of the Grand Army would therefore only be completed from 1 to 15 May.

Although the Prussian contingent was in fact in the vanguard, Napoleon nevertheless took every
precaution for the safety of the French columns. As they passed the capitals of Germany, they
were to leave strong garrisons in the country, to prevent an insurrection of the German
population, or to suppress it. He occupied Spandau, which he called the citadel of Berlin, as
Pillau was that of Königsberg. He ordered Victor to establish himself at Berlin, where he was to
assemble the Ninth Corps, 30,000 strong, to contain the Russians, and ensure the
communications of the army. It was prescribed to this Marshal not to interfere in the affairs of
the government.

"He should have the greatest respect," said Napoleon*, "for the king, the princes, the ministers
and the main personages of the State. He should above all show great respect for His Prussian
Majesty, and even the expression of this feeling can never be pushed too far in all the ceremonies
and in all the circumstances that may arise. Finally, the Duke de Belluno must not accept a
table. What I grant him in treatment must suffice for a great representation."

*Instructions to the Minister of War, 21 April 1812.
