Bouillerie, Commissariat General, had the barrels of gold prepared which were to be the reserve
of all the departments.

Provisions of all kinds, cannon, muskets, powder, ammunition, pontoon crews, were sent to
Danzig: the garrison of this place was increased to twenty thousand men.

The cavalry, artillery train and military crews were complete.*

*See appendix (second part), Ist Bulletin of the Grand Army, 20 June.

All troops had to live off the resources of the country. It had been forbidden to touch the
supplies, which were only to be a reserve. Numerous transports, among which one saw for the
first time voitures à la comtoise and teams of oxen, were intended to carry the stores of the army
following the columns.

Thus, while the cabinet of Saint Petersburg, relying on the statements of the situation of our
army, stolen by M. de Chernishev, believed to catch Napoleon unawares, two months had
sufficed for him to put himself in position, and, from the Rhine to the Vistula, all the roads were
covered with soldiers!

Each time that Napoleon was to take a campaign, his first care, before leaving Paris, was to
organize the public administration in such a way that none of its springs would be embarrassed.
He had acted thus during the Italian campaign, crowned by Marengo; in 1805, when he left for
Austerlitz; before the Prussian campaign of 1806, and in his last war with Austria, in 1809. The
Russian expedition, once resolved, Fouché, who was no longer Minister of Police*, had been
replaced, like us as we have said, by a man on whose devotion Napoleon could count, the Duke
de Rovigo, an implacable enemy of all conspiracies against his sovereign, his idol, wherever he
planted his eagles. Savary, we say, was to, by means of a daily report, inform the Emperor of all
that happened in the Empire, and especially of the movements of public opinion; also when the
Minister of Police took leave of the Emperor, the day before his departure, Napoleon said to him:

*Fouché, no doubt because he was no longer in power, was very opposed to the Russian campaign. On this subject
he composed a Memoir for the Emperor, in which he tried to demonstrate to him the danger there would be in
engaging in that distant war which, he said, "could not resemble any other." The means that Savary employed to
have the certainty that his predecessor, retired to his castle of Ferrières, was engaged in similar work, and to inform
the Emperor of it before Fouché could present it to him, is curious: we will have occasion to talk about it later.

"No useless rigors; make yourself loved rather than feared."

This advice was not the easiest to follow, for great energy had to be imparted to the general
administration of the Empire, of which the police was in fact the real centre.

General Clarke, Minister of War, also inspired much confidence in Napoleon in his means of
administering his department, which had become, by the force of circumstances, the most
important of all. The interior was in the hands of M. de Montalivet, who was to come to an
understanding with Savary for the administration of the departments. The other ministries, such
as finance, justice and worship, were sort of specialties. At the head of everything, Napoleon
