had placed Arch-Chancellor Cambacérès, because he knew him devoted, prudent and capable, by
a certain temperance of will, of stopping the zeal, sometimes pushed to excess, of Savary,
Montalivet and Clarke.

The council of ministers had to meet every day, under the presidency of the Arch-Chancellor,
who received orders directly from the Emperor. Marie-Louise, who was to accompany her
glorious husband to Dresden, received no political power; the idea of a regency had not yet
occurred to Napoleon, who felt too sure of his strength for that; Marie-Louise was only to
embellish Napoleon's plenary court at Dresden, to which almost all the rulers of Europe had been
summoned by him.

When everything was thus settled, the Emperor presided over the Council of State for the last
time and recommended to the ministers to maintain Paris and the Empire in a patriotic spirit: his
language seemed to take on a tone of inspiration and solemnity: "I am going to tame Alexander,"
he said; "I will win two battles, and I will go to Moscow or St. Petersburg: there I will dictate
peace. I will only be absent for three or four months, because this war is limited."

To the great functionaries of the State, he dictated the duties, saying to them:

"Do not be afraid to importune me with your correspondence, even every day."

To the Minister of War:

"You will activate the levies of men, and especially the organization of the cohorts."

To Savary:

"Do not forget to send me daily bulletins, written by your hand, on the spirit of the inhabitants of
Paris."

Finally, he said, addressing everyone:

"Zeal, gentlemen, union among you, confidence in me, and soon I will bring you an
advantageous, solid and glorious peace for France."*

*Locré, Minutes of the Council of State, May 1812.

Two days before his departure (that is to say, 7 May), Napoleon had his first treasure summoned
during the day, his diamond chest, and deposited in his bedroom; then he advised her not to go
away, "because," added the Emperor, "I shall need you later." Constant acquitted himself of this
commission. About nine o'clock in the evening, this servant was summoned again to the
Emperor, whom he found chatting with M. de La Valette, director-general of the post office. As
soon as Napoleon saw Constant, he went to the casket, placed on a sofa, opened it, examined its
contents, piece by piece, and said to his First Valet de Chambre, after closing the little cabinet
himself:
