

                                             2
 INTRODUCTION:              HISTORIOGRAPHY               AND    BIBLIOGRAPHY

study, in several ways, set the terms for all subsequent debate about
what the Maratha polity “was,” the central principles of governing,
and even the “‘character” of the Marathas and Brahmins involved. Let
me suggest some of Grant Duff’s viewpoints here; others will be
suggested further into the text. First, Grant Duff gave only a cursory
review of the period of the rise of Shivaji and, thus, downplayed
continuities with prior kingdoms in Maharashtra. Second, for Grant
Duff, history was mainly political history. He was interested in the
wars and battles, the factions at court, and who won and lost. Other
aspects, particularly economic and social, form only small parts of the
narrative. Third, Grant Duff focused only on the head of the polity and
occasionally on a few of the most powerful men who were his
commanders. We get no picture of life outside court or sectors of the
polity not immediately involved with the court. Fourth, the narrative is
strictly chronological; it never steps back to consider long-term trends
or changes. Finally, there is no question but that Grant Duff was proud
of the British conquest and celebrated the brave acts of the British
military involved. He emphasized great failures, especially the char-
acter of crucial leaders of the Maratha polity, which allowed for British
conquest.
   Much of the subsequent historiography on the Maratha polity
should be read as a gloss on Grant Duff. Each generation of historians
of Maharashtra needed to “prove” Grant Duff was wrong, and that the
Maratha polity represented something important to the political needs
of the day. In the 1890s, for example, the early “moderates,” especially
M. G. Ranade, tried to establish that in the seventeenth century the
Marathas as a people emerged from a political, social, and religious
renaissance. They represented an incipient “nationalism” and Shivaji’s
resistance to the Mughal Empire should be seen as the resistance of the
emerging “nation” to foreign domination. The parallels to the emerg-
ing resistance to the British in Ranade’s own time placed Shivaji in the
position of a leader of a principally secular, ‘national’? movement of
the seventeenth century.°
   Another theme added to the study of Shivaji and the Maratha polity
in the nineteenth century was that of Shivaji as a military strategist.

   6 M. G. Ranade, The Rise of Maratha Power (Bombay, 1900). It should be noted,
however, that it was Mountstuart Elphinstone, the well-known Bombay administrator of the
early nineteenth century who, in his History of India, first referred to the Marathas as a
“nation” and to Shivaji’s activities as a “war of independence.”
                          THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

British writers wanted to see Shivaji primarily as a glorious rebel,
capable of sustained resistance against a superior Mughal force. His
use of mobility and terrain spoke to British military concerns in
India.”
   One very positive effect of these attempts to critique Grant Duff
was the search for documents of the Maratha polity. The main source,
the huge quantity of Maratha central government documents captured
by the British in 1818, was, by colonial policy, closed to historical
research. (The British perceived these documents as a dangerous
source of national pride and probable sedition, and the archive
remained closed until independence.) The first alternative source was
the archives of the princely states and the larger Maratha families. Thus
there appeared before 1900 histories of important Maharashtrian fami-
lies, for example         Shinde,     Holkar,     the Satara Rajas, the Pratnidhi
family, the Angres, and the Dabhades.® The decades after 1900 saw a
series of dedicated collectors combing the countryside in search of the
documents of the Marathas which had not found their way to the
central archives. What were located were mainly the family collections
of administrative families, plus the land grants and records of smaller
Maratha families. The collecting and printing of these documents was
seen as important national work, leading to a new and more accurate
history of the Marathas. The most famous of these collectors was
V. K. Rajwade, who published thousands of documents along with
extensive introductions.’
   Largely in response to these private publications, the Bombay
government permitted a series of volumes of selections from the vast