

                                         I
                         THE        MARATHAS       1600-1818

now allow a more balanced discussion of Shivaji and the early Maratha
polity.?
   Within a decade of the British conquest of Maharashtra (1818), two
developments spurred the indigenous interest in Maratha history. The
first was a series of reports by early British administrators of the
conquered territories. These usually were based on both a search for
documents of the previous Maratha government and questioning of
clerks and others (mainly Brahmins) who had served the Marathas.
Much of what became “Maratha” history was created out of the
questions of the British, the answers of their informants, and mis-
understandings on both sides.*
   At the same time, an intense dialogue began between Christian
missionaries and Brahmin pundits; it covered the nature of Indian
society, Hinduism, and the role of Brahmins. By the 1840s and 1850s,
this debate led to the vigorous development of a locally sponsored,
Marathi-language press, mostly concerned with philosophical and
social questions. Simultaneously, there was increasing pressure from
the British colonial government (both through the census and the
courts) to define and close castes and subcastes.* This pressure led both
Brahmin and Maratha individuals and groups to rethink their history
and the history of Maharashtra. Some of the general journals began
including ballads and family histories, and a strictly historical journal,
Bodhsagar, appeared in Bombay in 1849-50.
   In 1863, the second and much more widely circulated edition of
Grant Duff’s English-language history of the Marathas sharpened the
debate.    The    author,      an    early administrator       in the new           Bombay
government, produced three volumes that covered the rise of Shivaji in
the mid-seventeenth century up to the British conquest in 1818.5 This

  2 The best discussion of the bakhar literature is the study in Marathi by R. V. Hervadkar,
Marathi Bakhar (Pune, 1975). The consensus is that the Shabasad and the 91-Kalami are the
most reliable bakhars for the Shivaji period. A flavor of this literature can be found in the
translations of P. P. Patwardhan and H. G. Rawlinson, A Sourcebook of Maratha History
(reprinted by the Indian Council of Historical Research, Calcutta, 1978).
   > Some of the more famous of these reports are as follows: M. Elphinstone, Report on the
Territories Conquered from the Peshwa (1809), T. Jenkins, Report on the Territories of the
Raja of Nagpur (1827), T. B. Jervis, Geographical and Statistical Memoir of the Konkan
(1840), W. H. Sykes, “On the land tenures of the Dekkan,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society, 2 (1835), andJ.Malcolm, A Memoir of Central India (London, third edition, 1832).
   * The terms of the debate and generational differences are covered in Richard Tucker,
“The early setting of the non-Brahmin movement         in Maharashtra,”    Indian   Historical
Review, 7, 1-2 (July, 1980-January, 1981), 134-58.
  > James Grant Duff, History of the Marathas (London, 1818, reprinted Jaipur, 1986).