

                                   XIV
                           GLOSSARY

vazier     in Muslim sultanates of the Deccan, the highest official after
           the sultan
vritti     a long-standing grant for religious service or merit
watan      the home, core rights forming the basis of a family’s status
           and wealth
zamindar   a broad Mughal term covering a wide variety of local armed
           landed elites




                                 XV
     feha        or a.                      eS
                                           td

Se              1 ey                   we eewiyitee ca
 a              i
                ae

ave               ine oe arihaeat
                                                 “9




                               =




                                   -



                                   v




     ae
                 =




            =




                               =




                               7




                                       =




                           _



                       _
  INTRODUCTION: HISTORIOGRAPHY
        AND BIBLIOGRAPHY

The writing of the history of Maharashtra and the Marathas is almost as
old as the polity itself. The first histories, termed bakhars, and written
in Marathi by Brahmin eulogists, were the product of the late seven-
teenth century to the mid-eighteenth century. The current consensus is
that much of the genre was hagiographical and often confused in dating
and placing events. Nevertheless, the best of this literature — the
Shabasad Bakhar and the 91-Kalami Bakhar — is important both for the
facts and the tone of the heroic and tragic events which form the basis
of the popular history of Maharashtra.!
   Unfortunately, many of the statements of even these two most
reliable bakhars have found their way into scholarly writing without
careful use of corroborating evidence. Considered critically, however,
the bakhar literature does raise several important issues for our
understanding of the Maratha polity. First, this literature treats Shivaji
— founder of the polity — as a near divine figure, regularly inspired by
the goddess Bhavani to great deeds, which were primarily important as
a Hindu resistance to Muslim domination and as leading to the
establishment of a Hindu state. This theme of some decisive difference
between Shivaji’s Maharashtrian kingdom and earlier Muslim Maha-
rashtrian kingdoms is an important one which runs regularly through
the later historiography on Maharashtra. Just what those differences
were and how they came about are critical to any discussion of the
Maratha polity.
   The second theme raised by these early histories is Shivaji as the ideal
Hindu leader. A great part of the continuing interest in Shivaji is as a
historical role model of perfect behavior. Any discussion of Shivaji,
then, must deal with the events that any school-child in Maharashtra
can relate, events that show courage and high moral character and
charismatic leadership. With this background, it is understandable why
acts of realpolitik, of dubious moral justification, get short shrift in
much of the later writing. Recent research and published documents
  1 Both of these bakhars have recent editions in Marathi edited by V.S. Vakaskar:
91-Kalami Bakhar (Poona, 1962) and Sabhasadact Bakhar (Poona, 1973).