

   7 C.f. Dennis Kincaid, The Grand Rebel: An Impression of Shivaji, Founder of the
Maratha Empire (London, 1937).
   * Most of these early family histories were never printed in large editions and most are long
out of print. Some examples would include M. M. Atre, Thorle Malhar Rao Holkar yanchen
Charitra (Life of Malhar Rao Holkar) (Poona, 1893), G. N. Deva, Srimanta Abilyabai
yanchen Charitra (Life of Ahilyabai) (Bombay, 1892), and J. P. Saranjame, Sinde hyanche
gharanyacha itihasa (History of the Shindes) (Poona, 1872).
   ® Important associations for historical research were founded at this time in Pune and
several regional towns of Maharashtra. Their lectures and publications gave a dynamism
and excitement to the movement to recover the history of the Marathas. Examples of family
and other documents collected in the 1900-30 period include D. V. Apte, Candracud
Daftar (Poona, 1920), the early volumes of Sivacaritra Sahitya, published by the Bharat
Itihas Samshodak Mandal, V. V. Khare (ed.), Aitihasik Lekh Samgraha (Miraj, 1918-26),
and V. K. Rajwade (ed.) Marathyanchya Itihasacin Sadhanen (published Poona, Bombay,
etc., 1898-1918), and K.V. Purandare (ed.) Purandare Daftar (Poona, 1929). Many
important volumes from this period are now available only at the Bharat Itihas Samshodak
Mandal, Pune.
  INTRODUCTION:                HISTORIOGRAPHY                AND     BIBLIOGRAPHY

central government archive. The first printing was thirteen volumes
between 1917 and 1925, selected and glossed by Rao Bahadur Wad.!°
Subsequent selections were begun by G. S. Sardesai in 1928. The series
now runs to forty-five volumes and continues today. Because they are
readily available and in Devangari script (rather than the difficult Modi
of the originals), these are the selections which form the basis of much
of the historical scholarship on Maharashtra.'!! They, however, have
two drawbacks. First, the majority of the volumes were published in
the British period and were explicitly intended to be of a “non-
controversial”       nature;     thus, crucial and important documents                     and
subjects were often simply left out. Second, in spite of the volume of
printed material (perhaps 50,000 documents by now), the selection
process has hampered many kinds of research. In areas such as
economic history, the selections tended toward those which the
historians found typical of the Maratha “system,” rather than long
runs of documents of a particular area or family, which might have
showed conflict or trends and changes.!?
   In the 1930s and rg4os, the process of publication of documents, if
anything, accelerated.!3 The writing of Maratha history also changed in
this period. In response to deteriorating relations between Hindus and
Muslims, Shivaji and the Maratha polity took on a new significance for
a new generation of historians. The importance of the Maratha polity,
for this group, was as a Hindu resistance to the overbearing and
oppressive Muslim government, the Mughal Empire. Shivaji, thus, was
turned into an ideal Hindu ruler, struggling against the foreign Muslim