

                                              8
 INTRODUCTION:        HISTORIOGRAPHY         AND   BIBLIOGRAPHY

term changes, such as the shift from tribute to regular tax collection.
Fourth, we will examine the nature of loyalty and legitimacy, as
continuing and insoluble problems. Fifth, the Maratha polity presents
a fascinating case study of military and technological change and its
social and economic effects — both at court and at the local level.
Finally, we must consider the legacy of the Maratha polity — what,
within India, did it change forever. As we shall see, it had profound
effects on revenue administration, law, education, trade patterns,
migration, and the economic and social make-up of Central India,
Gujarat, and Maharashtra.
                                    CHAPTE            Ra

 LHE GEOPOEIIIGS                              OFM          AGAR               Eiiica



For an understanding of the spatial framework of the Maratha polity
there are several crucial terms which appear throughout this study. The
two most important are the Deccan and Maharashtra. The Deccan,
which translates as “south,” is an old term appearing in the Vedic litera-
ture and the Mahabharata as Dakshinapatha. It meant the area below the
Tapti River, and suggested an area suitable for conquest. Throughout
history, “Deccan” has retained these overtones, the perspective of a
northern conqueror considering possible domains. What constituted
the Deccan, at any particular moment, depended on where the king-
dom’s southern border lay and what lay beyond. Over the whole his-
torical period, the area from the Tapti to the Godavari was frequently
integrated into northern empires, and the area south of it, between the
Godavari and the Krishna, became the Deccan.! In this sense, I will use
the term Deccan not as a fixed place, but only as a relational term, the
area beyond the southern border of a northern-based kingdom.
   The term “Maharashtra” is much easier to define. It is simply the
area where Marathi is the dominant language. As a place, Maharashtra
was mentioned from the first century AD onwards, but not until
inscriptional evidence of the seventh century is it possible roughly to
map the region. Ma ho leska (Maharashtra) figures prominently in the
narrative of the Chinese Buddhist pilgrim, Hsuan Tsang, in this period.
With the further development of Marathi, between 800 aD and 1300
AD, we can trace a definite linguistic region. For example, the saint-
reformer Chakradhara travelled all over the Marathi-speaking region,
preaching and plying his trade as a barber. He was proud never to set
foot in Kanada or Telegu areas. The minute record of his journeys gives
the limits of the Marathi language.? It agrees to a remarkable extent
with the map of find-spots for Marathi inscriptions. This Marathi-
language region is represented on Map 1. We should not think of this

   ' S.M. Alam, “The historic Deccan: a geographical appraisal,” in V. K. Bawa (ed.) Aspects
of Deccan History: Report ofaSeminar (Hyderabad, 1975), 16-29.
   * M. G. Panse, “Regional individuality of Maharashtra,” in Bawa (ed.), Aspects of Deccan
History, 139-40.
                                                                                                                                                           puy‘Lg uayei
                                                                                                                                                                     pal
                                                                                                                                                             ‘[9g61 ‘yjoyyng
                                                                                                                                                           purT
                                                                                Iooz
                                                                          002                                                                                   st
                                                                                                                                                                Alepunog
                                                        2                        : Be i                    ae                                              ‘yur
                                                                                                                                                             ‘a8piuquiea]
                                                 oe                                                                                                                 ‘AeSung]
                       “eee
                                                   ©,
                       .