

                                             16
              THE   GEOPOLITICS       OF   MAHARASHTRA

restrictions on widow-remarriage. Eventually, these changes came to
be solidified in a kinship network that conformed to the “correct”
behavior, financed mainly by the solid wealth of grants for military
service. Thus, the term ‘“‘Maratha”’ was a relational and interactional
term that described a newly emerging service elite.
   As we shall see, the nature of the development of the category
Maratha goes a long way towards describing the continuing factional
politics which dominated the Maratha polity’s history. Many of the
great families arose simultaneously, in service to the five Deccan
Muslim kingdoms, not in service to a single conqueror. (As we shall
see, many families were of at least equivalent age, legitimacy, and
power to Shivaji — the founder of the Maratha polity — and resisted his
attempts to establish authority.) Families, thus, held service grants
which solidly established them in a certain territory. The famous
Maratha trait of clinging, at all costs, to local rights to land revenue can
be understood as the refusal of a new landed elite to return to the status
of a purely service elite, able to be moved at the beck and call of the
polity, paid by whatever lands were assigned to them.
   The defining of Maratha as a new caste category continued
throughout the period of the Maratha polity and into the nineteenth
century, along the lines of the Rajput model already described. There
were attempts to list and define the “pure”? Maratha families and to
close the caste by observing practices not possible to poorer farmers,
such as secluding women. There was strong emphasis on soldiering as
the only proper vocation for a true Maratha.
   Let us return from this brief digression to the Maharashtra of the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. For certain groups, Maharashtra
would seem to have been a very different place after the Muslim
conquest. The warrior-lineages were either gone or making accommo-
dation with the new rulers. What of the effect on Brahmins, especially
Brahmins associated with courtly patronage? Let us suggest one
example: under the earlier Hindu dynasties of Maharashtra, there
would have been a whole round of kingly rituals to be performed at
various times each and every year to ensure not just fertility but the
continued proper ordering of the entire cosmos. What happened when
these rituals were simply no longer performed by the Muslim rulers?
Another example: in Hindu thought, such as the Arthashastra, it was
the king’s moral obligation to be the ultimate arbiter of caste relations,
acting on the precepts of his Brahmin advisers. His moral authority, in

                                     17
                        THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

large part, came from this role. What were Brahmins to make of new
rulers who did not belong to the correct caste to be king and were not
keen to enter the unknown territory of caste disputes? The fact is that
the changes were not as profound as we might expect. Because the
number of Muslims in the Deccan was always very small, they were
never more than the core administration, based in towns and forts, and
were heavily dependent on local talent for administration and tax
collecting.!2 From early on, various groups of Brahmins served the
Muslim states of the Deccan, and were crucial to their functioning.
They filled all the middle and lower levels of the tax-collecting
administration. After the break-up of the Bahmani kingdom, it was the
successor Muslim state of Ahmadnagar which controlled much of
Maharashtra (in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries). Deshasta Brah-
mins ran virtually the whole administration; they had suffered little
under Muslim rule, and probably gained a degree of social mobility.
They were thus familiar with revenue terms and practices throughout
the region and were well positioned to form the administration of the
new Maratha polity of the mid-seventeenth century.
   Throughout the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries in Maharashtra,
much was happening in Hinduism outside courts and Brahmin-
controlled temples. Itinerant and local preachers were developing a
popular form of Hindu faith, which came to be known as bhakti. It is
too easy to identify the rise of these fervent religious practices as a
reaction to the Muslim conquest. It is important to note that bhakti did
not begin in Maharashtra, and its origin long predated Muslim
conquest. It arose in Tamil country as early as the mid-tenth century as
a reaction to the overly formal, ritualistic Vedic practices of the time.
As an overall movement,             bhakti stressed fervent devotion              in the
vernacular language of the follower to the deity, usually Krishna.43
   In Maharashtra, it is also important to remember that early bhakti
predated the Muslim invasions. The fervent devotion and preaching
and writing in the local vernacular language paralleled developments in
Tamilnadu of the preceding two centuries. The writings of Namadey, a