

own horse and equipment. This is how the Mirat-i- Ahmadi referred to
all such troops in the seventeenth century, i.e. the Bargirs from
Ahmadnagar. Later they became Maratha units, with their own horses
and equipment, operating under Maratha chiefs and leaders.
   This origin would account for the varied and impossible to reconcile
lists of the “true” Maratha families compiled in the nineteenth cen-
tury.? It fits perfectly with the origin and development of the term
Rajput, whose martial ideology developed through service to the
Mughal Empire. Eventually, kinship and marriage restrictions defined
this Rajput group as different from other elements in the society of
Rajasthan. The hypergamous marriage pattern typical of Rajputs
tacitly acknowledged that it was a somewhat open caste category; by
successful service in a state army and translating this service into grants
and power at the local level, a family might become Rajput. The
process required changes in dress, eating patterns, the patronage of
local shrines closer to the “great tradition,” and an end to widow-
remarriage.'° A hypergamous marriage with an acknowledged (but
possibly impoverished) Rajput family would follow and with con-
tinued success in service the family would, indeed, become Rajput. All
this is well documented in relations between Rajputs and tribals, such
as Bhils, in Central India.!!
   I see no reason why the term Maratha did not develop in the same
way. First came service that differentiated certain families from the
ordinary cultivator; grants made these families involved in revenue
collection and further differentiated them at the local level. Simultane-
ously, a new ethic developed that included martial training and
hunting, different patterns in dress (such as the more complicated
turban), changed patterns of diet, the employment of genealogists, and

  9 Three such lists are considered in R. E. Enthoven, The Tribes and Castes of Bombay, 111
(Bombay, 1922), 21-25.
   '©0 Norman Ziegler, “Some notes on Rajput loyalties during the Mughal period,” in J. F.
Richards (ed.) Kingship and Authority in South Asia (Madison, Wis., 1978). The process is
analyzed   in much   more    detail in D.H. A. Kolff, Naxkar,     Rajput,   and Sepoy:   The
Ethnohistory of the Military Labour Market in Hindustan, 1450-1850 (Cambridge, 1990).
Kolff suggests, quite rightly, that several of the terms commonly thought of as “castes” —
Sikh, Pathan, Rajput, Afghan — were, in fact, terms dependent on military employment and
intimately linked to the perquisites and linkages of soldiering, ibid., 57-58.
   "1 Surajit Sinha, “State formation and Rajput myth in tribal Central India,” Man in India,
42, 1 January-March 1962), 35-80. This perspective, that “caste” is, and always has been,
embedded in the politics of kingship and service, I share with Nicholas Dirks, see The Hollow
Crown. Ethnohistory of an Indian Kingdom (Cambridge, 1987). I wish to thank Nick for
many conversations around these themes.