


                                                                                                                                 Nvigvuy                        ut are “yO
                                                                                                                                                                Kyusias.aa0¢
                                                                                                                                            Vers
                                                                                                                                                                   speos
                                                                                                                                                   s403/,0 “1
                                                                                  eet
                                                                                Node                                                                       dey ayWoy
                                                                                                                                                               T,
                                                                                                                                                      ry
                                                                                                                                                                   ‘upa
                                                                                                                                                                   ain3iz
                                                                                                                                                                   ‘(6961
                                                                                                                                                                    ‘b€z
                        THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

line as a sharp boundary, however. Recent research suggests that it is
more like a broad strip, perhaps fifty miles wide, inside which
considerable bilingual areas would be found, with much less on either
side. Many other patterns would tend to support this boundary. For
example, Maharashtra grows mainly wheat, cotton, and pulses and
very little rice, while Andhra grows rice, sugar, and millet.* Pilgrimage
routes, trading patterns, and marriage networks would also support
this Marathi-language boundary.
   There is also a long tradition of political boundaries matching
linguistic ones. When the western Chalukya kingdom broke into two
successor states in the opening of the twelfth century, it fissured into
two core areas, the Marathi-speaking areas of Maharashtra and the
Kanada-speaking areas of Karnataka. In Maharashtra, the new Yadava
dynasty immediately began to use vernacular Marathi as their official
language and patronized the important pilgrimage sites of Maha-
rashtra.
   What of the overall geographic features of this region? First, the
northern and southern boundaries have no defensible features; they are
readily open to invasion. Second, the region itself is sharply divided
into three subregions — the Konkan, the Ghats, and the Desh. The
Konkan is the narrow coastal strip, about thirty miles wide, which lies
below the mountains. Rainfall in the Konkan is over eighty inches a
year. Its other feature is the presence of important coastal ports. The
Ghats rise sharply from the Konkan coast and are characterized by
steep separated peaks and few passes. These mountains are wooded
(and were much more so in previous centuries); most of the rainfall
runs back into the Konkan. Fodder and food are scarce, and the only
items of trade are forest products — medicinal herbs, timber, honey, and
the like. The Ghats were important for their hill forts. In this strip,
perhaps thirty miles wide and running north-south the whole length of
Maharashtra, more than two hundred hilltops have been fortified over
time, many of them over and over again by successive local or regional
powers. Until the introduction of European cannon in the late
eighteenth century, those in the fort possessed a strong strategic
advantage over those outside. The third region, the Desh, is a broad
  > See Charles J. Bennett, “The morphology of language boundaries: Indo-Aryan and
Dravidian in peninsular India,” in David E. Sopher (ed.), An Exploration  of India:
Geographical Perspectives in Society and Culture (Ithaca, 1980), 234-51.
  * Jayshree Gokhale-Turner, “Images of Maharashtra,” in N.G. Wagle, Region and
Regionalism in Indian Politics (London, 1980).