

   10 Two typical volumes which came out of the joint editorship of Rao Bahadur G. C,
Wad and D. B. Parasnis were Kaifryats, Yadis, etc. (Bombay, 1908), and Selections from the
Satara Rajas and the Peishwas’ Diaries (Bombay, 1907).
  11 The princely states were also an important source of printed documents.            See, for
example, A. N. Bhagwat (ed.) Holkar Shahitchya Itihasachi Sadhne (Indore, 1924-25).
Unfortunately, both the documents selected and the histories of the families written from
them were sometimes attempts to glorify the family or settle old scores, such as rivalries and
conflicts with other families.
   12 This type of history, because of the fragmented nature of the documentation, tends to
use material from all areas and all periods of Maratha history in search of a ““Maratha” system.
Some of the best, seminal work is plagued by this problem. See, for example, the two
important studies by S. N. Sen, Administrative System of the Marathas (Calcutta, 1925) and
Military System of the Marathas (Calcutta, 1928), and V. T. Gune, The Judicial System of the
Marathas (Poona, 1953).
   13 For example, see D.B. Diskalkar, Historical Papers of the Sindhias of Gwalior:
1777-1793 (Satara, 1940), Historical Selections from Baroda State Records, 5 vols. (Baroda,
1934-39), G. H. Khare (ed.), Hingane Daftar, 2 vols. (Poona, 1945-47), V. V. Thakur (ed.),
Holkarsahica Itihasacin Sadhanen (Indore, 1944-45).
                         THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

rule.14 The parallels to the situation of the 1940s were apparent to all
sides. Muslims were “foreigners” and the proper government for India
should be a Hindu government. The best that Muslims could expect
was what they got under Shivaji, the “tolerance” and general morality
expected of a benign Hindu ruler.!°
   In the decades after independence, there have been several significant
trends in the study of Maratha history. The first is the publication and
use of documents from the surrounding rivals of the Marathas —
English, French, Portuguese,             and Mughals.'6 Within Maharashtra,
scholars have produced a very useful series of regional studies and
biographies.'7 Overall, Shivaji and the Maratha polity have retreated to
regional, rather than national symbols. This is perhaps understandable.
Historically, though the Marathas ruled much of northern and central
India in the eighteenth century, they were known as just another
government, certainly neither the most efficient nor the most bene-
volent that the area had known.
   In the last ten years, Shivaji and the Maratha polity have assumed
importance in yet another political struggle. Within Maharashtra, the
struggles among Brahmins, non-Brahmins, and Untouchables have
focused attention on the social reform aspects of Shivaji’s reign. In his
person, as a Maratha, he has become a symbol of non-Brahmin power.
More interestingly, Marxist and Untouchable writers have seized on
his attempts to decrease the power of the independent landed elites as
both consciousness of the need to end caste discrimination and a
commitment to the task.
   '* The best known of this group is G. S. Sardesai, Marathi Riyasat (Bombay, 1935) and
New History of the Marathas (Bombay, 1946).
   'S Two complementary bibliographies form the starting point for the history of Maha-
rashtra and the Marathas: first, V. V. Divekar, Survey of Material in Marathi on the
Economic and Social History of India (Pune, 1981); second, D. S$. Kharbas, Maharashtra and
the Marathas, Their History and Culture: A Bibliographic Guide to Western Language
Materials (Boston, 1975).
  16 See, for example, the volumes edited and translated by V. G. Hatalkar, French Records
Relating to the History of the Marathas (Bombay, 1983—_ ), P. S. Pissurlencar, Portuguese
Maratha Relations (Bombay, 1983), J. N. Sarkar, The Military Dispatches ofaSeventeenth
Century General (Calcutta, 1969), the reprinting of H. M. Elliot and J. Dowson, The
History of India a: Told by Its Own Historians, 7 vols. (Allahabad, 1964), and J. Sarkar,
House of Shivaji (New Delhi, 1978).
   '7 See, for example, M. Malgonkar, Puars of Dewas Senior (Bombay, 1963), S. G. Vaidya,
Peshwa Bayirao II and the Downfall of the Maratha Power (Nagpur, 1976), A. R. Kulkarni,
Maharashtra in the Age of Shivaji (Poona, 1967), G. T. Kulkarni, The Mughal-Maratha
Relations: Twenty Five Fateful Years (1682-1707) (Poona, 1983). A compilation of recent
writing is R. C. Majumdar and V. G. Dighe’s The Maratha Supremacy, Volume Eight of the
History and Culture of the Indian People (Bombay, 1977).