

                                            6
  INTRODUCTION:              HISTORIOGRAPHY              AND     BIBLIOGRAPHY

   Within Maharashtra, current writing on Shivaji and the Maratha
polity explicitly or implicitly goes round and round the following three
themes: (1) the Maratha polity as a “‘rising”’ of the regional conscious-
ness of Maharashtra (2) the Maratha polity as Hindu response to
oppressive Muslim rule, or (3) the Maratha polity as brave attempt to
change the nature of Hindu society and better the lot of its poorest
members. The more specific questions addressed by current historians
arise from one or more of these three general concerns: Was Shivaji an
ideal Hindu ruler? Was he a social reformer? How secular was he? Was
the Maratha polity a Hindu state? Was the resistance to the Mughal
Empire based on the perception of Mughals as “‘foreign”? How much
of the success of the Maratha polity can be attributed to a developing
regional consciousness in Maharashtra? What failures or problems led
to British conquest?
    It is now almost fifty years since independence and perhaps time to
stop writing Maratha history as a gloss on Grant Duff, as only the
failure of a resistance to colonial rule. It is time to stop combing the
records for some historical figure to blame for the British conquest. It
is less glamorous and less heroic to see the Maratha polity as one among
many in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, not as a proto-
nationalist resistance against the foreigner, nor as a Hindu crusade
against Islam. Now, however, the only way an historian can reach
these invalid conclusions is by ignoring or doing violence to the more
than adequate historical records that have become available in the
decades since independence.
   In the last fifteen years, a small group of foreign historians of
pre-colonial Maharashtra has explored quite different themes.
Throughout, this scholarship is characterized by the use of primary
Marathi sources (often from the Pune Daftar or the Bharat Itihas
Samshodak Mandal) and active collaboration with scholars and scribes
in Maharashtra. Overall, the focus has been away from the political
events of court and campaign and towards the countryside, especially
the relation of economic and political processes. Some of these studies
have, for example, examined the dynamics of state and caste, and rural
labor relations.!8 My own work has been on the nature of conquest, the
  18 See these examples of the work of Hiroshi Fukazawa: “State and caste system (jati) in
the eighteenth century Maratha kingdom,” Hitotsubashi Journal of Economics (June, 1968);
“Rural servants in the 18th century Maharashtrian village — demiurgic or jajmani system,”
Hitotsubashi Journal of Economics (February, 1972); several sections in The Cambridge
Economic History of India Vol. I, c. 1200-c. 1750 (Cambridge, 1982).

                                            iy
                              THE   MARATHAS       1600-1818

relation of state and local areas, and on changes in military practice.’
Others have focused attention on the great families which dominated
Maratha history and the related processes of money use and credit.?° A
third group of studies has examined patterns of conflict in the Maratha
polity and the whole nature of “rights” within it.?! Finally, a fourth
group of scholars has studied the religious and literary history of the
Maratha polity.?2
   This volume will respectfully draw on this body of history, both
older and modern, produced both inside and outside Maharashtra. The
overall perspective is to allow the Maratha polity to stand on its own as
a significant part of India’s history. The discussion focuses mainly on
economic and military questions and long-term trends and cycles; it
will downplay the political narration in favor of many themes not
covered in Grant Duff or subsequent histories, First, we will use the
Maratha polity as a main example of the dynamics of kingdoms of the
period — how they came together and decentralized. The perspective
will be not only from the court, but from the families who gave or
withdrew loyalty. The historical sweep is necessarily longer than
usually considered; we will consider the experience of Marathas and
Brahmins in service under the Deccan sultanates and see the Maratha
polity as the natural successor state to these kingdoms. Second, we will
look at the Maratha polity in terms of social mobility for selected
groups and individual families. Naturally, this will include patterns of
downward mobility, for those who, for example, lost out in succession
disputes. Third, we will consider the economics that funded the polity,
especially taxation and credit. Throughout we will be seeking long-
  19 Typical are ““The slow conquest: administrative integration of Malwa into the Maratha
Empire,” Modern Asian Studies, 11, 1 (1977); “Forts and social control in the Maratha state,”
Modern Asian Studies, 22, 1 (1979); “Recovery from adversity in eighteenth century India:
rethinking villages, peasants and politics in pre-modern kingdoms,” Journal of Peasant
Studies, 8, 4 (Fall, 1979).
   20 See these examples of Frank Perlin’s work, “Of ‘white whale’ and countrymen in the
eighteenth-century Maratha Deccan: extended class relations, rights and the problem of rural
autonomy under the old regime,” Journal of Peasant Studies, 5 (1978); “Proto-industriali-
zation and pre-colonial South Asia,” Past and Present, 98 (1983); ‘““Money use in late
pre-colonial India,” in John F. Richards (ed.), The Imperial Monetary System of Mughal
India (New Delhi, 1978).
   21 See especially Andre Wink, Land and Sovereignty in India: Agrarian Society and
Politics under the Eighteenth-century Maratha Svarajya (Cambridge, 1986).
  22 See, for example, the work of the following scholars: Anne Feldhaus, The Deeds of God
in Rddipur (Oxford, 1984); Eleanor Zelliot and Maxine Bernstein, The Experience of
Hinduism: Essays on Maharashtra (Albany, 1989); G. A. Deleury, The Cult of Vithoba
(Poona, 1960); M.S. Mate, Temples and Legends of Maharashtra (Bombay, 1962); S. B.
Tulpule, Classical Marathi Literature (Wiesbaden, 1979).