

                                            Mie
               THE   GEOPOLITICS          OF   MAHARASHTRA

plateau widest at the Ghats and narrowing to the east. The portion
closest to the Ghats is in the rain shadow of the mountains and not
very productive. Further east, however, the plain has typically been
fertile and well populated.° It has three main rivers, the Purna-Tapti at
the north, the Godavari, and the Krishna-Bhima, the most important
river of the Desh, which has important ancient settlement sites as well
as the Maharashtrian pilgrimage site of Pandharpur. We must empha-
size that the Desh and the Konkan were (and are) utterly different
ecologically, and formed what Braudel has termed “natural’’ trading
regions. We shall explore each region’s agriculture and specialities
shortly.
   This threefold division of Maharashtra has created certain geo-
political realities for any kingdom and would-be conquerors or rebels.
The Ghats thoroughly divide the two productive areas of the region.
Any kingdom based in the Desh must control the Ghats to control,
first, the trade routes to the coast and, second, the productive agri-
culture of the Konkan. Thus, a Desh-based kingdom’s “‘drive to the
west” is a given. The Ghats’ strength made it the natural retreat area
for rebels, from which they could raid either of the productive areas,
the Konkan or the Desh. (This they had to do as the Ghats could not
agriculturally support even a small army.) Both states and rebels also
had to deal with the monsoon, which tended to isolate the Konkan
(because of swollen, unfordable rivers) and made the passes through
the Ghats even more difficult. The monsoon divided the year into a
campaigning season, from October to May, and an agricultural season,
from May to September, and armies were arranged accordingly, with
most troops returning home to plant in May.
   In this geographic context, the story of the ‘“Marathas”’ properly
begins about the time of the Muslim invasions of Maharashtra, that is
about 1300 AD. The initial raid into the Deccan was by Ala-ud-Din-
Khilji, rebel nephew of the sultan in Delhi. The early looting expedi-
tions, which covered much of Maharashtra and Karnataka, were fol-
lowed by conquest, annexation, and the extinction of the Yadava
dynasty. Thus, the period from 1300 to 1320 was one of intense
conflict in Maharashtra, with many dominant lineages killed and many
more migrating south to escape the Muslim conquest. For example,
the stories of the Sufi saints of the period regularly extoll their
  5 Shown and mapped in D. G. Kulkarni, The River Basins of Maharashtra (New Delhi,
1970), 58.


                                        8)
                       THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

slaughter of the “infidels.” As the warrior-lineages tried to regroup,
they were pushed farther to the south. (Later, as is well known,
remnants of warrior-lineages from Andhra founded the state of
Vijaynagar south of the Tungabhadra river.) This phase of intense
conflict ended by about 1350 with the establishment of the Bahmani
dynasty, more Muslim settlers arriving from the north, and the cutting
of political ties with Delhi. The new dynasty got down to the business
of establishing forts and collecting taxes. Following the conquest, there
were few, if any, forced conversions,               no attempt to translate the
Muslim canon into Marathi to facilitate conversion, and a general
policy of continuing the existing grants to Hindu temples.
   The Muslim dynasties that stayed and ruled Maharashtra for the next
350 years were profoundly important in defining paths of social
mobility, areas of government involvement and patronage, military
and civilian bureaucracy, and styles of resistance. As we shall see, those
who prospered in these centuries were the families which came to be
termed ‘‘Maratha” and Brahmins from the Desh. Let us begin with the
Marathas.
   The term Maratha has several suggested etymologies, none of which
are satisfactory. They do not explain how the term arose, the dynamics
of how it was used, by whom, in reference to whom.                        None of the
suggested origins tell us why such a term would arise at a particular
period or in response to a particular series of events. On the face of it,
“Maratha” is different from the terms “Bengali” or “Tamil.” Every-
one of long residence in a Bengali-speaking areas and speaking Bengali
is a Bengali. Similarly, there might be Tamil Brahmins or Tamil
Christians, but they would all be Tamils. Not all Marathi-speaking
residents of Maharashtra are Marathas, not by any means. The case, as
we shall see, is similar to Rajasthan — where all Rajasthani-speaking
residents are not Rajputs.
   The term Maratha may be an old one, but the inscriptional evidence
is scarce and vague. There is, for example, an inscription in the Bedsa
cave (dating from the first century aD) that uses the term Maharathini
to refer to a queen, just as there is a fifth-century Singhalese chronicle
that calls a region Maharattha.
   There is nothing, however, in this early evidence to indicate that
the use of the term Maratha meant anything other than a resident of
Maharashtra. This is also the sense of the early Muslim chroniclers. Al
 6 Richard Eaton, Sufis of Bijapur: 1300-1700 (Princeton, 1978), 19-44.