


                                           14
                 THE    GEOPOLITICS            OF    MAHARASHTRA

Baruni (1020 AD) mentions Marhat Des as the area south of the
Narmada river and Ibn Batuta (1340 aD) notes that the people around
Daulatabad were Marathas.
   Over the next two hundred years, the term came to mean a new elite,
the Maratha chiefs who brought bands of followers to serve the
Bahmani kingdom or those rebelling against it.? The new meaning is
well established by the time of Ferishta’s history of the Deccan in 1600.
The process seems to fit a well-established pattern for the creation of
new caste categories that arise in response to new possibilities for
upward economic mobility.
   Looking backward from ample material on the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, we know that “Maratha” as a category or a caste
represents the amalgamation of families from several castes — Kunbi,
Lohar, Sutar, Bhandari, Thakar, and even Dhangars (shepherds) —
which existed in the seventeenth century and, indeed, exist as castes in
Maharashtra today. What differentiated, for example, ‘““Maratha” from
“Kunbi’”? It was precisely the martial tradition, of which they were
proud, and the rights (watans and inams) they gained from military
service. It was these rights which differentiated them from ordinary
cultivators, ironworkers, or tailors, especially at the local level.
   How then did the term arise in what seems to be the critical period
between 1400 and 1600? The most likely origin would be in the places
of military service, the Bahmani armies and especially the armies of the
five successor states. It would have arisen as a descriptive term for units
speaking Marathi, as opposed to Dakhani units (units composed of
Moslems born in India) or ’Afagis (units composed of recent Moslem
immigrants from Arabia or Central Asia).® Ibrahim Adil Shah of
Bijapur (1535-57) showed preference for troops from Maharashtra,
especially as a counterbalance to the power of Dakhani and ’Afagi
troops. Marathi came to be the language of government in the Muslim
kingdom of Ahmadnagar during this period. Probably, the term
Maratha gained credence slowly; the early references to these troops
were as “‘bargirs,” a generic term for cavalry who did not furnish their
  7 I am indebted to Dr. Anne Feldhaus for a reference to the use of the term marhatem in
Smritisthal, a Mahanubhav text attributed to the fourteenth or fifteenth century. In the text,
Bhatobas assures his listeners that in spite of the Muslim invasions and political upheaval,
“Maratha rule” (likely referring to the Yadava kingdom) would last as long as he did (with
implications of his own immortality). See U.N. Despande, Smritisthal (Pune, 1939,
reprinted 1960).
   8 I. A. Ghauri, “Organization of the army under the sultanates of the Deccan,” Journal of
the Pakistan Historical Society, 14, 3 (July 1966), 147-71.

                                              nS
                            THE   MARATHAS         1600-1818