

  ‘2 Hiroshi Fukazawa, “A study of the local administration of Adilshahi Sultanate (ap
1489-1686), Hitotsubashi Journal of Economics (June 1963), 37-65. See also I. A. Ghauri,
“Local government under the sultanates of Bijapur and Golconda,” Journal of the Research
Society of Pakistan, 3, 102 (Jan.-April 1966), 43-62.
   '> A good cross-regional survey of the bhakti movement can be found in Eleanor Zelliot,
“The medieval bhakti movement in history: an essay on the literature in English,” in
Bardwell L. Smith (ed.), Hinduism: New Essays in the History of Religion (Leiden, 1976)

                                           18
             THE   GEOPOLITICS        OF   MAHARASHTRA

saint of the Pandharpur school, illustrate trends of this early period. It
is important and typical that Namadev (preaching around 1310-50)
was not a Brahmin, but rather a tailor. The movement centered on an
all-embracing love of God; it rejected caste restrictions in external
ritual (such as prohibitions on low-caste persons entering temples)
and, likewise rejected caste as any indication of spiritual development.
It promoted the all-embracing experience of the pilgrimage (especially
to Pandharpur). This was a radical message and it became more so. It
threatened the role and authority of Brahmins in temple ritual and in
life cycle ceremonies. After all, if it was the love of God that mattered,
what did it matter if the rituals surrounding the images were performed
correctly according to the arcane knowledge that only Brahmins
possessed?
   Bhakti was thus well positioned to respond to the core moral crisis
which Muslim invasion and conquest represented. Such responses to
crises “in the order of things” are typical across many cultures and time
periods. The first response is often a call to faith and only faith as the
answer. This suggests a fundamental questioning of the institutions
charged with keeping things morally “in order.’ Emotional, direct
appeals to God are common in such a crisis. As the years pass, and the
moral order is still not right, it is typical to question feature after
feature of the culture. Again, it is no surprise that bhakti selected caste
as what was wrong with the culture, making it vulnerable to this sort of
conquest. The enforcing of caste rules and prohibitions was associated
with the very Brahminical structure which had failed. Later, in such a
movement, self-criticism gives way to trying to find a new moral order.
One typical response is to adopt what can be tolerated from the
incorrect rulers; these adoptions can range all the way from aspects of
the dress of the rulers, through eating habits, through revenue and
judicial terminology to fluency in the ruler’s language and on to
full-scale conversion. Another response, also found in bhakti, was
development of millenarian movements, which view the present as the
last and dark age.
   While individual adoptions of Muslim culture varied, the bhakti
movement, as a whole, found the idea of faith common to both bhakti
and Islam. Many poet-saints, of both Hindu and Muslim origin, tried
to find common bases for prayer and worship. Among the Marathi
poet-saints, a few were Muslim, such as Shah Muntoji Bahmani (of the
royal family of Bidar) and Husain Ambarkhan, a Muslim poet who