

                                              21
                        THE     MARATHAS           1600-1818

(as ornaments), timber and bamboo. All these products appear in the
market documents of the Desh towns of the seventeenth century.
Next, consider what the Desh produced which did (and does) not grow
in the Konkan: sugarcane (for jaggery, the main sweetener), cotton,
onions and garlic, tobacco, turmeric (crucial for fish curing). Perhaps
the most important of all were the pulses grown on the Desh. The
heavy rains of the Konkan made vegetables available only in limited
seasons, and pulses from the Desh were (and are) the basic complement
to the rice diet of the Konkan. Except in the heaviest monsoon periods,
bullock caravans regularly carried these items of trade (plus items of
copper, iron, and brass which came from outside Maharashtra) up and
down the Ghats to weekly markets in both areas.*°
   The coastal trade also connected natural areas of supply to areas of
demand. Spices and coconuts, timber and roofing tiles moved north to
the regions of Sind and Kathiawad; horses and dried fruits came on the
return voyages.
   All of this is in answer to the question of what, in the Maharashtra of
the mid-seventeenth century, was worth competing for. The only
thing was various rights to shares of produce of the land, beyond
subsistence. Consistently, throughout the region and the period, 40-50
percent of the produce of the land went to various right-holders and
the king. At the village level, there was the headman (patil) and the
records keeper (kulkarni). At the pargana level, a long-standing unit of
20-100 villages, there was the deshmukh (the “mouth of the land,”
representative of this group of villages) and the deshpande (pargana-
level records keeper). These various local elite families received about
15 percent of the government collection. The remainder the king
usually granted in one of two ways, as saranjam (non-hereditary grant
for maintenance of troops) or as inam (hereditary grant for special
service Or merit).
   Though the history of this system is fragmentary, it is worth noting
that the most important of these rights — patil and deshmukh — arose
through colonization. Maharashtra was so thinly populated in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries that even prime riverine land was
available. A man who brought his relatives and others and opened land
   20 Tam indebted to Mr G. T. Mantri for much of this information. His work has taken him
to villages, small towns, and markets throughout the Konkan and the Desh for almost a
half-century. His observations are corroborated in O. H. K. Spate and A. T. A. Learmonth,
India and Pakistan: A General and Regional Geography (Bungay, Suffolk, 3rd edn, 1967)
                                                                                           ,
694-96.

                                            PIP)
               THE   GEOPOLITICS          OF   MAHARASHTRA

became village headman or patil. He, in essence, owned the village land
and granted it to newcomers. (Thus, we find that a patil family
typically still owned 30-40 percent of the village cultivated land in
records of the eighteenth century.) A higher level of entrepreneurship
and colonization meant, in a compact area, starting up several new
villages or bringing in men who would. Such a man would have
become a deshmukh, as well as the village headman (patil), of the
villages that he directly started. Every deshmukh was, therefore, first a
patil.2! Let us emphasize that in the rain-shadow areas of Maharashtra
there was a regular cycle of depopulation and recolonization. For
example, the well-documented Mahadurga famine of 1630 produced
widespread depopulation and subsequent opportunities for recoloni-
zation.
  Even in the best of times, Maharashtra had limited communications
and transportation and any king needed the deshmukhs and the patils
for local control and revenue collection. Thus, we must not think of
these crucial rights as simply a sum of money given to an individual for
services or merit. Rather, they were complex rights which involved the
holder and his family in the fabric of rural society — in revenue
settlement and collection, adjudication and appeals, maintaining a
body of troops recruited from the area, and ritual leadership at various
festivals throughout the year.
   By the seventeenth century; rights and responsibilities were
routinely laid out in a sanad, the contract between the right-holder and
the government, which formalized the financial, military, judicial, and
ritual rights and obligations. It is important to understand these formal
relations before turning to the additional implicit roles, found only in
the correspondence between right-holders and the king. Let us begin
with the contract of a deshmukh with the central government. (Dozens
of these contracts exist at the Pune Archives.) The deshmukh was to
remain loyal to the sultan (of Bijapur or Ahmadnagar), pay the fixed
annual tribute to the royal treasury or to a designated person,
co-operate with any royal representatives in his area, and provide a
person who paid a surety bond for his good conduct. His local duties
included,   first and foremost,       the development        of cultivation    and
prosperity in his area (including finding and bringing back runaway
cultivators). The deshmukh maintained a body of troops to keep the
  21 The vast majority of these entrepreneurs were Maratha, but some deshmukhs came
from other groups — Brahmin, Prabu, Muslim, and Jain.