

                                    19
                             THE   MARATHAS          1600-1818

wrote a commentary on the Bhagvatgita and was an ardent follower of
Ganesh.!4 On the local level, there is considerable evidence of, for
example, Hindus worshipping at the tombs of Muslim saints (pirs).
Some Hindus           found the idea of brotherhood,                 so central to Islam,
enormously attractive because of its implicit critique of caste. These
ideas were preached across Maharashtra and soon spread to North
India.
   As with any movement of this size and duration, there were many
and complex threads in bhakti — quietist, fervent and emotional,
anti-caste, anti-Brahmin, syncretist and interested in Islam. We must
always see bhakti as first and foremost in conflict and dialogue with the
mainstream of Maharashtrian Hinduism, which was conservative in
practice, temple-oriented and Brahmin-dominated, used Sanskrit in
ceremonies, and supported caste as a social form. It is in this context
that we should understand that very few strands of bhakti dealt with
the secular/political/military world. None preached resistance to
Islamic rule as a fundamental precept.
   The most one can say of bhakti’s programmatic was that it proposed
several new definitions of personal moral behavior between persons
and groups in society. We must expect that different aspects appealed
to different constituencies, and that the focus shifted over time. Thus,
the anti-caste aspects appealed to lower caste members. The emerging
Maratha elite found local shrines to patronize.!5
   Now we must turn from the intellectual and religious ferment of
Maharashtra to look more intensively at the rights these new service
elites gained. Put most simply, what was worth competing for in
seventeenth-century Maharashtra? It certainly was not land. There was
an abundance of land and relatively few people. It was also not cash
generated by trade. Maharashtra, especially the Desh region, had a
generally low level of monetization. Let us review the evidence. First,
major trade routes, such as Burhanpur to Surat or Burhanpur to
Bijapur, skirted the region, and there were few mart cities (see
  14 A. R. Kulkarni, “Social relations in the Maratha country            in the medieval period,”
Indian History Congress Proceedings, Thirty Second Session (Jabalpur, 1970), 238-39. There
were,   of course,   other   well-known   Muslim   poet-saints,   such    as Shekh   Mohammad,
preaching and writing on themes common to bhakti.
   'S It is interesting that there seem to be no bhakti poet-saints who refer to themselves as
“Maratha,” though almost all preachers and writers refer to themselves by family name and
caste — tailor, potter, gardener. I am indebted to Eleanor Zelliot for this observation and
find 4further evidence for the emergence of “Maratha” as a relational category during this
period.

                                              20
                 THE     GEOPOLITICS            OF   MAHARASHTRA