


                                        “5
                         THE     MARATHAS           1600-1818

peace in his area, making these troops available for campaign against
the kingdom’s enemies, recalcitrant nearby deshmukhs, or even dis-
loyal high officials. The deshmukh convened local judicial assemblies,
as necessary, and recorded the results for the central government. The
deshmukh was also responsible for raising local free labor (bigar) for
the maintenance of roads, the building of forts, and gathering fodder
for passing armies.
   And what of the deshmukh’s rights? He was granted hereditary
tax-free lands and villages.22 From these he had the right to collect all
customary taxes and dues. In addition, he had the right to keep a small
percentage of the taxes collected from his villages. These local taxes
included both those collected in money and those collected in kind.
For example, the money taxes included transit duties, bazaar taxes,
fines, and a well-irrigation tax. In kind, the deshmukh collected shoes
from the shoemaker, repair of agricultural implements from the
carpenter, timber from the wood-gatherers, service from the mahar,
coconuts and mangoes from the growers, and free labor from the
village. In addition, the deshmukh had rights of precedence at local
festivals and to deference in his local villages and capital. Finally, his
rights included the keeping of armed retainers.?>
   Existing mid-sixteenth-century documents give us the formal char-
acteristics of the revenue system. Probably, most settlements consisted
of a simple division, based on the year’s harvest. One such example is
from the area around the village of Rohidkhore, subah Maval. Such a
settlement gave half of the produce to the government and half to the
village. There was no attempt to measure, no attempt to evaluate the
quality of land or to consider the cash value of the crop.2* From these
   22 We must differentiate here between four types of land tenure which received prefer-
entially lower tax rates in Maharashtra in this and later periods. The first, termed “‘watan,”
was a hereditary tenure which depended on satisfactory service of some sort. This included all
sorts of local “officials,” such as deshmukhs, village headmen, local and regional record-
keepers. The second sort of tenure was termed “inam” and was a hereditary reward for
previous service or merit. It was not necessarily completely tax-free, though generally taxed
at a lower rate. The third type was “‘saranjam” or “mokasa” which was land specifically
granted for the maintainance of military troops. It often paid the same rates as other
agricultural land; the government’s share was merely alloted to the grantee. The fourth type
of grant was known as “‘vrittis” which were generally long-standing religious or merit
donations. All of these distinctions are laid out in Ramchandra Nilkanth’s seventeenth-
century treatise on statecraft, the Ajnapatra, see, “The Ajnapatra or royal edict” (trans. S. V.
Puntambeker), Journal of Indian History, 8, 2 (August 1929), 214-19.
  3 Fukazawa, “Local administration of Adilshahi Sultanate,” 47-55.
  24 B. G. Tamaskar, Life and Work of Malik Amber (Delhi, 1987), 261-62. In this case, the
villagers were dissatisfied with a division settlement, and wanted the more sophisticated