

                                             30
                 THE    GEOPOLITICS           OF    MAHARASHTRA

seventeenth century appealed to both Shahji and the Bijapur court for
the return of the deshmukh rights of Karad.3” Through patronage of
the cousin with whom the family had originally taken refuge, one
Yadav son, then the other, was introduced into service in Shivaji’s
army.°® For the next forty years, the sons tried to get the deshmukh
rights back, appealing to Shivaji (who had inherited the deshmukh
right to Karad) and his successors every time that they performed
especially important service. The grant was just as regularly delayed
and denied. Tens of thousands of gold hons changed hands in this
process; the brothers used every patronage network they could
develop. It was not until the Maratha state was under mortal attack in
1789 that the negotiations got serious; two villages were granted, but
not the deshmukhi of Karad. Finally, the family took service with the
Mughals in the early eighteenth century, and it was Aurangzeb who
confirmed them as deshmukhs of Karad. Let us draw out several points
from this story of the Yadav family. First, it emphasizes that deshmukh
rights were intimately intertwined with the politics of the courts; the
Yadavs offended the Adil Shah court and were removed. Second, in
this case, they had no recourse or income once they were removed.
There were no “ancestral” lands to retire to. The family took shelter
with a relative and started the long process of service, as ordinary
soldiers. This was as serious a loss as we find in the whole political
system. In general, we might visualize a continuum of possible family
losses for the “wrong” choice in a critical faction dispute at court or an
invasion of their area. At the “mild” end would be a fine and prompt
reinstatement. More serious would be loss of peripheral rights outside
the home area. More serious yet would be loss of some key deshmukh
rights, village headmanships, and forts in the home area (constituting
what the family felt to be its “watan,”’ the patrimony of rent-free lands
and other perquisites). The most serious loss, of course, would be the
loss of the entire “‘watan,” as happened to the Yadavs. Third, there was
no problem in transferring the deshmukh rights to Muslim members of
court or to a Maratha not resident in the area (Shahji and his son
   37 Ibid. The Jagdale documents assert that a gota was assembled in Masur (near Karad) —
composed of cultivators, artisans, and Bijapur officials - which established by means of old
sanads the rights of the Jagdale family to the deshmukhi of Masur. The Jagdale documents say
that Shahji ignored the Bijapur government order to surrender the rights. Understandably,
the Yadav documents are silent on this point.
   38 [bid. Meanwhile, the Jagdale family made the wrong choice of supporting Afzal Khan
and the Bijapur army which had come to “control” Shivaji in 1659. After Afzal Khan’s defeat,
Shivaji’s troops took the Jagdale fort and killed the head of the family.