

   In addition to these rights in all villages, this deshmukh, Hammant
Rao Krishnaji Ghorpade, held the patilki (village headman rights) for
several villages within the area of his deshmukh. The basic entitlement
in these villages was 5 from every 100 kandys (a measure) of produce,
as he had received under the previous Adil Shahi government. He
received from Raja Ram two additional villages.
  Further, in two nearby villages, the deshmukh received a new inam
grant of one chavar (sixty acres) of unirrigated land and a 12.5 acre
mango grove in recognition of meritorious service to the king for
trying to reconcile a dispute between two generals.
This grant includes lands, the standing trees, and the leaves fallen on the earth [and
belongs] to you and your son and your grandsons, and all the heirs hereafter,
exclusive of hali pati and pestar pati [two small cesses]; you should take possession
and enjoy it henceforth. If any Hindu obstructs this grant, he will be treated as
committing the sin of killing a cow in Benares. If any Muhammadan obstructs this
grant, it will be treated as committing the sin of killing a pig in Mecca.?7

   Even this single grant of deshmukh rights alerts us to several
important features of the system. First, note that what was granted here
was not just the deshmukh right, but a series of rights, all in the same
area. Let us term these “nested” rights. Thus, the same man held not
only a strong fort in the area, but was headman of three of the villages
in his deshmukhi jurisdiction, as well as holding hereditary inam rights
to acreage and a grove of mangoes in one village. This pattern was
absolutely typical of the position of landed, armed elite families of
seventeenth-century Maharashtra. Second, the deshmukh must not be
construed as an ancient hereditary right, somehow insulated from
larger politics. Quite to the contrary; note how the right was granted in
personal audience of the king and in response to meritorious service to
the king. Deshmukhs were, as we shall shortly explore, powerful,
active negotiators in the politics of the day. Third, note that the village
headman’s rights and obligations were not specified in the document.
These, more than deshmukh rights, were subject to local custom and
practice and rarely involved intervention of the king. Though the mix
would vary, it is perhaps worth suggesting the parameters of this patil
right. He received a small share of whatever the government collected
in cash. More substantial would be the payments in kind — typically a
handful of grain and pulses from each cultivator, plus fowl and meat

  27 Ibid. See also Kulkarni, Maharashtra, 39-43.

                                            26
                THE    GEOPOLITICS           OF   MAHARASHTRA

from those who raised them. The patil was also entitled to free services
from all of the village artisans, such as a pair of shoes, cloth, messenger
services, and drummers. Finally, the patil led all village festivals and
ceremonies, such as Dasara, Diwali, and Holi, and received oil, cakes,
and images during each.”8 This patil right also required the approval of
the villagers before it could be transferred to a new family. Often, the
villagers resisted such change. For example, one village replied to
Shivaji, who wanted to shift the patil right, as follows: ‘““We are poor
cultivators but we would never surrender our village under pressure to
someone else; but you are the master of the region; if you so desire we
are helpless.”’?? Fourth, note that no kulkarni or deshpandiya rights
(village and pargana record-keeper rights, respectively) were included
in this grant. This is typical and expected. The Ghorpade family was
Maratha and almost certainly illiterate. Record keepers were Brahmin,
literate families. Conversely at this period, we find few Brahmin
families holding deshmukh positions.
   And what was the deshmukh to do to fulfill the responsibilities of
the contract? Much depended on the level of social control in the larger
polity. In a time of peace and adequate rains, the deshmukh seemed
more like a revenue official; this is how he is portrayed in most of the
histories of Maharashtra (based on the spotty published documents).
We see him, in these documents, accompanying the revenue officer of
the kingdom, committing himself, as responsible party, for the
payment of the revenue. We see him in these documents trying minor
civil cases, encouraging peasants to enlarge the area of cultivation, and
making sure that new areas were duly recorded in the records kept by
the kulkarni. In cases where the deshmukh family could not decide on
succession, or was in active conflict, the state intervened and divided
the right.
   More interesting, and more common, was the deshmukh’s role in
remission in times of adversity. An early document, dated 1600, from
the Pune area illustrates this process. The letter says that the
Nizamshahi government (at Ahmadnagar) was approached by the
cultivators, traders, and muqgadam and deshmukh of the area. They
stated that the mokasa holder (the grantee of the government’s share of
  28 For a full description of patil rights, see S.N. Sen, Administrative System of the
Marathas (Calcutta, 1976), 131-34. For adjudication of boundary disputes, see V. T. Gune,
The Judicial System of the Marathas (Pune, 1953), 203.
  29 AR. Kulkarni, “Social mobility in Maharashtra,” in A. G. Pawar (convener), Maratha
History Seminar (Kolhapur, 1971), 109-10.