

Two months later, in recognition of expelling Naiji Pandre from his
district, Rataji Mane was rewarded with robes of honor from the
Biapur court. “Wear it and be honored; you have done good ser-
vice.’’>3 Within three weeks, Rataji was ordered on another mission:
Ali Adil Shah II writes that Narsoji and Yeshwant Rao Mankoji have troubled the
people of Malgaon, pargana Kagal [near Santwadi] and have taken shelter with the
headman of Benur; recruiting infantry and cavalry, they have plundered Malgaon,
collecting 209 cattle and bulls, also some goods. So, immediately on receipt of this
letter, proceed to Malgaon. Give stern warning to both these men. Ask them to
produce the cattle, bulls, and goods [and] bring them back to Malgaon; deliver
them to the people, with the assistance of the muqqadam. Advise the people of
Malgaon that they will be given protection, and that there will be no further
trouble ... Also capture Narsoji and Yeshwant Rao. Send them here, with
necessary guard. See that there will be no further complaints in this regard.

Note that Malgaon is in the Konkan, more than 220 miles from the
Mane family base in Mhasvad. In late June, during the monsoon, this
would have meant a difficult journey down the Ghats of more than
seven days. Whatever convoy took the prisoners to Byapur would have
been gone for several weeks.
   In the next year, Rataji undertook two more tasks, using his troops
to enforce the authority of Bijapur. At the request of Ali Adil Shah I,
he drove out one Kandoji, from a village that had been granted to
Kandoji and was now resumed. He was also instructed to warn two
Nimbalkar brothers that they should leave the territory as it belonged
to Ali Adil Shah II, not Shivaji. Presumably, Rataji completed both
tasks, because he was later rewarded with robes of honor.
  These tasks and responsibilities highlight the complexity of the
deshmukh role. They were the most important source of troops in the

  32 Tbid., 129.
  33 Tbid., 130.


                                        29
                         THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

countryside, probably more important than troops housed in the forts
of the area. We have seen them used to repel invaders, disarm rebels,
and join other troops as main-force fighting units of the kingdom. It is
important to note the close ties between this loyal family and the
Bijapur king, which included personal audiences, many letters, and
robes of honor.
  In even more         troubled times, which            characterized       much      of the
seventeenth century, the office of deshmukh became more like high-
risk, high-return investment than some imagined stable rural elite
position. To illustrate this process, let us briefly consider the history of
the Yadavs,       another      deshmukh       family     of southern        Maharashtra,
located at Karad, about half way between Sangli and Satara.*4 The
testimony the family gave in 1716 says that they had been deshmukhs
of Karad for generations, when the story begins in the first decades of
the seventeenth century.°> (In fact, the Yadav family bought at least
some of their earliest rights — perhaps around 1500 — from the Jagdale
family which had to raise money for a large gift to the Bahmani king to
recover certain estates in the area which had been sequestered. Other
rights, especially the deshmukh               of Karad, had been added                in the
seventeenth century.) Perhaps around 1620, one Mudoji Nimbalkar
was involved in an unexplained armed dispute with the family, which
involved the taking of the fort of Karad; the Bijapur government sided
with Nimbalkar, and the whole Yadav family was removed from the
deshmukh right.*° The results were catastrophic. ‘From that day, our
revenue stopped.” The family moved to a small village in the same area
and threw themselves on the mercy of a relative (perhaps a cousin) who
still enjoyed a grant. There is little information on the family for the
next two decades. The deshmukh rights of Karad had, meanwhile, been
held by several high officials of the Bijapur court and passed to Shahji,
Shivaji’s father. The Yadavs throughout the middle decades of the
   34 An extensive collection of the Yadav family documents has recently been published by
Shivaji University. The broad history of service under the Adil Shahi government is covered
in the oral testimony of the division of the family grant, document #332, dated 1716. D. A.
Pawar (ed.) Tarabaikalin Kagadpatre (Kolhapur, 1969). I am indebted to Shiresh Chitge for
collaboration in the translation of these documents.
   35 A fascinating look at the further complexity of the issues comes from Andre Wink’s
work on theJagdales, the opposition claimants for the deshmukh rights in the Karad area. He
has pieced together the story from a variety of published and unpublished Marathi
documents. See Land and Sovereignty in India: Agrarian Society and Politics under the
Eighteenth-century Maratha Svarajya (Cambridge, 1986), 162-65.
  36 Ibid. The Jagdale documents assert that the Yadavs joined with Nimbalkar in raiding
Bijapuri territory and were, therefore, removed from their estates. The results were the same.