


                                              24
                 THE    GEOPOLITICS            OF   MAHARASHTRA

scattered formal grants, we get the general picture of a deshmukh as a
hard-working, local bureaucrat, involved in tax collection and expan-
sion of agriculture.
   Other, less common documents, show this to be a limited and quite
distorted view of the role of the deshmukh in Maharashtra of the
seventeenth century.?° Let us now, for example, look at the full terms
of deshmukhi rights of the middle of the seventeenth century. Our
example comes from the Satara district of southern Maharashtra and
consists of the details of a mid-century grant to the famous Ghorpade
family, as continued in 1696.76 The deshmukh requested and received a
personal audience with the Maratha king. As a result of the audience,
the king issued a sanad (grant contract). In it the king acknowledged
the deshmukh as the holder of Vandan fort, in the vicinity of Satara,
and that the family had been the holders of the deshmukhi rights under
the previous Adil Shah government. The rights to be continued were as
follows:
    (1)    One-quarter rupee from each chavar of cultivated land (a unit
           of approximately 60 acres)
    (2)    % percent of the produce of each weaver, per year
    (3)    From the oilpresser of each village, /s seer daily (about 3 oz.)
    (4)    From each mango grove, 5 out of every 100 picked
    (5)    Each year, at the bullock festival, jaggery (unrefined sugar) and
           oil (amount not specified)
    (6)    From each village, per bigha (about 2.5 acres) ‘4, seer (less than
           1 oz.) of clarified butter per year
    (7)    From each village, per chavar, 17/2 percent of the yield of the
           jiriyat (unirrigated farming)

settlement developed by Malik Amber in the first decades of the seventeenth century. The
document appointed an assessor to undertake the work. He was to bring together the
deshmukh, the deshkulkarni, the muqqadam, and other leading people and tour the area,
village by village. They were to classify each field, whether grade one, two, three, or four.
They were then to estimate the produce of the fields, based on the testimony of several
farmers. The final figures were to be checked by the examination of fields in each category
selected by a separate assessor.
   25 Throughout this discussion of the intrinsic tensions between the king and his “co-
sharers,” the deshmukhs, and other officials, let me acknowledge both the writings of and
discussions with Andre Wink, who has focused attention on the centrality of these tensions
to the state-building process. Specific references will be cited below.
   26 The full text of this grant (in Marathi) is in V. G. Khobrekar (ed.), Records of Shivaji
Period (Bombay, 1974), 92-94. I wish to thank G. T. Mantri for collaboration in all the
translations from this source.

                                             os)
                        THE    MARATHAS             1600-1818