

                                            27
                        THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

the revenue) had completely devastated the region, including “‘the
irrigated land, the unirrigated land, the houses in the towns, and the
orchards. The people have fled.” Therefore the deshmukh was ordered
by the government to set up a very low land revenue settlement for the
next year, and gradually increase it over the next seven years, in order
to bring the area back into cultivation.*° This role hints at the larger
than local importance of the deshmukh. In this case, he had to deal with
the cause of the people fleeing, find them or replacements, negotiate the
repopulation of the villages, and stand responsible for the gradual
increase in revenue, based on a formula of expected performance.
  It is not possible, however,              to understand   the dynamics of the
deshmukh position from this or any other single document. For that,
we must follow the actual letters of a family over a long period of the
seventeenth century. Fortunately, the recent publication of the docu-
ments of the Mane family of Mhasvad (in southern Maharashtra, about
sixty miles east of Satara, see Map 1) allows this long-term view. First, a
cluster of these documents from 1666-67 shows the dependence of the
Adil Shah government on the deshmukhs for local military forces and
the use of these forces in larger campaigns.
                                                                      April, 1666

Sayyad Ilias Saya Khan, commander, pleased with the valor of Rataji Narsingrao
Mane in repulsing the attack of Mirza Raja Jai Singh on Bijapur, recommended to
Ali Adil Shah II [sultan of Bijapur] that the deshmukhi watan of Kasbe Kaladhon
be granted to Rataji Mane. So a watan sanad is issued.3!

   The accompanying papers refer to Rataji Mane as deshmukh and
sardeshmukh (head of any and all deshmukhs) of both pargana Man
and the newly granted town of Kaladhon, entitled to the share of the
government revenue given to the sardeshmukh. He was further
honored with the grant of the sardeshmukhi of the pargana Manga-
lavede for his services in the war against the Mughals, and one gold hon
from each of ten villages. If we plot these new grants, once again the
“nested” pattern emerges. Kaladhon is about twenty miles south west
of Mhasvad, while Mangalavede is about forty-five miles east. Both
were probably adjacent to the Mane family’s core area of Man pargana.
Of the villages giving Rataji one hon each year, seven of the ten were
within twenty to thirty miles of Mhasvad.
 30 Khobrekar, Records of Shivaji, 11-12.
 31 Tbid., 124.

                                            28
                   THE   GEOPOLITICS      OF   MAHARASHTRA

   Other papers of the same months illustrate the use of Rataji’s troops
closer to home.
Ali Adil Shah II writes to Rataji that you have Kasegaon as mokassa [grant] for
people working in the faraskhana [police] and the palki-bearers. These villages are
troubled by Naiji Pandre, who has claimed that he has the mokassa grant and began
collecting the revenue, by force. So, proceed immediately on receipt of the firman
[order], with the necessary force and give stern warning to Punjaji Jamadar, who
represents said Naiji Pandre. Expel him, and warn him not to come again ...
Inform us accordingly.*?