

Map 1).'¢ Second, if we examine local grants, they were almost always
expressed in the produce of villages, plus services, rather than cash.!”
Third, all the revenue settlement evidence from the first half of the
sixteenth century suggests a low level of monetization. For example, a
field near the town of Shirwal received a settlement in this period
which was intended to bring it back into cultivation after a time of
disruption. It was a stepwise increasing demand, spread over five years.
What was to be paid, however, was not money, but grain, grass, and,
later, cotton. A document of the same period details the ‘““Bahamani”
settlement of the village of Khed (near Pune); it specified the dues to
the government as one third of the produce, with no attempt at
measuring fields or altering the demand year by year. More generally,
Malik Amber’s third settlement of Maharashtra in the 1620s conceded
that it was difficult to collect the revenue in money, and reverted to
grain and fodder per field cultivated.!® Still, to say that there was
generally a low level of monetization and no large-scale trading cities is
not to imply that villages were somehow self-sufficient or that trade
did not exist. Quite to the contrary, in the seventeenth century,
northern Maharashtra and Khandesh participated in the vigorous
cotton trade which centered on Surat and Burhanpur. Of the more than
150 varieties of manufactured cotton cloth mentioned in Surat records,
several were loomed in the Khandesh valley and exported.!? Further
south, there was also a regional trade between the Desh and the
Konkan, also a well-developed coastal trade. The Desh and the
Konkan were ecologically complementary regions. Consider the pro-
ducts that grow in the Konkan, but not on the Desh: coconuts (raw and
dried, the husk processed into coir mats and rope, coconut oil for hair
and cooking), mangoes, jackfruit, betel nuts, dried fish, salt (from
sea-water), herbs and honey (from the forested regions), rice, sea shells

  16 The only Maharashtrian city with a product named in the local trade records was
Paithan with its still produced Paithani silk saris. Junnar (north of Pune) was a paper-making
center and Chaul (on the coast) a weaving and ship-building center. Neither was, however, a
mart city. See section on non-agricultural products of the Deccan and Maharashtra by
H. Fukazawa, The Cambridge Economic History of India Vol. I: ¢ 1200-c.1750 (Cambridge,
1982).
 "7 hee of these are found in G.H. Khare (ed.) Persian Sources of Indian History
(Aitibasik Farsi Sahitya), 1-v (Pune, Bharat Itihas Samshodak Mandal, 1934-61). See also
A.R. Kulkarni, Maharashtra in the Age of Shivaji (Pune, 1967), 91.
   18 Ghauri, “Local government,” 44-45.
                                                           »
   19 §. P. Sangar, “Indian fabrics (seventeenth century),” in A. G. Pawar (convener),
Maratha History Seminar (Kolhapur, 1971), 39-53. See also S. P. Sangar, ““The Khandesh
textiles in the seventeenth century,” Journal of Historical Research, 16, 2, 59-62.