

        MARATHAS AND THE DECCAN
               SULTANATES

In this chapter, we will turn from the more general discussion of
deshmukhs and the political texture of seventeenth-century Maha-
rashtra to specific events of the Sultanates of Ahmadnagar and Bijapur.
These set the stage for the rise of Shivaji, the founder of the Maratha
polity. Here, we will focus on Shahji, Shivaji’s father, who rose from
minor commander to kingmaker and general in the middle decades of
the seventeenth century.
   Before embarking on the specifics of the house of Shivaji, we must
look at warfare in the seventeenth century. It will be against this
background that the innovations of Malik Amber early in the century
and Shivaji later in the century will make sense. The following is
somewhat idealized, but is drawn from accounts of warfare in Khan-
desh and Malwa, and warfare between the Deccan kingdoms. Much of
it will be familiar from studies of European, fort-based warfare of two
centuries earlier, but there were many local, Indian features.
   In the seventeenth century, a main-force army (be it Mughal, or
from Ahmadnagar or Bijapur) was a moving city. Based on heavy
cavalry, the army had at least three horses for every two riders. Each
mounted fighter had at least a servant and a groom. Artillery, which
supplemented the cavalry, was physically large and required dozens,
sometimes hundreds, of oxen for each piece. We must add to this
picture infantry and the full bazaar that accompanied the army and
supplied it. There were elephants for the commanders and a large store
of treasure to pay the troops, who normally bought their provisions in
the camp bazaar. Such an entourage, with everything from saddle-
makers to dancing girls, rarely moved more than ten miles a day,
usually with two stationary days per week.
   An “invasion” meant that the invading kingdom had solved a whole
series of internal problems, at least temporarily. The king had settled
on a commander and had overcome the factional grumbling of
whatever groups had not got their representative selected. The king
had enough cash to make the initial payment to the troops, so that the
army could move out. He had enough cash or credit (more likely the

                                   a7
                        THE    MARATHAS         1600-1818

latter) to sustain the army in the field for a campaigning season. There
had been a muster of the royal troops; there were enough to hope to
win. Some, if not all, of the subordinate polities (petty rajas, desh-
mukhs, zamindars) had shown up with their required contingents. By
the time all this was assembled, there was — in this best case scenario —
still time, before the monsoon, to invade another polity.!
    At ten miles a day, with months of preparation, it was certainly no
secret that an invasion was planned. Newswriters stationed at court
would have informed their respective neighboring courts that plans
were afoot. The only conjecture would be in which direction the army
would move. Anyone whose job it was to analyze the political events,
such as the newswriters, made guesses that were often entirely correct.
In any case, within days of the start of the expedition, the destination
would be obvious.
  Depending on the size of the expedition, it might be weeks, or even
months, before the army reached territory which could inaccurately be
called a frontier. This was a broad band between two heartland areas, in
which the deshmukh or petty raja might pay taxes and offer loyalty to
either side or none or both, depending on the perceived relative
strength of the two kingdoms. “Conquest” of this area meant that the
invading king sent messengers to these local powers and local officials
to attend his camp with a payment and their sanad of authority in hand.
Those who came received robes of honor, and had their authority
confirmed by fresh sanads in the name of the invading king.
   The invading army next sent patrols to coerce local powers who had
not attended court. Months might be spent in these outlying areas.
Recalcitrant petty rajas and deshmukhs usually retired to their forts. A
well-equipped army (with good artillery and enough gunpowder to
sap or mine) could take the smaller of the local forts. The larger ones
simply defied the invading army. While besieging a local fort, the
commander sent messages to village headmen to attend his camp, pay
tribute, and receive confirmation of their grants. Some came and, of
course, some did not. The commander then sent out patrols to
devastate villages whose headmen were truant. These villages usually
did not wait for the patrol, but packed up and left — to the surrounding
forested area, to a safer pargana, or to a nearby fort.
   1 The problems of getting an army into the field were much more successfully solved by
the Mughals than the sultanates of the Deccan. They had cantonments, an officer corps,
supply arrangements, and a core of professional soldiers.