

                                        44
              MARATHAS          AND     THE    DECCAN        SULTANATES

importance of Malik Amber’s masterful use of guerrilla warfare, which
was known as bargir-giri in Dakhni. This consisted of not meeting the
enemy main force in the field, but cutting off supplies, maneuvering for
the best position, and using superior mobility to strike vulnerable
locations far from the battle site.? Malik Amber’s success in the
campaigns of 1619-20, for example, was mainly due to harassing the
countryside on which the Mughal army depended for fodder, and
cutting off the supply caravans which provided it with food. These
tactics were thus common knowledge in Maharashtra a generation
before they were elegantly used by Shivaji in the 1650s.
   In the period after the battle of Bhatvadi (perhaps because his
relatives had been rewarded more than he), Shahji took service with
Biyapur, though he apparently retained jagir rights in the Pune region,
which was claimed by both Ahmadnagar and Biapur. Nothing is
known of his activities between 1626 and 1628.
   Malik Amber died in mid-1626 and the affairs of Ahmadnagar
quickly declined into factional chaos. Shortly after, Ibrahim Adil Shah
of Biyapur died (September 1627). Without his patronage, Shahji left
Byapuri service. Thus, in early 1628, Shahji returned to Ahmadnagar
and entered the chaos of the politics there. We know little of Shahji’s
service in the court of Ahmadnagar except that he was a higher general
than he had been in his previous service. For example, in 1629, Shahji
took a force of 6,000 cavalry to create a diversion in eastern Khandesh,
but was defeated by a Mughal force.8
   Towards the end of the 1620s, Mughal attention once again turned to
the Deccan and the vulnerable state of Ahmadnagar. The Mughal
Emperor Jahangir died in October 1627, and Shah Jahan took the
throne in February 1628. His first order of business was to secure the
south, particularly to eliminate a powerful Mughal noble who had been
an opponent during his rebellion against his father. In February 1630,
Shah Jahan crossed the Narmada with a huge army to deal with both
recalcitrant Mughal commanders and to extinguish Ahmadnagar.
   In the violent factional politics of the court of Ahmadnagar in 1630,
Shahji’s in-laws and patrons were murdered. Shahji promptly went
   7 The Persian term bargir meant a soldier who enlisted without his own horse and thus
rode a horse belonging to the king. His status was lower than a silahdar, who brought his own
horse and equipment. See S. N. Sen, The Military System of the Marathas (Calcutta, new
edition, 1958), 4-5. See alsoJ.T. Molesworth, A Dictionary, Marathi      and English, (Bombay,
second edition, 1857), 575.
   8 Sarkar, House of Shivaji, 28-29.


                                              45
                         THE     MARATHAS           1600-1818

into Mughal service with 2,000 cavalry. During the year he was in
Mughal service, he was sent to Junnar and Sangamner (see Map 2),
districts he was ordered to occupy and which were given to him as
jagir. When the jagir was resumed by the Mughal government, Shahji
left Mughal service and began plundering the region around Pune.
The Mughals claimed the area around Pune for several years and sent
an army to defeat Shahji, who fled to safety with the governor of
Junnar.
   The period of 1630-32 in northern Maharashtra was quite confused
with frequent changing of sides in the campaign that culminated in the
five-month siege of Daulatabad fort. The countryside was devastated
by the failure of three successive monsoons, culminating in the
Mahadurga famine, which depopulated large areas. Even during this
disaster the war went on. Bijapur sent a large army to the assistance of
Ahmadnagar. It seems that Shahji took service with Bijapur in this
campaign. The combined Ahmadnagar—Byapur force was, however,
defeated; the Mughals took Daulatabad, and the more powerful
Ahmadnagar generals retired to their lands to continue the resistance.
Shahji retreated from Daulatabad and seized a section of the southern
portion of the fallen kingdom of Ahmadnagar. It consisted of a triangle
formed by Nasik, Pune, and Ahmadnagar. His control was tenuous,
but he was able to offer service to many of the fleeing troops of the
Ahmadnagar state, and quickly formed an army of 2,000—-10,000 men.
   In the period immediately following (1634-36), Shahji became a
kingmaker. After the fall of Daulatabad, the Mughals sent the nominal
king to prison, but Shahji raised a young boy of the house of
Ahmadnagar to the throne and fought in his name. His forces seized
Junnar fort and much of the northern Konkan within a year. He took
up residence at Junnar fort and increased his troop strength to 12,000.
Late in the year, Shahji began raiding in the vicinity of Daulatabad, and
the Mughals mounted a major campaign to put an end to his resistance.
According to the Shiva-Bharat, the variability of the numbers of his
troops is explained by the coming and going of independent Maratha
contingents — Ghatge, Kate, Gaikwad, Kank,                             Chavan,       Mohite,
Mahadik, Pandhre, Wagh, Ghorpade, and others.?
  9 We will return to a detailed discussion of Shahji’s son, Shivaji, the founder of the Maratha
polity. Here, we only note the very disrupted conditions at the time of his birth (1630) and
early years. They coincide with the years of the Mahadurga famine, the final collapse of
Ahmadnagar, invasion by the Mughals, and failed resistance by his father. Life throughout
the area east of the Ghats, where he and his mother lived, was precarious at best.