

                                              46
             MARATHAS          AND     THE    DECCAN        SULTANATES

   The culmination of this new Mughal campaign was the battle of
Parenda (1634) in which many contingents on both sides were
Maratha. Families divided. At this time estimates vary on Shahji’s
strength. A Brahmin newswriter in Bijapur put it as an area yielding 7.5
million rupees, from which he maintained several large forts, including
his capital at Shahabad. The same source put his troops at only 3,000
cavalry, with an additional contingent of 2,000 from Bijapur.!° It is
interesting that the areas of Pune and Indapur were not included in
these possessions. These areas had been seized by Bijapur from the
now conquered state of Ahmadnagar. Shahji’s troops were no match
for a large main-force Mughal army and were defeated at Parenda. In
early 1635, the Mughal forces chased Shahji south from the area of
Daulatabad, capturing his supply train and about 3,000 of his men.
Within a year, Shah Jahan arrived with a major army to consolidate
Mughal control in the Deccan. In three months, the campaign was
generally very successful. Shahji and his forces were driven out of
northern Maharashtra into the Konkan, losing his cities, including
Junnar in the north and Nasik in the center.
   We must see the support given to Shahji by Bijapur as the result of a
factional dispute which pitted those who favored propping up the
failing Ahmadnagar state at all costs against the Mughals versus those
who wanted to divide the Ahmadnagar kingdom with the Mughals. As
long as the former were in power, Shahji’s resistance continued. Power
shifted to the latter group in 1635.
   In 1636 a peace treaty was concluded between Bijapur and the
Mughals. As required by the treaty, Bijapur cut off all support for
Shahji. He was finally besieged in Mahuli fort until October, when he
surrendered to the Mughals both himself and the Ahmadnagar pre-
tender. As part of the surrender, Shahji was taken into the Biyapuri
service and had to surrender the forts of Junnar and Mahuli to the
Mughals. Shahji then ceased to be an obstacle to the consolidation of
the Mughal conquests in northern Maharashtra. What then was the
power situation in 1636, at the conclusion of the treaty between the
Mughals and Bijapur? The Mughals held Daulatabad and all the
important forts in northern Maharashtra — Galna, Jalna, Ahmadnagar,
Udgir — and all the significant forts in Khandesh and Berar. Biapur
   10 Sarkar, House of Shivaji, 38-39. The revenue estimate was, of course, the potential
revenue in the best of times. The area had been badly devastated and the collectible revenue
was probably a tiny fraction of that.

                                             47
                                                                                   BIDAR
                                                                                  oO


                        Pandharpur
                                                                                                     e Hyderabad
                                                                     “DGULBARGA
                ,    Miraj,                                            fe
                                                                                                                   hn
               A Kolapur          j                    Bijapur              Ga.                             a Kt