

                                          38
          MARATHAS      AND   THE   DECCAN     SULTANATES

   Meanwhile, diplomacy with the invaded king’s court would reach a
fever pitch. The invader would state his demands, such as redress for
lands lost in a previous defeat; the “invaded” would prevaricate, or
make counter-offers. Envoys and newswriters sent gossip, rumors,
hints of possible advantages, and formal proposals.
   The invading commander and his ministers had constantly to decide
the advantage of staying in a more distant area or striking deeper into
the enemy’s heartland. Often, the “frontier” areas were not paying
propositions; the tribute collected did not match the costs of investing
forts or tracking down missing villagers. Also, time was against the
invader, with the monsoon coming.
   All this time, of course, the invaded kingdom was trying to work out
the same problems which had plagued the invader — resolve factional
conflict to pick a commander, assemble money, muster the royal and
deshmukhi troops. Usually, the invaded kingdom would wait, letting
the invader advance well into the heartland. This made for longer
supply lines for the invader, put the conflict later into the campaigning
season, and often placed the invader among villagers and local powers
more loyal to the invaded court.
   When the invader began collecting tribute from deshmukhs and
villages in the heartland area, the invaded kingdom was forced to
respond, and its army moved out. Diplomacy reached a new height, as
each side secretly tried to detach sections of the opposing army. There
were offers to commanders, possible pretenders to the throne, zamin-
dars, and mercenaries. Frequently, the two armies faced each other, in
camp, for months. Envoys passed back and forth, spies circulated, and
money and rights changed hands.
   Finally, one side or the other faced a problem they could not resolve.
It was, for example, getting very late in the campaigning season; or
they were running out of money to pay the troops; or factional conflict
was becoming impossible to control; or the opposing side was detach-
ing too many crucial troops or supporters. If the invaded king had the
more serious problems he could pay a tribute. The invading army
would then leave and try to solidify its hold on the “frontier” area,
hoping to be back in safe shelter before the monsoon.
   Fighting represented a much higher risk for both sides, but, of
course, represented the only way the invaded kingdom could gain
anything from the situation. The typical battle was short, the tactics
not subtle. The armies attacked in “wings” (right, middle, and left), the

                                    39
                        THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

cavalry going for hand-to-hand combat. Last minute diplomacy might
result in a whole wing decamping, joining the opposing side, or putting
up only token resistance. Reserves would be directed to places where
the line was yielding. As the dust rose, battles became more chaotic and
strategy more problematic. Battles usually ended with the person of
the king or commander. If he was captured, killed, or forced to retreat,
the army broke, leaving baggage, guns, and equipment on the field.
   Let us assume that the invaded kingdom lost the battle, but the king
escaped. He and his immediate followers retreated to the royal fortress,
strengthened the defenses, and waited. Most campaigns ended with the
invader taking the booty and retiring, especially if the monsoon was
starting.?
   It took yet another level of commitment, financing, and organi-
zation to besiege a large fortress. Defensive warfare had distinct
advantages. The fortress had an adequate water supply and was stocked
with provisions, often sufficient for several years. Some had enough
land inside to grow crops. The fortress had stables and barracks. The
besieging army had none of these. Local foraging quickly devastated
the surrounding countryside. The situation became worse as the
monsoon began. The army was in tents; men and horses suffered. It
became nearly impossible for long-distance traders to move caravans
of grain to the siege site. All the deshmukh and zamindar units,
composed of peasant/soldiers, wanted to go home to plant their fields.
   From inside the fortress, the besieged king continued every avenue
of intrigue and negotiation to weaken the besieging army. The
optimum situation for the besieged king placed some of his army
outside the fortress. There, they could attack caravans and encourage
peasants to leave the fortress area. Thereby, grain prices would go up in
the besieging camp; eventually, there would be famine and disease.
Since no one, at this period, had the technical means to take a large
fortress, the only hope of the besieger was to bribe a defender to open a
gate.
   If the siege dragged on through the monsoon, there was less and less
likelihood that the fortress would be taken. The invading king had
mounting problems. Perhaps he was running out of cash. Worse,
factions might be forming back at his capital, and he was not personally
  2 Many of these problems are sketchily discussed in I. H. Ghauri, “Organization of the
army under the sultanates of the Deccan,” Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society, 14, 3
(July, 1966), 147-71.