

                                           40
             MARATHAS         AND     THE    DECCAN       SULTANATES

there to counter their influence. There might be rebellions in his own
territory. It is, thus, understandable that few fortresses were ever taken
until late in the seventeenth century. It is equally understandable why
kingdoms could jockey for position for decades, even centuries,
without one extinguishing the other.
   It is against the background of this style of warfare that we can now
turn to specific events of seventeenth-century Maharashtra. It was
here that a new style of warfare, known as bargir-giri, developed.
Because the rise of the house of Shivaji (founder of the Maratha
polity), the development of bargir-giri, and the fortunes of Ahmadna-
gar kingdom were so closely tied, we must now consider the thirty-
five year “fall” of Ahmadnagar in some detail. Focus will always be on
the Marathas in service, rather than the arcane factional politics of a
declining state.
   We know almost nothing about the house of Shivaji Bhonsle before
his grandfather, Maloji. The family’s only hereditary grant was the
headmanship of a village by the name of Verul, near Daulatabad,
probably the village nearest the Ellora caves. Maloji’s earliest recorded
service was under fellow Marathas, the Jadhavs of Sindkhed, who held
grants for military service under the Ahmadnagar kingdom. Maloji
was a petty horseman in the service of these Jadhavs. Around 1600,
cousins of the Bhonsle family, known as the Ghorpades of Mudhol,
were well established in service in the Bijapur kingdom, neighbor and
rival to Ahmadnagar.4
   The death of Burhan Nizam Shah of Ahmadnagar (1594) set off a
severe factional struggle at court. Broadly, it pitted the “Deccan”
Muslims against the “foreign” Muslims, with the queen, Chand Bibi,
forming a third faction. Well aware of these problems, the Mughals
invaded from Khandesh immediately to the north (which they had
conquered more than twenty years before). In spite of resistance
organized by Chand Bibi, Mughal forces under Akbar took the town
and fort of Ahmadnagar in 1600. The fall of the capital, however, did
not mean the fall of the kingdom. Various nobles had troops and lands
to maintain them. The invasion was not vigorously pursued because
Akbar was already dying, and the succession war for the Mughal

  3 Good short histories of both the Bahmani kingdom and its main successor states —
Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, and Golconda -— are found in H. K. Sherwani and P. M. Joshi, History
of Medieval Deccan (1295-1724), vol. I (Government of Andhra Pradesh, 1973).
  4 G. S. Sardesai, New History of the Marathas 1 (Bombay, second impression, 1957), 51.

                                            41
                    THE   MARATHAS      1600-1818

throne took more than five years. It was 1608 before the new Emperor,
Jahangir, resumed the conquest of the Deccan.
   It was in this breathing space that Malik Amber emerged as the
leader of the remaining state of Ahmadnagar. He was an Abyssinian
slave who had held a minor position in the army of Ahmadnagar. After
the initial Mughal invasion (1594) he tried to find service at the courts
of both Bijapur and Golconda, but returned to Ahmadnagar in 1597.
At the time of the fall of the capital, Malik Amber held the northern
portion of the Konkan coast and some territory inland as far as
Daulatabad. The main campaigns by the Mughals were against another
leader named Miya Raju, who harassed Mughal forts and troops
throughout northern Maharashtra and into southern Khandesh. When
the Mughal succession dispute shifted to the north, Malik Amber
fought Miya Raju across the Pune-Nasik area, defeating him in 1608.
Because most Mughal troops were in the north, Malik Amber’s troops
regularly raided into the Mughal provinces of Khandesh, Berar, and
Gyyarat.
   After ten years of nearly constant warfare, it was in a short
interregnum (1610-12) that Malik Amber did his famous pargana by
pargana revenue settlement of northern Maharashtra. For our story,
this is also the period when he recruited many more of the Maratha
families into his army. They were immediately needed; he fought
campaigns against the Mughals and the Portuguese in 1613, and
another against the Mughals in 1615.
   In February 1616, there was a major battle between Mughal armies
and the troops of Malik Amber. In the weeks before the final battle,
there was much offering of service in the Mughal army to Malik
Amber’s Maratha leaders. Many changed sides. Malik Amber’s forces
lost the battle and he retreated to the fort of Daulatabad. Surrounded
by major Mughal armies, he surrendered Ahmadnagar fort and kept
much of the rest of his kingdom, but formally submitted to Mughal
service the following year.
   From 1617 to 1619, Malik Amber rebuilt his territory, recruited
troops and caused no problems for the Mughals. In 1619, however, all
the main Mughal forces were in the north. The Emperor was in
Kashmir and Prince Khurram was reducing the hill fort of Kangra in
the Punjab. Malik Amber began a successful operation in northern
Maharashtra, taking Ahmadnagar and raiding all the way into
Khandesh.