

                                   42
                        ([gZ61 ‘uorsoutsg] 0021-001 :andvlig fo sing ‘uowey preyory woz poidepe aie sease poindstp pue
sataepunog au 2g ‘(9861 ‘aspiuquie] vlvivas vaiwavp Cinquar-qiuaaig   sry agi 4apun sa11yOg pur 19190§ UDIAVABY :vIPUT Ut
(1U81a4a206 puy puvT ‘Yul, a1puy Woy paidepe) oz—$191 *9 ULdDaq] UISYUOU ay} Jo UONENIUS Axeuyru pueyesnyog       ‘7 dey
                   ifte        59}1\UOOL                                                   Ce   es       SS                               sy04 0
                  od
                          Wy O07                                                                         aN        “S
                                                                                                          Ye IPEAJUBARS
                                                                                                              -\        Be
                                                                                                                                  Veta:
                                                                                                                                 NVIGVvuVv
                                                                                                                             S
                                                                             yeBbeupewyy®
                                                                                                          rs
                              indeipuey9



                                                                                  MA
                                                                                 Me
                                                                               Te,        sauweBues rg
                                                               ipenieyiege
                                                                             ae
                                              x                                                          sa        ==
                                           BUPIEM 2                                      —*— —VNIVS — 43H INW —9-
                                                                              GES      =VvinHa — —=--—   -VNWIDVE—-
                                                                             sH=$: 3-a     ENWHD
                                                                                                 3082
                                                                                                 wees
                                                                                                  = =
                      THE   MARATHAS         1600-1818

   Malik Amber’s raids deep into Mughal territories finally forced the
Mughals to act. The Emperor sent Prince Shah Jahan into northern
Maharashtra with a large army in 1620. Malik Amber was defeated in
the field, but retreated to the fort of Daulatabad and sought terms. By
giving up part of his territory and a large indemnity, Malik Amber was
able to carry on the state of Ahmadnagara. Soon Mughal attention
again turned to the north, with the succession dispute beginning well
before the death of Jahangir, the Mughal Emperor. The Mughal
Empire consumed five years in this dispute, before attention could
again be paid to the conquest of the south.
   During 1621-24, Malik Amber was at war with the neighboring
Muslim kingdoms to the south. In a surprise action, he plundered
Bidar and laid siege to Bijapur. This is the background to the battle of
Bhatvadi in 1624, in which Malik Amber badly defeated the combined
forces of the Mughals and Biapur.                .
   Let us refocus on the Marathas in Malik Amber’s army. Maloji,
Shivaji’s grandfather, served Malik Amber and the fortunes of the
remaining state of Ahmadnagar through all of these campaigns. We
find only stray references to him, but they are interesting. For example,
in 1621 Maloji was serving as an agent for the collection of revenue in
the disputed area of Kanad Khore. He died in battle at Indapur, only a
year later. By then, his son, Shahji, was also a veteran in Malik Amber’s
service, and at twenty-six years old, one of the minor commanders of
the troops.°
   There are three important conclusions to be drawn from this period
in the history of Ahmadnagar. First, virtually all of Malik Amber’s
troops were Marathas. This is confirmed both in the Shiva Bharat, a
near contemporary Sanskrit poem probably commissioned by Shivaji
which lists the units in the battle of Bhatvadi, 1624, and a Tanjore
inscription which covers the same material. Second, there was some
shifting of service by the Maratha units. This was always the case, but
luring the units of the other side with offers of service became an
intense part of every pre-battle strategy. For example, before the Battle
of Bhatvadi, a few Maratha leaders went over to the Mughal side,
including Shahji, who returned to Ahmadnagar’s forces just before the
battle. The third conclusion to be drawn from this period is the
  ° J. N. Sarkar, House of Shivaji (New Delhi, 1978), 27.
  6     P. Patwardhan and H. G. Rawlinson, Sourcebook of Maratha History (Calcutta,
1978), 5.