

   Taking this perspective, we explicitly reject kingdom “‘boundaries”’
as a useful or functional way of understanding the complex political
entities of the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Deccan. Rather, we
must see families with clusters of “nested” rights, which are often
highly interpenetrated with other families’ rights. When a family
sought service with a competing faction or another polity, it withdrew
a whole cluster of rights — ritual, economic, judicial, military — from
one polity and gave it to another. Families shifted loyalty much more
on the basis of factional politics than they did on the basis of proximity
to something later historians would call a “frontier” with a neigh-
boring polity.
   What of villages in this period? We must similarly reject any general
description (such as that in dependency theory or world systems
theory) of Maharashtra’s villages as stable, producing only subsistence
agriculture, low in stratification, and participating in little trade. First,
subregions within Maharashtra varied considerably in their participa-
tion in trade and orientation towards cash-cropping. In the northern
areas of Khandesh and Aurangabad, there was, for example, a very old
tradition of cotton cultivation and manufacture, which grew consider-
ably under Mughal rule in the sixteenth century. Second, we have seen
that Marathas regularly served in the armies of the Muslim Deccan
kingdoms. This meant that men of even small villages went on
campaign, were often paid in cash, and returned to their village with
experience of the outside world. Third, the system of survival in these

   44 “Ajnapatra” (trans. Puntambeker), 214. I wish to thank Frank Perlin for several
discussions on the importance of deshmukh families for the history of Maharashtra.

                                         35
                         THE    MARATHAS     1600-1818

troubled times did not stop at the village boundary. Migration was a
common response to adversity — war, famine, or drought. These
patterns of migration were common until the beginning of this
century. Since brothers generally lived in the same village, refuge was,
as we have seen, with a more distant male relative. In addition, there
was a structured system by which those fleeing personal or local
adversity found shelter in any village. They became “‘uparis,”’ that 1s,
landless laborers welcomed for their addition to village productivity.
In time, if they stayed, they might become landholders (mirasdars).
Occasionally, refuge or service might also be sought with the wife’s
family; this is the pattern we find, for example, in the Shinde family late
in the seventeenth century. The considerable variation in the actual
cultivation found in villages year by year and the explicit records of
depopulation and repopulation suggest considerable migration and
entrepreneurial activity, rather than a stable, static village. Fourth, we
must recall the considerable stratification in Maharashtra’s villages in
this period. The village headman and the Brahmin records keeper had
substantially more land than average, plus rights in kind and service.
Also, the grantee of the government’s share (a saranjamdar or jagirdar)
lived in the village of his rights, and was of a much wealthier family
than the surrounding peasants. Like deshmukhs, these village elites
were negotiators with considerable power in the fluid system of the
time. Finally, we must not forget that ordinary cultivators were not
passive victims of larger events, but were often, themselves, negotia-
tors. Yearly, they either accepted the revenue settlement, or rejected it
and sent their headman back to renegotiate. More interestingly, the
ordinary cultivators could and did reject a headman they found
unacceptable, either because he was an unknown outsider or an
unsuitable insider (perhaps an illegitimate son of the former
headman).*5
 45 Kulkarni, “Social mobility,” ? 109-10.
                             CHAPTER