


                                            32
                 THE    GEOPOLITICS             OF    MAHARASHTRA

Mughal Empire could simply dictate terms to a local deshmukh family
like the Manes. Fortunately, the record picks up again ten years later.
We find Nagoji and Aurangzeb still haggling about what level of
military service and pay he was entitled to, and which other members
of the family would be taken into service. Nagoji was holding out for a
mansab of 7,000, seven forts in his area, the grant of seven parganas in
the area of Mhasvad with rights to try criminal cases, plus a ceremonial
drum, elephant, a horse with gold harness, 70,000 Rs. in immediate
cash, only one-fourth of his horses to be branded (implicitly acknow-
ledging that he would keep fewer troops than required), and no
requirements to provide fodder when the army was in his area.
Aurangzeb was offering a mansab of 5,000, payable from the revenues
of Berar (far from Nagoji’s home area of Mhasvad), and no other
relatives in service. A year later, this offer decreased to a mansab of
only 3,000. Nagoji finally entered service at 4,000 in 1700. The jagir
required both a nazar (gift) on taking it up and surety for good
conduct. A year later the surety bond was released, but Nagoji got little
of what he wanted — only two of the forts, none of the cash, no gold
trappings, and no drum. In another two years, as we shall later discuss,
he had shifted sides to the Marathas                       under     Shivaji’s grandson
Rajaram.*
   What, then, have we learned from this discussion of the position of
deshmukh in seventeenth-century Maharashtra? First, it was a
“hinge” position which involved the holder (and his family) in
face-to-face contact with both the king and court and the cultivating
villagers in his area. Second, the granting of these rights was the
principal way any government built and maintained loyalty in what
was not an urban-based “high” culture, but rather a fort-based, rural,
relatively poor agricultural area. Third, the role of the deshmukh
shifted dramatically in times of disputed authority. In the best of
times, with stability and prosperity, the deshmukh was much like a
government official. His powers and perquisites were spelled out in
detail in a written contract (sanad) with the government he served.*3
He assisted government revenue officers in making the settlement in
   42 The full complement of “nested” rights of the Mane family is laid out in a document
printed in Shiva Charittra Sahitya (Pune, Bharat Itihas Sanshodhak Mandal, 1926-65), v,
845. There is considerable overlap with the list of inam villages presented to Aurangzeb in
1689. See Khobrekar, Records of Shivaji, 138.
  43 “Regular”   settlements,   which   measured,    classified, and documented   land in the
deshmukh’s area were the time-tested means a central government used to gain information

                                              33
                        THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818