

                                            31
                        THE     MARATHAS         1600-1818

Shivaji). This is typical of the period; many deshmukhi rights were sold
or divided during family disputes or the periodic famines — 1630-36,
1650-55, 1690-93, 1710-12.39 Equally common and more destructive
were the invasions and wars of the same period. If we track any region
of Maharashtra, it was invaded on the average about every ten years
throughout the century. On the other hand, recall that the ratio of
cultivators to available land was very low; this means that if a
deshmukh was actually able to provide protection, by negotiation or
armed strength, the family was likely to be able to recruit and keep
peasants from less secure areas.*°
   The recently published Mane family documents allow us to watch
this negotiation process at work. (It is perhaps worth emphasizing,
once again, the importance of private family documents for the
understanding of Maharashtrian history, and the crucial continuing
search for and publication of these documents.) In the late 1670s, the
Biyapur government was fighting for its life against the Mughal forces
of Aurangzeb. Histories most often focus on the battles and sieges, but
negotiations with deshmukhs were equally important. Aurangzeb first
wrote to Nagoji Mane (son of Rataji) in October 1678 with a vague
offer of sardeshmukhi (which he already held from Bijapur) and
jamadari (military service grant, but of unspecified size), if Nagoji
would come personally to his camp. There the matter sat for seven
years; in the interim, Bijapur had fallen to the Mughals. Aurangzeb, the
Mughal Emperor, wrote to Nagoji Mane that, as the pargana Man had
been recently added to the empire, Nagoji was granted a jagir (grant for
military service) of 1,350,000 dams (33,750 rupees). A postscript,
added to the bottom of the document, noted that the city of Mhasvad
which had been taken from the enemy, “‘is now under the administra-
tion of Nagoji Mane.’’4!
   If only these documents had been printed, we would assume that the
  °° Khobrekar, Records of Shivaji, 95-97. Also, Pawar, Tarabaikalin, 488-89, for the
voluntary division of the Yadav deshmukh rights. For the sale of rights during famine, see
Kulkarni, Maharashtra, 96-97.
   ‘© Many of the terms associated with rural revenue relationships suggest this cycle of
depopulation and repopulation much more than stable, secure agriculture. For example, the
term “uprari” denotes a non-resident or refugee cultivator in a village. There were, for
example, regular methods for them to become landowning peasants if the original land-
holders absconded. To cite just one more example, there were regular methods of negotiation
and terms offered to try to bring back groups of cultivators who had absconded. A sample of
this process is found in the original Modi documents in the Pune Daftar, Peshwa Khandesh
Azmas Rumals, no. 187, “account of sardeshmukhi,” and no, 198, “warning letter.”
  41 Khobrekar, Records of Shivaji, 134-37.