

his area and was responsible for the revenue collection. He tried local
civil cases and used his troops to arrest local marauders, or to join
main force armies on campaign. His pay was specified and circums-
cribed by the contract with the state. It is all too easy to see these as
the only roles of the deshmukh, because government documents
tended to be produced largely in periods of stability, and — as we have
discussed — selective publication has overemphasized order, stability,
and continuity.
   The seventeenth century was far from the best of times, and much of
Maharashtra consisted of disputed border areas. These conditions
made the deshmukhs much more like high-risk rural entrepreneurs and
negotiators than paid bureaucrats in the revenue administration. Many
areas were periodically devastated by famine or war; this made the
deshmukh right available to a family bold enough or strong enough to
defend and repopulate it. Every deshmukh family occupied a strong
local fortified house, often several, and trained its youth in warfare.
Brave military service also could bring rights, and — as we have seen —
long-distance service in fighting a state’s enemies could bring consider-
able enhancement of rights. When the state itself was in doubt through
factional conflict or invasion, the position of the deshmukhs was even
more powerful, critical, and risky. They were forced to take sides in
factional disputes and successions. With troops and support, at a
critical moment, they could be king-makers or lose everything. They
risked this involvement because they needed the court as much as any
faction needed them. It was only the over-arching polity which
legitimized their own position of rights to revenue in their area. Even
more    important, it was        the sanad from the court which                  gave an
individual authority over his own kinsmen and the state’s backing if
they opposed him, as they often did. The history of Maharashtra and
the Maratha polity is, thus, the history of these deshmukh                      families.
There is no better summary of the position of these families than by
Ramchandra Nilkanth, high official of the Maratha polity and an astute
seventeenth-century observer of politics and statecraft. In the Ajna-
patra, he wrote as follows:
They are no doubt small but independent chiefs of territories. The weak manage to
exist by rigidly maintaining the tradition of power though decreasing from the

and a modicum of control. The technique was common to both the Mughals and the Deccan
sultanates. See R.F. Alavi, “Murshid Quli Khan’s revenue reforms in the Deccan,” in Studies
in the Medieval Deccan (Delhi, 1977), 61-72.

                                            34
                THE    GEOPOLITICS            OF   MAHARASHTRA

Emperor downwards. But they are not to be considered as ordinary persons. These
people are really sharers in the kingdom. They are not inclined to live on whatever
watan (rights) they possess, or to act loyally towards the king who is the lord of the
whole country and to abstain from committing wrong against any one. All the time
they want to acquire new possessions bit by bit, and to become strong; and after
becoming strong their ambition is to seize forcibly from some, and to create
enmities and depradations against others. Knowing that royal punishment will fall
on them, they first take refuge with others, fortify their places with their help, rob
the travellers, loot the territories and fight desperately, not even caring for their
lives. When a foreign invasion comes they make peace with the invader with a
desire for gaining or protecting a watan, meet personally with the enemy, allow the
enemy to enter the kingdom by divulging secrets of both sides, and then becoming
harmful to the kingdom get difficult to control. For this reason the control of these
people has to be cleverly devised.*4