


                                             59
                       THE     MARATHAS          1600-1818

district and the deshmukh rights of Indapur, some seventy miles
south-east of Pune. The family was, thus, a deshmukh family, though
not a large one. Beyond these hereditary rights, Shivaji’s father also
held the mokasa of the Pune region. In Bijapuri parlance of the day this
meant a hereditary grant of the government’s share of the revenue,
whether in cash or kind, for maintenance of troops. Shahji’s family
was not, for example, the hereditary deshmukh of Pune. This mokasa
grant was a triangle bordered by the Nira river on the south, the Bhima
river on the north-east, and a portion of the Ghats on the west. It ran
almost a hundred miles north to south and the same east to west, and is
almost the same outline as the current Pune district (see Map 1).? As
we have seen, the forts were held separately by families which held
grants from the Bijapuri government. Very little is confirmable about
Shivaji’s early years. The Pune region was largely devastated by two
decades of warfare and the famine of 1630. Dadaji Kondev, as steward,
set about repopulating and developing the jagir. There is every
indication that this was not a peaceful process: “(On coming, he
[Dadaji Kondev] took possession of the twelve Mawals. The Mawle
Deshmukhs were seized and taken in hand, the refractory among them
were put to death.”? We should not be surprised that force was
needed; the area’s deshmukhs had resisted one claimant to the area,
then another, for several decades.
  In 1640, Jijabai and Shivaji were called to Bangalore, and Shivaji was
married to Saibai, a daughter of the Nimbalkar family, another of the
prominent Maratha families. During these early years, Shivaji had not
seen his father. In 1642, after formal presentation at the Bijapur court,
Shivaji and his mother returned to Pune. All we know of his training
was that it included some reading and writing, riding and the martial
arts expected of a jagirdar’s son, and both the popular and high
tradition religious practice of the times. He probably participated in
the efforts of Dadaji Kondev, the steward, toward repopulating the
jagir and repairing the infrastructure.
  In 1644, Shivaji (as we have seen, a high commander in the Bijapur
army) was involved in a factional dispute that resulted in his arrest and
the sequestering of his estates, including Shivaji’s. The Bijapur govern-
ment instructed two nearby chiefs, the Khopde and Jedhe deshmukhs,
 2 G. S. Sardesai, New History of the Marathas (Bombay, second impression, 1957), 98.
ae      the Shabasad bakhar, as translated in S. N. Sen, Life of Siva Chhatrapati (Calcutta,


                                           60
                 SHIVAJI     AND    THE    MARATHA        POLITY

to seize the estates, but apparently the order was withdrawn before
being implemented. During this time, Shivaji explored the hills sur-
rounding his jagir and became familiar with large areas of the Ghats,
and — significantly — took the hill fort of Sinhagad, which commands
Pune.
   In 1647, Dadaji Kondev, the steward of Shivaji’s jagir, died, and
Shivaji took over the administration. One of his first acts directly
challenged the Bijapuri government. Shivaji, through stratagem (or
perhaps bribery, depending on the text) took the fort of Torna, and
seized the large treasure he found there. In the next two years, Shivaji
took another important fort near Pune, Chakan, which guarded the
northern road into the city. Meanwhile, he used the money found at
Torna to build a new fort five miles east of Torna, on the crest of a hill.
He named it Raigad, and it served as his capital for over a decade. All
challenges were possible because the Bijapuri government was in crisis
due to the illness of the reigning king. Shivaji in these same early years
also struck against rival Maratha families in his area.
At a place in the mahal of Supe, was his uncle, his stepmother’s brother, named
Sambhaji Mohite. The Maharaja had appointed him to the charge of the mahal.
Shivaji went to see him on the pretext of asking for a “post”’ on the day of the Simga
festival. The uncle was thrown into prison. He had three hundred horses of his
own stable and much wealth. All of his belongings and clothes were taken
possession of, and Supe annexed.*
Shortly after, Shivaji raided the town of Junnar, capturing three
hundred horses and “goods worth three hundred hons,” besides
clothes and jewels.
  In 1648, Shahji was once again arrested, not for Shivaji’s activities,
but for a conspiracy (which may or may not have been real) involving
the kingdom of Golconda; Bijapur, Shahji’s employer, was trying to
conquer Golconda and Shahji was accused of conspiring with the
enemy to at least delay the campaign. There was, in fact, little that
Shivaji could do to free his father. He appealed to the Mughals, resident
at Ahmadnagar, to invade Bijapur, and offered his services in return.
The offer was not accepted. He also repulsed a force from Bijapur, near
Purandar fort. Within a year, Shahji had been released, and Shivaji
continued his consolidation of his father’s jagir. He won over the fort
commanders of Baramati and Indapur, and more importantly, took the
fort of Purandar (some twenty miles from Pune).
 + Ibid., 3-4.
                                          61
                         THE     MARATHAS          1600-1818