

  18 Sarkar, House of Shivajt, 41.
  19 A. R. Kulkarni, Maharashtra in the Age of Shivaji (Poona, 1967).
  20 Ghauri, “Organization of the army,” 46.

                                           5§
                        THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

Basavapatan, held by Keng Nayak. The fort was taken along with
several others, including Velore, in this campaign.?!
  We know little about Shahji’s activities between 1642 and 1645.
Sometime between 1642 and 1644, Shahji’s estranged wife and his son,
Shivaji, visited Shahji at Bangalore. Besides arranging Shivaji’s mar-
riage, Shahji had the whole family, including Shahji’s two sons by his
second marriage, presented at the court of Bijapur. Shivaji and his
mother returned to Pune after a few months; nothing is known of the
conversations between father and son. In 1644, the war was once again
renewed, centering on the fort of Ikeri, which had been taken back by
the local raja, after conquest by the Biyapuri forces. Throughout, it is
possible that Shahji’s troops were involved, but they do not appear in
the military dispatches of Bijapur; it is also possible that he stayed
mainly on his jagir lands at Bangalore.
   In order to understand Shahji’s arrest by the Bijapuri government in
1648 it is important to understand the continuing tension between the
government and powerful nobles, like Shahji. There is little documen-
tation, but a paper found by Jadunath Sarkar in 1930 ina family archive
near Pune gives more detail than anything else we have. It is a letter to
Kanoyi Nayak Jedhe, who was the deshmukh of Bhor (twenty miles
south of Pune). He was commanded to assist representatives of
government in pursuing and annihilating Dadaji Kondev, who was
Shahji’s agent in the Pune area. The reasons were explicitly laid out.
“Shahji Bhonsle has become a rebel against this court” and his agent,
Dadaji Kondev, was campaigning in the Kondana district. The com-
bined government forces were to take control of the district. The order
was written in August 1644.22 We know no further details of the
expedition or the immediate results. It does, however, suggest that
resistance to Biyapuri control began well before Dadaji Kondev’s
death, when Shivaji took control of his father’s jagir in the Pune region.
There is clear evidence in the Bijapuri papers that a similar sequence
took place just a few years later in 1646, but again no details are given.
  These confiscations (1639, 1643, and 1646) are the background
leading to his arrest in 1648. Basically, the nayaks of the south
(Madurai, Jinji, Trichinopoly) were trying to gain freedom from their
overlord, Sri Ranga II of Vijaynagar. In the process, they courted
  21 Sarkar, House of Shivaji, 54.
  22 J. N. Sarkar, “An early supporter of Shivaji,” Indian Historical Quarterly, 7 (1931),
362-64.


                                           56
            MARATHAS         AND   THE   DECCAN   SULTANATES

Byapuri help. Forces from both Bijapur and Golconda invested Jinji. It
was at this protracted siege that Shahji was arrested. Shahi, as one of
the top leaders, was taking an independent course, which angered the
commander, Mustafa Khan. Shahji had been negotiating with the
various nayaks, and had even asked to go into service with the
Golconda government. Perhaps other Muslim nobles were jealous of
his growing power in the Bangalore area or his role in negotiating for
the Hindu nayaks of the south. It is clear that in 1648 he was one of
only two Maratha generals with a very high position in the army. It was
also a period in the history of Bijapur when there was a swing back
towards orthodoxy after the syncretist reign of Ibrahim II (1580-
1627).2> By the late 1640s, his successor, Muhammad, was already
weak from a lingering illness that was to kill him in 1656. Factions
struggled for power. In this atmosphere, policy shifts were rapid; it is
understandable why Shahji was brought to the capital in chains and
forced to give up his two most important forts (Kondana — renamed
Sinhagad and near Pune — and Bangalore), only to be pardoned by the
ruler within a year. The Maratha histories such as the Shiva Bharat
would have us believe that the father was imprisoned for the rebellion
of his son, Shivaji. There is plenty of evidence to the contrary, that it
was largely, if not exclusively, an internal political problem for the
Bijapuri government. The position of Shivaji is never mentioned in
Bijapuri descriptions of Shahji’s misdeeds, capture, imprisonment, or
release.
   We have little information on Shahji, from any source on the years
between 1648 and 1660. We know that the wars between Bijapur and
the Hindu nayaks of the south continued, with Bijapur generally
successful. The fall of the fort of Jinji in late 1648 was the beginning of
much more pressure on the kings of Madurai and Thanjur. Shahji was
apparently no longer stationed at Bangalore, but at Kanakgiri, near the
old Vijaynagar capital. His son, Ekoji, remained at Bangalore. Shahji
and his forces fought in the war between Bijapur and Golconda. One
son, Sambhaji, was killed during a revolt by the Rajah of Kanakgiri
(1654).24 The major events of the period were the death of Muhammad,
the ruler of Bijapur, and the subsequent chaos at the court. Many high
nobles withdrew their land and loyalty from Bijapur and took service
with the Mughals. The Mughals, under the new Emperor Aurangzeb,
 23 Eaton, Sufis, 95-96.
 24 Sardesai, New History, 87.