


                              d                                             Raichur
                      - * Belgaurn
                           Dharwad               Gadag                             Kurnul
                                      ”          er         rs
                                          Hubli         a              «Bellary

                              LKR RNATAK                                                     ~
                              ca                                                             Cuddapah |
                                                      .« Davangere




                                                                                                           pCHITTOR
                                                                 Bangalore               __...
                                                                                  Bere                     O VELLORE



                                  2

                                   : =A      ;
                      Tellicherry)                                                               Salem


                                  caliest                   3                              4 Ve, *




                                                                                   Trichinopoly * Thanjur



                                                                                                 Madurai
                                                                                                 e




                        200km
                         1
                   160 miles

                        75(0€



Map 3.   The Karnatak region (adapted from The Times Atlas of the World
[London, 1988], Plate 28).

                                                                48
            MARATHAS          AND    THE    DECCAN       SULTANATES

held the city of Pune, the forts nearby, Indapur, much of the area of
central Maharashtra, and all the Konkan.
   With Shahji, let us leave northern Maharashtra to the Mughals and
shift our focus to the kingdom of his new service, Bijapur. Some
specific history of Bijapur is also critical for an understanding of the
phenomenon of Shahji and the Maratha movement for independence.
It is all too easy to view Shahji in isolation, because he grew up far from
the capital in the marginal area of Pune. Still, we must not forget that all
the areas involved — Pune, the Ghats — were Bijapuri territory.
   As the most vigorous successor to the Bahmani kingdom, we must
understand that at the opening of the sixteenth century the Bijapur
kingdom was in a phase of conquest. Sultan Ali I (1558-80) had
established strong rule over the Bijapur area, developed the bureauc-
racy, expanded commerce, and built much of the city of Bijapur. Early
in his reign, he seized the important forts of Sholapur and Naldrug in
southern Maharashtra (see Map 3). After the battle of Talikota (1565),
in which the triple alliance, of Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, and Golconda
defeated Vijaynagar, Bijapur seized the entire region between the
Krishna and the Tungabharda rivers and a large area around Dharwar.
In a decade, the kingdom had effectively doubled in size. This conquest
provided a partial solution to the king’s most important continuing
problem, which was the strength of the nobles whose bases were large
tracts of alienated land. The king kept much of the new conquests as
“crown” lands, increased his bureaucracy to administer them, and
used the money to more than double his standing army to 8,000
cavalry.
   For our purposes, it is important to know who constituted this new
personnel. At the top of both the military and the administration were
Muslims. The senior civilian and military post was that of vakil, which
later became known as vazier.!! The top administration was small, and
concerned itself mainly with the collection of taxes from the crown
lands and the receipt of the fixed tribute from the subordinate states.
Beyond these few officials, there were a few major military comman-
ders and the palace officials. Large portions of the best lands in the
kingdom were alienated to this elite as “integrity fiefs” (dar wajh-i-
istiqamat). This elite remained small, in part because the new
   11 J, F. Ghauri, “Central structure of the kingdom of Biapur,” Islamic Culture, 44, 1
(January 1970), 21. One of the clearest discussions of Bijapur in this period is found in
Richard Eaton, Sufis of Byapur: 1300-1700 (Princeton, 1978).