

                                            51
                        THE     MARATHAS         1600-1818

of this administrator was minimized by a policy of frequent shifting of
posting. Outside the river valleys, which were the most settled and
prosperous areas and kept as crown lands, Muslim Biapuri presence
was even less. In Shahji’s father’s parganas in the relatively less fertile
Pune and Ghats area, there was little, if any, ongoing Byapuri
presence.
   In contrast to the more settled area of southern Maharashtra under
Bijapuri control, northern Maharashtra had little remaining govern-
ment infrastructure, as a result of steady warfare between the Ahmad-
nagar kingdom and the Mughal forces from 1600 to its conquest in
1630. The countryside around Pune, Nasik, and Ahmadnagar had
changed hands at least ten times between 1600 and 1635. The only
lasting features were villages, often under the walls of some fort, with a
citizenry used to “fight or flight.”” Most other villages had suffered
through the long-standing tactic of devastating civilian villages in
enemy areas to deny the enemy both grain and revenue, and to draw
off attacks from one’s own areas. Malik Amber, who ruled the declin-
ing state of Ahmadnagar from 1610-25, as we have seen, raised this
tactic to a high art in the process of holding off the Mughals for nearly
two decades. The remaining villages often yielded revenue and revenue
information only by force, and repeated force at that. Village
headmen, like the deshmukhs, were never paid from the government
treasury. They had tax-free lands in the village and a portion of the
harvest. Yet it is important to remember that Malik Amber’s land
revenue system gave a pervasive pattern for recovery from devas-
tation; also important was the flexibility of the system, the ability to
handle cash or kind when there was no cash. The continuity and
importance of Malik Amber’s settlement is confirmed in the g1-
Kalami Bakhar, one of the principal Marathi sources of the period. In
the discussion of the measures of Dadaji Kondev to promote recovery
in Shahji’s devastated lands around Pune, the stepwise increasing taxes
end in the eighth year with no specified amount per cultivated bigha,
as the earlier years had; they simply specified ‘Malik Amber’s settle-
ment.” This was the standard for fully cultivated fields throughout
northern Maharashtra. Thus, though the land was devastated, the
blueprint for recovery and taxation was common knowledge.!5
  15 For the details of the Malik Amber settlement, see A. R. Kulkarni, “Towards a history
of Indapur,” in D. W. Attwood, M.Israel, and N. K. Wagle, City, Countryside and Society in
Maharashtra, (Toronto, University of Toronto, 1988), 132.

                                           §2
             MARATHAS          AND     THE     DECCAN        SULTANATES

  Let us consider the possible strategies of a Maratha military family in
response to this situation, which had the following important features:
   (1)    A relatively low level of monetization and trade
   (2)    A declining economy that bottomed out with the region-
          side famine of 1630, leaving many areas underpopulated or
          depopulated
   (3)    The fall of Ahmadnagar to Mughal conquest
   (4)    A vigorous and growing state at Bijapur
   (5)     Declining numbers of foreign Muslim recruits in the armies of
           Biyapur, making the Maratha units relatively more important
   Probably the most common strategy was one that combined agri-
culture at home and loyal service in the army of Bijapur. Both had their
potential rewards. In a situation of serious underpopulation, those
remaining had the opportunity not only of cultivating the best lands,
but also of becoming the local officials with all the attendant rights.
Biyapur also offered favorable tax situations for the opening of new
cultivation. Consider the advantages of combining this agriculture
with service in the army of Bijapur. Service provided ongoing employ-
ment in years of agricultural scarcity; service gave the opportunity,
even in good years, for some members of the family to make a living
outside the region. Service also secured jagir grants over lands in
Maharashtra, as well as status. There was also the possibility of grants
in more prosperous areas outside Maharashtra, such as the Tunga-
bharda valley or coastal Konkan.
   Of the many Maratha families which chose to serve Bijapur, we have
only a few names (mainly those prominent in later Maratha history),
such as the Savant of Savantwadi, the Ghorpades of Mudhol, the
Nimbalkars of Phaltan, the Mores of Javli, the rulers of the later
Maratha princely state of Jata, and the Shirke, Mohite, and Man
families.!¢ There were, however, thousands recruited into the Bijapur
regular army, whose names we do not know. If we can generalize from
the few families we can trace, the Marathas presented themselves alone
or in small groups, such as two brothers or several cousins. If this was
in fact the pattern of recruitment, then the influence of Biyapuri service
would have been widespread throughout Maharashtra and touched
most families and villages.
   16 These families are listed in the Shiva Bharat, a contemporary Sanskrit poem. It has been
translated in Patwardhan and Rawlinson, Sourcebook, 5.