


                                              0)
                       THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

   During peacetime, the government maintained some long-term
control over the families by arbitrating the common, ongoing disputes
over rights and service grants.!”7 From the government’s point of view,
families, especially families of deshmukhs, were possible supplemental
units to the regular army, which cost almost nothing from the
government treasury. The key word here is ‘“‘possible.”’ Whether the
men of a particular family actually joined the main-force army
depended on the season of the year, relations between the family and
various factions at court, patronage of a particular Maratha general in
the Bijapuri army, and the internal politics of the family.
   Other strategies opened to families in certain situations, such as a
serious factional dispute at the court. This situation was particularly
common in the history of Bijapur. Few of its sovereigns lived longer
than thirty years, so that a minor was often on the throne. The regency,
as we have seen, became the focus of severe factional politics, as the
regent asserted power against other groups, frequently also trying to
gain the throne. Opposition usually centered on the queen-mother.
Courted by one side, then the other, a well-placed Maratha family
might extract much more favorable terms in return for their soldiers.
Equally likely, the family might fissure, some portion going with each
of the factions. Such common crises might end in one of several ways.
First, the king might take control and demote the regent. Second, the
regent might be assassinated by jealous followers. Third, the regent
might be imprisoned after a successful coup by the opposition. Fourth,
the regent or the opposition might call in an outside power. It was, for
example, this sort of crisis that invited Mughal conquest in the 1680s.
   Finally, a Maratha family might take up open rebellion against the
state it served; this, however was possible only in special circum-
stances. The government had to be preoccupied with other matters,
such as a succession dispute or repelling a serious invasion. Also, the
area of the rebellion had to be easily defended against government main
forces, such as in the mountains, where artillery could not be used and
supply lines were long. It probably helped if the area was not very
productive of either grain or revenue. All these factors came together in
Shivaji’s movement of independence in the mid-seventeenth century.
   With this perspective on other families in Bijapuri service, let us once
   '7 Many of these are mentioned in V. T. Gune, Judicial System of the Marathas (Poona,
1953), 64~65. See also G. H. Khare, “A letter of assurance from Ali Adil Shah I,” Indian
Historical Records Commission (October 1945).


                                          54
            MARATHAS          AND    THE    DECCAN       SULTANATES

again focus on Shahji, and his service with Bijapur. As part of his
initial jagir grant, Shahji managed to get the rights to the Pune
region.!§ These districts, as we have seen, had suffered particularly
badly in the 1630s, being repeatedly ravaged by Mughal troops. They
were almost depopulated by the late 1630s.!9 By the terms of the
Mughal-Bijapur treaty, Shahji was himself barred from staying in
Maharashtra, so the administration was granted to his son, Shivaji,
then ten years old, with Dadaji Kondev as manager. It is worth
emphasizing that the rights that Shahji had in the Pune region were a
mixture of village headman rights, deshmukh rights, and the jagirdari
rights, held subject to satisfactory service with the Buiapur
government.
   The same treaty which introduced Shahji into Bijapuri service had,
of course, much wider effects. By freeing Bijapur from the threat of
Mughal conquest from the north, Bijapuri could turn to conquest in
the south. Each campaigning season (1637-40), a Bijapuri army
crossed the Krishna and the Tungabharda into Mysore. Shahji was
one of many leaders in the army of Rustam-i-Zaman, the Byapuri
general charged with the conquest of Malnud. This Bijapuri army
defeated the nearby nayaks (local chiefs left after the demise of Vijay-
nagar) and took Bangalore in 1639. Shahji was left to hold Bangalore
and settle the surrounding area. Shahji’s strength was the band of sea-
soned veterans who had been with him throughout the wars of the last
decade. He also had Brahmin administrators, used to collecting taxes
in the countryside. Shahji thus set about creating a whole new estate,
based on the city of Bangalore. Bijapuri documents in the India Office
Collection show that the first of many conflicts that Shahji was to
have with the Bijapuri court happened that year. Muhammad Adil
Shah, the Bijapuri ruler, ordered the deshmukh of Lukmeshar to co-
operate with the commander              Sidi Mooflah, so that the “relations,
dependents, servants and horses of Shahji might be arrested.”?°
Unfortunately, we have no further details. Shahji’s force was,
however, unable to hold the area, once the main Bijapuri army moved
on. In 1641, there was a general uprising of the Hindu rajahs. Shahji
jointed the main Bijapuri army, under the command of Afzal Khan,
and, for example, was involved in the assault on the newly fortified