

                                         7
                          THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

immediately made plans to annex Bijapur. This is the context of the
Shivaji bid for independence, which became visible and unavoidable by
 1655:
   In another section, we will consider Shivaji’s actions from the inside,
looking outward from the Pune region at the surrounding threats and
possibilities. For now, let us take the viewpoint of the Bijapur court
and see what they tried to do about the “Shivaji problem.” The court
tried various tactics to bring Shivaji into line. The documentation 1s
scrappy, but the first tactic was to separate father from son. The new
ruler “reassured” Shahji that the offences of his son would not reflect
on him; all his grants would be continued.
26 May, 1658. At this time it has been reported to His Majesty that owing to the
disloyalty and audacity of Shivaji Bhonsle you are alarmed lest his faults should be
laid on your head. Be it known to this loyal subject that the improper conduct and
acts of Shivaji are evident to His Majesty. Therefore, the faults of Shivaji will not be
laid on you, but his offences are being imputed to him only.?5

In fact, the same reassurance document gave Shahji back the area
around Bangalore fort which he formerly had as a jagir.
   In the period 1659~62, after the defeat of the army under Afzal Khan
sent by Bijapur to defeat Shivaji, Shahji actively mediated between his
son and the Byapur government. Shahji also travelled to Pune to try to
work out a peace settlement; it was the first time father and son had
been together in twelve years.?¢ It was also the last time, as he died in a
hunting accident in early 1664.
   We will now move from the large scale to the small, from the politics
of Byapur and the invasions of the Mughals to the small town of Pune,
from the plains to the mountains; we move from the complexities of
service to a more simple life of hunting and horseback, and from
Shahji, the father, to Shivaji, the son and founder of the Maratha polity.
   25 Sarkar, House of Shivaji, 84.
   26 There has been considerable speculation in the historical literature that Shahji and his
son Shivaji werein contact throughout the period, and, in fact, developed joint plans for the
independence of Maharashtra. To date, however, no direct documentary evidence of such
contacts or plans has surfaced, although the Jedhe Chronology and the later Chitnis bakhar
offer indirect hints. We are left with the dominant position in the historiography that Shivaji
acted alone and even in opposition to his father.




                                             58
                                     CHAPTERS

 SHIVAJI (1630-80) AND THE MARATHA
                 POLITY

Let us begin, then, the narrative biography of Shivaji, founder of the
Maratha polity. (Throughout, I have kept to incidents corroborated in
at least two of the most reliable bakhars or confirmable by outside
sources.) The accomplishments of this extraordinarily capable and
charismatic leader must always be set against the complex context laid
out in the previous two chapters. The most important features of this
context were as follows: (1) the near devastation of much of Maha-
rashtra; (2) warfare between the major states of Bijapur and the Mughal
Empire; (3) his father’s deep involvement in Bijapur; and (4) the
presence, in Maharashtra, of powerful deshmukh                          families whose
authority was as legitimate as his.
   Shivaji was born in February 1630.! He was the second son of Shahji
Bhonsle and Jijabai, and he was born in the hill fort of Shivneri in the
northern part of the Pune district. Recall that these years of Shivaji’s
early childhood were ones of constant warfare and famine in Maha-
rashtra, particularly the Pune region. Shahji, his father, was a rebel
from brief Mughal service, and a Mughal army pursued him through
the Ghats and down to the Konkan. Other campaigns against the
Mughals followed, but Shahji’s forces, reinforced by Bijapur, were
generally unsuccessful against the Mughals. Shivaji and his mother
moved from fort to fort. His mother’s family had gone over to the
Mughal side, and mother and son saw little of Shahji. It was not until
1636, when Shahji was forced to go into service with Biyapur, that
Shivaji and his mother were able to settle in Pune.
   Shahji, as we have seen, succeeded in getting a grant in the Pune
region confirmed by the Bijapur government, the administration of
which was bestowed on Dadaji Kondev. The core of the rights was the
hereditary patil rights (village headman) to three villages in the Pune
   1 Until recently, there was some question about Shivaji’s birth date because the near
contemporary Jedhe Chronology placed it in 1627. The correct date has recently been
corroborated by his birth horoscope; a copy taken at the time of his birth was recently found
in Rajasthan. Raghubir Singh, “Correct date and year of Shivaji’s birth — fresh evidence from
Rajasthan collections,” in B. R. Kamble (ed.), Studies in Shivaji and His Times (Kolhapur,
1982), 11-28.