

he controlled eight important passes that traversed the Ghats from the
Desh to the Konkan coast.’
  This period, 165 5—60, was an extraordinarily confused time in both
the politics of the Bijapur state and in the larger politics of the whole of
Maharashtra. For more than a year, the king of Bijapur lay dying, and
factions formed      and reformed,       trying to seize power.        Meanwhile,
Bijapur was under attack by a major Mughal army, under the leader-
ship of Aurangzeb, son of the Mughal Emperor, Shah Jahan. In the
face of what seemed an unstoppable attack on Bijapur by the Mughals,
Shivaji opened correspondence with Aurangzeb, offering to keep
passes open and his services in return for recognition of his rights in
the Pune region and the former More lands. At the same time,
however, he raided several areas in the Junnar and Ahmadnagar
regions, which were under the control of the Mughals. The situation
abruptly changed, when, in 1656, Aurangzeb left for the north to fight
for the throne of the Mughal Empire on the death of Shah Jahan.
Shivaji responded to the situation by further conquests. From the
More lands which were on the top of the Ghats, he raided down into
the northern Konkan and captured the towns of Kalyan and Bhiwandi
and the large fort of Mahuli (see Map 2). The exact status of these lands
was ambiguous because of the abrupt departure of Aurangzeb for the
north. Bijapur, by the peace treaty of 1657, had ceded to the Mughals
all territory it had conquered from Ahmadnagar. This included the
northern half of the Konkan coast; there was no time, however, to set
up an administration. Shivaji could, therefore, claim that he was
seizing the territory in the name of the Mughals, on the basis of his
offer to serve them.
   The raids on the coastal plain were highly successful and first
brought Shivaji to the attention of the maritime powers on the west
coast of India. In briefest summary,             these consisted, first, of the
Portuguese based at Goa and holding several smaller ports (Chaul, 20
miles south of Bombay, Daman, 100 miles north of Bombay, and Diu
on the south coast of Saurastra) and forts (such as Bassein and Salsette
near Bombay). Through superior guns and navigation technology, the
Portuguese had been a terror of the western coast (though much less
effective on the remaining coast of India) through much of the
sixteenth century, forcing the indigenous ships to pay for “passes,”
   7 Patwardhan and Rawlinson, Sourcebook, translation of the Shabasad bakhar, p. 66.
Translation of the 91-Kalami bakhar, p. 67.


                                         63
                          THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

and generally attacking and opposing the various Muslim groups
involved in shipping. Portuguese trade (mainly cotton textiles from
India to south-east Asia) and attempted monopolies (mainly pepper
and spices) had, however, never been able to support the required forts
and military ships; the practice of taking “enemy” ships had placed the
Portuguese in adversarial relationships with every government and
family which sponsored shipping. By the mid-seventeenth century,
however, the Portuguese power was in decline and their hold on the
seas had been successfully challenged. The second power on the
western coast was the Dutch; using superior naval technology, they
had blockaded Goa and other Portuguese ports in the first decades of
the seventeenth century, and, by mid-century, had captured several
crucial Portuguese strongholds, both on the Indian coast and in
south-east Asia. Simultaneously, the British — a third power — were
exploring the same trading territory. They found themselves in a
generally weaker position than the Dutch, especially in securing
pepper and spices, and were forced into exploring the interstices of
trade to south-east Asia and directly to Europe. Large-scale naval
warfare between the British and the Dutch began in 1630 and
continued off and on for fifty years.’ On the west coast of India, the
British at mid-century were large traders at Surat, the Mughal port at
the mouth of the Tapti river. They were developing cloth exports of
Indian textiles directly to Europe. Bombay had yet to be given to the
British crown.? In addition, the strongest actual power on the Konkan
coast was not these well-known European trading nations, but the
Sidis of Janjira, an Abyssinian Muslim family who held sea forts and
some large nearby land possessions, and maintained an extensive navy
to protect its merchant shipping.'° (In general, all these coastal powers
were able to establish themselves because the major land powers — the