

At that time, died a Brahmin named Nilkantha Rav, commandant of the Adilshahi
fort of Purandar. His two sons began to quarrel with each other [about the
succession]. The Raje [Shivaji] went to Purandar to mediate between them. And he
possessed himself of the fort by imprisoning the two brothers. He established his
own garrison there.°

   It was shortly after the taking of Purandar fort that Bijapur finally
sent an expedition to deal with Shivaji as a rebel. This was at the same
time that Shivaji’s father Shahji was imprisoned at Bijapur for con-
spiring with Golconda. Without siege equipment, the Bijapuri force
was unable to dislodge Shivaji from Purandar fort.
   Between 1650 and 1655, Shivaji recruited deshmukhs and soldiers
and successfully crushed opposition to his control of the Pune region.®
During this time, there was little external opposition from Biyapur
because the king remained sick, and the only focus was the continuing
war with Golconda.
   The following year (1656), Shivaji broke out of his father’s jagir with
new conquests just to the south. Athwart the Ghats was a jagir
controlled by the More family. They held long-standing “‘nested”’
rights from Bijapur. Shivaji had been steadily undermining their power
by courting low level officials (village headmen and other grant
holders) by offering better terms. He also offered “‘aid”’ to one member
of the More family in a succession dispute. The upshot was a full-scale
war between the followers of Shivaji and the followers of the Mores.
Shivaji gained the Johar valley, and finally the fort ofJavali after a siege
of a month. The tactics were brutal, including conscious treachery on
Shivaji’s part. By May, Shivaji had taken Raigad, the strongest fort in
the area, and four of the More brothers were killed in battle. This
campaign, the bakhars all agree, was pure conquest and elimination of a
rival, as Shivaji had no legal rights to the More lands. Shivaji acquired
much more than a fort in the campaign. He gained enough treasure to
build another fort, which he named Pratapgad, near Raigad. Further,

   > Ibid., 5.
   6 These events are described in the Jedhe Chronology, a near contemporary source,
translated in P. P. Patwardhan and H.G. Rawlinson, Sourcebook of Maratha History
(Calcutta, 1978), 35. It is interesting that Ramchandra Nilkanth, the author of the Ajnapatra,
a famous Marathi treatise on statecraft, who was an observer of these events simply
characterized these recalcitrant deshmukh families — Mores, Shirkes, Savants, the Davlis of
the Konkan, Nimbalkars of Phaltan — as “‘rebels’’ and listed them along with Shivaji’s other
enemies, namely the Muslim Deccan kingdoms, the Mughals, the European powers, and
chiefs of the Karnatak. ‘““The Ajnapatra or royal edict” (trans. S. V. Puntambekar) Journal of
Indian History, 8, 1 (April, 1929), 86-87.                                          ;

                                             62
                SHIVAJI     AND    THE    MARATHA        POLITY