

   8 O.C. Kail, The Dutch in India (Delhi, 1981), 44-45.
   9 §. A. Khan, Sources for the History of British India in the Seventeenth Century (New
Delhi, 1978). It is interesting to compare the position of British traders at the same period in
coastal China. They were not able to establish their own trading cities or to dominate the
coastal trade. They had to trade in existing Chinese arenas and patterns and had almost no
impact on the interior. It was strong political opposition which limited their influence.
   '© The Sidis’ strongest fort was Janjira, the sea fort about forty miles south of Bombay. In
reality, the Sidis held as much legal authority as anyone else in the region. They had been
feudatories of the Ahmadnagar kingdom, then switched allegiance to Biyapur when Ahmad-
nagar was conquered by the Mughals. At mid-century, they controlled much of the coastal
area behind Janjira in what is now Raigad district of Maharashtra. See V. G. Dighe, Peshwa
Baptrao I and the Maratha Expansion (Bombay, 1944), 43-45.


                                              64
                  SHIVAJI       AND     THE    MARATHA          POLITY

Mughals, Admadnagar, and Bijapur — derived little of their income
from and were in the main unconcerned with seaborne trade.) It was
this complex coastal world which Shivaji entered, when he invaded the
coastal regions of the Konkan in 1657.!! In spite of campaigning in the
northern Konkan, Shivaji was unable to alter the fundamental power
relationships. He could neither displace nor defeat the Sidis of Janjira,
and needed to maintain friendly relations with the Portuguese as he
was at war with both Biyapur and the Mughals.
   By the end of 1659, Shivaji was, therefore, in control of the Pune
area, the northern Satara district (immediately to the south) and
about    half of the Kolaba             and    Thana      districts,    which     form     the
Konkan coast below the Pune and Satara districts. He controlled
forty forts, large and small, led a cavalry of 7,000 regular horse,
and infantry of approximately 10,000, and 3,000 independent
troopers.!?
   Let us pause to consider the sort of polity that Shivaji was carving
out in the Pune region. Many of the major writers on the subject would
have us believe that Shivaji was creating a Hindu state, something
fundamentally different and in opposition to the Muslim states that
surrounded it. The Brahmin historians of the twentieth century,
starting with Rajwade, especially wanted to prove that Shivaji was
guided by Brahmin advisors from early in his life, and that he had a
vision of a state based on something called Maharashtra Dharma. Much
of this, if not all, has been shown by later research to be an artifact of
the researchers, not a fact of the period. The only articulation of a
“Maharashtra Dharma” is in a text that predates Shivaji by four
hundred years. Further, it details only the relations between castes, not


   11 This discussion relies on much recent research which can only be suggested here. See,
for example, M. N. Pearson, Merchants and Rulers in Gujarat (Berkeley, 1976). Also, Ashin
Das Gupta and M.N. Pearson (eds.), India and the Indian Ocean: 1500-1800 (Oxford,
1987). Also, K. N. Chaudhuri, Trade and Civilization in the Indian Ocean: An Economic
History from the Rise of Islam to 1750 (Cambridge, 1985). For the specifics of relations
between Shivaji and the Portuguese, see P. S. Pissurlencar, Portuguese Mahratta Relations
(Bombay, 1983).
   12 Shivaji vigorously resisted the common cultural ethos of “gifting” much of his
territorial gains to his army. It is interesting to contrast Shivaji’s early army, which was
mainly recruits riding Shivaji’s horses, with armies built up in Tamilnadu at the same period;
these were mainly assembled by some sort of “‘service” to a king, from which the “gift” of a
landed income followed. These “inam” grants varied from a few quite large ones to
thousands as small as a few acres, for the support of a single trooper; they constituted most of
the cultivated area of the kingdom. See N. B. Dirks, The Hollow Crown: Ethnohistory of an
Indian Kingdom (Cambridge, 1987), 42-47, 168-95.