

                                           49
                         THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

Portuguese control of the western coast of India cut off easy immi-
gration from Arabia and Persia; the Mughal Empire likewise limited
immigration overland from the north. The result was a major recruit-
ment of local Hindus into both the military and the administration.
From this first expansion, Bijapur, like other Deccani states, used local
troops in large numbers, not only the levies of the landed families they
conquered, but directly recruited main-force cavalry. (This pattern 1s,
as we have seen, equally well documented for the more northerly
kingdom of Ahmadnagar.) The new recruits represented a range of
local people, predominantly Marathas, but also Lingayats and other
fighting groups available after the fall of Vijaynagar. Similarly, Brah-
mins, especially Deshastas from Maharashtra, and Prabhus, a non-
Brahmin writer caste, soon completely dominated the middle and
lower levels of the central bureaucracy. They even administered the
large “integrity” grants of the Muslim elite of the state.
   With the expansion of the ““crown” lands and the development of the
administrative bureaucracy, we should briefly note an emerging struc-
tural problem of the Deccan kingdoms, the ambiguous and difficult
relationship of the vazier and the sultan. The vazier was not only the
head of the administration, but kept the sultan’s seal and could issue
orders in his name. The more efficient he was, the more income came to
the sultan, but the more the vazier’s real power increased. (The
parallels to other kingly systems, such as mid-eighteenth-century
France should be obvious.) With a vigorous, adult sultan, interested in
governing, the vazier would be a loyal official; during a minority rule,
or any period in which the sultan was unable to rule (by absence,
illness, or disappearing into the harem), the vazier ruled the state. This
pattern is clear in Golconda and Ahmadnagar, as well as Bijapur. We
note the pattern here because it emerged as a problem when the
Maratha polity had lands to administer a century later.!2
   Throughout the reign of Sultan Ibrahim II (1580-1627), we must see
in Byapur a vibrant, syncretist kingdom, its ruler highly interested in
Hindu thought and music, its art affected by the many Hindu artisans
it employed, and a majority of Hindus in both its army and administra-
tion. The capital city, with a population of over 500,000, was cosmo-
politan and rich. European traders noted an active export trade in
cotton and silk cloth. The cotton came from southern Maharashtra,
  2 I. F, Ghauri, “Regency” in the sultanates of Bijapur and Golconda”, Journal of the
Pakistan Historical Society, 15, 1 (January 1967), 19-37.

                                              5O
             MARATHAS         AND     THE    DEGCGAN*SULTANATES

and raw silk was imported from China to be woven and re-exported.'3
At court, even the language reflects this syncretism. The court was
dominated by ‘“‘Dakkanis,” that is Muslims who had been living in the
south for generations. Their language was a mixture of the Arabic and
Persian of their origins, the North Indian Urdu of their past, the
Sanskrit of the Brahmins, and the Marathi, Telegu, and Kanada of their
subjects. This ““Dakkani” language became the official language at
court as well as the practical language of the bazaar and the camp. We
know, for example, that Ibrahim II spoke better Dakkani and Marathi
than he did Persian.
   Important to the power structure of the countryside of rural
Maharashtra at the time of Shivaji’s boyhood were the forts, especially
those scattered along the Ghats. Bijapur has been characterized as a
kingdom of cities and forts. As a kingdom, this is only partially true.
The sultan’s direct appointees controlled only the large, strategically
important forts. (Many smaller forts and fortified houses were held, as
we have seen, by indigenous deshmukh families, mainly Marathas.)
The large forts had villages attached to the grant for the maintenance of
the fort and its complement of soldiers. This practice was equally true
for northern Maharashtra, and had been for the whole period of
Ahmadnagar’s rule. For example, it was the Maratha garrison troops
who turned over Daulatabad to the founder of the Ahmadnagar
kingdom at the opening of the sixteenth century.
   What of the Bijapuri presence in the countryside? It was thin and
infrequent. First, there were the twenty-two tributary states, which
paid only a fixed tribute each year; there was no Byapuri presence
inside these areas at all. Much of the best remaining land, as we have
seen, was alienated to high nobles. They stayed at court or were on
military assignment; their lands were administered by their Brahmin
bureaucracy. In the directly administered “crown” lands, there was a
unified military/civilian administrator called a havildar whose auth-
ority was over several parganas and whose residence was in the largest
town in the area. His responsibilities were primarily notifying the
villages of any change in the jagir grants that affected them, plus
overseeing the tax settlement and collection, examining the forts, and
reviewing the troops of the lower military leaders.'* Even the presence
   13 Sherwani and Joshi, History of Medieval Deccan, 263-64.
   14 This system is considered in detail in the early chapters of S. N. Sen, The Military
System of the Marathas (Calcutta, reprinted edition, 1976).