

   With at least one night’s head start, Shivaji was able to elude pursuit
by travelling off the main roads in the tribal area east of Malwa. He
arrived in Maharashtra in just a month, though seriously fatigued and
sick from the trip. At Agra, all his goods and jewels were confiscated.33
   It is hard to overestimate the opportunity which the Mughal Empire
lost at this point. There was much misunderstanding on both sides.
Aurangzeb knew perhaps too much of the Deccan, the Marathas, and
of Shivaji. He could not conceive of supporting Shivaji, in his attempt
to extract loyalty from the deshmukhs, as probably the only way to
keep his loyalty. This policy might have treated the Marathas as the
Rajputs had been under Akbar. The cultural gulf between the Mughal
court and the Marathas made this unlikely, as did Aurangzeb’s
increasing Muslim sectarianism.
   Back in the Deccan, Shivaji did not immediately attack the Mughals.
Quite to the contrary, the following three years were ones of peace
with the Mughals. Shivaji offered his submission to Aurangzeb, sent
his son to enroll as a Mughal mansabdar, and sent a small contingent to
serve at Aurangabad. He recognized that a Mughal main-force army of
the style of Jai Singh’s would once again overwhelm the forces available
to him. Until 1669, Shivaji’s campaigns were minor, centered on
consolidating the Konkan, and failed in their main aim, which was the
capture of the sea fort of Janjira.
   The peace broke down in the fall of 1669. The immediate provo-
cation was a Mughal demand for recovery of the costs of Shivaji’s trip
to Agra. Shivaji launched rapid attacks to recover the lost forts in his
claimed territories. The first and most spectacular success was the
capture of Sinhagad fort. It was taken by scaling very difficult walls by
means of rope ladders in a night raid which culminated in hand-to-
hand combat inside the fort. The raid was led by Tanaji Malusare, who
was killed in the battle. The exploit is the subject of one of the most
popular Marathi ballads, still current today. Within six months,
Shivaji’s forces had taken four more forts — Purandar, Rohida, Lohgad
(see Map 4) and Mahuli (see Map 1). In October of 1670, Shivaji sacked
Surat for the second time, once again obtaining much booty.
Throughout 1670, he raided into Khandesh, Berar, and Baglan. These
are the districts immediately to the north of Maharashtra and had been
solidly under Mughal control, Berar and Khandesh for more than

 33 Sarkar, House of Shivaji, 169.

                                           7
                    THE   MARATHAS        1600-1818

seventy-five years, Baglan for about forty years. Early in 1671,
Shivaji’s forces captured both Mulher and Salher forts in western
Khandesh (see Map 2); these were crucial for control of the trade
routes to Surat and were bitterly fought over in the course of the next
few years. At the same time, he was able to expel Mughal forces from
Nasik, immediately to the south of these forts and from his home areas
around Pune. In 1672 and 1673, the focus shifted to south-east
Maharashtra and war with Bijapur. Bijapur was in the midst of another
succession crisis, with the death of Ali Adilshah II. Shivaji’s forces
sacked Hubli and took Panhala fort, one of the strongest forts in the
Bijapur area that controlled the main access from Shivaji’s area.
Meanwhile, other of his forces raided into the southern Konkan, the
area below the Ghats in the vicinity of Goa. Further attempts to defeat
the Sidi were no more successful than earlier campaigns. Throughout
this period, the Mughals were not focused on Shivaji in Maharashtra,
but on a fierce war with the Pathans in the north.
   Let us complete the narrative of Shivaji’s life before turning to the
important themes of the Maratha polity. From 1674 to his death in
1680, Shivaji was mainly involved in long campaigns in the south. He
was invited by a faction of the Bijapur court to invade Golconda, and
led an army all the way across India to Jinji on the eastern coast. There,
he both fought and negotiated with Ekoji (his half-brother) and took
the major fortress of Vellore. During this period, his son Sambhaji
briefly took service with the Mughal Empire, apparently unsatisfied
with his prospects for succeeding Shivaji. Shivaji had proposed divi-
ding the polity, his younger son, Rajaram, to get the heartland areas of
Maharashtra and his older son, Sambhaji, to get the new conquests in
the Karnatak and coastal Jinji. These problems,         as we   shall see,
remained unsolved at Shivaji’s death.34