

                                          73
                         THE     MARATHAS            1600-1818

Jai Singh pursued the military campaign very vigorously, both in the
capture of forts, and in the devastation of the lands belonging to
Shivaji. This had the effect of showing to other landed elite families the
power of the Mughal Empire. With this understanding of the larger
perspective, let us return to the siege.
   Jai Singh refused many offers of negotiation, demanding Shivaji’s
unarmed visit to his tent. Finally, Shivaji had to agree to the terms. The
Mughals took twenty-three of Shivaji’s forts, including most of the
major ones, leaving him twelve forts, including his capital, Raigad. The
treaty also confirmed that all Shivaji’s lands and possessions were
subject to loyal service to the Mughals. His son, Shambhuji, was
created a high Mughal mansabdar of rank of 5,000. Shivaji was to pay
four million gold hons, if he was confirmed in the possession of lands
in the Konkan, after the presumed Mughal conquest of Bijapur. These
lands were currently of ambiguous status; they had been ceded to the
Mughals by Bijapur in the treaty of 1636, but Bijapur had refused to
turn them over. They were, in fact, divided between Shivaji (mainly in
the South Konkan), the Sidi (mainly in the North Konkan), and
remaining Bijapuri nobles and officials.?> Finally, Shivaji was exemp-
ted from attendance at Mughal court. While the Mughals resumed all of
Shivaji’s lands, leaving him only the twelve forts, the Treaty of
Purandar was not a surrender of Shivaji to Mughal imperial might, but
the result of extended negotiation which reflected the power realities of
Maharashtra and Jai Singh’s overall strategy for the conquest of Bijapur
and Golconda. Jai Singh also hoped for an immediate impact on the
landed families of the region.
Seeing the rectitude in the words given by me, the slave of your majesty, and the
granting of leave of Shiva to depart, now all the zamindars of the Karnatak and the
wild people of Barkol and Kanul, etc., have sent their agents, just as one captured
deer draws many wild and forest deer. And they are waiting for hints or signs and
for the sake of the Bijapuri expedition. It is absolutely necessary to conciliate them
and give them hope to get their watan [homeland].?4
   After the rainy season, as a Mughal commander, Shivaji was given
orders to conquer the Panhala fort and region from the Bijapuris, and
the Phonda fort inland from Goa. His troops succeeded in neither

_ 28 Sarkar, House of Shivayt, 144. The actual letter from Jai Singh to Aurangzeb is translated
in Jadunath Sarkar and Raghubir Singh, Shivaji’s Visit to Aurangzib at Agra, Indian History
Congress Research Series, 1 (Calcutta, 1963).
  24 Sarkar, Military Dispatches, 19.


                                                74
                   SHIVAJI      AND    THE      MARATHA            POLITY

venture. They did, however, take the fort of Phaltan and take some
control of the southern Konkan area.?>
   This whole period well illustrates the important differences between
Shivaji’s army and the Mughal army of the time. Shivaji’s army came to
be more and more a rapidly moving light cavalry which was backed up
by forts as places of refuge. The strength of such an army was its speed,
being able to travel fast and light, striking at unexpected places far from
home base. Thus, the army was most effective precisely at raids, such as
the ones into the Konkan or the major one on Surat. It could cut off
supply lines to enemies or generally devastate enemy areas thought to
be sate. The army was weak, however, because it had no ability to take
forts by storm, sapping, or mining.?6 The armies also lacked provision-
ing facilities, so they were often forced to “live off the land,” a strategy
which did not endear them to peasants who had to provide the grain.
The final weakness of such an army was the difficulty in establishing
regular rule. Shivaji could not provide the protection to cultivation and
trade which would have made the area prosper. The area continued the
economic decline that had started with the wars of a half century
earlier.
   On the Mughal side, the army was mainly heavy cavalry, backed by
siege equipment and large-scale provisioning facilities. The initial
encounter showed the Mughal advantages — the ability to take Maratha
forts, the better training of the Mughal cavalry, the loyalty of regularly
paid troops, and the ability to hold territory by a well-worked out
system of negotiation and treaty with both locally powerful lineages
and local officials. In this initial encounter, the Mughal weaknesses
were not yet obvious — the fragility of the supply lines, the potential for
factional strife in the command of armies, the factionalization caused
by bringing into the Mughal army groups like the Marathas, and the
need for large amounts of cash, which were not met by a poorly
monetized and devastated region like Maharashtra. For example, the
cash needs for the capture of Purandar fort were Rs. 30,000 for salaries,
plus an unnamed amount for shot and equipment; the occupation of
the ceded forts required hiring 5 ,000—10,000 foot soldiers on a monthly
salary. Within two years, an imperial order forbade grants in the
  25 Sarkar, House of Shivaji, 153.
  26 The technology of sapping and mining had been used by the Deccan sultanates for at
least a century,   but was   neither routine   nor   efficient.   See I. A. Khan,   “Origin   and
development of gunpowder technology in India: a.p. 1250-1500,” The Indian Historical
Review, 4, 1, 26-27.