

                                          77.
                        THE     MARATHAS          1600-1818

to him nor acknowledged his presence. Shivaji was then made to stand
with relatively low-ranked nobles. He made a scene, refused the
honorary robes offered to him, and stalked out of the audience hall.
Except for the intercession of a powerful noble, Shivaji and his son
would have been killed within days. Even with a high noble’s surety
bond for his good behavior, Shivaji was confined to his house while
factions attempted to influence the emperor’s decision regarding his
future. All of this well illustrates the difference in Shivaji’s position as
perceived by Shivaji and by the Mughal Empire. Shivaji already
perceived himself as a king with lands, forts, subjects, and an admin-
istration. To the Mughal Emperor, however, Shivaji was only a
relatively successful rebel zamindar from Biyapur. Jai Singh was quite
explicit about this in his letters to Aurangzeb. “Shiva is a zamindar and
the pillars of his zamindari [that is, the Bijapur State] will not endure
beyond a period of seven or eight years.’’>!
   Within a fortnight all possibilities seemed grim. Shivaji was running
out of money to bribe nobles to work on his behalf. Court gossip said
that if he ever left Agra, he would be posted to Kabul; there was a
strong likelihood he would be murdered along the way. This posting
was confirmed; Shivaji refused to leave, and the order was cancelled,
but the situation further deteriorated. In the ensuing indirect nego-
tiation, Shivaji asked for all his forts back, in return for becoming a
mansabdar in Mughal service; Aurangzeb demanded all his remaining
forts, before even considering making him a mansabdar. Once again,
orders to kill Shivaji were only rescinded by the intervention of Jai
Singh. In despair, Shivaji asked that his men be allowed to return home,
and he allowed to retire to Benares as a sannyasi. This request was also
denied. A week later in early July, Shivaji’s entourage was, at last,
allowed to leave for the Deccan. Finally, Shivaji was able to negotiate a
loan of 66,000 Rs. from his patron at court and managed to escape.
Aurangzeb’s urgent enquiries, over the next several months, uncovered
no particular plot or escape route through the three sets of guards
surrounding Shivaji’s residence. The emperor strongly suspected
Kumar Ram Singh, but nothing was ever proven.>2
   31 Sarkar, Military Dispatches, 15.
   2 Sarkar and Singh, Shivaji’s Visit, 50-61. There is the widely quoted and charming story
that Shivaji, feigning illness, began distributing large baskets of sweetmeats to Brahmins of
the city. Both he and his son escaped captivity by hiding in baskets of sweetmeats that were
sent out of his house. There is, however, no evidence in the contemporary newswriters’
reports that this was more than one of many speculations of his escape route. More likely, he
simply bribed the guards.

                                            78
                 SHIVAJI      AND    THE   MARATHA   POLITY