


                                               75
                          THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

Deccan that carried cash salaries; only jagirs based on land were to be
granted.?7
   By the end of the monsoon 1665, Jai Singh did not like the drift of
the situation in Maharashtra. One of Shivaji’s main commanders had
been lured to the Bijapuri side, and could only be bought back with an
expensive Mughal service grant. Jai Singh worried about Shivaji
similarly defecting. This situation set the stage for Jai Singh’s suggest-
ion to the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb that Shivaji be forced to visit
Agra, the Mughal capital. After much negotiation and Jai Singh’s
guarantee of his personal safety, Shivaji, his son, and a small party of
250 troops set out for Agra in early May of 1666.
   An eye witness, at the capital, was impressed with Shivaji’s con-
tingent.
A large elephant goes before him carrying his flag. An adyance guard of troopers
also precedes him; the horses have gold and silver trappings. The Deccani infantry
too marches before him. In this manner he has come to Agra, with the whole of his
contingent moving with great care and pomp. He has two female elephants saddled
with haudas which follow him. A sukhpal [1.e., a sort of palki with a dome-shaped
top] is also carried before Shiva; its poles are covered with silver plate, and all its
tassels have large hanging knobs of silver. His palki is completely covered in silver
plates. With this spendour has he come.?8

   Let us pause while Shivaji and his entourage are making their way
north to Agra, to discuss chauth and sardeshmukhi, two revenue
claims central to the development of the Maratha polity. Both these
terms emerged in Shivaji’s negotiations with Jai Singh and both have
been much discussed in the historical literature. The term chauth, it
seems clear, was current in the Maharashtra of Shivaji. In the docu-
ments of Daman (on the coast, about 100 miles north of Bombay) the
Portuguese, for example, paid chauth to the nearby Ramnagar Raja, in
return for his not raiding the territory of the Portuguese. Chauth, a
kind of protection money, was contingent on stopping the depre-
dations of other raiders. The Portuguese withheld it when the Ramna-
gar Raja failed to stop raids by a nearby Koli Raja. The chauth was in
1659 offered to Shivaji, if he could stop the Koli raids.29

   27 Selected Documents of Aurangzeb’s Reign: 1659-1707 a.p. (Hyderabad, 1958), 62.
   28 Sarkar and Singh, Shivaji’s Visit, 31.                           ;
   29'S. N. Sen, Administrative System of the Marathas (Calcutta, third edition, 1976), Zi
A portion of the revenue, given by the king, to the subduer of rebels is also the sense in which
the term chauth is used in a much older document from Bidar, see G. S. Sardesai (ed.),
Selections from the Peshwa Daftar (Bombay, 1935), XxXI, no tr.

                                              76
                 SHIVAJI     AND    THE     MARATHA       POLITY

   It was likely from this source that Shivaji developed his definition of
chauth as simply a quarter of the government’s share of the produce of
an area. It was to be paid in return for not devastating the area. It was
protection money, extorted yearly from areas outside Shivaji’s
immediate jurisdiction, mainly those controlled by Bijapur and the
Mughals. This claim was such a direct challenge that no government
could concede chauth and retain dominant control of the countryside.
  Shivaji’s claim of sardeshmukhi was equally interesting. Thereby, he
claimed    to be head of the deshmukhs,              the dominant      families   in
parganas (whose position we have discussed in some detail in Chapter
1). The term appears in the Malik Amber settlement of much of
northern Maharashtra. This settlement generally divided the revenue,
two-thirds to the cultivator and one-third to the government, plus ro
percent of the government share to the king, as “‘sardeshmukhi.’° The
position of the sardeshmukh was also well known in the Bijapuri
system, and, though occasionally granted to noble families, it was
mainly seen as the personal prerogative of the king.
   Shivaji began these claims in the early 1660s. For example, he
claimed sardeshmukhi rights in Junnar and Ahmadnagar. Shivaji had
no legal claim to sardeshmukhi rights anywhere in Maharashtra, as he
possessed limited deshmukhi rights and no formal rights of kingship.
His claims in the Pune region rested mainly on the military grant to his
father from Ahmadnagar (by 1650, absorbed into the Mughal Empire).
So, sardeshmukhi, which Shivaji defined as 10 percent of the govern-
ment’s share of the revenue, was — like chauth — an audacious claim to
revenue and dominance over the deshmukhi families of central Maha-
rashtra. It allowed him to send agents into the countryside to discover
revenue information and make contact with village headmen; perhaps
more importantly, it gave him an excuse to invade any nearby region,
since sardeshmukhi was rarely voluntarily paid. It must be emphasized
how bold and defiant were these claims to chauth and sardeshmukhi
for one on his way to Agra to meet the Mughal Emperor.
   At the Agra court, things went badly from the very first day. The
initial audience provoked a crisis. Shivaji was brought forward in the
audience and gave one thousand gold mohars and two thousand silver
rupees as expected presents to the emperor. The emperor neither spoke
  30 A.R. Kulkarni, “Towards a history of Indapur”, in D. W. Attwood, M. Israel, and
N. K. Wagle, City, Countryside and Society in Maharashtra (Toronto, Centre for South
Asian Studies, 1988), 132.