

                                     67
                          THE    MARATHAS            1600-1818

stories of Maharashtra.!> It was long performed as a popular ballad at
village festivals, and still is the subject of films, plays, and school text
books. The two men fought and Shivaji disemboweled Afzal Khan
with the iron claws. After Shivaji killed Afzal Khan, on a signal, his
troops fell on the unsuspecting Bijapuri army, which they slaughtered.
Incidentally, there is every indication that many of the Byapuri troops
were Marathas, loyally serving Bijapur, as they had for hundreds of
years.
   Shivaji’s defeat of Afzal Khan escalated the conflict with Byapur.
The sultan immediately dispatched another army, under the command
of Afzal Khan’s son, Fazal Khan. Meanwhile, in the absence of Bijapur
authority, Shivaji raided into the south Satara district and further south
into the north Karnatak. Also, he managed to take the large fort of
Panhala, near Kolapur. The Bijapuri army was generally ineffective
until command passed to Sidi Jauhar (another of the Sidi family, this
one the subahdar of the Karnul region in the central Karnatak). The
considerably reinforced army blockaded Shivaji inside Panhala fort.
He and only a small band of followers escaped by night to Vishalgad
fort, while a small band held off the pursuing army in a narrow pass.
Like the Afzal Khan incident, the defence of the pass is one of the
incidents in the life of Shivaji that is celebrated in popular story. The
campaign reached no conclusion, with Shivaji safe in his fort, and the
Biapuri army restive to leave the Desh region.
   It was in the period after the defeat of Afzal Khan that Shivaji put
serious effort into consolidating his hold on the Konkan. He realized
the importance of naval power and built a fleet of small fast ships.
While they could not challenge a large European warship, they could
capture merchant shipping. The main purpose of this fleet was,
however, like the construction of several sea forts, to challenge and
contain the Sidi of Janjira. Though he expanded control in the Konkan,
Shivaji — because of ineffective artillery — was unable to defeat the Sidi
in this or any later period of his reign.!¢
   Before turning to Shivaji as a problem for the Mughal Empire, let us

  'S This story and other popular ballads are found in H. A. Ackworth,           Ballads of the
Marathas (London, 1894).
   '6 G. T. Kulkarni, “The Mughal struggle for occupation of Talkonkan (1660-1662),” in
Kamble (ed.), Studies in Shivayt, 57-59. A good, older discussion of Shivaji’s efforts to build a
navy, in order to defeat the Sidis, is found in J. N. Sarkar, Shivaji and his Times (New Delhi,
1973), 245-75. The best modern study is B. K. Apte, A History of the Maratha Navy and
Merchantships (Bombay, 1973).

                                              68
               SHIVAJI    AND    THE    MARATHA     POLITY

consider the ways that a state like Bijapur could have disciplined
someone like Shivaji and, more generally, strategies for cutting off
rebellion. First, there was     the offer of service in the army, either
personally or with followers. This was, as we have seen, the most
effective long-term strategy. It did not work in the case of Shivaji; he
never accepted service in the Bijapuri army, preferring to develop his
own control of the Pune region. The next level of pressure by a
government like Bijapur was to sequester the estates of the offending
noble. This was a common strategy; it meant the end, generally
temporarily, of employment, income, status at court, the opportunity
for booty, the ritual status within the villages of the grant, and the
ability to pay troops. For anyone truly integrated into the state system,
sequestering required a relatively swift resolution, say six months to a
year. This kind of discipline was several times quite effective with
Shivaji’s father, Shahji, precisely because he was integrated into the
Bijapuri army. Only two options were open to a noble like Shahji. If
the dispute was not resolved, he either took service with a rival state or
retired to his lands, expelled the state officials, and went into open
rebellion. Shahji had far too much vested in service with Bijapur and
his estates in the Bangalore region to switch to another state or retire to
his lands and fight. Shivaji’s case could not have been more different.
His estates, indeed, were sequestered, but it did not really matter since
he was not integrated into the Bijapuri army and did not derive his
income and status from service. Knowing the nature of these states and
the service involved, it is understandable that Shahji disavowed his
son’s activities and told the Bijapuris to do what they wanted with
Shivaji.
   Sequestering an estate was a simple, administrative act; actually
seizing it was a different matter. Bijapur had few troops in the
countryside, and those were stationed in forts. The next strategy, to
put down a rebellion, was to seize the person of the rebel. Again, this
was often not difficult when the noble was at court. Shahji was, thus,
captured twice. Shivaji, however, never resided at court so this gambit
was not possible. The next option for the state was to command a loyal
noble in the region of the rebel to actually seize the estate. Bijapur tried
this, and the short and decisive war between Shivaji and the More
family must be seen in this light.
   It was only after these strategies had failed to bring in the rebel that a
state like Bijapur would consider sending an army. The rebel had to be