

  In spite of continuing Mughal pressure, Shivaji launched an attack
on Surat within a few months of the night attack on Shaista Khan. The
sack of Surat is well documented from European accounts, and, as
sacks go, less violent than many.?° It was, however, cut short when
news of an approaching Mughal army reached the city and Shivaji fled
with the high-value booty.
   The twin insults, the defeat of Shaista Khan and the sack of Surat,
turned Shivaji from a minor regional irritation to a major problem for
the Mughal Empire. Particularly the attack on Surat had to provoke a
response; Surat was the main port of the Mughal Empire. Both the
nobles and the Emperor himself backed cargo ships which left from the
port, carrying cotton cloth, opium, tin, and the like, and large numbers
of pilgrims left for Mecca.
   The Mughal response came in the form of a large army, probably
14,000-15,000 trained troops, commanded byJai Singh, one of the best
  18 Kulkarni, “The Mughal struggle,” 59-64. We should recall that it was the Sidis who in
fact controlled most of the North Konkan, and both Shivaji and the Mughals were “‘offering”’
territory to commanders who would conquer tt.
   19 Tbid., 125.
  20 There   are   several   accounts   of the sack of Surat   in Surendranarth   Sen, Foreign
Biographies of Shivaji (Calcutta, second revised edition, 1977). M. N. Pearson has argued
that Mughal “decline” began with Shivaji’s twin insults of the attack on Shaista Khan and the
sack of Surat which “forced” the Mughal Empire to shift its focus to a major campaign in the
south; only the familiar show of Mughal military force could maintain the aura of
invincibility and thereby the loyalty of the crucial mansabdari elite and the respect of
surrounding empires, such as Persia. See “Shivaji and the decline of the Mughal Empire,”
Journal of Asian Studies, 35, 2 (February 1976), 221-35. It seems, however, that the plan for
the conquest of the Deccan kingdoms was a “given” well before the rise of Shivaji.

                                                71
                                 THE       MARATHAS                     1600-1818


                                                                                                             to Nasik


                                                                                         CHAKAN
                   om LOHGAD                                                                 omg
               ee
                                                 ee         a




                                                                                                                                                  to
                                                                                                                              Ahmadnagar
                                                                                                                                                  |




                                                                                                                           R.Muls
                                                                                                                                        Yorg,