

                                              65
                         THE     MARATHAS           1600-1818

any sort of a Hindu political program. Finally, there is no evidence of
any connection between the text and Shivaji.!°
   Let us consider          the alternative,       that, initially, Shivaji was            not
innovating, but only building power much like any other state at the
time. First, on the matter of administration, all of Shivaji’s appointed
officials such as Peshwa, Muzumdar, and Sarnobat were the same as
those found earlier in Ahmadnagar or the Byapur state. In tax
collection there were no innovations. He made stepwise increasing
settlements, which ended in “Malik Amber’s settlement,” the famous
measured settlement of the late Ahmadnagar kingdom. There is no
concrete evidence that he surrounded himself with Brahmin advisors;
to the contrary, recent evidence has shown that he did not meet the
main candidate for the role of advisor, Ramdas, until 1672. Finally,
there is considerable evidence of the Muslims that Shivaji welcomed
into his state from the earliest times. For example, the court proceed-
ings of 1657 list the names of the Muslim qazis (judges) who were on
salary to adjudicate cases. At the same time, Shivaji welcomed Muslim
recruits into his army. The first unit was a group of 700 Pathans, who
had left Bijapur after the treaty with the Mughals.!* Individual
Muslims also rose high in Shivaji’s army, such as Sidi Ibrahim, who was
one of ten trusted commanders at the confrontation with Afzal Khan
(to which we shall shortly turn), or Nurkhan Beg, who was Shivaji’s
sarnobat at this time. It is a question to which we will return at the end
of this chapter, but tentatively we see little difference between the
emerging polity of Shivaji and the surrounding states. It is only those
who must see Shivaji as the perfect Hindu king who will not allow that
he learned and absorbed from the Muslim states around him, slowly
formulating an idea of freedom and kingship that differed from the
surrounding Muslim states.
   The events of 1657—59 had been equally important for Bijapur. With
the departure of Aurangzeb for the north had come a treaty between
Bijapur and the Mughals which secured Bijapur’s northern borders
from further Mughal invasion. Bijapur’s succession dispute had,
likewise, been more or less resolved with the accession of Ali Adil Shah

   '° For an older articulation of the argument, see Lala Lajput Rai, Shivaji The Great Patriot
(Delhi, 1980), translated and edited by R. C. Puri, 236-37. The most definitive statement on
Shivaji’s relationship to Ramdas, in specific, and Maharashtra Dharma, in general, is by A. G.
Pawar, “Shivaji and Ramdas,”       in A. G. Pawar    (convener),   Maratha   History Seminar
(Kolhapur, 1971), 51-79.
  14 Rai, Shivajt, 90.


                                              66
              SHIVAJI    AND   THE    MARATHA    POLITY

II. While the king was a minor, leaving open all the problems of a
regency, at least there was a king, and some action could be taken.
Shivaji’s movement for independence was high on the list of problems.
Byapur finally took action in 1659. Afzal Khan led an army of about
10,000 troops into the Ghat region to crush Shivaji. As the representa-
tive of the Bijapur government, the local lineages were also required
to furnish troops and supplies. Probably the most important event of
the campaign came early, even before Afzal Khan met Shivaji’s forces.
On the march from Bijapur into Maharashtra, Afzal Khan detoured to
desecrate Hindu sacred places, especially Pandharpur, the most
important pilgrimage site in Maharashtra. This behavior was
unprecedented for a Bijapuri force; it reflected the sectarian orthodoxy
that was growing in the declining state of Bijapur. It also alienated the
local deshmukhs from whom Afzal Khan would have gained invalua-
ble local knowledge. He presumed that he did not need this local
support because he had been in charge of the Wai region and knew the
area well. From May to November, both sides maneuvered, Shivaji
retreating to the fort of Pratapgad and stationing his forces in the
jungles of Javli. Afzal Khan’s army was much more suited to open
plains warfare; the heavy cavalry could not move well in the mountain
passes. He also did not have adequate siege equipment. Shivaji on his
side knew that his forces could not defeat Afzal Khan’s in a battle on
the plains. So, Afzal Khan surrounded Shivaji in the fort and waited.
There were limits on both sides. Shivaji had limited stores in the fort,
but Afzal Khan was getting no supplies from the countryside.
Extended negotiations finally produced a solution. Shivaji agreed to
meet Afzal Khan, but at a place strategically favorable to Shivaji,
beneath the walls of Pratapgad, in a clearing in the dense forest whose
trails were known only to the Maratha defenders. It was a locale in
which Afzal Khan could only bring his immediate guard of 1,500 men,
and the meeting was set up under a truce so that the two leaders would
meet in an enclosure virtually alone. Both men came to the truce
meeting armed. Shivaji was wearing chain mail under his clothes and a
metal skull-protector under his turban. In one hand, he carried a short
sword and in the other sharpened iron claws. Certainly, Shivaji had
every reason to be suspicious. In a parallel situation, a decade earlier,
Afzal Khan had used just such a truce ceremony to imprison a Hindu
general. The exact sequence of events in the truce tent will never be
known, but the story forms one of the most enduring and stirring