

                                       69
                       THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

not only holding his own estates, but attacking nearby territory,
because that threatened other nobles and the tax base of the state. Still,
armies were for conquest, which would provide new lands for main-
taining nobles. Putting down a rebellion was a purely losing propo-
sition; at best, it regained some territory already assigned. There were
other reasons that the state was extremely reluctant to put an army into
the field against a rebel. It was categorically more expensive than using
a nearby noble. It also involved all the problems we have discussed in
the general section on warfare in the period. A successful campaign
might well shift the power balance at court; so might failure. In the
field, such an army’s best strategy was probably to overawe the rebel,
simply demonstrating by numbers and strength the futility of the
rebellion. This was the approach taken by Afzal Khan when a Byapuri
army finally took the field against Shivaji. Shivaji’s strategy, of killing
the leader during truce negotiations, while bold, also had an edge of
desperation; up to that point, Shivaji knew that the Bijapuri army was,
in fact, putting down the rebellion and his army was incapable of
meeting Afzal Khan in the field.
   For the Mughals, Shivaji was an inherited problem. By the treaty of
1657, as we have seen, Bijapur had ceded all the territory they had
taken from Ahmadnagar during the past two decades. Included in the
ceded territory were most of the districts that Shivaji in fact held.
Nothing could be done about the situation during the long succession
war following the death of Shah Jahan. Shivaji sent several letters to
Aurangzeb during 1658 and 1659. He asked for his ‘‘ancestral”’ lands in
return for providing 500 trained troops to the Mughal armies protect-
ing the imperial boundaries, and rights to any area of the Konkan that
he might conquer from Bijapur. Aurangzeb offered pardon and asked
for proofs of his loyal service.!”7 Aurangzeb finally defeated the other
contenders for the Mughal throne in mid-1659 and sent his maternal
uncle, Shaista Khan, to the Deccan to put affairs in order. Neither side
was prepared to honor any “‘agreements” of the previous two years.
Shivaji raided into the southern Konkan in 1659. Meanwhile, Shaista
Khan secured the districts of Ahmadnagar and the North Konkan
coast, capturing the fort of Kalyan. Up on the Desh, the Mughal army
devastated Shivaji’s home districts around Pune. Shaista Khan offered
service grants to Shivaji’s commanders in return for seizing territories

 '7 J. N. Sarkar, House of Shivaji (New Delhi, 1978), 121-2}.


                                          7°
                   SHIVAJI        AND     THE    MARATHA         POLITY

in the Desh and the Konkan.'*There the situation remained until April
1663, when Shivaji executed a daring night attack on Shaista Khan’s
camp. Four hundred followers slipped into the Mughal camp, attacked
the person of Shaista Khan, killed his son and a number of followers,
and escaped into the night.
   A letter from Shivaji to Aurangzeb’s “officers and counsellors”
written in this period gives a clear picture of Shivaji’s faith in the
difficult terrain of Maharashtra to protect his kingdom from Mughal
conquest. Why, Shivaji asked rhetorically, have your officers, in three
years of campaigning, been unable to succeed here?
My home, unlike the forts of Kaliani and Bidar, is not situated on a spacious plain,
which may enable trenches to be run [against the walls] or assault to be made. It has
lofty hill-ranges ... everywhere there are nalas hard to cross; sixty forts of extreme
strength have been built, and some [of them are] on the sea coast.!?