




              eemmoF ng
                    ba
                                  ty                                                                                  /
                          "nce         aNia/y
                                       ONG
                                          MI
                                           yf!
                                                      on                                               re pr           1)
                                                  oe
                                                       ;             Soman“hy,                           iep a                            era
                   Shivthar Ghale
                                                 fe                                                                                     Shirval
                    Varandhe
                                  e




  CHAMBHARGAD


          N




                                                                                                                                         to Satara




Map 4.    Main roads and forts of the Pune region c. 1660 (adapted from
Ramesh Desai, Shivaji, The Last Great Fort Architect [Bombay, Government
of Maharashtra, 1987]).




                                                                jz
                  SHIVAJI    AND    THE    MARATHA         POLITY

Mughal generals of the period. Through 1665, Jai Singh pursued a
multi-pronged offensive against Shivaji. Columns of Mughal cavalry
devastated the countryside of Shivaji’s jagir around Pune. Shivaji’s
army was unable to face these columns in the field. Meanwhile, Jai
Singh took a number of Shivaji’s important commanders into Mughal
service, as well as individual cavalrymen, thus sharply reducing Shiva-
j1’s troop strength. When Shivaji broke out into the Parenda region, the
Mughal army did not follow, but systematically began to reduce
Shivaji’s forts. Unlike any previous army in the region, the Mughals
had the technical expertise to build siege equipment, and had experi-
ence in taking forts by sapping, mining, and by storm. Thus they took
the large fort of Purandar, in spite of a gallant defense by the
commander. By June 1665, Shivaji was trapped in a fort, effectively
surrounded by the Mughal army (see Map 4).
  Let us leave Shivaji in his fort and Jai Singh in his siege camp and
look at the wider geopolitical perspective. Fortunately, there is won-
derful documentation for such a venture with the publication of the
detailed dispatches of Jai Singh while he was on campaign in Maha-
rashtra along with the replies of the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb.?!
From these dispatches, it is clear that the larger objective of the
Mughals was the conquest of the two remaining Deccani sultanates,
Bijapur and Golconda. There was, however, recognition that Shivaji
was an important factor to be dealt with. He had forts and a standing
army of at least 10,000 men. Jai Singh’s major fear was that he would
drive Shivaji into a triple alliance with Bijapur and Golconda, making
the conquest that much more difficult. As the military commander on
the spot, he was worried about a simultaneous war on two fronts. So,
the plan was to first neutralize Shivaji, then proceed with the war
against Biapur.
   How, then, did this overall plan devolve into strategy? Jai Singh first
isolated Shivaji from Bijapur and Golconda. Both had given Shivaji
considerable aid in the campaign against the Mughals. Bijapur had, in
fact, offered Shivaji formal recognition of the southern Konkan if he
would send his brother’s son into Bijapuri service.?? Jai Singh success-
fully promoted the idea at the court of Bijapur that Shivaji was a rebel
from both empires, and both had an interest in suppressing him. Then,
  21 Jagadish N. Sarkar, The Military Dispatches of a Seventeenth Century General (Cal-
cutta, 1969).
  22 [bid., 18.