




                                            99
                                    CHAPTER          4

      RESPONSES                  TO PAMILY                   INVASION
                                 (1680-1719)

None of Shivaji’s plans to divide the kingdom prevented the factionali-
zation of the court, which began about the time of his final illness in
1678. One faction supported Sambhaji, the other a much younger son,
Rajaram, then eight years old. This factionalization at the center,
caused in part by Mughal military pressure, forms the main theme of
this chapter. We will look at the shifting and delicate balance between
power at the center and power held by the principal commanders;
further, we will examine survival strategies and accommodations of
various families and the long-term effects of warfare on Maharashtra.
Finally, we will look at what government “control” and “conquest”
meant in this period, and the problems the Mughals had in integrating
Maratha families into the mansabdari system.
   Immediately after Shivaji’s death, a group of ministers and one of
Shivaji’s wives crowned Rajaram, who was promptly opposed by
several of the most powerful Maratha families and Sambhaji. It took
months for Sambhaji to crush the opposing faction, and it was more
than eight months before his coronation took place (in December,
1680).!
   As successions go, this one was not crippling, and Sambhaji’s first
few years looked much like Shivaji’s later strategies. There was, for
example, a campaign against the Sidi’s sea forts on the Konkan coast,
which was not particularly successful. Also in a similar way to the late
campaigns of Shivaji, Shambhaji sent a large army into the Karnatak in
April 1681. The army was defeated by Chickadevaraja of Mysore;
various campaigns there continued with the Marathas involved in the
affairs of Mysore, Madura, and Golconda throughout the 1680s —
sometimes      as allies, sometimes       as adversaries, sometimes as tribute
collectors.
   Throughout these campaigns, Sambhaji was well aware that he
lacked the technology to take forts by sapping, mining, or artillery. He
pressed the English at Bombay for a defensive treaty, eventually
  1 Kamal Gokhale, Chhatrapati Sambhaji (Poona, 1978), 39. There is a particularly good
discussion of sources for the Sambhaji period in this monograph, pp. 386-99.

                                           91
                   THE   MARATHAS      1600-1818

concluded in 1684, to obtain quality guns and ammunition. Sambhaji
secured, first, the fort of Pratapgad, then others along the Ghats.
Administrative records of the period suggest that the administration
continued, much as in Shivaji’s time, with officials appointed to fill
vacant posts.
   All this changed abruptly when a rebellious Mughal noble, Prince
Akbar, asked for and received asylum with Sambhaji. Let us pause a
moment to give Prince Akbar’s background. His revolt came after
Aurangzeb chastised the prince for non-activity in the war against the
Rajputs in 1678. In 1680, he went into open revolt, and early the next
year proclaimed himself emperor. After his defeat in Rajasthan, he fled
south with about 400 followers and corresponded with Sambhaji, who
was then in the Konkan.
  Sambhaji was, in those months, involved in problems of his own,
specifically a fully fledged plot to poison him and place his younger
brother on the throne. Sambhaji was indebted to Prince Akbar when he
revealed that the faction opposing Sambhaji had offered much of
Sambhaji’s kingdom to him for his support. Sambhaji put down the
plot; he eventually tried and executed twenty to twenty-five of the
main landed elite family leaders of this plot.
   Harboring Prince Akbar probably only hastened the inevitable
confrontation with the Mughals. Aurangzeb promptly concluded his
war with the Rajputs and brought a major army into the Deccan.
Sambhaji never gained the advantages he had hoped for from Prince
Akbar. He was never able to rally the Rajputs against Aurangzeb or
win over possibly dissident Mughal generals. (After several futile
campaigns and an attempt to mediate the Mughal—Maratha war, Prince
Akbar left India for Iran in 1687.)
   Aurangzeb’s goals were simple — conquer Bijapur and destroy
Maratha power. The Mughal strategy toward Maharashtra was not
subtle, just thorough. It consisted of steady pressure on Maharashtra’s
forts, beating Maratha forces in the field when they could bring them
to a battle, and devastating Maharashtra’s countryside. The Marathas
thwarted a quick victory by the well-established strategy of cutting off
Mughal supplies, raiding north into Mughal territories to draw off the
Mughal army, and seeking allies — Bijapur, Golconda, the Portuguese,
and the English. The fronts shifted quickly — Khandesh and northern