

                                              81
                   THE   MARATHAS       1600-1818

supply. The strategy he evolved was to use knowledge of the local
terrain and the superior mobility of his light cavalry to cut off supplies
to the enemy. His cavalry attacked caravans and devastated the
countryside around the enemy camp. Shivaji regularly refused a
decisive plains battle, which tactics of the day demanded. Instead he
left the “battlefield” and struck some portion of the enemy territory,
perhaps hundreds of miles away, forcing the enemy to chase him.
These tactics, it is true, had been developed by Malik Amber in the
early seventeenth century, but Shivaji raised them to a high art.
   Further, he understood the importance of forts for the geopolitics of
Maharashtra. He captured dozens of them and spent much of what he
gained on building dozens more. One might question why Shivaji built
many forts in areas where forts already existed. Shivaji could never be
sure of the loyalty of the families who held existing forts, and they,
indeed, often supported the opposing side. Only by building and
supplying his own forts could Shivaji staff and maintain them with
troops of proven loyalty. Shivaji also well understood that forts had
important symbolic value. They were the physical manifestation of
supra-local power, virtually the only one in Maharashtra. There were
no kingly cities (Shivaji never controlled Ahmadnagar, or Aurangabad,
or Burhanpur) and no important roads. Forts were the manifestation of
kingly authority. If there is any architectural monument to the genius
of Shivaji, it is the many forts up and down the Ghats of Maharashtra.
  It must be noted, however, that there were several drawbacks         to
Shivaji’s emphasis on light, mobile cavalry. The first was a limited
ability to take forts. Shivaji captured forts by stratagem, but rarely by
assault. He did not have the technical means of sapping or mining or
artillery which were available to the large Muslim powers. Late in his
reign,  he did hire foreigners and develop artillery, but the quality was
never high.
   The other much more serious problem was the way Shivaji’s tactics
spread warfare across the countryside. To make an army withdraw
from central Maharashtra, he attacked the Ahmadnagar region or
sacked Surat. To deny the Bijapuri army grain, he devastated a wide
area around their camp. Looting their grain caravans forced longer
foraging expeditions. There was an intrinsically destructive downward
spiral to this style of warfare.
   Equally destructive was the ethic of the yearly campaign. As the
Shahabad bakhar so eloquently puts it, “As soon as Dasara was over,

                                   82
                 SHIVAJI       AND    THE    MARATHA   POLITY

the army should march out of their quarters. At the time of their
departure, an inventory should be made ... and they should start on
the expedition. For eight months, the forces should subsist [on their
spoils] in foreign territories. They should levy contribution.’’3” The
clams of chauth simply quantified the demands of these yearly
expeditions. In spite of the confident assertion of the Shabasad bakhar
that war could be made to pay for itself, it rarely did. Undoubtedly it
was the ethic of the time, and Shivaji, his commanders, and the men
expected these yearly expeditions. It provided them with spoils and
glory, but military expeditions were an extraordinarily inefficient and
destructive way to extract either revenue or loyalty from a population.
In fact, this kind of raiding is the stuff of local legends; even centuries
later, oral traditions which portray the Marathas as destructive raiders
are found in several areas surrounding Maharashtra. At the very least,
living off the land was hard on the countryside and cultivation began a
downward cycle.
   Shivaji recognized these problems. He realized that Maharashtra
needed time, and peace, to recover from more than thirty years of
continuous warfare. Shivaji, from the early years, had a larger vision,
one that included welfare and prosperity for his subjects. It is possible
that his negotiated treaty with Jai Singh in 1665 was, in part, to allow
peace to return to Maharashtra. In the last decade of his reign, Shivaji
was fortunate that both Bijapuri and Mughal energies were focused
elsewhere. The Mughals fought Pathans and Rajputs; Bijapur was
consumed with factional disputes and a Mughal invasion.
   In this respite, Shivaji worked to rebuild Maharashtra. He encour-
aged taqqavi (developmental) loans, low settlements to repopulate
devastated areas, and carefully commanded his army when they were
in monsoon cantonments not to disturb cultivators. Further, he under-
stood the importance of the administration for tax collection. At the
top, was an advisory council; at the bottom, he laid out rules for the
measurement of agricultural land. Even with scanty records, it seems
that land measurements were carried out in some areas of the Desh,
though perhaps not in the Konkan.
  Shivaji also realized the potential destructiveness of his large stand-
ing army, when they were camped during the monsoon. He admoni-
shed his commanders to make sure the supplies lasted through the