


                                            94
                     FAMILY       RESPONSES          TO    INVASION

what did “conquest” mean in this period? The Mughals by 1689
controlled most of Khandesh and the forts of northern Maharashtra.
The Konkan resisted longer, but the major forts were captured within a
year of Sambhaji’s death, and the North Konkan became a Mughal
district. Shivaji’s fleet was burned and dispersed. On the plateau, all of
the land including the forts from Pune east was in Mughal control.’
The main Maratha resistance centered on the southern Ghats and
central Konkan. The recent Maratha conquests in the south were lost
with the exception of Jinji and Thanjur and the areas immediately
around them. The political situation continued to deteriorate; the
remaining heir, Rajaram (nineteen years old), and his mother, Tarabai,
were besieged in Raigad fort. Maratha resistance continued, however,
outside the fort. Two young leaders, Santaji Ghorpade and Dhanaji
Jadhav, gained fame and followers by daring raids on the Mughal
camps, including a night attack on Aurangzeb’s tent, which nearly
killed him.
   In spite of these attacks by various Maratha bands, the basic Mughal
tactics continued successfully. In November 1689, Zulfiqar Khan
bought access to Raigad, and Rajaram and a small party just managed
to escape. Pursued to Panhala (near Kolhapur), they fled south and
east, finally arriving at the estates of Sambhaji’s half-brother at Jinji and
Thanjur on the Coromandel coast.? The main supporters of Rajaram in
this flight were Dhanaji and Santaji, who also provided military escort
for some members of the inner circle who joined Rajaram atJinji. (The
retreat can be traced on Map 3.) Rajaram was soon crowned and set up
a functioning court.!°
   The Mughals followed, and soon Rajaram and his followers were
besieged in the fortress of Jinji. The nine-year siege of Jinji is a
textbook case of the problems of siege warfare, as discussed in Chapter
2. The most likely time that the fort would have been taken was in the
  8 See A. R. Kulkarni, ‘““Towards a history of Indapur,” in D. W. Attwood, M. Israel, and
N. K. Wagle (eds.), City, Countryside and Society in Maharashtra (Toronto, University of
Toronto, 1988), 132. The village of Indapur, sixty miles south-east of Pune, was integrated
into the Mughal sarkar of Junnar in 1682.
   9 One of the deshmukh families which we have been following, the Yadav family of Karad,
gave good service to Tarabai and Rajaram during this flight. Arzoji Yadav was sent by
Rajaram to get the royal hoard of jewelry out of Raigad, after he escaped. Arzoji was
entrusted with this jewelry, when the royal party fled to Jinji. See D. A. Pawar (ed.),
Tarabaikalin Kagadpatra, 1 (Kolhapur, 1969), 470-71.
   10 For the major events of the flight to Jinji, I have followed G. S. Sardesai, New History of
the Marathas (Bombay, second impression, 1957), 1, 332-34. See also Grant Duff, History of
the Marathas (Jaipur, reprinted edition, 1986), I, 265-68.