

                                              95
                         THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

first six months. The Mughals had supplies, cash, manpower,                              and
spirit; the weather was still favorable, and the Mughals had managed to
buy a substantial quantity of good gunpowder from the British at Fort
St. George. Jinji, however, was not taken, and within a couple of
months the general advantage shifted to the besieged. Jinji was such a
massive fortress that even the large Mughal army could not effectively
surround it. Provisions were, therefore, regularly brought in, and the
Maratha light cavalry regularly came and went."!
   By the middle of the monsoon, the Mughal camp was suffering.
Maratha bands, led by Santaji and Dhanaji and stationed outside the
fort, regularly cut off such caravans as made it through the monsoon.
Awaiting reinforcements, the Mughal general left Jinji and collected
what tribute he could among the petty chiefs in the south towards
Travancore.
   As the years passed, it is possible that the Mughal commander
reached an “understanding” with the Marathas and did not vigorously
pursue any attempt to breach the walls. It is equally possible that he
could not pursue the siege because of increased Maratha pressure.
Rajaram was able to recruit additional Maratha forces outside Jinji,
which cut off caravans and produced periodic crises in the Mughal
camp. By early 1693, the Mughals were themselves besieged. They had
destroyed their artillery through overcharging the volleys. The
enhanced Maratha forces, which sometimes numbered 20,000 cavalry,
cut off supplies and occasionally captured contingents of Mughal
troops, as foraging parties had to go further and further from the
Mughal camp. Because of interrupted communication, there were
incessant rumors of Aurangzeb’s death. The Mughal commander
proposed peace with Rajaram in early 1693, but the commander’s
advisors pointed out that Aurangzeb would never ratify the treaty.
   Two years were spent in another Mughal attempt to secure the south
coast and inland region. Once again, tribute was collected, but there
was no further progress in the siege of Jinji. The French who were in
touch with both sides were convinced that the Mughal commander and

   '! The long siege ofJinji figures prominently in the English Records of Ft. St. George, and
in the contemporary French memoir of Francois Martin. See Lotika Varadarajan (trans. and
annot.), India in the Seventeenth Century: Memoirs of Francois Martin (New Delhi, 1983).
John Richards has astutely pointed out that the Mughals were no more successful at
recruiting the nayaks of the south than they were in bringing the Maratha deshmukhs into the
mansabdari system. See “The imperial crisis in the Deccan,” Journal of Asian Studies, Bisne
(Feb. 1976), 327-55.

                                             96
                   FAMILY       RESPONSES         TO   INVASION

Rajaram had reached an understanding and were waiting for Aurang-
zeb’s death.
  Meanwhile, the war continued in Maharashtra. Rajaram had left the
campaign in Maharashtra to the competent oversight of Ramchandra
Nilkanth, who was based at Vishalgad fort (east of Kolhapur). (He had
been an official in Shivaji’s court, but had lost favor in the intervening
reign of Sambhaji.) Initial attempts to recruit leaders were successful —
largely based on lavish grants in areas held by the Mughals.!2 The
bands grew in size, as leaders recruited Marathas who had been in the
service of now defeated Bijapur and brought in new groups, such as
Dhangars, a shepherd caste.'> In 1692, with the forces of Santaji and
Dhanaji in Maharashtra, the Wai district and the important forts of
Panhala and Raigad were retaken. Santaji led another attack on Mughal
supplies along the Godavari river and defeated several Mughal forces
sent to contain him. The next year, Santaji’s forces returned to Jinji,
and were generally successful at cutting off supplies to the Mughal
camp and defeating the large forces the Mughals fielded. In spite of
Ramchandra Nilkanth’s attention to the forts under Maratha control
and attempts to regularize revenue collection, and the military suc-
cesses of Santaji and Dhanaji, Rajaram’s control and authority grew
more tenuous with each passing year of the siege. The very success of
the commanders made them more independent. In a personal appear-
ance at Jinji, Santaji demanded a “suitable” reward and asserted in open
court that he could make or unmake the Maratha king. Rajaram
immediately instigated Dhanaji against Santaji. This bitter and violent
rivalry resulted in a series of battles and finally the murder of Santaji.4
By 1697, Rajaram was also out of money; he sued for peace, but
Aurangzeb accepted none of his proposals.
   Finally, in 1698, Aurangzeb sent a new commander, reinforcements,
and cash. The siege pushed ahead; outer forts were taken, and an
assault planned. Meanwhile, Rajaram escaped to Vellore fort. Within
days, the Mughals scaled the walls and took the fort. Thus ended the
nine-year siege of Jinji.