

 37 §. N. Sen, Life of Siva, 31-32.

                                            83
                         THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

monsoon. Otherwise, “You will starve and the horses will begin to die.”
Then you will begin to trouble the country. For instance, you will go, and some
will take some grains of the cultivators, some bread, some grass, some wood, some
vegetables and things. When you begin to act like that, the poor peasants, who are
holding on to their cottages, and somehow eking out a livelihood, will themselves
begin to run away. Some of them will starve. Then they will think that you are
worse than the Mughals who overran the countryside.*®

   If we consider the larger picture, peace never came to Maharashtra
because Shivaji never worked out a modus vivendi with the Mughals.
Perhaps it was inevitable that no treaty would be honored, on either
side. We know the depth of Aurangzeb’s contempt for Shivaji, often
referring to him as a “mountain rat.’’ We also know the depth of
Shivaji’s commitment to independence. He entirely rejected Biyapuri
service and, only briefly and under duress, served the Mughal Empire.
   Shivaji’s most serious problem, after military pressure from the
Mughals, was his relations with the other grant-holding, armed
families in Maharashtra. They held rights either from Ahmadnagar or
Bijapur which were at least as old, and often larger, than Shivaji’s. As
we have seen, these families often held ‘“‘nested”’ rights in an area —
deshmukhi, a local fort, and a saranjam for maintenance of troops.
Often, virtually the whole of the government’s share of the produce
stopped with one family, for example in Wai or Satara or Sholapur.
  Over the course of his life, Shivaji tried a series of strategies to woo
and subdue these families. As we have seen, his early activities against
Byapur attracted few of these families, and he mainly recruited troops
from his father’s saranjam area around Pune. He consolidated his hold
 by winning over the non-deshmukhi commanders of some of the forts
 in the region. His first campaign was against the More family, holding
 forts and Bijapuri grants immediately south of Shivaji’s. The Mores
were ordered by Bijapur to put down Shivaji’s rebellion, and a brutal
campaign ensued, at the end of which the More family — father and four
sons — was largely extinguished. This “solution” was not lost on other
elite Maratha families of Maharashtra. The deshmukhs of Supe, the
remnants of the More family, the deshmukhs of Utroli, Phaltan, and
Wai all joined Afzal Khan and the Bijapuri army in his campaign
against Shivaji in 1659-60.°? After the defeat of the Bijapuri army,
  38 Patwardhan and Rawlinson, Sourcebook, 153.
   °° Satish Chandra, “Shivaji and the landed elements” in R. $. Sharma (ed.), Indian Society:
Historical Probings, in Memory of D. D. Kosambi (New Delhi, 1974).


                                             84
                 SHIVAJI      AND   THE   MARATHA   POLITY

