

                                         86
                  SHIVAJI       AND     THE    MARATHA          POLITY

the most audacious act of an admittedly audacious career. He decided
to have himself crowned as a Hindu king, a Kshatriya king, and — at a
stroke — solve his minor problems of authority over Brahmins and
major problems of authority over the large deshmukh families. He
would rule them with an authority sanctioned by Brahmins and
acknowledged by the large families.
   Many of the known facts surrounding the coronation support the
view that it was primarily concerned with internal relations in Maha-
rashtra. He called in the families                 to witness     the coronation,         the
Brahmins from Maharashtra and other parts of India, but he did notify
the surrounding states or invite envoys.
   There were big, controversial problems, which delayed the coro-
nation almost a year. First, there was Shivaji’s ancestry. If he was a
Maratha, or worse, a Kunbi-cultivator, he was not suitable material to
bea king. He had to bea Kshatriya. Everyone, however, knew Shivaji’s
immediate ancestors — Shahji, his father, who had been in Bijapuri
service, and his grandfather, Maloji, who had been a cultivating village
headman in northern Maharashtra — and they were all Marathas, not
Kshatriyas. If Shivaji was, indeed, a Kshatriya, why had he never had
the sacred-thread ceremony, and why did he he not wear the sacred
thread? Why had his marriages been in accordance with the Maratha
tradition, not the Kshatriya tradition? No one in the Brahmin commu-
nities in Maharashtra came forth with answers which would allow the
coronation to proceed.
   What was needed was a “creative” Brahmin, with credibility in
Maharashtra, to solve the various problems and perform the coro-
nation ceremony. Such a Brahmin was Gagabhat, a highly respected
writer and philosopher, originally from Maharashtra, but long resident
in Benares.
   The initial problem of Shivaji’s Maratha past was solved by the
“finding” of a genealogy which connected his family to Rajput origins
in Rajasthan, the family having migrated south to Maharashtra

   43 Patwardhan and Rawlinson, Sourcebook, 163. This is a translation of the Shabasad
bakhar. Also interesting is André Wink’s translation of the Sivdigvijaya (a chronicle of
Shivaji’s life) on the coronation: “Shivaji was unwilling to share the leadership of the
Marathas with others, and although he had formerly been on one level with many of the other
Maratha sardars as (mere) servants of Bijapur, he could justify his new claims to pre-eminence
amongst them by pointing out that this dependence, through his efforts, no longer existed”
(Land and Sovereignty in India: Agrarian Society and Politics under the Eighteenth-century
Maratha Svarajya (Cambridge, 1986)).

                                              87
                         THE     MARATHAS           1600-1818

following Muslim invasions of the thirteenth century.** The genealogy
solved the suitability problem, but gave no model for an actual coro-
nation ceremony. Rajputs were, after all, Mughal feudatories. They did
not perform ceremonies which seated an independent Hindu king on a
throne. Such a ceremony had not been performed in centuries.
   One by one, Gagabhat worked through the problems. He, in con-
sultation with other Brahmins, gradually worked out a ceremony
based on sacred texts, but unlike any extant ceremony. The opposition
was neither very visible nor vocal; this is possibly a problem of the
sources, which were produced by Shivaji’s court or Gagabhat himself.
The only outside observer was the Englishman, Oxinden, who had
little idea what was going on beyond the pomp and display.
   The actual ceremony took place over several weeks, and we will
focus briefly only on those parts which affected legitimacy and loyal-
ty.45 The first section was homage to the family deity and penance for
living as a Maratha, when he was in fact a Kshatriya. The second
section focused on the thread ceremony for himself and his son, and
new marriage ceremonies for all his wives, based on Kshatriya
customs. Thus, Shivaji had become suitable to be a king.
  The actual coronation took place over the course of nine days and
nights. It began with fasts, a night ritual of offerings at the sacred fire,
and the ascending of the smaller of two specially built thrones. Shivaji
held durbar from this throne and declared the beginning of a new cal-
endar and era. In the next section, he was ritually cleansed by bathing
in water and oil, then hot water, then anointed with earth from sacred
places, then bathed in honey, milk, curds, ghee, and sugar. Then there
was another bath of hot water and anointing with sandalwood powder.
This whole section made him the representative of Indra on earth.
  ** Two pieces of evidence suggest that Shivaji may have thought of himself as a Rajput
before this period. The first is a letter from his father, Shahji, written to Ali Adil Shah I, of
Bijapur (whom he served) in 1656. In the middle of this letter, complaining of the terms of his
service, he says, “I have served several kings, but always maintained my self-respect. We are
Rajputs” (in D. V. Apte, /tthas Manjari (Poona, 1923), 67). The second bit of evidence comes
from the impression Shivaji made on Rajputs, when he was at Agra. The contemporary
newsletters, written to the Rajput courts, include the following passage: “One day when
Ballu Sah, Tej Singh and Ran Singh were sitting together, Maha Singh Shekhawat said,
‘Shivaji is very clever, he speaks the right word, after which nobody need say anything more
on the subject. He is a good genuine Rajput, and we have found him just what he was
reported to be. He tells us such appropriate things marked by the characteristic qualities (or
spirit) of a Rajput that if they are borne in mind they will prove useful some day’” (translated
in Sarkar, House of Shivaji, 162).
   *> The details of the coronation are covered in V. S. Bendry, The Coronation of Shivaji the
Great (Bombay, 1960).