


          THEMES    AND    ISSUES    OF   SHIVAJI’S    POMEL Ns

At the outset, let us be clear what Shivaji did not do. First, Shivaji did
not represent “proto-nationalism.”’ He did not lead a movement of
Marathas. His was a polity like others at the time, offering mainly
social mobility for Maratha soldiers and Brahmin administrators, as
had Bijapur and Ahmadnagar. In revenue administration and social

 34 Thid., 199.

                                    80
                   SHIVAJI      AND     THE     MARATHA          POLITY

structure it represented more continuity with these kingdoms than
discontinuity. Second, Shivaji did not significantly alter the power of
the rural elite families of Maharashtra, especially the deshmukhs. He
attacked the largest of these who were rivals, but all the remaining
families with “‘nested”’ rights were left in peace.>> It would have been
impossible to collect taxes or govern without them. Shivaji’s was not a
revolt against deshmukhs, but a polity that attempted to integrate
them. He was more successful with some than others; many remained
partly or wholly loyal to the Mughals or Bijapur throughout his
reign. Third, Shivaji was not attempting to create a universal Hindu
rule. Over and over, he espoused tolerance and syncretism. He even
called on Aurangzeb to act like Akbar in according respect to Hindu
beliefs and places. Shivaji had no difficulty in allying with the Muslim
states which surrounded him — Bijapur, Golconda, and the Mughals —
even against Hindu powers, such as the nayaks of the Karnatic.
Further, he did not ally with other Hindu powers, such as the
Rajputs, rebelling against the Mughals. In his own army Muslim
leaders appear quite early, and the first Pathan unit joined in 1656.
His naval commander              was,    of course,       a Muslim.       Older Maratha
histories asserted that Shivaji was a close follower of Ramdas,                               a
Brahmin teacher, who guided him in an orthodox Hindu path; recent
research has shown that Shivaji did not meet or know Ramdas until
late in his life.3¢ Rather, Shivaji followed his own judgement
throughout his remarkable career.
   None of this should in any way minimize Shivaji’s main accom-
plishment, which was to carve a small kingdom out of a marginal,
frontier area of Bijapur and Ahmadnagar, and hold it against the vastly
superior forces of Bijapur and the Mughal Empire. Shivaji was a
general of extraordinary personal charisma and ability to motivate his
progressively larger armies. Many of his encounters depended on great
personal courage; he had it in abundance.
   Shivaji was, however, much more than just a successful and cou-
rageous leader of men. He evolved a strategy that consistently baffled
and defeated armies sent against him. Shivaji realized that the most
vulnerable point of the large, slow-moving armies of the time was
   35 V.G. Khobrekar (ed.), Records of Shivaji Period (Bombay, Government of Maha-
rashtra, 1974). Letters 11, 19, 21, 24, 35, 36, and 43 are all such grants.
   36 Pawar, “Shivaji and Ramdas,” 51-80. In Tamilnadu, Dirks has identified the acquisition
of a Brahmin spiritual preceptor as a stage in state formation. This is, perhaps, also a useful
way to see the relation of Shivaji to Ramdas, Dirks, The Hollow Crown, 167-68.