

 2 Ibid., 68-69.


                                  92
                   FAMILY      RESPONSES         TO   INVASION

Maharashtra in 1682, followed by the Konkan in 1683. The Marathas
attacked Goa and Chaul in 1683, but could not take the main forts. The
degree of conflict in the Konkan had alienated several key families by
1685-86. Overall, the Mughals gradually pushed Sambhaji’s forces
back to major forts, took some strongholds, and controlled more and
more of the agricultural land.> As they had for more than twenty years,
the Mughals also tried to bring powerful Maratha deshmukhs, who
were also the military commanders, into Mughal service.‘
   Diplomacy also shifted quickly. Aurangzeb initially tried to ally
with Bijapur against the Marathas, then he supported one faction
against another inside Bijapur. Sambhaji tried to ally with both Bijapur
and Golconda. This jockeying ended in 1686-87 with the fall of Bijapur
and Golconda to the Mughals. Suddenly, there were only two players
left on the field, the Mughals and the Marathas.
   Before looking at the last years of Sambhaji’s reign, let us look at the
histories of some sample deshmukh families to see how they dealt with
the invasion and crisis. What of the Mane family of Mhasvad, who we
considered in Chapter 1? In 1678, two years before Shivaji’s death, the
Mughals were courting the family. Nagoji Mane received a letter of
assurance from Aurangzeb that he would receive sardeshmukhi and
zamindari rights in his area if he joined Mughal service. A couple of
years later, there was an order from Aurangzeb granting the city of
Mhasve and a jagir in pargana Man of 1,350,000 Rs. In 1689, haggling
was still in progress over the exact rights of the Mane family. Nagoji
wrote to Aurangzeb that his father had inams in sixteen areas (mahals)
from Bijapur (all in Satara, Sholapur, and Sangli districts), and he
wanted them confirmed by Aurangzeb. Presumably, the negotiation
never reached a satisfactory conclusion, because — looking ahead — we
find Nagoji in Maratha service within just a few years. Both the Yadavs
of Karad (whom we briefly considered in Chapter 1) and their rivals,
the Jagdales of Masur, took Mughal service in this period to try to
maintain or better their position.°
   There was much shifting of sides as Mughal pressure increased and
families tried to save their rights and their lands. Consider, for
  3 The Mughals were, at this time, routinely using foreign gunners in the forts they
captured. See Selected Documents of Aurangzeb’s Reign, 1659-1706 a.b. (Hyderabad, 1958),
134-35, 138-40.
  4 Tbid., 153, 174-80.
  5 Andre Wink, Land and Sovereignty in India: Agrarian Society and Politics under the
Eighteenth-century Maratha Svarajya (Cambridge, 1986), 168-70.

                                          93
                         THE     MARATHAS          1600-1818

example, the Jedhe family of Kari. In 1684, Shivaji Jedhe left Maratha
service, joined the Mughals, and began devastating the lands of his
brother, Sarjerao, and other members of the family. Rather than seek
the intervention of Sambhaji and the Maratha court, Sarjerao sought
the help of a nearby Mughal fort commander. When, shortly after-
wards, Sarjerao Jedhe wrote to Sambhaji, pledging his loyalty to the
Maratha side, Sambhaji’s reply was understandably irate; he castigated
Sarjerao for looking to the enemy to solve family problems, for
allowing his brother to join the enemy, and tacitly serving the Mughals.
A year and a half later, however, Sambhaji accepted Sarjerao back into
Maratha service, on the intercession of a loyal commander and after a
personal audience. After Sarjerao captured Rohida fort from the
Mughals, Sambhaji also accepted Sarjerao’s son back into Maratha
service:®
   Towards the end of Sambhaji’s reign defections were common. In
the southern Konkan, for example, Sambhaji had badly alienated the
deshmukh families through burning villages to deny supplies to Goa
during an extended war with the Portuguese. Families often divided,
some members wanting to make accommodation with the Mughals,
others wanting to continue resistance. For example, Sambhaji attacked
the Shirke family in 1688, though they were his close relatives. We
know almost nothing of the circumstances, though several of the
Shirkes had gone over to the Mughal side some years earlier.
   Let us return to complete the story of Sambhaji. In early February
1688, while moving from Panhala to Raigad fort with a small con-
tingent, Sambhaji was captured by Mughal troops. He was brought to
Aurangzeb’s camp, tortured and executed. During his reign we find no
evidence to support notions, made popular by Marathi drama and
ballads, that Sambhaji was constantly drunk or drugged or in his
harem. Quite to the contrary; there are extant administrative orders
right up to the month of his execution.” Shivaji’s kingdom was not lost
because of the deficient moral qualities of Sambhaji. Rather, the
Mughal strategy of conquest was simply working.
   After Sambhaji’s death, what remained of Sambhaji’s kingdom, and
   6 Gokhale, Chhatrapati, 295-96. A good reconstruction of the earlier family history of the
Jedhe family is found in Wink, Land and Sovereignty, 173-76.                          ;
  ” There are over four hundred extant administrative documents from the short reign of
Sambhayi. The vast majority of them have been published in the Annual Proceedings,
Conference Reports Quarterly, and Shiva Charitra Shaitya, of the Bharat Itihas Samshodak
Mandal, Pune.