Shivaji invaded the coastal Konkan, again fighting mainly Hindu and
Muslim deshmukhs of the area. He annexed the territory of the Raja of
Shringapur.
   One of the key assertions in the Shahabad bakhar, and probably the
most discussed paragraph in Maratha history, states that Shivaji not
only stopped giving out large grants in land (substituting cash
payments), but that he broke the power of the large landed families by
destroying their forts and making revenue arrangements with village
headmen. Clearly, if Shivaji had been able to do this, his problems
would have been over. Indeed, in some areas Shivaji was able to
establish relations with village headmen and — to some extent —
undermine the position of the large families. There are a fair number of
village-level documents which show land measurement and revenue
information reaching his court. These date mainly from the last ten
years of his reign and are mainly from central Maharashtra. Overall,
there is ample evidence in both the administrative papers and sanads
that large-scale “‘nested’’ rights continued, and some new grants were
made, especially in the Konkan. The big families, such as those
centered at Bhor or Wai, clearly remained strong powers throughout
Shivaji’s reign, and their loyalty was subject to negotiation between the
main contenders — Bijapur, the Mughal Empire, and Shivaji. Another
strategy adopted by Shivaji, which recognized the power of these
families, was to marry into them. Shivaji thus married into the Shirke,
the Mohite, and the Nimbalkar families, all powerful in their areas.*°
   Shivaji’s early strategies for dealing with the large landed families of
Maharashtra — fighting them, undermining their administrative
control, and marrying into them — had not solved the basic problem of
legitimacy and authority. The families held long-standing grants from
Ahmadnagar or Bijapur. Shivaji could not suspend, alter, or adjudicate
these rights. He had no legal power to interfere in succession or even
tax collection.
   It is likely that the claim of sardeshmukhi arose as yet another
potential solution to this problem. We know that the origin of the term
in unclear, and that when Shivaji put forth the claim, in the mid-1660s,
the only holders of this right — besides the king — were a few of the most
powerful Maratha families, who had long served Ahmadnagar. The
claim, of course, was not to just ro percent of the government share of

  40 Sardesai, New History, 145.

                                          85
                       THE    MARATHAS         1600-1818

the revenue; it was to be sardeshmukh, that is, in some sense “over”’ or
superior to the deshmukhs. If the Mughal Empire had accepted his
claim, it would have become a basis for legal superiority over all but a
few deshmukhs. These negotiations, however, continued for decades,
with chauth and sardeshmukhi of the Deccan never formally granted
until long after Shivaji’s reign.
   In the middle period of his reign, between about 1660 and 1670,
Shivaji attacked the problem of legitimacy and loyalty in a manner
much like the Deccan sultanates, that is through the expansion of
crown lands and development of administration. Both in the Desh and
the Konkan, Shivaji was able to expand his personal estates. He
recruited many Brahmins, mainly Deshastas, to manage both the
estates and the central bureaucracy. He ordered these officials, for
example, to keep the accounts of his personal estates (in Kudal,
Rajapur, Dabhol, Pune, Javli, Kalyan, etc.) separate from the general
accounts of the polity.4! He also encouraged the development of a
small council of advisors; several of the officers had direct parallels in
the earlier Ahmadnagar kingdom (sarnobat, peshwa, chitnis, sarlash-
kar), others were new (amatya, pratinidhi, sachiv). With the money
from his raids and estates, Shivaji built up his own forces; troops were
paid out of the central government treasury and rode his horses. Again,
this is a strategy found in Biyapur during its period of expansion. Both
strategies were quite effective in shifting the balance of power from the
deshmukhs to Shivaji’s central government.
    It was in the last decade of Shivaji’s rule that he put together his most
ambitious plan to establish authority over the large deshmukh families.
It began with further strengthening his personal army, relative to the
strength of deshmukh forces. Though there is no direct, documentary
evidence of the size of Shivaji’s army, there is some indirect evidence.
From Shivajt’s will, for example, we know that he personally owned
30,000 horses. This suggests that his personal forces were perhaps
15 ,000-20,000 cavalry. This is a big army, by any standards of the day,
and was an order of magnitude larger than a typical deshmukh force.*2
He owned the guns and gunpowder to supply the army. In addition,
Shivaji was in possession of the largest and most important forts in
Maharashtra.
    It was from this position of strength that Shivaji undertook probably
 *! A. R. Kulkarni, Maharashtra in the Age ofShivaji (Poona, 1974), 29.
 2 Sarkar, House ofShivaji, 188-89, 194.