

                                               88
                 SHIVAJI      AND     THE    MARATHA          POLITY

  The ceremony continued with many Brahmins anointing him with
various sacred liquids from pots they had brought. They, thereby,
accepted Shivaji as a king and his authority over them. This was
followed by another lavish dakshina, distribution of presents to Brah-
mins. Thereafter, he received kumkum on his forehead, and ascended a
specially built chariot of Indra and received blessed bows, arrows,
horses, and elephants.
   The next sections were perhaps the most crucial for legitimacy and
loyalty. Shivaji ascended the main throne — made of gold and covered
with lion and tiger skins — and received presents from many of the
nobility. Gold coins from his chief administrators were poured over
his head. Next was a private darbar, in which he received fealty from
many of the powerful families of Maharashtra. Finally, there was a
large public darbar, in which his ascension and the era were
announced, and he received presents. Another substantial dakshina
was distributed to Brahmins and others who came to the public
darbar. Perhaps equally significant for the actual ceremony was how it
was financed, which was at least in part by a tax on the deshmukhs.
The successful collection of this tax and the presence of these families
at the ceremony suggests more control over them than ever before.*¢
   Shivaji certainly perceived an important change in his own status.
During the coronation ceremony, for example, he proclaimed a new
era and a new calendar. He set himself above all the deshmukh
families, receiving a cash payment from them in honor of the coro-
nation. Shivaji also saw himself as equal to the rulers of the surround-
ing states. In a letter to Baji Mudhol (deshmukh of the area), for
example, written in 1677, Shivaji emphasized that as an independent
ruler he could negotiate with the Qutb Shah monarchy of Golconda
on a footing of equality.47
   After the coronation, as expected of a newly crowned king, Shivaji
immediately went on campaign, suddenly raiding the Mughal camp on
the Bhima river. Later in the year, he attacked north into Khandesh
and Berar, along the way burning the English factory at Dharangaon.
In the last years of his life, Shivaji mainly returned to campaigning
in the south, as well as developing his naval force to control the
   46 Many of these acts and kingly “substances” were part of a much wider tradition of
kingship. Dirks’ description of eating the kingly rice, plus the regalia and wider ceremony
establishing kingly relations with landed families sound very similar. See Dirks, The Hollow
Crown, 101-04.
  47 Translated in Sardesai, New History, 240-43.

                                            89
                        THE     MARATHAS          1600-1818

Konkan.‘ The real change in the coastal region, however, was the
rapid development of Bombay. It had grown under English naval
protection into a thriving trading city of over fifty thousand inhabit-
ants, all of this is in spite of low-level opposition from the Marathas.
   Overall, Shivaji was fortunate that the Mughals and Bijapur were
otherwise occupied, giving a respite to Maharashtra. There is every
evidence that Shivaji was grooming his older son Sambhaji to rule.
Extant documents show Sambhaji as representative of Shivaji as early
as the negotiations with the English factors in 1673. There are several
court judgements by Sambhaji from the 1674-77 period, and he led a
major campaign in the Hubli area of the Karnatak in 1675-76.*?
   After a lingering illness of two years, Shivaji died in 1680. He left a
kingdom with a full treasury, more than a hundred forts in the Ghats,
the Desh, and the Konkan, and more tenuous possessions and rights
east and south into the Karnatak. Through his charismatic leadership,
successful campaigning, and administrative pressure, he had built up
his power relative to the large, landed deshmukh families of Maha-
rashtra. For almost a decade, his kingdom had been relatively free from
military pressure by both Bijapur and the Mughal Empire. As we shall
see in the next chapter, both the internal and external situation were to
change radically within a year.
   48 The Maratha ships had not improved in two decades. They were still very small and
lacked effective artillery. In an encounter before Khanderi island (just south of Bombay) in
1679, one English frigate routed a fleet of fifty of the Maratha boats. See Sarkar, House of
Shivaji, 272-73.
   49 Kamal Gokhale, Chhatrapati Sambhaji (Poona, 1978), 18-20.