

                                            103
                      THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

  Before looking at the complex situation in Maharashtra, let us briefly
consider the problems facing the Mughal Empire. In the war of
succession, several sources suggest that 10,000 seasoned soldiers died,
including many generals. By the time Bahadur Shah emerged the
victor, a number of structural problems were obvious. The most
serious was the decline in the real power of the center. The emperor
could no longer simply order an appointee to a new posting. It had
become a matter of negotiation, the appointee using his friends at court
to reverse or delay any undesirable posting. The center was receiving
less and less information from outlying areas, and the financial position
of the center steadily worsened. The extended conflict with the Rajputs
had alienated the empire’s most long-standing and loyal indigenous
allies. There was only inconclusive war, but no long-term solution to
the ongoing territorial claims of the Sikhs in the Punjab or the Jats in
the vicinity of Agra. Law and order and the safety of the roads were
questionable in much of the empire except the valleys of the Ganges
and the Jumna. Much of the most recent conquests — Biapur, Gol-
conda, Maharashtra — were losing propositions. The net effect of all the
problems was rapid, shifting factionalization at the Mughal court.
Groups formed around a policy towards a particular problem or the
priorities of problems or a particular individual, who seemed to have
the money or the leadership ability to solve some of the problems. It is
in this context that the Marathas represented only one of the Mughal
Empire’s serious problems; vacillating and contradictory policies
towards the Marathas were, thus, the norm in the next decades.28
  Rather than a simple war, we should view the situation in Maha-
rashtra as three-cornered. Shahu, Tarabai, and the Mughals were all
competing for the loyalty and support of deshmukh families and
leaders of Maratha bands. Mughal policy was inconsistent and expen-
sive, but often temporarily successful at diminishing Maratha raids.
The Mughal viceroy of the Deccan at the time of Aurangzeb’s death,
for example, favored bringing the major Maratha leaders into the
Mughal military system. Nimaji Shinde, who had been raiding Malwa
and Khandesh, was brought in at the 7,000 level along with his sons and
grandsons. This was a very large maintenance grant and Mughal
documents suggest that over 1,000 Mughal grantees were displaced to
make up Shinde’s estates in the Aurangabad area.
   8 Satish Chandra, Parties and Politics at the Mughal Court, 1707-1740 (Delhi, third
edition, 1978) 44-53.

                                         104
                    FAMILY       RESPONSES         TO   INVASION

  The dominant feature of the war in Maharashtra was the inability of
any side to command the loyalty of the leaders of Maratha bands for
long periods. When Shahu was released, virtually every leader pledged
loyalty to Tarabai. Yet, within months, Shahu had won over several
major leaders and defeated Tarabai’s forces at Khed and Satara.2?
Shahu’s forces pursued Tarabai’s army south into the Konkan, taking
several major forts, including Panhala. Tarabai took refuge in a coastal
fort with the Angria family. Shahu’s victory was more apparent than
real; as soon as he turned north towards Pune, Tarabai recovered most
of the major forts. Both sides sought grants of the Mughal share of the
revenue of the Deccan, which included rights to chauth (one-quarter of
government revenue) and sardeshmukhi (an additional one-tenth and
rights over the deshmukhs). Though the Mughal court delayed the —
decision, the rights were eventually awarded to Shahu.
   As the war dragged on, leaders more and more took wholly
independent action, mainly raiding Mughal territory on the perimeter
of Maharashtra. Let us look at some of these actions. In Gujarat, for
example, we have mentioned several raids before Aurangzeb’s death.
These continued; in 1707, Kanderao Dabhade attacked southern
Gujarat, threatened Ahmedabad, and was bought off with a large
tribute.*° In 1710, Surat was threatened again, and the residents started
building the city wall.
   In the northern half of Maharashtra, Maratha bands regularly raided
the Ahmadnagar area and plundered the suburbs of Burhanpur. In
1710, a band defeated the Mughal governor of Aurangabad and
plundered part of the city. The same pattern continued in following
years. The Mughal governor of Burhanpur was killed in 1711 defend-
ing the city from yet another Maratha band (see Map 7).
   To the south and east of Maharashtra, in 1710, Chandrasen Yadav
besieged Vijaydurg and attacked Gulbarga. Haibat Rao Nimbalkar
invaded Bijapur territory, but was attacked by the local Mughal
commander. Mughal sources reported a large band attacking the Junar
region. In 1711, Maratha bands attacked Karnul, Sholapur, and many
other places in the Karnatak (see Map 3).
   By 1712-13, the situation had hit some kind of low ebb. The anarchy
  29 For example, see Shahu’s courting of the Yadav family in Pawar, Tarabaikalin, 187-88,
and the shift to Shahu of the Satham family, who had been serving Tarabai. Ibid., 367-80.
   30 V. G. Dighe, Peshwa Bajirao I and the Maratha Expansion (Bombay, 1944), 22. Many
documents of the conquest of Gujarat are found in G. S. Sardesai, Selections from the Peshwa
Daftar, XII: The Dhabades and the Conquest of Gujarat (Bombay, 1931).