

                                               98
                    FAMILY      RESPONSES        TO    INVASION

forts in southern Maharashtra. He wanted complete jagir rights,
including the settling of criminal cases, in all the parganas surrounding
pargana Man, plus two new mahals in the area of Bidar and five new
parganas in the area of Parendra.'” About a year later, Aurangzeb came
back with a substantially smaller counter-offer — a zat of 5,000 and
swar support of about 4,000, all to come from jagirs in Berar. There
was no mention of control of forts in Maharashtra, much less the drum
or the elephant. Nagoji Mane was to give a substantial present to
Aurangzeb and give even more substantial surety for his conduct when
he entered service.'® He actually took Mughal service sometime in
1698, at the level of 5,000 zat and 4,000 swar. The documents do not,
unfortunately, tell us much about the “‘nested”’ rights of the Mane
family in the Mhasvad/Kasegaon area at this time. One document
details that Nagoji’s deshmukhi rights in Khanapur were continued,
and a document of 1700 suggests that the family held several important
forts in the area. Looking ahead, Nagoji Mane in 1702, as a Mughal
jagirdar, petitioned Aurangzeb on behalf of another Maratha for a
suitable position and honors.
   The second deshmukh family we have been tracking, the Yadavs of
Karad, split in this period. One branch took service with Aurangzeb,
another stayed loyal to Rajaram. Later, in 1706-08, the “disloyal”
members were welcomed back to the Maratha side.!? Actually taking
possession of the deshmukhi rights involved years of conflict.°
   We should not assume that either the Mane pattern of switching
sides every few years or the Yadav pattern of the family dividing were
the only ones. Consider, for example, the records of the Patankar
family of Patan, a hilly area of the Ghats. These deshmukhs showed
unswerving loyalty to the Maratha cause. After opposing both
Mughals and their Maratha allies in the Javli area, Rajaram in 1690
ordered the family and its troops to the Bijapur district; the head of the
family received twelve villages in hereditary inam and a ceremonial
elephant for his good service. In 1692, we find the family serving
outside of Jinji and supporting Dhanaji against Santaji Ghorpade. The
family received a total of thirty-seven villages in inam and mokasa in
   17 Tbid., 154-56. Nimaji Shinde, about whom much will be heard later, also left Mughal
service in late 1690 with Nagoji Mane and travelled to Jinji. G. T. Kulkarni, Mughal-
Maratha Relations, 103.
  18 Pawar, Tarabatkalin, 154-56.
  19 Tbid., 139-40, 176-79.
  20 Thid., 183-84.


                                           92
                         THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

1693, and rights to transit duties in Patan in 1696. When Aurangzeb
besieged Satara fort in 1700, the family looted his supplies.”
   Both Rajaram and Aurangzeb were competing for the loyalty of the
large deshmukh families. Both offered rights and recognition. Though
the Mughals had a major army in Maharashtra, they could not control
the long-term loyalty of the deshmukh families. Resistance continued
at all levels in Maharashtra. In some areas, families continued to hold
important forts and towns. In others, there were only roving bands
which retreated to the Ghat areas when pursued. Later in the decade,
families had recovered a few of the stronger forts in Maharashtra —
Pratapgad, Rajgad, Torna, and Panhala — and spread raids south to
Mughal-controlled areas around Belgaum and east onto the Byapur
plains. Much of the Desh deteriorated as the warfare continued.??
   The situation cannot be better summarized than by Ramchandra
Nilkanth who was responsible for the Maratha resistance in this
period. He wrote, just a few years later, the Ajnapatra, the justly
famous treatise on politics and statecraft, in which he characterized
these years as follows:
Many soldiers ... went to heaven whilst fighting in the cause of their master in
accordance with the duties of Ksatra. Some having lost their armies got confound-
ed in their valour and went over to the enemy. Some, seeing their master given up
to vices like the enemy, usurped, with the idea of holding them independently,
parts of territories and forts which had been made over to their possession ... In
various places persons, rising like the crescent moon owing to the weakness of
government, began to quarrel against one another. During these adverse times
minor chiefs ... got firmly rooted. The remaining parts of the country became
desolate, and forts got exhausted of military provisions. Only the idea of the state
remained.?3