

period. Chandrasen, however, fought with Shahu’s new Peshwa, Balaji
Vishwanath, and the family rapidly declined. After 1713, they never
again played a major role; later in the eighteenth century, they held
small estates and were not even sardars of any princely state in the
nineteenth century. Consider just two more examples. Mane Thorat
was a close associate of Shivaji, with long prior association with the
Bijapur court. In the later struggles, the family sided against Shahu and
was reduced to a small jagir on the ancestral lands of Kathad. Udaji
Chavan was a minor commander during the Shivaji period. The family
sided with Tarabai, and — as one of her main supporters — was given the
title of Himmat Bahadur. In the eighteenth century the family declined
to a small jagir in the Kolapur State. Sometime between 1710 and 1712,
Ramchandra Nilkanth (who had been a key figure in the resistance in
Maharashtra after Rajaram’s flight to Jinji) was brought over to
Shahu’s side. He got everything he asked for — sardeshmukhi and
mokasa rights and rights to a number of forts. His sons were brought
into service at high salaries. He was to be in charge of the administra-
tion. Two      years later, however,         he returned to Tarabai’s side and
extracted large concessions. Within a few years, as Shahu’s faction won
out, his position was displaced by Balaji Bajirao, Shahu’s chief minis-
ter.>! All of these families are examples of the more general principle
which we established in Chapter 1. In the Maratha polity, just as in the
earlier Deccan kingdoms, rights to shares of revenue were never
isolated from the larger politics of court. Factional struggles intensified
during disputed successions, and those on the losing side rarely
recovered positions of power.
   What, then, was the composition of the ‘‘new”’ elite when Shahu’s
faction was firmly in control in 1718? Three older families remained.
One was the Nimbalkar family, whose position of power went back
more than a century in the Phaltan area. The family had served Bijapur
in the sixteenth century and Shivaji in the seventeenth century; Haibat
Rao Nimbalkar was still a powerful figure at the court of Shahu.
Another family which remained from the Shivaji period was the
Deshasta Brahmin family of Bhor which took their name from the post
of sachiv which they had fulfilled ever since Shivaji’s original cabinet.°?
   31 The relevant documents are found in Pawar, Tarabaikalin, 274, 291.
   32 Older books on Shivaji’s “administration” assigned specific duties to the various
“cabinet” members, such as sachiv. More recent research suggests that their position was
advisory, their duties vague and overlapping, and that the “cabinet” rarely met as a body.
There was an inner circle of powerful men who met in darbar and some were assigned titles,

                                           107
                       THE    MARATHAS         1600-1818

The third older family which survived into the Shahu inner circle was
the Hingnikar Bhonsles. Originally village headmen in the village of
Hingni near Pune, the family had provided two leaders, Rupaji and his
nephew Parsoji, during Shivaji’s reign. Parsoji led an independent band
in Khandesh around 1700 and was the first major leader to accept
Shahu when he was released in 1707; Shahu rewarded him with a major
saranjam grant — six sarkars including 147 mahals in Berar and the ttle
Sena Saheb Subah. After the death of Parsoji in 1709, his son Kanoji
apparently mismanaged the saranjam and opened negotiations to go
into Mughal service. Shahu ordered his nephew, Raghuji, to defeat and
displace his uncle. This done, Raghuji succeeded to the title and
saranjam, which formed the basis of the later Maratha state of Nagpur.
   The rest of Shahu’s elite were leaders of successful, largely indepen-
dent bands. First was the Dabhade family, which, under Shivaji, had
been appointed village headmen of the village of Talegaon. Family
tradition has them instrumental in Rajaram’s escape from Jinji (1699),
but there is no outside confirmation. We find Kanderao Dabhade
raiding Gujarat as early as 1701, and his son continuing the raids froma
fortified base in Baglan. He was also one of the leaders who shifted to
Shahu at a crucial moment in 1713.°> By 1715, he could assemble as
many as 5,000 cavalry for a raid. In 1716, Dabhade closed the Mughal
road from Surat to the Deccan and extracted fees from all caravans on
the Burhanpur-Surat road. He engaged the Mughals near Ahmadnagar
and was raised to the cabinet post of senapati.
   A second independent leader was Fateh Singh Bhonsle (no relation
to the Hingnikar Bhonsles). Originally, the family held the head-
manship of the village of Parad, some twenty-five miles south of
Daulatabad, and the head of the family died in a pitched battle with
Shahu’s forces (in 1707). His widow appealed to Shahu, who promised
to treat her only son, Fattesingh, as his own. Later, Shahu granted him
a hereditary jagir in Akkalkot in southern Sholapur district.34 By 1715,
he emerged as a major leader.
   A third leader was Nimaji Shinde. We first found him serving in the
forces outside Jinji in the 1690s, then as an independent leader in
Khandesh in the late 1690s. He figures frequently in the raids on
such as sachiv; we should, however, be cautious about attributing too much of a modern
structure of government to them.
   33 Dighe, Peshwa Bayirao, 25.
   * A.R. Kulkarni, “The revolt of zamindars in Akkalkot, 1830,” in S. B. Bhattacharya
Essays in Modern Indian Economic History (Delhi, 1987), 147.