

   After the fall of Jinji, Rajaram and the royal entourage returned to
Maharashtra. The combined forces of the king and several leaders of
bands attempted a raid on Berar and Surat in late 1699; they collected
some chauth and sardeshmukhi in Khandesh, but were forced back
  21 Tbid., 180-95. Overall, the Mughals had been no more successful in either recruiting or
subduing the nayaks of the Karnatak, many of whom had been armed elite families of
Golconda. SeeJ.F. Richards “The Hyderabad Karnatik: 1687-1707,” Modern Asian Studies,
9, 2 (1975), 241-60. In the ensuing decades of the seventeenth century, the Marathas had little
success either.
   *2 See, for example, the kaulnama of Indapur, which mentions that the village was nearly
deserted and charged the deshmukh with repopulation, in Kulkarni, “Towards a history of
Indapur,” 131.
   > “The Ajnapatra or royal edict” (trans. S. V. Puntambekar), Journal of Indian History
3, 1 (April, 1929), 84-85.                                      ;

                                             100
                  FAMILY       RESPONSES        TO   INVASION

through the central Desh.?4 Several leaders remained in northern
Maharashtra — Nimaji Shinde in Khandesh, Parsaji Bhonsle in Berar,
and Kanderao Dabhade in Baglana. Typically, these leaders were
operating with almost no direction from Rajaram. In any case, Rajaram
died at Singhgad within a few months of the Berar raid.
   There was no replacement for Rajaram. The most suitable heir was
Shahu, Sambhaji’s son, but he had been a Mughal captive for years.
Rajaram left three sons (one illegitimate), four queens, and one
concubine. One queen died and one became a sati; the other two had
small sons to promote and hopes of a throne.
   In any monarchical system, this situation would be ideal for severe
factionalization. All claimants were minors. None had substantially
stronger claims by rules of succession. The factions split three ways,
one each surrounding a queen and her infant son, and one wanting to
continue the war in the name of the imprisoned Shahu. The winner was
the elder queen, Tarabai, who ruled for the next decade in the name of
her infant son, Shivaji II (and would play a role in Maratha politics for
far longer).
   In some ways, the coronation of Shivaji II only exacerbated factional
problems. Tarabai had to favor the leaders who supported her, such as
Parashuram Trimbuk and Shankraji Narayan, at the expense of those
who wavered, such as Ramchandra Nilkanth (who had, as we have
seen, been leading the effort in Maharashtra) and independent leaders,
like Dhanaji Yadav.?°
   Within weeks of Rajaram’s death, the Mughal forces under Aurang-
zeb took Satara fort and nearby Parli fort. The Maratha court fell back
to Visalgad (twenty miles east of Kolapur). With the fall of Visalgad in
1702, Tarabai moved the court to the lesser known fort of Ranga or
Prasidgad. In the next five years, the Mughals captured fort after fort.
Map 5 gives a better idea of the mobile nature of the warfare than any
description could.
   The Maratha strategy, throughout, was to hold a fort as long as
possible, then escape with as much treasure and as many men as
possible. Meanwhile, largely independent bands continued to raid the
settled Mughal areas of Khandesh and Malwa. Nimaji Shinde, for
example, defeated the Mughal deputy governor of Berar, Rustam
Khan, and spread raids into Khandesh. There was a raid on the rich
  24 Grant Duff, History, 390.
  25 Brij Kishore, Tarabai and her Times (Bombay, 1963), 65-66.