

   12 See Sardesai, New History, 337-38, for the translation of one such grant.
  13 Grant Duff, History, 270.
  14 After most of his troops had deserted him, both the Mughals and the Mane family were
pursuing him. The Mane family had a personal vendetta, because Santaji had executed an
in-law of the family. The Manes, apparently, found him first and killed him; Sardesai, New
History, 347. Mughal documents, particularly the Mashir-1-Alamgiri, however, suggest that
Nagoji Mane gave Santaji some short-term sanctuary, in spite of their feud, and that he was

                                            ih
                           THE    MARATHAS            1600-1818

    In contrast to the Maratha documents, which highlight efforts of
 Ramchandra Nilkanth, the picture we get from Mughal histories is that
 throughout the 1690s there was little functioning Maratha polity in
 Maharashtra. The state that Shivaji had created had ceased to exist. The
 Mughals controlled almost all of the major forts in Maharashtra and
 much of the countryside. They had begun assigning land in jagir grants
 for the maintenance of troops, as they had done in the conquered areas
 of Bijapur and Golconda.
   It is, however, the family documents of the deshmukh families of
 Maharashtra which show that the situation was, in fact, much more
 complicated. Some families had indeed sided with the Mughals, such as
 the Sawants of Sawantwadi and the Dalvis of Kudal. Most, however,
vacillated.!5 Let us, for example, again consider the Mane family of
Mhasvad. Against what we would expect, Nagoji Mane, who had been
in Mughal service for seven years, returned to Maratha service in 1691,
towards the beginning of the siege of Jinji. He personally travelled to
Jinji, had an audience with Rajaram, and was granted two new villages,
in perpetuity, for returning to service. He was also granted the
sardeshmukhi rights to all twelve mahals which he had previously held
(and two further inam villages within a couple of months).'® He stayed
in the area ofJinji for several years, and was complimented by Rajaram
for his service. As we have just seen, in 1697 Nagoji Mane sided with
Dhanaji Yadav, and, pursuing a personal vendetta, killed Santaji
Ghorpade; he was rewarded by Rajaram.
   Within a few months, however, Nagoji Mane was negotiating with
Aurangzeb to return to Mughal service. Let us emphasize that this was
 a negotiating situation. Nagoji Mane, in July 1697, wrote to Aurangzeb
  the terms under which he would return to Mughal service. He wanted
  pardon for whatever ‘“‘bad actions” he had done. He wanted a jagir of
  7,000 zat and 7,000 swar; only one-fourth of his horses should be
  branded. He wanted a large ceremonial drum, robes of honor, an
. elephant, and a horse with gold tack. He wanted an immediate cash
  payment of 70,000 Rs. and possession of Sangola fort and seven other
 actually killed by a near relative of the man Santaji killed; his head was carried to the Mughal
 camp by some soldiers who found it, rather than by Nagoji Mane.
    'S Sarjarao Jedhe, for example, left Maratha service in late 1692, after successful military
 campaigns against the Mughals. He joined Mughal service and was granted the deshmukh
 rights of Bhor, but returned to Maratha service a few years later. See G. T. Kulkarni, The
 eas                 Relations: Twenty Five Fateful Years (1682-1707) (Pune, Deccan College,
 1983), 148.
   '6 V.S. Khobekar, Records of Shivaji Period (Bombay, 1974), 140-47.