

                                                109
                          THE     MARATHAS           1600-1818

   Let us now turn to the second theme of Shahu’s early reign, the
events which led to Mughal recognition of Maratha rights in Maha-
rashtra. By 1716 it was clear that Mughal troops in Maharashtra were
not winning against the unifying Maratha bands. Various officials in
Gujarat, Khandesh, and further south sought piecemeal accommo-
dations.     The new        Peshwa,      Balaji Vishwanath,           asked the Mughal
Emperor for a sanad, granting Shahu the right to chauth (4) and sar-
deshmukhi (‘/.) of the government revenue throughout the six Mughal
subahs     of the Deccan          (Aurangabad,         Berar, Bidar, Golconda,              and
Biyapur — including the whole of the Karnatak — and Khandesh). The
demand also included chauth of Malwa and Gujarat, and recognition of
swaraj (independence) in the Maharashtra heartland, which meant
turning over all the remaining Mughal forts. Recent conquests by
Parsoji Bhonsle in Berar and Gondwana were to be confirmed, and
certain estates in the Karnatak were demanded in the name of Fateh
Singh Bhonsle. In return, the Peshwa, on behalf of Shahu, would main-
tain 15,000 troops for the Mughal subahdar of the Deccan, maintain
law and order, and return ro percent of sardeshmukhi to the Mughal
treasury. In addition, Shahu would pay a 100,000 Rs. yearly tribute.
   Even though the Mughal subahdar of the Deccan agreed to the
terms, the Emperor realized that such a sanad would effectively end
Mughal power south of the Tapti river. He prepared for war and
repudiated the treaty. Within a year, a Maratha army, under the
command of Balaji Vishwanath, travelled to Delhi, and became troops
of the Sayyid brothers, one of the factions competing for the Mughal
throne. Just a few months after the arrival of the Maratha army at
Delhi, a new puppet was put on the Mughal throne by the Sayyid
brothers, and the whole treaty was ratified. Balaji Vishwanath returned
to the Deccan in triumph in May 1719 with the treaty and Shahu’s
family (which had been held captive since his release in 1708).37
   Now let us turn to a more general discussion of legitimacy and the

such an army, but Shahu was only able to build one slowly in the course of the next decade or
so. Ibid. 1 (April, 1929), to1—o2.                       :
   *7 Grant Duff is the only historian to have seen the actual Mughal grant. It has since
disappeared. His extract gives several interesting details. The cash revenue of the six subahs of
the Deccan was estimated at over 180 million rupees at the time. Sardeshmukhi was calculated
at 10 percent of this figure. Shahu was to pay the Mughal court a “‘gift” of over six times the
value of a year’s sardeshmukhi in return for the grant, though there is no evidence that he ever
paid it. Grant Duff's extract also gives the districts included in the grant of swaraj, and they
did indeed cover the areas of the Desh and the Konkan in which Shivaji had held most
control. See Grant Duff, History, 324-25 n.