

                                            105
                     THE   MARATHAS       1600-1818

  in Maharashtra was near total. Shahu controlled only the area immedi-
  ately around Pune. With defections and the inability to pay his troops,
  the royal forces were substantially smaller than the larger independent
  Maratha bands. Tarabai’s position was much the same. Her base in the
  Konkan was equally devastated. Even though Aurangzeb’s policy of
  orthodox hostility toward the Marathas had been completely aban-
  doned, the Mughals were unsuccessful at developing loyalty among
  Maratha leaders. They pursued a policy which remained contradictory
 — trying to defeat the bands, while offering service to the more
  successful leaders. Since the main Mughal attention was on the Sikh
  uprising in the Punjab, followed by Jats, Mewatis, and Afghans raiding
 up to the walls of Delhi, Mughal policy in Maharashtra tended to
 devolve on the senior official (the vazier) and changed with each new
 office-holder.                                           :
    Let us now turn from the specific political narrative to a discussion
 of the broad processes by which Shahu brought about a consolidation
 of power and a strengthening of the monarchy. First, we will look at
 the composition of the elite military leadership of the Marathas in 1715
 and compare it to Shivaji’s elite, say forty years earlier. Second, we will
 look at the Maratha involvement in the factional politics in Delhi which
 resulted in the granting to Shahu, in 1719, of broad rights in Maha-
 rashtra. Then, we shall tie these two themes together in a discussion of
 power and legitimacy under Shahu.
    Let us turn first to the composition of Shahu’s military elite in 1715.
 The initial important point is that few of the families closely associated
with Shivaji survived or prospered in the eighteenth century. Some
had, of course, died out in the protracted wars and dislocation. Many
more declined as a direct result of Maratha factional politics. Sambhaji,
Shivaji’s son, for example, executed twenty-five members of key
families, including top cabinet members in the government, after the
 1683 plot to poison him. Two decades later, many other families lost
out in the factional conflict between Tarabai and Shahu. Consider
some examples. Santaji Ghorpade was a close associate and contempo-
rary of Shivaji. After all the factional strife, the family was given a small
jagir by Tarabai at Kaphi in Kolapur State and played no significant
part in later Maratha history. Dhanaji Yadav,        to consider another
example, was one of the principal leaders harassing the Mughal forces
outside Jinji in the 1790s. His son, Chandrasen Yadav, led a
                                                                major
band against the Mughals in Khandesh and Malwa in the
                                                              1700-10
                                    106
                    FAMILY      RESPONSES         TO   INVASION