

                                              IIo
                    FAMILY      RESPONSES         TO    INVASION

consolidation of power in the polity of Shahu. As we have just seen, the
turning of titular legitimacy into some real power at the center was,
first, a process of bringing men personally loyal to Shahu into the inner
circle and quickly rewarding them with saranjam grants for the
maintenance of troops. Within a few years, few of the original families
which had served Shivaji remained. Second, there was active warfare
against leaders who would not submit personal loyalty to the king. We
might think that these families simply retired to their “lands,” bided
their time, and re-emerged at the next opportunity. Such was not the
case. From the time of Shivaji, prominent families sank into oblivion,
crushed after siding with a losing faction. Most Maratha families had
only minimal “watan” rights, that is, rights given in reward for
previous service of high merit and really perceived as permanent and
inviolate. Most of their income came from other sorts of “nested”
rights (sardeshmukh, deshmukh, village headman) of which they could
be stripped — leaving the male members of the family as soldiers only or
somewhat wealthier peasants. In the most anarchistic times, “nested”
rights mattered less, since the band could be maintained by plunder. In
all other times, however, such as the consolidation under Shahu, troops
required a saranjam grant from the Maratha polity. None of these new
leaders had aspirations to replace Shivaji’s line; therefore, they needed
a king to assign them revenue.
   What is also clear is that neither a compact kingdom, nor a series of
compact fiefdoms was emerging. One example should suffice. As we
have seen, the Dabhade family of this inner circle were originally
headmen of the village of Talegaon. Their base for independent raiding
in the 1700-15 period had been Baglan in north-west Maharashtra. The
new saranjams were to come from Gujarat, not the “ancestral” area of
Talegaon.
   This leads us to the third theme of consolidation, the clarification of
the grant-giving process. As we have seen in Chapter 2, one of Shivaji’s
main problems was legitimacy. Many families held deshmukh and
other rights from the earlier Deccan kingdoms of Ahmadnagar and
Bijapur. From his coronation to his death, he attempted to consolidate
the grant-giving process, so that all new grants originated with him,
and old grants were continued in his name.** After his death, and
  38 The reality, as we have seen, was much more complicated. Even in Shivaji’s life, there
were a number of primary grant-givers — Bijapur, the Mughals, even the Portuguese, and the
Sidi of Janjira.
                          THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

especially after the death of Rajaram (1699), the number of grant-givers
multiplied. Tarabai, when she ruled, gave out many grants; even some
leaders of bands gave out smaller grants.>? The second process of grant
clarification concerns the deshmukhs and patils and the flow of tax and
revenue information from the countryside. Balaji Vishwanath fought
hard for the Mughal grant of 1719 because it gave full legal status for
revenue collection to Shahu’s government in much of India south of
the Narmada river. No one else, no faction, no leader of a Maratha
band, had this recognition. The grant represented moderate real assets
and huge potential assets which could be dispensed to loyal followers.
Conversely, it was only Shahu’s government which could remove
disloyal men from saranjams. Though the process was not completed
until about 1740, the Peshwa, in the name of Shahu, managed to force
all new and continued grants — saranjams, deshmukhi, patil, inam, and
others — through the central Maratha government.*°
   Dealing with the junior line — Tarabai’s claimant, Shivaji II — also
took over a decade, and was finally settled by the Treaty of Warna
(1731) which gave them a self-contained state at Kolapur. This division
allowed Tarabai to give small maintenance grants to her supporters and
a separate field of activity in the Karnatak. We have encountered this
solution twice before in Maratha history. Shivaji’s father divided his
holdings between Shivaji and Ekoji (his half-brother), Shivaji getting
the Pune area and Ekoji a kingdom in Thanjur. Shivaji himself tried to
divide his holdings between Rajaram and Sambhaji in the last years of
his life.41 For Shahu and Tarabai, this division was largely successful;
Kolapur survived as a separate, rarely threatening state throughout the
eighteenth century (and as a princely state in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries).
   It would have been ideal if Shahu had himself been a charismatic
military leader. It would have enhanced his legitimacy and hastened the
   *° See, for example, the stream of grants from Sambhaji II in 1716-17, in Pawar,
Tarabaikalin, 332-39.
   40 Andre Wink, Land and Sovereignty in India: Agrarian Society and Politics under the
Eighteenth-century Maratha Svarajya (Cambridge, 1986), 240-41. Ramchandra Nilkanth,
writing instructions for the king in the Ajnapatra (1700) recognized the crucial importance of
consolidating the grant-giving process. “They [watan-rights holders] should not be allowed
to have any privileges or watan rights without a state charter.” “Ajnapatra” (August 1929) ’
215.
   i These acts of division raise interesting questions of the kingdom as property of the king.
A deshmukh right, for example, could certainly be mortgaged, sold, or divided, because it
was perceived as income-producing property. Such treatment of a kingdom, however, had
less precedent or scriptural authority.