

                                         IOI
W                                                         @ e Ahmadnagar

    x


     qig                   oo

              ombay


        “                       P
                                    une


         df                         GOPKONDANA
                      oO
                 TORNA     2                 R. Nira
                           (2) RAJGAD


                                    “Ol          \     KHATAU

                                     PARLI




                                                          KHAWASPUR




                                                                        =
                                                                       100 miles
    o Forts



Map 5. Aurangzeb’s campaign against the Maratha hill forts, 1700-07 (taken
from Brij Kishore, Tara Bai and Her Times [New Delhi, 1963]).

                                                 102
                  FAMILY         RESPONSES        TO     INVASION

entrepot of Burhanpur in 1702.76 In the next year, Nimaji set up toll
posts along the Burhanpur—Surat road and built several small forts in
the Tapti valley (see Map 7). Even though the Mughal commander,
Firuz Jang, chased Nimaji Shinde north all the way across Malwa and
into Bundelkund, the situation did not improve. Throughout 1704, the
transport of grain, cash, and letters from the north to the Deccan was
often disrupted.
   The war in Maharashtra was devastating to the countryside. Both
sides tried to collect taxes and tribute, and foraged for food for men and
animals.   In 1703-04,          there was     a severe    famine    in Maharashtra,
accompanied by depopulation and migration. It is not clear that this
weakened the Maratha forces; joining a roving band was the only
available occupation in a sharply declining economic situation. It is
difficult otherwise to explain the rapid recruitment by leaders like
Nimaji Shinde or Dhanaji Yadav of thousands of Maratha recruits in a
very short time.
   By late 1705, the tide had turned. Aurangzeb faced serious problems
in the north. He had an exhausted army, anxious to leave the barren
hills of Maharashtra. Everyone, Marathas and Mughals, was waiting
for the emperor to die. Factions and alliances formed and reformed.
Maratha raids continued. Dhanaji Yadav, for example, raided Gujarat
in the campaigning season of 1706-07, sacked Baroda, and defeated the
Mughal deputy governor of the province and the faujdar of the city. In
the same year, there was a major raid on the city of Burhanpur.?”
   After nearly forty years of campaigning in the Deccan, Aurangzeb
died (March 1707) at Aurangabad, leaving the Marathas and Maha-
rashtra unconquered. His death set off the succession war for which all
the Mughal heirs and commanders had been positioning themselves for
years. Of central importance to Maharashtra, one of the earliest events
of the protracted Mughal war of succession was the release of Shahu,
Sambhaji’s son and heir, who had been a well-treated prisoner in the
Mughal camp for eighteen years. His “escape” in Malwa was leisurely
and arranged, and he ceremoniously visited the tomb of Aurangzeb
before proceeding further south into Maharashtra. For the next eight
years, there was full-scale civil war in Maharashtra between Shahu’s
forces and those of Tarabai, the queen who had been ruling in the name
of Shivaji II.
 26 Grant Duff, History, 399.
 27 Kishore, Tarabat, 86.