

                                         108
                      FAMILY        RESPONSES           TO    INVASION

Burhanpur and into Malwa and Khandesh throughout the first decade
of the eighteenth century, and was one of the strongest leaders
supporting Shahu. It is, however, a measure of the volatility of the
times that Nimaji Shinde disappears from the record within a decade,
and the family is untraceable thereafter.
   Now let us turn'to the “new” Brahmins in Shahu’s inner circle. First,
there was Parushram Pant Pratinidhi. He was a Deshasta Brahmin, the
family originally from Karhad. Secondly, there was the Bhat family of
Chitpavan Brahmins who were, as peshwas (chief ministers), to
become de facto rulers of the Maratha polity for the next sixty years.
The family were hereditary deshmukhs of Danda Rajpuri on the
Konkan coast about sixty miles south of Bombay.
   Because he was so important to Shahu’s success, and the family so
central to later Maratha history, let us pause a minute to consider the
rise of Balaji Vishwanath. In his late teens, he left a post as a clerk in the
saltworks of the Siddis of Janjira (in the Konkan) and, around 1700,
found employment as subahdar (head administrator) of Pune and later
the Daulatabad district.35 He early declared for Shahu, and militarily,
and especially through negotiations, was Shahu’s main support. He
brought in Dhanaji Yadav, the first major leader to support Shahu. He
led the military expedition against Dhanaji’s son’s revolt. After
appointment as Peshwa, in 1713, it was Balaji Vishwanath who
negotiated in the Konkan with Kanoji Angria, who was Tarabai’s main
supporter. When Angria switched sides, Tarabai’s support collapsed
and she was imprisoned. Balaji Vishwanath also led Shahu’s army
against the Mughal forces led by the Nizam, in 1713-15. Balaji
Vishwanath, thus, embodies the first theme of Shahu’s early reign, the
disappearance of older deshmukh families and the rise of new Maratha
and Brahmin families which chose correctly in the civil war between
Tarabai and Shahu.*¢

  35 In 1708, he was in the administration of Dhanaji Yadav, the Maratha commander who
figured so prominently in the war with the Mughals in the 1690s. See Maratha Itthasiche
Sadhne, tv, 170. Shortly thereafter, he served as diwan of the senapati, another of the inner
circle. See Dighe, Peshwa Bajirao, 2-3.
   36 Ramchandra Nilkanth in his Ajnapatra (issued in 1716 though written some years
earlier), devoted one of his longest sections of this treatise on statecraft to the qualifications of
king’s ministers and the dangers of a minister too powerful or a king not attentive enough,
“The Ajnapatra or royal edict” (trans. S. V. Puntambekar), Journal of Indian History, 8, 2
(August, 1929), 207-14. Ramchandra Nilkanth identified another important need of a strong
monarchy, a complete army (including artillery and matchlockmen) who were salaried
professionals paid by the king. Cavalrymen were to ride the king’s horses. Shivaji had had