


                                                                   «Agar                    Narsinghgarh
                       Piplauda
           Banswarae                        \eJaora Saraungpure                              Bersiae
                                                                                          Islamnagar ee Bae
                                                                                                           oy
                                             \Kachrod                           F
                                                  *     Shahjahanpure       Shwiapur        Diraha,” 7°Raisen
                                                                Bhopal@’
                                    WNolaye Ujjain Sundarsi Ichoree                                                7
              Thandia *    Raipura ?“Bad nawar   eDewas “Ashta
                                                                                    Ichawar®
          Dohad,                       ce
                                       jBalsa
                                                              Savere
                                                                                               art
             Jhabua®                   !          Tarana.      Se
                                                                       a

                       Amijhera °s — *Dhar -
                               Mandue >* Naicha

           p.Narm s

GUJARAT

        Nanadurbar
          “Navapur Sindkhed
                                Jalgaon
                        Songir >
                         Dharanga0" *Erando I
                        Leling Talis
                                               ~ Pachora’‘Jamnér
                     --N                                 Ce
                           —      -“


        KHANDESH
 20°N



Map 7.  Burhanpur, Khandesh, and Malwa c. 1750 (taken from Stewart
Gordon, “Burhanpur: entrepot and hinterland, 1650-175 0,” The Indian
Economic and Social History Review, 25, 4 [1988], 430).

                                                                  126
                 BAJI   RAO     I’S NORTHERN            EXPANSION

kingdom for himself and large jagirs for his leaders. Bajirao still feared
engagement with the Nizam’s efficient artillery and settled for cession
of Malwa.
  The following year 1739 brought the invasion of Nadir Shah (King
of Persia), the sack of Delhi with the deaths of perhaps 20,000 local
residents, and the loss of 1,500,000 Rs. worth of jewelry and the
famous Peacock Throne. When Nadir Shah withdrew from India
within a few months, Afghanistan, the Punjab, and the Frontier areas
were lost to Delhi’s control, and Sikh bands began to raid in the
vicinity of the capital, destroying much of the suburbs.*4 This was the
end of any leadership, effective or not, from Delhi.
   With the thorough success of Bajirao’s strategy in Malwa, Gujarat,
Konkan, and Gondwana,              now let us consider several themes of his
twenty years of ceaseless activity. (He was to die within a year at only
forty.) First, what do we mean by “conquest” in the context of the
Marathas and the eighteenth century? What did it take to convert a
revenue-paying Mughal province into a revenue-paying Maratha
province? The area best documented is Malwa; it was held personally
by the Peshwa, and those documents are found in the Pune Datftar.?°
The early raids, as we have seen, were by largely independent bands,
numbering as many as 5,000 cavalry. Like the combined raids under
Bajirao in the early 1730s, these certainly did not ““conquer’’ Malwa.
They gathered up whatever they could in cash and objects from the
villages and cities along their route.26 After some years of raiding,
estimates appear in the Peshwa’s documents as to the worth of an area,
usually in round sums. Through all the 1730s, the Marathas held no
legal rights to collect any part of the revenue of the Mughal subah of
Malwa; nevertheless, at Delhi, they kept up claims to Malwa’s revenue.
On the ground, however, the Marathas were doing a thorough job of
undermining Mughal administrative control. We have seen how they
rarely met a main-force army in battle, but, instead, cut off its supplies
and starved it. They first engaged and defeated smaller Mughal units of
the sarkar level, then the larger subah-level units, finally engaging
armies specially sent from Delhi. Equally important, Maratha revenue
officers established contact with the zamindars all across Malwa, and
  24 J. N. Sarkar, Nadir Shah in India (Calcutta, 1973), 78-86.
  25 The revenue documents, in the Modi script, are located in the Pune Daftar, Prant Azmas
Hindustan Rumals (hereafter referred to as H.R.), witth some additional papers in the Zamau
Rumals.
  26 See the receipts of the expedition, in H.R. 154 and H.R. 190.