

                                          118
                  BAJI   RAO     I’S NORTHERN            EXPANSION

families because their “nested” holdings in Maharashtra were minimal.
Rather, this group of leaders should be called — as they were at the time
— “‘sardars”’ (military leaders), whose power and holdings came from
military commands during this period of rapid expansion.
   Now, keeping the same time frame (1720-30), let us turn to the
Marathas’ main rival in the Deccan, the Nizam. We will not attempt
here even a summary of this distinguished Mughal general’s family and
early life. By the 1720s the Nizam was a seasoned general with long
senior experience in the Deccan, a powerful army, and substantial
ambition. He had correctly sensed the impossibility of controlling
Delhi, and had remained largely aloof from the devastating factional
struggles. In early 1723, the Nizam met the young Peshwa, near Jhabua
in Malwa. No documents remain of these talks, but their brief joint
campaign suggests cautious friendship. This policy foreshadows that of
the Nizam throughout his long reign — try to circumscribe the
Marathas, but provoke no irreparable breach with them. Late in 1723,
after granting permission for the Nizam to return to the Deccan as
vazier (the senior official), Delhi realized that if the Nizam returned to
the Deccan with his army, with or without authority, he would set up
an independent state. A pursuing Mughal army caught up with the
Nizam near Aurangabad in northern Maharashtra, but was totally
defeated, with some help from Maratha cavalry units under the
personal command of Bajirao Peshwa.’
   The imediate results of this victory were that the Nizam became the
rival of the Marathas, not only in what were to become his home
territories of Hyderabad, but also in the Karnatak (where both claimed
revenue rights), in Khandesh (where revenue had been divided
between the Mughals and the Marathas by the treaty of 1717), and in
Gujarat (where the Nizam’s relatives were, briefly, in power). Once
again we see that the concept of “boundaries” of these polities is not
very useful. The rights of the Nizam and the Marathas not only
interpenetrated, but they often collected revenue from the same
pargana or village. It is useful to remember that the Nizam’s capital was
not Hyderabad, as it became in the nineteenth century, but Auranga-
bad in the middle of northern Maharashtra.
   The peaceful rivalry between Bajirao and the Nizam lasted less than
two years, during which each had other problems — the Nizam
   7 Chandra, Parties and Politics, 171-73. See also Husein, First Nizam, 131, 150. The best
overall biography of Asaf Jah is Husein, First Nizam.

                                            119
                       THE    MARATHAS         1600-1818

solidifying his position in the south, and Bajirao leading expeditions
into Malwa. Both were ambitious military leaders with armies, and
their rights were totally intermixed. It seems inevitable that each would
try to use, subvert, or destroy the other.
   The first phase began in 1725. As part of the consolidation of power,
the Nizam sent an army into the Karnatak to clear it of Maratha
revenue collectors.’ The Maratha response came within months. Fateh
Singh Bhonsle led an expedition, reputed to be 50,000 horse, into the
Karnatak. This leader was originally from Akalkot (in southern
Maharashtra) and knew the terrain well. Bajirao accompanied him, but
did not command. The Maratha forces were outmaneuvered and
forced to retreat.    A second campaign, after the monsoon, also failed to
stop the Nizam’s army or its campaign of ousting Maratha collectors.
Bajirao used the failures to convince Shahu of the superiority of
striking northwards, where there would be no concerted resistance.
  Within a year, the war turned to political subversion. The Nizam, as
supreme Mughal representative in the Deccan, refused to pay any
chauth or sardeshmukhi to the Marathas. His grounds were that he
could not decide between the two heirs, Shahu and Sambhaji (of the
Tarabai faction). He “offered” to arbitrate the dispute, which, of
course, had been fought to a conclusion, with the division of the
Maratha polity, almost a decade earlier. Still, there were several leaders
of Maratha bands who did not like the rapidly increasing power of
Bajirao and the leaders loyal to him. The Nizam’s main spokesman at
Shahu’s court was Parushuram Pant Pratinidhi (a Deshasta Brahmin);
he was a direct rival of Bajirao (a Chitpavan Brahmin) in the inner circle
at court. The Nizam’s main supporter at Tarabai’s court was Chand-
rasen Yadav, who ~ as we have seen — fought Bajirao’s father ten years
earlier.
   Bajirao convinced Shahu that such “arbitration” actually meant the
Nizam taking over the kingship of the Maratha polity by supporting
Tarabai’s line. War began in August 1727 and ended in March of the
following year. On both sides, it was a war of movement.? Bajirao
(supported mainly by Shinde, Holkar, and the Pawar brothers) raided
the Nizam’s areas of Khandesh; the Nizam, in turn, struck at Pune.
The Nizam picked up an ally in Trimbukrao Dabhade, who wanted
 _* Andre Wink, Land and Sovereignty in India: Agrarian Society and Politics under the
Eighteenth-century Maratha Svarajya (Cambridge, 1986), 96-98.
  ° Brij Kishore, Tarabai and Her Times (Bombay, 1963), 161.