

                                            123
                         THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

a series of complicated alliances, including the English and the Dutch,
but the more important results were a dramatic decrease in the power
of the Sidi and the ousting of the Portuguese                      from the Konkan,
reducing them to the enclaves of Goa and Daman. The Marathas and
the English were the only remaining powers competing for supremacy
in coastal Maharashtra.
   Before turning to Malwa and the north, let us briefly carry forward
the story of the Hingnikar Bhonsles. In 1720, when Bajirao was
appointed Peshwa, Raghuji Bhonsle was the leader of a large Maratha
band and was promptly confirmed in a grant for the Berar region (now
north-eastern Maharashtra), and he agreed to keep a body of 5,000
horse in the service of Shahu. In the 1720s, he was most likely operating
in Berar and eastwards in Gondwana. In the 1730s, Raghuji hired his
band out to various factions of the Gond kingdom whose capital was at
Nagpur. By 1740, Raghuji had usurped the power, but kept the Gond
king a prisoner, as titular head. Thereby, Raghuji claimed status
independent from Shahu or the Peshwa, and, as we shall see, was one of
the most consistent opponents of the Peshwa. Through the 1730s,
Raghuji pushed raiding and tribute collection east and north-east, until
the area included coastal Orissa and all of Gondwana. (By the 1740s,
his units were attacking Bengal.)!?
   The main front, however, in the 1730s was Malwa and the areas
beyond — the Ganges and Jumna valleys, Delhi, and Rajasthan. The
Marathas fielded larger armies toward mid-decade; often Shinde,
Holkar, Pawar, and the Peshwa’s brother were operating separate, but
coordinated campaigns. The main Mughal commander, Jai Singh, lost
the war of movement              and in March          1733    offered terms — cash
immediately and the assignment of twenty-eight parganas in Malwa in
lieu of chauth and sardeshmukhi. When Delhi would not confirm this
treaty, the war in Malwa continued.                  Holkar’s army, for example,
passed right through Malwa in 1735, took the fort of Bundi (in
north-west Malwa), and extended raids into Rajasthan.?°
   In 1735, the Mughals assembled a huge, unwieldy army, including

xIV, Xxx, and xxxrv. The narrative of both campaigns is pieced together in Dighe, Peshwa
Bayirao, 43-83, 154-91.
   19 Wink, Land and Sovereignty, 1o8—og. The terror which these Maratha raids provoked
in Bengal is well described in the Maharashtra Purana, a contemporary Bengali text. See E. C.
Dimmock and P. C. Gupta (trans. and annot.), The Maharashtra Purana: An Eighteenth-
Century Bengali Historical Text (Honolulu, 1965).
  20 See Dighe, Peshwa Bajirao, 112-1 5.


                                            124
                BAJI   RAO    I’S NORTHERN          EXPANSION

contingents from Rajasthan, and entered Malwa. This campaign
showed that the Mughals had not evolved a strategy which could defeat
the Maratha wars of movement. As they had for more than four
decades, the Marathas cut off grain supplies, prevented the Mughal
army from foraging the countryside, and refused decisive battle. The
Mughal army starved; finally, the commander bought off the Marathas
with a large cash tribute. In these middle years of the 1730s, the Delhi
court vacillated between a “‘peace”’ party, which wanted to appease the
Marathas, and a “war” party.?! Plans for another campaign against the
Marathas, thus, coincided with suggestions for friendly meetings
between the Emperor and Bajirao. In 1735-36, Bajirao spent much
time in negotiations, through intermediaries, with the Mughal court.
All these negotiations failed, because Bajirao kept increasing the
demands — finally including a hereditary state for himself, jagir grants
for his most loyal leaders, immediate cash payments, full control over
Malwa, including the Rajput and Afghan zamindars, the right to
nominate all the Mughal officials of the Deccan, and personal rights to
 5 percent of the revenue of the Deccan.?? By May, Bajirao, without a
treaty, returned to the Deccan and prepared for war.
    The campaign of 1737 was indecisive, though Bajirao attacked Delhi,
even briefly holding the Emperor to ransom. It was in the following
year, 1738, that the issue was settled. The Mughal Emperor called in
the Nizam from the Deccan and supported him with zamindar levies
from Malwa, some troops from Rajasthan, and an army from Delhi.
The huge force moved from Delhi to Bhopal in eastern Malwa (see
Map 7). There — in a pattern perhaps boring by now — it had its supplies
cut off, came to a stop, and began to starve. As famine worsened in the
Nizam’s camp, the zamindar and Rajput contingents melted away.
Negotiations ended with the landmark treaty of Bhopal in January
1739.23 The Nizam granted the whole subah of Malwa to the Peshwa,
and ceded complete sovereignty of all lands between the Narmada and
the Chambal rivers. The Nizam agreed to try to obtain a large cash
tribute from the Mughal Emperor. Note that Bajirao did not get all that
he had asked for in the previous year, principally an independent
   21 The period of the conquest of Malwa is well discussed in J. N. Sarkar, “The
Mughal-Maratha contest for Malwa, 1728-1741,” Islamic Culture, 6 (1932), 535-52. Also
interesting are the letters of the Nizam to the Mughal Emperor, translated in P. Setu
Madhava Rao, Eighteenth Century Deccan (Bombay, 1963), 139-48.
   22 Sardesai (ed.), Selections from the Peshwa Daftar (Bombay, 1934-40), XV, 93-96.
   23 Tbid., 86.