

                                             Dr
               FAMILY     RESPONSES     TO   INVASION

consolidation. This was not the case, but Shahu had the good judge-
ment to ally with Balaji Vishwanath and, later, his son, who were such
leaders. This solution is a common one in many monarchical systems,
and was common enough in India in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. The vazier, diwan, or peshwa led the armies.
   The Maratha case is interesting because the new peshwa brought not
just charismatic leadership and negotiating ability, but two other
crucial requirements for consolidation. First, he patronized other
Chitpavan Brahmins who formed the core of a rapidly expanding
literate elite who filled jobs as tax collectors and administrators.
Records-keeping was spotty before, but quickly regularized thereafter.
This performance-based Brahmin elite was intermarried with and loyal
to the peshwas and provided not just administrators, but a surprising
number of military leaders in the coming decades. The second require-
ment which Balaji Vishwanath brought to Shahu was banking and
credit facilities. As we have seen, Maharashtra was little monetized in
the Shivaji period and had been largely destroyed since. Shahu’s
government, however, badly needed credit to raise armies and provide
for regular government functions from harvest to harvest. Balaji
Vishwanath brought in several banking families, exclusively Brahmin,
and their credit was crucial to Shahu’s bid for the throne. Especially
after the Mughal grant of 1719, these families began to advance money
against future revenue receipts. As we shall see, within a decade the
system had all the elements of a sophisticated government finance
system.
   None of these should be taken as final solutions to kingship in the
Maratha polity. The very patterns of consolidation under Shahu and
Balaji Vishwanath were fraught with problems. Here, let us suggest
just two. First, the Peshwa controlled patronage into military saran-
jams. He already controlled the Brahmin administrative and banking
elite. It will come as no surprise that he would soon emerge as de facto
ruler of the Maratha polity. Second, the creation of Thanjur and
Kolapur states furthered the ethos that conquest would be shared,
divided between the king and the military leader. Language to this
effect was found in the Mughal grant of 1719, and within a decade
leaders demanded a division of the new conquests in Malwa and
Gujarat.



                                  113
                                   CHAP      Minas

 BAJI RAO I’S NORTHERN EXPANSION
               (1720-1740)

Balaji Vishwanath died in 1720. Against the objections of other
ministers, Shahu appointed Balaji’s son, Bijirao. Here we meet, after
Shivaji, the most charismatic and dynamic leader in Maratha history.
He was only twenty years old and already had a reputation for rapid
decisions and a passion for military adventure. Bajirao had been on the
expedition to Delhi in 1719, and was convinced that the Mughal
Empire was breaking up and could not resist a Maratha drive to the
north into Malwa and beyond. This was the major theme of the next
twenty years of his ceaseless military and administrative activity.
   This judgement by Bajirao was quite correct. Let us consider the
various regions of the Mughal Empire, starting in the north and
working south. Ever since his appointment to the Punjab in 1713,
Abdul Samad Khan had sent little information to Delhi beyond the
yearly tribute. By the time his son succeeded him in 1726, the Punjab
was, functionally, an independent, tribute-paying state (with its own
problems with the Sikhs). Awadh followed the same course. Sagdat
Khan had been appointed governor in 1722, and independently
removed mansabdars and changed jagirs. Four years later, the attempt
to remove him resulted in his taking possession of Awadh. Thereafter,
the province paid some tribute, but there was no Mughal authority
inside it. In 1727 in Bengal, the son of Murshid Quli Khan succeeded to
his father’s governorship, and the province became functionally
independent.! The Rajput states, always internally autonomous,
expanded in the 1720s. Both Jodhpur and Jaipur took over new areas,
previously Mughal, on their borders. Even in areas close to Delhi,
Mughal control was tenuous. The Afghans from Farrukhabad,
between Delhi and Awadh, carved out a small kingdom, and by 1728
were attacking the Bundelas immediately to the south. Jats, in fact,
controlled much of the area surrounding Delhi. If we look further
south in Malwa, authority was already disputed with the Marathas. In
Gujarat, from 1724 onwards, each successive Mughal governor had to