

                                            116
                BAJI RAO       I’S NORTHERN          EXPANSION

(south-west Khandesh) and soon established bases in southern
Gujarat. An especially able leader, Damaji Gaikwad, rose rapidly in the
service of the Dabhades and was, early in this crucial decade, leading
the Dabhade forces. His son, Pilaji Jadhavrao, succeeded to the
command on his father’s death in 1721. The Maratha raids on Gujarat
encountered a series of ineffectual, short-term Mughal governors, each
successor militarily challenged by his predecessor. Maratha leaders
were typically courted by both.
  The Dabhade—Gaikwad band was far from alone in raiding Gujarat.
Two new groups rapidly emerged, one led by Kanthaji Kadam Bande,
the other by Udaji Pawar. Both were based in Khandesh, both raided
Malwa and Gujarat. The distinctive feature of these two bands was
their personal loyalty to the Peshwa, Bajirao, who used their forces to
extract a treaty in 1722 for half the chauth of the province from one of
the hapless Mughal governors. He assigned a portion of the collection
to Udaji Pawar. Pilaji Gaikwad, less tied to the Peshwa, formed links
with the local armed elites and the local Raja of Rajpipla and, thus, had
safe bases with allies inside Gujarat. There the situation stood at the
opening of the campaigning season in 1723.
  If we turn to Malwa, there were some differences. Both Udaji Pawar
and Kadam Bande, whom we have just met, also raided Malwa from
their bases in Khandesh. Two new leaders, Bhikaji Shinde and Malhar
Rao Holkar, began in service of these two, but within a couple of years
were leading bands of their own.
  Let us look, in some detail, at the career of Malhar Rao Holkar for its
illustration of the rapid advancement possible in the period. Holkar’s
early service was under Kadam Bande in Khandesh, starting as a
teenager in 1715. He served on Balaji Vishwanath’s expedition to Delhi
in 1719 and fought in the Battle of Balapur against the Nizam in 1720.
At about the same time, he took service with the Raja of Barwani (in
eastern Gujarat). This was not uncommon; Maratha soldiers and bands
often hired themselves out in local disputes throughout the 1720s.
   Holkar petitioned the young Peshwa, Bajirao, to join his service in
1721, citing disagreements with Kadam Bande, and was accepted, first
as a simple soldier.* A few years later, he was the leader of a small unit,

  3 V. G. Dighe, Peshwa Bajirao I and the Maratha Expansion (Bombay, 1944); 27. See also
Yusef Husein, The First Nizam; Life and Times of Nizam-ul-Mulk, Asaf Jah I (Bombay,
second edition, 1963), 143-46.
  4 Sardesai (ed.) Peshwa Daftar (Bombay, 1934—40), xvi, letter 1.

                                          1T7.
                          THE   MARATHAS        1600-1818

and we find him mediating an on-going dispute between the Peshwa
and Kadam Bande.
  Personal contact with the Peshwa and rapid advancement coincided
in the years 1723-29. Holkar accompanied the Peshwa on his campaign
in 1723-24, and was deputed to settle the affairs of Bhopal State in
eastern Malwa.> By 1725, Holkar’s command was 500 men. Though
the Marathas were relatively unsuccessful in defeating the Mughals in
this period, Holkar was given a vague saranjam grant (a military grant
for the maintainance of troops) to several unconquered districts in
Malwa in August 1727.°
   It was in the battle of Palkhed (1728) that Holkar particularly
distinguished himself by cutting off Mughal supplies and communi-
cation. The Peshwa greatly raised his status, in part as a check on the
less sure loyalty of the Pawar brothers. Within four years, Holkar was
leading a contingent of several thousand cavalry, personally loyal to
the Peshwa. His reward was a substantial portion of western Malwa in
the “division” declared by the Peshwa in 1732.
   If we ask why the Peshwa chose Holkar, the answer is at least in part
because of the general situation in Malwa in these years. Except when
the Peshwa personally led his troops and assembled bands into Malwa
(1723-24), discipline was generally low. Even after this quite successful
expedition, discipline rapidly broke down. Three commanders were
deputed to collect tribute and set up some sort of administration.
Instead, they hired themselves out in the faction disputes of various
Rajput zamindars of western Malwa — Amjhera, Jhabua, and Sailana.
This situation says much about the Mughal loss of control of their
zamindars, but it says as much about the difficulties of the Peshwa in
establishing control over the Maratha bands. When he found a loyal
leader, like Holkar, he promoted him. The important general point
here is that the founders of most of the major Maratha houses of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries — Nagpur (Bhonsles), Akalkot (the
Hingnikar Bhonsles), Dhar and Dewas (Pawars), Indore (Holkars),
Ujjain (Shindes), and Baroda (Gaikwads) — were all teenage soldiers
whose ability and loyalty were recognized by either Shahu or the
Peshwa and were rapidly promoted. This new elite did not, we should
emphasize, come from families which had been major commanders
under the Deccan sultanates. They cannot really be called ‘““deshmukh”
 > Ibid., x, letter 27.
 6 V. V. Thakur (ed.), Holkarsabica Itihasacin Sadhanen (Indore, 1944), 1, 10.