

                                            127
                       THE     MARATHAS         1600-1818

the Peshwa wrote to them yearly, demanding tribute.2”7 By the
mid-1730s, many had, in fact, paid tribute for several years, and the
regular bookkeeping suggests halting movement towards predict-
ability on both sides. As the Maratha patrols regularly cut off roads and
disrupted communications between garrisons and towns, the Mughals
were no longer providing basic security of life and property. Some
traders and town-based groups began dealing with the Marathas in the
hope of restoring it.
   After the Treaty of Bhopal, everyone knew the order had changed.
Many zamindars were called to witness the Maratha gains. Immedi-
ately, tribute was regularized from many of the zamindars of eastern
Malwa, with, for example, a Maratha collector resident at his court.
Note, however, that the Marathas, at this point, assessed no land,
collected no taxes, had no direct contact with the village headmen,
heard no court cases, and imposed no fines. The collector’s sole job was
to “ask” these large zamindars for the negotiated tribute each year.?8
On the whole, the system worked poorly; zamindars were usually in
arrears, and generally paid only when threatened with a Maratha
main-force army. As we shall see, this system was replaced within a
decade by a much more elaborate and information-intensive admin-
istration.
   Several features of the process of “conquest” are noteworthy. First,
conquest began in the countryside, not in the cities or the major forts,
which the Mughals held for decades. Second, the early forays, which
gathered up “wealth on hand” ended only with the legal recognition of
Maratha rights in Malwa (the Treaty of Bhopal, 1738). Third, these
rights quickly translated into agreements with local zamindars for a
yearly tribute. The Marathas thus made little attempt to displace local
powers. We should, in these early years, see Maratha control as very
limited, power as diffuse, and local lineages very much in control of
their lands and forts. Fourth, there were the beginnings of a central-
ized,   performance-based          civilian     revenue     administration,       loyal
directly to the Peshwa. Information was starting to come in from the
countryside of Malwa. Fifth, this process, which we have examined in
Malwa, was typical of all areas of Maratha conquest, though the stages
might occur at a somewhat earlier or later date. In Gujarat, for
   27 See, for example, the receipts in H.R. 179 (1731) and H.R. 154 (1732).
  28 See, for example, the tribute agreements in H.R. 165 and H.R. 185. These concern the
tribute of the Afghan state of Bhopal in south-east Malwa.

                                          128
                BAJI   RAO   I’S NORTHERN         EXPANSION

example, this phase of establishing stabilized ties with local lineages
was largely completed in the early 1730s. In Khandesh, legal recogni-
tion had come much earlier (1719), and the stabilized tribute phase was
passed by the mid-1720:.
  Our second theme of the 1720s to 1740s is change in the nature of
warfare. We have seen the general failure of the Mughal mode of
fighting. The Mughals relied on heavy cavalry, large slow-moving
armies, and decisive plains battles. Forts were places of strength and
retreat, cities the bases of administration.       After the Marathas    dis-
covered that the weakness of Mughal armies was supply, they raised
the art of raiding warfare to a high art. The Maratha bands generally
ignored forts, ransomed        cities, and drew    the Mughal   armies into
unfavorable areas of the plains, where they cut them off from supplies
and reinforcements. The only Mughal response was to raise ever larger
armies, which were, in fact, more vulnerable to the Maratha mobile
wartare; these grand armies were broken up by the Maratha’s raids on
the home areas of various commanders.
   There were two further changes in warfare, both just beginning in
the period. The first was on the Maratha side; armies were getting
bigger and more professional. In the 1700-20 period, it was rare for a
Maratha band to be more than 5,000 men. In the 1720-40 period, these
bands   often   coalesced    to armies   of 10,000-20,000.    Feeding   these
numbers was a continuing problem. The old “‘live off the land”’ tactics
were less possible. Also, more and more of these soldiers were
professionals who had to be housed during the monsoon. The mid-
17308 was the first time that, for example, major bands stayed in Malwa
through the monsoon, rather than returning to Maharashtra. Thus,
Maratha military units began to be more expensive, and expenses could
only be met with cash, not grants in kind, in the Deccan. As we shall
see, all of this pushed the development of revenue administration and
banking and credit. The other significant change was on the side of the
Marathas’ opponents. This was in artillery. The Mughals by the 1740s
had long experience in cannon. Developments in casting produced
field guns somewhat lighter and certainly more accurate than available
in previous decades. The Marathas feared them; they, for example, did
not want to engage the Nizam at the Battle of Bhopal (1738), because of
his artillery. Developments in artillery were coming quickly outside
India. When Nadir Shah invaded North India (1739), his forces used
relatively rapid-firing, small-bore guns against cavalry for the first time
                                     129
                         THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818