


                                         I20
                 BAJI    RAO    I’S NORTHERN            EXPANSION

none of Bajirao’s attempts to control Gujarat. Bajirao’s forces finally
trapped the Nizam at Palkhed (twenty miles west of Aurangabad) in
the dry hills near the Godavari river, cut off supplies, and forced the
Nizam to terms on 6 March 1728.
   Before discussing this turning point, let us catch up on events in
Malwa and Gujarat, which also yielded important treaty gains within a
year of Palkhed. In Malwa, recall that the major leaders were Shinde,
Holkar, and the Pawar brothers. The Mughals fought back relatively
successfully until the Peshwa brought the army, fresh from the
Palkhed victory, into Malwa after the monsoon of 1728. The Marathas
defeated the garrison forces of the sarkar capital of Ujjain and all other
Mughal forces in south-west Malwa. The Mughal subadar (head of the
province) was killed in action. The Peshwa travelled slowly north
through the western half of Malwa collecting tribute, reaching
Rajasthan in February 1729.!°
   Gujarat was more complicated. In the early 1720s, as we have seen,
there was a multi-party competition between leaders of raiding bands,
only one or two loyal to the Peshwa. The Nizam negotiated with
several Maratha leaders, and, for a time, allied with Kadam Bande. The
situation shifted quickly. By 1726, both of the leaders who had been
loyal to the Peshwa, Udaji Pawar and Kadam Bande, had sided with
the Dabhade/Gaikwad faction which opposed him. (Recall that in
these years Bajirao Peshwa was in the Karnatak on fruitless expeditions
with Fateh Singh Bhonsle.) The general pattern was that the Mughals
controlled the cities and the forts, and the Maratha bands roved the
countryside, collecting what they could.!! Trade at Surat sharply
dropped in this decade and was never to recover."
   Bajirao sent his brother, Chimnaji Ballal, into Gujarat with a large
army. The Mughal governor prepared fresh agreements in 1727 and
1728, which gave the Peshwa and Shahu chauth, sardeshmukhi, and
babti — in effect, 60 percent of the revenue. This move, of course,
undercut similar independent agreements which the Dabhade family
had extracted from the Mughals in previous years. As we have seen,
1727-28 was the height of the attempt by the Nizam to place a rival to
Shahu on the throne, and the Dabhade/Gaikwad group from Gujarat
   10 §. N. Gordon, “The slow conquest: administrative integration of Malwa into the
Maratha Empire, 1720-1760,” Modern Asian Studies, 2, 1 (1977), 8-10.
   11 Wink, Land and Sovereignty, 114-27.
   12 Ashin Das Gupta, “Trade and politics in eighteenth century India,” in D. S. Richards,
Islam and the Trade of Asia (Philadelphia, 1970), 187-96.

                                           MePArt
                         THE     MARATHAS           1600-1818

were active Nizam allies, being Shahu’s competitors for control of
Gujarat. After Palkhed, Shahu withdrew all support from the faction
and sanctioned expulsion of Dabhade, Gaikwad, and Kadam Bande
from Gujarat. The Peshwa’s forces campaigned against all three and
defeated their combined forces in 1731.
   To look ahead a few years, the Dabhade family rapidly declined and,
within two decades, after another rebellion against the Peshwa’s
authority, disappeared from Maratha history, another victim of
factional struggle.'? The Gaikwad family, however, survived, with half
the chauth and sardeshmukhi of Gujarat, perhaps kept by Shahu as a
balance to the rising power of Bajirao. By 1737, Gaikwad effectively
ruled the province, with Mughal rule reduced to the city of Ahmada-
bad.'* Subsequent decades show the family absorbing, bit by bit, all of
the Dabhade rights, in return for loyalty to the Peshwa, who himself
retained half the revenue of the province. The story of the Kadam
Bande family is simpler. The Gaikwads expelled them from Gujarat,
and they faded to become a small state (and subsequently a princely
state) on the border between Gujarat and Malwa.!5
   What, then, were the results of the milestone period between the
battle of Palkhed (1728) and the end of the Dabhade rebellion (1731)?
Palkhed resulted in the following concessions by the Nizam:
    (1)    recognition of Shahu as the sole Maratha monarch;
    (2)    recognition of his right to chauth and sardeshmukhi of the
           Deccan;
    (3)    reinstating the Maratha collectors who had been driven out;
    (4)    agreement to pay the outstanding arrears of chauth and
           sardeshmukhi.
The implications, however, were much more important. First, in
the military sphere, Bajirao had defeated the best-equipped Mughal
army of the day under its best general. The tactics of cutting off