

 | J. N. Sarkar, A Study of Eighteenth Century India (Calcutta, 1976), 1, 167.

                                          114
                                                                                       ‘(Yo areyg [7861 ‘p10jxQ] aurduq
ppgsny aga fo spy uy ‘qiqepy uvzs] wosy paiedepe) ozZ1 *9 ues99q ayi Jo yyso0U aitdurg yeysnyy ayi Jo saoutacig  “9 dey
                             40|06                             werediinsewif                    39/08
                                                                          AGE                                             CEES LA Ss
                                                                     “                                                                             eandelig
                  sali OO€                                                a            ere:                                      Nv                Q3 Gi:
                                                                     ;                                                              euepig                       vIs
                  w4OOS
                                                                                                                                                                       NV/ISVIV
                                                                                                 je                         Pal                    seBeupewuyy
                                                                              YVLSVE                                       VeEPOD      Yy
                                                                                                                             peqebueiny
                                                                                                                 “Yanoo
                                          aie   ZY         {                                   andueying              “andypuit.
                                     Ge                                                        HYV9030?                          re
                                                                                                                                            epe'
                                                                                               VHYVS
                                                                                                   |FavavHviiv
                                                                eietieg
                                                                fe
                                                     oan
                                                      AS
                                                                                   pedeueiiy
                         THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

displace his predecessor militarily, as each tried to make the province
an independent kingdom. By 1724, the Nizam had defeated two
Mughal armies, and returned to the Deccan as an independent ruler.
The days of huge imperial armies, well-stocked from imperial treasu-
ries, were over. The Marathas would now compete with provincial
governors with aspirations of their own and whatever resources they
could muster.
   All this was, however, not obvious in 1720 and Bajirao had to
convince the inner circle on a number of questions. Would the
direction of Maratha expansion be primarily north into Gujarat and
Malwa or south into the Karnatak? Would Marathas be friend or foe to
the Nizam, Mughal subadar of the Deccan? How would the largely
independent Maratha forces be controlled? How could a sound
administration be set up? How could expansion be financed, since
Maharashtra was still largely destroyed?
   Within months, Bajirao’s answers had caught the imagination of
Shahu and the inner circle. Invade Gujarat and Malwa, because the
Mughals were too weak to resist. The south could wait. The Nizam
could also wait; he had an interest in seeing Delhi weakened. Shahu
could regain control of the independent Maratha bands by Bajirao
personally leading and organizing the raids on the north. Let the
administration develop as new lands were conquered, and let the new
conquests fill the government treasury. Push the frontiers to the north
and give the heartland of Maharashtra time to recover. It was these
policies which prevailed.?
   Once this plan had been adopted, the following decade saw various
Maratha bands attacking on two and often three fronts during each
campaigning season. As earlier, bands tended to specialize in the
direction of their attack and retreat to safe bases during the monsoon.
It thus makes more sense to survey the main leaders than provinces or
regions. Let us begin with the Dabhade family (Kanderao, the father,
and Trimbukrao, the son), which operated out of bases in Baglana
   2 Satish Chandra, Parties and Politics at the Mughal Court, 1707-1740 (Delhi, third
edition, 1982), 190-91. For the period of rapid Maratha expansion, many documents have
been printed (in Marathi). See G. S$. Sardesai (ed.), Selections from the Peshwa Daftar
(Bombay, 1931), xt, xIv. Research on the documents of an individual village in the Pune
district suggests that agricultural recovery proceeded rather quickly, In the Maratha system,
basic agricultural revenue directly reflected acreage cultivated. In this particular village,
revenue and acreage had doubled between the worst period of Aurangzeb’s invasions (1698)
and 1724. It would double again by 1730. Harold H. Mann, The Social Framework of
Agriculture (Bombay, 1967), 126-28.