

  ‘3 The Dabhades, however, were not reduced to common military service, as they might
well have been a few decades earlier. Rather, they retained extensive “nested” rights in the
area of Talegaon (about twenty miles morth-west of Pune) which included several village
headmanships, a garrison at Induri, and considerable inam land. See Frank Perlin’s research
on this family archive, in “Money use in late pre-colonial India” in J. F. Richards (ed.), The
Imperial Monetary System of Mughal India (Oxford, 1987), 274-75.
   14 Dighe, Peshwa Bajirao, 42.
 _15 The stories of the smaller states on the western rim of Malwa are covered in Raghubir
oa Malwa in Transition, or a Century of Anarchy: The First Phase, 1698-1765 (Bombay,
1960).

                                             he
                 BAJI    RAO     I’S NORTHERN            EXPANSION

supplies and rapid movement had defeated the Nizam’s far superior
artillery.!° This same theme was being played out in Malwa. The
Mughal governors tried to contain the Maratha bands throughout
1726-28, but failed. Periodically, they were cut off from supplies in
the field. Second, the victory had settled the issue of Shahu’s legiti-
macy and authority. The treaty of Warna, 1731, created Kolhapur
State, the line of Tarabai becoming junior and non-threatening
holders of estates and rights in southern Maharashtra.!7 Third, Baji-
rao’s series of victories resulted in a serious challenge to his increasing
power. The defeat of the Gaikwad/Dabhade/Kadam Bande faction in
1731, however, meant the end of factional resistance at court for more
than two      decades.     De facto, it meant          that the Peshwa          ruled the
Maratha polity.
   In the next decade, we shall see how this consolidation of power
resulted in patronage of new leaders (which — as always — had its own
problems) and the development of an effective tax-collecting bureauc-
racy in many areas. Let us, first, summarize the main political and
military events up to 1740, then return to a more systematic discussion
of trends and patterns.
   For Bajirao, the campaigning season of 1733 was spent in besieging
Janjira, the extremely strong sea fort on the Konkan coast (see Map 1).
Recall that the Sidis (Abyssinian Muslims) had occupied this fort for
more than a hundred years and held it against all comers, including
Shivaji, the Portuguese, Dutch, and English. In the years after Shivaji’s
death, the Sidis had expanded their landholdings to include much of the
central and northern Konkan coastal plains. (The main competitor of
the Sidis was the Angrias, a Maratha family with sea forts and ships,
based in the southern Konkan.) Bajirao’s forces did not, however, take
Janjira, though they captured much of the surrounding area; a favor-
able treaty in 1736 gave the Marathas some control over virtually all of
the Sidi’s lands. Major warfare continued in the Konkan in the later
half of the 1730s. In a large, multipronged campaign headed by the
Peshwa’s brother, the Marathas attacked the Portuguese. Salsette,
Bassein, and Chaul all fell to the Marathas.!8 The apparent results were
   16 Many areas under the control of the Nizam actually began to pay chauth in this period.
See Z. Malik, ““Chauth-collection in the Subah of Hyderabad 1726-1748,” Indian Economic
and Social History Review, 8, 4 (December, 1971), 395-414.
  17 Kishore, Tarabai, 164.
  18 The documents of the Janjira campaign are found in Sardesai (ed.), Peshwa Daftar
(Bombay, 1934—40), x11 and 111. The documents of the Bassein campaign are scattered in x11,