

  15 Tbid., 28.


                                          143
                       THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

assessed in a Mughal manner, paid in the customary Muslim months.
The Marathas even retained the Mughal differential transit duties,
which charged Hindu traders double their Muslim counterparts.'®
Maratha demands never exceeded the pre-existing Mughal settlement.
As we have seen, the Marathas gave replacement sanad papers to
various local grantees; the duties and rights were described in Mughal
terms. When the Marathas established the basic apparatus of law and
order — courts, rural and urban police — both the terminology and
function resembled their Mughal counterparts.
   Maratha Malwa, however, was not simply an extension of Mughal
Malwa. Urban patterns changed considerably. The Marathas did not
simply take over the Mughal sarkar towns. Generally, they settled at
towns which had not been as important under the Mughals — Bhilsa
and Sironj, for example — rather than Mughal Sarangpur and Shah-
jahanpur. The Mughal trade from Agra never recovered. The Maratha
leaders patronized new capitals, such as Gwalior and Indore. The
credit network shifted from Mughal Agra to Pune, and the new
Brahmin bankers moved the revenue south, rather than north. The new
trade route for Chanderi silk (from Malwa), shifted to Pune and
Bombay. Rural patterns were more complicated. Many big zamindars
suffered; some had been entirely displaced, and many had lost a
substantial part of their territory. In contrast, others successfully
resisted all Maratha incursions and paid only an occasional tribute.
Overall, the pattern of Maratha control remained patchy. When we
think of the ‘‘texture”’ of these provinces — Malwa, Gujarat, Khandesh
— throughout the eighteenth century, we should be aware that there
were many local armed lineages which were not destroyed or replaced.
Authority varied from fully administered areas with detailed revenue
settlements     to areas     with   a number       of small,     armed     lineages to
permanently recalcitrant zamindars defying any Maratha authority
from the walls of a strong fort.
  During these years of administrative development there were several
paths of social mobility. First were the revenue collectors who
produced the detailed revenue documents we have just considered. In
the Peshwa areas, these men were mainly Chitpavan Brahmins (like the
Peshwa), though Saraswat and Deshashtas continued to fill a smaller
number of posts. The path was separate from that of military service.
   '6 See Pune Daftar, Prant Azmas Khandesh Rumal, no. 196, which contains both the rates
and records of actual collection.


                                          144
                    CONQUEST          TO   ADMINISTRATION

For example, the fifty or so Brahmin administrators from the Peshwa’s
area of Malwa are not found on the list of jagir grants; they, thus, did
not move from administration to command of troops.!” Incidentally,
this is one of the important ways that the Maratha administration
differed from the Mughal, which had a unified civilian/military rank
and pay structure. Very little research has been done on these adminis-
trative Brahmin families, so we do not know how much they over-
lapped, for example, with the Pune banking families.!8
   Outside the Peshwa’s area, the situation was different. In the new
Malwa “‘states”’ of Shinde and Holkar (following the division of 1732),
the new administrators were specifically not Chitpavan, but Saraswat,
a subcaste originally from Goa, who did not intermarry with Chit-
pavans. They benefitted greatly from this service and many families
emerged as wealthy holders of rights, both in Maharashtra and Malwa,
in the nineteenth century. In the other new “‘states” — the Gaikwad in
Gujarat and the Bhonsle family at Nagpur — the administration was,
once again, not Chitpavan. Both families used C.K.P.s (Chandrseniya
Kayastha Prabhu), a non-Brahmin, Marathi-speaking writer caste, in
their bureaucracy, and they prospered throughout the eighteenth
century.
   What of the cultural expression of these newly wealthy families? Let
us start with personal consumption patterns. There was increased
demand for luxury items, especially those not produced in Maha-
rashtra. These included Kashmiri shawls, and silks from Malwa, the
Ganges valley, and Bengal. We also find examples of inlaid stone,
typical of Agra and bidri work from Hyderabad. Objects for personal
use in silver, brass, copper, and ivory — mirrors, ink pots, pan boxes,
horse trappings — of great grace and beauty were both imported from
the north and produced for these families.!? The families maintained
poets, bards, and singers. Whole new schools and styles of painting