

in India. These swivel guns, mounted on camels, were spectacularly
effective.2? Developments toward more mobile, faster firing artillery
were progressing even more quickly in Europe. There is evidence in the
Peshwa’s correspondence that he was aware of his lack of superior
artillery; he was certainly aware that Europeans had it. None of this
solved the problem of how to integrate artillery into a cavalry-oriented
army.
   The final important theme of this period is social mobility. We have
already discussed many of the “losers” among Maratha families — the
rapid decline of the Dabhades, Yadavs, Kadam Bande, the Pawars —
and the Maratha “‘winners”’ — Shinde, Holkar, the Gaikwad, and the
Bhonsles of Nagpur. The dominant variables (except in the case of the
Bhonsles of Nagpur) were personal loyalty to Bajirao and proven
military leadership. Advancement came extremely quickly in this
period. The other big “winners” were Brahmins, also patronized by
Bajirao. To administer the newly conquered areas of Khandesh,
Gujarat, and Malwa, the Peshwa needed, quickly, a literate bureauc-
racy with       experience.      He    called    on     kinsmen,      other    Chitpavan
Brahmins, and, less so, other Brahmin                   communities       (Saraswat and
Deshasta); many of these families had served the Deccan kingdoms for
generations in low and medium level administrative positions. Hun-
dreds were recruited in the 1720-40 period, and their wealth built
much of what is now the old city of Pune.>°
   The third group to benefit from Bajirao’s expansion were the
bankers. Most were Brahmins, intermarried with and overlapping the
administrative families; they loaned money to the Peshwa against
revenue receipts, and made larger loans when the Peshwa needed to
raise an army or celebrate a large festival.>! They also received deposits

  29 Sarkar, Nadir Shah, 53-54.
  *© Their increasing wealth and position also gave an orthodox tone to the city. Bajirao
himself experienced this. Sometime in the late 1720s, Bajirao met and fell in love with a
Muslim dancing girl, named Mastani. She was a trained singer and also an accomplished rider.
She accompanied Bajirao on all his campaigns, and bore him a son in 1734. The orthodox
Brahmin community strongly objected to the attachment (though Bajirao also had a Hindu
wife and sons by her) and forced her to live outside the city. The community refused the
thread ceremony to Bajirao’s son, because of his connection to Mastani. In 1739, Bajirao’s
son and brother, at the instigation of the Chitpavan community, imprisoned her, when
Bajirao was on campaign; this broke his heart and he died within a few months. Mastani died
a few days later, whether by suicide is unknown.      See G. S. Sardesai, New History of the
Marathas (Bombay, second impression, 1957), 190-91.                                 :
  31 When Bajirao died, he was substantially, though not crushingly, in debt to the banking
families. The invasions had been expensive and most provinces were just barely becoming