

                                          132
                     CONQUEST          TO    ADMINISTRATION

Deccan.? The following year, there were negotiations between the
Mughal Emperor, Nana Saheb, and Alivardi Khan and a joint expedi-
tion against Raghuji Bhonsle. In 1743, Shahu negotiated a compromise
between the Peshwa and Raghuji, by which the later was “‘given”
Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa.> Each year, between 1745 and 1751,
Raghuji’s contingents raided Orissa, and, less successfully, attacked
Bengal or Bihar, against the determined opposition of Alivardi Khan.
The importance of these incidents is a further example of the complex-
ity of the Maratha political system. While Raghuji Bhonsle claimed
authority independent from the Peshwa, he still acknowledged the
authority of the king, Shahu. Still, Shahu could not dictate a solution to
the problem        of “‘spheres of influence,’            but, instead, negotiated a
compromise exactly parallel to the division of Malwa a decade earlier.
   By 1751, both Raghuji Bhonsle and Alivardi Khan were ready for
peace. Alivardi Khan was an old man, watching factional conflict
already forming. Raghuji Bhonsle was also ready to regularize tribute.
The treaty appointed a pro-Maratha governor of Orissa, set 120,000 Rs
as the annual chauth payment of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa, and
established the boundary between Bengal and Orissa. In effect, Orissa
became a Maratha province. In spite of increasing European influence
and conflicts in Bengal, there were virtually no Maratha raids on the
province in the 17503.                  |
   The second “frontier” of the 1740s and 1750s was the Karnatak.
Recall that the Nizam lost the Battle of Bhopal to the Marathas in 1738.
Thereafter, he moved south to consolidate his Deccan kingdom. He
put down a brief rebellion by his son and — with a large army — set
about throwing out the Maratha collectors trying to extract chauth in
much of the Karnatak.* With the focus of the new Peshwa, Nana
Saheb, in the north, through most of the 1740s the only leader
operating in the area was Raghuji Bhonsle, who, as we have just seen,
soon shifted his focus to Bengal and Orissa. Thus, by the mid-1740s,
the Karnatak passed back into the control of the Nizam.
   Everyone knew, however, that the death of the old Nizam would

  2 In this discussion of Raghuji Bhonsle’s raids and the subsequent negotiations, I have
followed B. C. Ray, Orissa under the Marathas (1751-1803) (Allahabad, 1960), 10-20.
  3 Yusef Husein, The First Nizam: Life and Times of Nizam-ul-Mulk, Asaf Jah I (Bombay,
second edition, 1963), 209-10.
  4 Fora reading of these events different from the English or French records, see the Tarike
Rahat Afza, a contemporary chronicle, translated in P. Setu Rao, Eighteenth Century Deccan
(Bombay, 1963), 191-219.

                                             5)
                         THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

produce an immediate succession crisis which would affect much of
South India. On his death in 1748, both the Nizam’s son and his
nephew raised armies and fought. From 1748 to 1758, the various
succession disputes of the heirs of the Nizam became part of a larger
war between the English and the French for the control of the Coro-
mandel coast. (So far in the narrative, we have not mentioned the
French. This is because they were significant traders only on India’s
eastern coast and had not — to this point — played any role in Maratha
history. Unlike any of the other European powers, the French, in
support of the Nizam, approached Maharashtra from the east by
land.)
   The Marathas fought only one major campaign against the Nizam
in this period. It began with the Marathas ransoming Aurangabad, in
northern Maharashtra, which was the Nizam’s capital. The next year,
Bussy, the French general, brought Salabat Jung, his candidate for the
Nizam’s throne, to Aurangabad and — on the death of Shahu —
attacked Maharashtra. Both sides jockeyed for position in the winter
of 1751. Bussy advanced through northern Maharashtra, the Marathas
falling back to within fifteen miles of Pune. For Bussy, however,
problems had started to mount. His high-handed treatment of Salabat
Jung, plus jealousy of his power, prevented the cash he needed from
reaching him from Hyderabad. Bussy also counted on help from
Maratha leaders opposed to the Peshwa; indeed, this faction was plot-
ting against Nana Saheb, but did not join Bussy. In a pattern we have
seen again and again, the Marathas cut off all grain supplies to Bussy’s
camp, and forced him to retreat to Ahmadnagar for supplies.5 By
November, Salabat Jung signed the Treaty of Bhalke, 1751, which
ceded the remaining half of the revenues of Khandesh, plus the
western half of Berar, plus the small province of Baglan (south and
west of Khandesh) to the Marathas. (Salabat Jung kept only the cities
of Aurangabad and Burhanpur and their associated forts — Daulatabad
and Asir.)®
   > The Tarikh Rahat Afza suggests that the Marathas were aided by Muffazar Khan Gardi
a commander with an efficient park of artillery, ibid., 206. The letters of Shah Navaz Khan
suggest the same, ibid., 206. The French sources suggest that the Marathas neutralized the
superior French artillery by the traditional tactics of moving into more rugged terrain and
cutting off supplies. See V. G. Hatalkar, French Records of Maratha History (Bombay, 1978) ’
1, 94-95.
  6 The documents of this treaty are found in G. S. Sardesai (ed.), Selections from the Peshwa
Daftar (Bombay, 1934-40), xxv, no. 149. See also P. M. Joshi (ed.), Selections from the
Peshwa Daftar, new series (Bombay, 1957-62), 1, letter 15s. A translated extract from the