


“g dey   (6z aiejd [gg61 ‘uopuoT] poy agi fo svjy sauty aq] wo.y paidepe) og—-obZ1 ‘9 ypemy pur ‘easy ‘ueyiseley
                                                                                                                                                                           ee
                    CONQUEST          TO   ADMINISTRATION

As early as 1728, Bajirao had led a tribute collecting expedition north
through western Malwa and into Rajasthan. There had been, however,
a friendship between Bajirao and Jai Singh (of Jaipur) which lessened
the pressure for tribute in the 1730s. After Bajirao’s death, Maratha
military contingents invaded Rajasthan almost every year.
   The strategy of Maratha involvement ran such a similar course, state
by state, that it is perhaps worth looking at one state in some detail.?
On Jai Singh’s death in 1743, there were two claimants for the throne,
Ishwar Singh and Madho Singh. Both sides hired Maratha leaders in the
ensuing war — Madho Singh allying with Holkar and Ishwar Singh
hiring Jayappa Shinde. The war dragged on, and eventually the
Ishwar/Jayappa group seemed to have the upper hand. At this point
the Peshwa intervened and — for a substantial price — offered to mediate
the dispute. The Peshwa (then on his way back from Delhi) invaded
Jaipur and demanded a huge tribute and division of the state with
Madho Singh, who the Peshwa now championed. By August 1748, the
Marathas succeeded in forcing a treaty on Ishwar Singh which gave
Madho Singh five parganas and themselves a 500,000 Rs. tribute.
Madho got his parganas, but the Marathas got no rupees. Two years
later, in 1750, the Peshwa ordered another invasion ofJaipur to realize
the arrears of tribute. Unable to pay or face the Maratha army, Ishwar
Singh committed suicide. The rival, Madho Singh, became king of
Jaipur, but he, also, could not pay the tribute. Shinde and Holkar, still
in the area, invaded Jaipur city a month later, now demanding
one-quarter to one-third of the state. There was a spontaneous, violent
uprising in the city of Jaipur against the Marathas and 3,000-4,000 were
killed. The Maratha armies retreated after Madho Singh agreed to a
50,000 Rs. annual tribute.
   If there is a moral in this, it might be not to invite Marathas into your
succession dispute. Yet the appeal of the Maratha mounted troops
seemed somehow irresistible. We have noted how Fateh Singh Bhonsle
was courted in the succession dispute of the Gond kingdom of
Deogarh; within a decade, he controlled the whole kingdom (which
became the princely state of Nagpur). Similarly, Maratha bands had
been hiring themselves out in succession disputes in western Malwa for
two decades, the state doing the hiring always losing revenue and often
  9 The basic facts are laid out in Sarkar’s, Eighteenth Century India, 255-60. Much more
detail will be found in the classic history of Rajasthan, Lt.-Col. James Tod, Annals and
Antiquities of Rajasthan (London, 1829).

                                           137
                      THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818