

                                    I4I
                    THE   MARATHAS       1600-1818

information in the kamavisdar’s reports was in every way the most
detailed the Marathas had ever collected. For example, there was a
document, termed a dehezada, which listed every village in the
pargana, and included those paying through a zamindar and those
paying through the village headman, original villages and those lately
colonized, deserted villages and those not found by the kamavisdar.
Attached documents recorded the name of every farmer in every
village, every bigha and fraction of a bigha of land he cultivated, and his
kharif (hot season) and rabi (winter season) crops.
   The main effect of the bigger and more differentiated bureaucracy
was the regulation of a wide range of economic and social relationships,
unregulated since the breakdown of the Mughal administration in the
1730s. The Marathas reviewed every major non-governmental demand
on revenue, thus scrutinizing each powerful family and religious
endowment in the area. Let us pause for a moment and consider one
detailed example of this process from Ashta (in eastern Malwa) in 1752.
The matter began when Vishnu Mahadey, who had been assigned the
revenue of Ashta by the Peshwa, questioned the right of one Pratap
Singh, a local Rajput, to an inam grant worth Rs. 200 per year. The
assignee’s agent asked the Peshwa to examine the existing grant paper
from the Mughal Emperor. The kamavisdar of Ashta examined the
paper and found it authentic, but questioned why Pratap Singh’s name
had been entered over his brother’s. The Peshwa personally reviewed
the kamavisdar’s report and heard oral testimony from an agent of
Pratap Singh’s to the effect that his client’s name had been entered
because his brother had died. In the end, the Peshwa continued the
inam; anew Maratha sanad was issued, specifying the same two villages
from which the two hundred rupees were to come. The Peshwa’s staff
forwarded suitable orders to the assignee, the kamavisdar, Pratap
Singh, and the village headmen of the two villages.14 Note that the
pattern here is the same which we have seen in Maharashtra;            the
Peshwa successfully asserted his right to arbitrate disputes over rights
to land revenue, and substituted his grant for a Mughal one.
   The new Maratha administration regulated a wider variety of
relationships than just financial ones. The new faujdars and kotwals
(rural and urban police) produced cases concerning every aspect of life.
As one example, let us look at the manufacturing and trading town of

 Lami bidvere   7


                                   142
                      CONQUEST       TO   ADMINISTRATION

Sironj (in eastern Malwa on the caravan route between Agra and the
south) in 1743. Kesari Brami was fined Rs. 114 for failure to pay back a
loan; at the end of the year, Sada Ram still owed Rs. 375 of the Rs. 475
he had been fined for using false weights. Hola Bora paid a Rs. 500
penalty for adultery. The thirty-nine cases from Bhilsa (also on the
caravan route in eastern Malwa) in 1749 were even more varied. The
government seized fifty rupees from the effects of an employee oilman
who committed suicide. Fighting between the bride’s and groom’s
families at an intercaste marriage resulted in a Rs. 50 fine. Several
persons paid “patdam”’, the tax to have a widow remarried.!5
   Stepping back from the minutiae of administrative development, let
us consider several broader trends. First, throughout much of Malwa
and Khandesh, the revenue was boosted in the 1750s to levels of the
best of Mughal times. This was without coercion, but by giving out
development loans to bring new lands into cultivation. Second, we
have a clearer idea of the nature of conquest. Overall, conquest was
slow. It began with raids on the movable wealth of villages; it
proceeded from countryside to cities, first unhinging the rural admin-
istration at the zamindar level. Towns and garrisons were first isolated,
then attacked. The final conquest demanded a force of some 10,000
troops, the defeat of a Mughal main-force army, and the extraction of a
Mughal grant to the area. This was followed, as we have seen, by
stabilized tax collection, development of the administration, and
adjudication of disputes on the local level.
   By the 1750s, it is important to remember that it was the Marathas
who held the towns and roads. It was their garrison troops who walked
the ramparts and anxiously watched for marauders. Their civilian
officials    made      surveys,   collected     revenue,   tried   cases,   regulated
bazaars. Now the Peshwa depended on the very communications and
trade that his armies had so recently disrupted. He needed to rebuild
the provinces which he had plundered; he worried about credit which
was based on rural tax revenues.
   If this new Maratha administration sounds suspiciously Mughal, it
should. Any larger political entity had to be built up out of nego-
tiations with hundreds of zamindars, village headmen and deshmukhs.
In the areas of Khandesh, Gujarat, and Malwa, the terms of reference
remained          severely Mughal. Taxes were         called by Mughal terms,