


                                            oo
                       THE    MARATHAS         1600-1818

   Stabilized tribute rapidly proved an unsatisfactory solution. First,
large zamindars did not control many areas of Malwa. Some areas had
only a deshmukh (termed chaudhri in Malwa) over 15-100 villages;
other areas had no functioning local administration above village
headmen. Mughal towns were, also, not generally under a zamindar’s
authority. Second, the Maratha government found itself bound by
long-term contracts with the zamindars, and, therefore, did not benefit
from ensuing peace and prosperity. The government tried to extract
“gifts” and “loans” from the zamindars to augment the contract, but
neither worked very well. Third, and by far the most serious problem,
was that the zamindars did not pay the contracted tribute. These areas
show a cyclical pattern of payment, high for a year or two following
the initial Maratha contract, then dropping off until a military expedi-
tion forced payment again.!3
   The Marathas quickly tired of the recurrent punitive forays. Their
first solution was to place garrisons in some of the zamindaries, but
they soon evolved a new strategy. With each necessary foray, the
Marathas imposed a more severe settlement on the zamindar. First, the
villages constituting the contract were specified, with threats to collect
directly if the sum was not paid. When the revenues were not
forthcoming, the collector — with troops — collected in the name of the
zamindar. Finally, after several years’ arrears, the Marathas demanded
full administrative control of the areas specified in the contract. In this
fashion, Bhopal (in south-east Malwa) surrendered half its territory,
which then appeared as parganas directly administered by the Peshwa’s
collectors. Other places, such as Kutavad (also in south-eastern
Malwa), turned over some villages to be directly administered and paid
tribute on the rest. Several large zamindaries, such as Bhilsa, Chanderi,
and Kurwai (in eastern Malwa) were displaced in the 1740s, and their
lands appear in the Peshwa’s documents as directly administered areas.
   The new administrative system was a simple one. The Peshwa
appointed a kamavisdar who had broad powers to settle taxes, collect
them, and adjudicate disputes, with some discretion to use funds to
develop agriculture. He had a small staff of clerks and messengers, and
a small number of troops (typically twenty or less). His reports and
records were regularly audited. (Readers familiar with the nineteenth-
century British administration in India will find these broadly consoli-
  '> See S. N. Gordon, “The slow conquest: administrative integration of Malwa into the
Maratha Empire, 1720-1760,” Modern Asian Studies, 2, 1 (1977), 15-2}.

                                         140
                CONQUEST       TO   ADMINISTRATION

dated powers of the kamavisdar strangely familiar. This is as it should
be; the British District Officer was modelled on his predecessor, the
Maratha kamavisdar.)
   The administration worked on a yearly cycle. The amount of the
initial contract between the kamavisdar and the Peshwa was based on
the best available statistics. Often, they were quite good (especially if
tribute had been collected for some years). This is not surprising,
because there were generally local revenue records, kept both at the
village and the pargana level, which specified every village and field
within the village. This documentation had been essential to the
previous Mughal system of revenue settlement and collection. The next
event in the yearly cycle was the payment of the first installment or
rasad. This rasad, which varied from one-third to one-half of the
contract, was, in effect, money loaned by the kamavisdar to the
Peshwa. Both principal and interest —between one and two percent per
month — were to be recovered from the kamavisdar’s district. The
Peshwa carefully structured the system to get as much money in
advance as possible. The kamavisdar’s pay was not a fraction of the
total revenue collected, but a fraction of the rasad. The kamavisdar
generally raised this rasad in the Pune banking community, and we find
many instances of these loans in the papers of the banking families. The
few rasad payments which have been analyzed in detail show a variety
of backers and that the backers shifted from year to year.
   With the first installment paid, the kamavisdar left for the field. He
settled in the largest town in his jurisdiction and set up an office and a
garrison (which are universal items of expenditure in these early
accounts). The kamavisdar next made regular tours through his
parganas (as evidenced by the “dinner expenses” charged to various
villages). Often, he established secondary small garrisons and posts
where transit duties were collected. Within our period (1740-60), the
bureaucracy expanded to include rural and urban police (faujdar and
kotwal).
   Based on the kamavisdar’s on-the-ground surveys, the body of
information flowing from the district to the Peshwa’s clerks at Pune
dramatically increased in volume and specialization. The once-a-year
accounting gave way to shorter and shorter periods. Six-months
accounts were replaced by one-month accounts for the larger and more
stable places (like Sironj and Bhilsa), reaching a peak intensity of daily
accounts and treasury receipts from several hundred villages. The