


                                            134
                     CONQUEST          TO   ADMINISTRATION

   And what has all this to do with the Karnatak? As we have just seen,
the strength of the Nizam depended through the 1750s on the strength
of the French available to him, and varied with the French position in
the Anglo-French war. There was, therefore, no regularly available
force to oppose Maratha incursions into the Karnatak. As they had for
decades, the Marathas treated the Karnatak as a suitable hunting
ground for treasure, with some hope of longer term revenue arrange-
ments. Nana Saheb Peshwa ordered campaigns into the Karnatek
yearly after the Treaty of Bhalke — Srirangapattan (1753), Bagalot
(1754), Bednur (1754-55), Savanur (1755-56), Srirangapattan (1757)
(see Map 3). In spite of these expeditions and extensive negotiations
between the Nizam and Nana Saheb, the Karnatak, for the Marathas,
never became anything more than an occasional area to raise tribute.
There were claims, but little real control, and the local lineages always
resisted payment. Within a few years, the rise of Mysore State would,
once again, change the face of South India.
   The third “frontier” was considerably north from Maharashtra.
Khandesh, for example, was in no sense a frontier at this period. The
Peshwa and the Nizam had been jointly ruling the province for more
than twenty years, and it was a prosperous, paying proposition. The
Marathas, as we have just seen, gained complete control of the province
in 1751 with a minimum of damaging warfare.’ In Gujarat, also, there
had been little fighting since the Dabhade rebellion of 1731. Mughal
authority was entirely gone, except for Ahmedabad and Surat, and the
revenue was divided principally between the Gaikwad family and
Nana Saheb.’ In Malwa, also, Mughal authority disappeared after the
Treaty of Bhopal (1738), and the Peshwa’s administration — as we shall
shortly see — rapidly developed, along with the new polities of Shinde
and Holkar.
  The line of conflict, the ‘‘frontier,” began at the edges of Malwa. To
the north and west was Rajasthan. This was not entirely new territory.

records of the qanungo (head records keeper) of Aurangabad is found in the papers of Sir
Charles Malet, India Office Library, MSS European, F. 149.
   7 See S. N. Gordon, “Recovery from adversity in eighteenth-century India: re-thinking
‘villages,’ ‘peasants,’ and ‘politics’ in pre-modern kingdoms,” Peasant Studies, 17, 4 (Fall,
1979), 61-79.
   8 This is not to say that there had not been considerable change in Gujarat. Industries
especially had been affected by the disappearance of Mughal patronage. The new Maratha
government at Ahmedabad had by and large not taken up the patronage of these luxury
industries, such as weaving, painting, inlaying of ivory and ebony, etc. Many craftsmen
migrated to Surat. See James Forbes, Oriental memoirs (London, 1813), 257-58.


                                            io)
                                                                           ejened