

land in the process. Perhaps the important thing to note is that once the
Mughal Empire could no longer declare the winner and enforce its
decision in the successions of large and small zamindar states, the
disputes could easily escalate, using outside troops like the Marathas.
The “subsidiary alliance system,” thus, was not a brilliant strategy
developed by the French or the English, but a common and probably
inevitable feature of post-Mughal, eighteenth-century politics.
   Succession dispute by succession dispute, we can trace the increasing
claims of Shinde, Holkar, and the Peshwa in Rajasthan. Between 1744
and 1751, Holkar installed his candidate on the throne of Bundi, who
surrendered territory and an annual tribute of 75,000 Rs. Jodhpur
experienced much the same process. After successive wars and peace
talks, the state was      divided    between    two    claimants,    with Shinde
promised a 5,000,000 Rs. tribute and Ajmer fort. Through the later years
of the 1750s, the Peshwa, Shinde, and Holkar sent armies into Rajasthan
to collect the arrears ofthe large promised tribute. Smaller amounts were
collected at Kotah, Bundi, Jaipur, and Udaipur, but nothing like an
administration was in place. As soon as the main-force Maratha army
left, the Maratha representatives were thrown out, and no tribute paid.
   In the 1750s, the “frontier” extended north to Delhi. In this period,
the Mughal government directly controlled little territory further than
fifty miles from the capital. Even this was fiercely fought over. Jats and
Rohillas disputed for the territory; factions fought for the throne, and
the Afghan king, Ahmad Shah Abdali, periodically descended on the
capital.
   The Marathas were frequently asked for help by one faction or
another, always extracting land or tribute. Usually, much more tribute
was promised than actually delivered, so that the “‘arrears” issue was
always a convenient excuse for invasion. Both Shinde and Holkar
fought in the region between the Chambal and the Jumna and defeated
the Bangash Afghans; this, in turn, triggered another invasion by
Ahmad Shah Abdali in 1752.
   For the Marathas, probably the two most significant events of the
whole chaotic period in Delhi were a treaty in 1752, which made them
protector of the Mughal throne (and gave them the right to collect
chauth in the Punjab), and the civil war of 1753, by which the Maratha
nominee ended up on the Mughal throne.!° A large Maratha army
   '° The period and treaty are fully discussed in Dharma Bhanu, “The Mughal-Maratha
treaty of April, 1752,” Journal of Indian History, 29-30 (195 1-52), 242-57.

                                        138
                     CONQUEST          TO   ADMINISTRATION

plundered Delhi and the nearby areas for the next two years, causing
large-scale depopulation.
   After yet another Abdali invasion, the Marathas, under Nana
Saheb’s brother, Ragunath Rao, and Malhar Rao Holkar, returned
from Malwa and the Deccan in the campaigning season of 1757-58. A
Maratha invasion of the Punjab followed, which coincided with the
much more significant Sikh rebellion. The Maratha Punjab adventure
was brief; the Ragunath Rao expedition left little administration
behind, and the Sikhs successfully resisted any attempt to set up
long-term Maratha authority. These events also set the stage for
another invasion by Abdali and the crucial battle of Panipat (176r).!!
   Before returning to a discussion of the Battle of Panipat, we must
look at developments inside the “frontier” areas. In the 1740-60
period, there were important changes in administration, the style of
factional dispute, new groups involved in social mobility, and major
changes in warfare. It is to these broad themes that we now turn.
   Let us begin with administrative development.!2 Maharashtra was
largely secure, but much of it was assigned to military and administra-
tive families serving the Maratha polity. Khandesh was under a dual
administration with the Nizam,                Gujarat was divided between the
Peshwa and the Gaikwad family, and Malwa had just been ceded by the
Treaty of Bhopal (1738).
   Some of the best documentation for administrative development
comes from Malwa, because the Peshwa retained large sections of the
province for support of his own army, and these records are preserved
in the Pune Archives. Let us look at how Malwa moved from an area of
sporadic tribute to a paying, prosperous province. After the treaty of
Bhopal (1738), the Peshwa was faced with actually administering the
eastern half of Malwa. (He had assigned the western half to Shinde,
Holkar, and Pawar, and these parganas entirely disappear from the
Peshwa’s administrative records.) As we have seen in Chapter 5, the
Peshwa tried an arrangement we have termed “‘stabilized tribute,”
which consisted of an agreement — generally for several years — signed
by both a local armed lineage, termed “‘zamindar” in the documents,
and a Maratha representative.
  11 A clear discussion of Delhi and the Punjab in this period is found in Sarkar, Eighteenth
Century India, 259-71.
   12 This section may be contrasted with the undocumented assertion that the Maratha
revenue system was widely corrupt and without administrative responsibility at least until
the mid-1750s. Sarkar, Eighteenth Century India, 223-26, 237-40.