

                                           130
                  BAJI    RAO    I’S NORTHERN            EXPANSION

from private individuals, financed business ventures, and moved
money from one city to another.
  What were the methods the Peshwa used to build loyalty and keep
control of these military, administrative, and banking families? First, as
we have seen, he centralized the rights-granting process, pushing aside
families which held previous or alternate authority. Second, he tried to
scatter and intermix grants so that no leader could use a compact
territory as a basis for rebellion. Third, paradoxically, he promptly
shared power in the newly conquered areas of Malwa and Gujarat. The
most important of the devolutions was the ‘‘division” of Malwa in 1732
between the Peshwa, Holkar, and Shinde, with a smaller share to
Pawar. Bajirao, however, was the grant-giver of this devolution, and
loyalty was the price of receiving such a grant. Asa strategy, it worked.
Shinde and Holkar remained loyal for decades. Fourth, the Peshwa
kept revenue settlement, collection, and division consciously compli-
cated. This placed his Brahmin administrators in a strong position, and
kept the Peshwa in the position of arbitrator of disputes. Fifth, the
Peshwa regularly appointed inam grants (hereditary merit grants) of
villages in Maharashtra to his commanders and others who performed
special service. While these represented a stable, personal income,
because they were in Maharashtra, they were easily sequestered for
disloyal behavior. Sixth, the Peshwa centralized banking in Maha-
rashtra so that administrators yearly had to come to the capital, pay
their advance, and receive personal audience with the Peshwa, before
proceeding to their districts. Finally, of course, the Peshwa was
married into and otherwise related to many of the banking and
administrative community.
paying propositions. It would be ten years before the debt was cleared. See Kishore, Tarabai,
165.




                                            131
                                   GHAR            ERIG

      CONQUEST TO ADMINISTRATION
               (1740-1760)

After the death of Bajirao in 1740, there was a short and inconsequen-
tial scramble for the powerful office of Peshwa.                  Shahu, however,
overrode the opposition and chose Bajirao’s son, Balaji Bajirao, for
the office. At the time (and currently in Maharashtra), he was known
as Nana Saheb, and will be thus referred to throughout this section.
He was only nineteen years old when he assumed office (recall that his
father, Bajirao had been only twenty); his experience had been some-
what more in administration than accompanying his father on the
yearly campaigns. !
   We shall divide the period from Nana Saheb’s taking office to the
watershed Battle of Panipat (1761) into two sections. First, we shall
look at the expanding areas controlled by the Marathas, and there
were many. Maratha leaders pushed into Rajasthan, the area around
Delhi, and on into the Punjab. They attacked Bundelkund and the
borders of Uttar Pradesh. Further east, the Marathas attacked Orissa
and the borders of Bengal and Bihar. In the south, Maratha armies
repeatedly crossed the Karnatak, collecting tribute. Second, we shall
look at what sort of polity developed behind these expanding
“frontiers.” Some of the themes will be the development of largely
autonomous Maratha polities, problems posed by the remaining
armed, elite groups in the areas conquered, and styles of factional con-
flict, and we will return to the theme of social mobility.
   The Maratha frontier to the east consisted of the raids of Raghuji
Bhonsle of Nagpur on Orissa, Bengal, and Bihar (see Map 6). As we
have seen, the Nagpur Bhonsles were generally in opposition to the
Peshwa, and claimed independent authority because of controlling the
Gond king of Nagpur. On Bajirao’s death, Bengal and Orissa were
functioning Mughal provinces under Alivardi Khan, though separated
from Delhi. In 1741-42, Raghuji’s troops swept through Orissa and
up into Bengal; soon after the rainy season, Alivardi Khan took the
field against them and forced them back in the direction of the
  | Jagadish N. Sarkar, A Study of Eighteenth Century India: Volume I, Political History
(1707-1761) (Calcutta, 1976), 219.