


                                               146
                    CONQUEST          TO   ADMINISTRATION

forward a grandson of Rajaram (named Ram Raja), who she claimed
had been raised secretly. In spite of widespread skepticism, Shahu
accepted the boy. His will asked all the leaders to accept Ram Raja and
placed his care and the running of the polity in the hands of the
Peshwa.?5
   Within a year of Shahu’s death, the situation became murky. Ram
Raja, who had been raised by farmers and had no courtly training, still
wanted to rule. Tarabai had expected to rule, and Nana Saheb Peshwa
wanted no part of either one of them. Both sides tried to recruit the
major leaders — Raghuji Bhonsle, Malhar Rao Holkar, Jayapa Shinde.
   An unprecedented summit meeting settled many of the issues.
Tarabai came from the fort of Satara to Pune. She was attended by most
of her partisans (mainly the holders of the large state offices — senapati,
sachiv, and pratinidhi — whose functions had been displaced by the
Peshwa’s consolidation). The other main leaders were also there —
Shinde, Holkar, Bhonsle, Sidashiva Bhau (the Peshwa’s cousin), Ram-
chandra Malhar, Sakaram Bapu, and Mahadoba Purandare.26 The
policies demanded by Nana Saheb Peshwa, and adopted, included the
following:
   (1)    All administration was to move from Satara to Pune, away
          from intrigues of the court.
   (2)    The three remaining state officers (pratinidhi, sachiv, and
          senapati) were to have no independent authority. All grants
          would only come from the Peshwa.
   (3)    There would be less intermixing of saranjams, as this had led to
          much fighting. Henceforth, areas under a leader would be
          more consolidated.
   (4)    In pursuit of this policy, the large saranjams of the pratinidhi
          and the senapati (the Dabhade family whom we have met in
          connection with Gujarat) were resumed. Raghuji Bhonsle was
          to get the pratinidhi’s rights in Berar, and the Peshwa the
          Dabhade holding in Khandesh.
   (5)    Sinhagad fort, formerly loyal to Tarabai, was to go to the
          Peshwa.
   (6)    The Peshwa was to make the appointments of the personal
          staff of Ram Raya.
  25 Brij Kishore, Tarabai and Her Times (Bombay, 1963), 170-73.
   26 Documents of this historic meeting are found in Sardesai (ed.) Peshwa Daftar, v1. See
especially letters 36, 45, 57, 59, 64, 83, 89.

                                           147
                        THE     MARATHAS          1600-1818

   Following this meeting, there were two immediate rebellions. The
Pratinidhi family refused to relinquish important forts in the Satara
area; the Peshwa sent an army and captured them. In Khandesh, the
Dabhade family, displaced by the agreement, raised a major revolt
which devastated villages all across Khandesh; it is easy to follow its
progress in the disruption of revenue collection.?”? Within two years,
however, the revolt was put down, village collection returned to
normal, and the Dabhade family disappeared from Maratha history.
As part of the same rebellion, the Gaikwad family, which had sup-
ported Dabhade and Tarabai, lost a major portion of Gujarat’s
revenue-paying districts to the Peshwa. The division yielded the
Peshwa nearly 3,000,000 Rs. per year in potential revenue.
   The last broad theme of the 1740-60 period is the many changes in
the strategy, tactics, and personnel of warfare. There were two impor-
tant structural changes in the period. First, frontiers had greatly
expanded. It was no longer possible for Maratha troops to return
home and farm. The last fullscale exodus from the north to the Deccan
for the monsoon had been in the mid-1730s. The troops were in
growing proportion full-time mercenaries, quartered at camps in
Malwa and Gujarat. There were several effects of this trend. They had
to be paid regularly and provided safe shelter during the monsoon;
this enormously increased the cash needs of each of the Maratha
leaders. Second, Maratha armies got much larger in this period.
Mainly as a result of the centralization of power by the Peshwa and
the division of the conquered areas among a small number of loyal
leaders, the day of the small, independent Maratha band was over.
They either became a unit in a larger army, or the few larger leaders
found them a nuisance and suppressed them.
   Strategy and tactics changed dramatically. The older Maratha tactics
were, of course, avoiding a pitched battle with a major army in the
field; instead, the Marathas           cut off supplies, communications,               and
foraging, and let the slow-moving army starve. These tactics, as we
have seen, were normally accompanied by forays deep into enemy
territory to draw off the enemy army. These strategies had been
effectively used by Raghuji Bhonsle in Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa in
the 1740s, had been eminently successful against the Nizam in the