

pieces were one of the first fruits of categorical improvements in
metallurgy, casting, and boring of the early eighteenth century.
Artillery was developed under direct, royal patronage by the “scienti-
fic’? method — standardized castings and bore, stronger carriage design,
testing and standardization of charge, thorough training and special-
ized functions of each member of the gun crew, and a written body of
literature on gun testing used to improve design. In field situations, the
rate of fire had increased from a few shots per hour to six or even eight
shots per minute. These new guns and units had proved enormously
effective against cavalry in Europe; these new pieces were just begin-
ning to appear in India in the Anglo-French war of the 1750s.°°
   The period also saw rapid developments in the use of infantry. The
Marathas had, of course, used infantry as early as Shivaji. The guns
were heavy and the rate of fire very slow. After Shivaji’s death, as we
have seen, Maratha warfare relied mainly on light'cavalry and move-
ment. Infantry, once again, assumed importance in the 1740-60 period.
The development of matchlocks and muskets in India is outside the
scope of the volume; suffice it to say that there had been many
demonstrations of the effectiveness of trained infantry in this period.
As with artillery, there had been intense experimentation and battle
experience in Europe. Infantry weapons had become lighter, more
accurate, and faster to load. The training of infantry included the
regular steps of loading, but also firing on command. In India, the first
demonstrations        of the effectiveness           of these      trained,    combined
infantry/artillery units were the English victories at the Battle of
Plassey in Bengal and Buxar in Bihar, and the Anglo-French war in the
south (1757—63).>! It is also important to note several failures of this
new system. These are illustrated, for example, when the Marathas,
using their traditional tactics, defeated the French forces under Bussy
at the Battle of Bhalke in 1751. The new armies were even more
vulnerable than Mughal armies to shortages of cash and supplies.
Unlike    the huge Mughal           armies, however,         they were,       because     of
discipline and training, able to retreat from difficult situations without
a complete rout. Other campaigns in the Anglo-French war in the
   3° The story of these developments is told in two complementary books. B. P. Hughes,
Firepower: Weapons Effectiveness on the Battlefield: 1630-1850 (New York, 1975), and
D. Chandler, The Art of War in the Age of Marlborough (London, 1976).
   *! The recruitment and training of the new English forces is well covered in Philip Mason,
A Matter of Honour (New York, 1974), 60-116. See also James P, Lawford, Britain’s Army in
India: From its Origins to the Conquest of Bengal (London, 1978)

                                            150
                   CONQUEST          TO   ADMINISTRATION

south showed that these new forces were much less effective in hilly
terrain, because the artillery could not keep up with the infantry
movements. Also, small units of infantry, unsupported by artillery,
could be overwhelmed by cavalry charges.
   Like artillery, infantry had effects on every aspect of warfare. They
slowed down movement to a walking pace. Infantry were paid
professionals, and their equipment (relative to the sword and shield of
light cavalry) was expensive. They were only effective as long as ball
and powder lasted. Other effects were less obvious. Infantry was
ineffective at foraging and living off the land, so that supplies had to be
carried along and restocked. Also, Indian-made muskets, even at this
period, were relatively slow to load and fire; therefore, there had to be
a substantial number of infantry, arranged in lines six, eight, or even
ten men deep; this was the only way to sustain enough fire to keep a
cavalry charge from breaking through the line. The use of infantry also
demanded a disciplined battle plan. Infantry was, especially in these
massed    lines, a one-directional         weapon,      and had to have cavalry
protecting its flanks from opposing cavalry sweeps around it.
   Leading up to the Battle of Panipat (1761), there were three different
models of warfare, co-existing uneasily among the Maratha generals.>?
Older leaders, such as Malhar Rao Holkar, favored the traditional
Maratha tactics of mobile, light cavalry, shunning a decisive battle.
Many of the leaders a generation younger had experience with the
effectiveness of artillery, but their armies were much more like Mughal
armies than the contemporary armies of Europe — moving cities which
included everything from vegetable stalls to dancing girls. Only one
commander, Ibrahim Gardi, had built a new army out of trained
infantry and artillery. None of the leaders had any experience in
integrating Maratha cavalry, which favored the charge and hand-to-
hand combat, with the artillery/infantry units, which required the
cavalry to protect its flanks.*?
   With this perspective, let us turn to the Battle of Panipat (see Map 8).
Because the combined Maratha army was routed by Ahmad Shah
Durani’s on the plains north of Delhi, this battle has been analyzed as
much as any other in India’s history — from the psychology of the
  32 Throughout this discussion of Panipat, I am following T. S. Shejwalkar, Panipat: 1761
(Poona, Deccan College, 1946).
   33 An interesting contemporary Marathi chronicle and papers of this period have been
recently translated and annotated by Ian Raeside. See The Decade of Panipat (1751-61)
(Bombay, 1984).