

   17 Pune Daftar, Zamav section, list of jagirs and inams for 1750-55. For an interesting
sketch of a less well-known Brahmin family’s social mobility through administrative service
to the Peshwa, see Shantaram Suntkakhar, Ashiahe Shrishantadurga (Belgaum, 1973).
   18 The materials for this research are, however, readily available in the dozens of
kula-vrittana, histories of Chitpavan Brahmin families, which have been printed in Maha-
rashtra in the last four decades.
   19 Many of these are preserved in the Raja Dinkar Kelkar Museum in Pune. Good coverage
of the museum’s holdings is found in “‘Treasures of everyday art: Raja Dinkar Kelkar
Museum,”   Marg, 34, 2. References to this luxurious lifestyle are found throughout the
Selections from the Peshwa Daftar and summarized in B. G. Gokhale, Poona in the
Eighteenth Century: An Urban History (Delhi, 1988), 65-75.

                                           145
                          THE     MARATHAS            1600-1818

were patronized.?° This was also an intense period of house building,
not only in Pune (mainly in the areas closer to the Mutha river) and
Satara, but in many smaller towns. Deshmukh families expanded their
houses; retainers and other grantees built new dwellings. All were
decorated with wonderful carved pillars, doorways, ceilings, and
windows.?! Religious patronage dramatically increased. Within Pune
and in the towns of Maharashtra, many new temples, ghats, and tanks
were built.22 The annual Pandharpur pilgrimage became more lavish
and the other sites in Maharashtra — Shridev, Jejuri, Nasik, and others —
more popular. Perhaps more striking was the increase in supra-
regional religious pilgrimage. From this period Maharashtrians, both
Brahmin and Maratha, replaced Rajputs as the main patrons at Benares,
both by building temples, bathing ghats, and rest houses, and by
on-going support of Brahmins.?> Thousands made the pilgrimage to
Benares (also Gaya and Muthra) each year, and a large community of
Maharashtrian Brahmins permanently settled in Benares to serve them.
Grants to Brahmins             (houses, land, cash, clothes) greatly increased,
especially under the direct patronage of the Peshwa.?4
   The second broad theme of the 1740-60 period was the further
consolidation of the power of the Peshwa, which occurred at the time
of the death of Shahu (1749). In the preceding two years, Shahu
recognized that the various Maratha leaders were lining up for a civil
war on his death. There was no acceptable heir. Shambhuji, of the
Kolapur      line, himself        an   older man,        had been       Shahu’s          rival for
twenty-five years, and was an anathema to the Peshwa. There were no
other heirs.
   Into this dilemma came Tarabai, the same Tarabai who had put
forward pretenders to the throne in 1707 and 1731. She brought

  2° Several issues of Marg have been devoted to this cultural flowering. See “The art of the
Chatrapatis and Peshwas,” 34, 2. Also, “Maharashtra: traditions in art,” 34, 4. Also,
“Maharashtra, religious and secular architecture,” 37, 1.
  21 The   growth   of Pune,    of course,   parallels the other   “successor”   state    capitals —
Hyderabad, Lucknow, Farrukhabad. A thorough discussion of the growth of the peths of
Pune is found in Gokhale, Poona, 16-44.
  22 See, for example, V. K. Bhave, Peshwekalin           Maharashtra   (New Delhi, reprinted
edition, 1976), 30-31.
   3 C. A. Bayly, Rulers, Townsmen and Bazaars: North Indian Society in the Age of     British
Expansion, 1770-1870 (Cambridge, 1983), 137.
   24 The various volumes of Selections from the Peshwa Daftar refer to aspects of this
patronage of Brahmins, either on a regular basis, such as the large donations during the month
of sravana, or on special occasions, such as a marriage or birth of a son. See, Peshwa Daftar
un, letter 137; Also, v, letter 26, 36, and xxxu, letter 183.