

                                         158
                              CENTRIPETAL            FORCES

Nizam’s invasion of 1763, remained peaceful and generally prosper-
ous. On the Desh, for example, the documents of Indapur show that
1773-95 was the most prosperous period of its history. Those assigned
to its revenues, as soldiers, lived in the village and lived well.!2 It was
much the same in the Konkan. In 1770, for example, an English sea
captain named Forbes visited Ragoji Angria, a sardar family who held
lands and rights near Bombay. The country was fertile and prosperous,
and the Englishman was treated to quite lavish hospitality.13 Study of
the family archives of the Dabhades of Talegaon show the development
by this period of widespread credit and cash networks which criss-
crossed Maharashtra with nodes at all major cities and towns. Unlike a
century before, cash not only circulated in the countryside, but was
used in the most minor and local transactions and for the pay of even
servants and laborers.'* Very large sums, millions of rupees, were
routinely raised in family firms which formed the banking community
of Pune, usually borrowed against future tax collections.!5
   Khandesh and the Aurangabad area had brief disruption early in the
1760s, but were well administered and productive. Malwa had some
warfare between Shinde and Holkae and the local armed lineages
(Ahirs, Rajputs) in the first five years after Panipat, but this was not
seriously disruptive; Malwa was basically doing well, and would do
even better, under the benevolent administration of Ahilyabai Holkar
in the coming decades.!® In all the areas directly controlled by the
Peshwa, detailed revenue information came into the capital on a
  12 A.R. Kulkarni, “Towards a history of Indapur,” in D. W. Attwood, M. Israel, and
N. K. Wagle (eds.), City, Countryside and Society in Maharashtra (Toronto, University of
Toronto, 1988), 131.
  13 James Forbes, Oriental Memoirs (London, 1813), 223-25.
  14 Frank Perlin, “Money use in late pre-colonial India” in J. F. Richards, The Imperial
Monetary System of Mughal India (Delhi, 1987), 279-85. See also Frank Perlin, “Of ‘white
whale’ and countrymen in the eighteenth-century Maratha Deccan: extended class relations,
rights, and the problem of rural autonomy under the old regime,” Journal of Peasant Studies,
   1978).
  ‘Path study of the banking community in Pune in the eighteenth century remains
to be done. A good study of a single family is G. T. Kulkarni, “Banking in the eighteenth
century: a case study of a Poona banker,” Artha Vijnyana, 15, 2 (1973), 180-200. A broader
survey is found in B. G. Gokhale, Poona in the Eighteenth Century: An Urban History
(Delhi, 1988), 131-37. Some families — such as the Naik Joshis of Baramati, the Naik Joshis of
Chas, and the Rastes — had moved to Pune when the Peshwa moved his residence there in the
1730s. All were related to the Peshwa family by marriage. Others, such as the Bhides, the
Omkars, and the Dikshit-Patwardhands,      became prominent bankers in the period before
1760, but their pattern was the same. The were Brahmins, married into the Peshwa’s family.
This near monopoly was in the last decades of the eighteenth century challenged by Gujarati
and Marwari banking houses based outside Pune.
   16 See M. W. Burway, Ahilyabai (Devi) Holkar (Indore, 1920).