

                                             eo
                         THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

monthly (and sometimes daily) basis, and most areas were predictable
enough so that the banking community loaned money at relatively low
rates of interest against future collections.!”
   Before carrying on the political narrative, let us pause to consider
Ahilyabai Holkar, one of the most extraordinary rulers of eighteenth-
century India, and the wider problem of women rulers of the Maratha
polity. In normative terms, women were excluded by the strict rules of
succession and could not succeed to kingship. Only sons fought for the
throne after their father died. Still, there are several examples of
women, in fact, ruling within the Maratha polity. We have, for
example, met Tarabai, who led the resistance to the Mughals in the
early years of the eighteenth century and played a central role in
Maratha politics for decades thereafter. Her case shows that a woman
could rule de facto as a wife (or widow) or as a mother (and regent) of a
potential heir. For a queen to rule required both extraordinary talent
and energy and fortuitous circumstances. In the case of Ahilyabai, the
circumstances included the death of her husband in battle in 1754
(leaving her with a young son). Thereafter, the father-in-law, the great
general Malhar Rao Holkar, seems to have trained her both in military
affairs and administration. A number of letters from Malhar Rao
Holkar to Ahilyabai show that she was (besides being literate) fully
involved in military and diplomatic activities well before her father-in-
law’s death. In 1765, he wrote her the following instructions:
... proceed to Gwalior after crossing the Chambal. You may halt there for four or
five days. You should keep your big artillery and arrange for its ammunition as
much as possible ... The big artillery should be kept at Gwalior and you should
proceed further after making proper arrangements for its expenses for amonth. On
the march you should arrange for military posts being located for the protection of
the road.'8

Malhar Rao Holkar assumed that she was competent to handle both
civil and military affairs and occasionally favored her with overall
military advice: “Whenever you reduce a fortress of the Gohad chief,

  '7 See, for example, the documents in the Pune Daftar, Prant Azmas Hindustan Rumals,
for these decades. These sophisticated financial transactions have generated a number of
attempts to explain the growth and movement of money in the countryside. See, for example,
H. B. Vashishta, Land Revenue and Public Finance in Maratha Administration (Bombay,
1975). Also, V. D. Divekar, “‘The emergence of an indigenous business class in Maharashtra
in the eighteenth century,” Modern Asian Studies, 16, 3 (July 1982), 427-44.
   '8 M. V. Kibe, “Fragments from the records of Devi Shri Ahilyabai Holkar,” Indian
Historical Records Commission: Proceedings, XIII (1930), 133.


                                           160
                             CENTRIPETAL           FORGES