

   27 Pune Daftar, Prant Azmas Khandesh Rumals. Since these rumals are arranged by place
rather than by period, the documents are somewhat dispersed. See nos. 20, 30, 128, 189, 191,
Kel, iy

                                            148
                       CONQUEST         TO   ADMINISTRATION

Battle of Bhopal (1738) and, as recently as 1752, at the Battle of Bhalke.
   From the 1740s onwards, the main opponents of the Maratha armies
were no longer huge Mughal armies, moving slowly on the plains, but
recalcitrant armed lineages, often inside surprisingly strong local forts.
For a century the Marathas had largely ignored artillery; they could no
longer. Technical development came quite quickly in this period. The
Marathas hired Europeans — first Portuguese, later mainly French and
English — who had expertise in casting and deploying cannon, and built
up speciality artillery units.28 The results were successful assaults on
the Jat fortress of Dig (south of Agra), the main fortresses of Rajasthan,
and Bassein (a very strong fort on the Konkan coast).2?
   Relying on artillery, however, changed the whole nature of warfare.
It tremendously increased the cash needs of a commander. Artillery
was expensive to produce. Both guns and shot required a full-time and
professional foundry. The metals, especially copper, were imported
and expensive. The best gunpowder was foreign-made and only
acquired from the Portuguese or the English for cash. Soldiers who
operated artillery were specialized, relatively well-paid professionals.
Even the support personnel, drovers and such, had to be paid in cash.
Equally important, artillery slowed down an army’s movements to the
pace of a bullock cart; the large pack trains also required both fodder
and supplies.
   Though the Maratha artillery had. proven relatively effective against
forts, it was still quite primitive. Guns were large and heavy, and
carriages often broke down. The guns were also not cast to a standard
bore, so that a limited number of balls could be fired from each specific
gun. Perhaps the worst drawback of the Maratha artillery was that the
guns were all-purpose weapons. They had to be big enough to knock
down fort walls and doors; this made them so cumbersome that they
were immobile when used in battle, rather than in a siege. Once the
battle began, they could not support ensuing charges or cover retreats.
Aiming mechanisms were crude, and volleys often entirely missed the
opposing army.
  It is worth noting that in Europe, particularly in England, these
decades saw the development of light, mobile field artillery. These
   28 An English observer visited the Peshwa’s ordinance factory in 1739 and found it
generally well run. See G. W. Forrest (ed.), Selections from the Letters, Dispatches, and State
Papers Preserved in the Bombay Secretariat (Bombay, 1885), 79.
  29 At Bassein, however, it was still mining that played the most important role in breaching
the wall, rather than artillery.

                                             149
                         THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818