

   1 P, M. Joshi (ed.), Selections from the Peshwa Daftar, new series (Bombay, 1957-62), 111,
letters 1-6.
   2 James Grant Duff, History of the Marathas (Jaipur, reprinted edition, 1986), 11, 119-20.

                                            155
                     THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

defeated the Nizam’s in a major battle on the banks of the Godavari
river at Rakhshasbhuvan (August 1763). Only the portion of the
Nizam’s army which had already forded the river survived. Effectively
besieged in Aurangabad, the Nizam surrendered several territories in
the Bidar area; some additional tracts went to Jankoji Bhonsle (for
switching to the Ragnath Rao side at a crucial moment).° This treaty
basically settled the relations between the Peshwa and the Nizam for
more than thirty years. More importantly, it was the first settlement of
a successful campaign in which the largest share of the gains did not go
to the central government, but to other nobles. This event marks the
beginning of a shift in power between the center and the periphery
which was to become much more serious in a decade.
   Ragunath Rao, wisely, became reconciled to some members of the
opposing faction. Patwardhan was reinstated in his holdings in Mira).
The Madhav Rao appointees to high posts returned to them, and the
loyal and competent personal clerks of Madhav Rao, especially Nana
Phadnavis, assumed higher positions in the administration. As a
divisive issue, the rivalry between Madhav Rao Peshwa, and his uncle
Ragunath Rao did not go away. Just a few years later, when the uncle
was returning from an expedition to the north, the Peshwa imprisoned
him; there he stayed until Madhav Rao Peshwa’s death in 1772.
Likewise, the issue of the independence of the Bhonsles of Nagpur
remained. Madhav Rao Peshwa even joined the Nizam                 in a joint
campaign in the late 1760s, which seriously reduced the territory and
power of the Bhonsles and established the supremacy of the Peshwa.
   The more important, larger question is how much this factional
conflict in the Deccan affected the functioning of the rest of the areas
which the Marathas controlled. Let us undertake a brief survey of the
periphery, beginning with Gujarat and proceeding in a clockwise
manner around the subcontinent.
   Damaji Gaikwad survived Panipat and returned to Gujarat with
much of his forces intact. After putting down several rebellions by
both Hindu and Muslim groups, he took part in the factional warfare
in the Deccan during the 1760s, emerging as a major “loser” because of
his continued support of Ragunath Rao.* By the late 1760s, the Peshwa
had forced the Gaikwad family to pay a large tribute. The death of
Damaji set off a long succession dispute between his sons with the
 > A.C, Banerjee, Peshwa Madhav Rao I, (Calcutta, 1943), 32-33.
 4 Joshi (ed.), Peshwa Daftar, letters 210-20.

                                        156
                             CENTRIPETAL            FORCES

Peshwa often able to assert authority (later, the East India Company
was also involved). On the ground, the result was warfare in Gujarat
through much of the remaining eighteenth century and a consequent
decline in trade, agriculture, and textile production.>
   Looking north and east of Gujarat, Rajasthan also threw off Maratha
authority after Panipat. Malhar Rao Holkar, escaping from Panipat
with much of his force, attacked the Rajputs in late 1761 and defeated
them at the Battle of Mangrol. The battle largely restored Maratha
power and reinforced the tribute-paying relationship established five
years earlier at the Treaty of Nagor. Marwar, for example, paid a
regular lump-sum tribute and had some areas directly administered by
Maratha collectors. This pattern stayed stable for several decades, and
Rajasthan was not the scene of warfare until the end of the eighteenth
century.®
   In the area around Delhi, between the Ganges and Jumna rivers and
south as far as the Malwa plateau, local landed lineages and remaining
Muslim powers fought incessantly through the decade after Panipat
(see Map 8). There was, in fact, little the Marathas could do to retain
any control. After Malhar Rao Holkar’s Rajasthan campaign, he — and
all other major leaders — were in the Deccan for the next six years.
Lesser Maratha leaders, with smaller armies, were generally unable to
defeat the Jats, Rohillas, or the large Muslim forces under Najib-ud-
daula. At best, they occasionally took sides in a family feud or allied
with one group against another.” The only major Maratha initiative of
the middle years of the 1760s was an inconclusive campaign led by
Ragunath Rao; it spent more time on the succession dispute in the
Holkar family than on conquering territory.® A large Maratha expedi-
tion came from the Deccan in 1769, and restored Maratha control to
the area. Through 1770, under the leadership of Mahadji Shinde, the