




                                     153
                             CGHAPTLER,7

     CENTRIPETAL                  FORCES          (1760-1803)



Within   weeks,   Ahmad    Shah   Abdali   retreated   from   India   to his
kingdom in Afghanistan. In the north, therefore, the power situation
remained much as it had been previously, consisting of armed local
lineages (Jats, Sikhs, Bundelas, and Rajputs), and the two major powers
(Shuja-ud-daula of Awadh and Najib-ud-daula, the representative of
Abdali). The difference, of course, was the Maratha loss of money,
credit, manpower, and prestige. These problems were exacerbated by a
loss of leadership at the center; Nana Saheb Peshwa died within weeks
of the defeat of Panipat. In addition, several major leaders had been
killed, and there were succession disputes within these families. Even
in the eighteenth century, bad news travelled fast; Panipat produced
results in every region that the Marathas controlled or from which they
even irregularly extracted tribute. The defeat inspired rebellions by
local armed lineages, invasion and subversion by neighboring powers,
and factionalization and bids for power at the center. As we shall see,
however, the decade after Panipat was, overall, one of recovery of
revenue areas, the rebuilding of military strength and prestige, effective
leadership, and even some gains in conflicts with neighboring powers.
Two themes became dominant in the decades after 1770, first, the
shifting power relations between the center and the Maratha “states”
(Shinde, Holkar, Gaikwad and Bhonsle) and, second, the emergence of
the English as the main competitor on the subcontinent.
   Let us begin with the factional problems at the capital, then survey
the outlying areas. On the death of Nana Saheb Peshwa, his second
son, Madhav Rao, received investiture. As he was only seventeen years
old, it was understood that his uncle, Ragunath Rao, would share, or
perhaps dominate, power. (It is worth noting that the investiture was
received from the Chattrapati — nominally in Shivaji’s line — who was,
and remained, imprisoned.)
   Many leaders, including the Bhonsles of Nagpur, the Nimbalkar
family of Phaltan (Satara District), and Gopal Rao Patwardhan (holder
of several large estates in southern Maharashtra), opposed the whole
dominance of government by Chitpavan Brahmins. Within a few

                                   154
                             CENTRIPETAL           FORCES

months, they joined the Nizam (grandson of Asaf Shah, founder of the
line), who invaded Maharashtra from the east.! Supported by these
disaffected leaders, the Nizam’s army pushed to within fifteen miles of
Pune; he was bought off, however, by a large tribute, paid from the
Maratha possessions in the area of Aurangabad and Bidar. Little was
lost, as the promised forts were not returned, nor was any but a small
amount of tribute paid. The Nizam withdrew to Hyderabad.”
   The factional problems became worse as Madhav Rao, the young
Peshwa, began to assert power. He selected new men for senior offices,
and gathered a small group of very competent personal clerks, who
were to emerge as major forces a decade later. Ragunath Rao, the
Peshwa’s uncle, accepted none of this, left Pune, raised an army, and,
with the assistance of one of the Nizam’s commanders, marched on
Pune. The young Peshwa’s forces were sure to be routed. In a
diplomatic stroke, the young Peshwa dispersed his forces and appeared
alone before his uncle, conceding him power as the only way to avoid
war and a divided state.
   As soon as Ragunath Rao reached Pune, he dismissed many of
Madhav’s Rao’s appointees and sent an expedition south against Gopal
Rao Patwardhan of Miraj (a holder of large jagirs for military service),
who had been one of Madhav Rao’s strongest supporters (see Map 1).
The expedition reduced the Patwardhan forts and seized the family
saranjams. It was only a matter of weeks before a new faction formed
around the dispossessed Patwardhans. Allies were easy to find. Prime
among them were the Bhonsles of Nagpur (who had generally opposed
the increasing power of the Peshwa), the Nizam (as always), and many
of the high officers who had been removed by Ragunath Rao.
   Through 1763, the forces loyal to Ragunath Rao (and Madhav Rao,
who now fully supported his uncle) were limited to two leaders and
insufficient to meet the Nizam—Bhonsle—Patwardhan army in the field.
Instead, they plundered various districts belonging to the Nizam and
Bhonsle. Using the same tactics, the Nizam burnt and plundered the
area around Pune and regions as far west as the Bhima river.
   Both sides needed to find shelter during the monsoon. The Nizam’s
army moved toward Aurangabad. A good offer from Ragunath Rao
detached     the Bhonsle from the Nizam’s                 forces; Ragunath’s         forces