

                                           ey
                       THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

commanders to the thickness of body armor of the Afghan cavalry. We
will, therefore, consider only briefly the movements before the battle,
and focus on the battle and its implications.
   We left the Marathas retreating out of the Punjab in late 1759, and
Shah Abdali slowly advancing toward India through what is now
Pakistan, with neither side able to control the Sikh rebellion.>+ The
main Maratha force, under Dataji Shinde, besieged Abdali’s repre-
sentative, Najib-ud-daula, but ineffective artillery allowed Najib to
hold out. In the next months (January—March 1760), one of Abdali’s
generals defeated part of Dataji’s army and forced a retreat of a second
army under Malhar Rao Holkar.*> Abdali failed in a siege of Dig fort,
held by Suraj Mal Jat, and moved off toward Rajasthan to ransom the
Rajput states. The Marathas moved to devastate the Rohilla Afghan
territories (which were allied to Abdali), causing Abdali to turn north
again.                                               .
   Throughout this hot season and monsoon (June—September 1760),
both sides wooed potential allies - Ahmad Shah Bangash (a local
Afghan lineage, near Delhi), the Jats under Suraj Mal, the Rajputs, the
Rohilla Afghans (another local lineage), and most prized, Shuja-ud-
daula, ruler of Awadh. He was known to have a full treasury, a strong
army, and regular revenue to maintain the army. On the whole, Abdali
was more successful in this local recruiting, allying with Ahmad Shah
Bangash, most Rohilla Afghans, and Shuja-ud-daula of Awadh. The
Marathas allied with the Jats and some Rohilla Afghans; the Rajputs
stayed neutral. In the same period, the Peshwa sent a very large
combined army from the Deccan to support the local commanders
who - on the whole — were doing poorly against the Abdali forces. This
slow-moving army arrived during the monsoon and, without boats,
could not cross the Jumna to attack Abdali’s camp near Aligarh. Both
sides suggested terms, but their negotiating positions were too far apart
for a settlement. After the monsoon, the Maratha army moved out to
Panipat and built a large fortified camp (October 1760). Including
combatants, support personnel, and the bazaar, it probably held
60,000-80,000 people. The monsoon had not been kind to the Maratha
forces; disease had broken out among the horses, and thousands died.
The vast army was rapidly running out of money. Abdali, when he
arrived at Panipat, also had his problems. He was virtually unable to
 34 See H. R. Gupta, History of the Sikhs (New Delhi, third edition, 1978), 11, 142-56.
 35 Sheywalkar, Panipat, 18-23.

                                          1§2
                CONQUEST        TO   ADMINISTRATION

communicate with his kingdom in Afghanistan because the Sikhs held
the Punjab. Both sides were running out of food, as foraging had
devastated   everything   for   miles.     The   skirmishing,   from   mid-
November to the end of the year, was indecisive.
  The main battle took place on January 14, 1761. In manpower, the
two sides were about equally arrayed. The Afghan forces were mainly
heavy cavalry, men in body armor using muskets; against them were
many units of Maratha light cavalry (men in light armor, with sword
and shield), the trained infantry of Ibrahim Gardi, and the large, heavy
guns brought from the Deccan.
   Throughout the morning, the Marathas pushed back the Abdali
troops in both the right and the center. The fighting revealed the
problems of the Maratha force. It proved impossible to coordinate the
infantry and the cavalry. The infantry moved forward in disciplined
order, but the cavalry broke off into general engagements with the
opposing cavalry. The situation was exacerbated by a weak command
structure. The Marathas were a composite army, and the various
leaders pursued various tactics. The artillery proved almost useless; it
was immobile, slow-firing, and inaccurate. Abdali’s light mobile swivel
guns were generally much more effective.
   In the late afternoon at a crucial moment Abdali was able to put
about 5,000 fresh cavalry into the battle, which broke through the
Maratha center. Typical of these large battles, capture or death of the
main leader meant a general rout, rather than an orderly retreat. The
Afghan troops pursued the fleeing Marathas much of the following
night. Estimates vary widely, but as many as 50,000 combatants and
non-combatants were killed. Abdali’s forces captured thousands of
horses, pack animals, and whatever could be looted from the bazaar.
Over the next six months, surviving units and individuals made their
way back to Maharashtra.