

send adequate number of artillery. In no case should you be entrenched
before a fort. As far as possible get the object by means of prestige.””!9
A tew weeks later, he advised Ahilyabai, on her arrival at Indore, to
arrange the administration of two districts in eastern Malwa and
assumed her competence to do so. Thus, when Malhar Rao died, and
Ahilyabai’s son — the nominal heir — went insane and died within a year
of succession, she (already thirty years old) had an established record
of both military and administrative competence. Rather than adopt an
heir, she petitioned the Peshwa to take over the administration of the
Holkar lands herself.2° She was fully prepared to lead her troops into
battle against the faction in the central government which opposed her,
when a letter from the Peshwa granting her authority settled the
issue.?! In a novel and ingenious solution, she chose Tukoji Holkar,
commander of the “‘household”’ troops (but no relative), to head all
military aspects of her rule. The stable division of power lasted three
decades, until both their deaths in the 1790s.
   Ahilyabai turned her attention to just administration, peace, and
prosperity within the Holkar estates, especially Malwa. (Tukoji
Holkar seems        to have administered          Holkar estates in the Deccan,
where he was resident for long periods, and in North India at other
periods.) Since Marathas had little tradition of veiling or secluding
women, Ahilyabai held daily public audience.
Her first principle of government appears to have been moderate assessment, and
an almost sacred respect for the native rights of village officers and proprietors of
land. She heard every complaint in person; and although she continually referred
causes to courts of equity and arbitration, and to her ministers, for settlement, she
was always accessible; and so strong was her sense of duty, on all points connected
with the distribution of justice, that she is represented as not only patient, but
unwearied, in the most insignificant causes, when appeals were made to her
decision.”
In spite of wars to the north and the south, Ahilyabar’s territories in
Malwa were not attacked or disrupted by local armed lineages during
her entire thirty-year reign, proof of her diplomatic and administrative
skill. She was more successful than any previous administration in

  19 Tbid., 135.
  20 There . strong suggestion that Ahilyabai also wrote to the Peshwa’s wife and she was
helpful in getting the crucial grant. See Burway, Ahilyabai Holkar, 22-24.
  21 J. Malcolm,   A Memoir of Central India (London, third edition, 1832), 1, 161-62.
  22 bid., 176. Malcolm based his history on oral reports of people who had actually been at
Ahilyabai’s court.

                                            161
                       THE     MARATHAS          1600-1818

halting the raids of the hill tribes, Bhils and Gonds, on agricultural
settlements. She kept virtually the same set of ministers and admini-
strators throughout her reign. She developed Indore from a small
village to a prosperous and beautiful city. She was a legend in
Malcolm’s time (the 1830s and 1840s), as she remains today, for the
help she gave widows in keeping their husband’s wealth, rather than
surrendering it to the state or greedy relatives or managers. Her
monuments are forts and roads in Malwa, and a wide variety of
religious endowments (temples, rest houses, tanks, bathing steps, and
the like), both in Malwa and far beyond — Varanasi, Dwarka in Gujarat,
Rameshwaram, Gaya. She also sponsored festivals and gave donations
for regular worship in many Hindu temples. Her reputation in Malwa
today is that of a saint; such are the. results of a good, honest
administration.
   Let us return to the more disrupted areas outside Ahilyabai’s
benevolent control. I hope the reader will bear with me through the
account of one more period of disputed succession, which we need for
discussion of patterns of successional conflict developed in the conclu-
sion. We begin with the death of Madhav Rao Peshwa in 1773. There
was only one suitable candidate, Narayan Rao, the younger brother of
Madhav    Rao. The second contender, Ragunath Rao, the Peshwa’s
uncle, we have met throughout the previous decade. Early in the
decade he shared power; later, he was a state prisoner at Pune. Within
nine months of investiture, Narayan Rao was dead, victim of overt
political murder. He was cut down by infantry demanding arrears of
pay, the murder instigated by his imprisoned uncle, Ragunath Rao.
The subsequent investigation proved only that Ragunath Rao wanted
the new Peshwa seized and confined. Therefore, Ragunath Rao shortly
became Peshwa. He quickly replaced the whole inner circle who had
served Narayan Rao and before that Madhav Rao. The new appointees
were men personally loyal to Ragunath Rao, who came from fairly
obscure origins; they never appeared before or after in Maratha
history.?3
   Ragunath Rao then launched a combined campaign against the
Nizam that was militarily successful, but brought no tribute or
territory. As Ragunath Rao planned a Karnatak campaign, important
leaders left camp for Pune and formed a faction supporting the soon to