

   With Tipu, the process was much more direct. As soon as the British
could marshall sufficient force and credit (1799), they attacked and
defeated Tipu, ending with the taking of his capital Srirangapattan. His
territories were largely absorbed into the British domain, a small part
going to the Nizam, a smaller part yet going to the Peshwa. By 1800,
thus, there were only two independent powers left on the field — the
British and the Marathas. Every other polity (with the exception of the
Punjab) was a subsidiary to one or the other. Observers knew that a
conflict was inevitable.
   The major event of 1800 was the death of Nana Phadnavis, who had
controlled the Peshwa, the administration, and diplomacy for the past
quarter-century. He was the last of a whole generation of leaders who
had become prominent after the Battle of Panipat — Tukoji Holkar,
Mahadji Shinde, and perhaps the best of all Maratha administrative
leaders, Ahilyabai Holkar. All died between 1795 and 1800.
  With the death of Nana Phadnavis, the factional situation simplified.
The Peshwa, freed from restraint, looked for allies and independent
action. From 1800 on, he regularly negotiated with the English, but did
not really need them as long as he was sure of Shinde’s backing. The
situation shifted, however, when Shinde was forced to leave Pune to
deal with Holkar, who was raiding and plundering his territory in
Malwa (see Map 7). Through 1801, Shinde and Holkar fought in
southern Malwa. Some of Shinde’s regular battalions were defeated in
the Ujjain area. Later in the season, battles were fought in the
Burhanpur region. Still later in the campaigning season, Shinde’s forces
defeated Holkar’s troops and plundered Indore, his capital. Holkar
decided to abandon Malwa and carry the war to the Deccan, hoping to
carve out a new sphere of influence.
   Not until well into 1802, with Holkar’s army coming south, did
negotiations between the Peshwa and the English become serious. On
October 25, 1802, Holkar’s army defeated the combined forces of the
Peshwa and Shinde’s forces in the Deccan in front of Pune. Pune was
once again plundered and the Peshwa fled to British territory at
Bassein, where he finally submitted to a subsidiary alliance. In 1803, by
this treaty, the British acquired territory Surat, the Peshwa’s person,
and a commitment that the Peshwa would bear the expense of the
British force and consult with the British resident at Pune. Holkar ran
out of money and turned north. A British army brought the Peshwa
back to Pune and installed him in office. This act represented the end

                                  172
                         CENTRIPETAL         FORCES

of the Maratha polity as an independent power. The rest of the story
is one of British conquest, largely with funds from conquered terri-
tories.




                                 APPENDIX


The following are thumbnail biographies of the inner circle of the Maratha
polity in the 1770s:
(1) Shinde (of Gwalior), Tukoji Holkar (the forces of Ahilyabai Holkar of
Indore), Gaikwad (of Baroda), and Bhonsle (of Nagpur). These are the
well-known, large, relatively independent states, all dating from the 1730s.
Their influence varied with their proximity to Pune, and the resolution of their
internal factional conflicts.
(2) Nana Phadnavis.    A Chitpavan Brahmin and extraordinarily able admini-
strator and negotiator, in control of the revenue administration. He had been
present at Panipat (1761) and had served in the administration of Madhav Rao
for ten years.
(3) Morobada. Cousin of Nana Phadnavis, close in age and a direct rival to
Nana. He was jailed in 1777, when the Nana/Shinde faction defeated
Ragunath Rao. The family survived with a small jagir and a large house in Pune.
(4) Bapuji Naik Baramatikar. This Chitpavan Brahmin family had been in Adil
Shahi service through most of the seventeenth century, mainly in banking and
finance. They held “‘nested” rights in the area of Baramati. Bapuji Naik briefly
joined the inner group as a backer of Ragunath Rao, but apparently returned
to Baramati after the faction was defeated. The family later changed its name to
Sowkar (banker), reflective of its main occupation.
(5) Sakharam Hari Bokil. He was a Kanada Brahmin, mainly a diplomat, and
was of the Madhav Rao generation. He emerged, in the 1770s, as a supporter of
Ragunath Rao and was jailed along with others of the faction; he died in jail in
less than a year. There is no subsequent mention of the family, other than that
the lands were confiscated.
(6) Bajaba Purandare. This family of Deshasta Brahmins came originally from
the Saswad area. They provided commanders and administrators to the
Peshwas, going back to the 1730s. Though Bajaba backed Ragunath Rao and
was jailed, the family recovered favor, served in the campaigns in the Karnatak
in the 1780s, and emerged as a large sardar under the British in the nineteenth
century.