

 23 The rapidly shifting situation is thoroughly covered in Grant Duff, History, 173-92.

                                          162
                             CENTRIPETAL           FORCES

be born son of the murdered Peshwa, Narayan Rao. Ragunath Rao
moved towards Pune, won a battle, but turned north towards Burhan-
pur. The opposing faction picked up the lukewarm support of the
Nizam. Ragunath Rao received support from Shinde and Holkar (of
Malwa), and hoped for support from the Gaikwad family of Gujarat
and one branch of the then divided Bhonsle family of Nagpur, not thus
far involved.
   Ragunath Rao’s position steadily deteriorated. The opposing allies
held Pune and the administration and, shortly, both Shinde and Holkar
declared against him. Ragunath Rao retreated westward, hoping to
find a solid ally among the warring brothers of the Gaikwad family of
Gujarat.
   After extended negotiations, Ragunath Rao found a new ally in the
English in Bombay. Their conflicts had been, as we have seen, with the
coastal powers, indigenous and foreign, and the English had been, in
fact, up to this point quite isolated from Pune’s main concerns or
campaigns. A new, ambitious policy of the Bombay government, with
the enhanced military remaining from the Anglo-French wars quickly
made them a major contender for territorial conquest. Their strategy
was in use throughout India at the time — support one candidate in a
succession dispute, in hopes of extracting major territorial gains if he
won. In this spirit, Bombay formally allied with Ragunath Rao. The
terms ceded a large tract in Gujarat, the islands near Bombay, and
150,000 Rs per month for the maintenance of 2,500 regular troops,
including artillery.
   By March 1775 Ragunath Rao’s forces had been defeated in Gujarat;
he fled to Surat, the British his only remaining ally. An East India
Company army assembled from Bombay and Madras. In the next few
months prospects looked good. The Company received large conces-
sions from Ragunath Rao and the hoped for member of the Gaikwad
family joined with his forces. The war of movement in Gujarat
generally favored the English-Ragunath Rao side.”4
   Once again, power quickly shifted. The Bengal Government,
recently elevated over Bombay and Madras, strongly opposed
Bombay’s forward policy and appointed their own negotiator, who
started from Calcutta. When the order was received, in May 1775, the
   24 There was, however, by no means a total collapse of the administration of Gujarat. See
the important local documentation in V. G. Khobrekar, Gujratetil Marathi Rajvat [Maratha
Administration of Gujarat], 1664-1820 (Pune, 1962).

                                            163
                       THE    MARATHAS         1600-1818

British forces went into cantonment in Gujarat. Negotiations began in
December 1775 and produced the Treaty of Purandar (March, 1776).
The treaty ended hostilities, returned the cessions in Gujarat, awarded
the British Salsette and Bassein and the revenues of Broach and some
immediate cash. The British, in return, withdrew all support from
Ragunath Rao. He was to receive a yearly stipend.*°
   Neither Bombay nor the Governor-in-Council in Bengal approved
the treaty, so war was resumed in 1777. Ragunath Rao waited in
Bombay with the British force. (A much larger force was marching
across India in support from Bengal.) Severe internal problems weak-
ened the party at Pune, and positions shifted several times. The arrival
of Holkar, with his 10,000 man              army,    changed the situation.        He
initially opposed the Nana Phadnavis group, but was soon brought in.
This support dramatically strengthened the faction opposing Ragunath
Rao, and most key Ragunath Rao supporters at Pune were jailed.*¢
   In late 1778, the British expedition of over 3,000 trained troops (with
19,000 bullocks dragging guns and supplies), finally moved out (not
yet joined by the force coming from Bengal). Meanwhile, the group in
Pune, under Shinde, Holkar, and Nana Phadnavis, assembled a large
army, stocked the Maharashtra forts, and raised cash. The British force
reached the top of the Ghats, marching less than a mile per day. By the
third week, the British force had run out of supplies, and the
commander decided to retreat. The Maratha army attacked and
surrounded the British force at Wadgaon (February 1779). Shinde
negotiated the treaty, by which the British gave up Ragunath Rao and
every bit of income and territory they had been promised since the
death of Madhav Rao in 1773. Leaving hostages, the British army
returned to Bombay.?7
  The end of this affair involved Colonel Leslie’s force which was
marching overland to Bombay from Bengal. It got involved in taking
Maratha forts in Bundelkund. The commander was replaced, and the
force pushed on. They passed through Malwa, waited for the Narmada
river to drop after the monsoon, and negotiated their way through the
Bhonsle territory of Nagpur. The force reached Burhanpur on the
Tapti river about the time the Bombay expedition was defeated, and
  *° A. Macdonald (compiler), Memoir of the Life of Nana Farnavis Compiled from Family
Records and Extant Works (London, reprinted edition, 1927), 26-29.
  26 Ibid., 30-34.
  27 Ibid., 39-41. See also R. Wallace, The Guicowar and his Relations with the British
(Bombay, 1863), 55.