

                                      173
                     THE   MARATHAS        1600-1818

(7) Trimbak Rao Mama. A Chitpavan Brahmin, surnamed Pethe, from the
Konkan coast. He fought at Panipat and served as a military leader and
diplomat. He died opposing Ragunath Rao’s advance on Pune in 1774. The
family never again gained prominence, and ended up with a small estate in
southern Maharashtra in the nineteenth century.
(8) Anand Rao Jivaji (Khasgiwala). After Panipat, this Chitpavan Brahmin
family formed the personal administration for Madhav Rao Peshwa. They
settled and collected revenue from the Peshwa’s personal inams. The family
retained holdings in both Pandarpur and Pune and were small jagirdars in the
nineteenth century.
(9) Hari Pant Phadke. A Chitpavan Brahmin. At this time, he was about
twenty years old, an army commander, just coming up. He was a strong
supporter of the Nana Phadnavis group and advanced rapidly in the next
decade.

(10) Murarrao Rao Gorpade of Gutti. This was an established Maratha family
whose lands were far from Pune on the border of Andhra. As an army
commander, he appeared briefly in the civil war of the 1770s as a supporter of
Ragunath Rao. He returned to Gutti and — with two sons — was killed in battle
opposing Tipu Sultan in the 1780s.
(11) Anand Rao Raste. In the seventeenth century, this Chitpavan Brahmin
family had been collectors on the Ratnagiri coast under the Nizam Shahi
kingdom. As administrators and soldiers, they rose rapidly in the 1740s, under
the patronage of Nana Saheb Peshwa. Members of the family fought at
Panipat. In the civil wars of the 1770s, the family first sided with the Nizam,
but returned to the Nana Phadnavis faction (1775). The family served as
military commanders, mainly in the Karnatak, and emerged with extensive
holdings in Pune and south Maharashtra.
(12) Govind Rao Patwardhan. This Chitpavan Brahmin family migrated from
the Ratnagiri coast to the Desh in about 1725. The family name was changed
from Bhat to Patwardhan after Sriwardhan, where they settled. Later, five sons
took service in Madhav Rao’s army (1760s). The family initially supported
Ragunath Rao, but was later won over to the Nana Phadnavis side; in the
1780s and 1790s, the brothers were prominent military commanders in the
south. The family emerged with six small states in southern Maharashtra in the
nineteenth century.




                                     174
                     EPILOGUE (1803-1818)

After the Peshwa took refuge with the British, the pattern followed the
familiar course of a disputed Maratha succession. The British offered
support to an otherwise weak candidate, in return for substantial
grants of revenue-producing land. More important, the British asserted
the legitimacy and authority of their candidate over the Maratha
houses. (This sequence is structurally no different from the British
attempt to set up Raghobadada a half-century earlier, or the Nizam’s
parallel attempts in the same period.) Just as predictably, Holkar and
others at Pune set up a rival candidate and sought allies. What differed
this time were the resources and organization of the British. Lord
Wellesley and Lord Lake organized a vast, comprehensive set of
coordinated campaigns, which put 60,000 trained men in the field on
widely separated fronts. The aims were to divide the Maratha houses,
break Shinde’s modern army and regular income, and seize income-
producing territory. During the monsoon of 1803, the British
neutralized Holkar, the rival Peshwa, and several of the smaller houses
(such as Patwardhan) with treaties.!
   In the months that followed, the war was fought on several fronts.
One British army engaged Shinde and the Bhonsle forces in northern
Maharashtra, the major battle costing thousands of casualties on both
sides. With the defeat of the Maratha army, the British took Burhanpur
and its nearby fortress, Asir. They also succeeded in stopping the
traditional raiding tactics adopted by the Bhonsle forces. Simultane-
ously, another British army moved on Delhi, Agra, and Shinde’s lands
north of the Chambal river. They were also successful, largely because
Shinde’s European officers (mainly French) deserted and disbanded
their troops. Without officers, some of Shinde’s best troops fought on,