




       Peshawar.
 AFGHANS




30°N     Multan’




 ARABIAN

       SEA


                      }
              Mangalore 5 MYSORE
                         \   nae
                   COORG~\4           “Yy
                         Nes I® Kaveri
                     Calicut


                                                  —-—-—   Approximate boundaries
                                                  LZ      British territories
                                                          Approximate area surrendered
                                                          to the Marathas by the Nizam
                                                          after Kharda
                                                  AAD     Tribute paid to British

                                                                                    sobe_|
Map 9. India in 1798 (adapted from C. C. Davies, An Historical Atlas of
                                                                      the
Indian Peninsula (Calcutta, 1963], 55).

                                            170
                        CENTRIPETAL          FORCES

brother was invested with the office of the Peshwa. Nana Phadnavis
retreated to Satara and tried to raise allies, including Bajirao, the elder
brother,    still imprisoned   in Shinde’s   camp.    From   Raigarh,   Nana
Phadnavis     built a coalition    supporting   Bajirao, which     included
Raghuji Bhonsle, the Peshwa’s household troops, and the Nizam —
who was brought in by the offer of all the territory which had been
taken from him after the Battle of Kharda.            By late 1796, Nana
Phadnavis had returned to Pune with enough backing to install Bajirao
as Peshwa.
   Events moved even more quickly in the next two years, and it was
Pune which suffered. Both Shinde’s and Holkar’s troops were can-
toned just outside the city and were in arrears of pay. There were
several serious battles on the streets of Pune and authority declined
quickly. When Tukoji Holkar died in late 1797, a succession dispute
between his sons was already in progress. Simultaneously, the new
Peshwa, Bajirao II, made a bid for freedom from Nana Phadnavis. He
instigated a Neapolitan adventurer serving Shinde to capture Nana
Phadnavis and his whole immediate group in January 1798. This was
followed by a sack of Pune to pay Shinde’s troops. Finally, Holkar’s
troops moved north to Malwa, and Daulat Rao Shinde’s attention was
demanded by a revolt, centered in northern Maharashtra, involving the
remaining queens of Mahadji Shinde. The areas around Ahmadnagar
and Kandesh suffered, as both armies fought each other, and pillaged
(see Map 1).
  The civil war widened, as both Shinde and the Peshwa sought allies.
The Peshwa brought in the Nizam. Shinde courted Tipu Sultan,
released Nana Phadnavis, who had been a prisoner in his camp for
nearly a year, and tried unsuccessfully to find a settlement with the
queens of Mahadji Shinde. The conflict spread to Malwa, with both the
army of the queens and Holkar’s troops attacking Shinde’s territory.
   Into this confused situation came the British. Their policy abruptly
changed with the arrival of Wellesley in April 1798. There was to be a
forward policy of engagement and subsidiary alliance with the
remaining powers to prevent associations between the French and the
Nizam, Tipu, or the Marathas. The Nizam was most eager to call in the
British, as a counter to Maratha pressure, and signed a subordinate
treaty in 1798. The Marathas were much more cautious. Nana Phad-
navis had always been suspicious of the British and opposed any treaty
or formal engagement.
                                     171
                   THE   MARATHAS       1600-1818