

                                             168
                             GENTRIPETAL            RORGES

the Deccan, bearing numerous Mughal insignia to be bestowed on the
imprisoned Peshwa. There was much speculation that Shinde would
displace Nana Phadnavis and take control of the central structure of the
Maratha polity. Though he succeeded in presenting the insignia,
Mahadji Shinde was very sick throughout his stay in Pune and died
there in early 1794 — succeeded by his adopted son, Daulat Rao Shinde.
   If the period from 1790-95 proved the superiority of infantry and
artillery, it was the 1795-1800 period which removed major polities
from the field. The Nizam was the first. In effect, he had been a
tributary of the Marathas since 1773, with no attempt to break free.
The new territories acquired at the conclusion of the war with Tipu
spurred attempts at independence. The Nizam’s actions raised Maratha
counter-claims to the chauth of Berar, Bedar, and Adoni. A large
combined army, including Shinde’s forces from the north, defeated the
Nizam at Kharda (April, 1795) and forced major concessions. This
defeat would have in all probability meant the final absorption of the
Nizam’s territory. Events intervened, however, to make the Nizam a
valued ally for a few years.
   After the Battle of Kharda, the major commanders returned to their
respective areas — Daulat Rao Shinde to Malwa, Purushuram Bhau
Patwardhan to Tasgaon in southern Maharashtra, Raghuji Bhonsle to
Nagpur. Only Tukoji Holkar remained at Pune, though his health was
declining rapidly. This was the peak of Nana Phadnavis’s power —
enemies defeated, commanders contentedly returning to their own
areas. It was a brief moment.
   In late 1795, the Peshwa, rendered helpless by the policies of Nana
Phadnavis, committed suicide; this act set off a succession dispute that
was to engulf the Maratha leaders in a civil war for the next five years.>”
The succession was “flawed” in every way. There was no son, no direct
heir to the Peshwa. The only collateral line contained the two sons of
Ragunath Rao, who had been Nana Phadnavis’s arch-enemy for more
than a quarter of acentury. As the conflict began, through 1796, Daulat
Rao Shinde played the major role, advancing south with a large army.
By the time he arrived at Pune, the factional situation had shifted
several times. The initial agreement between the elder of Ragunath
Rao’s two sons, Bajirao, and Nana Phadnavis broke down. By June,
Bajirao was a prisoner in Daulat Rao Shinde’s camp and the younger

  37 Only a brief summary is possible here. For the details, see Grant Duff, History, 61-110.


                                             169
                                                                  oF


                                                                          500km
                                                                            f
                                                                          300 miles