

 round robin of treaties between the major players — Tipu Sultan of
 Mysore, the Nizam, Nana Phadnavis and the British — as each tried to
 better his position. Detailed analysis of these events, policies, and
 battles, has been given in numerous histories of the British conquest of
 India, and will not be repeated here. Rather, we will consider only
 trends which were important for the Maratha polity.
    We left the British retreating toward Bombay in 1779-80. Within a
 year, a grand alliance to drive out the British had been formed; it
 included the Nizam, Haidar Ali of Mysore, the Bhonsle family, and the
 Peshwa. It lasted only a year, because the treaty of Salbai (1782), which
 was negotiated and dominated by Shinde, committed the Marathas and
 the British to friendship and joint conquest of Haidar Ali. (The same
 year, Haidar died, succeeded by his son Tipu.)
    This treaty is an important marker for changes in the Maratha polity.
 Certainly, there had been direct negotiations between outside powers
 and the Maratha “‘states’’ before. For example, both Fateh Singh
 Bhonsle and the Gaikwad family had frequently negotiated and allied
 with the Nizam. What changed here was that Shinde, formally
 subordinate to the Peshwa, was, in fact, guaranteeing the behavior of
 the whole Maratha polity. With the largest and most modern army in
 the polity, the tail was wagging the dog. The treaty also reflects the
 direct rivalry of Shinde, who wanted freedom from the English threat
 in order to expand his territories in the north, and Nana Phadnavis,
  who wanted to expand in the south. Shinde won.*4 The English were
very sensitive to these changes and were willing to give up much

the Maratha polity to their side.>> As we might predict from the whole
  of the previous Maratha history, things did not work out as neatly as
  the English hoped.
     The treaty of Salbai allowed Shinde to use his regular infantry and
  artillery to reduce many local armed lineages in northern Malwa and
  the Delhi area. In the next five years, he attacked Rajputs, Ahirs,
  Kichis, and Bundelas, winning the Battle of Lalsot against Jaipur.
  Nominally successful, the process actually bankrupted Shinde, who
  largely lost control of Delhi and the surrounding area. The new
  infantry/artillery units were proving crushingly expensive, even for the
  largest of the Maratha states.
   34 Macdonald, Nana Farnavis, 48-49.
   35 Wallace, Guicowar, 66-67.

                                         167
                          THE    MARATHAS            1600-1818

   In the south, Tipu forced the British into a “friendship” treaty at
Mangalore, separating them from Nana Phadnavis, who carried on the
war against Tipu, now allied with the Nizam. By 1784, Tipu with his
trained infantry and artillery had defeated the Nizam and extracted
tribute and territory. Through 1786-87, Maratha forces campaigned
against Tipu; the British withdrew, under orders from London to.
refrain from any forward adventures. The war remained inconclusive,
the Marathas taking forts in Tipu’s territory, but gaining little tribute
or rights; a peace treaty was finally concluded in March 1787.
   Through 1788-89, all parties jockeyed, knowing that the wars in the
south would resume as soon as the British re-entered the situation. The
British allied with the Nizam and allied with the Marathas in 1790.
Throughout, the Marathas were reluctant partners, not wanting to see
Tipu destroyed. They thus did not join Cornwallis on the disastrous
bid to take Srirangapatan, Tipu’s capital, in 1791. The combined army
did, however, take a whole series of Tipu’s forts along the Tunga-
bhadra river, and in 1791-92 captured more forts between Bangalore
and Srirangapatan (see Map 3). Tipu sued for peace in February 1792
and gave up large areas. The Marathas received Savnur, Lakshmeswar,
and Kandgol in Dharwar, and all the territory up to the Tungabhadra
river. The Nizam gained Cuddapah, Gooty, and the districts between
the Krisna and the Tungabhadra. The British were the biggest gainers —
Baramahal, Dindigul, Salem, Coorg, and much of the Malabar coast.
   Meanwhile, in the north, Shinde — with the battalions of infantry and
artillery trained by the Frenchman De Boigne — continued to gain
military victories over Jaipur (May 1790) and Jodhpur a few months
later.   These     two    battles     settled      Shinde’s   dominance         of Malwa,
Rajasthan, and the Delhi area until his death four years later. The
reduction of the huge fortress of Chittor by Shinde’s artillery, in a few
weeks, signalled the end of the traditional role of forts as places of
refuge. Shinde solved some of the problems of the cost of the new
forces by giving a large personal estate to De Boigne to cover the
on-going costs of the troops; the arrangements worked well for a
number of years.*° Through 1792, Shinde slowly moved south toward
  36 Shinde’s problems and strategies are covered in P. M. Joshi (ed.), Persian Records of
Maratha History, Vol I, Shinde as the Regent of Delhi (1787 and 1789-91) (Bombay, 1954).
It is important to note the size of these trained, uniformed units. Initial recruitment in 1790
was of ten batallions of 750 men, backed up by 60 pieces of artillery and 500 cavalry. Within
two years, the force was expanded to 24,000 troops with European officers and backed up by
130 pieces of artillery.