

   1 The period of the British conquest of the Maratha polity has been extensively covered,
both in original records and later histories. I have followed mainly G. S. Sardesai, New
History of the Marathas (Bombay, second impression, 1968), 111. See P. C. Ghosh, Baji Rao
I and the East India Company, 1796-1818 (New York, second edition, 1964); Also, M. P.
Roy, The Origin, Growth, and Suppression of the Pindaris (New Delhi, 1973). For the
specifics of the final campaign, see R. G. Burton, The Maharatta and Pindari War (Delhi,
reprinted edition, 1975).

                                           175
                   THE   MARATHAS        1600-1818

but were defeated. At the same time, other British units fought
Maratha forces in Gujarat, Orissa, and Bundelkond.        All were suc-
cessful.
   By December 1803, the British forced on the losers a series of
crippling treaties. The Peshwa was functionally replaced by the British
Resident at Pune, who took over the administration and all important
government functions. The British signed treaties of subordination
with all the Rajput states, plus the Jat, Rohilla, and Bundella states on
the northern rim of the Malwa plateau. All of these had previously paid
tribute regularly or irregularly to the Marathas. The British also took
control of Orissa, thereby securing control of the entire eastern coast
of India and much of the rest of the eastern territories of the Bhonsle
family. The treaty with Shinde conceded to the British all of his
possessions north of the Jumna (including Delhi and Agra), control of
the Mughal Emperor, all his possessions in Gujarat, and all claims on
other Maratha houses. The treaty also made the British arbiters of
disputes between the Maratha houses (rather than the Peshwa), and
forbade Europeans from taking service in any Maratha army.
   The campaigns of 1803-04 virtually bankrupted the East India
Company. The army was in arrears, and the Directors, more interested
in profit than in conquest, recalled Wellesley, replacing him with Lord
Cornwallis (whose specific charge was the negotiating of an end to the
expensive Maratha wars). There were three main results of this change
in policy. First, Holkar and Shinde recovered little of their lost
territory and were reduced to possessions on the Malwa plateau.
Second, the British repudiated alliances with the Rajasthan states and
others on the rim of the Malwa plateau. Third, and probably most
important, all the Maratha houses were directly tied to the British for
any claims. The effect of this series of treaties was to separate further
the Maratha houses and drastically reduce the power of the Peshwa. All
the forms of power, but none of the substance remained. The Peshwa
could not collect his own taxes or even discipline his own recalcitrant
deshmukh families without the consent of the British Resident.
   This situation — forms of power without substance — remained stable
for more than ten years. Some areas, such as Maharashtra, did well and
prospered; others, such as Malwa and Rajasthan, were often plundered
by the irregular troops of Shinde or Holkar, known as pindaries. The
situation began to shift in June 1817, when a new treaty was forced on
the hapless Peshwa, which effectively stripped him of all power. He