

                                           165
                          THE    MARATHAS            1600-1818

because the Marathas defeated the Bombay army. Though the new
artillery/infantry combinations of the Europeans were clearly superior
in the best of circumstances, they were not — at this point — invincible.
The Bombay army lost because of problems of terrain and supply — the
same two strategic advantages which had allowed Shivaji to resist
Bijapur and the Mughals. Even in the 1770s, it remained hard to drag
guns and food up the Ghats. Every month, the army cost more than the
revenue an average pargana produced in a year. As these new forces
became the norm, the power with the most credit would win.*!
   As much as possible, we have avoided burdening the narrative with
the names of the inner circle of power at Pune, but thumbnail
biographies are important for understanding the patterns of factional
politics, perhaps the most interesting feature of this period.3? What,
then, are we to make of this group of leaders? The main point to notice
is that there are no new Maratha families on the list. By this period, not
only were the main administrators Brahmin (Nana Phadnavis, Khasgi-
wale, Tulsibaghwale) and the bankers (Baramatikar) — this we would
expect — but so also were the military commanders (Raste, Patwardhan,
Phadke, Purandre). The Brahmin dominance of the grant-giving
process had made opportunities available to Brahmins, as never before
in the Maratha polity. The second point is that none of this new
group of commanders succeeded in establishing a large, independent
area of control, like Shinde, Holkar, Gaikwad, and Bhonsle had done
in the 1730-40 period. In spite of almost yearly campaigns in the
Karnatak, Maratha control never matched that of Gujarat, Malwa, or
Nagpur. Most of the tribute extracted from the local armed lineages
went to the Peshwa and later Nana Phadnavis. We shall elaborate on
these themes in the concluding section on the Maratha polity.
   Let us now carry the political narrative to 1803. The main themes of
the period were the increasing separation of north and south as spheres
of activity and the elimination of major polities. There was a constant

   >! In a wider context, it is worth noting that these same factors — supply, difficult terrain,
and credit — were decisive in another theater of the Anglo-French conflict, known as the
American Revolution. The British had considerable trouble moving artillery in the forests of
New England; George Washington was in despair at Valley Forge because he had no more
cash to pay crucial trained mercenary infantry. At the critical battle of Yorktown, the issue
was decided largely by problems of supply.
   32 See Appendix, p. 173.
   3 Grant Duff located an official list of the officers in Madhav Rao’s army. Of the 449 men,
there were 93 Brahmins, 8 Rajputs, 308 Marathas, and 40 Muslims. Grant Duff, History,
172n.

                                              166
                            CENT RIPE     Ad: RO RGES