

                                         164
                            CENTRIPETAL           FORCES

arrived at Surat about a month after the treaty had been signed.?8 The
main effect of this large English force was on the troubled politics of
Gujarat. The English forced Fateh Singh Gaikwad to cede to them
much of the revenues of southern Gujarat, which had been paid to the
Peshwa. During the campaign, the rapid breach of the walls of the city
of Ahmedabad showed, once again, the effectiveness of British artil-
ler?
   There are several long-term trends to be noted in this period of
factional warfare. First, we have seen a considerable shift in power
from the center to the peripheral Maratha states. Recall how the
position of the anti-Ragunath Rao force was strengthened by the
arrival of Shinde and Holkar’s troops from the north. From military
saranjams in the 1730s, the Shinde, Holkar, Bhonsle, and Gaikwad
families had built up regular administrations, including tax collection
and judicial functions. In the decades discussed, Holkar had the best
administered territories, Shinde was the strongest militarily and most
active diplomatically, while the Gaikwad and Bhonsle families were
factionally divided.*° The Pune administration needed at least two and
preferably three of these families to mount a large-scale offensive
against a serious external threat. Second, we should note the progres-
sion of power at Pune. Power was defined by control over the actual
revenue-producing bureaucracy. We have watched the shift from
Shivaji’s line to the Peshwa, and, in this period, from the Peshwa’s line
to Nana Phadnavis, who rose from being a clerk in Madhav Rao’s
service to controlling the government. Third, we should note the
British attempt to control the Maratha polity through the vehicle of
Ragunath Rao. This tactic is the same as the subversion of Bengal and
Awadh a decade earlier, and no different from the British “protection”
of the Peshwa a quarter-century later in 1803. It failed, in this period,
partly because they could not control Ragunath Rao, but mainly
   28 The manuscript letters and reports of the Goddard expedition are housed mainly in the
British Museum.    See Add. 29119, 38402, 28403. The political and military letters from
Goddard when he arrived in Gujarat are in the India Office Library, Orme MSS Vol. 197,
7-9. See also Raghubir Singh (ed.), English Records of Maratha History (Extra Volume):
Selections from C. W. Malet’s Letter-Book, 1780-1784 (Bombay, 1940).
   29 Wallace, Guicowar, 60-63.
   30 Based on documents no longer extant, Grant Duff made an attempt to quantify the
military strength of the center and the periphery for the early 1770s. He put the cavalry
strength of the Peshwa at 50,000 of which forty thousand were stationed in forts and
garrisons, leaving him about ten thousand troops for campaigning. He calculated that the
Bhonsle and Gaikwad families could muster 15,000 cavalry together. Shinde and Holkar
could muster 30,000 together, and the Pawar family, 3,000. Grant Duff, History, 171-72.