

                                   180
                            CONCLUSIONS

was found or sought. The duties and rights of these various portions —
saranjam, deshmukhi, inam, patil — remained unchanged. The forms of
reward for loyal service also remained unchanged; they included robes
of honor, palanquins, ceremonial elephants and horses, and drums. All
required face-to-face award at the court, whether at Pune, or Jinji, or
Satara. All of these forms of honor and the personal style of the
ceremony came directly from the prior Deccan kingdoms and con-
tinued unchanged throughout the Maratha polity. Another continuity
throughout the Maratha period was that reward did not necessarily
mean entrance into the inner circle. Many a deshmukh or a comman-
der, as we have seen, was rewarded and sent off to home lands or
distant duty.
   We find several strategies of promoting loyalty common to the
whole of the Maratha period. For example, every peshwa or king, on
his succession, brought in young men of his generation. With some
success, these new leaders were promoted very rapidly. Thus, we often
find men in their late teens leading units or bands of cavalry. By their
early twenties — as in the case of Shinde, Holkar, or Ranoji Bhonsle —
they were leading thousands of cavalry. In factional disputes, these
younger men, as we might expect, showed much greater loyalty to
their patrons (whether peshwa or king) than older men who had been
appointed by the previous sovereign. Another strategy that both those
of Shivaji’s line and the Peshwa used to build loyalty, was to marry into
other families in the inner circle. This strategy was not particularly
successful at building loyalty. The marriage enhanced the prestige of
the in-law family and created rivals — especially cousins and uncles.
Some of the most bitter factional conflict arose from exactly these
unions within the inner circle. (The tension between trying to concen-
trate power through marriage and creating rivals was, of course, also a
regular feature of European monarchies.) Another constant feature of
loyalty in this face-to-face milieu was the importance of charismatic
speaking ability. It seems clear that several in Shivaji’s line and several
of the Peshwas launched whole new strategies from debates among the
inner circle at court.
   If we look outwards from the court, the patterns of loyalty formed
mainly around short- and long-term cycles. For example, there was the
yearly cycle of authority/loyalty when the army assembled at Dassera
(after the monsoon) for the beginning of the campaigning season. At
the designated place of assembly, there would be the Sirpau ceremony
                                   181
                        THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

—a special turban distributed to the leaders, accompanied by a vow of
loyalty. This ceremony was accompanied by an examination of horses
and equipment and a blessing of the guns.
   Other demonstrations of loyalty were, however, expected. One
pattern of these followed the life-cycle of the king or peshwa.
 Accession, of course, required attendance and nazar (presents) from
both the court and a quite wide circle of deshmukh families of
Maharashtra. We find that this pattern of special taxes and audience
also accompanied the birth of a son, thread ceremony, marriage of
either peshwa or king or their sons, or adoption. All of these were
occasions for face-to-face contact between the king or peshwa and the
most important landed families of the polity. In a similar pattern,
authority and loyalty were periodically asserted in the life-cycle events
of these families, right up to most powerful military commanders. The
king or peshwa was needed for the transferring of “nested” rights on
the death of the grantee. Any relative or sharer of the revenue (such as a
saranjamdar supported from the area) could dispute the right of a son
to receive revenue when it was his father’s name on the grant. Only the
king or peshwa could, on receipt of a present and oath of loyalty,
transfer the grant to the son.
   Another cycle was the pattern of disputed authority. It appeared at
every succession, but was most fully played out in the periods of civil
war (1708-18, 1772-78, 1795-1801). The cycle began when the inner
circle prepared for a succession. Recall, for example, how factions had
already formed several years before Shivaji’s death. The contenders
reached out for alliances, first among the inner circle, then outside
powers (earlier the Mughals, later the Nizam of Mysore). At the same
time, the contenders courted bankers in the Pune community.? The
importance of holding a stable, loyal, revenue-producing area credit-
able with a banker cannot be overstated.
   After the death of the king or peshwa, the cycle moved from a
preparation stage to military conflict. First, there was assembling of
armies and attempts to gain position, using advantages of the terrain or
loyal forts or the season. We should note that one side or the other
would hold the capital, and certainly proclaim its candidate king or
peshwa, but that act did not end the cycle; it was not evena significant
marker in the process. As both contending armies moved in the field,
  > This community, of course, included the Dikshit/Patwardhan family which was based at
Nasik, but had representatives in Pune.