

first half of the eighteenth century. Across the Indian subcontinent,
responses to this new fighting force were mixed. Some leaders, such as
the Nizam, eagerly embraced the new forces. Others, like Holkar,
were skeptical. In truth, the skeptics were probably correct. Not only
had the record of these new forces been mixed (several victories, but
some signal defeats), but the evidence from the Nizam was that they
were so expensive that they mortgaged state finances to the army.
Panipat mainly demonstrated the incompatibility of the various
models of warfare — mobile cavalry, trained infantry/artillery, and the
huge Mughal-style army. For example, the cavalry was needed to
protect the flanks of the infantry, but the cavalry attacked in the
hand-to-hand         charge     (its most      effective     maneuver).        Without       a
command structure, the Marathas broke and ran when the commander
was slain.
   After Panipat, the various leader pursued one or the other of the
military paradigms. The Bhonsle family, for example, returned to
traditional Maratha light cavalry and never raised the new battalions of
infantry. Shinde, in contrast, rather quickly began recruiting infantry
and cast a large park of artillery. He recruited mainly North Indians
(especially Rajputs and Muslims), and within a decade his army was
hardly a “Maratha” army at all.? Holkar was somewhere between the
two. There remained a strong tradition of cavalry and reluctant
experiments with trained infantry, but active casting of artillery.!° In
the south, there were mainly changes in personnel. As we have seen,
after Panipat, no new Maratha commanders emerged. It is not that
there were no opportunities, but those opportunities were given to
Brahmins (Raste, the Patwardhan brothers, Hari Pant Phadke), not
Marathas. The simplest explanation would be anti-Maratha prejudice
among the ruling Brahmin elite at Pune. In the absence of solid
research, let us suggest some other factors. There was no Maratha king
leading any army, so that personal loyalty and bravery went unnoticed
and unrewarded. Perhaps there was a long-term need for close ties to
   ° It has been suggested that Mahadji Shinde, because he was not a legitimate heir, had
trouble recruiting Marathas and, therefore, quickly moved to recruiting North Indians,
Muslims, and others to his army. On this trend in all the Maratha armies of the second half of
the eighteenth century, see $.N. Sen, The Military System of the Marathas (Calcutta,
reprinted edition, 1979) 62-63.
   10 Right to the end, some Maratha armies resembled the moving cities of the Panipat
period. Also, recruitment structure remained largely as it had at Panipat, each man
“contracted” for by a leader. Pay was the endless, insoluble problem. See W. H. Tone,
Illustrations of Some Institutions of the Maratha People (London, 1818), 21-25.

                                            192
                                  CONCLUSIONS

the Pune banking community, because of increased credit needs for a
larger army, and they were more likely to back Brahmin commanders.
Alternatively, the Brahmin leaders were, perhaps, more flexible in
changing from the older mobile cavalry forces to the newer tactics. In
any case, the facts are there, awaiting research.
   By the 1780s and 1790s, there were two major military changes. The
first, as we have noted, was the great increase in the size of the armies of
Shinde and Holkar, relative to the troops under the Pune government.
In essence, Malwa was a wealthier area than Maharashtra, and both
leaders had used their revenues to advantage. Both had also benefitted
from tribute levied in Rajastan and the north. The second trend was
rapid conversion to the infantry/artillery model of warfare. An arms
race was in progress, pitting Shinde against Holkar. It bankrupted both
leaders, forcing, for example, Shinde into campaigns against Rajasthan
which were only money-raising ventures. It also forced both leaders to
use pindaries, which were units of unpaid cavalry (often Afghans) who
fought in battle, looted and generally lived off the spoils of war.
Wherever they were used, cultivation and revenue collection suffered
heavily. By the turn of the century, paying these new armies was the
main impetus of government policy. The Pune government raised a
regular battalion in the mid-1790s, and planned to raise several more,
but simply never had the money.!! The second change in this period
was the declining importance of forts. Artillery had so developed in
quality and accuracy that, for example, Shinde was able to take Chittor
(one of the largest and strongest forts in Rajasthan) in a matter of
weeks. This development was, of course, paralleled by the British, who
took Srirangapatan in the same period.
   Maharashtrian historians generally conclude a history of the
Maratha polity by assigning blame for the conquest by the English.
Many factors have been considered from failures of character of
individual personalities, to the inability of various families to pull
together, to the failure to cast good artillery. These alleged “failures”
are always placed within a very narrow Indian regional perspective. It
is only in a worldwide context that the conquest of the Maratha polity
gains some perspective. We must recall that the Maratha polity fought
the most sophisticated military force in the world at the time; it
had benefitted by both dramatic breakthroughs in metallurgy, and