

   > I have found such support formed 5-8 percent of the expenses of governing in the
Peshwa’s documents for every area and district I have examined.
   6 The hundreds of Persian loan words found in Marathi today are part of the legacy of
these continuities from the Deccan sultanates.

                                         186
                            CONCLUSIONS

   Within these normative and structural continuities were several
cycles. The first was the yearly cycle of information gathering and
revenue collection throughout the peshwa period in the most settled,
directly administered areas. As we have seen (in Chapter 3), the cycle
began in the capital, with the peshwa’s clerks preparing an estimate of
the collection of each collector’s area; after the collector accepted the
estimate, he raised the advance payment from the Pune banking
community. (Incidentally, the variety of names and the variability of
the guarantors suggests a relationship more market-style than patron—
client.) Well before the monsoon, the collectors left for the field,
returning to residences in the largest town of their jurisdiction. From
then on, they toured — examining the state of the crops and settling
taxes with each village — often trying minor cases along the way. The
typical stay in a village was only a day or two, time enough to examine
the local land records and note any changes in the actual fields under
cultivation. The documents confirming the taxes due were prepared at
his residence in the ensuing months, and signed by the village headmen
and the deshmukh of the area. Periodically, the village headman sent
payments to local Maratha treasuries. At the end of the revenue year,
the collector balanced the receipts against the agreed upon revenue and
prepared balance sheets for each village. When he once again returned
to Pune, he was responsible for the unpaid balance, which he had to
collect first in the following year. (If this entire cycle sounds sus-
piciously like the British District Officer of the nineteenth century, it
should. It seems likely that his role was patterned after the Maratha
kamavisdar, and it was a pattern and a cycle that met the expectations
of village headmen and deshmukhs.) Lest this be construed as some
sort of idealized system, recall that there are tens of thousands of
working documents of this system in the Pune Daftar, and every
researcher who has worked on them has found extraordinary levels of
thoroughness, predictability, and detail.
   We should also note a common cycle outside the areas of stable
control. In areas with armed local lineages, the cycle began with a
main-force Maratha army “conquering” the region. This, in fact,
meant that the local lineage found it expedient to come to terms rather
than fight, or retire to a fort and await siege. Typically, they paid some
tribute immediately, and promised some further amount in following
years. In these following years, payment either tapered off, or — more
commonly — stopped altogether. Note that the Maratha collector dealt