

  1 James Grant Duff, History of the Marathas (Jaipur, reprinted edition, 1986), 111, 109.

                                           193
                         THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

mercenary training developed in the European wars of the mid-
eighteenth century. More importantly, for the Indian context, the
English already held the most prosperous regions — Bengal and Tamil
Nadu. It was these areas which provided the credit and cash for the
English to put more than 100,000 trained, uniformed, and equipped
troops into the field, and supplied them during two long campaigns.
Ultimately, it was superior credit, artillery, and training, and the
momentum of victory in the Napoleonic Wars which defeated the
Marathas. It is worth recalling that virtually nowhere in the world was
this combination successfully resisted at the time.!?
   Finally, let us consider a few of the long-term effects of the Maratha
polity. All have been suggested in the text, but let us be explicit. First,
there was quite a bit of internal migration within Maharashtra, during
much of the period of the Maratha polity. Chitpavan and Karad
Brahmins, for example, migrated out of the coastal Konkan and found
service at Pune or Satara or with the rural elite. Individual families
moved to avoid famine or war. In addition, there was considerable
migration out of Maharashtra to areas controlled by the Maratha
polity. We find, even today, groups who trace their origin to the
Marathas in Gujarat, Malwa, Bangalore, the Kotah-Bundi areas of
eastern Rajasthan, the Rajasthan states, and Thanjur. For many of these
families, there was long-term social mobility; these Brahmin and
Maratha families continued as elites both in Maharashtra and areas of
Maratha control, such as the princely states of Gwalior, Indore,
Nagpur, and Baroda. The support of these elite families has been a
significant factor both in the nineteenth and twentieth century politics
of India, but also in the more limited area of patronage of Hindu
temples and places of pilgrimage, not only in Maharastara, but
throughout India.!> Second, the heritage of the Maratha polity in tax
collection, record keeping, and administration carried on well into the
   '2 The few exceptions make for interesting contrasts. China, for example, managed to
contain the Europeans to coastal enclaves, though unable to defeat them militarily. Japan
remained closed until later in the century. Afghanistan and Thailand remained independent,
as buffer states. The defeat of the British expeditions to Afghanistan, in the mid-nineteenth
century showed that — as always —a superior military force was vulnerable to severe problems
of terrain and supply.
   '3 As we have seen, of special importance was Ahilyabai Holkar, who ruled Holkar state in
the last four decades of the eighteenth century. She built literally dozens of temples, ghats,
wells, tanks, and rest-houses from the Himalayas all the way to the large pilgrimage sites of
the south. She supported hundreds of Brahmins and lavish yearly festivals. See the translated
documents in V. V. Thakur, Life and Life’s Work ofShree Devi Ahilyabai Holkar (Indore,
n.d.), Chapters 6, 8.