

                                         182
                            CONCLUSIONS

much more significant was the reaching down to deshmukh families
for immediate help, safe cantonment during the monsoon, money, or
additional troops. This meant that the conflict would be a longer and
more bitter one than usual. The military cycle had more periods of
devastating the revenue-producing areas of the rival than large-scale
battles. If the cycle carried on without resolution for more than a
campaigning season, one side or the other would likely call in an
outside power, which made the situation more precarious; the outside
power’s “help” cost a promise of tribute and land. This phase of the
conflict cycle ended with the capture of one or the other of the
candidates, usually after a decisive battle re-establishing an authorita-
tive office-holder. One consistent feature of the process is the variety
of outcomes possible for the loser. He might end up in prison, but just
as likely not. He might get a portion of the kingdom (the end of the
Tarabai episode) or a small estate (the family of Ragunath Rao).
   In the immediate aftermath of such a battle, loyalty was demanded of
every grant-holder, whether directly involved or not. The direct
opposition was not demoted, it was crushed. The families which had
been the core opposition did not somehow go back to their “‘estates”’
and wait for better times. Most rights, especially the lucrative saranjam
rights for maintenance of troops, were quickly resumed. Often, even
the older “‘nested”’ rights — deshmukh, inam, and patil — were resumed
and the family essentially returned to the status of leader of a small,
family-based military unit. We have seen how several of the prominent
families after choosing the wrong side in this sort of succession conflict
simply disappeared from Maratha history. For those outside the core
opposition, there does not seem to be a clear trend in what constituted
treasonous behavior, not to be forgiven. Throughout the period,
leading an attack on the capital was serious business, as was turning
overa large fort to the opposing side or switching sides in the final
battle. Simply taking service with the losing side was usually not
grounds for dismissal; such “errors” were routinely forgiven. The new
king or peshwa probably needed the support of the deshmukhs who
had joined the opposing side. For the supporters of the winning
candidate, there was very rapid promotion — including grants, and
offices with power and salaries.
   Now let us consider the long-term trends in authority and loyalty
during the Maratha period. From the low ebb of the Jinji period
(1690s) through 1720, there was a steady centralization of authority

                                   183
                         THE    MARATHAS           1600-1818

and demand for loyalty by Balaji Bajirao and Shahu. Independent
bands became parts of larger armies, led by the peshwa. In the Bajirao
period, the grant-giving process for inams, saranjams, even desh-
mukhs, was gradually taken over by the peshwa, in the name of the
king. In the 1730s, the “division” of Malwa and Gujarat actually
consolidated      the centralization.        Initially, the areas         under     Shinde,
Holkar, and the Gaikwad family were not, in any sense, “indepen-
dent” states. They were ruled by men who had come up with the
patronage of the peshwa, and were personally loyal to him. Especially
in the case of Shinde and Holkar, there is little evidence of independent
action until after the battle of Panipat (1761).4 From the 1740s onward,
the peshwa successfully asserted authority over quite ordinary groups
and individuals far from Maharashtra. We have seen, for example, how
his administrators adjudicated caste disputes in eastern Malwa. All of
these cases ultimately could be appealed to the peshwa. Also in this
period, Bajirao Peshwa personally led the army and received personal
pledges of loyalty from local zamindars and rajas, when the army was
on the march. For this issue of centralization, the period of 1770-95 is
more problematic. In some areas, it looks like the process of consoli-
dation and centralization was developing. For example, the Gaikwad
in Gujarat was sharing power with the Peshwa; the small states of
Satara and surrounding estates were not real rivals. At the same time
the beneficiaries of the “division” of the 1730s were rapidly developing
institutional and functional independence. Holkar had extensive, well-
managed lands on the Malwa plateau; the Peshwa received neither
revenue from them nor information about them. Shinde was, however,
the biggest gainer in these decades. To his lands in Malwa, he added
much of the area north of the Chambal river, the area around Delhi
west into what is now Harayana, and tribute from much of Rajasthan.
By the mid-1770s, the delicate balance of power between the center and
these peripheral “‘states”’ had shifted, and the Peshwa (or his keepers,
such as Nana Phadnavis) held estates and income only marginally
larger than these two families. By the 1780s, the center needed these
families to face any serious outside threat. Equally interesting,
however, was the fact that no new large landed powers grew up in the
   * Recall that Shinde and Holkar were also granted estates in Maharashtra, which were an
important source of prestige. Both families demonstrated great attachment to them. This
made the peshwa’s threat of sequestering these estates an effective means of disciplining both
families. In the later eighteenth century, the large holdings in Malwa and beyond made the
estates in Maharashtra less important.