

                                    189
                          THE     MARATHAS           1600-1818

tactics, staffing, personnel, provisioning, weapons, even principal
opponents. To get a sense of the change, we need only compare
Shivaji’s Mavali cavalry and lightly armed infantry to Shinde’s trained
and uniformed infantry and artillery a century later. Recall some of the
details of Shivaji’s early force. It was composed of mainly of Maratha
families of the central Ghat region. They were attracted to Shivaji by
his personal charisma and leadership. Commands came quickly; often
teenagers gained leadership positions. Warfare outside the mountains
was mainly on horseback, which put a premium on dash and strength.
Large battles were generally avoided; the winning strategy was to cut
off the supplies of the enemy army and raid deep into his territory to
draw him off. Battle tactics were simple, consisting mainly of cavalry
charges. In the mountains, infantry attacked the enemy in passes or
other difficult terrain. Recall how much Shivaji relied on superior
knowledge of the local countryside for strategic advantage. Artillery
was, for the most part, ignored, and forts could not be taken by mining
or sapping. Forts were, however, crucially important as places of
refuge, especially in the Ghat area of Maharashtra.? When the army
was in the field, provisioning was non-existent, and the army was
expected to live off the land. The entire Maratha force returned home
during the monsoon, much of it to plant crops. Recall that Shivaji
himself began the change from this pattern. By the 1670s, Shivaji had
510,000 horses of his own and had begun keeping his troops in
cantonment through the monsoon. Shivaji, unlike any other Indian
monarch (other than Tipu Sultan more than a century later), had made
a promising beginning at a navy, to compete in the complex politics of
the Konkan coast.
   If anything, Maratha warfare reverted to the earliest pattern during
the period of pressure by the Mughals (1680-1705), a time char-
acterized by small, mobile bands, individual leadership, and minimal
Maratha government control. It was difficult to assemble any force
larger than a few thousand troops. We find very few infantry units,
other than some garrison troops, in this period. The navy was defeated
and burnt.’
  Change began under the leadership of Bajirao Peshwa (1720-40).
  7 See, for example, Ramchandra Nilkanth’s long section on the organization and stocking
of forts in the Aynapatra (1700). “The Ajnapatra or royal edict” (trans. $. V. Puntambeker) >
Journal of Indian History, 8, 2 (August 1929), 219-28.
   ® The Angria family, however, built a fleet of small ships which were a factor in the coastal
politics until the late 1730s.

                                             190
                           CONCLUSIONS

Essentially, the change in this period was from resistance to conquest.
Bayirao was able to assemble much larger armies, coalescing them out
of the smaller bands. More importantly, he picked a small group of
promising young leaders and was able to promote them into large
holdings in the newly conquered territories of Malwa and Gujarat. By
the mid-1730s, these armies were staying in their areas through the
monsoon. After the Battle of Bhopal (which established Maratha
control of Malwa), the purpose and function of the armies changed.
The significant military events were no longer the large plains battles
against a Mughal army. The Marathas, in order to establish control,
needed to subdue local armed lineages. Loot was down and tribute and
revenue collection were the order of the day. Within a few years, the
need for effective artillery was obvious. Both the large leaders (Shinde,
Holkar) and the Peshwa knew that siege guns were necessary to take
the forts of the local lineages. Cash needs climbed, as leaders and the
Peshwa raised artillery units and paid for full-time garrison troops and
full-time mercenaries.
   From the death of Bajirao (1740) to Panipat (1760), the process of
change accelerated. Armies grew to a size that made living off the land
clearly impossible. Armies of 30-40,000 were occasionally assembled.
These armies no longer looked anything like the lightly equipped,
mobile cavalry of a generation earlier. They had become moving cities,
complete with thousands of bullock carts, an artillery train, and a
complete bazaar. In fact, they resembled Mughal armies in amenities
and luxuries. In part, the size and grandeur served the same function
that it had under the Mughals, to overawe the local lineages and gain
tribute without warfare. What had not changed was actual battle
tactics. No matter how large the army, it was simply divided into right,
middle, and left wings, which attacked its counterpart in the enemy
force. The army was the personal army of the commander; because
there was no command      structure, in the modern sense, if the com-
mander was killed or retreated, the army, no matter how large, broke
and ran.
   In the 1750s, there had been several demonstrations of a new
structure and organization of the military by the French and English, at
war with each other for much of the decade. The forces consisted of
trained infantry, using guns superior to anything made in India at the
time, supported by relatively quick-firing artillery. Both the guns and
the artillery were fruits of the advances in metallurgy in Europe in the
                                  191
                         THE     MARATHAS          1600-1818