

                                            184
                            CONCLUSIONS

period. The Patwardhans, the Rastes, and Hari Pant Phadke — the
successful military commanders of the late eighteenth century — never
had opportunities in the Karnatak like those of Shinde, Holkar, and
Gaikwad in an earlier period in the north. None of the newer leaders
were able to carve out even semi-independent areas.
   Overall, by the late period, power was consolidating in three centers.
The center remained fairly strong. The Peshwa’s areas had a full, intact
administration; the documents from the local districts were the most
detailed and comprehensive which the Maratha polity ever produced.
Though the Peshwa had lost some areas (such as the city of Burhanpur
to Shinde), the Gaikwad and Bhonsle families were courting the British
to keep from being absorbed into the Peshwa’s domains. Thus, at the
end of the period, there were only three significant powers in the
Maratha polity — Shinde, Holkar, and the Pune court. We must see this
overall trend as one of consolidation and centralization, not somehow
chaos and anarchy. Recall that the British were able to conquer the
Maratha polity a few years later by subverting the center, a situation
only possible when a strong, centralized bureaucracy was in place.
   In considering the long-term changes in loyalty and authority, one
significant question is how much change there was in the polity when
Brahmins replaced Marathas as the dominant element at the center. In
many fundamental ways it did not change the polity. For example, the
patronage of Muslim pirs and dargahs continued just as it had under
Maratha dominance and earlier under the Deccan sultanates. Differen-
tial tax rates in urban markets still favored Muslim traders. Still, there
were profound effects, the most obvious of which was widespread,
rapid social mobility for Brahmins somehow connected to the polity.
They became the administrators of the newly conquered regions as
well as in the expanding bureaucracy at the center. Equally important,
Brahmins became high military leaders in large numbers. One estimate
based on muster lists put the number of Brahmin leaders at almost
one-third of such leaders in the Peshwa’s army in the 1770s. (The
proportion may have been higher towards the end of the eighteenth
century.) We have noted that the prominent families which emerged in
the second half of the eighteenth century (Raste, Patwardhan) were all
Brahmin. Another route of social mobility was the emergence of
banking families who loaned money to the government; these were
overwhelmingly Brahmin. Outside this circle, there was steady
patronage for temple priests, teachers and scholars, and government

                                   185
                       THE    MARATHAS          1600-1818

patronage of festivals such as Diwali and Holi.> A second, perhaps less
well-known effect of Brahmin control of the center was the direct
patronage of temples and pilgrimage sites. From Goa, through the
Konkan, up on the Desh, and throughout areas of the Maratha polity,
villages and land were given in perpetual religious grants (some of
which still exist today as temple trusts). The third effect of this
Brahmin dominance was to create another line of cleavage in factional
disputes — Brahmin versus Maratha. This was not a major line of
cleavage or loyalty, but there was periodic discussion among the big
Maratha families of re-establishing Shivaji’s line to real power and
decreasing the power of the Brahmins.
   Let us turn from this discussion of loyalty and authority to our
second broad topic, information and revenue collecting. We will begin
with the continuities throughout the Maratha period. The entire
normative structure of revenue collecting came directly from the
Deccan kingdoms. This included the maximum amounts expected of
cultivating villages, the methods of assessing land, the categories of
land (bagayat, jirayat, etc.), the contractual rights of patils and desh-
mukhs, and the expected performance of each office. It is striking that,
for example, a document describing how a devastated area was to be
redeveloped in 1650 exactly described the process, as it was to be done
in the 1760s — including the same terminology of tacavi loans and
istawa (stepwise increasing) revenue settlements. On the whole, this is
one of the least innovative areas of Maratha rule. If one looks at Nizam
Shahi or Adil Shahi grants — deshmukhi, patilki, saranjam, or inam —
the structure, rights, and responsibilities are identical to grants of the
middle or late eighteenth century.®
   Especially important is the long-term continuity in the position of
the deshmukh. We have seen how these families possessed “‘nested”’
rights which included fortified houses, some patil rights in individual
villages, and inam villages and land, all in a circumscribed region. Every
government,      whether     Mughal,     Nizam      Shahi, or Maratha,         had to
negotiate with them. What should be emphasized here is their crucial
role in information and revenue collection, with responsibilities both
to the central government and the villages in their jurisdiction.