

                                   187
                   THE   MARATHAS       1600-1818

only with the court of the local lineage, simply requesting the tribute
each year. He received very little information from the surrounding
villages, had no relationships with village headmen, measured no fields,
collected no revenue. “Revolt” meant that the lineage forced the
collector to leave. (““Conquest” by another power functionally meant
the same thing, with the opposing power putting their collector in the
court of the armed lineage.) It took another main-force Maratha army
to “conquer” the lineage and begin tribute again. In some areas, such as
Malwa and Khandesh and parts of Gujarat, this sort of cycle was
quickly replaced by the regular revenue collection described above. In
others — the rest of Gujarat, the Jat and Rohilla areas near Delhi, much
of Rajasthan, and all of the Karnatak — the Maratha “‘conquest”’ never
got beyond this cycle of tribute collection from local armed lineages.
   The long-term trends in information gathering and revenue collec-
tion represent one of the major accomplishments of the Maratha
polity. From the 1720s, there was a steady expansion of area under
direct administration, largely at the expense of non-assessed lands
under armed, local lineages, but also seized from opposing powers,
such as the Nizam. The trend was toward greater quantity, quality, and
frequency of information reaching the center. In these records, we can
track the trend toward predictability, as areas acquired a reputation for
payment or recalcitrance. These judgements were actually quantified
by the Pune banking community, and were reflected in the rates of
interest charged for money loaned against the receipts of the area. We
can track, for example, cropping patterns, cities and trade routes, and
the minute details of caste and family conflict. In addition to the
revenue records, the peshwa regularly received news from all parts of
India, produced by professional newswriters at all the principal courts.
In a wider sense, the revenue collectors and newswriters have given us
an economic and social record for the eighteenth century unmatched in
detail and scope outside of Europe. Generations of historians can
utilize this record to answer many of the outstanding questions of
pre-colonial India.
   A second long-term trend, implied in this sophisticated revenue and
information-gathering effort, was that of monetization. Most areas had
trade and some money use even in the sixteenth century. Over the
period of the Maratha polity, money use moved outwards from
cash-crop areas (such as Gujarat, Khandesh, and eastern Malwa) into
areas less monetized (such as the Desh, the Konkan, Orissa, and the

                                  188
                            CONCLUSIONS

Karnatak). The research on this trend is still sketchy, but there was
certainly the development of vigorous demand in the new towns of
Maharashtra — Satara, Bombay, Kolapur, Pune, Ahmadnagar, Nasik,
Junnar — and at the new Maratha capitals — Indore, Gwalior, Nagpur,
Baroda. Older towns, associated with the Mughals, generally declined
— Surat, Burhanpur, Bijapur, and Shahjapur (in Malwa). There was
competition among the various ports on the coast — Bombay, Bassein,
Rajapur, Chaul — and traders migrated to the most favorable situation.
One marker of increased monetization was commutation of rights
formerly collected in kind to amounts collected in cash. There has, as
yet, been no large-scale study of this process, but several researchers
have found it in the records of even small and remote villages.
Commonly, the obligation to cut grass for the Maratha army, or the
obligation of a certain number of days of service carrying supplies for
the army, was commuted to a cash payment. Even many deshmukhi
rights in kind had been commuted to cash quantities by the end of the
eighteenth century. The development of large-scale markets, such as
vast annual horse fairs and cattle fairs, is yet another marker in this
trend.
    It should, perhaps, be emphasized that the Maratha polity was not as
strongly tied to cities as, for example, the Mughal Empire. Their
capitals, for much of the history, were in forts, not cities. In conquest,
they took the countryside first, the towns second, and left the cities
until much later. (The cities of Surat, Aurangabad, and Burhanpur all
fit this pattern.) Cities, also, were not significant producers of revenue,
generating less than the agricultural taxes of a small pargana. The
administration was based in the pargana towns — where the kamavisdar
lived — and did not pass through any nearby city. The Maratha polity
produced virtually no monumental urban architecture. In spite of this
neglect, cities served important functions. In finance, they were the
nodes of a highly sophisticated method of moving money. Hundis
(checks, payable at sight or in a specified time in another city) were so
commonly used that rates between cities were competitively set and
varied slightly with the season and the perceived danger of the
connecting route. The cities were also significant sources of manufac-
turing (such as the specialized cotton cloth of Burhapur) and wholesale
markets for stocking the military, to which we now turn.
   Unlike other aspects of the Maratha polity, there were virtually no
long-term continuities in any aspect of the military — not strategy,