

                                   176
                            EPILOGUE

would no longer have any representation at other courts in India or
even formal overlordship of the Maratha houses. Within months, the
British Residencies had been attacked and burned both in Pune and
Nagpur. British armies, however, quickly defeated the Peshwa’s forces
and the Bhonsle forces at Nagpur. By the end of 1817, a large,
multi-front campaign reminiscent of 1803-04 had crushed the pindari
forces (which had been raiding into British territory) and Holkar’s
forces, which were the only remaining effective army.
   The end of the Maratha polity came with a British proclamation in
February 1818, which formally removed the Peshwa. Within a few
months, he surrendered and his army was disbanded. The British
began the long process of settling and administering the territories
which they had conquered. The remaining Maratha houses received
treaties of subordination which turned them into princely states.




                                 Ly
                           CON GEUSIONS



How, then, might we describe the Maratha polity? At the outset, let us
dispose of several notions prevalent in the historical literature. The
Maratha polity was not an empire, if, by that, we have an image of
imperial Rome or the Mughal Empire. There was no graded civilian/
military ranking with attendant symbols of authority. Those in the
military were not, until late in the eighteenth century, full-time
professionals. The Maratha polity did not, and could not, impose a
uniform legal or revenue system. It never minted a uniform, high-
quality currency;! neither did it build the straight roads which were the
pride of the Roman Empire. Large parts of the Maratha polity, unlike
Rome or the Mughal Empire, were permanently alienated to military
commanders. There was no grand, imperial architecture.
   Another term, in favor since the nineteenth century in writings on
Marathas, is “‘confederacy.” This term, also, fails to describe many
central aspects of the Maratha polity. Confederacy implies a long-term
shared power among groups or individuals of more-or-less equal
power for mutual benefit or gain. The models which come to mind are
the co-operation between the Swiss cantonments or the pre-
Revolution American colonies. Confederacy implies a long-term cast
of characters (the confederates) to make and execute plans. In contrast,
as we have analyzed, it was characteristic of the Maratha polity that the
inner circle of power changed with each generation, sometimes as
frequently as each decade. Men joined or left the inner circle, depend-
ing on the stability and strength of the ruling family. Most critically,
those who left did not remain some sort of loyal opposition, later to
rejoin the inner circle. Rather, the families were most frequently
crushed for their opposition and subsequently disappeared from the
historical   record.    This    was,    clearly, a different       dynamic      from     a
confederacy.
   ' The Marathas adopted a very open attitude toward the minting of currency. Whoever
had bullion or older coins simply brought them to a Maratha mint and, for a fee, new coins
were produced. Even late in the eighteenth century, the most common silver coin, for
example, made in the Burhanpur mint was the sicca rupee, a coin much predating the Maratha
rule. See Pune Daftar, Prant Azmas Khandesh Rumal, no. 196.