

                                           178
                                  CONCLUSIONS

   Closer to a satisfactory formulation is Andre Wink’s emphasis on
the role of deshmukhs as “‘co-sharers” in the polity, the structural
tension within families holding rights, and the use of the granting of
rights to build the kingdom.? Overall, however, it is as one-sided to see
the Maratha polity as “typically” riven by factional politics as the older
histories which saw only kingly authority and “traitors.” The
published documents are, indeed, full of factional conflict and lead one
to this view. All the famous series — Selections from the Peshwa Daftar,
treaties, engagements and sanads, Poona Residency Correspondence —
are full of these problems. Yet, one must strongly question whether
this printed record is “‘typical” of the Maratha polity. We must
remember that the documents were selected as “interesting” more than
seventy-five years ago by a handful of historians of Maharashtra,
because of their concerns with political history. Meanwhile, hundreds
of thousands of routine revenue documents were deemed “uninter-
esting” and remain unprinted. To prove the pervasiveness of factional
conflict, one must show quantitatively that most of the rights were
under active dispute most of the time. This sort of research is possible
in the unpublished records of the Pune Daftar. The burden of proof is
to show that such conflict — at the central government level, at the
village and pargana level — was “‘typical,”’ that is that it consumed a
dominant portion of the polity’s resources and energy, leaving little for
other activities.
   We have every reason to doubt that factional conflict was the
dominant activity of the Maratha polity. If we look back over its
history, there were only three periods of fully fledged civil war, the
Tarabai-Shahu conflict of 1708-16, the period after the murder of
Narayan Rao (1772-78), and the period following the suicide of the
imprisoned Peshwa (1795-1801). These were, indeed, heavily factiona-
lized times, with much of the polity’s resources consumed in strife,
limiting the ability to expand the polity, even destroying heartland
areas. Nevertheless, these three periods were relatively brief. (All were
triggered by imperfect successions, the patterns of which we will soon
discuss.) To these we must add several rebellions, all of which lasted
only a few years and were of limited geographic scope. The Dabhade/
Gaikwad      rebellion,    for example,          was   confined   to Khandesh        and
northern Maharashtra and part of Gujarat. The revenue documents of
  2 See Andre Wink, Land and Sovereignty in India: Agrarian Society and Politics under the
Eighteenth-century Maratha Svarayya (Cambridge, 1986).

                                           179
                    THE   MARATHAS       1600-1818

the areas show only a two-year drop in revenue, plus considerable
short-term disruption, but recovery was complete within a couple of
years of the defeat of the rebelling families.
   The situation was much the same for “disputed”? deshmukh or
village headman rights. The printed papers regularly mention these
kinds of feuds and just as regularly show the families seeking the
intervention of the central power (whether Adil Shah, Nizam Shah, or
later, the Peshwa) to resolve them. Yet, if we track these families
through their own family papers or — even better — through detailed
revenue documents of the area, these conflicts rarely disrupted even the
most local area. They were usually settled by fiat or negotiation with
the central power with a clear winner and loser, at least until the next
succession. There is no doubt that the loyalty of the deshmukh families
was essential to the Maratha polity, but this was, at most times, a
routine face-to-face oath made by the head of the deshmukh family to
the king or, later, the Peshwa. Only when the polity was deeply
divided or the polity endangered (such as in the 1690-1705 period) did
the inner circle have to reach down for support from the smaller
deshmukhs. The limited number of times that a few hundred troops or
a few thousand rupees made a crucial difference, only proves the rule. .
After these critical moments, the deshmukhs — almost invariably —
disappeared from the inner circle.
   The Maratha polity was more complicated than any of these
formulations. There are several contexts in which it could be con-
veniently placed — as a successor state to the prior Muslim kingdoms of
the Deccan, or as an on-going colonial discourse with the non-
Maratha, local landed lineages, or as a distinctive example of heredi-
tary, monarchical systems. It was all of these. We will look for
continuity, multi-year cycles, and long-term change in three aspects of
the Maratha polity (1) authority and personal loyalty (2) revenue and
other sorts of information (3) military power.
   Let us begin with authority and personal loyalty. If we look, first, at
the inner circle, there were many continuities through the 150-year
history of the Maratha polity. The inner circle remained small, never
more than a dozen men. Through much of the history, all members of
the group returned to Maharashtra, and the capital, at every monsoon.
It was truly a face-to-face court. Throughout, the reward for loyal and
competent actions was the same — a right to a portion of the revenue
collected from agricultural production. No other source of revenue