                     BACKGROUND PAPER




          1.      Introduction

          Today’s macro-financial regime for the issuance and management of sovereign debt in Germany
          and Europe is predicated on a fundamental conception of the correct relationship between
          treasuries, central banks, and the private banking system: Sovereign debt issuance should not
          happen with the central bank balance sheet as the direct counterparty as this would constitute
          illicit “monetary financing”. Rather, sovereign debt issuance should be “disciplined” by market
          forces as the politicians in charge of treasuries’ balance sheets are otherwise prone to over-issuing
          sovereign debt. Hence, only private financial institutions should be the legitimate direct
          counterparties for sovereign debt issuance.

          This economic idea — most prominently codified in European Law, cf. Art. 123 (1) of the Treaty on
          the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), but also reproduced through lore for generations
          — is purportedly a key lesson from Germany’s turbulent political, economic, and financial history.
          Germany has indeed had an illustrious track-record of financial innovation, creative macro-fi-
          nancial management, spiking debt issuance, and devastating sovereign defaults connected to two
          lost world wars. Curiously enough, German sovereign bonds today have the status of the
          European safe asset and the German government consequently counts as Europe’s most
          trustworthy sovereign borrower, even though the German state had four sovereign defaults in 21
          years, counting from the Weimar hyperinflation 1924 over the Dawes and Young Plan to the
          dissolution of the German Empire in 1945 (Reiter 1967).

          Even though today’s macro-financial regime is often said to be the result of Germany’s historical
          experiences, it is doubtful whether there can be such a thing as an “objective history” which clearly
          suggests that some conclusions are correct whereas others are obviously wrong. For instance,
          there is a confirmed tendency of “misremembering Weimar”, i.e. having erroneous conclusions
          about which economic turbulences led to the rise of fascism in 1933 (Haffert, Redeker, and
          Rommel 2021). The 1924 hyperinflation in the early years of the Weimar Republic (Holtfrerich
          1980) remains most prominent in the collective memory and is said to be the cause of the strong
          anti-inflationary stance in both German policy circles and the German population. However, this is
          an erroneous understanding in so far as in fact the deflationary tendencies during the Great
          Depression (Kindleberger 1984) were the immediate reasons that brought the Nazis to power
          (Straumann 2019).

          While debates on historical learnings usually focus on the time of the world wars and the Weimar
          Republic, this paper goes further back in time and revisits the German macro-financial experience
          prior to World War I. It traces the evolution of German sovereign debt issuance practices from their
          early origins in 18th century Prussia over the foundation of the German Empire in 1871 up until
          1914 with the abrupt termination of the first era of globalization.

          To this end, the paper adopts the Monetary Architecture framework (Murau 2020), which
          conceptualizes the monetary and financial system as a web of institutions thought of as balance
          sheets that have a hierarchical relationship with each other and interlock through different credit
          instruments. The key institutions can be characterized according to different segments which they
          belong to: central banking, commercial banking, non-bank financial institutions or shadow banks,
          as well as a fiscal ecosystem which is made up of the state’s treasury and off-balance-sheet fiscal
          agencies (OBFAs) — public-private entities whose operations comprise aspects of monetary and
          fiscal policy. The actual setup of such a ‘monetary architecture’ is historically specific and subject to




3 of 41
