                      BACKGROUND PAPER




          2.      Feudal Prussia: From Friedrich II to the defeat against
                  Napoleon, 1740-1806
          Friedrich II, later called “the Great” (“der Große”), was the monarch of the Hohenzollern dynasty who
          ruled Prussia from 1740 to 1786. Under his reign, Prussia acceded to great power status in Europe,
          especially due to the three Silesian Wars, which Prussia fought successfully between 1740 and 1763
          against Habsburg Austria under Archduchess Maria Theresia. Those wars were the opening
          chaptersof the ensuing Austro-Prussian struggle for the hegemony over the German-speaking peoples
          where Prussia was the leading power of Protestantism and Austria of Catholicism (Kunisch 2004).

          At the time of the Silesian Wars, Prussia’s monetary architecture was financially underdeveloped, in
          particular compared to other European states such as England or the Netherlands (Ziegler 1993). In
          absolutist fashion, the public treasury existed in personal union with the king’s purse. The monetary
          system was largely based on commodity money, in the form of various coins circulating (Vilar 1969).
          Private banking was poorly developed, attempts to found private banking institutions regularly failed,
          and the availability of money and credit was chronically short (Poschinger 1878, Ch. 3). When Friedrich
          II wanted to raise additional money to carry out his wars, he did this mainly through coin debasement
          (Kindleberger 1984, 118), an essentially non-financial technique that involves reducing the amount of
          precious metal in a coin while letting it circulate further at face value.

          After victory in the Silesian Wars had led to a territorial consolidation of Prussia, Friedrich II worked
          towards developing his pre-industrial country in line with the dominant mercantilist doctrines. He
          founded the Königlich Preußische Bank and the Seehandlung to modernise the Prussian financial
          system. These reforms provided an important update to the Prussian monetary architecture and
          called two institutions into being which would crucially shape Prussia’s political and financial history.

          The Königlich Preußische Bank — also known as Königliche Giro- und Lehnbank — was a note-
          issuing bank (Zettelbank) with the right to issue bank notes (Zettel). Established on 17 June 1765, it was
          the first bank in German countries to receive this privilege. At the time, these circulating papers were
          not understood as actual money but as a mere promises to pay commodity money, i.e. money
          substitutes which may also be called “shadow money” in the Monetary Architecture framework (Murau
          2017). The Bank remained fully dependent on the king who routinely took out surpluses whenever the
          Bank made any. As much depended on the king’s oral orders, little is known about the Bank’s every-
          day operations. Even though the law which created it stipulated that the Bank was supposed to receive
          8 million Reichsthaler (Rthlr) as starting capital, it never received this. Instead, Friedrich II preferred to
          keep the Prussian state treasure in barrels stored in the cellar of his castle and in Spandau Fortress.
          The Bank only received 400,000 Rthlr to manage its everyday payments which were only paid out as
          an advance, not as equity. Throughout its first few years, the Bank only made losses. When the Bank
          was supposed to redeem the first issuance of its bank notes on 1 January 1768, it was so short on
          commodity money that it had to ask for a loan from other government coffers. When it received more
          cash later, it did not know how to make good use of it and engaged in barely profitable long-term
          operations, which kept its assets illiquid (Niebuhr 1854, 4–6; Born 1977, 16, 29).

          The Seehandlung — established on 14 October 1772, seven years after the Bank — was a mercantilist
          export corporation. Following French blueprints, the explicitly stated purpose of the Seehandlung was
          that ships under the Prussian flag should engage in import and export activities with Spain and other
          countries. To all extent and purposes, the Seehandlung was an OBFA of the Prussian state that had a
          government backstop and carried out activities on behalf of the government but remained under
          independent private leadership. The Seehandlung’s basic capital was 1.2 million Rthlr. It consisted of
          2400 shares of which 2100 belonged to the king and 300 were made available to private shareholders.
          Hence, unlike the bank, the Seehandlung from its early inception was an independent legal entity with
          some private interest involved, even though the state had a dominant influence. The profits it would

7 of 41
