                        HINTERGRUNDPAPIER                                                                             BACKGROUND PAPER

    Institute for Macrofinance




     Sovereign Debt Issuance and
     Transformation of the Monetary
     Architecture in Prussia and the
     German Empire, 1740–1914
          Steffen Murau1                                                                                 27.07.2023

          steffen.murau@globalclimateforum.org




          Executive Summary
      This paper traces the transformation of the monetary architecture and concomitant sovereign
      debt issuance practices in Prussia and the German Empire from 1740 to 1914 in order to reflect on
      contemporary ideas regarding the appropriate relation between states’ treasuries, central banks,
      and the private banking system in matters of sovereign debt issuance. It discusses three institu-
      tions as “protagonists” — the Königlich Preußische Bank, the Seehandlung, and the Disconto-Gesell-
      schaft — and follows them through four phases of Prussian and German history: feudal Prussia
      from Friedrich II to the defeat against Napoleon (1740–1806); from the Stein-Hardenberg reforms
      to the March Revolution (1807-1848); post-revolutionary Prussia, including the rise of Bismarck, his
      three wars, and the foundation of the German Empire (1849-1871); and Prussia in the German
      Empire during the first era of globalization (1871-1914). Adopting the Monetary Architecture frame-
      work as a conceptual lens, the analysis yields three main findings. First, off-balance-sheet fiscal
      agencies (OBFAs) have played a key role in the issuance and management of sovereign debt, even
      before central banks and treasuries in the modern sense had formed. This is highlighted in the
      institutional role of the Seehandlung, which kick-started Prussian sovereign debt issuance during
      the Napoleonic Wars. Second, central banking institutions have historically shifted within the
      public-private spectrum. The state-owned Königlich Preußische Bank became more functional and
      accountable after it was converted into the hybrid Preußische Bank. When it was transformed into
      the Reichsbank in 1875, a fully private ownership structure was chosen. Third, the economic libe-
      ralization after 1848 and the increased need to harness private funding for war finance led to the
      emergence of syndicated sovereign bond issuance. The Disconto-Gesellschaft, which played a
      leading role in the Prussia Consortium and the Imperial Bond Consortium, was at the forefront of
      establishing a new relationship between private finance and the state.


   #FISCAL POLICY
   #DEBT
   #INSTITUTIONS
   #HISTORY




          1   Research Group Leader, Global Climate Forum (GCF), Berlin, and Freie Universität Berlin.
              Contact: steffen.murau@globalclimateforum.org.


1 of 41
