                     BACKGROUND PAPER




          a permanent process of institutional evolution and adaptation. Institutions and instruments
          emerge in specific historical situations, interact with other institutions, fulfil certain functions for
          some time, and can then transform or even disappear due to different political, economic, or
          financial factors.

          A key feature of the monetary architecture is how the relationship between different institutions
          is organized, notably the central bank, banks, the treasury, and OBFAs. These institutions issue
          different debt instruments as their liabilities. Some debts of the central bank and banks are
          typically understood as credit money, notably notes, reserves, and deposits, which historically
          existed alongside various forms of commodity money. The treasury and OBFAs issue their own
          forms of debt, which are used for government financing and can be purchased and held by central
          banks, banks, or other entities, including firms and private households. For analytical purposes, it
          is of interest which forms of debt are issued, by whom, with which counterparties, and in what
          volume. Moreover, it matters what volumes of debt issuance are seen as legitimate and how this
          is supported or prohibited.

          Overall, the Monetary Architecture framework perceives the modern credit money system
          historically as developing in co-evolution with sovereign debt issuance practices. Both money
          creation and sovereign debt issuance have an inherent public-private hybridity which has
          manifested itself differently across multiple periods. To trace this process in the context of Prussia
          and the German Empire, the paper proceeds chronologically and studies four eminent phases of
          Prussian and German history: feudal Prussia under Friedrich II to the defeat against Napoleon
          (1740–1806); from the Stein-Hardenberg reforms to the March Revolution (1807-1848); post-
          revolutionary Prussia, including the rise of Bismarck, his three Wars of German Unification, and the
          foundation of the German Empire (1849-1871); and Prussia in the German Empire during the first
          era of globalization (1871-1914).

          To tell story of the transforming monetary architecture throughout various political-economic
          settings — including wars, revolutions, and different constitutional orders — the paper chooses
          three eminent financial institutions as its “protagonists” and follows them throughout the four
          phases. The protagonists are taken from the central banking, fiscal, and banking segments of the
          Prussian and later German monetary architecture. The analysis yields three main findings which
          offer a novel angle to reflect upon the inherited wisdom about the organisation of sovereign debt
          issuance and the appropriate roles of the treasury and central bank in the process.

          First, central banking institutions for most of the time played a subordinate role in Prussian
          sovereign debt issuance practices. Even though Prussia obtained its first central bank as early as
          1765, the fully state-owned Königlich Preußische Bank, it remained rather dysfunctional and
          disconnected from government finance. In 1846, it was converted into the private-public
          Preußische Bank. In 1875, Prussia sold it to the newly founded German Empire, which made it the
          Reichsbank, and placed its ownership entirely in private hands while maintaining some organized
          political influence. While the Reichsbank was more involved in sovereign debt issuance than its
          predecessors, it was never at the forefront of issuing and funding the sovereign debt of Prussia
          and the German Empire prior to 1914.

          Second, OBFAs played an important and largely underappreciated role for Prussian sovereign debt
          issuance even before the treasury and the central bank in a modern sense were established.
          Typical examples for OBFAs today would be national development banks, government-sponsored
          enterprises, and other special-purpose funds (cf. Guter-Sandu and Murau 2022). The key
          institution for Prussia was the Seehandlung. Founded in 1772 as a public-private mercantilist


4 of 41
