                      BACKGROUND PAPER



          make were for the largest part profits of the king whose private purse at the time was largely identical
          with that of the state. At the same time, since its early origins, the Seehandlung found itself in an
          ongoing institutional struggle with the Königlich Preußische Bank (Schleutker 1920, 4–24; Hellwig 1922,
          7–10).



          2.1 Sovereign debt issuance via the Seehandlung from 1772 to the Napoleonic Wars

          Part of the original rationale to establish the Seehandlung was to make Prussia competitive with
          harbour cities in the Baltics, foremost Gdansk which defied Prussian influence. From 1773, the
          Seehandlung received a monopoly for the trade in salt, one of the key commodities at the time,
          needed for the preservation of foodstuff. For this reason, it was a thorn in the eye of merchant
          associations. Yet, it was highly profitable and generated a steady income to the king’s purse. He gladly
          used the Seehandlung for his own financial purposes. He borrowed deposits from it and used them
          for military expenditures or imports of raw materials (Hellwig 1922, 7–10).

          In a prototypical dynamic of financialization, the Seehandlung transformed over time from a trading
          society to a financing and banking institution for the government. This was particularly
          accelerated by the Napoleonic Wars that followed the 1789 French Revolution. As the wars made the
          salt business and any form of maritime trade very difficult, the Seehandlung increasingly used its
          capital for the credit business. In 1794, the Seehandlung’s privilege — originally granted for only 20
          years — was extended until the year 1808 and its legal structure was changed. Shares were swapped,
          dividend payments were reduced, and a royal guarantee of the capital contributions was added. The
          privilege for salt trade was re-affirmed. In exchange, it had to pay 45’000 thaler every year to the state.
          The extension of mercantilist privileges improved the Seehandlung’s financial standing and enabled it
          to further engage in the business of money and credit (Hellwig 1922, 19–22). This allowed the
          Seehandlung to carry out OBFA-financing schemes on behalf of the state. However, these activities —
          like all financial matters of the king — were notoriously kept secret.

          Endowed with an explicit treasury backstop, the Seehandlung entered into the Lombard business, i.e.,
          it granted credit against pledged securities and discounted bills of exchange. Since the Seehandlung
          had a good financial standing, private capitalists were interested in investing their money in the
          Seehandlung. It offered 2.5% deposits repayable on demand at any time as well as 4% debt
          instruments that were redeemable with six-month notice. As lenders could obtain a better interest
          rate at the Seehandlung than at the Königlich Preußische Bank, which gave only 2-3%, the conflict
          between both institutions intensified and the king’s attempts to settle the dispute never succeeded for
          long (Hellwig 1922, 22–23).

          As Prussia’s role in the coalition against Napoleon required large sums of money, the Prussian state
          for the first time in its history was forced into significant debt. While Friedrich II had accumulated some
          surpluses in his public budget, his war chest was used up rapidly. His successor, Friedrich Wilhelm II,
          started using the Seehandlung to issue bonds on behalf of the state. However, it was not easy to place
          them. Due to the limited financial power within Prussia, it was necessary to get access to capital
          abroad, notably in Leipzig, Frankfurt, and Amsterdam. The Seehandlung played a leading role to
          facilitate this. Originally, the bonds were issued in the name of the Prussian state and executed by the
          king. When the credibility of Seehandlung increased, this became unnecessary. The Seehandlung was
          now able to issue its own bonds and then transfer the proceeds to the king. The Prussian state made
          excessive use of this option. The volume of Seehandlung’s bonds on the market was 9-10 million thaler
          in 1800; 21 million thaler at the end of 1804; and 17.8 million thaler in 1806. As the Seehandlung’s
          bonds became more widely known, it was able to reduce the interest rate it offered to 3%. This was
          also in the interest of the Königlich Preußische Bank, which itself faced problems of refinancing due to
          the high interest rate offered by the Seehandlung (Hellwig 1922, 23–24).

8 of 41
