                      BACKGROUND PAPER




          2.2 Sovereign default after the Prussian state collapse in 1806

          The idiosyncratic role that the Seehandlung had attained as a de facto sovereign-debt-issuing OBFA
          in the monetary architecture of absolutist Prussia was largely due to its director Karl August
          Struensee who had been in office since 1782. In addition to his role as the head of the Seehandlung,
          he presided over the general salt administration and was a minister in charge of factories and
          indirect taxes. When Struensee died in 1804, different proposals were circulated about the
          Seehandlung’s institutional organisation vis-à-vis the treasury and the Königlich Preußische Bank
          (Hellwig 1922, 26–27).

          In 1806, King Friedrich Wilhelm III tasked Freiherr Heinrich Friedrich vom und zum Stein with re-
          organizing Prussia’s economic and financial institutions. Freiherr vom Stein separated the
          Seehandlung from the general salt administration and put it in charge of purchasing salt
          internationally but no longer for selling it. Instead, he strengthened its role as a financial institution
          that administered the sovereign debt and discounted bills of exchange. He found the business
          conduct of Königlich Preußische Bank deeply unsatisfactory because it had mainly given loans to the
          state and big landowners rather than using its right to issue promissory notes and supporting trade
          through advances. Therefore, he briefly considered merging it with Seehandlung but then proposed
          to create a personal union among some of their leadership to more closely connect their operations
          (Hellwig 1922, 27–29).

          Freiherr vom Stein’s proposal, however, did not materialize because Prussia’s army was defeated by
          Napoleon in the Battle of Jena-Auerstedt on 14 October 1806. Napoleon entered into Berlin on 27
          October 1806. In the meantime, King Friedrich Wilhelm III fled to Königsberg and Memel in East
          Prussia, taking much of his government and administration with him. Stein managed to save
          900,000 thaler of the Seehandlung and also ship them to East Prussia. Due to the military defeat,
          Prussia lost half of its territory and had to pay huge reparations to France while Napoleon continued
          marching towards Russia (Wehler 2007).

          The Prussian defeat amounted to nothing less but a state collapse, which coincided with a
          sovereign default: Prussia was no longer able to fulfil its promises to pay. The debt of the Prussian
          state to the Seehandlung had increased over the years. In 1804, the Prussian state owed 12.9 million
          thaler to the Seehandlung, which corresponded to half of the entire Prussian sovereign debt at the
          time of 24.8 million thaler. This was roughly equivalent to all bonds of the Seehandlung in
          circulation, which amounted to more than 21 million thaler. As the Prussian state was no longer able
          to pay back its debts to the Seehandlung while the French confiscated all the Seehandlung’s
          properties that they could get, the Seehandlung had to default on its bond payments on 20 October
          1806 (Hellwig 1922, 29-31).

          When the Seehandlung stopped its payments in 1806, the prices of its obligations dropped, though
          by only a few percentage points as the French authorities initially accepted them for the payment of
          reparations. However, when the French authorities refused to accept the bonds for payment, their
          price plummeted further. In June 1808, they dropped to their lowest value of 27% of their nominal
          price. They even dropped further than the bonds of the Königlich Preußische Bank — primarily
          because the main debtor of Seehandlung was the Prussian state (Hellwig 1922, 37–40).

          Prussia’s sovereign bankruptcy, together with military defeat, called time on the old feudal order
          and led to gradual social, economic, and financial innovations that put Prussia on the path towards
          transforming into an industrial society. This also affected the organization of its monetary
          architecture and implied various reforms of sovereign debt issuing practices.



9 of 41
