                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           The final article of the 1848 Constitution stated that it shall be subjected to revision immediately
           after the first session of the chambers. When the new parliament (Landtag) met for the first time
           on 26 February 1849, it formally accepted the Constitution imposed by Friedrich Wilhelm IV and
           then began work on its revision. On 31 January 1850, the king promulgated the revision. The new
           1850 Constitution introduced the Prussian three-class franchise for elections to the second (lower)
           chamber (Abgeordnetenhaus). The system weighted votes depending on the amount of taxes paid
           and thus gave considerably more power to the wealthy. The second chamber received budget
           authority: Draft finance laws and state budgets, including plans for sovereign bond issuance, had
           to be agreed upon by the second chamber and the king. The first chamber (Herrenhaus),
           comprising the nobility, then could only approve or reject them in their entirety. With the 1850
           Constitution, Hardenberg’s vision from the 1820 Edict had effectively been fulfilled. Prussia’s
           monetary architecture subsequently no longer had a formal debt brake.




           4.1 The Disconto-Gesellschaft and the rise of the Prussia Consortium

           The gradual economic and political liberalization in the aftermath of the March Revolution led to a
           strengthening of private finance, in particular the foundation of new banking institutions. The most
           important one was the Disconto-Gesellschaft, established in 1851. The founder was none other
           than David Hansemann who had been finance minister for the liberal party from March 1848.
           When the reactionary forces regained power in September 1848, he was removed from office and
           made president of Preußische Bank. This position was fitting insofar as he had previously worked
           in the trading and banking business. A staunch advocate of financial liberalization, he had
           attempted to found a Zettelbank in the Rhineland in 1846, which did not get approved at the time.
           As the head of Preußische Bank, he sought to foster his liberal agenda but was ousted in April 1851
           after ongoing conflicts with the bank’s other directors. Subsequently, he established the Disconto-
           Gesellschaft. Following the role model of the Belgian Union du Crédit, it was designed as a credit
           cooperative — a business structure that found the approval of the Prussian authorities. In June
           1851, the Disconto-Gesellschaft became operational (Däbritz 1954, 4–24).

           The events of spring 1848 also had a profound effect on the Seehandlung. Based on a cabinet
           order of 17 April 1848, the government of Camphausen and Hansemann re-integrated the
           Seehandlung into the Prussian treasury. From 1848 onwards, there were attacks from parliament
           against the Seehandlung’s very existence. In the first session of the second chamber on 28 January
           1850, some voices demanded that it should be removed. The argument was that the state could
           only issue bonds and guarantees with the consent of both chambers, but that the Seehandlung —
           given its structure as a public-private institution — offered the potential for the government to
           carry out illegal operations. As an example, they mentioned the Prämienanleihe of 1832. The
           majority in the session, however, perceived the Seehandlung as useful and thought that it should
           be possible to fit it into the new constitutional structures. They stressed that the function of the
           Seehandlung had already changed and that it was subordinated to the finance minister. In 1850,
           the Landtag requested that the Seehandlung should sell its trading and industrial businesses and
           reduce its activities to the scope of the 1820 Edict. Moreover, it requested that the Seehandlung
           submit reports to the central budget committee. Both demands were later implemented (Hellwig
           1922, 91-99).




17 of 41
