                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           treasury bonds traded on the Berlin Stock Exchange at levels between 71% and 73% of their
           nominal price. This was also the first large foreign bond brokered by the Rothschild banking house
           and stressed the importance of the Pound Sterling as an international currency (Henderson 1956,
           528–29).

           After its 1806 default, the Seehandlung was able to return to business in 1809. During 1810, it paid
           its missing interest which caused the prices of its outstanding bonds to rise again to 60%. The salt
           business continued at the time. It even increased in importance because Prussia had lost many of
           its domestic salt mines and salt had to now be imported from abroad. From 1813, as the salt trade
           made it possible for the Seehandlung to return to profitability, it was now easily able to meet its
           payment obligations. In 1813, the Seehandlung was tasked with issuing new debt. From December
           1814 onwards, it was allowed to accept deposits against bonds at a 4% interest rate with one-year
           maturity. This was yet another turning point for the Seehandlung — it could reactivate its banking
           business (Hellwig 1922, 37–46).

           The Königlich Preußische Bank had suffered massively through the war. Most of its assets had
           been illiquid long-term loans to Polish landowners whose properties got confiscated. This made
           the Bank lose 10 million thalers, 40% of its asset book, and impoverished countless creditors. It was
           unable to pay interest for years, and still had to pay advances to the state. By 1817, its official books
           listed a surplus of 920 thousand thaler, even though in reality it had an estimated deficit of 7.2
           million thaler. It had claims of 27 million thaler of which 8 million turned out worthless. The Bank
           was, in fact, insolvent. Still, the decision was not to close it but to maintain it under treasury
           administration. Its business activity was shifted towards short-term lending, but it had to continue
           operating without any share capital. Due to the lack of basic funding, the Bank was not able to carry
           out basic central banking operations such as backstopping the discount market, which made the
           Berlin discount rate one of the most volatile ones in Europe (Treitschke 1885, 80–83).

           All this information about the financial positions of the Prussian state, the Seehandlung and the
           Bank was guarded like a state secret and was not allowed to see the light of day until 1834 when
           some information was allowed to be published (Hellwig 1922, 50).




           3.2 The Seehandlung and Hardenberg’s Edict on State Finances of 1820

           The Prussian monetary architecture took another U-turn when Hardenberg — now an experienced
           statesman at the end of his career who had outlived all his competitors — issued the Edict on
           State Finances of 17 January 1820 (Hardenbergsches Staatsschuldenedikt), a quasi-dictatorial
           act to which the king approved after Hardenberg had used his supreme standing to lobby the
           monarch who may not have fully understood the implications of the Edict. The Edict had four key
           elements:

           First, it established a new independent debt management agency. In the run-up to the Edict,
           Hardenberg had tasked a government commission to gather a full overview of all the various types
           of sovereign debt outstanding that the Prussian state was liable for, a process which took several
           years. The king insisted that all debt should be accepted at face value and rejected demands for a
           unilateral haircut as he wanted to maintain the creditworthiness of his government, thus the Edict
           stipulated that all Prussian debt should be repaid in full, which was supposed to be facilitated by
           the new agency (Hellwig 1922, 51).




12 of 41
