                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           3.      From the Stein-Hardenberg reforms to the March
                   Revolution, 1807-48

           In order to regain the status of a great power after the defeat against Napoleon, King Wilhelm III
           felt compelled to modernize the Prussian state, which would eventually have a major impact on
           Prussia’s monetary architecture. The masterminds behind the Prussian reforms were Freiherr vom
           Stein and Karl August von Hardenberg. Between 1807 and 1811, they contributed significantly to
           the modernization of the administration and sought to implement some of the ideas of the
           Enlightenment into politics. With the October Edict of 1808, the Stein-Hardenberg reforms
           abolished peasant serfdom and allowed all men to choose their occupation freely. This effectively
           ended feudalism and gave rise to an industrial society in the spirit of Adam Smith. The army reform
           introduced general conscription. The municipal reform gave cities the right to self-government.
           Cabinet reform modernized state administration and established ministers for various areas of
           domestic and foreign policy. Better moral and intellectual education was provided by the
           educational reform of Wilhelm von Humboldt, which created the humanistic grammar schools
           (humanistisches Gymnasium). The economic reform abolished the guild system, thus creating the
           basis for the development of freedom of trade (Wehler 2007).

           Yet, the modernization of Prussia only went so far and did not establish a democratic order in the
           modern sense. After Napoleon’s Russian campaign failed in 1812, the Congress of Vienna (1814-15)
           sought to restore the old power structures and re-organize European politics. The Congress’s
           agreement was signed nine days before Napoleon’s terminal defeat in the battle of Waterloo on 18
           June 1815 against the British-Prussian coalition army. In the context of territorial reshuffling,
           Prussia received new territories in the Rhineland, which was pushed for particularly by the British
           in order to form a strong military bulwark against France (Duchhardt 2013).

           As a result of the negotiations chaired by Austrian statesman Klemens von Metternich, the
           Congress of Vienna decided on the foundation of the German Confederation (Deutscher Bund), an
           association of 39 states to replace the former Holy Roman Empire, which had been dissolved in
           1806. Bavaria and Württemberg only agreed to the plan after Napoleon’s temporary return to
           power. The Confederation had one organ, the Federal Convention or Confederate Diet (Bundestag)
           located in Frankfurt am Main. Each member state sent one representative. While the German
           Confederation was not a state, the decisions of the Confederate Diet were binding. Austria became
           the hegemonic state, Prussia was placed second with some distance, followed by all other
           medium-sized, small, and city states (Huber 1967).

           An implication of founding the German Confederation was a consolidation of the units of account
           in use. Originally, the German Confederation comprised nine different currency units: Prussian
           thalers, imperial thalers, Theresian thalers, crown thalers, Rhenish florins, Frankish florins,
           Austrian florins, Hamburg marks, and Lübish marks. With the creation of the German Customs
           Union (Zollverein) on 22 March 1833, the member states agreed on a process of monetary
           integration. The Dresden Mint Treaty of 1838 would later divide the Zollverein into two currency
           areas: the North German thaler area and the South German florin area (Born 1977, 11).

           In this setting, Prussia’s monetary architecture transformed in multiple respects. The status of the
           Seehandlung as an OBFA changed several times, the Königlich Preußische Bank received a
           complete overhaul, and the Prussian treasury became independent of the king’s purse.




10 of 41
