                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           4.      Post-revolutionary Prussia: The rise of Bismarck and the
                   German Empire, 1849-1871

           The revolutionary year of 1848 would create new dynamics for the transformation of Prussia’s
           monetary architecture and lift the political and institutional deadlock of Prussia’s state finances
           after the de facto debt brake created by Hardenberg’s 1820 Edict.

           Uprisings first began in Sicily in January 1848 and reached Paris in February. On 24 February 1848,
           the French King Louis Philippe I abdicated. On 13 March, Chancellor Metternich stepped down in
           Vienna. As a result, the revolutionary movement spilled over into Prussia. The call for
           parliamentary participation in politics, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, and freedom of
           conscience was supported by a large part of the population since the government had lost much
           of its trust during the preceding economic crisis. After oppositional popular assemblies in Berlin
           demanded liberties from the Prussian monarchy, military action escalated into barricade fighting
           on 18 and 19 March which claimed several hundred lives. King Friedrich Wilhelm IV was finally
           forced to withdraw the military from Berlin and make political concessions (Hachtmann 1997).

           On 21 March, Friedrich Wilhelm IV rode through the city wearing a black-red-gold armband and
           had a civilian-dressed officer carry a black-red-gold flag ahead, symbolically placing himself at the
           forefront of the German national movement. In his proclamation “To My People and to the
           German Nation”, he expressed his desire to create an all-German assembly of estates and to
           introduce a true constitution — precisely the type of institutional innovation the absence of which
           had been the reason for the de facto debt brake. Prussia should, according to the core statement
           of the declaration, “merge into Germany”. With the so-called Märzerrungenschaften (freedom of the
           press and assembly and the promise of a constitutional monarchy and German unity), all the
           demands of the moderate liberals had been met.

           On 29 March 1848, Friedrich Wilhelm IV established a new government. The king appointed two
           bankers from the Rhineland, Ludolf Camphausen and David Hansemann, as Prussian prime
           minister and finance minister, respectively. They were the first people in the Prussian government
           that were not descendants of the nobility, complying with demands to grant participation to
           economic and financial elites from the bourgeoisie. On 2 April, the new government presented a
           draft election law on the basis of which a constituent Prussian National Assembly (Preußische
           Nationaversammlung) was to emerge. On 1 May 1848, the first free election in Prussia took place.
           Liberal and left-liberal forces received a majority, while the conservatives suffered a resounding
           defeat, to the dismay of the king. At the same time, Prussian deputies were also elected to the
           all-German Frankfurt National Assembly (Herre 2007).

           Tasked to draft a constitution, the Prussian National Assembly started meeting in Berlin from 22
           May. On 9 November, however, the government ordered the expulsion of the National Assembly
           to Brandenburg an der Havel and dissolved it by royal decree on 5 December when Friedrich
           Wilhelm IV unilaterally enacted a constitution for Prussia. The king’s 1848 Constitution comprised
           many liberal demands such as a catalogue of fundamental rights, including jury trials, freedom of
           speech, the press and assembly, as well as a parliament consisting of two elected chambers. Yet,
           the 1848 Constitution had ministers responsible to the king, not the Parliament; and the king had
           veto power over legislation and could dissolve Parliament at any time, which left him firmly in a
           position of power in spite of the Constitution’s liberal elements (Hein 2019).




16 of 41
