                      BACKGROUND PAPER



           3.1 Rebuilding the public financial system after the 1806 defeat

           Prussian defeat and its ensuing bankruptcy triggered a series of institutional restructurings.
           Through the law of 16 December 1808 prepared by Freiherr vom Stein, the Seehandlung and the
           Königlich Preußische Bank were subordinated to the Prussian treasury, which was then led by
           Finance Minister Altenstein. In 1810, Altenstein was replaced by Hardenberg who divided up the
           treasury into two divisions; one of them was the public treasury, to which the Bank and the
           Seehandlung both belonged.

           Hardenberg’s edict on State Finances of 27 October 1810 saw the Seehandlung lose its formal
           status as an independent legal entity altogether and initiated the process of its merger with the
           treasury. The Seehandlung’s debts were taken over by the state; creditors of the Seehandlung
           became direct creditors of the Prussian state. Different solutions for interest payments were
           negotiated, all in the context of Prussia’s required reparation payments to France. Some more
           institutional reshuffling followed through which the Seehandlung and the Königlich Preußische
           Bank were shifted around within the structures of the treasury (Hellwig 1922, 31–34).

           Yet, even at that time, the Seehandlung’s status as an OBFA was kept ambiguous. In 1809, for
           instance, it was possible to frame the Seehandlung as a private institution and rescue some of its
           properties from confiscation by the French. This position was confirmed by the Prussian
           government, which kept the Seehandlung’s budget separate from that of the state. Even though
           this was formally changed in 1810, this did not always happen in practice. By 1812, it still remained
           common practice to list the Seehandlung’s liabilities independently of those of the treasury. In
           1815, the Prussian minister of finance insisted that the internal book-keeping should stop referring
           to advances and claims between the treasury and the Seehandlung as both are supposed to be the
           same entity (Hellwig 1922, 34–35).

           In the years after Prussia’s defeat, the volume of sovereign debt skyrocketed. At the end of 1806,
           the Prussian debt had been 53.5 million thaler. By 1820, it amounted to 180 million thaler of
           interest-bearing bonds. In addition, there were 11.2 million thaler of paper money and 25.9 million
           thaler of provincial debt that had been taken over by the Prussian state. In total, the debt was 217.2
           million thaler, which corresponded to 4.25 years of public revenue. Partly, this sum comprised debt
           issued by the various territories and entities returned to Prussia after the Congress of Vienna.
           Many of the defeated territories had issued their own debt instruments to raise funds in order to
           pay reparations. At the same time, it included debt issued by states under French control — for
           instance that of the Kingdom of Westphalia, which existed from 1807 to 1815 on Prussia’s Western
           territories with the city of Kassel as its capital, and was ruled by King Jérôme Bonaparte, Napoleon’s
           youngest brother (Treitschke 1885, 71–73).

           That said, the rising debt volumes were not only a war time inheritance. The Prussian government
           itself also started taking on new debt. By 1817, Prussia had public debts in the sum of 20 million
           thaler that needed immediate payment while another 15 million thalers were urgently needed for
           defence and reconstruction after the war. For the year 1818, a deficit of 8 million thalers was
           envisioned. The Prussian state was on the verge of bankruptcy, and there was even a risk that the
           government would not be able to pay the wages of soldiers or civil servants. After negotiating in
           vain with a number of Berlin banking houses for arranging a government bond, a large foreign
           loan seemed the only salvation from this dangerous situation. The Seehandlung reached out to
           Nathan Rothschild in London who succeeded in securing a 5% bond of £ 5 million at 72% of the
           nominal value. The conditions of the bond were rather favourable as at that time, Prussian




11 of 41
