                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           private bank notes, which was emphatically demanded by the industrialists. During a stock market
           crash in 1844, the government prohibited forward transactions in domestic bonds and all trade in
           foreign bonds because it blamed them for crowding out the trade in sovereign bonds the market
           prices of which had dropped sharply. This measure caused the capital market to collapse and
           tightened the supply of money and credit even further. To protect itself from losses, the Königlich
           Preußische Bank raised its discount rate for the first time since 1836, and when this measure was
           still unable to protect the bank’s funds, it tried credit rationing in the fall of 1845 (Ziegler 1993, 487–
           90).

           Under the impression of this crisis, the government opted for a policy change and founded the
           Preußische Bank. With the Banking Act of 5 October 1846, it transformed the Königlich
           Preußische Bank: the newly created Preußische Bank would receive a private equity base and be
           placed on a new footing. However, it was not transformed into a joint-stock company but remained
           a public-law institution. While private investors were allowed to provide most of the capital, their
           representatives were involved in the management only in an advisory capacity. The investment
           was made palatable to them through a state guarantee for an annual dividend of 3.5% (later 4.5%)
           and the prospect of a superdividend if the company made a corresponding net profit. Similar to
           the 1844 Bank Charter Act in England, it provided a limit for note issuance, which was fixed at 15
           million thalers that had to be covered with specie by one third and 6 million thaler covered by
           sovereign debt (Ziegler 1993, 490–93).

           However, by 1847, the money shortage had not improved because the Preußische Bank did not
           make use of the note issuing elasticity it was granted. For example, when a credit crunch happened
           later in the year, the Bank acted procyclically and restricted its credit supply instead of acting as
           lender of last resort (Ziegler 1993, 493). This was the situation when the March Revolution of 1848
           erupted.




15 of 41
