                      BACKGROUND PAPER



           Second, in the third article of the Edict, after the provision that the state would guarantee the debt
           with all its domains (Domänen), there was the inconspicuous addition ‘with the exception of the
           domains, which are necessary to meet the annual requirement of 2.5 million thaler for the mainte-
           nance of the royal family’. This incidental sentence caused a momentous change in Prussian state
           law: the king now received an annual minimum income, which by comparison was not even very
           high, effectively representing a shift from an absolutist monarchy to a constitutional monarchy in all
           but name (Treitschke 1885, 76–77). While it excluded the king from liability for Prussian debt, it de
           facto created a legal separation of the king’s purse from the state treasury in the monetary
           architecture.

           Third, the Edict foresaw that no new sovereign debt was supposed to be issued unless there was a
           consent of Prussia’s estates (Reichsstände) achieved after consultation in a representative assembly
           of all estates (reichsständische Versammlung). In the Constitution of the German Confederation
           (Deutsche Bundesakte) signed at the end of the Congress of Vienna, all member states had committed
           to introduce such an assembly, but the Prussian king had hitherto not complied. Therefore, once
           signed into law, the Edict was tantamount to an outright sovereign debt brake. Hardenberg’s
           intention was to create the necessity for the king to deliver on his promise and pass a constitution
           for Prussia with a representative assembly. Hardenberg expected that this would happen within a
           year. The king, however, did not follow suit, and the debt brake remained indefinitely (Treitschke
           1885, 77–78).

           Finally, the Edict introduced one important exception to the debt brake — bonds issued by the
           Seehandlung, which was re-established as an independent institution outside of government control
           that would act as the banker for the government. As stated in an appendix to the Edict, written by
           Christian von Rother, the Seehandlung was supposed to,

              ‘form an essential and organic complement to the institutions by which the finances and the
              public debt system were ordered; it should become, not only temporarily until the introduction
              of the general estates, but even later after the introduction of the general estates, a ready and
              powerful instrument for the execution of the monetary transactions and credit operations of
              the administrative authorities, in order to secure for the cases of extraordinary but temporary
              monetary needs the elasticity and freedom of action which is gained in other states by the
              power of the administration to issue interest-bearing central treasury bills, treasury bills and
              other aids to a pending administrative debt; finally, if in the future it should be necessary to
              proceed to real government bonds, it should mediate and facilitate the same by its
              cooperation. While the state would provide it with credit through its guarantee, it would in turn
              support the credit of the state through its lively trade connections, through the commercial
              handling of its monetary transactions and through the punctual fulfilment of the obligations
              entered into before it. In order to fulfil this task and prevent possible abuses, it could not be
              subordinated to the state administrative authorities, but had to exist alongside them with a
              separate administration and its own assets. From this point of view, the Royal Cabinet Order
              of January 17, 1820, declared the Seehandlung to be a monetary and commercial institution of
              the state in its own right, independent of the Ministry of the Treasury. It was thus appointed,
              as it were, as the state and court banker, to handle not only abroad but also domestically all
              such transactions in which commercial involvement is desirable and necessary — whether
              they involve the payment or collection of funds, the purchase or sale of papers and securities,
              or other mercantile transactions — for the account of the state and its authorities in return for
              an ordinary commercial commission’ (cited after Hellwig 1922, 52–53).

           The Seehandlung had received back its original role as an OBFA and would subsequently operate
           under the leadership of Rother himself, who played a key role in re-attributing to it this status.

13 of 41
