                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           The distinctive feature of the syndicate in 1859 was that it was comprised of neither the
           Seehandlung nor the Rothschilds — even though Gerson Bleichröder was one of the Rothschild’s
           close confidants (Stern 1977). Prussia had now created its own Berlin-based government
           financiers. The consortium banks soon used their reputation to facilitate further bond issuance for
           railroad construction, both for domestic companies as for foreign powers, notably the Russian
           Empire (Däbritz 1954, 47–48).




           4.2 From the constitutional conflict to Bismarck’s fratricidal war of 1866

           The reign of King Wilhelm I became shaped by a constitutional conflict between him and the
           lower chamber of the Prussian parliament which lasted from 1859 to 1866. Under the impression
           of the Second Italian War of Independence, Wilhelm I wanted to carry out far-reaching military
           reforms, including an increase of the number of recruits and an extension of military service. In
           1860, the lower chamber passed the military reform bill but used its budget authority — granted
           to it by the 1850 Constitution — to significantly scale down the funding. In March 1862, the newly
           elected parliament decided to block the military reform altogether. In response, the king dissolved
           the parliament and decreed a new election. Yet, the new parliament, elected in 1862, again had a
           majority against the military reform. The stalemate thus continued (Stern 1977, 20–23).

           In this situation, the king appointed Otto von Bismarck as chancellor. Bismarck had previously
           been a conservative member of parliament and worked as a Prussian diplomat at the German
           Confederation in Frankfurt, in Russia, and in France between 1851 and 1862. Bismarck’s
           appointment was due to his promise to the king that he would carry out the desired military
           reforms — if necessary, against the parliamentary majority. Hence, from the start of his chancellor-
           ship, Bismarck operated with government finances outside of the constitutional order and with the
           Prussian state unable to issue new sovereign debt in a legal manner. To legitimize his government
           policy, he postulated a “gap theory” (Lückentheorie), according to which in case of a deadlock
           between king and parliament — a situation not defined by the 1850 Constitution — the king had
           the final say. This doctrine essentially disempowered parliament, and was also found highly
           suspicious by the other states in the German Confederation (Görtemaker 1996). Bismarck’s
           approach to the situation was a strategy of “blood and iron”. Before assuming office, he
           purportedly told British statesman Benjamin Disraeli: “I shall seize the first best pretext to declare
           war against Austria, dissolve the Confederate Diet, subdue the minor States, and give national
           unity under Prussian leadership” (cited in Stern 1977, 24). His time in office seemed to follow
           precisely along these lines.

           In 1863, a confrontation was looming between Denmark and the German Confederation over the
           territories of Schleswig and Holstein, which Denmark wanted to incorporate in view of forming a
           unified state. In November 1863, Danish King Christian IX passed a new constitution which
           declared Schleswig part of the Danish state. The German Confederation, led by Prussia and
           Austria, prepared for war. Even though Prussia had a war chest of 21 million thaler, Bismarck
           applied for a loan of 12 million thaler from parliament in December 1863, which were rejected in
           January 1864. Searching for alternative financing options, Bismarck received an offer of 15 million
           thaler from a South German consortium, headed by Frankfurt banker Raphael von Erlanger,
           despite the inherent danger that such bonds would not be honoured if issued without
           parliamentary authorisation. An alternative option contemplated was the sale of government
           property such as the coal mines in the Saar area to a private company to free up funds for war
           finance (Stern 1977, 34–41).



19 of 41
