                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           Napoleon III, who had rushed to the French troops by rail to boost their morale, fell into German
           captivity. On 4 September, the French monarchy collapsed, and the Third French Republic was
           proclaimed. When peace negotiations between Bismarck and the new French foreign minister
           Jules Favre failed, the French republican government attempted to find new recruits and rebuild its
           army. The Prussian general staff attempted to conclude the war by advancing on Paris and
           managed to encircle the French capital on 19 September. French attempts to break the
           encirclement failed in the ensuing months. Paris capitulated after heavy shelling on 28 January
           1871, and an armistice was signed the same day (Bremm 2019).

           Already during the war, Bismarck worked towards founding a German Empire (Deutsches
           Kaiserreich). In his mind, the only option to prevent French revanchism was to convince the
           Southern German states to join the North German Confederation. In the so-called “November
           Treaties”, the four Southern German states agreed with Bismarck on the terms to join the
           confederation. On 10 December 1870, the Reichstag voted on a new constitution in which the
           president of the confederation should receive the title “Emperor”. Formally, the constitution
           became effective on 1 January 1871. Symbolically, the founding of the empire was confirmed on 18
           January 1871 by the proclamation of Wilhelm I as German Emperor in the Hall of Mirrors at the
           Palace of Versailles (Winkler 2000).

           A particular challenge was to manufacture consent of the Bavarians to submit to the Prussian rule
           and give up their long-standing orientation towards Austria. Bismarck was able to use Prussia’s
           newly developed financial strength to literally bribe Bavaria’s King Ludwig II into joining the
           German Empire by exploiting his financial calamities, as Bavaria’s public finances had been
           severely overstrained due to the king’s architectural pet projects. In July 1870, at the very beginning
           of the war, Ludwig II asked Bismarck for financial support to deploy the Bavarian army. Bismarck
           followed suit and sent a heavily guarded train with silver bars amounting to 3 million gulden (1.7
           million thaler) from Berlin to Munich. In November 1870, Bismarck offered Ludwig II an annual gift
           of 100,000 thaler if the accepted Prussian King Wilhelm I as future German Emperor. The allowance
           was to be paid out of the Welfenfonds — a slush fund made up of the property of the Royal House
           of Hanover, which Prussia had confiscated as the result of its annexation of Hanover in the 1866
           war. In exchange, Ludwig II sent an “Imperial Letter” (Kaiserbrief) — signed by himself and Bismarck
           — to the Prussian king, confirming Bavaria’s accession to the North German Confederation and
           accepting Wilhelms’s future status as German Emperor (Stern 1977, 133).




24 of 41
