                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           Without a clear financing concept, Bismarck launched an Austro-Prussian invasion of Schleswig on
           1 February 1864 — later called the First War of German Unification. Bismarck had persuaded the
           Austrians to join this two-pronged attack against the Danes with the goal of incorporating the
           territory, rather than keeping it as an independent state, which was preferred by the other
           members of the German Confederation. While the Seehandlung was still negotiating with Erlanger
           about a secret financing agreement in March, the Austrian and Prussian troops gained a military
           victory on 18 April, which pre-decided the war, even though a formal peace deal was only struck in
           October 1864. The conquered territories were divided between Prussia and Austria, but they
           agreed on ‘joint sovereignty’ in the Gastein Convention (Stern 1977, 41–46). Bismarck had managed
           to finance the war merely with budget surpluses, even though he had been willing to resort to
           unauthorized loans or an illegal sale of government property (Stuebel 1935, 10).

           The German-Danish war was only a prelude to the “fratricidal” Austro-Prussian War of 1866 — also
           called the German-German war or Second War of German Unification. The main occasion for the
           war was a dispute over the administration of the conquered territories in Schleswig and Holstein.
           Bismarck strived for full control whereas Austria had little use for them. The deeper roots were the
           struggle over hegemony within the German Confederation and Bismarck’s desire to exploit
           Austria’s political and financial weakness at the time while ending the constitutional conflict at
           home.

           In the prelude to the fratricidal war, Bismarck — still unable to issue government bonds in a legal
           way — filled the government coffers through a deal facilitated by the banker Gerson Bleichröder.
           On 18 July 1865, the Prussian government renounced its right to purchase the stock of the
           Cologne-Minden Railroad for 13 million thaler and was able to free up money by liquidating a
           guarantee fund it was obligated to maintain for the railroad. This deal violated the constitution and
           was harshly criticized by parliament. It provided the financial basis for the upcoming war with
           Austria, which at the time was approaching bankruptcy (Stern 1977, 62–69).

           The dynamic leading to the war unfolded in January 1866 when Prussia protested the Austrian
           decision to form a united assembly in Holstein, declaring it a breach of the principle of joint
           sovereignty. Both sides mobilized their military. On 1 June, Austria brought the dispute before the
           Confederate Diet and allowed the assembly in Holstein to convene. Prussia declared the Gastein
           Convention nullified and invaded Holstein on 9 June. On 14 June, the Confederate Diet voted for a
           partial mobilization against Prussia. The following day, Bismarck claimed that the German
           Confederation had ended and invaded Hanover, Saxony, and Hesse. While the Austrian army was
           mobilizing for an invasion of Silesia, the Prussian army confronted it in Bohemia on 3 July 1866. In
           the Battle of Königgrätz, Prussia defeated Austria decisively (Bond 1966).

           The mobilization for the fratricidal war was hugely unpopular ex ante and triggered a financial crisis
           in Prussia in May 1866. The government decreed to found public credit institutes (Darlehnskassen)
           which issued notes (Darlehnskassenscheine) amounting to 6 million thaler as emergency money
           (Bergius 1870, 255; Stern 1977, 79). Seeking financial support, the new finance minister von der
           Heydt reached out to Adolph Hansemann, who had taken over leadership of the Disconto-Gesell-
           schaft from his father David. Adolph Hansemann called the representatives of the leading Berlin
           banks to support the war effort by taking over additional Cologne-Minden railroad stock. Against
           the advice of Hansemann and Bleichröder, the banks — expecting a Prussian defeat — offered
           only to pay much less than the daily price, which was rejected by the minister. Hansemann
           proactively offered all the funds he could liquidate to support Bismarck’s war effort and forwarded
           them to the Seehandlung (Däbritz 1954, 68–69). Subsequently, a consortium of Disconto-Gesell-




20 of 41
