                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           5.      The First Era of Globalization: Prussia in the German
                   Empire, 1871 to 1914

           The foundation of the German Empire had not only major implications for the political and
           economic setup of Prussia but also for its monetary architecture and sovereign debt issuance.

           On 16 April 1871, after the first election to the Reichstag, the Constitution of the German Empire
           (Bismarcksche Reichsverfassung) was passed and became effective on 4 May 1871. It gave the
           German Empire a double structure of member states and the newly created hierarchically higher
           ‘imperial’ political level. Formally, the Empire was a confederation of princes, which is why the
           Bundesrat — the representative body of the constituent states — was its highest state organ. The
           Bundesrat had a total of 58 votes. Prussia was the largest state with 17 votes. Bavaria had six,
           Sachsen and Württemberg four, Baden and Hessen three, all others two or one (Art. 8). De facto,
           however, the main powers were vested in the Presidium of the Confederation, which was held by
           the King of Prussia under the title of ‘German Emperor’. The emperor appointed the Imperial
           Chancellor, who presided over the Bundesrat, directed its business, and was the sole responsible
           minister of the Empire. The chancellor became an authoritative figure of the political system both
           behind the scenes and in public perception. Laws of the Empire required the approval of two
           bodies, the Bundesrat and additionally the Reichstag. The Reichstag was elected every three years
           and, from 1885, every five years, according to universal suffrage for men. Still, the parliament
           remained subordinate to the Emperor who was allowed to open, postpone, or dissolve both the
           Bundesrat and the Reichstag at his discretion (Ullmann 2005).

           The foundation of the German Empire gave rise to some years of extraordinary economic,
           industrial, and financial advancements. The period from 1871 to 1873 was later called the “Age of
           Founders” (Gründerzeit). It soon gave way to the „Founders’ Crash“ (Gründerkrach), a phase of
           depression that lasted until the end of the 1870s and saw many of the newly founded
           organizations go bankrupt. The comparatively liberal phase came to an end in 1878. The
           foundation of the Empire had accelerated the transformation towards an industrial society,
           concomitant with a sharpening class antagonism and increasing demands for an overthrow of the
           capitalist system. In reaction, Bismarck introduced the Socialist Act (Sozialistengesetz), banning all
           social-democratic, socialist, and communist organizations, which started a historical period
           sometimes referred to as that of a Kulturkampf. Moreover, Bismarck introduced protectionist
           tariffs and, in the 1880s, would lead the Empire into the “Scramble for Africa”, the intensifying
           colonialist and imperialist policies of the European powers. In March 1888, Emperor Wilhelm I died.
           As his successor Friedrich III passed away after only 99 days in office, it became the “Year of the
           Three Emperors” (Dreikaiserjahr), with Wilhelm II assuming the throne on 15 June. As the young
           Wilhelm II increasingly challenged Bismarck’s authority and finally ousted him in March 1889, his
           reign became known as the Wilhelmine Period. Wilhelm II broke with Bismarck’s mitigating foreign
           policy aimed at a balance of power and nurtured claims towards an increasingly global dominance
           of the German Empire, which would eventually lead to the outbreak of the First World War in 1914
           (Nonn 2017).

           At the beginning of those events stood a reform of the coinage system, which completed decades
           of monetary integration in between the German states. When the Empire was founded, it still had
           six different coinage systems: the thaler in most of Northern and Central Germany; gulden in the
           South; francs in the territories received after the Franco-Prussian War; as well as alternative
           coinage systems in the free cities of Hamburg, Lübeck, and Bremen (Parchmann 1933, 10–11).




25 of 41
