                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           schaft, Bleichröder, and J. Kahn, Bonn, took over a small sum of stock of Bergisch-Märkische
           Railroad. After the Prussian victory at Königgrätz, the mood changed. The Seehandlung was able
           to sell the bonds of the Cologne-Minden railroad without help of the banks (Stuebel 1935, 11).

           Hoping to prevent feelings of revenge, Bismarck pushed for a face-saving peace agreement with
           Austria, without claiming any of Austria’s territory. The Peace of Prague, concluded on 23 August
           1866, formally dissolved the German Confederation. While the Austrian Empire lost all influence
           over the former German Confederation and subsequently formed the dual monarchy of Austro-
           Hungary, Prussia annexed Schleswig-Holstein, Hanover, and Hesse-Nassau as its provinces and
           formed the Northern German Confederation (Norddeutscher Bund), which encompassed all
           German territories North of the river Main. Through its Constitution effective from 1 July 1867, the
           Northern German Confederation became a federal state under Prussian leadership with Berlin as
           its capital and the Prussian king as head of state. The Bundesrat (federal council) became an
           assembly of representatives of the state governments and the Reichstag a representation of the
           people (Jahr 2020).

           The victory in the fratricidal war made it possible to put the constitutional conflict to an end. In
           September 1866, Bismarck introduced an indemnity bill (Indemnitätsgesetz) to parliament which
           retroactively approved the government budgets of the previous years. Moreover, he introduced a
           law in November 1866 permitting the government to cover extraordinary expenses for military
           purposes via treasury bills (Schatzanweisungen). The end of the constitutional conflict led to an
           economic and financial boom, particularly manifested in the form of railroad construction. The
           Prussian government was able to now issue bonds to pay off war debts, finance railroads, and
           compensate dethroned German princes (Stuebel 1935, 11, 85). These bond issuances were taken
           over by the Prussia Consortium, now under the formal leadership of the Seehandlung (Hellwig
           1922, 108). The Disconto-Gesellschaft remained the largest private bank and had a supreme
           relationship with the government due to its cooperation at the beginning of the German-German
           war. Other private banks joined and left the Consortium for different bond issuances. Figure 3
           provides an example for the composition of the Prussia Consortium at the time (Reiter 1967, 97).

              Preußische Staatsbank (Seehandlung)
              Preußische Bank
              Disconto-Gesellschaft
              S. Bleichröder
              Berliner Handels-Gesellschaft
              F. M. Magnus
              Mendelssohn & Co.
              Gebr. Schickler
              R. Warschauer & Cie.
              H. C. Plaut
              M. A. v. Rothschild & Söhne
              Sal. Oppenheim jr. & Söhne


              Figure 3: The Prussia Consortium led by the Seehandlung after the Austro-Prussian War;
                        Source: Reiter (1967, 97)




21 of 41
