                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           The first Imperial Coinage Law (Reichsmünzgesetz) of 4 December 1871 consolidated the coinage
           system and introduced a new unit of account for the entire Empire: the Mark (ℳ). With the coinage
           law, the German Empire made a widely debated shift from the silver currency to gold currency.
           1 ℳ was defined as 0.358423 grams of fine gold. One reason for the shift was an ongoing
           devaluation of silver outside of the Empire’s borders, which led to a fear of monetary isolation if
           the German Empire remained with the silver currency. On the other hand, there were increasing
           trade and financial relationships with England, which already had a gold currency and was running
           the international gold standard, which the Empire then effectively joined (Parchmann 1933, 13).
           This step effectively kickstarted the “first era of financial globalization”.

           Under those circumstances, Prussia’s monetary architecture and its sovereign debt issuance
           practices — now inextricably intertwined with the monetary and financial institutions of the Empire
           — transformed profoundly again.




           5.1 French Reparations, sovereign debt reduction, and the Seehandlung in the Gründerzeit

           The victory over France led to a significant inflow of reparation payments to Prussia and the
           German Empire. In the preliminary peace agreement signed on 26 February 1871 in Versailles, the
           sum of reparations was listed at 5 billion francs, payable within three years. The successive
           withdrawal of German troops was connected to the payment of the agreed sum. The final Peace
           Agreement of Frankfurt, signed on 10 May 1871, stipulated that 500 million francs be paid 30 days
           after restoration of French government authority given that in Paris an uprising was still ongoing.
           The next instalment of 1 billion francs had to be paid by the end of 1871, even though 325 million
           francs were reduced as France passed on ownership of the railroads in Alsace-Lorraine. 500 million
           francs had to be paid on 1 May 1872, while the remaining sum of 3 billion francs was supposed to
           be paid on 2 March 1874 with a 5% annual interest (Nonn 2017; Bamberger 1873).

           Moreover, the Peace Agreement of Frankfurt stipulated that French reparations could be paid in
           gold, silver, first-class bills of exchange, or bank notes issued by the Bank of England, Preußische
           Bank, Nederlandsche Bank, and the Banque Nationale de Belgique. This stood in sharp contrast to
           the peace agreement with Austria in 1866 which accepted only “cash”, defined as coins and bullion
           made up of gold and silver (Born 1977, 32–33). Hence, bank notes received an upgrade in their
           relevance as monetary instrument, even though they still did not have the status of legal tender at
           the time.

           To raise the funds, the French government carried out two sovereign bond issuances. For the first
           issuance in June 1871, it collaborated with the Paris branch of the Rothschild family bank who
           helped distribute the bonds all across Europe. The 2 billion francs consol was significantly
           oversubscribed at 4.8 billion francs. The second issuance of July 1872 was even more successful.
           Instead of the advertised 3 billion francs, the subscription amounted to 43 billion francs, 26 billion
           of which came from abroad, with Belgium and England accounting for the largest shares with 9 and
           7 billion, respectively. All subscribers were allocated consols in line with the oversubscription rate.
           Having raised the required money, France made use of the possibility of an early payment of the
           reparations to make the German troops withdraw and re-establish national sovereignty (Buhr
           1999).

           On the side of the German Empire, 75% of the funds were supposed to be distributed among the
           member states according to their military involvement in the war and 25% according to their
           population. The 5 billion francs of reparations were mainly paid in bills of exchange. In addition, the


26 of 41
