                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           4.3 Financing the Franco-Prussian war

           With the successful 1866 war and after the foundation of the Northern German Confederation had
           established Prussia as the uncontested hegemon over the German states, a new symbiotic
           relationship had emerged between the Prussian treasury, the Seehandlung, and the Preußische
           Bank on the one hand, and private Berlin-based banks on the other hand. The firm establishment
           of the Prussia Consortium strengthened the private aspects of Prussia’s hybrid monetary
           architecture. While the Prussian government had still been cautious about private finance in the
           1850s, it now embraced the rising power of banks in Berlin, which increased in importance as a
           financial centre due to Prussia’s strengthened geopolitical role (Stuebel 1935, 12–13).

           The most trusted private financier was Adolph Hansemann whom the government tasked in 1868
           with developing a proposal for converting Prussian sovereign debt into consols — eternal bonds
           without maturity (ewige Rentenschuld) — following the British and French role model. Adolph
           Hansemann suggested a cautious approach by converting only Prussian 4.5% bonds — a
           suggestion that was implemented shortly afterwards (Däbritz 1954, 70).

           At the same time, the status of the Seehandlung as an OBFA was reconfirmed. During the time of
           the constitutional conflict, the lower chamber of parliament had launched heavy attacks against
           the Seehandlung — arguing that an institution that could take out very significant loans in the
           name and on behalf of the state made a mockery of the tax and public debt approval rights of the
           people’s representation. After the 1866 war, the tensions about the Seehandlung’s constitutional
           status eased, also because it agreed to disclose more of its business operations to parliament
           (Hellwig 1922, 109–115). The importance of the Seehandlung was boosted again in the upcoming
           Franco-Prussian War — the Third War of German Unification — when it obtained the role of the
           war financing bank of the Northern German Confederation (Kriegsbank des Norddeutschen Bundes).

           The Franco-Prussian War was the result of escalating tensions over the succession to the Spanish
           throne after the Spanish military had ousted Queen Isabella II in September 1868. The leaders of
           the coup searched for a new ruler among the European royal families and chose prince Leopold
           von Hohenzollern, a relative of the Prussian king, in February 1870. This choice was supposed to
           remain secret until the official announcement but was leaked prematurely in June 1870. France
           vehemently protested the choice for fear of getting encircled by two states ruled by the same
           dynasty. On 7 July 1870, the French ambassador in Prussia asked King Wilhelm I to convince
           Leopold to withdraw the candidacy for the Spanish throne. Wilhelm I agreed and acted
           accordingly. Despite the diplomatic success, France’s foreign minister insisted on a public apology
           from Prussia and a binding commitment not to support any Spanish Hohenzollern candidacy in the
           future. After Wilhelm I rejected this request, Bismarck launched a press statement on 13 July called
           Ems Dispatch (Emser Depesche), which portrayed the French demands as excessive and sparked
           nationalist outrage in both France and the German states. On 14 July 1870, thousands of people
           went to the streets of Paris demanding war against Prussia. On 15 July, the French parliament
           voted to take on war loans. On 19 July, France formally declared war against Prussia, arguing that
           Prussia’s project to install a Hohenzollern prince on the Spanish throne was directed against
           France’s territorial integrity (Bremm 2019).

           If it was Bismarck’s intention to provoke the French to declare war (Becker 1971), he had been
           successful. France stood isolated as the aggressor. In the eyes of world public opinion, the cause
           of the war was null and void. The Southern German states Bavaria, Württemberg, Baden, and
           Hesse-Darmstadt decided to support the North German Confederation in the war against France.




22 of 41
