                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           professional associations (Berufsgenossenschaften), and insurers were ordered to increase the
           volume of Prussian and Imperial bonds in their asset books. These measures turned out very
           successful — the Prussian consol was 30 times oversubscribed, the imperial bond 46.5 times
           (Stuebel 1935, 61-62).

           From 1895, the financial cycle entered an expansionary phase again, largely connected to the
           spread of electrification. It was interrupted by a crisis in 1900, but as the Reichsbank proved its
           capability as lender of last resort in Bagehot’s sense (Reichsbank 1926, 9), the growth of trade and
           industrial production increased in the German Empire. Politically, the German Empire entered into
           conflict with England and Russia over their influence in Turkey, and with France over Morocco. In
           this context, the need for sovereign debt issuance of Prussia and the German Empire increased
           further for a variety of reasons. First, the increased international tensions led to a military arms
           race and increased investments in the army and the navy. Second, the nationalized railroad
           network was not able to cope with the volume of goods transported. It required new investment
           and the state looked into complementing it with canals. Third, as the size of the cities expanded
           rapidly, investment in schools, infrastructure, and public health were necessary (Stuebel 1935, 52,
           70-75).

           While parliament had persistently objected to increasing Prussia’s sovereign indebtedness in the
           1890s and reintroduced the statutory redemption obligation (gesetzliche Tilgungspflicht) in 1897,
           this attitude changed in the early 1900s. Instead, the parliament pushed the minister of finance to
           issue more bonds to carry out the necessary investments. He initially resisted, fearing that one day
           the point would be reached where the state would no longer be able to place its bonds, but
           eventually gave in. Overall, the volume of Prussian sovereign debt increased from 6.6 billion ℳ on
           1 April 1900 to 10.4 billion ℳ on 1 April 1914 (Stuebel 1935, 52, 75-76).

           However, Prussia and the Empire faced increasing difficulties placing their bonds on the
           financial markets. Due to a general saturation of demand, the market prices of Prussian bonds had
           a continuous downward tendency, which forced the Seehandlung occasionally to intervene and
           stabilize the prices through bond purchases. In 1900-01, the Prussian government continued its
           attempts to sell its bonds over-the-counter, but from 1902 it shifted again to syndicated issuance
           as it was unable to satisfy its enormous financing need without the help of the large banking
           corporations. It continued issuing consols, mostly in coordination with the Empire. While the first
           syndicated issuances were still very successful, a series of bond issuances failed from 1909 to
           1913. On several occasions, the banks in the syndicate were unable to place significant parts of the
           consols they had guaranteed to take over and were forced to face large losses (Stuebel 1935, 74,
           80-84).

           In addition, Prussia’s government increasingly shifted to issuing treasury bills (Schatzanweisungen),
           which did not require approval from parliament and were primarily used by large banks to manage
           their short-term liquidity needs. On the one hand, from 1904 to 1913, Prussia issued 745 million
           ℳ of interest-bearing treasury bills in four rounds at 3.5% and 4% with a 4- and 5-year maturity.
           On the other hand, from 1905 to 1913, it issued around 1.7 billion ℳ of non-interest-bearing short-
           term treasury bills, which had maturities from one month to one year and were remunerated
           according to the Reichsbank’s discount rate. The government first used this technique in 1904 to
           avoid having to increase the interest rate paid on consols under unfavourable market conditions.
           Later, it used the treasury bills to tap demand in the short-term money market. Moreover, it was
           seen as less problematic to sell short-term treasury bills on foreign market places — a precedent




32 of 41
