                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           6.     Conclusion

           This paper has traced the transformation of the monetary architecture and concomitant sovereign
           debt issuance practices in Prussia and the German Empire from 1740 to 1914, while following
           three financial institutions that were quintessential at the time: the Königlich Preußische Bank
           (later turned Preußische Bank and Reichsbank), the Seehandlung, and the Disconto-Gesellschaft.

           This institutionalist analysis through the prism of the Monetary Architecture framework provides
           food for thought to reflect on the economic idea that is conventionally taken as the key lesson from
           German history: that the issuance of sovereign debt should not be carried out with the central
           bank as counterparty and that market forces have to discipline treasuries that are inherently prone
           to overspending. These lessons are typically taken from the German experience during and in
           between the world wars. The analysis of the one and a half centuries before that — starting with
           financially underdeveloped feudal Prussia until the German Empire in the first era of globalization
           which in many respects shares parallels with today — yields a range of interesting insights.

           First, Prussia’s history of sovereign debt issuance shows that from its very beginning in feudal
           times there already existed an antagonism between the state treasury and OBFAs in the form of
           the Seehandlung. Under King Friedrich II, the Seehandlung had both issued its own debt
           instruments and passed on the proceeds to the state and facilitated the placement of the Prussian
           state’s sovereign bonds on the market. This solution was never without its critics. Institutional
           reforms had repeatedly sought to curtail the activities of the Seehandlung and integrate it into the
           Prussian treasury. At the same time, it was able again and again to regain its independence and act
           as an OBFA that was able to find pragmatic fixes to the need of Prussia to raise funds, almost
           always connected to war finance. In feudal times, the Seehandlung’s advantage was that as a
           public-private hybrid with a salt monopoly, it had a better standing as a borrower than institutions
           owned by the absolutist king. In the early 19th century, the Seehandlung was used to circumvent
           the sovereign debt brake, which Hardenberg had imposed on the Prussian monetary architecture.
           In fact, OBFA financing is older than the contemporary understanding of fiscal and monetary
           policy, which draw on an understanding of treasuries and central banks that has only developed
           in the late 19th and early 20th century.

           Second, the creation of syndicated issuance was indeed an innovation that happened as the
           Prussian political and economic constitution liberalized and the monetary architecture developed
           stronger private institutions. However, the reason why syndicated issuance has prevailed as a
           solution within the Darwinian process of institutional selection and transformation is not that it
           would have disciplined sovereign debt issuance. On the contrary, the specific advantage of
           syndicated issuance was that it allowed the treasury to issue more sovereign debt at a better price
           because the private banks crowded in more private capital to fund the emissions. The existence of
           an oligopoly of banks that had the exclusive right to act as primary market counterparties has been
           contested since its origin, seen by some as an illegitimate source of profit. However, as
           experiments with alternative structures for sovereign debt issuance on the primary market led to
           less government revenue, the government resorted back to the oligopolistic structure. With the
           integration of the Seehandlung in the Prussia Consortium as its formal leader, the hybrid structure
           of sovereign debt issuance practices received a novel manifestation, which provided the grounds
           for the evolution of the ever-increasing structural indebtedness of the German Empire after 1871.




35 of 41
