                      BACKGROUND PAPER




           This situation started to change in 1876. As the sale of consols proceeded too slowly, the
           government decided to issue a bond of 100 million ℳ through a syndicate. The plan was met with
           harsh criticism. The liberals opposed it because they perceived it as a violation of the principle of
           free competition. The conservatives opposed it for antisemitic reasons because they saw an illicit
           relation of finance minister Camphausen with the Jewish haute finance. As an alternative, the
           government contemplated the introduction of the English tender system, which was supposed to
           avoid giving preferential treatment to one specific banking group but dropped the idea again.
           Instead, the finance minister followed an offer of the Prussia Consortium. The issuance was
           unsuccessful. The market rejected it because the interest rate was set too low upon the wish of the
           minister. Therefore, only 25% of the bonds were signed. Still, the failure of the underwriting turned
           out as an advantage for the consortium, as the government had once again been vividly shown the
           risk involved in a public underwriting and how advantageous it was when an efficient consortium
           took this risk away from the financial administration. Although the attacks against the consortium
           continued in the press and parliament, the government stuck to issuing the bonds to the Prussia
           Consortium in the following years (Stuebel 1935, 27–29).

           The structure of the Prussia Consortium only marginally shifted compared to its setup before the
           foundation of the Empire. Most importantly, the Preußische Bank had dropped out due to its
           conversion into the Reichsbank. The Disconto-Gesellschaft remained the most influential member.
           Its quota was first at 23%, later at 18%. As it was also allowed to represent Norddeutsche Bank,
           M.A. Rothschild, and Sal. Oppenheim jr & Söhne, it commanded one third of the votes. The second
           largest bank was S. Bleichröder, whose quota was first 15%, later 12%. If the consortium offered to
           take over a bond, it would inform the Seehandlung which would pass on the offer to the minister
           for approval. The Seehandlung chaired the committee, which carried out the operations, and was
           allowed to participate with a share between 5% and 8%. However, as each offer of the syndicate
           specified the underwriting price and the bond acceptance date, as well as the underwriters' share,
           the ability of the Seehandlung to influence the Prussia Consortium was de facto very small (Stuebel
           1935, 30–31).

           The consortium was not a loose association but in fact a rather closed group of companies which
           tried to resist against any outsiders who attempted to become a part of it. In 1877, Deutsche Bank
           — which had only been founded in 1870 and was led by the ambitious Georg von Siemens — asked
           to be admitted to the consortium when the Prussian state wanted to issue a bond of 50 million ℳ.
           When the request was denied, Deutsche Bank directly approached the president of the
           Seehandlung and offered to take over the entire issuance at a more favourable rate. Instead of
           accepting the offer outright, the president initiated negotiations with the consortium which then
           eventually allowed the Deutsche Bank to participate in the syndicated issuance with a low share
           (Stuebel 1935, 31).

           From 1879, Prussian debt issuance increased sharply as Bismarck started nationalizing private
           railroads. He had advocated the nationalization of railroads under the structure of the Empire
           since 1873 but his attempts had consistently been blocked by other member states. Therefore, he
           decided to focus on railroad nationalization solely in Prussia. Via a law of 20 December 1879, the
           Prussian government bought four lines of the Prussian railroad system. The nationalization was
           organized in such a way that the state took over the stock from private shareholders and replaced
           it with Prussian sovereign debt in the form of consols. The new sovereign debt created for this
           purpose amounted to 1171.9 million ℳ. As Prussia’s sovereign debt amounted to 1321.2 million
           ℳ on 1 April 1879, the railroad nationalization law effectively doubled Prussia’s debt burden
           (Stuebel 1935, 33-34).




29 of 41
