                     BACKGROUND PAPER




           While the banks perceived this as a damaging competition that destabilized the price and
           marketability of the consols, public opinion was very positive and found that the over-the-counter
           sales removed the illicit monopoly of the large banks. In the meantime, the market price for
           Prussian consols increased throughout the 1880s and reached its peak in 1889 (Stuebel 1935,
           46-48).

           A major change in bond issuance techniques occurred in 1888. After a stock market crash in 1887,
           financial conditions tightened and it became more difficult to place sovereign bonds. The financial
           crisis had a global dimension and peaked in 1890 when the bank Baring Brothers in London had
           to close down due to the sovereign default in Argentina. While the Seehandlung was determined
           that the Prussian government would not return to syndicated issuance, the Empire — which since
           1881 had also shifted to over-the-counter sales — decided to deviate and for the first time issued
           a subscription bond via a consortium that was led by the Reichsbank. This time, the consortium
           members were divided up into groups according to their ability of placing bonds and had quotas
           of 10%, 7.5%, 5%, or 3%. While the participating banks were mostly the same ones as in the Prussia
           Consortium, the new syndicate was now renamed into Imperial Bond Consortium
           (Reichsanleihekonsortium) to reflect the Reichsbank’s leadership (Stuebel 1935, 50-52; Reiter 1967,
           104-107).



           5.4 The double structure of Prussia and Imperial Bond Consortium in the Wilhelmine Era

           The double structure of the Prussia Consortium and the Imperial Bond Consortium existed from
           the Dreikaiserjahr 1888 onwards throughout the Wilhelmine Period. In the monetary architecture of
           Prussia and the German Empire, it came along with a declining role of the Seehandlung vis-à-vis
           the Reichsbank and the Disconto-Gesellschaft’s passing of the zenith as the main government
           financier.

           In 1890, the financial administrations of Prussia and the Empire decided to coordinate their
           sovereign bond issuance to avoid competing against each other on the financial market. They
           attempted to issue a 235 million ℳ bond, which ultimately failed. They reached out to the banks
           of the former Prussia Consortium and proposed conditions for a new syndicated bond issuance.
           The banks, however, colluded to dictate the terms. Nevertheless, the finance minister gave them
           their will. In October 1890, Imperial bonds and Prussian consols were issued in parallel with the
           help of the consortium. Even though the issuances were oversubscribed, they turned out a failure
           because speculators (Konzertzeichner) purchased the securities without an intention to hold on to
           them; instead, they sold the bonds quickly, which lead to the market price dropping below the
           emission price. This problem was to ensue for many of further future bond issuances (Stuebel
           1935, 58-60).

           In February 1891, the Empire and Prussia worked again with the consortium in order to issue 250
           million ℳ of Prussian 3% consols and 200 million ℳ of 3% imperial bonds. They took several joint
           measures to ensure the success of the issuance. Various branches of the Reichsbank and of the
           Prussian administration were used to circumvent speculators and reach private investors. The
           banks launched a coordinated advertisement campaign and also offered bonds via their branches
           in London, Amsterdam, and Brussels. By ministerial decree, savings banks (Sparkassen),




31 of 41
