

Nothing like this had ever been done before. Oral history as such was not new. But hitherto it had essentially been confined to two genres. Either – this was its first incarnation, under the aegis of Allen Nevins at Columbia, patriotic hagiographer of Lincoln – it set down the spoken reminiscences of Prominenten, politicos and bureaucrats thought to have played an important role in affairs of state, from above. Or – in a subsequent and opposite version, inspired in good part by Paul Thompson at Essex – it was typically concerned to retrieve the daily lives of those below the radar of any public drama, the lower orders of the unremarked and forgotten, in an extension of social history. Blood of Spain differed from both. What it set out to do, and achieved, was to recapture popular experience, not apart from, but in the very quick of a vast socio-political and military conflict, through an astonishing spectrum of individual lives. In finding and drawing out the testimony of participants from both sides in an ideological and civil war that still could not be freely spoken of in Spain, Ronnie had the advantages of an outsider, as an Englishman, and the instincts of a first-class reporter. But without his natural gifts of quiet courtesy and tact, he could never have got so many different people to open up to him, often for the first time since the thirties, about the repressed national trauma. What he discovered was that those with the clearest and most striking memories were typically middle-level witnesses, active but not leading participants in the conflict – those he would term ‘militants’, and whose accounts of their past form distinct sections in his reconstruction of it.

On its appearance in 1979, Blood of Spain was rightly hailed as a masterpiece of oral history. Yet Ronnie himself always had reservations about the term, observing that it generally rested on a confusion between source and genre, taking oral as if it denoted a subdiscipline comparable to economic, social or cultural history and the like, whereas in fact it simply indicated another kind of evidence which could inform any of these – in so far, of course, as witnesses were still alive, hence perforce contemporary fields within each. In the case of his work, though based on interviews, Blood of Spain is not a collation of them, of the kind that can be found in what at first sight might look like enterprises akin to it – Terkel’s Hard Times or ‘The Good War’, on the Depression and America’s World War Two, are representative examples – but a meticulously constructed composition. The successive phases of the Spanish Civil War form a historical narrative whose grandeur and intensity comes from its continuous inset of voices from survivors, most fairly and some very succinct, intercalated at regular intervals by notably longer recollections – ‘Militancies’, or particularly vivid scenes or incidents – ‘Episodes’, and concluding with a retrospect on flash-points of the Republic – land, religion, nationalisms, libertarians, rising of 1934, army – that preceded and precipitated the Civil War.