## Introduction

Just embarking on a new design and reconception of New Left Review in early 1964, I got a letter out of the blue saying the writer was a friend of André Gorz, and offering help in the production of the journal if it was needed. No further introduction was necessary. We needed every help we could get, and the unknown Ronald Fraser was immediately made unpaid business manager, and in short order became a central member of the editorial team. It was the most unpredictable, and perhaps most decisive, piece of luck the fledging magazine – which had a number of improbable strokes of good fortune – ever received. The newcomer stood apart from the rest of the group bringing it out in two critical ways. He was older by a decade than the average age of the editorial committee: not in his early twenties, but early thirties, already married with a son; and he had bypassed university, out of which the rest of us had just emerged, for work as a reporter, at Reuters and later the San Francisco Chronicle. These were marked differences, accentuated by the triumphalist jeunisme of the time. But two bonds nevertheless united us. One was a common distance from any centre of national gravity. Most of the original members of that editorial committee came from backgrounds at some angle to English life: origins immediately or otherwise Anglo-Irish, Scots, New Zealander, Deserter. Ronnie, born in Germany and by descent half-American, not only fitted this profile, but shared the general detestation of Englishry that went with it. The second tie was more personal. He had been politicized by his friendship with Gorz, met by chance some years before in Spain, whose autobiography, The Traitor, became a central intellectual reference for him. Gorz was one of the first European thinkers we had contacted in planning a new kind of NLR, and this was a work that had made a great impression on me too. So there was a common existentialist formation, which would come out in the journal in a number of ways – not least the inspiration of De Beauvoir’s Second Sex for Juliet Mitchell’s ‘Longest Revolution’ of 1966, kick-starting second-wave feminism, and a long interview we conducted with Sartre in 1969.1 That made a natural basis for productive exchange and collaboration.

The first, and most lasting, change Ronnie brought to New Left Review was to ensure its survival. Like most small magazines of the time and since, when he arrived it was still losing money, with dwindling reserves of credit or cash to keep it going. Taking the precarious finances of the journal in hand, he devised a seven-year plan to put it on a sound material footing, which worked to a tee. By the turn of the seventies, NLR had achieved a take-off in circulation that was self-sustaining. The fact that some sixty years after his architecture the journal supports a considerably larger staff with a positive balance sheet – a rarity in the world of the left, or indeed of any journals with intellectual pretensions – is originally due to him. So too would be the creation in 1970 of New Left Books, which became the Verso of today, in London and New York. Setting up a publishing house is a much harder and more complicated task than running a magazine, and the fortunes of the one have always been more accidented than of the other. But there as well, the survival of any house of the left for over fifty years, not to speak of the growth in its reach and reputation, is a feat for which the founding credit goes in large measure to him. To the end, he took a lively interest in its performance.