

The second big difference he made to NLR was intellectual. From an early age, he wanted to be a writer, publishing a novel at the turn of the sixties,2 and his primary orientation remained literary. Translations of texts from two Spanish writers of the ‘generation of the fifties’, Antonio Ferres and Luis Martín-Santos, and reflections on a novel by Michel Butor, were among his contributions to the journal.3 But in him writerly ambition – frustrated – was wedded to reportorial curiosity in a single enterprise that came to unify everything he wrote: a life-long commitment to lived experience as an intellectual and political value. In NLR, that produced the finest integrated series of texts in the history of the journal: the twenty-five accounts of different kinds of work published without a break, save for a special issue on May 1968 in France, over four years between 1965 and 1969.4

The subject was given editorial priority under the influence of Marx’s economic-philosophical manuscripts of 1844, then very strong on us, and introduced with a quotation from it. But Ronnie alone was capable of converting what could otherwise have remained a theoretical concern into so concrete and vivid a sequence of experiential reports, covering industrial, clerical, professional and speculative employment – car-worker, printer, steel-maker, signalwoman, miner, bricklayer, bus-driver, teacher, trawler, housewife, actor, croupière, accountant, stockbroker and more – not to speak of unemployment. They were collected in two volumes by Penguin in association with NLR in 1968–69, with introductions by Ronnie and afterwords by Raymond Williams and Alvin Gouldner respectively. They read as freshly today as when they were written.

Work I and II appeared some years before Studs Terkel’s Working in the United States.5 It is a reasonable surmise that Terkel’s book, which sold a million copies, was prompted by Ronnie’s enterprise, as he was asked to write it by André Schiffrin, who knew Ronnie and would be his American publisher at Pantheon. The contrast between the two is instructive. Terkel, an irrepressible raconteur who started out life as a concierge in his father’s hotel before becoming a talk-show host on radio, taped interviews with some 130 individuals, grouped by type of activity – Cleaning Up, Watching, Driving, Counting, etc. – and edited to allow their voices an average of a little over four pages each. The result is a lively and diverse mosaic, with many a graphic expression of discontent at particular jobs and the system around them, as well as of satisfaction at tasks of meaning and worth. Terkel himself was a very honourable American progressive in a Midwestern tradition – his family were admirers of Debs.6 But by reason of its formal composition, analytic reflection could not be a strength of his book, in which the word ‘capitalism’ is not to be found. Ronnie proceeded very differently. He did not tape interviews, but solicited written contributions, in the belief that if these could be located, they would allow deeper and acuter capture of the lived realities of work, and more time for reflection on them. The result is reports that are longer – an average of fifteen to sixteen pages, significantly less anecdotal and more substantial; some, tours de force of literary intensity. Two that remain indelibly etched in the mind are Ronnie’s own grim description of work in the hub of Reuters – its opening paragraphs have a touch of Zola – and Tom Nairn’s unforgettable memento of existence as a nightwatchman.7 The framing of both collections is unambiguously socialist.