

*

In 1969, a few months after the publication of the second volume of Work, in one of those serendipitous moments that historians sometimes know in the archives, Ronnie saw in The Times an item reporting that the republican mayor of a Spanish village had emerged from thirty years of hiding, on news that Franco had finally issued an amnesty for suspects and opponents of the Civil War period. The village was Mijas, where Ronnie had gone to write in 1957 after quitting Reuters, and later made a home. Rumours that the mayor was concealed and still alive had surfaced now and then among the villagers, and Ronnie had in fact based a character in one of his unpublished novels on such a figure.8 He decided there and then to see if a book, of fact not of fiction, could be made from the ordeal of this sequestration. Once the initial press hubbub around the mayor had died down, he returned to Mijas in the summer of 1969 and taped the life-history of Manuel Cortés, an Andalusian barber born in 1905, who became a Socialist under Primo de Rivera, was elected mayor on the eve of the Civil War, joined the carabineros at the front in defence of the Republic, and was proscribed when it fell, to endure thirty years immured in a hole in the wall of one house, and confinement to an attic; and of the wife who protected him.

In Hiding, the reconstruction of this arresting story published in 1972, made Ronnie’s name, winning admiration across the board in the Anglosphere – Arthur Miller singling it out for praise – and opening a new cycle in his career. A Spanish edition remained impossible. But when Schiffrin told him he doubted whether a Spanish case study in a ‘village series’ that a group of publishers was planning would be possible either, Ronnie took up the challenge. On the heels of In Hiding, he produced within another year a compelling history and ethnography of Mijas, composed of a tessellation of interviews with fifty villagers of all ages, social positions and political outlooks, set within a narrative tracing the evolution of the community from the last years of the nineteenth century to the invention of the Costa del Sol and tourist invasion of the region in the sixties – resident foreigners are not neglected, providing a further half-dozen witnesses.9 ‘Written with a certain novelist’s vision’, as he put it, and published with the transparently altered title Tajos, the book’s precision and scholarship form a sober contrast with Gerald Brenan’s lyrical portrait of the village of Yegen in South from Granada, the work that had once attracted Ronnie to the area.

No sooner was Tajos out than at the suggestion of Alastair Reid, the Scots poet and translator of Borges and Neruda who lived in the yet smaller village of Galilea in Majorca,10 Ronnie conceived the project of an oral history of the Spanish Civil War, and had no difficulty getting an advance from Schiffrin to finance it. This was in a sense a logical jump, by now. But it was a huge one: from recovering the experience of a couple, to a village, to a country; from a lifetime, to several generations, to just three convulsive years of war and revolution. With characteristically clear-eyed planning, he determined from the outset not to attempt to cover every part of Spain, but to select two Republican- and two Nationalist-controlled zones – centred respectively in Barcelona and Madrid, Andalusia and Castile-León – and one that knew control by both, Vizcaya-Asturias; and to concentrate principally on what the Civil War meant for the population behind the lines of fighting, rather than at the fronts themselves. Criss-crossing the country for two years from 1973–75, finding what interlocutors he could, he eventually interviewed over three hundred witnesses, recording upwards of 3 million words, the tapes dispatched at every stage to Gorz in Paris for fear of discovery and confiscation by Franco’s police. Out of these, after another two and a half years, he composed Blood of Spain, a book of 200,000 words.11