

The epigraph at the head of the foreword to Blood of Spain is from Pierre Vilar, and reads: ‘The subjective aspect of events, the “atmosphere” in which they took place, is also a condition of history . . . Indeed, can history be made real if [this aspect] is not resuscitated? Shall we leave the task solely to the novelist?’ Such was, exactly, the ambition of the book – ‘an attempt’, Ronnie wrote, ‘to reveal the intangible “atmosphere” of events: to discover the outlook and motivations of the participants, willing or unwilling; to describe what civil war, revolution and counterrevolution felt like from inside both camps’, to which he brought the formal ingenuity and sophistication of a historian who described himself as a novelist manqué. But, he added, ‘the atmosphere does not hang above events like the ether; it is a social emanation, the result of very terrestrial struggles’.12 If recovery of the lived experience of the agents and patients of the Civil War was a project reflecting the existentialist imprint on his outlook, already visible in his enquiry into the meanings of work for himself and others, he was also a Marxist who knew that objective structures, and their explanations, were not the same as subjective passions or intentions. Engels’s warning to Bloch stood at the entrance to his book as a whole.

Among the universal acclaim for Blood of Spain, one response was pitched at a level above any other, Victor Kiernan’s essay on it in NLR: a magnificent if sombre meditation on the contradictions and paradoxes of Spain from the time of Ferdinand VII to that of Franco – it might, after Edward Thompson and in its comparisons of the Spanish and English civil wars, have virtually been entitled ‘The Peculiarities of the Spaniards’. As a work of history, Kiernan wrote, its ‘chorus of discordant voices echoing out of the past’ was ‘so life-like as to be almost eerie’, bringing together ‘the fragmentary, disconnected experiences and sensations of a multitude of individuals’ that ‘lived through a cataclysmic time whose collective orbit transcended and eluded them all’. But, he went on,

it is with the collective reality of the whole that systematic history-writing must concern itself, seeking to trace the movement of events in terms of institutions, parties, nations and their ramifying accompaniments. All these entities are more or less artificial, abstractions from the tangible stuff of human life, much like identikit images; the beings composing them are never fully congruent with them, and in most of their daily and hourly consciousness may be far distant from them.

That was especially true of the country in hand. ‘Subjective and objective realities, always some distance apart, were very far removed in Spain, with its jumble of epochs and cultures’, where ‘what men thought and felt might have much or little connection with any fact of life, and found expression in ideas or attitudes often contradictory, sometimes to outsiders incomprehensible’.13