

Still, if he was not so English, what else could he be? In America at the turn of the sixties, he wanted his son to be born in England, because that was the only culture, he said, of which he had some understanding and where to a degree he felt he belonged. When he joined NLR, he shared our hostility to all that was emblematically British, but there was a difference in our relationship to it. This was partly one of origins: no one else was a product, however anomalous, of the Home Counties. He was more English, in that sense. But there was a further distance, of time not space. He came of age in the early fifties, years of deadening political conformity and cultural provincialism in England, the night of the Coronation and the High Cold War. We, in our majority, were products of the early sixties, when social conventions, moral prohibitions and ideological fixations were cast to the winds in a youthful rebellion that was international, but whose cultural cutting edge came from England. So, though less English in background, we were carried by the movement of the time, and more at home in this altered national landscape than he could ever be, something he noticed. We were less constrained.

His manners were better than ours, in a style that was more reserved. Tall and unobtrusively good-looking, the tensions in his formation were visible in the range of his characteristic expressions: much of the time a kind of impassivity, hinting more at subterranean diffidence than any inner serenity, then suddenly lit up by laughter or elation. He had many unexpected friends, but was not gregarious, more at ease in smaller than larger groups. Writing, taping and researching alone in Spain, he was accustomed to solitude. The one virtue to which he admitted was perseverance. He was more professional than we in everything he undertook, and had a more confident relation to the world of objects. Women, much attracted to him, were a zone of turbulence, where emotions held under control elsewhere could flower or explode. He was not patriarchal; all three with whom he had children worked in one way or another with him. To Spaniards he could seem the epitome of an English gentleman, as traditionally conceived. To us, he subverted such traditions.

*

After In Search of a Past came an oral history of the student revolt of the late sixties. An international venture covering six countries – the US, France, Germany, Italy, Britain and Northern Ireland – Ronnie co ordinated and edited the work of eight colleagues for the production of 1968. The least personal of his books, it perhaps cost him the most, as by now he was suffering from chronic fatigue syndrome, a medical affliction then little known. He was no student in the sixties or at any time, but the upheavals of 1968 were far from foreign, arousing the riotous energies in him. In the great Grosvenor Square demonstration of that year against the war in Vietnam, massed in front of the American embassy, when equestrian police charges were unleashed against the crowds, he could be seen, jubilant in a sans-culotte knit cap, in the forefront of the counter-charges. Soon after the book appeared, he found the companion with whom he would be entirely happy, Aurora Bosch, a Spanish historian of the US from Valencia, and moved to Spain to live with her.