

How completely did they do so? As a young man in Spain, Ronnie had two tutelary inspirations. Before he met Gorz and read The Traitor, it was Gerald Brenan’s South from Granada that had drawn him to find an attic in Spain to become a writer, and when In Hiding came out, he rode over on a newly acquired Lambretta to the nearby village where Brenan then lived, to leave a copy on his doorstep, after which, and a comic misunderstanding about Ronnie’s identity, they became friends. The affinity was understandable. Separated by two generations – Brenan was born in 1894 – they otherwise had much in common. Brenan too had been divided between a harshly disciplinarian father of military background and a loving, if meandering mother from a family of vast wealth; hated his public school, never went to university, relocated to Spain, failed as a novelist, produced a classic – The Spanish Labyrinth – on the origins of the Civil War, and wrote a famous memoir of his childhood and adolescence, A Life of One’s Own. An immensely learned autodidact of his time, Brenan was an Edwardian romantic who had little truck with Marxism, let alone existentialism. But though he was more sexually damaged by his upbringing, and found England after the Great War stifling,19 he was also much more assured and casually embedded in his class and country. It was the lack of Brenan’s easy good terms with his social environment, rather than any pronounced contrast of familial fate, that set Ronnie most obviously apart from him. Although Brenan’s mother was more attentive to her son, he too was looked after by a nanny, and suffered when she left, a sequence common enough in the upper classes of the time, as more generally the compensating emotional warmth that the company of servants could represent for children in such families.

More decisive in Ronnie’s case was the particular standing of the family itself. In Search of a Past underplays this, in keeping with the psychoanalytical side of the book.20 His parents were recent arrivals in Berkshire, parachuted into the landscape from origins alien to it. His father, who came from Scottish gentry in the Highlands, spent his working years in Germany with the shipping line Elder Dempster. There he married an American, younger than himself, of millionaire stock, whose mother – a Colorado heiress on both sides of her family (silver, banking, retailing) – had married en secondes noces a German baron, also in shipping, with whom she lived in Mexico after the First World War before returning to Hamburg, where her bilingual daughter gave birth to Ronnie in 1930. Wealthy but deracinated, this was a household planted in a county society with which it had no prior connexions. Once established there, his parents naturally entertained, but the links would have been brittle. The atmosphere of In Search of a Past is one of isolation, marked by absence of any memory of other children of the same class in the neighbourhood. When the couple divorced, his mother relocated first to America, taking the children with her, then to Switzerland, while his father went back to Germany. Released from school at Wellington, Ronnie completed high school in Connecticut, secured but did not take up admission to Princeton, moved back to Geneva, and after escaping dispatch to Korea during military service due to a knee injury, eventually applied for entrance at Cambridge. When his interviewer told him that if he wanted to be a writer, university was not a requirement, he desisted. The normal post-war cursus for one of his class had not been internalized. His links with England were attenuated.