

In Search of a Past can in many ways be called an English version, or counterpart, of The Traitor. Gorz’s influence on the book was not confined to its pronominal scheme, but went much deeper. The friendship born by hazard in Mijas was central to Ronnie for many years thereafter. Before they met, both were reporters by profession, both outsiders to their society, both frustrated writers. The Traitor was conceived when Gorz came to the conclusion that the philosophical summum on which he had been working for years was unpublishable, and was written with the aim of so systematically understanding the hollow self that had led to this failure that in doing so he would be freed to become someone else. On reading it, Ronnie recognized the same sensation of isolation and nullity that had haunted Gorz, and soon decided that the novels he was writing or had written were unpublishable too. The project of In Search of a Past was the same as well: the tracking down of a fugitive subject as the means of transforming it.

But the connexions also point to the contrasts between the two books. Gorz brought to bear on his past a formidable theoretical machinery, befitting the continuation of Sartre he had wanted to become, which illuminates rather than obscures the sharpness of scenes and episodes from the Austria of Dollfuss and the Anschluss and of wartime Switzerland that give The Traitor its biographical bite. Chronologically, the story runs from childhood to early manhood after the war. But reflection predominates by some way over narration, in a lucid self-portrait that can be read as a mutation, encoded by Marxism and existentialism, of a classical French tradition.

In Search of a Past, whose narrative stops when the author is fourteen rather than twenty-four, attempts no such self-portrait – the subject of the search remains elusive, escaping definition or direct characterization. Gorz’s temperament was philosophical; he was relatively little concerned with history, and treated class as a structural category of any capitalist society, without much interest in national variations or sociological refinements. Ronnie’s outlook was more empirical; his imagination was historical; and he was the product of a culture in which class was not only the structure, but the intimate texture of society, in a way that it was not in France. He was also writing in a country where psychoanalysis had a longer tradition and more substantial presence. The Sartre who formed the young Gorz had resisted Freud. The epigraph to The Traitor comes from Francis Jeanson; to In Search of a Past, from Winnicott. The route to recovery of the self was thus necessarily quite different. In the one, others figure as little more than memorable flashes, obstacles or alleviations to the subject; in the other, they are meticulously realized, as the path to discovery of the subject. That contrast is in part a function of another critical difference between the two writers. The Austria and Switzerland of his origins Gorz had forever left behind. In France he arrived as an outsider, but committed with the fervour of a religious convert to a culture where he became at home without difficulty. Ronnie had no such ease with England, and had not left it behind. Its oppressive particulars were bound to figure much more concretely in his enterprise.