

*

If the seventies were a Spanish decade, the eighties saw a return of Ronnie’s writing to England, with the excavation of his childhood that produced in 1984 the most unusual of all his books. In Search of a Past is generally treated as an autobiography – when it appeared, it came close to winning a prize as such – and the category is not a simple misnomer. Yet the work is not a recollection of the writer’s past, nor even exactly a reconstruction of it, but a quest for his identity through the remembrance of others, and the household to which they and he belonged. Its subtitle is nothing like My Early Years. It is rather The Manor House, Amnersfield 1933–1945. Such, formally speaking, is the object of the book; what it will tell us about the subject who is its author subtends, but does not cancel, that organizing focus. As with In Hiding, the origins of In Search of a Past lie in another improbable chance of the kind Ronnie seemed to attract, as if such findings were magnetized like filings to his particular Fingerspitzengefühl. In late 1967, while he was still engaged on his Work series for NLR, he discovered that some of the servants in the country house where he had been a child were still in the neighbourhood thirty years later, including – least likely of all – his German nanny, packed off to her homeland when the war broke out, and never heard of since. That might have remained just a matter of private interest had not (he explained many years later) he met Oscar Lewis the previous year and, on asking him whether he regarded The Children of Sanchez as anthropology or literature, been told, ‘Literature, I guess.’ As he reports his reaction, ‘My heart missed a beat. So one could recreate a past, become a literary man, through others!’17 Whereupon he bought a cassette recorder, and started to tape interviews with those who had known him as a child.

At the time, he had not known how to wrest an intelligible narrative out of the materials he recorded, and had put them away. Over a decade later, however, on a depression intensifying a lifelong sense of inward emptiness, and deciding to embark on psychoanalysis, he realized it might be possible to weave inner and outer searches for himself into a single literary form. He would later write, ‘My concern, as a historian and a writer, has for long been with the interaction of the social and the subjective’.18 In Search of a Past, published in 1984, became its most remarkable expression: alternating exchanges in his analysis with recollections of the servants surrounding him as a child – nanny, groom, parlour-maid, gardener, cook, nurserymaid – as well as of his younger brother, and glimpses of his now senile father, whose death concludes the time of the work, it moves between the two poles with a terse, unsettling power. Inspired by the example of Gorz, the formal structure of the book is given by a sequence of pronouns: We (author and analyst); They (servants); She/He/She (nanny, father, mother); You (how servants saw the author as a child); We (author and analyst); Us (author and brother); I (author as a definite outcome, and precarious overcoming, of childhood and analysis). Substantively, what this structure delivers in a single movement is a stunning ethnography of a wealthy family and its household of retainers in the Home Counties between the wars, a live miniature of class relations, and a narrative of the psychological damage that a cold authoritarian father, a doting, distracted mother, and their divorce caused their first child, buffered only by the surrounding servitors.