

In those aspects where the fragments were too few to create a new source, I preferred to array them in a mosaic of narrative detail rather than generalize on the basis of insufficient evidence. Some may object that I haven’t seen the wood for the trees. I would reply that the trees are the wood (or more usually a copse) seen in close-up. If any readers get lost, they’ll soon see on which side of the trunk the moss grows. At other times, however, where the specific conditions of a particular form of resistance – the guerrilla, for example – demanded it, the focus was widened beyond the trees to explain the geo-social and historical context in which they could grow. To those discomforted by the narrative break, I can say that these explanatory interludes may be passed over lightly without losing the general thread.

In the course of the book, a number of Spanish myths concerning the war are laid to rest. The ‘spontaneity’ of the initial popular risings; the uniform patriotism of all social classes; the lower orders’ trust in their ‘natural’ superiors; even their voluntary commitment to the defence of their country. And much else, like the Church hierarchy’s immediate and total commitment to the war against ‘atheist’ France; or the wealthy’s financial support for the cause.

Some of these myths are themselves a Spanish historical legacy used for political ends: contemporary with events, in the first instance cited; and later, recycled in mid-nineteenth-century liberal attempts to create a modern nation around the myth of national unity in the war’s ‘glorious epic’; and again in the mid-twentieth century, to a diametrically opposed, and more sinister political purpose: the early Franco regime’s constant invocation of popular resistance to a foreign aggressor (now communism, a judaic–masonic international conspiracy) in defence of Spain’s ‘eternal values’: religion, the fatherland and the natural authority – a return to the absolutist monarch – of the dictator himself.

The reality of the war for the population in general was very different: death, illness, hunger, flight; suffering enemy razzias for food and contriving wily stratagems to prevent the loss; resistance and passivity; and fear, always fear: of all armies, French, British and Spanish; of marauding bandits in the guise of guerrillas; of a treacherous present and – should the French win – an uncertain future, bereft of tradition, altar and throne. In this flux of fears only one constant stood out: popular hatred of the repressive imperial occupation forces which thieved a living off the land (to which they had no alternative under Napoleon’s dictum that war feeds war), laid waste to villages, vandalized churches and wantonly killed, nominally to support a usurper Bonaparte king.

*

While the book follows the war’s chronological course, though avoiding all but the decisive battles, it will be immediately apparent that a great part is devoted to the first two years of the war, from the summer of 1808 to that of 1810. There is a good reason for this. In wars which unleash in self-defence a popular rising, revolutionary or not, that overthrows or nullifies the existing state apparatus, a power vacuum is opened up in the latter’s place. For the struggle to continue this has to be filled and a new regime consolidate its power. But until it does, in the general chaos, all sorts of previously unexpected social and political opportunities are seized upon, whether in actions or words, that demonstrate the people’s ideas and wishes formerly repressed either directly by the prior regime or through social conditioning (or more usually both). This is a fertile moment to study popular social realities which largely lay obscured in the immediate past; and which, once some sort of order is restored, tend to subside again into the undergrowth.