## Acknowledgements

I wish to thank the Leverhulme Trust and the Cañada Blanch Foundation for grants which enabled me to carry out a considerable part of the documentary research on which this book is based. Without their generous aid, the work’s scope would have been much diminished, especially at the local level where the grants enabled me to engage a score of individuals to scour provincial and other archives for relevant material. I gratefully recognize the contribution to this book made by the following though none, of course, is responsible for the use I made of their research:

Juan Ballesta; Gonzalo Butrón; Julia Cifuentes; Monica Ferrer; Ines Gómez; Leonor Hernández; Germán López; Isabel Martínez; José Manuel Pelaez; Marcel Poblet; Elena Quirós; Gonzalo Rodríguez; Pilar Rovira; Pilar Salomón; Ma. José Sánchez Pravia; Julio Sierra; Sonia Turón; and Miguel Vázquez.

I am especially endebted to Professor Josep Fontana, an outstanding Catalan historian of the period, for his continuing encouragement and knowledge on which I could always call; Professor David Sven-Reher led me gently by the hand through some elementary demographic procedures and his invaluable suggestions have added considerably to the book’s range; Antonio Moliner and Richard Hocquellet kindly made available their doctoral theses and the marquesa de Marañón allowed me to consult the private papers of her Bertrán de Lis forebears; William Christian’s deep anthropological understanding of popular Spanish religious practices was always instructive and María Tausiet’s permission to use her work allowed me to probe a case of village religious ‘possession’ during the war; in researching the period, Isabel Aguirre, head archivist of the Simancas archives, was exceptionally helpful, as were Fernanda del Rincón, archivist of the Valencian Cortes and Chris Woolgar of the Hartley Library, Southampton University. I wish also sincerely to thank Perry Anderson and Tariq Ali for their constant friendship and counsels during some difficult moments in this book’s production; and Fred Halliday for his unremitting efforts on my behalf from his new Barcelona base.

A considerable number of historian-demographers provided me with much valuable information. As their names will be found among the sources at the end of Appendix 5 I shall not repeat them here. But I wish to take the opportunity of thanking them collectively.

Many historians whose names do not figure helped me at various times and in ways too varied to enumerate; I am particularly grateful to the following: Celso Almuiña, Rafael Aracil, Manuel Ardit, Marc Baldó, Xosé Barreiro, Antonio Bernal, Robert Brenner, Esteban Canales, Raymond Carr, Julián Casanova, Francisco Díaz Torrejón, Fernando Díez Rodríguez, Juan Francisco Fuentes, Mario García Bonafé, Salvador García Jiménez, Antonio García López, Carmen García Monerris, Ana Ma. García Rovira, Ramón Garrabou, Carlo Ginzburg, Nigel Glendenning, Manuel González Portilla, Richard Herr, Eric Hobsbawm, Herminio Lafoz, Emilio La Parra, Alicia Laspra, Francisco Javier Maestrojuán, José Martínez Carrión, Tom Mertes, Jesús Millán, Encarna Nicolás, Madalena de Pazzis, Ma. Antonia Peña, Manuel Pérez Ledesma, Vicente Pérez Moreda, José Manuel Pérez García, José Antonio Piqueras, Paul Preston, Joaquín Recaño, Ricardo Robles, Isabel Rodríguez Zurro, Ma. Cruz Romeo, Pedro Ruíz Torres, Jorge Sánchez Fernández, Antoni Simón Tarrès, Ignaci Terradas and Ramón Villares. (I apologize in advance to any I may have inadvertently overlooked; a last-minute computer crash lost for ever the original list which I have had to recompile from memory).