## Foreword

Amid the vast compendium of histories of the Peninsular War, the appearance of yet another book requires some explanation. It would, of course, be vain to hope to add anything new to the overall map of this well-charted conflict; but within it one area has remained virtually unexplored: the unremitting popular Spanish resistance to Napoleon’s attempted seizure of the Spanish homeland.

Over six long years in a nation still proud of its tradition as an age-old Catholic monarchy and defender of the true faith, the bloody struggle was unique in French-occupied countries. (Anti-Napoleonic revolts at different times in other largely Catholic areas – Naples, Sicily, the Tyrol – were by comparison minor, surmountable regional affairs. Even Napoleon’s Russian disaster in 1812 owed more to snow and disease than to pitched battles and guerrilla resistance.) Elsewhere in Europe, however, local elites and populations accepted the French imperial system; but not in Spain, France’s ally which Napoleon had treacherously invaded and where he had proceeded to depose its new young Bourbon king in favour of his own brother. Reaction to the emperor’s attempt to take over the nation, unlike his policy in other defeated countries, aroused a popular Spanish resistance which continued unabated even during the two and a half years when Wellington did not once venture from Portugal into the Spanish interior.

It is sometimes forgotten today that the Peninsular War began in Spain over the nation’s immediate destiny as France’s ally. In 1808, both sides stumbled – Napoleon aggressively, the Spanish Old Regime’s rulers more than reluctantly – into war. Neither expected an armed conflict and both shared a similar view of the necessary outcome should one occur: Spain would inevitably go down to defeat in the face of Napoleon’s superior might. And so it would and should have been, had not the Spanish people risen in their country’s defence and new patriotic governing bodies seized power from the old rulers; and had not Britain, eager to exploit an anti-Napoleonic struggle on France’s southern flank, come to their aid.

From the resistance sprang a political revolution which deeply fissured, without destroying, Spain’s Old Order, enunciating the principle of popular sovereignty and heralding the (male) population’s entry into the political arena. It was Spain’s first step into the modern era.

The causes and experience of the Spanish civilian resistance and revolution form the theme of this book. Its major concern is to elucidate the common people’s initiatives and responses to the war while simultaneously taking account of their commoner superiors who initiated the anti-Napoleonic risings in 1808 and used them to seize regional power in the people’s name; and among them those who carried the political revolution forward. In short, the book embarks on a social history from below of the resistance and an account of individuals’ lived experience during the war.

This dual aim is the cause of some of the book’s idiosyncrasies. In the first place, widespread illiteracy among the lower orders made for a scarcity of written sources, and even when these were discovered, they were of a fragmentary nature, difficult to generalize unless repeated in distinct places or regions. And their shard-like character also made it virtually impossible to follow the same individual through distinct experiences. Often I would have given an arm and a leg to have been able to interview a sample of the survivors; instead I was obliged to create new sources – frequently as databases, built out of the fragments – to explore important areas of the resistance and the social changes (or lack of them) that the war induced (or maintained alive).