

But it also blocked the state’s centralizing aspirations. It was one thing for the crown to decree laws and another to see that these laws were put into effect. When they ran counter to the local oligarchy’s interests they were quietly sabotaged. Despite the intendentes and state-appointed local corregidores, the monarchy lacked an adequate administrative machinery in the regions to back them up, and relied on local powers to carry out its orders. The result was a ‘dispersion of power in a multiplicity of … hierarchies, each relatively autonomous in relation to the crown, although subordinated to it as the supreme power’.3

Alongside the overlapping, there lay the clear legal demarcation of the social order. The organization of society by estates, each with its own laws, was hierarchical and distinctly defined. With the exception of the clergy, where there was choice, everyone else was born into a pre-existing estate. In real life things were more complex: by the eighteenth century belonging to an estate was often more a juridical than a functional matter, as the untitled nobility’s situation demonstrated (see below).

Within the social structure there was also some movement. By the late eighteenth century a service nobility existed, created by the monarchs to reward special services to their persons or the state. Lower down the social scale, economic expansion in mid-century had created a stratum of the new wealthy: colonial shippers, señorial dues-farmers, government contractors, grain merchants, large land-leasing farmers, among whom some had become members of local oligarchies. Even more important for the political revolution that broke out in 1808, the basic tenets of a laissez-faire ideology had evolved in some important sectors of the enlightened classes.

Until the first decade of the nineteenth century, these internal social movements were of no immediate threat to the Old Order, for in this hierarchically organized society, nobility and Church played a dominant role. The Church was the more important of the two. Spaniards inhabited one of the oldest political units in Europe which had spanned almost identical borders since the early sixteenth century; if they had a collective identity it was that they shared the same religion. ‘The whole of the ancien régime’s legitimising discourse and the vigilant eyes of institutions such as the Inquisition had left a seemingly indelible Catholic legacy.’4 Alongside allegiance to the crown, this religious identity, the sense of being defenders of the true faith, ‘God’s chosen people among gentiles’, and the ‘spiritual reserve of the West’,5 was without doubt the most important national foundation of a society which tended in general to look back on its heritage rather than forward to an innovatory future. Beyond these two national loyalties, at the popular level, there was little or no sense of belonging to more than a local community, or at most a region, which was hardly surprising given the poor communications and the lack of literacy.