

Unlike eighteenth-century France, the Church was not the preserve of the upper nobility. High ecclesiastical office tended to be filled by university-educated commoners or untitled nobles – many of them reform-minded prelates – in the same way as the royal administration; while at its lower levels it was an avenue of social ascent for the labouring classes’ sons. Although the clergy numbered in 1787 just under 134,000 or about 1.3% of the total population, of the 60,000 ordained priests only approximately one-quarter served as parish rectors or curates. This left over 2,000 of the country’s 19,000 parishes without spiritual assistance.

The intellectual and spiritual level of parish priests varied from the virtually uneducated to the enlightened. The vicar of Ciudad Real reported that in his district ‘many priests were to be found who were so stupified and ignorant that it was a triumph for them to understand the canon of the Mass’. In the isolated Andalucian vicarates of Huéscar and Cazorla priests were found living with their mistresses, gambling and hunting, engaged in smuggling, and some who refused to wear clerical dress when they performed their sacerdotal duties.10

On the other hand, there were those who ‘identified with the interests of their flocks … [and] defended the poor against the powerful and the señores’. This was certainly the case of some Andalucian parish priests who were among the leaders of their municipal councils’ legal battle over their señorial lords’ usurpation of village lands.11

In addition to the secular clergy, the religious orders had just under 40,000 monks, friars and novices in 2,000 houses; and just over 24,000 nuns and novices in 1,000 convents. The majority of the male orders were mendicants (monks represented only one-tenth of the orders’ numbers); and because urban centres provided the easiest pickings for alms the friars, alongside the ordinary clergy, were concentrated in towns and cities.* In Sevilla the religious orders outnumbered the secular priesthood, alone providing 1,600 members for the great religious processions.12

Like the secular, the regular clergy presented a gamut running from ‘ignorance and superstition’ to spirituality and erudition. A well-educated elite held high office, presiding over a large body of friars whose ‘intellectual quality and religious commitment left much to be desired’.13 Some friaries and convents were in a state that left more than something to be desired, as the diocesan visitor sent to inspect the Dominicans in Villanueva de los Infantes, a small township in the Mancha, reported.

The nuns and friars mingle daily together for indecent purposes, from which vile coitus two children have resulted … I saw with my own eyes the nuns leaving their convent at night and making for the friary. And in the daytime, the friars scandalously entering into the enclosed convent.14

However unruly the behaviour of a minority, most friars and parish priests enjoyed the lower orders’ respect. Great numbers of them were recruited from the same social strata; and if their religious observances did not meet the Church’s highest demands, the same could be said of the majority of their flock who evinced a common trait, ‘ignorance, and an evident superficiality of theological knowledge, a defect which made it easy to fall into superstitious practices far removed from religious rectitude’.15