

With an officer corps like this, it was hardly to be wondered at that so many of the new recruits who had enthusiastically enlisted to fight Napoleon deserted or took up the struggle on their own as guerrillas.

### SPANISH ENLIGHTENMENT AND LIBERALIZATION

The Bourbons’ determination to reform and return Spain to a position of power in the world, necessary to strengthen the state and defend its colonial empire, led them to appoint enlightened men to their bureaucracy who tried to put into governmental practice the lessons of ‘reason’ learnt from France and elsewhere. Thus, many of the major figures of the Spanish Enlightenment from mid-century on were high state functionaries.* The questions they raised on how best to develop the country, and on the individual’s rights, continued to reverberate throughout the Napoleonic era.

One of the main questions posed by these reformers was a question still familiar today. To what extent should the state regulate the lives and activities of its subjects in the interests of their ‘felicity’ (i.e. well-being) and the country’s economic progress? To the early reformers of Carlos III in the 1760s and 1770s, exemplified by Campomanes, the Consejo de Castilla’s attorney, there was no doubt: they believed they could – indeed, had to – use the absolute monarchy to reform the absolutist state without undermining its bases. A series of gradualist reforms were put in hand to free Spain of the ‘obstacles’ to progress.† The thinking behind them, however, was state ‘productivism’ rather than a generalized opening up to ‘free enterprise’. It was a case of using certain market mechanisms for the benefit of the state, and, not least, that of the treasury. But the reforms did not have the desired effect.

Within twenty years, the earlier strategy was radically challenged by some of the second ‘generation’ of enlightened thinkers, most notably by Gaspar Melchor Jovellanos. Under the influence of Locke and Adam Smith, among others, Jovellanos came to believe that ‘the first objective of social laws’ must always be ‘to protect the individual’s interests’, which were the stimulus to progress and the source of a nation’s wealth. By denying self-interest and relying on government laws and regulations, the earlier reformers had put the cart before the horse. Each citizen must be ‘independent and free in his actions, as long as these do not contradict the law’, and each citizen must be ‘equal in the eyes of the law and have the same right to enjoy its protection’.37 Taking these views to their logical conclusion became one of the progressives’ ideological aims during the war. But Jovellanos, an admirer of England’s constitutional monarchy, blended reform with monarchic traditionalism;‡ and in this mix, it could be said, he more closely represented popular wartime sentiment than that of the third generation whose progressives believed in a political rupture with the past since in their view the major obstacle to Spain’s advance was absolutism itself.