

I knew only too well the conduct of this Holy Tribunal and of its satellites who, excited by the most frenzied superstition, persecuted without moderation, examination or formality [those who had spoken] indiscrete words or other trifles …

The tribunal commissioner, who appeared not to know of Tamburini, demanded the forbidden works. Posse gave him the dissertation. The commissioner looked at its cover, read his orders, and told the curate that he must hand it over. ‘Happy to make the sacrifice and to be freed of this henchman’s claws, I left.’*

Posse, a Galician smallholder’s son, was fortunate; though other prisons awaited him later in life, he would not see the inside of an Inquisitorial prison.

*

There were two important consequences of the Church reform movement. The most significant was that the reformers believed that the forces opposed to change were too strong to overcome without state intervention. This discouraged reforming self-reliance within the Church, and encouraged a too-ready dependence on state legislation. The imbrication of the state in the Church’s internal affairs led opponents of eccelesiastical reform to lay the blame on the state – or rather the state’s political structure – at crucial moments of shaping a new constitutional monarchy during the war. Opposition to Church reform – especially, but not solely, the Inquisition’s abolition – reinforced clerical resistance to political change.

The second consequence was that many university students who, as adults, took part in the war were exposed to – and espoused – the reform movement, particularly at Salamanca university where the curriculum had, after long resistance, been finally modernized. The trajectories of many of these reformers during the war would criss-cross one another’s as some stayed loyal to the patriot cause and others served the Bonaparte regime. The conflict tragically split the enlightened, young and old, as it split the governance of Spain in what, effectively, became a civil war within the larger Napoleonic war.

### THE NOBILITY AND THE FEUDAL LAND SYSTEM

With one important exception, that of the army officer corps (see below), the Spanish Bourbons excluded the aristocracy from any dominant role in the affairs of state. Unlike in France, by the end of the eighteenth century the old Spanish titled nobility had lost most of its political influence, which had fallen into the hands of commoners and minor untitled nobles.18 Nonetheless, the nobility was the essential vertebra of the social order and its apex. By its status alone, the aristocracy enjoyed honour, dignity, esteem. ‘To be a noble was the secret ambition of every Spaniard.’19

In 1797, according to the not always very reliable Godoy census, the ‘nobility’ numbered just over 400,000; but of these only 1,323 were titled nobles. The remainder were hidalgos – the children or descendants of those who claimed nobility. As the entire Basque-born male population of Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa claimed hidalguía, just over 100,000 hidalgos were to be found in those two provinces alone;* and, for historical reasons, a very large proportion of the remainder also lived in the other northern regions where their way of life was often virtually indistinguishable from the lower orders. South of Madrid, however, their numbers fell sharply, they tended to own land and their social status was higher.