

In its determination to control all aspects of society, including the ecclesiastical estate, Bourbon absolutism had wrested from an ineffectual papacy the right to appoint Spain’s bishops, and it ensured that a number of enlightened clerics were put in place. These were generally in favour of expanding royal intervention in Church affairs in order to secure the reforms they believed necessary because the state alone had the authority to confront Rome and deeply entrenched religious customs in Spain. These enlightened reformers and their lay supporters were, by the late 1780s, opposed to the religious orders, the Inquisition, and papal temporal authority over the Spanish Church. They believed in a personal, more interior religion, in ‘knowledge of the religious truth, and in the practice of a simple liturgy’.16 They were as hostile to superstitious ‘popular’ devotions as they were to the extravagances of the official cult. One of their earliest and greatest achievements, no doubt, was to secure the Inquisition’s agreement to the Bible being read in the vernacular, though this met strong opposition from ultramontane members of the clergy.

The Inquisition was a state within the ecclesiastical state, but also a power within the temporal state. Under Carlos III it was, however, a power in decline. After exiling one inquisitor general for obeying Rome rather than the monarchy, Carlos III appointed an enlightened bishop to the post. In 1782, the latter admitted that fear of the Inquisition’s censorship, now regulated by the state, was ‘nearly extinct’. But this did not prevent the Inquisition from banning virtually the entire range of foreign enlightened thought, from Montesquieu to Rousseau, Voltaire to Diderot, Adam Smith (The Wealth of Nations) to Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe. The Inquisition’s proscription, however, did not thwart the enlightened securing and reading clandestinely these authors’ works in the original. What it did, rather, was to prevent their translation and publication in Spanish.17

But the Holy Office’s structure – permanent tribunals in the different regions, inquisitors, prisons, familiares (lay informers and inquisitorial police force) – remained in place. The Inquisition, with its long history, was arguably a more centralized and effective power for repression than the state itself. And, as always in the past, it could be called upon in defence of the state.

The central role allotted to the Holy Office by the government during the panic of the French Revolution reinforced the threat that hung over Spaniards’ heads, and many at all levels of society – from government ministers to obscure parish priests – would suffer the attentions already recently known to others. On being charged in 1797 by the Valladolid tribunal for possessing proscribed works, Juan Antonio Posse, a young rural curate in a remote mountain village of León, believed himself ‘doomed’. Before setting off, he hid with great difficulty under rocks on the roadside the works of Pedro Tamburini – ‘the Inquisition’s most formidable opponent’ – taking with him only a relatively harmless dissertation by the Italian professor, whose enlightened Catholicism was the pole star of Spanish Catholic reformers.