

The dominance of colonial trade favoured the maritime regions, producing an uneven development in relation to the interior, with the exception of Madrid. This imbalance, however, became of strategic importance during the war: until the French slowly reduced most of the ports, their merchants’ capital helped to keep the armed resistance afloat and, though often protesting at the sums of money the patriot authorities demanded of them, they supported the war effort in the hope that the conflict would end soon in order for them to renew colonial commerce. They realized, moreover, that a Bonapartist victory would end their monopolistic control of the trade, opening it to rival French houses. Their objective then was for political stability, peace and good trading conditions, in a reformed Spain independent of alliances which inevitably led to war. In Cádiz, besieged but never conquered, the merchants not only ran patriot government finances for a period but they cashed in their wealth as political leverage during the government’s long residence there.

Earlier in the century some merchants in Cataluña, Valencia and the Basque country had taken a step to proto-industrialization and organized ‘putting-out’ systems. Valencian silk, Viscayan iron, Catalan wool production were organized in this way. But the introduction of cottons opened up new domestic markets by replacing more expensive forms of woollen clothing, especially for the rural population which in the second half of the century was having to spend a greater part of its exiguous income on food; and it was Catalan merchants who took advantage of the demand, launching Cataluña on the path of industrialization. † By the end of the eighteenth century, possibly as many as 100,000 workers were employed in 3,000 Catalan cotton factories.44 Of particular social importance was the fact that women – and children – now became industrial workers alongside men. Women’s right to work as spinners ‘and in all those trades compatible with their decorum and the physical strength of their sex’ was recognized and extended to the whole of Spain in 1784.

### POOR COMMONERS: THE URBAN LABOURING CLASSES

Three-quarters of the urban lower orders were poor, and at times of economic or agrarian crisis, poverty – if not outright destitution – extended to half the Spanish population.* From the mid-1780s, urban workers’ wages or takings lagged far behind inflation: between 1786 and 1800 a Madrid building labourer’s wages rose approximately one-fifth; the price of bread, the major staple in the poor’s diet, more than doubled in the same period. At the end of the century the unmarried labourer could just manage to remain above absolute impoverishment; the really hard hit were married labourers with two children.45 Only in Barcelona where the increase of cotton manufacture exceeded that of the population’s growth, did wage rises keep rough pace with inflation.

The poor lived in cramped quarters within the cities’ old walls. The doubling in size of the urban population under the flood of dispossed landworkers, and new proletarians in Barcelona’s case, did not lead to an increase in urban centres’ housing: simply twice as many people were crammed into them as at the beginning of the century. In Madrid, an average of thirty-three people lived to a house, a number higher than in Paris after the Napoleonic wars. Most of the poor lodged in narrow, sunless, evil-smelling streets, in a single basement or attic room with little ventilation and light, no sanitation, heating or fireplace. Cooking was done in one corner, on a fire built of bricks, and smoke filled the room where a whole family lived; in basements residual water often ran on the floor, creating an unbreathable foetid atmosphere. Garbage, urine and excrement were thrown out on the street.46 Madrid was known as one of the filthiest capitals of Europe.