

Throughout the second half of the eighteenth century, the increasing belligerence of municipalities which challenged the lord’s legal rights led to court cases that could and did drag on for generations, to the señores’ considerable cost. Though townships and villages usually lost in the end, unchallengeable ownership became a matter of importance to the nobility. During the Napoleonic war, it was to no small extent this material interest which kept most of the latter – and other would-be landowners – aligned with the patriot reformers, who wanted to introduce a free market in land. The more aware nobles were prepared to exchange their constantly contested señorial rights for a more profitable and less troublesome ownership; and this, as will be seen in the book, they achieved when, under certain conditions, the Cortes of Cádiz turned señores into outright landowners.

With very rare exceptions, the grandees did not invest in new agrarian methods to increase agricultural productivity on their estates. The money went on sumptuary spending, especially in maintaining vast numbers of retainers, or at best – if the Dukes of Medinaceli and Infantado were representative – into reorganizing and centralizing estate administrations to make them more efficient to ensure that they benefited from rising agrarian prices.22

Agriculture progress in the kingdom of Castilla was further blocked by the nobility’s use – the Church had its own variant (mortmain) – of the legal artifice of entailment to protect their holdings from being squandered by indebted heirs. The entailed secular estate (mayorazgo) was indivisible, inalienable and not liable for debt, and inheritable exclusively by the oldest son.* More importantly from the agricultural point of view, the entail could not legally be let on long leases, thus making the improvement of the land of no interest to tenants. And since it could also not be sold, the mayorazgo was especially galling at a time of land hunger at the turn of the century, and was generally criticized as leaving the estates poorly farmed. To Floridablanca, the reforming first minister, entail was ‘a seminary of idleness’.†23

Each municipality also had large tracts of commons which could not in principle be sold. Estimates of the total amount of inalienable land varied from half of the entire territory of Spain (of which only forty percent was arable) to sixty percent of the country’s productive land.24

Finally, one further point about landownership needs to be made. The question of who owned the land was not always as relevant as that of who controlled and benefited from it. One reason for this was again an overlapping of rights: title to the land and its hereditary use could be vested in distinct individuals (or corporative bodies, in the case of title-holders). In a wide swathe of northern Spain stretching from Galicia and parts of Castilla la Vieja through the Basque country, Navarra and Aragón to Cataluña, different forms of hereditary leases were common, with the result that tenants felt themselves to be ‘owners’ of the land they worked. During the war, the sense of protecting their own ‘property’ became an important factor in fomenting popular resistance, especially the guerrillas.