

The fact that hidalgos could be found in every walk of life did not mean that they were an insignificant social grouping. On the contrary, in their educated middle and upper echelons, they represented an important – arguably indeed one of the most important – strata of Spanish society. They were a working nobility and their very numbers, especially in the north, made them a large pool of potential recruits to a series of positions and professions. From their ranks came high government officials and prelates, merchants and bankers, lawyers and writers, and virtually all army and naval officers, since hidalguía was a condition of entrance to the military colleges. In the regions their wealthier members, who were usually medium-sized landowners, often with an entailed estate, were almost always to be found among the local elite. In Galicia, for example, though relatively few in number, they were the elite.

It was, however, the titled nobility, especially the thirty or so grandees, who were the large landowners and principal señores.* Thanks to strategic marriages and fortuitous inheritances, the magnates had become a national, inter-related nobility with domains in different parts of the country. Even so, this tight-knit aristocratic grouping had no real political coherence, some of its members’ only desire being to enjoy once again a determining role in the country’s government.

How much land the titled nobility owned has never been satisfactorily calculated,† and for a reason: their predominance rested not solely on their own landholdings but as much on a feudal structure for extracting the surplus of those who tilled land which the señores did not own. It was yet another case of overlapping rights; the system was known as señorial and the lands and rural municipalities over which it was exercised a señorío.

In the main, the system’s widespread usage arose from bankrupt Hapsburg monarchs, the Bourbon’s predecessors who, to raise money, sold their jurisdictional rights to crown property; these covered the exercise of justice – including on occasion capital punishment – and local administration under the royal prerogative of appointing magistrates and town councils in crown domains. Apart from these, the monarchy also sold its feudal dues and rents, which could include a part of the crown’s taxes (and not infrequently a portion of tithes), its rights to levy tributes and tolls and to exercise monopolistic feudal privileges over mills, bakeries, smithies, even brothels and, of course, hunting rights. But the monarchs did not sell the land itself.

Though for historically distinct reasons señoríos, notably in Andalucía and Cataluña, included landownership, the vast majority were jurisdictional only. While the titled nobility occupied the largest single number of these lordships, the Church, monasteries and military orders also exercised and profited from them. In Spain as a whole these different types of señoríos outnumbered royal domains.‡

By the end of the eighteenth century it was estimated that more than one-quarter of the Spanish population and over sixty-five percent of cultivated land was under secular and ecclesiastical señorial rule.20 Another estimate had it that nine-tenths of all wheat on the market, which in normal times kept the urban population in bread, came from noble and ecclesiastical señorial rights, rents and tithes extracted in kind from those who worked the land.21