

Death was always imminent – to the villager and the urban lower orders alike. Life expectancy at birth for all Spaniards was no more than 26.8 years (27.3 for males and 26.3 years for females), two years less than in France and about ten years less than in England,58 and though the chances of living longer increased after adolescence, they also decreased after forty; a rural worker who reached fifty could be considered old.* Village (and urban) parents could expect half of their children to die before the age of fifteen. Infantile mortality accounted for about fifty percent of all deaths.59

Poverty and malnutrition, if not outright starvation, were largely responsible for villagers succumbing to fatal illnesses. In the second half of the century the rate at which small owners and tenants were forced off the land rose sharply – Castilla la Vieja lost about one-third, and Castilla la Nueva one-fifth of its small producers – and the numbers of landless day labourers, and poverty, increased correspondingly.†60 By the turn of the century just under one half of Spain’s nearly 1,700,000 land working population consisted of landless labourers;‡ a further thirty percent were tenants, and twenty percent owners – many of whom were doubtless smallholders barely earning a self-sufficient existence

Although just over one-third of all villagers were no more than twenty-five years old, there was, understandably, precious little in youth to be joyful about. In the majority of villages, even on the great festive days, there reigned a ‘sad silence’, observed Jovellanos:

Only boredom and idleness, it appears, makes some people come out of their houses to wander purposelessly here and there, to the village entrance, to the plaza, the church porch or to lean against a corner, their faces wrapped in their cloaks; and so they sadly spend the hours and entire evenings without enjoyment or pleasure. And if to this is added the aridity and filth of these places, the poverty … [and] the sad and silent atmosphere … who could not be surprised and saddened by the sight of such a phenomenon?61

This ‘sad silence’ was but a foretaste of ‘the horrible calm of desperation’ that might, at any moment, strike down the villager.

Most village families consisted of no more than two to three children.* Although sterility generally affected only about ten percent of married couples, many poor families could not support more offspring; infanticide, as in England at the time, was not uncommon.62 Nor was illegitimacy: somewhere between seven and ten percent of village births overall, though the rate appeared to be declining in the 1790s.†

Villagers worked many hours but few days. That was to say, they worked from sunrise to sundown when they worked, but the work year was frequently interrupted by religious holidays. Not working (‘idleness’ to the enlightened) was consubstantial to the villagers’ life; they worked only because they had to.‡ ‘To work was to be poor.’ This fact was expressed in their very language. ‘Pobres’ was the word labourers used about themselves not just because they were poor, but because poverty and work was seen as one and the same thing: one worked of necessity, not for any other reason.63