

Apprentices’ and journeymen’s conditions, usually far removed from those of the masters, were worse. ‘There is no more infamous and toilsome slavery [on the Barbary coast] than that which these apprentices experience in Madrid’, wrote a well-known playwright, Nicolás Fernández de Moratín, in a 1777 submission.54 The masters did not care about their apprentices’ cleanliness, gave them only an old sack to sleep on in a corner of the shop and often used them for the ‘meanest of tasks quite distinct from their trade’; moreover they refused them a place at their table, and beat them. One of the most famous outlaws of the period, Francisco Esteban, became a highwayman rather than take any more of his master’s blows.55

Significantly, the complex guild ordinances rarely referred to apprentices’ or journeymen’s conditions of labour. It was left to masters to use apprentices as cheap labour for anything up to ten years – even if the formal apprenticeship term was for only four to six – since the guilds fixed the minimum age for completing the apprenticeship at twenty, paying them with board, lodging and clothing. And, unless he were a master’s son, it was unlikely that the apprentice would rise higher than a journeyman.

The latter’s relatively low numbers had one significant effect. The guilds lacked the very sharp difference and rivalry between master and worker that distinguished the French; journeymen’s clandestine associations and strikes were unknown in Spain. But they and apprentices were volatile groups, more likely than masters to be involved in street disturbances and the anti-French risings of 1808.

### VILLAGERS: THEIR LIVES AND LIVELIHOOD*

Throughout the second half of the eighteenth century, villagers’ existence grew much harsher than in the first, relatively prosperous half. By the time Carlos IV came to the throne in 1789, almost any villager who had in adolescence survived diphtheria, scarlet fever and probably smallpox to reach twenty-five would have also lived through two subsistence crises; eight years of high bread prices; two years of an infant mortality crisis, accompanied by hunger in some regions; and a malaria epidemic (1786–1787) which laid low 875,000 people, of whom 77,000 died, in 1786 alone. This, too, was accompanied by a bad crop year.56

Francisco Cabarrús, a notable financier, witnessed villagers dying of starvation and malaria in La Mancha.

I saw hundreds of its unhappy inhabitants shortly before the harvest running from place to place … father and mother covered in rags, livid of face, betraying all the symptoms of poverty, sickness and death, and their children totally naked and extenuated … And still before my eyes I seem to see one of these poor people dead at the foot of a tree next to the house where I was staying. [The wife and children] stood by the corpse without tears or any of those expressions of grief that might relieve their feelings; their attitude, their silence told of the horrible calm of desperation.57