

It was a patience, however, tinged with fear: of crop failures and hunger; of not securing a tenancy for want of a pair of oxen or mules, a plough and seed-grain; of being thrown off the land. As a Salamanca small tenant, José Pérez, explained, fear was one of the causes of low agricultural production:

Because of the unhappiness and dread the worker feels after four years when his lease ends, knowing that the labour he has put in to fertilizing and clearing the land will raise the cost of the new lease, and only the powerful or wealthy farmer will be able to afford it.66

There was fear, too, of the Church which, as a large landholder, could give or deny the villagers land to rent; which from the pulpit could threaten them with eternal hellfire; and which, were this insufficient, could condemn them – through the Inquisition – for deviations of religious orthodoxy … Fear of many other things, natural and supernatural: of thunderstorms, snakes, menstrual blood, ghosts …

From birth to death, villagers lived in a world permeated by the Church: baptism ensured eternal life; their given name, drawn from the calendar of saints, brought heavenly protection in return for homage to and veneration of their eponymous saint. ‘The Virgin … and the saints were for the villager personages close to them, present in reality; little less than omnipotent, they interceded for those who made a gift-offering – a mass or even a ham – and it was expedient to keep them well-disposed for any daily setback.’67

The few young villagers who learned to read,* did so from chapbooks filled with miraculous religious happenings and secular stories, structured as a catechism or sermon, with a religious moral ending. Catholic doctrine was learned by rote at home from archaic catechisms. Most village families told their beads each evening before eating, and at table the bread was blessed; small prints of locally venerated saints, which were commonly displayed, could be had for little outlay.

The major instrument of religious education and control of a still largely illiterate village culture had perforce to be oral. This implement was the sermon – not the pious weekly exhortation addressed to believers, as the word suggests, but a direct intervention in village life, since for the Church all aspects of civil life were immediately appraised by religious standards. ‘Sacred, therefore, was the power of the monarch as long as he carried out God’s will, sacred the social classes established by God, sacred the belief in the only true religion and those who preached it.’68 Reading eighteenth-century sermons is like ‘being taken back to the medieval world’, an historical specialist on the subject has commented.69

But as much as Catholic doctrine, the supernatural intruded constantly on villagers’ lives, beneficently or evilly, and intercession and protection were needed, for the villagers had little objective defence against natural ills. Their religious practices were a means whereby they sought to dominate nature, deal with the threats of an unpredictable world which was full of sudden fears and shocks, and ensure their personal salvation – and even that of their parish community.70 It was hardly surprising then if villagers held a dualistic view of the supernatural where