

The differences with France were notable. Put schematically, the Spanish commoner elite and the lower untitled nobility had not been excluded by the upper nobility from political power, as in France; and unlike the French nobility which was unable to extract sufficient economic surplus from its long-lease-holding peasantry and gained this income instead from its control of the state, the Spanish nobility, excluded from the running of the state, ensured its surplus by short-term rents that took advantage of the inflationary demand for land and an oligarchic control of local municipalities.

Absolutism permitted handsome incomes to Spanish colonial traders. The large merchants, of whom there were relatively few in comparison to France and England, had no reason to be hostile to the ruling system, and indeed generally supported it. Whereas the fiscal crisis of the French state was acute, in Spain this was still to come. But perhaps most important of all, there had been no widespread cultural preparation critical of absolutism, as in France; no sociétés de pensée, for example, to create a public opinion independent of traditional sources of authority.† In 1780, religious books accounted for only one-tenth of French titles; in Spain the proportion of works of piety, devotion and the lives of saints had shown little or no change throughout the eighteenth century.‡ Nor had the religious rituals of death and burial.24

The Enlightenment had never deeply penetrated the labouring classes whose loyalty to Crown, Altar and their traditions remained their overt touchstones. Here again the difference between the two countries was notable: the French literacy rate was double that of Spain where over eighty percent of the population remained illiterate.*

Although the government did everything possible to prevent news of the revolution reaching Spain, it was impossible to stop seditious material being smuggled in. Information was widely spread; but it was a matter of geographical breadth rather than sociological depth. Incendiary posters and anonymous letters citing revolutionary slogans appeared not infrequently in different places.25 But they were usually isolated cases – the work of a disaffected or hot-headed individual, whose use of revolutionary slogans, one suspects, was most often designed to frighten the local authorities. It was more at the level of the imaginary rather than of ideas that the use of these symbols came to represent a breaking down of values.†

The threat to the life of Louis XVI, the Spanish king’s cousin, whom Carlos IV made every effort to save, brought about an extraordinary change in Spain’s leadership: the appointment of a twenty-five-year-old former junior Horse Guards’ officer, Manuel Godoy, to head the government and try to succeed where two experienced and elderly first ministers – Floridablanca and his successor, conde Aranda – had failed. An unknown recently promoted by the king from the lower nobility to a dukedom and grandee‡ of Spain; a first minister who had not spent a lifetime working his way up through the royal service to reach power; the first royal favourite to rule the country for a century and a half. If nothing else, the change illustrated the problems which the French Revolution had caused among the governing elite. That Godoy was or was not the queen’s lover is of no particular historical importance. What is of historical import, however, was that Spaniards of every station in life soon came to believe that he owed his elevation to what they took as a fact; and they despised him and the queen for it, and pitied the cuckolded king. It was the beginning of a popular delegitimization of the reigning sovereign – although not of the monarchy itself – at a critical time for the Old Regime.