

Outside of Barcelona, there was uncertainty and confusion.

Writing to his stepson, a student at Valencia University, Dr Luis Freixas, a town councillor of the southern Catalan township of Villafranca del Penedès, described the atmosphere and the division of opinion between an enlightened reformist like himself and the unlettered commoner. All Catalans had been ‘shocked and surprised’ by the French troops’ occupation of Barcelona, but the ‘healthier elements’, as he described himself and the educated classes, saw it as a ‘precautionary measure to carry out Napoleon’s measures’. They did not for a moment envisage ‘living under other masters than the Bourbon family’.

Yet the ordinary people continue to think they are to become subjects of a French prince…. It is the clerics who are whipping up these ideas, clearly because their own interests hallucinate and preoccupy them. Imagine the state our good nuns are in, believing that they are to be sent packing immediately. The friars are in the same state, and the priests fear a formidable reform.

I see everything with serenity and believe that nothing will be as commonly feared. You for your part remain tranquil, as we are at home …*

Until early March, when they heard of their ‘ally’s’ occupation of the Spanish strong points, most of the population outside the directly affected areas still believed that Napoleon’s troops were intended to reinforce Junot in Portugal, to attack Gibraltar or prevent the British seizing Cádiz. They were assisted in their misbelief by Carlos IV, who was fearful of providing Napoleon with the slightest pretext of aggression, and issued tranquillizing proclamations about the imperial troops’ presence; and, for very different reasons, by a faction around the heir to the throne, Fernando, who spread rumours of Napoleon’s support of their bitter struggle against Godoy, the Spanish chief minister.

Meanwhile, Madrid life continued apparently as normal: inflation had abated temporarily, pawnshop takings dropped by over a quarter and redemptions increased. The capital’s theatres, always a thermometer of public sentiment, did good business; French luxury goods and books were in high demand – Napoleon’s France was held in esteem.15

Everything changed overnight, however, on the the news of the takeover of the Spanish fortresses and the intelligence from Portugal that Junot’s army had not only taken over the country in the Emperor’s name after the royal family’s flight,† but was also looting its wealth. On the further news that a fifty-thousand-strong French army, under Marshal Murat, was now advancing, slowly but surely, on Madrid, with the stated objective of continuing southwards to Cádiz,16 fear spread among the capital’s inhabitants and beyond into the two Castillas. Marriages dropped sharply, as young betrothed, widows and widowers, postponed or cancelled their weddings throughout the region. There could hardly have been a clearer sign of people’s worries about the immediate future than this sudden, widespread change of plan.‡