

General Junot’s troops reached the Portuguese frontier without serious incident: a Burgos student stabbed a French officer,5 and many petty looters and stragglers – about one hundred, the French claimed – were picked off by Salamanca villagers.6 The imperial soldiers had yet to learn how to protect themselves against civilians. On November 30, Junot occupied Lisbon. At the last minute the British navy took away the Portuguese royal family and transported them to Brazil.

Napoleon, however, was concerned with more than Portugal. Without waiting to be assured of Junot’s position, he dispatched another twenty-five thousand troops into Spain and stationed them across Castilla la Vieja.‡ Soon these were followed by two more corps, totalling sixty thousand men, most of whom were quartered in the Basque country and Navarra. Finally, he ordered fourteen thousand troops across the Catalan frontier to march on Barcelona.

This massive display of military strength was accompanied by guile to secure several major Spanish fortresses: in Pamplona, imperial troops staged a snowball fight with the fortress guards to lure them from their posts, and then rushed the main gate; in Barcelona, an imperial military parade in front of the ciudadela swung one of its wings around to seize the entrance and occupy the fortress – a prelude to taking over the city’s second fortress on the Montjuich hill. Shortly thereafter, Godoy was forced to permit French troops to occupy San Sebastián and its fortress for lack of troops to defend it.

By March 1808, only four months after the first imperial troops had entered Spain en route for Portugal, Napoleon had secured three major peninsular ports – Lisbon, Barcelona and San Sebastián – had occupied four important Spanish fortresses, and had one hundred thousand soldiers on his ally’s territory without the government’s permission or their certain knowledge of his military objectives. Moreover, he had scattered the Spanish army, twenty-five thousand of its troops to Portugal, and a further sixteen thousand to the Danish islands on the pretext of an imperial invasion of Sweden. On this, his first aggression against a country which was not his aggressor, he had his forces excellently placed in Spain to exert the maximum leverage for whichever of the options he choose to pursue.

*

The Emperor was at the height of his power. He could, it seemed, propose and dispose of nations’ destinies and territories at will, create kingdoms, principalities and dukedoms out of their lands, rearrange the map of Europe according to a new ‘rationality’. His determination to cause England’s economic collapse made the control of coasts, ports and ships vital.7 For the first time, the Emperor turned his full attention to the Iberian Peninsula and the western Mediterranean. ‘Etre maître de la Méditerranée, but principal et constant de ma politique’, he pronounced in 1806.8

In the immediate term, Portugal had been secured for the continental blockade by General Junot; but there remained Spain: a potentially great naval power with its arsenals and yards at a standstill since the battle of Trafalgar, its long Atlantic and Mediterranean coastline, and a market still closed to French products which could substitute for those lost abroad to Britain’s retaliatory economic war and the United States’ embargo on trade with the combatants. But Spain was an unsatisfactory ally, a government unreliable in its adherence to the Emperor’s cause, with an inefficient economy despite its great colonial resources, and ruled by the last remaining Bourbon on a major European throne.