

Colonial trade was immediately affected. After little more than a year of war, Spanish customs revenues had fallen to one-third of their 1792 figure; and the share of these in the state’s total revenues had dropped from 28.2 percent to 8.8 percent and would continue to decline even further. Only in the temporary peace after the Treaty of Amiens in 1802 was there a recuperation to fifteen percent.47 When the war between Spain and Britain was resumed at the end of 1804, the effects on Spain’s trade and naval power were even more disastrous. In the year before the resumption of hostilities, 105 merchantmen sailed from Cataluña to the colonies carrying goods worth 76.8 million reales; in 1807 only one Catalan merchantman set out bearing two hundred thousand reales of produce.48 There were large lay offs in the Catalan textile factories whose major markets were the colonies. In 1797–98 prices increased nearly twice as much as during the Convention War and wages fell in central Spain.49

For both the metropolis and the colonies, a further, and equally decisive consequence of the war was the Spanish government’s decision to end its monopoly in colonial trade and open it to neutral shipping – a measure necessary to keep the colonies supplied. In every recent war, even when Britain was not the enemy, this measure had had to be applied, demonstrating Spain’s fundamental inability to wage war and provision its colonies. The measure became an important impetus to the colonial independence movement, since the colonials derived greater profit from trading with Europe through neutrals than they did under Spain’s trade monopoly.*

Godoy himself came to realize that France was using the alliance to her sole advantage and that war with England had been an economically shortsighted error, but his attempts to extricate Spain were met by France with hostile reactions which he lacked the determination to confront.† The experience of the War of the Convention (and even more of the American War of Independence) made it evident that modern warfare was so costly that, without any counterpart, it could strain asunder the seams of societies more prosperous than Spain’s. But Godoy continued along this dangerous path, a path which led in the first instance to the state’s bankruptcy.

In an attempt to deal with the fiscal crisis, loans were floated abroad, the capital of the Bank of San Carlos, established in 1782 as the national bank, was confiscated,50 and more state bonds issued. By 1798, the latters’ value had dropped by fifty percent. After no more than two years of renewed war against England, the Spanish treasury’s situation was so critical that Godoy was forced to take a drastic measure; he ordered Church property sold, a reform that no earlier enlightened reformer had dared to enact. The Church was one of the two pillars of the absolute monarchy, a state within the state, the single wealthiest institution in the kingdom of Castilla.

By 1808, between one-sixth and one-seventh of all Church property not devoted to ‘the cure of souls’ had been sold to the value of 1,653 million reales. In some regions, like Andalucía, Murcia, Salamanca and Madrid, the proportion reached twenty to twenty-five percent. This measure, which included the sale of hospitals, asylums, foundling homes, pious foundations, etc., ‘caused immense damage to the poor rural classes who were the most in need of help.’51 But as the amount of debt emitted in state bonds alone reached two thousand million reales, and the bonds’ value had dropped by half, the sale of Church property was insufficient to meet state indebtedness. In the king’s name, Godoy secured the Pope’s agreement for further sales, ‘owing to the considerable decrease in the income of my crown because of the wars, shortages, epidemics and other calamities which have afflicted this kingdom’, although these sales did not come into full effect before Napoleon’s invasion in 1808.