

Possibly there was greater revolutionary effervescence in the large cities like Barcelona and Madrid where ‘… in the taverns … and cafés nothing else is heard but talk of battles, revolution, Convention, national representation, liberty, equality: even the whores ask you about Robespierre and Barrere [sic] …’. So wrote P. Estala to Juan Pablo Forner; but as the latter was an enlightened but well-known counter-revolutionary thinker, his correspondent’s views may well have been tailored to over-emphasize the revolutionary danger.35

The imaginary, which can contain contradictory signs and symbols, is no guarantee of future action; and its twists and turns are difficult to document. Nonetheless, when the Spanish villagers had the freedom to do so, during the anti-Napoleonic struggle, they stopped paying tributes and dues, taxes and tithes; and equality – equality of sacrifice, if nothing more – became one of the most palpable public demands.

### WAR AGAINST REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE

Well aware of the cost of war, the two previous first ministers had striven to keep Spain from armed conflict with revolutionary France. Godoy attempted to follow this policy, but after the Convention rejected Spanish interference in trying to save Louis XVI’s life and declared war on Spain he responded in kind. On a reduced scale the ensuing war was, in many respects, a precursor of Spain’s Napoleonic war.*

The similarity began in the sheer military ‘folly’ of fighting France – whether Napoleon’s armed might in 1808, or revolutionary France in 1793 – which had defeated the Prussians at Valmy and the Austrians at Jemappes the previous autumn, victories that had sent shock waves through the counter-revolutionary powers. And though new to supreme power, Godoy was well aware of his army’s weakness and the treasury’s poor financial state – both of which would become even more critical by 1808. On each occasion, however, Spain was fortunate in not having immediately to confront battle-hardened French veterans. In 1793 they faced a large but militarily inexperienced Convention force in south-western France and in 1808 mainly raw imperial conscripts in hastily created new regiments. In each case, Spanish arms were crowned with early victories that shortly turned into crushing defeats.

Religious fervour, and initial popular mobilization in defence of ‘Religion, King and Country’ (the slogan under which the Spanish subsequently rose against Napoleon) were the most visible of similarities between the two wars. Coined by clerical anti-revolutionaries, the slogan combined three elements meaningful to all social orders: religion, the common denominator of all Spaniards, allied with the monarch, the benevolent secular pastor of his flock, and the homeland (patria) or community to which each individual had a personal sense of belonging and in which, however tenuously, each had material interests to defend. For the Church, suitably enough, the trilogy became a trinitarian unity. ‘The homeland, King, even God Himself, form but a single object and finality’, declaimed Friar Juan Izquierdo, doctor of sacred theology, in a widely reproduced sermon given during the blessing of a battalion’s flag in Barcelona.36 Or as the best-known missionary preacher of the day, Friar Diego Josef de Cádiz, put it: