

The prime example of self-organization and irregular war was precipitated in 1794, when a French counter-offensive drove the Spanish out of the territories they had occupied in France, and back into Catalonia. Historically, Catalans had been exempt from conscription into the Spanish army; and they retained their hostility to it, having staged a militia revolt in 1773. Their preferred way of defending their country was as ‘volunteers’ contracted by their municipal authorities.38 When the French advanced into Cataluña in the autumn, and the Spanish army surrendered Figueras castle, a stronghold on the road between the French frontier and Barcelona, an important element of territorial loyalty was rapidly revealed: the population’s readiness to fight by any and all means against an aggressor in its own region. With the Spanish army falling back in disarray, the Catalans, amidst generalized fear that their country was about to be occupied, took their defence into their own hands. Virtually ignoring the central government as they had earlier ignored French revolutionary appeals offering them their independence, a junta (assembly) of representatives from all the corregimientos (the administrative areas into which Cataluña was divided) met in January 1795 to organize the mobilization of sixteen to twenty thousand volunteers between the ages of sixteen and fifty, and the levying of a general progressive tax on the population for the country’s defence. The ‘contracted volunteers’ were formed into regiments of miquelets (militia); and villagers, gathered in local defence groups known as sometents,† began irregular warfare on the enemy rearguard. The Convention’s reduced forces went on the defensive and the Catalanreinforced Spanish army secured two victories over them, the last – after peace had been signed but the news had not reached the front – opening the way to a reoccupation of the Cerdagne.

But it was with a lightning attack in July 1794, on Guipúzcoa, the Basque province bordering France, that the decisive French breakthrough came; the Convention’s offensive led to panic and disorder in the Spanish army which until then had held a fairly tranquil line. But here the popular reaction appeared initially different. The French advanced almost without meeting resistance and San Sebastián surrendered without a fight on August 4. While Cataluña was just ending a long period of prosperity, the Basque country had, since the mid-eighteenth century, been struggling with a basic structural difficulty: population growth had outstripped the availability of land to support it. This began to destabilize traditional rural society in which the system of small tenants on hereditary leases living on dispersed farmsteads or in small villages and hamlets could no longer be replicated. The social crisis was marked by the appearance of bandits, beggars and vagrants on roads and in villages where previously these were said to be unknown. As the crisis worsened, the landowners who controlled economic, political and social power in the country tried to pass taxation needs – increased by the war – onto their small tenants. The villagers began to confront the landowners. The greatest threat to the latter’s power, however, came from Madrid’s attempt to impose tighter tax controls when, under the Basque fueros, or self-governing rights, the country traditionally contributed its self-raised taxes as a ‘gift’ to the royal exchequer at the king’s request.