

That said, it was their deep sense of paternal ‘abandonment’ by their monarch which was was one of the principal causes that moved villagers to take part in the Aranjuez tumult, and again to rise in 1808 against Napoleon who sequestered and unseated their new king, Fernando.

*

If there had ever been any doubt that the Aranjuez rebellion was conjugated by the Fernandista nobility, the events in Madrid confirmed the organized nature of the revolt. As soon as the news of Godoy’s capture was known in the capital on the afternoon of Saturday, March 19, the houses of Godoy’s mother, brother and sister were sacked and burned, as well as those of a number of his ministers and exministers. All their furniture, their carriages, horses and mules, silver and jewels were dragged out on the street and set fire to or killed. But Godoy’s own house, according to Gil de Bernabé, was spared, because the royal coat of arms had been fixed to its facade – effectively therefore taking it over in the new King’s name.

Despite the rising, on Saturday night there was order, since it seemed that there were people in command of the rebels. Viva el Rey, they cried, and death to the Traitor sausage-maker,* and whoever wouldn’t repeat it, they threw to the ground, shouting that people like that should be exterminated. But that night the rebels troubled no one.30

In their blind hatred of the royal favourite, a score of Fernandista grandees had won a greater triumph than they could have hoped for. They expected to reap the political rewards, and Fernando’s appointment of the duque del Infantado to the presidency of the Consejo de Castilla heralded what seemed like the beginning of their return to political influence and power. Within a couple of months, they had thrown their victory away in a humiliating misjudgement of Napoleon’s intentions. In this ‘meanwhile’ they had further eroded the Old Order.

### A NEW BOURBON KING

Popular jubilation at the news that Spain had a new king began early the following day in Madrid. The caretaker of the San Fernando Academy arrived to find an enormous crowd, bearing regimental colours and beating drums, gathered inside and outside the building. Numbers of people had already broken the lock on the library door and smashed the bust of Godoy which stood inside.

Then they asked for a portrait of our prince the King, saying that they knew there was one in the Academy and that if it was not handed over to them they would set fire to the building …

The caretaker informed them that there was no such portrait in the Academy. ‘Let us go’, said one. But in the meantime others had taken from the wall the portrait of the king, and were carrying it off.

‘In case you are not aware, that is not our prince the King,’ I assured them, ‘but the King [Carlos] as a youth.’ To which they replied, as though giving me a piece of their mind: ‘We love the King’ and they walked off with the portrait.31

Later that same evening, the caretaker saw the Fernandistas sallying forth in procession from Atocha with flags flying and the royal portrait carried under a pallium. Thus their young new king, upon whom the people had set their hopes, was popularly acknowledged and cheered in the youthful image of his unloved father. It made no difference: it represented the king.