

Another who took the road from the capital to Aranjuez – in a carriage, for sure, not on foot like the villagers – was the French ambassador François de Beauharnais, a ‘Fernandista’ whose presence among the people – ‘sufficiently disguised not to compromise his diplomatic status but not to the extent that he was unrecognizable’20 – made it appear that the attempt to prevent Godoy’s plan had the Emperor’s approval. Teba, still in his peasant garb, and now known as ‘Tío Pedro’, acted as the ringleader of the people on their rounds.

The first anti-Godoy rising at 1 a.m. on March 17 was set off accidentally by the sound of a pistol shot, but the ground had been well-fertilized in advance. In its origins, therefore, the revolt was a traditional ancien regime tumult, in which the nobility or local men of power stirred up and used popular discontent to precipitate a riot against the authorities to serve their own ends. The Aranjuez rising, nonetheless, also combined a number of exceptional factors which gave it an unusual potency: the Spanish army’s first direct intervention in influencing the political affairs of state21 – without the guardsmen’s support the rising’s success would have been in doubt; alongside this, the unanimity of purpose of conspirators, people and military to prevent the royal family fleeing and to overthrow none other than the ‘head of state’ – here the people’s active participation was crucial since the Bourbon regime feared nothing so much as popular revolt; and, by no means least, the national crisis in which the rising occurred and the place at which it occurred: the royal palace, seat of absolutist power.

The sound of the pistol shot electrified the night; a military trumpet sounded the alarm. Suddenly all was confusion, shouts and alarms. Soldiers, villagers, conspirators running, shouting Viva el rey y muera el tirano! (Long live the king, death to the tyrant!). Firebrands blazed in the dark. ‘Tío Pedro’ on horseback led a party of villagers to Godoy’s house, with hundreds of men and women following. The guard refused to fire on them.22 They broke down the door and swept in like a tidal wave. Godoy’s wife, the condesa de Chinchón, who was the royal couple’s niece, was found in her underclothes preparing for bed, and carried unharmed by a mob of mainly women to the safety of the royal palace. But Godoy had vanished. The people searched high and low, and then sacked the house, building a bonfire and burning many of Godoy’s posessions, though witnesses generally agree that nothing was stolen.*

At 5 a.m. a terrified king relieved the missing Godoy of all his official posts. Another disturbance in the palace and outside among the people had followed the sacking of Godoy’s house and the latter, reported an artillery officer, Gil de Bernabé, were now

demanding his head. The Prince [Fernando] had to appear on a palace balcony and tell them that there was a decree which stripped him of his posts. But the people of Aranjuez and Madrid were not content with the decree. They began again to search for [Godoy] while those in the palace continued to plot.23