

Popular acclaim was reserved for Fernando VII who entered Madrid on horseback on March 24 without military escort and to a rapturous welcome. An immense crowd pressed around him and, cheering and shouting for joy, raised him and his horse in their arms and carried them through the streets, recalled a young witness.42 ‘The king said he wanted no more soldiers than the hearts of his vassals’, wrote another onlooker, and this he certainly achieved.43 Knowing that his support depended on the people as much as on the nobility, he ordered his first minister to prepare plans to make more cultivable land available from the royal estates and to bring water to Madrid, but surprisingly did not abolish Godoy’s much-hated takeover of the clergy’s beneficent property or alleviate taxes on the rural world.* In fact, his major reforms consisted in appointing anti-Godoyista ministers, releasing Jovellanos from prison, and permitting other members of the political elite, whom Godoy had banished from court, to return. The new reign raised great popular hopes – but of what? In the first instance, a negative hope: Spaniards did not want a return to Godoy’s ‘arbitrary despotism’ or even the ‘enlightened despotism’ of his predecessor, Floridablanca. As an enlightened contemporary cleric, Joaquín Lorenzo Villanueva, wrote:

Unlike the French in their revolution, the Spanish did not want to change their original system of government, to convert their monarchy into a republic. They were happy to be ruled by a king … who was faithful to his oath to observe the fundamental laws … to ensure that in no way would the rights of all subjects, and even less so those of the nation, be predjudiced. All Spaniards were agreed on the re-establishment of the moderate monarchy.44

‘Nobody is opposed to reforms’, an informant of the French consul in Cádiz wrote. A ‘great reduction’ in the number of royal tax administrators and excisemen in favour of free domestic trade would be generally welcomed; so too, would the abolition of the millones (a tax on wine, vinegar, olive oil, meat, soap and tallow candles), and ‘the suppression of tithes and feudal dues’. A system which assured that the state serviced its debt, including the vales reales, or state bonds which could be used as paper money, would be ‘of the major importance’ and should be accompanied by the creation of a commission of intelligent merchants, former treasury administratives, state cashiers and court individuals, etc., to agree on the means of achieving ‘this great enterprise’. ‘If the merchants and traders of Madrid, Cádiz, Sevilla, Barcelona and Bilbao were summoned to form a pecuniary council, I do not believe that anyone would regret it.’ As to the legal system, the informant wrote that ‘I do not doubt that a new legal code would be accepted in place of the existing laws because of the despicable corruptness which permits their manipulation.’45

Although these prescriptions must be treated with caution, given their source, they were more than likely a fair description of some of the grievances of merchants, farmers and to some extent the rural poor, in western Andalucía, if not elsewhere. Fernando VII’s government included reform-minded ex-ministers or high administrators whom the former favourite had dismissed or who had personal or political reasons for desiring Godoy’s downfall. Given the chance, under Fernando VII, they would presumably have attempted to continue their enlightened predecessors’ gradualist reforms without undermining the Old Regime. But within eight weeks of Fernando’s assuming the throne, Napoleon had dethroned him and his father and put his own brother, Josef, in their place. Force majeure – and the apparently favourable opportunity of reforming Spain under a Bonaparte regime – outweighed loyalty to the Bourbons; many of Fernando’s ministers – Jovellanos was a major exception – struck their colours and collaborated with Josef, the new king.