

At all hours of the day, the capital’s streets were patrolled by groups of fifteen to twenty city fathers, led by a magistrate, to ‘prevent the people from committing an outrage’. The patrols, reported the writer, also had another objective: ‘To show the French troops that we are neither negligent nor trusting of them…. We have seen so many and such extraordinary things that nothing should surprise us any longer.’63 In a move typical of the Old Order under popular stress, a government ordinance made all parents and employers responsible for ensuring that their sons and daughters, domestic servants, and employees kept out of trouble, and if they did not obey, they should be reported to the justices. Masters were to report by name and address any journeyman or apprentice who did not come to work daily. 64 In a French attempt to reduce tension, the imperial military command in mid-April moved a division out of Madrid.65 But none of these measures had any real effect because an undeclared war, fought with cold steel, was already being waged in the streets; and the French troops were its victims. How many were assassinated or died of their wounds is open to the interpretation of confusing hospital records.* Their woundings and murders were not the response to similar French outrages – though drunken French officers did kill a peace-abiding merchant on April 26 – but stemmed rather from anger and desperation after Fernando VII’s departure.66 The most feared by the French, and the most skilled with the blade, were the chisperos – the tradesmen and workers of the popular neighbourhoods, ‘the legitimate people (men and women) of Madrid’, in the words of José de Arango:

And although they usually wounded more with their sharp tongues and piquant wit than with the blunt knives they used for cutting their wads of Brazilian tobacco, Murat was fearful of them …†

In reality, however, Murat was more scornful than fearing of the undisciplined mob. Napoleon had demonstrated in Egypt and Italy that a whiff of grapeshot was sufficient to deal the rebellious natives a sharp and salutary lesson in the superiority of French armed strength. There they had not risen their heads in revolt again. In Burgos French troops fired on a menacing mob, wounding several people. On April 26 Napoleon wrote to Murat: ‘It is time to show the necessary energy. I suppose you will not spare the canaille of Madrid if they make a move, and that immediately afterward you will them have disarmed.’ To which Murat replied, on May 1, that he was ready to give any rebel ‘a good lesson’, while recognizing that news from Bayonne was causing great restlessness.

There can be little doubt that the Fernandistas strove to keep the Madrileños’ desperation on the boil – but just short of boiling over – with anti-French rumours and propaganda. They could play on the people’s latent xenophobia, and most notably the chisperos’ anti-French sentiments.

While the king on his peregrination northwards to meet Napoleon continued to issue placatory orders to respect the French troops in Madrid, nothing, in the staunch Fernandistas’ views, would be more fatal than if these were strictly obeyed and the inhabitants lapsed into passive acceptance of French military rule. On the other hand, a rising would jeopardize Fernando’s cause, giving the French the pretext they needed to overthrow him. What was required then was the threat, but not the actuality, of a rising to prove to Napoleon that the king had wide popular support which would not passively condone anything but the Emperor’s confirmation of his right to the throne. Thus the government junta wrote to Fernando on April 18 in Vitoria on the need to conserve ‘the people’s spirit at the climax of vigor and energy in which it now finds itself’. Once the king’s departure from Vitoria to France was made officially known, many Fernandistas, however, gave him up for lost: his fate was only too clear in their eyes. For once, French and Spanish participants in the events broadly agreed on this generalized feeling, though significantly disagreeing on its future significance. On April 21, Murat wrote to Napoleon that Fernando had lost much of his credit with the people who were whispering: ‘C’est être par trop bête de ne pas voir le piège …’ (‘It is the greatest stupidity not to see the trap that has been set [for Fernando] …’). Antonio Alcalá Galiano commented that if no one thought of being able to save the king, very few were willing to subject themselves to the crown’s French usurper.67 The Spaniard, writing with hindsight, was of course correct: only ten days after Murat’s letter came the Madrid anti-French rising of May 2. Giving up their king for lost by no means signified that the common people had abandoned their monarch. As one diarist recorded: