

An affray between a French and Spanish soldier on April 1 ‘caused a general commotion among the people who ran shouting “a rising! a rising!” which could have had serious consequences had calm not been restored by the duque del Infantado, Negrete [Spanish military commandant of Madrid] and French generals’.55 Simultaneously, a rumour was put about that the French forces were seizing food supplies bound for Madrid and arresting suppliers with the aim of creating shortages in the capital and raising the price of foodstuffs, which made a considerable impact on the population, always alert to the possibilities of food shortages, especially bread, since the disastrous famine year only four years earlier.56 (The fact was rather that the need to supply Murat’s large force in a city where the bulk of all food had to be transported from considerable distances, meant the certainty of ‘shortages and rising prices’, as later the governing junta pointed out.) At that moment there was no good reason for the French high command to increase popular tension when everything depended on securing Fernando’s departure to meet Napoleon.

Throughout the month, however, there were increasing complaints to the authorities about the ‘outrageous’ conduct of French officers who, among other things, were said to have committed an ‘enormous number’ of thefts in the wealthy houses where they were billetted. An anonymous diarist, who was politically favourable to the French cause, wrote that ‘these houses have been sacked as though Madrid were a conquered city’, reporting at the same time on an edict in Spanish and French of April 26 threatening punishment of anyone who bought stolen furniture, clothing and jewellery.57

Ready to take offence at any breach of local custom, the population was irritated by the French soldiers’ lack of respect for Spanish women – a French soldier was killed on April 18 on the Toledo Bridge when he tried to kiss a Madrileña, and several of his companions wounded.58 The troops’ religious irreverence – they did not take off their hats or caps on entering churches to the sound of military music and beating of drums – and their demonstration of armed strength displayed in frequent military parades, as a young Madrileño at the time recalled, were further serious irritants.59 But the inhabitants were even more angered by Murat’s refusal to recognize Fernando as their king and his patent support for Carlos IV, whom rumour had it he wished to restore to the throne, as well as by his persistent attempts to have Godoy freed from prison. ‘The nation appears calm, but … it is electric, it will need only a spark to produce some event’, wrote the French ambassador to his minister on April 7. And a French army officer who travelled from Madrid to Badajoz warned that the Spanish were demonstrating a ‘strong resolution to resist’.60

Tension rose even higher after Fernando left the capital for Burgos. On April 13, the Wednesday before Easter, the parish priest of Carabanchel de Arriba, Andrés López, killed a French captain billeted on him. The priest went into hiding and the French burnt his house to the ground. The following day, the fear of a generalized outbreak of violence caused the authorities to order the churches to be closed at night – an unprecedented act in the middle of Holy Week. (It was reported privately that the queen had paid vagrants to go about on Holy Thursday and Good Friday proclaiming Carlos IV as king.*) A more potent rumour, initiated apparently by a friar of San Gil, said that ‘a great riot, prepared by paid people’, was planned for April 14, Holy Thursday night.61 There was possibly more than wishful thinking in the latter rumour since there was documented evidence to show that attempts to stage risings in April in Madrid, Valencia and Pamplona were made, though in the event none occurred:62 it was the friar’s account which led to the closing of the churches.