

Its publication just before the May 2 rising in Madrid irritated or incensed the reading public, depending on their political passions – for the time being at least. In the propaganda war, the French occupiers were outmatched by Madrid rumour and hearsay, since much of it concerning Spain’s fate was closer to the truth (indicating its high-placed origin) than the fabricated Bayonne communiqués.

On April 30, our diarist reported, offhandedly, a new and disturbing rumour:

Since last Thursday (April 28), it has been put about that on May 2 next, coinciding with [Carlos IV’s] appointment of the Gran Duque [Murat] as his Regent in Spain, a popular commotion is to be feared. Alarmed by this, a number of families left Madrid today. On the said day, the Queen of Etruria [Fernando VII’s sister] and her children are to leave the capital for Bayonne.78

This warning of a possible rising did not make clear whether the event was being ‘planned’ or was simply ‘feared’. The date – April 28 – coincided, however, with the governing junta’s first fears of a popular rising, and presumably the rumour originated with some junta member. And it was obviously taken seriously enough by some to flee for safety.

### BAYONNE: NAPOLEON DETHRONES THE BOURBONS

At the same time as ordering Godoy’s release, Murat gave up all plans of persuading Carlos to return to the throne, and prepared the royal couple’s dispatch to France. Once Godoy was free to accompany them, so he believed, they were certain to fall in with Napoleon’s plans.

Over two weeks of forceful negotiation in Bayonne, the Emperor achieved his aims. For the first week, Fernando’s councillors, who had made so many mistakes, resisted Napoleon’s abdication ultimatum, which was accompanied by ‘threats made in so imperious and unheard of tones that they cannot be transcribed to paper’.79 The Spanish prime minister, Cevallos, told the French foreign minister, Champagny, that Fernando ‘could not and should not renounce his throne in favour of another dynasty, because to do so would be to break faith with his vassals and his own reputation’. Nor could he ‘consent to another dynasty reigning because only the Spanish nation, by virtue of its original rights, could elect another family to the throne once the present ruling family ended its reign’.80

In stating the latter point, the prime minister was the first to put forward against the Emperor’s pretensions the ideological argument which, in differing modalities, informed and justified the patriotic coalition of progressives, moderate and absolutist monarchists in their resistance to Napoleon during the war. It was a myth generated by a particular (and religious) vision of natural law* which supposed that in the formation of human society, individuals had relinquished all or part of their natural freedom in exchange for the protection and benefits that would accrue to them from living conjointly in society under an elected king. This portmanteau ‘compact’ allowed for many interpretations including, somewhat surprisingly, absolutism: the people’s initial election was a once and for all choice, a ‘pact of subjection’ to a king whose only obligation was to maintain intact his royal ‘prerogatives’. The vassal’s duty was to obey.81