

While it was evident to everyone in those critical days that the solution to the dynastical and political crisis lay in Napoleon’s hands, not even the most sceptical of Fernando’s councillors could believe that Savary had been sent deliberately by the Emperor to deceive the new king and to usurp the throne.52 But this was indeed Napoleon’s plan: to lure the whole royal family to Bayonne on the pretext of resolving the Spanish succession and to secure their abdications in favour of his brother. By their ‘voluntary’ removal to France he hoped to avoid their becoming the focus of armed resistance in Spain. In the extreme that Fernando refused to cross the French border of his own will he was to be arrested and brought by force. Despite a few days’ hesitation in Vitoria, where many advised the king not to proceed further and even to flee in disguise, and despite Fernando having received a letter from the Emperor which should have alerted him and his councillors to Napoleon’s views of the new king – an heir to the throne who communicated with a foreign power, as Fernando had done in writing to him before the Escorial affair, was acting ‘criminally’, Napoleon wrote, adding: ‘It is very dangerous for kings to accustom their people to shed blood in taking justice into their own hands. I pray that you will never experience this one day … the people are always happy to avenge the tributes which they have paid us …’53 – nonetheless, Fernando allowed himself again to be persuaded by Savary that the Emperor had been delayed by affairs of state and was waiting in Bayonne to confirm him in his throne. On April 20, ten days after setting out to meet Napoleon in Burgos, Fernando crossed the Bidasoa into France. He was met by his younger brother, Carlos, and three grandees, whom he had sent ahead. They broke the news: Napoleon had decided to end Bourbon rule in Spain. It was too late to turn back: Fernando was now in fact Napoleon’s prisoner – as in effect he had been since the day he relied on the Emperor to validate his reign.

The Napoleonic ‘card’, which the ‘Fernandistas’ had played for so long, had turned against them. In their deployment of ‘reasons of state’ they had again proven themselves singularly inept. Many of the common folk, like those in Vitoria who cut the traces of the king’s carriage to try to prevent him leaving for France, knew and cared little about reasons of state: they sensed the danger and responded in the only way they knew how.

While, in Bayonne, the Emperor was resolving Spain’s dynastical succession, in Madrid Murat was acting as the master of direct politico-military domination. French forces confiscated shipments of weapons for Spanish troops;54 and orders to keep the peace, not to insult French forces and not to circulate handbills and lampoons against the French flowed constantly from the government junta* which Fernando had left behind to deal with urgent state matters, but with no other instructions than to keep the peace with the French. These orders were a constant reminder to the population of the occupation troops’ intensifying unpopularity in the capital.