

When the fighting began, columns of French soldiers converged on the centre from barracks and cantonments around the capital. But they met stiff opposition and suffered losses in their advance. In the course of the morning, considerable numbers of Madrileños armed themselves: from the artillery park, where they clamoured outside the closed gates until these were opened and arms were distributed; from the guards barracks;10 from the town hall guard;11 but also from individuals – an armourer claimed to have armed more than eighty people that morning.12 Others threw arms down from their balconies (as well as heavy objects onto French soldiers’ heads, one of which killed an officer), and nobles armed their retainers and released them to fight.13

Shortly after 11 a.m. the French cavalry – the mamelukes, Imperial Guard chasseurs, Polish lancers and dragoons – charged the crowd in the Puerta del Sol. The chisperos leapt onto the horses’ haunches and knifed their riders, or stabbed the horses in the belly to unseat the cavalrymen. It turned into a bloody hand-to-hand conflict; the chasseurs’ colonel had two horses killed under him in charges across the square, twenty of his men were put out of action, and he himself was slightly injured.14 The wounding of the chispero Antonio López Regidor bore witness to the close quarters of the fighting: he was struck in the chest at point-blank range by a pistol shot as he knifed a mameluke from the hindquarters of his horse…. To reduce the chisperos, who also quickly learned to take advantage of the cover of buildings, the French had, after two hours of fighting, to bring up cannon and sweep the square with grapeshot.*

In the wards and kitchens of the General Hospital in the Calle Atocha fighting suddenly broke out when French troops entered the building; kitchen lads, male nurses, hospital assistants and other employees, who armed themselves with kitchen knives and other instruments, rushed to the defence and there were wounded on both sides. The French called for reinforcements and these took seven of the hospital workers captive, none of whom was ever again seen alive. The same fate awaited a number of building workers who threw their buckets and tools at the French from the scaffolding of the new Santiago church which they were building, causing casualties among the Polish cavalry.

The sound of musket fire spreading through the city brought out more volunteers. More than fifty prisoners in the city prison offered to fight, giving their word of honour to return afterwards; one of them was killed and another wounded – but only one did not keep his word to go back to gaol.15 More typical, however, of the type of combatant who responded to the sound of fighting in the streets was a twenty-three-year-old Valencian journeyman, Francisco Matas, who, on hearing ‘the heroic efforts beginning to be made by the city’s inhabitants’, knew he had ‘to share their glory with them. And though only a poor journeyman … [I] left my master’s shop and ran amidst the confusion and danger in the streets to the artillery park which troops and civilians were defending with great heroism.’ There, when his master, a hatter, Francisco Labal, went to take him his food, he found Matas serving one of the cannons and firing other arms with ‘great ardour and courage’.16