

However, elsewhere in the city armed French troops were attacked wherever they were met – the unarmed usually being left to go free – by Madrileños using any weapons they could lay their hands on at first: clasp knives, clubs, cutting tools, and a few blunderbusses, shotguns and pistols. Barely an hour had passed since the French cannonade had precipitated the insurrection.

‘To arms! To arms!’, a Sevillian priest, living not far from the palace, heard rushing people shout from the street. The Rev. José María Blanco went out to see what was happening:

I had just arrived at an opening named Plazuela de Santo Domingo, the meeting point of four large streets, one of which leads to the palace, when, hearing the sound of a French drum in that direction I stopped with a considerable number of decent and quiet people whom curiosity kept rivetted to the spot. Though a strong piquet of infantry was fast advancing upon us, we could not imagine that we stood in any kind of danger. Under this mistaken notion we awaited their approach; but, seeing the soldiers halt and prepare their arms, we began instantly to disperse. A discharge of musketry followed in a few moments, and a man fell at the entrance of the street, through which I was, with a great throng, retreating from the fire. The fear of an indiscriminate massacre arose so naturally from this unprovoked assault, that every one tried to look for safety … I hastened on towards my house, and having shut the front door, could think of no better expedient, in the confused state of my mind, than to make ball cartridges for a fowling piece which I kept.5

The overwhelmingly plebeian nature of the rising was evinced in the much-quoted experience of Antonio Alcalá Galiano, nineteen-year-old son of a naval commander killed at Trafalgar and scion of an elite family of government administrators, who on taking to the streets was rejected by a group of young working men for his youth and evident social status. ‘You’re no good for anything’, one of them told him. His reaction was to believe that he had as much to fear from the plebs as he had from the French, and he went home to wait ‘until decent and sensible folk joined the rising’.6 In fact he was mistaken: considerable numbers of ‘decent’ people had joined the rising from the start, and the Rev. Blanco recalled one of them, a ‘well-dressed man’, who went down the street calling loudly on the male inhabitants to make for an old arms depot. But he made no impression on Blanco’s part of the town.7

The fighting lasted until three in the afternoon. Murat had laid his plans well; his troops occupied the dominating heights around the capital, he had ordered artillery into the Retiro, and his cantonments had been well chosen to allow his soldiers to advance rapidly into the city’s centre from all directions. With thirty thousand troops under his command, he expected to be able to control any unforeseen situation. A month earlier, he had been concerned that the organizers of the Aranjuez rising were plotting a popular revolt in Madrid; and at the time of General Savary’s arrival in the capital to ‘persuade’ Fernando to go north to meet Napoleon, Murat was evidently considering arresting the duque del Infantado, Escoiquiz and other Aranjuez plotters.8 It was known that the two principal Fernandista nobles who initiated the Aranjuez rising – Infantado and conde de Teba, now conde de Montijo – met in Madrid; but nothing was known about the outcome of their talks. However, there was no doubt – for the documentary evidence existed – that a plot to precipitate a widespread rising, including Madrid, had been planned for April. In the Spanish capital two ‘well-dressed individuals’ offered large sums to whomever could assemble three to four hundred armed men. A wig comber informed the authorities that a shoemaker and a rag picker who had been approached had rejected the offer, and nothing more was heard of this plot, which the Spanish authorities presumably managed to abort. Nonetheless, three merchant brothers and purveyors to the Valencia city hall, of a certain standing and wealth, and who subsequently were the major conspirators behind their city’s participation in the nationwide rising had, from shortly after the Aranjuez insurrection, raised their own private ‘army’ of five hundred paid men to support Fernando VII’s cause and to begin a popular anti-Napoleonic rising in late April. One of the brothers later wrote that an unidentified relative who had taken a leading part in the Aranjuez mutiny and was close to Fernando had asked them to organize a ‘popular commotion’ demanding that the French leave Spain. A special agent was also sent from Madrid at about the same time to prepare a rising in Pamplona. None of these risings took place, probably because the Madrid attempt had failed.9 Finally, artillery Captain Pedro Velarde’s outline of a plan for a nationwide military resistance was also documented; but it did not include a civilian rising in Madrid whose chances of success he, as an experienced military officer, must have certainly doubted, though he died in its defence once it had started.