

‘Treachery!’ cried a man who had suddenly appeared, ‘they have taken our king and now they are taking the whole royal family to France! Treachery! … Death to the French!’

A former royal locksmith and Fernandista confidential agent, José Blas Molina Soriano, had seen Luisa’s coach driving through the streets, and had run to the palace where he found another royal coach waiting; immediately he had enquired of the coachmen who they were waiting for. On his worst fears being confirmed he launched the cry to the sixty or seventy people gathered outside. He then ran into the palace, followed by the people, shouting, ‘the prince must not leave ….’ By chance, they encountered the tearful prince who, to their acclaim, promised to appear on a palace balcony if they returned outside. This they did and the prince duly appeared, bowing his head several times in acknowledgement to the crowd which had now increased to about two hundred.2 An Asturian-born inn porter, José Muñiz Cueto, who was outside the palace early in the morning, independently confirmed Soriano’s story, but added, as other witnesses also claimed, that a court official had appeared on a palace balcony and shouted to the crowd: ‘Vassals! To arms! They are taking the prince!’3

The confidential agent, Soriano, a man of humble origin who understood the popular mentality, played the role of ‘agitator’ to perfection, an essential role as would be seen in the later provincial risings. He claimed subsequently to have been acting independently, yet his vigilance of the movement of the royal carriages and his easy access to the royal palace suggested that he was well known there and was informed of the junta’s fear that Murat might try forcibly to smuggle the prince out of Madrid. If he was in reality acting on the junta’s behalf, it was, however, as a spy, not as a popular agitator, since the junta was trying at all costs to maintain public calm.

Another person at court had no doubt as to the rising’s origin: ‘There is a great rising’, a lady of the court cried to the naval engineer and poet, José Mor de Fuentes, as he was making his way to the palace at about 10 a.m. ‘A rising, why?’ ‘Because the French want to take the prince.’4

Rapidly informed of a crowd gathering outside the palace, Murat dispatched a general and another officer to discover the cause; seeing them riding in and believing that the officers had come to take off the prince, the crowd turned on them and they unsheathed their swords. The situation was momentarily defused by a Spanish guards officer who protected the French general, and by the arrival of a small party of French soldiers who escorted the two officers back to Murat’s residence. Almost immediately, French cannon were wheeled to the edge of the palace square and fired into the crowd which, leaving the dead and wounded behind, fled through the city, crying out the news.

Hearing the cannon fire, a Galician hidalgo, Joaquin Terreiro Montenegro, made for the Plaza de Santo Domingo near the palace. ‘Seeing the people sadly defenceless in the face of the enemy’, he ‘exhorted them to take arms’. To a judge of the Madrid court, Francisco Cano Manuel, who was there at the head of a police patrol, and to the commander of the palace guard picket, he made the same proposal. ‘The latter replied that he was without a single cartridge, the judge that he lacked all support, and the people that they had been refused arms at the depot.’ Terreiro, jurisdictional lord of ‘a number of places in the Kingdom of Galicia’, told them that if they were determined ‘they should demand arms again and again. But it was all in vain ….’*