

This thread of abandonment by their king was woven into a fabric of other fears, passions, anxieties, resentments and hopes, as was seen during the Aranjuez rising. But within this fabric a new warp had also recently been woven: the knowledge, since Aranjuez, that the people, by their joint action, could definitively affect the affairs of state.

On May 1, a large crowd in the Puerta del Sol had waited since early morning in front of the post office for the latest official Spanish communiqué from Bayonne – which did not arrive, stirring up new conjectures and exacerbating old fears. The crowd booed and hissed Murat on his way through the square, and wildly cheered don Antonio, Fernando’s uncle and president of the governing junta, as his old and unstylish carriage drove past. Only at 10 p.m., under a shower of rain, had the waiting crowd dispersed, still without news from Bayonne.

For the past four days, Murat had been pressuring the junta to dispatch to Bayonne Fernando’s two siblings still remaining in Madrid: Luisa, the ex-queen of Etruria, whose husband had been enthroned and she, his widow, dethroned by Napoleon, and the fourteen-year-old infante (prince) Francisco de Paula, the youngest of the royal children. On May 1, the junta had finally agreed to the young prince leaving the following day: as a gesture to the junta’s fear that the royal departure would lead to rioting, Murat agreed that it should take place after dark on May 2. The news of the impending departures, spread by court officials and palace servants, became known. On the same day, moreover, the first of the French-inspired Spanish pamphlets of the propaganda war appeared from Murat’s press, which attempted to persuade Spaniards to abandon the decrepit Bourbon monarchy and accept a new Napoleonic crowned head. It was clear from this that Napoleon was intent on taking over the throne. Fearing the worst, the junta ordered the three-thousand-odd Spanish troops in the capital to be confined to barracks and deprived of munitions.

From an early hour on May 2, the street sellers were chanting their wares as usual, reassuring a visitor to the capital that everything was normal;1 it was ‘St Monday’ – the day of the week when, as in other west European countries, those manual workers who could afford to do so (and many who couldn’t), took the day off. More artisans and the like were able, therefore, to gather in public places than on a normal work day. The Puerta del Sol was again crowded with people waiting for the long-delayed bulletin from Bayonne. Only a handful had gathered outside the palace gates. By 8.30 a.m., Luisa was on her way. She was not popular, being considered almost a foreigner, and had remained close to her discredited parents, Carlos IV and María Luisa, on whose behalf she had corresponded frequently with Murat. No one attempted to prevent her departure. A second carriage still waited, its driver and postilion already in place.

The immediate events following on Luisa’s departure were confused. Different accounts and participants’ reports almost inevitably varied; but the significant aspect was that all led to the same conclusion, expressed in an old woman’s cry, ‘They are taking them away from us!’