

Having conceded ground since the arrival of his parents, Fernando now collapsed. He was not made of the stuff of patriotic martyrdom. Moreover, he had just dispatched a decree effectively declaring war on Napoleon, which the French police might easily seize. Whether Napoleon actually threatened him with death or not is immaterial: Fernando knew that the Bourbon duc d’Enghien had been abducted and shot on the Emperor’s orders. The following day, May 6, Fernando renounced the throne in his father’s favour; and the latter, after confirming Murat as his lieutenant general in Spain (Murat had packed don Antonio, Fernando’s uncle and president of the governing junta, off to France on May 3 and taken over his presidency), handed his throne over to Napoleon.

But Fernando went even further. Abandoned by his councillors, he subsequently renounced his rights as heir to the throne. And on May 12, he, his brother Carlos and his uncle Antonio issued a proclamation in Bordeaux absolving Spaniards of ‘all obligations’ to them. The three then continued on to their internment at Talleyrand’s country estate at Valençay where the young ex-king spent the war years grovelling before Napoleon, going so far as to congratulate him on placing his brother on the throne of Spain. Fernando thus became the first afrancesado – the name given to collaborators with the Bonaparte regime by the anti-Napoleonic patriots who had risen in his name and in defence of his throne.

Courage and dignity in the morning; cowardice and vileness in the afternoon. Fernando was dominated by events. His shifty character, lacking in all decorum, allowed him to humble himself before events in the hope of better times without any sense of humiliation to outrage his feelings. He had a plebeian soul which accounted for his popularity.91

Thanks to Bourbon turpitude, Napoleon won the Spanish throne easily. But he would live to regret it. On St Helena, he confessed that the resulting ‘accursed Spanish war was the primary cause of my misfortunes’92 – ‘I started this affair very badly, I confess; the immorality of it was only too patent, the injustice too cynical, and it was a very vile trick because I have fallen victim to it myself.’93