

It was not only journeymen but masters who rose, though it is probable that there were as many of the former as of the latter.* One such master was the forty-two-year-old embroiderer, Agustín Pérez de Hiriás, who stemmed originally from Mier, ‘in the mountains of Santander’.

I went out into the street exalted by feelings of patriotism. I had a blunderbuss and a sword, and other patriots joined me.† After firing at the enemy a few times, we reached the Calle de Alcalá. There the French unleashed a fusillade and I was hit in the chest by a musket ball and, bathed in blood, was left for dead. Some neighbours carried me back to my house in the Calle de Mira el Rio, without any hope of living.

He was fortunate enough to be treated at home by the hospital’s chief assistant who extracted the ball and various breastbones, and after nine months of treatment he miraculously survived. But he was left with an asthmatic affliction that had made it impossible to practice his trade, ‘and moreover with the misfortune of a wife who went mad at the fright of seeing me brought home nearly dead …’. 17

The neighbours, who had also been resisting the French advance in the Calle Alcalá, where some of the bitterest street fighting took place, were all men in their forties and fifties but of mixed occupations. They carried Pérez home ‘through back streets and at considerable danger to their lives’ lest they encounter a French patrol, having taken the precaution of throwing the master embroiderer’s arms into a doorway. Among them was another master embroiderer and a tavern keeper, both of about Pérez’s age; a forty-eight-year-old excise and revenue man; and a ‘worker’ (without further specification) who was fifty-two.

The combatants often fought in groups formed by affinity or friendship which had gathered around the best-armed or the most authoritative amongst them. Of the fifteen identifiable groups, eight were led by civilians, four of them of the educated elite, five by military men, and two of unknown leadership.‡ Two of the civilian-led groups were formed in public drinking places; and another was made up of the conde de Altamira’s and the Portuguese ambassador’s retainers. 18

Early in the rising, at about the time the Galician hidalgo was exhorting the people to arm themselves, Mor de Fuentes encountered in the streets close to the palace ‘a tall, well-built, twenty-five to thirty-year-old woman waving a white handkerchief and crying discomposedly, Arms! Arms’!19 At the Puerta de Toledo, not far distant, the manolas of the surrounding plebeian neighbourhoods had massed in a tactically intelligent attempt to prevent French cuirassiers from entering the capital from their cantonment in Carabanchel. The women gathered at the Toledo gate dragged whatever they could lay hands on into the street to form barriers to the oncoming cavalry, dismounted a few cavalrymen, stabbing their horses, before being ridden down by the mass of horsemen. As one of the young women, Benita Sandoval y Sánchez, escaped into a nearby house, she was seen and followed: French cuirassiers on foot riddled her body with bullets as she tried to hide amidst clothes and furniture.20 Of the two neighbourhoods which suffered the highest number of casualties in the rising, the area around the Puerta de Toledo was one.21