

Somewhat surprisingly, given that they were officially confined to barracks, the military made up fourteen percent of the combatants, not far short of the number of artisans. The soldiers, most of them individuals of regiments not stationed in Madrid, were led by junior officers, especially of the elite artillery corps. Like many of their rank, the latter had admired Napoleon, an artilleryman, for his military genius, until his ‘treacherous’ takeover of Spanish army fortresses. Their admiration turned to hatred of the invader, and it was then that Captain Velarde began to plot a national military rising against the French.

Royal personnel and revenue men comprised a further 5.4 percent. Adding to these the military, and the middling to upper commoner classes, these non-plebeians represented one-third of the known combatants. (Many of the soldiers and royal personnel were obviously of plebeian extraction, but they are included in their respective professions.)

Identified villagers from outside Madrid, whose remaining presence in the capital after Sunday, May 1, has – in the traditional historiography of the rising – been said to have constituted an important insurrectionary force, totalled three percent of the known combatants; but it may well be that among those of unknown trades and places of origin there were many villagers whose identities could not be established after their death.*

Numerically, the clergy took little part, their representation being the second equal lowest above beggars; but their few numbers, five in all, should not allow one to overlook their importance in mobilizing and enthusing the combatants in the struggle. One of them indeed led a group in the streets. All were ordained priests. Surprisingly no members of religious orders appear to have risen, even though one of the priests was a monastery chaplain.

There were also significant absences in the combatant rolls. The titled nobility and large merchants did not appear. These privileged strata temporized; like Alcalá Galiano, they saw the rising as an exclusively ‘plebeian’ outburst and almost certainly doomed, while they might yet have to defend their real interests more effectively under a Napoleonic king. Only one grandee, a military officer, was known to have risen: an infantry captain, he raised a group of soldiers and civilians which fought in the Puerta de Toledo; and another four officers who led groups would almost certainly have been hidalgos (untitled nobility). In order to keep one foot in each camp, the aristocracy participated by proxy, sending their servants out to do battle – and the latter suffered the consequences: one in four of the service contingent killed in combat or executed was a noble’s servant.

Ranging from adolescents to seventy-year-olds, the majority of the combatants killed or executed were twenty to forty-year-olds. The widespread nature of the rising can be judged by the fact that the combatants came from forty-five of the capital’s sixty-four neighbourhoods.41 But the rising’s physical spread should not be confused with its demographic extent: as far as can be calculated, less than one percent of the Madrid population took part; and the proportion of combatant tradesmen and service personnel, for instance, barely exceeded 0.5% of their respective occupations.† Most remarkable in this respect was the relatively high proportion of liberal professionals: just under one percent of their occupational stratum, the highest of any civilian grouping.