

On receiving the news in Trujillo not a moment was lost in deciding

to die in defence of the grief-stricken Madrileños and to avenge the Outrages committed by our disguised enemies. A Junta of the three estates was immediately summoned by the Corregidor to enlist all men capable of bearing arms in the City and the eighty-two villages of its jurisdiction and with them all horses, money and provisions to march on Madrid under the command of senior and junior army officers whom the captain general of the Province was summoned posthaste to provide.43

Enlisted men from the whole jurisdiction had begun to reach the city on the morning of May 6 when a government order, ‘distorting the horrible scenes of May 2 and imposing calm and harmony with the perfidious French’, was received by the authorities, and the mobilization was called off.

In Mérida, nearly 400 kilometres from Madrid, the corregidor ordered the village justices to recruit men and, as ‘loyal Spaniards’, to expedite all necessary measures to ‘aid the capital and its inhabitants in the briefest time possible… in order that they may triumph over this unprecedented iniquity so that its authors learn that we are true Spaniards’.44

More significantly, in Badajoz, General Francisco Solano, one of Spain’s ablest military commanders, convinced the captain general to issue a joint proclamation against the French on May 5. This called on Spaniards to take up arms to avenge the bloodshed in Madrid and recover the monarch held prisoner in Bayonne.45 But Solano’s messages to military leaders in Sevilla and elsewhere, and to the War minister, O’Farril, in Madrid, calling for all out military resistance, received no answer. Believing himself without support, Solano obeyed Murat’s orders to take up his duties as captain general of Andalucía and governor of Cádiz – where a month later he was assassinated for refusing unequivocally to support the rising.

After riding for twenty-four hours the courier fleeing Madrid fell ill with fatigue, but the practice of one local justice urgently forwarding messages to the next worked admirably. Within seventy-two hours the Móstoles proclamation – which had in each of the cities, towns and villages to be copied and the justice to add his notes on where he had received it and from and to whom he was dispatching it, as well as the measures he was taking – travelled 550 kilometres to reach Andalucía just inside the provincial limits of Huelva. Napoleon’s courier travelled no faster: the Emperor in Bayonne, at approximately the same distance from Madrid, received the news of the Madrid rising at about the same time.*

This brief mobilization against the French, which was brought to an end by the governing junta’s urgent orders issued by the Consejo de Castilla, took place in a region sensitive to the effects of the French occupation of neighbouring Portugal, and which had had to live with, and now live down, the shame wrought on the country by its native son, Godoy. To the extent of accepting the orders of an obscure local justice, the highest local authorities were obviously predisposed to act since in each case the mobilization was ordered – and equally countermanded – by them. Two took the responsibility on their own shoulders; a third, in Trujillo, instituted what would shortly become a major form of governance: a local junta, composed in this case of members of all three estates. These authorities were in all cases dutifully obeyed in the manner the Old Regime expected of its subjects.