

Only one thing appeared likely to save someone: the ability to speak French. Estebán Sorrolla who had been captured after fighting in the Puerta del Sol was taken with others to be shot; speaking French to his guard he managed to awaken his pity and was allowed to escape.31 Celestino Espinosa, a French-speaking scrivener attached to the street patrol of a member of the Madrid court, had managed to save one man’s life during the fighting by crying loudly in French to the officer who was on the point of executing him on the spot for stabbing a French soldier, that it was ‘dishonourable’ to shoot a man without trial, and he should be turned over to the court member. Espinosa promised to act as guardian for the fugitive, whom he turned loose. The scrivener himself escaped only with great difficulty after this act and again largely because he spoke French.32

As frequently occurred in mass executions, one or two individuals escaped by luck, cool-headedness or both. Juan Suárez, who had fought in the artillery park, was already kneeling waiting to be shot on the Montaña del Príncipe Pío when he succeeded in freeing himself from the rope that bound the victims’ wrists, and, throwing himself down before the fusillade, rolled and then ran down the hill, hotly pursued by French troops who inflicted several sword wounds before he managed to leap over a wall and vanish into the safety of the church of San Antonio de la Florida.33 Another man, don Cosme Martínez del Corral, an ex-artilleryman who fought in the Puerta del Sol and later in the park, was found to be still alive after being ‘executed’ with others in the patio of the Buen Suceso Hospital. Taken into the hospital, he slowly recovered.34

At least eighty-six men – one in seven of the identified combatants – and thirteen non-combatants, including two women, met their deaths in front of firing squads.*

In the early hours of the afternoon, there reigned a sad peace in Madrid, accompanied by terror and rage … And when darkness fell, the silence and solitude was rent by the sound of musket volleys and shots which continued until dawn … In the morning came the news of the gravity of the atrocities …

recalled Antonio Alcalá Galiano many years later.35

This brutal revenge – ‘the blackest, perhaps, which has stained the French name during their whole career of conquest’36 – shocked ‘decent and sensible’ Madrileños who had taken no part in the rising, or who had even secretly condemned it. The French military had failed their word when they agreed to bring the fighting to an end. The repression’s major burden fell on the labouring poor: craftsmen and journeymen, tradesmen, labourers, servants, waiters, porters, muleteers, carters … These had formed one-third of the combatants, and made up over half of the known executed. Artisans were hard hit: as a proportion of those executed, they lost twice as many to the firing squads as they had contributed proportionately to the insurrection. Royal servants met an even harsher fate: they suffered a proportional execution rate of two and a half times their combat strength.