

Murat was triumphant at his victory. ‘Yesterday’s affair delivers Spain to the Emperor’, he is alleged to have told O’Farril, on May 3. ‘You should say that it places Spain beyond his reach forever’, O’Farril is said to have retorted. 40 Apocryphal or not, O’Farril’s response was correct.

In one aspect, Murat’s triumphalism was vindicated, however. The Madrid population did not again collectively raise its head against the French occupation. Indeed, once Josef Bonaparte was established on his throne in Madrid, and began to court the labouring classes with free entertainments, bullfights, and distributions of bread and money, the chisperos settled down to enjoying themselves, at least until the bread ran out in the famine of 1812.

*

Who were the people who rose? Individuals in low-paid ‘petty service’ jobs – servants and inn porters mainly, but with a large sprinkling of coachmen, hospital attendants, water carriers, small traders and the like – formed the largest single civilian group. Close behind them were artisans, journeymen and apprentices. Together these two groups made up thirty percent of the identified combatants.* Among the artisans, shoemakers and cobblers, tailors and building workers – as might be expected of a capital devoted to sustaining courtiers and government officials – were the foremost trades, representing one-fifth of the insurrectionist tradesmen. In all, thirty trades were represented – about half of those then existing in the capital.

The next largest group, representing nearly fifteen percent of the combatants, is the one that the least is known about: those whose trades or professions, and frequently even their places of origin, are unspecified. Leaving aside the prisoners, whose effectiveness in the combat, judging by their casualty rate, was practically nil, women made up the next largest plebeian grouping (six percent). A relatively small number of labourers and agrarian workers completed the manual labouring contingent. Including women (an assertion based almost exclusively on the humble quarters where they lived since the documents barely ever referred to their jobs), plebeian combatants made up forty percent of the total.* Their social composition was not unlike that of the Parisian revolutionary menu peuple.

Although less numerous, the fourth largest civilian grouping was composed of liberal professionals, gentlemen,† administratives, clergymen and ladies at just under thirteen percent of the total. Of these, liberal professionals – doctors, surgeons, professors, teachers, architects, notaries, scriveners, musicians and painters – represented over one-third, with gentlemen forming another third. This educated commoner stratum was more numerous than contemporaries or historians have generally allowed, and played a significant, albeit not a leadership, role. Though perhaps not as emotionally motivated as the plebeians by the last of the royal family’s removal to France,‡ they patently felt that a Napoleonic takeover of Spain, engineered by trickery, threatened their interests: their aim to have a voice in the reforms which they knew only too well the country needed, and which they expected of the Fernandista regime, coupled with the fear of a return to the ‘despotism’ of the past under another – Napoleonic – name; the loss, in short, of the country’s freedom. After nearly thirteen years of war as France’s ally, and at considerable financial and naval cost to Spain (for which they blamed Godoy), they were not prepared to see their country surrendered to any foreign power.