

… when the Alcalde of Mostole [sic] demanded aid on May 2, the justice mobilized all the neighbourhood and the inhabitants would have marched to Madrid, had it not been that Superior orders determined the contrary …

wrote the justice of the small village of El Cerro some months later.46

In contradistinction, when the proclamation reached Jerez de los Caballeros, an Extremaduran township of some 7,000 inhabitants, where landless labourers and small tenant farmers had revolted against landlords’ enclosures of municipal lands only eight years earlier, a local priest had little success in raising the townsfolk. An hidalgo ‘inflamed by true love of the patria’, the Rev. Sanabría Solis had, from the time when ‘the French Emperor’s perfidious intentions to usurp the Spanish crown became clear’, begun to look for ways in which his small contribution’ could be employed to free his country ‘from the threat of slavery’. At that very moment the Móstoles proclamation reached his hands:

What Spaniard could remain unmoved by those inhuman atrocities and perfidiousness? Justly angered, I threw myself into the street, despite the early dawn hour, to seek out the military commandant and beg of him the loan of a horse in order to proclaim Fernando as king throughout the whole town and to rouse the inhabitants to fight against France. But my wishes could not be realized at that time. Some people of repute did not agree with my manner of acting.47

The moment of activist anti-French priests had not yet arrived. But Sanabría did not allow this to deter him. Some days later, on the news that Fernando had renounced his throne, he was again in the streets, wearing the red sash of San Sebastián and carrying the standard of the Purísima Concepción ‘to demonstrate that under the Patron of Spain’s protection I was prepared to shed my blood like the Holy Martyr in defence of my country and its just cause’.

I proclaimed openly that the abdication was a fraudulent deception and that Fernando VII was incapable of handing over his nation to the odious France. A transhumant sheep-master was holding the abdication document in his hand. Eyes burning with rage, I seized it from him and tore it up. Nothing could now stop my zeal. Without concern for my life or the dangers that surrounded me, I rode through the streets proclaiming Fernando as our true king, arousing the people with vigorous exhortations to take up arms. Not content with this, I scattered among the people all the money I carried to show them my extraordinary joy.48

Neither priestly largesse, a saint’s standard nor vibrant harangues resulted in greater success on this second venture than on the first, for the priest did not succeed in rallying the people to his cause.* Here as elsewhere, the rural townships were not prepared to move until they had seen their region’s capital rise. The absence in the priest’s harangues of any appeal to the people’s religious feelings was also striking. Possibly, he believed that the religious regalia he outfitted himself with was sufficient; or that religion was so consubstantial with monarchy that it seemed irrelevant to single it out.