

When the Móstoles proclamation reached Sevilla on May 6, popular unrest broke out almost immediately. Two days later, the chief civil authority in the city, the asistente of Sevilla† and intendente of the four Andalucian kingdoms, Vicente Hore, raised the royal standard in a town hall meeting, ordered a voluntary enlistment, and sent orders to Córdoba, Jaén and Granada to contribute men and aid to the force being raised in Sevilla. His hand – he was a Godoy favourite – had in no little part been forced by the popular agitation; but his proposals were received ‘with public acclamation since these were the measures the people desired’.49

Shortly, however, the orders from Madrid ‘deforming the events of May 2’ were received in Sevilla, as elsewhere, strictly forbidding any mobilization. Vincente Hore then began to calm the people,

but not to dishearten them. I was zealous in ensuring the prevention of disorders resulting from the popular convulsions; but not in a manner to destroy the enthusiasm and love for King and Country which the people had demonstrated. On the contrary, I exhorted them publicly to preserve this for the opportune moment …50

The imminent national rising would have taken place without a proclamation signed by a mere local justice under the auspices of a high government official. What the Móstoles document showed – in a relatively narrow strip of the country which included, however, its fourth largest city, Sevilla – was the conviction among a part of the ruling elite that the loss of the king, in whom they had placed their hopes for reform, was equivalent to the loss of the fatherland’s future well-being, a feeling shared by the larger urban populations. Napoleon’s domination must be resisted at all cost, their king returned to them. In the countryside, however, villagers responded dutifully to their local authorities as was expected of them, and ignored fervent Fernandista agitation, even from the mouth of their local priest, a powerful figure in the landscape of their lives.

### BAYONNE: NAPOLEON’S CONSTITUTION FOR SPAIN

Having achieved his immediate aim of displacing the Spanish Bourbon monarchy, on May 10 Napoleon informed his brother, Josef, King of Naples, that he had made him King of Spain; two days earlier, the Emperor had ordered Murat to apprise the Consejo de Castilla to request Josef as the new sovereign, but he did not wait for an answer before appointing his brother.51 Two weeks later Napoleon issued a proclamation to Spain in which he announced grandiloquently that the Spanish nation was ‘perishing’ and that he would remedy its ills. ‘I want your last descendants to remember me and say: He is the regenerator of our patria’, he concluded.52 Napoleon in fact plannned to rebuild the Spanish navy as quickly as possible, to solve the country’s financial crisis and to ‘make the colonies safe from British influence, to prevent them from separating from the metropolis, and to open them up to French trade’.53 He ordered ships prepared to sail to various parts of South America to give effect to his plan.