

Though with some significant permutations among them, the major groupings of the Madrid rising – the labouring poor, petty services, women, military and professional classes – would be among the participants in the provincial risings later in the month. There, artisans were more important than petty services, and middle-level merchants as important as the professional classes; a new group, students, almost absent from the Madrid rising, entered on the scene in some places, while royal servants, excisemen, gentlemen and ladies were unrepresented.

In the records of many combatants it is said that they acted out of ‘patriotic exaltation’, an anachronistic expression at the time of their action. But the scriveners and the like who crafted their testimonies after the war knew the formulaic expressions made current during the conflict which would bring their clients the honours they sought. What really mobilized them on the day? King and Religion, for sure. But more than that, a hatred of the invader – a rage against these foreign troops advancing through their neighbourhoods to kill their fellow women and men who had risen to assert their right to live in their customary ways, unsubjected to any alien power. In this the women no doubt differed little from their menfolk; but they threw themselves, unarmed and unhesitatingly, into a combat of which they had no experience, and paid a heavy price for their incredible courage.

In rising against French domination, the Madrid struggle was thus for freedom, a concept which at that moment asserted Spaniards’ right to be ruled by the monarch they had elevated to the throne with the hope of instituting reforms which would correct what the detested Godoy had refused them; and the right to continue to live in the way they chose. (It was not individual freedoms, it should be added, since such concepts were barely conceivable to the majority under the Old Regime.) Spain was an old and proud nation that had suffered no major foreign invasions since finally defeating the Muslims five centuries earlier in a reconquest that in itself had lasted seven hundred years.* Nowhere else in continental Europe had Napoleon attempted to overthrow his major enemies’ monarchs: the houses of Austria, Prussia and Russia. But he was prepared to do so to an ally, Spain, which had been relatively faithful to its alliance, though at high cost for the privilege. To shake themselves free of this alliance, instituted by Godoy, and the Bonapartist intervention which had resulted from it, was to become the cherished aim of a great number of Spaniards. They did not need, indeed resented, Napoleon’s efforts to reform their country under his brother Josef’s rule. The cries of Viva Fernando VII! in the Madrid streets during the rising expressed a popular desire for their king’s return, announcing the concept of the ‘desired’ Fernando, which became one of the rallying cries – and, from a later perspective, greatest mystifications – of the coming struggle.