

With the exception of Cataluña, the main risings were an exclusively urban-originated affair, the majority on the mainland’s periphery. The eight cities in which the principal risings took place – in the sense that these were the major foci from which the insurrections spread outwards: Oviedo, Valencia, Zaragoza, Sevilla, La Coruña, Badajoz, Valladolid and Cartagena – varied in size from about twelve to twenty-three thousand inhabitants (Badajoz, Oviedo, Cartagena, Valladolid) to forty thousand (Zaragoza) and eighty thousand (Sevilla, Valencia). The risings were not thus dependent on the size of the towns – indeed, cities like Granada, Málaga and Cádiz, with populations of fifty thousand or more, and regional or provincial capitals like Murcia (fourteen thousand) and Santiago de Compostela (twenty thousand), did not rise until other towns in their provinces or region had led the way, although only a day or two separated them. The significant factor was that, almost without exception, the major risings took place in the most important regional towns that were the seats of captain generals and audiencias.*

None of the insurrectionary towns was occupied by French forces which, with the exception of Valladolid, were several days’ march distant. (French columns were – or were feared to be – marching on Sevilla and Zaragoza, however.) None, therefore, had immediately to confront the Napoleonic occupation forces, as had the people of Madrid on May 2. Had they had to do so, the results might have been similar to those in the Spanish capital.

In Cataluña, on the other hand, the risings were widely disseminated in townships throughout the region. Under French military occupation, the capital, Barcelona, did not rise, leaving pride of place to Lérida. But it cannot be said that the latter’s insurrection conditioned to anything like the same degree the subsequent risings in the region, as was the case with the major cities in the rest of Spain.*

The insurrections in some towns but not others can only be explained by the determined planning of local Fernandistas to raise their inhabitants and the degree of prior popular agitation. These factors were not independent one of the other; and the attitude of the army, active in support or studiously passive, was vital to both. Moreover, gratifications, or subornations, were not uncommon, in the Old Order’s manner of organizing commotions.

Popular agitation may to some extent be attributed to a generalized malaise due to the bad economic conditions, especially for artisans, or specific conditions like that of Cartagena, where the Spanish Mediterranean fleet’s major arsenal had been at a virtual standstill since the Trafalgar defeat.† But the crowd’s motivations were multi-layered and complex. One general aspect of these must be taken into account. In a traditional society, where everything was apparently regulated from above by laws, decrees and custom, nothing was a greater destabilizing factor than political uncertainty. To be ‘unsure of the future’, ‘not to know what to expect’, represented a rupture with the Old Order’s ‘monolithic mental and operative system’.4