

There could be little doubt that the smallholder and his friend, who went unnoticed for nearly two centuries by local historians and chroniclers, were trusted members of the Bertrán private army who had been posted among the crowd that morning to ensure both a popular rising and to control it. The crowd, thus inspired (or paid) to stage an ‘orderly rising’, tore up the Gazeta de Madrid and the official paper in the duque de Berg’s (Murat’s) name, and set off for the captain general’s palace on the far side of the Turia river. There, this dignitary, the conde de la Conquista, appeared on a balcony and told them to trust to the constituted authorities to take the necessary action, and called on them to disperse quietly to their homes. The crowd turned back without protest; but it did not obey orders to return home. Very shortly, it discovered carts laden with tax-revenue money about to leave for Madrid, seized them and dragged them to a trusted noble’s mansion. Amidst the crowd’s clamours and shouts that more money had been sent the previous day and on the need to secure its return, a Franciscan friar, Juan Rico, who happened to be visiting the noble, the conde de Cervelló, asked to be heard:

Senñores: The people is a monster unless it permits itself to be governed by one person whom all the remainder obey. Without that everything will be disorder and confusion … Remember, with clamours and shouts we shall not defeat the French, but only with arms and armies and a good government to lead us. And all of these we are presently lacking … If we know how to lead ourselves, we shall triumph.9

The demand for a leader was immediately accepted by the crowd which, evidently convinced of its own ‘monstrosity’, elevated Rico to the leadership. At the head of the crowd, the new people’s tribune set off for the audiencia where the local authorities were meeting. He and another Franciscan entered the council chamber. After informing the authorities that the Valencian people accepted no other king than their ‘beloved Fernando VII’, Rico launched into a long tirade on Godoy which ended finally with the people’s demands: declaration of war on Napoleon, a general enlistment and arming of the people, and their favoured noble’s appointment to train and lead the recruits. When his harangue was countered by the captain general, Rico retaliated: ‘There are forty thousand people outside waiting for your reply. It is my duty to inform them of your way of thinking and your replies to my glorious demands.’ Whereupon, according to the friar, the gathered dignitaries panicked, fearful of being slaughtered by the crowd, and granted the demands, including that of issuing the enlistment edict in the name of Fernando VII.10

*

The Zaragoza rising on the morning of Tuesday, May 24 – precipitated, as in Valencia, by the arrival of the Gazeta de Madrid following on earlier information that a column of French troops was marching on the city11 – was exceptional in originating amongst an urban-based group of medium-sized vineyard owners and agrarian foremen.12 As elsewhere, the news of Madrid’s May 2 rising and the French repression had resulted in popular anger. The vineyard owners, who worked their own land, and the agricultural foremen, included two men, Mariano Cerezo and Jorge Ibor,* who were said to have ‘a great ascendancy’ over their fellow parishioners, and collaborated closely together. They began in one of the traditional ways of articulating public discontent: the lampoon or satire posted overnight in prominent places. But having taken their agitation so far, they felt inadequate to the task of leading a rising, and went in search of a reputable and respected local leader.† In each case they were turned down on the pretext that ‘the authorities’ intervention was indispensable’, and things must be done ‘in an orderly manner’.13 As they subsequently wrote, their