

The commotion was as ‘spontaneous’ as they come – and therein lay its danger for Fernandistas and local authorities, who equally feared popular mobilization and the ‘inevitable descent into anarchy’ that this entailed in their eyes. This was shown a few hours after the disturbances when a special session of the Junta General of Asturias,* which had begun its triennial sessions in Oviedo on May 1, unanimously recognized that the people’s ‘noble enthusiasm’ to preserve the monarchy and ensure the country’s defence was not ill-judged,

as long as the people maintained and acted without resort to commotions but at the orders of the legitimate authorities and the people’s natural representatives …7

But the Oviedo audiencia did not admit defeat. It ordered that further Junta meetings be postponed until July, that the university be closed, and all arms seized during the commotion by the armourers from the arms factory be handed in. Incensed by these measures, the crowd was pacified only by respected Fernandistas’ assurances that another opportunity to achieve their aims would soon arise.

*

In Zaragoza and Valencia, the other two civilian-led risings, where prior commotions had been less marked, more threatening procedures had eventually to be taken against the old authorities during the insurrection itself. Moreover, in neither of these two cities was the rising as meticulously planned as in Oviedo. In both, it was not until the arrival of the Gazeta de Madrid officially announcing the Bourbon abdications, that the people rose.

Amongst the crowd that Monday morning, May 23, in the Plaza de la Compañía, where Valencians normally gathered to read the latest Madrid news – the newspapers could be bought or hired and read aloud for the benefit of the illiterate – was a smallholder and his companion from the huerta, the rich, irrigated land around the city. As the full import of the news was silently taken in, a sudden, solitary cry was heard: Viva Fernando VII!

The smallholder, Francisco Lluesma, and his companion, Vicente Rausell (whose profession is unknown but who as likely as not was also a smallholder) had come well prepared for such a moment; money in their pockets and a Fernandista standard ready to be unfurled. Inspired by their ‘patriotic zeal’ and ‘without thought for the dangers and risks involved’ they had thereupon immediately

inflamed the good vassals’ spirits to ensure that they proclaimed Fernando VII as their legitimate king … Both distributed largesse from their own pockets to the needy and poor who had gathered in order to prevent pillage and disorders, a purpose they indeed achieved at that critical moment.8

Three merchant brothers and purveyors to the town hall, of a certain standing and wealth in Valencia, were known to be the major conspirators behind the rising. Vicente, Manuel and Mariano Bertrán de Lis had, from shortly after the Aranjuez insurrection, raised their own private ‘army’ of five hundred paid men, mostly huerta smallholders, to support Fernando VII’s cause and to begin a popular anti-Napoleonic rising in late April. That rising had not taken place, but their private militia was still in existence. Moreover, they had a couple of city councillors, a lawyer, a doctor and an army captain from the small garrison of six hundred-odd soldiers, in their group of progressive Fernandistas.