

At a more prosaic level, the popular classes were deeply affected by a persistent rumour that swept the country from the moment of the French army’s invasion: it had brought in its baggage train thousands of manacles to seize the young and force them into Napoleon’s army in the north of Europe. While the rumour was unfounded, the dread of conscription into the Emperor’s army was one of the most powerful fears that mobilized the lower orders. Aware of the rumour’s potency, and before setting a foot in Spain, the new French king issued a proclamation denying that Spaniards would be conscripted into the Napoleonic army; but it made no difference.

A fundamental distinction between the different risings lay in the balance of military to civilians. In almost all the insurrectionary cities, a few junior military officers were among the conspirators; but in garrison towns like Cartagena, La Coruña and Badajoz, the military (or naval) forces assumed a particular importance, as their relative weight on the post-rising juntas showed. In the others, civilians, though usually able to count on the support of at least part of the local military, were pre-eminent. No military forces rallied to repress the main risings.

Of the major risings, three – Oviedo, Valencia and Zaragoza, none of them with important garrisons – were civilian led and organized; four, where the presence of garrisons was marked – Sevilla, La Coruña, Badajoz and Valladolid – were civilian–military affairs; and one – Cartagena, the great Mediterranean naval base – was a garrison-organized insurrection.

### THE CIVILIAN RISINGS: OVIEDO, VALENCIA, ZARAGOZA

Prior planning, hostility to the authorities who temporized with the French, the Fernandista need to prevent the risings from getting out of hand, popular agitators, and the people’s seizure of arms, were in differing degrees essential to almost all the civilian-led risings. Oviedo, the capital of Asturias, was a prime example of planning. A group of Fernandista commoner elite who ‘formed a real revolutionary committee’ organized the coup on the night of Tuesday, May 24, and the formation of a supreme junta early the following day,5 after nearly two weeks of popular commotion. Among this group of Fernandistas were the senior Oviedo judge, two government officials, the Oviedo arms factory purveyor, the local postal service head, an artillery commissioner, a military officer, two cathedral canons and a number of private individuals; only one titled noble joined the group.* The decision to stage the coup on the night of May 24–25 was quite deliberate; the group’s determination to control events equally evident in that the conspirators had earlier joined with the old authorities to pacify the crowd for fear of a popular rising. In Valencia, which rose a day earlier but only formed its junta two days later, the same preoccupation was patent. Two agitators, armed with plentiful money, raised the crowd and ensured that it remained orderly.

In all of these risings, the existing authorities – as a rule represented by captains general and audiencia magistrates – tried to quell the revolt and were the insurrectionists’ first enemy. In Oviedo, for example, where a fortnight separated the start of popular commotions, which even the Fernandistas wanted controlled, and the actual ‘controlled’ insurrection, the news on May 9 of the Madrid May 2 rising and subsequent repression, saw an indignant crowd shouting ‘To arms! Death to the French! Revenge for our people vilely assassinated!’, and setting off for the audiencia to demand the orders the authorities had received from Madrid. The magistrates stalled, and the people, who included a large number of vociferous women, threatened to break down the doors. Amidst utter confusion, the principality’s procurator general, a known Fernandista, demanded the orders in the name of the people who were to be praised for their understanding that ‘the monarchy and the nation’s freedom and independence are endangered’. Still the magistrates havered. Seeing the orders in one of the chief secretary’s coat pockets, the procurator took them and showed them to the crowd, saying that he would read them aloud in the Campo de San Francisco; and there having done so,† he tore them up. He then told the people to remain orderly, respect the constituted authorities and not to insult, directly or indirectly, anyone. He formed the armed into street patrols and ordered their leaders to inform him immediately of any incidents.6