

the flag be flown … and a cannon salute fired. Immediately I issued orders for this to be done. Then they demanded that the people be armed, and to hand over the persons of Filangieri and Biedma [the previous captain general]. I refused to accept this, and I told them I had only sufficient arms to defend the city and that I would give them out, but not to women and young girls. They could be sure, I said, that they would always find me at their head even at the cost of my life, and that the generals were the king’s loyal vassals … Convinced, they began to break out in cheers for the governor.42

Alcedo returned to the captain general’s residence where to his great surprise he found himself alone. Filangieri and all his guests had escaped across the garden at the back and into the nearby secret door of a friary. Then, as Alcedo relates,

the people again became infuriated by the news that on Murat’s orders muskets were being embarked on a warship at El Ferrol for America. They invaded the residence and smashed all the glass, tore the paper from the walls, broke to pieces all the furniture and made off with many things. From there they went to the artillery park where they seized all the arms. I assured them that the muskets being embarked for America would be unloaded and that the Regiment of Navarra would be ordered to return from El Ferrol; tired at last and heeding my persuasions, they quietened down.43

Despite the military governor’s admonitions, it was not only men of all ages but women and children who armed themselves from the store of forty thousand muskets. ‘And those who seemed dubious about arming themselves were obliged to do so by the women.’44

A blacksmith, one Francisco Conde, now launched a rumour that manacles were being readied on the French consul’s orders to take conscripts off as captives to France. This caused a new disturbance, which was only subdued when Sinforiano López, the saddler, led the people out in a procession carrying a portrait of Fernando VII, and to the usual vivas! and huzzas.

The following day, all the Coruña authorities met in a provisional general junta to resolve what to do about the commotion which had ‘inconvenienced the authorities’ and led to a ‘critical situation’. With ‘the armed and riotous people outside the audiencia building’, the junta noted that

the people continued to remain firm in their ideas … that it was in the Nation’s best interests to defend the Fatherland, Religion and Liberty which the French wanted to violate and that they were prepared to die and to kill whomever opposed them.45

The junta’s statement was signed by General Biedma who, along with Filangieri,* had earlier sworn loyalty to Fernando VII. The old authorities, when they turned coat, were not always easy to sweep aside.

Nonetheless, as a result of the risings in La Coruña and a day later in the capital, Santiago, Galicia as a whole, with its deep sea ports dominating the Atlantic to the west, with its borders adjoining Asturias and Castilla la Vieja to the northeast and east, and with Portugal to the south, was ensured for the Fernandista cause.