

However, they confronted a formidable military opponent in the captain general of Castilla la Vieja, General Cuesta, who had been appointed to the post shortly before by Fernando VII, and was as opposed to a rising as the majority of the old authorities. He did everything he could to stifle it, issuing a proclamation on May 21 calling for public tranquility throughout the region of his command. The population should remain ‘quiet and prudent’.56

A week later, on May 29, he wrote in a letter to the León town hall, which fell in his territory, to advise the town councillors that he accepted the Bourbon renunciations of the Spanish throne ‘under the pact recognizing our independence and that Spain will not be dismembered [i.e. not have part of its territory annexed to France]’. This, he argued, was in the nation’s best interests, aware as he was that ‘all sensible Spaniards and lovers of their fatherland’ shared his views.

However, there are many amongst the vulgar who are incapable of reasoning and who, I must suppose, are unfortunately seduced by some malevolent and rebellious men … who allow themselves to be swept blindly into an insurrection … But who would lead us in such an event? … Do they do not take into account that their own leaders would come to dispute the supreme leadership, and take us into civil war?57

Cuesta’s opinions were no worse – and certainly no better – than those of the majority of the old authorities. Only four days later, however, he found himself at the head of the insurrection which finally broke out at three o’clock on the afternoon of Tuesday, May 31:

a crowd of all classes of persons went to the Plaza Mayor and in front of the town hall began to shout Viva Fernando VII! Death to the country’s traitors! They demanded a general obligatory enlistment without distinction of estates to defend the homeland, the issuing of all arms in the city, and the appointment of a leader whom they could obey. The city councillors, who were in meeting, agreed, and the four thousand people who had gathered went to the captain general’s residence and repeated their demands.58

Cuesta refused to do more than issue the two hundred and fifty muskets the French army had left behind on its march to Portugal the previous year. Even so, the people were roused to action, placing guards at the royal gates, the town hall entrances and the captain general’s residence.

They seized various carts without waybills loaded with cotton and arms en route for Madrid, and merchandise of people they considered suspect, allowing no one to leave or enter the city unless their good conduct was accredited. Those coming from outside they questioned. They detained postal couriers and took them to the town hall to declare the purpose of their arrival.59

Though they hid their traces well, some influential people were behind the demonstration; but of only one individual – and then not a socially high-placed person – was there any precise information. This was a butcher who had made a small fortune as a purveyor of meat to the city, one Pedro García known locally as Perín. At the time of the insurrection he was ‘one of the persons who distinguished himself most in favour of fatherland and nation’.* The presence of a well-to-do city purveyor was not surprising: these were generally well connected to town hall authorities responsible for ensuring the city’s food supplies and enjoyed an influence beyond their ordinary status. The Valencia purveyors, Bertrán de Lis, were the main organizers, it will be recalled, of the rising in the Levante capital.