

Blazquez Prieto, an ecclesiastical judge, and a town councillor whom the captain general’s assembly had appointed to pacify the people, made for the plaza Real where they had been informed a crowd had gathered. There the judge found ‘a large number of men and women, none of whom, because of their station in life, I recall recognizing’.

Their cries of Viva la Religión! Viva el Rey! Death to the traitors! and similar things was indescribable. The men were mutinous, but the women appeared no less than raging Furies … The task [of calming such a crowd], under the burning sun was hard; but after an hour and a half it was beginning to bear fruit when a small column of soldiers, wearing their barracks uniforms – some armed with musket and bayonet, others with only a musket or sword – accompanied by drummers and regimental flags, advanced in quick step, followed by many of the crowd whom I and my companion had just calmed.52

Shortly, it became known that a French courier had arrived in the town. This set alight new rumours: the captain general was preparing to hand over Badajoz to General Kellerman, commander of a French occupation division a short distance across the border in Portugal. The people invaded the captain general’s quarters; he escaped by a secret door and made for one of the city’s gates, La puerta Palmas.53 But the mob traced his steps and he was forced to take refuge in the gate’s guardroom. A number of garrison officers hurried to the scene to try to contain the infuriated crowd of ‘young women, soldiers and civilians’ who were demanding his head. To no more avail than Torre del Fresno’s last-minute plea of his patriotic sentiments and readiness to relinquish his command. Hardly had he finished speaking than he was run through the back by a soldier’s iron-tipped stave.54 The mob dragged his body through the streets and dumped it at the door of his quarters.

Little less than three weeks earlier the captain general had been the city’s hero. His proclamation calling on the population to arms in defence of Madrid’s May 2 rising had led to his acclaim. With the exception of General Solano, the real force behind the proclamation, no other top-ranking military commander had come out in support. Dismayed by the experience, Torre del Fresno and Solano, captain general of Andalucía, delayed in giving their immediate support to the rising; and both met the same fate at the hands of their own troops.

The assassination brought the Badajoz commotion to an end. That evening, a junta was formed, nearly two-thirds of whose members were army officers. This proportion was only exceeded on the junta which arose from the most military of all the insurrections, Cartagena. Though justified by the two towns’ military and naval importance, their juntas demonstrated the military’s willingness to intervene directly in their country’s political affairs.*

*

Astride the main line of communications between France and Portugal, Valladolid was a crucial strategic city in Napoleon’s plans. There the Spanish military were ‘the motor of the people’s insurrection’, Hilarión Sancho, a well-placed eyewitness, confided in his diary of 1808.55 In this case it was the Household Guards who had accompanied Fernando VII to the French border on his fatal passage to Bayonne to meet Napoleon and who, on their return, had been ordered to remain in the Castilian capital.