

It was then that the rumour began to circulate that a French column under General Dupont had reached Andújar, a short march from Córdoba, on its officially announced sortie to Cádiz to relieve the blockaded French fleet, and which was due to pass through Sevilla en route.‡ The rumoured proximity of French troops helped to arouse the Sevillian population.

The risings in La Coruña and Badajoz owed less to planning than to prior agitation, and the authorities’ failure, on May 30, to honour Fernando’s feast day. This was traditionally celebrated – in honour of Fernando III, the canonized thirteenth-century king who had taken Córdoba and Sevilla from the Muslims – by a cannon salute and the royal flag raised on battlements and castles. In 1808 the ceremony took on a new significance as a visible indication of whether the authorities’ allegiance lay with Fernando VII or with the French-dominated regime in Madrid. Failure to observe tradition aroused the people’s anger and afforded the opportunity (or the pretext) to begin an insurrectionary movement.

La Coruña’s authorities had been successful in keeping down any previous unrest – using displays of force, where necessary. But the news of the Madrid May 2 events and the almost concurrent arrival on May 10 of a French staff officer to report on the ‘state of Galicia’s public tranquility’, which had been interpreted by locals as spying on the city’s defences, arsenals and military preparedness, had excited their spirits;32 and agitation among military officers, especially those of the Regiment of Navarra, incensed by the French seizure of the Pamplona fortress, had been intense.

*

In Sevilla, May 26, although unconnected with Fernando’s saint’s day, was a date propitious for a rising – indeed it had probably been chosen deliberately, being a public holiday when the people were in the streets.33 As Friar Giles y Carpio recorded in his diary:

On May 26, the day of Our Lord Jesus Christ’s Ascension, it being five of the clock in the afternoon, a revolt or insurrection began amongst a multitude of people in the Plaza de San Francisco. The people made for the house of Sr. Saavedra, lieutenant captain general, to ask for arms, but they did not find him at home. They then went to the artillery depot to seek arms but it was shut.

After going to another lieutenant captain general’s house without finding him at home, they returned to the square and then set off in search of the asistente.

And they found him, and they told him to send an order to the military commandant to hand out arms to all … to defend the city against the French canaille. This he did. It was the people, accompanied by troops, who were the cause of this rising.34

Acting apparently outside of the main Fernandista conspiratorial group, the merchant and known smuggler Tap y Nuñez and a couple of accomplices raised a cavalry squadron by liberal use of money.* The sound of soldiers in the streets rallied the people who had risen earlier and who now joined what was becoming a ‘revolution’. Accompanied by troops and a growing crowd, Tap’s associate, Antonio Esquibel, hastened to the artillery park, where the commandant handed over the keys without ado and retired. Esquibel claimed to have found twenty-six thousand muskets and a considerable number of light artillery pieces among much other war materiel. Having armed his civilian followers, he made the rounds of the nobility, farmers, bakers and innkeepers to demand mules to draw the artillery from the depot to strategic positions in the city streets.35