

Nonetheless, General Cuesta was the only captain general of the main risings to retain his post without suffering the humiliation of the insurrection electing another general to lead it or of being dismissed, let alone of losing his life. A staunch traditional monarchist, and one of the few surviving generals capable of commanding an army in the field, he would live to lead patriot arms to their only near victories in the disastrous year of 1809.

### AN ARMED-FORCES RISING

The Cartagena insurrection was planned by naval and military officers who, like most of officialdom throughout the country, had known of the royal abdications for a good week or more before the Gazeta de Madrid published the official confirmation.66 The second senior naval officer, Lieutenant General Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros,* his adjutant and the colonel of the infantry regiment garrisoning the town, all known anti-Godoyistas, were the masterminds.67

An enormous crowd was awaiting the Gazeta’s distribution outside the post office and broke into huzzas for Fernando VII and shouts of ‘Death to the French!’ when the news was read out. Immediately cockades were distributed – evidence of some prior organization – and the crowd made for the arsenal, where artillery and naval officers handed out arms and munitions; and the six thousand garrison troops (out of a civilian population of seventeen thousand) immediately sided with the insurrection, giving it an experienced armed force which made it practically invincible locally.68

The newly armed, who included the dockyard and arsenal’s craftsmen, immediately began to make their power felt, but without any apparent thought of taking power themselves. Instead, they rounded up the captain general, the governor, and municipal authorities, often under threat of armed force, and made them report to the town hall; there they obliged these authorities to declare publicly for Fernando. They had little choice if they did not want to see the situation turn dangerous. Once the ceremony had been performed, to the usual huzzas for Fernando, the crowd invaded the council chamber and determinedly demanded that couriers be sent immediately to the captain generals of Granada and Valencia, and the corregidor of Murcia, the provincial capital, informing them of the rising and asking them to report on their cities’ situation. The authorities agreed. Meanwhile, other armed people were fetching all the military and naval commanders of the garrison, the city’s chief magistrate and the postal administrator. When all of these were present, they effectively formed a general junta. But on several accounts it was a very exceptional junta in comparison to those of other risings. In the first place it was almost totally composed of military and naval officers – seventeen out of a total of nineteen members – and not a single cleric amongst them, a situation shared only with Oviedo. Whether the conspirators had instructed trusted insurgents to round up all the authorities was unknown. If they had not done so, then the junta had been created de facto by the people – rather than as was usual by the Fernandista leaders. Furthermore, it was by no means yet freed of dependence on the armed crowd. So tumultous was the populace in its demands and petitions that the junta could not quieten them. One demand was insistently repeated, however: that Cartagena’s captain general, Francisco de Borja, rescind the orders he had received from Madrid the day before to dispatch the Spanish Mediterranean fleet from Mahon in Menorca to the French port of Toulon. (Many of the insurgents had relatives aboard.) His agreement calmed the crowd and they accepted the junta’s proposal that two of its members act as the people’s spokesmen, and the remainder vacate the chamber. The junta then got down to the business of planning the town’s defence and calling volunteers to the colours, who were to be armed and trained by the garrison. At 4 a.m. it suspended its session until the following morning.