

Even had he conquered the Bruch pass, General Schwartz would have had to return to Barcelona. General Duhesme, the overall French commander, had realized that risings in Gerona, Figueras and other places on the highway between the Catalan capital and the French frontier threatened his lines of communication with France. Not to lose direct and unimpeded contact with France was obviously more important than ventures into western Cataluña and beyond. Barely had the second French column under General Chabran reached Tarragona than Duhesme ordered it to return to Barcelona. Nonetheless, while setting his sights on Gerona, Duhesme could not overlook the humiliation of the Bruch defeat. To teach the ‘brigands’ a lesson, he ordered Chabran to take the pass with a column of five thousand men and several artillery pieces a week after Schwarz’ defeat. Again the local sometent rallied; and this time they were joined by Spanish military forces – mainly a Swiss mercenary regiment of five hundred men outfitted as villagers89 – who gave them a trained backbone; equally important, they had four cannon served by regulars. The outcome was a second victory for the Catalan forces, who sent Chabran retreating back to his base with 450 casualties, and the loss of a regimental eagle. This double victory – plus Duhesme’s defeated attempt in the face of the population’s resistance to take Gerona on June 20 with eight thousand troops but insufficient artillery, and his subsequent withdrawal to Barcelona – seemed to augur a great future for the Catalan popular struggle.

From the start the risings in Cataluña had been more widespread than those in the rest of Spain. Popular disturbances in Barcelona at the end of May led to no more, because the considerable number of French troops in the Catalan capital made a rising there impossible. In consequence, the Catalan insurrection in the last days of May and the first week of June was more territorially dispersed than elsewhere. The Catalan region rose rather than spreading outwards from an insurrection in a major city within it. This resulted in a dispersion of local powers which was shortly overcome by their incorporation into a central organization or regional junta.

But there were also other significant differences. The organized labouring classes, through their guilds, took a more active role than elsewhere in inciting or inflecting the insurrection, recalling their traditional role in civic affairs.* In Gerona, for example, it was four master craftsmen, in the name of their guilds, who called for a rising. After hearing the previous day that Figueras, close to the French border, had revolted, a saddler and harness maker, a corder, potter and carpenter, demanded on June 5 that a town-council meeting be called immediately to hear the workers’ determination to defend their town against the French. And although, as was seen in Manresa, the guilds were conservative – usually in the sense of attempting to protect the artisans’ position within the Old Regime – their participation opened a political space for guild representation in a number of local juntas. This and the sometents’ determined resistance made the Catalan insurrection in general more truly ‘popular’ than in the rest of the country. Amongst the Fernandistas who did play a role, local merchants were far more important than elsewhere.*