

On the following day, June 1, the crowd, once again of ‘all classes of persons’, demanded of Cuesta that he order a general enlistment, and appoint a leader; he agreed only to the enlistment of volunteers – the authorities’ general ruse to control a dangerous situation – and that these should return to their homes. Believing that they were being taken in, the crowd grew infuriated and made for the Inquisition’s tribunal where they asked for and received the standard of the Faith which was carried through the streets by three priests to the people’s huzzas of ‘Viva la Fé!’ [‘Long live the Holy Faith!’], ‘Religion, King Fernando and the Fatherland’, and to the sound of church bells ringing out the alarm.60 Under the pressure, Cuesta began to shift ground and ordered a general enlistment.

The people remained suspicious, however, and when on June 2 an edict was published calling for tranquility and on everyone to return to their homes, the insurrection took a more direct course: men brought out their firearms and attached royal cockades to their hats, as did many women, and the criminal courts released all their prisoners.61 The people felt the authorities were deceiving them. To concentrate theirs and especially Cuesta’s mind they erected the gallows in the main square to the cry of ‘traitors’, and shouted threats to make gallows birds of the authorities if they continued to dupe the people ‘by turning everything into a delusion’.62

The gibbets had the desired effect. Cuesta gave in. The proclamation of Fernando VII as king of Spain and the Indies was rapidly organized, with the town councillors on horseback leading the way, followed by the Household troop and a cavalry battalion. Behind them marched the insurrectionists and a company of merchants, ‘richly dressed in new uniforms’; an empty carriage and a coach symbolically brought up the rear. Under a canopy on the High Court’s main balcony, Cuesta and the Court’s magistrates solemnly proclaimed Fernando as king and the procession returned to the town hall where the royal standard was hung from a balcony.63

Reluctant to the end, however, to concede power, Cuesta allowed an Armaments and Defence Junta to be formed but limited its attributes strictly to military affairs. He permitted similar juntas in only those cities of his territory which had intendentes.64

By the evening of the insurrection 1500 people had been armed. Commissioners were sent out to surrounding villagers and shortly two thousand or more villagers had come in and were despatched up the road to Palencia from where the immediate French threat was expected.65 On June 9 Cuesta led all the regular troops at his disposal and an enthusiastic but untrained and undisciplined rabble of armed civilians out to meet the French army; in a pitched battle at Cabezón three days later he lost the bulk of his force. Inexplicably, he drew up the greater part of his men with their back to the river Pisuerga instead of using the river as a natural protection. Many of his soldiers drowned trying to escape the French forces.* It was the first setback for Spain’s patriot forces which in Cataluña, La Mancha and Valencia were almost simultaneously winning their first victories over Napoleon’s generals.