

Finally, as elsewhere, the rising spread outwards beyond the city gates. On receiving the news, Murcia, the provincial capital, rose the following day, forming a supreme junta for the whole region. The rising thus spread throughout the kingdom of Murcia which covered at the time a large territory reaching north to Albacete in La Mancha and to the southern borders of Cuenca, westwards to the limits of Granada and Jaén, and eastwards into parts of what are today Alicante.

By mid-June, the major urban insurrections had spread to the whole of Spain, with the exception of those areas directly occupied by the French: the Basque country, Navarra and La Rioja, with a long thin tongue of territory stretching south through Burgos and Madrid to the Tajo river; in Catalonia, solely the occupied capital, Barcelona, had not risen. The juntas of Galicia, Sevilla and Valencia had joined Asturias in asking England for aid in arms and money.

The Spanish insurrections were both influential on, and supported by, similar risings in Portugal. The Galician junta had sent emissaries to the Spanish army regiments stationed in Oporto, as part of the Fontainebleau treaty agreement, calling on them to desert their post and join the Galician insurrection. On June 6, they did so. Five days later, the northern province of Tras Os Montes, bordering on southern Galicia, rose, followed soon afterwards by the whole of northern Portugal. It was not many days before the Portuguese insurrection spread southwards into the Alentejo and Algarve. On June 16, the southernmost town of Faro rose. General Junot, the French commander and governor of Portugal, found himself in Lisbon surrounded by an insurrectionary countryside.

*

Predictably, the risings were heralded by strange natural phenomena. In Zaragoza, a cloud was said to have formed in the shape of a palm tree over the chapel of the Virgen del Pilar, one of Spain’s two patron saints, and a palm branch over Valladolid’s plaza Mayor two weeks later.* In a sense the urban lower ranks’ insurrectionary passion was a response to the dispassionate reasoning of their earlier enlightened reformers, many of whom nailed their colours to the new Bonapartist mast. In other words, the insurrection was the common people’s Baroque victory over the Enlightenment. A counter-revolutionary insurrection: was this another Vendée? In part, yes – and the comparison did not escape some Spanish participants;70 defence of king and religion were common to both. And one social stratum, the artisanate, was prominent in both. But the dissimilarities were greater than the similarities. In contrast to the largely peasant counter-revolutionary mobilization of 1793–1796 in one part of western France,71 the Spanish insurrection was urban in its origins and national in its scope. Though both risings were directed against the ‘usurpers’ of the absolutist monarchy, the French reaction was against its own revolution, while the Spanish insurrection was directed against a royal favourite and his administration, which had begun the process of temporizing with an ally’s invasion, and the abduction of their king whom the people had been instrumental in putting on the throne. If in the first place the Spanish insurrectionists sought to replace the authorities whom they suspected of pro-French sympathies, in the longer term they were prepared to fight the greatest continental power not only in defence of their king and religion but also for the patria, the ‘fatherland’ in differing senses of the word: in the geographically national sense, but more often in the geographically restricted sense, the regional or literal homeland (the villagers’ habitat or patria chica). In both these meanings, the word contained social and moral connotations: the identification with monarchy and religion, familiar customs and traditions, and a sense of continuity over sudden and radical change, generally feared to herald conditions prejudicial to the labouring classes’ interests.† Popular insistence on ensuring a general enlistment, almost always ‘without exception of classes’, meaning that nobility and clergy were not exempt, demonstrated their readiness to fight, but only on the basis of equality of sacrifice.