

Enraged by Duhesme’s proclamation, Manresa inhabitants on the following day – market day – publicly burned in the township’s main square all official paper stamped with the duque de Berg’s (Murat’s) name to the usual huzzas of Viva la Religión! Viva Fernando! Viva la Patria! Local Fernandista notables took over, defying the governor who had issued an order for all inhabitants to return to their homes and await further orders, although resorting to the usual stratagem of agreeing to volunteers joining up. The immediate appearance on a balcony overlooking the square of two parish priests, wearing Spanish Bourbon cockades, was indicative of the authorities’ fear that the burning might lead to much graver events.75 The clergy could well be needed to contain the people’s ardour.

The Fernandista elite met rapidly and agreed on the need to set up a junta. But they were careful to enlist the guilds in their enterprise, trusting in them to control the lower ranks, and calling on them to hold immediate elections to appoint their delegates. The Fernandistas were not mistaken. The general tenor of the guild leaders’ sentiments can be judged by one guild’s unanimously voiced decision to ‘obey our king, Fernando VII …’ and to join together with the other guilds to establish a junta to govern during his absence. Their main demand was to

defend the town, the Principality [of Cataluña] and the whole Kingdom [of Spain] from the hostilities and violences which the Emperor may attempt or carry out. The guild’s will [is] solely to defend Religion, King and Country.76

That same evening Manresa’s leading notables and authorities complied. Apart from the governor and town councillors, the defence junta included some of these public figures, as well as priors, canons and other ecclesiastics, and the guild representatives. The junta sent out members to the villages in its district and to townships beyond, informing them of the events and calling on them to raise their local ‘home guard’ or sometent. Though within the month this conservative junta was in serious trouble from some of the Manresa populace who assassinated the governor and three gaoled resident Frenchmen, and tried to take over the junta in the common people’s name, it acted with dispatch in terms of the town’s defence.

After many days of popular agitation, Igualada rose on June 4. Its 950 textile workers were suffering the same economic conditions as in Manresa. The town also had over five hundred landless agricultural day labourers among its working population. The rising was led by Antonio Franch, a well-to-do merchant in his thirties who had recently inherited a ‘respectable patrimony’ from his deceased father and subsequently became a noted guerrilla leader in the region;77 and Joseph d’Olzinellas, another man of wealth.

From the last days of May, the Igualada townsfolk had begun to agitate and the authorities had had their work cut out to contain them. On June 3, the town councillors’ minds had been concentrated by the people’s armed appearance in front of the council chamber, waving a paper – either Duhesme’s decree of June 1 or the officially stamped paper in the duque de Berg’s name, to which apparently they set fire, as in Manresa – and by their threats of more drastic action if their will was not met.