

There was, however one very good material reason why the rural population remained silent and not easily distracted from their daily concerns: in the fields stood the best wheat crop of the first eight years of the new century. Here was relief at last from the dearth of 1803–05. This bounty had to be harvested and the grain brought safely in. Neither the smallholder nor landowner, neither the small renter nor farmer, was prepared to see this crop jeopardized by a war which would inevitably leave the countryside short of hands; it was to this without doubt that the Orihuela statement referred in ‘excusing’ those engaged on agricultural tasks from publicly affirming their patriotism.*

In conclusion, it was highly doubtful that the countryside would have risen when it did had it not been for the urban population’s action. That the latter’s insurrection was supported by the rural – basically for the same three reasons: religion, king and fatherland – saved the passionate urban response from isolation and almost certain destruction.

### THE RISINGS’ POPULAR OPPONENTS

The Pedroches de Córdoba situation illustrated one often-overlooked aspect of the rising: the insurrection was not as unanimously supported as is still sometimes put about. In a couple of Aragón townships, for example, dissidence was openly expressed. In Borja, Major General Eugenio Navarro, who had turned down the command offered to him by the original Zaragoza conspirators, criticized at a town council meeting what had taken place in the Aragonese capital ‘and spoke long in his attempt to dissuade attendance at the Aragonese Cortes’ summoned by Palafox. Other military men appeared to share his view. The local authorities viewed the rising ‘with small honour and coldness’, reported a Dominican friar who argued in its favour at the meeting.107

In Mallén, seven of the township’s more distinguished inhabitants gathered each afternoon on benches in the main square and spoke openly of the fact that ‘they would be happy to live under the Napoleonic code’ and that it was ‘foolishness for Zaragoza and other provincial capitals to rise, that they should remain tranquil and obey the Grand Duke of Ber [sic], and a thousand other expressions against Spain and the patria’. The effect, wrote an informant, was to ‘cool down the inhabitants’ ardour to take arms against the French’.108

Some individuals were even more violent about their beliefs. In the small Catalan village of Conques, near Tremp, Juan Castejón, ‘a man of very bad conduct’, spoke out openly in Napoleon’s favour and uttered ‘outrageous’ expressions against Fernando. He said he hoped the French would take all of Spain.

He is a man without religion, the proof of which is his saying that religion and clergy are unnecessary, prejudicial to Spain. He has terrified the people by telling them their cause cannot win … threatened many villagers with a loaded fowling piece, and insulted them … His son, who is barely twelve, is no better. He threatened to hit the senior town councillor, broke María Pla Casada’s head, and pointed a pistol at Buenaventura Puig. (Letter from the Conques senior councillor, Pedro Cudés and two others to junta superior de Cataluña, November 16, 1808).