

Of another isolated Extremaduran village the Rev. José Blanco left an indelible account. He had escaped from Madrid in mid-June with a friend in a mule-drawn wagon to return to his native Sevilla to take part in the patriot cause, and had reached Almaráz, which was famous only for its bridge which spanned the river Tajo. Here he was informed by the local magistrate of what had happened when the village rose. The inhabitants, armed with whatever weapons they had been able to collect, including sickles, pickaxes and similar farming implements, had gathered in front of his house. He came out to meet them and asked what they wanted.

‘We wish, Sir, to kill somebody,’ said the spokesman of the insurgents. ‘Someone has been killed in Truxillo; one or two at Badajoz, another at Merida, and we will not be left behind our neighbours. Sir, we will kill a traitor.’ As this commodity could not be procured in the village, it was fortunate for us that we did not make our appearance at a time when the good people of Almaraz might have made us a substitute on whom to display their loyalty.103

The outlandish reasons for this village’s rising confirmed the emulatory nature – in this case only for the worst of reasons – of many villagers’ willingness to participate in and support the urban insurrection. There was nothing here (if Blanco’s report was to be believed) of rising for religion, king and fatherland.

To return to the Mediterranean coast, Orihuela, in southern Alicante, was exceptional in being the first to rise in the province. Closer to Murcia than to the city of Alicante, news of the Cartagena insurrection reached Orihuela on May 24.104 An economically declining agrarian town of about five thousand inhabitants with a high percentage of hidalgos and clerics, impoverished artisans, smallholders who had been reduced to renters or landless day labourers and beggars, and where an old landed oligarchy was bitterly engaged in fighting off the attempts of nouveau riche farmers to take political control, Orihuela could fairly be said to be suffering the Old Regime’s social crisis.105 Even one of its past splendours, the university, had been closed down. In the words of one of the local town hall’s penmen, the inhabitants’ ‘faces gave clear proof of the real feelings which had taken hold of their hearts. They were like lambs which have lost their mothers, like lions which feel themselves maltreated.’

Unable to resist the authorities’ apparent acceptance of Napoleon’s takeover, the people’s silence was at last broken by news of their king’s abdication, and on the afternoon of May 24 they issued a proclamation claiming their sovereign, ‘with a barely contained desire for vengeance on the usurpers and in defence of religion and the fatherland …’

Our decision to take up arms was ratified by a growing number of inhabitants, although some of those engaged on their agricultural tasks were, in accord with the orders given, excused from doing so.106

The most notable element in these various local reports was the townships’ original silence and lethargy in front of the extraordinary events which were shaking Spain. Whether or not these towns’ inhabitants were silent because they were repressing a rage that only their faces mutely expressed it is impossible to know; but if it were so they were not prepared, before their own capitals had given them the lead, to act on their anger, as did the Catalan inhabitants of similar-sized towns. But then, the latter included large numbers of artisans and unemployed workers who were facing an immediate French military threat, something that none of the almost totally rural or coastal towns’ inhabitants cited here had yet to confront.