

This village is tranquil. The revolution which has begun in Sevilla and Córdoba, and this village’s invasion by tumultuous troops, leaves us defenceless, without means to resist. We can only flee, be devastated or suffer death rather than be disloyal to [Murat’s] sacred orders …98

However, after the Córdoba junta’s formation and its formal declaration that the Bayonne royal abdications were annulled, the Pedroches authorities changed their minds and adhered to the patriot cause.99

Such a case was exceptional. But villagers’ impassivity in the face of events was notewothy. In Jerez de los Caballeros, Extremadura, at the news both of the May 2 Madrid events and Fernando VII’s subsequent forced abdication, the local priest tried in vain twice to arouse the villagers to action, even to the point of scattering money at their feet.* A random sample of the reaction of other villages and rural townships illuminated their uncertainty about the wisdom of rising, though it must be observed that the reports came from Fernandistas determined to prove their own patriotism and loyalty.

Fortuna, an isolated township of some 4,500 inhabitants about thirty kilometres north-east of Murcia, existed largely on self-subsistence agriculture. The provincial capital, under the impact of the Cartagena rising of May 23, had itself risen the following day and set up a junta on May 25. Three days later the Fortuna justice wrote to the Murcia junta that the inhabitants had had to ‘suffer in silence’,

until last night when the storm broke with a fury that all the town’s respectable people could hardly contain. It still continues but with welcome signs that it will shortly be directed … to that indispensable fire of valiant self-sacrifice to the last breath.100

If Fortuna villagers had ‘suffered in silence’, the relatively isolated town of Villanueva de la Serena, about thirty kilometres from the Madrid–Mérida highway in Extremadura, had not ‘moved’ until in the first days of June a cavalry captain dispatched by the Sevilla junta reached the town with the ‘laudable aim of raising the people against the common enemy’. This was all the more remarkable because, on receiving the news of the Madrid May 2 rising, the township had ordered a general enlistment of men and arms in its district to go to the capital’s aid. The town’s inhabitants swore not to obey any of Murat’s orders. All of this Villanueva had done on its own initiative, ‘without receiving any superior orders’. In May, then, it seemed as though the town’s district ‘desired nothing more than to break with the French’.101 Although the Extremaduran capital, Badajoz, rose on May 30, Villanueva remained passive until the Sevillan emissary aroused them, and the authorities, in his presence, swore allegiance to Fernando VII. On June 5, in response to a request from the newly installed Badajoz junta to send all available horses – possibly the first communication Villanueva had received from it – the town assembled in three hours sixty-one horses and riders who were sent off to the regional capital.102