

The Catalans had not yet turned their sense of a distinct identity into a political project. This would take another three-quarters of a century. In the Convention war only fifteen years previously, seemingly aghast like most Spaniards at the French Revolution’s regicide, they had fought alongside the rest of Spain – indeed, had been forced by the Spanish state’s weakness to organize their own war – against the revolution which threatened their country. It was their homeland which they were defending from a foreign invader. They had ignored French revolutionary siren calls for Catalan independence. Generally respectful of the established religion, and of their priests, the population appeared to have accepted the latter’s slogan of religion, king and fatherland as the banner under which to fight the revolution.

Now, in 1808, they confronted a second, and even more dangerous, French invasion of their country. By guile, Napoleon had advanced further than the French revolutionaries of 1793–1795, seizing their capital, Barcelona, and their fortresses and citadels. The lower orders, who had always suspected French military intentions, were as outraged by Napoleon’s treachery as the inhabitants of regions as yet unaffected by the French invasion. And the Catalan anti-Napoleonic propertied and lettered classes were united by a sense of their historic past. This stratum of society ‘scrupulously respected the hierarchical edifice of existing Catalan society … rejecting the introduction of any innovations which lacked historical foundation … and aspiring to recover their freedoms which had been suppressed a century earlier’.92

As the Catalan social and landed ‘hierarchical edifice’ rested on much the same principles as in the rest of Spain,* these men had no difficulty in identifying their general interests with those which were being defended elsewhere: the Old Regime’s socio-economic status quo. If anything, the Catalan junta was even more conservative than others, ‘sacrificing on many occasions questions of principle and desirable and useful reforms to safeguard the established order’ and ‘remaining always faithful to the [Spanish] common cause’.93

In 1808, then, Catalan sentiment was not experienced as dividing the country from the patriot cause; the ruling elite, by a combination of repression and appeals to Catalan ‘patriotism’ saw to that. As a result, no region was more loyal to the Spanish anti-Napoleonic war. And when there were doubts about this, they as often came from Castilians as from Catalans.

*

The Bruch battles were signal victories, for sure. But of the multiple myths the victories engendered,* one was particularly double-edged: Catalan volunteers, with the most rudimentary of arms had, under the Almighty’s protection, conquered by their bravery the victors of Austerlitz, Jena and Friedland. The Grande Armée, in other words. Nothing was further from the truth. The Grande Armée had not yet made its appearance in Spain. At the first battle of El Bruch, the imperial troops were raw Neapolitan conscripts and Swiss; Schwartz was a minor general, whose biographical details do not figure in the majority of Napoleonic sourcebooks, and whose major claim to fame was probably his defeat at El Bruch. And the remainder of the imperial army was mainly made up of raw French recruits. But the myth brought a confidence which both inspired resistance and led to despondency when the imperial armies began to impose their will.