

But on one aspect of the conflict all could agree: it was a defensive war. If Napoleon restored Fernando VII to the throne – renouncing his brother as the new monarch – withdrew his troops from Spain, relinquished the right to intervene in the country’s domestic affairs and left reform of the country to Spaniards well aware of its need, there would be no cause to fight. In other words, Spanish resistance was aimed at restoring the country’s situation to a moment prior to Napoleon’s intervention in its affairs.

These aims limited to Spain alone were not usually understood by Britain, Spain’s new ally in the anti-Napoleonic conflict. Britain was involved in a struggle with France for world hegemony, and Napoleon’s overthrow was essential to this. Patriot Spain was concerned in ridding itself of the Bonapartist regime which the Emperor had imposed; what happened to Napoleon once this objective had been achieved was of far less concern to it. These different objectives led to many of the misunderstandings between the new allies.

The one Spanish objective – the important exception unmentioned in most of the early manifestos – which did bear on global interests rather than the merely domestic, was defence of the South American colonies and of Spain’s monopolistic trading rights with them. The more perspicacious patriots were fearful of both the Emperor’s and Britain’s intentions on this score, for both pressured Spain to open its colonies’ ports to their trade.

We do not believe that [Bonaparte] is unaware that if he persists in his plans, the absolute loss of our’s and all Europe’s patrimony in the Americas will be inevitable. New, different dynasties will arise [in the colonies] which will become formidable and independent of their former metropolitan powers. Britain will acquire a preponderance over them that it has never previously enjoyed.11

The anonymous writer’s perceptions were correct. To counter Napoleon’s growing hold over Spain in the first half of 1808, and his feared control over her vast Empire, Britain planned to break Spain’s colonial power by fostering and aiding independence movements in her colonies.12 Britain’s last-minute evacuation to Brazil of Portugal’s regent in 1807 was already bringing her considerable advantages in the right of direct trade with Brazil when the regent threw open his ports to ships of friendly nations. In short, Napoleon’s direct intervention in Spain was inciting Britain’s direct intervention in her colonies; Spain had nothing to gain and everything to lose from either of the world rivals’ policies. The Spanish insurrections, however, changed the scenario. In place of the Spanish colonies, Britain’s immediate intervention would now take place in metropolitan Spain and, to an even greater extent, in Portugal.

### THE JUNTAS AND BRITISH AID

The maritime juntas closest to Britain or Gibraltar – Asturias, Galicia and Sevilla – were those whose deputies reached London the earliest. The two Asturian deputies set sail on a British privateer on May 30. When they reached the Admiralty on June 6, astonished officials had to search a map for Asturias’s location; but a few days later the deputies had secured the British government’s agreement to provide financial and military assistance to the region. In the meantime they were wildly applauded and feted wherever they made public appearances. Soon Britain had signed similar agreements with two other insurgent provinces, others following on later.13