

Two other social groupings, new not to the exercise of power, but to the direct tasks of government, were also important in reinforcing the juntas’ authority: the military and the clergy. The military overall occupied nearly one-fifth of the first junta seats; and their presence was even higher in garrison towns where they had participated in the rising. They were obviously necessary to plan their region’s defence against the imminent French attacks which the juntas feared – rarely did they imagine being able to go on the offensive to pre-empt the attack – and in non-garrison towns junta members were often military engineers and fortification experts.

The clergy’s share of junta seats was the highest after municipal and provincial government representatives, nearly a quarter of the total number on average. They included the whole gamut of the Church hierarchy, from archbishops to parish priests who, unlike the religious orders, had in general adopted a vacillating attitude towards the change of monarchy. It was rather the religious orders which were violently opposed to the Bonaparte regime, as they had been to the French Revolution, for the friars foresaw their own demise under a Napoleonic monarchy; the abolition of their friaries was equivalent in their minds to the demise of religion in Spain, and so to the demise of Spain tout court. However, it was not they who formed a clear majority of the clerical representatives, but canons who occupied a high rank in the traditional urban hierarchy of authority.

Finally, the juntas co-opted about ten percent of their number from local elites, almost exclusively from the upper and lower nobility. Nearly half of these were grandees and titled nobility. The top ranks of nobles thus made a return to power from which half a century of absolutist Bourbon reformism had virtually excluded them by turning them into court functionaries.

Those absent from the juntas were equally significant. Merchants, for example, formed a paltry two percent overall; on average, the labouring classes fared slightly better – nineteen members, compared to the merchants’ thirteen, out of a total of 597 – but this was mainly due to their relatively high participation in Catalan and Valencian juntas.

### SUPREME AUTHORITY:
THE ASSUMPTION OF POPULAR SOVEREIGNTY

Very shortly, if not immediately, the juntas took to themselves the title of ‘supreme’ in their regions (with the exception of Sevilla which, voluntaristically, declared itself supreme over all of Spain and the Indies), and assumed sovereign powers. They justified the latter on two overlapping political scores. In the first place, their ‘legitimate’ king’s (and his family’s) forced and thus illegal abdication, and the juntas’ readiness to fight to restore Fernando VII to his throne, allowed them to assume a delegated sovereignty in the king’s name until he should return. This, however, was the lesser of the two political justifications. The major reason, with its historical roots in the widely accepted theory of the ‘social pact’* was that, deprived of a ruling monarch, sovereignty devolved on the people; and by rising, the people had demonstrated their sovereign will, which, subsequently, they had bestowed on the juntas. The effects of this legalistic sleight of hand depended on the interpretation given to the word sovereignty: in the absolutist view, which predominated despite the political rupture, the people had risen for Fernando VII, and the juntas’ sovereignty was no more than temporary until the king should be restored to his throne.† In the minority progressive view, the risings had instituted a popular sovereignty (that’s to say, the sovereignty of those with property qualifications) subject only unto itself and the need for a constitution.