

The British sent out a boat to take the sub-lieutenant aboard, and he was soon transferred to the naval commander’s ship. To his surprise and joy he was shown letters and dispatches for Romana which the British had no way of conveying to the general. He was asked if he would take them ashore. Though a known deserter, he volunteered and was landed by night from an English cutter on the coast of Langeland. He made his way to his commandant and from there, in disguise, to General Romana. As he later wrote:

Everyone was amazed by the news. I myself did not know what was happening to me. The dispatches were all directed towards the objective that Romana save the division and return with it to Spain, because the present circumstances demanded it. Orders were issued to assemble the troops, and to the English to gather their ships.

Romana entered into secret negotiations with Rear Admiral Keats, the British second-in-command, on the means of taking his troops off and returning them to Spain. Meanwhile his forces on Langeland took over the island and, on August 9, the Spanish commander seized Nyborg which became the main concentration point. Four days later, nine thousand troops were evacuated by sea to Gothenburg where they awaited the British transports that would return them to Spain. Some five thousand Spanish troops were left stranded, captured by French forces to whom Romana’s second-in-command, Juan de Kindelan, had betrayed his superior’s plans. Surrounded by a large enemy force, one Spanish cavalry captain shot himself rather than surrender.25

### THE JUNTA ARMIES’ SOCIAL COMPOSITION:
VOLUNTEERS AND ENLISTED MEN

The regional juntas immediately summoned all men between the ages of sixteen and forty-five to enlist. It was a measure initially taken as much to get the insurrectionary crowd off the streets and under military discipline as to increase the existing army’s strength; yet, when it came to the latter, popular enthusiasm for the cause was such that more than sufficient recruits enlisted to make good the heavily depleted strengths of most regiments, and enough men still remained to create new volunteer regiments.

One of those who volunteered was Francisco Guervos, a young Granada cathedral violinist. Little over eighteen months earlier, when he was conscripted to serve ten years in the pre-war army, he had paid a substitute to take his place; but as soon as war was declared, Guervos had not doubted a moment about joining the colours.

I desired only to sacrifice my peace and quiet, my interests, and what is more my life, as any man must who loves his country and freedom. And the principles of religion which have been engraved on my heart similarly induced me to volunteer.26*

It was the only time in the war when volunteers flooded into the army in great numbers. Where did they come from? Young educated men like Guervos were obviously a minority in a country where seventy percent of the people were engaged on the land. It stood to reason that the majority of recruits must be villagers. And since day labourers and smallholders together formed the predominant rural population, they could be expected to have provided the greater part of those who enlisted. But the extremely rare enlistment rolls which record trades, occupations and professions, albeit only partially, reveal that this was not so. Two such rolls from Morón de la Frontera in western Andalucía and Igualada in Cataluña reveal that artisans who made up little more than four percent of Spain’s active population, enrolled in equal numbers to agrarian workers. A third such roll from the city port of Alicante shows artisans providing the same number of men as service workers, the two largest groups to enlist. In all, over 2,000 recruits were recorded in the three rolls which were the only examples of their kind brought to light in the research for this book.†