

The significance of the word ‘revolution’ was if anything more complex, since all and sundry came to use it, giving to it their particular shades of meaning. As a catchword, ‘our Glorious Revolution’, for example, could be interpreted as each wished. For the absolutists, revolution maintained its original sense, a complete turn of the celestial sphere to its original starting point:3 as the heavens turned in their orbit, things changed so that everything might finally remain unchanged, with the sole exception of disbarring ‘despotism’ for ever. But to the progressives it signified a political (but not social) revolution: an institutional rupture with Bourbon centralism and its organs of power, and their replacement by new forms of government.*

The rupture with the Old Regime’s institutions was a fact. In the insurrectionary zone, only four of the eight captain generals, the most important regional authority, remained in place, indeed alive, after June. And these had lost most of their former power to the juntas. The highest body in the land, the Consejo de Castilla, had been delegitimized because it had temporized with the French. Other leading institutions – the audiencias and intendentes, for example – continued to exist but their de facto role was shortly reduced: the rupture went deep but it was not a revolutionary break.

Apart from the need to fill the power vacuum, the rapidity with which the juntas were created responded to the Fernandistas’ need to be seen to be forming ‘patriotic’ local governments satisfactory to the people in order to ensure the existing social order’s continuing stability and to put an end to any further street commotions that might threaten it. To reinforce the fact that the risings had not changed, and would not change, the social status quo, many of the more important juntas selected their members as representatives of the Old Regime’s three estates (expanded to include the military, and sometimes various classes of commoners, as in Valencia’s case). Needless to say, the juntas’ members were, with only one known exception, appointed, not elected; the need for speed made any other procedure unviable, the leaders claimed.

The major juntas then were the direct outcome of the risings, but they were not a direct emanation of these. That is to say, they did not generally spring from or – even less – represent the insurrectionists in the streets, and if they made a gesture towards doing so, it was only tangentially and in minority form. This disjuncture between rising and junta was determined by the insurrections themselves, in which the people had either yielded leadership of their movement to their Fernandista social superiors or the latter had to all intents and purposes controlled the rising from the start.

Having succeeded in displacing if not overthrowing the old authorities, the Fernandista leaders however lacked the conviction of their own political weight to govern local and regional affairs. They needed, they felt, a good dosage of the old authorities in the juntas for these to command their regions’ respect. It made no difference that these authorities had until yesterday obeyed Madrid’s orders and done their utmost to prevent the rising: their titles were known and respected and would ensure that the juntas were obeyed. All the juntas considered the presence of local royal officials and municipal councillors indispensable – to such an extent, indeed, that these on average together formed the largest single block – forty percent – of members of the first juntas created.*