

Confirming this change were other, equally striking, figures. Only twenty-six men from Morón and Puerto Serrano claimed that they were the sole support of an aged or widowed parent, a cause for not serving which previously had outnumbered physical infirmities. Those using this excuse in the Morón enrolment fell to one-quarter of the usual pre-war rate. Puerto Serrano’s quasi-messianic mass enrolment, if not patently duplicated by the Morón men, was certainly replicated in their attitudes and actions.

Whatever their trade or employment, it was the sixteen to twenty-five yearolds who dominated in the district enrolment. They made up eighty percent of the volunteers – the sixteen to twenties alone accounted for just over fifty-six percent of the total – and one-third of the enlisted; of the latter, however, the older men between twenty-six and forty-five formed half, no doubt because many were married with children and expected to be exempt; bachelors and widowers without children were always the first to be conscripted.

A Catalan comparison – Igualada volunteers’ enrolment from May to the beginning of October – illustrated similarities and differences with Andalucía.29 After an initial enrolment of some three hundred men, of which no record remained – and was perhaps never kept – the Igualada volunteers were almost equally divided between land workers and craftsmen, with a scattering of other trades or professions. Four out of five were twenty-five years or less of age; one in two was between sixteen and twenty. These proportions were identical to those of Morón district; but there the similarity ended for, like the rest of the volunteers, the two youngest age groups represented an equal division between agrarian and artisanal occupations, with a handful of students in a very distant third place.

Though chronologically the first, the last of the three enrolments which recorded trades and profesions took place in Alicante, the Valencia region’s major port, on May 29, 1808 when seven hundred and five volunteers joined up.30 The roll again showed the weight of artisanal representation, though here it was shared with men in various types of service employment rather than with agrarian workers. Bricklayers, shoemakers and cobblers were, as so often, at the head of the artisans, closely followed by ropemakers, as might be expected of a port.*

As the only urban roll, it reflected a far wider occupational spectrum than the others. Royal and municipal employees, domestic servants, a rather large land transport sector, and for the first time in the three rolls, members of the privileged classes, including five nobles, an estate-owner, and a priest. In the service sector, which matched that of the artisans in size, there were merchants, agents, brokers, dealers, retailers and salesmen, as well as shopkeepers and their assistants. And following them, tavern-keepers, bakers and breadsellers, water carriers and cacao grinders, a wig dresser, a butcher, three blood-letters and a couple of surgeons.