

Social protest, as will be seen in a later chapter, did not stop there. It was clear, however, that many of the lower ranks were not unduly impressed by the juntas’ pretensions to sovereignty. Either there was a king who ruled or there was not, and the juntas, whatever they proclaimed, were not an annointed king. In Valencia, the people’s opposition to their junta led to the most violent reaction to be witnessed in the Spanish peninsula.

### VALENCIA: THE JUNE 5–6 MASSACRES

Two days after the initial Valencia rising, the Franciscan friar, Juan Rico, whom the insurrectionaries had elevated to the role of their tribune, and a lawyer of the Bertrán de Lis faction, presented a list of junta candidates to an ad hoc meeting of the old authorities. Prior to this, Vicente Bertán de Lis, one of the insurrection’s major planners, had sought out intendente Aspiroz, who had opposed the rising with all his strength, and insisted that he attend the meeting and form part of the proposed junta. Bertrán de Lis was quite clear on the need for the latter to be made up of ‘notables of all the classes, together with the [existing] authorities and the captain general’. He gave three reasons to support his argument:

Our [the insurrectionary leaders’] sole value to the people today is that we represent their feelings; but if we alone govern, at the first setback the people will drag us through the streets, ride roughshod over us. No one knows us in the province and even less so in Spain. It is important that the country sees that there is no opposition to the rising in order to encourage the other provinces to do the same … And in the junta we will govern in the authorities’ name.49

At that moment, the Valencian insurrectionaries had no idea that other provinces had risen; they could not even be sure that their own province would follow their lead. Thus the idea of presenting a ‘united front’ to the country had its logic; but underneath it lay another: non-members of the political elite, the unknown, could not be seen to govern. Institutional authority was sacrosanct, even if those who filled its posts had done their level best to quash the rising. But this was now to the insurrectionists’ advantage. As a result of the old authorities’ previous hostility, they had fallen hostages to the rising’s success: their positions, even their lives, depended on it. So, Bertrán de Lis could argue, his group of reformers would govern in the authorities’ shadow. The argument had only one flaw: the group could govern only as long as it controlled armed power in the streets.

As finally formed, the fifty-member junta included all the old authorities. The urban population and the huerta smallholders were highly discontented. Rico himself recalled how the people ‘remained … in a perpetual state of commotion, distrusting the old authorities’. A riotous crowd frequently approached to the very chamber where the junta was meeting.

The people’s distrust and suspicion that they were not being led in good faith and with a sincere desire to defend and save the country, grew daily stronger, and their tumultous conduct became so frequent … that not even the junta’s most active and energetic measures could contain them.50