

Frenchmen: You have been forced to shed your’s and your sons’ blood to enslave Europe for a non-French family which reigns in various European nations in your name but not in France’s interests …

Italians, Germans, Poles, Swiss and all the others who form the so-called French army: why do you fight for your oppressor who has deprived you of all that you hold most sacred? For him who has forced you from your homes, depriving you of your wordly goods, your wives and children, your fatherlands which he had previously enslaved? Your ally and generous friend, the Spanish Nation, invites you to desert the flag that is enslaving nations and to enlist under ours that has been unfurled for the most just cause the world has known. 31

Attempting to drive a wedge down the fault-line of national sentiment was innovative but insufficient, the junta realized, and it went on to offer all deserters the same reward: when the war ended victoriously for the Spanish cause, as was to be hoped, they would receive land to cultivate and live peacefully for the rest of their lives ‘in the midst of a nation which loves and respects you’.

The proclamation brought some immediate results from General Dupont’s expeditionary force encamped around Córdoba which, though undefended, it had just seized and sacked in tremendous manner. Many more potential deserters, the Sevilla junta had learned, were fearful of changing sides lest they be assassinated, given ‘the people’s professed hatred of all Frenchmen, and other foreigners, who do not clearly speak our language’; and the junta was forced to remind these people that they must treat deserters with every consideration for not only did the latter diminish the enemy’s strength and increase their own, but deserters could provide invaluable information on the enemy army’s movements.32

The example set by the Sevilla junta was soon followed by Asturias33 and subsequently developed in greater and more extensive detail by the Junta Suprema, the central government formed by the regional juntas in the autumn of 1808. Proclaiming that one of the most powerful ways of making war was to ‘debilitate the enemy without loss, indeed even increasing our own forces in the process’, the Suprema issued a proclamation in four languages to the ‘Germans, Poles, Dutch, Swiss and Italians’ serving in the Napoleonic armies calling on them to desert. Each soldier who crossed the lines would be paid two hundred reales, and three hundred if he brought his musket. Cavalrymen would be paid extra for their horses. Once again it warned Spaniards to ‘protect and welcome’ all deserters.34 Finally, the Suprema published a second proclamation, now in five languages (Spanish, Italian, French, German and Latin – the latter in the hope that, lacking a Polish translator, Catholic Poles would be able to decipher it), stressing the Napoleonic armies’ defeats in Portugal at the hands of the British, and the fact that Austria, Russia and Turkey had declared against France.