

Why were craftsmen the largest group to enlist? The answer in part depended on another question: why were day labourers so remiss in joining up? For had they enlisted in anything like their proportion of the population, they would have largely outnumbered the craftsmen. The answer to the latter lay without doubt in the excellent harvest standing in the fields. The landowners pressed them not to answer the call, fearing that the first good wheat crop of the century would remain unreaped in the fields. And probably the labourers themselves saw the opportunity of finally securing a better day wage – or at least more day wages – by staying to reap, gather and thresh the good crop.

No other social group outdid the craftsmen in producing five times the number of recruits compared to their population percentage. Journeymen were evidently anxious about the future. While masters would always be needed, the journeymen had no certainty of becoming a master within the restrictive guild system which the latter manipulated to their own ends; and if the guilds were abolished, as seemed likely under the new Bonaparte king, the journeymen would be left to sink or swim, and most likely the former, in a world that no longer offered them any protection. In other words, they were fighting against sinking to the lowest depths of proletarianization.

However, one sector of the agrarian world enlisted in almost the same proportions to their numbers in the population as the craftsmen: tenant farmers – the labradores.* These were local men with the knowledge and means to farm considerable areas of land, which they rented from the nobility or large landowners. The inflationary spiral of agrarian prices, however, was bringing in new labradores – often not men of the land at all – who were prepared to pay higher rents in order to make a quick return on their investment, relegating the old labrador class to unemployment and a decline in social status. Like the journeymen, though at another level, the old type of labrador confronted the same dilemma, and saw their future as fighting to preserve the past; the new labrador as fighting to become the owner of the land.

The question of fervour to fight can be resolved without recourse to simplistic or rhetorical assertions, as has usually been the case in Spain for the last two centuries. The enrolment demonstrated quite clearly that very few recruits sought at that moment to escape army service as they had done pre-war and would again do later in the war. Both the Puerto Serrano and Morón contingents displayed surprisingly few infirmities or physical defects which would prevent them from serving. Less than twenty infirm men in all compared to the three to four and a half times that number proportionately in some prewar enlistments. Hernias had been the most common rural affliction adduced to escape military service in the past; there was not a single case among the Morón enrolled, and only two among the Puerto Serrano recruits. (Poor eyesight, deafness, lameness, loss of an arm, heart trouble, and one case of epilepsy – that was the total range of infirmities.)