

If you continue to serve under Napoleon’s banner you will die as hated as the French who brought you here to fight Spaniards who were and are your friends … Already thousands of your men have joined our armies and find in them a friendly welcome and a reward for adhering to our cause.35

Within the nine months from the Sevilla junta’s proclamation to the last of the Junta Suprema, there had been a notable change in approach. No direct appeal was any longer made to French soldiers to desert, only to the non-French serving in the Napoleonic army. The latter were obviously the weak link, the most likely deserters on whom all attention had to be focused. The French as a nation, rather than the ‘tyrant’ Napoleon who had earlier to be distinguished from the French people, had become the enemy. The ‘national wedge’ was no longer used; national languages replaced it. Deserters were no longer offered some idyllic and distant recompense, but an immediate financial reward. The war was no longer painted in terms of the justice of the Spanish cause (though the Suprema did not doubt it) but in terms of emphasizing the dangers of continuing to serve Napoleon, whose army had suffered defeat. The Emperor was no longer invincible: international alliances against him were again being formed. The Spanish war in this sense had become internationalized, less an idealistic struggle than a life or death conflict dependent no longer solely on its own strengths but on factors external to it.

The Junta Suprema’s claim that ‘thousands’ had deserted was a propagandistic effect; but there could be no doubt that from 1809, one of the harshest years of the war, a growing number of non-French in the Napoleonic army in Spain began to desert.* Some of those who deserted – but only a few – joined the Spanish guerrilla. Forty Russian deserters were recruited by Brigadier Mariano de Renovales in his initially successful resistance movement in the Navarese Roncal and Ansó valleys during the spring and summer of 1809. What their immediate past had been, where they had been taken prisoner by Napoleon – one can suppose at Austerlitz or Friedland – or why they had joined the French army, Renovales did not relate. He had gathered them together ‘from the many who had deserted the enemy army’. He was full of praise for their bravery. ‘Their fidelity to our cause and the valour with which they fought was inexplicable’, he wrote.36

### POPULAR DISAFFECTION WITH THE JUNTAS

Despite their ardent patriotic proclamations, the juntas did not arouse great popular fervour. Their war measures, particularly new taxes, were inevitably responsible in part. For the first few months, the wealthy (often redeeming their past passivity or overt hostility to the rising) contributed liberally. As an institution, the Church was a large donor: in Galicia, for example, it contributed six and a half million reales in the first six months of the war.37 But donations came from all sectors of society. In Extremadura, one of Spain’s poorest regions, more than two and a half million reales were contributed between June and the end of December, 1808, by townships, ecclesiastical institutions and most notably by individuals.38 But these donations soon dropped off: the cost of maintaining the war effort affected the latter’s pockets too directly, and they were unwilling to finance it from their private wealth, some of which had suffered losses because it originated in the Bonapartist-controlled zone.