

Morón de la Frontera was an important town of some ten thousand inhabitants, the administrative centre of a large agrarian district sixty-five kilometres south-east of Sevilla. Here, between May 30 and June 13, 1808, 772 men were enrolled, of whom just under half were volunteers.27

The enlistment itself took a dramatic form. On Monday, May 30, Morón found itself invaded by nearly ninety men who had walked from the small, isolated village of Puerto Serrano, thirty-five kilometres to the south, and who clamoured to volunteer. The Morón authorities had taken no steps at that point to begin an enrolment, but their hand was forced by the new arrivals, nearly half of whom were aged between sixteen and twenty. That day, only one man from Morón – job and age unstated – volunteered. On the Tuesday, an even larger group arrived from Puerto Serrano. By the end of the day 194 men had volunteered and twenty-five had enlisted, all but eighteen of them from Puerto Serrano. The proportion of sixteen to twenty-year-olds had risen to little short of sixty percent.

On Wednesday, June 1, the last large contingent from Puerto Serrano arrived: seventy men, all but half a dozen of them volunteers. On this day the Morón inhabitants began to stir: twenty men volunteered and six enlisted. However, this was small beer compared to the effort made by Puerto Serrano: in three days this village of about one thousand inhabitants – one tenth of Morón’s size – had enrolled 311 men, only one less than those eventually enlisted by Morón township. Moreover, the overwhelming majority of the Puerto Serrano men were volunteers, almost all of them between sixteen and twenty-five years old.

Who were these men? Regrettably, the Morón scribes, as was official custom at the time in regard to the lower orders, did not generally think fit to note their trades, recording those of only thirty-nine of the Puerto Serrano volunteers and ten of their enlisted. Taking both categories together, there were twenty-six day labourers and four smallholders, who outnumbered the remainder by thirty to nineteen. On this very small sample, the supposition that day labourers and smallholders formed the majority of volunteers and enlisted men appeared to be borne out. And in the Morón district as whole (as opposed to the township alone) land workers slightly outnumbered artisans.

The Morón township enrolment of 312 recruits was less inexplicably dramatic, but more socially instructive, since 182 had their trades or professions listed, seventy percent of all those in this category.28

Here, artisans, who formed just over ten percent of the inhabitants, provided half the recruits. Day labourers, who formed nearly half the population, provided just over ten percent of the enlisted. Only one Morón man in just under seven volunteered – compared to Puerto Serrano’s five volunteers for each enlisted man. Not a single Morón landowner’s name appeared among those whose professions were recorded; and only seven master craftsmen. It was their journeymen or occasional apprentice who answered the call. Again, as in Madrid during the May 2 events, journeymen shoemakers, cobblers and bricklayers formed the majority, followed by barbers and carpenters.