

the street to the Carmen gate was thick with people, most of them armed, and among them women, old men and boys. Now and again a group would break off to make for the Portillo or Engracia gates. Others were returning carrying the wounded on their shoulders. Women were rushing towards the cannon with drink for the gunners. Spirit reigned in every face …10

The leaderless defence soon found its own leadership. A number of men – among them two or three of the small vineyard owners who had raised the city barely three weeks earlier – effectively organized the gates’ defence. Santiago Sas, a highly respected priest in the Portillo quarter, rallied his parishioners and distributed arms to defend their neighbourhood’s gate, while an engineer major raised a force of men, women and priests to take up position on the rooftops and balconies of nearby houses to fire on the attackers. Another small vineyard owner, Josef Zamoray, and a cavalry major, Mariano Renovales, led the defence of the Engracia gate. ‘Victory or death!’ was the order of the day.

Three times the French attacked and entered the empty cavalry barracks embedded in the city wall; and three times, in hand-to-hand fighting with cold steel and small arms, the people, who were waiting, annihilated them. At the Carmen gate, the French charged to within a few metres of the Spanish cannon; several of the gunners fell by their pieces. Civilian volunteers leapt forward to replace them, reloading the guns and beginning so rapid a fire that the French infantry was forced back with heavy casualties. Still unrelenting in his determination to take the city by storm, the French commander observed the depleted defence at the Engracia gate, and ordered his Polish cavalry to charge. Pennants flying, a squadron leapt over the silenced guns and dead gunners at the gate, and swept into the city, brushing aside the few men who tried to halt them.

The cry went up, ‘the Engracia gate is undefended!’ The Polish cavalry turned into the widest street on their left which led to the plaza del Carmen and on to the cavalry barracks and the plaza del Portillo by the gate of the same name. But as they charged along the roughly cobbled street, from rooftops and balconies musket shot and stones rained down on them, killing a number. In the Portillo plaza, the Polish cavalry lost all sense of direction. In scenes reminiscent of the May 2 rising in Madrid’s Puerta del Sol, men, women and youths rushed at them with knives, hatchets and clubs. The squadron’s remnants and riderless horses galloped back the way they had come to escape the inhabitants’ fury. This was the furthest the French storm reached.11

At the gates, artillery munitions were running short. Without being given any apparent orders, women, youth and children went round houses and artisans’ workshops throughout the city demanding scraps of iron, broken glass, pieces of old clothing to put as a wad between the charge and the cannon shot, rags to bandage the wounded, candles and fuses, bread and drink for the people who were fighting …