

Calvo was brought back to Valencia, tried and executed in the Inquistion’s prison at dawn on July 4, and his body publicly displayed in the plaza de Santo Domingo. The junta created a tribunal of public safety, the first (but by no means the last) of its kind on the patriot side. Three of the existing audiencia magistrates sat on the tribunal which wreaked a formidable vengeance on those accused of taking part in the massacres: twenty-four smallholders and three urban labouring men were executed for the Valencia slaughter and a further twenty-three for the massacre of the French in Segorbe. Apart from these another eighteen were executed for the assassination of the Ayora governor, his two maidservants and another man during the rising. In all then, sixty-eight people. The royal road to Madrid, beside which the executed were buried in shallow graves, became virtually impassable owing to the stench of rotting corpses.60

### CONTROLLING THE PEOPLE

The French massacres reinforced the power of the old authorities on the Valencian junta. Unjustly, the latter held the Bertrán de Lis progressives responsible for the slaughter. It was this sort of terror that, from the start, all the juntas were determined to avoid. The crowd had played its necessary part in the insurrections, but now it must subside again into its customary subservient and passive role. Even the majority of progressives would have agreed, heirs as they were to the eighteenth-century absolutist reformers who had feared nothing more than popular risings. As a result of the massacre, on July 21, two months after the rising, the Valencia junta ordered the gallows raised and the garrotte publicly displayed throughout its region, because of the ‘threat to public tranquility in all places’.*

Almost unanimously, the juntas’ first proclamations included the demand to restore public order, threatening strong measures against any who disobeyed. The Sevilla junta stated that

cavalry and infantry patrols will prevent any public gatherings, which only serve to foment false and prejudicial ideas, instead of obeying the orders of those in command to enlist and organize for the defence of the fatherland … Cafés, taverns, wine shops, billiard rooms and all other places of public entertainment will without exception close at the evening church bell to prayers for souls in purgatory. Any infringement of this order will be punished in proportion to the offence.61

Ten days later, surprised that there were still some ‘evil people who disturb the social order … and foment sedition which only causes irremediable harm’, the Sevilla junta found itself obliged to repeat its original proscriptions in even stronger language. It would severely punish

all persons who, in whatever manner, oppose or obstruct [the junta’s] just plans. In consequence it forbids any gatherings, meetings or secret conventicles which, by an orderly government, must always be seen as suspicious. People are forbidden to go in armed groups through the streets … or to join together to search rooming houses, treating their occupants as criminals.62