

Palafox and his intendente, Calbo de Rozas, put the city on a war-economy footing. All property belonging to French residents and Spaniards who had fled and did not return within a week was ordered to be confiscated. One wealthy woman was imprisoned and her property taken over.40 Food prices were fixed at their June levels, and temporary flour mills, worked by mules, and bake-houses were set up. The inhabitants handed over their wheat and flour which was made into the inferior bread habitually given to soldiers and prisoners, and which rich and poor alike now ate out of solidarity with the defenders.41 The well-to-do were asked to make donations and give shirts for the many shirtless defenders. The shortage of gunpowder had to be resolved by ingenuity: every mortar and pestle was requisitioned and powder was ground by hand, while groups of civilians, including women and children, carefully washed the streets to find unprocessed saltpetre and sometimes even scraped it off the walls of buildings. The charcoal required was provided by burning hemp, which grew in abundance around the city. 42 Even so, only a small proportion of the enormous quantities of gunpowder needed could be produced; and a powder factory was set up in the safety of a mountain village seventy kilometres to the southeast.43 An edict ordered village justices to round up and return the volunteers and regulars who had deserted in the first days of the siege.44

Martial discipline had never been one of the civilian defenders’ strong points. After over a month of confronting death by the hour, dissension arose between military and civilians, some of the latter maintaining that courage and the will to fight justified any indiscipline, and accusing the military of cowardice. The latter responded that bravery was insufficient if unaccompanied by military skills. Both arguments neglected an important cohesive aspect of the civilian–military defence: the civilians’ will and courage to fight infused the soldiers with the sense of an all-out struggle; the military gave to the civilians a disciplined backbone and the knowledge of how best to organize the defence.

Nonetheless, there was open talk of treachery to explain the defenders’ little success in raising the siege, and of the Valencia junta’s lack of patriotism in not sending its army on the Ebro to the city’s aid.* A spy mania became widespread. ‘The people began to distrust everything, making them so suspicious that they overlooked no measures to discover traitors.’45 No one could stop a mob seizing the military governor of the Cinco Villas, who was confined to prison on suspicion of communicating with Murat, and shooting him as a traitor at one of the gates.46 But a beggar who aimed his musket at people to secure alms was sentenced to a severe flogging.47

Only a volunteer captain’s quick reaction in arresting a priest he overheard trying to raise men to assassinate the French being held in custody for their own safety prevented a repetition of the Valencia massacre. Arraigned before the junta, the priest pleaded for his life, alleging that an aide-de-camp had ordered the assassination. Both men were held in custody, and the guard on the French was doubled.