

It is impossible to describe the haste with which people worked … Soldiers and civilians who had been gathered to defend the batteries ran towards them or fled. The constant ringing of the bell and the shaking of the earth heightened the horror: and it seemed as though there was nowhere to save one from death.37

That evening, July 1, Palafox at last returned, entering through El Arrabal on the northern side which still provided free access to the city. He brought with him thirteen hundred men and a few cavalry he had managed to raise after his defeat at Épila. He took command, establishing his headquarters in the San Francisco friary close behind the main southern defences.

At 3 a.m. on July 2 the French guns at last fell silent after one last crescendo of firing in unison. This heralded the beginning of a general French infantry assault. Six columns were moved up under cover of darkness, and before dawn launched their first attack. They were repelled. But the danger was greatest at the Portillo gate where fifty defenders had been killed or wounded. On a rumour that the French had entered the city, civilian reinforcements rushed back to the market square. The last gunners alive, who were working frantically to set their huge twenty-four pound cannon, saw the line of French infantry, with fixed bayonets, advancing at the double, and fled. At that moment, a young woman who was bringing drink to the gunners, sprang forward, seized the still smouldering linstock from the hands of a dying artilleryman, and fired the cannon, which was loaded with grapeshot: the carnage among the closely packed French infantry was devastating. Standing on the gun carriage the woman rallied the civilian defenders to the gate’s defence; and they poured musket fire onto the French who wavered and then turned in retreat.

Agustina Zaragoza’s bravery had saved the gate. Catalan on her mother’s side, she was ‘about 22 years of age, a handsome woman, of the lower class of people’, as one upper-class English observer who met her in Zaragoza baldly put it.38 Another gave a more flattering picture: ‘Her countenance is mild and feminine; her smile pleasing and her face altogether the last I should have supposed to belong to a woman who had led troops through blood and slaughter and pointed the cannon at the enemy ….’39 Not surprisingly, she became the symbol of Zaragoza’s heroic defence, and by extension of the patriotic war.*

The battle raged for several hours; unarmed civilians, women again prominent among them, reloaded the defenders’ muskets so that they could keep up a rapid fire. French guns destroyed most of the earthworks, but not a single French soldier got into the city, though many died little more than an arm’s length from the Spanish guns. As a result of this latest failure, all the more surprising after his day and night bombardment, Verdier decided that only a regular siege could reduce the city; and he began the time-consuming business of digging parallel siege trenches, linked by short diagonals and zig-zags, so that his troops could advance under protection as close to the city walls as possible, and heavy siege artillery could be dragged up and set in specially dug batteries to breach the walls. But he had also to cut the city’s last link with the rest of Aragón, the northern road through El Arrabal, along which supplies of food and powder still reached the city. Under cover of dark and in the space of a single night, his engineers threw a flying bridge over the river, wide enough for a cannon to pass; and fighting now extended to the city’s northern side, making it nearly impossible to bring in further supplies.