

Their enthusiasm was so extreme that women of all ages and classes ran into the streets, and some took off their stockings to make sacks for the grapeshot and for the cannon wads others divested themselves of their outer clothes. And some even advanced to the batteries to cool off the cannon with vinegar and water. Their admirable and heroic ardour showed what a people is capable of when they possess a real love and enthusiasm for liberty.26

Only a fortnight earlier, the Diario de Valencia had written that ‘the public considers that the fair sex can have no part in this war until her humanitarian duties are called upon’.27 In all likelihood this was in answer to a statement from La Coruña reproduced two days earlier in the junta-originated newspaper, the Gazeta de Valencia, which had cast a very different light on women’s role.

Our revolution’s great work is due to the dash and courage of our Matrons who were the first to throw themselves into danger and to create a public spirit [of opposition to the French]. The people rose and the women in particular rode roughshod over everything, mistreating all the troops who came out in defence of the French government.28

Women in Zaragoza and again in Valencia proved that the ‘public’s idea of the fair sex’ was no more than a patriarchal myth. The Gazeta de Valencia eulogized their role in the defence. ‘Receive, you sensitive and loving beings, your country’s and our sex’s sincere thanks’, the paper’s report concluded.29

As in Zaragoza, there were individuals who played a particularly valiant role in Valencia’s defence. Miguel García, an inn-keeper, with a small group of companions – smallholders, by one account – made constant sorties from the city’s gates to harass the enemy. García had a horse shot from under him; a garrison officer gave him his, and he continued to skirmish beyond the walls.30

At eight o’clock in the evening the fighting came to an end. The inhabitants spent all night reinforcing the damaged walls and gates. But the French had suffered heavy losses. Without sufficient men or heavy artillery, and with a Valencian–Murcian division now threating his rear, Moncey took the only course open to him. Early the following day he began the retreat on Madrid. This time he choose the easier of the two roads via Almansa, where another defile made his force vulnerable to attack. Despite the junta’s urgent orders, the Valencia army commanders inexplicably made no serious attempt to cut off his retreat. The people could not be faulted for their distrust of senior officers.

In a postcript to the heroic defence, ten days later the Diario de Valencia published a curious notice: ‘those false and imprudent devotees who carried off the images and other effects which had been spared the flames of the Socorro church during the French attack, have not given notice of them. As things belonging to the altar and sacristy are missing, they are kindly asked to return them.’31 As in Zaragoza, there were local looters who stole religious treasure when the opportunity arose.