

On the eve of the great French siege bombardment which began on the night of July 31–August 1, Palafox announced that he had just received news from the Valencia junta of a great Spanish military victory in Andalucía. He had no further details and the defenders could not know that the battle of Bailén would shortly bring them relief. Before this, nearly two weeks of bitter fighting from street to street and house to house awaited them.

The bombardment, the worst the city’s inhabitants had yet had to face, continued until shortly before dawn on August 4. On the previous evening, the fifteenth-century hospital, which at that moment held over five hundred sick and wounded, as well as orphans and the insane, was repeatedly hit. The inmates panicked. Men and women volunteers – ‘abandoning all attention to their own property’48 – rushed to evacuate them; and patients of both sexes ran, hobbled or staggered into the streets in their hospital nightshirts with their bandages, crutches and splints. As more shells rained down and masonry collapsed, great numbers were killed, some literally blown apart. To add to the horror several lunatics escaped and ran shouting, singing and wildly laughing amidst the corpses. ‘Hell opened its gates that day’, wrote an eyewitness.49

Shortly after first light on Thursday, August 4, the French assault started, announced by the besiegers’ sixty guns firing in unison to cover their troops as they took up position. In a further six hours of bombardment, the heavy French siege guns smashed nearly three hundred metres of wall, and opened two huge breaches. Men and women defenders braved the enemy fire to carry up sacks of earth and cotton to try to fill them; to little avail because by noon the Spanish artillery was silenced, although sharpshooters were still firing from amidst the ruined walls. An hour later, Verdier gave the order to attack. French and Polish infantry rose from their siege trenches and charged. For the first time they succeeded in putting a foot inside the city walls.

But once inside they found that ‘each house was a citadel from whence there came such a hail of bullets as I have never seen before’, wrote the French commander in his report on the action.50 Verdier himself was wounded in the thigh, and Lefebvre again took command. The imperial infantry’s advance was slow – but it advanced. Long before this moment, by eighteenth-century siege rules, the defenders’ could have surrendered with honour. But if they fought on they must expect the city to be sacked: pillage, rape, murder, arson … If the inhabitants did not lose their lives, they were sure to lose everything else.

As his wound was being dressed, Verdier reportedly sent Palafox a message under a flag of truce, to which he received an instant answer.

(French) Headquarters – Santa Engracia. Capitulation.
Headquarters – Zaragoza: Cold Steel and War.*

The French commander gave the order for his troops to continue their assault. Storming houses, silencing their defenders, they advanced through a hail of musket balls, bricks, pots and pans and boiling water and oil – soon known to the French soldiers as ‘garlic soup’ – hurled down on them by the inhabitants. Before long, the attacking skirmishers reached the Coso, the city’s main thoroughfare. There, suddenly, everything went still. The defenders’ fire was silenced. Only the great bell continued to sound the alarm. Panic-stricken, the inhabitants were fleeing across the stone bridge to El Arrabal on the far side of the Ebro which the besiegers had been unable to take. They swept soldiers and civilian defenders with them in their headlong rush. Some shouted that the city had fallen, others threw down their arms, and many older inhabitants were nearly trampled to death in the crush to cross the bridge.51