

The news had got out: Palafox for the second time had left the Aragonese capital at its darkest hour. Guarded by a cavalry detachment, he had ridden off over the bridge with his staff officers and intendente, turning over the city’s command to the fusilier brigadier, Antonio Torres. ‘He saw, of course, that the city was lost’, wrote his elder brother, marqués de Lazán, later;52 so much then, it seemed, for ‘Cold Steel and War’. But there was at least a plausible pretext for his departure. Only a few kilometres from the city’s northern exit, a Catalan column of two line regiments and two to three thousand new levies had arrived with an enormous convoy of much-needed supplies; and Palafox had gone to join them.

On the northern end of the stone bridge, a young cavalry lieutenant stopped the mass exodus almost single-handed. Brandishing his sabre, he ordered a cannon dragged out and aimed at the bridge; the tidal flight hesitated as the people saw him lift the linstock to fire the gun; at that moment several Franciscan friars ran past him onto the bridge, bearing a crucifix aloft, and urging the people to return to their posts. ‘Is this how you defend the Faith and God’s cause?’ In a few minutes, the mass panic was ended; and as the people streamed back into the city those who still remained believed that the long-awaited reinforcements had arrived.53

It was now the military’s turn to rouse the civilians. Under a hail of fire and with only a bayonet in his hand, an engineer captain, Marcos Simonó, jumped onto an improvised cannon parapet. Seeing civilians gathered at the openings of side streets and in doorways, he shouted that they were cowards. To ‘defend their wives, families and fatherland’, they must come out and fight. But the civilians hesitated. Noticing several French soldiers emerging from a house, the captain cried out: ‘The enemy are fleeing!’ A number of civilian defenders ran to his side and put themselves at his orders …54

A small group of men, led by a friar, charged suddenly from a side street and fired their muskets at point-blank range at the head of a French column. They paid with their lives; but their suicidal charge was another signal of the defence’s revival. Heavy shooting broke out on the Coso; and barricades were again raised. A Spanish cannon opened fire along the thoroughfare; and soon more were brought up to sweep the Coso with grapeshot. Many of them were adorned with a red banderole which read in large letters: Victory or Death! The French, who a moment before had appeared on the verge of dominating the city, now found the tables turned. They could not advance down the barricaded side streets; and were exposed to sniper fire from the tops of houses when they sought cover. Shortly they were driven back by a charge of Spanish regulars and civilians. Fighting turned into house-to-house combat, the French often occupying one floor, the defenders the next; staircases had to be stormed one by one, and party walls knocked through in order to advance. No quarter was given in hand-to-hand fighting; ‘friend and foe all fought pell-mell and without order’. The streets were littered with the dead and dying. It was each for himself; armed only with a knife, a seventy-six-year-old carpenter attacked two French soldiers who were sacking a house after assassinating its inhabitants; he killed one and, seizing his musket, took the other prisoner. Another man crept between the dead and attached a rope to a French cannon; in the struggle the rope broke and the defenders were denied their prize. More successfully, Manuel Fandos, a surveyor of the Imperial Canal, and a few companions, undertook a lightning dash across the Coso, killing the French gunners, and dragging their cannon away to turn it on the enemy.