

The French were gradually driven back, maintaining advance strongholds only in the hospital and San Francisco friary on the Coso’s south side. At nightfall, these two buildings were the apex of the French-held area; the base was the three hundred metres of wall their siege guns had battered down. Joining the two, along Santa Engracia street, they held a tenuous hold. In seven hours of fighting they had suffered two thousand casualties – a high proportion for a siege army of fifteen thousand which had also to protect its lines and batteries, and attempt to close off the city on both banks. It was evident now that no rapid end to the struggle was in sight.55

Throughout the night besiegers and besieged worked to strengthen their defences. By morning, both sides had rough but continuous front lines, the defenders encircling the French, often with no more than a narrow street in between. Wherever there was a space, cannon had been brought up to sweep the street. To the defenders’ cheers and the sound of music, the marqués de Lazán, who had left the previous day after his brother, Palafox, re-entered the city from the north with a veteran battalion from the Catalan column and a few wagons of munitions. The French had not been able to hold the northern approaches to the city; in heavy skirmishing El Arrabal’s smallholders had forced the enemy off their land. The munitions arrived in the nick of time.

On August 5th there was not a single cartridge left, or the means to make them. In such critical circumstances, it was astonishing that, though they knew it, the people were not plunged into despair.56

Over the city there hung a pall of smoke. In the streets, the dead lay in heaps, unburied. The August heat was intense. But nothing now deterred the defenders, encouraged by the reinforcements and munitions which they had received. While the French commander laid plans for his troops to advance house by house, since this was the ‘only kind of warfare suitable for waging against these madmen’, the Spanish launched counter-attacks. The intense street fighting was to last another week. As a French officer, J. Belmas, subsequently wrote:

The besieged defended themselves with unparalled fury. We could only gain ground by setting fire everywhere, by burrowing from house to house, by piercing the walls between one and the next to establish communications and form new lines of embrasures. Often we smashed down one partition to find the enemy behind it, defending himself with the bayonet.57

The fighting was in fact unnecessary. Both Palafox, who returned on August 9 with four thousand regular troops and armed villagers and two hundred supply carts, and Verdier, the French commander, had received the same news. The French army in Andalucía had capitulated to the Spanish after the battle of Bailén on July 14; barely entered into his new capital, King Josef was retreating from Madrid with his army to a defensive line on the upper Ebro. A Valencian division was, at last, moving to the relief of Zaragoza.