

More than anywhere else, the smallholders from around the city had good reasons to fear the French attack. Their massacre of French residents only three weeks earlier was certain to cause massive reprisals should Moncey take the city.* But with the French forces at the delapidated city walls, a junta faction led by the captain general La Conquista vacillated in favour of surrender.

According to friar Rico – whose memoirs always stated the author’s sole protagonism in important events – the people’s tribune alerted some of his trusted followers to the junta’s doubts and these gathered a crowd of armed people at the junta’s door shouting: ‘Death to all those villanous and cowardly leaders, the traitors who want to surrender the city. They must all be put to death.’21 Hearing these threats, wrote Rico, some junta members fell to their knees before a crucifix on the wall, believing that their hour had come. Others prepared to resist the mob. Finally Rico was commissioned to calm the people, which he was able to do only on condition that the whole junta emerged and joined the defence. Having no other option but to face death at the people’s hands, its members came out and made the rounds of the major gates. There they sounded out the defenders’ feelings. ‘War, war, we shall die rather than surrender’, came the answer.22 Moncey’s last surrender summons met with a sharp riposte:

The people of Valencia prefer to die in the city’s defence rather than come to any [surrender] agreement. They have informed the junta of this and, for your information, the latter hereby apprises you of the fact.23

It was not the junta which had led the people, but the people who had led the junta to the city’s defence. Fighting broke out immediately, the French attacking the western gates, especially the Quart with its two ancient towers. Inhabitants lined the top of the walls and kept up a heavy musket fire; but it was the artillery that decimated the advancing columns, whose flanks and rear were constantly harried by smallholders. Vicente Bertrán de Lis, one of the rising’s main protagonists, was active in this skirmishing, leading a group of his ‘private army’.24 Knowing the terrain intimately, the smallholders fought the enemy hand-to-hand amongst the Turia river’s reedbeds, and opened irrigation channels to flood the path of the advancing French. By evening, after seven hours of fighting, Moncey’s troops had not set foot in the city.

The few regular Spanish military officers who commanded the cannon at the gates no doubt saved the situation. But the people’s massive participation, and among them the educated elite – lawyers, scriveners, merchants, landowners and other ‘law-abiding’ inhabitants who stood unprotected along the tops of the walls by the Quart gate to fire on the French – reinforced the general determination to resist to the last breath.25

By five o’clock in the afternoon, grapeshot was running out at the Quart battery. Friar Rico, who was active throughout the defence, secured a large quantity of iron. But the sacks in which to load it into the cannon were lacking. On summoning the neighbours to make good the need, people poured out of their houses with sheets, pillowcases, linen and woollen goods, iron kitchen utensils, crying out that if there were insufficient grapeshot they would tear down the iron balustrades and rejas from their windows. As in Zaragoza, women were again highly prominent in the defence. As Rico records: