

Verdier received orders on August 6 to be ready to raise the siege; but the following day the order was countermanded. The French general staff wanted Zaragoza captured as soon as possible in order to turn it into a strongpoint in their defence of the Ebro diagonal. On the point of being dismantled, the besiegers’ batteries resumed firing.58

Palafox had delayed his return for two days believing that the French would raise the siege. On the day he returned to the city, the news of the Bailén victory was published in a special edition of the Pocal gazette. The rejoicing was triumphal; but the defenders still had four days of street combats ahead. The French batteries continued to fire on the city. The newly arrived Catalan volunteers, in their traditional village dress of red bonnets and wide-kneed breeches, chased the enemy from the Santa Catalina and botanical gardens; divided into squads and marshalled by a conch bugle, they fought hand to hand with the long knives they preferred.

By August 12, the French had moved back all their men, with the exception of a few snipers. On the night of the 13th, the bombardment was again intense and so many fires broke out all along the Coso that they ‘appeared to be but a single blaze’.59 Shortly before dawn the following day a great explosion shook the city; as a farewell gesture, the French had exploded a mine under the Santa Engracia monastery. That morning, not a single French soldier remained in the city. On direct orders from King Josef to raise the siege and cover the left flank of his army making for the Ebro, the besiegers had started their withdrawal at midnight under cover of the bombardment. The two months’ siege had cost them 3,500 casualties and an untold amount of war materiel, including their heavy batteries which they spiked and threw into the Imperial Canal. Nearly all the high-ranking French officers were wounded, killed or sick, and some regiments were commanded now by captains, as Lefebvre reported a week later.60

The defenders’ losses in life and property were incalculable; ‘the loss of women and boys was very great, and fully proportionate to that of men’.61 ‘Zaragoza will be famous for ever – but it has been destroyed for a century’, wrote one of the eyewitnesses. ‘They could have razed the city to the ground and finished us all off, but they would not have seen us surrender.’62 As Sir Charles Vaughan later wrote:

It is a very singular fact to add, that though the writer of these few pages saw in Zaragoza many a parent who had lost his children, and many a man reduced from competence to poverty, he literally did not meet with one human being who uttered the slightest complaint; every feeling seemed to be swallowed up in the memory of what they had recently done, and in a just hatred of the French.63

The day after the French raised the siege, August 15, was the day of the Annunciation. A thanksgiving Te Deum was celebrated in the basilica of the Virgen del Pilar, the patron saint. In a language common to many Spanish patriots at the time, one of the men who had lived through the siege wrote: