

Do you believe that tithes are to maintain those who go about Toledo† in carriages with their whores and to keep priests who are no more than drones? – Yes, that is what we believe, responded the villagers in chorus.14

Although patriot bishops and cathedral chapters were initially often a source of considerable funds for the local juntas, popular feeling was aroused by the Church’s determined refusal of any wartime sacrifice of its right to tithes. As a letter to the Junta Suprema by one who called himself Juan de Miedez put it: ‘Why should the poor soldier suffer and die in the war, and the canonry with its excesses bring down the wrath of our great God on the whole Spanish Nation?’15 Both the Suprema and the Catalan regional junta agreed with the Church and señorial lords, denying to all and sundry the right to seize dues and tithes: in their view, no change in the feudal system could be envisaged. The social status quo, it might be argued, was necessary to maintain a broad patriotic alliance against the French; but it could equally be argued that this strategy suited both juntas’ conservative instincts.

Villagers on the other hand were not content solely with denying the Church its dues; land seizures, strikes for higher wages, smallholders’ revolts, farmers’ and juntas’ counter-offensives affected various regions of the patriot zone.

Only two weeks after the Sevilla rising, day labourers in the nearby township of Carmona refused to reap the harvest on the great estates.‡ They stayed at home, alleging that their absence was due to the ‘new developments’. Effectively on strike, the withdrawal of their labour increased – as they must have known it would – the shortage of field hands resulting from the recent large army enlistment. Taking advantage of the excellent grain crop standing in the fields, the day labourers were attempting to secure a raise in their pitifully low wages. On June 9 the Carmona junta reacted with draconian measures: for each day that a labourer refused to work he was to be punished by ten days in gaol and two hours in chains.16

Presumably this got some men back, because ten days later the junta received a farmers’ memoir setting wage levels for different labouring jobs. The day before, after complaints from a number of townships about the labourers’ strike, the Sevilla junta issued an edict which said it had been made aware of landworkers’ ‘scandalous abuse’ of the shortage of hands caused by

the indispensable necessity to defend the fatherland, religion and our beloved sovereign … Ignoring the level of day wages already agreed, they have tried to raise them exorbitantly, to the very notable prejudice of agriculture. The junta cannot remain indifferent to … or fail to restrain the avarice of these inconsiderate vassals who use to their own benefit the afflictions of their fellow workers …17

In order to contain wages ‘within the limits of reason and distributive justice’, the Sevilla junta ordered that all wages agreed prior to the ‘present events’ must be respected and local justices must enforce these, punishing if necessary those who failed to respect the agreed rates. Significantly the junta did not threaten recalcitrant labourers with the fate that Carmona had decreed; indeed it even threw them a few crumbs by recognizing that as a result of ‘the actual circumstances’ wages might rise somewhat: no junta at that moment could afford to create an enemy of its future rural recruits or run the risk of serious agrarian conflict.