

To the people’s even greater delight, the Andalucian army’s ‘valiant soldiers’ arrived ‘adorned with captured spoils’: hats decorated with enemy plumage, officers’ swords and even proudly mounted on the crop-tailed horses of the highly regarded French cuirassiers, reported the Gazeta de Madrid.

Some were attired in complete French uniforms to show that they had looted the enemy whose life they had taken. Others bore the muskets, swords and sabres which had, on the day, been loaded and sharpened to use against them … The overjoyed Madrid populace mingled with the soldiers and followed them …5

The possibility that these rough and ready patriot troops might unite with the Madrid populace to cause a commotion – even to fill the capital’s power vacuum – was never more than an elitist chimera, as the events of the following day proved. On August 24, with all the city’s councillors dressed in the traditional black doublets and hose of Spain’s golden age, a rejection of all that was French, indeed foreign, Madrid proclaimed Fernando VII king and the authorities swore the traditional oath of fealty. It was the people who had insisted on the dress, asserted Quintana’s Semanario Patriótico, and it was the people who gave the day its particular significance.

They were not the purely passive spectators accustomed like mercenaries to attend the ceremonial occasions organized by the authorities or, as often as not, by a tyrant’s will … it was the people who were this august function’s glorious spirit, motif and composer. Not content with cheering their king, the populace’s … greatest huzzas and vivas were reserved, as was only right and just, for the noble English guests, Lord Doile and Colonel Vitingham, in a display of the people’s gratitude for the singular favour that their generous nation is demonstrating to Spain; and frequently cheers were heard in which ‘England!’ ‘Spain!’ and ‘Fernando!’ were mixed.6*

The following day, the city’s inhabitants and troops were treated to a celebratory firework display, music in the Prado, the ascent of three hot-air balloons and two specially authorized bullfights, one in the morning and one in the afternoon, to which the soldiers who had ‘so gloriously defended their country’ were allowed in free and, as ‘a gift to the capital’s public’, civilian spectators were charged only half price.7 The Prado itself was shut to carriages so that ordinary people could ‘enjoy the spectacle more comfortably’. Significant of the general feeling of new-found freedom, 8,300 tickets were sold by the two Madrid theatres for their performances on August 25.8 There was no particular thought of the morrow; the inhabitants, assiduously assuaged by the local authorities, believed that the war had come to an end; they had declared for Fernando VII and forgotten that Napoleon did not take defeat lightly.

Meanwhile, the armies tarried in Madrid when they should have been marching north to chase the French army out of Spain. There was more than one reason for Castaños’ delay. The Sevilla junta refused to authorize him to move north of Madrid or to continue to supply him.9 The juntas’ determination to keep their armies under their own control – for without an army they lacked their most important recourse to power – here demonstrated one of the true, and limited, faces of the ‘national’ rising. And though Sevilla subsequently denied its refusal to supply its army, there can be little doubt that it was true.† In a letter from Madrid, Castaños wrote that he was ‘saddened to know that nearly three thousand of my troops cannot leave their barracks because they have nothing to wear, and I don’t count in this number those men who are in rags …’.10 Both Madrid theatres gave three special performances in late August to raise money to provide troops with uniforms; they brought in 28,301 reales, a paltry sum in relation to the troops’ needs.11 The lack of uniforms and shoes would constantly beset the Spanish army whose troops often went barefoot and in rags.