

While the capitulation talks were continuing, Guervos saved a cuirassier officer’s life from a Spanish soldier. ‘These wretches are no better than the French when it comes to killing and thieving’, he wrote to his parents. He went to the French encampment to visit the officer whose friendship he had won by his action.

The camp was a horror; everyone dying of thirst and receiving two ounces of bread a day. We’re not much better off; for three days we have eaten nothing but gazpacho for want of money to provide us our rations.77

As Vedel’s reinforcements had not appeared on the field of battle, Dupont sued for surrender terms. The arrival at this moment, though late, of Castaños’ reserve army, added to the pressure: Dupont was effectively caught between two fires. He agreed to capitulate. When Vedel at last appeared on the scene, he felt himself free of the agreement: only the Spanish threat to slaughter Dupont’s troops brought him to capitulate on the same terms as his commander-in-chief.* The Spanish thus forced the surrender of more than seventeen thousand unwounded French troops; nearly two thousand more French dead and wounded were left on the battlefield. The cost to the Spanish army was just under one thousand casualties.78 While much of the local population devoted itself to attending to the Spanish wounded, others set about looting the surrendered French troops of the plunder they had themselves looted on their unsuccessful campaign.79

*

By the standards of the Napoleonic wars Bailén was not a major battle. But its repercussions far exceeded its military importance. A second-rate military power, in political turmoil at the start of its anti-Napoleonic resistance, had forced the capitulation of a Napoleonic army in the field.† Even worse, King Josef, who had barely arrived in Madrid, exaggerated the importance of the defeat and the Spanish army’s strength, and fled northwards with his military to take refuge on the defensive line of the Ebro. ‘This foolish action, as much as Bailén itself, gave the Spanish uprising credibility and damaged Napoleon’s prestige throughout Europe.’80

The Iberian summer of 1808 was not a good one for the Emperor. His army was about to be bundled out of Portugal by the British – a second French capitulation more important than that of Bailén, because henceforth Portugal would be British terrain; had been humiliatingly defeated in Andalucía; had failed to take the ‘indefensible’ Zaragoza; had been thrown back before the walls of Valencia; and had abandoned a second attempt to capture Gerona and Tarragona in Cataluña. Spanish popular resistance was proving more difficult to overcome than mere ‘punitive’ military expeditions could deal with.

Bailén also gave a national dimension to the Spanish struggle: apart from Andalucians, there were in the victorious army Aragonese, Castilian, and Murcian troops. Three commanders were Navarese, Extremaduran and Catalan. (Indeed, even José San Martín, the future liberator of Argentina and Chile, who was serving in the army as a Spanish cavalry captain, made his name by ambushing a party of French soldiers prior to the battle.) In other words, the victory belonged not solely to Andalucía, but to a much wider national (not to say international) spectrum. The Sevillan junta was well aware of this. In a manifesto issued a few days after Bailén, it reminded Andalucians that they were Spanish, and called on them to unite with their brothers on the Ebro, the Duero and the Júcar – the latter two rivers representing Castilla la Vieja, Castilla la Nueva and Valencia.81 An anonymous poet in Sevilla wrote: