

Greater affairs, however, detained Castaños in Madrid. The regional juntas, led by Galicia, Valencia and Murcia, had reached agreement on the need to set up a Junta Suprema, in effect a national government, to conduct the war effort.* General Cuesta, who had so reluctantly been pressed into joining the Valladolid rising, quickly attempted to pre-empt the new ruling body. As the regional juntas’ deputies were making their way to the Junta Suprema’s founding meeting, he proposed to Castaños that the two generals and the duque del Infantado (who like many another authority after Bailén had abandoned the French cause and turned ‘patriot’) should take over supreme military command. The provincial juntas would be abolished and the authority of the captain generals and audiencias re-established. Generals with military command would pressure the Junta Suprema to appoint a regency in its place. To his credit, Castaños turned down the plot which would have been the first real pronunciamiento – the military’s intervention in politics at a national level which so plagued the rest of the Spanish nineteenth century.12

Ignoring these state affairs, the Madrid proletarian youth who had burlesqued the last French cavalry to abandon Madrid took to the streets as though they were theirs. To the horror of the burgess and the authorities they cavorted naked in the Prado’s public fountains, ‘without heed of the presence of both sexes’, and sang lewd songs which ‘offended the public’s sense of decorum and virtue’. The Consejo de Castilla demanded that the Madrid justices re-establish patrols of law-abiding subjects.13

### RURAL CONFLICT IN THE REARGUARD

We must pause for a moment in the march of events to survey the rearguard, the rural world which formed the majority of the population. The still widely-held Spanish idealization that all social classes were united as one in the struggle was rapidly shown to be no more than a myth.

From the start of the war, frequent complaints from the Church and señorial lords that their vassals were not paying dues and tithes reached the regional juntas. As the lords were not receiving their dues, post-hoc logic assumed that the villagers were not paying them. In many cases this was true. But another more imperative logic was also at work: local oligarchs were retaining these impositions, especially tithes, in order to pay the war contributions demanded by the juntas, and to have sufficient food stocks in hand to meet the requisitions of the Spanish and French armies, both of which had to live off the land. In this way, these classes spared themselves the burden of being the major contributors to the exactions levied on their villages.* But the ability to provide supplies to the armies was also a way to save ordinary villagers from military – especially French army – reprisals for failure to deliver up their meagre crops.

Bishops and cathedral chapters were particularly vocal in their protests about losing tithes. Village resistance had begun before the war, but with the conflict the refusal became more radical and widespread. The Church’s right to exact such tribute was now questioned in even the smallest of places, like Herrera del Duque, far from the beaten track in Badajoz, where villagers staged a catechismal parody during their local fiesta in May, 1808. A man on a donkey, acting the part of towncrier, addressed the villagers: