

Dupont made the mistake of underestimating the number of Spanish troops in front of him and committing at first only the vanguard of his marching column. In consequence, his cavalry was much depleted in the first attacks. It took him time to deploy infantry from his column, which included a baggage train five kilometres long, loaded with pillaged loot from the Córdoba sacking, so Napoleon subsequently claimed, but more importantly with the sick and infirm.

From dawn until early afternoon, in the increasing summer heat, the patriot forces withstood the French attacks. In the front line of the defence was one of Reding’s infantry battalions, in which Francisco Guervos, the Granada cathedral violinist and volunteer, commanded a company after being promoted to corporal and sergeant in two months. In a letter to his parents, he wrote:

The enemy’s vanguard of twelve thousand men had the fortune to take a low hill planted with olive trees around our positions. The olives saved them from even greater disaster. Our infantry was very bold: groups of thirty to forty men held off the ferocious and repeated enemy cavalry’s charges … although with great daring numbers of their horsemen reached to within twenty paces of our batteries … I was lucky not to be hit by a musket ball. I had left my position to reprimand a soldier who had left the line. Immediately, the sergeant behind me was killed, crumpling to the ground. It was impressive to see the raw recruits (and even officers) politely acknowledge a grenade or cannon ball which passed over their heads.73

The penultimate attack was led by the French commander and all his generals at the head of his only veteran force, the Marine Guards, who were bringing up the rear. The attack was thrown back, and Dupont was wounded.

One final attack by Swiss mercenary troops originally in Spain’s service, but whom Napoleon had pressed into the French occupation army, ended the battle. On the other side of the line were the Swiss mercenaries who had remained loyal to the patriot cause. The latter followed the Swiss custom of parading their colours and presenting arms in front of their countrymen who were about to attack them. Thereupon the Swiss in Dupont’s army refused to fight and fraternized with their compatriots.74 At that point, the patriot flying column appeared in Dupont’s rear and flank, and the French commander, believing it to be Castaños’ vanguard, asked for a truce and a free passage through Bailén. General Reding agreed to the former, but replied that the latter depended on his commander-in-chief, General Castaños.

Heat and thirst were the major protagonists of the battle. Even Spanish soldiers of the reserve who had not fought dropped dead from dehydration.75 For the infantry combatants, thirst was worsened by the powder which dried their mouths when they chewed off the end of their cartridges before loading their muskets. There was no shade, and the stubble which was set alight by the fighting increased the heat. The Spanish forces, which included seventy mounted bull herders from Jerez with their long lances,* were supported by Bailén inhabitants who brought them water and encouraged their resistance. The heroine – for there had to be one who epitomized the popular struggle – was a relatively well-to-do married woman of sixty-five, María Luisa Bellido.76 As she was carrying water to General Reding, her pitcher was shattered by a musket ball; without hesitating a moment, she brought a piece of the jar in which some water remained to quench the commander’s thirst. But the French received no such popular help. When the truce was declared the French troops dispersed in search of water. Sergeant Guervos believed that, ‘more than three thousand Swiss and Italians used this as a pretext to come over to our side. If the truce had lasted longer, Dupont would not have had a force to surrender …’