

The God of the armies has elected you, valiant Zaragozanos, to lower the pride of the stupidest, most calculating, ambitious and insatiable prototype of a tyrant; the most famous troublemaker and irascible destroyer of Europe, the fevered, the frenetic Napoleon.64

Two days earlier, in a vein also then common, a Palafox proclamation had excoriated the French army for pillaging,* robbing churches, rape, firing crops and assassinating the innocent and defenceless. But he went on to single out the women defenders for particular praise. They had displayed a courage ‘superior to all those [women] whom history has recorded’, an ‘extraordinary spirit’ amidst danger to bring food and succour to the male defenders.65

As a tribute to the people’s determined defence and defiance of authority, the authorities disarmed the civilian defenders at the end of the siege.66 The former’s fear of those it called ‘troublemakers’ was evident: armed, their continued defiance of those who were in power during the siege might lead to highly undesirable results.

Four months later Zaragoza was again under siege. In even worse conditions, the city again held out for two months until it was finally forced to capitulate.

### BAILÉN: AN IMPERIAL ARMY’S
CAPITULATION IN THE FIELD

On July 19 the Andalucian patriot army defeated General Dupont at Bailén. The French general, it will be recalled, had marched from Madrid on yet another pacification campaign, ostensibly to ensure the safety of the French fleet in Cádiz, but in reality to subdue the Andalucian insurrection. After taking – and sacking – Córdoba he learned that the French fleet had surrendered and that a large Andalucian army was being formed under General Castaños, who had supported the Sevillan insurrection with his troops stationed in front of Gibraltar. This news – the patriot army’s number exaggerated and with the added threat of inclusion of British troops who had landed near Cádiz – the Sevillan junta ensured he received through messages sent deliberately for French outposts to intercept.67 Dupont thereupon retired to Andújar on the Guadalquivir where he havered for a month, urgently requesting reinforcements from Madrid and preparing to defend himself, instead of going onto the offensive or retiring to the easily defended Sierra Morena defiles.†

Andújar was not a good place to hold out. The extreme summer heat and the infections which accompanied it caused twenty percent of his troops to report sick.68

General Castaños used the time to train his new volunteers. While there was no lack of arms – the British forces in Gibraltar provided a considerable number – the need of uniforms and shoes was a pressing problem. Although the Sevillan army provisioner put four hundred tailors to work, they could not provide sufficient uniforms in the time necessary. The junta called on the women of Sevilla to help out. Even so, Saavedra, the junta president, and the army chiefs, decided to ‘share out each uniform between two recruits, giving to one a hat, coat and corduroy trousers, and to the other the (regiment’s) barracks cap, jacket and cloth trousers.’69