

To tolerate these in the present circumstances is to contribute directly to the corruption of the public spirit which is all that can save us in the terrible crisis in which we find ourselves.6

The Madrid justices expressed their ‘unanimous surprise’ at the order for, as they reported to the Junta Suprema, they had not the slightest indication of gatherings of this nature, although they would increase their vigilance henceforth.7

As a newly established government, the Junta Suprema, still unsure of its public legitimacy, might be excused its paranoia about public talk. But it did not understand that the new ‘spirit’ on which it so patently admitted that the war effort depended, equally depended on a new sense of popular intervention in public affairs. Old Regime reflexes which demanded an unquestioning obedience to authority and the trinitarian slogan of religion, king and fatherland still ruled the minds of the new authorities.

### MILITANCIES: AN INFORMANT’S ARREST

Little did sixty-one-year-old Josef Guinart think he was venturing his freedom when he set off from Madrid to Aranjuez on foot with a letter for Floridablanca, the Suprema’s president. A Catalan who had come to the capital in vain to find work in the mid-eighteenth century, he had joined the army and served four and a half years in the Regiment of Africa. Subsequently, he had become a wigdresser and guild member; but more recently he had lost work due to the new male fashion of dispensing with wigs and cutting hair short. He and his wife made a modest living from their Madrid home on the main floor of No. 4, Calle Júcar, where they rented out two rooms for a total of twelve reales a day. Guinart, lodgers testified, spent most of the day in bed. But he had not forgotten that he had been brought up in the household of the engineer general who had remodelled the Barcelona fortresses of the Ciudadela and Montjuich and the Figueras fortifications. He believed that he knew their weak points and how they could be re-taken by the patriot forces. He also understood, so he thought, French military tactics, which were ‘quite different to all those of the nations they had overcome’. And so on Sunday, November 13, he set out with the letter for Floridablanca, describing these matters.

He got no further than Villaverde, one of the first villages on his route, when he was detained. Had he a passport to go to Aranjuez, the local justice asked. No, he replied, but his matter was urgent. He had to deliver this letter to the Junta Suprema’s president. The letter was unsealed and unstamped, noted the justice, taking him into custody. Guinart resisted arrest, which did his case little good. Obliging him to put a stamp on his missive, the justice sent it to the Madrid corregidor, informing him at the same time of Guinart’s arrest. The corregidor immediately reported the detention to the Junta Suprema.

So far, there was not much to hold against Guinart. But presumably frightened by his arrest, he disowned his letter and pretended that it had been given to him by a Catalan in Madrid whose name and address were unknown to him. Even this was insufficient to cause him grave trouble. This came from another source. When Martín de Garay, the Junta’s secretary general, received the information from the Madrid corregidor, he asked the royal architect in the capital to investigate Guinart. The architect talked to the Catalan’s neighbours, including the actor Vicente Baca, and discovered that Guinart had had commissions and contracts from the Godoy government to transport artillery and other war materiel during the recent Franco-Spanish invasion of Portugal, while still continuing to work as a wigdresser. This was enough for Garay to order, three days later, that Guinart be taken under arrest to Aranjuez, seat at that moment of the Junta. Guinart’s fate thereafter remained undocumented, but if he was still imprisoned, as was likely, he was probably released when the Junta fled shortly before Napoleon’s capture of the capital a fortnight later.8