

Guinart – perhaps no more than a self-deluded ‘expert’ – was illustrative of the lower orders who tried to make their voices heard to those in command of the patriot war effort. His efforts were no more successful than others before and after him.

### PAMPHLETEERING: A UNITED NATIONAL STRUGGLE?

Guinart would have done better to have written a pamphlet than to try to approach the new government directly. Before – and indeed immediately after – the Junta Suprema’s formation, the educated commoner elite’s main form of intervention in public affairs was pamphleteering. Scores, if not hundreds, of pamphlets and tracts were written and printed at their authors’ expense. This sudden explosion of opinion was a clear sign of the Old Regime’s institutional collapse: its censorship had vanished in the debris, and the literate, whose voices had been stifled for so long, breathed a new air of freedom. To read all that was published ‘you would have to rise at seven in the morning, when the blind pour into the streets, and not finish until eleven at night’, wrote a correspondent in the Diario de Málaga.9 In the majority of cases the writers used the freedom to relieve themselves of their pent-up feelings but expressed not much original thought.

Although a hard and fast line could not be drawn between them, the pamphlets fell into two broad categories: vituperative diatribes against Napoleon, the French Revolution, French influence in and domination of Spain,* sometimes in verse but more often in prose; and those primarily concerned with the type of patriot government needed to meet the country’s imperative needs. Leaving the second category for later consideration, the first consisted largely of invective, insults, satire, irony, sarcasm, parody and hyperbole, in which Godoy was not spared either; but as there was a limit to the amount of virulence that most of the home-spun writers could summon up to describe Napoleon’s ‘despotic tyranny’, they tended to repetition: the Emperor was unfavourably compared to the tyrants of antiquity (Nero, Caligula, Tamburlaine, Attila); to a tiger, a fox, a wolf. He was a cross between ‘a wild beast and man’, a ‘tyrant sated with crimes’, the ‘Anti-Christ’. † He was a man of ‘frenetic ambition’, ‘impious’, ‘treacherous’, ‘perfidious’, ‘barbarous’; ‘Europe’s greatest robber’, the ‘dragon of France’, ‘the Corsican upstart’; ‘a small island’s abortion’, ‘a monster spewed from Hell’ … In short, ‘assassinations, false oaths, treachery, impudent lies, corruption: all these are noble and approved means in the Napoleonic Code which illustrate his sacriligious morality’. What Spaniard could believe that the Emperor desired Spain’s ‘felicity’, ‘regeneration’ and ‘defence of her religion’ when he had founded his claim to the Spanish throne on Fernando’s forced abdication; when his troops had sacked Spanish churches, murdered priests and defiled nuns; and when, at this moment, he was preparing handcuffs and chains to take Spain’s youth to fight Austria ‘on the shores of the Danube’.