

However, even this edict did not immediately have the desired effect, because a few days later the Carmona junta admitted that ‘many labourers are still in the town and will not go to the fields to work’. And those who had returned were being paid ‘excessive’ wages by some estate bailiffs without heed of the Sevilla proscriptions or its own. The Carmona junta issued another decree raising the punishment for each day’s refusal to work to twenty days in gaol – although reference to chains was now omitted – and a fine of about five days’ wages.*

The repetition of a broadly similar situation in Calatayud, Aragón, suggested that labourers’ determination to raise their low wages thanks to the outbreak of war was a fairly widespread phenomenon.†18

More dramatic events broke out in Don Benito, an Extremaduran town of some ten thousand inhabitants, in November 1808. A crowd of carters, labourers and artisans gathered in the main square for the military enlistment ordered by the newly formed Junta Suprema throughout the patriot zone to raise the army’s strength. Suddenly shouts were raised:

‘Let the rich go to war, they’re the ones who’ve got something to lose, the pasture lands! …’ The protesters drew out knives and daggers and threatened the magistrate and town councillors who fled precipitously in fear of their lives …

These ‘malicious mutineers’ then pursued other honourable townsmen, even entering their homes to insult them, wrote an anonymous correspondent. As these men received not the slightest punishment, they felt themselves free to take over en masse the pastures and plough them. ‘They have threatened the lives of any who oppose them, a threat they repeated to the new corregidor in the public square.’19 The correspondent maintained that there was no cause in the enlistment proceedings for this tumult. But one must suspect him of being economical with the truth; wartime enlistments carried out by the local authorities frequently led to disturbances. The reason was simple: the local oligarchs’ sons were all too often excused military service on some trumped-up pretext, while the poor were sent to the army.

In Don Benito, however, the landworkers’ riot represented a refusal to fight in defence of the wealthy’s property and privileges which were denied them; and their protest was immediately carried over into direct action to solve the agrarian problem that had bedevilled Extremadura for centuries: its vast untilled pastures which the impoverished and landless villagers, denied access to the land, rightly saw as the cause of their poverty.*

The region was one of Spain’s poorest: Extremadura was the privileged winter grazing of the great flocks of transhumant sheep which were driven down from the cold northern Castilian plains where they grazed in summer. Though the corporate power of the age-old Mesta, the powerful group of Castilian sheep-owners, who included nobles and monasteries, had been eroded in the eighteenth century, their merinos still grazed in Extremadura and parts of Andalucía, exercising a hold over the land which prevented much of it being tilled.