

The enlightened’s passionate hatred of Napoleon – the epithets and quotations above come from the pens of two such erudite and respected authors* – was reminiscent of lovers scorned. And though one of them, Capmany, specifically rejected the notion, many of the Spanish educated elite had in the recent past admired Napoleon as France’s redeemer who had brought order out of revolutionary chaos without denying the best of the revolutionary conquests. But the Emperor’s treatment of his long-suffering ally had turned admiration into abhorrence.

These authors’ excessive language, however, was also intended as an instrument of patriotic propaganda to whip up and maintain anti-Napoleonic sentiment in the country. Another form of this propaganda, in question-and-answer form which made it more easily assimilable by the public at large, was the Catechism. The first of these, El Catecismo civil, ‘a brief compendium of the Spaniards’ obligations, awareness and explanation of their freedom’s nature, to be useful in the present circumstances for both sexes’ education’, was published just days after the rising in Cartagena.†

Q. Tell me, boy, what are you called?

A. A Spaniard, by the grace of God. does Spaniard mean?

A. A fine, upstanding man.

Q. As such, what and how many are your obligations?

A. Three. To be a Christian, an Apostolic Roman Catholic, defender of the true faith, of King and Fatherland, and to die before being conquered

Q. Who is your king?

A. Fernando VII.

[…]

Q. Who is the enemy of our felicity?

A. The Emperor of the French

Q. Who is he?

A. A new and infinitely evil señor. The covetous origin of all wrong, exterminator of all good, the sum of all vice.

Q. How many natures has he? [Does he belong to the race of humans?]

A. Two. One diabolical, the other human. [It can be doubted, given his diabolical operations].

[…]

Q. Who can free us from such a monster?

A. The union of Spaniards under arms.

Q. Is it a sin to kill French people?

A. No, sir, it merits praise if by this the What homeland is freed of their insults

[…]

Q. What is Spain? [Who forms the fatherland?]

A. The entirety of many peoples [our peoples] ruled by a King and governed by the same [just] laws

Q. Are ours and all these peoples’ interests the same?

A. Yes, sir, by the natural and reciprocal obligation of all to support and defend each other

[…]

Q. What felicity should we be seeking?

A. That which the French cannot give us.

Q. And what is this?

A. The security of our rights and persons, the free practice of our sacred religion, and the establishment of our monarchical government, adapted to Spain’s present customs and those of European religion

[…]

Q. To whom shall we look to achieve this?

A. To Spain, which alone has this right, to the exclusion of all foreigners.10

Apart from the obligatory anti-Napoleonic virulence, and the determination that the country’s political salvation depended exclusively on itself, the Catechism attempted briefly to articulate two war-related problems. The need for union among the Spanish peoples whose continuing mass mobilization was necessary to man the armies needed to repel the foreign aggressor, and the question of how this could be achieved and on what basis it could be maintained. In short, the nature of the Spanish ‘Nation’ or ‘Fatherland’. The Catechism went no further than proposing that Spain consisted of the entire conglomeration of its peoples (or communities) who had a mutual obligation to defend each other. Once they had released their venom on Napoleon, both of the earlier cited authors, the Catalan-born Antonio Capmany, the most intelligent of Spanish conservatives, and Isidoro Antillón, a determined Aragonese progressive, addressed this problem in more detail. In Antillón’s words: