

We are all Spaniards … All members of a great family, [who] are fighting for our King Fernando, for our religion, our laws and our honour. The cause is one: one is our spirit, one is our plan, one our defence, common to all are the dangers and the victories … But we need a centre of this union.11

The notion of the ‘great family’ came from the Old Order monarchy. The king was the ‘father’ and his vassals his ‘sons’. As such, all those under his rule were ‘brothers’ who faced common dangers together. The initial appeal to defend religion, king and country sought an overarching bond to unite Spain’s peoples in terms they could easily understand and feel. Hatred of Napoleon, the perfidious aggressor, pursued the same aim. The Emperor’s previous military triumphs had been achieved because he had ‘fought against kings, not the people. Our situation is different ….’ The Spanish would do well to recall what Napoleon had only the previous year told the Poles: ‘A nation of eight million inhabitants, who want to be free, runs no risk of ever being subjugated.’ Antillón continues:

Spain has a population of more than twelve million souls.* Let us for this once profit from his [Napoleon’s] doctrine. Let us show the world that the forces of tyranny are nothing against a million men, armed en masse to defend their liberty and honour.12

While the progressives shared the absolutists’ view of the people’s prime importance as the originator of the risings and in volunteering to fight, they saw the urgent need of going beyond religion, king and fatherland in order to maintain popular enthusiasm for the struggle. A country-wide, but provincial popular resistance had to be – but had not yet been – turned into a united, ‘national’ struggle which would enable Spain’s peoples to release and coordinate all their human energies and material resources to free the country of the foreign invader.

In this sense, it was fortunate that Spain had been a ‘state-nation’, covering the same geographical territory, and occupied by mostly the same peoples, as it had been since its foundation in the fifteenth century by Fernando and Isabel (more aptly known in Spanish as ‘The Catholic Kings’). Its inhabitants shared a collective identity, centred on the monarchy and Church, that had largely been forged by Spain’s 150-year-long dominance in Europe. Funded by the silver and gold from the newly conquered South American empire, Spain’s supremacy had involved the country in constant wars in defence of its fortuitously inherited European possessions† and of Roman Catholicism against the Reformation. While the fighting did not immediately affect the bulk of the Spanish population, the conflicts inevitably ended up doing so: the popular recognition of Spain’s common enemies and of their abhorent betrayal of the true religious faith served to foster this identity which, by the eighteenth century, was comparable – though incomparably distinct – to that of the English and French.13 In this identity’s formation, moreover, the Spanish Church’s bitter struggle against the Reformation had played a singular part: as the irreducible defender of Catholicism, the Church and Inquisition raised intransigence and intolerance to the rank of sanctity. It was unsurprising therefore that these two characteristics entered into the popular collective identity.