

The letter’s anonymous author – one of the ‘honourable’ townsmen, without a doubt, and probably one of those who had been insulted – could not believe that the lower orders, ‘usually humble towards their [social] superiors and obedient to the local magistrate’, could have had the ‘effrontery’ to act with such wildness. There must be a ‘hidden hand’ behind them; and the hand he found was almost as surprising as the events themselves. A friar, Miguel Cortes de la Rocha by name – no ordinary friar, for sure, because he was a member of a prestigious military–religious order – had revealed himself as the instigator of the troubles after the first commotion and the authorities’ flight, publicly telling the labourers in the evenings:

‘Look, my sons, we are all equals in this world. There’s no difference between you and me other than that I am ordained. Go out to plough the pastures, nobody shall punish you for it.’ And so these delinquents say they have nothing to fear because (the friar) will protect them and he has many connections in Badajoz and Madrid.20

The anonymous correspondent then went on, perhaps libellously, to detail the friar’s ‘disreputable life’ and wrote that it could be ‘reasonably doubted whether he was religious’. A native of the township, he had said only three or four masses in his years in Don Benito, knew no Latin, was living with a young mistress, a stranger to the town, had sucked his elderly parents dry, and lived in considerable style which had led him to lose nearly all his wealth. But he was well connected by marriage with a former Madrid minister and with a present titled member of the Extremaduran junta which often used him to carry out local tasks on its behalf.

Whether friar Miguel was in fact the ‘hidden hand’ or whether it was not rather the ‘hand of justice’ that was at work must remain an open question. But if the friar in fact expressed the thoughts attributed to him then his clerical support would have been of vital importance to the labourers who invaded the pastures and began to plough them in readiness to sow their own crops.

*

The most seriously threatening rural revolt against the new authorities came in Asturias. The Fernandistas of Oviedo, the regional capital, had recruited the villagers as a hired street force to make their rising; in late September 1808, the junta’s powerful opponents used the same tactic in an attempt to overthrow it.

They called on villagers to attend a popular assembly on September 25 in Oviedo. Some four hundred came, as did numerous townsfolk. After drawing up a document of popular grievances, the crowd marched to the junta’s seat in the town hall, broke in to the council chamber and arrested one deputy whom they accused of treachery. They carried him off and imprisoned him in the fortress.

Although the junta had been reformed only a few weeks earlier, it basically remained an alliance of the landholding lower nobility and a handful of progressives. In order to ensure that the alliance could work to the latter’s advantage, the progressives made several concessions to the majority which were prejudicial to the villagers. In a region supposedly at war, and where the hidalgos formed seventeen percent of the population, the junta abrogated a Godoy measure and reaffirmed the nobility’s privileged exemption from enlistment. The whole burden of fighting in the war now fell on the commoners, the villagers in particular. But the final straw came not as the result of a junta order but of a rumour that it was about to abolish a twenty-year-old royal privilege which made it illegal to dispossess villagers of the lands they rented. This provision had made villagers lifetime tenants of the land they held in rent. Whether or not there was some truth to the rumour mattered little. Given that the junta was dominated by the same lower nobility that had always ruled their lives, and which had just restored some of their privileges, the villagers readily believed it.