

Largely isolated by the Counter-Reformation from scientific and philosophical advance in much of western Europe, the lower orders’ reliance on tradition, the way things had ‘always been’, became inbred: Catholic monarchy and entrenched defence of the holy faith; a (supposedly) ethnic and Catholic Spanish purity (stemming from the Jews’ and Muslims’ expulsion from the late fifteenth to the early seventeenth centuries), and an endemic suspicion of all that was foreign; lack of innovation and defence of the routines of daily life – these became the common people’s inheritance.

The cost of Spain’s golden age had its share of blame in this. The colonies’ precious metals flowed in – and flowed directly out to finance the country’s wars. European ascendancy and intransigent defence of Catholicism was bought at the price of a domestic socio-economic leap forward, the creation of a vital urban life and the emergence of new capitalist classes.

Spain’s European dominance was finally broken by France in mid-seventeenth century. One hundred and fifty years of decadence followed: depopulation, a marked decline in agriculture, the country reduced largely to exporting wool. Not until the beginning of the eighteenth century, alongside the change from Habsburg to Bourbon absolutism, did Spain slowly begin to recover. A century later at the start of the Peninsular War the country, though for long now a second-rate European power, still retained the largest colonial empire of its time. But it was less this, less the new economic and demographic progress or even a distant collective memory of the country’s glorious past* which inspired popular pride: this rested, as always, on loyalty to tradition, to the inherited Spanish identity. The extent to which, socially, this identity encompassed a feudal past was indicated by two terms still current in the first years of the nineteenth century: ‘vassal’, a word which had long since disappeared from the vocabulary of most European absolutist regimes,† and ‘purity of blood’. The latter, a legal requirement for admission to many state posts, and to even the lowest ranks of the nobility, meant proof of several generations’ ‘non-contamination’ by alien, non-Catholic forbears: Muslims, Jews, Gypsies or any other ‘undesirable’ ethnic or religious group. So deep-rooted was the consubstantial nature of Spanish ethnicity and Catholicism that an expression resumed it: ‘castellano viejo’, signifying an authentic Catholic Spaniard. (The extent to which this value was assimilated by the common people was evinced by the fact that as late as the start of the Peninsular War, artisans’ guilds aped the practice of demanding blood-proof of their new members.) In so traditional a society, in the absence of a flourishing urban civil culture, the Enlightenment could hardly have been expected to penetrate deep into the social fabric: only a few years before the anti-Napoleonic war, four out of every five Spaniards still remained illiterate.

Without their monarch, without their religion, the lower orders’ traditional identity at the start of the Peninsular War appeared threatened. To preserve it, they had risen and volunteered en masse to fight Napoleon; however desperate the cause, however unlikely the victory, could it have been otherwise? Which people with a sense of their old and characteristic identity would lie passively before a foreign power’s military invasion? And even less so in front of an ally who had dethroned their king and threatened their religion. They would struggle to the death against an aggressive imperial army to assert the right to their traditional way of life: to protect their families, their homes, their plots of land, their scanty possessions, their cities, townships and villages: and beyond that, their time-honoured world under a Catholic monarch and Church.