

your forefathers in character, dress and language, and the love of the land which saw your birth and which will witness your death. Now you have shown this in your bravery and disdain for your lives by throwing out the [French] robbers who threatened your possessions, honour and families.20

The concept of motherland could then in the first instance appeal to the villagers’ basic sense of loyalty to their own community and traditions which, though far from extending to Capmany’s global vision of the patria, could certainly encourage the villagers’ continuing patriotism.

The idea of a motherland, never clearly defined as a concept, was a portmanteau into which progressives and absolutists alike could put some of their treasured beliefs in order to remain united in the struggle. More clearly than most, Capmany saw that the Spanish had still ‘to save their skins’, as he put it, warning constantly of the French military threat that awaited them in Napoleon’s certain counter-offensive to reverse his early defeats. The need for unity of all strata of patriot society was essential to this endeavour. His strongly held anti-Napoleonic sentiments, so widely shared, were insufficient; but he indicated the way: conservative ideas mixed with promises of reforms held together – momentarily at least – by an emotional, and sometimes irrational, appeal to love of the patria as the mother of patriotism, the mother of all Spain’s patriot peoples.

*

More than erudite disquisitions on the modern nation or popular sovereignty, religion, king and country – a slogan with the advantage that one or other of its terms could be prioritized – had captured the people’s heart. Indeed, Alcalá Galiano maintained that the slogan ‘was everywhere repeated, written and sung’. 21

Apart from heeding patriotic propaganda, there was one immediate and practical task, much closer to home, which concerned the villagers and rural townfolk: to defend their houses, families, crops and possessions from the ravages of the French army. This was undoubtedly a – if not the – major mobilizing patriotic force in the occupied or invaded regions. To see their homes and villages burnt to the ground was a sharp reminder of what the conflict was immediately about. The story of Feliciano Recoder, a Catalan administrator, may serve as a representative example.

### EPISODES: FLEEING FRENCH REPRESSION

At an untimely three o’clock in the morning of Wednesday, June 8, 1808, Feliciano Recoder was woken by shouts in the streets of his home town, Molins del Rey, close to Barcelona. ‘The French are coming! They’re sacking the place!’ Rapidly awakening his wife, children and mother-in-law, and telling them to dress, Recoder and his family fled from their house. In the dark and with their only possessions the clothes they stood up in, they climbed the mountain tracks to the hamlet of Papiol. Here they stopped, looking down on their township to observe the imperial troops’ movements.

Recoder was a veteran of the War of the Convention. He had been one of the twenty thousand Catalan militia – miquelets, as they were locally known – who had responded to the mass call-up to defend Cataluña after the Spanish army had proved incapable of holding back the French revolutionaries. He had served as a lieutenant of the Mataro tercio of miquelets. In the fourteen years since then, his fortunes had risen thanks to his appointment as administrator of the toll bridge across the Llobregat river in Molins del Rey. The head of the Barcelona postal service had nominated him, and his appointment had been approved by no less than the government’s chief minister, Pedro Cevallos. But he had not, so early in the present war, imagined having again to serve. Though Recoder and his fugitive family were unaware of it, the ‘French’ troops who were sacking their township were the mainly Italian soldiery under General Schwartz who had just been driven back from the Bruch pass. They were determined to wreak vengeance for their defeat on a undefended village within close range of French-occupied Barcelona and imperial aid if needed. After loading a train of carts with their booty, they consumed their rage in fire.