

The pamphleteers, especially the newly liberated Madrid educated classes, apparently considered that there was all the time in the world to reform Spain peacefully. They were living a time of illusion, granted by Napoleon’s careful preparations to crush them.

### THE JUNTA SUPREMA SEIZES POWER

The Junta Suprema was finally founded with due pomp and circumstance in the palace of Aranjuez on September 25, 1808, little more than three months after the original idea had been mooted. After a solemn mass in the royal chapel, the deputies were sworn in. The provincial juntas had previously reached agreement that each should send two deputies to the founding meeting. In the preceding two days, preliminary discussions among the score of deputies who had already reached Aranjuez had led to some significant decisions, of which there remained very few documentary traces. Even deputies who arrived after the event found no account of them.26

The prior meeting in effect staged a political coup. Rejecting the Valencian position that the new government was to be the regional juntas’ ‘administrative body’; and the Sevilla junta’s condition which made its deputies responsible for reporting back on all major decisions before voting, it decided that the new body was to be the nation’s supreme central government. The assembled deputies were no longer to represent their individual provinces or regions, but the ‘entire Nation’. To ‘give itself the luster due to its functions’ the Suprema collectively assumed the title of ‘His Majesty’;* ‘sovereign authority’, it claimed, had been vested in it until Fernando’s return to the throne.

The upper nobility’s return to power, which was observed in the provincial juntas’ membership, was more than replicated in the new governing body: numerically, over half the deputies were nobles, all but a handful titled and five of them grandees. Ecclesiastical representation was the second most numerous, and included two archbishops (one of whom died before the Junta’s foundation) and several canons. There was only one known commoner – Calbo de Rozas, a Madrid merchant, who had played a notable role in Zaragoza’s defence and who was one of the two Aragonese deputies. Of several others their social rank has not been ascertained to this day – they may have included another commoner or two.27 While overall, the majority of the deputies leaned towards the preservation of the absolutist status quo, there were no easily definable political lines of division amongst them.

At the professional level, the deputies covered a broader range. There were three ex-government ministers; seven military officers, again repeating the provincial pattern; an identical number of jurists; and four who had held important financial and economic posts, as intendentes, army treasurer and accountant.28 While many of the deputies were thus not without professional expertise, they nonetheless formed a large and unwieldy body of illustrious unknowns.

There could be little doubt, however, that the Junta Suprema was a radically new form of Spanish government. It was certainly the culmination of the institutional and political rupture which the risings and the provincial juntas had precipitated, and the projection of this rupture to the highest level of state. But unsure of its ‘constitutional’ basis for – or unable to articulate a justification of – its seizure of power, the Junta Suprema hesitated before the instances of the Old Regime, refusing to make the institutional rupture definitive: for example, it kept the Consejo de Castilla in place and used it to make public its orders and edicts. This deeply irritated those provincial juntas which had seen in the Consejo the traitorous voice of the French during their first occupation of Madrid. But in fact, the Suprema’s action was very little different from the provincial juntas’ original incorporation of Old Regime figures in order to give themselves credibility with their local populations. For what was at stake here was the same search for credibility, though now at the national level.