

Despite the earlier diplomatic restrictions, the word ‘nation’ itself was frequently used in 1808 official junta proclamations, although its meaning was ambiguous and dependent on context. Sometimes – although increasingly rarely – it reverted to its original meaning as the country where a person was born: ‘The nation to which we owe our birth’.17 As an extension of this definition, it was also used as a synonym for the entire Spanish peoples: ‘All that the Nation holds precious – its possessions, its customs, its women – are threatened.’ At other times, associated with an appropriate phrase, it referred to the Monarchy or to its historically and juridically constituted ‘state-nation’. ‘The Nation’s sacred rights’, for example, or ‘The Nation, its laws, its Monarchs and its Religion.’ These last phrases, from a Sevilla junta proclamation of May 29, 1808, whose title, A General Appeal to the Nation, without doubt referred to the Spanish peoples as a whole, concluded with a passionate appeal to Spaniards to defend the ‘fatherland’.18

The fatherland and patriots were no new concepts either. The second half of the eighteenth century saw a proliferation of the educated elite’s ‘patriotic societies’ whose leitmotif was ‘love of the fatherland’.* The War of the Convention, during which the reactionary elements of the Church had redefined, in a counter-revolutionary sense, the patria in opposition to the French Revolution’s ‘La Patrie’; and more profoundly the anti-Napoleonic struggle, extended the meaning of patria and patriotic in several new directions. In the first instance, love of the fatherland descended from the educated elite’s heights to the patria’s plebeian defenders; and as the conflict spread to all the regions of Spain, so the patria extended in popular credence from local or regional allegiance to the whole of the country. Finally, the new patriots were expected to experience so burning a personal devotion to the fatherland that they would willingly sacrifice their lives in its defence. (Whether this latter asumption on the part of the patriot rulers coincided with the plebeians’ real sentiments will be explored in later chapters.)

It was the patria, rather than the abstract notion of the nation, which Antoni Capmany, a curious blend of conservative and reformist, traditionalist and man of the Enlightenment, proposed as the unifying national principle of the Spanish peoples’ anti-Napoleonic resistance. This was not, of course, ‘La Patrie’ of the French Revolution, but neither was it the diametrically opposed ‘patria’ of Spanish absolutist churchmen during the Convention War. His was a ‘patria’ full of affective appeal. Returning to the Old Regime concept of the monarchy as a family, the ‘patria’ became the motherland and ‘the mother’ its guiding symbol.* Patriots of all strata of society owed it to her to love and shed their blood in defence of the mother who had borne them.19

Capmany praised the villagers for not having been corrupted like the upper orders by French thought and fashions, for having remained true to