

Up to this time, however, their struggle had inevitably been local or at most regional. In the recent past, the word ‘nation’ had often been applied to their traditional identity; but it was not – and could not be – a ‘nation’ in the modern sense for it lacked one of the essential ingredients: popular participation in the country’s governance – and the consequent sense that the people had equal rights and responsibilities for Spain’s destiny.* It was this that the progressives wanted to endow the people with.

In order that the Spanish peoples felt as one nation in fighting against Napoleon they had also to be fighting for a better, participative future in that nation’s creation. In little more than two months, writing on the type of patriot government needed before the Junta Suprema was formed, Antillón had gone far beyond his ‘great family’ notion to the start of a new nation’s creation:

To count alone on the people to contribute with their possesions, their bloodshed and all sorts of sacrifices, and not to create a just government … is a horrendous idea which will fill them with despair and be the cause of grave ills. Our [old] laws and Córtes recognize and admit that kings are only heads of government, and that sovereignty resides in the nation, or in its people … Nature did not create slaves, lords, kings and vassals: these are the work of man-made institutions and force: that is why [by nature] we are all equal … [The people’s] extraordinary acts of bravery are due to the firm and well-founded belief that they are fighting for their freedom … Our need for them to continue in this conviction … requires that we return to them their rights of which they have been deprived …14

Among these rights was that of electing representatives in whom they had confidence to form a government which ‘restores felicity to the fatherland’. But Antillón himself doubted the efficacy of his ideas, especially during a revolution. ‘As long as the mass of the people, on whom one must count, remain in ignorance, and for want of ideas, find themselves at home in the dark, continuing to kiss without thought the same chains which have bound them to their degradation and slavery’, the few politically educated were preaching to the wind. He wished that the patriotic literati wrote books of ‘good and healthy politics’ in a simple and accessible style so that country people could understand what they should expect of their present sacrifices and the dangers they ran if they allowed themselves again to be governed by an arbitrary government.15

Popular sovereignty, like the modern nation, was an abstract notion to those, like villagers, brought up to believe in monarchy and Church, a novelty which was vigorously combatted by absolutists – and the many priests among them – as yet another French revolutionary import. It was hardly surprising, therefore, that the people did not get what Antillón deemed essential to their rights; and the Junta Suprema refused him permission to reprint his pamphlet.16