

The theoretical foundations of this new government’s legitimacy were of minor importance to the public at large compared to the legitimacy it still had to win by proving its practical ability to organize the war effort. It was not theory but practice – could it defeat the invader, or at least keep him at bay? – that would legitimate popularly its seizure of power.

The Junta Suprema quickly received recognition from the state’s official institutions, including (after some legalistic quibbles) the Consejo de Castilla, and from provincial and local juntas. Some of the township and village authorities were quite ecstatic. In the small coastal port of Muros, Galicia, as the local judge, Juan Antonio Navarra, reported, he ordered the tower illuminated and the church bells to ring. On the facade of the local inn where he lodged, he hung a portrait of Fernando on horseback and a Latin inscription below it: Fernando VII, Optimo maximo/Patri Patria.

To the bagpipes’ accompaniment, the common folk’s simple maidens danced, responding with affectionate huzzas to the Viva Fernando VII! Viva la Suprema Junta! which from time to time I called out from the balcony. A musket shot accompanied my cries, and rockets which I launched into the air. An English frigate which was anchored in the port, responded with colourful fireworks until eleven o’clock of the night … I had the great satisfaction to witness the ordinary people’s patriotic enthusiasm.29

The Suprema’s establishment was celebrated even under the enemy’s nose. In Olmos de Esgueva, a village forty-five kilometres north-east of Valladolid, on which the French were closing fast, a large ceremonial procession was held in the streets. With a sharp sense of the military situation, the corregidor then advised the people gathered outside that it would be ‘most appropriate’ to suspend the next day’s celebratory bullfight and that they should better set out to spy on the enemy, and console and shelter the many families who had fled from Burgos and other parts which the French had taken. ‘With their customary mansuetude, the people obeyed.’30

One of the earliest Junta Suprema’s measures was to order the Consejo de Castilla to restore the traditional censorship on the publication of pamphlets. The new sovereign body had no wish for public controversy which, in its view, would only cause disunity ‘among those not expert in these matters’, while permitting ‘our enemy to take great partisan advantage of such’.31 At the same time, the Junta ‘solemnly recognized’ the national debt, stated that annual taxable income would be carefully calculated, and the Old Order’s tax system simplified in as far as possible to make its burden equitable.

The first to feel the full weight of the Junta Suprema’s sovereign authority were its own constituent provincial juntas. Their titles and authority were immediately reduced from ‘Supreme’ (i.e. sovereign) to ‘Superior Provincial juntas of Observation and Defence’. They were forbidden to make further military and civilian promotions;32 had to provide the Junta Suprema with financial statements of their time in office, including funds still held, and renounce the honours which they had previously used; and they were to respect the existing laws prohibiting the de facto freedom of the press and ‘in so important a matter, not permit the least change or infraction’. The Supreme Junta did not quite dare abolish its constituents altogether, as it might have wished. But in diminishing their titles – and status was all-important to Old Order minds – it subjugated them to its sovereign orders.