

Already a month before Bailén the necessity had become obvious to some regional juntas. Again with surprising unanimity, three juntas – Asturias, Galicia and Murcia – proposed within ten days of each other in mid-June some form of central government or gathering of the Cortes. On July 16 – the day after Bailén, but in ignorance of the event – the Valencia junta weighed in with its proposal for a Junta Suprema. It urged speed in forming a central governing body. The war effort required it. So, too, did relations with the colonies.

If the colonies do not depend directly on any [metropolitan] central authority, each will establish its own independent government, as has happened in Spain. Their distance, situation, wealth and the natural inclination towards independence will lead them to it if the ties which unite them to the fatherland are broken. Our enemies will then achieve, thanks to our carelessness, what they have not been able to engineer despite their most powerful efforts.23

Coming hard on the patriots’ stunning victory, the Valencia proposal was generally accepted, especially by the powerful Sevilla junta. Very shortly thereafter, the Consejo de Castilla, in an attempt to make good its seriously impared patriotic credentials, threw a spoke in the juntas’ wheel by proposing that it should take a leading role in a Junta Suprema’s formation and composition. The uproar from the regional juntas, Sevilla especially, was so thunderous that the Consejo backed down.

During the three-month interregnum in major combats after the French evacuated Madrid at the beginning of August, and Napoleon unhurriedly assembled the Grande Armée on the French border to deal a decisive blow to the Spanish ‘insurgents’, the pamphleteers had a field day with their ideas and proposals on the sort of government needed. The majority seemed to have little idea of what was awaiting them. Many, those of absolutist persuasion in particular, proposed a regency. The reformists’ rejection of this was straightforward:

The stairs to the throne, which formerly no one dared tread without some more or less legitimate right of succession, are now commonly trodden by men who climb them without any such right. Their example, joined to human ambition, will excite even more the passion to dominate.24

On one point there was widespread agreement among the pamphleteers: whether a regency or some other form of government be created, it should be formed of a small body of men able to act decisively and rapidly. Its task would be to appoint a supreme military commander to coordinate the provincial armies in benefit of patriot military operations. Once this and other war-related matters were dealt with, the new government should settle down to resolving the country’s much needed reforms. The judiciary, treasury, military, navy and diplomatic corps were still packed with Godoy’s placemen who must be dismissed. Within a few months, wrote a reformist, ‘the Nation will find itself renewed … After this peaceful and consoling revolution, the task of planning the new order of things can begin with the creation of a new constitution.’25