

It would be easy for me to govern Spain and, should I be obliged to do so, I shall appoint viceroys in every province. But I do not refuse to cede my rights of conquest to the king once the capital’s thirty thousand burghers … have proven their loyalty … and made known to the nation that its existence and happiness depend on a king and a liberal constitution, which favours the people and is opposed only to the grandees’ egoism and proud passions.16

Napoleon’s revolutionary inheritance emerged in strength in his decrees and these words to the councillors. There was no reason to doubt the intention of either. His decrees were among the reforms necessary to modernize Spain, as four years later the patriots’ Constituent Assembly, the Cortes de Cádiz, implicitly recognized in creating a constitutional monarchy. Napoleon may also have hoped his measures would draw progressive Spaniards to the Bonapartist cause, overlooking that those who had joined the patriots rejected the concept of reform by a foreign power, even by the ‘greatest of Emperors’. But they were also a marker: the reforms, which Napoleon issued in his own name without consulting his anointed king, much to the latter’s chagrin, were what awaited the country if he were obliged to impose his personal rule in his brother’s place. As things turned out, with Josef restored by Napoleon to the throne, the decrees were, with two exceptions – the abolition of the Inquisition and of the religious communities – never put into effect. King Josef was not strong enough, or sufficiently willing to take such drastic but necessary measures.

### FLIGHT: MUTINOUS PATRIOT TROOPS

To the people at large in the patriot zone, maddened by Madrid’s surrender and the armies’ flight, the decrees – if they heard of them at all – were Napoleonic propaganda and they paid them no heed. The blow of defeat was all the heavier because the initial patriot triumphs had bred over-confidence and complacency. The provincial juntas’ gazettes kept the news of the capital’s fall from the people for as long as they could, up to a fortnight in Sevilla, and twice as long in Valencia where it was not published until January 3, 1809; but rumour always outpaced official news. The people knew well before it was announced that the capital had fallen and that its armies were in full retreat, its soldiers dispersing and mutinous. Accusations of treachery were rife. In Talavera, men of the Extremaduran army and local townsfolk assassinated the general in command of the Guadarrama passes, Benito San Juan. General Castaños, relieved of the overall command to which the Suprema had appointed him only shortly before, and ordered to re-join the Junta Suprema’s military committee, was fortunate not to meet the same fate. Subjected to every kind of insult and threat in the villages as he vainly tried to catch the Junta up in its flight southwards, he found that marauding soldiery were spreading the word that ‘there must be no more generals in command, and no government that gives orders ….’17 Calbo Rozas, one of three deputies ordered to Talavera by the Junta to report on the Extremaduran army’s desertion, wrote from Navalmoral four days after Madrid’s fall: