

Such is the insubordination that officers and other individuals on the road open the Junta’s dispatches. Out of curiosity, no doubt … It is impossible to get any news from Madrid.18

This merchant deputy had only a couple of weeks earlier shared with the Junta his reflections on the manner in which, despite having no armies or generals, the Aragonese, Catalans and Valencians had beaten off the French. ‘They have given a cruel lesson to all those grand politicians and learned military men’, he wrote. He proposed that senior officers who failed in their leadership should be court-martialled within the week and, if guilty, hanged within sight of their troops.19 Little had he thought then that mutinous troops would shortly take justice into their own hands.

On the night of December 1–2 the Suprema had fled from Aranjuez. It put about that it was making for Puerto de Santa María close to Cádiz. It travelled down the main Extremaduran road to Badajoz when, in Trujillo, it ran out of money. The Junta invoked the patriotism of the bishop and canons of Plasencia to provide the wherewithal to continue its flight. Recognizing that the Junta’s appeal had caused it the ‘most painful sentiments for a service that involves our duty and honour’, the bishop and canons apologized that, ‘with the gravest difficulties, we have succeeded in collecting only ninety thousand reales …’.20 Replenished with funds, the Junta managed to continue its flight. It had already received news of what sounded like a Sevilla junta revolt. On learning that the Suprema had fled, the Sevilla junta had called for a new junta to be formed in Córdoba of two delegates each from the Andalucian, Extremaduran and La Mancha juntas. When it became known that the Junta not only still existed, but was making for Andalucía, the Sevilla junta announced that its proposal had been intended only to create and coordinate the armed forces necessary to defend their regions should Napoleon thrust southwards after his victory in Madrid.21 However, relations were tense enough for many Junta members and their staffs to doubt their reception in Sevilla where, in fact, it had been decided to establish the Junta; but these fears were unfounded. On reaching the Andalucian capital on December 17, the Suprema received a warm welcome.22

Immediately on its arrival the Junta despatched urgent instructions to Badajoz to send out special commissioners to round up the dispersed troops to defend the Almaraz bridge on the main Madrid–Badajoz road across the Tajo. If the bridge were taken, all of Extremadura would be threatened. ‘Experience shows that our troops abandon even the best military positions when confronted by an enemy force not much greater in numbers.’23

General Galluzo, commander of the Extremaduran army, had unsuccessfully tried to blow up the bridge. When he learned that his flank had been turned by the French who, unopposed, had crossed the next bridge upriver, he inexplicably retreated some kilometres from Almaraz, leaving the bridge to be defended by only two infantry battalions of his force of five thousand men. On December 24, after only an hour’s combat, the French seized the bridge. The road to the heart of Extremadura was now open.