

On the morning of December 4, Madrid’s gates were opened, and the French marched in. Remembering Murat’s ferocious repression after the May 2 rising, the inhabitants had handed in their arms; they watched the troops in sullen silence. Napoleon kept the garrison to a minimum and its soldiers on a short leash. Even so there were ‘excesses’ and Napoleon reprimanded his army publicly: any imperial soldier caught mistreating an inhabitant, pillaging or impeding the re-establishment of order would be condemned to death by a military tribunal, he announced.12 As a further step to avoid provocation, the Emperor only entered the city once – and then early in the morning and without fanfare – to visit the royal palace, otherwise remaining in the duque del Infantado’s country house at Chamartín.

Those who had tried to leave Madrid before and during the French offensive had run the more likely risk of death at the hands of the capital’s inhabitants or the villagers arriving to help in the capital’s defence than from the French. José Pizarro was one of those who turned back on his attempted first flight, convinced that his life was in greater danger outside than within the capital.

Even the mass exodus on the capital’s fall was not without serious risk. Marauding soldiers and parties of villagers still making for the capital to defend it were a threat to those who had a privileged look to them and were evidently fleeing. Even grandees were obliged to leave the capital on foot. And the very few privileged who fled in comfort had to contend with the people’s ire. Their carriages were fired on, recalled the wife of a highly placed public servant.13 For those on foot, the lack of food was one of the worst hazards.

Determined to put the greatest distance between himself and Madrid, Pizarro set out again on foot and reached Navalcarnero with some companions he had encountered en route. There was no food to be had. Recalling an attractive young woman whom he had known years before in an amateur theatrical production, and whose father was a shoemaker in the now almost deserted township, he made enquiries of the only young man he could find. The directions he received were correct. He rang on the doorbell. Recognizing Pizarro, an aged, poor old man opened the door and embraced him, crying: ‘my dear sir, what a state you are in!’ Locking the door behind him, he began to cook a chicken with rice, a dozen eggs, and put bread and wine on the table. Once Pizarro and his companions had satisfied their stomachs, the old man told them of a fellow shoemaker who lived in the Toledo hills who would help them the following day. By leaving the main road, Pizarro and his fugitive companions might escape the worst of the marauding bands; and the shoemaker sent his son to show them the right track.

I can do no more than praise this shoemaker’s truly noble conduct and generous hospitality … The natural moral character of this poor sort of person should put in the shade those arrogant enlightened individuals, whose knowledge is most of the time directed at no more than a contemptible, small-minded egoism.14