Men and women working with their hands to lift the paving stones from the streets, to dig, fill sandbags, carry stones, to help with the defence work. In the [defence] junta, I found nothing but disorder, suspicion, and … dissimulated terror. So I, and many other honourable men and even women, went to work like day labourers on the defence of the Puerta de Fuencarral, and on a battery at the top of the calle de Alcalá.4

Though the popular spirit was willing to emulate Zaragoza’s defence, Madrid was not the Aragonese capital: in the latter it was the old part of the city, with its winding, narrow streets, that had helped to hold off the besiegers. Madrid’s northeastern sector which was under threat of assault had a number of avenues leading into the city’s heart. Napoleon came at the head of a far greater veteran army than the heterogeneous Zaragoza besiegers had assembled. The decisive difference resided in neither of these factors, however, but in the pusillanimity of those in authority in Madrid.

The Junta Suprema had placed the city’s defence in the hands of the marqués de Castelar, captain general of Castilla la Nueva, and General Tomás Morla, a member of the Junta’s military committee. But by the eve of Napoleon’s attack, the popular effervescence had risen to such a pitch that the authorities, alongside Castelar and Morla, created a defence junta to organize and keep it under control. The junta included officials of Madrid institutions and four Consejo members.5

On December 2, Napoleon reached the capital’s gates. Before launching his assault, he summoned the city to surrender, and received a defiant response: the inhabitants would die buried in the ruins of their houses rather than permit French troops to enter the city. The Emperor would have to assault the capital. But again before ordering the attack, he demanded the capital’s surrender. The Emperor had no wish to reduce Madrid by force and so to create patriotic heroes of its defenders; he wanted a quiescent and undamaged capital which would peacefully swear allegiance to its Bonaparte king, his brother, and show up the patriots as a doomed, fanatic, priest-ridden horde manipulated by the English for their own anti-French ends.

As the defence junta’s reply did no more than stall for time, Napoleon ordered his troops to attack. As the first shells fell on José Pizarro’s home his servants fled and the house was converted into a munitions depot. Pizarro himself received an order from the man commanding the Fuencarral gate to fetch munitions for the patriots who were fighting in open country beyond the gate.

I did as I was told. The people’s docility and zeal was incredible in those glorious days: someone had only to call out and from all the balconies people threw down their iron and copper utensils to make grapeshot, woollen or cotton articles for cannon wads. The balconies were covered with mattresses ready for street attacks; the entrances to the streets themselves were blockaded with tables, rich chests of drawers, and furniture of all sorts. There was no mistrust, all the houses were left open … Oh my countrymen, you were always worthy of better government!6