

Instead of pressing the attack, at 11 a.m. Napoleon sent another surrender summons, offering the city a pardon, security for its peaceful inhabitants, respect for churches and clergy and ‘oblivion of the past’.7

To the military on the defence junta it was obvious that the city could be heavily bombarded from the Retiro height which Napoleon’s forces had taken; to the civilians that, if resistance continued, their homes and property would be sacked. A majority decided to send two negotiators, General Morla and Bernardo Iriarte, a member of the Council of the Indies, to treat with the Emperor. After two hours of negotiations with Marshal Berthier, Napoleon’s chief of staff, the two Spaniards were taken before the Emperor who was waiting in the next tent. As Iriarte later recalled, Morla, almost prostrating himself at Napoleon’s feet, appealed for mercy, humbly repeating, ‘Aiyes pitié du peuple de Madrid’ (Have pity on the people of Madrid).

The Emperor turned his back on him and repeated, ten or a dozen times, ‘FF’ [‘Fuck’] … Embarrassed by this scene, I intervened and addressed the Emperor in a tone quite distinct from that of Morla’s humble and lamentable voice. ‘Sire, I am the brother of him who had the pleasure to sign the Peace of Bêle (which ended the War of the Convention) and to renew the links between our two nations which should never be separated one from the other. What happiness would be mine if I could obtain from a Hero such as Your Majesty the kind treatment of this people as befits your character.’8

Without moving, the Emperor continued the discussion with Iriarte. He threatened that if Madrid did not sign the capitulation articles by six the following morning, December 4, all those caught with arms would be executed. With these terms before it the junta spoke no more of resistance; but the news of the coming capitulation was kept secret for fear of the inhabitants’ reaction. As Pizarro recorded:9

Everything was done behind the people’s back, gulling them deceitfully; the people were still full of spirit and fight … I saw troops and their officers mysteriously retreating from their posts, the junta inexplicably and uncertainly leaving, and finally everything breaking up … Determined not to remain in the conqueror’s power, I decided to leave the capital and follow the fatherland’s noble but desperate resistance.*

The problem was to get the people to stop firing on the enemy. This was not easy, as Domingo Traveso, a Galician in the Seminario de Nobles, reported:

In the morning of December 3, an officer of the Segovia Grenadiers appeared and ordered everyone in the Seminario to stop firing. He said this was necessary because our armies were approaching from the rear to cut off the enemy and we could be mistaken and shoot at them. But the people took no notice and did not stop firing until two o’clock in the afternoon of the same day.10

When it became public knowledge that the junta was about to surrender many, like Traveso – a batchelor from Cedofeita, Galicia, who had been staying with his uncle, an employee in the general accomptancy of the state – fled the capital on foot; on reaching Mondoñedo on December 26, Traveso suffered the fate of many eyewitnesses of Madrid’s fall: he was detained in the militia barracks on possible charges of aiding and abetting the enemy by spreading false rumours. He was fortunate that two young Galician bakehouse porters from Vivero arrived shortly afterwards on foot from Madrid. They not only confirmed that Madrid had fallen but added that they had fled on hearing it said – or reading it in a French edict, one of them claimed – that all youth were to be rounded up and forced to join the imperial army.11