

The people who have learned to reason, and to weigh the measures of their Government since the late Revolution, are by no means contented … if any reverse should take place [on the Ebro – the new front line after the French retreat from Madrid] it requires no degree of foresight to predict that the Power of the Junta will totter to its base.41

Though slightly exaggerated, this was a prescient prediction. Several deputies, Stuart reported, had assured him that they felt very strongly the necessity of some measure to ‘calm the publick mind, [and] to re-establish the popularity of the Junta …’. Accordingly, the Suprema had determined to publish a manifesto written by Quintana, ‘a writer of some eminence’.42

The address, headed simply, ‘Spaniards’, dated October 26, was made public two weeks later.43 After rehearsing Spain’s recent ills, Quintana stated that in the Junta’s formation the Spanish had won their ‘greatest success, their greatest victory’. This ‘interim repository of supreme power’, a new ‘centre of authority’ had to confront an enemy of ‘colossal strength’. He warned that the road ahead was ‘long and arduous’ and that to follow it to its end would require ‘prudence and constancy … your enthusiasm and greatest qualities’. The Junta had decided to raise an army of five hundred thousand men and fifty thousand cavalry, the address continued. But its military preparations, urgent as they were, formed only one of its aims. The other, as important as the first, was to ensure to the people the ‘great reward’ for their enthusiasm and sacrifices. Political independence was nothing without felicity and internal security … It was high time that the law based on the general good came into being….

Spaniards, the fatherland must no longer sound a hollow and meaningless word to you … The Junta has already publicly recognized that a greater voice in the government must be accorded to the Nation, which in the king’s name and cause has achieved everything alone and without assistance. The Junta solemnly pledges that you shall have this fatherland which you have so enthusiastically invoked and defended – nay, indeed, conquered – with such valour.

The manifesto promised that the Junta would study the necessary reforms of the civil and penal code, projects to improve state education – ‘for so long overlooked among us’ – and called on the educated elite to submit their views on these matters to the Junta which would consider them with care. The Spanish would know how to improve their institutions and consolidate their liberty without disrupting the state. Quintana had judged public sentiment acutely. The pamphleteers’ insistence on the Junta as charged both with leading the war effort and as a reforming body had seen to that. But it was the war rather than reforms which had immediately to occupy its collective decisions.

Although the Junta had detached deputies to the various armies, it had not taken full control of the war effort; its generals were riven by rivalries and, most serious of all, the logistic support to keep the troops in the field was totally inadequate. The Junta admitted as much: ‘Many soldiers are nearly naked and exposed to illnesses which, because of the onset of winter, will cause more casualties than the enemy’; and it called on the provincial juntas to open subscriptions for uniforms which, including shoes and cape, cost a total of 257 reales.* An English observer reported that while the regulars and Valencian troops seemed fairly well clad, the Aragonese, Castilians and Murcians were suffering terribly from exposure. The Murcians in particular had no more than light linen shirts, pantaloons and a poncho to cover them from the rain. A terrible epidemic of dysentry was thinning the ranks.44 Three weeks later the Junta had again to insist that the provincial juntas secure uniforms for their recruits, look to their training and organize food supplies which could be had by ‘asking them of the wealthy who, being those most concerned to ensure the fatherland’s freedom, should willingly provide them’.45 The Junta’s summons came at a moment when the summer’s grain harvest in the Castillas and Andalucía had been the highest of the century.