

Coming from an enlightened top level civil bureaucrat – especially one as drily observant of his fellowmen as Pizarro – this was a fine testimony to the virtues of the Spanish artisan.

### NAPOLEON’S ‘REGENERATION’ OF SPAIN

In under four weeks, Napoleon had achieved his military objectives. With the patriot armies’ rout and the capital’s surrender, Spanish resistance had, he believed, met its end.

Amidst scenes of mutinous soldiery fleeing for their lives, the Junta Suprema’s hasty retreat, and the capital’s quiescent populace, Napoleon’s judgement appeared justified. In a war between states, one resounding victory, the capital’s capitulation, ended the conflict. But Madrid was not Vienna or Berlin; the Spanish war was not between states – there was nothing yet that could reasonably be called a patriot ‘state’ – but between a national uprising and the Napoleonic order. The war had started in the regions; in part deliberately, the provincial risings had set out to fragment a Madrid-based ‘despotic’ state. While the capital’s fall deeply affected the provincial patriot inhabitants who blamed it on the Junta Suprema’s ineffectual leadership, Madrid was not the resistance’s centre, and its surrender did not signify the end of the patriot cause. Resistance returned to where it had begun, in the regions.

The Emperor’s view was thus ill-judged. The war was not at an end, but rather about to begin: the real, gritty, grinding and seemingly endless war. Until then Napoleon had fought and defeated, in a decisive battle or two, the potentates of Europe, not their peoples – the objects, perhaps, but not the subjects of imperial destiny. He depreciated the lower classes. Despite his military genius, which had revolutionized warfare, he could find no strategy to deal adequately with popular war. And though the imperial armies in Spain were still to win many resounding victories in the field, the end of the tunnel, the ultimate victory which concluded the war, never came. As resistance was crushed in one region, it began again in another …

Nevertheless, with his customary reforming zeal and confidence in his power, the Emperor decreed from his Chamartín residence a series of radical reforms to ‘regenerate’ Spain. At the stroke of a pen, he abolished all feudal rights, including señorial jurisdictions, did away with the Inquisition, reduced the number of religious communities by two-thirds – their properties to fund an increase of secular priests’ salaries to 2,400 reales – and abrogated all internal customs barriers.15 At the same time, he dissolved the Consejo de Castilla. Had the Chamartín decrees been put into effect, they would have changed the face of Spain overnight. But what power was to implement them? His own, the Emperor assured a gathering of city councillors come to pay him homage on December 9. ‘There exists no obstacle capable of delaying for long the execution of my will ….’ But what was ‘superior’ to his power, he confessed, was to create a Spanish nation under a Bonapartist king if Spaniards continued in their hatred of France which ‘England’s supporters’ had spread throughout the country. National Spanish independence required that the king be assured of his subjects’ love and loyalty.