

I saw a ruined army, and troops who presented a most distressing appearance. Some were entirely barefoot, others almost naked, and all disfigured … by the most ravenous hunger … Many died of hunger along the roads and in the mountains. They appeared more like walking corpses than men ready to defend their fatherland.32

Infantado ordered that all male adults of La Mancha provide one pair of shoes each for the army, and that all arms abandoned or sold by the troops on their retreat be handed in immediately. The response was not overwhelming, for both orders were repeated six weeks later.33

### DEFEATS IN CATALUÑA

As the remnants of the Army of the Centre were straggling into Cuenca, disaster struck the Catalan army. Its second commander in six months, General Vives, former captain general of Mallorca, had ineptly set his sights on converting into a siege the patriot land blockade of Barcelona which prevented supplies reaching the city by road from France. His army of some twenty thousand was not strong, or experienced, enough to contain the city, let alone take it. Certainly, the French commander in Barcelona, General Duhesme, was experiencing problems supplying his ten thousand men and the inhabitants; Napoleon gave the task of relieving the city to General St Cyr at the head of an army of twenty-five thousand which marched into Cataluña at the same time as the Grande Armée advanced on the Ebro. After a month-long siege of Rosas, whose bay provided a base from which the British navy could control French maritime supplies to Barcelona, and which finally capitulated on December 5 without Vives making more than a minimal effort to relieve the town, St Cyr pressed forward to Barcelona. The attempt to stop him at Cardedeu resulted in the rout of General Reding, hero of Bailén, and the French commander entered the city on December 17. St Cyr’s victory was as much a moral as a military defeat for the Catalan army’s raw recruits who had taken courage from their blockade of Barcelona. Four days later they were dealt another blow: St Cyr again heavily defeated the army which had reassembled at Molins del Rey. Having lost all of their artillery, the survivors retreated southwards to Tarragona. As the Catalan junta wrote to one of its representatives on the Junta Suprema, these two ‘unfortunate defeats’ had led to such general discontent – ‘insubordination spread throughout a part of the army and some villages’ – that it had been necessary to appoint General Reding, who had twice gone down to defeat in under a week, to the army’s overall command.

One of the principal causes of our misfortunes is lack of money which makes it impossible adequately to clothe, equip and supply the army. A single province invaded by the enemy cannot maintain an army with the inadequate amount of aid that has been provided.34

Shortage of funds, supplies, food and clothing was endemic to all the patriot armies and remained so throughout the war. Meanwhile, only one army remained more or less in a condition to fight: the Aragonese, and that was now bottled up in Zaragoza at the beginning of the city’s second seige.