

Marshal Lannes had nine thousand troops to fight within the city; and as he periodically relieved half his force to rest for a few hours, his combat strength in the street fighting was effectively halved. This was a small number to take on an army still officially numbered at twenty thousand – almost certainly an exaggeration for many were fighting sick and could barely remain on their feet – as well as several thousand civilian defenders. But at the expense of vast quantities of gunpowder and field artillery brought through the breaches, the French advanced, more or less at the speed at which their sappers could dig; above ground, some of the more daring of these slid between the defenders’ loopholes and hammered their protruding musket barrels with crowbars … And yet so slow was the advance that many of the French troops grew discouraged: after three weeks of street fighting they had still not taken a building on the Coso from any of their breaches.

Palafox issued one proclamation after another: his patriotic rhetoric was considerably superior to his military leadership.

As in the first siege a spy mania broke out among the defenders. Since the beginning of the second the gallows had been raised in the customary public places and not a few ‘French spies” bodies were exhibited to the public dangling from them. They were shortly joined by a storeman in whose warehouse a number of desperately needed beds were discovered by chance. He was immediately seized as a traitor and garrotted in prison that night. His corpse was hung from the gibbets carrying a notice across his chest: Assassin of the human race for hiding twenty thousand beds.

Finally, on February 7 the besiegers advancing from the Agustín friary reached the south side of El Coso by capturing the orphans’ hospice. But this was only a slender hold. The French troops pushing slowly forwards to the Coso from Santa Engracia along the street of the same name faced a formidable obstacle: the heavily defended and fortified San Francisco friary where the besieged had workshops and a powder factory. French engineers planned to place the largest mine they had yet used under it: three thousand pounds of gunpowder. But as their sappers tunnelled they heard the unmistakable sounds of the defenders’ counter-sapping which had already reached behind them. Immediately, the French ordered their mine to be placed at the end of the tunnel; and in the early afternoon of February 10 they fired it. The huge explosion blew up a large part of the friary, but as the smoke and dust settled, the church tower was seen still to be standing. A ferocious and bloody hand-to-hand battle which lasted two days began among the ruins and dismembered corpses, in the church and on its roof. French soldiers pursuing defenders across the roof tiles slipped and fell to their deaths.44

Palafox issued another of his long proclamations, each of which was becoming more feverish in tone. Envisaging that the defenders might abandon him and the city to its fate, in which case ‘the world will abominate you’, he called on them to stand firm. Any who did not would bear the ‘mark of scorn on his forehead in the eyes of God and mankind’.45