

On December 28 the Junta issued its first decree creating and regulating irregular civilian combatants which envisaged them as a ‘new type’ of voluntary militia to ‘introduce terror and consternation into the enemy’s ranks’. Without totally depriving them of self-initiative, the Suprema placed these newly authorized formations firmly under regular army command, giving the civilian leaders and their subordinates military rank and pay; and excluding from their members all enlisted soldiers. This was to say that deserters were not permitted to join. The new voluntary militia was an expeditious and cheap way of extending resistance at no cost to the virtually bankrupt patriot treasury; and it was given a considerable incentive by permitting these new militias ‘to enrich themselves honourably from enemy booty’ and ‘to immortalize their names with actions worthy of eternal fame’. But the moment at which the decree was issued was so disastrous for the cause that it did not become widely known in large parts of the remaining patriot zone.

*

The Army of the Centre, commanded by Castaños until he was relieved of his command, was in little better shape than the Extremaduran army. Although only the rearguard had engaged the enemy, the long retreat after the defeat at Tudela – in which the Aragonese army took the brunt of the fighting – had taken its toll. A soldier, Alvaro de Angulo, wrote to his father from La Mancha on December 9 of the hardships the troops had suffered. Many officers and soldiers had dispersed because of their ‘great hunger and tiredness’.

After two weeks without having slept under a roof more than the half of two nights, paying a duro for a loaf of bread, losing the best part of our baggage, stealing horses one from another and – had it been possible – each others’ hearts too, we have neither been told where we are going nor ordered to fight which the whole army desired …31

The army had retreated on Madrid but arrived too late to play any part in the capital’s defence. Instead, its remnants had crossed the Tajo by ferry at various points upstream from Aranjuez, which had already fallen to the French, to take refuge in the mountains of Cuenca. Barely had Angulo’s regiment crossed the river and reached Santa Cruz de la Zarza than it was ordered to parade without arms. As Angulo related in his letter:

This made the troops think that they were about to be handed over to the enemy. There were shouts of ‘treachery!’ which were immediately followed by others crying ‘the enemy is upon us!’ Thereupon the soldiers fled, each as best he could, losing the remainder of the baggage and the regimental strongbox … I said to Perico Cuevas that I would follow him in whatever he did. That day we decided to make for Despeñaperros,* where we believe there must be people prepared to resist the enemy, whom we believe is going to march on Andalucía … Some officers and troops are accompanying us in the same spirit.

No sooner had the army reached the relative safety of the Tajo’s left bank than a mutiny broke out. Set in motion by his troops, an artillery colonel took the lead in trying to get the army’s remnants to retrace its steps to defend Madrid. But his commanders, under orders to make for Cuenca, and simultaneously incapable of dealing with the mutiny, renounced the army’s command in favour of the duque del Infantado. Grudgingly, the Junta Suprema accepted this fait accompli. The new commander gave a desolate account of the troops under his command.