

The great number of soldiers in the city had until then induced a certain popular lethargy, the inhabitants believing that the defence works and the fighting could be left to the military. Palafox’s constant proclamations and edicts – sometimes threatening, at others cajoling the population – had had far less effect than the besiegers storming through the city walls. Moreover, the number of soldiers fit to fight had diminished considerably. A new protagonist had entered the scene: typhus. In the cramped conditions, with civilians huddled in shelters against the bombardment, the epidemic spread rapidly.* Within a week of the siege’s start, six thousand soldiers were ill; by the time of the assault three hundred people were said to be dying each day. Food, especially meat and vegetables was in very short supply, either for the sick or healthy. Soldiers dropped dead in the streets. Corpses, the majority naked, some in sacks, were piled up at church doors and in public places, and the stench became so great that the order was given to bury them at night without coffins.40 By close to the end of the siege the number of hospitalized soldiers had doubled.41 The inhabitants again needed to fight for their and their families’ lives.

On January 30, after so heavy a bombardment that three whole storeys of the Santa Mónica convent by the plaza de San Agustín collapsed simultaneously, burying many of the defenders, the French seized it. From there on the following day they attacked the church and friary of San Agustín just to the north. Through a hole they blew in the church wall, the besiegers charged in and took cover behind the main altar. The defenders seized chairs and benches to improvise a barricade in the nave, and occupied the side chapels, the organ loft and even the ornately carved wooden pulpit, one of the most cherished adornments of the church which was soon filled with smoke from the grenades thrown by both sides. As the stained glass windows shattered under musketfire, the organ pipes were pierced, holy statues and wooden carvings in the side chapels splintered, the French charged from behind the altar. A bloody battle was fought at the foot of the pulpit, the last defenders were shot or bayoneted to death, and the attackers ran out of the church into the friary, only to find that every passageway was barricaded and had to be stormed.42 Finally, they seized it, assuring themselves of access to two straight streets leading to the eastern half of the Coso.

That same day, Palafox issued a proclamation calling on women to fight alongside the men. (Indeed, a considerable number had already been doing so for the past three days.)

The French soldiers will be frightened of you, ashamed of defeat at your hands … Your sole presence intimidates the bravest. A woman, when she wishes, makes the strongest [man] tremble …43

Numerous women responded the following day when French forces burst into the Plaza de la Magdalena on the Coso. Palafox had urgently summoned the inhabitants to the defence, and eight thousand people were waiting for them. So strong was the resistance, so withering the fire, that the French were forced to retreat.