

Typhus spread to the French troops who were fully stretched in holding on to the positions they had won. They still only controlled about one-quarter of the city. On February 15, Palafox fell ill; two days later he was confined to bed. On the 18th the French, after a short siege, siezed El Arrabal on the far bank of the Ebro and dominated the stone bridge which crossed to the city. They could now bombard Zaragoza from north and south. In the afternoon of the same day, the university on the far side of the Coso was mined, stormed and occupied. Officers dragged sick soldiers from their hospital beds to make good the depleted defence; often they had sufficient strength only to fire one round before collapsing. The end was in sight.

His fever worsening, Palafox made over his command to a junta of thirty-three officers, churchmen and authorities on the 19th. They spent all night and the best part of the next day arguing about the prospects of continuing the defence. Fewer than three thousand troops were fit to fight, they were informed, and few defensible strongholds remained. Marshal Lannes concentrated their minds by unleashing the heaviest bombardment the city had yet suffered and exploding several large mines in the city; he gave the junta two hours to agree to his summons to capitulate or face a full-scale attack. The junta agreed to negotiate. Lannes granted the inhabitants a general pardon; the garrison was to march out the following day from the Portillo gate with their arms and lay them down; all civilians were to hand in their weapons and villagers were free to return to their homes.

At noon on Tuesday, February 21, the garrison marched out. Colonel Luis François Lejeune, who had participated in both sieges, observed the thirteen thousand sick men who,

bearing the germs of the contagious disease in their blood, all hideously thin, with long, black, neglected beards and with barely enough strength to hold their weapons, slowly dragged themselves along to the beat of the drum. Their clothes were filthy and dishevelled. Everything about them gave the impression of the most atrocious hardships. But a sentiment of indefinable pride still flashed across their livid countenances.46

While the French troops looked at them and wondered aloud why they had had so much trouble overcoming this rabble, the Spaniards seemed to be counting the French ranks and ‘strongly regretting that they had ever weakened before such a small number of enemies’.47

An even more desolate sight met the first imperial officers who ventured into the city. ‘It was a horror to behold’, wrote a Polish officer, Heinrich von Brandt. The infected air was suffocating, dense smoke covered the sky. Under the arches of the calle de Toledo where many inhabitants who had lost their homes took refuge,

there lay children, old people, the dying and the dead, household furniture of every description, and starving domestic animals all in an indescribable confusion. In the middle of the street there was a heap of corpses, many in a state of complete nudity; here and there were braziers where a few poor wretches were cooking their food … The children above all, thin and with eyes bright with fever, were painful to see.48