

The revolt, however, was not yet over. Wednesday, December 28, its third day, began with the people’s altercation with a former junta member who had torn down an anti-junta pasquinade at Cuatro Esquinas, the city’s centre, and ended with the closing down of the honourable volunteer militia. The latter was highly unpopular. Its colonel, conde de Campo Hermoso, was known for his incompetence and arbitrary conduct, which affected all the city’s inhabitants, and particularly the subordinate classes.

But there was another reason, not confined to Murcia, for the regiments’ unpopularity. It was supposed to be made up of those who, for whatever reasons, were not eligible for military service. But in fact it was the refuge of many young men, especially from the privileged classes, to escape enrolment in the army.

There is no reason why youth who are fully capable of serving in the army or those who have got married to avoid military service, or hidalgos looking for ways out of joining the army by interpreting His Majesty’s orders in their own interests, should be allowed to enlist in the honourable militia in order to escape their responsibilities.16

This complaint by the newly enlisted Murcia plebeians showed that they were not prepared to be oppressed by the better-off who were dishonourably escaping the call to the colours by joining the honourable volunteers regiment. To make matters worse the latter’s duty officer – a ‘chubby young blond fellow’ – had the previous night arrested a wigdresser when he went to ask for the volunteers’ drums.17

Two carpenters and a baker made for the guardhouse. Juan Meléndez, a master carpenter in the silk-spinning factory, one of the intendente’s ‘wicked men’, demanded to see the officer in charge. The latter, a lawyer, admitted the carpenter to his presence. He did not know Meléndez who at first had his cloak wrapped round his face.* But later the duty officer saw that he was tall, brownish-skinned with a mark on his lip. The newcomer told him to come out onto the staircase.

There he opened his cloak. He had bulges in it which appeared to be firearms. On his left side there protruded a dagger or knife hilt. Taking off his hat, he said: ‘The people order you to close down the guardhouse and to come with me to the marqué s de Villafranca’s …’18

Recognizing that the man before him was one of the leaders of the previous day’s tumult, and that he came determined to achieve his ends, the duty officer consented: the few volunteer soldiers under his command had no ammunition, and there was still much popular disorder.

In the presence of the Suprema’s deputy, the master carpenter handed over the volunteer guardroom’s keys to Villafranca. ‘The people considered it right to shut the guardhouse. This gentleman was the officer on duty ….’ ‘Meléndez, you have done a very bad thing’, Villafranca replied. ‘If the people wanted this, they should have asked me first since they have placed the government in my hands’, the lawyer–officer recalled him as saying.