

On the day after Christmas, two popular and peaceful demonstrations demanded that Villafranca take over the junta’s political and military command. In the evening, a mass of people marched up to his house in the pouring rain, bringing with them the postal courier who had just arrived. They insisted that any suspicious letters be opened and read aloud.7 At that moment a thin man, with sunken cheeks in a brownish-skinned face, wearing a cape and top hat,* came through the crowd and said that the courier had brought documents for the intendente, Clemente Campos. ‘To his house!’ the people began to shout. A regimental adjutant, Gerónimo Valle, was ordered by his colonel, who was present, to accompany the crowd to ensure that no harm befell the intendente’s guard drawn from the regiment. When the adjutant reached the intendente’s house, people were shouting: ‘attack the guard!’, ‘force them inside!’ Valle pushed his way to the front. ‘Gentlemen, contain yourselves. What is it you want?’ ‘The ceremonial mace’, came the shout. A corporal touched Valle’s shoulder: ‘here it is’ and handed him the intendente’s symbol of office.

Almost immediately thereafter, according to Valle, who was latter arraigned for his part in the events, the intendente appeared before the crowd.

I have no desire to command. I am a true Spaniard and a respectable man. I have no need of more guards than the people of Murcia. Take my mace. I beg of you only one consideration: please leave us in peace because my wife has just given birth …8

Subsequently the intendente saw matters less equanimously. His staff of office had been forcibly seized as the result of an ‘iniquitous plot’ to deprive him of the junta’s presidency, to which Villar, the Suprema’s representative, had given his approval the following day. ‘The consequences of this bad example are evident from its similarity to a democracy’, he wrote to the Suprema, going on to finger the ten men who, he claimed, were the real troublemakers: an apothecary, two carpenters, a tavern-keeper, a surgeon, a noted doctor, a weaver, a master woodcarver, a scrivener’s assistant, and one other man whose trade or profession he did not state.9

The crowd, whose leaders were armed with staves, blunderbusses, shotguns, swords and carbines, next made for the military councillor’s house and shouted that he surrender his mace. Lieutenant General Julián Retamosa appeared with his staff of office which, with the crowd’s approval, Valle took. No sooner had the general retired inside his house, than a voice shouted: ‘and the general’s sash!’ The crowd took up the cry. The general sent a servant down with it and handed it over to Valle who wrapped it around the two maces.

When Valle handed them over to the Suprema’s deputy, the latter passed them on to Villafranca: ‘As the people have elected your excellency as their political and military leader, as these insignia demonstrate, I, in the name of Fernando VII, bestow them on you.’ A one-eyed man in the crowd called out: ‘And if you don’t govern well we shall take them from you.’10