

Having arrived direct from England without campaigning experience, Baird’s division, with the exception of the Guards, fell to pieces in the village of Bembibre, about forty kilometres west of Astorga.

Bembibre exhibited all the appearance of a place lately stormed and pillaged. Every door and window was broken, every lock and fastening forced. Rivers of wine ran through the houses and into the streets, where lay fantastic groups of soldiers … women, children, runaway Spaniards, and muleteers, all apparently inanimate … while the wine, oozing from their lips and nostrils, seemed the effect of gunshot wounds.58

The British rearguard tried to get the drunken soldiers to their feet and on the march westwards. But the two-day advance that Moore had stolen on the French was lost. The French cavalry were now upon the British. In Bembibre, they rode through the lines of the drunken soldiers ‘slashing among them as a boy does among thistles’.59 More than three hundred British were taken prisoner, most of whom bore sabre wounds.

The scenes of drunkenness, pillaging, looting and general disorder were repeated at Villafranca. They were far worse than anything seen among the Spanish armies’ ‘dispersos’; Spanish troops were frequently reported to be dying of hunger – something never reported about the British who died rather of drunkenness. What Moore saw in Villafranca incited him to another strong proclamation. He again told his officers to ‘put an end to this disorder’. While some plundered, others straggled and many fell down dead drunk; the rearguard, in which Hanoverian dragoons, though often hard pressed, played a singularly important role, held off the enemy. The remainder of the army did no fighting; it had to march – and march fast – through sleet and snow. But it was retreating not on mountain tracks but along a main road. It was on the second of the road’s two major passes, the Pedrafita, that the most dramatic accounts appeared in many soldiers’ memoirs of the retreat. Most of them concerned the scores of women camp followers and their children who had accompanied the army from Portugal. Ensign Blakeney saw a group of soldiers lying in the snow by the roadside. He approached to get them to their feet to continue the retreat.

In my coming up a sad sight presented itself. Through exhaustion, depravity or a mixture of both, three men, a woman, and a child all lay dead, forming a kind of circle, their heads inwards. In the centre was still the remains of a pool of rum, made by the breaking of a cask of that spirit. The unfortunate people must have sucked more of the liquor than their constitutions could support.60

One of Moore’s staff officers picked up a baby still suckling at her dead mother’s breast under an overturned bullock cart, wrapped it in his cloak and rode off with it. Other officers stopped and lifted up two-day-old twins struggling in the snow beneath a second cart on its side: the woman who had been riding in it, and the mules pulling it, were dead.