

‘Well, the thing is done now’, responded Meléndez, ‘and there is no remedying it’, letting Villafranca understand that he had no regrets.19 Without more ado, the honourable volunteer regiment was disbanded.20

The two carpenters and the baker were arrested, with many others, at the beginning of April 1809, nearly three months after the events. Of the first dozen or so men who were gaoled by the investigating magistrate for their alleged participation in the tumult’s various events over half were master craftsmen – those usually called upon by the pre-war authorities to put down the revolts of their journeymen and apprentices, none of whom figured among the recorded number of Murcian accused. The working elite’s dissatisfaction with their social superiors in the old junta’s organization of the local war effort – and it was not much better under the new – had reached critical proportions. As an anonymous correspondent wrote to the Suprema:

If the provincial juntas had been created correctly, and the artisan and farmer had had a vote on them like all the others who should not have it, things would have been different … In Murcia only the unhappy artisans are enlisted, for the rest nobody has to serve …21

For long thereafter, Murcian politics remained polarized between ‘old’ and ‘new’ juntas. Obliged to send two ranking officials to restore a minimal unity, the Suprema became the target of popular anger by also reinstating the ‘old guard’ alongside the new. As one friar, Alejandro Valentín Castillo Zapata, recorded:

The people are very disdainful. They say: on our own authority we overthrew the former junta and we had just and powerful reasons for doing so … What reasonable motive has the Suprema to derogate what only a short time earlier it approved … [and to press for the arrest of those] who took part in the events – persons who deserve to be applauded rather than punished?22

But this, the friar continued, was an ‘everyday occurrence in Spain at the present time …’. Murcia was experiencing what had happened in Valencia, Granada and other ‘notorious places’: their juntas, assuming a ‘feigned patriotic air and a burning zeal’ to the prejudice of the public cause, had punished many hundreds of ‘good, true and innocent patriots’ to prevent an outcry against their corrupt obstination and conduct. Unless the Suprema took the most serious measures to remedy these ills, the lower orders would, without any doubt, take over the whole government. ‘They will cure these problems easily ….’ Preaching to the wind: the Suprema was the supreme example of what the writer complained of.

### CÁDIZ: THE JUNTA DEPOSED

There were few critical junta members, especially progressives, who did not suffer imprisonment at the hands of their fellows. The above writer’s reference to Valencia concerned the anti-progressive junta coup staged by the region’s former captain general, La Conquista, on December 29, 1808, when he arrested Vicente Bertrán de Lis and father Rico, leaders of the original anti-Napoleonic rising, along with most of the Bertrán group, on trumped-up charges of ‘disturbing public order and clashing with the authorities’ during the latter rising. The accused were shipped off to Mallorca, though eventually most were found innocent.23