

By now great numbers of Moore’s army, including some officers were marching barefoot – or unable to keep up because of their bleeding feet. Shoes disintegrated in the churned up mud. Dysentery was rife, exhaustion common. Officers fell asleep as they marched. With only one day’s bread ration remaining, and Soult on his heels, Moore ordered a twenty-four-hour forced march of seventy kilometres to Betanzos, close to La Coruña, where he expected to find British transports waiting to embark the army. With the exception of the Guards and the two reserve brigades, which had alternated as the rearguard and frequently faced the enemy, the remaining regiments which reached Betanzos were ‘disorderly, the officers negligent; the whole army … disorganized in the most disgraceful manner’, wrote a senior British officer.61 Behind the regiments came the thousands of sick, shoeless, exhausted, the plunderers, marauders and malingerers. And what had the looters stolen? Money, but also

brass candlesticks bent double, bundles of common knives, copper saucepans hammered into masses, every sort of domestic utensil which could be forced into their packs were found upon them without any regard to value or weight … On this day upwards of fifteen hundred robust marauders … passed through the rearguard of the reserve.62

From the motley array of loot, it was obvious that the villagers had suffered the greatest plundering. Most of the latter fled their homes as the British retreated, leaving houses unattended which, on the flimsy pretext that the villagers were withholding due aid, the soldiery considered ripe for plunder. Defending the villagers against accusations of ‘their inhospitable reception of us, and the concealment of provisions’, a British officer put it:

Do those who are most loud in their complaints honestly think that an army of 30,000 Spaniards would be better received in England than we were in Spain? I doubt it much. The people, dispirited and alarmed, began to look to self-preservation as the primary or sole object of their care.63

The Junta Suprema was outraged by Moore’s retreat.

It is with the greatest bitterness that the Junta has witnessed the British Army’s conduct … it could have retreated with Romana’s army to the mountains of Galicia and there stood firm.64

But as much as the British retreat, the Suprema feared that La Coruña’s fall would give Napoleon ready access by fast-sailing ships to the Spanish South American colonies to alarm and undermine their confidence with false news about the patriot cause.65

The British army, at last in reasonably good order after Moore had again issued a strong warning to officers and troops, reached La Coruña to a warm welcome. Men and women set out, as in the defence of Madrid, to try to strengthen the city walls against the French attack which they realized was imminent. But the transport ships Moore had ordered from Vigo had not arrived. The British were going to have to make a last stand. Moore drew up the army on a ridge about three kilometres outside La Coruña near the village of Elviña, while Soult occupied a ridge in front. The following day, the transports put into La Coruña. Early in the afternoon of January 16, when evacuation of the sick, baggage, cannon and cavalry was planned to begin – previously over two thousand horses and draught cattle, in so sorry a state that they were not worth shipping, were stabbed and shot to death or finally driven over a cliff66 – the French attacked. There was heavy fighting for Elviña which was taken and re-taken; as he was directing a counter-attack Moore was struck by a cannon-ball that severed his left arm and shoulder – a fatal wound from which he died a few hours later. He was buried that night in La Coruña. After three hours of fighting, the battle ended with both armies occupying more or less the same positions as they had before it.