

Although up to this point there could be little doubt that the crowd – and possibly Valle – were working in concert with Villar, the comment indicated that the people had their wits about them. The events of the following day reinforced this idea.

At 10 o’clock the next morning, more grave incidents occurred outside the episcopal palace.* As the bishop’s employees were preparing to distribute tithe grain and alms to the poor, a small, red-faced man in a green cape strode up. A mason, commonly known as the ‘Governor’, he shouted to the men to stop giving out wheat and insulted them roundly. To the two or three poor who had already received their portion, he ordered them to return it to the stack, and the granary’s doors to be shut.

This is what the people want. All the grain must be sent to the army, he cried. Then, turning on the episcopal porter, he said: why are you not wearing a cockade? You’re man enough for that, do the same as the rest of your class … Then the apothecary who was standing close by told the porter to get back to his room lest worse happen …11

Under arrest, the mason in question, by the name of Marin, testified to the investigating magistrate that he had just come out of the episcopal palace lavatory as the alms distribution was beginning.

It seemed right that the wheat which was about to be handed out should go to the army, because here everyone can work and improve their lot. The accused did not intend to insult anyone; had he thought he might do so, he would have preferred to bury himself underground, being, as he was, no more than a very poor man who could eat only when he worked …12

Marín’s action attracted a large crowd to the bishop’s residence. And what comments had he heard them make?, the investigating magistrate asked the forty-six-year-old apothecary, Manuel Gómez, identified by the intendente as one of the city’s ‘most wicked’ subjects and who was detained in gaol on suspicion of participating in the events. The people were saying that the bishop ‘should be confined to a friary and receive only twenty reales a day, and all the rest of his income should be devoted to the war effort’.13

Villafranca condemned the insults against the prelate’s decorum and respect, and ordered the arrest of those responsible. While the bishop gave way to the popular demand no longer to distribute alms to the poor and send the proceeds to the army, he also gave vent to his ire. He informed the Junta Suprema that he had suffered

the most sacrilegious and degrading insults that could be made to a vagrant or criminal. The people wanted to confine me to a friary and seize my mitre … [while] others have distorted my actions to give them a criminal appearance, to make them appear as though I do not use my tithes to support the public cause.14

But the bishop was careful not to say as much to the Murcian public. Two days after the worst of the tumult, he issued a printed statement in which he listed all the money the bishopric had contributed to the war effort and on alms since the beginning of the war. Privately, he begged Villafranca to have the case against his denigrators dismissed or, if that were impossible, that none of the accused be punished. Christian charity was informed by the experience that it was impolitic to antagonize the Murcian lower orders.15