

Villanueva was an important agricultural township, the head of the Montiel administrative district, lying about thirty kilometres due east of Valdepeñas in the southern half of La Mancha. Nearly sixty percent of its population was engaged in the dry-land grain farming typical of the area. Artisans formed one in twelve of the working inhabitants. Although the population of 5,700 had declined since the end of the seventeenth century, Villanueva remained one of the more densely populated municipalities of La Mancha, including a high proportion of day labourers; and for that reason no doubt, like other places in the region, the township had earned a reputation for rebelliousness.29

The increasing numbers of smallholders and tenants who had lost their lands to large farmers and had been reduced to day labouring had heightened social tension in La Mancha for a number of years before the war. Labourers, who still remained proportionately far below the numbers in Andalucía and Extremadura, resorted to acts of violence against the large farmers’ lands, ripping up their crops and putting axes to their olive trees.30

The call to patriotism was insufficient to reduce the social tension: all those without property to defend knew only too well – indeed it had been stated by none other than the Junta Suprema – that the landowners and wealthy had the most to lose from a French victory. Nevertheless, by resisting the French, the proletarians stood to lose a great deal more: theirs and their families’ lives, their women’s honour and the desecration of their cherished religion – a threat more than enough, in the absence of an army to defend them, to put doubts in the mind of all but the bravest. Even the Suprema recognized the problem of convincing villagers to engage in their self-defence.

It was in this situation that the Villanueva lawyer and member of the local junta, Antonio Josef Cabañero, declared the township’s independence from the provincial junta and the Suprema. He issued a call to all the neighbouring villages to send delegates to a meeting to agree on a common defence policy. His refusal to accept the provincial junta which, like the majority of its kind, had not thought to include members from its principal townships, led him to reject its emissary sent to resolve the local dispute unless two of Villanueva’s junta members were given seats on the provincial junta. But his defiance was reported to have gone much further: he had ‘captivated the people’s simple minds and especially that of the junta’s president’, had taken over all public funds and used ‘armed force to seize all the king’s possessions’, that’s to say, all those to which the Suprema had entitled itself.31 A strong personality in a situation like this could become an indisputable leader. But what was equally evident was that, in the absence of a strong patriot national government, local autonomy again inevitably came to the fore. And this autonomy, just as inevitably, denied the inhabitants’ duty blindly to obey the patriot authorities. The strength of wartime resistance depended as much on this local disobedience – or rather, local initiative – than in obedience to the central authorities. In the last instance, the latter could do very little to protect individual villages or their surrounding rural areas.