

since the Army of the Centre has been here, this town and its neighbouring villages have been devastated. Food and supplies have been paid only by receipts and bits of paper. The costs have risen by having to care for six hundred ill soldiers. Due to this, sickness has spread so rapidly among the small number of the town’s inhabitants that within less than a week two hundred people have been laid low, and the contagions continue to spread.2

Contagious diseases and lack of hospitals decimated civilians, and reduced the fighting strength of the armies. In April 1809, five thousand soldiers were in Catalan hospitals with ‘putrid fevers’ resulting from lack of proper clothing and the miserable conditions of the previous winter’s campaign. The army’s commander-in-chief ordered a ration of brandy for his troops to increase their nutrition ‘in order to prevent in part the spread of disease’.3

Naturally, nothing was more feared. In March 1809, the Sevilla junta commissioned a doctor to report on how contagious diseases in La Mancha could be prevented from spreading to the Andalucian capital.4

By October 1808, Napoleon had pushed nearly three hundred thousand troops into Spain in an attempt to put down the insurrection. (The number rose by another fifty thousand to its maximum in the summer of 1810.)5 Depending on circumstances, the Spanish army had around one hundred thousand men. Without counting the British army’s sporadic incursions, some four hundred thousand ‘useless hands’ had to live off a countryside which, before the war – when most of the available labour was working the land – struggled to support its own population. It was fortunate for Napoleon – and the patriots – that the conflict began in a bountiful agrarian year: the highest grain crops of the new century. A famine year in 1808, or even a year of below average crops, and it is doubtful that the war could have continued for long, unless Napoleon renounced his dictum that imperial troops had to live off the land, as he was forced to do in Cataluña, a region traditionally deficient in grain.

Although in principle the Spanish military paid for its supplies, the patriot treasury was usually in such dire straits that the payments, as in Chinchilla, were not in cash but receipts. (Some of the wealthier made a good living from this: they discounted heavily the villagers’ paper and collected the full amount – or as near as they could get for it – from the treasury when the Mexican silver ships arrived.) Short of hands, the villagers had to support, virtually free of charge, two, and sometimes three, destructive armies as well as Spanish guerrilla forces and try to keep themselves alive. In consequence, a vital – indeed the vital – issue of the war turned on the control of limited food resources.

In 1809, the villagers’ inevitable inexperience in this matter no doubt increased their number of deaths; lack of food exposed them to dying cruelly of disease. Some, of course, died at the hands of imperial troops in their raids to exact supplies but they were the minority. The sort of thing that happened in these French forays – the following example is from the village of Pueblanueva, southeast of Talavera de la Reina – was described by a member of the Toledo junta in hiding, Martín de la Cerda. On November 24, 1809, French infantry, accompanied by cavalry, entered the place and seized eight to nine thousand head of all type of livestock, as well as over seven hundred fanegas of barley.* They also looted some houses. Three days later, as he was writing his account, they were seizing a further ninety-two fanegas of barley and looting three more houses.