

Just over a fortnight before the judge, Francisco León Bendicho, set out on his commission, Toledo had been taken by the French without resistance; this opened the way to the enemy light cavalry which set out on exploratory patrols southwards towards La Mancha. But the mass of the French army had been diverted to Castilla la Vieja and León in pursuit of the British forces under General Moore and was not about to attack. Nonetheless, fear of the enemy’s advance reigned in villages and townships deep into La Mancha.

The judge began with an escort of four hundred light cavalry. Given the chronic shortage of patriot troopers, this was a huge force. Almost immediately his escort was ordered north to reinforce the patriot vanguard. After ‘very disagreeable’ talks with the cavalry’s major, Bendicho persuaded him of the importance of keeping his escort to ensure ‘public order’ in the rear. The real reason emerged a few days later when a new general ordered the escort to the west, and the judge accompanied it ‘because my person was not safe without it, due to the influence which the previous scenes of ferocity still retained in the people’s minds’.26

While fearing for his personal safety, Bendicho was, for a high court judge, curiously reticent about providing concrete evidence of this ‘ferocity’, or of the ‘considerable number of assassins and the evil-intentioned’ he had arrested who were ‘fomenting this province’s insurrections’. He reported only one arrest of a man who had seriously wounded a magistrate in the countryside near Almagro.27 But when it came to a confrontation with the provincial junta of Ciudad Real over the extent of his remit, he acted with insufferable arrogance – filling endless pages to the junta and Suprema on a trivial matter of precedence and status.28 Obviously imbued with a sense of his self-importance as a judge and a Suprema commissioner, his positive patriotic influence on villagers and town inhabitants, in which the Suprema had trusted, could only have been of small value.

He nearly met his downfall at the hands of the patriot tribunal of public security in Sevilla. His failure to explain the ‘grave excesses’ of the deposed French-born corregidor in Almagro were sufficient for the tribunal to consider the judge’s conduct highly suspicious and to demand his recall for investigation. The Suprema softened the punishment to a reprimand, and Bendicho continued in his post – almost certainly as much hated as the French – until he fled before the enemy in April 1809. The actions of one Old Regime judge were of no special social significance other than as an indication of the human material on which the Junta Suprema counted to assure itself of popular support. Blind obedience to patriot authority – like obedience to the eighteenth-century absolutist reformers – was, in this view, the villagers’ essential duty. Popular mobilization had therefore to take place outside of the authorities’ ambit. The contrasting events in two townships, which Bendicho reported but did not investigate, were significant of the social divisions taking place in La Mancha. In the face of the French threat, a local lawyer in Villanueva de los Infantes revolted against the provincial junta and the Suprema because neither could do much to defend his locality; in Carrión de Calatrava, a noble of a famous house staged a coup to reinstate señorial domination.