

made them determined to resist whatever number of French attacked the township. They were perfectly united in their aim – the only essential in such circumstances. In order to triumph, the whole peninsula should have pursued this aim from the start, and should at the present still pursue it … The people said, We shall triumph or die before surrendering …

On the following two days, French cavalry detachments approached the township to observe if it was still defended. Seeing that the defences had been improved – new trenches had been dug, more embrasures opened in the walls, every sort of cart and carriage used to form ramparts in the streets should the French suceed in penetrating the outer defences – the French cavalry withdrew without offering to fight.

Even so, the French cavalry general ordered the township to surrender and swear allegiance to Josef Bonaparte. ‘Some people argued that, in order to avoid worse consequences Villacañas should submit; but others, more sensible, rejected their arguments.’ By this time the inhabitants had armed themselves with every conceivable weapon: muskets, shotguns, blunderbusses and pistols; swords, halberds, lances, pikes, sharpened iron staves and billhooks attached to long wooden poles … ‘a selection of quite extraordinary weapons’. The military men divided them into groups to defend the township. On Christmas day, the French cavalry again appeared in force. By now totally confident, the defenders shouted at them to attack; when the French held back, the infuriated inhabitants suddenly rose from their defensive positions and attacked them, putting the enemy to flight and pursuing him into the countryside. ‘Since then we have seen no more of him.’

*

Villacañas became an heroic patriotic episode, cited as an example of local defence in the Suprema’s call for all-out popular war. Without denying the bravery and determination of the township’s inhabitants, it must be said that French light cavalry was not the adequate military force to subdue a township’s resistance. It was not intended as such, as its lack of cannon demonstrated. It was the Napoleonic army’s exploratory ‘screen’, ranging far ahead of the infantry to gather information of the enemy’s positions and the possibilities of exacting food supplies. At a moment of the Spanish armies’s dispersion, it was a force sufficient to occupy undefended townships; but not to overcome those which stubbornly resisted.

To cite Villacañas as exemplary in terms of local resistance was consequently somewhat of a Suprema deceit. Should the French infantry, supported by cannon, attack a township or village, the consequences were almost certainly to be much graver for its inhabitants. But as long as the patriots defended the interests of noble landowners and large farmers, their concept of popular resistance could go no further than to envisage that the plebeian inhabitants of villages and townships should – as in Villacañas – patriotically sacrifice their lives in an all-out resistance to the French. Real popular war would have made very different demands on the dominant social structure: greater representation in provincial juntas, or even in the Suprema; the end of noble domination of the army’s officer corps, the abolition of señoríos and their feudal domination; the conviction that defence of the fatherland was the defence of a more just and equitable future instead of the defence of an existing hierarchical society … If the patriots, exemplified in the Suprema, did not envisage this sort of popular war, it must be said that the villagers did not generally demand it either. Under the Church’s influence, when they were willing to fight it was to defend the past, not the future.