

The inactivity ended on the evening of December 20, 1808. Guided by a local man, sixty French cavalry silently entered the township and formed up in the main square. Their captain demanded that the magistrate provide them with two men to lead them to Alcazar de San Juan, the district’s chief town, thirty kilometres or so to the south, for which they were leaving immediately. Distrusting their intentions, the inhabitants suddenly fell on them with any and every weapon that came to hand, killing two troopers and their horses and putting the rest to flight. The people, who suffered no losses, pursued them into the countryside, but in the snow and darkness lost sight of them. This access of popular fury was typicially attributed, in the subsequent report (by a participant in the events), to the inhabitants’ renowned patriotism, their hatred of and anger at these ‘bandits whose only precepts are sackings, violations, desecration and devastation’. If this were the case, why had the inhabitants quietly basked in their ‘criminal inactivity’ only the day before?

The writer gave a small, but better clue to another important aspect of this sudden attack. Among the inhabitants were a number of men who had served in the army, to whose orders the inhabitants – especially the ‘rustics’ as the correspondent put it – willingly deferred. Had these been retired army officers, it would have been customary to specify their rank. But there was no mention of rank, not even of the military man who was popularly elected as ‘General’ to lead the defence. It was conceivable therefore that some of these men were dispersed soldiers of the Army of the Centre, and by now virtual deserters – whom the writer did not want to refer to directly in order to save them from reprisals. These soldiers’ well-documented desire to avenge their humiliating retreat after the battle of Tudela may well have precipitated the attack.

Whatever the case, Villacañas was now committed to defend itself against the inevitable French reprisal. That night the inhabitants seized the arms stored in the town hall, and posted sentries to alert them to a surprise French attack. As was their habit in these situations, some of the local authorities decamped, leaving the township to its fate. Nonetheless, a few ‘more or less distinguished persons’, among whom were the report’s author, and a number of priests and friars remained to participate in the defence.

The following day, December 21, two hundred enemy cavalry appeared shortly before noon to take the township. The enemy opened fire with such ferocity that ‘it sounded like cannon shots’. The fire was returned from behind the walls which enclosed underground rooms on Villacaña’s outskirts and hastily dug trenches. The battle lasted over three hours; the defenders nearly ran out of cartridges, but the ‘God of battles’ came to their aid by the discovery of some musket balls, powder and cartridges held by the inhabitants. Unable to advance, the French finally sounded the retreat. This victory over ‘the victors of Austerlitz, Jena and Marengo’ enthused the population. Their patriotism