

When, in the summer of 1809, the French occupied villages in Villanueva’s neighbourhood and the patriots fled to the hills, the township’s junta president and magistrate, who was earlier said to have been in Cabañero’s thrawl, swore allegiance to King Josef. This the local junta members in hiding, including Cabañero, would have forgiven him, believing he had acted out of ‘fear or stupidity’; but what they could not forgive was that he had travelled to Madrid, taking with him a commoner under a noble pseudonym, to swear personal fealty to Josef on behalf of Villanueva’s nobility and commoners.32 Duplicity, it appeared, was but another form of personal defence.

*

The Carrión coup, in the heartland of the Calatrava military–religious order’s domains, momentarily deposed a local magistrate appointed by the provincial junta in place of the previous señorial administration. Members of the order had come under attack at the beginning of the war from one of the first patriot guerrilla leaders for having failed in 1808 to help villagers fight Dupont’s army as it crossed La Mancha to Andalucía.

Carrión de Calatrava, not far distant from Ciudad Real, was a village of some two thousand inhabitants, one in five of whom was a day labourer. It was one of the many, centred on Almagro, over which the military–religious order had held sway since the seven-century-long reconquest of Spain from Islam’s domination. In Carrión, early on the morning of Friday, March 18, 1809, a noble, Antonio Portocarrero, accompanied by his brother, a friar of the order, and several other persons, affixed a public edict proclaiming that he was asuming the judgeship in order to control ‘the revolutionaries and discontented’ who had ‘disturbed public tranquility’ since the new magistrate’s appointment. Henceforth, his edict proclaimed, gatherings of three or more people were prohibited under pain of a fine and imprisonment, and ‘revolutionaries and tumultuous people’ would be punished under the full rigour of the law. Portocarrero’s acolytes assaulted the existing magistrate who quickly resorted to a cavalry colonel for help; after ascertaining from the local priest who was the village’s rightful magistrate, the colonel arrested Portocarrero. He was found to have a pistol on him, and his dagger was discovered thrown into a corner of his place of confinement.33

The coup’s importance was more symbolic than real. But it demonstrated the determination of an important sector of the landed classes not to lose their señorial domination over ‘revolutionary’ day labourers and the like.

*

As a result of these multiple disturbances in the patriot zone, the Junta Suprema issued, on February 3, 1809, new orders on the suppression of riots. No society or government could exist unless its members were to ‘submit to the law and respectfully obey the authorities whose duty it is to enforce it’. Henceforth, riot leaders and those who offended magistrates would be shot out of hand; and their followers sentenced to two hundred lashes and ten years in a penal colony. The lightest sentence was forcible enlistment in the army to fight in the positions most exposed to danger. It became an offence to pass on ‘seditious’ comments about magistrates or the authorities, to detain or open the mails, to call anyone a ‘traitor’ in public. The armed forces were to assemble immediately on the scene of a riot; parents and guild masters were responsible for keeping their children or journeymen and apprentices out of the streets; and guild officials were to put themselves at the authority’s orders to restore public order. With the exception of enlistment riots, which continued unabated, the number of other riots certainly declined – though whether this was due to the new ordinance or to the increasing demands of the war was open to question.