

it is impossible that the Council of the Indies could persuade the colonies’ inhabitants that it has freely decided in the national interest [to impose the oath of fidelity]. The Junta [Suprema] or the other juntas which still exist are certainly in frequent correspondence with the colonies and will have told them that the juntas are invincible and whatever else they feel is needed to maintain their and the colonies’ union …

Whatever the outcome of the present struggle, Spain must preserve the Indies … When the Spanish provinces [in revolt] admit defeat or change opinion and come to agreement [with us] … When the colonies’ inhabitants do not receive conflicting reports from Spain, but hear a single authoritative voice speaking … then it is almost certain that Spain’s and the colonies’ unity will remain assured through ties of family, custom and interests; and those in the Indies who promise themselves a better future under a different form of government will be overcome. Meanwhile, the divisions in Spain must not be permitted to pass to the colonies and foster plans for independence.25

Though it illustrated a Bonapartist political view of what was necessary to preserve the colonies, Azanza’s report was already outdated by the time Embite got hold of it.* On learning of the beginning of the war and the creation of regional juntas in the metropolis, many of the South American colonies had formed their own juntas which sooner or later would lead to independence movements. Embite’s report to the Suprema’s general secretary answered one other important question: the state of mind of Madrid’s population.

Here it is necessary to divide the inhabitants into the same classes the social order uses to consider mankind. All those who previously made up what was called the plebs – tradesmen, retailers and employees, even those of the courts of justice – are spirited and abhor the French domination more than ever. The large merchant houses and their employees support the new regime out of fear. Amongst the inhabitants at large, there are many declared supporters of our enemies, I was assured.

After a week in the capital, Embite was informed by a sympathizer that his presence there was known to the police, and another friendly informant told him that a man in muleteer’s disguise had been taken prisoner. Believing that this might be his companion del Campo, he decided to leave. Again his merchant host came to his aid, securing a pass from the Spanish police – an easier matter than from the French military – to leave the capital with his servant. Taking on his host’s guise, Embite left Madrid the following day to return to Sevilla which he reached without great trouble.26

Once he had presented his report, he petitioned the Suprema in Old Regime style to grant him a recompense for his efforts: to be appointed one of its aides-de-camp and promotion to lieutenant colonel. In May Embite received his reward of the promotion and reinbursement of the money he had spent from his own pocket, some five thousand reales.