

With all the more reason, the inhabitants of occupied Castilla la Vieja hoped for the conflict’s conclusion to rid themselves of the constant anxiety caused by the intrusive imperial military presence. But in both Castillas it may be equally true that the recovery in conceptions was a further sign of the ravages of war. Couples began to ‘make good’ the drop in the birth rate due to the earlier decline in fertility.

Though a popular desire for the war’s end was disappointed, the above average recuperation fed through into a demographic recovery in both Castillas in 1810–1811.

### THE PATRIOT ARMY:
DEFEATS, AND MORE DEFEATS ON THE BATTLEFIELD

The year ended as it had started with the main patriot army routed and in flight. With the exception of a couple of small victories – Alcañiz, in Aragón, and the re-occupation of Salamanca for a fortnight; and, fought together with the British, the stalemated battle of Talavera – the year brought nothing but defeats, the final and most disastrous of which took place at Ocaña in Castilla la Nueva, opening the road to the conquest of Andalucía at the beginning of 1810. Most of the battlefield defeats could be attributed to two factors: the field commanders’ incompetence and their lack of coordination; and the fear inspired in largely untrained troops by this ineptitude which allowed French cavalry to descend on their rear. The Junta Suprema’s policy of ‘permanent war on all fronts at all times’, adopted after the battle of Talavera, failed. Despite serious recruitment delays, the Junta managed to assemble masses of raw recruits to form the appearance of large armies which, under their Old Regime commanders, were thrown willy-nilly into open-field combat against seasoned imperial troops. The cavalry was the patriot armies’ weakest point. The lack of sufficient horses, given the mid-eighteenth-century turn to mules as the country’s major traction,* aggravated the situation. But even reasonably mounted, the patriot cavalry was often the first to turn tail. The infantry – stolid, but militarily untrained, village recruits – could stubbornly withstand frontal attack, but when the patriot cavalry fled they had not learned to manoeuvre to reduce the enemy threat from the flank or rear.

The battle of Medillín on March 28, 1809, was a prime example. Marshal Victor, under orders to advance on Extremadura and Andalucía, and to help Soult who had marched from Galicia into Portugal to confront the British army now under General Wellesley, was met on March 28 outside Medellín by General Cuesta, commander of the Extremaduran army. On the Suprema’s orders, he had just been reinforced by the duque de Alburquerque with twelve thousand men. Together the two forces numbered twenty-two thousand against Victor’s eighteen. Successful at first in forcing the French back, the two Spanish columns sought to re-engage the enemy, advancing at a different pace, and leaving gaps in their line. The French cavalry saw their opportunity and charged; the Spanish cavalry turned tail, and the French outflanked the patriot force. When the enemy troopers appeared in their rear, the Spanish infantry panicked and fled the field. The massacre of the routed lasted all day, turning the battle into a slaughter. The Spanish lost ten thousand men, three-quarters of them dead and wounded; some battalions were annihilated down to the last man. It was Spain’s historically worst military defeat so far on its own territory.8