

In the spring of 1809, the Junta floated the idea that selected officers should be sent to Prussia – whose army since Frederick the Great’s time had been the Spanish military model – to perfect themselves in the art of war; but the minister of war turned down the suggestion ‘because of the present circumstances’, presumably referring to the recent Medellín disaster and the threat of a French invasion of Andalucía.16

The harshest criticism of the officer corps and the army in general came from Jovellanos, the Junta member for Asturias. In a memorandum to his fellow deputies a few days after Medellín, he wrote among other things that the officer corps should be purged, and NCOs and others who had distinguished themselves on the field of battle promoted to officers.

It is not good enough to take the broom only to the heads [of the armies], it is necessary to take it right down to the lowest officer ranks … There has been great abuse in the use of our armies. We look only to numbers, when it is not the numbers of men, but their skill and bravery that win victories. We clamour for more muskets to arm men, and we do not attempt to train them in their use. There are thousands of enlisted men everywhere, and yet there is not a single depot to train them.17

His call for a ‘training army’ went unheeded at the time. The moment was too fraught to withdraw veterans from active duty to train recruits. As Jovellanos himself continued: ‘the [Medellín] disaster of March 28 has put the fatherland in danger. That misfortune was the result of a lack of unity … The Junta must recognize that it is impossible for us to find two generals who can effectively cooperate together.’ But now that the Suprema had appointed Cuesta supreme commander, it must trust him, give him ample powers. ‘In the situation in which we find ourselves, it is everything or nothing.’*

The Suprema’s policy of calling on raw recruits to reinforce armies allowed Cuesta to replace his force’s ten thousand Medellín losses in a couple of months. At various times, the Junta clearly expressed the belief that only ‘great masses of troops, aided by villagers’ could defeat the French. ‘We must oppose tactical superiority by numbers, [military] skill by enthusiasm, and then the fatherland will not be exposed to its present crisis’, the Suprema officially informed its deputy and commissioner in Cataluña in the late winter of 1809.18 This was a revolutionary military strategy without revolutionary politics: popular ‘enthusiasm’ was predicated solely on anti-French sentiment, not on the lower orders’ defence of revolutionary conquests. Approving the Extremaduran call for a mass general rising to help stave off the French military threat four days before Medellín, the Suprema cited favourably and at length Galicia and Cataluña as prime examples of this strategy, which had killed more French than any other, and called for their example to be followed ‘as long as the rising is orderly … and does not propose to go beyond its implied objectives’ (stress added).19 In other words, as long as it contained no threat to the status quo. Within these limits, the Suprema envisaged that a mass rising would