

Not surprisingly, the rank-and-file had little confidence in their generals, and the latter little confidence in their largely untrained men. Just as bad, many regimental officers seemed to have little stomach for fighting in these circumstances. In January 1809, the Suprema ordered the many officers who had come to Sevilla on the pretext of illness to return forthwith to their regiments, and forbade any officer to be absent from his post. The wounded and sick amongst them were to be attended to in army hospitals. (These officers’ lives had evidently been eased by the custom of drawing campaign rations while in the rearguard, a practice which the Junta had also to forbid.9) Finally, the Suprema threatened to execute any officer who deserted.10

Alerted six weeks later by the tribunal of public safety to the continuing presence of many officers in Sevilla, which the population took badly, the Junta again issued immediate orders for them to return to their regiments.11 The problem was not new, and nor did it seem to have been cured under the Suprema’s rule.

Desiring to put an end to the scandalous abuse of officers leaving their posts on all occasions, and especially on a day of action, in which [the Junta Suprema] sees an intolerable lack of discipline, of insubordination and above all one of the principal causes that our military actions do not correspond to the bravery and constancy of our troops who, with so many less obligations and advantages, are giving proof of their love and fidelity to our King and Country … (preamble to Suprema order, November 17, 1808)12

As the date of this order makes clear, the problem had existed from the time of Napoleon’s offensive, if not before. Exactly a year later, in November 1809, it still evidently continued. The Army of the Centre’s generals who, at Ocaña, had just suffered an even worse defeat than that of Medillín, reported to the Suprema that ‘some regiments had had very few officers to lead them’ on the decisive day.13 The high command was obviously looking for every possible pretext to explain the rout; but this one had a familiar ring. The Junta once more ordered all officers to their posts.

Alongside these defaulters, there were many officers who fought bravely at the head of their men; though how many took the time to supervise their training was another question. The Suprema’s order in April 1809, that all troops, whether armed or not, must train seven hours a day should have been superfluous.14 The Junta also fulminated against infantry officers who had evaded the summons to hand over horses suitable for the cavalry and ordered them to ride only mounts that were ‘two fingers’ under the requisitionable height. Similarly, the Suprema was ‘outraged’ that officers had arrogated to themselves more batmen than were officially permitted and had provided them also for their wives and families who remained in the rearguard. These batmen had to be returned to their regiments forthwith or be treated as deserters.15