

French patrols soon stopped them. Embite showed the pass and said he had gone to leave his wife in Mora, and had forgotten to report to the local French commandant. The officer in charge was understanding but told them to remain until further orders. Embite and his companion looked for ways to escape; but at that moment the outpost received orders to retire northwards and they were free to continue their journey. Luck accompanied the daring, and the two men finally reached Madrid. But not before seeing some horrifying sights on the road entering Aranjuez:

Three poor men had been hanged and were dangling from trees … At the beginning of the long bridge [across the Tajo] four more had not only been hanged but had been nailed through the breast to the tree trunks … In neighbouring villages, as we heard, fathers and husbands had seen their daughters and wives raped and even sons their old mothers … Everything that had been beautiful in the Aranjuez palace and gardens had been burned or destroyed by the French army …24

In Madrid more trouble awaited them. Embite returned to former lodgings to find them already taken. His companion was received by an ironmonger to whom he had been recommended until at six in the evening of the first day he was told he had to leave. Fear was greater than patriotic hospitality, and del Campo was obliged to spend the night in an inn, a dangerous move because all new arrivals had to be registered with the police. The next day he fled Madrid in the company of some muleteers, not to return.

Greater luck as usual attended Embite. A ‘generous and patriotic merchant’ took him in, provided for all his needs and refused to leave his side during the week he spent on his mission. On the vital issue of discovering the Bonapartist government’s policy towards the colonies another stroke of luck put in his hands – he did not report how – a ‘position’ paper by Miguel Azanza, the new king’s Treasury minister and a former viceroy of New Spain (Mexico). Arguing that Spain without the Indies would forever be ‘an impoverished country without authority or defence’ in the world, the new regime must do nothing to antagonize the inhabitants which could only encourage their aspirations for independence such as already existed in Puerto Rico, Cuba, Vera Cruz (Mexico) and other places of the northern colonies.

As soon as they know by whatever means about the latest events in Spain the inhabitants will become as impassioned as the Andalucians and other regions’ people who have been attempting to defend themselves and will join in their common cause …

Azanza’s paper was designed to stave off any attempt to make the colonies swear fidelity to the new monarch, as the inhabitants of the Bonapartist zone had been obliged to do. He reported that the king’s three councils, in joint session, had unanimously rejected a prior attempt to do so as ‘inopportune’. He recognized furthermore that the colonies had from the start thrown in their lot with the Sevilla junta which had told them not to obey any royal council’s orders. If now they learned that the Emperor in person had conquered Madrid and placed his brother back on the throne,