

There is not a saint they have not burned, a woman they have not abused and they have killed some men who refused to give them what they wanted … This has to be seen to be believed.6

Despite these barbarities, the loss to the villagers of their whole herd of livestock and no doubt a large part of their barley reserves was an even greater blow. In just a few days the village economy was shattered. How the villagers were to live thereafter could be barely imagined. But they and township inhabitants learned to become more resourceful. They hid their crops and livestock from any and every army that crossed their lands. Toledan villagers sowed their grain by night to prevent soldiers of one side or another seizing their seed corn.7

Though in 1809 several regions suffered heavy population losses they were exceeded in the two Castillas, southwestern Andalucía and Extremadura by those of the pre-war famine and malaria epidemic. From mid-1803 to mid-1804, Extremadura lost five percent of its population, each of the two Castillas just over four percent and southwestern Andalucía, struck also by yellow fever, slightly more than three percent. The first full year of war in these regions was less deadly than a peacetime famine accompanied by disease.†

During the war (as in the pre-war) there were wide regional differences. For example, Valencia, in the patriot rearguard, lived (in comparative population terms) as if the war barely existed in 1809. Though a small rise in mortality – among young children especially in early spring and mid-summer – brought a population decrease, the mere 0.2% was the lowest of all the regions. Marriages were buoyant, reaching their highest point since the turn of the century. Month after month throughout the year, with the single exception of November, when the patriot army went down to its heaviest defeat of the war at Ocaña, they exceeded their average. Conceptions followed the same pattern, though at a lesser rate.

Felicitous Levante! Valencia still had three years before its population experienced the full rigours of war and enemy occupation with demographic results as disastrous as elsewhere.

### POPULAR ATTITUDES TO THE WAR

Death was usually involuntary; marriage and conception – intimate individual choices however limited by contemporary constraints – frequently spoke more tellingly about popular expectations and fears than the lettered elites’ scanty references.

This was demonstrated in several regions from the onset of war. Marriages, the area of greatest personal choice, dropped in Cataluña throughout 1808 but the decline was particularly notable in February, when Barcelona was first occupied, in May during the abdication crisis – two of the usually highest marriage months of the year – and in July and August after the risings and the effective declaration of war. From the moment the French army marched on Madrid in March 1808, marriages dropped in the two Castillas. Extremadura’s situation was yet more extreme. From May, the month of the anti-French rising in Madrid and the Bourbon abdications, weddings plummeted below average for twenty-nine straight months with only one exception. Almost without respite Extremadura remained a frontline region.