

On the neighbouring Isla de León, the governor warned that there was no money to pay the day labourers for such works. ‘The consequences of this must be taken into account, for the labourers have no other means of subsistence than that which they earn by their daily work.’31

In January 1810, just before the Suprema’s demise, it sent conde de Ayamans, its Mallorcan deputy, to speed up and complete the Cádiz fortification work that had been going on for over a year. He ordered all the surrounding townships and villages to send labourers ‘with their clouts’ to work on the fortifications ‘at the same daily wage as they receive from individual employees’. Within four days he had 440 men working on the caño del Trocadero’s defences.32†

*

Not so long before, the labouring classes who were now disinclined to build defences had enthusiastically participated in, or welcomed, the popular uprising against the Napoleonic invasion and the Godoyistas in power and volunteered en masse for the army to fight for their king, religion and fatherland. Little less than nine months later they refused, even in so fundamental a matter as their home towns’ defence, to sacrifice a day’s wage to the struggle. An attitude of defiance towards their patriot ‘betters’ was apparent in their dissent. They threatened the latter with allowing the French to seize the towns and appropriate their property. This was perhaps no more than a form of pressure to receive the wage they believed their due. They – the labouring hands – had no property to lose. Significantly none of the places had yet suffered the dramatic effects of French occupation.

It was obvious that a long string of patriot military defeats had undermined popular enthusiasm and morale. The lower classes’ sacrifice of life and well-being in an ineffectually led army of which they formed the majority – and were the major sufferers – was known to all. Those with conscripted sons or relatives had seen how the local privileged used their power to keep their sons from the military’s grasp. The Junta Suprema’s misconduct of the war had led to widespread disillusion with this new form of government. Save in the most extreme of circumstances – the last Gerona siege for example – proletarian patriotism could not feed on labourers’ empty stomachs; but there was a further, and more complex dimension to their understanding of patriotism.

At this historical moment, patriotism could – if only still just – be distinguished from nationalism. The Enlightenment’s reformulation of antiquity’s love of one’s country and the willingness to sacrifice one’s life for it demanded liberty, equality before the law and justice. Absolute monarchy, which considered the country its feudal domain and its peoples as vassals, distinguishing legally between privileged noble, the ecclesiastical orders and commoners, could not create a patria. Without liberty, equality and justice there could be a country but no fatherland.33

The 1808 risings were generally assumed by their Fernandista organizers to be the work of a ‘patriot’ populace. The major problem less than a year later was to maintain this sense of patriotism. To suppose that altar and monarchy dominated their sole sense of ‘patriotism’ was to imagine that the lower orders were unable to form their own ideas of what patriotism should mean.