

This downturn in marriages, which continued generally throughout 1809, seemed to require no explanation: the youth had gone to war, leaving their fiancées behind. However, in many regions patriotic conscription lagged. Young men, who should have been in the army, were still at home and took advantage of this to get married and thereby claim – sometimes only temporarily – exemption from the call-up.

The extraordinary number of deaths in 1809 should, paradoxically, have served to increase the matrimonial rate as it expanded the ‘market’ for second marriages, very common at the time, of widows and widowers.* Over and above the Old Order’s structural demographic ebbs and flows the decline indicated that the people in 1809 did not look on their future with much hope, certainly not enough to consider their conditions propitious for marriage. Even in the heady days of the previous year, when a patriot victory seemed assured, villagers were evidently doubtful; and 1809 increased their fears. Although a patriot victory had receded to an uncertain horizon, they could not be certain what a rapid Bonapartist triumph would bring in its train. Accustomed to the Old Regime’s political certainties, and the continuities of their daily lives, villagers and townsfolk lived in doubt and fear of what lay ahead.

A rise in conceptions* in the spring of 1809, after nine months of decline in the two Castillas, was seemingly at odds with a popular sense of anxiety about the future. The drop had begun just after the risings in the summer of 1808. While fertility was subject to many more physical constraints than marriage, the simultaneity of the decline – and of the subsequent recuperation – in two such large regions was notable. (In Castilla la Vieja, the decrease was particularly marked in the autumn of 1808 during Napoleon’s invasion.) Moreover, like marriages, the trend was exaggerated in Extremadura, where conceptions declined below average for twenty-six straight months from May 1808. Most remarkable was the case of Plasencia, a town of some five thousand inhabitants in northern Extremadura, not far from the main Madrid to Lisbon road, where not a single marriage or conception was recorded in the autumn of 1808, a phenomenon that had not occurred even during the worst of the pre-war famine years. The panic at the Emperor’s offensive appeared evident.† Arguably, the two Castillas’ simultaneous reversal of the conception decline – spring was traditionally the highest fertility period of the year – expressed in both occupied and patriot zones the other face of anxiety: popular hope in a quick resolution of the conflict and an end to a threatening uncertainty, albeit under a new king. A similar recuperation in springtime fertility in patriot-controlled Andalucía – for the first time in the new century and at precisely the moment when the region felt under constant threat of French invasion – suggested that this was so. Disillusionment with the Suprema had reached such a pitch that the majority of couples in the patriot rearguard, which still included southern Castilla la Nueva, could well believe that their and their family’s fate would be better if the war, irrespective of victor, were brought to an end.