

The Basques, with their large concentration of iron ore mines, and to a lesser extent the Catalans, were the specialists in the trade. During the Convention War, when the French revolutionary army occupied the Basque factory, a considerable number of Basque armourers were moved on government orders out of harm’s way to the Asturian capital, Oviedo, where a new factory was established. But in 1808, both Basque and Asturian factories had for different reasons stopped production. The former region was again occupied by the French (whose muskets used a smaller size ball), the latter for lack of Basque iron. The Suprema did not want to depend on Britain (perhaps doubting the new ally’s continuing commitment)* or on any other foreign source for its supplies. It decided therefore to order provincial juntas in its Andalucian and Levante rearguard, which had no tradition of firearm production, to create arms factories.

Half a dozen juntas responded immediately. Almost all were in the same position as Granada, where the five so-called local armourers ‘could barely make an individual part or two – and even then badly – but none knew how to construct a whole musket’.62 Only the drive and initiative of some junta members, especially in Granada and Valencia, and their search for a few qualified armourers wherever they could find them, managed to push their projects forward with some success. Not surprisingly, their understanding of a factory was of a place in which the whole manufacturing process was undertaken by wage labour. A considerable amount of time was inevitably taken up therefore in building or conditioning the workshops, and even more in making the necessary special tools – drills, files and vises which were unobtainable locally. In its first nine months, the Granada factory almost exclusively made tools, but it had not had to buy any abroad, it proudly added.63 This was all very well; but it barely responded to the urgencies of the moment: very few new muskets were in fact produced in the year before the Andalucian factories fell to the enemy in early 1810, though great numbers of damaged firearms were reconditioned.*

Following the Granada’s junta’s earlier example in its own province, the Suprema in August ordered all armourers, blacksmiths, locksmiths, cutlers and iron workers in general in Sevilla, Jaén and Córdoba provinces to report to the Sevilla or Granada arms factories with their tools.64 This caused an outcry from farmers and rural local authorities, who claimed that they were needed to make and repair agricultural tools, and from the craftsmen who complained that their livelihoods and families were being ruined.

Despite this labour conscription, there were no documented labour problems in Granada or most of the other new factories. This was reserved for Sevilla. Indeed, as the Granada junta pointed out at the end of 1809, in the six months since its factory had been completed, a labour force skilled in a trade never before locally undertaken had been created. Youth who had entered as apprentices had become proficient journeymen in crafts that normally required four to six years’ apprenticeship. The pressure of war showed that the Old Regime’s artisanal routines could be surpassed. It also demonstrated among Basque armourers brought to Sevilla how entrenched these routines could remain.