

In the first months of the war, patriot Spain could call on three-quarters of a million single men of conscription age, well over half of whom were sixteen to twenty-five-year olds, the age group which had shown the greatest willingness to volunteer at the start of the conflict, and eighty-seven percent of whom were under forty.* This demographical base should have been more than sufficient to raise an army of half a million unmarried men alone. In part this was borne out by the massive enlistment, much of it voluntary, immediately after the uprisings, which provided more than sufficient troops to make good the depleted army regiments and even to form new ones. The introduction of conscription was thereby delayed until November 1808, during Napoleon’s invasion. In its need for fresh recruits, the newly created Junta Suprema followed the Old Regime’s conscription procedures. With their superficial appearance of equality – the drawing of lots of those deemed eligible to serve – the system was inherently plagued with manipulative possibilities. To obtain the number of men needed the new central government fixed quotas for each province, without certain knowledge of their total population or of how many had enlisted from each at the start of the war; and a proportion of the quotas was in turn allocated to each village and township by the provincial centres. Lacking any administrative structure to manage conscription, the central government and provincial juntas were forced to rely, as had the Old Regime, on local magistrates to decide who should be included in the drawing of lots. This inevitably led to favouritism, manipulation and corruption at local level to exempt the sons of relatives, friends and of local oligarchs. Even though the Suprema insistently reiterated that there were to be no exemptions except for the physically incapacitated the abuses continued. This inequality of sacrifice resulted in widespread popular disturbances, protests and disaffection.

Conscription became so plagued with protests that the Junta Suprema ordered in May 1809 that each province create a grievance junta to investigate the complaints; as late as December 1, 1809, in the Sevilla military district, the list of all those whose cases were outstanding and their villages of provenance covered two dense pages of handwritten text.35

One of these, from Puebla de Guzmán, south-western Andalucía, was fairly typical. The conscripted protested that the local magistrates had exempted thirty-four men who should be serving. A priest, Lorenzo Gómez Romero, who came from the region, explained that in this village

the magistrates’ or the caciques’ … intrigues to free their sons (probably without the slightest grounds) and those of their allies and supporters, have created a high state of ferment in this village … H.M. [the Junta Suprema] should realize that these villages’ original sin can be reduced to three points: Who should give the orders; who should steal the most; and who should pay the least.36