

In Sevilla, an artillery colonel of thirty years service, Francisco Dátoli, who had helped establish the Oviedo factory, was in June put in charge of musket production. The Suprema, which provided the funds, had initially entrusted the setting up of a factory to two Sevillan brothers, the Gutierrez, one of them an armourer of apparently little technical knowledge. On his first inspection of their plant, Dátoli found that only six muskets, four of them without bayonets, had been made. In his report to the Suprema he avoided sharp criticism because, as he circumspectly put it,

in the present critical circumstances, anyone who does not fall in with the people’s or an individual’s ideas is – as easily as unfairly – distrusted, since all believe that only they know what is best.65

This particular view of the difficulties – perhaps even the personal dangers – of the moment did not prevent him from setting out to bring Basque armourers from Oviedo and the Basque country to Sevilla to set up an efficient arms factory. He already had twenty-six Basque masters and fifty journeymen, but he needed many more to establish a factory which, as he hoped, would employ three thousand workers. Opportunely, three infantry captains, two of them veterans of the second Zaragoza siege, and two Basque civilians separately volunteered to smuggle armourers and iron out of the French-occupied Basque country.

Captain Manuel Eguaguirre y Redín was the most experienced in this matter, having twice undertaken such a mission, the last time bringing out half the number of masters Dátilo already had at his service. Eguaguirre, who had no doubt that the unemployed Basque armourers would follow him because they had families to support, planned to hide them in woods close to the coast until they could be taken off by ship to Asturias from one or other small port.66 By early August Dátilo had seventy-six Basque armourers on hand.

With his experience of transferring Basque armourers to Oviedo and setting up the new factory, Dátilo did not expect the problems he had to confront with the first of the armourers to arrive. Almost immediately they complained that they were unable to work because they could not set up forges in the places where they were lodged. Many were accustomed to start working at night, and they wanted to be out of the city’s centre. Dátilo sought a large house to accommodate them and the hundred or so family members who had accompanied them. Within a short time, the armourers demanded that the rooms be partitioned so that each family could have its individual living space because of the incidence of fevers and the danger of these spreading to their families by having to live at miserably close quarters. Meanwhile, they and their journeymen were receiving a day wage although in their first two months they did not produce a single new musket, with the exception of three hundred assembled from English barrels and locks.

Understanding that the only way to get them to produce the quantity and quality of muskets required was to respect their traditional work practices, Dátilo pressed ahead drawing up a piece rate contract. But when he presented it to the masters, giving them three days to sign, all five armourers’ guilds refused to put their names to it. Among their objections, they stated, quite reasonably, that they needed first to know what they would be charged for the raw materials required to carry out their work, claiming that prices, wages–even washing a white shirt – cost double what they were accustomed to paying in the north. Moreover, they were unused to the Andalucian summer heat which would cause them illness and reduce their productivity. Finally, they asked for a Basque-speaking priest to attend to their spiritual needs; and a mass to be said on holy days.