

Of those waiting to be conscripted, some mutilated their trigger finger; others fled. Almost despairingly, the Ecija junta in Andalucía reported in mid-1809 that a ‘considerable number of lads fit to serve have fled into the countryside, taking refuge on estates or other lands whose owners have no means to prevent them’.

Many have also fled to the islands in the [Guadalquivir] river where, because of hunger, need and not being able to go to the villages, they have committed excesses. Only a strong armed force would be capable of dealing with those who have formed bands, to end these ills and to bring the men in.42*

Many others in Andalucía and Extremadura took refuge in military hospitals, presumably with the connivance of the attendants;43 in Galicia hundreds if not thousands sought safety in neighbouring Portugal;44 in Cataluña they escaped to northern Valencia45 or, if they had the means, to the Indies.46

Deserters, wrote an anonymous correspondent from the village of Mollina, Andalucía, ‘are carrying on disgracefully with the women here because the parish priest has married a deserter twice … They are getting married in this place not to have to go to the war.’47 All over the country, many hastily married in the hope that for the next nine months there would be sufficient single men to fill the quota by which time they, as the husbands of pregnant wives or as fathers, would almost certainly be exempt.

The most exhaustive list of means to avoid conscription and the requisitioning of horses came to the Suprema from a correspondent in Benameji, Córdoba. He recorded that those who had sixty fanegas of land or their renters were being exempted. This in itself was causing numerous crafty instances of false land deeds being drawn up. Not only had marriages increased enormously – in neighbouring villages there were as many as nineteen in one day – but the blame lay with parish priests whose interest in marriage fees was a major stimulus. Moreover, these priests, knowing full well that there was no contact with the papacy, were engaging in another ‘crafty practice’, charging one hundred reales or more for the preliminary procedures to secure marriage dispensations. This was creating a great number of scandals and sinful conduct because unmarried couples, who had no hope of receiving a dispensation, were living together, often with children. The number of friars had suddenly increased, a dozen having become novices from the township in the last three months alone. Local surgeons were telling potential recruits what illnesses to simulate and even giving them caustics to create sores and ulcers. Horses were being hobbled to make them lame or having patches put on them to burn their skin to prevent them being taken for the cavalry.48

The problem in Cataluña, was especially acute. When military conscription was finally introduced at the beginning of 1810, just under ten percent of the enlisted in Vich, for example, deserted; and the following year the percentage doubled.49 But heavy desertion had begun earlier among the volunteer militia who were inducted into the Spanish army’s line regiments: up to thirty percent in one case, and almost all within the first few weeks. Throughout the war, it was estimated, five hundred Catalans deserted on average every month from the regular army, most of them new conscripts.50 On this basis, over the four remaining years of war after conscription was introduced, the total of twenty-four thousand deserters would have been almost as high as the number of army troops serving in Cataluña at any one time.