

It would be erroneous not to suppose that the labouring classes were fighting for altar and throne: in sermons and confessionals parish priests instructed them in defence of their ‘fathers’ religion’; in their hearts they believed that their new king would alleviate their intolerable poverty. In practice, they defended their homes, families and lives from the enemy’s depredations. The deserters who, despite the seemingly contrary evidence certainly shared these beliefs, were a minority. Willingly or unwillingly, the majority accepted their fate as enlisted troops against an ‘impious’ and destructive enemy.

But the self-serving village wealthy’s conduct in seeking to free their sons from conscription and to use deserters for their own ends bore no relation to the working poor’s idea of equality of sacrifice as the basis of the patriotic war effort. Their large-scale desertion could not for sure be explained solely by their social superiors’ egotistical example. But whether they served or deserted, these labouring hands could not but be aware that the well-to-do classes were unprepared to sacrifice their wealth or their sons to the war effort, at the same time as they called on the poor to sacrifice their livelihoods and lives for the patriotic cause.

### PLOUGHSHARES INTO SWORDS: AN ARMOURERS’ STRIKE

Resistance to the patriot government and elite continued with go-slows and obstructions at the very heart of the war effort: arms manufacture. The shortage of muskets had preoccupied the Junta Suprema from its first days. It lacked sufficient to arm the thousands of volunteers who flooded to the colours in the initial enthusiastic response to the risings.58 England provided 160,000 muskets by November 1808, with the promise of more to follow.59 But the new recruits, ill-trained or untrained in their use, quickly damaged them, and the dispersing troops habitually flung them away. With its smooth bore barrel, the musket was a relatively simple firearm. Its effective range was about one hundred metres. It was designed not so much to be aimed at an individual target as to be fired by troops in volleys. Its elementary character, however, had compensations: the cartridges, consisting of a cylindrical paper twist containing powder and ball, were easy to make by hand; the soldier bit off the cartridge twist, poured the powder, ball and the paper as a sealing wad into the muzzle and rammed it all home; a flint’s spark set off the priming charge in the pan. A trained Spanish infantryman could fire four rounds every three minutes,60 his mouth and lips becoming parched and blackened in the process by the powder.

A musket’s manufacture, however, was a slow process, involving five master armourers, each a specialist in a different part (barrel, lock, stock and butt, brass furnishings and bayonet). The most complex part, the barrel, required rolling and forging a trapezoidal sheet of special iron and of specific thickness, which then had to be drilled out to the correct size for the ball, and its asperities removed by hand filing. A skilled armourer might make three to four barrels a day. Traditionally, each master and his journeymen worked from the master’s home, periodically handing in their finished components to the ‘factory’ and collecting new raw materials, the cost of which were deducted from the contracted piece rate for each part. The factory tested all the pieces and any that were unserviceable were broken by the examiner, the master having to make good the deficiency.61