

A popular protest in the township of Vivero on the north Galician coast shed some light on these matters. At the beginning of the war, the corregidor’s measures to form defence squadrons manned by retired soldiers and township inhabitants and his order that all privately held muskets be handed in for their use brought a formal complaint signed by fifteen members of the community. They protested that ‘men of influence and power’ were exonerated from serving when it was they who should be the township’s most determined defenders, and if they were not willing or able to undertake this themselves, they had the financial means to provide it.34

As it was, the burden of defence fell on the ‘weak shoulders of men who live only by their work and industry’, they wrote. Elsewhere, local defence in the name of ‘religion, fatherland and liberty’ (stress added) had been organized to alleviate the burden on those who ‘groan under the oppression of labour in order to stay alive. For that reason no one should be exempt from what, in justice, is an obligation on all.’

The situation, continued the protesters, had been worsened by forming all those with military experience into a separate township guard, leaving the squadrons without anyone capable of training them. It was they, the untrained, who would be exposed to death and desolation in the dangerous outposts. In other words, the untrained labouring classes were to defend the rich on the basis of the latter’s ‘patriotic’ demand to defend a fatherland from which, de facto, they were excluded. They rejected their social superiors’ patriotism outright. Instead, they put forward their own patriotic demand: equality of sacrifice in the war effort.

This was an equality which their presence as ‘street troops’ during the Fernandista-led or inspired risings of 1808 had left their social superiors on the newly formed regional and local juntas with no option but to heed: the juntas’ initial call to arms had unanimously summoned all men – without distinction of class or status – between the ages of sixteen and forty-five to report for military service. The labouring poor expected no less than that the powerful and the rich would contribute equally to the war effort. And they had been deceived. They had not seen the privileged commit their means, their wealth, their sons to fighting the common enemy. Nor had the Suprema offered them any tangible advantages for defending the patriot cause. To the contrary, the new government defended all the Old Regime’s rights and privileges: señorial and Church prerogatives over the land, social privilege, subordination of the labouring classes. The Cortes, were it finally summoned, might bring reforms; but most reforms, as workers knew from the past, could prejudice as much as help them. Meanwhile, they understood full well that the patriot elite – which was not about to go short of a meal for itself and its families – was primarily defending its own interests at their expense; and at the same time demanding of them a sacrifice for the patriotic cause which they had already paid a hundred fold on the battlefield. Why then should they forgo a day’s wage that kept them and their families alive? Or demonstrate a patriotic zeal which their betters denied to themselves? The Vivero protesters’ last claim, in a pure Old Regime style, demonstrated that it was equality of sacrifice – not social equality – that the lower orders demanded. They complained that the defence squadrons