

Like so many others, he yielded before an irrestible force as did our adored King Fernando when he renounced the throne and recommended that his vassals obey the oppressor. It was no crime of Sotelo’s not to sacrifice his life, for this could not save the country, and neither the law nor any prior example demanded it.83

Peace, on the other hand, was a worthy cause which could save his country. Four years before, shortly after becoming the Sevillan Academy of Literature’s director, he had begun his political career with an expression of his desire for peace: ‘A felicitous and fortunate peace, capable of restoring fertility to our countryside, industry to our cities, commercial activity and happiness to our nation.’84 A year later, Spain was again at war – and had been at war, albeit on different sides – ever since.

Sotelo’s failed peace negotiations raised a calumnious, vituperous outrage against him in the patriot zone. In a Manichean atmosphere where only ‘good’ or ‘bad’ Spaniards, ‘patriots’ or ‘traitors’ existed, and a ‘turncoat’ was condemned to hell’s fire, libelled and slandered on all sides, it would have been impossible for him to have attempted to return. Meanwhile, his situation in Madrid remained uncertain, if not dangerous; but he could do no more than remain there. A year later, having earned sufficient credibility with the new regime, he was appointed one of a number of Bonapartist royal commissioners, in his case of Jerez, after Andalucía was conquered. Meanwhile, his wife and children were but a crow’s flight away in patriot Cádiz. His friend Almagro, who had gone to such ends to escape and organize Sotelo’s flight from Madrid, also served the Bonapartist cause in Andalucía. 85

### A CONVINCED BONAPARTIST: ANTONIO RIVAS

Sotelo’s was an extreme but not exceptional case. In many instances, families were divided by geography and ideology as they were over a century later in the Civil War of 1936–1939. Among the more notable of them, conde de Montijo’s younger brother, conde de Teba, who had been instrumental in the Sevilla and Cádiz patriot risings, went over to the Bonapartist cause in Sevilla; the disputatious, progressive Sevillan member of the Suprema, Tilly, had members of his family living under – and acknowledging – King Josef in Madrid; some of the better known Sevillan literati, Sotelo’s friends, sided with the Bonapartist camp after Sevilla’s surrender in 1810. Even more striking was the fact that the southwestern Andalucian landed classes kept – deliberately or coincidentally – a foot in either camp: after the region’s fall, some of their members fled to patriot Cádiz while others remained behind to claim their family’s estates to prevent them from being taken over by the Bonapartist regime.

A less notable, but more riveting case, was that of Antonio Rivas, Bourbon corregidor of Trujillo, Extremadura, in 1808, whose wife stubbornly refused to follow him into the Bonapartist camp. From the patriot point of view, Rivas was suspect from the beginning. He rescued a considerable number of French subjects, civilian and military, from patriot persecution. Surviving the ‘stormy slings and arrows of fortune’ until December of 1808, the approach of Napoleon’s army led the local junta to denounce him as ‘suspicious of infidelity to king and fatherland’. The patriot military commander, General Galluzo, before his own ignominious retreat in front of the imperial forces at the Almaraz bridge over the Tajo, had him arrested. Accompanied still by his wife, and under escort, he was taken in the direction of Sevilla, although subsequently he was returned to Badajoz when it became clear that the French were not to advance that far south. The Extremaduran tribunal of public safety began proceedings against him. These had not advanced very far when Marshal Victor invaded Extremadura in the spring of 1809 before the battle of Medellín. Once Victor reached close to Mérida – from where Sotelo had conducted his abortive peace negotiations – Rivas managed, with his prosecutor’s complicity, to get permission to travel there for a few days to help his wife, a member of whose family was seriously ill. In Mérida he defected to the French army; and Victor appointed him the town’s corregidor.