

Unwittingly, however, Almagro was Sotelo’s downfall. The former sent his friend a letter from Andalucía telling him of his attempts to rescue him. The courier, who brought other letters also, was denounced by ‘a bad Spaniard’ and a list of all those to whom he had delivered correspondence was discovered on him. In the middle of Wednesday night, March 29, all those listed were arrested and imprisoned, though Sotelo was only found after another friend was deceived into revealing where he was living. Like all the other prisoners, Sotelo was kept incommunicado for three days. On the following Saturday, April 1, a police commissioner took him after ten o’clock at night to General Morla’s* dwelling where he was to be held under house arrest; a day or two later, a French and a Spanish officer with an escort arrived with a carriage, and between them Sotelo was taken off to Mérida in Extremadura to open peace feelers with his companions-in-arms.

This sequence of strange events had its antecedents. After a council of ministers’ meeting on April 2, at which King Josef had heard several of his ministers express the opinion that the moment was opportune to sound out the patriot terrain and take the initiative in peace feelers, the king charged the war minister and General Morla with selecting suitable persons for the task. On April 3, the minister presented Sotelo’s name, which met with no objection. As the French ambassador, La Forest, put it, ‘he has committed so many misdemeanours which require pardon that for these alone he will find all the avenues to the enemy open’.82 In this convoluted comment, the ambassador confirmed Sotelo’s adhesion to the patriotic cause.

Up to this time he had neither sworn loyalty to the Bonapartist regime – an absolute requirement of any official who hoped to retain his post – nor participated in any of the public acts which were obligatory on them. Why then had he undertaken to carry out this Bonapartist mission? Had he in the couple of days between imprisonment and setting off, been ‘turned’? It was very unlikely. Sotelo was highly principled. If he had ever managed to escape from the capital, he no doubt would have served the patriot cause, while probably dissenting from the Suprema’s politics. But caught in Madrid, his enlightened rationality informed him – as it did most Spanish Bonapartists – that the French army’s conquest and occupation was disastrous for Spain. As a high official of the Council of War, Sotelo was particularly sensitive to the ravages of the conflict. General Morla, an intelligent, if not perhaps overly courageous, former patriot, would certainly have reinforced Sotelo’s opinion. Anything was better than allowing the French army – and the continued resistance which threatened civil war – to destroy the country when what was urgently needed was Spain’s reform. Patriots and Spanish Bonapartists were equally agreed on this necessity – though not on the means of achieving it. Many Bonapartists, furthermore, were fully aware that the French army’s occupation, attacks on civilians and exactions were disastrous for their cause, fuelling further patriot resistance; but at the same time they were forced to recognize that without the French army their regime would be overthrown by the patriots within days or weeks. This was their Via Crucis, which they could never escape throughout the war. Having infringed every Bonapartist edict and law, Sotelo was in no position to refuse the assigned mission, unless he were prepared to pay for it with his life. As his wife, who ardently defended her husband through thick and thin, commented in a fine comparison: