

*

One other productive undertaking demanded by the Suprema of craftsmen was the making of saddles and tackle for the increased number of cavalry it proposed to raise. Unlike musket production, saddle making was by no means an unknown skill in Andalucía and Levante, and presented few problems other than those of price. In January 1809, the Suprema nonetheless took the precaution to order all craftsmen in Sevilla and Córdoba provinces to report to Sevilla city ‘without excuse, pretext or delay’ to work on saddle making.71

The saddlers were a different kettle of fish to the Basque armourers. For a start, they were established in their own ‘country’ and had none of the newcomers’ doubts about unknown conditions, costs and the weather. They grasped the chance to compete to increase their normal limited production for the wealthy and to take advantage of being fully employed.

Whether the Suprema’s conscription and centralization was cost-effective was another matter. The price of a saddle and tackle in Sevilla was reported to be of the order of five hundred reales, whereas Jerez masters quoted 420. In Cádiz and neighbouring townships, craftsmen were prepared to work for four hundred, and finally for as little as 360 which ‘leaves the craftsman with only a short surplus but no gain’. Domingo González was a leading Cádiz master saddler capable of making fifteen complete sets in ten days, and was producing them at the basic price to support the war effort.

All your majesty’s [i.e. Suprema’s] vassals have the indispensable obligation to contribute, according to their capabilities, classes and states, to the fatherland’s service. It would seem, Sir, that I have fulfilled this obligation …72

González, who wrote that as a result of his war work his shop had ‘lost its good standing’, petitioned the Suprema to reward him with the title of royal master saddle and tackle maker, chief special saddle maker to the cavalry of Cádiz and its district, and to award him the wage or pension which ‘shall please your Majesty’.

The Suprema’s response was not recorded. But the petition was in no way out of the ordinary. Great numbers of the educated elite who believed they had sacrificed their personal well-being to the patriot cause petitioned the Suprema for recompense in the form of vacant official posts, stipends, honorific titles or other public marks of recognition. In this instance a craftsman followed their example; even so, he did not forget the monetary sacrifice which his patriotism had cost him.

### A BONAPARTIST PEACE INITIATIVE

It was not only Spanish generals who disrespected official orders; Napoleon’s marshals, though better field commanders, were equally disobedient when it suited them. After his Medellín victory, Marshal Victor, believing that the patriots’ crushing defeat could be exploited as political leverage on the Junta Suprema, halted the conquest of Extremadura and Andalucía which he had been ordered to carry out by King Josef and only briefly moved to help Soult in Portugal. He thought instead to strengthen a prevailing spirit among some Spanish Bonaparte ministers* to bring the patriots to surrender. Without unanimous expectation of success, the Bonapartist government in Madrid agreed and despatched Joaquín María Sotelo, a former patriot, as its emissary.