

From Mérida, Sotelo sent a low-key letter to the Junta, stating that ‘various honourable Spaniards, who cannot look with indifference on the absolute dissolution of our beloved country’, had persuaded King Josef to undertake this initiative in order to spare the country the evils of French military occupation. He placed much emphasis on ‘the horrible effects’ of military conquest on the occupied provinces, and the desire to save Andalucía from the same fate. He offered nothing concrete, however, other than the request that the Suprema appoint one or two deputies to begin talks.73

The Suprema responded in fulminating style. Recalling its ‘sacred oath to the nation’, it said that if Sotelo were invested with powers sufficient to treat of ‘the restitution of our beloved king and of the French troops’ immediate evacuation from all Spanish soil’, he should make them public in a form recognizable by all nations. Then, ‘with our allies’ agreement’, the Suprema would listen to him. Negotiations on any other basis, which would not save the state, could only be degrading to the Junta which had solemnly promised to ‘be buried in the ruins of the monarchy rather than listen to any proposition that lessened the Spanish people’s honour and independence’.74

And there, despite a few more exchanges, the matter rested. In his last communications, Sotelo commented that if the ‘evils’ he was trying to resolve could only be treated on the Suprema’s conditions, this was tantamount to refusing even to listen to proposals for their resolution. ‘If the Junta does not consent to the proposed conference, I shall have the eternal pleasure of having endeavoured to secure the good of our beloved country, although with the bitterness of not having succeeded …’75

### MILITANCIES: JOAQUÍN MARÍA SOTELO

Like many of his high administrative contemporaries, Sotelo had so far had an agonizing war. The 42-year-old solicitor general of the pre-war Bourbon Council of War had escaped from French-occupied Madrid shortly after the national patriot rising the previous year, leaving behind his pregnant wife and children.

From the beginning of the French intervention in Spain, he had given vent to doubts about Napoleon’s ulterior motives and had taken certain military precautions to foil his plans, his wife later wrote. Indeed, his experience in Portugal during the Spanish–French invasion of 1807 had led to disgust with the French occupation; but he had returned from Portugal to French-occupied Madrid, where he had been appointed to the Bonapartist supreme tribunal’s section of the Grace and Justice ministry. Though he never took up the post, his appointment was published by the Bonapartist-controlled Madrid press. He had opposed Murat, evaded swearing loyalty to the new regime and had managed – feigning illness – to avoid being sent to Bayonne as a deputy to Napoleon’s constitutional congress, his wife added. Shortly after the May 2, 1808, rising in Madrid, he had offered his resignation from his post, which the war minister, O’Farril, refused to accept.76 Finally, he had fled the capital.