

Pontevedra was the first to fall after a two-week siege. Cachamuiña had organized partisan leaders in a number of neighbouring insurrectionary villages to join forces to take the town. No sooner had Pontevedra been taken than the victorious forces left it to join the siege of Vigo, a larger and more important city port to the south; and – temporarily, as it turned out – the French reoccupied Pontevedra.

Meanwhile, another leader also to become famous, the parish priest of Vilar y Couto, Mauricio Troncoso y Sotomayor, had rebelled against Soult’s requisitions of foodstuffs, wine, meat and mules for his army on its march to invade Portugal. He told his parishioners not to provide the supplies and invited them and neighbouring hamlets and villages to join him in armed struggle against the French. Two small French detachments which came to collect the provisions in Vilar y Couto were beaten off; the battle with a third, larger contingent lasted three days.

Little more than an isolated hamlet of scattered houses around a parish church just north of the river Miño, Vilar y Couto became the nucleus of an army which grew to over 7,000 strong. By the end of February, Romana had appointed Troncoso ‘general’ of his newly raised army. Shortly thereafter he laid siege to Tuy, downriver on the Miño, where the French garrison numbered four thousand.

At the same time, the parish priest of Valladares, Juan Rosendo Arias Enríquez, and two Franciscan friars, along with several local hidalgos, raised the countryside south of Vigo. They issued a proclamation, also signed by Troncoso, ordering all men able to bear arms to report within twenty-four hours or face a firing squad. Their siege of Vigo began on March 8, the same day as Pontevedra’s investment, but it was a week before all the region’s partisan bands had gathered to join it. Vigo and Tuy were the only two French-garrisoned places in the south. Though much larger than the latter, Vigo was more lightly held by a scant fifteen hundred imperial troops. After the partisans, under two of their Franciscan friar leaders, brothers Villagelíu and Giráldez, had thrown back a French attempt from Pontevedra to raise the siege and attacked the city itself which they could not take, the situation turned more unfavourable to the French: two British frigates arrived off Vigo to help the besiegers whom they supplied with a certain amount of munitions. Surrender talks began, but the French commandant, fearing that some of the village partisans would run amok, refused to surrender to civilians. Cachamuiña, Lieutenant Pablo Morillo (raised from the ranks on the Bailén battlefield for his bravery, and one of the officers dispatched by the Junta Suprema to assist the Galician patriots) and a retired captain, Francisco Colombo, who had raised the village of Cotobade, arrived from Pontevedra to take over the negotiations, and to advise the besiegers. But as the negotiations dragged on, some partisan leaders believed that the garrison was playing for time. On the night of March 27, with Cachamuiña and the two Franciscan friars at their head, the partisans again attacked the city. Within an hour, the French surrendered. The next day, more than eight hundred imperial troops, led by their commandant, Chalot, formally surrendered to Captain Coutts Crawford of the frigate Venus who took them prisoner.25