

Many of these same villagers had, a decade earlier, burned down the recently created Sargadelos iron-ore foundry; at the instigators’ trial it was alleged that the incendiarists had cried ‘Long live freedom, long live France, death to the factory and its owner!’ though the accused claimed that the cries were ‘Long live the king and death to Ibáñez!’ (the foundry’s merchant owner).† Finally, in view of the prospect of the French army’s certain vengeance on the township, the villagers were pacified and prepared to defend themselves and Vivero. The vengeance was not long in coming, and this time in strength. Some two thousand imperial troops pushed through the civilian-manned defences on the outskirts and seized Vivero on February 18, putting it to the sack for over three days. Two hundred people were slaughtered, but the majority of the population managed to flee to the hills.

In Vivero and Ribadeo, it was villagers from parishes in the surrounding countryside who provided the townships’ main fighting force, though in neither case had the French troops carried out the customary seizure of their crops. The villagers around Betanzos – Moore’s last halting place before La Coruña – were far less favourably placed since the French army was thick on the ground and forced them to feed it, adding insult to injury by frequently seizing the best oxen or cows which had drawn their cartloads of supplies. Aggrieved, these villagers one night took their revenge in an action that remained part of the region’s collective memory: at an agreed hour they rose in the last week of February and massacred all the French officers and men in their parishes, burying them in the pine woods with their accoutrements and effects, and immediately dispatching their horses to Romana’s army in Ribadavia in the south. According to tradition, 199 French were killed, one wounded corporal escaping to report the massacre.20

Local resistance in the south was precipitated by Soult’s march from the Atlantic coast to the city of Orense where he crossed the Miño river to invade Portugal. Once the example of local resistance was set, it developed rapidly into a widespread uprising, taking advantage of the absence of Soult’s troops, and gathered great numbers of rural recruits with the aim of expelling the enemy from their territory.

The mass of combatants were villagers; but they were raised and led by their social superiors, in many cases parish priests or local magistrates, and subsequently by a number of officers sent for the purpose by the Junta Suprema or detached from Romana’s Galician army. After the initial moments of resistance, they were generally organized by parishes, in companies and battalions with sergeants and corporals, and commanders whom they elected. As could be expected the latter were ‘individuals who, by their gifts, authority and bravery’, the villagers recognized as worthy of respect. The best shots among the youth were selected for the few firearms available.21

