

Santiago is ours … After an hour of firing we tired of this suffering, and I ordered Morillo to charge the enemy on the right flank while I led the other columns on his front … Morillo succeeded in entering the city and cut down the enemy in the streets, pursuing them for more than a league. We have suffered few losses.28

The French were reported to have had six hundred dead and wounded, including among the latter Macune himself. However satisfying this conquest, it was premature to offer great thanks. The division could take a city but were unable to hold it. Ney reconquered it barely a fortnight later in his last desperate attempt to put down the insurrection.

Meanwhile Soult, who had suffered defeat by Wellesley at Oporto and made a harrowing escape – even worse than Moore’s – over the Portuguese mountains, reached Lugo, the easternmost provincial capital of central Galicia. At a stormy meeting, Ney argued that their task was to suppress the Galician rising; at this moment, he held no more than La Coruña, El Ferrol, Mondoñedo and Lugo. Soult responded that the main objective was to force the British out of Portugal. Each was doing no more than express Napoleon’s original orders. Finally, they agreed that while Ney would push the insurgent army back to Tuy, and send a column to Orense, Soult would pursue Romana and force him to fight or retreat, and would also make contact with French forces in Zamora and Astorga.29

### FRENCH WITHDRAWAL

Ney returned to Santiago which he took without a battle, the partisans having retreated south of Pontevedra to strong defensive positions at the Sampaio and Caldelas bridges across the Oitabén river on the main road to Tuy. The former bridge had been cut on Morillo’s orders and the latter was heavily blockaded. On June 7–8 all Ney’s attempts to force a passage for his twelve hundred cavalry across the swollen river’s fords were beaten back by the Miño Division’s ten thousand partisans and soldiers who held the far bank in well-prepared positions. A gunboat from an English frigate also participated in the defence. As great numbers of the insurgents were still without firearms, they used, it was said, every artifice of war: cannon hollowed out of oak trunks, bound with iron rings; improvised bows and arrows made from umbrella spokes; clay pots painted bronze to appear like cannon mouths …30

Soon realizing the high cost to his eight-thousand-strong corps if he continued to press the issue, Ney called off the attack and returned with his troops to Santiago and La Coruña.

Though little more than a minor victory – Vigo’s earlier siege and capture by village partisans without military help was more significant of the uprising’s strength – the Sampaio battle had consequences far beyond its military importance. While Ney waited in La Coruña for Soult to join him, the latter, on hearing the news of the battle, decided to abandon Galicia and march to neighbouring León. Ney was left in an untenable position, with little other choice than to evacuate the region also. By July 3, he had removed his force from Galicia; behind lay the popular insurrection which two of Napoleon’s most famous marshals had been unable to repress. Galicia was free of the French army which, throughout the rest of the war, would never again set foot there. After achieving this reversal of Napoleonic fortunes, the majority of Galician villagers returned home to tend their land and look after their livestock. The parish priest Troncoso, lately ‘general’ of the Miño forces besieging Tuy, also returned to his village to continue to care for his spiritual flock. The popular rising brought no social change in its train. The dominant rural classes – hidalgos and clergy – retained their hegemony over the villagers. In part this was due to the fact some of these classes had participated in the struggle to expel the French, fighting as they were to preserve their privileges. Troncoso, however, was highly critical of them. He had expected, he wrote in a summary of his activities to the Suprema’s defence minister, Pedro Cornel, that the ‘arduous enterprise’ of ousting the French would have been supported by local magistrates at the head of their villagers, and dispersed army officers who would have led the ‘rough plebeians’ who made up the Miño army.