

Two small northern coastal townships and their surrounding countryside were the next to offer open resistance: Ribadeo, on the Asturian border, and Vivero, an isolated medieval port at the end of a long bay well to the west. French troops deployed from Mondoñedo, the nearest town, reached Ribadeo on January 25, 1809, and demanded, as was their habit, rations of bread and wine; some ‘honourable and distinguished patriots’ incited its inhabitants to resist their demands and to unite in their locality’s defence. Within twenty-four hours villagers from outlying parishes armed with shotguns, pikes, sickles, and other edged weapons had gathered in strategic places on the troops’ return route and set about the small French column which, it was reported, lost sixty of its 150 men in continuing skirmishes.16

The consequences of the neighbouring parishes’ participation in Vivero’s defence were sharper. A column of seventy French cavalry entered the township on January 28 to a chilly reception. The commander’s orders were to ensure that the local civilian, military and ecclesiastical authorities swore allegiance to King Josef; his proclamation to that effect aroused the inhabitants’ anger. Nonetheless, despite prior defence preparations, Vivero’s 2,700 inhabitants and local authorities made no move to defend themselves for a week. However, after midnight of the morning on which the authorities had been summoned to swear allegiance, five thousand villagers from neighbouring parishes and hamlets gathered on the heights outside Vivero and began a lively fire. The French cavalry force was already in a state of fear: ‘they read in the inhabitants’ faces their inner anger at their presence, and posted sentries at night …’.17 Heavy rain interrupted the villagers’ attack for four hours. At 5 a.m. they advanced on the walled township. At the same time, its inhabitants began to fight the French. Within an hour, the enemy had suffered eight dead, forty-eight prisoners, including their commander and his officers, and a number wounded. Only eighteen of the original seventy-four troopers managed to escape, the majority of them being cut down in the countryside beyond Vivero.

Once they felt themselves the masters of the township, the villagers went on the rampage. They demanded that all existing authorities be dismissed and threatened to kill the corregidor, firing at his house. They wanted no corregidor, they clamoured, unless they appointed him themselves to ‘do and undo’ as they themselves desired. Nor any more scriveners.* Shouting that the local junta members were French sympathizers, they assaulted the houses of two of them, both naval officials. They knew full well that the local junta had been set up, as in many other places in Galicia, by the dominant elite – in this case the municipal council – essentially to control any ‘popular excesses’, but without the most minimal popular pressure or participation.18 Thus even the Dominican friary did not escape their fury; they dragged out five casks of wine to drink, using the brothers’ glasses and serviettes, before going on to loot the home of a rich merchant, the French and Danish vice-consul, which they stripped of every movable object. Several locally respected men, who tried to calm the mob, were manhandled, and one was wounded. Even the hastily assembled junta’s offer of food and drink for all the villagers was insufficient to calm them.19