

The wealthy and enlightened should have contributed to maintaining order, always so difficult in such cases, and with their wealth could have helped to feed the many poor who made up the army’s largest number … But with great sorrow the writer must say, that with a few exceptions, it was not so. The wealthy’s promises … were never kept … What damage they did to the cause! Keeping themselves and their wealth to themselves, they left the poor to fight alone.31

The villagers were well aware of their role. As one of them from Lugo later stressed, it was they who had ‘kicked the French out of Galicia and back into Castilla’.32 They had no doubt of their united strength; but that strength had had to be mobilized by their social superiors before it became effective.

### CATALAN POPULAR RESISTANCE

O Peuples d’Espagne! Que vous seriez laches, si vous ne preferiez la mort au joug d’aussi cruels devastateurs. [Oh Spanish people, how cowardly you would be if you did not prefer death to such a cruel and devastating yoke.] – (Inscription found on the interior wall of a house occupied by a senior French officer in Vich when General Blake took over the same quarters in August, 1809.33

The territorial liberation struggle in Galicia lasted six months; in Cataluña it continued for six years. Popular resistance to the French occupation in 1809 had aspects quite uncommon to the Galician struggle, the greatest of which was in the relationship of forces. Once Soult had left Galicia on his invasion of Portugal, the French were left with one soldier for every seventy Galicians; after St Cyr’s army entered Cataluña to reinforce the small French force there in the autumn of 1808, the imperial army had one soldier for every twenty-three inhabitants. Despite this enormous difference, large areas of Cataluña remained at the beginning of 1809, like southern Galicia, unoccupied, including all the major towns with the exception of Barcelona.

Moreover, the Catalan people’s struggle faced dangers unknown to the Galician resistance. Zaragoza’s fall in February 1809 left the French army free to move from neighbouring Aragón into western and southern Cataluña to carry out Napoleon’s aim of subjugating the main towns which his armies in Cataluña had been unable to achieve. This danger was perceived from before Zaragoza’s fall; and the Suprema ordered General Reding to lead his army of Cataluña to the Aragón capital’s relief.34 But Reding did not carry out the order, and under Catalan pressure to secure a victory over St Cyr, he instead went down to defeat. The year 1809 began then as the old year had ended, with the army’s third rout in pitched battle in as many months. At Valls on February 25, Reding, the hero of Bailén, lost not only the day but his life,* the remnants of his army retreating in disarray on Tarragona.†

As elsewhere, the defeat at Valls finally proved that the army in Cataluña could not take on the French in open battle and led to a re-thinking of military strategy. Henceforth the army’s tactics would have to approximate those of irregular war, in which a considerable number of Catalan villagers were already engaged; irregular war was more appropriate to the village-raised militia (miquelets) and sometents who knew their countryside intimately and who could be stiffened by small numbers of regular troops. But the new strategy contained a major contradiction: irregular war was to be centred on or around the main unoccupied towns which were to be turned into defensive fortresses. To exchange mobility and the enemy’s constant harassment by a static defence, inevitably led to a siege mentality on the unhappy Zaragoza model. The French, well armed for sieges, were sooner or later certain to take the town and a large number of military prisoners which depleted the army of much needed veterans. As could be expected, therefore, this resulted in a succession of Catalan siege defeats in the coming years, without for all that eliminating the popular anti-French struggle in the countryside.*