

Many hundreds, if not thousands, of young villagers fled their homes and conscription to join their compatriots in Portugal. Aware of the potential recruits and deserters in the neighbouring country, the Galician junta first called for volunteers among its native population in Lisbon. A meagre ninety to one hundred men came forward, of whom a quarter deserted before they set off. The junta admitted to the Suprema that it had taken the measure because of the need to man the army; as soon as Romana’s tattered force had reached Galicia, all the soldiers from the region had ‘set off for home’, he reported.9

After the poor showing in Lisbon, the junta asked the Spanish consul in Oporto in the autumn of 1809 to detain and hand over ‘a goodly number of Galicians apt for military service’, only to find that their commissioner’s attempts were sabotaged by the Oporto authorities and Portuguese and British merchants who kept, he claimed, 2,500 Galician servants hidden in their houses. Of the thousand or so men who were finally returned to Galicia most were illiterate villagers; great numbers deserted on the march back.10

La Coruña city councillors urged parish priests to arouse the patriotism and honour of the deserters among their flocks to return to the colours before a military commission came for them. To ensure itself of sufficient conscripts, the junta dropped the army’s required five-foot minimum height by two inches.11 Before their priests’ efforts could have much effect, the smallholders observed one of the more striking cases of ‘patriotism and honour’ which went awry. The Literary Battalion (as it was always popularly called, though its official title was the Royal Volunteer Battalion of Santiago Light Infantry) of one thousand student volunteers, mostly of the lower nobility, raised at the start of the war by Santiago University, stirred patriot hearts in and beyond Galicia: here was privileged youth setting an example. The students made sure, however – as indeed they did elsewhere – to secure serious advantages from their future heroism; each year served in the battalion would count as a completed academic year.

By the time they and the Galician army reached León, the first province to the east of Galicia, in the early autumn of 1808 and before engaging in a single combat, they were much ‘less ferocious and enthusiastic than when they set out’, observed the Rev. Juan Antonio Posse, a Galician parish priest in a village near León.

Many no longer wanted to continue. Their commander (an army colonel, who had been promoted on the spot in Santiago to brigadier) found himself in the dire necessity to send many of them home. The majority left with their uniforms almost in tatters; others became beggars. Many of the latter came to me, pretending to be ordinary people. I gave them what I could.12

General Blake, the Galician army commander at the time, sent home a further 350 in September 1808, after the defeat at the battle of Rio Seco, ‘because of their lack of spirit and willingness to sacrifice their lives for the cause’.13 The battalion was reformed with a mixture of the remaining students and soldiers, and thereafter performed creditably.