

After their victory, the partisans hastened to the siege of Tuy where for nearly a month the Couto parish priest, Troncoso, had led his army. The immediate effect of this strengthened force was that Troncoso was relieved of his command and replaced by Lieutenant Colonel Manuel García del Barrio, the senior officer sent by the Suprema to Galicia. This was taken very badly by the other partisan leaders, especially when del Barrio decided to lift the siege in the face of a combined attack by Soult in Portugal and Ney from the north. With only two thousand men with firearms, the rest having only lances, axes and clubs, del Barrio’s decision made military sense. But the local partisans refused to join him in his retreat. They elected friar Giráldez as their commander, who asked Cachamuiña, now the new military governor of Vigo, for munitions to continue the siege. Happily for the partisans, Soult’s column commander realized that there was little possibility of holding the town for long, and the marshal needed its four thousand men. He evacuated the garrison and its artillery across the river Miño. On April 17 there was not a French soldier left; southern Galicia was free of imperial domination.

The advantages enjoyed by the partisans in the unoccupied enemy south were revealed in the north where the occupation force was a great deal more numerous. When the small port of Corcubión just to the east of Cape Finisterre raised an army of villagers under its parish priest to resist further enemy exactions, a French infantry column from Santiago evaded the defenders and burned the village to the ground, slaughtering a great number of its inhabitants. The British frigate Endymion, which the Corcubión junta had called upon for assistance, could do little to help.26

### THE MIÑO DIVISION

In the south, the third and last stage was potentially the most difficult: to confront the French in open battle. Here at last, though not on his direct orders, a portion of Romana’s army participated.* A detachment of two thousand men, whom he had left under General Martín de la Carrera in Puebla de Sanabria, on the extreme south-eastern limits of Galicia, joined the partisans, bringing with them nine cannon and a few troopers. A group of guerrillas under José María Vázquez, of Salamanca, who was known for daring attacks in Castilla la Vieja, also joined the Galicians.27 By this time, the partisans alone numbered fourteen thousand, of which those formed by the parish priest, Troncoso, comprised the largest nucleus; and together with the newly arrived troops, the whole force turned itself into the División del Miño, commanded by Carrera. Its immediate objective was to take Santiago de Compostela, a symbolic town for all Galicians, indeed for most Spaniards, as the (supposed) burial place of St James, the Apostle, one of the two patron saints of Spain.

With Morillo as its chief of staff, the new division, taking with it ten thousand men, advanced north along the coast road towards Santiago. The city was defended by General Macune of Ney’s army with nearly three thousand troops, fourteen cannon and three hundred cavalry. He chose to engage the insurgent force on open terrain, supposing no doubt that there his disciplined and trained troops would have the better of the village partisans. On May 23, at the campo de la Estrella, he joined battle with the division which outnumbered him by over three to one. For once, weight of numbers told; he was defeated. Carrera’s report on the battle read: