

They have no other God but money, and to get it they would sell their fatherland, their parents, their saints and everything else … I can assure you that were it not for the nation’s honour and interest to wage the war to the end, there would be no one outlandish enough to take up arms to defend these despicable people. They abhor the very name of soldier … instead they have gangs of thieves who, calling themselves sometents, devastate villages almost like the French and pillage with greater ability than they. At general headquarters I have seen various bands of them in rags and tatters, covered in filth. (Their rags to allow them to flee all the faster, their filth so as not to spend the slightest money) …44

Guervos was in fact a privileged urban Andalucian, who had been promoted from sergeant to lieutenant in command of an infantry company, and was able to afford in Cataluña to keep a horse, a groom and a barber–tailor.* His relative prosperity came by issuing letters of credit on his Andalucian family to Catalan civilians and clergymen. He was thinking, he wrote his parents, of taking on a third servant, a wigdresser.45

Guervos, then, was hardly likely to sympathize with poor villagers in tatters fighting to defend their lives, homes and families, or taking revenge on rich villagers who had exploited them as hired labour. However, after the experience of defeat – taken prisoner at the battle of Valls, Guervos managed to escape and rejoin the army – his letters became, if not more sympathetic to the Catalans, at least deeply aware of the hardships the villagers were suffering.

The army which Guervos so staunchly defended did not come cheap. The additional taxes imposed to try to fund it – on top of French exactions – tarred the Catalan junta in the people’s eyes with the same brush as the army itself. As General Blake informed the Suprema on August 8,

No resources remain in the villages … Nothing but near desperation and the people’s unhappy clamours … The troops have nothing to subsist on, and are hated for being a burden on the inhabitants … Even the most fertile imagination is unable to suggest ways of exacting what is needed.46

A few days earlier, Guervos wrote to his parents:

If you could see the greater number of this principality’s villages and townships you would be overcome with horror at the devastation they have suffered at the enemy’s hands. Everything is in ruins and amongst the rubble you can find the images of saints and dead children lying together. There is nothing but desolation everywhere.47

### THE PEOPLE’S SUFFERINGS

The villagers’ hardship could be judged by their population losses. In the hardest hit, these rose well above the already enormous Catalan seven percent decline in natural growth from 1808 to 1809. In the village of Bràfim, on the much-marched route between Barcelona and Valls, one in six of the population died in the winter months of 1809, the local doctor reported in his diary.48 Parish records suggest that the death rate for the whole year was even higher: 18.5 percent of the population. Births also declined, though not so drastically. As a result, natural growth in 1809 dropped by a catastrophic 16.7 percent over the previous year when Bràfim had reached its maximum population figure in the new century.