

Having organized the women volunteers, Alvarez had a large part of the civilian population under his control; like most of the educated elite, whether military or civilian, he disliked and feared nothing more than the lower classes ‘getting out of hand’.

My friend: After three days of incessant bombardment … the houses are almost all destroyed; but in spite of everything you would be overcome to see the common folk, and especially the women, walking along the streets or at their doors, dodging the cannon-balls and laughing at them … It seems that [the Spanish army] has abandoned this unhappy city, but our spirits are not lowered. If we receive no help, we may go down to defeat; but we shall not live to see it … We prefer to die or to be killed first … if you learn that your friend has died, console yourself that this was probably her true destiny, that she preferred it to living in perpetual slavery42*

As in Zaragoza’s second siege, the initial Gerona garrison of just over 5,700 men – more than half of them regulars, the remainder miquelets – largely outnumbered the male working population. In popular terms therefore the defence bore little resemblance to the first Zaragoza siege of the previous year, where the people fought under their own leaders from the start in a determined whirlwind to repulse the French at the city’s very gates and in its streets.

Both Gerona’s besieged and besiegers firmly believed that the Montjuich fortress was the strategic key to Gerona’s fate. Alvarez ordered it to be defended at all costs; and even when his engineers commandant inspected the battered defences and advised him that the only course was to abandon the fortress, he again repeated his order. For five more days the defenders held out until they saw a vastly superior imperial force preparing to attack. The Montjuich commander gave the order to evacuate and retire into the town. Shortly afterwards a series of tremendous explosions tore the remains of the fortress apart as the defenders’ slow-burning fuses set off the powder kegs they had planted in the walls. Montjuich’s seven-week defence had cost the garrison over five hundred dead and more than four hundred wounded.

In fact, the loss of the fortress signalled only the end of the siege’s first stage; the second would continue for a further four months.

### SPANISH AND CATALAN RESENTMENTS

The Gerona siege occupied the French army in Catalonia to the virtual exclusion of all else. To Barcelona’s south there was little fighting. But the Spanish-led army did nothing to relieve the town. Almost inevitably in the circumstances, popular Catalan sentiment rose, expressed mainly through hostility to the Spanish military on its soil, its officers and men considered truculent and cowardly braggarts. This enmity was recognized by General Coupigny, the acting military commander, in March 1809. ‘There reigned a total and disagreeable anarchy and a deep-rooted opposition to the Castilian troops’, he wrote.43 While the Catalans’ initial reaction was to vote with their feet – deserting from the army or finding pretexts for not serving – the Castilian military’s hostility to the Catalans was openly manifested from the start. Sergeant Francisco Guervos, a Bailén veteran who numbered among Reding’s Granada division ordered to Cataluña in one of the Suprema’s first military measures, was an articulate example of this. Barely arrived in Cataluña, the former Granada cathedral violinist wrote to his parents that every day he hated the Catalans more and more.