

The immediate cause of the massive number of deaths, an epidemic of ‘catarrhal and gastric fevers’ in Dr Bosch i Cardellach’s words, could not be disassociated from the wretchedness of war: the village had already suffered the first of its eight French sackings, and the inhabitants had fled to the mountains for the third time in as many winter months. Over the six years of conflict, the villagers abandoned their homes no less than seventeen times – the last of which was on the Spanish army’s advance to ‘liberate’ them. Three years after the war’s end, Bràfim had still not reached its 1800 population figure.

Other villages suffered as much or more. The war was bleeding most villagers dry. They appeared to be the protagonists of the struggle, but in reality they were its victims. The same could be – and was, justly – said of villages in many other parts of Spain; but in Cataluña there was barely any respite. Everywhere villagers were forced repeatedly to flee their homes, to suffer French sackings, punitive exactions and fines. Nonetheless, they continued to resist: their determination to defend their homes, families and forefathers’ religion was encapsulated in a small incident at the beginning of April 1809, close to Granollers, in the Vallés. Here, as imperial troops advanced, local villagers posted themselves on the heights. The French general sent an aide-de-camp with a message: his troops only fought other troops, not civilians; in consequence the latter should leave their weapons and go home, and no harm would come to them. If not, he would attack … The villagers replied that they only took orders from the Spanish commander-in-chief, whom they would inform. Until his answer arrived, they would remain on the heights but were prepared not to attack the French as long as the latter ceased hostilities in the surrounding villages. If this ‘just proposal’ were rejected

the villagers will use every means at their disposal to rid themselves of the invader … They will never surrender to a power which has demonstrated no other right than that of force. General St Cyr and his worthy companions can cover themselves with the sad glory of reducing this country to a pile of rubble; like cannibals, they can enjoy the pleasure of treading on the corpses of those they have killed; but neither they, nor their Master, will ever be able to say that the Vallés villagers surrendered to the yoke which the whole Nation justly rejects. This is their answer, given by those who occupy the said heights.49

Although the style and language used in Spanish was hardly that of the plain villager who, like as not, was barely literate and spoke only Catalan, the defiance and determination to defend themselves was patent. But with good sense they were also prepared to secure a truce in hostilities, however short, against troops who, on previous incursions into their villages, had assassinated their inhabitants in cold blood and burned down their houses, violated their women and desecrated their ‘forefathers’ religion’, plundered and pillaged, as their statement also asserted.