

Worthless they no doubt were to the task of subduing Cataluña; but in terms of the patriots’ war aims, of controlling the countryside and depriving the enemy of vital food supplies, while at the same time causing a steady drain in imperial casualties, they were far from worthless. In May 1809 alone, irregular forces pushed back or scared off six enemy sorties from Barcelona into the neighbouring countryside. On May 6, an enemy force of one hundred Italian infantry and a few cuirassiers were known to the miquelets – communications between patriots within and without the walls of the Catalan capital successfully evaded the occupying army’s vigilance – to be setting out to escort a wagon despatched by General Duhesme, Barcelona’s French commander. Forty miquelets and the same number of Spanish regular cavalry were detailed to lie in ambush in woods outside Hospitalet. They allowed the imperial escort to pass – its numbers for a single wagon testifying to the French command’s insecurity – and then attacked it from the rear, taking thirty-four prisoners, the wagon, arms and horses and pursuing the remainder until confronted by superior enemy forces.55 This was but one of the small, ‘worthless’ incidents which made up the war on the ground.

*

Popular resistance was never as total, homogenous and univocal as the phrase implied. The miquelets and the sometents, who were not strictly subject to army discipline, shared many military disadvantages which a writer to the Catalan junta observed had started because

this war began back to front, due to Barcelona’s occupation by the enemy. Miraculously a handful of people without order or discipline stopped the enemy at the Bruch pass, and thus the idea progressively took hold that, in disbanding the regular army, [the war could be fought] without generals, cavalry or infantry. The crime of desertion was considered a virtue and remains so to this day. The first bodies of miquelets did not fight with the coordination and method of those in 1794 [during the Convention War] when there was a line army which brought order and discipline. (Antonio Borràs, January 29, 1809)56

So little had Catalans accepted conscription into the Spanish army, that ‘some people try to form sometent companies to avoid the call-up’, wrote a Mataró junta member. ‘And they attempt to oblige villagers to maintain them. Many justices complain that neither they nor their orders are respected since the conscripted refuse to join the army and flee their homes. The justices ask this junta for help to make them see reason, but we have no force or any help to give them.’57

As a village-raised force the sometent also inevitably became an expression of local ‘politics’: public favours – privileging the privileged by giving them command – and private grudges against individuals could be worked out through them. As an example of the latter, Martiniano Clara, a fifty-five-year-old illiterate village baker in Besalu, whose miquelet son had earlier been killed in action, found that his other son and bakery lads were called up as sometents, leaving him without any help. He was unable to bake the bread needed by the village’s inhabitants, or the rations of passing military forces. ‘Perhaps moved by some unfounded resentment’, the local junta had then included his name in the drawing of lots and he had also been selected to serve as a sometent. He appealed against this ‘injustice’ to the Gerona junta, which ordered that he not be obliged to serve.58