

*

Despite five attempts in seven months† by the capital’s internal resistance to liberate Barcelona, their planned night-time risings were never able to coordinate effectively with the exterior Catalan forces which were to advance to support them. The resistance’s ineptness – ‘as soon as any plans were agreed upon they immediately became public knowledge [in the capital] down to their last details’ – did not do much to encourage an armed intervention which most Spanish military commanders, with the exception of the Catalan partisan leaders Milans del Bosch and Juan Claros, believed ‘one of the most risky enterprises’ they could face.64 Nonetheless, the Barcelona acting captain general’s and the majority of the audiencia’s refusal in April 1809 to swear allegiance to Josef as the new king of Spain kept high the resistance’s hopes; and plans were laid for another urban rising on the night of May 11. But when the moment came, the military forces from outside the city did not appear. The French rapidly found traces of the abortive attempt and arrested eighteen alleged plotters, among them seven clerics. A military court sentenced five of the accused – a doctor, a priest, a currency broker, a treasury bond official and a sergeant – to death: the French took their revenge principally on the educated elite whom they suspected of organizing the revolt. As the condemned were mounting the scaffold, the cathedral bell unexpectedly rang out the tocsin. Four artisans, a carpenter, a locksmith, a mason and an esparto plaiter, had gained access to the belfry and, with farriers’ hammers, struck the bell in a call to the population to defend itself. French troops immediately surrounded the cathedral: the carpenter managed to escape, but the three others were trapped and forced to hide under the organ’s bellows. Tricked after seventy-two hours into revealing their presence, they were soon thereafter climbing the scaffold themselves.65

On the last attempted rising on the night of June 6, the regular troops finally moved; a Catalan vision of the Spanish army was expressed in what followed:

As the division approached up the rise from St Feliu, some of the troops fired, and the word spread immediately that the French were coming. Despite it being a false alarm, or better put, an intrigue, a part of the cavalry vanguard turned and fled, trampling down the infantry behind. Some of the troops began to fire at one another, some threw down their arms and ran, the drummers forsook their drums, there were injured and in a disorderly stampede all finally took to their heels, forgetting their most sacred duty.

As a result Juan Claros’s and Jayme Jatjó’s (irregular) divisions had to abandon their positions, and ‘the sometents, seeing themselves deceived yet again, cursed the troops and their commanders … quite justly, because one of their groups, led by the Englishman, John Evans, had reached the powder stores on Montjuich, from where they had fired on the fort; the soldiers’ preciptious flight exposed them to being cut off’.66