

*

In the ‘intestinal’ war, as one contemporary writer termed it, that was being waged at the same time as the war against Napoleon, it was significant that complaints about land-related problems – villagers’ non-payment of rents and dues – formed only about one sixth of the total protests received by the Catalan junta between November 1808 and June 1809.59 Rather than attacking the señorial and land-owning system outright, it seemed that miquelets and some-tents tried to enrich themselves directly at the expense of the village rich: it was an individualist rather than a social revolution. At the local level, however, juntas’ retentions of tithes to pay for their self-defence were far more frequent. Tithes, as Dr Bosch of Bràfim commented, were the first resource on which village juntas laid their hands. This illustrated that the better-off were as hostile to the Church’s exactions as were the poor smallholders: feudal dues – despite the señores’ eighteenth-century attempt to increase the latter – were considered by villagers as part of their contractual land rents. Tithes, on the other hand, were seen as an unjustifiable imposition by a Church which enriched itself at their expense.

The popular agitation against the more prosperous villagers also reflected the latter’s lack of zeal in assuming their local responsibilities in the face of war. The Catalan junta was inundated with reports from municipalities informing it that newly appointed or elected councillors refused to take up their posts. Comprehensible at the personal level – it was they who had to treat with invasive imperial forces and attempt (often at the risk of their lives) to prevent a sacking or worse – their collective refusal did not testify to great patriotic selflessness. As the people’s principal representative on the Olot township council complained to the Catalan junta:

The large landholders and those who do not work for a living take advantage of all possible excuses to refuse to serve the public … [and] offer frivolous pretexts not to occupy public posts.60

Of the sixty-two municipal complaints received by the Catalan junta in the spring of 1809, forty percent concerned at least one councillor who had refused to take up his post or who petitioned to be excused from filling it.61* The Catalan junta was having none of this, and ordered them to take up their positions under threat of a fine.

The intestinal war was fought not only between poor and rich villagers, but between the new organisms of local power – the juntas – and those of the ancien regime – the town halls. The former considered themselves emanations of popular power appointed to lead the war effort; the latter, rejecting the assumption that the juntas had taken over all their powers, fought to retake their previous legal rights. In general, the Catalan junta sided with local juntas.

*

Great numbers of the better-off fled Cataluña for Mallorca, which remained unthreatened by the French, and points further off. This was particularly true of the Barcelona burgess who escaped from the capital, having in general first paid a hefty fine to the French command for the privilege of joining ‘the insurgents’. The capital’s landed denizens were put on the line: the Catalan junta threatened to expropriate their estates if they did not leave the city to live on them. (Ten nobles reported their return to the Catalan junta between November 1808 and June 1809, although it must be assumed that others did not inform the junta.) The occupying French military’s policy of ridding the capital of possible oppositionists and of expelling the indigent to save food, increased the exodus; the capital lost about two-thirds of its pre-war population of one hundred thousand.62 In its place, Mallorca became patriot Cataluña’s main trading port. Compared to the turn of the new century, the number of ships calling at Palma annually more than doubled during the war.63