

At midnight, four hundred soldiers and civilians, including women, tried to escape from the town. As they waded the Ter, French guards gave the alarm, shooting broke out, many were killed, a few managed to escape, and the majority fled in panic back to the town.

At the appointed hour the next morning, just under 3,400 officers and men marched out and laid down their arms. Behind them 1,090 officers and troops, including Alvarez,* remained in hospital.90 The original and reinforced garrison’s 9,400 troops had suffered nearly five thousand casualties, of whom approximately one thousand had died.91 Such was the state of the soldiers who surrendered that ‘the besiegers felt ashamed to have been held at bay so long by dying men’, an imperial eyewitness observed.92 Despite the capitulation treaty, 119 clerics were subsequently deported.

It was the civilian population, however, which had suffered most. One in five died – nearly sixty percent more than the garrison’s deaths. This high civilian mortality rate was caused less by enemy action than by hunger, sickness and the infrahuman conditions in which people had been forced to exist.93

*

As predicted, Gerona’s surrender deeply affected the Catalan population who blamed the Spanish army for not having raised the siege. It was easy to make Blake the scapegoat and he certainly deserved a fair share of the blame.† However, it was also the case that the Suprema’s war minister had ordered him not to risk his small force in certain defeat; and the Junta, after ordering him to ‘speed to Gerona’s defence’, had later written that it had intended him to do only what, in his military judgement, was ‘possible’.94 In any case, he had given the Catalan junta long warning of his refusal to take on the besiegers with his outnumbered army;‡ had the junta acted decisively, it could have used southwestern Cataluña’s seven-month freedom from enemy attack to raise levies to reinforce him. But it was easier for the junta to write letters of protest than to take resolute action. Finally, it realized that its own prestige was at stake and summoned a congress on November 20 in Manresa, which decided to raise a mass sometent levy and a ten million real loan to support it. By the time even a small force could be assembled, it was too late: Gerona had fallen. The failure to go to the besieged town’s aid led to a series of incendiary anonymous letters and pasquinades protesting about ‘the betrayal of Cataluña’, the Spanish army’s passivity, the junta’s resort to conscription, and urging the need for Catalans alone to take up their own defence. Some of these were signed by ‘The Tiger of the Catalans’, and repeated themselves, in Catalan or Spanish, in almost identical terms.

Take to arms, Catalan people and our sound will frighten the Spanish military and humble French pride. I shall be your leader – The Tiger of the Catalans.95

The tiger was little more so than on paper, but after Gerona and the failure to recapture Barcelona, there was little doubt that distrust of, and desertion from, the Spanish army notably increased. Gerona’s capitulation was just the first of the four Catalan sieges which all went down to defeat.