

The townspeople’s overwhelming joy at this sudden supply of food rapidly turned to disappointment. The nearly three thousand new reinforcements left by the commanding officer from among the troops who had entered with the convoy consumed much of the food themselves. The siege mentality was like a dam which, owing to the earth carried in from its contributing rivers, silted up and reduced its capacity. Nonetheless, the inhabitants were heartened by the show of aid and by the besiegers’ subsequent eleven days of inactivity, which they used to repair the town’s defences. Encouraged by the enemy’s lack of action, neighbouring villagers again risked their luck to bring in scanty supplies over mountain tracks which for those who could afford them provided some additional relief.71 As it turned out the September 1 breakthrough was the last important external aid Gerona received. Two other convoys the same month were beaten back before reaching the town. Between June and September most food prices, with the exception of wheat and barley, had at least trebled, a contemporary diarist noted, and some, like the cost of a fowl, had risen over twenty times. Alvarez’s order that prices, other than those of food brought in by villagers, were not to be increased had little effect. Supply and demand at a time of scarcity were stronger than patriotic appeals.72

Alvarez’s lack of military talent at the head of the defence, in his staff subordinate’s words, was made good by his fanaticism. The French revolutionary wars had to a large extent revolutionized counter-revolutionary warfare by introducing the people as a determining force; the former idea of a passive population under siege had gone.*

No one had previously considered what the defenders can do when they unite valour and ingenuity; how much they can slow down the besiegers’ work by continuous sorties, or how many ways there are of defending a breach. The previous error was to suppose that everything depended on the artillery.73

His very fanaticism led Alvarez to use these new tactics – and often to very good effect. Unlike Palafox in Zaragoza, he organized frequent sorties to delay the siege works. To an officer who was to command one of these and who asked on what point to retreat were he forced to do so, Alvarez tartly replied: ‘To the cemetery.’74 He was able, moreover, to imbue the inhabitants, many always ready to believe in miracles, with his military version of ‘martyrdom’ in an unyielding defence.

By mid-September, the besiegers had opened three wide breaches in the town’s north-eastern walls. The prior month’s bombardments had been so fierce that it was said that only one house in the town still stood intact. In the afternoon of September 19, after a further morning’s heavy artillery fire, the imperial troops launched their much-awaited assault. Behind the breaches, the defenders had prepared a second line of defence, cutting wide pits, constructing barricades and opening loopholes in houses. In bitter fighting, some of it hand to hand, the garrison’s regular troops and miquelets threw back the attackers who suffered over six hundred killed and wounded to the defenders’ 250 casualties.† As an eyewitness, Narcis de Camp y de Font, wrote to the Catalan junta: