

Though everything stood to be lost in the two hours of fighting, the town remained calm. People stood at their doors to give the wounded a sip of the little good wine they still retained, the best cordial there is. The Santa Bárbara women’s company’s went to the breaches to fetch the troops munitions, water and whatever wine could be had, and to bring back the wounded. Men of the Cruzadas were on the walls … The whole town was at work … And the prize for all of this is not to know whether the town will be rescued before it dies of hunger, for famine is nearly upon it …75

The victory was hailed as Gerona’s ‘great day’. The imperial forces would not again try to storm the place. Instead they attempted to starve it into submission. This change of strategy, combined with Blake’s two further fruitless attempts to relieve pressure on Gerona – in the last, on November 1, he was defeated with the loss of two thousand men and thereafter retreated from the scene – made the end almost inevitable; but still the starving town held out for a further six weeks.

Every day from late September, a number of the garrison’s and population’s horses were slaughtered – Alvarez was the first to offer his – to provide meat for the troops, the population and the sick. The bishop ordered a soup kitchen to be opened at his expense to feed the poor.76 Hungry army infantrymen began frequently to enter inhabitants’ houses demanding, as ‘charity’, bread and wheat.77 By the beginning of October, the spectre of famine became a reality. The mills were not producing sufficient flour to provide bread; Alvarez inspected them. As he came away, an inhabitant called out: ‘Sir, do not be distressed, we will eat dry grains of wheat if necessary.’78

The French command was now taking measures in the heights above the town to prevent villagers getting through with food: cords with bells and guard dogs to alert sentries to anyone passing over the mountain tracks. Marshal Augereau, who had finally taken command from St Cyr in the first days of October, reinforced this new tactic with constant bombardments and feint attacks to wear down the population’s morale. To save food, the Gerona junta ordered beggars and all those without means, women and children under sixteen, people over sixty, the walking sick and those who had taken refuge in the town, to leave when the opportunity arose.79*

In spite of widespread hunger, it was not the inhabitants but the garrison officers who first broke ranks. They complained bitterly that they were receiving neither food nor pay. To pacify them, Alvarez called a meeting of the town’s notables and guilds on October 4 to raise sixteen thousand reales to provide them with food and pay. Though this sum was not forthcoming, those in attendance committed the nobility, clergy and guilds to contribute ten reales a day.80 At the beginning of November, the junta had to ask that this payment be repeated. To survive the populace was by now eating almost anything – or nothing because of the exorbitant prices. As J. A. Nieto Samaniego, a doctor in charge of military hospitals, recorded: