

Cats and mice were considered exquisite dishes and sold for a good price … A fowl fetched an ounce of gold, a pair of half rotten thrushes twenty reales, a jar of bad brandy seventy reales, and a jug of wine forty to fifty; as to greens, a handful of celery leaves, wild chicory or poppies, the only vegetables we could obtain … sold for similarly exaggerated prices. And there was no question of bargaining: the first buyer snatched them from the seller’s hands.81

A refugee from occupied Barcelona who had reached Lérida offered to manufacture dried broth cubes for the beleagured hospital inmates. Each cube would make four cups of wholesome meat or chicken broth, he wrote, and because of their small size and weight they could be easily taken into the town in sufficient quantities to make broth for 2,500 men a day. But his offer to the Catalan junta, to which he sent four experimental cubes and informed it of the manufacturing process came, like other aid, too late.82 Heavy rains and cold weather in October worsened the inhabitants’ plight, scurvy, dysentry and fever weakened their half-starved bodies. The homeless poor, and those whose houses had been shelled, slept out; every night some of them died. Others dropped dead in the streets. For days their bodies lay unburied, adding to the pestilence. The sick were confined in over-crowded hospitals; the rain leaked through their tiled roofs. No medicine remained to treat the patients. Dr Viadér recalled their plight:

Most of them lay on the bare floor for want of straw, benches or beds; a minority had palliasses which had rotted. All were without nightshirts, sheets, bolsters or blankets … [The hospitals] were a cruel source of contagious disease. Such great numbers died that it can be affirmed that of every hundred seventy-five were the victims of these conditions.83

A quarter of the garrison troops fell ill; and as the still-active soldiers could no longer be relieved, they too became more readily exposed to sickness.84 By the end the original garrison had lost two-thirds of its men.85* ‘In general, every face bears the pallor of approaching death’, Dr Nieto Samaniego reported to Alvarez on November 29.

[The inhabitants’] voices are listless, their steps slow, their breathing frequent, their pulse weak; they suffer from an excessive despondency, not only physical but of natural pride and amour propre. They have little inclination for social intercourse; and the little they have serves only to relieve grief, to brood on their hunger, to think of their harsh fate … [and] the cruel abandonment to which we have been reduced, leaving us to die in hardship, barrenness, famine and sickness or by the terrible besieger’s sword.86

There were hardly any pregnant women to be seen. Menstruation, the same doctor reported, was frequent and excessive. ‘Many women have seen their newborn die of hunger, clinging to their milkless breasts.’ The streets were torn and deeply holed by cannon fire, and the holes were full of excrement washed by the rain from the cesspits of roofless houses. The remains of human diarrhoea were everywhere; and adding to the pestilence were the human and animal corpses buried in the ruins.87