

When Toledo was captured by the French in December 1808, shortly after Madrid fell to Napoleon, Borbón fled south with the Suprema in front of the imperial troops, leaving full powers to the cathedral chapter which in turn delegated them to the auxiliary bishop and two canons. Covering an enormous area in the heart of Spain, the Toledo primate archdiocese was the country’s largest, and its wealthiest. Most of its northern part was in French-occupied territory, but the southern still lay in patriot hands and its various vicariates were unable to communicate with Toledo.

This ambiguous situation lasted until April 1809, when the Bonapartist regime in Madrid decided to exert greater control and ordered the chapter to elect one of its nominees to hold delegated powers. The chapter at length complied, the cardinal retaliated by appointing two trusted canons to the same post and a number of ‘flying vicar generals’ to the patriot front lines to maintain contact with Toledo. From this new and even greater diocesan confusion, a pragmatic compromise was struck. Depending on the circumstances, the cathedral chapter consulted either the Bonapartist or Borbón-appointed governors, and thus lived relatively untroubled for a further year. In this condition, compounded by the cardinal’s indecisive character, it could hardly be expected that Toledo would afford clerical direction to the patriot struggle.3†

At the start of the war, the Church included its share of both vehement Old Regime clerics and politically circumspect reformists who had counted on the prewar state to implement Church reforms; but alongside a minority of ‘afrancesados’ – the most notable of whom was the inquisitor general and archbishop of Zaragoza, Ramón de Arce – the Church had its share of episcopal contemporizers with the Bonapartist regime in the occupied zones who remained to care for their flock or who adopted one of the only other positions open to them: Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar’s …

The bishop of Valladolid, one of the very early Bonapartist supporters (though at the same time highly doubtful that the patriotic rising left him much scope for pressing King Josef’s case), issued a pastoral to his diocese in July 1808:

Jesus Christ did not ordain himself as a judge in secular matters … To serve God and not to obey the king, to love your neighbour and to offend against a single man, are contradictory acts, products of a bad conscience. Those who serve God and love their neighbour will be faithful and obedient to their sovereign.4

The criticism of the Church’s ‘inactivity’ appeared then to stem from the failure of a general ecclesiastical call for a religious war or from the demands of a ‘theological interpretation’ of the ongoing events. Very shortly after the national risings, of which he would probably have been unaware at the time, Pope Pius VII called on the Spanish clergy to ‘rouse themselves’ and look at the evil the ‘impious’ Napoleon had caused France. In a pastoral on June 7, 1808, which contained many allusions to the books of the Maccabees* and the Apocalypse (which became the touchstone of later patriot sermons and religious writings – afrancesado bishops tended rather to the New Testament) he warned all Spaniards of the dangers to religion they faced from Napoleon, ‘that sinful man and son of damnation’. He told Spaniards that the war was just and that they should fight for ‘king, country and the law’ and to ‘avenge the injustices done to Spain and its princes …’5