

In the whirlwind of the risings – in which individual clerics played a not inconsiderable part in awakening and maintaining a spirit of popular resistance – until the victory at Bailén, many indecisive bishops followed Borbón’s suit and did not commit themselves to the patriot cause. In this they were little different to many high government functionaries and members of the nobility. However, the dozen or so prelates who were presidents or members, alongside an even greater number of canons, of the provincial juntas assured a part of the Church with patriotic credentials.

Nonetheless, in 1808 a considerable number of clerics showed publicly that they were reluctant to deny their evangelical duties and preach a religious war in outright support of the patriot cause. In Sevilla a few days after Bailén, a Carmelite friar, for example, preached a sermon, under the ambiguous title, ‘Should we hope or fear?’ in which, though admitting that this was a scandalous theme for a religious minister to pose, he tried to persuade other clerics not to resist the French. ‘Have they not seen that the cancer of defending the throne, state and fatherland is certain to bring the Church’s ruin?’ he asked. He ended his sermon, however, giving thanks that ‘due to our faith’ the patriots had won victories ‘without the means to do so’, showing that he had little trust in their ability to withstand the French. On the same day in Sevilla, a canon and member of the Granada junta gave a sermon in which, after rehearsing Spain’s history since the seventh century, he praised ‘the Maccabean spirit’ of the troops who were heroically defending the country. In the absence of a national Church response to the war, everything depended at first on individual clerical initiatives. Significantly, however, there were few recorded appeals for a religious war.6

The change came with the crisis at the end of 1808 when Napoleon crushed the Spanish armies, took Madrid and seemed set to capture most of the country. The Suprema considered the Church’s efforts insufficient and called on it for an organized endeavour to enthuse the people’s will to resist. The first such appeal to prelates and the heads of religious orders came as the Junta fled south before Napoleon’s offensive. The clergy, it said, ‘have the greatest interest in and are the first who are obliged to defend religion … The Suprema expects you to employ all your zeal, suasion and patriotism to revive the people’s spirit ….’7 Subsequently the Junta called on missionaries to go out to preach in favour of the patriot cause, ‘as our kings have bidden in equally calamitous times’.8

Rather than these Suprema appeals it was no doubt the fact that the majority of the lower clergy, secular and religious, feared Napoleon’s imminent domination; this determined them to declare a Holy War, a ‘Crusade’ against a godless invader, ‘the most heretical of all heretics’. A torrent of vituperation and abuse poured out on the enemy in sermons and writings, much of it sustained by a theological interpretation of Spain’s history in which the divine will was the prime mover of events. In this ideology, which drew a veil over the many material interests that the divinity was unlikely to attend to, ‘Spain is suffering the lash of punishment because it provoked the terrible hand of God against itself.’ And thus: ‘The Most High, who is the God of fury and vengeance, is reaching out anew to Spaniards to convert them.’9