

The village was living in a state of promiscuity. Nobody obeyed the religious precepts. Children’s education was totally ignored. Many parents could not be obliged to send their children to school or to catechism classes. Couples came to me to get married without ever having been to confession; worse yet, many on their death beds were without knowledge of the sacraments that would save their souls. It was impossible to make or oblige many parents to fulfil their religious duties. Their lives reached a state of demoralization in which custom and tradition were quite ignored.41

### RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCE

These complaints all stemmed from the clergy, the majority of whom were parish priests of the villages and townships where they were serving. Though there was no reason to suspect that they did not tell the truth as they saw it, their focus on events was obviously unilateral. Measured by whether one of the Church’s proscriptions – the Lent commandment of sexual abstinence – was observed to a greater or lesser degree during the war provided more objective evidence that their complaints were in general unfounded, at least among couples if not village youth.*

Pre-war, despite the proscription, during the forty-six days of Lent from Ash Wednesday to Easter Saturday inclusive, sexual abstinence was not particularly marked. Depending on region, Lent conceptions constituted on average between ten and fourteen percent of annual conceptions, Extremadura representing the highest and Castilla la Nueva the lowest. Measured by this yardstick, the wartime averages in a total of seven regions showed very small changes despite the increased emphasis from 1809 of the Church’s summons to the population to mend their religious ways in order to win the war. As could be expected, the averages also sometimes reflected the regions’ population growth or loss as was the case in the disastrous year of 1809 when Lent conceptions dropped in line with the latter in all seven regions.†

Lent wartime averages did, however, show certain tendencies compared to pre-war. In six of the regions they ran counter to or exceeded population growth, rising in Castilla la Nueva, Extremadura, the Basque country and Valencia and declining in south-western Andalucía and Castilla la Vieja. In other words by this measure wartime religious observance was higher in the two latter regions than in the other four. Understandably: Castilla la Vieja was historically the heartland of Catholic Spain, and southwestern Andalucía had been the centre of patriot resistance for over a year (1809–1810).

In the remaining regions the war’s dislocations and the breakdown of absolutism’s civil and clerical controls over the people evidently fostered a slight decrease in religiosity. But the overall averages obscured certain moments of relative declines which, in the historical context, were noteworthy. Between 1810 and 1812, in both Castillas and Andalucía Lent conceptions rose to wartime highs. In these three years, the French extended their occupation; by early 1812, they dominated – though they could never entirely control – the largest extent of Spain they were to hold. The popular perception that, despite the ongoing guerrilla struggle, they were there to stay with the consequent loss of the Church’s previous power, could well have accounted for the downturn. Change was inevitable and the Church could not prevent it.