

However great – or feigned – his trust in ‘Agra’, Canning could not be seen to act in Mexico without the newly created Suprema’s knowledge and insisted that Agra return to Spain to inform the Junta of Fernando’s written wish. If he went, it would be to his doom, the ex-friar knew. He boarded a British ship bound for La Coruña at Portsmouth and disembarked at Plymouth; but two of his retinue remained on board and were arrested when they reached Spain without passports. It was not long before the patriot authorities had discovered who they were dealing with.

Gutiérrez–Agra got wind of the arrests before Canning and escaped from Britain on board a ship bound for Lisbon. But his pursuers were by now more alert than he. Placed under patriot surveillance from the moment he reached Portugal, he and his ‘secretary’ were issued, as a blind, with Suprema passports to Sevilla; the intention was to see whether he would lead his observers to other French agents. Instead, the two men went north in a vain attempt to take refuge in Soult’s army which had invaded Portugal from Galicia. They were arrested before they could reach the imperial invaders, incarcerated in a Lisbon prison and from there taken by coach to Sevilla where they were handed over to the tribunal of public safety, the Suprema’s special court to investigate and try suspected French sympathizers. Except for his break with the Church, Gutiérrez did not deny his past, alleging in self-defence that all his actions had been undertaken to avenge himself on the French. It did him no good: he was a man condemned to death from the moment of his arrest in Portugal. Four days after his execution, his secretary met the same fate.

While alive a bit player in the great events of his time, Gutie posthumous fate was considerably grander. Before the war, he had published anonymously in France a violently anti-clerical novel, which circulated secretly and to such great success in Spain that it ran to three editions in as many years. But after his death, and still anonymously, a further twenty Spanish editions, translations into French, German and Portuguese, stage adaptations and romantic ballads were published up to the 1850s. Gutiérrez became a nineteenth-century best-selling author. His novel, which concerned an innocent young girl’s misadventures at the hands of a lecherous archbishop of Sevilla and of Inquisitorial fanaticism, was a deep-felt plea for religious tolerance.*

### DIVINE WONDERS

Prodigious phenomena contributed to keeping alive a spirit of Providence’s intervention on the patriot side. A Valencian farmer’s eighteen-year-old son, who, alongside his work in the fields, had demonstrated a vocation for the priesthood and had taken his first vows in the Franciscan order, was conscripted at the beginning of the war and killed in battle almost immediately during the French advance on Valencia. Salvador Torrent’s corpse lay high up on the wooded heights of the Cabrillas pass, some locals reported to his smallholding parents in Chirivella, a village close to the provincial capital. Nearly four months after the battle, they set out to find his remains, passing in horror the skeletons of other corpses consumed by beasts and birds of prey and the summer’s heat. To their astonishment, they found their son’s body lying incorrupt on the ground in the form of a cross, its head on its right shoulder, its arms outstretched, one foot over the other, naked but for the cord of the Franciscan order. They carried him down on their shoulders and brought him home where for three days his corpse was displayed to a numerous public of all stations of life before being buried in his order’s habit.