

Shortly after his report, the abbot engaged in a serious struggle with the provincial junta in defence of the monastery’s ecclesiastical and señorial rights. The neighbouring township of Monistrol, confronted without prior notice of their arrival, had had to victual three thousand soldiers and sometents on their way to the relief of Gerona; to do so the town hall had laid hands on wine and other foodstuffs due in tithes or rent to the monks, and had allowed doors of the monastery’s archives in the township to be torn down. Other places had also seized agricultural produce due to the monastery. Monistrol scathingly rejected the monastery’s protest and appealed to the provincial junta which supported it publicly.

These illegalities, thundered the abbot, had ‘very grave and detrimental consequences’ for ecclesiastical property and señorial rights:

especially now when the common people flatter themselves on their desired freedom from paying tithes and from the clergy’s just ascendancy … Heaven, it is to be feared, will not bless the civil authorities’ efforts in the just common cause if they do not … literally comply with indispensable canonical law …33

The abbot’s claim of his outstanding contribution to the Catalan war effort may have been true; but his invocation of divine threat, his evident concern to conceal the monastery’s real wealth from its señorial subjects’ suspicious eyes, and his outraged attempt to bring the ‘licentious’ villagers to heel, illustrated the lengths to which the higher clergy defended itself during the war, especially in Cataluña where a ‘war’ against feudal rights was being simultaneously waged within the wider Napoleonic struggle.

The bulk of Church treasure remained where it was – in town and village churches, jealously guarded by local clerics. Once, but then only briefly, the Suprema took direct action, sending a judge and a canon to La Mancha to secure Church silver which on their last incursion the imperial forces had itemized but left in place. In their brief excursion to fifteen townships, the Suprema commissioners netted over one thousand pounds of silver in weight – an average of sixty-six pounds per township – which they carted back for the Suprema’s use.34 Had such expedient action been used throughout the patriot zone, the treasury’s difficulties would have been lessened. But intent on keeping the patriotic alliance together, the Suprema could not – or would not – take drastic measures against ecclesiastical or private property.

### EPISODES: RESISTANCE: A CATALAN PARISH PRIEST

Sixty-six-year-old Pere Solanllonch had served uninterruptedly as Pierola’s priest since the age of thirty. The village of about five hundred inhabitants lay just south of the Bruch pass where the imperial column had met its first Catalan defeat at the hands of armed civilians and military. It was sufficiently off the beaten track, however, for many neighbouring village families to seek refuge there. Nonetheless, on one of the occasions when the Napoleonic troops occupied Igualada, the nearest township, they spread through the neighbouring countryside ‘robbing and sacking without pity’. The priest wrote notes of the events in different parish records, depending on the clerical function he had just performed: baptismal, confirmation and burial records, church accounts and tithe books all served at one time or another.