

But the major reason for the church’s refusal to contribute its great wealth in treasure – silver plate in particular – lay elsewhere. Its patriotism did not run to trust in the Suprema: neither its organization of the war nor its promises of refunding the silver after the war were credible. Moreover, if the conflict went the wrong way, it was certain that the Bonapartist regime would not pay back the valuables the clergy had contributed to the struggle against it. Church treasure was better kept by those whose duty it was to look after it.

Thus the popular sacrifices called for in the name of religion were not reciprocated by the Church in the one area where its contribution would have weighed heavily in the patriots’ favour. Enormous amounts of treasure remained locked away or hidden not only in the great churches and monasteries, but scattered over parishes throughout the land. The Suprema’s efforts to unlock this fortune to pay for the war were of no avail.

In its first appeal, on April 4, 1809, the Junta called on the Church to hand in all treasure not strictly required for religious services ‘for the just and religious objective of avoiding or diminishing the risk of its being stolen by the French troops in their sacrilegious atrocities’. The treasure would be considered part of the national debt and repaid as soon as the ‘present critical circumstances come to an end’.29 Clerics were not deceived: the call was in fact a way of obliging the Church to pay a large part of the war effort. While some prelates sent their cathedral treasure for safe keeping to provinces less exposed to immediate attack, they notably did not hand it over to the Junta. Cuenca, which had suffered a French sacking at the beginning of the war, was an exception; so, too, was Salamanca province which despatched over two thousand kilos of church silver to Sevilla.*30

In general, however, so little notice was taken of the Suprema’s appeal, that it was obliged to repeat its demand, expressing its ‘grief’ at the Church’s refusal to heed its previous order. The outcome was no more favourable, for in December 1809 the Junta again issued an order for treasure to be handed in as part of new war measures.31

In Cataluña, similar demands by the provincial junta also had little effect. But the abbot of the famous monastery of Montserrat informed the Suprema that he had ‘certainly contributed more [funds] than anyone’ to the Catalan military effort, handing over monastery treasure, while maintaining in silence the amount, ‘in order to avoid invidious comparisons, excuses and other taxpayers’ speculations’. During the rising, the monastery had aided the ‘thirty or more’ villages over which it exercised señorial lordship, and continued to support their forces in proportion to the rents it received from each.

Counting this and ordinary and extraordinary war contributions, and the amounts which the licentious liberty, the arbitrariness of renters and their dependents retained and still retain, the Monastery has left not one-third of the rents which it received in ordinary times, and which were never as high as vulgar foolishness, exaggerated devotion or personal distemper claimed.32