

On July 31 imperial soldiers descended for the first time on the village.

They came with such fury and cunning that as I fled from my house, a French cavalryman on a white horse and another on foot with drawn sabre saw me. ‘There’s the priest … Kill him! Kill him!’ I heard the foot soldier shout. By the skin of my teeth I managed to escape.35

His church and rectory sacked, for forty nights of the village’s three months’ trials and tribulations, Solanllonch noted, he slept in a hut on the edge of his lands to escape danger. But he never abandoned his parish or parishioners throughout the whole time, escaping yet once more with his life.

Vigilance day and night had to be extreme in order to escape such an enemy’s cruelty. We posted a few lads up in the sierra de las Rauredas … to raise a white sheet as a flag, and when the French tried to come down, they fired three musket shots … That was the signal for all to flee their homes. Almost every day the enemy made as though to descend on us. What frights, what escapes, what losses! This torment and affliction continued from the day of St James [July 25] to October 10, 1811, on which day the French retired to Barcelona with their spoils … Many, many neighbourhood people remained without a change of shirt, without bread to eat or wine to drink. [The soldiers] flung the hogsheads down and smashed them: not even a robber, no, no one would do that. Oh what a bad time of it we had!

Summoned by the French commandant in Igualada to report to receive orders, he paid no heed: ‘Let him go to hell,’ I said to myself, ‘that little ferret can wait for me. What does he think, that at sixty-six years of age I need orders.’

In all, the imperial soldiers made three razzias on the village, each time sacking the Church and rectory ‘leaving me as fleeced as a new-shorn sheep’. The soldiery had taken all his food stores. His brother advised him not to go to the rectory after the third raid; but the priest insisted. Tears came to his eyes when he saw the destruction wreaked. ‘But courage!’ he said to himself, ‘he who really trusts in God is never completely downcast.’

### EPISODES: THE EX-FRIAR
AND NAPOLEONIC SECRET AGENT

Less edifying was a former friar’s garrotted corpse on public display in Sevilla’s plaza de San Francisco on the early morning of April 15, 1809. Round his neck a sign informed the curious that he had been executed for forging papers in Fernando VII’s name. Luis Gutiérrez’s eventful, thirty-nine-year-old life had come to an end at the executioner’s hands. Twenty years earlier he had fled his order and the Inquisition for revolutionary France, settling just across the Spanish border in Bayonne, a convenient town for a born intriguer to exercise his literary talents against his country’s civil and religious authorities. His first coup was to write a vicious attack on the Spanish political system and the Inquisition, and then to engineer the Spanish government’s purchase of the manuscript in order to avoid its publication in France and its certain clandestine distribution subsequently in Spain. Later he founded and became the chief editor of the Gaceta de Bayona which was a stalwart Spanish organ of French propaganda, especially during the Bayonne constitutional assembly of 1808, which brought Gutiérrez his golden opportunity: at the French government’s behest, he forged letters from the imprisoned Fernando and his brother Carlos addressed to the Mexican viceroy, informing him that it was the king’s wish that a regency in his name be created in the colony which would be saved for his throne should Napoleon succeed in imposing his brother’s rule on Spain. To prosper, this plot needed British acquiesence and assistance. By August 1808, Gutiérrez, under the pseudonym of the baron de Agra, was in London, with a small retinue in attendance, claiming to have foiled French vigilance and escaped in a British man-of-war. He had several meetings with George Canning, foreign secretary, who agreed to forward the documents to the viceroy and support the plan; surprisingly for such an acute mind, Canning appeared to have fallen totally for the plot which had been very carefully designed to attract British interest. Fearing revolutionary anarchy above all, and desiring a small, effective government, Canning had pushed for a regency in Spain; British support for a similar governing body in Mexico would hinder Napoleon’s claims to Spain’s South American empire and would, it could be supposed, bring British trade similar rewards to those granted in Brazil by a grateful Portuguese royal family which had been taken to safety there in a British warship. However, at the time it was hatched, the plot had quite other objectives for Napoleon: if successful, it would undermine the metropolitan juntas’ self-assumed authority to act in Fernando’s name and deal organized Spanish resistance a serious blow. A regency in Mexico could claim to be the only body authorized by the king, making the formation of a patriotic central government highly problematic. At this time, Napoleon was also planning to ‘emancipate’ Spain’s empire to keep it as free as possible of British influence. A regency, therefore, was the future government already in place.