

The young man’s well-known morality and the prodigy of his corpse … offer to the Patria’s glorious defenders an example worthy of imitation and a laurel leaf to the Religion [which] makes a man forget dangers and be prepared to risk his life for his Country …36

*

Despite prelates’ exhortations of penitence, the population at large – if a number of parish priests can be believed – were not in a particularly penitent mood. Many churchmen did not believe that the lower orders or even the middling classes were responding to the theological proposition that Napoleon was God’s scourge to return Spaniards to the Catholic devotion inherent to the nation’s customs. Clerical complaints about the lack of respect for religion, immorality, and the breakdown of Catholic custom began early in the war, and increased as the ‘ungodly’ French dominated ever larger areas of Spain. In 1809 one priest wrote to the Junta Suprema:

Couples living publicly in sin without the rites of marriage have become common in a great number of villages, and they include individuals of good standing of all classes and states. Blaspheming and other vices are increasing scandalously. Women have forgotten their modesty, and their extravagant, indecorous dress has been the downfall of many. These women should be severely punished …*37

Another cleric observed in the same year that

We cannot win the war unless God delivers up the enemy into our hands. How can a soldier who is in mortal sin have the courage to fight when he knows that a bullet may send him straight to hell? … And if they win a victory many generals barely attribute it to God, or to the Virgin’s intercession, or to the rest of the saints, but to natural forces like their soldiers’ bravery, enthusiasm and daring, treating them as though they were invincible which only God can be.38

In the French-dominated zones, parish priests complained in the later years of the war that the villagers who had made their peace with the occupiers had adopted their habits. Some French soldiers entered a church with modesty and devotion,

but the majority blasphemed against God and the Virgin, against all the saints without the least shame; the vileness with which they speak of divine providence; the temerity with which they laugh about immortality and hell, the irony with which they condemn the gospels, their satires against Christian virtue and morality … and in short the total breakdown of our customs.39

The youth in particular, especially in the towns, were reported as being the most affected by the change, ‘senselessly imitating the lascivious distractions previously unknown among us, and the sensuality of our barbarous oppressors’.40

One parish priest, of the village of Lozoya, in the sierra de Guadarrama, north of Madrid, blamed not only the French but the example set by the guerrillas who found refuge there. The latter’s behaviour was ‘free and unbridled’, the former’s ‘irreligious and tyrannical’; and soon the effects of both were felt. The local youth began to steal cattle and other livestock, and to live hidden in bands, robbing unwary travellers. The parish priest decided there was no option but to flee his parish: he had already been threatened with a dagger during confession.