

The first recorded interception of Bonapartist mail took place in February, 1808,‡ two months before Juan Martín, a smallholder from Fuentecén, a small village on the Duero in Burgos province, and a former corporal in the Convention War, began his sorties, accompanied by two companions, to capture French couriers on the Burgos–Madrid road, a practice which led to him eventually becoming the guerrilla leader best known to patriots and Bonapartists alike, and in command of several thousand men. El Empecinado, as he was always known,§ soon gathered a group of a dozen men, which included his three brothers. On horseback – he captured a great number of horses in an operation in Segovia province to provide for his group – he and his men roamed over Castilla la Vieja, cooperating with the armies when they could: he was at the early battles – and bloody defeats – in his region and in Salamanca when Sir John Moore was waiting there in the autumn, unsure whether to advance or retreat.¶ In the meanwhile he attacked the French garrison of Roa, a township in his home territory – together with another guerrilla leader destined to become famous: the priest Jerónimo Merino – but they were put to flight. Shortly thereafter he captured a treasure trove of French booty. More men joined his party: by December his band numbered thirty. He returned to his home territory and ambushed forty dragoons on a food-gathering expedition: they were all killed. A small company of gendarmerie was his next target: he took them prisoners and sent them to Valencia. He had learned a lesson from the fate of his first French prisoners. He had sent them under the guard of half his party to ensure their safe arrival at the nearest small town; there they were murdered by the inhabitants, the guard presumably doing little to protect them.6 Vengeance was the original password of popular resistance. The rules of war were for those whose job it was to make conventional war.

About one in six of all the parties recorded during the war were founded in 1808 in various parts of the country. All of them began as small local groups of only a few individuals gathered around a leader to whom, like a clan chieftain, they owed loyalty and respect. The party’s fate and ultimate growth – or disintegration and disappearance – depended almost entirely on the chief’s success in the field, the capture of booty, arms and – especially – horses.

### LEGITIMATION

While they wished to encourage popular resistance, the authorities also feared it, lest the people in arms subvert the social order from below. In consequence, one of the Suprema’s first decrees on reaching Sevilla after its flight before Napoleon’s 1808 offensive attempted to regulate the guerrilla groups which had begun to form.* But in the chaotic condition of the moment the decree remained unknown in the greater part of the patriot zone.

In the following months, the number of civilian combatants – and the danger of their being shot out of hand by the imperial forces as armed bandits – had so obviously increased that the notion of ‘legalizing’ the guerrillas as recognized, albeit non-uniformed, militiamen found favour in the Suprema. Under a new decree they were to become ‘land privateers’ on the same legal lines as those which applied to maritime privateers.† The decree of April 17, 1809, was justified because