

Unlike the territorial liberation struggle, the guerrilla knew better than to try to defend static positions. When the enemy occupied and garrisoned townships and villages, this dispersal of forces achieved one of the guerrillas’ aims: the French command was left with fewer men to throw against the main armies or with which to pursue the guerrillas. When the enemy marched on without leaving a garrison, he gained no additional foothold in the countryside. When, caught between these two profitless options, he burned down the villages, more recruits joined the guerrillas. Whatever the enemy did could be turned to the guerrillas’ advantage.

The guerrilleros armed and mounted themselves in the first place mainly at the enemy’s cost. Mobility, rapidity, surprise was their strength in attack, retreat and dispersal. A lion’s heart, a fly’s stomach, and a hare’s feet – this was their self-image. Their speed of flight in different directions was as important as their surprise in attack. For this very reason, considerable numbers of guerrilleros – at least half if not more of the small parties, as the Junta Suprema recommended – were mounted; and the infantry was enjoined to spring onto the horses’ haunches in case of need. But horses were hard to come by; and many had only rough-and-ready saddles and wooden stirrups and nags at the best.* El Empecinado made a point of ensuring that his cavalrymen carried a spare set of horseshoes with them.13 The general practice was that a guerrillero who captured a mount from the enemy or secured one by licit or illicit means kept it and joined the party’s ‘cavalry’. Although overall the proportion of guerrilla horsemen to foot did not exceed one in six, by 1811 the more than nine thousand mounted guerrillas became the equivalent of Napoleon’s light cavalry which the patriot army grievously lacked: apart from their unceasing attritional attacks, the guerrilla was the army’s ‘eyes’, its screen stretched out far into the enemy’s rear to gather information on his movements; this, indeed was one of their major functions which even critics of their military usefulness, like Wellington and most of the patriot higher command, came to appreciate.

The guerrillas also needed their own ‘eyes’. Some – like Javier Mina in Navarra, the priest Jerónimo Merino fighting around Burgos and Francisco Abad Moreno, ‘El Chaleco’, in La Mancha – received considerable help from spy networks run by patriots in their zones of operation who provided them with information on enemy strength and movements and sometimes ‘directed’ their operations. The effective guerrilla and its leader’s prestige depended on trustworthy intelligence for its success; reliance on hit-and-miss tactics or chance rarely succeeded.

*

In regions like the Basque country which had in recent decades been hard hit by economic setbacks, the ‘social’ war seemed sometimes to take precedence over the struggle against the French. Here a relatively stable agrarian economy had entered a structural crisis of land shortage and rapid population growth and the rural unemployed had become vagrants, vagabonds and even bandits. Occupied from the initial moments of Spain’s invasion, the Basques, like the Navarrese, had not initially risen: with the high number of imperial forces on the ground there was little hope of success; and the Basque elite, concerned mainly with the preservation of their self-governing rights which Napoleon’s Bayonne constitution had agreed provisionally to respect, and the dire state of their region, hoped that a temperate response to the French occupation would be more profitable to their interests than a declaration of war. It was thus not until after Bailén that a successful rising finally took place in Bilbao in August 1808. And one of the major reasons that it took place at all was, as elsewhere, the high level of French impositions and exactions.