

The most excoriating military criticism came from the Suprema-appointed junta of La Carolina, responsible for the defence of Despeñaperros, the major pass in the Sierra Morena from La Mancha to Andalucía, and of the army operating before it. After the latter’s rout at Almonacid, junta members saw patriot soldiers fleeing all over the countryside like ‘flocks of discomfited pigeons … who reached the sierra devastated and broken in spirit … There has been no other military nation up to now which has conducted war in the manner we have been doing.’

Our generals are absolutely ignorant of how to unite their forces, totally lacking intelligence and the art of coordinating a plan of campaign … This junta is convinced of the necessity of restraining and reducing to moderate limits the whims of military despotism. Events have shown that we have no generals in whom such unlimited power can be safely confided.8

There was certain irony in this. The report was signed by, among others, the junta’s president, Juan Carlos Aréizaga, who was shortly to lead – through his incompetence – the patriot army to its gravest defeat.

### MILITANCIES: LORENZO CALBO DE ROZAS –
A MERCHANT PATRIOT

The Suprema took very seriously the accusations that it had failed the allied armies in the matter of food supplies. Within two days of the Talavera battle, it ordered its ‘troubleshooter’, to use a contemporary phrase, Lorenzo Calbo Rozas, to Extremadura to investigate. The former Madrid merchant, who had been Zaragoza’s intendente during the city’s first siege, and was subsequently appointed a deputy for Aragón to the Suprema, was one of the few Junta members who was prepared to take an active role in attempting to resolve concrete problems. Like many another Madrid merchant, Calbo was a Basque by origin who, in 1798 at the age of twenty-five, migrated to the capital at the start of what was to become a highly successful and prosperous business career. By the beginning of the war, a decade after reaching Madrid, his fortune was estimated at four and a half million reales, including six houses in Madrid, which easily put him among the richest twenty-five percent of the capital’s merchants.9* His business interests extended from Málaga, Cádiz, La Mancha and Alicante to Lisbon.10†

As an active progressive, Calbo was exceptional among merchants. At the very beginning of the Suprema’s existence, it was he who had raised in Madrid part of the loan which the Junta desperately required to continue the war effort; and during Zaragoza’s second siege, he forcibly advised the Suprema that if it did not send reinforcements to relieve the city, he would resign his Suprema post and return to Aragón to fight with musket in hand.11 In the spring of 1809, the Junta asked him to report on the manufacture and distribution of army uniforms, including those sent from England, because many troops were still unclothed – the Suprema believed that many recruits sold their uniforms.12 He submitted proposals to the Suprema for the reform of the patriot administration, which he called ‘dim and abusive’, and most of its employees ‘negligent or inept’.13 It was not surprising therefore, that the attempt to resolve the armies’ supplies should fall on him. An ardent supporter of summoning the Cortes as rapidly as possible and of immediate press freedom, he had used his privileged position as a Junta deputy to bypass the Suprema’s attempted control of the press and publish an attack on army officers’ neglect of their troops’ training and other military wrong-doings. The Suprema retaliated and ordered the paper closed.14 The article earned Calbo considerable unpopularity with the military, and his absolutist Suprema colleagues were, no doubt, only too pleased to commission him to take on the prickly task of dealing with the allied armies’ food supplies.