

Among the privileged classes’ leaders in all three types of guerrilla it was those with experience of commanding pre-war who generally commanded in wartime: clergy, military and civilian authorities/functionaries.

With their ideological hostility to imperial ‘hereticism’, reinforced by the Bonapartist abolition of monasteries and friaries, the lower clergy’s leadership role was hardly surprising: probably close on two-thirds of clerical guerrillas were former monks and friars. The military, however, was a different matter.

The soldiers on active service in 1808, whose ranks were recorded, were overwhelmingly officers. Captains were the most numerous amongst them – nearly one-third of the total. (A captaincy was a watershed to which many might ascend and few transcend.) However, another twenty-five percent were regimental commanding officers or above: lieutenant colonels, colonels and a brigadier. The majority of these had taken part in the Zaragoza sieges and had been promoted by José Palafox, the Aragón commander, who had dispatched them to raise local contingents to come to the aid of the Aragonese capital. Others had escaped from the French after the second siege and the city’s surrender in early 1809. Their experience of an open city’s outright resistance had taught them that where urban inhabitants, led by their own local leaders, determinedly fought, using whatever means came to hand, they had stiffened the military’s resolve which, in turn, provided a steadying and rallying force for the population. The combination of civilian spirit and military discipline could serve equally in the rural guerrilla.

The military presence in the parties was reinforced by deserters or ‘dispersed’ troops. With every battle defeat, soldiers (and officers) fled in all directions to escape the enemy and (theoretically) to live to fight another day. Many of these who were willing to continue the struggle joined a guerrilla instead to escape the army, its officers whom they did not trust – the great majority Old Regime nobles – and the constant battlefield defeats, harsh military discipline, hierarchical command and lack of supplies, food especially. In a well-organized guerrilla they could expect a regular day’s pay, usually higher than in the army, a share of captured booty, sufficient food, and an absence of strict military discipline.*

Yet another sort of deserter was to be found in the guerrilla ranks – deserters from the imperial armies in Spain. These were almost invariably non-French troops. German, Italian, Dutch, Polish, even Russian conscripts deserted in considerable numbers, many of them joining the large guerrilla parties. Some British deserters or stragglers were also to be found among them. Of those whose reasons for joining the guerrilla were recorded,† one in four claimed that he had been a ‘disperso’. (If other known dispersos, whose motives for joining the guerrilla went unrecorded, were added to the above, deserters would have formed between thirty and fifty percent of the total.) Nonetheless, regular military men followed by smallholders, land-use owners and artisans formed the majority.