

It is not part of the British system to make active war against the French … It should not be forgotten that after Talavera the English general [Wellington] withdrew his forces from those of Cuesta … The British government has realized that the Spanish Nation’s struggle against the Tyrant [Napoleon] is altogether unequal, that all the sacrifices it makes are useless, and might as well be thrown into the sea …4

No more was heard thereafter about the proposal.

*

Much of the earlier recrimination revolved around Spanish food supplies for Wellington’s army. When in January 1809, shortly after its arrival in Sevilla, the Suprema appointed Clemente María Rodríguez director general of the kingdom’s royal provisions, whose task was to supply the armies, he found the office like a ‘skeleton in its death throes’, without funds, staff, and any knowledge of the armies’ or their commissariats’ whereabouts.

The only ready money I found in the till was sixty-one thousand nine hundred reales. There was no accounts staff, no one to take charge of distributing supplies … How great was my surprise and bitterness, my worry and fear! … Instead of the twelve million reales a month that in peacetime H.M. government assigned to this office, I received [from the Suprema] only two million six hundred and forty-six thousand from March 1 to June 30 …5

Before the battle at Talavera was even joined, Wellesley believed that the Spanish were wilfully withholding food supplies. ‘It is ridiculous to pretend that the country cannot supply our wants’, he wrote. His own lack of prior intelligence about the villagers’ situation in northern Extremadura, which had suffered the ravages of two French armies, not to speak of the patriot army and General Moore’s artillery column, was patent. Not to have taken this into account was a serious mistake for any general who planned to campaign in the poorest region of Spain. A British informant – perhaps an agent – who travelled through the area shortly after the battle, reported to his minister of war that

from Mérida to Trujillo there was no cattle … [the villagers] had not enough oxen or any animals to thresh out their crop … [I saw in Trujillo] the unpaid bills of some miserable wretches who were starving though in possession of regular receipts to a great amount for provisions furnished to Gen. Hope [commander of Moore’s artillery in 1808] …6

However, there was no doubt in the mind of a patriot lawyer, Laureano Escamilla, from the small village of Erguijuela in Extremadura, who witnessed the scenes in the rearguard before and after the battle, that there had been criminal incompetence in supplying the patriot armies. Lack of food, in particular, had been the cause of ‘thousands of soldiers deserting, falling ill or dying’, he wrote to the Suprema. The officers and authorities responsible should be severely punished.

Soldiers and villagers see these guilty men, endure them and can do nothing about them. They do not know how to complain or dare not do so, and their only sad consolation is to say that everything is lost because of the bad Spanish government.7