

*

These were the years when the imperial forces expected to win, and in all reason should have won the war in the Peninsula. However, in battle terms, their impressive number of troops was deceptive: not even a quarter of their effective strength could ever be asssembled by the French command for a single battle: sixty thousand men was the maximum and that was for the decisive battle of Vitoria in 1813. The rest were tied down in occupying the country, protecting lines of communications and escort duties. An entire army corps was needed to keep the high road between the French frontier and Madrid open from guerrillas. The journey from the Spanish capital to the French frontier that had taken three days before the war, now took eleven, and for large military convoys, with an escort of three to four thousand men, cavalry and artillery, Madrid to Paris could take as many as thirty-seven days. In Andalucía, Soult needed seventy thousand men to maintain his hold over a region where a guerrilla movement had begun almost immediately after its fall. The number of parties formed became the largest of any of the regions.

Though many Spaniards in the occupied zones had no doubt come to the conclusion that the French were there to stay and that further resistance only imperilled their lives or worsened their living conditions, a large minority of the population continued to fight. In the absence of sizeable patriot armies – after Ocaña, the patriots could never again raise forces totalling one hundred thousand – and with an ineffectual government confined to Cádiz, it was during these two years that the guerrilla became not only a significant fighting force, ensuring that enemy troops who otherwise would have formed larger armies to throw at the Anglo-Portuguese forces had to be retained in the rearguard, putting the smaller allied armies on a closer numerical parity with the French;2 but equally, the guerrillas’ small though resonant victories served to raise the population’s morale and will to resist.

Nonetheless, relief that the war was more or less at an end seemed the dominant note. Andalucía in general had put up no real resistance; it was a moment when much of Spain’s labouring classes gave signs of retreating into apathetic acquiesence of a fait accompli: the Bonapartists observed this in the spring of 1810.

For a short time, villagers recognized their real interests, threw off these enemies of the people [the guerrillas] or tried to persuade them to return to their homes to take advantage of the king’s pardon for their past mistakes and to enjoy all the advantages which his government offers.3

In the time it took the smallholder Espoz y Mina to consolidate his hold on the Navarrese resistance in 1810 and prove that a great guerrilla was in the making, guerrilleros went home, villagers were demoralized and the temperature of resistance fell notably. After Andalucía’s fall, a large part of the population seemed for a moment stunned into resignation; the armies’ virtual demise as a fighting force and the imperial troops’ impact on the rural world were the decisive factors in maintaining the guerrilla alive. Until then, it could be said that the guerrilla had been an auxiliary to the army; even its greatest coup could not match a battle won. But the patriots had now lost almost every battle but the first and by the beginning of 1810, the army was a discredited and spent force. All that remained were the guerrillas. They had rejected the army’s regular warfare for a style of their own, and this had brought them military honours and officer’s rank. To renounce the struggle would have been to dishonour both the cause and their particular place in it.