

Without them, they knew, the rearguard’s resistance would crumble. The guerrilla was the crystallization of the villagers’ will to resist. It was the only form of combat available to the weak against the strong. The guerrilleros were the villagers’ kith-and-kin. They were used to fighting in straitened circumstances. When the guerrilla failed, the rearguard’s spirit and determination dropped. Keeping resistance alive was one of the guerrilla’s main aims.

Despite the philosophers and politicians, who weigh up the balance of forces, the advantages and disadvantages of their field positions, the armies’ greater or lesser skills – even whether their cause is good or bad – the guerrillero will win because the philosophers do not take into account … the presence or lack of fighting spirit which is needed for victory … (Semanario Politico, Historico y Literario de la Coruña)4

The Bonapartists were shocked and angered at ‘our misfortune’ in witnessing the guerrilla’s strengthening re-emergence. They recognized it as a rural reaction; support stemmed from the villagers. But they pinpointed it concretely on the guerrilla’s thefts of the well-to-do’s property, and sale of the stolen goods to the lower orders locally or in neighbouring villages.

These evil men, aided by some of the inhabitants, enter the villages and sack the houses of the rich whom they call traitors, taking their owners with them to assassinate later or often in the village itself. They then carry off in triumph everything of worth, in money, livestock and other effects, certain that they can sell them at low prices in neighbouring villages if not in the village where they have committed these horrors … There would be fewer men of this ilk if they were sure they could not find buyers, and there would be no buyers if the local magistrates arrested them and handed them over to the courts …5

This slim pretext for the guerrilla’s increasing numbers appeared at first sight like a displacement theory which refused to recognize the truth that the imperial occupiers’ exactions were the cause of the Bonapartist ‘misfortune’; and it might have applied equally to French and British soldiers who made a fair picking from this sort of trade.* But perhaps it was precisely in implying the considerable difference between the soldiery’s and guerrilla’s aims that the Bonapartist government theory signalled a fact worth taking into account. Since the guerrilla’s objective was to eliminate village authorities’ collaboration with the occupying force, their seizure of the well-to-do’s property was a punishment or a warning to them of the vengeance they could expect if they sided with the enemy; and the sale of their property an acknowledgement of the impoverished social order under which most of the lower classes of villagers lived. In a rudimentary manner, then, the guerrilla found itself waging a ‘social’ war with the objective of ensuring the majority of villagers’ support for the patriot cause by redistributing wealth from rich to poor and – by the use of terror – restraining the rural wealthy from collaborationism. The ‘sale’ of the wealthy’s goods was a piece of social revenge that was a means to maintaining alive a popular spirit of resistance.†