

Lack of coordination doomed the first part of the plan. In the west, the army, although it defeated an imperial force southwest of Salamanca on October 18 and for a fortnight occupied the city which the French had evacuated, had revealed its presence three weeks before the Army of the Centre moved into La Mancha; on November 28, it went down to defeat at Alba de Tormes. The Extremaduran army, depleted to reinforce the Army of the Centre, advanced on Talavera but was easily held off. When at last, on November 8, the fifty-thousand-strong Army of the Centre, the greatest yet assembled by the patriots, began to advance across the plains of La Mancha, its flanks were not as secure as the plan had assumed.

Speed and surprise were now of the essence. The army, into which much British aid had been poured in cloth and muskets, was commanded by General Juan Carlos Aréizaga, who had given a good account of himself in one of the only two patriot victories of the year: in defeating an imperial attack on Alcañiz, Aragón, earlier in 1809. As a result, he had been appointed president of La Carolina junta, in which post he was one of the signatories of a blistering report on Spanish generals. (See above, p. 350.) But there was another imperious reason for speed: La Mancha had been so ravaged by French and Spanish armies that the villages’ food stocks were exhausted. The French had but recently carted off all the grain and other foodstuffs they could lay their hands on. Two members of La Carolina junta, with personal knowledge of the region, were detailed to accompany the army in the hope of being able to provision it; but they reported that the situation was so desperate that they could find no supplies.30

By November 13 the Army of the Centre had reached La Guardia, some fifty kilometres south of Aranjuez on the Tajo river. There it inexplicably halted for three days before continuing on to Ocaña, only twenty kilometres to the north. From La Guardia, Aréizaga urgently addressed the Granada junta, maintaining that his forces were in a ‘deplorable state for lack of shoes and almost devoid of uniforms’, and appealed to it to supply him with shoes.31

Shoes – the bane of all infantrymen’s lives! The British foot soldier carried two pairs with him: even so, he needed the constant attention of cobblers amongst his companions to keep him from going barefoot. The Spanish conscript, if he was lucky, had only one pair. To make good the deficiency, the Suprema had ordered esparto sandals – which also became popular with British troops – and a rudimentary type of laced leather overshoe used by hunters in the cold and wet Castilian winters – to be manufactured to replace the insufficient infantryman’s shoe. English aid in this respect was not of much use. ‘The heel of the Spaniard generally projects much, and the foot is longer than that of the English peasant’, observed a British note at the end of a request for renewed supplies.32

It was remarkable, nonetheless, that a commander-in-chief of a major offensive should only take notice of his troops’ barefoot and near-naked state when he was approaching the enemy’s positions.