

The Suprema’s special commissioner to the army, Juan de Dios Ravé, a military officer and a Suprema deputy for Córdoba, confirmed that many of the men were shoeless. But as he had refused to accept this as an excuse from the Castilian and Extremaduran armies for their tardiness in protecting his army’s flanks, he could not claim exemption to his own rule: ‘Let them march like many of our troops, barefoot’, he exclaimed.33

It was probably the fear that the enemy on his flanks, especially Soult in the Tajo valley, had not been closely enough engaged by the Extremaduran army to keep him from attacking the Army of the Centre which brought Aréizaga to delay his march on Madrid. His advance guard had crossed the river Tajo, and six thousand Cuenca villagers and townsmen, armed with primitive weapons, who had responded to the mass mobilization ordered by the Suprema, reached Tarancón, fifty kilometres to the east of Ocaña. Their task was less to fight than to present a diversionary threat to split the enemy forces. They had barely arrived when Aréizaga ordered them home, informing their leader, the Cuenca junta president, that they were not needed. However, the volunteers provided the army with a large quantity of shoes, esparto sandals and leather overshoes.34

Then came three days of torrential rain which held up the bulk of the army again. These delays gave Soult time to gather his forces. Abandoning the advance on Madrid, Aréizaga recrossed the Tajo, while Soult, with thirty-four thousand men, advanced. On November 18, the most important cavalry engagement of the whole war took place with a total of seven thousand cavalrymen, the Spanish being pushed back to Ocaña which the infantry had now reached. Here, on flat terrain, his flank unprotected by any natural advantage, incomprehensibly and without military necessity, Aréizaga decided to give battle the following day. Poorly led, without clear orders and a decisive overall command, the Spanish army was at a disadvantage from the start. Soult immediately exploited the undefended flank and his cavalry turned it. The Spanish soldiers panicked at finding themselves attacked from the rear. The army was totally destroyed, losing ten thousand dead and wounded and twenty thousand prisoners, including three generals. The commander-in-chief came down from the belfry where he had been watching the battle; he was smoking a cigar and held a field glass in one hand. He mounted his horse and calmly rode off south without leaving any orders …35

Once again, the Suprema’s trust in a regular army commander led to a sacrificial slaughter and loss of its raw recuits. The Junta could not put together another such army immediately; Andalucía now lay open to the French.

Although it took the imperial army time to organize Andalucía’s invasion, on January 13, 1810, as the French began their attack the Suprema announced that it was moving to the Isla de León, Cádiz’s immediate hinterland, allegedly to prepare for the Cortes’ opening on March 1: the inhabitants of Sevilla were not deceived, seeing it as a flight from the advancing enemy. Ten days later almost all the Suprema’s members left Sevilla for the Isla. Those who went overland were threatened and insulted, and sometimes fortunate to escape with their lives: villagers believed the common rumour that the government was abandoning them. They had not forgotten the Portuguese royal flight to Brazil aboard an English man-of-war little more than a year earlier. Those Suprema delegates who travelled down the river Guadalquivir were more fortunate, reaching their destination without trouble.