

The view that sergeants would make better commanders than noble generals was frequently expressed, reiterating the enlighteneds’ pre-war anti-noble stance. The government’s expenditure on wages and salaries also came under attack. The four to five million reales that were spent on these could maintain four to six thousand soldiers a day, complained one correspondent. Even Godoy had not robbed the state of this amount. ‘If we are all asleep, let us go to bed and leave the French to come and dominate us.’

Public awareness that the rich were not contributing their just share to the war effort was evident in a number of protests the Suprema received on the score:

Shamefully, it is the better-off classes that have shown the least patriotism … The truth is that we owe everything to the classes which have nothing to lose … From the others we can expect nothing, generally speaking. Have we not seen the paltry, mean contributions they have made … Nothing about taking over private and Church silver plate? It seems, I repeat, that we are not at war, that we want to leave all the wealth to the French …

The war profiteers were the target of special criticism. They were accused of being the cause of the soldiers’ hunger and lack of uniforms:

The military purveyors think only of becoming rich at the expense of the poor soldier who sacrifices his life for the fatherland … These purveyors should be sentenced to death after scrupulous investigation into how they have come by their wealth when before supplying the army they were poor, almost of a venal class … [The soldiers’ lack of food and clothing] makes the youth resist joining the army, and explains the violence with which they have to be taken from their villages … for there are some who say, even if they drag me I shall not go …

Finally, a single voice was raised in favour of irregular warfare in place of pitched battles.

The only thing that is of use to us is to make the enemy waste the time which he wants to gain. This can be achieved by occupying strong points where tactical manoeuvres, of which the enemy knows a great deal and we do not, are useless or inapplicable. By continuous alerts which tire the [enemy] soldier … and offensives, depriving him of provisions by all imaginable means, which leave him in hunger …

### THE SUPREMA’S DEMISE

Shortly after Talavera the Suprema conceived a new plan for a massive autumn attack on Madrid. It defended the idea of permanent war on all fronts at every moment, and, despite the difficulties, it had by the early autumn of 1809 succeeded in increasing the number of its regular forces.

In the west a forty-thousand strong patriot army would keep Ney occupied around Salamanca; another, under the duque de Alburquerque, now in command of the Extremaduran army, would threaten Soult in the Tajo valley, while the decisive thrust, unthreatened by flank attacks, would be launched by a reinforced Army of the Centre across La Mancha direct on Madrid. A mass rising of villagers in unoccupied Cuenca province was to support the main offensive. On paper it read splendidly; in practice it ended, for the same reasons as always, in the gravest of disasters.