

Diego Francisco learned of her manoeuvre, fled Bujalance and after a few days appealed to his brother for help. The latter agreed and hid him in a number of different country farmhouses and hamlets, paying for his food and his repeated and costly illnesses. Diego Francisco offered to reimburse his brother for the considerable costs involved as soon as he had again taken possession of his estates. Joaquina meanwhile continued in her former position, until in 1810, learning that French troops were approaching Bujalance, she fled, leaving behind the money she had amassed. On the day of Josef’s visit to Bujalance, Diego Francisco appeared in the township to ask the corregidor whom the king had appointed to return his estates to him. This the official did without more ado, and Diego Francisco took charge of the olive crop which was then being picked, and sold the oil to repay his brother for the two years he had maintained him.

But Joaquina was not prepared to sacrifice her well-being. She went to Córdoba and convinced Josef’s regal commissioner to repossess her of what she had lost, including the olive oil her husband had sold. As Diego Francisco was not well enough to travel, his brother went to Córdoba in his place to inform the commissioner of events and to present a petition that he revoke his order. He received a dusty answer, telling him to return home to await a decision which, when it came, was shattering: a complete embargo of all his property. He was, he informed the king, penniless and unable to pay the labourers who had gathered his own olive crop, to whom he owed six thousand reales, or the millers who were pressing oil from it. If anyone should have had their possessions embargoed, it was his brother who had reclaimed his estates and sold the oil, he wrote.

Finally, Pedro de Torres y Coca begged the king to issue a royal decree to the Bujalance corregidor that not only should the embargo be lifted but that his brother’s right to administer his own estates be recognized ‘at least until such time that a court can consider the case and reach a decision’.

In this manner the supplicant will receive … the justice which His Majesty is well known to accord his loyal vassals, among the first of whom is the present petitioner. He prays to God incessantly that Your Majesty’s precious and important life which is so necessary to this monarchy may last a great many years.19

The outcome of this case is not on record. But it was not uncommon for a wife to administer her husband’s property when he was considered incapable or too idle to do so.

### NAPOLEON’S COUP: DIVIDING SPAIN

As Josef continued his triumphal tour, a bombshell struck: Napoleon decreed on February 8, 1810, that all the regions north of the Ebro – Cataluña, Aragón, Navarra and the Basque country – were henceforth to be ruled directly by his own generals. Shortly, he added Burgos and the Valladolid-Palencia-Toro district, and Andalucía, where he gave Marshal Soult supreme civil and military command. Josef was to be left with nothing but Castilla la Nueva, Extremadura, and a small portion of Castilla la Vieja and, as his only forces, the Bonapartist Army of the Centre and the few Spanish regiments he had created, mainly of prisoners of war who were voluntarily prepared to enrol, often with the idea of deserting to the patriots whenever the chance occurred. Nothing probably did the Bonapartist cause in Spain more political harm than Napoleon’s decree which he justified by the high cost of maintaining the French army there, and the Spanish administration’s failure to gather sufficient revenues to pay for it. While this was probably true, it fooled no Bonapartist or anti-Bonapartist Spaniard. The Emperor had divided Spain along the Ebro and his next move would be to annex the northern part to France. This had been one of his first plans for Spain which he explicitly rejected in the Bayonne constitution where the country’s territorial integrity was guaranteed, an integrity which Josef always stressed in his vain attempts to win his subjects’ hearts and minds.*