

Although the scorched-earth policy was not carried out close to Lisbon with the thoroughness Wellington had hoped for, and Masséna’s army was able to hold out for a month in front of the lines and three further months in Santarem on the Tajo where food was more plentiful, only Masséna’s steely determination kept the French army in Portugal. Despite Napoleon’s order to all his field commanders to help him none did except Soult in Andalucía who finally moved in February, scraping together as many men as he could without threat to the loss of his Andalucian fiefdom, and besieged Badajoz which after five weeks tamely surrendered to him on March 10, although the border fortress town had men and supplies sufficient to hold out another month. Five days earlier, Masséna’s army, having received no further reinforcements, began its withdrawal, committing harrowing atrocities in the Portuguese villages en route. The invasion cost the French some twenty-five thousand men, about sixty percent of whom fell victims to starvation, disease and the Portuguese irregulars.16 Although Masséna had failed in his major objective, the French had in the course of mid-1810 to the spring of 1811 succeeded in taking three of the major Spanish–Portuguese fortified border towns: Ciudad Rodrigo, Almeida and Badajoz. Until Wellington had subdued these, he could not move into Spain. General Beresford’s failure to recapture Badajoz in May 1811 effectively confined British forces to Portugal for the rest of the year and they failed to present any threat to the French armies in Spain.

### JOSEF IN ANDALUCÍA

After Andalucía’s fall, King Josef made a triumphal entry into his newly conquered territory. Constantly derided by his ‘subjects’ with derogatory sobriquets – Pepe Botella was the most usual* – he was, surprisingly, received with popularity by the Andalucian local elites who had been aggrieved and frustrated by the Junta Suprema’s incompetence in leading the war effort and the run of military defeats. The war had at last receded, the Andalucians had not yet suffered the full rigours of French military occupation, and they believed for a time that peace at any price was an improvement on the immediate past. Josef, a legal man by training and a wealthy merchant by profession, was Fernando VII’s antithesis: a moderate liberal who wished to reform his new kingdom and improve its people’s lot. Cultured, amiable and generous to a fault – Napoleon envied his older brother’s cultivation and success with women – Josef’s well-intentioned desires were undermined by one serious defect, as Napoleon also saw. A civilized monarch – too civilized, too gentle a man, perhaps – he lacked the mettle, the strength of character to impose himself as king in the difficult conditions of the Spanish struggle. ‘He is fond of pleasure but does not value military glory enough’, was a Napoleonic general’s succinct summation of his character.17

But now, with his – and not his brother’s – conquest of the largest and most populous patriot region, Josef allowed himself to believe that he had achieved military glory, had imposed his regal will. He deluded himself. Important as the region’s addition to his rule might be, his conquest, brought about and maintained by French bayonets, precipitated a popular resistance – the formation of the highest number of guerrilla parties recorded in any region, while his failure to take Cádiz allowed the patriots a stronghold from which to begin their own constitutional reforms. Very shortly, moreover, Napoleon showed him who was the real ruler of Spain.