

Raising agrarian production was a constant concern. In 1809, Josef had distributed unused land of the Aranjuez royal estates in plots to local villagers. At the end of the following year, the superintendent of the royal household in Madrid, the comte de Miot de Melito, reported that the plots had ‘reached the extreme of producing nothing’.35 The villagers, the French intendente of Aranjuez informed him, ‘continue to destroy not only the woods, but the palace itself, the guards’ and all the other houses scattered over the vast domain’, despite his threats to oblige their municipalities to pay for the damage done. Meanwhile, the French garrison commanders

want only to be provided for their table with everything they desire and when they do not get it, they try to extort it. The local justice is not strong enough to stand up to all the kicks and blows he has received [from them] and there is no one who wishes to take his place. (Le marquis de Varese, Aranjuez intendente)36

But there was another reason for this state of affairs: the guerrillas. They ‘taxed’ any smallholder who worked a plot. Ninety of Tomasito’s party arrived one spring day in 1811 in Añover del Tajo, accompanying a patriot war commissioner, and relentlessly demanded thirty-five reales per fanega of unirrigated land from each villager who worked the king’s estates. These belonged to H.M. Fernando VII, whose rights were being abused and the true government of Spain and the Indies had authorized a commission, which extended to another four villages, to demand these monies from those who were unlawfully working H.M.’s lands, the war commissioner’s proclamation stated. Those who could not pay were obliged to hand over their draught horses, and some were arrested until they paid up. The guerrilleros stayed until nearly nightfall because they could not secure money from a number who had given their horses. Before they left, they returned the horses to their owners, saying that they would return in a few days to collect the payment ‘without failure’, and the kingdom’s Cortes gathered in Cádiz would determine what should be done with the crops when they were gathered. In all, they collected 5,500 reales from Añover, according to a receipt they left, before crossing to the southern bank of the Tajo.37

But it was in Andalucía that the major agrarian effort was made. Mariano Urquijo, Josef’s first minister, complained in July 1810 that

we are at present so confined to Madrid alone … that materially we cannot exist, and shall have to go to Andalucía for food … because the insurgents and their English friends barely allow us here to procure supplies to maintain the army … La Mancha is a theatre of bandits and the poor. Our provinces are full of thieves and people on the move … We shall, I repeat, have to obtain food from Córdoba and Sevilla.38

Urquijo’s complaints must be taken with a grain of salt because he was pointing out the adverse effects of Napoleon’s division of Spain to his fellow minister, Miguel Azanza, who was in Paris trying to persuade Napoleon to revoke his decision. Moreover, it was a letter intercepted by the guerrilla and may have been tampered with before being published in the official patriot Gaceta de la Regencia. Nonetheless, the importance in the government’s mind of Andalucía as a source of food was almost certainly not exaggerated. The grain harvest of 1810 was nowhere nearly as abundant as the record 1808 crop.