

In the immediate, Josef, who was not without vanity, bathed in his clamorous Andalucian reception, the popular recognition of his sovereignty which was so strenuously denied him elsewhere. The reception Josef received in Córdoba, he assured General Suchet, surpassed in allegiance anything he had ever received in his former kingdom of Naples.18

### EPISODES: A COUNTRY MARRIAGE

On his procession, Josef had passed through the rural township of Bujalance where the authorities had turned out in full to welcome him. Among them was Pedro de Torres y Coca, an hidalgo who, in representation of the nobility, had received from Josef’s hand a ring which, as he subsequently wrote, was the ‘gem he would always most highly treasure’.

Learning earlier that Josef was in Granada, he set out to lay himself, in the idiom of the day, at his sovereign’s feet and kiss hands. But his good intentions were frustrated only two leagues from his destination when he was held up by sixteen ‘bandits’ who several times during the night threatened to execute him and his retainers. They accused him of having hidden in the farmhouse where they had discovered him a great quantity of money to hand over to Josef. Finally, they robbed him of five thousand reales in money and clothes and all of his gold. In these straitened circumstances, he had felt it impossible to present himself to the king and had returned home with the hope of being able to pay homage when Josef reached Jaén or Andújar which were closer to

These events he related in a petition to Josef which indeed had another, quite different purpose: to beg the king to order that a wrong done him by the regal commissioner* in Córdoba be righted. The latter had embargoed all his wealth, household goods and olive crop at the demand of doña Joaquina Dozta, whom his brother, don Diego Francisco, had married at the age of forty twenty years earlier. Joaquina was half her husband’s age, of ‘unknown antecedents and very poor’, he added. His brother’s entailed estates brought in over thirty thousand reales a year.

Despite the difference in age, my brother who is a meek man, allowed Joaquina to flatter him into making over his estates’ management to her which she carried out for seventeen years. She did not respond with the gratitude and love which such a privilege merited but avariciously amassed wealth for her widowhood because they had no children. Not content to leave him without the money for those occasions that society offered his peers, she treated him like her ward and even denied him her table and bed.

Two years earlier, Diego Francisco clearly saw that he was losing his income and peace of mind, revoked her powers and made them over to his brother. A lawsuit followed immediately to legalize the change to which the justices agreed. In accord with his social status, Diego Francisco also claimed his living costs from his wife.

Realizing that she had to pay not only his past costs but the expenses of the lawsuit, and that she would no longer control her husband’s income, Joaquina took action. It was at the start of the war, and the Córdoba junta had just been formed. ‘Thanks to the work of some of its delegates’, Torres y Coca alleged in his petition to Josef, ‘she succeeded in procuring an absolute decree to have her former rights restored, and that her husband should be interned in the monastery of El Fardón, situated in a deserted, uninhabited place. She had no consideration for the fact that this would have killed my brother because of his great age and poor health.’