

Josef sent various emissaries to Paris to try to persuade his brother to reverse his decision and accept the terms of the Bayonne constitution, threatening to abdicate otherwise. But there was no changing the Emperor’s mind. The Spaniards had not accepted the constitution, he retorted, and Josef had kept the throne only thanks to the French armies’ presence. He did not therefore feel any obligation to respect the constitution.

In November 1810, during Masséna’s Portuguese campaign, Napoleon was even more brutally frank.

The King of Spain would be very little if he were not the Emperor’s brother and the general of his armies. He would be so little that a mere town of four thousand souls would be stronger than all the supporters he may have in Spain. Even his guard is French. Not a single Spanish officer of repute has shed his blood for the King.20

Napoleon’s reference to the number of Josef’s supporters was obviously understated for ironic effect. What was certainly true was that the country had not rallied to the Bonapartist cause. The regime was faced with an irresolvable contradiction. Because of popular resistance, only the French army on the ground kept it in being; but by its actions that very same army undermined any possibility of the new government winning positive public acceptance or legitimation. Spain was occupied by a foreign military power which was visibly more concerned with imposing its will and sacking the country’s resources than with improving its lot.

### AFRANCESADOS

Those who supported the Bonapartist regime were well aware of the contradiction. If they supported the new regime it was generally for one of three reasons: opportunism; careerism or the need to earn a living, irrespective of who was in power; and genuine political belief in the reformist policies Josef tried to implement.

There were considerable numbers of the first two categories who, once their region was conquered, changed coat and went to work for the new regime. Judge Francisco de León Bendicho, of the Granada high court, for example, had served the Suprema as its commissioner to La Mancha and subsequently on the important La Carolina junta which oversaw the patriot Army of the Centre’s activities. Although as commissioner, he did not prove to be particularly decisive or valiant, refusing to continue investigating the villages’ ‘dangerous turmoil’ without a cavalry escort, he later redeemed himself by collecting a considerable quantity of parish church plate and jewellery from La Mancha for the patriot cause; and was one of two La Carolina junta members sent to the Mancha to find food for the army on its abortive Madrid offensive which ended in the rout of Ocaña.

After the Suprema’s flight, he returned to the Granada High Court where, in June 1810, under French occupation, he was the criminal courts’ chief justice. Two months later he had risen to become the court’s dean. Something then went wrong. Possibly because of his past connections with the Suprema, General Sebastiani, Granada’s imperial commander, arrested him in his home and ordered him to be sent to Madrid to be placed at the government’s disposition. From this moment at the beginning of September 1810, until fifteen months later, evidence of his fate vanished. Then, equally suddenly, he reappeared in December 1811 as president of the Málaga extraordinary criminal tribunal, the Bonapartist court which tried guerrillas, bandits and the like. The court’s life was languid: no one was sentenced, let alone executed during his tenure of office which ended exactly a year later in 1812 with his appointment to the equivalent Madrid tribunal. As part of new justice reforms, these courts were very shortly abolished, and Bendicho was last heard of, in April 1813, as a judge on the Bonapartist provisional Madrid court.21 He was a judge who evidently believed that, with the same impartiality, he could try ‘dissidents’ of one side or the other.