

Masséna, whom Napoleon had also placed in command of all northern Spain in order to use its military resources for the offensive, had an effective fighting strength of sixty-five thousand before the invasion proper began. But he could not use the thirty thousand imperial troops stationed in the north of Spain – indeed had to reinforce them – for fear of guerrillas in conjunction with the remaining small Spanish regular forces disrupting his communications with France.11

After reducing Almeida, Masséna waited a month for reinforcements and supplies. The former did not arrive. Although the Emperor had ordered his generals to afford him all the help he required, General Reille, the military governor of Navarra, diverted some of the reinforcements which crossed into Spain in August to his own flying columns which were fighting the three thousand guerrillas raised and led by Espoz y Mina in the region. The reinforcements helped Reille to harry the guerrillas for over two months in a series of forced marches and counter-marches over mountainous terrain, until, with only half of his men left, Espoz y Mina was obliged temporarily to leave Navarra, cross the Ebro and take refuge in Castilla la Vieja.12 Mina had nonetheless delayed Masséna’s reinforcements which, when Reille finally despatched them, arrived too late to be of any effective use.

Wellington made one stand against Masséna on September 27 at Buçao; more decisive than his victory, however, was the scorched-earth policy, a traditional Portuguese practice before an invading army, which Wellington enforced. Unable to hold Coimbra, he obliged its forty thousand inhabitants to withdraw in front of the British troops, carrying with them everything that could serve the enemy.

Old people, lame and sick people, women just risen from childbed, children, and whole families with all their belongings packed either on bullock carts, mules, horses or donkeys, were to be seen mixed up with all kind of beasts, among which pigs, owing to unruliness and horrible cries, were the most conspicuous. Now and again, the cry would arise that the French were coming, and then the young girls would implore all those who were riding to help them upon the saddle with them. Ladies, who, according to the custom of the country, had never perhaps left their homes except to go to Mass, could be seen walking along, three in a row, wearing silk shoes and their heads and shoulders covered only with thin scarves.13

Masséna’s army, now down to fifty-seven thousand men,14 depended on supplies irregularly brought from the rear on roads which were in a terrible state, suffering severe deprivation as a result.

In mid-October Masséna found himself facing an impenetrable challenge. The Anglo-Portuguese army and eight thousand Spanish troops whom General Romana had marched from Extremadura, were ensconced behind two parallel fortified lines of earthworks, blockhouses and hundreds of cannon some twenty miles in front of Lisbon and guarding all access to the Portuguese capital. Wellington had been constructing these fortifications, the Torres Vedras lines, for over a year: the first line was held by the Portuguese militia while the Anglo-Portuguese field army was held back to counter-attack if the French managed to break through at any point in order to decimate the enemy weakened by the assault.15