

Though there could no doubt about the regime’s willingness to bring in reforms, there was always something improvised about those which were enacted. Like the division of Spain into prefectures, which was intended to show Napoleon that Madrid still controlled the whole country’s future, they tended often to be reactions to immediate situations, not part of a general and considered plan. In the circumstances, probably little more could be expected: dependent on French bayonets to remain in being, subject to Napoleon’s diktats, to imperial marshals’ political caprices, to shortage of funds and the ebb and flow of the war itself, it was hardly surprising that the regime had an air of provisionality about it.

### PATRIOT REFORMS:
THE CONSTITUENT CORTES OF CÁDIZ

On Monday, September 24, 1810, the unicameral Cortes assembled – or rather those deputies who had managed to reach the Isla de León, usually by sea – in the church of San Pedro and took the oath to ‘carry out faithfully and legally the task which the Nation has entrusted to you, preserving the laws of Spain, yet modifying if necessary those that must be changed for the good of the Nation’.42

The claim to sovereignty had been at the heart of the provincial juntas and the Junta Suprema. But none had claimed, as the Cortes immediately declared in its first decree, that it represented popular national sovereignty. As the nation’s sole elected legislature it separated the executive and the legislative – the judiciary would follow shortly – and was the first real rupture with the Old Order, in which the monarch had incorporated all three functions in his divinely appointed being. The nation’s will, expressed in the legislature, was thus set above the monarchy which became the executive to whom the former could delegate such powers as it saw fit. At the same time, in its first measure, it recognized Fernando VII as Spain’s sole and legitimate king, while turning the regency into the executive branch of the government and titling itself ‘His Majesty’. The Old Regime’s adherents, like the Bishop of Orense, one of the regents, were not surprisingly incensed at this usurpation of monarchical rights which heralded the creation of a parliamentary monarchy. He denounced the Cortes’ declaration of sovereignty, accusing it of turning the king into ‘the nation’s vassal’ and asserting that its assumption of an omnipotent power would ‘consummate the Nation’s ruin and even offend Religion’.43 The deputies responded by confining the bishop to a monastery for six months; but the introduction of religion as a political issue from the Cortes’ inception did not bode well for the future.

Of the just over one hundred deputies who had assembled, nearly one half were substitutes for those who had not yet been able to reach Cádiz or whose election had been delayed because they were in the French zone. They had been elected by their fellow countrymen who had sought refuge in Cádiz.* Twenty-six of these substitutes represented the South American colonies and two the Philippines. As little by little the elected deputies arrived their numbers rose to 233. Of these approximately one-third were clergymen (although only five among them were bishops), a handful of titled nobility, another handful of merchants and property owners, and a majority of mainly professionals – lawyers, professors, government officials, physicians and literati. One social stratum was entirely absent: the lower orders.