

Many guerrilla leaders initially adopted an authoritarian attitude towards villagers, which was not especially surprising in a society where the enlightened, the state and the Church had, pre-war, all ordered the lower orders to obey their instructions on almost every aspect of their public and private lives. But when carried too far this guerrilla ‘commandism’ was an unaccepted but actual admission of failure. Unable to win the population’s support by victories over the French, their forced exactions from villagers, whom they refused to defend from imperial extortion, isolated and marginalized them, as it did the villagers, from the struggle. These parties tended not to last long; their chieftains were betrayed, or captured and sometimes shot by those guerrilla leaders who, sharing the villagers’ social origins, fully understood their motives for taking to arms. It was this type of leader who prevented the rearguard from accepting the occupation as an uncontestable inevitability. Two elements were necessary to achieve this. The constant threat to collaborators’ lives, or even to those who sought refuge in ‘neutrality’. The imperial forces were too thin on the ground to protect all those who were – or would have been – prepared to collaborate; the guerrillas were only sufficiently strong enough to pick off some of them but the example was sufficient. Who could know where they would strike next? The second condition required victories, however small, over the occupation forces, especially on their foraging expeditions. News of these travelled fast. Without these triumphs the villagers resented the guerrillas’ impositions, knowing full well that they had still to confront the enemy’s exactions.

*

After another winter of renewed French counter-insurgency, when Mina was obliged to disperse his four battalions of one thousand men each to the safety of the mountainous northwest of Navarra and the eastern Pyrenees, with the occasional exception to strike a blow, it was not until May 1811 that the French counter-insurgency again slackened off, and Mina could assemble his four battalions once more. The moment coincided with his receiving the news from his fifth Alavese battalion commander* that a French convoy of over one hundred carriages of French sick and wounded, more than one thousand Spanish and British prisoners of war, and Marshal Masséna’s booty from his abortive Portuguese offensive was leaving Vitoria on May 25 for France. The marshal himself was part of the convoy. The escort alone numbered 1,650 troops.

Mina did not hesitate. There was little enough time. He knew the column would have to traverse the Arlabán pass on the borders of Álava and Guipúzcoa. In an eighty-five-kilometre forced march over rough terrain in two days and a night, he led his four thousand men to Arlabán. Once the column was well into the pass, Mina employed his usual tactics: an initial volley of one musket round per man and then a bayonet charge.

Two hundred and forty of the escort were killed and 160 taken prisoner. The rest fled back along the road they had come. Almost all the one thousand prisoners were released,† and seventy carts captured, the effects and money they contained worth four million reales. Quantities of gunpowder and munitions of which the guerrillas were always short were also seized. Masséna, who had tarried in Vitoria, was warned by the fleeing escort of the attack. The guerrilleros retired ‘laden with gold and portmanteaux full of rich apparel’, Mina wrote.7‡ It was the biggest guerrilla victory to date.