

The regime’s regal commissioner for Andalucía, conde de Montarco, was particularly preoccupied by the state of agriculture which was not as flourishing as Urquijo might have thought. A great deal of land was untilled, there was a shortage of day labourers, estates went unrented, and French army exactions as usual took an undue proportion of the crops. Montarco’s first measure at the end of 1810 allowed anyone to till unused land, provided they first asked the local corregidor; except for the land’s owner or tenants, no one was to be given preference.

The initiative received little or no response – in Ronda, for example, no one applied for land. This may have been due to fear of guerrilla reprisals – the Ronda serranía was one of the first of the Andalucian guerrilla areas – or to villagers’ passive resistance to any innovative measure, especially one initiated by the Bonapartist regime when the war’s outcome or even end remained uncertain, or to a combination of these. Montarco decided that more drastic measures were needed and ordered in July 1811 that all fixed land rents should be reduced by one quarter for that and the coming year, with the exception of those which had been voluntarily reduced by more than that amount. Landowners’ perquisites of chickens, pigs, straw and the like were reduced by one-third. Moreover, twenty-five percent of village or common lands could be tilled.

This plan for increasing production also came to naught because municipalities were obliged to buy seed corn sufficient for the increased tillage. Most of them were by now so poor that they had no money to spare on agriculture. In November 1811, Montarco made one last attempt. Farmers were to be handsomely rewarded for switching to the cultivation of new crops which yielded more than one harvest a year like potatoes and certain cereals easier to grow than wheat. As eight months later the French military withdrew from Andalucía, the outcome of this initiative remained unknown. There can be little doubt however that if Montarco’s reforms had taken root, Andalucian agriculture, and with it some of the traditional social structures of the agrarian world, would have radically changed.39

*

Josef, once more on the point of abdicating in March 1811 – ‘my presence here is today completely useless’, he wrote to the Emperor40 – decided at the end of the month to go to France on receiving the news of the birth of Napoleon’s son and heir; the Emperor had asked him to be the child’s godfather. Relations between the two brothers had by now become so strained that Napoleon barely communicated directly with Josef, leaving this to his chief of staff, Marshal Berthier. In late April Josef set off. Many afrancesados believed he would never return. He was already in France when he received the Emperor’s order that he was not to leave Spain; he ignored it and continued to Paris. There in a long and stormy meeting on Spanish affairs, Josef succeeded in winning some concessions.

Napoleon granted him five hundred thousand francs until July 1, and a further one million francs per month for the rest of the year. Half of this was to fund the Army of the Centre which henceforth was guaranteed to be under Josef’s direct command, and more importantly, one-quarter of all the tax funds collected by the imperial armies in the regions which, under Napoleon’s division of Spain, depended on Paris, was to be handed over to Madrid. Justice and the administration of these regions was in future to be carried out in the king’s name; and all French army commanders were now to report to Josef on their military and political initiatives. In other words, the king regained some degree of authority over the land he was supposed to reign.41