

Freedom of the political press turned out to be a double-edged weapon for the liberals. Amidst a plethora of newspapers which sprang up in Cádiz, the liberals’ opponents ensured that their own press took every opportunity to attack the progressives, to proselytize and make adverse propaganda, while the liberals paid the price of their most radical wing running afoul of the censorship junta which sent a couple of them to gaol for several weeks. Moreover, the liberals, with their visceral fear that the common people should inflect or infect their political agenda, made no attempt to find new graphic forms to attract their support, relying on the Old Order’s classic art styles in their papers or pamphlets. Where a Goya was needed to bring alive the disasters of Absolutism, the old genre of classical print, even if intended as criticism, subtly reinforced a continuity rather a rupture with the past.45

The question of the colonies had arisen on the day after the Cortes assembled. The American deputies had put forward the need of accompanying the Cortes’ decree establishing its national sovereignty with a statement that the colonies’ inhabitants held equal rights to those of the metropolis and conceding an amnesty to those who had taken part in the recent events. In a secret session, the Cortes agreed.46 But it came too late and was not enough.

A previous problem re-emerged only a fortnight after the freedom of the press was approved. The Cortes appealed for volunteers to build fortifications and for the recruitment of ten thousand men for the army. The results were nugatory. The liberals had no more learned the lessons of the past two years than the Suprema members had in their time. Meanwhile the Cortes set up a Constitutional Commission of nine lawyers and six clergy, of whom ten in all were Spanish and five Spanish-Americans, presided over by the liberal cleric Muñoz Torrero. Liberals and their opponents* were about equally represented; the ultra absolutists had only two members.

When, in December 1810, well-founded rumour had it that Napoleon intended to give a Bonaparte princess in marriage to Fernando (in fact, the latter had beseeched the Emperor to do so and had been turned down), the Cortes acted in united determination to prevent it by passing a motion that a Spanish monarch could not marry without the knowledge and approval of the Spanish nation.

Although a number of liberals had put forward motions at the beginning of 1811 to abolish feudal land rights, it was nearly a year since its inception before the Cortes began to debate the question which directly concerned the majority of the population.† At stake were the two forms of señorial domination of the rural world. The first, and by far the most extensive, was a lordship’s jurisdictional rights which did not necessarily bear any relationship to actual ownership of the land but granted the right to appoint local justices and municipal councillors who could be expected to do their lord’s bidding in any dispute with his vassals. Such disputes inevitably arose over the lord’s other feudal rights to dues and tributes from those working the land, rights which also included the monopoly of mills, smithies, baking ovens, brothels,‡ grazing, of hunting and shooting …§ The lord might be an individual or an institution, a bishopric or monastery, for example. Most of the rights, which belonged originally to the monarchy, had been sold to them in the past by near-bankrupt kings to raise funds.