

*

With a history of anti-feudal struggle stretching back to the sixteenth century, the Valencian countryside was the focal point of renewed conflict between señorial domination and the villagers from the very beginning of the war. Many villagers stopped paying dues and tributes, alleging in part that their contributions of food supplies and money to the ‘national’ cause made further impositions impossible to meet. A Suprema decree in 1809 expropriating the rents of all those suspected of siding with the Bonapartist regime, whose whereabouts were unknown or who received rents in other parts of patriot Spain became a useful instrument in their hands, since many of the titled nobility had señoríos in provinces outside Valencia* or lived elsewhere; interpreting the decree with considerable latitude, local corregidores instructed the villagers not to pay them rent.48

While landownership was an important element of the anti-feudal struggle, the latter was marked by another factor: it was the large farmers who led the conflict and were the most vocal in their protests at señorial domination. They resented having to pay dues and tributes to the lord, who profited at their expense and labour; members of the local oligarchies, they wanted to be free agrarian entrepreneurs, unsubjected to their lord’s restrictive rights and justice.

The Cortes’ August decree added fuel to the flames. It did not satisfy the villagers who wanted land, and it dissatisfied all those who had made their living from the señorial system. Moreover, it was rare in Valencia for there to be a clear distinction between jurisdictional and territorial señoríos. Unlike in Castilla, where the señores’ income came almost exclusively from rents, in Valencia by the end of the eighteenth century, dues and tributes accounted for half of their income. In consequence, the decree’s ambiguity as to whether this meant the abolition of both or only of the jurisdictional aspect, allowed villagers to accept the former interpretation. Though the question of whether it was the señores or their vassals who had to present the documentary proof of their alleged rights was a complicating issue, for most villagers all señoríos had been abolished.† As a lawyer representing the Valencian señorial landlords wrote:

Since the August decree was published in Valencia, my plaintiffs’ villagers rejected with vulgar or insulting gestures not only the jurisdiction but also the prerogatives and prohibitions which the decree left to private owners. They used violence to usurp the provisions which it granted to owners and which did not fall under jurisdictional abolition: our share of the crops, the payments due … from [land] contracts freely made … Many also had the temerity to take over our buildings and property … In Alberique they went so far as to take over the owner’s and justice’s houses … and put to public auction the boat, inn, shops, baking ovens and mills, and also the owner’s own rooms, and to smash the coat of arms in the portico and replace it with the title of plaza de la Constitución …49