

After being shorn, Mina’s men were issued with new uniforms: brown jackets and trousers, tall black hats and hemp espadrilles which was to be the standard uniform of the Navarrese Division, as Mina called his force. In uniforming his men, he was no different to the majority of guerrilla leaders, since one of the first things they tried to do was to replace with standard uniforms their men’s captured pieces of imperial military outfits and shakos – a cylindrical or conical hat with a peak and a plume – which they wore on top of villagers’ clothes. The reason was simple: the leaders wanted to be recognized, both by the patriot authorities and the enemy, as official military detachments. As such, they asked the patriot authorities to grant them and their subordinates military rank, and to receive money and aid. From the enemy, they wanted their men who were taken prisoner to be granted the same rights as any regular soldier and not considered, as they only too often were, brigands and gallows-carrion.

The major guerrilla leaders were not men who rejected authority or discipline per se, indeed they often tried to impose better discipline on their forces in the search for greater combat effectiveness, using dispersed soldiers to train their men and officers to lead them when their numbers rose beyond a single leader’s control. They gave their guerrillas military-sounding titles – the Castilian Scouts, the Sharpshooters of Cantabria, the Hussars of Iberia – and as far as they could organized their parties along military lines into companies, battalions, regiments, divisions. But one factor would always prevent them from becoming totally militarized: the guerrilleros’ loyalty to a charismatic leader. When wounded, as Espoz y Mina was, his men felt leaderless and relapsed into a generalized inactivity.

Their leaders’ military inclinations were not reciprocated by the Spanish regular army officers in general. They claimed that the guerrilla was detrimental to the regular army because it recruited the young, protected deserters, encouraged indiscipline and demoralized the enemy-occupied rearguard by its exactions and incursions into villages. Some of these arguments were no more than received ideas. Guerrillas operating around Valladolid gathered up dispersed soldiers and deserters who had not returned to their regiments and as a punishment

branded their foreheads with the letter ‘D’ and told them that if in three days they had not reported to the nearest army or party they would be shot and they and their parents and closest siblings would be declared traitors, lose all their property and be branded with the letter T.6

The guerrillas’ military critics overlooked the fact that the enormous desertion from and dispersal of the regular patriotic armies had begun in late 1808 when the guerrilla had barely started to form and was the outcome of a refusal, on the one hand, to serve in an army in which the privileged orders (including officers) frequently managed, in one form of another, to evade having to face the enemy; and where, once in the army, the ordinary recruit had no other resource than to flee in defeat. It similarly ignored the social problems caused by conscription. It was an open question whether the dispersed soldiers would necessarily, or without considerable restraint, have rejoined the army under commanders they did not trust and who did not trust them. The constant complaints to the authorities about ‘dispersed bandits’ was an indication that they would – as many indeed did anyway – have become outlaws instead. Or landworkers whom local oligarchs were prepared to protect to secure the labour they needed.