

Elsewhere, townships, especially in the Alicante señorío of the conde de Altamira (who, under his other title of marqués de Astorga, had for a time been the Suprema’s president) set up ‘popular juntas’ to run local affairs in place of the count’s administration. There was no shortage of anti-feudal incidents throughout the patriot zone; what was lacking was their fusion into a mass movement to ensure that the Cortes abolished the señorial system in its totality. Given that a large number of small and medium-sized farmers were armed and fighting in the guerrilla, their absence from the political scene was the more striking.*

The Cortes, meanwhile, found itself confronted with another question of land ownership. What to do with land which was not owned individually but collectively, such as village commons? But also entailed estates and ecclesiastically owned land. The Cortes only found time to debate the first. The ideological liberal argument was that the commons should be sold to the highest bidder without any type of restriction.† Those deputies who put this view admitted that only the wealthy would benefit, but they believed that in the long run this would be to society’s advantage. However, they ran into criticism from their own fellow liberals. Returning to the enlightened reformers’ argument that a state’s wealth and strength depended on the size of its population, García Herreros stressed that a population increase was meaningless if the additional people were poor and wretched. They must be part of families with their roots in the land if the state’s wealth were to increase. Thus a motion was tabled in 1811 that one-third of the commons should be sold in small plots, and all that were not sold should be distributed among the landless and small tenantry. The more radical liberals raised the limit to one half of the commons.

The state will gain a great amount if the number of owners is multiplied, if ownership is extended to those who presently do not own land, and if not a single plot is without its distinct owner.50

The motives underlying this motion were not only to increase private property and agricultural production (and thus the state’s revenues) but to reward those villagers who had fought in the war. But the decree, published at the beginning of 1813, came too late to have any effect: Fernando’s return from his French exile the following year and the restoration of absolutism put an end to it.