

The second type of señorial holding was that of the land itself which a grateful monarch had originally bestowed on a noble vassal who had distinguished himself in the monarchy’s service, usually in a military capacity. The land ceded the crown’s rights over uncultivated land which belonged to neither a municipality nor an individual. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, these señoríos were not usually directly worked by the owner, heir of a long distant forebear, but parcelled out into holdings or even smallholdings and rented out. Where the owner was also the jurisdictional lord he or she would collect dues and tributes, which had over time often become confused with rents. To complicate matters still further, señorial domination could vary in detail in different parts of the country without losing its basic purpose of extracting the landworking population’s surplus. ‘Nothing contributes more greatly to the unhappiness of villagers than to be subject to jurisdictions and particular señoríos’, said a Valencian deputy, Antonio Lloret, who came from a señorial township.47

The simplest political solution to these forms of rural domination was to abolish all types of señoríos and reincorporate them as crown property, repaying the owners who could show that their original title was legally foolproof. This, indeed, was what the deputy for Soria, García Herreros, proposed in a motion at the beginning of a long and intense debate which led to the noble deputies collectively asking for the only time in the Cortes’ history that the terms of a motion be clarified. This they soon were by another proposal by García Herreros which demanded that only señorial jurisdictional rights be revoked and that land recognized legally to belong to the señor become his or her private property. This took into account the fact that the señor’s forbears had often over the centuries expanded their señoríos by abuse of their power and the forceful recognition of rights over land that had neither been ceded by the crown nor bought from individuals. Their legal ownership of señorial rights would have to be proven.

Pre-war, as land values rose, villagers engaged in lengthy legal disputes, lasting anything up to half a century, to reclaim these rights, which involved the nobility in considerable costs and conflicts with townships and villages in their señoríos. The more acute among the nobility had come to realize that they would be better off as private landowners rather than as the señorial incumbents of disputed land. Rising rents would offset any loss of dues and tribute. It was this awareness that led them not to fear the liberals depriving them of feudal lordships as long as the former confirmed them as property owners; and this was one of the reasons that had made their wartime ‘popular front’ alliance with the liberal reformers possible.

Heirs of the eighteenth-century enlightened reformers, the liberals had no time for the ‘idle’ nobility as it had been called by their intellectual forebears. But on the señorial issue the liberals were not prepared for a showdown with the nobility. It could be argued that the necessities of the war forbade any such rupture among the patriots. But in fact the liberals, in agreeing to abolish only jurisdictional señoríos, were trapped in their own ideology: their determination that there be one – and only one – law before which all Spaniards must be equal meant that special jurisdictions, such as those of the jurisdictional lordships, had to be abolished. And their insistence on the sanctity of private property meant that they could not deprive any individual of his or her right to enjoy and use it for the felicity of the nation as a whole. The proposal that all señoríos be taken over by the crown quickly dropped from the debate. Ideology dominated – as it was later to dominate the Cortes’ debates on the Constitution and the rupture between a reforming and a defensively reactionary Spain. And it was permitted to dominate during the señorial debate by the absence of a large-scale villagers’ movement, like that of the French Revolution, demanding the distribution of the nobility’s domains which would have pressured the liberals into more radical action. As it was, the decree of August 6, 1811, abolishing señorial jurisdiction did nothing to reform the landowning structure of Spain since the señores continued to hold their large domains, converted now into private property. Moreover, the decree contained two fatal ambiguities. Whether those señoríos which were both territorial and jurisdictional were abolished because of their latter status; and whether it was the señor or his vassals who had to produce the evidence of rightful ownership to disputed land.