

The commoners and clerics who made up the greatest number of deputies were in general moderate reformers who knew what measures they wished to see enacted although they had no overall parliamentary plan for achieving them. It was only as a small group among them proposed one reform after another, which was usually approved by the majority, that it became clear that a new political order was taking shape which was very different from that of the Old Order’s absolutism. In this view, freedom – political and civil – was the only basis which would bring a lasting and just felicity to the nation and ensure that despotism could not again rule the country. The vassal of the past must become the citizen of the future. Equality – not Jacobin social equality – but equality before the law and equality of opportunity went hand in hand with liberty. Equality before the law meant sweeping away the maze of legal privileges enjoyed by the two upper estates, the nobility and Church, as well as that of distinct institutions, and opening up to all Spaniards the freedom to rise in society as the reward of their own abilities, merits and virtues. In a word, the reformers were proposing a meritocracy. The citizen would be free when he – for women did not form part of the political theory – enjoyed the same legal rights as every other citizen, without the exclusions which the privileged had imposed on him in the past.

The outstanding reformers came soon to be known as ‘liberals’, the first time the word had been applied to a political grouping, and after a time their opponents were named ‘serviles’, that was to say servile to absolutism. There was one other important aspect to this nascent liberalism which remained an essential tenet of its ideology thereafter: the rejection of state intervention – inherited then as a reaction to the enlightened reformers’ attempts to involve the state in resolving all the problems which held back Spain’s economic growth. Individual interest, not government laws and regulations, were the stimulus for progress, the liberals maintained: and individual interest could only be assured by the hallowed right of property and by the free market in every aspect of economic life. All ‘monopolistic’ interests, such as the guilds, which set prices and determined the labour market in their trades, were to be abolished.

Within three weeks of the Cortes’ assembling, it began discussion on a proposal to free the press. The issue had been aired by Calbo Rozas in the Suprema without success; but the Cortes was a different matter. Three deputies made particularly powerful speeches in favour: Agustín Argüelles, a thirty-four-year-old Asturian hidalgo lawyer; José Mexía, born in Quito and professor of medicine at Lima University; and Diego Muñoz Torrero, an Extremaduran cleric and former rector of Salamanca University, who summed up the argument in favour with the words: ‘the right to examine a government’s actions is an imprescriptible right that no nation can renounce without renouncing its nationhood’. The Cortes approved press freedom, but it was a conditioned approval which applied only to the expression of political ideas. All religious writings had still to receive the consent of prior censorship, although this was removed from the Inquisition to the bishops. Moreover, a supreme censorship junta was created – along with provincial juntas of the same nature – to guard against abuses of press freedom, political or otherwise, and see to it that the accused were prosecuted by the courts.44