

Matías neither went to war immediately nor followed his father’s medical profession.* For the next two years he lived with his parents in Leciñena, helping his father attend to the local sick and those of the neighbouring village of Perdiguera, all of whom were living rough. Matías’ village was permanently occupied by imperial forces, and their French commandant became a firm friend of his father, don Cosme, who had cured him of a painful illness.

From the time of the cure the commandant came to our house every day after our meal, because his only pleasure was to talk to my father … They conversed in Latin. I must say that my father was famous for his command of the ancient language. Whenever new imperial troops arrived, the commandant immediately posted guards outside our house to ensure that no one entered or bothered us in any way.

Once General Suchet was fully occupied with besieging the towns of southern Cataluña the columns of his troops diminished,

and the Spaniards began to raise guerrillas in all parts, waking at last from the lethargy in which they had been enveloped … Aragón’s liberation came from the west, from Mina’s side, from the borders of Navarra. Mina exercised control over the Aragonese parties and appointed Joseé Tris, Malcarado, as their chief.

Matías’ father’s death at the age of forty-eight in 1811 left the family with three sons, of whom Matías was the oldest, three daughters and a mother. ‘All señores without careers and little money.’ In his new circumstances, Matías chose the profession of arms.

Almost immediately one of Mina’s officers asked me to accompany him, in fact, offering me a horse and arms … That very afternoon I was part of his group of twenty horse and fifty soldiers in the sierra of Llanaja whose task was solely to recruit people and send them to Navarra for training … Our orders were that if we saw a French force we thought we could defeat we should attack it and until 1812 all of us came out of these encounters unharmed, by which time we could do to the French what they until then were used to doing to us. Then, sometimes, we would go into the villages at night – until then we always slept in the woods – but wheat was so dear in 1812 that … a kilo of bread cost sixty centimos whereas a guerrilla’s daily pay – and this was good pay – was ten centimos a day.

Probably because most of his guerrilla companions were illiterate, Matías from his earliest time in the party had been made the receiver and distributor of the company’s rations. ‘As a result I never went short of wheaten bread …’ This showed little solidarity with the rest of his troop whom he always contemptously called ‘those people’, though he was referring to the Navarrese whom he considered as far greater fighters than his fellow Aragonese, and to Mina’s custom of mixing veteran and recent recruits in the division’s forces.

At the beginning of June 1812, Mina sent the Aragón cavalry a commandant accompanied by twelve men and a sergeant whose task was to take over the small cavalry force and form a regiment to be called the Aragonese Hussars. Until two months before, most of the Aragonese cavalrymen continued on provincial recruiting missions, remaining in Aragón, under the command of José Tris, an Aragonese guerrilla leader of somewhat dubious reputation. Indeed, Matías did not record the incident by which Tris went down in guerrilla history. In April 1812, Espoz y Mina had passed into Aragón after a second handsome victory at Arlabán,* in the Basque country, when he was nearly captured during the night in lodgings in the village of Robres. There was no doubt that he had been betrayed, and there were a number of different stories as to how he escaped. One of these had him surprised alone in his rooms by a French cavalry detachment. While the French tried to break down the front door, Mina rushed out with a stave in his hands, and as he battered the nearest foes into submission shouted: ‘Lancers to the rear! Cavalry sergeant, take the first squadron to the left!’30 Thinking that it was they, not Mina who had been trapped, the French withdrew just long enough to allow the guerrilla leader to escape on horseback.†31