

At the beginning of February 1812, the British navy provided Mina with two twelve-pound cannon and two four-pounders in a drop-off in the Bay of Biscay. For a week, the guerrilla humped, hauled and heaved the precious artillery pieces over mountain paths and tracks in enemy occupied territory with the division spread out covering the flanks to a considerable depth to prevent a surprise French attack. When they reached their objective – Tafalla, one of the Navarrese towns most heavily fortified by the French – the twelve-pounders were not long in opening a breach in the castle walls which, after an abortive guerrilla assault, was still sufficiently threatening to induce the imperial garrison to surrender the following day.15

General Reille, who had chased Mina very hard and pursued a repressive policy in Navarra in the same year, saw the writing on the wall. The mobile column which Napoleon had ordered as the chief counter-insurgency weapon, was losing its fighting efficiency, he observed. Until then, numerically inferior imperial columns had been able to engage and put to flight guerrilla bands. But the latter’s combat experience was beginning to tell and they were defeating increasingly large French columns, many of which were manned by raw conscripts or troops unfamiliar with the terrain. Until more troops were available, Reille noted, the imperial inferiority could only be made good by cavalry and artillery units – which were impossible to deploy in rugged terrain.16

### THE BATTLE FOR FOOD

The battle for provisions was vital to the guerrilla war – indeed to the conflict itself. Napoleon’s policy of ‘war feeding war’ – in other words that his troops be fed and paid by local requisition – was viable for an army on the march but became a very different matter when, in a poor agrarian country, it turned into an army of occupation. Nothing was more likely to keep a rural guerrilla alive and fighting than French exactions of food and money in an impoverished countryside.* Moreover, if the guerrilla could prevent the French requisitioning supplies, they did the enemy as much harm as by forcing a column to flee or killing a score of imperial soldiers. To deny the enemy their daily subsistence brought the guerrilla – who also had to live off the land – the popular support it needed, added new recruits to their cause, and left the enemy hungry, unpaid and demoralized.

As their power increased, so by 1811–1812 the guerrilla increased the French army’s illness rate by their stubborn defence in the war of provisions, preventing the enemy from providing full rations to his troops. This they achieved more often by seizing imperial supply columns – flocks of sheep, beef on the hoof, convoys of wheat carts – than by preventing the French soldiers’ requisitions; as a result the French military’s sickness rate of twenty percent in Spain was higher than on campaigns in central Europe. In January 1813, Suchet had to reduce the bread ration from twenty-four to sixteen ounces because the guerrillas had collected most of the available surplus from the harvest and hindered the transportation of what little grain the French had managed to accumulate; and in the early summer of the same year one-quarter of his infantry reported sick.17 The guerrilla sapped the enemy’s morale – imperial troops had little faith that they would conquer the ‘invisible’ army in this constant, never-ending struggle which forced them into long, tiring and fruitless marches over rugged country only to find that the enemy had vanished into thin air; or even worse, if they encountered the guerrilla face-to-face they feared a terrifying fate. Untrained for this sort of work, conscripts had little stomach for it: the guerrilla’s existence encouraged the rate of desertion in the Napoleonic ranks. Even in major cities, regular French troops felt under constant threat. ‘Little by little we are going to be destroyed … We shall all die here’, wrote an infantry sergeant major to his father in France shortly after Sevilla’s occupation.