

The sheer weight of men which the large parties had come to command was leading them to the formation of a critical mass which inevitably changed their aims and perspectives. They were beginning to seek a centred spatial control, to hold down territory, to become more like a popular territorial liberation movement. Critical mass, however, was not a question of sheer numbers alone. Of equal, if not greater importance, was fighting experience. After years of hand-to-hand combat, the guerrillas were battle-hardened veterans who were no longer frightened of the French troops, having killed, captured or put them to flight on so many occasions. As an experienced French counter-insurgency general who led the ‘Infernals’ (so named by the French for their notorious anti-guerrilla tactics) wrote after suffering a heavy defeat at Espoz y Mina’s hands:

I confess to your excellency in all honesty that the brigands of this kingdom [Navarra] merit the name of veteran soldiers. They can compete with the best of our armies, for the continuous battles and victories have made them lose their fear of us. (General Soulier to Marshal Suchet, February, 1812)12

The decline of eighty thousand imperial troops in Spain during Napoleon’s Russian campaign* reduced French military pressure on the guerrillas and opened a space for a new sense of territorial conquest. This was best expressed by Espoz y Mina’s blockade of Pamplona, the Navarrese capital. Decreed in December 1811, the blockade was put into serious effect in the early months of 1812. Its aim was to cut off the capital and its French garrison from the rest of the region. Marker stones, guarded twenty-four hours a day, were set up on all the major roads into the city at a distance of about one and a half kilometres from the walls: no one was to be permitted to carry money, food or merchandise beyond these markers towards the capital. Its inhabitants were allowed to leave the city to live in the guerrilla zone but not to return: those who remained in Pamplona were declared enemies for as long as the war lasted. ‘The volunteer detachments guarding the line will shoot anyone they see approaching, without orders or communication; and whether wounded or not the offender will be hanged immediately from a tree’, said Article 10 of Mina’s blockade decree.13 This in a year when food was already growing short meant considerable hardship for the Pamplona population, and hardship also for the small farmers who marketed their produce in the capital, but it was a clever territorial move. It visibly demonstrated to the population that total belligerency was demanded of them by a guerrilla that was in civilian as well as military command.

Earlier, in another brilliant stroke, Mina had taken over Navarrese custom posts and chanelled their tolls – three million reales a year, he estimated, including a monthly ‘contribution’ of one hundred ounces of gold from the French customs post at Irún to allow French goods to cross the border – into the guerrilla movement to pay his men’s wages, buy arms and munitions, uniforms and other equipment. Although he was quite capable of levying forced contributions from townships which had proven themselves unwholeheartedly behind the cause, and of obliging the villagers to provide his men with food, he used the customs money to avoid having to impose monetary taxes on the mass of the rural population. In order to rally the Aragonese to his guerrilla, Mina pledged that he would put an end to the excessive French taxation, requisitions and pillage.14