

We shall never destroy these bandits … Without hesitation and in broad daylight, an inhabitant will kill a French soldier he finds on his own in the street … The other day a drunken soldier who was stabbed to death had more than thirty dagger wounds from head to stomach … Like others, he died in the cruellest of torments. The armed villagers commit the most brutal barbarities. They cut their victims’ ears off and stick their genitals in their mouths …18

Shortly before, a lieutenant colonel of the Imperial Guard, who had been promoted to colonel to command a line regiment, had suffered this fate in a village not two leagues from Sevilla before he could take up his new posting. After six in the evening no troops in the Andalucian capital dared to venture out of barracks.* The French occupation army was in a wretched state, the sergeant major confessed to his father. The soldiers had been three days without bread. No uniforms, no shoes, no shirts were reaching them from France … ‘I have seen many soldiers die of vermin, I saw one with a hole in his armpit eaten by lice which had laid their eggs in it, others die of chagrin and misery.’ It was quite probable that sickness – human louse-borne typhus in particular – decimated the imperial ranks more heavily than the guerrilla. Suchet’s third army corps alone, which was one of the best equipped and supplied, lost an estimated thirty-six thousand men – or one sixth of its strength yearly – to illness between 1810 and 1814.19 At an annualized rate, this was the equivalent of nearly twenty casualties a day.

In the ongoing battle for provisions, the French exacted more than 150 million reales in food, fodder and monetary taxes from the Navarrese population alone. The bulk of this fell on the villagers. This amount represented two years of the region’s average pre-war annual agarian, commercial and industrial production; spread out over five enemy occupation years, the sum was the equivalent of forty percent yearly of the region’s principal income. Just under half the total sum was requisitioned from villagers solely between February 1808 and July 1811, in rations of bread, wine and meat for the imperial troops and barley and straw for their horses.20

It was the area of small farmers’ predominance in La Montaña – the rugged northern part of Navarra – which most resented enemy exactions and sought to resist them; and it was this region, giving on to the foothills of the Pyrenees in the east, that formed one of the major guerrilla recruiting bases and refuges throughout the war. With its gorges, hidden valleys and series of mountain ranges of up to two thousand metres high, it was ideal guerrilla country; French superiority in arms and military organization was largely neutralized by the terrain. La Montaña was over-populated at the time for the subsistence farming on which it depended because the usual outlets of migration or emigration had been cut off by the war, and there was no shortage of potential guerrilla recruits who shared a common cultural heritage: like Espoz y Mina, they spoke Basque. With the exception of Pamplona, the region’s capital, there were no major towns: the people lived in small villages or hamlets scattered over the countryside, which made the imperial army’s task of tax-collecting and requisitioning all the harder and more hazardous.*