

Mina is my life,

Longa is my love,

Don Gaspar de Jáuregui

Fills my heart

or

Since the priest Merino

a general was made

Spain’s urgent interests

Are no longer delayed*28

A smallholder (Mina), a master artisan (Longa) and a poor Basque shepherd (Jáuregui – who significantly was given the title of don, perhaps only to fill the stanza adequately) were the guerrilla leaders the common people celebrated. There were no similar songs saluting Spanish noble generals.

The guerrilla leader, El Empecinado, was very rapidly turned into a national hero, epitomizing the anti-Bonapartist struggle. A number of plays about his exploits were written and performed in Cádiz theatres from 1810 on. The guerrilla struggle was felt by common patriot folk – or at least those who did not live under its exactions and terror – to express the essence of popular resistance to the Bonapartist regime.

### MILITANCIES: THE FORGING OF A GUERRILLERO29

Matías Calvo was an Aragonese doctor’s son from Lecineña, a large village about thirty kilometres northeast of Zaragoza in the Monegros steppe lands. In 1801, aged nine, Matías was sent to grammar school in Zaragoza. ‘God endowed me with an average talent but made of me a bad but quite intrepid student who, in my time off, got up to pranks and fights … [but] never of a nasty kind ….’

At the university, he read philosophy, as had Javier Mina, the founder of the Navarrese guerrilla, who was three years older than he and whom Matías probably knew. But Javier seemed to have been no direct influence on Calvo; it was his relative Espoz y Mina, who succeeded Javier on his capture in 1810, who made an impact. After the 1808 rising and general enlistment Calvo, as a university student, was immediately made a sergeant in Fernando VII’s Royal Infantry Regiment. ‘At that time one can say that there were few men in Spain capable of commanding a company let alone a battalion, but when we saw the enemy we thought we would eat him alive simply because he was the enemy. What ignorance!’

Matías took part in both the defences of Zaragoza, in the first fighting at the Carmen gate which was one of the most vulnerable openings in the city walls. But halfway through the second siege he, along with several others, deserted, jumping from the city wall at night and making off across the countryside towards his home village. ‘No words can describe the state of the city by then … everything was in ruins ….’ His return home was worse than the besieged city he had fled. French forces were attacking and sacking the village where three thousand patriot civilian reinforcements had assembled to relieve Zaragoza. Thirty-seven inhabitants, men, women and children lay dead in the streets and houses, and the sanctuary of Our Lady of Magallón was ablaze.

Escaping with young villagers up the high wooded hill to the sanctuary, Calvo saw below him, stretching out over two kilometres or more, the French forces sweeping forward, leaving swathes of dead Aragonese volunteers behind them. A few artillery pieces were still defending the sanctuary. In his hurry across the square in front of it he did not notice that one of the ‘artillerymen’ was a woman, Lorenza Marcén, helped by her fifteen-year-old son, Nicolás Seral. Both were killed in the final French attack.