

The only opposition in Navarra to imperial domination lay in Espoz y Mina’s guerrilla which grew exponentially year by year, until it became by far and away the largest in Spain. Though the Navarrese Division had also to be fed by the villagers, their requisitions were much more modest than those of their enemy – thirty percent of the total compared to the imperial forces’ seventy percent; and only seven percent overall of the guerrillas’ were exacted by armed force. At the same time, the guerrilla paid (in fact, issued receipts) for nearly three times as much food received as they seized by force.21

All French-occupied regions suffered heavy monetary imposts and seizures of foodstuffs to pay for the imperial war and to keep their troops victualled. Between 1810 and 1814, Suchet extracted from Aragón forty-one million francs – just under 150 million reales – the same amount as in Navarra, though the Aragonese population was approximately three times the size of the former.22 Santander, on the Cantabrian coast, was another province harshly pillaged by the French where feeding, supplying and paying for their occupation took up seventy-five percent of the province’s costs.23 It was one of the main battlegrounds of Juan Diáz Porlier, a young naval officer who had fought at Trafalgar and subsequently transferred to the army. By 1811 he had a force of several thousand men. The Bonapartist provincial police chief had no doubts about it:

The situation is looking worse and worse throughout the province … the miserable inhabitants have nothing to eat because of the guerrilla’s requisitions of foodstuffs and enlistment of recruits.24

On top of the French exactions, which were the main cause of the misery, and the guerrilla supplying itself, foodstuffs that could be of use to the enemy were expropriated. In Castilla la Vieja, the different bands carted off the grain as soon as it had been threshed. Writing to the Bonapartist police minister, Pablo Arribas, his Valladolid informant reported:

The conde de Torreblanca’s bailiff has had his whole grain crop in Cubillos seized, leaving him in its place a Junta [Suprema] decree which ordered the parties to requisition all those whom they believed to be Bonapartist supporters or who lived in the French-occupied zone. (Josef Timoteo del Monasterio, Valladolid, September 20, 1811)

Though even the early small parties had been able seize a certain amount of food requisitioned by the imperial troops, or to ambush enemy detachments on their exaction raids, villagers could not be adequately protected until the guerrilla became a large and veteran force that dominated the countryside and fought the French in open battle.

### POPULAR SUPPORT

Mina’s three guerrilleros, who escorted the French prisoners to be exchanged, arrived in Pamplona with their arms and revolutionary insignia, and after being presented to the [French] Governor were allowed to walk through the capital’s streets, squares and public gates … A numerous crowd gathered and followed the three bandits, crying Viva Mina! Viva Mina! …25