

Matías’ parents lived by the sanctuary but they had fled. After sleeping in the sierra, eleven of the bolder youth made a cautious reconnaissance of the village: the French had evacuated the place.

Oh, heavens above! Words fail me. We looked at one another as we passed the first houses … there was a corpse lying in the street, two more further on. A man who had been ill in bed at home lay dead … There was not a house in the village with an unbroken chair, a table, not even the smallest thing; everything was smashed, all the doors and windows as well. It was horrible to walk down the streets.

That night the youth made a fire in the public square with the firewood prepared by the French troops to warm themselves. Matías lay down on a stone bench between the arcades. When he awoke he found himself alone in the midst of a dark, cold, silent square. He recalled that his erstwhile companions had spoken of a house where they could spend the night and he set off to find it. But they were not there.

I did not know where to go. I seemed to remember that the last place we had spoken of was by El Coso. I went down the calle Mayor to the corner of the Coso and the calle Baja, but I did not see or hear anyone. It was enough to frighten even the most courageous … Passing a door all you heard was a dog howling … Through another door I had already seen a man with his throat slit, and others shot to death … When I reached the calle Gimeno, my courage failed me entirely. A man who until that moment had known neither fear nor danger, my eyes were suddenly blind with terror. I believe that if I had not had the luck to see a light emerge into the street … I would not have come out of the village alive. I was convinced that something even more frightening had happened and that my companions had fled.

His young companions welcomed him back and shared out the little food they had found: two doves and a chicken inside a large feather-lined wicker basket which must have belonged to the general commanding the French troops. ‘The experience made me realize that I was beginning to live, that it was impossible to continue to exist as I had until then …’

In a literary memoir this new state of consciousness would almost surely have heralded a change in personal attitude and activity. A sixteen-year-old who had been gaoled (for his anti-Godoy student actions), experienced most of the Zaragoza sieges, an attack and the sacking of his home village, a night of panic, and two winter months in the Sierra de Alcubierre where his family and the other villagers took refuge thereafter, would be prepared to throw in his lot with the guerrillas. But this was not Matías’ case. After Zaragoza’s fall on March 29, 1809, and the patriot military defeats three months later in their attempt to encircle Zaragoza, there were virtually no guerrillas to join. General Suchet succeeded in slowly but surely eliminating the small bands like that of Anselmo Alegre, an ex-smuggler whose ten-year sentence to the galleys had been pardoned by the patriots for fighting as a guerrilla leader in the sierra de Alcubierre.