

To say that the guerrilleros swam like fish in a sea of villagers would be exaggerated. To the guerrilla, the villager ‘owed’ the fighting man his foodstuff for risking his life daily to protect the run-of-the-mill non-combatant villagers, whose principal resolve in the harsh war conditions was to retain as great a portion as possible of their agricultural reserves. If the guerrilla protected the villagers from enemy plunder, well and good, the former’s demands could be seen as an insurance policy, and what the guerrillas took, the French were denied. But so, too, were the villagers. And if the guerrilla could not or would not protect them, leaving the villagers still to face enemy impositions, then they were no more than another armed pestilence to feed.

The large partisan bands appreciated only too well the need for villagers’ support – they had many men and horses to feed, required good local intelligence and guides in unknown territory, refuges and deposits for arms and stores, and a rural population that did not betray their presence to the enemy. They understood very clearly that rogue guerrillas who were no better than bandits did them a great deal of harm by undermining village support and, when they did not shoot them out of hand, they arrested them, going so far on occasion as to hand them over to enemy justice.

Gerónimo Saornil, whose party came to number nine hundred by 1812, fought in Castilla la Vieja, mainly in the area around Valladolid. A youthful veteran of the Convention War, he had been released by the rising from a Valladolid gaol at the beginning of the war, where he was being held on charges of robbery or smuggling, and took to the hills where he formed a group of partisans. In the spring of 1812, he caught nine men in the act of robbing some passers-by in Medina del Campo and arrested them; he believed they were the same group which a few days earlier had robbed and killed four people. He penned a letter to the local Bonapartist corregidor, explaining that he held these men prisoner.

But I have no safe prison for them, nor does my style of life permit me to take them with me to put them on trial. This is why I have decided to hand them over to Your Honour so that they may be formally tried and receive the punishment befitting their crimes in accordance with the law. I trust therefore that you will tell me where you would wish me to turn them in … (A flying camp, May 1, 1812, Geronimo Saornil)26

This was a service, his letter added, which was as important to the patriots as to the Emperor’s troops; convinced of this, he had detached a number of parties to hunt down and arrest thieves and murderers to ‘re-establish in this manner public order and tranquility’. He would continue to hand over to the Bonapartist authorities all those who committed such grave crimes, he concluded.

Nonetheless, there were very many villagers’ complaints about guerrilla exactions and brutality. For example, the party of Julián Sánchez (‘El Charo’) from Salamanca, whose aid Wellington appreciated sufficiently to incorporate him into his army, was accused of arbitrarily demanding rations and other exorbitant supplies, and when the local magistrates did not provide them of tying them to a tree in the square or on stands resembling scaffolds in the village outskirts and giving them a severe beating until they accepted their demands, thus ‘satisfying their evil aim of doing harm for its own sake’.27 The terrorizing of local authorities which was part of the guerrilla strategy could also affect the ordinary villager whose food supplies the magistrates, in order to save their own lives, would commandeer to satisfy the guerrilleros’ demands. Nonetheless, popular sympathy with the guerrilla was expressed in the traditional coplas (four-line songs) which were invented – often by women – to be sung to well-known tunes.