

By way of comparison, throughout the whole war in neighbouring Aragón the French suffered just over 7.5 guerrilla-inflicted casualties per day; and from the fall of Zaragoza in March 1809 to September 1811, when General Suchet, the French commander in Aragón, managed if not to destroy the guerrillas totally, at least to bottle them up, the French losses averaged no more than 4.5 men per day.51*

There were, however, considerable variations in this rate at other times of the war. Thus during Suchet’s four-month campaign to take Valencia (September 1811 to January 1812), when he left Aragón weakly garrisoned, a resurgent guerrilla put out of action a daily average of twenty enemy. In the whole Ebro valley, the average reached thirty-five per day. This rate – of over one thousand men a month – almost equalled Suchet’s losses of the previous two and a half years.52

Napoleon’s determined attempt, on the eve of his Russian campaign of 1812, to put an end to the guerrilla threat in his rear and their periodic raids across the Pyrenees into France, also ended with high daily losses. The specially created Army of the Ebro† lost 2,500 men, an average of twenty-two a day, over the sixteen weeks that its campaign lasted.

To try to set such losses in perspective, a comparison with the casualties suffered by the French in two regular army battles – one, for example, from the early stage of the war, Talavera (1809), and the other from almost the ultimate, Vitoria (1813) – is instructive. In both cases, the French confronted allied armies of which the British under Wellington constituted the major fighting force. The average French losses in the two battles was 14.4 percent of their total forces involved, with a death, prisoner and missing rate of 4.3 percent, and a wounded rate of 10.1 percent.‡

However, the comparative interest lies in annualizing the Talavera and Vitoria losses, including wounded. Over one year, these ran in crude terms to twenty and just under twenty-two soldiers per day respectively. But the two battles taken together lasted only three days. If the time span is factored in, the French losses in one year for the total of both engagements ran at a daily equivalent of 125.5 men; and thus over four years, the timespan of Mina’s Navarrese Division, at 31.4 a day.

During limited periods, guerrillas in the Ebro Valley, as has been seen, inflicted a broadly similar rate. But the Navarrese claim to have caused roughly comparable average losses day after day for four years, especially in 1810 and the first half of 1811, when for nine out of fifteen months French military pressure was so great that Espoz y Mina was obliged to disperse his guerrilla, was of a different order. By including the wounded, especially of the walking wounded who succeeded in escaping with the help of their companions and lived to fight another day the estimates were open to exaggeration. But the majority of casualties consisted of wounded – seventy percent of the losses at Talavera and Vitoria combined – and guerrilla estimates which included them must be viewed with initial caution.