

The Navarrese figure of 9.2 enemy killed and captured per day is therefore a more reliable figure from which to start. At the two battles jointly these losses accounted, in crude annual numbers, for 12.5 men per day; and in weighted terms (over four years) for 9.4. On this calculation, the Navarrese guerrilla caused similar enemy losses in killed and captured as those which resulted from the pitched battles.

Neither Navarra nor Aragón were typical of the guerrilla movement, the one highly mobilized and the largest of all, numbering by 1811–1812 ten thousand men, the other virtually quiescent for the previous two and a half years; their figures consequently represented two extremes. But despite such regional ups-and-downs it could be supposed that the remaining guerrilla movement, with four and a half times Navarra’s numbers, was capable of causing sustained daily losses of killed and captured at least double that of the Navarrese: in other words eighteen per day. Throughout five years of war then, and including Espoz y Mina’s four-year-long struggle, the guerrillas would have accounted for forty-six thousand French losses without counting the wounded.

If the guerrilla proportion of enemy dead and captured to wounded were generally similar to that of the two battles (1:2.3), a further 106,000 losses would have been inflicted, bringing the total to 152,000 over the five years, or eighty enemy soldiers per day. In that case, the guerrillas would have caused just one half of the hypothetical French losses during the war;* and the Navarrese claim of fifty thousand total killed, captured and wounded would have accounted for one-third of these.

Although the overall figures including wounded, are not far short of those advanced by General Bigarré for guerrilla-inflicted deaths alone, they remain, it must be stressed, highly speculative. As for the general’s guerrilla ‘losses’ of twenty-five thousand – by which it must be assumed from the context that he was referring to deaths – if the same proportion of killed and captured to wounded were applied as in the two battles the guerrillas would have sustained a further 57,500 losses, a total of slightly over eighty thousand in five years or an average of forty-five per day. A rate in other words of just over half that wreaked on the enemy … But the proportion’s plausibility does not signify that it is more than conjecture.

### GUERRILLA WAR AND REVOLUTION

Though by no means exclusively plebeian, as has been seen, the guerrilla formed the only popular Spanish armed force during the war. Its major leaders (for contemporaries and historians alike) were of plebeian origin: landworkers and small farmers like Juan Martín, ‘El Empecinado’ in Castilla la Nueva; Espoz y Mina in Navarra and Julián Sánchez, ‘El Charro’, from Salamanca; the 18-year-old shepherd Gaspar de Jáuregui, ‘El Pastor’, in the Basque country and the rural parish priest Jerónimo Merino in Castilla la Vieja, alongside the Burgos master ironworker, Francisco Longa, in Cantabria. (Four army officers, Juan Díaz Porlier, in Asturias and Cantabria, Mariano Renovales in the Basque country, José Joaquín Durán, in Castilla la Vieja, Navarra and Aragón and Ramón Gayán also in Aragón, were the outstanding exceptions.) By the end of 1811 Mina, apart from a few towns still physically held by the French, virtually ruled his native Navarra, while other leaders – El Empecinado was a case in point – dominated the main military resistance in Guadalajara and neighbouring territories up to the gates of Madrid.