

The minutes seemed like eternity until we got the order to charge. We had advanced some five hundred paces to find gaps in the stone boundary walls of the fields through which to set upon the enemy …

The French cavalry fired two rounds at the Spanish as they charged – the first with their carbines, the second with pistols. ‘The first round broke our commandant’s leg and the second killed a brave cavalryman of our army whom I did not know until he was dying, but his comrades told me was a courageous man.’ The rest of the fighting was hand to hand with sabres and infantry bayonets. Matías’ sabre had over one hundred parrying chips slashed into it, and his commanders came to look at it … ‘I knew thereafter that my companions had no equals in all the armies.’ The French cavalry finally broke through the Spanish lines and retired into Huesca with thirty casualties against twenty for the guerrillas. The latter’s wounded could take comfort from the fact that Espoz y Mina took great care of them, for he believed that a well-trained soldier was his most valuable asset.

*

Four years earlier, Palafox had ordered frightened and improvised Aragonese troops to defend Zaragoza. The tables had turned now, Matías reflected. Then, Palafox had been unnerved by the constant defeats and it was the Spanish who took refuge in the cities; now it was the Spanish who were ready and prepared to take on the enemy in open battle. Severe discipline, austerity, courage and the sharp intelligence of those in command had made of the Navarrese Division a formidable and frightening force, even for the most experienced imperial troops.

Officers used to say to me that I was cut out for a military career. But they were mistaken. I was not really courageous, and I did not distinguish myself in any of the many other actions in which I took part. But nor, I must say, did I ever leave my post or fail the mission assigned to me. I was never rash, but nor was I a coward … where others expected me to be they found me. That was my whole campaign, I had a great passion to pursue a military career, but in a few moments all my plans were brought to nought.

Matías remained a guerrilla sergeant for the rest of the war.

### MAIL INTERCEPTIONS

One of their major tasks – indeed, as has been pointed out, the origins of the guerrilla movement itself – was the interception of enemy mail. Preserved in the Madrid National Historical Archive among the Junta Suprema’s documents is a collection of 1,626 intercepted letters.* Only twenty-eight date from 1808; but in 1809 the figure rose tenfold and in 1810 trebled that of the previous year. The highest number, it must be said, were private Spanish letters, followed by Bonapartist government mail. Amongst the intercepted French correspondence from within Spain were a number of letters from French generals and regional commanders to their counterparts or hierarchical superiors reporting on and complaining about the state of their region usually because of the increase in guerrilla activities. There were even a few personal letters to her husband in Madrid from the king’s wife who remained in France. But there were no concrete French military orders.†