

El Empecinado, a former corporal in the Convention War, was the supreme guerrilla observer of the rules of war in relation to his prisoners, and General Hugo, Victor Hugo’s father, who spent a fruitless time pursuing him, respected him for it and treated his guerrilla prisoners in the same manner.†

In Navarra – and to a lesser degree the Basque country – the spiral of violence was more acute than in most of the rest of Spain. A succession of French generals, frustrated by their lack of success in putting an end to popular Navarrese resistance on the borders of France, turned to terror. Guerrilla corpses were left to hang for days in trees alongside major roads to intimidate the population; but soon their bodies vanished overnight and there were French soldiers’ corpses hanging in their place. ‘Vous pendez les nôtres. Nous pendons les vôtres’, said a placard pinned to their chests. In revenge, the French commander of Navarra, General d’Agoult, ordered fifteen of the fifty-seven monks held in Pamplona to be executed and their bodies to be strung up publicly for twenty-four hours.40

Although a successor, General Reille, won two significant victories over Espoz y Mina’s guerrillas in the autumn of 1810, he racked up the violence by several notches; lists of those absent from their homes without good reason were the most useful police source of information. Over 3,300 people from the capital and surrounding villages were imprisoned in Pamplona: some villages had up to thirty percent of their inhabitants incarcerated.41

The guerrilla’s repression of local civil authorities to keep them in line was one counterpart to the occupiers’ repression. Ears and noses cut off, foreheads branded, tarring and feathering were frequent forms of physical punishment. Spanish ‘traitors’ serving under French colours were regularly executed. But French prisoners had been respected. However, on December 14, 1811, Espoz y Mina issued an order that all French officers and soldiers captured, with or without arms, in battle or not, would be hanged and left along the main roads. This was in response to an increased wave of repression decreed by Reille in which 150 guerrillas and 60 non-combatants were recorded as having been executed between July and October 1811. Moreover, Reille had nearly six hundred guerrillas’ relatives arrested, and the gaols were so crowded that he deported three hundred civilians to France on a single day in October – bandits who were fit only to ‘finish their days in some distant dungeon’. His successor, General Abbé, who relieved Reille in November, had a further sixty-seven guerrillas and their relatives executed in the first nine days of December.42

On January 11, 1812, Espoz y Mina put his threat into execution. He had just decisively defeated Abbé and his two-thousand-strong column outside Sangüesa, inflicting six hundred casualties. That day he took no prisoners. And thereafter, when the French executed a guerrilla officer, four French officers held in Mina’s prisoner-of-war camp were shot; for every rank-and-file guerrilla, twenty imperial soldiers were executed. As the French by now were losing more men to the guerrillas than vice-versa, Abbé stopped treating Mina’s men as bandits; and Mina returned to his former system of giving quarter to captured enemy troops. The barbarous cycle was finally laid to rest for the last years of the war.