

So pervasive was the guerrilla presence in the province that the intendente could find no trustworthy person to carry his letter, even when ‘rolled in a paper small enough to be hidden from the searches and examinations that all have to undergo from the cuadrillas as they close around the province from all sides’. Finally, he found a French military detachment marching to Burgos to take it on the first stage of its travel to the justice minister and the king in Madrid.

### TAKING THE WAR HOME TO THE ENEMY

Although both Mina and the Catalan irregulars raided Pyrenean France from time to time, they did not think seriously about cutting at the enemy’s underbelly in a joint invasion, something Napoleon came to fear unduly.* It was a strategic guerrilla error which demonstrated two aspects of the war.

A defect which the large guerrillas shared with the army was their difficulty of combining for joint operations. While the smaller parties often collaborated to increase their strength for a particular coup, the larger they grew the more they tended to be sufficient unto themselves, even when formed into a single army. Poor communications between them contributed to, and resulted from, this situation. In August 1811, three large guerrilla parties and the same number of irregular military forces, two of them Catalan, numbering in all twenty thousand men, stood in or on the borders of Aragón; this was five times the strength of the imperial counter-insurgency columns in the region which could easily have been swept out by the combined force. Or more daringly, this large irregular cohort, which did not take action in Aragón, could have crossed into France and campaigned in the lower Pyrenees, the sort of terrain they were accustomed to, and possibly have relieved pressure on Valencia which was about to be invested by Marshal Suchet. But which commander would lead such a combined force? Espoz y Mina, who by this time controlled most of Aragón north of the Ebro, and his counterpart, Durán, on the river’s southern banks were neither likely to concede such a prominent role. Moreover, the former was determined to keep Catalans out of his new Aragonese dominion.

The second shortcoming was common to the Spanish struggle in general. The major objective, as was pointed out earlier, was not Napoleon’s overthrow, but to rid the country of its Bonapartist regime and the French army which kept it in existence. Not to have taken advantage of Napoleon’s invasion of Russia in 1812 to threaten France’s southwestern borderlands was an admission of this aim; it was also an indication that the Navarrese guerrilla’s ‘critical mass’ was more concerned with its region’s (and Aragón’s) territorial liberation from the French occupation forces than in a wider strategy of attacking the enemy’s bases across the frontier.

Admittedly, Mina’s division – even united with Catalan irregular forces – could not hope to hold a part of Pyrenean France for any length of time; but the anti-Napoleonic propaganda effect of a serious offensive across the Pyrenees would have served notice on French public opinion that the Emperor was engaged on two fronts simultaneously and that his home rearguard was threatened. The fact that Wellington, who was concerned solely with defeating Napoleon, was no more aware than the guerrilla of the advantage of advancing into France after his 1812 victory at the battle of Salamanca, certainly made it invidious to criticize the latter with their smaller forces and different concerns. Nonetheless, Wellington’s failure did not excuse a strategic guerrilla omission.48