

*

The quantity of the guerrilla mail interceptions in 1810 – 963 – did not increase their quality: forty percent of the intercepts were private letters mailed from within Spain and to a small degree from France. However, the Bonapartist regime suffered heavily, particularly in official correspondence with Andalucía. Ministers accompanying Josef on his official tour of the newly won region complained constantly that correspondence from the capital was not being received. On July 27, 1810, for example, the entire Andalucian mail from Madrid was seized by a guerrilla party at Villarrubia de los Ojos. But it was by no means a problem confined to Andalucía: ‘Despite the proximity of this town [Guadalajara] to the capital and court [Madrid], it is as though we were a hundred or more leagues away in relation to the mail …’35 wrote the Guadalajara prefect in 1811; while the king’s regal commissioner to Andalucía, on his return to Sevilla on September 21 in the same year, after visiting the whole region with Marshal Soult, reported that he had received no correspondence from Madrid since June 26 and no orders since August 5. ‘I very much fear that the mail will be lost because of its constant interception especially around Granada and Málaga.’36 Part of the problem, the Bonapartist government maintained and probably not without reason, was that the majority of postal couriers in Spain were Spanish and out of fear handed over their dispatch bags to the first person to stop them.37 They had plenty of incentive to do so, since their lives were usually at stake. Bonapartist officials, when they could, used the French military’s postal system which was protected by the army – in November 1809, the entire Third Regiment of the Vistula was detached to safeguard correspondence.38

Mail interception was not all-weather work, however; in autumn and winter throughout the war intercepts dropped to only a small percent of their spring/summer highpoint. Thus guerrilla effectiveness depended to a considerable degree on the year’s seasonal weather.

### REPRISALS

The question of reprisals arose from the start of the war, demonstrating the conflict’s popular ideological nature.39 While with some exceptions the regular troops kept more or less to the levels accepted by eighteenth century rules of war, reprisals on occasion rose to barbarous heights among the opponents in the guerrilla struggle. As irregulars and ‘brigands’, the guerrillas received no quarter from French troops who saw in each villager their potential assassin; and village combatants gave none where they could expect none and saw in every imperial soldier a pillager and sacrilegious invader. Some guerrilla leaders moreover justified the tactic of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, as the only means to force the French to recognize the guerrillero as a bona fide combatant. Only a dehumanized foe could be stabbed in the back or strung from a tree; only a dehumanized authority could order the guerrilla to attack enemy hospitals among its normal targets.*