

There could be no doubt that such orders were intercepted, since an increase in the French use of a cipher for many military communications was notable by the beginning of 1812. A collection of fifty-two such dispatches – not all in cipher (which a British intelligence captain cracked) – was received and compiled by Wellington’s command between March 1812 and March 1813.33 Since one of the guerrilla’s main objectives was to inform on the enemy’s war plans and movements, the absence of a section devoted exclusively to intercepted military orders is striking.

But one letter in particular was remarkable, less for what it said than the circumstances of its interception.

### EPISODES: A DEATHLY INTERCEPT

One of the first guerrilleros in the north, Juan Fernando Echevarría, a young man of good family, was also one of the first to be captured by French troops in March 1809. A Basque, he had begun his guerrilla with a score of men in the uplands of the neighbouring province, Santander, where he called his party La Compañía del Norte (the Northern Company). The conditions of his capture with two of his men were never made specifically clear. The three were taken to the prison at Mercadillo until they could be sent to Bilbao. Between fifteen and twenty of his men tried to rescue them from the gaol, but the provincial vice-commissioner of police, the abbot of Siones, and villagers and prison guards fought them off for three-quarters of an hour. The following day under the command of a French sergeant who, recognizing the quality of his person, let Echevarría ride his horse on his word of honour not to escape, the captives set off, the two other guerrilleros on foot. Their route took them through the township of Balmaseda. After attending mass in the parish church, Echevarría asked his guard to be allowed a few minutes with a family friend who lived there. The meeting was very brief, just long enough for Echevarría to beg the friend, Joaquín María de los Azuelas, to write to Juan Fernando’s brother to ask the latter to try to secure him a royal pardon; Azuelas sat down to do so immediately.

They say that this king is so compassionate that, on prostrating oneself at his feet, his charitable heart may respond to an appeal for clemency. My friend … you should not neglect this task… because it is a matter of your brother and you should put forward his extreme youth … And speak to Abril, who is a general, and to Amorós* to see if they are able to secure your brother’s pardon … Here my friend we have suffered considerably and I in particular because my house was one of the seventy-five whose sad lot it was to be burned to the ground in this poor and now very unhappy village … Much patience is needed …34

This letter never reached its destination. It was intercepted by guerrilleros – quite possibly by Echevarría’s own men – and eventually was forwarded to Sevilla where it ended in the Junta Suprema’s files. In May 1809, little more than a month after his capture, Echevarría was sentenced to be hanged: the Bilbao extraordinary criminal tribunal was set up especially to try him and his associates, the first of these courts which were to become a standard instrument of Bonapartist anti-guerrilla ‘legal’ repression. Whether any representation was made on his behalf to Josef remained unknown.