

Mina wreaked a terrible vengeance for his near escape. Believing that Tris and six town officials had betrayed him, he had them shot. Nothing in his actions or in the French correspondence suggested that the Aragonese guerrilla leader had betrayed Mina, or that he was a traitor. A scapegoat, however, he certainly was. But Mina had not finished. With his usual speed and decisivenesss, he ordered all the magistrates of the villages who should have warned him of the French attack to be hanged forthwith. On being informed that the Lecineña parish priest had told a patriot cavalry officer, whose handsome uniform he had mistaken as French, that, according to the local justice, there were a great number of Navarrese dispersos in the region, Mina also ordered the priest and justice shot. Such was Espoz y Mina’s authority, nonetheless, that not only did his own men accept this rough and ready justice, but the members of Tris’s band made no objection to being taken over by Mina and stayed under his command even after their former leader was shot.

*

One guerrilla battle Matías never forgot, for it was his first as a sergeant, was an affair that was typical enough of the sort of ‘battle’ that the guerrillas were frequently engaged in and which would in normal circumstances have barely made a footnote in a history of the war. But Matías related it as though it were a major victory. One June day of 1812, he was ordered by his new commander to go to Huesca (the capital of the Aragonese province of the same name which was in French hands) with four mounted men to see if they could provoke the French garrison – said erroneously to be made up of not more than thirty cavalry – into battle. His commandant believed that twenty of Mina’s cavalry – Matías’ company strength – would be sufficient to deal with them because the Navarrese Division by now felt it could handle greater numbers with ease.

Quite probably Matías was chosen for the mission because he knew Huesca well, the town being only a few hours on foot from his native village, or because he and the men were not yet fitted out in the glamorous Navarrese cavalry uniforms which the latter could now afford, while the Aragonese-based men were still dressed little differently to the villagers. With his four soldiers, Sgt Matías made his way in the dawn through Huesca’s streets, his and his men’s arms hidden under their capes, while he thought of some student prank from his tavern days in Zaragoza to set matters alight.

‘We reached the market at last and there we shot dead a gabacho [the common Spanish name for a Frenchman]32 who was just leaving a meat stall. The rest of the French troops in the market ran for their fort.’ Quite cold-bloodedly, the guerrilleros celebrated the death with some glasses of spirits in the market liquor shop. Then they left at a canter.

At about the time that Matías had set out on his mission, the guerrilla leader Joaquín de Pablo, ‘Chapalangara’, set out for Huesca with two companies of his Aragonese infantry guerrilla and forty horse. The infantry took up an ambush position around the Huesca gates. From beyond the city walls Matías and his guerrilleros allowed themselves to be seen, and soon a French gendarme cavalry squadron sallied forth. Specially trained to maintain (French) civilian order and put down bandits in rural zones, the gendarmes could see that they were outnumbered by the two hundred infantry. ‘When we reached our rendez-vous with our chief he asked me: “How many are there?” and I replied, “quite a few”, without giving him any more details. I would have been taken as a coward to have said more; in that division you had to be cautious.’ As he was admiring the ‘gendarmes’ high-spirited looks’, Matías saw that there were not thirty but nearly eighty horsemen. Chapalangara’s infantry advanced on the enemy, while the guerrilla cavalry was ordered to take up position behind the French to cut off their retreat into the town. On seeing the number of infantry ahead of them the enemy wheeled about to retire on Huesca, only to encounter the guerrilla horse. The infantry continued forward …