

Soldiers, he knew, spent their pay almost as soon as they received it. As a result, he effectively paid them every five days: the rapid turnover of money helped to keep the Aragonese economy afloat, while simultaneously discouraging the troops – many of whom in other armies were not paid for months – from acts of violence against the population. The main question then was money. But he was also prepared to take drastic retributive measures: to burn to the ground or deport the entire population of a village if it did not contribute its taxes or bring in the harvest or where his soldiers were shot. Suchet also believed that he had to attract the Aragonese with positive policies, and he did so by leaving much of the local administration, especially tax collection, to the old authorities and rewarded them with a greater share of responsibility in disposing of the region’s resources.

I was convinced that as I could not cover the whole country with my troops, it was in the army’s interest to concern the people in preserving the national product by giving them one quarter of the region’s income … the people had no interest whatsoever in allowing themselves to be stripped of it by the brigands …58

He raised six companies of fusileros – the pre-war volunteer anti-brigand militia – paid for by an extra tax, praising the Aragonese as courageous fighters and, in one of his most popular measures, ordered that the army’s stores be opened to those communities whose crops had been ruined.

The people know at last the protective power that is being offered to them, they rise against the ‘brigands’ … the farmers have sown their fields everywhere, the land is being cultivated, even industry is showing some progress.59

Suchet relied also on the mobile column, often made up of squadrons of gendarmerie, trained to patrol and control the French countryside, as the major link between his strongholds, which were often no more than fortified convents or friaries. But he attempted to improve their performance on the ground which had often to replicate the guerrillas’.

From Paris, Napoleon could not himself handle the small detail of an anti-insurgency war when matters of greater moment occupied most of his thinking. This was evident from the degree of insubordination which he tolerated – unknowingly in many cases – from his generals in Spain. Quite possibly, had he taken personal command of the counter-insurgency campaign, ensuring sufficient troops and making provincial generals cooperate at regional levels he might have succeeded in putting paid to the majority of the northern guerrillas. But this required a strategic decision which for reasons of international affairs (his marriage to Marie Thérèse of Austria, his plans for invading Russia) he was unable or unwilling to take. Compared to these, Spain was a secondary affair.

Many of the Emperor’s commanders were more concerned with holding to ransom rather than executing any patriot they believed could raise the money to pay. To make ready cash was more important to them than shooting patriots which brought them no returns other than to create more martyrs and to reinforce the enemy cause. Napoleon was also faced with a military problem that put the counter-insurgency’s priority in question. Who was the main enemy? There could be no doubt that the Anglo-Portuguese army was the greatest of the three threats which confronted his domination of Spain: however much of a nuisance, the guerrillas could not and would not win the war on their own. The renewed Spanish army and the guerrillas together were a force to be taken into account, but one that was hardly likely to threaten the withdrawal of the imperial forces from the country. The Anglo-Portuguese army, on the other hand, was capable of winning battles which could threaten imperial dominance. And if the latter were joined by the Spanish army and guerrillas the threat would be seriously increased. Despite the failure of Masséna’s campaign, in 1810–1811, to throw the British into the sea, the Anglo-Portuguese army was blocked in Portugual until early 1812 by the French capture of the major fortress towns along the Spanish border; as a result the French were left a choice of isolating and defeating one or other of the Spanish forces as the first step in defence of the country. By 1812, some of Napoleon’s generals were advocating that the guerrilla was the major enemy to be destroyed.60