

But the nub of the problem lay in Napoleon’s politico-military strategy towards Spain. He envisaged it as a wealthy colony to be exploited for his larger ambitions and overlooked the country’s actual conditions. He never provided a viable counter-insurgency policy. This error resulted in helping to keep the guerrilla alive. In the first place, his refusal to appoint a commander-in-chief to plan and coordinate on a national scale the counterinsurgency (and the anti-British struggle) was a prime mistake. He believed that he could control the war from Paris through a series of provincial commanders, many of them principally concerned with their own parcel of territorial power and frequently in dispute with one another. The result was the extreme difficulty of mounting a unified, consistent and simultaneous counter-insurgency campaign over several provinces or entire regions, a difficulty increased by the Emperor’s observance of artificial provincial boundaries as the limits of territorial military commands. In consequence, the guerrillas could usually find secure refuges along provincial or regional borders where none of the provinces’ French commanders, knowing that the effort was useless since the guerrillas would simply move into the neighbouring province, was prepared seriously to campaign. The mistake was compounded by dividing power within the political regime Napoleon had created to replace the old Bourbon monarchy by his segregation of the Spanish provinces north of the Ebro from his brother’s kingdom to that of his own in Paris. Not only did this arouse popular resistance in the affected regions at the possibility of their being formally incorporated into France, but added yet more generals in politico-military command of provinces.

Yet another of Napoleon’s errors was to believe that if Spanish resistance to Bonapartist domination of Spain had been irreducible since 1808, only military force could subdue it. And while in general the assumption of Spanish resistance was correct, Napoleon made no attempt to formulate alternative policies which would give the population good reasons not to support the guerrilla. Military pacification and taxation, repression and requisition, were the only nostrums on offer.

The counter-insurgency had to fight without better weapons or communications than the enemy. Artillery and cavalry were of little use, in fact were often counter-productive in the rough terrain where most of the operations took place. Therefore the French had either to deploy highly superior numbers or highly-trained troops if they were to defeat the guerrillas. Every time they detached large numbers to the counter-insurgency campaign they obliged the insurgents to disperse; but even with an occupying force of three hundred thousand men divided into distinct provincial commands, it was not often that they were able to assemble sufficient troops for a sufficiently long campaign – a campaign which had indeed to be virtually constant – to maintain their enemy’s dispersal. And as they moved troops from one region to another the guerrilla filled the vacuum they had left.