

Indeed Napoleon agreed with them. He had no wish to see the guerrillas cross the Pyrenees while he was campaigning in Russia. The Army of the Ebro, which he created with the express purpose of ‘pursuing the guerrillas to extinction’, was particularly aimed at eliminating the border raids from Cataluña which he had just annexed. This new army of thirty-six thousand men he placed under the command of General Reille, a veteran counter-insurgent general. The armies of the North, Cataluña and Valencia were ordered to help – another sixty-four thousand troops on paper. One hundred thousand soldiers in all, the largest single army the French had tried to put together in Spain. Apart from these men, Napoleon planned that an additional division of conscripts and national guardsmen protect the French frontier from the irregulars’ raids. The most significant change in Napoleon’s thinking was that the new army should not be restricted by provincial boundaries and was to cover natural geographical areas of operation.

As usual Napoleon expected Reille to break the guerrillas’ back in one swift campaign, following his own plan which tried always to crush the enemy with a single blow, and ordered Reille to coordinate closely with General Decaen in Cataluña. But instead of helping Reille, Suchet, the Aragón army commander who had just scored an outstanding victory in taking Valencia, and Decaen began to dismember the Ebro army. Suchet, who had won his marshal’s baton after his victorious siege of Tarragona, ordered Reille to send two regiments to replace the Polish regiments which he had had to send on the Russian campaign; while Decaen took two other regiments from lower Cataluña. Before he even started, Reille lost one quarter of his army which was reduced to twenty-two thousand men.

Napoleon always underestimated the guerrilla’s staying power. 1812 was a famine year and Reille’s troops could not secure sufficient supplies in any one zone for more than a few days; where they could not eat they could not fight, and Reille’s sweeps grew ever more limited; his incessant movements to feed even his reduced army made it impossible to crush the guerrillas along the Ebro. Suchet again intervened, ordering Reille to protect only his own territorial base, Aragón. By the beginning of May,

Reille had only fourteen thousand men left. On May 6, 1812, the army was wound up after four months of operations, having lost two thousand five hundred men.

### REPRESSION: THE EXTRAORDINARY
CRIMINAL TRIBUNALS

Article II
Assassins, thieves, the armed rebellious, the seditious, rumour-mongers, spies, recruiters for the insurgents [patriots] and those who are in communication with them, or those who are found with daggers and sharp-edged weapons upon them, if convicted will be hanged irremissibly within twenty-four hours and without the right of appeal. (Bonapartist decree creating a new court, the Extraordinary Criminal Tribunal, Madrid, February 16, 1809).61

The courts which the Bonapartist regime considered essential to control the incipient guerrilla movement at the beginning of 1809 tried over two thousand accused during their three years of existence (one year less in Andalucía which was taken in 1810). Of these close on four hundred received the death sentence. The unremitting nature of the repression was demonstrated by the fact that, with the exception of 1809 when the extraordinary tribunals were created piecemeal in different provincial capitals and sixty-one prisoners were sentenced to death, in 1810 and 1811 the figures were over one hundred annually. A diarist in Valladolid carefully, if laconically in the style of the times, recorded the executions for the latter year.