

Napoleon believed that a single campaign would eliminate the guerrillas. He was projecting state war against popular war. Powerful but brief sweeps never suppressed the insurgents for long: they disappeared in small, dispersed companies. He was convinced, on the basis of the Vendée, that mobile columns were the military answer, and in this instance his generals followed his orders. Napoleon was hostile to static garrison troops, and was constantly ordering regiments to be moved from one command to another just when the troops had become familiar with the terrain in which they had to fight. The result was to slow down the counter-insurgency: commanders delayed in dispatching their best troops to another, usually rival, general, and often did not fill their ordered quota of men, leaving the other command even more under strength than before the change was ordered.

Though Napoleon took the ‘brigand’ threat seriously enough, especially when they raided French territory, he never came to believe in the guerrillas’ fighting capabilities, and his counter-insurgency was manned mainly by inexperienced conscripts who were the most likely to be terrorized by the guerrilla tactics of surprise attack, ambushes and hand-to-hand fighting. Moreover, the conscripts heard enough stories of the guerrillas’ brutality to live in mortal fear of their enemy, and were easily demoralized by the constant losses – small detachments of their regimental companies, including individual companion conscripts – who were suddenly missing after a minor military operation to collect taxes or requisitions of food. The counter-insurgency required troops already hardened to living in a hostile environment and trained to accept that their own lives were under constant threat from even the most innocent-looking villager.

### EPISODES: REVENGE

Francesc Torné i Montserrat, a twelve-year-old Catalan veil-weaver, was returning one day to his home in Reus from a visit to a nearby mill where he had gone to see if his father’s flour was ready when he was stopped by a French patrol. They asked him where he was coming from, but as he did not speak French he neither understood the question nor was able to answer. Believing that he was a ‘mountain brigand’, they immediately ordered him to kneel on the ground and readied their arms to shoot him. Luckily for the lad, the French sergeant in command, seeing that he was only young, put an end to the matter and told Francesc to get up. ‘Allons’, he said, gesturing to him to get on his way home.

A few nights later he had his revenge for the great fear he had experienced. The two imperial soldiers billeted in his house were in a drunken stupour in bed, dead to the world. Francesc and some companions grabbed first one and then the other, carried them outside and threw them down the well. Then they filled a great sack with earth and rocks and threw it in after them. Shortly, some of the soldiers’ companions arrived, asking for them. Francesc said they had recently left, but he did not know where. The following evening the companions returned saying the two soldiers had not been seen all day, gathered up their arms and equipment and left.