

This guerrilla military ascendancy raised an important but seldom addressed question. Why did this plebeian armed force not act on the political situation of the moment? Could, for example, the patriot Cádiz Cortes’ decision of August 6, 1811, to abolish only the jurisdictional aspects of the señorial system on the land, satisfy these village guerrilleros? In effect, the Cortes had proposed no profound social change in the señorial agrarian world other than to deprive the señores of the right to appoint magistrates and municipal councillors and to collect certain dues and tributes which pertained to their lordships’ rights. For the rest, the same señores would now own the land over which they had exercised feudal privileges if their legal rights to ownership could be sustained.

The Cortes debates had given a fair indication of the lack of any substantial reforms to be made to the basic structure of land ownership, and it was clear that the villager did not stand to gain much – indeed, as will be seen, stood rather to lose a great deal – from other legislation which was to ‘liberalize’ the rural world by opening it to market forces. The August 6, 1811 legislation might alone have been thought sufficient to generate protest among the village guerrilleros and ensure that they used their military strength to attempt to amend, reform or radically change it and to put in its place a land reform act.

But the guerrilleros made no move to cash in their armed force for political power; indeed, there was little evidence from the 1810 elections to the Cortes in the occupied zones – when the guerrilla strength was, of course, considerably less than two years later – that they made much effort to ensure that some of their own number were elected.* For all their leadership and organizational skills, most of them would have agreed, sincerely or ironically, with El Empecinado: ‘I am an ignorant fellow; I am sorry that God did not give me more talent, or fortune more learning, but I am not to blame.’53 In other words, national heroes they might be, but the ability to represent the nation in debating its future was not part of their self-conceived mental attributes. Apart from self-depreciatory jibes, there were objective conditions which explained, though not necessarily in order of priority, the guerrilla absence from the political scene.

News from the constitutent Cortes might take a month or more to reach Navarra which was about as far from Cádiz as it was possible to get by land in Spain. For many months at the start of his guerrilla leadership, Mina had had virtually no contact with Cádiz at all, and though the government came to admire and reward his military exploits, it never seemed to overcome a certain suspicion, fuelled by the Navarrese refugee elite, of the ‘governmental’ measures he took to achieve his ends: his take-over of Navarrese customs posts, which yielded his guerrilla several million reales a year, was a case in point.

But as Mina acerbically pointed out,