

The majority of those judged and sentenced to death by the extraordinary criminal tribunals in Spain were not, however, guerrilleros. The Bonapartist regime – like the French army – did not distinquish between ‘bandits’ and ‘guerrillas’. For both they were one and the same. In consequence, it was often highly difficult to differentiate – in the brief descriptions of their crimes afforded by the summary of their cases – whether indeed these were highwaymen or guerrillas. They were tried for armed hold-ups: but whether their ultimate purpose was to steal their victims’ money or to use it to further the patriot struggle was usually left in doubt (indeed, there were parties for whom the difference was of little import). Considering therefore only those who were officially identified as such, approximately twenty-five percent of those condemned to death were indisputably guerrilleros.*

Only in 1812, when the French were in obvious danger and had abandoned Andalucía did total death sentences drop back to fifty-nine, close to their starting point. Over and above the tribunals, the French military held their own courts martial which sent to their deaths an unspecified number of real or suspected guerrilleros. Usually, Bonapartist and French military respected their rough codes of justice; but occasionally the latter resorted to the barbarities of which they accused the ‘brigands’: the minor Aragonese guerrilla chieftain, ‘Pesoduro’ was tortured, and his hands – cut off while he was still alive – were publicly nailed up; on the scaffold the rope broke several times before he was finally hanged.65

The courts’ magistrates, prosecutors and staff were exclusively Spanish – drawn from the legal profession and frequently from criminal courts, including, in Andalucía especially, those tribunals which the patriots had set up to try people accused of supporting or materially aiding the Bonapartist regime.† The latter were established in most patriot-held provincial capitals, and although they did not publish figures of their executions and sentences it was certain that they did not condemn to death anything like the number sentenced by the Bonapartist extraordinary tribunals.

The guerrillas took their revenge on the tribunals’ justices by seizing them – often as they made their way to take up their posts. Thus the presidents and judges of both the Ciudad Real and Málaga tribunals were captured before they could reach their destination to set up their court. Three hundred guerrilleros, most of them on horseback, attacked Valdepeñas in La Mancha in May 1810, and took the Ciudad Real justices prisoner, sending them under guard, the Bonapartist local authorities supposed, to Valencia. Two years later El Empecinado captured the prosecutor and a judge of the Cuenca tribunal.

Guerrillas also seized a Madrid tribunal judge who was taken to Cádiz where he was publicly hanged by the patriot government; and the secretary of the Bilbao court was sequestered. A good measure of the tribunals’ unpopularity was the difficulty some had in finding executioners to carry out the death sentences. Ciudad Real and Guadalajara complained that they could find none and Jaén informed the justice ministry that the local executioner would accept no less than three thousand three hundred reales a year with certain perquisites which he claimed went with the job.