

This, and the following incident, were stories told many years later to his son, who wrote them down.56 Like most family stories they were almost certainly much embroidered in the telling, or even outright fabulations. But they revealed, if not ‘the truth’ in this particular case, a more general truth by no means confined to Cataluña: an enemy aggressor created a popular resistance in its homelands ready to resort to individual acts of great violence against a hated invader. Francesc was again returning home at nightfall from the countryside with some landworking friends when they heard a noise behind them. They turned and saw five French soldiers carrying vegetables and fruit they had stolen. Allowing them to catch up by the aptly named Devil’s Reservoir, Francesc gave a signal, his friends dropped their own baskets, and attacked the soldiers with their mattocks, wounding three, two of whom fell to the ground. The other, with his face badly injured, fled with the two unhurt soldiers towards Reus. Francesc and his friends threw the remaining two into the reservoir and then fled themselves, entering the town from another direction as though nothing had happened. A French patrol was ordered out to catch them; but all it found was two corpses floating on the water …

*

To return to the broader theme of counter-insurgency, Suchet, arguably Napoleon’s most successful commander in Spain, observed that this sort of war required battle-trained soldiers used to fighting in small units, lightly equipped and rapid, acting by surprise and led by experienced officers who were both audacious and prudent: ‘These are men who are almost always out on missions; and they have to be able to bear the most painful marches and the harshest conditions …’57

In Suchet’s view, the mobile columns replicated the guerrillas’ own tactic of sweeping over the countryside when what was needed, he believed, was to occupy it; and he garrisoned as many strongpoints in his territory as his military strength, which was rarely overwhelming, allowed, and kept the same troops in the same towns for as long as possible. This had a dual objective: his soldiers not only knew their combat terrain but could fraternize with the local population, helping to reduce conflictive situations and extend the flow of intelligence on guerrilla movements. This tactic was not totally successful either, but on several occasions his garrisons held out long enough to pin down guerrilla forces or expose them to counter-attack from relief columns.

He realized early on that to win the guerrilla war he had to win over the population. Aware that looting, thieving and violence were inevitably brutal forms of alienating villagers, he kept his troops on a very short leash to prevent them pillaging. Above all, he knew that he could not pacify Aragón, create a civil administration, pay and feed his troops while great numbers of dispersed soldiers from his two victories over the patriot armies near Zaragoza in 1809 swarmed in the countryside. He made the guerrillas his main target of attack.