

Jan 1, 1811. ‘El Galleguillo’ was brought in a prisoner this morning. At four in the afternoon, more or less, he was shot …
Jan 9. Five men, one of them a surgeon’s son, were publicly garrotted in the Campo Grande …
May 23. A soldier, said to be an escaped English prisoner and a spy, was executed by a firing squad in the Campo Grande …
July 30. Three men, one of them the son of a local inhabitant, commonly known as Fantasías, were garrotted in the main square. Another was a lathe worker …
August 2. A priest, chaplain to Saornil’s party, and taken prisoner, was garrotted in the main square …
Sept 22. A German, said to have deserted and joined a guerrilla, was executed by a firing squad …
Dec 8. Early in the morning ‘Chagarito’ and two accomplices who had been captured by the French the previous night were brought in. Chagarito revealed the names of this city’s inhabitants and those of other places who, through force or out of fear, had supplied or helped him. The other two were honourable and gave no names. Chagarito thought his revelations would save his life. The extraordinary tribunal was fair and acquitted all those he had informed against. Chagarito and the other two were sentenced to death and garrotted in the main square on Dec 24. Chagarito’s corpse was quartered and the pieces stuck up on the country paths into the city.62

These were but some of the thirty public executions in the Castilian capital in a single year – though only half of them were known guerrilleros; and the eleven who were executed by firing squad had certainly been sentenced by French drumhead courts martial, since the extraordinary tribunal condemned its victims to the garrotte. In Jerez de la Frontera, where before 1810, eight years could pass without an execution and the average was one a year, the extraordinary tribunal condemned forty-four men to death in thirty months.63 Overall, Madrid was the bloodiest. It sentenced to capital punishment one hundred accused for various activities, including resistance, in its four years of existence; 1809 was the harshest year. The Valladolid tribunal came next in severity with seventy-one, more than half of them in 1810.

The extraordinary tribunals had two quite distinct origins, one Basque, one French. In 1799, the Basque elite had become so concerned by the increase in rural criminality in its country that it had approved a special law to judge and execute bandits and thieves which gave the prosecution thirty days to prove guilt and thereafter no appeal, complaint or other recourse was admitted before the death sentence was applied to all those above the age of sixteen. Soon after the beginning of the war this special law was resuscitated to try the first Basque guerrilla captured.*64 The exceptional increase in highwaymen, brigands and the like which the war spawned was also used to justify bringing back the 1799 law.

The second source stemmed from French Republican and Royalist plots against Napoleon in 1803. The future Emperor had thereupon set up special summary criminal tribunals in France to try traitors and assassins, armed robbers, arsonists, vagabonds and re-offenders. These tribunals’ sentences were carried out immediately and without the possibility of appeal.