

no titled noble, no owner of an entailed estate or man of property, no renowned name came forward to raise the banner of resistance … around which all the youth who desired could rally … So what could be expected of men like us who for the greater part knew only how to handle a spade, a mattock and pruning shears, and whose only commercial experience was of selling the harvests our small plots produced?54

For a long time Mina’s main contact with patriot Spain was through Valencia, arguably the most manifestly anti-señorial region of Spain. But Navarra was not señorial Valencia: except in the southern plains, some seventy percent of Navarrese villagers owned the land they worked, and ‘use-owners’ made up most of the rest, even the relatively small proportion of señoríos being rented out on inheritable leases.55 In Valencia, on the other hand, the señores derived at least half their income from dues and tributes.

This difference which, with the exception of Galicia, was true of most of the north and northeast, explained why the large guerrillas did not become directly involved in the agrarian questions being debated in Cádiz. Another factor also held them back. The guerrillas appeared as the patriot army disappeared as a fighting force. But this did not mean that institutionally the Spanish army had disappeared for good as the large guerrillas’ insistence on attempting to militarize their parties demonstrated. Thus, while their leaders and subalterns were being incorporated into the officers’ ranks, it was difficult, if not impossible, for them openly to sustain political positions which their military superiors did not support, let alone to intervene militarily in the Cádiz proceedings.

Finally, of course, the threat of disunion, the difficulties guerrilla leaders experienced (like the military) in cooperating effectively, the possibility of open civil war and the threat of complete surrender to the French would all have weighed heavily on any thought of using guerrilla military power to shape the country’s future. This was not to say that at the local regional level there were not accusations of guerrilla leaders wishing to take or exercise power. Apart from Mina, El Empecinado for example was virtually accused by the Guadalajara junta in 1811 of wanting to make himself the region’s supreme commander and of disobeying its authority. But these were fairly exceptional situations.

### POLITICS

As the above implied, regrettably little was known about the political attitudes of even the better known leaders during the war itself. The most that was likely to emerge was whether they proclaimed the new 1812 ‘liberal’ constitution to their men and had them swear allegiance to it – not an insignificant political fact, for sure, but one that had an obligatory element to it which detracted somewhat from the authenticity of the political sentiments expressed by the act.

It was after the war that the leaders expressed their politics by declaring themselves liberals, monarchists or absolutists, or in other cases trying to weave an uncommitted path between the political options which, with Fernando VII’s abrogation of the 1812 Constitution and the return to absolutism, were now at the forefront of the political divide which the war had opened in Spanish society.