

More than twice as many ex-guerrilleros fought as royalists against the liberals’ restoration of the 1812 constitution during the revolution of 1820–1823 as fought in support of it.* The fact that two well-known guerrilla leaders – El Empecinado and Espoz y Mina – came out for the liberals and a third, Porlier, had a year after the end of the war risen in their cause, may have obscured the historical vision that liberals were a minority in the guerrilla movement at large. Although generalization on an exiguous sample is hazardous, it could be argued that, as the crystallization of popular resistance, the guerrilla represented widespread popular sentiment in which defence of the monarchy without constitutional restrictions instead of the political innovation of national sovereignty, seen as a foreign import, was the keystone. This political option, which included defence of religion, did not, however, exclude the serious reforms expected of Fernando’s restored reign. Undeniably, the rural population, from which a majority of guerrilleros stemmed, wanted an improvement of its lot; but the liberals offered them so little – abolition of jurisdictional lordships without total relief from feudal dues and tithes; a free agrarian market in which the señores became outright landowners and villagers stood little chance of acquiring land – that their political reforms held hardly any popular rural appeal.*

*

Had the Spanish ‘revolution’, so consistently invoked by most sectors of the fragile patriotic alliance of Old Regime supporters and reformists – had this revolution extended to the labouring poor, the military effectiveness of the Spanish anti-Napoleonic war effort would have been deeply reinforced. But the revolution was not a social revolution. Its luck was that the poor were prepared to fight for reasons of their own: to defend their families and lives, their plots and homelands, their customs and traditions, their forefathers’ religion, their monarchy. Their determination was best expressed in the struggles for popular territorial liberation and guerrilla warfare. To this extent, the patriots were fortunate in having their support. But in the long run, as Mina himself said, the war was finally won ‘in the snows of Russia’.

### COUNTER-INSURGENCY

The insurgency’s success was everywhere in direct relation to the counterinsurgency’s insufficiencies. Many of these arose from Napoleon’s failure to confront the basic problems of guerrilla warfare. It was not a new military problem; the Vendée and Calabrian insurrections had been forerunners from which lessons could and had been learned. One of Napoleon’s generals, Suchet, was capable of keeping the guerrillas in Aragón quiet for nearly two years; another, Reille, though less successful in Navarra, kept Mina on the run for nine months and defeated him heavily on two occasions. Why then was French counter-insurgency in general apparently so ineffective?

The first question was whether it was as ineffective as it appeared. Of the guerrillas, whose wartime death was recorded,† one-quarter were killed in action or upon being taken prisoner. This did not say much for the counterinsurgency’s combat effectiveness. But when account was taken of the fact that two-thirds of the guerrillas known to have died were tried and sentenced to death, it would seem that at another level the anti-guerrilla struggle was rather more successful than was usually believed: the level of French intelligence networks must have been high; informants among the population more plentiful, and anti-guerrilla sentiment and collaboration with counter-insurgency measures greater than was generally imagined.