

Despite the pessimism, the British envoy reported at the same time that ‘the large majority of the merchants and of the lower classes of the People [in Cádiz] are determined enemies to the French’. In January 1812, worse came. Suchet, who had won his marshal’s baton at Tarragona, captured Valencia. Napoleon had insisted to Suchet on his particular interest in the city and its region in order principally to use its resources, little impaired by the war, to fund his Russian campaign.36 In the rearguard for the first three years of the war, Valencia had been a hotbed of intrigue. General Romana’s younger brother, José Caro, an ambitious frigate captain, plotted, in temporary alliance with the Bertrán de Lis brothers who wanted to create a more popular junta, to depose the absolutist captain general of the region; Caro aspired to take the latter’s post. The Suprema agreed to Caro’s appointment as military second-in-command, but when it ordered him in 1809 to join General Blake’s army in Aragón, he and the Bertrán brothers contrived a night of popular disturbances to prevent Caro from leaving, and Blake having been defeated twice by Suchet, the Suprema gave in to the threat: anything was better than the populace in the streets unless they were defending their cities from the French. The intrigues were sharpened by Romana, a member of the Valencian aristocracy, who also wanted to become the region’s captain general. Moreover, the possibility that Suchet would advance on Valencia from Aragón added an element of fear to Caro’s urban support and to the genuine popularity he had won among smallholders around the city for lifting certain imposts on their produce; any attempt to make him move from Valencia was seen by the lower orders as a betrayal. But it was he who was shortly to betray their trust. In March, 1810, Suchet, under orders from King Josef, made a halfhearted attempt on Valencia. Shortly before, the captain general of Cataluña, Enrique O’Donnell, had called on Caro to move to the defence of Tortosa which he feared Suchet was about to besiege. Finally Caro was obliged to lead a ten-thousand-strong force from the Levante capital to ward off Suchet. He advanced at a snail’s pace northwards up the coast to occupy a strong position* from which he could threaten Suchet in either direction. But one hundred hussars of the French vanguard put the Valencians to flight and Caro, aware that his aura of power, already undermined, had vanished in defeat, mysteriously vanished himself, disguised as a friar, to resurface in Mallorca.37 The roving British military adviser, Major General Doyle (to give him the rank to which he had been promoted in the Spanish army) had been critical of the Valencian army for over two years. It was under the command of ‘bad’ officers of all ranks, he reported in the autumn of 1810, and the Valencian division’s conduct during the Tarragona siege had been ‘most disgraceful’.38 In Cádiz, Henry Wellesley had been pressing the regency to allow British officers to train Spanish recruits, as they had successfully done in Portugal, but had come to the conclusion that