

Already in January, to the local authorities’ amazement, a young beggar woman found dying in the street could not be admitted to the women’s hospital because there was no room left for even a single patient.9 In March two corpses were discovered in a room in the Santiago neighbourhood; a man who had died of dysentry and a woman, who looked after him, who had got drunk and died.10

Meanwhile the king had donated half of his civil list to acquire wheat at any price, and ordered the government to bring in grain from its own warehouses. Madrid’s large stores had been progressively depleted by the treasury even before Napoleon’s invasion. Special taxes on the country-wide network of grain storehouses – which had originated in the middle-ages and had been much expanded in the eighteenth century – in order to raise money to back the depreciating value of government bonds (the vales reales) had left many of them, including Madrid’s, without the funds to purchase grain. From the beginning of the war, what remained of the stocks had been mainly used to feed troops. In the countryside, government exactions exacerbated the shortage.* In consequence, when the dearth began there were virtually no wheat reserves in the capital on which to call.

Lacking a national market and an adequate road system to move wheat cheaply from areas of surplus to those with grave shortages, pre-war wheat prices had always fluctuated wildly depending on supply. In a bad harvest year they could be four hundred percent higher in the Castilian interior than in good years, although on the coast, where wheat could be imported, the rise might be only fifty percent.11 A sharp increase in the price was therefore to be expected in Madrid where in mid-May 1811 a fanega of wheat was fetching between sixty-six and eighty-eight reales; a year later it was being sold at between 400 and 490.12

At the beginning of March 1812, the Bonapartist secret police reported that

almost every day [we] find poor people dying in the streets. Sickness is increasing daily. Three swollen corpses have been taken from the San Lorenzo prison … There are great numbers of prostitutes plying their trade on the banks of the river [Manzanares].13

Until April the inhabitants’ resignation and patience was remarkable. Bread, which only the wealthiest could afford, was openly carried and sold without protest among a starving people.14 The previous month the government had been forced to recognize that the measures taken so far, which included funding a special commission to provide soup and healthy, plentiful food for the most needy at accessible prices, were inadequate and it doubled its monthly subsidy to one hundred thousand reales. Private donations were called for and received: but over and above the eleven thousand poor who were helped, three thousand of the subscribers also received the advantages of subsidized foodstuffs. Indeed, by this time even some government judges, whose salaries were always in arrears, were reduced to begging.15