

The number of deaths in the ten months between September 1811 and July 1812 was put at twenty thousand.25 In the light of the secret police number for May 1812, this was exaggerated: it assumed, on the basis of one of the worst months, a similar mortality rate for every month that the famine lasted. But only a parish by parish count, which remains to be carried out, could arrive at a figure closer to the truth. Nonetheless there could be no doubt that in these ten months the Madrid poor suffered their worst period of the war.

*

But it was not only the capital which suffered. Compared to the previous year, deaths soared by as much as eighty-five percent in southwestern Andalucía*, the hardest hit; by nearly sixty percent in Cataluña where, on top of the 1809 decline, population growth fell to its lowest level of the war – indeed, the lowest of the entire period from 1800 to 1817; by fifty percent in Castilla la Nueva and just under the same amount in Extremadura, and by one-third in Castilla la Vieja; only the northwestern regions were spared the famine’s worst rigours.†

The havoc of war heightened the effects of the poor 1811 harvest. Had the country not had to support the French army – or rather, had the latter not requisitioned all the grain its commanders could lay their hands on – 1812 would have been a year of scarcity and hunger, but not of famine. As it was, the general death rate hid important local differences: villagers and townsfolk in Tarragona province, for example, suffered only about one-third of the overall Catalan increase. Three places only a few kilometres apart in La Sagra, the grain-growing Toledan plain southwest of Madrid, bore out these disparities at the micro level: in the village of Lominchar mortality rose in the year by fifty percent, just a little over the provincial average; in Esquivas the increase was 170 percent and in Cedillo over three hundred percent. (These two latter figures suggested that epidemics must have killed many inhabitants who were weakened by starvation.)

In some areas, the under-sevens suffered disproportionately. In the city of Sevilla, as in Barcelona province, their deaths rose to the highest levels of the war, in the latter case more than doubling the 1800–1817 average. Debilitated by lack of food, the young were even greater prey than normal to the dysentries and other illnesses which the summer almost inevitably brought. The simultaneity of the highest mortality in southwestern Andalucía from April to June and in Cataluña from May to July – just before the new harvest when the previous year’s meagre wheat stocks had been consumed and at the beginning of the summer heat – testified to the plight of the young. But here again their dire straits were not uniform: in Castilla la Nueva generally it was the adults who died – child mortality actually declined by nearly ten percent over the previous year. Parents sacrificed themselves to keep their offspring alive. The three Sagra villages showed once more the differences that existed in one small locality. In Lominchar, the under-seven’s death rate fell by one-third compared to 1811; in Esquivas on the other hand it rose by nearly 150 percent and in Cedillo by sixty percent.