

To alleviate the city’s wheat shortage, the Gaceta de Sevilla reported that fifteen boats had brought wheat – the equivalent of one hundred cartloads – down the river from Córdoba, despite the difficulties of navigating the Guadalquivir. The form of transport saved twenty reales a fanega, the paper claimed.31 As wheat in Córdoba was also in short supply and was selling at 220 to 250 reales the fanega in January 1812, according to the patriot’s Sevilla agent, the policy served little more than robbing Peter to pay Paul. Moreover, the paper warned speculators who hid wheat stocks in the hope of selling them more dearly that French army stores were more than sufficient to feed Sevilla until the coming harvest. Possibly this was no more than propaganda to reassure the inhabitants that everything was being done to keep them from starvation.

But such was the lower classes’ state – ‘a multitude of miserable people whose faces more than their clamours proclaim their horrifying poverty’ – that Marshal Soult ordered cheap soup kitchens to be opened in January 1812. All civilian and military authorities who received a fixed government salary were ordered to subscribe to a charity committee with a minimum of one day’s pay per month. With more foresight than in Madrid, Soult ordered that all civilians with less than five hundred reales a month could not subscribe.32

Earlier, a party of French dragoons who had just arrived in Sevilla from Almendralejo, Extremadura, said that the township was ‘in the greatest misery. They themselves had given the inhabitants half a ration to prevent them perishing from hunger’, the Sevilla patriot agent reported.33

Children were the major victims in Sevilla. Their death rate rose by over eighty percent of the 1800–1817 average while adults’ increased by just over one-third of the average. The under-sevens’ mortality began to increase from the beginning of 1811 before the famine began, due to what the Gaceta of Sevilla called ‘a convulsive cough’.34 The great difference between the adult and child death rate during the famine indicated that it was illness – whether this same one or another – which, added to the debilitating effects of the lack of food, caused the enormous number of children’s deaths in 1811 and 1812.

### MILITARY SUCCESSES AND DEFEATS:
THE FALL OF VALENCIA

The imperial seizure of Tarragona in June 1811 had brought despair and despondency in Cádiz; the South American deputies to the Constituent Cortes were saying all was lost and were ‘planning independence’, the French were receiving money from the Tarragona locals, and grandees with estates in Valencia – now threatened with invasion – were talking badly about the government, Wellesley reported to London. ‘The word treachery was in the mouth of every Catalan’, Colonel E.B.J. Green, the British military agent in Cataluña had informed him. Some three thousand Catalan recruits had instantly deserted from the Spanish army.35 A council of war summoned by the commander-in-chief had decided that the Spanish army should abandon Cataluña.