

Before they did, however, the lower classes continued to enjoy themselves. Theatre takings remained high; in the Maravillas quarter, site of the artillery depot where so much blood had been shed in the uprising on May 2, 1808, the only public dance hall, La Estrella, was always full of soldiers ‘and the freest women of the surrounding neighbourhoods’. Public propriety was somewhat wanting, however, the police commissioner reported.

Modesty and decorum which should be maintained at all public functions are not sufficiently in evidence, and this cannot be remedied because some of those present have drunk a surfeit of wine which results in an excess of kissing and hugging … I have warned the female proprietor …4

Gambling was the other major popular distraction. The government tried to outlaw card games, especially ‘cané’ which was a particular favourite among the Madrid labouring poor. When an out-of-work master carpenter, Juan de Bastiyeta, with five children to provide for was granted permission by the Madrid corregidor to organize a simple game of fortune with sweetmeats as prizes, the latter was immediately reprimanded by the police minister for acting beyond his limits and against royal regulations. Despite their rigorous hostility to the lower classes’ uncontrollable gambling, the Bonapartist authorities nonetheless received a healthy income from the Madrid gaming-house licences they approved. An ‘inveterate vice’, as the Ocaña police commissioner called it, gaming was widespread and one of the ‘greatest evils’ of La Mancha; and in Sevilla, where the regal commissioner, conde de Montarco, tried to put an end to it, his efforts led nowhere because, as he informed the government, the French occupation forces derived too much money from it to allow its prohibition.5

To appease the Madrid lower classes for their increasing hunger, carnival celebrations, which the Bourbon monarchy had banned for over forty years, were permitted by the king in February 1812, and were held in traditional style with three days of masked balls.

Yesterday the people had great entertainment in putting on masks and strolling along the Prado in groups in ingeniously splendid dress, despite the short notice they were given that the celebration was to take place. Last night, a large crowd attended the theatre of the Caños del Peral for the public ball, and the people amused themselves in an orderly fashion … For a moment everyone forgot about the high cost of bread and the other burdens that are tormenting them.6

Indeed, judging by the amounts taken by the Caños theatre on Feb 10th and 11th – nearly thirty-four thousand reales – there was still money available for pleasure.7 But by the end of April so few people were going to the theatre that the other main Madrid stage, the Coliseo del Principe, took in on April 29 only 381 reales. Possibly the program was not sufficiently attractive; but it was more likely that hunger and shortage of money – those who still had cash were having to pay four or five times the pre-famine prices simply to stay alive – had reduced one of the Madrileños’ major attractions.8