

On April 7 and 8, the poor finally lost patience. Several bakeries were asaulted and the government had to call on armed force to subdue the assailants, some forty of whom were detained, before peace was restored.16 The government, whose free market economy principles forbade it to control prices, began to clamp down on the bakers with inspections to ensure that they were not hoarding wheat to raise bread prices. However, more energetic measures were needed. At the beginning of the month, the secret police – all of eight individuals* – informed the government that

sickness continues to devastate the population; the hospitals are overflowing with patients, and the populace is exasperated by hunger and misery. Despite this, the people’s spirit is running high and very seditious conversations are heard, both among the lower orders and decent persons who talk of nothing but enemy victories and their certainty that soon all the countries dominated by the French will be liberated … There was very little wheat in the grain market yesterday …17

Some way had to be found to prevent the capital starving to death and to return its inhabitants to their previous acceptance of the regime. The interior minister, rejecting the idea of mixing wheat with rice, maize, potato or carobs – potatoes were already too dear and carobs in large quantities caused ‘acute colic’ – decided that only an inferior quality of bread, which included a large amount of bran, could be baked. Although there was a degree of social equality of sacrifice to the measure, since this was the sort of bread used to feed ordinary campaigning soldiers and gaol prisoners, the people remained dissatisfied. Believing openly that bakers were making undue profits from the new measure, they demanded that the government fix the price of a standard 2lb loaf.18

Even the new sort of bread did not end starvation. May 1812 was almost certainly the most deadly month. Among the few sources of relief were the long queues at the remaining convent doors for a cupful of watery soup which at least warmed empty stomachs. Enterprising sorbet wafer-makers turned their talent to setting up street stands where they cooked ‘sandwiches’ from grass pea flour and onions which cost a quarter of a real. Although recognizing that these stands were tolerated for the ‘good of the poor’, the secret police wanted them banned because neighbours were suffering from the smoke of the burned oil and fat and the stands could be the source of fire. ‘Public order and salubrity demands that these so-called sandwich stands be prohibited.’19

Though the secret police report did not recall it, a most surprising scene had taken place at one of these stands a few weeks earlier when the people lost patience with their long suffering. A priest bearing the viaticum was on his way to give the last rights to a dying person. In normal times people uncovered their heads in respect, or knelt in the street at the sight of the eucharist. But now indignation and exasperation had reached such a point that, as the priest passed a stand on the corner of the Calle de la Fe, the owners began to throw spoonfuls of dough at passers-by.20 Public order required no repetition of such disgraceful scenes.