

For the second time of his reign, Josef, his court and a mass of followers fled the capital as a result of a battle. Their three-week peregrination, many of the king’s followers on foot, turned into a nightmare of heat, thirst and dust as they crossed the drylands of La Mancha.

In a highly sensible manner, the local Madrid authorities dealt with the sudden change of power by negotiating a pact that there should be no reprisals and a simple handover to a new set of aldermen.53

*

The run of Anglo-Portuguese victories, culminating in the occupation of Madrid, temporary though it turned out to be, brought new spirit to the Spanish popular resistance. The more perspicacious guerrilla leaders understood well that Napoleon’s invasion of Russia could only favour them by reducing the number of imperial troops who could be brought to bear. From the beginning of the year, bands of guerrillas ventured ever closer to Madrid, harassing the capital’s outskirts and making it unsafe for the French to venture much beyond the city’s walls. ‘Much annoyed’, the French increased their guard and night patrols, reported the Madrid patriot confidential agent to Cádiz. 54 The fully uniformed guerrillas advanced to the Puerta de Toledo and to the far side of the river Manzanares where they were plainly visible to the inhabitants; a French colonel who was riding along the river was attacked and barely escaped with his life. The Bonapartist authorities and secret police reported the guerrillas’ attacks on a number of nearby villages.

The famine also had its effect on villagers’ hopes of joining a party where they knew they would be fed. As the capital’s secret police reported on April 3, 1812:

Yesterday, the party of [Luis] Gutíerrez passed through Villaconejos on its way to Colmenar de la Oreja; it was accompanied by a great number of unarmed people who had left their homes to seek food, and they begged to be allowed to join this bandit’s party.55

### WELLINGTON AND JOSEF

While Wellington in Madrid debated his next move – for, important as the capital’s occupation undoubtedly was, he still had French armies to the north and south of him – Josef in Valencia had no doubt that either Suchet’s or Soult’s armies must reinforce central Spain if he were to defend his kingdom. His choice fell on Soult’s army of over seventy thousand troops, and the French marshal was ordered to evacuate Andalucía. Reluctantly, Soult agreed, and in August the great pull-out began, accompanied by a huge baggage train of looted treasure. The siege of Cádiz which had lasted thirty months was lifted; at the beginnning of October Soult joined Josef and Suchet in Valencia.

Wellington decided to advance north, leaving a sizeable force in Madrid to protect his rear from Suchet and Soult. He intended to crush the French army which he had so decisively defeated at Salamanca. But instead of offering battle the French withdrew north of Burgos, leaving Wellington to face the city’s ancient fortifications, strengthened to a degree by the French, and an imperial garrison of two thousand. Though lacking a proper siege train, he decided to invest Burgos instead of finding his way round it and driving against the main enemy army. His siege wasted a month and failed. Meanwhile, the French had been reinforced by contingents from the Army of the North, which was mainly occupied holding the guerrillas at bay, and Josef and Soult were advancing on Madrid: separately, Wellington and his rearguard in the capital were each outnumbered. In late October, both began their retreat on Salamanca where they joined forces. There, however, the French outflanked Wellington, forcing him to abandon Salamanca and continue his retreat to the Portuguese border with an army now as ill-disciplined, demoralized and disorderly as Moore’s on his retreat in 1808. After nine months of campaigning in Spain, the allied offensive ended back where it had started, having gained only two strategic advantages: the Anglo-Portuguese army was no longer locked into Portugal by the French hold on the Spanish fortified border towns; and Andalucía had been freed of occupation. But in a year when Napoleon was bogged down in Russia, and could not reinforce his armies in Spain, Wellington’s opportunity of dismembering the French armies and advancing to the Ebro, if no further, was foiled by a city of old walls and a couple of thousand troops within.