

While the constitution gave equal rights to Spaniards and colonials, who now formed ‘a single monarchy, one and the same nation, one sole family’, it did not grant the full political rights of ‘Spanish citizenry’ to people who did not originate within the territorial limits of this ‘single nation’, that was to say slaves or even freed men of African origin. Despite Agustín de Argüelles’ passionate arguments in favour of abolishing the ‘infamous traffic’ of slavery, the Cortes rejected the proposal as it later again did an abolitionist motion put by Isidoro Antillón. It accepted rather the liberal Peruvian deputy Mexia’s argument that immediately to free ‘an immense multitude of slaves, apart from ruining their owners, could result in disagreeable consequences for the State’.57 Liberal liberty thus went so far and no further.*

*

Although the constitution proclaimed Roman Catholicism to be the nation’s exclusive religion which would be protected by ‘wise and just laws’ and the practice of any other religion prohibited – the liberals expressed no desire for religious freedom – it was the question of religion, and the Inquisition in particular, which dominated the remainder of the Cortes’ life. And not only of the Cortes, but of much of the country at large.

‘What news of Cádiz?’ became a common salutation among many villagers and townsfolk. As the Cortes debates turned to religion, and parish priests’ sermons to politics, so popular argument grew in intensity. Worst of all, as the vicar of Ciudad Real observed, was the temerity and lack of responsibility with which people expressed their views despite their lack of information …

Although we do not know definitely what is going on in Cádiz, neither do those at the helm of government have any idea of what is happening in the provinces. One needs a great amount of kindness and prudence to live now in these villages, where public writers’ and journalists’ views on everything are confused with those of the government … [The people] do not think, they only know how to obey because that is the only education they have received … To give them freedom is to lead them to anarchy … The tribunes of Cádiz are so divorced from reality that they will end up as victims of their own ideas … When the people begin to hear and see what they have not seen or understood, the results will not be good.58

The vicar had a point: the liberals never envisaged seeking the nation’s subsequent approval of their constitution. They acted as absolutely as an absolute monarch, imposing their constitution and conflating self-claimed national sovereignty with the national will. As great a leap forward in its creation of a constitutional monarchy as it undoubtedly was, the constitution was a partisan construct which did not seriously attempt to create a framework in which non-liberals could create political channels to the state.

This became clear when the absolutist Bishop of Orense announced that he would swear loyalty to the constitution only on condition that his right was respected to demand revisions at a later date of a number of aspects he found objectionable. The Cortes responded in fulminating style, declaring him unworthy of the name of Spaniard, and ordered his immediate expulsion from Spain. The assembly then approved a motion that it would mete out the same punishment to anyone who refused to swear unreserved loyalty to the constitution. From his Portuguese exile, the bishop retorted that to impose the constitution on the people without their sanction was to make slaves of free men. For the constitution to be valid, he subsequently argued, it must be ratified by newly elected deputies and approved by the king – or ‘is he no longer king?’59