

In Tortosa, where their stay was prolonged by snow in the interior, the food shortages were so acute that after a few days their rations were cut back; but ‘against all obstacles’ the French column commander managed to get them restored.

Our pious commandant not only allowed some of us from all the orders to go into the city to seek the charity that the humane inhabitants were prodigal in offering, but permitted groups of four friars at a time, accompanied by a guard, to go out for walks and to buy everything we needed.

Friar Benavent sallied out into the somewhat ‘lugubrious’ town a number of times: in best enlightened form, he set about measuring the width of the Ebro – its flow, which he also wanted to calculate, was impossible because the current was too great – the length of the bridge spanning it and the number of ships in the port.

Five friars were freed in Tortosa; two others died a natural death and one was killed when he fell from a roof where he had climbed in order to rid himself of the fleas and lice ‘as indeed we all did’. But the French commandant and the regiment guarding them was relieved. On February 17, the column set out again with the addition of sixty prisoners of war, including some officers; the marches were longer now, up to seven hours or more a day, until they reached Zaragoza five days later. There they were allowed a day’s rest before setting out for France.

However, before they had marched two days, an Aragonese guerrilla party was sighted. The new commandant gave the order immediately to lighten the carts and all the prisoners on foot and their escort began with the utmost speed to retrace their steps to Zaragoza. By the time they reached the Aragonese capital, Benavent had fallen ill with fever and was taken to the military hospital ‘where the worst misery was the flea-ridden beds’. On March 14, the French military governor informed him that Suchet had granted his freedom. But he still had to convalesce in a private house before he could set out on his return to Valencia. Meanwhile, he again began describing and measuring the outstanding Zaragozan monuments and recording the city’s major aspects.

Once recovered, Benavent, in the company of three other friars from Jaca, in Aragón, started out from Zaragoza on foot. As they passed through a number of villages not far distant from the city, their eyes fell on cemetery walls where the back bones, ribs and shinbones of those executed by the French were still plainly visible. Finally, some days later, brother Benavent reached Valencia.

### NAPOLEON’S SECOND BOMBSHELL

Although unaware of the victory, on the day Valencia fell Napoleon decided on Cataluña’s de facto annexation to the French empire.* It was a decision long foreseen and feared: by Catalans who would now be subject to imperial conscription, and by Josef’s Spain which saw his kingdom further dismembered. However, since the early days of the war, the Bonapartist regime had had virtually no contact with Cataluña which, in its northeastern corner of Spain bordering on France fell more easily into the Paris than Madrid orbit. The Emperor’s motives for this move, which he had been planning for two years, were mixed. On the eve of his Russian campaign, he wanted to protect his southern flank from invasion by an Anglo-Catalan force by extending France’s frontier to the Ebro. And, as in Valencia, he needed all the resources he could wring out of Cataluña by placing it firmly under centralized French control. Indeed, the latter process had been continuing apace for some time with high French treasury officials imposing the Napoleonic tax system, and finally the appointment of a senior French official as secretary general of the Bonapartist Catalan government. Administratively then Cataluña had been run by French officialdom for some two years before the annexation decree which took the process a step further. The region was to be divided into a northern and southern area at about the level of Barcelona, and subdivided into four departments, as head of which Napoleon appointed two French intendants of state and four French prefects. Sub-prefects and director generals of the various services were also French. What the change in effect meant was that Napoleon replaced by a civil regime the previous military government responsible to him since his first bombshell of Feburary 1810 segregating the provinces north of the Ebro.43