

Brother Benavent was one of the friars who had tried to prevent the Valencian populace’s massacre of the French in the Ciudadela in 1808. For his efforts, he had been forcibly ejected from the fortress by the smallholder supporters of Canon Calvo, the ultramontane cleric, whose hostility to the ruling junta led him to encourage – or at least religiously endorse – the mass assasination.*

At three o’clock on the afternoon of the 16th, the prisoners reached Sagunto, north of Valencia, to be enclosed in a ruined church full of manure where they were given some raw meat and soldiers’ bread but no means of cooking. They slept as they could among the ruins; in the morning they were ordered to fall in:

They checked each one of our names against their lists of the four hundred and seventy-one of us. Then they called out Brothers Pedro Pascual Rubert, the head of the Capuchins, Gabriel Pichó, master of noviciates, and the Dominicans Faustino Igual and Vicente Bonet. These they executed by the river bank, while they read out to us the marshal’s [Suchet’s] orders on prelates.†

The column then took to the road again. Some of the friars were barefooted. When they reached the village of Nules in the afternoon they were confined in a friary’s church which the French military had turned into a barn. The local town hall provided them with great pots of excellent haricot beans, and pitchers of water and they were able to eat and drink properly for the first time on the march. The next day as they passed through the village of Villareal on their way to Castellón they were much moved by the fact that the villagers had all locked their doors, but from their balconies and windows they dropped loaves of bread, raisins, figs, oranges, sausages and even money. ‘Some of the friars collected as much as eleven pesetas and others filled their cloaks with food.’ That evening at sunset in Castellón two Dominicans, who were accused of trying to escape, were taken out and shot.

After roll-call the following morning, with drums beating at the head of the column, grenadiers marching next and another squad following up at the rear, the fusileros in two files along either side of them, the friars set off again.

We and the carts carrying the old and infirm were in the middle … But the French commandant’s pity on us had gone so far as to increase the number of carts, so that one hundred and forty of the weakest could ride …

At their various halts, the local town halls, priests and women provided them with food, wine and water to wash. ‘The women especially went to great pains, making hot chocolate to comfort us … The commandant and his officers equally displayed great humanity by allowing us all the consolation and comfort that we were offered.’ In Ulldecona, just within Cataluña, the women brought bread, wine and pots of cooked rice, ‘although the majority of the inhabitants did not have bread for their supper; but they gave us so much that we had more than enough for our needs: in truth, the people’s charity was exceedingly great.’