

Orgasms were a traditional part of popular exorcisms carried out on village women at the time by expert female exorcists at a famous sanctuary at Zorita, in Castellón: ‘these exorcists knew the purely physiological effect that orgasms produced, and they took advantage of the subsequent soothing lassitude to calm the possessed’.72 Sexual desire had formed a large part of two of the most famous exorcism cases in the seventeenth century: the nuns’ possession in the Madrid convent of San Plácido in 1628 which brother Francisco had tried to exorcize with kisses and caresses, and the possessions which had taken place in the Aragonese valley villages of Tena between 1637 and 1642. According to the inquisitor who had investigated the latter, they were caused ‘by an illness resulting from refusing to satisfy the sexual desires of one Pedro Arruebo’.73

As the number of exorcisms demanded of him by the Tosos possessed increased, the parish priest felt it incumbent on him to inform his religious superiors in the Zaragoza archdiocese of the events. The answer was not long in coming and was somewhat surprising to the uninitiated. The exorcisms were to stop forthwith and the possessed – ‘troublemakers’, the auxiliary bishop called them – were to be punished. Their fathers and husbands were to keep them busy working, and not allow them a moment of leisure; they were to be bathed in cold water … ‘If they don’t mend their ways at home, they must be shut into their room or punished in some other manner. If in church or in the streets, the justices must gaol them …’ Their signs of being possessed ‘are highly equivocal and could well be due to natural causes’ or hysteria, an illness whose distinct symptoms were at the time beginning to be identified.

Here, then, were the alleged witchcraft’s victims being disavowed, threatened with punishment by the highest clerical authority, and the ‘witch’ exonerated. When the priest read out the bishop’s letter to those involved, they and their parents and relatives rioted and the priest fled the village for three months to save his life.

The villagers paid no heed to the clerical authorities. Martínez and her husband appealed to the bishop for protection and he in turn ordered the civil authorities to arrest the ‘possessed’ which they steadfastly refused to do. They explained that to put ‘the popular will’ and the ‘common good’ above all other considerations, meant supporting the possessed in the name of the people against the ‘witch’, Martínez. The villagers’ welfare was more important than one person’s fate. ‘If Joaquina continues with her outrages she will be killed by these mad or possessed women, and the village inhabitants can never be held responsible for failing to prevent what could not be prevented’, the parish priest, the local junta of ‘probity’ – an assembly of the village aldermen – and the justices of the peace wrote jointly to the bishop.74

There was an evident clash here between the enlightened eighteenth-century prelates and the popular religious beliefs of the majority of villagers. Whereas two centuries earlier the Church had been at the forefront of witch-hunting, the Enlightment of the last quarter of the eighteenth century had come to consider witchcraft as a superstition, an absurd idea explicable only by the lower orders’ lack of culture and inadequate religious formation.*75 Indeed, after reading the evidence, the archbishopric’s legal assessor judged that, far from considering Martínez a witch, she was a good, God-fearing woman who took communion regularly, and against whom nothing could be held despite the ignorant villagers’ suspicions.