

Je ne suis nullement devot,

Monseigneur, ne vous en deplaise;

Etre profane, c’est mon lot:

Ainsi, quand votre main je baise,

Je n’y vois la main du Pasteur,

J’y vois la main du bienfaiteur†

Gallardo’s claim not to be devout, which he would repeat for the rest of his life, was no doubt true. He had rejected the priesthood at a time when many of similar social origins made a career of the Church. As a man of the Enlightment, he was hostile to the Church’s secular power, its counter-enlightenment friars and priests, its baroque rituals and the superstitions and miracles in which the devout believed. The Inquisition was a particular bête noire for its censorship of books, and he courageously stood up to it. Moreover, his anatomical studies were making a ‘sensorialist’ and materialist of him. He considered himself a ‘Voltairean’, and also no doubt had a clever young student’s desire to shock, a side of him that at a later age he never totally lost. But, taking account of the precision of his language, lack of devoutness did not mean that he was an atheist. Even when presented with the intellectual opportunity – in philosophica–medical terms – to deny the existence, or at least the importance, of the soul, he refused as a young man to take the leap. Although there were a small number of other enlightened Spaniards – some of them in high governmental positions – who would have subscribed privately to Gallardo’s lack of devoutness, they were more cautious than he in expressing it; in general the Spanish Enlightenment did not question the Catholic, Roman and Apostolic faith in which they had been brought up, though they questioned the practices of the Spanish Church which embodied it.*

Although, finally, Gallardo did not graduate as a medical doctor, his first two youthful translations were of French medical works. The first, on hygiene, or medical prophylaxis, a matter then much in vogue among the European enlightened as an important part of state policy on health, was written in 1785 by a Lyons surgeon, M. Pressavin. The latter, as Gallardo presumably knew, had played a not insignificant role as a deputy to the National Convention and as a member of the Jacobin clubs until 1793. Gallardo had himself chosen to translate the book;† and in his translator’s preface he paraded his medical erudition by pointing to the book’s limitations in the light of subsequent discoveries, but more importantly insisted on his efforts ‘once and again to illuminate the almost ignored elegance of Spanish’. Three years later, in the prologue to his second translation of a work by Jean-Louis Alibert, a leading figure of the French ‘philosophical’ school of medicine and an outstanding clinician, which concerned the relationship of medicine to the ‘physical’ and ‘intellectual and moral’ sciences, he returned to his claims for Castilian. ‘It is well known’, he wrote, that ‘our language has great advantages over French, singularly in its grandeur and extravagant wealth of expression.’ At the same time, his new prologue permitted Gallardo to express himself more clearly on scientific and philosophical matters: