

The overall conclusion of [Alibert’s] Discourse is that all generally well-organized men contain within them the physical potential to rise to the greatest heights of thought; and that the difference of talent which we note among them depends on the different circumstances in which they find themselves, and the different education they have received. The importance of education is therefore once more exemplified.

Subsequently, in two entries on the ‘Senses’ and on ‘Sensations’, written for a Spanish medical dictionary, Gallardo commited himself almost totally to the most advanced French theory of the day in which vague metaphysical explanations – even the soul – had disappeared in the need to explain the instinctive and intellectual sensorial processes. Surprisingly, however, Gallardo re-introduced the soul as a substantive element. Possibly, the young writer, who did not sign his contributions, was covering his tracks to ensure that he was not hauled up before the Inquisition.

Soon after the publication of Gallardo’s second translation, his Salamanca publisher ran afoul of the Inquisition when he proposed to publish a new edition of his deceased brother-in-law’s poetry, which the Holy Office had banned ‘for its excessive licence in the order of ideas’. The publisher resorted to his translator and friend, Gallardo. The young man had no hesitation in writing a Memorial in Defence of the Posthumous Poetry of D. Joseé Iglesias de ia Casa, having it printed and signing it with his name, and dispatching it to the Inquisition in Valladolid and the other tribunals of the Holy Office. In it Gallardo argued that ‘as moralists, spiritual doctors are permitted in the same manner as corporal doctors to call things by their proper names’. That said, and citing an Iglesias poem as an example, he added that there was nothing gross, lascivious or obscene in his love poetry. Nonetheless, the Inquisition confirmed its ban, as well as ordering all copies of the Memorial seized. It was a courageous act on Gallardo’s part to confront the Holy Office on behalf of a friend, and it cost him much enmity among his Salamanca adversaries who called him ‘an excommunicated heretic’ and a Voltairean in an attempt to make his life difficult with the local clergy. He responded in what was to become his classic counter-attack: a ferocious and biting satire of his enemies.

In 1801, he had a stroke of luck and was appointed interpreter to a French division returning home from supporting the Spanish Army in Godoy’s short war, on Napoleon’s demand, against Portugal. As a result, he spent two months in Bayonne, where a French abbé be friended him and extended his knowledge of the philosophes’ works. Like the poet Joseé Quintana, though by a different route, Gallardo assimilated the ideas of liberty and hispanicism which made it impossible for him and others of his enlightened generation to accept that Spain’s freedom should be the work of any other than Spaniards themselves. And this was one of the reasons that they had no hesitation in rising against Napoleon.