

The people’s presentiment was correct. As a condition of Fernando’s release, Napoleon demanded that he sign an alliance against the British. The treaty also stipulated that as a counterpart for the withdrawal of French troops from Spain, Britain must follow suit; and that afrancesados would regain their positions and be restored to their previous social status. Fernando, who had done little else in his enforced exile at Valençay but attempt to ingratiate himself with Napoleon (while his uncle knitted and tore out pictures which he considered obscene or irreligious from the books in Talleyrand’s extensive library), sent an emissary to Madrid to sound out the regency, over which his cousin, Cardinal Luís María Borbón, primate of Spain, now presided. The regency’s response was clear: the Cortes of Cádiz had, in January 1811, decreed that it would not recognize any treaty signed on foreign soil by the captive king. The emissary was sent back with a letter and a copy of the decree. Napoleon’s manoeuvre was only too patent. After his defeat at Leipzig in October 1813, he was willing to withdraw his army from Spain in order to prepare for a last stand in France and to rid himself of the British threat on his southwestern border. At the same time he was trying to split the British–Spanish alliance.

On February 2, 1814, the Cortes, in which on the question of the king’s return the liberals still commanded a large majority, approved a decree which stated that Fernando would not be considered free until he had sworn an oath to the constitution which would be handed to him on reaching the frontier. Moreover, no foreigner at all, neither an armed force nor any afrancesado, even a servant, would be allowed into Spain. The decree further ordered Fernando to follow a strict itinerary from the border to Madrid, whither he would be accompanied by the regency’s president.

On March 22, Fernando crossed the frontier into Cataluña, a part of which was still occupied by Suchet, and two days later reached the Spanish army in the principality. But he did not follow the Cortes’ itinerary to follow the coast road south to Valencia and then to Madrid. His enthusiastic reception everywhere led him to assert his independence and visit Zaragoza where he remained for five days. His two communications to the Cortes were of a studied ambiguity. Finally, on April 16, Fernando entered Valencia to extraordinary scenes of popular rejoicing: unhitching the horses from his carriage, the people pulled the monarch’s coach through the streets.

Earlier the same day on the road into Valencia, the regency’s president, Cardinal Borbón, had driven to Puçol, a nearby township, to present his cousin Fernando with a copy of the constitution. Their carriages met and both men alighted. Each waited for the other to advance. Finally, the cardinal moved, and Fernando held out his hand to receive the kiss of obeisance. The cardinal hesitated. Angrily, Fernando said, ‘kiss!’ and the cardinal obeyed. It was a symbolic victory for Fernando which would shortly turn into reality.