

A week later, he added significantly in a further despatch to Castlereagh: ‘the king has nothing to offer the Nation in place of the Constitution’. Coming from Wellesley, whose meddling in patriot political affairs had been a thorn in the side of the Cádiz Cortes, this was unexpected support for the constitution, for which he had shown no particular enthusiasm, expressing the view that it was not ‘consonant with the general feeling of the Nation’. Instead he had devoted his attention in Cádiz to protecting British interests as he saw them. These included opening Spain’s South American colonies to British trade, intriguing to replace the regency by one more sympathetic to Britain, having Wellington appointed as supreme commander of Spanish forces, and protesting at the dispatch of ten thousand Spanish soldiers to put down the colonial insurrections. And if his demands were not met, he had threatened the regency and Cortes with withdrawing the British garrison from Cádiz and suspending British loans. But his meddling – with the exception of the patriot diversion of troops from the main ground of the anti-Napoleonic conflict to the colonies – had met with the British government’s disapproval and the warning that it did not want to become involved in Spain’s internal affairs.9 In self-defence, Wellesley affirmed categorically that had it been known at the beginning of the war

that the Spanish Nation could be brought to the brink of ruin, not by the military successes of its Enemy, but by the continued misconduct of its Government … (and if for that reason) the authority of the Government has not hitherto been respected in the country, it is solely to be ascribed to the neglect of all the measures necessary to assist the exertions of the People, and to the want of public confidence in the regular Army and its officers …10

A perspicacious comment; as indeed were his views on Fernando’s return and the political options before him. ‘The King will be in difficulties if he rejects the Constitution’, he reported to Castlereagh in another ‘Most Secret and Confidential’ despatch from Valencia on April 19. But Fernando, he added, was prepared to use force to achieve his ends.

On May 5 Fernando left Valencia for Madrid, where he had appointed the ultra General Eguía captain general to publish his decree and to take the measures he had ordered. General Elío, at the head of an army division, which included the British colonel at the head of the Spanish troops he had trained, escorted the king, his uncle and brother who had been held by Napoleon at Valençay. Everywhere en route Fernando was met by cheering crowds who usually proceeded to smash the tablets in their main squares celebrating the constitution.

On May 11 the Madrid captain general informed the Cortes president that the king had dissolved the assembly. As the president was one of the signatories to the Manifiesto de los Persas he readily acquiesced. That night the persecution began with the arrest of all the leading liberals whom Eguía, supported by troops, could lay hands on. The arrests continued the following day in Madrid and the provinces. That day a few hundred of the mob, probably organized by the conde de Montijo, whom Fernando had dispatched to the capital earlier to stir up anti-liberal sentiment, tore down the stone naming Madrid’s plaza Mayor the plaza de la Constitución, and dragged it to the Cortes shouting ‘Viva Fernando VII!’, ‘Long Live Religion!’, ‘Down with the Cortes!’ ‘Viva la Inquisición!’ They then wrecked the Cortes chamber and obliterated the word constitution from the facade.11