

As late as 1817, for example, five years after the war effectively ended in Andalucía with the French withdrawal in 1812, Puerto Real, which had been in the imperial front line during the two-year siege of Cádiz, was still missing over half of its six thousand pre-war population. Over forty percent of its buildings and warehouses had been destroyed. Less than half of its former land was being cultivated, and only one-quarter of its olive trees were still standing. Six out of every seven of its large extent of pines had been cut down. The local authorities estimated that the total capital destruction amounted to over sixty million reales, and that its tax revenues had been reduced to one-third of their pre-war level.20

Whether in the ‘front line’ or not, many towns never recovered their earlier eminence. Alcaláde Henares, Cervantes’ birthplace, a university town northeast of Madrid, had benefited greatly from the pre-war establishment of a royal textile factory in Guadalajara. This was abandoned during the war and Alcalá’s inhabitants – especially women spinners who had worked at home – were left without other means than to eke out a living from agriculture. The township which in 1768 had a population of four thousand householders was reduced to twelve hundred in 1836.21 Alcorcón, another town close to Madrid, which had begun pre-war to develop a glass manufacture, was ravaged by the war: three times as large before the conflict as it was after its end, the place never recovered.22 Talavera which had enjoyed economic growth pre-war due to the establishment of a royal silk factory declined in population and importance from the time of the battle there.23 Béjar, a town known for its woollens south of Salamanca, never saw a major battle, yet it was an important communications centre. In 1809 alone, it was estimated that the town and the surrounding district paid 1,215,000 reales in woollens, supplies, contributions and impositions, nearly ten times its annual pre-war taxes. Apart from this, it was sacked by the French.24 Though its woollens managed to survive the war, much of the pre-war artisanal production in other rural townships was either lost for good or suffered a serious economic setback and erosion of capital. In an impoverished country there was no market for goods. Antonio Iñigo, whose annual prewar profit had been put at one thousand reales, was one of the many small manufacturers in Palencia, Castilla la Vieja, known for its production of woollen blankets. As he recorded:

In more prosperous times I had a small woollens factory … today because of the great burden of billeting [French soldiers], the dearness of food and other causes which are well known, I am left without any capital. I have had to find work labouring in my brother’s factory, with a day wage that is hardly enough to buy the bread needed [to keep my family alive].25

He was lucky to find work with his brother as a day labourer; great numbers of workers of both sexes were laid off and reduced to beggars during the war. It took two decades for the town to overcome the wartime crisis.26