

Over the first fifteen years of the new century Extremadura was one of the most severely affected by pre-war famine and the calamities of war. Its overall population losses were equally heavy in both, though wartime deaths in fact dropped by ten percent compared to the previous period. The problem lay in the low number of births. Even here there were significant intra-regional differences. The southern Badajoz province suffered during the conflict much more heavily than Cáceres to the north. The French and especially British sieges of Badajoz played their part: deaths rose by nearly twenty percent and births dropped by just over this amount. As a result of the pre-war and wartime losses, Badajoz province ended the war with nearly half of its 1800 population missing – an outcome unheard of anywhere else.*

Over nine major regions as a whole, the six years of war concluded with a minimal gain of 1. 1 percent in population.† This was somewhat better than the half of one percent loss in the pre-war’s eight years, demonstrating that pestilence and famine were harsher on the population than armed conflict; but little comfort could be derived from the fact. Without the war and its accompanying losses, the population in the worst affected regions pre-war could have been expected to recuperate slowly; and, barring any new disasters, growth in the unaffected regions would have continued.

On the financial cost of the conflict things were little better. The central patriot treasury received 1,500 million reales during the war – six hundred from South America (though these were rapidly reduced from 1811 and the colonies’ independence struggle); but this figure had little meaning overall since each regional junta’s treasury kept the tax money it collected to finance its own army. Cataluña alone spent five hundred million on its military effort. Apart from the money raised in taxes or received from the colonies, the real matter concerned the supplies the villagers provided, had requisitioned or exacted. When receipts were given it was very rare that these were ever paid. (Even British army receipts meant going to Lisbon and waiting weeks to receive the money. Hence a flourishing market in British debt developed, enriching those who had the money to pay villagers in deeply discounted cash on the nail). In fact, the national (patriotic) debt rose by some six hundred thousand million reales during the war which, with a couple of hundred thousand millions more, was cavalierly struck off the national debt by the government in power in 1834.18 A large part of this money was owed to the rural population for supplies to the patriot armies.

These figures do not, of course, take into account the Bonapartists’ tax income and expenditure on the war which, since it was nominally in control of the greater part of Spain from 1810 on, was certainly no less than that of the patriot government. There can be no doubt that in the main this was also extorted from villagers.*

*