

Under French pressure – Louis XVIII was politically wary of their presence in France – the afrancesados were amnestied by the liberal Spanish revolution. Those who returned had shortly to resume their exile when, at the Holy Alliance’s behest, Louis invaded Spain to restore Fernando to his ‘rightful’ throne in place of the constitutional monarchy which, as a result of the revolution, he had been forced to accept.

Some of the leading patriot protagonists on both sides of the divide died before the end of the war. Among them, most notably, were Floridablanca, the Suprema’s first president, as early as 1809; Gaspar Melchor Jovellanos who, in the sorry aftermath of the Suprema’s demise, died in his native Asturias in 1811. In the same year, General Romana, who had hastened with his army in 1810 to Wellington’s defence at the Torres Vedras lines before Lisbon, died in Portugal (of syphilis, it was said). In his obituary, Wellington accorded him the greatest honours of any Spanish general in the war.

As might be expected, the three major protagonists of these events – Manuel Godoy, Fernando VII and Josef Bonaparte – experienced differing fates. Refused permission by Fernando to return to Spain, Godoy lived for most of his remaining life in impoverished exile in Paris, his previous reputation as a ‘despot’ much relativized by liberals who had experienced the absolutist restoration.

With the brief exception of the liberal triennium, Fernando ruled as absolute king until his death in 1833, when he left the succession to his new-born daughter, Isabel; thereupon, his younger brother Carlos, who had shared Fernando’s wartime reclusion in France, claimed the throne in the name of an apostolic Catholic absolutism and, backed by villagers in the north, where the guerrilla had found its greatest popular base, instigated the first Carlist civil war against the liberals on whose support Fernando’s widowed queen regent, María Cristina, had to rely. Though the Carlists went down to defeat in the five-year conflict, the anti-liberal cause refused to die with them; a century later, the military rising against the liberal second republic and the ensuing Spanish civil war (1936–1939), the gravest of all, demonstrated that absolutism in a modern authoritarian–clerical form remained alive in the sinews of Spanish society.

In the post-Napoleonic era, Josef Bonaparte chose a more peaceable course: he crossed the Atlantic to exile in the US – an option Napoleon rejected – to settle in New Jersey where, under the title of Count Survilliers, he lived for many years farming a couple of hundred acres in character with what he really was: a philanthropic country gentleman. Popular, it appears, amiable and cultured as always, he won his neighbours’ affection; his success with women, which Napoleon had envied, had not abated: one of his female admirers, a young Quaker, bore him a child and, concerned for their future, Josef secured her a French refugee husband. Later, after a time in England, he retired to Tuscany where in 1844, at the age of seventy-six, he died in the company of his first (and only) French wife. Of Josef it could be said that he was one of the truly honourable (although ineffectual) protagonists of this long, often savage and, for both sides ultimately, cursed war.