

On the land, livestock losses overall were incalculable. In Gerona, where in 1790 it was reported that most farmers had amongst their considerable farm animals a small flock of sheep whose lambs were so prized that that they were exported to Madrid and Valencia, in 1815 all that were left were thirty-five lambs, eighteen sheep, eight oxen, four cows, twelve goats and twenty pigs.27

On top of this a great number of villages had to sell part of their commons in order to pay taxes and imposts exacted by the French or Spanish armies, thus losing a source of income which pre-war had served to pay taxes and further impoverishing the already poor labourers and small tenants for whom these lands had often offered the only material life-saving expedient.

The post-war brought little or no relief: the depression which affected Europe at the end of the Napoleonic wars saw a large drop in agricultural prices which even further impoverished the already destitute Spanish villager.

*

It was the greatest irony of the war – a conflict replete with ironies – that at an enormous cost of lives and destruction and the almost certain loss of its colonies, patriot Spain had in the end fought to restore an absolutist monarchy. The people had risen to defend king, religion and fatherland; the liberals’ attempt to create a parliamentary monarchy out of the conflict had not counted on the lower classes’ necessary support, offering them little but the panacea of a market economy which would further destroy their traditional ‘moral economy’. However resounding their great leap forward, the liberals abstractly believed that their constitution’s fine words were sufficient: it was enough to have approved and incarnated them in print for their political reality to prevail. This piece of political ingenuousness, which would be repeated more than once in Spain’s subsequent history, led to the liberals’ easy dismemberment – and repression – by military force at the behest of the most malign sovereign in modern times to occupy the Spanish throne. The war’s final result was to set back the country economically, politically and demographically by at least three decades if not more.

Had the struggle been worth such an outcome? The response can be safely left to Goya. In an engraving of which there is evidence that the artist finally planned it as the last of the Disasters of War, a male corpse is seen half rising from a coffin. In his hands are a sheet of paper on which, as though inscribed by the dead man, is a single word. Nada – Nothing. The original caption repeats the word and adds: ‘That is the Case.’