

The general assertion that great numbers of villagers had stayed over in Madrid from the day before, a Sunday, and participated in the rising or came in specifically to fight remains an open question. The identified number is small, 18 in all. (Only one group of villagers – from Fuencarral, just to the north of the capital – and led by a local priest, is known to have come specifically to Madrid to fight: the priest’s enthusiasm was such that he brought his group to the capital on Sunday; but their numbers are not recorded and only the priest figures in table 1 under ‘clergy’.)

In determining the status of villager, it is highly important to distinguish in the casualty listings between the word ‘householder in …’ or ‘resident of …’ (‘vecino de’ in Spanish) from the word ‘place of origin’ or ‘native of’ (‘natural de’). A large proportion of the Madrid population had migrated from their places of origin to live and work in the capital: though ‘natives’ of other places, they had become Madrileños and were included in population figures as such. Equally, those ‘natives’ of villages near to the capital cannot be taken as non-Madrileño villagers who participated in the rising (as some over-eager researchers have done) simply because of the proximity to Madrid of their places of origin when, as far as is known, these ‘villagers’ lived in the capital.

A further source of confusion has lain in following Guzmán in not distinguishing between combatants and non-combatants: a number of muleteers who arrived at the city gates from nearby villages during the fighting have been identified as participants in the rising, especially as many of them met a tragic fate: seized by the French troops and searched, they were executed if carrying even a sack-sewing needle. But these victims of the rising (who are included in Table 1 as Non-Combatants Executed) did not have time to participate in the insurrection, even had they intended to.

In light of the small number of identified village combatants, two assumptions are possible. That – like the Madrid prisoners – villagers suffered a very low casualty rate and they therefore returned home unrecorded in casualty rolls; or that they rest unidentified among the 91 combatants of unspecified occupations and places of origin. On the unlikely assumption that the latter were all villagers, their participation – taken together with identified villagers – would reach some 18% of all recorded combatants, the highest single proportion of any group.

One piece of evidence does suggest that many of these unspecified combatants may have been villagers: only four of them were killed in the artillery park, while the majority died in the poor southwestern neighbourhoods which would have been more familiar to them than the park which had only opened the previous year.

Of the identified village combatants it is noteworthy that four came from Leganés under the lordship of marqués de Astorga, and two from places under the duque del Infantado’s lordship – Manzares el Real and Miraflores de la Sierra; both nobles were leading Fernandistas. A further five combatants came from five other lordships around Madrid.17