

At the same time, I have added to Guzmán’s roll: 44 unwounded combatants, culled from witnesses to the actions of the dead and wounded in the official postwar submissions;4 or to the mention of other uninjured combatants in these applications. Also added are 24 military who escaped unwounded from the artillery park. Another 54 unwounded combatants were prisoners from the city gaol, whose overall numbers I have increased by one to take account of a prisoner who escaped from another Madrid prison and was killed. I have also added three wounded combatants who are missing from Guzmán’s list and, among the executed combatants, six hospital workers and three masons building the new Santiago church, none of whom Guzmán lists separately. I have also included as combatants the six excisemen who were executed since it must be assumed that they put up resistance before being captured; as well as two combatants subsequently executed in Leganés. Among the non-combatants executed, I have added two women, as Note 8 to Table 1 explains. In all 145 individuals.

From these re-calculated figures it will be observed that the ratio of wounded to killed has risen to 1:1.6. Despite the increase, this still remains an unsatisfactory basis on which to estimate an overall combatant figure; a proportion of three or four wounded for each person killed in street fighting would appear a more likely minimum; the average of this proportion, 3.5, seems reasonable in the circumstances.15 The same factor should be applied also to the numbers of unwounded combatants.

However, the executed are similarly understated: it is known from parish records that 43 individuals were buried after being executed on the Montaña del Príncipe Pío but only 24 of these are recorded in Guzmán’s roll; and there are grounds for believing that sixteen more unrecorded individuals were executed in the Prado. A factor of 1.5 applied to the executed would account for these extra numbers. Rounding up all figures to indicate that there is no pretension of providing exact numbers, the following provides an approximate combatant estimate:

Killed/fatally wounded:

250

Wounded: 3.5 × 160:

560

Executed: 1.5 × 85:

125

Non-wounded 3.5 × 120:

420

Total:

1,355

This hypothetical aggregate represented 0.8% of Madrid’s 176,374 inhabitants, according to the Godoy census, which without doubt underestimated the population. (Most historians put the figure at or around 200,000.) It also lends credibility to Colonel Aniceto Ramos Charco-Villaseñor’s estimate that 1,000 people must have taken part in the defence of the artillery park, if not in the park itself (where Guzman’s figure of 100 defenders is patently wrong since nearly 250 men, defending the rear of the park, were at their posts when the French took the place), then in the surrounding streets in order to have held off the French attacks for even three hours.16

The number of total combatants identified represents about 45% of the estimated total.

## VILLAGERS