                  University of Dayton Review, Vol. 12, No. 3 [1976], Art. 3

   Council of the Imperial University recommended on February 1, 1811, that the Ecole
   propagate uniform principles of instruction and education: 'Elle peut seule former
   d'habiles professeurs, tenir l'enseignement au niveau des connaissances humaines et
   etablir l'uniformite des principes."16 As an affiliate of the Imperial University the
   Ecole Normale provided the official indoctrination. By 1813 all professors of higher
   education were required to undergo instruction there.

      Numerous specialized institutions cultivated the sciences, it seems, even more
   intensively than did the formal schools. Among them were the Museums of Natural
   History, the Conservatories of Arts and Crafts, the schools of pharmacy and medi-
   cine, the astronomical observatories, a Bureau of Longitudes, the Ecole Poly technique,
   and private societies such as that at Arcueil. Throughout his rule Napoleon mani-
   fested a great deal of leadership by his interest in the progress of science. At a time
   when the life sciences were developing their raison d'iHre, he focused much attention
   on the Museum of Natural History in Paris, for example by providing funds for the
   resumption and acceleration of projects previously interrupted during the Revolu-
   tion; also, he increased the museum's land domain at a time which witnessed the
   multiplication of activities embracing instruction, collections for research, replace-
   ment of specimens, collections of living specimens in flora and fauna, and new con-
   struction including an amphitheater.17 Under Chaptal's versatile ministry the museum
   flourished and despite deficiencies it was rated the most complete in Europe. Already
   by 1802 the museum was so well-organized and active that it offered instruction in
   the natural sciences. During the dark days of 1813, as Napoleon's armies were reeling
   from defeat in Germany, classes continued there while being suspended elsewhere.
   Thirteen professors presented their lectures. In addition, the museum's administra-
   tion maintained correspondence with twenty-four provincial schools, with approxi-
   mately 190 botanical gardens throughout France, and exchanged or purchased
   selected specimens from throughout the world. The Empress Josephine was unusually
   active in dealings with the museum. Several academies (universities) maintained
   museums of natural history; that in Turin contained a school of natural sciences.
   Museums of natural history were also established in various parts of the empire.
   Since the museum in Paris was the premier one on the continent, it received many
   distinguished visitors among them Tsar Alexander, various kings and princes with
   their entourages; even Napoleon and Josephine found time to visit the museum.

      Another specialized institution was the Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers in Paris,
   combining the pure and applied sciences. ls Founded during the Revolution it soon
   displayed as complete an array as possible of various scientific and mechanical ap-
   paratus illustrative of the progress of science and technology especially in France
   from the past three centuries. In short, it was a continuous exposition and reminder
   of the country's scientific and inventive genius. It also became part of the nation's
   educational structure. Additional conservatories were established at Chiilons-sur-
   Marne, Beaupreau (transferred later to Angers), and at St. Maximinien near Treves;
   the first included the school that was transferred from Compiegne upon Napoleon's
   dissatisfaction. Professor Williams saw such ecoles as primarily trade schools teach-


https://ecommons.udayton.edu/udr/vol12/iss3/3
   26                                                                                        6
