                  University of Dayton Review, Vol. 12, No. 3 [1976], Art. 3

   was replaced by a milirary man. By 1809 its students were subject to call and place-
   ment by the minister of war. Quality theoretical instruction suffered at the demands
   of immediate military requirements. In September, 1809, Montalivet, minister of in-
   terior, inquired as to how many students from the Ecole were selected for training
   in the special School of Roads and Bridges; it appears that some twenty-eight
   graduates had been requested that year but only seventeen were obtained. Perhaps
   as a result of this shortage, Napoleon's decree of August 30, 1811, pertained to the
   "passage des eleves de l'Ecole Poly technique dans Ie corps de Genie et dans les
   services publics."22 This was not really a new tack since as early as 1802 the school
   was preparing qualified candidates for various branches of the military and tech-
   nical civil services. Thus , the Ecole launched with optimistic expectations, unfor-
   tunately because of war priorities, failed to fulfill hopes of freedom and large-scale
   scientific and technological excellence projected at the beginning of the Consulate.
   However, that had been, its plight fortunately did not coincide with the entire condi-
   tion of French science.
      The institutions developing and disseminating the sciences were imbued with an
   elan well-described by the philosophical terms of rationalism and empiricism and
   by the scientific procedural term of experimentalism. Ultimately all three were inter-
   twined with the wider theory of nature then prevailing, the mechanistics-ensist
   philosophy. French empiricism probably owes its initial impetus to Voltaire upon his
   return from England where he encountered the new ideas in full force. It was further
   enhanced by the ideas of Condilla c, best known for his epistemological sensism. In
   Napoleon's era the new philosophical tenets culminated with the ideologues, for
   example their ideas that man is a machine or an animal; in any case that man is
   purely material in essence. Collingwood appraises the new development as destroy-
   ing the traditional view of substantialism, that is that natural life including man can
   be only understood through the concept of unchanging essences;23a but science was
   slowly departing from the old classical-scholastic tradition since transformism, that
   is evolution, was currently adumbrated as an explanation of organic life.
     That experimentalism was the generally accepted procedure in France by Na-
   poleon's time may be verified by numerous examples. 23b There is the "crash" pro-
   gram which Napoleon established in the promise of discovering a medical remedy
   for the croup disease. The prize awarded 12,000 francs for the best memoir on the
   subject. Sustained research on the problem culminated in its solution in the late
   nineteenth century. Another example of experimentalism appears in the First Con-
   sul's establishment of a prize honoring discoveries in electricity and galvanism .
   Alexander Volta (1745-1827), inventor of the "pile" or storage battery, inspired the
   prize when he presented a demonstration of his discovery with Napoleon in the
   audience. Research in astronomy continued as seen in the establishment of the
   Lalande prize awarded annually to the sCientist "qui ... aura fait l'observation la
   plus interessante ou Ie memoire Ie plus utile au progres de l'astronomie." Since the
   science of astronomy was very popular, a consequence of the marvelous contri-
   butions of Newton, Herschel, and Laplace, Napoleon provided funds for astronomical


https://ecommons.udayton.edu/udr/vol12/iss3/3                                                8
   28
