                  University of Dayton Review, Vol. 12, No. 3 [1976], Art. 3
    successive stages of education: a structure of public primary schools, the inter-
    mediate lycees, and higher education in the special schools. The law placed education
    in the hands of a general director and laid the basis for a universal system of state-
    wide education that still stands today. Apparently, Napoleon was the first modern
    ruler to successfully confront the problem which has been recently denominated as
    the "two cultures," that is harmonizing education in the arts and sciences (including
    technology) without tipping the balance in favor of one or the other in an irreparable
    and harmful manner with results detrimental to the best interests of society.

       Napoleon was well-equipped to undertake the gigantic task before him. As a young,
    ambitious student he showed interest in the sciences, acquiring more than a smat-
    tering of various subjects. As a student at Brienne, he came under the influence of
    Etienne Bezout's text on mathematics so that some verses in the author's honor are
    attributed to Napoleon. 2 As an ambitious officer at Valence and Auxonne, he culti-
    vated his scientific bent, studying such subjects as mathematics, mechanics, physics,
    chemistry, and astronomy; besides, he read copiously in biology becoming familiar
    with Buffon's writings and ideas. Despite this emphasis on the empirical and experi-
    mental sciences, it has been judged that Napoleon's educational formation was dis-
    tinctively Cartesian: "Ce n'est qu' apres avoir considere intuitivement quelques
    propositions simples qu'il en conclut d'autres."3 The geometric or deductive method
    still seemed to linger in scientific procedure in France at the time, a way that un-
    balanced hypothesis and imagination beyond empirical foundations. This method
    may help explain why Napoleon tried to impose his will on political and social
    realities rather than to work congruently with the data and norms of such reality as
    envisioned by followers of the natural law philosophy. In general, he received broad
    exposure in the sciences and humanities in addition to training leading to a military
    career. While Napoleon was more keenly curious about science as a young man,
    later on, as general and chief of state he continued to maintain interest in it; but
    being a practical man and a politician, he also looked for immediate applications of
    the sciences. 4

       Science, I contend, was to serve as the keystone in Napoleon's educational struc-
    ture, especially on the higher levels. A survey of the institutions of science, either
    newly formed or traditionally supported, should present an adequate test or measure-
    ment and verification of my hypothesis. Napoleon's regime patronized science in the
    following institutions: the lycees in secondary education; special schools, imperial
    academies (which included the universities, the special schools, and lycees), faculties
    of science, the Ecole Normale, Ecole Poly technique, various non-conventional centers
    of learning such as the Museums of Natural History, the Conservatories of Arts and
    Crafts, the Bureau of Longitudes, astronomical observatories, and numerous socie-
    ties, among them, the notable Arcueil Society. Also it appears that the methodology
    underlying this cultivation of science was a combination of experimentalism, empiri-
    cism, and Cartesian rationalism. Undoubtedly, the scientists' basic philosophical
    orientation originated in the prevailing European philosophy of sensationalism and
    mechanism.



https://ecommons.udayton.edu/udr/vol12/iss3/3
    22                                                                                        2
