         Maras: Napoleon I and Education in the Sciences: One Aspect of the Two C

   matical and physical sciences was the complement of all liberal education, whether
   it be for the immediate utility, the extension of ideas, or the explanation of diverse
   natural and social phenomena, all of which it would be shameful not to try to com-
   prehend. In 1808, but two years after establishment of the University, the law of
   March 17 organized the University and that of September 17 provided for its regula-
   tion. Article II of the latter decree assigned all public instruction dating from January
   1, 1809, as belonging exclusively to the Imperial University. In addition, the statute
   of October 18 (in consequence of Article IV of the law of March -17) divided the
   University into thirty-two academies, each one a complete educational structure
   containing lycees, special schools, and administration. Between 1808 and 1813 at
   least seven more academies were added to the original number, and included acade-
   mies in the Lowlands, Germany, and Italy.13 These "academies" apparently were
   complete universities in the etymological sense of the Latin "universitas" meaning
   "all" subjects. Unfortunately, Napoleon's defeats in 1813 and 1814 made for the
   elimination of thirteen academies. The Bourbon regime of the Restoration further
   reduced the number of academies to seventeen besides restoring the name "univer-
   sity" to the institutions . With the second Restoration of the Bourbons in the summer
   of 1815, however, the term academy was restored.

      The Faculties of Science for each academy were likewise created by the law of
   March 17, 1808. A year later such faculties existed in six French cities; by 1812 an
   additional eleven arose. Higher mathematics, mathematical and experimental phys-
   ics, chemistry, and natural history were taught in these faculties, courses being one
   year in duration. The professors were subject to a rigorous criteria which the Council
   of the Imperial established on February 16, 1810. For example every professor was to
   be knowledgeable in the "history of science" [sic] which he taught and this included
   current bibliography. In whatever courses feasible, demonstrations and experiments
   were to be part of normal pedagogic procedure. Candidates for the doctorate in the
   Faculty of Sciences were to present two dissertations. It is interesting to read that
   the professor of geography was to present his science "dans ces rapports mathe-
   matiques, physiques, historiques et politiques , industriel et commerciaux. II fera
   conna'itre la correspondance des noms et des li eux qui lient-elles la geographie
   ancienne et la geographie moderne."14 Similar thoroughness was expected of pro-
   fessors in the other sciences.

     The decree of March 17, 1808, organizing the Imperial University also established
  the Ecole Normale for the purpose of educating teachers in the sciences and letters.15
  Ma triculants were obligated upon graduation to serve teaching terms of ten years .
  A subsequent decree of July 29, 1811, exempted all such graduates from military ser-
  vice. Article CXIII stipulated the following: 'ces aspirants suivront les le<;ons du
  College de France, de I'Ecole Poly technique ou du Museum d'histoire naturelle,
  suivant qu'ils se destineront a enseigner les lettres ou les divers genres des sciences.'
  Moreover, scientific studies were required of all students durjng the first year of
  matriculation; the course of studies at the Ecole Normale lasted only two years, but
  an ambitious, successful student could continue studies leading to the doctorate. The


Published by eCommons, 1976                                                              25    5
