         Maras: Napoleon I and Education in the Sciences: One Aspect of the Two C

   Napoleon I and Education in the Sciences:
   One Aspect of the Two Cultures in Conflict*
                                                                            Raymond J. Maras



      Several years ago the position was taken that Napoleon's patronage of the sciences
   when weighed against the provisions for the teaching of science in the schools seems
   to be in the nature of propaganda. According to the research on the subject, science,
   under the Napoleonic aegis, was defined in a narrow, utilitarian manner and "any
   attempt to institutionalize a concept of science which went beyond this utilitarianism
   was immediately thwarted." Hence, Napoleon's contribution was merely to continue
   the close link between science and the military which the Revolution introduced. In
   fact, in Napoleon's regime "the pursuit of a scientific education was ... tantamount
   to enlisting .... " Napoleon's reforms, it was further concluded, paradoxically brought
   about the reduction of science and thereby contributed to the continuous gap in
   France between the pure scientist and the skilled worker that has never been ad-
   equately filled.!
     An investigation of the sources at the French archives and national library forces
  me to an entirely different conclusion. My thesis claims that Napoleon's educational
  structure, despite the pressures of reconstruction, war, and imperial expansion at-
  tempted to resolve the gap or disparity between the "two cultures"; in other words ,
  the world of science and experimentation, including applied science, was approach-
  ing a position in Western culture that could not be retained in the traditionally
  inferior status; the accumulated evidence and successes of science abetted by a
  growing belief in progress and happiness during the past three centuries confronted
  a society (1789-1815) undergoing radical change. Thus the problem was posed and
  answered about the relationship and relative utility of the traditional studies in the
  humanities and education in the materially beneficient sciences along with their ap-
  plication. The National Convention (1792-95) was unable to deal satisfactorily with
  the problem; being faced with practical exigencies, it perforce emphasized the
  sciences, especially applied science, in its educational institutions. The following
  discussion and explication convince me of the credibility of my thesis.
     In 1801 on the morrow of the French Revolution which left the nation's educational
  structure disunited, Napoleon, having secured his power at First Consul, proclaimed
  his intention of reforming the system of public schools, and charged a commission
  of distinguished men to prepare a comprehensive program of national education. On
  May 1, 1802, the government promulgated the law establishing a network of three
  ':' A shortened version of this paper was read at the XJIth International Congress of the History
      of Science, Paris, 1968.lt appeared in the Acres, vol. XI (Paris, 1971),87-91.



Published by eCommons, 1976                                                                     21    1
