         Maras: Napoleon I and Education in the Sciences: One Aspect of the Two C
     What was the condition of the lycees and the colleges, the basis of the educational
  infrastructure? It has been pointed out that one of the glaring weaknesses of the
  Revolution's legacy in education was the gap between the elementary and higher
  echelons of instruction. Since the program for the central schools projected in 1795
  failed to flourish, Napoleon decided (following the coup d'etat) to institute a nation-
  wide system of secondary schools or lycees. 5 Having been charged with the task in
  1801 the planning commission comprising such scientists as Coulomb and Cuvier
  prepared a prospectus of instruction that placed stress on the physical sciences.
  Therefore, the law of May 1, 1802, provided for an emphasis on the sciences, particu-
  larly mathematics and physics. In 1804 Antoine-FranQois Fourcrey (1755-1809), scien-
  tist and director of public instruction, addressed the government's general assembly
  indicating satisfaction with the growth, curriculum, and emphasis on science in the
  lycees. By 1808 some forty-eight lycees were organized. On the other hand, it has been
  noted that actually the sciences played a minor role in secondary education, and that
  the humanities dominated the curriculum. Yet, FranQois Guizot (1787-1874), states-
  man, educator, and historian, acknowledged that the lycees had their "growing pains"
  but instruction in them was progressively perfected and surpassed the quality of
  instruction offered in the minor seminaries. 6

     A growing population and an expanding empire required additional lycees. Be-
  tween 1805 and 1813 the number of lycees increased significantly; schools were
  opened in France and in the imperial possessions: Italy, Germany, the Lowlands, and
  Switzerland. Moreover, the decree of November 15,1811, raised the number of lycees
  in the empire to one hundred, of which eighty were to be operating by 1812. Another
  decree of August 29 , 1813, created twenty-three more in France and annexed terri-
  tories; already in Paris in 1812 four lycees were operating and the city needed three
  more-it received four in addition to the expansion of the others. One should keep in
  mind that the communes erected 370 secondary schools by 1807 and apparently they
  were thriving.7 Also, despite the competition from the public school program, private
  secondary schools continued to exist. s In curricula these schools were regarded as
  complementary to the subjects offered on the higher level (in the Faculties of
  Science). Thus the educational structure embodied in the lycees indicates a growing
  preoccupation with the sciences probably unmatched anywhere else in Europe. Un-
  fortunately, for the further progress of the schools and science-education, the years
  1812-14 witnessed catastrophic military reverses that spelled the doom of the first
  Napoleonic empire; nevertheless, his educational system though modified has en-
  dured to the present day.

     What was the condition of higher education in the sciences? Article XXIII of the
  decree of May 1,1802, stated that "the final degree of instruction would comprehend
  a complete and exhaustive study as well as the perfecting of the sciences and the
  useful arts." Article XXV represents the central intention apropos of the sciences;
  seven of the ten divisions of the article pertain to science; one of them specified the
  formation of thirteen new special schools of science: four in natural history, chem-
  istry, and physics; another called for three medical schools; still another created two


                                                                                      23
Published by eCommons, 1976                                                                 3
