        Maras: Napoleon I and Education in the Sciences: One Aspect of the Two C

  ing elementary technical knowledge, mathematics, and physical science; on the other
  hand Charles Babbage of England praised the French government for establishing the
  Paris conservatory and for its lectures on the sciences as applied to the arts and
  manufactures. In Napoleon's time the Conservatory in Paris continued to be some-
  thing more than a museum. There were professorships in chemistry and mechanics;
  qualified personnel were provided in agriculture, and the curriculum included both
  theoretical and practical subjects. Collections were continuously added to the
  museum's stores. Charles' celebrated physics collection was added under the empire.
  Champagny, minister of interior, sent a request to Hanover to obtain literature con-
  cerning the mechanical arts. Moreover, the Parisian institution became a "center of
  demonstration of the applied sciences." Laboratories and workshops were provided
  and facilities offered to poor but promising workers to carry out their investigations.
  Out of such an atmosphere and assistance there came Jacquard's textile loom in 1801
  and Leblanc's later research on crystallography. The impetus to technology which
  the Revolution and Napoleon promised was bringing results . In 1810 Napoleon
  deemed it worthy of his time to visit the conservatory.
     Success did not mark the activity of every educational institution. The Ecole
  Poly technique, France's greatest school of applied science, failed to fulfill its glorious
  expectation. 19 The resolution of December 16, 1799, provided for the school's im-
  provement along scientific lines. Article I of the resolution stipulated that the Ecole
  Poly technique, founded during the Revolution, "est destinee a repandre l'instruction
  des sciences mathematiques, physiques, chimiques, et des arts graphiques, et par-
  ticulierement a former des eleves pour les ecoles d'application des services ci-apres
  designes . . . . "20 Articles XII and XIV placed emphasis on mathematics and the
  sciences, particularly their application. The council of improvement recommended
  that the special schools be restricted to applied science, their truly distinguishing
  mark. The Ecole was to enable the students to have the time and means to deepen
  their knowledge as well as to expand it; its general aim focused on a two year com-
  mon foundation centering about mathematics and the sciences. Unfortunately, the
  law abolished the students' freedom to choose their own careers, a decision contrary
  to the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen of 1789 which was substantially
  implemented in subsequent constitutions to 1795 but excluded in 1799. The Ecole
  was to be transformed "into a general school of advanced science ... to instruct
  those who wished to cultivate the arts and sciences for their own use, or to use
  their scientific knowledge in civil pursuits."21 The expanded curriculum thus was
  projecting the sciences to new heights of prestige. Theoretical chemistry and physics
  were stressed while an extensive mathematics program provided the basis for the
  more sophisticated study of the physical sciences. Despite this avowed new de-
  parture over 70 per cent of the graduates of 1799 entered the military service after
  Napoleon's coup d'etat-at this time France was at war with the second coalition.
  The process of militarizing the Ecole continued under Napoleon. The decree of July
  16, 1803, concerning the organization of the Ecole transformed it into a veritable
  military academy as military studies supplanted the curricula in science. Louis B.
  Guyton de Morveau (1737-1816), a well-known scientist and director of the Ecole,


Published by eCommons, 1976                                                                     7
                                                                                          27
