                  University of Dayton Review, Vol. 12, No. 3 [1976], Art. 3

    special schools in the mechanical and chemical arts, and one in mathematics, and
    another in geography9 The later law of April 11, 1803 , provided for the establishment
    of three or more schools of pharmacy. Fourcroy, the director of education, held the
    prevailing position that the progress of civilization followed the growth of science.
    Undoubtedly, Napoleon esteemed science highly for its practical contributions to the
    welfare of the state and his regime.
       The law of 1802 fixed the number of special professional schools and determined
    their curricula. During the subsequent four years the government completed organi-
    zation of these schools: "each one devoted to a definite, practical task, each answer-
    ing to a professional need clearly defined and generally understood; doing better
    without interference." The cardinal feature of these special schools lay in the greater
    specialization and more serious consideration given to each of the sciences for which
    the taste and talent disposed the student. These special schools provided the final
    stage of higher instruction: "l'etude complete et approfondie, ainsi que Ie perfection-
    nement des sciences et des arts utiles. " lo
      Having adopted the concept of the special school, the regime's authorities also
    introduced it into the annexed , imperial territories. In 1805 the University of Turin
    was to include nine special schools, among them those of pharmacy, natural sciences,
    and pure and applied mathematics; the school of natural sciences was only the second
    one in the empire then; Paris' Jardin des Plantes was the other. Genoa also had its
    special schools. Parenthetically, the University of Turin, with its recognition of the
    principle that the institution must give service to the state, provided Napoleon with
    a model implemented several years later.
       According to Guizot, by 1807-08 the various elements of public instruction had
    been instituted, but "success was lacking in the attempt to establish among them even
    the feeble ties that united them before the revolution." In short, the educational
    makeup in France lacked effective centralization. Also , "Aucune regIe n'etait etablie
    sur les etudes preliminaires qu'on devait exiger de ceux qui se presentaient pour
    entrer dans les differents ecoles speciaux; aucune correspondance ne liait ces ecoles
    aux ecoles secondaires." Hence, the Imperial University idea was superimposed upon
    the decentralized state of affairs. Louis de Fontanes, (1757-1821), author of an essay
    in verse form on astronomy and a classicist also , replaced Fourcroy in 1808. When he
    asserted that the country needed a single University and that this University required
    a single head, Napoleon is reported to have replied: 'It is so . .. , you understand
    me.'11
       The law of May 10,1806, established under the name of the Imperial University "un
    corps charge exclusivement de l'enseignement et de l'education public dans tout
    l'Empire." It was to provide a centralized system of national education for the coun-
    try, and would include under its supervision even the private schools. Fourcroy's
    discussion of the motives for the law forming a teaching body emphasized the need
    for physical sciences in education, primarily because of their utility.12 Napoleon
    harbored similar views. The Legislative Assembly judged that the study of mathe-


https://ecommons.udayton.edu/udr/vol12/iss3/3
    24                                                                                        4
