                    University of Dayton Review, Vol. 12, No. 3 [1976], Art. 3

    Since education per se is not confined entirely to the institutionalized systems of
  formal schooling, no matter how indispensable, one might therefore look beyond
  the schools to various societies to see what they were doing to promote the sciences.
  Napoleon's relationship to these societies, although not always direct, proved to be
  ~ignificant. Among the most important of these societies were the Society for the
  Encouragement of National Industry32 and the Arcueil Society.33 The former fostered
  research and practical application, placing French science within reach of the manu-
  facturer and the tiller of land. The Arcueil Society may be the French parallel to
  England's Lunar Society, a group of scientists and practical men who helped fashion
  the scientific climate of opinion and contributed to the growth of science, technology,
  and culture in England and the world. For many years Berthollet and Laplace, the
  two motive forces at Arcueil, promoted experiment, provided a library, laboratory
  facilities, and occasionally obtained financial aid. Its most famous representative is
  undoubtedly Gay-Lussac, discoverer of the law of gases. A third notable society ap-
  pears in the Societe philomatique. 34 Actually Napoleonic France was dotted with
  numerous scientific societies in the departments: a..mong them societies existed at
  Cherbourg, Grenoble, Poitiers, Mont-Tonnerre, and Ems-Superieur. 35
    Perhaps an excellent landmark in the development of science in France may be
  that of the growth of the Institute of France. Its First Class of the Physical and Mathe-
  matical Sciences comprised eleven sections; those of geography and navigation being
  new. Napoleon favored the First Class by including two perpetual secretaries, one
  for the physical, the other for the life sciences, a greater number of correspondents
  than any of the other classes, and by adding the new sections. The Institute was
  France's grand and prestigious body, a kind of senate of science, signalling to the
  government the new discoveries and inventions, and supervising instruction. The
  Institute usually recognized the illustrious men of mathematics and the sciences
  by welcoming them to its membership or correspondence. 36
    Thus, Napoleon, as may be induced from the above accumulated data, established
  and supported a new national system of formal and quasi-formal education that dis-
  ciplined the growing power, utility, and attraction of the new knowledge and method-
  ology. To further promote the advances in secondary as in higher education, he pro-
  ceeded with "crash" programs, awards, and prizes to stimulate training, research,
  and discovery. Indubitably, one of the grandest successes, but one rather short-lived
  and never fully developed, was the establishment of science as a keystone in French
  education. He and his counsellors esteemed the "two cultures," understanding their
  complementarity and appreciating their relative values.
                                                                           University of Dayton

                                             NOTES
    I. L. Pearce Williams, "Science, Education , and Napoleon I ," Isis, XLVII (1956), 379-82.
    2. Paul Bartel, La Jeunesse in·e dite de Napoleon d'a pres de Ilombreux documents (Paris, 1954),
        pp. 62-64, 250.



https://ecommons.udayton.edu/udr/vol12/iss3/3
  30                                                                                                   10
