        Maras: Napoleon I and Education in the Sciences: One Aspect of the Two C
  observatories which under the empire existed in Paris, Marseilles, Toulouse, Turin,
  and Genoa. Moreover, the Bureau of Longitudes in Paris, a creation of the Revolution,
  employed four astronomers, two navigators, one geographer, and four assistants
  to the astronomers .24

     Experimentalism further manifested itself in the development of innovative
  projects. Under the Directory there were appeals for special schools, one of which
  appeared in 1800 at Lyons. Chaptal provided the necessary funds for the school
  specializing in applied experimental chemistry "applicable aux pro cedes et au per-
  fectionnement des arts et manufactures. "25 In 1806 a plan was presented for the es-
  tablishment of a professorship in hydrostatics and hydrodynamics.26 Such scientists
  as Bossut, Monge , Lagrange, and Prony were interested in the theory and subject mat-
  ter; Marie Riche, Baron de Prony (1735-1839), was also absorbed with the practical
  applications. It is amusing if not revealing that the professor teaching the subject
  would have to teach transcendental mathematics, physics, chemistry, hydraulic
  architecture, and mechanics; he would also be expe cted to produce an elementary
  treatise discussing the sciences in their present state of development. Another inno-
  vation proposed the creation of a school of forestry which one writer regarded in
  1807 as a necessity.27 It is known that French-sponsored experimental stations
  existed in the United States at this time. In 1806, moreover, the Museum of Natural
  History established a school of agriculture reputed as the first of its kind in Europe;
  its purpose was "d'augmenter les moyens d'arriver a la connaissance de l'histoire
  naturelle des vegetaux . . ." through experiment.28

     Experimentalism, of course, pervaded the curricula of the Ecole Normale, which
  prepared the teaching faculty for the nation , and which was regarded as "en effet
  Ie complement naturel de ces Facultes (des Sciences et des Lettres); les uns donnaient
  les maltres, l'autre fournissait les eleves ; de leur collaboration dependaient Ie sort
  de l'Universite."29 The revised regulations (1809) in the Faculty of Sciences also
  affected the Ecole Normale by placing emphasis on mathematics and physi cs.3o
  Article XIV required all students to take courses in general and experimental physics ;
  Article XV required students majoring in the math series to take all four courses in
  mathematics: integral and differential calculus, mechanics , and astronomy. Articles
  XVII-XXI dealt with the life sciences. Courses meeting twice weekly for one hour
  lasted seven months. Article XXIX required demonstrations and experiments in all
  courses possible. The method of experimentalism and the philosophy of empiricism
  may also be illustrated in the activity of Franc;:ois Magendie (1783-1855), who had
  taken his medical training under the new system of medical studies which Napoleon
  instituted. 31 Trained in the new methodology he experimented with physiological,
  phenomena, espousing a theory of biological determinism-an operational principle
  which posits the tenet that "under identical conditions the resulting phenomena will
  be identical. " He and later Claude Bernard, the physiologist, vindicated the experi-
  mental method for medicine. Such pioneering was multiplied time and again, having
  become an integral part of science's universality and standard procedure.



Published by eCommons, 1976                                                           29    9
