

ART. IV. If, unfortunately, the forces stipulated in the preceding Article should be found insufficient, the High Contracting Parties will concert together, without loss of time, as to the additional number of troops to be furnished by each for the support of the Common Cause; and they engage to employ in case of need, the whole of their forces, in order to bring the War to a speedy and successful termination, reserving to themselves the right to prescribe, by common consent, such Conditions of Peace as shall hold out to Europe a sufficient Guarantee against the recurrence of a similar calamity.

ART. V. The High Contracting Parties having agreed to the dispositions laid down in the preceding Articles, for the purpose of securing the effect of their Engagements during the period of the temporary occupation, declare, moreover, that even after the expiration of this measure, the said Engagements shall still remain in full force and vigour, for the purpose of carrying into effect such measures as may be deemed necessary for the maintenance of the stipulations contained in the Articles I. and II. of the present Act.

ART. VI. To facilitate and to secure the execution of the present Treaty, and to consolidate the connexions which at the present moment so closely unite the Four Sovereigns for the Happiness of the World, the High Contracting Parties have agreed to renew their meetings at fixed periods, either under the immediate auspices of the Sovereigns themselves, or by their respective ministers, for the purpose of consulting upon their common interests, and for the consideration of the measures which at each of those periods shall be considered the most salutary tor the repose and prosperity of Nations, and for the maintenance of the Peace of Europe.

ART. VII. The present Treaty shall be ratified, and the ratifications shall be exchanged within Two Months, or sooner, if possible.

In faith of which the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed it, and affixed thereto the seal of their arms.

Done at Paris, the 20th of November, 1815.

| (Signed) | (Signed) |
| --- | --- |
| (L. S.) Castlereagh. | (L. S.) Metternich. |
| (L. S.) Wellington. | (L. S.) Wessenberg. |

## Note from the Ministers of the United Cabinets to the Duke of Richelieu

NOTE from the Ministers of the United Cabinets, to the Duke de Richelieu, communicating a Copy of the preceding Treaty of Alliance; dated Paris 20th November 1815.[2]

The Undersigned Ministers of the United Cabinets have the honour to communicate to his Excellency the Duke de Richelieu the New Treaty of Alliance which they have just signed, in the name and by command of Their august Sovereigns; the object of which has been, to give to the Principles established by those of Chaumont, and Vienna the application the most conformable to existing circumstances, and to unite the destinies of France with the common interest of Europe.

The Allied Cabinets consider the stability of the order of things, happily re-established this Country, as one of the essential bases of a solid and durable tranquillity. It is towards this end that their united efforts have been constantly directed; it is their sincere desire to maintain and to consolidate the result of these efforts, which has dictated all the stipulations of the New Treaty. His Most Christian Majesty will perceive in this Act the solicitude with which they have concerted measures the most proper to remove every thing which might in future endanger the interior repose of France, and prepared remedies against the dangers with which the Royal Authority, the basis of public order, might yet be menaced. The principles and the intentions of the Allied Sovereigns in this respect are invariable; of this the engagements which they have just contracted furnish the most unequivocal proofs; but the lively interest which they take in the satisfaction of his Most Christian Majesty, as well as in the tranquillity and prosperity of his Kingdom, makes them hope that the fatal chances suppose! in these engagements, will never be realized.