

ART. I. The High Contracting Parties reciprocally promise to maintain, in its force and vigour, the Treaty signed this day with His Most Christian Majesty,[3] and to see that the stipulations of the said Treaty, as well as those of the particular Conventions which have reference thereto, shall be strictly and faithfully executed in their fullest extent.[4]

ART. II. The High Contracting Parties, having engaged in the war which is just terminated, for the purpose of maintaining inviolably the Arrangements settled at Paris last year,[5] for the safety and interest of Europe, have judged it advisable to renew the said Engagements by the present Act, and to confirm them as mutually obligatory, subject to the Modifications contained in the Treaty signed this day with the Plenipotentiaries of his Most Christian Majesty,[3] and particularly those by which Napoleon Buonaparte and his family, in pursuance of the Treaty of the 11th of April 1814, have been for ever excluded from Supreme Power in France, which exclusion the Contracting Powers bind themselves, by the present Act, to maintain in full vigour, and, should it be necessary, with the whole of their Forces.[6] And as the same Revolutionary Principles which upheld the last criminal Usurpation, might again, under other forms, convulse France, and thereby endanger the repose of other States ; under these circumstances, the High Contracting Parties solemnly admitting it to be their Duty to redouble their watchfulnes for the tranquillity and interests of their People, engage, in case so unfortunate an event should again occur, to concert amongst themselves, and with his Most Christian Majesty, the measures which they may judge necessary to be pursued for the safety of their respective States, and for the general Tranquillity of Europe.

ART. III. The High Contracting Parties, in agreeing with his Most Christian Majesty that a line of military positions in France should be occupied by a corps of Allied troops during a certain number of years,[7] had in view to secure, as far as lay in their power, the effect of the stipulations contained in Articles I. and II. of the present Treaty, and uniformly disposed to adopt every salutary measure calculated to secure the tranquillity of Europe by maintaining the order of things re-established in France, they engage, that in case the said body of troops should be attacked or menaced with an attack on the part of France, that the said Powers should be again obliged to place themselves on a war establishment against that Power, in order to maintain either of the said stipulations, or to secure and support the great interests to which they relate, each of the High Contracting Parties shall furnish, without delay, according to the stipulations of the Treaty of Chaumont, and especially in pursuance of the 7th and [[8th Articles of this Treaty, its full Contingent of Sixty Thousand Men, in addition to the forces left in France, or such part of the said Contingent as the exigency of the case may require should be put in motion.