



PKEFACE. 


Vll 


lias lost by this mode of treatment in compactness and 
continuity, it has gained in trustworthiness and authen¬ 
ticity. If the narrative be less animated, the history is 
more genuine. 1 have had to deal with unpublished 
materials, and to treat of very strange events; and I 
have not tlioimlit it suflicient to fuse these materials 

O 

into my text, and to leave the reader to fix or not 
to fix his faith upon the unsupported assertions of an 
unknown writer. 

I would make another observation regaiding the exe¬ 
cution of tliis Work. The more notorious events of the 
A\"ar, which stand fully revealed in military despatches 
and published blue-books, have not been elaborated 
Avith the care, and expanded into the amplitude, which 
their imiiortance may seem to demand. These Volumes 
may bo tliought, perliaps, rather deficient in respect of 
military details. Compelled to condense somewhere, I 
have purposely abstained from enlarging upon those 
events, which have already found fitting chroniclers. 
The military memoir-Avriters, each one on his own 
limited field, hav arranged before us all the strategical 
operations of the Campaign from the assemblage of 
Fane’s army in 1838, to the return of Pollock’s at the 
close of 1842; but the political history of the War 
has never been written. For information on many 
points of militar}’ interest, not sufficiently dAvelt upon 
in these volumes, I Avould therefore refer the reader 
to the Avorks of Havelock, Hough, Barr, Eyre, Stacy, 
Nedl, and other soldierly Avriters. The progi’ess of 
events in Upper Sindh alter the cajiture of Khelat, 
I have not attempted to narrate. The military opera- 



Vlll 


PREFACE. 


tions in that part of the country have found an intelli¬ 
gent annalist in Dr. Buist. 

1 need only now, after gratefully acknowledging my 
obligations to all who have aided me with original 
papers, or with information otherwise conveyed (and I 
have largely taxed the patience of many during the 
progrc'ss of this work), offer one more word of apology. 
I knoAv that ray scholarly Oriental friends will revolt 
against my spelling of Oriental names. I have only to 
bow beneath their correcting hand, and fling myself 
u])on their mercy. I have written all the names in the 
old and vulgar manner, most familiar to the English 
eye. and in pronunciation to the English ear; and I 


October, 1851. 



CONTExNTS OF VOL L 


BOOK I.—INTRODUCTION. 

[1800—1837.] 

CHAPTER I. 

[1800—1801.] PAGE 

.Sliah Zemaun and the Douranee Empire—Threatened Afghan Invasion— 
Malcolm’s First Mission to Persia— Country and People of Afghanistan— 

Fall of Zemaun Shah. 1 


CHAPTER II. 

[1801—1808.] 

The Early Days of Soojah-ool-Moolk—Disastrous Commencement of his 
Career—Defeat of Shah iMahmoud—Reign of Shah Soojali—The Insurrec¬ 
tion of Prince Kaysur—Tidings of the British Mission . 2.1 

CHAPTER III. 

[1801—1808.] 

Franco and Russia in the J‘]ast—Death of Hadjee Khalil Khan—The Mission 
of Condolence—Aga Nebee Khan—Extension of Russian Dominion in the 
East—French Diplomacy in Persia—The Pacification of Tilsit—Decline 
of French Influence at Teheran . 3.1 