


CHAPTER III. 

[June—August : 1839.] 

Tlie Disunion of the Barukzycs—Prospects of Dost Mahomed—Keane's 
Advance to Ghuznee—^lassacre of the Prisoners—Fall of Gliuznce— 
Flight of Dost Mahomed—lladjee Khan, Khuukur—Escape of Dost Ma¬ 
homed . 

CHAPTER IV. 

[August—Deeembor: 1839.] 

Dawn of the Rcstorati.ju—DiflBculties of our Position—Pi'oposed With¬ 
drawal of the Army—Arrival of Colonel AVado—Ilis Operations—Lord on 
tlie llmdoo-Koosli—Evils of our Policy—Defective Agency—Moollah 
Shikore—Our Political Agents—Operations in the Khybur Pass—The 
Fall of Khelat. 46 i> 


BOOK IV. 

[1340—1841.] 

CHAPTER I. 

[January—September ; 1840.] 

The Gr-^at Game of Central Asia—The Russian Expedition to Khiva—Ap¬ 
prehensions of Burnes—Colonel Stoddart—Affairs on the Ilindoo-Koosh 
—Failure of the Russian Expedition—Conduct of the Sikhs—Herat and 
Yar Mahomed—Mission of Abbott and Shakespear—Disturbances in the 
Ghilzye Country—Fall of Khelat—Arthur Conolly. 49 (i 









Xll 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER IL 

[June—Noyember; 1840.] page 

The last Struggles of Dost Mahomed-^The British in the Hindoo-Koosh— 

The Ameer’s Family—Occupation of Bajgah—^Disaster of Kamurd—Es¬ 
cape of Dost Mahomed—Fererish State of Caubul—-Dennie’s Brigade— 
Defeat of the Ameer—Sale in the Eohistan—The Battle of Purwan- 
durrah—Surrender of Dost Mahomed. 542 

CHAPTER m. 

[[November: 1840—September: 1841.] 

Yar Mahomed and the Douranees—Season of Peace—Position of the Dou- 
ranees—The Zemindawer Outbreak—Conduct of Yar Mahomed—Depar¬ 
ture of Major Todd—Risings of the Douranees and Ghilzyes—^Engage¬ 
ments with Aktur Khan and the Gooroo—Dispersion of the Insurgents.. 569 

CHAPTER IV. 

[September—October: 1841.] 

Aspect of Affairs at Caubul—The King—The Envoy—Burnes—Elphinstone 
—The English at Caubul—Expenses of the War—Retrenchments of the 
Subsidies—Risings of the Ghilzyes—Sale’s Brigade—Gatherings in the 
Kohistan . 604 

. . 637 


ERRATA IN VOL. I. 

Page 128, line 15, for “ Seigtan,” read “Seistan.” 

„ 131, line 5, for as if though,” read “ as though.” 

„ 378, note, for “Sale and Denniss,” read “ Sale and Dennie." 






THE WAH IN AFGHANISTAN. 


BOOK I-INTRODUCTION. 
[ 1800 — 1837 .] 


CHAPTEE I. 

[ 1800 — 1801 .] 

Shah Zetnauu and the Doiivanee Empire—Threatened Afghan Invasion— 
Malcolm’s First Mission to Fersia—Country and People of Afghanistan— 
Fall of Zemaun Shah. 

At the dawn of the present century, Zemaun Shah 
reigned over the Douranee Empire. The son of Timour 
Shah, and the grandson of the illustrious Ahmed Shah, 
he had sought, on the death of his father, the danger¬ 
ous privilege of ruling a divided and tumultuous people. 
Attaining by intrigue and violence what did not rightfully 
descend to him by inheritance, he soon began to turn 
his thoughts towards foreign conquest, and to meditate 
the invasion of Hindostan. His talents were not equal 
to his ambition, and his success fell far short of the mag¬ 
nitude of his designs. There was too little security at 
home to ensure for him prosperity abroad. And so it 
happened, that he was continually marching an army 
upon the frontier, eager to extend the Douranee Empire 
to the banks of the Ganges; and continually retracing 
von. I. B 