


* I find this fact stated, among The execution of his intentions will 
other answers to queries put in 1800-1 be hazardous unless he can obtain 
by Captain Malcolm to Mahomed the co-operation of the Sikhs and 
Sadik, in an interesting manuscript hostages for the continuance of it; 
document forwarded to government and I have great doubt as to his 
by that officer. success.” Lord Wellesley, two or 

t Of the two, perhaps, Lord three years later, spoke of the threat- 
Wellesley regarded the movements ened invasion “ creating the liveliest 
of the Douranee monarch with the sensation throughout Indiaand 
livelier concern. Sir John Shore added, “Every Mahomedan, even in 
wrote: “Report speaks of an in- the remotest re^on of the Deccan, 
vasion of Hindostan by Zemaun waited with anxious expectation for 
Shah, and with respect to his in- the advance of the champion of Is- 
tention is entitled to credit. . . . lam.” 

B 2 



4 


SHAH ZEMAUN AND THE DOUEANEE EMPIEE. 


the emissaries of Napoleon were endeavouring to cement 
alliances hostile to Great Britain in every quarter of the 
Eastern world, the position of affairs in Central Asia was 
regarded with increased anxiety, and their management 
demanded greater wisdom and address. It was now no 
longer a question of mere military defence against the 
inroads of a single invader. The repeated failures of 
Zemaun Shah had, in some degree, mitigated the alarm 
with which his movements were dimly traced in Hin- 
dostan. The Douranee monarch lost something of his 
importance as an independent enemy; but as the willing 
agent of a hostile confederacy, he appeared a more for¬ 
midable opponent, and might have become a more suc¬ 
cessful one. An offensive alliance between France, Persia, 
and Caubul, might have rendered the dangers, which once 
only seemed to threaten us from the North-west, at once 
real and imminent. To secure the friendship of Persia, 
therefore, was the great aim of the British Government. 
It was obvious that, whilst threatened with invasion 
from the West, Zemaun Shah could never conduct to a 
successful issue an expedition against Hindostan; and 
that so long as Persia remained true to Great Britain, 
there was nothing to be apprehended from French in¬ 
trigue in the countries of Central Asia. It was deter¬ 
mined, therefore, to despatch a mission to the Court of 
the Persian Shah, and Captain Malcolm was selected to 
conduct it. 

The choice could not have fallen on a fitter agent. In 
the fullest vigour of life, a young man, but not a young 
soldier, for, born in that year of heroes which witnessed 
the nativity of Wellington, of Napoleon, and of Mehemet 
Ali, he had entered the service of the Company at the 
early age of thirteen. Captain Malcolm brought to the 
difficult and responsible duties entrusted to him, extra¬ 
ordinary energy of mind and activity of body—talents 



Malcolm’s fibst mission to Persia. 


5 


of the most available and useful character—some experi¬ 
ence of native courts and acquaintance with the Oriental 
languages.* He had been successively military secretary 
to the commander-in-chief of Madras, town-major of 
Fort St. George, assistant to the Eesident at Hyderabad, 
and commandant of the infantry of the Nizam’s contin¬ 
gent. When that army took the field in Mysore, and 
shared in the operations against Tippoo Sultan, Captain 
Malcolm accompanied it in the capacity of political 
agent, which was virtually the chief command of the 
force; and, after the reduction of Seringapatam and the 
death of Tippoo, was associated with General Wellesley, 
Colonel Close, and Captain Munro,f in the commission 
that was then appointed for the settlement of the Mysore 
country. This was in 1799. 