


debted for their success to their entire 
independence of all foreign aid. As 
the minion of Persia, Shah Mahmood 
could never have prevailed against 
his elder brother. As the popular 
Douraneo champion he was irresis¬ 
tible.”— [Calcutta Review^ vol. xii.] 
Malcolm was at Shiraz in June, 1800, 
when he received intelligence of the 
Shah's successes in Khorassan. “ I 
have sent,” he wrote, “ the firman of 
the king, giving an account of his 
successful progress in Khorassan, 
which came yesterday (June 27,, 
1800), that I may peruse it. My 
doing so will be taken as a com- 
liment. I shall have to give a 
andsome present to the Persian that 
brings and reads it: but I shall be 
able correctly to ascertain its re¬ 
sults.”— [MS, Correspondence of Sir 
John Malcolm,'] 

t MS, Correspondence of Sir John 
Malcolm, 



PB00BE8S OF THE FEBSIAK MISSION. 


7 


Malcolm wrote, the days of his sovereignty were num¬ 
bered, and the bugbear of Afghan invasion was passing 
into tradition. 

But neither Lord Wellesley nor Captain Malcolm 
thought only of an Afghan invasion. Their excited 
imaginations beheld clearly the French in the distance; 
and when it became the duty of the' diplomatist to weave 
into the shape of a treaty the defensive policy of the 
British-Indian Government, it was at once apparent that 
apprehensions of French intrigue and French hostility 
were paramount in the minds alike of the Governor- 
General and his representative. It would have been 
sound policy to conceal these apprehensions. Instead 
of this, we declared them to the world; and from that 
time it stood revealed to all nations, by our own show¬ 
ing, that we looked upon Persia and Afghanistan as the 
high-road from Europe to the heart of our Indian Em¬ 
pire. The terras proposed by Captain Malcolm were 
acceded to with but little reluctance by the Persian 
Court. The envoy was empowered either to offer a sub¬ 
sidy of from three to four lakhs of rupees for a term of 
three years, or by a liberal distribution of presents to 
the king and hit principal ministers, to bribe them into 
acquiescence. Malcolm chose the latter course. He 
threw about his largesses with an unstinting hand, and 
everything went smoothly with him. The name of 
England became great in Iran; and in the breasts of the 
highest and the lowest a fever of cupidity was raised, of 
which every subsequent mention of an English mission 
brought back a serious relapse. 

The ffirther Malcolm advanced into the interior, the 
greater was the attention shown to the Mission, for the 
greater was the renown of the liberality of the Christian 
Elchee. Every difficulty melted away beneath the 



8 


S HAH ZEMAITN AUD THE DOUEANEE EMPIRE. 


magic touch of British gold.* There had been at the 
outset some trifling disputes about formalities—about 
titles and designations—but these were soon cleared 
away; and the serious business of the Mission proceeded 
in the midst of feasts and formalities to a satisfactory 
completion. Of all the terms proposed by Captain Mal¬ 
colm, but one was demurred to by the Persian Court. 
“And that even,” writing some years afterwards, he 
says, “was not rejected. It was referred for future 
settlement through the agency of Hadjee Ehalil Khan, 
who was appointed ambassador on the part of the Persian 
Government to India.”f This proposal related to the 
cession of the island of Kishm in the Persian Gulf, on 
the necessity of which Malcolm wrote a gigantic state- 
paper, and never ceased to expatiate so long as he had 
a hand in the game of Persian diplomacy. But other 
able men then and since have scouted this favourite idea 
of a settlement in the Persian Gulf as a defence against 
European encroachments; and shown, by undeniable 
geographical demonstration, the shadowy nature alike of 
the danger and the defence. 