

In February, 1801, Captain Malcolm reported that he 
had accomplished the object of his mission, and brought 
his labours to a close. “ Whether with credit or not,” 
he added in a private letter, “ it is the province of my 
superiors to judge. I can only say, in self-defence, that 
I have done as much as 1 was able; and no man can do 

* But before Malcolm^ left Shiraz thought necessary to answer, or rather 
he began to have some misgiyings on further, the ends of my mission, and to 
the score of his lavish expenditure, support the dignity of the Briti^ 
“ I trust I will not disappoint your Government; but people sometimes 
hopes,** he writes from that place, differ in their opinions on such points, 
under date Jul^ 26, 1800, “ but the However, ‘All’s well Ibat ends well,’ 
expense 1 have incurred is heavy, and as the man called his play.”— 
it is on that score alone I am alarmed. Correspondence of Sir John Malcolm.'] 
Not that it is one farthing more than f Brigadier ^General Malcolm to 
I have to the best of my judgment Lord Minto^ October y 1810. 



THE ANTI-GAliUCAlI TREATY. 


9 


more. I am far from admiring my own work, or con¬ 
sidering it (as termed in one of the preambles) a beau¬ 
tiful image in the mirror perpetuity. It is, on the 
contrary, I know, a very incorrect performance; and I can 
hope it to meet with a favourable consideration only on 
the grounds of the difficulties I had to encounter in a 
first negotiation with a government not two stages re¬ 
moved from a state of barbarism.”* 

The treaty, indeed, called for apology; but not on the 
grounds indicated in this deprecatory letter. It stipu¬ 
lated that if ever again the Douranee monarch should 
be induced to attempt the invasion of Hindostan, the 
King of Persia should be bound to lay waste, with a 
great army, the country of the Afghans; and conclude 
no peace with its ruler that was not accompanied 
with a solemn engagement to abstain from all aggres¬ 
sions upon the English. But it was remarkable chiefly 
for the bitterness with which it proscribed the French. 
“ Should an army of the French nation,” it stated, 
“ attempt to settle, with a view of establishing them¬ 
selves on any of the islands or shores of Persia, a con¬ 
joint force shall be appointed by the two high con¬ 
tracting parties to act in co-operation for their ex¬ 
pulsion and extirpation, and to destroy and put an end 
to the foundation of their treason; and if any of the 
great men of the French nation express a wish or desire 
to obtain a place of residence or dwelling in any of the 
islands or shores of the kingdom of Persia, that they may 

• MS, Correspondence ,—^In another wishing to demonstrate the advan- 
letter Malcolm says: “ Had 1 to do tages of simplicity of style^ he pro- 
with men of sense and moderation 1 duced a copy of an Indian treaty, 
should not fear, but I have to deal when the M^za, after reading two 
with a ^ race that are possessed of articles of it, declared that he would 
nei^».*' The necessity of adopting “ give in his resignation to his sove- 
m all his negotiations the most flowery reign rather than that such a docu- 
language,^ somewhat puzzled him at ment should be copied into the re- 
first; but in time he fell into the right cords of the office over which he 
vein of discourse. On one occasion, presided.'* 