

In that same year be was selected by Lord Wellesley 
to fill the post of envoy to the Court of Persia. With 
such address had he acquitted himself in all his antece¬ 
dent appointments; so great had been the knowledge of 
native character, the diplomatic tact, and the sound un¬ 
derstanding he had evinced in all his negotiations; that 
at an age when the greater number of his contemporaries 
were in the discht rge of no higher duties than those en¬ 
tailed by the command of a company of sepoys, Captain 
Malcolm was on his way to the presence of the great 
defender of Islamism, charged with one of the most impor¬ 
tant missions that has ever been despatched by the British- 
Indian Government to the Court of a native potentate. 

• The mission, says Captain Malcolm, was “ completely 
successfuland they who do not trouble themselves to 

* This must be taken, however, made but slight progress in it, al- 
wiih some limitation. At this time, though he had somewhat improved 
according to Malcolm's own account, his Hindostanee pronunciation, 
hb knowledge of Persian was not very f Men who lived to occupy a space 

extensive or profound. Hewrotefrom in history, as the Duke of Welfing- 
Shiraz that he had had so little time ton. Sir Barry Close, and Sir Thomas 
to study the language, that he had Munro. 



6 


SHAH ZEMAtJH AND THE DOUBANEB EMPIRE. 


inquire too nicely into the relations of cause and effect, 
may accept this assertion of its success. But the fact is, 
that time and circumstance did more for us than diplo¬ 
macy. It was the ostensible object of Captain Malcolm’s 
mission to instigate the Shah of Persia to move an army 
upon Herat, and so to withdraw Shah Zemaun from his 
threatened invasion of Hindostan. But the move, which 
was to do so much for our security in India, had been 
made before the British ambassador appeared at the 
Persian Court; and the work, which was thus com¬ 
menced by Futteh Ali, was completed by Prince Mah¬ 
moud.* “ You may rest assured,” wrote Captain Mal¬ 
colm, from Ispahan, in October, 1800, “ that Zemaun 
Shah can do nothing in India before the setting in of the 
rains of 1801. He has not time, even if he had the 
power for such an attempt; and by the blessing of God 
he will for some years to come be too much engaged in 
this quarter to think of any other.”f But some years to 
come of empire he was not destined to see. Even as 


^ A writer in the Calcutta 
who betrays an acquaintance with his 
subject such as could only have been 
iictj^uircd in the countries of which he 
writes, or by the examination of an 
immense mass of contemporary re¬ 
cords, justly observes: “That the 
storm was dissipated in the manner 
suggested by Lord Wellesley was cre¬ 
ditable to his lordship’s foresight, but 
was entirely independent of his mea¬ 
sures. ^ The second expedition of Fut¬ 
teh Ali Khan into Khorassan in 1800, 
which drew Shah Zemaun from Can- 
dahor to Herat, took place almost si¬ 
multaneously with Captain Malcolm’s 
journey from the south of Persia to 
the capital. His majesty received the 
British mission at Subzewar; and 
the subsequent proceedings of Shah 
Mahmood, which led, in the sequel, 
to his dethronement, so far from ori¬ 
ginating in British instigation or in 
Persian support, were in reality in¬ 