



2 


SHAH ZEMAim AND THE DODBANBB EMFIBE. 


Ms steps in alarm, lest his own sovereignty should be 
wrested from him in his absence. For many years 
Zemauu Shah’s descent upon Hindostan kept the British 
Indian Empire in a chronic state of unrest. But he 
never advanced further than Lahore, and then was com¬ 
pelled precipitately to retire. Starvation threatened his 
troops; a brotherly usurper his throne; and he hastened 
back lest he should find Prince Mahmoud reigning at 
Caubul in his stead. 

This was in 1797,* when Sir John Shore was Go¬ 
vernor-General of India. We smile now at the alarm 
that was created along the whole line of country from 
the Attock to the Hooghly, by the rumored approach of 
this formidable invader. But half a century ago, the 
English in India knew little of the resources of the 
Douranee Empire, of the national characteristics of the 
people, of the continually unsettled state of their political 
relations, or of the incompetcncy of the monarch him¬ 
self to conduct any great enterprise. Distance and ig¬ 
norance magnified the danger; but the apprehensions, 
which were then entertained, were not wholly ground¬ 
less apprehensions. All the enemies of the British 
Empire in India had turned their eyes with malicious 
expectancy upon Caubul. Out of the rocky defiles of 
that romantic country were to stream the deliverers of 
Islamism from the yoke of the usurping Franks. The 
blood of the Mahomedan princes of India was at fever 
heat. From northern Oude and from southern Mysore 
had gone forth invitations to the Afghan monarch. 
With large promises of aid, in money and in men. Vizier 
Ali and Tippoo Sultan had encouraged him to move 


* And again in the cold weather 
of 1798-99 he advanced as far as 
Lahore, but was recalled by the in¬ 
vasion of Khorassan by the Persian 
troops. Lord Wellesley had by this 


time succeeded to the government 
of India. The danger was then con¬ 
sidered sufficiently cogent to call 
for an augmentation of the native 
army. 



BUHOBBD AFGHAN INVASION. 


3 


down upon Hindostan at the head of an army of true 
believers. Others, with whom he could claim no com¬ 
munity of creed, extended to him the hand of fellowship. 
The Bajah of Jyneghur offered him a lakh of rupees a 
day as soon as the grand army should enter his dis¬ 
trict.* We, who in these times trustingly contemplate 
the settled tranquillity of the north-western provinces 
of India, and remember Zemaun Shah only as the old 
blind pensioner of Loodhianah, can hardly estimate 
aright the real importance of the threatened move¬ 
ment, or appreciate the apprehensions which were felt 
by two governors-general of such different personal cha¬ 
racters as Sir John Shore and Lord Wellesley.f 

The new century had scarcely dawned upon the Eng¬ 
lish in India, when the perils which seemed to threaten 
them from beyond the Indus began to assiune a more 
complicated and perplexing character. The ambition of 
a semi-barbarous monarch and the inflammatory zeal of 
hordes of Mussulman fanatics, were sources of danger, 
which, however alarming, were at least plain and in¬ 
telligible. But when it was suspected that there was 
intrigue of a more remote and insidious character to 
be combated—i hen intelligence, only too credible, of 
the active efforts of French diplomacy in Persia, reached 
the Calcutta Council-Chamber, and it was believed that 