

In the time of Ahmed Shah the Douranee horsemen 
mustered about 6000 strong. The other western tribes and 
the Persian stipendiaries together reached about the same 
number. In the reign of Timour Shah, the army was com¬ 
puted at some 40,000 soldiers, almost entirely horsemen ;§ 


♦ And even this obligation ceased 
to be recognised by Abmed Shah, 
who paid the Douranee horsemen for 
their services, alleging that their lands 
had been bestowed upon them as a 
free and unencumbered gift. In Ze- 
maun Shah’s time they held pay-cer¬ 
tificates, available when they were 
called out on active service, and rea¬ 
lised, if they could, t.ie amount due 
to them by means of o 'ders on Cash- 
mere, Mooltan, and other outlying 
provinces. — [J/aS. liecords-~-llawUn-‘ 
son and Malcolm,'] 

t Or, more strictly, for every parcel 
of land demanding the services of a 
single kulha, or plough; from which 
the division of land, and the assess¬ 
ment founded upon it, took its name. 

t Thus the Fopulzy es, who had 965 
kulbaSf furnished, in Ahmed Shah’s 
time, 806 horsemen ; the Alekozyes, 
with 1050 kulbas, gave 851; the Ba- 
r^zyes, who had 1018 kulbas^ fur¬ 
nished 907; and so on. I must state 
tlmt I do not derive these details from 
Sir John Malcolm and his informants, 
but from Major (now Colonel) Baw- 
linson, who extracted them from 
the Candahar records when Political 


Agent at that place. To an elaborate 
report on the revenue system of 
Western Afghanistan, especially as 
affecting the Douranee tribes, drawn 
up by that accomplished officer in 
1842, I am indebted for much va¬ 
luable information, which will be 
found incorporated with subsequent 
portions of the narrative. 

§ The authority for this, according 
to Malcolm’s informant, was the Cau- 
bul records. The numbers set down 
are 12,000 Douranees, 12,000 Kuz- 
zilbashcs, 8000 Gliilzycs, 3000 Kho- 
rassanees, 3W0 Beloocbees, 300 Ha- 
zarehs. It is not improbable that in 
this computation, which is somewhat 
va^ely given, account is taken of the 
reliefs; so that, for every one horse¬ 
man on service at a time, two are set 
down in the records. Forster, who 
travelled in Afghanistan in the reign 
of Timour Shah, says that his entire 
anny did not exceed 30,000 men, nor 
his revenue a million of our money. 
How these men were not paid by 
Timour Shah, and how they con¬ 
trived to pay themselves, m^ be ga¬ 
thered frona a passage in Forster’s 
Travels, which is worth transcribing; 



16 fiTTATT ZEMAUN AND THE DOUBANEE EMPIEE. 


but no such force had served under Zemaun Shah, and 
they who had seen in 1799-1800, the muster of his troops 
near Caubul, and had access to the returns of the muster- 
masters, reported that he then assembled only some ten 
or twelve thousand men, and aU, with the exception 
of a few Persian stipendiaries, in the immediate service 
of the Wuzeer, very miserably equipped. Even the 
Kuzzilbashes, when Shah Zemaun took the field in 
1799, refiised to accompany the projected expedition, on 
the plea that they wanted arms to fight their battles, 
and money to support their wives. 