



12 SHAH ZBMATJN AND THE DODBANEE EMPIRE. 


wheeled carriages, they were for the most part good 
horsemen, and lived much in the saddle. Early trained 
to the use of arms, compelled constantly to wear and 
often to use them in the ordinary intercourse of life, 
every man was more or less a soldier or a bandit. Their 
very shepherds were men of strife. The pastoral and 
the predatory character were strangely blended; and the 
tented cantonments of the sheep-drivers often bristled 
into camps of war. 

But there was a brighter side to the picture. Of a 
cheerful, lively disposition, seemingly but little in ac¬ 
cordance with the outward gravity of their long beards 
and sober garments, they might be seen in their villages, 
at evening tide, playing or dancing like children in their 
village squares; or, assembling in the Fakir’s gardens, to 
smoke and talk, retailing the news gathered in the shops, 
reciting stories, and singing their simple Afghan ballads, 
often expressive of that tender passion which, among 
them alone of all Oriental nations, is worthy of the name 
of love. Hospitable and generous, they entertained the 
stranger without stint, and even his deadliest enemy was 
safe beneath the Afghan’s roof. There was a simple 
courtesy in their manner which contrasted favourably 
with the polished insincerity of the Persians on one side, 
and the arrogant ferocity of the Rohillas on the other. 
Judged by the strict standard of a Christian people, they 
were not truthful in word or honest in deed, but, side by 
side with other Asiatic nations, their truthfulness and 
honesty were conspicuous. Kindly and considerate to 
their immediate dependents, the higher classes were fol¬ 
lowed-with loyal zeal and served with devoted fidelity 
by the lower; and, perhaps, in no eastern country was 
less of tyranny exercised over either the slaves of the 
household or the inmates of the zenana. Unlettered 
were they, but not incurious; and although their more 
polished brethren of Persia looked upon them as the 



THE PBODUCTS OE AFGHANISTAN. 


18 


Boeotians of Central Asia, their Spartan simpJidtj and 
manliness more than compensated for the absence of 
the Attic wit and eloquence of their western neigh¬ 
bours. 

Soldiers, husbandmen, and shepherds, they were de¬ 
scribed as the very antithesis of a nation of shopkeepers. 
The vocation of the tradesman they despised. To Tau- 
jiks, Hindoos, and other aliens, was the business of sell¬ 
ing entrusted, except upon that large scale which enti¬ 
tled the dealer to be regarded as a merchant, and gene¬ 
rally entailed upon him the necessities of a wandering 
and adventurous life. The principal commerce of the 
country was with the Persian and Russian states. In 
the bazaars of Herat, Candahar, and Caubul the manu¬ 
factures of Ispahan, Yezd, and Cashan, the spices of 
India, and the broad-cloths of Russia, brought by Astra- 
kan and Bokhara, found a ready market. Occasionally, 
when the settled state of the country gave encourage¬ 
ment to commercial enterprise, an adventurous merchant 
would make his way, through Dera from Bombay, with 
a cafila of British goods, for the scarlet cloths of England 
were in especial demand to deck the persons of the body 
servants of tht king. The indigenous products of the 
country were few, but important; for the rich shawls of 
Cashmere and the gaudy chintzes of Mooltan, exported 
in large quantities, were in good repute all over the 
civilised world.* At Herat some velvets and taffetas of 
good quality were manufactured, but only for internal 
consumption; whilst the assafoetida of that place, the 
madder of Candahar, and the indigo of the Derajat,f 