



10 SHAH ZEMAUN AND THE DOTJBANEE EMPIRE. 

raise the standard of abode or settlement, leave for their 
residing in such a place shall not be granted.” Nor was 
this all. The British envoy succeeded in persuading the 
Shah to issue a firman of a still more vindictive character. 
In this document the king exhorted his provincial gover¬ 
nors to “ expel and extirpate the French, and never allow 
them to obtain a footing in any place;” adding, “ you are 
at full liberty to disgrace and slay the intruders.” These 
proceedings have been severely censured by French 
writers, and even English politicians have declared them 
to be “an eternal disgrace to our Indian diplomacy.” 
But those were days when, even in India, men’s minds 
were unhinged and unsettled, and their ideas of right 
and wrong confounded by the monstrosities of the French 
revolution. Kevolutionary Frenchmen were looked upon 
as animals to be slain and exterminated with as little 
ceremony and as little compunction as venomous rep¬ 
tiles or savage beasts. It was conceived that there was 
a great and pressing danger, and Captain Malcolm was 
sent to combat it; but it may be questioned whether the 
information which the mission brought back was not all 
the benefit resulting from the movement. The treaty 
was never formally ratified; and the Persian Court praC' 
tically ignored its obligations as soon as it was no longer 
convenient to observe them. 

Before the mission of Captain Malcolm to the West, but 
little was known in India, and nothing in Great Britain, 
about the Douranee Empire, the nature and extent of its 
resources, the quality of its soldiers, and the character of 
its ruler. The information which that officer acquired 
was not of a very alarming description. The Douranee 
Empire, which has since been shorn of some of its fairest 
provinces, then consisted of Afghanistan, part of Kho- 
rassan. Cashmere, and the Derajat. The Sikh nation had 



CHABACTBE OF THE AFGHANS. 


11 


not then acquired the strength whict a few years later 
enabled it, under the military directorship of Bunjeet 
Singh, to curb the pretensions and to mutilate the empire 
of its dominant neighbour. That empire extended from 
Herat in the west, to Cashmere in the east; from northern 
Balkh to southern Shikarpoor. Bounded on the north and 
east by immense mountain ranges, and on the south and 
west by vast tracts of sandy desert, it opposed to external 
hostility natural defences of a formidable character. The 
general aspect of the country was wild and forbidding; 
in the imagination of the people haunted with goules 
and genii; but not unvaried by spots of gentler beauty in 
the valleys and on the plains, where the fields were 
smiling with cultivation, and the husbandman might be 
seen busy at his work. 

Few and far between as were the towns, the king¬ 
dom was thinly populated. The people were a race 
—or a group of races—of hardy, vigorous moun¬ 
taineers. The physical character of the country had 
stamped itself on the moral conformation of its in¬ 
habitants. Brave, independent, but of a turbulent vin¬ 
dictive character, their very existence seemed to depend 
upon a constant succession of internal feuds. The wisest 
among them would probably have shaken their heads in 
negation of the adage —“ Happy the country whose antinlg 
are a blank.” They knew no happiness in anything but 
strife. It was their delight to live in a state of chronic 
warfare. Among such a people civil war has a natural 
tendency to perpetuate itself. Blood is always crying 
aloud for blood. Revenge was a virtue among them; the 
heritage of retribution passed from father to son; and 
murder became a solemn duty. Living under a dry, 
clear, bracing climate, but one subject to considerable 
alternations of heat and cold, the people were strong and 
active; and as navigable rivers were wanting, and the 
precipitous nature of the country forbade the use of 