

♦ There was a considerable trade which on an average consist of 
in horses; but rather through than seven hundred camels, each carry- 
from Afghanistan. The animals were ing eighty Tabrizee maunds. These 
brought from Balkh and Toorkistan, come into Persia by the route of 
fattened at Caubul, and sold in India. Candahar and Herat .”—[Mahomed 
^ t “ Five or six cafilas of this in- Sadik's Answers to Captain Malcolm^ 
digo leave the Derajat affnually, 1800-1 (MS'.).] 



14 SHAH ZEMAUN AND THE DOURANEB EMPIRE. 

found a market in the Pemian cities, and the dried fruits 
of the country were in request in all neighbouring 
parts. These, a few other drugs of little note, and some 
iron from the Hindoo Koosh and the Solimanee range, 
formed the main staple of Afghan commerce. Between 
the large towns there was a constant interchange of com¬ 
modities; and long cafilas, or caravans, were ever in 
motion, from east to west, and from north to south, toil¬ 
ing across the sandy plains or struggling through the pre¬ 
cipitous defiles, exposed to the attacks of predatory 
tribes, who levied their contributions often not without 
strife and bloodshed. 

Such was the not very flattering picture of the com¬ 
mercial wealth of the Douranee Empire, which was 
painted by Captain Malcolm’s informants. Nor was the 
military strength of the Empire set forth in any more 
striking colours. Distance and ignorance had vastly 
magnified the true proportions of that famous military 
power, which was to have overrun Hindostan, and driven 
the white men into the sea. The main strength of the 
Afghan army was in the Douranee horse. The Doura¬ 
nee tribes had been settled in Western Afghanistan by 
Nadir Shah. He had first conquered, then taken them 
into his service, and then parcelled out amongst them, as 
his military dependents, the lands which had before been 
held by a motley race of native cultivators. It was the 
policy of Ahmed Shah and his successors—a policy 
which was subsequently reversed by the Barukzye sir¬ 
dars—to aggrandise and elevate these powerful tribes, by 
heaping upon them privileges and immunities at the ex¬ 
pense of their less favoured countrymen. Upon the 
misery and humiliation of others, the Douranee tribes 
throve and flourished. The chief oflSces of the state were 
divided amongst them; they held their lands exempt 
from taxation. The only demand made upon them, in 



dA.Rld.Yi 


15 


return for the privileges they enjoyed, was that they 
should furnish a certain contingent of troops.* It was 
said to be the principle of the military tenure by which 
they held their lands, that for every plough used in culti- 
vationf they should contribute a horseman for the service 
of the state. But it does not appear that the integrity of 
this system was long preserved. In a little time there 
ceased to be any just proportion between the ploughs and 
the horsemen; and it became diflScult to accoimt for the 
arbitrary manner in which each of the different Douranee 
clans furnished its respective quota of troops.J 