

So fell Zemaun Shah, the once dreaded Afghan monarch, 
whose threatened invasion of Hindostan had for years been 
a ghastly phantom haunting the Council-Chamber of the 
British-Indian Government. He survived the loss of his 
sight nearly half a century; and as the neglected pen¬ 
sioner of Loodhianah, to the very few who could remem¬ 
ber the awe which his name once inspired, must have 
presented a curious spectacle of fallen greatness—an illus¬ 
tration of the mutability of human affairs scarcely paral¬ 
leled in the history of the world. He died at last full 



24 sffAH ZBMAUN AND THE DOURANBB EMPIBB. 


of years, empty of honours, his death barely worth a 
newspaper-record or a paragraph in a state paper. 
Scarcely identified in men’s minds with the Zemaun Shah 
of the reigns of Sir John Shore and Lord Wellesley, he 
lived an appendage, alike in prosperity and adversity, to 
his younger brother, Soojah-ool-Moolk. That Soojah 
had once been reputed and described as an appendage to 
Shah Zemaun—“ his constant companion at all times.” 
They soon came to change places, and in a country where 
fraternal strife is the rule and not the exception, it is 
worthy of record that those brothers were true to each 
other to the last.* 

^ Since this passage was written, and the Sikhs united should make 
I have had reason to think that it him (Shah Zemaun) King of Afghan- 
ought to be acc^ted with some qua- istan.—[ Correspondence 

lification. In October, 1840, when of Sir W, K Macnaghten,} This 
Dost Mahomed was flitting about the story may seem to be at variance 
Kohistan, and the greatest anxiety with the statement in the preceding 
prevailed among our political officers page,—that “ between a blind king 
at Caubul, Sh^ Soojah said to Sir and a dead king there is no politick 
William Macnaghten, just as he was differencebut I am acquainted with 
taking leave after an excited confer- no Mahomedan law that excludes a 
ence, “You know I have from the blind prince from the throne. The 
first expressed to you a mean opinion exclusion is based upon the popular 
of my own countrymen. If you assumption that blindness disqualifies 
want further proof, look at that from a man from managing the affairs of an 
my own brother.” The Shah then empire. If, however, in Mahomedan 
showed Macnaghten an intercepted countries, there have been no excep- 
letter, bearing the seal of Shah Ze- tions to this rule—of which I am 
maun, to the address of Sultan Ma- doubtful—in the regal line, it is cer- 
homed Barukzye, purposing that, as tain that many provincial govern- 
Shah Soojah had made over the ments have been in the hands of men 
country to the infidels, the Barukzyes who have been deprived of their sight. 



KAlUEiT DATS OF SHAH SOOJAH. 


25 


CHAPTER n. 

[ 1801 — 1808 .] 

The Early Days of Soojah-ool-Moolk—Disastrous Commencement of his 
Career—Defeat of Shah Mahmoud—Reign of Shah Soojah—The Insur¬ 
rection of Prince Kaysur—Tidings of the Britbh Mission. 

From the fall of Zemaun Shah we are to date the rise 
of Soojah-ool-Moolk. They were brothers by the same 
father and mother. At the tkne of the political extinc¬ 
tion of the elder, the younger was about twenty years 
of age. He had taken no part in the government; was 
but lightly esteemed for courage; and had little place in 
the thoughts of the people, except as an appendage of 
the reigning m )narch. In command of the royal troops, 
and in charge of the family and property of the king, 
whilst Zemaun Shah was striking a last blow for em¬ 
pire in the West, he had held his post at Peshawur. 
There he received the disastrous tidings of the fate that 
had descended upon his brother and his prince. He at 
once proclaimed himself king, began to levy troops, and 
in September, 1801, marched upon Caubul with an army 
of 10,000 men. Victorious at the outset, he did not 
improve his successes, and was eventually defeated by 
the Douranees under Futteh Khan. The destinies of 
princes were in the hands of the powerful Barukzye 