

c2 



20 SHAH ZKMAUN AND THE DOCBANEE EMPIEE. 


tected; and he perished miserably with his associates in 
the enterprise of treason. 

Poyndah Khan died, leaving twenty-one sons, of whom 
Futteh Khan was the eldest. They are said, after the 
death of their father, to have stooped into a cloud of 
poverty and humiliation, and to have wandered about 
begging their bread. But their trials were only for a 
season. The Barukzye brothers soon emerged from the 
night of suffering that surrounded them. There was no 
power in the Douranee Empire which could successfully 
cope with these resolute, enterprising spirits. In Afghan¬ 
istan revenge is a virtue. The sons of Poyndah Khan 
had the murder of their father to avenge; and they 
rested not till the bloody obligation had been faithfully 
fulfilled. Futteh Khan had fled into Persia, and there 
leagued himself with Prince Mahmoud. Repeated failure 
had not extinguished the ambition of this restless prince. 
The accession of the Barukzye sirdar now inspired him 
with new courage. Upheld by the strong arm of the 
“ king-maker,” he determined to strike another blow for 
the sovereignty of Caubul. With a few horsemen they 
entered A^hanistan, and, raising the standard of revolt, 
pushed on to unexpected conquest. 

There were not many in Afghanistan, nor many among 
the disinterested lookers-on at that fraternal strife, who 
were inclined to jeopardise their character for sagacity 
by predicting the success of the prince. Everything, in¬ 
deed, was against him. His treasury was always empty. 
His friends were not men of note. With the exception 
of the Barukzye sirdars,* no chiefs of influence espoused 


* And even the character of Fut¬ 
teh Khan was at that time yery little 
understood and appreciated. He was 
described to Captain Malcolm as a 
man of influence, but of low, dissi¬ 
pated habits, who spent all his time 


in drinking wine and in smoking bang. 
It should be mentioned, however, 
that Prince Ferooz, Mahmoud’s bro¬ 
ther, was associated in this enterprise. 
He became master of Herat, whilst 
Mahmoud pushed on to Candahar. 



SUCCESSES OP PRINCE MAHMOUD. 


21 


his cause. His followers were described to Captaiu Mal¬ 
colm as men “ of low condition and mean extraction.” 
But in spite of the slender support which he received, 
and the strenuous efforts which were made to destroy 
him, the successes which from time to time he achieved 
seemed to show that there was some vitality in his cause. 
A divinity seemed to hedge him in, and to protect him 
from the knife of the assassin. He escaped as though 
by a miracle the snares of his enemies, and from every 
new deliverance seemed to gather something of prospe¬ 
rity and strength. It was after one of these marvellous 
escapes, when the weapons of the Kuzzilbashes* had fallen 
from their hands, palsied by the mysterious presence of 
the blood royal, that Candahar fell before the insurgents. 
With two or three thousand horsemen of the Barukzye 
and Achekzye tribes, Mahmoud invested the place for 
thirty-three days, at the end of which Futteh Khan, 
with a handful of resolute men, escaladed the fort near 
the Shikarpoor gate, and put the panic-struck garrison 
to flight. The Meer Akhoor, or Master of the Horse, 
fled for his life. The Shah-zadah Hyder sought sanc¬ 
tuary at the tomb of Ahmed Shah; and Prince 
Mahmoud becam i master of the place. 