



26 


EABLT DATS GS SHAH 800 JAH. 


sirdar. TTia energies and his influence alone upheld 
the drooping sovereignty of Shah Mahmoud. Weak 
and unprincipled, indolent and rapacious, that prince 
had been raised to the throne by Futteh Khan; and, 
though it was not in the nature of things that a ruler so 
feeble and so corrupt should long retain his hold of the 
empire, for a while the strong hand of the minister 
sustained him in his place. 

Soojah-ool-Moolk fled to the fastnesses of the Khybur 
Pass. In the winter of 1801 the Grhilzyes broke out 
into open rebellion against the Douranee power; but 
were defeated with great slaughter. The Douranees re¬ 
turned to Caubul, and erected, from the heads of the 
conquered, a pyramid of human skulls. In the spring 
of the following year the same restless tribe was again 
in rebellion; and again the energies of Futteh Khan 
were put forth for the suppression of the dangerous spirit 
of Ghilzye revolt. In March, 1802, the insurgents were 
a second time chastised; and, it is said, on the same 
day, Soojah-ool-Moolk, who had raised an army in the 
Khybur and marched upon Peshawur, sustained a se¬ 
vere defeat at the hands of the Douranee garrison, and 
was driven back into the obscurity from which he had 
fruitlessly emerged. 

Thus for a while was tranquillity restored to the Dou¬ 
ranee Empire. Beading and conversing with learned 
men, and taking counsel with his military adherents, 
Soojah-ool-Moolk, from the time of his defeat, remained 
inactive in the Afreedi country. Even there the .vigi¬ 
lant enmity of the Wuzeer tracked the unhappy prince. 
There was no security in such retirement. The shadow 
of Futteh Khan darkened his resting-place and disturbed 
his repose. He fled to Shawl; and there, in the depth 
of winter and on the verge of starvation, wandered about, 



DECLINE OE SHAH MAHMOXTD. 


27 


making vain endeavours to subsist himself and a few 
followers by the sale of his royal jewels. Among a 
people little understanding the worth of such costly ar¬ 
ticles, purchasers were with difficulty to be found. In 
the extremity which then beset him he changed the cha¬ 
racter of the pedlar for that of the bandit, and levied 
money by plundering caravans, and giving notes of hand 
for the amount that he raised. In this manner he col¬ 
lected three lakhs of rupees, and was enabled to levy 
troops for an attack upon Candahar. But Providence 
did not smile upon his endeavours. He was again re¬ 
pulsed. Again was he involved in a great ruin; with 
little hope of extrication by the energy of his own 
struggles, or the inherent vitality of his cause. 

But in the mean while the sovereignty of Shah Mah¬ 
moud was falling to pieces by itself. He had risen upon 
the weakness of his predecessor, and now by his own 
weakness was he to be cast down. What Shah Zemaun 
had done for him, was he now doing for Soojah-ool-Moolk. 
In the absence of Futteh Khan, the Kuzzilbashes were 
suffered to ride roughshod over the people. The ex¬ 
cesses which they committed at Caubul scattered the 
last remnant ff popularity which still adhered to the 
person of the Shah. At last an open outbreak occurred 
between the Sheeas and the Soonees. The king identi¬ 
fied himself with the former; Akrum Khan, Mooktor- 
ood-Dowlah, with the latter. In this conjuncture Soojah- 
ool-Moolk was sent for to strengthen the hands of Shah 
Mahmoud’s opponents. When he arrived, he found 
Caubul in a state of siege. Futteh Khan had by this 
time returned to aid the royal cause, but too late to re¬ 
gain the ground that had been lost in his absence. There 
was an engagement, which lasted from morning to even¬ 
ing prayer, and at the end of which Mahmoud was de¬ 
feated. Futteh Khan fled. Soojah-ool-Moolk entered 
Caubul in triumph; and Mahmoud threw himself at his 