

Fighting men, indeed, were never wanting in Afghan¬ 
istan, but money was wanting to induce them to leave 
their homes. It was said that Shah Zemaun might, on 
any great national enterprise, have led 200,000 men 
into the field, if he had had money to pay them. 
But his entire revenues were not equal to the pay¬ 
ment of a very much smaller force. He was con¬ 
tinually being deserted by his soldiery, at critical times, 
for want of the sinews of war to retain them. The 
emptiness of his treasury, indeed, reduced him to all 
kinds of shifts and expedients, such as that of raising 
the value of the current coin of the realm. But no 
devices of this character could confer upon him a really 
formidable army. In one important branch he was 
miserably deficient. The Douranee artillery consisted 
of some twelve brass field-pieces and five hundred 
zumboorucks, or camel guns. Even these were mise- 

“ This day a body of Afghan cavalry tures almost the only means of sub¬ 
encamped in the environs of Akorah, sistence ; for when inactive, they are 
and overspread the country like a often reduced to such distress by the 
swarm of locusts, devouring and de- blind parsimony of their prince, that 
stroying wherever they went. It their horses, arms, and clothes, are 
seemed as if the land was invaded; sold for a livelihood ” The same 
they entered in a violent manner writer, speaking generally of the Af- 
every village within their scope, and ghan army, says that he felt a sen- 
fed themselves and horses at the ex- sible disappointment at seeing it com- 
pense of the inhabitants. Such ex- posed of a tumultuous body, without 
peditions afford these hungry crea- order or common discipline.” 



CHABACTEB OF ZEICAUN SHAH. 


17 


rably equipped; the camels wanted drivers, and the guns 
were in bad condition. It was said by one who visited 
the encampment of the grand army, under 2emaun 
Shah, in 1799*1800, that there were not above 500 
good horses in camp, and that these belonged principally 
to the King and the Wuzeer. The men were moimted for 
the most part on yaboos, or ponies, few of which, at a 
liberal valuation, were worth a hundred rupees. 

Such was the army with which Zemaun Shah medi¬ 
tated the invasion of Hindostan. The personal character 
of the monarch was not mote formidable than the army 
which he commanded. More of a scholar than of a 
soldier, very strict in the observances of his religion, and 
an assiduous reader of the Koran, his way of life, judged 
by the princely standard of Central Asia, was sufficiently 
moral and decorous. Humane and generous, of a gentle, 
plastic disposition; very prone to take for granted the 
truth of all that was told him; by no means remarkable 
for personal activity, and somewhat wanting in courage, 
he was designed by nature for a facile puppet in the 
hands of a crafty Wuzeer. And such was Zemaun Shah 
in the expert hands of Wuffadar Khan. It was reported 
of him that he took no active part in the management of 
public afiairs; and that when it was politic that he should 
make a show of government and appear at Durbar, what 
he said was little more than a public recital of a lesson 
well learnt in private. He was, indeed, the mere mouth¬ 
piece of the minister—of a worse and more designing 
man. Content with the gilded externals of majesty, he 
went abroad sumptuously arrayed and magnificently 
attended; and mighty in all the state papers of the time 
was the name of Zemaun Shah. But it was shrewdly 
suspected that, bad the state of his domestic relations and 
the military resources at his command enabled him to 