

It is not a peculiarity of Eastern princes alone to 
shine with a brighter and a steadier light in the hour 
of adversity than in the hour of success. The trials of 
prosperity were too great for Prince Mahmoud, as they 
have been for greater men; and he soon began to lose 
ground at Candahar, The marvel is, that his fortunes 
were not utterly marred by his own folly. It was only 
by the concurrence of greater folly elsewhere that in this 

* The Kuzzilbashes, of whom a Persian settlers in Afghanistan; many 
more particular account will be given of whom are retained in the military 
in the course of this narrative, are service of the state. 



22 RTTArr ^MATJN AND THE DOUEANEE EMPIBE. 


conjuncture lie was saved from ruin. His impolitic and 
liauglity conduct towards the Sirdars early demonstrated 
his unfitness for rule, and well-nigh precipitated the en¬ 
terprise in which he was engaged into a sea of disastrous 
failure. There seemed, indeed, to be only one thing 
that could sustain him, and that one thing was wanting. 
He was as poor as he was unpopular. But the days of 
Shah Zemaun’s sovereignty were numbered, and no folly 
on the part of his antagonist could arrest the doom that 
was brooding over him. 

At this time Zemaun Shah was on his way towards 
the borders of Hindostan. He had advanced as far 
as Peshawur, when intelligence of the fall of Candahar 
reached his camp. It was believed that he had little 
actual design of advancing beyond the Sutlej. Partly with, 
a view of enforcing the payment of the Sindh triWe— 
partly to overawe the Sikhs, and partly to abstract his 
own army from the dangerous vicinity of Candahar, and 
the corrupting influences to which in such a neighbour¬ 
hood it was exposed, he had made this move to the south¬ 
ward. It was very obvious that in such a condition of 
his own empire, all idea of invading Hindostan was 
utterly wild and chimerical. If such an idea had ever 
been formed, it was now speedily abandoned. All other 
considerations gave place to the one necessity of saving 
his kingdom firom the grasp of his brother. He hastened 
back to Western Afghanistan; but an impolitic expedi¬ 
tion imder the prince, Soojah-ool-Moolk, who was soon 
destined to play a conspicuous part in the great Central- 
Asian drama, had crippled his military resources, and 
when he retraced his steps he found that the strength of 
Prince Mahmoud had increased as his own had dimi¬ 
nished. He marched against the rebels only to be de¬ 
feated. The main body of the royal troops was imder 



VALL OB ZEUAT7N SHAH. 


the command of one Ahmed Khan, a chief of the Noor* 
zye tribe. Watching his opportunity, Futteh Khan 
seized the person of the Sirdar’s brother, and threatened 
to destroy him if the chief refused to come over bodily 
with his troops, and swell the ranks of the insuigents. 
The character of the Barukzye leader certified that this 
was no idle threat. Ahmed Khan, already wavering in 
his loyalty, for the conduct of the Wuzeer had alienated 
his heart from the royal cause, at once made his election. 
When the troops of Shah Zemaun came up with the ad¬ 
vance of the rebel army, he joined the insurgent force. 
From that time the cause of the royalists became hope¬ 
less. Disaster followed disaster till its ruin was complete. 
The minister and his master fell into the hands of the 
enemy. Wuffadar Khan, with his brothers, was put to 
death. Death, too, awaited the king—^but the man was 
suffered to live. They doomed him only to political ex¬ 
tinction. There is a cruel, but a sure way of achieving 
this in all Mahomedan countries. Between a blind king 
and a dead king there is no pobtical difference. The 
eyes of a conquered monarch are punctured with a lancet, 
and he de facto ceases to reign. They blinded Shah 
Zemaun, and cast him into prison; and the Douranee 
Empire owned Shah Mahmoud as its head. 