

VOL. I. c 



18 RTTATT ZEMATJN AND THE DOURANBE EMPIRE. 


take the field, as the invader of Hindostan, a bribe 
any day offered to the Wuzeer might have broken up 
the Douranee army, and kept the invader quietly at 
home. 

On the whole, he was a popular ruler. The culti¬ 
vating classes were happy under his government. It 
recognised their claims to remuneration for whatever was 
taken fi:om them for the service of the state, and no acts 
of fraud and oppression were ever committed in his 
name. The merchants and traders were secure under 
his rule. In the midst of much that was base and un¬ 
worthy in the character and conduct of the minister, he 
had a reputation for fair dealing with these classes, and 
they looked up to him for protection. But far otherwise 
were his relations with the warlike tribes and the chief 
people of the empire. They were not without feelings 
of loyalty towards the king; but it was rather affection 
for his person, than satisfaction with the government of 
which he was the head. The grasping character of the 
minister, who engrossed to himself all the patronage of 
the state, rendered him, in spite of his courteous manners 
and affable demeanour, obnoxious to the principal Sirdars; 
and something of this disaffection began in time to be 
directed against the monarch himself, who had too long 
abandoned his own better nature to the sinister guidance 
of the unprincipled and unpopular Wuzeer. 

Like many a monarch, abler and better than himself, 
Zemaun Shah had chosen his minister unwisely, and was 
undone by the choice. When he entrusted the affairs of 
his empire to the administration of Wuffadar Khan, he 
made the great mistake of his life. A base and design¬ 
ing man, without any of those co mma nding qualities 
which impart something of dignity and heroism to crime, 
the Wuzeer bent his sovereign, but could not bend cir- 



FCTTEH KHAN AND THE BAETTKZYES. 


19 


cumstances to his wilL The loyalty of the Douranee 
sirdars he could extinguish, but their power he could 
not break by his oppressions. Alarmed at their in¬ 
creasing influence, Wi^adar Khan sought to encompass 
them in the toils of destruction; but he destroyed 
himself and involved his sovereign in the ruin. Prince 
Mahmoud was in arms against his royal brother. 
Exasperated by the conduct of Wufiadar Khan, the 
Douranees threw all the weight of their influence into 
the scales in favour of the prince. The rebellion which 
they headed acquired strength and swelled into a revo¬ 
lution. And then began that great strife between the 
royal princes and the Douranee sirdars, which half a 
century of continued conflict, now witnessing the supre¬ 
macy of the one, now of the other, has scarcely even yet 
extinguished. 

The two principal clans or tribes of the Douranees 
were the Populzyes and the Barukzyes. The Suddozye, 
or Royal race, was one of the branches of the former. 
The Bamezye, in which the Wuzeership was vested, but 
not by inalienable right, was another branch of the same 
tribe. Second in influence to the Populzyes, and greater 
in extent, was the tribe of the Barukzyes. To this tribe 
belonged Futteh Khan. He was the son of Poyndah 
Khan, an able statesman and a gallant soldier, whose wis¬ 
dom in council and experience in war had long sustained 
the tottering fortunes of Timour Shah. On the death of 
that feeble monarch he had supported the claims of Ze- 
maun Shah. With as little wisdom as gratitude, that 
prince, it has been seen, sufiered himself to be cajoled by a 
man of less honesty and less ability, and became a tool in the 
hands of Wuffadar Khan. The favourite of two monarchs 
was disgraced; and, from a powerful friend, became the 
resolute enemy of the reigning family. He conspired 
agmnst the King and the Wuzeer; his designs were de- 