



28 


EABL7 DATS OF SHAH SGOJAH. 


feet.* To him, who in the hour of victory had shown 
no mercy, mercy was shown in the hour of defeat. It is 
to the honour of Shah Soojah that he forbore to secure 
the future tranquillity of his empire by committing the 
act of cruelty which had disgraced the accession of the 
now prostrate Mahmoud. The eyes of the fallen prince 
were spared: and years of continued intestine strife de¬ 
clared how impolitic was the act of mercy. 

For from this time, throughout many years, the strife 
between the royal brothers was fierce and incessant. In 
his son Kamran, the ex-King Mahmoud found a willing 
ally and an active auxiliary. To the reigning monarch 
it was a period of endless inquietude. His resources 
were limited, and his qualities were of too negative a 
character to render him equal to the demands of such 
stirring times. He wanted vigour; he wanted activity; 
he wanted judgment; and above all, he wanted money. 
It is ever the fate of those who have risen, as Soojah 


* This was in July, 1803. Shah 
Soojah’s own account of these trans. 
actions, which forms part of the auto- 
bioOTaphy written by him at Loodhi- 
anah in 1826-27, is contained in the 
following words;—“After our arri¬ 
val at ICazee, we had scarcely pre¬ 
pared our force, when Futteh Khan’s 
army appeared; our troops immedi¬ 
ately were drawn up in battle array, 
and an attack made upon them. The 
battle lasted from the morning to the 
evening prayer, when the enemy gave 
way, and retreated in great disorder 
to the valley Advaz, and then to 
Kamran’s camp in Candahar, where 
the drunkenness of the Kuzzilbash 
soldiery, and the ill-treatment which 
the Soonee doctors received, soon 
disgusted all our subjects, who en¬ 
tirely refused to give Kamran assist¬ 
ance. On hearing this we imme¬ 
diately returned to our capital. Shah 
Mahmoud was so disheartened by 
the news of our victory, that after 
swearing on the Koran ne would not 


again be guilty of treachery, he sent 
some of his principal attendants to 
request the royal piardon, which we 
granted; and had him conveyed from 
the outer to the inner fort with all 
due respect to his rank. We then 
entered the Balia Hissar with regal 
pomp, and seated ourselves on the 
throne of Caubul.” Mr. Flphinstone 
says of this “victory,” that “Futteh 
Khan was at first successful; he 
routed the party of the enemy which 
was immediately opposed to him, and 
was advancing to the city, when the 
desertion of a great lord to Soojah 
threw the whole into confusion: his 
own party then fell off by degrees, 
till he found himself almost alone, 
and was compelled to provide for his 
safety by a precipitate flight. Next 
morning Shah Soojah entered Caubul 
in triumph. Mooktor-ood-Dowlah 
walked on foot by the side of his 
horse, and many other Douranee 
ameers followed in his train.”— 
{Elphinstone^s “ CavibvX'' — AppmdixJ\ 



BEBEUJOK OS' PBmCE EATSUB. 


29 


rose to monarchy, to be dragged down hy the weight of 
the obligations incurred and the promises made in the 
hour of adversity. The day of reckoning comes, and 
the dangers of success are as great as the perils of failure. 
The Douranee monarch could not meet his engagements 
without weakening himself, by making large assignments 
upon the revenues of different provinces; and even then 
many interested friends were turned by disappointment 
into open enemies. This was one element of weakness. 
But the error of his life was committed when he failed to 
propitiate the loyalty of the great Barukzye, Futteh Khan. 
Upon the accession of Shah Soojah, that chief had been 
freely pardoned, and “ allowed to salute the step of the 
throne.” But the king did not estimate the real value of 
the alliance, and, elevating his rival Akrum Khan, refused 
the moderate demands of the Barukzye chief. Disap¬ 
pointed and chagrined, Futteh Khan then deserted the 
royal standard. He chose his time wisely and well. The 
king had set out with an army to overawe Peshawur 
and Cashmere. When they had proceeded some way, 
Futteh Khan, who accompanied him, excused himself on 
the plea of some physical infirmity which disabled him 
from keeping pace with the royal cortege, and said 
that he would join the army, following it by easy 
stages. Thus, disguising his defection, he fell in the 
rear, and as the royal party advanced, returned to fo¬ 
ment a rebellion. 