

brother, we agreed to this. Prince and the Shah. “A suitable answer,” 
Kaysur being in Dehleh, Shah Ze- says the Shah, “ being given to the 
maun and Mooktor-ood-Dowlah went ro 7 al letter, and dresses of honour be- 
there and brought him into the pre- ing given to the ambassadors, we dis- 
sence. Shah Zemaun then requested missed them with gifts. Our thoughts 
that we would give him Candahar were then directed to the state of Can^ 
once more, and became security for dahar^ The point is of little unport- 
his good behaviour in future. We ance in Afghan history; and only 
agreed to this in spite of our good worth noticing in illustration of the 
judgment.” It was whilst still en- difficulty of determining with preci- 
gaged with the settlement of affairs sion the dates of different events, and 
at Candahar, not after their complete the order in which they occurred, 
adjustment, and Soojah’s subsequent No two narratives altogether agree—^ 
^p^tion to Sindh (as stated by Mr, but except where Shah Soojahspeahs 
Elphmstone), that ambassadors ar- of his "victories,” we may regard 
nved from Bokhara to negotiate a him as a tolerably good authority in 
naarriagebetweentheKhan’sdaughter all that relates to himself. 



32 


EABLT DATS OF SHAH SOOJAH. 


cal conjuncture, Kamran returned in alarm to the former 
place, and Kaysur joined the king at the latter. “ We 
again,” says Shah Soojah, “ gave him charge of Canda- 
har, at the request of our queen-mother, and our brother, 
Shah Zemaun. On our return to Caubul, Akrum Khan 
and the other Khans petitioned us to pardon Futteh 
Khan, who was now reduced to poverty. We assented. 
He was then brought into the presence by Akrum Khan. 
We remained some time in Candahar, in the charge of 
which we left Prince Zemaun, and sent Kaysur to 
Caubul.” 

Again was it in the power of Shah Soojah to conci¬ 
liate the great Barukzye. Again was the opportunity 
lost. There was something in the temper of the monarch 
adverse to the formation of new, and the retention of old, 
friendships. Whilst Futteh Khan was again made to feel 
the impossibility of any lasting alliance with a prince 
who could not appreciate the value of his services, and 
who neither invited nor inspired confidence, the chain 
which bound Mooktor-ood-Dowlah to the sovereign 
was gradually relaxing, and a new danger began to 
tlireaten the latter. When the Shah was absent in the 
Sindh territory, the minister fluug himself into the arms 
of Prince Kaysur, and publicly proclaimed him king. 
The rebels moved down upon Peshawur, and took pos¬ 
session of the city. Shah Soojah immediately began to 
direct his operations against that place. It was on the 
3rd of March, 1808, that the two armies came into colli¬ 
sion. “ The sun rising,” says Shah Soojah, who had 
halted for six days in the vicinity of Peshawur, hoping 
that the rebellious minister might perhaps repent, “ we 
saw the opposite armies in battle array. Khojan Mahom- 
med Khan, with a few Khans, followers from Mooktor- 
ood-Dowlah’s army, did great deeds of valour, and at last 
dispersed our raw soldiers, leaving us alone in the field. 