

In this distracted country there was at that time 
another aspirant to the throne. The son of Zemaxm 
Shah, Prince Kaysur, had set up his claims to the sove¬ 
reignty of Caubul. He had been appointed governor of 
Candahar by Shah Soojah; and probably would have 
been satisfied with this extent of power, if Futteh Khan 
had not incited him to revolt, and offered to aid him in 
his attempts upon the crown. The prince lent a willing 



80 


EABLY DATS OP SHAH SOOJAH. 


ear to the charmings of the Sirdar; and so it happened 
that whilst Shah Soojah was amusing himself on the way 
to Peshawur—enjoying the beautiful scenery and the 
diversion of hunting,”—his nephew and the Barukzye 
chief were raising a large army at Candahar, intent upon 
establishing, by force of arms, the claims of the family of 
his sightless brother. 

This ill-omened intelligence brought the Shah back in 
haste to his capital, whence he soon marched towards 
Candahar to meet the advancing troops of the prince. 
And here again, to the treachery of his opponents rather 
than to the valour of his own troops, the Shah owed his 
success. On the eve of the expected conflict, the son of 
Ahmed Khan, with other Douranee chiefs, deserted to 
the royal standard. Disheartened and dismayed, the prince 
broke up his army, and fled to Candahar. In the mean 
while, Shah Soojah returned to Caubul to find it occupied 
by an insurgent force. According to his own confession, 
he was employed for a month in repossessing himself of 
the capital. The insurgent prince and the Barukzye 
chief, during this time, had in some measure recovered 
themselves at Candahar, and the king marched again to 
the westward. Kaysur fled at his approach; andFutteh 
Khan betook himself to Herat, to oflfer his services to the 
son of his old master. The prince was brought back 
and conducted to the royal presence by Shah Zemaun 
and the Mooktor-ood-Dowlah, who besought the forgive¬ 
ness of the king on the plea of the youth and inexperi¬ 
ence of the ofiender, and the evil counsel of the Barukzye 
sirdar. Against his better judgment, Shah Soojah for¬ 
gave him, and restored him to the government of Can¬ 
dahar.* 

• “ Wkae in Candahar,” writes Prince Kaysur’s pardon, as his inez- 
Shah Soojah, “we receired letters perience and the advice of Futtdi 
mm our beloved brother Shah-zadah Khan and other rebels had led him 
Mooktor-ood-Dowlah, requesting from his duty. Out of respect to our 



STRtrooi;BS for rmpirb. 


81 


The affairs of Caiidahar being thus settled for a time, 
Shah Soojah marched into Sindh to enforce the payment 
of tribute which had been due for some years to Caubul. 
He then returned to his capital, and after giving his 
troops a three months’ furlough, began to think of com¬ 
mencing operations against Kamran, who was again dis¬ 
turbing the country to the west. In the mean while, 
this prince had marched upon Candahar, and Kaysur had 
fled at his approach. This was the second time the two 
princes had met as enemies—^the second time that the 
scale had been turned by the weight of the chief of the 
Barukzyes. On one occasion, Futteh Khan had invited 
Kamran to Candahar, and engaged to deliver up the city 
—then suddenly formed an alliance with Kaysur, and, 
sword in hand at the head of a small body of Douranees, 
driven back the prince with whom he had just before 
been in close alliance. Now he forsook the son of Shah 
Zemaun to unite himself with the heir of Mahmoud. 
Forgetful of past treachery, Kamran received the power¬ 
ful Barukzye; and they marched together upon Canda¬ 
har. Kaysur, as I have said, fled at his approach; and 
the insurgents took possession of the city. In the mean 
while, the Penians were advancing upon Herat, and 
Shah Soojah was moving up to Candahar. In this criti- 