

* Hadjee Khalil Khan reached Bombay on the 21st of May, 1802^ 
and was killed on the 20th of July. 



DEATH OF KHAUI. KHAN. 


37 


Government-House were suspended. Distant stations 
caught the alarm from the Council-Chamber of Calcutta. 
The minor presidencies were scarcely less convulsed. 
Bombay having previously thrown itself into mourning, 
instructions for similar observances were sent round to 
Madras; and two days after the arrival of the Chijffbne 
it was announced in the Gazette that Major Malcolm, 
who was at that time acting as private secretary to 
Lord Wellesley, had been directed to proceed to Bombay, 
for the purpose of communicating with the relations of 
the late Hadjee Khalil Khan, taking with him, as secre¬ 
tary, his young friend and relative, Lieutenant Paisley, 
who had accompanied him on his first mission to Persia. 
At the same time Mr. Lovett, a civilian of no long 
standing, was ordered to proceed immediately to Bushire, 
charged with an explanatory letter from Lord Wellesley 
to the Persian king, and instructed to offer such verbal 
explanations as might be called for by the outraged 
monarch. For some days nothing was thought of in 
Calcutta beyond the circle of this calamitous affair. In 
other directions a complete paralysis descended upon the 
Governor-General and his advisers. The paramount 
emergency bewildered the strongest understandings, and 
dismayed the stoutest hearts at the Presidency. And 
yet it was said, not long afterwards, by the minister of 
Shiraz, that “ the English might kill ten ambassadors, if 
they would pay for them at the same rate.” 

Major Malcolm left Calcutta on the 30th of Au¬ 
gust, and beating down the Bay of Bengal against 
the south-west monsoon, reached Masulipatam on the 
19th of September. Taking dawk across the country, 
he spent a few days at Hyderabad in the Deccan, trans¬ 
acted some business there, and then pushed on to Bom¬ 
bay. Reaching that Presidency on the 10th of October, 



38 


FRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


he flung himself into his work with characteristic energy 
and self-reliance. Mr. Lovett, who had none of his 
activity, followed slowly behind, and fell sick upon the 
road. Jonathan Duncan, the most benevolent of men, 
was at that time Governor of Bombay, and some mem¬ 
bers of the Persian embassy had presumed upon his good¬ 
nature to assume an arrogance of demeanour which it 
now became Malcolm’s duty to check.* He soon re¬ 
duced them to reason. Before the end of the month 
every difficulty had vanished. Many of the Persians 
were personally acquainted with the English diplomatist. 
All were acquainted with his character. But above all, 
it was known that he was the bearer of the public 
purse. He came to offer the mourners large presents and 
handsome pensions from the Supreme Government,! and 
it is no matter of surprise, therefore, that he had soon, in 
his own words, “ obtained from them a confidence which 
enabled him to set aside all intermediate agents, and 
consequently freed him from all intrigues.”^ 