


fate, therefore, is now fixed, and you 
may carry him to the devil in any 
manner you like best.* ”— [Sir Har^ 
ford Jones's account of the transactions 
of IL M's mission to the Court of Ter- 
sia^ Note vii.'\ It is curious, 
but somewhat humiliating, to read 
the different versions of the same 
transactions put forth by Jones and 
Malcolm, and their respective ad¬ 
herents. For example. Sir Harford 
Jones says that when the Iladjee’s 
body reached Bagdad, Mr. Day, a 
Bombay civilian, who had been de¬ 
puted to accompany it into the in¬ 
terior, took fright at the plague, and 
abandoned his charge. “ Mr. Day’s 
alarm was so great,” he says, “ as to 
become most tormenting to himself, 
and most ridiculous and troublesome 
to us, who had stood the plague the 
preceding year. I, therefore, re¬ 
shipped him for Bussorah as soon as 
possible, and undertook to receive 
and execute such wishes as the 
Khan’s relatives expressed to me.” 
Now the account given of this matter 
by one of the gentlemen of Malcolm’s 
mission, set forth that “Jones has 
frightened away Mr. Day by alarm¬ 
ing accounts of the plague.”—“ On 
this subject,” it was added, “ I need 
make no remarks to you, who know 
him so well. This might be im¬ 
proper, and would, I imagine, be 
perfectly unnecessary.’* I have dwelt 
upon these personal matters at greater 
length than they deserve, because 
they illustrate the feelings, on either 
side, with which Jones and Malcolm, 
at a later and more important period, 
were likely each to have regarded the 
parallel but antagonistic mission of 
the other to the Persian Court. The 
bitterness which then overflowed was 
the accumulated gall of years. 




40 FRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 

forgotten. The Resident at Bushire, a Persian of good 
family, naturalised in India, and employed by the Com¬ 
pany_an astute diplomatist and a great liar—had 

thought it necessary to testify his zeal by circulating a 
false version of the circumstances attending the death of 
the Hadjee, and calumniating the memory of the deceased. 
There was no need, indeed, of this. The Persian Govern¬ 
ment seems to have regarded the death of the Hadjee 
with exemplary unconcern; and marvelled why the 
English should have made so great a stir about so small 
a matter. If a costly British mission could have been 
extracted out of the disaster, the Court would have been 
more than satisfied; whilst they who were most deeply 
interested in the event, moved by the same sacra fames, 
thought rather of turning it to profitable account than 
of bewailing the death of their relative and friend. 

The brother-in-law of the late envoy lost no time in 
offering his services to fill the place of the deceased. The 
name of this man was Aga Nebee Khan. He was the son, 
by a second connexion, of the mistress of Mr. Douglas, 
chief of the Bussorah factory, and had been Mr. Jones’s 
moonshee, on a monthly salary of thirty rupees. The 
Hadjee himself had been a person of no consideration. 
Half-minister and half-merchant, he had thought more of 
trading upon his appointment than of advancing the in¬ 
terests of the state; and Nebee Khan, who had embarked 
with him in his commercial speculations, now lusted to 
succeed his murdered relative in his diplomatic office, as 
well as in the senior partnership of the mercantile con¬ 
cern. And he succeeded at last. It cost him time, and 
it cost him money to accomphsh his purpose; but partly 
by bribery, partly by cajolery, he eventually secured the 
object of bis ambition.* It was not, however, till three 