

* Especial Instructions having been the appointment of a man of rank 
given to the British mission to secure as successor to Khalil Khan, the in- 



A6A NEBEE KHAN . 


41 


full years had passed away since the death of the Hadjee, 
that his brother-in-law reached Calcutta, “ not exactly 
to fill his relative’s place, but to exercise the triple func¬ 
tions of minister, merchant, and claimant of blood- 
money, which he roundly assessed at twenty lakhs of 
rupees.” 

And in those three years a great change had come over 
the Supreme Government of India. A long war, pro- 


trigues of Aga Nebee to obtain the 
appointment greatly embarrassed our 
diplomatists m Persia. But it was 
acknowledged that the aspirant was a 
man of good temper, good abilities, 
and more than average respectability. 
He professed himself to be heart and 
soul the friend of the English; and, 
doubtless, was perfectly sincere in his 
attachment to their wealth and pro¬ 
fusion. Like all his countrymen, he 
was capable of profound dissimula¬ 
tion, and lied without the slightest 
remorse. Knowing the views of the 
British functionaries with regard to 
the succession, he sent through his 
brother to Mr. Lovett an account 
of an interview he had had with the 
Shah, representing that he had urged 
upon his majesty the propriety of 
appointing an elchei. of high rank as 
successor to Hadjee lihalil Khan, but 
that the king had insisted upon ap¬ 
pointing him, saying, “ I did not call 
Mahomed Nebee here for nothing. I 
sent for him to learn the circum¬ 
stances of the business, and now that 
he has given me a true and just ac¬ 
count of all particulars, I must ex¬ 
emplify my justice to the world. 
Mahomed fl'ebee and Hadjee Khalil 
Khan were brothers, and everybody 
knows they were of one mind. They 
were brothers and relations, and, in a 
word, like father and son. But Ma¬ 
homed Nebee’s capacit^y is greater 
than his was, and it is now three 
years since he has borne the ex¬ 
penses of the embassy, and has had 
ever^hing ready for the mission. It 
is, therefore, proper that I should 
appoint him, in order that his right¬ 
ful claims may be satisfied, and my 


justice made known to all princes 
and nations of the world.” In this 
letter an amusing attempt is made 
to persuade Mr. Lovett to proceed to 
Teheran as an ambassador from the 
British-Indian Government, “with 
handsome and splendid equipments, 
so as to exceed by many degrees those 
with which Major Malcolm travelled; 
for this is the particular wish of the 
king and his ministers, in order that 
it m^ get abroad universally that 
the English had, for the sake of 
apologising, made these new prepa¬ 
rations far exceeding the former, and 
that it is evident they highly regard 
the friendship of the king, and were 
not to blame for the death of Hadjee 
Khalil Khan. His majesty, too, 
when he hears of the splendour and 
greatness of your retinue, will be 
much pleased, and most favourably 
inclined . . . Do not be sparing in ex- 
peiiditure, or presents, or largesses. 
Every country has its customs; and 
every nation may he won somehow or 
other. The people of Persia in the 
manner above stated'' It is hard to 
say which is to be most admired, the 
candour or the craft of this. Mr. 
Lovett, who was lying sick at Bush* 
ire, had no authority to proceed as an 
ambassador to Teheran; but Malcolm 
was sorely afraid lest these tempta¬ 
tions should be too much for an am¬ 
bitious and self-confident young man 
—a character which, however, it is by 
no means certain that Lovett de¬ 
served, for he candidly acknowledged 
his own unfitness for the post, and 
said that it would suit his capacity 
much better to serve in a subordinate 
position.— Records,’] 