

* The number of Oriental names indistinct phantasmagoric transitions, 
which it is necessary to introduce— The events, too, which I have nar- 
the repetition of incidents, greatly rated have been chronicled before, 
resembling each other, of conquest I have endeavoured, however, to im- 
and re-conquest, of treachery and part some novelty to the recital by 
counter-treachery, ofrebeUions raised following, and sometimes quoting, 
pd suppressed—creates a confusion Shah Soojah*s autobiography, whitm 
S European reader, was not accessible to precedmg histo- 

It IS dimcult to interest him in these rians. 



FRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


35 


CHAPTER m. 

[ 1801 — 1808 .] 

France and Russia in the East—Death of Hadjee Ehalil Hhan—The 
Mission of Condolence—Aga Nebee Khan—^Extension of Russian Domi¬ 
nion in the East—French Diplomacy in Persia—The pacification of Tilsit 
—Decline of French influence at Teheran. 

The intestine wars, which rent and convulsed the A%han 
Empire, were a source of acknowledged security to the 
British power in the East. From the time when in the 
first year of the present century Captain Malcolm dictated 
at the Court of Teheran the terms of that early treaty, 
which French writers freely condemn, and Englishmen 
are ashamed to vindicate, to the date of the romantic 
pacification of Tilsit, the politics of Central Asia excited 
little interest or alarm in the Council-Chamber of Cal¬ 
cutta. India had ceased to bestir itself about an Afghan 
invasion. Instead of a shadowy enemy from beyond the 
Indus, the British had now to face, on the banks of the 
Jumna, a real and formidable foe. The genius of the 
two Wellesleys was called into action to curb the inso¬ 
lence and crush the power of the Mahrattas; and whilst 
we were alternately fighting and negotiating with Scin- 
diah and Holkar, we scarcely cared to ask who reigned 
in A%hanistan; or if accident made us acquainted with 

D 2 



36 


FKANCE AND EUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


the progress of events, viewed with philosophic unconcern 
the vicissitudes of the Douranee Empire. 

Content with the obligations imposed upon the Shah 
by the terms of the Malcolm treaty, and engaged in the 
solution of more pressing political questions at home, 
Lord Wellesley and his immediate successors bestowed 
little thought upon the Persian alliance. Throughout 
the remaining years of that nobleman’s administration, 
one event alone occurred to rouse the Governor-General 
to a consideration of the temper of the Court of Teheran. 
That event filled him with apprehensions of danger pre¬ 
posterously incommensurate with its own importance, 
and ridiculously falsified by the result. An accident, 
and a very untoward one, it occurred at a time when the 
Indian Government had not yet recovered from the in¬ 
quietude engendered by their disturbing dreams of French 
and Afghan invasion. The story may be briefly told. 
On the return of Captain Malcolm from Persia, one Had- 
jee Khalil Khan had been despatched to India to reci¬ 
procate assurances of friendship, and to ratify and inter¬ 
change the treaty. The mission cost the Hadjee his life. 
He had not been long resident in Bombay,* when the 
Persian attendants of the ambassador and the detach¬ 
ment of Company’s sepoys forming his escort quarrelled 
with each other in the court-yard before his house, and 
came into deadly collision. The Hadjee went out to 
quell the riot, and was struck dead by a chance shot. 
The intelligence of this unhappy disaster was brought 
round to Calcutta by a king’s frigate. The sensation it 
created at the presidency was intense. Every possible 
demonstration of sorrow was made by the Supreme 
Government. Minute guns were fired from the ramparts 
of Fort William. All levees and public dinners at 