



DEFEAT OF SHAH MAHMOtTD. 


33 


protected by a few faithful Douranees. We still remained 
on our guard, when our attendants warned us of the ap¬ 
proach of Khojan Mahommed Khan. We rushed on the 
traitor sword in hand, and cut through four of the iron 
plates of his cuirass. Our chief eunuch, Nekoo Khan, 
brought his horse and accoutrements. Mooktor-ood- 
Dowlah then attacked our force; but he and his whole 
race perished. Prince Kaysur fled to Caubul. We then 
marched in triumphant pomp to the Balia Hissar of 
Peshawur.” The gory head of the minister, borne aloft 
on a spear, and carried behind the conqueror, gave dclat 
to the procession, and declared the completeness of his 
victory. 

Prince Kaysur, after a single night spent at Caubul, 
fled into the hill country; but was brought back to the 
capital by the emissaries of the Shah. The experience 
of past treachery and past ingratitude had not hardened 
the monarch’s heart: and he again “ pardoned the mani¬ 
fold offences of his nephew.” In the mean while Mah¬ 
moud, who had been joined by Putteh Khan, and had 
been endeavouring to raise the sinews of war by plunder¬ 
ing caravans, obtained, by the usual process of treachery, 
possession of Can lahar, and then marched upon Caubul. 
Shah Soojah went out to meet him, and Mahmoud, ren¬ 
dered hopeless by disaffection in his ranks, broke up his 
camp and fled. The king then turned his face towards 
the west, and ordered his camp to be pitched on the road 
to Herat. “Hearing of our approach,” he says, “our 
brother, Feroz-ood-Deen, then in charge of the fort of 
Herat, sent a petition, requesting our orders, proffering 
the tribute due, and offering to become security for Mah¬ 
moud’s future behaviour. The same blood flowed in our 
veins, and we ordered one lakh of rupees to be paid him 
yearly fiom the tribute of Sindh, and conferred on him 
the government of Herat.” This done, he proceeded to 
Caubul, and thence to Peshawur, where he “ received 

VOL. I. D 



34 


EAKLY DAYS OF SHAH SOOJAH. 


petitions from the Khan of Bahwulpore and Moozuffiir 
Khan, Suddozye, stating that ambassadors from the Com¬ 
pany’s territories, by name Elphinstone and Strachey, 
had arrived, and requested orders.” “We "WTOte to the 
ambassadors,” says the Shah, “ and ordered our chiefs to 
pay them every attention.” 

The history of this mission will be embraced in a 
subsequent chapter. It is not without some misgivings 
that I have traced these early annals of the Douranee 
Empire.* But the chronicle is not without its uses. It 
illustrates, in a remarkable manner, both the general cha¬ 
racter of Afghan politics, and the extraordinary vicissi¬ 
tudes of the early career of the man whom thirty years 
afterwards the British raised from the dust of exile, and 
reseated on the throne of his fathers. The history of the 
Afghan monarchy is a history of a long series of revo¬ 
lutions. Seldom has the country rested from strife— 
seldom has the sword reposed in the scabbard. The 
temper of the people has never been attuned to peace. 
They are impatient of the restraints of a settled govern¬ 
ment, and are continually panting after change. Half-a- 
century of turbulence and anarchy has witnessed but little 
variation in the national character; and the Afghan of 
the present day is the same strange mixture of impetu¬ 
osity and cimning—of boldness and treachery—of gene¬ 
rosity and selfishness—of kindness and cruelty—as he 
was when Zemaun Shah haunted the Council-Chamber 
of Calcutta with a phantom of invasion; and the vision 
was all the more terrible because “ the shape thereof” no 
one could discern. 