

It was arranged that the body of the deceased ambas¬ 
sador should be put on board at the end of October, and 
that, a day or two later, the vessel should set sail for the 
Persian Gulf. Mr. Paisley was directed to attend the 

* “Mr. Duncan, with that good- 1802, “remunerate his expense, au- 
nature and candour which he so eini- thorise a handsome present to the 
nently possesses, congratulated me Hadjee’s son and wives at Bushire, a 
this morning on the great change distribution of alms at Kurbulai, and 
which had been eflccted in his Per- make a noble present to every one in 
sian friends, and said my conduct the embas^ in the name of the 
had convinced him that an over- Governor-drcneral, and not exceed 
desire to conciliate had led him into the limits of one lakh of rupees. The 
error. The fact is, his errors all pensions which I shall recommend 
arose from timidity. The rascals will amount to 46,000 rupees per 
bullied him.”— [Correspondence of annum. You have here the outline 
Sir J, Malcolm: MS,—October 15, of my plans, and I am sanguine in 
1802.] the hopes that they will be ultimately 

t “I shall satisfy the reasonable crowned with success.”— [MS, Cor- 
expectations of Luteef,” wrote Major respondence of Sir J, Malcolm,"] 
Malcolm from Bombay, in October, f MS. Correspondence. 



89 


DISPOSAX OF THE HADJEE S BEMAINS. 

Hadjee’e remains, and was charged with the immediate 
duties of the mission.* When the vessel reached Bush- 
ire, it was found that the death of the Hadjee had created 
little sensation in the Persian territories, and that before 
the intelligence was ten days old it had been well-nigh 


* “I shall send,” wrote Major 
Malcolm, “Mr. Paisley with the 
Hadjee’s body, which will not only 
be considered a high compliment, 
but be useful in a thousand ways. 
It will preserve this transaction from 
the touch of Mr. Manesty and Mr. 
Jones. It will enable me to convey 
a correet state of the feeling here on 
the subject to many respectable Per¬ 
sians, and I shall obtain from Mr. 
P. a true account of the manner in 
which the transaction is received in 
Persia. He will give Lovett infor¬ 
mation which will secure him from 
error at the outset, and bo of the 
highest utility to him during his 
residence in India.”— \_MS. Corre^ 
spondenceJ] It is not certain, how¬ 
ever, that the high compliment here 
designed was duly appreciated by 
the Persians. Sir Harford Jones 
(from whose “touch” the transaction 
was to be preserved) says that “it 
seems to have escaped Marquis Wel¬ 
lesley that that which might be con¬ 
sidered a complimen at Calcutta, 
might in Arabia, Turkey, and Persia, 
be regarded so improper as almost to 
become an insult.The Per¬ 

sian moollahs as well as the Persian 
merchants at Bagdad, were shocked, 
and on my applpring to old Sulcmein 
Pacha for certain honours to be paid 
to the corpse, when removed from 
Bagdad to be carried to Nejeef, he 
said, ‘Very well; as you desire it 
to be done, it shall be done: but 
Hadjee Khalil Khan lived an infidel, 
and with infidels, and was, therefore, 
destined to hell; he was, however, 
murdered by infidels, and so became 
a ahahyde (martyr); but his former 
friends have robbed him of this 
chance, by deputing an infidel to 
attend his corpse to the grave; his 