



42 


FRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


secuted with extraordinary vigour, had exhausted the 
financial resources of the state. The reign of India’s 
most magnificent satrap—the “ sultanised” Governor-Ge¬ 
neral—was at an end. A new ruler had been sent from 
England to carry out a new policy; and that policy was 
fatal to the pretensions of such a man as Nebee Khan. 

He had fallen, indeed, upon evil times. Those were 
not days when moneyed compensations were likely to 
be granted even to ambassadors, or when there was any 
greater likelihood of an Indian statesman embarrass¬ 
ing himself with distant engagements which might com¬ 
pel him to advance an army into unknown regions, or 
send a fleet into foreign seas. The system, on which the 
future government of India was to be based, compre¬ 
hended a scheme of painful internal economy and rigid 
abstinence from external interference. Lord Cornwallis 
went out a second time to India, pledged to a policy purely 
domestic. It was his design to turn his back upon other 
states, and to fix his eyes intently on our own. The 
government was on the verge of absolute bankruptcy. 
There were large bodies of irregular troops in our ser¬ 
vice who could not be discharged, even when they were 
useless, because they could not be paid. To reconcile 
two adverse schemes of policy, or rather to prevent an 
abrupt and violent transition from one to the other, was 
the difficult duty of Sir George Barlow. This long-tried 
and intelligent public servant had been appointed to suc¬ 
ceed Lord Wellesley as Governor-General of India j but 
now, with affectionate earnestness and loyal zeal, he ex¬ 
erted himself as senior member of council, to assist the 
government of the friend who had reluctantly snatched 
from him the object of his ambition. The brief reign of 
the aged marquis was one of doubt and uncertainty in 
the minds of the foremost officers of the state. They 
who, under Lord Wellesley, had pursued, and were still 
pursuing, the course of policy favoured by that nobleman, 



RECEPTION OE NEBEE KHAN. 


43 


knew not how to transfer their allegiance to a ruler 
pledged to the abandonment of those measures which 
they believed his predecessor would have resolutely main¬ 
tained. Colonel Malcolm, who had been long acting 
as Political Agent with Lord Lake’s army, determined to 
throw up his appointment; and the commander-in-chief 
saw nothing but discredit before him if he continued at 
the head of a force condemned to ignominious inactivity. 
And so it happened, that when Lord Cornwallis, in Octo¬ 
ber, 1805, sunk under his senile infirmities, and died at 
Ghazeepore, Sir George Barlow, who succeeded to the 
chief seat in the government, was embarrassed by threat¬ 
ened desertions, and compelled to use all his influence to 
prevent abrupt changes in the constitution of the execu¬ 
tive, which might have locked the wheels of government, 
and plunged the aflairs of the state into a sea of danger¬ 
ous and bewildering confusion. 