

And BO it happened, that when the British Govern¬ 
ments in London and Calcutta awoke almost simul¬ 
taneously to the necessity of “ doing something,” they 
found a well-appointed French embassy established at 
Teheran, under General Gardanne, an officer of high 
reputation, whom even hostile diplomatists have delighted 
to commend; they found a numerous staff of officers,* 
civil and military, with engineers and artificers, prepared 
to instruct and drill the native troops, to cast cannon, and 
to strengthen the defences of the Persian cities; they 
found French agents, under the protection of duly con¬ 
stituted mehmendars^ visiting Gombroon, Bushire, and 
other places, surveying the harbors of the gulf, and in¬ 
triguing with the ambassadors of the Ameers of Sindh. 
And it was pretty well ascertained that the invasion of 
India by a French and Persian army was one of the 
objects of the treaty, which, soon after the arrival of 
Gardanne at Teheran, was sent home for the approval 
of Napoleon. 

But a mighty change had, by this time, passed over 
the politics of Europe. It was in July, 1807, that on a 

* General Gardanne*s suite seems thirty European officers, and a num- 
to have consisted of “ twenty-five of- her of artmcers,”—at least, I find it 
ficers, two clergymen, a physician, so represented by Malcolm.— [MS, 
some artillery and engineer officers, Records.'] 



THE PACmCATlON OP TILSIT. 51 

raft floating upon the bosom of the River Niemen, near 
the city of Tilsit, in the kingdom of Prussia, the Emperor 
Alexander and Napoleon Buonaparte, after a brief and 
bloody campaign, embraced each other like brothers. 
In the short space of ten days, fifty thousand of the best 
French and Russian troops had been killed or disabled 
on the field of battle. Yet so little had been the van¬ 
tage gained by either party, that it is even to this day a 
moot point in history, as it was in the cotemporaiy re¬ 
cords of the war, whether the first peaceful overtime was 
made by the Russian monarch or the Corsican invader. 
Both powers eagerly embraced the opportunity of repose; 
and in a few days the scene was changed, as by magic, 
from one of sanguinary war and overwhelming misery to 
one of general cordiality and rejoicing. The French 
and Russian soldiers, who a few days before had broken 
each other’s ranks on the bloody plains of Eylau and 
Friedland, now feasted each other with overflowing hos¬ 
pitality, and toasted each other with noisy delight. Such, 
indeed, on both sides was the paroxysm of friendship, 
that they exchanged uniforms one with the other, and 
paraded the public streets of Tilsit in motley costume, as 
though the reig.i of international fraternity had com¬ 
menced in that happy July. And whilst the followers of 
Alexander and Napoleon were abandoning themselves to 
convivial pleasures, and the social affections and kindly 
charities were in full play, those monarchs were spending 
quiet evenings together, discussing their future plans, 
and projecting joint schemes of conquest. It was then 
that they meditated the invasion of Hindostan by a con¬ 
federate army uniting on the plains of Persia. Lucien 
Buonaparte, the brother of the newly-styled emperor, 
was destined for the Teheran mission; and no secret was 
made of the intention of the two great European poten¬ 
tates to commence, in the following spring, a hostile 