

It was at this time, when threatened with the ven¬ 
geance of Russia, that the Persian Court addressed a letter 
to Napoleon, then in the full flush of unbroken success, 
seeking the aid of that powerful chief. It was at this 
time, too, that Aga Nebee Khan commenced his journey 
to India, and it is probable that if the Indian Govern¬ 
ment had shown any disposition to aid the Persian 
monarch in his eflbrts to repel the aggressions of the 
Muscovite, the French alliance would have been quietly 
but effectually relinquished. But the supineness of Eng¬ 
land was the opportunity of France. The Indian Govern¬ 
ment had left the settlement of the Persian question to 



EFFORTS OF FRENCH DIPLOMACY. 


49 


the Cabinet of St. James’s, and the Cabinet had dawdled 
over it as a matter that might be left to take care of 
itself. In this extremity, the Persian monarch forgot the 
treaty with the British, or thought that the British, by 
deserting him in his need, had absolved him from all 
obligations to observe it, and openly flung himself into 
the arms of the very enemy which that treaty so trucu¬ 
lently proscribed. 

In the autumn of 1805, an accredited French agent 
arrived at Teheran. The result of the Indian mission 
was then unknown; and Colonel Romieu was received 
with that barren courtesy which almost amounts to dis¬ 
couragement. It would probably, too, have been so re¬ 
garded by the French envoy, had not death cut short his 
diplomatic career, after a few days spent at Teheran, and 
a single audience of the king. But the following spring 
beamed more favorably on the diplomacy of France. 
The cold indifference of England had been ascertained 
beyond a doubt, and the danger of Russian aggressive¬ 
ness, now sharpened by revenge, was becoming more and 
more imminent. All things conspired to favour the 
machinations of the French ; and they seized the oppor¬ 
tunity with vigour and address. Another envoy ap¬ 
peared upon the scene. Monsieur Jaubert was received 
with marked attention and respect. He came to pave 
the way for a splendid embassy, which Napoleon pro¬ 
posed to despatch to the Persian Court, Overjoyed at 
these assurances of friendship, the king eagerly grasped 
the proffered alliance. He was prepared to listen to any 
proposal, so that his new allies undertook to co-operate 
against his Russian enemies. He would join in an inva¬ 
sion of Hindostan, or, in concert with the French, ampu¬ 
tate any given limb from the body of the Turkish Empire. 
There was much promise of aid on either side, and for a 
time French counsels were dominant at the Persian capi- 

VOL. I. E 



50 


FBANCE AIID RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


tal. Two years passed away, during which the emis¬ 
saries of Napoleon, in spite of accidental hindrances, con¬ 
trived to gain the confidence of the Court of Teheran. 
They declared that England was a fallen country—that 
although protected for a time by its insular position, it 
must fell a prey to the irresistible power of Napoleon— 
that, as nothing was to be expected from its fidendship, 
nothing was to be apprehended from its enmity; and so, 
industriously propagating reports to our discredit, they 
established themselves on the ruins of British influence, 
and for a time their success was complete. 