


MS, Correspondence of Sir John Malcolm, 



FAII.I7BB OF Malcolm’s mission. 5d 

vincial town, whilst a French and a Russian agent were 
basking in the royal sunshine at Teheran, and were en¬ 
tertained as guests of the prime minister, the represen¬ 
tative of Great Britain was told that he must conduct 
his negotiations and content himself with the countenance 
of lesser dignitaries of state. Persian officers were in¬ 
structed to amuse the British envoys, and to gain time. 
“ The earnest desire of the king,” wrote the prime minister 
to Nussur-ood-Dowlah, at Shiraz, “is to procrastinate, 
and to avoid all decided measures. You must, there¬ 
fore, amuse General Malcolm by offering your assist¬ 
ance;" and in this and other letters the local officers at 
Shiraz were instructed by every means in their power to 
detain Captain Paisley at that place; but he had de¬ 
parted before they were received, or it is difficult to say 
in what manner the imperial mandate might not have 
been obeyed.* “ A consideration of all these things," 
wrote Captain Paisley to government, “ induces me to 
conclude that the subsisting alliance between the Govern¬ 
ment of France and Persia is more intimate than we 
have yet imagined—that its nature is more actively and 
decidedly hostile to our interests than has hitherto been 
suspected, and . hat the reliance of the king on the pro¬ 
mises and assurances of the French agents must be 
founded on better grounds than have yet come to our 
knowledge.”! 

Chafed and indignant at the conduct of the Persian 
Court, General Malcolm at once came to the determina¬ 
tion to return immediately to Calcutta, and to report to 

* MS» Records ,—Copies of these tosh, writing from Bombay to his 
letters were obtained by the Mission, son-in-law, Mr. Rich, at Bagdad, 
and are now before me. I do not find counsels him to be prepared for a 
in them anything to give colour to the rapid retreat, and adds, “ Paisley was 
suspicion that it was intended forcibly very nearly made prisoner at Shiraz.” 
to detain Paisley at Shiraz. But He narrowly escaped, as will be 
such appears to have been the im- gathered from the subsequent not* 
mession at the time, and may have being seized and detained at Bushire. 
been the case. Sir James Mackin- t MS, Records. 



60 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PEBSIA. 


the Supreme Government the mortifying result of his 
mission. On the 12 th of July, he sailed from Bushire, 
leaving the charge of the embassy in the hands of Cap¬ 
tain Paisley, who remained at his post only to be insulted, 
and at last narrowly escaped being made a prisoner, by a 
precipitate retreat from the Persian dominions.* The 
failure of the Mission, indeed, was complete. Persia con¬ 
tinued to make professions of friendship to the British 
Government; but it was obvious that at that moment 
neither British diplomacy nor British gold, which was 
liberally offered, could make any way against the domi¬ 
nant influence of the French mission. Napoleon’s officers 
were drilling the Persian army, casting cannon, and 
strengthening the Persian fortresses by the application, 
for the first time, to their barbaric defences, of that sci¬ 
ence which the French engineers had learnt in such per¬ 
fection from the lessons of Vauban and Cormontagne. 