

E 2 



52 FRANCE ANP RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 

demonstration “ contre les possessions de la Compagnie 

desindes. ” 

But by this time both the British and the Indian 
Governments had awakened from the slumbers of indif¬ 
ference in which they had so long been lulled. They 
could no longer encourage theories of non-interference 
whilst the most formidable powers in Europe were push¬ 
ing their conquests and insinuating their intrigues over 
the countries and into the courts of Asia. Lord Minto 
had succeeded Sir George Barlow as head of the Su¬ 
preme Government of India. Naturally inclined, as he 
was instructed, to carry out a moderate policy, and to 
abstain as much as possible from entanglements with na¬ 
tive rulers, he would fain have devoted himself to the 
details of domestic policy, and the replenishment of an 
exhausted exchequer. But the unsettled state of our 
European relations compelled him to look beyond the 
frontier. What he saw there roused him into action. 
It is observable that statesmen trained in the cabinets 
and courts of Europe have ever been more sensitively 
alive to the dangers of invasion from the North than 
those whose experience has been gathered in the fields of 
Indian diplomacy. Lord Wellesley and Lord Minto were 
ever tremulous with intense apprehension of danger from 
without, whilst Sir John Shore and Sir George Barlow 
possessed themselves in comparative confidence and tran¬ 
quillity, and, if they were not wholly blind to the peril, at 
all events did not exaggerate it. There is a sense of se¬ 
curity engendered by long habit and familiarity with 
apparent danger, which renders a man mistrustful of the 
reality of that which has so often been shown to be a 
counterfeit. The inexperience of English statesmen sud¬ 
denly transplanted to a new sphere of action, often sees 
in the most ordinary political phenomena strange and 
alarming portents. It is easy to be wise after the event. 



THE FRENCH AND RUSSIAN AIXIANCE. 


53 


We know now that India has never been in any real 
danger from French intrigue or French aggressiveness; 
but Lord Wellesley and Lord Minto saw with different 
eyes, and grappled the shadowy danger as though it 
were a substantial fact. In those days such extraordinary 
events were passing around, that to assign the limits of 
political probability was beyond the reach of human 
wisdom. The attrition of great events had rubbed out 
the line which separates fact from fiction, and the march 
of a grand army under one of Napoleon’s marshals from 
the banks of the Seine to the banks of the Ganges did 
not seem a feat much above the level of the Corsican’s 
towering career. 

Eightly understood, the alliance between the two great 
continental powers which seemed to threaten the destruc¬ 
tion of the British Empire in the East, was a source of 
security to the latter. But in 1807, it was not so clearly 
seen that Persia was more easily to be conciliated by the 
enemies, than by the friends, of the Russian Autocrat— 
that the confederacy of Alexander and Napoleon was 
fatal to the Persian monarch’s cherished hopes of the 
restitution of Georgia, and the general retrogression of 
the Russian army; and that, therefore, there was little 
prospect of the permanency of French influence at the 
Court of Teheran. The danger, then, seemed imminent, 
and only to be met by the most active measures of defence. 
Averse as it long had been to unnecessary interference 
with foreign states, the British-Indian Government reluc¬ 
tantly entered upon a new game of external diplomacy; 
but, wisely determined to prosecute it with consummate 
vigour of execution applied to a far-reaching comprehen¬ 
siveness of design. To baffle European intrigue, and to 
stem the tide of European invasion, it seemed necessary 
to enlace in one great network of diplomacy all the states 
lying between the frontier of India and the eastern 