



THE CAMPAIGN IN ARMENIA. 


47 


the north of the Aras, threatening them with the fate of 
Ganja if they did not make instant submission in com¬ 
pliance with the orders of the Russian monarch, who 
had instructed him not to pause in his career of conquest 
until he had encamped his army on the borders of that 
river. 

In the spring of 1804, Abbas Mirza, the heir-apparent 
to the throne of Persia, took the field at the head of a for¬ 
midable army, and marched down upon Erivan, the ca¬ 
pital of Armenia. The governor refused to abandon his 
charge, and when the prince prepared to attack him, called 
the Russian general to his aid. The result was fatal to the 
Persian cause. In the month of July, the army of the 
Crown-Prince of Persia and the Russian and Georgian 
force under Zizianoff, twice encountered each other, and 
twice the Persian army was driven back with terrible 
loss. On the second occasion the rout was complete. 
Abbas Mirza lost everything. Taking refuge in a small 
fort, he endeavoured to negotiate terms with Zizianoff; 
but the Russian general told him haughtily, that the 
orders of his sovereign were, that he should occupy all 
the country along the Aras River, from Erivan to the 
borders of the Caspian, and that he chafed under the 
instructions which confined his conquests to a limit so 
far within the boundaries of his own ambition. 

The disasters of the heir-apparent brought the king 
himself into the field. Moving down with a large army 
to the succour of the prince, he again encountered the 
Russian forces, but only to see his troops sustain another 
defeat. Disheartened by these repeated failures, the 
Persians then changed their tactics, and adopting a more 
predatory style of warfare, harassed their northern enemy 
by cutting off his supplies. The year being then far 
advanced, Zizianoff drew off his forces, and prepared to 
prosecute the war with renewed energy in the following 



48 


FKANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


spring. That spring was his last. An act of the blackest 
treachery cut short his victorious career. He was con¬ 
ducting in person the siege of Badkoo, when the gar¬ 
rison, making overtures of capitulation, invited the Rus¬ 
sian general to a conference for the settlement of the 
terms. He went unattended to a tent that had been 
pitched for his reception, and was deliberately set upon 
and slain by a party of assassins stationed there for the 
bloody purpose. The King of Persia, when the tidings 
reached him, grew wild with delight. In an ecstasy 
of joy he published an inflated proclamation, setting 
forth that he had achieved a great victory, and slain the 
celebrated Russian commander. But other thoughts soon 
forced themselves upon the king and his ministers. A 
black cloud was brooding over them—the retribution of 
an outraged nation. A signal chastisement was expected. 
New armies were looked for; new encroachments anti¬ 
cipated from the North; new forfeitures of dominion 
seemed to be inevitable—^the righteous result of an 
act of such atrocious perfidy. Persia felt her weakness, 
and, in an extremity which seemed to threaten her very 
existence, trusted to foreign European aid to rescue her 
from the jaws of death. 