



MUSCOVITB AGM3BBSSIQK. 


46 


had long been pushing their intrigues in that quarter, and 
now at last w'ere beginning to overcome the difficulties 
which had formerly beset them. The Malcolm treaty of 
1800 bound the contracting parties to a defensive alliance 
against France; but the terms of that treaty had been 
scarcely adjusted, when French emissaries endeavoured 
to shake the fidelity of Persia by large offers of assistance. 
The offers were rejected. The French were told, in em¬ 
phatic language, that “ if Napoleon appeared in person 
at Teheran, he would be denied admission to the centre 
of the universe.” But, undaunted by these failures, they 
again returned to tempt the embarrassed Persian. Every 
year increased the difficulties of the Shah, and weakened 
his reliance on the British. He was beset with danger, 
and he wanted aid. The British-Indian Government 
was either too busy or too indifferent to aid him. The 
energetic liberality of the French contrasted favourably 
with our supineness; and before the year 1805 had 
worn to a close, Persia had sought the very alliance and 
asked the very aid, which before had been offered and 
rejected. 

The assistance that was sought was assismnce against 
Russia. In 180.!:, the Shah addressed a letter to Napo¬ 
leon, then in the very zenith of his triumphant career, 
seeking the aid of the great western conqueror to stem 
the tide of Russian encroachment. For years had that 
formidable northern power been extending its conquests 
to the eastward. Before the English trader had begun 
to organise armies in Hindostan, and to swallow up 
ancient principalities, the grand idea of founding an 
Eastern empire had been grasped by the capacious mind 
of Peter the Great. Over the space of a century, under 

rate in an attack upon the Turkish the representations of the savans ,— 
dominions; but the doubtful charac- Brigadier Malcolm ioLwdMinio: 

ter of the agents thwarted their MS. Becords."] 
schemes, and he gave little heed to 



46 FRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 

emperors and empresses of varying shades of character, 
had the same undeviating course of aggressive policy 
been pursued by Russia towards her eastern neighbours. 
The country which lies between the Black Sea and the 
Caspian was the especial object of Muscovite ambition. 
A portion of it, occupied by a race of hardy, vigorous 
mountaineers, still defies the tyranny of the Czar, and 
still from time to time, as new efibrts are made to subju¬ 
gate it, new detachments of Russian troops are buried in 
its formidable defiles. But Georgia, after a series of wars, 
notorious for the magnitude of the atrocities which dis¬ 
graced them, had been wrested from the Persians before 
the close of the last century, and in 1800 was formally 
incorporated with the Russian Empire by the Autocrat 
Paul. 

These encroachments beyond the Caucasus brought 
Russia and Persia into a proximity as tempting to the 
one as it was perilous to the other. The first few years 
of the present century were years of incessant and san¬ 
guinary strife. In the Russian Governor-General, ZizianoflP, 
were combined great personal energy and considerable 
military skill, with a certain ferocity of character which 
seldom allowed him to display much clemency towards 
the vanquished. A Georgian by extraction, and con¬ 
nected by marriage with the princes of that country, he 
never forgot the cruelties which had alienated for ever 
the hearts of the Georgian people from their old Maho- 
medan masters. The restless aggressive spirit of the 
great Muscovite power was fitly represented by this man. 
He was soon actively at work. He entered Daghistan— 
defeated the Lesghees with great slaughter — carried 
Ganja by assault, and massacred the garrison—a second 
time defeated the Lesghees, after a sanguinary engage¬ 
ment; and then returning to Tifiis, addressed the go¬ 
vernors of Shamakhee, Sheesha, and other fortresses to 