

Of the wisdom of Malcolm’s abrupt departure from 
Bushire, different opinions may be entertained. On the 
day after he embarked for Calcutta, one of the most 
sagacious men then in India was seated at his writing- 
table discoursing, for Malcolm’s especial benefit, on the 
advantages of delay. “As to the real question,” wrote 
Sir James Mackintosh to the brigadier-general, “ which 
you have to decide in the cabinet council of your own 
understanding, whether delay in Persia be necessarily 
and universally against the interests of Great Britain, it 
is a question on which you have infinitely greater means 
of correct decision than I can pretend to, even if I were 
foolish enough, on such matters, to aspire to any rivalship 
with a man of your tried and exercised sagacity. I 

* “ Gener^ Malcolm came round hia person being seized by the Per- 
to Cidcutta in August to communi- sian Government, instigated by the 
cate the information he had been able French agents.”— \_From letter of In- 
^ leaving his secretary at structions sent by Supreme Government 

Abushire, who was obliged subse- to MountstuartElphinstone^ in IS09 ,— 
quently to quit the place to prevent MS. Records.’] 



MOVEMENTS OF SIE HARFOED JONES. 


61 


should just venture in general to observe, that delay is 
commonly the interest of the power which is on the de¬ 
fensive. As long as the delay lasts, it answers the pur¬ 
pose of victory, which, in that case, is only preservation. 
It wears out the spirit of enterprise necessary for assail¬ 
ants, especially such as embark in very distant and peril¬ 
ous attempts. It familiarises those who are to be attacked 
with the danger, and allows the first panic time to sub¬ 
side. It affords a chance that circumstances may become 
more favorable; and to those who have nothing else in 
their favour, it leaves at least the ‘chapter of accidents.’”* 
The ‘ chapter of accidents ’ is everything in Oriental di¬ 
plomacy. Malcolm, too impetuous to profit by it, left his 
successor to reap the harvest of altered circumstances. 
Sir Harford Jones, who had been waiting his oppor¬ 
tunity at Bombay, entered the arena of diplomacy a few 
months later than Malcolm, and his progress was a long 
ovation. It was the ‘ chapter of accidents’ that secured 
his success. 

On the first receipt of intelligence of General Mal¬ 
colm’s withdrawal. Lord Minto despatched a letter to Sir 
Harford Jones, urging him to proceed to Persia with the 
least possible dilay. But he very soon revoked those 
orders, and addressed to the Bnglish envoy stringent 
communications, desiring him to remain at Bombay.^ 


* Another passage from this letter 
is worth quoting m the margin:— 
“ What I doubt (for I presume to go 
no further), is, whether it be for our 
interest to force on the course of 
events in the present circumstances. 
You are a man of frank character 
and high spirit, accustomed to repre¬ 
sent a successful and triumphant go¬ 
vernment. You must from nature 
and habit be averse to temporise. 
But you have much too powerful an 
understanding to need to be told, 
that to temporise is sometimes ab¬ 
solutely necessary, and that men of 