



DESPATCH OP BRIGADIER MALCOLM. 


57 


ford Jones sadled for Bombay with the mission on board 
one of his Majesty’s ships. He reached that port in the 
month of April, 1808, just as the embassy under Bri¬ 
gadier-General Malcolm, despatched by the Governor- 
General to the Court of Teheran, was putting out to sea 
on its way to the Persian Gulf.* 

Sir Harford Jones, therefore, rested at Bombay, await¬ 
ing the result of Malcolm’s proceedings. On the 10th 
of May the latter reached Bushire, and on the 18th wrote 
to Sir George Barlow, who had succeeded to the govem- 
norship of Madras, “ I have not only received the most 
uncommon attention from all here, but learnt from the 
best authority that the accounts of my mission have 
been received with the greatest satisfaction at Court. 
The great progress which the French have made and 
are daily making here satisfied me of the necessity of 
bringing matters to an early issue. I have a chance of 
complete victory. I shall, at all events, ascertain exactly 
how we stand, and know what we ought to do; and if I 
do not awaken the Persian Court from their delusion, 
I shall at least excite the jealousy of their new friends. I 
send Captain Paisley off to-morrow for Court—ostensibly, 
with a letter for the king; but he has secret instructions, 
and will be able to make important observations. He is 
charged with a full declaration of my sentiments and 
instructions in an official form, and you will, I think, 
when ypu see that declaration of the whole proceeding, 
think it calculated for the object. I have endeavoured 

* Malcolm wrote from Bombay on Harford’s character and former petty 
the 15tli of April, stating the course animosities on the same scene, of 
of policy he intended to pursue, and maintaining concord and unanimity 
the tone of remonstrance he purposed in the gulf one hour after his arriyal. 
to adopt, at the same time urging the Sir Harford,” he added, “ is not in 
Governor-General to suroend the possession of that high local respect 
mission of Sir Harford Jones. In and consideration in the countries to 
this letter he says that he should which he is deputed that should at-^ 
despair, “ from his knowledge of Sir tach to a national representative.” 



58 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PERSIA. 


to combine moderation with spirit, and to inform the Per¬ 
sian Court, in language that cannot irritate, of all the 
danger of their French connexion. Captain Paisley will 
reach Court on the 20th of June, and on the 15th of 
July I may expect to be able to give you some satisfac¬ 
tory account of his success.”* 

But in this he was over-sanguine. The French envoy 
had established himself too securely at Teheran to be 
driven thence by the appearance of a Malcolm at Bushire. 
A little too impetuous, perhaps—a little too dictatorial, 
that energetic military diplomatist commenced at the 
wrong end of his work. He erred in dictating to the 
Persian Court the dismissal of the French embassy as a 
preliminary to further negotiations, when in reality it 
was the end and object of his negotiations. He erred in 
blurting out all his designs, in unfolding the scheme of 
policy he intended to adopt, and so committing himself 
to a line of conduct which after-events might have ren¬ 
dered it expedient to modify or reject. He erred in 
using the language of intimidation at a time when he 
should have sought to inspire confidence and diffuse good¬ 
will among the officers of the Persian Court. These may 
not have been the causes of his want of success; but it 
is certain that he was completely unsuccessful. The 
large promises and the prompt movements of the French 
contrasted favourably with our more scanty ofiers and 
more dilatory action; and although Malcolm now came 
laden with presents, and intending to pave hia way to 
the Persian capital with gold, the British mission was 
received with frigid indifference, if not with absolute 
disrespect. The despatch of Captain Paisley to the 
capital was negatived by the Persian Government. His 
progress was arrested at Shiraz; and there, at that pro- 