



54 


PRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


points of the Eussian Empire. Since India had been 
threatened with invasion at the close of the last century, 
the Afghan power had by disruption ceased to be formi¬ 
dable. We had formerly endeavoured to protect our¬ 
selves against France on the one side, and Afghanistan on 
the other, by cementing a friendly alliance with Persia. 
It now became our policy, whilst endeavouring to re¬ 
establish our influence in that country, to prepare our¬ 
selves for its hostility, and to employ Afghanistan and 
Sindh as barriers against encroachments from the West; 
and at the same time to increase our security by enlisting 
against the French and Persian confederacy the friendly 
offices of the Sikhs. That strange new race of men had 
by this time erected a formidable power on the banks of 
the Sutlej, by the mutilation of the Douranee Empire; and 
it was seen at once that the friendship of a people occupy¬ 
ing a tract of country so situated, and inspired with a 
strong hatred of the Mahomedan faith, must, in such a 
crisis as had now arrived, be an object of desirable attain¬ 
ment. Whilst, therefore, every effort was to be made to 
wean the Court of Teheran from the French alliance, 
preparations were commenced, in anticipation of the pos¬ 
sible failure of the Persian mission, for the despatch of 
British embassies to the intervening countries. 

The duty of negotiating with the Sikh ruler was en¬ 
trusted to Mr. Metcalfe, a civil servant of the Company, 
who subsequently rose to the highest place in the govern¬ 
ment of India, and consummated a life of public utility 
in a new sphere of action, as Governor-General of our 
North American colonies. Mr. Elphinstone, another 
civil servant of the Company, who still lives, amidst the 
fair hills of Surrey, to look back with pride and con¬ 
tentment upon a career little less distinguished than that 
of his cotemporary, was selected to conduct the embassy 
to the Court of the Douranee monarch. Captain Seton 



BRinSH-mDIAlT DIFLOHAOT. 


55 


had been previously despatched to Sindh; and Colonel 
Malcolm, who was at that time Resident at Mysore, was 
now again ordered to proceed to the Persian Court, 
charged with duties which had been rendered doubly 
diflGicult by our own supineness, and the contrasted 
activity of our more restless Gallic neighbours. 



56 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PEBSIA. 


CHAPTER IV. 

[1808—1809.] 

The Second Mission to Persia—Malcolm’s Visit to Bushire—Failure of the 
Embassy—His Return to Calcutta—Mission of Sir Harford Jones—His 
Progress and Success. 

When, in the spring of 1808, Colonel Malcolm a second 
time steered his course towards the Persian Gulf, another 
British diplomatist had started, from another point, upon 
the same mission. Moved as it were by one common im¬ 
pulse, the Cabinet of England and the Supreme Council 
of India had determined each to despatch an embassy to 
the Court of Teheran. A curious and unseemly spectacle 
was then presented to the eyes of the world. Two mis¬ 
sions, in spirit scarcely less antagonistic than if they had 
been despatched by contending powers, started for the 
Persian Court; the one from London—the other from 
Calcutta. The Court of St. James had proposed to assist 
Persia by mediating with St. Petersburgh, and Mr. Har¬ 
ford Jones, a civil servant of the Company, who was 
made a baronet for the occasion, was deputed to Teheran 
to negotiate with the ministers of the Shah. It was ori- 
^nally intended that he should proceed to Persia, taking 
the Russian capital in his route; but the pacification of 
Tilsit caused a departure from this design, and Sir Har- 