

In the month of October, 1805, the vessel bearing the 
Persian ambassador sailed into the harbour of Bombay. 
He was welcomed with all the formalities befitting his 
station, and with every demonstration of respect. But a 
series of untoward circumstances, like those which, in the 
reign of our secc nd James, delayed the public audience of 
Lord Castlemaine at Borne, postponed, for the space of 
many months, the reception of Nebee Khan at Calcutta. 
At length, on the 28th of April, 1806, the ceremony of 
presentation took place. The Governor-General lined the 
public way with soldiers, and sent the leading officers of 
the state to conduct the merchant-minister to his presence. 
It was an imposing spectacle, and a solemn farce. The 
Persian elchee knew that he had come to Calcutta not to 
treat of politics, but of pice; and the English governor, 
while publicly honouring the Persian, secretly despised 
him as a sordid adventurer, and was bent upon baffling 
his schemes. At the private interviews which took 



44 


BUANCB AND KU8SIA IN THE BAST. 


place between tHe British functionaries and Nebee Khan, 
there was little mention of political affairs. There was a 
long outstanding money account between the parties, 
and the settlement of the account-current was the grand 
object of the Mission. The Persian, who thought that 
he had only to ask, found that times had changed since 
the commencement of the century, and was overwhelmed 
with dismay when the British secretary demonstrated to 
him that he was a debtor to our government of more 
than a lakh of rupees. Satisfied with existing relations 
of friendship between Persia and G-reat Britain, and 
never at any time disposed to embarrass himself with 
unnecessary treaties. Sir George Barlow declined to enter 
into new political negotiations, or to satisfy the exorbitant 
personal claims of the representative of the Persian Court. 
Nebee Khan left Calcutta a disappointed man. The 
speculation had not answered. The investment had 
been a bad one. He had toiled for four long years; had 
wasted his time and wasted his money only to be told at 
last, by an officious secretary, that he owed the British- 
Indian Government a lakh and seven thousand rupees. 
In January, 1807, carrying back a portfolio, not more 
full of political than his purse of financial results, the 
ambassador left Calcutta. Neither the merchant nor 
the minister had played a winning game. Compensa¬ 
tions and treaties were alike refused him; and he went 
back with empty hands. 

In the mean while, the French had succeeded in esta¬ 
blishing their influence at the Court of Teheran.* They 

* Some French agents, under the the British, and endeavoured to ob- 
ieign^ character of botanists, had tain permission to re-establish their 
visited '^heran before Buonaparte footing at Gombroon. Had the emis- 
mvaded Egypt, and wished Aga Ma- saries appeared in a more openly 
Homed Khan, the then ruler of JPersia, diplomatic character, they might have 
to seize Bussorah and Bagdad. They succeeded, for Aga Mahomed Khan 
stimulate the coveted the territory named, and 
bnaU to assist Tippoo Sultan against might have been induced to co-ope- 