



STTMMABT 0^ THE AMBASSADOBIAl. WAB. 73 

comes within the proper compass of this history to nar¬ 
rate the incidents of the ambassadorial war, still less to 
comment upon them. But it may be briefly remarked 
that all parties were wrong. Mistakes were unquestion¬ 
ably committed by Malcolm, by Jones, and by the In¬ 
dian Government. There was an old feud between the 
two former, which certainly did not tend to smooth 
down the difficulties which had arisen; and the Govern¬ 
ment of India was not very patient of the home-born 
interference with what it conceived to be its rightful 
diplomatic prerogative. Jones, though receiving his 
credentials from the Crown, was placed in subordination 
to the local government, and ought to have obeyed its 
mandates. That he would have done so, had he re¬ 
ceived instructions to withdraw before he had fairly en¬ 
tered upon his work, it is only just to assume; but having 
once made his appearance in Persia as the representa¬ 
tive of his sovereign, he thought that he could not 
abandon his mission under orders from the Indian Go¬ 
vernment without lowering the dignity of the Crown. 

He did not commence his expedition to Persia until 
some time after Malcolm had retired; and when he 
went at last, it was imder urgent solicitations from the 
Governor-General to proceed there without delay. He 
cannot, therefore, be charged with indelicacy or pre¬ 
cipitancy. He went only when the coast was clear. 
That he succeeded better than Malcolm is to be at¬ 
tributed mainly to the “ chapter of accidents.” Malcolm 
says that it was owing to his measures that Jones was 
enabled to advance—that the rumour of his military 
preparations overawed the Persian Court—and that all 
the rest was done by bribery. We are not bound to 
accept this version of the story. That there was at 
that time little hope of any mission succeeding with¬ 
out bribery no man knew better than Malcolm. But 



74 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PERSIA. 


Malcolm could not bribe his way to Teheran in the 
spring, because the French were then dominant at 
Court. Had he waited till the autumn, the road 
would have been lubricated for him. One thing at 
least is certain. Nothing could have been more fortu¬ 
nate than the miscarriage of Malcolm’s military expe¬ 
dition. It would have embarrassed our future proceed¬ 
ings, and entailed a large waste of public money. As to 
the question of prerogative, it would be little use to dis¬ 
cuss it. It has been settled long ago. The “ fools at 
home,” as Malcolm called them, have taken into their 
own hands the appointment of our Persian ambassadors, 
and the conduct of all subsequent negotiations with the 
Persian Court. Henceforth we shall have to regard the 
relations subsisting between Persia and Great Britain as 
affairs beyond the control of the East India Company 
and their representatives, and to look upon the ministers 
of the Crown as responsible for all that we have to con¬ 
template in that quarter of the world.* 