


♦ MS, Correspondence, 



THE PROJECTED EXPEDITION TO KARRACK. 66 

The proceedings of Brigadier Malcolm at Bushire had not 
been viewed with unmixed approbation by Lord Minto 
and his council; but he was the employ^ of the Indian 
Government; they had confidence in the general sound¬ 
ness of his views; and they felt that in the maintenance 
of their dignity it was expedient to support him. In no 
very conciliatory mood of mind had that eager, energetic 
officer returned to Calcutta. Chewing the cud of bitter 
fancies as he sailed up the Bay of Bengal, he prepared a 
plan for the intimidation of Persia, and was prepared 
with all the details of it when, on the 20th of August, he 
disembarked at Calcutta. There was no unwillingness 
in the Council-Chamber to endorse the schemes of the 
baffled diplomatist. It was agreed that an armament 
should be fitted out to take possession of Karrack, an 
island in the Persian Gulf, or, in the delicate language 
of diplomacy, to form an establishment ” there, as “ a 
central position equally well adapted to obstruct the 
designs of France against India, as to assist the King of 
Persia (in the event of a renewal of the alliance) against 
his European enemies.” 

These measures were described as ‘‘ entirely defensive, 
and intended e\ en to be amicable.” The command of 
the force was of course conferred on Brigadier Malcolm. 

I am vested,” he wrote to his friends at Madras, “ with 
supreme military and political authority and control in 
the Gulf, to which, however threatening appearances 
may be, I proceed with that species of hope which fills 
the mind of a man who sees a great and unexpected 
opportunity afforded him of proving the extent of his 
devotion to the country.”*" It was to be a very pretty 
little army, with a compact little staff, all the details of 
which, even to the allowances of its members, were soon 
drawn up and recorded. An engineer officer was called 
in and consulted about the plan of a fort, with a hou^ 

* MS, Correspondence, 



66 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PEESIA. 


for the commandant, quarters for the officers, barracks 
for the men, a magazine to contain five hundred barrels 
of gunpowder, and everything else complete. The acti¬ 
vity of the Brigadier himself at this time was truly sur¬ 
prising. He drew up elaborate papers of instructions to 
himself, to be adopted by the Governor-General. One 
of these, covering twenty-six sheets of foolscap, so be¬ 
wildered Lord Minto in his pleasant country retreat 
at Barrackpore, that he could come to no other con¬ 
clusion about it than that the greater part had better 
be omitted. Every conceivable contingency that could 
arise out of the movements of France or Russia, or dis¬ 
pensations of Providence in Persia, was contemplated 
and discussed, and instructions were sought or suggested; 
but a new series of contingencies occurred to the Brig¬ 
adier after ho had embarked, and a new shower of ifs 
was poured forth from the Sand-heads still further to 
perplex the government. Lord Minto had by this time 
fully made up his mind that the French were coming; 
wrote of it, not as a possible event, but as a question 
merely of time; and contemplated the probability of con¬ 
tending in Turkey for the sovereignty of Hindostan.* 
But the French had too much work to do in Europe 
to trouble themselves about operations in the remote 
Asiatic world. 