

The success of Sir Harford Jones embarrassed the 
British-Indian Government even more than did the 
apprehension of his failure. Lord Minto and his coun¬ 
cillors were sorely perplexed. It was desirable, as they 
all acknowledged, that the engagements entered into by 
the representative of the Court of England should be 
completed ; but it was not desirable that the Indian 
Government should be degraded in the eyes of the Per* 
sian Court. Between their anxiety to accept the thing, 
done and to disgrace the doer, they were thrown into a 



72 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PERSIA. 


state of ludicrous embarrassment.* The resolution, how¬ 
ever, at which they arrived was, under all the circum¬ 
stances of the case, as reasonable as could be expected. 
It was determined to accept Sir Harford Jones’s treaty, 
and to leave the dignity of the British-Jndian Govern¬ 
ment to be vindicated on a future occasion. Perhaps it 
would have been even better quietly to have lived down 
the slight; for it cost a large sum of money, expended 
on a profitless mission, to satisfy the British-Indian 
Government that it had re-established its name at the 
Court of the Persian, and confounded the malignity of 
Jones.f 

This is a curious chapter of diplomatic history. It is 
one, too, which has evoked from the partisans of both 
parties an extraordinary amount of bitterness. It hardly 


♦ Mr. Lumsden wrote a minute 
(July 10, 1809), in which he says: 
“We must either continue to employ 
at the Court of Persia an agent in 
whom we have no confidence, who 
has studiously endeavoured to de¬ 
grade the authority of the Govern¬ 
ment of India, under whose orders 
he was placed; or by deputing an 
agent of our own to Teheran, whilst 
he continues there, acknowledged by 
the Persian Government as the repre¬ 
sentative of his Britannic Majesty, 
we may expose the public interest to 
danger from the presence in Persia of 
two distinct authorities, who cannot 
act in concert, but will, it is to be 
feared, necessarily counteract each 
other, and occasion great perplexity 
to the Persian minister.” At the 
same time, Mr. Colebrooke wrote: 
“Our situation as regards Sir H. 
Jones is certainly difficult and em¬ 
barrassing in the extreme. We are 
desirous of fulfilling the engagements 
he has contracted, and of maintaining 
the alliance concluded by him. And 
we are glad that he should continue 
at the Court of Persia to watch the 


wavering counsels of that Court, and 
to oppose the revival of French in¬ 
fluence at it, until he can be replaced 
by our own envoy; but by either 
re-accrediting him with the Court, or 
silently executing his engagements, 
we acquiesce in the continued degra¬ 
dation of this government.”—[JlfiS*. 
Records."] 

t On the details of Malcolm’s sup¬ 
plementary mission it is unnecessary 
to dwell. Its political results are 
compressible into the smallest pos¬ 
sible space. It was, indeed, a mere 
pageant; and a very costly, but not 
wholly a profitless one. It yielded a 
considerable harvest of literary and 
scientific results, among the most 
important of which may be men¬ 
tioned Malcolm’s voluminous “ His¬ 
tory of Persia” and the present 
Sir Henry Pottingcr’s admirable 
“Account of Beluchistan;” works 
which, it haft been well said, “not 
only filled up an important blank 
in our knowledge of the East, but 
which materially helped to fix the 
literary character of the Indian 
services.” 