


your character only can temporise 
with effect. When Gentz was in Eng¬ 
land, in 1803 (during the peace), he 
said to me, that ‘it required the 
present system, and the fate minis¬ 
ters for nothing required the reality 
and the reputation of vigour so much 
as temporising.** — {^Mackintosh to 
Malcolm: July 13,1808.] 
t The first letter appears to have 
been written on the 10th of August. 
On the 20th, Brigadier Malcolm 
reached Calcutta. On the 22nd, a 
letter was sent to Sir Harford JonJf 
directing him to wait for further 



62 


THE SECOND MISSION TO FEBSIA. 


Malcolm had reached Calcutta in the interval; and set 
forth, in strong colours, the nature of the inEuence that 
had been opposed to his advance, and mapped out a plan 
of action which, in his estimation, it would now be expe¬ 
dient to adopt. Lord Minto appears to have fallen 
readily into the views of the military diplomatist; but 
he failed altogether to cut short the career of Sir Har¬ 
ford Jones. Letters travelled slowly in those days; and 
before the missive of the Governor-General, ordering his 
detention, had reached Bombay, the vessel, which was to 
bear the representative of the Court of London to the 
Persian Gulf, had shaken out its sails to the wind. 

On the 14th of October, the Mission reached Bushire. 
Sir Harford Jones set about his work earnestly and con¬ 
scientiously. He had difficulties to contend against of 
no common order, and it must be admitted that he faced 
them manfully. He found the Persian authorities but 
too well disposed to arrogance and insolence; and he 
met their pompous impertinence with a blustering 
bravery, which may have been wanting in dignity, but 
was not without effect. He bullied and blasphemed, and 
after a series of not very becoming scenes, made his way 
to Teheran, where he was graciously received by the 
Shah. The ‘ chapter of accidents ’ had worked mightily 
in his favour. The reign of Gallic influence was at an 
end. Our enemies had overreached themselves, and been 
caught in their own toils. Before Napoleon and the Czar 

orders, and on the 29tli another and Mintons letter, I embarked on board 
more urgent communication was ad- Za Nereide, and she, with the Sap- 
dressed to him, with the intent of phire^ and a very small vessel belong- 
annulling his mission. It appears mg to the Company, called the Sylj^ 
that in those days a letter took more sailed out of Bombay harbour for 
^an three weeks to accomplish the Persia on the 12th of September, 
journey between Calcutta and Bom- 1808.” Malcolm had calculated that 
bay. ^e Grovemor-General*s letter the letter of August 22nd would rea^ 
of the 10th of August must have Bombay by September 13th; and that 
djpiched the latter place about the in all probability Jones would not em« 
^h of September. Jones says, In bark before that date. But, as usual, 
seven days from receiving Lord he was over-sanguine. 



DECLINE OF FRENCH INFLUENCE. 


63 


had thrown themselves into each other’s arms at Tilsit, 
it had been the policy of the French to persuade the Per¬ 
sian Court that the aggressive designs of Russia could be 
successfully counteracted only by a power at enmity with 
that state ; and now Napoleon boasted that he and the 
emperor were “ invariablement unis pour la paix comme 
pour la guerre.” 