

At the beginning of October Malcolm started for 
Bombay, from which Presidency the details of his army 
were to be drawn. But before the vessel on which he 
had embarked had steered into the black water, he was 

♦ For example, in one^ of his mi- proach of the army may be earlier 
nutes written about this time, he than on the former supposition, and it 
says: “It appears doubtful whether will have less difficulty to encounter, 
the partition of European Turkey The route of our divisions must in 
wiU precede the French expedition to this event be Ihrou^ the territory of 
There appears to be reason, Bagdad. ... I incline, under 
hj the late advices, to suppose that all the circumstances now known to 
the consent of the Porte may have me, to think that the force stationed 
been obtained to the passage of the at Earrack should be greater than we 
French army. In this case, the ap- before looked to.”— Records.^ 



EMBABBASSMENTS OF THE IKOIAK OOVEBBMEKT. 67 

recalled, in consequence of the receipt of intelligence of 
Sir Halford Jones’s intended departure for Bushire. 
This was, doubtless, very perplexing; but Malcolm did 
not despair. “ I am this instant,” he wrote, on the 5th 
of October, “ recalled to Calcutta in consequence of ad¬ 
vices from Sir Harford, stating his intention of leaving 
Bombay on the 11th of September. As it appears 
possible that he may not be ready to sail before the 
13th, he wiU, I think, receive a letter from this govern¬ 
ment of the 22nd, desiring him to stay; and if that has 
the effect of stopping him, the letter of the Supreme 
Government, dated the 29th, will probably put an end 
to the mission.”* Vain hope ! Sir Harford Jones was 
at that time not many days’ sail from Bushire; and be¬ 
fore Malcolm finally quitted Calcutta, had started fairly 
on his race to Teheran. 

The Supreme Government now more urgently than 
before addressed instructions to the nominee of the Bri¬ 
tish Cabinet, ordering him to retire from Persia. The 
Council were all agreed upon the subject. Mr. Lumsden 
and Mr. Colebrooke, who were Members of Council at 
the time, expressed themselves even more strongly on 
the subject than the Governor-General. All were cer¬ 
tain that Sir Harford Jones must either fail signally, or 
disgrace and embarrass the government by a delusive 
success. He might be repulsed at Bushire—or balBed at 
Shiraz—or drawn into a treaty favorable to the French. 
In any case, it was assumed that he was sure to bring 
discredit on the British Government and the East India 
Company. Without asserting that the conduct of the 
Persian Court had been such as to call for a dedaratioD 
of war from the rulers of British India, it was contended, 
and not, perhaps, without some show of reason, that any 
advances made at such a time would compromise its 
dignity, and that the attitude to be assumed should be 

* MS. Correqxmdence of Sir John Malcolm. 

F 2 



68 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PEESIA. 


rather one of reserve than of solicitation. Both parties 
were in an embarrassing position. Whilst Lord Minto 
was writing letters to Sir Harford Jones, telling him that 
if he did not immediately close his mission, all his pro¬ 
ceedings would be publicly repudiated,* Sir Harford 
Jones, as representative of the sovereign, was repudiating 
the proceedings of the Supreme Government of India, 
and offering to answer with his fortune and his life for 
any hostile proceedings on the part of the British not 
provoked by the Persians themselves. The government 
did its best to disgrace Sir Harford Jones by dishonour¬ 
ing his bills and ignoring his proceedings; and Sir Har¬ 
ford Jones lowered the character of the Indian Govern¬ 
ment by declaring that it had no authority to revoke his 
measures or to nullify his engagements with the Persian 
Court. 