

* From 1826 to 18«S5, however, Government; but the diplomatic 
the nomination of the Persian envoy control was not relinquished by the 
was again vested in the Indian Foreign-office. 



THE MISSIONS TO LAHOEE AND CADEtTI,. 


75 


CHAPTER V. 

[1808—1809.] 

The Missions to Lahore and Caubul—^The Aggressions of Runjeet Singh— 
Mr. Metcalfe at Umritsur—^Treaty of 1809—Mr. Elphinstone's Mission 
—Arrival at Peshawur—Reception by Shah Soojah—Withdrawal of the 
Mission—^Negotiations with the Ameers of Sindh. 

It was whilst Sir Harford Jones was making his way 
from Bombay to Bushire, in the months of September 
and October, 1808, that the Missions to Caubul and 
Lahore set out for their respective destinations. Since 
the time when the rumored approach of an army of 
invasion under Zemaun Shah had troubled the hearts of 
the English in Lidia, the might of the Douranee rulers 
had been gradually declining, as a new power, threaten¬ 
ing the integrity of the A%han dominions, swelled into 
bulk and significance, and spread itself over the country 
between the Sutlej and the Indus. It was no longer 
possible to regard with indifference the growth of this 
new empire. We had supplanted the Mahrattas on 
the banks of the Jumna, and brought ourselves into 
proximity to the Sikhs. A group of petty principalities 
were being rapidly consolidated into a great empire by 
the strong hand and capacious intellect of Runjeet SingTi, 
and it had become apparent to the British that thence¬ 
forth, for good or for evil, the will of the Sikh ruler must 



76 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHORE AND CAUBUL. 


exercise an influence over the councils of the rulers of 
Hindostan. 

It was part of Lord Minto’s policy at this time, as we 
have seen, to include the Lahore chief in the great Anti- 
Gallican confederacy with which he had determined to 
frustrate the magnificent designs of Napoleon. But the 
posture of afiairs on our northern frontier was such as to 
occasion some embarrassment in the Council-Chamber of 
Calcutta. The military power of the Sikh rajah had 
been put forth, with almost unvarying success, for the 
subjection of the petty principalities within his reach; 
and now it appeared that he was desirous of reducing to 
a state of vassalage all the chiefs holding the tract of 
country which lies between the Sutlej and the Jumna. 
There was much in this to perplex and embarrass Lord 
Minto and his colleagues. It was desirable, above all 
things, to maintain a friendly power beyond the frontier, 
but whether this were to be done by supporting the 
Sikh chiefs in the Cis-Sutlej territories, even at the risk 
of actual hostilities with Runjeet Singh; or whether, on 
the other hand, it were expedient to sacrifice the petty 
chieftains to Runjeet’s ambition, and enter into an offen¬ 
sive and defensive alliance against the Persians and the 
French with that prince, were questions which agitated 
the minds of our Indian statesmen, and found no very 
satisfactory solution in the elaborate minutes which they 
provoked. Lord Minto, whilst expressing his natural 
inclination to assist a weak country against the usurpa¬ 
tion of a powerful neighbour, and fully recognising the 
principle of non-interference, so consistently inculcated 
by the government at home, maintained that the emer¬ 
gency of the case was such as to justify a departure from 
ordinary rules of conduct, and a violation of general 
maxims of policy. The defence of India against the 
dangers of French invasion was stated to be the most 