

• MS, Correspondence of Sir John Malcolm — JDecend)er 24,180S. 



70 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PEESIA. 


social, mucli less in diplomatic, converse. There was an 
intentional indefiniteness in one of the articles of the 
treaty, which was to be referred to the British Govern¬ 
ment for specific adjustment, and Meerza Sheffee, not 
understanding or approving of this, blurted out that the 
British envoy designed to “cheat” him. The figure 
used in the Persian language is gross^and offensive, and 
the word I have employed but faintly expresses the force 
of the insult. Jones had not patience to bear it. He 
started up, seized the counterpart treaty lying signed on 
the carpet before him, gave it to Mr. Morier, and then 
turning to the astonished Wuzecr, told him that he was a 
stupid old blockhead to dare to use such words to the 
representative of the King of England, and that nothing 
but respect for the Persian monarch restrained him from 
knocking out the old man’s brains against the wall. 
“ Suiting the action to the word, I then,” says Jones, in 
his own narrative of his mission, “ pushed him with a 
slight degree of violence against the wall which was be¬ 
hind him, kicked over the candles on the fioor, left the 
room in darkness, and rode home without any one of 
the Persians daring to impede my passage.” It is not 
surprising that, after such a scene as this, the Persians 
should have shaken their heads, and said, “ By Allah ! 
this Feringhee is either drunk or mad.” 

But, in spite of this and other untoward occurrences, 
the preliminary treaty was duly interchanged. It bears 
date the 12th of March, 1809. By this treaty, the Shah 
of Persib, declaring all other engagements void, cove¬ 
nanted “ not to permit any European force whatever to 
pass through Persia, either towards India, or towards 
the ports of that country.” He fiirther undertook, in the 
event of the British dominions in India being attacked 
or invaded by the Afghans or any other power, “ to 
afford a force for the protection of the said dominions.” 



PROVISIONS OF THE TREATY. 


71 


On the part of the British Government, it was stipulated 
that in case any European force had invaded, or should 
invade, the territories of the King of Persia, his Britan¬ 
nic Majesty should afford to the Shah a force, or, in lieu 
of it, a subsidy,-with warlike ammunition, such as guns, 
muskets, &c., and officers, to the amount that might be 
to the advantage of both parties, for the expulsion of the 
force so invading.” The general provisions of the treaty 
were included in this, but the anticipated arrival of Bri¬ 
gadier Malcolm with a military expedition in the Persian 
Gulf rendered it necessary that certain specific articles 
should be inserted with especial reference to this move¬ 
ment. It was provided that the force should on no 
account possess itself of Karrack or any other places in 
the Persian Gulf; but that, unless required by the 
Governor-General for the defence of India, it should be 
held at the disposal of the Persian shah, the Shah under¬ 
taking to receive it in a friendly manner, and to direct his 
governors to supply it with provisions “ at the fair prices 
of the day.” This preliminary treaty was conveyed by 
Mr. Morier, accompanied by a Persian ambassador, to 
England, where it was duly ratified and exchanged; and 
Sir Harford Jones was confirmed in the post of Resident 
Minister at the Court of Teheran. 