



THE NOBTH-WESTEEN FBONTIEB. 


77 


pressing object of attention, and entitled to most weight 
in the deliberations of the state; but it was doubted 
whether the alliance with Runjeet Singh would effec¬ 
tually secure that desirable end,* whilst it was certain 
that the gradual extension of his dominions would be 
permanently injurious to British interests in the East. 
It was desirable, in a word, to secure his alliance and 
to check his presumption at the same time. Any act 
of hostility and discourtesy on our part might throw 
him into the arms of Holkar and Scindiah, and other 
native princes; and a confederacy might be formed 
against us that would disturb the peace of India for 
years. Starting, however, with the assumption that the 
French were undeniably about to invade Hindostan, it 
was contended by the Governor-General, that whilst 
the native princes would be inclined to wait the coming 
of the great western liberator, it was our policy to hus¬ 
band our strength for the. grand struggle with our ter¬ 
rible European opponent. “ We are, in reality,” wrote 
Lord Minto, “ only waiting on both sides for a more 
convenient time to strike. We know that Holkar and 
Scindiah, the Rajah of Bhurtpore, and probably other 
chiefe, have taken their part, and are sharpening their 
weapons in expectation of a concerted signal.” 

Thus, oscillating between two courses of policy, and 
considering the question solely as one of expediency— 
that kind of expediency, however, to which something 
of dignity is imparted by a great national crisis, real or 
supposed—the Governor-General at last came to favour 
an opinion that sound policy dictated a strenuous effort 

* “ I doubt,” wrote Lord Minto, and elsewhere for the purpose of com- 

whether his jealousy would permit munication, as shouldrender us inde- 
him to admit, by treaty, our troops pendent of his fidelity. If he does not 
freely into his country, and to con- accede to this, we shall derive little 
sent that we should establish such benefit from his alliance.”*—[[Mtnute 
posts both in front against the enemy of Lord Minto: MS. Eecorda^ 



78 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHORE AND CAUBHL. 


on the part of the British Government to curb the 
aggressive spirit of the Sikh conqueror, and to set a limit 
to his dominions. It was seriously debated by Lord 
Minto whether Eunjeet should not at once be deprived 
of all power to work us mischief; but the recollection of 
the advantages of maintaining, if possible, a longer peace, 
and of the non-interference system so strenuously enforced 
upon him by the home authorities, suggested to him the 
expediency of following a more cautious line of policy, 
and merely simulating, in the first instance, an intention 
to oppose a hostile front to the aggressiveness of the 
Sikhs. “ If it were not found expedient,” wrote Lord 
Minto, “ ultimately to pursue or to favour these views, 
the apprehension alone of so great danger brought home 
to him may be expected to render Eunjeet Singh more 
subservient to our wishes than any concessions or com¬ 
pliances will ever make him.” 