

In the mean while, Brigadier Malcolm had sailed down 
the Bay of Bengal, and reached Bombay by the first 
day of December. His instructions had preceded him; 
a select force of some two thousand men was ready to 
receive his orders; and by the 18th of January the ex¬ 
pedition was prepared, at all points, to take ship for the 
Gulf, to pounce upon Karrack, and to strike a great 
panic into the rebellious heart of the Persian nation. 
“ But,” says Malcolm, in one of his voluminous narra¬ 
tives, “ the accounts I heard of the great change caused in 
the affairs of Europe by the general insurrection of Spain, 
and the consequent improbability of Buonaparte making 
an early attack upon India, combined with the advance 
of Sir Harford Jones into Persia, led me to suspend the 
sailing of the expedition. My conduct on that occasion 

* In one of these letters, written and retiring from Persia, it has been 
in February, 1809, it is said: “ I can- determined, imd measures have been 
not venture to omit acquainting you taken accordingly, to disavow your 
that in the event of your not comply- public character in that country 
ing, without further reference or de- subsequent to your receipt of iny 
lay, with the instructions conveyed in letter of 3l8t of October.**— 
this letter, by closing your mission Records,'} 



THE PBELIMINABY TREATY. 


69 


was honoured by approbation, and the expedition coun¬ 
termanded.” But though the military expedition was 
countermanded, the Mission was not. Malcolm, con¬ 
fident that the proceedings of such a man as Jones, for 
whom he entertained the profoundest possible contempt, 
could be attended only with disastrous failure, deter¬ 
mined to procee^ to Persia, in spite of the civilian’s 
accounts of his favorable reception. “ I have private 
accounts from Bushire,” he wrote on Christmas-eve, 
“ which state that Sir Harford Jones is, or pretends to 
be, completely confident of a success which every child 
with him sees is unattainable through the means he uses. 
His friends now believe he will go on in spite of any 
orders he may receive from the Governor-General. 1 
mean to go on too (there is, indeed, nothing in these 
despatches that can stop me for a moment), so we shall 
have 9.fine mess (as the sailors say) in the Gulf. Will 
this lesson cure the fools at home of their mischievous 
propensity to interfere with the local government?”* 
Such, indeed, was the feeling between the two diplo¬ 
matists, and so little was it disguised, that the Shah, per¬ 
ceiving plainly the true state of the case, abused Mal¬ 
colm before Joaes, and Jones before Malcolm, as the 
best means, in his opinion, of ingratiating himself with 
them both. 

In March, 1809, the preliminary treaty was inter¬ 
changed, on the part of their respective sovereigns, by 
Sir Harford Jones and Meerza Shefiee. No treaty be¬ 
fore or since was ever interchanged imder such ex¬ 
traordinary and unbecoming circumstances. Meerza 
Shefiee, the prime minister of Persia, was an old and 
infirm man. His age and rank among his own people 
had given him a sort of license to speak with an amount 
of fi-eedom such as is not tolerated among Europeans in 