

Skilfully taking advantage of this, Sir Harford Jones 
ever as he advanced inculcated the doctrine which 
had emanated in the first instance from the French 
embassy, and found every one he addressed most willing 
to accept it. There was, fortunately for us, a galling 
fact ever present to the minds of the Persian minis¬ 
ters to convince them of the truth of the assertion that 
it was not by the friends, but by the enemies of Russia 
that their interests were to be best promoted. The 
French had undertaken to secure the evacuation of 
Georgia; but still the Russian eagles were planted on 
Georgian soil. The star of Napoleon’s destiny was no 
longer on the ascendant. The “ Sepoy General,” whom 
he had once derided, was tearing his battalions to pieces 
in the Spanish peninsula. Moreover, the French had lost 
ground at Teheran, in their personal as in their political 
relations. They had not accommodated themselves to 
the manners of the Persian Court, nor conciliated, by a 
courteous and considerate demeanour, the good-will of 
their new allies. They were many degrees less popular 
than the English, and their influence melted away at 
the approach of the British envoy. The Shah, too, had 
by this time, not improbably, become suspicious of the 
designs of the French. It was urged with some force 
that if the French invaded India they would not leave 
Persia alone. Mahomed Shereef Khan, who was sent 
by Nussur-oolah-Ehan to General Malcolm just befor^ 
his departure from Bushire, to repeat the friendly assu¬ 
rances of the Persian Government, very sagaciously ob- 



64 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PERSIA. 


served, “ If the French inarch an army to India, will they 
not make themselves masters of Persia as a necessary pre¬ 
lude to further conquests, and who is to oppose them 
after they have been received as friends ? But our king,” 
continued the old man, “ dreams of the Bussians. He 
sees them in Aderbijan, and within a short distance of 
the capital, and, despairing of his own strength, he is 
ready to make any sacrifice to obtain a temporary relief 
from his excessive fear. In short,” he concluded, whilst 
strong emotion proved his sincerity, “ affairs have come 
to that state that I thank my God I am an old man, 
and have a chance of dying before I see the disgrace 
and ruin of my country.”* Had Malcolm remained a 
little longer at Bushire, he would have seen all these 
dreams of French assistance pass away from the ima¬ 
ginations of the Persian Court, and might, under the 
force of altered circumstances, have carried everything 
before him. 

When Sir Harford Jones reached the Persian capital. 
General Gardanne had withdrawn; and there was little 
difficulty in arranging preliminaries of a treaty satisfac¬ 
tory alike to the Courts of Teheran and St. James’s. 
The work was not done in a very seemly manner; but it 
was not less serviceable when done, for the manner of 
its doing. Perhaps there is not another such chapter as 
this in the entire history of English diplomacy. Jones 
had left Bombay under the impression that he was acting 
in accordance with the wishes of Lord Minto; but he 
had not been long in Persia before he found that the 
Indian Government was bent upon suspending his opera¬ 
tions, and, failing in this, was resolute to thwart him at 
every turn. They dishonoured his bills and ignored his 
proceedings. A totally opposite course of policy had been 
determined upon in the Council-Chamber of Calcutta. 