

But before this rapid sketch of the diplomacy of 1808-9 
is brought to a close, some mention must be made of 
another subordinate measure of defence against the pos- 

to meet and do them honour. On dignity, and our most confidential 
their arrival, we gave them suitable Ameers waited on them. . . . We 
dwellings, and ordered their wants learned that Shah Mahmoud had lefb 
and wishes to be attended to. After Caubul, and halted at Chuk-Dilah. 
a few days* rest the ambassadors came Hearing this, we immediately re- 
to the presence, and presented vari- fiected on the state of the Company’s 
ous articles of European and Hin- ambassadors. We resolved, first, to 
dostanee workmanship, also many place them in a state and place of 
elephants with superb accoutrements, safety; and proceed to punish the re- 
Hresses of honour were conferred on bels; and then, if God would grant 
all* We gave strict orders that the a victory, we intended to return to 
Mission should be treated with every treat them in a proper manner.*’ 



90 


THE MISSION TO SINDH. 


sibility of a foreign invasion. The low countries lying 
on the banks of the river Indus, from its junction with 
the Punjabee tributaries to the sea, were known as Upper 
and Lower Sindh. The people inhabiting the former 
were for the most part Beloochees—a warlike and tur¬ 
bulent race, of far greater physical power and mental 
energy than their feeble, degraded neighbours, the Sindh¬ 
ians, who occupied the country from Shikarpoor to the 
mouths of the Indus. The nominal rulers of these pro¬ 
vinces were the Talpoor Ameers, but they were either 
tributary to, or actually dependent upon the Court of 
Caubul. The dependence, however, was in effect but 
scantily acknowledged. Often was the tribute to be 
extracted only by the approach of an army sent for its 
collection by the Douranee monarch. There was con¬ 
stant strife, indeed, between Sindh and Caubul—the 
one ever plotting to cast off its allegiance, and the other 
ever putting forth its strength more closely to rivet the 
chains. 

In July, 1808, Captain Seton was despatched by the 
Bombay Government to the Court of the Ameers at 
Hyderabad. Misunderstanding and exceeding his in¬ 
structions, he hastily executed a treaty with the State of 
Sindh, imposing, generally and unconditionally, upon 
each party an obligation to furnish military aid on the 
requisition of the other. The mind of the envoy was 
heavy with thoughts of a French invasion, which seem 
to have excluded all considerations of internal warfare 
and intrigue in Central Asia. But the Ameers were at 
that time intent upon emancipating themselves from the 
yoke of Caubul, and Captain Seton found that he had 
committed the British Government to assist the tributary 
State of Sindh against the Lord Paramount of the coun¬ 
try, thereby placing us in direct hostility with the very 
power whose good offices we were so anxious to concili- 



PROCEEDINGS OP CAPTAIN SETON. 


91 


ate. There was, indeed, a Persian ambassador at that 
very time resident at the Sindh capital, charged with 
overtures for the formation of a close alliance between 
Persia and Sindh subversive of the tributary relations of 
the latter to the State of Caubul.* He was acting, too, 
as the secret agent of the French; and the Ameers made 
no secret of the fact, that but for the friendly overtures 
of the British they would have allied themselves with 
the Persians and French. They now grasped at the 
proffered connexion with the Indian Government, believ¬ 
ing, or professing to believe, that it entitled them to assist¬ 
ance against the State of Caubul, and industriously pro¬ 
pagated a report of the military strength which they had 
thus acquired. The danger of all this was obvious.f 
Captain Seton’s treaty was accordingly ignored ; and Mr. 
Elphinstone was instructed that, in the event of Shah 
Soojah remonstrating against Captain Seton’s treaty, he 
might, without hesitation, apprise the Court of Caubul 
that the engagements entered into were “ totally unau¬ 
thorised and contrary to the terms of the instnictions 
given him;” and that, in consequence of these errors. 
Captain Seton had been officially recalled, and another 
envoy despatched to Sindli to negotiate the terms of a 
new treaty. 