

♦ Under date March 6, 1809. 



MR. ELPHINSTONE’s MISSION. 


85 


avoid contracting even defensive engagements with the 
Court of Caubul; and added, “ Should the contracting 
those engagements be absolutely required by the King, 
the eventual aid to be afforded by us ought to be limited 
to supplies of arms, ordnance, and military stores, rather 
than of troops."* 

The Mission proceeded through Bekanier, Bahwul- 
pore,f and Mooltan; and ever as they went the most 
marked civility was shown to the British ambassadors. 
But one thing was wanting to render the feeling towards 
them a pervading sentiment of universal respect. They 
had not long crossed the frontier before they discovered 
that a more liberal display of the facial characteristics of 
manhood would elevate them greatly in the eyes of a 
people who are uniformly bearded and moustached.^ 

• MS, Records, Another paragraph Mission received this hint from an 
of these instructions is worth quoting. European deserter, namcd^ Pensley, 
“ Although there is not now the same who had been entertained, in a mili- 
immediate exigency for forming a tary capacity, by Shah Soojah. They 
friendly connexion with the Court of might nave learnt the lesson from 
Caubul, yet that measure is of impor- Mr. Forster, who, twenty years be- 
tance, and contains an object of sound fore, had travelled in Afghanistan, 
policy, in the event, however remote. That enterprising gentleman, a civil 
of either the French or any other servant of the Company, found his 
European power endeavouring to ap- beard of the greatest service. He 
I)roach India by that route.” suffered it to grow for fifteen months, 

t It is worthy of remark in this and had reason to regret that before 
place, that Mr. Strachey, who accom- he had wholly shaken off Eastern 
panied Mr. Elphinstone's Mission in associations, he allowed the razor 
the capacity of secretary, and who to profane it.^ Putting himself on 
on this as on other occasions evinced board a Russian frigate in the Cas- 
the possession of a high order of in- plan, he thought that he might reduce 
tellect, drew up a very able memo- nis face to its old European a^ect; 
randum on the advantages of forming but he tells us that “ the Ghilan 
a connexion with Bahwul Khan. In envoy, then proceeding on the frigate, 
this paper there occurs the following expressed a surprise to see me, "i^om 
prescient passage:—Bahwul Khan he thought a Mahomedan, eating at 
might also be induced, in the event the same board with the Russian gen- 
of actual hostilities, to invade the tlemen; but when he saw a barber 
territories of Runjeet Singh at any commencing an operation on my 
point we might suggest, and thereby beard, which I took the opportunity 
form an important diversion, whilst of having shaved, he evinced great 
the British army would be advancing amazement and indignation; nor did 
froin another quarter of the Sikh he, until repeatedly informed of my 
territoiy.”— [JliS. Records,"] real character, cease his reprehension 