

Up to this time the primary object of the British 
Government had been the establishment of such an alli¬ 
ance with the rulers of the Punjaub, as might ensure a 
strenuous conjoint opposition to an European army ad¬ 
vancing from the West. But those were days when a 
constant succession of great changes in the European 
world necessarily induced a shifting policy on the part 
of our Indian statesmen. It was difficult to keep pace 
with the mutations which were passing over the political 

VOL. I. Q 



82 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHOBB AND CAUBttL. 


horizon—difficult to keep a distant mission supplied 
■with instructions which were not likely to become 
totally useless before they could be brought into effective 
operation. With Mr. Metcalfe at Umritsur it was com¬ 
paratively easy to communicate. He had been ordered 
to temporise—^to do nothing in a hurry; and he had 
succeeded so well as to protract his negotiations imtil the 
spring of 1809. The delay was most advantageous to 
British interests. The “chapter of accidents” worked 
mightily in our favour. The war with Napoleon had 
now been carried into the Spanish peninsula, and it de¬ 
manded all the energies of the Emperor to maintain his 
position in Europe. The necessity of anti-Gallican alli¬ 
ances in India became less and less urgent. The value 
of Sikh friendship dwindled rapidly down, and the pre¬ 
tensions of the Sikh ruler naturally descended with it. 
The sight of a formidable British force on the frontier— 
the intelligence of the European successes of the great 
“ Sepoy General” who, a few years before, on the plains 
of Bcrar, had given the Mahrattas a foretaste of the 
quality of his military skill*—the declining influence of 
the French in Central Asia,—all suggested to the wily 
Sikh Rajah the expediency of forming a friendly alliance 
with the British.f He was now in a temper to accede 
to the terms proposed to him by the British diplomatist; 


^ “ At the time when the proposal 
was made for the adjustment of difle- 
rences, the forces on both sides re¬ 
mained quiet in sight of each other, 
when the news of the defeat of Junot 
(Duke of Abrantes) at Vimiera, by 
the British army, under Sir Arthur 
Wellesley, was received in the camps 
of General St. Leger and Colonel 
Ochterlony, and, as usual, cele¬ 
brated by royal salutes. The cause 
of this firing being made known to 
Runjeet Singh, the salute was, by 
his special command, repeated from 
.all the artillery in his camp—a cir- 
oumstance which, whether it be attri¬ 


buted to politeness towards the Bri¬ 
tish commanders, with whom he was 
in treaty, or to a general condemna¬ 
tion of the system of Buonaparte, 
was felt equally agreeable.”—[Asiatic 
Annual Register. 

t It is said, too, that an accidental 
collision between some of the Ma- 
homedan sepoys of Mr. Metcalfe's 
mission, and a far superior body of 
Sikhs, in which the inferiority of 
the latter was most munistakeably 
demonstrated, had no inconsiderable 
effect upon the mind of Hunjeet 
Singh, who was a spectator of the 
discomfiture of his countrymen. 