



80 


THE MISSIONS TO lAHOEE AND CAUBUL. 


to adopt the more dignified course of ordering Mr. Met¬ 
calfe to withdraw at once from the Sikh camp, and, re¬ 
garding the conduct of Kunjeet Singh as an outrage 
against the British Government, to take measures at once 
to chastise him;—whether, as recommended by Mr. 
Edmonstone, who always brought a sound judgment to 
bear upon such questions, and whose opinions were 
seldom disregarded by the Governor-General, to limit the 
negotiations with Runjeet Singh to defensive measures 
against the French, leaving the question of the subjuga¬ 
tion of the Cis-Sutlej states for future adjustment;—or 
whether it would not be more prudent to direct Mr. 
Metcalfe to encumber himself as little as possible with 
engagements of any kind—to adopt a cautious and tem¬ 
porising line of policy, so as to admit of frequent refer¬ 
ences to Calcutta in the course of his negotiations, and 
to wait for anything that might chance to be written 
down in our favour in that great “ chapter of accidents,” 
which so often enabled us to solve the most perplexing 
questions, and to overcome the most pressing difficulties.* 
This was the course finally adopted. On one point, 
however, the tone of government was decided. Eun- 
jeet Singh had required the British Government to 
pledge itself not to interfere with his aggressions against 
Caubul; and Mr. Metcalfe was now informed, that 
“were the Rajah to conclude engagements with the 
British Government in the true spirit of unanimity and 
confidence, we could not accede to any proposition upon 
the part of Caubul injurious to his interests: uncom¬ 
bined with such engagements, that question (of his 
aggressions against the Caubul territories) cannot pos¬ 
sibly form an article of agreement between this go- 

• “The point to aim at in our without a rupture. I should, on 
present transactions with Uie Rajah this principle, rather wish to pro¬ 
of Lahore,” wrote Lord Minto, “ ap- tract them, to accelerate the treaty.” 
pears to be that we should keep —[Minute of Lord Minto: MS, i2c- 
ourselves as free as can be done cords.'] 



MOVEltfEXTS ON THE FRONTIEB. 


81 


vernment and the Rajah of Lahore; and on this ground 
the discussion of it may be properly rejected. At the 
same time, if the occasion should arise, you may in¬ 
form the Rajah that Mr. Elphinstone is not authorised 
to conclude with the State of Caubul any engagements 
injurious to his interests. You will be careful, how¬ 
ever, as you have hitherto been, to avoid any pledge 
on the part of government which might preclude any 
future engagements with the State of Caubul on that 
subject.” And whilst Mr. Metcalfe was carrying out 
this temporising policy inculcated by the Calcutta coun¬ 
cil, troops were pushed forward to the frontier to 
watch the movements of the Punjabee chief. A body 
of King’s and Company’s troops, under General St. 
Leger, and another under Colonel Ochterlony, com¬ 
posed entirely of native regiments, were posted in 
the neighbourhood of Loodhianah, ready, at a mo¬ 
ment’s notice, to take the field against the followers 
of Nanuk. Vested with political authority, the latter 
officer, on the 9th of February, 1809, issued a pro¬ 
clamation calling upon the Sikh ruler to withdraw his 
troops to the further side of the Sutlej, and placing all 
the Cis-Sutlej principalities under the protection of the 
British Government. It was plain that we were no 
longer to be tampered with, and that there was nothing 
left to Runjeet Singh but to yield a reluctant compliance 
to our terms. 