



THE I^ORE TREATY. 


83 


and accordingly, on the 25th of April, 1809, a treaty 
was executed by Runjeet Singh in person, and by Mr. 
Metcalfe on the part of the British Government, in which 
there was no more mention of the French than if the 
eagles of Napoleon had never threatened the eastern 
world. It was stipulated that the Bajah should retain pos¬ 
session of the territories to the north of the Sutlej, but 
should abstain from all encroachments on the possessions 
or rights of the chiefs on the left bank of the river. This 
limitation was merely a prospective one. It had been in¬ 
tended to deprive Runjeet of the tracts of country which 
he had previously occupied to the south of the Sutlej; 
and the rough draft of the treaty contained, as a part of 
the first article as it now stands, the words, “ And on the 
other hand, the Rajah renounces all claim to sovereignty 
over the Sikh chiefs to the southward of that river, and 
all right of interference in their affairs but this passage 
had been subsequently erased by Lord Minto, and Run¬ 
jeet Singh was now left in possession of the tracts he had 
originally occupied, though restrained from all further en¬ 
croachments. The Sikh chiefs between the Sutlej and 
the Jumna, not already under the yoke of Runjeet Singh, 
were taken under British protection, and on the 5th of 
May a proclamation was issued declaring the nature of 
the connexion which was thenceforth to exist between 
them and the dominant power on the south of the 
Jumna. 

In the mean while, Mr. Elphinstone’s Mission was 
making its way to the Court of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk. 
The envoy had been originally instructed that he was 
empowered to receive from the King of Caubul proposals 
having for their basis the employment of the power and 
resources of that state against the advance of any 
European army. He was authorised to express a convic¬ 
tion, as regarded offensive operations, that in the event of 

* MS. Records. 

g2. 



84 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHORE AND CAUBUL. 


Persia being found decidedly confederated Avith the 
Prench in their projected expedition to India, the British 
Government “ would not hesitate to adopt any plan of 
hostility against Persia consonant to the views of the 
King of Caubul.” But he was cautioned against enter¬ 
ing into any permanent arrangement, or pledging his 
government to any ulterior line of conduct. Everything 
was to be limited to the occasion. It was to be the 
policy of the envoy rather to draw the Court of Caubul 
into solicitations to the British Government, than to make 
any spontaneous offers of assistance. And he was in¬ 
structed especially to impress upon the mind of the King, 
that both as regarded security from without, and the in¬ 
ternal safety and tranquillity of his own dominions, it was 
above all things the interest of the Douranee monarch to 
break up the alliance existing betAveen the Court of Tehe¬ 
ran and those of Paris and St. Petersburgh. 

But this alliance Avas already in a state of dissolution. 
The spring of 1809 brought, as we have seen, glad 
tidings from Europe to the Anglo-Indian capital, and all 
fear of a French invasion ])assed away from the minds 
of our rulers. Whilst Mr. Metcalfe was bringing to a 
conclusion, irrespective of all reference to the French, 
his long-pending negotiations with Lahore, Mr. Elphin- 
stone was instructed* that the important events which 
had occiured in Europe Avould necessarily induce a 
modification of the course of policy to be pursued at the 
Court of Caubul. He was told that it was no longer 
necessary to entertain a thought of offensive operations 
against Persia, but that the British Government would 
accede to engagements of a nature purely defensive 
against that state, should such a stipulation appear to be 
an object of solicitude to the Afghan monarch. This 
was merely stated as an admissible coiurse. The Gover¬ 
nor-General declared that he would wish, if possible, to 