

t It IS said that Mr. Elphinstone’s of the act; during the process of 



86 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHOEB AND CAUBTO. 


Our officers have ever since carefully abstained from in¬ 
curring this reproach; and it may be doubted whether, 
ever again, any hint will be required to stimulate them to 
encourage an Asiatic development of hair on the lower 
part of the face. 

I do not intend to trace the progress of the Mission. 
The story has been told with historical fidelity and gra¬ 
phic distinctness in a book which is still, after the lapse 
of nearly forty years, the delight of Anglo-Indian readers, 
and which future generations of writers and cadets will 
turn to with undiminished interest. On the 25th of 
February, the Mission entered Peshawur. Crowds of 
wondering inhabitants came out to gaze at the represen¬ 
tatives of the nation which had reduced the great Mogul 
to a shadow, and seated itself on the throne of Tip- 
poo. Pushing forward with the outstretched neck of 
eager curiosity, they blocked up the public ways. The 
royal body-guards rode among the foot-passengers; lashed 
at them with their whips; tilted with their lances at 
grave spectators sitting quietly in their own balconies; 
and cleared the way as best they could. But fast as they 
dispersed the thronging multitude, it closed again around 
the novel cavalcade. Through this motley crowd of ex¬ 
cited inhabitants, the British Mission was with difficulty 
conducted to a house prepared for them by royal man¬ 
date. Seated on rich carpets, fed with sweetmeats, and 
regaled with sherbet, every attention was paid to the 

which he threw on me many a look of breadth, though it had been somewhat 
contempt. When the barber began to shrivelled W the severity of the late 
cut off the moustachios, he several winter. When you advert to the 
times, in a peremptory manner, re- general importance of an Asiatic 
quired him to desist, and, seeing them beard, to the essential services which 
gone, ‘ Now,’ said he, * of whatever mine had rendered, and to our long 
country or sect you may be, your and intimate association, I trust that 
disgrace is complete, and you look this brief introduction of it to your 
like a woman.’ Thus, after a growth notice will not be deemed imperti- 
of fifteen months fell my beard, nent. This operation of cutting it 
which in that period had increased to ought, however, to have been post- 
a great magnitude, both in length and poned till my arrival at Astracan.” 



RECEPTION OP MR. EEPHINSTONE. 


87 


European strangers. The hospitality of the King was 
profuse. His fortunes were then at a low ebb; but he 
sent provisions to the Mission for two thousand men, 
with food for beasts of burden in proportion, and was 
with difficulty persuaded to adopt a less costly method of 
testifying his regal cordiality and respect. 

Some dispute about forms of presentation delayed the 
reception of the English ambassadors. But in a few days 
everything was arranged for the grand ceremonial to take 
place on the 5th of March. When the eventful day ar¬ 
rived, they found the King, with that love of outward 
pomp which clung to him to the last, sitting on a gilded 
throne, crowned, plumed, and arrayed in costly apparel. 
The royal person was a blaze of jewellery, conspicuous 
among which the mighty diamond, the Koh-i-noor, des¬ 
tined in after days to undergo such romantic vicissitudes, 
glittered in a gorgeous bracelet upon the arm of the Shah. 
Welcoming the English gentlemen with a graceful cordi¬ 
ality, he expressed a hope that the King of England and 
all the English nation were well, presented the officers of 
the embassy with dresses of honour, and then, dismissing 
all but Mr. Elphinstonc and his secretary, proceeded to 
the business of the interview. Listening, attentively to 
all that was advanced by the British envoy, he professed 
himself eager to accede to his proposals, and declared that 
England and Caubul were designed by the Creator to 
be united by bonds of everlasting friendship. The pre¬ 
sents which Mr. Elphinstone had taken with him to 
Afghanistan were curious and costly; and now that they 
were exposed to the view of the Shah, he turned upon 
them a face scintillating with pleasure, and eagerly ex¬ 
pressed his delight. His attendants, with a cupidity 
that there was no attempt to conceal, laid their rapacious 
hands upon everything that came in their way, and 
scrambled for the articles which were not especially 