



88 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHORE AND CAUBUL. 


appropriated by their royal master. Thirty years after¬ 
wards, the memory of these splendid gifts raised longing 
expectations in the minds of the courtiers of Caubul, 
and caused bitter disappointment and disgust when Cap¬ 
tain Burnes appeared with his pins and needles, and 
little articles of hardware, such as would have disgraced 
the wallet of a pedlar of low repute.* 

At subsequent interviews the impression made by the 
Shah upon the minds of the English diplomatists was of a 
description very favorable to the character of the Afghan 
ruler. Mr. Elphinstonewas surprised to find that the Dou- 
ranee monarch had so much of the “ manners of a gentle¬ 
man,” and that he could be affable and dignified at the 
same time. But he had much domestic care to distract 
him at this epoch, and could not fix his mind intently 
on foreign politics. His country was in a most unsettled 
condition. His throne seemed to totter under him. He 
was endeavouring to collect an army, and was projecting 
a great military expedition. He hoped to see more of the 
English gentlemen, he said, in more prosperous times. 
At present, the best advice that he could give them was 
that they should retire beyond the frontier. So on the 
14th of June the Mission turned its back upon Peshawur, 
and set out for the provinces of Hindostan.f 


* It was the very costliness of might have been limited with respect 
these presents, and the lavish expen- both to the nature and extent of the 
diture of the entire Mission, that gave items composing them, and that the 
the deathblow to the system of diplo- provision of articles for presents to 
matic extravagance which had been an extent so enormous as that exhi- 
favoured by the Elphinstones and bited in the accounts of these Mis- 
Malcolms. When the accounts of sions has been regulated by a prin- 
the Afghan and Persian Missions ciple of distribution unnecessarily 
came before the Governor-General profuse.”—[AfS. Records.’] 
in Council, Lord Minto stood aghast t It Is to be regretted that Shah 
at the enormous expenditure, and, in Soojah’s own notices of the British 
a stringent minute, recorded “his Mission are very scanty. He says, 
deliberate opinion, that the actual in his autobiographical narrative, 
expenditure has far exceeded the “ On receiving intelligence that the 
necessity of the occasion—that the English ambassadors had arrived at 
personal expenses of the envoys Kohat, we sent an appropriate party 



THE CAUBUL TREATY. 


89 


Three days after the Mission commenced its homeward 
journey, the treaty which had been arranged by Mr. 
Elphinstone was formally signed at Calcutta by Lord 
Minto. The first article set out with a mis-statement, 
to the efiect that the French and Persians had entered 
into a confederacy against the State of Caubul. The two 
contracting parties bound themselves to take active mea¬ 
sures to repel this confederacy, the British “ holding 
themselves liable to afibrd the expenses necessary for the 
above-mentioned service, to the extent of their abilityT 
The remaining article decreed eternal friendship between 
the two States: “ The veil of separation shall be lifted 
up from between them; and they shall in no manner 
interfere in each other’s countries; and the King of 
Caubul shall permit no individual of the French to enter 
his territories.” Three months before these articles were 
signed, Sir Harford Jones had entered into a preliminary 
treaty with the Persian Court, stipulating that in case 
of war between Persia and Afghanistan, his Majesty the 
King of Great Britain should not take any part therein, 
unless at the desire of both parties. The confederacy 
of the French and Persians had been entirely broken 
up, and all the essentials of the Caubul treaty rendered 
utterly null and useless. 