

The agent then appointed was Mr. N. H. Smith, who 
had been filling, with credit to himself, the office of Resi¬ 
dent at Bushire. He was instructed to annul the former 
treaty, and to “endeavour to establish such an inter¬ 
course with the chiefs of Sindh as would afford the 

* The Ameers had sent vakeels to determined upon, to ascertain the 
Persia, seeking assistance against practicability of sending an embassy 
Caubul; and the Persian ambassa- to Candahar or Caubul, by the route 
dor had accompanied them on their of Sindh; and upon the strength of 
return to Sindh. these instructions, had taken upon 

t Nor was this the only error himself to address a letter to the 
into which Captain Seton had fallen. King of Caubul, expressing the desire 
That officer was instructed, before of the British Government to form an 
Mr. Elphinstone^s Mission had been alliance with that monarch. 



92 


THE MISSION TO SINDH. 


means of watching and counteracting the intrigues of the 
French in that and the neighbouring States.” It was no 
easy thing to establish on a secure basis friendly relations 
with so many different powers, if not at open war with 
one another, in that antagonistic state of conflicting in¬ 
terests which rendered each principality eager to obtain 
the assistance of the British to promote some hostile de¬ 
sign against its neighbour. But partly by open promises, 
and partly by disguised threats, our agents at this time 
succeeded in casting one great network of diplomacy 
over all the states from the Jumna to the Caspian Sea. 
The Ameers of Sindh coveted nothing so much as assist¬ 
ance against the Douranee monarch. The British envoy 
was instructed to refuse all promises of assistance, but to 
hint at the possibility of assistance being given to the 
paramount State in the event of the tributary exhibiting 
any hostility to the British Government. It was dis¬ 
tinctly stated that the object of Mr. Elphinstone’s Mission 
to Caubul was exclusively connected with the appre¬ 
hended invasion of the Persians and the French; that 
the affairs of Sindh would not be touched upon by the 
Caubul embassy, and that, therefore, the affairs of Cau¬ 
bul could not with propriety be discussed by the ambas¬ 
sador to Sindh; and it was adroitly added, that the rela¬ 
tions between Caubul and Sindh could only be taken into 
consideration by the British Government in the event of 
the latter state exhibiting a decided disposition to encou¬ 
rage and assist the projects of our enemies. 

Nor was this the only use made of the conflicting claims 
of Caubul and Sindh. It happened, as has been said, 
that Persia had been intriguing with the Ameers, and had 
promised to assist them in the efforts to cast off the Dou¬ 
ranee yoke. The French had favoured and assisted 
these intrigues; and Mr. Elphinstone was accordingly 
instructed to instigate the resentment of the Afghan 



RESULTS OF OUR DIPLOMACY. 


93 


monarch against the French and Persian allies, and to 
demonstrate to him that the very integrity of his empire 
was threatened by the confederacy. It was the policy of 
the British-Indian Government to keep Sindh in check by 
hinting at the possibility of British assistance rendered to 
Caubul for its coercion; and, at the same time, to alarm 
Canbul by demonstrating the probability of Sindh being 
assisted by Persia to shake off the Douranee yoke. 
Operating upon the fears of both parties, our diploma¬ 
tists found little difficulty in bringing their negotiations 
to a successful termination. The Ameers of Sindh en¬ 
tered readily into engagements of general amity, and 
especially stipulated never to allow the tribe of the French 
to settle in their country. But before these treaties were 
exeeuted, France had ceased to be formidable, and Persia 
had become a friend. The Sindh and Caubul treaties 
were directed against exigencies which had ceased to 
exist; but they were not without their uses. If the em¬ 
bassies resulted in nothing else, they gave birth to two 
standard works on the countries to which they were 
despatched; and brought prominently before the world 
the names of two servants of the Company, who have 
lived to occupy no small space in the world’s regard, and 
to prove themselves as well fitted, by nature and educa¬ 
tion, to act history as to write it.* 