

* I need scarcely write the names flowery courtiers of the Celestial Em- 
of Elphinstone and Pottinger—or al- pire, and thence to the control of the 
hide to their respective works. Of Caflre savages of Southern Africa, is 
the former statesman I have already now quietly anchored in the more 
spoken. The Lieutenant Henry Pot- commonplace government of Madras, 
linger, who, early in the century, ac- The materials for Pottinger’s work 
companied the Sindh Mission, and was on Beloochistan were mainly collected 
attached to General Malcolm’s staff in the course of the journey under- 
on his second visit to Persia, after taken in connexion with Malcolm^s 
passing, at a later stage of his career. Mission; but it was the Sindh em- 
frem the management of the wild bassy that first directed his atten- 
tribes of Beloochistan to play an in- tion to the countries of which he 
tricate game of diplomacy with the wrote. 



94 


THE MID-CAREBR OF SHAH SOOJAH. 


CHAPTER VI. 

[ 1809 — 1816 .] 

The Mid-Career of Shall Soojah—His Wanderings and Misfortunes—Cap¬ 
tivity ill Cashmere—Imprisonment at Lahore—Robbery of the Koh-i-noor 
—Reception of the Sliah by the Rajah of Kistawar—His Escape to the 
British Territories. 

Before Mr. Elpliinslone’s Mission had cleared the limits 
of the Douranee Empire, Shah Soojah had given battle 
to his enemies, and been disastrously defeated. The 
month of June, 1809, had not worn to a close, before it 
was evident that his cause was hopeless. Still he did 
not abandon the contest. Despatching his Zenana, with 
which was his blind brother, to Rawul Pindee, he made 
new efforts to splinter up his broken fortunes. But sus¬ 
taining several defeats, and narrowly escaping, on more 
than one occasion, with his life, he desisted for a time 
from operations, of which every new struggle demon¬ 
strated more painfully the utter fruitlessness. He wanted 
military genius, and he wanted the art to inspire confi¬ 
dence and to win affection. Deserted by the chiefs and 
the people, he withdrew beyond the frontier, and there 
entered upon new preparations for the renewal of the 
contest under circumstances more favorable to success. 
Entertaining and drilling troops, he spent a year at 
Rawul Pindee. Some defections from his brother’s party 



HIS CAPTIVITr IN CASHMERE. 


95 


inspiring him with new hopes, he marched thence to 
Peshawur, and took possession of the Balia Hissar. But 
here the treachery of his friends was likely to have 
proved more fatal to him than the malice of his enemies. 
The chiefs on whom he had most relied were bribed over 
by the Governor of Cashmere to seize the person of the 
King. Persuading him, before he commenced the expe¬ 
dition to Caubul, to send out the horses of his troopers 
to graze in the neighbouring villages, and thus stripping 
him of his only defence, they escaladed the Balia Hissar, 
seized the royal person, and carried the unfortunate 
monarch to the valley of Cashmere. Here he was offered 
his release at the price of the Koh-i-noor; but he refused 
to surrender this magnificent appendage to the Crown 
of Caubul, and rescued it from the hands of one plunderer 
only to suffer it to fall into the gripe of another. 