

In this conjuncture, the Governor-General, harassed 
and perplexed by doubts, was fortunate in the personal 
character of the officer to whom had been entrusted the 
conduct of the mission to the Sikh ruler. Mr. Charles 
Metcalfe had early recommended himself to the favor¬ 
able consideration of Lord Wellesley, who was never 
slow to recognise in the junior officers of the state the 
promise of future eminence.* He had been but a short 
time in the service, when the Governor-General placed 
him in his own office—that nursery of Indian statesmen 
—and he soon confirmed the expectations that had been 
formed of his judgment and intelligence by proving him- 

* A remarkably able paper on the of it now before me is the following 
disposal of the subsidiary force which, marginal note, written in the Go- 
under the provisions of the defensive vernor-Generai’s fine, bold, charac- 
■alliance with Scin^ah, that prince teristic hand:—“ This paper is highly 
had agreed to receive, drawn up by creditable to Mr. Metcalfe's charac- 
Mr. Metcalfe, in 1804, conduced more, ter and talents. It may become 
perhaps, than anything else to confirm very useful. A copy of it should be 
Lord Wellesley’s high opinion of the sent to the Commander-in-Chief, and 
young civilian's talents. On a copy another to M^jor Malcolm.—^W.” 



THE CAPRICES OP EUNJEET SINGH. 


79 


self, in the camp of the Commauder-in-Chief, and at the 
Court of Delhi, an oflELcer of equal courage and saga¬ 
city. The estimate which Lord Wellesley had formed 
of his talents was accepted by Lord Minto; and in the 
whole range of the civil service—a service never want¬ 
ing in administrative and diplomatic ability of the highest 
order—it is probable that he could not now have found 
a fitter agent to carry out his policy at Lahore. 

On the 1st of September, 1808, Mr. Metcalfe crossed 
the Sutlej, and on the 11th of the same month mot the 
Sikh ruler at Kussoor. The conduct of the Kajah was 
arbitrary and capricious. At one time courteous and 
friendly, at another querulous and arrogant, he now 
seemed disposed to enter into our views and to aid our 
designs; and then, complaining bitterly of the inter¬ 
ference of the British Government, insisted on his right 
to occupy the country beyond the Jumna. Nor did he 
confine his opposition to mere verbal argument, for 
whilst the British envoy was still in his camp, he set 
out to illustrate his views by crossing the river, seizing 
Furreedkote and Umballah, and otherwise overawing 
the petty Sikh chiefs between the Sutlej and the 
Jumna.* 

On the receipt of this intelligence by the Calcutta 
Council, it was debated whether it would be expedient 

• “ The Kajah coupled his acqui- would tender any engagements with 
escence in the proposed arrangements him for that purpose entirely ineffi- 
of defence against an invading Euro- cient and nugatory. Even during 
pean army with the condition of the reference he made to government 
being permitted to extend his domi- on these demands, he crossed the 
nions over all the Sikh territories Sutlej to attack the Sikh territories, 
between the Sutlej and the Jumna. The extreme jealousy and suspicion 
He also provisionally demanded that of us evinced by the llajah, together 
the British Government should not with his own conduct and ambitious 
interfere in favour of the King of character, rendered it indispensably 
Caubul in his aggressions against necessary to resist his pretensions to 
that monarch’s dominions—at the sovereignty over the territories on 
same time shackling the advance of this side of the Sutlej, and the Kajah 
the British troops into his country, was required to withdraw his army.” 
and the establishment of the neces- — [5/afemew/ in Instrwtions to Mr, 
sary depdts, with conditions which E^hinstone: MS. Itecords,^ 