

foot, and a man of the Populzye tribe Khan finished his torments by cutting 
severed the left. Attah Mahomed his throat.*’ 



110 DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZTES. 

tal into the hands of the Barukzye Sirdars. But Dost 
Mahomed and his brethren had not forgotten the terrible 
tragedy which had cut short the great career of the chief 
of their tribe. In a garden-house, which had once be¬ 
longed to the murdered minister, they met Atta Mahomed, 
there to complete the covenant for the surrender of the 
city. A signal was given, when one—the youngest— 
of the brothers rushed upon the Bamezye chief, threw him 
to the ground, and subjected him to the cruel process 
which had preceded the murder of Futteh Khan. They 
spared his life; but sent him blind and helpless into the 
world, with the mark of Barukzye vengeance upon him— 
an object less of compassion than of scorn. 

The seizure of the Balia Hissar was now speedily 
effected. The Shah-zadah was surrounded by treachery. 
Young and beautiful, he was the delight of the women of 
Caubul; but he had few friends among the chivalry of 
the empire. Too weak to distinguish the true from the 
false, he was easily betrayed. Persuaded to withdraw 
himself into the upper citadel, he left the lower fortress 
at the mercy of Dost Mahomed. The Sirdar made the 
most of the opportunity; ran a mine under the upper 
works, and blew up a portion of them. Death stared the 
Shah-zadah in the face. The women of Caubul offered 
up prayers for the safety of the beautiful Prince. The 
night was dark; the rain descended in torrents. To re¬ 
main in the citadel was to court destruction. Under cover 
of the pitchy darkness, it was possible that he might effect 
his escape. Attended by a few followers, he made the 
effort, and succeeded. He fled to Ghuzni, and was saved. 

Dost Mahomed was now in possession of Caubul. But 
threatened from two different quarters, his tenure was 
most insecure. Shah Mahmoud and Prince Kamran were 
marching down from Herat, and Azim Khan was coming 
from Cashmere to assert his clmms, as the representative 



BE-AFFEABANCE OF SHAH 800JAH. 


Ill 


of the Barukzye family. But the spirit of legitimacy was 
not wholly extinct in Afghanistan. The Barukzyes did 
not profess to conquer for themselves. It was necessary 
to put forward some scion of the royal family, and to 
fight and conquer in his name. Dost Mahomed pro¬ 
claimed Sultan Ali, whilst Azim Khan invited Shah 
Soojah to emerge fi'om the obscurity of Loodhianah and 
re-asscrt his claims to the throne.* 

Weary of retirement and inactivity, the Shah con¬ 
sented, and an expedition was planned. But the covenant 
was but of short duration. The contracting parties fell out 
upon the road^ and, instead of fighting a common enemy, 
got up a battle among themselves. The Shah, who never 
lived to grow wiser, gave himself such airs, and asserted 
such ridiculous pretensions, that Azim Khan deserted his 
new master, and let loose his troops upon the royal cortege. 
Defeated in the conflict which ensued,f Shah Soojah fled to 
the Khybur hills, and thence betook himself to Sindh. 
Another puppet being called for. Prince Ayoob, for want 
of a better, was elevated to this dignity, and the new 
fnends set out for Caubul. 