

As the lieutenant of his able and powerful brother, the 
young Dost Mahomed Khan displayed in all the contests 
which rent the Douranee Empire a daring and heroic 



106 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZIES. 


spirit, and considerable military address. Early acquiring 
the power of handling large bodies of troops, he was re¬ 
garded, whilst yet scarcely a man, as a dashing, fearless 
soldier, and a leader of good repute. But, in those early 
days, his scruples were few; his excesses were many. It 
was one of those excesses, it is supposed, which cost the 
life of Futteh Khan, and built up his own reputation on 
the ruin of his distinguished brother. 

It was shortly after the retirement of Shah Soojah to 
the British possessions that Futteh Khan set out, at the 
head of an army, to the western boundary of Afghanistan. 
Persia had long been encroaching upon the limits of the 
Douranee Empire, and it was now to stem the tide of 
Kujjar invasion that the Afghan Wuzcer set out forKho- 
rassan. At this time he was the virtual ruler of the 
country. Weak, indolent, and debauched, Shah Mahmoud, 
retaining the name and the pomp of royalty, had yielded 
the actual government of the country into the hands of 
Futteh Khan and his brothers. The Princes of the blood 
royal quailed before the Barukzye Sirdars. Ferooz-ood- 
Decn, brother of the reigning monarch, was at that time 
governor of Herat. Whether actuated by motives of per¬ 
sonal resentment or ambition, or instigated by Shah Mah¬ 
moud himself, Futteh Khan determined to turn the Per¬ 
sian expedition to other account, and to throw Herat into 
the hands of the Barukzyes. The execution of this 
design was entrusted to Dost Mahomed. He entered 
Herat with his Kohistanee followers as a friend; and 
when the chiefs of the city were beyond its gates, in 
attendance upon the Wuzeer, with characteristic Afghan 
treachery and violence he massacred the palace guards, 
seized the person of the Prince, spoiled the treasury, and 
violated the harem. Setting the crown upon this last act 
of violence, he tore the jewelled waistband from the person 



THE PAIil* OF FUTTEH KHAN. 


107 


of the royal wife of one of the royal Princes.* The out¬ 
raged lady is said to have sent her profaned garment to 
Prince Kamran, and to have drawn irom him an oath that 
he would avenge the injury. He was true to his vow. 
The blow was struck; but it fell not on the perpetrator of 
the outrage: it fell upon Futteh Khan. 

Dost Mahomed had fled for safety to Cashmere. 
The Wuzeer, returning from the Persian expedition, 
fell into the hands of Prince Kamran, who punctured 
his eyes with the point of a dagger.f What followed 
is well known. Enraged by so gross an outrage on a 
member of the Suddozye family, alarmed at the grow¬ 
ing power of the Barukzyes, and further irritated 
by the resolute refusal of Futteh Khan to betray his 
brothers, who had effected their escape from Herat, Kam¬ 
ran and his father, Shah Mahmoud, agreed to put their 
noble prisoner to death. They were then on their way 
from Candahar to Caubul. The ex-minister was brought 
into their presence, and again called upon to write to his 
brothers, ordering them to surrender themselves to the 
Shah. Again he refused, alleging that he was but a poor 
blind captive; that his career was run; that he had no 
longer any influence; and that he could not consent to 
betray his brethren. Exasperated by the resolute bearing 
of his prisoner, Mahmoud Shah ordered the unfortunate 
minister—the king-maker to whom he owed his crown— 