


cuse whicli afTection could dictate, to the whole story to encour^e any 
prolong our stay.” “ The Rajah,” he doubt of its authenticity. The free 
adds, “ accompanied us two marches, use, indeed, which I have made of 
and at parting, which took place Shah Soojah's autobiography is suffi- 
in silence, tears stood in the eyes of cient proof of my belief in the gene- 
both parties. We had no dress of ral fidelity of the narrative. It was 
honour, no khillaut worth his accept- written ^ dv the Shah^s ^ Moonshee, 
ancc, but he accepted our thanks under his Majesty’s superintendence, 
and blessing, and departed with eveir I have yioted Lieutenant Bennett's 
mark of grief.” Amidst so mucn translation, as published in the Cal- 
of selfish rapacity and dark ingrati- cutta Monthly Journal, It supplies, 
tude as marks these annals of the at the same time, more interesting and 
Douranee Empire, it is a pleasure to more authentic materials of Aighan 
chronicle such an episode as this in history tlian are to be found else- 
the history of Shall Soojah’s for- where, and to the majority of readers 
tunes. I am too wiUing to believe is probably as good as manuscript. 



HIS BBCEPTION AT LOODHIANAH. 108 

trackless mountains, had now safely conducted us to the 
land of friends, we passed a night, for the first time, with 
comfort and without dread. Signs of civilisation showed 
themselves as we proceeded, and we soon entered a fine 
broad road. A chuprassie from Captain Ross attended 
us; the hill ranas paid us every attention; and we soon 
reached Loodhianah, where we found our family treated 
with marked respect, and enjoying every comfort after 
their perilous inarch from Lahore.’^ 

It was in the month of September, 1816, that Shah 
Soojah joined his family at Loodhianah. lie sought a 
resting-place, and he found one in the British dominions. 
Two years of quietude and peace were his. But quietude 
and peace are afflictions grievous and intolerable to an 
Afghan nature. The Shah gratefully acknowledged the 
friendly hospitality of the British, but the burden of a life 
of inactivity was not to be borne. The Douranee Empire 
was still rent by intestine convulsions. The Barukzye 
sirdars were dominant at Caubul; but their sovereignty 
was threatened by Shah Mahmoud and the Princes of 
Herat, and not, at that time, professing to conquer for 
themselves, for the spirit of legitimacy was not extinct in 
Afghanistan, they looked abroad for a royal puppet, and 
found one at Loodhianah. Azim Khan invited Shah 
Soojah to re-assert his claims to the throne; and the Shah, 
weary of repose, unwarned by past experience, flung him¬ 
self into this new enterprise, only to add another to that 
long list of failures which it took nearly a quarter of a 
century more to render complete. 



104 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZYES. 


CHAPTER VII. 

[ 1816 — 1837 .] 


Dost Mahomed and the Barukzyes—^Early days of Dost Mahomed—The 
fall of Futteh Khan—Defeat of Shah Mahmoud—Supremacy of the 
Barukzyes—Position of the Empire—^Dost Mahomed at Caubul—^Expedi¬ 
tion of Shah Soqjah—His Defeat—Capture of Peshawur by the Sikhs. 