


victim, whom he would have crouched 
to the day before, named the wrong 
of which it was the recompense; thus 
depriving him of the highest consola¬ 
tion the mind of man can possess 
under torment—the conscience void 
of offence. Another of the barbarians 
cut off his nose; Khana Moolla Khan 
severed his right hand; Khalook Dad 
Khan his left hand, the blood gush¬ 
ing copiously from each new wound. 
Summurdar Khan cut off his beard, 
saying, ‘ This is for dishonouring 
my wife.’ Hitherto the high-spirited 
chief had borne his sufferings without 
either weakness or any ebullition of 
hi.s excitable temper. He had only 
once condescended, in a calm voice, 
to beg them to hasten his death. The 
mutilation of ears and nose, a punish¬ 
ment reserved for the meanest of¬ 
fences of slaves, had not been able to 
shake his fortitude; but the beard of 
a Mahomedan is a member so sacred, 
that honour itself becomes confounded 
with it; and he who had borne with 
the constancy of a hero the taunts 
and tortures heaped upon him, seemed 
to lose his manhood with his beard, 
and burst into a passion of tears. 
His torments were now drawing to a 
close. Gool Mahomed Khan, with a 
blow of his sabre, cut off his right 



INTBIGUES OP ATTA MAHOMED. 


109 


From this time, the rise of Dost Mahomed was rapid. 
He had the blood of kindred to avenge. The ingratitude 
—the cruelty of Mahmoud and his son, were now to be 
signally punished by the brother of the illustrious sufferer. 
Azim Ehan, who ruled in Cashmere, counselled a course of 
forbearance; but Dost Mahomed indignantly rejected the 
proposal; and declaring that it would be an eternal dis¬ 
grace to the Barukzyes not to chastise the murderers of 
their chief, swore that he would march upon Caubul, at 
the head of an army of retribution. Inclined neither to 
enter personally upon so perilous an undertaking, nor to 
appear, in such a juncture, wholly supine, Azim Ehan 
presented his brother with three or four lakhs of rupees to 
defray the charges of the expedition—a sum which was 
exhausted long before the Sirdar neared Caubul. But in 
spite of every obstacle. Dost Mahomed Ehan reached 
Eoord-Caubul, two marches from the capital, and there 
encamped his army. 

The youthful son of Eamran, Prince Jehangire, was 
then the nominal ruler of Caubul. But the actual admi¬ 
nistration of affairs was in the hands of Atta Mahomed. 
A Sirdar of the Bamezye tribe, a man of considerable ability, 
but no match for Dost Mahomed, he was now guilty of 
the grand error of underrating such an adversary. He had 
acted a conspicuous part in the recent intestine struggles 
between the Suddozye brothers; but he had no love for 
the royal family—none for the Barukzyes. He it was 
who had instigated Eamran to the cruel murder of Futteh 
Ehan, and had with his own hands commenced the inhu¬ 
man butchery. Now, to advance ambitious projects of 
his own, he was ready to betray his masters. Simulating 
a friendship which he did not feel, he leagued himself 
with their enemies, and covenanted to betray the capi- 