


Among the twenty brothers of Futteh Khan was one 
many years his junior, whose infancy was wholly disre¬ 
garded by the great Barukzye Sirdar. The son of a 
woman of the Kuzzilbash tribe, looked down upon by the 
high-bred Douranee ladies of his father’s household, the 
boy had begun life in the degrading office of a sweeper at 
the sacred cenotaph of Lamech.* Permitted, at a later 
period, to hold a menial office about the person of the 
powerful Wuzeer, he served the great man with water, or 
bore his pipe; was very zealous in his ministrations; kept 
long and painful vigils; saw everything, heard everything 
in silence; bided his time patiently, and when the hour 
came, trod the stage of active life as no irresolute novice. 
A stripling of fourteen, in the crowded streets of Pesha- 

* “ By an honorary or devotional to Meiter Lam by his mother, and 
vow of his mother he was consecrated instructed to exonerate her from the 
to the lowest menial service of the consequences of a sacred obligation, 

^red cenotaph of Lamech.by sweeping, for the period of a 

This cenotaph is known in the col- whole day, the votive area included 
loquial dialect of the country by the within the precincts of the holy place 
appellation of Meiter Lam. In con- inclosing the alleged tomb of the an- 
formity with the maternal vow, when tediluvian, the father as he is termed 
the young aspirant became capable of the prophet Noah.”—[GcncroZ 
of wielding a brush, he was carried Harlan,’} 




EAItLT DATS OF DOST MAHOMED. 


105 


wur in broad day, as the buyers and the sellers thronged 
the thoroughfares of the city, he slew one of the enemies 
of Futteh Khan, and galloped home to report the achieve¬ 
ment to the Wuzeer. From that time his rise was rapid. 
The neglected younger brother of Futteh Khan became 
the favourite of the powerful chief, and following the for¬ 
tunes of the warlike minister, soon took his place among 
the chivalry of the Douranee Empire. 

The name of this young warrior was Dost Mahomed 
Khan. Nature seems to have designed him for a hero of 
the true Afghan stamp and character. Of a graceful 
person, a prepossessing countenance, a bold frank manner, 
he was outwardly endowed with all those gifts which most 
inspire confidence and attract affection; whilst undoubted 
courage, enterprise, activity, somewhat of the recklessness 
and unscrupulousness of his race, combined with a more 
than common measure of intelligence and sagacity, gave 
him a command over his fellows and a mastery over cir¬ 
cumstances, which raised him at length to the chief seat 
in the empire. His youth was stained with many crimes, 
which he lived to deplore. It is the glory of Dost Ma¬ 
homed that in the vigour of his years he looked back with 
contrition upon the excesses of his early life, and lived 
down many of the besetting infirmities which had over¬ 
shadowed the dawn of his career. The waste of a deserted 
childhood and the deficiencies of a neglected education he 
struggled manfully to remedy and repair. At the zenith 
of his reputation there was not, perhaps, in all Central 
Asia a chief so remarkable for the exercise of self-discipline 
and self-control; but he emerged out of a cloudy mom of 
vice, and sunk into a gloomy night of folly. 