

It was in 1812 that Shah Soojah was carried off a 
prisoner to Cashmere. He appears to have remained 
there about a year, and, during that time, to have been 
treated with little kindness and respect. Mahmoud was 
then in comparative quiet and security at Caubul, and, 
in his good fortune, seems to have regarded with com¬ 
passion the fate of his unhappy brothei'. “ When Shah 
Mahmoud heard of the way in which we were treated,” 
writes the royal autobiographer, “ the latent feelings of 
fraternal affection were roused within him, and he imme¬ 
diately sent a force into the Barukzye country. After 
plundering the whole tribe of Atta Mahmoud Khan, ho 
carried men, women, and children into captivity. Find¬ 
ing that this had not the desired effect, viz., our release 
from bondage, he sent a force to Cashmere, under Futteh 
Khan.” Atta Mahmoud advanced to give him battle; 
but his followers deserted to the standard of the Baruk¬ 
zye Wuzeer, and he fled homewards to Cashmere. Here 
threatened by Futteh Khan, he implored the assistance 



96 


THE MID-CAREER OP SHAH SOOJAH. 


of his captive. “ Seeing his escape could not be effected 
without our aid, he came,” says Shah Soojah, “ to our 
place of confinement, bare-headed, with the Koran in 
one hand, a naked sword in the other, and a rope about 
his neck, and requested our forgiveness for the sake of 
the sacred volume.” The Shah, who, according to his 
own statements, was never wanting in that most kingly 
quality of forgiveness, forgave him on his own account, 
and recommended him to make submission to Futteh 
Khan. The Wuzeer was advancing upon Cashmere from 
one direction, and the Sikhs from another; and it was 
plain that the rebellious Nazim had nothing before him 
but to submit. 

I wish to believe Shah Soojah’s history of the amiable 
fraternal impulses which dictated the expedition to Cash- 
mere. But it is difficult to entertain a conviction that it 
was not directed towards other objects than the release of 
the exiled monarch. The result was, that Atta Mahmoud, 
the rebellious Nazim, made submission to Futteh Khan;— 
that Mokhura Chund, the leader of the Sikh expedition, 
met the Dourance minister about the same time, and that 
both recommended Shah Soojah to proceed on a visit to 
Runjeet Singh.* The Maharajah, it soon became very 
clear, coveted the possession of the great Douranee dia¬ 
mond. On the second day after Shah Soojah entered 
Lahore, he was waited on by an emissary from Runjeet, 
who demanded the jewel in the name of his master. 
The fugitive monarch asked for time to consider the re¬ 
quest, and hinted that, after he had partaken of Run- 
jeet’s hospitality, he might be in a temper to grant it. 

* The Shall sajs : “ Mokhum his master’s fame would be increased 

Chund, on the part of Kunjeet Singh, by our going. According to Futteh 
informed us, that his master was llhan^s petition, we agreed to this, 
anxious that we should proceed to and marched towards Lahore with 
Li^ore as soon as at lioerty, and Mokhum Chund and other Sinshs, 
visit the residence of our seraglio in whilst Futteh Khan returned to Shah 
that city; he also mentioned that Mahmoud in Caubul.” 