

* There are varying accounts re- t So Shah Soojah—^who, however, 
specting the identity of this lady, does not allude to the outrage com- 

Vigne says that she was dau^ter mitted by Dost Mahomed. He merely 
of Timour Shah, and sister to Shah says, “After the Kujjar campaign, 
Mahmoud. Mohun Lall, probably Futteh Khan grew ambitious, and 
with more correctness, places her in a determined to tS^e into hitf own hands 
lower generation—asserting that she the reins of government, and for this 
was the sister of Prince Kamran, and ^rpose resmved to ensnare Prince 
the wife of Prince Malik Qasim, son Kamran, who, hearing of the plot, 
of Ferooz-ood-Deen. There is some- seized Futteh Khan, put out his eyes 
thing rather penilexing in these rela- with the point of a sh^ dagger, and 
tionships. As Ferooz-ood-Deen was after performing on him an operation 
the brother of Shah Mahmoud, if Mr. similar to the African mode of scaJp- 
Vigne*s account be correct, his son was ing, placed him in confinement.”— 
the nephew of the lady in question. [Autobiography.'] 



108 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZYES. 


to be put to death before him; and there, in the presence 
of the feeble father and the cruel son, Futteh Khan was 
by the attendant courtiers literally hacked to pieces. His 
nose, ears, and lips were cut off; his fingers severed from 
his hands, his hands from his arms, his arms from his 
body. Limb followed limb, and long was the horrid 
butchery continued before the life of the victim was ex¬ 
tinct. Futteh Khan raised no cry, offered no prayer for 
mercy. His fortitude was unshaken to the last. He died 
as he had lived, the bravest and most resolute of men— 
like his noble father, a victim to the perfidy and ingrati¬ 
tude of princes. The murder of Poyndah Khan shook 
the Suddozye dynasty to its base. The assassination of 
Futteh Khan soon made it a heap of ruins.* 


* Calcutta Review, This passage, 
with many others of the present chap¬ 
ter, is taken, with some additions and 
curtailments, from a bio^aphy of 
Dost Mahomed Khan, written a few 
years ago by the author of this work. 
As the article was the result of much 
research, and written at least witli 
the greatest care, I do not know that 
I can much improve upon it. Of the 
circumstances attending the death of 
Futteh Khan, an elaborate account is 
given by Captain James Abbott in his 
“Journey to Khiva.” lie received 
the story from Sumund Khan, “ who 
had been much about the person of 
Shah Kainran.” I subjoin the closing 
scene of this tragic episode:—“Fut¬ 
teh Khan was brought into a tent, 
pitched between Herat and the ri¬ 
ver, (?) in which sat a circle of his 
mort^ foes. They commenced by 
each in turn accusing him of the in¬ 
juries received at his hands, and heap¬ 
ing upon him the most opprobrious 
epithets. Atta Mahmoud nThan then 
stepped up to him, and seizing one of 
his ears, cut it off with his knife, say- 
ing, ‘ This is for such and such an in¬ 
jury done to such an one of my rela¬ 
tives.’ Shahagaussie Newaub cut off 
the other ear. Fach, as he wreaked 
this unmanly vengeance upon the 