



EXTOBTION OF THE KOH-I-NOOB. 


97 


On the following day, the same messenger presented him¬ 
self again, and received a similar reply. Runjeet Singh 
was in no mood to brook this delay. Determined to pos¬ 
sess himself of the Koh-i-noor, he now resorted to other 
measures to extort it from the luckless owner. “We 
then,” says Shah Soojah, “ experienced privations of the 
necessaries of life, and sentinels were placed over our 
dwelling. A month passed in this way. Confidential 
servants of Runjeet Singh then waited on us, and inquired 
if we wanted ready cash, and would enter into an agree¬ 
ment and treaty for the above-mentioned jewel. We 
answered in the affirmative, and next day. Ram Singh 
brought 40,000 or 50,000 rupees, and asked again for the 
Koh-i-noor, which we promised to procure when some 
treaty was agreed upon. Two days after this, Runjeet 
Singh came in person, and, after friendly protestations, he 
stained a paper with safflower, and swearing by the 
Grunth of Baba Nanuck and his own sword, he wrote 
the following security and compact:—That he delivered 
over the provinces of Kote Cumaleeh, Jung Shawl, and 
Khuleh Noor, to us and our heirs for everj also ofiering 
assistance in troops and treasure for the purpose of again 
recovering our throne. We also agreed, if we should 
over ascend the throne, to consider Runjeet Singh always 
in the light of an ally. He then proposed himself that 
we should exchange turbans, which is among the Sikhs 
a pledge of eternal friendship, and we then gave him the 
Koh-i-noor.” 

Having thus obtained possession of the great diamond, 
Runjeet Singh, who at no time of his life had very high 
ideas of honour, was unwilling to give up the jagheer 
which he had promised as the price of it. Whilst Shah 
Soojah was still thinking over the non-performance of the 
contract, Runjeet Singh invited him to accompany an 
expedition which was proceeding under the Maharajah 

VOL. I. H 



98i 


THE MED-CAKEER OP SHAH BOOJAH. 


to Pesliawur, and held out to him hopes of the recovery 
of his lost dominions. The Shah joined Bunjeet Singh 
at Rotas, and they proceeded together to Bawul Pindee. 
There the Maharajah, seeing little chance of success, 
abandoned the expedition, and, according to the account 
given by Shah Soojah, desired him to proceed onward in 
the company of Ram Singh. Left alone with that chief, 
ho was shamelessly plundered by robbers of higher note 
than the Sikh chiefs would willingly admit. All thought 
of proceeding to Peshawur was now abandoned, and, 
accompanied by Ram Singh and the heir-apparent, Shah 
Soojah returned to Lahore. 

At the capital his property was not more secure 
than on the lino of march. There was something 
yet left to be plundered, and the plunderers were of still 
higher rank. Runjeet Singh stripped the wretched 
monarch of everything that was worth taking, and 
“ even after this,” says Shah Soojah, “ he did not per¬ 
form one of his promises.” Instead of bestowing new 
favours upon the man who had yielded up his treasures 
BO unsparingly, the Maharajah began to heap new indig¬ 
nities upon him. Spies were set over him, and guards 
surrounded his dwelling. Five months passed in this 
way; and as time advanced, the condition of the wretched 
Douranee Prince became more hopeless; his escape from 
this wretched thraldom more to be coveted, and yet 
more difficult to encompass. He remembered the friendly 
overtures of the British Government, and sighed for a 
peaceful asylum under the shelter of the wings of the 
great power beyond the Sutlej. “We thought,” he 
says, “ of the proffered friendship of the British Govern¬ 
ment, and hoped for an asylum in Loodhianah. Several 
Mussulmans and Hindoos had formerly offered their ser¬ 
vices, and we now engaged them and purchased several 
of the covered hackeries of the country. Every stra- 