



THE EXPEDITION TO CASHMEKE. 


101 


“ ready to sacrifice his territory for the weal” of the Shah, 
freely supplied the sinews of war; troops were levied, and 
operations commenced. 

But it was not written in the Shah’s book of life that 
his enterprises should result in anything but failure. 
The outset of the expedition was marked by some tem¬ 
porary successes; but it closed in disaster and de¬ 
feat. The Shah’s levies charged the stockaded posi¬ 
tions of the enemy sword in hand, and were pushing 
into the heart of the country, when the same inexorable 
enemy that has baffled the efforts of the greatest Euro¬ 
pean states raised its barriers against the advance of the 
invading army. “ We were only three coss,” relates Shah 
Soojah, “ from Azim Khan’s camp, with the picturesque 
city of Cashmere full in view, when the snow began again 
to fall, and the storm continued with violence, and without 
intermission, for two days. Our Hindostanees were be¬ 
numbed with a cold unfelt in their sultry regions; the 
road to our rear was blocked up with snow, and the sup¬ 
plies still far distant. For three days our troops were 
almost famished, and many Hindostanees died. We could 
not advance, and retreat was hazardous. Many lost their 
hands and feet from being frost-bitten, before we deter¬ 
mined to retreat.” 

These calamities, which seemed to strengthen the de¬ 
votion of the Rajah of Kistawar to the unfortunate Shah, 
and which were borne by him with the most manly forti¬ 
tude, sobered the fugitive Afghan monarch, and made him 
again turn his thoughts longingly towards a tranquil 
asylum in the Company’s dominions. At the earnest 
request of his new firiend, he remained during nine months 
beneath the hospitable roof of the Rajah, and then prepared 
for a journey to Loodhianah.* Avoiding the Lahore 

* Shah Soojah records that the ‘‘burst Into tears. He urged the 
faithful Rajah, on the King announc- dangers of the road, his wish to sacri- 
ing his determination to depart, fice his wealth for us, and every ex- 



102 THE MrD-CAEEER OF SHAH SOOJAH. 

territory, lest he should fall into the hands of Runjeet 
Singh, willing rather to encounter the eternal snows of the 
hill regions than his ruthless enemies on the plains, he 
tracked along the inhospitable mountains of Thibet, 
where for days and days no signs of human life or vegeta¬ 
tion appeared to cheer his heart and encourage his efforts. 
‘‘The depth of the eternal snows,” he says, “was im¬ 
mense. Underneath the large bodies of ice the mountain 
torrents had formed themselves channels. The five rivers 
watering the Punjaub have their rise here from fountains 
amid the snows of ages. We passed mountains, the 
snows of which varied in colour, and at last reached the 
confines of Thibet, after experiencing the extremes of 
cold, hunger, and fatigue.” 

His trials were not yet over. He had still to encounter 
dangers and difficulties among the hill tribes. The people 
of Kulloo insulted and ill-treated him; but the Rajah 
came to his relief, and, after a few days of onward travel¬ 
ling, to the inexpressible joy of the fugitive monarch the 
red houses of the British residents at one of our hill sta¬ 
tions appeared in sight. “ Our cares and fatigues were 
now,” says the Shah, “ forgotten, and giving thanks to 
Almighty God, who, having freed us from the hands of 
our enemies, and led us through the snows and over the 