



ESCAPE OF SHAH SOOJAH. 


99 


t£^em was defeated by the spies, until at last we found 
that Abdool Hussan had disdosed our plans to Bunjeet 
Singh. At last, being hopeless, we called Abdool 
Hussan and Moollah Jaffier into the presence, and after 
oflfering them bribes, and giving expectations of reward, 
we bought them to our purpose; and the members of the 
seraglio, with their attendants, all dressed in the costume 
of the country, found a safe conveyance in the hackeries 
above mentioned to the cantonments of Loodhianah. 
When we received accounts of their safe arrival, we gave 
sincere thanks to Almighty God!” 

But his own escape was yet to be effected. Outwitted 
to this extent, Runjeet Singh redoubled his precautions, 
and in no very conciliatory mood of mind hemmed in 
the ex-King with guards, and watched him day and 
night with the keenest vigUance. “ Seven ranges of 
guards,” says the royal autobiographer, “ were put upon 
our person, and armed men with lighted torches watched 
our bed. When we went as far as the banks of the 
river at night, the sentinels upon the ramparts lighted 
flambeaux until we returned. Several months passed 
in this manner, and our own attendants were with diffi¬ 
culty allowed to come into the presence. No relief was 
left but that of our holy religion, and God alone could 
give us assistance.” And assistance was given, in the 
shape of unwonted resolution and ingenuity. In this 
critical hour the resources of the Shah seem to have 
developed themselves in an unexampled manner. He 
foiled all Runjeet’s efforts to secure his prisoner, and 
baffled the vigilance of his guards. A few faithful 
attendants aided his endeavours, and he escaped ft'om 
the cruel walls of Lahore. “We ordered,” he says, 
“ the roof of the apartment containing our camp equi¬ 
page to be opened, so as to admit of a person passing 
through; apertures were formed by mining through 

H 2 



100 


THE MID-CAEEEB OE SHAH SOOJAH. 


seven other chambers to the outside of the building.” 
Everything being thus prepared, the unhappy King dis¬ 
guised himself as a mendicant, and leaving one of his 
attendants to simulate the royal person on his bed, crept 
through the fissures in the walls, escaped with two fol¬ 
lowers into the street, and emerged thence through the 
main sewer which ran beneath the city wall. 

Outside Lahore he was joined by his remaining follow¬ 
ers. He had been thinking, in confinement, of the bless¬ 
ings of a safe retreat at Loodhianah ; but no sooner did he 
find himself abroad than he courted new adventures, and 
meditated new enterprises. Instead of hastening to the 
British provinces, he turned his face towards the hills of 
Jummoo. Wandering about in this direction without 
seemingly any fixed object, he received friendly overtures 
from the Rajah of Kistawar, and was easily persuaded to 
enter his dominions. 

The Rajah went out to meet him, loaded him with 
kindness, conducted him to his capital, and made the 
kingly fugitive happy with rich gifts and public honours. 
Offering up sacrifices, and distributing large sums of 
money in honour of his royal guest, the Rajah spared no¬ 
thing that could soothe the grief or pamper the vanity of 
the exiled monarch. But the novelty of this pleasant 
hospitality soon began to wear away, and the restless 
wanderer sighed for a life of more enterprise and excite¬ 
ment. “ Tired of an idle life,” he says, “ we laid plans 
for an attack on Cashmere.” The Rajah of Kistawar was 
well pleased with the project, and placed his troops and 
his treasury at the command of his royal guest. The 
Shah himself, though robbed of all his jewels, had a lakh 
of rupees remaining at Lahore, but as soon as he began to 
possess himself of it, the Maharajah stretched out his 
hand, and swept it into his own treasury. Nothing 
daunted by this accident, the Kistawar chief, who was 