



124 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZTES. 


insolent and dictatorial. He had treated the Shah as a 
fallen prince, and endeavoured, in the event of his resto¬ 
ration, to reduce him to a state of vassalage so complete, 
that even the prostrate Suddozye resented the humilia¬ 
ting attempt. The idea of making another effort to 
regain his lost dominions had, however, taken such 
shape in his mind, that it was not to be lightly aban¬ 
doned. But empires ai'e not to be won without money, 
and the Shah was lamentably poor. Jewels he had to 
the value of two or three lakhs of rupees; and he was 
eager to pledge them. But the up-country bankers were 
slow to make the required advances. “ If 1000 rupees 
be required,” said the Shah, “ these persons will ask a 
pledge in property of a lakh of rupees.” From the ob¬ 
durate bankers he turned, in his distress, to the British 
Government; but the British Government was equally 
obdurate. 

In vain the exiled Shah pleaded that the people of 
Afghanistan were anxious for his arrival; and that 
those of Khorassan would flock to his standard and ac¬ 
knowledge no other chief. In vain he declared that 
the Barukzyc Sirdars were “ not people around whom 
the Afghans would rally”—that they had no authority 
beyond the streets and bazaars of Caubul, and no power 
to resist an enemy advancing from the northward. 
Neither up-country bankers nor British functionaries 
would advance him the requisite funds. “My impa¬ 
tience,” he said, “ exceeds all bounds; and if I can raise 
a loan of two or three lakhs of rupees from any banker, 
I entertain every expectation that, with the favour of 
God, my object will be accomplished.” But although 
the Persians were at that time pushing their conquests 
in Khorassan, and the Shah continued to declare that 
the Douranee, Ghilzye, and other tribes, were sighing 
for his advent, which was to relieve them from the 
tyranny and oppression of the Barukzyes, and to secure 



SHAH SOOJAH’s EXPEDITION. 


126 


them against foreign invasion. Lord William Bentinck, 
too intent upon domestic reforms to busy himself with 
schemes of distant defence, quietly smiled down the 
solicitations of the Shah, and told him to do what he 
liked on his own account, but that the British Govern¬ 
ment would not help him to do it. “ My friend,” he 
wrote, “ I deem it my duty to apprise you distinctly, 
that the British Government religiously abstains from 
intermeddling with the affairs of its neighbours when 
this can be avoided. Your Majesty is, of course, master 
of your own actions, but to afford you assistance for the 
purpose which you have in contemplation, would not 
consist with that neutrality which on such occasions is 
the rule of guidance adopted by the British Govern¬ 
ment.” But, in spite of these discouragements, before 
the year 1832 had worn to a close, Shah Soojah “ had 
resolved on quitting his asylum at Loodhianah for the 
purpose of making another attempt to regain his throne.” 

The British agent on the north-western frontier. Cap¬ 
tain Wade, offically reported this to Mr. Macnaghten, 
who then held the office of Political Secretary, and with 
the announcement went a request, on the part of the 
Shah, for three months of his stipend in advance. The 
request, at a later period, rose to a six months’ advance; 
and a compromise was eventually effected ior four. So, 
with 16,000 rupees extracted as a forestalment of the 
allowance granted to his family in his absence, he set out 
for the re-conquest of the Douranee Empire. 