

In the revolution which had overthrown the Sud¬ 
dozye dynasty, the tribes had taken no active part, and 
the Barukzye Sirdars had risen to power neither by their 
aid nor in spite of their opposition. A long succession of 
sanguinary civil wars, which had deprived them, one by 
one, of the leaders to whom they looked for guidance and 



SUPPBESSIOK OF DOUBANEE POWER. 


121 


support, had so enfeebled and prostrated them, that but 
a remnant of their former power was left. No imme¬ 
diate apprehension of danger from such a source darkened 
the dawn of the Barukzye brethren’s career. But to be 
cast down was not to be broken—to be enfeebled was 
not to be extinct. There was too much elasticity and 
vitality in the order for such accidents as this to subject 
it to more than temporary decline. The Douranees were 
still a privileged class; still were they fattening upon the 
immunities granted them by the Suddozye Kings. To 
curtail these privileges and immunities would be to strike 
at the source of their dominant influence and command¬ 
ing strength; and the Barukzye Sirdars, less chivalrous 
than wise, determined to strike the blow, whilst the Dou¬ 
ranees, crippled and exhausted, had little power to resist 
the attack. Even then they did not venture openly and 
directly to assail the privileges of the tribes by imposing 
an assessment on their lands in lieu of the obligation to 
supply horsemen for the service of the state—an obligation 
which had for some time past been practically relaxed— 
but they began cautiously and insidiously to introduce 
“ the small end of the wedge,” by taxing the Eyots, or 
Humsayehs of the Douranees, whose various services, not 
only as cultivators but as artificers, had rendered them 
in the estimation of their powerful masters a valuable 
kind of property, to be protected from foreign tyranny 
that they might better bear their burdens at home. 
These taxes were enforced with a rigour intended to 
offend the Douranee chiefs; but the trials to which they 
were then subjected but faintly foreshadowed the greater 
trials to come. 

Little by little, the Barukzye Sirdars began to at¬ 
tach such vexatious conditions to the privileges of the 
Douranees—so to make them run the gaundet of all 
kinds of exactions short of the direct assessment of their 
lands—^that in time, harassed, oppressed, impoverished 



122 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEHKZTES. 


by these more irregular imposts, and anticipating every 
day the development of some new form of tyranny and 
extortion, they were glad to exchange them for an assess¬ 
ment of a more fixed and definite character. From a 
minute detail of the measures adopted by the Barukzye 
Sirdars, with the double object of raising revenue and 
breaking down the remaining strength of the Douranees, 
the reader would turn away with weariness and impa¬ 
tience; but this matter of Dourariee taxation has too 
much to do with the after-history of the war in Afghan¬ 
istan, for me to pass it by in this place without at least 
a slight recognition of its importance. 