

On the 28th of January, 1833, he quitted his resi¬ 
dence at Loodhianah, and endeavouring, as he went, to 
raise money and to enlist troops for his projected expe¬ 
dition, moved his camp slowly to Bahwulpore, and 
thence, across the Indus, to Shikarpoor, where he had 
determined to rendezvous. 

But having thus entered the territory of the Ameers 



126 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZYES. 


of Sindh as a Mend, he did not quit it before he had 
shown his quality as an enemy, by fighting a hard battle 
with the Sindhians, and effectually beating them. The 
pecuniary demands which he had made upon them they 
had resisted; and the Shah, having a considerable army 
at his command, deeply interested in the event, thought 
fit to enforce obedience. Early in January, 1834, an 
engagement took place near Eori, and the pride of the 
Ameers having been humbled by defeat, they consented 
to the terms he demanded, and acknowledged the supre¬ 
macy of the Shah,* 

Having arranged this matter to his satisfaction, Shah 
Soojah marched upon Candahar, and in the early sum¬ 
mer was before the walls of the city. He invested the 
place, and endeavoured ineffectually to carry it by 
assault. The Candahar chiefs held out with much re¬ 
solution, but it was not until the arrival of Dost Ma¬ 
homed from Caubul that a general action was risked. 
The Sirdar lost no time in commencing the attack. 
Akbar Khan, the chief’s son, who, at a later period, 
stood out so prominently from the canvas of his coun¬ 
try’s history, was at the head of the Barukzye horse; 
Abdul Samat Khanf commanded the foot. No great 
amount of military skill appears to have been displayed 
on either side. Akbar Khan’s horsemen charged the 
enemy with a dashing gallantry worthy of their im¬ 
petuous leader; but a battalion of the Shah’s troops, 
under an Indo-Briton, named Campbell, fought with such 
uncommon energy, that at one time the forces of the 
Barukzye chiefs were driven back, and victory appeared 

* “ The Sindhians have agreed to them for the entire execution of these 
pay a contribution of either five or articles .**—\Captain Wade to Mr, 
seven lakhs of rupees to farm the MacnaghUn: March 5^ 1834.1 
Shikarpoor territory for a settled f Not the minister—but a jPersian 

annual sum from Shah Soojah, and adventurer of the same name, who 
to provide him with an auxiliary afterwards obtained service in Bok- 
fbree, the Shah taking hostages from hora. 



DEFEAT OP SSHAH SOOJAH, 


127 


to be in the reach of the Shah. But Dost Mahomed, 
who had intently watched the conflict, and kept a hand¬ 
ful of chosen troops in reserve, now let them slip, rallied 
the battalions which were falling back, called upon Akbar 
Khan to make one more struggle, and, well responded 
to by his gallant son, rolled back the tide of victory. 
Shah Soojah, Avho on the first appearance of Dost Ma¬ 
homed had lost all heart, and actually given orders 
to prepare for flight, called out in his desperation to 
Campbell, “ Chupao-chupao,”* then ordered his elephant 
to be wheeled round, and turned his back upon the 
field of battle. His irresolution and the unsteadfastness 
of the Douranees proved fatal to his cause. 