

In the heyday of their prosperity, the Douranees had 
been too arrogant and unscrupulous to claim from us much 
commiseration in the hour of their decline. The Baruk¬ 
zye Sirdars held them down with a strong hand; and the 
policy was at least successful. It was mainly the humi¬ 
liation of these once dominant tribes that secured to Dost 
Mahomed and his brothers so many years of comparative 
security and rest. Slight disorders, such as are insepa¬ 
rable from the constitution of Afghan society—a rebel¬ 
lion in one part of the country, the necessity of coercing 
a recusant governor in another—occasionally distracted 
the mind of the Sirdar from the civil administration of 
Caubul. But it was not until the year 1834 that he was 
called upon to face a more pressing danger, and to pre¬ 
pare himself for a more vigorous contest. The exiled 
Suddozye Prince, Shah Soojah, weary again of inactivity, 
and imdaunted by past failure, was about to make another 
effort to re-establish himself in the Douranee Empire; 
and, with this object, was organising an army in Sindh. 

Had there been any sort of unanimity among the Ba¬ 
rukzye brothers, this invasion might have been laughed 
to scorn; but Dost Mahomed felt that there was trea¬ 
chery within, no less than hostility without, and that 
the open enemy was not more dangerous than the con- 



EB-APPEARANCE OF S HAH SOOJAH. 


123 


cealed one. Jubbar Kban, Zemaun Khan, and others, 
were known to be intriguing with the Shah. The Ne- 
wab, indeed, had gone so far as to assure Dost Ma- 
liomed that it was useless to oppose the Suddozye in¬ 
vasion, as Soojah-ool-Moolk was assisted by the British 
Government, and would certainly be victorious. He 
implored the Sirdar to pause before he brought down 
upon himself certain destruction, alleging that it would 
be better to make terms with the Shah—to secure 'some¬ 
thing rather than to lose everything. But Dost Ma¬ 
homed knew his man—knew that Jubbar Khan had 
thrown himself into the arms of the Suddozye, laughed 
significantly, and said, “ Lala, it will be time enough to 
talk about terms when I have been beaten.” This was 
unanswerable. The Newab retired; and preparations 
for war were carried on with renewed activity. 

In the mean while, Shah Soojah was girding himself 
up for the coming struggle with the Barukzyc Sirdars. 
In 1831 he had sought the assistance of Runjeet Singh 
towards the recovery of his lost dominions; but the 
Maharajah had set such an extravagant price upon his 
alliance, that the negotiations fell to the ground without 
any results.* The language of the Sikh ruler had been 

* Among other stipulations was in two ways; firstly, a real friend is 
one, that “ the heir-apparent of the he who is interested in the good 
Shah shall always attend his highness name of his friend. The Maharsnah 
with a force, having also his family bcin^ my friend, how can he find 
along with him; that he shall he satisfaction in my eternal disgrace ? 
treated with distinction, and expected ^J'o desire the disgrace of one’s 
to accompany the Maharajah in all friend is not consistent with the dic- 
his journeys.” Another demand put tates of wisdom. Secondly, there 
forth by llunjeet was for the de- is a tradition among all classes of 
livery to him of the sandal-wood people that the forefathers of the 
gates of Somnauth (or Juggernauth, Sikhs have said that their nation 
as the Maharajah called them), dcs- shall, in the attempt to bring away 
tined afterwards to confer such cele- the portals of sandal, advance to 
brity upon the Indian administration Ghiznee; but having arrived there, 
of Lord EUenborough. Shah Soo- the foundation of their empire shall 
jah’s answer to the demand is worth be overthrown. I am not desirous 
quoting:—“Regarding the demand of that event. I wish for the per- 
of the portals of sandal at Ghiznee, manence of his highness’s domi- 
a compliance with it is inadmissible nion.” 