

From this time (1826) to the day on which his fol¬ 
lowers deserted him at Urghandi, after the capture of 
Ghuzni by the British troops. Dost Mahomed was supreme 
at Caubul. His brothers saw that it was useless to con¬ 
test the supremacy; and at last they acknowledged the 
unequalled power of one whom they had once slighted 
and despised. And now was it that Dost Mahomed began 
fully to understand the responsibilities of high command. 



118 


DOST IdAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZTES. 


and the obligations of a ruler both to himself and his 
subjects. He had hitherto lived the life of a dissolute 
soldier. His education had been neglected, and in his 
very boyhood he had been thrown in the way of pollution 
of the foulest kind. From his youth he had been greatly 
addicted to wine, and was often to be seen in public reel* 
ing along in a state of degrading intoxication, or scarcely 
able to keep his place in the saddle. All this was now to 
be reformed. He taught himself to read and to write, ac¬ 
complishments which he had before, if at all, scantily pos¬ 
sessed. He studied the Koran, abandoned the use of 
strong liquors, became scrupulously abstemious, plain in 
his attire, assiduous in his attention to business, urbane, 
and courteous to all. He made, and without exposing 
himself to a charge of hypocrisy, a public acknowledgment 
of his past errors and a profession of reformation, and 
did not belie by his life the promises which he openly 
made.* 

It is not to be questioned that there was, at this time, 
in the conduct of Dost Mahomed, as a ruler, much that 
may be regarded with admiration and respect even by 
Christian men. Success did not disturb the balance of 


* ** The days^” says General Har¬ 
lan—and the truth of the statement 
is not to be questioned—“ that Dost 
Mahomed ascended the musnud, he 
performed the ‘ Toba/ which is a 
solemn and sacred formula of re¬ 
formation, in reference to any accus¬ 
tomed moral crime or depravi^ of 
habit. He was followed in the Toba 
by all his chiefs, who found them¬ 
selves obliged to keep pace with the 
march of mind—to prepare for the 
defensive system of policy, this as- 
sumj^ion of purity, on the part of 
the ^ince, suggested. The Toba 
was a sort of declaration of princi¬ 
ples; and the chiefs, viewing it in 
that ligh^ beheld their hopes of su- 

1 >remacy in imminent hazard .... In 
ater life the Ameer became sensible 


of the advantages arising from learn¬ 
ing. Although knowledge of litera¬ 
ture among Mahomedan nations is 
confined to a contracted sphere, at 
least the reputation of theological 
science was essential to the chief, on 
whom had been conferred the title of 
Ameer-ul-Mominin, or Commander 
of the Faithful. To escape the humi¬ 
lity of dependence upon subordinate 
agents, more especially the secre¬ 
taries necessarily employed in all re¬ 
venue and judicial transactions, he 
tasked his mind with the acquisition 
of letters, and became worthy, by his 
industry and success in the pursuit, 
of the greatest respect of the great, 
as he commanded the admiration of 
the vulgar, who are ever accustomed 
to venerate the divinity of wisdom.” 