

* This was in 1818. See close of the 
last chapiter, “AzimKhan,”says Shah 
Soojah, m his autobiography, “sent us 
a fawning petition, informing us that 
he had collected all Futteh Khan’s 
relations, comprehending the whole 
of the Barukzye tribe, and swearing, 
by everything sacred, that he and the 
other chiefs had taken an oath of 
fidelity to us their lawful king, en¬ 
treated that we would march imme¬ 
diately to Peshawur, where he would 
join the royal standard with all the 
troops and the treasury of Cashmere. 

We sent for Mr. Murray, and ordered 
him to make the Resident of Delhi 
acquainted with this, and inform us 
of their opinion. This opinion he 
^ve ns, some days afterwaras, name¬ 
ly,^ ‘ That for political reasons no 
assistance could be given, but that 
we were at liberty eitner to depart or 


remain in the asylum allotted to us.* 
Two years had liecn passed in case, 
and we now determined to make an 
attempt to reascend our throne.” 

t Shah Soojah attributes his de¬ 
feat to an accidental explosion of 
gunpowder. “ Our attendants,” ho 
says, “only amounted to 300, with 
two guns, but they had taken up on 
advantageous position on a bridge, 
near the garden. The Meer Akhor 
charged us with his horse; but the 
first fire from the cannon made him 
bite the dust, when an unfortunate 
accident happened. A large quan¬ 
tity of powder had been brought to 
be divided among the matchlock men. 
This caught fire, ly which fifty men 
were blown up and others wounded. 
Resistance was now in vain, and we 
escaped with difficulty to the Khybur 
hills.” 



112 DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZYES. 

In the mean while, the royal army, which had marched 
from Herat under Shah Mahmoud and Prince Kamran 
approached the capital of Afghanistan. Unprepared to 
receive so formidable an enemy, weak in numbers, and 
ill-supplied with money and materials, the Dost could not, 
with any hope of success, have given battle to Mahmoud’s 
forces. The danger was imminent. The royal troops 
were within six miles of the eapital. Dost Mahomed and 
his followers prepared for flight. With the bridles of 
their horses in their hands, they stood waiting the 
approach of the enemy. But their fears were groundless. 
A flight ensued; but it was not Dost Mahomed’s, but 
Mahmoud’s army that fled. At the very threshold of 
victory, the Suddozye Prince, either believing that there 
was treachery in his ranks, or apprehending that the 
Barukzyes would seize Herat in his absence, turned 
suddenly back, and flung himself into the arms of de¬ 
feat. 

The Barukzyes were now dominant throughout Afghan¬ 
istan. The sovereignty, indeed, of Aziin Khan’s puppet, 
Ayoob, was proclaimed; but, Herat alone excepted, the 
country was in reality parcelled out among the Barukzye 
brothers. By them the superior claims of Azim Khan 
were generally acknowledged. Caubul, therefore, fell to his 
share. Dost Mahomed took possession of Ghuzni. Poor 
Dil Khan, Kohan Dil Khan, and their brothers, occupied 
Candahar. Jubbar Khan, a cousin of Dost Mahomed, 
was put in charge of the Ghilji country. Sultan Mahomed 
and his brothers succeeded to the government of Pesha- 
wur, and the Shah-zadah Sultan Ali, Dost Mahomed’s 
puppet, sunk quietly into the insigniflcance of private 
life. 