

This was in 1823. The death of Azim Khan pre¬ 
cipitated the downfal of the Suddozye monarchy, and 

* Azim Khan does not appear to quire the services of his brother, but 
have recognised the strength of had actually laid siege to Ghuzni. 
Dost Mahomed's character; and Azim Khan^s batteries caused great 
to this grand error must be attri- slaughter; but Dost Mahomed could 
buted his premature death. Shortly not be persuaded to open the gates 
before the expedition to the Sikn of the fortress. A negotiation took 
frontier, he had not only contemptu- place; and the brothers embraced, 
ously declared that he did not re- But they never forgave each other. 



nOTVOTAI. OF THE STJDDOZTES. 


115 


raised Dost Mahomed to the chief seat in the Douranee 
Empire. The last wretched remnant of legitimacy was 
now about to perish by the innate force of its own corrup¬ 
tion. The royal puppet, Ayoob, and his son attempted to 
seize the property of the deceased minister. Tidings of 
this design reached Candahar, and Shere Dil Khan, with 
a party of Barukzye adherents, hastened to Caubul to 
rescue the wealth of his brother and to chastise the spoli¬ 
ators. The Prince was murdered in the presence of his 
father, and the unhappy King carried off a prisoner to 
that ill-omened garden-house of Futteh Khan, which had 
witnessed the destruction of another who had done still 
fouler wrong to the great Barukzye brotherhood.* 

In the mean while, Habib-oolah-Khan, son of Azim 
Khan, had succeeded nominally to the power possessed by 
his deceased parent. But he had inherited none of the 
late minister’s intellect and energy, and none of his per¬ 
sonal influence. Beside the deathbed of his father he had 
been entrusted to the guidance of Jubbar Khan, but he 
had not the good sense to perceive the advantages of such 
a connexion. He plunged into a slough of dissipation, 
and, when he needed advice, betook himself to the coun¬ 
sels of men little better and wiser than himself. The 
ablest of his advisers was Ameen-oolah-Khan, the Loghur 
chief—known to the present generation as “ the infamous 
Ameen-oolah”—he who played so distinguished a part in 
the recent tragedies at Caubul. This man’s support was 

* “ One Ilajl All,” says Mr. Mas- and regarded them with apathy, 
son, “ who is reported to have shot The Sirdars, when they had given 
the Prince, despoiled the Shah of his the orders consequent on the feat 
raiments and clad him in his own; they had performed, returned to 
then by the Sirdar’s orders, placed their dwellings in the city with the 
him behind himself on a horse and same composure after the deposition 
carried him off to the Burj Vazir. of a monarch, as if they had been 
A singular spectacle was offered to enjoying a morning ride/’ Tlie un- 
the people of the city as Haji Ali fortunate puppet subsequent^ found 
bore the degraded monarch along his way to Lahore, where Kunjeet 
the streets; but they had become Singh allowed him a monthly pen- 
familiar with extraordinary events, sion of 1000 rupees. 