

I 2 



116 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZYES. 


worth retaining; but Habib-oolab, having deprived the 
“ good Newab” of his government, attempted to destroy 
Ameen-oolah Khan ; and thus, with the most consummate 
address, paved the way to his own destruction. Dost 
Mahomed, ever on the alert, appeared on the stage at the 
fitting moment. Alone, he had not sufficient resources 
to compete with the son of Azim Khan; but the Newab 
speedily joined him; and soon afterwards, in the midst 
of an engagement in the near neighbourhood of Caubul, 
the troops of Ameen-oolah-Khan went over bodily to Dost 
Mahomed; and the son of Azim Khan sought safety 
within the walls of the Balia Hissar. 

Dost Mahomed, having occupied the city, invested the 
citadel, and would, in all probability, have carried every¬ 
thing before him, if the Candahar chiefs, alarmed by the 
successes of their brother, and dreading the growth of a 
power which threatened their own extinction, had not 
moved out to the ostensible assistance of their nephew. 
Dost Mahomed retreated into the Kohistan, but the unfor¬ 
tunate Habib-oolah soon found that he had gained nothing 
by such an alliance. His uncles enticed him to a meeting 
outside the city, seized him, carried him ofF to the Loghur 
country; then took possession of the Balia Hissar, and 
appropriated all his treasure. Dost Mahomed, however, 
was soon in arms again, and the Peshawur brothers were 
before Caubul. The affairs of the empire were then 
thrown into a state of terrible confusion. The Barukzye 
brothers were all fighting among themselves for the 
largest share of sovereignty; but it is said that “ their fol¬ 
lowers have been engaged in deadly strife when the rival 
leaders were sitting together over a plate of cherries.” 
To this fraternal cherry-eating, it would appear that Dost 
Mahomed was not admitted.* Sitting over their fruit, 

* Masson.—Mr. Vtoe says, that were the cherry-eaters. We do not 
Dost Mahomed and ^er Dil Kban pretend to determine the point. 



SUPREMACY OP DOST MAHOMED. 


117 


his brothers came to the determination of alluring him 
to an interview, and then either blinding or murder¬ 
ing him. The plot was laid; everything was arranged 
for the destruction of the Sirdar; but Hadjee Khan 
Kakur, who subsequently distinguished himself as a 
traitor of no slight accomplishments, having discovered in 
time that Dost Mahomed was backed by the strongest 
party in Caubul, gave him a significant hint, at the proper 
moment, and the Sirdar escaped with his life. After a few 
more fraternal schemes of mutual extermination, the bro¬ 
thers entered into a compact by which the government of 
Ghuzni and the Kohistan was secured to Dost Mahomed, 
whilst Sultan Mahomed of Peshawur succeeded to the 
sovereignty of Caubul. 

The truce was but of short duration. Shere Dil Khan, 
the most influential of the Candahar brothers, died. A 
dangerous rival was thus swept away from the path of 
Dost Mahomed. The Kuzzilbashes, soon afterwards, gave 
in their adherence to the Sirdar, who now felt himself 
in a position to strike another blow for the recovery of 
Caubul. Sultan Mahomed had done nothing to strengthen 
himself at the capital. Summoned either to surrender or 
to defend himselfj he deemed it more prudent to nego¬ 
tiate. Consenting to retire on Peshawur, he marched 
out of one gate of Caubul whilst Dost Mahomed marched 
in at another, and the followers of the latter shouted out 
a derisive adieu to the departing chief. 