

But this did not last long. Shah Soojah had begun 
again to dream of sovereignty. He was organising an 
army at Shikarpoor. Against this force marched Azim 
Khan, accompanied by the new King, Ayoob. Recalled 



EXPEDITION AGAINST THE SIKHS. 


113 


to the capital by the intrigues of Dost Mahomed^ and 
delayed by one of those complicated plots which display 
at once the recklessness and the treachery of the Afghan 
character,’* the Wuzeerwas compelled for awhile to post¬ 
pone the southern expedition. The internal strife sub¬ 
sided, the march was renewed, and Azim Khan moved 
down on Shikarpoor. But the army of Shah Soojah melted 
away at his approach. 

Then Azim Khan planned an expedition against the 
Sikhs. He had no fear of Runjeet Singh, whom he had 
once beaten in battle. Dost Mahomed accompanied his 
brother, and they marched upon the frontier, by Jella- 
labad and the Karapa Pass. But the watchful eye of 
Runjeet was upon them, and he at once took measures 
for their discomfiture. He well knew the character of the 
Barukzye brothers—knew them to be avaricious, ambi¬ 
tious, treacherous; the hand of each against his brethren. 
He thought bribery better than battle, and sent agents to 
tamper with Sultan Mahomed and the other Peshawur 
chiefs. Hoping to be enabled, in the end, to throw off 
the supremacy of Azim Khan, they gladly listened to his 
overtures. Dost Mahomed received intelligence of the 
plot, and signified his willingness to join the confederacy. 
His offer was accepted. This important accession to his 
party communicated new courage to Runjeet Singh. 
Everything was soon in train. Azim Khan was at Min- 
chini with his treasure and his Harem, neither of which, in 
so troubled a state of affairs, could he venture to abandon. 

* The story is worth giving in a Khan would return the compliment, 
note, as eminently characteristic of W assassinating Dost Mahomed. 
Afghan history. ^ Dost Mahomed, Inis was agreed upon. Sultan Ali 
who had proclaimed Sultan Ali was strangled in his sleep. Shah 
king, advised that prince to murder Ayoob then called upon Azim Khan 
ShA Ayoob; and Azim Khan ad- to perform his part of the tragedy; 
vised Shah Ayoob to murder Sultan but the minister coolly asked, “ How 
Ali. Sultan Ail indignantly re- can I slay my brother and recom- 
jected the proposal; Shah Ayoob mended a renewal of the expedition 
consented, on condition that Azim to Shikarpoor. 

VOL. I. I 



114 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAUUKZYES. 


Sultan Mahomed wrote to him from the Sikh camp that 
there was a design upon both. The intelligence filled the 
Sirdar with grief and consternation. He beheld plainly 
the treachery of his brothers, shed many bitter tears, looked 
with fear and trembling into the future; saw disgrace on 
one side, the sacrifice of his armies and treasure on the 
other; now resolved to march down upon the enemy, 
now to break up his encampment and retire. Night 
closed in upon him whilst in this state of painful agitation 
and perplexity. Rumours of a disastrous something soon 
spread through the whole camp. What it was, few could 
declare beyond the Sirdar’s own tent; but his followers 
lost confidence in their chief. They knew that some evil 
had befallen him; that he had lost heart; that his 
spirit was broken. The nameless fear seized upon the 
whole army, and morning dawned upon the wreck of a 
once formidable force. Ills troops had deserted him, and 
he prepared to follow, with his treasure and his Harem, to 
Jellalabad. Runjeet Singh entered Peshawur in triumph; 
but thought it more prudent to divide the territory be¬ 
tween Dost Mahomed and Sultan Mahomed, than to 
occupy it on his own account, and rule in his own name. 
The division was accordingly made. In the mean while 
Azim Khan, disappointed and broken-spirited, was seized 
with a violent disorder, the effect of anxiety and sorrow, 
and never quitted the bed of sickness until he was carried 
to the tomb.* 