



CHABACTEB OF DOST MAHOMED. 


119 


his mind, nor power harden his heart. Simple in his habits, 
and remarkably affable in his manner, he was accessible 
to the meanest of his subjects. Ever ready to listen to 
their complaints and to redress their grievances, he sel¬ 
dom rode abroad without being accosted in the public 
streets or highways by citizen or by peasant waiting to lay 
before the Sirdar a history of his grievances or his suf¬ 
ferings, and to ask for assistance or redress. And he never 
passed the petitioner—never rode on, but would rein in 
his horse, listen patiently to the complaints of the meanest 
of his subjects, and give directions to his attendants to 
take the necessary steps to render justiee to the injured, 
or to alleviate the sufferings of the distressed. Such was 
his love of equity, indeed, that people asked, “ Is Dost 
Mahomed dead that there is no justice ?” 

He is even said, by those who knew him well, to have 
been kindly and humane—an assertion which many who 
have read the history of his early career will receive with 
an incredulous smile. But no one who fairly estimates the 
character of Afghan history and Afghan morals, and the 
necessities, personal and political, of all who take part in 
such stirring scenes, can fail to perceive that his vices 
were rather the growth of circumstances than of any ex¬ 
traordinary badness of heart. Dost Mahomed was not by 
nature cruel ; but once embarked in the strife of A%han 
politics, a man must cither fight it out or die. Every 
man’s hand is against him, and he must turn his hand 
against every man. There is no middle course open to 
him. If he would save himself, he must cast his scruples 
to the winds. Even when seated most securely on the 
musnud, an Afghan ruler must commit many acts abhor¬ 
rent to our ideas of humanity. He must rule with vigour, 
or not at all. That Dost Mahomed, during the twelve 
years of supremacy which he enjoyed at Caubul, often 
resorted, for the due maintenance of his power, to mea¬ 
sures of severity incompatible with the character of a 



120 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZYES. 


humane ruler, is only to say that for twelve years he re¬ 
tained his place at the head of affairs. Such rigour is 
inseparable from the government of such a people. We 
cannot rein wild horses with silken braids. 

Upon one particular phase of Barukzye policy it is 
necessary to speak more in detail. Under the Suddozye 
Kings, pampered and privileged, the Douranee tribes 
had waxed arrogant and overbearing, and had, in time, 
erected themselves into a power capable of shaping the 
destinies of the empire. With one hand they held down 
the people, and with the other menaced the throne. 
Their sudden change of fortune seems to have unhinged 
and excited them. Bearing their new honours with little 
meekness, and exercising their new powers with little 
moderation, they revenged their past sufferings on the 
unhappy people whom they had supplanted, and, partly 
by fraud, partly by extortion, stripped the native culti¬ 
vators of the last remnant of property left to them on 
the new allocation of the lands. In the revolutions 
which had rent the country throughout the early years 
of the century, it had been the weight of Douranee in¬ 
fluence which had ever turned the scale. They held, 
indeed, the crown at their disposal, and, seeking their 
own aggrandisement, were sure to array themselves on 
the side of the prince who was most liberal of his pro¬ 
mises to the tribes. The danger of nourishing such a 
power as this was not overlooked by the sagacioTis minds 
of the Barukzye rulers. They saw clearly the policy of 
treading down the Douranees, and soon began to exe¬ 
cute it. 