

For some time there was little to disturb the even cur¬ 
rent of affairs, or to change the character of our relations 
towards the Persian state. It was the policy of Great 
Britain, by strengthening the military resources of the 
coimtry, to render Persia an insurmountable barrier 
{gainst the invasion of India by any European state. But 
by this time France had ceased to be formidable; and 



142 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


what was ostensibly defence against the powers of Europe, 
was, in reality, defence against the ambition of the Czar. 
It is doubtful, however, how far our policy was success¬ 
ful, We supplied the Persian army with English arms 
and English discipline; our officers drilled the native 
troops after the newest European fashions, and for some 
time the Crown Prince, Abbas Meerza, was delighted with 
his new plaything. But the best-informed authorities 
concur in opinion that the experiment was a failure; and 
that the real military strength of the empire was not 
augmented by this infusion of English discipline into the 
raw material of the Persian army.* It has been said, 
indeed, and with undeniable truth, by one who was him¬ 
self for many years among the instructors of the Persian 
army, that “ when Persia again came into collision with 
Russia in 1826, her means and power as a military nation 


^ * The exiflanation of this failure, 
j^iven hy the same experienced writer, 
IS worth quoting:—“ If it be remem¬ 
bered that when the system is af¬ 
fected with chronic paralysis, the at¬ 
tempt is vain to restore any particular 
member to a healthy action, it will be 
understood that, to a nation devoid 
of organisation in every other de¬ 
partment of government, a regular 
army was impossible. It thus hap¬ 
pened that, notwithstanding the ad¬ 
mirable material for soldiery which 
were offered by the hardy peasantry 
of Azerbijan, and the still hardier 
mountaineers of Kermanshah—not¬ 
withstanding the aptitude of the offi¬ 
cers to receive instruction—notwith¬ 
standing that a due portion of physi¬ 
cal courage appertained generally to 
the men—the disciplined forces of 
Persia, considered as an army, and 
for the purpose of national defence, 
were, from the epoch of their first 
creation, contemptible. Beyond drill 
and exercise, they never had anything 
in common with the regular armies 
of Europe and India. System was 
entirely wanting, whether in regard 


to pay, clothing, food, carriage, equi¬ 
page, commissariat, promotion, or 
command; and under a lath-and- 
plaster government like that of Per¬ 
sia, such must have been inevitably 
the case. At the same time, how¬ 
ever, a fiilse confidence arose of a 
most exaggerated and dangerous cha¬ 
racter; the resources of the coun¬ 
try were lavished on the army to an 
extent which grievously impoverished 
it at the time, and which has brought 
about at the present day a state of 
affairs that, in any other quarter of 
the world, would be termed a national 
bankruptcy; above all, the tribes— 
the chivalry of the empire, the forces 
with which Nadir overran the East 
from Bagdad to Delhi, and which, 
ever yielding but ever present, sur¬ 
rounded, under Aga Mahomed Khan, 
the Russian armies with a desert— 
were destroyed. Trulj then it may 
be said that in presenting Persia with 
the boon of a so-called regular army, 
in order to reclaim her from her un¬ 
lawful loves with France, we clothed 
her in the robe ofNessus.—[Ga/ctttta 
Review^ vol. xii.] 