

K 2 



132 


DOST MAHOMED AliTD THE BABITKZTES. 


Thus was this great expedition, so promising at the out¬ 
set, brought prematurely to a disastrous close. Trea¬ 
chery broke up, in a single night, a vast army which 
Runjeet Singh had contemplated with dismay. The 
Ameer, with the dibris of his force, preserving his guns, 
but sacrificing much of his camp equipage, fell back 
upon Caubul, re-seated himself quietly in the Balia 
Hissar, and, in bitterness of spirit, declaiming against the 
emptiness of military renown, plunged deeply into the 
study of the Koran. 

From this pleasant abstraction from warlike pursuits, 
the Ameer was, after a time, aroused by a well-grounded 
report to the effect that Sultan Mahomed had been 
again intriguing with the Sikhs, and that a plan had 
been arranged for the passage of a Punjabec force 
through the Khybur Pass, with the ultimate intention of 
moving upon Caubul. An e.xpedition was accordingly 
fitted out, in the spring of 1837; but the Ameer, having 
sufficient confidence in his sons Afzul Khan and Maho¬ 
med Akbar, sent the Sirdars in charge of the troops with 
Meerza Samad Khan, his minister, as their adviser. The 
Afghan forces laid siege to Jumrood, and on the 30th of 
April Hurree Singh came from Peshawur to its relief. 
An action took place, in which both the young Sirdars 
greatly distinguished themselves, and Shumshoodeen 
Khan’s conduct was equally conspicuous. The Sikh 
chieftain, Hurree Singh, was slain, and his disheartened 
troops fell back and entrenched themselves under the 


Hohun Lai says that “ the appalling 
news (of the treachery of Sultan 
Mahomed) wounded the feelings of 
the Ameer most bitterly. There were 
no bounds to the sweat of shame and 
folly which flowed over his face, and 
there was no limit to the laughter of 
the^ people at his being deceived and 
ridiculed. His minister, Meerza Sa¬ 


mad Khan, was so much distressed 
by this sad exposure of his own trick, 
and still more by the failure of his 
plan in losing the Fakir, that he hung 
down bis head with great remorse and 
shame, and then, throwing away his 
state papers, be exclaimed, that he 
would avoid all interference in the 
government aflairs hereafter.” 



THE BATTLE OF JUMBOOD. 


133 


walls of Jumrood. Akbar Kban proposed to follow up 
the victory by dashing on to Peshawur; but the Meerza, 
who, according to Mr. Masson, had, during the action, 
“secreted himself in some cave or sheltered recess, 
where, in despair, he sobbed, beat his breast, tore his 
beard, and knocked his head upon the ground,” now 
made his appearance, declaring that his prayers had 
been accepted, and “ entreated the boasting young man 
to be satisfied with what he had done.” The advice 
was sufficiently sound, whatever may have been the 
motives which dictated it. Strong Sikh reinforcements 
soon appeared in sight, and the Afghan army was com¬ 
pelled to retire. The battle of Jumrood was long a 
theme of national exultation. Akbar Khan plumed 
himself greatly on the victory, and was unwilling to 
share the honours of the day with his less boastful bro¬ 
ther. But it was not a very glorious achievement, and 
it may be doubted whether Afzul Khan did not really 
distinguish himself even more than his brother. In 
one respect, however, it was a heavy blow to the 
Maharajah. Kunjeet Singh had lost one of his best 
officers and dearest friends. The death of Hurree Singh 
was never forgotten or forgiven. 