

The loss of Peshawur rankled deeply in the mind of 
Dost Mahomed. The empire of Ahmed Shah had been 
rapidly falhng to pieces beneath the heavy blows of the 
Sikh spoliator. The wealthy provinces of Cashmere 
and Mooltan had been wrested from the Douranees in 
the time of the Suddozye Princes, and now the same 
unsparing hand had amputated another tract of country, 
to the humiliation of the Barukzye Sirdars. The 
Ameer, in bitterness of spirit, bewailed the loss of ter¬ 
ritory, and burned to resent the affiront. In spite, 
however, of the boasted victory of Jumrood, he had 
little inclination to endeavour to wrest the lost terri- 



134 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZYES. 


tory, by force of arms, from the grasp of the Sikh 
usurpers. Mistrusting his own strength, in this con¬ 
juncture he turned his thoughts towards foreign aid. 
Willing to form almost any alliance so long as this great 
end was to be gained, he now looked towards Persia 
for assistance, and now invited the friendly aid of the 
British. It was in the autumn of this year, 1837, that 
two events, which mightily affected the future destinies 
of Dost Mahomed, were canvassed in the bazaars of 
Caubul. A British emissary was about to arrive at the 
Afghan capital; and a Persian army was advancing upon 
the Afghan frontier. Before the first snows had fallen, 
Captain Burnes was Resident at Caubul, and Mahomed 
Shah was laying siege to Herat.* 

* The authorities consulted in the jah ; and the manuscript reports of 
preparation of this cha])tcr are the Colonel Itawlinson. To the latter I 
published works of Burnes, Conolly, am indebted for much valuable in- 
Vigne, Masson, Mohuii Lai, Harlan, formation relative to the Dourance 
&c.; the autobiograi)h7 of Shah Soo- tribes. 



LATEB EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


135 


CHAPTER VIII. 

[1810—1837.] 

Later Events in Persia—The Treaty of Goolistan—Arrival of Sir Gore 
Ouseley—Mr. Morier and IVIr. Ellis—The Definitive Treaty—The War 
of 1826-27—The Ti'eaty of Toorkomanchai—Death of Eutteh Ali Shah— 
Accession of Mahomed Shah—Ilis Projects of Ambition—The Expe¬ 
dition against Herat. 

It is necessary now to revert, for a little space, to the 
progress of affairs in Western Asia. Whilst the Sud- 
dozye Princes in Afghanistan had been gradually relax¬ 
ing their hold of the Dourance Empire, Persia had 
been still struggling against Russian encroachment—still 
entangled in the meshes of a long and harassing war. 
Though enfeebled by the paramount necessity of con¬ 
centrating the resources of the empire on the great 
European contest, which demanded the assertion of all 
her military strength, the aggressive tendencies of the 
great northern power were not to be entirely controlled. 
Little could she think of remote acquisitions of territory 
in Georgia, whilst the eagles of Napoleon were threaten¬ 
ing her very existence at the gates of Moscow itself. 
Still with little intermission, up to the year 1813, the 
war dragged languidly on. Then the good offices of 
Great Britain were successfully employed for the re¬ 
establishment of friendly relations between the two con- 