

* MS. Becords. Sir Gore Ouse- which does not appear in the subse- 
lej^s treaty is not given in the collec- qnent treaty, the amount of the allow- 
tion of treaties in the published ances to be granted by Uie Shah to 
“ Papers relating to Persia and Af- the British officers serving in Persia 
ghanistan.” In another article of this, is laid down. 



140 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


nations, entertaining a design of invading India, or being 
at enmity with Great Britain, whatever, to enter Persia.” 
“ Should any Buropean powers,” it was added, “ wish to 
invade India by the road of Khorassan, Tartaristan, 
Bokhara, Samarcand, or other routes, his Persian Majesty 
engages to induce the kings and governors of those 
countries to oppose such invasion as much as is in his 
power, either by the fear of his arms or by conciliatory 
measures”—an engagement of very little value, inasmuch 
as the “ power” to perform it would have been of the 
smallest possible amount. In the third article it is laid 
down, that “ the limits of the territories of the two states 
of Russia and Persia shall be determined according to 
the admission of Great Britain, Persia, and Russia”—a 
stipulation of an extraordinary and, perhaps, unexampled 
character, inasmuch as Russia had not consented to this 
mode of adjudication. The eighth and ninth articles 
related to Afghanistan, and are contained in the follow¬ 
ing words: 

VIII. “ Should the A%hans be at war with the British 
nation, his Persian Majesty engages to send an army 
against them, in such manner, and of such force, as may 
be concerted with the English Government. The expenses 
of such an army shall be defrayed by the British Govern¬ 
ment, in such manner as may be agreed upon at the 
period of its being required. 

IX. “ If war should be declared between the Afghans 
and Persians, the English Government shall not interfere 
with either party, unless their mediation to effect a peace 
shall be solicited by both parties.”* 

• Of this article it has been said by Britain; and if proceeding from 
an experienced writer: “ The obliga- Persia, it indicated that desire of ter- 
tion which we contracted in the 9th ritorial extension which was more 
article, to abstain from interference in fully developed in the sequel, and 
the event of a possible contest be- which, when developed, compelled us 
Afjgfhans and Persians, is on general grounds to repudiate the 
hardly intelligible. Such a proposal treaty altogether.”— [^Calcutta Review^ 
could not have proceeded from Great vol. xii.] 



ORGANISATION OF THE PERSIAN ARMY. 141 

One more clause of the definitive treaty calls for notice 
in this place. In Article VI., it is covenanted that 
“ should any European power be engaged in war with 
Persia, when at peace with England, his Britannic Ma¬ 
jesty engages to use his best endeavours to bring Persia 
and such European power to a friendly understanding.” 
“ If, however,” it is added, “ his Majesty’s cordial inter¬ 
ference should fail of success, England shall still, if re¬ 
quired, in conformity with the stipulations in the pre¬ 
ceding articles, send a force from India, or, in lieu thereof, 
pay an annual subsidy (200,000 tomauns) for the support 
of a Persian army, so long as a war in the supposed case 
shall continue, and until Persia shall make peace with 
such nation.” By this article we, in effect, pledged our¬ 
selves to support Persia in her wars with Russia, even 
though we should be at peace with the latter state. By 
the convention of Goolistan, it is true that amicable rela¬ 
tions had been re-established between the Russian and 
Persian Governments; but these relations were likely at 
any time to be interrupted; and it was not difficult to per¬ 
ceive, that, before long, the aggressive policy of Russia 
would again bring that state into collision with its Per¬ 
sian neighbour. The article, in reality, pledged us at 
least to the probability of a war with Russia; and laid 
down the doctrine that every future aggression of the 
latter against the dominions of the Persian Shah was 
to be regarded in the light of a hostile demonstration 
against our Indian possessions. 