

The Douranee tribes had looked upon the advance of 
the King with evident satisfaction. Trodden down and 
crushed as they had been by the Barukzyes, they would 
have rejoiced in the success of the royal cause. But 
they had not the power to secure it. Depressed and 
enfeebled by long years of tyranny, they brought only 
the shadow of their former solves to the standard of 
the Suddozye monarch. Without horses, without arms, 
without discipline, without heart to sustain them upon 
any great enterprise, and without leaders to inspire 
them with the courage they lacked themselves, the 
Douranees went into the field a feeble, broken-spirited 
rabble. Had they been assured of the success of the 
enterprise, they would at least have assumed a bold 
front, and flung all their influence, such as it was, into 
the scales on the side of the returned Suddozye; but 
remembering the iron rule and the unsparing vengeance 
of the Barukzye Sirdars, they dreaded the consequences 
of failure, and when the crisis arrived, either stood aloof 
from the contest, or shamefully apostatised at the last. 

* Mr. Vime Baj^s that lie had this attack, but is employed here to si^- 
Campbell himself. The word nify an irregular descent, or rush, 
indicates more properly a plundering upon the enemy. 



128 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZYES. 


The few, indeed, who really joined the royal standard 
contrived to defeat the enterprise; for whilst the Shah’s 
Hindostanees were engaging the enemy in front, the 
Douranees, moved by an irrepressible avidity for plun¬ 
der, fell upon the baggage in the rear, and created such 
a panic in the ranks that the whole army turned and 
fled. It was not possible to rally them. The battle 
was lost. The Barukzye troops pushed forward. Camp¬ 
bell, who had fallen like a brave man, covered with 
wounds, was taken prisoner, with others of the Shah’s 
principal officers; and all the guns, stores, and camp- 
equipage of the Suddozye Prince fell into the hands of 
the victors. The scenes of plunder and carnage which 
ensued are said to have been terrible. The Shah fled 
to Furrah, and thence by the route of Seigtan and Shora- 
wuk to Kelat. The Candahar chiefs urged the pursuit 
of the fugitive, but Dost Mahomed opposed the measure, 
and the unfortunate Prince was suffered to escape. 

But scarcely had the Sirdar returned to Caubul when 
he found himself compelled to prepare for a new and 
more formidable enterprise. Runjeet Singh was in 
possession of Peshawur. The treachery of Sultan Ma¬ 
homed Khan and his brothers had rebounded upon 
themselves, and they had lost the province which had 
been the object of so much intrigue and contention. In 
their anxiety to destroy Dost Mahomed, they opened a 
communication with the Sikhs, who advanced to Pesha¬ 
wur ostensibly as friends, and then took possession of 
the city.* Sultan Mahomed Khan ignominiously fled. 
The Sikh army under Hurree Singh consisted only of 
900Q men, and had the Afghans been commanded by a 