


activit^^, and his thorough acquaint¬ 
ance with the native character. As¬ 
sociated with Pottingcr, on their first 
entry into Beloochistan, he after¬ 
wards diverged to the northward, 
and, in the guise of a horse-dealer, 
penetrated through Seistan to Herat, 
and thence, by the way of Yezd and 
Ispahan, reached the northern re¬ 
gions of Persia. A great part of the 
line which he thus traversed had 
never before, and has never, I be¬ 
lieve, since, been explored by an 
European traveller. Stories of Chris¬ 
tie’s extraordinary personal strength 
and prowess are current to the pre¬ 
sent day in the north of India and 
in Persia. In the latter country, in¬ 
deed, he was adored by the soldiery, 
and his name is still a household 
word among the old officers of the 
Azerbijan army. He was killed at 
the head of his famous Shegaughce 
brigade, in the night attack which 
was made by the Russians on the 
Persian camp at Aslandooz, in 1811. 

Lieutenant Lindsay was an officer 
of the Madras Horse Artillery, and, 
to scientific attainments of no ordi¬ 
nary extent, added the most imposing 
personal appearance. He was six 
leet eight inches in height (without 
his shoes), and thus revised, in the 
minds of the Persians, their ideas 
of the old heroes of romance. After 


many years’ service in Persia, he re¬ 
signed his appointment in the Indian 
service, and, succeeding to the estate 
of Kincolquhair, settled in Scotland 
as Lindsay Bethune. In 1834 he 
was again sent to Persia by the Bri¬ 
tish Government, with a view to his 
employment in the expected war of 
the succession, and was thus enabled, 
in the following year, to add to his 
former laurels, by leading (on the 
death of Futteh Ali Shah) the ad¬ 
vanced division of the Persian army 
from Tabreez lo Teheran, and sub¬ 
sequently quelling a very serious 
rebellion against the authority of 
Mahomed Shah, that was set afoot 
in the south of Persia by the Prince 
of Shiraz and his sons. For this 
service, on his return to England, 
he was rewarded with a baronetcy, 
and in 1836 he was a third time 
sent out with a Major-General’s com¬ 
mission, to take command of the 
Persian army. Owing, however, to 
the misunderstanding which arose 
out of the advance upon Herat, the 
Persian Government on this occa¬ 
sion declined to employ him, and 
he finally retired from military life 
in 1839. Sir H. Bethune, in a green 
old age, is, I believe, at the pre¬ 
sent day, again travelling in Persia, 
revisiting the scenes of his former 
prowess. 



138 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


■whicli it was to be afforded should be left to the discre¬ 
tion of the British Government. But in the definitive 
treaty the amount was fixed at 200,000 tomauns (or 
about 150,000/.); and a special article was introduced, 
setting forth that “ since it is the custom of Persia to pay 
her troops six months in advance, the English ambas¬ 
sador shall do all in his power to pay the subsidy 
granted in lieu of troops in as early instalments as may 
be convenient and practicable,”—a pleasant fiction, of 
which it has been said, with truth, that it might “ well 
be taken for a burlesque.” 