

On the 14th of March, 1812, this treaty was signed 
by Sir Gore Ouseley, Mahomed Shefi, and Mahomed 
Hassan; and a week afterwards, the British ambassador 
wrote to inform the Court of Directors of the East India 
Company that “ the good effects of the definitive treaty, 
and the proofs of the confidence with which it has in¬ 
spired the Shah, are already manifest.” The Persian 
monarch, having declared his fixed determination to 
strengthen Abbas Meerza to the utmost of his ability, by 
raising for him a disciplined army of 50,000 men, re¬ 
quested Sir Gore Ouseley to obtain for him, with the 
utmost possible despatch, 30,000 stands of English mus¬ 
kets and accoutrements, the price of which was to be 
deducted from the subsidy. “The Shah,” wrote the 
envoy, “ has further promised me, that this large deduc¬ 
tion from the subsidy shall be made up, through me, to 
Abbas Meerza’s army from the royal coffers, so that we 
may congratulate ourselves on having worked a wonder¬ 
ful (and, by many, unexpected) alteration in the Shah’s 
general sentiments.”* 

Sir Gore Ouseley returned to England, leaving his 
secretary, Mr. Morier, in charge of the Mission j but 
before the treaty was finally accepted, it was modified by 

* Sir Gore Ouseley to (he Court of Directors; March 21, 1812.—[JkfS'. 
Records.^ 



THE DEFINITIVE TREATY. 


139 


the British Government, and Mr. Henry Ellis was de¬ 
spatched to Persia, in 1814, to negotiate these alterations 
at the Persian Court. A comparison of the treaty, signed 
by Sir Gore Ouseley, with that which was subsequently 
accepted, will show that the alterations, which were very 
considerable in respect of words, were less so in respect 
of substance. The most important conditions of the 
treaty are to be found in both documents. But the pro¬ 
gress of events had rendered it necessary to expunge 
certain passages from the treaty negotiated by Sir Gore 
Ouseley. For example, the 7th article of that treaty 
provided, that ‘‘ should the King of Persia form maga¬ 
zines of materials for ship-building on the coast of the 
Caspian Sea, and resolve to establish a naval force, the 
King of England shall grant permission to naval officers, 
seamen, shipwrights, carpenters, &c., to proceed to Persia 
from London and Bombay, and to enter the service of the 
King of Persia—the pay of such officers, artificers, &c., 
shall be given by his Persian Majesty at the rates which 
may be agreed upon with the English ambassador,”* 
But by the treaty of Goolistan, Persia engaged not to 
maintain a naval force on the Caspian. The article, 
therefore, was necessarily expunged. 

On the 25th of November, the definitive treaty, which 
was finally accepted, was concluded at Teheran by 
Messrs. Morier and Ellis. It was declared to be strictly 
defensive. The plan of defence thus marked out was 
more extensive than practicable. It bound the Persian 
Government to engage “ not to allow any European array 
to enter the Persian territory, nor to proceed towards 
India, nor to any of the ports of that country; and also 
to engage not to allow any individuals of such European 