

The Mussulman force reached Peshawur. The brave 
heart of Runjeet Singh quailed before this immense 
assemblage, and he at once determined not to meet it 
openly in the field. There was in his camp a man named 
Harlan, an American adventurer, now a doctor and now 
a genei'al, who was ready to take any kind of service 
with any one disposed to pay him, and to do any kind 
of work at the instance of his master.f Clever and un¬ 
scrupulous, he was a fit agent to do the Maharajah’s 

* General Harlan. Major (now Sir George) Pollock to 

t Harlan originally went out to Rangoon. He does not appear to 
China and India as supercargo of a have earned a Tery good name during 
merchant vessel. He left his vessel his connexion with the Company’s 
at Calcutta, and obtained service, as army, which he soon quitted, and ob- 
a supernumerary, on the medical tained service with Runjeet Singh— 
establishment of the Company. He afterwards to seek the patronage of 
was posted to the artillery at Dum- Dost Mahomed, whom he had so 
Dum, and afterwards accompanied foully betrayed. 



BETUAYAI. OF DOST MAHOMBO. 


131 


bidding. Runjeet despatched him as an envoy to the 
A%han camp. He went ostensibly to negotiate with 
Dost Mahomed; in reality to corrupt his supporters. 
“ On the occasion,” he says, with as little sense of 
shame as if though he had been performing an exploit 
of the highest merit, “ of Dost Mahomed’s visit to 
Peshawur, which occurred during the period of my 
service with Runjeet Singh, I was despatched by the 
Prince as ambassador to the Ameer. I divided his 
brothers against him, exciting their jealousy of his 
growing power, and exasperating the family feuds, with 
which, from my previous acquaintance, I was familiar, 
and stirred up the feudal lords of his durbar, with 
the prospects of pecuniary advantages. I induced his 
brother, Sultan Mahomed Khan, the lately deposed 
chief of Peshawur, with 10,000 retainers, to withdraw 
suddenly from his camp about nightfall. The chief 
accompanied me towards the Sikh camp, whilst his fol¬ 
lowers fled to their mountain fastnesses. So large a 
body retiring from the Ameer’s control, in opposition to 
his will, and without previous intimation, threw the 
general camp into inextricable confusion, which termi¬ 
nated in the clandestine route of his forces, without beat 
of drum, or sound of bugle, or the trumpet’s blast, in 
the quiet stillness of midnight. At daybreak no vestige 
of. the Afghan camp was seen, where six hours before 
50,000 men and 10,000 horses, with all the busy host 
of attendants, were rife with the tumult of wild emo¬ 
tion.”* 

* It would appear that Dost Ma- opinion of the Sikhs; but Sultan 
homed, instigated by Meerza Samad Mahomed, after having taken a 
Khan, seized Mr. Harlan, as well as number of oaths on the Koran, 
the Fakir Azizoodeen, who was also pledging himself to compliance with 
sent as an ambassador into the the AmeeFs wishes, sent back the 
Ameer's camp. The Dost endea- prisoners (or hostages^ as Dost Ma- 
Toured to throw the odium of the homed called them) to the Maha- 
act upon Sultan Mahomed, Tioping rajah's camp. Mr. Harlan himself, 
thereby to ruin liiiu utterly in the however, says nothing about this. 