

* Shah S(^jah, when on his way to blished his title to give away any 
Shikarpoor, in 1833, had entered into portion of the Afghan dominions; so 
a treaty with Hunjeet Sinnh, by one ne sent his grandson, Nao Nehal 
of the articles of which ne ceded Singh, a boy, who then “ took the 
Peshawur to the Sikhs. But Bun- spear into ms hand” for the first 
jeet Singh was by no means inclined time, to take possession of the 
to wait until the Shah had esta- place. 



LOSS OF PESHAWUK. 


129 


competent leader they might have driven back a far 
stronger force, and retained possession of the- place. 
The Peshawur chiefs were everlastingly disgraced, and 
Peshawur lost to the Afghans for ever. 

But Dost Mahomed could not submit patiently to 
this. Exasperated against Runjeet Singh, and indig¬ 
nant at the fatuous conduct of his brothers, he deter¬ 
mined on declaring a religious war against the Sikhs, 
and began with characteristic energy to organise a force 
sufficiently strong to wrest Peshawur from the hands of 
the usurpers. To strengthen his influence he assumed, 
at this time, the title of Ameer-al-Mominin (commander 
of the faitlifiil*), and exerted himself to inflame the 
breasts of his followers with that burning Mahomedan 
zeal which has so often impelled the disciples of the 
Prophet to deeds of the most consummate daring and 
most heroic self-abandonment. Money was now to be 
obtained, and to obtain it much extortion was, doubtless, 
practised. An Afghan chief has a rude and somewhat 
arbitrary manner of levying rates and taxes. Dost Ma¬ 
homed made no exception in his conduct to ‘‘ the good 
old rule,” which had so long, in critical conjunctures, 
been observed in that part of tlie world. He took all 
that he could get, raised a very respectable force, 
coined money in his own name, and then prepared for 
battle. 

At the head of an imposing array of fighting men, 
the Ameer marched out of Caubul. He had judged 
wisely. The declaration of war against the infidel— 
war proclaimed in the name of the Prophet — had 
brought thousands to his banner ; and ever as he 
marched the great stream of humanity seemed to swell 
and swell, as new tributaries came pouring in from 

* He had been recommended by poor to support his dignity as a Sir- 
some to assume the titles of royalty, dar, it would be preposterous to think 
but he replied, that os he was too of converting himself into a King. 

VOL. I. ' K 



130 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZYES. 


every part, and the thousands became tens of thousands. 
From the Kohistan, from the hills beyond, from the 
regions of the Hindoo-Koosh, from the remoter fast¬ 
nesses of Toorkistan, multitudes of various tribes and 
denominations, moved by various impulses, but all 
noisily boasting their true Mahomedan zeal, came flock¬ 
ing in to the Ameer’s standard. Ghilzyes and Kohis- 
tanees, sleek Kuzzilbaslies and rugged Oosbegs, horse¬ 
men and foot-men, all who could wield a sword or lift a 
matchlock, obeyed the call in the name of the Prophet. 
“ Savages from the remotest recesses of the mountainous 
districts,” wrote one, who saw this strange congeries of 
Mussulman humanity,* “ who were dignified with the 
profession of the Mahomedan faith, many of them giants 
in form and strength, promiscuously armed with sword 
and shield, bows and arrows, matchlocks, rifles, spears 
and blunderbusses, concentrated themselves around the 
standard of religion, and were prepared to slay, plunder, 
and destroy, for the sake of God and the Prophet, the 
unenlightened infidels of the Punjab.” 