



136 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


tending powers;* and a treaty, known as the treaty of 
Goolistan, was negotiated between them. By this treaty 
Persia ceded to Russia all her acquisitions on the south 
of the Caucasus, and agreed to maintain no naval force 
on the Caspian sea; whilst Russia entered into a vague 
engagement to support, in the event of a disputed suc¬ 
cession, the claims of the heir-apparent against all com¬ 
petitors for the throne. 

During these wars, which were carried on with 
varying success, the Persian troops upon more than 
one occasion had been led to the charge by English 
officers of approved gallantry and skill. Accompany¬ 
ing General Malcolm to Persia in 1810, they were re¬ 
tained in the country by Sir Harford Jones; and were 
very soon busily employed in drilling and disciplin¬ 
ing the infantry and artillery of the Persian Prince.f 
Of these officers, the most conspicuous wen- Captain 
Christie and Lieutenant Lindsay, who led into the field 
the battalions which they had instructed, and more than 
once turned the tide of victory against their formidable 
European opponents.^ 

* Hussia refused to accept the 
formal mediation of Great Britain; 
but the good offices of the ambassa¬ 
dor were employed with success. 

t “ Poor Captain Christie and Lieu¬ 
tenant Lindsay,” says Sir Harford 
Jones, “by their indefatigable per¬ 
severance had brought, when I left 
Persia, the one, several of the regi¬ 
ments of the Prince’s infantry, and, 
the other, the corps of horse artillery, 
considering the shortness of the time 
they had been employed, to a state of 
perfection that was quite astonishing. 

And what is e^ally to the credit of 
these gallant officers, they were both 
adored the officers and men under 
their tuition; though in the beginning 
they had often been obliged to treat 
the latter with a degree of severity 
that could not then have been prac¬ 


tised with safety at Constantinople. 
The Prince Royal, however, had much 
merit in this respect, for whenever a 
punishment v/as inflicted and com¬ 
plained of to him, he invariably gave 
the offender a double portion of it, 
and by this means soon put an end 
to complaint.”— {Sir Harford Jones's 
Account of the Transactions of his 
Majesty's Mission to the Court of Per¬ 
sia^ 1807-1811.] Malcolm took with 
him to Persia, as a present from 
the Indian Government to the Shah, 
twelve field-pieces, with harness and 
all necessary equipments for horse 
artillery. 

f Captain Christie was an officer 
of the Bombay army, selected for 
employment in Persia, bjr General 
Malcolm, on account of his high re¬ 
putation for gallantry and personal 



SIK GOKE OUSEI^Y’s TREATY. 


137 


In the mean while, Sir Harford Jones had been suc¬ 
ceeded in the Persian embassy by Sir Gore Ouseley, 
who in the summer of 1811 reached Teheran in the 
character of Ambassador Extraordinary from the King 
of England. The preliminary treaty which Jones had 
negotiated was now to be wrought into a definitive one. 
It was somewhat modified in the process. The new 
treaty was more liberal than the old. In the preliminary 
articles relaling to the subsidy, it had been set down that 
the amount should be regulated in the definitive treaty; 
but it was understood between the British and the Per¬ 
sian plenipotentiary, that the amount was on no account 
to exceed 160,000 tomauus, and that the manner in 