

These successes, however, were but short-lived. The 
son of the Prince Royal, Mahomed Meerza, a youth more 
impetuous than skilful in the field, soon plunged the 
divisions he commanded into a sea of overwhelming dis¬ 
aster. The Prince himself, not more fortunate, was in 
the same month of September, 1826, beaten by the Rus¬ 
sian General, Paskewitch, in open battle, with a loss of 



TREATY OF TOOEKOMANCHAI. 


145 


1200 men. The war was resumed in the following 
spring, and continued throughout the year with varying 
success; but the close of it witnessed the triumph of the 
Russians. Erivan and Tabreez fell into their hands.* 
Enfeebled and dispirited, the Persians shrunk from 
the continuance of the stru^le. The intervention of 
Great Britain was gladly accepted, and Persia submitted 
to the terms of a humiliating peace. 

After some protracted negotiations, a new treaty, 
superseding that of Goolistan, was signed at Toorkoman- 
chai, in February, 1828, by General Paskewitch and 
Abbas Meerza. By this treaty, Persia ceded to the Czar 
the Khanates of Erivan and Nakhichevan; and consented 
to the recognition of the line of frontier dictated by the 
Russian Government. The frontier line between the 
two empires, laid down in the fourth article of the 
treaty, commenced at the first of the Ottoman States 
nearest to the little Ararat mountain, which it crossed 
to the south of the Lower Karasson, following the course 
of that river till it falls into the Araxes opposite She- 
rour, and then extending along the latter river as far as 
Abbas-Abad.f The line of frontier then followed the 
course of the Araxes to a point twenty-one wersts be¬ 
yond the ford of Ledl-boulak, when it struck off in a 
straight line drawn across the plain of Moghan, to the 

^ Tho words of the llussian mani- top of Ararat, and penetrating fur- 
festo, announcing these events, are ther and further into the interior of 
worth quoting:—“ Obliged to pursue Persia, it occupied Tabreez itself, with 
the enemy through a country with- the country aepending on it. The 
out roads, laid waste by the troops Khanate of Erivan, on both sides of 
which were to have defended it; often the Araxes, and the Khanate of 
opposed by nature itself; exposed to Nakhichevan, a part of the ancient 
the burning sun of summer, and the Armenia, fell into the hands of the 
rigour of winter; our brave army, conquerors.” 

after unparalleled efforts, succeeded t This fortress, together with the 
in conquering Erivan, which was re- surrounding country, to the extent 
puted impregnable. It passed the of three wersts and a half, was ceded 
Araxes, planted its standards on the to Russia. 

VOL. X. L 



146 


LATBB EVENTS IN PBB8U. 


bed of the river Bolgaron, twenty-one wersts above the 
point of confluence of the two Rivers Adinabazar and 
Sarakamyshe; then passing over the summit of Ojil- 
koir and other mountains, it extended to the source of 
the River Atara, and followed the stream until it falls 
into the Caspian Sea. 