



THE OUTBREAK IN GEORGIA. 


143 


■were positively inferior to those which she possessed at 
the close of her former struggle.” 

From the date of the convention of Goolistan, up to 
the year 1826, there was at least an outward observ¬ 
ance of peace between the Russian and Persian states. 
The peace, however, was but a hollow one, destined 
soon to bo broken. The irritation of a disputed boun¬ 
dary had ever since the ratification of the treaty of 
Goolistan kept the two states in a restless, unsettled 
condition of ill-disguised animosity; and now it broke 
out at last into acts of mutual defiance.* It is hard 
to say whether Russia or Persia struck the first unpar¬ 
donable blow. The conduct of the former had boon in¬ 
solent and offensive—designed perhaps to goad the 
weaker state into open resentment, and to furnish a pre¬ 
text for new wars, to be followed by new acquisitions of 
Eastern territory. Both parties were prepared, by a 
long series of mutual provocations, for the now inevitable 
contest. It needed very little to bring them into open 
collision. 

In Georgia there had been frightful misrule. The 
officers of the Christian government had wantonly and 
insanely outraged the religious feelings of its Mussulman 
subjects; and now an outburst of fierce Mahomedan 
zeal in the adjoining kingdom declared how dangerous 
had been the interference. The Moollahs of Persia rose 
as one man. Under pain of everlasting infamy and 
everlasting perdition, they called upon the Shah to 
resent the insults which had been put upon their re¬ 
ligion. The mosques rang with excited appeals to the 
feelings of all true believers; and every effort was made 
by the excited ecclesiastics to stimulate the temporal 
authorities to the declaration of a holy war. 

The King, however, shrank from the contest. He 
had no ambition to face again in the field the formidable 



144 


LATEB EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


European enemy who had so often scattered the flower 
of the Persian army, and trodden over the necks of the 
vanquished to the acquisition of new dominions. But 
the importunity of the Moollahs was not to be with¬ 
stood. He pledged himself that if Gokchah—one of 
the disputed tracts of country occupied by the Russians 
—were not restored, he would declare war against the 
Muscovite power. Convinced that the Russian Govern¬ 
ment would yield this strip of land, acquired as it was 
without justice, and retained without profit, the Shah 
believed that the condition was, in effect, an evasion 
of the pledge. The error was soon manifest. It was 
not in the nature of Russia to yield an inch of country 
righteously or unrighteously acquired—profitably or un- 
profitably retained. Gokchah was not restored. The 
Moollahs became more and more clamorous. The Shah 
was threatened with the forfeiture of all claims to para¬ 
disaical bliss—and the war was commenced. 

Excited by the appeals of the Moollahs, the Persians 
flung themselves into the contest with all the ardour 
and ferocity of men burning to wipe out in the blood of 
their enemies the insults and indignities that had been 
heaped upon them. They rose up and massacred all 
the isolated Russian garrisons and outposts in their 
reach. Abbas Meerza took the field at the head of an 
army of 40,000 men; and at the opening of the campaign 
the disputed territory of Gokchah, with Balikloo and 
Aberan, were recovered by their old masters. 