

* Abbas Meerza gratefully ac¬ 
knowledged the assistance he re¬ 
ceived from Captain Shee, Mr. Beek, 
and M. Berowsai, the Pole, of whom 
subsequent mention will be made. 
At the siege of Koochan a sergeant 
of the Bombay Horse Artillery, 
named Washbrook, directed the mor¬ 
tar batteries, which mainly conduced 
to the reduction of the place. 



152 


lATEB EVENTS IN PERSIA, 


fore him. The recusant chiefs made their submission; 
and before the close of 1832 all the objects of the cam¬ 
paign had been accomplished, and the subjugation of 
Khorassan was complete. 

Emboldened by success, Abbas Meerza now contem¬ 
plated new enterprises. The project of an expedition 
against Khiva, to be subsequently extended to Bokhara, 
was then revived; and the reduction of Herat, a design 
favoured alike by the ambition of the Prince and the 
insidious policy of Kussia, was again brought under re¬ 
view. Herat, which lies on the western frontier of 
Afghanistan, had, on the partition of the Douranee Em¬ 
pire among the Barukzye Sirdars, afforded an asylum 
to Shah Mahmoud, and had ever since remained in the 
hands of that Prince aud Kamran, his successor. To 
subjugate this tract of country was to open the gate to 
further Eastern conquest. The Kussian agent was eager, 
therefore, to promote a movement which squared so well 
with the designs of his own Government. The expe¬ 
dition against Herat was no longer to be postponed. In 
1833 it was actually put into execution; and the com¬ 
mand of the invading force was entrusted to Mahomed 
Meerza, the son of the Prince Eoyal. 

In the autumn of 1833 Abbas Meerza died at Meshed. 
Arrested in the prosecution of the siege of Herat by 
the tidings of his father’s death, Mahomed Meerza re¬ 
turned, in no enviable frame of mind, and withdrew 
within the Persian frontier. There were some doubts, 
too, at that time, regarding the succession; but these 
were soon set at rest. The Shah nominated Mahomed 
Meerza as his heir, and both the British and the Russian 
Governments gave their cordial assent to the choice. 

A few months afterwards, in the autumn of 1834, 
Futteh Ali Shah died at Ispahan; and Mahomed Meerza 
ascended the throne. The change was not favorable to 



DEATH OF FUTTEH ALI SHAH. 


153 


British interests. Futteh Ali had ever been our friend. 
From him the Russians had received little encouragement 
—^but his son and his grandson had thrown themselves 
into the arms of the Muscovite; and now that the latter 
had ascended the throne, there was every prospect of 
Russian influence becoming paramount at the Persian 
Court. Great Britain had done for the young King all that 
he required. He believed that those good oflices, which 
mainly had secured for him the succession to the throne, 
were employed only for the purpose of counteracting 
the dreaded ascendancy of Russia; and he was in no 
humour to display his gratitude towards a nation, the 
character and the resources of which he so little under¬ 
stood. 