

* “ A letter has been received in the echo of a lie—but ‘ coming events 
town from Persia, which has excited cast their shadows before,’ and many 
a good deal of talk in the bazaar, of these rumours, combined with the 
and the substance of which we give tone which now and then breaks out 
merely as a rumour of the day. It in the Russian journals, show but too 
states that Prince Abbas Meerza has well the turn of men’s thoughts and 
ordered 30,000 men to march upon wishes, and should warn us to be pre- 
Herat, and that this movement is pared .”—\_Bomhay Gazette^ August 25, 
onl^ preparatory to an advance upon 1832.] About the same time, Dr. 
India in conjunction with Russia. Wolff, who was then travelling in 
This is probaoly a mere rumour or Central Asia, wrote: It is remark- 



THE KHORA88AH EXPEDITION. 


151 


advance of tke confederate armies of the two states into 
Khorassan, and thence upon Herat and India, generally 
discussed and believed. Such, indeed, at this time, was 
the ascendancy of Muscovite influence over the mind of 
Abbas Meerza, that it was reported he had married a 
Russian Princess, and adopted the Christian faith. 

There was a British officer in the Persian camp. Cap¬ 
tain Shee, whose interference brought about the post¬ 
ponement of the Khivan expedition, and in the follow¬ 
ing year it was determined to abandon the Oosbeg enter¬ 
prise for the time, and to punish the olTending Aighans. 
An expedition against Herat Avas then planned; but 
British interference, this time directed by the sagacity 
of Mr. M‘Neill, was again successfully put forth, and 
the movement Avas suspended. In the mean while the 
Khorassan campaign was prosecuted with vigour. The 
arms of Abbas Meerza were triumphant. The inde¬ 
pendence which the province had endeavoured to assert 
could not be maintained in the face of the battalions 
of the Prince Royal, aided, as they were, by European 
courage and skill.* Ameerabad and Koochan fell be- 


able that there is a current belief, not 
only throughout Khorassan, but, as I 
found it afterwards, throughout Toor- 
kistan even to Caubul, that Abbas 
Meerza had married a Russian Prin¬ 
cess, and adopted the Russian reli¬ 
gion ; and that <50,000 Russians would 
come to Khorassan by waj of Khiva, 
and assist Abbas Meerza in conquer¬ 
ing Khorassan. So much is true 
that Russia has written to Futteh 
Ali Shah, offering him 5000 men for 
taking Khorassan, and putting down 
the cni^w—i.c., plundering system 
of the Toorkomans; and 1 hope to 
prove it to a certainty that Russia 
will be very soon the mistress of 
Khiva, under the pretext that the 
King of Khiva has 8000 Russian 
slaves, whilst I know by the most 


authentic reports that there arc not 
above 200 Russian slaves and 60 
Russian deserters at Khiva.”—[CaZ- 
evUa Christian Observer^ September^ 
1832.] It was stated at one time 
that Russia had consented to yield 
her claim to the balance of the indem¬ 
nity money remaining then due by 
Persia, on condition of the latter join¬ 
ing in an expedition against Khiva. 