

In the spring of 1836 the plan of the campaign was 
laid down, but it was doubtful whether the Shah pos¬ 
sessed the means of immediately reducing it to practice. 
An unhappy expedition against the Toorkomans in the 
course of the summer somewhat cooled the military 
ardour of the Shah; and before the year had worn to a 
close he opened negotiations with Herat. A gallant 
answer was sent back to his demands. “ You demand 
hostages,” said the Heratee minister. “ We gave no 
hostages during the reign of the late Shah; and we will 


• The officer whom he proposed to rank of Major in Persi^ and who had 
send was Lieutenant Todd, of the long been employed in instructing the 
Bengal Artillery, who held the local artillery of the Persian army. 



THE HERATEE CAMPAIGN. 


157 


give none now. You denaand a present; we are ready 
to give as large a present as we can afford. If the Shah 
is not satisfied with this, and is determined to attack us, 
let him come. We will defend our city as long as we 
can; and if we are driven from it, it will of course re¬ 
main in your hands till we can find means to take it 
back again from you.” The Shah was, at this time, 
on the way back to his capital. He at once summoned 
a council of war, laid the offensive answer of Yar Ma¬ 
homed before the chief ofllicers who attended him in 
his tent; and sought their advice. The result was a 
determination to return to Teheran for the winter 
months, and to commence the expedition against Herat 
early in the following spring.* 

But the spring of 1837, like the spring of 1836, passed 
by, and the expedition was not commenced. There ap¬ 
peared to be some hope of bringing matters to an issue 
by peaceable negotiation. But the demands of Persia 
involved the sacrifice of the independence of the state of 
Herat, and Shah Kamran could not be persuaded to reduce 
himself to a state of vassalage. He had great respect for 
the Shah of Persia he said; but he could not acknow¬ 
ledge him as his sovereign—could not coin money or 
suffer prayers to be read in his name. He consented 
that hostages should reside for two years at Meshed as 
guarantees for the fulfilment of the terms of the pro¬ 
posed treaty. He consented that certain sums of money, 
in the way of tribute, should be paid annually to the 
Persian Government. He consented to furnish troops 
in aid of any Persian expedition against Toorkistan. 
He consented to restrain his subjects from marauding, 

* The Russian minister had urged voured to persuade the Shah not 
the King to undertake a winter cam- to proceed against Herat at all; 
paign against Herat. But Count and Simonich told the same story 
Nesselrode always resolutely mmn- in his letters to his own govern- 
tained that Simonich had endea- ment. 



158 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


and plundering, and capturing slaves on the Persian 
frontier. But he could not consent to relinquish the 
title of Shah, and acknowledge himself a dependent of 
Persia. The propositions submitted by Herat were 
moderate and reasonable; they called for nothing from 
the Persian Government beyond a pledge of non-inter¬ 
ference in the internal affairs of Herat. But the preten¬ 
sions of the King of Kings to the sovereignty of Western 
Afghanistan were not to be sobered down even by the 
representations of the British minister, who endeavoured 
to reconcile conflicting interests, and to cement a friendly 
alliance between the contending parties. Mahomed 
Shah was determined cither to break down the indepen¬ 
dence of Herat, or to batter down its walls. So the 
enterprise long projected—long brooded over, was un¬ 
dertaken in earnest at last.* 