


* Sir Harford Jones* 
L 2 



148 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


the unscrupulousness of Russia placed England at a dis¬ 
advantage. The game was one in which the more 
honourable player was sure to be foully beaten. Russia 
made new acquisitions of Eastern territory, and England 
looked idly on. 

It is doubtful whether our statesmen were ever clearly 
satisfied that, in refusing the subsidy, .they acted up 
strictly to the spirit of the treaty of Teheran.* Certain it 
is, that the claim of the Persian Government, at this time, 
awakened our British diplomatists to a re-consideration 
of those subsidy articles which had involved, and might 
again involve us in difliculties, not only of an embar¬ 
rassing, but of a somewhat discreditable, character. It 
was desirable to get rid of these perplexing stipulations. 
The time was opportune; the occasion was at hand. 
The large indemnity insisted upon by Russia drove the 


* A writer in the Foreign Quar^ 
terly Revieu\ who, if not Sir John 
M‘NeiIl himself, has unblushingly ap¬ 
propriated, without acknowledgment, 
a large portion of the pamphlet on tJie 
“ Progress and present position of 
Bussia in the East,” published some 
three or four years before, says: 
“ Assuredly Prince Abbas Meerza 
relied strongly upon this (the 4th 
article of the treaty), and without it 
would never have engaged in the con¬ 
test he provoked; we are bound in 
justice to say, and we say it on good 
authority, wantonly and in defiance 
of the feelings of the Persian Govern¬ 
ment and King. But though Persia 
had fairly executed all her share of 
the treaty in question, the English 
minister, when called upon to fulfil 
this condition, hesitated, hung back, 
negotiated, and delayed under every 
possible pretext, while he could not 
deny the faith or the claim of Persia. 
It was clear, however, to all the par¬ 
ties that Mr. Canning only sought a 
means of escaping the fulfilment of 
the stipulations. He was hard pressed 


by the reluctance to engaging in a 
war with Bussia, represented as too 
probable by the minister of that power 
at the British Court, and by the dex¬ 
terity of a first-rate female diploma¬ 
tist, to whom, indeed, the manage¬ 
ment of the matter was fairly confided 
by the Bussian Court, and whose in¬ 
fluence was fatally effective in this 
and the Turkish questions. In 
affecting to adhere simply to the 
policy of his predecessors, Mr. Can¬ 
ning forgot the immense difference 
and disgrace of refusing the fulfilment 
only at the time when, and because, 
the need was urgent. He could not 
foresee that Persia must become, if 
further humbled, the tool of Bussia 
against the East; if he had, no earthly 
power would have balanced against 
his duty. He did not even per¬ 
ceive that the crisis to Persia had 
arrived; and contented himself with 
a double sacrifice to vanity, in as¬ 
suming to arbitrate against a sove¬ 
reign prince, and hearing his praises 
resounded by the lips of successful 
beauty.” 



THE REIGN OF INTIMIDATION. 