



AMBITIOUS PROJECTS OF MAHOMED SHAH. 155 

with all his subjects,” added Mr. Ellis, “ he conceives that 
the right of sovereignty over Herat and Candahar is as 
complete now as in the reign of the Sufiarean d 3 masty.” 
“ This pretension,” it was added, “ is much sustained by 
the success of his father Abbas Meerza, in the Khorassan 
campaign, and the suggestions of General Berowski.”* 
The Persian ministers declared that the rightful do¬ 
minions of the Shah extended to Ghuzni; that an expe¬ 
dition against Herat would be undertaken in the follow¬ 
ing spring; that the capture of Candahar would shortly 
follow; and that then he would launch into new fields 
of enterprise among the Beloochees and the Toorkomans. 

The Heratee campaign, however, was the most 
cherished, as it was the proximate of all these under¬ 
takings ; and the Eussian minister was ever ready with 
suggestions for the immediate march of the Persian army, 
lest the British Government should step in to discourage 
the undertaking, or take measures to thwart its success. 
It was urged, too, that the expedition would be rendered 
more diificult by delay, and at a later period more ex¬ 
tensive military resources would be required to prosecute 
the war with success. 

The British minister watched all these proceedings 
with interest and anxiety. It seemed to him, that 
whilst the restlessness of Russian intrigue was con¬ 
stantly threatening to educe a state of things in Cen¬ 
tral Asia, embarrassing to the British-Indian Govern¬ 
ment, it became the British, on their parts, to make a 
counter-move that would keep her dangerous ally fairly 
in check. It had been seen, long before this, that the 
experiment of drilling the Persian army was nothing 
better than an expensive failure. It had, to some ex¬ 
tent, the effect of excluding other European disciplina- 

* Mr. Ellis to Lord Palmeraton: lisTied Papers relating to Persia and 
Teheran^ November 13, 1835.—[Pm6- Afghanistan.'] 



156 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


rians, but, beyond this, it did not increase our influence 
in the Persian dominions, or the security of our Indian 
frontier. It was advisable, therefore, to do something 
more. Never doubting that the network of Russian in¬ 
trigue would soon extend itself beyond the Persian fron¬ 
tier, it appeared to the British minister expedient that 
we should anticipate the designs of Russia in Afghanis¬ 
tan by sending an envoy to Dost Mahomed, and offering 
to despatch British officers to Caubul to discipline the 
Ameer’s army.* It was obvious that a decided move¬ 
ment was becoming every day more and more necessary. 
A mere conciliatory course of policy, dictating oflers of 
quiet intervention, was found of no avail in such a con¬ 
juncture. The British minister offered to use his in¬ 
fluence with Shah Kamran to induce that ruler to ab¬ 
stain from the commission of those acts which had 
offended the Shah-in-Shah of Persia, but the offer had 
been coldly received. It was evident that the ' aggres¬ 
sive designs of Mahomed Shah were largely promoted 
by the Russian minister, and that no peaceful mediation 
would induce the young King to abandon his projects 
of Eastern conquest. 