


149 


Persian financiers to extremities, and reduced them to 
all kinds of petty shifts to meet the extortionate demand. 
In this conjuncture, England, like an expert money¬ 
lender, was ready to take advantage of the embarrass¬ 
ments of the Persian State, and to make its own terms 
with the impoverished creditor of the unyielding Mus¬ 
covite. The bargain was struck. Sir John Macdonald, 
on the part of the British Government, passed a bond 
to the Shah for 250,000 tomauns as the price of the 
amendment of the subsidy articles, and subsequently 
obtained the required erasures by the payment of four- 
fifths of the amount. 

A season of outward tranquillity succeeded the com¬ 
pletion of the treaty of Toorkomanchai. But the great 
northern power did not slumber. Though, during 
those years it added little outwardly to its dominions, 
it was obtaining more and more that great moral as¬ 
cendancy which, perhaps, was better calculated to secure 
its ends than an ostentatious extension of territory. The 
game of quiet intimidation was now to be tried. The 
experiment succeeded to the utmost. Obtaining such 
an ascendancy over its counsels as enabled it to induce 
Persia to transgress its legitimate boundaries, and adopt 
an aggressive policy towards the countries on its east¬ 
ern frontier, the European power overawed its Asiatic 
neighbour. It was the object of Eussia to use the re¬ 
sources of the Persian State in furtherance of its own 
ends, without overtly taking possession of them, and thus 
bringing itself into collision with other powers. To 
secure this ascendancy it was necessary to assume a com¬ 
manding—indeed, an offensive—attitude of superiority, 
and, whilst abstaining from acts of aggression, sufficiently 
momentous to awaken the jealousy of other European 
States, to keep alive the apprehensions of its Eastern 
neighbour by an irritating, dictatorial demeanour, often 



150 


LATEB EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


implying threats of renewed hostility. Conscious of 
weakness, Persia yielded to the influence thus sought to 
be established; and in due course became, as was in¬ 
tended, a facile tool in the hands of the Eussian minister. 

Such, briefly stated in a few sentences, is the history 
of the relations subsisting between Russia and Persia 
since the treaty of Toorkomanchai. It need not be added 
that, during this time, English influence declined sensibly 
at the Persian Court. Little pains, indeed, were taken 
to preserve it, until it became apparent that the en¬ 
croachments of Persia upon the countries between its 
frontier and India, instigated as they were by the Rus¬ 
sian Government, were calculated to threaten the secu¬ 
rity of our Indian Empire. In 18.S1, Abbas Meerza, the 
Prince Royal, against the advice of the Shah, determined 
on sending an army into Khorassan; and then projected 
an expedition against Khiva, for the chastisement of that 
marauding state, which had so often invaded the Persian 
frontier, and carried off into slavery so many Persian 
subjects. The Russian agent encouraged, if he did not 
actually instigate, these movements. It was said, in¬ 
deed, that the active co-operation of Russia would soon 
be apparent in both enterprises—^that it was her policy 
to seek the assistance of Persia in a movement upon 
Khiva, and to aid that state in the subjugation of Kho¬ 
rassan. Not only in Khorassan itself, in Afghanistan 
and Toorkistan, but in the bazaars of Bombay,* was the 