

The thought of breaking down the monarchy of Herat 
still held possession of the mind of Mahomed Shah. 
Ever since, in the autumn of 1833, he had been arrested 
in his first expedition against that place by the death of 
his father, he had brooded over his disappointment, and 
meditated a renewal of the hostile undertaking. It is 
said, indeed, that he swore a solemn oath, sooner or later 
to retrace his steps to the eastward, and to wipe out his 
disgrace in Afghan blood. Seated on the throne of his 
grandfather, and upheld there by British influence, he 
dreamt of Eastern conquest, openly talked of it in 
durbar, and delighted to dwell upon his prospective 
triumphs over Oosbeg and Afghan hosts. He needed 
little prompting to push his armies across the Eastern 
frontier. But there were promptings from without as 
well as from within. Russia was at the elbow of the 
Shah, ever ready to drop tempting suggestions into the 
young monarch’s ear, and to keep alive within him the 
fire both of his ambition and his revenge. It was the 
policy of Russia at this time to compensate for its own en¬ 
croachments on the Western frontier of Persia, by help- 



154 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


ing that country to new acquisitions of territory on the 
East. Mahomed Shah had little real love for his great 
Northern neighbour; but he profoundly reverenced the 
gigantic power of the Czar, and, mistaking quiescence 
for weakness, aggressiveness for strength, contrasted 
the resources of Russia and England in a manner very 
unfavorable to the pretensions of the latter.* The 
enormous wings of the Russian eagle seemed to over¬ 
shadow the whole land of Iran; and the Shah was 
eager that they should be stretched over him in pro¬ 
tection, and not descend upon him in wrath. He knew, 
by bitter experience, Avhat was the might of the Nor¬ 
thern army; he had fled before the Cossacks on the field 
of Ganjah, and narrowly escaped with his life. But 
of the English he knew little more than that some 
courteous and accomplished gentlemen were drilling his 
native troops, and doing their best to create for, him a 
well-disciplined army out of the raw materials placed 
at their disposal. 

And so it happened, that in 1835, when Lord Pal¬ 
merston wrote to Mr. Ellis, who had been sent out from 
London on a mission of condolence and congratulation 
to Mahomed Shah, that he was “ especially to warn the 
Persian Government against allowing themselves to be 
pushed on to make war against the Afghans,” he could 
obtain no more satisfactory reply from the ambassador 
than that the Shah had “very extended schemes of 
conquest in the direction of A%hanistan.” “ In common 

* Nor did he scruple outwardly to the British ambassador.—J2e- 
cvince the relative degrees of respect cords. ] This incident, however, 
which he entertained for the two wLich created some sensation in 
nations in the persons of their repre- the Calcutta Council-Chamber, may 
sentatives. On one occasion, for have had its source in the private 
example, when the Kussian envoy, feelings of Meerza Massoud, the 
Count Simonich, was returning from foreign minister, who, having long 
an excursion, the foreign minister resided at St. Petersburgh, was 
went out to meet him, but demurred a mere creature of the Russian 
to paying the same compliment to State. 