

Such was the boundary laid down in the treaty of 
Toorkomanchai. The other articles granted an indemnity 
to Russia of eighty millions of roubles for the expenses of 
the war—yielded to that state the sole right of having 
armed vessels on the Caspian—recognised the inheritance 
of Abbas Meerza—and granted an amnesty to the inhabi¬ 
tants of Aderbijan. To Persia this treaty was deeply 
humiliating; but the manifestoes of the Emperor boasted 
of its moderation, and declared that its ends were merely 
the preservation of peace and the promotion of commerce. 
“ For us,” it was said, “ one of the principal results of 
this peace consists in the security which it giv^s to one 
part of our frontiers. It is solely in this light that we 
consider the utility of the new countries which Russia 
has just acquired. Every part of our conquests that did 
not tend to this end was restored by our orders, as soon 
as the conditions of the treaty were published. Other 
essential advantages result from the stipulations in favour 
of commerce, the free development of which we have 
always considered as one of the most influential causes 
of industry, and at the same time as the true guarantee 
of solid peace, founded on an entire reciprocity of wants 
and interests.” 

The hypocrisy of all this is too transparent to call for 
comment. Russia had thus extended her frontier largely 
to the eastward; and England had not interfered to pre¬ 
vent the completion of an act, by which it has been said 
that Persia was delivered, bound hand and foot, to the 



THE QUESTION OF AGfOEESSION. 


147 


Court of St. Petersbuigh.”* How far the British Go- 
verhment was bound to assist Persia in the war of 
1826-27, still remains an open question. The treaty of 
Teheran pledged Great Britain, in the event of a war 
between Persia and any European State, either to 
send an army from India to assist the Shah, or to grant 
an annual subsidy of 200,000 tomauns during the con¬ 
tinuance of the war j but this article was saddled with 
the condition that the war was to be one in nowise pro¬ 
voked by any act of Persian aggression. A question, 
therefore, arose, as to whether the war of 1826-27 was 
provoked by the aggressions of Persia or of Russia. 
Each party pronounced the other the aggressor. The Per¬ 
sian Government maintained tliat the unjust and violent 
occupation of Gokchah by a Russian force furnished a 
legitimate casus belli; but the Russian manifestoes de¬ 
clared that, “ in the midst of friendly negotiations, and 
when positive assurances gave us the hope of preserving 
the relations of good neighbourhood with Persia, the 
tranquillity of our people was disturbed on the frontiers 
of the Caucasus, and a sudden invasion violated the ter¬ 
ritory of the Emperor in contempt of solemn treaties.” 
Russian statesmen have never been wanting in ability to 
make the worse appear the better reason. Whatever 
overt acts may been committed, it is certain that the 
real provocation came not from the Mahomedan, but 
from the Christian State. The backwardness of Eng¬ 
land at such a time was of dubious honesty, as it doubt¬ 
less was of dubious expediency. A more forward policy 
might have been more successful. Had Russia been as 
well disposed to neutrality as Great Britain, it would 
have been to the advantage of the latter to maintain the 
most friendly relations with the Muscovite State; but 