

His reception in England was of the most flattering 
character. The commendations of the East India Com¬ 
pany and the Board of Control were endorsed by the 
commendations of the public. He published his book. 
It was read with avidity. In the coteries of London, 
Bokhara Bumes became one of the celebrities of the 
season. Learned societies did him honour. Fashionable 
dames sent him cards of invitation. Statesmen and 
savans sought his acquaintance. At Holland House and 
Bowood he was a favoured guest. He was no niggard 
of his information; he talked freely; and he had “ some 
new thing” whereof to discourse. His fine talents and 
his genial social qualities recommended him to many; 
and there was more than enough in the overflowings of 
English hospitality to satisfy a vainer man. 

These, however, were but unsubstantial rewards. He 
looked for promotion in the paths of Oriental diplomacy; 
and Lord Ellenborough, who then presided at the India 
Board, recommended him for the appointment of Secre¬ 
tary of Legation at the Persian Court.* This offer he was 


^ He was promised, too, the reversion of the office of minister. 



174 THE “ commercial” mission to caubttl. 


recommended to decline; and he returned to India, in 
the spring of 1835, to resume his duties as Assistant to 
the Kesident at Cutch. Rescued in the autumn from 
the obscurity of this appointment, he was despatched to 
the Court of the Ameers of Sindh. The duties of the 
Mission were performed with judgment and ability. The 
Ameers consented to the proposal for the survey of the 
Indus, and would gladly have entered into more inti¬ 
mate relations with the British Government had it been 
considered, upon our part, desirable to strengthen the 
alliance. 

Whilst still in the Sindh country, Burnes received 
instructions from the Supreme Government of India to 
hold himself in readiness to undertake the charge of the 
“ commercial” mission which it had been determined 
to despatch to Afghanistan, and to proceed to Bombay 
to make preparations for the journey. He reached 
that Presidency in the course of October, 1836, and 
on the 26th of November, accompanied by Lieutenant 
Leech, of the Bombay Engineers, and Lieutenant Wood, 
of the Indian Navy,* Burnes sailed from Bombay to 
“ work out the policy of opening the River Indus to 
commerce”—that policy, the splendid results of which, 
years afterwards, when our army, our treasure, and our 
reputation, had been buried in the passes of Afghanistan, 
Lord Palmerston openly boasted in Parliament amidst 
the derisive cheers of the House. 

Taking the Sindh route, Burnes presented himself at 
the Court of the Ameers, and was hospitably received. 
The English officer explained the object of his mission; 
talked about the navigation of the Indus; and dvjglt 
encouragingly upon the instructions which he had re¬ 
ceived, “ to endeavour to infuse confidence into all classes 

i, * Lorf of the Bom- the Mission in transitu. Mohun Lai 

bay Medical Estbalishment, joined also accompanied it. 