



170 THE “ COMMERCIAL MISSION TO CAUBVL. 


the age of twenty, was appointed Persian interpreter 
to a force assembled for a hostile demonstration against 
Sindh, rendered necessary by the continued border feuds 
which were disturbing the peace of our frontier. In a 
little while he became distinguished as a topographer no 
less than as a linguist; and as a writer of memoirs, and 
designer of maps of little-known tracts of country, soon 
rose into favour and repute. Attached to the depart¬ 
ment of the Quartermaster-General, he was employed 
upon the survey of the north-western frontier of the 
Bombay Presidency, and shortly afterwards was ap¬ 
pointed Assistant Political Agent in Cutch, a province 
with which he had made himself intimately acquainted. 
In the young officer a spirit of enterprise was largely 
blended with the love of scientific research. He was 
eager to push his inquiries and to extend his travels into 
the countries watered by the Indus and its tributaries— 
the fabulous rivers on the banks of which the Macedo¬ 
nian had encamped his victorious legions. It was not 
long before occasion offered for the gratification of his 
cherished desires. A batch of splendid English horses 
had been despatched, in 1830, to Bombay, as a present 
to Runjeet Singh; and Sir John Malcolm, then Go¬ 
vernor of that Presidency, selected Alexander Bumes to 
conduct the complimentary mission to Lahore.* In¬ 
structed, at the same time, to neglect no opportunity of 
acquiring information relative to the geography of the 
Indus, he proceeded through the country of the Ameers 
of Sindh, though not without some obstruction, from the 
jealousy and suspicion of the Talpoor rulers.f At the 

„ * William Napier says, that ver, in 1831, under pretence of con- 
an enlightened desire to ascertain veying presents to liunjeet Singh.”— 
the commercial capabilities of the T Conquest of Sindh.l 

Lord Ellenborough, f And, doubtless, very absurd and 
i^esident of the Indian Board uncalled for the jealousy was consi- 
Conteol, to employ the late Sir dered in those days. As Bumes as- 
Alexander Burnes to explore the ri- cended the Indus, a Syud on the 



CAKEEB OE AEEXANOEB BUBNES. 


171 


Sikh capital he was received with becoming courtesy 
and consideration. The old lion of the Punjaub flung 
himself into the arms of the young British officer, and 
retained him as an honoured guest for a month. Leaving 
Lahore, Bumes crossed the Sutlej, and visited Lood- 
hianah, where, little dreaming of the closer connexion 
which would one day exist between them, he made the 
acquaintance of the ex-King, Soojah-ool-Moolk, and his 
blind brother, Zemaun Shah. “Had I but my king¬ 
dom,” said the former to Bumes, “ how glad I should be 
to see an Englishman at Caubul, and to open the road 
between Europe and India.” 

From Loodhianah the traveller proceeded to Simlah, 
to lay an account of his journeying and its results at 
the feet of the Governor-General. Lord William Ben- 
tinck was then recruiting his exhausted energies in the 
bracing climate of that hill station. He received the 
traveller with kindly consideration, and listened to his 
narrations with interest and attention. Full of enthu¬ 
siasm, with his appetite for enterprise stimulated by his 
recent adventures, Burnes pressed upon the Governor- 
General the expediency of extending the fields of geo¬ 
graphical and commercial enquiry upon which he had 
entered, and succeeded in obtaining the sanction of the 
Governor-General to an expedition into Central Asia, 
to be undertaken under the patronage of government, 
but not avowedly in connexion with any public objects. 