



CHABACTEE of LOBD AUCKLAND. 


163 


uttered with a grave sincerity, and expressed the genuine 
aspirations of the man. 

Nor did the early days of his ^vemment disappoint 
the expectations of those who had looked for a pains¬ 
taking, laborious administrator, zealous in the prosecu¬ 
tion of measures calculated to develop the resources of 
the countiy, and to advance the happiness of the people. 
It appeared, indeed, that with something less of the un¬ 
compromising energy and self-den3dng honesty of Lord 
William Bentinck, but with an equal purity of bene¬ 
volence, he was treading in the footsteps of his prede¬ 
cessor. The promotion of native education, and the 
expansion of the industrial resources of the country, 
were pursuits far more congenial to his nature than the 
assembling of armies and the invasion of empires. He 
had no taste for the din and confusion of the camp; 
no appetite for foreign conquest. Quiet and unobtru¬ 
sive in his manners, of a somewhat cold and impassive 
temperament, and altogether of a reserved and retiring 
nature, he was not one to court excitement or to desire 
notoriety. He would fain have passed his allotted years 
of office in the prosecution of those small measures of 
domestic reform which, individually, attract little atten¬ 
tion, but, in the aggregate, affect mightily the happiness 
of the people. He belonged, indeed, to that respectable 
class of governors whose merits are not sufficiently pro¬ 
minent to demand ample recognition by their cotempo¬ 
raries, but whose noiseless, unapplauded achievements 
entitle them to the praise of the historian and the grati¬ 
tude of after-ages. 

It was not possible, however intently his mind might 
have been fixed upon the details of internal administra¬ 
tion, that he should have wholly disregarded the a^res- 
sive designs of Persia and the obvious intrigues of the 
Russian Government. The letters written from lime to 

M 2 



164 THE “ commercial” mission to caubul. 

time by the British minister at the Persian Court were 
read at first, in the Calcutta Council-Chamber, with 
a vague interest rather than with any excited appre¬ 
hensions. It was little anticipated that a British 
army would soon be encamped before the capital of 
Afghanistan, but it was plain that events were taking 
shape in Central Asia over which the British-Indian 
Government could not afford to slumber. At all events, 
it was necessary in such a conjuncture to get together 
some little body of facts, to acquire some historical and 
geographical information relating to the countries lying 
between the Indian frontier and the eastern boundaries 
of the Russian Empire. Secretaries then began to write 
“ notes,” and members of Council to study them. Sum¬ 
maries of political events, genealogical trees, tables of 
routes and distances, were all in great requisition during 
the first years of Lord Auckland’s administration. 

The printed works of Elphinstone,Conolly, and Burnes, 
of Malcolm and Fraser, were to be seen on the breakfast- 
tables of our Indian statesmen, or in their hands as they 
wore driven to Council. Then came Sir John M‘Neiirs 
startling pamphlet on the “Progress and Present Posi¬ 
tion of Russia in the East.” M‘Neill, Urquhart, and 
others were writing up the Eastern question at home; 
reviewers and pamphleteers of smaller note were rush¬ 
ing into the field with their small collections of facts 
and arguments. It was demonstrated past contradiction, 
that if Russia were not herself advancing by stealthy 
steps towards India, she was pushing Persia forward in 
the same easterly direction. If all this was not very 
alarming, it was, at least, worth thinking about. It was 
plainly the duty of Indian statesmen to acquaint them¬ 
selves with the politics of Central Asia, and the geo¬ 
graphy of the countries through which the invasion of 
India must be attempted. It was only right that they 