



RECEPTION OF THE MISSION AT CAUBUL, 


176 


by a declaration of the happy and close friendship which 
subsisted between the British and the powers on the 
Indus.” From Hyderabad he proceeded to Bahwulpore; 
and thence to Dehra Gazee Khan. At the latter place 
he received intelligence of the battle of Jumrood; 
and, pushing on to the neighbourhood of Peshawur, 
soon found himself near the theatre of war. jFrom 
Peshawur to Jumrood, Avitabile* drove the British 
officers in his carriage. The deputation that was to 
conduct them through the Khybur Pass had not made 
its appearance. They were suffering martyrdom from 
the effiuvia of the putrifying corpses of the Afghan and 
Sikh soldiers who had fallen in the recent conflict; and, 
at all hazards, they determined to push on. The Khybur 
was cleared without accident or obstruction. Friendly 
deputations from the Ameer greeted the British officers 
as they advanced. On the 20th of September, they en¬ 
tered Caubul. 

They were received “ with great pomp and splendour.” 
At the head of a fine body of Afghan cavalry Akbar 
Khan came out to meet them. Placing Burnes on an 
elephant beside him, he conducted the British officers to 
his father’s Court. The Ameer, intent on doing honour 
to the occasion, had requested the principal citizens of 
Caubul to unite with him in welcoming the strangers. 
Nothing could have been more honourable than the 
reception of the British Mission—more indicative of 
the high estimation in which the British were held by 
the ruler of Caubul. A spacious and beautiful garden 
within the Balia Hissar, and near the palace, was allotted 
as the residence of the Mission. 

On the following day, “ with many expressions of his 
high sense of the great honour conferred upon him,” 

• Avitabile, an Italian by birth, was Singh, and at that time Governor of 
a ijeneral m tne service of Kunjeet Peshawur. 



176 THE “ COMMERCIAL ” MISSION TO CAUBUL. 


Dost Mahomed formally received the representtaives of 
the British Government. Burnes submitted his creden¬ 
tials. The letters were opened by the Ameer himself, 
and read by his minister, Meerza Samad Khan. They 
introduced Burnes to his Highness solely as a commercial 
agent. The flimsy veil was soon dropped. It was evident 
from the first that whatever might have been his instruc¬ 
tions—whatever might have been the proximate, or 
rather the ostensible object of the mission, Burnes had 
ulterior designs, and that he, in reality, went to Caubul 
either as a spy or a political diplomatist. He had not 
been three days at the Afghan capital, before he wrote 
to Mr. Macnaghten, that he should take an early oppor¬ 
tunity of reporting what transpired at the Ameer’s Court; 
and ten days afterwards we find him announcing “ the 
result of his inquiries on the subject of Persian influence 
in Caubul, and the exact power which the Kuzzilbash, 
or Persian party resident in this city, have over the 
politics of Afghanistan.” To a private friend he wrote 
more distinctly: “I came to look after commerce, to 
superintend surveys and examine passes of mountains, 
and likewise certainly to see into affairs and judge of 
what was to be done hereafter; but the hereafter has 
already arrived.”* It is hard to say what our Oriental 
diplomatists would do if they were forbidden the use of 
the word “ commerce.” It launched Burnes fairly into 
the sea of A%han politics; and then he cut it adrift. 