

He had, indeed, at this time, apart from the com¬ 
mercial bearings of the case, httle more than a dim 
notion of obtaining a clearer insight into the politics of 



£ABLY TRAVELS IN CENTRAL ASIA. 167 

Central Asia. Since distant rumours of an Afghan 
invasion had disturbed the strong mind of Lord Welles^ 
ley, much had been learnt both in India and in England 
concerning the countries between the Indus and the 
Oxus. The civil and military services of the East India 
Company, numbering in their ranks, as they ever have 
done, men of lofty enterprise and great ability, had, since 
the commencement of the century, brought, by their 
graphic writings, the countries and the people of Central 
Asia visibly before their home-staying countrymen. Be¬ 
fore the close of the eighteenth century but one English 
traveller—a Bengal civilian, named Forster—had made 
his way from the banks of the Ganges across the rivers 
of the Punjaub to the lakes of Cashmere, and thence 
descending into the country below, had entered the for¬ 
midable pass of the Khybur, and penetrated through 
the defiles of Jugdulluck and Koord-Caubul to the 
Afghan capital, whence he had journeyed on, by Ghuznee, 
Candahar, and Herat, to the borders of the Caspian Sea. 
The journey was undertaken in 1783 and the following 
year, but it was not until some fifteen years afterwards 
that the account of his travels was given to the world. 
Honourable alike to his enterprise and his intelligence, 
the book exhibits at once how much, during the last 
seventy years, the Afghan Empire, and how little the 
Afghan character, is changed. 

The great work of Mountstuart Elphinstone, published 
some fifteen years after the appearance of Mr. Forster’s 
volume, soon became the text-book of all who sought for 
information relating to the history and geography of the 
Douranee Empire. But Elphinstone saw little of the 
country or the people of Afghanistan; he acquired in¬ 
formation, and he reproduced it with marvellous fidelity 
and distinctness, and would probably not have written 
a better book if he had travelled and had seen more. 



168 THE “ commekcial” mission to caubui.. 

It was left for a later generation to explore the tracts of 
country which were unvisited by the ambassador; and 
for a later still to elicit encouragement and reward. 

Years passed away before government began to re¬ 
cognise the value of such inquiries. When Mr. Moor- 
croft, of the Company’s Stud-Department, a man of 
high courage and enterprise, accompanied by Mr. Tre- 
beclc, the son of a Calcutta lawyer, set out, in 1819, 
in the mixed character of a horse-dealer and a merchant, 
upon his long and perilous journey; spent the last six 
years of his life in exploring the countries of Ladakh, 
Cashmere, Afghanistan, Balkh, and Bokhara ; and died 
at last in the inhospitable regions beyond the Hindoo- 
Koosh, nothing but absolute discouragement and oppo¬ 
sition emanated from a government that had not the pre¬ 
science to see the importance of such investigations. 