

water's edge lifted up his hands, and he said that although some of his 
exclaimed, Sindh is now gone, since reports respecting their immediate 
the English have seen the river, designs might not be quite cor^ 
which is the road to its conquest.” rect, yet this tribe never began as 
Nearly twenty years before. Sir James friends without ending as enemies, 
Mackintosh had written in his journal: by seizing the country which they 
“ A Hindoo merchant, named Der- entered with the most amicable pro- 
ryana, under the mask of friendship, fessions.” ** A shrewd dog,” said 
had been continually alarming the Mackintosh; but he did not live to 
Sindh Government against the Eng- see the depths of the man^s shrewd- 
lish mission. On being reproved, ness. 



172 THE “ commercial” mission to caubul. 


He set out on his overland journey to England ostensibly 
as a private traveller, but protected by passports de¬ 
signed to show that he was travelling under the coun¬ 
tenance of the government which he served. 

Accompanied by Dr. Gerard, an assistant-surgeon on 
the Bengal establishment; by a young native surveyor, 
named Mahomed Ali; and by Mohun Lai, a Hindoo 
youth of Cashmerian descent, who had been educated 
at the Delhi College, and patronised by Mr. Trevelyan, 
Burnes set out on his long and perilous journey. Start¬ 
ing at the commencement of the new year of 1832, the tra¬ 
vellers crossed the Punjaub, and proceeded by the route 
of Peshawur and Jellalabad to Caubul. Here they were 
hospitably received by Dost Mahomed. The character 
of the Caubul chief and of the Afghan nation impressed 
themselves favorably upon the mind of Alexander 
Burnes. Of the latter he spoke as a simple-minded, 
sober people, of frank, open manners, impulsive and 
variable almost to childishness. He had seen and con¬ 
versed with Shah Soojah at Loodhianah, and declared 
his conviction that the exiled Prince had not energy 
sufficient to empower him to regain his throne or tact 
sufficient to enable him to keep it. The character of 
the Barukzye Sirdar now presented, in the eyes of the 
English officer, a favorable contrast to that of the Sud- 
dozye Prince. He saw before him a man of no common 
ability, with a well-disciplined mind, a high sense of 
justice, and a general appreciation of his duties and re¬ 
sponsibilities, as a ruler of the people, not unworthy of a 
Christian potentate. I do not believe that from that time 
he ever changed his opinion of the man. 

Leaving Caubul, Burnes and his fellow-travellers 
ascended the mountain-paths of the Hindoo-Koosh, and 
journeying onward by the route of Syghan and Koon- 
dooz, debouched into the valley of the Oxus, followed 



BURNES’S RECEPTION IN ENGLAND. 173 

the course of that river for many days, and then made their 
way to Bokhara. After two months spent in that city, 
they re-crossed the Oxus and journeyed westward to the 
Persian frontier. Visiting Meshed, Teheran, Ispahan, 
and Shiraz, and making the acquaintance on the way 
both of Abbas Meerza and the Shah, they proceeded to 
Bushire and Bombay. From Bombay, Bumes pushed 
on to Calcutta, and early in 1833 had laid before the 
Governor-General the results of his Central-Asian travels. 
Lord William Bentinck received him with marked atten¬ 
tion and respect, and sent him to England, that he might 
impart, in person, to the home authorities the information 
with which he was laden. 