

In 1828 Mr. Edward Sterling, an officer of the Bengal 
civil service, being in England on furlough, undertook 
to return to India by the route of Khorassan and Af¬ 
ghanistan. From Sir John Macdonald, the Resident 
Minister at Teheran, he received every encouragement 
and assistance; but the Indian Government looked 
slightingly upon his labours, and neglected the man. 
The information he had acquired was not wanted; and 
he was put out of employment because he had over¬ 
stayed, by a few weeks, the period of his leave of 
abisence. Those were days when no thought of an 
invasion from the westward overshadowed the minds 
of our Indian statesmen.* But when, a few years after- 

* o apathy,” says ragement for the production of 

Mr. Sterling, “ prevailed, and the it. Neglect had been preceded by 
members of the government could the deprivation of my appointment, 
not be roused to take an interest I was no longer collector of Agra; 

T L knowledge that situation had been disposed of 

that I had been in these interest- nearly two months prior to my reach¬ 
ing countries produced no desire ing the Presidency: my return was 
for intelligence regarding them, deemed hopeless, and my death anti- 
ana my reception gave no encou- cipated.” 



ARTHUR CONOLLY. 


169 


wards, a young officer of the Bengal cavalry, named 
Arthur Conolly—a man of an earnest and noble nature, 
running over with the most benevolent enthusiasm, 
and ever suffering his generous impulses to shoot far 
in advance of his prudence and discretion—set out 
from London, proceeded, through Eussia, across the 
Caucasus, and thence through Persia and Khorassan, 
accompanying an Afghan army from Meshed to Herat, 
and journeyed on from the latter place to Candahar, 
and, southward, through Beloochistan and Sindh to 
India, there was little chance of the information which 
he collected on his travels being received with ingra¬ 
titude and neglect, and held as of no account. The 
period which elapsed between the time when those 
travels were completed and the date at which their 
written results were given to the world, deprived Arthur 
Conolly of some portion of the credit which he might 
otherwise have received, and of the interest which at¬ 
tached to his publication. Another officer had by this 
time made his way by another route, through the unex¬ 
plored regions of Central Asia, and laid before the 
government and the country an account of his wan¬ 
derings. On him, when Lord Auckland bethought 
himself of despatching a commercial agent to Caubul, 
the choice of the Governor-General fell. 

Born in the year 1805, at Montrose, and educated in 
the academy of that town, Alexander Bumes proceeded 
to Bombay at the early age of sixteen, and, at a period of 
his career when the majority of young men are master¬ 
ing the details of company-drill, and wasting their time 
in the strenuous idleness of cantonment life, had recom¬ 
mended himself, by his proficiency in the native lan¬ 
guages, to the government under which he served. 
Whilst yet in his teens, he was employed to translate 
the Persian documents of the Suddur Court, and, at 