

♦ Kamran had threatened Canda- from Dost Mahomed, had sent an 
har on more than one occasion; and emissary to the Bombay Government, 
at the end of 1835 Mr. Masson re- offering to cede their countir to the 
ported to the Supreme Government British!—[il/iS. Records,1 I merely 
that the Sirdars of that place, de- give this as a report sent down by the 
spairing of obtaining any assistance English news-writer. 



160 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


Herat, and he fell readily into an alliance which he 
hoped would place that principality securely in his 
hands. 

With very different feelings Dost Mahomed Khan 
viewed the advance of the Persian army. He wished 
Mahomed Shah to assist him in a religious war against 
the Sikhs; but even an alliance based upon these grounds 
he was willing to forego, if he could secure the friendly 
offices of the British. A new actor was by this time 
upon the scene, and new schemes of policy were begin¬ 
ning to unfold themselves before the Ameer. Little 
did he think, when he received with honour, and took 
friendly counsel with a British officer sent to his Court 
to discuss matters of commerce, how soon that officer 
would again enter the Afghan capital accompanied by a 
British army. Burnes appeared at Caubul—Mahomed 
Shah at Herat; and the seeds of the Afghan war were 
sown. 


The various treaties referred to in this Introductory Book will he found 
in an Appendix at the end of the I'olume, 



THE “ COMMERCIAE” MISSION TO CAUBUL. 161 


BOOK II. 
[ 1835 — 1838 .] 


CHAPTER I. 

[1835—1837.] 

The Commercial Mission to Caubul—Arrival of Lord Auckland—His Cha¬ 
racter—Alexander Burnes—His Travels in Central Asia—Deputation 
to tlie Court of Dost IVIaliomed—Reception by the Ameer—Negotiations 
at Caubul—Failure of the Mission. 

In the autumn of 1835 Lord Auckland was appointed 
Governor-General of India. The Whigs had just re¬ 
turned to power. The brief Tory interregnum which 
had preceded the restoration to office of Lord Melbourne 
and his associates had been marked by the appointment 
to the Indian Viccroyship of Lord Heytesbury—a noble¬ 
man of high character and approved diplomatic skill. 
His official friends boasted largely of the excellence of 
the clioice, and prophesied that tlie most beneficial re¬ 
sults would flow from his government of I^jdia. But 
nothing of the Governor-General ever devolved upon him, 
except the outfit. The Whig ministers cancelled the ap¬ 
pointment, and, after a time, selected Lord Auckland to 
fill the rudely-vacated place. 

The appointment occasioned some surprise, but raised 
little indignation. In India, the current knowledge of 
Lord Auckland and his antecedents was of the smallest 

VOL. T. M 



162 THE “ COMMEBCIAI-” MISSION TO CAUBUL. 


possible amount. In England, the general impression 
was, that if not a brilliant or a profound man, he was at 
least a safe one. The son of a Tory lawyer, who had 
been one of the most' consistent supporters of Pitt’s 
administration, and had been raised to the peerage in 
reward for his services, he was generally regarded as one 
of the steadiest and most moderate of the Whig party. 
As an industrious and conscientious public servant, 
assiduous in his attention to business, and anxious to 
compensate by increased application for the deficiencies 
of native genius, he was held in good esteem by his 
colleagues and respected by all who had official inter¬ 
course with him. India did not, it was supposed, at 
that time demand for the administration of her affairs 
any large amount of masculine vigour or fertility of re¬ 
source. The country was in a state of profound tran¬ 
quillity. The treasury was overfiowing. The quietest 
ruler was likely to be the best. There was abundant 
work to be done; but it was all of a pacific character. 
In entrusting that work to Lord Auckland, the ministry 
thought that they entrusted it to safe hands. The new 
Governor-General had everything to learn; but he was a 
man of methodical habits of business, apt in the acquisition 
of knowledge, with no overweening confidence in himself, 
and no arrogant contempt for others. His ambition was 
all of the most laudable kind. It was an ambition to 
do good. When he declared, at the farewell banquet 
given to him by the Directors of the East-India Com¬ 
pany, that he “ looked with exultation to the new pros¬ 
pects opening out before him, affording him an opportu¬ 
nity of doing good to his fellow-creatures—of promoting 
education and knowledge—of improving the adminis¬ 
tration of justice in India—of extending the blessings of 
good government and happiness to millions in India,” it 
was felt by all who knew him that the words were 