

The Barukzye Sirdars of Afghanistan watched the 
advance of the Persians with evident satisfaction. They 
had never ceased to see in Shah Kamran the murderer 
of Futteh Khan. They had never ceased to regard 
with impatience and irritation that last remnant of 
Suddozye supremacy which marred the completeness of 
Barukzye rule, and at times even threatened to extend 
itself towards the East in an effort to restore the old 
dynasty of the successors of Ahmed Shah. The ap¬ 
proach of the Persian army seemed now to promise at 


* Though we need not seek the 
causes of this expedition in anything 
either nearer or more remote than 
the ambition of the young Shah and 
the intrigues of the Bussian Govern¬ 
ment, a pretext was put forth by or 
for I'ersia of a more plausible kind. 
It was urged that the Heratees had 
carried off and sold into slavery 
the subjects of the Persian Shah. 
There is no doubt of the fact. But 
it was never put prominently for¬ 


ward by the Shah, who always urged 
that Herat had no right to be 
independent. Another pretext, but 
k weak one, for undertaking the 
war was also alleged. Hulakoo, 
son of the Prince of Kerman, after 
his father wa.s taken and blinded, 
and Kerman occupied by the Shah’s 
troops, fled to Herat, and from 
thence endeavoured to excite dis¬ 
turbances in Kain, Khaf, and Eastern 
Kerman. 



INTRIGUES OF THE CANDAHAB SIRDARS. 


159 


least the overthrow of Shah Kamran; and the Gandahar 
brothers looked eagerly for the transfer of the Heratee 
principality to themselves.* 

To cement the alliance with Mahomed Shah, and to 
secure the most advantageous terms for himself and his 
brothers, Kohun Dil Khan determined to send one of 
his own sons to the Persian camp. Dost Mahomed dis¬ 
approved of the movement. “ If you look upon me,” 
he wrote to the Gandahar chief, “ as greater than your¬ 
self, do not send your son to Persia. In the event of 
your not attending to my advice, such circumstances will 
happen as will make you bite the finger of repentance.” 
But the Gandahar chief was not to be turned from his 
purpose by the remonstrances of the Ameer. The bait 
held out by Persia was too tempting to be resisted; and 
Russia was standing by, ready to guarantee the alluring 
promises of Mahomed Shah. M. Goutte, the Russian 
agent with the Persian army, wrote letters of encourage¬ 
ment to Kohun Dil Khan, and General Berowski en¬ 
dorsed the flattering assurances they contained. “ It is 
better,” wrote the former, “ to despatch Omar Khan with¬ 
out apprehension, and I will write to the Persian Go¬ 
vernment to remove all apprehensions at your sending 
your son. He will be treated with great distinction by 
the Shah and his nobles.” “ Nothing but good,” said 
the latter, “ will result from this your connexion with 
the Shah ; so much good, indeed, that I can not put it 
to paper. Be convinced that your serving the Shah will 
turn out every way to your advantage.” The Gandahar 
chief was easily convinced. He had fixed his eye upon 