



CORRESPONDENCE WITH DOST MAHOMED. 


165 


should have been seen tracing on incorrect maps the 
march of a Russian army from St. Petersburgh to Cal¬ 
cutta, by every possible and impossible route, now floun¬ 
dering among the inhospitable steppes, now parching 
on the desert of Merve. The Russian army might not 
come at last; but it was clearly the duty of an Indian 
statesman to know how it would endeavour to come. 

It was in the spring of 1836 that Dost Mahomed 
addressed a letter of congratulation to Lord Auckland 
on his assumption of the office of Governor-General. 
“ The field of my hopes,” he wrote, “ which had before 
been chilled by the cold blast of wintry times, has by 
the happy tidings of your Lordship’s arrival become the 
envy of the garden of paradise.” Then adverting to the 
unhappy state of his relations with the Sikhs, he said: 
“ The late transactions in this quarter, the conduct of 
reckless and misguided Sikhs, and their breach of treaty, 
are well known to your Lordship. Communicate to me 
whatever may suggest itself to your wisdom for the 
settlement of the aflairs of this country, that it may 
serve as a rule for my guidance. I hope,” said the 
Ameer, in conclusion, ‘‘ that your Lordship will consider 
me and my country as your own;” but he little thought 
how in effect this Oriental compliment would be accepted 
as a solemn invitation, and the hope be literally fulfilled. 
Three years afterwards Lord Auckland, considering Dost 
Mahomed’s country his own, had given it away to Shah 
Soqjah. 

To this friendly letter the Governor-General returned 
a friendly reply. It was his wish, he said, that the 
Afghans “should be a flourishing and united nation;” 
it was his wish, too, that Dost Mahomed should encourage 
a just idea of the expediency of promoting the navigation 
of the Indus. He hinted that he should probably soon 
“ depute some gentlemen” to the Ameer’s Court to dis- 



166 THE “ C0MMEBCIA1-” MISSION TO CAUBUL. 


pUss with him certain commercial topics j and added, 
■with reference to Dost Mahomed’s unhappy relations 
with the Sikhs, and his eagerness to obtain assistance 
from any quarter: “My friend, you are aware that it is 
not the practice of the British Government to interfere 
with the aflairs of other independent states.” With 
what feelings, three years afterwards, when a British 
army was marching upon his capital, the Ameer must 
have remembered these words, it is not difficult to con¬ 
jecture. 

This project of a commercial mission to Afghanistan 
was no new conception of which Lord Auckland was 
the parent. It had at least been thought of by Lord 
William Bentinck—and, certainly, with no ulterior 
designs. That Lord Auckland, when he wrote to Dost 
Mahomed about “deputing some gentlemen” to Caubul 
to talk over commercial matters with the Ameer, had 
much more intention than his predecessor of driving the 
Barukzye Sirdars into exile, is not to be asserted or 
believed. He may have seen that such a mission might 
be turned to other than commercial uses; he may have 
thought it desirable that the gentlemen employed should 
collect as much information at the Ameer’s Court as 
the advantages of their position would enable them to 
acquire. But at this time ho would have started back 
at the barest mention of a military expedition beyond 
the Indus, and would have scouted a proposal to sub¬ 
stitute for the able and energetic ruler of Caubul that 
luckless Suddozye Prince—the pensioner of Loodhianah, 
—whose whole career had been such a series of disasters 
as had never before been written down against the name 
of any one man. 