

In the mean while the attention of the Mission was 
directed to the state of affairs at Candahar. The chief 
of that place, Kohun Dil Khan, had not only declared 
his willingness to embrace the Persian alliance, but had, 
as we have seen, determined on sending his second son, 
with the Persian Agent, to Mahomed Shah, as the bearer 
of presents to the Shah and the Russian embassy. Against 
this course of procedure Dost Mahomed had protested. 
“ Oh! my brother,” he wrote, “ if you will do these 



CONDUCT or THE CANDAHAK SIEDABS. 179 

things without my concurrence, what will the world say 
to it ?” There can be no doubt of the Ameer’s sincerity. 
Indeed, it was the conviction that the Caubul chief was 
entering with his whole soul into the British alliance, to 
the exclusion, as it was believed, of the Candahar Sirdars, 
that drove the latter to strengthen their alliance with 
the Persian Court. Bumes himself had no doubt that 
the Ameer was at this time acting a straightforward part. 
On the 30th of October he wrote to a private friend: 
“ Here a hundred things are passing of the highest in¬ 
terest.Dost Mahomed Khan has fallen into all 

our views, and in so doing has either thought for him¬ 
self or followed my counsel, but for doing the former I 
give him every credit, and things now stand so that 
I think we are on the threshold of a negotiation with 
King Kunjeet, the basis of which will bo his withdrawal 
from Peshawur, and a Barukzye receiving it as a tribu¬ 
tary of Lahore, the chief of Caubul sending his son to 
ask pardon. What say you to this after all that has 
been urged of Dost Mahomed Khan’s putting forth ex¬ 
travagant pretensions ? Runjcet will accede to the plan 

I am certain.I have, in behalf of Government, 

agreed to stand as mediator with the parties, and Dost 
Mahomed has cut asunder all his connexion with Russia 
and Persia, and refused to receive the ambassador from 
the Shah now at Candahar. His brothers at that city 
have, however, caressed the Persian Elchee all the more 
for this, and 1 have sent them such a Junius as, I be¬ 
lieve, will astonish them. I had, indeed, reason to act 
promptly, for they have a son setting out for Teheran 
with presents to the Shah and the Russian ambassador; 
and I hope I shall be in time to explain our hostility to 
such conduct. Everything here has, indeed, run well; 
and but for our deputation at the time it happened, the 

n2 





180 THE “commercial” MISSION TO CAUBDL. 


house we occupy would have been tenanted by a Rus¬ 
sian Agent and a Persian Elchee.”* 

On the 31st of October, Burnes wrote to Mr. Mac- 
naghten that another conference had taken place on the 
24th between himself and the Ameer, and that what 
passed on that occasion “ set Dost Mahomed’s conduct 
in a light that must prove, as I believe, very gratifying 
to Government.” On the British Envoy expressing the 
regret which he felt on being made acquainted with the 
misguided conduct of the Candahar Sirdars, the Ameer 
had declared that if such conduct was distressing to the 
British agent, it was much more distressing to him; that 
he himself repented of having ever listened to the over¬ 
tures of Persia; that he would take care publicly to 
manifest his desire to strengthen his relations with the 
British Government, and do everything in his power tb 
induce his Candahar brothers to adopt a wiser course 
of policy. Burnes replied that he was delighted to hear 
the expression of such sentiments; but distinctly stated 
“ that neither he nor his brothers were to found hopes 
of receiving aid from the British Government;” that so 
long as they conducted themselves with propriety they 
might rely upon the sympathy of the British Govern¬ 
ment, but that they must, by no means, expect to derive 
anything more substantial from the alliance.f Dis- 