

* Unpublished Correspondence of Russia has come forward with offers 
Sir A, Burnes, which are certainly substantial. Persia 

t And, on the 30th December, has been lavish in her promises, and 
Burnes, with reference to this pro- Bokhara and other States have not 
mised sympathy, wrote, in the follow- been backward. Yet, in all that has 
ing words, to Mr. Macnaghten. The passed or is daily transpiring, the chief 
passage was not published in the offi- of Caubul declares that he prefers the 
cial correspondence. It was thought sympathy andfriendly offices of the -Bri- 
better to suppress it:—“ The present tish to all these offers^ however alluring 
position of the British Government tkey may seem^ from Persia or from 
at this capital wpears to me a most the Emperor —which certainly places 
gratifying prooi of the estimation in his good sense in a light more than 
which it IS held by the Afghan nation, prominent, and, in my humble judg- 



MODIFICATION OP BDENBS’S INSTRUCTIONS. 181 


coura^ng as this was, the Ameer still courted the Bri¬ 
tish alliance—still dedared that he would exert himself 
to the utmost to detach his Candahar brothers from 
their connexion with Persia, and even, if desired by the 
British agent, would commence active operations against 
them. Discountenancing the idea of an active move¬ 
ment against Candahar, Bumes commended the good 
feeling of the Ameer, and exhorted him to do his best, 
by pacific means, to break down Kohun Dil’s connexion 
with Persia—an effort whicli “ could not fail to be re¬ 
ceived by the British Government as a strong mark of 
his desire for our friendship, and of great good sense.” 

Bumes, who had gone to Caubul, as a commercial 
agent, was at this time without any political instructions. 
As he ascended the Indus, he had received letters from 
Government, somewhat modifying the character of his 
mission, and placing a larger amount of discretion in his 
hands.* But he did not feel that he was in a position to 
deal with the Peshawur question without positive in¬ 
structions from the Supreme Government; so all that 
he could now do was to temporise, to amuse Dost Ma¬ 
homed with vague assurances of sympathy and good¬ 
will, until the wishes of the Governor-General were con¬ 
veyed to him in a specific shape. He could promise 

ment, proves that, by an earlier at- scene of carnage, where, instead of 
tention to these countries, we might embarrassing my government, I feel 
have escaped the whole of these in- myself in a situation to do good. It 
trigues, and held long since a stable is this latitude throughout life that 
influence in Caubul. — [Ungarbled has made me what I am, if I am any- 
Correspondence of Sir A. Bumes.'] thing, and I can hardly say how 
* “As I approached Caubul,’' he grateful I feel to Lord Auckland, 
wrote to a private friend, on the 5th .... 1 have not as yet got the re¬ 
ef July, “ war broke out with the plies to my recommendation on our 
Afghans and Sikhs, and my position line of policy in Caubul, consequent 
became embarrassing. I was even on a mscovered intrigue of Bussia, 
ordered by express to pause, and and on the Caubul chief throwing 
while hanging on my oars another himself in despair on Perso-Bussian 
express stul cries pause, but places a arms. I have at last something to 
vast latitude in my hands, and ‘for- do, and I hope to do it well.”—[TVi- 
ward’ is my motto—forward to the vate Correspondence of Sir A, Bumes."} 