

In the mean while he determined to despatch at once 
an officer of the British mission to Candahar. That 
officer was Lieutenant Leech. On Christmas-day, 
Burnes sat down and wrote him a long and clearly- 
worded letter of instructions. It was hoped that the 
presence of a British agent at Candahar would keep 
Persia in check, and if not, he could despatch to Caubul 
the earliest intelligence of the advance of the Persian 
army, and so enable Burnes to counteract the movement 
with the least possible delay.* 

* “ The chiefs of Candahar,’* he thority to do so; but am I to stand 
wrote a few days afterwards, to a by and see us ruined at Candahar, 
mrivate friend, “ had gone over to when the Government tell me an at- 
Persia. 1 have detached them and tack on Herat would be most im- 
offered them British protection and palatable. Herat has been besieged 
^h i£ they would recede, and if fifty days, and if the Persians move 
Persia attacked them. I have no au- on Candahar, I am off there with the 



184 THE commercial'^ mission to caubul. 


Burnes Exceeded his instructions, and was severely 
censured by the Governor-General. Lord Auckland 
was then on his way to Simlah; and from Bareilly Mr. 
Secretary Macnaghten wrote a long letter to the Caubul 
agent, at the close of which he touched upon the pro¬ 
mises made to the Candahar chiefs. “ It is with great 
pain,” he said, that his Lordship must next proceed to 
advert to the subject of the promises which you have 
held out to the chiefs of Candahar. These promises 
were entirely unauthorised by any part of your instruc¬ 
tions. They are most unnecessarily made in unqualified 
terms, and they would, if supported, commit the Govern¬ 
ment upon the gravest questions of general policy. His 
Lordship is compelled, therefore, decidedly to disapprove 
them. He is only withheld from a direct disavowal of 
these engagements to the chiefs of Candahar, because 
such disavowal would carry with it the declaration of a 
difference between you and your Government, and might 
weaken your personal influence, and because events 
might, in this interval, have occurred which would ren¬ 
der such a course unnecessary. But the rulers of Can¬ 
dahar must not be allowed to rest in confidence upon 
promises so given, and should affairs continue in the 
same uncertainty as that which prevailed at the date of 
your last despatches, you will endeavour to set yourself 
right with the chiefs, and will feel yourself bound in 
good faith to admit that you have exceeded your in¬ 
structions and held out hopes, which you find, upon 
communication with your Government, cannot be realised. 
After what has been stated, his Lordship feels that he 
need not enlarge on his strict injunction that you in 

AmcCT and his forces, and mean to and I am glad to say I am up to it in 
We have good health and all that, and was never 
s^ft—forty-six guns and stout Af- more braced in my life.”—[Corrc- 
ghans, as brave as irregular troops spondence, of Sir A. Bumes—privately 
need be. I am on stirring ground, printed.'\ 