

* The first information relative to a week. The last morning of my 
the fact of Vickovich’s mission to Can- ride I had an adventure. Our whole 
bul was accidentally obtained by Major party were pretty well knocked up, 
Rawlinson, when on his way to the and in the dark, between sleeping and 
camp of Mahomed Shah, who was then waking, we had managed to lose the 
marching upon Herat. The circum- road. As morning dawned, we found 
stances, as set forth in a private ourselves wandering about on the 
letter, from that ofiicer himsmf, are broken plain whi& stretches up 
not unworthy of narration :—“ Tehe^ from Subzewar to the range contain- 
ran, November 1, 1837. I have just ing the Turquoise mines, and shortly 
returned from a journey of much afterwards we perceived that we 
interest. M‘Neill had some business were close to another party of horse- 
in the Persian camp which he thought men, who were also, apparently, try- 
I might help to arrange, and I was ing to regain the high road. I was 
bid accordingly to make my way to not anxious to accost these strangers, 
the ‘ Royal wtirrup,* with all con- but on cantering past them, I saw, to 
venient despatch. Iwasobli^dtoride my astonishment men in Ck)ssack 
day and night, as the post^iorses on dresses, and one of my attendants 
the road, owing to the constant pas- recognised among the pivty a servant 
sage of couriers, were almost un- of Ike Russian Mission. My curiosity 
serviceable, and yet 1 was only able, was, of course, excited, ana on reach- 
ailer all, to accomplish the distance ing the stage 1 told one of my men to 
of something more than 700 miles in watch for the arrival of the travellers. 



HBST MEETING WITH VICKOVICH, 


187 


On the day after the arrival of Vickovich at Caubul, 
Bumes reported the incident to the supreme Government, 
and detailed the circumstances of his reception. Like al¬ 
most everything in Burnes’s public letters, which places 
the conduct of Dost Mahomed in a favorable light, the fol- 


and find out who they were. Shortly 
afterwards the Russian party rode 
up, inquired who I was, and finding 
1 was a British officer, declined to 
enter the Khan, but held on their 
road. In such a state of afiairs as 
preceded the siege of Herat, the 
mere fact of a Russian gentleman 
travelling in Khorassan was sus¬ 
picious. In the present case, how¬ 
ever, there was evidently a desire for 
concealment. Nothing had been 
heard of this traveller by our Mis¬ 
sion at Teheran. I had been told, 
indeed, absurd stories on the road, of 
a Muscovite Prince having been sent 
from Petersburg to announce that 
10,000 Russians would be landed at 
Asterabad, to co-operate with the 
Shah in reducing Herat; and this 
was evidently the man alluded to, 
but I knew not what to believe, and 
I thought it my duty, therefore, to 
try and unravel the mystery. Follow¬ 
ing the party, I tracked them for 
some distance along the high road, 
and then found that they had turned 
off to a gorge in the hills. There at 
length I came upon the group seated 
at breakfast by the side of a clear 
sparkling rivulet. The officer, for 
such he evidently was, was a young 
man of light make, very fair com¬ 
plexion, with bright eyes and a look 
of great animation. He rose and 
bowed to me as I rode up, but said 
nothing. 1 addressed him in French 
—the general language of communi¬ 
cation between Europeans in the 
East, but be shook his head. I then 
rooke English, and he answered in 
Russian. When I tried Persian, he 
seemed not to understand a word; at 
last he expressed himself hesitatingly 
in Turcoman, or Uzbeg Turkish. 1 