



lyo THE “ commbbcial” mission to caubitl. 

came firom the Cabinet of St. Petersburgh there is now 
little room to doubt. 

Bnmes, however, for some time, was doubtful of the 
real character of the agent and his credentials; but after 
some weeks of hesitation, he wrote to Mr. Macnaghten, 
“ Though a month and upwards has elapsed since Mr. 
Vickovich reached Caubul, and my suspicaons were from 
the first excited regarding his real character, I have 
been unable to discover anything to invalidate the cre¬ 
dentials which he brought, or to cast a doubt on his 
being other than he gives himself out, and this, too, after 
much vigilance and inquiry.” 

This was written on the 22nd of January. In the 
same letter Bumes writes: “ Mr. Vickovich himself has 
experienced but little attention from the Ameer, and has 
yet received no reply to his communications. He has 
been accommodated in a part of a house belonging to 
Meerza Samee Khan,* and is entertained at the public 
expense. He paid his respects to the Ameer on the 12th 
of January, and has had no other personal intercourse 
with him. He has been luging the Ameer to send an 
agent to Count Simonich to receive the presents of the 
Emperor.” Nothing, indeed, could have been more dis¬ 
couraging than the reception of the Russian agent. Dost 
Mahomed still clung to the belief that the British Go¬ 
vernment would look favorably upon his case, and was 
willing to receive a little from England, rather than 
much from any other state. But he soon began to per¬ 
ceive that even that little was not to be obtained. Be¬ 
fore the dose of the month of January, Bumes had re¬ 
ceived specific instructions from the Governor-General, 
and was compelled, with the strongest feelings of reluct- 

* ** Samad Samee Ehan, with Ahdool Samad, 

KnaD. The reader must be careful or Samat, Khan, the Persian adven* 
not to confound Dost Mahomed's turer, of whom I have spoken in a 
secretary and confidential adviser, note at page 126. 



RECEPTION OF VICKOVICH. 


191 


ance and mortification, to strangle the hopes Dost Ma¬ 
homed had so long encouraged of the fnendly media¬ 
tion of the British Government between the Ameer and 
Runjeet Singh. 

The whole question of Peshawur was now fully dis¬ 
cussed. Bumes, with his instructions in his hand, 
miserably fettered and restrained, enunciated the opi¬ 
nions of his government, from which he inwardly dis¬ 
sented, and strove, in obedience to the orders he had 
received, to make the worse appear the better reason. 
Dost Mahomed was moderate and reasonable; and 
Burnes must have felt that the argument was all in 
favour of the Ameer. That others, in higher place, 
thought so too, is clearly indicated by the fact that pains 
have been taken to keep the world in ignorance of what 
Dost Mahomed, on this occasion, advanced with so 
much reason and moderation in reply to the official 
arguments of the British agent, who was compelled to 
utter words which were dictated neither by the feelings 
nor the judgment of the man. 