



THE LETTERS FROM NICHOLAS. 


189 


be so in reality; for, if not an impostor, it is a most un¬ 
called-for proceeding, after the disavowal of the Bussian 
Government, conveyed through Count Nesselrode, al¬ 
luded to in Mr. M‘Neiirs letter of 19th of June last.”* 
The letters of which Vickovich was the bearer, like 
those brought by Bumes, were purely of a commercial 
tendency. One was from the Emperor himself; the 
other from Count Simonich—written in the Russian 
and the Persian languages. The authenticity of the 
letter from the Emperor has been questioned.f The 
fact is, that it was one to be acknowledged or re¬ 
pudiated, as most convenient. It was intended to satisfy 
Dost Mahomed on the one hand, and to be suspected by 
the European allies of Russia upon the other. That it 


* A few days afterwards, in one of 
those undress communications from 
which we often gather more signifi¬ 
cant truth than from the more formal 
official documents, Burnes wrote to a 
private friend: “We are in a mess 
here. Herat is besieged, and may 
fall; and the Emperor of Russia has 
sent an envoy to Caubul, to offer 
Dost Mahomed Khan money to fight 
Runjeet Singh 1!!!! I could not be¬ 
lieve my eyes or ears; but Captain 
Vickovich—for that is the agent’s 
name—arrived here with a blazing 
letter, three feet long, and sent im¬ 
mediately to pay his respects to my¬ 
self. I, of course, received him, and 
asked him to dinner. This is not the 
best of it. The Ameer came over to 
me sharp, and offered to do as 1 like, 
kick him out, or anything; but I stood 
too much in fear of Vattel to do any 
such thing; and since he was so 
friendly to us, said I, give me the 
letters the agent has brought; all of 
which he surrendered sharp; and 1 
sent an express at once to my Lord 
A., with a confidential letter to the 
Governor-General himself, bidding 
him look what his predecessors had 
brought upon him, and telling him 
that after this 1 knew not what might 
hap^n, and it was now a neck-and- 
neck race between Russia and us; 


and if his Lordship would hear rea¬ 
son, he would fortnwith send agents 
to Bokhara, Herat, Candahar, and 
Koondooz, not forgetting Sindh. How 
all this pill will go down I know not, 
but I know my duty too well to be 
silent .”—IPrimte Correspondence of 
Sir A. Burnes.'] 

t Mohun Lai says that he trans¬ 
lated the Persian copy of the letter 
from the Emperor, but that he lost 
the translation during the insurrec¬ 
tion of 1841-42. “It plainly ac¬ 
knowledged,” he states, “ the receipt 
of the Ameer’s letter, and assured 
him that all the Afghan merchants 
shall be well received in the empire 
of Russia, justice and protection shall 
be extended towards them, and their 
intercourse will cause to flourish the 
respective states .”—[Zife of Dost 
Mahomed^ voL 2 ., p, 300.] Masson 
declares that it was a forgery^ seal 
and ^1, alleging, in proof, that it bore 
no signature. To this Mohun Lai 
replies, that the absence of the royal 
signature is a proof rather of the 
genuine than the counterfeit character 
of the document. The reasons given 
are not very conclusive, as regards 
the general usage of the Czar; but, 
under the circumstances of the case, 
he would have been more inclined to 
omit than to attach the signature. 