



ABRIVAL OF VICKOVICH. 


185 


future conform punctually on all points to the orders 
issued for your guidance.”* And so Bumes was censured 
for a measure which, under all the circumstances of the 
case, was the very best that could have been adopted; 
and the Candahar chiefs threw themselves again into 
the Persian alliance, and entered into a formal treaty 
with the Shah—under a Bussian guarantee. 

In the mean while a new actor had appeared on the 
political stage, ready to pick up the leavings of the 
British agent, and to appreciate what the British Go¬ 
vernment had been pleased to reject. On the after¬ 
noon of the 19th of December, a Russian officer 
named Vickovich,f entered the city of Caubul. Born 
of a good family in Lithuania, and educated in the 
national university of Wilna, he had attracted attention, 
whilst yet a student, by the liberalty of his sentiments and 
the fearlessness with which he expressed them. Associated 
with others of kindred opinions and equal enthusiasm, 
he took part in a demonstration in favour of the Polish 
cause, which well-nigh ended in the suppression of the 
institution; and, whilst other more formidable conspira¬ 
tors were condemned to end their days in Siberia, he 
and his immediate colleagues in the university were sent 
to Orenburgh, as a kind of honourable exile, to be em¬ 
ployed in the military colony of the Ural. Here the 
general intelligence, the aptitude for instruction, the 
love of adventure, and the daring character of young 

* Mr. W. H, Macnaghten to Cap^ Captain Bumes. Lord Auckland 
tain A. Bumes, Cartw, Bareilly, 20th subsequently, with praiseworthy can- 
January, 1838. The letter from dour, admitted that the best autho* 
which this passage is taken consists rities at home were of opinion that 
of twenty-four paragraphs, of which the measure which had evoked these 
three only appear in the published expressions of the severe displeasure 
correspondence. There seems, indeed, of his Lordship, was the very best that 
ta have been a studious suppression could have been adopted, 
ofthe entire history of the oners made f I ^ave given the vulgar ortho- 

to the Candahar chiefs, and of the graphy of the name. His real name 
censure which they called down upon was Viktevitch, or Wiktewitch. 



186 THE “ COMMBBCIAli" MISSION TO CAOBUL. 


Vickovich, soon distinguislied him above his associates* 
Attached to the expeditions sent out for the survey of the 
Desht-i'Kipchak, he lived for some years among the 
Calmucks, gaining an acquaintance with the Nogai and 
Jaghatai dialects of the Turkish language, and sub¬ 
sequently, during a residence of some months in Bokhara, 
whither he was sent with the Caravan from Orenburgh, 
acquired a sufficient knowledge of the Persian language 
to enable him to converse intelligibly, if not fluently, in 
it. When, therefore, the Russian Government began to 
meditate a mission to Caubul, and to cast about for a 
competent agent, there seemed to be no likelier man 
than Vickovich to perform, with advantage to the state, 
the dubious service required of him. He was at this time 
aide-de-camp to the Governor of Orenburgh. The Caubul 
agency was entrusted to him without hesitation. He was 
despatched at once to Astrakan, whence he crossed over 
to Resht, in Ghiliin, and received his final instructions 
from Count Simonich, at Teheran, in September, 1837. 
Before the end of December he was at Caubul,* 