

On the 24th of September Burnes was invited to a 
private conference with the Ameer. It took place in 
“ the interior of the Harem” of the Balla-Hissar. Akbar 
Khan alone was present. Dinner was served; and “ the 
interview lasted till midnight.” The Ameer listened 
attentively to all that Burnes advanced relative to the 
navigation of the Indus and the trade of Afghanistan, 

* Unpublished Cori'espondence of Sir Alexander Burnes. 



INTERVIEWS WITH DOST MAHOMED. 


177 


but replied, that his resources were so crippled by his 
war with the Sikhs, that he was compelled to adopt 
measures injurious to commerce, for the mere purpose of 
raising revenue. He spoke with much warmth of the 
loss of Peshawur, which, he alleged, had been basely 
wrested from him, whilst he was engaged in war with 
Shah Soojah. Burnes replied with a number of cut- 
and-dried sentences about the ability and resources of 
Runjeet Singh. To all of this the Ameer cheerfully as¬ 
sented. He acknowledged that he was not strong enough 
to cope with so powerful an adversary as the ruler of 
Lahore. “ Instead of renewing the conflict,” he said, 
“ it would be a source of real gratification if the British 
Government would counsel me how to act: none of our 
other neighbours can avail me; and in return I would 
pledge myself to forward its commercial and its political 
views.” Remarking that he heard with pleasure this 
acknowledgment, Burnes assured him that the British 
Government would exert itself to secure peace between 
the Punjaub and Afghanistan; and added, that although 
he could not hold out any promise of interference for the 
restoration of Peshawur, which had been won and pre¬ 
served by the sword, he believed that the “ Maharajah 
intended to make some change in its management, but 
that it sprung from himself, not from the British Govern¬ 
ment.” The Ameer could not repress his eagerness to 
learn the precise character of these contemplated ar¬ 
rangements ; but all that Burnes could ofier was a con¬ 
jecture that the Maharajah might be induced to restore 
the country, under certain restrictions, to Sultan Maho¬ 
med Ehan and his brothers, to whom, and not to the 
Ameer, it had formerly belonged. 

On the evening of the 4th of October, Burnes was 
again invited to the Balla-Hissar. The Ameer had in 
the mean time waited upon him in his own quarters. 

VOL. I. N 



178 THE “ commeecial” mission to caubul. 


At this second conference in the palace, the Newab 
Jubbar Khan was present. On this occasion, to the 
surprise of the British envoy, the Ameer carried his 
moderation and humility to an excess which might 
almost have aroused suspicion. He declared that if the 
representative of Great Britain recommended him to do 
so, he would express to Runjeet Singh his contrition for 
the past, and ask forgiveness; and that if the Maharajah 
“ would consent to give up Peshawur to him, he would 
hold it tributary to Lahore; send the requisite presents 
of horses and rice; and in all things consider himself, in 
that part of his dominions, as holding under Lahore.” 
Burnes suggested that such an arrangement would be 
destructive to the hopes of Sultan Mahomed, who ought 
to be regarded with compassion; and asked whether it 
would not be equally advantageous to the reputation of the 
Ameer that Peshawur should be restored to his brother. 
To this the Ameer replied, that the country might as 
well be in the hands of the Sikhs as in those of Sultan 
Mahomed, who had been to him both a treacherous 
friend and a bitter enemy. Little more passed at this 
meeting. Burnes retired to speculate upon the conduct 
of the Ameer and write letters to the political Secretary, 
Mr. Macnaghten, who was destined soon to play so con¬ 
spicuous a part in the great drama, of which this “ Com¬ 
mercial” mission was the prologue. 