



182 THE “ COMMEBCIAL” mission to CAUBtTL. 


nothing substantial. He could only write for instruc¬ 
tions, and await patiently the receipt of letters fix)in 
Hindostan. 

But Bumes, though he shrunk from compromising his 
government in the direction of Lahore, had no such 
scruples with regard to the proceedings of the Barukzye 
Sirdars in the countries to the westward. He thought 
that some latitude having been allowed him, he might 
take prompt measures to meet a pressing difficulty threat¬ 
ening us from a quarter so far removed from the ordi¬ 
nary circle embraced by the dehberations of the Calcutta 
Council. Before he entered Afghanistan the conduct 
of the Candahar chiefs had engaged his serious atten¬ 
tion, and he had written to the British minister at the 
Persian Court, saying that he should leave nothing un¬ 
done to try and put a stop to their intercourse with the 
Russian mission. “ If matters go rightly,” he added, 
“ we shall be able to neutralise the power of the Can¬ 
dahar chiefs, or at all events place them in complete 
subjection to Dost Mahomed Khan, w'hose influence 
increases daily.” Bumes, as has been seen,* had de¬ 
spatched in October a letter to Kohun Dil Khan, threat¬ 
ening him with the displeasure of the British Govern¬ 
ment if he continued his intrigues with the Persian and 
Russian Court; and the measures taken at this time were 
so far successful, that, encouraged by their result, the 

* AntCy page 179. In a letter to could do good. The first exercise of 
another correspondent, written about the authority has been to despatch a 
the same time, Burnes s^s : With messenger to Candahar, to tell them 
war came intrigues, and 1 have had to discontinue their intercourse with 
the good fortune to find out all the Persia and Russia, on pain of dis- 
doings of the Czar and his emissaries pleasure—and not before it was time, 
here, where they have sent letters and for a son of the chief of that city, with 
presents. After proving this, I plainly presents for the Russian ambassador, 
asked the Governor-General if such is ready to set out for Teheran.”— 
things wore to be allowed, and I got [5ir A, Burnes to Captain Jacob — 
a reply a week ^o, altering all my Caubuly 29(h of Octobery 1837: MS, 
instructions, giving me power to go Correspondence,'] 
on to Herat, and anywhere, indeed, I 



AFFAIRS AT CANDAHAB. 


183 


British agent determined to take further steps’to secure 
the alliance of the chiefs of Candahar. On the 22nd of 
December, Burnes became convinced of the improved 
temper of Kohun Dil Khan, who declared that he had 
dismissed the Persian Elchee, had determined not to 
send his son to the Persian Court, and was anxious, above 
aU things, for the counsel and assistance of the British 
Government, and of his brother, Dost Mahomed Khan. 
Mahomed Shah had by this time began to cool down 
in his zeal for the Afghan alliance; and it appeared to 
bo at least possible that the Sirdar, instead of receiving 
Herat from the Shah, would, after the capture of that 
place, bo threatened with the loss of Candahar. Seizing 
the opportunity afforded him by this favorable change 
in the aspect of affairs, Burnes wrote at once to Kohun 
Dil Khan, stating that if the Persian monarch threatened 
to subdue his chiefship, he would go at once to Can¬ 
dahar, accompanied by Dost Mahomed, and assist him 
by every means in his power, even to the extent of pay¬ 
ing his troops. 