


knew just sufficient of this language 
to carry on a simple conversation, but 
not enough to be inquisitive. This 
was evidently what my friend w.’inted, 
for when he found I was not strong 
enough in Jaghatai to proceed very 
rapidly, he rattled on with his rough 
Turkish as glibly as possible. All 
I could find out was, that he was a 
hond fide Russian officer, carrying 
resents from the Emperor to Ma- 
omed Shah. More he would not 
admit; so, after smoking another pipe 
with him, I remounted, and reached 
the Royal Camp beyond Nishapoor 
before dark. I had an immediate audi¬ 
ence of the Shah, and in the course of 
conversation, mentioning to his Ma¬ 
jesty my adventure of the morning, 
he replied, ^ Bringing presents to me ! 
why, I have nothing to do with him; 
he IS sent direct from the Emperor 
to Dost Mahomed, of Caubul, and I 
w merely asked to help him on his 
journey.’ This is the first informal 
tion we have ever had of a direct 
communication between Petersburg 
and Caubul, and it may be of great 
importance. The gentleman made his 
appearance in camp two days after 
my arrival, and I was then introduced 
to him by Mons. Goutte, as Captain 
Vitkavitch. He addressed me at once 
in good French, and in allusion to our 
former meeting, merely observed, 
with a smile, that ^ It would not do to 
be too familiar with strangers in the 
desert.’ 1 was so anxious to bring 
back to McNeill intelligence of thS 
Russian Mission to Caubul, that I re¬ 
mained but a very few days in camp; 
and here I am again in T^eran, after 
a second gallop of 7fi0 miles, accom¬ 
plished this time in about 150 consecu¬ 
tive hours.’^— Correspwdence,’] 



188 THE “ commercial” mission to caubul. 


lowing passages were cut out of the correspondence before 
it was placed in the printer’s hands;—“ On the morning of 
the 19th,” wrote Burnes, “that is, yesterday, the Ameer 
came over from the Balia Hissar early in the morning 
with a letter from his son, the Governor of Ghuznee, re¬ 
porting that the Russian agent had arrived at that city 
on his way to Caubul. Dost Mahomed Khan said that 
he had come for my counsel on the occasion; that he 
wished to have nothing to do with any other power than 
the British; that he did not wish to receive any agent of 
any power whatever so long as he had a hope of sym¬ 
pathy from us; and that he would order the Russian 
agent to be turned out, detained on the road, or act in 
any way I desired him. I asked the Ameer if he knew 
on what business the agent had come, and if he were 
really an agent from Russia. He replied that I had read 
all his letters from Candahar, and that he knew nothing 
more. 1 then stated that it was a sacred rule among 
civilised nations not to refuse to receive emissaries in 
time of peace, and that I could not take upon myself to 
advise him to refuse any one who declared himself duly 
accredited, but that the Ameer had it in his power to 
show his feelings on the occasion by making a full dis¬ 
closure to the British Government of the errand on which 
the individual had come; to which he most readily as¬ 
sented. After this the Ameer despatched a servant on 
the road to Ghuznee to prevent the agent’s entering Cau¬ 
bul without notice; but so rapid has been his journey, that 
he met him a few miles fix>m the city, which he entered 
in the afternoon, attended by two of the Ameer’s people. 
He has not yet seen the Ameer. He has sent a letter 
from Count Simonich, which I have seen, and states that 
he is the bearer of letters from Mahomed Shah and the 
Emperor of Russia. I shall take an early opportunity of 
reporting on the proceedings of the Russian agent, if he 