

In a letter of the 26th of January, which I now have 
before me in an ungarblcd stale, Burnes forwarded to 
the Governor-General a full account of the important 
conference between the Ameer and himself, held after 
the receipt, by the latter, of instructions from the 
Gktvernor-General.* At this meeting Burnes commu¬ 
nicated to Dost Mahomed the sentiments of .the Go¬ 
vernor-General, and recommended the Ameer, in accord- 


* An attempt, in the published 
Blue Book, was made to conceal the 
fact of the receipt of these letters, and 
to make it ap^ar that Bumes acted 
entirely upon his own responsibility. 
The genuine letter conunenced with 
the following words:—“ I have now 
the honour to acknowledge the receipt 
of your (the Political Secretary’s) 


letters of the 2dth of Ifovember and 
2nd of December last, which reached 
me about the same time, and con¬ 
veyed the views of the Right Honour¬ 
able the Govemor-Goneral regarding 
the overtures made by Dost Maho¬ 
med, &c., &c.” In the published ver¬ 
sion the letter commences with the 
word “regarding.” 



192 THE “commercial” mission to catjbul. 


ance "with the opinions expressed by Lord Auckland, to 
■wave his own claims to Peshawur, and be content "with 
such arrangements as Kunjeet Singh might be inclined 
to enter into with Sultan Mahomed. The Ameer replied 
that he bore no enmity against his brother, though his 
brother was full of rancour against him, and would gladly 
compass his destruction; but that with Sultan Mahomed, 
at Peshawur, he would not be safe for a day; and that 
it would be less injurious to him to leave it directly in 
the hands of the Sikhs, than in the hands of an enemy 
ever ready to intrigue with the Sikhs for his overthrow. 

“ Peshawur,” said he, “ has been conquered by the 
Sikhs; it belongs to them; they may give it to whom¬ 
soever they please; if to Sultan Mahomed Khan, they 
place it in the hands of one who is bent on injuring me; 
and I cannot therefore acknowledge any degree of grati¬ 
tude for your interference, or take upon myself to render 
services in return.” And then follow these mollifying 
sentences, which it was a gross injustice to Dost 
Mahomed to omit from the published letter: “ I admit,” 
said the Ameer, “ that it will be highly beneficial in 
many ways to see the Sikhs once more eastward of 
the Indus, but I still can dispense with none of ray 
troops or relax in my precautionary measures, as equal 
if not greater anxieties will attach to me. I have un¬ 
bosomed myself to yoii, and laid bare, without any sup¬ 
pression, my difficulties. I shall bear in lively remem¬ 
brance the intended good offices of the British Govern¬ 
ment, and I shall deplore that my interest did not per¬ 
mit me to accept that which was tendered in a spirit so 
friendly, but which to me and my advisers has only 
seemed hastening my ruin. To Runjeet Singh your in¬ 
terference is beneficial, as he finds himself involved in 
serious difficulties by the possession of Peshawur, and he 
is too glad of your good offices to escape from a place 