



FURTHER NEHOTIATIONS. 


197 


the world. Meerza Samee Khan, next day, told the same 
story;* but, fettered by the orders of the Supreme Go¬ 
vernment, Burnes could give him no hope. 

On the oth of March, Jubbar Khan again appeared be¬ 
fore Burnes with a string of specific demands, dictated by 
the Ameer. “ These consisted of a promise to protect 
Caubul and Candahar from Persia; of the surrender of 
Peshawur by Ilunjeet Singh; of the interference of our 
government to protect, at that city, those who might 
return to it from Caubul, supposing it to be restored to 
Sultan Mahomed Khan; with several other proposals.” 
Upon this Burnes, with an expression of astonishment, 
declared that, on the part of the British Government, he 
could accede to none of these propositions; and added, 
that as he saw no hope of a satisfactory adjustment, he 
should request his dismissal. The Newab,” said Burnes, 
left me in sorrow.” 

The British agent then sat down, and drew up a 
formal letter to the Ameer, requesting leave to depart for 
I'lindostan. In spite of what had taken place, the letter 
somewhat startled the Ameer, who summoned a meeting 
of his principal advisers, “which lasted till past midnight.” f 


* “ The Meerza made nearly the 
same observation as the Newab about 
the exj)ectations wliich the Ameer had 
cherished of doiii^ service for the 
British, and devoting himself to it; 
that it was not the adjustment of 
Feshawur affairs that dissipated his 
hopes, but the indifference to his suf¬ 
ferings and station, which it was now 
clear we felt.” The Meerza truly 
said that Dost Mahomed had often 
written to the British Government 
about his affairs, and that in reply 
th^ answered him about their own. 
—lUngarbled Correspondence of Sir 
A, Jiumes,] 

f It is probably of this meeting, or 
one shor^ preceding it, of which 
General Harlan, who has not much 
reg^d for dates, speaks in the fol¬ 
lowing passage. Harlan had by 


this time quitted Kunjeet Singh’s 
service, nnd taken service with 
Dost Mahomed :—“ The document 
(Lord Auckland’s ultimatum) was 
handed to me amongst others. T 
satisfied myself, by the Governor- 
Gcneral’s signature, of its authen¬ 
ticity, surveying the contents with 
extreme surprise and disappointment. 
Dost Mahomed was mortified, but 
not terrified.The Governor-Ge¬ 

neral’s ultimatum was handed round, 
and an embarrassing silence ensued. 
A few minutes elapsed, when Abdul 
Sami Khan recalled the party from 

abstraction. lie proclaimed that 

the Governor - General’s ultimatum 
left no other alternative than the dis¬ 
mission of the English agent, for the 
spirit of the Kuzzilbash party was 
supercilious and unyielding, though 





198 THE “commercial” mission to caubul. 


On the following morning the conference was resumed; 
and about mid-day Meerza Samee Khan waited on Burnes, 
and invited him to attend the Ameer in the Balia Hissar. 
Gracious and friendly even beyond his ordinary courtesy 
and urbanity, Dost Mahomed expressed his regret that 
the Governor-General had shown so little inclination to 
meet his wishes; but added, that he did not even then 
despair of forming an alliance advantageous both to Eng¬ 
land and Afghanistan. A long argument then ensued; 
but it led to nothing. The old ground was travelled over 
again and again. Burnes asked for everything; but pro¬ 
mised nothing. He had no power to make any con¬ 
cessions. The meeting, though it ended amicably, was 
productive of no good results. Burnes took his departure 
from the Balia Hissar. He might as well have departed 
from Caubul. 