




FAILDKB OP THE RUSSO-PEBSIAN LEAGUE. 201 


everything by the dissolution of his friendship with the 
British, the Russians could really do nothing to assist 
him. Mahomed Shah was wasting his strength before 
Herat. The Persian army, under the command of the 
Sovereign himself, moved by Russian diplomacy and 
directed by Russian skill, was only precipitating itself into 
an abyss of failure, and the Candahar brethren, who had 
been promised so much, were linking themselves with 
a decrepit cause, from which they were likely to gain 
nothing. Soon other tidings came to alarm him. The 
Russian game was nearly played out; and the resent¬ 
ment of the British was about to break forth in a man¬ 
ner which threatened the total extinction of Barukzye 
supremacy in Afghanistan. He looked out towards the 
West, and he could plainly see that, in flinging himself 
upon Russo-Persian support, he had trusted to a founda- 
dation of sand. The ground was shifting under his feet. 
His new friends were not able to assist him. A subal¬ 
tern of the British army within the walls of Herat was 
setting them at defiance.* 

* I have spoken at page 189 of the (which are now commenced between 
letterfrom the Emperor Nicholas, with you and myself) in my heart, I will 
which Vickovich made his appear- feel always happy to assist the people 
ance at Caubul. 1 have since found of Caubul who may come to trade 
a translation of it. It was excluded into my kingdom. On the arrival of 
from the published papers : your messenger I have ordered him 

“ A.C. In a happy moment, the to make preparations for his long 
mcs.senger of your Highness, Meerza journey back to you, and also ap* 
Hosam, reached my Court, with your pointed a man of dignity to accom- 
friendly letter. I was very much de- pany him on the part of my govern- 
lighted to receive it, and highly grati- ment. If it pleases God, and he 
fied by its perusal. I’lie contents of reaches safe, he will present to you 
the letter prove that you are my well- the rarities of my country, which 1 
wisher, and have friendly opinions have sent through him. By tlie grace 
towards me. It flattered me very of God, may your days be prolonged, 
much, and I was convinced of your — Sent from St, Petersburgh^ the 
friendship to my everlasting govern- capital of Ritssia^ on the 27th of Aprils 
ment. In consequence of this, and 1837, A,D,^ and in the I2th year of 
preserving the terms of friendship my rei^P 



202 


HERAT. 


CHAPTEE n. 

[1837—1838.] 

The Siege of Herat—Shah Kamran and Yar Mahomed—Return of the 
Shah—Eldred Pottinger—Preparations for the Defence—Advance of the 
Persian Army—Progress of the Siege—Negotiations for Peace—Failure 
of the Attack—The Siege raised. 

SuEKOUNDEU by a fair expanse of country, where alter¬ 
nating coru-fields, vineyards, and gardens varied the rich¬ 
ness and beauty of the scene; where httle fortified villages 
studded the plain, and the bright waters of small 
running streams lightened the pleasant landscape, ‘ lay 
the city of Herat.* The beauty of the place was be¬ 
yond the walls. Within, all was dirt and desolation. 
Strongly fortified on every side by a wet ditch and a 
solid outer wall, with five gates, each defended by a small 
outwork, the city presented but few claims to the admi¬ 
ration of the traveller. Four long bazaars, roofed with 
arched brickwork, meeting in a small domed quadrangle 
in the centre of the city, divided it into four quarters.f 