


♦ All this was carefully erased from 
the letter before it was allowed to 
form a part of the published Blue 
Book; and the following just obser¬ 
vations of Captain Burnes shared no 
better fate : “ It has appeared to me 
that they” (the opinions and views of 
the ruler of Caubul) “ call for much 
deliberation. It will be seen that the 
chief is not bent on possessing Pesha¬ 
wur, or (m gratifying an enmity to¬ 
wards his brothers, but simply pur¬ 
suing the worldly maxim of securing 
himself from injury; the arguments 
which he has adduced seem deserving 
of every consideration, and the more 
so when an avowed partisan of Sultan 
Mahomed does not deny the justice 
of the Ameer’s objection.” And fur¬ 
ther on, our agent observes : “ Since 
arrmng here, I have seen an a^ent 
of Persia with alluring promises, 
after jKinetratiiig as far as Candahor, 
oompelled to quit the country be¬ 


cause no one has sent to invite him 
to Caubul. Following him, an agent 
of Russia with letters highly compli¬ 
mentary, and promises more than 
substantial, has experienced no more 
civility than is due by the laws of 
hospitality and nations. It may be 
urged by some that the offers of one 
or both were fallacious, but such a 
dictum is certainly premature; the 
Ameer of Caubul has sought no aid 
ill his arguments from such oflfers, but 
declared that his interests are bound 
up in an alliance with the British 
Government, which he never will de¬ 
sert as long as there is a hope of 
securing one.” There is much more 
in a similar strain—much more can¬ 
celled from the published correspond¬ 
ence—with the deliberate intention 
of injuring the character and mis¬ 
representing the conduct of Dost Ma¬ 
homed, and so justifying their after¬ 
conduct towards him—but enough 



TIIE GABBLED DESPATCHES. 


195 


Still, in spite of the declarations of Burnes that Dost 
Mahomed had little to hope from the co-operation of 
the British Government, the Russian Mission made 
scant progress at the Afghan capital. Alluding to the 
negotiations of our agent, Vickovich wrote some time 
afterwards: “ All this has occasioned Dost Mahomed 
Khan to conduct himself very coldly towards me; and 
then, as he daily converses with Burnes, from my arrival 
here to the 20th of February I have hardly been two or 
three times in his presence.” The fact is, that up to this 
time, as we are assured on the concurrent testimony of 
the British and tlie Russian agent, the latter was received 
in a scurvy and discouraging manner. But on the 21st 
of February letters were opened from the Governor- 
General, stating, in the most decisive language, that 
there was no intention to accede to the proposals of 
the Ameer, and that Peshawur must be left to the Sikhs. 


has already been given to prove how 
mightily the Ameer has been wronged. 

I cannot, indeed, suppress the 
utterance of my abhorrenoo of this 
lystem of garbling the oflicial corre¬ 
spondence of public men — sending 
the letters of a statosinan or diplo¬ 
matist into the word mutilated, emas¬ 
culated—the very pith and substance 
of theiii cut out by the unsparing 
hand of the state-anatomist. The dis¬ 
honesty by which lie upon lie is 
palmed upon the world has not one 
redeeming feature. If public men 
are, without reprehension, to be per¬ 
mitted to lie in the face of nations— 
wilfully, elaborately, and maliciously 
to bear false-witness against their 
neighbours, what hope is there for 
private veracity ? In the case before 
us, the snppreasio veri is virtually the 
nssc 'tio fi&i. The character of Dost 
Mahomed has been lied away; the 
character of Burnes has been lied 
away. Both, by the mutilation of the 
correspondence of the latter, have 
been fearfully misrepresented—both 
have been set forth as doing what 