



THE PESHAWUB QUESTION. 


193 


which is a burden to his jfinances, but by that escape a 
debt of gratitude is exactible from him and not from 
me ; and if your government will look into this matter, 
they will soon discover my opinions to be far from 
groundless, and my conclusions the only safe policy 
I can pursue.’^ 

The Ameer ceased to speak, and Jubbar Khan fol¬ 
lowed, proposing a compromise. He suggested that it 
might be found advisable to deliver over Peshawur con¬ 
jointly to the Ameer and Sultan Mahomed—^Runjeet 
Singh receiving from the two chiefs the value which he 
might fix as the terms of surrender. The Ameer ob¬ 
served that such an arrangement* would remove his 
fears, and that if he appointed Jubbar Khan to repre¬ 
sent him at Peshawur he would be sure of an equitable 
adjustment of affairs. Burnes replied in general terms 
that the withdrawal of the Sikhs to the eastward of the 
Indus would be a vast benefit to the Afghan nation ; 
and asked Dost Mahomed whether he would rather 
see the Sikhs or Sultan Mahomed in Peshawur. The 
Ameer replied that the question put in plain words was 
ii startling one; but he asked in return if that could be 
considered beneficial to the Afghan nation which was 
especially injurious to him who possessed the largest 
share of sovereignty in Afghanistan. He then ob¬ 
served, in evidence of the truth of his assertions re- 

* Burnes, commenting on the Ne- attempt was made to bring about a 
wab’s proposal,^ observes : “ The ob- settlement of the Peshawur question 
serrations coming from the Newab on the basis of this proposal, I have 
Jubbar Khan are the more remark- not been able to ascertain. But Cap¬ 
able, since he is devoted to his brother, tain Wade, considering it by no 
Sultan Mahomed Khan, and would means unreasonable, decTared his will- 
rejoice to see him restored to Pesha- ingness, with the consent of the Su- 
wur. Thej consequently carried with preme Government, to urge it upon 
me a conviction that the Ameer’s fears the acceptance of Kunjeet. (See post- 
are not groundless, and that they will page 343, note.) It is doubtful, how- 
deserve all due consideration before ever, whether, even if Runjeethfiidcon- 
govemment entered upon any mea- sented to it, Sultan Mahomed would 
sures for attaching this chief to its have fallen into the arrangement, al- 
interests.” This passage was, of though Jubbar Khan declared his 
course, suppressed. Whether any abiUty to reconcile the brothers. 

VOL. I. O 



194 THE commeecial’’ mission to caubul. 


lative to the dangers to which he was exposed from 
the supremacy of Sultan Mahomed at Peshawur: 
‘‘ Sultan Mahomed Khan has just sent an agent to the 
ex-King at Loodhianah (Shah Soojah) to offer his 
services to combine against me and to secure my 
brothers at Caudahar, in support of this coalition/' 
‘‘ What security,” asked the Ameer, “ am I to receive 
against a recurrence of such practices ?” He then con¬ 
tinued: “As for the ex-King himself, I fear him not; he 
has been too often worsted to make head, unless he has 
aid from the British Government, which I am now 
pretty certain he will never receive. If my brother at 
Peshawur, however, under a promise of being made his 
minister, and assisted with Sikh agents and money, 
appears in the field, I may find that in expressing my 
satisfaction at his restoration to Peshawur, I have been 
placing a snake in my bosom—and 1 may then, when 
too late, lament that I did not let tlie Sikhs do their 
worst, instead of replacing tliem by another description 
of enemies.”* 