


they did not, and omitting to do what 
they did. 1 care not whose knife— 
whose hand did the work of mutila¬ 
tion. And, indeed, I do not know. 1 
deal with principles, not with persons; 
and have no party cn<is to serve. The 
cause of truth must be upheld. Of¬ 
ficial documents arc the sheet-anchors' 
of historians—the last courts of appeal 
to which the jiublic resort. If these 
documents are tampered with — if 
they are made to misrepresent the 
words and actions of public men, the 
grave of truth is dug, and there is 
seldom a resurrection. It is not al¬ 
ways that an afflicted parent is ready 
to step forward on behalf of an in¬ 
jured child, and lay a memorial at 
the feet of his sovereign, exposing the 
cruelty by which an honourable man 
has been represented in state docu¬ 
ments, as doing that which was ab¬ 
horrent to his nature. In most cases 
the lie goes down, unassailed and 
often unsuspected, to posterity; and 
in place of sober history, we have a 
florid romance. 

2 



196 


THE “commercial” MISSION TO CATJBUL. 


Then, but not till then, a change came over the conduct 
of Dost Mahomed, and the Russian Mission began to rise 
in importance. 

But still another effort was to be made by the Baruk- 
zyes to secure the friendship of the British Government. 
On the 1st of March, Jubbar Khan came in from his 
country seat, and next morning called upon Burnes. He 
had read Lord Auckland’s discouraging letter; but he 
still believed that, through his agency, for he was 
notoriously friendly to the British, something might yet 
be done. His efforts, however, were fruitless. Burnes, 
tied down by his instructions, could give the Newab no 
encouragement. The British Government called upon 
Dost Mahomed to abstain from connecting himself with 
every other state; and promised, as the price of this 
isolation, that they would restrain Eunjeet Singh from 
attacking his dominions; “And that,” said Jubbar Khan, 
“ amounts to nothing, for we are not under the appre¬ 
hension of any aggressions from the side of Lahore.”* 
The Peshawur diflSculty, he said, might be got over; 
but the offer of so little, in return for so much that was 
asked from the Ameer, placed him in a most humiliating 
position, and would, if accepted, lower him in the eyes of 


* Lord Auckland’s offers to re¬ 
strain Runjeet from attacking the 
country of the Sirdars were laughed 
at by them. Jubbar Khan said that 
they indicated very little knowledge 
of the state of Afghanistan; for that, 
“ so far from the proffered protection 
from Runjeet being of the value 
stated, the Maharajah never sought 
to attack Caubul, and that hitherto 
all the aggression had been on the 
part of the Ameer, and not the ruler 
of Lahore.” He added, with unde¬ 
niable truth, that “it appeared we 
valued our offers at a very high rate, 
since we expected, in return, that the 
Afghans would desist from all inter¬ 
course with Persia, Russia, Toorkis- 


tan,” &c. “Were the Afghans,” he 
asked, “to make all these powers 
hostile, and to receive no protection 
against the enmity raised for their 
adhering to the British?” “As for 
Peshawur,” he added, “being with¬ 
held from the Ameer, it might be got 
over; and he believed he did not 
overrate his influence with Sultan 
Mahomed Khan, when he stated that 
he might bring about a reconciliation 
between him and the Ameer; but he 
must say that the value of the Afghans 
had, indeed, been depressed, and that 
he did not wonder at the Ameer’s 
disappointment.” — [ Ungarbled Cor^ 
respondence of Sir A, Burnes.} 