

On the 21st of March, the Ameer wrote a friendly 
letter to Lord Auckland, imploring him, in language 
almost of humility, to “ remedy the grievances of the 
Afghans;” to “ give them a little encouragement and 
power.” It was the last despairing effort of the Afghan 
chief to conciliate the good-will of the British Government. 
It failed. T\iQ fiat had gone forth. The judgment against 
him was not to be reversed. Other meetings took place; 
but Burnes knew them to be mere formalities. He re- 


full of duplicity.Nicb Ma- advantageous settlement of your af- 

liomcd Ameer Khan, Akbondzadeli, fairs;' and to this proposition the 
openly opposed the Kuzzilbash party, council assented.” The 

and urged many weighty arguments proposition, it appears, was made to 
in favour of a pacific settlement of Burnes; but Burnes declined the ho- 
thc Ameer’s relations with the Bri- nour of negotiating with the doctor- 
tish Government, which had now as- general. Harlan says that he then 
Burned a position so inauspicious. He wrote to the British envoy, offering 
concluded his oration with these words, to “ negotiate upon his own terms;” 
addressing the Ameer: ‘ There is no but Burnes sent “ a reply personally 
other resource for you but to intro- friendly,” but “ evincing a deficiency 
duce Mr. Harlan in the negotiations of knowledge of first principles con- 
with Mr. Burnes, and he, through his cerning the rights of independent 
own facilities and wisdom, will ar- powers in political negotiations.” 
range a treaty, according to their Burnes says nothing about this in his 
European usage, for the pacific and official or private letters. 




PROCEEDINGS OF VICKOVICH. 


199 


xaained at Caubul with no hope of bringing matters to a 
favorable issue; but because it was convenient to remain. 
He was awaiting the return from Koondooz of Dr. Lord 
and Lieutenant Wood. The month of March passed away, 
and the greater part of April. These oflScers did not 
rejoin the Mission. But one of the Candahar Sirdars, 
Mehr Dil Khan, appeared at Caubul, with the object of 
winning over the Ameer to the Persian alliance. The 
do-nothing policy,” as Burnes subsequently characterised 
it, had done its work. The Russians, as he said, had 
given us the coup-de-grace. Vickovich was publicly sent 
for, and paraded through the streets of Caubul. So 
Barnes determined to depart. Accordingly, on the 26th 
of April, he turned his back upon the Afghan capital.* 
Burnes went; and Vickovich, who had risen greatly 
in favour, soon took his departure for Herat, promising 
everything that Dost Mahomed wanted—engaging to 
furnish money to the Barukzye chiefs, and undertaking 
to propitiate Runjeet Singh.f The Russian quitted 
Caubul, accompanied by Sirdar Mehr Dil Khan and 
one Aboo Khan, Barukzye, a confidential friend of Dost 
Mahomed, and, on the present occasion, his repre¬ 
sentative. It had been arranged that Azim Khan, the 
Ameer’s son, accompanied by the minister, Samee Khan, 


* Mr. Masson says, that before its 
departure the ^Mission had fallen into 
contempt, and that the assassination 
of Burnes was talked of in Caubul. 
He explains, too, what, according to 
his account, were the real causes of 
Burncs’s departure without his com¬ 
panions ; but it does not come within 
our province to investigate Masson’s 
charges against the envoy. 