



204 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


having only a light field artillery, might make good its 
passage, if not actively opposed, across the stupendous 
mountain-ranges of the Hindoo-Koosh ;• but it is only 
by the Herat route that a really formidable well-equipped 
army could make its way upon the Indian frontier from 
the regions on the north-west. Both the nature and the 
resources of the country are such as to favour the success 
of the invader. All the materials necessary for the 
organisation of a great army, and the formation of his 
depots, are to be found in the neighbourhood of Herat. 
The extraordinary fertility of the plain has fairly en¬ 
titled it to be called the “ Granary of Central Asia.” 
Its mines supply lead, iron, and sulphur; the surface of 
the country, in almost every direction, is laden with salt¬ 
petre ; the willow and poplar trees, which furnish the 
best charcoal, flourish in all parts of the country; whilst 
from the population might at any time be drawn hardy 
and docile soldiers to recruit the ranks of an invading 
army.’*'^ Upon the possession of such country would de¬ 
pend, in no small measure, the success of operations un¬ 
dertaken for the invasion or the defence of Hindostan. 

The city of Herat, it has been said, stood within solid 
eartheni walls, surrounded by a wet ditch. The four 
sides were of nearly equal length, a little less than a mile 
in extent, facing towards the four points of the compass. 
The most elevated quarter of the city was the north-east, 
from which it gradually sloped down to the south-west 
corner, where it attained its lowest descent.f The real 
defences of the place were two covered ways, or fausse- 
braies^ on the exterior slope of the embankments, one 
within and the other without the ditch. The lower one 
was on the level of the surrounding country, its parapet 
‘‘ partly covered by a mound of earth on the counter- 

♦ Report of Major Eldred Pot-- Calcutta: July, 1840. — [iliiS. Re- 
Huger to the Supreme Government cords,'] 

of India on the defences of Herat, f Eldred PotHnger's MS. Journal. 



INTERNAL CONDITION OF HERAT. 


205 


scarp, the accumulation of rubbish from the cleansings of 
the ditch.” On the northern side, surrounded by a wet 
ditch, the citadel, once known as the Kella-i-Aktyar- 
Aldyn, but now as the Ark, overlooked the city. Built 
entirely of good brick masonry, with lofty ramparts and 
numerous towers, it was a place of considerable strength; 
but now its defences, long neglected, were in a wretched 
state of repair. Indeed, when, in 1837, tidings of the 
advance of the Persian army reached Herat, the whole 
extent of the fortifications was crumbling into decay. 

The population of Herat was estimated at about 
45,000 inhabitants. A large majority of these were 
Sheealis, It was said that there might have been 1000 
Hindoos, of various callings, in the city; there were 
several families of Armenians, and a few families of 
Jews. The general appearance of the inhabitants was 
that of a poor and an oppressed people. Dirty and ill- 
clad, they went about in a hurried, anxious manner, 
each man looking with suspicion into his neighbour’s 
face. Few women were to be seen in the streets. It 
was hardly safe for a stranger to be abroad after sunset. 
Unless protected by an armed escort, there was too great 
a likelihood of his being seized and sold into slavery. 
There was no protection for life, liberty, or property. 
They who should have protected the people were the 
foremost of their oppressors. During the absence of the 
King, in 1837, such was the frightful misrule—such the 
reign of terror that had been established by the char¬ 
tered violence of the rulers of the city, that the shops 
were closed before sunset, and all through the night 
the noise and uproar, the challengings, and the cries for 
help, were such as could scarcely have been exceeded if 
the place had been actually besieged. A son of Yar 
Mahomed Khan, the Wuzeer, was then governor of the 
city. Compelled to hold office upon a small salary, he 
enriched himself by plundering the houses of the inha- 