

* Arthur Conolly. The correct- not be recognised by its former visi- 
ness of this description is confirmed tants. Moreover, the city and its 
by Eldred Pottinger, in his unpub- surrounding places have been so well 
lished jouraal. 1 liave been obliged described by Lieut. A. Conolly, that 
to write it in the past tense. “ The I need not repeat the description.”— 
late war,” says Pottinger, “ and its [^Eldred Pottinger's MS, Journal.'] 
consequences have so changed the en- f Of these bazaars Pottinger writes: 

tire neighbourhood of the city, that, “ The interior of the city is divided 
under its present appearance, it would into four nearly equal divisions, by 



THE cmr OF HERAT. 


208 


In each of these there may have been about a thou¬ 
sand dwelling-houses and ten thousands of inhabitants. 
Mosques and caravanserais, public baths and public reser¬ 
voirs, varied the wretched uniformity of the narrow dirty 
streets, which, roofed across, were often little better than 
dark tunnels or conduits, where every conceivable de¬ 
scription of filth was suffered to collect and putrify. 
When Arthur Conolly expressed his wonder how the 
people could live in the midst of so much filth, he was 
answered, “ The climate is fine; and if dirt killed people 
where would the Afjfhans be ?”* 

Such to the eye of an ordinary traveller, in search of 
the picturesque, was the aspect of the city and its en¬ 
virons at the time when the army of Mahomed Shah 
was marching upon Herat. To the mind of the mili¬ 
tary observer both the position and construction of the 
place were suggestive of much interesting speculation. 
Situated at that point of the great mountain-range which 
alone presents facilities to the transport of a train of 
heavy artillery, Herat has, with no impropriety of desig¬ 
nation, been described as the “ Gate of India.” Within the 
limits of the Hcratec territory all the great roads leading 
on India converge. At other points, between Herat and 
Caubul, a body of troops unencumbered with guns, or 

two streets which, at right angles, country are, with a vacancy at the 
cross each other in the centre of the apex, filled merely with bits of broken 
city. The principal one joins the bricks. . . . The whole of the lower 
gate of Candahar to the l*ay-i-llissar, floors on each side are used as shops.” 
and was formerly covered by a sue- —[Eldred Pottinyer's MS, Journal.'] 
cession of small domes, springing * Conolly says: “ The town itself 
from arches which cross the streets, is, I should imagine, one of the 
About two-thirds of this magnificent dirtiest in the world. . . . No drains 
bazaar still remain; but so choked up having been contrived to carry off 
with rubbish, and so ruinous, that it the rains, which falls within the walls, 
has lost much of its attraction to the it collects and sta^ates in ponds 
eye. This bazaar was about 1300 which are dug in different parts of 
yards long and 6 in width. The soli- the city. The residents cast out the 
dity of the masonry of this work refuse of their houses into the streets, 
should have ensured its stability; but and dead cats and dogs are commonly 
unfortunately the arches are all de- seen lying upon heaps of the vilest 
fective—not one has a keystone, filth.**— [ConoUy'a Journey to the North 
They are built, as all others m this of India?] 