

+ Overtures had been made to 
Runjeet by Vickovich, who offered 
to visit the Maharajah's Cmirt. But 
British influence at this time was too 
strong at Lahore for the Russian to 
make way against it. Runjeet, how¬ 
ever, who was not ignorant of the 
Russo-phobia then rampant amongst 


us, turned the Cossack’s overtures to 
some account, and probably pretended 
more uncertainty on the score of the 
answer to be returned to him than he 
in reality felt. Mackeson, to whom 
the business of counteracting the 
designs of Vickovich was entrusted, 
managed it with great address, and 
won from the Maharajah a promise to 
have nothing to do with the Musco¬ 
vite agent. But the knowledge that 
the Russian agent was, as it were, 
knocking at the gates of Lahore, made 
our autliorities especially anxious to 
conciliate the Maharajah^ by refrain¬ 
ing from entering into any negotia^ 
tions with Caubul wiiich might pos¬ 
sibly give umbrage to Runjeet 



200 


THE “ commercial” MISSION TO CATTBUL. 


should be despatched to the Shah; but this arrange¬ 
ment being set aside, in consequence of the scruples of 
the Meerza, Aboo Khan was despatched in their place. 
There were now no half measures to be pursued. Dost 
Mahomed had flung himself into the arms of the Persian 
King. 

Vickovich was received with all honour in Western 
Afghanistan.* Russian promises now began to carry every¬ 
thing before them. A treaty between the Candahar bro¬ 
thers and the Shah was drawn up and signed by the latter. 
The Russian ambassador to whom it was forwarded 
sent it back to the Sirdars, saying, “ Mahomed Shah has 
promised to give you the possession of Herat; I sincerely 
tell you that you will also get Ghorian, on my account, 

from the Shah.When Mahomed Omar Khan 

arrives here I will ask the Shah to quit Herat, and I will 
remain here with 12,000 troops, and, when you join, we 
will take Herat, which will afterwards be delivered to 
you,”—magnificent promises, most refreshing to the souls 
of the Candahar chiefs. The letter was sent on to Dost 
Mahomed; but it did not fill the heart of the Ameer 
with an equal measure of delight. The Russian alliance 
was unpopular at Caubul. It had “ ruined him in the 
eyes of all Mahomedans.” It soon became obvious, too, 
in spite of the fair beginning, that whilst he was losing 


* What befel the unhappy agent 
after this, it is painful to relate. 
When he returned to Persia, in 1839, 
after giving a full report of his mission 
to M. Duhamel, the new minister at 
Teheran, he was instructed to proceed 
direct to St. Petersburgh. On his 
arrival there, full of hope, for he had 
discharged the duty entrusted to him 
with admirable address, he reported 
himself, after the customary formality, 
to Count Nesselrode; but the minis¬ 
ter refused to see him. Instead of a 
flattering welcome, the unhappy envoy 
was received with a crushing message, 


to the effect that Count Nesselrode 
“ knew no Captain Vickovich, except 
an adventurer of that name, who, it 
was reported, had been lately engaged 
in some unauthorised intrigues at 
Caubul and Candahar.** Vickovich 
understood at once the dire portent 
of this message. He knew the cha¬ 
racter of his government. He was 
aware of the recent expostulations of 
Great Britain. And he saw clearly 
that he was to be sacrificed. He went 
back to his hotel, wrote a few bitter, 
reproachful lines, burnt all liis other 
papers, and blew out his brains. 