


217 


increased vigour, addressed himself to the defence of 
the city. The gates were closed against all egress. 
. The people poured into Herat in floods from the sur¬ 
rounding country. In eveiy house were huddled to¬ 
gether the members of five or six families. The very 
ruins were thickly tenanted. But still the streets were 
alive with throngs of people seeking habitations in the 
city. Everywhere excitement and alarm w'ere visible 
in the countenances .and the gestures of the Ileratees. 
It was a strange and fearful conjuncture, and no man 
felt himself secure. A fiat had gone i'orth for the 
apprehension of all persons of doubtful loyalty. Many 
suspected of infidelity were seized, their persons impri¬ 
soned, and their property confiscated, whilst others, 
in whom the spirit of rebellion had been more clearly 
evidenced, were plunged, with all their family and 
dependents, into one great sea of ruin. When it was 
known that Shuins-ood decn Khan,* an Afghan chief of 
note, had thrown off his allegiance to Herat, his Per¬ 
sian dependents were seized and stripped of all they 
possessed. Some were tortured, some were sent into 
slavery, and some were condemned to death. The 
women and children were sold or given away. Those 
of the Afghan tribes were more mercifully treated; but 
lew escaped imprisonment and fine. Nor were even 
the priesthood spared. The Moollahs of the Sheeah 
sect were arrested and confined, lest they should stir 
up intrigue and disafiection among the people. 

* Shums-ood-deen Khan of Herat minister's persecution that he de- 
was a Populzye nobleman of very serted to the Persian camp on the 
good family, and in great favour with approach of the invading army. Had 
Shah Kamran before the commence- he remained in the city, he would 
ment of the siege of Herat. His certainly have been imprisoned or 
sister was the Shah's favourite wife, assassinated, for the Shah was power- 
and he was entirely in his Majesty’s less to protect him. It was sur- 
confidence. A position of so much mised, indeed, that his Majesty coun- 
p)wer, however, made Yar Mahomed selled, or at any rate connived at, his 
his enemy, and it was to escape the flight as his only means of escape. 



218 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


Whilst these precautions against internal revolt were 
taken by the Shah and his unscrupulous minister, 
actively and unceasingly they laboured to defend the 
city against the enemy advancing from without. The 
fortifications now began to bristle with armed soldiers. 
The hammer of the artificer rang upon the guns in the 
embrasures. The spade of the workman was busy upon 
the ramparts. Eager for the foray, the trooper mounted 
his horse and scoured the country to cut off stragglers. 
But still the Persian array moved forward in that com¬ 
pact and well-ordered mass which had baffled the efforts 
and kindled the indignation of marauders along their 
whole line of march. Soon the contest actually com¬ 
menced. On the 22 nd of November, the advanced 
guard of the Persian army took up its position on the 
plain to the north-west of the city. Watching its op¬ 
portunity, the Afghan horse charged the enemy’s cavalry 
with success, and then fell upon an infantry regiment, 
which stood firm, and repulsed the attack. The Persian 
field artillery opened briskly upon the Afghan force. 
A couple of guns in the city replied to them ; whilst 
a party of Alghan liorsemen, dismounted, crept under 
cover, and with their long rifle-barrelled matchlocks, 
fired on the Persian gunners. Upon this, skirmishers 
were sent out by the Persians, who turned the flank 
of the Afghans, and forced them back to the position 
which they had taken up before. No advantage was 
gained by either party. But the contest was now fairly 
commenced. 