



RUMOURS OF THE PERSIAN ADVANCE. 


211 


to be received into the city. These were the terms 
dictated by Mahomed Shah, and thrown back by Shah 
Kamran with defiance. 

The greatest excitement now prevailed throughout the 
city. There was but one topic of discourse. Every 
man met his neighbour with a word about the coming 
of the Persian army. The Sheeaffs, smarting under the 
tyranny to which they had long been subjected, spoke 
of the advent of the Persian monarch as of the coming 
of a deliverer, whilst the Soonee Afghans, whom they 
taunted with predictions of the success of the invading 
force, swore that they would defend, to the last drop 
of their blood, the only remnant of the old Afghan 
monarcliy which liad not been violently wrested from 
the hands of its legitimate possessors. 

*On the 17th of September the King returned to Herat. 
Moved by one common impulse of curiosity, the people 
wont forth to meet him. The streets were lined with 
eager thousands, and the house-tops were alive with 
gazers. A procession of the true Oriental type, it pre¬ 
sented, in vivid contrasts, strazige alternations of the 
shabby and the superb. First came a few strong bag¬ 
gage-mules, and a few straggling horsemen, mounted on 
tine well-built animals, but lean, and often lame and 
wounded. Then, in their high red-cloth caps, appeared 
he criers and the executioners, bearing aloft the instru- 
nents of their calling; and, in spite of the grim sugges- 
iveness of the large knives and tiger-headed brazen 
aaces, presenting an appearance less solemn than gro- 
esque. Next came a string of horses led by armed 
rooms, their fine stag-like heads telling the purity of 
heir blood, and their handsome equipments the royal 
wnership they boasted. Then followed, close behind, 

1 a covered litter of red cloth, carried by Hindostanee 
carers, Shah Kamran himself. Very plainly, but taste- 

V 2 



212 


THE SIEGE OF HEKAT. 


fully attired, the golden bosses on his sword-belt, and 
the jewels on his dagger-hilt, being the only ornaments 
about the royal person, he returned, through the open 
curtains of his litter, with a kingly and a graceful cour¬ 
tesy, the salutations of the people. Next came the Koyal 
Princes, with the eunuchs, and other personal attendants 
of the Shah ;* and then, but at a long interval, a motley 
crowd of armed foot-men, the regular infantry of Herat, 
in all sorts of irregular costumes. These preceded the 
cavalcade of the Wuzeer, Yar Mahomed, who, with all 
the chiefs of note around him, headed the main body of 
the Afghan cavalry, whose low sheepskin caps and 
uniform attire made up a very soldierly appearance. 
Another body of infantry closed the procession. The 
guns had been left behind. 

Among the many Avho went forth on that September 
morning to witness the entrance of Shah Kamran into 
his capital, was a young European officer. Riding out 
a mile beyond the city walls, he picketed his horse in 
the court-yard of a deserted house, and joined a party of 
Afghans, who, sitting on the domed roof of the build¬ 
ing, were watching the procession as it passed. He had 
entered Herat about a month before, after an adven¬ 
turous journey from Caubul, through the Imauk and 
Hazareh coimtries. The name of this young officer was 
Eldred Pottinger. He was a Lieutenant in the Bombay 
Artillery; and had been despatched by his uncle. Colonel 
Pottinger, who was then Resident in Sindh,f for the 
purpose of exploring the countries of Afghanistan, and 
collecting materials for a full report to be drawn up on 
his return. He started in no recognised official capacity, 