


* rottinjjer, who is ])r()vokin^ly 
chary, in his jounuil, of inlbrmatioii 
about himself, does not say wliether 
he appeared at these interviews in 
his true cliaracter of a Ih-itishoflicer; 
but I conclude that he did not, on 
these occasions, attempt to conceal 
his nationality. Nor does it seem 
that, in his intercourse with the higher 
class of Heratees, he wore any dis¬ 
guise ; for we soon find him taking 
part in a conversation about Arthur 
Conolly, and addressed as a country¬ 
man of that fine* hearted young Eng¬ 
lishman. I cannot transcribe, without 
a glow of pleasure, the following pas¬ 
sage in Pottinger’s journal:—“I fell 
in with a number of Captain Conolly's 
acquaintances. Every person asked 
after him, and appeared disappointed 
when 1 told them 1 did not know him. 
In two places I crossed Mr. Conolly's 
route, and on his account received 
the greatest hospitality and attention 


—indeed, more than was jdeasant, for 
such lilierality re([uired correspond¬ 
ing upon my part; and my funds 
were not well adapted for any extra¬ 
ordinary demand upon them. In 
Herat, Mr. Conolly’s fame was great. 
In a large party where the subject of 
the Europeans who had visited Herat 
was mooted, Conolly’s name being 
mentioned, I was asked if I knew him, 
i\iid on replying, ‘ Merely by report,’ 
Moollah IMahomed, a Sheeah Moolhili 
of eminence, ealliii" to me across the 
room, said, ‘You have a great plea¬ 
sure awaiting you. When you see him 
give him my salutation, and tell him 
that I say he has done as much to 
give the English nation fame in 
Herat, as your ambassador, Mr. El- 
phinstone, did at Peshawur;’ and in 
this he was seconded by the great 
mass present.” — [Eldred Pottinger^s 
MS, Journal.'} 



PREPARATIONS FOR THE SIEGE. 


215 


Scarcely had the King returned to Herat, when a 
proclamation went forth into the surrounding villages, 
decreeing that all the grain and forage should be 
brought into tlie city, and tliat the villagers should abide 
within its walls, on pain of the Shah’s resentment. The 
danger seemed something dim and remote, and the order, 
at first, was little iieeded. But wlien, towards the close 
of C)etol)er, intelligence re.iched Herat that the Persian 
army had arrived at Toorbut, another more imperative 
edict was is'^ucd, commanding all tlie outstanding crops, 
grain, and forage, to be destroyed, and the fruit trees to 
be cut down in the surrounding gardens. The soldiery 
were let loo<e upon the country to carry out the royal 
decree. The ])olicy of this measure is apparent; but 
tliere was unlooked-for evil in the result. It was the 
object of the Ileratec Government to keep all the avail¬ 
able grain, forage, and firewood outside the city from 
falling into the hands of the invading army. If these 
nccc'ssaries could not be stored in Herat, the next best 
thing was to destroy them. But the license thus given 
to the soldiery completely unhinged the little discipline 
Uiat had before^ kept them together. They were, indeed, 
li’om that time so completely disorganised, that it was 
never afterwards found practicable to reduce them to 
order. 