

In the mean wliile, the city was alive with rumours of 
the progress of the Persian army. It was ascertained 
that they were moving forward^ in three bodies, the 
advance of which was a force of 10,000 or 12,000 men, 
under Alayar Khan.* Every now and then a prisoner 

* Better known by his title of hash^ or younger branch. Futteh Ali 
Asoof-ood-dowlah. He was the head Shah, to stanch an old tribe feud, 
of the Yukhaiv-bash division of the had married his son and heir-appa- 
Kajjar tribe, and, according to the rent, Abbas Meerza. to the heiress of 
liOTaldry of the clans, was thus of the rival branch, and Mahomed Shah 
higher rank than the Shah, who being the issue of this marriage, the 
was merely the chief of the Ashagha^ Asoof-ood-dowlah was his maternal 



216 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


was brought in; but the people, who seized them, bitterly 
complained that they could not make more captures. 
The Persian army, they loudly declared, was composed 
of a set of the most contemptible cowards, because they 
marched in compact bodies, defended by their guns, 
instead of straggling boldly about on purpose to be cut 
off by marauding Afghans.* 

Early in November there was a hard frost, and the 
Heratees began hopefully to speculate on the chances of 
a severe winter. Never were the predictions of the 
weatherwise so cruelly falsified; but the hope buoyed 
them up for a time. Another cheering anticipation was 
belied in the same mortifying manner. It was long a 
matter of anxious conjecture whether the Persians 
would attack Ghorian. In 1834-35 they had left it 
untouched ; and it was believed that now again they 
would mask it, for its reputed strength was greater than 
that of Herat, and it was defended by a picked garrison, 
under the command of the brother of Yar Mahomed. 
But these hopes were soon dispersed by the arrival of 
couriers from Ghorian, with tidings that the place was 
besieged. On the 15th of November it was announced 
that Ghorian had fallen. 

Matters now began to wear a more alarming aspect. 
Cursing with his whole heart the cowardice or trea¬ 
chery of his brother, who, almost without a struggle, had 
shamefully surrendered his charge,f Yar Mahomed, with 


uncle. The Asoof was Governor of 
Kliorassan, with almost independent 
powers, from 1835 to 1847. He is 
now in exile at Baghdad. 

* As the army approached Herat 
some important captures were made. 
Among others, the secretary of the 
Asoof-ood-dowlah was carried off, 
with all his papers. 

*|* This was Yar Mahomcd*s first 
angry view of the case; but it may 


be doubted whether Shere Mahomed 
Khan was fairly to be censured for 
the loss of Ghorian. Of small dimen¬ 
sions, and unfurnished with bomb- 
proofs, the place was ill calculated to 
sustain the heavy vertical fire of shot 
and shell which the Persian artillery 
poured into it. A magazine and 
storehouse took fire; and at the time 
of its surrender Colonel Stoddart 
pronounced it to be quite untenable. 



DEFENSIVE OPEBATIONS. 