

♦ Pottinger says that “he was divide a sheep in two by a single 
much devoted to field sports, and cut of his sabre, and with a Lahore 
spent the greater part of his time in bow send an arrow through a cow.” 
their pursuit. He was an unerring —[Mi?. Journal] 
shot with a matchlock; he could 



208 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


ends, a becoming courtesy of demeanour; and, as by 
assiduous attention to costume, he endeavoured to com¬ 
pensate for the deficiencies of an unattractive person, 
there was something of a high and princely aspect about 
the outward bearing even of this degraded man. Short 
and thickset, with mis-shapen limbs and an unseemly 
gait, his appearance was more comely in repose than in 
action. His face was pitted with the small-pox, and 
there was a harshness in his countenance stamped by the 
long possession of arbitrary power and the indulgence of 
unbridled passions; but he had a finer, more massive, 
more upright forehead, than the majority of his country¬ 
men, with more of intellect impressed upon it. His voice 
had once been loud and deep; but the feebleness of age, 
much sickness, and much suffering, had given a queru¬ 
lousness to its tones which was equally undignified and 
unpleasing. 

If in the character and the person of Shah Kamran 
there was little that was estimable or attractive, there 
was less in the person and character of his Wuzeer. 
Yar Mahomed Khan was a stout, square-built man, of 
middle height, with a heavy, stern countenance, thick 
negro-like lips, bad straggling teeth, an overhanging 
brow, and an abruptly receding forehead. His face was 
redeemed from utter repulsiveness by the fineness of his 
eyes and the comeliness of his beard. Like his master, he 
attired himself with care and propriety; but his manner 
was more attractive than his appearance. Affable in 
his demeanour, outwardly courteous and serene, he seldom 
gave the rein to his temper, but held it in habitual con¬ 
trol. He talked freely and well, had a fund of anecdote 
at his command, was said to be well read in Mahomedan 
divinity, and was strict in his attention to the external 
formalities of his religion. His courage was never 
questioned; and his ability was as undoubted as his 
courage. Both were turned to the worst possible ac- 



KAJfRAN AND TAB MAH0MT3D. 


209 


count. Of all the unscrupulous miscreants in Central 
Asia, Yar Mahomed was the most unscrupulous. His 
avarice and his ambition knew no bounds, and nothing 
was suffered to stand in the way of their gratification. 
Utterly without tenderness or compassion, he had no 
regard for the sufferings of others. Sparing neither sex 
nor age, he trod down the weak with an iron heel; and, 
a tj’rant himself, encouraged the tyranny of his retainers. 
As faithless as he was cruel, there was no obligation 
which he had not violated, no treachery that had not 
stained his career. If there was an abler or a worse man 
in Central Asia, I have not yet heard his name.* 

In the summer of 1837 the bazaars of Herat were 
a-stir with rumours of the movements of the royal army. 
The King and the Wuzeer were absent from the city on 
a campaign in Seistan. To gratify the personal rancour 
of the latter they had laid siege to the fortress of Jowayn, 
and in the vain attempt to reduce a place of no political 
importance, had crippled their own military resources in 
a manner which they soon began bitterly to lament. 
The waste of so much strength on so small an enter¬ 
prise was unworthy of a man so able and so astute as 
Yar Mahomed; but the feeling of personal resentment 
was stronger in him than either avarice or ambition, 
lie had a larger game in hand at that time, and he 
should have husbanded all his resources for the great 
struggle by which he sought to restore to the Suddozye 
Princes the sovereignty of Caubul and Candahar.f 