


equal indignation—and that a corre¬ 
sponding exaltation was felt by the 
victors at the sight of these barbarous 
trophies, and the spoils brought in.'* 
— iMS, Jourtial.'] As rewards were 
always given for these bloody tro¬ 
phies, the garrison were naturally very 
active in their endeavours to obtain 
them. Sometimes their avarice out¬ 
stripped both their honesty and their 
nationality. On one occasion, after 
an unsuccessful sortie, an Afghan 
brought in a pair of ears. A doak 
and some ducats were given him as a 
reward for his butchery. Before 
any questions could be put to the 
fellow, he suddenly vanished.. About 
half an hour auerwards, another 
man, covered with mud, made his 
wpearance with a head in his hand. 
TheWuzeer, thinking it looked as 


though it had no cars, ordered one of 
his retainers to examine it. On 
this the bearer of the ghastly 
trophy threw it down, and ran away 
with all the speed he could command. 
The head was picked up by one of 
the Wuzeer's retainers, and found to 
be that of a comrade, who had fallen 
during the sortie of the preceding 
night. The fellow was pursued, and 
soundly beaten and kicked—but the 
more successful bringer-in of the 
ears was not to be found, though 
several rough unscrupulous fellows 
were told by the Wuzeer that they 
might possess themselves of botu 
cloak and ducats if they could. 

* MS. Journal of Eldred Pot* 
Unger. 

f “ The enemy’s fire being directed 
to the parapet at all points, the 



INCIDENTS OF THE SIEGE. 


221 


Day after day, with little change of circumstance and 
little gain to either party, the siege continued throughout 
the months of November and December. At the end 
of the former, Pottinger wrote in his journal, “ The Per¬ 
sians have wasted some thousand rounds of ammunition, 
and are not more advanced than when the firing com¬ 
menced.” The dreaded artillery of Mahomed Shah was 
less formidable in reality than in the excited imagina¬ 
tions of the Heratees; and the besieged gathered new 
courage from the success of their resistance. The fire 
from the Persian batteries was irregular and spasmodic; 
sometimes maintained with exceeding spirit, and at 
others languid and uncertain. The round shot from the 
guns went over the batteries, often clearing the entire 
city, but sometimes falling within it. The vertical firing 
from the mortars told with better effect. The shells* 
were thrown less at random, and many houses were de¬ 
stroyed. The loss of life was not great in the city; but 
those domestic episodes of war, which give so painfiil an 
interest to the annals of an attack upon a fortified town, 
were not absent from the siege of Herat. In the next 
house to that in which Eldred Pottinger resided, a shell 
descended close to the spot on which an infant was sleep¬ 
ing. The terrified mother rushed between the deadly 
missile and her child. The shell exploding carried off 
her head; and the corpse of the mother fell upon the 
babe, and suffocated it. 