



206 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


bitants, and selling the people into slavery. All who 
were strong enough followed his example, and when 
detected, secured immunity for themselves by giving 
him a portion of the spoil.* So remorseless, indeed, was 
the tyranny exercised over the unhappy Sheeahs by 
their Afghan masters, that many of the inhabitants of 
Herat looked forward to the coming of the Persian King 
as to the advent of a deliverer, and would gladly have 
seen the city given over to the governance of one who, 
whatever may have been his political claims, was not an 
alien in his religious faith.f 

Such was the last remnant of the old Afghan mo¬ 
narchy in the hands of Shah Kamran—the only one of 
the Suddozyc Princes who had retained his hold of the 
country he had governed. His government was at this 
time a pageant and a name. An old and a feeble man, 
broken down by long years of debauchery, he had re¬ 
signed the active duties of administration into the hands 
of his Wuzeer. He was, perhaps, the worst of the royal 
princes—the worst of a bad race. His youth had been 
stained by the commission of every kind of Oriental 


* Eldred Pottinger, from whose 
manuscript journal the materials of 
this chapter are mainly drawn, gives 
a remarkable illustration of the man¬ 
ner in which justice was then admi¬ 
nistered. “ During this period,” he 
says, “a Ileratee detected a noted 
robber in his outhouse, and with the 
aid of his neighbours arrested him. 
In the morning, when taken before 
the Sirdars by the cutwal, to request 
the order for punishment might be 
given as the case was proved, the 
robber declared, that on hearing the 
citizen call for aid, he had run to his 
help, and being immediately laid hold 
of, made prisoner and accused. He 
also accused the cutwal of being a 
partner in the plan. The young Sir¬ 
dar, with an acumen to be wondered 
at but not described, decided that 
his was the truth of the story—-sold 


the accuser, and so severely fined the 
witnesses, that they were reduced to 
poverty and debt to the soldiers—^the 
sure precursor of slavery. He then 
gave the thief, who was his own ser¬ 
vant, a I'helat (or dress of honour) 
and released him. U nder such a go¬ 
vernor the misery of the people would 
require a more eloquent pen than 
mine to narrate.” 

t It need scarcely be said that the 
Persians are generally of the Sheeah, 
and the Afghans of the Soonee sect. 
At Herat uie rulers and the soldiery 
were Soonees, whilst the shopkeepers 
and other peaceful citizens were 
Sheeahs. Tne oppression of the 
Sheeahs by their Afghan masters was 
one of the circumstances by a refer¬ 
ence of which Mahomed Shah sought 
to justify his invasion of Herat. 



CHABACTEB OF SHAH KAMRAN. 


207 


crime; and now in his old age, if the evil passions of 
his nature were less prominently developed, it was only 
because physical decay had limited his power to in¬ 
dulge them. In his younger days he had set no restraint 
upon himself, and now it was nature only that restrained 
him. The violent gusts of passion, which had once 
threatened all who were within his influence, had given 
place to an almost incessant peevishness and petulance of 
manner, more pitiable to behold than it was dangerous to 
encounter. He had once played openly the part of the 
bandit—placing himself at the head of gangs of armed 
retainers, plundering houses by night and slaying all 
who opposed him; now he suffered others to commit the 
violence which he had before personally enacted, and 
oppressed, by deputy, the weakness which he could not 
see smitten before his face. He had once been immo¬ 
derately addicted to sensual pleasure, and in the pursuit 
of such gratification—arrested by no feelings of compas¬ 
sion, by no visitings of remorse—had violently seized 
the objects of his desires, to whomsoever they belonged, 
and cast them adrift when his appetite was sated; now 
he sought excitement of another kind, to which age and 
feebleness were no impediments, and turned from the 
caresses of women to seek solace from the stimulants of 
wine. Unfaithful to his friends and unmerciful to his 
enemies, ingratitude and cruelty were conspicuous in his 
nature, and these darker features of his character there 
was little to lighten or relieve. Among his countrymen 
he was esteemed for a certain kind of courage, and in 
his younger days he had not been wanting in activity 
and address.* Though naturally haughty and arrogant, 
there were times when he could assume, for his own 