

♦ Among these was M. Euler, the the condition of Afghanistan by the 
Shall'8 European physician. reports of Mr. Masson, who was then 

t Colonel (Sir Henry) Pottinger the British news-writer at Caubul. 
had been particularly interested in 



KT.n nKn pottingee. 


213 


but travelled onward in the most unostentatious manner, 
assuming the disguise of a Cutch horse-dealer, and at¬ 
tracting little attention on his route. Journeying up¬ 
wards by Shikarpoor and Dehra Ismael Khan to Pesha- 
wur, he proceeded thence to Caubul, and there chang¬ 
ing his disguise for that of an Indian Syud, made his way 
tlirough the rude country of the Imauks and Hazarehs 
to Herat. Though at this period he was but slightly 
acquainted with the Persian language, and was ignorant 
of the Mahomedan prayers, of their genuflexions, modes 
of worship, and similar observances, he passed on almost 
unquestioned by the credulous Afghans. In Herat itself, 
tliough he seems to have taken little pains to conceal 
his real character, he remained, for some time,* lodging 
iu a caravanserai, and mixing freely with its inmates, 
but seldom recognised as an European by those with 
whom he associated. 

The King and the Wuzeer returned to Herat; and 
Eldred Pottinger soon sent a message to the latter, 
offering, as a stranger and a traveller, to wait upon him, 
if he desired to see him. To the surprise of the Eng¬ 
lish olBccr, Yar Mahomed sent a messenger to him inti¬ 
mating that, early on the following morning, he would 
be happy to receive him. Pottinger went. The minis¬ 
ter, who was seated in an alcove in the dressing-room 
of his bath, rose as the stranger entered, invited him to 
take a seat beside himself, and welcomed him with 
becoming courtesy. As the only articles he possessed 
worthy of the acceptance of the chief, Pottinger pre¬ 
sented his detonating pistols; and the gift was graciously 
received. A few days afterwards he paid, “ by desire,” 

♦ “ I have heard him,” writes one Mecca, he silenced all questioning by 
who knew Pottinger well, “ describe appealing to the usage of India.”— 
how on two occasions, when challenged [Private Correspondence."] 
about not praying or turning towards 



214 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


a visit to the King.* Little did Shah Kaiuran and Yar 
Mahomed, when they received that unassuming traveller, 
think how much, under Providence, the future destinies 
of Herat were in the hands of that young Englishman. 
The spirit of adventure was strong in Eldred Pottinger. 
It had brought him to the gates of Herat, and now it 
kept him there, eager to take a part in the coming 
struggle between the Heratees and their Persian in¬ 
vaders. And when the day of trial came—when the 
enemy were under the walls of the city—he threw him¬ 
self into the contest, not merely in a spirit of adven¬ 
ture, as a young soldier rejoicing in the opportunity thus 
afforded him of taking part in the stirring scenes of active 
warfare, but as one j^rofoundly impressed with the con¬ 
viction that his duty to his country called upon him, in 
such a crisis, to put forth all his energies in aid of those 
who were striving to arrest a movement threatening not 
only the independence of Herat, but the stability of the 
British Empire in the East. 