

* Yar Mahomed was the nephew same capacious mind and energetic 
if Atta Mahomed, an influential Sir- character which distinguished their 
W of the Alekozyc tribe, who was cousin, Yar Mahomed, who was al- 
ninister to Shah Mahmoud and ways, more or less, at enmity with 
dadjee Feroz, and afterwards of them, and at last drove them out of 
>hah Kamran. This man left two Herat, in 1841. 
ons, Been Mahomed and Sultan f Pottinger says, with reference to 

dahomed; but neither possessed the this ill-judged movement, that the 

VOL. I. P 



210 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


It was soon buzzed ‘abroad in Herat that the army 
was about to return—that it had broken off from the 
siege of Jowayn—and was coming back to gird itself 
up for stirring work at home. Cossids were coming in 
daily from the royal camp with instructions for the col¬ 
lection of grain and the repair of the defences of the 
city. The meaning of this was involved in no obscurity. 
The ambassador who had been sent to Teheran to seek, 
among other objects, the assistance of Mahomed Shah in 
the projected enterprise for the recovery of Candahar 
and Caubul* had brought back an answer to the effect 
that the Persian monarch claimed both principalities lor 
himself, and intended to take possession of Herat as a 
preliminary to further operations. It was said to be the 
intention-of the King of Kings to proceed to Caubul, 
and, receiving as the price of his assistance the sub¬ 
mission of the Amcor, to join Dost Mahomed in a reli¬ 
gious war against the Siklis. Herat was to be reduced 
on the road. Kuinran was to be deprived of liis regal 
titles. Prayers were to be said and coin struck in the 
name of the Persian King; and a Persian garrison was 

Wuzcor played away the last stake of Yar iVTahoincd ever really contem- 
his master by which he could have plated an expedition for the recovery 
hoped to recover his former domi- of Cundalnir and Caubul; but it is 
iiions or to defend his present. In- certain that they talked about it. In 
deed, after-events have shown that the letter which Kamran sent to Ma- 
the body of cavalry which he thus homed Shah, by Futteh Mahomed 
frittered away and destro 3 ’ed was Ivhan, lie e.xpressed a “ hope o! ob- 
stron^ enough to have prevented the tainin^ the favour of his Majesty, so 
Per ^ian army leav ng its own frou- that with the aiil of the well-wishers 
tier.” There was, however, some com- of Persia he minht subdue his here- 
pensat on whicli, whether the result of ditary ilominion.s, and overwhelm Ids 
the sie»je or not, is worth mentioning, rebellion'^ enemies;” and in the mes- 
in the fact that when Herat was at- sage whieli Pottinger was coinmis- 
tiMjked by the Persians, many of the sioned to deliver to the Persian ino- 
old garrison of Jowayn came to the narch, it was distinctlv declared that 
assistance of their former enemies. Futteli ^lahomed Khan liad been sent 
* It is doubted by some, whose to Teheran to beg for aid towards 
opinions arc entitled to the highest the recovery of Kainran's paternal 
respect, ‘whether either Kamran or kingdom.— post, page 229, 