

The following day witnessed the opening of the siege 
of Herat—one, whether we regard the protracted nature 
of the operations, the vigour of the resistance, the gal¬ 
lantry of the chief actors concerned in it, or the magni¬ 
tude of the political results, of the most remarkable in 
modern history. It was on the 23rd of November that 



COMMENCEMENT OF THE SIEGE. 21& 

the siege actually commenced. Taking possession of all 
the gardens and enclosures to the west of the city, and 
establishing themselves in considerable force among a 
cluster of ruins that afforded them good shelter, the Per¬ 
sians began to make their preparations for the attack. 
The garrison sallied out as they advanced. The Afghan 
infantry disputed every inch of ground, and the cavalry 
hung on the flanks of the Persian army. But they 
could not dislodge the enemy from the position they had 
taken up; and after carrying off a few prisoners, were 
compelled at last to retire. From the events, however, 
of that day, two significant facts were to be deduced. 
The Persians had tried their artillery upon the walls of 
Herat in answer to the guns which the garrison had fired 
in support of their skirmishers; and the rotten parapets 
had fallen like tinder even to the light shot that was 
poured upon them.* It was plain that little reliance was 
to be placed upon the strength of the defences. It was 
plain, too, that the war thus commenced would be car¬ 
ried on in a spirit of unsparing hatred and savage inhu¬ 
manity— that what was wanting, on either side, in 
science, would be made up for in cruelty and vindictive¬ 
ness. The Afghan skirmishers that evening brought in 
some prisoners and some heads. The latter were paraded 
about the ramparts.f The former were bartered for 
horses with the Toorkomans, and sent off to Merve. 

• “A good many light shots,” says that were brought in daily, nor in- 
Eldred Pottinger, “ were fired at the deed do I know. I never could 
walls to keep down the fire in sup- speak of this barbarous, disgusting, 
port of the skirmishers ; and it was and inhuman conduct with any tem- 
a very disheartening sight to see the per. The number, however, in these 
breaches they made in the rotten sorties was always insignificant, and 
parapets.”— Journal,'] the collecting them invariably broke 

Of this barbarous custom of the vigour of the pursuit, and pre¬ 
bringing in the heads of the enemy, vented the destruction of the 
Pottinger speaks with becoming in- trenches. There is no doubt great 
dignation. “ I have not thought it terror was inspired by the mutilation 
necessary,” he writes in his journal, of the bodies amongst their comrades. 

to recount the number of heads But there must have been, at least, 



220 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


The siege was soon in full operation. Whilst the 
Heratees were busily at work strengthening their de¬ 
fences, the Persians were entrenching themselves, throw¬ 
ing up their batteries, planting their guns, and trying 
their effect upon the walls of the city. After a day 
or two, guns, mortars, and rocket batteries were all in 
full play upon Herat. The rockets ranged too widely 
to work any serious mischief to the besieged; but their 
grand fiery flight as they passed over the city struck 
terror into the hearts of the people, who clustered upon 
the roofs of the houses, praying and crying by turns. 
“ The uproar and confusion inside was tremendous, 
whilst not a sound was heard from the ramparts which 
a few nights before had been shaken by clamour.”* 
The defenders of the city had too much serious occu¬ 
pation on hand to expend themselves in much noise. 
It was no easy thing to repair the defences which 
were crumbling to pieces under the fire of the Persian 
batteries. Silently, but resolutely, they set about their 
work, repairing the mischief as it arose, and giving a 
new character of defence to the battered fortifications.f 