



MESSAGE OF SHAH KAMRAN'. 


229 


rest of whicli my rebellious subjects have deprived me. 
Your grandfather always styled my father ‘ brother,’ and 
rae ‘ son;’ and now you, to show your fraternity, leave 
the seventy other cities of your dominions to besiege an 
empty one, which can never become yours whilst an 
A%han remains to wield a sword in its defence. I took 
refuge here, as it was near your grandfether’s (may he be 
blessed!) dominions; and became entitled to the rights 
of a neighbour. I looked for aid to recover mylbst 
territories—to drive out the false traitors who have 
seized them—but, lo I my neighbour is come with an 
army to turn me out of the last corner of my paternal 
dominions. You have acquired them all during the 
dissensions of my family, and now you wish to deprive 
me of the last morsel. It becomes not kings to ally 
themselves with traitors. How differently did I behave 
on the death of your grandfather (Futteh Ali Shah) ? 
Was not all Khorassan in rebellion, or ready to rebel ? I 
had received letters from all its chiefs, inviting my aid to 
throw off your yoke. All my nobles and people were 
pressing me to march. I had 10,000 horsemen; and the 
news of an attack on Khorassan would have raised and 
brought double that number after me. Nishapoor was 
in rebellion. You had only a few troops in Meshid. 
No other force was between me and Teheran. In this 
state, I said that I would not take advantage of the 
troubles of your family. I despatched my troops, that 
they might prepare for a campaign against my rebellious 
subjects. I also sent Futteh Mahomed Khan to congra¬ 
tulate you on your succession, and to beg for aid—offer¬ 
ing that, if you would give me a force of regular infantry 
and guns sufficient to recover my paternal kingdom, I 
would, on achieving success, transfer Herat to you. 
What is your answer ? How generous I You. look 
round to see who your neighbours are. I am your 



230 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


weakest one* You, therefore, assemble all your force to 
rob me of my last of eighty cities. You answer my 
supplication for aid by the roar of yomr cannon and 
bombs. Act generously: raise the siege; retire and give 
me the troops and guns I want; and I will give you, on 
my success, Herat. Also, turn the Afghan traitors out 
of your camp. If you persist in your present purpose, 
futiue ages will call you a robber, who preyed upon the 
agdR and helpless. If you do not act generously, God is 
great; and on him we rely. We have still got our 
swords.” 

Such was the message Pottinger was commissioned to 
deliver to the Shah of Persia. It came out by snatches, 
in an excited spasmodic manner; but was understood by 
the British officer. Having heard all that was to be 
said, he took his departure, and joined the Wuzeer upon 
the works. But, for some time, the projected negotiations 
never advanced beyond the threshold. It occurred to 
Shah Kamran that it would be well to strike a blow, and 
to achieve some demonstrable success, before despatch¬ 
ing an emissary to the Persian camp, lest the overtures 
should be attributed to conscious weakness, and rather 
increase than lower the pretensions of the Shah. 