

In the mean while, with a vigour and a constancy 
worthy of any garrison, in ancient or in modern times, the 

rubbish began to shelter the foot of formed.”—[UfA’. Joumai of Eldred 
the escarp. Strong working parties Pottinger,'} 

commenced building up backs to the ♦ “ A great number of these shells 
rampart at the point fired at, so that are carved out of slate-rock, and 
the body of the old rampart ma^ their chamber contains little more 
become a paranet, and the summit than a bursting charge. Hence they 
of the new back a terre-pleine from are unable to do much execution.’*-^ 
which to deiend the breaches when [MS, Joumai of Eldred Pottinger,} 



222 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


besieged continued to conduct their defensive operations. 
Three of the five gates of the city were kept open, and 
the communications with the surrounding country were 
preserved. The cattle were sent out to graze. Fire¬ 
wood and other commodities were brought into the city. 
Every week found the beleaguered Heratees in better 
spirits and higher courage. The terror inspired by the 
name of the descendant of Nadir Shah was rapidly wear¬ 
ing out. The Persians, after all, did not seem to be 
such formidable opponents. Every night the garrison 
sallied out, attacked the working parties, carried off their 
tools, often destroyed their entrenchments, wounded and 
sometimes killed the workmen, and carried their bleed¬ 
ing heads, with barbarous triumph, into the city. 

Whilst the activity of the garrison seemed rather to 
increase, that of the besiegers was plainly declining. 
Throughout the mouth of December little progress was 
made. The fire of the Persian batteries slackened— 
sometimes altogether ceased. When it was most lively, 
it was wild and eccentric—so slovenly, indeed, as to 
warrant the belief that every gun was pointed in a dif¬ 
ferent direction, and every gunner firing at some parti¬ 
cular mark of his own. At last, on Christmas-day, 
when the siege had been continued for more than a 
month, Eldred Pottinger wrote in his journal, “ I could 
not help recollecting the three shots a day which the 
Spanish army before Gibraltar fired for some time, and 
which the garrison called after the Trinity.” 

The following day was one of barbarous retaliation. 
All the Persian prisoners in Herat were sent ofl" for sale 
to Kurookh. There were Afghan prisoners, at this time, 
in the Persian camp; and Mahomed Shah had no re¬ 
fined Christian notions on the score of returning good 
for evil. He ripped up the bellies, or destroyed after 
some cruel fashion, all the prisoners who fell into his 



MISSION OF SHERE MAHOMED. 


223 


hands. After this, in spite of the heavy rains that fell 
during the two succeeding days, there were some demon¬ 
strations of increased vigour in the conduct of the siege. 
A mine was sprung, and a practicable breach effected; 
but the storming party was driven back with consider¬ 
able loss. Hadjee Khan, who commanded the party, 
was severely wounded, and one Mahomed Shery, a de¬ 
serter from Herat, and a soldier of very formidable re¬ 
putation, was killed in the breach. So much was this 
man dreaded, and such throughout the city was the opi¬ 
nion of his prowess, that when intelligence of his death 
was conve 3 "ed to Kamran, the Shah exclaimed, with 
eager delight, “ Mahomed Shah, I am well satisfied, will 
never take Herat now'' 