

The charge of the Afghans was a gallant and a success¬ 
ful one. Whilst the ramparts of Herat rang with the ex¬ 
cited acclamation of Shabdsh! ChiRoostum- 

any!" (“Bravo! Bravo! conduct worthy of Roostum 
liimself!”) the Persian column gave way before its im¬ 
petuous assailants, and retreated amongst the buildings 
i'rom which it had debouched. For a short time the pro¬ 
gress of the struggle was lost sight of by the gazers on the 
ramparts; but the sharp, quick rattle of the musketr}'’, 
the loud booming of the guns, and the columns of dust 
that rose against the clear sky, told that the infantry and 
artillery had covered the retreat of the Persian horsemen. 
The tide of victory now turned against the A%han 
force. The Heratees, who before had driven back the 
Persian cavalry, were now in turn driven back by the 
enemy. The squadrons in the rear, instead of closing up, 
wheeled about, and the whole column was soon in flight. 
Recovering themselves, however, for a short time, the 
stru^le was briefly renewed on tire plain; but the Per¬ 
sian horse, being well supported by the infantry planted 



SELF-CONGRATULATIONS OP THE GARRISON. 233 

in the gardens on both sides, whilst the rear of the 
A%han cavalry afforded no support to the troops in 
front, the flight of the Heratees was renewed, and a gun 
was brought to bear upon their retreating columns. With 
vaiying success the battle was continued throughout 
the day. Towards evening the A%hans regained the 
advantage which they had lost at an earlier period of the 
engagement; and as the shades of evening fell over the 
scene, the Persians evacuated the posts they had occupied, 
and the A^hans were left in possession of the field. 

The engagement, though a long, was not a sanguinarj* 
one. The loss on the side of the A%hans was not estimated 
at more than twenty-five or thirty killed. The Heratees, 
of course, claimed the victory; but the Sheeah inhabi¬ 
tants, who had made their way to the walls of the city, 
and were among the spectators of the fight, could not 
repress their inclination to sneer at a success of so dubious 
a character.* To the young English oflicer who had 
watched the events of the day, it was very clear that 
neither army was of a very formidable character. The 
A%han cavalry made a better show than that of the 
enemy, but in the infantry branch the advantage was 
greatly on the side of the Persians. The whole affair 
was nothing better than a series of skirmishes, now re¬ 
sulting in favour of one party, now of the other. But 
the crafty Wuzeer boasted of it as a great triumph; and 
on the following morning went round to all those parts 
of the works from which the scene below could not be 

* Contendin^emotions of Sympathy, through the whole of his discontent, I 
now with their co-rellgionists, and observed he felt a sort of pride and 
now with their feUow-citizens, agi- satisfaction in being the countryman 
tated the breasts of the Heratees. of those who set we Persians at de- 
“ I went,’’ writes Pottinger, on the fiance.. But he appeared fully im- 
2nd of February, “ to see a Sheeah: pressed with the idea that the city 
he was grieving over the fate which must whilst the Afghans I had 
hung over him; one moment curs- just left were talking of plundering 
ing Mahomed Shah’s pusillanimity— Teheran with the aia of our artillery 
the next, the Afghani tyranny. But, and infantry Records,^ 