

f On the 10th of January, “ money 
being wanted, the houses of the Per¬ 
sian followers of Shere Mahomed 
were confiscated on a charge of trea¬ 
son, in giving up Ghorian.^— 
gerU JowmaT: MS.1 



226 


SIEGE OF HEBAT» 


The aiege operations were continued, but with little 
access of vigour. The Persians were conducting no less 
than &ve several attacks on different points of the for- 
tifications. The work was not carried forward in a 
manner that would have gladdened the heart of the 
commanding officer of a corps of English sappers; but 
the real nature of the enemy’s movements was so little 
xmderstood, that the garrison often exaggerated the 
danger, and gave the Persians credit for stratagems that 
had never entered their minds. One example of this 
will suffice. From beneath the rampart opposite the 
attack, conducted by General Samson and the Russian 
regiment, a mysterious noise, as of mining, was heard to 
proceed. It was audible to very few, and then only from 
a particular point; but abundant confirmation of the 
worst apprehensions of the garrison was derived from 
the fact that there was a working party in constant 
activity, throwing out black mud from the trench in 
the neighbourhood of the spot whence the mysterious 
sounds were heard to issue. The greatest alarm was oc¬ 
casioned by this intelligence; and the Heratees began 
at once to take counsel as to the best means of counter¬ 
acting the stratagems of the besiegers. In this crisis, as 
in all others, the advice of Eldred Pottinger was sought 
by the garrison. His activity was unfailing; he was al¬ 
ways on the ramparts ; always ready to assist with his 
counsel—the counsel of an educated English officer—the 
ruder sciince of the responsible conductors of the defence, 
and to inspire with his animating presence new heart 
into the Afghan soldiery. They asked him now if it 
were possible to min e below the ditch. His answer was 
in the affirmative; but he represented at the same time 
how much more feasible it was to fill up the ditch and 
sap across it. “The fear of stratagem, however,” he 
says, “was predominant; and they took stronger mea- 



EMPLOTHENT OE ETiBBBD POTTINGER. 227 

sures to counteract the supposed danger^ and went to 
greater trouble about it than they did with actions of 
vital importance to their preservation. I recommended 
that a gallery of envelope under the lower fausse-hraie 
should be completed, and in it a few shafts simk a little 
below the floor of the gallery. This did not satisfy them; 
so they sunk shafts on both sides of the wall and con- 
nected them by galleries; and dug a ditch inside the 
city, at the foot of the mound, till the water stood seve¬ 
ral feet deep in it.” The sequel of all this is sufficiently 
diverting. It was not until some months afterwards, 
when these extensive and laborious works were nearly 
completed, that it was discovered that the mysterious 
noise, which had struck so great a terror into the hearts 
of the garrison, arose from nothing more formidable than 
“ a poor woman, who was in the habit of using a hand- 
mill to grind her wheat, in an excavation at the back of 
the mound.”* 