

On the 18th of January, Yar Mahomed besought 
Eldred Pottinger to proceed as an envoy, on the part of 
the Afghans, to the Persian camp. The young English 
officer readily assented to the proposal; and it was ar¬ 
ranged that on the morrow he should have an audience 
of Shah Kamran, and receive instructions for the con¬ 
duct of his mission. Accordingly, on the following day, 
he was conducted to the residence of the Shah. As he 
went along, he observed with pain, in the interior of the 
city, the desolating effects of the siege. ‘‘Scarcely a 
shop had escaped destruction. The shutters, seats, 
shelves—nay, even the veiy beams and door-posts had 

* The digging a gaUery,” writes consequences resulted to the Sheeah 
Pottinger, und^ the wall, and en- i^abitants; and many domicilianr 
tering m the midst of the town, ap- viaits were paid in seai^ of the gal- 
pear^ a most capital pl^ and suit^ lery, whilst the ruins and empty 
much better th& cunning than any houses were particularly patrolled 
other. ConsequentlT, they were seri- for many nights.” — Jbtir- 

ously alarmed, and mr a time serious noZ.] 

q2 



228 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


in general been tom out for firewood. Scarcely any 
business was going on. Here and there were gathered 
knots of the pale and anxious citizens, whispering their 
condolences and grievances—anxious that they might 
escape the notice of the rude Afghans, who were swag¬ 
gering about the streets.”* The room in which the 
Shah received the English officer was a dreary, comfort¬ 
less place. “ I have seen nothing I can compare to it,” 
wfote Pottinger, “ but an empty store-room carpeted.” 
Plainly, but richly attired, attended only by his eunuchs, 
the Shah welcomed the young Englishman. But he ap¬ 
peared ill at ease—unhappy about himself—peevish, and 
lost in thought; for he was sick. It was plain, indeed, 
that he was more concerned about his health than about 
the safety of the city. Sending for his chief physician, 
he consulted him about the royal symptoms, and in the in¬ 
tervals of this interesting personal conversation, coughed 
out, with considerable energy and warmth, his instruc¬ 
tions to the British officer. His cough, indeed, in all 
probability, saved him fi:om something more serious. 
For when he had worked himself into a passion, it com¬ 
pelled him to pause, and whilst he was applying himself 
to the restoratives at hand, he cooled down till the next 
paroxysm of rage and coughing brought him to a full 
stop. 

The interview was long and tedious. Much was said in 
a very wordy language by the Shah, but the substance of 
the message sent through the young English envoy to the 
Persian King, is thus set down in the words of the latter: 
“ You are acting very ungenerously and very unjustly in 
coming to deprive me of the last city of eighty—of the 

♦ Eldred Pottinger'^s MS, Journal, ter class of the Afghi^ used to say, 
“ No matter,** he adds, ** how the ‘ Afsoos ast, lekin chi koonjm*—‘ it 
cowardice and meanness of these is a pit^, but what can we do?* In the 
men might be despised, no one Fay Hissar (esplanade in front of the 
could hdp pitying the wretchedness drawbridge) were lying half a dozen 
they were awering. Even the bet- Ferrian hea^ lately brought in.*’ 