



DESIGNS OF THE WDZEEB. 


225 


for the A ^hftna will not hear of surrender.”* And with 
this message Shere Mahomed returned, crestfallen, to the 
Persian camp.f 


* The Wuzeep was too crafty a man 
to do anything to exasperate the Shah 
of Persia whilst there was the least 
prospect of his success. Pottinger’s 
Opinion on the subject is worth quot¬ 
ing:—“The minister throughout all 
the negotiations constantly addressed 
Mahomed Shah as his sovereign, and 
called both Hadjee Akasy (tlie Per¬ 
sian prime minister) and Alayar Khan 
( Asoof-ood-dowlah) his father. He also 
invariably threw the blame of the de¬ 
fence on some one else, and regretted 
being obliged to fight. He constantly 
talked of nis being bound in honour 
to serve his master, Kainran, but in 
inclination to serve Mahomed Shah. 
He also invariably avoided mixing 
himself up individually in any act 
decidedly hostile to Persian feelings 
or prejudices ; allowing some of ms 
friends to act, and then, under (to the 
Persians) a show of inquiry, sharing 
the advantages; so that in reality 
very few tangible instances could be 
mentioned of his hostility, and none 
but what, as a good talker, he could 
easily assert were not so; and that 
he had taken the Persian side. He 
knew that the King was aware that 
ail the chiefs of the Persian army 
supported themselves by the same 
means as he did; and in many in¬ 
stances without adding the lip-loyalty 
which he always gave vent to—that, 
moreover, he comd say that he did 
not oppress the Persian people—that 
it was the other chiefs who did so— 
that without aid, he could not check 
it in his equals, who would otherwise 
join to overthrow him—that the ay- 
layats (wandering tribes) always act¬ 
ed so—that he would not desert the 
cause of his patron and benefactor. 
In a despot, who only looks in his 
followers for personal attachment, 
and prefers the hardiest and most 
unscrupulous, less than this would 
have secured favour; nay, more, 
raong chiefs who support themselves 
in the same way, such arguments 

VOL. L Q 


would have secured popularity; and 
as parties also ran hign in the Per¬ 
sian camp, and he had secured the 
favour or the two chiefs, both sides 
would have been anxious to secure 
so knowing and powerful an assistant 
by exertions in procuring his liberty. 
Yar Mahomed, with that shrewdness 
which characterises the Afghan na¬ 
tion, saw the favorable position he 
was in, and availed himself of it to 
the utmost. He had an overweening 
idea of the valour of his countrymen 
in arms, and a corresponding low one 
of that of the Persians. From having 
failed in a siege with his own people, 
he thought no other army could suc¬ 
ceed against his nation; and in the 
event of being taken, his eyes, over¬ 
looking the danger to which the Per¬ 
sian wrath mi^t expose him, were 
dazzled with visions of the wealth, 
the power, and glory he might ac- 

a uire in the service of what he 
lought a rich and ill-managed go¬ 
vernment. I do not mean to say 
that any persons had recommejided 
this plan to Yar Mahomed, or that it 
had been [obscure in MS ,]; but that 
from the multitude of his counsellors, 
some recommending war, some sub¬ 
mission, this must have been the mean 
opinion; and, added to the knowledge 
that, whether he defended himself or 
not, his life was in the same danger, 
and that the promise of a Kajar was 
only to be trusted as the last resource. 
He, therefore, address^ himself to 
the task of defence; but, at the same 
time, took steps to secure his interest 
in case of a reverse, I do not think 
that he could have succeeded in the 
latter point: but he, doubtless, had 
hopes of succeeding.**—[3f5. Jour- 
nal.'] 