



234 


TBE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


observed, rendering a highly embellished account of the 
events of that memorable day. “ Though so changed,” 
says Pottinger, “ that scarcely any one could recognise it, 
those who had been present in the fight,, finding them¬ 
selves such heroes, commenced swelling and vapouring. 
The soldiery gathered round in the greatest excitement, 
and their opinion of their own superiority to the Per¬ 
sians was greatly increased- Many of them would say, 
“ If we had but guns I” Others, evidently disliking the 
Persian cannon, would improve on this, and say, “ Ah! if 
the infidels had no guns we would soon send them 
away.” 

On the 8th of February, Pottinger received permission 
to visit the Persian camp. In the public baths of the 
city, where Yar Mahomed, with other men of note, in 
a state of almost entire nudity, was sitting at breakfest 
on the floor—his officers and servants standing around 
him armed to the teeth—the English officer took leave of 
the Wuzeer. “ Tell Hadjee Meerza Aghassi” (the Persian 
minister), said Yar Mahomed, “ that ever since he has 
honoured me with the title of son, and the Hadjee has 
assumed that of my father, I have been most desirous of 
showing him filial afiection, and have endeavoured to do 
so. But the Hadjee, in a most unpatemal manner, has 
brought the Shah-in-Shah with an army to besiege Herat; 
and I am bound, by the salt I am eating, to stand by my 
old master. If, however, they will return to Persia, I 
will follow and show my obedience as the son of the 
Hadjee and the servant of the Shah-in-Shah. Further, 
tell him, that whatever may be my own wish, the A%han3 
would never surrender the city, nor dare I propose it to 
them. And you may tell him, too, that we have all 
heard of the bad treatment received by the A%hans who 
have joined the camp of Mahomed. Shah, and are thereby 
deterred from joining his Perrian Majesty.” 



POTTmaEB'S BBCEPTTON IN THE PEESIAN CAMP. 285 

CartTing this message with him, Pottinger lefb the 
city, accompanied by a small party of A%hans. They 
attended him some distance beyond the walls, and then 
shouting out their good wishes, left him to pursue his 
journey. A single attendant, Syud Ahmed, and a cossid 
went with him. Pushing on through narrow tortuous 
lanes, bounded by high mud walls, and every moment 
expecting to be saluted by a bullet from some zealous 
sentinel posted on his line of road, the young English 
oflScer pushed on towards the Persian camp. “ I kept a 
good look-out,” he wrote in his journal, “ and fortunately 
I did so, as, through one of the gaps in the wall, I observed 
the Persians running to occupy the road we were fol¬ 
lowing. I therefore stopped and made Syud Ahmed 
wave his timban for want of a better flag of truce. The 
Persians, on this, came towards us in a most irregular 
manner—so much so that, if twenty horsemen had been 
with me, the whole Persian picket might have been cut 
offl Some were loading as they ran; and one valiant 
hero, who came up in the rear after he had ascertained 
who we were, to prevent danger, I suppose, loaded his 
musket and fixed his bayonet. They were a most ragged 
looking set, and, from their dress and want of beard, 
looked inferior to the Afghans. They were delighted 
at my coming; and the English appeared great favourites 
among them. A fancy got abroad that I was come with 
proposals to surrender, which made the great majority 
lose all command over themselves at the prospect of 
revisiting their country so soon. They crowded round; 
some patting my legs, and others my horse, whilst those 
who were not successful in getting near enough, con¬ 
tented themselves with Syud Ahmed and the cossid—the 
whole, however, shouting, “ Afreen! Afreen! Ehoosh 
amedeedi Anglish hameshah dostan-i Shah-in-Shah.” 