

The 30tli of December was the great day of the fes¬ 
tival of the Eyd-i-Ramzan. On this day the long Ma- 
homedan fast terminates; and it is ordinarily one of 
feasting and i*ejoicing. Even now, with becoming festi¬ 
vity, was it observed both by besiegers and besieged. 
On either side there was a tacit suspension of hostilities. 
Accompanied by the royal family, Shah Kamran vrent 
in procession to the Juma Musjid, or great mosque 
and, after offering up the accustomed prayers, distributed 
sweetmeats among the Moollahs. The holy men scram¬ 
bled for the delicacies with surprising activity; but they 
were deprived of their accustomed banquet of more sub¬ 
stantial food. The liberality of his Majesty, on this 
occasion, flowed in a different channel. It was not a 
time ill which to distribute valuable provender among 
such unserviceable people as priests, nobles, and cour¬ 
tiers. The customary entertainment to these worthies 
gave place, therefore, to a distribution of all the dispo¬ 
sable provisions to the fighting men and operatives on 
the works. 

* “ They made,** says Poiiinger, “ but a beggarly appearance.** 



224 


THE SIEGE OP HERAT. 


The new year opened with some increase of activity on 
the part of the besiegers. Their mining operations alarmed 
the garrison; and vigorous efforts were made by a corre¬ 
sponding activity in the works, to frustrate the designs of 
the assailants. All true Mahomedans were called upon, 
by proclamation, to aid in the defence of the city, as the 
danger was very pressing. The assistance of the Mool- 
lahs was called in to organise working parties from 
among the people; and the houses of the Sheeahs and all 
suspected persons were again searched for arms. In the 
midst of these preparations, an emissary from the Persian 
camp made his appearance in the trenches opposite to 
the south-west bastion, and demanded to speak with 
the Wuzeer. This was the brother of Yar Mahomed, 
Shere Mahomed Khan, who had delivered up Ghorian 
to the Persians. The Wuzeer refused to see him ; but 
the Sirdar implored the soldiers at the post to tell his 
brother that if Herat were not surrendered to Mahomed 
Shah, the Persian monarch would put him to death, 
storm the city, hang Yar Mahomed like a dog, and give 
his women and children to be publicly dishonoured by 
the muleteers. 

The Afghans replied with a volley of abuse, cursing 
the Sirdar and the Persians; but the message was deli¬ 
vered to the Wuzeer. It found the minister in no very 
gentle mood. The mention of his brother’s name ex¬ 
asperated him beyond control. “ Tell the Sirdar,” he 
said, “ I am glad that Mahomed Shah intends to save 
me the trouble of putting the traitor to death. He 
is no brother of mine. I disown him. He is not my 
father’s son. He is not an Afghan, but a Cashmerian, 
after his mother. As for myself, when Mahomed Shah 
takes the city, he is at liberty to do with me what he 
likes. In all other respects, I am his Majesty’s most 
obedient servant; but I cannot obey him in this matter, 