

An attempt was soon made to strike an important 
blow, but it was singidarly unsuccessful. On the 21st of 
January, the Afghans determined to Uiake a night attack, 
in considerable force, upon the camp of Sirdar Mahomed 
Khan at Karta. Nearly the whole garrison turned out, 
and was reviewed by the Wuzeer. The King himself, 
looking out from a tower of the citadel, surveyed in secret 
the gathering below, as Tar Mahomed, on the terre- 
pleine of the rampart, surrounded by all the principal 
chiefr not absolutely on duty, mustered the fighting men 
on the lower part of the works. Twelve hundred men 
were selected for the sortie, and told off in detachments, 



6ENEBA1. ACTION ON THE FIAIN. 


231 


under tlie command of different chiefs. Divesting them* 
selves of whatever could, in any way, encumber their 
movements—of everything, indeed, but their shirts, 
drawers, skull-caps, and swords—they filed out of the 
Kootoobchak gate, the chief of each party naming his 
men, one by one, as they crossed the drawbridge. Fut- 
teh Mahomed Khan, to whom the command of the entire 
party had been entrusted, followed last, upon foot. But 
of all these great preparations nothing came at*last. 
“The business failed; no attack was made; and every 
one was blamed by his neighbour.”* 

This lamentable failure determined the Shah to post¬ 
pone Pottinger’s departure for the Persian camp. To 
commence negotiations immediately after a miscarriage 
of so formidable a nature, would have been a confession 
of weakness, very impolitic in such a conjuncture. The 
King, therefore, imperatively arrested the movements of 
the young English ambassador, whilst the Wuzeer began 
to bethink himself of the best means of removing the im¬ 
pediment which loomed so largely before the eyes of the 
King. Accordingly it was determined that, on the 26th 
of January, both the cavalry and the infantry should 
be sent out to draw the Persians into action. It was a 
fine bright morning. The whole city was in an unusual 
state of excitement. Partly impelled by curiosity, partly 
moved by a more laudable ambition to fill the places of 
those whose services were required beyond the walls, the 
citizens flocked to the ramparts. Along the whole 
eastern face of the fortifications the parapets and towers 
were alive with men. “ The old Afghans and relatives 
of the military,” writes Pottinger, “in like manner 
crowded iAie fausse-hraies. I do not think that less than 
7000 men were assembled on one side in view of the 
enemy.” The scene on which they looked down was a 
* MS. Jouraalo/Elclred PotSiiger, 



232 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


most exdting one.. It stirred the hearts of that eager 
multitude as the heart of one man. The Afg han cavalry 
on issuing from the city, had spread themselves over the 
open country to the east, and the foot-men had taken pos¬ 
session of a neighbouring village and its surrounding gar¬ 
dens. The Persian videttes had fallen back; the trenches 
and batteries had been manned; and the reserves had 
stood to their arms, when, looking down from the ram¬ 
parts, the excited Heratees saw the Persian Sirdar, 
Mahomed Khan, with a large body of troops, prepare 
himself for an offensive movement, and push onward to 
the attack. At the head of the column was the Persian 
cavalry. As soon as they appeared in sight, the Afghan 
horse streamed across the plain, and poured themselves 
full upon the enemy. 