



236 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


(“Bravo! Bravo! Welcome! The Englisli were always 
friends of the King of Kings.”)* 

The officer who commanded the picket, a major in the 
Persian army who had served under Major Sart; who 
knew all the English officers recently connected with the 
Persian Court or the Persian army; and who had, more¬ 
over, been the custodian of Yar Mahomed, when the 
Wuzeer was a prisoner at Meshid, conducted Pottinger 
to the guard-room. Apologising, on the plea of mili¬ 
tary necessity, for any interference with his free progress, 
he stated that discipline required that the emissary should 
be taken to the Major-General commanding the attack. 
It happened that General Samson,f of the Russian regi¬ 
ment, was the officer in command. The way to the 
General’s quarters was “ through gardens and vineyards, 
in which not even the roots of the trees and shrubs were 
left.” The General received the British officer with 
much courtesy, conceiving him at first to be an Afghan; 
and was greatly surprised to find that he was in the 
presence of an European soldier. Sending for tea and 
kalyans (pipes), he regaled his guest with becoming 
courtesy, and then sent him on in safety to the Persian 
camp. 

Intelligence of Pottinger’s arrival had preceded him, 
and the whole camp came out to meet the ambassador. 
None knew who or what he was. A report had gone 
forth that he was some great A%han dignitary from 
Herat, who brought the submission of Kamran to the 
terms of Mahomed Shah. As he advanced, the torrent 
of people swelled and swelled, imtil in the main street of 
the camp the crowd was so dense that, if the escort had 
not plied their iron ramrods with good effect, it is doubt- 


* Eldred PoUtnget^B MS. Jourtud. Ferrian aervice, commanding a corps 
t Samson was a Busnan in Uie of Bnssian refiigees. 



POTTINGBB AND THE PEESIAN WUZEBB. 237 

ful whether the embassy would ever have reached the 
tent of the Peraan Wuzeer. The quarters of the great 
snan were gained at last, and the envoy was graciously 
received. The interview was a brief one. Keadily ob¬ 
taining permission to visit the tent of Colonel Stoddart, 
and to deliver the letters of which he was the bearer 
from the Government of India, the question of admission 
to the presence of Mahomed Shah was left to be de¬ 
cided by the monarch himself. It is easy to imagine the 
delight of the two English officers on finding themselves, in 
so strange a place and under such strange circumstances, 
in the presence of one another.* It was cruel to in¬ 
terrupt such a meeting; but before the two English 
officers had exchanged many words, and partaken of a 
cup of coffee in Stoddart’s tent, a peremptory message 
came from the minister to summon Pottinger to his pre¬ 
sence. The two officers went together to Hadjee Meerza 
Aghassi’s tent, where the Wuzeer, after the usual cour¬ 
tesies, asked what was the message brought by Pottinger 
from “ Prince” Kamran to the King of Kings, and what 
was that which Yar Mahomed had sent to himself. “ I 
replied,” says Pottinger, in his journal of these events, 
“ that the message from the Afghan King was to the 
Persian King, and that I could not deliver it to any one 
else; that regarding his own message, probably a smaller 
number of auditors would be desirable.” The tent 
accordingly was cleared; and the Hadjee, a small, thin 
man, apparently in a very bilious and excitable state, 