

On the 6th of April, Mr. M‘Neill, the British minister 
at the Persian Court, arrived in the camp of Mahomed 
Shah. He had left Teheran on the 10th of March; 
and, in spite of efforts made by the Persian ministers to 
arrest his progress at Ghorian, had pushed on with all 
possible rapidity to the Persian camp. It was urged 
that his presence could not fail to encourage the Heratees 
in their resistance. But the British minister pleaded his 
duty to his sovereign, and was not to be detained. He 
was coldly received in the Persian camp, but he de¬ 
manded and obtained admittance to the Shah, and having 
exacted the customary formalities of reception, presented 
his credentials recently received from the Queen. The 
impression made upon the King, and subsequently upon 
the minister, was favorable to the British Envoy, and 
soon his discreet and conciliatory bearing smoothed down 
the irritation which had been engendered by his advance. 
But the Kussian minister. Count Simonich, was also on 
his way from Teheran; and Mr. McNeill felt that the 
approach of this man was an obstacle to his success.f 

* The point,” says Mr. M‘Neill, casion, require that a g^ison of their 

on which the negotiation broke oiT troops should be ad^tted into the 
was, I believe, the demand of the town.”—[ilifr. M^NeiU to Lord Auck» 
Shah, that Shah Kamran and Yar Zand, 1838. PMished Cor^ 

h^homed should wait upon him in responaenceJ} 

his camp, and there make their sub- f Afr. M'^NeUl to Lord AucldaTid, 
mission to him. I learn that the April 11, 1838. Papers relating to 
Persians did not, as on a former oc- Persia and Afghanistan, 

R 2 



244 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


On the 13tli of April, Mr, M'Neill had an audience of 
the Persian monarch, in the course of which he stated 
that the proceedings of Persia in Afghanistan were an 
obvious violation of the treaty between Great Britain 
and the former state ; and that the British Government 
would be justified, therefore, in declaring it to be at an 
end, and in taking active measures to compel the with¬ 
drawal of the Persian army from Herat. The audience 
lasted two hours. The Shah solemnly protested that he 
had never meditated anything injurious to the interests 
of Great Britain; and the minister, with still stronger 
emphasis, repeated the declaration. At a subsequent 
interview, the Shah consented to accept the mediation 
of the British mission; and on the 16 th of April the 
Persian soldiers proclaimed from the trenches that Ma¬ 
homed Shah had determined to send Shere Mahomed 
Khan into Herat, accompanied by the British minister. 
But it was not Mr. M‘Neill, but an inferior officer of the 
embassy, who was about to present himself on the mor¬ 
row in the character of a mediator, beneath the walls of 
the beleaguered city. 

The 18th of April was one of the most memorable 
days of the siege. The Persian batteries opened, before 
noon, with unwonted activity, against the ramparts be¬ 
hind the great mosque. The walls soon began to crum¬ 
ble beneath the heavy fire of the enemy. First the thin 
parapets fell; then the terre-plein came down; “ the old 
walls sliding into masses at every round.”* Before 
evening, on the eastern and northern sides, the breaches 
were practicable, and that on the west was greatly en¬ 
larged. But the Afghans were in no way disheartened. 
They saw their walls crumbling beneath the heavy fire 
of the Persian batteries, and were neither alarmed nor 
discouraged by the spectacle. They had never trusted, 