



248 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


form reserves. Yar Mahomed’s post was at the gate of 
Miilik, as the breach close to it was the most dangerous, 
and the point was defended by the worst troops.” It 
was agreed among the different chiefs that not a shot 
should be fired until the enemy reached the counter¬ 
scarp, on pain of the immediate loss of the delinquent’s 
ears. 

The assembly had scarcely broken up when intelli¬ 
gence arrived that the British minister, Mr. M‘Neill, had 
arrived at the edge of the ditch and sought entrance 
to the city. The report was presently confirmed by a 
messenger who brought letters from the envoy to Yar 
Mahomed and Lieutenant Pottinger. Pottinger, who 
was just composing himself to sleep, started up and 
proceeded, with all haste, to the Wuzeer’s post. Yar Ma¬ 
homed mustered the chiefs to receive the Envoy with 
becoming respect, and conducted him to his quarters. 
The greater part of the night wms spent in discussion. 
It was nearly dawn when M‘Neill accompanied Pottin¬ 
ger to his residence, and they lay down to sleep. 

Pottinger rose before seven o’clock, and found M‘Neill 
engaged in writing. The Wuzecr, having been sent for 
by the former officer, soon made his appearance, grum¬ 
bling at, but still honestly commending the vigilance 
of the British minister,* whom he conducted to the 
presence of Shah Kamran. The Shah, ^with the ut¬ 
most frankness and unreserve, placed the negotiations 


* “ I was a food deal surprised on 
awaking at hiuf-past six to see the 
Envoy already up and busy writing. 
At seven, according to engagement, I 
sent to let the'Wuzeer know that his 
Excellency was ready to receive him. 
Yar Mahomed was asleep when the 
message arrived; but they awoke 
him, and he joined us in a short time 
with a whole posse of chiefs. On my 
meeting him at the door he asked me 


was it customary for our ministers 
not to sleep at night, declaring that he 
had scarcely closed his eyes when he 
was told that Mr. McNeill was wait¬ 
ing for him; and further remarked, 
“ I do not wonder your affairs prosper 
when men of such high rank as your 
minister plenipotentiary work harder 
than an Afghan private soldier would 
do even under the eye of the Shah.” 
—{Eldred Pottinger s MS, Journal,'] 



NEGOTIATIONS BKOKEN OEF. 


249 


in the hands of Mr. M‘Neill, and said that he would 
gladly consent to any terms agreed upon by that officer. 
After partaking of some refreshment, the British minis¬ 
ter took his departure; and the armistice ceased. 

This was on the 21st of April. On the 23rd Major 
Todd was despatched from the Persian camp with intel¬ 
ligence no less surprising than discouraging. Mahomed 
Shah had resolutely refused to submit to British arbitra¬ 
tion the disputes between the states of Persia and Herat. 
In an abrupt and peremptory manner he had “ refused 
the proposed agreement and spoke of prosecuting the 
siege.” “ Either,” he said, “ the whole people of Herat 
shall make their submission, and acknowledge themselves 
my subjects, or I will take possession of the fortress by 
force of arms, and make them obedient and submissive.”* 
The British minister was deeply mortified at the result. 
He had been, however unwittingly, a party to the de¬ 
ception of the Government of Herat. He had told Yar 
Mahomed that the Shah would accept his intervention 
and abide by his decision; and now his overtures had 
been peremptorily declined.f It was suggested by some 
whether it would be expedient to send any reply to the 
hostile declaration of Mahomed Shah, but as it had been 
forwarded by the British minister, etiquette demanded 
that an answer should be returned.J That answer was 
grave and dignified. “ If the Persians,” wrote Yar Ma¬ 
homed, “ will not attend to your words, we must answer 
with our bodies and leave the result to God. Be not dis¬ 
tressed. Now that we have suflered so many injuries, 