

• Eldred Pottinger*s MS, Journal. 



ABBTVAL OF MAJOR TODD, 


245 


they said, to their walls. The real defence, they de¬ 
clared, was the fausse-braie. About noon the Persians, 
having pushed on a gallery at this point, the garrison 
exploded it with a mine, and taking advantage of the 
alarm occasioned by the explosion, the Afghans rushed 
upon the besiegers, and at first carried everything be¬ 
fore them. But in a short time the trenches of the 
enemy were lined with musketeers. The small-arm 
fire of the Persians overwhelmed that of the garrison, 
whilst the breaching batteries resumed their fire against 
the wall. Yar Mahomed and Pottinger were both upon 
the works. The Wuzeer ordered the men to cease fir¬ 


ing, and to sit down, that they might be sheltered from 
the storm of musket-balls; but instead of this they drew 
their swords, brandished them over their heads, and 
calling to the Persians to come on, rushed down to the 
attack. They paid dearly for this bravado.* Pottinger 
himself narrowly escaped a bullet, which entered the 
lungs of Aga Ruhem, a favourite and devoted eunuch of 
Yar Mahomed, and sent him to his grave. 

In the evening, the Persians in the trenches announced 
that an Englishman in their camp sought admittance to 


* “ Several men,” says Pottinger, 
“ received bullets through the hands 
and arms. One fellow, more fool- 
hard;^ than the rest, kept brandish¬ 
ing his huge Afghan knife, after the 
others had complied with the repeated 
orders to sheathe their weapons, and 
had the knife destroyed by a bullet, 
which struck it just above his hand. 
I had gone down to the spot to see 
the mine sprung, and was sitting on 
the banquette with the Wuzeer and a 
party of chiefs, who, whilst tea was 
preparing, were bantering the man 
whose knife was broken, and who 
came to beg a sword instead, when a 
bullet came in through a loophole 
over my head, and, smashing a brick 
used for stopping it, lodged in Aga 
Ruhem's lungs, who was standing 
opposite—one of the splinters of the 


brick at the same time wounding him 
in the face. The poor fellow was an 
eunuch of Yar Mahomed's, and was 
always to be seen wherever any dan¬ 
ger was. He died in two or three 
days. I had been but the moment 
before looking through the top of 
the parapet, with my breast resting 
against the loophole, watching the 
Persians, who were trying to esta¬ 
blish themselves in the crater of the 
mine; and the Afghans on the coun¬ 
terscarp, who were trying to grapple 
the gabions and overset them, so tnat 
the scene was very interesting; and I 
had not sat down with the chiefs until 
Deen Mahomed Khan actually pulled 
me down by my cloak to listen to the 
jokes passed on the man who had his 
knife destroyed; and 1 thus escaped 
Aga Ruhem's bullet.— IMS. Journal.} 



246 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


the city. The announcement was received with peals 
of derisive laughter and abuse. The Englishman was 
Major Todd, an officer of the Bengal artillery, who had 
been for many years employed with the Persian army, 
and whose great attainments and estimable personal 
qualities had won for him the respect of all with whom 
he had been associated. When a note was conveyed to 
the Wuzeer stating that the officer who sought admit¬ 
tance was the naib of the English ambassador, Yar 
Mahomed sent for his young English ally. Pottinger 
immediately joined him. The Wuzeer and many other 
chiefs were sitting on the fausse-braie near the breach. 
Making room for him on the charpoy on which he was 
seated, Yar Mahomed laughingly remarked, “ Don’t be 
angry with me. I have thrown ashes on it (the offered 
mediation), and blackened its face myself.” Pottinger 
asked for an explanation, and was told that the Wuzeer 
had sent back word to the Persian camp that the Af¬ 
ghans wanted neither the Turks, the Russians, nor the 
English to interfere—that they trusted to their good 
swords; that at that hour of the evening they would not 
allow the Shah-in-Shah himself to enter; and that no 
one should be allowed to enter at that point. But if, 
they added, the English naib would present himself on 
the morrow at the south-east angle, he would be granted 
admittance to the city.* Much of this was mere bra¬ 
vado. Yar Mahomed acknowledged that he only wished 
to impress the Persians with the belief that he was care¬ 
less about British mediation. 