

On the 20th of February, the Persian emissary again 
appeared with a letter from the camp of the besiegers. 
It stated that the Shah had no desire to possess himself 
of Herat; he only claimed that his sovereignty should be 
acknowledged. The answer sent back on the following 
day was full of compliments and promises. Everything 
asked for would be done if the Persian army would 
only retire. On the 24th, the negotiations were con¬ 
tinued—but with no result. The siege, in the mean while, 
proceeded. The garrison continued their sallies and 

VOL. I. R 



242 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


sorties—sent out foraging parties—carried off large quan¬ 
tities of wood—and generally contrived to return to the 
city without suffering any injury from the activity of the 
investing force. 

On the part of the latter, as time advanced, the firing 
became more steady; but the severity and uncertainty 
of the weather, and the scarcity of food, which was 
now beginning to be painfully felt, damped the energy of 
the besiegers. Continuing, however, to push on their 
approaches, they did at least mischief enough to keep the 
garrison in a constant state of activity. Some unimpor¬ 
tant outworks were carried; and on the 8th of March, to 
the great mortification of the Wiizeer, the enemy gained 
possession of a fortified post about .SOO yards from the 
north-east angle of the fort. The Afghans vrho manned 
the post were found wanting in the hour of danger, and 
were visited with summary punishment for this cowardly 
offence. Their faces were daubed with mud, and they 
were sent round the works and through the streets of 
the city, accompanied by a crier, commissioned to pro¬ 
claim their cowardice to the world. 

From the moment that this post fell into the hands of 
the enemy, “ the investment,” says Pottinger, “ began to 
be really felt.” The operations of the besiegers were 
pushed forward with some vigour, but the constancy of 
the garrison was not to be shaken.* Towards the end of 
March, the Asoof-ood-dowlah, whose force had encamped 
on the plain to the north-west of the city, sent in a mes¬ 
sage to the Afghan minister, offering to be the medium 
of negotiations for the suspension of hostilities. The 
Afghans sent word back that they were prepared to 
listen to any reasonable overtures; but that if peace was 

* It would be tedious to narrate to the sclentitic reader, without the 
all the details of the siese, and diffi- ud of a series of elaborate plans, 
cult to render them intelligible, even 



RECEPTION OP MR. MCNEILL. 


243 


to be made, it must be made quickly. Seed time, it was 
said, was passing; and once passed, peace was impos¬ 
sible. Their subsistence would then depend upon their 
plunder. After a few days, an interview was arranged 
between Yar Mahomed and the Asoof-ood-dowlah, and 
on the 2nd of April it was held on the edge of the ditch 
opposite the north-east tower. But the Wuzeer re¬ 
turned, hopeless of any arrangement.* On the following 
day a grand meeting of chiefs was held ; but there was 
an end of all tli ought of peace. 