

On the following day, Major Todd made his appear¬ 
ance. A vast crowd went out to gaze at him. He was 
the first European who had ever appeared in Herat in 

• “ I was much annoyed,’’ says sdf by saymg^ that he acted so to 
Pottinger, and told him he had pro* make the Persians think he was not 
bably prevented the English ambas- solicitous for the English to interfere.*’ 
sador interfering, and he excused him* —[MiS. Journal'} 



AW-BAKANCE OF BIB. M‘NE11A,. 


247 


full regimentals; and now the tight-fitting coat, the 
glittering epaulettes, and the cocked hat, all excited un¬ 
bounded admiration. The narrow streets were crowded, 
and the house-tops were swarming with curious spectators. 
The bearer as he was of a message firom Mahomed Shah, 
announcing that the Persian sovereign was willing to 
accept the mediation of the British Government, he was 
received with becoming courtesy by Shah Kamran, 
who, after the interview, took the cloak from his own 
shoulders, and sent it by the Wuzeer to Major Todd, as 
a mark of the highest distinction he could confer upon 
him.* The English officer returned to the Persian camp 
with assurances of Kamran’s desire to accept the media¬ 
tion of the British minister. But there was no suspen¬ 
sion of hostilities. That evening the aspect of afiairs was 
more warlike than ever. “ The Persian trenches were 
filled with men. The parties of horse and guards of the 
line of investment appeared stronger than usual; and 
everything betokened an assault of which at dusk the 
garrison received intelligence. The Afghans made all 
arrangements to meet it; the difierent chiefs were sent 
off to different points either to strengthen the posts or 


♦ “ A horse,’* says Pottinger, “ was 
also given; but Major Todd was as 
anxious not to accept presents, as the 
Afghans were to make them—so he 
would not wait for*he horse, notwith¬ 
standing they set about cutting away 
the parapet of the fausse-hrak^ and 
making a ramp up the counterscarp 
to get the nag out. The Wuzeer was 
obstinately bent upon sending out 
the horse; but as there was no use in 
destroying a parapet in the only en¬ 
tire work left, or making an easy road 
across the ditch, when there were four 
practicable breaches * * » 

As soon as the Persians were gone, 
my people led the horses off in an¬ 
other direction, and 1 told the work¬ 
men to stop and repair the damage 


done, so that the Wuzeer did not 
know of the ruse till late in the after¬ 
noon, when his master of the horse 
reported the return of the horses. 
He immediately sent them to me, 
saying he had given them to the 
English and would not take them. I 
told him I had not enough of grain 
to keep them; and suggested that 
if he did not like to keep them, they 
might be eaten. The people present 
on the receipt of the message highly 
approved of the latter part; and x ar 
Mahomed gave to the most clamorous 
the horse intended for the Persian, 
which was duly roasted. I believe 
the other one underwent the same fate 
a few weeks subsequently.*’— 
JournalJ] 