

With little variation from the procedure of the two 
previous months, the siege operations were continued. 
The Persians had expected much from the addition to 
their siege train of an immense sixty-eight pounder, which 
was to batter down the defences of Herat as easily as 
though they had been walls of glass.* But the gun was 
so badly mounted, that, after the fifth or sixth round, the 
light carriage gave way, and this formidable new enemy, 

♦ They fired from this piece eight- case of copper. These were of so 
inch sheUs frill of lead, or twelve or much yalue, that the garrison fought 
eighteen-poimd shot, with an outer for them. 



240 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


that was to have done such great things, sank into an 
useless incumbrance. 

The siege continued without intermission; but it was 
evident that both parties were anxious to conclude a 
peace. Not many days after Pottinger’s return to Herat, 
a Persian officer* came into the city, with instructions 
from General Samson, privately endorsed by the Wuzeer, 
to endeavour to persuade the Afghans to consent to the 
terms offered by Mahomed Shah. It was better, he 
said, for them to settle their differences among them¬ 
selves, than to employ the mediation of infidels.f At 
the same time, he assured the A%hans that Mahomed 
Shah had no desire to interfere in the internal adminis¬ 
tration of Herat. What he required them to do was, to 
supply his army with soldiers, as they had, in times past, 
supplied the armies of Nadir Shah. The present move¬ 
ment, he said, was not an expedition against Herat, but 
an expedition against Hindostan, and that it behoved, 
therefore, all true Mahomedans to join the army of the 
King of Kings. Let them only unite themselves under 
the banner of the great defender of the faith, and he 
would lead them to the conquest and the plunder of 
India and Toorkistan. 

The Persian emissary returned, on the following day, 
bearing promises of a vague and delusive kind, and sug¬ 
gestions that if the Persians were really inclined for 
peace, the best proof they could give of the sincerity of 
their inclinations would be the retirement of the besieg¬ 
ing force. Great was the excitement after his departure, 
and various the views taken of his mission. By some, 

* The same man, a major in the should be taken from our conduct in 
army, whom Pottinger had first met India, where we had pretended fraend- 
in the Persian camp. ^ ship and trade to cover our ambition, 

t ‘J The man,** says Pottinger, “ was and finally, by such deceit, had mas- 
also instructed to say that warning tered all lndia.*’-->[il//S. Journal] 



SUCCESSES OF THE PEB81ANS. 


241 


the young and thoughtless, it was conjectured that his 
visit betokened a consciousness of weakness on the part 
of the enemy; and they already began to picture to 
themselves the flight and plunder of the Persian army. 
But the elder and more sensible shook their heads, and 
began, with manifest anxiety, to canvass the Persian 
terms. It mattered little, they said, whether Kamran 
was designated prince or king—whether the supremacy 
of the Persian Shah was or was not acknowledged in 
Herat, so long as they did not endeavour to plant a Per¬ 
sian garrison in the city. But the Wuzeer declared that 
he had no confidence in the Persians—^that he desired to 
be guided by the advice, and to be aided by the media¬ 
tion of the English; and that if the Shah would place 
the conduct of negotiations in the hands of Colonel 
Stoddart, he on his part would trust everything to Lieu¬ 
tenant Pottinger, and agree to whatever was decided 
upon by the two English officers. “ This,” wrote the 
latter, “ was a most politic measure. It threw all • the 
odium of continuing the war OS’ the shoulders of the 
Afghan war party on those of the Persians, whom every 
one would blame, if they declined to trust their guest, 
Colonel Stoddart; and it would tend to make the Afghans 
believe that nothing but their destruction would satisfy 
Mahomed Shah.” 