



POTTINGEB’S DIFFICTn:.TrES. 


253 


with Pottinger’s approval despatched a letter into the 
Persian camp, intimating that “ he agreed to the sup- 
pression of slavery, and would aid in its extinction; that 
he would release from bondage, and send back the 
people of Jam and Bakhurs if possible, and he would try 
to make the Soonee Hazarehs serve Persia; that he 
would pay a yearly present after the current year, and 
would also give his son and one of the King’s sons 
as hostages. Persia should, on her part, restore Gho- 
rian, and when his son joined the Persian camp, his 
brother, Shere Mahomed Khan, should be sent back, and 
that Mahomed Shah should give them an order for five 
or six thousand kurwars of grain on the Governor of 
Khorassan.” “ If these terms be not accepted,” it was 
added, “ nothing but the possession of Herat will satisfy 
you.” 

Pottinger had no easy part to play, at the best; but 
now his difficulties began to thicken around him. He 
could only hope to counteract Russian influence by im¬ 
pressing Yar Mahomed with a conviction that the 
British Government would do great things for Herat. 
But on the 29th of May he received instructions from 
Mr. M‘Neill on no account to commit the government 
by any offers of aid to Herat, as he had received no 
authority to make them. Startled and embarrassed by 
these injunctions, for, seeing that without such promises 
Yar Mahomed would have accepted the mediation of 
Russia, he had already committed the government, 
Pottinger went at once to the Tukht-i-pool, where the 
chiefs were assembled, and honestly stated that in his 
anxiety to bring affairs to a satisfactory adjustment, he 
had exceeded his powers. Exasperated by this an¬ 
nouncement, the chiefs broke out into violent reproaches 
against Pottinger, M‘Neill, and the whole British nation, 
and then began to discuss the advantages of the Russian 



254 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


alliance. Firm in the midst of all this storm of invec¬ 
tive, the young British officer declared that he had only 
spoken the truth—that such were the instructions of the 
British minister—that he had no power to disobey 
them ; but that a representation to Mr. M'Neill of the 
disappointment they had occasioned might induce him 
to depart from this cautious policy. To this the chiefs 
were induced to listen; and it was finally resolved to 
await the results of another reference to the British 
Envoy.* 

But the influence of Mr. M‘Neill at the Persian Court 
was now rapidly declining; and his departure was at 
hand. His position, ever since his arrival in the camp 
of Mahomed Shah, had been one of no little difficulty 
and embarrassment. Unhappily, at that time, one of 
those petty perplexities, which arising between state and 
state, often evolve more serious misunderstandings than 
affairs of far higher moment, was constantly obtruding in 
the way of a satisfactory adjustment of differences, an 
obstruction of a very annoying and irritating kind. A 
Gholam, or courier, of the British minister, Ali Maho¬ 
med Beg by name, was on his way from Herat to 
Teheran, bearing some letters from Yar Mahomed, Pot- 
tinger, and others, to Mr. M‘Neill, and escorting some 
horses, sent by Futteh Mahomed Khan, the Herat agent, 
as presents to the same officer. YTithout any interrup¬ 
tion he had passed the Persian camp and was within 
three stages of Meshed, when Berowski recognised the 
man and officiously reported him at head-quarters. 
Immediately horsemen were despatched to carry him to 
the Persian camp. What followed could not be nar¬ 
rated better or more briefly than in the language of Mr. 