

* Mr, MNeill to Yar Mahomed — he never expected anything else— 
Published Correspondence. that the Kajars have been noted for 

•f* Pottinger explained to Kamran their want of faith ever since they 
the manner in which Mr. M‘JS'eill have been heard of—-that his father 
had been deceived. “ On the 24th,” and himself had several times tried 
he says, ^ 1 had an audience of Shah their promises but always been 
Kamran to explain the manner in miserably deceived.”— [MS. Journal.'] 
which the Persians had deceived the { Pottinger's MS, Journal. 

British Envoy. His Majesty said that 



250 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


find lifl>ve been kept beck fi^om our tillage and cultiva- 
tion, and bave suffered that loss which should not have 
befallen us, what have we now to care for ?” * 

And now the siege was prosecuted with increased 
activity. A new actor had appeared on the stage. A 
Russian officer, Count Simonich, who represented the 
government of the Czar at the Persian Court, arrived 
in camp on the morning of the day which witnessed 
Mr. M‘Neiirs visit to the city of Shah Kamran. 

The inopportune arrival of the Russian diplomatist at 
once suggested to Mr. M'Neill the hopelessness of his 
mission. When he returned to the Persian camp, he 
found all his apprehensions realised. Count Simonich 
soon manifested his inclination to remain no passive 
spectator of the contest. Freely giving advice and ren¬ 
dering assistance, he began, in effect, to conduct the 
operations of the siege; whilst the officers of his suite 
were teaching the Persian soldiers to construct batteries 
of a more effective character than those which had been 
hitherto employed. Nor was Russian skill all that was 
supplied, in this conjuncture, to raise the drooping spirits 
of Mahomed Shah. Russian money was freely distri¬ 
buted among the Persian soldiers and a new impulse 
was given to them at a time when their energies were 
well-nigh exhausted, and their activity was beginning 
to flag.f 

Mr. M‘Neill remained in the Persian camp, and in 
spite of the failure of his endeavours to reconcile the 
contending parties, determined not to abandon all hope 
of bringing about a satisfactory arrangement. A strongly- 

* Yar Alahomed to Mr, M^NeUl-^ Count Simonich had reconnoitred the 
Piibli^ed Correspondence, city, and had examined with a tele- 

t Mr, MNeUl to Lord Palmerston scope from the top of the Masula, 
-^Published Correspondence, Intelli- ana given his opinion that all the 
gence of Simonich's movements soon points attacked were too strong to be 
reached the beleaguered garrison, ti^en; and that the only vulnerable 
“ We were told,’’ says Fottinger, “ that side was the eastern side.” 



KUSSIAN INFLUENCE. 


251 


worded letter was addressed to the Persian ministers; 
and at one time it seemed likely that'the Shah would 
accede to the terms offered by the Government of Herat; 
but the arrival of Mendly letters from Kohun-dil Khan, 
the Candahar chief, offering to aid him in the prosecu¬ 
tion of the siege, inflated him with new courage, and 
caused him to rise in his demands. He demanded com¬ 
pensation for the losses he had sustained; and the nego¬ 
tiations were again broken off at a time when they 
seemed likely, at last, to reach a favorable termina¬ 
tion. 