

* “ I then proceeded to Colonel door, where he overwhelmed me with 
Stoddarf s tent, who I found in the a most affectionate Persian welcome, 
greatest astonishment possible, as his to which I, to his great surprise, re- 
servants, tahing up the general report plied in English. No one who has 
of mj rank, had announced me as the not experienced it can understand 
Mooshtehid of Herat. He had been the pleasure which countrymen enjoy 
undressed; and putting on his coat when they thus meet—^particularly 
to do honour to the high dignitary, when of the same profession and pur- 
gave me time to enter hui tent before suing the same object.** — [Etdi^ed 
he could get out, so we met at the Pottinger's MS. Joumall 



238 


THE SIEGE OF HESAT. 


twbted himself into all kinds of undignified contortions, 
and prepared himself to receive the message of the A%han 
Wuzeer. 

Pottinger delivered his message. A long, animated, 
but profitless discussion then arose. The Hadjee refused 
to listen to the A%han proposals, and declared that the 
English had themselves set down Herat on their maps 
as a part of the Persian dominions. In proof of the 
assertion, Bumes’s map was produced, and, to his inex¬ 
pressible chagrin, the Hadjee was shown to be wrong. 
Colonel Stoddart was then appealed to; but his answers 
were shaped in true diplomatic fashion. He had no in¬ 
structions on the subject—he would refer the case to the 
envoy at Teheran—^he was not aware that the British 
Government had ever received official information from 
the Persian Government of Herat being annexed to that 
state, whilst a branch of the Suddozye family, which the 
British Government, in conjunction withFutteh Ali Shah, 
had acknowledged as sovereign in Afghanistan, still held 
possession of the place. The difliculty was not to be 
solved; and the English ofiicers took their departure 
from the tent of the Wuzeer, to be summoned shortly to 
the presence of the Shah. 

Under a tent, surrounded on all sides by an outer wall 
of red canvas, Mahomed Shah, plainly attired in a shawl 
vest, with a black Persian cap on his head, received, 
with becoming courtesy, the British officers. At the op¬ 
posite end of the tent, in posture of profound reverence, 
heads bent, and arms folded, stood the personal attend¬ 
ants of the Eong. The message of Shah Kamran was 
delivered; and the Persian monarch, speaking at first 
with much dignity and calmness, stated, in a dear and 
forcible manner, his complaints against Herat and its 
ruler. But, warming as he proceeded, he lashed himself 
into a passion; denounced Shah TTamran as a treacherous 



CONTINDATION OF THE SIEGE. 


239 


liar; and declared that he would not rest satisfied until 
he had planted a Persian garrison in the citadel of Herat. 
There was nothing more to he said upon the subject ; 
and the British officers were formally dismissed. 

A violent storm, which broke over Herat on the fol¬ 
lowing day, prevented Pottinger’s return to the city. 
But on the 10th of February he turned his back upon 
the Persian camp. “ I mounted,” he writes, “ and riding 
out by the flank of the Persian line, I returned to the 
city by the gate I came out at; and so avoided the 
points where hostilities were going on. On my coming 
back the whole town was in a ferment. What they 
had expected I do not pretend to know; but from the 
instant I entered the gate, I was surrounded by messen¬ 
gers requesting information. I, however, referred them 
all to the Wuzeer, and went there myself. After a short 
interview, I was summoned by a messenger from the 
Shah. His Majesty having seen my reton with his 
glass, was awaiting my arrival, anxious to hear Maho¬ 
med Shah’s message. When he had heard it, he re¬ 
plied by a gasconading speech, abusing every one.” And 
so terminated these first negotiations for a suspension of 
hostilities in an utter and mortifying failure. 