

Nor was it only in the Persian camp that at this time 
Russian influence was making its way. The garrison 
was beginning to think whether it would not be expe¬ 
dient for Herat to fling itself into the arms of the great 
northern power. On the night of the 23rd of May there 
was a consultation among the chiefs, when it was pro¬ 
posed that an envoy should be sent to the Russian 
ambassador, acknowledging the dependence of Herat 
upon that state. It was asserted, at the suggestion of M. 
Euler, the Shah’s physician, that if such a step as this 
were taken the Persians dare not continue the siege, and 
that the English dare not interfere. The proposal was 
favorably received. It was with difficulty that the 
chiefs could be induced to listen to a suggestion for 
delay; but on the following day intelligence of the 
energetic course pursued by Mr. M‘Neill foimd its way 
into the city. It was announced that the British minister 
had threatened Persia with hostilities if Herat should fell 
into its hands; that the city would be retaken, at any 
cost, by the British army; and that Major Todd had 
been sent to India to make arrangements with the Gover¬ 
nor-General for the sustenance of the people of Herat 
after the siege. This intelligence—which was not wholly 
correct—changed at once the complexion of affairs. It 



252 


THE SIEGE OE HEKAT. 


was plain that the British were, after all, the best friends 
of the Afghans, and that it would be folly to reject their 
good offices for the sake of the problematical friendship 
and good faith of the Russian Government. The an¬ 
nouncement, indeed, raised the spirits of the garrison, 
and inspired them with new courage. Even those who 
the day before had been loudest in their support of the 
Russian alliance, now abandoned it without reserve. 

This feeling, however, was but short-lived. It soon 
appeared that the intentions of the British Government, 
as reported to have been set forth by Mr. M‘Neill, had 
been over-stated; and again the chiefs began to bethink 
themselves of the advantages of a Russian alliance. 
Many meetings were held, at which the terms to be 
offered and accepted were warmly debated. At all of 
these Pottinger was present. Sometimes he was received 
and listened to with respect; at others he was treated 
with marked discourtesy. Now the value of the British 
alliance outweighed that of the Russian in the estima¬ 
tion of the chiefs; now it was held of far lighter account; 
and as the scale of their opinions turned, so varied 
with intelligible capriciousness their bearing towards the 
English officer. A man of temper and firmness, he was 
little disconcerted. The whole assembly might be against 
him; but he was not to be overawed. 

On the evening of the 27th of May, Pottinger sought 
a private interview with Yar Mahomed. Telling the 
Wuzeer that his conduct towards the Persians had 
caused him to be suspected by the British ambassador, 
he insisted upon the necessity of acting decidedly upon 
two points—Kamran, he said, must never submit to be 
called the servant of Persia; nor must he on any account 
admit the interference of the Russians. Yar Mahomed 
assented to these conditions—declared that he would 
never sacrifice the independence of Herat, and, finally, 