

The events of the 24th of June, though they had 
raised Pottinger’s character, as a warrior, in the A%han 
city, in the Persian camp, and in the surrounding 
country, had, greatly indeed, diminished his popularity 
in Herat and increased the difficulties of his position. 
In the negotiations which followed, Mahomed Shah in¬ 
sisted upon Pottinger’s dismissal. The young English 
officer had excited the measureless indication of the 
Persian King; and the A%han Wuzeer was not disin¬ 
clined to reproach him with presenting a new obttocle 



PROPOSED DISMISSAL OF POTTINGEB. 


269 


to the adjustment of the differences between the two 
states. The A%han envoys said that they had always 
thought Pottinger was one man, but that the importance 
the Persians attached to his departure showed that he 
was equal to an army.* Pottinger was always ready 
with a declaration that no thoughts of personal safety or 
convenience should ever suffer him to stand in the way 
of an arrangement conducive to the safety of Herat 
and the welfare of his country, and that if these objects 
were to be gained by his departure, he was willing to 
depart. But Tar Mahomed, whilst unwilling to retain 
him, was unwilling to persuade him to go. The dis¬ 
missal of the man who had saved Herat from the 
grasp of the Persians, would have been an act that might 
have fixed a stain upon the character of the "Wuzeer, 
prejudicial to the success of his after-career. Moreover, 
it was possible that Pottinger’s assistance might be wanted 
at some future time—that the Persians, having obtained 
his dismissal, might hesitate to perform their promises, 
and rise in their demands on the strength of the advan¬ 
tage which they had thus gained. 

The month of July was not distinguished by any 
great activity on the part of the besiegers. The siege, 
indeed, now began to assume the character of a blockade. 
The question of surrender had become a mere question 
of time. It seemed impossible much longer to protract 

“ The Wuzeer told me the whole taiy, and expressed loudly their gra- 
business hung upon me; that the titude to the British Government, 
Persians made a point of obtaining to the exertions of which they attri* 
my dismissal, without which they buted the change in the tone of the 
would not treat. They were so press- Persians. They, however, did not 
ing, that he said he never before mve the decided answers they should 
guessed my importance, and that the have done, but put the question off 
Afghan envoys who had gone to camp by sayi^ I was a guest. The Per- 
had told him they had always thought sians onered to be security for my 
me one man, but the importance the safe passage to any place I chose 
Persians attached to my departure to go to.**—* [Eldred Pottinger^$ MS. 
showed that 1 was equal to an mrmy. J<mmah'\ 

The Afghans were very complimen- 



270 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


the defence. Yar Mahomed, with all the resources of 
uttscrupulous cruelty at his command, could not ex¬ 
tort suflBcient money from his victims to enable him to 
continue his defensive Operations with any prospect of 
success. But it appeared to him, as it did to Pottinger, 
expedient to postpone the inevitable day of capitulation, 
in the hope that something might yet be written down 
in their favour in the “ chapter of accidents,” out of 
which so often had come unexpected aid. Yar Ma¬ 
homed looked for the coming of an Oosbeg army. He 
had long anxiously expected the arrival of a relieving 
force from Toorkistan; and scarcely a day had passed 
without some tidings, either to elevate or depress him, 
of the advent or delay of the looked-for succours. Pot¬ 
tinger, though unwilling to encourage in others expecta¬ 
tions which might not be realised, was inwardly con¬ 
vinced that something of a decisive character respecting 
the intentions of his own government must soon be 
heard, and that the knowledge of those intentions would 
have an effect upon the Afghan garrison and the Persian 
camp very advantageous to the former. With the ob¬ 
ject, therefore, of gaining time, the Wuzeer renewed his 
exertions to raise money for the payment of the troops. 
Assemblies of the chiefs were held, at which every 
practicable method of recruiting their exhausted finances 
was discussed. The Sirdars addressed themselves to the 
discussion as men wholly in earnest, determined to do 
their best.* The resolution of the chiefs in this con- 