



266 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


the exterior slope hill upon the Persian stormers. The 
effect of this sudden movement was magical. The Per¬ 
sians, seized with a panic, abandoned their position and 
fled. The crisis was over; Herat was saved.* 

But no exultation followed a victory so achieved. 
The bearing of the Afghans was that of men who had 
sustained a crushing defeat. The garrison were crest¬ 
fallen and dispirited. A general gloom seemed to hang 
over the city. Yar Mahomed, long after the danger 
was past, moved about as one confused and bewildered. 
There were few of the chiefs whose minds were not so 
wholly unhinged by the terrors of that great crisis as to 
be unable, for days afterwards, to perform calmly their 
wonted duties. A complete paralysis, indeed, descended 
upon men of all ranks. The loss on both sides had 
been severe; but if half the garrison had fallen in the 
defence of the breach, Herat could not have been more 


* There is nothing finer in tlic an¬ 
nals of the war in Afghanistan than 
tlie heroic conduct of Eldred Pot- 
tingcr on tiiis 24th of June. But I 
should as little discharge my duty as 
an historian, as 1 should gratify my 
inclinations as a man, if I were not 
to say that I have extracted, with 
some difficulty, from Pottinger’s manu- 
scrijpt journal, the real history of the 
service that he rendered to his country 
on this memorable day. The young 
Bombay artilleryman was endowed 
with a rare modesty, which made him 
unwilling to speak or to write about 
himself. In the copy of the journal 
before me he has erased, throughout 
the entire record of this day, every 
entrance made in the first person; and 
only by giving rein to a curiosity, 
which I snould not have indulged, or 
considered pardonable in any ordi¬ 
nary case, nave I succeeded in ex¬ 
tracting the real history of an inci¬ 
dent which has already, in one or 
two incorrect shapes, been given to 
the world. Wherever Pottinger had 


written, in the original copy of his 
journal, ** I,” he had erased the ego¬ 
tistical monosyllable, and substituted 
the words, “the people about the 
Wuzeer,” or had otherwise disguised 
the record of his own achievements. 
For example, the words, “ I had several 
times to lay hold of the Vizier, and 
point to him the men, who turned as 
soon as he did,” are altered into “ the 
people about abused, and several times 
had to lay hold of the Vizier, &c., &c.” 
The story, I believe, was first pub¬ 
lished on the authority of a letter 
from Colonel Stoddart. What was 
thought of Pottinger’s conduct be¬ 
yond the walls of Herat, may be 
gathered from the fact, that a few 
days afterwards a man came in from 
Kurookh, bringing some important 
intelligence, who, immediately on his 
arrival, went up to Pottinger, seized 
his hands, kissed them, said he was 
indeed “ rejoiced that he had made so 
great a pilgrimage,” and sfioke with 
enthusiastic praise of the l«|itt]8e of 
the Persian stormers. 



SrnrFEBINGS of the besieged. 