

All these cumulative offences, added to the great sub¬ 
ject of complaint—the conduct of Persia towards Herat— 
made up such an amount of provocation, that Mr. M‘]S[eill 
felt his position at the Persian Court was little likely to 
be one of much longer continuance. The Shah had 
declared that he would raise the siege if the British 
minister would afford him a pretext for the retrograde 
movement, satisfiwitory in the eyes of his countrymen, by 



MISUin)EBSTAin)IN6S WITH THE PEBSIAH COURT. 257 


threatening, on the part of his government, to attack 
Persia if she continued her offensive operations against 
Herat; but from this promise he had receded, or thrown 
such difficulties in the way of its fulfilment, as practi¬ 
cally to nullify the pledge. Mr. M'Neill massed all his 
demands upon the Persian Government. The Shah re¬ 
quired that he should keep the question of Herat distinct 
from the others, and, on the British minister refusing to 
do so on his own responsibility, declared that he would 
do it himself, by acceding to all the demands except that 
which related to Herat. “ The Shah then,” says Mr. 
M‘Neill, in his report of these proceedings to the Foreign 
Secretary, “ immediately dismissed me, with an assurance 
that he should adopt that course; but before I had left 
the area on which the royal tent was pitched, he called 
after me, that on his agreeing to the other demands, he 
should expect me to avoid all further discussion of the 
affairs of Herat, and to order Mr. Pottinger to quit that 
city. In answer, I represented that I could not tie up 
the hands of my own government in respect to the ques¬ 
tion of Herat, and that Mr. Pottinger was not under my 
orders.”* 

There was obviously now little hope of bringing these 
long-protracted negotiations to a favorable conclusion. 
The British mission was fast falling into contempt. The 
Russians were exalted at the Persian Court. The British 
were slighted and humiliated. There was not a tent- 
pitcher in camp who did not know that the British 
mission was treated with intentional disrespect. It was 
time, therefore, to bring matters to a crisis. So, on the 
3rd of June, Mr. M‘Neill addressed a letter to the Fo¬ 
reign minister in the Persian camp, announcing his in¬ 
tention to depart for the frontier on the following day. 

* Mr. MNeUl to Lord Palmerston: Meshed, June 25, 1838. 

VOL. I. S 



258 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


“I feel myself called upon,” lie concluded, “to inform 
you that, until the reparation and satisfaction I have 
demanded, for the indignities already offered, shall have 
been fully given, the Queen of England cannot receive 
at her Court any minister -who may be sent thither by 
the Shah of Persia.” The decisive language of the 
British minister called forth an evasive reply from the 
Persian Government. The Shah professed not to un¬ 
derstand “ his Excellency’s object in all these ■writings,” 
and declared that there had been no indignity or disre¬ 
spect ever offered to him. But M‘Neill was not to be 
thus appeased. He sent back, in a few plain words, a 
statement of his demands. He demanded that Hadjee 
Ehan, who had outraged the servant of the British mi¬ 
nister, should be removed from office; that Hadjee Meerza 
Aghassy, who had connived at the outrage, should go to 
the British minister’s tent, and apologise for the insult; 
that a firman should be issued, commanding the servants 
of the Persian Government not to interfere with the de¬ 
pendents of the British mission; that the Governor of 
Bushire should bo removed from office for his insults to 
the British Resident; and that the commercial treaty 
should be forthwith concluded and ratified. All these de¬ 
mands but the last were to be carried into effect within 
three days of the date of the letter. 