

As they neared the point of attack, the garrison were 
seen retreating by two and threes; others were quitting 
the works on the pretext of carrying off the wounded. 
These signs of the waning courage of the defenders 
wrought differently on the minds of the two men who 
had hitherto seemed to be cast in the same heroic mould 
—soldiers of strong nerves and unfailing resolution. 
They saw that the garrison were giving way. Pottin¬ 
ger was eager to push on to the breach. Yar Mahomed 
sat himself down. The Wuzeer had lost heart. His 
wonted high courage and collectedness had deserted 
him in this emergency. Astonished and indignant at 
the pusillanimity of his companion, the English officer 
called upon the Wuzeer again and again to rouse him¬ 
self—either to move down to the breach or to send his 
son, to inspire new heart into the yielding garrison. 
The energetic appeal of the yoimg Englishman was not 
lost upon the Afghan chief. He rose up; advanced fur¬ 
ther into the works; and neared the breach where the 
contest was raging. Encouraged by the diminished 
opposition, the enemy were pushing on with renewed 
vigour. Yar Mahomed called upon his men, in God’s 



IRRESOLUTION OF TAR MAHOMEI). 


265 


name, to fight; but they wavered and stood still. Then 
his heart failed him again. He turned back; said he 
would go for aid; sought the place where he had before 
sat down, and looked around, irresolute and unnerved. 
Pointing to the men, who, alarmed by the backwardness 
of their chief, were now retreating in every direction, 
Pottinger in vehement language insisted upon the abso¬ 
lute ruin of all their hopes that must result fi’om want 
of energy in such a conjuncture. Yar Mahomed roused 
himself; again advanced, but again wavered; and a 
third time the young English officer was compelled, by 
words and deeds alike, to shame the unmanned Wuzeer. 
The language of entreaty was powerless; he used the 
language of reproach. He reviled; he threatened; he 
seized him by the arm and dragged him forward to the 
breach. Such appeals were not to be resisted. The 
noble example of the young Englishman could not infuse 
any real courage into the Afghan chief; but it at least 
roused him into action. The men were retreating from 
the breach. The game was almost up. The cowaidice 
of the Wuzeer had well-nigh played away the last 
stake. Had Yar Mahomed not been roused out of 
the paralysis that had descended upon him, Herat would 
have been carried by assault. But the indomitable cou¬ 
rage of Eldred Pottinger saved the beleaguered city. 
He compelled the Wuzeer to appear before his men as 
one not utterly prostrate and helpless. The chief called 
upon the soldiery to fight; but they continued to fall 
back in dismay. Then seizing a large staff, Yar Maho¬ 
med rushed like a madman upon the hindmost of the 
party, and drove them forward under a shower of heavy 
blows. The nature of the works was such as to forbid 
their falling back in a body. Cooped up in a narrow 
passage, and seeing no other outlet of escape, many of 
them leapt wildly over the parapet, and rushed down 