

s 2 



260 


THE SIEGE OP HERAT. 


the beginning of May, feimine and sickness pressed so 
severely upon the inhabitants, that it was debated 
whether it would not be expedient to suffer a number of 
them to depart out of the city. Fever and scurvy were 
rife among them; and it appeared that the enemies out¬ 
side the gates were less terrible than the viewless ones 
within. In this extremity they mustered in large num¬ 
bers, and petitioned the Shah to suffer them to depart. 
The Shah referred the matter to the Wuzeer; and the 
Wuzeer consulted the chiefs. The discussion was long 
and animated. The decision was against the departure 
of the people. The petitioners were mainly women 
and children; and to suffer them to depart would be to 
throw them into the hands of the licentious Persian sol¬ 
diery, and to expose them to a fate more terrible than 
famine and death.* 

The Persians now, under Russian direction, continued 
to prosecute the siege with increased vigour and judg¬ 
ment. The whole of the investing force—some portion 
of which had before been scattered over the great plain 
—was now drawn in more closely round the city. 


grain whilst it was tolerably cheap. 
This and sundry other excuses were 
easily overcome; but he evidently 
wished to avoid the employment, or 
to make excuses for use when he 
failed. As soon as one objection was 
overruled another was raised; but I 
overcame all except that the stench 
of the dead bodies from the city would 
prevent these spirits from venturing, 
except under extraordinary strong 
incantations, within its walls; as 
angels and gins are smd to be parti- 
cumrly fond of sweet odours, and 
excessively angered by the contrary. 
The argument was a clencher, and no 
ingenuity could overturn it, for cer- 
^nly the smell was abominable, and 
in a calm, or when the wind came 
from the southward, in which direc¬ 
tion the greatest number had been 


buried, the human kind could scarcely 
withstand the horrible effluvia of 
putrid flesh.” — \Eldred Pottinger^s 
MS. Journal.'] 

* A few days afterwards, however, 
a party of some 600 or 700, mostly 
old men, women, and children, were 
put out of the gates. “ The enemy,” 
says Pottinger, “ opened a heavy 
fire on them until they found out 
who they were, when they tried to 
drive them back with sticks and 
stones; but Nfdb Dustoo, to whom 
the business was entrusted, liker a 
fiend than a man, opened a fire upon 
the wretched citizens from the works, 
and the Persians thus let them pass. 
From the besiegers* fire no one suf¬ 
fered, as a rising ground was between, 
but ^m that of the garrison it is 
said several fell.” 



UNSUCCESSFUL ASSAULTS. 


261 


On the 13th of June an assault was attempted at the 
south-west angle, but gallantly repulsed by the garrison. 
Informed by some desertem &om Herat that the defence 
of the famse-braie was comparatively neglected during 
the mid-day heats, the Persians surprised the guards at 
the outer works, and pushed on towards the Jansse-braie. 
But a little party of Afghans—not more than three or 
four in number—stood at bay in the passages of the 
traverses, and heroically defended the post until assist¬ 
ance was at hand. The relieving party came down 
gallantly to the defence. Headed by Sultan Mahomed 
Omar, they flung themselves over the parapet of the 
upper famse-braie, and pouring themselves down the 
exterior slope overwhelmed the assailants and dislodged 
them with great slaughter.* 