



ASSAULT OF THE.24TH OF JUNK. 


268 


fifth, gallantly headed by their officers, the storming 
column threw itself into the trench of the lower fausse- 
braie. The struggle was brief, but bloody. The defenders 
fell at their post to a man, and the work was carried by 
the besiegers. Encouraged by this first success, the storm¬ 
ing party pushed up the slope. A galling fire firom the 
garrison met them as they advanced. The officers and 
leading men of the column were mown down; there was 
a second brief and bloody struggle, and the upper fausse- 
braie was carried. A few of the most daring of the 
assailants pushing on in advance of their comrades 
gained the head of the breach. But now Deen Ma- 
homed came down with the Afghan reserve. Thus 
recruited, the defenders gathered new heart. The Per¬ 
sians on the breach were driven back. Again and again, 
with desperate courage, they struggled to effect a lodg¬ 
ment, only to be repulsed and thrown back in confiision 
upon their comrades who were pressing on behind. The 
conflict was fierce; the issue was doubtful. Now the 
breach was well-nigh carried; and now the stormers, 
recoiling from the shock of the defence, fell back upon 
the exterior slope of the fausse-braie. It was an hour 


prevented them following up the ad¬ 
vantage. At the south-west angle, 
or Pay-in-ab, the Persians can scarcely 
be said to have attacked, as they never 
advanced beyond the parapet of their 
own trenches* It was evidently a 
mere feint. At the western, or Arak 
gate, a column composed of the Rus¬ 
sian regiment, and other troops under 
Samson, and those under Wully Khan, 
marched up to the counterscarp; but 
Wully Khan being killed, and Samson 
carried off the field wounded, the men 
broke and fled, leaving an immense 
number killed and wounded. The 
latter were nearly all shot by idlers on 
the ramparts, or murdered by the 
plunderers, who crept out to strip the 
slain. The other attack, on the centre 


of the north-west face, was repulsed 
in like manner, after reacliing the 
counterscarp.” — [Eldred Pottinger's 
MS. Journal.] Wully Khan's body 
was found on the following day, and 
his head was brought into the city. 
On his person were found several 
letters relating to the plan of assault, 
which satisfactorily proved tliat it had 
been designed by the Russian officers 
in the Persian camp. There were 
two letters among them from Ma¬ 
homed Shah himself—one addressed 
to Wully Khan, ordering him to 
conform to the plan of the Russian 
ambassador, and another to Hadjee 
Meerza Aghassy, directing him to 
give similar instructions to Wully 

l^n. 



264 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


of intense excitement The fate of Herat was trembling 
in the balance. 

Startled by the first noise of the assault, Yar Mahomed 
had risen up, left his quarters, and ridden down to the 
works. Pottinger went forth at the same time, and on 
the same errand. There was a profound conviction in 
his mind that there was desperate work in hand, of which 
he might not live to see the end. Giving instructions to 
his dependents, to be carried out in the event of his 
falling in the defence, he hastened to join the Wuzeer. 
It was a crisis that demanded all the energy and cou¬ 
rage of those two resolute spirits. The English officer 
was equal to the occasion. The Afghan Sirdar was not. 