


267 


stunned and prostrated by the blow. The Persian camp 
was equally dispirited; and a week of inaction super¬ 
vened.* Even the work of repairing the damaged forti¬ 
fications was slowly recommenced by the garrison; and 
when at last the men returned to their accustomed duties 
it was plain that they had no heart. Nor was there any¬ 
thing strange and unaccountable in this. The A%hans 
had repulsed the Persians on the 24th of June; but they 
felt that nothing but a miracle could enable them to 
withstand another such assault. The resources of the 
government had failed them. Food was scarce; money 
was scarce. The citizens could not be fed. The soldiers 
could not be paid. 

In all of this there was much to disquiet with painful 
doubts and misgivings the mind of Eldred Pottinger. 
To protract the siege was to protract the sufferings of 
the Heratees. The misery of the people was past 
counting. The poor were perishing for want of food; 
the rich were dying under the hands of the torturers. 
The soldiers clamoured for money; and wherever money 
was known or suspected to be, there Avent the ruthless 
myrmidons of Yar Mahomed to demand it for their 
master, or to Avring from the agonised victim the treasure 
which he sought to conceal. To tear from a wretched 
man, at the last gasp of life, all that he possessed; then, de¬ 
manding more, to torture him anew, until, sinking under 

* The loss upon the Persian side have been very great in proportion to 
was very heavy. A large number of the whole number killed and wounded, 
officers, including several chiefs of Major-General Berowski and Sirteps 
note, were killed and wounded. Mr. Wully Khan and Kebbee Khan, have 
M^Xeill wrote from comp, near Te- been killed; Sirteps Samson Khan^ 
heran, to Lord Palmerston: “The Hossein Pasha Khan, and JaffierKooli 
number of the killed and wounded of Khan, have been wounded; and al- 
the Persian army is variously stated; most all the field-officers of these bri- 
but the best information 1 have been gadcs have been killed or wounded.** 
able to obtain leads me to believe There is little doubt, however, that 
that it cannot be less than 1700 or the entire number of casualties is 
1800 man. The loss in officers, and greatly overstated in this passage, 
especially those of the higher ranks, 



268 THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 

tiie accumulated agony, the miserable victim was released 
by death; and then to fling his emaciated corpse, 
wrapped in an old shawl or blanket down at the 
threshold of his desolated house, was no solitary achieve¬ 
ment of the Wuzeer. Even ladies of rank were given 
over to the torturers. The very inmates of the Shah’s 
Zenana were threatened. A reign of terror was esta¬ 
blished such as it sickened Pottinger to contemplate. 
He felt that he was the cause of this. Many reproached 
him openly. The despairing looks and gaunt figures of 
others reproached him more painfully still. All that 
he could do to redress the wrongs of the injured and 
alleviate the suflerings of the distressed he did in this 
fearful conjuncture. Men of all kinds came to him im¬ 
ploring his aid and importuning him for protection. 
Some he was able to save, stepping between the wrong¬ 
doer and the wronged; but from others he was power¬ 
less to avert by his intervention the ruin that was im¬ 
pending over them. Every day brought palpably before 
him new illustrations of the unsparing cruelty of the 
Wuzeer. But dire political necessity compelled him to 
protract a conjuncture laden with these terrible results. 
It is impossible to read the entrances in his journal at 
this time without feeling how great was the conflict 
within him between the soldier and the man. 