

Again the Persian minister declared, on the part of 
the Shah, that no indignities had ever been offered to 
the British mission; and again Mr. M‘Neill requested his 
dismissal. The Shah was not ready to grant it. “ No,” 
he said; “never shall we consent to the departure of his 
Excellency. Let him by all means lay aside his inten¬ 
tion, and let him not allow this idea to enter his mind.” 
But he was not to be persuaded to lay aside his inten¬ 
tions. The Persian ministers continued to declare that 
no insults had been offered the British mission. So, re- 



SOTPBBING® OF THE CITIZENS. 


259 


luctant as he was abruptly to terminate our diplomatic 
intercourse with Persia, Mr. M'Neill, on the 7th of Jime, 
took his departure from the Persian camp. Prom the 
ramparts of Herat they looked out upon the striking 
of the English ambassador’s tents, and a large party of 
horsemen were seen making their way across the plain. 
The rupture was now complete. Persia was no longer 
an ally of Great Britain. 

In the mean while, as the year advanced, the miseries 
and privations of the siege were more and more severely 
felt by the inhabitants. The wonder is, that at a still 
earlier period they had not become wholly unendurable. 
Houses were pulled down to supply fuel.* Horses 
were killed for food. The vast number of people 
assembled within the walls had not only generated an 
extreme scarcity of provisions, but was in a fair way to 
generate a. pestilence. The city was altogether without 
sewers or other means of drainage. The accumulations 
of filth had therefore become inconceivable, and the 
stench hardly to be borne. The decaying bodies of the 
dead had polluted the air to a still more horrible extent; 
so that there was every probability of some fearful 
epidemic breaking out among the people.f Indeed, at 

* The Jews’ synagogue had been as we had got now intimate he told 
devoted to this unhofy use; but they me that he as yet had not commenced 
had contrived to accomplish its re- the practice; that he wanted to 
demption. pursue the science allowed by the 

t An amusing illustration of the Hudyth; not the accursed magic— 
unsavoury condition of the city at Sihr Malown; that he wished but for 
this time is given in Pottinger’s «four- power to summon the ^ns and angels 
nal. He had made the acquaintance to his aid. Though this was not ex- 
of a magician, and wished to have a actly what I wanted, I should have 
specimen of his art. ** People of his been most happy of an introduction 
class,” he writes, “ are very careful to either of these classes; and, there¬ 
of exposing themselves; and are ex- fore, not to lose my labour, I used my 
cessively suspicious and bigoted. It utmost endeavours to get my friend 
was therefore a long time before I to commence his incantations at once, 
could venture to request a turn of He made many excuses. First, he 
his art. However, I at last did so, had not got clean clothes to change 
but was disappointed at finding he as the scarcity had obliged him to 
was not a regular practitioner; and part with ev^ything extra to buy 