

^ • “ Notwithstuiding,” says Pot- never contemplated that I should be 
tmger, “that I micht then oe con- kept out of their assembly.”— [MS. 
sidered a doubtw Mend, it was JoumaU'] 



POSITION OF MB. MCNEILL. 


255 


M‘Neill;—“ He was forced,” wrote the minister to Lord 
Palmerston, “ to return with them; a part of his clothes 
were taken from him; the horses which he was bringing 
for me from Herat were seized; he was draped to camp, 
and there placed in custody. He succeeded, however, in 
making his way to the tent of Colonel Stoddart, and was 
by that officer conducted to the prime minister, who, 
after he had been informed by Colonef Stoddart that the 
man was in the service of this mission, again placed him 
in custody, while Hadjee Khan, an officer of the rank of 
Brigadier in the service of the Shah, not only used offen¬ 
sive language in addressing Colonel Stoddart in presence 
of the prime minister, but after the messenger had been 
released by order of his Excellency, seized him again in 
the midst of the camp; stripped him to search for any 
letters he might have concealed about his person ;* took 
from him Lieutenant Pottinger’s letter, which was sent 
to the prime minister; used to the messenger the most 
violent threats and the most disgusting and opprobrious 
language, and took from him a portion of his accoutre- 
ments.”t 

This was, doubtless, a grievous insult; and Mr.M'Neill 


* Published Correspondence relating 
to Persia and Afghanistan. 

t The Gholam’s own account of the 
treatment he received from Hadjee 
Khan is worth quoting:—“Hadjee 
Khan then turned to me, and threa¬ 
tened me with instant death. I de¬ 
manded the reason, but he gave me 
no other answer than abuse, calling 
me a traitor and a rascal, and said 
that he himself would be mj execu¬ 
tioner. He then began to imbutton 
his coat sleeves, threatening me all 
the while, and every now and then 
half unsheatibun^ his dagger. ‘ I will 
be your executioner myself,’ said the 
Khan. * K there be an enemy to the 
English, I am the man—you are a 
traitor and a rascal—your eyes shall 


be plucked out; the Shah has ordered 
me to kill you; I will first cut off 
your bands. You must have papers 
from Herat, and unless you instantly 
deliver them up, you shall be cut to 
pieces.’ Hadjee Khan went on in 
this strain for a long time, during 
which I was stripped nearly to my 
skin, the air being so cold that water, 
on being exposec^ instantly froze. I 
was silent under all these threats 
and demonstrations, merely observing 
that, having such a noble executioner 
as Hadiee Khan, I was content to 
die, and I hoped the office woidd re¬ 
main in his family.**— Statement of 
AH Mahomed Beg.—[Published Cor- 
respondence relating to Persia and Af¬ 
ghanistan.'] 



256 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


believed that it was intended to be one. It was designed, 
he thought, “ to exhibit to the Afghans and to the Per¬ 
sian army an apparent contempt for the English, with a 
view to diminish the moral effect which might have 
been produced on either party, by the general belief that 
we were opposed to the conquest of Herat by the 
Persians.” It was an insult for which reparation, if not 
offered by one state, might be rightfully exacted by the 
other; and Mr. M‘Neill was not a man to sit down 
tamely under such an outrage as this. But the incident 
had taken place in October, and now, in May, though the 
subject had been repeatedly forced upon the attention of 
Mahomed Shah and his ministers, no fitting reparation 
had been offered to the British Government. The Per¬ 
sian Government had, indeed, asserted their right to 
seize, punish, or put to death, without reference to the 
British minister, the Persian servants in his employ¬ 
ment. The breach was thus palpably widening. The 
Governor of Bushire, too, had used offensive language 
towards the British Resident in the Persian Gulf; and 
the redress, which had been sought by Mr. M‘Neill, had 
not been granted by the Persian Government. Then 
there was another grievance of which the British minister 
complained. The Persian Government had continued 
to evade the conclusion of the commercial treaty, which 
was guaranteed to us in the general treaty of friendship 
between the two states. 