

Another attempt, made at the same time, to efiect a 
lodgment at the south-east angle, was equally unsuccess¬ 
ful. Twice the storming column advanced, and twice it 
was repulsed. The fortune of the day was against the 
Persians. 

In nowise disheartened by these failures, the besi^ers 
now redoubled their exertions, and pursued their mining 
operations with a vigour and an activity which the gar¬ 
rison could not match. The Afghans were now becoming 
dispirited and inert; even the chiefs began to despond, 
and the wonted constancy of the Wuzeer forsook him. 
Everywhere Pottinger saw with uneasiness signs of 
failing courage and impaired activity. He had been 
deputed by Mr. M‘Neill to act as British Agent at Herat, 
and now, in his official capacity, he redoubled his exer¬ 
tions. There was need, indeed, of his best efforts. The 

* It was said that Mahomed Shah who, attended by a party of idlers, 
had come down in person to wit- and a small body ot horse, was a 
ness the assault; but the Boyal ama- spectator of the defeat of his coim- 
teur was only the Shah's brother, trymen. 



262 


THE SIEGE OF BEBAT. 


siege was being pushed forward, not only with an energy, 
but with an intelligence that had not marked the earlier 
stages of the attack. The breaches had be6ome more 
practicable. The Persians were filling up the ditch at 
some parts, and constructing bridges to span it at others. 
Another assaidt of a more formidable character than 
any before attempted was said to be in contemplation; 
and as these rumours were circulated through the works, 
and the obscure terms of the future were magnified 
by the palpable dangers of the present, the defenders 
scarcely strove to conceal the fear which had overcome 
them. 

The threatened assault was at hand. The 24th of 
June was a memorable day in the annals of the siege. 
It opened with a heavy fire fi:om the Persian batteries on 
all the four sides of the city. Then there was a perfect 
lull, more ominous than the uproar that preceded it. 
The signs of the coming assault were plain and intelli¬ 
gible ; but strangely were they disregarded. The Wuzeer 
was at his quarters. The garrison were off their guard. 
Many, indeed, had composed themselves to sleep. The 
enemy had been seen assembling in great force; but no 
heed was taken of the movement. Suddenly the still¬ 
ness was broken by the booming of a gun and the flight 
of a rocket; another gun—then another—and presently 
a heavy fire of ordnance from all sides, supported by 
a discharge of musketry, which, feeble at first, grew 
presently more vigorous and sustained. There was 
no longer any doubt of the intentions of the besieging 
force. The enemy had braced themselves up for a 
general assault upon the city, and were moving to the 
attack of five different points of the works. 

At four of these points they were repulsed.* At the 

* ** The assault on the gate of Can- chased back into their trenches; but 
dahar was repulsed, and the Persians the danger at the souih^^ast angle 