


288 


as heroes, and their successful sorties as great victories. 
When, however, the Persians really attempted anything 
like a combined movement against their works, the garri¬ 
son began to lose heart, and were with difficulty brought 
to repulse them. To what extent they were indebted 
to the unfailing constancy and courage of Eldred Pot- 
tinger, has been set forth, but I believe very imperfectly, 
in this narrative of the siege. Enough, however, has 
been shown to demonstrate that but for the heroism of 
this young Bombay artilleryman, Herat would have fallen 
into the hands of Mahomed Shah. The garrison were 
fast breaking down, not so much under the pressure from 
without as the pressure from within—the chiefs were 
desponding—the people were starving. But still the 
continued cry of Eldred Pottinger was, “ A little longer 
—a little longer yet.” When the chiefs talked of sur¬ 
render—when they set forth the hopelessness of fur¬ 
ther efforts of defence—he counselled still a little fur¬ 
ther delay; his voice was ever for the manlier course; 
and what he recommended in speech he was ever eager 
to demonstrate in action. Yar Mahomed did great 
things at Herat. It would be unjust to deny him the 
praise due to his energetic exertions in the prosecution 
of the defence, however unscrupulous the means he em¬ 
ployed to sustain it. But his energies failed him at last; 
and it was only by the powerful stimulants applied by 
his young European associate that he was supported and 
invigorated in the great crisis, when the fate of Herat 
was trembling in the balance. There was one true sol¬ 
dier in Herat, whose energies never failed him; and 
History delights to record the fact that that one true 
soldier, young and inexperienced as he was, with no 
knowledge of active warfare that he had not derived 
from books, rescued Herat from the grasp of the Persian 



284 


THE SIEGE OE HERAT. 


monarch, and baffled the intrigues of his great northern 
abettor.* 

About these intrigues something more should be 
said. No sane man ever questions the assertion that 
Russian diplomatists encouraged Mahomed Shah to 
undertake the expedition against Herat, and that 
Russian officers aided the operations of the siege. No 
reasonable man doubts that, so encouraging and so aid¬ 
ing Persia, in aggressive measures against the frontier of 
Afghanistan, Russia harboured ulterior designs not 
wholly unassociated with thoughts of the position of the 
British in Hindostan. At all events, it is certain that 
the first word, spoken or written in encouragement of 
the expedition against Herat, placed Russia in direct an¬ 
tagonism with Great Britain. “ The British minister at 
Teheran was instructed to dissuade the Shah from such 
an enterprise; urging reasons of indisputable force, and 
founded upon the interests of the Shah himself. But the 
advice given by the Russian ambassador was all of an 
opposite tendency. For while Mr. M‘Neill was appeal¬ 
ing to the prudence and the reason of the Shah, Count 
Simonich was exciting the ambition and inflaming the 
passions of that Sovereign; whilst the one was preaching 
moderation and peace, the other was inciting to war and 
conquest; and whilst the one pointed out the difficulties 
and expense of the enterprise, the other inspired hopes 
of money and assistance.”! 