

• Eldred Pottinger's Journal: MS. his while. A person who disregards 

t ** Yar Mahomed is one of the truth, and thinks nothing of denying 
most persuasive talkers I have met. what he has asserted a few minutes 
It is scarcely possible to talk with him before, is a most puzzling person to 
and retain anger. He is ready in a argue with. Until you have thought 
surprising degree, and is so patient over what has been said, you cannot 
under rebuke, that I never saw him understand the changeable colours 
fail to quiet the most violent of his which pass before you.*’ w \Eldr 9 d 
countrymen, when he thought it worth Pottingefs MS. <7buma/.] 

T 2 



276 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


tliat might pacify his visitor. They were soon in ear¬ 
nest conversation, as friends and brothers, regarding the 
general condition of the garrison and its available re¬ 
sources. The Wuzeer declared that “ he regretted much 
the step he was obliged to take, but that indeed no 
alternative was left him—that every resource which 
even tyranny commanded was exhausted—that he dared 
not lay hands on the property of the combatants, though 
many of them had large funds.” The chiefs, he declared, 
were misers. The eunuch, Hadjee Ferooz, he said, 
could easily contribute two lakhs of rupees towards the 
expenses of the war, and the Shah might contribute ten 
—but neither would advance a farthing. “ They are 
all,” he said, “ equally niggardly. They have money, but 
they will not advance it. When their wives are being 
ravished before their faces, they will repent of their 
avarice—but now it is impossible to convince them of 
the folly and the danger of the course they are pur¬ 
suing. With such people to deal with, and the soldiery 
crying out for pay and subsistence, how can I hold out 
longer by force ?” He consented, however, to protract 
the negotiations to the utmost—to amuse the Persians— 
and to gain time. And, in the mean while, he extracted 
from the weak and unresisting all that he could wring 
from them by torture. On the night after this confe¬ 
rence with Pottinger, the Moonshee-Bashee died under 
the hands of the torturers. 

The struggle, however, was now nearly at an end. 
The movements in the Persian camp appear, at this 
time, to have been but imperfectly known within the 
walls of Herat. Whilst Mahomed Shah was making 
preparations for the withdrawal of his army, Yar Ma¬ 
homed and the A%han Sirdars were busy with their 
financial operations for the continuance of the defence. 
A Finance Committee was appointed. Kamran was 



FINANCE OPERATIONS. 


277 


told that he must either provide money for the payment 
of the soldiery, or authorise the Committee to set about 
their work after their own manner. Eager to save his 
money, he sacrificed his people, and armed the Com¬ 
mittee with full powers to search the houses of the 
inhabitants, to order the expulsion of all who had less 
than three months’ provisions, and to take jfrom those 
who had more all that they could find in excess. The 
'L’opshee-Bashee, or chief artilleryman, to whom the 
executive duties of the Committee were entrusted, con¬ 
trived to extort from the inhabitants several days’ food, 
and a large supply of jewels, with which he enriched 
the Wuzeer and himself. It was always believed that 
the former had amassed large sums of money during 
the siege; that he had turned the scarcity to good ac¬ 
count, by turning into his own coffers no small portion of 
the coin which he had wrung by torture from the 
Avretched inhabitants. Noav, when the soldiery, lacking 
the means of subsistence, entered upon a course of plun¬ 
dering that threw the whole city into confusion, the 
Wuzeer, whilst issuing a proclamation forbidding such 
irregularities, and declaring severe penalties for the 
offence, allowed a continuance of the license to his own 
people, that he might avoid the necessity of paying them 
at his own cost. It is not strange, therefore, that when 
reports were circulated throughout the city that the 
Persian army was about to move, the Soonee Parsewans, 
scarcely less than the Sheenhs, should have received the 
intelligence, some with sorrow, and some with a forced 
incredulity, “ preferring the miseries of the siege with 
the ultimate prospect of the city being taken and sacked, 
to the raising of the siege and the prospect of Kamran’s 
and Yar Mahomed’s paternal government.” “All I 
wonder,” said Pottinger, recording this fact, “is, that not 