



278 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


a man is to be found among them bold enough to termi¬ 
nate their miseries by the death of their oppressors.”* 

But it was now becoming every day more obvious that 
Mahomed Shah was about to break up his camp. Some 
countrymen came in to Herat and reported that the 
Persians were collecting their guns and mortars, and 
parking them as though in preparation for an immediate 
march. Parties of horsemen also had been seen moving 
out of camp. Others brought in word that the enemy 
had destroyed their 68-pounders, were assembling their 
carriage-cattle, and were about to raise the siege. The 
English, it was said, had taken Shiraz; but the Persians 
in the trenches, declaring that they were ready for 
another assault, cried out, that though the English army 
had advanced upon that city, the Prince-Governor had 
defeated it. All kinds of preposterous rumours were 
rife. Some asserted that the Russians had attacked and 
captured Tabrecz; others that the Russians and English 
had formed an alliance for the overthrow of Mahomed- 
anism, and the partition of the countries of the East 
between the two great European powers. But amidst 
all these rumours indicating the intended retrogression of 
the Persian army, the garrison was kept continually on 
the alert by alarming rumours of another attack; and it 
was hard to say whether all these seeming preparations 
in Mahomed Shah’s camp were not designed to lull the 
Heratees into a sleep of delusive security, and render 
them an easier prey. 

But the month of September brought with it intelli¬ 
gence of a more decided character. There was no 
longer any doubt in Herat that Mahomed Shah was 
breaking up his camp. Letters came in from the Per¬ 
sian authorities intimating the probability of the “ King 

♦ Eldr^d Pottinger^s MS. Journal. 



THB SIEGE BAISED. 


279 


of Kings” forgiving the rebellion of Prince Kamran on 
certain conditions which would give a better grace to 
the withdrawal of the Persian monarch. To some of 
these, mainly at Pottinger’s suggestion the Heratees 
demurred; but on the 4th of September, the Persian 
prisoners were sent into camp; and the Shah-in-Shah 
promised Colonel Stoddart that the march of the army 
should commence in a few days. There was, indeed, a 
pressing necessity for the immediate departure of the 
force. “ The forage in camp,” wrote Colonel Stoddart 
to Mr. M‘Neill, “ will only last for five or six days more, 
and as messengers have been sent to turn back all cafilas, 
no more flour or grain will arrive. The advanced 
guard under Humza Meerza leaves camp on Friday 
evening.” 

Everything was now ready for the retreat. The guns 
had been withdrawn from their advanced positions, and 
were now limbered up for the march. The baggage- 
cattle had been collected. The tents were being struck. 
The garrison of Herat looked out upon the stir in the 
Persian camp, and could no longer be doubtful of its 
import. The siege was now raised. The danger was 
at an end. Before the 9th of September, the Persian 
army had commenced its retrograde march to Teheran; 
and on the morning of that day the Shah mounted his 
horse “ Amecrj,” and set his face towards his capital. 