

• It will have been perceived that ters of Colonel Stoddart and Mr. 
I have described the operations of M‘Neill, whilst no account has ever 
the sie^e of Herat almost entirely as yet been given to the public of the 
from within the walls. I have done defensive operations of the Heratees. 
this, partly because I believe that the I have already stated that my infor- 
interest of such descriptions is greatly ination has been, for the most part, 
enhanced when the reader is led to derived from the Manuscript Jour- 
identify himself more particularly nals of Eldred Pottinger. 
with one contending party; and f Draft of a Note to he presented 
partly, because the outside move- by the Marquis of Clanricarde to 
ments of the Persian army have been Count Nesselrode. Published Papers. 
already detailed in the published let- 



RUSSIAN SUBTERFUGES. 


285 


Such, verj^ plainly stated, in grave, official language, 
had been the relative positions of Russia and Great 
Britain. But when Lord Durham, in 1837, was directed 
to seek from the Russian minister an explanation of 
conduct so much at variance with the declarations of 
the Muscovite Government, the answer was, that if 
Count Simonich had encouraged Mahomed Shah to 
proceed against Herat, he acted in direct violation of his 
instructions. 

But for a man disobeying the instructions of an 
arbitrary government, Simonich acted with uncommon 
boldness. He advanced to the Persian ruler 50,000 
tomauns, and promised, that if Mahomed Shah took 
Herat, the balance of the debt due by Persia to Russia 
should be remitted. Thus encouraged, Mahomed Shah 
advanced upon Herat. How Simonich followed M‘Ncill 
to the Persian camp, and how he thwarted the efforts of 
the British diplomatist to bring about an accommodation 
of the differences between the two contending states, and 
how Russian officers subsequently directed the siege, has 
been already shown. It has been shown, too, how a 
Russian agent guaranteed a treaty, injurious to British 
interests, between Mahomed Shah and the Sirdars of 
Candahar. It has been shown, too, how a Russian 
agent appeared at Caubul, and how he endeavoured to 
detach Dost Mahomed from an alliance with the British, 
and to encourage him to look for support from the 
Persian King and his Muscovite supporters. 

Considering these things, the British Government 
asked whether the intentions of Russia towards Persia 
and Afghanistan were to be judged from Count Nessel¬ 
rode’s declarations, or from the actions of Simonich and 
Vickovich. The answer was, that Vickovich had been 
despatched to Caubul on a ‘‘ Commercial Mission,” and 
that, if he had treated of anything but commerce, he 



286 


THE BIBOE OF HEBAT. 


had exceeded his instructions; and that Simonich had 
been instructed not only to discourage Mahomed Shah 
from prosecuting the expedition against Herat, but to 
withdraw the Kussian-deserter regiment, which formed 
no insignificant portion of the invading army. “ Not 
upon the cabinet of Russia,” it was said, “ can fall the 
reproach of having encouraged or suggested that fatal 
enterprise.”* The proceedings of the agents were repu¬ 
diated. Vickovich, being a person of no account, was 
remorselessly sacrificed, and he blew out his brains. 
But an apology was found for Count Simonich. It was 
said that he only assisted a friendly state when in ex¬ 
treme difficulty, and that any English officer would have 
done the same.f 