

The demonstration was an insignificant one in itself; 
but by the time that intelligence of the movement had 
reached the Persian camp, the expedition, gathering new 
dimensions at every stage, had swollen into bulk and 
significance. The most exaggerated reports of the 
doings and intentions of the British soon forced them¬ 
selves into currency. The Persian camp was all alive 
with stories of the powerfal British fleet that had sailed 
into the gulf, destroyed Bunder-Abassy and all the other 
ports on the coast, taken Bushire, and landed there a 
mighty army, which was advancing upon Shiraz, and 
had already taken divers towns in the province of Pars. 
Nothing could have been more opportune than the 
arrival of these reports. Mr. M‘Neill was making his 
Way towards the frontier, when intelligence of the 
Karrack expedition met him on the road. About the 
same time he received letters of instructions from the 
Foreign-office, issued in anticipation of the refusal of 



STOBDART IN THE PERSIAN CAMP. 


273 


Mahomed Shall to desist from his operations against 
Herat; and thinking the hour was favorable, he re¬ 
solved to make another effort to secure the withdrawal 
of the Persian army, and to regain for the British Mission 
the ascendancy it had lost at the Persian Court. 

Fortified by these instructions from the Foreign-office, 
Mr. M‘Neill despatched Colonel Stoddart to the Persian 
camp, with a message to the Shah. The language of 
this message was very intelligible and very decided. 
The Shah was iiiformed that the occupation of Herat or 
any part of Afghanistan by the Persians would be con¬ 
sidered in tlie light of a hostile demonstration against 
England; and that he could not persist in his present 
course without immediate danger and injury to Persia. 
It was stated, that already had a naval armament arrived 
in the Persian Gulf, and troops been landed on the 
island of KaiTack, and that if the Shah desired the 
British Government to suspend the measures in progress 
for the vindication of its honour, he must at once retire 
from Herat, and make reparation for the injuries which 
had been inflicted upon the Britisli Mission. 

On the 11th of August, Colonel Stoddart arrived in 
the Persian camp. Repairing at once to the quarters of 
the minister, he found the son of the Candahar chief 
and a party of Afghans waiting in the tent. The Hadjee, 
on his return, received him with courtesy and friend¬ 
liness, and fixed the following day for an interview with 
the Shah. Stoddart went at the appointed hour. The 
King was sitting in a raised room, up six or seven steps. 
Beckoning to the English officer to come up more closely to 
him, he welcomed him with much cordiality, and listened 
to the message from the British Government. Taking 
advantage of a pause in the recital, the King said: “ The 
fact is, if I don't leave Herat, there will be war, is not 
that it?” It is war,” returned Stoddart; “ all depends 

VOL. I. T 



274 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT 