


* At one of these consultations, 
held on the 18th of July, “ Been 
Mahomed,** said Pottinger, ** proposed 
that each chief shoum bring what 
he had to the Wuzeer. The Wuzeer 
proposed that each chief should 
retam his own men. The Topshee- 
Bashee said: * As the Shah has 
mon^ and won't give it, we can¬ 
not force him; but if you allow 


me to seize whom I like, and the 
chiefs five me their promise that 
they will not interfere in favour of 
any one, I will undertake to provide 
the expense of the men for two 
months.* The chiefs immediately 
said, * Done!* and had an agreement 
made out, and those present sealed it. 
.... They were, or appeared Well 
satisfied with me; and we Wuzeer 



THE KABBACK EXPEDITION. 


271 


juncture surprised and delighted Pottinger, who was little 
prepared for the unanimity with which they determined 
on protracting the defence. “ With open breaches, trem¬ 
bling soldiery, and a disaffected populace, they deter¬ 
mined to stand to the last. How I wished,” exclaimed 
Pottinger, “ to have the power of producing the money!” 

The plan which was at last resolved upon—one which 
threw into the hands of a single chief the power of 
seizing the property of whomsoever he thought fit to 
mulct for the service of the state—sunder a written pledge 
from the other chiefs not to interfere, as had been their 
wont, for the protection of their own friends, threw the 
city into such confusion, and produced so many appeals 
to the assembly of chiefs, that Pottinger, anxious to 
establish a less arbitrary system of levying contributions, 
suggested that all who voluntarily brought their money 
would be reimbursed, at his recommendation, by the 
British Government. But money came in slowly. The 
difiiculties of the garrison seemed to thicken around 
them. Negotiations were, therefore, again resumed, with 
a determination at last to bring them to an issue; and mes¬ 
sengers were constantly passing and repassing between 
the city and the Persian camp. 

But in the mean while, far beyond the walls of Herat, 
events were taking shape mightily affecting the issue 
of the contest. Lord Auckland, who had watched with 
much anxiety the progress of affairs in the West, had, in 
the course of the spring, determined on despatching an 
expedition to the Persian Gulf, to hold itself in readi¬ 
ness for any service which Mr. M'Neill might deem it 
expedient to employ it upon, “ with a view to the main¬ 
tenance of our interests in Persia.” Instructions to this 
effect were forwarded to Bombay. In conjunction with 

<juoted my anxiety and efforts as an and children to defend.’*—[iJWrsd 
example to those who had their women Pottinger's MS, J 



272 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


Sir Charles Malcolm, the chief of the Indian navy, the 
Bombay Gkivemment despatched the Semiramis and 
Hugh lAndsay steamers, and some vessels of •war, "with 
detachments of the 15th, 23rd, and 24th Regiments, and 
the Marine battalion, to the Persian Gulf; and instructed 
the Resident, Captain Hennell, to land the troops on 
the island of Karrack, and concentrate the squadron 
before it. On the 4th of June, the Semiramis steamed 
out of the Bombay harbour, and on the 19th anchored 
off Karrack. The troops were- immediately landed. The 
governor of the island, greatly alarmed by the coming 
of the steamer and the fighting men, but somewhat 
reassured by the appearance of Captain Hennell, said that 
the island and everything it contained, himself and its 
inhabitants, were at the disposal of the British Resident; 
and at once began to assist in the disembarkation of the 
troops. 