


upon your Majesty’s answer—God preserve your Ma¬ 
jesty !” The message, written in the original English, 
was then given to the King. “ It is all I wished for,” 
he said. “ I asked the minister plenipotentiary for it; 
but he would not give it to me. He said he was not 
authorised.” “ He was not authorised then,” returned 
Stoddart; “ but now he has been ordered to do it. No 
one could give such a message without especial autho¬ 
rity from Sovereign.” The Shah complained that 
the paper was in English, which he could not under¬ 
stand; but said that his Meerzas should translate it for 
him, and then that he would give a positive answer to 
its demands. Two days afterwards Stoddart was again 
summoned to the royal presence. “We consent to the 
whole of the demands of the British Government,” said 
the Shah. “ We will not go to war. Were it not for the 
sake of their friendship, we should not return from before 
Herat. Had we known that our coming here might 
risk the loss of their friendship, we certainly would not 
h.ave come at all.”* The English officer thanked God 
that his Majesty had taken so wise a view of the real 
interests of Persia; but hinted to the Foreign Minister 
as he went out, that although the Shah’s answer was 
very satisfactory, it would be more satisfactory still to 
see it at once reduced to practice. 

Whilst, in the Persian camp, Mahomed Shah was 
promising the English diplomatists to withdraw his army 
from Herat, an officer of the Russian Mission—M. 
Goutte, who had approved himself an adept in intrigue 
—^was bus 3 dng himself in Herat to bring about an 
^rangement that would give a colour of victory to the 
achievements of the investing force. If Kamran could 
have been persuaded to come out and wait upon Ma- 

* Colonel Stoddart to Mr, M^NeUL Correspondence relating to Persia and 
Afghanistan, 



POTTINGER AND YAR MAHOMED. 


276 


homed Shah in token of submission, the army might 
have been withdrawn with some show of credit, and 
the Russian Mission might have claimed a diplomatic 
victory. The Afgh ans were not, in their present re¬ 
duced state, disinclined to acknowledge the supremacy 
of Mahomed Shah, and to consent that Eamran should 
visit the Persian monarch at Ghorian—^but the Bussiaa 
envoy demanded that he should come out of Herat, and 
make his obeisance to the King of Elings, as a prelimi¬ 
nary to the withdrawal of the Persian army.* 

This was on the 17th of August. On the morning of 
the 18th, Yar Mahomed sent a messenger to Pottinger, 
requesting his attendance at the Wuzeer’s quarters. The 
English officer was received with coldness almost amount¬ 
ing to discourtesy. Scarcely a word was spoken to him 
whilst the levee lasted j but when the assembly broke 
up, Pottinger, in a tone of voice that showed he was not 
to be trifled with, asked him why he had sent for him 
if he had nothing to communicate and nothing to ask. 
The "Wuzeer took him by the hand and was about to 
leave the room ; when Pottinger, arresting his progress, 
demanded a private interview. The room was cleared. 
The young English officer and the A%han Sirdar sate 
down together, and were soon in friendly discourse. Yar 
Mahomed, the most plausible and persuasive of men,t 
soon stilled the tempest that was rising in Pottinger’s 
breast. All meekness and gentleness now, he was ready 
to submit patiently to any rebuke, and to say anything 