

There was some truth in this. At all events, when it 
was added by the Russian minister that his government 
had more reason to be alarmed by the movements of 
Great Britain, than Great Britain by the movements of 
Russia; and that England sought to monopolise the pri¬ 
vilege of intrigue in Central Asia, it was difficult for any 


* It is not very clear, however, 
that the Rusian Government, though 
doubtless discredited by the failure, 
regarded it as a “ fatal enterprise.” 
Russia had a double game to play. 
Ill the familiar language of the turf, 
she “ hedged.” Whether the Persians 
won or lost, she was sure to gain 
something. The views of Russian 
statesmen have been thus set forth, 
not improbably in the very language 
of one of them: 

** RiUMia,** it is stated, **has played a 
very successful, as well as a very safe, 
game in the late proceedings. When 
she jirompted the Shah to undertake 
the siege of Herat, she was certain of 
oarrjing an important point, however 
the exp^ition terminated. If Herat 
fbll, which there was every reason to 
expect, then Candahar and Caubul 
would certainly have made their sub« 
mission. Russian influence would 


thus have been brought to the thresh¬ 
old of India; and England, however 
much she might desire peace, could 
not avoid being involved in a diflicult 
and expensive war, in order to avert 
more serious dangers. If, on tbe 
other hand, England interfered to 
save Herat, she was compromised— 
not with the mere Court of Mahomed 
Shah, but with Persia as a nation. 
Russia had contrived to bring all 
Persia to Herat, and to identify all 
Persia with the success or failure of 
the campaign: and she had thus gra¬ 
velled tne old system of partisanship, 
which would have linked Azerbijan 
with herself, and the rest of the na¬ 
tion with her rival.”— \^Calcutta Re^ 

t Count Nesselrode's Instructions to 
Count Pozeo di Bor go: November 1, 
1839. 



BNOLAND Ain> RUSSIA. 


287 


candid and unprejudiced observer of events to pro¬ 
nounce harsbly upon the injustice of the imputation. 
When, too, some time afterwards, Baron Brunow said 
to Sir John Hobhouse, “ If we go on at this rate, 
the Cossack and the Sepoy will soon meet on the 
banks of the Oxus,”* it would have been hard to have 
laid the contemplated collision wholly to the account 
of the restlessness of the Czar. True it is, that the 
policy of Russia in the East had been distinguished 
for its aggressive .tendencies jf and it is equally true, 
that in tlie plenitude of our national self-love, we en¬ 
couraged the conviction that Great Britain had con¬ 
quered the entire continent of Hindostan by a series 
of purely defensive measures. Looking merely at the 
recognised policy of the East India Company, the dis¬ 
tinction may be admitted. For a century have this great 
body been steadfastly setting their face against the ex¬ 
tension of their empire; but their empire has been ex¬ 
tended in spite of them, and their agents have been less 
pacific than themselves. The general tendencies of 
the Eastern policy worked out by the English in India 
has not been purely defensive, and they are, perhaps, 
the last people in the world entitled to complain of the 
encroachments ol‘ their allies. England and Russia seemed 
at one time to be—and, perhaps, they are stUl—ap¬ 
proaching each other on the vast Central-Asian battle¬ 
field; but when the account between the two great Euro- 