

To Mahomed Shah this failure was mortifying indeed; 
but the interests at stake were too large for him to sacri¬ 
fice them at the shrine of his ambition. He had spent 
ten months before the walls of Herat, exhausting his 
soldiery in a vain endeavour to carry by assault a place 
of no real or reputed strength. He had succeeded only 
in reducing the garrison to very painful straits; and had 
retired at last, not os one well-disposed to peaceful ne¬ 
gotiation and reasonable concession, submitting to the 



280 


THE SIEaE OF HEBAT. 


fnendly intervention of a neutral power, and willing to 
wave the chances of success; but as one who saw before 
him no chance of success, and was moved by no feeling 
of moderation and forbearance, but by a cogent fear of 
the consequences resulting from the longer prosecution 
of the siege. On the whole, it had been little better 
than a lamentable demonstration of weakness. The 
Persian army under the eye of the sovereign himself, 
aided by the skill of Russian engineers, and the wisdom 
of Russian statesmen, had failed, in ten months, to re¬ 
duce a place which I believe, in no spirit of national self- 
love, a well-equipped English force would have reduced 
in as many days. The real cause of the failure is not 
generally understood. The fact is, that there was no 
unity in the conduct of the siege. Instead of devising 
and adhering to some combined plan of operations, the 
Sirdars, or Generals, under Mahomed Shah, to whom the 
prosecution of the siege was entrusted, acted as so many 
independent commanders, and each followed his own 
plan of attack. The jealousy of the chiefs prevented 
them from acting in concert with each other. One 
would not serve under the other, or even support the 
operations of his brothers. Each had his own inde¬ 
pendent point of attack, and they would not even move 
to the assistance of each other when attacked by the 
Heratees in the trenches. Except when Mahomed Shah 
insisted on a combined assault, as on the 23rd of June, 
and the Russian minister directed it, there was no union 
among them. Each had his own game to follow up; 
his own laurels to win; and was rather pleased than dis¬ 
appointed by the failures of his brethren. It was not 
possible that operations so conducted should have re¬ 
sulted in anything but failure. But it was the deli¬ 
berate opinion of Eldred Pottinger, expressed nearly 
two years after the withdraw?! of the Persian army. 



EXCUSES FOR THE FAILURE. 


281 


that Mahomed Shah might have taken Herat bj assault 
within four-and-twenty hours after his appearance before 
its walls, if his troops had been efficiently commanded.* 
Whether Mahomed Shah ever rightly understood this 
matter I do not pretend to know, but he felt that it was 
necessary to make an effort to patch up the rents which 
this grievous failure had made in his reputation. So he 
issued a firman setting forth all the great results of his 
expedition to the eastward, and attempted to demon¬ 
strate, after the following fashion, that he gained a vic¬ 
tory even at Herat:—^“At last,” so ran the royal pro¬ 
clamation, “ when the city of Herat existed but in name, 
and the reality of the government of Kainran was re¬ 
duced to four bare walls, the noble ambassadors of the 
illustrious British Government, notwithstanding that 
three separate treaties of peace between the two govern¬ 
ments of England and Persia, negotiated respectively by 
Sir Harford Jones, Sir Gore Ouseley, and Mr. Ellis, were 
still in force, disregarding the observance of the condi¬ 
tions of these treaties, prepared to undertake hostilities, 
and as a warlike demonstration, despatched a naval 
armament with troops and forces to the Gulf of Persia. 
The winter season was now approaching, and if we pro¬ 
tracted to a longer period our stay at Herat, there ap- 