


* “ It is my firm belief that Maho¬ 
med Shah miglit have carried the city 
by assault the very first day that he 
reached Herat, and that even when 
the garrison gained confidence, and 
were flushed with tlie success of tiieir 
sorties, lie might have, by a proper 
use of the means at his disposal, taken 
the place in twenty-four hours. His 
troops were infinitely better soldiers, 
and quite as brave men,as the Afglians. 
The non-success of their efforts was 
the fault of their generals. We can 
never again calculate on such, and if 


the Persians again return, they will 
do so properly commanded and en¬ 
lightened as to the causes of their 
former failure. Their material was 
on a scale sufficient to have reduced 
a powerful fortress. The men worked 
very well at tlic trenches, considering 
they were not trained sappers, and 
the practice of the artillery was really 
superb. They simply wanted engi¬ 
neers and a general to have proved 
a most formidable force .”—[Eldred 
Pottinger^s Report on Herat: Calcutta^ 
July^ 1840. MS. Records."] 



282 


THE SISGE OF HERAT. 


peared a possibility that our victorious army might suffer 
from a scarcity of provisions, and that the maintenance 
of our troops might not be unaccompanied with diffi¬ 
culty; the tranquillity of our provinces was also a matter 
of serious attention to our benevolent thoughts; and 
thus, in sole consideration of the interest of our faith and 
country, and from a due regard to the welfare of our 
troops and subjects, we set in motion our world-subduing 
army upon the 19th of Jumady-al-Akber^ and prepared 
to return to our capital. . . . During the protracted siege 
of Herat, a vast number of the troops and inhabitants 
had perished, as well from the fire of our cannon and mus¬ 
ketry as from constant hardship and starvation; the re¬ 
mainder of the people, amounting to about 50,000 families, 
with a large proportion of the Afghan and Persian chiefs, 
who had been treated with the most liberal kindness by the 
officers of our government, and who being compromised, 
could not possibly, therefore, hold any further inter¬ 
course with Yar Mahomed Khan, marched away with 
us, with zealous eagerness, to the regions of Khain and 
Khorassan, and there was no vestige of an inhabited 
spot left around Herat.” 

But although the failure of Mahomed Shah is mainly 
to be attributed to the jealousy, and consequent disunion, 
of his generals, it would be an injustice to the garrison of 
Herat not to acknowledge that they owed their safety, 
in some measure, to their own exertions. Their gallan¬ 
try and perseverance were not of the highest and most 
sustained character; and might have yielded to the 
assaults of the Persians if there had been any union 
among the assailants. They gathered courage from 
the languid movements of the besiegers; and, surprised 
at the little progress made by the once dreaded army of 
Mahomed Shah, they came in time to regard themselves 



SEBVICES OF ELDRED FOTTINGEB. 