



DANGERS READ AND SUPPOSED. 


291 


The dangers which threatened the security of our 
Anglo-Indian Empire, in 1837-38, were seen through the 
magnifying medium of ignorance, and greatly exaggerated 
in the recital. But the appearance of the Persian army 
before Herat—the presence of the Russian officers in the 
Persian camp—and the intrigues of the Barukzye Sirdars 
of Afghanistan, were, at all events, substantial facts. It 
was little doubted that Herat would fall. There seemed, 
indeed, no possibility of escape. The character of Ma¬ 
homed Shah was well known; and it was not believed 
that, having conquered Herat, he would there stop short 
in his career of conquest. It had long been officially re¬ 
ported, by Mr. EUis and others, to the Anglo-Indian 
Government, that Mahomed Shah encouraged very ex¬ 
tensive ideas of Afghan conquest, and that the Russian 
officers about his Court were continually exerting them- 
sfelves to foster the flame of his ambition. It seemed 
probable, therefore, that Herat, having fallen into the 
hands of Mahomed Shah, the Persian monarch would 
either push on his conquests to Candahar and Caubul, 
or, having transferred the Heratee principality to the 
hands of the Candahar Sirdars, and rendered Dost Ma¬ 
homed such assistauce in his wars against the Sikhs as 
would make him, in effect, the vassal of Persia, would 
erect, in Afghanistan, a platform of observation which 
might serve as the basis of future operations to be under¬ 
taken, not only by the Persians themselves, but also by 
their great northern allies. 

It was, plainly, the policy of the British Government 
to preserve the independence of A^hanistan, and to 
cement a friendly alhance with the ruler or rulers of 
that country. But it was not very easy to discern how 
this was to be effected. Our Indian statesmen had never 
exhibited any very violent friendship for the Barukzye 
Sirdars. Lord William Bentinck had refused to connect 

u 2 



292 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


himself in any way with the politics of A%hanistan; but 
he had suffered Shah Soojah to raise, in 1833-34, an 
army of invasion under the shadow of the British flag, 
and had done everything but openly assist the enterprise 
he was undertaking for the recovery of his lost domi¬ 
nions. Some nice ideas of legitimacy and usurpation, 
suggested by our own position in India, may have closed 
the sympathies of our Anglo-Indian rulers against men 
who were simply the de facto rulers of Afghanistan, and 
who laboured under the imputation of having rather 
acquired their dominions by right of conquest than 
possessed them by right of birth. The British-Indian 
Government had not concerned itself for a quarter of a 
century about the government of the Douranee Empire; 
but it now appeared that, because Zemaun Shah had 
threatened to invade India, and Shah Soojah had de¬ 
monstrated his incapacity to maintain himself in secu¬ 
rity on the throne, or to preserve the integrity of his 
dominions, the English in India, when they thought of 
establishing a friendly and a permanent power in the 
countiy beyond the Indus, turned to the Suddozye 
Princes as the fittest instruments for the furtherance of 
these ends. Even in 1833-34 it was plain that the 
success of Shah Soojah would have delighted our Indian 
statesmen. Though we declined to aid him in a very 
substantial manner, our sympathies went with him; and 
now again it was obvious that we had very little desire 
to conciliate the friendship of the Barukzye Sirdars, who 
had long been eager for a closer alliance with the great 
European power beyond the waters of the Sutlej, but 
had always been condemned to have their advances 
coldly received. 