

• Count Simonich’s letter was in- subsequently placed at the disposal 
tercepted, and taken to McNeill by of Burnes. 
one Mecr Mahomed, whom M'iNeill 



OPINIONS OF CAPTAIN WADE. 


295 


General, “ such an experiment on the part of our 
government would be to play into the hands of our 
rivals, and to deprive ourselves, as it were by a felo-de-se, 
of the powerful means which we have in reserve of con¬ 
trolling the present rulers of A^hanistan. The attempt 
to reduce the country to the sway of one of them would 
be an arduous enterprise. The chief obstacle in the way 
of Dost Mahomed would be in the opposition of those 
who are inimical to him and his family, and these in¬ 
clude every other Douranee tribe in the country, to 
whom, therefore, the knowledge of such a design would 
render our name generally odious—whilst the attempt 
itself would undoubtedly lead the Toorkomans and other 
great bordering tribes to view with jealousy the powers 
of a chief whose interests they would soon have the 
sagacity to discover we had adopted for the purpose of 
serving our own interests at their expense.” 

“ Our policy,” continued Captain Wade, “ ought not 
to be to destroy, but to use our endeavours to preserve 
and strengthen the different governments of Afghanistan 
as they at present stand; to promote among themselves 
a social compact, and to conduce, by our influence, to the 
establishment of that peace with their neighbours, which 
we are now endeavouring to produce between them and 
the Sikhs on one side, end the Sikhs and Sindhians on 
the other. Whilst distributed into several states, the 
Afghans’are, in my opinion, more likely to subserve the 
views and interests of the British Government than if we 
attempted to impose on them the yoke of a ruler to whose 
authority they can never be expected to yield a passive 
obedience. Though undoubtedly weak, they would col¬ 
lectively be fully adequate to the defence of their country, 
when they have derived the advantages of a more de* 
cided intercourse with our government than at present 
exists. . . . Supposing that we were to aid Dost 



296 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


Mahomed to overthrow in the first place his brother at 
Candahar, and then his Suddozje rival at Herat, what 
would be the consequence ? As the system, of which it 
is intended to be a part, would not go to gratify the long¬ 
ing wish of Mahomed Shah for the annexation of Herat 
to his dominions, the first results would be, that the 
Shah-zadah Kamran would apply to Persia, and offer, 
on the condition of her assistance to save him from the 
fate which impended over his head, to submit to all the 
demands of that general, which Kamran has hitherto so 
resolutely and successfully resisted, and between his fears 
and the attempts of Dost Mahomed Khan to take it 
(Herat), which is regarded by every one who has studied 
its situation as the key to Afghanistan, would inevitably 
fall prostrate before the arms of Persia, by the effect of 
the very measures which we had designed for her security 
from Persian thraldom.”* 