


* Sir John Hobhouse^s answer is 
worth giving. “ Very probably, Baron; 
but however much 1 should regret the 
collision, I should have no fear of the 
result.” I give this on the authority 
of a distinguished writer on ** Our 
Political Relations with Persia,” in 
the Calcutia Review, 

’j' For a very interesting and ably 
written summary of the progress of 
Russia in the East, and an elaborate 


investigation of the question of the 
possibility of a Russian invasion of 
India, see Mr. Robert Bell*f excellent 
“ History of Russia.” It was written 
before the British crossed the Indus— 
before Russia entangled herself in the 
steppes, and England in the dehles of 
Central Asia. Neither country now, 
remembering these disasters, thinks 
of the meeting of the Sepoy and the 
Cossack without a shudder. 



m 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


pean states comes to be struck, it is doubtful whether 
History will set down against the Muscovite power any 
greater transgression than that which it is the object of 
these volumes to record.* 


♦ I may as well mention here that 
the chasm between Persia and Great 
Britain, created by the events nar¬ 
rated in this chapter, was not bridged 
over until the spring of 1841, when 
Ghorian was given back to the Hera- 
tees. Before the close of that year, 
Mahomed Shah was collecting a great 
army, and contemplating extensive 
operations, the object of which, ac¬ 
cording to Sir John M‘Neill, though 
disguised under the name of opera¬ 
tions against Khiva, was another as¬ 
sault upon Herat.— [Sir John JUPSeill 
to Sir Alexander Barnes: January 5, 
1842. MS.'] This letter was written 
more than two months after Burnes 
had fallen a victim to the policy which 
I am now about to elucidate. Sir 
John M'Neill wrote : “ I have now to 
inform vou, that since the arrival of 
Count Medem, the new Uussian mi¬ 
nister, about a month ago, tlie Shah 
has given orders for collecting an 
army in iUe spring, about two months 
hence, which is intended to be nu¬ 
merous, and to be accompanied by 
two hundred pieces of artillery; and 
he announces his intention to*^ march 
in the direction of Meslicd, for the 
purpose of attacking Khiva. The ad¬ 
vance of the Shah, with such an army 


to Meshed, may produce some com¬ 
motion in Afghanistan, as you will 
no doubt hear of his proposing to go 
to Herat; and I conclude, therefore, 
that you will be prepared to put down 
any movements tliat may be caused by 
the rumour of his approach, and for 
any ulterior measures that may be 
necessary.” But in a postscript, dated 
January 6, the very day on which 
the British commenced their lament¬ 
able retreat from Caubul, he added : 
“ Since writing the preceding lines, 
some circumstances which have come 
to my knowledge lead me to think it 
quite possible that the Shah may not 
follow out his intention of going with 
an army into Khorassan, and it is even 
possible that no army may be sent in 
that direction ; but I am still of opi¬ 
nion that it is considerably more pi*o- 
bable that a force will be sent, than 
lliat it will not; and if a large army 
should march to Meshed, its objects 
will, 1 think, have reference rather to 
Herat than to Khiva.” [MS. Cor- 
respo7ide7ice.] The expedition was 
abandoned at the time; but as these 
pages are passing through the press. 
It is announced that Yar Mahomed is 
dead, and that a Persian garrison is 
occupying Herat. 