



POLICT OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


289 


CHAPTER HI. . 

[1837—1838.] 

Policy of the British-Indian Government—Our Defensive Operations— 
Excitement in British India—Proposed Alliance with Dost Mahomed— 
Failure of Burnes’s Mission considered—The Claims of the Suddozye 
Princes—The Tripartite Treaty—Invasion of Afghanistan determined 
—Policy of the Movement. 

Whilst the Persians were pushing on the siege of Herat 
to an unsuccessful termination, and the Russians were ex¬ 
tending over them the wings of encouragement and assist¬ 
ance, the English in India were devising measures for the 
security of their own dominions, which seemed to be 
threatened by these movements on the frontier of Af¬ 
ghanistan. 

But what these measures were to be it was not easy to 
determine. It was believed that the danger was great 
and imminent. There was a Persian army, under the 
command of the “ King of Kings” himself, investing 
Herat, and threatening to march upon Candahar and 
Caubul. There were Russian diplomatists and Russian 
engineers in his camp, directing the counsels of the Shah, 
and the operations of the siege. The Barukzye Sirdars 
of Afghanistan were intriguing with the Persian Court; 
and far out in the distance, beyond the mountains of the 
Hindoo-Koosh, there was the shadow of a great northern 
VOL. I. u 



290 


POLICY OP THE INDUN GOVERNMENT. 


army, tremendous in its indistinctness, pushing on by 
rapid strides towards the frontiers of Hindostan. 

The remoteness of the countries in which these inci¬ 
dents were passing, might have reconciled our Anglo- 
Indian statesmen to dangers of a character so vague, and 
an origin so distant; but the result of all these disturbing 
rumours was an after-growth of new perils springing up 
almost at our very doors. The native states on our own 
borders were beginning to evince signs of feverish unrest. 
From the hills of Nepaul and the jungles of Burmah 
came mutterings of threatened invasion, which compelled 
the British-Indian Government to look well to their lines 
of frontier. Even in our own provinces, these nimours of 
mighty movements in the countries of the north-west 
disquieted the native mind; there was an uneasy, restless 
feeling among all classes, scarcely amounting to actual 
disaffection, and perhaps best to be described as a state 
of ignorant expectancy—a looking outwards in the belief 
of some coming change, the nature of which no one 
clearly understood. Among our Mussulman subjects the 
feeling was somewhat akin to that which had unsettled 
their minds at the time when the rumored advent of 
Zemaun Shah made them look for the speedy restoration 
of Mahomedan supremacy in Hindostan. In their eyes, 
indeed, the movement beyond the Afghan frontier took 
the shape of a Mahomedan invasion, and it was believed 
that coimtless thousands of true believers were about to 
pour themselves over the plains of the Punjaub and Hin¬ 
dostan, and to wrest all the country between the Indus 
and the sea from the hands of the infidel usurpers. The 
Mahotnedan journals, at this time, teemed with the ut¬ 
terances of undisguised sedition. There was a decline in 
the value of public securities; and it went openly from 
mouth to mouth, in the streets and the bazaars, that the 
Company’s Raj was nearly at an end. 