

* See Harlan^s account of the reception of these presents. X see no 
reason to question its veracitj. 



300 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


Becured the supremacy of the Barukzyes in Afghanistan; 
and as Sultan Mahomed Khan wanted the ability, or the 
honesty^ to hold his own at Peshawur, it was but natural 
and fitting that the chief of the Barukzyes should endea¬ 
vour to enter into arrangements better calculated to pre¬ 
serve the integrity of the Afghan frontier. He desired, 
in the first instance, the absolute possession of Peshawur 
on his own account. He subsequently consented to hold 
it, conjointly with Sultan Mahomed, in vassalage to Run- 
jeet Singh. Had the British Government endeavoured 
to effect an amicable arrangement between the Ameer and 
the Maharajah, there is no room to doubt that Dost Ma¬ 
homed would have rejected all overtures from the west¬ 
ward, and proved to us a firm and faithful ally. But, 
instead of this, we offered him nothing but our sympathy; 
and Dost Mahomed, with all respect for the British Go¬ 
vernment, looked for something more substantial than 
mere meaningless words. 

That his conduct throughout the long negotiations with 
Burnes was characterised by an entire singleness of pur¬ 
pose and straightforwardness of action is not to be main¬ 
tained ; but it may with truth be said that it evinced some¬ 
what less than the ordinary amount of Afghan duplicity 
and deceit. Singleness and straightforwardness do not 
flourish in the near neighbourhood either of Eastern or 
Western diplomacy j and perhaps it is not wise, on our 
own account, to look too closely into these matters. The 
wonder is, not that the Ameer was so deceitful, so tor¬ 
tuous, so arrogant, and so exacting, but that he was so 
sincere, so straightforward, so patient, and so moderate. 
He might have possessed all these qualities in much 
scantier measure, and yet have been a very respectable 
Afghan chief. 

It was, however, decreed that Dost Mahomed was a 
hostile chief; and the policy of the British Government 
soon made him one. Had Burnes been left to obey the 



THE SnCLAH COUNCIL. 


301 


dictates of his own reason and to use the light of his 
own experience, he would have conciliated both the 
Candahar Sirdars and the Caubul Ameer, and raised 
up an effective bulwark in Afghanistan against Persian 
invasion and Russian intrigue. We refused to detach 
Kohun Dil Khan from the Persian alliance, and we de¬ 
liberately drove Dost Mahomed Khan into it. In fact, 
our policy, at this time, seems to have been directed to 
the creation of those very difficulties to encoimter which 
the British Government launched into the Afghan war. 

Unfortunately, at this time, Lord Auckland was sepa¬ 
rated from his Council. He was on his way to that 
pleasant hill Sanitarium, at Simlah, where our Governor- 
Generals, surrounded by irresponsible advisers, settle the 
destinies of empires without the aid of their legitimate 
fellow-counsellors, and which has been the cradle of 
more political insanity than any place within the limits 
ofHindostan. Just as Mahomed Shah was beginning 
to open his batteries upon Herat, and Captain Bumes 
was entering Caubul, Lord Auckland, taking with him 
three civilians, all men of ability and repute—Mr. William 
Macnaghten, Mr. Henry Torrens, and Mr. John Colvin— 
turned his back upon Calcutta. 