

The expediency of maintaining the integrity of Herat 
was not at this time more palpable than the injustice 
of destroying it. But it hardly seems to have entered 
into the consideration of our Indian statesmen, that 
to transfer Herat, or any other unoffending principality 
from the hands of one ruler to those of another, was 
to perpetrate an act of political tyranny not to be 
justified by any reference to the advantages resulting 
from such a course. We had not, at that time, the 
shadow of a pretext for breaking down the independ¬ 
ence of Herat. Kamran, indeed, was at this time about 
to play the very game that tended most to the advance¬ 
ment of British interests. Had he formed an alliance 
with Persia, having for its end the recovery of his father’s 
dominions—had he advanced, with a confederate Persian 
army, upon Caubul and Candahar, and consented to 
abandon Herat as the price of Kujjur assistance—some 

• Captain Wade to J. R, Colvin, Esq^ June 27, 1837. MS. Records. 



FAILURE OF BURNES’S MISSION. 


297 


pretext might have been found in these aggressive mea¬ 
sures for the confiscation of the principality. But Herat 
was now about to erect itself into a barrier against Russo- 
Persian invasion, and to fight single-handed the first great 
battle of resistance at the gates of Afghanistan. 

Mr. McNeill’s project for the consolidation of the 
Afghan Empire found little favour in the eyes of our 
Indian statesmen; but there were many who thought 
that, without any acts of spoliation and oppression, the 
de facto rulers of Afghanistan might be so encouraged 
and conciliated by small offers of assistance, as to secure 
their friendly co-operation in the great work of resisting 
invasion from the westward. But when Captain Burnes 
was despatched to Caubul, his powers were so limited, 
that, although he was profuse in his expressions of sym¬ 
pathy, he had not the authority to offer substantial 
assistance; and when he ventured to exceed the instruc¬ 
tions of government, he was severely censured for his 
unauthorised proceedings. 

His mission failed. What wonder? It could by no 
possibility have succeeded. If utter failure had been the 
great end sought to be accomplished, the whole business 
could not have been more cunningly devised. Burnes 
asked everything; and promised nothing. He was tied 
hand and foot. lie had no power to treat with Dost 
Mahomed. All that he could do was to demand on 
one hand and refuse on the other. He talked about the 
friendship of the British Government. Dost Mahomed 
asked for some proof of it; and no proof was forthcoming. 
The wonder is, not that the Ameer at last listened to 
the overtures of others, but that he did not seek other 
assistance before. 

No better proof of his earnest desire to cement an 
alliance with the British Government need be sought for 
than that involved in the fact of his extreme reluctance 
to abandon all hope of assistance from the British, and to 



298 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 