

Mr. John Colvin was the private secretary of the 
Governor-General, and his confidential adviser. Of all 
the men about Lord Auckland, he was believed to exer¬ 
cise the most direct influence over that statesman’s mind. 
Less versatile than Torrens, and less gifted with the 
lighter accomplishments of literature and art, he pos- 



304 


POLICY OP THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


sessed a stronger will and a more powerful understand¬ 
ing. He was a man of much decision and resolution of 
character; not troubled with doubts and misgivings; 
and sometimes, perhaps, hasty in his judgments. But 
there was something noble and generous in his ambition. 
He never forgot either the claims of his country or the 
reputation of his chief. And if he were vain, his vanity 
was of the higher, but not the less dangerous class, which 
seeks rather to mould the measures and establish the 
fame of others than to acquire distinction for self. 

Such were the men who accompanied Lord Auckland 
to the Upper Provinces of India. About him also clus¬ 
tered the common, smaller staff of military aides-de- 
camp; and not very far in the back-ground were the 
two sisters of his Lordship—ladies of remarkable intel¬ 
ligence and varied accomplishments, who are supposed 
to have exercised an influence not wholly confined to 
the social amenities of the vice-regal camp. Lord Auck¬ 
land was possessed of a clear judgment, and his inte¬ 
grity of purpose is undoubted; but he wanted decision 
of character—he too often mistrusted his own opinions, 
and yielded his assent to those of irresponsible advisers 
less single-minded and sagacious than himself. There 
was no want of capacity in Lord Auckland’s camp. The 
men by whom he was surrounded were among the ablest 
and most accomplished in the country; but it was for the 
most part a dangerous kind of cleverness that they pos¬ 
sessed; there was too much presmnption in it. These 
secretaries, especially the two younger ones, were too 
ardent and impulsive—they were of too bold and ambi¬ 
tious a nature to be regarded as anything better than 
perilous and delusive guides. But Lord Auckland'en¬ 
trusted himself to their guidance. Perhaps, he scarcely 
knew to what extent he was swayed by their counsels; 
but it is my deliberate conviction, that if he had not 
quitted Calcutta, or if he had been surroimded by older 



WASLIKB FBOMPTINGNS. 


805 


and more experienced advisers, he would have followed a 
line of pplicy more in accordance with his own feelings 
and opinions, and less destructive to the interests of the 
empire. 

But, so surrounded. Lord Auckland journeyed by easy 
stages towards the cool mountain-ranges of the Hima- 
layah; and as he advanced there came to the vice-regal 
camp tidings, from time to time, of the progress or no¬ 
progress of Mahomed Shah’s army before Herat, and of 
Burnes’s diplomatic movements at the Court of the Caubul 
Ameer. There was much in all this to perplex Lord 
Auckland. He was in all sincerity a man of peace. 
They who best knew his character and that of his chief 
secretary,* predicted that if war could, in any way, be 
avoided, there would be no war. But from all quarters 
came disturbing hints and dangerous promptings; and 
Lord Auckland thus assailed, had not resolution enough 
to be true to his own moderate and cautious character. 
Mr. M‘Neill had despatched Major Todd from Herat to 
the camp of the Governor-General; and had urgently 
solicited Lord Auckland to adopt vigorous measures for 
the intimidation of Persia and the defence of Herat, which, 
it was alleged, could not much longer resist the efforts of 
the investing force. Nothing short of the march of a 
British army upon Herat was thought by some suf¬ 
ficient to stem the tide of Russo-Persian invasion. The 
British Government, seeing everywhere signs of the 
restless aggressive spirit of Russia, and the evident 
tendency of all her movements towards the East, had 
written strong letters to the Governor-General, urging 
him to adopt vigorous measures of defence. His own 
immediate advisers were at hand to second the sugges- 