


turn his eyes in another direction. It was not until he 
was driven to despair by resolute refusals from the 
quarter whence he looked for aid, that he accepted the 
offers so freely made to him by other States, and set the 
seal upon his own destruction. Our government,” said 
Burnes, “would do nothing; but the Secretary of the 
Russian Legation came with the most direct offers of 
assistance and money, and as I had no power to counteract 
him by a similar offer, and got wigged for talking of it at 
a time when it would have been merely a dead letter to 
say Afghanistan was under our protection, I was obliged 
of course to give in.’’* What better result Lord Auckland 
could have anticipated, it is hard to say. If the failure 
of the Mission astonished him, he must have been the 
most sanguine of men. 

I am unable to perceive that there was anything unrea¬ 
sonable or unfriendly in the conduct of Dost Mahomed at 
this time. That, from the very first, he was disappointed, 
there is no doubt. He had formed exaggerated ideas of 
the generosity and munificence of the British Government 
in the East, and, doubtless, expected great things from the 
contemplated alliance. The Mission had scarcely been 
a day in Caubul, when the feelings of the Ameer were 
shocked—the exuberance of his hopes somewhat straitened 
—and his dignity greatly offended, by the paltry character 
of the presents of which Burnes was the bearer. No one 
ignorant of the childish eagerness with which Oriental 
Princes examine the ceremonial gifts presented to them 
by foreign potentates, and the importance which they 
attach to the value of these presents, as indications of a 
greater or less degree of friendship and respect on the 
part of the donor, can appreciate the mortification of Dost 
Mahomed on discovering that the British Government, 
of whose immense resources and boundless liberality he 
had so exalted a notion, had sent him nothing but a few 
* Private Correspondence of Sir A, Bnmes, 



CONDUCT OF DOST MAHOMED. 299 

trumpery toys. Burnes had been directed to ‘‘procure 
from Bombay such articles as would be required to be 
given in presents to the diflFerent chiefs.” And it had 
been characteristically added: “ They ought not to be 
of a costly nature, but should be chosen particularly 
with a view to exhibit the superiority of British manu¬ 
factures.” Accordingly the envoy had provided himself 
with a pistol and a telescope for Dost Mahomed, and a 
few trifles for the inmates of the Zenana—such as pins, 
needles, and playthings.* The costliness of the presents 
lavished upon Shah Soojah, when the Mission under 
Mountstuart Elphinstone had entered Afghanistan, was 
still a tradition throughout the country. The Ameer was 
disappointed. He thought that the niggardliness of the 
British Government, in this instance, portended no good. 
Nor was he mistaken. He soon found that the intention 
to give little was manifest in all the proceedings of the 
Mission. 

It has been said that the Ameer asked more than 
could reasonably be granted; that he had no right to look 
for the restoration of Peshawur, as that tract of country, 
since the dismemberment of the Douranee Empire, had 
fallen to the share of Sultan Mahomed. It is very true 
that the country had once belonged to Sultan Mahomed. 
Now, to have re-established him at Peshawur would have 
been to have paved the way for the march of Runjeet 
Singh’s army to Caubul. So thought Dost Mahomed. 
It was better to submit quietly to the unassisted enmity 
of the Maharajah, than to have an insidious enemy on the 
frontier, by whose agency Runjeet Singh might have 
accomplished that which he could not have achieved 
alone. It was the treachery of Sultan Mahomed that had 
lost Peshawur to the Afghans. It was the personal 
energy, the martial prowess, of Dost Mahomed that had 