

Before Mahomed Shah had advanced upon Herat, the 
British Minister at the Court of Teheran, well acquainted 
with the ambitious projects of the Persian monarch, had 



BBCOMMENDATIONS OF MB. M‘NEILL, 


293 


earnestly pressed upon the attention of the British Go¬ 
vernment the expediency of some counteracting move¬ 
ment in the country between Persia and Hindostan. 
And when it was known to Mr. M‘Neill that Lord Auck¬ 
land had despatched Captain Burnes upon a mission to 
the Court of Dost Mahomed, he wrote a long confiden¬ 
tial letter to that officer, setting forth the advantages 
of subsidising the Ameer, and placing both Herat and 
Candahar under his rule. The letter was dated March 
13th, 1837. “I sincerely wish,” wrote Mr. M‘Neill, 
“ if the Ameer Dost Mahomed Khan and you come to a 
good understanding, that he were in possession of both 
Candahar and Herat.”* 

And again, in the same communication, he wrote more 
explicitly: “ Dost Mahomed Khan, with a little aid from 
us, could be put in possession of both Candahar and 
Herat. I anxiously hope that aid will not be withheld. 
A loan of money would possibly enable him to do this, 
and would give us a great hold upon him. He ought to 
be precluded from receiving any other foreign represen¬ 
tative or agent of any kind at his Court, and should agree 
to transact all business with foreign powers through tlic 
British agent. Unless something of this kind should be 
done, we shall never be secure; and until Dost Mahomed 
Khan or some other Afghan shall have got both Can¬ 
dahar and Herat into his hands, our position here must 
continue to be a false one.”f 

At this time, the Envoy in Persia, though profoundly 
convinced that the Candahar Sirdars were not to be 
trusted, and that the game they were playing was one 
injiuious to the interests of Great Britain, seemed to re¬ 
pose confidence in the good feeling of Dost Mahomed, 
and to believe that it would be easy to secure his 

• Mr. WNeUl to Captain Burnet, t McNeill to Captain Burnes. 
MS, Becords. MS, Records, 



294 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


alliance. Of the intrigues of the former he wrote: 
“ Kohun Dil Khan is playing a double game, and trying 
to strengthen himself by the alliance with Persia against 
both Caubul and Herat. He has put himself in com¬ 
munication with the Kussian minister here, who has sent 
by the return envoy, Tej Mahomed Khan, Barukzye, a 
letter and presents. The letter will not find its way to 
the Khan,* for I am sending it to Lord Palmerston; but 
the presents have been forwarded, and it appears that 
Kohun Dil was the first to open the correspondence, and 
I think it not improbable that he had been advised to 
do so by Aziz Mahomed Khan, the agent formerly sent 
hither, who found the Court apparently devoted to 
Russia. I hope you will be able to put a stop to the 
intercourse, which I have only been able to impede and 
interrupt for a time.” 

Such were the views and recommendations of Mr. 
M‘Ncill. Among the few officers in the Company’s ser¬ 
vice who at that time had any knowledge of the politics 
of Central Asia, not one was more conspicuous than 
Captain Claude Wade, who had held for some years 
the delicate and responsible office of Governor-General’s 
agent on the North-Western Frontier. It was natural that 
in such a conjuncture the opinions of so well-informed 
and experienced an officer should have been sought 
by the Supreme Government. Captain Wade, through 
whose office the Trans-Indian correspondence passed, 
now therefore, on forwarding to government a copy of 
Mr. M'Neill’s letter, freely expressed his opinion against 
the proposal to consolidate the Afghan Empire under the 
rule of the Caubul Ameer. “ In my opinion,” he wrote 
to Mr. Colvin, the private secretary of the Governor- 