

Mr. Macnaghten was at this time chief secretary to 
Government. He had originally entered the service of 
the East India Company in the year 1809, as a cadet of 
cavalry on the Madras establishment; and whilst yet a 
boy acquired considerable reputation by the extent of 
his acquirements as an Oriental linguist. Transferred 
in 1814 to the Bengal civil service, he landed at Cal¬ 
cutta as the bearer of the highest testimonials from the 
government under which he had served; and soon jus¬ 
tified by his distinguished scholarship in the collie of 
Port William the praises and recommendations of the 
authorities of Madras. It was publicly said of the young 
civilian by Lord Hastings, that “ there was not a Ian- 



302 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


guage taught in the college in which he had not earned 
the highest distinctions which the government or the col¬ 
lege could bestow.” On leaving college he was appointed 
an assistant in the office of the Register of the Sudder 
Dewany Adawlut, or High Court of Appeal; and in 1818 
he quitted Calcutta to enter upon the practical duties of 
the magistracy, but after a few years was recalled to the 
Presidency and to his old office, and in a little while was 
at the head of the department in which he had com¬ 
menced his career. During a period of eight years and 
a half, Mr. Macnaghten continued to occupy the respon¬ 
sible post of Register of the Sudder Dewany Adawlut, 
and was only removed thence to accompany Lord Wil¬ 
liam Bentinck, in the capacity of secretary, on the tour 
which that benevolent statesman was about to com¬ 
mence, at the close of 1830, through the Upper and 
Western Provinces of India. The objects of this jour¬ 
ney were connected entirely with measures of internal 
reform ; but having approached the territories of Runjeet 
Singh, the Governor-General met the old Sikh chief at 
Roopur, and there Macnaghten, who had up to this 
time been almost wholly associated with affairs of do¬ 
mestic administration, graduated in foreign politics, and 
began to fathom the secrets of the Lahore Durbar. 
Returning early in 1833 to Calcutta, with his experience 
greatly enlarged and his judgment matured by the op¬ 
portunities afforded him on his journey, as well as by 
his intimate relationship with so enlightened and libe¬ 
ral a statesman as Lord William Bentinck, Macnaghten 
now took charge of the Secret and Political Department 
of the Government Secretariat, and remained in that 
office during the interregnum of Sir Charles Metcalfe, 
and the first year of Lord Auckland’s administration, 
until summoned by the latter to accompany him on his 
tour to the North-Western Provinces. 

Such, briefly narrated, were the antecedents of Mac- 



TOBBENS AND COLVIN. 


303 


naghten’s oflBcial life. That he was one of the ablest 
and most assiduous of the many able and assiduous civil 
servants of the East India Company all men were ready 
to admit. With a profound knowledge of Oriental lan¬ 
guages and Oriental customs, he combined an extensive 
acquaintance with all the practical details of government, 
and was scarcely more distinguished as an erudite scholar 
than as an expert secretary. In his colleague and assis¬ 
tant, Mr. Henry Torrens, there were some points of resem¬ 
blance to Macnaghten; for the younger officer was also 
an accomplished linguist and a ready writer, but he was 
distinguished by a more mercurial temperament and more 
varied attainments. Perhaps there was not in all the pre¬ 
sidencies of India a man—certainly not so young a man 
—with the lustre of so many accomplishments upon him. 
The facility with which he acquired every kind of infor¬ 
mation was scarcely more remarkable than the tenacity 
with which he retained it. With the languages of the 
East and the West he was equally familiar. He had read 
books of all kinds and in all tongues, and the airy grace 
with which he could throw off a French canzonet was 
something as perfect of its kind as the military genius 
with which he could sketch out the plan of a campaign, 
or the official pomp with which he could inflate a state 
paper. His gaiety and vivacity made him a welcome 
addition to the Governor-General’s vice-regal court; and 
perhaps not the least of his recommendations as a tra¬ 
velling companion was that he could amuse the ladies 
of Lord Auckland’s family with as much felicity as he 
could assist the labours of that nobleman himself’. 