


fected with regard to the former, at 
the expense of the Ameers of Sindh; 
Runjeet receiving a larger amount 
without detriment to the Shah. 

* Mr, Macnaghten to Government, 
Camp^ near Lahore^ June 20 , 1838 : 
MS, Records, 

t Mackeson was the general mes¬ 
senger on the part of the British 
agent, as was the Fakir Azizoodeen, 
or Kishen Chund, on the part of the 
Maharajah. These functionaries were 
Constantly going backwards and for¬ 


wards, in the frightful heat, to com¬ 
municate the suggestions or replies 
of their respective chiefs. 

t It is probable that the demand 
for Jellalabad was intended to be 
refused, in order that the refusid 
might strengthen Runjeet*8 claims to 
increased pecuniary compensation; 
for before the arrival of the Mission 
he was in the habit of speaking of 
Jellalabad as a possession not to be 
coveted by the Khalsa. 



318 POUCT OV THB INDIAN OOVBHNMENT. 

Bubffldy, instead of the territorial accession, which the 
British agent had resolutely refused.* 

On the 26th of June the treaty was formally signed 
by the Maharajah. It had been slightly modified since 
the original draft was prepared; but, with the exception 
of the introduction of the subsidy article, had undergone 
no essential alterations. It was, in effect, a treaty be* 


* Captain Cunninghame (^History of 
the Sikhs) says that Runjeet was in¬ 
formed that the expedition for the 
restoration of Shah Soojah would be 
undertaken, whether the Maharajah 
chose to share in it or not. “ That 
Runjeet Singh,'* the author adds in 
a note, “ was told he would be left out 
if he did not choose to come in, does 
not appear on public record. It was, 
however, the only convincing argu¬ 
ment used during the long discussions, 
and I think Major Mackcson was 
made the bearer of the message to 
that edect." But this is stated some¬ 
what too broadly. Runjeet Sin^h 
was not told that the British, in the 
event of his refusing to co-operate 
with the Shah, would undert^e by 
themselves the restoration of Shah 
Soojah, but that they might be com¬ 
pelled to do so in self-defence. Macke- 
son told Runjeet, as Macnag:hten had 
before told the Fakir Azizoodeen, 
that in order “ to guard against any re¬ 
proach of reserve or concealment, here¬ 
after,” it was ri^ht “ to inform him 
now of the possibility that might occur 
of our being compelled, in self-defence, 
to take our own measures to ward off 
approaching danger, and use our own 
troops to restore Shah Soojah to the 
throne.” The Maharajah, receiving 
this communication as though he had 
not been prepared for it by Fakir 
Azizoodeen, told Mackeson at once 
to prepare the treaty. Not imme¬ 
diately understanding,” says Macke¬ 
son, in his memorandum of this inter¬ 
view, “ to what treaty he might 
allude,^ 1 asked the Fakir whether 
that with the supplementary articles 
presented by Mr. Macnaghten to 
the Maharajidi's approval was the 


one alluded to. The Maharajah ob¬ 
served, ‘ That oneand the Fakir 
recalled his attention to the point by 
asking how the question of Jellalabad 
was to be settled; to which his High¬ 
ness replied, that if the Sikhs could 
not be allowed to hold possession of 
Jellalabad, some other arrangement 
could be made, which would have the 
effect of making the Kalsa-jee act in 
cordial co-operation—that the friend¬ 
ship between the Sikhs and the 
British was great, and had lasted 
many years—that the British and 
Sikh Governments had no care, and 
were both able to act independently, 
but that they had a care for tne 
mutual friendship which had lasted 
so long. The Fakir hinted to me to 
suggest some other mode to supersede 
that of the Sikhs holding possession 
of Jellalabad. I observed that it now 
rested with the Maharajah to suggest 
any plan that might have occurred to 
his mind. After some further conver¬ 
sation, Runjeet Singh said that an 
annual tribute of two lakhs of rupees 
from Shah Soojah would satisfy him 
for the non-possession of Jellalabad; 
and this granted, he was willing to 
co-operate for the restoration of the 
Shah. The British agents objected 
to the payment of tribute, as it would 
be an acknowledgment^ of inferiority 
on the part of the SHah; but they 
consented that the two lakhs should 
be paid, in the shape of a subsidy, 
Runjeet Singh undertaking to keep 
up a force on the frontier, at the cafi 
of the Afghan monarch.*'— \^Lieutenant 
Mackeson's Memorandum of a convert 
saHon toith the Maharajah^ Runjeet 
Singhy cdLahorey 2Srd of JunCy 1838: 
MS. R^^ords.) 