

* Lord Waiiam Bentinck is said war! The very last men in the 
to have exclaimed, “What! Lord world I should have suspected of 
Auckland and Macnaghten gone to such folly!” 

VOL. I. X 



306 


POLICY OP THB INMAN GOVERNMENT. 


tions both of Mr. M‘Neill and the British Minister; and 
so Lord Auckland, though he hesitated to undertake a 
grand military expedition across the Indus, was per¬ 
suaded to enter upon defensive measures of a dubious 
character, affecting the whole question of the sovereignty 
of the Douranee Empire. 

The open, acknowledged danger to be met, by vigorous 
measures on the part of our Anglo-Indian statesmen, 
was the attempt of Mahomed Shah to destroy the in¬ 
tegrity of Herat, and his asserted claims to the sovereignty 
of Ghuznee and Candahar. It is true that by the ninth 
article of the treaty with Persia, England was especially 
bound not to interfere in any quarrels between the 
Afghans and the Persians; but our statesmen both in 
the East and the West, saw a ready means of escape 
from these conditions in the circumstances of the assault 
on Mr. M'Neill’s courier, which however contemptible 
in themselves were sufficient to bring about a tempo¬ 
rary rupture between Persia and Great Britain. Lord 
Auckland was slow to encourage an idea of the expe¬ 
diency of such direct interference as would be involved 
in the passage of a British army across the great boim- 
dary line of the Indus. But he saw the necessity of so 
establishing our influence in Eastern Afghanistan as to 
erect a secure barrier against invasion from the west¬ 
ward ; and now that he had abandoned all desire to pro¬ 
pitiate Dost Mahomed and the Barukzye chiefs, and had 
begun to think of carrying out his objects through other 
agency, it was only natural that he should have turned 
his thoughts, in the first instance, to the Suddozye pen¬ 
sioner of Loodhianah, who had made so many unsuc¬ 
cessful efforts to reseat himself upon the throne of the 
Douranee Empire. 

Shah Soojah had lived so long upon the bounty of 
the British Government, that it was only reasonable 



OPINIONS OP LORD AUCKLAND. 


307 


to believe that we should find in him a fast friend 
and a faithful ally. But when in the month of May, 
1838, Lord Auckland, then at Simlah, wrote an elabo¬ 
rate minute, setting forth his opinions regarding the 
measures best calculated to secure the integrity of the 
western frontier of Afghanistan, and suggesting the 
restoration of the exiled Suddozye Prince, it was evi¬ 
dent that he had not, at that time, grasped the grand, 
but perilous idea, of sending a British army into the fast¬ 
nesses of Afghanistan to break down the dynasty of 
the Barukzyes, to set up a monarch of our own, and so 
to roll back for ever the tide of western invasion. He 
meditated nothing more at this time than the encourage¬ 
ment of an expedition to be undertaken by Shah Soojah 
and Kunjeet Singh, the British Government supplying 
money, appointing an accredited agent to accompany the 
Shah^s camp, and furnishing a certain number of British 
officers to direct the movements of the Shah^s army.** It 
appeared to him that there were but three courses open 
to him; “ the first to confine our defensive measures to 
the line of the Indus, and to leave Afghanistan to its fate; 