


poor), in consideration of the pay¬ 
ment by them of compensation-money 
to the amount of twenty lakhs of 
rupees; and another recognised the 
integrity of Herat. 

• Kunjeet was always doubtful 
whether his soldiers would not shrink 
from attempting to force the Khybur 
Pass. He told Mackeson, before the 
arrival of Macnaghten's Mission, that 
the Khalsa entertained very strong 
prejudices against that kind of war¬ 
fare, of which, it may be added, both 
he and his chiefs had the vaguest 
possible idea. He believed tliut to 
Ibrce the Khybur Pass was to push 
a column of troops into it, somewhat 
as you would push them over a nar¬ 
row bridge, the men in the rear 
stepping over the bodies of their 
slaughtered comrades. He had no 
notion of turning the pass by flank 
movements—of crowning the heights 
on either 8ide--and accomplishing by 
skilful dispositions what could not be 
ilone by brute force without a dread¬ 


ful sacrifice of life. Subsequently, 
at his interviews with the officers of 
the British Mission, he reverted to 
this subject. He said that he had 
never tried the Khalsa at such work; 
that he doubted whether they could 
be induced to march over the corpses 
of their countrymen; and asked 
whether British troops could be de¬ 
pended on for such service. He added, 
that the Sirdars, whom he had sent 
to command his troops at Peshawur, 
had often urged him to suflcr them 
to move through the Khybur upon 
Jellalabad; but that he had uniformly 
refused to listen to their proposals. 
IMS. Notes."] 

f Kunjeet put in a claim for more 
than a moiety of the tribute-money bf 
twenty lakhs of rupees that was to be 
wrung from the Ameers of Sindh 
and mvided between him and the 
Shah; and he asked also for the 
transfer of Jellalabad to his own rule. 
The latter demand was steadfastly re¬ 
fused; but an arrangement was ef- 



SCRUPLES OP RDNJEET SINGH. 


317 


support the cause of Shah Soojah.” This, however, was 
uttered in a precautionary spirit, “in order to guard 
against the possibility of its being supposed hereafter 
that we designedly concealed our intentions from his 
Highness, and that we had sinister and exclusive views 
of our own.”* 

On the 23rd of June, by which time the Mission had 
followed the camp of the Maharajah to Lahore, and the 
patience of the British negotiators had been well-nigh 
exhausted, by the vexatious claims and frivolous objec¬ 
tions of the Sikh party, a statement to the same effect 
was made on Macnaghten’s authority by Lieutenant 
Mackesonf to Runjeot Singh himself; and the Maha¬ 
rajah told the British officer at once, in his hurried, 
emphatic manner, to prepare the treaty. It seemed as 
though the many objections which had been started had 
originated from the Maharajah’s advisers rather than 
from himself, and that they had kept out of his way the 
probability of the British Government acting for them¬ 
selves independently in the matter before him. But 
now that the case had been plainly stated in his own 
hearing, Runjeet at once grasped the whole question; 
fully comprehended his own position; and resolutely 
decided for himself. But, never forgetful of his own 
interests, he clamoured still for the cession of Jellala- 
bad;J and, with seeming coquettishness consented to 
receive two lakhs of rupees in the shape of an annual 