


Minute of Lord Auckland^Unpuhlishcdportion: MS. Records. 



SIACNA6HTBN S mSTKUCTIONS. 309 

to make to the Maharajah. He was now enjoined to 
sound Runjeet Singh on the subject of the proposed 
confederate expedition against the Barukzye Sirdars of 
A%hanistan. These instructions were written three days 
after the minute of the 12 th of May. It seems that in 
this brief interval some idea of the employment of Bri¬ 
tish troops in support of the Suddozye prince had dawned 
upon the understanding of the Governor-General. It is 
certain, at least, that the letter written by Mr. Torrens 
speaks of a demonstration to be made “ by a division of 


the British army occupying 

* It were worth while to quote 
some passages from this letter of 
instructions, only a grandiloquent 
passage setting forth generally the 
pacific views of Lord Auckland, and 
the power of the British Government 
havmg been inserted in the Blue 
Book. “You can then, as you ob¬ 
serve the disposition of the Maharajah, 
listen to all he has to say, or, in the 
event of his showing no disposition to 
commence the conference, you can 
state to him the views of your own 
government — that two courses of 
proceeding had occurred to his lord- 
ship—the one that the treaty formerly 
executed between his Highness and 
Shah Sooiah should be recognised by 
the British Government—that whilst 
the Sikhs advanced cautiously on 
Caubul, accompanied by British 
agents, a demonstration should be 
made by a division of the British 
army occupy i ng Shikarpoor wi th Shah 
Soojah in their company, to whom the 
British Government would advance 
money to enable him to levy troops 
and purchase arms, and to whom also 
the services of British officers should 
be lent, that the same opportunity 
should be taken of securing to the 
Maharajah what it had been custo¬ 
mary for him to receive from the 
Scindians, and that with regard to 
Shikarpore, the supplementary arti¬ 
cle in the treaty now proposed (and 
which with a second supplementary 


Shikarpoor.”* This was a 

article relating to Herat is annexed 
to this despatch) should be substi¬ 
tuted for article IV., in the former 
treaty—that in the event of his 
Highness agreeing to this convention, 
the Governor-General would be pre¬ 
pared to ratify it, unless circumstan¬ 
ces should intermediately have oc¬ 
curred to induce his Lordship to alter 
his views as to its expediency, and 
that in the event of the convention 
being ratified by his Lordship, the 
descent on Shikarpoor, for temporary 
occupation, should be directed as soon 
as due preparations could be made, 
and the season will permit. If his 
Highness also approved of this con¬ 
vention, and agreed that the opera¬ 
tions of the allies should be conducted 
in concert with each other, by means 
of British agents in the camp of each, 
the Governor-General would be pre¬ 
pared to enter into a general de¬ 
fensive alliance with his Highness 
against the attacks of all enemies 
from the westward. 