

* Lieutenant (now Colonel) Mac- freely with the young officer regarcl- 
keson was one of the assistants to ing the progress of Bumes*s nego- 
the Governor-General’s agent on the tiations at Caubul, the mission of 
north-west frontier. Whilst Burnes Vickovich, and other matters con- 
was at Caubul he was directed to nected with the politics of Afghan- 
remain at Peshawur, a place with istan. Rumours had then reached 
which his name has since become him of the designs of the British 
historically associated. Some two Government to invite him to co-ope- 
montbs before the arrival of Mac- rate in measures for the overthrow 
n^hten’s Mission he joined Runjeet of the Barukzye Sirdars. He cUs- 
Sinch’s camp and travelled with the cussed the subject with little reserve; 
Mimarajah through difiereiit parts of and it was evident that the project 
the Sikh Empire. Runjeet conversed had little attraction for him* 



CONTEBENCE WITH BUNJEET SINGH. 


313 


Government This he did fluently and well. Whether 
all he advanced were strictly true it is hardly necessary 
to inquire. Diplomacy is not intended to be subjected 
to such a test. The tender interest taken in the honour 
and dignity of the Maharajah were descanted upon, on 
the one side, and the unreasonableness of Dost Mahomed 
on the other. The failure of Burnes’s Mission was spoken 
of as the result of the unwillingness of the Caubul 
Ameer to break off negotiations with other foreign agents, 
though even at that time Dost Mahomed, after Burnes’ 
departure, was making a last despairing effort to win 
back the friendship of the British Government. Then 
came a somewhat inflated eulogium on the resources 
of the British Government, and the 200,000 soldiers who 
could at any time be brought into the field to resist 
a simultaneous invasion from all the four sides of 
India. If then, urged Macnaghten, such were the unaided 
power of the British Government, what must that power 
be when united with the strength of the Sikh empire? 
There was nothing, indeed, of a palpable character to be 
apprehended from the movements of the Russians and 
Persians, or the hostility of the Barukzye Sirdars, but as 
their intrigues, it was said, must have the effect of un¬ 
settling men’s minds, both in the British and the Sikh 
dominions, it was desirable to concert measures for the 
future suppression of all these disturbing influences. He 
had, therefore, been despatched by the Governor-General 
of India to the Court of the Maharajah, to ascertain the 
wishes of his Highness. 

Bunjeet listened very patiently to this address, only 
interrupting the speaker now and then to express his 
assent to Macnaghten’s statements; and when asked what 
were his wishes, replied that they were the wishes of 
the British Government. After some further inter¬ 
change of compliments, Bunjeet asked what were the 



814 


POLICT or THE INDIAN QOVEBNHENT. 


of the British Government; and the British Envoy 
then b^an guardedly to state them after the manner of 
the instructions he had received. There were two courses, 
he said, open to the Maharajah—the one was, to act in¬ 
dependently; the other was to act in concert with the 
British Government. A murmur of approbation arose 
from the assembled chiefs, when Runjeet broke in with 
the assertion that it was his wish to act in concert with 
the British Government. Entreating him not to decide 
hastily, but to weigh well the details of the two schemes, 
Macnaghten then said, “ Your Highness some time 
ago formed a treaty with Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk. Do 
you think it would be still for your benefit that the 
treaty should stand good, and would it be agreeable 
to your wishes that the British Government should be- 
c>ome a party to that treaty?” “ This,” replied Runjeet, 
would be adding sugar to milk.” “ If such,” said Mac¬ 
naghten, “ be decidedly the wish of your Highness, I do 
not think that the Governor-General would object to 
supply Shah Soojah with money and ofiicers to enable 
him to recover his throne.” He then proceeded to state 
what were the views of the Governor-General—that the 
Shah should advance by the route of Candahar, whilst 
the Sikh troops should advance upon Caubul through 
the Khybur Pass. “ Circumstances,” it was added, 
“might arise to render it necessary for the British 
Government to send some of its own troops down the 
Indus, to repel any threat of aggression in that direction.” 
“ How many ?” asked Runjeet. The answer was, “ As 
many as the exigency of the occasion may require; but 
their employment in that direction will only be tem¬ 
porary.” 