

Macnaghten next launched into a panegyric on the 
general moderation of the British Government; and then 
having entered into some particulars relating to the 



NEGOTIATION OF THE TBEATT. 


816 


necessary modification and extension of the treaty be¬ 
tween Shah Soojah and Bunjeet Singh,* proceeded to 
call the attention of the Maharajah to the second 
plan suggested by the Governor-General—^the plan of 
independent action on the part of the Sikh ruler, which 
Lord Auckland declared that he was more inclined to 
favour than the other project. But it was with diffi¬ 
culty that Bunjeet Singh could be induced to listen to 
this proposal. His impatience broke out openly. His 
mind, he said, was made up on the subject. He 
would have nothing to do with the independent expe¬ 
dition. The plan first set forth by the British Envoy 
was the one which he purposed to accept; and so Mac- 
naghten could only say in reply, that though the Go¬ 
vernor-General approved of the course last stated, his 
Lordship set too much value on the friendship of the 
Maharajah to wish to force it upon him. 

It now only remained to settle the details of the project 
for the subversion of Barukzye ascendancy in A^hanistan. 
So little at this time was it in contemplation that the 
brunt of the expedition should fall upon the British 
army, that Bunjeet, who soon began to have his mis¬ 
givings regarding the success of an undertaking in which 
his own troops and the raw levies of Shah Soojah were 
to be the main actors, sent the Fakir Azizoodeen to 
ask Macnaghten whether, in the event of the allies 
sustaining a reverse, the British Government were pre¬ 
pared to support him. The affirmative reply hardly 
seemed to satisfy the Sikh agent, who spoke of the 
remoteness of our resources from the scene of action; and 
it was obviously then the desire of his master that the 
British troops should take a more prominent part in the 
coming expedition. He seemed, indeed, to think that too 

* The greater part of the proposed were added to it. One of these re- 
tretLtj was substantiallj and Uterally eognised the independence of the 
the same as that negotiated in 1833 Ameers of Sindh (Runjeet thereby 
—•but some supplementaiy articles withdrawing all clidme <m Shikar* 



316 


POUCY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT, 


lai^e a share of the danger* devolved upon him, and 
that he was to be allowed too little of the spoil.f The 
advantages to be derived from the alliance with Shah 
Soojah were not, he said, so great that he might not 
reasonably ask for something beyond what had been set 
forth in the proposals of the British Government; and it 
is not to be denied that there was at this time some show 
of truth in the assertion. Macnaghten continued to 
reply that the Maharajah, if he were not satisfied with 
the terms of the treaty, was at liberty to act inde¬ 
pendently, and that it would be no offence to the British 
Government if he preferred that scheme to the other; 
but he took the opportunity, in the course of one of his 
conferences with the Sikh agents, to hint that it was 
possible that “ circumstances might occur to render it 
necessary for us to counteract danger, and that if it 
seriously threatened us we might be compelled to arrest 
the advance of the Persians by the advance of our own 
troops, and in this case we might find it expedient to 