


* “ Of plans of this nature, that 
of granting our aid or countenance 
in concert with Kunjeet Singh, to 
enable Shah Soojah-oobMoolk to re¬ 
establish his sovereignty in the Eastern 
division of Afghanistan, under en¬ 
gagements which shall conciliate the 
fedings of the Sikh ruler, and bind 
the restored monarch to the support 
of our interests, appears to me to be 
decidedly the most deserving of at¬ 
tention. Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk and 
Maharajah Kunjeet Singh would pro- 
bablj^ act readily upon such a plan, 
it being similar to tnat in which they 
were before engaged, but which failed 
principally from the want of pecuniary 
aid, and the absence of our active 
sanction and support. In such an 
enterprise (which both from past ex- 

X 


perience, and from the circumstance 
that it would be undertaken in resis¬ 
tance of an attempt to establish Shecah 
supremacy in the country, would, 
we believe, have many partisans in 
Afghanistan) Kunjeet Singh would 
assist by the employment of a portion 
of his troops, and we by some contri¬ 
bution in money, and tne presence of 
an accredited agent of uie govern¬ 
ment, and of a sufficient number of 
officers for the direction of the Shah’s 
army .”—[Minute of Lord Auckland: 
Simlah, May 12, 1838~3f5. Records.^ 
A portion of this minute is given in 
the published correspondence. The 
passage quoted, and, indeed, all the 
latter and more practical portion of 
of it, is omitted. 

2 



308 


POLICY OP THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


the second, to attempt to save A%hanistan, by granting 
succour to the existing chiefships of Caubul and Can- 
dahar; the third, to permit or to encourage the advance 
of Runjeet Singh’s armies upon Caubul, under coimsel 
and restriction, and as subsidiary to his advance to orga- 
nise an expedition headed by Shah Soojah, such as I 
have above explained.” “ The • first course,” argued 
Lord Auckland, “ would be absolute defeat, and would 
leave a fi:ee opening to Russian and Persian intrigue 
upon our frontiers. The second would be only to give 
power to those who feel greater animosity against the 
Sikhs, than they do- against the Persians, and who would 
probably use against the former the means placed at 
their disposal; and the third course, which in the event 
of the successful resistance of Herat, would appear to be 
most expedient, would, if the state were to fall into the 
hands of the Persians, have yet more to recommend it, 
and I cannot hesitate to say, that the inclination of my 
opinion is, for the reasons which will be gathered from 
this paper, very strongly in favour of it.”* 

All this is sufficiently moderate, if it is not sufficiently 
just. The whole question is argued simply as one of 
expediency. It appeared to Lord Auckland to be most 
expedient to construct an alliance between Runjeet Singh 
and Shah Soojah for the recovery of the lost dominions 
of the latter. England was to remain in the back-ground 
jingling the money-bag. At this time, it had been ar¬ 
ranged that Macnaghten should proceed, with little de¬ 
lay, to the Court of Lahore. It had been intended, in the 
first instance, that the mission should be merely a com¬ 
plimentary one. But as events began to thicken, in the 
north-west, it appeared impossible to confine to such nar¬ 
row limits the communications which he was instructed 