



CONFBBESNOE WITH BDKJEET SINGH. 


311 


English gentlemen* with befitting cordiality and re¬ 
spect. As Macnaghten entered the hall, the aged 
Prince rose fi'om his seat, and tottering along the 
whole length of the presence-chamber, warmly em¬ 
braced the British minister, and welcomed the other 
gentlemen of the Mission. After the usual compliments 
had been exchanged, and the presents sent by the Bri¬ 
tish Government had been examined by the Maharajah 
with curious minuteness, a conversation ensued on an 
infinite variety of topics. “ The Maharajah,” wrote 
Macnaghten to the Governor-General, “ passed from 
war to wine, and from learning to hunting, with breath¬ 
less rapidity. He was particularly anxious to know how 
much each member of the Mission had drunk of some 
ardent liquor he had sent them the night before. He 
was equally anxious to know the distance at which 
a shrapnel shot could do execution. It is impossible to 
say on which of these subjects his interrogatives were 
most minute. He asked me if I was a good huntsman, 
and on replying in the negative, he asked me if I knew 
Arabic and Sanscrit. On receiving a reply in the af¬ 
firmative, as if doubtful of what I had said, he insisted 
on my reciting a couplet of the former language. He 
asked about Herat—about Dost Mahomed Khan, about 
the Persian army and their connection with the Russians, 
and the possibility of their invading India.”f It was not 
prudent to enter too minutely into this matter in open 
Durbar. Macnaghten replied, briefly and generally, to 
the questions about Russo-Persian invasion, and laughed 
the idea to scorn. “ I can enter more fully into the ques¬ 
tion,” he added, “ at a private interview.” 

On the morning of the 3rd of June, Macnaghten and 

* Captain Osborne, Lord Auck- dated with some of the most honour^ 
land^s nephew and military secretary; able incidents of the Afghan war; 
Captain George Macgregor, of the and Dr. Drummond, accompanied 
artillery, one of his aides-de-camp, Macnaghten. 
whose name has since become asso- t Records, 



812 


POLICT OP THE INDIAN GOYBBNMBNT. 


the Other members of the Mission, accompanied also by 
Captain Wade and Lieutenant Mackeson,* appeared by 
invitation at Durbar. There was some general conver¬ 
sation about the relations between Russia and Persia j 
and then a signal was made to the British officers to 
retire into an inner apartment. There the business of 
the conference was now to be transacted. On the part 
of the Lahore Government there were present—Dhyan 
Singh, the minister; his son Heera Singh, the favourite 
of the Maharajah; Lehna Singh, Adjeet Singh, and 
other Sirdars, with the doctor-secretary, the Fakir 
Azeez-ood-deen. On the part of the Mission, there were 
present with Macnaghten, Captains Osborne and Wade. 
Macgregor, Mackeson, and Dr. Drummond remained 
outside with some other officers of the Maharajah’s 
Court. 

Runjeet Singh commenced the conference. The letter 
of the Governor-General, he said, had been read to him, 
and he fully understood its contents. He desired that 
all present should hear it; and accordingly the Fakir 
Azeez-ood-deen, whose polished manners and admirable 
address presented a striking contrast to the ruder bear¬ 
ing of the Sikh chiefs by whom he was surrounded, read 
the letter aloud, and, with that unequalled power of in¬ 
terpretation of which he was the master, distinctly ex¬ 
plained every sentence. Macnaghten was then requested 
to state what he had to say on the part of the British 