

“ You will, at the same time, pro¬ 
pound the only other course of pro¬ 
ceedings, which, in the opinion oi the 
Governor-General the case admits 
of, which is to allow the Maharajah 
to take his own course against Dost 
Mahomed Khan without any refer¬ 
ence to us. Should his Highness 
show a decided preference for this 
course, you are authorised to tell him 
at once that he is at liberty to follow 



81.9 ttitict OS' IfCB IKSIAN OOVXBinEENT. 

Btep m adrance. The great project to which Lord Auck> 
land subsequently lent himself was only then b^inning 
to take shape in his mind. 

The Mission crossed the Sutlej, and on the 31st of 
May were presented to Kunjeet Singh at Adeena-nuggur. 
In a mango-grove—each under the shadow of its own 
tree—the Sikh ruler had ordered a number of mud- 
huts to be erected for the accommodation of Macnaghten 
and his companions. Small and comfortless as were these 
abodes, the officers of the Mission joyfully resorted to 
them for shelter from the intolerable summer-sun and the 
burning winds, which had scorched them in their own 
tents. Even now something horrible in the retrospect 
to the survivors of the Mission is the fiery heat of that 
June weather. 

In the midst of much pomp and splendour, sur¬ 
rounded by his courtiers, the Maharajah received the 


it, but ;yrou should point out to him 
the possibility of defeat, by the com¬ 
bined army of the Persians and Af¬ 
ghans, and you will, as far as you 
can consistently with propriety, im¬ 
press upon him the necessity of cau¬ 
tion, and of using Afghan rather than 
Sikh iniluence or agency. Should 
he wish to make an instrument of 
Shah Soojah, you will apprize him 
that the Governor-General attaches 
too much importance to the person 
of the ex-King to admit of his going 
forth otherwise than with the almost 
assured certainty of success; but 
that the ex-King will be permitted 
to proceed to Caubul with a view of 
being re-instated in his sovereignty, 
should the Sikhs succeed in tuning 
possession of Caubul, and that ar¬ 
rangement be desired by his Highness. 

“ Of the relative advantages which 
may be derived from these two plans 
you will be better able to judge after 
you shall have fully opened them, 
with the consideration which each 
has to recommend it to the Maha¬ 


rajah. His Highness may possibly 
be unwilling to commit his troops in 
the passes of the Khybur, and he 
may strongly feel the difficulty which 
religious and natural animosity will 
oppose to any measure mainly rest¬ 
ing on Sikh power and Sikh innuence. 
He may not, therefore, reject the 
plan that stands first in this paper; 
and there can be little doubt that, for 
ultimate efficiency, and for bringing 
greater weight and greater strength 
to bear in concert upon the objects 
in view, that this plan should have 
the preference; but it is cumbrous, 
and a considerable time may elapse 
before it can be set in motion; and 
if it might conciliate Afghan opinion 
on one hand, on the other it might 
impair with the Sikhs that cordiauty 
which would be so essential to the 
success of co-operation. His lord- 
ship, on the whole, is disposed to 
think that the plan which is second 
in order is that which will be found 
most expedient”—[MiS. Records,"] 