



THB TEIPABTITE TREATY. 


319 


tween Runjeet Singh and Shah Soqjah, guaranteed by 
the British Government; and it ran in the following 
words: 

Treaty of alliance and friendship executed between Maharajah 

Runjeet Singh and Shah Soojah-oohMoolk^ with the appro- 

bation of and in concert withy the British Government 

Whereas a treaty was formerly concluded between Maharajah 
Runjeet Singh and Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, consisting of four¬ 
teen articles exclusive of the preamble and the conclusion; and 
whereas the execution of the provisions of the said treaty wad 
suspended for certain reasons; and whereas at this time Mr. W. 
H. Macnaghten, having been deputed by the Right Honourable 
George Lord Auckland, Governor-General of India, to the pre¬ 
sence of Maharajah Runjeet Singh, and vested with full powers 
to form a treaty in a manner consistent with the friendly engage¬ 
ments subsisting between the two states, the treaty aforesaid is 
revived and concluded with certain modifications, and four new 
articles have been added thereto, with the approbation of, and in 
concert with, the British Government, the provisions whereof as 
contained in the following eighteen articles, will be duly and 
faithfully observed, 

1st. Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk disclaims all title on the part of 
himself, his heirs, successors, and all the Suddozyes, to whatever 
territories lying on either bank of the River Indus that may be 
possessed by the Maharajah—viz.. Cashmere, including its limits, 
east, west, north, and south, together with the Fort of Attock, 
Chuch Hazara, Khebel, Amb, with its dependencies on the left 
bank of the aforesaid river; and on the right bank Peshawur, with 
the Eusafzae territory, Kheteks, Husht Nagger, Mechnee, Kohat, 
Himgoo, and all places dependent on Peshawur, as far as the 
BdiyburPass; Bunnoo, theVezeree]territory, Dour Tuwk, Goraug 
Kulabagh, and Kushulgher, with their dependent districts; Dera 
Ishmael Khan, and its dependency, together with Dera Ghazee 
Khan, Kut, Methen, Omerkoth, and their dependent territory; 
Seeughur, Heren Dajel, Hajeepore, Rajenpore, and the three 
Ketchees, as well as Mankeera, with its districts, and the province 
of Mooltan, situated on the left bank. These countries and 
places are considered to be the property and to form the estate 



320 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVEBNMENT. 


of. the Maharajah; the Shah neither has nor will have any con¬ 
cern with them. They belong to the Maharajah and his posterity 
from generation to generation. 

2nd. The people of the country on the other side of Khybur 
will not be suffered to commit robberies, or aggressions, or any 
disturbances on this side. If any defaulter of either state who 
has embezzled the revenue take refuge in the territory of the 
other, each party engages to surrender him, and no person shall 
obstruct the passage of the stream which issues out of the Khybur 
defile, and supplies the fort of Futtehgurh with water according 
to ancient usage. 