

18th. Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk binds himself, his heirs, and suc¬ 
cessors, to refrain from entering into negotiations with any foreign 
state without the knowledge and consent of the British and Sikh 



DSPABTUBS OSt THE MISSION. 


323 


Govermnents, and to oppose any power having the design to 
invade the British and Sikh territories by force of arms, to the 
utmost of his ability. 

The three powers parties to this treaty—^namely, the British 
Government, Maharajah Runjeet Singh, and Shah Soojah-ool- 
Moolk—cordially agree to the foregoing articles. There shall be 
no deviation of them, and in that case the present treaty shall be 
considered as binding for ever; and this treaty shall come into 
operation from and after the date on which the seals and signa¬ 
tures of the three contracting parties shall have been affixed 
thereto. Done at Lahore this 26th day of June, in the year of 
our Lord 1838, corresponding with the 15 th of the month of 
Assar, 1895, Aera of Bekramajeet. 

The treaty was despatched to Simlah for the signature 
of the Governor-General, which Runjeet Singh expressed 
some anxiety to obtain with the least possible delay. But 
Lord Auckland at once decided that he could with no 
propriety attach his name to the treaty until it had been 
sanctioned and signed by Shah Soojah. Anxious as he 
was to conclude the negotiation, Runjeet Singh could 
not demur to this decision. His patience, however, was 
not to be severely taxed, Macnaghten was directed to 
proceed with all possible expedition to obtain the con¬ 
sent of the Shah; and so, on the 13 th of July, the Maha¬ 
rajah gave the English gentlemen their audience of leave; 
and, amidst the most profuse expressions of friendship 
and attachment, they took their departure from Runjeet’s 
Court. 

They turned their faces towards Loodhianah. A 
pensioner on the bounty of the British Government, 
Shah Soojah, ever since his last disastrous attempt to 
regain his empire, had dwelt there in the midst of his 
family as one not yet reconciled to a life of peaceful 
obscurity, but somewhat sobered down by the repeated 
failures which had beset his unfortunate career. It is 
probable that no political vicissitudes in Afghanistan, 

Y 2 



TfmtBf'm TmTsmjm crnmaot^sr. 


himever fiivorable to the restoration of the monarchy, 
'Wbuld have tempted him to head another expedition for 
the recovery of Caubul and Candahar. But when reports 
reached him of the designs of the British Government, 
and the probability that he would be supplied with 
British money and British skill for the support and 
conduct of the army which he was to lead against the 
Barukzye Sirdars, he saw more clearly his way to his old 
place in the Balia Ilissar of Caubul; and long dormant 
hopes and expectations began to revive within him. But 
he could not wholly suppress his suspicions of the sin¬ 
cerity, both of the British and the Sikhs; and his delight 
was straitened by the thought that he would, in effect, 
be little more than a passive instrument in the hands of 
his powerful and ambitious allies. 