

3rd. As agreeably to the treaty established between the 
British Government and the Maharajah, no one can cross from 
the left to the right bank of the Sutlej without a passport 
from the Maharajah; the same rule shall be observed regarding 
the passage of the Indus, whose waters joins the Sutlej; and no 
one shall be allowed to cross the Indus without the Maharajah's 
permission. 

4th. Regarding Shikarpoor and the territory of Sindh lying 
on the right bank of the Indus, the Shah will agree to abide by 
whatever may be settled as right and proper, in conformity with 
the happy relations of friendship subsisting between the British 
Government and the Maharajah, through Captain Wade. 

5th. When the Shah shall have established his authority in 
Caubul and Candahar, ho will annually send the Maharajah the 
following articles—viz., 55 high-bred horses of approved colour 
and pleasant paces, 11 Persian cimeters, 7 Persian poniards, 25 
good mules; fruits of various kinds, both dry and fresh, and 
surdees or musk melons of a sweet and delicate flavour (to be 
sent throughout the year), by the way of Caubul River to Pesha- 
wur; grapes, pomegranates, apples, quinces, almonds, raisins, 
pistales or chronuts, an abundant supply of each; as well as pieces 
of satin of every colour, choghas of fur, kimkhobs wrought with 
gold and silver, and Persian carpets, altogether to the number of 
101 pieces; all these articles the Shah will continue to send every 
year to the Maharajah. 

6th. Each party shall address the other in terms of equality. 

7th. Merchants of Afghanistan, who will be desirous of trading 
to Lahore, Umritsur, or any other parts of the Maharajah’s pos¬ 
sessions, shall not be stopped or molested on their way. On the 



THE TRIPARTITE TREATY. 


321 


contxarr, strict orders shall be issued to facilitate their intercourse, 
and the Maharajah engages to observe the same line of conduct 
on his part in respect to traders who may wish to proceed to 
Afghanistan. 

8th. The Maharajah will yearly send to the Shah the follow¬ 
ing articles in the way of friendship: 55 pieces of shawls, 25 
pieces of muslin, 11 dooputtas* 5 pieces of Jcinkhob, 5 scarves, 
55 tinbuns, 55 loads of Bara rice (peculiar to Peshawur). 

9th. Any of the Maharajah’s officers who may be deputed to 
Afghanistan to purchase horses, or on any other business, as well 
as those who may be sent by the Shah into the Punjaub for the 
purpose of purchasing piece goods or shawls, &c., to the amount 
of 11,000 rupees, will be treated by both sides with due atten¬ 
tion, and every facility will be afforded to them in the execu¬ 
tion of their commission. 

10th. Whenever the armies of the two states may happen to be 
assembled at the same place, on no account shall the slaughter of 
kine be permitted to take place. 

11th. In the event of the Shah taking an auxiliary force from 
the Maharajah, whatever booty may be acquired from the Baruk- 
zyes in jewels, horses, arms, great and small, shall be equally 
divided between the two contracting parties. If the Shah should 
succeed in obtaining possession of their property without the 
assistance of the Maharajah’s troops, the Shah agrees to send a 
portion of it by his own agents to the Maharajah in the way of 
friendship. 