

Seventhly, After the decay of the monarchy, in the same man¬ 
ner as my servants rebelling usurped the country, so did the 
Sindhians place officers in possession of Shikarpoor; now that I 
shall regain possession of my kingdom, the Sindhians must release 
Shikarpoor. It is a royal possession, and must belong to me.J 

Eighthly, With respect to slave-girls who ran away from their 
masters, although to deliver them up may be against the regu¬ 
lations, yet as it is a matter of necessity, for respectable people 


* “ The wisli, I said, expressed in 
ihc fifth article would be scrupulously 
attended to.”— ^MS, Itecords.^ 
t ” With respect to the objection 
urged in the sixth article, to making 
money-payments to Maharajah Run- 
jeet Singh, 1 reiterated the arguments 
formerly used, to show the distinctions 
between a tributary and a subsidiary 
obligation. These arguments, it will 
be observed, had due weight with his 
Majesty, for in the written article he 
brings forward the objection as one 
that may occur to the world, not as 
one to which he himself attaches any 
importance. Ultimately, however, his 
Majesty admitted that it would be 
impossible to satisfy all unreasonable 
objections, and that to those who un¬ 
derstood the subject, and whose opi¬ 
nions alone were to be valued, the 
reciprocal nature of the subsidiary 
obligation would be sufficiently obvi¬ 
ous. With regard to the objection 
specitied in this article, founded on 
the anticipated want of means, I gave 
his Majesty encouragement to hope 
that the British Government would 


not permit him to be in distress for 
the means of discharging his necessary 
pecuniary obligations.”— [A/aS^. Re¬ 
cords.2 

X ” The seventh article, I observed, 
was at variance with the proposed 
provisions in the new treaty regarding 
Shikarpoor. His Majesty, after some 
conversation, agreed to expunge the 
article, as well as to exclude the men¬ 
tion of Shikarpoor in other places 
where it had been introduced, from 
his paper of requests ; but he seemed 
to set great value on his claim to 
Shikarpoor and the Sindh possessions 
generally. The Ameers, he observed, 
had no legitimate title to their domi¬ 
nions but what they derived from him. 
Shikarpoor, he said, he was particu¬ 
larly desirous to obtain possession of, 
as being an appropriate place of re¬ 
fuge and escape for his family in case 
of reverses; but he ultimately admitted 
that the object would be sufficiently 
secured to him so long as the Britiui 
influence prevailed with the Ameers.” 
—[il/5. Records,} 



ASSENT OF THE SHAH. 


333 


(females) cannot dispense with servants, however the regulations 
may be enforced with other people, it is not right to apply them 
to a guest, it is proper that the slave-girls of the Vilaitis (native 
of Afghanistan) attached to me, who may run away from their 
masters, be made to return.* 

Having mastered the contents of this paper, Mac- 
naghten proceeded to the audience, and after the first 
salutations, began, with his Majesty’s permission, to read 
over the several articles, and comment on them as he 
proceeded.f He then went on to say that it was now 
plain that the Shah’s mind had been set at rest on all the 
points which had before occasioned him doubt, and as 
his Majesty was now prepared without scruple to ratify 
the treaty, he hoped that he would furnish him with 
a written paper to this effect. To this the Shah readily 
assented, and the following postscript was then appended 
to the document: 