

Then Macnaghten asked the King whether it were his 
desire to advance by the Khybur Pass, or the route of 
Sindh. To this Shah Soojah replied that the Khyburees 
were his slaves—that they were willing to sacrifice them¬ 
selves at his bidding—that he frequently received im¬ 
ploring letters from the Momunds, the Eusofzyes, and 
other tribes in the neighbourhood of Peshawur, but that 
there were so many solid advantages in the combined 

* Lieutenant Mackeson's Memoran- days before sent an emissary to Kam- 
dum: MS, Records, ran to conjure him, for the honour of 

t “Who would, however,” it was the Afghans, to hold out for two short 
added, “ not interfere with the full months, and he would hear of miracles 
exercise of his authority over his worked in his favour.”— {Lieutenant 
subjects.” MackesorCs Memorandum: MS, Re- 

t “ He mentioned having a few cords."] 



380 


POUCT OF THE USTDIAN GOVEBimENT. 


movement by Candahar and Peshawur, which would 
completely paralyse the movements of Dost Mahomed, 
that he gave it the preference. His own force, he said, 
should advance by Candahar, whilst his eldest son, 
Prince Timour, might accompany the Sikh army through 
the Khybur Pass.’*' 

Little more now remained to be said. But before 
taking his leave of the Shah, Macnaghten invited him to 
state in writing the points on which he required the 
assurances of the British Government, and expressed a 
hope that, as the Mission had received instructions to re¬ 
turn immediately to Simlah, his Majesty’s wishes might 
be laid before him with the least possible delay. 
Desiring the British Envoy to call upon him again on 
the following evening, after leisure had been allowed 
him to study well the contents of the proposed treaty, 
the Shah then bade him adieu; and the English officers 
took their departure. It did not appear to those present, 
on this occasion, when the sovereignty of Afghanistan 
was ofi’ercd to the long-exiled monarch, and now, for 
the first time since his dethronement, there dawned upon 
him something like a certainty of recovering his lost 
dominions, that he received the announcements of the 
English Mission with feelings of very earnest exultation 
and delight. There were evidently some misgivings in 
the mind of the Shah, who mistrusted both Eunjeet 
Singh and the British Government. Everything seemed 
to have been already arranged between the two parties, 
whilst he himself, it appeared, was designed to be a 
passive instrument for the furtherance of their ends—a 
puppet in their hands, to give grace to the show and 
character to the expedition. 

• Some anxiety was expressed by of the Sikhs, but he was assured that 
ue Shah lest Prince Timour should the presence of British officers in his 
be consigned entirely to the guidance camp would effectually preyent this. 



STIPULATIONS OP THE SHAH. 


331 


An hour before the time appointed for the second 
meeting between Shah Soojah and the British Emissary, 
Moollah Skikore waited upon the latter with a paper, 
setting forth the points upon which the Shah especially 
desired to have the assurances of the British Government. 
They ran to the following effect: 