

Firstly. That as regards the descendants of the King of the 
Douranees (Ahmed Shah), and the sons and relations of myself, 
whoever they may be, the right of providing for them or not, and 
the direction of all that concerns them, belong to me alone; in 
this matter neither the British Government nor other shall exer¬ 
cise any interference.* 

Secondly. After I have been reinstated in Caubul and Canda- 
bar, if, in consequence of the smallness of my possessions, I should 
desire to send an army against Balkh, Seistan, Beloochistan, and 
the neighbourhood and dependencies of Caubul and Candahar, 
and take possession of them, no hindrance shall be offered.f 

Thirdly. When Caubul and Candahar become mine, the de¬ 
pendencies of those places, as they existed in the time of the 
monarchy, ought to belong to me.J 

Fourthly. When I have been reinstated at Caubul, and the 
officers of the British Government prepare to return, should I 
desire to retain one of them as an envoy, and some others for the 
purpose of forming and disciplining my army, they will not be 
refused.§ 

Fifthly. The British officers shall exercise no authority over 


* It will be more convenient for 
purposes of reference to append, as a 
note to each article, Macnagliten’s re¬ 
plies to these several points, as given 
at the subsequent interview: “ VVitli 
regard to the first article,” he writes, 
“ 1 told the Shah tliat he might make 
his mind perfectly at ease, as the Bri¬ 
tish Government had no intention or 
wish to interfere between his Majesty 
and his family and dependents.”— 
{Mr. MacnagUen to Government^ 

17, 1838 : MS. Records.'] 
t “ With regard to tlie second arti¬ 
cle, I pointed out to the Sliali that 
the conquest of Shikarpoor would be 
directly opposed to one of the articles 


of the treaty. To the rest of the ar¬ 
ticle 1 could only say that it would be 
naturally the wish of the British Go¬ 
vernment to witness the consolidation 
and extension, to their proper limits, 
of his Majesty’s dominions.”— 
Records.] 

% “ On the subject of the third ar¬ 
ticle, I observed that, of course, the 
Shah did not mean to include the 
territories ceded to Runjeet Singh by 
the new treaty, and that the mention 
of Shikarpoor was inadmissible.’^— 
[Mis'. Records ] 

§ ** The fourth article I stated would 
doubtless be approved by the Go- 
vemor-Geneial.”—[MS. Records.] 



332 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


the people of Afghanistan, whether soldiers or subjects, without 
my approbation and concurrence.* 

Sixthly, With respect to giving two lakhs of rupees, and some¬ 
thing besides from Shikarpoor, it appears to me very hard and 
difficult; firstly, because my country will not afford means suffi¬ 
cient for the expenses of my government and the maintenance of 
my troops ; and secondly, because the measure will be considered 
by the world as payment of tribute. It rests, however, with the 
British Government, and if it is of opinion that the country has 
the means, and that the measure is a proper one, I do not object. 
The conduct of my affairs is in the hands of the British Govern- 
ment.f 