

After a reperusal of the treaty, and hearing the representations 
made by the British officers of high rank, it appeared to me right 
that, in the foregoing enumeration of the objects to be desired, 
the mention of Shikarpoor should not be introduced, and with 
respect to the objections which I have stated, to giving two lakhs 
of rupees to Runjeet Singh, in exchange for the services of his 
troops, as it does not appear to me injurious to my dignity, I 
liave omitted all mention of that also, and am now prepared with 
willingness and satisfaction to sign the treaty. J 

The negotiation now at an end, the Shah expressed 
his eagerness to commence work without delay; and was 
urgent in his solicitations for an immediate supply of 
money, arms, and ammunition. He again, too, ex¬ 
pressed his desire to conduct the expedition for the re- 

* “ On the very delicate subject in- into consideration with the same anxi- 
troduced into the last article, I ob- ous desire to gratify his Majesty in 
served to his Majesty that its con- this as in all other matters.”— [MS, 
nexion with the treaty generally did RecordsJ] 
not seem to me to be obvious, but f MS. Records, 
that I would nevertheless bring it to t Macnaghten*s comments are 
the notice of the Governor-General, ^ven, for easier reference, in the 
who would, I felt persuaded, take it preceding notes. 





POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVEENMENT. 


covery of his dominions, as one relying mainly upon the 
strength of his own army. He wished to obtain the 
assistance of British officers in raising and disciplining 
his troops, but he hoped “ that the immediate operations 
for regaining his throne might be conducted” by those 
troops. Such reliance on his own arms would raise, 
he said, his character in the estimation of the people, 
‘‘ while the fact of his being upheld by foreign force 
alone could not fail to detract, in a great measure, 
from his dignity and consequence.”* He had already, 
he declared, in reply to a suggestion from the British 
Envoy, sent letters to many persons of influence in 
Afghanistan, calling upon them to join his standard, 
and he was certain that thousands would flock to it 
from all parts of the country.f He appeared to be in 
the highest spirits, and spoke strongly of the debt of gra¬ 
titude which he owed to the British Government, both 
for the protection that had been yielded him during 
past years, and for the more active assistance which 


♦ JIfr. Macnaqhtm to Covernment, 
July 17, 1838 : MS. Jlecords. 

t Many of those letters were 
promptly responded to, and in some 
instances voluntary tenders of service 
were made by chiefs discontented 
with the Barukzyc rule. Among 
others, Khan Shereen Khan, chief of 
the Kuzzilbashes, wrote to Shah 
Soojah declaring his intention to join 
his standard. “ Since we have been 
so unfortunate,” said the chief, “ as 
to be far from your royal household, 
it is only known to God how 
wretchedly we pass our days. We 
have now resolved, as soon as the 
troops of your Majesty arrive on the 
frontier, to lose no time in waiting 
upon your Majesty and proving our 
fidelity b^ sacrificing ourselves in 
your service. For God’s sake do 
not make this letter public.” Even 
before it was known that there was 
any intention on the part of the Shah 
to attempt to regain his kingdom, 
many of the chiefs, either offended 
by Dost Mahomed’s alliance with the 