

12th. An exchange of missions, charged with letters and pre¬ 
sents, shall constantly take place between the two parties. 

13th. Should the Maharajah require the aid of any of the Shah’s 
troops in furtherance of the object contemplated by this treaty, 
the Shah engages to send a force commanded by one of his principal 
officers; in like manner, the Maharajah will furnish the Shah, 
when required, with an auxiliary force composed of Mahomedans, 
and commanded by one of his principal officers as far as Caubul, 
in furtherance of the objects contemplated by this treaty. When 
the Maharajah may go to Peshawur, the Shah wiU depute a 
Shah-zadah to visit him; on which occasions the Maharajah will 
receive and dismiss him with the honour and consideration due to 
his rank and dignity. 

14th. The friends and enemies of each of the three high 

VOL. I. Y 



322 POLICY OP THE nn>IAN GOVERlfMENT. 

powers—that is to «ay, the British and Sikh Governments and 
Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, shall be the friends and enemies of all# 

15th. Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk agrees to relinquish for himself, 
his heirs, and successors, all claims of supremacy and arrears of 
tribute over the country now held by the Ameers of Sindh 
(which will continue to belong to the Ameers and their successors 
in perpetuity), on condition of the payment to him by the Ameers 
of such a sum as may be determined, under the mediation of the 
British Government, of such payment being made over by him to 
Maharajah Runjeet Singh. On these payments being completed, 
article 4 of the treaty of the 12th of March, 1833, will be con¬ 
sidered cancelled, and the customary interchange of letters and 
suitable presents between the Maharajah and the Ameers of Sindh 
shall be maintained as heretofore. 

16th. Shah Soojah engages, after the attainment of his object, 
to pay without fail to the Maharajah the sum of two lakhs of 
rupees of the Nanukshahee or Kuldar currency, calculating from 
the date on which the Sikh troops may be despatched for the 
purpose of reinstating his Majesty in Caubul, in consideration of 
the Maharajah stationing a force of not less than 5000 men— 
cavalry and infantry—of the Mahomedan persuasion within the 
limits of the Peshawur territory for the support of the Shah, and 
to be sent to the aid of his Majesty whenever the British Govern¬ 
ment, in concert and counsel with the Maharajah, shall deem the 
aid necessary; and when any matter of groat importance may 
arise to the westward, such measures will be adopted with regard 
to it as may seem expedient and proper at the time to the British 
and Sikh Governments. In the event of the Maharajah requiring 
the aid of the Shah’s troops, a deduction shall be made from the 
subsidy proportioned to the period for which such aid may be 
afforded; and the British Government holds itself responsible for 
the punctual payment of the above sum annually to the Maharajah, 
so long as the provisions of this treaty are duly observed. 

17th. When Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk shall have succeeded in 
establishing his autliority in Afghanistan, he shall not attack or 
molest his nephew, the ruler of Herat, in the possession of his ter¬ 
ritories, now subject to his government. 