



326 


POUCr OF THE ISDIAK GOVESRMEirr. 


and explain the articles of the amended treaty. The 
Shah’s comments were frequent and emphatic. Sneer¬ 
ing at the minuteness with which the possessions of Bun- 
jeet Singh were defined in the first article, he declared 
that Peshawur was only a burden to the Sikh govern¬ 
ment, and that Bunjeet would willingly hand it over 
to any one but Dost Mahomed. Indeed, he said, 
the Maharajah’s vakeel had often pledged his word to 
him that, in the event of his recovering his throne, 
Peshawur should be reannexed to his dominions. But 
when Captain Wade and Moollah Shikore* recalled to 
his Majesty’s recollection that Peshawur had been ex¬ 
pressly named in the old treaty among the possessions of 
Bunjeet Singh, the Shah acknowledged that it was so, 
and yielded the point. 

Other articles were then commented on by the Shah 
and his agent; but that which seemed most to stagger him 
was the stipulation for the annual payment by Caubul 
of two lakhs to the state of Lahore. Little advantage, 
observed the Shah, could the British Government ex¬ 
pect to derive from his restoration, if they placed him 
in a position inferior to that held by the present ruler 
of Caubul, who paid no tribute to the Sikhs. “ He had 
said, “ indulged a hope that the day would 
come when the British Government, whose honoured 
guest he had been for more than twenty years, would 
restore him to the throne and possessions of his ancestors 
—that the British Government must be aware that, after 
such a period of dependence on them, in whatever man¬ 
ner they chose to send him forth, his fair name was 
identified with their own—^that in this world a good 
name alone deserved to be prized—that half a loaf with 

* Moollah Shikore was at this time be made of him in a subsequent por- 
the Shah's ^ent and confidential ad- tion of the narrative. 

Tiser in exile. Further mention will 



QcxsnaN ot xee 32^7 

a good name were better than abundance without it. 
He then alluded to the small revenues of A%hanistan— 
said that Caubul and Candahar yielded nothing—that 
when Shikarpoor paid its revenues regularly, the amount 
realised was only three lakhs—that to enable him to 
establish his government, and keep it, he would require 
to maintain 15,000 troops; and how were they to be 
paid ?—that it would be less irksome if the money were 
only required to be paid whenever be had occasion to 
make use of the services of Runjeet Singh’s troops.”* 
To all of this Macnaghten replied, that the payment 
was not, by any means, to be regarded in the light of 
tribute from a weaker to a more powerful state, but 
simply as remuneration for services performed. Adroitly 
alluding to the subsidy recently paid by the British Go¬ 
vernment to the Persian state, the Enghsh Envoy said 
that a powerful government often subsidised, for its own 
uses, a weaker one; and that if Runjeet did not furnish 
the troops, the Shah would be exempted from paying 
the money; but that as the former was bound to hold 
them always in readiness for service, it would not be 
reasonable to pay them only when they were called into 
the field. Indeed, he urged, Runjeet Singh had with 
difficulty been persuaded to consent to the terms of this 
very article, which imposed upon him no light condi¬ 
tions, and had, moreover, been substituted as a com¬ 
pensation to the Maharajah for withdrawing the de¬ 
mands he had made for actual territorial concessions 
both at Shikarpoor and Jellalabad. 