

On the evening of the 15th of July, accompanied by 
Captain Wade and Lieutenant Mackeson, Mr. Mac- 
naghten waited on Shah Soojah at Loodhianah. Seated 
on a musnud slightly elevated above the level of the 
room, the Shah received the British gentlemen with 
becoming cordiality, and desired them to seat themselves 
on a carpet beside him. Macnaghten commenced the 
conference. He spoke of the friendly feeling that had 
always existed between the British Government and the 
Suddozye Princes, since Mr. Elphinstone’s mission to 
Afghanistan—said that, although unable actively to co¬ 
operate with the Shah in his first attempts to regain his 
kingdom, the British Government had always desired 
the success of his undertakings; explained the circum¬ 
stances under which a mission had been sent to the 
Court of Dost Mahomed; and commented upon the un¬ 
friendly manner in which it had been received, and the 
conductor the Ameer in “rejecting our good offices;” 
conduct which had rendered it necessary to counteract 
his hostile designs by establishing a friendly power in 
the territories of Afghanistan. 



OOttRWBWCn wnH shah sooiah 


8t» 

To all of this the Shah listened attentively, and then 
said that he had always foretold the result of the mission 
to the Court of Dost Mahomed—(which was a piece of 
good luck he was not able to appreciate)—that he who 
had not been true to his own master was little likely 
to be true to a foreign power—but that now he would 
see the result of his folly, and be baffled in his attempt 
to betray his country into the hands of the Persian in¬ 
vaders. 

Upon this Macnaghten at once announced the inten¬ 
tion of the British Government to restore Shah Soojah to 
his hereditary dominions. It would have been more agree¬ 
able, he said, to his government to act in such a matter 
■without consulting any other state; but that the Sikhs 
were now in actual possession of so many of the provinces 
of the old Douranee Empire, and their interests so in¬ 
timately associated with those of the British in that part 
of the country, that it was impossible to omit them from 
the compact—that, consequently, the Governor-General 
had instructed him to wait on Runjeet Singh, and that 
the result had been the formation of a treaty which 
was now to be submitted for his Majesty’s approval, 
together with a letter from Lord Auckland. The letter 
was then read; and Macnaghten reverting first to the 
old treaty between Shah Soojah and Runjeet Singh, 
said that it was the intention of the British Govern¬ 
ment to become a party to its stipulations under certain 
alterations and additions. With the utmost unconcern 
the Shah said that a paper of some kind had been ex¬ 
changed with Runjeet Singh, but that it was merely to 
the effect, that if he regained his dominions there should 
be an interchange of friendly letters, presents, and mis¬ 
sions between the two Courts. 

Whether Macnaghten smiled at this version of the old 
alliance is not on record. But he began now to read 