

There was little to be said in reply to this. The Shah 
yielded a somewhat reluctant assent; the remaining arti¬ 
cles of the treaty were read, and called forth but slight 

* Memorandum^ hy LieuUMacheson^ on the \5th. of July^ 18381 MS, JRe^ 
of Mr, MacnaghterCs Interview urUft cords, 

Soojdk>ooUMoolky at Jjoodhianah^ 



FOUCT OF THE INBIAN CtOTEENHENT. 


comment. Macnaghten then invited the Shah to state 
unreservedly his opinions on the whole question. Thus 
appealed to, the exiled King spoke out cordially and un¬ 
restrainedly, but with a full sense of what was due to 
himself. “He spoke of his long connexion with the 
British Government, of his fortune being entirely in their 
hands—said that he had entertained the hope, in his long 
exile, that it would sooner or later stretch out its arm to 
restore him to all the possessions and powers of his ances¬ 
tors—^but that if this hope could not at once be fulfilled, 
he must content himself with what now remained of the 
disjointed kingdom of Afghanistan; that in the event of 
the straitened revenue of Candahar and Caubul being 
further reduced by the payment of two lakhs of rupees 
annually to the Sikhs, he must look to support from the 
British Government to meet and oppose any increased 
danger from the approach of more powerful enemies from 
the westward. On this point full assurance was given him. 
He then observed that there were one or two other points 
in which he wished to have assurance given him, and 
that, in other respects, he was at the disposal of the 
British Government—1st. That no interference should be 
exercised with liis authority over those of his tribe and 
household; 2ndly. That he should be allowed to raise 
forces of his own to go with some show of power, and 
not as though he were a mere puppet in the hands of 
the British Government to work out their views. He 
then dwelt on the importance of this in the eyes of his 
people who would come to join his standard—said that 
if they found he was no longer the source of honour and 
reward, they would desert him and return to their homes, 
as they would have no object in connecting themselves 
with the schemes of foreigners—that he should’ therefore 
be allowed to commence recruiting men, as many were 
wmting to enter his service—that when his adherents 



CONTEKENCE WITH SHAH SOOJAH. 


flocked to his standard, he should be able to ^ve them 
hopes of reward for their services.”* 

On all these points the fullest assurances were given 
to the Shah. Then Macnaghten began to set forth 
how it was the desire of the British Government that 
one of their own functionaries should be stationed at the 
Shah’s Court ;f and that British ofBcers should be fur¬ 
nished to discipline the Shah’s levies, to command them 
during the expedition, and to remain with him after his 
restoration. To all of this the Shah readily assented. 
Declaring himself confident of success, he then expressed 
an eager hope that no delay would be permitted, but that 
the expedition would set out as soon as ever the troops 
could be raised for the purpose. When the beginning 
of the ensuing cold weather was named as the time for 
commencing operations, the Shah expressed surprise and 
regret that the movement should be so long delayed; and 
urged the expediency of moving whilst Herat was still 
holding out. His appearance in the neighbourhood of 
Candahar, he said, would doubtless compel Mahomed 
Shah to withdraw his investing army, and secure the 
frontier against all future attacks.^ 