


Persians, or warned by the failure of 
Burnes’s Mission of the danger of 
clinging any longer to a falling house, 
wrote to the Shah, beseeching him to 
return. “The faggots,” it was said, 
“ are ready. It merely requires the 
lighted torch to be applied.” It is 
remarkable that one of the first to 
tender his services to the Suddozye 
Prince was that very Abdoollah 
Khan, Achetzkye, who was the prime 
mover of the insurrection at Caubul, 
which brought about the restoration 
of the Barukzyes.— [^Captain Wade 
to Mr. Macnaghten^ June 5th^ 1838: 
MS. Records.'] At this time the Shah 
was restricted from corresponding 
with his Afghan friends; but Captain 
Wade, whilst reporting to govern¬ 
ment the receipt of the letters from 
Abdoollah Khan and others, recom¬ 
mended that the restriction should 
be removed. The Shah seems to 
have laid before the British agent, in 
perfect good faith, all the letters he 
received from Afghanistan whilst a 
pensioner on the British Government. 



MEETIKO WITH ZEMAUH SHAH. 


335 


was about to confer upon him so much power and 
grandeur. 

Macnaghten now took his leave of the Shah, and 
proceeded with the officers of the Mission to pay a visit 
to Zemaun Shah, who, blind and powerless, had re¬ 
mained since his dethronement an appendage to the faded 
Court of his younger brother, dreaming over the past 
grandeur of his magnificent reign, and sighing to revisit 
the scene of his by-gone glories. V.ague rumours of the 
intention of the British .Government to restore the Sud- 
dozye Princes to the sovereignty of Afghanistan had 
reached him in his dreary exile; and now tliat the Bri¬ 
tish Envoy was at his door, so eager was he to learn 
the whole truth, that almost before the ordinary salu¬ 
tations had been exchanged, he pressed Macnaghten for 
a full revelation of the glad tidings of which he was the 
bearer. The intelligence, which the English gentleman 
imparted to him, stirred the heart of the old blind Prince 
with joy and exultation. “ He seemed filled with delight 
at the prospect of being permitted to revisit the land of 
his ancestors.”* This was the first gleam of good fortune 
that had burst upon him for many years; and it was a 
curious and affecting sight to mark the effect which the 
announcement of the good offices of the British wrought 
upon one, who, forty years before, had threatened vast 
expeditions to the southward, which had filled the Bri¬ 
tish in India with anxiety and alarm. 

On the 17th of July, Macnaghten and his suite turned 
their backs upon Loodhianah, and repaired, with all pos¬ 
sible haste, to Simlah, there to discuss with Lord Auck¬ 
land and the secretaries who had remained with him, 
the measures now to be adopted for the restoration of 
Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk to the long-lost empire of Ahmed 
Shah. 

♦ Mr, Macnaghten to Government, July 17, 1838 : MS. Records. 



336 


THE SI MLA H MANIFESTO. 


CHAPTER IV. 

[July—October, 1838.] 

The Simlah Manifesto—The Simlali Council—Influence of Messrs. Colvin 
and Torrens—Views of Captains Burnes and Wade—Opinions of Sir 
Henry Fane — The Army of the Indus — The Governor-General’s 
Manifesto—Its Policy considered. 