

The regiments now ordered to assemble were her 
Majesty’s 16th Lancers, 13th Infantry, and 3rd Buffi; 



348 


THE SIMIAH MANIFESTO. 


the Company’s European regiment; two regiments of 
Native light cavalry, and twelve picked Sepoy corps.* 
Two troops of horse artillery and three companies of 
foot, constituted the artillery brigade; and some details 
of sappers and miners, imder Captain Thomson, com¬ 
pleted the Bengal force. The usual staff-departments 
were formed to accompany the army,f the heads of 
departments remaining in the Presidency whilst their 
deputies accompanied the forces into the field. ■ 

Whilst the Bengal army was assembling on the 
northern frontier of India, under the personal command 
of Sir Henry Fane, another force was being collected at 
Bombay. It was composed of a brigade of cavalry, in¬ 
cluding her Majesty’s 4th Dragoons, a brigade of artillery; 
and a brigade of foot, consisting of two Queen’s regiments 
(the 2nd Koyals and 17th Foot) and one Sepoy corps. 
Major-General Thackwell commanded the cavalry; 
Major-General Wiltshire the infantry; and Colonel 
Stevenson the artillery brigade. Sir John Keane, the 
commander-in-chief of the Bombay army, took com¬ 
mand of the whole. 

Such was the extent of the British force warned for 
field-service in the autumn of 1838. At the same time 
another force was being raised for service across the 
Indus—the force that was to be led by Shah Soojah into 
Afghanistan; that was to be known distinctively as his 
force; but to be raised in the Company’s territories, to be 
commanded by the Company’s officers, and to be paid by 
the Company’s coin. 

To this army was to have been entrusted the work of 
re-establishing the authority of the Suddozye Princes in 

• The 2nd, 5th, 16th, 27th, 28th, Quartennaster-General; Major J. D. 
Slst, 35th, 3_7th, 42nd, 43rd, 48th, Fareons, Deputy Commissary-Gene- 
and 53rd repinenta. ral; M^jorHoi^h, Deputy Advocate- 

t. The principal stafT-officera were General; and Major T. Byrne, As- 
hujor P. Craigie, Deputy Acljutant- sistant Adjutant-General of Queen’a 
General; Major W. Garden, Deputy Trooju. 



SHAH SOOJAH’S FORCE. 


349 


Western A%hanistan; but it had now sunk into a mere 
appendage to the regular army which the Bridsh-Indian 
Government was about to despatch across the Indus; 
and it was plain that, whatever opposition was to be 
encountered, the weight of it would fall; not upon Shah 
Soojah’s raw levies, but upon the disciplined troops of 
the Indian army that were to be sent with them, to 
secure the success of the otherwise doubtful campaign. 
Whatever work there might be in store for them, the 
recruiting went on bravely. For this new service there 
was no lack of candidates in the Upper Provinces of 
India. The Shah himself watched with eager pride the 
formation of the army which was to surround him on his 
return to his own dominions, but was fearful lest the 
undisguised assumption of entire control by the British 
officers appointed to raise his new regiments should de¬ 
prive him of all the kclat of independence with which 
he was so anxious to invest his movements. It was, 
indeed, no easy matter, at this time, to shape our mea¬ 
sures in accordance with the conflicting desires of the old 
King, who wished to have everything done for him, and 
yet to appear as though he did it himself. To Captain 
Wade was entrusted the difficult and delicate duty of 
managing one who, by nature not the most reasonable 
of men, was rendered doubly unreasonable by the ano¬ 
malous position in which he found himself after the rati¬ 
fication of the tripartite treaty. It was difficult, indeed, 
to say what he was at this time. At Loodhianah he had 
hitherto been simply a private individual. He had held 
no recognised position. He had been received with no 
public honours. He had gone hither and thither, almost 
unnoticed. He had excited little interest, and met with 
little attention. Some, perhaps, knew that he had once 
been an A%han monarch, and that he received four 
thousand rupees a month from the British Government 