

Such were the sanguine expectations of Captain 
Burnes, and the very moderate policy which he was 
inclined to recommend, on the presumption that all 
amicable relations with Dost Mahomed had now been 
repudiated by the British Government. The opinions 
of Captain Wade were scarcely less in accordance 
with those which found favour in the Simlah Coimcil- 
Chamber. It had ever been the belief of this officer 

Conunom, in Terifioadon of the aaser- land. That I may not be myself ac- 
tjon that Bumes had recommended cused of garbling, I give the letter 
the course adopted by Lord Auck- entire in we Appendix, 



OPINIONS OP CAPTAIN WADE. 


343 


that the consolidation of A%hauistan would prove 
injurious to British interests. He had insisted that it 
was the wisest policy to support the existing rulers, and 
to encourage the disunion among them. Of Dost Ma¬ 
homed, personally. Captain Wade entertained no favor¬ 
able opinion. He undeixated both the character of the 
man and his influence over his countrymen; but so little 
was he disposed to counsel the subversion of the existing 
rule in A^liauistan, that he was always willing to 
endeavour to bring about an arrangement with Dost 
Mahomed, by recommending Runjeet Singh to accept 
the overtures of the Ameer.* It was his opinion, that if 
the consolidation of the country were to be attempted at 
all, it would be more expedient to support the claims of 
Shah Soojah than of Dost Mahomed; but he regarded 
the restoration of the Shah only as a last resort, and 
would rather have seen the Barukzye chiefs left quietly 
in their own possessions. Indeed, in the very letter of 
the 1st of January, 1838, on which so much stress has 
been laid. Captain Wade, even in the printed version, 
says: “Shah Soojah’s recognition could only, however, 
be justifled or demanded of us, in the event of the prostra¬ 
tion of Herat to the Persian Government;” and in the 
unprinted portion of this letter the writer says: “ I can 
see nothing in the state of parties at present in the 
Punjaub to deter us from pursuing a line of policy” (in 

With reference to the final oiTers more reasonable than his former over- 
of Dost Mahomed to hold Feshawur, tures, though the Maharajah’s opinion 
conjointly with Sultan Mahomed, of their operation on the Peshawmr 
tributary to Lahore (Jubbar Khan branch ot the family remains to be 
acting as the Ameer's representative), (hsclosed. 1 am ready, with the sane* 
Captain Wade wrote: “ They seem tion of the Governor-General, to 
to be in some accordance with the communicate the proposition now 
overture made by Bunjeet Sin^h made to Runjeet Sing^ and to sup- 
to Dost Mahomed before Captain port by every argument that I can 
Bumes's arrival at Caubul, as re- use the expediency of its acceptance 
ported in my despatch of the 8th of by him .”—{Captain Wade to Afr. 
Angost last, and appear, as far as I Macnaghten^ March 3, 1838.] 
can ju^e of them at present, to be 



344 


THE SIlfLAH SIAKIFESTO. 