

Mahomed were gone over and re- whether this letter has ever been 
ported, from notes taken down at the made public from any private souroe. 
time, by the Fakir to the Maharajah. Like almost ever 3 rthmg else relating 
Runjeet declared himself very grate- to the proceedings at Lahore and 
ful for this information; and sent Loodhiamdi in June and July, 1830, 
again to ask Bumes to tell him, not it was studiously suppressed by go* 
as a public functionary, but as a pri- vemment. 

vate friend, whether the restoration ♦ To Mr. Macnaghten^ June2^ 1838. 



OPINIONS OP CAPTAIN BURNES. 


341 


at Caubul. Captain Wade had declared his conviction 
that the disunion of the Afghan chiefs was an element 
of security to the British; but this opinion Burnes con¬ 
troverted, and pronounced himself in favour of the con¬ 
solidation of the A%han Empire. “ As things stand,” 
he wrote, “ I maintain that it is the best of all policy to 
make Caubul in itself as strong as we can make it, and 
not weaken it by divided forces. It has already been 
too long divided. Caubul owed its strength in bygoii^ 
days to the tribute of Cashmere and Sindh. Both are 
irrecoverably gone, and while we do all we can to keep 
up the Sikhs, as a power east of the Indus, during the 
Maharajah’s life or afterwards, we should consolidate 
Afghan power west of the Indus, and have a king, and 
not a collection of chiefs. Divide et impera is a tem¬ 
porising creed at any time; and if the Afghans are 
united, we and they bid defiance to Persia, and instead 
of distant relations wo have everything under our 
eye, and a steadily progressing influence all along the 
Indus.” 

Such were the general views that Burnes enunciated, 
in the knowledge that the Simlah Cabinet had deter¬ 
mined on the deposition of Dost Mahomed. In fulfil¬ 
ment of the object thus contemplated, he recommended 
that the empire should be consolidated under Shah 
Soojah, rather than under Sultan Mahomed or any 
other chief. He believed that the restoration of the ex 
Eiing could be accomplished with the greatest facility, 
at a very trifling expenditure of the resources and dis¬ 
play of the power of the British Government. “ As 
for Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, personally,”* he wrote, “ the 

* Burnes had originally written, quote the passages in the text from 
** Of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, per- a copy, the accuracy of which is cer- 
sonally, I have, that is as ex-King of tihed by two Justices of the Peace 
the Afghans, no very high opinion f* at Bombay. This letter was cited by 
but he had scored out tuc words. 1 Sir John Hobhouse in the House of 



842 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


Britisli Government have only to send him to Peshawur 
vrith an agent, and two of its own regiments as an 
honorary escort, and an avowal to the A%han8 that we 
have taken up his cause, to ensure his being fixed for 
ever on the throne. The present time is perhaps better 
than any previous to it, for the Afghans, as a nation, 
detest Persia, and Dost Mahomed having gone over to 
the Court of Teheran, though he believes it to be from 
dire necessity, converts many a doubting Afg han into a 
bitter enemy. The Maharajah’s opinion has only, there¬ 
fore, to be asked for the ex-King’s advance on Peshawur, 
granting him, at the same time, some four or five of the 
regiments which have no Sikhs in their ranks, and 
Soojah becomes King. He need not move from Pesha¬ 
wur, but address the Khyburrees, Kohistanees of Caubul, 
and all the Afghans from that city, (stating) that he has 
the co-operation of the British and the Maharajah, and 
with but a little distribution of ready money—say, two 
or three lakhs of rupees—he will find himself the real 
King of the Afghans in a couple of months. It is, how¬ 
ever, to be remembered always, that we must appear 
directly, for the Afghans are a superstitious people, and 
believe Shah Soojah to have no fortune—but our name 
will invest him with it.” 