

It is plain that no advice offered by Burnes could 
have had any effect upon the question of the restoration 
of Shah Soojah. Macnaghten, on reaching Adeena- 
nuggur, had determined not to await the arrival of the 
agent from Caubul before stating the views of the 
British Government to Eunjeet Singh. He had, indeed, 
given the Maharajah the option of participating in an ex¬ 
pedition for the restoration of Shah Soojah before he had 
received, either orally or by letter, the recommendations 
of Captain Burnes. When Bumes joined the British 
Mission, our government was irretrievably committed to 
a course of policy which he either might or might not 
have supported. If he had any influence on the future 
out-turn of events, it was rather as the adviser of Eun¬ 
jeet Singhf than as the adviser of the British Mission. 


• Mr. Masson says {Narrative, vol. 
iii., p. 495J that Burnes told him that 
the expedition across the Indus ** had 
been arranged before he reached 
Simlah, and that when he amved 
Torrens and Colvin came running to 
him and prayed him to say nothing to 
unsettle Ids Ii6rdship; that they had 
tdl the trouble in the world to get him 
into the business, and that even now 

Z 


he would be glad of any pretext to 
retire from it.'* I was for a long time, 
very sceptical of the truth of this 
story; and 1 do not now vouch for it. 
But I know that many men, with far 
better opportunities than my own of 
determinmg the authenticity of the 
anecdote, are inclined to believe it. 

t Bunjeet was very anxious to ob¬ 
tain Bumes’s private opinion regard- 

2 



340 


THE S TWnr.AH MANIFESTO. 


The fatal offer had been made to the Maharajah before 
Bumes joined the Mission camp. 

. What Burnes really recommended, as the growth of 
his own free and unfettered opinion was, that the case 
of Dost Mahomed should be reconsidered, and that the 
British Government should act with him and not against 
him. “ It remains to be reconsidered,” he wrote,* “ why 
we cannot act with Dost Mahomed. He is a man of un¬ 
doubted ability, and has at heart a high opinion of the 
British nation; and if half you must do for others were 
done for him, and offers made which he could see con¬ 
duced to his interests, he would abandon Kussia and 
Persia to-morrow. It may be said that opportunity has 
been given him; but I would rather discuss this in per¬ 
son with you, for I think there is much to be said for 
him. Government have admitted that he had at best 
a choice of difficulties; and it should not be forgotten 
that we promised nothing, and Persia and Russia held 
out a great deal.” But Burnes had been asked for his 
advice, not regarding the best means of counteracting 
Persian or Russian influence in Afghanistan, but the 
best means of counteracting Dost Mahomed; and he 
gave it as his opinion, that if Dost Mahomed were to be 
counteracted, the restoration of Shah Soojah was a more 
feasible project than the establishment of Sikh influence 

ing tlic state of politics in Afghanis- of Shah Soojah would be really to 
tan, and the course which it was ex- his advantage. Burnes’s answer was 
pedient for the Maharajah to adopt, in the affirmative; and Runjeet seems 
The Fakir Noor-ood-deen had two to have been, to some extent, in- 
or three conferences with Burnes lluenced by it .—[Captain Bumes to 
upon these points. The whole his- Mr. Macnagliten, Lahore^ June 20<A, 
tory of the negotiations with Dost 1838 : iiecorifo.] Ido not know 