



350 


THE SIBILAH MANIFESTO. 


as a reward for his incapacity and a compensation for his 
bad fortune. Beyond this little was known and nothing 
was cared. But now, suddenly, he had risen up from the 
dust of Loodhianah as a recognised sovereign and framer 
of treaties—a potentate meeting on equal terms with the 
British Government and the Maharajah of the Punjaub. 
He could not any longer be regarded as a mere tradition. 
He had been brought prominently forward into the light 
of the Present; and it was necessary that he should now 
assume in men’s eyes something of the form of royalty 
and the substance of power. 

It was natural that, thus strangely and embarrassingly 
situated, the Shah should have earnestly desired to 
bring his sojourn at Loodhianah to a close, and to 
launch himself fairly upon his new enterprise. The 
interval between the signing of the treaty and the actual 
commencement of the expedition was irksome in the 
extreme to the expectant monarch. It was plain that 
he could not move without his army; he therefore did 
his best to expedite its formation. Constantly attending 
the parade where the work of recruiting was going on, 
he desired personally to superintend both the payment 
and the enlistment of his men; and was fearfiil lest a 
belief should become rooted in the public mind that 
he was not about to return to Afghanistan as an inde¬ 
pendent Prince, ruling his own people on his own ac¬ 
count. The tact and discretion of Captain Wade 
smoothed down all diflSculties. Whilst preventing such 
interference on the part of Shah Soojah as might em¬ 
barrass the movements of the British officers appointed 
to raise and disdpline his regiments, he contrived to 
reconcile the mind of the King to the system in force, by 
directing that certain reports should be made to him on 
parade, and at other times through on appointed agent, 
of the number of men enlisted into his service, and the 



POLITICAL MANAGEMENT OF THE CAMPAIGN. 351 


amount of pay that was due to each.* At the same 
time, it was suggested to the commanding officer of the 
station that, as one entitled to the recc^itions due to 
royalty, the Shah should be saluted by the troops when 
he appeared in public. The suggestion was promptly 
acted upon; and the King, whose inveterate love of forms 
and ceremonies clung to him to the end of his days, re¬ 
joiced in these new demonstrations of respect, and bore 
up till his time of trial was over. 

In the mean while Lord Auckland, having thus mapped 
out a far more extensive scheme of invasion than had 
ever been dreamt of, a few months before, in his most 
speculative moments, was thinking of the agency which 
it was most desirable to employ for the political manage¬ 
ment of the ensuing campaign. It had been determined 
that a British Envoy should accompany Runjeet Singh’s 
army by the Peshawur route, and that another should 
accompany Shah Soqjah’s camp on its march towards the 
western provinces of Afghanistan. There was no diffi¬ 
culty in naming the officer who was to superintend the 
demonstration to be made by the Sikh troops through 
the formidable passes of the Khybur. Captain Wade 
was nominated to this office. He was to be accom¬ 
panied by the eldest son of Shah Soojah, the Prince 
Timour, a man of respectable character, but not very 
brilliant parts, whose presence was to identify the Sikh 
movement with the immediate objects of his father’s 
restoration, and to make obvious to the understandings 
of all men that Runjeet Singh was acting only as Shah 
Soojah’s ally. 