

VOL. L 


recommend for adoption; and whe¬ 
ther you think that the Sikhs, using 
any (and what ?) instrument of Au 
ghan agency, could establish them¬ 
selves in Caubul?’'— [^Masson's Nar¬ 
rative, vol. iii.] A letter, with a si¬ 
milar suggestion, was sent to Captain 
Bumes, of whose reception of the 
project I shall speak more in detail. 
The matter is fisher noti^able as 
an indication of the unwillingness 
of Lord Auckland to interfere more 
actively in the politics of Afghanis¬ 
tan. 



338 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


much to perfect his acquaintance with the tactics and 
strategy of modern warfare. He possessed, indeed, the 
very knowledge which the other members of the Simlah 
Council most wanted; and hence it was that he came to 
exercise considerable influence over Lord Auckland, 
more perhaps through his brother secretaries than 
directly brought to bear upon the mind of the Governor- 
General himself. It was urged that the expedition, if 
entrusted entirely to Shah Soojah and the Sikhs, would 
set in disastrous failure; and there was at least some 
probability in this. Runjeet Singh was no more than 
lukewarm in the cause; and the Sikhs were detested in 
Afghanistan. Lord Auckland shrunk from the respon¬ 
sibility of despatching a British army across the Indus; 
but, warned of the danger of identifying himself with a 
slighter measure promising little certainty of success, he 
halted, for a time, between two opinions, and slowly 
yielded to»the assaults of his scribes. 

There were two other men then on the frontier whose 
opinions Lord Auckland had been naturally desirous to 
obtain. Captain Burnes and Captain Wade were at 
least acquainted with the history and politics of Afghan¬ 
istan, and they had freely placed their sentiments on 
record. It has been advanced that the course of policy 
eventually pursued was in accordance with the views of 
these two officers. It is important, therefore, that it should 
be clearly ascertained what those views actually were. 

On the 20th of July Captain Burnes joined the Simlah 
Council. On the 29th of May, whilst halting at Pesha- 
wur, he had received a letter from Mr. Macnaghten, in¬ 
structing him to proceed at once to join the British 
Mission, and in obedience to the summons had started 
at once on his downward journey. In the middle of 
June he had joined the camp of the British Envoy at 
Lahore, and taken part in the later deliberations which 
had preceded the acceptance by Ruiijcct Singh of the 



OPIKIONS OP CAPTAIN BURNES. 


339 


terms proposed by the British Government; and on the 
departure of the Mission for Loodhianah had proceeded 
to join Lord Auckland and his advisers at Simlah.* 

Bumes had already placed his opinions on record. 
At Hussan Abdool he had received Macnaghten’s letter 
calling upon him for his views regarding the best means 
of counteracting the hostile influence of the Barukzye 
chiefs, and on the 2nd of June he had despatched a long 
demi-ofEcial letter, stating the policy which, under the 
then existing circumstances, he conceived it expedient to 
adopt, “ not,” in his own emphatic words, “ what was 
best; but what was best imder the circumstances, which 
a series of blunders had produced.” 