

It is obvious that, in all the negotiations detailed in the 
preceding chapter, the paramount idea was that of an 
alliance between Runjeet Singh and Shah Soojah, gua¬ 
ranteed by the British Government, and a conjoint ex¬ 
pedition into Afghanistan from the two sides of Pesha- 
wur and Shikarpoor, to be undertaken by the armies of 
the Lahore ruler and the Suddozye Prince. It was hinted 
to Runjeet Singh that events might be developed, which 
would render necessary the more active co-operation of 
the British army; but Shah Soojah, who was desirous 
above all things that the British should not take the 
foremost part in the coming expedition, was led to be¬ 
lieve that, assisted by a few British officers, he would be 
left to recover for himself his old dominions, and that 
he would by no means become a puppet in the hands of 
his Feringhee allies.* 

* It was, as I have shown, the first ed, the invasion of Afghanistan (see 
wish of the Governor-General that the Lord Auckland's Minute and instruc- 
Sikhs should undertake, single-hand- tions to Mr. Macnaghten in the pre- 



VIEWS OF THE OOVBBMOR-OENEBAI.. 


387 


But these moderate views were about now to be ex¬ 
panded into a political scheme of far wider scope and 
significance. Whilst Macnaghten was negotiating the tri¬ 
partite treaty at Lahore and Loodhianah, John Colvin 
and Henry Torrens remained at Simlah, as the scribes and 
counsellors of the Governor-General. To what extent 
their bolder speculations wrought upon the plastic mind 
of Lord Auckland it is not easy, with due historical 
accuracy, to determine. But it is generally conjectured 
that the influences then set at work overcame the 
scruples of the cautious and peace-loving statesman, and 
induced him to sanction an enterprise of a magnitude 
commensurate with the bold and ambitious views of his 
irresponsible advisers. The direct influence mainly 
emanated from John Colvin. It is probable, indeed, 
that the counsels of a man so young and so erratic as 
Henry Torrens would have met with no acceptance from 
the sober-minded nobleman at the head of thp govern¬ 
ment, but for a circumstance which gave weight to his 
opinions and cogency to his advice. By all the accidents 
of birth and early associations, as well as by the bent of 
his own genius, the young civilian was a true soldier. 
The son of a distinguished officer and an approved mili¬ 
tary teacher, he had graduated, whilst yet a boy, in 
the learning of the camp, and his after studies had done 


ceding chapter). Macnaghten, on his 
way to Runieet’s Court, wrote to Mr. 
Masson: “You will have heard that 
I am proceeding on a mission to 
Runjeet Singh; and as at my inter¬ 
view with his Highness it is probable 
that the question of his relations with 
the Afghans will come on the 
I am naturally desirous of obtaining 
the opinion of the best-informed men 
with respect to them. Would you 
oblige me, therefore, by stating what 
means of counteraction to the policy 
of Dost Mahomed Khan you would 