


A%lianistati) “every way consistent with our engage¬ 
ments, our reputation, and our interests—viz., that of 
recognising the present holders of power, and discourag¬ 
ing any ambitious schemes of one party to the detriment 
of another.” And in conclusion. Captain Wade sums up 
what he believes to be the true policy of the British, 
declaring that “ if Dost Mahomed is kept, as he now is, 
at Caubul, whether as a Governor of the province, under 
Shah Soojah, or in independence of him, and Peshawur 
be restored to Sultan Mahomed, or remain as at present, 
we might not only be safe from disturbances, or any 
sudden inroads from the western powers, but be enabled 
to secure the integrity of the Sikh nation as far as the 
Indus, and would mould these people and their already 
more than half-disciplined troops to our wishes.”* 
Captain Wade over-estimated the popularity of Shah 
Soojah. He was in constant receipt of information to the 
effect that the Douranecs and other tribes were eager for 
his return; and he did not, perhaps, sufficiently consider 
that the Afghans always long for what they have not, 
and arc seldom unripe for revolution. But although he 
believed it would be safer to attempt to re-establish the 
integrity of Afghanistan under Shah Soojah than under 
Dost Mahomed, he thought that it would be better policy 
still to leave untouched the disunion and antagonism of 
the Barukzye Sirdars. 

Such, read by the light of their immutilated de¬ 
spatches, were the genuine opinions of Burnes and Wade. 
But the Simlah Council had more ambitious views, and 
were disposed towards more extensive plans of opera¬ 
tion. First one project, then another, had been dis¬ 
cussed. It had been debated, firstly, whether the move¬ 
ment on Candahar could be undertaken by the Shah’s 

* Captain WadetoMr,Macnaghien: have been garbled almost as shame- 
MS, Records, Captain Wade’s letters lessly as Captain Burnes’s. 



SIR HENBT FANE. 


345 


raw levies, supported only, as originally intended, by a 
British army of reserve at Shikaipoor; and secondly, 
whether some two or three regiments of British troops 
would not be sufficient to escort the Shah’s army into 
the heart of his old dominions. Both of these projects 
were abandoned. 

Sir Henry Fane was at this time commander-in-chief 
of the British forces in India. He had pitched his tent 
at Simlah, and was in ffiequent consultation with the 
Grovernor-Greneral. He was a fine old soldier of the Tory 
school, with very strong opinions regarding the general 
“ shabbiness” of all Whig doings, and a strenuous dis¬ 
like of half-measures, especially in military affairs. It is 
believed that he did not approve of the general policy 
of British interference in the affairs of Afghanistan, but 
he was entirely of opinion that it was the duty of 
government, in the conjuncture that had arisen, either 
not to interfere at all, or to interfere yi such a manner 
as to secure the success of our operations. Always by 
nature inclined towards moderate measures, the Go¬ 
vernor-General for some time resisted the urgent recom¬ 
mendations of those who spoke of the formation of a 
grand army, drawn from our own regular establishment, 
to be headed by the commander-in-chief in person, and 
marched upon Candahar, perhaps upon Herat itself. 
But Lord Auckland was never the most resolute of men. 
His own confidential advisers had long been endeavour¬ 
ing to convince him of the necessity of adopting more 
vigorous measures. The commander-in-chief was not 
only recommending such measures, but insisting upon 
his right, as the first military authority in the country, 
to determine the number of British troops to be em¬ 
ployed, and the manner of their employment. And the 
ministers of the Crown, fortified by the knowledge that 
the expenses of the war would fall upon the treasury 