



B46 


THE 8IMLAH MANIFESTO. 


of the East India Company, and that they would not 
be called by the British people to account for any ex¬ 
penditure, however lavish, upon remote warlike opera- 
^ns, which the public might easily be persuaded to re¬ 
gard as the growth of the most consummate wisdom, 
were exhorting Lord Auckland to adopt effectual mea¬ 
sures for the counteraction of Bussian intrigue and 
Persian hostility in the countries of Afghanistan. So, 
after some weeks of painful oscillation. Lord Auckland 
yielded his own judgment to the judgment of others, 
and an order went forth for the assembling of a grand 
army on the frontier, to be set in motion early in the 
coming cold weather, in support of Shah Soojah and 
his levies; to cross the Indus; and to march upon Can- 
dahar. 

In August, the regiments selected by the commander- 
in-chief were warned for field-service, and on the 13th 
of September ho published a general order, brigading 
the different components of the force, naming the staff- 
oflicers appointed, and ordering the whole to rendezvous 
at Eurnaul. The reports, which all through the dry 
summer months had been flitting about from cantonment 
to cantonment, and making the pulses of military aspirants, 
old and young, beat rapidly with the fever of expectancy, 
now took substantial shape; and everywhere the ap¬ 
proaching expedition became the one topic of conversa¬ 
tion. Peace had reigned over India for so many years, 
that the excitement of the coming contest was as novel 
as it was inspiriting. There was not an officer in the 
army who did not long to join the invading force; and 
many from the distant Presidency, or from remote pro¬ 
vincial stations, leaving the quiet staff-appointments 
which had lapped them long in ease and luxury, rushed 
upwards to join their regiments. Even in that un- 
propitious season of the year, when the country was 



rOBMATION OF THE OBANS ABMT. 


347 


flooded by the periodical rains, corps were set in motion 
towards Kumaul, flrom stations as low down as Be¬ 
nares, and struggled manfully, often through wide sheets 
of water, to their destination at the great northern 
rallying point. There had been no such excitement in 
military circles since the grand army assembled for the 
reduction of Bhurtpore; and though the cause was not 
a popular one, and there was scarcely a mess-table in 
the country at which the political bearings of the inva¬ 
sion of Afghanistan were discussed without eliciting the 
plainest possible indications that the sympathies of our 
officers were rather with the Barukzye chief than the 
Suddozye monarch, there was everywhere the liveliest 
desire to join the ranks of an army that was to traverse 
new and almost fabulous regions, and visit the scenes 
rendered famous by the exploits of Mahmoud of Ghuzni 
and Nadir Shah. 

The army now warned for field-service consisted of 
a brigade of artillery, a brigade of cavalry, and five 
brigades of infantry. Colonel Graham was to command 
the artillery j Colonel Arnold the cavalry j whilst the 
brigades of infantry were assigned respectively to Colo¬ 
nels Sale and Dennis, of the Queen’s; and Colonels Nott, 
Roberts, and Worseley, of the Company’s, service. The 
infantry brigades were told off" into two divisions under 
Sir Willoughby Cotton, an old and distinguished officer 
of the Queen’s army, who had rendered good service 
in the Burmese war, and was now commanding the 
Presidency division of the Bengal army, and Major- 
General Duncan, an esteemed officer of the Company’s 
service, who was then in command of the Sirhind 
division of the army, and was therefore on the spot to 
take the immediate management of details. 