

Various points have been adjusted, which had been the subjects 



THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


359 


of discussion between the British Government and his Highness 
the Maharajah, the identity of whose interests with those of the 
Honourable Company has now been made apparent to all the sur¬ 
rounding States. A guaranteed independence will, upon favor¬ 
able conditions, be tendered to the Ameers of Sindh, and the 
integrity of Herat, in the possession of its present ruler, will be 
fully respected; while by the measures completed, or in progress, 
it may reasonably be hoped that the general freedom and security 
of commerce will be promoted; that the name and just influence 
of the British Government will gain their proper footing among 
the nations of Central Asia; that tranquillity will be established 
upon the most important frontier of India; and that a lasting 
barrier will be raised against hostile intrigue and encroachment. 

His Majesty Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk will enter Afghanistan 
surrounded by his own troops, and will be supported against 
foreign interference and factious opposition by a British army. 
The Governor-General confidently hopes that the Shah will be 
speedily replaced on his throne by his own subjects and adhe¬ 
rents ; and when once he shall be secured in power, and the inde¬ 
pendence and integrity of Afghanistan established, the British 
army will be withdrawn. The Governor-General has been led to 
these measures by the duty which is imposed upon him of pro¬ 
viding for the security of the possessions of the British Crown; but 
he rejoices that, in the discharge of his duty, he will be enabled 
to assist in restoring the union and prosperity of the Afghan 
people. Throughout the approaching operations, British influ¬ 
ence will be sedulously employed to further every measure of 
general benefit, to reconcile differences, to secure oblivion of 
injuries, and to put an end to the distractions by which, for so 
many years, the welfare and happiness of the Afghans have been 
impaired. Even to the chiefs, whose hostile proceedings have 
given just cause of offence to the British Government, it will seek 
to secure liberal and honourable treatment, on their tendering 
early submission, and ceasing from opposition to that course of 
measures which may be judged the most suitable for the general 
advantage of their country. 

By order of the Right Hon. Governor-General of India, 

W. H. Magnaghten, 

Secretary to the Goyemmeat of In<Ua, with the 
Govemor-General. 



360 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


NOTIFICATION. 

With reference to the preceding Declaration, the following ap¬ 
pointments are made:—Mr. W. H. Macnaghten, Secretary to 
Government, will assume the functions of Envoy and Minister on 
the part of the Government of India at the Court of Shah Soojah- 
oohMoolk. Mr. Macnaghten will be assisted by the following 
officers:—Captain A. Burnes, of the Bombay establishment, who 
will be employed, under Mr. Macnaghten’s directions, as Envoy 
to the Chief of Kelat, or other States; Lieutenant E. d’Arcy 
Todd, Bengal Artillery, to be Political Assistant and Military 
Secretary to the Envoy and Minister; Lieutenant Eldred Pottin- 
ger, Bombay Artillery; Lieutenant R. Leech, of the Bombay 
Engineers; Mr. P. B. Lord, of the Bombay Medical Establish¬ 
ment, to be Political Assistants to ditto, ditto; Lieutenant E. B. 
Conolly, 6th Bengal Cavalry, to command the escort of the Envoy 
and Minister, and to be Military Assistant to ditto, ditto; Mr. G. 
J. Berwick, of the Bengal Medical Establishment, to be Surgeon 
to ditto, ditto. 