

The comments which might be made in this place on 
Lord Auckland’s Simlah manifesto have been, for the 
most part, anticipated. How far Dost Mahomed “ per¬ 
sisted in using the most unreasonable pretensions,” and 
“ avowed schemes of aggrandisement and ambition, in¬ 
jurious to the security and peace of the frontiers of 
India,” I have shown in a former chapter. I have 
shown, too, how far the best authorities were of opinion 
that the Barukzye Sirdars were “ ill-fitted, under any 
circumstances, to be useful allies to the British.”* Little 
comment is called for beyond that involved in the recital 
of these facts, the studious suppression of which by the 
government of the day is the best proof of the im¬ 
portance attached to them.f 


* The facts may be briefly repeat¬ 
ed in a note, M‘ij'eill recommended 
the consolidation of Afghanistan un¬ 
der Dost Mahomed. Burncs recom¬ 
mended the same course. Wade re¬ 
commended the government to rely 
upon the disunion of the Barukzye 
Sirdars, and was opposed to consoli¬ 
dation of any kind. 

t The responsibility of this fhmous 
manifesto belongs to Lord Auckland, 
though some of nis colleagues in the 
government at home have declared 
toemselves willing to share it with 
him. Sir John Hobhouse, in 1850, 
told the Ofliciel Salaries Committee, 
in reply to a question on the subject 
of the Afghan war, that he did it 
himself;^* and so far as the announce¬ 
ment went entirely to acquit the East 
India Company of taking part in the 


origination of the war, it is to be 
accepted as a laudable revelation of 
the truth; but although Lord Pal¬ 
merston and Sir John xiobhouse saw 
the expediency of extricating the 
British Government from the diffi¬ 
culties into which the conduct of 
Mahomed Shah had thrown them, by 
encouraging a demonstration from 
the side of India, the expenses of 
which would be thrown upon the 
Indian exchequer, they are to be re¬ 
garded rather as accessories after, 
than before, the fact. The truth is, 
that Lord Auckland had determined 
on the course of policy to be pursued, 
not before the India Board despatches 
were written, but before they were 
received. Sir John Hobhouse stated 
in the House of Commons (June 23, 
1842) that Lord Auckland must not 



OPUIIONg AT BOMB. 


868 


The oldest, the most experieoced, wd the most 
sagacious Indian politicians were of opinion that the ex¬ 
pedition, though it might be attended at the outset with 
some delusive success, would close in disaster and dis¬ 
grace. Among those who most emphatically disapproved 
of the movement and predicted its failure, were the Duke 
of Wellington, Lord Wellesley, Mountstuart Elphinstone, 
Mr. Edmonstone, and Sir Charles Metcalfe.* The Court 


bear the blame of the measure; it 
was the policy of government; and 
he might mention Siat the despatch 
which he wrote, stating his opinion 
of the course that ought to be taken 
in order to meet expected emergen¬ 
cies, and that written by Lord Auck¬ 
land, informing him that the expedi¬ 
tion had already been undertaken, 
crossed each other on the way.” 
When the Whig ministry went out 
of office in the spring of 1839, it 
was believed that the Peel cabinet 
would repudiate the Simlah mani¬ 
festo, and direct a considerable modi¬ 
fication of the measures which were 
to follow the declaration of war. The 
bedchamber emeuie arrested the for¬ 
mation of the Peel ministry; and it 
was mainly to serve Lord Auckland, 
and to escape the disgrace of a public 
reversal of their Indian policy, that 
the Whigs again took the reins of 