

and to take me with him, and I am 
highly obliged for his appreciation.” 
-^mvate Correspondence of Sir A. 
Bumes: MS.^ 



APPOINTMENT OF ME. MACNAGHTBN. 353 

wished to take Burnes with him as his confidential 
adviser. But this plan met with little or no encourage¬ 
ment. The Governor- General appreciated Bumes’s 
talents, but mistrusted his discretion. He thought it 
advisable to place at the stirrup of Shah Soojah an older 
head and a steadier hand. Men, who at this time 
watched calmly the progress of events, and had no pre¬ 
judices and predilections to gratify, and no personal 
objects to serve, thought that the choice of the Governor- 
General would fall upon Colonel Henry Pottinger, who 
had been familiar from early youth with the countries 
beyond the Indus, ancj was now in charge of our political 
relations with the Court of Hyderabad, in Sindh. But 
Lord Auckland had no personal knowledge of Colonel 
Pottinger. There was little identity of opinion between 
them; and the Governor-General recognised the expe¬ 
diency of appointing to such an office a functionary 
with whom he had been in habitual intercourse, who 
was necessarily, therefore, conversant with his views, 
and who would not scruple to carry them out to the 
utmost. 

The choice fell on Mr. Macnaghten. It seems, at one 
time, to have been the design of the Governor-General 
to associate this gentleman with the Commander-in- 
Chief, in a kind of commission for the management of 
our political relations throughout the coming expedi¬ 
tion ;* but this idea seems to have been abandoned. It 
•was finally determined that Mr. W. H. Macnaghten 
should be gazetted as “ Envoy and Minister on the part 
of the Government of India at the Court of Shah 
Soojah-ool-Moolk.” And at the same time it was resolved 
that Captain Burnes should be employed, “ under Mr. 
Macnaghten’s directions, as Envoy to the chief of Kelat 
or other states.” It was believed, at this time, that Shah 

* See Burnes’s correspondence, quoted in a preceding note. 

VOL. I. 2 A 



854 


THE 8IMLAH MANIFEBTO. 


Soojah having been reseated on the throne, Macnaghten 
•would return to Hindostan, leaving Burnes at Caubul, 
as the permanent representative of the British-Indian 
Government at the Court of the Shah. It "was this belief 
that reconciled Burnes to the subordinate office which 
was conferred upon him in the first instance, and made 
him set about the work entrusted to his charge with all 
the zeal and enthusiasm which were so conspicuous in 
his character.* 

And so Burnes was sent on in advance to smooth the 
way for the progress of the Shah through Sindh, whilst 
Macnaghten remained at Simlah to assist the Governor- 
General in the preparation of the great official manifesto 
which was to declare to all the nations of the East 
and of the West the grounds upon which the British 
Government had determined to destroy the power of 
the Barukzye Sirdars, and to restore Shah Soojah-ool- 
Moolk to the throne of his ancestors. 