

But it is stated in the manifesto itself that the war 
was undertaken “ with the concurrence of the Supreme 
Council of India.” It would be presumptuous to affirm 
the absolute untruth of a statement thus publicly made 
in the face of the world by a nobleman of Lord Auck- 

enough to make us unpopular, the dated September 20, 1837, there oc- 
connexiou with Runjeet and our curs this remarkable passage : — 
guarantee ofhis conquests must make “With respect to the states west of 
us detested. These opinions formed the Indus, you have uniformly ob- 
at a distance may seem absurd on the served the proper course, which is to 
spot; but I still retain them notwith- have no political connexion with any 
standing all I have yet heard.'’— state or party in those regions, to 
[3f5. CorrespondenceJ] t^e no part in their quarrels, but to 

* In a despatch from the Court of maintain so far as possible a friendly 
Directors to the Governor-General, connexion with all of them,” 



KETTBEMENT op the PERSIAN ABUT. 


365 


land’s unquestionable integrity; but so certain is it that 
the manifesto was not issued with the concurrence of the 
Supreme Council, that when the document was sent down 
to Calcutta to take its place among the records of the 
empire, there issued from the Council-Chamber a respect¬ 
ful remonstrance against the consummation of a measure 
of such grave importance, without an opportunity being 
afforded to the counsellors of recording their opinions 
upon it. The remonstrance went to England, and elicited 
an assurance to the effect that the Governor-Greneral 
could have intended no personal slight to the members 
of the Supreme Council; but those members were far 
too high-minded to have thought for a moment about 
the personalities of the case; they thought only of the 
great national interests at stake, and regretted that they 
should ever be jeopardised by such disregard of the 
opinions of the Governor-General’s legitimate advisers. 
Such a manifesto as this would never have been cradled 
in Calcutta. 

It would not be just, however, to scrutinise the policy 
of Lord Auckland at this time by the light of our after 
experience. We know now that before the Simlah mani¬ 
festo was barely incubated, the Persians had raised the 
siege of Herat,—that, for all purposes of defence against 
encroachments from the westward, the expedition to Kur- 
rack, contemptible as it was in itself, had sufficed. We 
know that the handful of “ rotten Hindoos,” as Maho¬ 
med Shah subsequently designated them, magnified by 
report into an immense armament, had caused that 
monarch to strike his camp before Herat, and march 
back his baffled army to Teheran. But, on the 1st of 
October, 1838, Lord Auckland believed, and had good 
grounds for believing, that the fall of Herat was inevi¬ 
table. At this time it may have been questioned whe¬ 
ther the restoration of Shah Soojah to the sovereignty 



THE SIULAH MANIEESTO. 


of the Douranee Empire were the best means of resisting 
Persian aggression and combating Russian intrigue, but 
few doubted the propriety of doing something to meet 
the dangers that threatened us from these sources. Had 
Herat fallen to the Persian arms, the Barukzye Sirdars, 
without some intervention on our part, would have 
prostrated themselves at the feet of the Persian monarch; 
and Russia would have established an influence in Af¬ 
ghanistan which we should have striven in vain to 
coimteract. There was a real danger, therefore, to be 
feared. Though the means employed were of doubtful 
justice and expediency, the end to be accomplished was 
one of legitimate attainment. 