

2 a2 



356 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


ship would exert his good offices with his Highness for the resto¬ 
ration of an amicable understanding between the two powers. 
The Maharajah, with the characteristic confidence which he has 
uniformly placed in the faith and friendship of the British nation, 
at once assented to the proposition of the Governor-General, to 
the effect that, in the mean time, hostilities on his part should be 
suspended. 

It subsequently came to the knowledge of the Governor- 
General, that a Persian army was besieging Herat; that intrigues 
were actively prosecuted throughout Afghanistan, for the purpose 
of extending Persian influence and authority to the banks of, and 
even beyond, the Indus; and that the Court of Persia had not 
only commenced a course of injury and insult to the officers of 
her Majesty’s Mission in the Persian territory, but had afforded 
evidence of being engaged in designs wholly at variance with 
the principles and objects of its alliance with Great Britain. 

After much time spent by Captain Burnes in fruitless negotia¬ 
tion at Caiibul, it appeared that Dost Mahomed Khan, chiefly in 
consequence oi’ his reliance upon Persian encouragement and 
assistance, persisted, as respected his misunderstanding with the 
Sikhs, in urging the most unreasonable pretensions, such as the 
Governor-General could not, consistently with justice and his 
regard for the Irlendship of Maharajah Runjeet Singh, be the 
channel of submitting to the consideration of his Highness; that 
he avowed schemes of aggrandisement and ambition injurious to 
the security and peace of the frontiers of India; and that he 
openly threatened, in furtherance of those schemes, to call in 
every foreign aid which he could command. Ultimately he gave 
his undisguised support to the Persian designs in Afghanistan, of 
the unfriendly and injurious character of which, as concerned the 
British power in India, he was well apprised, and by his utter 
disregard of the views and interests of the British Government, 
compelled Captain Burnes to leave Caubul without having effected 
any of the objects of his mission. 

It was now evident that no further interference could be^ exer¬ 
cised by the British Government to bring about a good under¬ 
standing between the Sikh ruler and Dost Mahomed Khan, and 
the hostile policy of the latter chief showed too plainly that, so 
long as Caubul remained under his government, we could never 



THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


357 


hope that the tranquillity of our neighbourhood would be secured, 
or that the interests of our Indian Empire would be preserved 
inviolate. 

The Governor-General deems it in this place necessary to re¬ 
vert to the siege of Herat, and the conduct of the Persian nation. 
The siege of that city has now been carried on by the Persian 
army for many months. The attack upon it was a most unjusti¬ 
fiable and cruel aggression, perpetrated and continued, notwith¬ 
standing the solemn and repeated remonstrances of the British 
Envoy at the Court of Persia, and after every just and becom¬ 
ing ofier of accommodation had been made and rejected. The 
besieged have behaved with a gallantry and fortitude worthy of 
the justice of their cause; and the Governor-General would yet 
indulge the hope that their heroism may enable them to main¬ 
tain a successful defence, until succours shall reach them from 
British India. In the mean time, the ulterior designs of Persia, 
affecting the interests of the British Government, have been, by 
a succession of events, more and more openly manifested. The 
Governor-General has recently ascertained by an official despatch 
from Mr. M‘Neill, her Majesty’s Envoy, that his Excellency has 
been compelled, by a refusal of his just demands, and by a sys¬ 
tematic course of disrespect adopted towards him by the Per¬ 
sian Government, to quit the Court of the Shah, and to make a 
public declaration of the cessation of all intercourse between the 
two Governments. The necessity under which Great Britain is 
placed of regarding the present advance of the Persian arras into 
Afghanistan as an act of hostility towards herself, has also been 
officially communicated to the Shah, under the express order of 
her Majesty’s Government. 