

But it was not so easy to determine to whom should 
be entrusted the difficult and responsible duty of direct¬ 
ing the mind of Shah Soojah, and shaping, in all beyond 

* Captain Wade to Mr* Macnaghten^ Loodhianahj September 23rcf, 1838: 
MS* Records. 



THE smi^ MAIHEESTO. 


352 

i 

the immediate line of military operations, the course of 
this great campaign. It seemed at first that the claims 
of Alexander Bumes could not be set aside. No man 
knew the country and the people so well; no man had 
so fairly earned the right to be thus employed. But it 
soon appeared to Bumes himself, sanguine as he was, 
that Lord Auckland designed to place him in a subordi¬ 
nate position; and chafing under what appeared to him a 
slight and an injustice, he declared that he would either 
take the chief place in the British Mission, or go home to 
England in disgust.* But these feelings soon passed 
away. ^ It had been debated whether the chief political 
control should not be placed in the* hands of the com¬ 
mander-in-chief; and Sir Henry Fane, naturally favouring 
an arrangement which would have left him free to act 
as his own judgment or his own impulses might dictate. 


* “ We are now planning a grand 
campaign/* he wrote on the 22nd of 
Julj, “to restore the Shah to the 
throne of Caubul—llussia having 
come down upon us. What exact 
part I am to play I know not, but if 
full confidence and hourly consulta¬ 
tion be any pledge, I am to be chief. 
I can plainly tell them that it is aut 
Ccesar aut nullus, and if I get not 
what I have a right to, you will soon 
see me en route to England.** On 
the 23rd of August he wrote : “ Of 
myself I cannot tell you what is to 
become. The commander-in-chief 
wants to go and to take me—but this 
will not be, and 1 believe the chief 
and Macnaghten will be made a 
commission—Wade and myself poli¬ 
tical agents under them. I plainly 
told Lord Auckland that this does 
not please, and I am disappointed. 
He replied that I could scarcely be 
appointed with the chief in equality, 
and pledged himself to leave me in¬ 
dependent quickly, and in the high¬ 
est appointment. What can I do 
when he tells me I am a man he cannot 


spare. It is an honour, not a disgrace 
to go under Sir Henry; and as for 
Macnaghten, he is secretary for all 
India, and goes pro tern. Besides, I 
am not sorry to see Dost Mahomed 
ousted by another hand than mine.*’ 
—[PnVflfc Correspondence of Sir A. 
Burnes,'] These fetters were written 
to his brother. In another letter 
addressed to Captain Duncan, also 
on the 23rd of August, Bumes wrote : 
“ Of my own destinies, even, I cannot 
as yet give an account. I go as a 
Political Agent with the Shah, but 
whether as the Political Agent re¬ 
mains to be seen. I find I bask in 
favour, but Sir Henry Fane is to go, 
and he must be the Agent; but it is 
even hinted that they will place a 
civilian with him, and employ me in 
advance. Be it so. 1 succeed to the 
permanent employ sdter all is over. 
. . . . The chief wishes to go 