

W. H. Macnaghten, 

Secretary to the Government of India, with the 
Governor-General. 


It was not to be supposed that such a manifesto as 
this could be published in every newspaper in India and 
in Europe, and circulated, in an Oriental dress, throughout 
all the states of Hindostan and the adjoining countries, 
without provoking the keenest and the most searching 
criticism. In India there is, in reality, no public; but if 
such a name can be given to the handful of English 
gentlemen who discuss with little reserve the affairs of 
the government under which they live, the public looked 
askance at it—doubting and questioning its truth. The 
press seized upon it and tore it to pieces.* There was 
not a sentence in it that was not dissected with an un¬ 
sparing hand. If it were not pronounced to be a collec- 

* I do not^ mean that the entire time, it had very few genuine sup- 
pren of_ India and England con- porters; and I know that now it has 
demned it; but I believe that, at the fewer still. 



ITS POLICY CONSIDERED. 


361 


tion of absolute falsehoods, it was described as a most 
disingenuous distortion of the truth. In India every 
war is more or less popular. The constitution of Anglo- 
Indian society renders it almost impossible that it 
should be otherwise. But many, who rejoiced in the 
prospect before them, wished that they were about to 
draw their swords in a better cause; and openly criticised 
the Governor-General’s declaration, whilst they could not 
bring themselves to wish it unwritten. 

Had the relief of Herat been the one avowed object of 
the expedition, a war now to be undertaken for that 
purpose would have had many^more supporters. The 
movement might have been a wise, or it might have been 
an unwise one; but it would have been an intelligible, 
straightforward movement, with nothing equivocal about 
it. It would have been addressed to the counteraction 
of a real, or supposed danger, and would have been 
plainly justifiable as a measure of self-defence. But it 
was not equally clear that because Mahomed Shah made 
war upon Herat, England was justified in making war 
upon Dost Mahomed. The siege of Herat and the 
failure of the Caubul Mission were mixed up together in 
Lord Auckland’s manifesto; but with all his own and his 
secretary’s ingenuity, his Lordship could not contrive, 
any more than I have contrived in this narrative, to make 
the two events hang together by any other than the 
slenderest thread. It was believed at this time that 
Herat would fall; and that Candahar and Caubul would 
then make their obeisance to Mahomed Shah. But we 
had ourselves alienated the friendship of the Barukzye 
Sirdars. They had thrown themselves into the arms of 
the Persian King, only because we had thrust them off. 
We had forced them into an attitude of hostility which 
they were unwilling to assume; and had ourselves ag¬ 
gravated the dangers which we were now about to face 



m 


THE SCAKIFESTO. 


on %he western frontier of A^hanistan. That in the 
summer of 1838, there existed a state of things calling 
for active measures on the part of the British Govern¬ 
ment is not to be denied; but I believe it to be equally 
undeniable that this state of things was mainly induced 
by the feebleness of our own policy towards the Barukzye 
Sirdars. 