

f overnment. After this. Sir John 
[obhouse never neglected an oppor¬ 
tunity of publicly identifying him¬ 
self with Lord Auckland’s policy, 
and was not deterred, even by the 
disastrous termination of the war, 
from boasting that he was the author 
of it. 

* The Duke of Wellington said 
that our difficulties would commence 
where onr military successes ended. 
Lord Wellesley always spoke con¬ 
temptuously of the folly of occupy¬ 
ing a land of rocks, sands, deserts, 
ice and snow.” Sir Charles Metcalfe 
from the first protested against Lord 
Auckland’s measures with respect 
to the trade of the Indus; and in 


1835-36, when Mr. Ellis’s proposal 
to assist Dost Mahomed with British 
officers and drill-instructors to disci¬ 
pline his army (anpage 156), came 
down to Calcutta, said, one day after 
council, “ Depend upon it, the surest 
way to bring llussia down upon our¬ 
selves is for us to cross the Indus and 
meddle with the countries beyond it.” 
Mr. Edmonstone always hung down 
his head, and almost groaned aloud, 
when the Afghan expedition was 
named; and Mr. Elphin stone wrote in 
a private letter: “ You will guess what 
I think of afiairs in Caubul. You re¬ 
member when I used to dispute with 
you against having even an agent in 
Caubul, and now we have assumed the 
protection of the state, as much as if 
It were one of the subsidiary allies in 
India. If you send 27,000 men up the 
Durra-i-Bolan to Condahar (as we 
hear is intended), and can feed them, 
I have no doubt you will take Can- 
dahar and Caubul and set up Soojah ; 
but for maintaining him in a poor, 
cold, strong, and remote country, 
among a turbulent people like the 
Afghans, I own it seems to me to be 
hopeless. If you succeed, I fear jrou 
will weaken the position against 
Bussia. The Afghans were neutral, 
and would have received your aid 
against invaders with gratitude—* 
they will now be disaffected and glad 
to join any invader to drive you out, 
I never knew a close alliance Detweeu 
a civilised and an uncivilised state 
that did not end in mutual hatred 
in three years. If the restridnt of 
a close connexion with ua were not 



364 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


of Directors of the East India Company were strongly 
opposed to the war, and had no part in its initiation 
beyond the performance of such mechanical duties as 
are prescribed by act of parliament. The members of 
the Secret Committee are compelled to sign the despatches 
laid before them by the Board of Control; and the Pre¬ 
sident of the Board of Control has unreservedly ad¬ 
mitted that, beyond the mere mechanical act of signing 
the papers laid before them, they had no part in the 
recommendation or authorisation of the war. The policy 
of the East India Company is a policy of non-inter¬ 
ference. They had seldom lost an opportunity of incul¬ 
cating upon their governors the expediency of refrain¬ 
ing from intermeddling with the Trans-Indian states.* 
The temper, indeed, of this great body is essentially paci¬ 
fic ; all the instructions which emanate from them have a 
tendency towards the preservation of peace and the non¬ 
extension of empire; and when tlie merits and demerits 
of their government come to be weighed in the balance, 
it can never be imputed to them that they have been 
eager to draw the sword from the scabbard, or have 
willingly squandered the resources of India upon un¬ 
just and unprofitable wars. 