

The chiefs of Candahar (brothers of Dost Mahomed Khan of 
Caubul) have avowed their adherence to the Persian policy, with 
the same full knowledge of its opposition to the rights and in¬ 
terests of the British nation in India, and have been openly assist¬ 
ing in the operations against Herat. 

In the crisis of affairs consequent upon the retirement of our 
Envoy from Caubul, the Governor-General felt the importance 
of taking immediate measures for arresting the rapid progress of 
foreign intrigue and aggression towards our own territories. 

His attention was naturally drawn at this conjuncture to the 
position and claims of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, a monarch who, 



358 


THE RTMT.AH MANIFESTO. 


wHen ill power, had cordially acceded to the measures of united 
resistance to external enmity, which were at that time judged 
necessary by the British Government, and who, on his empire 
being usurped by its present rulers, had found an honourable 
asylum in the British dominions. 

It had been clearly ascertained, from the information furnished 
by the various officers who have visited Afghanistan, that the 
Barukzye chiefs, from their disunion and unpopularity, were ill 
fitted, under any circumstances, to be useful allies to the British 
Government, and to aid us in our just and necessary measures of 
national defence. Yet so long as they refrained from proceed¬ 
ings injurious to our interests and security, the British Govern¬ 
ment acknowledged and respected their authority; but a different 
policy appeared to be now more than justified by the conduct of 
those chiefs, and to be indispensable to our own safety. The 
welfare of our possessions in the East requires that we should 
have on our western frontier an ally who is interested in resisting 
aggression, and establishing tranquillity, in the place of chiefs 
ranging themselves in subservience to a hostile power, and seeking 
to promote schemes of conquest and aggrandisement. 

After serious and mature deliberation, the Governor-General 
was satisfied that a pressing necessity, as well as every considera¬ 
tion of policy and justice, warranted us in espousing the cause of 
Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, whose popularity throughout Afghan¬ 
istan had been proved to his Lordship by the strong and unani¬ 
mous testimony of the best authorities. Having arrived at this 
determination, the Governor-General was further of opinion that 
it was just and proper, no less from the position of Maharajah 
Runjeet Singh, than from his undeviating friendship towards the 
British Government, that his Highness should have the offer of 
becoming a party to the contemplated operations. 

Mr. Macnaghten was accordingly deputed in June last to the 
Court of his Highness, and the result of his mission has been the 
conclusion of a triplicate treaty by the British Government, the 
Maharajah, and Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, whereby his Highness 
is guaranteed in his present possessions, and has bound himself to 
co-operate for the restoration of the Shah to the throne of his 
ancestors. The friends and enemies of any one of the contracting 
parties have been declared to be the friends and enemies of all. 