

On the 1st of October the manifesto, long and anxiously 
pondered over in the bureau of the Governor-General, 
received the official signature and was sent to the press. 
Never, since the English in India first began the work 
of King-making, had a more remarkable document issued 

* Lord Auckland, with charac- when the army crosses, to regard you 
teristic kindliness, exerted himself to as an independent political officer to 
allay any feelinp of mortification that co-operate with Macnaghten.’ No- 
may have welled up in Burnes’s thing could be more delicately kind, 
mind; and the latter wisely revoked for I have permission, if I like, to 
his determination to be aut Ccesar send an assistant to Kelat. I start 
autnullus. The extracts from Burnes’s in a week, and drop down the Indus 
letters, given in a preceding note, ex- to Shikarpoor, where, with a brace 
plain the motives that induced him to of Commissaries, I prepare for the ad- 
forego his original resolve ; and the vance of the army and the disburse- 
following passage, from another private ment of many lakhs of rupees. I 
letter, wows still more plainly the care not for the responsibility ; I am 
feelings with which he regarded the firm in the saddle, and have all confi- 
considerate conduct of the Governor- dence. 1 think you will hear the 
General, of whom he writes: “ ‘ I result of my negotiation to be, that 
mean, therefore,’ continued he (Lord the British flag flies at Bukkur.”— 
Aucldan^, ‘ to gazette you as a ^Private Correspondence of Sir A, 
Political Cooixiiisaioner to Kelat, and iwmes.] 



THE SnCLAH MAKIFKSTO. 


866 


from the council-chamber of an Anglo-Indian viceroy. 
It ran in the following words, not one of which should be 
omitted from such a narrative as this: 

DECI.ABAT10N ON THE PAKT OF THE BIGHT HONOTTBABLE 
THE GOVEBNOB-GENEBAI. OF INDIA. 

Simlah, October 1, 1838. 

The Right Hon. the Governor-General of India havings with 
the concurrence of the Supreme Council, directed the assem** 
blage of a British force for service across the Indus, his Lordship 
deems it proper to publish the following exposition of the reasons 
which have led to this important measure. 

It is a matter of notoriety that the treaties entered into by 
the British Government in the year 1832, with the Ameers of 
Sindh, the Newab of Bhawalpore, and Maharajah Runjeet Singh, 
had for their object, by opening the navigation of the Indus, to 
facilitate the extension of commerce, and to gain for the British 
nation in Central Asia that legitimate influence which an inter¬ 
change of benefits would naturally produce. 

With a view to invite the aid of the de facto rulers of Afghan¬ 
istan to the measures necessary for giving full effect to those 
treaties, Captain Burnes was deputed, towards the close of the 
year 1836, on a mission to Dost Mahomed Khan, the chief 
of Caubul. The original objects of that officer’s mission were 
purely of a commercial nature. Whilst Captain Burnes, how¬ 
ever, was on his journey to Caubul, information was received by 
the Governor-General that the troops of Dost Mahomed Khan 
had made a sudden and unprovoked attack on those of our 
ancient ally, Maharajah Runjeet Singh. It was naturally to be 
apprehended that his Highness the Maharajah would not be 
slow to avenge the aggression; and it was to be feared that, the 
flames of war being once kindled in the very regions into which 
we were endeavouring to extend our commerce, the peaceful and 
beneficial purposes of the British Government would be altogether 
frustrated. In order to avert a result so calamitous, the Governor- 
General resolved on authorising Captain Burnes to intimate to 
Dost Mahomed Khan, that if he should evince a disposition to 
come to just and reasonable terms with the Maharajah, his Lord- 