

It had been determined, in the first instance, that 
twenty lakhs of rupees should be paid by the Ameers 
of Sindh, as ransom-money, for Shikarpoor. Runjeet, 
as has been seen, asked for more than a moiety of the 
money, which it was proposed to divide equally between 
him and Shah Soojah; and, as it was not deemed ex¬ 
pedient by the British Government to gratify Runjeet’s 
cupidity at the expense of the King, it was determined 
that the amount demanded from the Ameers should be 



THE AMEERS OR SIHDH. 


381 


increased, and that Runjeet should receive fifteen in¬ 
stead of ten lakhs, without injury to the claims of his 
ally. But there seemed to be some doubt whether the 
Ameers would consent to pay the money thus appro¬ 
priated to others’ uses. The Shikarpoor question, in¬ 
deed, required some definite settlement by Shah Soojah 
himself; and as Shah Soojah was to proceed through 
Sindh, for the purpose of bringing the Ameers to a 
proper imderstanding of their duties, it was necessary 
that the British army that escorted him should march 
by the same route. 

That the Ameers should have demurred to the pay¬ 
ment of the money claimed by an exile of thirty years’ 
standing would, under any circumstances, have been a 
result of the demand exciting no purprise in the mind of 
any reasonable being on one side of the Indus or on the 
other. But that, having already received a formal re¬ 
lease from the Shah, they should have objected to the 
revival of an abandoned claim, is something so natu¬ 
ral and so intelligible that it would have been a miracle 
if they had not resisted the demand. Colonel Pottinger 
saw this at once : he saw the injustice of the whole pro¬ 
ceeding; and he wrote to the Supreme Government: 
“ The question of a money-payment by the Ameers 
of Sindh to Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk is, in my humble 
opinion, rendered very puzzling by two releases written 
in Korans, and sealed and signed by his Majesty, which 
they have produced. Their argument now is, that they 
are sure the Governor-General does not intend to make 
them pay again for what they have already bought and 
obtained, in the most binding way, a receipt in full.”* 

Injustice ever begets injustice. It was determined by 
the Simlah Council that Shah Soojah and the Army of 


Colonel H, Pottinger to Government: Puhlished Papers relating to Sindh, 



S82 


THE ABMT OF THE ITOTJS. 


the Indue should be sent through the country of the 
Ameers. To accomplish this, it was necessary that, in 
the first instance, an existing treaty should be set aside. 
When the Ameers consented to open the navigation of 
the Indus, it was expressly stipulated that no militaiy 
stores should be conveyed along the river. But as soon 
as ever Lord Auckland had resolved to erect a friendly 
power in Afghanistan, and to march a British army 
across the Indus, it became necessary to tear this pro¬ 
hibitory treaty to shreds, and to trample down the 
scruples of the Ameers. “ Whilst the present exigency 
lasts,” it was intimated to Colonel Pottinger, “ you may 
apprise the Ameers that the article of the treaty with 
them, prohibiting the using of the Indus for the convey¬ 
ance of military stores, must necessarily be suspended 
during the course of operations undertaken for the per¬ 
manent establishment of security to all those who are 
a party to the treaty.” And that there might be no 
miscomprehension of the general course of policy, 
which the Governor-General desired to pursue towards 
the Ameers, a letter was addressed to Colonel Pottinger, 
stating that “he (the Governor-General) deems it hardly 
necessary to remind you that in the important crisis 
at which we are arrived, we cannot permit our enemies 
to occupy the seat of power: the interests at stake are 
too great to admit of hesitation in our proceedings; and 
not only they who have shown a disposition to favour 
our adversaries, but they who display an unwillingness 
to aid us in the just and necessary* undertaking in 
which we are engaged, must be displaced, and give way 
to others on whose friendship and co-operation we may 