

The Governor-General reached Ferozepore on the 
27th of November. The Commander-in-Chief and the 
infantry of the Army of the Indus had arrived a day or 

• The meeting was agreed upon complishment, on the ground of the 
TOfore the British Government had expense that he was obliged to incur 
determined to cross the Indus ; and in Keeping his troops together. 
Runjeet complained of its tardy ac- 



EECEPTION or BUNJBET SINGH. 


373 


two before; and on the following day the main body of 
the cavalry and artillery took up their ground on the 
plain.* On the 29th,f the first meeting between Lord 
Auckland and Bunjeet Singh took place amidst a scene 
of indescribable uproar and confusion. The camp of 
the Governor-General was pitched at the distance of 
some four miles fi'om the river Gharra, In the centre 
of a wide street of tents were those set apart for the 
purposes of the Durbar. A noble guard of honour 
lined the way, as amidst the roar of artillery and the 
clang of military music, Bunjeet Singh, escorted by 
the English secretaries and some of the principal poli¬ 
tical and military oflGicers in camp, rode up, in the centre 
of a line of elephants, to the Durbar tent. The Gover¬ 
nor-General and the Commander-in-Chief came forth to 
meet them. Then came the crush of the two lines of 
elephants, urged forward by the goads of their drivers, 
and meeting with a terrific shock—the clangour of a 
tumultuous crowd of Sikh horsemen and footmen—a 
rush of English officers eager to see the show; and, pre¬ 
sently, amidst such tumult and such noise as had sel¬ 
dom before been seen or heard, the elephants of the 
Governor-General and the Maharajah were* Brought 
side by side, and Lord Auckland, in his uniform of 
diplomatic blue, was seen to take a bundle of crimson 
cloth out of the Sikh howdah, and it was known that 
the lion of the Punjaub was then seated on the elephant 
of the English ruler. In a minute the little, tottering, 
one-eyed man, who had founded a vast empire on the 

♦ It is generally acknowledged that rity on such points, says: “ A force 
nothing could have been more orderly, has never been brought together in 
or more creditable both to the regi- any country, in a manner more ere- 
ments and their commanding officers, ditable and soldier-like than was the 
than the style in which all the com- Bengal portion of the Army of the 
ponents of the “ Army of the Indus” Indus.” 

made their way to Ferozepore. Cap- f Captain Havelock says the 28th 
tain Havelock, an excellent autho- —‘Colonel Fane, the 29th. 



374 


THE ABMY OB' THE INDUS. 


banks of the fabulous rivers of the Macedonian con¬ 
quests, was leaning over the side of the howdah shaking 
hands with the principal officers of the British camp as 
their elephants were wheeled up beside him. Then the 
huge phalanx of elephants was set in motion again. 
There was a rush towards the Durbar tent—the Eng¬ 
lish and the Sikh cortige were mixed up together in 
one great mass of animal life. Such was the crush— 
such was the struggle—that many of the attendant 
Sikhs believed that there was a design to destroy their 
old decrepit chief, and “ began to blow their matches 
and grasp their weapons with an air of mingled distrust 
and ferocity.”* But in time a passage was made, and 
the imbecile little old man was to be seen tottering into 
the Durbar tent, supported on one side by the Governor- 
General, and on the other by Sir Henry Fane, whose 
fine manly proportions and length of limb, as he forced 
his way through the crowd, presented a strange contrast 
to the puny dimensions of the Sikh chieftain who leant 
upon his arm. 