



SIB HENRY FANE AND SIB JOHN KEANE. 


379 


sidency, in command of the Bombay division, which 
was to be conveyed by water firom that port to Kurra- 
chee. On the junction of the two divisions, the chief 
command would fall into his hands. In Sir Henry 
Fane the Bengal army had unbounded confidence. 
They knew him to be a strict, but a good officer. They 
may have thought that he made of too much account 
external forms and appearances, better suited to the mild, 
cloudy atmosphere of Great Britain than to the fiery 
skies of Hiudostan. But they admired the energy of his 
character; the decision of his judgment; the promptitude 
of all his actions. The initial measures which had been 
entrusted to him had been carried out with remarkable 
ability. There was a coolness in all that he did; a 
clearness in all that he said; which inspired with un¬ 
limited confidence the officers with whom he was asso¬ 
ciated. They knew that he had the welfare of the 
army at heart;—that their safety and honour could not 
be confided to one less likely to abuse the trust. It was 
with no common regret, therefore, that they saw him 
yield into other hands the command of the Army of the 
Indus. Of Sir John Keane they knew little, and what 
little they did know did not fill them with any very 
eager desire to place themselves under his command. 

Such was the position of affairs at the commencement 
of December. The Bengal army, then encamped at 
Ferozepore, consisted of about 9500 men of all arms. 
The levy that had been raised for the immediate service 
of Shah Soojah was then passing through Ferozepore. 
It comprised two regiments of cavalry; four regiments of 
infantry; and a troop of horse artillery—^in all, about 
6000 men. It had marched from Loodhianah on the 
15th of November, under the command of Major-General 
Simpson; and was now about, on the 2nd of December, 
to commence its progress across the frontier. On the 



380 


THE ABMY OF THE INDUS. 


10th of the same month the Bengal division was to 
break ground from Ferozepore. 

The line of march to be followed by the invading 
army ran, in a south-westerly direction, through the 
territories of Bahwulpore, and thence crossed, near 
Subzulkote, the frontier of Sindh, striking down to the 
banks of the Indus, and crossing the river at Bukkur. 
It then took a north-westerly course, passing through 
Shikarpoor, Bhag, and Dadur to the mouth of the Bolan 
Pass; thence through the pass to Quettah, and from 
Quettah, through the Kqjuck, to Candahar. A glance 
at any map of the countries on the two sides of the 
Indus will satisfy the reader at once that this was a 
strangely devious route from Ferozepore to Candahar. 
The army was about to traverse two sides of a triangle, 
instead of shaping its course along the third. 

But it was hardly a subject for after-consideration, 
when the tripartite treaty had been signed, what route 
should be taken by the army destined for the restoration 
of Shah Soqjah to his old dominions. It had from 
the first been intended that the Shah should proceed 
through the Sindh country, whilst Runjeet’s troops 
were advancing through the Khybur Pass. It was 
not, indeed, a geographical but a political question. It 
was necessary that the army should proceed through 
Sindh, for the Ameers were to be coerced. 