

* These brigades consisted of the the one had seldom been at fault in 
3rd Buffs, the 2nd, 27th, 5th, 20th, India or in Europe; the other was 
and 53rd Regiments of Native In- above suspicion. Sortilege, after all, 
fantry. Captain Havelock and other did little for the army ii^ne instance ; 
military authorities have condemned for it sent forward to Ine labours of 
this decision by lot. It is said that the campaign the 13th Light Infantry, 
the principle of selection should have then as ever zealous, indeed, and full 
been adhered to on the reduction, as of alacrity, but even at Ferozepore 
well as on the formation of the force, shattered by disease ; the spirit of its 
^*Sir Henry Fane,” says Captain soldiers willing, but unequal to the 
Havelock, “ need not thus have dis- task ; whilst it doomed to inactivity 
trusted or paid so poor a compliment the Buffs, one of the most effective 
to his own sagacity and impartiality; European corps in India.” This is 



378 


THE ABMT OP THE INDUS. 


Irregular Cavalry, under that fine old veteran, Colonel 
Skinner, of the Local Hoirse, were to share the same 
fate; and the artillery force, greatly reduced in strength, 
now lost its Brigadier (Colonel Graham), and was order¬ 
ed to go forward under Major Pew, who had organised 
the camel battery, and had joined the brigade in com¬ 
mand of that experimental section of the ordnance corps. 
Nor were these the only changes which the intelligence 
of the defeat of Mahomed Shah had wrought upon the 
Bengal force. Sir Henry Fane, as Commander-in-Chief 
of the Indian army, had determined to take command in 
person of the forces assembled for the expedition across 
the frontier. The assemblage of regiments ordered upon 
this service was to be called “ The Army of the Indus.” 
Both the extent of the force, and the objects of the 
expedition, seemed to demand the supervision of the 
chief military authority in the country. But now that 
the force had been greatly reduced, and the objects of 
the campaign had dwindled down into a measure of 
interference with the internal government of an inde¬ 
pendent country. Sir Henry Fane had no ambition to 
command such a force, or to identify himself with such 
an expedition. There was no want of physical energy 
or mental vigour in the man, but his health was failing 
him at this time; and it was expedient that he should 
altogether escape from the fiery climate of the Eastern 
world. He determined, therefore, to resign the command 
of the expedition into other hands, and to set his face 
towards his native land. 

Sir John Keane, the Commander-in-Chief of the Bom¬ 
bay army, was coming round from the western pre- 

the impartial testimonv of an officer chance which gent Sale and Dennigg 
of the ISth Li^ht Infantry. It was into Afghanistan, and associated the 
written immediately after the first name of the 18 th Light Infantiy with 
mmpai^ of the Army of the Indus, some of the most illustrious incidents 
No writer would now regret the of the war. 