

In the tent the ladies of the Governor-General’s 
family, and those of some of the principal military and 
political officers, were seated, ready to receive his High¬ 
ness. The customary formalities were gone through, 
and civilities interchanged; and then the Maharajah 
was conducted into an inner chamber, where the pre¬ 
sents intended for his reception were laid out in costly 
and curious array. Here, a picture of Queen Victoria, 
from the easel of Miss Eden, whose felicitous pencil has 
rendered the European eye familiar with the persons of 
many of the principal Sikh chieftains who graced the 
Ferozepore gathering, was presented to Bunjeet Singh. 

* Captain Havelock's i^arra/ive— Years in India ; and Mr. Stocqueler's 
from wnich this description has been Memorials of Afghanistan also con- 
mainly written; Colonel Fane's Five tributes some det^. 



VISIT TO BUNJEET SINGH. 


375 


Sir Willoughby Cotton bore it, with becoming reverence, 
into the tent, and as he presented it to the Maharajah, 
who bowed before it, the guns of the camel battery 
roared forth a royal salute. Then Runjeet was escorted 
to another tent, where specimens of British ordnance, 
caparisoned elephants, and horses of noble figure, stood 
ready for his Hi g hn ess’s acceptance. All these were 
inspected with due expressions of admiration and a be¬ 
coming interchange of courtesies, and then, amidst an 
uproar of hurras, a crash of military music, and another 
scene of indescribable confusion, Runjeet Singh as¬ 
cended his elephant and turned his back upon the 
British camp.* 

On the following day Lord Auckland returned the 
visit of Runjeet Singh. It was said by one present 
on this occasion, that the Sikhs “shone down the 
English.”f The camp of the Maharajah was on the 
other side of the river; and there, amidst a scene of 
Oriental splendour, difficult to describe or imagine, the 
great Sikh chieftain received the representative of the 
British nation. The splendid costumes of the Sikh 
Sirdars—the gorgeous trappings of their horses—^the 
glittering steel casques and corslets of chain armour— 
the scarlet and yellow dresses—the tents of crimson and 
gold—^made up a show of Eastern magnificence equally 
grand and picturesque. As the Maharajah saluted the 
Governor-General, the familiar notes of the national 
anthem arose from the instruments of a Sikh band, and 
the guns of the Kalsa roared forth their expected wel- 

♦ “ It is worthy of notice that a tive.'\ Remembering how the Sikh 
strange accident befel the old Maha- Empire fell before the British guns 
rajah in the tent containing the at Groojrat, we may at least observe 
larger g^ of the British Govern- that this was a cipious type of the 
ment. *^e was not very firm on his destiny then awaiting the great king* 
legs at any time, but here he had the dom founded by Runjeet Bingh. 
misfortune to stumble over a pile of t StocqueUr'sMemorkilaofAfglianr 
shells, and fell prostrate before the istan. 

British guns.”—[Raveioch’s Narra^ 