



INJUSTICE OP THE EXPEDITIONi 


371 


a mere experiment. There were more reasons why it 
should fail than why it should succeed.* It was com¬ 
menced in defiance of every consideration of political and 
military expediency; and there were those who, arguing 
the matter on higher grounds than those of mere ex¬ 
pediency, pronounced the certainty of its failure, because 
there was a canker of injustice at the core. It was, 
indeed, an experiment on the forbearance alike of Grod 
and of man; and therefore, though it might dawn in 
success and triumph, it was sure to set in failure and 
disgrace. 


* Shah Soojah Himself said tHat 
there would be little chance of his 
becoming popular in Afghanistan, if 
he returned to the country openly 
and avowedly supported, not by his 
own troops, but by those of the 
Feringhees. Even the less overt as¬ 
sistance of an infidel government 
was likely to cast discredit upon 
the undertaking in the eyes of “ true 
believers.” The Shah talked about 
the bigotry of the Mahomedans; 
but it was plain that he had his mis¬ 
givings on the subject. “ During a 
visit,says Captain Wade, “ which I 
paid to the Shah, the day before 
yesterday, he informed me that some 
Mahomedans of Delhi had been 
writing to him, to inquire how he 
could reconcile it to his conscience, 
as a true believer in the Koran, to 
accept the assistance of a Christian 
peome to recover his kingdom. The 
Shah said that he contemplated with 
pity the bigotry of these people, and 


began to quote a passage of the Koran 
to prove their ignorance of its doc¬ 
trines with reference to the subject on 
which they had presumed to address 
him. Having a day or two previously 
received information that the Newab 
of Bhopal had made a particular re¬ 
quest of his Lordship to be permitted 
to place a party of his kinsmen and 
retainers at the service of the British 
Government, on the present occasion 
from the desire which he had to testify 
his deep sense of gratitude to it for 
the manner in which it had watched 
and protected the interests of their 
family in every necessitude of their 
political existence, I mentioned the 
circumstance to his Majesty, to show 
the different views that prevailed 
among the followers of the faith, both 
with regard to their duty to the state 
and to their religion .”—^Captain 
Wade to Mr. Macnaghten: October 6, 
1838. MS. Records.’] 


2b2 



872 


THE ARMY Ot THE INDUS. 


BOOK III. 
[1838—-1839.] 


CHAPTER I. 


The Army of the Indus—Gathering at Ferozepore—Eesignation of Sir 
Henry Fane—Route of the Army—Passage through Bahwulpore—The 
Ameers of Sindh—The Hyderabad Question—Passage of the Bolan Pass 
—Arrival at Candahar. 

The army destined for the occupation of Afghanistan 
assembled at Ferozepore, on the north-western frontier 
of the British dominions, in the latter part of the month 
of November. It had been agreed that the expedition 
across the Indus should be inaugurated by a grand 
ceremonial meeting between Lord Auckland and Run- 
jeet Singh;* and that the troops of the two nations 
should be paraded before the illustrious personages, 
there reciprocating hospitalities and interchanging other 
marks of friendship and respect. 