

In giving publicity to this important intelligence, the Governor- 



368 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


General deems it proper at the same time to notify, that while he 
regards the relinquishment by the Shah of Persia of his hostile 
deigns upon Herat as a just cause of congratulation to the 
Government of British India and its allies, he will continue to 
prosecute with vigour the measures which have been announced, 
with a view to the substitution of a friendly for a hostile power in 
the eastern provinces of Afghanistan, and to the establishment of 
a permanent barrier against schemes of aggression upon our north¬ 
west frontier. 

The Right Hon. the Governor-General is pleased to appoint 
Lieutenant Eldred Pottlnger, of the Bombay Artillery, to be 
Political Agent at Herat, subject to the orders of the Envoy and 
Minister at the Court of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk. This appoint¬ 
ment is to have effect from the 9th of September last, the date on 
which the siege of Herat was raised by the Shah of Persia. 

In conferring the above appointment upon Lieutenant Pottin- 
ger, the Governor-General is glad of the opportunity afforded him 
of bestowing the high applause which is due to the signal merits 
of that officer, who was present in Herat during the whole period 
of its protracted siege, and who, under circumstances of peculiar 
danger and difficulty, has, by his fortitude, ability, and judgment, 
honourably sustained the reputation and interests of his country. 

By order of the Right Hon. the Governor-General of India, 

W. H. Macnaghten, 

Secretary to the Government of India, with the 
Governor-General. 

When the Persian army was before Herat—when the 
Afghan garrison was on the eve of surrender—when 
the chiefs of Caubul and Candahar were prostrating 
themselves at the feet of Mahomed Shah, the expedition 
for the restoration of Shah Soojah was one of doubtful 
honesty and doubtful expediency. The retrogression of 
the Persian army removed it at once from the category 
of questionable acts. There was no longer any question 
about it. The failure of Mahomed Shah cut from under 
the feet of Lord Auckland all ground of justification, 
and rendered the expedition across the Indus at once a 



INEXPEDIENCT OP THE EXPEDITION. 


369 


folly and a crime. The tripartite treaty did not pledge 
the British Government to send a single soldier beyond 
the frontier. The despatch of a British army into the 
heart of Afghanistan was no part of the covenant either 
with Eunjeet Singh or Shah Soojah. It was wholly an 
after-thought. When Macnaghten, after his conferences 
with the Maharajah of the Punjaub and the ex-King of 
Caubul, returned to Simlah to lay the result of his 
mission before the Governor-General, the British Go¬ 
vernment had pledged itself only to furnish a handful of 
European oflScers to raise and discipline the Shah’s regi¬ 
ments; and so little had any obligation been imposed 
upon us to surround the ex-King with our battalions, 
on his restoration to his old dominions, that he himself 
expressed an eager hope that he would be suffered to 
advance as an independent prince, and not as a mere 
puppet in our hands.*^ 