

To march a British army into Afghanistan was not, 
therefore, an obligation upon the Indian Government; it 
was their deliberate choice. The avowed object of the 
expedition, as set forth in the November declaration, was 
the establishment of a friendly power in Afghanistan. 
But the subversion of an existing dynasty could only be 
justified on the ground that its hostility threatened to 
disturb the peace and tranquillity of our own dominions. 
Whatever the hostility of the Barukzye Sirdars may have 
been when Mahomed Shah was before the gates of 
Herat, it had now ceased to be formidable. It was 
obvious that the chiefs of Caubul and Candahar were 
little likely to exaggerate the power of a Prince that 
had brought all his military resources to bear upon the 
reduction of a place of no reputed strength, and, after an 

• A general assurance had been British Government would advance 
given to Runjeet Singh, in reply to a to their aid; but he bad failed to elicit 
difficulty started by himself, that if from Macnaghten any more specific 
the allies met with any reverses, the promise of co-operation. 

VOL. I. 2 B 



870 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


ineffectual struggle of nine months’ duration, had re¬ 
treated, either because he was unequal to the longer con¬ 
tinuance of the contest, or because the British Govern¬ 
ment had landed 500 Sepoys on an island in the Persian 
Gulf. It was only in connexion with the Russo-Persian 
movement that an aUiance with the rulers of Afghanistan 
had become a matter of concernment to the British Go¬ 
vernment. It was only by a reference to the crisis which 
had thus arisen that the Indian Government could in 
any way justify their departure from the course of non¬ 
interference laid down by the Court of Directors, and re¬ 
cognised by Lord Auckland and his predecessors. But 
now that the danger, to the counteraction of which the ex¬ 
pedition across the Indus was directed, had passed away, 
the expedition was still to be undertaken. A measure so 
hazardous, and so costly, as the march of a British army 
to the foot of the Hindoo-Koosh, was only justifiable so 
long as it was absolutely indispensable to the defence of 
our Indian possessions; but if so extreme a measure had 
ever been, it was no longer necessary, to the security of 
India, now that the army of Mahomed Shah, defeated 
and disgraced, was on its way back to the capital of 
Persia. The expedition now to be undertaken had no 
longer any other ostensible object than the substitution 
of a monarch, whom the people of Afghanistan had 
repeatedly, in emphatic, scriptural language, spued out, 
for those Barukzye chiefs who, whatever may have been 
the defects of their government, had contrived to main¬ 
tain themselves in security, and their country in peace, 
with a vigour and a constancy unknown to the luckless 
Suddozye Princes. Had we started with the certainty 
of establishing a Mendly power and a strong government 
in Afghanistan, the importance of the end would have 
borne no just relation to the magnitude of the means to be 
employed for its accomplishment. But at the best it was 