

But before the Simlah proclamation had obtained 
general currency throughout India, authentic intelli¬ 
gence of the retrograde movement of the Persian army 
had reached the camp of the Governor-General. The 
tidings which arrived, in the first instance, from various 
native sources, and had been conveyed to Lord Auck¬ 
land by the political ofiicers on the frontier, were now 
oflicially confirmed. The siege of Herat had been raised. 
Mahomed Shah had “ mounted his horse, Ameerj,” and 
turned his face towards his own capital. The legitimate 
object of the expedition across the Indus was gone. 
All that remained was usurpation and aggression. It 
was believed, therefore, that the army assembling on the 
north-western frontier would be broken up; and Shah 
Soojah and Runjeet Singh left to pursue their own 
policy as might seem most expedient to them. The 
Simlah proclamation had placed the siege of Herat in 
the foreground as the main cause of the contemplated 
expedition; and now that the pretext for the invasion 
of A%hanistan was removed, political consistency seemed 
to require that the sword should be returned to the 
scabbard. With no common anxiety, therefore, was the 



THE HOTEMBBS DECI.ABATION. 


367 


result of this unexpected intelligence from Herat awaited 
by the regiments which had been warned for active 
service, and were now in all the excitement of pre¬ 
paration for a long and adventurous march. The dis¬ 
appointment anticipated by many descended only upon a 
few. On the 8th of November, all doubts were set at 
rest, and all anxieties removed by the publication of an 
order by the Governor-General, setting forth that, al¬ 
though the siege of Herat had been raised, the expedi¬ 
tion across the Indus would not be abandoned: 

OBDERS BT THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL 
OF INDIA. SECRET DEPARTMENT. 

Camp de Buddee, 8th November. 

The Right Hon. the Governor-General of India is pleased to 
publish, for general information, the subjoined extract of a letter 
from Lieutenant-Colonel Stoddart, dated Herat, the 10th Sep¬ 
tember, 1838, and addressed to the Secretary to the Government 
of India. 

“ I have the honour, by direction of her Britannic Majesty's 
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary, and the Hon. 
East India Company's Envoy at the Court of Persia, to acquaint 
you, for the information of the Right Hon. the Governor- 
General of India in Council, that his Majesty the Shah of Persia 
yesterday raised the siege of this city, and with the whole of 
the royal camp marched to Sangbust, about twelve miles, on his 
return to his own dominions. His Majesty proceeds without 
delay, by Torrbut Sheki Jaum and Meshid, to Teheran, 

This is in fulfilment of his Majesty's compliance with the 
demands of the British Government, which I had the honour of 
delivering on the 12th inst., and of the whole of which his 
Majesty announced his acceptance on the 14th of August. 

“ His Majesty Shah Kamran and his Vuzeer, Yar Mahomed 
Khan, and the whole city, feel sensible of the sincerity of the 
friendship of the British Government, and Mr. Pottinger and 
myself fidly participate in their gratitude to Providence for the 
happy event I have now the honour to report." 