



376 


THE AKMY OF THE INDUS. 


come. In the splendid Durbar tent of the ruler of the 
Punjaub, the British Statesman and British General, 
after the due formalities had been observed and some 
conversation had been carried on through the medium 
of interpreters, were regaled with an unseemly display 
of dancing girls, and the antics of some male buffoons. 
The evening entertainments were still less decorous. It 
was a melancholy thing to see the open exhibition, even 
on this great public occasion, of all those low vices 
which were destroying the life, and damning the repu¬ 
tation, of one in whom were some of the elements 
of heroism—who, indeed, but for these degrading sen¬ 
sualities, would have been really one of the greatest, 
as he was one of the most remarkable, men of modern 
times. 

Then came a grand display of the military resources 
of the two nations. On one day the British force was 
manoeuvred by Sir Henry Fane, and on another the 
Sikh troops were exercised by the Sirdars. The con¬ 
summate skill with which the British chief attacked an 
imaginary enemy was equalled by the gallantry with 
which he defeated it. He fought, indeed, a great battle 
on the plain, and only wanted another army in his .front 
to render his victory a complete one. The Sikh Sirdars 
were contented with less elaborate movements; but 
what their troops were ordered to do they did readily 
and well, and military critics in the British camp ad¬ 
mitted that their allies made no contemptible show of 
the tactics which they had learnt from their French 
instructow.* 

Runjeet Singh returned to Lahore, and the Governor- 
General followed him, on a complimentary visit, to the 
Sikh capital; whilst the British troops prepared to cross 

For an account of the manoeuvres both of the British and Sikh divisions, 
see Captain Havelock's Narrative, 



KEDUCTION OF THE ABMY. 


377 


the frontier in furtherance of the objects mapped out in 
the great Simlah manifesto. But there was no longer a 
Persian army to be encountered at Herat—no longer 
a Russian force in the background. The expedition 
had lost half its popularity with the army; and the 
force that was to take the field had been shorn of a 
portion of its original dimensions. On the 27th of 
November it had been publicly announced by the Com- 
mander-in-Chief, “ that circumstances in the countries 
west of the Indus had so greatly changed since the 
assembly of the army for service, that the Governor- 
General had deemed that it was not requisite to send 
forward the whole force; but that a part only would be 
equal to effecting the future objects in view.” It had 
become the duty therefore of the Commander-in-Chief to 
determine what regiments should cross the Indus, and 
what should remain in Hindostan. Sir Henry Fane had 
selected for service the corps whose efficiency, on his 
recent tour of inspection, had been most clearly demon¬ 
strated; and now that it devolved upon him to dash the 
hopes of some of these regiments, unwilling to make an 
invidious choice, he had decided the difficult question by 
lot. Instead of two divisions, the Bengal army was now 
to consist of one, under the command of Sir Willoughby 
Cotton. The brigades of infantry commanded by 
Colonels Denniss and Paul were to be left behind ;* the 