

The reluctance of the Bahwulpore authorities was 
soon overcome; but the demands made upon the for¬ 
bearance of the Ameers of Sindh were of a more 
oppressive and irritating character. The Bahwul 
Khan has ever been held up to admiration as the 
most consistently friendly of all the allies of the British 
Government; but the expedition was distasteful to him 
and his people, and the real feeling broke out in the 
beginning, though, after a while, it Avas suppressed. It 
is not strange, therefore, that the Talpoor Ameers, of 
whom so much more was demanded, should have 
co-operated somewhat unwillingly in a measure which 
had openly exacted from them a large amount of 
treasure, and was not unlikely in the end to deprive 
them of all that they possessed. Interpreted into 


Captain Wade to Mr, Macnaghten: Nw, 8 and 9, 1838. MS. Becords. 



THE AMBERS OF SINDH. 


385 


homely English, the language now to be addressed to 
these unhappy Princes was simply, “ Tour money or 
your life/’ Colonel Pottinger was the agent employed, 
in the first instance, to dictate terms to the Court of 
Hyderabad; but he was too clear-headed and too high- 
minded a man not to perceive the injustice of the course 
prescribed by his government, and to feel painfully un¬ 
willing to pursue it. The instructions he had received, 
divested of the specious outside dress of diplomatic 
phraseology, and rendered in plain English by Colonel 
Pottinger himself, were truly of a startling character. 
The British agent was directed to tell the Ameers that 
“ the day they connected themselves with any other 
power than England would be the last of their inde¬ 
pendence, if not of their rule.” “ Neither,” it was 
added, “ the ready power to crush and annihilate them, 
nor the will to call it into action, were wanting, if it 
appeared requisite, however remotely, for the safety or 
integrity of the Anglo-Indian Empire or frontier.” The 
Ameers were known to be weak; and they were be¬ 
lieved to be wealthy. Their money was to be taken; 
their country to be occupied; their treaties to be set 
aside at the point of the bayonet, but amidst a shower 
of hypocritical expressions of friendship and good-will. 

Whilst Colonel Pottinger, not without some scruples, 
was enclosing the Ameers of Lower Sindh in the toils 
of his diplomacy. Captain Burnes, who by this time had 
reaped the reward of his services in knighthood and a 
lieutenant-colonelcy, was proceeding to operate upon the 
Princes of Beloochistan. Originally sent upon a mission to 
Mehrab Khan of Khelat, he had turned aside, however, to 
negotiate with the Ameers of Khyrpore, in Lower Sindh, 
and had found them more tractable than the Hydera¬ 
bad Princes in Colonel Pottinger’s hands. It was deemed 
expedient that the British troops should cross the Indus 

VOL. I.. 2 c 



386 


THE ARMY OF THE INDUS. 


at Bukkur, and Burnes was instructed to obtain the 
temporary cession of the island. The fortress stands on 
a rock, dividing the river into two channels. Appre¬ 
hending that the incursion of British troops into their 
country would be followed by acts of territorial spolia¬ 
tion, the Ameers of Khyrpore, whilst expressing in 
general terms their willingness to co-operate with our 
government, expressly stipulated that the forts on either 
bank of the river were to be untouched. But as Buk¬ 
kur stood on neither bank, but on an island, it appeared 
to the British diplomatist that the wording of the me¬ 
morandum actually placed the fortress in his hands. 
Ashamed, however, of such an exhibition of legal acute¬ 
ness, he declared that he had no intention to take advan¬ 
tage of such a reading of the document; he cited it merely 
as an instance of the manner in which very cunning 
people sometimes overreach themselves. There was no 
need, indeed, to look lor flaws in a state paper, when the 
Army of the Indus was assembling to help itself to what 
it liked. The Ameers were told that, whatever might 
be their dislike to the march of our troops through 
Sindh, “ the Sindhian who hoped to stop the approach 
of the British army might as well seek to dam up the 
Indus at Bukkur.” . The fiat had gone forth, an army 
was to march, and it was now on the road. 