

Even in those early days the voice of complaint was 
not wholly silent;* but when the army began to make 
its toilsome way through Sindh and Beloochistan, there 
were few in its ranks who did not look back with regret 
to the march through Bahwulpore, when all their wants 
had been supplied in a manner which they were little 
likely to see again. It was on the 29th of December 
that the head-quarters of the army reached the capital 
of Bahwul Khan’s country. Sir Henry Fane, who had 
been proceeding down the river by water, landed from 
his boats, and held a Durbar on the following day; and 
on the 31st returned the visit of state which the Khan 

♦ Some of the Shah’s troops were the grain districts of Upper India, 
very unreasonable in their expecta- made violent complaints because they 
tions and their complaints. The raw found that to the westward barley 
levies of horse, just recruited from was the food of horses. 



892 


THE ARMY OF THE INDUS. 


had paid him.* On the first day of the new year the 
army broke ground again, and set out for the frontier 
of Sindh. 

On the 14th of January, the head-quarters of the 
Ar my of the Indus entered the Sindh territory near Sub- 
zulkote. On the preceding day, Sir Alexander Bumes 
had joined the British camp; and though he had ob¬ 
tained by his negotiations the cession of Bukkur to the 
British Government,! for such time as it might seem ex- 


* Sir Henry Fane was much 
pleased with the economy of Bah- 
wul Khan’s Court. Though not on 
an extensive scale, it was, perhaps, 
better ordered, on the whole, than 
that of any native potentate at the 
time. 

t The manner in which Meer 
Koostuin, the Ameer of Khvrpore, 
was dragooned out of Bukkur, ift 
worth relating. It was at first inti¬ 
mated to Burnes that the Ameer ob¬ 
jected to the British army passing the 
river at that point. Of this Burnes 
wrote: “ As to Meer Mahomed 
Khan’s message about this chief’s 
(Meer Roostum’s) objections to the 
Bengal army passing .at Bukkur, 
the minister did speak of such a 
wish, when I first reached Kohree, 
which I treated witli complete in- 
diflerence, adding that the army 
would cross at the most conccnwnt 
point,*'—[^Burnes to Pottimjer: Novem¬ 
ber 3,1838.] Burnes, however, at this 
time, was doubtful whether it were 
expedient that the Bengal column 
should cross the river at Bukkur at 
all. ^ “ I find,” he wrote, “ on minute 
inquiries, that if 1 suggest that the 
Bengal army should come to Bukkur 
at on, I shall bring them about fifty 
miles out of their road to Shikarpoor. 
Their most direct route is b^ Gotkee, 
and when I have seen the river there 
and the roads from it to Shikarpoor, 
I shall be able to say whether the 
army crosses at Gotkee or Bukkur.” 
After a lapse of two or three weeks, 
it appeared to Burnes that the army 


would more expediently cross the 
river at neither of these points. 

“ The point at which the army would 
cross the Indus,” he wrote to Mac- 
naghten, on the 22nd of November, 