

There was every reason why the restoration of Shah 
Soojah, who was famous for the extravagance of his 
pretensions in the direction of Sindh, should have been 
viewed with apprehension and alarm by the Talpoor 
Ameers. But the matter now began to wear a much 
more formidable aspect. The British Government had 
not only announced its intention to assist the long-exiled 
monarch in his attempt to regain his crown, but had 
encouraged him to assert long dormant claims, and had 
announced its intention to march an army into the 



CONDUCT OP THE AMBERS. 


387 


country of the Ameers, to plant a subsidiary force there, 
to compel the Princes of Sindh to pay for it, to knock 
down and set up the Princes themselves at discretion, to 
take possession of any part of the country that might be 
wanted for our own purposes—in fact, to treat Sindh and 
Beloochistan in all respects as though they were petty 
principalities of our own. That the Ameers thus strug¬ 
gling in our grasp, conscious of their inability openly to 
resist oppression, should have writhed and twisted, and 
endeavoured to extricate themselves by the guile which 
might succeed, rather than by the strength which could 
not, was only to follow the universal law of nature in all 
such contests between the weak and the strong. Mac- 
naghten complained, some time afterwards, that no civi¬ 
lised beings had ever been treated so badly as wore the 
British by the Princes of Sindh. If it were so, it was 
only because no civilised beings had ever before com¬ 
mitted themselves to acts of such gross provocation. 
Throughout the entire period of British connexion with 
Afghanistan, a strange moral blindness clouded the vi¬ 
sions of our statesmen: they saw only the natural, the 
inevitable results of their own measures, and forgot that 
those measures were the dragon’s teeth from which 
sprung up the armed men. The Ameers of Sindh 
viewed all our proceedings at this time with mingled 
terror and indignation. Our conduct was calculated to 
alarm and incense them to the extremest point of fear 
and irritation; and yet we talked of their childish dis¬ 
trust and their unprovoked hostility. 

The Ameers of Sindh were told that, whether they 
were friendly or unfriendly to the movement, the British 
army would cross the Indus when and where our go¬ 
vernment directed, and do whatsoever our government 
pleased—that resistance on their part would be not only 
useless, but insane^ as it would bring down inevitable 

2 c 2 



388 


THE ABMT OF THE INDUS. 


destruction on the head of all who stood up to oppose 
US. From that time these unhappy Princes felt that 
they ruled only by sufferance of the British. They 
knew their helplessness, and if at any time they thought 
of open resistance, the idea was speedily abandoned. Two 
British armies were bearing down upon their dominions 
—the one from Upper India—the other from the Sea. 
Burncs and the Commissariat officers were in advance, 
laying in supplies for the consumption of the invading 
force, and threatening with heavy penalties all who re¬ 
fused to co-operate with them. It would be difficult to 
conceive anything more distressing and more irritating; 
and yet we expected the Ameers to open their arms and 
to lay down their treasures at our feet. 