

The military authorities now determined to despatch 
the greater part of the Bengal column down the left 
bank of the Indus to co-operate with Sir John Keane 
against Hyderabad. Burnes entirely approved of the 
movement.* It does not appear that Keane had made 
any requisition for more troops."f" The two columns, 
indeed, were entirely ignorant of each other’s opera¬ 
tions. Thus early the want of an intelligence-depart¬ 
ment was painfully apparent; but up to the last day 
of our connexion with Afghanistan nothing was done, 
nor has anything beeu dope in more recent wars, to 
remedy the admitted evil. But down the left bank of 
the Indus went Cotton with his troops, glorying in the 
prospect before them. The treasures of Hyderabad 
seemed to lie at their feet. Never was there a more 
popular movement. The troops moved on in the highest 
spirits, eager for the affray—confident of success. Here 
was an unanticipated harvest of honour—an unexpected 


* “The aspect of aiTairs to the south 
being anything but satisfactory, the 
Commander-in-Chief intimated tome, 
in the presence of General Cotton, that 
the passage of the army across the 
Indus, even had the bridge been 
ready, which it will not be for ten 
days, was inexpedient, whilst matters 
were unadjusted at Hyderabad—that 
it was further his decided opinion 
that a portion of the army should at 
once march down towards Hydera¬ 
bad. Participating entirely in these 
sentiments, as far as political matters 


were concerned, I felt myself bound 
to give the fullest effect to the views 
of his Excellency, and notify the in¬ 
tended movement of the troops to 
the south to Meer Koostum Elhan.'* 
— A, Burnes to Government: 
Rohree^ January^ 28, 1839. MS, 
Records,"] 

f Some days after Cotton’s force 
had moved down the river, a re¬ 
quisition came for a troop of horse 
artillery, a detachment of cavalry, 
and a brigade of infantry.—[Have- 
hek's Narrative,] 



POSITION OF BIACNAGHTEN. 


897 


promise of abundant prize-money—^within their reach, 
A march of a few days would bring them under the 
walls of Hyderabad, to humble the pride of the Ameers, 
and to gather up their accumulated wealth. 

But there was one man then on the borders of the 
Indus to whom this movement down the left bank of 
the river was a source of unmixed dissatisfaction. Mr. 
Macnaghten, who, under the''title of Envoy and Minister 
at the Court of Shah Soojah, had been appointed politi¬ 
cal director of the campaign, viewed with alarm the de¬ 
parture of Sir Willoughby Cotton from Kohree, just as it 
was hoped that the Bengal column was about to cross to 
the right bank of the river. The Shah, with his con¬ 
tingent, was at Shikarpoor. Macnaghten had joined the 
royal camp. The King and the Envoy were alike eager 
to push on to Candahar; but, deserted by the Bengal 
troops, they were compelled to remain in a state of 
absolute paralysis. Seldom has any public functionary 
been surrounded by more embarrassing circumstances 
than those which, at this time, beset Macnaghten, At 
the very outset of the campaign there was a probability 
of the civil and military authorities being brought into 
perilous collision. The Envoy looked aghast at the 
movement upon Hyderabad, for he believed it involved 
an entire sacrifice of the legitimate objects of the cam¬ 
paign. It appeared to him, in this conjuncture, to be 
plainly his duty, as the representative of the British- 
Indian Government, to take upon himself the responsi¬ 
bility of preventing the march for the restoration of 
Shah Soojah from being converted into a campaign in 
Sindh. Yet to no man could the assertion of such au¬ 
thority be more painful than to one of Macnaghten’s 
temper and habits. It was certain that the military 
chiefe would resent his interference, and that the whole 
army would be against him. But he turned his face 