



390 


THE ABMY OF THE INDUS. 


one of those immense moving cities, which are only to be 
seen, when an Indian army takes the field, and streams 
into an enemy’s country. 

It was clear, bright, invigorating weather—the glo¬ 
rious cold season of Northern India—when the Army of 
the Indus entered the territories of Bahwul Khan. Nature 
seemed to smile on the expedition, and circumstance to 
favour its progress. There was a fine open country 
before them; they moved along a good road;* supplies 
were abundant everywhere. The coyness of the Bah- 
wulpore authorities, which had threatened to delay the 
initial march of the army, had yielded in good time, 
and at every stage Mackeson and Gordon had laid up in 
depot stores of grain, and fodder, and firewood, for the 
consumption of man .and beast.f Officers and soldiers 
were in the highest spirits. “ These,” it was said by 
one who accompanied the army on the staff of its com- 
mimder, and has chronicled all its operations,^ “were 
the halcyon days of the movements of this force.” To 
the greater number who now crossed the frontier this 
was their virgin campaign. The excitement was as 
novel as it was inspiriting. They might be about to 
meet mighty armies and to subdue great principalities; 
or they might only be entering upon a “ grand military 
promenade.” Still in that bright December weather 
the very march through a strange country, with all that 


This road, some 280 miles in 
length, had been prepared, under 
Mackeson’s directions, to facilitate 
the march of our troops. 

t As the army advanced, the Khan, 
to whose court Mackeson had been 
despatched to conclude a treaty of 
protective alliance, exerted himself 
to assist the enterprise, and exhibit¬ 
ed the most friendly feeling towards 
Shab Soojah. He gave the Shah two 
guns—made him a present of money 


—sent a party of irregular horse, 
under one of his chief officers, to escort 
him through the Bahwulpore domi¬ 
nions ; and allowed the office^ of the 
Shah's contingent to recruit their 
regiment from the ranks of his own 
regular infantry. The Shah's regi¬ 
ments were in this way raised to their 
full strength, six hundred men having 
been drawn from the Bahwulpore 
army.”— [MS. Notes.'] 

% Captain Havelock. 



LOSS OF CATTLE. 


391 


great and motley assemblage, was something joyous and 
animating. The army was in fine health, full of heart, 
and overflowing with spirits. It seemed as if. an expe« 
dition so auspiciously commenced must be one great 
triumph to the end. 

There was but one thing to detract from the general 
prosperity of the opening of tho campaign. Desertion 
was going on a-pace—not from the ranks of the fight¬ 
ing men, but from the mass of officers’ servants, camel- 
drivers, and camp-followers whicli streamed out from 
the rear of the army. The cattle, too, were falling sick 
and dying by the way-side. The j)rovi8ions with which 
they were supplied were not good, and dysentery broke 
out among them. Many were carried off by their 
owners, who shrunk from the long and trying journey 
before them; and it soon .became manifest that the 
most formidable enemy with which the advancing army 
would have to contend, would be a scarcity of carriage 
and supplies. 