


shee, as instructed, replied to all that 
nothing but the un^alified cession 
of the fortress of Bukkur, during 
the war, would satisfy me. He 
said it was the heart of his country, 
his honour was centred in keeping 
it, his fainihr and children would 
have no confidence if it were given 
up, and that if I came to Khyrpore 
the Ameer could speak in person to 
me many things. To this I had in¬ 
structed the Moonshee to say, that it 
was impossible till he signed the 
treaty, as I asked a plain question 
and wanted a plain answer.”—[P m6- 
lished Papers.~\ Earnestly was Meer 
Roostum entreated by his family not 
to sign the treaty, but to determine to 
resist the unjust demand. Greatly 
perplexed and alarmed, he wrote a 
touching letter of entreaty to Burnes; 
but by this time his doom was sealed. 
It was useless for liim any longer to 
struggle against his fate; so on the 
morning of the 24th of December he 
sent for Mohun Lai, told him that 
Burnes had been the first and best 
friend of the Khybur state, but that 
he had made an unexpected demand 
upon him, and that his good name 
would be irrecoverably lost if Lord 
Auckland did not seize upon Kura- 
chee, or some other place from the 
Hyderabad family, who were our 
enemies, and now triumphing, whilst 
he, ovir dearest friend, was thus de¬ 
pressed. If they were suffered to 
escape, he said, that his only course 
would be to commit suicide. “ With 
this,” wrote Burnes to government, 
“and saying Bismillah! (in the name 
of God) he sealed the treaty and 
the separate article in the presence of 
All Morad Khan, Meer Zungee, Soola* 
man Abdur, and about twenty other 
people.” A day or two afterwards, 
Burnes himself called on Meer Roos¬ 
tum and received his submission in 



894 


THE ABMY OF THE INDUS. 


through the country of the Ameers was extremely dis. 
tasteful to them; and that if they did not break out 
into acts of open hostility, their conduct towards us was 
likely to be marked by subterfuges, evasions, and deceit 
of every possible kind. 

But it soon began to be suspected that the temper of 
at least some of the Talpoor Princes was such, that a 
hostile demonstration against them was little likely to be 
avoided. The Hyderabad Ameers had assumed an atti¬ 
tude of defiance. They had insulted and outraged Co¬ 
lonel Pottiuger, and were now collecting troops for the 
defence of their capital. Sir John Keane, with the 
Bombay army, had landed at Vikkur at the end of 
November, and, after a long and mortifying delay, had 
made his way on to Tattah. Having come by sea, he was 
necessarily without carriage. He had relied upon the 
friendly feelings of the Sindh rulers ; but the Sindh 
rulers were not disposed to do anything for him, but 
everything against him. They regarded the British Ge¬ 
neral as an enemy, and threw every obstacle in his way. 
Sir John Keane was compelled, therefore, to remain 
in inactivity on the banks of the river until the 24th 


person. The poor old man, declaring 
that he was irretrievably disgraced, 
asked what he could now do to 
prove the sincerity of his friendship 
for the British Government. “ The 
answer to this declaration,” wrote 
Burncs, “was plain—to give us orders 
for supplies, and to •place all the country 
as far as he could at our command — 
and he has done so as far as he can.'* 
—[^Burncs to Government: Khyrpore^ 
Dec, 28, 1838. Published Papers 
A week after the treaty had been 
signed, Burnes received a letter from 
government, containing an allusion to 
the possibility of some other place 
being taken instead of Bukkur from 
the Khyrpore ruler. To which 
Burncs replied: “ I beg to correct any 