

“ has received the fullest considera¬ 
tion. It at first appeared to me that 
the ferry of Golkee, being on the 
most direct route to Shikarpoor from 
the frontiers of Sindh, it should be 
chosen; but an examination of the 
country between this and the river 
showed so much jungle, that I aban¬ 
doned the intention and sought a 
ferry lower down, which was found 
at Azeezpore, east of Shikarpoor, 
and near the spot’where Shah Soojah 
formerly crossed. By avoiding Roh- 
ree, three marches arc thus saved.”— 
[Bumes to Macnaghten: November 
22, 1838. MS, Becords,'] But the 
possession of Bukkur itself was 
coveted by the Supreme Govern¬ 
ment ; and four days afterwards 
Burnes wrote : “ The resolution 

to fix a force permanently in this 
country certainly diminishes the va¬ 
lue of Bukkur as a military posi¬ 
tion, since we can possess our¬ 
selves of it when we choose. ... I 
will by no means lose sight of his 
Lordship’s views on the subject of 
Bukkur; but if Hyderabad becomes 
the station of the subsidiary force, 
and Bukkur is demanded by us, 
men’s eyes will see only that we have 
seized Sindh, and made no distinc¬ 
tion between friend and foe.” — 
[Bumes to Macnaghten : November 26, 
1838. MS* Records,'] 



THE CESSION OF BUEKUB. 


393 


pedient to us to retain it, and had thus secured the 
peaceful passage of the Indus, the report which he 
made of the general feeling of the Sindhians was not 
very encouraging. It was plain that our armed passage 


But the wishes of the Supreme 
Government were so distinctly ex¬ 
pressed, that Burnes’s reluctance was 
soon overcome. The course which 
was to be pursued towards the Hy¬ 
derabad Ameers seemed to render 
less objectionable the demand to be 
made upon the Khyrpore Prince. 
But the cession of ilukkur was ex¬ 
tremely distasteful to Meer Roos- 
tum. It was calculated to lower him 
in the eyes both of the other Ameers 
and of his own subjects ; and Burnes, 
fearing that he would be dissuaded 
by his relatives, made the stipulation 
for the surrender of the jilacc a 
separate article of the treaty, in 
order that the Ameer might conceal 
it from them if he feared that they 
would remonstrate against it. “I 
sent my Moonshee, Mohun Lai,” wrote 
Burnes, “ with the treaty, signed 
and sealed, to Khyrpore on the 11th 
instant, first directing him to give 
the document to the minister, and 
then wait on the chief if invited. 
After a delay of four days, it ap¬ 
peared that all would end well; but 
the minister was then directed to 
wait upon me at Shikarpoor, and 
he came full of (jrkf and dismay 
at the demands made^ and even stated 
that he had not shown the separate 
article to Meer Jioostum Khan from 
downright shameJ'^—[^Burnes to G’o- 
vernment: Dec. 25, 1838.] When 
Burnes, disbelieving the minister’s 
story, despatched Mohun Lai to Khyr¬ 
pore, to deliver the treaty and the 
separate article, “ face to face,” to 
the Ameer, and to demand his ac¬ 
ceptance of its terms, “the con¬ 
sternation,” says Burnes, “caused 
by this public declaration, was very 
great. The Ameer first offered 
another fort in its stead; next, to find 
security that our treasure and muni¬ 
tions were protected; but the Mooo- 