

♦ Just and necessary r 

-Earth is sick, 

And Heayen is weary of the hollow words 
Which States and Kingdoms utter when they talk 
Of truth and justice. 



IKJUSTICB TO THE AMEEBS. 


383 


be able implicitly to rely.” This was the dragooning 
system now to be carried out in ’ Sindh. Sensible of 
the injustice of such proceedings, and the discreditable 
breach of faith that they involved, Colonel Pottinger did 
his best to soften down these intimations; but still the 
naked fact remained, that if the Ameers of Sindh dis¬ 
played any unwillingness to co-operate with the parties 
to a treaty under which they were to be fined a quarter 
of a million of money, they were at once to be dra¬ 
gooned into submission and deprived of their posses¬ 
sions, at the point of our bayonets and the muzzles of 
our guns.* 

The system now to be adopted was one of universal 
intimidation and coercion. Along the whole line of 
country which the armies were to traverse, the will and 
pleasure of the British Government was to be the only 
principle of action recognisable in all our transactions 
with the weaker States, which were now to be dragooned 
into prompt obedience. Their co-operation was not to 
be sought, but demanded. Anything short of hearty 
acquiescence was to be interpreted into a national of¬ 
fence. The Khan of Bahwulpore and the Ameers of 
Sindh were ordered not only to suffer the passage of our 

* I do not intend to enter into the tow.] A letter, also said to have 
politics of .Sindh more than is abso- been written by the Persian King to 
lutely necessary to the elucidation of two of the Ameers (Mahomed lUian 
the history of the war in Afghanistan; and Nussur Khan), acknowledging 
but it ought to be mentioned here the receipt of letters from them 
that the harsh and unjust treatment and exhorting them to look to him 
of the Ameers in 1838-39 has been for protection, was forwarded from 
defended or extenuated upon the Khelat to Kunjeet Sin^, who sent 
grounds of an alleged traitorous cor- it in through Captain W'ade to the 
respondence with Mahomed Shah of Govemor-GeneraL But Major Todd, 
Persia. A letter from one of the who by this time had joined Shah 
Ameers to the King of Kings*’ was Soojah at Loodhianah, did not hesi- 
intercepted, but Colonel Pottinger tate to pronounce it, from its style 
declared that it was of no political and language, to be a palpable fabri- 
importance, but simply an ebullition cation.’— [Captoin Wade to Mr, 
of Sheeahism, addressed to Mahomed Macnaghten: October MS. 

Shah as Defender of the Faiths lUcord^.'] 

[Corretpondence relating to Afghanis^ 



384 


THE ABMY OP THE INDUS. 


troops through their dominions, but also to supply them 
on their way. The former had ever been regarded as 
one of the staunchest friends of the British Government ; 
but when he was called upon to collect camels and to 
place supplies at the different stages for the use of the 
array, the work was carried on with obvious reluctance. 
It was found necessary to remind the Khan of his “ ob¬ 
ligations” and “responsibilities.” The officers of the 
Khan affected to believe that the British force would 
not march, and, whilst laying in supplies for the Shah’s 
troops, hesitated to make an effort in behalf of our 
supporting columns. The “obstinacy and perversity” 
—the “duplicity and equivocation”—the “neglectful, 
if not reckless conduct of the Bahwulpore authorities,” 
was severely commented upon by our political officers;* 
and it was apprehended that the march of the army 
would be delayed by the misguided conduct of our 
respectable ally. 