

The Bengal army moved from Ferozepore on the 10th 
of December.* Availing themselves of the water-car¬ 
riage, they moved down parallel to the river. The sick, 
the hospital stores, and a portion of our Commissariat sup¬ 
plies were forwarded on boats, which were subsequently 
to be used for the bridging of the Indus. The force 
consisted of about 9500 men and 38,000 camp-followers. 
Some 30,000 camels accompanied the army.f There 
was an immense assemblage of baggage. Sir Henry 
Fane had exhorted the officers of the Army of the Indus 
not to encumber themselves with large establishments 
and unnecessary equipages; but there is a natural dis¬ 
position on the part of Englishmen, in all quarters of the 
globe, to carry their comforts with them. It requires. 

* Shah SoojaVs force passed burden, had been mostly drawn on 
through Ferozepore on the 2nd. hire from Bekaneer, Jaysujmer, and 
Major Todd accompanied the Shah, the northern and north-western pro* 
Macnaghten joined the royal camp yinces of India; but the country had 
at Shikarpoor. been so drained, that at last it became 

t It had been no easy matter to necessary to indent upon the brood* 
provide carriage-cattle for that im- camels of the government stud at 
mense assemblage. The camels, which Hissar. 
constituted the bulk of the beuts of 



BAGGAGE OF THE ABMY. 


389 


a vast deal of exhortation to induce officers to move 
lightly equipped. The more difficult the country into 
•which they are sent—the more barbarous the inhabi¬ 
tants—the more trying the climate—the greater is their 
anxiety to surround themselves with the comforts which 
remote countries and uncivilised people cannot supply, 
and which ungenial climates render more indispensable. 
In the turmoil of actual war, all these light matters may 
be forgotten; but a long, a wearisome, and unexciting 
march through a difficult but uninteresting country, 
tries the patience even of the best of soldiers, and fills 
him with unappeasable yearnings after the comforts 
which make endurable the tedium of barrack or canton¬ 
ment life. It is natural that with the prospect of a long 
and wearisome march before him, he should not be 
entirely forgetful of the pleasures of the mess-table, or 
regardless of the less social delights of the pleasant 
volume and the solacing pipe. Clean linen, too, is a 
luxury which a civilised man, without any imputation 
upon his soldierly qualities, may, in moderation, desire 
to enjoy. The rudeness and barrenness of the country 
compel him to supply himself at the commencement of 
his journey with everything that he will require in the 
course of it; and the exigencies of the climate necessarily 
increase the extent of these requirements. The expedi¬ 
tion across the Indus had been prospectively described 
as a “grand military promenade;” and if such were 
the opinion of some of the highest authorities, it is not 
strange that officers of inferior rank should have en¬ 
dorsed it, and hastened to act upon the suggestion it 
conveyed. And so marched the Army of the Indus, ac¬ 
companied by thousands upon thousands of baggage¬ 
laden camels and other beasts of burden, spreading 
themselves for miles and miles over the country, and 
making up with the] multitudinous followers of the camp 