


error in my own communication that 
may have led his Lordship to the 
belief that this place is not well 
adapted for a depot. I look upon it 
as the most important military posi¬ 
tion on the Indus, and in this I am 
now joined by Major Leech, who has 
examined it professionally. It is 
uitc a mistake to imagine that it is 
ifiicult of access, and that there is 
but one landing-place. There are 
two gates, and the ferry-boats can 
track all round the island. For three 
months during the swell, the water 
certainly runs with great velocity, 
but now the Indus is here as un¬ 
ruffled as a pond .”—[Bumies to Go~ 
vemment: Uzeezpoor Ferry^ Decern^ 
her 31, 1838.] 



CONDUCT OF MEER BOOSTUM. 


395 


of December. A supply of carriage from Cutch, ob¬ 
tained by the energetic exertipns of Captain Outram—a 
supply by no means adequate to the wants of the force, 
but most welcome at such a time—came opportunely to 
release Sir John Keane from this local bondage, and the 
Bombay column then commenced its march into Sindh. 
Proceeding up the right bank of the Indus to Tattah, 
and thence to Jerruk, he awaited at the latter place 
the result of the negotiations which were going on at 
Hyderabad. Captain Outram and Lieutenant Eastwick 
had been despatched to the Court of the Ameers wjth 
Lord Auckland’s ultimatum; and Keane, with the Bom¬ 
bay column, was now, at the end of January, awaiting 
the* result. 

Surrounded by his own contingent, Shah Soojah had 
proceeded in advance of the Bengal column; and his 
force had crossed the Indus, in very creditable order, 
before the end of the third week of January. Shikar- 
poor had been fixed upon as the place of rendezvous. 
There the force was now encamped, and there the Envoy 
and Minister joined the suite of the Douranee monarch. 

Cotton was to have crossed the Indus at Eohree, 
which lies opposite to the fort of Bukkur. Some delay 
had taken place in the cession of the fortress; for the 
Bengal column had arrived on the banks of the river 
before the treaty with the Ameer of Khyrpore, by 
which it was to be ceded, had arrived with the ratifica¬ 
tion of the Governor-General; and after its arrival, some 
further delay was occasioned, either by the mistrust or by 
the guile of the Sindh ruler. He was not ignorant of the 
state of affairs at Hyderabad. He knew, or suspected, 
that there was a likelihood of a large portion of the 
Bengal column being detached, and he was eager to 
temporise. Something might be written down in the 
chapter of accidents, that might enable him to retain 
possession of Bukkur; or something might be gained by 



396 


THE ABMT OF THE INDUS. 


the detention of Cotton’s troops. It was not, therefore, 
till the 29th of January that the British flag waved from 
the fort of Bukkur—and even when the detachment of 
troops, which was to, receive possession, crossed the 
river, opposition seemed so probable, that some powder- 
bags, wherewith to blow in the gates of the fort, were 
stowed away in one of the boats. 