

We should not, I think, on any account, lose the season for ad¬ 
vancing upon Candahar. With our European regiment, some 
more artillery, a couple of Native regiments, and a small battering 
train, we might not only occupy Candahar, but relieve Herat; 
and by money, if we have no disposable troops, make Caubul too 
hot for Dost Mahomed. 

The Shah is very solicitous about future operations, and, I am 
sorry to say, talks foolishly every time I sec him on the subject 
of his confined territories that are to be—and frequently says it 
would be much better for him to have remained at Loodhianah. 
The next time he touches on the subject, I intend to remind him 
of the verse of Sadi, “ If a king conquers seven regions he would 
still bo hankering after another territory.” I have little doubt of 
being able to bring him into a more reasonable temper of mind. 
He is much delighted with the four six-pounders presented to 

. him by your Lordship.I hardly think it probable that 

50,000 rupees per mensem will suffice for the Shah’s expenses, but 
on this point I will write tp your Lordship more fully on another 
Occasion.! 

And again he wrote, soon afterwards, to Mr. Colvin: 

I grieve to say that I have no consolation to afford you. Out 
accoimts from every quarter as to what is really passing are most 

♦ Unpublished Correspondence of Sir W. //. MacnnglUen, f Ibid, 




400 


THE ARMY OF THE INDUS. 


unsatisfactoiy, and Sir Willoughby Cotton is clearly going on a 
wild-goose chase. He cannot possibly, I think, be at Hyderabad 
under twenty-five days from this date, and he seems to be 
travelling by a route which has no road. He will soon, I fear, 
find himself in the jungle. If this goes on as it is now doing, 
what is to become of our Afghan expedition? Burnes’s letters 
are most unsatisfactory.* 

He had hardly despatched the letter from which this 
last passage is taken, when a communication from the 
Governor-General was put into his hands, and it became 
more than ever obvious from its contents, that Lord 
Auckland's first wish was, that the Bengal column 
should accompany Shah Soojah and his contingent as 
expeditiously as possible to Candahar. Fortified by 
these advices^ Macnaghten, on the following day, wrote, 
in emphatic language to Sir Willoughby Cotton, in vir¬ 
tue of the power vested in him by the Governor-Ge¬ 
neral, requiring that military chief to furnish him with 
a force sufficient to enable him to give effect to his 
Lordship's plans in Afghanistan: 

“ I have already urged,” he added, in the strongest terms, 
your crossing over to this side of the river with your whole force. 
Of Sir John Keane’s army there can be no apprehension. His 
Excellency will always be able to keep up his communication 
with the sea, whilst your presence on this side would enable us 
to establish a strong post at the extremity of the Sindh territories, 
and ensure the safety of the supplies for the Army of the Indus 
in its advance into Afghanistan. The Ameers cannot for any 
length of time keep up an army—they must be reduced to act 
on the defensive, and then the result could hardly be doubtful. 
Dangerous as the experiment might be* it would, in ray opinion, 
be infinitely better that we should let loose fifteen or twenty 
thousand of Runjeet Singh’s troops (who would march down 
upon Hyderabad in a very short space of time), than that the 
grand enterprise of restoring Shah Soojah to the throne of 