

* Unpublished Correspondence of Sir W. H, Macnaghten: Feb. 6, 1839. 



SUBMISSION OF HYDBBABAD. 401 

Caubul and Candahar should be postponed for an entire season. 
By such a postponement it might be frustrated altogether.” 

Thus were the military and political authorities 
brought into a state of undisguised antagonism. Ciiv 
cumstances, however, had already occurred to unravel 
the web of diflSculty that had been cast around them. 
The progress of the Bengal column towards Hyderabad 


was arrested by the receipt 
that the Ameers, awed by 
mitted to the demands of 

♦ On the 20th of January, Outram 
and East wick had arrived opposite 
Hyderabad. A few passages from the 
journal of the former will best indi¬ 
cate the progress and result of their 
negotiations. 

“ January —Waited till evening, 
in expectation of being summoned to 
the Durbar, but a frivolous excuse 
was sent for not seeing us this day, 
and our attendance was requested at 
2 p.M. to-morrow. 

“ January 22. — «... At 4 p.m. 
the Ameers sent for us, and received 
us with much affectation of cordia¬ 
lity. After the usual complimentary 
speeches, all excepting contidential 
attendants were directed to withdraw, 
when their Highnesses entered upon 
the subject of the treaty, a copy of 
which had been previously furnished 
to them, and every article of which 
was commented on ; many objections 
being made and supported with much 
plausibility bv the Ameers, especially 
by Noor Mahomed Khan. These 
matters were discussed until sunset, 
when we were dismissed with every 
assurance that ‘the will of the British 
Government was law to that of Sindh,’ 
but tnat a definite answer could not 
be given until next day. 

** January 28.—The hostile inten¬ 
tions of the Ameers are hourly evinced; 
all supplies to and communication 
with our camp are prohibited, and we 
ascertain that it had even been pro¬ 
posed to attack our little party, and 
that an engagement had been solemnly 

VOL. I. 2 


of intelligence to the efiect 
impending danger, had sub- 
the British Government.* 

sworn to by all the Ameers and the 
chiefs to stand by each other in the 
approaching struggle. Under these 
circumstances .... determined to 
demand either an acceptance of the 
treaty or an explicit avowal of their 
own intentions, together with our dis¬ 
missal.This message was ac¬ 

cordingly sent in the evening, and an 
immediate answer demanded. None 
was, however, received, ... 

“ January 24,— . . . Sent again to 
Noor Mahomed demanding an answer 
to our message of yesterday, , , The 
answer given was, that the treaty would 
be sent back, and that we might stay 
or go, as we pleased. At noon em¬ 
barked, and steamed down the Indus 
to Jerriik. 

“ January 25.—The army (Sir John 
Keane’s) arrived here. 

** January 27.—The native agent at 
Hyderabad writes that two of the 
Ameers—viz., Noor Mahomed and 
Nufar Kban, are still wavering and 
inclined to yield, but that Meer Ma¬ 
homed Khan and the Beloochees are 
determined not to submit. 