

Burnes hastened to Khelat. He was courteously re¬ 
ceived. He found Mehrab Khan an able and sagacious 
man. Suspicious of others, but with more frankness and 
unreserve in his character than is commonly found in 
suspicious men, the Khan commented freely on our policy 
—said, with prophetic truth, that we might restore Shah 
Soojah to Afghanistan, but that we should not carry the 
Afghan people with us, and that we should, therefore, 
fail in the end—and then, after launching into an indig¬ 
nant commentary on the ingratitude of Shah Soojah, for 
whom he had suffered much and reaped nothing in re¬ 
turn, he proceeded to set forth the evils which had 
resulted to him and his people from the passage of the 
British army through his dominions.! “ The English,” 

* Captain Havelock says : “ From dertaking the British had embarked 
the 28th of March, the loaf of the in—declared it to be one of vast mag- 
European soldiers was diminished in nitude and difficult accomplishment— 
weight, the Native troops received that instead of relying on the Afghan 
only half instead of a full seer of ottah nation, our government had cast them 
(that is a pound of flour) per diem, aside and inundated the country with 
and the camp-followers, who had foreign troops—that if it was our end 
hitherto found it diffictdt to subsist to establish ourselves in Afghanistan, 
on half a seer, were of necessity re- and give Shah Sooiah the nominal 
duced to the famine allowance of a sovereignty of Caubul and Canda- 
quarter of a seer.” har, we were pursuing an erroneous 

t “ The Khan, with a good deal of course—that all the Afghans were 
earnestness, enlarged upon the un- discontented with the Shah, and all 



410 


THE ABHT OV THE mDUS. 


he said, “ had now come, and by their march throng 
his country, in different directions, destroyed t|)is crops, 
poor as they were; helped themselves to‘the water 
which irrigated the lands, made doubly valuable in this 
year of scarcity;”—“ but he had stood,” he added, “ qui¬ 
escent, and hoped from the English justice, from the 
Shah justice; hoped that his claims might be regarded 
in a proper light, and he for ever relieved from the mas¬ 
tery of the Suddozye Kings.” He then spoke freely and 
fluently of our policy in Central Asia, of the position in 
which we had placed ourselves at Herat by supporting 
such a miscreant as Yar Mahomed, and of the failure of 
our negotiations at Caubul and Candahar. “ I might 
have allied myself,” he said, ‘‘ with Persia and Russia— 
but I have seen you safely through the great defile of 
the Bolan, and yet I am unrewarded.” 

Burnes had brought with him the draft of a treaty, 
which, on the following day, ho sent to the Khan. He 
had made it a condition of all peaceable negotiation with 
the Beloochee Prince that he should wait upon Shah 
Soojah in his camp—a condition which Mehrab Khan 
disliked and resisted, but from which he could not ex¬ 
tricate himself. The treaty, by which the supremacy of 
Shah Soojah was distinctly acknowledged, bound the 
British Government to pay Mehrab Khan a lakh and a 
half of rupees annually, in return for which the Khan 
engaged to “ use his best endeavours to procure supplies, 
carriage, and guards to protect provisions and stores 
going and coming from Shikarpoor, by the route of 