


* ** The conduct of the officers of the bouring Beloochee tribes to attempt 
Khelat chief has been most creditable at their peril to molest us* Such 
and praiseworthy. Syud Mahomed has been the confidence thus given^ 
Sheriff, the Governor of Gundava, that a great body of the migratory 
and Moolla Ramzan, a slave of the inhabitants from Cutchee availed 
Khan, have attended me the whole themselves of our escort to ascend 
way, procured a band of eighty of the into Afghanistan.’’-~[jBttmes to Molo 
natives to escort us, and they likewise naghten: March 16, 1889« MS» 
addressed the Ameers and the neigh- eordi.] 



408 


. THE ABMT OP THE INDUS. 


cattle in the rear, or carried off by the plunderers about 

them. ^ 

Happy was every man in the force when the army 

again emerged into the open country. The vaUey of 
Shawl lay before them, a favoured spot in a country of 
little favour. The clear crisp climate braced the Euro¬ 
pean frame; and over the wide plain, bounded by noble 
mountain-ranges, intersected by many sparkling streams, 
and dotted with orchards and vineyards, the eye ranged 
with delight; whilst the well-known carol of the lark, 
mounting up in the fresh morning air, broke with many 
home associations charmingly on the English ear.* On 
the 26 th of March the Bengal column reached Quettah 
—“ a most miserable mud town, with a small castle on a 
mound, on which there was a small gun on a rickety 
carriage.! Here Sir Willoughby Cotton was to halt 
until further orders. Starvation was beginning to stare 
his troops in the face. 

Seldom has a military commander found himself in the 
midst of more painful perplexities than those which now 
surrounded Cotton. It seemed to be equally impossible 
to stand still or to move forward. His supplies were now 
so reduced, that even upon famine allowances his troops 
could not have reached Candahar with provisions for 
more than a few days in store; and to remain halted 
at Quettah would necessarily aggravate the evil. There 
appeared to be no possibility of obtaining supplies. All 
the provisions stored in Quettah and the surrounding 
villages would not have fed our army for many days. 
In this painful conjuncture. Cotton acted with becoming 
promptitude. He despatched his Adjutant-General to 
Sir John Keane for orders, whilst Burnes proceeded 
to Khelat to work upon the fears or the cupidity of 

• See HavelocVs Narrative. 

t Hough's Narrative of the Operations of ike Army of the Indue. 



BUBNES AT KHELAT. 


40 ^ 


Mehrab Khan; and, in the mean while, reduced to the 
scantiest dole the daily supplies meted out to our un> 
fortunate fighting men and our more miserable camp-fol¬ 
lowers.* These privations soon began to tell fearfully 
upon their health and their spirits. The sufferings of 
the present were aggravated by the dread of the future; 
and as men looked at the shrunk frames and sunken 
cheeks of each other, and in their own feebleness and 
exhaustion felt what wrecks they had become, their 
hearts died within them at the thought that a day was 
coming when even the little that was now doled out to 
them might be wholly denied. 