

Mabomedans alarmed and excited at chief of Caubul was a man of ability 
what was passing—that, day by day, and resource and though we could 
men returned discontented, and we easily put him down by Shah Soojah 
might find ourselves awkwardly is- even in our present mode of proce- 
tuated if we did not point out to Shah dure, we comd never win over the 
Soojah his errors, if the fault origi- Afghan nation by it.**—[Bamss to 
nated with him, and alter them if Maenaghten: Khdaty March 80^ IS99. 
they sprung fix»m ourselves—that the MS. Reoords.2 



BUBNSS AT KH£l<AT. 411 

Rozan, Dadur, the Pass of Bolan, through Shawl to 
Koochlafe, from one frontier to another.” 

Mehrab Khan affixed his seal to the treaty. But he 
disliked the bargain he had made. He was altogether 
suspicious of Shah Soojah and the Suddozyes. He 
was by no means certain of the success of the present 
enterprise. He believed, that by paying homage to the 
Shah, he would raise up a host of powerful enemies, 
and plunge himself into a sea of ruin. Striving to allay 
the apprehensions of the Khan, Burnes made some tri¬ 
fling concessions, which were not without their efiect; 
and then proceeded to press upon him the subject which 
at that moment was of most immediate importance to 
British interests—the matter of supplies; and earnestly 
pointed out the imperative necessity of every possible ex¬ 
ertion being made by the Khan to provide them. But it 
was easier to suggest such provision than to make it. 
Mehrab Khan said that he would do his best—that he 
would place men at Burnes’s disposal to proceed to 
Nooshky and other places, where the crops were nearly 
ripe (“ and,” said Burnes, parenthetically, “ he has done 
so”)—that he would “ give grain in Gundava and Cutchee, 
and if we would send for our stores at Shikarpoor to 
Dadur, he would actively aid in passing them through 
the Bolan—that he might also aid us at Moostung in 
getting a small quantity of grain; but that there was 
really very little grain at Khelat, or in the country—that 
he had reduced his escort to wait on the Shah to lOQO 
men, on account of the scarcity—and that he could not 
then furnish the grain, but each man must bring his own.” 
“This intelligence,” wrote Burnes to Macnaghten, “i$ 
very distressing in our present position; but my inquiries 
serve to convince me that there is but a small supply 
of grain in this country, and none certainly to be ^ven 
us, without aggravating the present distress of the in- 



412 


THE AEMT OF THE INDUS. 


habitants—some of whom are feeding on herbs and grasses 
gathered in the jungle. It is with some difficulty we 
have supported ourselves, whilst the small quantities we 
have procured have been got by stealth. This scarcity is 
corroborated by a blight in last year’s harvest. Under 
such circumstances, the only way of turnmg the Khan to 
account is in supplying sheep; and here be can and is 
willing to assist us to a great extent. Probably 10,000 
or 16,000 may be procured; and arrangements are now 
being made for purchasing and sending them down to 
Shawl.”* 