



398 


THE ARMY OF THE INDTTS. 


steadfastly towards Candahar; and determined to arrest 
the progress of the Bengal column on its march to the 
Sindh capital 

In what light this diversion was viewed by him, and 
for what reasons he deprecated it, Macnaghten’s letters, 
written at this time, indicate with sufficient distinctness; 
and it is just, therefore, that in a matter which has en¬ 
tailed some odium upon him, he should be suffered to 
speak for himself: 

The Governor-General,” he wrote to Burnes, “ never seems to 
have contemplated the diversion of the army of the Indus from its 
original purpose, except on emergency. No such emergency ap** 
pears to have arisen. We are utterly ignorant of the state of affairs 
below. It is hardy possible to conceive that matters should not have 
been settled, unless under the very improbable supposition that 
Sir J. Keane should be waiting for reinforcements, or that a suspen¬ 
sion of liostilities may have been agreed upon, pending the receipt 
of further instructions from the Governor-General In the first 
place, it may be presumed that the Bombay reserve will reach Sir 
John Keane long ere Sir Willoughby Cotton can do so. In the 
latter case, it is probable that the suggestions with which I have 
this day furnished Colonel Pottinger, will bring matters to an 
amicable conclusion. As far as I have learnt the motives of Sir 
W. C.’s movement down the left bank of the Indus, it was with 
a view of creating a diversion, and never with any intention of 
actually proceeding all the way to Hyderabad. The effect of the 
movement, whatever it may have been, must have been already 
produced. At all events, by crossing to this side of the river, the 
effect will rather be heightened than lessened; while, if the force 
should not be required further, it might be all ready to proceed at 
the proper season to its original destination in Afghanistan, I 
should hope in less than ten days from this date to receive a reply 
from Colonel Pottinger; and, in the mean time, the boats might 
be got ready to proceed with the troops downwards, should 
their services be required. Thus no time would be lost. But, as 
in that case there could be Kttle hope of the return of the troops 
to proceed this season into Afghanistan, 1 would strongly urge 
that a force, to the extent specified in the second paragraph of 



macnaghten’s letters. 


399 


this letter (one European regiment, one Native cavalry, a troop of 
horse artilleiy, with a suitable battering train), with a sufficiency 
of carriage-cattle for itself and Shah Soojah’s army, should be 
directed to proceed to Shikarpoor. With such a force I am 
clearly of opinion that the views of the Governor-General, in 
regard to Afghanistan, could be carried into effect during the 
present season. The consequences of losing a whole season are 
not to be foreseen.”* 

In another letter he wrote to the Governor-General 
—and the passage has an additional interest, as affording, 
for the first time, a glimpse of the unreasonable character 
of Shah Soojah, and the extent to which his Majesty’s 
peculiarities heightened the difficulties of Macnaghten’s 
position: 