


ceased to long for the warmth of their doaks.* The 
distance from Shikarpoor to Dadur is 146 miles. It 
was accomplished by the Bengal column in sixteen pain¬ 
ful marches. Water and forage were so scarce that the 
cattle suffered terribly on the way. The camels fell 
dead by scores on the desert; and further on the Beloo- 
chee robbers carried them off with appalling dexterity. 
When the column reached a cultivated tract of country, 
the green crops were used as forage for the horses. The 
ryots were liberally paid on the spot; but the agents of 
the Beloochee chiefs often plundered the unhappy culti¬ 
vators of the money that had been paid to them even in 
front of the British camp. 

It was on the 10th of March that the Bengal column 
reached Dadur, which lies at the mouth of the Bolan 
Pass. Whatever doubts may before have been enter¬ 
tained regarding the provisionary prospects of the Army 
of the Indus, they were now painfully set at rest. Major 
Leech had been long endeavouring to collect supplies 
for the army at this place; but, in spite of all his zeal 
and all his ability, he had signally failed. Mehrab Khan 
of Khelat, under whose dominion lay the provinces 
through which the army was now passing, had thrown 
every impediment in the way of the collection of grain 
for our advancing troops. The prospect, therefore, be¬ 
fore them was anything but an encouraging one. At 
Dadur they found themselves, on the 10th of March, 
with a month’s supplies on their beasts of burden. Cot¬ 
ton saw that there was little chance of collecting more; 
so he determined to push on with aU possible despatch. 

On the 16th he resumed his march; and entered the 
Bolan Pass. Bumes had gone on in advance with a 
party under Major Cureton, to secure a safe passage for 
the colunm; and had been completely successful. The 


♦ Havelock. 



TBS PASSAGE OF THE SOLAN. 


407 


Beloochee authorities rendered him all the aid in their 
power;* and when Cotton appeared with his troops on a 
clear, stiil morning, at the mouth of the defile, there was 
little likelihood of any obstacle being opposed to his free 
progress. But the baggage-cattle were fidling dead by 
the wayside; the artillery horses were showing painful 
symptoms of distress. The stream of the Bolan river 
was tainted by the bodies of the camels that had sunk 
beneath their loads. The Beloochee freebooters were 
hovering about, cutting off our couriers, murdering 
stragglers, carrying off our baggage and our cattle. 
Among the rocks of this stupendous defile our men 
pitched their tents; and toiled on again day after day, 
over a wretched road covered with loose flint stones, 
surmounting, at first, by a scarcely perceptible ascent, 
and afterwards by a difficult acclivity, the great Brahoo 
chain of hills. The Bolan Pass is nearly sixty miles in 
length. The passage was accomplished in six days. 
They were days of drear discomfort, but not of danger. 
A resolute enemy might have wrought mighty havoc 
among Cotton’s regiments; but the enemies with which 
now they had to contend were the sharp flint stones 
which lamed our cattle, the scanty pasturage which 
destroyed them, and the marauding tribes who carried 
them off. The way was strewn with baggage—with 
abandoned tents, and stores; and luxuries which, a few 
weeks afterwards, would have fetched their weight twice 
counted in rupees, were left to be trampled down by the 