

“ January 29.—A deputation from 
the Ameers arrived, but merely de¬ 
livered letters to the Commander- 
in-Chief and the Resident. 

^'January 30.—^The deputation de¬ 
livered their messages, which were 
expressive of the kindljr intentions ot 
tlie Ameers, but required explana¬ 
tions on certain points of the treaty. 

** January 81.— In the evening ac¬ 
counts brought from Hyderabad that 

D 




402 


fHE ASHY 07 TBE mDtJS. 


They had consented to pay the money which had been 
required from them, and it was believed that it would 
soon be paid.* They had submitted to the terms of a 
stringent treaty, which had been fastened upon them 
by the British authorities, and agreed to pay annually 
three lakhs of rupees for the support of a British sub¬ 
sidiary force in their dominions. Cotton was, there¬ 
fore, instructed to halt his division; and on the very 
7 th of February on which Macnaghten had written and 
despatched the letter which I have above quoted, the 
hopes of the Bengal column were dashed by the an¬ 
nouncement that Hyderabad and its treasures were no 
longer lying at their feet. The Ameers paid an instal¬ 
ment of the tribute-money, and Cotton, to the great joy 
of the Envoy, but to the extreme disappointment of his 
troops, retraced his steps to Rohree, and prepared to 
effect the passage of the river, whilst Keane, with the 
Bombay column, moved up along the right bank of the 
Indus, and saw, through the dusty atmosphere of Lower 
Sindh, the palace and the city where was stored the 
gathered wealth which was to have enriched his army. 

Meer Shere Mahomed, of Meerpore, “ Febrmry 4.— .... The Ameers 

had arrived at that city with his army, now express the utmost anxiety to ful- 
and had plundered our grain depots I lil the terms of the treat)’, and im- 
“ February I.—Deputies from the mediately to make good Shah Soojah’s 
Ameers arrived, to intimate that their tribute, tt^ether with the value of the 
Highnesses had resolved to submit grain lately plundered. This alacrity 
to the treater, adding that the plunder rs caused by their having heard of the 
of the grain was in opposition to approach of the Bengal army down 
their authority, and that many persons the opposite side of the river, and of 
had been kiJJed in an attempt to Shah Soojah’s on this^not to mention 
prevent it. They further promised a report that the latter had plundered 
to repay the value of the grain, and Larkhana.”— OutranCt Rough 
requested a few verbal alterations in Note# of tht C«nq>aign in Sindh and 
the treaty, with which their envoys Afghanistan.'] 

returned to the capital. • The amount was twenty lakhs of 

Febrmry 2.-—Accounts from Hy- rupees, a moiety of which was paid 
derabad mention that the Ameers down. The otlier seven lakhs, making 
tmve ratified the treaty, returned into up the gross amount to be paid by 
the fort from the camp they had oc« the Talpoor Princes, were paidby the 
c^ied on the banka of the river^ and Ameer of Kbyrpore. 
ordered the dispersion of tbeir army. 