

“ Sir Willoughby,” wrote the En- from me, however quietly and mo- 
voy to Mr. Colvin, on the 24th of destly given, was received with hau- 
February, “ made his appearance in teur ; and I was distinctly told that I 
camp yesterday morning. He is evi- wanted to assume the command of 
detitly disposed to look upon his the army; that he, Sir Willoughby, 
Majesty and his disciplined troops and knew no superior but Sir John Keane, 
myself as mere cyphers. Any hint and that he would not be interfered 



PROGRESS THROUGH CUTCH. 


405 


It was decreed that the Bengal column should at once 
move in advance. On the following day it was ma- 
ncBuvred in presence of the King. The parching heats 
of Sindh, and the evil effects of a failing Commissariat, 
had not then begun to impair our army; and, in full 
health and fine condition, the troops moved before the 
well-pleased Shah. On the 23rd, Sir Willoughby Cotton 
began to put his force again in motion. But the Shah's 
contingent remained halted at Shikarpoor. There was 
not carriage sufficient for its advance. 

The difficulties of the march now began to obtrude 
themselves. Between Sukkur and Shikarpoor the 
camels had dropped down dead by scores. But there 
was a worse tract of country in advance. The officers 
looked at their maps, and traced with dismay the vast 
expanse of sandy desert, where no green pasture met 
the eye, and no sound of water spoke to the ear. But 
the season was favorable. Escaping the arid and pesti¬ 
lential blasts of April and May, and the noxious exhala¬ 
tions of the four succeeding months, the column ad¬ 
vanced into Cutch. The hard, salt-mixed sand, crackled 
under their horses’ feet as the General and his staff 
crossed the desert, on a fine bright night of early March 
—so cool that only, when in a full gallop, the riders 

with, &c., &c. All this arose out of to leave Shah Soojah in the lurch, 
my requesting 1000 camels for the without the means of moving, I 
use of the Siiah and his force. Sir should esteem it my duty, as a poli- 
Willoughby was ably backed by tlie tical officer, to protest most strongly 
Commissariat officers. My arguments against the arrangement, and that the 
were urged throughout in the most Governor-General would determine 
mild and conciliatory tone. I was which of us was right. Sir Wil- 
determined on no account to lose my loughby dined with me, and at dinner 
temper ; and we parted at a late hour the important despatches from the 
last night very good friends. I told Governor-General and yourself, dated 
him 1 was the last man in the world the 5th instant, were put into my 
who would presume to interfere with hands. We discussed their contents 
his military arrangements; but I in my private tent afterwards—-pre¬ 
found it requisite to tell him, during sent Sir W. C., Todd, and Burnes.”— 
one of our conversations, that if he [^Z/npublished Correspondence of Sir 
thought it for the good of the service W. H, MacnagUenJ] 



406 


THE ABMY OF THE INDUS. 