



CAPTDBE OP KUBACHBE. 


403 


Halting for some days opposite Hyderabad,* the Bom¬ 
bay troops received intelbgence to tbe effect that the 
Reserve which had been sent to their assistance from the 
Presidency had arrived at Eurachee, under Brigadier 
Valiant. The 40th Queen’s Regiment formed a portion 
of this brigade. It had been brought from Bombay in 
a seventy-four gun-ship—the Wellesley —and Admiral 
Sir Frederick Maitland was on board. In the position 
which affairs had assumed in Lower Sindh, it seemed 
desirable that the English should possess themselves of the 
fort of Eurachee; so the Admiral summoned it to sur¬ 
render. The answer of the Commandant was a gallant 
one. “ I am a Beloochee,” he said, “ and I will die 
first.” With characteristic mendacity the Sindhian boat¬ 
men in the harbour declared that the place was prepared 
to withstand a siege, and that one of the Ameers had 
come down with an army of 3000 men. The English 
sailor had now an answer to give as gallant as that of 
the Beloochee chief. “The more the better,” he said; 
“ we shall have the first trial of them.” Everything was 
soon ready for the attack. But British humanity again 
interposed, and Maitland a second time summoned the 
garrison to surrender. The reply was a word of defiance, 
and a shot from the fort. Then was heard by the gar¬ 
rison that which had never been heard there before, and 
of which they had no conception—a broadside from an 
English man-of-war. The Wellesley's guns did their 
work in less than an hour, and the British colours soon 
floated over the place. The garrison had consisted of 
only some twenty memf 

* ** The city of Hyderabad/* says the Ameer, which surmounts their 
Dr. James Burnes, in his Visit to the capital, is but a paltry erection of Bl- 
Court of Sindh^ an interesting and burnt bricks» crumbling gradually to 
valuable work, ** in a collection of decay, and perfectly incapable of with* 
Wretched low mud hovels, as destitute standing for an hour the attack of re- 
of the means of defence as they are of gular troops.** 
external elegance or internal coodbrt; *|* Kennedy, 

and even the boasted stronghold of 

2 D 2 



404 


THE AEMY OF THE INDUS. 


On the 20th of February, Sir Willoughby Cotton, 
with the head-quarters of his force, arrived at Shikar- 
poor. On the morning of that day the General and 
the Envoy were for some time in conference with each 
other. The discussion was a long and a stormy one. 
The General seems to have anticipated the interference 
of Macnaghten, and to have resented it before it took 
any really offensive shape. The two officers looked on 
each other with suspicion. The General leapt hastily 
to the conclusion that the civilian was determined to 
overrule his military authority; and the Envoy, on the 
other side, thought that the soldier regarded him, the 
King and the King’s army, with something very like 
contempt. Macnaghten wanted carriage for the Shah’s 
force, and asked for 1000 camels. Sir Willoughby re¬ 
sented this as an act of interference; accused the Envoy 
of wishing to assume the command of the army, and de¬ 
clared that he knew no superior authority but that of 
Sir John Keane. At this, and at subsequent meetings, 
the Envoy urged that he had no intention of inter¬ 
fering with the military movements of the General, but 
that if he thought it for the good of the service that 
Shah Soojah should be left behind, the matter must be 
referred for the decision of the Governor-General, In 
tlie evening they met at dinner in the Envoy’s tent. 
The meal was not over when important despatches from 
the Governor-General were placed in Macnaghtens 
hands. In the Envoy’s private tent they were read 
and discussed. Burnes and Todd were present at the 
conference. Late at night the General and the Envoy 
parted “ very good friends.”* 