

In the mean while, the Shah’s contingent and the Bom¬ 
bay division of the Army of the Indus were making their 
way through Sindh.f Greatly straitened for carriage, it 
had been for some time doubtful whether the whole of 
the Shah’s army would be able to proceed to Candahar. 
There had been a disposition on the part of Sir Wil¬ 
loughby Cotton to look with contempt upon the Sud- 
dozye levies, and to make the King and his regiments 
play a part in the coming drama, by no means in accord¬ 
ance with the estimate which Macnaghten had formed 
of their importance. And now Sir John Keane seemed 
equally inclined to throw into the background the King, 
the Envoy, and the contingent. But Macnaghten had 
claimed for the Shah a prominent place in the coming 
operations,! and the military chief had yielded to his 

♦ Bumes to Macnaghten : Khelat, being in advance with at least a por- 
April 2, 1839. tion of his own troops after the junc- 

*1* The Shah and his contingent tion of the several divisions shall have 
moved from Shikarpoor on the 7th of been effected, or rather after you have 
March. ^ ^ made your final arrangements for the 

± “ His Majesty the Shah is natu- order of our advance. This you will 
rall^ anxious to occupy a prominent observe will be conformable to the 
position in our movements, and it is wishes of the Governor-General, as 
very desirable, on political grounds, expressed in the accompanying ex- 
that he should do so ; 1 trust, there- tracts. His Lordship never contem- 
fore, that your Excellency will see fit plated the leaving behind any portion 
to attend to his Majesty’s wishes in of the Shah's force except in the case 
this particular, |and to authorise bis of opposition being shown by Sindh 



DEVASTATIONS OF THE AEMT. 


4ia 

representations, and even placed at his disposal a number 
of baggage-cattle which he greatly needed for his own 
force. Anxious to conciliate the commander of the army, 
and never unmindful of the public interests, the Envoy 
gratefully declined the offer.* Keane was “in a wretched 
plight for want of cattle,” and Macnaghten, believing that 
the Bengal Commissariat had neglected the Bombay chief, 
did his best to enable him to move. 

Sir Willoughby Cotton had suggested to Macnaghten 
the expediency of a movement upon Khelat; but the 
Envoy was then little inclined to take the same unfavor¬ 
able view of the conduct of Mehrab Khan which Cotton, 
smarting under the privations to which his force had 
been subjected, was prone to encourage. “ With regard 
to moving upon Khelat,” he wrote on the 15 th of March 
to the Bengal General, “ I am not prepared at present to 
take upon myself the responsibility of that measure; and 
I am in great hopes that Sir Alexander Burnes will be 
able to arrange everything satisfactorily.The further 
he advanced, indeed, the more obvious it became that the 
Khan of Khelat had just grounds of complaint against 
the English army. Everywhere traces of the devasta¬ 
tion—much of it unavoidable devastation—which our ad¬ 
vancing columns had left behind them, spoke out intel¬ 
ligibly to him; and he plainly saw how extremely dis¬ 
tasteful both our ofBcers and measures had become to the 
Beloochees. Pondering these things, he sate down and 