

But when, supported by his Feringhee allies, the Shah 
had established himself in Candahar, the Douranees, 
ofiering their congratulations and tendering their allegi¬ 
ance, gathered round the restored monarch. The issue 
of the contest seemed no longer doubtful. The do¬ 
minion of the Barukzye Sirdars had received its death¬ 
blow. The restoration of the Suddozye dynasty was 
certain; and with whatever feelings the Douranees may 
have inwardly regarded it, it was politic to make an 
outward show of satisfaction and delight. The change 
had been efiected without their agency; but they might 
turn it to good account. So they dusterod around the 
throne, and began to clamour for the wages of their pre¬ 
tended forbearance. They put forward the most extra¬ 
vagant claims and pretensions; bargained for the restora¬ 
tion of all the old privileges and immunitiee which they 
had enjoyed under Ahmed Shah and his successors; and 
would fain have swept the entire revenues of the state 
into their own hands. 

It was plain that the Eing could not recognise the 
claims which were thus profusely asserted. But it 
would have been imprudent, at such a time, to have of¬ 
fended or disappointed these powerful tribes. The Shah 



428 


THE HALT AT CANDAHAB. 


liad establislied himself at Candahar. Kohun-dil-Kban 
and his brothers had fled for safety across the Helmund. 
But Dost Mahomed was still dominant at Caubul. There 
was work yet to be done. There were dangers yet to 
be encoimtered. It was necessary, therefore, to con- 
conciliate the Douranees. So steering, as well as he 
could, a middle course, the Shah granted much that was 
sought from him; but he did not grant all. He restored 
the Sirdars to the chieftainships of their clans, and to 
the offices which they had been wont to hold about the 
Court. He gave them back the lands of which they had 
been denuded, and granted them allowances consistent 
with the rank which they had been suffered to reassume. 
Some vexatious and oppressive imposts were removed, 
and a considerable remission of taxation was proclaimed. 
But the system of assessment which the Barukzye Sir¬ 
dars had introduced was continued in operation; and 
the same revenue officers continued to collect the tax. 
These men were thoroughly hateful to the Douranees. 
They had been the willing instruments of Barukzye op¬ 
pression, and had carried out the work of their masters 
with a ferocity, strengthened by the recollection of one 
of those old hereditary blood-feuds, which keep up from 
generation to generation a growth of unextinguishable 
hate. 

If any feelings of delight at the thought of the restora¬ 
tion of the Suddozye dynasty welled up anywhere in 
the breasts of the people of Afghanistan, it was among 
these Douranee tribes. As the grandson of Ahmed 
Shah, they were prepared to welcome Shah Soojah. 
They were prepared to welcome him as the enemy of 
the Barukzye Sirdars. But the ugly array of foreign 
bayonets in the background effectually held in control 
all their feelings of national enthusiasm. They regarded 
the movement for the restoration of the Suddozye 