


the utter ruin of the policy 


found bidding against one another. 
Everything was paid for at a ruinous 
price. The sums paid for the hire 
and purchase of carriage-cattle were 
preposterous; and the loss incurred 
by government from the deaths of 
the animals may be surmised, when it 
is stated that the number of deaths 
between Ferozepore and Candahaxhas 
been estimated at not less than 20,000. 
Large sums, too, were often paid for 
demurrage. For example, on one 
batch of camels hired from Bekanier 
and Jaysulrnere, 44,000 rupees were 
paid for demurrage and remuneration 
for losses before they reached the 
place (Shikarpoor) at which their 
services were required, or were even 
seen by our Commissariat officers.— 
[MS. Notes.] 



422 


THE HALT AT CAMDAHAE. 


CHAPTER n. 

[April—August: 1839.] 

Arrival at Candahar—The Shah’s Entry into the City—His Installation— 
Nature of his Reception—Behaviour of the Douranees—The English at 
Candahar—Mission to Herat—Difficulties of our Position—Advance to 
Ghuznee. 

On the 25th of April, Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk re-entered 
the chief city of Western A^hanistan. As he neared 
the walls of Candahar, riding in advance of his con¬ 
tingent, some Douranee horsemen had gone out to wel¬ 
come him; and as the cavalcade moved forward, others 
met him with their salutations and obeisances, and 
swelled the number of his adherents. It is said that 
some fifteen hundred men, for the most part well dressed 
and well mounted, joined him before he reached the 
city. 

Accompanied by the British Envoy, his staff, and the 
principal officers of his contingent, and followed by a 
crowd of A%hans, the Shah entered Candahar. There 
was a vast assemblage of gazers. The women clustered 
in the balconies of the houses, or gathered upon the 
roofs. The men thronged the public streets. It was a 
busy and an exciting scene. The curiosity was intense. 
The enthusiasm may have been the same. As the 
royal cortige advanced, the people strewed flowers be- 



THE SHAH AT CANDAHAB. 


428 


fore the horses’ feet, and loaves of bread were scattered 
in their way. There were shouts, and the sound of 
music, and the noise of firing; and the fitces of the 
crowd were bright with cheerful excitement. The 
popular exclamations which were flung into the air 
have been duly reported. The people shouted out, 
“ Welcome to the son of Timour Shah I” “ We look to 
you for protection!” “ Candahar is rescued from#the 
Barukzyes I” “ May your enemies be destroyedi" It 
was said, by some who rode beside the Shah, to have 
been the most heart-stirring scene they ever witnessed 
in their lives. Thus greeted and thus attended, the 
King rode to the tomb of Ahmed Shah, and ofiered up 
thanksgivings and prayers. Then the procession re¬ 
turned again through the city, again to be greeted with 
joyous acclamations; and “ the eventful day,” as the 
Court chroniclers affirmed, “ passed off without an ac¬ 
cident.” 

The welcome thus given to the Shah on his public 
entry into his western capital, filled Macnaghten with 
delight. The future appeared before him bright with 
the promise of unclouded success. It seemed to him 
that the enthusiastic reception of the Shah would be a 
death-blow to the hopes of Dost Mahomed, and that in 
all probability the Ameer would fly before us like his 
brothers. It was encouraging intelligence to commu¬ 
nicate to the Governor-General; so on his return from 
the royal progress through the city, Macnaghten sate 
down and wrote thus to Lord Auckland: 