

Camp Quettah, April 6, 1839. 

* * * Sir John Keane has represented to me in the strongest 
terms the necessity for moving on. The fact is, the troops and 


♦ Unpublished Correspondence of Sir W- H. Maenaghien, 
VOL. I. 2 E 



418 


THE ARMY OF THE INDUS. 


followers are nearly in a state of mutiny for food, and tlie notion 
of waiting for such a person as Mehrab Khan, who has done his 
best to starve us, seems utterly preposterous. I trust the Governor- 
General will see fit to annex the provinces of Shawl, Moostung, 
and Cutchee to the Shah’s dominions. This would be the place 
for cantoning a British regiment. It is so cold now that I can 
hardly hold my pen, and the climate is said to be delightful all 
the year round. I am certain the annexation could be made with¬ 
out the slightest difficulty .... Now for Gandahar. The game 
is clearly up with the Sirdars. I had a letter from the triumvirate 
yesterday, brought by Syud Muhun Shah, whom they have sent 
to treat, or rather to get the best terms for themselves they can. 
As to opposition, it is quite clear that they look upon that as hope¬ 
less, and they have not even the power to retreat. I am un¬ 
willing to reduce them to desperation, and shall try and get the 
Shah to make some provision for them; but he is very loth to do 
so. Their demands now are extravagant beyond measure; but I 
do not think that a lakh of rupees per annum distributed among 
the three brothers would be too much for the King to give, if 
they agreed upon that to sink into the retirement of private life. 
Notwithstanding all the croaking about Shah Soojah’s want of 
popularity, I feel certain that my prediction will be verified, and 
that his Majesty will be cordially welcomed by all classes of the 
people.* 

On the 7th of April the army resumed its march.f 
On the 9th it was at Hykulzye, a spot rendered famous 
in the later annals of the war. From this place Mac- 
naghten wrote again to the same correspondent: 

Camp Hykulzje, April 9. 

* * * I have reason to believe that the Sirdars of Gandahar 
are at their wit’s end. They make resolutions one day and break 

• Unpublished Correspondence of when Sir John Keane joined the 

Sir W. H. Macnaghten, Bengal column, Cotton tell back to 

f The head-quarters of the 2nd the divisional command, and Nott re¬ 
brigade were left in garrison at Quet- turned to the brigade to which he had 
tah, under General William Nott, of originally been posted. Out of this 
the Company’s army, who, at a later much controversy arose; the command 
period, so distinguished himself in of the other division of the “ Army 
wmmand^ of the troops at Gandahar. of the Indus” having been conferred 
Whilst Sir Willoughby Cotton was on General Willshire, of the Queen’s 
^mmanding the Benral army in chief, army, a Junior major-general, but an 
Wott had comfBanded a division; bot older officer and Ihratenant-colonel. 



UCACNAGHTUN TO COLVIN. 4ld 

them the next. But all accounts concur in reporting that they 
are abandoned by the priesthood, and that if there is any reli¬ 
gious feeling extant, it is all in favour of Shah Soojah. In a fit 
of desperation the last resolve of Kohun Dil Khan is stated to 
be, that he will make a night attack on our camp with about 
2000 followers who are still attached to his person. This I fully 
believe to be fudge. The whole of the force, from Sir W. Cot¬ 
ton downwards, are infected with exaggerated fears relating to the 
character of the King and the prospects of the campaign. They 
fancy that they see an enemy in every bush. The Khan of Khelat 
is our implacable enemy, and Sir J. Keane is burning with revenge. 
There never was such treatment inflicted upon human beings as 
we have been subjected to on our progress through the Khan’s 
country. I will say nothing of Burnes’s negotiations. His in¬ 
structions were to conciliate, but I think he has adhered too 
strictly to the letter of them. The Commander-in-Chief is very 
angry. I would give something to be in Candahar; and there, 
Imhallahy we shall be in about a week; but, in the mean time, 
this union of strictly disciplined troops with lawless soldiers is 
very trying to my patience. With a less tractable king than 
Shah Soojah the consequences might be fatal. I have references 
every minute of the day, and we are compelled to tell his Majesty’s 
people that they must not touch the green crops of the country. 
This they think very hard, and so I believe does the King, but he 
has, nevertheless, forbidden them. Supplies are now coming in, 
but they are yet very dear—2^ seers of flour for a rupee I But 
this price will, no doubt, daily fall. The groat thing is to give 
people confidence. All the villages in the Khan of Khelat’s 
territory were deserted at our approach, and not a soul came near 
us, except with the view of plundering and murdering our fol¬ 
lowers. The instant we crossed the frontier the scene was 
entirely changed. The inhabitants remained in their villages, 
and have manifested the greatest possible confidence in our jus¬ 
tice and good faith. Is it possible to conceive that the difference 
of feeling in the Khelat country has not been brought about by 
design? * * * 