



DIFFICDliTIBS OF THE EXPEDITION. 


415 


done to the crops. The devastation is grievous; but the interest 
which the people saw me ttike .in their complaints has done more 
to pacify them than I ever expected. Another source of great 
dissatisfaction has been the seizure by our troops of different in¬ 
dividuals, and even families, on the plea of being robbers. This 
I have done all in my power to remedy.* 

More and more sensible, after every march, of the 
miserable country through which he was passing, and the 
difficulties which now beset the expedition, Maenaghten 
was anxious to push on with all possible expedition. But 
Sir John Keane, who was in the rear with the Bombay 
column, dreading the assemblage, on the same spot, of so 
large a body of troops as would be brought together by 
the junction of the three forces, urged upon him the ex¬ 
pediency of halting, whilst his Excellency went forward 
to ascertain the chances of finding forage and provisions 
in the Bolan Pass.f So the Shah and his contingent 
halted for a few days at Bagh,J whilst Sir John Keane 
pushed on with his escort. On the 28 th of March, the 
King, the Minister, and the Commander-in-Chief were all 
assembled together at Dadur. “ Their united camps dis- 

* Unpublished Correspondence of t From Bagb, Maenaghten wrote 
Sir W, H. Maenaghten, to the Governor-Genorars Private 

t “Ihave a letter from Todd, dated Secretary: “This is a wretched 
yesterday, from Gundava, giving a country in every respect. It may be 
lamentable account of the Bombay said to produce little else but plun- 
force. They are nearly on the point derers; but with the knowledge 
of starvation. . . . Sir John starts we now have of it, we may bid 
to-morrow for Dadur with a small defiance to the Russian hordes as 
escort, and he has begged me to keep far as this route is concerned. Any 
back the Shah with his troops and army might be annihilated in an 
followers until he reaches that place, hour by giving it either too much 
and is able to gain some information or too little water. The few wells 
as to the state of forage and provi- that exist might easily be rendered 
sions there and in the pass. We have unavailable, and by just cutting 
a wretched time of it nere; and 1 am the Sewee bund the whole coun- 
most anxious to push on, but I cannot try might be deluged.”— [ Afr. Mac^ 
venture to run counter to the wishes of naghten to Mr. Colvin: Camp Bagh, 
his Excellency.”— [Mr. Maenaghten March 22, 1839. Unpublished Cor- 
to Sir A. Burnes: Bagh^ March 22, rc,9pondence.^ 

1839. Unpublished Correspondence.'] 



416 


THE AEMT OP THE INDUS. 


played all the pomp and circumstances of a triple head* 
quarter.” The passage of the Bolan was accomplished 
without difficulty, and on the 4th of April, Sir Wil¬ 
loughby Cotton, having ridden out with his staff from 
Qucttah, greeted the General-in-Chief and his com¬ 
panions as they were resting at the entrance to the 
Shawl Valley, after the fatigues of the passage through 
the defile. The tidings which he had to communicate 
were of the gloomiest hue. He reported that his men 
were on quarter-rations, and that there was every pros¬ 
pect of the army, as it entered Afghanistan, being op¬ 
posed at every step. Macnaghten, however, more san¬ 
guine, was already beginning to think and to write about 
the means of disposing of the Barukzye Sirdars. On 
that 4th of April he wrote to the Governor-General a 
letter, which indicates the tone of his own feelings and 
of those of the Afghan Prince: 