


and Khelat.”— \^Mr,Macnaghten to Sir 
J, Keane: Shikarpoor, Feb, 27, 1839. 
Unpublished Correspondence.'] 

♦ “lam exceedingly obliged to you 
for the attention you hare paid to 
my suggestions regarding the Shah’s 
troops; but your want of camels is 
so pressing, that I feel it impossible to 
retain the 1000 camels placed at my 
disposal. Deeply as I regret, on po¬ 
litical grounds, the necessity of leav¬ 


ing behind any portion of the troops 
of his Majesty, I feel that any scru¬ 
ples on this score must give way to 
the more urgent exigencies of the 
public service.”—[ilfr. Macnaghten to 
Sir J, Keane: Shikarpoor, March 3, 
1839. Unpublished Correspondence,] 
•f* Mr, Macnaghten to Sir W, Cot¬ 
ton: March 15, 1839. Unpiibluhed 
Correspondence, 



414 


THE ABH7 OF THE nSTDIJS. 


wrote the following letter to Lord Auckland—a signifi¬ 
cant letter, which shows how early had hurst upon Mac- 
naghten the truth, that only by a liberal expenditure of 
money was there any hope of reconciling to our opera¬ 
tions the chiefs and people beyond the Indus: 

Camp Bagh, March 19. 

I found the Khelat authorities in the worst possible humour. 
Our enemies have evidently been tampering with them, and they 
had good cause for dissatisfaction with us; their crops have been 
destroyed, and the water intended for the irrigation of their fields 
has been diverted to the use of our armies. A great portion of 
these evils was perhaps unavoidable, but little or no effort seems 
to have been made either to mitigate the calamity or to appease 
the discontent which has been created by our proceedings. Our 
officers and our measures are alike unpopular in this country, and 
I very much fear that Sir A. Burnes may be led, by vague 
rumours of the Khan’s unfriendly disposition, to recommend offen¬ 
sive operations against him. In what difficulties we might be 
involved by such a proceeding it would be impossible to foretell. 
My most strenuous efforts have been day and night directed to¬ 
wards reconciling all persons of influence to our operations; and 
in this I have been successful; but considerable sums must be 
expended, not only in remunerating the people for the severe 
losses they have sustained, but in bribing the authorities. Your 
Lordship may rely upon it, that I shall not expend one rupee of 
the public money more than I deem indispensably necessary; but 
here we are quite at the mercy of the Bcloochees. This very 
day, had they been inimically inclined, they might with the 
greatest ease have turned an inundation into our camp, which 
would have swept away our entire force and everything belonging 
to us. The change in the demeanour of the authorities since 
yesterday is wonderful. They are now our devoted servants, and 
the Vizier has promised to write off instantly to his master at 
Khelat, advising him to give us his entire and unqualified friend¬ 
ship and support. Sir John Keane is in a wretched plight for 
want of cattle, and I cannot help thinking he has been neglected 
in a very unwarrantable manner by the Bengal authorities. . . • 
1 went out myself this morning to see what damage had been 