

* Captain Havelock, who is by no city to be present in the plains; and 
means msposed to take an unfavor- it was remarked with justice, that the 
able view of the policy out of which passage in the diplomatic proCTamme 
emanated the assembling of the Army which presented a place behind the 
of the Indus, says: Unless I have throne for ‘ the populace restrained 
been deceived, all the national enthu- by the Shah's troops,* became rather 
siasm of the scene was entirely con- a bitter satire on the display of the 
fined to his Majesty^a immediate re- morning.’* Compare Dr. Kennedy*8 
tainers. The people of Candahar version of these proceedings. All 
are ^ said to have viewed the whole private accounts 1 have received con- 
afisdr with the most mortifying in^- firm the truth of thepxintednarratives. 
ference. Few of them qmt^ the f Kennedy. 



426 


THE HALT AT CANBAHAB. 


But the miserable paucity of Afghans who appeared to 
do homage to the King, must have warned Shah Soojah, 
with ominous signihcance, of the feebleness of his tenure 
upon the affections of the people, as it bitterly dis. 
appointed and dismayed his principal European sup* 
porters. Every effort had been made to give publicity 
to the programme of the ceremony; and yet it is said, by 
the most trustworthy witnesses, that barely a hundred 
Afghans had been attracted, either by curiosity or by 
loyalty, to the installation of the adored King. 

Such were the mere outward facts of Shah Soqjah’s 
reception as recorded by the chroniclers of the day. It 
is certain that, surrounded by his own contingent, and 
supported by the British army, he advanced unopposed 
to Candahar. The brief local excitement which his en¬ 
trance into the city had aroused, cannot be regarded as 
national enthusiasm. When the first outbreak of curiosity 
had subsided, the feeling which greeted the restored Ki n g 
was rather that of sxUlen indifference than of active devo¬ 
tion. In the vicinity of Candahar the Douranee tribes 
constituted the most influential section of the inhabitants. 
They had been oppressed and impoverished by the Ba- 
rukzye Sirdars, and had longed to rid themselves of the 
yoke of their oppressors. But when the representa¬ 
tive of the Suddozye dynasty, under which they had 
been pampered and protected, appeared at the gates of 
the Douranee Empire, they had neither spirit nor 
strength to make a strenuous effort either in support o^ 
or in hostility to, the restored monarch. It is doubtful 
whether, in the conjimcture which had then arisen, the 
Douranees, had they possessed any military strength, 
would have openly arrayed themselves on the side of 
the Shah; for although they hated the Barukzyes who 
had oppressed them, there were the strongest pational 
and religious feelings to exdte them against a Prince 
who had brought an army of Franks to desolate their 



BEHAVIOUB OF THB DOUBAXIFES. 


427 


country. Had they stood erect in the cdd pride of 
conscious power, a mighty conflict would have raged 
within them. The antagonism of personal and national 
interests would have rent and convulsed them; and it 
is not improbable that in the end, abhorring the thought 
of an infldel invasion, they would have determined to 
support the cause of the Sirdars. But when Shah 
Soojah was advancing upon Candahar, the Douranees 
were in a state of absolute feebleness and paralysis. 
They held aloof, for they had neither power nor incli. 
nation to take any conspicuous part in the revolution 
which was then brooding over the empire. 