


April 4, 1831. 

We are now encamped within ten miles of Shawl. Sir W. 
came in here this morning, and talks in a most gloomy strain of his 
prospects. He says he has but twelve days’ supplies, and his men 
arc already on quarter-rations. We cannot reckon on being at 
Candahar under a fortnight, and it will go hard with us if we can¬ 
not get supplied in the mean time from other quarters. Sir W, 
is a sad croaker; not content with telling me we must all inevitably 
be starved, he assures me that Shah Soojah is very unpopular in 
Afghanistan, and that we shall be opposed at every step of our 
progress. I think I know a little better than this. My accounts 
from Candahar lead me to believe that the religious excitement is 
subsiding, and that the Sirdars are only thinking how they can 
make good terms for themselves; or, failing that, how they may 
best contrive to effect their escape. It will be as well not to reduce 
them to desperation; for though they cannot oppose us in the 
field, yet they make sad havoc with our supplies. Large bands 
of camel-plunderers kept hovering over our line of march, and it 
certainly looks as if they had been incited by some one of 



DIFFICULTIES OF THE EXPEDITION, 417 

influence. The mistakes and contretemps which are constantly 
occurring in our motley camp, require the exercise of much 
patience and discrimination. The Shah is in good health and 
spirits; but says he never had so much trouble and bother in his 
lifetime as he has met with during this campaign. The reason is 
obvious; the people on former occasions helped themselves to 
everything they wanted, and no complaint was permitted to ap¬ 
proach the sacred person of his Majesty. His opinion of the 
Afghans as a nation is, I regret to say, extremely low. He 
declares that they are a pack of dogs, one and all, and, as for the 
Barukzyes, it is utterly impossible that he can ever place the 
slightest confidence in any one of that accursed race. We must 
try and bring him gradually round to entertain a more favorable 
opinion of his subjects. I cannot yet say how the Barukzye chiefs 
shall be disposed of, but 1 am decidedly of opinion that it would 
be a wise measure to get them quietly out of Afghanistan and 
pension them, if we can do so at an expense not exceeding a lakh 
of rupees per annum. If they oppose us and are taken, the Shah 
must, I imagine, be permitted to do what he likes with them 
short of putting them to death; and his own humane nature is a 
sufficient security that he will not proceed to extremities.* 

On the 6th of April, Sir John Keane fixed his head¬ 
quarters at Quettah, and assumed the personal command 
of the army. Reviewing all the circumstances of his 
position, he came to the determination to push forward 
with all possible despatch to Candahar. There was no 
prospect of obtaining supplies through the agency of 
Mehrab Khan. Already was the Envoy convinced of 
the treachery of that Prince—already was he beginning 
to talk about dismembering the Khanate of Khelat, and 
annexing the provinces of Shawl, Moostung, and Cutchee 
to the Douranee Empire. On that day he wrote to the 
Private Secretary of the Governor-General: 