

Candahar, April 25,1839. 

We have, I think, been most fortunate in every way. The 
Shah made a grand public entry in the city this morning, and 
was received with feelings nearly amounting to adoration. I shall 
report the particulars officially. I have already had more than 
one ebullition of petulance to contend with. The latest 1 send 



424 


THE HALT AT CANDAHAR. 


herewith, and I trust that a soft answer will have the efiect of 
turning away wrath. There are many things which I wish to 
mention, but I really have no leisure. Of this your Lordship 
may judge, when 1 state that for the last three days I have been 
out in the sun, and have not been able to get my breakfast before 
three in the afternoon. I think it would be in every way advan¬ 
tageous to the public interests if, after Shah Soojah gains pos¬ 
session of Caubul, I were to proceed across the Punjaub to Simlah, 
having an interview with Runjeet Singh, and giving him a detail 
of all our proceedings; perhaps getting him to modify the treaty 
in one or two respects. I have broached the subject of our new 
treaty to his Majesty, but my negotiations are in too imperfect a 
state to be detailed. Of one thing I am certain, that we must bo 
prepared to look upon Afghanistan for some years as an outwork 
yielding nothing, but requiring much expenditure to keep it in 
repair. His Majesty has not yet nominated a Prime Minister, 
nor has he as yet, I believe, determined his form of administra¬ 
tion. His new adherents are all hungry for place; and in answer 
to their premature solicitations, he tells me that he has informed 
them that, since it took God Almighty six days to make heaven 
and earth, it is very hard they will not allow him, a poor mortal, 
even the same time to settle the affairs of a kingdom. I am 
gratified at being able to assure your Lordship that the best feel¬ 
ing is manifested towards the British officers by the entire popu¬ 
lation here, and I devoutly hope that nothing may occur to dis¬ 
turb the present happy state of things. Dost Mahomed will, I 
doubt not, take himself off like his brothers, though not, perhaps, 
in quite so great a hurry, when the intelligence reaches him of the 
manner in which Shah Soojah has been received at Candahar. 
The Sirdars have carried off ray elephants, and I am informed 
that the animals proved of the greatest service to them in crossing 
their ladies over a deep and rapid river not far from this. W^e 
have heard nothing since our arrival here of the embassy from Herat. 
If 1 go to Simlah from Caubul, Sir A. Burnes could be left to 
officiate for me, and in case of my return he might go to Can¬ 
dahar and relieve Major Leech, who might be left there in the 
first instance. I remain, my Lord, yours, &c. 

W. H. Macnaghtbn.* 

Unpublished Correspondence of Sir W, H. Macnaghien^ 



INSTALLATION OF THE SHAH. 


425 


Encouraged by the presumed “ adoration” of the 
people, it was now determined to give them another 
opportunity of testifying the overflowing abundance of 
their loyalty and aflection. So the 8th of May was 
fixed upon for a general public recognition of the re¬ 
stored sovereign, on the plains before Candahar. Both 
columns of the British army had now arrived. The 
troops were to pass in review order before the King; 
and other ceremonial observances were to give tclat 
to the inauguration. Upon a raised platform, under 
a showy canopy, sate the restored monarch of the Dou- 
ranee Empire. He had ridden out at sunrise under a 
royal salute. The troops had presented arms to him on 
his ascending the musnud, and a salute of a hundred 
and one guns had been fired in honour of the occasion. 
Around him were the chief military and political officers 
of the British Government. Everything went off as it 
had been ordered and arranged, and most imposing was 
the spectacle of the review-march of the British troops. 
But the King had then been a fortnight at Candahar, 
and the curiosity of the people had subsided. There 
was no popular enthusiasm.* The whole affair was a 
painful failure. The English officers saluted the King; 
and the Eiing made a speech about the disinterested 
benevolence of the British Government. Greatly pleased 
was his Majesty with the exhibition; and when the 
troops had been dismissed, he said that its moral in¬ 
fluence would be felt from Pekin to Constantinople.f 