

Mactidghten was naturally of a sanguine temperament. 
Civilians seldom estimate military difficulties aright. It 
is true that our political difficulties were melting away. 

2 £ 2 



420 


THE AEMT OF THE INDUS. 


The Candahar Sirdars, deserted and betrayed, seemed to 
have given themselves up to despair, and there was little 
chance of the progress of our army being disputed by an 
Afghan force. But the scarcity, which had pressed so 
severely on our troops, and had nearly destroyed our 
horses, was not less a reality because no enemy appeared 
to educe all the disastrous results which were likely to 
flow;from such deterioration of the physique of our army. 
The Army of the Indus surmounted the Kojuck Pass as 
safely as it had traversed the Bolan. The Shah, with 
his contingent, was now in advance, leading the way as 
it became him into his restored dominions; and many 
of the chiefs and people of Western Afghanistan were 
flocking to his standard.* There were not wanting 
those who said that, if there had been any prospect 
of opposition at Candahar, the Bang and his levies 
would not have been the first to appear under the walls 
of the city. But authentic intelligence had reached 
Macnaghten, to the effect that Kohun-dil-Khan and 
his brothers had fled from Candahar—that there was 
no union among the Barukzyo brotherhood—and that, 
if a stand were to be made at all, the battle-field would 
be nearer the northern capital. The way, indeed, 
was clear for the entry of the Suddozye monarch; so 
he pushed on in advance of Sir John Keane and his 
army, to receive, it was said, the homage of his people. 
Money had been freely scattered about; and the people 
had already begun to discover that the gold of the Pe- 
ringhees was as serviceable as other gold, and that there 
was an unfailing supply of it. Early in the campaign, 

* Foremost among these was the contingent. He joined the Shah on 
notorious Hadjee Khan, Rhaukur, the 20th of April, and from this time 
whose sudden defection broke up the the Sirdars saw that their cause was 
Barukzye camp, just as Raliun Dil hopeless. Further mention of this 
Khan and Mehr Dil Khan were medi- chief will be found in a subsequent 
tating a night attack on the Shah's cliapter. 



THE COMMISSAKIAT. 


421 


Macnaghten had encouraged the conviction that the al¬ 
legiance of the A%hans was to be bought—^that A%han 
cupidity would not be proof against British gold. So he 
opened the treasure-chest; scattered abroad its contents 
with an ungrudging hand; and commenced a system of 
corruption which, though seemingly successful at the 


outset, wrought, in the end, 
he had reared.* 

* I have not attempted in this 
chapter to give a minute account of 
the march of the three columns of the 
invading army to Candahar. It is no 
part of my design to render this work 
conspicuous for the completeness of its 
military details. I do not underrate 
their importance; but the operations 
of the Army of the Indus have al¬ 
ready been so minutely chronicled, 
that I have only to refer the reader 
to the works of Havelock, Kennedy, 
and Hough. The real history of the 
march is to be found in the records of 
the Commissariat department. The 
difficulty of obtaining carriage and 
supplies was almost unprecedented, 
and the expenditure incurred was 
enormous. There were two different 
Commissariat departments (the Ben¬ 
gal and the Shah's) sometimes to be 