



DISUNION OF THE BABUEZTES. 


439 


to the best account the sufferings of our &uiine-stricken 
army, and have given us, at the outset of the campaign, 
a check fix)m which we should not have speedily re¬ 
covered. But it seems to have been the design of Pro¬ 
vidence to paralyse our enemies at this time, and so to 
lure us into greater dangers than any that could have 
beset us at the opening of the campaign. 

But although with slight feelings of astonishment 
Dost Mahomed now contemplated the successful esta¬ 
blishment of Shah Soojah at Candahar, it could not 
have been without emotions of bitterness and mortifica¬ 
tion that he beheld his countrymen either flying ignobly 
before the invaders, or bowing down without shame 
before the money-bags of the infidels. It was a sore 
trial to him to see how almost every chief in the country 
was now prepared to sell his birthright for a mess of 
pottage. He had not suflScient confidence in his own 
strength, or the loyalty of his people, to believe that he 
could offer any effectual resistance to the approach of 
the Suddozye King, supported as he was by British 
bayonets and British gold. His enemies were advanc¬ 
ing upon Caubul, both along the eastern and western 
lines of approach; and he was necessitated to divide his 
strength. Nor could he even give his undivided atten¬ 
tion to his foreign enemies. There were danger and 
disaffection at home. The Kohistan was in rebellion.* 
He could see plainly that the Kuzzilbashes were against 
him. Indeed, all the bulwarks of national defence 
which he could hope to oppose to the advancing enemy, 
were crumbling to pieces before his eyes. Believing 
that all nationality of feeling was utterly extinct in the 
souls of his brethren, it had, ever since he had established 
himself at Caubul, been his policy to place the least pos- 

* The Eohistan is the hiU countiT’ to the north o£ Ceubul, Ijing between 
the capital and the Hindoo-Koosb. 



440 


THE FALL OF 6HUZNEE. 


sible amount of power in their hands, and to entrust all 
his delegated authority to the hands of his sons. His 
only trust now was in them. Akbar Khan had been de¬ 
spatched through the eastern passes to oppose the 
march of Wade and the Sikhs; Hyder Khan was in 
command of the garrison of Ghuznee; and Afeul Khan, 
with a body of horse, was in the neighbourhood of that 
fortress, instructed to operate against the flanks of our 
army in the open country. The Ameer himself was at 
the capital waiting the progress of events, and husband¬ 
ing his strength for the final conflict. 

In the Ameer’s camp there seems to have been little 
knowledge of the movements and designs of the enemy. 
It had been for some time believed that it was the in¬ 
tention of the British chiefs to march upon Herat, and 
now again it was the opinion that they purposed to 
mask Ghuznee and move at once upon Caubul. It 
seems, therefore, to have been the design of Dost Ma¬ 
homed that Afzul Khan and Hyder Khan, having suf¬ 
fered us to advance a mSrch or two beyond Ghuznee, 
should fall upon our rear, whilst Dost Mahomed himself 
was to give us battle from the front.* But he had 
not measured aright the policy of the British Com¬ 
mander. It was not Sir John Keane’s intention to mask 
Ghuznee, but to reduce it. 