

VOL. I, 2 F 



484 


THB HALT AT OAHDAHAB. 


Stoddart had work to do in another quarter. He 
quitted Herat and made his way to Bokhara. But 
Pottinger was solicited to postpone his departure, and 
the dawn of the new year still found him at the Court 
of Herat. He only remained to be insulted. In Janu¬ 
ary, 1839, another outrage was committed upon him. 
His house was attacked by the retainers of Yar Maho¬ 
med. One of his public servants was seized and muti¬ 
lated. As the year advanced, the hostile temper of the 
Wuzeer became more and more apparent. Tidings of 
the advance of Shah Soojah and his British allies had 
reached Herat; and although the integrity of that state 
had been especially guaranteed by the Tripartite treaty, 
and British money was then maintaining both the go¬ 
vernment and the people of Herat, Yar Mahomed 
began to intrigue both with the Persian Court and the 
Candahar Sirdars, and endeavoured to form a confede¬ 
racy for the expulsion of the Shah and his allies from 
Afghanistan.* 

But the Persian Court was little inclined to commit 
itself to an act of such direct hostility against Great 
Britain. The Army of the Indus continued to advance; 
there was no prospect of any organised opposition. Our 
success was sufficiently intelligible to Yar Mahomed. 
He respected success. So, when Shah Soojah entered 
Candahar, and the British army encamped beneath its 
walls, he hastened to congratulate the Shah upon his 
restoration, and sent a friendly mission to the British 
camp. In return for this, Macnaghten now determined 
to despatch a British officer to Herat to negotiate a 
friendly treaty with Shah Kamran. His first thought 

* “ Facts regarding our Political Noyember, 1837, to February, 1841,” 
Kelations with Herat, and the Con- by Dr. J. S. Login, attached to the 
duct of Yar Mahomed Khan, from Heratee Mission. 



BCAJOR TODD. 


486 


was to entrust the duty to Bumes; but Bumes was 
disinclined to undertake it; and Sir John Keane was of 
opinion that he could not be spared.* 

So the choice of the Envoy fell upon Major Todd, an 
officer of the Bengal Artillery, who had been for many 
years employed in Persia, instructing the artillerymen 
of Mahomed Shah in the mysteries of his profession, and 
assisting the British Mission in matters lying beyond 
the circle of mere military detail. Thoroughly ac¬ 
quainted with the languages and politics of Western 
Asia, a man of good capacity, good temper, and good 
principle, he appeared to be well fitted for the office 
which the Envoy now thought of delegating to him. 
He had been in the camp of Mahomed Shah during the 
siege of Herat, and had been employed in the negotia¬ 
tions which had arisen between the two contending states. 
He had subsequently travelled down through Afghanis¬ 
tan to India, charged with information for the Governor- 
General, and had then recommended himself, by the 
extent of his local knowledge and general acquirements, 
scarcely more than by the integrity of his character and 
the amiability of his disposition for emplo 3 rment, upon 
the Minister’s staff. He was military secretary and 
political assistant to Mr. Macnaghten when the Envoy 
deputed him to Herat. There went at the same time 
other officers, whose names have since been honourably 
associated with the great events of the Central-Asian 
War—James Abbott and Richmond Shakespear, of the 
Bengal Artillery; and Sanders, of the Engineers, who fell 
nobly upon the field of Maharajhpore.f They went to 