



APPEARANCE OP THE CITT. 


429 


Prince in the light of a foreign invasion; and chafed 
when they saw our English officers settling themselves 
in the palaces of their ancient Princes. 

In the mean while, the Army of the Indus remained 
inactive at Candahar. The halt was a long and a weary 
one. Provisions were miserably scarce. It was necessary 
to remain under the city walls until a sufficiency could 
be obtained, and to obtain this sufficiency it was neces¬ 
sary to await the ripening of the crops. Every one was 
impatient to advance. The delay was simply painful 
and disheartening. There were no compensating ad¬ 
vantages to be obtained from a halt under the walls of 
Candahar. Save a few who had the real artist’s eye to 
appreciate the picturesque, the officers of the force were 
disappointed with the place. They had believed that 
they were advancing upon a splendid city; but they 
now found themselves before a walled town, presenting 
so few objects of interest that it was scarcely worth 
exploring. After the desolate tracts over which they had 
passed, the valley of Candahar appeared to the eye of 
our officers to be a pleasant and a favoured spot. There 
were green fields, and shady orchards, and running 
streams, to vary the surrounding landscape. But they 
found the city itself to be little better than a collection 
of mud-houses, forming very unimposing streets.* The 
citadel was in ruins. “ The interior consisted only of 

* As at Herat, the four principal eye, as nothin? appears above the 
streets meet in the centre of the city, long, high walls but the top of 
and at their junction are covered Ahmed Sbah^s tomb, the summits of 
over with a great dome. The pic- a few minarets, and the upper parapets 
turesque accessories of Candahar are of the citadel. But the interior, as 
by no one so well described as by seen from the battlements, cannot 
Lieutenant Rattray, in his letter- fail to delight. Its irreguli^ mud- 
press accompaniments to his admira- houses, partly in ruins, varied with 
ble series of Views in Afghanistan.** trees and minarets ; the square red- 
With true artistic feeling, he writes : brick dwelling with doors and win- 

Viewing Candahar from without, dows of Turkish arches; the lofly 
or at a distance, there is no pecu- habitations of the Hindoo; the tents 
liarity in its structure to strike the pitched here and there on the flat 



430 


THE HALT AT CANDAHAB. 


the relics of houses of foigotteu Princes.”* There was 
altogether an air of dreariness and desolation about the 
place. Many of the houses had been thrown down by 
repeated shocks of earthquake, and had not been rebuilt. 
The public buildings were few; but conspicuous among 
them was the tomb of Ahmed Shah, whose white 
dome, seen from a distance, stood up above the houses 
of the city, whilst a spacious mosque, with its domes 
and minarets, seen also from afar, enshrined a relic of 
extraordinary sanctity—the shirt of the Prophet Ma¬ 
homed. 

When the British arrived before Candahar in April, 
1839, it was said that the principal inhabitants had 
forsaken the place. But enough remained to give an 
animated and picturesque aspect to the city. The streets 
and bazaars were crowded with people of different castes 
and different costumes — Afghans, Persians, Oosbegs, 
Beloochees, Armenians, and Hindoos; whilst strings of 
laden camels everywhere passing and repassing, enhanced 
the picturesque liveliness of the scene. 