

There was little to break the monotony of the halt at 
Candahar. The movements of the enemy, and the 
probabilities of a stirring or a languid campaign, were 
discussed in our officers’ tents; and when, on the 9th of 
May, a brigade under Colonel Sale—an officer who had 


house-tops; the long terraces crowded stupendous and inaccessible moun- 
with people, busied in their various tains, from the whole rise a panorama 
callings in the open air; the dung pleasing to look uj^ii*** 
and mud^plastered hut of the Khau* ♦ Kennedy. Tlie author adds i 
kur, with his heavy, wild-looking buffa- ** Shah Soojah had sheltered himself 
Iocs tethered round it; the high enclo- in one, Mr. Macnaghten in another, 
sures of the different tribes; the war- and Sir Alexander Burnes in a third, 
like castles of the chieftains; the The latter had been rebuilt by one 
^ily-decorated palace of some great of the chieffa of Candahar for his 
Douranee Lord, with its fountains, favourite wife. It had an air of 
squares, and court-yards; and the magnificence and grandeur where it 
domed houses of the other inhabitants, stood; but in the Mogul Serai of 
the bazaars, mosques, turrets, and Surat, or in Ahmedabad, it would be 
cupolas, rising up in the midst of passed unobserved.” 



FUOHT OF THF SIBDABS. 


481 


already done much good service to his country, and was 
destined now to play a conspicuous part in the great 
Central-Asian drama—was despatched to Ghiresk, a place 
some seventy-five miles in a westerly direction irom Can- 
dahar, in pursuit of the fugitive Sirdars, there were 
few officers in Keane’s army who did not long to ac* 
company it. But the campaign was a brief and an in¬ 
glorious one^Sale marched to Ghiresk and returned to 
Candahar. The Sirdars had abandoned the place, and 
fled across the Persian frontier. They had but a hand¬ 
ful of followers, and they were powerless to offer any 
resistance to our advancing troops. From Kohun-dil- 
Khan and his brothers nothing was to be apprehended. 
Their very names were soon almost forgotten by the 
Feringhees who had driven them from their homes. 
Candahar and the surrounding country was in possession 
of the restored Suddozye Princes. But Shah Soqjah 
and his supporters still looked anxiously towards the 
north, where Dost Mahomed, the ablest and the most 
powei’ful of the Barukzyo brotherhood, was still muster¬ 
ing his fighting men—-still endeavouring to rouse the 
chiefs to aid him in the defence of his capital against 
the often-rejected King, who had now come back to 
them again, supported by the gold and bayonets of the 
infidels. 

But the very circumstances which might be supposed 
to work to our disadvantage, and to give strength to the* 
enemy, really favoured our cause. The protracted halt 
at Candahar gave Dost Mahomed and his adherents 
abundant time to mature their measures of defence. 
Whilst the British army was starving at Candahar, the 
Barukzyes at Caubul might have been collecting troops 
and strengthening their defences for a vigorous and well* 
organised opposition. But to Dost Mahomed this con¬ 
tinued halt was altogether unintelligible. He could 