

The strength of Ghuznee was the boast of the Afghans. 
They believed that it was not to be carried by assault. 
On the other hand. Sir John Keane, persuaded that it 
was not a place of any strength, had advanced upon 
Ghuznee without any siege guns. A battering train had 
been brought up, with great labour and at great ex¬ 
pense, to Candahar, and now that it was likely to be 

* This was the account of the munication with the Prince after his 
Ameer's tactics given by Hjder Khan, capture, and ought to be well in- 
Mohun Lai, upon whose authority 1 formed upon this point, 
instance it, was in daily personal com- 



ABANDONMENT OE THE 6IEOE TBAIN. 


441 


brought into use, and so to repay the labour and the 
expense, Sir John Keane dropped it by the way. He 
was nearing the strongest fortress in the country—he 
knew that it was garrisoned by the enemy, and that, if 
he advanced upon it, it would be vigorously defended. 
He determined to advance upon it; and yet, with an 
amount of infatuation which, although after-events have 
thrown it into the shade, at the time took the country 
by surprise, and was, perhaps, unexampled in Indian 
warfare, he left his heavy guns at Candahar, and ad¬ 
vanced upon Ghuznee with nothing but light field- 
pieces. He had been told that it was a place of no 
considerable strength, and that it would give him 
no trouble to take it. Major Todd and Lieutenant 
Leech had seen Ghuznee, and their reports had dissi¬ 
pated the anxieties of the Commander-in-Chief. So he 
found himself before a place which he subsequently de¬ 
scribed as one of “ great strength both by nature and by 
art,” without any means of effecting a breach in- its walls. 

The city of Ghuznee lies between Candahar and 
Caubul—about 230 miles distant from the former, and 
ninety miles from the latter place. The entire line of 
country from Candahar to Caubul is, in comparison 
with that which lies between Caubul and Peshawnr, 
an open and a level tract, opposing no difliculties to the 
march of an army encumbered with artillery and bag¬ 
gage. As a city, it was of less importance than either 
Caubul or Candahar.* But the strength of the citadel 

♦ “ The town,” says Lieutenant you for the darkened narrow streeta 
Rattray, stands on the extreme and small charloo of Ghuznee. How- 
point of a range of hills, which slope ever, it possesses snujg houses and 
upwards and command the north- capital stabling, sufficient for a ca- 
east angle of the Balia Hissar, near valry brigade, within its walls ; and 
which u perched the tomb of Be- in the cit^el, particularly, the squares 
lool the Wise, among ruined mosques and residences of its former goyer- 
and grave-stones. As a city, it will nors were in many instances spacious 
not bear comparison with Caubul and even princely in their style and 
or Candahar; and a previous visit decorations.** 
to the bazaars of either would spoil 



442 


THE EALL OE OHaZNEE. 


had been famous throughout many generations; and the 
first sight of the fortress, as it burst suddenly on the 
view of our advancing army, “ with its fortifications 
rising up, as it were, on the side of a hill, which seemed 
to form the background to it,” must have thrust upon 
every officer of the force the conviction that, at Can- 
dahar, they had all under-rated the strength of the 
place. It obviously was not a fortress to be breached 
by nine-pounder and six-pounder guns. 