



432 


THE HALT AT CANDAHAB. 


not understand why, if they really purposed to advance 
upon Caubul, Macnaghten and Keane were wasting their 
strength in utter idleness at Candahar. It was the Ameer’s 
belief that the British were projecting a movement upon 
Herat; that the Army of the Indus would branch off to 
the westward; and that its operations against Caubul 
would be deferred to the following year. Believing 
this, Dost Mahomed turned his thoughts rather to the 
defence of the eastern than of the western line of road. 
It had been arranged,* under the Tripartite treaty, that 
Prince Timour, the eldest son of Shah Soojah, accom¬ 
panied by Captain Wade and a Sikh force, should pene¬ 
trate the passes beyond Peshawur, and advance upon 
Caubul by the road of Jellalabad and Jugdulluck. This 
force was now advancing. Dost Mahomed sent out 
against it some of his best fighting men, under the com¬ 
mand of bis favourite son, Akbar Khan—the young 
chief who was destined to stand out with such terrible 
prominence from among the leading personages distin¬ 
guished in the later history of the war. 

No thought, however, of a movement upon Herat 
weighed at this time on Macnaghten’s mind. It ap¬ 
peared to him little desirable to march a British army 
into the dominions of Shah Kamran, so long as there 
was a possibility of attaining the desired results by any 
means less costly and hazardous. There was little im¬ 
mediate prospect then of Mahomed Shah returning for 
the re-investment of Herat. There was no pressing 
danger to be combated. So Macnaghten determined to 
send, instead of a British army, a British mission to 
Herat, with a handful of engineer and artillery officers, 
and a few lakhs of rupees to be expended on the de¬ 
fences of the place. 

It was in the montb of September, 1838, that, after 

* See ante, page 351. 



AOTAIBS Arr HERAT. 


438 


a nine months’ investment of Herat, Mahomed Shah 
struck his camp and turned his face towards his own 
capital Eldred Pottinger had saved the city from the 
grasp of the Persians. But his work was not yet done. 
The wretched people were starving. The necessary 
evils of the protracted siege had been greatly enhanced 
by the grin^ng cruelty of Yar Mahomed. To have 
left Herat immediately on the departure of the Persian 
army would have been to have left the inhabitants to 
perish. Moreover, the accursed traffic in human flesh, 
which the Persian Prince had set forth as the just cause 
of his invasion of Herat, had not been suppressed. So 
Pottinger remained in Herat, and Stoddart, having wit¬ 
nessed the breaking up of the Persian camp, joined his 
brother-officer in the city, and then the two began to 
labour diligently together in the great cause of universal 
humanity. 

But these labours were distasteful to the Wuzeer. 
Pottinger and Stoddart had done the work which Yar 
Mahomed required of them. The one had driven off, 
and the other had drawn off, the Persian army. He 
did not desire that they should interfere with his in¬ 
ternal tyranny. To oppress the helpless people at his 
will seemed to be his rightful prerogative. The slave- 
trade, which he carried on with such barbarous acti¬ 
vity, was the main source of the Heratee revenue. The 
English officers did not propose to effect its suppression 
without securing adequate compensation to the slave- 
dealing state. But Yar Mahomed viewed all their 
proceedings with jealousy and suspicion; and two 
months after the close of the siege of Herat, they were 
grossly insulted in the presence of the King, and ordered 
to withdraw themselves beyond the limits of the Heratee 
territory. 