



444 


THE EAIX OF OHCZNEE. 


fortifications of Ghuznee, was so valuable and necessary, 
that my friend Abdool Rashed Khan was requested to 
attend upon him in all his reconnoitring expeditions.” 
He was precisely the man we wanted. He gave us all 
the information we required. He taught us how to 
capture Ghuznee. 

Having determined to enter Ghuznee through an 
entrance effected by an explosion of gunpowder, Keane 
began to issue his instructions for the assault, which was 
to take place before daybreak on the following morning. 
Every preparation was made, and every precaution was 
taken to ensure success. It was a day of expectation 
and anxiety, and not wholly uneventful. On that 22nd 
of July was made known to us, with fearful demon¬ 
strativeness, the character of those fanatic soldiers of 
Islam, who have since become so terribly familiar to us 
under the name of Ghazees. Incited by the priesthood, 
they flock to the green banner, eager to win Paradise 
by the destruction of their infidel foes, or to forestal the 
predestined bliss by dying the martyr’s death in the 
attempt. A party of these fearless followers of the 
Prophet had assembled in the neighbourhood of Ghuznee, 
and now they were about to pour down upon the Shah’s 
camp, and to rid the country of a King who had out¬ 
lined Mahomedanism by returning to his people borne 
aloft on the shoulders of the infidels. A gallant charge 
of the Shah’s Horse, led by Peter Nicolson, who took 
no undistinguished part in the after-events of the war, 
checked the onslaught of these desperate fanatics; and 
Outram, with a party of foot, followed them to the 
heights where the cavalry had driven them, and cap¬ 
tured their holy standard. Some fifty prisoners were 
taken. It is painful to relate what followed. Con¬ 
ducted into the presence of Shah Soojah, they gloried 
in their high calling, and openly reviled their King. 
One of them, more audacious than the rest, stabbed one 



ICASSACBE OF THE GHAZEES. 


445 


of the royal attendants. Upon this, orders were issued 
for the massacre of the whole. 

The Shah ordered them to be beheaded, and they 
were hacked to death, with wanton barbarity, by the 
knives of his executioners. Coolly and deliberately the 
slaughter of these unhappy men proceeded, till the whole 
lay mangled and mutilated upon the blodd-stained 
ground.* Macnaghten, a little time before, had been com¬ 
mending the humane instincts of the King. The hu¬ 
manity of Shah Soojah was nowhere to be found except 
m Macnaghten’s letters. It is enough simply to recite 
the circumstances of a deed so terrible as this. It was 
an unhappy and an ominous commencement. The Shah 
had marched all the way from Loodhianah without en¬ 
countering an enemy. And now the first men taken 
in arms against him were cruelly butchered in cold 
blood by the “humane” monarch. The act, impolitic 
as it was unrighteous, brought its own sure retribution. 
That “martyrdom” was never forgotten. The day of 
reckoning came at last; and when our unholy policy 
sunk unburied in blood and ashes, the shrill cry of the 
Ghazee sounded as its funeral wail. 