

This, at all events, had been learnt at Candahar 
during the two months’ halt of our army, which, when 
everything has been said on the subject of supplies, 
seems still to demand from the pen of the historian 
something more in the way of explanation. The sup¬ 
plies had now come into camp. They might not be 
available for the troops on the line of march to Caubul;* 
but there was no longer any excuse for protracting the 
halt. So, on the 27th of June, as Runjeet Singh, the 
old Lion of Lahore, was wrestling with death at his 
own capital, the British army resumed its march; and 
on the 21st of July was before the famous fortress of 
Ghuznee. 


* A convoy of camels laden with 
grain had been for some time ex¬ 
pected from the southward, under 
the charge of a Lohanee merchant, 
named Surwar Khan. Some efforts 
had been made by the enemy to in¬ 
tercept this convoy, or to corrupt the 
Lohanee chief; and it is said that 
nothing but the determined fidelity 
of the leader of the Irre^ar Horse 
that accompanied it, saved the convoy 
from being carried off to the Baruk- 
zyes. It reached Candahar, but there 
a new difiicidty presented itself. The 
camel-drivers refused to proceed. 


There were 20,000 maunds of ^ain 
now at the disposal of our Commissa¬ 
riat officers; out the contumacy of 
these men was now likely to render 
it wholly useless. Suwar Khan had 
contracted to bring the convoy to 
Candahar; but the camel-drivers, 
afraid of the vengeance of Dost Ma¬ 
homed, refused to proceed any further. 
There was kio contending against this; 
so the supplies were made over to the 
Commissariat, and stored at Candahar, 
where a detachment of our troops was 
left. 



438 


XHB VALL 09 GHUZXnBB. 


CHAPTER m. 

[June—August: 1839.] 

The Disunion of the Barukzyes—Prospects of Dost Mahomed—Keane’s 
Advance to Ghuznee—Massacre of the Prisoners—Fall of Ghuznee— 
Flight of Dost Mahomed — Hadjee Khan, Khaukur—Escape of Dost 
Muiomed. 

The disunion of the Barukzye brethren lost Afghanistan 
to the Sirdars. The bloodless fall of Candahar struck 
no astonishment into the soul of Dost Mahomed. He 
had long mistrusted his kinsmen. Candahar, too, was 
the home of the Douran^es. Ho knew that the Baruk¬ 
zyes had nothing to expect from the allegiance of that 
powerful tribe. He knew that they were little inclined 
to strike a blow for the existing dynasty; but he knew, at 
the same time, that they were so prostrate and enfeebled, 
that the Suddozye Prince would derive no active as¬ 
sistance from them—that they would only throw into 
the scale the passive sullenness and harmless decrepitude 
of men broken down by a long course of oppression. 

If Dost Mahomed and the Candahar Sirdars had 
leagued themselves firmly together, without jealousy 
and without suspicion—^if they had declared a religious 
war, had appealed to the Mahomedan feelings of the 
people—if they had, by their own energy and activity, 
encouraged Mehrab Khan, of Khelat, to array himself 
against the invaders, and throwing themselves heart and 
soul into the cause, had opposed our passive through 
the Bolan and Eojuck Passes, they might have turned 