

From the fortifications of the citadel Hyder Khan 
looked out through a telescope, and beheld our British 
columns advancing slowly and steadily across the plain. 
Some preparations had been made for external defence; 
but not on any extensive scale. Parties of the enemy 
were posted in the villages and gardens around the‘fort; 
but our light companies soon dislodged them. The 
morning was spent in brisk skirmishing;* the range of 
the enemy’s guns was tried; the engineers reconnoitred 
the place; and then it was determined that the camp 
should be pitched upon the Caubul side of the city. It 
was reported that Dost Mahomed himself was advancing 
from the capital, and it was expedient to cut oft’ his 
direct communication with the fort. Not without some 
confusion the camp was pitched. Had Afzul Khan 
descended with his cavalry upon us at this time, he might 
have wrought dire mischief amongst us. 

Day had scarcely dawned on the 22nd, when Sir John 
Keane, accompanied by Sir Willoughby Cotton and the 
engineers, ascended the heights commanding the eastern 
face of the works, and reconnoitred the fortress. He had 
determined on carrying the place by assault. In ignorance 
of the means whereby this was to be accomplished, the 

* The en^oiyy dislodged from the chief among them. Captain Graves 
garden, retreated to an outwork, of the 16th Native Infantry, and 
whence they directed a heavy fire Lieutenant Homrigh, of the 48th, 
upon our people, and did some mis*^ were wounded* 



FliAK OV THK Aa8AX]I.T. 


44S 


King had recommended that the army should leave 
Ghuznee to itself, and march on at once to CaubuL It 
was evident that the light field>pieces which Keane had 
broiight up with him from Candahar could not breach 
the solid walls of Ghuznee. “ If you once breach the 
place,” said the Shah, “it is yours; but I cannot im- 
derstand how you are to breach it—how you are to 
get into the fort.” But Sir John Keane did understand 
this; for his engineers had taught him. He imderstood, 
though he had left his siege train behind, that there was 
still a resource remaining to him. Though the walls 
could not be breached, a gate, Captain Thomson assured 
him, might be blown in with gunpowder. 

The gate to be blown in was the Caubul gate. All 
the others had been built up. The military historians 
leave it to be surmised by the reader that the know¬ 
ledge of this important fact was derived from the recon^ 
naissances of the British Commander and his engineers. 
The truth is, that the British had then in their camp a 
deserter from the Ghuznee garrison—a Barukzye of 
rank, who had been induced to turn his traitorous back 
upon his tribe. Abdool Bashed Khan was the nephew 
of Dost Mahomed. When the “ Commercial Mission” 
was in Afghanistan, Mohun Lai had made the acquaint¬ 
ance of this man. The Moonshee seems to have been 
endowed with a genius for traitor-making, the lustre of 
which remained imdimmed to the very end of the war. 
He now began to operate upon his friend; and he 
achieved a brilliant success. Abdool Bashed was not 
deaf to the voice of the charmer. Mohun Lai wrote 
him a seductive letter, and he determined to desert. As 
the British army approached Ghuznee he joined our 
camp. “I introduced him,” says Mohun Lai, “to the 
Envoy, who placed him under the immediate disposal 
of Lord Keane. The information which he gave to 
Major Thomson, the chief engineer, relative to the 