

♦ ** I think Sir A. Burnes is dis- f Lieutenant North, of the Bombay 
inclined to go to Herat, and Sir J. Engineers, and Drs. Login and Rit- 
Keane is averse to his goi^ there, chie, also accompanied them, llie 
It is probable I may send ^dd in- Mission left Candahar on the 2l8t of 
stead.’*— [Mr. Macnaghten to Lord June, and reached Herat on the 25th 
Auckland: Candahar, April 25,1839. of July. 

UnpvibUshed Correspondence.'] 

2 F 2 



436 


THE HALT AT CANDAHAR. 


Strengthen the fortifications of the place, and they took 
with them guns and treasure. 

A few days after the departure of the Mission to 
Herat, the army recommenced its march. It had been 
halted at Candahar from the 25th of April to the 27th 
of June. During this time the harvest had ripened; the 
carriage-cattle had gained strength ; but sickness had 
broken out among our troops. The heat under canvas 
had been extreme. Fever, dysentery, and jaundice had 
been doing their work; and many a good soldier had 
been laid in a foreign grave. Money, too, had been 
painfully scarce. It had been scattered about so pro¬ 
fusely on our first arrival at Candahar, that now an 
empty treasury stared Macnaghten in the face; and he 
tried in vain to negotiate a loan. All these were dis¬ 
piriting circumstances; and there were others which 
pressed heavily upon the mind of the Envoy. It was 
becoming plainer and clearer to him every day, that the 
Afghans regarded the intrusion of the British into their 
dominions with the strongest feelings of national hatred 
and religious abhorrence. A different class of men from 
the Belooch marauders, who had carried off our cattle 
and plundered our stores in the southern country, were 
now surrounding our camp. If our people straggled far 
from their supports, they did it at the peril of their 
lives. “ Remember, gentlemen, you are not now in 
Hindostan,”* was the significant warning which broke 
from Shah Soqjah, when two young officers,f returning 
from a fishing excursion along the banks of the Ur- 
ghundab, had been cut down by a party of assassins. 
It was plain, too, that the Ghilzyes of Western Afghan¬ 
istan—the original lords of the land—^were disinclined 
to bend their necks to the Suddozye yoke. They had 

* HaYdock. former was murdered; the latter es- 

t liwerari^ and Wilmer. The caped with his life. 



ADVANCE UPON GHUZNEE. 


437 


rejected the overtures made to them. They were not 
to be bought by British gold, or deluded by British 
promises. Perhaps they may have doubted the sin¬ 
cerity of the latter. Already were Shah Soojah and 
Macnaghten scattering about those promises even more 
freely than their money ; and already were they ceasing 
to respect the obligation of fulfilling them. The G-hil- 
zyes now regarded us with unconquerable mistrust 
There was every prospect of their long continuing to be a 
thorn in the flesh of the restored monarch and his sup¬ 
porters—a wild and lawless enemy, not to be reduced 
to loyalty by Douranee Kings, or to subjection by foreign 
bayonets. 