

* Whether this step was taken by agreed to by his principal partisans, 
Dost Mahomed on his own account, does not very clearly appear, 
or whether it was recommended or 



SITUATION OF THE AMEEB. 


453 


on the bounty of the British Government. Had liis 
cause been far more hopeless than it was, Dost Maho¬ 
med would have rather flung himself upon the British 
bayonets than upon the protection of the Feringhees. 
Jubbar Khan then frankly stating his own determination 
to follow the fortunes of his brother, requested and re¬ 
ceived his dismissal.* 

The Newab returned to the Ameer’s camp. All hope 
of negotiation was now at an end, and Dost Mahomed, 
with resolution Avorthy of a better fate, marched out to 
dispute the progress of the invaders. At the head of an 
army, in which the seeds of dissolution had already 
been sown, he moved down upon Urghundeh. There 
he drew up his troops and parked his guns. But it was 
not on this ground that he had determined to give the 
Feringhees battle. The last stand was to have been 
made at Maidan, on the Caubul river—a spot, the 
natural advantages of which would have been greatly in 
his favour. But the battle was never fought. At Ur¬ 
ghundeh it became too manifest that there was treachery 
in his camp. The venal Kuzzilbashes were fast desert¬ 
ing his standard. There was scarcely a true man left in 
his ranks. Hadjee Khan, Khaukur, on whom he had 
placed great reliance, had gone over to the enemy, and 
others were fast following his example. This was the 
crisis of his fate. He looked around him and saw only 
perfidy on the right hand and on the left. Equal to 

• Mohun Lai says that the Ne- wab took his departure without see- 
wab, who had acted with the greatest ing the Sirdar. He said significantly 
friendliness towards Bumes and his to the Envoy, in the course of con- 
Mission, and was known to have been versation, ‘‘ If Shah Soojah is really 
at the head of the English party in a King, and come to the kingdom of 
Caubul, begged that the wife of Hy- his ancestors, what is the use of your 
der Khan might be given up to him; army and name ? You have brought 
but preferred the request in vain, him, by your money and arms, into 
He sought an interv iew, too, with his Afghanistan. Leave him now with 
nephew; and it would have been us Afghans, and let him rule us if 
granted to him, but the official re- he can.’' 
ferences caused delay, and the Ne- 



454 


THE FALL OF GHHZKEE. 


the occasiou, but basely deserted, what could the Ameer 
do ? Never had the nobility of his nature shone forth 
more truly and more lustrously. In the hour of ad¬ 
versity, when all were false, he was true to his own 
manhood. Into the midst of his own perfidious troops 
he rode, with the Koran in his hand; and there called 
upon his followers, in the names of God and the Prophet, 
not to forget that they were true Mahomedans—not to 
disgrace their names and to dishonour their religion, by 
rushing into the arms of one who had filled the country • 
with infidels and blasphemers. He besought them to 
make one stand, like brave men and true believers; to 
rally round the standard of the commander of the faith¬ 
ful; to beat back the invading Feringhees or die in the 
glorious attempt. He then reminded them of his own 
claims on their fidelity. “ You have eaten my salt,” he 
said, “ these thirteen years. If, as is too plain, you are 
resolved to seek a new master, grant me but one favour 
in requital for that long period ol‘ maintenance and kind¬ 
ness—enable me to die with honour. Stand by the 
brother of Futteh Khan, whilst he executes one last 
charge against the cavalry of these Feringhee dogs; in 
that onset be will fall; then go and make your own 
terms with Shah Soojah.”* The noble spirit-stirring 
appeal was f ainly uttered; few responded to it. There 
was scarcely a true heart left. With despairing eyes he 
looked around upon his recreant followers. He saw 
that there was no hope of winning them back to their 
old allegiance; he felt that he was surrounded by 
traitors and cowards, who were willing to abandon him 
to his fate. It was idle to struggle against his destiny. 
The first bitter pang was over; he reassumed his serenity 
of demeanour, and, addressing himself to the Kuzzil- 
bashes, formally gave them their discharge. He then 