

The work was done rapidly and well. The match 

^ * The advance consisted of the storminff columns. The regiments 
light companies of the four European were: 3ie 2nd, the 13th, and 17th 
regiments; the remaining companies (Queen’s), and the Company’s Euro* 
composed the other sections of the pean Be^ment. 



THS STOlEtlimO OS' 6UUZNBK. 


447 


was applied to the hose. The powder exploded,* 
Above the roaring of the guns and the rushing of the 
wind, the noise of the explosion was barely audible.f 
But the effect was as mighty as it was sudden. A 
column of black smoke arose; and down with a crash 
came heavy masses of masonry and shivered beams in 
awful ruin and confusion. Then the bugle sounded the 
advance. Dennie, at the head of his stormers, pushed 
forward through the smoke and dust of the aperture; 
and soon the bayonets of his light companies were cross¬ 
ing the swords of the enemy who had rushed down to 
the point of attack. A few moments of darkness and 
confusion; and then the foremost soldiers caught a 
glimpse of the morning sky, and pushing gallantly on, 
were soon established in the fortress. Three hearty, 
animating cheers—so loud and clear that they were 
heard throughout the general camp|—announced to their 
excited comrades below that Dennie and his stormers 
had entered Ghuznee, 

Then Sale pressed on with the main column, eager to 
support the stormers in advance; and as he went he met 
an engineer officer of the explosion party, who had been 
thrown to the ground, shattered and bewildered by the 
concussion,§ and who now announced that the gate was 
choked up, and that Dennie could not force an entrance. 
So Sale sounded the retreat. The column halted. 
There was a pause of painful doubt and anxiety; and 
then the cheering notes of the bugle, sounding the ad¬ 
vance, again stirred the hearts of our people. Another 
engineer officer had reported that, though the aperture 
was crowded with fallen rubbish, Dennie had made good 

* Hongh says: “LieutenantDurand f Hayelock. Hough says: “ The 

was obliged to scrapNe the hose with explosion was heard by nearly all.*^ 
his finger-nails, finding the powder J Havelock, 
failed to ignite on the first appUca- § Captain Feat, 
tion of title port-fire.** 



448 


THE EAIX OE GHUZNEE. 


his entrance. Onward, therefore, went Sale; but the 
enemy had profited by the brief pause. The opposition 
at the gateway now was more resolute than it would 
have been if there had been no check. The Afghans 
were crowding to the gate—^some for purposes of de¬ 
fence, others to escape the fire which Dennie was pour¬ 
ing in upon them. Sale met them amidst the ruins— 
amidst the crumbled masonry and the fallen timbers. 
There was a sturdy conflict. The Brigadier himself 
was cut down ;* but after a desperate stru gg le with his 
opponent, whose skull he clove with his sabre, he re¬ 
gained his feet, again issued his commands; and the 
main column was soon within the fortress. The sup¬ 
port, under Colonel Croker, then pushed forward; the 
reserve in due course followed; the capture of Ghuznee 
was complete; and soon the colours of the 13th and 
17th Regiments were flapping in the strong morning 
breeze on the ramparts of the Afghans’ last strong¬ 
hold.! 