

t He was confined at Chunar, 
where he seems to have borne his 
imprisonment with considerable phi¬ 
losophy. 

J “ With regard to the ordnance 
captured at Urghiindeh, the guns 
were of all calibres, chiefly below 
6-pounder—one a 17-pouiider, and a 
few of different sizes, between 17 and 

12-pounders.The number of 

shot left at Urghundeh was 4270, of 

various sizes.The shot is 

hammered iron, and so uneven, that, 
unless weighed, their weight could 
not be told. They are chiefly much 

under 6-pounder shot.With 

regard to the other stores taken at 
Urghundeh, nothing was of the 
slightest service, except the old iron of 
the carriages, and the axletrees, also 
good as old iron only, and to which 


purpose they have been appropriated.** 
—{^TAeutenant Warhurton to Sir W. 
Jl. Macnaffhten: Cauhul^ August 15, 
1841. MS, Records.'] 

§ “ Onward,” says Captain Have¬ 
lock, “ moved the force, and an hour 
had not elapsed since the day broke 
when it came full upon the abandoned 
ordnance of the fallen Barukzye. 
Twenty-two pieces of various calibre, 
but generally good guns, on field 
carriages, superior to those generally 
seen in tlic armies of Asiatic Princes, 
were parked in a circle in the Ameer’s 
late position. Two more were placed 
in battery in the village of Urghundeh, 
at the foot of the hills. . . . The route 
by which we had advanced was 
flanked by a deep, impracticable 
ravine, on which the Afghan left 
would have rested ; there their artil¬ 
lery had been parked, and would pro* 
bably from this point have swept the 
open plain, and searched the narrow 
defile by which we would have de¬ 
bouched upon. Their front was open 
for the exertions of a bold and active 
cavaliys and here the Ameer might at 
least liave died with honour.” 






460 


THE PAM. OP GHUZNEE. 


Stand against the battalions of General Nott; but on which^ 
like his distinguished clansman, he never gave us battle. 

On the 6th of August, Shah Soojah and the British 
army appeared before the walls of Caubul. On the fol¬ 
lowing day the King entered the capital of Afghanistan. 
The exile of thirty years—^the baffled and rejected repre¬ 
sentative of the legitimacy of the Douranee Empire, was 
now at the palace gates. The jingling of the money¬ 
bags, and the gleaming of the bayonets of the British, had 
restored him to the throne which, without these glitter¬ 
ing aids, he had in vain striven to recover. The Balia 
Hissar of Caubul now reared its proud front before him. 
It was truly a great occasion. The King, gorgeous in 
regal apparel, and resplendent with jewels, rode a white 
charger, whose equipments sparkled with Asiatic gold.* 
It was a goodly sight to see the coronet, the girdle, and 
the bracelets which scintillated upon the person of the 
rider, and turned the fugitive and the outcast into a 
pageant and a show. There were those present to 
whom the absence of the Koli-i-Noor, which, caged in 
Hyde Park, has become so familiar to the sight-seers 
of Great Britain, suggested strange reminiscences of the 
King’s eventful past. But the restored monarch, want¬ 
ing the great diamond, still sparkled into royalty as he 
rode up to the Balia Hissar, with the white-faced Kings 
of Afghanistan beside him. In diplomatic costume, Mac- 
naghten and Burnes accompanied the Suddozye puppet. 
The principal military officers of the British army rode 
with them. And Moonshee Mohun Lai, flaunting a 
majestic turban, and looking, in his spruceness, not at 
all as though his mission in Afghanistan were to do the 
dirty work of the British diplomatists, made a very con¬ 
spicuous figure in the gay cavalcade.f 