

• Havelock. 



FLIGHT OF DOST MAHOMED. 


455 


dismissed all who were inclined to purchase safety by 
tendering allegiance to the Shah; and with a small hand¬ 
ful of followers, leaving his guns still in position, turned 
his horse’s head towards the regions of the Hindoo- 
Koosh. 

It was on tlio evening of the 2nd of August that Dost 
Mahomed fled from Urghiindeh. On the following day 
the British army, which had moved from Ghuznee on 
the 30th of July, received tidings of his flight. It was 
now determi)ied to send a party in pursuit. It was 
mainly to consist of Afghan horsemen; but some details 
from our cavalry regiments were sent with them, and 
Captain Outram, ever ready for such service, volunteered 
for the command. Other officers — bold riders and 
dashing soldiers*—were eager to join in the pursuit; 
and a party of ten, with about five hundred mounted 
men, mustered that afternoon before the Mission tents, 
equipped for the raid. 

If the success of this expedition had depended upon 
the zeal and activity of the officers. Dost Mahomed 
would have been brought back a prisoner to the British 
camp; for never did a finer set of men leap into their 
saddles, flushed with the thought of the stirring work 
before them. But when they set out in pursuit of the 
fallen Ameer, a traitor rode with them, intent on turn¬ 
ing to very nothingness all their chivalry and devotion. 
There was an Afghan chief known as Hadjee Khan, 
Khaukur, of whom mention has been made. He was a 
man of mean extraction, the son of a goat-herd,f but from 
this low estate had risen into notice, and obtained ser¬ 
vice with Dost Mahomed. It was not in his nature to 
be faithful. He deserted Dost Mahomed, and attached 

♦ The names of many of them Trere Lieutenants Broadfoot, Hogg, Ryves, 
subsequently associated with the later and Dr. Worral. Captains Tayler and 
incidents of the war. They were Trevor joined them on the 8«i. 
Captains Wheler, Troup, Lawrence, f Outram says he was a melon- 
Backhouse, Christie, and Erskinc: fseller. 



456 


THE FALL OF GHDZNBE. 


himself to the Candahar Sirdars. On the advance of 
the British army he deserted the Sirdars, and flung him¬ 
self at the feet of the Suddozye. Delighted with such 
an accession to his strength, the King appointed him 
Nassur-ood-dowlah, or “ Defender of the State,” and con¬ 
ferred on him a Jaghire of the annual value of three 
lakhs of rupees. 

At Candahar, whence the Sirdars had fled, the Had- 
jee, profoundly conscious of the hopelessness of their 
cause, broke out into loyalty and enthusiasm, and was, to 
all outward seeming, a faithful adherent of the Shah. 
But as he entered the principality of the Caubul Ameer, 
he seemed to stand upon more uncertain ground; the 
issue of the contest was yet doubtfiil. Dost Mahomed 
and his sons were in the field. So the Hadjee made 
many excuses; and fell in the rear of the British army. 
He was sick; it was necessary that he should march 
easily; he could not bear the bustle of the camp. Keep¬ 
ing, therefore, a few marches in the rear, he followed 
our advancing columns, with his retainers; and there, it 
is said, “ enjoyed the congenial society of several discon¬ 
tented and intriguing noblemen.”* 