


♦ I give the circumstances of Sale’s 
escape in the words of Captain 
Havelock, who has detailed tjiem 
with trustworthy minuteness. “ One 
of their number rushing over the 
fallen timbers, brought down Briga¬ 
dier Sale by a cut in the face with 
his sharp shiuisheer (sabre). The 
Afghan repeated his blow as his op¬ 
ponent was falling; but the pummel, 
not the edge of his sword, this time 
took cflect, though with stunning 
violence. lie lost his footing, how¬ 
ever, in the effort, and Briton and 
Afghan rolled together amongst the 
fractured timbers. Thus situated, 
the first care of the Brigadier was to 
master the weapon of his adversary. 
He snatched at it, but one of his 
lingers met the edge of the trenchant 
blade. He quickly withdrew his 
wounded hand, and adroitly replaced 
it over that of his adversary, so as 
to keep fast the hilt of his shunsheer. 
But he had an active and powerful 


opponent, and was himself faint from 
the loss of blood. Captain Kershaw, 
of the 13th, aide-de-camp to Brigadier 
Baumgardt, happened in the mulee to 
approach the scene of conflict; the 
wounded leader recognised and called 
to him for aid. Kershaw passed his 
drawn sabre through the body of the 
Afghan ; but still the desperado con¬ 
tinued to struggle with frantic vio¬ 
lence. At length, in the fierce grap>- 
ple, the Brigadier for a moment got 
uppermost. Still retaining the wea¬ 
pon of his enemy in his left hand, he 
dealt him with his right a cut from 
his own sabre, which cleft his skull 
from the crown to the eyebrows. 
The Mahomedan once shouted, ^Ne 
UUanr (Oh! God!) and never 
moved or spoke again .”—[^Captain 
Havelock's ifarraiive,"] 

t Havelock. The colour of the 
ISth was the first planted by the 
hand of Bnsign Frere—a nephew of 
the Hon. John Hookbam Frere. 



FOEBEABANCE OF THE VICTOES. 


449 


But there was much hard fighting within the walls. 
In the frenzy of despair the A%hans rushed out from 
their hiding-places, sword in hand, upon our stormcrs, 
and plied their sabres with terrible effect, but only to 
meet with fearful retribution from the musket-fire or the 
bayonets of the British infantry. There was horrible 
confusion and much carnage. Some, in their frantic 
efforts to escape by the gateway, stumbled over the 
burning timbers, wounded and exhausted, and were 
slowly burnt to death. Some were bayoneted on the 
ground. Others were pursued and hunted into corners 
like mad dogs, and shot down, with the curse and the 
prayer on their lips. But never, it is said by the his¬ 
torians of the war, after the garrison had ceased to fight, 
did the wrath of their assailants overtake them. Many 
an Afghan sold his life dearly, and, though wounded 
and stricken down, still cut out at the hated enemy; 
but when resistance was over, mercy smiled down upon 
him. The appeals of the helpless were never dis¬ 
regarded by the victors in their hour of triumph. The 
women, too, were honourably treated. Hyder Khan’s 
Zenana was in the citadel; but not a woman was out¬ 
raged by the captors.* 