

* Akbar Khan, who had by this joined his father's camp prostrated 
time been withdrawn from the de- by sickness, 
fence of the Khybur line, and had 



45d 


THE FALL OF GHUZNEB. 


nisli the speed of his flight. Outrani seemed almost to 
have the Ameer in his grasp; when Hadjee Khan again 
counselled delay. It was necessary, he said, to wait for 
reinforcements. The Ameer had two thousand fighting 
men. The Afghans under Hadjee Khan were not to be 
relied upon. They had no food; their horses were 
knocked up; they were unwilling to advance. Angry 
and indignant, Oiitram broke from the Hadjee in the 
midst of his entreaties, and declared that he would 
push on with his own men. Again and again there 
was the same contention between the chivalrous ear¬ 
nestness of the British officer and the foul treachery of 
the Afghan chief. At last, on the 9th of August, they 
reached Bameean, where Hadjee Khan had repeatedly 
declared that Dost Mahomed would halt, only to learn 
that the fugitives were that morning to be at S 3 'ghan, 
nearly thirty miles in advance. The Ameer was push¬ 
ing on with increased rapidity, for the sick Prince, 
who had been carried in a litter, was now transferred 
to the back of an elephant, and his escape was now 
almost certain. The treachery of Hadjee Khan had 
done its work. Outram had been restricted in his 
operations to the limits of the Shah’s dominions; and 
the Ameer had now ])assed the borders. Further 
pursuit, indeed, would have been hopeless. The horses 
of our cavalry were exhausted by over-fatigue and want 
of food. They were unable any longer to continue their 
forced marches. The game, therefore, was up. Dost 
Mahomed had escaped. Hadjee Khan, Khaukur, had 
saved the Ameer; but he had sacrificed himself. He 
had over-reached himself in his career of treachery, and 
was now to pay the penalty of detection. Outram 
officially reported the circumstances of the Hadjee’s 
conduct, which had baffled all his best efforts—efforts 
which, ho believed, would have been crowned with sue- 



CAPTtmfi Ot THK AMEBr’S BARK. 


459 


cess*—and the traitor, on his return to Caubul, was 
arrested by orders of the Shah. Other proofs of his 
treason were readily found; and he was sentenced to 
end a life of adventurous vicissitude as a state prisoner 
in the provinces of Hindostan.f 

So fled Dost Mahomed Khan across the frontier of 
Afghanistan. His guns were found in position at Ur- 
ghundeh by a party of cavalry and horse artillery sent 
Ibrward to capture them. They were mostly light 
piecesand neither the ordnance nor the position which 
had been taken up, could be considered of a very for¬ 
midable character.^ It has been already said, however, 
that the Ameer had fixed upon another spot on which 
to meet the advancing armies of the Shah and his allies 
—a spot well calculated for defence, which, three years 
afterwards, Shumshoodeen Khan selected for his last 


♦ Others, however, thought that his 
failure was fortunate, it being onl^yr 
too probable, in their opinion, that, if 
he had come up with the fugitive, his 
little party would have been over¬ 
whelmed by the followers of the 
Ameers and the traitorous Afghan 
horsemen whom Hadjec Khan had 
taken with him. 