



FLIGHT OF AFZUX KHAK. 


451 


the Commander-in-Chief overcame his reluctance, and 
Keane conducted him both to the Mission and to the 
King. Instructed as to the reception he was to accord 
to the fallen Barukzye chief, the Suddozye monarch re< 
ceived him with an outward show of kindness, and, with 
the dignified courtesy which he so well knew how to 
assume, declared that he foi^ave the past, and told him 
to go in peace. 

And so Ghuznoe fell to the British army, and was 
made over to the Suddozye King. It cost the victors 
only seventeen killed and a hundred and sixty-five 
wounded. Of these last eighteen were officers. The 
carnage among the garrison was more fearful. Upwards 
of five hundred men were buried by the besiegers; and 
many more are supposed to have fallen beyond the 
walls, under the sabres of the British horsemen. Six¬ 
teen hundred prisoners were taken. Immense stores of 
grain and flour, sufficient for a protracted defence, fell 
into our hands; and a large number of horses and arms 
swelled the value of the captured property. 

The fall of Ghuznee—a fortress hitherto deemed by 
the Afghans impregnable—astounded Dost Mahomed 
and his sons, and struck terror into their souls. Afzul 
Khan, who was hovering about the neighbourhood, pre¬ 
pared to fall upon our baffled army, found, to his won¬ 
derment, that the British colours were waving over the 
far-famed citadel of Ghuznee, and immediately sought 
safety in flight. Abandoning his elephants and the whole 
of his camp-equipage, which fell as booty into the hands 
of Shah Soojah, the Sirdar fled to Caubul. His father, 
greatly incensed, ordered him immediately to halt, and 
“ peremptorily refused to receive him.”* He had ex¬ 
pected something better from one who had done such 
good service on the boasted battle-field of Jumtood. 

* Outram. 

2 o 2 



452 


THE FALL OF GHUZNEE. 


In little more than four-and-twenty hours after the 
fall of Ghuznee, intelligence of the event reached the 
camp of the Ameer. He at once assembled his chiefs, 
spoke of the defection of some of his people, expressed 
his apprehension that others were about to desert him, 
and declared his conviction that, without the aid of 
treachery, Ghuznee would not have fallen before the 
Feringhees. Then he called upon aU present, who 
wavered in their loyalty, at once to withdraw from his 
presence, that he might know the extent of his resources, 
and not rely upon the false friendship of men who 
would forsake him in the crisis of his fate. All protested 
their fidelity. A council of war was held, and the Ne- 
wab Jubbar Khan was despatched to the British camp* 
to treat with Shah Soojah and his allies. 

The Newab mounted his horse and rode with unac¬ 
customed rapidity to Ghuznee. Mohun Lai went out to 
meet him some miles beyond the camp; and Burnes re¬ 
ceived him at the piquets. A tent was pitched for his ac¬ 
commodation near the Envoy’s; and he was well received 
by the British Mission. The King received him, too, with 
the same well-trained courtesy that he had bestowed on 
Hyder Khan—but the efforts of the Newab were fruit¬ 
less. He tendered on the part of the Ameer submission 
to the Suddozye Prince; but claimed, on the part of the 
brother of Futteh Khan, the hereditary office of Wuzeer, 
which had been held so long and so ably by the Baruk- 
zyes. The claim was at once rejected, and the mockery 
of an honourable asylum” in the British dominions 
offered in its stead. Jubbar Khan spoke out plainly and 
bluntly, like an honest man. His brother had no ambi¬ 
tion to surrender his freedom and become a pensioner 