

* There has been so much bitter and other servants amusing them- 
controversj on this unhappy subject, selves (for actually they were laugh- 
that I have not written this bare out- ing and joking, and seemed to look 
line of the event without instituting upon the work as good fun) with hack- 
inquiries among those who were most ing and maiming the poor wretches in- 
likely to have had some personal cog- discriminately with their long swords 
nizance of it. That I have rightly and knives. I was so horrified at 
characterised these murders 1 know, coming so suddenly on such a scene 
for 1 have the evidence of one who of blood, that I was for the instant, as 
saw the butchery going on. An officer it were, spell-bound. On inquiry, 
of the highest character writes, in I ascertained that the King had or- 
reply to my inquiries: As regards dered this wholesale murder in con- 
what is called the Ghuznee massacre, sequence of one of the number (they 
I was walking one day in camp, and were, or were said to be, all Ghazees^ 
came upon the King^s tents, at the who had shortly before been taken 
rear of which 1 saw a fearfully bloody prisoners) having stabbed, in his Mar 
sight. There were forty or fifty men, jesty’s presence, a Pesh-Khidmut, or 
young and old. Many were dead; body-attendant of the King. My 
others at their last gasp; others with friend and I made our exit; and he 
their hands tied behind them; some went direct to the Envoy’s tent and 
sitting, others standing, awaking their reported the circumstance.’*— 
doom; and the King^s executioners Correspondence.'] 



446 


THB VAUa of GHTJZNEE* 


A gusty niglit had heralded a gusty morn, when 
Keane, inwardly bewailing the absence of his heavy 
guns, planted his light field-pieces on some command¬ 
ing heights opposite the citadel, and filled the gardens 
near the city walls with his Sepoy musketeers. No 
sound issued from the fortress, nor was there any sign of 
life, whilst unseen under cover of the night, and unheard 
above the loud wailings of the wind, the storming 
column was gathering upon the Caubul road, and the 
engineers were carrying up their powder-bags to the gate. 
The advance was under Colonel Dennie, of the 13 th 
Light Infantry; and the main column under Brigadier 
Sale.* Captain Thomson, of the Bengal Engineers, 
directed the movements of the explosion party; and 
with him were his two subalterns, Durand and Mac- 
leod, and Captain Peat, of the Bombay corps. Three 
hours after midnight everything was ready for the 
assault. 

Then Keane ordered the light batteries to open upon 
the works of Ghuznee. It was a demonstration— 
harmless but not useless; for it fixed the attention of 
the enemy, and called forth a responsive fire. A 
row of blue lights along the walls now suddenly broke 
through the darkness and illuminated the place. The 
enemy had been beguiled by the false attack, and were 
now looking out towards our batteries, eager to learn 
the nature of the operations commenced by the invest¬ 
ing force. And whilst the Afghans were thus engaged, 
anticipating an escalade and manning their walls, the 
British engineers were quietly piling their powder-bags 
at the Caubul gate. 