

Resistance over, the Commander-in-Cljief and the 
Envoy entered Ghuznee by the Caubul gate. Shah 
Soojah, before the contest was over, had ridden down 
to the point of attack, and watched the progress of 
events with the deepest interest, but with no apparent 
want of collectedness and nerve.f Keane and Mac- 

* Havelock. The military histo- diflerent if individual soldiers had 
rian attaches the forbearance of the entered the town primed with arrack, 
soldiery to the fact, that no spirit or if spirituous liquors had been dis- 
rations had been served out to them covered in the Afghfin depots.’* 
during the preceding fortnight. ‘‘No f I bave been assured by an officer 
candid man,” he says, “ of any mi- on the staiT of the Shah's army, that 
litary experience, will deny that the he was near his Majesty, at the 
character of the scene, in the fortress taking of Ghuznee, when under fire, 
and the citadel, would hare been far and that he exhibited great coolness 

VOE. I. 2 G 



450 


THE FAUi OF GHUZNEE. 


naghten now led him up to the citadel. The wife of 
Hyder Khan, and the other women of his Zenana, 
were conducted, under the orders of the political and 
military chiefs, by John ConoUy, a cousin of the Envoy, 
to a house in the town, where they were placed under 
the charge of the Moonshee Mohun Lai.* But Hyder 
Khan himself had not yet been discovered. The Suddozye 
Prince and the British chiefs were inquiring after the 
commander of the garrison; but no tidings of him were 
to be obtained. He might have been concealed in the 
fortress, or ho might have effected his escape. Accident 
only betrayed the position of the young Sirdar. He 
■was found in a house near the Candahar gate, by an 
officer of the Company’s European regiment.f At once 
acknowledging that he was the governor of Ghuznee, he 
threw himself upon the mercy of his captors. Con¬ 
ducted to Keane’s tent, the Sirdar was guaranteed his 
personal safety, and placed under the charge of Sir 
Alexander Burnes.J He was unwilling at first to appear 
in the presence of Shah Soqjah; but the assurances of 

and courage. He is said by my in- Stocqueler (^Memorials of Afghanis- 
formant, who was close beside him, to tan) attributes the honour of the 
have sate “as firm as a rock,not show- capture to Brigadier lloberts, who di- 
ing the slightest alarm either by word rected Captain Tayler to proceed to 
or gesture, and seeming to think it the house. 

derogatory to his kingly character to J “ The Sirdar, mounted on a 
move an inch whilst the firing lasted.” small horse, and accompanied by a 
— iMS. Correspondence.'] few of his companions, was conducted 

* Mohun Lai says : “ Captain John by Major Maegregor to the tent of 
Conolly conducted them, with every the Commaiider-in-Chief. Sir Alex- 
mark of deference, to a house in the ander Burnes and myself were sent 
town, where it fell to my lot to pro- for, and as soon as the Sirdar saw 
vide them with everything necessary him he felt a little easy in his mind; 
which they wanted; and that respon- and discovering me with him, the ex- 
sible charge of them I had for a long pression of his countenance was at once 
time, and executed it to the satisfac- changed, and he asked me for a glass 
tion of the ladies, until they were sent of water. Lord Keane allowed him 
to India .”—[_Life of Dost Mahomed.] to remain in my tent, under the charge 
f Captain Tayler, Brigade-Major of Sir A. Burnes. I clothed hSn 
of the 4th Brig^e. Mohun Lai says with my own clothes every day, and 
that “ Miyor Maegregor found him he partook of my meals .”—[Mohun 
concealed with an armed party in the Lafs Life of Dost Mahomed.] 
tower, waiting for the night.” Mr. 