

If Ghuznee had not fallen, Hadjee Khan and his 
friends would have gone over in a body to the Ameer, 


* See the “ Life of Hadjee Khan, 
Khaukur, the Talleyrand of the East,” 
published originally in the Delhi Ga¬ 
zette. It is attributed to the pen of 
Arthur Conolly. The writer adds: 
“ In the comp of those chiefs con¬ 
spiracies against Shab Soojah and his 
allies were daily agitated. Their 
letters formed the pride, the comfort, 
the hope, and the amusement of the 
Caubul Court.Some¬ 

times it was proposed by the traitors 
to attack the English camp in con¬ 
cert with the Ghilzyes at night. Fear 
prevented this plot ripening; but had 
the army met with a repulse, it would 
undoubtedly have been attacked in 
rear. At last, at a full meeting—1 


have it from the lips of one present 
at it—it was determined to loin Dost 
Mahomed e7i masse. At this meet¬ 
ing were the Hackee Khan, Hadjee 
Dost, FyztuUub Khan, Noorzye, and 
many others. They had been de¬ 
ceived by a false report of a partial 
action of cavalry the day before; 
the opportunity had arrived, they 
thought, for giving us the coup de 
grace, Harmy had the conclave 
separated, when intelligence wa? re¬ 
ceived of the capture of Ghuznee. It 
need hardly be said that, a few hours 
afterwards, Hadjee Khan and the 
rest were congratulating his Majesty 
on the splendid victory. ’ 



HASJEE KHAN, KHAUKUB. 


457 


and on the slightest information of a reverse having be¬ 
fallen us, would have flung themselves on our rear. But 
the fall of this great Afghan stronghold brought the 
Hadjee again to the stirrup of the Shah; and he was 
again all loyalty and devotion. Confident of his fidelity, 
and perhaps anxious to establish it in the eyes of all 
who had viewed with suspicion the proceedings of the 
Hadjee, the King now put it to the proof. The man 
had once been Governor of Bameean. He knew the 
country along which the Dost had taken his flight. 
What could be better than to entrust the conduct of the 
expedition to the veteran chief? The King and Mac- 
naghten were of the same mind; so Hadjee Khan, who 
had been for some time in treasonable correspondence 
with Dost Mahomed, was now despatched to overtake him 
and bring him back a prisoner to the camp of the Shah. 

The result may be easily anticipated. Hadjee Khan 
cheerfully undertook the duty entrusted to him. The 
enterprise required the utmost possible amount of energy 
and promptitude to secure its success. The Ameer and 
his party were more than a day’s journey in advance of 
his pursuers. Every hour’s delay lessened the chance 
of overtaking the fugitive. So the Hadjee began at 
once to delay. The pursuers were to have started four 
hours after noon; Hadjee Khan was not ready till night¬ 
fall. Then he was eager to take the circuitous high 
road instead of dashing across the hills. His people 
lagged behind to plunder. He himselti when Outram 
was most eager to push on, always counselled a halt, and 
in the hour of need the guides deserted. The Ameer 
was now but little in advance; he Avas encumbered 
with women, and children, and much baggage. He had 
a sick son,* on whose account it was necessary to dimi- 