



LORD Auckland’s minute. 


465 


So thought Lord Aiickh'uid.* He had given his mind 
long and painfully to tlie subject, and had written an ela¬ 
borate minute, reviewing all the circumstances of our po¬ 
sition in Afglianistan after the entry of the Shah into the 
country. Macnaghten had been settled little more than 
a month in Caubul, when a copy of this minute, dated 
Simlah, August 20, was put into his hands. There 
was nothing unintelligible in it. Ably written, clearly 
worded, it enunciated, in unmistakeable paragraphs, 
the views of the Governor-General, and left Mac¬ 
naghten, even had he been disposed to follow an oppo¬ 
site course, which ho was not, no alternative but to 
retain a portion of the troops, and himself to abide at 
Caubul as controller of the Shah. Lord Auckland saw 
plainly the advantages of withdrawing the Army of the 
Indus. India could ill afford the abstraction of so large 
a body of disciplined troops, and it was probable that 
their services might be required in less remote regions; 
but he could not purchase the advantages of their with¬ 
drawal at the price of the failure of the Afghan ex¬ 
pedition, f 

It was the opinion of the Governor-General at this 
time, that although the British army could not with 


* As to whetlicr the presence of injurious speculations which have 
the British did or did not increase tlic been founded on their absence. It 
stability of the restored inonarehy, mi^ht check the restless and un- 
different opinions are entertained, friendly spirit which has prevailed 
The matter will be subsequently di.s- beyond our northern and eastern 
cussed. It was calculated to give frontiers, andivould give us disposable 
the King present support, but not strength for the requisitions which it 
permanently to rivet his hold of the seems probable, in the present aspect 
empire. of affairs, may, in more quarters than 

f “lam anxiously desirous,” wrote one, be made for military demonstra- 
Lord Auckland, in the minute of tion. Yet I need scarcely add, that 
August 20, “ that the forces which even these objects, and the immediate 
compose the Army of the Indus should reduction of expenditure, would be ill 
be once more stationed within our attained at the price of leaving unac- 
own provinces. The political effect of complished the great purposes with 
their return could not but be advan- which the expedition to Caubul was 
tageous. It would put an end to the undertaken.”—[MiS. RecordsJ] 

VOL. I. 2 n 



466 


THU DAWN OF THE RESTOBATION. 


safety be wholly withdrawn, a force consisting of some 
five or six regiments of all arms would be sufficient to 
keep Shah Soojah upon his throne.* The Bombay 
troops were to be withdrawn, en masse^ by the Bolan 
Pass; and a portion of the Bengal army by the route of 
Jellalabad and the Khybur. The posts at which it was 
expedient to plant these troops were, in the opinion of 
the Governor-General, the two chief cities of Caubul 
and Candahar; and the principal posts on the main 
roads to Ilindostan—Ghuznee and Quettah, on the 
West, and Jellalabad and Ali-Musjid on the East. The 
orders which Sir John Keane had issued, before the 
Governor-General’s minute reached Caubul, anticipated 
with much exactness the instructions of the Governor- 
General.f A brigade under Colonel Sale was to re¬ 
main in Afghanistan. Sir John Keane was to take the 
remainder of the Bengal troops back to India by the 
Khybur route; and General Willshirc was to lead the 
Bombay column down by the western line of the Kojuck 
and the Bolan. 