



accommodation fob the troops. 


475 


The winter was before them. They could not remain 
encamped on the plain around Caubul. It became, 
therefore, matter of anxious consideration how accommo¬ 
dation was to be provided for so large a body of regular 
troops. The subject, indeed, had pressed upon the at¬ 
tention of the political and military chiefs before the 
brigade, which was originally to have been left in the 
country, had swelled into a division; and the engineer 
officers had been called into council, and had given the 
only advice that was likely to emanate fi'om competent 
military authority. Lieutenant Durand—a gallant sol¬ 
dier and an able scientific officer—saw at once the im¬ 
portance of posting the troops in the Balia Hissar.* And 
there, m the winter of that year, they were posted, to be 
removed in the following autumn to the fatal canton¬ 
ments which by that time had sprung up on the plain. 


* The importance of this subject 
is so great when viewed in connexion 
with the melancholy history of our 
subsequent disasters, that I cannot 
do better than quote the following 
account of the difficulties thrown 
in the way of the engineers—an ac¬ 
count, the authenticity of which is 
not to be questioned: “ Occupied 
with the reception of Shah-zadah 
Timour, with the foregoing expedi¬ 
tions and detachments, and with the 
establishment of the Shah’s Court and 
of his civil administration, Macnagli- 
ten for some time neglected to con¬ 
sider how the troops, which he kept 
at Caubul, were to be lodged.^ The 
uestion was one demanding instant 
ecision, as the winter of 1839 was 
rapidly approaching, and there was 
no suitable cover for troops. Though 
pressed upon this subject, as soon as 
It was decided that a portion of the 
British army was to remain, it was 
not until the end of August that any 
steps were taken in this important 
matter, and then they consented in 
sending an engineer officer. Lieu* 


tenant Durand, accompanied by Mo- 
hun Lai, to examine three small forts, 
which Burnes had reported as afford¬ 
ing a suitable position for the troops. 
These diminutive forts were west of 
Caubul several miles; and having 
neither cover, space, water, nor in 
fact any other requisite for the con¬ 
venience of the troops, and being, in 
a military point of view, ill placed as 
a position for the force, were at once 
rejected bjr the engineer, who consi¬ 
dered that it was essential to have mili¬ 
tary possession of the Balia Hissar; 
and that it was the proper place, under 
every point of view, both with re¬ 
ference to the present and the future, 
for lodging the troops. The Shah, 
upon various pretences, opposed this 
measure of precaution, and Mac- 
naghten yielded to objections which 
he felt and acknowledged to be ridi¬ 
culous. Sale was to to left in com¬ 
mand at Caubul; and he had there¬ 
fore a voice in the selection of the 
locality for the cantonment of his 
force. 1'he engineer, however, stated 
that it was impossible, before the win- 