

* Havelock. the military annalist to disturb the 

*1* I am indebted for this, as for gravity of the historical inquirer, but 
much else, to Captain Havelock, it is impossible to restrain asmile at the 
There is but little in the pages of happy wording of the following; ** Let 



ENTBT IKTO CAUBUL. 


461 


But never was there a duller procession. The King 
and his European supporters rode through the streets of 
Caubul to the palace in the citadel; but as they went 
there was no popular enthusiasm; the voice of welcome 
was still. The inhabitants came to the thresholds of the 
houses simply to look at the show. They stared at 
the European strangers more than at the King, who had 
been brought back to Caubul by the Feringhees; and 
scarcely even took the trouble to greet the Suddozye 
Prince with a common salaam. It was more like a 
funeral procession than the entry of a King into the 
capital of his restored dominions. But when Shah 
Soojah reached the palace from which he had so long 
been absent, he broke out into a paroxysm of childish 
delight—visited the gardens and apartments with eager 
activity—commented on the signs of neglect which 
everywhere presented themselves to his eyes—and re¬ 
ceived with feelings of genial pleasure the congratula¬ 
tions of the British officers, who soon left his Majesty 
to himself to enjoy the sweets of restored dominion.* 


me not forget to record that Moonshec 
Mohun Lai, a traveller and an au¬ 
thor, as well as his talented master, 
appeared on horseback on this occa¬ 
sion in a new upper garment of a 
very gay colour, and under a turban 
of very admirable fold and majestic 
dimensions, and was one of the gayest 
as well as the most sagacious and 
successful personages in the whole 
cortege" 

* General Harlan, who was at 
Caubul at this time, has written an 
account of the desertion of Dost 
Mahomed by his followers at Ur- 
ghundeh, wmch only wants a con¬ 
viction of its entire truth to render 
it extremely interesting. According 
to this writer, the Ameer was not 
only deserted, but plundered by his 
followers at the last. A crowd of 


noisy disorganised troops,^’ he says, 
“insolently pressed close up to the 
royal pavilion—the guards had dis¬ 
appeared—the groom holding the 
Prince’s horse was unceremoniously 
pushed to and fro—a servant auda¬ 
ciously pulled away the pillow which 
sustained the Prince’s arm—another 
commenced cutting a piece of the 
splendid Persian carpet—the beau¬ 
tiful praying rug of the Prince was 
seized on by a third. . . . ‘Take 
all,’ said he, ‘that you find within, 
together with the tent.’ In an in¬ 
stant the unruly crowd rushed upon 
the pavilion—swords gleamed in the 
air and descended upon the tent— 
the canvas, the rojies, the carpets, 
pillows, screens, &c., were seized and 
dispersed among the plunderers.” 



46) 


DAW or THE RESTORATION. 


CHAPTER IV. 

[August—December : 1839.] 

Dawn of the Kestoration—Difficulties of our Position—Proposed With¬ 
drawal of the Army—Arrival of Colonel Wade—Ilis Operations—Lord 
on the Hindoo-Koosh—Evils of our Policy—Defective Agency—Moollah 
Shikore—Our Political Agents—Operations in the Khybur Pass—The 
FallofKhelat. 