



COLONEL wade’s OEEBATIONS. 


4G9 


with the Sikh auxiliaries, had exhibited au amount of 
zeal which had won the confidence of the British ofiSicers. 
But Akbar Khan himself had refused to come down to 
conduct in person the defence of Ali-Musjid. Dost Ma¬ 
homed had by this time discovered that the greater 
danger was to be apprehended from the western line of 
attack, and had recalled his son to the capital. The 
Afghan troops had garrisoned Ali-Musjid; but so closely 
had Wade invested it, so determined was the attitude 
he had assumed, and so successful was now the play of 
his guns,* that on the night of the 2Gth they evacuated 
the fortress; and on the following morning Wade took 
possession of the place. 

There was little more work for Wade and the 
auxiliaries. Akbar Khan, who had pitched his camp 
at Dakha—a place to the south of Jellalabad—had now 
broken it up, and retired to join his father at the capital. 
The Shah-zadah and his party, therefore, advanced 
without further opposition. Opposite Dakha, on the 
other side of the Caubul river, Avas the fort of Lalpoorah, 
where dwelt Sadut Khan, chief of the Momund tribe, 
llis conduct had evinced strong feelings of hostility to 
the Suddozj’e Princes. He Avas now, therefore, to 
be reduced, and his chiefship confeired on another. 
Throughout our entire connexion with Afghanistan, it 
Avas seldom our good fortune to select fitting objects 
Avhei’eon to lavish our bounty. It Avas generally, indeed, 
our lot to set up the wrong man. But the case of Tora- 
baz Khan, who was appointed to the chiefship of Lal¬ 
poorah, was one of the few fortunate exceptions to this 
calamitous rule. In this man we found a faithful ally; 
and when misfortunes overtook us, he was not unmind¬ 
ful of the benefits he had received at our hands. 

♦ Under Lieutenant Barr, of the tions, to which I would refer the rea- 
Bengal Artillery, who has written a der for authentic details, conveyed in 
Narrative of Colonel Wade’s Opera- a pleasant, soldierly manner. 



470 


THE DAWE OP THE BESTOBATION. 


On the 3rd of September, Wade and the Shah-zadah 
reached Caubul. The operations of the motley force which 
they had led through the difficult passes of Eastern Af¬ 
ghanistan, have been dwarfed, as I have said, by the more 
ostentatious exploits of Sir John Keane’s bulkier armyj 
but it is not to be forgotten, that it was in no small measure 
owing to the operations of Wade's force that the resist¬ 
ance offered to Keane’s army was so slight and so ill- 
inatured. It was long before Dost Mahomed ceased to 
regard the movement through the Khybur with greater 
anxiety than that of the main army along the western 
route. Akbar Khan and his fighting men never met 
Wade in the field; but they wore drawn away from the 
capital at a time when they might have done good 
service in the West; and it is in no small measure owing 
to this division of the Ameer’s military strength, that he 
was unable to offer any effectual resistance to the march 
of the IJritish army from Candahar. Nor, when we take 
account of tlie circumstances which facilitated our suc¬ 
cess at the outset of the war, ought it ever to bo over¬ 
looked that Wade, from his forward position at Pesha- 
wur, was enabled to open a correspondence with parties 
at Caubul favorable to the restoration of the monarchy, 
and to win over many adherents to the Shah before he 
approached his capital. It was in no small measure 
owing to Wade’s diplomacy, carried on mainly through 
the agency of Gholam Khan, Populzye, that the Kohis- 
tanees were induced to rise against the Ameer.* These 
were important services. Wade carried on the work 
with much address; and there were able men associated 
with him.f But the whole affair was a melancholy 
illustration of the lukewarmness, if not of the positive 