

The restoration of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk to the sove¬ 
reignty of Afghanistan had now been outwardly accom¬ 
plished. The Barukzye Sirdars had been expelled from 
their principalities; a British garrison had been planted 
in Candahar and in Ghuznee; and a British army was 
now encamping under the walls of Caubul. A great 
revolution had thus been perfected. The Douranee 
monarchy had been restored. 

But Shah Soojah was not contented. Even during 
the excitement of the march he had complained of the 
narrow kingdom to which he was about to retiurn; and 
now, as he looked out from the windows of his palace 
over the fair expanse of country beneath him, he sighed 
to think that the empire of Ahmed Shah had been so 
grievously curtailed. 

Very different, indeed, was the Douranee Empire, over 
which the sceptre of Shah Soojah was now waved, from 
that which his father had handed down to Zemaun 



DljnCULTIBS OF ODB POSITION. 


468 


Shah and his brothers, to be sacrificed by their weakness 
and disunion. The kingdom, which had once extended 
firom Balkh to Shikarpoor, and from Herat to Cashmere, 
had now shrunk and collapsed. On every side its inte* 
grity had been invaded. Cashmere and Mooltan had 
fallen to the Sikhs; Peshawur had been wrested from 
the Afghans by the same unscrupulous neighbour; the 
independence of Herat had been guaranteed to a branch 
of the Royal family; the Beloochees had asserted preten¬ 
sions unknown in the times of Ahmed Shah; the petty 
Princes on the northern hill frontier no longer acknow¬ 
ledged their allegiance to Caubul. In whichever direc¬ 
tion he turned his eyes, he beheld the mutilations to 
which the old Douranee Empire had been subjected; 
and yearned to recover some of the provinces which had 
been severed from the domain of his fathers. 

But already was the kingdom to which he had been 
restored more extensive than he could govern. There 
were many difficult questions now to be solved—the 
first and the most important of which related to the con¬ 
tinuance of his connexion with his Fcringhee allies. The 
British Government had now done all that it had under¬ 
taken to do. It had escorted Shah Soojah to his palace 
gates, and seated him upon the throne of his fathers. 
In accordance with Lord Auckland’s manifesto, the time 
had now arrived for the withdrawal of the British army. 
But it was obvious that the British army could not 
yet be withdrawn. The Shah had no hold upon the 
affections of his people. He might sit in the Balia 
Hissar, but he could not govern the Afghans. Such, 
at least, was the conviction which by this time had 
forced itself upon Macnaghten’s mind. If the British 
Minister had ever contemplated the early abandonment of 
the restored King, the idea had now passed away. The 
Shah himself felt no confidence in his own strength. He 



464 


DAWN OF THE BESTOEATION. 


did not believe that the power of Dost Mahomed was 
irretrievably broken; but still saw him, in imi^nation, 
flitting about the regions of the Hindoo-Koosh, raising 
the Oosbeg tribes, and pouring down for the recovery 
of Caubul. There were objections, many and weighty, 
to the continued occupation of Afghanistan by British 
troops—objections of one kind, which the Shah acknow¬ 
ledged and appreciated ; and objections of another, 
which every statesman and soldier in India must have 
recognised with painful distinctness. But the experi¬ 
ment of leaving Shah Soojah to himself was too dan¬ 
gerous to be lightly tried. The Shah would fain have 
rid himself of British interference and control, if he could 
have maintained himself without British support; and 
the British Government would fain have withdrawn its 
troops from Afghanistan, if it could have relied upon the 
power of the Shah to mainttdn himself. But to leave 
the restored Suddozye to be dethroned and expelled, after 
the homeward march of the troops that had restored him, 
would have been to court an enormous failure, which 
would have overwhelmed our government with dis¬ 
grace. Neither was the restoration sufficiently popular 
in itself, nor was there sufficient stability in the character 
of the King to warrant so hazardous an experiment. If 
the policy of the Afghan invasion had not been based 
upon error, the experiment would not have been a hazard¬ 
ous one. But the very acknowledgment of the Shah’s 
inability to maintain himself after the departure of the 
British army, was a crushing commentary on the asser¬ 
tions put forth in the great October manifesto. The truth 
was not to be disguised. The “ adoration” which had 
greeted the Shah on his return to his long-lost dominions, 
was found to be a delusion and a sham. The palace of his 
fathers had received him again; but it was necessary still 
to hedge in the throne with a quickset of British bayonets. 