

* Sec Shahamat All’s Sikhs and the letters into Persian, is ali-suiE- 
Afghuns ; also Mohun Lai’s Life of dent on such a point as this. 

Dost Mahomed. The authority of f Mackeson, Lord, and Cunning- 
the former, who must have translated ham. 



detention op the tboops. 


471 


infidelity of our Sikh allies. It was plain that, hence¬ 
forth, we were to expect little from their alliance but 
ill-concealed attempts to thwart and baffle the policy to 
which they were parties. 

The month of September passed pleasantly over the 
heads of the officers of the Army of the Indus. The fine 
climate, the fair scenery, and the delicious fruits of 
Caubul, Avere all things to be enjoyed after the sufferings 
and privations of the long and toilsome march from 
Hindostan. Then there were shoAVS, and spectacles, 
and amusements. Tlie troops wore reviewed; and the 
officers rode races; and the Shah, ever delighting in 
pageantry and parade, established an order of knight¬ 
hood, and held a grand Durbar, at which the ceremony 
of investiture was performed with becoming dignity and 
grace. And the officers, happy in the belief that they 
were soon about to turn their backs on Afghanistan for 
ever, went about purchasing memorials of their visit 
to Caubul, or presents to carry back to their friends.* 

But the hopes of many were doomed to disappoint¬ 
ment. On the 18tli of September the Bombay column 
commenced its inarch to India by the route of the 
Kojuck and the Bolan; and it was believed that a large 
portion of the Bengal troops would soon be in motion to¬ 
wards the provinces along the eastern country just tra¬ 
versed by Colonel Wade. A country in which wine was 
selling at the price of 300 rupees a dozen, and cigars at 
a rupee a piece,* was not one in which the officers of the 
army were likely to desire to pitch their tents for a 
sojourn of any long continuance. When, therefore, it 
began to be reported among them that the original 
intentions of withdrawing the troops, with the exception 
of a single brigade, had been abandoned, there was a 

• These were the prices fetelied at Arnold, who died at Caubul in the 
the sale of the effects of Brigadier mouth of September. 



m 


THE DAWN OF THE KESTOHATION. 


general feeling of disappointment. The official order 
was looked for with anxiety; and on tlie 2nd of October 
it appeared.* The principal portion of the division was 
to be left in A^hanistan, under Sir Willoughby Cotton; 
and only a comparatively small detachment was to 
march to the provinces with Sir John Keane. A week 
afterwards, orders were issued for the disposition of the 
troops, and the military occupation of Afghanistan was 
complete.! 

A change so great as this in the military arrange¬ 
ments, consequent on the restoration of Sh^ Sooj^, 
could only have been brought about by a behef in the 
presence of some new and pressing danger. Dost Ma¬ 
homed had been driven across the Hindoo-Koosh; but 
it was believed that he might there be hospitably re¬ 
ceived by some of the petty Oosbeg chiefs, between 
Bameean and Balkh; and that he might, united with 
them, gather sufficient strength to encourage him to tuni 
his face again towards the South, and to sweep down 