

t Runjeet was dying when the hasten back to Lahore, where parties 
troops were assembling; and his struggling for ascendancy were 
death was announced before they beginning to form their intrigues, 
commenced their march. There was, They hesitated for a time between 
at the outset, a liberal exhibition of their inclination and duty, but the 
the good intentions of the Durbar; latter prevailed. No sooner, how- 
but, before they were reduced to ever, had the Shah-zadah advanced, 
practice, they had dwindled down to than the whole of the Reserve broke 
a very small amount. There was a up their camp at Attock, and marched 
highly important gathering at Pesha- in haste to Lahore; but the con- 
wur. The young Prince, Nao Nehal tingent, the command of which had 
Singh, was there; Gholab Singh, the now devolved on a Mahomedan 
present Maharajah of Cashmere, was officer — viz.. Sheikh Bassawan, a 
there; as were also Lena Singh, Ma« Colonel and Brigadier in the French 
jeetia, and other principal Sirdars, legion, remained faithful to its post.” 



468 


THE DAWN OF THE EESTOEATION. 


the greater the inefficiency of the Sikh demonstration, the 
greater the praise that is due to the English officer who 
triumphed over the difficulties thrown in his way by the 
base infidelity of his allies. Wade found himself at 
Peshawur with a motley assemblage of Hindoos, Sikhs, 
and Afghans, on the fidelity of a considerable portion of 
which it was impossible to rely. The Prince him¬ 
self was soon found to be an absolute cypher. His 
most remarkable characteristic was, to speak paradoxi¬ 
cally, that he had no character at all. He was a harm¬ 
less, respectable personage, with an amount of apathy in 
his constitution which was sometimes advantageous to 
those in whose hands he placed himself; but, at others, 
engendered an amount of impracticability that was very 
embarrassing and distressing. It was plain that, what¬ 
ever was to bo accomplished, must be accomplished by 
the energy of the British officers. Left to themselves, 
the Sikhs, aided by the Afghans who had joined the 
standard of the Prince, would never have forced the 
Khybur Pass. This formidable defile was supposed to 
be, if vigorously defended, impassable; and the long halt 
at Peshawur had given the Afreedis, if they were not 
inclined to sell the passage, abundant time to mature 
their defensive operations, and Akbar Khan, who had 
come down from Caubul to oppose the march of Wade 
and the Sikh auxiliaries, every opportunity of perfecting 
his plans. It was not until the 25th of July that Wade 
found himself before Ali-Musjid. The Afreedis, on 
that and the preceding day, had made some show of re¬ 
sistance; and our troops—the regulars under Captain 
Farmer, and the irregulars under Lieutenant Mackeson,* 
had done good service; whilst Colonel Sheikh Bassawan, 

* Mackeson, after doing good ser- way to Peshawur, where he had joined 
vice at Bahwulpore, to facilitate the Colonel Wade. He was, therefore, 
march of the Bengal column of the engaged both in the eastern 
Army of the Indus, had made his western operations. 