

♦ I may as well append the most f “ G. 0. October 9.—Her Ma- 
important portion of It: jesty’s 13th Light Infantry, three 

“ G. O, October 2.—Tlic whole of guns of No, 6 Light Field Bat- 
the 1st (Bengal) Division of Infantry, tery, and the 35th N I., to remain at 
the 2nd (Bengal) Cavalry, and No. 6 Caubul, and to be accommodated in 
Light Field Battery, will continue the Balia llissar. 
in Afghanistan, and a detachment “ The 48th N.I., the 4tli Brigade, 
of 30 Sappers, under an Engineer and detachment of Sappers and 
officer. ^ Major-General Sir W. Cot- Miners and 2nd Cavalry, with a Hes¬ 
ton will command the troops in salah of Skinner’s Horse, to be can- 
Afghanlstan, and all reports to be toned at Jellalabad. 
made to him after the 10th instant. “ Ghuznee to be garrisoned by tlie 

“ The 2nd Troop, 2nd Brigade 16th N.I., a llessalah of Skinner’s 
Bengal Horse Artillery, her Ma- Horse, and such details of his Ma- 
msty s 16th Lancers, the 3rd Light jesty Shah Soojali’s as are available. 
Cavalry, 4th Local Horse, the re- The whole to be under the command 
mainder of the Sappers and Miners, of Major M‘Laren. 
a Company of 20th N.I., with Cap- “ Candahar will have for its gar- 
tam Farmer’s Company 21st N.I., rison the 42nd, 43rd N.I., 4th Com- 
and the detachment now in progress pany 2nd Battalion Artillery, a lies- 
to head-quarters, under Captain Hop- salah of the 4th Local Horse, and 
kins, 27th N.I., will move towards such details of his Majesty Shah 
^‘Vi 1 order as Sooiah’s troops as may be available, 

will be hereafter issued.” Major-General Nott will comuiand.” 



EXPEDraON TO THE HINDOO-KOOSH. 


473 


upon the country which had been wrested from him. It 
had not, at first, been conceived that the prospect of the 
Ameer’s recovery fix>m the heavy blow which had de¬ 
scended upon him, was sufiiciently imminent to indicate 
the necessity of making any preparations upon a large 
scale to arrest his return to Afghanistan. But it was 
considered expedient to send a detachment of the Shab’s 
troops, with some field artillery, to Baraeean, the ex¬ 
treme frontier station of the Shah’s dominions. Ac¬ 
cordingly, on the 12 th of September, a detachment had 
marched for the Hindoo-Koosh. A troop of Native 
Horse Artillery, which had just come in from Candahar, 
formed the most remarkable portion of this little force. 
The difficulties of the road to be traversed were such as 
no European artillery had ever before encountered.* 
But, in spite of this, the 4th troop, 3rd Brigade of Horse 
Artillery, under Lieutenant Murray Mackenzie (leaving 
its captain dead at Caubul), made good its way to Ba- 
meean; and the Shali’s Goorkha regiment, with other 
irregular details, accompanied it to its dreary winter- 
quarters, in the mountainous recesses of the great Cau¬ 
casian range. 

Upon the policy of this movement I cannot pause to 
speculate. I believe that the system of planting small 
detachments in isolated positions was one of the great 
errors which marked our military occupation of Afghan¬ 
istan. But something more was designed than this. It 
was in contemplation to send a larger force to explore 
the mountains of the Hindoo-Koosh. Dr. Percival Lord, 