

♦ The Envoy said, that as Dost guns which Dost Mahomed sent along 
Mahomed had sent guns over the these roads were three - pounders, 
same road to Bameean, there was no whilst ours were six^pounders. The 
reason why our guns should not go. troop came along the wheel-track of 
The Doctor-General Harlan boasted the Ameer’s guns, and reported “ the 
that he had crossed the Hindoo- breadth between the wheels less 
Koosh with artillery. But Mac- than half of that of ours.” 
naghten had not considered that the 



474 


THE DAWN OF THE RESTORATION. 


who had been one of Burnes’s companions on the “ Com¬ 
mercial Mission” to Caubul, had just returned to the 
Afghan capital with the force under Colonel Wadej 
and now that it was considered desirable to despatch a 
political officer to the Oosbeg frontier, it was but natural 
that Lord, who liad visited the neighbourhood of Koon- 
dooz in 1837-1838, should have been selected for the 
duty. Lord went; but had not been long absent from 
Caubul, when he returned with exaggerated stories of 
the success of Dost Mahomed among the petty chiefs of 
the Hindoo-Koosh, and of a great movement which was 
about to be made for the re-establishment of the supremacy 
of the Ameer.* Upon tliis, Macnaghten, who had begun 
to doubt the extreme popularity of Shah Soojah, and the 
safety of confiding lus protection and support to the 
handful of British troops which it was originally in¬ 
tended to leave hi Afghanistan, made a requisition to Sir 
John Keane for a stronger military force; and turned Dr. 
Lord's story to account in the furtherance of his own views. 

It was easy to issue orders for the maintenance of a 
large body of British troops in Afghanistan; but it was 
not so easy to house the regiments thus maintained. 


♦ A writer in the Calcutta Review^ 
who was at Caubul at the time in¬ 
dicated, thus explains the manner 
ill which Lord was beguiled: “ It 
soon became known that Lord’s sud¬ 
den retreat to Caubul was the subject 
of merriment amongst the Afghans; 
who said, ‘ That it was in no way sur¬ 
prising for Shah Soojah to run away, 
that being his custom; but that it 
was not expected than an English¬ 
man would run so soon, or so easily.’ 
Snow liad fallen on the mountains; 
and the sight of their white-capped 
heads disinclined the Afghans, who 
formed Lord’s escort, to attempt the 
passage of the Hindoo-Koosh at a 
season when inclement weather and 
an early winter seemed setting in. 


They therefore caused various re¬ 
ports of the occupation of Ivoondooz 
by Lost Mahomed to be brought, in 
order to try and deter Lord from 
prosecuting a disagreeable journey. 
Finding him hesitate upon these 
rumours whether or not to proceed, 
they were encouraged to dupe him 
still further by intelligence that a 
rebellion was raging around him; 
upon which, in hot haste, he rode 
back to Caubul. Macnaghten, after 
a few da^s, finding that the rebellion 
was a fiction, was not ^ altogether 
pleased with his own participation in 
needless alarm, though well satisfied 
that the occasion had been afforded 
him of making the requisition with 
which Keane had complied.” 