

Even from this early date everything was working 
sil(‘ntly against us. The inherent vice of the course (jf 
policy wliich we liad initiated was beginning to infect 
evenly branch of the administration. The double go¬ 
vernment which had been established was becoming a 
curse to the wliole nation. The Shah and his officers 
ostc'iisibly controlled all the departments of civil ad¬ 
ministration ; but everj^vhere our English officers were 
at their elbow, to counsel and suggest; and wlien it 
was found necessary to coerce the disobedient or punish 
the n^bellious, then it was British authority that drew 
the sword out of the scabbard, and hunted down ofTen- 
clers to the death. Bound by treaty not to interfere in 
the inteiTial administration of the countrj", the British 
functi<maries were compelled to permit the existence of 
much which they themselves would never have mitiated 
or allowed in provinces subject to their rule; but they 
were often called upon to enforce measures, unpopular 
and perhaps unjust; and so brought down upon them¬ 
selves opprobrium which was not always their due. It 
* Mohun Lai’s Life of Dost Mahomed* 



INSECURITY OF THE GOVERNMENT. 


461 


could hardly be said that the King possessed a govern¬ 
ment of his own, when the control of the army and the 
exchequer was in the hands of others. England supplied 
the money and the bayonets; and claimed the right to 
employ them both according to her own pleasure. It 
would have been a miracle if such a system had not 
soon broken down Avith a desolating crash, and buried 
its authors in the ruins. 

It was said prophetically by more than one statesman, 
that our difficulties would begin where our military 
successes ended. Englishmen and Afghans alike said 
that it was easy to restore Shah Soojah to the throne, 
but difficult to maintain him upon it. It was, from the 
first, only a question of time—only a question how long 
such a system could be propped up by the strong arm 
and the long purse of the King-makers. No amount of 
wisdom in the agents of such a policy could have saved 
it from ultimate ruin. Sooner or later it must have 
fallen. If there had been nothing else indeed to bring 
it to the ground, the utter exhaustion of the Indian 
treasury must have given it its death-blow. 

To have placed Shah Soojah on the throne, and to 
have left him again to be driven back an outcast and a 
fugitive, to seek an asylum in the provinces of India, 
would have been a failure and a disgrace. It was the 
object of the British Government, therefore, to hedge 
him in a little longer with our authorit}^, and to establish 
him more firmly on the tlironc. But so far from these 
being synonymous terms, and coexistent states of being, 
they were utterly antagonistic and irreconcileable. The 
more w'e surrounded the King with our authority, the 
less firmly he was fixed on the throne. It might have 
been sound policy to have continued the occupation of 
Afghanistan, if our continuance had tended to secure the 
supremacy of the Shah, and to establish him in the affec- 