



THE POLITICAL AGENTS. 


485 


And so it hq^pened that, fix>m the very dawn of the 
restoration of the monarchy, unpopular and unscrupulous 
Afghan agents were employed to carry out a monstrous 
system. Of a very different character were the British 
agents upon whom now devolved the duty of watching 
the proceedings of the native executive, and, without any 
palpable acknowledged interference, virtually controlling 
it. The political agents scattered about Afghanistan have 
drawn down upon themselves a larger measure of vitu¬ 
peration than perhaps has ever descended upon any body 
of British functionaries. They were mixed up with an 
unholy and a disastrous policy, and per]ia])s some little of 
the evil that subsequently developed itself may be attri¬ 
buted to their personal defects; but, on the whole, they 
were not unwisely chosen, and it is doubtful if other men 
would have done ])etter. At all events, when Burnes, 
Conolly, Leech, Pottinger, Todd, Lord, and others, who 
had previously made thianselves acquainted with the 
country and the j)eople of Afghanistan, were sent to 
overlook the progress of affairs in different parts of 
Afglianistan, it cannot be said that no care was taken to 
select our agents from among the officers who were most 
qualified by previous experience to perform the new 
duties devolving upon them. Macnaghten’s assistants 
were, for the mc/St part, men of local exj)erience and 
proved activity. The Governor-General had imparted 
to the Envoy his ideas of the manner in which it would 

the revived Suddozye monarchy, to vested almost entirely in the hands of 
be admitted tb the share of power Wuliee Mahomed Khan, the revenue 
which they deemed their right, and manager, and the direction of the * 
from which they had been jealously government was to the same extent 
excluded by the Sirdars. Xo such dependent upon Brttish guidance.*’ 
participation whatever was extended — \_Major RuwUnsorCs Report on the 
to them. The present governor of Assessment of the Douranee Tribes, 
the province, being altogether disqua- MS, Records.'] 1 have met with no 
lified by his youth and inexperience abler official paper than this in the 
to take an active part in the admi- whole course of my inquiries, 
nistration, the executive power was 



486 


THE DAW OE THE BESTOEATION. 


be most expedient to employ them.* And it may be 
doubted whether, if the system itself had not been so radi¬ 
cally defective, it would have ever broken down under 
the agency which was commissioned to carry it into effect. 

Such, traced in dim outline, were some of the ele¬ 
ments of decay planted deep in the constitution of the 


* The Supreme Government were 
desirous to place Burnes at Canda- 
har, with Leech as his assistant; but 
Burnes was disinclined to leave Cau- 
bul; and the charge of the agency 
was entrusted to Leech. In the 
August minute, already quoted. 
Lord Auckland thus sketches the 
proposed political arrangements :— 
“ Mr. Macnaghten will himself be, of 
course, as much as possible near to 
the King. He has, in co-operation 
with Sir John Keane, conducted, with 
an ability and with a success that I 
shall always be forward to acknow¬ 
ledge on the part of both these offi¬ 
cers, the extremely difficult duties of 
his present office. I should be sorry, 
indeed, to see committed to another 
the prosecution of the great work 
in which he has been engaged, and I 
trust that he may be induced to re¬ 
main at Caubul until the power of the 
Shah shall appear to be thoroughly 
consolidated, the institutions of his 
kingdom placed on a satisfactory 
footing, and the salutary influence of 
the British name acknowledged there 
and in the countries beyond it. I 
think a political agency, subordinate 
to the Mission at Caubul, should be 
maintained at Candahar, and that it 
cannot be better entrusted than to 
the approved zeal and ability of Sir 
Alexander Burnes. Candahar, I pre¬ 
sume, will be the seat of a Viceroy ; 
and as for some period of the year all 
communication between that city and 
Caubul is, I believe, cut off, to the 
agent at Candahar may, I think, be 
delegated some control over the poli¬ 
tical agents at Herat and Khelat, and 
the correspondence which may be 
necessary with the political agents in 
Sindh. X would not disturb Lieute¬ 