

* The picturesejue aspects of the 
town arc well described by Lieutenant 
Rattray : “ It is well-built and hand¬ 
some, and is one mass of bazaars. 
Every street has a double row of houses 
of different heights, flat-roofed, and 
composed of mud in wooden frames. 
Here and there a larch porch of carved 
wood intervenes, giving entrance to 
the court-yard of the residences of 
the nobles, in the centre of which is 
a raised platform of mud, planted 
with fruit-trees, and spread with car¬ 
pets. A fountain plays near; and 
here, during the heat of the day, 
loll the chiefs at case, listening, as 



THE cnr OF CAtTBUX. 


477 


holed walls, with here and there small obtruding towers 
or bastions, too weak and too extended to be serviceable 
for purposes of defence. It is said to be about three 
miles in circumference. The Balia Hissar stands on 
a hill, overlooking the city. There are, strictly speak¬ 
ing, two Balia Hissars; the lower of which, on our 
first entry into Caubul, was in a rickety and decayed 
state, and could rrot Irave stood for an hour agairrst 
British artillery. Both were commanded by the w^alled 
hills above them. The upper Balia Hissar, or citadel, 
commands the whole of the city and the suburbs. The 
lower Balia Hissar, which is surrounded by a shallow 
but rather deep ditch, commands only part of one of the 
bazaars—the Shore bazaar, two large forts (Mahmoud 
Khan’s and the Beenee Hissar), and the road to Jellala- 
bad.* The houses of the town are mostly flat-roofed; 


they smoke their pipes, to the sound 
of the * saccringni,* or guitar, the 
falling water, or the wonderful tales 
of the Persian story-teller. The 
houses overhang the narrow streets; 
their windows have no glass, but con¬ 
sist of lattice-work wooden shutters, 
which push up and down, and are 
often richly carved and otherwise 
ornamented. The shop windows are 
open to the sun, and tlje immense 
display of merchandise, fruits, game, 
armour, and cutlery, defies descrip¬ 
tion. These articles are arranged 
in prodigious piles from floor to 
ceiling; in the front of each sits the 
artificer engaged in his calling, or 
from amidst the heaped-up prolusion 
peeps out the trader at nis visitors 
The grand bazaar (Char Chouk, or 
Chutta) has a substantial roof built 
in four arcades, which are decorated 
with painted panels, now nearly in¬ 
distinct, and originally watered by 
cisterns and fountains, which are ne¬ 
glected and dried up.^* 

* *• The Balia Hissar, particularly 
the citadel, completely commands the 
city; but the streets are so narrow 


and winding, that from the summit 
of the fort an expanse of flat-roofed 
houses is alone seen, and the tho¬ 
roughfares of the city are seldom to 
be traced. The houses, of unburnt 
brick walls and mud roofs, have ns 
little timber as possible in their con¬ 
struction—this material being costly 
at Caubul; it follows, therefore, that 
they are not easily set on fire. From 
their irregularity of height and struc¬ 
ture, and from the jealousy which 
guards each flat roof from the gaze of 
the curious by surrounding walls, com- 
muniention from housetop to house¬ 
top would be very difficult, except in 
a few portions of tlie moie regular 
parts of the city. The line of hill, 
between whicli and the river the city 
lies, is steep and difficult, but acces¬ 
sible; and its domineering aspect 
formerly led to its being included 
within the defences of Caubul; for a 
stone wall with a crenelated' parapet 
runs along its summit, and dips down 
to the gorge, by which the Caubul 
river, breaking tlirough the ciiain, 
enters the city. The ends of some 
of the streets, which cross the main 