

This was a miserable state of things—and even the 
influence of the gold was limited and short-lived. After 
the outbreak at Caubul, when Mohun Lai was secreted 
in 'the Kuzzilbash quarters, lie heard the men and 


A passage in Lord Auckland’s 
unpublished minute of August 20, 
1839, to which allusion has already 
been made, contains a summary of 
the efforts of the Supreme Govern¬ 
ment to supply Macnaghten with 
funds. It exhibits the fearful man¬ 
ner in which already the war was 
beginning to tell upon the hnaiices of 
India : “ It has been a matter of con¬ 
cern and some disappointment to 
learn that the military chest and the 
political treasury was exceedingly 
low at the time of the departure of 
the army from Candahar, and that 
some embarrassment was in conse¬ 
quence apprehended. The difficulty 
has no doubt arisen from causes un¬ 
foreseen : from a longer detention 
than was anticipated at Candahar, 
from the disasters which have delayed 
the arrival of Major Newport’s con¬ 
voy, and from an extent of expense 
far beyond what was expected in the 
purchase of grain and of camels, whilst 
the death of the Maharajah Kunjeet 
Singh has made it difficult for me to 
apply so instantaneous a remedy as 


I could have desired. But the 10 
lakhs, under the charge of Major 
Newport, will in all probability have 
arrived at Candahar about the 26th 
of July. Thirteen lakhs are now 
traversing the Punjaub under the 
care of Captain Nuthall, and should 
be at Peshawur in the first week of 
September; arrangements have been 
made by the political agent at Urn- 
ballah, >)y bills on Peshawur, or by 
negotiations through the Sikh Go¬ 
vernments, to have a further sum of 
10 lakhs available at an early period 
across the Indus, and an additional 
amount of 7 or 8 lakhs will be soon 
ready for immediate transmission to 
the same quarter; 30 lakhs more will 
be ready for remittance in October; 
a further sum will be with the lapse 
of time at hand at Delhi; and besides 
all this, 21 lakhs of Company’s ru¬ 
pees, with 5 or 6 lakhs of bullion, now 
at Shikarpoor, may be sent on to 
Candahar, as soon as the inundations 
subside.” Here we have a million of 
money disposed of by a few strokes of 
the pen. 



480 


THE DAWN OF THE RESTORATION. 


women talking among themselves, and saying that the 
English had enriched the grain-sellers, the grass-sellers, 
and others who dealt in provisions for man and beast, 
whilst they reduced the chiefs to poverty, and killed the 
poor by starvation.* The presence of the English soon 
raised the price of all the necessaries of life. This was 
no new thing. If a flight of Englishmen settle in a 
French or a Belgian town, it is not long before the 
price of provisions is raised. But here was a Commis¬ 
sariat department, with a mighty treasury at its com¬ 
mand, buying up all the commodities of Caubul, and 
not only paying preposterous sums for everything they 
purcliased, but liolding out the strongest inducement to 
purveyors to keep back their supplies, in order to force 
a higher range of ])rices. 