

But already was ho beginning to have some expe¬ 
rience of the turbulent elements of Afghan society, and 

* Keane, immediately before his possible, I cannot but congratulate 
departure, remarked to an officer who you on quitting the country ; lor, mark 
was to accompany him : “ 1 wished my words, it will not he long before 
yon to remain in Afghanistan for the there is here some signal catastrophe/* 
good of the public service; but since —{Calcutta Review*"} 
circumstances have rendered that im- 



488 


THE DAWN OF THE RESTORATION. 


the difficulty of controlling the tribes. In the West, the 
Ghilzyes had been demonstrating the unruliness of their 
nature ever since Shah Soojah re-entered Afghanistan, 
and, shortly after his restoration to the Balia Hissar of 
Caubul, Captain Outram had been sent out against 
them, and had achieved one of those temporary successes 
which, in a country like Afghanistan, where blood is 
ever crying aloud for blood, can only perpetuate the dis¬ 
quietude of a disaffected people—and now in the East, 
the passes of the Khybur were bristling with the hostile 
tribes. The Khybur chiefe had always turned to good 
account the difficulties of the passage through their ter¬ 
rible defiles. They opened the highway in considera¬ 
tion of certain money-payments from the Caubul rulers. 
The sums paid under the Suddozye Kings had been 
reduced by the Barukzye Sirdars; but on his restoration, 
Shah Soojah, who, in a day of difficulty, had sought and 
found a refuge among the Khyburees, now promised to 
restore to the tribes the privileges which they had en¬ 
joyed under his fathers. But the Shah had acted in this 
matter without the authority or the knowledge of Mac- 
naghten, and the chiefs were little likely to receive the 
amount which the King had agreed to pay to them. In¬ 
censed by what they considered a breach of faith, they 
rose up against the small detached parties which Wade 
had left at different posts between Peshawur and Jel- 
lalabad.* Ali-Musjid was attacked—but not taken. 
Ferris, who commanded the garrison, .repulsed them with 
heavy loss. But a battalion of Nujeebs, entrenched in 
the vicinity of the fort, was cut up by an incursion of the 
mountaineers.f The appearance of Sir John Keane, 

* Some of these parties were de- suffering severely from sickness at 
tachments of Sikh troops, the time. One half of them, it is said, 

f The Khyburees fell upon them were ineffective when the Khyburees 
in their stockaded position before at- fell upon them, 
tacking Jellalabad. The Nujeebs were 



OPEEATIONS AGAINST THE KHTBUHBES. 


m 


with the residue of the Army of the Indus, quieted for a 
time the turbulent tribes. But when the column had 
cleared the pass, they harassed the detachments sent to 
the relief of Ali-Musjid,* and a force under Colonel 
Wheeler was therefore sent out from Jellalabad to over¬ 
awe the refractory mountaineers, and support the nego¬ 
tiations in which Mackeson was engaged. The Khy- 
burees attacked his baggage, hamstrung his camels, and 
thus contrived to sweep some booty into their hands. 
Wheeler’s operations were for a time successful; but it 
was not until Macnaghten himself appeared on the scene, 
and recognised, in view of their formidable defiles, the 
expediency of conciliating by sufficient money-payments 
these troublesome clans, that they sunk into temporary 
quiescence. 