

Whilst such was the state of things at the supremo 
seat of government, there was little less to create dis¬ 
satisfaction in the intemal administration of Candahar. 
The }>rincipal revenue officers were two Sheeahs, the 
sons of that Hussein Khan, the obnoxious minister whom 
Shall Zemaun had put to death. Their names were 
Mahomed Takee Khan and Wulloo Mahomed Khan. 
Cradled in intense enmity to the Douranees, they had 

* “ Erery day complaints were ing an order from Moollah Shikore. 
made to us, and we permitted ourselves If there was any man among them 
to interfere, by giving notes to the known to us, and whonu we would 
complainants, requesting the Moollah wish to favour, the Moollah took 
to settle their cases,* but this did no care to annoy and vex hiin^ by giving 
good, for, instead of having redress him an order to a distant village for 
to their grievances, they were beaten, such sums, which he would likely spend 
and sometimes confined, for coming during his journey; or else to poor 
and complaining to us against the villages, where there was very uttle 
Shah’s authority. All the chiefs or chance of gaming anything.”—-filio- 
heads of tribes received their allow- hun lAxJUt Life of Dost Mahomed."]^ 
ances from certain villages, by obtain- 

2 I 2 



484 


THE DAWN OF THE RESTORATION. 


grown into unscrupulous persecutors of the tribes. Se- 
lected by the Barukzye Sirdars as willing agents of 
those humiliating and enfeebling measures by which 
they sought to extinguish the vitality of the Douranees, 
they entered upon their work in a ruthless and uncom¬ 
promising spirit, and plied the instruments of their office 
with remarkable success for the pewecution and degra¬ 
dation of their enemies. The hatred with which the 
Dourances regarded these men was too deep to suffer 
them to embrace with complacency any measures, how¬ 
ever conciliatory in themselves, of which the old Baruk¬ 
zye tools were the executors. Such unpopular agents 
were enough to render distasteful the most popular 
measures. The Dourances were, indeed, greatly disap¬ 
pointed. Do what they would, they could not obtain a 
paramount influence in the state. The door was closed 
against them by the British janitors who kept watch 
iiTound the palace j and the chiefs soon began to chafe 
under the foreign intrusion wliich deprived them of all 
siscendancy in th(i councils of the restored monarch, and 
prevented them from regaining the full extent of those 
financial privileges which they had enjoyed under his 
Suddoyze predecessors.* 

* “ Immediately consequent on finding that they no longer possessed 
his Majesty’s accession, certain feel- a dominant voice in the royal coun- 
ings began to take root among the cils, or the ability, as formerly, to 
Douranees, in connexion with the render the sovereign the victim of 
presence of British troops, which their intrigues, and that this conyic- 
promised ill for the future tranquil- tion of their political influence being 
lity of the country. Several of the for ever superseded, must have led 
most influential chiefs acconmanied them to value the many personal ad- 
the Court ftom Cnndahar to Gaubul vantages they had gained by the re- 
and Jellalabad; and although it must storation, and to regard with peculim* 
have been with feeling of gratified hostility the intruders upon their 
pride that they behdd the leader fancied rights. At Candahar the 
of their order—their Shah Baba, or progress of events had the same ten- 
father King, as he was familiarly dency to render the Douranees dis- 
named—seated upon the throne of contented, if not actually inimic^. 
his ancestors, yet it is also not un- The chiefs who had remidned with 
necessary to suppose that their mor- the tribes were of inconsiderable in* 
tification must have been great at fluence; but they still looked, under 