


nant Pottinger at Herat. His name 
is attached to the establishment of 
British influence in that city. He 
has had a most difficult task to exe¬ 
cute, and I would suspend all opinion 
on the instructions with which it 
may be determined to furnish him, 
until I have a report of the result of 
the mission of Major Todd. I think, 
also, that Captain Bean should cer¬ 
tainly remain in charge of the poli¬ 
tical functions which have been com¬ 
mitted to him at Quettah. I have 
had occasion to remark with un- 
ciualified approbation all the mea¬ 
sures of that officer which have been 
brought before me; he has done 
much for the pacification of the wild 
country about him; his presence 
will be necessary for the protection 
of commerce in its transit through 
the one avenue which exists between 
Lower Afghanistan and the Indus, 
and I should be exceedingly sorry to 
see him moved to any other quarter. 
Under these general arrangements, 
Major Leech will render assistance 
at Candahar to Sir A. Burnes, and 
perhaps Ur. Login to Lieutenant 
Pottinger at Herat; and Mr. Mac¬ 
naghten will report in detail upon 
the number of officers whose aid will 
be indispensably necessary, under his 
own personal superintendence. He 
will have with him Major Todd, 
Lieutenant Macgregoi^ and presently 
Messrs. Lord, Leech, and Arthur Co- 
nolly. I am aware that the duties 
of his office will be complicated and 
extensive. He may have missions to 
send to Bokhara and Koondooz, and 
to other neighbouring states, and I 
would not stmt him in assistance.’*— 
\_Minute of' Lord Auckland: Sindah, 
August 20, 1839. MS, Records.2 



EIJBMENTS OP BPCAT. 


487 


political sj'stem which we were attempting to cany out 
in Afghanistan. Always of a sanguine temperament, 
and one whose wish was ever father of his thoughts, 
Macnaghten did not see that already the seeds of a great 
and sweeping revolution were being sown broadcast across 
the whole length and breadth of the land. He was pre¬ 
pared, and it was right that he should have been, for local 
and accidental outbreaks. The Afghans are a turbulent 
and lawless people—little inclined to succumb to autho¬ 
rity ; and have a rough way of demonstrating their dis¬ 
likes. Had he expected the authority of the Shah to be 
universally established in a few weeks, the British Envoy 
would have manifested a deploriable ignorance of the 
national character; but little less was the ignorance 
which he manifested, when he believed that the system 
of government he was countenancing could ever esta¬ 
blish the country in tranquillity, and the King in the 
affections of the people. There were others who saw 
clearly that such a system was doomed to set in dis¬ 
aster and disgrace;* but Macnaghten, when he accom¬ 
panied the Court to Jellalabad, carried with him no 
forebodings of evil. He believed that the country was 
settling down into quietude under the restored mo¬ 
narchy; and so little, indeed, did he think that any 
danger was to be apprehended, that he encouraged his 
wife to join him in Afghanistan, and sent a party of 
irregular horsemen under Edward Conolly to escort 
her from the provinces of India. 