



478 


THE DAWN OF THE BESTOEATION. 


the streets for the most part narrow and tortuous. The 
most important feature of it is the great bazaar, built, 
or commenced, by Ali Murdan Khan—a mart for the 
produce of all the nations of the East. 

The Bombay division of the Army of the Indus 
marched from Caubul on the 18th of September; and on 
the 15th of October, Sir John Keane, with the troops 
destined for Bengal, set out for the provinces by way of 
the eastern passes. The Shah had by tliis time begun to 
think of escaping from the severity of the Caubul winter, 
and reposing in the milder climate and more tranquil 
neighbourhood of Jellalabad. The sweets of restored 
dominion had not gratified him to the extent of his anti¬ 
cipations. He was, indeed, a disappointed man.* He 
felt himself only half a King; he was fettered, controlled. 
It was plain that, in the eyes of his subjects, his con¬ 
nexion with the Feringhees had greatly humiliated him. 
But he wanted the English money and the English bayo¬ 
nets, and was compelled to bear the burden. 

Macnaghten was to accompany the Kmg to Jellala¬ 
bad; and, in the mean while, Burnes was to be left in 
pohtical charge of Caubul and the neighbourhood. The 
people seemed to bo settling down into soraetliing like 
quiescence. If there were little enthusiasm among them, 
they seemed at first to be outwardly contented with the 


thoroughfares, abut upon the foot of 
the hill, which thus looks into them : 
but, as the minor streets are still more 
tortuous than the main ones, such 
views along them are very partial.”— 
[ Calcutta Revieiv.'] 

♦ “ The capital and the fort had 
disappointed nis expectations. He 
often sate at a window of the palace, 
wiling away time, his eye wandering 
over the different objects which the 
city and its plain offered. On one 
of these occasions, after a long silent 
pause, Shah Soojah made the remark 


that ‘ everything appeared to him 
shrunk small and miserable; and 
that the Caubul of his old age in no 
respect corresponded with the recol¬ 
lections of the Caubul of his youth.’ 
He was glad, therefore, to escape 
from the severity of the winter of a 
place, the ideal charms of which age 
and the experience of the reality had 
banished. Jellalabad, although a still 
more wretched town, enjoys, from its 
lower altitude above the sea-level, 
a warmer climate, and the winter is 
far less severe*”—[C'a/caWa Hcview,'] 



THB MONBY-BAO. 


4ytf 


change. Cupidity is one of the strongest feelings that 
fnds entrance into the Afghan breast. The boundless 
wealth of the English had been a tradition in Afghanistan 
ever since the golden days of Mountstuart Elphinstone’s 
mission. Money had been' freely scattered about at Can- 
dahar; and it was believed that Tvith an equally profuse 
hand it would now be disbursed at Caubul. It is true 
that the military chest and the political treasury had 
been so indented upon, that when the ai-my reached the 
capital there was a painful scarcity of coin.* But there 
were large supplies of treasure on the way. The jingling 
of the money-bag was already ravishing their ears and 
stirring their hearts. They did not love the Feringhees; 
but they delighted in Feiinghee gold. 