

VOL. I. 2 I 



482 


THE DAWN OF THE BESTOEATION. 


lions of the people; but it was not in the nature of 
things that the effect of the experiment should not have 
been diametrically the reverse. 

So prodigious an anomaly was the system itself, that, 
except so far as it affected the period of its dissolution, 
retarding or expediting it by a few months or a few 
years, the agency employed in the vain attempt to up¬ 
hold it was a matter of little moment. But that agency 
was assuredly not of a character to enhance the chances 
even of its temporary success. Shah Soojah had brought 
from Loodhianah one Moollah Shikore*—a man who 
had shared his exile, and acted as his confidential agent. 
He was old, and enfeebled by age. His memory was 
gone; so were his ears. For some offence against his 
Majesty in former days, he had forfeited those useful 
appendages. A happy faculty of remembering the per¬ 
sons and personal histories of men, is one of the most 
useful ingredients in the character of a statesman, and it 
is one which, in rare exuberance, some of our greatest 
statesmen have possessed. But it was said of this Mool¬ 
lah Shikore, that men whom he had seen on one day he 
forgot on the next.f The King had abundant faith in 
his loyalty, and confidence in his personal attachment. 
The man had managed the personal affairs of the royal 
exile with such address, that it was believed that he 
could now manage the affairs of his royal master’s re¬ 
stored dominions. So the King made him minister of 
state. They called him Wuzeer. But his master did 
not acknowledge the title, and the British did not call 

♦ Moollah Shikora came through Macnaghten: August 7, 1840. Un- 
the Khybur with Prince Timour and published Correspondence,'} “ He had 
Colonel Wade. lost his memory to such an extent that 

T^“So completely is this poor he could not recognise a person whom 
man s memory gone, that he never he had well known before, if he had 
recognises a man he has once seen ; not seen him even for a day.*— 
that the dommonest business requires [Mohun LaVs Life of Dost MaTiomed,} 
half a dozen notes.** — [Humes to 



MOOLItAH SHIKOBB. 


483 


him by it. ‘‘ Bad ministers,” wrote Bumes, “ are in 
every government solid grounds for unpopularity; and I 
doubt if ever a King had a worse set than Shah Soojah.” 
The system itself was rotten to the very core; and the 
agency employed was, perhaps, the corruptest in the 
world. Had ther<^ been much more vitality and strength 
in the system, MooUiih Shikore and his deputies would 
soon have given it its death-blow. 

But though feeble in other respects, this Moollali 
Shikore was not feeble in his hatred of the British. The 
minister op]3re>.5(Kl the people. The people appealed 
to the British func*tionaiies. The British functionaries 
remonstrated witli the minister. And the minister 
])imished tlie j)c‘ 0 ])le for ap])ealing to the British func¬ 
tionaries.* The SJuili and his minister chafed under the 
interference of the British. But they loved the British 
money; and they required the support of the British 
bayonets. And so bravely for a time v/orked the double 
government at Caubul. 