


♦ iinte, page 411. 
t Ante^ page 407, note. 
t AntCy page 414. 


§ In his minute of Aujgust 20, Lord 
Auckland wrote on this subject:— 
** Mr. Macnaghten has authoritj^ as 



494 


bestobation of the monabcht. 


was true that Shah Soojah had, in the hour of need, been 
succoured by Mehrab Khan. A statesman in whom 
the kindly instincts of humanity were so strong as in 
Lord Auckland, was not likely to forget the obligations 
which so essential a service at such a time imposed upon 
the restored monarch.* But the graceful suggestion of 
the Governor-General was lost; and the Khan lived just 
long enough to curse himself for his folly in having 
opened his arms to receive the Suddozye pretender, 
when he fled, baffled and beaten, from the battle-field 
of Candahar. For that act of hospitality he paid five 
years afterwards with his life. 

Whether any thoughts of this kind arose to dash the 
pleasure of those who toasted the victors of Khelat 
at Avitabile’s dinner-table, can only be conjectured; bgt 
all present acknowledged that the capture of Mehrab 
Khan’s stronghold was a great militaiy exploit. The 
native soldiery are said to have esteemed it more highly 
than the capture of Ghuznee. The native soldiery, too, 
had been allowed to participate in the honour of the 
exploit. Sir John Keane had been much censured for 
composing liis storming column entirely of European 
companies. The exclusiveness of the act seemed to imply 
mistrust in his Sepoy regiments, and did not raise the 

respects the Khelat territories, to de- spectin^ it, either by bringing it also 
clarc the annexation of the provinces under the direct rule of the Shah, or 
of Shawl, Moostung, and Cutch Gun- placing the claimant, Shah Newaz 
dava to the Afghan dominions; and 1 Khan (or any other Beloochee chief), 
have but to add, that it is my strong in possession of it.”—[3/6\ Records. 
opinion that no power should be left * “ As to Mehrab Khan himself, 
in the hands of Mehrab Khan, who he may have claims upon Shah 
has shown himself our bitter and de- Soojah-ool-Moolk, arising out of the 
ceitful enemy, wholly unworthy of important succour given to his Ma- 
our confidence. For this object, it jesty in his expedition in 1834, and 
will, I conceive, be sufficient to occupy Mr. Macnaghten will naturally not 
Khelat itself, and to hold it and the fail to second any proposition of a 
districts adjacent, in addition to Moos- liberal personal support to the chief 
tung and Shawl, under our pro- which the Shah may be disposed to 
visional management or superintend- make, in generous acknowledgment 
ence, for the very short period that of those services .”—[Lord Auckland's 
will elapse, until it may be seen what Minute: August 20, 1839. MS. Re~ 
final arrangement can be made re- cords,"] 



DISSOLUTION OF THE ABHT OF THE INDUS. 495 


Greneral in the estimation of their officers. It was a 
subject, therefore, of general congratulation throughout 
the Company’s army, that a Native regiment had shared 
with two of the Ghuznee storming corps the glory of 
the assault upon Khelat, and had proved themselves well 
worthy of the confidence that had been placed in them. 
And so Sir John Keane and General Willshire returned 
to India. The “Army of the Indus” was broken up; 
and soon there came from England the welcome announce¬ 
ment that the successes of the campaign had been duly 
appreciated by the Sovereign, and the chief actors duly 
rewarded. Lord Auckland was created an Earl; Sir 
John Keane rose up as Buron Keane of Ghuznee; Mr. 
Macnaghten took his place in history as Sir William 
Macnaghten, Baronet; Colonel Wade became thenceforth 
Sir Claude Wade, Knight; and a shower of lesser dis¬ 
tinctions, of brevets and bath-honours, descended upon 
the working officers, whose gallantry had contributed so 
largely to the success of this memorable campaign. 