

* The Commander of the Faith- the same time he wrote privately iQ, 
aa Ihe Khan stales himself, re- authorise lum rather to put thew to 
ceiyed Dost Mahomed with co^ia- death, than to aUow them to aet foot 
IHy, and pressed him to send for his within the territories of Bolfham. 
fhndlj, to wimm he promised erery Long and anxiously did the Cou^ 
Idndneas. But the Dost knew the maader oftbeFalfehM look out 
<diaraoter of the Khan too well to the Dost’s Zenana and iheu^ mob 
jpboe the objects of his sdeotson with- and omomenls, whidi be intended to 
m^tlmneaebof thatPrinee. He ao* transfer to Ins own treasures; bnl 
omrdtBirly wrote a^ktler to hit l»o- when he found that he was 
thjsri was shown to the Kham hb guest, he east bolb tbe iDoit 
leqiiestii^ibblbeyttii^tHs 9m his sons into nriisB^ mfkm 
totbafebndly ConrtofBdchAra; at ^VSiere thsb thoil f n liy 


{$06 THE OBEAt <IAMS m CEITTEAL ASIA. 

tll0 eb»f^ of Jubbar Ehan, in the ho£pitahle temtoiy of 
tiie WuUee of Khooloom; and it was said that tbe Khan 
of [Ebkhara had declared, that if they sought the protec¬ 
tion of the British Government, he would destroy Dost 
Mahomed. But Jubbar Khan was^ ell disposed at this 
time to seek from the British an honourable asylum for 
his brother’s family; and the question of their reception 
was earnestly pondered by Macnaghten, and discussed 
with the Shah. In the middle of February, he wrote to 
Bumes, from Jellalabad: 

I have just received your letter, with its enclosures from Lord. 
The question he puts as to the reception to be given to any ofier 
that may be made for placing the Dost*s family under our protec¬ 
tion, is a very important one; and as he has expressed his anxiety 
for early instructions, I can have no hesitation in communicating 
to you ray opinion for his guidance. Common hospitality requires 
that an asylum should not be refused to persons who are in so 
distressed a plight as the Dost’s family; but, at the same time, 
common prudence requires that in the exercise of this office of 
humanity, we do not expose ourselves to the machinations of 
perfidious enemies. I think, therefore, that Lord should at one# 
say, in reply to any request on the subject that may be 
him, that we are prepared to accord a safb and honourable 
to the whole of Dost Mahomed’s family, on the condition oftftteir 
residing wherever our government may think proper. they 
come in, they might, in the first instance, be sent down to^uettah 
or Cutch Gundava, and it would rest with the Governw-G^cneral 
to determine whether they should ultimately be sent toLsoodhianah. 
I think it exceedingly probable that these terms will gladly 

be accepted.Before giving any decided opinimi as to 

our policy in Toorkistan, I wish to await Lord’s promised official 
despat^; but I am strongly disposed to think that we had better 

is brouf^t to Bokhara.” Jub- fi>ro, opened with the Envoy, who 
bar Khan was now at a loss to know was, above all thinm anxious to ob- 
how to act, as his own residence and tain possession of &e Dosfs family, 
^at of his hvoiher’s Ikmily ceased to as, ”in that case, the Khan of Bok-' 