

It was at Avitabilo’s hospitable table in the Goork- 
hutra of Pesliawur, that Macnaghten received intelli¬ 
gence of the fall of Khelat. Tlic licalth of the victors 
was drunk with delighted enthusiasm, manifestmg itself 
hi the “tlu’ce times three” of a good English cheer. 
Al l the circumstances of the capture of the stronghold 
were discussed with deepest interest to a late hour. It 
was told how, on the morinng of the 13th of November, 
General Willshire, with the 2nd and 17th Queen’s 
Regiments, the 31st Bengal Native Infantry, with two 
howitzers, four of the Shah’s six-poimder guns, and 
a detachment of local horse, found himself before 
Khelat. It was plain that Mehrab Khan was in no mood 

* Two companies of the 27tli Na- attacked by the Khyburees in great 
live Infantry, under Lieutenant Laing force, and worsted, with the Joss of 
—a very gallant officer, who fell ho- their cattle. Another party, sent by 
nourably at Caubul in the winter Sir John Keane to throw ammunition 
of 1841-42, were sent by Sir John into Ali-Musjid, was also attacked ; 
Keane to reinforce Ferris at Ali-Miis- two officers were severely wounded, 
jid. Afterwards, two companies of and some men killed; but the convoy 
the 21st, with one of sappers, were ultimately reached its destination, 
despatched to throw provisions into McLeod, with his sappers, did good 
the fort. On tlieir return they were service on this occasion. 



490 


THE DAWN OF THE EESTOEATION. 


to submit to the terms dictated to him. He had at first 
doubted the intentions of the British to move against his 
stronghold, and had been slow to adopt measures of 
defence. But when he knew that our troops were ad¬ 
vancing upon Khelat, he prepared himself, like a brave 
man, to meet his fate, and flung defiance at the infidel 
invaders. Khelat is a place of commanding strength. 
Tile citadel rises high above the buildings of the town, 
and fi’owns menacingly at its assailants. On the north¬ 
west of the fort were three heights, which the Khan had 
covered with his infantrj'^, supported by five guns in 
position. The engineer officers reported that, until these 
heights were carried, it would he impossible to proceed 
against the fortress. Orders were then given for the 
attack. It was Willshirci’s hope that the enemy might be 
driven down to the gates of the fortress, and that our 
stormers might rush in with them. Gallantly the hills were 
curried; gallantly the guns were captured. The infantry 
atlvanccd under a heavy fire from the British artillery. 
The shrapnel shot from Stevenson’s batteries fell with too 
deadly an aim among the Bidoochee footmen for them to 
hold thehr position on the hUls. They fled towards the 
walls of tlie fortress, and our infantry pushed hotly after 
them. But not in time were they to secure an entrance; 
the gates were closed against their advance. 

The artillery was now brought into play. The in¬ 
fantry, compelled to protect themselves against the heavy 
fire poured in from the rocks, sheltered themselves be¬ 
hind some ruined buildings, whilst our batteries, planted 
on the heights, opened upon the gate and the neighbour¬ 
ing defences. Two of Cooper’s guns were brought within 
a distance of 200 yards; and whilst the guimers feU 
under the matchlock fire of the enemy, played full upon 
the gate. At last it gave way. Pointing his hand to¬ 
wards the gate, Willshire rode d.own to show the infiintry 