



492 


THE DAWN OF THE RESTORATION. 


proceeded to rescue from captivity the aged mother 
and other female dependents of an old rival, whose 
claims were to be no longer denied. 

Nussur Khan, the chiefs son, had fled. A considerable 
amount of prize property was collected; an old preten¬ 
der to the throne, known as Shah Newaz, who had for 
some time been hanging on to the skirts of Shah Soojah 
and his allies, was set up in his place; and the provinces 
of Shawl, Moostung, and Cutchee, which had long been 
sentenced to spoliation, were stripped from the old do¬ 
minions of the Khan of Khelat, and annexed to the ter¬ 
ritories of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk. The Shah had been 
hankering after an extension of empire; and it was de¬ 
termined that the much-coveted aggrandisement should 
be conceded to him in the direction of Upper Sindh. 

It is possible that, whilst all these circumstances were 
being narrated and discussed at Avitabile’s dinner-table, 
there may have been jnesent one or two officers much 
troubled with self-questionings regarding the justice of 
these proceedhigs. But the general opinion, all through¬ 
out Alghanistan and India, was that this Mehrab Khan 
had been rightly punished for his offences. Few knew 
distinctly what these oflences were. There was a gene¬ 
ral impression that he had been guilty of acts of in¬ 
describable treachery; and that during the passage of 
the British army through Beloochistan, he was con¬ 
tinually molesting our advancing columns. It was the 
fashion to attribute to the wickedness of Mehrab Khan 
all the sufferings which afflicted the Array of the Indus 
on its march to Candahar, the scarcity which pressed so 
heavily upon man and beast, and the depredations of the 
marauding Beloochees. The very barrenness of the 
country, indeed, was by some laid at his door. It was 
not very clearly seen at this time that the Army of the 
Indus was at least as much the cause, as it was the 
victim of the scarcity in Beloochistan. When our troops 



THE CONDUCT OF MEHRAB KHAN. 


493 


passed tlirough the dominions of the Elhan of Ehelat, 
there was already, as has been shown by Bumes’s admis¬ 
sions, a scarcity in the land; and now the army in¬ 
creased it.* The safe passage of the Bolan Pass was ef¬ 
fected through the friendly agency of the Brahoo chief.f 
And we have it emphaticallj', upon the authority of 
Macnaghten, that the progress of the Army of the Indus 
through the coimtry of Melirab Khan was attended by 
much devastation—that a great injury was inflicted 
upon the pwple—and that nothing would have been 
easier than for the Khan to have destroyed our entire 
force.J Such was the language of our diplomatists up 
to the end of March; but in April, Bumes recommended 
the castigation of the Khan of Khelat; and Mehrab 
Khan was doomed to be stripped, on the first conve¬ 
nient opportunity, of his territory, and deprived either 
of his liberty or his life. The evidence of Mehrab 
Khan’s treachery is not sufficiently strong to satisfy me 
that the British righteously confiscated his principality 
and sacrificed his life. He was surrounded by traitors. 
When his stronghold was entered, it was seen that the 
servants he had trusted had the means of betraying their 
master; and it was clear, to all who investigated the 
charges against him with judicial impartiality, that he 
had been betrayed. It was clear that many of the of¬ 
fences imputed to him were to be ascribed rather to the 
machinations of his secret enemies than to his own 
enmity and bad faith. But he had been early doomed 
to destruction. The recommendations of the British 
diplomatists in Afghanistan had been adopted by the 
Govenior-General; and the deposition of Mehrab Khan 
and the annexation of Shawl, Moostung, and Cutchee, 
had been decreed in the Simlah Council Chamber.§ It 