



496 


THB GEEAT GAME IN CENTRAL ASIA. 


BOOK IV. 

[ 1840 — 1841 .] 


CHAPTER I. 

[January—September: 1840.] 

The Great Game in Central Asia—the Russian Exfiedition to Khiva— 
Apprehensions of Burnes—Colonel Stoddart—Affairs on the Hindoo- 
Koosh—Failure of the Russian Expedition—Conduct of the Sikhs—Herat 
and Yur Mahomed—Mission of Abbott and Shakespear—Disturbances in 
the Ghilzye Country—Fall of Khelat—Arthur Conolly. 

The King and the Envoy spent the winter at Jellalabad. 
There was something like a lull in Afghanistan. When 
the snow is on the ground the turbulence of the Afghans 
is wont to subside.* The time was favorable for the 
consideration of revenue matters, and Macnaghten began 
to inquire into the expenditure and the resomces of the 


* The winter, however, \ias not 
wholly iinprodiictiveof military events. 
A detachment was sent out under 
Colonel Orchard to reduce the fort of 
Piishoot, which lies some fifty miles 
to the north-east of Jellalabad, and 
to expel the “ refractorj^hief ” of the 
surrounding district, ^le affair was 
a successful failure. Repeated at¬ 
tempts were made by the Engineer 
Pigou to blow in the gate, after the 
Ghuznee fashion; but the heavy 


rains had damaged the powder, which 
was naturally bad; and every effort 
was unsuccessful. As there was no 
hope of efiecting an entrance in this 
manner; as Abbott and his artillery 
had vainly exhausted their ammuni¬ 
tion, and a considerable number of 
our men had fallen under the fire of 
the fort, Orchard drew off the assail¬ 
ants. Soon after their withdrawal, 
however, the enemy evacuated the 
place. 



k^[^3oal. inquiry uriii not k iMttMMtory cne. It 
troB'c^^vknis that the govliham^t could he carried on 
<H>ly by the eztractirm of large sums Scaca the ^treasury 
of India; and Macna^ten was continua%' turgiog the 
SufH^^e Govemroeut to authoiire the expenditoe of 
these large sums of money, and contmually ezlmrting ^he 
authorities in the north-western proyinces to smid Um 
all the treasure they could spare. 

But there was much in the state of our foreign rela¬ 
tions at this time to distract the thoughts of the minister 
from the afhirs of the home department. The Kussian 
question was now forcing itself again upon our Indian 
statesmen. Even before the Court turned its back upon 
Caubul, tidings had been received, in the first instance 
fiom Pottinger at Herat, wMch left little room to doubt 
that a Russian force was about to set out from Oren- 
buigh on an expedition into Central Asia. The imme¬ 
diate object of this movement was to threaten the state 
of Khiva, which had long been throwing obstacles in the 
way of Russian commerce, and carrying off Russian sub¬ 
jects into hopeless captivity. Russia had been carrying 
on an extensive trade with the countries of Central 
Asia; but the state of Khiva which borders on fh^ 
country occupied by the Kerghiz Cossacks, was now de¬ 
clared by the Russian Govenunent to be “ daily haram* 
ing the wanderii^ tribes that encamp on our fiontaerB, 
interrupting the intercourse the othm? states of Asia keep 
up with us, detaining the caravans of Bokhara on thdr 
way to and from Russia, obliging them to pay e^lxava*; 
gaut duties, and compelling them by main foree ko ptM 
through its territory, and there sming a cdUad^nhlii^ 
poxtipn their merdiandise” “ These •in8idts^..to 
smgitem, holding conunercial intercourse wUh . IfaBsi ij) 
continuis riie RustiMn state-papei^i^ite 
AMLrojjfiaato nf tho Govqmmeixt of tbe.C«aei dedbn^iypijit 