



THE FALL OF KHELAT. 


491 


that an entrance was ready for them. Rising at once 
from their cover, they rushed in with a loud hurrah. 
Pennycuick and his men were the first to enter. The other 
companies soon followed, until the whole of the storming 
column were within the walls of Khelat. Onward they 
struggled manfully towimds the citadel. Evei*}’^ inch of 
ground was obstinately disputed. But at last the citadel 
was won. There was a desperate resistance. Sword in 
hand, Mehrab Khan and some of his principal chiefs stood 
there to give us battle. The lOuin himself fell dead 
with a niuskc't-ball through his breast. Eight of his 
principal ministers and Sirdars fell beside him. From 
some inner apartments, of difficult approach, a fire was 
still poured in upon our people; and it was not until 
Lieutenant I^uveday, an assistant of the British agent, 
went up to them alone, that they werc^ induced to sur¬ 
render.* Loveday received them as prisoners; and then 

* The private letters of Lieutenant our capture of the fort, the death of 
Loveday (quoted in the Asiatic Jonr~ Mehrao Khan, and the near approach 
7ial) throw some light iqjon the inci- of her son, whom our government had 
/ dents of the capture. “ In one court- placed on the MusnmL You may 
yard I saw aheap of their dead, some readily fancy the scene; what witli 
forty or fifty—some very fine hand- surprise and joy, she burst into tears, 
some fellows — their shields shot said she was my slave, and would 
through, and broken swords and have thrown herself at my feet if 1 
matchlocks 1 ving about in tn cry had not prevented her. On the fol- 
dircction, telling of the fierce fight, lowing day a few of Mehrab Khan’s 
There was still, however, a small servants brought the body of their 
party who obstinately lield out in an master for burial—a fine looking man. 
inner apartment; there was no going There was one little hole in his 
at them except by a narrow passage, breast, which told of a musket-ball 
which admitted but of one at a having passed through. He had no 
time; three or four attempted it, and clothes on, except his silk pyjammahs. 
were instantly shot dead. AVeofl'ered One of his slaves whispered me for 
them quarter, but they would not a shawl; alas! I had nothing of the 
trust us. At last 1 was sent up alone, kind, but luckily remembered a bro- 

when they surrendered.cade bed-cover, which I had bought 

I then went to the mother of Shah in my days of folly and extravagance 
Newaz, who is the new Khan, and at Delhi. I called for it immediately, 
who made his escape from prison and gave it to the Khan's servants, 
seven years ago. This poor creature, who were delighted with this last 
with a few old women, had been shut mark of respect, and wrapping up 
up in a distant apartment ever since the body in it, placed their deceased 
the flight of her son, miserably fed master on a charpoy and carried him 
and m^erably clothed. I explained to the grave." 
in a few words what had taken place; 