

As the year advanced, Macnaghten’s difficulties seemed 
to thicken around him. The failure of the Bussian expe¬ 
dition removed one source of inquietude; but it was a 
remote one. And nearer home, many dangers were 
bristling up in his path. Immersed, however, in foreign 
politics, the Envoy gave little heed to the domestic 
troubles which were gathering around him. His thoughts 
were continually ranging beyond the limits of Shah 
Soojah’s dominions; and whilst the edifice he had reared 
was falling to pieces by the force of its own innate cor¬ 
ruptness, he was devising measures of external defence. 

During the spring and the early summer months two 
subjects pressed greatly on his attention, and became the 
burdens of his discourse. The one was the conduct of 
the Sikhs; the other, the state of affairs at Herat. Ever 
since the death of Bunjeet Singh, the temper of the 

^ " Jam informed that the situation dated 28th June. He condrmi the 
of €eneral Peaoffski and his army is retreat of tlie Rns^ians^ whoee oamp 
more perilous than this account states, appears to have been attacked by a 
because, in conseouenCe of the delays pestilence. 'Ftie Rhan of Khiva writes ' 
that h^d occurred, his. etook of pro* to Todd that Uie Russian forts and, 
visions is found to be insufficient, and entrenchments have been destroyed, 
be IS not in a condition either to await and that some guns and a ouanti^' of' 
tihe thaw and then to proceed to Khivi^ stores helontpg tothem .^^aUji bm 
dr to return home without further brought in triumph to Kliiva.—[w 
t&dJ^*^L^JCIanrioorde-to LordPaU W. & MacutMf^n to Majbr > 
fnersfon., MS* lUcordsJl linson: July 1841* 4fSS* Corre^ 

** 1 had thik thqr a letter from Toad, tpMence.^ 

TO£. U 2 !• 



Ill .1»|B0iniA7aAHSXNaipi»*lim4. 

j^iahore Durbar had been such as to impress the Envoy 
singly with the conviction that nothing but decisive 
measures would ever biing our allies to r^ard the terms 
of the Tripartite treaty. The real ruler of the Punjaub 
was the young and impetuous Prince, Nao Nehal Singh, 
who had almost set aside the authority of his imbecile 
&,ther, and was longing for the day when he might take 
more openly and undisguisedly the sceptre into his hands. 
In every possible way our allies had evaded the stipula¬ 
tions of the treaty. They had rendered no efiectutd aid 
to the Prince Timourin the operations which, conjointly 
with Wade, he had undertaken for the recovery of his 
father’s throne. They were making light of the obliga¬ 
tion to support a contingent force of Sikh troops on the 
frontier, in return for the subsidy granted by the treaty; 
and proof had been afforded that they were engaged in 
treasonable correspondence with our enemies in Afghan - 
istan. It is certain, at least, that they were harbouring at 
their frontier stations the rebel Ghilzye chiefs, who had 
been driven out of Shah Soojah’s territory, and suffering 
them to return again to foment new distiurbances.” Sul¬ 
tan Mahomed Ehan and his brothers at Peshawur were 
servants of the Maharajah, but they were Barukzyes still; 
and it-was not strange that they regarded with undis¬ 
guised satisfaction the clouds which were gathering over 
the restored Suddozye monarchy. 