

^2 



STS TOE C^REAT GAME lE CENTRAL ASIA. 

Fualld with these inquietudes arising out 6^ the «6n- 
diict of the Lahore Durbar and its agents, ran the trbuTaIra 
which weighed upon Macnaghten’s mind in cbnnekion 
with the ill-omened aspect of afifairs at Herat. The' inso¬ 
lent ingratitude of Tar Mahomed had reached a pitcTb of 
sublime daring. The British Government were lavishing 
their treasures upon Herat; and the chief tainister of 
Herat, in return for this support, was insulting tlie British 
officers, and intriguing with the Persian Court. In the 
history of human infamy there is nothing more infamous 
than the conduct of this man. The treaty between the 
British Government and the state of Herat, by Which 
the latter bound itself not to enter into negotiations with 
other states without the knowledge and consent of the 
British Berident, had only been signed a few weeks, 
when Tar Mahomed was detected in carrying on a 
correspondence with the Persian Asoof-ood-Dowlah at 
Meshed, offering to place himself and his country under 
the protection of the Persian Government, ahd^ip^tmg 
him to enter into a league for the expulsion' tn^ infidel 
English from Afghanistan.* 

Up to this time eight lakhs of rupees had been ad¬ 
vanced to the Heratee Government. When the new 
year dawned upon Herat, twelve lakhs had been so ad¬ 
vanced. The utmost benefits had been conferred upon 
the state. The measures of our British officers had rescued 

* The treaty with Shah Kainran Government. In reporting this cir- 
had been signed but a few weeks; cumstance for ^oiir information, I eit* 
a treaty which secured to the au« pressed my opinion tliat the mainte* 
thorities of Herat solid advantages, nance of friendly relations with a 
but prohibited them from negotia- eovernment that had proved imelf 
ting with foreign states without insensible of bene^ and ignbrant of 
the knowled^ and consent of Uie the obligations of a treaty, seemed no 
British Resiaent Agent; when it longer possible; and that It would be 
was discovered tliat Tar Maho- found necessary, Ihr the safe^ of our 
med Kban, the de facto ruler of the newly-acquired position bey^d the 
country had secretly made overtures Indus, to reannex the territoiy of 
to the Persian authorities at Idesbed, Herat to the dominions of his 
expressing his hatred towards the ’ShtHi Soojah.***— 2bdd to A 
English, and ofibring to place himself W. H, MacM^Uen: Qheiruk^ Mardi 5, 
under the protection of the Persian 1841. MS. H€cordtS\ 



OraDUCT Oft JAR RAIKnOEP* 


5J7 


Bod people fi;om starntt^.”* B^t a1| this 
y«cj tiioe a letter was addre^ to Mahomed Shah of 
Persia, Jo the name of Shah Eamran, declaiing the 
Heiatee’ruler to be the faithful servant of the Sh^*in* 
Shah; and setting forth that he only tol^ted the ^le- 
smioe of the English because they were useM to him— 
that, in truth, they were not tugsardly with thmr money;; 
but that the hopes of his Majesty were in the a^lw 
of Iskm. 

In explanation of such black-hearted treachery as this, 
it is said that the apprehensions of Yar Mahomed had 
been excited by the imposing attitude of Great Britam in 
A^hanistan—that he looked upon the danger to be ap¬ 
prehended from the cont%uity of the British army as 
something less remote and more alarming than the return 
of Mahomed Shah; and’ that it was his policy at this 
time to play off one state against another, and to secure 
the good offices of Persia, whilst openly receiving the 
bounties of Great Britain. This is, doubtless, the view 
in which the matter is to be regarded with reference to 
the case of Yar Mahomed, the statesman. He was not 
incapable of taking a statesmanlike view of the posi¬ 
tion of his principality. He understood the interests of 
Herat. But better still did he understand the interest of 
Yar Mahomed. The presence of the English officers 
at Herat was a burden and a reproach to the Wuzeer. 
He hated their interference; he had no sympathy with 
their high-toned notions of humanity—with their horror 
of slavery—^with their compassion for the weak and op- 