

But more important still than the considerations in¬ 
volved in these questions, was the question which had now 
arisen regarding the free passage of our troops and convoys 
through the dominions of Lahore. It was obvious that 
we could not maintain our position in A fghaniBt,aTi so long 
as the Punjaub stood impassable between that country and 
Hindostan. But Nao Nehal Singh and the Ealsa viewed 
with insurmoimtable jealousy the passage of our arma¬ 
ments through the Punjaub. They dedared, tlia» when 
Mr. Clerk negotiated for a passage for the troops return- 





ai 

iog fiom ^ eocpedituKoi into A^anistan, l^e aooozded 
p«rmi8aiQa w«$ limited to that e^eoUd cnse, and liras by 
no meaai intended to convey a general lioeoee ftnr tbe re* 
peated crosangs and re<ax)enng8 which now se^ed to be 
in contemplation. But Macnaghten declared that it was 
absolutely necessary to “ macadamise'* the road through 
the Puiyaub; and the authorities at Calcutta began to 
think that a war with the Sikhs was no improbable 
event* 


• " Tbe plot it thickening,wrote 
Mocn^hteii, on the 10th of April, 
**and Thave no hesitation in assert¬ 
ing my belief tlmt we shell find our¬ 
selves in a very awkward predica^ 
ment, unless we adopt measures for 
macadamising the road through tbe 
Punjaiib.*' On the 15th of the same 
montli he wrote t ** It may not be 
the interest of our neighbours to give 
us offence; but it is their interest to 
do 118 injury, and in attempts to effect 
this, a certain good neighbour has 
certainly been most active and per- 
tcvoring. We have fresh instances 
and clear proof of this spirit daily. 
Nothing would give us a greater 
name in Central Asia than success 
in such a cause; but I need not dilate 
on the ten thousand advantages that 
would attend a vigorous policy in 
this direction.” — [Af5. Correspond^ 
encs.] Avitabile’s proceedings at this 
time were a source of extreme annoy¬ 
ance to Macnagbten. The General 
vras interfering with the Ehyburees. 
The Koochlee-Kbail tribe of Afreedis, 
from whom he demanded revenue, 
went to Mackeson for protection, and 
said: **Formerly the Sikhs used to 
pay ns 18,000 rupees a year to get 
water at Jnmrood; and now. on the 
strength of tbdr alliance with you, 
thCT ask ns for revenue.”—[.iiei#- 
Umnt Matckeson: AprU 12| 1840, 
OfftrespondmceJ] The chief of 
the tribe saio to Mackeson: ** Why 
do you stay at Peshawur? Ton are 
poweiless were, and yon prevent us 
from we Pikfis ip return for 

dm tajam thpy inflict upon us. 

Si 


Come and tarry witli us.” Avitabile 
threatened to carry Ore and sword 
among the Koochfee-Khail people; 
and Mackeson, to prevent the em¬ 
ployment of force, went security for 
them. Besides this, he laid an em¬ 
bargo on all merchants and travellers, 
subjects of Shah Soojah, passing 
through Peshawur, and declar^ that 
not one of them should proceed until 
the Shah had given ample security 
against the commission of robberies 
in the pass .—ILieutmant Mackeson 
to Mr, Haddock: April 26. MS, 
Correspondence,^ These things greatly 
embarrassed our position, at a time 
when we especially desired to tran- 
quillise tbe Kbyburees. Macnaghten 
wrote urgently to government on the 
subject: *' By this day's dawk 1 am 
sending to the Supreme Government,” 
he wrote, in a private letter, on the 
2drd of April, **a budget containing 
the proceedincs of General Avitabile. 
These are calculated to do infinite 
mischief—so much so, indeed, that 
unless redress is afforded, I do not see 
how it is possible that a rupture with 
the Sikh Government can 1^avoided; 
it's a necessary consequence of such 
proceedings; all our ties must be 
renewed in tbe pass, mid commerce 
^ tliis route may be extinguished. 
Can tbe Fofpa be acting without 
instructions? Why should ho fOOk 
to exasperate us ? But our convoy 
has got safely through, apd wa arf op 
tbe best possible terms with tpa 
Khyburees, who detest oua MUWt 
Boc/i^ deruHiitoa olodpr * 