

he safh in Khooloom, afw the sen- hara could make no use of him.”_ 

toents of the Bokhara chief were TCtdaUta .fiMkw.} 
known. Kegodations were, there- 




ooet'iftURWim’^ kaiolt. 


601 


sot « 6 f 4 we»bc 7 <«d SygMi* veSm wAtm bossd in good fudi 
to clo<M^ of iriiiidi I am not aware. Fean oi oqr approach might 
prore as incentive to the Shah of Bokhan to set M^omed 
on again.* 

A few days aftervrards, he wrote agam to the same 
correspondent: 

Jellalabad, February 28,1840* 

Mr DEAB Bubnes, 

Since I wrote to you yesterday, I have communicated 
with his Majesty on the subject of the Dost’s family. He does 
not understand upon what principle he can be expected to grant 
them an asylum or a maintenance, and nothing can persuade him 
that he is called upon, either by humanity or policy, to do so. 
Against the Newab Jubbar Khan his Majesty’s wrath is especially 
turned. He trusts that we are not to be gulled by hia professions 
of friendship, whilst the whole tenor of his conduct towards us 
has been that of rancorous hostility. His Majesty will not object 
to our allowing them an asylum in Quettah or Cutch Gundava, 
until the pleasure of the Governor-General is known regarding 
the future disposal of the family; but nothing short of absolute 
Ibrei would induce him to contribute one rupee towards their 
support. Under present circumstances, the family cannot expect 
from us more than a general assurance of kind and honourable 
treatment, on condition of their living wherever we choose to 
locate them; and there must be no more waiting on events. If 
they wish for protection, they must seek it instantly. As to Jub¬ 
bar Khan himself, I doubt whether his Majesty will do more than 
assign him a decent maintenance. If we get the Dost’s family 
into our possession, our objection to the movement into Toorkis* 
tan will be obviated. In that case, the Shah of Bokhara could 
make no use of the Dost. Iiot us examine what we are. to gain 
by such a movement, and upon what principles it should be con¬ 
ducted. The first thing to be gained is the punishment of the 
Shah of Bokhara, for his frequent and outrageous violation of 
the law of nations, and the release of our agent, Colonel Stoddar^ 
who, without some exertion on our part, will, it is likely^ be 
doomed to incarceration for life. I suppose the expeditaon to be 
conveniently feasible, if entered upon at the proper season of the 
* UnpvbUihed Corre$p<mdenee. 



Jlwoor Shah effec^ ^ aax M^jJjipijfgfOf 
.nw Mijnseineat we muy eltlier enlirt on oiir nde, (Kj,s|^<r|)eu* 
1^ between ns and Bokbiaia. If we conii|)^^^ tbe 

Snlii^'Bokhan to release Stoddart, to evacdaie tE(S 'Odun- 
(A tins side of the Qzus, and to paj the eipeht^ 6t tbe 
wA should have achieved dl that is desaablsJ 
Believe me, yours, &o.,jSKi., 

W. H. Macnaohten. 

The Court remained at Jellalabad up to the third 
week of April,- mmI the excursive mind of the Envoy 
was still wandering out in the wild regions beyond the 
Hindoo>Koosh. It was certain that a Bussian army was 
advancing upon Khiva. In the country about Khooloom 
the adherents of Dost Mahomed were exciting against 
us the hostility of the Oosbegs. Jubbar Khan, with the 
Ameer’s family and a large party of retainers, were there. 
The petty chie& beyond the mountains were in a state 
of doubtful vassalage, scarcely knowing whether they 
were subject to Herat or to Caubul; whether they 
would recognise the Khan of Bokhara or the Khan of 
Khiva as their suzerain; or whether they would be, in 
effect, independent of all.* It was desirable to annek 
these Cis-Oxus principalities to the territory of the Shah, 
to strengthen our frontier, and keep them out of the 
hands of the Bokhara ruler. Already was there a weak 
detachpent wintering amid the inhospitable snows of 
Bameean. The despatch of a strong brigade to the 
country beycmd was still among the cherished projects 
of the Envoy. Writing from Jellalabad, he turned his 