

Asia. 

With deep and painful interest Macnaghten watched the 
progress of events at Herat. The perfidy of Yar Maho¬ 
med Was so glaring—so unblushing—that^the Envoy had 
not hesitated to recommend offensive proceedings against 
the state of Herat, to be followed by its reannexation 
to the dominions of Shah Soojah. But Lord Auckland, 
when the proposal first came before him, was disinclined 
to embrace it. He thought it better to forgive Yar Maho^ 


• “When Major Todd, in June, 
1889, arrived as envoy at Herat, he 
selected MooUah Hussan, a Mahome- 
dan priest of great respectability) as 
bearer of a letter of friendship to 
the Khan Hnzzrut (Supreme Lord) of 
KhivU) called also Khaurism Shah, or 
King of Khaurism. Moollah Hussan, 
arrived at Khiva when the state was 
threatened with a Russian invasion, 
was well received; and on his return 
was accompanied by an Oosbeg Lord, 
Shookkurroola Bre by name, as am¬ 
bassador from the Khan Huzzrut to the 
Indian Government. The letter borne 
by this ambassador accepted of the 
tender of British friendship, and made 
several demands, which could not be 
complied with on the responsibility 
of Todd. It was in answer to 
this mission that the Envoy deputed 
me to timi the Court of Khifa.^— 


[^Captain Abbott's Narrative of a Jour* 
ney from Herat to Khiva: Prelimi¬ 
nary Pemarks*'} 

For an account of Captain Abbott’s 
personal adventures, with a glimmer¬ 
ing here and there of his political nego¬ 
tiations, 1 would refer the reader to 
these interesting volumes. Abbott 
says, at the commencement of his nar¬ 
rative : We (Todd and Abbott) sepa¬ 
rate under circumstances suffimtmly 
gloomy. 1 leave him in the very 
stronghold of robbers. I go myself as 
agent of the British Government to a 
Court, of the language and manners of 
which 1 am utterly ignorant, and to 
accomplish that of which tbi( gmst 
sanguine have no hope. It is singly 
a matter of duty) andas su^ evUimd 
upon cheerfully, and wltb thU A^ter- 
minatioD to cany my tfibits |o'the 
ttttasost.'' 




npill and make a fmtiber experiiimiit 
lidbsHof the Wuzeer. So, instead of an army, m Mao^ 
aei^ten eagerly recommended, a further supply of money 
sent to Herat; and Yar Mahomed continued to in¬ 
trigue with the Persian Government^ 

It seemed to the Envoy, at this time, that thcsre was 
no middle course to be pursued. Ail through our Cen¬ 
tral-Asian policy, indeed, there ran two substantive 
ideas. It was either the bayonet or the money-bag that 
was to settle everything for us. When Macnaghten 
found that the rulers of Herat were not to be dragooned 
into propriety, he declared that there was nothing left for 
us now but to bribe them. He proposed that a subsidy 
of two or three lakhs per annum should be granted to 
Herat; that guns, muskets, and ordnance stores in abun¬ 
dance should be furnished to the state; and in the mean 
while he continued to send up more treasure, with a 
profusion which startled the Calcutta Government, to 
be expended on the strengthening of its defences and 
the sustentation of the people.f 