

I intend sending Arthur Conolly, who has joined me here, and 
Rawlinson on a mission to Kokan, with a view, if possible, to 
frustrate the knavish tricks of the JRusse log in that quarter. 
Though there are doubtless many of the elements of mischief in 
this country, yet I should not apprehend any internal explosion, 
even if the greater portion of our troops were withdrawn. The 
Berowski mentioned in the Madras paper was killed at the siege 
of Herat. Perofsski, I think, is the name of the leader of the pre¬ 
sent expedition. Depend upon it we shall never be at our ease 
in India until we have subjugated the Punjaub and Nepaul; and 
the sooner we can come to a reckoning with our faithful allies the 
Singhs, the better. They are doing all they can to injure us in 
this quarter, and arc comforting all the rebels and parties di&- 
afiected to his Mcgesty Shah Soojah. We should here have no 
difficulty in dealing with them in this quarter, and I will venture 
to say there would not be a disciple of Nanuk on this side the 
Indus a week after the dedaradon of hostilities.’* 

* AfiSf.Cbrrefpon(fe«ce. Inihisletter 1^ cjrpher; and as at a later period, 
the Enroy ^us alludes to the ii 7 «tem muiug General FoUock's ooeupaficm 
writing which has now,super* of the passes between Pe^wur and 
seded the old plan of correspondence Caubtu, it was found of the utniist 



m 


As month advanced, ti|ie inteiligenpe fix>m the 
North more and more calculated to jivd^ the opinion 
entertained by the Mission of the success of the Russian 
expedition. On the 2l8t of March, Mimnaghten had 
written to the Agra Governor: 

Lord Auckland tells me that the Russian force consists only of 
3000 cavalxy Cossacks, 800 mounted artillerymen, and twelve 
light field-pieces ; but Burnes tells me that he knows, from goo4 
information, that the force is much larger. Let . us hope the 
armadi^ may be dispersed before it reaches Bokhara, whatever 
may be the strength of it. If the Russians are likely to establish 
themselves there, we had better be up and doing.^ 

But on the 15th of April he wrote from Jellalabad: 

You will see from Captain Abbott’s report how contemptible 
is the enemy with which the Russians have to contend, and I fear 
they will experience no obstacle to their progress all the way to 
Bokhara. Had we not been here, they would by this time next 
year have established themselves without the slightest opposition 
or difficulty in Afghanistan. They appear to have completely 
gained over (whether by promises or threats) the King of Bokhara, 
who turns a deaf ear to all our advances.f 

On the 23rd, the Court having then commenced its 
progress to Caubul, the Envoy wrote in a still less con¬ 
fident strain: 


service to our officers, it may be 
interesting to describe the method 
in the words of the Envoy : “Are 
you in possession of the hikmvi of 
ooneealed writing, by means of con- 
je^water and a solution of iodine ? 
This is much better than any cypher. 
The paper is to all appearance blank, 
but when rubbed over with the solu- 
ti^ony the words written with conjee- 
water start into life, as it wer^ most 
miraculously. Something unimpor¬ 
tant is cenerally written with omn- 
mon and what is intended^ as 
seeiet. is hiterliited with "ooiuec* 
water. 3^ this some ^ diw. Any 
tyiedioal man in your neishroiirliood 
will give the solution. The paper 