

It is painful to me that government pay any attention to the 
stories of persons who are afficted with the ** imposthume of too 
much leisure,” and who are daily fabricating the grossest false- 
hoods against his Majesty and the authorities, who are supposed 
to be the cause of their detention in a land “ not overflowing with 
beer and cheroots.” The Shah is conciliating in the extreme to 
all his chiefs. He is too much so, in fact. He listens with the 
greatest patience to all their requests and representations, however 
unreasonable, and he cannot bear to give any of them a direct re¬ 
fusal on any occasion. You have been told that he is a ruler 
who seeks to get on “ without trusting, rewarding, or punishing” 
any of his own people. It is nonsense upon the face of it, and is 
contradicted by every hour’s experience. I have nothing more 
to say about his Majesty’s character than I have already said. I 
believe him to be the best and ablest man in his kingdom. The 
history of the revenues of this poor country may be given in a 
few words. The whole is consumed in the pay of the priesthood, 
the soldiery, and the support of his Majesty’s household. You 
shall have the particulars of these as soon as I can get half an 
hour’s leisure. You know we are solemnly bound to refrain from 
interference in the internal administration; and, in my advice, I 
have been cautious to urge no innovations which could, ai this 
early stage of our connexion with them, shock the prejudices of 
the people. 

Bumes has had no special duties under me. He has cheerfully 
done everything that 1 have asked him to do, and has been of 
much assistance to tne. I have stated, fully and officially, all the 
particulars regarding Nioolson and Wulloo Khan* I know that 
the case has been made the subject of much malicious misre¬ 
presentation. 

And now, my dear Colvin, you must allow me to disbvurdm 
my mind to you. 1 have perceived, or fancied I perc^Ved, din 
several occasions lately, a want of confidence in my proceedings, 



m 


THE QlBfSiA^ (3AME IN CENTBAZi ASIA. 


$$i3L ^ ^lapofdtieii tp listen to every unfavorable r^iort i^gai4lllg 
fijS^its ixK this quarter; whilst I do not receive that ^ 

Vfhieh the overwhelnaing difficulties of my position entitle pae* 
In deciding upon a ccrntTOversy thrust upon me by Brigadier 
Roberts, the government convey to me an iiuplied censure for 
not supporting his military position, though the justice of my 
views is admitted; and take that occasion of conveying a compli¬ 
ment to Brigadier Roberts, though he had written to me a most 
disrespectful letter. If no important operations should b^ 
templated for next year in this quarter, for the conduct of which 
it may be thought desirable that I should remain, some of the 
public money will be saved by the appointment of a less paid 
though equally qualified agent. I never yet have served in an 
office where I had not the confidence of my superiors, and my 
inclination to do so is by no means strengthened after a labo¬ 
rious public life of thirty-one years.* 