

but both at Moostung and Culc^M 
ve^ eneraetic measures will be re¬ 
tired to Uiese countriesand happily 
their tetonrces art such, that this wifi 
amply repay the labour and expense/ 
Wat tide vigour displayed by his 
M^{esty*s Govemment on the spot. 


or by our own authorities F One of 
his Majesty^s governors has joined 
the insurgents, and the political agent 
Was taken by surprise on an occasion 
which the slightest foresight might 
have anticipated. What right have 
we to expect that any chief placed in 
power shall flourish by us, unless his 
government is better than that which 
we have overthrown? Did Shall 
Newaz muster or even organise his 
troops ? Did he point out the neces¬ 
sity for payment, or the means of 
making them superior to his advei^ 
saries ? We advanced him a lakh of 
rupees, and allowed him to oontintie 
most at Caubu], while we withdrew 
all our troops. Khelat is the capitid 
of Beloochistano-a poor but vast cottn- 
tryi stretchine from the mountsiiii in 
sight of the Indus to the confines of 
Persia* Tbro^h tbb Wide tract Our 
discomfiture aflSets Onr reputatietii 
the only solace in it will be found in 
our chieL not our troops beiim van** 



0TAT1 OF THB OOOJRtkt, 


531 


mdnihk a detacbittfent of fiiitlsh ikt6pB ad¬ 

vanced to the relief of Dadur, which had been at- 
tacked by the enemy, the unfortunate young ofiSicer was 
found in the deserted camp of the Brahoosi chained to a 
camel-pannier^ half naked, emaciated, and dead. His 
throat had just been cut by the sabre of a Beldoohee 
horseman. • 

But in spite of all these indications of unrest—^these 
signs of the desperate unpopularity of the restored 
monarchy—Macnaghten clung to the belief that the 
country was settling down under the rule of Shah 
Soojah, and never ceased to represent to Lord Auckland 
and his secretaries that there were no grounds for un-^ 
easiness or alarm. He was, indeed, most anxious to re¬ 
move any impressions of an opposite character which 
may have forced themselves upon the minds of the Go¬ 
vernor-General and his advisers. On the 8th of July, 
he wrote to Mr. Colvin : 

..... You tell me that my letter has left a very painful 
impression upon you, as manifesting my sense of the weakness of 
the royal cause. I fear 1 must have written my mind to very 
little purpose regarding the state of this country. You rightly 
conjecture that the Barukzyes have most inflammable material 
to work upon.” Of all moral qualities, avarice, credulity, and 
bigotry, are the most inflammable, and the Afghans have all these 
three in perfection. I’hey will take Sikh gold, they will believe 
that Shah Soojah is nobody, and they will esteem it a merit to 
fight against uS. When, in addition to these indueementS, there 
has been positively no government in the country for ihe last 
thirty years, it will cease to be wondered at that cemmorion can 
easily be raised by intriguers possessing a long contiguity of 
flpontier, and having, besides, all the means and appliances to 
ensure suoceSs* though our presence here, doubtless, Strengihens 
Shah Soojah, it must be rsonembered that in aeme sense it 