



S88< THB COnSAV GAME nr CBNTRiilVABlA. 

gcoiAj and, after a march of some five miles, {bund 
eaem^ al^ut 2000 strong, occupying some biUs in his 
froiBt. The action was a gallant one on both sides. 
Twice the enemy charged. The first charge was re¬ 
pulsed by a heavy fire firom Turner’s guns—^the second 
was met at the point of the bayonet by Spence's in¬ 
fantry. Anderson, after the first march ^m Can- 
dahar, beguiled by some accounts of the retirement of 
the enemy, had sent back the greater part of the 
cavalry with which he had started; so that he was 
weak in that arm. But for this, he would have cut up 
the enemy with heavy slaughter. As it was, the victory 
was complete. The enemy fled and betook themselves 
to their mountain fastnesses, whilst Anderson re-formed 
column and marched on to take up a good position 
above Olan Robat. The country around was quieted 
for a time by this victory; but disaffection was not 
rooted out. Indeed, every action of this kind only in¬ 
creased the bitter animosity of the Ghilzyes, and esta¬ 
blished unappeasable blood-feuds between our people 
and the tribes. 

But the money-bag was now brought in to complete 
what the bayonet had commenced. It was expedient 
to conciliate the Ghilzyes, who had at any time the 
power of cutting off oiu: communications between Can- 
dahar and Caubul; and Macnaghten, therefore, recom¬ 
mended the payment of an annual stipend to the chiefe,* 
on condition that they woitld restrain their followers 
from infesting the highways. But neither the bayonet 
nor the money-bag could keep these turbulent tribes in 
a continued state of repose.f 

* 80,000 mpeei (or SOOOI.) per Wnlloo Efam. I bellere tliot &e 
annuBie following accoimt of the transaedon, 

t In oonneiion with the Ghilzye whidi appear^ in a Calcutta jour* 
affain at tbia time, cornea in the un* nal, h snoatantially correct: Wul- 
pleaaant atoiy of the surrender of loo Khan, after hu bea^g, wi^ed 





m 


At |t^ fame lame, dm state pi^rthe^aowthempirovinceB 
was siid^ .mi to ezdte paioM disquietude m Mao^ 
nsgjbten’s mind. The tmd of coimtrji.tiriueb, dfter die 
c^iqre of Khelat, had been anneamd, bgr the did, of the 
Indian Government, to the territory of Shah Sobjah, 
was perpetually breaking out into fierce spasms of 
unrest. It had been almost entirely denuded ol 
British troops; and small detachments were sent 
here, and there, or solitary political agents sate 
themselves down, with only a handful of fighting 
men at command, as though all their paths were 
pleasantness and peace, and all their homes bowers of 
repose. But the Beloochees neither liked their new 
chief nor his European supporters. The blood of 
Mehrab Ehan was continually crying out against the 
usurpation. Ever and anon opportunity offered, and it 
was not neglected. One officer,* on his way from the 
fort of Kahun with a convoy of camels, was over¬ 
whelmed and destroyed by the Beloochees. Eahun was 
invested by the Murrees. Quettah was besi^ed by the 
Khaukurs.f It was soon apparent that the whole country 