

But above all these petty cares and distractions rose 
the one dominant thought in Macnaghten’s mind of the 
great and beautiful game that was to be played by the 
annexation of Herat and the coercion of the Sikhs; and 
still he coptinued to write to Lord Auckland that there 
was nothing else to be done. One letter of many will 


* UnpuhUshed Cormspoudence. In 
another letter to the same correspon¬ 
dent, he writes: ** You observe, after 
the first expression of disorder, a oon- 
ciliating policy is the only ope thpt 
can be successful, or tliat we can 
countenance. Who is to judge as to 
whether the disorder is repressed or 
not; we here, or you at the Presi¬ 
dency? And why should you pre¬ 
judge ps and suppose us guilty of 
w|ui|on crvolty at the suggestion pf ^ 
malevolent and inter^t^ raction? 
This treatment is anytliing hut fair, 
anct ypn will fin^ that it is not the 
to secure zealous and honest service.^ 
On the 20th of August, writing to 
another correspondent, he thus spohe 
of hit contemplated resj^tiun; ** I 
am much obliaed to you'for the kind 
hint contained in yoor last. 1 thotild 


never for a moment think of resign¬ 
ing my post from any difference qf 
opinion between myself and my supe¬ 
riors as to the measures which should 
be adopted for the security of our in¬ 
terests in this quarter, but when a 
want of confidence is shown in myself 
personally, 1 would rather not wait 
till 1 get a less equivpcal hint to move. 
Of late, I find that there has been 
kept up a system of esnionage on my 
proceedings, pn4 thai me mps^ rep^y 
credence has been afforded to the 
malevolent tales of every idle felloyr 
about caiup, to lay nothing nf newi- 

paper fabrications, which are taken 
for gospel. I cannot well help myself 
as to my coffespondents, for Colvin 
evidently w^tes to me witfe tbt 
tion or the GovernoF-Oenend," 



AWKWxjom (Hr 594 

suffioo to show how this iMcUng idea still bverbom 
eveiything in his mind; 

TO I<OBD AlJCBIiAJnO. 

Oftubttly Avgvuit IMif 

My Lo»p, 

We are now arrived at a crisis which oallfl for tho IftOil 
serious coasideration. If such a course riiould suit the copvfN 
nience of government, I should say that a vigorous poliey aow 
is that which ought to be pursued. It is, indeed, in my opinioHi 
by such a course alone that our interests can be secured, aud your 
Lordship’s past policy justified. Py annexing Herat to the 
crown Caubul, and by insisting upon the concession of our 
rights from the ruler of the Punjaub, your Lordship will at once 
provide for the consolidation of Shah Soojah’s power, and show 
to the world that the attainment of all the advantages contem> 
plated from the movement across the Indus, has been hitherto 
opposed only by the perfidious intrigues of the two powers pro* 
fessing to be our friends and allies. In addition to the demands 
already made upon the Sikhs, they should be required, I think, tP 
admit unequivocally our right of way across the Punjaub, and in 
the event of their denying this right, they should be convinced 
that we can take it. I confess myself utterly ignorant of what 
political objections may exist to this course of proceeding, or of 
the military means that may be available; and I am much staggered 
at a paper which I have just seen from Captain Sanders, who 
talks of its being expedient to take 12,000 men against Herat. 
I believe, however, that military authorities seldom underrate the 
difficulties to be encountered. This paper will, I believe, be sent 
to your Lordship by Sir W^. Cotton. I have a proposition from 
Captain Bean to recognise the right of Mehrab Khan’s son to 
the mnsnud of Khelat. This I think might be done, if he would 
come and pay homage in person to Shah Soojah, as Shah 
Karwaa can never be reinstated. But I shall tell Captain Bean 
to k^ the qupption Qp§n if possible, until I know ypur Lord^ 
drip’s vie?ra regarding H«»t* If it hp intended ^ to land i 
large fprcQ into the cpuntry with a view of raduping 
the Khelat affair will afford an excellent screen to our ihten- 
tiona.' I must beg your Lordship most earnestly, if posrible, 
to relieve the two European and five Native regiments now 