

And so still was Macnaghten’s cry ever for more 
money and more bayonets, that be might play tba 
“beautiful game” of knocsking down and setting up 
kingdoms and principalities, with which it became us 
not to interfere, to the waste of the resources, and the 
sacrifice of the interests of those which Providence had 
especially committed to our care. 

In the mean while, in the dominions of Shah Soojab, 
everything was going wrong. Macnaghten still pro¬ 
fessed his belief in the popularity of the King, and was 
unwilling to acknowledge that the people were not in a 
state of repose. But every now and then, both in Af¬ 
ghanistan itself, and in the country that had been 
wrested from Mehrab Khan, awkward evidences of the 
unsettled state of the country rose up to proclaim far 
and wide the fact that there was little loyalty in men’s 
minds towards the Shah, and little afihction for our* 
selves. The Ghilzyes, whom in the preceding autumn 
Captain Outram had attacked, and, it was said, re¬ 
duced, were now again rebelling in Western Afghanistan. 
The chiefs had fled to Pe8hawur,had been harboured there 
during the winter, and now, on the return of the spring, 
had been slipped from thmr retreat, strengthened, it 

♦ MS. Correspondence qf Sir W. before us, tlie results will be incalcu- 
H, Mficna^fUen. I have taken litis lablybeneficial tous,and to ^le tribes 
and tbe two preoediqg oxtmcm from whose destinies we may change from 
copies in Arthur Conolly's hand- turmoil, violence, ignorance, and po- 
writiog. Oonidly biinieff writes: verly, to ptaoe, emighteniiieata and 
!* We are on the eve of stlimiig Mmm ; varM happiness.'* 
but if we play the great game that is 



iifit 

ym faelieredtbySikh gold. At aU evoatf, in tiw mrath 
of April iltey were actively employed fairing [the tribea 
and catting off our communications between. Candahar 
and Caubul. Gleneral Nott had by this time assumed 
the command of the troops at the former place—a place 
with which his name has since become imperishaJdy 
associated. Under-rating the strength of the “ rebelSi*' 
as all were called at this time who did not appreciate 
the new order of things which the British had estS' 
blished in A%hanistan, he sent out a party of 200 
horsemen, under Captains Walker and Tayler, to clear 
the road. But the detachment was not strong enough 
for the purpose. It was necessary to reinforce them, 
Nott had some good officers about him, but he had not 
one better than Captain William Anderson, of the Ben¬ 
gal Artillery, commandant of the Shah’s Horse Artillery 
at Candahar. So, on the 6th of May, the General sent 
for Anderson, and asked him whether he could prepare 
himself to march on the following morning, with a re¬ 
giment of foot, four guns, and 300 horsemen. Ander¬ 
son answered promptly that the artillery were always 
ready, and that he would do his best. By seven o’clock 
on the following morning the detachment was under 
arms and ready for the march. On the 14th they 
came up with Tayler and Walker, in the neighbour¬ 
hood of the Turnuk river. The Ghilzyes were about 
eight miles distant, variously reported at from 600 to 
3000 men. Anderson’s cattle were exhausted; so he 
halted, and, to gain time, opened negotiations with the 
enemy. The answer sent back by the chiefr was a 
gallant one. They said, that they had 12,000 men—a 
firm faith in God and in the justice of their cause—and 
that they would fight. So Anderson prepared to At¬ 
tack th^. Detaching his cavalry to the right and left, 
he moved down, on the 16th, with his infiantiy and his 