



letters whiohy in mmm^ ^ he tdespfttcted 
from Caubnl to his oorrespo&denttf in difihrent of 
India s^d Afghanistan. To the lieutenint^Govemor of 
the North-West Provinces he wrote, on the 10th of July : 

• • . « {urged the removal of the Sikhs to the east of the Indus 
as a matter for amicable negotiation, by purchase or otherwiiS^ 
in the event of their acceding to our other just demands, and 
as a matter of coercion only in the event of their forcing us 
into actual hosdlities. It is clear to me, however, that this country 
can never rise into prosperity while it is shorn of its two wings, 
Peshawur and Herat. 

TTe have heard nothing lately regarding the Russians, and 
probably shall receive no accurate intelligence until the arrival 
of the overland mail. I participate in your fear that Arthur 
ConoUy will not be permitted to proceed northwards. I regret 
this for the sake of the public interests, and on his private ac< 
count, for the opportunity would have been a grand one to obtain 
distinction. 

I am in daily expectation of hearing of the capture of 6ho* 
rian, hut of the policy which directed this measure I confess 
myself unable to form a judgment.* It is apparently calculated 
to make an irreparable breach between us and the Kujjurs. We 
have patched up a sort of truce in the Ghilzye country, which 
may improve into a state of solid and permanent tranquillity if 
the Sikhs will only give us fair play. If we had the countries 
to the west of the Indus, I feel satisfied that you would never 
hear of an insurrection in Shah Soojah’s dominions; but when I 
hint at this in higher quarters, I am charged with wishing to gain 


* Ghorian, the frontier post of He¬ 
rat, had been taken by the Persians 
in 18S8.— ante^page 216.] When, 
in the spring of 1840, the perfidy of 
Yar Mahomed was discovered, the 
Wuseer expressed some contrition, 
and ad anxiety to prove his sinceriqr, 
by fitting out an expedition for the re¬ 
covery of Herat. All that he wanted 
was moD^» If the British amt 
would advance him two lakhs or ru¬ 
pees, be would speedily recover Oho- 


rian. The money was advanced; and 
of course Ghorian was not recovered. 
It was believed by the Mission that, 
whilst pretending to make his prepa¬ 
rations for the expedition, the Wuxeer 
was sending messes to the Feihian 
commandant at Ghorian, telling bila 
not to be under any wprehenslpt^ 
for that although the Biitkh 
him to recover the place, hi hid ii 
intention of making the attempt. 



m 


THE QEEAT GAME IN Ca^l^tjAXr ASIA* 


popcil^y f6r the Shah, at the .ejqpense of lahhi 

All I ean aaj i% that if a&ira aiie allowed 
k^fetttain on their preaent footing, I would rather that an abler 
malt , than myaelf were appointed to administer ihe afimrs of the 
ooiintry.* 

Ten days afterwards he wrote to the Governor- 
General: 

This, if the means are available, appears to me the time for 
aoeompliahing the great work which your Lordship has eom- 
mence^ and of e&otually frustrating the designs of Russia. 
Herat should now be taken possession of in the name of Shah 
Soojah. To leave it in the hands of its present possessors, after 
the fresh proofs of treachery and enmity towards us which they 
have displayed, would, in my humble opinion, be most dan¬ 
gerous. Herat may be said to be the pirot of all operations 
affecting the safety of our possessions and our interests in the 
East, and thence Balkh and Bokhara would be at all times acces¬ 
sible* The Sikhs should no longer be suffered to throw unrea¬ 
sonable obstacles in the way of our just and necessary objects, 
and if they really feel (as they are bound by treaty to do) an 
interest in the success of our operations, they should not object to 
the passage of our troops, or even to their location in the Punjaub, 
should suoh a measure be deemed conducive to the welfare of us 
both. Your Lordship will, I feel assured, forgive the freedom of 
these remarks. I am convinced that one grand ef&rt will place 
the safety of our interests on a firm and solid basis. .... 1 
shall only add, that should offensive operations against Herat be 
undertaken, X should not entertain the smallest doubt of their 
comidete and speedy success, especially as wc should have many 
friends in the country.t 