

* This, however, was not aniil the had then been tor SdUle lUbnihS la 
beginning of November. Loveday captivity. 

2m2 




THE OBBAT GAME IN CENTRAL ASIA. 

likens him. There is no denying that he has been supported 
hj infidek; and were we not here, he would adopt A%haii 
means of suppressing disturbances, such as we could not he a 
party to. To break faith with a rebel is not deemed a sin by the 
most moral Afghan; and assassination was an every-day occurrence. 
By the encouragement of blood-feuds, it is notorious that Dost 
Mahomed propped up the little power he had beyond the gates of 
Caubul.* 

It vexed Macnaghten’s spirit to think that he could 
not communicate to other British officers in Afghanistan 
his own overflowing faith in the popularity of the Shah, 
or his own respect for the royal person. From the very 
outset of the campaign the popular feeling throughout 
the army had been strong against Shah Soojah, and the 
conduct of his Majesty himself had not tended to lessen 
it.f And the worst of it was, that all kinds of stories 
about the haughty exclusiveness of the Shah, and the 
estimation in which he was held both by the British 
officers and by his own subjects, were perpetually 
making their way to Government House, and there 

* UnpMiahed Correspondence of happy to have saved government the 
Sir W* //. Macnaghten, trouble of passing orders on the ques- 

f About this time Macnagliten had tion, had Sir Willoughby so far sup- 
been much vexed by the conduct of ported me as to have conveyed a 
General Nott, vho, from first to last, censure to General Nott for the de- 
treated the Eoyal Family of Caubul liberate and gratuitous violence which 
with the aupremestcontempt. Nothing he had committed. The animus by 
could induce him to behave towards which he has been actuated is ap- 
any one of them with ordinar}' respect, parent throughout—lie relused to pay 
At last Macnaghten was compelled the Prince the common cpmpliment 
to lay his complaints before the Su- of calling upon him, although told 
preme Government. “It was with that such a civility was expected. 
inuchregret,^he wrote to Lord Auck- There is, 1 regret to say, a feeling 
land, “ tliat I felt compelled to refer too prevalent amongst the officers of 
to governsient a diierence of opinion the force against his Majesty, who is 
between myself and Sir Willoughby, considered the sole cause of titeir de¬ 
but if such an outrage as tliat commit- tention here—antbl hope that though 
ted by General Nott ia to be tolerated they may not be compelled to treat 
and justified, there roust be an end of the Royal Family with becoming re- 
our efforto to make it be b^ieved that spect, yet that tn^ will not 1^ per- 
Shih Soejah is king of this country, roitted to offer them a direct insult 
I know how embarnusing these re& with impunity.** 
rences are, and I should have been 



DEFENCE OF SHAH 800JAH. 


m 


finding ready acceptance. It irritated Macna'ghten to 
receive letters from Colvin^ commenting on failure, and 
hinting at mismanagement in Afghanistan, At last his 
patience gave way, and on the 4th of August he wrote 
to the Private Secretary: 