

to make terms. Anderson allowed but he is sent prisoner to Canbul.** 
him to go into Candahar to do so. The writer adds^ that ** three^ of 
He was successful, and received a the prisoners made over to Lieu- 
dress of honour from Major Leech, tenant Nicolson and the Shah-sadah 
and one Arom the Shah-zadah ruling Tiinour had their heads strudc ^ 
Candahar. He declared he had been but I have before me a specific 
instigated to reaistance by men in declaration, made by the Envoy in a! 
Calabar, and that he would show letter to Lord Auckland, dated Ko- 
their letters. He returned to Ander- vember 24, 1840, that ** not a single 
son, and then to his home; when political execution hae taken place 
hearing that Lieutenant Nicolson and since his Majesty’s accession 
Sha^adah Timour were near, re- power.” 

lying on ^e pledged words of our * Lieutenant Walpole Cleri^ii 
political agent. Major Leech, and the young officer of conspicuous gallantq^ 
Shah • zadah Futteh Jung, WuUoo and Seal. n ' ^ ^ 

Khan went to make his obedience, f The defence of the former place 
and was immeffii^yiKized and made , by Qpptaio Lewis Broviii end of 
priionet; His letters and dress pf latter by Captain Bean,' are aoHlfit 
honWy with a d^ngpio* the most noticeable, incldeiitix of iitfeO 

test ai^m siich pfooeoc^p irom war, oihI deservf more, extended:'boit 
Anfiospon, may have saved his heed, dco than can give, 4itoiilo>4Wt 

vox. I. 2 m 



690 


THB CfflBAT Q*M« IN CUTCBAIi ASIA. 


WM in ravolt. The youthful scm of Mehrab Eb&a Vras 
in the field. The tribes were flocking around him. The 
dbiief who had been set Up in his place was at Khelat. 
Lieutenant Loveday was with him. The defences of 
the place were miserably out of repair. The garrison 
mainly consisted of the chiefs own people. There were 
scarcely any means of resistance at their command, when 
the wild tribes, headed by the family of Nussur Ehan, 
came crowding around the walls of Khelat. The new 
chief was staunch and true. But there were traitors and 
eyil counsellors in the fort, and Loveday listened to bad 
advice. No succours could be sent to his relief, for our 
other positions in Upper Sindh were threatened by the 
hostile tribes. And so it happened that, after some days 
of beleaguerment, Khelat fell to the Brahoo chiefs.* 
Newaz Khan abdicated in favour of the youthful son of 
the chief who had fallen in the defence of his strong* 
hold; Loveday was made a prisoner; and when, some 


place. I am compelled to leave it to 
others to chronicle more minutely the 
progress of events in Upper Sindh. 

* Commenting on the neglect of all 
ordinary precautions, by which tlie in- 
•urrection had been suffered to make 
so much head in Upper Sindh, 
Burnes, on the 7th of August, wrote 
to Macnaghten: ** In April, 1639, 
when called upon by you to state 
officially what should be done to 
chastise the treachery of the chief of 
Khelat, 1 recommended, in common 
with jrourself and Lord Keane, his 
deposition ; but I as plainly stated in 
mv letter of the 10th of that month, 
* that while our troops continued at 
Shawl, this may be an unnecessary 