


541 


Eveiytbwg now waa ready. ConpUy, oarlys in Sep) 
tember, turned his face towards the Hlndoo-Koosh. 
There was a Mission of anoth^ kind theii setting to< 
wards those dreary regions. It was not a Mission of 
Peace. Colonel Dennie, who had distinguished himself 
at th head of the Ghuznee stormers, was about to 
maKsh, with the 35th Sepoy Begiment, to reinforce the 
Bameeah detachment, and to take the command of all 
the troops on the northern frontier.* 


* In one of Macnaghten's letters, 
at page 534, there is an allusion to a 
controversy forced upon him by Bri¬ 
gadier BoWts. The Brigadier was 
in chief command of Shah Soojah's 
regular force. He complained that 
his position was not respected by the 
Envoy, and his authority reduced to 
a mere sham. In consequence of this 
representation, government addressed 
Macnaghten on the subject, in the fol¬ 
lowing w<»d8: 

**Ilis Lordship in Council has a 
strong desire, in which he looks for 
your concurrence, to uphold the mi¬ 
litary position of Brigadier Boberts. 
whenever the regular troops shall be 
Withdrawn from Afghanistan, he will 
be your first nulitary authority; and 
every British officer employed in that 
country should be led to look to 
him. His Lordship can only express 
his approbation of the care which is 
exhibited bjr the Brigadier for the 
force committed to his charge, and 


he will be glad when ciroumstances 
will permit mm to car^ into efibet 
his views for its discipline and com- 
fort.” 

Fortified by^ this, the Brigadier 
pressed his opinions and his advice 
on the Envoy, in a manner which the 
latter resented. There was another 
controversy. The Brigadier wrote 
both to the Envoy and to the Gover¬ 
nor-General. He insisted that the 
people of the country were hostile to 
us; and that it was madness to post 
small detachments of troops in iso¬ 
lated fortresses. Macna^ten paid 
little attention to his representations, 
and never heeded his advice.— {Bri¬ 
gadier Roberts to Lord Auckland, Sej^ 
temher 30<A, 1840; and to Sir W, H. 
Macnaghten^ same date, MS, Records,"} 

The Brigadier was right; but the 
collision cost him his appointment. 
Plain truths were not very palatable 
in those days. 



ms THE LAST IVBCSCaSt oreow ItAHOlfEl}. 


CHAPTER H. 

tJtlil^ltoVembel:': 1840j 

The last Struggles of Dost Mahomed—The British in the Hindoo-Koosh— 
2^e Ameer's Family—Occ^ation of Bajgah—Disaster of Itamurd— 
Es^pe of Dost Mahomed—^Feverish State of Caubul—Dennie’s Brigade 
—Defeat of the Ameer—Sale in the Kohistan—^The Battle of Purwan** 
durrfidi^-Surrender of Dost Mahomed. 

It is time that to these regions of the EUndoo-Keosh 
attention should now again be directed. The little force 
which had been despatched thither in the autumn «f 
1830^ and had wintered among the caves of Bameean, 
was, by the coming in of spring, released from its 
inactivity. It was not Lord’s policy to be quiet. There 
Was Jubbar Rhan with the family of Dost Mahomed at 
Khooloom. Already it has been seen that the reception 
of these people had been the subject of correspondence 
between Lord and Macnaghten. But Jubbar Khan 
halted between two opinions. The winter passed away. 
The spring passed away. And still he remained with 
his brother’s family at EJiooloom. The WuUee, or chief 
of that place, was still true to the cause of the Ameer; 
and he permitted the Newab to maintain this numerous 
party by levying the transit duties of the place. 