

The ’^month of September brought with it no miti- 
gatioxi aS the anxieties of the Envoy. From the country 
beyond the BQndoo-Eooth came exaggerated tidily 
the successful progress of Dost Mahomed: 

2x2 



THE LAST SXBUGGLES OF DOST HABOHED. 

“jljt 18 reported to-day,” wrote IMacpaghten on the 3rd, “ that 
all 'l?oorkistan is in arms against the Feringhees, and the 
tidt here arc very hard at work. It is certain that Hybuk has 
fikllen to the Dost, and it is probable that Codrington will have 
to retire on Syghan. I put the best face on matters, and a slight 
success which our troops had at Bajgah over a party of the 
enemy, furnishes me with the foundation of a good story.”* 

But this good story soon became a bad one. On the 
30th of August the Oosbegs had attacked Btggah; and 
the Goorkha regiment, aided by Battray with a party of 
Afghan horse, had driven back the assailants. But it 
was plain that this isolated post, in the midst of a hostile 
population, was no longer tenable. It was expedient, 
therefore, to fall back upon Syghan. So Bajgah was 
evacuated. The Goorkhas commenced their retreat; 
and then it was pronounced that Syghan could not be 
held against a large body of hostile troops. Sio it was 
determined that they should fall back upon Bameean. 
They lost everything upon the retreat. We had pushed 
on our out-posts to these remote points, only to abandon 
them disactively on the first appearance of the enemy. 

But there was something far worse than this. A regi¬ 
ment of Afghan infantry had been raised, and Captain 
Hopkins commanded it. It was the commencement of 
an attempt to establish a national army for the support 
of the throne. Its loyalty was now to be put to the 
proof, by placing it within the reach of all those sinister 
influences which were most likely to undermine it. The 
result may be readily anticipated. The atmosphere of 
the Hindoo-Koosh, and the contiguity of Dost hfohmned, 
were fatal to the fidelity of the corps. The A fghan 
soldiers, headed by their commandant, Saleh Mahomed,f 

MS. CorreaptmdMce. JohnioBiluittheooiMlmotoftiKeEiiro- 

^ t Saleh Mahomed, of whom men- pean non-commissioned officers had 
tion will he made io a snhseqaent aisgosted him and his men, and 
|Murt of thb narrative, tcdd Captain moved them to desert* 



BBVERISn STATE OP CAt»0L. 54^^ 

dolled tHMr colours; and a number of them joined the 
enemy. 

On the 5th, the Envoy wrote to Lord Audcland: 

We have just heard that the whole country between this and 
the Oxus is up in favour of Dost Mahomed Khan. Our troops 
have retired upon Bameean, and if the enemy attack them in iStat 
position, 1 should have little fear of the result; but their tactics 
will probably be different. The Kohistan is ready to rise, and 
the whole town is full of traitors and disaffected characters. Our 
attention will probably be distracted by risings in difieiont direc¬ 
tions at the same time.* ^ 

Again, on the following day, he wrote in the same 
strain to Major Rawlinson : 