

Ever delighting in adventure, and prone to romance, 
he was at this time in a frame of mind which rendered 
him peculiarly greedy of excitement. A great sorrow 
was weighing heavily upon his heart. He sought relief 
in stirring occupation—in active adventure upon new 
scenes of enterprise; and when, for a time, it seemed 
that the unwillingness of the Supreme Government to 


* ** I feel very confident,” be wrote trary, others still selfish, but quali- 
to a fidend, ** about all our policy in fied with peace and generosity, all 
Central Asia, for 1 think that the de- made instrumental to good. See the 
signs of our government there are French in Africa, the English, Aus^ 
honest, and that they will work with trians, and Russians on the Bospho« 
a blessing from God, wbo seems now rus, forcing the Turks to be Enropeah 
to be breaking up all the barriers of under a smdow of Mabpmedaoisiq | 
the long-closed £ast, for the intro- and providing for the peaceful settle- 
duction of Christian kiiowledg|e and meot of the fairest and moat aacred 
peace. It is deeply interesting to countries in the world.’* —[Af& 
watch the efiects that are being pro- remndenee of Arthw CanoUif: Cm* 
duced by the exertions of the Euro- bid, May 16, 1840.] 
pean powers, somp selfish and con- 



SIS THE OBEAV OAMS Of tOmfiAL ASIA. 

ihe ll^os wiM sot to be oyeroome, he gnve 
ymt to the liveliest feelings of disappointment.* Mejmr 
BftwlinsoB mid Captain Oonolly wei« to have proceeded 
together to the camp of General Peroffiki. But the 
Muscovite expedition to Khiva was brought by cold and 
want to a mournful end at Ak-boulak, and there was 
soon no Busaian camp in Central Asia to which these 
entexprising offices could be despatched. But ConoUy, 
believing in his inmost heart that there was a mudi 
grandw game to be played in those remote regions than 
one suggested by the mere accidental circumstance of 
the Bussian advance, still clung to his conviction of the 
policy of the contemplated Mission, and earnestly em 
forced his opinions upon his political chief. Macnaghten 
listened—yielded—and indulging rather the wishes of 
his hiend than conforming to the dictates of his own 
judgment, recommended the enterprise to the favorable 
consideration of the Supreme Government; and acting 
upon certain passages in a letter from the Chief Secre¬ 
tary, which might be construed into an implied permis¬ 
sion, of a general rather than a specific character, ordered 
Conolly to proceed to Khiva and Kokund-f 

* " You will have seen Sir Wil- the following passages of a letter to 
liam*s flying seal despatch about our the Supreme Government: “ Re¬ 
mission to the Russian camp, and ferring, therefore, to the general per- 
on to Kokund, if permitted. I was mission accorded in the Secretary’s 
greatly disappointed when Lord Auck- letter of the 11th of May last, on the 
land's proliibitory letter arrived, for point of Captain Conollj’s mission to 
I had set my heart upon this nobly- Rokund, 1 nave come to the determi- 
stirring employipent $ and when the nation of at once sending off th^t 
chance of it seemed removed, I felt oflicer to the Court in question bj 
the blanh Uiat a mao must fbel who the route of Khiva, aod in compimy 
has a heavy grief as tliq first thing to withYakoobRai, the Khan Puzarut^ 
fall bach npon."— [ilfxSi, Corremond^nce envoy here, "ifho Is |m|doui tp return 
pf Ardwr ConeUy: Cqttbu^ May 80, home. Y^oqb l>e a good 