

This was a state of things which, in Lord’s and Mac- 
naghten’s opinions, had already lasted long enough. 
They were eager to bring the Newab to a decision. So, 
at the end oi May, or the beginning of Jxme, a party 



wxmAVa* cor siMAa. 


648 


wttf Mttt oat u&der Goptnin (Mrbett, MtsHBiMy ftnr tho 
puipose of Fecoanoitiing the pMMi tO the fiOlth Of OUf 
poidtioa at Bameean. But theVe was, dOttbUese, another 
object in view. It was believed that such a detnonstra- 
tilon Would have the effect of quickening the movements 
of Jobbar Khan, who had more than once been on the 
point of starting for the British post, but, overcome bv 
his irresolution, had struck his tents and returned. Al^ 
ready had some of the party of refugees left their 
asylum at Khooloom, and sought the hospitality of the 
British. Azim Khan, one of the Ameer’s sons, had 
“come inj” and some of the women and children, too, 
had passed on towards Caubul. But the Newab him¬ 
self still vacillated; and it was believed that a forward 
movement of our troops would stimulate him to come 
to a decision. 

The movement had the desired effect. At all events, 
Jubbar Khan set out for Bameean. Nor was this the 
only noticeable result of the reconnaissance. Beyond 
the valley or glen of Kamurd, which stretches north¬ 
ward from Syghan across the great mountain-range, 
lay the isolated fortress of Bajgah. When our recon¬ 
noitring party came upon this place, to their surprise 
they found it deserted. It belonged to one Syud Ma* 
homed, who now appeared, and declared that he had 
vacated it for the express purpose of making a tender 
of the fort to the British, as an outpost that might be 
of great service to them. A small party of infantry 
were accordingly placed in the fort, and the circum¬ 
stance was immediately reported to Dr. Lord. Lord 
grasped at the offer; and in the strongest terms recom¬ 
mended both to Cotton and Macnaghten the perma¬ 
nent occupation of the post. Bis aiguments prevised; 
and on the 29th of June the Shah's 4th Begiment, under 
Oaptaha Hay, was teat to garrison this isolated ftirt. 
On the Srd of July, Jubbar Khun arrived at BamiMNus 



544 THB T.AB T STBUOOIJBS 07 ZKMST MAHOMED. 

unth tbe aemainiiig members of^tbe Ameer’s, 
of retamers 

li Soon became obvious that the occupatioD.pf Bajgah 
Wfis a mistake. Sturt, the engineer, who )ia4 .b^,spnt 
to survey the passes, pronounced upon.^ ioh^tuess af; 
a military post. It was plain, too, that the temper of 
the surrounding tribes was very different from that :0^. 
the population about Bameean. At the latter place: 
soldiery and the peasantry were on the best possible 
terms. About Bajgah the people looked upon theuew 
corners with a jealous eye. All the efforts of Captain 
Hay to establish a friendly intercourse between himself 
and the inhabitants failed They would not bring in 
grain; they would not bring in forage. Soon their hos¬ 
tility began to evince itself in a more alarming manner. 
“ On the extreme summits of the northern hills overlook¬ 
ing Bajgah, were frequently seen groups of horsemen, 
apparently watching the movements of the people in the 
deep glen below.”* 