

A week later, and it had become still more apparent 
that, even in the very neighbourhood of the capital, 
sedition was weaving plots for the subversion of the att- 
thoiity of the Shah; and that the Sikhs were intriguing 
from a distance for the restoration of Dost Mahomed. 
On the 19th of August, the Envoy wrote to the same 
correspondent; 

We have intercepted a letter which, if genuine (as I have every 
reason to believe it to be), implicates many chiefs in this quarter 
as meditating an insurrection in favour of the DostI It distinctly 
states that Nao Nahal Singh has promised pecuniary aid in fur¬ 
therance of the derign. 1 am now just going to his Majesty to 
consult as to what should be done.t 

It was time, indeed, that the King and the Envoy 
should take counsel together. Dost Mahomed had es¬ 
caped from Bokhara. 

For a while, the fugitive Ameer had tasted the 
bitterness of close confinement in the city of Bokhara. 
Afzul Khan and Akbar Khan shared his captivity. 
We know how the Khan of this inhospitable place is 
wont to treat his Christian guests. His Mahomedan 
visitors, whom he at first received with an outside 
show of kindness, were dealt with somewhat more 
leniently. But the natural ferocity of the man was 
not to be kept down. .Dost Mahomed nearly became 
the victim of a treacherous murder. Baffled in this 
attempt on the life of his prisoners, and not daring 
openly to slay them, he kept them for a time under 
strict surveillance, forbidding them even to repair to 
worship in the mosques. This inhospitable treatment 
seems to have called forth a remonstrance from the Shah 
of Persia, in consequence of which greater liberty was 
allowed to the unfortunate Princes. They made the 
* MS. Corrapmieiice. f Ibid. 



B80APB OV DOST^KABQUXD. 


547 


most of &e rdlaxatioDt «nd eifected th^ esca^ie. Many 
Tomantio incidents are told about this flight from 
Bokhara. The horse on which the Ameer fled fdl 
exhausted l)y the way-side. So he transferred him- 
sdf to a caravan, which he chanced to overtake; and 
escaped detection only by dyeing his beard with ink* 
The WuUee of Khooloom, with unshaken fidelity, opened 
his arms to receive his old ally, and placed all his re¬ 
sources at his command. 

It was not long before the Ameer again found him¬ 
self at the head of a considerable force. His family, 
with the exceptioa4>f the two sons, who had shared his 
captivity in Bokhara, were in the hands of the British. 
He knew the danger of his determined course; and, 
when reminded that his wives and children were in our 
power, sorrowfully replied, “ I have no family; I have 
buried my wives and children.” As the Oosbeg fighting 
men flocked to the standards of Dost Mahomed and the 
Wullee of Khooloom, the hopes of the former seemed to 
rise; and his determination to strike a vigorous blow for 
the recovery of his lost empire, gathered strength and 
consistency. To have cut up the Bameean detachment, 
and emeiging from the Hindoo-Koosh, to have appeared 
on the plains below flushed with victory, raising the old 
war-cry in the name of the Prophet, and profiting by the 
unpopularity of Shah Soojah and his supporters, in that 
part of the country, would have been a mighty achieve¬ 
ment—one which would have rendered easy his trium¬ 
phant pn^ress to the very walls of the capital. He de¬ 
termined to make the eflbrt; and early in September 
advanced upon Bameean, with a force of six or eight 
thousand men. 