

t Cauhul, August 4, 1840.—^ Hip, 
hip, hurrah! Uz ikhbal^hjenab, I do 
believe that 1 am fairly going now, so 
accept my best thanks ror your con¬ 
gratulations. 1 receive th8m with a 
pang of real regret that yon are not 
going with me; but Todd bids me be 
eommrted with the thou^ts of your 
realised important elevation t sO Pit 
utter no vain sorrow. Nothing cto 



THE OBBAT OABIE IN CKSnlBAli ASIA. 

i^e cause. He was full of impetuous enthusiasm. He 
Was eager that the British ^vemment should play 
” the grand game” in Central Asia, and declared that a 
mission so righteous in its objects must prosper in his 
hands. His spirits rose, as he looked into the future; 
and, full of generous enthusiasm, he began to mal® pre¬ 
parations for his journey.* An ambassador from Shah 
Soojah was to accompany him. But it was long before 
the King could select from the people about his Court 
one to whom he could entrust so responsible a duty. 
At last, after much hesitation, his choice fell upon Allah- 
dad Khan, Populzye—a little, scrubby-looking, sallow¬ 
faced man, with a busy look and a restless eye, believed 
to be skilful in political intrigue, and as little likely to 
betray his trust as any man about the Court. He left 
his family and his money behind him, and these, as the 
Shah significantly said, were the best guarantees for his 
good conduct. 


be done a>head, unless Afghanistan is If the British Government would 
settled ; and I have confident liope of only play the grand game; — help 
your being highly instrumental to this Russia cordially to all that she has a 
desirable end/*—[Af5. Correspondence right to expect—shake hands with 
of Arthur ConoUy,'} Persia—get her all possible amends 

♦ “ Caubul, August 22.—^We are from the Oosbegs, and secure her 
just on the wing; and 1 shall make such a frontier as would both keep 
the best of my way to the two capitals these man - stealers and savages 
for which 1 carry credentials. Shakes- in wholesome check, and take away 
pear has really done wonders; and her pretext for pushing herself and 
if we can follow up the good impres- letting herself be pushed on to the 
sions which he and Abbott have Oxus—force the Bokhara Ameer to 
made, and the British Government be just to us, the Afghans, and the 
will give pecuniary aid, we may keep other Oosbegs states, and his own 
the Oroos (Russians) out of Toor- kingdom—but why go on; you know 
kistan altogether; and bring about my, at ai^ rate in one sense, enl^ed 
a fine order of things there for every views. fnshaUah ! The expediency 
party concerned. It is a work which —nay, the necessity of them will lie 
must prosper; and I only wish again seen, and we shall play the noble 
that you were to be of the party to part that the first Chnstian nation of 
accomplish it; but, as I said bemre, the world ought to fill .’*—{Captain 
you occupy a high and useful station, ConoUy to Maw BiatoUMon, MS, 
and can’t be at two places at <mce. Correspondence^ 



CSOIKWI.t’b 