



THE GREAT GAME IN CENTRAL ASIA. 


neighbourhood. They are inefficieiit and wtmi cut, 
and both officers and men are grumbling and diso<Hitented. 
tn the present state of afiairs it would be very hazardous to 
admit of their return, unless their places were filled by fresh 
troops, and a relief would enable us to settle with promptitude 
the Bajor afiairs, and to place our relations with the Khy- 
buxees on a firmer bans. Then, should Dost Mahomed come 
in, he will have to be sent to India, and in the present state 
of Sikh feeling, I doubt if it would be prudent to send him 
across the Punjaub with only a regiment for his escort. We have 
a rumour very generally credited that Colonel Stoddart has been 
poisoned by the Ameer of Bokhara, but I yet hope that it will 
prove incorrect. On the Ghllzye afiairs alluded to in your Lord¬ 
ship’s letter of the 16th, I have this day written to Mr. Colvin. 
In a day or two it is my intention to send up officially, with my 
comments, a paper handed to me by Sir A. Burnes, on the pre¬ 
sent state and future prospects of this country. I hope to show 
that, all things considered, we are in as prosperous a condition as 
could have been expected. Sir A. of course wishes to prove the 
contrary, since by doing so, when he succeeds me, his failures 
would thus find excuse and his success additional credit. This 
is all natural enough. I have been exposed to a thousand inter¬ 
ruptions whilst writing this, and beg pardon if I have used too 
much freedom. I remain, &c., 

W. H. Macnaghten.* 

In a letter despatched a few days afterwards to Lord 
Auckland, Macnaghten wrote: ‘^I trust the Russians 
may not come to Khiva this year, for we have quite 
enough on our hands without them. Captam Conolly 
starts in a few days. I trust your Lordship will have 
the goodness to direct that both he, |ihd Captain Ab¬ 
bott be gazetted as lieutenant-colonels whilst serving in 
Toorkistan.*’ There had gone forth a Mission—and an 
ill-omened one, to Bokhara—th^e had gone forth two 
MimSns to Khiva^^^d now one was to be despatched 
to the intervening s^&fe Vif Kokund. 

^ MS, CarreqMmdaw^ of Sir W, H, MaenaghUn, 



AlliHDK 


m 


Eagestfy did Arthur Con<^ the idea of this 
Ec^omd Ifiasicm. He was a man of an earnest, impul¬ 
sive nature, running over with the purest fee^ngs of 
benevolence, and glowing with the most intense longings 
after the civilisation and evangelisation of the human 
race. He believed that the great Central-Asian move¬ 
ment was designed by Providence to break down the 
huge walls of Mahomedanism which begirt the shining 
East, and to substitute civilisation, liberty, and peace, fi>r 
barbarism, slavery, and strife. He was a visionary; but 
one of the noblest order; and when he looked out 
beyond the great barrier of the Hindoo-Koosh, traversed 
in imagination the desert of Merve, and visited the bar¬ 
barous Courts of the Khans of Khiva, Kokund, and Bok¬ 
hara, he never doubted for a moment that the mission 
which he was about to undertake was one of the highest 
and holiest with which a Christian officer could be en¬ 
trusted.* 