

We are in a stew here—perhaps greater than the occasion 
warrants; but our situation is far from comfortable. It is reported 
that the whole country on this side the Oxus is up in favour 
of the Dost, who, with the Wullee, is certainly advancing in 
great strength; so much so that our troops have been obliged to 
fall back upon Bameean, whilst we have a formidable band of 
conspirators in the city, and the Kohistan is ripe for revolt. 
These matters of course engross my serious attention, and I have 

about fifty chits to answer every half hour.We are 

wretchedly weak, having only three infantry regiments, includ¬ 
ing one of the Shah’s. Wc have been compelled to send off the 
35th to reinforce the garrison at Bameean, but still we arc strong 
enough, I hope, in a fur field, to lick all the Moofsids that could 
be brought against us.t 

Macnaghten’s worst fears were confinned. Caubul 
now seemed to be on the eve of an insurrection. On 
the 9th, the Envoy, in perturbation of mind, wrote again 
to Bawlinaon at Candahar: 

The town is in a very feverish state. Some people are shutting 
up their shops; others, sending their families away; end seme 
active measures must soon be taken for stopping the panic. We 
have taken poaMnon of the gate of the Balia Hissar by a guard 
from Craigie's regiment, and brought the mountain train ihside 

* MS. Corr&tpondeMce. Ihid 



550 THE LAST STBTTOGLES OE DOST MASOMED. 


the dtadeU The apparently inaignificant &ct of Mesdamos 
Trevor and Marsh having come up . from the Balia Hissar from 
ihe town, has created a great sexisation. We are sending out a 
party to watch the Charekar Pass, and Sanders goes with them; 
so that between force and conciliation and intrigue (in which art, 
I am sorry to tell you, I have now taken my degree), I hope we 
shall be more than a match for the Dost. But I have an anxious 
time of it, as you may imagine. 

I had a letter from Lord Auckland yesterday, and from that I 
gather that his Lordship’s intentions are essentially pacific, both 
as regards Herat and the Punjaub* Oh! for a Wellesley or a 
Hastings at this juncture. By a most ingenious process, he has 
substituted the cause for the effect, or rather the e£^t for the 
cause. He says, so long as we are continually agitating the 
question of taking possession of Peshawur and Herat, we cannot 
expect honest co-operation from the powers owning those places; 
thus overlooking, or affecting to overlook, the fact, that but for 
the dishonesty of those powers the question would never have 
been contemplated by us. This drivelling is beneath contempt. 
I shall now send up the proofs I have obtained (and they are 
tolerably strong) of the perfidy of the Sikhs without note or 
comment, and leave the rest to Providence. I shall adopt the 
same course with regard to the intrigues of Yar Mahomed. 

Day after day, the clouds gathering over C^nbul grew 
denser and darker. On the 12th, Macna^ten wrote to 
the Governor-General: 

MtLosd, Ikubul, Sept 12, 184a 