


♦ Writing on the let of October, 
the Envoy Sius sketched the aspect 
of affairs: “ The result of the vic¬ 
tory at Bameean has not been bj any 
means such as I could have wished. 
Dost Mahomed will not come in, and 
the Wullee of Khooloom will not gnve 
him up. The latter has omitted to 
T6pij to Dr. Lord's last overture, so 
I imagine we must retreat from 
8yghan, re infectQ, Two of the Dost's 
sons have escaped from Ghizni, and 
thev will no doubt endeavour, and 
probably wHh success, to raise a dis¬ 


turbance in the Ghilzye country. In 
short, the aspect of imairs is by no 
means agree^le, and we shall have 
abundance of work on our hands for 
next season. B^ore, Khooloom, and 
divers other places it will be requi¬ 
site to visit with our arms before 
the country can be called settled. 
Amongst a bigoted pec^e aoeustom- 
ed to anardiy, it never can be diffi¬ 
cult to scatter the seeds of rebellion.** 
—[ Carreaptmdenee ef Sir W* H. 

MacnaghUn,\ 



icofrainm cw SBB AinaiB. 


m 

attack, the enemy, dreadii^ the recommencement 
of hostilitiee, the fort in the hands of the beeaegera 
The works were destroyed; and so fer the movement 
was snccessfnl—^but the failure of the assatilt deeply 
mortified the Envoy. “ I have bad news to send you,” 
he wrote on the 4th of October; ‘^our arms have met 
with a reverse at Joolgah in the Kohistan.* A storm 
and escalade was attempted, but it would not do. The 
enemy evacuated the place in the evening; but 1 fear that 
the whole of the Moofisids (rebels) have escaped. .... 
Bumes represents the country as being in a very unsettled 
state; and I fear that it will be necessary for his Majesty 
to remain in Caubul this winter. I intend to write and 
tell Lord Auckland that he must send us reinforcements 
vid the Punjaub. The Dost was last heard of at Eanjau; 
but I have no doubt of his soon entering Nijrow. 
Would it be justifiable to set a price on this feUow’s 
head? We have intercepted several letters from him, 
irom all of which it appears that he meditates fighting 
with us so long as the breath is iu his body.” 

During that month of October, to the annoyance and 
embarrassment of the political officers and the discom¬ 
fort of the troops, Dost Mahomed was flitting about 
fi:om place to place, with no intelligible plan of action to 
give it any shape and consistency to our countervaUing 
movements. Various were the reports which reached 
the British camp—various the accoimts of the nature of 
his movements and the number of his adherents. Many 
of these were of the most conflicting character;—and 
the best-informed officers in the British camp were beset 

* MS, Corretpondence of Sir W, have heard of the diattier at 
JET. Macnaghten. The todc a which I think was a worse afiair wan 

▼etj gloomy view of this anair. In tiiat of Fushoot.*’ 
aamer he says, ^You will 



Tint VALIi OF DOST MABOMED. 


tritii doubt and peiplexity. On the lldi of October it 
WAS known that the Dost was in the vall^ of Ghore- 
bund. “ I believe that there can be little or no doubt;” 
wrote Sir William Macnaghten to Lord Auckland, on 
the following day, ^ of Dost Mahomed’s having entered 
Ghorebund, and of his being at this moment within 
forty or fifty miles distance from Caubul. It is impos¬ 
sible to say what may be the effect of his coming into 
this neighbourhood. But I apprehend very serious con¬ 
sequences, fot both the town of Caubul and the country 
are ripe for revolt. Dr. Lord writes that, as soon as 
Dost Mahomed heard of Mr. Rattray’s approach, he said 
he would not remain to be sold to the Feringhees, and 
immediately took the road to Ghorebund. I cannot 
ascertain how many men he has with him—some ac¬ 
counts say ten thousand, others, three hundred., The last 
is, I dare say, nearer the mark—^but what I dread is, the 
effect of his incessant intrigues (whilst he is so near us) 
upon the minds of the population.” Such, indeed, at ^is 
time, were the gloomy forebodings which overahadowed 
the minds of the political chiefs, that they predicted the 
necessity of concentrating the troops in the Balia Hissar 
of Caubul, and actually began to talk of making piepara- 
tions for a siege. Guns were mounted on the citadel to 
overawe the town. The guards were everywhere in¬ 
creased. The Bameean detachment was ordered to 
return to the capital with all possible despatch. And 
Sir William Macnaghten began to talk about submit¬ 
ting to the disgrace of being shut up in Caubul for a 
time.” It was, indeed, a critical moment. It has been 
seen that the Envoy had begun to contemplate the expe¬ 
diency of soling a price on the Ameer’s head. It is a 
proof alike of the dangers that beset our poaticm in 
Afghanistan, and the disturbing effects they had wrought 