

Dost Mahomed was now in the Nijrow country. His 
cause seemed to gather strength. Even some of Shah 
Soojah’s soldiers deserted their British officers and flocked 
to the Ameer’s standard. On the 27th of October he 
broke ground, and moved down towards the capital. On 
the 29th, intelligence of his movements having reached 
the British camp at Bhag-alum, the force marched out to 
intercept the enemy. The two following days were em¬ 
ployed by the engineer officers in reconnoitring and but- 



IKMSt MAHOKBD IN NUBOVr. 


56S 


Teying the surrounding country ; and on the 1st of 
November the force encamped before Meer-Musjedee’s 
fort. Here it was ascertained that they were in the 
neighbourhood of the enemy, and preparations were 
made to give battle to the Ameer and his adherents. 

On the 2nd of November—a day which has obtained 
a melancholy celebrity in the annals of the English in 
Afghanistan—the British force came at last in sight of 
the enemy. The army of the Ameer was posted in 
the valley of Purwandurrah. The Nijrow hills were 
bristling with the armed population of a hostile country. 
Unprepared for the conflict, Dost Mahomed had no 
design on that November morning of giving battle to the 
Feringhees. An unexpected movement precipitated the 
collision. On the first appearance of the British troops 
the Ameer evacuated the village of Purwandurrah and 
the neighbouring forts; and was moving off to a position 
on some elevated ground commanded by a steep hill to 
the rearward, when, at the suggestion of Dr. Lord, the 
British cavalry were moved forward to outflank the 
Afghan horse. What followed is one of the most 
exciting, as it is one of the most melancholy inci¬ 
dents of the Afghan war. It was a clear bright 
morning. The yellow foliage of autumn glittered like 
gold in the broad sunlight. The opposite hills were 
alive with the enemy. The crisp fresh air, so bracing 
and invigorating to the human frame, seemed to breathe 
confidence and courage. Dost Mahomed, who, since his 
defeat at Bameean, had been often heard of, but never 
seen, by the British troops, and who seemed to elude the 
grasp of the Army of Occupation like an ignis fatuus, 
was now actually within their reach. It ought to have 
been an hour of triumph. It was one of humiliation. 
The Afghans were on the hills skirting one side of the 
pass; the British troops were on the opposite declivity. 

2o 2 



564 THE IiAST STBUGGIiES OF DOST MAHOMED. 


l>OBt Mahomed saw our cavalry advancing, and from that 
moment cast behind him all thought of retreat. At 
the head of a small band of horsemen, strong, sturdy 
A%hans, but badly mounted, he prepared to meet his 
assailants. Beside him rode the bearer of the blue 
standard which marked his place in the battle. He 
pointed to it; reined in his horse; then snatching the 
white lunghi from his head, stood up in his stirrups un¬ 
covered before his followers, and called upon them, in 
the name of God and the Prophet, to drive the cursed 
Kaffirs from the country of the faithful. “ Follow me,” he 
cried aloud, “ or I am a lost man.” Slowly, but steadily, 
the Afghan horsemen advanced. The English officers, 
who led our cavalry to the attack, covered themselves 
with glory. The native troopers fled like sheep. Em¬ 
boldened by the craven conduct of the British cavalry, 
the Afghan horsemen rode forward, driving their enemy 
before them, and charging right up to the position of the 
British, until almost within reach of our guns.* The 
Afghan sabres told, with cruel efiect, upon our mounted 
men. Lieutenants Broadfoot and Crispin were cut to 
pieces. A treacherous shot from a neighbouring bastion 
brought Dr. Lord to the ground; and the dagger of 
the assassin completed the work of death. Captains 
Fraser and Ponsonby, whose gallantry has never been 
surpassed even in the annals of old Roman heroism, still 
live to show their honourable scars; and tb tell, with 
mingled pride and humiliation, the story of that melan¬ 
choly day. 