



5S4 T8B 9AUj ov dost hahomsd. 

stood the fixe; but the gonenobly serredy and the 
shrapnel practioe told with tarifio effect on dense bodies 
nfmen who bad nothing to give back in return. The 
Oosb^ fell back, and, as they retreated, the guns were 
pushed forward; and first from one distance, then fix)m 
another, opened a destructive fire upon the wavering 
disconcerted enemy. The Oosbeg force was soon broken 
to pieces; and our cavahy were then let slip in pursuit. 
Following the disordered masses for some miles along 
the defile, they cut down large numbers of the enemy, 
and dispersed them in all directions. Dost Mahomed 
and his son are said to have o>ved their lives to the 
fieetness of their horses. 

Intelligence of this victory soon reached Caubul, and 
was received with the liveliest emotions of joy by the 
British Resident. His spirits rose at once. Again he 
began to look at the present without alarm, and into 
the future without despondency. Never was a victory so 
much wanted as in that month of September. Writing 
to Major Rawlinson, on the 21st, he said : 

Before 1 close this, I may be able to tell you of some of the 
consequences of this glorious success. It has enabled me, in the 
mean time, to breathe a little more freely. I can assure you I was 
beginning to be very nervous, and I entertained great apprehen¬ 
sion that Afghanistan was about to be convulsed from one end to 
the other. Hardly an hour passed without brkiging me some 
unpleasant intelUgence, and the Mufrids in all quarters were be¬ 
coming Kummun basta. The Dost had only one weapon—that 
was religion, and he certunly wielded it most skilfully. I think 
the Oosbegs will now abandon him. Lord has offered handsome 
terms to the WuUee, and should this fail, I am not without hope 
that Meer Mahomed Beg will seize the present opportunity of 
revenging himself on his old enemy. .... 

The attempt to detach the WuUee of Khooloom finm 
hia alliance with Dost Mahomed was crowned with com- 
{dete succ^ Doubtlm Mackenme’e guns were the great 




BD-iimutAiica 09 Am asoodi. 


5S5 


suad're power. The battle of Bameean must ha^e shown 
theOosbeg oMef the hopelessness of hirther reedstanoe ; 
and as Dennie was moving on to' Syghan, it was prudent 
to come at once to terms. Lieutenant Battray was sent 
forward to arrange a meeting between the Wtillee and 
Dr. Lord; and on the 28th of September, on the summit 
of the Dundun-i-Shikun, the British political agent and 
the Oosbeg chief entered into engagements, by which the 
latter bound himself not to harbour or assist Dost Ma¬ 
homed, or any member of his family. The country to 
the south of Syghan was yielded to Shah Soojah; that 
to the north of it to the Wullee; and a telescope, which 
he said had been promised, and which he was hurt at 
not having received before, was given to the latter in 
completion of the bargain. 

“I am like a wooden spoon,” said Dost Mahomed; 
“ you may throw me hither and thither, but I shall not 
be hurt.” Defeated on the Hindoo-Koosh, he reappeared 
in the Kohistan. Disaffection was rife throughout that 
part of the Douranee Empire. The chiefe had begun to 
feel the evils of the new revenue system, or rather the 
manner of its administration, which rendered the tax- 
gatherer something more than a name. Supported by 
British power, the executive officers of the Shah no 
longer stood in awe of the petty chieitains, who soon 
began to murmur against the change of government, and 
to lay all their grievances at the door of the Feringhees. 
Thus irritated and exasperated, they were in a temper 
to welcome back the Barukzye Sirdar. More than one 
fortress was in the hand of a recusant chief; and it was 
appreh^ded that the presence of Dost Mahomed would 
set the whole country in a blaze.* 