



KXXSPSBAflON OP TRS KtNO. 86t 

upon ihe'tnmds of our poHtical ministers, that ihich was 
the ^miasperalaon produced by thfe apparent success of 
Dost Mahomed, even upon the kindly nature of the 
Envoy, that he talked about “ showing no mercy to the 
man who was the author of all the evil now distracting 
the country.” Shah Soojah had long been eager to 
“ hang the dog;” and now, in conversation with Mac- 
naghten, he taunted him with his mistaken leniency. 
“ I suppose you would, even now,” said the King, “ if I 
were to catch the dog, prevent me from hanging him.” 
“ It will be time enough,” said the Envo)’’, “ to talk about 
that when your Majesty has caught him.” The British 
minister was about to take his leave, when the Shah 
arrested him, and said: “You know I have from the first 
expressed to you a mean opinion of my own countrymen. 
If you want further proofs, look at that from my own 
brother.” He then placed in the Envoy’s hands an in¬ 
tercepted letter to the address of the Barukzye chief, 
Sultan Mahomed, proposing that, with his aid, and that 
of the Sikhs, Shah Zemaun should be placed on the 
throne, as Shah Soojah had made over the country to 
the dominion of infidels. The letter bore the seal of the 
old blind king himself. It was on the following day 
that the Envoy wrote to the Governor-General that no 
mercy should be shown to the Ameer; but he added, 
“ should he be so fortunate as to secure the person 
of Dost Mahomed, I shall request his Majesty not to 
execute him till I can ascertain yoiu: Lordship’s senti¬ 
ments.”* 

In the mean while, the force under Sir Bobert Sale had 
moved, in pursuit of the Dost, into the Nijrow country. 
Ckj the 18th they were encamped near Kardurrilb; and 
on the 20th were meditating an attack on the plkdA 

.'.U '' 

* Sir W, B, Macnaghten to Lord Auckland: October 31, 1840. Vnpuh^ 
liahed Correspondence. 

VOL. I. 2 O 



60S THE IJUST STBUGGLES OF DOST MAHOMED. 

The Envoy, who watched their procee<^gs with extreme 
anxiety, was impatient of the seeming dilatoriness of their 
movements ; and wrote to one of his colleagues; “ Bumes 
and Sale, with nearly 2000 good infantry, are sitting down 
before a fortified position about twenty miles distant, 
and are afraid to attack it. The enemy made an attack 
upon them the night before last—killed and wounded 
some of our people, and got off unscathed. All this is 
very bad.” But it was not in reality so bad as it seemed 
to the perplexed and anxious minister at Caubul. Whilst 
he was writing, preparations were in progress for an 
attack, on the following day. On the morning of the 
21st the force was ready and eager for action. But, 
as the troops advanced, fresh and in good spirits, upon 
Kardurrah, a party of villagers met them with tidings 
to the effect that the enemy had abandoned their position, 
and that the place was without an inhabitant. If any 
feelings of mortification welled up on the discovery that 
the garrison had escaped our toils, the}'^ very quickly sub¬ 
sided. It was plain that the enemy had m^e a great 
mistake, and that the British force had providentially 
been delivered from a great danger. The position that 
the “ rebels ” had abandoned was one of uncommon 
strength, and had it been defended with any spirit, could 
only have been carried, if at all, after a large expenditure 
of life. 