

1 am much fatigued, having been severely worked the 
whole day; but I write these few lines just to apprise your Lord- 
that affairs in this quarter have the worst posmhle appearance. 
THie whole Kohistan is reported to be ripe for revolt, though pos- 
ribly in this there may be some exaggeration; and we hear of re¬ 
solutions to rise in other parts of the country. But the worst 
n^rs of all is that received fiom Dr. Lord this morning, to the 
eflbct that an entire compi^ of Captain Hopkins’s corps has gone 
off mth its aims and aocouwements to join Dost Mahomed Khan, 
•xid it is fully eiqpected that their example will be followed by the 
whole regiment Dost Mahomed Khan is said to be advandng 



DBSPoin>»rcT m dost mahoicbd. 


551 


with his foioe; but Dr. Lord’s iatelligenoe seema very de¬ 
fective. I hsve just had a note from Sir W. Oottbn, in which he 
observes: I really think the time has now arrived for you and I 
to tell Lord Auckland, totidem verUs^ that oircumslati6ea have 
proved incontestibly that there is no Afghan army, and that unless 
the Bengal troops are instantly strenglhened, we cannot hold the 
country.” I have long since, and strongly and repeatedly, urged 
my opinion that another brigade should be sent to us. I have 
al^ pointed out that there is no such thing as an A%han army, 
and I have incessantly urged my earnest opinion to the efl^t that 
our position here would be most perilous unless a stop Were put 
to Sikh intrigues. They have now been allowed to go on till the 
country is thoroughly convulsed by them. Dp to this raomenl 
Syud Mahomed Khan, one of the Barukzye triumvirate, is carry¬ 
ing into effect his iniquitous designs against his Majesty’s Govern¬ 
ment. Caubul is full of Sikh emissaries, and letters were yeste]^• 
day intercepted from the Sikh agent to the address, amongst 
others, of Nao Nehal Singh, which clearly shows the anitnus by 
which the Sikhs are actuated towards their allies of the Tripartite 
treaty. The Sikh agent acknowledged the letters were his own. 
He did not know they had been opened. Copies of these may, T 
hope, be sent down officially to-morrow. 

I have the honour to be, &c., &c., 

W. H. Macnaghten. 

The 18th of September was a memorable day. It was 
the turning-point of our fortunes in Afghanistan. On 
that day the anxieties of the British minister were at 
their height. Never was the aspect of affairs more 
threatening—never was there so little to cheer and en¬ 
courage the perplexed political chief. The pale cast of 
despondency was over all his thoughts. His physical 
and mental energies were alike beginning to fail. At 
no period of my life,” he wrote on that 18th of Septem¬ 
ber, do I remember baying been so much harassed in 
body and mind as during the past month. Nor is tny 
yet much lessened. The Aj%hans as^e gun¬ 
powder, and the Dost is a lighted match. Ofhiswhens- 
abouts we are wonderfiiUy ignorant. I have no hope 



I 



attack Bameeaa, and I have 


hB nill fhmv himself into the Kobistfui, it is 