

Hepert. 



miwABp Qom»m> 


m 


and du^ctcd' its movements. At ^ entrance of the 
Ghorehund Pass was a fortified vUlage* and a chain of 
detached foi$s, belonging to a hostile chief, who was 
known to be in league with the fagitiye Ameer. The 
name of this place was Tootundurrah. On the 29th of 
September, Sale invested the enemy’s position. There< 
sistance was very slight. The fire of our guns and the 
advance of the infantry column soon compelled its eva¬ 
cuation, and the place was speedily in possession of the 
British troops. The success was complete, and would 
have be^i dieaply purchased; but one fell there, who^ 
mourned in anguish of spirit by the Envoy, was lamented 
by the whole force. Edward ConoUy, a lieutenant of 
cavalry, one of three accomplished and enterprising 
brothers who had followed the fortunes of their distin¬ 
guished relative, Sir William Macnaghten, and obtained 
employment under the British Mission, had on that very 
morning joined Sale’s force as a volunteer. He was act¬ 
ing as aide-de-camp to the General; when, as the column 
advanced, he was struck down by a shot fi'om the 
enemy’s position. The bullet entered his heart. “ My 
mind was in too disturbed a state all day yesterday,” wrote 
the Envoy on the 1st of October, “ to admit of my 
writing to you. Poor Edward ConoUy (Arthur’s next 
brother) has been kiUed by a dubious hand at a petty 
fortress in Kohirtan. Never did a nobler or a kinder 
spirit inhabit a human fiame. Poor feUowI he was shot 
through the heart, and 1 believe he was the only m- 
dividual oa our side killed during the operations of the 
29th, when three fcnts belonging to the chief rebel in 
the country w«a taken. The whole of the chi^ 
the Eohistan have now taken to flight. This is a resvilt ' 
I by no means anticipated; my wisii was to piinkih 
some, and to conciliate others. As it is, I fear thatBc^t ! 
Mahomed Khan wiU now be received by them ydth 



S58 CTB WALL or DOST MAHiTMMW). 

open anas. There never was such a set villains. 
They came in here, and bound themselves to s^ve the 
fthah under the most solemn oaths conceivable, and yet 
they had not returned to their homes half an hour 
before they reopened thdr correspondence with Dost 
Mahomed. Their punishment became indispensable, for 
they would shortly have had Dost Mahomed amongst 
them; and now there is a possibility of their having im¬ 
bibed BO wholesome a terror of our arms, as to prevent 
their ever again assuming an offensive attitude.”* 

Having destroyed the defences of Tootundurrah, Sale 
advanced on the 3rd of October to the attack of Joolgah 
—another fortified position held by the Kohistanee 
rebels. The walls of this place were too thick to be 
eadly breached, and too high to be easily escaladed. 
The guns were light; the scaling ladders were short; 
and the enemy on the crest of the breach offered the 
most determined resistance. The storming party, led by 
Colonel Tronson, of the 13th Light Infantry, advanced 
to the attack with a desperate gallantry worthy of a 
more distinguished success. Many of the leading men 
were shot dead in the breach; the stru^le to efiect a 
lodgment was ineffectual; and the column was even¬ 
tually withdrawn. Bepulsed, but not disheartened by 
failure, the British troops were preparing to renew the 