

He scorned to have become reconciled to his fate. 
He had no wish, he said, to escape. Force, indeed, would 
not drive him to abandon the refuge he had voluntarily 
sought. With Macnaghten he conversed freely of his 
past history ; and raised, by the recital alike of his 
doings and his sufferings, the strongest feelings of admi¬ 
ration and compassion in the Envoy’s breast. Every 
effort was made to soothe the Ameer’s feelings; and he 
soon became serene and cheerful. A report that it was 
the design of our government to banish him to London, 
disturbed his equanimity for a time; but he was soon 
reassured by the promises of the Envoy, and began to 
look forward with hopefulness to a life of repose and 
security in the British dominions.* ** 

• “ The Dost,” wrote Sir W. Mao- my guarding hhn, as he would not go 
naghteoi on the 6th of November, were I even to attempt his expulsion 

** occupies a tent in my compound; with blows of a stick* He k certainly 
and he does not, I think, as yet, re- a wonderful fellow*’^ In a letter to 
gret the step he has taken. Ue says, anotheroorrespondenthesays: ^ This 
indeed, that there is no necessity mr morning I have passed a pleasant 



OOBTOOT OF THE AMEES. 


567 


A prisoner, but an honoured one, in the British camp, 
Dost Mahomed remained some ten days at Caubul, 
during which time all the leading officers of the garrison 
paid him the most marked attention. Men, who kept 
aloof from Shah Soojah, as one to be religiously avoided, 
were eager to present themselves before the unfortunate 
Ameer, and to show that they [respected him in hia 
fallen fortunes. He received his visitors with courtesy, 
and conversed with them with freedom. Seated on the 
ground, he desired them to be seated; and seemed to 
take pleasure in the society of the brave men who did 
him honour. Captain Nicolson, an officer of distin¬ 
guished gallantry and great intelligence, whose early 
death on the banks of the Sutlej is to be deeply de¬ 
plored, having been selected by Sir W. Macnaglxten to 
fill the difficult and delicate office of custodian to the 
fallen prince, acted, on these occasions, as interpreter. 
It may be doubted whether a single officer q[uitted his 
presence without drawing a comparison between the 

hour with the Dost. I went to see is necessary to restrict the number of 
him in his tents, where he is very his* visitors, because Afghans are the 
comfortable. He gave me the whole most mischief-making people oii the 
account of his wanderings, from the face of the earth. We could not 
timeofhisdightat Urgbundeli. What- deny him an interview with his mo- 
ever else he may be, he is certainly a ther; and yesterday evening, shortly 
shrewd, clever fellow ; and it is dif- after the old lady went away, Burnes 
ficult to refrain from compassionating went in to see him, and found him 
his fallen state. 1 hope lie is tolera- in a state of considerable affliction 
bly reconciled now to nis Indian des- and excitement. It seems that some 
tination. Mussoorie would be the one had told him (and 1 have no 
best place for his location, and if you doubt his mother, instigated by some 
could give him a Zemundaree in the mischievous people in the town, was 
Dhoon, he might have some occupa- his informant) that it was our inten¬ 
tion for his restless mind.*’ Three tion to send him to London. I told 
days afterwards, writing; to Lord him to make his mind at ease, for 
Auckland, the Envoy saidi ** 1 have that without hti consent we Imd no 
the pleasure to announce the arrival wish to send him beyond Loodbianah; 
this morning of Mahomed Afaiil, the and at his request 1 gave him a wri* 
eldest son of Dost Mahomed Khan, ting to this effect. He to ainee 
We are doing all we can to soothe seemed perfectly well satisfied*^*** 
the eX'pchicTs feelings, and up to yes- \Unpubluihed Corrupondmct nf jS^ 
terday evening our efforts appear to W, Macnoffkkn,’} 
have been attended with success. It 