

In iront of our columns, flaunting the national stan¬ 
dard, the A%hans stood for some time masters of the 
field, and then quietly withdrew fixjra the scene of 
battle. Sir Alexander Bumes, awed by this disaster, 

* ^me of the troopers were pup- her 6, “ that two squadrons of them 
sued fop a considerable distance. “ I were pursued for a mile <w two by 
learn, wrote the Envoyy on Noyem- twenty Douranees.’* 



SUJUtBHJOBB OV DOST IfAHOHBD. 


565 


wrote to Sir William Macnaghten that there washothing 
left for the force but to &11 back upon Caubul, and im¬ 
plored the Envoy there to concentrate all our troops. 
Sir William received the letter on the 8rd of November, 
as he was taking his evening ride in the out^irts of the 
city. His worst forebodings seemed to be confirmed. 
Little did he know what thoughts were stirring in 
the breast of the Ameer. Dost Mahomed, in the very 
hour of victory, felt that it was hopeless to contend 
against the power of the British Government. He had 
too much sagacity not to know that his success at Pur- 
wandurrah must eventually tend, by moving the British 
to redouble their exertions, rather to hasten than to 
retard the inevitable day of his final destruction. He 
quitted the field in no mood of exultation; with no 
bright visions of the future before him. He had won 
the last throw, but the final issue had ceased to be a 
matter of speculation. The hour in which, with dignity 
and grace, he might throw himself upon the protection 
of his enemies, now seemed to have arrived. He had 
met the British troops in the field, and, at the head of a 
little band of horsemen, had driven back the cavalry of 
the Feringhees. His last charge had been a noble one; 
he might now retire from the contest without a blot 
upon his name. 

So thought the Ameer; as was his wont, taking 
counsel of his saddle. None knew in the British camp 
the direction he had taken; none guessed the character 
of his thoughts. On the day after the victory of Pur- 
wandurrah he was under the walls of Caubul. He had 
been four-and-twenty hours in the saddle; but be* 
trayed little symptoms of fatigue. A single horseman 
attended him. As they approached the residence of 
the British Envoy, they saw an English gentleman re¬ 
turning from his evening ride. The attendant gaU 



566 THE IwlST STBHGOtBS OF IWST MAHOMED. 


loped forward to satisfy himself of the identity of the 
rldmr, and being assured that the Envoy was before 
him, said that the. Ameer was at hand. “ What 
Ameer?” asked Macnaghten. “ Dost Mahomed Khan," 
was the answer; and presently the Ameer himself stood 
before him. Throwing himself from his horse. Dost 
Mahomed saluted the Envoy, and said he was come to 
claim his protection. He surrendered his sword to the 
British chief; but Macnaghten returning it to him, 
desired the Ameer to remount. They then rode to¬ 
gether into the Mission compound—Dost Mahomed ask¬ 
ing many eager questions about his family as they went. 
A tent having been pitched for his accommodation, he 
wrote letters to his sons, exhorting them to follow his 
example and seek the protection of the British Grovern- 
ment. 