

* lii^or who wm suliBe- aceesBion of Shah Swjah, he apttnted 

emjfisjjed as Political Agent to the Kohistanee chiefs, who had em- 
m this part of the country, thus de* braced his cause and raked the tn- 
serfeest^c ayea of the general dis- sarrection (which so paralysed the 
affection In the year 1839, on the movements of Dost Mahomed Khan), 



rnfs VAU. of uAfioMto. 

: In sudi a conjuncture it became necessaiy M Jih' wofuei 
iking in the Eobistan. But it was not easy to detmv' 
aiiie what. A blow was to be stnu^, and the chapter 
of accidents was to determine how and in what direc¬ 
tion it should fall. Accordingly, in the last week of 
September, a force under Sir Robert Sale was ordered 
to take the held. Sir Alexander Barnes accompanied it, 


an increase of wages, amounting to 
five hundred tomauns a year, which 
sum, however, was not payable in 
ready money, but by order on the 
land-tax of ^e chief himself, or on 
that of some turbulent district where 
regtdar payment was doubtful, and 
the influence of the chief necessary to 
sectnre any payment at all. The value 
of the sum thus given, might, there¬ 
fore, in the government amount be 
rated at notmng. I may here men¬ 
tion that all the pay, as termed, of 
these chiefii, was of the same kind; 
jmd I am not aware of any instance 
in which the amount surpassed that 
of the land-tax payaUe by the chief, 
or, inde^ equalled it; and, in my 
opinion, it would have ^en better to 
have released the duels altogether 
then fh>m the payment of that tax, for 
the manner of realising it was one of 
the greatest grievances, as our power 
rendered it unnecessary for the tax- 
gatherers to show the same considera¬ 
tion for these nobles which they bad 
formerl;y been obliged to do. Our 
instructions not to interfere in these 
internal afikira, rendered us powerless 
to afford relief, though we saw dis¬ 
content and dbloyalty growing around 
us. During the year 1840 the chiefs 
in the dilTerent parts of the countiy 
found that tlie change of government 
was inimical to their interests and 
power, Insoniuch that it had given 
them a master who was able to compel 
obeefienee, instead of one who was 
obliged to overlodt their excesses in 
exchange fbr their support. They 
therefore gladly revolted to export 
^e return of Dost Mahomed I^an. 
No doubt other causes largely com¬ 
bined to irritate them. Hatred of 


foreign domination, fanaticism, the 
licentiousness of the troops, and 
especially the impunity with which 
women could be seduced and carried 
off* in a country celebrated for tlie 
strictness of the late ruler on this 
point, and the extreme jealousv of 
the natives. The consequence of this 
revolt was the despatch of General 
Sale's force to the Kohbtan in the 
autumn of that year. The force was 
too weak for the destruction of the 
rebels; and Sir A. Burnes, the 
Political Agent, with a force, found 
it necessary to temporise and treat 
with all who had not made themselves 
very remarkable in Opposition; and 
of those who liad, the most extreme 
step ventured upon was delivering 
over the possessions of the rebel to 
his cousin, or nearest of kin, who was 
of the royal party; and Sir A. Burnes 
(under the authority of Sir W. H. 
Macnaghten, afterwards sanctioned 
by the Governor-General in Council) 
promised to those persons, and the 
others who bad remained neuter 
during the contest (joining us at the 
end), that they should enjoy the pay 
and advanta^s promised on the suc¬ 
cession of Shah Soojah. It was also 
understood that no alteration would 
afterwards be made. Hiese agree¬ 
ments were made by Prince Timour, 
who had plenary powers from his 
father, ana the arrangements were 
fioidly approved of by the Shah him¬ 
self;'and under die feeling that the 
promises of the British Dovesnment 
would be sacredly observed, the dis¬ 
contented who remained untouched 
sat^ down and tufsssdllieiratteiitioii 
to agriculture." — 