

of Todd’s safety, and to learn the particulars of his departure 
from Herat, or the proximate cause of that important event, as 
well as his, and your, and Sanders’s opinion as to the practicabi¬ 
lity of successful operations against Herat this season. I suppose 
if the force were to move from Candahar by the middle of May 
it would be time enough, but will the requisite battering-train 
be then forthcoming, and shall we have a quantum suff. of grain 
and camels? The Governor-General will, I fear, if possible, do 
nothing.f 

The particulars of Todd’s departure from Herat were 
these. Yar Mahomed had long been accommodating 
his demands to every change in the political barometer. 
Unfortunately, those changes had indicated little but 
the depressed circumstances of our position in Afghan¬ 
istan. The fall of Khelat; the progress of Dost Ma¬ 
homed on the Hindoo-Koosh; the insurrection in Zemin- 
dawer, were adverse circumstances which encouraged 
the Wuzeer to rise in his demands for more money, and 
even to meditate aggressive movements of a more pal¬ 
pable character than any which had yet been undertaken 

* The Chaoos-Bashee had reported that the King had encouraged the 
revolt of the Douraneea. f MS^ Corre^ondence. 




THE EXACTIONS OE TAB MAHOMED, 


583 


against the power of Shah Soojah and his supporters. 
At one time he contemplated an attack upon Candahar, 
and was anxious that his intentions should be known to 
the British Mission. But the surrender of Dost Ma¬ 
homed had somewhat checked his presumption; and the 
descent upon Candahar was postponed. But the project 
was not wholly abandoned.* 

The knowledge of the Zemindawer outbreak soon 
caused it to be revived. Yar Mahomed, it has been 
seen, despatched an emissary to the disaffected country 
to keep alive the spirit of revolt. At the same time he 
sent a deputation to the Persian chief at Meshed, urging 
him to unite in an attack on Candahar, whilst the com¬ 
munications between that place and Caubul were cut off 
by the snow. 

This last glaring act of perfidy excited Todd to re¬ 
taliate. He believed that there was a point of forbear¬ 
ance beyond which it would be disgraceful to his country 


* “ The continued forbearance and 
generosity of the British Government 
were, however, alike unapjireciated 
by Yar Mahomed Khan. The cir¬ 
cumstances detailed in my demi-offi¬ 
cial letter to your address of the 30th 
of September, will sufficiently prove 
this; and on the 30th of November 
last I had the honour to report as 
follows ; ‘ During the past month, 
the most aggravated and absurd re¬ 
ports of the advantages gained by 
Dost Mahomed Klian, the Kohis- 
tanees, and Beloochees, over our 
troops, and of the weakness of our 
position in Afghanistan, had acquired 
ready credence in Herat. Urgent 
and repeated demands for extra assist¬ 
ance in money have been made by 
the Vizier and others, but without 
effect. The opportunity has been 
thought favorable for attempting to 
work upon our fears ; and a foray on 
Candahar was seriously discussed, and, 
I believe, ultimately decided on, by 
the minister and his advisers, letters 
having been received by him from the 