

It will have been gathered from these letters that 
Macnagliten was not altogether without a suspicion at 
this time that the disaffection of the Douranees had 
been fomented by the intrigues of Yar Mahomed. The 
suspicion soon rose into knowledge. There were un¬ 
deniable proofs that the Heratee Wuzeer had been 
writing inflammatory letters to the Douranee chiefs. 
He had sent a delegate, named Nussur-ood-deen Khan, 
into the Zemindawer country, with letters to each of the 
principal Douranee chiefs, and one of them had for¬ 
warded to Lieutenant Elliot, Rawlinson^s assistant, a 
copy of the seditious missive, which ran to the follow¬ 
ing efiect : 

Let each of you assemble his followers, and go in to Aktur 
Khan in Zemindawer, and be ready and prepared, for I have 
moved out of Herat; and from Meshed, troops 10,000 strong, 
with twelve guns and two lakhs of rupees, are marching to our 
assistance. At latest, 1 shall arrive at Bukhwa by the end of the 
month Mohurram. Let not any Douranee chief of those now 
assembled disperse his followers, for I am most assured of coming 
to join you.t 

* Unpublished Correspondence. t Records. 

2 p 2 



580 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


Upon the goodly tree of Lord Auckland’s forbearance 
was now clustering, thick and ripe, the expected fruit. 

But there was other intelligence than this to astound 
the Envoy, and make him cry out more and more bit¬ 
terly against the authorities, who had thwarted his long- 
cherished desire to play the “ great game.” Suddenly 
there came upon him the intelligence that the outrages 
and the exactions—the treachery and the insolence—of 
Yar Mahomed had reached such a pitch, that Todd had 
broken up the British Mission, and set his face towards 
Candahar. 

The first thought of Macnaghten on receiving this 
intelligence, was to muster all our available resources, 
especially the “ big guns,” and to commence another siege 
of Herat. On the 25th of February he wrote to Raw- 
linson: 

This, indeed, is astounding intelligence, and there is no 
longer any necessity for delicacy as regards Herat. You can 
send over the big guns, therefore, and take any other precautions 
that may be deemed necessary for the safety of the frontier, with¬ 
out reference to anything I have said in former letters; and, 
moreover, a strong clTort should be made to crush Aktur Khan 
without delay. I cannot tell what government will do, though 
1 know what tliey ouglit to do. I have strongly recommended 
their sending as large a force as may be available, and as speedily 
as possible, to Candahar, even if an attack on Herat should not 
be meditated.* 

And again, three days afterwards, he wrote to the 
same correspondent: 

I shall be curious to know what his Lordship thinks of the 
present crisis. I presume that he will %oUh to proceed against 
Herat, but there may be doubts as to the means of our effectually 
doing so; and certainly we ought to run no risks. If we are 
compelled to postpone the operation for another season, it would 
be well, 1 think, to erect a strong post at Washeer, or some other 