



Ameer and the Shah, very much to the disadvantage 
of the latter. The King refused to see his prisoner, al¬ 
leging that he would not be able to bring himself to 
show common civility to such a villain. “ This is well,” 
said the Envoy, writing to the Private Secretary of 
the Governor-General, “ as the Dost must have suffered 
much humiliation in being subjected to such an or¬ 
deal.” All the natural kindliness of the Envoy now set 
in towards the fallen prince, and all the courtesies of 
the English gentleman were fteely bestowed upon him. 

On the 12th of November, 1840, Dost Mahomed 
Khan, under a strong escort,* commenced his journey 
towards the provinces of India; and two months after¬ 
wards Macnaghten wrote: 

I trust that the Dost will be treated with liberality. His case 
has been compared to that of Shah Soojah; and I have seen it 
argued that he should not be treated more handsomely than his 
Majesty was; but surely the cases are not parallel. The Shah 
had no claim upon us. Wc had no hand in deprivii^ him of his 
kingdom, whereas wc ejected the Dost, who never oficnded us, 
in support of our policy, of which he was the victim.t 

And SO Macnaghten, in a few linM of irrepressible 
truth and candour, denounced the in^stice of the policy 
of which he himself had been one of the originators. 
It is possible, too, that Lord Auckland may have felt 
that Dost Mahomed “ never offended us,” but that we 
had victimised him; for he received the Prince he had 
deposed with becoming hospitality and respect, and bur¬ 
dened the revenues of India with a pension in his fevoiu 
of two lakhs of rupees. 

* A detac^meDt of our troops was coxnmaDded the troops in Afghanis- 
then returning to India. The Com- tan, set his face towards Indm; and 
plmy^B European regiment, and Cap- the command temporarily devolved 
tain Garbetvs troop of Horse Artil- on Sir R. Sale, 
lery, marched from Caubul; and the f Sir TV. H. Macnaghten to Mr. 
48th Native Infhnt^"'joined the es- HcSertson: Jan, 12,1841. MS, Corro- 
eM at JellalabadhltAi the same time, spondence, 

3ir Willoughby Cotton, who had* 



Asm tss boubansss. 


$ 


CHAPTER III. 

[NoTember: 1840—September: 1841.] 

Yar Mabomed and the Douranees — Season of Peace — Position of the 
Douranees—^The Zemindawer Outbreak—Conduct of Yar Mahomed— 
Departure of Major Todd—Risings of the Douranees and Ghilzjes— 
Engagements with Aktur Khan and the Gooroo—Dispersion of the 
Insurgents. 

The remainder of the month of November passed away 
in peace and tranquillity. The Envoy began now for 
the first time to taste the blessings of repose, and to 
enjoy the advantages of leisure. But his active mind 
was soon again busily at work. Dost Mahomed had 
surrendered; but the Sikhs had not been coerced. The 
time for the “ macadamisation” of the Punjaub seemed 
now to have arrived. To the Lieutenant-Governor of 
the North-Western Provinces of India, he wrote on the 
24th of November: 

Now that I have a little leisure to write, I have nothing to 
write about. These piping times of peace are unfavorable to the 
exercise of the epistolary art. I could, indeed, write a volume as 
to what I would do were I Governor-General. Never did cards 
play so beautifully into any man’s hands. Now is the rime for a 
Bubridiary force in the Punjaub, and for the cession of the £striotB 
to the west of the Indus. We are clearly not bound any logger 
by the Tripartite treaty, and so I have told Lord Auckland; but 
I don’t think his Lordship’s ambirion will aim at more riwn ke^ 
ing matters on their present foorii^. 'The Dost is getring on 