


♦ “ It is curious to observe the 
manner in which the Douranees have 
reasoned ^on the liberalitj of his 
Majestj^s Grovemment, and the gra* 
dual modifications which we maj 
suppose their feelings to have under- 
gone» from the evidence of alterations 
in their tone and conduct. Daring 
the first year of his Majesty's restored 
goverament, they exhibitea outwardly 
but little change from the same pas- 
i to demeanour which had ehaxuo- 


terised their submission to the Sirdars 
under the later periods of the Baruk* 
zye administration. No sooner, how¬ 
ever, had the new order been issued 
for the remission of the land-tax, than 
with resuscitated hopes they benan 
to remonstrate, to agitate, and inti¬ 
mately to take up imns, when their 
means of intimidation fiuled them. 
I bring forward, by way of illustra¬ 
tion, the example of the tribes in Ze- 
mindawer. They had been subjected. 



DI8APP0INTMEKT 07 THE DOHRANEES. 


578 


In Z^nindawer, a district which lies to the north-west 
of Candahar, symptoms of inquietude began to evince 
themselves at the end of 1840. At this time, the affairs 
of Candahar and its neigbourhood were, as r^ards all 
European superintendence, under the chaise of Major 
Bawlinson. This officer, who had been employed for 
some years in Persia,* and on the rupture of our friendly 


during the preceding year, to some 
severity of treatment by the financial 
arrangements of Wullee Mahomed 
Khan; but they had endured the yoke 
almost without a murmur. Since the 
arrival of the Wukeel at Candahar, 
they had been, on the contrary, en¬ 
tirely free from interference. Iwot a 
government agent of any class had 
appeared in Zcmindawer, nor had a 
khurwar of grain been realised, yet 
the tribes of that district, on the first 
demand of revenue, took up arms 
to withstand, as they said, oppressive 
exactions; and whilst ajjart^ of horse 
were encamped upon this side of the 
Helmund,* appointed to support the 
government officer in his collections, 
they crossed the river, and attacked 
them without the semblance of an 
excuse on the score of provocation 
or actual rapacity. The unpopu¬ 
larity of the agent deputed to realise 
the revenues, and the apprehension 
of a repetition of the exactions of the 
previous year, may have been instru¬ 
mental in assembling the tribes in 
arms as a measure of defence; but 
surely such motives are insufficient to 
justify or explain a gratuitous attack 
before the collections of the present 
yemr had commenced; or, if the 
motives which the Zemindawarces 
assigned for their ofifensive hostility 
be admitted, surely some radical 
change of character must have taken 
place, to have emboldened to this 
act of sggressive rebellion tribes who 
had sumnitted passively to the most 
gelling tyranny on the part of the 
Sirdars, and who had ^en yielded, 
since the accession of his Majesty, to 
the harshness of the collections of the 


preceding year, without betrayiim 
any open signs of discontent. It 
appears to me that, had the land-tax 
on the Tajul Kulbaa been continued, 
the tribes in Zemindawer, seeing no 
indication of a change in the poHcy 
of the government, and conscious 
that the power of coercion was 
stronger, at the present, than at any 
reviouB time, would have never 
reamed of assembling in arms to 
resist the royal authority, and that 
we must consequently attribute to the 
exercise of his Majesty’s clemency, 
and to the impression which had 
arisen from it, that it was the aim of 
the government to manage the Dou- 
ranees through the agency of their 
hopes rather than of their fears, and 
that rebellion might thus be attempt¬ 
ed with impunity, so sudden and 
unusual a display of boldness as 
could induce the tribes to rise in 
arms and attack a government agent, 
however, and perhaps deservedly, un¬ 
popular.”—[if/q/or RawlinsorCs JDou- 
ranee UeporU MS. Recotdi,] 