

♦ It would be foreign to the objects colonel than General Nott, and the 
of this work to discuss the question Indian Commandcr-in-Chief had de» 
of Nott*s supercession. It was at one creed that the relative ranks of the 
time a fertile subject of discussion in majorogenerals should be determined^ 
India, involving, as it-did, a general not bv the dates of their brevets as 
question of militaiy rank in the higher such, nut by the dates of their lieu- 
grades. General Wiltshire was an tenant-colonels* commissions* 
older officer and an older lieutenant- 



5T6 


TAB MAHOHED AND THE DODBAKEBS. 


that the difficulty was much lessened by so fortunate BH 
association. 

Such were the men upon whom, at the b^inning, 
of 1841, devolved the duty of looking this Douranee 
outbreak fairly in the face. The task that fell to Nott’s 
share was the easier of the two. He had simply to beat 
the enemy in the field. The insurgents of Zeminda- 
wer had risen up against a party of the Shah’s horse, 
who had been sent out to support the revenue officers, 
and had defeated and dispersed them. A detachment, 
therefore, was ordered out against them, under Captain 
Farrington. On the morning of the 3rd of January 
they came up with the rebels. The Douranee horse, 
some 1200 or 1500 strong, showed a bold front; but 
the fire of Hawkins’s guns was too hot for them, and 
they began to waver. The infantry well completed what 
the cavaliy had well begun; the insurgents were driven 
from their position, and were soon broken and dispersed. 
And so, for the time, the military officer had done his 
work, and with good success. The political officer had 
a more difficult duty to perform. Rawlinson was called 
upon to elucidate the causes of the dissatisfaction of the 
Douranees, and to recommend the best means of quench¬ 
ing the dangerous spirit of revolt. On the 13th of 
January, Macnaghtcn wrote to him from Jellalabad; 
and the letter is curious, as it contains the earliest allu¬ 
sion to the suspicion which subsequently, in a more de¬ 
cided manner, attached itself to the fidelity of Shah 
Soojah: 

« * # • * 

I do not exactly know the drift of your observation as to 
the tone ultimately to be given to our relations with this country.” 
Nor am I aware of the true sentiments of government as applicable 
to such a case as that which we are now considering. Ihe dis- 
affection of Aktur Khan could not have been foreseen by them, 



MACNAGHTEN ON THE HOURANEES. 


577 


still less any general feeling of disafiection on the part of the 
Douranees. We must first ascertain, as clearly as possible, the 
causes of this feeling. If there is just ground of dislike to the 
Vakeel, we should persuade his Maj^ty to remove him, and at the 
same time adopt measures for keeping the Douranees in check, 
either by reverting to the old system of taxation, or requiring their 
presence and performance of duty. The Vakeel’s assertion as to his 
Majesty’s wish to support the Douranees in their unreasonable 
proceedings, and his motive for doing so, is ridiculous. But it is 
only one of the thousand and one calumnies that are daily pro¬ 
pagated with the view (God only knows why) of injuring his 
Majesty’s character. His Majesty, when I told him of the neces¬ 
sity of sending out a regiment against Aktur Khan, at once 
admitted the propriety of the move, but lamented that the 
Douranees were such donkeys as to require coercion. There is 
one point mentioned in your letter which I feel clear about. 
The domestic tranquillity of the country is an object far more 
important than the provision of a national force against Persian 
inroads. I have no notion how many Douranees would acquire 
the means of being formidable to his Majesty by his remission of 
the Roobbas; but I think every safe and fair opportunity should 
be taken of limiting their power (as it seems the indulgence 
already granted has had so baneful an efiect) and of improving 
the revenues. I would commence with all those who have taken 
any part in this rebellion, and deprive them of any favour that 
may have been shown to them. What honours and privileges 
have recently been conferred upon the Douranees that they had 
not before? Lot me know, in your official letter, whether you 
deem the removal of the Vakeel desirable, and how you would 
recommend his place to be supplied. I cannot help thinking that 
Yar Mahomed has more to do with this tmeute than you ascribe 
to him. 