

* Major Rawlinson went out to 
India as a cadet on the Bombay Es¬ 
tablishment in 1827. He was a fel¬ 
low-passenger of Sir John Malcolm, 
from whom he imbibed his earliest 
taste for Oriental literature* In 
1828, having passed, whilst yet a 
cadet, an examination in the Hin- 
dostanee language, he was posted 
to the Ist Grenadier Regiment^ with 
which he served until 1833. In 
this interval he passed in^two other 
languages, Mahratta and Persian. 
In 1833, when Lord William Ben- 
tinck d^atched a party of ofibers 
to Persia to drill the ftfmy of Ah]^ 



5T4 


TA& MABOVSD AND m DOmtAHTBES. 


Mlfttionfi 'Rrith that state, necessarily remanded to India, 
had been so strongly recommended, for his intimate ac¬ 
quaintance with the languages, the people, and the 
politics of the East, as well as for his general aptitude 
and intelligence, by Sir John M‘Neill to Lord Auckland, 
that the Governor-General ordered him to proceed to 
Caubul, to be employed under Macnaghten. In the 
early part of 1840 it had been proposed to despatch 
Rawlinson and Arthur Conolly on a mission to the 
camp of the Russian General Peroffski, but the breaking 
up of the Russian expedition caused this project to be 
abandoned; and another field of activity was opened 
out to Rawlinson in a region less inhospitable and re¬ 
mote. The supervision of affairs at Cnndahar had 
hitherto been entrusted to Major Leech; but Leech had 
given offence to the Envoy by the dilatoriness with 
which he had sent in his accounts, and it had seemed 
good to Macnaghten to remove him from his post.* He 
could not have appointed a better man than Rawlinson 
to fill it. So, on the 4th of July, he sent to that oflicer 
the Shah’s official notification of his appointment as poli¬ 
tical agent at Candahar. 

The command of the troops at Candahar was in the 
hands of Major-General Nott. He was an old Sepoy 
officer of good repute; a man of some talents, but blunt 


Meerxa, Rawlinson, still an ensisn, Lord Auckland for employment in 
was selected as adjutant of the de- Afghanistan, 
taohment. In Persia he continued * Other grounds of complaint may 
to serve until the rupture with that have subsequently arisen, but this 
state. During a space ^ of nearly dilatoriness was the first offence, 
three years he was^ in military com- Leech pleaded in extenuation that he 
mand of the province of Kerman- liad been removed fVom one smpoint- 
shab, living entirely among the Per- ment to another, before he.\nad had 
sians, and becoming as familiar with time to make up the financial state- 
their language and literature as with ments of his last mission; and sent In 
htsown. He graduated in diplomacy a list of no less than eight different 
under Sir John M*NeiU, by whom he counts of which he had to bring 
was entrusted with various political the arrears.—LeecA to Sir W. 
duties, and strongly recommended to H. Macnaghten: June 30, 1840.] 



OINBBAL NOTT. 


676 


addreM—an honest, plain-spoken soldier, not always 
right, but always believing himself to be right—hearty, 
genuine, and sincere. His &ults were chiefly those of 
temper. He had not been well used. Sir Hmry Fane 
bad recognised his merits; but Sir John Keane, who 
was accused of fostering a narrow-minded prejudice 
against the Company’s service, had superseded him in a 
manner which had greatly incensed the General himself 
and the army to which he belonged.* Labouring under 
a strong sense of the injustice that had been done him; 
feeling that his worth had not been duly appreciated, or 
his services duly rewarded; seeing much in the general 
management of the afiairs of the distracted country in 
which his lot had been cast to excite his unqualifled 
disapprobation; and being, moreover, constitutionally of 
an irritable temperament, he sometimes said and wrote 
what was calculated to offend others; and as the political 
officers were the especial objects of his dislike, he was 
in no favour at the Residency. Macnaghten declared 
that that general’s conduct frequently embarrassed him, 
and recommended, therefore, his recall; but it was lelt 
that Nott was a fine soldier; and, though the govern¬ 
ment eventually listened to the Envoy’s counsel in this 
matter, they were slow to remove him from a sphere 
in which his energy and decision were likely to be so 
serviceable to the state. And, perhaps, it was felt that, 
in his political colleague at Candahar, Nott had a man 
of excellent temper, of great tact and forbearance, and 