

I am aware that it is difficult for you to furnish correct notions 
of the feelings of the strange people amongst whom our lot is cast; 
but without some information of the kind, it must be impossible 
for me to form a correct judgment as to the course to be pursued. 
One would suppose it could not be a very difficult matter, with 
our invincible means, to keep in proper subjection people who 
trembled under the feeble sway of the Barukzyes. At tlje same 
time, their real grievances should be removed, and if the Vakeel is 

VOL. I. 2 P 



578 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOTJRANEES. 


a rapacious tyrant, as lie is represented to be, he should certainly 
be ejected, and another arrangement made for next year.* 

In another letter, written on the 5th of February, to 
Mr. Colvin, the Envoy again adverted to the subject of 
Douranee disaffection, which had now become, in reality, 
the most important to which the attention of the au¬ 
thorities could be addressed: 

Aktur Khan was disappointed In not getting the chiefship of 
Zemindawcr; and he found the people in a temper to aid his 
rebellious project, owing to the oppressions practised by the 
Vakeel. They submitted to these oppressions in the time of the 
Barukzye Sirdars, knowing that there was no remedy. But now, 
having their own King restored to them, they take their own 
rude way of having their grievances made known, in full confi¬ 
dence of their being redressed. Major Rawlinson observes, on 
the authority of the Sirdar, that the Douranees were elated be¬ 
yond all bounds of dutiful service. I doubt much whether such 
an efiect could be produced by such a cause; and I moreover 
much doubt whether the Douranees have any such real cause to 
bo elated, for, according to the best information I can obtain, the 
royal bounty has been intercepted by the revenue managers. The 
whole question, however, of the Candahar revenue system requires 
very careful consideration. Our unpopularity is assigned as an¬ 
other reason for the cmeute. With a certain class, the aristo¬ 
cracy attending the Court, whose consequence we have annihilated, 
we are, doubtless, unpopular; but I question whether there exists 
any bad feeling against us in the country generally. In support 
of my opinion, I may adduce the fact of Lieutenant Pattenson 
having recently made the tour of the disturbed districts with a 
small escort. 

He was looked up to wherever he went as a deliverer, and 
heard nothing but universal execrations against the Vakeel and 
his clique. I am perfectly satisfied of the imperative necessity of 
at once removing these obnoxious individuals. They will be im¬ 
mediately summoned to Jellalabad, and a successor in every way 
competent will this day set out to succeed them. I shall suspend 
my judgment as to the supposed necessity of breaking the power 
* MS* Correspondence of Sir W* H* MucnagTUen. 



INTRIGUES OF YAR MAHOMED. 


579 


of the Doutailees, until I get Major Rawlinson's promised Kulba 
report; but I shall desire Rawlinson at once to banish from his 
thoughts the wild project of seizing “ at least fifty or sixty of the 
most powerful and turbulent of the Douranee Khans,” and send¬ 
ing them to India. It is hard if we cannot find some means less 
stringent of restoring tranquillity. My own impression is, that 
matters will revert to a wholesome state, as soon as ever the incubus 
of apprehension is removed from the body of the people; and this 
will be effected by the simple recall of the obnoxious Parsewan 
managers. Our appearing in the field as their allies is the surest 
method of gaining for ourselves universal detestation. In the 
mean time, you may set your mind at ease whatever may happen. 
We have force enough at Candahar to crush any hostile combina¬ 
tion against us, however extensive.^ 