

It has been shown, that on the appearance of Shah 
Soojah at Candahar, the Douranees, enfeebled and pros¬ 
trated by their Barukzye oppressors, clustered around 
the throne, and sought from the restored monarch the 
privileges and immunities which had been wrested from 
them by the Sirdars. Uncertain, at that time, of the 
ultimate success of the expedition, and eager to swell 
the number of his adherents, the Shah was willing to 
grant, and more willing still to promise. He made cer¬ 
tain remissions of taxation in favour of the tribes; but 
he entrusted the execution of these new popular mea¬ 
sures to the old unpopular agency; and the Parsewan 

* Writing to the same correspon- expenditure to keep it in repair. You 
dent shortly afterwnrdti he cautioned are a little too sanguinei I think, in 
him not to expect any very speedy or your hope of a speedy and universal 
extensive reforms ; and, above all, reform in this countiy. For thirty 
not to look for any favorable iinan- years the inhabitants of most qf the 
‘ eial results* ** By-«nd*by his Ma<- districts have never paid a fraction of 
jesty," said the Envoy, "vrill, I hope, revenue, until they were coerced into 
be able to make both ends meet* At payment by the presence of troops* 
present, pecuniary assistance to a con** habit has grown into second na* 

siderabie extent will be indispensable, ture with them, and we cannot expect 
As I said when we drst reacned Can- them to subside at once into the con* 
dahar, the country must be looked dition of dieerful ta:x«payem«’^<**>C17a* 
upon as an outwork, requiring large pvkUthed Corrsi;poii(fefice«] 



672 


YAB 1CAHOHB0 AND THE DOUBANEES. 


revenue-collectors, who had oppressed the tribes during 
the reign of the Sirdars, were still left to ezm;i3e their 
hated calling under the King. 

The experiment of giving is a dangerous one. In the 
ordinary concerns of human life, it is found that the 
shortcomings of those who give bring down upon them 
more hatred and more reproach than the withholdings 
of those who give not. It is perilous to raise hopes not 
to be fulfilled. The Douranees had looked for much 
from the restoration of the Shah; and they were dis- 
ap^nted. They had patiently submitted to the ex¬ 
actions and oppressions of the Barukzyes—but the im¬ 
perfect liberality of the Suddoyze monarch irritated them 
past endurance. They looked upon the Barukzyes as 
their natural enemies, and they submitted when they 
knew that they had no power of resistance. But be¬ 
lieving that it was the wish of the restored government 
of the Shah to conciliate and encourage them, they de¬ 
monstrated their dissatisfaction in a violent and offensive 
manner, with the strongest assurance in their mind 
that their grievances would be redressed. Under the 
Barukzyes such a course would have been worse than 
useless, for their spasms of painful unrest were pleasing 
to the Sirdars. But as it seemed that the Shah desired 
to please them, they strove to evince, by most unmis- 
takeable signs, that they were not pleased; and broke 
out into rebellion.* 