



870 


YAB ICAHOMSP AND THB DOUEANSES. 


▼ery well. He evidently sees that it is useless kicking against 
the pricks; and he wishes now to cultivate our friendship as 
eagerly as he before provoked our enmity. We start for Jellala- 
bad in three or four days; and it is high time we should do so, as 
the weather is becoming bitterly cold here. We shall now have a 
little time to devote to the affairs of the country, and I trust its 
condition will be soon as flourishing as its poor resources will 
admit.* 

And again, on the 9th of December, he wr8te in the 
same cheerful strain of the tranquillity by which he was 
surrounded: 

The surrender of the Dost has been productive of so much 
quiet that I have positively nothing to write about. The officers 
who, the other day, were grumbling audibly at being overworked, 
now complain that they are dying of ennui. By my last accounts, 
the Dost had reached Peshawur in safety, and his family had 
arrived at Jellalabad. They will start again to-day to join him. 
I see no reason to apprehend any obstacle in the passage of the 
Punjaub.t The Royal Family will, I trust, be on the wing for 
Afghanistan before the Dost gets near Hindostan, in order that 
the apartments they occupied may be prepared for the illustrious 
Dosf. He will, I have no doubt, petition for a more congenial 
climate by the time he has had one taste of the hot winds.} • • • 

This was written from Gundamuck. The Court was 
on its way to its winter quarters at Jellalabad. On the 
morning of the 13th they reached that place. The 
Envoy found Sir Willoughby Cotton still there, but 
“ anxious to get away f and Captain Macgregor, the 
political agent in charge of the district, surrounded by a 
motley crew of the chiefs of the country, who seemed to 

• MS, Correanondence. original prudence of fixing a route 

t Kurruok Singh and Nao Nehal for British troops dear of the Sikh 
Singh had bv this time been gathered capital, and the complete subjumflon 
to Uieir fathers. They died a few of the Mahomedan tribes, left the 
days after the surrender of Dost Ma- English commander unaware of the 
homed, when the Ameer and Ids struggle going on, except ikom ordi- 
cscort passed through the Pumaub, nary reports and news^writers.^’ — 
their march was a cpiiet one, Al- \Cmningham's History of ihe Sikhs.'] 
though Shere Sii^ was then laying } MS. Correspondence. 

^jjfgP to the cita£l of Lahore, the 



0(»miXiON OF THF DOOSAims. 


571 


look up to him as their common faUier. In the enjoy* 
meat of a little rest from pressing anxieties, the Envoy 
began to turn his thoughts to the dmnestic administration 
of the country. “We have hitherto,” he nrrote to the 
Private Secretary of the Governor-General, “ been strug¬ 
gling for existence, without any leisure to turn to the. 
improvement of the administration.”* And very little of 
this leisure was even now vouchsafed to him. Though 
Dost Mahomed was on his way to the provinces of India, 
and the winter snows had now set in, the struggle for 
existence was still going on, and more fiercely than ^er. 
The Ghilzyes and Kohistanees had already rise*up 
against the government of the Shah and his supporters; 
and now the Douranees were breaking out into revolt. 