

* MS. Correspondence of Sir W, H. MacnaghUn. 



THE RUPTURE WITH HERAT. 


581 


place on the frontier which may promise to be salubrious. A 
battering-train would, I imagine, be our chief want, and I rather 
think there is one at Sukkur, which was left there by Sir John 
Keane for want of carriage. I have written to Ross Bell on this 
subject, and begged him to send their heavy guns up to you as 
soon as practicable, with their material. I have further suggested 
to him to apply to Major Parsons at Ferozcpore for draught 
bullocks, if he cannot get them more handily. Possibly you 
might supply them. What does Sanders think now of the means 
at our command for subduing Herat? We could, easily co¬ 
operate via the Hazura route with a brigade, the mountain train, 
and a respectable body of horse. 

I had written thus far, when I received your important letter 
of the 19th, with its inclosures. The rupture with Herat now 
seems to be complete, but the proximate cause of it is yet un¬ 
known to mo. I trust that Todd and his party may have safely 
arrived at Candahar, and I wish him to remain there for the pre¬ 
sent. Is there any chance of our mustering heavy guns and 
force suflicient to attack the place this year? What does Todd 
say of the best season for operations, and what aid does he hope 
we might obtain from people in and around Herat? Our money 
ought now to fructify. 

With regard to your opinions as to our policy in this country, 
I may say mine arc diametrically opposed to them. I deny both 
your premises and conclusion. I deny that we arc universally 
hated; if we were, I deny that such would be a sufficient reason 
f )r our returning and abandoning the fruits of our signal triumph, 
still less for taking the country to ourselves. This liowever, is 
no time for unprofitable argument. With the notions you en¬ 
tertain, you may be apt to be led into despondency; otherwise, 
the notions which you or I may entertain arc of little consequence, 
as the determination of our superiors is fixed. It would be a 
rash attempt to send troops through the snow from Caubul to 
Mooltan; and besides, we have them not to spare at present.* 

After another lapse of three days, he wrote again: 

Jellalabad, March 2nd, 1841. 

I have had a long conversation with his Majesty this morn¬ 
ing, dc rebus omnibus, but chiefly with regard to the state of 

* MS. Correspondence of Sir W. H. MacnagJiten. 



582 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


things at Candahar. His Majesty has just received a letter from 
the Vakeel ■which has convinced him of the Chaoos-Bashee’s 
guilt. I told him that though the evidence from such a quarter 
might be exceptionable, there could be no doubt of the fact. 
His Majesty’s rage knows no bounds. He swears that he will 
burn the Chaoos with excrement, and I feel certain that he will 
inflict upon him some grievous punishment such as we could not 
abet. Cutting out the tongue, the offending member, is the 
smallest penalty thought of, but I really think there would be no 
harm in depriving the rascal of his ears. Now touching the 
Vakeel.* His Majesty was a little impatient with me this morn¬ 
ing. There is, he says, no stability in my counsels. I first re¬ 
commend that he should be recalled instantly, then that he should 
be left at Candahar to give an account of his stewardship; but it 
is his wish to leave to you the final determination of the ques¬ 
tion.You may imagine how anxious I am to hear 