


* Macnaghteri’s correspondence, 
during these months of June and 
July, afford many illusttation^> of Ins 
views with reference to tlie policy to 
be pursued towards the disaffected 
clnefs. Tliey show that he had, as he 
sometimes mournfully acknowledged, 
become by this time an adept in in¬ 
trigue. His natural humanity, too, 
seems to iiave been somewhat blunted : 

“ June 20.— I am out of all patience 
with Aktur Khan, but 1 feel satisfied 
that a judicious use of the Janbaz will 
extirpate the villain. If not, we must 
tolerate his audacity no longer; and 
a regular force must be sent after him, 
to hunt him to the world's end. 

“ Ju7ie 24.—You will never get any 
good out of }Our Douranee allies. I 
don’t understand why you should wait 
until Ghiresk i^ taken, before you send 
out a force to quell this insurrection. 
Nothing is so catching in this country 
as the spirit of rebellion; and if the 
insurgents should gain possession of 
Gliiresk, 1 apprehend a very general 
rising in favour of that contemptible 
rascal, Aktur Khan. . . . Our pre¬ 
dicament as legards these Afghan 
chiefs is by no means an enviable one. 
They arc such arrant blockheads, that 
any knave may in a day make a traitor 
of the most loyal of them. . . . This 
is my day for receiving natives, and I 
don’t remember when I have been so 
bothered. Certes, reform is a trouble¬ 
some thing to manage in any country.” 

On the 2nd of July, he wrote; 
“If the garrUon of Ghiresk will only 
hold out a few days longer, and Aktur 
Khan will only have the goodness to 
remain until Hart gets in rear of him, 
I confidently hope that hi» carcase is 
ere now a prey to the vultures. Certes, 
he is a most impudent sug. 


July 16.— I had a visit from Atta 
Khan yesterday. I never beheld a 
more forbidding countenance than 
that which graces the shoulders of this 
worthy. I'he fool predominates over 
the villain ; but there is at the same 
time a vicious-looking obstinacy of 
purpose about the lips and features 
geneially, which would lead me to 
suppose, that though the man had not 
intellect enough to discern his true 
interests, yet that he would be a most 
dangerous instrument in the hands of 

designing persons. 

What do you think of sending a 
secret and trustworthy emissary to 
Aktur Khan, and promising him pro¬ 
tection in the event of his divulging 
the names of all those from whom 
he received assistance in Candahar? 
Though a dishonest man, he is a con¬ 
temptible fellow. Our object is not 
so much to punish him for his au¬ 
dacity, as to prevent future rebellions ; 
and this would be effectually done by 
making an example of those who, 
keeping in the background them¬ 
selves, have instigated other poor 
devils to go to slaughter. If you com¬ 
municate with Aktur, I would treat 
him as if we knew he was but an 
instrument in the hands of others. 1 
do not at present know where 1 can 
obtain evidence to convict Sydul or 
Atta Khan, or even the Cliaoos- 
Bashee. Could you send me Meer 
Allium's letter, and any witnesses 
to prove that the Chaoos-Bashee 
made use of the treasonable language 
imputed to him on the road to Can¬ 
dahar ? Tej Khan accompanied him, 
and that scoundrel I believe to be at 
the bottom of the whole Fussad. If 
there are no strong political objec¬ 
tions to the measure, pray lose no 