


city dwelling on the weakness of its 
garrison, and inviting him to make 
the attempt.’ 

“ The extravagance of the Vizier 
about this time involved him in debt 
to a cunsideiablc amount; and find¬ 
ing that I was not disposed to advance 
more money than had been sanctioned 
by government, he endeavoured to 
obtain my consent to his ebappowing 
the Persian territory. Failing in this, 
he proposed to foray some of the dis¬ 
tricts nominally subject to his own 
authority ; and at length, discovering 
the futility of attempting to obtain 
money from me on these pretences, 
he thought that by giving publicity to 
his intention of attacking Candahar, 
he might intimidate me into purchas¬ 
ing his forbearance. The enterprise 
was, 1 believe, resolved on; and 
though the timely surrender of Dost 
Mahomed Khan caused this project 
to be laid aside for the time, it was 
not fully abandoned.” —[Major Todd 
to Sir W. H, Macnaghten: Ghiresk, 
March 5,1841. MS. Eecordt,^ 



584 


YAK MAHOMED AND THE DOUBANEES. 


to descend; so he determined to suspend the payment 
of the allowance* which had been granted to the state; 
and, taking advantage of the presence of a large body 
of troops in Upper Sindh, announced, on the 1st of 
February, his intention to the Wuzeer. But Yar Ma¬ 
homed, at this time, was intent on playing a ‘‘great 
game/’ He believed that his deputation had been favor¬ 
ably received at Meshed; he believed that the Dou- 
ranees were again working themselves into rebellion; and 
he had abundant faith in the continued forbearance of 
the British Government. So he played, with his accus¬ 
tomed craft, for a large stake; and little heeded the 
consequences of failure. The one object of all his in¬ 
trigues was to obtain money. Seeing that he could not 
any longer drive Todd to open the treasury, he de¬ 
termined to cajole him. He reminded the British agent 
of the desire he had long before expressed, to post a 
British contingent in the valley of Herat; and declared 
that, on the payment of two lakhs of rupees, he would 
give his assent to the measure. Never had he the shadow 
of an intention of fulfilling his part of the contract— 
but he wanted the money. His sincerity was soon tested. 
Todd demanded that the Wuzeer’s son should be sent 
to Ghhesk. there to await an answer from the Govern¬ 
ment of India, and to escort, if the answer were in 
approbation of the measure, the British troops to Herat; 
and it was added, that on the Sirdar’s arrival at that 
place the money demanded would be paid. But Yar 
Mahomed at once refused his assent to Todd’s proposal. 
He required the immediate payment of the money or the 
departure of the Mission. So Todd chose the latter 
alternative, and turned his back upon Herat, f 

Never before, perhaps, had the British Government 

*25fiOO Tupees(2600l)per mensem, was printed, some time ago, in the 

t Dr. Login's “ Statement of Facts Calcutta Review, from a copy given 
relating to Herat.” This document me by Todd. 