



592 


YAE MAHOMED AND THE DO0RANEES. 


Ghilzye swordsmen again and again reeling under the 
iron shower. For five busy hours continued that mortal 
struggle; and then the Ghilzyes gave way. They had 
greatly outnumbered our party, and they left many dead 
on the field. All night long, too, the moving lights an¬ 
nounced that many more, both of killed and wounded, 
were carried off to their camp. 

This was a signal military success; and Wymer’s 
Sepoys covered themselves with glory. But great was 
the shame of the political measures out of which the 
action had arisen. Lynch had irritated the Ghilzyes, 
whom he ought to have soothed. His conduct was 
viewed with general disapprobation. Lord Auckland’s 
opinions have been recorded. Macnaghten virtually 
removed Major Lynch from his appointment. What 
Bumes thought of the matter, may be gathered from 
the following letter, which is distinguished equally by 
good feeling and good sense: 

Caubul, June 30, 1841. 

Mr DEAR Lynch, 

I have just got your letter, with the statement on 
Ghilzye affairs, and am concerned to find you arc in trouble. I 
spoke to the Envoy about you; and, in fact, I showed to him the 
statement. But he tells me that you have resigned, and that he 
and you are altogether at variance on the mode of working out 
Ghilzye politics. I am not cognizant of all which you relate 
regarding affairs in your quarter; but I am sorry to tell you that 
1 am one of those altogether opposed to any further fighting in this 
country; and that I consider we shall never settle Afghanistan at 
the point of the bayonet. And this opinion, which I have so long 
held, I am glad to see has been at length adopted in Calcutta, and 
will be our future guide. As regards the Ghilzyes, indeed, immense 
allowances ought to be made for them; they were, till within three 
generations, the Kings of Afghanistan, and carried their victorious 
arms to the capital of Persia. It is expecting too much, therefore, 
to hope for their being at once peaceful subjects; and as they 
exhibited so much indisposition to the King^s Government, it 



LETTEES OF BURNES AND MACNAGHTEN. 


593 


was, I think, right to build a fort at Khelat-i-Ghilzye, and thus 
bridle them; thereby enabling us, in the heart of the Ghilzye 
country, to protect those who were disposed to join us, and 
gradually undermine our enemies. 

Do not think you did wrong in writing to me, I was glad to 
hear from you; and, had it been in my power, would have been 
glad to assist you also. I think you have been unfortunately 
situated, and had a questio veccata at every step. Had I been by 
you, I would have said build Khelat-i-Ghilzye, and pardon all 
kinds of insolence, for those who laugh may win. From what 
I hear, and from what, indeed, you told me here, 1 rather suspect 
you will be glad to get to Old England, and have done with this 
kind of work. I have not heard who is to succeed you; but 
here again, had I power, I would send no one, for I would leave 
the Ghilzycs to themselves, and quarter our troops at Khelat 
with the new chief, and allow him to rally all parties around 
him; but, perhaps, you will think me very heterodox in all my 
views. . . , Yours, very sincerely, 