

Alexander Burnes.* 

Wliilst in this manner efforts were being made to 
tranquillise the Ghilzyes, the proceedings of Aktur Khan 
and the Douranees were again exciting the apprehen¬ 
sions of the Envoy. Unable to obtain all that he wanted 
for himself, the chief, who at one time had affected con¬ 
trition, was now again breaking out into revolt Irri¬ 
tated by this, Macnaghten wrote toRawlinson (May 31) 
as he had before written in the case of Dost Mahomed, 
that if he could seize Aktur Khan, he would recom¬ 
mend his execution : 

I think you should strain every nerve to lay hold of that 
indomitable Moofsid, Aktur Khan, and that if you can seize him, 
the Prince should be recommended to execute him. The five 
Khans whom you propose sending out will of course do their 
utmost to effect his capture, but it occurs to me that the services 
of Ibrahim Khan, the Tymunce chief, might be turned to some 
account on this occasion, and that the deputation of the Kazee's 
son will afford an opportunity of urging him to assist us. I 
♦ MS, Correspondence of Sir A, Burnes, 

2 Q 


VOL. 1. 



594 


YAK MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


further think that a reward of 10,000 rupees should be offered 
for the apprehension of Aktur Khan. 

This moment I have received an express letter from Major 
Lynch, dated the 27th inst. He tells me that he is besieged by 
about 5000 Ghilzyes, who are within three miles of his position, 
but that he is prevented by my instructions from attacking them! 
Could any man in his senses have so construed those orders? 
The question to be asked in this case is. Why did the chief 
military authority at Khelat suffer the rebels to occupy a menacing 
position so close to him in force ? If, as I suspect, it should 
turn out that Major Lynch has been interfering to prevent the 
military authorities from exercising their own discretion on the 
strength of my orders, his conduct will be so utterly indefensible, 
that I must request you at once to supersede him, and I shall tell 
him so. We cannot assist him from this place. Colonel Wymer 
must have reached him before to-day, and the rebels must have 
dispersed or been severely punished ere now. I shall desire John 
Conolly to remain with the Prince at Ghuznec till the road is clear.* 

The Ghilzyes and the Douranees were both in arms 
against the authority of the Shah and his supporters. 
The whole country of Western Afghanistan was in a fear¬ 
ful state of unrest. Rawlinson, at Candahar, saw clearly at 
this time the frail tenure by which we held our position 
in Afghanistan, and was continually warning the Envoy 
of the dangers which loomed so largely before him. 
But Macnaghten only censured his correspondent for his 
‘‘ unwarrantably gloomy vieAVs,” and denounced every¬ 
thing that was said about the unsettled state of the 
country as an “ idle statement.” How unwilling he was 
to believe that the clouds were gathering over his head, 
may be gleaned from the long letter which he wrote to 
Rawlinson on the 13th of June: 