

Your letter of the 7 th arrived this morning. I don’t like 
reverting to unpleasant discussions, but you know well that I 
have been frank with you from the beginning, and that I have 
• MS, Correspondence of Sir JV. IL Macnaghten, 



macnaghten’s opinions. 


595 


invariably told you of what I thought I had reason to complain. 
This may be confined to one topic—your taking an unwarrant¬ 
ably gloomy view of our position, and entertaining and dissemi¬ 
nating rumours favorable to that view. We have enough of 
difficulties and enough of croakers without adding to the number 
needlessly. I have just seen a letter from Mr. Dallas to Captain 
Johnson, in which he says the state of the country is becoming 
worse and worse every day. These idle statements may cause much 
mischief, and, often repeated as they arc, they neutralise my pro¬ 
testations to the contrary. I know them to be utterly false as re¬ 
gards this part of the country, and I have no reason to believe 
them to be true as regards your portion of the kingdom, merely 
because the Tokhees arc indulging in their accustomed habits of 
rebellion, or because Aktur Khan has a pack of ragamuffins at 
his heels. As I have said before, there is nothing in these matters 
which might not have been foreseen, or which ought to cause us 
the slightest uneasiness. We will take such precautions as shall 
prevent the Ghilzycs from annoying us; and this is all that is re¬ 
quisite for the present. We may safely leave the rest to time. 
As to the documents protesting against the appointment of Sun- 
mud, I look upon them as pure fudge. Send for the Janbaz. 
Let them make a forced march by night, and come in the rear 
of Aktur. Seize the villain, and hang him as high as Haman, 
and you will probably have no more disturbances. The Janbaz 
may remain out while the collections are going on, if necessary. 
I have already explained to you that I never intended offering a 
reward for Aktur’s head, nor should I approve of encouraging 
the man who has a blood-feud with him to put him out of the 
way. This, besides being objectionable, would be superfluous, 
because his enemy must know that we could not be other¬ 
wise than gratified at the removal of so atrocious a traitor. 
With regard to the Tymunees, all I meant was, that they 
should be encouraged to seize Aktur if he attempted to take 
refuge in their territory, and I thought that a large pecuniary 
reward would be necessary to overcome their natural scruples 
to such a proceeding.* 

But these Doiiranee children were now again to be 
corrected. “Though all was content and tranquillity 

• MS, Correspondence. 

2 Q 2 



596 


YAK MAHOMED AND THE DOUBANEES, 


from Mookoor to the Khybur,” it was necessary that our 
troops should be continually in the field. And it was 
not always child’s play in which they were summoned 
to engage. Aktur Khan, that “ indomitable Moofsid,” 
was now, at the beginning of July, still in arms before 
Ghiresk, with a body of three thousand men, and it was 
necessary to strike a blow at the rebel chief.* So 