



TBEATMENT OF MAJOR TODD. 


585 


been so insulted and so outraged in the person of its 
representatives. Shah Kamran, at a private audience, 
told one of the officers of the Mission that, but for his 
protection, “ not a Feringhee would have been left 
aliveand asked if he did not deserve some credit for 
not acting towards Todd and his companions as the 
Ameer of Bokhara had acted towards Colonel Stoddart. 
Yar Mahomed had intercepted Todd’s letters to Can- 
dahar. He had been for some time in an habitual 
state of intoxication. The seizure of the persons of the 
British officers, and the plunder of their property, had 
been openly discussed by the Wuzeer and his profligate 
friends, and there is little doubt that, if the Mission had 
remained longer at Herat, the members of it would have 
been subjected to indignities of the worst kind.* 

The Mission left Herat, and halted for a time at 
Ghiresk. When the tidings of its abrupt departure 
reached Lord Auckland at Calcutta, he was roused into 
a state of very unwonted exacerbation. He was not a 
hasty man—he was not an unjust one. But on this 
occasion he committed an act both hasty and unjust. 
He at once repudiated the proceedings of Major Todd 
at Herat; and removed him from political employment. 
The first intelligence of Todd’s suspension of the allow¬ 
ance was received from the Sindh agency. On the 11th 
of March, the Governor-General wrote to Macnaghten: 

1 will not pronounce upon Major Todd’s proceedings until I 


♦ “ My departure from Herat may 
appear to you unnecessarily precipi¬ 
tate ; and it is possible tliat 1 might 
have remained a lew days longer. But, 
had I done so, I should have exposed 
the officers of the Mission to certain 
insult and danger, and thus have pr^ 
vented the possibility of a future ami¬ 
cable adjustment of our differences 
with the Herat Government. Tlie 


Vizier had latterly been constantly 
in a state of intoxication ; and the 
project of seizing us, and plundering 
our property, was seriously discussed 
by himself and his drunken associates, 
as the readiest mode of replenishing 
his coffers.” — {Major Todd to Sir 
W, //. Macnaghten: March 5, 1841. 
MS. Records.] 



586 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURAKEBS. 


have an account of them from him. Yet they are bo contrary to 
the policy I have enjoined towards Herat—^so regardless of con¬ 
sequences, and of all considerations of prudence and propriety, 
that I can hardly conceive how they may by possibility be at¬ 
tended with circumstances such as may relieve him from that ex¬ 
treme displeasure with which, upon a first impulse, I am disposed 
to visit him.* 

But although Lord Auckland declared that he would 
not pronounce upon Todd’s conduct until he had re¬ 
ceived that officer’s explanations, he publicly remanded 
him to his regiment before those explanations were re- 
ceived.f How strongly he felt on the subject may be 
gathered from another letter, dated the 16th of March: 

I am writhing in anger and in bitterness at Major Todd^s con¬ 
duct at Herat, and have seen no course open to me, in regard to 
it, but that of discarding and disavowing him; and we have 
directed his dismissal to the provinces. What we have wanted 
in Afghanistan has been repose under an exhibition of strength, 
and he has wantonly, and against all orders, done that which Is 
most likely to produce general disquiet, and which may make our 
strength inadequate to the calls upon it. I look upon a march 
to Herat as perfectly impracticable; and if it were not so, I should 
look upon it, under present circumstances, as most inexpedient. 
We have taught Yar Mahomed to be more afraid of us than of 
the Persians. It is possible that, when he has been left a little 
time to himself, he will be more afraid of the Persians than of us 
—but, in the mean time, the state to which things have been 
brought is a cause of much anxiety and more apprehension to 
me.J 