

Against an armed interference with the affairs of 
Herat, Lord Auckland had always steadfastly set his 
face. It was his belief that it was necessary to establish 
ourselves firmly in Afghanistan before operating upon 

* MS. Correspondence, suspended the allowance to Herat. 

t When, however, he declared his He did not know that Todd had 
intention to wait for further informa- quitted Herat, 
tion, he only knew that Todd had J MS. Correspondence. 



INSTRUCTIONS OF LORD AUCKLAND. 


58T 


Herat; but Macnagbten always declared that there was 
no possibility of achieving the former object until the 
latter had been accomplished. But his instructions were 
imperative. Even after the departure of the Mission, 
the Governor-General counselled a mild and forbearing 
course. On the XOth of April, he wrote to Mao 
naghten: 

I cannot apprehend organised invasion from Herat, though 
there may be a foray on the frontier, which will not have the 
effect of making the advent of Yar Mahomed popular in Zemin- 
dawer. I think it, however, more likely that you will have 
to deal with letters and agents than with troops; and you ask me 
in what manner you are to receive overtures which may bo made 
to you by Yar Mahomed. I would receive them calmly and 
coldly, but not repulsively. I would show no impatience to 
renew a Mission to Herat. I would have it to be understood that 
the stoppage of the allowances was unauthorised, and that the 
detachment of a brigade to the citadel of Herat was not desired, 
and would not have been acceded to by the British Government, 
but that the conduct of the Vizier has given great offence, and 
that we can regard Herat with no confidence or friendly feeling 
until there shall have been on the side of that state an entire 
change of policy. I can only repeat, therefore, what I have said 
very many times within the last two years: That you must be 
strong in Afghanistan before you can hope to exercise a whole¬ 
some influence upon Herat; and I am glad that you are giving 
your attention to the condition of the internal government of 
the country.* 

* MS. Correspondence. Sir Jasper Afghanistan ours, we should, perhaps, 
Nicolls, as Commander-in-Chief, had be compelled to make Herat our ad- 
always consistently opposed the ad- vanced post; it is really the gate of 
vance to Herat, on the grounds that India. The problem is solved in a 
we had not troops for the purpose, military sense; politically, it remains 
and, as a Member of Council, on the with your Lordship and the au- 
grounds that we had not money. On thorities at home, acting on your 
the 1 8th of August, 1840, on returning views. To show front at Herat, and 
some papers to Lord Auckland, he at some selected point on or near the 
wrote to the Governor-General: “lam Oxus, we should be very strong in 
glad that your Lordship has repressed .^ghanistan. The elements of sta- 
the anxiety to annex Herat again to bility are sadly deficient there, and 
Caubul in the way hinted at. Were two quicksands interpose between 