



Ooo YAR MAHOMED AND THE DODBANEES. 

Whilst Lord Auckland was thus writhing in anger 
and bitterness at the thought of Major Todd’s departure 

Candahar and Caubul and our own means to leave as it is, unless tlie 


provinces. I mean the Punjaub and 
the Ameers’ country. Being out of 
India, we cannot keep such establish¬ 
ments as will be required there with¬ 
out a large augmentation of our army, 
and this without any perceptible in¬ 
crease of revenue. I very much 
doubt that Shah Soojah will ever be 
able to support himself. With this 
opinion, and seeing here the relief is 
given up on account of six regiments 
only, we may feel some apprehension 
that our numbers are at this moment 
too low. Discontent may follow.” 
“I wanted him,” adds Sir Jasper 
Nicolls, in his private journal, “to 
feel that we cannot go further, or 
even retain seven regiments in Af¬ 
ghanistan without increase of force. 
We shall maintain ourselves there 
with difficulty. Yet all the young di¬ 
plomatists want to aid Khiva—occu¬ 
py Balkh—threaten Bokhara—and, 
lastly, to seize Herat before its traitor 
Vizier may give it up to Persia and 
llussia. We are beset with hollow 
friends in that quarter.” “Lord 
Auckland said nothing of importance 
in reply, and did not allude to it 
next day in Council.” 

The only member who counte¬ 
nanced the proposed expedition was 
Mr. Prinsep. On the 15th of March 
(on which day intelligence of Todd’s 
departure was received), Sir Jasper 
Kicolls wrote, after Council, in his 
journal: “Lord Auckland has pro¬ 
hibited any advance. This accorded 
with my often-expressed opinion that 
wc are too much extended already; 
but when I signed my assent to-day 
in Council to his letters, I whispered 
to him, that if Herat was to be oc¬ 
cupied by us against the will of the 
Vizier, the present circumstances 
were very propitious. We had a 
large body of troops at hand, and 
probably their plans were not ma¬ 
tured.” “ On the 26th he wrote: 
“ Lord Auckland sent home a long 
minute regarding Herat, which be 


Persians should show that they were 
anxious to lay hands upon it. He 
means to preserve our footing in Af¬ 
ghanistan.” 

In what manner the home autho¬ 
rities regarded the Herat question 
may be gathered from another pas¬ 
sage in Sir Jasper Nicolls’ journal: 

“ August 19, 1841.—I wrote a h^ty 
paper to-day, and a short one, against 
the occupation of Herat, if it can 
possibly be avoided. It was no sooner 
written than orders were received to 
seize it, if the Persians made any 
preparations to attach any part of 
Kamran’s dominions to their own. 

I wrote in the way of warning. Lord 
A. also advised the government not 
to carry our arms further before 
this despatch was received. I only 
fully expressed my opinion that we 
are not justified in risking the 
revenues of India for anything ex¬ 
ternal. As this subject may be 
brought unpleasantly forward, I shall 
just note that, by the June mail, we 
received a letter desiring us to take 
Herat. There was by the same mail 
a later despatch, not so anxious about 
it, or more cautious. I thought 
Lord Auckland’s minute alluded to 
the June letter, and very desirous to 
damp our ardour in carrying on hos¬ 
tilities, and spending our money so 
far out of India, I wrote as I did. 
Two hours after my paper was sent 
in, I received for perusal the Secret 
Committee’s despatch of July, enclos¬ 
ing Lord Palmerston’s directions to 
check Persia in this object. They 
will not look for any difficulty to be 
started by me; but really I am most 
deeply impressed by a conviction that 
a continuance of so large a force, and 
of such expenditure beyond the In¬ 
dus, will go far to break us down. I 
have no desire to embarrass the ques¬ 
tion, or to take a distorted view of it. 
We all concurred with Lord Auck¬ 
land except Prinsep. He thinks 
that we must displace Tar Mahomed, 