



590 


TAB MAHOMED AND THE DOUBANEES. 


those which he had already sanctioned, and hoping to 
restore the tribes to their allegiance. But their dis¬ 
affection was too deeply rooted to be operated upon by 
such measures. The entire system of government was 
offensive to them. The presence of the British was a 
perennial source of irritation. What they regarded as 
their legitimate influence had been usurped by the 
Feringhees; and they were soon ready again to appear 
in the field, and cross their sabres with the foreign 
bayonets. 

And as the Douranees were mustering their men, the 
Ghilzyes also in Western Afghanistan were showing 
how little we had yet done, either to dragoon them or 
bribe them into quiescence. Early in the spring, with¬ 
out sufficient pretext for such a proceeding, a Ghilzye 
fort had been attacked, under the directions of Major 
Lynch, one of ovu' political officers, by a party of the 
Shah’s regular troops under Captain Macan, aided by 
Sanders, the engineer; and the chief, with fifteen of his 
men, had been killed by the assailants.* The act, which 


* Th^se proceedings in the Ghil¬ 
zye country wer^reatly disapproved 
of both by the Envoy and the Go¬ 
vernor-General ; and Major Lynch, 
the political officer at Ehclat-i-Ghil- 
zye, subsequently forfeited his 
pointment. The Envoy wrote : “ It 
is a great pity that our officers will 
thrust themselves and us into a di¬ 
lemma before we are prepared for it. 
1 foresaw the likelihood of the Ghil¬ 
zyes resenting the erection of a fort 
in the heart of their country. But why 
should we go and knock our heads 
against mud forts ? Why should we 
not have waited till the Ghilzyes 
chose to attack usP*’— [aSiV W. H, 
Macnaghten to Major Rawlinson: 
May 1841. MS. Correspondence.’] 
The Governor* General thus con¬ 
veyed his opinions on the subject: 

** I am looking with anxiety for fur¬ 
ther accounts from Khelat-i-Ghilzye, 
and the more so, as I must regard 


with great mistrust the manner in 
which our affairs have been managed 
in that direction. It has seemed to 
all of us to be wise that a mili¬ 
tary post should be established of 
some strength between Candahar and 
Ghuznee. The steps towards its es¬ 
tablishment should nave been quietly 
and carefully taken, and at a time 
when we are strong, and without ob¬ 
structions in other quarters. In this 
instance we have been weak at Can¬ 
dahar. We have had (1 hope not up 
to this time) troops beyond the Hel- 
mund, and Major Lynches proceed¬ 
ings have been marked by a vapour¬ 
ing and needless parade, such as has 
been most likely to provoke popular 
excitement. I hope by every de¬ 
spatch to learn that you have warned 
an officer of better qualifications to 
take his place.**— [Lord Auckland to 
Sir W. H. Macnaghten: June 5, 
1842. MS. Correspondence.] 



DEFEAT OF THE 6HILZTES. 


591 


in itself was a gallant military exploit, was looked upon 
as an unjustifiable aggression; and did much to keep 
alive the animosity which we had already contrived to 
excite. It soon began to bear the accustomed fruit. To 
assist us in keeping the Ghilzyes in check, it had been 
determined to restore the dismantled fort of Khelat-i- 
Ghilzye, which lies between Candahar and Caubul, and 
to occupy it as a military position. The tribes had wit¬ 
nessed with jealousy the restoration of the works, and 
clustered menacingly around the place. Their irritation 
was now increased. They assumed a more threatening 
attitude. So Nott sent out a force against them. 
Colonel Wymer, a good and successful officer, with 
400 men of his own regiment, the 38th Sepoys, four 
horse-artillery guns, and a party of Christie’s horse, took 
the field in the month of May. The Ghilzyes, eager 
for the conflict, moved down from Khelat-i-Ghilzye to 
meet our advancing troops; and, on the 19th, gave 
them battle. Night was beginning to fall when they 
came up with Wymer’s camp at Assiai-Ilmee. A Ghilzye 
chief of high estate, named Gool Mahomed, known as 
the “ Gooroo,” who had threatened Keane’s army 
nearly two years before, was at the head of the 
tribes. They came on with unwavering gallantry, but 
were met with a heavy fire from Hawkins’s guns, 
which, served with equal rapidity and precision, com¬ 
mitted mighty havoc in their ranks. Upon this, the 
Ghilzyes, resolutely intending to attack simultaneously 
both flanks and the centre of Wymer’s force, divided them¬ 
selves into three columns; and, coolly and deliberately, 
they came down sword in hand to the charge. Wymer 
had an extensive convoy to protect. His movements, 
therefore, were crippled; and he was compelled to stand 
on his defence. But the destroying grape from the guns, 
and the steady musketry fire of the Sepoys, sent back the 