



attempts to conciliate the douranees. 589 


from Herat, the tribes on the Helmund, whom Yar Ma¬ 
homed had endeavoured to excite, were collecting their 
strength for another struggle. In spite of all our concilia¬ 
tory efforts, the Douranees had not been quieted. Aktur 
Khan had outwardly tendered his allegiance to the 
King, and had received a dress of honour, with an as¬ 
surance from our political officers that the past would be 
forgotten.* The revenue officers, whom the Douranees 
detested, had been removed. The old earless minister, 
Moollah Shikore, had been replaced by Oosman Khan, 
a younger, an abler, and a more honest man; and Mac- 
naghten was contemplating other fiscal reforms than 


and he apprehends nothing from the 
distance or expenditure, in com- 
arison with what must follow from 
is keeping Afghanistan in revolt. 
My argument as to the intolerable 
drain was taken from his minute of 
March.'' Again, on the 31st of 
August, Sir Jasper wrote : “Weekly 
wc expend large sums upon the Shah 
and the country—not only in allow¬ 
ances, salaries, supplies, stores, pen¬ 
sions, compensations, and numberless 
contingencies ; but barracks, stables, 
forts, magazines, and even a long 
causeway in Cutchee. Yet no return 
can ever be made. To crown all — 
the hUster HeratJournal of 
Sir Jasper Nicolls.~\ 

* Lieutenant Elliot to Major Raw- 
linson: MS, Correspondence. Elliot 
went out into the Zemindawer 
country and met Aktur Khan in the 
camp of the Douranee Sirdar, Atta 
Mahomed Khan. He conducted his 
negotiations with some tact and ad¬ 
dress ; but Major Kawlinson had 
little hope that these conciliatory 
efforts would have any permanent 
effect on the tribes. Forwarding a 
report of Elliot's proceedings, he 
wrote to Macnaghten: “I have 
reason to believe that a very bitter 
feeling of hostility to ourselves pre¬ 
vails amongst the Douranees gene¬ 
rally; and thisfeeling, which could not 
but ^ highly dangerous to us in the 


event of foreign invasion, would pro¬ 
bably be confirmed and extended by 
any measures of coercion which fell 
short of extermination. At the 
present time, therefore, when the 
Government of Herat is threatening 
our western frontier, and endeavour¬ 
ing by inflammatory letters to ex¬ 
cite opposition to his Majesty Shah 
Soojah's authority in all parts of the 
province, it would be, I think, par¬ 
ticularly desirable to avoid any col¬ 
lision with the Douranee tribes which 
might add a further impetus to their 
inclination to join the ranks of our 
enemies. I do not anticipate, at the 
same time, that, by the conciliatory 
treatment recommended by Lieu¬ 
tenant Elliot, we gain any other ad¬ 
vantage than that of temporary tran¬ 
quillity ; and however prudent, there¬ 
fore, it may be at present to induce 
the rebel chief of Zemindawer to 
abstain from disorders, by the hope 
of obtaining through his forbearance 
substantial personal benefits, I still 
think that, when the danger of foreign 
aggression is removed, and efficient 
means are at our disposal, the rights 
of his Majesty's Government should 
be asserted in that strong and dig¬ 
nified manner which can alone en¬ 
sure a due respect being paid to his 
authority ."—[March 11, 1841. MS, 
Records,} 