

It is true the population is exclusively Mahomedan, but it 
is split into rival sects; and we all know that of all antipathies 
the sectarian is the most virulent. We have Hazaras, Ghilzyes, 
Douranees, and Kuzzilbashes, all at daggers drawn with each 
other, and in every family there are rivals and enemies. Some faults 
of management must necessarily be committed on the first assump¬ 
tion of the administration of a new country, and the Douranee 
outbreak may be partially attributed to such faults; but what, 
after all, do such outbreaks signify? The modem history of India 
teems with such instances. There is hardly a district in which 



600 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


some desperate adventurer has not appeared at some time or other, 
and drawn the entire population after him. The whole province 
of Bareilly, in 1817, rose against us on a religious war-cry. The 
whole province of Cuttack, shortly afterwards, followed the stan¬ 
dard of the rebel Jugbeneda, and we had infinite trouble in 
quelling the insurrection. Instances of this kind might be infi¬ 
nitely multiplied, and yet we find the effects of such outbreaks 
are very evanescent. The people of this country are very credulous. 
They believe any story invented to our prejudice; but they will 
very soon learn that we are not the cannibals we are painted. 
Mr. Gorman’s fate was doubtless very melancholy; but are there 
no assassinations in other countries? I read in Bombay Times 
only this morning an account of a cavalry officer being shot at in 
the open day in one of our villages. You say, The infatuated 
town’s-people are even beginning now to show their teeth; there 
have been three cases to-day of stones thrown from the tops of the 
houses on Sepoys’ heads walking along the streets.” Certainly 
our troops can be no great favourites in a town where they have 
turned out half the inhabitants for their own accommodation; 
but I will venture to say there is not a county town in England 
where soldiers are quartered in which similar excesses have not 
happened. European and Native soldiers have traversed the town 
of Candahar unarmed; and though it is to be apprehended that 
their conduct has been occasionally very aggravating, only two 
assaults have been committed upon them. When I went to 
Hyderabad in 1810, and for many years after, no European could 
venture to show himself in the city, such was the state of feeling 
against us. Look upon this picture and on that. Now I believe 
the lieges of Hyderabad look upon us as very innocent Kaffirs. 

You are quite right, I think, in directing Pattinson to accept 
the submission of all the rebels, save Aktur, who may be desirous 
of coming in. They should be required to furnish security for 
appearance sake. But these people are perfect children, and 
should be treated as such. If we put one naughty boy in the 
corner, the rest will be terrified. We have taken their plaything, 
power, out of the hands of theDouranee chiefs, and they are pouting 
a good deal in consequence. They did not know how to use it. 
In their hands it was useless and even hurtful to their master, and 
we were obliged to transfer it to scholars of our own. They insti¬ 
gate the Moollahs, and the Moollahs preach to the people; but 