

Being appointed to the command of a horse-field bat¬ 
tery, stationed at Delhi, he left Dum-Dum for the im¬ 
perial city, where he continued to serve, until, shortly 
before the Sikh invasion, he attained that great object of 
regimental ambition, the command of a troop of horse- 
artillery. In the Upper Provinces, he had more than 
once been disquieted by the illness of his young and 
fondly-loved wife ; but the heavy blow, which was to 
prostrate all his earthly happiness, did not descend upon 
him until within a few days of that memorable 18th of 
December, which saw the British army fling itself upon 
the Sikh batteries at Mudkhi. It was at Ferozshuhur 
that Todd, broken-hearted, with a strong presentiment 
of his approaching end, perhaps, in the extremity of his 
anguish, scarcely wishing to escape destruction, led his 
troop into action and perished in the unequal conflict,* 
and among the many who fell on that mournful day, 
there was not a braver soldier or a better man. 

♦ Calcutta Review, A round shot from one of the Sikh batteries, I 
believe, carried off his head. 



THE GATHEBING OF THE STORM. 


607 


CHAPTER IV. 

[September—October: 1841.] 

Aspect of Affairs at Caubul—The King—The Envoy—Burnes—Elphinstone 
—The English at Caubul—Ex[>ense9 of the VVar—Retrenchment of the 
Subsidies—Risings of the Ghilzycs—Sale’s Brigade—Gatherings in the 
Kohistan.—Sale’s Arrival at Gundamuck—The 1st of November. 

Taking advantage of the lull that followed the defeat of 
the Dourauees and the Ghilzyes in Western Afghanistan, 
it is advisable that I should glance briefly at the general 
condition of things at the capital in this month of Sep¬ 
tember. 

The King was in the Balia Hissar. Discontented 
and unhappy, he complained that he had no real autho¬ 
rity; that the English gentlemen were managing the 
affairs of his kingdom; and that he himself was a mere 
pageant and a show. He had watched with satisfaction 
the growth of the difficulties which were besetting the 
path of his allies, and was not without a hope that their 
further development would be attended by our with¬ 
drawal from so troubled a sphere. It was plain to him 
that, although deference was outwardly shown to his 
opinions, and a pretence of consulting his wishes was 
made by his British advisers, they really held all the 
power in their hands; and he said, complainingly, to one 



608 


SHAH SOOJAH. 


of them,* for whom he entertained no little personal 
affection, that he “ did not understand his position.” The 
appointment of the new minister, Oosman Ehan, in the 
place of his old and tried servant, Moollah Shikore, had 
been extremely distasteful to him; and it chafed him to 
think that a functionary so appointed must necessarily 
be less eager to fulfil his wishes than those of his Euro¬ 


pean allies.f 

* Captain Macgregor.— \_See Mac- 
gregor's Report on the Causes of the 
Caubul Outbreak. 

f The King’s health too, began to 
fail him about this time, and Mac- 
iiagliten began to consider the expe¬ 
diency of sending for the heir ap- 
arent. On the 5th of September, 
e wrote to Rawlinson, complaining 
that his Majesty, since the return of 
his family, had been in a very nerv¬ 
ous and irritable state: 