



MAJOR TODD. 


606 


him. His departure from Herat was inopportune; for, 
although Todd had no reason to believe the settle- 
ment of our differences with Persia was any nearer to its 
consummation than it had been for some time, they were 
then on the eve of adjustment. So Todd, remanded to 
his regiment, proceeded to join it at the head-quarters of 
the Artillery at Dum-Dum. “ Equal to either fortune,” he 
fell back upon the common routine of regimental service, 
and, in command of a company of Foot Artillery, devo» 
ted himself with as much earnest and assiduous zeal to 
the minutim of military duty, as he had done, a year 
before, to the affairs of the Herat Mission. It has often 
been said that political employ unfits a man for regimen¬ 
tal duty; but Major Todd, from the time that he first 
rejoined his regiment to the hour of his death, never 
slackened in his attention to his military duties ; and, 
perhaps, in the whole range of the service, there was not 
a more zealous, a more assiduous—in otlier words, a 
more conscientious regimental officer than the old anta¬ 
gonist of Yar Mahomed. The trait of character here 
illustrated is a rarer one than many may suppose. No¬ 
thing in his political life became him like the leaving of 
it. There are few who know how, gracefully, to descend. 


small share which I have had in 
these proceedings. Had I waited 
for orders, the Russians might have 
been within a few marches of Khiva; 
and had we been satisfied with the 
tales of Sir Alexander’s agents, we 
should have now believed the Russians 
300,000 strong, and to be within as 
short a distance of Caubul. The road 
between Teheran and this place is 
infested by roving bands of Toorko- 
mans, who have been let loose on 
Persian Khorassan by the Khan of 
Khiva. His Highness thinks that he 
is thus doing us service; but 1 have 
written to undeceive him in this mat¬ 
ter, and I have pointed out to him 
that the practice of man-stealing is 
abhorrent to us, whether the man be 

fi T^iiaatnn rtn n T^Ai*oinrt TTia Arkn/1ii/»f 


on this occasion reminds me of an 
answer given to me by Mahomed 
Shah’s Wuzeer, one Meerza Maho¬ 
med, a great oaf. I had been super¬ 
intending some artillery practice at 
Teheran. A jackass having been 
I)laced as the target, I remonstrated 
against the cruelty of putting up one 
of God’s creatures as a mark, when 
wood or canvas would answer every 
purpose. The Wuzeer replied, * On 
my eyes be it, I will stick up a j)ony 
next time.’ As if I had specially 
pleaded the case of jackasses. 

“ Sheil thinks that the prospect of 
a settlement of our differences with 
Persia is as distant as ever, and is 
strongly opposed to my plan of al¬ 
lowing the bhah to keep Ghorian, and 



606 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


It i8 not improbable that these years of regimental 
duty were the happiest period of his life. Shortly after 
his return to the Presidency, from which he had so long 
been absent, he married; and in the enjoyment of domes¬ 
tic happiness, such as has rarely been surpassed, he soon 
forgot the injustice that had been done to him. Cheer¬ 
fully doing his duty in that state of life to which it had 
pleased God to call him, respected and beloved by all 
who had the means of appreciating the simplicity of his 
manners, the kindness of his heart, the soundness of his 
intelligence, and the integrity of his conduct, he found 
that, in exchanging the excitement of a semi-barbarous 
Court for the tranquillity of cantonment life and the 
companionship of a gentle and amiable wife, the barter, 
though not self-sought, had been greatly to his ad¬ 
vantage. 