

The Ghilzyes, too, had received another check. Co¬ 
lonel Chambers, early in August, had been sent out 
against them, with a party of his own regiment, the 5th 
Light Cavalry, the 16th and 43rd Sepoy Regiments, and 
some details of Irregular Horse. He came up with the 
enemy on the morning of the 5th; but before he could 
bring the main body of his troops into action, a party 
of his cavalry had fallen upon them and scattered them 
in disastrous flight. 

Under the influence of these victories, Macnaghten’s 
confidence rose higher and higher. The Douranees were 
broken, and the Ghilzyes had submitted “ almost with¬ 
out a blow.” Aktur Khan had fled, and the “ Gooroo” 
had surrendered. Now, indeed, the Envoy thought that 
he might report “ all quiet fi:om Dan to Beersheba.” If 
anything caused him a moment’s inquietude, it was the 
thought that Aktur Khan, the favourite son of Dost 
Mahomed, was still abroad, hovering about Khooloom. 
With something that now seems like a strange presenti¬ 
ment, he wrote that “ the fellow would be after some 
mischief, should the opportunity present itself.” It was 
on the 20th of August that, writing to Mr. Robertson, 
he thus expressed himself: 



MACNAGHTEN ON THE DOURANEBfiL 


603 


The victory of the Helmund was very complete. I believe the 
enemy on that occasion was as numerous a body as could ever 
be congregated in this country, consisting of some 4000 or 5000 
men. The Douranees want one more threshing, and then they 
would be quite satisfied of the futility of opposing us; but my 
last letter from Rawlinson gave me no hope that they would 
collect again. The whole of the Ghilzye tribes have submitted 
almost without a blow; for the gallant little afiair in which the 
5th Cavalry redeemed the honour of that branch of the service, 
could hardly be dignified with the name of a fight. Those who 
knew this country when it was ruled by Barukzyes, are amazed at 
the metamorphosis it has undergone, and with so little bloodshed. 
The former rulers were eternally fighting with their subjects 
from one year’s end to another. Now we cannot move a 7iaick 
and four without having all the newspapers setting up a yell about 
the unpopularity of the Shah. The Shah is unpopular with the 
Douranee Khans, and wo have made him so by supplanting them, 
and taking the military power which they were incompetent to 
use from their hands into our own. With all other classes his 
Majesty is decidedly, but deservedly, popular, and the Khans are 

too contemptible to be cared about. 

We have had very unpleasant intelligence from Bokhara, it 
being reported that Colonel Stoddart is again in disgrace and con¬ 
finement; and I am the more alarmed about this, from thinking 
it probable that Arthur Conoily will return from Kokund •oia 
Bokhara. But the intelligence requires confirmation. Mahomed 
Aktur, the Dost’s favourite son, is still at Khooloom, and has re¬ 
jected my overture to come in. The fellow will be after some 
mischief, should the opportunity present itself. . . . You will 