



598 


YAB, MAHOMED AND THE DOUBANEES. 


passage of the river. Woodburn made his arrangements 
for their reception. The Douranees made a spirited 
attack, but Woodburn’s infentry, well supported by 
Cooper’s guns, met them with too prompt and sure a 
fire to encourage them to greater boldness. The Janbaz, 
already graduating in treachery and cowardice, covered 
themselves with that peculiar kind of glory which clung 
to them to the end of the war. It was a busy night. 
The enemy far outnumbered Woodburn; but the steady 
gallantry of his gminers and his footmen achieved the 
success they deserved. Before daybreak the enemy had 
withdrawn. It would have been a great thing to have 
followed up and dispersed the rebels, but with all the 
country against him, and a body of horse at his back, 
on which no reliance could be placed, it would have 
been madness to make the attempt. 

The month of August found the Envoy still cheerful 
and sanguine. The convulsions of the Douranees and 
the spasms of the Ghilzycs were regarded by him as the 
accompaniments only of those infantine fevers which 
were inseparable from the existence of the tribes. In 
vain Eawlinson, with steady eye watching these symp¬ 
toms, and probing with deep sagacity the causes of the 
mortal ailments out of which arose all those fierce 
throes of anguish, protested that throughout Western 
Afghanistan there was a strong national feeling against 
us; and that difficulties and dangers were coiling their 
serpent folds around us with irresistible force. Mac- 
naghten still asked what we had to fear, and thus, on 
the 2nd of August, addressed his less sanguine colleague: 

I am not going to read you a lecture, first, because when you 
indited your letter ot the 28th ult. you pleaded guilty to the 
influence of bile; and secondly, because at the present writing I 
must own the same impeachment; but I must pen a few remarks, 
in the hope of inducing you to regard matters a little more 



ENGAGEMENT WITH AKTUE KHAN. 


599 


“ couleur de rose." You say, “ The state of the country^ causes me 
many an anxious thought— we may thresh the Douranees over 
and over again, but this rather aggravates than obviates the diffi¬ 
culty of overcoming the national feeling against us—in fact, our 
tenure is positively that of military possession, and the French in 
Algiers, and the Russians in Circassia, affiord us an example on a 
small scale of the difficulty of our position.” Now upon what do 
you found your assertion that there is a national feeling against 
us, such as that against the French in Algiers or the Russians in 
Circassia? Solely, so far as I know, because the turbulent Dou¬ 
ranees have risen in rebellion. From Mookoor to the Khybur 
Pass all is content and tranquillity, and wherever we Europeans 
go we are received witli respect, and attention, and welcome. 
But the insurrection of the Douranees is no new occurrence. The 
history of the rule of the Barukzye Sirdars would show that they 
were engaged in one continuous struggle with their turbulent 
brethren. If they were able to reduce them to subjection with 
their contemptible means, what should wo have to fear from them? 
We have given them something to lose which they had not before; 
and you may rely upon it that they will be quiet enough as soon 
as they are satisfied (which they ought to be pretty well by this 
time) of the futility of opposition, provided some means are 
adopted of preventing Yar Mahomed from carrying on his in¬ 
trigues. Then, the Ghilzyes have been in arms. True. But it 
would have been unreasonable to suppose that they should sur¬ 
render their independence without a struggle, and wo have now 
put the bit in their mouths. I do not concur with you as to the 
difficulty of our position. On the contrary, I think our prospects 
are most cheering, and with the materials we have there ought to 
be little or no difficulty in the management of the country. 