

see that Shah Soojah has most handsomely given back Cutchee 
and Moostung to the young Khan of Khelat. His Majesty’s re- 
venue is little more than fifteen lakhs per annum—hardly enough 
for the maintenance of his personal state—and yet the government 
below are perpetually writing to me that this charge and that 
charge is to be defrayed out of his “ Majesty’s resources!” God 
help the poor man and his resources!! The country is perfectly 
quiet from Dan to Bcersheba.* 


^ MS* Correspondence. 



604 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


But although all was quiet from Dan to Beersheba, 
there was a considerable force out in the Dehrawut, and 
a party of indomitable Douranees still defying the King 
and his allies. Akrum Khan refused to submit. It was 
determined, therefore, to make an attempt to seize him. 
It was not difficult to find one, willing for a few pieces 
of gold, to lead a small party of our people to the lair 
of the untamed chief. John Conolly, with a little band 
of horsemen, went out on this duty. It is said that the 
legs of the guide were tied under his horse’s belly, that 
he might not treacherously escape. Akrum Khan was 
surprised, captured, and carried, a doomed captive, to 
Candahar, where, under the orders of Prince Timour, he 
was blown from a gun. 

I cannot close this chapter without a few more words 
relating to Todd and the Herat Mission. That, in one 
sense, the Mission failed, is certain; but, there were some 
of Todd’s measures which did not fail, and it is not to 
be forgotten that on his own responsibility he despatched 
Abbott and Shakespear to Khiva, and the good that 
was done by these Missions was often in the retrospect 
a solace to him in after days, when smarting under the 
injustice of his masters.’*' Lord Auckland never forgave 


* I cannot refrain from quoting 
here a letter on this subject from 
Todd to Outraiii, written before his 
removal from political employment: 

“ Your kind letter of November 
3rd reached me a few days ago. I 
would fain send you an adequate 
return, but I am out of sorts, and, 
beshles, have but little to tell you. 
Shakespear's proceedings have been 
in all respects admirable. The zeal, 
perseverance, and judgment he has 
displayed throughout his arduous 
undertaking, entitle him to the 
highest praise; and I trust he will 
be rewarded as he deserves. The 
property restored by Russia is valued 


at upwards of a crore of rupees; 
and the number of merchants and 
others released, exceeds 600. The 
news was received at Khiva with 
every demonstration of joy; and 
Shakespear’s name has been inserted 
in the calendar of Oosbeg saints! 
The^ Russians, by liberating their 
captives immediately on the arrival 
of Shakespear and his ‘ company,* 
have given a strong proof that they 
are^ unwilling or unable to renew 
their attempt on Khiva; and 1 hope 
that they will now be prevented 
taking up that formidable position on 
the road to India. I cannot help 
congratulating myself on even the 