



ENGAGEMENT AT SECUNDBEABAD. 


601 


this will be very temporary. The evil of it we must have borne 
with, or abandoned all hope of forming a national army.* . . . 

The Douranee children, however, required more chas¬ 
tisement. No man could have done more than Wood- 
burn did with his means; but these means were in¬ 
sufficient. It was the custom then, both against the 
Ghilzyes and the Douranees, to send out detachments 
sufficiently large to accomplish, with the aid of their 
guns, small victories over the enemy, and so to increase 
the bitterness of their hostility, without breaking their 
strength. Aktur Khan was still in arms. Banded with 
him was Akruin Khan, another Douranee chief, inspired 
with like bitter hatred of the restored monarch and his 
Feringhce allies. A force mider Captain Griffin was 
now sent out against them. It was strong in the 
mounted branch. Eight hundred sabres, three hundred 
and fifty bayonets, and four six-pounder guns, followed 
Griffin into the field of Zemindawer. On the 17th of 
August he came up with the insurgents. It was a 
moment of some anxiety. The Janbaz had not by their 
conduct under Woodburn won the confidence of the 
British officers. Nott always mistrusted them, and the 
feeling was, not unreasonably, shared by others.f But 
here they were associated with the men of the King’s 
regular cavalry, and they may have felt the danger of 
defection. Be the cause what it may, they did no 

• MS. Correspondence. peruses the General’s subsequent, and 

t jSTott’s disparagement of the Jan- most uncandid despatch, in which he 
baz so irritated Macnaghten, and omitted all notice of the exemplary 
displeased Lord Auckland, that his conduct of the Janbaz at Secunder- 
removal from Candahar was contem- abad. 

plated. The following extracts from “ September 5.—You are not likely 

Maciiaghten’s correspondence show to have Xott with you much longer, 
what was thought on the subject: His conduct in respect to the Janbaz 
^^Septemhe-2 .—Between you and me, has elicited the severest displeasure 
Lord A. is much displeased with of government, by whom he nas been 
General Nott for his light and indis- declared disqualified for his present 
criminate censure and disparagement important command.”—[ MS. Com * 
of the Janbaz; and I think his dis- spondence.^ 
pleasure will be increased when he 



602 


YAE MAHOMED AND THE DOUEANEES. 


shrink from the encounter. The enemy were strongly 
posted in a succession of walled gardens and small 
forts, from which they opened a heavy matchlock fire 
upon our advancing troops; but the fire of our guns and 
musketry drove them from their enclosures, and then 
the cavalry, headed by the young Prince Sufder Jung, 
who had something more than the common energy of 
the royal race, charged with terrific effect, and utterly 
broke the discomfited mass of Douranees. The victory 
was a great one. Aktur Khan fled. The Douranees 
were disheartened; and for a time they sunk into the 
repose of feebleness and exhaustion. 