

“ September 5 .—I have lately had 
a great deal of trouble with our good 
old King, who, since the arrival of 
his family, seems to have lost all his 
nerve and temper. But I hope to 
bring him round again soon, for he 
has a large stock of sterling good 
sense.” .... 

By the beginning of the third week 
of September, the King had worked 
himself into a fever : 

“ September 21.—His Majesty is 
ill of fever, which has been hanging 
about him for some time; and, at his 
time of life, the issue, to say the 
least of it, is very doubtful. It seems 
to be in the highest degree desirable 
that Shah-zadah Timour should be 
here, in the event of a fatal termina¬ 
tion of his Majesty’s illness. The 
Nizam-ood-Dowlah and I have had a 
serious conversation this morning on 
the subject. He thinks, and 1 am 
disposed to agree with him, that it 
might be well if Shah-zadah Timour 
were to address an areeza to his Ma¬ 
jesty, stating how much grieved he 
was to hear of his Majesty’s illness— 
the intelligence of which had filled 
him with so much uneasiness as to 


incapacitate him from the proper per¬ 
formance of the duties of government, 
and expressing an earnest desire to 
come and kiss his Majesty’s feet, and 
thereby give relief to his mind.” 

Next day, however, the King was 
better, and Macnaghten wrote : 

“ September 22.—I am happy to 
tell you that his Majesty is very 
much better to-day—so much so, in¬ 
deed, that if you have not spoken to 
the Shah-zadah on the subject of my 
yesterday’s note, 1 think it unneces¬ 
sary to do so.” 

Prince Timour was, at this time, 
overnor of Candahar. Futteh Jung 
ad, in the first instance, been sta¬ 
tioned at the western capital; but 
the atrocities be bad committed com¬ 
pelled his removal. One of Mac- 
naghten’s letters (5ep^em5cr 21, 1840) 
contains an abominable story, which 
had travelled to Caubul, hardly fit 
for publication, but horribly illustra¬ 
tive of the cruelty of the Prince. He 
was subsequently removed, and his 
brother, a very moderate and respect¬ 
able man, sent to Candahar in his 
place. Sir Jasper Nicolls* Journal 
contains a notice of the Prince’s re¬ 
moval: “ Futteh Jung has just been 
removed by force from Candahar, 
for tyranny, extortion, drunkenness, 
and all manner of crimes. His re¬ 
moval was skilfully performed by 
Major Rawlinson. The fellow loaded 
his double-barrelled pistols when he 
suspected all was not right; but his 
attached servants were one by one 
called away, and his younger brother 
also, and he feared to act alone.”— 
IMS. Journal^ 



THE GOVERNORSHIP OP BOMBAY, 


609 


Macnaghten, indeed, was paramount at Cauljul. But 
the days of his Afghan sovereignty were numbered. 
He was about to receive the reward of a life of success¬ 
ful and appreciated service, and to end his official days 
in comparative quiet and repose. He was about to 
escape out of the cares and inquietudes—the difficulties 
and dangers—the incessant harassing turmoil and ex¬ 
citement of a life of resjionsibility among a turbulent 
and discontented people, and to commence a new career 
of useful and honoured public service, upon a less 
stormy and tumultuous scene. He had been appointed 
Governor of Bombay. The same recognition of approved 
zeal and capacity which had been extended to Malcolm 
and Elphinstone, had now come to testify the estimation 
in which Macnaghten’s services were held by his em¬ 
ployers. It was a high and a flattering mark of con¬ 
fidence, and it was doubly welcome after all the doubts 
and misgivings engendered in his mind by the implied 
censures of his immediate superior. The value of the 
gift, too, was enhanced by the seasonableness of the time 
at which it was received. Macnaghten looked around 
him, and saw that “ everything Avas quiet from Dan to 
Beersheba;” and he rejoiced in the thought that he was 
about to quit Afghanistan for ever, and to carry with 
him no burden of anxiety and fear. 