

Burnes was also at Caubul. He had been there ever 
since the restoration of the Shah, in a strange unrecognised 
position, of which it is difficult to give any intelligible 
account. He used to say, that he was in the “ most 
nondescript of situations.” It appears to have been his 
mission in Afghanistan to draw a large salary every 
month, and to give advice that was never taken.* This 

* On the Ist of April, 1841, Bumes to his brother: “ I am now a highly 
described his position thus, in a letter paid idler, having no less than 3500 

VOL. I. 2 R 



610 


THS GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


might have satisfied many men. It did not satisfy 
Bumes. lie said that he wanted responsibility; and 
under Macnaghten he had none. He had no precise 
duties of any kind; but he watched all that was going 
on in Afghanistan with a comprehending eye and an 
understanding brain, and he wrote, in the shape of let¬ 
ters to Macnaghten, long and elaborate papers on the 
state and prospects of Afghanistan, which his official 
chief dismissed with a few pencil-notes, for the most 
part of contemptuous dissent. Burnes saw clearly that 
ever 5 rthing was going wrong. He probed, deeply and 
searchingly, the great wound of national discontent—a 
mighty sore that was ever running—and he felt in his 
inmost soul that the death-tlirocs of such a system could 
not be very I'cmote. But better days were now begin¬ 
ning to dawn upon him. He had been waiting for 
Macnaghten’s office, and now, at last, it seemed to 
be within his reach. A few weeks, and he would be 
supreme at Caubul; and the great object of his ambition 
gained. 

The command of the troops was in the hands of Ge¬ 
neral Elphinstone—an old officer of the Queen’s service, 
of good repute, gentlemanly manners, and aristocratic 
connexions. He had succeeded Sir Willoughby Cotton 
in the early part of the year. But it must have been a 
wonder to him, as it was to all who knew him, what 
business he had in such a place. He had no Indian 
experience o» any kind, and he was pressed down by 
physical infirmities. When Sir Willoughby Cotton 
imtimated his desire, on the plea of ill health, to be re¬ 
lieved from the command of the troops in Afghanistan, 


rupees a month as Resident at Caubul, by which I mean that I give paper 
and being, m the lawyers call it, only opinions, but I do not work them 
counsel, and that, too, a dumb one— out.” 



GEanmAi. elphinstone. 


611 


there was an officer already in the country to whom 
their charge might have been safely delegated. But he 
was not in ffivour either at the Mission or at the 
Calcutta Government House. Sir Jasper Nicolls would 
have placed Nott in command; but there were obstacles 
to his appointment, at which I have already hinted; and 
it was deemed expedient to send to Caubul a man of a 
more ductile nature, with as few opinions of his own as 
might be to clash with those of the political chief. So 
Lord Auckland despatched General Elphinstone to Af¬ 
ghanistan—not in ignorance of his disqualifications, for 
they were pointed out to him by others—but in spite of 
a clear perception of them. Whether those who sent 
the brave old gentleman to India with all his infirmities 
thick upon him, recommended him for this especial 
field of service, or whether any notions of routine and 
the obligations of the roster pressed themselves upon 
Lord Auckland with irresistible force, I cannot confi¬ 
dently declare; but so inexplicable by any reference to 
intelligible human motives and actions is an appoint¬ 
ment of this kind, that it is impossible not to recognise 
in such a dispensation a mightier agency than that of 
man, or to reject the belief that, when Elphinstone went 
to Caubul, the curse which sate upon our unholy policy 
was working onward for our overthrow. 