




REBELLION OF THE DOUKANEES. 


597 


Woodburn, a fine dashing officer, who commanded one 
of the Shah’s regiments, was sent out against him, with 
his own corps (the 5th Infantry), two detachments of 
Janbaz, or A^han Horse, under Hart and Golding, and 
some guns of the Shah’s Horse Artiller)', under Cooper. 
The enemy were posted on the otlier side of the river. 
Woodbiun tried the lords, but they were impassable. 
Hart, however, had tried them at anotlier point, but, 
finding himself unsupported, he returned. This was in 
early morning. Four hours after noon the enemy 
struck their camp, and soon afterwards commenced the 


time in urging tlie Prince to seize and 
imprison liim. In my letter of yester¬ 
day, 1 named four disaffected JMool- 
lalis, wlioni I suggested that the 
Prince should scud for and latc 
soundly. This should be done in open 
Durbar ; and I am not certain that 
it would not be advisable, ^pour e/t- 
courager les autres,* to hang up one or 
two of the rebels taken flagrante 
delicto. But this is a matter best left 
to your own discretion.” 

On the 19th, he wrote: “ I saw 
his Majesty yesterday evening, when 
we had a good deal* of conversation 
as to the expediency of seizing Atta 
Khan and Sydul Khan. One of his 
Majesty’s arguments against the mea¬ 
sure was to me convincing. He said, 
‘ I sent an honourable invitation to 
these individuals and sngs^ as they are. 
Who would ever believe my word 
again if I were now to seize them, 
in defiance of the implied pledge?’ 
So they will remain at large, but be 
well looked after and deprived of 
power and money. His Majesty 
quaintly obseived, ‘If you wish to 
destroy a blind man, it is not neces¬ 
sary to kill him. Take away his 
stick.’ 

“ July 26.—Sydul Khan and Atta 
Khan both deserve to be hung ; but 
I have already told you that his Ma¬ 
jesty is prevented from bringing these 
individuals to condign punishment by 
the consideration (and it is a weighty 


one) of his having invited them to 
Caubul on a promise of honourable 
treatment. The same reason does 
not apply to the Chaoos-Bashee ; and 
I iiope, in the course of to-morrow, to 
request you to send evidence against 
him, or to tell you that he has ex¬ 
piated his offence on the gallows. You 
aie the best judge of the expediency 
of arresting Taj Khan. . . . My own 
notion is, that this (the league be¬ 
tween Persia and Ilerat) will not 
induce Lord Auckland to swerve 
from his pacific policy, and that he 
will rely on the return of our am¬ 
bassador to Teheran for setting 
matters to rights. Put, in the mean 
while, what will Yar Mahomed be 
about? I fear that he will be 
desperate, since we have told him dis¬ 
tinctly that we will not tolerate a 
Persian ascendancy at Herat; and 
this seems to be already established 
by his submission. He may therefore 
imagine that he could not be worse 
off; and he may feel really inclined 
to invade Candahar. In this case, 
would it be prudent to leave one 
regular regiment in advance, far from 
support? But this is a consideration 
which will have suggested it to your¬ 
self. The rebels in the Kohistan are 
still giving us trouble ; but I hope to 
arrange that affair without the em¬ 
ployment of tioops. Leech writes 
checringly of his prospects.” 