

He at once observed them and sought * For a pleasant descriptive sketch 
to have them remedied; but holding of the amusements of the English at 
a secondary place, the safety of his Caubul, see Mr. Gleig's account of 
troops and their magazines was made the Operations qf Sale's Brigade in 
likewise of secondary consideration, Afghanistan. 



THE WOMEN OF CAUBUL. 


615 


I am not writing an apology. There are truths which 
must be spoken. The temptations which are most 
difficult to withstand, were not withstood by our English 
officers. The attractions of the women of Caubul they 
did not know how to resist. The Afghans are very 
jealous of the honour of their women; and there were 
things d.one in Caubul which covered them with shame 
and roused them to revenge. The inmate of the Maho- 
medan Zenana was not unwilling to visit the quarters of 
the Christian stranger. For two long years, now, had this 
shame been burning itself into the hearts of the Cau- 
bulees; and there were some men of note and influence 
among them who knew themselves to be thus wronged. 
Complaints were made; but they were made in vain. 
The scandal was open, undisguised, notorious. Redress 
was not to be obtained. The evil was not in course of 
suppression. It went on till it became intolerable; and 
the injured then began to see that the only remedy was 
in their own hands. It is enough to state broadly this 
painful fact. There are many who can fill in with vivid 
personality all the melancholy details of this chapter of 
human weakness, and supply a catalogue of the wrongs 
which were soon to be so fearfully redressed. 

Such, dimly traced in their social aspects, was the 
general condition of things at Caubul in this month of 
September, 1841. Politically—such was Macnaghten’s 
conviction — everything was quiet from Dan to Beer- 
eheba. The noses of the Douranee Khans had, he said, 
“ been brought to the grindstone and the Gooroo and 

* Macnftgbten bad hj ibis time tbeir claws. His letters written at 
arrived at the conclusion that it was this time exhibit his feelings towards 
necessaiT’ to adopt towards the Dou- the ** blackguard Douranees t*’ 
ranees the same harsh policy which d?i^t<s^29.^The Douranee ohieft 
had been pursued by the Barukzye who have been in rebellion must be 
Sirdars. He had brought many of efiectually humbled. And we must 
the principal chiefs to Caubul^ and put it out of their power to attempt 
was now endeavouring to extract any further mischief. The Barukzye 



616 


THE 6ATHEBIN0 OF THE SXOBM. 


other Ghilzye chiefs were in his safe keeping at Caubul, 
seemingly contented with their lot. As the month ad¬ 
vanced, our prospects seemed to brighten. The Envoy 
continued to write that everything was covlewr de rose*'* 


Sirdars took the only effectual me¬ 
thod of keeping these gentry quiet. 
We must never dream of conciliation. 
Terror is the only instrument which 
they respect. 

“ Augiist 31.—These fellows must 
be crushed, and our only refuge from 
constant intrigue and disaffection is to 
show the hopelessness of both. In 
short, we must treat the Douranees 
as the Barukzye Sirdars treated them. 
The difference in our favour is, that 
we have better means of humiliating 
them. 