



622 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


regiment at Caubul, and another at Candahar, would be 
sufficient to keep the whole country in order : 

.Rumours are rife as to the intentions of the 

Tories towards this country, when they get into power. If they 
deprive the Shah altogether of our support, I have no hesitation 
in saying (and that is saying a great deal) they will commit an 
unparalleled political atrocity. The consquences would be fright¬ 
ful. The act would not only involve a positive breach of treaty, 
but it would be a cheat of the first magnitude. Had we left 
Shah Soojah alone, after seating him on the throne, the case 
would have been different. He would have adopted the Afghan 
method of securing his sovereignty. But we insisted upon his 
acting according to European notions of policy, and we have 
left all his enemies intact—powerless, only because we are here. 
In short, we should leave him with all the odium of having called 
in the aid of foreign infidel auxiliaries, and with none of those 
safeguards which he himself would have provided for his security. 
How could we expect him, under such circumstances, to maintain 
his power ? I know that he would not attempt it. He would 
pack up his all, and return to his asylum in India, the moment 
our resolution was imparted to him. We have effectually pre¬ 
vented his forming a party for himself. In a few years hence, 
when the present generation of turbulent intriguers shall have 
been swept away, the task will be comparatively easy. As it is, 
the progress we have made towards pacifying, or rather subjugat¬ 
ing (for neither the Douranees nor the Ghilzyes were ever before 
subject to a monarchy), is perfectly wonderful. The Douranee 
Kings kept these unruly tribes in good humour by leading them to 
foreign conquest. The Barukzye rulers kept them down by sharing 
their power with some, and sowing dissensions amongst others, by 
the most paltry and unjustifiable shifts and expedients, to which 
the Shah could not, if it were in his nature even, have recourse. 
Now the whole country is as quiet as one of our Indian chief- 
ships, and more so—but the reaction would be tremendous if the 
weight of our power was suddenly taken off. There are gangs 
of robbers here and there which it would be desirable to extirpate; 
and I had intended to postpone this job till a more favorable 
opportunity; but you will see, from my official letters, that it has 
been forced upon me, by Captain Hay^s proceedings, at an earlier 
period than I anticipated, Wq are yreW prepared, however, and 



ahgumbkts against withdkawal. 


623 


the coercion of these brigands will have an excellent effect all 
over the country. Dost Mahomed not only tolerated them, hut 
went snacks in their spoils. After their dispersion shall have 
been effected, there will be literally nothing to do except the sub¬ 
jugation of Nijrow. Pottinger has a project for effecting this, 
without trouble or expense, by marching through their country 
the troops returning to Hindostan and Jellalabad. I have sub¬ 
mitted this to the General; and should it be carried into effect, I 
shall beg of government to send us no more troops, for they 
would only be an encumbrance. A million and a quarter per 
annum is certainly an awful outlay; but if the items were exa* 
mined, you would find that a full moiety of this is to be laid to the 
account of Mr. Belfs proceedings in Upper Sindh, where they 
have had an army, cui hono 9 larger than the Army of the Indus. 
All this profligate expenditure will now cease, and, barring Herat, 
I am quite certain that the Shah’s force would be ample, with the 
addition of one European regiment at Caubul and another at 
Candahar, to keep the entire country in order. I am, too, making 
great reduction in our political expenditure; and I feel certain that, 
in a very short time, an outlcJJr of thirty lakhs per annum will 
cover, and more than cover, all our expenses. The process of 
macadamization (which, notwithstanding the present lull, I cannot 
but consider as near at hand) would reduce our outlay to nothing. 
I should not be surprised to see Colonel Stoddart and Arthur 
Conolly walking in any fine morning. I am glad you approved of 
the wig I conveyed to the latter. I am satisfied it adverted from 
him worse consequences. His enthusiasm, which I found it im¬ 
possible to repress, is continually leading him into scrapes.* . . • 