

Next in rank to General Elphinstone were Sir Robert 
Sale and Brigadier Shelton—both officers of the Queen’s 
service, but soldiers of long Indian experience. Each 
had served with his regiment in the Burmese war; and 
each had acquired a reputation for the highest personal 
courage. Sale’s regiment was the 13th Light Infantry. 
Shelton’s was the 44th.* Both of these regiments were 

* Sbdton liad ocone up from India His brigade was employed against 
with the 44tb, through the Punjaub. the refractory tribes of the Sungboo- 

2 R 2 



612 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


now at Caubul. But the 13th was about to return to 
India, and soon afterwards to Great Britain. It had seen 
many years of Indian service, and had been in Afghan¬ 
istan since Keane’s army first entered the country. The 
44th had come up early in the year, and had done some 
service in the Naziain valley, near Jellalabad, on the way. 

The main body of the British troops were in the new 
cantonments. These works had been erected in the 
course of 1840. They wore situated on a piece of 
low ground open to the Kohistan road. They were 
extensive and ill defended. They were nearly a mile in 
extent, and were surrounded by ramparts so little for¬ 
midable that they might be ridden over.* Near the 
cantonments was the Mission compound, occupying an 
extensive space, and surrounded by a number of houses 
and buildings belonging to the officers and retainers of 
the Mission. There was here, also, a weak attempt at 
defence j but the walls were beyond measure contemp¬ 
tible; and the whole expanse of building, the entrenched 
camp and Mission compound together, were so planted, 
as to be swept on every side by hills, and forts, and vil¬ 
lages, and whatever else in such a country could bristle 
with armed men. No such works were ever known— 
so wretched in themselves, and so doubly wretched by 
position. If the object of those who constructed them 
had been to place our troops at the mercy of an enemy, 
they could not have been devised more cunningly in 
furtherance of such an end. They were commanded on 


Khail in the month of February, and 
reduced them to a fitting state of sub¬ 
jection ; but not without the loss of 
two valuable officers. Lieutenant 
Pigou, of the Engineers, was blown 
to pieces, whilst endeavouring to 
force in, with powder, the gates of 


a fort; and Captam Douglas, As¬ 
sistant-Adjutant-General, was shot 
dead hj the side of the Brigadier. 

^ A small pony, says Lieutenant 
Rattray, was backed by an officer to 
scramble down the ditch and over 
the wall. 



THE CANTONMENTS. 


613 


every side; and so surrounded with villages, forts, gardens, 
and other cover for an enemy, that our troops could 
neither enter nor leave the camp without exposing them¬ 
selves to a raking fire from some one of these points of 
attack. And to crown the calamity of the whole, the 
Commissariat supplies, on which our army depended for 
its subsistence, were stored in a small fort, not within, 
but beyond, the cantonments. The communication be¬ 
tween the two places was commanded by an empty 
fort, and by a walled garden, inviting the occupation of 
an enemy. Human folly seemed to have reached its 
height in the construction of these works. There stood 
these great, indefensible cantonments, overawed on 
every side, a monument of the madness which Provi¬ 
dence, for its own ends, had permitted to cloud and be- 
w'ilder the intelligence of the “ greatest military nation 
of the world.” There it stood, a humiliating spectacle; 
but except by new comers, who stood in amazement be¬ 
fore the great folly, little account was taken of it. Men’s 
eyes had become accustomed to the blot.* 