



618 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


The popular expedition into the Zoormut country waa 
completely successful. Macgregor, who accompanied 
the force in the character of political adviser, found the 
rebellious forts evacuated. He had only, therefore, to 
destroy them. The results, however, of the movement 
were not wholly pacificatory. Pottinger said that the 
feeling which it engendered in the Kohistan was ex¬ 
tremely unfavorable to us. It confirmed, he said, in 
the minds of the malcontents, “ the belief so industriously 
spread of our difficulties, whilst rumours from Herat and 
Candahar of invasion, renewed rebellion, and disturb¬ 
ances, were again spread abroad.”* 

During the early part of October the Kohistanees re¬ 
mained perfectly quiet. But every hour, said Pottin¬ 
ger, “ brought rumours of the formation of an extensive 
conspiracy.” These he at first doubted; but he reported 
them to the Envoy, and asked for information on the 
subject. The answer was, that neither Macnaghten nor 
Bumes could perceive any grounds for suspicion. 

In the mean while, the Eastern Ghilzyes were break¬ 
ing out into revolt.f They had the same cause of com¬ 
plaint as the Kohistanees. The money-bag, which had 
kept them in order, was beginning to fail. It is a moot 
point whether revenge or avarice is the stronger feeling 
in the Afghan breast. Both were now arrayed against 
us. The bayonet and the money-bag were failing to do 
their work. 

The expenses of the occupation of Afghanistan had 
long been telling fearfully upon the revenues of India. 
Lord Auckland had been slow to look the intolerable 
evil of this exhausting drain fairly in the face. But the 
other members of the Supreme Council had been less 

* Major Pottinger*s Budeeabad Re» the Douranees, were all leagued to- 
port. ^ gather; and that the compact be- 

t Pottinger was of opinion that tween them was formed about the 
the Ghilzyes, the Kohistanees, and end of September^ 



EXPENSES OE THE WAB. 


619 


slow to address themselves fully to the subject ; and the 
home authorities had written out urgent letters regard¬ 
ing the miserable results of the continued occupation of 
a country that yielded nothing but strife. Looking at 
the matter in the most favorable point of view, it was 
found that the support of Shah Soojah cost the treasury 
of India at least a million and a quarter a year. The 
Court of Directors and the Board of Control, or that 
fusion of the two authorities known as the Secret Com¬ 
mittee, had taken, before the close of 1840, a correct and 
statesman-like view of the subject, and had written out 
that they could see nothing in the continued support of 
Shah Soojah, who, it was plain, had no hold upon the 
affections of the people, to compensate for this alarming 
exhaustion of the financial resources of India, and the 
necessary injuries inflicted upon the people by such a 
fearful waste of the revenues of the country. And, in 
the spring of 1841, it had become a matter for serious 
consideration whether the policy, which had proved so 
utterly disastrous, should not be openly and boldly 
abandoned. The question came before the Supremo 
Council at the end of March.* Either by some negli- 