

land's paper only will be received for cannot afford the heavy, yet increas- 
a time. He states our resources to ing drain upon us. Nine thousand 
be only a crore less than when we troops between Quettah and Kura- 
crossed the Indus. The Accountant- chee ; at least 16^000 of our army 
General says, that on the doth of and the Shah's to the north of Quet- 
April we may expect the reduction tah. The King's expenses to bear in 
to amount to three crores and three- part — twenty-eight political officers 
quarters. 1 told Prinsep that he had to pay, besides Macnaghten — Dost 
been very complaisant not to point Mahomed's allowance — barracks—a 
this out.'*^ fort or two to build — loss by ex- 

* Sir Jasper NicolW MS, Jbitr- change, &c., &c. To me it is alarm- 
naly March 29.—“ At last the adver- ing. The silver does not return, and 
tisement for a loan is prepared, and it is becoming scarce." 
will shortly appear. Though Lord t “ You will have seen that Govern- 



CHANGE OP MINI8TBT AT HOME. 


621 


But the call was responded to but slowly.* Money 
did not come in freely, though it was going out with a 
freedom perhaps unexampled in the history of Indian 
finance; and the Court of Directors still continued to 
write out, as Sir Jasper Nicolls and others in India were 
declaring, that it had become necessary either to withdraw 
altogether from Afghanistan, or to fall back upon the 
alternative of a large augmentation of the army. As the 
year advanced, too, other influences were at work to 
move the Indian Government to consider more and more 
intently the subject of the continued drain upon the 
resources of India. Great Britain was on the eve of 
a change of ministry, which would settle in Downing- 
street a party of Conservative statesmen, and send to 
Calcutta one of their number, known to be hostile to 
the whole policy of the expedition across the Indus; 
and Macnaghten was already beginning to tremble at the 
thought of what he called prospectively an “ unparalleled 
atrocity ”—but what many would have regarded as an 
act of wisdom and justice—the withdrawal of the British 
army from Afghanistan. How strongly Macnaghten felt 
upon this subject, and in what manner he argued against 
it, may be gathered fi:om a letter which, on the 26th of 
September, he addressed to the Governor of Agra. Still 
he continued to report that the whole country was quiet, 
and insisted that the Shah’s force, aided by one European 


ment is opening a new five per cent, 
loan. What can this be for ? I ap¬ 
prehend it augurs ill for the Chinese 
settlement, and that we shall have 
that work to do over again.*’—[<Sir 
W, H, Macnaghten to Major Raw^ 
linson: April 20^ 1841. MS. Corres- 

* Sir '\a^per NicolU MS. Journal^ 
May 20.—“ Here is a very untoward 
account of the Afghan finances. It 
will never do to have India drained 
of a million and a quarter annually 
for a rocky frontier, requiring about 


25,000 men and expensive establish¬ 
ments to hold it even by threats as at 
present. The specie, too, is drawn 
away not to return. Little comes from 
China. How is it to end? Money is 
not rapidly subscribed to the loan, 
because it gains twelve to eighteen 
per cent, for short periods elsewhere 
—amongst natives, twenty>four per 
cent, or more. Unless a large acces¬ 
sion of Punjaub territory comes in to 
connect us safely with Caubul, and to 
aid our very heavy expenses, we imui 
wUhdrawy 