

Such, at the close of September, were Macnaghten’s 
views of our continued occupation of Aghanistan. But, 
before this, the letters of the Court of Directors, the 
orders of the Supreme Government, and the portentous 
shadow of the coming Tory ministry, had roused Mac- 
naghten to a sense of the great fact that it was ne¬ 
cessary to do something to render less startlingly and 
offensively conspicuous the drain upon the resources 
of India, which was exhausting the country, and para- 

♦ MS. Correspondence of Sir W, H. Macnaghten. 



624 


THE GATHERING OP THE STORM. 


lysing the energies of its rulers. So it was determined 
to carry into effect a system of economy, to be applied 
wherever it could be applied, to the expenditure of 
Afghanistan; and, as ordinarily happens, both in the 
concerns of public and of private life, the retrenchments 
which were first instituted were those which ought to 
have been last. Acting in accordance with the known 
wishes of government, Macnaghten began to retrench 
the stipends, or subsidies, paid to the chiefs. He knew 
how distasteful the measure would be; he was appre¬ 
hensive of its results. But money was wanted, and he 
was compelled to give it effect.* 

The blow fell upon all the chiefs about the capital— 
upon the Ghilzyes, upon the Kohistanees, upon the 
Caubulees, upon the Momunds, even upon the Kuzzil- 
bashes.f Peaceful remonstrance was in vain. So they 
held secret meetings, and entered into a confederacy to 
overawe the existing government, and to recover what 
they had lost. Foremost in this movement were the 
Eastern Ghilzyes. Affected by the general retrench¬ 
ments, they had also particular grievances of their own. J 
They were the first, therefore, to throw off the mask. 
So they quitted Caubul—occupied the passes on the 
road to Jellalabad—plundered a valuable cahla—and 

* The retrenchments, too, were to oaths were taken to support each 
touch the Court. “ 1 have suggested otlier, and a plan of operations was 
sundry retrenchments,” lie wrote to formed .”—[^Report of Captain Mac» 
Kawlinson, “ which, though necessary, gregor. MS, Records.'] 
will be most unpalatable to his Ma- t ** Ghilzyes, however, had 
jesty and his myrmidons.” another grievance—viz., that during 

f “ In carrying out the system of the rule of Ameer Mahomed Khan 
economy, the Kuzzilbashes, Can- (Dost Mahomed's brother), who had 
bulees, Kohistanees, Ghilzyes, and managed partially to subdue this wild 
Momunds, were alike sufferers. De- tribe, and had effected a reduction in 
putations were sent on their part their pay of 18,000 rupees, this was 
to the Nizam-ood-Dowlah, to Sir restored to them in 1839, on the 
>\illiam H. Macnaghten, and to the return of the Shah ; but it was a^in 
Shah, to seek redress; but their com- reduced on the present occasion, 
plaints being unattended to, they all Further, they were held responsible 
united heartily to resist and upset, if for thefts committed beyond their 
possible, a measure so obnoxious to respective boundaries.** — [Captain 
them. Secret meetings were held, Maegregor^s Report, MS, Records.] 