


♦ Sir Jasper Nicolls^ MS. Journal — 
some passages of which may be cited 
in illustration of this part of the 
inner history of the war : 

** March 12.—My letter of the 10th 
of November will be found difficult 
to parry after all ; and 1 regret to 
say that the immense expenditure 
cannot long be borne. A million a 
year will not cover our charges ; and 
Lord Auckland’s answers to the last 
week’s applications prove to me that 
he begins to feel it. 

** March 2 \.—We are called upon 
to make early and large remittances 
to the Upper Provinces; and fifty 
lakhs have been ordered (tlieir requisi¬ 
tions increased in a week to eighty 
lakhs). Thirty lakhs went last week to 
Bombay, and twenty-niuc are now at 


Ferozepore, waiting for transmission. 
This will never do. Even if we had 
a firmer hold of Afghanistan than we 
have, we shoidd be compelled to give 
it up, fur a drain of a million a year 
will infallibly swamp us. Even a 
good share of the Punjaub would not 
cover this great charge. Lord Auck¬ 
land is not inclined to look this in the 
face, and acknowledge by a loan the 
unfortunate result of our successes. 

“ March 26.—Lord Auckland sent 
home a long minute regarding Herat. 
. . . He means to preserve our foot¬ 
ing in Afghanistan. Mr. Bird and 
Mr. Prinsep approve of this, though 
the latter rouncily and justly asserts 
that it cannot be done under a crore 
and a quarter (a million and a quarter) 
annually; and that no present mode 



620 


XHB OATHEBINa OF THE STOBM. 


gence, or by some juggle, the opinions of the military 
members of Council were not obtained; but Lord 
Auckland and the civilians decided in favour of the 
continued occupation of the country, though it was 
certain that it could only be done at the cost of a million 
and a quarter a year. But money had already become 
painfully scarce. It was necessary to recruit the ex¬ 
hausted treasury. There was no other mode of accom¬ 
plishing this than by opening a new loan. Such a 
public declaration of the embarrassed condition of the 
government was distressing to Lord Auckland; but 
nothing else was to be done. So at the end of March 
he drew up an advertisement for a five per cent, loan.* 
It is a remarkable instance of that kind of monomaniac 
blindness which besets some men, under peculiar condi¬ 
tions of existence, that when Macnaghten learnt that a 
new loan had been opened, he asked, “ What can this 
be for ?” and spoke of the war— in China ! f 

of extending our receipts to that ex- .Auckland did not advert to a deli- 
tent, is open to us. Lord Auckland ciency of three-aud-a-half crores in his 
wrote a note to ask our opinions on paper on Afgiianistan, be now acts 
the subject. Mr. Maddock never upon it. This will force on the Court 
circulated the note. Sir W. Case- a decision as to our maintaining our 
ment and myself were therefore silent, position in that quarter at such a 
We are clearly in a great scrape. That price, for they will assuredly never pay 
country drains us of a million a year even the charges of the Shah, 
and more; and we only in truth are May 12.— Before I close this 
certain of the allegiance of the people book (volume of the Journal), I 
within range of our guns and cavalry, would record my opinion that the 
. . . , One part of Lord Auck- whole thing will break down. We 