


It is true that Pottinger was not sending in very favorable 
reports from the Kohistan and the Nijrow country, which 
were now his new sphere of action;* but of these 
troubles Macnaghten made light account. He believed 
that Pottinger was an alarmist. It is true that an expe¬ 
dition was going out to Zao, to reduce some turbulent 
robber tribes; but this necessity he attributed to the 
indiscretion of one of our own officers, who had need¬ 
lessly attacked the place with insufficient means, and 
been compelled to beat a retreat.f The expedition, too, 
as Macnaghten said, was only a “ little go;” and im¬ 
mensely popular with our officers, who were zealously 
volunteering for the 8port.J 

ampled facility, and everything is t ** September 25.—Our little go 
couleur de rose ^"—[Jl/5. Correspond-- against Zao is very popular. Half 
fiwce.] the officers here are volunteering for 

* After leaving Herat, Pottinger the fray. I hope the thing vrill be 
had gone down to Calcutta in 1840 ; done cleverly and completely. Nij- 
but had returned to Afghanistan, and row will then be the only thorn in 
been appointed political agent in the our side. Pottinger has a project of 
Kohistan, in May, 1841. subjugating these wild mountaineers, 

t “ September 22.—Hay’s foolish at- and of seizing or ejecting the Moof^ids, 
tack upon the fort of Zao has entailed who have taken refuge in their terri- 
upon us the necessity of sending out tory, by employing the Ooloos, and at 
a force in that direction. Itwillcon' the same time marching through it 
sist of two infantry regiments, with a the troops returning to Hindostan and 
quantum sufficit of artillery and cavalry. Jellalabad. This would certainly form 
I have long been impressed with the an overwhelming force—eighteen guns 
necessity of sending an expedition of sorts, two regiments of cavalry, and 
against the Khowajahs and other six regiments of infantr}*. 1 have sub¬ 
robber tribes ; but I had hoped to milted the plan to the General, but I 
postpone it till next season. After do not know what he will say to it. 
the punishment inflicted upon them Were the rebel Kohistanee chiefs 
by Outram in 1839, they were for expelled from Nijrow, 1 should beg 
some time quiet; but now their au- of government to send us no more 
dacity has become again conspicuous, troops.”— [Sir W. H. Macnaghten to 
They have incessantly fired into our Major Rawlinson, MS, Correspond- 
camps, and plundered and murdered ence.] Brigadier Roberts savs, that 
our defenceless camp-followers. Were when the Kohistanee expedition of 
we not to raze to the ground the 1840, which nearly had such a dis- 
fort that resisted the Shah’s authority, astrous termination, was first pro- 
and harboured the robber chiefs, we jected, it was looked upon as a mere 
might expect to be hourly insulted, party of pleasure, and that ladies 
and to have our dawks with Canda- were talking of joining it. It does 
har cut off during the winter.”—[Sir not appear whether they had any 
W, H, Macnaghten to Major Raw- notion of participating in the plea- 
linaon, MS. Correspondence.^ sures of the popular expedition to Zao. 