

The English had by this time begun to settle them- 


** A writer already g^uoted, of hi^ 
authority on this point, says: “It 
has been already noted, that the tena¬ 
city of purpose displayed by the en¬ 
gineer, Durand, had forced Mac- 
naghten and the reluctant Shah into 
the precaution of constructing bar¬ 
racks and occupying with troops the 
Balia Hissar; also, it has been men¬ 
tioned, that the Envoy subsequently 
cave up these barracks to the Shah 
for the use of the 160 ladies and 
women of the Harem, and threw up 
all military hold of this important 
post. Sturt, Durand^s successor, was 
in nowise participant in this grievous 
error: for he too pertinaciously ad¬ 
vocated placing the troops in the 


Balia Hissar, clearing it of all private 
houses, and rendering it a good 
stronghold. It is bitter to think, 
that had the repair of the works and 
their improvement been commenced 
in 1839, when urged by the first en¬ 
gineer, or even later, when again 
pressed by the second engineer, a 
tithe of the sums thrown away at 
Herat would have rendered the Balia 
Hissar, by November, 1841, a for¬ 
tress impregnable, when held by a 
British garrison, against all that 
the disanected Afghans could have 
brought before its walls.” The same 
writer adds: “ These grave errors 
had been committed, it must be re¬ 
membered, in justice to the memory 



614 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


selves down in Caubul. Indeed, from the very commence¬ 
ment, they had done their best, as they ever do, to ac¬ 
commodate themselves to new localities and new circum¬ 
stances, and had transplanted their habits, and, I fear it 
must be added, their vices, with great address, to the 
capital of the Douranee Empire. It was plain that they 
were making themselves at home in the chief city of the 
Afghans. There was no sign of an intended departure. 
They were building and furnishing houses for them¬ 
selves— laying out gardens — surrounding themselves 
with the comforts and luxuries of European life. Some 
had sent for their wives and children. Lady Mac- 
naghten. Lady Sale, and other English women, were 
domesticated in comfortable houses within the limits of 
the great folly we had erected on the plain. The Eng¬ 
lish, indeed, had begun to find the place not wholly 
unendurable. The fine climate braced and exhilarated 
them. There was no lack of amusement. They rode 
races; they played at cricket. They got up dramatic 
entertainments. They went out fishing; they went out 
shooting. When winter fell upon them, and the heavy 
frosts covered the lakes with ice, to the infinite astonish¬ 
ment of the Afghans they skimmed over the smooth 
surface on their skates. There is no want of manliness 
among the Afghans; but the manliness of the Feringhee 
strangers quite put them to shame. They did not like 
us the less for that. The athletic amusements of our 
people only raised their admiration. But there was 
something else which filled them with intensest hate.* 

of the gallant, but luckless Elphin- and sacrificed to a false show of secu- 
stoniS, before his arrival at Caubul. rity .”—\^Calcutta Review. 