


* Sir W. H. Macnaghten to Captain 
Macgregor: October 18, 1841. MS. 
Records. 

*1* “ With regard to Tezeen, I wish 
to leave matters very much to your 
discretion. But the season is far ad¬ 
vanced, and if the rebels are very 
humble, I would not be too hard 
unto them. But Gool Mahomed can 
have nothing but war, and the de¬ 
fences of Khoda Buxsh's fort must be 
demolished ; he can only have the 
reduced Mowaiib, and the plundered 
property must be restored. Hostages 
must be furnished by both ; the more 
we can conveniently punisli these ras¬ 
cals, the better; but I should be sorry 
to hear of their bolting, probably to 
renew their depredations; but jou 


must judge for the best on the spot— 
u thousnnd things may happen which 
1 cannot foresee.”— W.IL Mac~ 
naghtcn to Captain Macgregor: Octo- 
her 19, 1841. MS. Records.'] 

t The Shah’s llazir-bash. There 
was no doubt of their treachery, and 
next day Macgregor sent them back to 
Caubul. 

§ “ Monteith’s official letter is so 
full of the treachery of the whole party, 
I believe the General will send it 
back to him for reconsideration. If 
he had clear proof against the party, 
he should have summarily executed 
the whole of them. If his accusation 
rests on suspicion alone, he has acted 
most unwisely and most unjustly. It 
is a vtry convenient and a very com- 



macgbegob’s negotiations. 631 

Sale appeared with two more infantry raiments, with 
more guns, and more sabres; and after a brief halt, for 
want of carriage, which much tried the patience of the 
Envoy,* the whole swept on to Tezeen. Here the force 
halted for some days, and Macgregor busied himself 
in negotiations with the enemy. Macnaghten had in¬ 
structed him to accommodate matters, if it could be done 
without any loss of honour; and Macgregor was candid 
enough to acknowledge that the insurrection of the 
GhUzyes had been brought about by “ harsh and unjust ” 
measures of our own; so he opened a communication 
with the rebel chiefs; and, being known to most of them, 
consented to a personal interview. So Macgregor met 


mon process to ascribe to our Afghan 
allies every calamity that befalls us. 
But why were the camels committed 
to such custody? Their loss is very 
provoking in every way, but I trust 
they will soon be recovered. Sale 
will be with you to-morrow, and you 
will advance upon Tezeen the next 
day.”—[6’trlF. If. Macnaghten to Cap¬ 
tain Macgregor: Oct 19, 1841.] 

♦ “ October 21.—Our troops have 
halted to-day at Khoord-Caubul for 
want of camels I I ! I had hoped, ere 
evening, to have announced to you 
the capture or dispersion of the 
Tezeen rebels ; but of this there is no 
hope till to-morrow. Our people in 
this quarter have a happy knack of 
bitching matters. However, let that 
pass. All's well that ends well. In 
the mean time, it is very satisfactory 
to think that, notwithstanding we 
had rebellion at our very doors, not a 
single tribe has joined the rebels. The 
interruption of our communications is 
very provoking, but the road will soon 
be opened. ... 1 do not think I 
can possibly get away from this be¬ 
fore the 1st proximo. The storm will 
speedily subside!; but there will be a 
heaving of the billows for some time, 
and I should like to see everything 
right and tight before I quit the helm. 