

♦ “ The only officer killed, Wynd- that moment of peril to save the life 
ham, a captain of the 35th Native of a wounded soldier, by bearing him 
Infantry, fell nobly. Himself lame from the combat on his charger, 
from a hurt, he had dismounted at When the rear-guard broke before 



636 


THE GATHEBING OF THE STORM. 


Sale halted at Gundamuck. Macnaghten heard oi 
the loss sustained between Jugdulluck and Soorkhab, 
but wrote to Macgregor, on the 1st of October, that he 
“hoped the business last reported was the expiring 
effort of the rebels;” and that the party would have 
dispersed, and thannahs been re-established.* To Ma¬ 
jor Rawlinson he wrote on the same day, and congratu¬ 
lated him on the tranquil appearance that affairs had 
assumed in the direction of Candahar. It was now the 
very day that he had fixed upon for his departure from 
Caubul; and still he did not doubt for a moment that 
his emancipation was close at hand. 

the onset of the Ghilzyes, Wyndham, swords and knives of an unsparing 
unable to keep pace with the pur- foe .”—[Calcutta Review,^ 
sued, turned, fought, and, over- ♦ MS, Correspondence* 
powered by numbers, fell beneath the 



APPENDIL 


[Vol. L, Page 70.] 

Preliminary Treaty with Perm, concluded hy Sir Harford Jones, 
on the 12M of March, 1809. 

In the Name of Him who is ever necessary, who is all-sufficient, 
who is everlasting, and who is the only Protector. 

In these times, distinguished by felicity, the excellent Ambas¬ 
sador, Sir Harford Jones, Baronet, Member of the Honourable 
Imperial Ottoman Order of the Crescent, has arrived at the Royal 
City of Teheran, in quality of ambassador from his Majesty the 
King of England (titles), bearing his Majesty’s credential letter, 
and charged with Ml powers munited with the great seal of 
England, empowering him to strengthen the friendship and con¬ 
solidate the strict union subsisting between the high states of 
England and Persia. His Majesty the King of Persia (titles), 
therefore, by a special firmaun delivered to the said ambassador, 
has appointed the most excellent and noble Lords Meerza Ma¬ 
homed Shefieh, qualified with the title of Moatumed-ed-Dowlah, 
his first vizier, and Hajee Mahomed Hoosseln Khan, qualified 
with the title of Amcen-ed-Dowlah, one of the ministers of record, 
to be his plenipotentiaries to confer and discuss with the afore¬ 
said ambassador of his Britannic Majesty, all matters and affairs 
touching the formation and consolidation of friendship, alliance, 
and strict union between the two high states, and to arrange and 
finally conclude the same for the benefit and advantage of both 
kingdoms. In consequence whereof, after divers meetings and 
discussions, the aforesaid plenipotentiaries have resolved that the 
following articles are for the ^nefit and advantage of both the 
high states, and are hereafter to be accordingly for ever observed. 

Art I. That as some time will be required to arrange and 



638 


APPENDIX. 


form a definitive treaty of alliance and friendship between the two 
high states, and as the circumstances of the world make it neces¬ 
sary for something to be done without loss of time, it is agreed 
these articles, which are to be regarded as preliminary, shall become 
a basis for establishing a sincere and everlasting definitive treaty of 
strict friendship and union; and it is agreed that the said definitive 
treaty, precisely expressing the wishes and obligations of each 
party, shall be signed and sealed by the said plenipotentiaries, 
and afterwards become binding on both the high contracting 
parties. 