


Burncs is naturally in an agony of 
suspense about the succession to me. 
I think, and hope, he will get it. I 
know no one so fit for the office. 
Qukta non movere is his motto; and, 
now that tranquillity is restored (or 
will be in a day or two), all that is 
required will be to preserve it. I 
hardly know how to answer your 
separate note of the 15th, received 
this morning; but 1 can assure you 
I feel exceedingly proud at having 
gained your good opinion. We have 
had a very trying time of it since we 
were first officially associated, and it 
was no wonder that you, occupying as 
you did the post of danger, should 
have occasionally yielded to despon¬ 
dency, especially when under the in¬ 
fluence of severe illness. But in all 
other respects you have given me en¬ 
tire satisfaction, and 1 feel that we 
are mainly indebted to your temper, 
judgment, and energy, for overcoming 
the numerous difficulties 1^ which we 
have been surrounded. Wherever I 
go, I shall carry with me a pleasing 
recollection of your friendship, and of 
the laborious and successful opera¬ 
tions which have fallen to our joint 
lot.”— W. H. Macnaghten to Ma¬ 
jor RawUneon. MS. Corrupondence."] 



632 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


the chiefs. There was a long and animated discussion. 
They demanded that their salaries should be restored to 
their former footing; and to this Macgregor consented. 
Other demands were made and resisted altogether, or 
conceded to with some qualification; and it was sup¬ 
posed that the Ghilzye affair had been “ patched up after 
a fashionnot, perhaps, without some loss of dignity, 
but with as much vigour as was convenient at the time. 
At all events, Macnaghten was able to report that the 
affair was settled.f 


* “ I met them according to their 
own desire, being accompanied by 
Captain James Paton (wlio wished to 
examine more closely the fort in case 
we mighi find it necessaiy to proceed 
against it), my Persian writer, and an 
orderly Sowar, for I thouglit, by 
throwing myself completely on their 
mercy, I should be more likely to 
secure their protection. The chiefs 
demanded that tiieir salaries should 
be placed on their former footing— 
that they sliould not be held respon¬ 
sible for thefts committed beyond their 
respective boundaries, and that Gool 
Mahomed Khan should be reinstated 
as their chief. To the two first-men¬ 
tioned demands I agreed, but to the last 
1 objected, for by displacing Biirkutt 
Khan, w'ho had been appointed to the 
chief&hip (on Gool Mahomed having 
joined in the rebellion), the honour of 
the government would have been 
compromised. This led to a long and 
warm discussion ; but the chiefs, find¬ 
ing that on this point I was firm, 
yielded to me, and 1 returned to camp. 
On the 25th they sent in their agents 
to remain with me, and to make ar¬ 
rangements for re-establishing the 
Thannahs and Dkk Chokies, &c. The 
next day we left Tezeen for Gunda- 
muck. Although 1 felt a little doubt¬ 
ful in my own mind as to the good 
faith of the chiefs, Gool Mahomed 
and Mahomed Shah Khan (they not 
appearing to be satisfied), in the pro¬ 
mised fulfilment of their engagements, 
still I saw no good reason why they 