


should notact up to them if they con¬ 
sulted their own interests ; and any 
infraction of the treaty might be re¬ 
sented at Gundamuck, when the chiefs 
would be far more tangible than in 
their present position, from which to 
extricate the troops, in itself formed 
an object of much solicitude to me.*’ 
— [^Captain Macgregor's Report. MS. 
Records.'] 

t “ October 26.—I am glad that 
affairs liave been settled; and I con¬ 
clude that you have got such as¬ 
surances, whether by hostages of a 
sufficient description or otherwise, to 
satisfy you that there is no intention 
of breaking out again when they 
catch us off' our guard. I have just 
got a note from Pottinger, who evi¬ 
dently writes in great trepidation. 
He says the Nijrowees are coming 
down to attack him. But 1 have no 
doubt that the storm will blow over, 
when they hear of the settlement of 
the Ghilzye question.”— [^Sir W. H. 
Macnaghten to Captain Macgregor. 
MS. Corretpondence.] 

“ October 26.—I have not much 
time to spare to-day, but I cannot 
resist writing, to tell you that our 
Ghilzye differences are brought to a 
settlement. I cannot say a most 
satisfactory one. But we are well 
out of the scrape, as we are posi¬ 
tively unable to compete with these 

mountaineers and their jezails. 

If we expect to keep the people 
of this country in order, we must 
get two or three regiments of moun- 




MACGREGOR S NEGOTIATIONS. 


633 


He thought the terras granted to the rebels were too 
favorable; and the King was dissatisfied with them;* 
but the Envoy replied that it was the treachery of the 
Shah’s own people that had paralysed the efforts of our 
negotiators. Indeed, it was known that people about 
the Court had left Caubul for the purpose of joining in 
a night attack upon our troops. Still Macnaghten could 


taineers from different tribes, and 
arm them with the jezail of the 
country. In the mean time, we are 
lucky in having patched up this 
quarrel. The worst part of the trans¬ 
action is our having conceded to 
Khoda Buksh, one of the chief re¬ 
bels, his mowajib, on the old footing, 
without deductions. The best part 
of it is, our having persuaded the 
confederates to tlirow overboard Gool 
Maliomed, one of tlieir number, and 
to recognise Burkutt Khan as the 
chief of Jubbar Kheil. They were 
very averse to this, and stood out 
against it for a long time. Pottinger 
writes as if he were about to be in¬ 
vaded by the Nijrowees, but I ima¬ 
gine there is little ground for this 
alarm, and that at all events the 
fellows will sneak into their holes 
again when they hear that the Ghil- 
zyes are quiet. If all is quiet, 1 in¬ 
tend being off on the 1st proximo. 

“ . . . There is no use in my saying 
anything about Akrum, as I presume 
he is past praying for. But if Futteh 
Khan put to death his renowned fa¬ 
ther, IVleer Aulum, the Prince need 
have little hesitation about putting to 
death the son.”—[5ir W, U, Mac- 
naghten to Major RawUnson, MS. 
Correspondence.] 