

“ Oct. 29.—I am glad to find, from 
your letter of the 2(ith, which reached 
me this morning, that the execution of 
that incorrigible malefactor Akrum was 
conducted so quietly. It is as well, per¬ 
haps, that the Prince spared the ears of 
Yar Mahomed [Akrum’s nephew], as 
these mutilations are very shocking ; 
but does he not des»‘rve perpetual im¬ 
prisonment ? Our affairs in this quar¬ 
ter are gradually settling down into 
tranquillity; but we have an ugly 
matter upon our hands. The Shah’s 
Meer Akhor, who with eighty horse 
was in Monteith’s camp on the night 
of the Shubkoom, is said to have 
dealt foully with us, and I fear, if his 
guilt is proved, that I shall have a 
great deal of difficulty in procuring 
his execution. His Majesty is natu¬ 
rally averse to believe that one of his 


dependents could have behaved so 
treacherously, as he rightly conjec¬ 
tures that a large portion of the dis¬ 
grace of such rascality will be reflected 
on himself. But 1 shall endeavour to 
persuade him that he will incur a still 
larger portion of it if he liesitate about 
inflicting the most signal punishment 
on the guilty individual. I tremble, 
indeed, to think of the consequences 
which must ensue if his Majesty 
fails in his duty in this respect. But 
his natural good sense and devotion 
to us will, I hope, come to his rescue. 
Maegregor’s letters (his last was dated 
the day before yesterday, from Kutta 
Sung) lead me to hope that the few 
robbers, by whom alone the road is 
now infested, will speedily disperse. 

. I trust I have at last 

got Pottinger into a pacific mood, 
though I tremble when I open any of 
his letters, lest I should find that he 
has got to loggerheads with some of 
his neighbours. In the present ex¬ 
cited state of men’s minds, a row in 
any quarter would be widely infec¬ 
tious, and we are not in a condition 
to stand much bailing. You may rely 
on hearing from me when anything 
of interest takes place. The rebels 
had very favorable terms given them 
by Maegregor. He acted wisely in 
acting leniently; and it is rather for¬ 
tunate that they had a good grievance. 
They had been required to give an 
ittzaim for thefts by Ghilzyes wher¬ 
ever committed, and this was jubhur 
of the most intolerable kind. But 
the rascally Governor, Humz Khan, 
who excited the chiefs to rebellion, 
took care that I should know nothing 
of what was going on.”—[Af5. Corre¬ 
spondence of Sir W. H. Macnaghten.'] 




ACTION NEAR SOORKHAB. 


686 


Tezeen to Grundamuck the agents of the Ghilzye chiefs 
•were in our camp; but there was some hard fighting for 
the brigade. The enemy mustered in force, and attacked 
our column; and the old excuse was made, that it was 
owing to no faithlessness on the part of the chiefs, but 
to their inability to control the tribes. It was a terrible 
country for a baggage-encumbered force to toil through, 
in the face of an active enemy. Jugdulluck was gained 
with little opposition; but, on the next march, it was 
seen that the heights were bristling with armed men, 
and a heavy fire was poured in from all the salient 
points, on which, with the instincts of the mountaineer, 
they had posted themselves, with such terrible effect. 
Sale threw out his flanking parties, and the light troops, 
skirmishing well up the hill-sides, dislodged the enemy, 
whilst a party under Captain Wilkinson, pushing 
through the defile, found that the main outlet had not 
been guarded, and that the passage was clear. The 
march was resumed; but the enemy were not yet weary 
of the contest. Eeappearing in great numbers, they fell 
furiously upon our rear-guard, and, for a time, our 
people, thus suddenly assailed, were in a state of ter¬ 
rible disorder. The energetic efforts of our officers 
brought back our men to a sense of their duty, and 
restored the confidence, which, for a little space, had 
forsaken the young soldiers. Broadfoot, Backhouse, and 
Fenwick, are said to have rallied and reanimated them. 
But the loss that fell upon them was heavy—more than 
a hundred men were killed and wounded; and among 
them was Captain Wyndham, of the 35th, who fell like 
a brave soldier in the unequal fight.* 