


dence of the rascals in having taken than ever it was, after the insurrection 
up a position, with four or five liun- is put down. It is particularly pro- 
dred men, in the Khoord-Caubul Pass, yoking that Maegregor is absent with 
not fifteen miles from the capital. I a large portion of our force at this 
hope they will be driven out of that juncture. My accounts from Burn at 
either to-day or to-morrow; but the Gundamuck are very satisfactory. The 
pass is an ugly one to force. They efforts of the rebels to raise the tribes 
fired last night upon the 35th Regi- are as unavailing as incessant. His 
ment, and succeeded in killing or Majesty’s name has been freely nsed, 
wounding twenty-four Sepoys. Tiigao as usual; no wonder—-it is a tower 
has been the nursery, and Ilumza of strength; but never was a more 
Khan the dry-nurse of this insurrec- foul calumny uttered than that which 
tion. Tugao will be visited, I hope, in would associate his Majesty with our 
a day or two, and I have solicited his enemies.” — [Sir W. If. Macnaghtm 
Majesty to put Humza in durance vile, to Major Rawlinson, MS. Correspond^ 
and to confiscate all his property, cnce. 

This imeute of ours is particularly * Captain Vounghusband, of the 
provoking just as I am about to quit 35th, Captain Wade, the Brigade- 
Afghanistan. I had hoped to leave Major of the force, and Lieutenants 
the country in perfect tranquillity; Mein and Oakes, of the 16th, were 
and I still think that it will be quieter wounded in this affair. 

2 s2 



628 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


khak, whilst Monteith, with the 35th and the other 
details, was left encamped in the Koord-Caubul valley. 

In the mean while, Macgregor had returned from the 
Zoormut country. Macnaghten had known him long, 
and had abundant confidence in the man.* He had 
for some time been employed in political superintend¬ 
ence of the country between Caubul and Jellalabad, and 
by an admirable union of the vigorous and the con¬ 
ciliatory in his treatment of the tribes, had won both 
their respect and their affection. The Envoy now be¬ 
lieved that Macgregor would soon restore the country to 
tranquillity, and was impatient until his return. Mac¬ 
gregor reached Caubul on the 11th of October, and 
soon started for Monteith’s camp. Macnaghten, who 
believed that the outbreak was local and accidental, 
looked with eagerness to the result. He took little heed 

o 

of what was going on in the Kohistan. He did not 
think that the Douranee Khans, whose “ noses he had 
brought to the grindstone,” were plotting their emancipa¬ 
tion from the thraldom of the infidels. 

But Pottinger, in the Kohistan, plainly saw the storm 
that was brcAving—plainly saw the dangers and dif¬ 
ficulties by which he was surrounded. As the month 
of October advanced, the attitude of the Kohistanees 
and the Nijrowees was more and more threatening. 
Meer Musjedee had been, some time before, described 
in the newspapers paragraphs of the day as stalking 
about the country, and sowing broad-cast the seeds of 
rebellion. The measures of the King’s government had 
long before made these very people, who had risen up 