

* “ October 27.—I do not entertain 
the smallest doubt of the policy of 
your proceedings, or of the wisdom 
of your granting such favorable terms 
to the rebels. His Majesty sent for 
me this morning before breakfast. He 
was evidently much dissatisfied; but 
1 proved to him that, if the terms 
granted were less stringent than they 
should have been, the fault lay with 
his own traitorous servants, who con¬ 


spired with the enemy and paralysed 
our troops. He promised to seize 
Mahomed Ali Aieer Khan this day, 
and to make an example of him if his 
treason were proved. 1 am almost 
satisfied of the fellow’s guilt, and 
think that Gool Mahomed’s letter 
must have been intended for our 
perusal. His Majesty particularly 
dwelt upon the description of hostages. 
He said they were jlistens, &c, I 
explained to his Majesty that these 
people were not sent as hostages, 
but merely to assist our troops, and 
to be the medium of a friendly com¬ 
munication, until the chiefs acquired 
sufficient confidence to send their 
relatives. I wish you could prevail 
upon them to do this. You might 
say that, until this was done, his Ma¬ 
jesty never could feel assured of their 
sincerity, and that consequently the 
door will always be open to future 
misunderstanding. 1 understand that 
four companies of the 54th, with the 
cavalry and artillery, march to-morrow 
morning as an escort to the sick, &c. 

I shall probably make a start on 
Monday morning, the 1st proximo, 
that is, if everything is quiet; but 
matters have still a threatening ap¬ 
pearance in the direction of the Ko- 
histan, and 1 dread to open the letters 
I receive from Pottinger, but I sin¬ 
cerely trust that the accommodation 
of our differences with the Ghilzyes 
will have the effect of keeping quiet 
the Moofsids in that quarter. 1 am 
a good deal bothered, as you may 
imagine, just now. Now that my 
departure is so near, every fellow is 
having at me.**—[5ir W. H. Mac¬ 
naghten to Captain Maegregor. MS. 
Correspondence. ] 



634 


THE GATHERING OP THE STORM. 


not believe that there was any wide-spread feeling of 
disaffection among the chiefs and the people of Caubul; 
nor when Pottinger sent in gloomy reports from the 
Kohistan, could he bring himself to think that they were 
anything but the creations of a too excitable brain.* 
Maegregor soon learnt the value of his treaty. From 


* “ Oct. 27.—The Eastern Ghilzye 
affair having been patclied up after a 
fashion, our friends have condescended 
to open the road, and I have been 
very busy all day writing letters. . . 

I take my departure, barring any 
more rows, on the 1st proximo ; but 1 
shall retain charge of my office until I 
reach Ferozeporc. 1 am trembling lest 
there should be a row in the Koliistan, 
which Pottinger constantly threatens, 
though, I believe, without sufficient 
reason. The settlement of the Ghil- 
lye question will. 1 dare say, keep the 
-Vloofsids quiet in that quarter. No¬ 
thing, however, that has occurred in 
this country has annoyed me so much 
as the mode in which this settlement 
has been effected; but 1 have not yet 
got the particulars, and 1 have the 
fullest reliance on the judgment and 
discretion of Maegregor, by whom the 
negotiation was conducted. 