

Sale’s brigade, wliich was returning to the provinces, 
was, it has been seen, to stifle the insurrection en route to 
Jellalabad. Macnaghten, however, thought of strength¬ 
ening the force, with a view to the operations against 
the Ghilzyes, and he wrote to Captain Trevor, who, 
pending the arrival of Macgregor, was holding the enemy 
in negotiation, that he believed the General would send 
out ‘‘ two (ight-inch mortars, two iron nine-pounder 
guns, Abbott’s battery, the 5th Cavalry, the Sappers and 
Miners, and the 13th Queen’s, with the 36th and 37th 
Native Infantry.”f But he continued to talk of the im¬ 
pudence of the rascals,” and expressed his belief that, the 
insurrection put down, the country would be quieter than 
ever. J On the 9th of October, Colonel Monteith marched 

morrow I hope our expedition will or ten days. I shall leave a paper 
reach the refractory forts of Zao, and of instructions with Burnes. The 
teach them a most salutary lesson.”— country, 1 trust, will be left in a state 
[Air W. II, Alacnaghten to Major of tranquillity, with the exception of 
Jiawliiison, MS. Correspondence.] the Gliilzves, between this and Jel- 
* ‘‘Oct. 7.—The Eastern Gin Izyes lalabad, and I hope to settle their 
are kicking up a row about some de- hash on the road down, if not be- 
ductions which have been made from fore.”— [Ifjid.^ 

their pay. The rascals have com- f The i37th Native Infantry and 
pletely succeeded in cutting off our the oth Cavalry were not a part of 
communications for the time being, the relieved brigade, 
winch is very provoking to me at this % “ October 11.—One down, t’other 
juncture; but they will be well come on, is the principle with these 
trounced for their pains. I have sue- vagabonds; and lucky for us that it is 
ceeded in sowing dissensions among so. No sooner have we put down 
them, which will, Inshallah! make one rebellion than another starts up. 
some of them «>ar^/ia/a. A force will The Eastern Ghilzyes are now in an 
move out against them to-morrow or uproar, and our communications with 
next day, but I do not apprehend any Jellalabad are completely cut off. This 

open opposition. state of tilings— InskalldkJ —^will not 

“ I hope to be off from tliis in eight last long. Only imagine the impu- 




CLEABING THE KHOOBD-CAUBUL PASS. 


627 


from Caubul, with the 35th Native Infantry, a squadron 
of the 5th Cavalry, two guns of Abbott’s battery under 
Dawes, and Broadfoot’s Sappers and Miners. That 
night his camp was attacked at Bootkhak—the first 
march on the Jellalabad road. On the 10th, therefore, 
Sale received orders to march at once with the 13th, 
and on the following day he started to clear the passes. 
On the 12th, Sale entered the defile of Khoord-Caubul. 
The enemy occupied the heights in considerable force, 
and, in their own peculiar style of warfare, opened 
a galling fire upon our advancing column. Sale was 
wounded at the first onset, and Dennie took command 
of the troops. He spoke with admiration of ‘‘ the 
fearless manner in which the men of the 13th, chiefly 
young soldiers, ascended heights nearly perpendicular 
under the sharp fire of the insurgents.” And added, 
that the Sepoys of the 35th, who had fought under 
him at Bameean, rivalled and equalled them in 
steadiness, activity, and intrepidity.”* The pass was 
cleared, and then the 13th retraced its steps to Boot- 