



RISING OP THE EASTERN GHILZYES. 


625 


entirely cut oflF our communications with the provinces 
of Hindostan. 

Upon this, Humza Khan, the governor of the Ghilzyes, 
was sent out to bring them back to their allegiance. 
“ Humza Khan,” wrote Macnaghten to Macgregor, on 
the 2nd of October, “ who is at the bottom of the whole 
conspiracy, has been sent out by his Majesty to bring 
back the Ghilzye chiefs who have fled; but I have little 
hope of the success of his mission.”* Humza Khan, 
whose own stipend was included in the general re¬ 
trenchment, had been commissioned to carry the ob¬ 
noxious measure into effect; and he had instigated the 
chiefs to resist it. He was now sent out to quell a dis¬ 
turbance of which he was himself the parent and the 
nurse. 

These movements did not at first much alarm Mac¬ 
naghten. He was intent upon his departure from Cau- 
bul; and he said that the outbreak had happened at a 
fortunate moment, as his own party and the troops pro¬ 
ceeding to the provinces could take them en route to 
India.”f But a few days afterwards he began to take a 

* MS. Records. See the Duke of middle of December. I am suffering 
Wellington’s Comments on this Sub- a little atixiety just now, as the 
ject in the Appendix, Kastern Glulzye chiefs have turned 

j- ** October 3 .— You will have heard Yagkce, in consequence, I believe, of 
ere now of my appointment to Bom- the reduction of their allowances, and 
bay. I could wish that this most ho- their being required to sign an itte- 
nourablc distinction had been withheld zain against robberies. We have 
a little longer, until 1 could have pro- sent to bring them back to their alle- 
nounced our relations in this country giance, and I think there will be no 
as being entirely satisfactory ; but, difficulty about them, unless the root 
thanks in a gieat measure to your ofthe JPWsadliesdeeper, and they are, 
zealous co-operation, 1 may even now as some assert, in league with iViaho- 
say, tliat everything is rapidly verging nied Akbar. In that case, it will be 
to that happy consummation. No necessary to undertake Of)erations on 
time is fixed for my departiiie. That a larger scale against Nijrow and 
will depend upon the instructions I re- Tugao, in the latter of which districts 
ceive from Lord Auckland. Should his the JVJoofsids have taken refuge. 
Lordship direct xne to deliver over I'hey are very kind in breaking out 
my charge to iiurnes, there is little or just at the moment most opportune 
nothing, that 1 know of, to detain me, for our purposes. The troops will 
and 1 ought to be in Bombay by the take them en route to India. To- 

VOL. I. 2 s 



626 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


more serious view of the matter; and he urged Mac- 
gregor to return with all despatch to Caubul, that he 
might accompany the expedition he was about to send 
out against the rebels. But at the same time he wrote 
to Rawlinson, that he did not apprehend any open oppo¬ 
sition ; and he never seemed to doubt that the insurrec¬ 
tionary movement would promptly be put down.* 