

* Macgregor, an officer of the Macnaghten, to negotiate the Tripar- 
Beneal Artillery, had been one of tite treaty, lie subsequently accom- 
Lord Auckland’s aides^dt-campf and panied the Envoy to Caubul,'and was 
had accompanied, as has been shown, always in his confidence.] 
the British Mission, despatched under 



AFFAIRS IN THE KOHISTAN. 


629 


against the tyranny of Dost Mahomed, ripe for revolt 
against the more consummate tyranny of the Shah. 
And now, in the middle of October, Pottinger saw that 
the state of things was fast approaching a crisis; so he 
demanded hostages from the Kohistanee chiefs. To this 
the Envoy reluctantly consented. “ And,” wrote Pot¬ 
tinger, in his official account of these transactions, “ I 
only succeeded in procuring them by the end of the 
month, when everything betokened a speedy rupture 
with the Nijrowees.” By tliis time, indeed, Meer Mus- 
jedee had openly raised the standard of revolt, and the 
people were clustering around it. 

Macnaghten thought very lightly oi' these movements 
in the Kohistan. Nothing disturbed his faith in the 
general tranquillity of the country, and the popularity of 
the double government. He greatly desired the settle¬ 
ment of the Ghilzye question, for there was something 
palpable and undeniable in such a movement; and he 
was anxious to set his face towards the provinces of 
Hindustan. Eagerly, therefore, he looked for intelligence 
from Macgregor. He had begun, however, to doubt 
whether so troublesome a business could be settled by 
peaceful negotiation. “We must thrash the rascals, I 
fear, after all,” he wrote to Macgregor, on the 17th; “ but 
I don’t think that the troops will be under weigh until 
the 20th. Is not this provoking ? Abbott has made 
some excuse about his guns being injured. Pray write 
a circumstantial plan of the best means of surrounding 
and preventing the escape of the villains.”* Abbott 
was not a man to make excuses of any kind, but the 
Envoy was becoming impatient. On the 18th, he wrote 
again: It has been determined that the Sappers and 
miners, the mountain train, and two companies of the 

* iStr W. H. Maenaghtat to Captain Macgregor : OeUAer 17, 1841. MS. 
Records. 



630 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


37th Native Infantry, march out to join you to-morro-w 
morning. They will make one march to Khoord-Caubul. 
The next day I hope you will be joined by the 13th, 
the 37th, and Abbott’s battery. I hope you will arrange 
the plan of attack before Sale arrives.”* But although 
Macnaghten was eager to “ thrash the rascals,” certain 
prudential considerations suggested to him that it would 
only be expedient to punish them as much as could 
“ conveniently ” be done. It would not be convenient, 
at such a time, to exasperate the insurgents too much, 
and drive them to block up the passes, and plunder 
everything that came in their way.f 

In the mean while, Monteith, in his isolated post in 
the Khoord-Caubul valley, was exposed, if not to some 
danger, to considerable inconvenience, for the enemy 
made a night attack upon their camp, aided by the 
treachery of the Afghan horsemen,! who admitted them 
within their lines. One of our officers. Lieutenant Jen¬ 
kins, and several Sepoys, were killed; and a number of 
camels carried off by the enemy. Monteith reported the 
treachery of his Afghan friends, and the Envoy resented 
his just suspicions.§ But he was now to be relieved. 