APPENDIX. 


Bozoork, Caimacan (titles), and Meerza Abdul Wahab, Principal 
Secretary of State (titles), were duly appointed, and invested with 
full powers to negotiate with the plenipotentiaries of his Britannic 
Majesty, James Morier, Esquire, recently appointed minister at 
this Court, and the above-mentioned Henry Ellis, Esquire. These 
plenipotentiaries having consulted on the terms most advisable 
for this alliance, have comprised them in eleven articles. What 
relates to commerce, trade, and other affairs, will be drawn up 
and concluded in a separate commercial treaty. 

Art. I. The Persian Government judge it incumbent on them, 
after the conclusion of this definitive treaty, to declare all al¬ 
liances contracted with European nations in a state of hostility 
with Great Britain null and void, and hold themselves bound not 
to allow any European army to enter the Persian territory, nor to 
proceed towards India, nor to any of the ports of that country; 
and also engage not to allow any individuals of such European 
nations, entertaining a design of invading India, or being at 
enmity with Great Britain, whatever, to enter Persia. Should 
any European powers wish to invade India by the road of Kha- 
razm, Tartarlstan, Bokhara, Samarcand, or other routes, his Per¬ 
sian Majesty engages to induce the kings and governors of those 
countries to oppose such invasion, as much as is in his power, 
either by the fear of his arms, or by conciliatory measures. 

II. It is agreed that these articles, formed with the hand of 
truth and sincerity, shall not be changed or altered; but there 
shall arise from them a daily increase of friendship, which shall 
last for ever, between the two most serene kings, their heirs, 
successors, their subjects, and their respective kingdoms, domi¬ 
nions, provinces, and countries. And his Britannic Majesty 
further engages not to interfere in any dispute which may here¬ 
after arise between the princes, noblemen, and great chiefs of 
Persia; and if one of the contending parties should even offer a 
province of Persia, with view of obtaining assistance, the English 
Government shall not agree to such a proposal, nor, by adopting 
it, possess themselves of such part of Persia. 

III, The purpose of this treaty is strictly defensive, and the 
object is that from their mutual assistance both states should 
derive stability and strength; and this treaty has only been con¬ 
cluded for the purpose of repelling the aggressions of enemies; 
and the purport of the word aggression in tins treaty is an attack 



APPENDIX. 


645 


upon the territories of another state. The limits of the territory 
of the two states of Russia and Persia shall be determined accord¬ 
ing to the admission of Great Britain, Persia, and Russia. 

IV. It having been agreed by an article in the preliminary 
treaty concluded between the high contracting parties, that in 
case of any European nation invading Persia, should the Persian 
Government require the assistance of the English, the Governor- 
General of India, on the part of Great Britain, shall comply with 
the wish of the Persian Government, by sending from India the 
force required, with officers, ammunition, and warlike stores; or, 
in lieu thereof, the English Government shall pay an annual 
subsidy, the amount of which shall be regulated in a definitive 
treaty to be concluded between the high contracting parties; it is 
hereby provided that the amount of the said subsidy shall be two 
hundred thousand (200,000) tomauns annually. It is further 
agreed that the said subsidy shall not be paid in case the war with 
such European nation shall have been produced by an aggression 
on the part of Persia; and since the payment of the above 
subsidy will be made solely for the purpose of raising and dis¬ 
ciplining an army, it is agreed that the English minister shall be 
satisfied of its being duly applied to the purpose for which it is 
assigned. 