

V. Should the Persian Government wish to introduce Euro¬ 
pean discipline among their troops, they are at liberty to employ 
European officers for that purpose, provided the said officers do 
not belong to nations in a state of war or enmity with Great 
Britain. 

VI. Should any European power be engaged in war with 
Persia when at peace with England, his Britannic Majesty en¬ 
gages to use his best endeavours to bring Persia and such Euro¬ 
pean power to a friendly understanding. If, however, his Ma¬ 
jesty’s cordial interference should fail of success, England shall 
still, if required, in conformity with the stipulations in the pre¬ 
ceding articles, send a force from India, or, in lieu thereof, pay an 
annual subsidy of two hundred thousand (200,000) tomauns for 
the support of a Persian army, so long as a war in the supposed 
case shall continue, and until Persia shall make peace with such 
nation. 

VII. Since it is the custom of Persia to pay the troops six 
months in advance, the English minister at that court shall do all 



646 


APTBUDrS. 


in his power to pay the subsidy in as early instalments as may be 
convenient. 

VIII. Should the Afghans be at war with the British nation, 
his Persian Majesty engages to send an army against them in such 
manner and of such force as may be concerted with the English 
Government. The expenses of such an army shall be defrayed 
by the British Government, in such manner as may be agreed 
upon at the period of its being required. 

IX. If war should be declared between the Afghans and Per¬ 
sians, the English Government shall not interfere with either 
party, unless their mediation to effect a peace shall be solicited by 
both parties. 

X. Should any Persian subject of distinction, showing signs of 
hostility and rebellion, take refuge in the British dominions, the 
English Government shall, on intimation from the Persian Go¬ 
vernment, turn him out of their country, or, if he refuses to leave 
it, shall seize and send him to Persia. 

Previously to the arrival of such fugitive in the English terri¬ 
tory, should the governor of the district to which he may direct 
his flight receive intelligence of the wishes of the Persian Govern¬ 
ment respecting him, he shall refuse him admission. After such 
prohibition, should such person persist in his resolution, the said 
governor shall cause him to be seized and sent to Persia; it being 
underatood that the aforesaid obligations are reciprocal between 
the contracting parties. 

XI. Should his Persian Majesty require assistance from the 
English Government in the Persian Gulf, they shall, if convenient 
and practicable, assist him with ships of war and troops. The 
expenses of such expedition shall be accounted for and defrayed 
by the Persian Government, and the above ships shall anchor in 
such ports as shall be pointed out by the Persian Government, 
and not enter other harbours without permission, except from 
absolute necessity. 

The articles are thus auspiciously concluded: 