

VII. In case war takes place between his Persian Majesty and 
the Afghans, his Majesty the King of Great Britain shall not take 
any part therein, unless it be at the desire of both parties, to afibrd 
his mediation for peace. 

VIII. It is acknowledged the intent and meaning of these pre¬ 
liminary articles are defensive. And it is likewise agreed, that as 
long as these preliminary articles remain in force, his Majesty the 
King of Persia shall not enter into any engagements inimical to 
his Britannic Majesty, or pregnant with injury or disadvantage to 
the British territories in India. 

This treaty is concluded by both parties in the hope of its being 
everlasting, and that it may be productive of the most beautiful 
fruits of friendship between the two most serene kings. 

In witness whereof we, the said plenipotentiaries, have hereunto 
set our hands and seals in the royal city of Teheran, this 
twelfth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand 



640 


APPENDIX. 


eight hundred and nine, answering to the twenty-fifth of 
Mohurrum el Haram, in the year of the Hegira one thousand 
two hundred and twenty-four. 

(L.S.) Harford Jones. 

(L.S.) Mahomed Sheffeeh. 

(L.S.) Mahomed Hoossein. 


[Vol. I., page 83.] 

Treaty with Runjeet Singli^ the Rajah of Lahore^ dated 26th April, 

1809. 

Whereas certain differences which had arisen between the Bri¬ 
tish Government and the Rajah of Lahore have been happily 
and amicably adjusted; and both parties being anxious to maintain 
the relations of perfect amity and concord, the following articles 
of treaty, which shall be binding on the heirs and successors of tlie 
two parties, have been concluded by Rajah Runjeet Singh on his 
own part, and by the agency of Charles Theophilus Metcalfe, 
Esquire, on the part of the Britisli Government. 

Art. I. Perpetual friendship shall subsist between the British 
Government and the state of Lahore. The latter shall be consi¬ 
dered, with respect to tlie former, to be on the footing of the most 
favoured powers; and the British Government will have no con¬ 
cern with the territories and subjects of the Rajah to the north¬ 
ward of the River Sutlej. 

II. The Rajah will never maintain, in the territory occupied by 
him and his dependents on the left bank of the River Sutlej, 
more troops than are necessary for the internal duties of that 
territory, nor commit, or suffer, any encroachment on the posses¬ 
sions or rights of the chiefs in its vicinity. 

III. In the event of a violation of any of the preceding articles, 
or of a departure from the rules of friendship, on the part of 
cither state, this treaty shall be considered null and void. 

IV. This treaty, consisting of four articles, having been settled 
and concluded at Uniritser, on the 25th day of April, 1809, Mr. 
Charles Jheophilus Metcalfe has delivered to the Rajah of Lahore 
a copy of the same in English and Persian, under his seal and 



APPENDIX. 


641 


signature; and the said Rajah has delivered another'copy of the 
same under his seal and signature; and Mr. Charles Theophilus 
Metcalfe engages to procure, within the space of two months, a 
copy of the same, duly ratified by the Right Honourable the 
Governor-General in Council, on the receipt of which by the 
Rajah the present treaty shall be deemed complete and binding on 
both parties, and the copy of it now delivered to the Rajah shall 
be restored. 