

The faithful servants of both states having agreed to this treaty, 
the conditions of confirmation and ratification have been per¬ 
formed, and this document has been sealed and signed by the 
Right Honourable the Governor-General, and the Honourable 
the Members of the Supreme British Government in India, this 
17th day of June, 1809, answering to the 1224 of the Hegira. 


[Vol., I., page 93.] 

Treaty with the Ameers of Sindh, dated 22nd August, 1809. 

Abt. L There shall be eternal friendship between the British 
Government and that of Sindh—namely, Meer Gholam Alee, 
Meer Kurreem Alee, and Meer Murad Alee. 

II. Enmity shall never appear between the two states. 

III. The mutual despatch of the vakeels of both Governments 
--^namely, the British Government and Sindhian Government— 
shall always continue. 



APPE£iDIX. 643 

fV. Th© Govemmeiit of Sindh will not allow th© ©stablishment 
of the tribe of the French in Sindh. 

Written on the 10th of the month of Rujeeb-oohMoorujub, 
in the year of the Hegira 1224, corresponding with the 22nd of 
August, 1809. 


[Vol. I., page 139.] 

Definitive Treaty with Peraia^ concluded at Teheran^ by Mesara, 
Morier and Ellia^ on the 25th November^ 1814. 

Praise be to God, the all-perfect and all-sufficient. 

These happy leaves are a nosegay plucked from the thornless 
garden of Concord, and tied by the hands of the plenipotentiaries 
of the two great states in the form of a definitive treaty, in which 
the articles of friendship and amity are blended. 

Previously to this period, the high in station, Sir Harford 
Jones, Baronet, Envoy Extraordinary from the English Govern¬ 
ment, came to this Court to form an amicable alliance, and, in 
conjunction with the plenipotentiaries of Persia, their Excellencies 
(titles) Meerza Mahomed Shefieeh, and Hajee Mahomed Hussein 
Khan, concluded a preliminary treaty, the particulars of which 
were to be detailed and arranged in a definitive treaty; and the 
above-mentioned treaty, according to its articles, was ratified by 
the British Government. 

Afterwards, when his Excellency Sir Gore Ouseley, Ambas¬ 
sador Extraordinary from his Britannic Majesty, arrived at this 
exalted and illustrious Court, for the purpose of completing the 
relations of amity between the two states, and was invested with 
full powers by his own Government to arrange all the important 
affairs of friendship, the ministers of this victorious state, with the 
advice and approbation of the above-mentioned ambassador, con¬ 
cluded a definitive treaty, consisting of fixed articles and stipular 
tions. 

That treaty having been submitted to the British Government, 
certain changes in its articles and provisions, consistent with 
friendship, appeared necessary; and Henry Ellis, Esquire, was 
accordingly ^patched to this Court, in charge of a letter expla¬ 
natory of the above-mentioned alterations. Therefore, their Ex¬ 
cellencies Meerza Mahomed Shefieeh, Prime Minister, Meerza 

2 T 2 



644 


