

Madras is reduced to four Queen’s regiments of infantry, one of 
which is at Moulmein, and therefore, at some seasons of the year, 
out of reach. We have drawn from that Presidency the largest 
number that it can safely spare, and no other source is open to us 
on this side of the Cape from which to strengthen the European 
portion of this army. 

Recent events assure us that the Sikhs will not long quietly 
admit our establishment in Afghanistan: surrounded as they will 
be; humbled by the superiority which we claim when we require 
a passage for our troops and convoys through their territory; and 
elated by many years of successful encroachment on their neigh¬ 
bours, they will venture upon a trial of their strength. 

Indian history proves that a sense of inferiority has not pre¬ 
vented adjoining states from forcing the British Government into 
hostilities:—Tippoo in 1799, Nepaul, Ava, the Mahrattas in 
1817, afford instances of this. The Sikhs will follow their exam¬ 
ples, I have no doubt, whenever they have, or think they have, 
a favourable opportunity. Nepaul will urge them on conti¬ 
nually to the contest, and will probably afford the opportunity 
alluded to. 

We ought to be at all times strong enough to enter upon war 
simultaneously with these two states; and not entirely to forget 
that Ava still smarts under'the loss of its territory. When com¬ 
pelled to enter into hostilities at the same time with the Sikhs 
and Nepaulese, it may be so arranged that we, at first, adopt a 
defensive line of proceeding towards one of them. If we can 
draw upon Madras for cavalry, there will be the means, in that 
arm, of meeting both contingencies. We ought, however, to have 
more than seven European regiments to give weight and effect to 
operations carried on in countries so far apart, that mutual sup¬ 
port is impracticable. If I am not mistaken, the Marquis Wel¬ 
lesley desired that the establishment of her Majesty's troops should 
not be less than 25,000 men. Since his Lordship left India, 
great additions have been made to our territory, and wo have 
been brought into contact with warlike tribes, inhabiting coun¬ 
tries badly suited to the constitution of our native soldiery. 
When I state that we have at this time ten and a half European 
regiments beyond the limits known in Lord WeUeslefe time, it 



652 


APPENDIX. 


may be granted that I cannot be very wrong in urging that the 
established number of her Majesty’s troops to be employed in 
India shall be raised to 25,000 men. Bombay is undoubtedly over¬ 
pressed at this moment. There are nine of her native infantry regi¬ 
ments in Sindh, or moving thither, of which four must soon return 
to be recruited and restored. To enable Bombay to do this, and 
to garrison Aden and Kharack, Madras has been resorted to ; in¬ 
deed, the other two Presidencies would now be crippled, were it 
not for the great assistance given by Fort St. George. To carry 
on happily through all we have undertaken, through contests 
which may be expected; to check the germs of disloyalty at 
home, should such arise ; to give our native corps short periods of 
foreign service, and to carry on the reliefs ; I recommend govern¬ 
ment seriously to consider whether it is not most necessary that 
an early augmentation of the army should take place. 