

From the advanced position which we have taken up, we can¬ 
not, perhaps, consistently withdraw; in good faith we cannot dis¬ 
place Shah Soojah ; we have, therefore, to continue to rule, as 
we now do, in his name, which entails the expense of his esta¬ 
blishments, personal, civil, and military, upon us, without any 



APPENDIX. 


660 

prospect c£ reimbursement. It is not, however^ on financial 
grounds that I am anxious to lay my opinions before the Governor- 
General in Council—^it is to recommend that the future may be 
considered, and that the Honourable Court may be solicited to 
authorise such addition to the Indian army as our present position 
seems to demand. Our occupation of Afghanistan draws a con¬ 
siderable portion of our troops entirely out of India, and the com¬ 
munication with them is always tedious—at times impracticable. 
We have at present five European regiments beyond the Indus, 
or proceeding thither, and I cannot, under existing circumstances, 
estimate our permanent European force at less than three regi¬ 
ments, two in the north and one in Sindh. 

Our native troops have conducted themselves exceedingly well 
in Afghanistan ; but it is to them a foreign country: the climate 
is most uncongenial; to the Hindoos most injurious. We ought 
not, I think, to suffer any native corps to remain more than two 
years there. There are at this time nineteen regiments of native 
infantry beyond the Indus, or moving thither by various routes: 
of these it is possible, but not certain, that two may return to 
Bengal and four to Bombay before the end of March, leaving 
thirteen far beyond our frontier. I have little doubt that the im¬ 
posing bodies of troops now proceeding to Sukkur and Caubul 
will place the Shah’s government on a firmer footing than it has 
ever yet been. Allowing, however, the most perfect success to all 
our operations in the south, and fully expecting lasting benefit 
from the important advantages gained by Brigadier Dennie and 
Sir Robert Sale, I cannot think that less than ten regiments of 
native infantry can be considered sufficient to restrain the ferocity 
of the northern tribes, to curb the independence of the Beloochees, 
and to crush the propensity of both to eject us, by intrigue and a 
harassing war of details. The Shah’s troops are not included. 
Taking, then, three European and ten native regiments as the 
force by which we may expect to hold the country, maintaining 
our communications of diplomacy : two and six would be the 
Bengal proportion—one and four the proportion of Bombay. 

The augmentation ordered last year by the Honourable Court, 
when the three new European regiments are fit for service, will 
give the number desired ; indeed, they were raised to meet the 
probable consequences of our advance beyond the Indus; but if 
other regiments melt away, as her Majesty’s 13th Light Infantry 



APPENDIX. 661 

and the let European Regiment have done^ we shall fcfel the drain 
a very heavy one. 