


[Vol. I., page 89.] 

Treaty with the King of Cauhuly dated VIth June^ 1809. 

Wlicrcas, in consequence of the confederacy with the state of 
Persia, projected by the French for the purpose of invading the 
dominions of his Majesty the King of the Douranees, and, ulti¬ 
mately, those of the British Government In India, the Honourable 
Mountstuart Elphinstone was despatched to the Court of his 
Majesty, in quality of envoy plenipotentiary, on the part of the 
Right Honourable Lord Minto, Govern or-General, exercising the 
supreme authority over all affairs, civil, political, and military, in 
the British possessions in the East Indies, for the purpose of 
concerting with his Majesty^s ministers the means of mutual 
defence against the expected invasion of the French and Persians; 
and whereas the said ambassador, having had the honour of being 
presented to his Majesty, and of explaining the friendly and 
beneficial object of his mission, his Majesty, sensible of the 
advantages of alliance and co-operation between the two states 
for the purpose above described, directed his ministers to confer 
with the Honourable Mountstuart Elphinstone, and, consulting 
the welfare of both states, to conclude a friendly alliance; and 
certain articles of treaty having accordingly been agreed to be¬ 
tween his Majesty's ministers and the British ambassador, and 
confirmed by the royal signet, a copy of the treaty so framed has 
been transmitted by the ambassador for the ratification of the 
Governor-General, who, consenting to the stipulations therein 
contained, without variation, a copy of these articles, as hereunder 
written, is now returned, duly ratified by the seal and signature 
of the Governor-General, and the signatures of the members of 
the British Government in India. And the obligations upon 
VOL. 1 . 2 T 



642 


APPENDIX. 


both Governments, both now and for ever, shall be exclusively 
regulated and determined by the tenor of those articles, which are 
as follow: 

Abt. 1. As the French and Persians have entered into a con¬ 
federacy against the state of Caubul, if they should wish to pass 
through the King’s dominions, the servants of the heavenly throne 
shall prevent their passage, and, exerting themselves to the extent 
of their power in making war on them and repelling them, shall 
not permit them to cross into British India. 

II. If the French and Persians, in pursuance of their confede¬ 
racy, should advance towards the King of Caubul’s country in a 
hostile manner, the British state, endeavouring heartily to repel 
them, shall hold themselves liable to afford the expenses necessary 
for the above-mentioned service, to the extent of their ability. 
While the confederacy between the French and Persians continues 
in force, these articles shall be in force, and be acted on by both 
parties. 

III. Friendship and union shall continue for ever between these 
two states. The veil of separation shall be lifted up from be¬ 
tween them, and they shall in no manner interfere in each other’s 
countries; and the King of Caubul shall permit no individual of 
the French to enter his territories. 