

Sealed by 

Month of Suffer, A.H. 1244. H.R.H. Abbas Meebza. 

Firmaun from his Majesty the Shah to Colonel Macdonald^ 
British Envoy in Persia. 

A.O. 

Let it be known to Colonel Macdonald, the English envoy, 
exalted by our munificence, that, our noble son having represented 
to us his having recently come to an arrangement relative to the 
two articles of the treaty with England, we have ordered that 
what has been executed by our son, touching this transaction, in 
conformity with the firmaun of full pow^ers granted to him by us, 
be confirmed by our royal ratification and consent; and we duly 
appreciate the exertions of your Excellency during the last year, 
which have obtained you the goodwill of the Shah. 

Regarding the crore of tomauns required for the redemption of 
Khoee, agreeably to what has been laid before us, H.R.H. Abbas 
Meerza has directed the payment of 400,000 tomauns by Mo- 
hamed Meerza; and we have besides instructed the remaining 
100,000 tomauns to be delivered to Meerza Abul Hassan Khan, 
Minister for Foreign Afi&irs, for the purpose of being transmitted 
to you. 

Your Excellency will, therefore, conceiving this firmaun as your 
security, become responsible for the payment of the above sum. 



APPENDIX. 


649 


which will be afterwards paid to you by the lord of exalted rant, 
Meerza Abul Hassan Khan. Also make known to us all your 
wishes. Sealed by 

His Majesty Futteh Ali Shah. 


[Vol. I., page 587.] 

Minute op Sir Jasper Nicolls. 

loth November, 1840. 

The manner in which the affairs of Afghanistan have pressed 
upon the military resources of India arc well known—upon 
Bengal they have borne so heavily, added to a prospect of a war 
with Nepaul, that the annual and most necessary relief of the 
native troops has been in a great degree suspended. 

Whilst we are very liberal in our care and payment of our 
army, it would be most imprudent to risk the loss of their attach¬ 
ment to the Company’s government by denying them the periodi¬ 
cal return to their homes, which they so much covet, and which 
is so necessary for their domestic comfort and respectability. 
As long as an expectation of being able to withdraw a portion of 
our troops from Caubul this year was entertained, or could be 
reasonably hoped for, I abstained from offering any remarks on 
the subject of relief; but instead of withdrawing regiments from 
Afghanistan and Sindh, we are now sending into those countries 
between six and eight thousand men to confirm, in some place to 
re-establish, our supremacy. I use these words, because it is now 
clear to me that Shah Soojah, even with a force commanded by 
European officers, most inconveniently spared to instruct the 
troops, and to lead them on, will never be the independent King 
of Afghanistan. The semi-barbarous tribes of that country, who 
have been freed from any well-established rule for centuries, will 
not submit to any settled form of government under a native of 
that land. They have shown us that they do not stand in much 
awe even of our power and resources. 