

II. It is agreed that the preliminary articles, formed with the 
hand of truth and sincerity, shall not be changed or altered, but 
there shall arise from them a daily increase of friendship, which 
shall last for ever between the two most serene kings, their heirs, 
successors, their subjects, and their respective kingdoms, dominions, 
provinces, and countries. 

III. His Majesty the King of Persia judges it necessary to 
declare that from the date of these preliminary articles, every 
treaty or agreement he may have made with any one of the 
powers of Europe becomes null and void, and that he will not 
permit any European force whatever to pass through Persia, either 
towards India, or towards the ports of that country. 

IV. In case any European forces have invaded, or shall invade, 
the territories of his Majesty the King of Persia, his Britannic 
Majesty will afford to his Majesty the King of Persia, a force, or, 
in lieu of it, a subsidy, Avith warlike ammunition, such as guns, 
muskets, &c., and officers, to the amount that may be to the 
advantage of both parties, for the expulsion of the force so 
invading; and the number of these forces, or the amount of the 
subsidy, ammunition, <fec., shall be hereafter regulated in the 
definitive treaty. In case his Majesty the King of England 
should make peace with such European power, his Britannic 
Majesty shall use his utmost endeavours to negotiate and procure 
a peace between his Persian Majesty and such power. But if 
(which God forbid) his Britannic Majesty’s efforts for this purpose 
should fail of success, then the forces or subsidy, according to the 
amount mentioned in the definitive treaty, shall still continue in 
the service of the King of Persia as long as the said European 
forces shall remain in the territories of his Persian Majesty, or 
until peace is concluded between his Persian Majesty and the said 



AFPBNPIX. 


639 


European power. And it is further agreed, that in case the domi¬ 
nions of his Britannic Majesty in India are attacked or invaded 
by the Afghans or any other power, his Majesty the King of 
Persia shall afford a force for the protection of the said dominions, 
according to the stipulations contained in the definitive treaty. 

V. If a detachment of British troops has arrived from India in 
the Gulf of Persia, and, by the consent of his Persian Majesty, 
landed on the island of Karrak, or at any of the Persian ports, 
they shall not in any manner possess themselves of such places; 
and, from the date of these preliminary articles, the said detach¬ 
ment shall be at the disposal of his Mnjesty the King of Persia, 
except his Excellency the Governor-General of India judges such 
detachment necessary for the defence of India, in which case they 
shall be returned to India, and a subsidy, in lieu of the personal 
services of these troops, shall be paid to his Majesty the King of 
Persia, the amount of which shall be settled in the definitive treaty. 

VI. But if the said troops remain, by the desire of his Majesty 
the King of Persia, either at Karrak, or any other port in the 
Gulf of Persia, they shall be treated by the governor there in the 
most friendly manner, and orders shall be given to all the 
governors of Farsistan, that whatever quantity of provisions, &c., 
may be necessary, shall, on being paid lor, be furnished to the said 
troops at the fair prices of the day. 