

A definitive treaty between the two states having formerly been 
prepared, consisting of twelve articles, and certain changes, not 
inconsistent with friendship, having appeared necessary, we the 
plenipotentiaries of the two states, comprising the said treaty in 
eleven articles, have hereunto set our hands and seals, in the royal 
city of Teheran, this twenty-fifth day of November, in the year of 



APFEimiX. 


647 


our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fourteen, corresponding 
with the twelfth Zealhajeh, in the year of the Hegira one thousand 
two hundred and twenty-nine. 

(L.S.) James Morier. 

(L.S.) Henry Ellis. 

(L.wS.) Mahomed Sheffeeh. 

(L.S.) Abdul Wahab. 

(L.S.) IsAH (Meerza Bozoobk). 


[Vol. L, page 149.] 

Bonds given by Abbas Meerza^ Prince Royal of Persia, and by 
the Shall, cancelling the Subsidy Articles of the Treaty of 
26th November, 1814. 

Bond granted by Abbas Meerza, Prince Royal of Persia, to 
Lieutenant-Colonel Macdonald, British Envoy. 

Be it known to Colonel Macdonald, British envoy at our 
Court, that we, the heir apparent to the Persian throne, in virtue 
of the full powers vested in us by the Shah, in all matters touch¬ 
ing the foreign relations of this kingdom, do hereby pledge our 
solemn word and promise, that if the British Government will assist 
us with the sum of two hundred thousand tomauns (200,000), 
towards the liquidation of the indemnity, due by us to Russia, we 
will expunge, and hereafter consider as annulled, the Illrd and 
IVth articles of the definitive treaty, between the two states^ con¬ 
cluded by Mr. Ellis, and obtain the royal sanction to the same. 

This paper bears the seal of his Royal Highness Abbas Meerza, 
and that of his Persian Majesty^s Minister the Kaim-Mukam. 

Dated in the month of Shaban, or March, 1828. 

Ruckum of his Royal Highness the Heir Apparent, in ratification 
of the Annulment of the Illrd and IVth Articles of the 
Treaty with England. 

Relative to the articles III. and IV. of the propitious treaty 
between England and Persia, which was concluded by Mr. Ellis, 
in the month Zeekaud, A.H. 1229, agreeably to the engagements 
entered into with your Excellency, that, in consequence of the 
sum of 200,000 tomauns, the currency of the country, presented 
as an aid to Persia, in consideration of the losses she has sustained 
in the war with Russia, we, the heir apparent, vested with full 
powers in all matters connected with the politics of this nation, 



648 


APPENDIX. 


have agreed that the said two articles shall be expunged, and 
have delivered a bond to your Excellency, which is now in your 
hands. 

In the month of Zikeyla, A.H. 1243, on our going to wait 
upon his Majesty at Teheran, in consistence with the note addressed 
to your Excellency by Meerza Abul Hassan Khan, the Minister 
for Foreign Affairs, we were appointed sole agent in this matter 
by his Majesty, with unlimited authority; therefore, as the 
Government of England, through the medium of Colonel Mac¬ 
donald, have afforded us the assistance of 200,000 tomauns, wc, 
the representative of his Majesty, have, on this day, the 14tli of 
the month Suffer, and the 24th of the Christian month August, 
annulled the two obnoxious articles of our propitious treaty. 
The envoy, considering this document as a ratification on the 
subject of the two articles, will know that it is liable to no further 
comment from the ministers of his Majesty’s Court. 