

I advise an early increase under certain knowledge of the diffi¬ 
culty of raising good men, and of the time required to train them, 
and to establish confidence in their officers. Ten regiments ap¬ 
pear to be sufficient to give us security in Afghanistan and Sindh. 
They should be effective corps. We have not only neighbours to 
overawe, but treacherous subjects to control, and doubtful friends 
to intimidate. Five for Bengal, three for Madras, and two for 
Bombay, seem to be the due proportions, the addition to Madras 
being given on the acknowledged condition that she must be 
ever ready to take some of the southern stations of Bengal and 
Bombay, as at present. I very much prefer augmentation by re¬ 
giments to numerical increase by companies, though well aware 
of the additional expense, and that for some years (five at least) 
wc shall not have our regiments well officered. 

Again, I assure his Lordship and my colleagues, that my sole 
object in drawing their attention to this subject is my anxiety 
to provide for the future. We well know the difficulties expe¬ 
rienced from the monsoons and seasons, in drawing troops toge¬ 
ther ; we must be convinced that we have force and stability in 
every quarter, and that our power is felt and acknowledged. 
When we require an instance of the difficulties alluded to, let us 
remember that Brigadier Shelton’s column will not reach Jellala- 
bad until four months after it was urgently applied for, and that 
it cannot proceed to Caubul till the roads are free from snow. 
Afghanistan not being well suited to cavalry operations, and the 



APPENDIX. 


653 


difficult passes compelling us to nan*ow the artillery branch of our 
equipment, I do not see that we are likely to meet any impedi¬ 
ment in increasing these portions of our force when it may be 
necessary. 

I have carefully avoided all reference to Herat, or to any em¬ 
ployment of troops beyond the Hindoo-Koosh. If hostilities 
should be undertaken in either, the case I have attempted to 
establish will even more urgently require consideration and fore¬ 
thought. 

J. Nicolls. 


[Vol. I., page 088 .] 

Minute of Sir Jasper Nicolls, 19th August, 1841. 

When the opinions of the members of government were 
last given on the affairs of Afghanistan, I did not offer mine, 
because there was very little time for doing so before the despatch 
of the mail—and further, because I had partly recorded my sen¬ 
timents on the 10 th of November, 1840, when advising an in¬ 
crease of the army, to meet the demand our new conquest called 
for. The surrender of Dost Mahomed, a few days before, was 
given as a proof that no such increase was required, and the 
serious increase of expense was another ground for setting aside 
the recommendation. I was well disposed to yield assent to both; 
but I observe by the activity with which our reinforcements have 
since been sent, that there is a conviction at home that our 
European troops should be kept on a high establishment. I cor¬ 
dially join in the Governor-GeneraFs opinion now recorded, that 
we should not advance upon Herat, if it can possibly be avoided. 
We experience anxiety and difficulty in keeping Shah Soojah 
upon his throne, without extending his kingdom at the risk of 
our own power and security. The military base on which our 
positions in Afghanistan are now supported, is very objectionable 
on account of distance; difficulty of communication; foreign 
interposition. The seasons control and cramp every movement, 
and the proceedings and policy of the Sikhs cannot be antici¬ 
pated. To advance beyond the Helmund would greatly increase 
our difficulties. A corps at Herat could not be easily reinforced, 
and, as a bridle upon Persia, Russia, and the Turcomans, it should 