

We know in this country something of the customs of those 
countries—of the meaning of some of the native expressions in 
this letter. It appears that there are four thanahs, or posts, 
between Caubul and Gundarauck. A thanah is either a per¬ 
manent or a temporary post, to guard a road or district of 
importance. We have seen who the person was selected to 
induce the rebels to submit; let us now see who were the per¬ 
sons appointed to take charge of these thanahs or posts in the 
disturbed country—those named in the subsequent part of the 
despatch as the very men who were the leaders in the rebellion, 
in the attack, and destruction, and murder, of the East India 
Company’s officers and troops! 

No libels can state facts against the Afghan Government 
stronger than these. 

But Mr. Macnaghten has discovered that the Company’s 
troops are not sufficiently active personally, nor are they suffi¬ 
ciently well armed for the wai&re in Afghanistan. Very pos- 



APPENDIX. 


sibly an Afghan will run over his native hills faster than an 
Englishman or a Hindoo. But we have carried on war in hill 
countries, as well in Hindostan and the Deccan as in the Spanish 
Peninsula; and I never heard that our troops were not equal, as 
well in personal activity as by their arms, to contend with 
and overcome any natives of hills whatever. Mr. Macnaghten 
ought to have learnt by this time that hill countries are not 
conquered, and their inhabitants kept in subjection, solely by 
running up the hills and firing at long distances. The whole of 
a hill country of which it is necessary to keep possession, par¬ 
ticularly for the communications of the army, should be occu¬ 
pied by sufficient bodies of troops, well supplied, and capable of 
maintaining themselves; and not only not a Ghilzye or insurgent 
should be able to run up and down hills, but not a cat or a goat, 
except under the fire of those occupying the hills. This is the 
mode of carrying on the war, and not by hiring Afghans with 
long matchlocks to protect and defend the communications of the 
British army. 

Shah Soojah Khan may have in his service any troops that ho 
and Mr. Macnaghten please. 

But if the troops in the service of the East India Company 
are not able, armed and equipped as they are, to perform the 
service required of them in Central Asia, I protest against their 
being left in Afghanistan. It will not do to raise, pay, and 
discipline matchlock-men, in order to protect the British troops 
and their communicu/ions, discovered by Mr. Macnaghten to be 
no longer able to protect themselves. 

Wellington. 


END OF VOL. 1. 


WHITINO, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STBAKD. 




