



654 


4FFEND1X. 


contain, at l^ast, the power of protracted self-defence. We 
should be called upon, probably at no distant time, to take the 
field in its support. To do this safely, we should be strong on 
our whole line from Gaubul to Khelat, for Afghan intrigue would 
undoubtedly be actively employed to disturb the district from 
which the troops were drawn. Yar Mahomed is certainly a very 
insidious enemy, but if ejected from Herat he would not be less 
so. The Douranees and Ghylzes are stimulated by him no doubt, 
and perhaps other tribes may be so; they do not however receive 
either money or aid from him, and they will tire of advice which 
only leads to their discomfiture. 

Although Dost Mahomed is now residing amongst us, I do not 
perceive that the Shah’s government is much more at ease than 
it ffas at this time last year; though our military force beyond 
the Indus has been much increased. The hope of leaving the 
Shah’s dominions to his own force and government seems more 
distant than it then was. 

My former proposal was met by an assertion (a very just one) 
that the heavy drain upon the finances would not admit an in> 
crease of establishment. 1 was not then aware of the full extent 
of that drain—it is now rated so high as to create a deficit of a 
million and a quarter annually, and I think we should not venture 
to send a second army beyond the Indus, to destroy the resources 
of India; for such a consequence may be apprehended from such 
a heavy annual exportation of the necessary funds. Again, 
when our jealous and intriguing neighbours observe our forces 
spreading to the east and west, so far beyond our former limits, 
and learn that our finances are decreasing annually, will they not 
be tempted to encourage each other to regain what we have 
wrested from them, and to unite the turbulent spirits within our 
provinces to rebellion. 

I offer these opinions with hesitation and regret—but I lost 
the opportunity of stating them some months since, and am 
fearful that similar idlence at this time might be misconstrued. 

J. Nicolls. 



APPENDIX. 


655 


[Vol. L, page 619.] 

COPY OF A MEMORANDUM BY THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON, ON 
SIR W. MACNAGHTEN’S LETTER OP OCTOBER 26, 1841. 

January 29th, 1842. At night. 

It is impossible to read tbe letter from Mr* Macnaghteu 
to the Secretary to the Government in India, without being sen¬ 
sible of the precarious and dangerous position of our affairs in 
Central Asia. 

Mr. Macnaghtcn complains of reports against the King Shah 
Soojah Khan and his government, as libels. 

Of these we can know nothing; but I am convinced that no 
complaints or libels can be so strong as the facts stated by Mr. 
Macnaghten in this letter. 

It appears that when Mr. Macnaghtcn heard of the first 
symptoms and first acts of this rebellion, he prevailed upon the 
king to send a message to the rebels, inviting them to return to 
their allegiance. 

The selection of the person sent is curious—Humza Khan, 
the Governor of Caubul. His mission tailed, of course, says Mr. 
Macnaghten, because Humza Khan was the chief instigator of 
the rebellion! 