

Victorious  and  exclusive  during  the  first 
months  of  that  revolution,  they  imagined  that 
they  had  no  cause  for  further  concealment. 
They  boasted  of  their  success;  they  revealed 


author's  preface.  ivU 

their  secret  proceedings;  they  promulgated 
decrees,  and  posted  up  proclamations.  The 
press  multiplied  their  Catechisms,  the  Trans- 
actions of  their  Societies,  and  the  results  of 
their  deliberations.  Their  Patents  and  their 
Symbols  were  sold  publicly. 

From  these  sources,  the  Author,  who  never 
belonged  to  any  secret  society,  not  even  to 
Freemasonry,  which  is  tolerated  and  pro- 
tected throughout  the  greater  part  of  Europe, 
has  drawn  the  materials  of  his  work.  They 
encreased  upon  him  as  he  arranged  them; 
but  as  they  did  not  present  themselves  either 
chronologically,  or  in  the  order  of  their  re- 
spective importance,  he  was  obliged  perpe- 
tually to  correct,  abridge,  and  transpose, 
which  has  occasioned  a  confusion  of  compi- 
lation, a  want  of  unity  in  the  cast,  which 
could  only  have  been  corrected  by  means  of 
leisure  and  careful  revision.  The  Author  has 
preferred  sacrificing  these  advantages,  to  that 
of  seizing  the  favourable  moment  for  publi- 
cation. 

He  must  further  observe,  that  the  original 
is  French,  although  it  is  not  his  mother 
tongue.    He  made  use  of  it  on  account  of  his 

a  4 


viii  author's  preface. 

English  translator^  thereby  renouncing  all 
pretension  to  elegance  of  style.  It  was  of 
too  much  consequence  to  him  to  bring  out 
his  work  first  in  London.  The  continent  is 
accustomed  to  receive  the  truth  with  less  dis- 
trust when  it  proceeds  from  Great  Britain.  It 
is  a  homage  we  owe  to  her :  let  her  permit  us 
to  wish  that  we  may  soon  participate  with 
her  in  this  honourable  privilege. 

The  Author,  living  at  a  distance  from  the 
translator,  has  not  had  the  advantage  of 
comparing  the  work  with  the  original  manu- 
script, or  of  giving  him  those  verbal  explana- 
tions which  might  often  have  been  essentially 
necessary.  This  is  an  additional  reason 
for  not  refusing  him  the  indulgence  he  lays 
claim  to. 

After  all,  it  will  be  perceived,  that  he  relies 
wholly  on  the  interest  of  the  subject,  and  on 
the  consciousness  of  never  having  altered 
facts,  to  adapt  them  either  to  prejudice  or  to 
theory. 

He  will  give  his  name  when  the  original  is 
published. 

Naples,  26tk  Januari/,  1 82 1 . 


TRANSLATOR  S  PREFACE 


If  the  Author  sohcits  indulgence  on  account 
of  the  desultory  mode  in  which  he  collected 
his  materials,  the  Translator  can  claim  no  less. 
The  original  manuscript  was  transmitted  to 
him  in  detached  portions  ;  he  was  frequently 
left  to  find  out  the  probable  place  of  the 
several  paragraphs  and  documents  to  be  in- 
serted in  various  parts  of  the  w^ork,  without 
a  possibility  of  consulting  the  Author.  Be- 
sides this  disadvantage,  and  that  occasioned 
by  the  circum.stance  that  the  Author  himself 
did  not  write  in  his  native  language,  there  is 
another  with  regard  to  various  passages  trans- 
lated from  the  Italian,  such  as,  the  Declara- 
tions, Laws,  &amp;c.  of  the  Carbonari.  The  ori- 
ginals of  these  are  mostly  written  in  a  peculiar 
dialect,  often  by  very  illiterate  persons,  and 
almost  always  printed  very  carelessly,  so  that 
in  many  instances  the  sense  can  only  be  con- 
jectured. 