

"  Di  unguento  tal  sacrandosi 
Teobaldo  al  tempio,  air  ara, 
Gli  astanti  ritrovavansi 
Di  soavit^  si  cara, 
Cosi  nostra  concordia 
E  grata  al  mio  Signor." 

The  second  intimates  that  "the  Friends"  par- 
ticipate in  the  delights  of  the  union,  as  this  oint- 
ment spreads  itself  over  the  person  of  St.  Theobald. 

"  Cosi  qualor  consagrasi 
Per  tutto  si  difFonde 
L*unguento  odorosissimo 
Che  Teobaldo  infonde, 
Pria  sulle  chiome  spargesi 
Poi  sulla  barba  lunga, 
Finche  scorrendo  all  ultimo 
Lembo  del  manto  giunga." 

It  appears  certain,  however,  that  neither  the 
Fendeurs  nor  the  Charbonniers  ever  rose  to  any 

*  No  translation  of  these  little  pieces  has  been  subjoined,  as  they 
are  both  paraphrastic  versions  of  the  P'  and  2""?  verses  of  the 
133"»  psalm.     T. 


10  MEMOIRS  OF 

importance,  or  acted  any  conspicuous  part  among 
the  secret  societies  of  Europe,  till  the  period  of 
the  Revolution.  Doubtless  such  societies  were  in 
being  in  Italy,  as  well  as  in  other  countries, 
before  that  time;  but  on  the  breaking  out  of  that 
fearful  event,  they  were  superseded  by  others 
more  generally  known,  and  of  more  importance. 

The  Free-masons  were  established  in  Italy 
among  all  ranks.  The  Illuminati  of  Weishaupt 
reckoned  among  their  initiated  some  of  the  Knights 
of  Malta,  with  the  celebrated  Dolomieu  at  their 
head.  But  the  reorganizers  of  the  Carbonari  of 
the  present  day  chose  that  order  in  preference, 
because  it  suited  their  plan  to  gain  proselytes 
chiefly  among  the  middle  and  lower  classes  of  the 
people.  They  acted  upon  the  principle  that 
dictated  the  clear  statement  contained  in  the 
letter  of  the  Duke  of  Otranto  to  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  dated  January  1,  1816:  and  which 
is  as  follows  : — 

"  The  tranquillity  of  kingdoms  does  not  depend 
upon  the  manner  in  which  persons  of  rank  think 
and  act,  nor  upon  the  spirit  that  governs  them. 
Their  ambition  has  no  influence  if  it  be  not  umted 
to  some  popular  interest.  Their  intrigues  and 
their  conspiracies  are  impotent  in  their  conse- 
quences, if  not  supported  by  the  active  interference 
of  the  multitude.  If  the  monarch  has  tlie  attach- 
ment and  the  force  of  the  people  on  his  side,  he 


THE  CARBONARI.  1  1 

has  nothing  to  fear  from  opposition  in  pubHc 
debates,  nor  from  secret  faction.  Pubhc  quiet 
depends  on  the  moral  direction  of  the  labouring 
classes  who  compose  the  body  of  the  people,  and 
constitute  the  base  of  the  social  edifice.  It  is 
these,  therefore,  that  should  be  the  principal 
objects  of  the  care  and  vigilance  of  a  good 
police,  &amp;c."* 

The  reform,  or  rather  the  restoration  of  the 
order  of  Carbonari,  is  ascribed  by  the  grand 
masters  at  Naples  to  an  unknown  officer  who  had 
spent  some  time  in  Spain.  The  next  efficient 
supporter  of  the  sect,  was  Maghella,  a  native  of 
Genoa,  of  whom  we  will  give  some  biographical 
traits,  which  may  serve  to  throw  light  on  his 
motives  for  countenanciug  and  assisting  in  the 
renewal  of  the  order  of  Carbonari.  He  was 
originally  employed  in  the  counting-house  of  a 
man  of  rank  and  influence  in  his  native  country, 
whose  lady  introduced  and  recommended  him  to 
the  French  authorities. 