

mistica  disciplina.  Crede  di  trovare  cosa  di  misterioso  e  di  singolare, 
e  si  manifest^  Re  di  Francia.  Domando  con  istanza  di  conoscere 
i  loro  misterj  e  ([ua\  fusse  lo  scopo  delle  loro  unioni.  Viene  soddis- 
fatto  e  ne  rimase  ammirato.  Chiede  di  voler  esser  iniziato  e 
promesse  divenirne  il  loro  protettore.  Si  gli  accorda  un  tal 
favore  (!)  L'indomani  fu  restituito  in  seno  de'  cacciatori  che 
desolati  lo  andavano  cercando  avendolo  smarrito.  Tornato  in 
Francia  adempi  esattamente  il  giuramento.  Si  dichiara  protettore 
de'  C.  C.  e  ne  moltiplica  il  numero,  che  in  seguito  si  distese  in 
Germania  ed  indi  in  Ingliilterra. 

Chiunque  de'  B.  C.  C.   desidera  di  avere  un  numero  maggiore 
de  notizie  rapporto  al  nutrimentO;,  al  progress©  ed  all'  espansione 

B  4 


8  MEMOIRS  OF 

accurately  and  carefully  translated,  and  published 
in  Italy;  and  since  diligently  re-translated  and 
published  with  notes  at  Naples.'^ 

The  French  branch  of  the  Order  derives  con- 
siderable importance  from  the  adoption  of  its 
patron  saint  in  Italy,  where  he  had  formerly  been 
little  known  or  honoured.  St  Theobald  has  been 
elected  protector  of  the  Society  at  Naples,  as  he 
is  of  the  Charbonniers  of  France.f     It  is  he  who 

della  setta  C.  (Carhonica)  potra  leggere:  IjHistoire  du  Jaco- 
hinisme  di  Barriiel,  che  con  somma  accuratezza  e  diligeiiza  e  stata 
tradotta  e  stampata  in  Italia,  ed  in  prosieguo  e  stata  anche 
diligentemente  tradotta,  annotata,  e  stampata  in  Napoli.* 

*  It  will  be  seen  in  the  course  of  the  work  that  the  religious 
sectaries  which  preceded  the  Reformation  were  probably  the 
founders  of  most  of  the  secret  societies  of  Italy,  France,  and 
Germany.  It  is  possible,  therefore,  that  the  origin  of  this  story 
is  to  be  found  in  the  protection  granted  by  Louis  XII.  to  the 
Waldenses,  who  had  taken  refuge  in  Dauphine.  Francis  the 
First  suffered  their  persecution  with  great  reluctance,  and  on  his 
death-bed  enjoined  his  successor  to  puiiish  their  oppressors.  The 
injunction  was  disregarded  j  but  though  a  horrid  massacre  took 
place,  the  mountains  of  Dauphine  continued  to  shelter  a  remnant 
of  the  unhappy  Waldenses,  which  occasioned  petty  disturbances 
even  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  See  Lacretelle,  Guerres  de  la 
Religion,  also  Mad.  de  Sevigfie's  Letters.     T. 

t  See,  at  the  end  of  this  Memoir,  the  Life  of  St.  Theobald, 
extracted  from  Baillet.  '^  La  Vita  di  S.  Teobaldo,  tradotta  dal 
Latino  d.  buon  Cugino  Giacinto  de  Mattia,"  was  published  at 
Naples,  August,  1820. 

*  Codice  di  Caiboueria,  Parte  Ima.  ul  Imo  grado  dcgli  A.  (Apprendenti) 
Londia  (Napoli)  1020, 


THE  CARBONARI.  9 

is  invoked  by  the  Good  Cousins  in  their  hymns, 
and  who  is  mystically  alluded  to  in  two  pieces  of 
verse  dedicated  to  the  Friends  (Agli  Amici)  and 
printed  at  Naples  a  few  days  after  the  last  revo- 
lution. The  first  of  these  pieces  compares  the 
concord  of  the  Carbonari  to  a  sacerdotal  and 
precious  ointment.^ 