

As  minister  of  police  in  the  Ligurian  Republic, 
he  displayed  firmness  and  talent  in  some  popular 
tumults.  Murat  became  acquainted  with  him 
during  the  French  campaign  in  Piedmont,  and 
gave  him  his  protection  and  countenance.  He 
was  not  equally  happy  in  making  an  impression 

*  We  find  a  similar  opinion  in  Cicero's  recently  discovered 
treatise,  de  Republica.     T, 


12  MEMOIRS  OF 

on  Bonaparte,  who,  on  the  annexation  of  Genoa 
to  France,  only  bestowed  on  him  the  office  of 
Director  of  the  Sale  of  Tobacco.  When  Murat 
succeeded  Joseph  Bonaparte  on  the  throne  of 
Naples,  Saliceti,  then  minister  of  police  in  that 
kingdom,  sent  for  Maghella,  and  employed  him 
in  his  department  without  any  ostensible  situation. 
On  the  sudden  death  of  Saliceti,  Maghella  ob- 
tained his  place,  with  the  title  of  director-general 
of  police,  and  a  seat  in  the  council  of  state. 

Before  Bonaparte's  Russian  campaign  in  1812, 
Maghella  had  advised  Murat  to  take  no  part  in  it ; 
and  when  the  latter  returned  to  Naples  in  Decem- 
ber the  same  year,  much  dissatisfied  with  that 
disastrous  expedition,  the  same  minister  did  not 
hesitate  to  hazard,  at  a  meeting  of  council  held 
on  the  occasion,  a  still  more  daring  opinion.  He 
advised  Murat  to  declare  openly  against  Bonaparte, 
and  to  proclaim  the  independence  of  Italy ;  and 
he  dwelt  on  the  favourable  chances  of  such  a 
project  under  the  circumstances  of  the  moment. 

The  French  armies  were  annihilated,  and  the 
allies,  but  newly  and  feebly  united,  in  1813,  would 
have  lent  their  aid  most  willingly  to  any  new 
enemy  of  France.  Even  at  the  congress  of  Prague, 
seven  or  eight  months  later,  they  did  not  oppose 
the  independence  of  Italy,  which  they  then  con- 
sidered as  a  fresh  advantage  gained  over  Napoleon. 


THE  CARBONARI.  13 

Some  English  agents  of  distinction  anxiously 
diffused  this  idea  in  the  country,  and  even  acted 
upon  it. 

The  small  French  garrisons  in  the  departments 
of  Rome,  the  lake  of  Thrasymene,  Tuscany,  and 
Genoa  would  have  been  easily  driven  out,  and 
Maghella  himself  offered  to  excite  a  movement 
in  the  kingdom  of  Italy,  to  put  down  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Viceroy.  The  Revolution  at  Milan 
on  the  20th  of  April,  1814,  has  since  proved  that 
he  did  not  mis-calculate,  and  that  the  viceregal 
government  of  Eugene  Beauharnois  was  not  very 
firmly  established. 

That  national  independence  was  the  object 
proposed  by  the  Neapolitan  propagators  of  liberty, 
appears  from  the  deposition  of  the  Count  Gallo 
d'Arpino,  who  was  implicated  in  the  conspiracy 
of  Macerata,  1817.  On  his  examination  at  the 
Castle  of  St.  Angelo,  he  asserted  that  their  maxims 
were  favourable  to  the  papal  government,  "  inas- 
much as  he  (Gallo)  remembered  to  have  heard 
from  Zurlo,  minister  of  the  interior,  and  from 
Salfi,  professor  of  history  at  Naples,  with  both 
of  whom  he  conversed  at  Pesaro,  in  April,  1815, 
during  the  campaign  of  Murat  against  the  Aus- 
trians, — that  it  was  only  necessary  to  drive  out 
the  foreigners,  without  altering  the  governments 
of  the  country,    and    that   they    therefore    dis- 