

These  associations,  in  the  course  of  time,  acquir- 
ed more  consistency,  and  spread  themselves  over 
Germany,  France,  and  the  Netherlands.  Their 
secret,  and  the  oath  wdiich  bound  them  together, 
was  called  the  faith  of  the  colliers.  Important 
services  rendered  to  the  members  of  the  order, 
sometimes,  though  rarely,  procured,  to  persons  of 
rank,  admissions  into  its  body ;  and  it  is  asserted 
that  several  members  of  the  parliaments  of  France 
were  enrolled  in  it  in  the  years  1770 — 17£)0. 

The  society  of  Hewers  (Fendeurs)  resembled 
that  of  the  Colliers.  Among  their  symbols  of 
initiation,  we  find  the  trunk  of  an  old  tree, 
together  with  other  allusions  to  their  occupations 
in  the  woods.f 

*  llie  forest  laws  have  given  rise  to  frequent  and  violent 
commotions  in  Germany,  as  well  as  in  England.  The  insur- 
rection of  the  German  peasantry,  headed  by  the  reformer  Muricer, 
1524,  pretended  to  have  the  double  object  of  reformation  in 
religion,  and  the  abrogation  of  the  oppressive  forest  laws.     T. 

t  For  an  account  of  the  occupation  of  the  ChaiTcrs,  or  Colliers, 
see  the  story  of  JNIartin  Waldeck,  in  the  popular  novel  of  the 
Antiquaiy.     7'. 


THE  CARBONARI.  3 

A  book  which  excited  some  attention  in  France, ! 
namely,  "  The  History  of  the  Secret  Societies, 
which  had  in  view  the  Destruction  of  the  Govern- 
ment of  Buonaparte — Paris,  1815:"  contains  a 
curious  note  on  the  origin  of  the  Carbonari.  It 
is,  at  once,  an  apology  for  the  institution,  and  for 
its  object;  concerning  which  the  author  seems  to 
be  thoroughly  informed.  Of  the  whole  work  it 
is  the  passage  w^here  the  details  are  most  interest- 
ing. He  asserts  that  the  association  of  Charbon- 
niers,  or  Bucherons,  has  long  existed  in  the  French 
department  of  the  Jura,  and  among  the  inhabitants 
of  the  neighbouring  mountains ;  and  that  it  is 
there  called  Cousinship,  or  Good  Cousinship,  (Le 
Bon  Cousinage).  It  was  revived  and  put  in  activity 
under  the  reign  of  Bonaparte,  nominally  by  the 
Marquis  de  Champagne. 

At  the  feasts  of  the  Carbonari,  the  Grand  Master 
drinks  to  the  health  of  Francis  I.  King  of  France, 
the  founder  of  the  order.^  An  historical  essay  in 
the  "  Code  of  Carbonarism"  contains  an  amusino; 
account  of  the  origin  of  the  order,  and  of  the 
initiation  of  its  royal  protector ;  and  characteristi- 
cally concludes,  by  referring  the  reader  to  the 
Abbe  Barruefs  History  of  Jacobinism.  It  may 
be  taken  as  a  fair  specimen  of  the  many  compo- 

*  2  Brind.  11  G.  M.  lo  porta  a  Francesco  1"^°  Re  di  Francia, 
(Fondatore  dell'  Ordine).  See,  II  Mentore  di  un  B.  C.  C.  App. 
(Buon  Cugino  Carbonaro  Apprendente),  p.  51. 