

Si  divisero  in  tante  baracche  ciascuna  veniva  eretta  da  un  buon 
Cugino  che  non  era,  se  non  che  il  primo  tra  gli  eguali,  che  com- 

*  Vendita  may  be  translated  Lodge — it  is  literally  place  cf  sale,  or  market; 
Baracca  in  Italian  and  Spanish  is  a  hut,  or  tent :  hence  the  word  barrack,  a 
temporary  dwelling,     T. 

b3 


O  MEMOIRS  OF 

communicated  with  the  Alta  Vendita,  and  was 
styled  the  Grand  Master. 

There  dwelt  in  the  forest  a  hermit  of  the  name 
of  Theobald :  he  joined  them,  and  favoured  their 
enterprize.  He  captivated  their  admiration,  and 
was  proclaimed  protector  of  the  Carbonari.  Thus 
peaceably,  these  philanthropists  passed  their  days, 
and  met  at  certain  appointed  times. 

It  happened  that  Francis  I.  King  of  France, 
hunting  on  the  J?^ontiers  of  his  kingdom,  next  to 
Scotland,  in  following  a  wild  beast,  parted  from 
his  courtiers.  Night  came  on,  and  he  lost  him- 
self in  the  forest.  He  stumbled  upon  one  of  the 
baracche  and  asked  for  shelter;  it  was  granted, 
and  the  Good  Cousins  unanimously  ministered  to 
him  all  that  he  was  in  need  of.  Francis  I.  admired 
the  happiness  of  these  Carbonari,  and  their  mystic 
discipline.     He  thought  he  saw  something  mys- 

municava  coU'  Alta  Vendita  e  che  chiamavasi  G.  M.  (gran 
maestro) . 

Si  rivenne  nelle  foreste  iin  eremita  di  nome  Teobaldo  j  cestui 
si  unisce  con  essi  e  ne  favorisce  I'intrapresa.  Si  rendc  aimnirabile, 
ed  e  proclamato  protettore  dei  B.  C.  C.  Cosi  pacifici  questi 
uomini  filantropi  menevano  i  loro  giorni  e  si  univano  in  alcuni 
stabiliti  tempi. 

Avenne  die  Francesco  1"'",  Re  di  Francia,  andando  a  caccia 
ne'  conjini  del  regno  ddla  ■parte  di  Scuzia,  inseguendo  una  fiera  si 
allontauo  dai  suoi  corteggiani  ;  si  fe  notte  e  si  disperse  per  la 
foresta.  S'imbatte  in  una  di  queste  baracche,  cliicse  ricovero  c  gli 
fu  accordato,  somministrandogli  unanimamente  tutto  il  bisognevole. 
Ammiro  Francesco  I.  il  coutento  di  (juesti  uomini  C.  C.  c  la  loro 


THE  CARBONARI.  7 

terioiis  and  singular  in  it,  and  discovered  himself 
to  them  as  King  of  France.  He  earnestly  re- 
quested to  be  made  acquainted  with  their  secret, 
and  with  the  object  of  their  association.  They 
gratified  him,  and  he  was  struck  with  admiration ; 
and  expressed  a  wish  to  be  initiated  into  their 
order,  promising  to  be  their  protector.  The  favour 
was  granted,  and  next  morning  he  w^as  restored 
to  the  hunters,  who,  having  missed  him,  were 
seeking  him  in  great  anxiety.  On  his  return  to 
France,  he  scrupulously  fulfilled  his  oath.  He 
declared  himself  the  protector  of  the  Carbonari, 
and  increased  their  number.  The  society  after- 
wards spread  itself  successively  over  Germany 
and  England.  Any  G.  C.  who  wishes  to  have 
further  information  respecting  the  origin,  progress, 
and  extension  of  the  sect,  may  read  the  History  of 
Jacobinism    by   Barruel,    which    has    been  most 