

B   2 


4  MEMOIRS  OF 

sitions   of  the  sort  with  which   the   NeapoHtan 
Carbonari  have  gratified  the  public. 

Historical  Essay  on  the  Origin  of  Carbonarism.* 

During  the  troubles  in  Scotland,  in  Queen 
Isabella's  time,  which  formed  an  sera  in  Carbo- 
narism,  many  illustrious  persons  having  escaped 
from  the  yoke  of  tyranny  took  refuge  in  the 
woods.  In  order  to  avoid  all  suspicion  of  criminal 
association,  they  employed  themselves  in  cutting- 
wood  and  making  charcoal  (the  only  commercial 
produce  of  Scotland).  Under  pretence  of  carrying 
their  charcoal  for  sale,  they  introduced  themselves 

*  The  following  is  a  faitliful  copy :  the  orthography  of  the 
original  is  preserved.  The  sense  is  occasionally  guessed  at  in  the 
translation. 

Saggio  Istorico  sulV  Origine  delta  Carhoncria. 

LTstoria  della  turbolenza  nella  Scozia,  allorch^  la  Regina 
Isabella*  fisso  un  epoca  della  Carboneria,  molti  illustri  uomini 
sottratti  del  gioco  (giogo)  della  tirannia,  si  ricoverarono  nelle 
foreste.  Per  allontanare  ogni  sospetto  di  criminose  adunanze, 
si  posero  a  tagliare  le  legna,  ed  a  fare  de'  Carboni,  unko  prodotto 
commerciale  in  Iscozia — Con  questo  favore  essi  si  riconducevano 

*  There  was  no  Isabella,  Queen  of  Scotland,  contemporary  with  Francis  I.  of 
France.  The  Isabel,  whose  adventures,  while  Uving  in  the  woods  with 
banished  men,  the  nobles  of  the  country,  might  be  a  subject  for  romance,  was 
tlie  first  wife  of  Robert  Bruce,  and  must  have  died  within  the  first  twelve  jears 
of  the  fourteenth  century.  It  is,  however,  scarcely  worth  while  to  search  for 
Queen  Isabella,  since  the  Scotland  she  reigned  over  is  certainly  not  part  of 
Britain,  if  Francis  reached  its  woods,  while  hunting,  or  if  its  principal  produce 
is  the  charcoal  of  its  forests.     T. 


THE  CARBONARI.  5 

into  the  villages,  and  bearing  the  name  of  real 
Carbonari  (Colliers),  they  easily  met  their  par- 
tisans, and  mutually  communicated  their  differ- 
ent plans.  They  recognized  each  other  by  signs, 
by  touch,  and  by  words ;  and  as  there  were  no 
habitations  in  the  forest,  they  constructed  huts  of 
an  oblong  form,  with  branches  of  trees.  They 
established  a  government,  which  issued  laws. 
This  government  consisted  of  three  persons:  their 
office  was  triennial,  and  they  presided  over  three 
vendite,  or  lodges;  one  legislative,  another  ad- 
ministrative, and  the  third  judicial.  This  last  was 
called  the  Alta  Vendita. 

These  vendite  were  subdivided  into  a  number 
o{  Ba7'acch€,  each  erected  by  a  Good  Cousin  of 
some    distinction    among    his    companions,    who 

ne'  paesi,  ed  esponendo  i  Carboni  a  Vendita,  portando  I'etimologia 
delle  ioro  unioni  a'  V.  C.  (veri  Carbonari).  In  tal  guisa  ottennero 
I'agio  di  rincontrarsi  con  i  Ioro  partegiani,  e  communicarsi  vicen- 
devolmente  i  sentimenti  de'  Ioro  piani.  Sij  riconoscevano  pero  con 
segni,  tatto,  e  parole  5  non  essendo  poi  delle  abitazioni  costruirono 
delle  baracche  di  legna  con  figura  quadrilunga.  Stabilirono  un 
governo  che  emano  dei  regolamenti — Questo  governo  rappresen- 
tato  da  tre  persone  era  triennale,  tenente  una  Vendita  di  legisla- 
zione,  una  di  amministrazione,  e  la  terza  giudiziaria,  che  si  cbiama 
Alta  Vendita.* 