


MEMOIRS  OF 

pproved  of  his  Holiness  absenting  himself  from 
his  states."^^ 

To  throw  off  the  yoke  of  the  transal pines, 
"  cacciare  i  barbari  dall'  Italia,"  had  been  the 
exhortation  directed  by  Petrarca  and  Macchiavelli, 
and  by  others  before  and  after  them,  against  all 
foreign  powers.  It  was  now  pointed  exclusively 
against  France.  The  sovereigns  of  other  coun- 
tries no  longer  considered  such  maxims  dangerous. 
They  ventured  to  repeat  them  in  their  procla- 
mations against  Bonaparte,  from  1809  to  1814. 
But  the  cry  of  Italian  independence  soon  found  a 
more  dangerous  application,  for  it  is  become  the 
rallying  word  of  all  factions  against  the  legitimate 
governments  of  the  country. 

'~  Murat  was  too  timid  and  too  irresolute  to  follow 
the  course  pointed  out  to  him  by  his  minister  of 
police :  and  the  French  party  at  Naples  sent 
information  of  Maghella's  sentiments  and  advice 
to  Paris.  Genoa  being  then  considered  as  part 
of  France,  he  was  claimed  as  a  Genoese,  and 
consequently  a  French  subject,  and  was  accord- 
ingly sent  to  Paris  as  a  prisoner.  Napoleon 
endeavoured  in  vain  to  win  him  over  to  his 
interest,  and  he  remained  under  the  surveillance  of 
the  police  until  December,  1813,  when  the  armies 
of  the  allies  entered  upon  the  French  territory. 
His  escape  was  effected  in  a  daring  and  romantic 

*  Printed  minutes  of  the  trial.     See  Appendix. 


THE  CARBONARI. 


dJD 


manner;  and  his  arrival  at  Naples  contributed 
much  towards  determining  Murat  to  declare 
against  his  brother-in-law. 

Being  once  more  at  Hberty,  he  eagerly  endea- 
voured to  rouse  Italy  Jo  independence  in  1815; 
and  in  the  name  of  Murat  he  organized  the  Papal 
provinces,  of  which  he  had  taken  possession,  and 
iFwas  there  that  the  lodges  of  the  Carbonari  were 
then  established,  and  thence  they  increased  rapid- 
ly in  the  country. 

Maghella  ought  to  have  been  aw^are,  that  his 
schemes  for  the  independence  of  Italy  were  most 
chimerical  and  impracticable.  This  consideration, 
however,  was  overlooked  in  his  eagerness  for  the 
cause ;  but  he  must  have  known  Murat  too  well, 
to  believe,  that  he  was  the  person  who  could  put 
such  a  project  in  execution.  He  probably  intend- 
ed to  use  him  as  an  instrument,  whom  he  could 
afterwards  reject  at  pleasure.  He  began  by  en- 
deavouring to  limit  the  regal  power  at  Naples  by 
a  constitution,  in  order  to  hold  out  such  an  addi- 
tional bait  to  the  other  Italian  States,  as  might 
induce  them  to  join  in  his  views.  The  nobility. 
and  higher  classes  of  the  capital  lent  themselves 
readily  to  his  proposals,  and  the  names  of  the  first 
families  are  among  the  signatures  to  the  address 
printed  March,  1815,  soliciting  a  constitution  from 
Joachim,  which  he  had  often  promised,  though 
without  any  apparent  intention  of  keeping  that 