

Explanation  of  the  Symbols, 

"  The  cross  should  serve  to  crucify  the  tyrant 
who  persecutes  us,  and  troubles  our  sacred  opera- 
tions. The  crown  of  thorns  should  serve  to  pierce 
his  head.  The  thread  denotes  the  cord  to  lead 
him  to  the  gibbet ;  the  ladder  will  aid  him  to 
mount.  The  leaves  are  nails  to  pierce  his  hands 
and  feet.  The  pick-axe  will  penetrate  his  breast, 
and  shed  the  impure  blood  that  flows  in  his  veins. 
The  axe  will  separate  his  head  from  his  body,  as 
the  wolf  who  disturbs  our  pacific  labours.  The 
salt  will  prevent  the  corruption  of  his  head,  that  it 
may  last  as  a  monument  of  the  eternal  infamy  of 
despots.  The  pole  will  serve  to  put  the  skull  of 
the  tyrant  upon.  The  furnace  will  burn  his  body. 
The  shovel  will  scatter  his  ashes  to  the  wind. 
The  baracca  will  serve  to  prepare  new  tortures  for 
the  tyrant.     The  fountain  will  purify  us  from  the 


THE  CARBONARI.  33 

vile  blood  we  shall  have  shed.  The  linen  will 
wipe  away  our  stains,  and  render  us  clean  and 
pure.  The  forest  is  the  place  where  the  Good 
Cousins  labour  to  obtain  so  important  a  result. 
The  trunk  with  a  single  branch  signifies  that,  after 
the  great  operation,  we  shall  become  equal  to 
the  N.  C." 

One  would  be  tempted  to  doubt  the  reality  of 
the  last  explanation  of  the  symbols,  if  it  were  not 
given  in  the  minutes  of  a  legal  trial.  Perhaps  the 
compiler  of  the  notes  may  have  confounded  the 
verbal  depositions  of  some  of  the  witnesses  with 
what  he  thought  he  had  read  in  the  catechisms  of 
the  sect. 

Although  the  general  doctrine  of  the  order 
makes  mention  but  of  two  ranks  of  Carbonari,  a 
single  pamphlet  of  eight  pages,  without  a  title  or 
the  name  of  the  publisher,  which  has  fallen  into 
the  author's  hands,  makes  mention  of  a  third,  and 
describes  its  operations  and  the  mode  of  initiation,* 
The  object  of  this  third  rank  or  order  is  to  procure 
information  concerning  the  sigiis  and  saa^ed  words 
known  and  understood  by  men  of  different  nations 
on  the  whole  surface  of  the  globe  towards  east  and 
west,  towards  mid-day  and  midnight.  The  Vendita 
represents  a  cavern  in  the  interior  of  a  mountain. 

*  Travagli  del  3^°  Grado.  The  style  is  contemptible ;  and  the 
sense  for  the  most  part,  must  be  guessed  at. 

D 


34  MEMOIRS  OF 

In  one  corner  is  seen  a  rustic  urn,  with  this  inscrip- 
tion, "  Here  hes  the  hero."  The  absurd  story  of 
this  heroic  personage  is  related  to  the  new  member 
immediately  after  his  initiation  in  these  words  : — 

*  "  Philip  the  Macedonian,  having  undertaken 
to  conquer  the  great  city  of  Thebes  in  Beotia  with 
a  powerful  army,  was  resisted  by  the  brave  citizens 
on  the  borders  of  their  territory  with  all  the  forces 