


26  MEMOIRS  OF 

the  necessity  for  recovering  it  by  the  efforts  of 
the  Society. 

The  initiated  were  addressed  more  openly  as 
soon  as  they  had  shown  an  aptitude  for  seizing  al- 
legories, or  when  they  belonged  to  a  more  en- 
lightened class  of  society. 

The  two  following  initiatory  discourses  present 
a  striking  contrast  to  each  other.  The  first,  ex- 
tracted from  the  Constitution  of  the  order  at 
Naples,  is  calculated  for  uncultivated  persons.  The 
second  was  found  among  the  papers  of  the  Roman 
Conspirators  of  1817;  among  whom  were  many 
persons  of  birth  and  education. 

First  Discourse,  pronounced  by  the  Grand  Master, 

"  Hear  me,  dear  and  good  Cousins: 

"  Nature,  when  she  created  man,  meant  him  to 
be  free.  It  is,  therefore,  the  duty  of  every  man  to 
keep  himself  so,  and  to  fulfil  the  engagement  she 
has  imposed  on  him  by  diffusing  liberty  among 
his  brethren,  by  communicating  his  pleasures  to 
them,  by  partaking  in  their  pains  and  labours,  and 
by  considering  himself  on  an  equality  with  all  his 
fellow  creatures,  so  that  he  may  exalt  himself  to 
the  most  sublime  heights  of  virtue. 

"  Unfortunately,  the  flattering  hopes  of  seeing 
such  virtue  become  universal  have  been  deceived. 
The  tender  name  of  brother  has  been  renounced ; 


THE  CARBONAllI.  27 

and  man  has  treated  his  fellow-man  as  an  enemy. 
At  first  the  strong  usurped  the  rights  of  the  weak. 
Afterwards  violence  was  superseded  by  cunning. 
Hence  arose  intrigue,  hatred,  treason,  imposture, 
superstition  :  man  became  the  vile  slave  of  his 
infamous  passions.  Yet  Reason,  sovereign  of  the 
human  mind,  enlightened  some  sager  individuals 
as  to  the  real  nature  of  things.  She  preserved 
them  from  the  general  corruption;  and  they  en- 
deavoured to  bring  back  their  wandering  fellow 
mortals  to  the  neglected  paths  of  virtue.  But, 
deaf  to  the  voice  of  reason,  they  rejected  her  pre- 
cepts. It  was  then  that,  still  indefatigable,  those 
benevolent  sages  conceived  the  idea  of  secret  so- 
cieties, which,  assiduously  labouring  to  give  a 
better  education  to  mankind,  might  be  the  means 
of  exciting  them  to  virtue;  and  these  societies 
are  those  of  the  Carbonari." 

Explanation  of  the  Symbols  according  to  the  Nea- 
politan  Constitution, 

N  1.  The  trunk  of  the  tree  which  you  see,  ex- 
presses the  surface  of  the  earth  on  which  the  Good 
Cousins  are  dispersed.  It  denotes  also  the  firma- 
ment equally  spread  above  all ;  and  shows  us  that 
our  wants  are  equal,  and  our  interests  the  same. 
The  roots  of  the  tree  mark  its  stability.  Its  ver- 
dant foliage,  and  the  strength  by  which  it  resists 


28  MEMOIRS  OF 

the  storm,  indicate  that  it  never  grows  old  ;  and 
that  as  our  first  parents,  after  having  lost  their  in- 
nocence, covered  their  shame  with  leaves,  the 
Good  Cousins  ought  to  conceal  the  faults  of 
their  fellow  men,  and  particularly  those  of  the 
Society. 