

t  Cap.  2.  Art.  8.  Delia  Esposizione  dei  Dritti  dei  Carbonari 
della  Republica  Lucana  Occidentale. 

+  See  App.  III.  for  the  ceremonies  of  initiation. 

c3 


22  MEMOIRS  OF 

Of  the  General  Doctrine  of  the  Order. 

Art.  1.  Good  Cousinship  is  principally  founded 
on  religion  and  virtue. 

Art.  2.  The  place  of  meeting  is  called  the 
Baracca  ;  the  space  surrounding  it,  the  Forest  or 
Wood;  the  interior  of  the  Lodge,  the  Vendita. 

Art.  3.  The  Members  are  called  Good  Cousins; 
they  are  divided  into  two  classes — Apprentices  and 
Masters. 

Art.  4.  Tried  virtue  and  purity  of  morals,  and 
not  Pagan*  qualities,  render  men  worthy  of  belong- 
ing to  the  Carbonari. 

Art.  5.  An  interval  of  six  months  is  necessary 
before  an  apprentice  can  obtain  the  rank  of  master. 
The  principal  obligations  imposed  on  him  are,  to 
practise  benevolence,  to  succour  the  unfortunate, 
to  show  docility  of  mind,  to  bear  no  malice  against 
Carbonari,  and  to  enrich  his  heart  with  virtue. 

Art.  6.  By  this  article  it  is  forbidden  to  talk 
directly  or  indirectly  against  religion,  and  by 

Art.  7,  All  conversation  on  religion  in  general, 
or  against  good  morals,  is  prohibited. 

Art.  8.  Every  Good  Cousin  Carbonaro  is 
obliged  to  preserve  inviolable  secrecy  concerning 
the  mysteries  of  the  Order. 

Art.  9.  No  G.  C.  C.  may    communicate  what 

*  Pagan.  Pagano  way  be  translated  ;7ro/ane,  belonging  to  the 
uninitiated. 


THE  CARBONARI.  23 

is  done  or  decided  upon  in  his  Vendita,  to  those 
who  belong  to  another,  much  less  to  persons  not 
initiated. 

Art.  10.  The  greatest  reserve  is  recommended 
to  the  Members,  towards  all  persons  with  whom 
they  are  not  well  acquainted,  but  more  especially 
in  the  bosoms  of  their  own  families. 

The  centre  of  the  machinations  of  the  Carbonari 
was  formed  in  the  capital  itself,  and  was  intended 
to  be  permanently  established  there,  as  affording 
the  most  effectual  means  of  concealment.  The 
Alta  Vendita,  or  principal  lodge,  was  composed  of 
honorary  members  and  of  deputies  from  each 
particular  Vendita.  It  was  declared  to  be  an  ad- 
ministrative and  legislative  body,  a  court  of 
council  and  of  appeal ;  and  it  was  accordingly 
divided  into  different  sections.  It  was  the  busi- 
ness of  this  Vendita  to  grant  charters  of  organi- 
zation to  new  lodges,  or  to  confirm  such  as  were 
submitted  for  its  approbation.  It  has  continued 
to  retain  its  powers,  but  was  eclipsed,  before  the 
revolution  of  1820,  by  the  superior  activity  and 
influence  of  the  Carbonari  magistracy  of  the 
Western  Lucanian  Republic*  The  Diet  of  the 
Carbonari  of  that  district  doubted  and  debated 
Avhethcr  it  should  acknowledge  the  Alta  Vendita, 