

*  Western  Lucania  is  the  Carbonaro  name  for  the  province  of 
Principato  Citra. 

c4 


24  MEMOIRS  OF 

or  General  Assembly  of  the  capital,  which  met 
provisionally,  after  the  revolution,  in  the  Convent 
of  San  Domenico  Grande,  and  referred  the  de- 
cision to  a  committee,  who  were  of  opinion  that 
two  deputies  from  each  tribe  ^  should  be  sent 
thither  in  order  to  organize  a  real  general  assembly 
of  the  Carbonari ;  to  which,  however,  it  was  not 
thought  expedient  to  grant  the  power  assumed  by 
the  old  Assembly,  of  dictating  laws  peremptorily. 
The  committee  further  suggested,  that  if  the  Alta 
Vendita  could  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  meet  this 
plan,  the  same  deputies  should  be  authorized  to 
negotiate  with  the  Vendite  of  other  provinces, 
and  especially  with  the  Republics  of  Hirpinia, 
Daunia,  Picentia,  Eastern  Lucania,  Lecce,  Co- 
senza,  and  Catanzaro,  to  extend  the  league ;  and  to 
establish  a  central  assembly  of  the  confederate 
provinces.  It  will  appear,  in  the  sequel,  that 
Salerno  has  superseded  Naples  as  the  head-quarters 
of  the  Carbonari.  We  must  now  return  to  the 
circumstances  of  the  infant  institution. 

The  description  of  the  Vendita,  extracted  from 
the  Code  of  Carbonarism,'|'  will  assist  the  reader  to 
comprehend  the  explanations  of  the  symbols, 
painted  on  the  patents  of  the  initiated,  and  used  at 
their  meetnigs. 

*  The  subdivisions  of  the  Carbonari  are  called  tribes, 
f  Sect.  1. 


THE  CARBONARI.  25 


Of  the  Decorations  of  the  Vendita  of  the  First 
Rank. 

The  Vendita  will  be  represented  by  a  room  of 
planks  covered  also  with  wood. 

The  pavement  must  be  of  brick  ;  the  interior  fur- 
nished with  seats  without  backs.  At  the  end  there 
must  be  a  block  supported  by  three  legs  (basi)  ;  on 
the  two  sides  there  must  be  two  other  blocks  of 
the  same  size,  for  the  assistants.  On  the  block  of 
the  Grand  Master  there  must  be  the  following- 
symbols  :  a  linen  cloth ;  water ;  salt ;  a  cross ; 
leaves ;  sticks ;  fire ;  earth ;  a  crown  of  white 
thorns;  a  ladder;  a  ball  of  thread,  and  three 
ribbons,  one  blue,  one  red,  and  one  black.  There 
must  be  an  illuminated  (raggiante)  triangle,  with 
the  initial  letters  of  the  pass-word  of  the  second 
rank  in  the  middle.  On  the  left  hand  there  must 
be  a  triangle,  with  the  arms  of  the  Vendita  painted. 
On  the  right  three  triangles,  each  with  the  initial 
letters  of  the  sacred  words  of  the  first  rank.  The 
triangles  should  be  transparent;  that  is  to  say,  with 
the  light  behind. 

On  the  admission  of  apprentices,  the  symbolical 
picture  of  the  Vendita,  and  the  emblems  on  the 
patents,  which  are  a  repetition  of  it,  were  explained 
after  a  discourse  on  the  natural  liberty  of  man,  its 
forfeiture  by  the  perversepess  of  the  wicked,  and 