

*  See  App.  No.  II. 
C2 


20  MEMOIRS  OF 

from  France.  These  different  denominations,  which 
succeeded  each  other,  were  artfidly  invented  not 
only  for  the  purpose  of  increasing  their  secrecy, 
but  to  enable  their  chiefs  whenever  it  suited  their 
purposes,  to  get  rid  of  members  who  had  been 
admitted,  although  of  the  basest  condition,  or  of 
such  as  change  of  times  or  circumstances  had 
rendered  obnoxious  to  suspicion.  They  also  served 
to  inform  all  the  initiated  at  once,  of  whatever 
was  going  on  in  the  way  of  innovation  or  reform, 
to  discover  their  inclinations  and  opinions,  and  to 
keep  them  in  constant  activity,  that  they  might  be 
ready  and  ardent  to  support,  on  the  first  oppor- 
tunity, a  political  change  agreeable  to  their  wishes. 

"  In  fact,  the  adherence  of  any  individual  to 
one  of  the  secret  societies  suffices  to  ensure  his 
reception  with  a  corresponding  rank  into  all  those 
that  may  be  formed  afterwards,  so  that  one  sect  is 
always  merging  in  another,  while  procuring  new 
proselytes.  That  they  are  all,  however,  no  other 
than  so  many  ramifications  of  Masonry,  some  of  the 
best  informed  sectaries  themselves  allow,  and  none 
of  them  differ  essentially  as  to  the  object  they  have 
in  view :  viz. — Independence,  or,  at  least,  a  con- 
stitutional government,  particularly  in  Italy." 

One  consequence  of  this  amalgamation  has  been 
the  toleration  of  all  the  Christian  sects  which 
Masonry  contained.     This  is  clearly  expressed  in 


THE  CARBONARI.  21 

thefundaniental  Statute  of  Carbonarism,  in  the  Wes- 
tern Lucanian  Republic,^  central  district  of  Salerno^ 
1818.  'I All  the  Carbonari  of  the  Western  Lu- 
canian Republic  have  the  natural  and  inalienable 
right  of  adoring  the  Almighty  according  to  the 
dictates  of  their  own  understanding  and  con- 
science, it  This  is  of  course  one  motive  of  the 
rooted  aversion  of  the  Popes  to  this  order. 

But,  though  such  free  toleration  is  allowed,  the 
ceremonies  of  admission  partake  of  an  almost 
fanatic  superstition.  The  novices  were  told  that,  in 
imitation  of  their  Grand  Master,  Christ,  they 
must  necessarily  pass  through  sufferings  to  purity 
and  happiness ;  they  were  crowned  with  thorns,J 
and  a  reed  was  placed  in  their  hands.  A  dramatic 
representation  exhibited  part  of  the  agonies  of  the 
Saviour,  and  it  was  solemnly  announced,  that  the 
great  requisites  were  to  preserve  their  faith,  and 
mutually  to  assist  ^ach  other. 

The  following  extract  from  the  1st.  chap,  of  the 
statutes  of  Carbonarism  will  tend  to  explain  the 
real  or  pretended  principles  of  the  sect. 

*  Principato  Citra. — It  is  to  be  observed^  that  the  Carbonari 
have  adopted  names,  some  ancient,  some  modern,  but  all  differing 
from  those  in  common  use,  for  the  districts  where  they  have 
established  their  lodge. 