

c 


r^. 


MEMOIRS  OF 


Vho  confined  him  for  twelve  months  at  Fenes- 
trella,  and  afterwards  set  him  at  liberty. 

Some  persons  at  Naples  imagine  that  the  Tu- 
genbund  (Union  of  Justice)  in  Prussia  had  suggest- 
ed to  Maghella  the  idea  of  forming  secret  societies 
as  a  means  of  directing  public  opinion  against  the 
French ;  but  according  to  the  Minerva  Napolitana* 
he  might  have  found  examples  of  such  in  his  own 
country,  with  this  difference,  that  they  had  taken 
an  opposite  direction.  "  The  machinations,"  says 
that  paper,  "of  a  few  cautious,  though  ambitious 
persons  found  means,  soon  after  the  year  1790,  to 
spread  certain  liberal  political  doctrines  among  the 
numerous  class  of  the  real  Carbonari  of  Genoa,  in 
order  to  deliver  that  flourishing  city  from  the  domini- 
on of  its  oligarchy  and  to  annex  it  to  Francel  These 
same  doctrines  were  preached  about  ten  years  after- 
wards among  the  lowxr  classes  of  the  kingdom  of 
Naples,  and  the  proselytes  of  that  part  of  Italy,  adopt- 
ing the  same  denomination  {Carbonari),  which  was 
properly  applied  to  the  Genoese  colliers,  used  it  in 
a  metaphorical  sense  to  signify  a  man  of  small 
property,  or  a  mere  husbandman  or  artisan.!' 

To  give  stability  to  the  sect  thus  introduced  at 
Naples,  and  to  graft  it,  if  we  may  so  speak,  on  an 
old  stock,  in  order  to  force  its  growth,  all  free- 
masons were  admitted  simply  by  ballot,  and  with- 

*  No.  7. 


THE  CARBONARI.  1ft 

out  undergoing  the  preparatory  trials  required  from 
ordinary  candidates.! 

Hence  it  is,  perhaps,  that  from  the  minutes  of 
the  proceedings  at  Rome  against  the  conspirators 
of  Macerata,'^  it  appears  that  all  the  secret  socie- 
ties of  Italy  were  considered  as  derived  from  free- 
masonry. The  members  of  the  court  observe, 
"  We  had  become  fully  acquainted  with  the  ma- 
sonic sect  during  past  calamities,  w^iich  owe  their 
origin  to  it.     The  other,  that  of  the  Carbonari, 

was  called  in  iust  as  these  calamities  werS  about  to 

,      ,       *} _^ -«» 

cease,  as  if  to  increase  and  perpetuate  themJ  It 
had  its  origin  and  principal  seat  at  Naples,  whence 
it  spread  to  some  provinces  of  the  Papal  State, 
and  its  inauspicious  influence  had  been  particular- 
ly felt  in  the  Marchesi  While,  in  the  midst  of 
general  peace,  this  Society  was  making  progress 
in  several  cities  of  Dalmatia,  other  secret  asso- 
ciations no  less  audaciously  erected  themselves.. 
The  Guelphs  extended  themselves  into  Lombardy 
from  the  northern  provinces  of  the  states  of  the 
Church.  The  Republican  brother  protectors  of 
French  and  Lombard  origin  insinuated  them- 
selves into  some  parts  of  the  Marches.  The 
Adelphi  lurk  in  great  secrecy  throughout  Piedmont ; 
and  lastly  the  Society  of  the  Black  Pin  {La  Spilla 
nera)  has  attempted  to  introduce  itself  into  Italy 