

13.  The  axe,  the  mattock,  and  the  shovel,  are 
the  tools  of  our  sacred  labours,  &amp;c." 

"  The  President  marks  the  signals,  and  orders 
(vantaggi)  by  a  stroke  of  his  axe  on  the  block  be- 
fore him." 

Discourse  extracted  from  the  Papers  found  upon 
the  Conspirators  of  Macerata,  1817.* 

*'  The  earliest  societies  of  men,  hoping  to  find 
happiness  within  the  walls  of  cities,  entrusted  the 
command  of  their  forces  to  one  person  for  the 
common  defence.  He,  instead  of  protecting  and 
defending  them,  became  their  oppressor.  Civil 
equality  disappeared ;  and  the  rights  of  man  were 
dethroned  by  despotism.  Corrupted  human  na- 
ture suffered  the  laws  of  truth  and  justice  to  be 
supplanted  by  depravity  of  manners,  and  by  the 
persecution  and  oppression  of  the  good. 

"  A  few  wise  and  good  men  who  still  cherished 
in  their  hearts  that  morality,  whose  principles  are 
unalterable,  either  by  change  of  time  or  the  suc- 
cession of  generations,  while  they  wept  over  these 

*  Printed  Minutes  of  the  Trial     Rome,  1818. 


THE  CARBONARI.  31 

evils  in  secret,  ruminated  on  the  means  of  preserv- 
ing untainted  some  sentiment  of  sound  morality. 
They  secretly  imparted  their  knowledge  and  their 
views  to  a  few  persons  worthy  of  the  distinction. 
Thus  transmitted  from  generation  to  generation, 
their  maxims  became  the  fountain  of  that  true 
philosophy  which  can  never  be  corrupted  nor  al- 
tered in  its  appearance.  It  is  in  the  school  found- 
ed on  them  that,  without  veil  or  mystery,  men  are 
taught  to  respect  and  to  maintain  the  rights  of  their 
fellow  men. 

"  The  mysteries  of  Mythras  in  Persia,  of  Isis  in 
Egypt,  of  Eleusis  in  Greece,  and  of  the  temples 
yet  to  be  rebuilt,  and  the  light  that  is  yet  to  be 
spread,*  are  all  so  many  rays  proceeding  from  the 
same  centre,  moving  in  an  orbit  whose  field  is  the 
immensity  of  wisdom. 

"  Carbonarism  is  not  the  last  or  least  of  the 
societies  that  have  proceeded  from  this  school.  It 
has  simplified  many  various  systems,  and  adopted 
only  the  unaffected  language  of  nature.  It  pre- 
sents itself  without  mystery  to  those  who  know 
how  to  understand  it;  it  receives  them  into  its 
peaceful  bosom,  and  elevates  them  to  the  contem- 
plation of  never  varying  nature,  to  the  love  of 
man  collectively,  to  the  hatred  of  oppression  and 
despotism,  to  the  knowledge  of  good,  and  of  all 

*  Ed  i  Templi  da  riedificarsi,  e  la  Luce  da  stendersi,  &amp;c. 


32  MEMOIRS  OF 

that  is  useful  to  society,  and  confirms  the  general 
systems  of  truth  and  justice. 

"  Carbonarism  teaches  in  its  baracche  the  true 
end  of  moral  existence,  and  gives  rules  of  conduct 
for  social  life.  It  points  out  the  means  for  diffus- 
ing the  light  of  truth,  and  for  disseminating  the 
principles  of  philosophy  and  equality.  It  is  to  the 
sacred  rights  of  equality  that  the  G.  C.  must  espe- 
cially attach  himself 