


16  MEMOIRS  OF 

promise.  The  nobles  were  influenced  by  motives 
which  are  easily  explained.  They  had  seen  their 
ancient  privileges  and  their  feudal  revenues  suc- 
cessively disappear ;  the  greater  number  had  been 
stript  of  these  with  very  little  ceremony,  and 
without  indemnification ;  and  as  a  body,  they 
could  offer  no  resistance  to  the  government. 
iThey  therefore  hoped  to  find  a  resource,  and  their 
hopes  were  not  unfounded,  in  a  constitutional 
assembly  which  it  would  become  their  business  to 
manage.  Their  object  was  rather  to  check  the 
royal  authority  as  opposed  to  the  aristocratic  in- 
terest, than  to  defend  the  rights  of  the  people.! 
The  army  made  common  cause  with  them  from 
motives  equally  selfish.  They  were  jealous  of  a 
great  number  of  French  officers  of  all  ranks, 
employed  and  often  preferred  by  Murat.  They 
had  attempted  to  procure  the  removal  of  these 
foreigners  atVarious  times  in  vain,  and  they  there- 
fore regarded  a  national  parliament  as  a  remedy 
for  the  particular  evil  of  which  they  had  to  com- 
plain, and  hoped  that  the  dismissal  of  the  intru- 
ders would  be  among  its  first  decrees. 

The  provinces  of  the  kingdom,  particularly  the 
Abruzzi  and  the  Calabrias,  displayed  a  feeling  of 
indifference,  and  even  dislike  to  the  great  work  of 
the  Constitution.  They  still  retained  an  attachment 
to  King  Ferdinand,  and  an  aversion  from  inno- 
vations, the  utility  of  which  they  could  not  com- 


THE   CARBONARI.  17 

prebend.  It  was  to  get  rid  of  these  sentiments 
and  to  gain  the  people  by  degrees  to  the  consti- 
tutional object^  without  letting  them  perceive  it 
themselves,  that  Maghella  and  his  associates  re- 
solved to  introduce  th^  sect  of  the  Carbonari. 
This  was  accomplished ;  but  it  became  necessary 
also  to  deceive  Murat  and  the  opposite  party.  They 
were  assured,  therefore,  that  such  an  institution 
would  operate  powerfully  in  drawing  off  the 
attention  of  the  populace,  always  prone  to 
rebellion  from  the  remembrance  of  their  ancient 
sovereigns,  and  would  assist  in  gaining  them 
over  to  the  new  order  of  things.  Meanwhile, 
the  doctrine  preached  to  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Calabrias  and  the  Abruzzi  was  as  perfectly  adapted 
to  their  conception  as  to  their  inclinations.  It 
depended  for  effect  on  the  two-fold  excitement  of 
religious  fanaticism  and  pecuniary  interest;  for, 
while  the  imitation  of  Jesus  Christ,  himself  the 
Grand  Master  of  the  Order,  was  the  devotional 
object  proposed,  they  were  shown,  at  the  bottom 
of  the  scene,  a  political  change  which  must  infal- 
libly diminish  the  taxes. 

But  the  Austrian  successes  under  General  Bi- 
anchi,  in  1815,  put  an  end  to  the  political  intrigues 
of  Maghella ;  for  he  was  taken  prisoner  and  sent 
to  a  Hungarian  fortress.  After  some  time,  he  was 
given  up  to  his  sovereign,  the  King  of  Sardinia, 