

2.  The  white  linen  on  which  you  have  been 
received,  is  the  produce  of  a  plant.  By  maceration 
and  by  labour  it  is  become  such  as  you  see  it ;  so 
ought  we  to  purify  and  cleanse  ourselves  by  con- 
tinual efforts.  Enveloped  in  linen  when  the  natural 
light  first  shone  upon  us,  it  receives  us  again  at 
the  moment  of  our  regeneration  to  virtue. 

3.  Water  cleansed  us  w^hen  we  came  from  the 
womb ;  it  teaches  us  here  to  purify  ourselves  from 
the  stains  of  vice,  in  order  that,  being  delivered 
from  its  contamination,  we  may  enjoy  the  pleasures 
of  virtue. 

4.  Salt,  the  means  of  preserving  corruptible 
things,  exhorts  us  to  preserve  our  hearts  from  the 
general  corruption. 

5.  The  crown  of  white  thorns  placed  upon  our 
heads  reminds  us  to  be  cautious  and  steady  in  our 
movements  and  actions,  to  avoid  the  pain  of  being 
wounded. 

6.  The  cross  foreshows  the  labours,  the  persecu- 
tions, the  death  that  threatens  those  who  aspire  to 
virtue.  It  exhorts  us  to  persevere  in  imitating  tlie 
example  of  Jesus  Christ,  our  Grand  Master,  who 


THE  CARBONARI.  29 

willingly  suffered  death  to  bring  us  nearer  to  sal- 
vation. 

7.  The  earth  buries  the  body  in  eternal  oblivion  ; 
and  it  is  thus  that  the  secret  of  our  sacred  order 
should  be  buried  in  the  bottom  of  our  hearts.  It 
is  the  most  important  symbol  of  our  institution. 
The  Pagans  spread  snares  for  us  ;  they  are  perverse 
enough  to  mistrust  our  associations,  the  very  in- 
struments of  their  redemption  and  happiness.  And 
were  they  to  penetrate  our  secret,  they  might  force 
us  to  sustain  an  unequal  combat. 

8.  The  ladder  shows  the  G.  C.  C.  that  virtue  is 
only  to  be  attained  step  by  step. 

9.  The  bundles  of  sticks  denote  the  members  of 
our  respectable  order,  united  in  peace. 

10.  The  ribbons,  the  principal  decoration  of  the 
Carbonari,  express  by  their  colours  the  cardinal 
virtues.  Black,  or  the  charcoal,  is  faith.  Blue, 
or  the  smoke  of  our  august  furnace,  is  hope  :  and 
red,  or  the  fire,  charity. 

11.  The  specimen  of  wood,'^'  which  is  the  appro- 
priate badge  of  the  apprentices,  is  to  be  fastened  to 
their  coats  at  the  button-hole  by  atri-coloured  ribbon. 
Several  of  similar  shapes  are  stuck  into  the  ground 
at  regular  distances,  to  mark  the  dwellings  of  Good 
Cousins.  Its  form  is  that  of  the  pole  of  the  fur- 
nace of  real  charcoal  burners;  the  extremities  are 

*  The  specimen  of  wood  refers  to  the  sample  offered  by  the 
wood-cutters  to  their  customers. 


30  MEMOIRS  OF 

cut  diagonally.     The  masters  wear  a  badge  of  the 
same  form  in  silver. 

12.  The  thread  of  that  ball  is  the  mysterious  tie 
which  unites  us. 