

Art.  26.  Those  who  break  the  social  tie, 
by  abandoning  their  families  to  w^ant,  and 
who  give  themselves  to  a  dissolute  life,  shall  be 

*  Talli. — Act.  2.  Preliminary  Regulations.  "  AH  transgressions 
against  the  laws  of  the  Carbonari  are  called  Falli." 


48  MEMOIRS  OF 

suspended  for  a  period  of  from  six  months  to  two 
years. 

Art,  9n,  Those  who  play  at  games  of  chance 
among  themselves  shall  undergo  the  same  punish- 
ment for  the  same  space  of  time. 

Section  \Oth. — Offences  against  Honour^ 

Art,  65.  Whoever  shall  attempt  the  honour  of 
females,  belonging  to  Good  Cousins,  shall  be  pu- 
nished by  being  given  up  to  general  execration. 

A7^t.  66.  By  females  belonging  to  Good  Cousins,- 
are  to  be  understood,  1st,  wives,  daughters,mothers, 
sisters,  and  all  female  relations  to  the  second 
degree;  2d,  females  devoted  to  the  exclusiv^e 
attachment  of  Good  Cousins  are  included  in  this 
class  ;  3d,  female  relations  in  whatsoever  degree,  re- 
siding with  Good  Cousins,  are  also  to  be  under- 
stood. 

Art.  67.  Any  attempt  at  violence  subjects  the 
offender  to  the  punishment  of  execration. 

Art.  6S.  Those  who  do  not  resist  the  criminal 
invitations  of  the  wives  of  Good  Cousins  shall 
have  their  names  inserted  in  the  Black  Book, 
anneramento. 

Art.  69.  Those  who  lend  themselves  to  the 
failings  of  their  family,  whether  wives,  sisters, 
cousins,  or  persons  otherwise  related,  shall  undergo 
the  same  punishment. 


THE  CARBONARI.  "  49 

Art,  70.  Such  persons  as  shall  take  advan- 
tage of  the  weakness  of  degraded  females,  shall 
be  suspended  from  the  society,  for  a  period  of  from 
six  months  to  two  years. 

A?^.  73.  Good  Cousins  who  are  married  are 
forbidden  to  have  other  attachments,  under  pain  of 
being  suspended  from  the  society,  during  a  period 
of  from  two  to  six  years. 

Art,  74!.  Those  who  shall  seduce  or  carry  off 
the  female  servants  of  Good  Cousins,  for  base  pur- 
poses, shall  be  suspended  for  a  term  of  from  one 
to  three  years. 

The  same  crimes  are  punished  much  less  se- 
verely when  Pagans  and  their  wives  are  the  plain- 
tiffs ;  the  proportion  is  as  one  to  ten,  as  we  learn 
from  Articles  71  and  72.*  So  that  it  is  not  mora- 
lity itself  which  these  Lycurguses  have  at  heart, 
but  the  prevention  of  jealousies  and  division  among 
the  members  of  the  order. 

No  society,  intended  by  its  founders  to  be  so 
widely  spread,  ever  sought  to  detach  its  members 
so  completely  from  the  state,  by  imposing  on  them 
a  legislation  distinct  in  its  form,  and  at  variance 

*  Art.  71.  Violence  offered  to  the  wives  of  Pagans  constitutes 
an  offence  punishable  by  Anneramento,  being  inscribed  in  the  black 
book. 