


*  The  province  of  Principato  citra. 

t  The  tribes  are  the  Pecentina,  the  Pestaiia,  the  Consilina,  the 
Velina. 


46  MEMOIRS  OF 

bring  to  trial,  and  to  punishment,  such  offenders  as 
shall  be  found  obdurate.  The  magistracy  has 
published  an  advertisement,  and  directs  that  the 
same  be  circulated  throughout  the  Republic. 

Advertisement. 

For  some  days,  private  offences,  quarrels,  and 
vexations  have  been  frequent,  and  the  enemies 
of  good  order  would  fain  attribute  them  to  the 
Carbonari.  They  are  certainly  not  capable  of 
sucb  conduct,  having  hitherto  given  most  suffi- 
cient proofs  to  the  contrary ;  but  if  any  Good 
Cousin  should  be  guilty  of  the  slightest  of  these 
misdemeanours,  let  the  aggrieved  party  repair  to 
the  authorities,  in  full  confidence  of  immediate 
redress.  He  who  cannot  command  his  own  pas- 
sions is  unworthy  of  the  name  of  Carbonaro. 


"* 


The  penal  statutes  of  the  Western  Lucanian 
Republic,  to  which  we  have  already  referred,  con- 
tain some  laws  on  general  conduct,  an  extract 
from  which  may  not  be  uninteresting.     They  are 

*  In  the  month  of  October,  1 820,  robbery,  accompanied  with 
violence  and  housebreaking,  had  increased  to  so  great  a  degree  at 
Naples,  that  the  Minister  of  Justice,  Ricciardi,  proposed  to  the 
Parhament  to  suspend  the  liberty  of  the  individual,  in  order  to 
arrest  those  suspected  of  such  outrages.  As  public  rumour  princi- 
pally accused  the  armed  Carbonari  of  these  crimes,  the  provisional 
assembly  of  the  order  thought  it  expedient  to  publish  the  procla- 
mation, which  forms  No.  VII.  of  the  Appendix. 


THE  CARBONARI.  47 

SO  austere,  that  no  ordinary  legislator  would  have 
ventured  to  impose  them.  It  would  have  been 
almost  impossible  to  enforce  a  strict  observance  of 
them  while  the  sect  was  still  under  the  restraint 
of  absolute  secrecy,  and,  consequently,  even  the 
masters  of  the  Vendite  subject  to  mutual  oppo- 
sition. But  the  importance  of  such  laws  at  the 
present  moment  will  be  easily  conceived,  when  we 
find  that  the  most  uneducated  part  of  the  Neapoli- 
tan population,  that  part  which  has  been  hitherto 
destitute  of  all  moral  principle,  is  united  into  one 
society,  without  much  distinction  or  inquiry. 

Penal  Statutes,  Sect.  4th. — Offences^  against 
Public  Order. 

Art.  24.  Whoever  shall  be  habitually  intimate 
with  persons  degraded  in  the  eyes  of  the  public, 
shall  be  punished  by  suspension  from  all  partici- 
pation in  the  sacred  labours,  for  a  period  of  from 
two  months  to  a  year. 

Art.  25.  Whoever  gambles  for  wine,  or  fre- 
quents public-houses,  or  who  shall  appear  often  in 
public  in  a  state  of  intoxication,  shall  be  punished 
by  suspension  as  above. 