


42  MEMOIRS  OF 

put  the  existing  prohibitory  laws  against  secret 
meetings  in  force  against  the  Christians.  Trajan 
pubhshed  no  new  edict  against  their  dogmas,  but 
he  forbade  their  meetings  as  contrary  to  the  wel- 
fare of  the  Republic,  and  of  religion.*  It  was 
in  consequence  of  this  decree,  that  the  Pagan 
magistrates  introduced  themselves  among  the 
Christians,  who,  under  cover  of  night,  offered  up 
their  prayers  and  praises  to  God ;  and  punished 
them  tyrannically  as  forming  a  college,  or  fellow- 
ship, sodalitium,  apart  in  the  state,  and  belonging 
to  a  dissenting  religion,  whose  chief  was  the  Pope, 
or  Bishop  of  Rome.f 

The  Carbonari  are  called  a  sect,  a  name  which 
seems  to  imply  a  religious  distinction  in  Italy ; 
and  the  appellation  does  not  displease  them. 

It  is  curious  to  listen  to  the  fanatics  of  the 
Society,  while  they  detail  the  miraculous  conver- 
sions which  it  has  already  wrought.  The  ferocious 
Lazzaroni  of  Naples,  and  the  wildest  brigands  of 
the  Calabrias  and  the  Abruzzi  have  been  known, 
immediately  on  their  initiation,  to  perform  the 
most  striking  acts  of  benevolence  and  justice. 
Under  this  pretext,  of  bringing  back  the  wicked 
to   the   ways    of   virtue,     distinguished   brigand 

*  Pliny,  the  Pro-consul  in  Bithynia,  writes  to  Trajan,  that  the 
order  to  that  eflfect  had  been  published. 

'[  St,  Clement,  who  was  first  exiled  and  afterwards  received  the 
crown  of  martyrdom. — Baronius  ad  Atin.  Christi  100. 


THE  CARBONARI,  43 

chiefs  are  admitted  into  the  order.  The  notorious 
Gaetano  VardarelU  himself  was  a  Carbonaro.''^ 

So  far  is  this  system  carried,  that  an  assassin, 
condemned  to  the  chain,  is  permitted  to  take  his 
place  in  the  Vendita  of  the  Castle  of  St.  Elmo, 
where  he  is  confined  with  other  galley-slaves,  and 
the  commander  of  the  fort,  himself  a  Carbonaro, 
has  not  dared  to  exclude  him,  but  is  obliged  to  sit 
by  his  side. 

The  Carbonari,  like  the  English  Puritans  during 
the  Civil  Wars,  affect  great  austerity  of  manners, 
and  talk  of  reformation.     They  cause  such  Good 

*  The  Revolution  at  Naples  has  not  diminished  this  sympathy 
for  malefactors,  although  their  alliance  is  no  longer  of  such  im- 
portance as  at  first.  Repeated  proposals  have  been  made  to  set 
the  least  notorious  at  liberty,  in  order  to  form  them  into  armed 
companies  ;  and  the  legislative  assembly  has  deigned  to  take  these 
proposals  into  consideration. 

"^  All  the  prisons  are  filled  with  convicts,"  says  the  famous 
address  to  the  national  Parliament,  drawn  up  in  pursuance  of  an 
order  issued  by  the  Alta  Vendita,  by  its  Grand  Master,  Giuliano, 
in  the  month  of  October,  1820.^  ''  There  are  some  among  them 
whom  misery  has  driven  to  crime.  Rome  has  more  than  once 
armed  her  slaves,  and  Sparta  has  employed  her  helots,  after  having 
set  them  at  liberty.  Select  from  these  prisoners  such  as  are  not 
guilty  of  the  worst  crimes,  and  form  a  free  corps  of  them.  They 
will  enter  upon  a  new  course  of  life,  and  may  be  rendered  useful 
to  themselves  and  to  the  country,  which  will  at  the  same  time  be 
freed  from  a  burden." 