

d4 


40  MEMOIRS  OF 

clidates  for  admission  into  the  Society,  have  been 
rejected  as  unworthy.^  The  sentence  is  executed 
by  whoever  is  especially  named  for  the  purpose, 
and  the  rest  of  the  lodge  cannot  resist  or  annul  it. 

Although  the  printed  penal  statute  of  the 
Western  Lucanian  Republic  makes  no  explicit 
mention  of  the  punishment  of  death,  yet  it  con- 
tains some  articles  which  clearly  imply  it.  The 
punishments  are  divided  under  the  heads  of  degra- 
dation and  penalties  in  general.  The  first  head 
js  again  subdivided  into 

1st.  Devoting  to  general  execration. 

2d.  Burning  the  name,  or  the  person  in  effigy. 

3d.  Unanimous  black-balling — anneramento.'\ 

Among  the  consequences  of  these  punishments, 
are  interdiction  of  water  and  fire,  the  prohibition 

*  ^'  The  Black  Book  is  that  in  which  the  christian  and  surnames, 
the  age,  the  country,  and  the  condition  of  all  the  Pagans  who  have 
been  unsuccessful  candidates  for  Carbonarism,  are  inscribed.  The 
Vendita  which  rejected  them,  and  the  number  of  votes  against  them, 
must  also  be  entered.  The  Good  Cousins  whose  names  have  been 
burnt,  the  usual  punishment  for  betraying  the  secrets  of  the  order, 
by  any  particular  Vendita,  or  even  by  the  Alta  Vendita  itself,  must 
be  registered  in  the  same  book,  and  the  rank  they  held  in  the 
society  is  to  be  noted.  The  Golden  Book  is  the  register  of  the 
regulations,  elections,  and  installations  of  officers  of  the  order.  It 
contains  besides  a  list  of  all  the  regular  Vendite,  and  such  debates  as 
are  of  general  importance  to  the  society."  See  Constitution  of  the 
Order  of  Good  Cousins  at  Naples,  section  10  of  the  Archives. 

t  Anneramento,  the  consequence  of  black-baUing,  i.  e.  being 
inscribed  in  the  Black  Book. 


THE  CARBONARI.  41 

of  all  communication  between  other  Good  Cousins 
and  the  criminal,  whose  name,  written  in  large 
letters,  is  affixed  in  all  the  vendite,  and  read  at 
every  sitting.  "  The  Anneramento,"  they  observe, 
may  be  effaced  by  time,  but  "  infamy  attaches  itself 
for  ever." 

The  execration  is  more  than  mere  disapproba- 
tion. Its  mystery  is  explained  in  the  55th  article  of 
the  9th  section,  "  On  Crimes  against  Individuals," 
which  declares  that  a  murderer  is  not  punishable, 
when  the  person  put  to  death  is  a  Carbonaro, 
condemned,  after  trial,  to  general  execration,  or  to 
have  his  name  or  effigy  burnt.  The  oath  of  initi- 
ation itself  is  a  proof  that  the  punishment  of 
death  is  among  the  engines  used  by  this  dangerous 
society. 

Excepting  in  the  case  of  the  absolute  power 
exercised  by  the  vendite,  the  Secret  Societies  flatter 
the  predominating  taste  of  the  age  for  equality. 
The  rich  and  the  poor,  the  noble  and  the  artisan,  are 
here  confounded.  The  same  charm  had  attracted 
thousands  of  converts  to  the  bosom  of  the  infant 
Christian  church.  The  Agap^e,  the  Communion, 
and  the  Catacombs,  placed  the  slave  on  a  footing 
Avith  his  master.  The  priesthood,  being  accessible 
to  all,  levelled  all.  And  this  equality  reconciled 
the  lower  order  of  proselytes  to  the  privations  and 
dangers  to  which  they  were  perpetually  exposed. 
The  Roman  Emperors  perceived  the  danger.    They 