

D  3 


38  MEMOIRS  OF 

presumptuous  men,  devanis  hominibus,  arose.  They 
took  the  name  of  avengers,  Vendicosi,  and  did 
all  the  mischief  in  their  power,  not  by  day,  but 
by  night.  At  length  Adiorolphus,  of  Ponte 
Corvo,  Grand  Master  of  the  sect,  was  hanged  by 
order  of  the  King,  and  many  of  his  partisans 
branded  with  a  hot  iron. 

The  members  of  a  second  Sicilian  Society, 
almost  unknown  to  the  rest  of  Europe,  called 
themselves  the  Beati  Paoli.  Their  actions  and 
their  motives  perfectly  resembled  those  of  the 
Free  Knights^  in  Germany.  Persons  of  all  ranks 
united  themselves  secretly,  and  proceeded  especi- 
ally against  the  great  barons  and  the  tribunals, 
whose  power  was  such  that  they  were  not  to  be 
reached  openly. 

This  institution,  vicious  and  horrible  in  itself, 
did,  however,  produce  some  partially  salutary 
effects,  restraining  the  arbitrary  hcentiousness  of 
the  great,  by  the  terror  with  which  it  inspired 
them.  The  punishments  inflicted  by  the  Beati 
Paoli  were  death  by  poison  or  the  dagger,  muti- 
lation, destruction  of  property  by  fire,  and  for 
the  slightest  crimes  or  faults,  the  severest  beating. 
The  ramifications  of  this  Society  were  spread  over 
the  whole  island.  The  most  formidable  com- 
panies were  those  of  Messina  and  Trapani.  It  is 
said  that  papers  relating  to  the  Society  still  exist 

*  Die  Vehingericlite. 


THE  CARBONARI.  39 

in  the  archives  of  the  two  cities ;  and  though  it 
was  most  powerful  in  the  middle  ages,  traces  of  its 
existence  are  to  be  found  as  late  as  the  eighteenth 
century.  A  cavern  is  shown  at  Palermo,  in  a 
street  called  de  Canceddi,  near  the  church  of  Santa 
Maria  di  Gesu,  where  they  held  their  meetings, 
and  the  grandfather  of  the  present  Prince  of 
Trabia  caused  one  of  their  most  daring  chieftains, 
surnamed  Testa  Longa,  to  be  executed. 

It  was  in  vain  that  the  government  published 
the  severest  laws,  and  denounced  the  heaviest 
penalties  against  them  in  all  the  pragmatic  acts 
of  the  kingdom ;  but  the  change  in  the  state  of 
society,  and  the  improvement  of  manners,  at  length 
put  an  end  to  the  association.  A  lively  recollec- 
tion of  it  still,  however,  remains  among  the 
Sicilians;  and  they  are  heard  to  exclaim,  on 
receiving  any  injury  or  loss,  for  which  they  cannot 
apply  to  justice,  "  Ah,  se  fossero  ancora  i  Beati 
Paoli !"  Ah,  if  the  Beati  Paoli  were  still  in  being ! 

The  Carbonari  have  adopted  some  of  the  forms 
of  the  Beati  Paoli.  If  any  unfortunate  being  has 
incurred  their  vengeance,  especially  if  it  be  by 
any  act  of  infidelity  towards  the  sect,  the  Grand 
Masters  meet  in  what  is  called  a  chamber  of  honour, 
and  deliberate  on  his  fate.  If  he  be  condemned, 
they  write  his  name  on  a  piece  of  paper,  which  is 
burnt,  and  he  is  registered  in  the  Black  Book  with 
those,  who,  having  presented  themselves  as  can- 