

e2 


52  MEMOIRS  OF 

The  committee  having  given  in  their  report,  it 
was  printed  in  three  parts,  each  of  which  was 
ratified  by  the  Diet  under  the  following  titles. 

Organization  of  the  Judicial  Authority. 

"  The  representatives  of  the  Carbonari  of  the 
Western  Lucanian  Republic,  at  a  meeting  of  the 
Grand  Diet  of  the  year,  perceiving  the  necessity 
of  establishing  a  constant  system  of  regulation  for 
the  judicial  proceedings  of  the  Order,  have  sanc- 
tioned, and  do  sanction  the  following  act,  which 
distributes  and  defines  the  functions  of  judicial 
power,"  &amp;c.  &amp;c. 

Code  of  Judicial  Proceedings, 

"  The  representatives  of  the  Carbonari,  &amp;c.  have 
sanctioned,  and  do  sanction  the  following  act, 
which  distributes  and  fixes  the  regulations  to  be 
observed  by  witnesses,  juries,"  &amp;c. 

Penal  Statutes. 

"  The  representatives  of  the  Carbonari,  &amp;c.  per- 
ceiving the  necessity  of  establishing  a  regular 
system  of  punishment  for  offences  of  which  the 
Carbonari  may  be  guilty,  have  sanctioned,  and  do 
sanction,"  &amp;c.  &amp;c. 


THE  CARBONARI.  53 

A  decree  of  the  Western  Lucanian  Republic 
enacts,  that  "  as  the  Carbonari  of  the  Repubhc 
must  preserve  a  mihtary  attitude  until  the  consti- 
tutional government  is  really  consolidated,  they 
are  all  required  to  be  in  arms,  to  maintain  the  im- 
prescriptible rights  of  the  nation,  and  to  ensure  the 
constitution  and  Royal  family  against  all  hostile 
attempts."  Again,  Art.  14.  "  exact  registers 
should  be  kept,  in  which  the  names  of  such  as 
come  forward  willingly  shall  be  entered  as  ho- 
nourable and  brave — Onorati  eprodi; — while  such 
as  refuse  to  march,  unless  they  be  lame,  or  other- 
wise physically  incapable,  shall  be  stigmatized  as 
without  honour,  and  cowards,  senza  onore  e  co- 
dardi.'' 

These  regulations  have  enabled  the  magistracies 
of  the  Carbonari  to  contribute  powerfully  to  cause 
young  recruits  and  soldiers  on  furlow  to  join  their 
different  corps,  and  to  prevent  desertion  in  the  in- 
terior. 

In  the  capital  the  patrols  of  Carbonari  preserve 
good  order,  parading  the  streets  night  and  day, 
headed  by  constables  and  agents  of  police,  whom 
they  have  forced  to  be  initiated,  in  order  to  be- 
come worthy  of  the  command  ;  and  they  are  now 
organizing  a  Carbonaro  guard  of  safety,  Guardia  di 
sicurezza  Carbonara,  dressed  in  a  particular  uni- 
form, of  which  we  give  a  specimen.  It  will  be 
remarked,    that  one  of  the   characteristic    orna- 

E  3 


5-1:  MEMOIRS  OF 

ments  is  the  death's  head  on  the  car  touch 
box.  It  is  evident,  that  the  troops  acting  from 
this  impulse,  though  its  direction  is,  for  the  mo- 
ment, in  favour  of  government,  are  too  little  under 
its  controul,  not  to  be  able  to  turn  against  it  so 
soon  as  the  Vendite,  which  are  in  fact  political 
debating  clubs,  shall  receive  orders  from  their  su- 
periors to  that  effect.  The  truth  is,  that  the  execu- 
tive power  of  the  state  is  in  their  hands ;  and  it 
rests  with  them  alone  to  disband  the  regular  troops, 
the  soldiers  of  which,  being  Carbonari,  do  not 
obey  their  officers  from  any  principle  of  military 
discipline,  but  solely  because  it  is  the  v/ill  of  the 
societ}^ 