

*  Indrizzo  al  P.  N.  (Parlamento  Na%ionaIe)  presso  Pasquali  Tezzano,  strada 
Cisterna  dell'  Olio,  No.  26.  This  address  was  Avithdrawn  from  circulation,  and 
is  now  difficult  to  procure. 


44  MEMOIRS  OF 

Cousins  as  have  committed  excesses  to  do  public 
penance  in  the  Vendite.  They  preach  against 
games  of  chance,  and  it  is  at  their  instigation,  that 
such  games  have  been  prohibited.  Their  oath 
contains  a  clause,  by  which  they  are  bound  to 
respect  the  conjugal  honour,  and  the  good  name  of 
the  Carbonari.  And  praiseworthy  actions  are  re- 
ported at  their  meetings,  and  registered.* 

It  is  the  office  of  the  magistracy  or  senate  to 
watch  over  the  conduct  of  the  citizens  of  the 
Republic.  And  its  satisfaction  or  dispjeasure  is 
signified  by  such  public  notices  as  the  following  : 

f(  From  the  Central  District  of  Salerno,  \6th  of  the 
Wth  month,  3d  year. 
"  The  Magistracy  exercising  the  executive  power 

*  For  example. — Art.  31.  of  the  proceedings  of  the  second 
sitthig  of  the  grand  diet  of  Salerno,  (August  20,  1820.)— "The 
Good  Cousin  Gatti,  who  was  seized  and  wounded  on  the  21st  of 
the  9th  month  (June),  by  the  Good  Cousin  F.  Copeta,  renews 
the  generous  act  of  pardoning  him,  and  invites  all  the  Good 
Cousins  to  follow  his  example.''  The  Grand  Diet  decides  that  this 
*'  virtuous  act  be  published,  and  printed,  and  communicated  to  all 
the  Vendite  of  the  Republic,"  &amp;c.,  and  in  the  proceedings  of  the 
4th  sitting  of  this  Diet,  the  same  fact  is  again  alluded  to.  Art. 
.57.  "  It  has  been  debated,  whether  the  person  named  Copeta,  who 
seized  and  wounded  the  Good  Cousin  Gatti,  ought  to  profit  by 
the  pardon  of  the  latter.  It  has  been  determined,  that  the  gene- 
rosity of  Gatti  is  not  sufficient  to  retain  Copeta  in  the  family  of 
the  Carbonari,  but  only  to  preserve  him  from  severer  punishment  ^ 
and  it  has  therefore  been  decided  to  burp  his  name,  i.  e.  to  expe^ 
him  fi'om  the  Society. 


THE  CARBON  AHI.  45 

of  the  Western  Lucanian  Republic,*  to  the  Coun- 
cils of  the  Tribes,  and  all  the  Vendite  of  the  said 

Republicf 

"  The  magistracy  has  hitherto  been  well  satis- 
fied with  the  good  conduct  of  the  Carbonari,  but 
some  unpleasant  representations  have  lately  been 
made.  It  is  said,  that  private  revenge  pollutes  the 
virtue  of  some  Good  Cousins  ;  that  discord  and 
dissension  divide  our  families;  that  ambition  has 
shown  itself,  to  the  disgrace  of  the  moderation  of 
our  order,  della  Carbonica  moderazione  ;  that  the 
abuse  of  arms,  which  are  now  needless,  has  in- 
creased beyond  measure,  that  the  public  authori- 
ties are  despised,  and  that  the  property  of  the 
Commons  and  the  Royal  demesnes  are  invaded. 
The  magistracy  cannot  believe  that  all  this  can  be 
true.  But  if  it  be  so,  why,  Good  Cousins,  why 
throw  discredit  on  us?  Why  be  our  own  enemies  ? 
Why  subject  ourselves  to  hatred,  instead  of  se- 
curing the  love  of  the  nation?  Why  disgrace  a 
cause,  which  has  hitherto  reflected  so  much 
honour  and  so  much  glory  on  the  Carbonari  ?  Let 
the  Grand  Masters  therefore  be  on  the  watch  to 
admonish  with  paternal  tenderness,  and  where 
that  will  not  suffice,  let  the  orators  be  ready  to 