

The  other  secret  sects  profess  equally  to  have  V 
the  independence  of  their  country  solely  in  view.^^ 

D   2 


S6  MEMOIRS  OF 

^h  In  the  catechism  of  the  GUielphs,  "  Italy,  torn  and 
oppressed,"  is  indicated  by  the  mystic  name  of 
mother.  These  sectaries,  who  call  themselves  her 
children,  declare  themselves  bound  and  resolved  to 
succour  and  to  comfort  her.  They  assert  boldly 
that  the  moment  of  her  resuscitation  is  at  hand, 
when  the  cock  shall  crow  afresh ;  when  the  eagles 
shall  fight ;  when  the  bulls  shall  wrestle ;  when 
the  harp  shall  provoke  the  dolphms  ;  when  the  moon 
shall  be  covered  with  blood  ;  and  the  bark  shall 
remain  aground ;  a  metaphorical  prophecy  con- 
cerning persons  and  nations,  and  a  new  war  which 
is  to  overturn  the  present  governments  of  Italy. 
At  the  time  when  these  societies  were  formed,  the 
public  mind  was  singularly  prepared  to  receive 
with  avidity  all  that  could  excite  and  elevate  the 
imagination.  Men's  minds  seemed  to  be  possessed 
anew  with  the  enthusiasm  of  the  twelfth  century,''^ 
/when  the  liberties  of  the  Itahan  cities  and  repub- 

/  lies  were  founded  amidst  the  struggles  between 
the  Emperors  and  the  Popes,  and  on  the  ruins  of 

\  the  authority  of  the  former. 

"  It  was  then,"  observes  an  historian  of  distin- 
guished merit,t  in  relating  the  wars  of  Frederick 
Barbarossa  against  Alexander  III.,  "  that  men  be- 
gan to  make  use  of  those  mystical  representations 

*  1159—1162. 

t  Johannes  Von  Mlilleiv,  Allgeraeiner  Geschichten.  B.  xv. 
Kap.  5. 


THE  CARBONARI.  57 

of  religion  which  had  been  preserved  from  time 
immemorial  in  the  valleys  of  the  Alps,  the  seat  of 
ancient  modes  of  thinking,  which  had  their  origin 
in  Switzerland,  the  Pays  de  Vaud,  the  villages  of 
the  Valais  and  of  the  Cevennes.  Their  character- 
istics^ \\^rej_the  simplicity,  the  freedom,  and  the 
equalijtv_of_the  first  Christian  communities.  But 
some  Gnostic  prejudices  against  social  order  had 
gradually  led  to  an  exaggerated  system  of  morals. 
Could  it  be  supposed  that  the  Emperor  would 
make  use  of  these  men  against  Rome  ?  far  from  it : 
he  joined  the  Church  against  them ;  their  ideas  of 
liberty  did  not  coincide  with  his  plan  of  govern- 
ment, which  was  formed  on  that  of  the  Cassars, 
He  had  caused  Arnold  de  Brescia,  the  most  enter- 
prising agent  of  the  sectaries,  to  be  burnt  for  fa- 
vouring the  attempt  made  by  the  nobility  to  pro- 
cure the  freedom  of  Rome  by  the  assistance  of  the 
people.  The  spirit  of  Arnold  remained,  and 
mingled  with  the  rising  liberties  of  the  free 
buro^hers." 

The  error  of  creating  a  state  within  a  state,  and 
of.  erecting  secret  tribunals  to  redress  wrongs,  has 
existed  in  all  barbarous  and  turbulent  times,  It  is 
of  very  ancient  date  in  the  kingdom  of  the  two 
Sicilies.  About  the  period  to  which  we  have  just 
alluded,  that  is  1186,  under  William  II.  the  Nor- 
man, according  to  the  Chronicles  of  the  Abbeys 
of  Fossa  Niiova  and  of  Monte  Casino,  a  sect  of 