

tJThe  number  of  Carbonari  has  increased  with 
astonishing  rapidity .\  They  amounted  to  from  twen- 
ty-four to  thirty  thousand  from  the  very  beginning 
of  their  establishment.  The  whole  population  of 
some  towns  in  the  Abruzzi  and  the  Calabrias  en- 
listed themselves.  Lanciano,  for  instance,  though 
an  inconsiderable  place,  had  1£00  men  armed  in 
1814. 

Admission  to  the  first  rank  of  Carbonarism  is 
easily  obtained ;  and  whoever  objects  to  gt^ing 
through  the  ceremony  in  the  grand  assembly,  may 
perform  it  before  three  grand  masters  in  private. 
As  nothing  was  trusted  to  the  apprentices,  nothing 
was  risked  by  multiplying  them.  The  main  ob- 
ject was  to  secure  a  number  of  satellites,  ready  to 


THE  CARBONAUr.  55 

obey  invisible  superiors,  and  directions  which  they 
cannot  understand. 

The  magistrates,  as  well  as  the  civil  and  military 
officers,  have  been  often  obliged  to  become  mem- 
bers of  the  society,  in  order  to  preserve  some 
shadow  of  their  authority.  But  the  lower  clergy 
enrolled  themselves  of  their  own  free  will ;  and 
seconded  the  views  of  the  institution  by  every 
means  in  their  power.  The  number  of  priests 
initiated,  notwithstanding  the  severest  prohibitions 
pronounced  by  the  Holy  See,  is  a  proof  that  the 
Roman  hierarchy,  like  all  other  ancient  institu- 
tions, is  in  danger  from  its  own  members,  'i  The 
lower  clergy  form  the  democratic  and  revolution- 
ary part  of  the  society ;  immense  numbers  of  them 
have  taken  part  openly  in  the  late  troubles ;  among 
whom  Menechini  at  Nola,  and  Guida  at  Salerno, 
have  distinguished  themselves.  Thirty  priests  are 
named  in  the  official  reports  concerning  the  in- 
surgents at  Benevento;  some  monks  were  the 
first  to  exasperate  the  populace  of  Palermo  against 
the  Neapolitan  troops ;  and  the  Jesuits  first  insti- 
gated the  declaration  of  Sicihan  independence  at 
Girgenti.  The  greater  number  of  those  priests 
who,  after  the  temporary  abandonment  of  their 
convents,  caused  by  the  events  of  the  French  Re- 
volution, had  been  forced  to  re-assume  the  religious 
habit  either  by  their  own  wants,  or  by  the  orders 
of  their  superiors,  felt  nothmg  but  the  privations 

K  4 


56  MEMOIRS  OF 

and  restraints  to  which  they  had  ceased  to  be  ac- 
customed within  the  w^alls  of  the  cloister;  and 
they  were  no  longer  consoled  for  these  privations 
by  the  veneration  with  which  they  had  formerly 
been  regarded  without  its  precincts.  Many  of  the 
curates  and  poor  priests  sigh  for  promotion  by 
seniority,  as  it  is  regulated  in  the  army,  and  look 
upon  young  prelates  of  rank,  as  the  soldiers  and 
officers  of  Bonaparte  do  upon  the  noblemen  placed 
at  the  head  of  their  companies  without  having 
served  in  the  campaigns.  They  maintain  that  the 
Pope  and  the  bishops  are  the  usurpers  of  their 
rights;  that  the  primitive  church  had  opened  the 
priesthood  to  all  without  respect  of  persons ;  and 
they  hold  themselves  beyond  the  reach  of  the 
anathemae  thundered  against  the  Carbonari,  be- 
cause they  are  pronounced  by  the  holy  Father, 
who  is  a  party  as  well  as  judge  in  the  cause. 