

Art.  72.  Those  who  shall  seduce  the  female  relations  of  respec- 
table Pagans  shall  be  suspended  from  the  society  for  a  period  of 
from  two  to  six  months. 


50  MEMOIRS  OF 

with  its  laws.  It  seems  as  if  the  progress  of  the 
clergy  in  the  middle  ages,  and  their  pretensions  to 
be  independent  on  temporal  tribunals,  had  served 
the  Carbonari  as  a  model.  The  Good  Cousins  are 
strictly  forbidden  to  refer  their  causes  to  the  ordi- 
nary judges  until  they  have  reported  them  to  one 
belonging  to  the  sect.  In  the  statutes  of  the 
Western  Lucanian  Republic,  the  only  cases  in 
which  it  is  allowable  to  infringe  the  rule,  are  laid 
down.  The  institution  of  juries  is  solemnly 
adopted  by  the  Carbonari. 

Art,  22.  *^  In  criminal  prosecutions  the  Carbo- 
nari of  the  Western  Lucanian  Republic  have  a 
right  to  be  heard  by  counsel,  and  to  know  the 
cause  and  nature  of  the  accusations  brouo-ht  ao:ainst 
them.  They  have  also  a  right  to  confront  wit- 
nesses, to  bring  forward  evidence  in  their  own 
favour,  and  to  demand  a  speedy  and  public  trial 
by  means  of  an  impartial  jury,  without  whose  ver- 
dict they  cannot  be  pronounced  guilty.  No  man 
can  be  deprived  of  his  rights,  and  the  judgment  of 
his  peers,  but  by  the  laws  of  the  republic. 

Art.  23.  "  The  institution  of  juries  shall  be  re- 
sorted to  in  the  investigation  of  any  controversy 
whatever  that  may  arise  among  the  Carbonari  of 
Western  Lucania. 

A7^t,  24.  "  The  Carbonari  of  the  Western  Lu- 
canian district  have  a  right  to  bring  forward  their 
respective  complaints,  of  what  nature  soever,  in 


THE  CARBONARI.  51 

the  assemblies  of  the  Carbonari ;  but  no  one  may 
lodge  complaints  against  his  Good  Cousin  in  the 
Pagan  tribunals,  except  in  the  following  cases  : — 

1.  *•  When  the  complaints  have  not  been  at- 
tended to  by  the  Carbonari. 

2.  "  When,  after  the  sentence  of  the  Order,  the 
assembly  by  which  it  has  been  passed  may  have 
reasons  for  permitting  a  further  investigation  in  a 
Pagan  court." 

It  certainly  augurs  but  ill  for  the  new  constitu- 
tional government  of  Naples,  and  proves  how  little 
confidence  is  reposed  in  it,  that  the  Carbonari  not 
only  continue  to  follow  the  same  system  of  judicial 
separation,  but  have  lately  made  some  alterations 
and  additions  in  their  code,  which  show  that  they 
mtend  to  persevere.  The  grand  diet  of  Salerno, 
for  instance,  Art.  63,  at  the  meeting  of  the  3d  of 
August,  1820,  decrees,  "  That  the  Grand  Diet,  in 
consequence  of  the  happy  change  of  circumstances, 
considers  a  revision  of  the  present  laws  of  the 
order  to  be  indispensable.  It  therefore  appoints  a 
committee,  composed  of  the  Good  Cousins  Rossi, 
Giuseppe  Nicola,  Caviglia  Giacomo,  and  Farina 
Giacinto,  to  take  them  into  consideration.  A  de- 
putation of  sixteen  deputies,  four  from  each  tribe, 
shall,  for  the  present,  ratify  their  opinion  in  the 
name  of  the  people;  and  the  laws  so  reformed 
shall  be  put  in  force  until  a  further  decision  of  the 
Grand  Diet  of  the  next  year." 