

The  lower  priests  at  Naples  contend  that  the 
laws  of  the  kingdom  ratify  the  edicts  of  the  Pope 
only  when  accompanied  by  the  "  Exequatur"  of 
the  king,  which  was  never  added  to  the  edict  con- 
demning the  Carbonari.  They  therefore  replied 
by  a  remonstrance  to  Pope  Pius  VII.  which  will 
be  found  in  the  Appendix.*  And  the  magistracy 
of  the  sect  at  Salerno  issued  a  public  notice,  that 
"  the  magistracy  being  informed  that  some  super- 

*  Appendix,  No.  V.  The  remonstrance  is  dated  20th  Septem- 
ber, 1820. 


THE  CARBONARI.  57 

stitious  fanatics,  in  order  to  discourage  the  Good 
Cousins,  and  to  prevent  the  increase  of  their 
numbers,  are  circulating  old  bulls  of  excommuni- 
cation and  other  follies,  inezie,  disgraceful  to  an 
enlightened  age,  declare  that  these  things  should  be 
regarded  with  contempt ;  and  especially  as  these 
bulls  are  the  wicked  fabrication  of  a  party  hostile 
to  the  country.  It  is,  nevertheless,  necessary  to 
keep  an  eye  upon  such  fanatics;  and  towards 
them  the  vigilance  recommended  in  our  2d  Article 
shall  be  directed.     Salerno,  19th  August,  1820." 

The  notions  of  the  clergy  are  chargeable  with 
the  same  confusion  and  error  as  apply  to  the 
general  arguments  on  political  equality.  But 
when  the  foundation  of  an  edifice  gives  way,  all 
its  angles  appear  distorted. 

The  secret  societies  at  Naples  had  become  a  re- 
fuge for  the  timid  during  the  fearful  revolutions 
of  that  city.  The  governments  which  had  so 
quickly  succeeded  each  other  inspired  no  confi- 
dence. Hence  the  unprotected  were  glad  to  unite 
themselves  closely,  in  hopes  of  some  support  in 
the  vicissitudes  with  which  they  were  threatened. 
The  more  enterprising  rejoiced  at  finding  them- 
selves exalted  into  judges  on  the  great  questions 
of  the  nation ;  they  imagined  themselves  the  de- 
fenders of  the  injured  and  oppressed.  The  secrecy 
and  dissimulation  required,  cost  nothing  to  the  in- 


58  MEMOIRS  OF 

habitants  of  the  south,  among  whom  they  have 
become  habitual.  With  them  passive  courage  is 
highly  valued ;  and  whosoever  is  not  a  traitor  by 
nature,  seldom  becomes  so  from  fear  of  punishment 
or  torments.  In  the  autumn  of  1819,  one  Gaetano 
Illuminati  of  Ferrara  was  arrested  at  Rome.  The 
proofs  against  him  were  so  strong,  that  he  at- 
tempted only  a  momentary  denial  of  his  attendance 
at  some  illegal  meetings,  and  was  obliged  to  con- 
fess that  his  letters,  which  had  been  intercepted 
by  the  police,  were  sufficient  to  condemn  him. 
Yet  he  peremptorily  refused  to  name  his  accom- 
plices, and  declared  that,  to  avoid  useless  impor- 
tunities, he  would  starve  himself  to  death.  Ac- 
cordingly, he  persevered  for  twelve  days  in  refus- 
ing to  swallow  the  slightest  nourishment,  or  to  lie 
down  to  rest  on  his  bed.  The  physicians  of  the 
prison,  who  visited  him  dail}^,  perceived  that  he 
was  dying ;  and  he  was  at  length  only  induced  to 
renounce  his  purpose,  by  awakening  his  feelings 
of  tenderness  for  his  mistress  and  children,  and  by 
the  promise  of  asking  him  no  further  questions  as 
to  his  associates. 