


THE  CARBONARI.  69 

(Note.)— Genera.]  Nunziante,  the  inilitary  com- 
mandant of  the  Calabrias,  received  a  secret  com- 
mission in  1816,  to  take  information  as  to  the 
number  of  sectaries  in  those  provinces,  in  order  to 
their  suppression.  He  succeeded  in  corrupting 
one  of  the  members ;  but  a  short  time  afterwards, 
the  body  of  the  informer  was  discovered,  covered 
with  wounds,  and  with  a  paper  attached  to  it, 
addressed  to  the  General,  exhorting  him  to  reUn- 
quish  his  enterprize,  unless  he  wished  to  share  the 
fate  of  the  traitor.  This  man  had  been  con- 
demned to  death  in  the  presence  of  his  own 
brother,  who  had  no  possible  means  of  saving  him, 
or  warning  him  of  his  fate. 

It  was  on  this  occasion,  that  Nunziante  sent 
information  to  Naples,  that  the  means  at  his  dis- 
posal w^ere  wholly  inadequate  to  contend  with  the 
Carbonari,  whose  number  in  the  Calabvias  he 
estimated  at  fifty  or  sixty  thousand. 

Other  instances  of  assassination  of  this  kind 
have  always  been  concealed,  or  at  least  they  have 
been  little  noticed  by  the  public ;  either  because 
the  Government  has  been  afraid  of  exposing  its 
Aveakness,  Avhile  its .  agents  trembled  lest  they 
should  draw  upon  themselves  the  hatred  of  the 
sect;  or  because  those  who  fell  beneath  the 
poignard  were  obscure  or  unknown  individuals. 

Extract  IV.  "  Canosa  began  his  operations  by 
drawing  up  a  list  of  all  the  brigands,  who  had 

f3 


70 


MEMOIRS  OF 


played  a  part  in  the  sanguinary  scenes  of  1799, 
and  embodied  them  in  a  new  society,  of  which  he 
himself  became  the  chief,  and  to  which  he  gave 
the  name  of  Calderari  del  Contrapeso.  He  in- 
vited all  the  old  Calderari  to  join  his  association, 
on  account  of  their  enmity  to  the  Carbonari.  He 
required  the  initiated  to  take  an  oath,  whose  prin- 
cipal articles  were,  passive  obedience  to  his  orders, 
and  an  engagement  to  exterminate,  by  every 
possible  means,  the  Carbonari  and  the  Freemason." 
The  following  is  the 

Oath  of  the  Calderari, 


"  I,  N.  J^^.  promise  and  swear  upon  the  Trinity, 
as  supreme  director  of  the  universe,  upon  this  cross, 
and  upon  this  steel,*  the  avenging  instrument  of 
the  perjured — to  live  and  die  in  the  Roman 
Catholic  and  Apostolic  faith,  and  to  defend  with 
my  blood  this  religion,  and  the  society  of  True 
Friendship,  the  Calderari^  to  which  I  am  about  to 
belong.  I  swear  never  to  offend,  in  honour,  life, 
or  property,  the  children  of  True  Friendship ;  I 
promise  and  swear  to  all  the  Knights,  true  friends, 
all  possible  succour  that  shall  depend  on  me.  I 
swear  to  initiate  no  person  into  the  Society  before 

*  The  Sikhs,  a  warlike  nation  of  India,  swear  by  the  steel.  A 
Highlander,  to  this  day,  considers  no  oath  so  binding  as  that  by 
the  point  of  his  duk  or  knife.     T, 