


THE  CARBONARI.  71 

I  arrive  at  the  4th  rank.  I  swear  eternal  hatred 
to  all  Masonry,  and  to  its  atrocious  protectors; 
as  well  as  to  all  Jansenists,  Materialists,^  Econo, 
mists,  and  Illuminati.  I  swear,  as  I  value  my  life- 
never  to  admit  any  of  them  into  the  Society  of 
Friendship.  Lastly,  I  swear,  that  if,  through 
wickedness  or  levity,  I  suffer  myself  to  he  per- 
jured, I  submit  to  the  loss  of  life  as  the  punish- 
ment of  my  error,  and  then  to  be  burnt :  and 
may  my  ashes,  scattered  to  the  wind,  serve  as  an 
example  to  the  children  of  Friendship  throughout 
the  whole  world.  And  so  help  me  God,  for  the 
happiness  of  my  soul,  and  the  repose  of  my  con- 
science." 

(Note.) — The  Minerva  Napolitanaf  does  not  ac- 
cuse the  Prince  of  Canosa  of  the  institution  of  the 
Calderari.  A  Bishop  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples, 
says  that  work,  whom  it  is  unnecessary  to  name, 
formed  a  plan,  or  it  was  suggested  to  him  at 
Rome,  where  he  had  taken  refuge  as  hostile  to 
the  French  government,  of  setting  up  a  sect  in 
opposition  to  the  Carbonari,  then  erroneously 
looked  upon  as  friendly  to  that  government;  on 
his  return  to  Naples,  and  on  being  reinstated  in 
his  episcopal  see,  he  assembled  a  number  of  per- 
sons of  the  middle  and  lower  classes,  and  gave 
them  the  name  of  Calderari,  or  Braziers,  in  order 

*  Materialists,  perhaps,  should  be  read  MoHnists. 
t  No.  7,  p.  314. 

F  4 


72  MEMOIRS  OF 

to  resist  the  Carbonari,  as  kettles  resist  coals,  which 
are  exhausted  by  burning  under  them  ! 

Extract  V. — "  The  new  sect  was  divided  into 
Curias.  A  central  Curia  in  each  province  was 
directed  to  keep  up  a  correspondence  with  all  the 
others  in  its  division.  The  minister  took  measures 
for  ensuring  a  rapid  and  secret  communication. 
He  recommended  to  the  chiefs  to  make  proselytes, 
and  distributed  among  them  twenty  thousand 
muskets,  which  he  had  procured  from  the  Govern- 
ment arsenals,  or  purchased  from  private  individuals. 

This  extraordinary  scheme  was  drawing  towards 
its  execution,  and  had  already  spread  terror 
throughout  the  provinces,  when  the  King,  having 
received  information  of  what  one  of  his  ministers 
had  dared  to  attempt  without  his  knowledge, 
and  having  learned  the  true  character  of  Canosa, 
deprived  him  of  liis  office  and  banished  him. 

Thus  terminated  a  plot  which  would  have 
occasioned  fresh  miseries,  and  new  scenes  of  blood; 
and  which,  although  it  produced  no  immediate 
result,  has  not  been  without  consequences,  alarm- 
ing even  at  the  moment  in  which  we  are  writing, 
(1818). 

In  fact,  the  Carbonari,  the  sect  opposed  to  the 
Calderari,  have  increased,  and  are  still  increasing 
in  the  kingdom.  The  two  Societies  are  constantly 
and  jealously  watching  each  other ;  the  shghtest 
spark  would  suffice  to  produce  an  explosion,  and 