

We  must  now  return  to  the  political  history  of 
the  Carbonari  during  the  reign  of  Murat.  The 
suspicions  of  that  sovereign  were  excited  against 
them  at  an  early  period ;  and  he  began  to  hate 
and  to  persecute  them.     The  anonymous  author 


THE  CARBONARI.  59 

of  a  violent  pamphlet  against  the  minister  Zurlo,* 
addressed  to  the  Carbonari,  ascribes  the  persecu- 
tion to  him.  The  following  is  his  account  of  his 
proceedings;  for  the  truth  of  which  we  cannot 
pledge  ourselves :  — 

"  No  sooner,"  says  the  writer,  "  was  Zurlo 
created  counsellor  of  state,  than  Joseph  Bonaparte 
employed  him  to  draw  up  a  constitution,  in  which 
the  onli/  article  favourable  to  the  nation,  relates  to 
the  expulsion  of  foreigners  from  the  offices  of  go- 
vernment. This  project  Joseph  never  carried  into 
effect.  Afterwards,  during  a  popular  commotion, 
Murat  attempted  to  conciliate  the  nation  by  order- 
ing the  election  of  representatives  according  to  the 
singular  method  proposed  in  that  constitution. 

"  By  Zurlo's  management,  a  chief  of  division 
belonging  to  Saliceti's  police  was  among  the  first 
members  elected.  The  minister  turned  a  deaf  ear 
to  the  remonstrances  of  the  provinces.  He  multi- 
plied the  officers  of  the  Civil  Administration,  of  the 
University,  and  of  the  Benevolent  Institution.  He 
lent  his  assistance  towards  the  abolition  of  feudal 
rights,  as  he  had  done  in  \199  towards  the  sup- 
pression of  the  "  Sedili"  of  Naples,  only  to  in- 
crease the  arbitrary  power  of  the  monarch. 


*  Notizie  sulla  Coiidotta  politica  di  Giuseppe  Zuiioj  terza  edi- 
zione  correttissima. 


60  MEMOIRS  OF 

"  The  *  offensive  nature  of  these  proceedings  of 
government  was  perceived  by  many,  and  felt  by 
all.  The  feeling  of  opposition  it  excited,  gave 
rise  to  the  associations  of  the  Carbonari,  whose  ob- 
ject was  to  displace  the  ministers,  and  force  a  con- 
stitution from  the  government.  The  spirit  of 
Murat  and  of  his  ministers  was  too  well  known  by 
its  despotic  effects ;  it  was  therefore  resolved  to 
have  recourse  to  the  grand  project  of  disorganising 
the  army,  in  order  to  assist  in  recalling  King  Fer- 
dinand, in  the  hope  of  obtaining  a  constitutional 
government  from  him ;  especially  as  much  was 
expected  at  Naples,  from  the  known  virtues  of  the 
hereditary  Prince;  a  confidence  justified  by  the 
result. 

"  Zurlo  now  perceived  the  danger  of  being  ex- 
posed. He  advised  Murat  to  declare  all  the  sol- 
diers who  were  Carbonari  infamous.  The  order  of 
the  day  to  that  effect  was  read  at  head-quarters 
towards  the  end  of  1813.  But  the  societies  in- 
creased notwithstanding.  The  universal  desire  for 
a  constitution  manifested  itself  even  among  the 
magistrates,  and  in  the  council  of  state.  Serious 
disturbances  took  place  in  Calabria  Citra.  The 
Abruzzi  followed  the  example  on  the  report  that 
the  intermediate  provinces  had  raised  the  standard 
of  the  constitution.    At  that  moment  Joachim  was 