

*  P.  14.  of  the  same  pamphlet. 


!* 


H/RJi 


:n  FRANC13 


THE  CARBONARI.  61 

at  Bologna:  the  only  minister  with  him  was 
Zurlo,  minister  of  the  interior,  and  of  the  southern 
Italian  departments.  It  was  he  who  issued  the 
fatal  decree  of  April  4th,  1814,  in  consequence  of 
which  so  much  blood  was  shed  among  the  consti- 
tutionalists by  the  ambitious  Nolli  in  the  Abruzzi, 
and  by  the  ferocious  Manhes  in  the  Calabrias. 

"  The  affairs  of  King  Joachim  began  to  decline 
after  this  period.  Every  one  knows  the  event ; 
but  every  one  does  not  know  that  fear  induced 
him  to  suspend  those  bloody  executions,  and  to  fill 
the  prisons  with  Carbonari,  in  order  to  massacre 
them  at  leisure.  They  were  indebted  to  the  re- 
turn of  King  Ferdinand  for  their  deliverance.  A 
very  short  time  before  the  arrival  of  that  monarch, 
who  was  recalled  by  the  suffrages  of  the  constitu- 
tionalists, the  greater  number  of  whom  were  Car- 
bonari, Zurlo  formed  an  absurd  plan  for  diverting 
the  public  feeling,  as  follows  : 

"  In  order  to  save  the  credit  of  the  decrees 
against  Carbonarism,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
change  its  object,  Joachim  was  pleased  to  alter  its 
form  or  name.  Carbonarism  was  metamorphosed 
into  agriculture;  the  Vendita  became  Pagliaja, 
straw  hut,  and  the  Good  Cousins,  Coloni,  hus  \ 
bandmen.  Murat  created  himself  grand  master  of 
the  order.  Zurlo  and  his  friends  were  the  chief 
agents  in  this  enterprize.  Printed  proclamations 
were  circulated  by  thousands  in  the  provinces,  but 


6q  memoirs  of 

ineffectually :  for  an  order,  of  which  the  sovereign 
was  grand  master,  his  prime  minister  the  second 
in  rank,  and  his  agents  of  police  the  subaltern 
officers,  was  immediately  recognized  as  an  associa- 
tion in  favour  of  despotism,  and  not  of  the  consti- 
tution." 


Meantime,  while  such  were  the  measures  adopted 
by  Murat  or  his  minister,  the  religious  feeling 
which  had  been  diffused  throughout  the  sect,  the 
agents  of  King  Ferdinand  who  had  introduced 
themselves  into  it,  and  the  arming  of  troops  under 
some  of  the  heads  of  the  Order,  who  had  set  up 
the  standard  of  the  good  cause,  gave  rise  to  a 
suspicion,  that  the  Pope  protected  the  Carbonari, 
which  a  supposititious  brief  adroitly  distributed  in 
manuscript  confirmed. 

Murat  was  so  fully  convinced  of  its  truth,  that 
one  of  the  first  requests  he  made  to  Pius  VII., 
when  he  met  him  at  Bologna  on  his  return  from 
France,  1814,  was,  that  he  would  recall  the  Bull 
issued  in  favour  of  the  Carbonari.  His  Holiness 
assured  him,  that  he  had  not  published  the  paper 
in  question  ;  and  to  the  further  request  of  Joachim, 
that  he  would  pronounce  a  public  condemnation  of 
the  Carbonari,  he  replied,  that  the  Bulls  of  his 
predecessors  were  sufficient  for  the  purpose. 
However,  he  was  no  sooner  arrived  at  Rome,  than 
an  edict  against  the  free-masons  and  secret  socie- 