


THE  CARBONARI.  75 

Extract  VI. — Of  Canosa,  Count  OrloiF  says  :* 
"  The  Prince  Canosa,  called  to  the  ministry  of  the 
police,   no   sooner  became  possessed  of  a  power 
which  may  become  as  dangerous  as  it  is  useful, 
conceived   the  fatal   project  of    abandoning  the 
system  of  moderation  which  had  been  so  prudently 
adopted.     He  granted  to  the  lowest  class  of  people 
the  right  of  carrying  arms,  which  had  before  been 
severely   prohibited.       In    fact,  he    armed  men, 
thirsting  for  blood,  who  were  always   ready   to 
enrich  themselves   with  the   spoils   of  the  more 
civilized.       But  he  looked    upon   the   latter  as 
enemies,  because  they  professed  sentiments  differ- 
ent from   his  own.      A  party  man  himself,   he 
protected  parties.      Bands  of  brigands  organized 
themselves,    and   overran   the    country   in    arms, 
giving  out   that  they   were  the    agents   of  the 
minister  of  police,   and   under  his   especial  pro- 
tection.    The  troubles  produced  by  the  revolution, 
and   the   changes  in  the   government,  had  esta- 
blished in   the  kingdom  parties   divided  amongst 
themselves,  and  which,   notwithstanding  the  re- 
turn of  the  legitimate  monarch,  still  subsist ;   and 
are  preparing  perhaps  new  sources  of  distress  for 
this   country,  which  for   so  many  centuries  has 
scarcely  ceased  to  be  cruelly  agitated." 

The  information  Count  Orloif 's  book  had  given 

*  Memoires  sur  le  Royaume  de  Naples,  p.  283. 


76  MEMOIRS  OF 

concerning  the  Carbonari,  had  been  received  with 
avidity,  and  reappeared  with  more  or  less  variation 
in  the  pubUc  journals,  and  more  particularly  in 
the  Literary  Gazette  of  London.  At  length  the 
Prince  of  Canosa  took  up  the  pen  himself,  to 
answer  it  in  a  work,  entitled  I  Piffari  di  Mon- 
tagna,  ossia  Cenno  estemporaneo  di  un  Cittadino 
imparziale,  sulla  CoJigiura  del  Principe  di  Canosa, 
e  sopra  i  Carbonari ;  Epistola  critica  diretta  aW 
Estensore  del  Foglio  Litterario  di  Londra,  Dublino, 
nel  Maggio,  1820,  pp.  118.  The  Mountain 
Pipes ;  or,  an  Extempore  Essay,  by  an  Lnpartial 
Citizen,  on  the  Conspiracy  of  the  Prince  of  Canosa, 
and  of  the  Carbonari :  a  Critical  Epistle  addressed 
to  the  Editor  of  the  London  Literary  Gazette : 
Dublin,  May,  1820,  pp.  118. 

Although  this  publication  is  anonymous,  the 
style  and  manner  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  author, 
in  the  minds  of  those  acquainted  with  his  former 
compositions. 

He  attempts  to  prove  that  he  had  neither  the 
pecuniary  means,  nor  the  intention  of  distributing 
20,000  muskets  among  the  Calderari.  Besides, 
the  great  numbers  of  the  Carbonari,  which  existed 
at  the  very  time  he  entered  into  office  as  head  of 
the  police,  made  him  sufficiently  conscious  of  the 
impossibility  of  destroying  them  by  such  expe- 
dients. 