


THE  CARBONARI.  73 

amidst  the  havoc  it  would  produce,  some  dexterous 
and  daring  votary  of  ambition  would  inevitably 
arise,  to  the  eminent  danger  of  the  Government." 

(Note.) — The  Prince  of  Canosa  left  the  ministry 
on  the  27th' June,  1816,  after  he  had  been  in  office 
about  six  months.  A  fanatical  priest,  whom  he 
protected,  namely  the  Padre  Cotillo,  had  pre- 
dicted that,  on  that  day,  venemous  serpents  would 
issue  from  the  earth,  and  fire  descend  from  Heaven, 
to  exterminate  the  Neapolitans.  The  populace 
was  terrified.  C  The  27th  of  June  was  expected 
by  the  Lazzaroni  with  inexpressible  anxiety.  But 
the  day  proved  perfectly  fair ;  not  a  single  cloud 
obscured  the  sun,  and  tranquillity  was  restored. 

Three  months  after  the  exile  of  Canosa,  the 
Official  Gazette  of  the  two  Sicilies  contained  the 
following  article : — "  Since  the  publication  of  the 
Act  by  which  His  Majesty  proscribed  all  Secret 
Societies,  some  individuals,  the  greater  number  of 
whom  are  of  the  lowest  condition,  and  who  had 
formerly  displayed  devotion  to  the  King,  and 
attachment  to  the  Good  Cause^  have  been  in  the 
habit  of  meeting  in  the  secret  conventicles,  com- 
briccole,  of  the  Society  called  Calderari :  His 
Majesty  has  directed  them  to  be  arrested  and  given 
up  to  justice." 

Canosa  retired  into  Tuscany.  His  confidant, 
the  Abbate  Latini,  was  banished  to  Ponza.      This 


74  MEMOIRS  OF 

intriguing  person,  who  had  for  some  time  been 
pensioned  by  England,  was  now  accused  not  only 
of  having  betrayed  the  correspondence  of  Queen 
Caroline  of  Austria,  whose  private  secretary  he 
was,  to  Lord  William  Bentinck,  but  also  of  having 
forged  several  letters,  which  it  was  pretended  she 
had  written  to  Bonaparte  and  his  agents.  Latini 
died  at  Leghorn  in  I8I9. 

We  have  given  above  some  traits  of  the  cha- 
racter of  Maghella,  whom  public  opinion  points 
out  as  the  person  who  first  gave  influence  to  the 
Carbonari.  And  in  addition  to  the  anecdotes  of 
Canosa,  who  has  been  always  considered  as  the 
friend  of  the  Calderari,  contained  in  the  extracts 
we  have  already  made  from  Count  OrlofF's  work, 
we  shall  present  the  same  writer's  more  elaborate 
character  of  that  minister. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  both  Maghella  and 
Canosa  were  ministers  of  poUce  ;  and  that,  having 
both  obstinately  followed  their  own  private  views, 
they  but  ill  served  the  cause  of  their  sovereigns. 

Never  has  political  police  been  so  much  em- 
ployed as  in  the  present  age,  and  never  was  it 
before  imagined  so  necessary  to  the  preservation 
of  thrones. 

Never,  on  the  other  hand,  has  it  proved  so 
impotent  in  checking,  or  so  dangerous  in  exciting, 
conspiracy  and  rebellion. 