

*  Drawn  up  and  printed  in  July,  1807. 

t  Giove  Fulminante--the   name  of  one  of  the  lodges  of  the 
Decisi. 

X  Documents,  No.  IV.  of  the  Reporf . 


THE   CARBONARI.  65 

del  Colonello  Palmieri.  But  all  this  is  no  proof  that 
that  secret  society  was  that  of  the  Carbonari. 

Extract  II.  "  The  revolution  which  Lord  Wil- 
liam Bentinck  had  effected  in  Sicily,  where  the 
English  were  possessed  of  the  supreme  authority, 
under  the  very  eyes  of  the  Court  of  Naples, 
having  obliged  the  Queen  to  retire  from  public 
business,  the  Carbonari  remained  in  a  manner  de- 
serted, and  without  a  rallying  point.  It  was  then 
that  men  of  character  and  fortune  perceived  with 
terror,  that  these  bands,  composed  in  part  of  fero- 
cious wretches  already  notorious  by  the  excesses 
committed  by  them  in  \799,  menaced  the  public 
peace  with  the  most  cruel  disasters,  the  effect  of 
which  it  was  not  difficult  to  foresee.  To  avert 
these  evils,  and  obtain  such  an  influence  as  should 
enable  them  to  direct  the  principles  and  move- 
ments of  the  society,  they  entered  it  themselves : 
nine  of  them,  under  the  name  of  Capi  di  Vendite, 
were  put  at  the  head  of  the  Vendite,  or  BaracchCy 
names  by  which  the  various  detached  meetings  of 
the  order  were  designated.  Thus  organised,  the 
society  or  sect  united  in  its  body  men  of  all  par- 
ties— Republicans,  Constitutionalists,  friends  of 
Murat,  and  partisans  of  the  Bourbons,  and  it  is  to 
the  heterogeneous  sentiments  which  then  animated 
it,  that  its  subsequent  divisions  are  to  be  attributed. 

In    1813,    during   the    campaign    of    Saxony, 
Queen  Caroline  Murat,  who  was  Regent  in  the 


66  MEMOIRS  OF 

absence  of  her  husband,  considered  the  Carbonari 
as  a  sect  which  could  not  be  tolerated  without 
compromising  the  stability  of  the  then  established 
government  She  therefore  began  the  perse- 
cutions against  them,  which  her  husband  followed 
up  on  his  return  to  Naples  after  the  battle  of 
Leipzig,  and  it  was  probably  this  impolitic 
measure,  which  rendered  his  government  so  un- 
popular during  the  last  year  of  his  reign. 

"  It  was  about  this  time,  that  the  division  of  the 
sect  took  place.  The  number  of  the  initiated  had 
increased  beyond  calculation.  Its  leaders,  aware  of 
the  difficulty  of  directing  the  movements  of  so  great 
a  multitude,  conceived  the  plan  of  a  reform,  and 
executed  it  with  secrecy  and  promptitude.  The 
members  who  were  retained,  continued  to  bear  the 
name  of  Carbonari,  while  those  who  were  expelled 
took  that  of  Calderari,*  and  an  implacable  hatred 
arose  between  the  rival  sects.  Commotions  followed, 
and  the  public  tranquillity  was  often  endangered 
by  their  disputes.  Murat,  alarmed,  wavered  for 
some  time  between  the  two  parties,  and  at  last 
determined  on  supporting  the  Carbonari  who 
were  most  numerous.  But  it  was  too  late.  The 
intentions  of  the  Congress  at  Vienna  were  known 
or  suspected,  and  the  people  were  unwilling  to 
exert  themselves  in  support  of  a  man,  whose  fall 
seemed  inevitable.     Murat,  despised  by  the  Car- 