


THE  CARBONARI.  6S 

ties  appeared,  signed  by  Cardinal  Pacca,  Pro-Secre- 
tary of  State.'^ 

To  give  an  idea  of  the  variety  of  opinions  con- 
cerning the  Carbonari,  entertained  not  only  in  the 
other  countries  of  Europe,  but  in  Naples  itself, 
we  shall  present  the  reader  with  some  extracts 
from  a  work  on  the  subject  published  by  Count 
OrlotF,  who  ascribes  the  origin  of  the  sect  to 
Queen  Caroline  of  Austria.-f  To  these  extracts, 
we  will  subjoin  a  few  explanatory  notes,  but  it  is 
impossible  to  reconcile  the  different  views  of  the 
opposite  parties,  one  of  which  considered  the  Car- 
bonari, as  Jacobins  and  Republicans,  and  the 
other  as  the  supporters  of  the  legitimate  sove- 
reignty of  the  Two  Sicilies. 

Extract  I.—"  In  1812,"  says  the  Count,  "  the 
emissaries  of  Queen  Caroline  of  Austria  laid  the 
foundations  of  an  association,  known  by  the  name 
of  Carbonari.  This  sect  spread  itself  rapidly  through 

*  For  the  Edict  dated  15  th  August,  1814,  see  the  Appendix 
No.  IV. 

t  Memolres  sur  le  Royaume  de  Naples — our  first  extract  is  from 
Vol.  II.,  p.  284. 

A  wretched  pamphlet,  entitled  "  Breve  idea  della  carhoneria, 
suaorigine  net  regno  di  Napoli,suo  scopo,  sua  persecuzione,  e  causa 
chefe  nascere  la  sett  a  de  Calderari.  Dal  dottore  in  legge  Pasquale 
Tonelli—Napoli  1820,  presso  Pasq.  Tizano,  Strada  Cisterna 
deU'olio — No.  26"  repeats  very  nearly,  but  without  giving  its 
authority,  some  of  the  assertions  of  the  Comte  d'Orloff  respecting 
the  two  sects. 


64  MEMOIRS  OF  # 

the  Calabrias  and  Abruzzi,  and  thence  throughout 
the  kingdom,  so  that  it  is  now  beheved  to  consist 
of  upwards  of  two  hundred  thousand  members.  The 
original  object  of  the  association  was  to  seize  all 
opportunities  of  attacking  and  subverting  the  au- 
thority of  Murat." 

(Note.) — On  examining  the  correspondence 
of  Salvatore  Bruni,  in  the  first  report  of  Saliceti, 
Minister  of  General  Police,  "  on  the  conspiracy 
planned  in  the  year  1807,  against  the  French 
army  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  and  [against  the 
person  and  states  of  H.  M.  Joseph  Napoleon,"* 
the  traces  of  a  secret  society  are  plainly  discern- 
ible, and  it  is  by  that  title,  that  Bruni  designates 
his  confederates.  The  emblems  engraved  on  his 
passports  and  patents,  the  corresponding  deco- 
rations, viz.  heads  and  orange  trees,  which  he 
earnestly  recommends  should  be  placed  on  the 
pedestals,  on  which  the  figures  of  the  twelve 
quarters  of  Naples  were  to  be  exhibited,  the  incen- 
diary proclamations  in  the  name  of  Jupiter  Thun- 
derer,'}' are  all  so  many  marks  of  a  secret  associ- 
ation, as  well  as  the  letter  J  addressed  by  Queen 
Carohne,  and  dated  Palermo,  10th  May,  1807, 
to  the  society   of  Colonel  Palmieri,  Alia  Societa 