

*  Braziers — from  Caldaro,  a  kettle. 


THE  CARBONARI.  67 

bonari,  and  hated  by  the  Calderari,  perceived  his 
throne  totter,  without  a  single  effort  of  any  party 
in  his  favour." 

(Note.) — The  assertion  that  men  of  character 
and  fortune  were  placed  at  the  head  of  the  lodges, 
in  order  to  oppose  the  ferocious  bands  of  1799?  is 
not  conformable  with  truth.  Such  persons  have 
never  been  members.  Neither  did  the  Carbonari 
remain  in  inaction  towards  the  period  of  Murat's 
fall,  as  the  expression,  "  without  a  single  eifort  of 
any  party  in  his  favour"  seems  to  imply.  But  their 
efforts  were  hostile  to  Joachim,  for  they  contributed 
to  the  dissolution  of  his  army,  and  caused  his 
precipiiate  retreat  after  the  battle  of  Tolentino, 
by  exciting  disobedience  and  desertion.  Whole 
battalions  yielded  to  patriotic  invitations  so  agree- 
able to  their  taste. 

The  society  sent  deputies  into  Sicily  to  offer  the 
kingdom  as  a  gratuitous  gift  to  the  Monarch. 
The  Chevalier  de'  Medici  treated  with  them.  They 
demanded  some  concessions,  which,  as  they  assert- 
ed, had  been  promised  to  them,  and  a  formal  con- 
firmation of  their  institution. 

The  sanction  they  pleaded  for  was  refused,  as 
well  as  the  reduction  of  the  taxes,  and  the  estab- 
lishment of  constitutional  privileges.  They  were 
simply  told,  that  those  to  whom  they  applied  were 
ignorant  of  the  existence  of  such  privileges  :  and 

F  2 


S^  MEMOIRS  OF 

it  was  recommended  to  them  not  to  be  too  impor- 
tunate. 

Extract  III.  "The  Chevalier  de  Medici,  to 
whom,  in  the  interim,  the  portfoHoof  Police  was  en- 
trusted, seemed,  on  the  King's  restoration,  to  attach 
little  importance  to  these  internal  divisions.  En- 
tirely occupied  by  the  momentous  care  of  the 
finances,  he  regarded  both  sects  with  indifference. 
The  Carbonari  attributed  his  inaction  to  fear,  the 
Calderari  augured  from  it,  protection  to  themselves* 
The  latter  had  witnessed  the  restoration  with  plea- 
sure. It  visited  their  wrongs  on  the  head  of  their 
oppressor.  The  Carbonari,  on  the  contrary,  appre- 
hensive of  future  persecutions  which  might  give 
their  rivals  the  advantage  over  them,  took  precau- 
tions for  their  safety.  They  drew  the  bonds  of  their 
union  closer,  and  renewed  their  oaths  of  mutual  and 
eternal  assistance  and  defence.  "  Such  was  the 
state  of  the  two  sects  at  the  moment  when  the 
Prince  of  Canosa  became  Minister  of  Police,  in 
December,  18 19-  He  adopted  a  different  conduct 
from  that  of  his  predecessor  with  regard  to  the 
two  mysterious  associations.  Persuaded  that  the 
Carbonari,  who  had  been  protected  by  Murat, 
during  the  last  months  of  his  reign,  were  irrecon- 
cilable enemies  of  King  Ferdinand,  he  formed  a 
plan  of  attack  against  them,  whose  success  would 
have  involved  the  subversion  of  the  social  order." 