


THE  CARBONARI.  91 

§  52  of  the  first  division  of  our  criminal  code. 
And  whosoever  has  not  opposed  the  progress  of  the 
Society,  or  has  neglected  to  inform  against  its 
members,  agreeably  to  the  §§  54  and  55  of  the 
same,  has  thereby  become  an  accomplice,  and  has 
incurred  the  penalties  provided  by  the  law. 

Therefore,  from  the  date  of  the  publication  of 
this  present  Notification,  no  person  can  avail  him- 
self of  the  excuse  of  not  being  aware  of  the  pre- 
cise object  of  the  Carbonari;  and  consequently, 
whosoever  shall  enter  into  the  said  Society,  or  shall 
not  oppose  its  progress,  and  inform  against  its 
members,  shall  be  proceeded  against  according  to 
the  provisions  of  §§  52,  53,  54,  and  55,  of  the  first 
part  of  the  criminal  code,  set  forth  in  the  annexed 
extract  from  the  statute. 

Extract  of  Chap.  7.  §  1.  of  the  first  division  of 
the  criminal  code. 

§  52.     He  is  guilty  of  the  crime  of  high  treason 

(a)  Who  attempts  any  thing  against  the  personal 
safety  of  the  supreme  head  of  the  state : 

(b)  Who  engages  in  any  scheme  tending  to  pro- 
duce a  violent  revolution  in  the  system  of  govern- 
ment, or  to  draw  upon  the  state  any  danger  from 
without,  or  to  encrease  an  existing  danger,  whether 
such  schemes  be  publicly  or  privately  pursued,  by 
persons  singly,  or  associated  by  machination,  by 
counsel,  or  by  act;  by  force  of  arms  or  otherwise, 
by  participation  of  secrets  conducing  to  such  an 


92  MEMOIRS  OF 

end,  or  by  plots  directed  towards  it ;  by  instiga- 
tion, by  raising  the  people,  by  espionnage,  or  aid, 
by  any  action  whatsoever,  tending  to  such  an 
object. 

§  53.  This  crime  is  punishable  w^ith  death  even 
if  it  fail,  and  is  within  the  limit  of  a  bare  attempt. 

§  54.  He  who  shall  deliberately  neglect  to  op- 
pose a  treasonable  conspiracy,  having  it  in  his 
power  without  peril  to  himself  so  to  do,  becomes 
an  accomplice  in  the  crime,  and  is  punishable  with 
the  severest  imprisonment  for  life. 

§  55,  He,  also,  who  shall  deliberately  neglect 
to  give  information  before  the  magistrates,  of  per- 
sons known  by  him  to  be  guilty  of  high  treason, 
becomes  an  accomplice  in  the  crime  (unless  it  shall 
appear  from  the  circumstances,  that,  notwith- 
standing such  neglect,  no  evil  consequence  is  to 
be  apprehended.) — Such  accomplice  being  punish- 
able with  severe  imprisonment  for  life. 

§  56.  He  who  shall  have  joined  the  secret  so- 
cieties alluded  to,  §  52.  (b.)  tending  to  high  treason, 
but  who  shall  afterwards  repent,  and  give  infor- 
mation to  the  magistrates  concerning  their  mem- 
bers, regulations,  objects,  and  enterprizes,  while 
they  are  still  secret,  and  their  bad  effects  may  be 
prevented,  is  assured  that  his  full  pardon  will  be 
granted,  and  his  information  kept  secret. 