

He  defends  himself  against  the  accusations  of 


THE  CARBONARI.  77 

cruelty  and  blood-thirstiness,  by  retracing  his 
political  life,  during  the  whole  course  of  which, 
he  had  never  been  sanguinary  or  vindictive.  He 
ingenuously  confesses  the  serious  fault  he  had 
committed,  while  minister,  in  surrounding  himself 
by  subalterns,  whom  he  himself  denounces  as 
stupid  and  corrupt;  and  excuses  himself  on  ac- 
count of  the  length  of  time  during  which  he  had 
been  absent  from  his  native  country. 

He  refutes  the  assertion  that  the  emissaries  of 
Queen  Caroline  of  Austria  did,  in  the  year  1813, 
found  the  Society  of  Carbonari,  for  the  purpose 
of  overturning  the  power  of  Murat;  because,  at 
the  period  in  question,  that  princess  was,  in  a 
manner,  imprisoned  in  the  country,  without  moneys 
without  power,  and  narrowly  watched  by  Lord 
William  Bentinck. 

He  seems  himself  uncertain  whether  the  sect 
be  of  French  or  of  Italian  origin ;  agreeing,  how- 
ever, with  many  persons  at  Naples,  who  assert 
that  a  French  officer  was  the  first  who,  in  1810, 
introduced  its  mysteries  at  Capua,  the  Society 
having  been  proscribed  in  his  own  country.  It 
met  at  first  with  little  encouragement,  and  for  a 
long  time  the  number  of  the  initiated  did  not 
exceed  seventy-five ;  but  at  length  its  real  apostles 
appeared  under  the  forms  of  the  conscription, 
the  droits  reunis,  and  the  free  quartering  of  the 
military. 


78  MEMOIRS  OF 

The  Carbonari,  kept  under  by  an  active  system 
of  police,  only  began  to  put  their  doctrines  in 
practice  when  the  French  Empire  had  ceased  to 
exist,  and  the  power  of  Murat  began  to  totter. 
They  then  imagined  that  the  latter  was  intimi- 
dated, and  on  the  point  of  yielding :  but  they  were 
mistaken;  for  he  instituted  judicial  proceedings 
against  them,  and  caused  some  of  them  to  be 
executed.  At  length  (1815)  the  foundation  of 
Joachim's  throne  being  entirely  sapped,  and  the 
Austrian  army  on  the  advance  towards  Naples, 
they  chose  that  moment  for  revenge,  and  also  to 
acquire  a  claim  on  the  gratitude  of  King  Ferdi- 
nand, by  joining  him,  and  by  preventing  a  renewal 
of  the  popular  massacres  of  1799?  which  seemed  to 
threaten  the  partizans  of  the  French. 

On  this  occasion,  the  Carbonari  made  a  momen- 
tary junction  with  the  Calderari,  who  were  not 
enemies  to  monarchy  in  general,  but  only  to  the 
French  usurpation.  But  the  two  factions  neither 
had  a  common  origin,  nor  did  they  ever  profess 
the  same  principles.  Many  of  the  Calderari  had, 
in  fact,  been  associated  with  those  who  acted  a 
part  in  the  horrors  of  1799;  and  the  Prince  of 
Canosa  had  nothing  to  do  with  those  massacres. 