

The  ministry  immediately  despatched  the  Com- 
missioner Intonti  to  Foggia.  the  chief  town  of 
the  Capitanata.  Intonti  had  been  Attorney-general 
there,  and  was  acquainted  with  several  members 
of  the  different  sects.  He  was  entrusted  with 
unlimited  authority,  and  empowered  to  inflict 
summary  justice,  or  rather  injustice,  by  executing 
suspected  persons,  without  trial      He  preferred 


THE  CARBONARI.  83 

milder  measures  ;  and  did  not  even  signify  to  the 
authorities  of  the  place  the  extent  of  his  commis- 
sion. On  his  arrival  he  summoned  the  most  vio- 
lent to  his  presence,  and  represented  to  them  that 
it  was  impossible  for  the  government  to  yield  to 
their  demands  for  a  constitution,  as  neither  the 
Emperor  of  Austria,  whose  troops  were  either  still 
within  the  kingdom,  or,  at  most,  had  only  just 
passed  the  frontier,  nor  the  other  allied  powers, 
would  consent  to  such  a  measure. 

Thus,  for  a  time,  tranquillity  was  preserved  by 
persuasive  measures ;  and  the  operations  of  the 
Carbonari  were  suspended.  But  the  Capitanata 
was  one  of  the  foremost  of  the  provinces  in  setting 
up  the  standard  of  the  revolution. 

The  first  number  of  the  Amico  della  Constitu- 
zione,  drawn  up  by  General  Colletta,  giving  an 
account  of  the  proceedings  at  Naples,  from  the  2d 
to  the  6th  of  July,  1820,  contains  the  following 
passage : 

"  The  society  of  Carbonari  was  the  focus  of  dis- 
content, not  because  it  propagated  sentiments  ini- 
mical to  government,  but  because  those  whose 
opinions  were  hostile  to  government  became  sec- 
taries. Whoever  therefore  is  curious  to  trace  the 
progress  of  public  disaffection  has  only  to  consult 
the  progressive  registers  of  Carbonarism.  The 
number  of  Carbonari  enrolled  during  the  month  of 
March  in  the  present  year  amounted  to  642,000." 

g2 


84  MEMOIRS  OF 

Not  satisfied  with  this  multitude,  the  Carbonari 
recruit  daily  throughout  the  kingdom,  as  well  as 
in  Naples  itself,  where  there  are  upwards  of  three 
hundred  and  forty  lodges.  The  Capri  line  of  battle 
ship  alone  contains  three.  They  seek  to  make 
proselytes  among  the  lower  orders,  particularly 
among  servants,  and  the  Lazzaroni  and  fishermen, 
whom  they  dread.  Article  13th  of  the  proceed- 
higs  of  the  Grand  Diet  of  Salerno  expresses  openly 
the  opinion  of  the  meeting  as  to  the  importance  of 
facilitating  the  reception  of  candidates,  and  of  re- 
laxing the  severity  of  the  scrutiny. 

Art.  13.  "  Good  Cousins,  Dignitaries!  The 
magistracy  earnestly  exhorts  you  to  second  the 
wish  of  the  Grand  Diet,  expressed  in  Art.  78. 
Let  us  augment  our  strength ;  let  us  be  cautious 
how  we  exclude ;  let  us  again  examine  those  who 
had  been  rejected  in  more  suspicious  times  ;  let  us 
exercise  less  rigour  in  admitting  members.  Let 
us  refuse  such  only  as  are  really  unworthy  and  irre- 
claimable ;  those,  for  instance,  guilty  of  defama- 
tion, qualified  robbers,*  and  men  without  honour. 
Let  us  overlook  corrigible  faults ;  they  will  be  cor- 
rected in  our  Baracche.  Let  us  not  reject  those 
who  have  hitherto  entertained  opinions  at  variance 