

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  observe,  that  an  assor 
piation  of  a  million  of  men  can  no  longer  be  con-r 

■*  Cenno  storico  sui  Fatti  die  hanno  preceduto  e  prodotto  it  Movi-. 
yiento  del  Battagliotie  Sacxo  di  Nola. 


THE  CARBONARI.  89 

sidered  as  a  secret  society,  although  such  a  mass 
may  be  united  by  conventional  signs  unknown  to 
others,  as  well  as  by  oaths. 

The  spirit  of  such  an  institution  cannot  fail  to 
evaporate  in  a  multitude  which  its  chiefs  can  no 
longer  controul.  Besides,  the  object  of  overturning 
and  destroying  the  government  has  been  obtained : 
it  is  all  that  such  a  sect  can  bring  about :  it  has 
not  the  power  to  create  or  to  rebuild. 

This  inundating  sea  will  retire  of  its  own  accord 
from  the  shores  which  it  has  laid  waste;  but  it 
will  leave  the  germs  of  other  sects  and  associations, 
which,  from  their  very  essence,  must  be  in  oppo- 
sition to  existing  governments. 

It  was  long  imagined  that  the  Po  was  the  boun- 
dary line  of  the  sect  in  Italy ;  but  this  is  a  mistaken 
notion.  Its  principles  are  more  widely  diffused, 
but  under  different  forms,  and  among  various 
classes,  which  renders  it  less  powerful  than  at 
Naples,  where  its  members  acted  in  concert,  had 
absolutely  the  same  interests,  and  looked  upon 
events  in  the  same  light. 

The  Carbonari  of  the  Roman  States  appear  to 
be  of  higher  rank,  but  of  a  more  sanguinary  and 
vindictive  character.  The  account  of  their  con- 
spiracy, extracted  from  the  minutes  of  the  trial  of 
the  conspirators,  is  inserted  in  the  Appendix  to 
this  work;  from  the  time  of  its  failure,  they  seem 
i;^ot  to  have  attempted  any  iniportant  movements ; 


50  MEMOIRS  OF 

but  a  number  of  individuals,  especially  in  Romagna, 
have  fallen  singly  beneath  their  daggers. 

In  the  Lombard- Venetian  kingdom,  His  Ma- 
jesty the  Emperor  of  Austria  found  it  necessary  to 
publish  the  following  decree,  dated  August,  1820, 
against  the  Carbonari. 

Regno  Lombard©  Veneto. 
Notification. 

The  society  called  Carbonari,  which  has  spread 
itself  over  various  neighbouring  states,  has  at- 
tempted to  make  proselytes  even  in  the  Regal 
dominions  of  the  Caesars.  From  the  investigations 
that  have  been  made  on  the  subject,  the  views  of 
this  Society  have  been  discovered  to  be  as  dangerous 
to  the  state,  as  they  are  criminal  in  themselves, 
although  they  are  not  communicated  by  the  supe- 
riors to  every  member  of  the  society.  By  the 
express  command  of  His  Majesty  the  Emperor  and 
King,  the  object  of  these  persons  is  publicly  set 
forth,  as  a  warning  to  each  and  every  of  his 
subjects. 

The  precise  object  then  of  the  Carbonari 
IS  the  subversion  and  destruction  of  all  go- 
vernments. It  follows,  therefore,  that  whosoever, 
being  already  acquainted  with  this  object,  has, 
notwithstanding,  entered  into  the  society  of  the 
Carbonari,  is  guilty  of  high  treason,  according  to 