

*  Perhaps  the  Assassini  Pensionati — persons  who,  having  been 
long  in  prison,  are  released  with  a  pension,  to  take  from  them  the 
temptation  of  stealing.  This  is  much  practised  at  Rome,  but  with 
little  good  effect.     T. 


1 


THE  CARBONARI.  85 

with  our  own.  They  were  then  ignorant  of  the 
sanctity  of  our  principles ;  if  they  be  now  ahve  to 
it,  why  refuse  them  the  hght  ?  We  pray  you  let 
us  forswear  all  revenge,  party-spirit,  and  faction. 
Let  us  endeavour,  in  short,  to  be  a  true  people  by 
uniting  the  whole  nation  with  us,  in  order  to  be  in 
a  state  to  resist  any  foreign  invasion  whatsoever. 

Art,  14.  "  Nevertheless,  the  magistracy,  while 
it  recommends  indulgence  in  receiving  members, 
proposes  a  certain  means  of  assuring  ourselves  of 
those  who  enter  our  order.  They  must  sign  the 
oath ;  and  this  solemn  act  will  be  sent  hither  to  be 
laid  up  in  our  archives.  Such  as  cannot  write  miist 
make  the  sign  of  the  Cross  in  the  presence  of  three 
witnesses,  who  must  add  their  signature.  This 
document  will  over-awe  those  who  may  wish  to 
betray  us." 

This  admonition  not  having  produced  all  the 
effect  desired,  the  magistracy  adds,  in  the  official 
journal  of  the  republic  -*  "  We  are  sorry  to  be 
obliged  to  express  the  most  decided  disapprobation 
as  to  the  number  of  black  balled  candidates,  {an- 
neramenti,)  announced  by  the  last  courier,  there 
being  no  less  than  thirty  in  a  single  Vendita. 
Where  will  such  a  spirit  of  exclusion  lead  us,  my 
Good  Cousins?  Supposing  that  200  Vendite  were 
to  black-ball  as  many,  not  in  a  day  or  in  a  month, 

*  August  19,  1820.     Art.  2. 
G  3 


§6  MEMOIRS  OF 

but  in  a  year,  we  should  not  only  lose  six  thousand 
faggots  for  our  furnaces,"*  but  we  should  create  an 
army  of  6000  enemies,  without  reckoning  their 
friends  and  adherents.  Our  force  would  be  but  as 
one  to  a  hundred ;  and,  in  the  end,  we  should  be 
reduced  to  a  petty  faction,  unable  to  stand  our 
ground  against  so  many,  who,  in  the  event  of  a 
sinister  result,  not  being  of  our  body,  would  fall 
upon  us.  What  absurd  policy  is  this  !  What  im- 
prudence under  circumstances  not  only  not  secure, 
but  even  dangerous  !  The  magistracy  therefore 
again  earnestly  recommends  attention  to  the  13th 
Article  of  this  Journal." 

The  legislative  statutes  of  the  Carbonari  of  the 
Western  Lucanian  Republic  of  1818,  section  5th, 
Art.  80,  settle  the  following  proportions  between 
the  population  and  the  Vendite,  whose  effective 
members  then  consisted  of  the  small  landholders 
of  the  provinces,  upon  whom  thq  land-tax  weighed 
heaviest,  and  of  the  lower  ranks  of  civil  and  mili- 
tary officers. 