

The  name  of  Calderari,  as  he  assures  us,  was 
first  adopted  in  Palermo,  not  at  Naples.  In  the 
former  of  these  towns,  there  existed  different 
companies  of  trades  (Maestraiize),  which  had  en- 


I 


THE  CARBONARI.,  79 

joyed  great  privileges  until  they  lost  them  by  the 
constitution  of  Lord  William  Bentinckr  The  nu- 
merous company  of  Calderari  (Braziers)  felt  the 
loss  most  keenly  :  they  sent  a  deputation  of  their 
chief  members  to  the  Queen,  to  assure  her  that 
they  were  ready  to  rise  and  assert  the  injured  rights 
of  the  crown.  The  flames  of  insurrection  were 
communicated  to  the  tanners,  to  the  other  com- 
panies, and  to  the  majority  of  the  people,  and  of 
the  Neapolitan  emigrants  in  Sicily. 

Lord  William  Bentinck,  aware  of  what  was 
passing,  put  the  Neapolitan  emigrants  on  board 
ship,  and  sent  them  under  a  neutral  flag  to  Naples, 
where  Murat  received  them  with  a  magnanimity 
scarcely  to  be  expected  from  an  enemy. 

For  this  they  were  not  grateful.  They  had 
hardly  landed  before  they  entered  into  the  secret 
societies  then  conspiring  against  the  French  go- 
vernment ;  and  their  original  name  of  Calderari 
was  communicated  by  them  to  the  conspirators, 
with  whom  they  united  themselves  by  new  oaths 
at  Naples. 

An  event  which  had  recently  happened  in  that 
city  gave  a  sort  of  fashion  to  the  epithet  of  Cal- 
deraro  :  this  was  the  blowing  up  of  the  house  of 
Saliceti  by  night,  by  one  Domenico,  a  brazier  by 
trade.  The  Prince  of  Canosa  was  suspected  of 
being  the  instigator  of  this  crime;  and  a  strict 
search  was  commenced,  in  order  to  discover  the 


8(J  MEMOIRS  OF 

perpetrators.  Several  unfortunate  wretches  were 
executed  on  the  strength  of  false  evidence,  forced 
out  by  torture,  or  procured  by  bribery.  After 
their  death  an  accident  brought  the  real  author 
and  executor  of  the  explosion  to  light.  The  whole 
was  discovered  through  the  simplicity  of  one  of 
the  private  nuns,*  named  Theresa  the  dyer,  (Te- 
resa la  tintora,)  the  aunt  of  the  brazier.  Even 
the  model  of  the  infernal  machine  was  obtained  : 
Domenico  had  escaped  in  time,  and  they  could 
not  arrest  him  in  Sicily. 

The  name  of  Calderari  of  the  Counterpoise  (Cal- 
derari  di  Contrapeso),  professing  to  be  the  creation 
of  Canosa,  is  derived  from  a  circumstance  which 
the  author  of  the  PifFari  di  Montagna  reveals  to  us. 

The  existence  of  the  Trinitarii  (for  so  these 
sectaries  entitled  themselves  before  they  were 
called  Calderari)  was  better  known  to  the  Minister 
of  Police,  Canosa,  than  to  his  colleagues.  He  had 
been  but  a  few  days  in  office  when  there  was  a 
discussion  in  council  on  the  secret  societies  which 
infested  the  provinces,  even  more  than  the  capital. 
Two  of  the  ministers  addressed  the  Prince  of  Ca- 
nosa seriously,  and  exhorted  him  to  employ  all  his 
means  against  the  Calderari,  the  atrocious  remnant 
of  1799.     The  Minister  of  Police  answered,  that 