

*  From  a  pamphlet  entitled,  Istruizioni  sul  Secondo  Grado  di 
M.  (maestro)  Carbonaro  redatto  dal  G.  M,  delia  R.  V.  (Rispet- 


THE  CARBONAEI. 


9^ 


bonarism  is  to  restore  to  the  citizen  that  liberty  and 
those  right^which  Nature  bestowed  on  us,  and 
which  tyranny  itself,  once,  did  not  deny  us.  To 
attain  to  this  object,  it  is  necessary  to  try  the  virtue, 
and  to  consolidate  the  union  of  courageous  and 
exemplary  citizens  :  this  is  no  trifling  labour,  since 
the  cunning  of  political  tyranny  has  interposed  a 
thick  veil  between  men's  eyes  and  the  sublime 
light  of  truth.  Wretched  mortals  study  those  false 
maxims,  which,  leading  to  prejudice  and  supersti- 
tion, envelope  them  in  darkness,  and  induce  them 
to  lead  a  life  of  slavery  and  submission  to  ill  treat- 
ment, blind  to  the  origin  of  their  misfortunes.  Oh, 
men  !  do  you  not  hear  the  clank  of  the  chains  with 
which  you  are  bound?  They  are  fastened  upon 
you  by  the  tyrant. 

By  the  law  of  Nature,  he  who  seeks  to  destroy 
others  should  himself  be  annihilated.  And  are 
not  kings,  who,  forgetting  that  they  are  men, 
proudly  regard  themselves  as  superior  beings,  and 
usurp  the  right  of  disposing  of  the  blood  of  their 
fellow  men,  and  of  looking  upon  them  as  slaves,  are 
they  not  the  lords  of  the  wives  and  children  and 
possessions  of  those  slaves  ?  And  yet  honour,  and 
homage  and  respect,  are  still  paid  to  those  infernal 
monsters  !*     Oh,  blindness  of  man  ! ! ! 

tahile  Vendita)  all'  O.  {ordone)  Napoli.     Pasquale  Tavassi,  sotto  il 
titolo  distintivo,  I  liberi  Pitagorici.     Napoli,  1820,  dai  Torchi  di 
Giuseppe  Severino,  Vico  nuovo  della  pace.     Nos.  18  and  19. 
*  Mostri  Infernali. 


T96\  MEMOIRS  OF 

iJBut  as  the  maxims  of  the  Carbonari  are  founded 
on  the  simple  principles  of  nature  and  reason,  and 
on  the  doctrines  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  belongs  to  them 
to  overturn  the  throne  raised  by  fanaticism  and 
ambition,  and  to  expel  from  it  the  monster  who 
pollutes  the  whole  creations  The  blood  of  so 
many  innocents,  torn  by  main  force  from  the 
bosoms  of  their  families,  and  sent  to  perish  in 
capricious  wars ;  the  blood  of  so  many  illustrious 
citizens  slaughtered  for  speaking  the  language  of 
truth ;  this  blood,  I  say,  calls  on  us  for  vengeance : 
and  the  number  of  our  friends  now  groaning  in 
fetters  claim  our  assistance.  Yes !  the  Carbonari, 
knowing  what  truth  and  justice  are,  and  possessing 
humane  and  compassionate  hearts,  will  one  day 
vindicate  the  rights  of  man.  Having  found  your 
conduct  to  be  regular  and  zealous  towards  the 
Order,  we  have  admitted  you  into  the  chamber  of 
honour,  that  is  to  say,  among  the  sworn  members 
of  the  Republic.  You  are  come  here  to  tender 
your  lives  for  any  service,  when  the  Carbonari 
shall  invite  you  to  save  your  country  from  op- 
pression.* 