


^  .-//.It  has  been  questioned  whether  the  Neapolitan 


THE  CARBONARI.  93 

Carbonari  aim  at  a  republic,  or  whether  they  are 
satisfied  with  the  constitution  they  have  obtained. 

The  solution  of  this  problem  does  not  appear  to 
be  very  difficult.  Constitutional  monarchies  are 
so  complicated,  and  their  advantages  are  so  little 
within  the  comprehension  of  ordinary  minds, 
having  hardly  any  direct  influence  on  the  inferior 
classes ;  they  are  unquestionably  and  necessarily 
so  much  more  lavish  in  expenditure  than  absolute 
monarchies,  that  the  mass  of  the  people  can  only 
feel  their  just  value,  after  a  long  and  painful  edu- 
cation, and  after  the  lapse  of  many  generations, 
harassed  by  political  storms.  Now  it  is  the  lower 
classes  of  society  who  compose  the  bulk  of  the 
Carbonari  of  Naples;  and  although  the  Spanish 
charter  offers  them  numerous  openings  for  demo- 
cracy and  licentiousness,  it  does  not  flatter  their 
imaginations  sufficiently  to  induce  a  sincere  or 
lasting  attachment. 

The  principal  attractions  of  the  present  system 
consist  in  the  popular  courts,  the  voting  by  ballot? 
the  power  of  trying  and  condemning  by  the  list, 
even  the  most  distinguished  of  their  fellow  citizens, 
and  also  of  repressing  such  as  might  aim  at  rising 
above  the  ordinary  level.  These  privileges  also 
reconcile  them  to  the  continuance  of  their  heavy 
taxes,  and  to  that  of  the  evils  of  the  conscription, 
the  motives  or  the  pretexts  of  the  revolution. 

The  high  sounding  words,  independence,  liberty. 


94  MEMOIRS  OF 

and  equality,  which  are  pepetually  rung  into  the 
ears  of  the  Carbonari ;  the  whole  system  of  edu- 
cation adopted  by  the  order,  its  completely  repub- 
lican form,  and  even  the  very  language  of  the  sect, 
familiarize  the  people  with  the  idea  of  a  common- 
wealth, and  keep  it  constantly  in  their  view. 

It  would  be  very  difficult  to  discover,  in  the 
maxims  of  Carbonarism,  any  thing  that  bears  re- 
ference to  a  monarchy,  even  constitutional.  That 
form  of  government  would  never  satisfy  the  revo- 
lutionary fanatics  and  votaries  of  unreserved  equa- 
lity, for  the  general  principle  that  every  man  is 
qualified  to  rise  to  any  office  in  the  state,  tolerates 
with  reluctance  the  exceptions  of  a  king  and  royal 
family. 

That  the  professors  and  pedagogues  of  the  Car- 
bonari do  not  dissemble  on  this  head,  their  various 
publications  furnish  a  convincing  proof.  The 
Catechisms,  the  Mentors,  the  Circulars,  the  Patents, 
and  the  Emblems  of  the  sect,  all  speak  a  language 
not  to  be  misunderstood.  The  following  is  a  dis- 
course pronounced  by  the  orator  of  the  Vendita  of 
the  Pythagoreans  at  Naples. 

Discourse.* 
Know,  finally,  that  the  object  of  respectable  Car- 