

*  Monaca  di  Casa :  they  wear  the  religious  habit,  and  observe 
certain  rules  at  home,  without  forming  themselves  into  communi- 
ties, and  without  being  subject  to  monastic  confinement.  ■. 


TH£  CARBONAftl.  81 

the  real  objects  of  all  these  secret  societies  were 
the  samCj  to  enrich  themselves  at  the  expense  of 
their  neighbours,  and  to  encroach  upon  the  go- 
vernment, in  order  to  usurp  its  power ;  that  hap- 
pily all  these  sects  were  at  variance;  that  it 
was  necessary  to  foment  their  nmtual  hatred  as 
much  as  possible;  that  as  the  sect  of  Calderari 
was  less  strong  and  powerful  than  that  of  the  Car- 
bonari, it  was  politic  to  protect  and  favour  the 
former,  in  order  to  counterbalance  the  latter,  and 
to  make  use  of  them  as  agents  and  spies  for  the 
police  against  their  rivals  :  and  this  was  the  more 
eligible,  as  the  Trinitarii,  or  Calderari,  took  an 
oath  to  defend  legitimate  monarchy,  while,  on  the 
contrary,  the  Carbonari  took  an  oath  to  destroy  it. 

*'  In  reasoning  thus,  the  Prince  of  Canosa  fre- 
quently employed  -the  expression  counterpoise,  ex- 
pecting that  Calderarism  would  serve  him  as  a 
counterpoise  to  Carbonarism ;  and,  notwithstand- 
ing the  rule,  that  nothing  said  in  council  is  to  be 
revealed,  his  speech  transpired,  and  gave  rise  to' 
the  reports  concerning  the  institution,  or  the  re- 
form, of  the  Calderari  del  Contrapeso.'" 

These  notices  from  the  work  of  the  Prince  of 
Canosa  possess  a  double  interest,  one  derived  from 
their  source,  and  the  other  from  the  consid^^^^^i^^ 
that  it  is  fair  to  attend  to  his  justification  after  so 
many  accusations.  It  is,  however,  time  to  return 
to  the  course  of  events  at  Naples. 

G 


("Sy  MEMOIRS  OF 

In  1817  the  Capitanata  began  to  alarm  the 
government,  as  well  as  the  provinces  of  Lecce, 
Bari,  and  Avellino :  the  inhabitants  were  pos- 
sessed of  a  number  of  small  printing  machines, 
and  made  use  of  them  to  multiply  manifestos, 
which  they  distributed  in  all  directions.  In  these 
they  demanded  a  constitution  from  the  King,  and 
excited  the  people  to  withhold  the  payment  of  the 
taxes  in  case  of  a  refusal.  Three  proclamations  of 
this  kind,  various  in  their  expressions  and  tone, 
followed  each  other  within  a  short  period.  The 
first  was  couched  in  the  language  of  entreaty. 
The  second  reminded  the  King  that  "  he  had  pro- 
mised a  constitution  to  his  people,"  and  advised 
him  to  keep  his  royal  word.  The  third  reproached 
him  with  delay.  The  people,  it  said,  have  too 
long  descended  to  entreaties,  to  obtain  what  was 
due  to  the  nation;  and  it  intimated  that  they 
would  no  longer  pay  the  taxes  unless  they  obtain- 
ed their  constitution.  The  land-tax  gatherers  were 
threatened  with  death. 