

"  In  every  district,  Ordone,  of  any  number  of 
inhabitants  not  exceeding  1000,  one  Vendita  may 
be  established. 

From    1,000  to    2,000— two. 
From    2,000  to    4,000— three. 

*  Faggots, /ro;?^,  for  the  furnaces, /bmc//i — Carbon  arc  terms  for 
members  of  their  society. 


THE  CARBONARI.  87 

From    4,000  to    6,000— -four. 
From    6,000  to    8,000— five. 
From    8,000  to  10,000— six. 
From  10,000  to  1 8,000-^eight. 

In  1820  there  were  one  hundred  and  eighty- two 
Vendite  in  Western  Lucania,  who  sent  deputies  to 
the  Grand  Diet. 

The  persons  who,  from  the  beginning,  have  di. 
rected  the  labours  of  the  Carbonari  towards  a 
political  and  constitutional  object,  have  always 
been  few  in  number.  The  impulse  once  given  and 
received,  they  voluntarily  withdrew  behind  the 
scenes,  and  have  been  forgotten.  Even  the  late 
revolution  brought  but  few  to  light. 

The  Canonico  Menechini  at  Nola,  and  Lieu- 
tenant Morelli,  only  declared  themselves  because 
the  exigency  of  the  moment  required  it.  Of  these, 
Menechini  alone  seems  to  have  been  possessed  of 
power.  Sonnets  in  honour  of  the  Canonico  poured 
in  on  all  sides ;  and  copies  of  his  portrait,  engraved 
on  stone,  were  sold  by  thousands  in  the  streets  of 
Naples. 

He  was  appointed  one  of  the  members  of  the 
Committee  of  Public  Safety :  and  during  the  first 
days  of  the  revolution,  his  popularity  enabled  him 
twice  to  serve  the  cause  of  humanity.  First,  by 
calming  the  enraged  populace  assembled  before  the 
Royal  Palace,  at  the  time  of  the  massacre  of  the 

g4 


88  MEMOIRS  OF 

Neapolitans,  and  of  the  sanguinary  scenes  at  Pa- 
lermo; and  afterwards,  by  disarming  the  resents 
ment  of  the  ferocious  Carbonari  in  the  Field  of 
Mars,  when  they  threatened  the  lives  of  the  ex^ 
ministers  Medici  and  Tommasi.  But  the  reputa- 
tion of  Menechini  soon  declined,  and  he  set  out 
for  Messina,  to  organize  Carbonarism  in  Sicily. 

Some  other  individuals,  all  sons  of  St.  Theobald, 
to  use  their  own  expression,  have  had  the  boldness 
to  publish  an  account,  authenticated  by  their  sig- 
natures, of  the  contrivances  and  means  employed 
by  them  at  some  distance  of  time,  to  bring  about 
the  revolution  of  July,  1820.  They  call  it  "  An 
Historical  Staternent  of  the  Facts  which  preceded 
and  produced  the  Movement  of  the  Sacred  Bat- 
talion of  Nola,"*  for  so  they  call  that  detachment 
of  the  cavalry,  belonging  to  the  Bourbon  regiment, 
which  deserted  from  Npla  on  the  1st  of  July,  and 
was  led  by  Silvati  and  Morelli  to  raise  the  standard 
of  rebellion  at  Monteforte. 

This  pamphlet,  which  was  speedily  and  cautiously 
withdrawn  from  circulation,  is  become  exceedingly 
scarce,  and  we  have  therefore  inserted  it  in  the 
Appendix,  as  essential  to  the  history  pf  Carbo- 
narism. 