


''Advertisement,  C^th  July,  1820  J. 


"* 


The  Senate  of  the  Eastern  Lucanian  Repubhc 
represents  the  people  of  Basilicata,  and  supports 
their  rights  at  the  price  of  its  own  blood. 

Until  the  constitution  of  Ferdinand  I.  shall  be 
published,  and  accepted  by  the  deputies  of  the 
people  of  all  the  provinces  of  the  kingdom,  no  act 
or  decree  of  the  late  government  shall,  from  this 
day  forward,  be  published  or  observed  in  the  terri- 
tory of  Eastern  Lucania  or  Basilicata. 

The  administrative  and  judicial  authorities  shall 
exercise  their  functions  in  the  name  of  the  Con- 
stitution and  of  the  King ;  and  the  articles  con- 
tained in  the  Declaration  printed  at  Potenza  the 
6th  July,  1 820,  which  has  been  proclaimed  to  the 

*  The  Lieutenant-General  F.  Pignatelli  Strongoli,  sent  about 
this  time  to  Basilicata  and  Potenza,  quieted  some  tumults  and  dis- 
sensions which  had  agitated  that  province  during  fifty  days. 
Libels  and  incendiary  letters  were  distributed,  the  pubhc  autho- 
rities were  disregarded,  the  public  money  was  retained.  The 
most  violent  talked  of  marching  against  the  capital,  and  the 
election  of  the  new  magistrates  of  the  Carbonari  took  place  in  the 
midst  of  the  greatest  confusion,  and  the  threats  and  the  poignards 
of  the  rioters. 


108  MEMOIRS  OF 

people  of   Basilicata,  shall  be  entirely  observed, 
till  the  said  Constitution  be  given. 

Whoever  opposes  this,  is  declared  an  enemy  to 
his  country  and  the  interests  of  the  people. 

The  command  of  the   constitutional  forces  of 
Eastern  Lucania  is  entrusted  to  General  Sponsa 
and  Colonel  Corbo,  who,  having  particularly  dis- 
tinguished themselves  in  the  defence  of  our  cause, 
have  merited  the  gratitude  of  the  country,  accord- 
ing to  the  1 1th  article  of  the  said  Declaration. 
The  Pi^esident,     Carlo  Corbo. 
First  Assistant,  G  a  eta  no  Scale  a. 
Second Assista?it,  Germano  Marone. 
Secretary,  Giuseppe  Sicorella. 

Gaetano  Corrado. 
Senators. 
Marco  Lacapra. 
LuiGi  Spera. 
Bonaventura  Marone. 
Pasquale  Manta. 
Gen.  Bagnulo. 
Pasquale  Cilento. 
Fr.  Marone,  G.  M.  dei  Pitiliani. 

It  has  been  observed,  that  the  Carbonari  are  in 
great  measure  independent  on  the  judicial  authori- 
ties. This  is  still  more  the  case  with  regard  to  the 
executive  and  legislative  powers,  which  they  look 
upon  with  suspicion.  Hence  their  anxiety  to  form 


THE  CARBONAUI.  J09 

leagues,  and  provincial  republics,  in  order  to  keep 
a  watchful  eye  even  upon  the  Supreme  Vendita  at 
Naples,  which  they  consider  too  close  to  the 
government.  The  project  for  the  confederacy, 
communicated  by  the  Supreme  Magistracy  of  Sa- 
lerno to  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Carbonari, 
places  the  fears  and  the  wishes  of  the  order  in  the 
clearest  light. 