

IX.  Besides  the  extraordinary  convocations,  the 
congress  will  meet  regularly  on  the  18th  of 
September  of  every  year.  The  duration  of  its 
deliberations  shall  not  be  less  than  fifteen  days, 
nor  shall  it  exceed  a  month.  The  place  of  meeting 
shall  for  this  year  be  at  Salerno,  several  Republics 
having  expressed  a  wish  to  this  effect. 

X.  The  duration  of  the  congress  shall  be  three 
years.  Every  year,  however,  one  third  of  the 
members  shall  vacate  their  seats  by  lot,  and  be 
replaced.  The  deputation  shall  be  renewed  every 
year.  At  the  end  of  the  three  years,  it  will  be 
determined  whether  the  Confederacy  shall  continue, 
be  modified,  or  dissolved  ;  and  this  determination 
will  depend  on  observing  whether  the  constitu- 
tional government  be  completely  established. 

XL  No  member  of  the  deputation,  even  if  he 
have  a  legitimate  motive,  shall  quit  his  post  with- 
out acquainting  the  body,  and  the  Republic  he 
represents,  on  pain  of  having  his  name  burnt, 
besides  being  burnt  in  effigy,  if  he  acts  so  from 
prevarication  or  treachery. 

XII.  The  Republics  which  shall  find  this  pro- 
ject adapted  to  the  general  good  are  requested  to 
send  their  act  of  adherence  as  soon  as  possible  to 
the  magistracy  exercising  the  supreme  executive 
power    of    the    Western    Lucania   (Salerno),    di- 


THE  CARBONARI.  117 

recti ng  their  letters  in  the  Pagan  style,  to  D. 
Pietro  Sessa,  the  secretary  of  the  said  magistracy. 
If  they  have  any  observations  to  make  on  the  less 
essential  parts  of  the  project,  they  may  reserve 
them  for  the  discussion  of  the  congress,  which, 
for  the  first  time,  shall  be  considered  as  an  assem- 
bly representing  the  Confederate  Republics  of  the 
Carbonari. 


Fortunately,  this  sect,  which  arrogates  to  itself 
so  much  independence,  and  the  right  of  interfe- 
rence in  all  public  affairs,  is  daily  losing  ground  by 
its  own  imprudence.  It  is  a  jacobine  or  radical 
party,  such  as  is  to  be  found  elsewhere,  far  beyond 
the  limits  of  the  two  Sicilies.  The  curiosity  of  its 
members  is  no  longer  irritated  by  an  unknown 
object.  Their  zeal  is  no  longer  kept  aUve  by 
mystery.  The  ceremonies  and  emblems  have  lost 
their  power  as  symbolical  of  great  events,  and  a 
happy  futurity ;  for  habit  has  rendered  them  fami- 
liar and  uninteresting.  The  abuse  of  them  has 
often  made  them  ridiculous,^  and  the  lower  orders 
of  candidates  have  learned  to  speculate  more  on 

*  The  fair  sex  has  thought  fit  to  form  societies,  and  as  Free- 
masonry had  its  lodges  of  *^*Mopses,"  so  Carbonarism  tolerated 
female  lodges,  under  the  name  of  Vendite  delle  Giardiniere :  i.  e. 
Lodges  of  Garden-women.  These  ladies  boast  of  their  Good 
Cousinship,  and  the  glorious  title  of  Giardiniere  figures  in  their 
publications,  especially  in  their  patriotic  verses  5  which  will  not, 