

*  Nuovo  Statute  organico  della  Carboneria  della  Republica 
Lucana  Occidentale,  (Principato  citra)  Sanzionato  nella  Gran  Dieta 
deir  anno  2,  (1818.)  Ordone  eentrale  di  Salerno.  Dalla  Tipografia 
della  Rep.  Luc  Occid.     (Printed  August,  1820.) 


THE  CARBONARI.  101 

public  shall  preserve  inviolate  the  ties  which  unite 
them  by  confederation  with  all  the  Carbonari  dis- 
persed over  the  face  of  the  earth. 

Art.  5.  The  Carbonari  of  the  W.  Lucanian  Re- 
public will  naturally  be  the  friends  and  allies  of 
all  associations  of  liberal  and  philanthropic  men. 

Art.  Q.  This  Society  shall  propose  for  its  object 
the  general  wish  of  the  Order,  which  particularly 
aims  at  the  diffusion  of  knowledge,  the  uniting  of 
the  different  classes  of  citizens  in  the  bonds  of 
love,  the  impressing  of  a  national  character  on  the 
.people,  in  order  to  iu-terest  them  in  support  of 
their  country  and  religion :  the  destruction  of  the 
source  of  crimes  by  the  inculcation  of  good 
mojals:  the  protection  of  the  feeble,  and  the  re- 
lief of  the  unfortunate. 

CHAP.    III. 

Of  the  Form  of  Goxiernment  of  the  Western 
Lucanian  Republic, 

The  Republic  shall  be  governed,  first,  by  a  Senate 
to  propose  laws  and  to  debate;  2dly,  by  a 
representation  of  the  people  to  decide ;  and  3dly, 
by  a  magistracy  to  execute." 

On  the  first  revolutionary  movement  at  Naples 
all  these  republics  of  the  Carbonari  emerged  from 
their  obscurity,  and  seized  the  command  of  the 

h3  • 


102  MEMOIRS  OF 

Government,  till  the  King  had  signed  the  decree 
adopting  the  Constitution  of  the  Spanish  Cortes. 
The  Eastern  Lucanian  RepubHc  was  so  conspicu- 
ous by  its  vehemence,  that  not  only  foreigners,  but 
even  the  inhabitants  of  Naples,  and  those  members 
of  Government  initiated  into  the  Order,  thought 
that  it  intended  to  detach  itself  altogether  from  the 
body  of  the  kingdom,  and  to  form  a  sort  of  insu- 
lated state  in  its  very  centre. 

This  report  continued  in  circulation,  even  for 
some  days  after  the  Spanish  Constitution  had 
been  proclaimed,  and  sworn  to  at  Potenza,  and 
the  magistracy  found  it  expedient  to  publish  the 
following  Advertisement : 

From  the  Patriotic  Journal  of  Eastern  Lucania, 
Potenza,  QOth  July,  1820. 

Advertisement. 

Some  evil  disposed  persons  have  raised  an  outcry, 
because  the  Government  of  the  Carbonari  of  this 
district  has  styled  itself  the  Eastern  Lucanian 
Republic.  They  have  represented  this  as  an  ap- 
proach to  a  democratic  constitution,  and  have 
thereby  endeavoured  to  agitate  the  public  mind. 
Without  thinking  it  worth  while  to  advert  to  the 
Constitution  of  Carbonarism,  which  should  be 
concealed  from  the  profane,  we  beg  leave  to  in- 
form  these  oligarchical   pedants,   that   the   term 