

The  reader  must  not  suffer  himself  to  be  de- 
ceived by  some  expressions  of  respect  towards  the 
royal  family,  and  of  attachment  to  the  new 
constitution  in  this  singular  document :  for  the 
King,  the  Hereditary  Prince,  the  Ministers  and 
their  agents,  the  army  and  its  officers,  all  in  short, 
who  possess  power  or  influence  in  the  state,  are 
not  the  less  exposed  to  continual  accusations  of 
bad  faith,  and  of  secret  intentions  hostile  to  the 
sect  and  to  the  revolution.  Such  members  of  the 
Parliament,  also,  as  are  not  returned  from  the  body 
of  the  Society  itself,  or  such  as  lean  towards  the 
Ministry,  or  even  towards  moderate  measures,  are 
obnoxious  to  such  attacks. 

The  consciousness  of  having  been  the  principal 
movers  of  the  rebellion,  and  of  having  raised  the 
political  storm  which  impends  over  the  country, 
induces  the  Carbonari  to  gain  as  many  accomplices 
as  possible,  openly  to  implicate  such  as  are  back- 
ward in  acknowledging  their  fellowship,  and  to 
exact  security  from  all  new  members.    Hence 


XIO  MEMOIRS  OF 

proceed  their  memorials,  and  addresses,  and  the 
violent  measures  forced  upon  the  government. 
Hence,  also,  their  anxiety  never  to  lose  sight  of  its 
operations,  and,  if  possible,  to  controul  and  direct 
them. 


Journal  of  the  Western  Lucanian  Republic, 

No.  2. 
From  the  Central  District  of  Salerno,  the 
19th  of  the  nth  month,  year  3.  (19th  of 
August,  1820.) 

PROJECT    OF    CONFEDERATION. 

Respectable  Good  Cousins, 

The  Magistracy  exercising  the  Supreme  Execu- 
tive power  of  the  Western  Lucanian  Republic, 
taking  into  serious  consideration  that,  although 
the  moral  and  physical  efforts  of  the  Carbonari, 
generously  seconded  as  they  are  by  our  august 
monarch  Ferdinand,  and  his  destined  successor  to 
the  throne.  Prince  Francis,  Vicar  General  of  the 
kingdom,  have  attained  their  object  of  overturn- 
ing a  despotic  government.  Much  still  remains  to 
be  done,  in  order  that  the  constitutional  govern- 
ment may  be  consolidated  and  preserved  from 
iniquitous  plots  within,  and  from  aggression  from 
without. 

Maturely  considering  that,  although  the  Carbo- 


THE   CARBONARI.  1  11 

nari  are  already  united  by  feelings,  principles,  and 
force  of  action;  yet  it  is  necessary  that  such  a 
confederacy  should  be  bound  together  by  a  solemn 
act,  in  order  that,  with  combined  and  well-directed 
forces,  they  may  be  enabled  to  resist  any  hostile 
attack  whatever,  and  to  sustain  the  Bourbon 
dynasty  on  the  constitutional  throne. 

To  obtain  this  salutary  result,  it  proposes  the 
following  articles . 

I.  There  shall  be  a  confederacy  between  the 
Carbonari  of  those  provinces,  not  excepting  the 
province  of  Naples,  which  are  already  formed  into 
regular  governments.  Every  one  of  them,  how- 
ever, shall  preserve  its  own  independence,  with 
sovereign,  legislative,  and  executive  power,  within 
the  limits  of  its  own  territory. 