


THE  CARBONARI.  105 

■    1.  The  King  is  to  have  the  executive  power 
only. 

2.  He  cannot  make  or  interpret  the  laws,  par- 
don, confer  appointments,  impose  contributions,  or 
make  peace  or  war.  These  rights  belong  to  the 
people,  which  is  to  be  represented  by  its  legitimate 
deputies. 

3.  At  the  end  of  every  year  the  Ministers 
of  government  shall  give  a  public  account  of  their 
transactions. 

4.  The  citizens  are  to  enjoy  full  liberty  of 
thought  and  of  the  press. 

5.  Situations  are  only  to  be  bestowed  on  those 
born  and  residing  in  the  kingdom. 

6.  The  preservation  of  public  order  should  be 
the  care  of  every  citizen;  but  this  charge  is 
entrusted  (under  responsibility)  especially  to  the 
officers  of  the  militia,  to  the  Ecclesiastics,  to  the 
Syndics,  Decurions  and  principal  proprietors. 

7.  In  order  that  the  party- spirit  which  divides 
the  nation  may  cease,  and  that  all  the  citizens 
may  form  a  people  of  brothers,  it  is  forbidden  to 
insult  or  offend  in  any  way  whatever,  those  who 
have  hitherto  entertained  an  opinion  contrary  to 
liberal  ideas,  and  who,  corivinced  of  their  error y 
shall  have  the  right  of  again  taking  their  place 
among  honest  citizens. 

The  country  receives  them  with  transports  of 

8.  On    the    other   hand,    whosoever  seeks    to 


106  MEMOIRS  OF 

check  or  oppose  the  operations  of  the  Consti- 
tutionalists, either  by  word  or  deed,  shall  be  tried 
and  punished  by  a  military  commission — attempts 
to  discourage  and  alarm  constitute  the  former  of 
these  offences. 

9.  The  national  debt  is  guaranteed. 

10.  All  military  ranks  and  honours,  with  their 
corresponding  pensions  of  whatever  nature,  and 
for  whatever  service  they  may  have  been  granted, 
are  confirmed. 

11.  All  such  soldiers  and  citizens,  as  distin- 
guish themselves  in  the  service  of  the  good  cause, 
have  a  sacred  claim  on  the  national  gratitude. 
The  country  will  generously  reward  their  labours. 
And  those  soldiers  who  are  the  first  to  support  the 
operations  of  the  constitutionalists  shall  immedi- 
ately be  promoted  a  step. 

12.  The  Ministers  of  religion  are  invited  to 
offer  up  public  prayers  to  Almighty  God,  that  he 
may  protect  the  Neapolitan  nation  in  its  glorious 
enterprize. 

13.  The  present  declaration  shall  be  published 
by  the  Syndics  and  Rectors  upon  the  altar,  and 
read  at  the  head  of  the  companies,  who  compose 
the  constitutional  army. 

(Signed.)  The  orator  of  the  Senate  of  the  Eastern 
Lucanian  Republic  certifies  that  this  Decla- 
ration is  conformable  to  the  original. 

Egidio  Marco  Giuseppe. 
Potenza,  6th  July,  1820. 


THK  CARBONARI.  107 


Extract  Jrom  the  Patriotic  Journal  of  Eastern 
Lucania. 