

"  Shall  shine  upon  human  miseries."* 
Thanksgiving,  honour,    and    glory   to  Thee  for 
ever. 


Such  readers  as  may  be  inclined  to  interpret  these 
expressions  in  a  less  sinister  sense,  may  read  the 
last  stanza  of  the  lyrical  motto  which  decorates 
the  title-page  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Eastern 

*  "  Risplenderk  suUe  sciagure  umane." 


THE  CARBONARI.  i)9 

Lucanian  Republic,  printed  at  Potenza,  its  head- 
quarters, 18!20. 

Ma  tiia  pianta  radice  non  pone 
Che  su'  pezzi  d'  infrante  corone : 
Ne  si  pasce  di  fresche  ruggiade. 
Ma  di  sangue  di  membra  di  RL^ 

Monti. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  the  chiefs  of  the  Eastern 
Lucanian  Society  are  men  without  authority  or 
influence,  because  the  principal  members  of  its  su- 
preme magistracy  have  been  elected  deputies  to  the 
National  Parliament.  All  the  republics  of  the 
Carbonari  do  not,  however,  so  shamelessly  preach 
the  disgusting  doctrines  of  horror  and  jacobinism. 

The  Elder  Sister,  i.  e.  the  Western  Lucanian  Re- 
public, is  more  crafty  in  the  pursuit  of  its  object, 
and  conceals  it  better.  It  sometimes  assumes  the 
credit  of  wishing  to  support  the  constitution,  and 
will  surely  not  fly  in  the  face  of  the  monarchy  till 
the  danger  of  foreign  invasion  shall  be  past. 

In  the  detail  of  the  fundamental  principles  of 

*  Thy  plant  will  strike  its  roots  alone 
'Midst  fragments  of  a  shatter' d  throne  ; 
Nor  freshest  dews  its  leaves  may  nourish, 
'Tis  regal  blood  must  make  it  flourish. 

The  ode  to  Liberty,  consisting  of  only  two  stanzas,  of  which  the 
one  quoted  is  the  second,  is  not  printed  in  the  ordinary  editions  of 
Monti's  works.     T. 

H  2 


100  MEMOIRS  OF 

its  Statute  of  organization,  it  explains  its  intentions 
more  mildly. 

"  The  Representatives  of  the  Western    Lucanian 
Republic,  met  in  Grand  Diet  :* 

"  Wishing  to  consecrate  anew  the  social  ties 
of  the  Carbonari  of  Western  Lucania,  formed  by 
the  statute  of  the  year  1,  according  to  the  reiterated 
manifestations  of  the  general  feeling,  and  to  the 
declaration  of  the  first  principles  which  were  its 
basis,  and  which  must  secure  its  duration  for  the 
common  welfare — By  virtue  of  the  authority  re- 
ceived from  the  people,  and  in  their  name,  have 
sanctioned  and  do  sanction,  &amp;c. 

CHA?.  r. 

Of  the  Creation  of  the  Order  ;  of  its  Object  and 
its  Essential  Relations. 

Art.  1 .  One  single  united  society  shall  be  formed 
of  the  Carbonari  of  Western  Lucania. 

Art.  2.  The  boundaries  of  its  territories  shall 
be  those  of  the  pagan  province  of  Principato  Citra, 

Art.  3.  The  Western  Lucanian  Republic  shall 
be  one,  indivisible,  and  independent. 

Art.  4.  The  Carbonari  of  the  W:  Lucanian  Re- 