

II.  The  confederacy  may  be  afterwards  extend- 
ed to  the  Carbonari  of  other  provinces,  adopting^ 
as  a  principle,  that  the  territory  of  every  Republic 
shall  be  circumscribed  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
Pagan  provinces.  But  they  must  first  establish  a 
regular  government,  summoning,  as  occasion  shall 
i-equire,  one  or  more  deputies  from  every  Vendita 
to  the  General  Diet,  in  order  to  establish  its  own 
internal  independent  organization,  and  the  election 
of  its  own  magistrates. 

III.  Meanwhile,  till  such  regular  government 
be  established  in  the  provinces  that  are  not  yet 
organized,  insulated  Vendite,  and  even  tribes,  may 


1  12  MEMOIRS  OF 

attach  themselves  to  the  neighbouring  govern- 
ments ;  being  obHged,  however,  to  send  deputies 
to  the  general  diet  of  their  own  province,  and 
afterwards  to  return  to  the  government  of  the 
same,  as  soon  as  it  shall  be  reduced  to  form. 

IV.  The    object   of  the    confederacy  will   be^ 

1.  The  consolidation  and  preservation  of  the 
constitutional  government  of  the  monarchy. 

2.  The  defence  of  our  most  holy  religion,  as 
well  as  of  the  august  reigning  Bourbon 
dynasty. 

3.  Our  mutual  defence  against  the  blind 
enemies  of  the  Order  of  the  Carbonari. 

4.  The  direction  of  the  public  spirit  to  the 
principles  of  sound  and  correct  morality, 
by  means  of  education  and  instruction,  in 
order  that  religion  and  the  legitimacy  of 
thrones  may  be  respected. 

5.  The  active  and  efficacious  co-operation  of 
all  our  moral  and  physical  efforts  to  obtain 
such  important  objects. 

V.  The  confederacy  should  be  governed, 

1.  By  a  periodical  congress,  composed  of 
three  representatives  from  every  Republic. 

2.  By  a  permanent  deputation  composed  of 
one  third  of  the  said  representatives,  one  of 
each  region,  to  be  chosen  from  the  body  of 
the  congress  itself 

VI.  The   peprmanent    deutation  shall    always 


1 


THE    CAIiBONART.  113 

act  on  behalf,  and  in  the  name  of  the  congress. 
The  duties  of  the  same  shall  be  as  follows  : 

1.  To  examine  and  pronounce  sentence  upon 
the  acts  of  government ;  to  watch  over  the 
conduct  of  its  agents  ;  to  effect  the  reform 
of  abuses  by  moral  influence,  and  by  peti- 
tions, if  necessary. 

2.  To  suggest  to  the  Confederate  Republics, 
all  means  and  measures  which  can  conduce 
to  the  national  prosperity,  and  to  acquaint 
them,  on  the  other  hand,  with  their  wants. 

3.  To  open  treaties  with  philanthropic  and 
liberal  societies  in  other  countries,  and  to 
interest  them  in  the  general  welfare  of 
humanity. 

4.  To  form  into  independent  Republics,  all 
the  provinces  not  yet  organized,  and  to 
admit  them  to  the  confederacy. 

5.  To  give  the  private  watch- word  every  half 
year  to  all  the  Confederate  Republics. 