

*  After  the  discourse,  the  symbols  were  explained  as  in  the 
other  Vendite,  but  with  some  difference,  probably  such  as  to  suit 
the  various  degrees  of  information  possessed  by  the  members. 
The  instructions  contained  in  the  master  s  catechism  suggests, 
that,  of  the  earth  may  be  said — ^'  The  earth  reminds  us  that  we 
should  not  be  ambitious  or  covetous  of  greatness,  for  we  must  all 


I 


THE  CARBONARI.  97 

The  oath  administered  to  those  admitted  to  the 
second  rank  in  the  same  Vendita,  i.  e.  the  Pytha- 
gorean, breathes  the  same  sentiments.  "  I  swear 
eternal  hatred  against  all  tyrants,  and  their  satel- 
lites, and  to  avail  myself  of  all  opportunities  to 
destroy  them."  Another  remarkable  proof  of  the 
prevalence  of  the  same  sentiments  is  the  prayer  of 
a  G.  C.  Apprentice,  affixed  to  the  Mentor.* 

A.  G.  D.  G.  M.  D.  U.    (Al  Gran   Dio  Gran 
Maestro  del  Unwerso.) 

Carbones  succensi  sunt  ab  eo. — Ps.  xvii.f 

O  Thou  Great  God,  x\uthor  and  Master  of  Na- 
ture, Thou  who  hast  formed  men  to  be  free  and 
independent,  and  not  to  be  the  tyrants  and  op- 
pressors of  their  brethren.  Thou  who  kindlest  in 
the  hearts  of  thy  children  the  holy  flame  of  charity, 
of  that  charity  which  considers  all  men  upon  the 
earth  as  forming  one  family !  Thou  who  guidest 
throuQ-h  the  desert  of  life  those  souls  which  are 


•to- 


be  changed  to  dust.  Life  is  no  other  than  a  short  journey,  hreve 
passo.  Of  the  thorns  the  orator  may  say, — "  The  crown  of  thorns 
shows  us,  that  under  despotism,  instead  of  tasting  of  the  sweet 
and  precious  productions  of  the  earth,  and  the  delights  of  liberty, 
we  gather  bitter  thorns,  which  are  for  ever  tormenting  us,  and 
therefore  we  should  seek  to  free  ourselves  once  for  all  from  the 
yoke  of  tyranny." 

*  II  Mentore  di  un  B.  C.  App. 

f  In  the  English  version,  Ps.  xvii.  v.  8,     T.  - 

n 


$8  MEMOIRS  OF 

faithful  unto  Thee,  and  protectest  them  by  thy 
omnipotence;  who  smitest  with  the  axe  of  thy 
vengeance  the  thrones  that  are  raised  upon  pro- 
fane principles,  and  erectest  upon  their  ruins  the 
rightful  sovereignty  of  the  people:  receive  the 
homage  of  adoration  and  respect  which  we  render 
up  to  Thee  from  the  bottom  of  our  hearts.  Pro- 
tect the  people  of  the  free  Carbonari,  who  humbly 
invoke  Thee  :  and  if  Thou  hast  defended  them  from 
the  injuries  of  arbitrary  power  and  ferocious  ty- 
ranny ;  if  Thou  hast  made  them  feel  the  gift  of  thy 
all-powerful  patronage,  continue  to  stretch  over 
them  thy  beneficent  hand.  Permit  them  not  to 
degenerate  from  the  divine  law.  May  virtue  every 
where  accompany  them.  May  they  be  enabled  to 
defend  those  principles  which  they  have  sworn  to 
maintain,  even  with  their  blood,  and  may  they 
continue  in  unanimity  and  concord  until  the  sun 