

6.  To  keep  an  eye  upon  every  attempt  which 
may  be  made  against  the  welfare  of  the 
nation,  from  within  and  from  without. 

7.  If  the  country  or  royal  family  are  in 
danger,  or  if  any  attempt  be  made  to 
overturn  the  constitution,  to  declare  it 
upon  sufficient  evidence  to  the  Confederate 
Republics  ;  to  wait  the  deliberations  of  the 

I 


1  14  MEMOIRS  OF 

same,  and  then  to  act  according  to  the 
instructions  which  shall  be  communicated. 

8.  To  call  an  extraordinary  meeting  of  the 
congress,  when  necessary. 

9.  To  put  in  motion  the  whole  or  a  part  of 
the  forces  of  the  Carbonari,  and  to  appoint 
a  temporary  commander-in-chief,  even  with- 
out the  consent  of  the  Republics,  or  of  the 
congress;  but  only  in  the  following  most 
urgent  cases  that  do  not  admit  of  delay. 

1.  An  attempt  against  the  royal  family. 

2.  An  anti-constitutional  revolution. 

3.  An  unforeseen  hostile  attack  from  with- 
out, by  land  or  by  sea ;  in  which  cases 
the  deputation  shall  be  most  strictly  and 
personally  responsible. 

VII.  The  duties  again  of  the  congress  shall  be : 

1.  To  fix  the  place  of  its  own  sittings,  as  well 
as  that  of  the  permanent  deputation,  with 
the  power  of  varying  it  according  to  cir- 
cumstances ;  preferring  the  most  central 
provinces,  such  as  the  two  principal,  Terra 
di  Lavoro  and  Naples. 

2.  To  fix  the  regulations  for  the  internal 
management  as  well  of  the  congress  as  of 
the  deputation. 

3.  To  fix  the  probable  expenditure  of  the 
Confederacy. 


THE  CARBONARr.  115 

4.  To  fix  the  contingent  of  the  forces  of  every 
Republic. 

5.  To  examine  all  the  operations  of  the  per- 
manent deputation,  to  approve  or  cen- 
sure them,  especially  if  the  forces  of  the 
order  be  in  motion. 

6.  To  propose  to  the  Confederate  Republics, 
three  illustrious  personages,  so  as  to  be  able 
to  select  from  them  a  commander-in-chief 
of  the  forces  of  the  Carbonari  by  a  plu- 
rality of  votes. 

7.  To  accommodate  with  prudence  and  wis- 
dom, the  disputes  which  may  arise  among 
the  Republics. 

8.  To  preserve  uniformity  in  the  journals  of 
proceedings,  and  in  the  catechisms  of  the 
order. 

9.  To  propose  to  the  Confederate  Republics, 
the  improvements  of  which  the  respective 
statutes  may  be  susceptible. 

VIII.  Neither  the  congress  nor  the  deputation 
should  ever  oppose  the  deliberations  of  the  par- 
liament, or  the  acts  of  government,  by  active 
measures,  but  merely  watch  over  them  to  inform 
the  Republics  and  await  their  determination. 

They  can  neither  impose  any  contributions  nor 
dispense  aid.  Much  less  can  they  initiate  prose- 
lytes, grant  rank,  honours,  distinctions,  or  punish 

I  2 


116  MEMOIRS  OF 

any  one,  on  pain  of  being  prosecuted  as  guilty  of 
high  treason  against  the  people. 