


I 


THE  CARBONARI.  /  103; 

Republic  is  not  confined  in  its  application  to  a 
state  in  which  either  the  many  or  the/ew  govern, 
but  it  signifies  also,  any  government  lawfully 
constituted,  as  Rousseau  teaches  in  his  Social  Con- 
tract, B.  ii.  chap.  vi.  where  he  thus  expresses  him- 
self— "  I  call  every  state,  governed  by  the  laws, 
under  every  possible  form  of  administration,  a 
Republic :  provided  that  public  interest  alone 
governs,  and  where  the  public  welfare  is  considered, 
every  legitimate  government  is  a  Republic." 


The  Declaration  "  In  the  name  of  God,"  of  the 
6th  July,  and  the  "  Notice"  published  on  the  8th 
of  the  same  month,  are  documents  that  appear  to 
us  sufficiently  curious  to  be  inserted  in  this  place. 
Among  other  interesting  matter,  the  restrictions 
to  be  imposed  on  the  executive  power,  and  the 
imperfect  state  of  the  constitution,  which  is  as- 
sumed, are  not  the  least  deserving  of  attention. 

DECiARATION     IN     THE      NaME     OF     GoD,     AND 
UNDER  THE    AuSPICES   OF   THE  NEAPOLITAN 
/t^l^OPLE. 

\Art,\\,  The  united  citizens  aim  at  rendering 
the^fonarchy  constitutional,  for  upon  that  must 
depend  the  welfare  and  prosperity  of  the  nation, 
which  has  been  condemned  for  so  many  centuries 
to  slavery  and  degradation. 

Art.  2.  The  national  assembly  which  is  about  to 
be  confirmed  will  endeavour  to  obtain  every  pos- 

h4 


104  MEMOIRS  OF 

sible  diminution  of  the  taxes.  And  to  give  an 
immediate  proof  of  the  interest  it  takes  in  the 
condition  of  the  indigent  class  of  citizens,  as  well 
as  in  that  of  the  proprietors,  it  assumes  to  itself 
at  once  the  power  of  decreeing  the  diminution  of 
o.ne  half  of  the  duty  on  salt,  one  third  of  the 
land  tax,  and  the  abolition  of  the  conscription. 

Art,  3.  No  tumult  or  crime  should  obscure  the 
fortunate  epoch  of  the  regeneration  of  the  country. 
Whoever  therefore  dares  to  interrupt  the  public 
tranquillity,  or  attempt  the  honour,  the  liberty  or 
the  property  of  the  citizens,  or  in  any  way  what- 
ever offend  religion  or  its  ministers,  shall  be  tried 
and  severely  punished  by  a  military  commission. 

Art.  4.  That  social  order  may  effectually  be 
preserved,  the  laws  actually  in  force  shall  con- 
tinue to  be  observed  till  tiie  publication  of  the 
new  legislative  code. 

A7^t.  5.  All  the  magistrates  and  officers  of 
government,  in  whatsoever  branch  of  admini- 
stration, shall  remain  in  their  situations,  pro- 
vided that,  within  twenty-four  hours  from  the 
publication  of  the  present  Declaration,  they  take 
the  oath  of  fidelity  to  King  Ferdinand  I.,  and  to 
the  Constitution,  to  be  administered  to  them  by 
the  highest  ecclesiastical  dignitary  in  the  town 
where  they  reside,  and  at  a  public  ceremony  to  take 
place  in  the  principal  church  : — the  constitution  is 
established  on  the  following  basis : 