

*  See  his  Justification  at  the  end  of  the  Memoir. 


126  MEMOIRS  OF 

Upon  as  his  residence.  He  pretends  that  he  felt 
some  repentance  at  this  time,  and  had  some  idea 
of  shutting  himself  up  in  the  college  of  the 
Missionaries;  but  being  informed  that  a  new 
order  of  arrest  had  been  issued  against  him,  he 
proceeded  secretly  to  Naples,  to  seek  to  avert  its 
effects.  Soon  finding  that  the  attempt  was  use- 
less, he  retired  to  resume  the  execrable  mode  of 
living  which  he  had  not  long  quitted. 

It  was  about  this  time  that  he  put  himself  at 
the  head  of  the  Patrioti  Europei  and  Decisis 
These  associations  increased  at  first,  from  the 
weakness  of  the  government  in  neglecting  to 
punish  the  guilty,  and  from  the  corruption  of  the 
lower  clergy,  and  inferior  government  officers.  It 
was  found  that  priests  were  attached  to  all  the 
camps  and  detachments.  The  arch-priest,  Cirino 
Cicillo  of  Cacamola,  Vergine  of  Coregliano,  and 
Leggeri,  filled  important  situations  in  the  sect. 
The  signature  of  the  Iq^t  was  found  under  the 
patents,  in  quality  of  Captain  Reporter,  (Capitano 
Relatore).  The  arch-priest  Zurlo,  of  Valsano, 
celebrated  mass  there  on  Christmas  Eve,  armed 
from  head  to  foot. 

As  soon  as  these  bands  had  acquired  some 
strength,  they  sent  detachments  of  resolute  men 
into  every  town  and  village.  Supported  by  a 
larger  troop  in  the  neighbourhood,  they  soon 
became  the  despotic  masters  of  insulated  places. 


THE  CARBONARI.  l27 

A  horde  of  twenty  or  thirty  of  these  ruffians  over- 
ran the  country  in  disguise,  masked  as  Punchi- 
nellos.''^ In  places  where  open  force  could  not 
be  employed,  the  most  daring  bandits  were  sent 
to  watch  for  the  moment  to  execute  the  sentences 
of  secret  death  pronounced  by  the  society.  It 
was  thus  that  the  Judge  of  the  Peace  of  Luogo 
Rotondo  and  his  wife  were  killed  in  their  own 
garden,  and  that  the  sectary  Perone  plunged  his 
knife  into  the  bowels  of  an  old  man  of  seventy, 
deir  Aglio  of  Francavilla,  and  afterwards  massa- 
cred his  wife  and  servant,  having  introduced 
himself  into  their  house  under  pretence  of  deliver- 
ing a  letter. 

They  would  not  suffer  neutrality:  it  was  ab- 
solutely necessary  to  join  them,  or  to  live  exposed 
to  their  vengeance,  which  appeared  to  be  inevi- 
table. They  did  not  invite  the  support  of  the  rich 
proprietors  and  persons  of  distinction,  against 
whom  their  hostilities  were  to  be  directed,  but  they 
unhappily  found  partisans  among  the  less  wealthy ; 
and  some  of  the  inferior  nobles,  who  were  jealous 
of  the  great,  also  joined  them.  The  government, 
instead  of  summoning  the  opulent  proprietors  to 
its  assistance,  disgusted  and  offended  them  by 
distrust.     A  meeting  at  the  fair  of  Galantina  to 