

i4 


120  MEMOIRS  OF 

outlaws,  who,  under  the  names  of  the  different 
Secret  Societies,  Carbonari,  Decisi,  Filantropi,  &amp;c. 
and  even  sometimes  without  any  such  pretence, 
way-laid  travellers,  interrupted  the  course  of  public 
justice,  and  went  so  far  as  to  seize  the  government 
supplies. 

One  of  the  most  celebrated  leaders  of  those 
gangs  was  the  Priest  Ciro  Annichiarico.  Driven 
from  society  by  his  crimes,  he  had  taken  refuge 
in  the  mountain  forests,  and  having  collected  a 
desperate  band  of  outlaws  like  himself,  he  had 
long  carried  on  his  depredations  unmolested. 
Upon  the  adoption,  however,  of  vigorous  mea- 
sures by  the  government,  in  order  to  put  down  the 
brigands,  he  took  the  alarm,  and  determined,  if 
possible,  to  persuade  all  the  various  bands  of  out- 
laws and  brigands  of  whatever  faction  or  deno- 
mination, to  make  a  common  cause,  and  to  oppose 
the  march  of  the  King's  troops,  with  all  the  forces 
they  could  muster.  He  imagined  that  the  more 
formidable  they  could  make  themselves,  the  better 
terms  they  might  expect  when  they  came  to  treat, 
and  he  was  the  more  eager  to  induce  the  chiefs  of 
the  bandits  to  join  him,  as  he  had  less  hope  of 
personal  indulgence,  being  already  under  sentence 
of  at  least  perpetual  imprisonment  for  murder. 
The  Vardarelli,  it  was  believed,  who  had  made 
themselves  very  conspicuous  by  their  activity  in 
plundering  both  private  individuals  and  the  public, 


I 


THE  CARBONARI.  IQl 

had  obtained  good  terms,  yet  they  would  not  have 
objected,  perhaps,  to  rebel  anew,  if  they  could 
have  hoped  to  better  those  terms.  Giro,  therefore, 
invited  them,  and  the  heads  of  other  bands,  to  a 
personal  conference,  in  order  to  treat  of  the  mea- 
sures to  be  pursued  against  General  Church,  and 
they  accordingly  had  two  different  interviews, 
the  first  at  the  end  of  1816,  or  the  very  beginning 
of  1817,  in  a  little  deserted  chapel,  where  he 
celebrated  mass  before  he  began  the  conference, 
and  the  second  in  the  month  of  March  or  April, 
1817,  in  a  farm  between  S.  Eramo  and  Gioja. 
Gaetano  Vardarelli  differed  as  to  the  propriety  of 
a  junction:  "  He  represented  that  it  was  better  to 
act  in  concert,  but  separately,  and  to  avoid  a 
general  insurrection,  of  which  they  might  easily 
become  the  victims.  As  long  as  our  bands  are  not 
numerous,  government  will  be  deceived,  and  make 
war  upon  us  feebly,  as  it  does  now ;  but  as  soon 
as  we  form  ourselves  into  a  more  important  body, 
it  will  be  forced  to  send  more  troops  against  us." 
Vardarelli  at  this  moment  had  already  obtained  a 
capitulation,  and  was  in  the  service  of  King  Fer- 
dinand; but  he  would  have  been  ready  to  quit  it, 
if  the  enterprize  of  Giro  had  been  attended  with 
marked  success :  he  therefore  kept  himself  in  readi- 
ness, and  remained  at  hand  to  wait  the  event. 