


124  MEMOIRS  OF 

blame  him  in  his  absence,  so  firmly  were  they 
persuaded  that  his  demons  would  immediately 
inform  him  of  it.  On  the  other  hand,  again,  he 
affected  a  libertine  character;  some  very  free 
French  songs  were  found  in  his  portfoUo  when  he 
was  arrested.  Although  a  priest  himself,  and 
exercising  the  functions  of  one  when  he  thought 
it  expedient,  he  often  declared  his  colleagues  to  be 
impostors  without  any  faith.  He  published  a 
paper  against  the  Missionaries,  who,  according  to 
him,  disseminated  illiberal  opinions  among  the 
people,  and  forbade  them  on  pain  of  death  to 
preach  in  the  villages,  "because,  instead  of  the 
true  principles  of  the  Gospel,  they  taught  nothing 
but  fables  and  impostures."  This  paper  is  headed, 
"  In  nome  delta  Gra7ide  Asseynhlea  Nazionale  deW 
Ex'Regno  di  Napoli,  opiuttosto  delV  Eiiropa  in t era, 
pace  e  salute,''  "  In  the  name  of  the  Great 
National  Assembly  of  the  Ex-Kingdom  of  Naples, 
or  rather  of  all  Europe,  peace  and  health." 

He  amused  himself  sometimes  with  whims,  to 
which  he  tried  to  give  an  air  of  generosity. 
General  d'Octavio,  a  Corsican  in  the  service  of 
Murat,  pursued  him  for  a  long  time  with  a  thou- 
sand men.  One  day,  Giro,  armed  at  all  points, 
surprised  him  walking  in  a  garden.  He  dis- 
covered himself,  remarking  that  the  life  of  the 
General  was  in  his  hands,  "  but,"  said  he,  "  I  will 
pardon  you  this  time,  although  I  shall  no  longer 


THE  CARBONARI.  125 

be  so  indulgent,  if  you  continue  to  hunt  me  about 
with  such  fury."  So  saying,  he  leaped  over  the 
garden  wall  and  disappeared. 

Having  hidden  himself,  with  several  of  his 
people,  behind  a  ruined  wall  at  the  entrance  gate 
of  Grottaglie,  the  day  when  General  Church  and 
the  Duke  of  San  Cesario,  accompanied  by  some 
horsemen,  reconnoitred  the  place,  he  did  not  fire 
upon  them ;  he  wished  to  make  a  merit  of  this 
before  the  military  commission,  but  it  was  pro- 
bably the  fear  of  not  being  able  to  escape  from 
the  troops  who  followed  the  general,  that  made 
him  circumspect  on  this  occasion. 

Giro's  physiognomy  had  nothing  repulsive  about 
it ;  it  was  rather  agreeable.  He  had  a  verbose, 
but  persuasive  eloquence,  and  was  fond  of  inflated 
phrases.*  Extremely  addicted  to  Avomen,  he  had 
mistresses,  at  the  period  of  his  power,  in  all  the 
towns  of  the  province  over  which  he  was  con- 
stantly ranging.  He  was  of  middle  stature,  well 
made,  and  very  strong. 

When  King  Ferdinand  returned  to  his  states  on 
this  side  the  Faro,  he  recalled  such  as  had  been 
exiled  for  political  opinions.  Giro  Annichiarico 
attempted  to  pass  for  one  of  these,  and  presented 
himself  to  the  public  authorities  at  Lecce.  They 
gave  him  a  safe  conduct  to  Bari,  which  was  fixed 