

Napolitani,  ma  quello  Jinisce  a  b mi  a  me^ 

*'  This  General  is  another  sort  of  man  from  those 
whom  they  sent  against  me  before.  I  have  made 
fools    of   many    Generals,    French,    Italian,    and 


THE  CARBONARI.  137 

Neapolitans,  but  this  one  will  end  by  making  a 
fool  of  me." 

He  soon  perceived  that  he  lost  resources  daily,  that 
his  credit  was  weakened,  and  that  those  who  were 
still  faithful  to  him  would  probably  turn  their 
backs  upon  him.  He  had  a  proof  of  their  fickle- 
ness, when,  despairing  of  success,  he  attempted  to 
embark  at  Brindisi.  The  captain  of  the  vessel 
recognised  him,  and  demanded  2000  ducats  as  the 
price  of  his  safety ;  not  having  them  to  give,  he 
wrote  to  his  friends,  who  refused  to  advance  the 
sum. 

Pressed  and  surrounded  more  and  more  closely, 
Ciro  resolved  to  risk  a  general  rising  and  a  pitched 
battle.  He  fixed  the  27th  of  February  for  this 
purpose,  and  appointed  the  place  of  rendezvous 
under  the  walls  of  S.  Marzano,  but  his  catastrophe 
took  place  before  that  time. 

S.  Marzano,  an  Albanian  colony,  is  a  miserable 
little  village,  containing  from  900  to  1000  inha- 
bitants, belonging  to  the  Marquis  Bonelli,  of 
Barletta,  and  situated  some  miles  distant  from  the 
road  between  Manduria  and  Tarentum.  It  is 
admirably  calculated  for  a  military  position,  the 
rocky  hill  on  which  the  town  is  built,  and  which 
is  planted  with  olives,  is  surrounded  and  intersect- 
ed by  garden  walls ;  it  is  quite  insulated  and  ex- 
tends from   east  to  west.      The  view  from   the 


13S  MEMOIRS  OF 

terrace  of  the  baronial  castle  is  magnificent. 
From  this  spot,  the  town  of  Oria  and  the  towers 
of  Francavilla  are  discerned,  and  in  another  di- 
rection Monte  Asole  and  Grottaghe. 

It  was  from  the  latter  place  that  Giro  Aimichi- 
arico  set  out,  on  the  25th  of  January,  1818,  with 
forty  horsemen  and  ten  foot ;  when  at  two  o'clock 
in  the  afternoon  he  fell  in  with  a  detachment  of 
cavalry  consisting  of  eighteen  men,  commanded 
by  Captain  Montorj,  who  charged  him,  and  drove 
him  as  far  as  Neviera,  a  farm  at  the  foot  of  the 
hill  of  S.  Marzano.  He  there  made  some  resist- 
ance, and  afterwards  retreated  into  the  town  itself. 

Captain  Montorj  attempted  to  enter  by  the 
steep  and  narrow  path  which  wound  up  to  it, 
but  Ciro  Annichiarico  and  his  adherents  of  S. 
Marzario  posted  themselves  on  an  elevated  point 
and  repulsed  him.  He  turned  the  hill  in  order  to 
scale  it  on  the  side  of  Manduria,  but  there,  too,  he 
was  received  by  a  shower  of  balls.  He  observed, 
however,  that  they  were  the  same  men  who  had 
followed  his  movements,  and  hence  concluded 
that  they  were  not  strong  enough  to  defend  all 
the  points  at  once,  and  that  he  should  gain  his 
object  by  deceiving  them.  Concealed  by  the  wall 
of  a  garden,  he  attracted  the  enemy  by  firing  a 
carbine  or  two  on  one  side,  while  he  suddenly 
hastened  with  the  rest  of  his  men  to  the  other. 