


I 


THE  CARBONARI.  133 

their  weapons  to  his  breast  "con  vero  entusiasmo" 
(with  real  enthusiasm),  in  their  cannibal  language, 
and  plunged  them  into  his  body  at  the  fourth 
signal. 

The  four  points  which  are  observable  after  the 
signature  of  Pietro  Gargaro,  indicate  his  power  of 
passing  sentence  of  death.  When  the  Decisi 
wrote  to  any  one  to  extort  contributions,  or  to 
command  him  to  do  any  thing — if  they  added 
these  four  points,  it  was  known  that  the  person 
they  addressed  was  condemned  to  death  in  case  of 
disobedience.  If  the  points  were  not  added,  he 
was  threatened  with  milder  punishment,  such  as 
laying  waste  his  fields,  or  burning  his  house. 

The  Salentine  Republic,  the  ancient  name  of 
this  district,  was  also  that  destined  for  their 
imaginary  Republic,  which  they  called  "  un  anello 
della  Republica  Europea,"  a  link  of  the  European 
Republic. 

The  symbols  of  the  Thunderbolt  darting  from  a 
cloud  and  striking  the  crowns  and  tiara;  the  Fasces 
and  the  Cap  of  Liberty  planted  upon  a  death's  head 
between  two  axes  ;  the  skulls  and  bones  with  the 
words  "  Tristezza,  Morte,  Terrore,  and  Lutto," 
Sadness,  Death,  Terror,  and  Mourning,  sufficiently 
characterize  this  Association.  Their  colours  were 
yellow,  red,  and  blue,  which  surround  the  patent. 

It  is  dated  according  to  the  common  style,  29th 
k3 


134  MEMOIRS  OF 

of  October,  1817,  while  those  of  the  Philadelphes 
and  Reformed  European  Patriots,  which  are  also 
given  at  the  end,  have  an  asra  of  their  own ;  the 
first  is  dated  Lecce,  the  15th  of  March,  third  year, 
which  corresponds  with  the  year  1816,  and  the 
second  "  Lecce,  at  the  camp  of  Avenged  Liberty, 
fifth  year,"  that  is  to  say,  in  1817. 

The  fees  required  for  these  certificates  formed 
a  branch  of  the  revenue  of  the  Society,  as  well  as 
the  forced  contributions  in  money  and  provisions. 

Such  were  the  excesses  which  accompanied 
these  disorders,  when  it  was  at  last  considered  time 
at  Naples  to  put  an  end  to  them.  In  the  sumiher 
of  1817,  General  Church  was  sent  to  Lecce  to 
reconnoitre  the  country,  and  the  state  of  things ; 
some  months  afterwards,  he  was  entrusted  with 
the  command  of  the  provinces  of  Bari  and  Otranto, 
and  General  Pastore  was  recalled.  The  Intendant 
Predicatella  was  superseded  in  his  functions  for  a 
time,  by  the  Secretary-General  Amanti.  General 
Church,  armed  with  the  royal  Alter- Ego,  or,  in 
other  words,  with  full  and  unlimited  powers,  passed 
the  Ofanto  with  liiJOO  men  of  the  foreign  regi- 
ments in  the  Neapolitan  service,  formed  by  him- 
self; among  them  were  some  companies  of 
cavalry.  He  could  depend  upon  these  soldiers, 
the  greater  part  of  whom  were  Germans,  Swiss, 
and  Albanians.     Those  who  were  in  the  country, 