

Giro  Annichiarico,  born  of  parents  in  easy  cir- 
cumstances, in  the  little  town  of  Grottaglie,  was 


122  MEMOIRS  OF 

destined  to  the  ecclesiastical  profession,  and  enter- 
ed it  very  young.  His  brothers  are  respectable 
farmers ;  his  uncle,  the  Canonico  Patitaro,  is  a  man 
of  learning  and  information,  and  never  took  any 
part  in  the  crimes  of  his  nephew.  The  latter  began 
his  infamous  career  by  killing  a  young  man  of  the 
Motolesi  family  in  a  fit  of  jealousy.  His  insati- 
able hatred  pursued  every  member  of  the  family, 
and  he  exterminated  them  one  after  the  other,  with 
the  exception  of  a  single  individual,  who  succeed- 
ed in  evading  his  search,  and  who  lived  shut  up  in 
his  house  for  several  years,  without  ever  daring  to 
go  out.  This  unfortunate  being  thought  that  a 
snare  was  laid  for  him  when  people  came  to  tell 
him  of  the  imprisonment,  and  shortly  after  of  the 
death  of  his  enemy;  and  it  was  with  difficulty 
that  he  was  induced  to  quit  his  retreat. 

Giro,  condemned  for  the  murder  of  the  Motolesi, 
to  fifteen  years  pf  chains,  or  exile,  by  the  tribunal  of 
Lecce,  remained  there  in  prison  four  years,  at  the 
end  of  which  time  he  succeeded  in  escaping.  It 
was  then  that  he  began,  and  afterwards  continued 
for  several  years,  to  lead  a  vagabond  life,  which 
was  stained  with  the  most  atrocious  crimes.  At 
Martano,  he  penetrated  with  his  satellites  into  one 
of  the  first  houses  of  the  place,  and  after  having 
offered  violence  to  its  mistress,  he  massacred  her 
with  all  her  people,  and  carried  off  96,000  ducats. 

He  was  in  correspondence  with  all  the  hired 


THE  CARBONARI.  123 

brigands ;  and  whoever  wished  to  get  rid  of  an 
enemy  had  only  to  address  himself  to  Giro.  On 
being  asked  by  Captain  Montorj,  reporter  of  the 
military  commission  which  condemned  him,  how 
many  persons  he  had  killed  with  his  own  hand, 
he  carelessly  answered,  '*  E  chi  lo  sa  ?  saranno  tra 
sessanta  e  settantar  Who  can  remember?  they 
will  be  between  sixty  and  seventy.  One  of  his 
companions,  Occhiolupo,  confessed  to  seventeen; 
the  two  brothers  Francesco  and  Vito  Serio,  to 
twenty-three:  so  that  these  four  ruffians  alone 
had  assassinated  upwards  of  a  hundred ! 

The  activity  of  Giro  was  as  astonishing  as  his 
artifice  and  intrepidity.  He  handled  the  musket 
and  managed  the  horse  to  perfection ;  and  as  he 
was  always  extremely  well-mounted,  found  con- 
cealment and  support,  either  through  fear  or  in- 
clination, every  where.  He  succeeded  in  escaping 
from  the  hands  of  the  soldiers,  by  forced  marches 
of  thirty  and  forty  miles,  even  when  confidential 
spies  had  discovered  his  place  of  concealment  but 
a  few  hours  before.  The  singular  good  fortune  of 
being  able  to  extricate  himself  from  the  most 
imminent  dangers,  acquired  for  him  the  reputation 
of  a  necromancer,  upon  whom  ordinary  means  of 
attack  had  no  power  among  the  people,  and  he 
neglected  nothing  which  could  confirm  this  idea, 
and  increase  the  sort  of  spell  it  produced  upon 
the  peasants.     They  dared  not  execrate,  or  even 