


THE  CARBONARI.  135 

were  only  to  be  depended  upon,  after  having  wit- 
nessed the  firm  determination  with  which  the 
General  set  about  the  enterprize,  and  after  the 
factious  individuals  had  been  weeded  out.  It  was 
the  same  with  the  militia. 

The  ready  co-oj)eration  of  the  wealthy  pro- 
prietors has  been  already  noticed.  The  Dukes  of 
Cesareo  and  of  Monte  Jasi  were  the  most  zealous. 
Encouraged  by  their  example,  several  individuals, 
even  of  the  lowest  class,  furnished  information 
concerning  the  criminals.  The  fear  of  not  being 
supported  had  prevented  them  from  doing  so  before ; 
but  the  greatest  part  of  the  latter  description  were 
silent,  and  maintained  a  line  of  conduct  which  indi- 
cated that  they  would  not  hesitate  to  declare  for  the 
sectaries,  if  the  latter  should  succeed  in  eluding  the 
efforts  of  the  new  General,  as  they  had  done  those 
of  his  predecessors.  This  was  particularly  the  case 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tarentum,  at  Grottagiie, 
S.  Marzano,  Martina,  and  Francavilla,  the  usual 
haunts  of  Giro  and  his  friends.  When  General 
Church  first  visited  these  places,  the  inhabitants 
looked  on  in  gloomy  silence,  and  no  person  saluted 
him;  a  poor  monk  was  the  only  person  who 
bowed  to  him. 

The  bandits  and  the  banished  (fiiorusciti  e  fiior- 
banditi)  were  summoned  ineffectually  for  the  last 
time,  before  the  Royal  Commission  at  Lecce, 
instituted   by    the  decree   of  the    17th   of  July, 

K  4  . 


^36  MEMOIRS  OF 

1817.  Ciro  Annichiarico  sent  the  Justification 
annexed  to  this  Memoir.  General  Church  made 
his  military  dispositions.  He  divided  his  troops 
into  moveable  columns  sufficiently  strong,  and 
only  placed  garrisons  upon  some  points  which 
were  absolutely  essential ;  either  from  their  com- 
manding the  vast  plains  of  that  country,  or  because 
they  were  strong  enough  to  serve  as  places  of 
retreat  for  the  brigands.  The  ground  offered  little 
difficulty  in  beating  and  traversing  in  all  directions, 
but  it  was  extensive  compared  to  the  number  of 
the  troops,  and  exposed  them  to  constant  fatigue, 
which,  however,  they  supported  without  a  murmur, 
encouraged  by  the  example  of  their  chief  and 
officers,  and  well  fed  and  paid.  The  moveable 
columns  all  operated  towards  a  common  centre, 
by  gradually  narrowing  the  circle,  in  the  middle 
of  which  were  the  towns  of  Grottaglie,  S.  Marzano, 
and  Francavilla.  Other  columns  of  reserve  ac- 
companied the  General,  who  proceeded  wherever 
the  spies  had  traces  of  Ciro  Annichiarico. 

"  jE  un  alt7^o  Uomo  quelloGeneraledai  precede?2ti 
che  rrH  hanno  mandati  sul  corpo^'  said  Ciro,  biting 
his  thumb,  in  token  of  rage  and  disappointment: 
"^0   h — —    tanti  Generali,  Francesi,  Italiani,  e 