

*  We  spare  the  English  reader  the  enumeration  of  some  of  the 
horrors  committed  by  these  ruffians. 


128  MEMOIRS  OF 

deliberate  on  the  means  of  checking  the  disorders, 
was  cried  down,  and  treated  at  Naples  as  a  revo- 
lutionary proceeding.  They  proved,  however,  the 
purity  of  their  intentions,  by  aiding  the  govern- 
ment to  their  utmost,  as  soon  as  more  energy  was 
shown,  and  by  co-operating  with  General  Church, 
with  whom  many  individuals  of  this  class  served 
both  as  officers  and  private  volunteers. 

While  General  Pastore,  commandant  of  these 
provinces,  and  the  Marquis  Predicatella,  Intendant 
of  Lecce,  inflamed  party-spirit  by  imitating  the 
system  of  Canosa;  the  national  guard,  under  their 
orders,  suffered  itself  to  be  partly  seduced  by  the 
sectaries,  as  well  as  a  number  of  soldiers  and  some 
officers  of  the  crown  battalion  of  reserve. 

The  number  of  the  sectaries  had  arrived  at  its 
greatest  height  in  the  month  of  December,  1817, 
and  of  January,  1818.  At  that  period,  they  were 
estimated  at  20,000  men.  Several  of  them  lived 
at  home,  in  apparent  tranquillity,  on  the  produce 
of  their  professions ;  but  they  were  not  the  less 
active  in  committing  unheard-of  crimes,  as  their 
detection  was  more  difficult.  Persons  have  been 
known  to  sign,  under  their  poignards,  contracts 
for  the  sale  of  their  houses  or  lands,  the  objects  of 
the  avarice  of  these  ruffians  ;  these  contracts  were 
executed  in  all  the  forms  of  law,  and  acknow- 
ledgements were  given  by  the  owners  for  sums 
which  they  had  never  received. 


THE  CARBONARI.  129 

The  Lodges  of  the  Decided  (i  Decisi)  were 
called  Decisions  (Decisioni) — the  Assemblies  of 
the  Reformed  European  Patriots,  Squadrons 
(Squadriglie),  each  from  forty  to  sixty  strong ; 
and  those  of  the  Philadelphes,  Camps  (Campi), 
about  three  or  four  hundred  strong.  There  were 
one  hundred  and  thirteen  Camps  and  Squadrons 
in  the  province  of  Lecce,  and  four  in  the  city  of 
that  name.  The  organization  of  these  Camps  and 
Squadrons  was  military;  we  find  in  them  a  Pre-. 
sident  Commandant,  two  Counsellors,  two  Cap- 
tains, an  Aide -de-Camp,  a  Captain  Reporter,  a 
Secretary,  a  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  &amp;c.  &amp;c.  Their 
sittings  were  at  first  held  in  the  night,  and  care- 
fully guarded  by  sentinels;  their  military  exer- 
cises took  place  in  solitary  houses,  or  suppressed 
and  deserted  convents;  but  taking  courage  by 
degrees,  they  were  afterwards  seen  performing 
their  evolutions  by  day,  and  in  the  open  air. 
Many  of  them  had  fire-arms,  almost  all  had  poig- 
nards.  They  began  at  the  same  time  to  organize 
a  corps  of  cavalry.  On  the  day  appointed  for  the 
great  revolution,  Ciro  had  promised  to  furnish 
horses  to  two  hundred  armed  conspirators  of 
Francavilla,  who  were  to  repair,  on  the  27th  of 
February,  ]  8 1 8,  to  a  certain  place  near  S.  Marzano. 
It  appears  that  the  engagement  was  kept  on 
neither  side,  for  in  the  very  prison  of  Francavilla, 
Ciro,  and  some  conspirators  of  that  town,  mutually 