

K 


130  -  MEMOIRS  OF 

reproached  each  other  with  having  betrayed  their 
cause  by  neglecting  this  agreement. 

The  Institution  of  the  Decided,  or  Decisi,  is  so 
horrible  that  it  makes  one  shudder.  The  patent 
given  at  the  end  of  this  Memoir,  and  transcribed 
and  commented  on  here,  will  give  some  idea  of 
the  Society.* 

S.  (Salentina)  D.  (Decisione) 
S.  (Salute) 

No.  5.   Uo.    Mazoni    Grandi,   (Muratori   Grandi) 
L.  D.  D.  T.  G.  S.  A.  F.  G.  C.  I.  T.  D.  U.  &amp;c. 

La  Decisione  del  Tonante  Giove  (name  of  the 
Lodge  or  Decisipn)  spera  a  fare  Guerra  contro  i 
Tiranni  dell'  Universo,  &amp;c. 

(The  Initials  and  the  letters  printed  in  red,  are  written  with 
blood  in  the  original.) 

II  mortale  Gaetano  Caffieri  e  un  F.  D.  (Fratello 
Deciso)  No.  cinque,  appartenente  alia  De.  (Deci- 
sione) del  Giove  Tonante  sparsa  sulla  superficie 
della  Terra ;  per  la  sua  De.  (Decisione)  ha  avuto 
il  piacere  di  fare  parte  in  questa  R.  S.  D.  (Repub- 
licana  Salentina  Decisione).  Noi  dunque  inviti- 
amo  tutte  le  Societa  filantropiche  a  prestare  il  loro 
braccio  forte  al  medesimo  ed  a  soccorrerlo  nei  suoi 
bisogni,  essendo  egli  giunto  alia  De.  (Decisione)  di 

*  See  the  Plate. 


THE  CARBONARI.  13l 

acquistare  la  liberta  o  morte.     Oggi  li  29  Ottobre, 
1817. 


Signed, 


Pietro  Gargaro,  II  G.  M.  D.  No.  1. 

(II  Gran  Mastro  Deciso,  No.  1 .) 
V.  de  Serio,  2°.  Deciso. 
Gaetano  Caffiert. 
Registratore  dei  Morti. 


translation. 

The  Salentine  Decision. 
Health, 

No.  5,  Grand  Masons. 

The  Decision  of  Jupiter  the  Thunderer  hopes 
to  make  war  against  the  tyrants  of  the  universe, 
&amp;c.  &amp;c. 

The  mortal  Gaetano  Caffieri  is  a  Brother 
Decided,  No.  5.  belonging  to  the  Decision  of 
Jupiter  the  Thunderer,  spread  over  the  face  of  the 
Earth,  by  his  Decision,  has  had  the  pleasure 
to  belong  to  this  Salentine  Republican  Decision. 
We  invite,  therefore,  all  Philanthropic  Societies  to 
lend  their  strong  arm  to  the  same,  and  to  assist  him 
in  his  wants,  he  having  come  to  the  Decision  that 

k2 


132  MEMOIRS  OF 

he  will  obtain  liberty  or  death.     Dated  this  day^ 
the  29th  of  October,  1817. 

Signed, 

Pietro  Gargaro  (the  Decided  Grand 

Master,  No.  1 .) 
Vito  de  Serio,  Second  Decided. 
Gaetano  Caffieri, 
Registrar  of  the  Dead. 


As  the  number  of  these  Decided  ruffians  was 
small,  they  easily  recognised  each  other.  We  find 
that  the  Grand  Master  bears  the  No.  1. ;  Vito  de 
Serio,  No.  2 ;  the  proprietor  of  the  patent,  Gaetano 
Caffieri,  No.  5.  He  figures  himself  among  the 
signatures  with  the  title  of  Registrar  of  the  Dead, 
which  does  not  allude  to  the  deceased  members  of 
the  Society,  but  to  the  victims  they  immolated, 
and  of  whom  they  kept  a  register  apart,  on  the 
margin  of  which  were  found  blasphemies  and 
infernal  projects.  They  had  also  a  Director  of 
Funeral  Ceremonies,  for  they  slaughtered  with 
method  and  solemnity.  As  soon  as  the  de- 
tachments employed  on  this  service  found  it  con- 
venient to  effect  their  purpose,  at  the  signal  of  the 
first  blast  of  a  trumpet  they  unsheathed  their 
poignards ;  they  aimed  them  at  their  victim  at  the 
second  blast;  at  the  third  they  gradually  approach 