

I  3 


118  MEMOIRS  OF 

the  alms  which  they  expect  in  case  of  want,  from 
the  Society,  than  on  the  marvellous  secrets  to  be 
revealed  to  them. 

The  old  members  have  begun  to  look  down  with 
contempt  on  the  new,  although  they  are  them- 
selves disappointed  and  disgusted  with  a  reality  by 
no  means  corresponding  with  the  expectations 
they  had  formed. 

Free-masonry  appears  now  to  be  destined  as  a 
retreat  for  such  Carbonari  as  begin  to  despise  their 
old  associates,  and  who  are  glad  of  a  pretext  for 
joining  a  more  respectable  order.  The  lodges  of 
the  Free-masons  are  daily  increasing  in  number  at 
Naples,  and  its  publications  are  read  with  much 
more  avidity  than  those  of  the  Carbonari.  It  is 
not  uncommon  to  hear  the  expression,  "  Such  an 
one  is  more  than  a  Carbonaro,  he  is  a  Free-mason." 

The  government  follows  the  example  of  the 
Spanish  Cortes,  and  seems  inclined  to  put  in  force 
the  decree  of  Madrid  against  clubs  and  political 
societies,  as  the  best  means  of  attacking  the  sect. 

Some  general  officers,  particularly  General  Flo- 
restan  Pepe,  have  shown  that  they  are  not  afraid 
of  the  Vendite  in  their  corps,  who  endeavoured  to 

however,  we  think,  turn  the  heads  of  the  Neapolitan  youth. 
Several  of  them,  now  before  us,  are  the  productions  of  the  muse  of 
the  Cousin  Giardiniera  G.  A.  D.  R.  and  are  addressed  *'  To  the 
Glorious  Young  Men  of  the  Country" — La  C.  Giardiniera  G.  A. 
D,  R»  ai  Gloriosi  Giovani  della  Patria. 


THE  CARBONARI.  1  ]9 

iafluence  their  fellow-soldiers  :  and  General  Ca- 
rascosa  shows  them  so  little  deference,  that  when 
certain  officers,  who  had  been  disgraced  for  cow- 
ardice in  1815,  demanded  re-admittance  into  the 
service,  alleging,  among  other  reasons,  their  attach- 
ment to  Carbonarism,  he  answered,  "  Poco  mi 
premeva  di  S,  Teobaldo,  e  del  Grand'  Architetto 
del  Universo.'"  What  care  I  for  St.  Theobald,  &amp;c. 
Thus  the  natural  progress  of  the  evil  itself  has 
been  the  means  of  discovering  the  remedy.  It  is 
this  remedy,  which  the  small  number  of  the  friends 
of  order  look  to  as  the  only  port  of  safety;  and 
good  policy  will  be  extremely  caiytious  not  to  shut 
that  opening  against  them,  by  haCving  recourse  to 
violence  and  persecution. 


As  a  supplement*  to  the  account  we  have  given 
of  the  Secret  Societies,  particularly  the  Carbonari, 
it  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  retrace  some  of  the 
events  connected  with  General  Church's  campaign, 
as  it  has  been  called,  against  the  brigands  of 
Calabria  and  the  Abruzzi.  The  tranquillity  of 
those  provinces  had   been  disturbed  by  bands  of 

*  To  the  Reader.  A  sheet  of  the  M.S.  of  tjis  work  was  un- 
fortunately lost.  It  contained  the  introductory  part  of  this  Sup- 
plement, as  far  as  the  words  celebrated  mass  before  he  began  the 
conference.  As  both  the  Author  and  Translator  are  on  the  Con- 
tinent, the  Editor  could  only  supply  the  following  paragraphs  from 
memory  i  they  contain,  however,  the  only  facts  stated  in  the  original 