

When  condemned  to  death,  a  Missionary  offered 


146  MEMOIRS  OF 

him  the  consolations  of  religion,  Ciro  answered 
him  with  a  smile,  '' Lasciate  queste  chiacchiere; 
siamo  deW  istessa  professione;  non  ci  burliamo  fra 
noi.'' — Let  us  leave  alone  this  prating ;  we  are  of 
the  same  profession ;  don  t  let  us  laugh  at  one 
another. 

As  he  was  led  to  execution,  the  8th  of  February, 
1818,  he  recognised  Lieutenant  Fonsmorte,  and 
addressed  these  words  to  him,  "  Se  io  fosse  Re,  *vi 
farei  Capitano,' — If  I  were  King  I  would  make 
you  a  Captain.  This  officer  was  the  first  to  arrive 
at  Scaserba  with  his  soldiers. 

The  streets  of  Francavilla  were  filled  with 
people :  there  were  spectators  even  upon  the  roofs. 
They  all  preserved  a  gloomy  silence. 

On  his  arrival  at  the  place  of  execution,  Ciro 
wished  to  remain  standing,  he  was  told  to  kneel, 
he  did  so,  presenting  his  breast.  He  was  then 
informed  that  malefactors,  like  himself,  were  shot 
with  their  backs  towards  the  soldiers;  he  sub- 
mitted, at  the  same  time  advising  a  priest,  who 
persisted  in  remaining  near  him,  to  withdraw,  so  as 
not  to  expose  himself. 

Twenty-one  balls  took  effect,  four  in  the  head, 
yet  he  still  breathed  and  muttered  in  his  throat ; 
the  twenty-second  put  an  end  to  him.  This 
fact  is  confirmed  by  all  the  officers  and  soldiers 
present  at  his  death.  "  As  soon  as  we  perceived," 
said  a  soldier,  very  gravely,    "  that  he  was  en- 


THE  CARBONARI.  147 

chanted,  we  loaded  his  own  musket  with  a  silver 
ball,  and  this  destroyed  the  spell. '"^  It  will  be 
easily  supposed  that  the  people,  who  always  attri- 
buted supernatural  powers  to  him,  were  confirmed 
in  their  belief  by  this  tenaciousness  of  life,  which 
they  considered  miraculous. 

On  the  following  day,  the  9th  of  February,  ten 
of  the  most  criminal  among  the  Decisi  were 
executed  at  Francavilla,  among  whom  were  all 
the  dignitaries  whose  signatures  are  contained  in 
the  patent  given  at  the  end. 

They  were  led  through  the  streets  of  Franca- 
villa ;  several  of  them  recognized,  at  the  windows, 
the  fathers,  the  sons,  or  the  relations  of  those 
w^hom  they  had  assassinated,  and  asked  pardon  of 
them.  But  these  were  the  only  ones  who  express- 
ed the  least  feeling  of  repentance.  All  the  others 
were  so  hardened  and  fanatical,  that  they  died 
without  regretting  their  crimes,  and  with  a  fero- 
cious indifference. 

The  military  tribunal  afterwards  brought  about 
227  persons  to  trial ;  nearly  half  of  them,  having 

*  It  is  still  believed  in  Scotland,  that  Viscount  Dundee,  com- 
monly known  by  the  name  of  Graham  of  Claverhouse,  was  invul- 
nerable to  all  ordinary  weapons,  and  that  his  death,  at  the  battle 
of  Killiecrankie,  was  owing  to  the  presence  of  mind  of  a  young 
officer,  who,  finding  himself  within  pistol  shot  of  Dundee,  twisted  a 
silver  button  off  his  jacket,  with  which  he  loaded  his  piece  and  shot 
the  Viscount  thi'ough  the  heart.     T. 