

l3 


150  MEMOIRS  OF 

which  they  may  be  accused  of  having  taken  in 
the  unfortunate  events  of  the  province. 

4.  The  Kin2:  thanks  all  those  who  have  con- 
tributed  to  the  establishment  of  good  order." 

A  proclamation  of  the  month  of  April,  1819, 
directs  all  the  Local  Authorities  who,  till  then, 
had  addressed  their  reports  directly  to  the  General, 
to  send  them  in  future  to  their  ordinary  superiors, 
as  they  did  before  these  troubles. 

Lastly,  a  letter  dated  Lecce,  28th  of  April,  1810, 
contains  the  following  dispositions  : 

"  The  reign  of  the  assassins  being  at  an  end,  and 
all  the  province  tranquillized,  it  is  resolved,  in 
order  to  extinguish  their  memory,  that  the  heads 
of  the  malefactors  executed  in  pursuance  of  the 
sentences  of  the  military  commission,  and  which 
are  exposed  under  the  church  towers,  and  other 
parts  of  the  town,  shall  be  taken  down  and 
interred,  and  that  the  places  where  they  were  ex- 
posed shall  be  entirely  cleaned  and  white-washed. 
This  letter  shall  be  read  by  the  Arch-priests  in  all 
the  churches." 

The  death  of  Giro  and  his  principal  accomplices 
happily  put  an  end  to  disturbances  which  had 
threatened  to  take  a  wider  range.  The  following 
Justification,  which  Giro  sent  to  Lecce,  in  answer 


THE  CARBONARI.  151 

to  the  summons  addressed  to  him,  will  complete 
the  portrait  of  this  audacious  robber  captain,  who 
was  not  altogether  destitute  of  those  talents  which 
most  impose  upon  the  multitude. 


Justification  of  Giro  Annichiarico. 

To  the  Commission  assembled  by  the  Royal  Decree 
of  the  \7th  of  July,  1817. 

The  Priest  Giro  Annichiarico,  of  the  town  of 
Grottaglie,  has  learnt  with  surprize  that  the  com- 
mission appointed  in  Lecce  for  the  purpose  of 
launching  the  thunders  of  exile  against  those  who 
range  the  country  in  arms,  committing  excesses, 
and  resisting  the  public  force,  demands  the  reason 
why  Giro  Annichiarico  lives  out  of  his  country. 
At  the  same  time  the  definitive  sentence  of  exile 
is  threatened  to  be  passed,  unless  within  the  space 
of  eight  days,  the  relations  or  friends  of  the 
accused  explain  to  the  Go m mission  the  reason  of 
his  non-appearance. 

It  is  not  to  be  hoped,  Most  Respectable  Signers, 
that  any  person  can  be  found  to  undertake  the 
defence  of  Annichiarico,  since  the  fear  of  the 
soldiers,  who  would  mark  such  a  person  out  for 
destruction,  prevents  even  his  nearest  relations 
from  lending  the  succour  they  owe,  to  one  who 

l4 


152  MEMOIRS  OF 

belongs  to  them  by  every  tie  of  nature  and  of 
blood.  I  am,  therefore,  obliged  to  make  my  own 
defence,  which  I  write  in  a  gloomy  forest  (dalla 
piu  orrida  foresta),  that  is  at  once  my  home  and 
my  sanctuary.  I  write  it  with  boldness  of  heart, 
for  I  feel  within  me  no  tumult  which  reproaches 
me  with  having  ever  acted  against  reason,  or  with 
having  in  the  slightest  degree  oifended  against  the 
sacred  law^s  of  virtue,  of  probity,  and  of  honour. 
At  this  moment  I  appeal  to  your  own  unsullied 
justice,  and  am  quite  certain  that,  having  laid 
aside  all  prejudice  and  passion,  your  generous, 
wise,  and  well-formed  hearts  will  be  penetrated 
with  compassion  for  one  who,  till  this  moment, 
has  been,  through  misrepresentation,  the  object 
of  hatred  and  execration. 