


THE  CARBONAlin  141 

A  square  wall  of  enclosure,  sufficiently  high  and 
solid,  generally  surrounds  the  dwelling-house, 
built  against  one  side,  and  containing  two  or  three 
habitable  rooms,  and  sometimes  a  small  chapel, 
the  asylum  for  culprits — "  Qui  non  si  gode  asilo," 
(Here  no  sanctuary  is  enjoyed)  informs  them  if  this 
privdege  is  not  attached  to  it.  The  stables  and 
out-houses  form  a  right  angle  with  this  dwelling- 
house;  but  without  touching  it.  At  some  dis- 
tance from  the  surrounding  wall,  rises  a  round  or 
square  tower  of  two  stories,  standing  quite  alone. 
The  ascent  to  the  first  story  is  either  by  stone 
steps  inserted  in  the  tower,  by  a  drawbridge,  or 
by  a  ladder  easily  drawn  up.  This  was  the  case 
in  the  Masseria  of  Scaserba,  the  plan  of  which  is 
here  given. 


142 


MEMOIRS  OF 


Plan  of  the  Masseria  of  Scaserba,  last  place  of 
retreat  of  Ciro  Afinichiarico, 


A.  A.  A.  Wall  of  enclosure. 

jB.  Large  entrance  gate. 

C  Square  insulated  tower. 

i).  Door  of  the  tower. 

-E.  E.  E,  E.  Granaries  and  stables. 


Worn  out  with  fatigue,  Ciro  and  three  com- 
panions, Vito  di  Cesare,  Giovanni  Palmieri,  and 
Michele  Cuppoli,  had  taken  refuge  in  Scaserba, 
to  repose  themselves  for  a  few  hours.  He  had 
previously  provided  this  and  all  the  farm-houses 
of  the  district  with  ammunition  and  some  pro- 


THE  CARBONARI.  143 

visions.  When  he  saw  the  militia  of  S.  Marzano 
inarching  against  him,  he  appeared  very  Httle 
alarmed,  and  thought  he  could  easily  cut  his  way 
through  their  ranks.  He  shot  the  first  man  dead 
who  came  within  range  of  his  musket.  This  delay 
cost  him  dear:  the  militia  sent  information  to 
Lieutenant  Fonsmorte,  stationed  at  the  "  Castelli," 
a  strong  position  between  Grottaglie  and  Franca- 
villa.  This  officer  hastened  to  the  spot  with  forty 
men.  On  seeing  him  approach,  Giro  perceived 
that  a  vigorous  attack  was  to  be  made.  He  shut  up 
the  people  of  the  Masseria  in  the  straw  magazine, 
and  put  the  key  in  his  pocket.  He  took  away  the 
ladder  from  the  tower,  and  loaded,  with  the  aid  of 
his  companions,  all  the  guns,  of  which  he  had  a 
good  number. 

Major  Bianchi,  informed  of  what  was  going  on, 
sent  on  the  same  evening  a  detachment  of  Gen- 
darmes, under  Captain  Corsi,  and  the  next  morn- 
ing proceeded  in  person  to  Scaserba.  The  siege 
was  formed  by  132  soldiers;  the  militia,  on  which 
little  dependence  was  placed,  were  stationed  at 
some  distance,  and  in  the  second  line. 

Giro  vigorously  defended  the  approaches  to  his 
tower  till  sun-set.  He  attempted  to  escape  in  the 
night,  but  the  neighing  of  a  horse  made  him 
suspect  that  some  cavalry  had  arrived,  whose 
pursuit  it  would  be  impossible  to  elude.  He 
retired,  after  having  killed,  with  a  pistol  shot,  a 