


THE  CARBONARI.  139 

This  stratagem  succeeded :  Montorj  entered  S. 
Marzano,  and  the  panic-struck  followers  of  Ciro 
dispersed.  Ciro  himself  effected  his  escape,  Cap- 
tain Montorj  not  having  men  enough  to  guard 
the  passes.  Immediately  afterwards,  the  infantry 
of  the  moveable  column  arrived.  A  census  of  the 
town  was  taken,  the  Mayor  suggested  to  Major 
Bianchi  of  the  National  Guard  a  method  of  dis- 
covering the  delinquents.  Every  house  was 
searched,  and  the  guilty  were  recognized  by  the 
smell  or  the  blackness  of  their  hands,  a  proof  of 
their  having  recently  handled  fire-arms  and  pow- 
der. Vito  Serio,  the  brothers  Francesco  and 
Angelo  Vito  Lecce,  RafFaello  Zaccharia,  and  Pietro 
Barbuzzi  were  arrested,  and  all  executed,  on  the 
3d  of  February,  at  Francavilla.  Their  heads  were 
placed  before  the  church  of  S.  Marzano,  which 
was  blown  down  by  a  hurricane  some  months 
afterwards,  and  they  were  buried  beneath  its  ruins. 
On  this  occasion  the  black  standard  and  decora- 
tions of  Ciro  were  taken.  General  Church  sent 
them  to  Naples,  and  they  were  presented  to  the 
King  by  Prince  Nugent,  the  Captain-General. 
Major  Bianchi  followed  up  the  advantage  that  had 
been  gained.  The  next  day  he  proceeded  to  Fran- 
cavilla. He  there  found  the  inhabitants  in  great 
fermentation,  determined  to  break  open  the  prisons 
and  release  those  confined^  in  them.  Having 
ascertained  who  were  the  ringleaders,  he  lost  not 


140  MEMOIRS  OF 

a  moment  in  causing  them  to  be  seized  in  their 
houses.  He  sent  his  gendarmes  into  the  streets 
with  orders  to  lay  hands  on  all  they  should  meet 
in  arms.  This  daring  measure  terrified  the  people, 
and  fully  succeeded  in  quelling  the  tumult. 

The  troops  drew  nearer  Francavilla  ;  a  military 
commission  was  established  there  to  try  the  offen- 
ders. General  Church  arrived  in  person.  Know- 
ing that  Giro  could  not  be  very  far  distant,  and 
that  he  had  the  most  intimate  correspondence  with 
S.  Marzano,  he  threatened  that  town  with  pillage 
as  a  punishment  for  its  rebellious  conduct,  unless 
it  enabled  him  to  secure  the  person  of  Giro  within 
eight  days.  Trembling  for  their  property,  the 
militia  undertook  to  pursue  him.  On  the  5th  or 
6th  of  February,  the  militia  of  S.  Marzano  learnt 
that  Giro  had  thrown  himself  into  the  farm-house 
(Masseria)  of  Scaserba,  belonging  to  the  chapter 
of  Grottaglie,  at  about  ten  miles  from  Francavilla. 

The  Masserie  in  Apulia  and  the  provinces  of 
Otranto  and  Tarentum  are  all  built  on  the  same 
plan,  and  are  capable  of  defence ;  the  word  is  not 
altogether  rendered  by  "  farm-house,"  which  gives 
but  an  inadequate  idea  of  the  Masseria.  They 
date  from  the  period  when  the  incursions  of  the 
Turks  and  pirates  were  apprehended,  and  when 
the  country  people  shut  themselves  up  in  their 
holds  with  their  cattle  and  most  valuable  effects, 
in  order  to  secure  themselves  from  a  sudden  attack. 