

In  this  miserable  state,  circumstances  invited 
me  to  crimes  and  vengeance ;  but  the  feelings  of 
nature  and  religion  within  me  recalled  me  to 
duty.  After  some  time,  I  learnt  with  horror  from 
the  charitable  shepherds,  that  a  set  of  brigands 


THE  CARBONARI.  157 

infested  the  Apennines  that  lie  between  Martina 
and  Grottaglie  my  native  town.  I  was  told  that 
husbandmen  had  abandoned  their  farms,  flocks  and 
herds,  and  the  labours  of  the  field,  to  fly  from 
repeated  incursions  of  these  assassins.  I  was  in- 
formed of  the  robberies  and  outrages  committed 
on  passengers,  and  I  felt  my  heart  bleed  (^spezzare) 
when  these  disasters  happened,  and  especially 
when  my  townsmen  were  the  victims.  A  better 
opportunity  could  not,  certainly,  present  itself  to 
an  irritated  man,  to  improve  his  miserable  state,  by 
joining  this  horde  of  robbers.  But  I  felt  just  the 
reverse :  I  conceived  in  my  mind  the  noble  idea  of 
succouring  mankind.  This  thought  raised  within 
me  the  pleasing  hope  of  being  one  day  able  to  un- 
deceive the  government,  as  to  the  calumnies  that 
were  heaped  upon  me.  I  therefore  issued  from  my 
cavern  with  courage,  and  forsaking  the  deep  forest 
that  had  been  my  home,  I  at  last  arrived  at  the 
road  to  Martina  in  the  Apennines.  I  forbear  to 
disclose  what  happened  afterwards;  suffice  it  to 
say,  and  I  can  say  it  with  truth,  that  these  roads 
through  the  Apennines  are  free,  the  traveller 
journeys  without  dread,  the  farm-houses  are  re- 
opened, and  the  shepherd  sings  while  he  leads  his 
peaceful  flock  to  pasture. 

Such,  most  noble  Signors,  is  the  faithful  narra- 
tive of  the  actions  of  the  priest  Giro  Annichiarico. 
I  hve  at  a  distance  from  my  dear  country,  because 


158  MEMOIRS  OF 

the  government  will  not  receive  me  into  society 
and  order:  I  fly  my  father's  house,  because  the 
seizure  of  my  person  and  my  death  are  meditated. 
Treachery  has  confined  me  to  the  woods,  and 
deprives  me  of  human  intercourse.  If  the  govern- 
ment of  the  province  had  not  been  so  precipitate, 
in  lending  faith  to  calumny,  I  should  certainly  be 
enjoying  my  natural  and  civil  liberty ;  and  I  should 
at  this  moment  be  in  the  bosom  of  my  family,  or 
at  least  I  should  continue  to  live  at  Bari,  under 
the  inspection  of  the  police.  I  should  at  any  rate 
be  living  in  order,  and  I  too  should  taste  the  sweets 
and  blessings  of  society.  Thus  have  I  myself 
assigned  the  reason  of  my  absence,  which  was 
asked  of  my  relations  and  friends.  The  Commis- 
sion has,  however,  declared  me  out  of  the  pro- 
tection of  the  law,  and  has  threatened  to  pass  the 
definitive  sentence  against  me.  Let  me  be  per- 
mitted to  ask,  in  one  word,  what  are  my  offences? 
Just  those  that  are  falsely  attributed  to  me  by  my 
adversaries,  those  that  are  the  offspring  of  cabal 
and  imposture,  those  that  are  brought  forward  by 
culprits  in  custody,  who,  either  corrupted  by  in- 
trigue, or  secretly  flattering  themselves  that  they 
may  escape  punishment,  have  been  induced  to 
name  the  Abbate  Annichiarico.  And  do  these 
deserve  to  be  believed?  and  are  these  the  grounds 
of  my  banishment?  and  is  it  thus  that  your  incor- 
ruptible   (incorrotta)  justice,    most   excellent  Si- 