

L2 


148  MEMOIRS  OF 

been  guilty  of  murder  and  robbery  by  force  of 
arms,  were  condemned  to  capital  punishment,  and 
their  heads  were  exposed  near  the  places  of  their 
residence,  or  in  the  scene  of  their  crimes. 

In  a  short  time,  peace  was  restored  to  these 
desolated  provinces.  General  Church  used  his 
power  with  discretion.  His  established  principle 
was  to  listen  to,  or  receive  no  accusation  against 
political  opinions,  or  connexions  with  secret  so 
cieties;  but  he  punished  crimes  and  deeds  of 
violence  with  severity.  He  caused  the  accused 
to  be  tried  without  delay ;  expelled  vagrants  ;  and 
dismissed  from  their  situations  such  government 
officers  as  could  not  be  depended  upon.  Instead 
of  seizing  the  arms  without  an  equivalent,  he 
caused  their  value  to  be  paid.  He  threatened  with 
death  such  artisans  as  should  dare  to  manufacture 
prohibited  arms.  He  exhorted  the  confessors  to 
endeavour  to  get  possession  of  the  poignards,  or 
to  oblige  the  penitents  to  throw  them  into  wells. 

The  city  of  Lecce,  grateful  for  the  blessing  of 
restored  tranquillity,  voted  a  statue  to  the  King, 
and  a  sword  of  honour,  with  the  freedom  of  the 
city,  to  General  Church. 

The  following  are  extracts  from  the  several 
publications  and  circulars  of  the  Field-Marshal, 
Plenipotentiary  Commissioner  of  the  King,  ad- 
dressed to  the  authorities  of  the  provinces  of 
Lccce  and  Otranto,  to  efface  even  the  traces  of 


THE  CARBONARI.  149 

the  impression  which  these  scenes  of  horror  liad 
produced  there. 

General  Church  to  the  Syndics,  S^-c. 

Head-Quarters,  Lecce, 
20th  September,  1818. 

1.  H.  M.  the  King  has  commanded  the  publi- 
cation of  an  act  of  perfect  amnesty  as  to  the  past, 
as  far  as  regards  the  criminal  associations  held  in 
different  parts  of  the  province  by  some  persons 
who  attempt  to  mislead  the  people.  The  act  of 
H.  M.  comprehends  all  those  who,  from  ignorance 
or  fear,  have  consented  to  belong  to  these  associ- 
ations, it  being  well  understood  that  they  have 
returned  to  the  straight  line  of  duty. 

The  General  having  made  a  report  to  the  King 
on  the  tranquillity  which  reigned  in  his  division, 
and  on  the  dissolution  of  the  sects,  H.  M.  declares, 
through  him,  that  he  no  longer  believes  in  the 
existence  of  such  associations. 

2.  Persons  imprisoned,  exiles,  or  fugitives,  as 
well  as  those  guilty  of  assassination,  or  ordinaiy 
crimes,  are  not  comprehended  in  this  amnesty. 

3.  After  this  declaration  of  the  sovereign,  the 
General,  commanding  this  sixth  military  division, 
publicly  announces  that  he  will  receive  no  accu- 
sation against  the  individuals  of  this  province,  on 
the   subject  of  the   principal  or  secondary   part 