

In  the  year  1803,  the  murder  committed  on 
the  body  of  Giuseppe,  son  of  the  late  Nicola 
Motolese,  was  imputed  to  me.  At  that  time  the 
town  of  Grottaglie  was  divided  by  two  parties, 
which  are  always  the  cause  of  private  and  public 
ruin.  I  was  supposed  to  belong  to  one  of  these, 
for  which  reason  the  above  imputation  was  cast 
■upon  me  by  the  opposite  Taction.  The  govern- 
ment which  then  regulated  the  province  of  Lecce 
began  to  persecute  my  innocent  brothers  without 
ceasing,  expecting  them  to  dehver  up  their  own 
brother.  Trusting  in  my  innocence,  and  induced 
by  fraternal  love,  I  instantly  flew  to  present  my- 


THE  CARBONARI.  153 

self  to  the  extraordinary  commission  of  Apulia 
sitting  at  Trani.  That  assembly  being  dissolved, 
I  was  handed  over  to  Lecce  to  be  tried  by  the 
ordinary  tribunal.  It  was  to  me  a  most  fearfu^ 
instance  of  the  intrigues  of  power ;  for  without 
defence,  without  a  possibility  of  obtaining  per- 
mission to  extend  the  very  limited  time  allowed 
for  trial,  and,  as  I  was  told,  even  without  the  con- 
sent of  my  feeble  counsel ;  my  cause  was  pervert- 
ed, I  became  the  victim  of  imposture,  and  was 
sentenced  to  fifteen  years  of  exile.  For  four 
successive  years  I  was  kept  in  the  most  dreadful  of 
prisons,  without  being  sent  to  my  destination, 
notwithstanding  the  repeated  petitions  which 
I  sent  to  the  ministers  of  justice.  I  at  last 
succeeded  in  escaping,  by  eluding  the  vigilance 
of  my  keepers.  I  found  myself  free,  it  is  true, 
but  every  effort,  every  possible  intrigue  was 
employed  to  arrest  me.  From  that  moment,  the 
most  cruel  and  incessant  persecutions  were  begun, 
even  to  attempting  my  death  by  a  black  scheme 
of  treachery  to  which  my  innocent  brother  fell  a 
victim,  and  by  which  I  was  severely  wounded. 
For  a  long  time  I  was  obliged  to  live  in  a  wretched 
state,  in  remote  solitudes,  and  my  existence  differ- 
ed in  nothing  from  that  of  savages  and  wild 
beasts.  The  most  gloomy  caverns  formed  my 
retreat,  and  in  constant  want  of  the  merest  neces- 
saries for  human   sustenance,  I   passed  my  days 


154  MEMOIRS  OF 

amidst  the  horrors  of  the  forests  and  of  the  rocks. 
I  sometimes  obtained  a  scanty  meal  from  the  pity 
of  the  keepers  of  the  flocks ;  and  the  wild  fruits  of 
mother  earth  often  supplied  me  wkh  the  means  of 
satisfying  hunger.  All  that  remained  with  me 
was  my  invincible  courage,  and  the  peace  of  a 
conscience  which  reproached  me  with  nothing.  In 
the  mean  time,  disturbances  took  place  in  various 
parts  of  the  province,  and  the  blame  was  always 
unjustly  made  to  fall  upon  me.  Whatever  robbery, 
whatever  murder,  whatever  assassination*  was 
committed  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  was  instantly 
given  out  by  the  cabal  to  be  owing  to  the  Abbate 
Annichiarico.  The  very  offenders  themselves, 
either  to  conceal  their  own  names  or  to  excuse 
their  iniquitous  actions,  have  implicated  no  name 
but  that  of  the  Abbate  Annichiarico.  And  why 
have  they  not  said  that  the  wars,  fomented  by 
cruel  ambition,  to  the  destruction  of  miserable 
human  beings — why  have  they  not  said  that  these 
also  were  kindled  by  the  Abbate  Annichiarico? 
In  consequence  of  such  accusation,  without  proofs, 
because  all  were  false,  the  government  of  the 
military  occupation^  declared  me  without  the  pale 
of  the  laws. 