

*  (qualunque  assassinamento)  :  assassinamento  means  strictly  a 
high-way  robbery.     The  brigands  are  called  assassini.     T. 

f  "  L'occupazione  militai'e,"  the  term  appropriated  to  Murat's 
government. 


I 


THE  CARBONARI.  155 

My  innocent  brothers,  sent  for  the  second  time 
to  the  prisons  of  Lecce,  suffered  for  many  months 
a  punishment  which  they  had  done  nothing  to 
deserve ;  while  their  famiUes,  abandoned,  and  des- 
titute of  all  human  succour,  languished  in  the 
greatest  misery.  These,  indeed,  would  have  been 
circumstances  sufficient  to  drive  me  to  every  excess, 
had  not  the  Almighty  (il  grande  Architetto  delF 
universo),  by  his  timely  assistance,  revived  in  my 
heart  the  sentiments  of  religion. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  arms  of  the  Bourbons 
re-entered  the  kingdom,  and  the  glorious  reigning 
monarch  benignly  resolved  to  recal  into  the  order 
of  society  all  those  who  had  been  banished  from 
it.  Among  the  rest,  I  sought  to  profit  by  the 
beneficent  determination  of  the  sovereign,  and 
therefore  presented  myself  to  the  authorities  at 
Lecce.  The  government  favoured  my  wishes,  I 
obtained  a  temporary  safe  conduct,  I  was  fixed  at 
Bari  under  the  inspection  of  the  police,  and  the 
most  pleasing  hopes  were  kindled  within  me,  of 
seeing  myself  for  once  at  rest,  living  without  fear, 
in  society  and  order.  It  was  then  that  I  examined 
myself  and  called  to  mind  my  duties.  I  reflected 
seriously  on  the  indelible  obligations  imposed  on 
me  by  my  sacred  profession,  and  I  determined  to 
retire  to  the  College  of  the  Missionaries  at  Bari, 
with  the  permission  of  the  usual  minister  employed 
for  this  purpose  by  the   Eccellentissimo   Capece 


156  MEMOIRS  OF 

Latro,  Archbishop  of  Tarentum.     I  was  on   the 
point  of  following-  up  my  noble  resolution,  when 
the  thunderbolt  burst  upon  my  head  {allorchh  in- 
tesi  lo  scroscio  del  violent issimo  fulmine,  che  si  sca- 
gliava  sul  mio  capo).     Ah!    let  it  be  permitted 
me,  most  respectable  Signors,  to  exclaim  this  mo- 
ment with  ^neas,  (coir  Enea  di  Virgilio) — "  In- 
fandum— jubete  vos — renovare  dolorem."      I  have 
not  force  enough  to  express  to  you  how  my  heart 
was  rent,  or  the  deplorable  state  which  I  miserably 
sunk   into,  when  I   was  secretly   informed  by  a 
faithful  friend,  that  my  arrest  was  ordered  on  the 
cruel  accusation  of  having  infringed  the  mandate. 
I  vanished  like  lightning  from  Bari ;  I  went  to  the 
capital  to  obtain  redress,  and  to  discover  once  more 
the  black  conspiracy  against  me.     All  was  vain. 
The  hopes  I  had  cherished,  disappeared ;  and  while 
perplexed  as  to  the  steps  I  ought  to  take,  the  power 
of  my  relentless  persecutors  prevailed.      At  last 
I  left  the  capital,  and  guided  only  by  that  fortitude 
and  constancy  so  necessary  in  my  misfortunes,  I 
betook  myself  to  my  old  haunts  in  the  solitude 
of  the  forests,  and   recommenced   a   savage  and 
wretched  life. 