


144  MEMOIRS  OF 

Voltigeur,  stationed  under  the  wall  he  had  at- 
tempted to  scale.  He  again  shut  himself  up  in 
his  tower,  and  employed  himself  till  morning  in 
making  cartridges.  At  day-break,  the  besiegers 
tried  to  burst  open  the  wooden  gate  of  the  outer 
wall;  Giro  and  his  men  repulsed  the  assailants 
by  a  well-directed  fire,  they  killed  five  and  wound- 
ed fourteen  men.  A  barrel  of  oil  was  brought  in 
order  to  burn  the  door.  The  first  man  who  set 
fire  to  it  was  shot  through  the  heart.  A  four 
pounder  which  had  been  conveyed  to  the  place* 
was  pointed  against  the  roof  of  the  tower.  Several 
of  this  calibre  had  been  contrived  to  be  easily 
dismounted  from  their  carriages,  and  transported 
on  mules.  This  little  piece  produced  great  effect. 
The  tiles  and  bricks  which  fell,  forced  Giro  to 
descend  from  the  second  story  to  the  first.  He 
was  tormented  with  a  burning  thirst,  for  he  had 
forgotten  to  provide  himself  with  water,  and  he 
never  drank  wine.  This  thirst  soon  became  in- 
supportable. 

After  some  deliberations  with  his  companions, 
he  demanded  to  speak  with  General  Ghurch,  who 
he  believed  was  in  the  neighbourhood,  then  to  the 
Duke  of  Jasi,  who  was  also  absent;  at  last  he 
resolved  to  capitulate  with  Major  Bianchi.  He 
addressed  the  besiegers,  and  threw  them  some 
bread.  Major  Bianchi  promised  him  that  he 
should  not  be  maltreated  by  the  soldiers.      He 


THE  CARBONARI.  145 

descended   the   ladder,    opened    the   door   of  the 
tower,   and   presented    himself   with    the    words 
"  Eccomi,  Don  Giro  I" — Here  I  am,  Don  Giro! 

He  begged  them  to  give  him  some  water  to 
quench  his  thirst,  and  desired  them  to  hberate 
the  farmer  and  his  family,  who  had  been  shut  up 
all  this  while  in  the  straw  magazine.  He  declared 
that  they  were  innocent,  and  distributed  money 
among  them. 

He  suifered  himself  to  be  searched  and  bound 
patiently ;  some  poison  was  found  upon  him ;  he 
asserted  that  his  companions  had  prevented  him 
from  taking  it.  He  conversed  quietly  enough 
with  Major  Bianchi  on  the  road  to  Francavilla, 
and  related  to  him  the  principal  circumstances  of 
his  life. 

In  prison,  he  appeared  to  be  interested  for  the 
fate  of  some  of  his  partisans,  begging  that  they 
might  not  be  persecuted,  and  declaring  that  they 
had  been  forced  to  do  what  they  had  done. 

He  had  entertained  some  hope,  till  the  moment 
when  he  was  placed  before  the  Gouncil  of  War, 
under  the  direction  of  Lieutenant-Golonel  Guarini. 
He  addressed  a  speech  to  him,  taking  him  for 
General  Ghurch.  He  insisted  on  speaking  to. 
that  officer ;  this  was  refused,  and  he  resigned 
himself  to  his  fate,  drily  saying,  "  Ho  capito," 
(I  understand  — ). 