


I 


THE  CARBONARI.  159 

gnors,  is  induced  to  heap  the  most  opprobrious 
punishment  upon  a  citizen,  in  whose  breast  the 
sincerest  sentiments  of  honour  and  virtue  are 
engraved?  upon  a  man  who,  with  the  warmest 
feehngs  of  charity,  has  been  ready  to  shed  his 
blood  to  aid  his  fellow-creatures,  by  snatching  them 
from  the  fangs  (branche)  of  bandits? — Have  I 
ever  resisted  in  arms  the  public  force?  Have  I 
ever  ranged  the  country  in  arms  for  the  purposes 
of  robbery,  and  to  load  myself  with  crimes?  If 
such  actions  had  ever  been  committed  by  me,  I 
should  certainly  not  find  a  hand  charitable  enough 
to  prolong  my  life,  and  the  earth  itself  would  not 
afford  me  an  asylum  from  destruction. 

Ah!  most  gentle  Signors,  why  will  you  drive 
me  to  desperation,  and  to  crimes  which  my  heart 
so  much  abhors  !  Why  seek  the  total  ruin  of  a 
man,  of  an  honest  citizen,  of  a  priest,  of  a  faithful 
friend  to  public  order?  At  this  moment  I  appeal 
to  your  rigid  justice; — you,  who  cherish  in  your 
breasts  the  sentiments  of  pity,  exert  yourselves,  at 
length,  in  favour  of  an  unhappy  being,  miserably 
oppressed  and  persecuted  for  the  long  space  of 
fifteen  years ;  make  an  energetic  representation  to 
the  Sovereign,  that  permission  may  be  granted  me 
to  return  to  society,  and  to  live  in  the  discharge  of 
my  sacred  duties.  I  see  the  abyss  that  threatens  to 
swallow  me  up;  I  foresee  the  series  of  evils  and 
crimes  into  which  I  may  be  compelled  :  I  shudder 


160  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  CARBONARI. 

at  the  prospect.  Spare  me,  for  pity's  sake,  this  sad 
catastrophe  of  misfortunes,  and  lend  assistance  to 
one  whose  Hfe  is  passed  in  the  gloomy  solitude 
of  the  forest,  and  the  loathsomeness  of  the  ca- 
vern. 

The  Priest  Ciro  Annichiarico. 


The  6th  November,  1817. 


CONCLUSION. 


LETTER 


FROM    THE 


I 


AUTHOR  TO  THE  TRANSLATOR. 

Naples,  Jan.  25M,  1821. 

Sir, 

I  TRUST  this  letter  will  reach  you  in 
time  to  be  inserted  at  the  end  of  the  Memoirs  of 
the  Carbonari,  as  it  contains  some  facts  in  support 
of  the  opinions  already  advanced  as  to  the  natural 
progress  of  the  sect,  if  not  disturbed  by  external 
force. 

A  pamphlet*  which  appeared  about  a  month  ago, 
in  defence  of  G.  Paladini,  S.  Vecchiarelli,  and  P. 
Maenza,  proves,  that,  from  the  month  of  August, 
1820,  that  is  to  say,  shortly  after  the  revolution  of 
Naples,  the  Carbonari  were  divided  into  two  dis- 
tinct parties :  the  first  may  be  called,  that  of  the 
Constitutional  Carbonari,  who  considered  their 
labours  ended,  and  their  object  obtained,  on  the 

*  Memoria  del  Avvocato  D.  Carlo  Quarto,  nella  Causa  dei  tre 
Arrestati  Guglielmo  Paladini,  Salvatore  Vecchiarelli  e  Pasquale 
Maenza,  coUa  Decisione  della  Gran  Corte  Criminale  di  Napoli  j  si 
aggiunge  una  Leggenda  delle  Operazloni  combinate  per  formare  e 
sostenere  la  Calunnia,  ed  ua  Indirizzo  di  Accusa  al  Parlameiita 
contro  i  Calunniatori. 