

A  secret  and  impenetrable  correspondence  was  set  on 
foot  by  them,  by  means  of  a  dictionary  of  various  words, 
referable  to  others  of  real  meaning,  with  the  aid  of 
numbers,  and  fictitious  names,  for  the  safe  conveyance  of 
letters  to  the  individuals  composing  the  different  councils. 

The  secret  societies  were  united  together  by  a  Project 
which  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  government,  and  among 
whose  articles  there  appears  a  particular  engagement — To 
maintain  an  extensive  and  active  correspondence  among 
the  sectaries,  expressly  for  the  communication  of  the  or- 
ders of  the  general  centre  in  Bologna — To  augment  the 
number  of  sectaries,  and  to  obtain  monthly  information  of 

&gt;f   3 


174  APPENDIX    II. 

their  progress,  and  respective  qualities  ;  including  that  of 
readiness  or  fitness  to  bear  arms,  (attitudine  all'  armi,)  as 
may  be  gathered  from  the  following  articles. 

Plan  of  Organization^  for  the  Union  of  Secret  Societies, 
and  for  establishing  an  extensive  Communication ,  and  an 
active  and  secure  Correspondence : 

1 .  The  Roman  state  shall  be  divided,  for  the  present, 
into  three  grand  divisions  ;  these  shall  be  divided  into  pri- 
mary centers  ;  and  these  again  into  secondary  centers. 

2.  The  first  division  in  the  Legation  of  Bologna  is  a  pri- 
mary center ;  the  second  division  consists  of  the  Legations 
of  Ferrara,  Ravenna,  and  Forli ;  which  last  shall  be  a  pri- 
mary center,  as  well  as  Ancona,  for  the  three  Marches  of 
Fermo,  Macerata,  and  Ancona,  which  will  form  the  third 
division. 

6.  Every  secret  society  will  observe  its  own  constitution, 
and  will  act  according  to  its  own  regulations. 

7.  In  order  to  have  an  accurate  and  active  communica- 
tion, and  that  the  correspondence  may  be  secure,  the  al- 
phabet of  the  Guelphs  will  be  adopted. 

9.  Every  representative  will  attend  to  the  particular  in- 
terests of  the  respective  society  by  which  he  was  elected, 
and  will  keep  up  an  uninterrupted  correspondence  with  it, 
in  order  to  secure  a  free  communication  with  the  centers, 
according  to  the  orders  emanating  from  the  general  center, 
(fixed  by  the  same  plan  at  Bologna.) 

l6.  In  the  monthly  statement,  particularizing  every  so- 
ciety subordinate  to  the  primary  center,  individuals  will  be 
classed  and  described  as  proprietors,  wealthy  or  otherwise, 
young,  old,  titled,  fit  to  bear  arms,  &amp;c. 


APPENDIX    II.  175 

III  the  same  plan  of  organization,  it  is  settled  by  a  par- 
ticular provision  for  the  Society,  that 

"  Every  council  that  shall  have  appointed  its  committee 
will  assign  to  every  individual  composing  such  committee, 
a  certain  number  of  Guelphs,  proportioned  to  the  extent 
of  the  society,  to  instruct  them  in  their  duties,  and  to  cul- 
tivate a  general  public  feeling. 