

*  jMcmorial  of  the  Aflvocate  D.  C.  Quarto,  p.  3. 
&gt;1  2 


I64f  author's  letter 

After  passing  sixty-seven  days  imprisoned  in  the 
Castles  of  St.  Elmo  and  Del'  Ovo,  the  persons 
accused  were  dismissed  by  the  ordinary  tribunals 
to  which  this  cause  had  been  referred,  for  want  of 
proof. 

Meantime  the  Jacobine  lodges,  though  forming 
but  a  slender  minority,  continue  their  dark  in- 
trigues. Their  members,  interdicted  and  rejected 
from  all  community  with  the  others,  bear  the  name 
of  Solitary  or  Dispersed  Greeks,  i  Greci  solitarj  o 
dispersi.  The  lodge  of  the  Pythagoreans,  whose 
oath  has  been  given  in  the  body  of  the  work,  as 
well  as  the  acts  of  the  third  rank  of  Carbonari, 
which  we  mentioned  as  an  anomaly  in  the  sect, 
appear  to  bear  reference  to  them.  A  short  time 
ago,  Lucente,  the  Governor  of  Teramo,  caused 
their  lodges  to  be  shut  up.  It  is  these  Dispersed 
Greeks  who  have  filled  many  peaceable  persons 
with  such  terror,  that  they  do  not  think  them- 
selves safe  from  their  violence  at  any  time  or 
place,  and  who  have  alarmed  the  minds  even  of  the 
most  august  personages,  although  they  have  hi- 
therto been  watched  with  sufficient  vigilance  to 
prevent  their  attempting  any  serious  outrage. 

The  excellent  constitution  of  the  National  Guard, 
Guardia  di  Sicurezza,  of  the  capital,  formed  as  it 
is  of  proprietors  interested  in  the  maintenance  of 
order,  has  greatly  facilitated  the  means  of  doing 
this.      The  Neapolitan  legions,  on  the  contrary. 


TO  THE  TRANSLATOR.  \65 

composed  ot  the  classes  in  less  easy  circumstances, 
and  of  which  almost  every  soldier  is  a  Carbonaro, 
represent  the  most  turbulent  party.  Behind-hand 
in  discipline  as  in  dress,  they  are  not  in  habits  of 
cordiality  with  the  National  Guard,  and  still  less 
with  the  Royal  Guard,  who  are  believed  to  incline 
towards  the  Calderari. 

These  misunderstandings  broke  out  openly  a 
few  days  since,  on  occasion  of  the  suspending 
veto  of  the  Prince  Regent  pronounced  upon  cer- 
tain modifications  of  the  Spanish  constitution, 
relative  to  religion.  The  veto  had  been  instigated 
by  the  violent  remonstrance  of  Cardinal  Ruffo, 
Archbishop  of  Naples,  and  of  twenty-two  of  the 
other  archbishops  and  bishops  of  the  kingdom. 

On  the  15th  January,  some  hundreds  of  persons, 
said  to  belong  to  the  legions  and  to  the  violent 
lodges,  assembled  in  the  Court  of  Parliament,  and 
took  possession  of  the  tribunes.  They  had  the 
impudence  to  address  the  deputies,  and  to  demand 
the  punishment  of  the  Cardinal  Archbishop;  the 
adoption  of  the  modifications,  in  defiance  of  the 
veto;  the  dissolution  of  the  Committee  of  Public 
Safety  ;  and  the  reduction  of  the  Royal  Guard. 