

"  Those  who  are  at  the  head  of  small  divisions  will  be  ex- 
pected to  report  their  own  proceedings  to  the  counsellors 
of  those  divisions,  in  order  that  the  latter  may  acquaint  the 
council  with  all  the  advantages  resulting  from  such  instruc- 
tions, and  from  the  influence  of  the  spirit  of  the  Guelphs  ; 
that  it  may  reckon  upon,  and  avail  itself  of,  such  individuals 
as  are  most  zealously  attached  to  the  great  general  cause." 

Ancona,  the  center  of  Guelphism  in  the  Marches,  and 
the  principal  seat  of  Carbonarism,  went  still  farther  in  its 
zeal,  by  constituting  within  its  walls  the  Supreme  Vendita, 
which  had  been  sought  in  vain  at  Bologna.  Its  proceedings 
were  directed  to  the  same  object,  expressed  in  the  plan 
already  quoted,  but  it  rendered  itself  singular,  by  making 
use  of  secret  passports,  consisting  of  cards  of  spades  and 
hearts,  provided  with  a  dry  seal,  with  the  initial  letters 
i\.  V.  A.  Alta  Vendita  di  Ancona,  in  order  that  the  Good 
Cousins  might  be  recognized  without  difficulty  in  their  tra- 
vels, and  might  receive  all  those  demonstrations  of  hospi- 
tality, which  (they  say)  peculiarly  belong  to  the  philan- 
thropic principles  of  Carbonarism. 

This  Vendita  allotted  the  distribution  of  these  passports, 
in  the  provinces  of  Romagna  and  Lombardy,  to  the  secta- 
ries of  Bologna,  reserving  to  itself  the  dispensation  of  them, 
in  the  Marches  and  the  Roman  state. 

It  was  expressed  in  the  instructions  of  these  passports, 
N  4 


176  APPENDIX   II. 

that  their  system  was  only  known  to  the  First  Lights,  (the 
Grand  Masters,)  in  order  that  **  it  might  be  more  effec- 
tually concealed  from  the  eye  of  the  vigilant  wolf;  and  the 
necessary  signs  were  added,  in  case  the  departure  of  the 
Good  Cousin  should  be  secret,  or  that  he  should  be  obliged 
to  travel  under  a  feigned  name  J' 

In  the  midst  of  these  insidious  proceedings,  they  did  not 
omit  to  impose,  bi/ means  of  crime,  on  the  sectaries  them- 
selves, as  well  as  on  the  uninitiated,  called  by  them  Pagans, 
to  remove  every  possible  obstacle  to  the  free  prosecution  of 
their  labours  ;  as  well  as  to  confirm  the  former  in  the  obli- 
gations they  had  contracted,  and  to  convince  both  of  the 
formidable  power  of  the  Society.  Several  individuals,  who 
were  adverse  to  their  maxims,  were  destined  to  the  poignard, 
and  were  actually  wounded  in  a  sudden  attack,  one  of 
them  mortally.  These  victims  were,  (in  addition  to 
their  colleague  Priola,  of  S.  Elpidio,  accused  of  perjury,) 
Feliziani,  of  Ascoli ;  the  advocate  Martini,  judge  in  the 
tribunal  at  Fermo ;  the  commissary  of  police  Ricci ;  the 
legal  vicar  of  Petritoli,  D.  Ignazio  Scarsini ;  Valeriani,  of 
Montelpare;  and  the  brigadier  of  Carabiniers,  Pastori, 
who,  after  repeated  threats  of  death,  conveyed  in  public 
notices,  although  he  escaped  a  pistol  shot,  was  afterwards 
poisoned  ;  &amp;c.  such  aggressions  and  homicide  (without 
reckoning  that  of  Pastori)  having  been  committed  without 
any  iminediate  cause,  in  the  night,  by  persons  unknown, 
and  in  disguise. 