

The  reproaches,  however,  of  the  popular  deputies, 
who  taxed  them  with  having  sold  themselves  to 
some  foreign  power,  in  order  to  dishonour  the 
nation,  sufficed  to  silence  and  disperse  the  mob. 
But  the  same  evening,  skirmishes   between   the 


}66  author's  letter 

legionaries  and  the  National  Guard,  took  place  in 
several  quarters  of  the  city :  happily,  the  latter 
were  uniformly  successful ;  and  we  are  assured, 
that  a  reform  in  the  legions  of  the  capital,  and  a 
purging  of  the  lodges,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the 
unavovved  members,  will  be  the  consequence,  and 
that  they  have  already  begun,  by  withdrawing  and 
burning  some  thousands  of  patents  which  had 
been  granted  to  Carbonari  of  that  kind. 

The  war  which  threatens  the  Kingdom  of  the 
Two  Sicilies,  and  which  the  sects  have  in  some 
measure  drawn  upon  it,  makes  the  constitutional 
Carbonari  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost,  to  efface 
from  their  association  the  character  of  a  secret 
society,  and  to  impress  it  with  that  of  an  institution 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  present  order  of  things, 
which  they  look  upon  as  their  own  work. 

It  is  on  this  consideration,  that  Don  G.  Troyse, 
minister  of  pardon  and  justice,  addressed  a  circular 
letter  to  the  higher  clergy,  in  order  to  convince 
them,  that  the  Papal  bulls  refusing  absolution 
after  confession  to  the  members  of  secret  societies, 
are  no  longer  applicable  to  the  Carbonari  :* 

"  It  is  time,"  he  says,  *'  to  abjure  the  errors  into 
which  we  had  fallen  with  regard  to  these  societies, 

*  Circolare  del  Ministro  di  Giustizia  e  Grazie,  agli  111""  e 
Riv™*  Arcivescovi,  Vescovi,  &amp;c.  del23  Dec.  1820.  Napoli.  Sig- 
nat.  II  Ministro  degli  Affaii  Ecclesiastici, 

G.  TU0Y»J5. 


TO  THE  TRANSLATOR.  167 

whose  object  is  no  longer  a  mystery,  because  they 
are  so  widely  extended  that  no  class  of  citizens 
can  now  be  ignorant  of  the  purposes  of  their 
meetings.  They  laboured  to  obtain  that  consti- 
tution, which  was  solemnly  acknowledged  and 
sworn  to  by  his  Majesty — that  constitution,  which, 
by  its  twelfth  article,  acknowledges  no  religion 
but  that  of  the  Roman,  Catholic  and  Apostolic 
Church,  professed  by  our  fathers,  and  which  shall 
always  be  ours. 

"  Now  is  it  not  wilfully  diminishing  the  respect 
due  to  the  Holy  See,  when  we  attribute  to  it  power 
matters  merely  political,  and  completely  foreign 
to  its  province  ?  All  mystery  being  now  laid  aside, 
and  the  object  of  the  Carbonari  openly  avowed, 
their  societies  are  no  longer  subject  to  the  bulls  in 
any  way,  but  are  amenable  directly  and  exclu- 
sively to  the  laws  of  the  realm." 

With  regard  to  the  occurrences  at  Lecce,  in 
1817,  &amp;c.  of  which  I  have  placed  the  particulars 
after  the  account  of  the  Carbonari,  you  will  do 
well  to  turn  your  attention  to  the  debates  of  the 
Neapolitan  Parliament,  on  the  3d  of  January, 
1821. 