

M 


I6i2  author's  letter 

establishment  of  a  constitutional  government.  The 
second,  or  Ultra  Carbonari,  redoubled  their  zeal  at 
that  period;  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  opposition 
of  the  others,  they  would,  undoubtedly,  have  forced 
the  revolution  of  their  country  to  run  through  all 
the  changes  of  that  of  France,  and  have  hurried  it 
as  soon  as  possible  into  a  reign  of  terror. 

At  the  time  when  the  Austrian  reinforcements 
had  begun  to  assemble  in  Lombardy,  when  the 
Prince  of  Cariato  had  been  sent  back  from  Vienna, 
and  Palermo  was  in  a  state  of  insurrection,  men  of 
sense  perceived  that  nothing  could  avert  the  storm 
but  moderate  conduct,  and  carefully  avoiding  the 
horrors  which  have  hitherto  been  but  the  too 
faithful  attendants  on  popular  msurrections. 

With  these  intentions,  they  endeavoured  to  gain 
the  Carbonari,  to  which  order  they  belonged,  and 
contrived  to  win  over  the  Supreme  Lodge  of  Naples, 
whose  president,  Giuliano,  had  formerly  been  a 
police  officer;  and  also  some  of  the  provincial 
magistracies. 

But  their  views  were  displeasing  to  the  Ultra- 
Carbonari,  whose  doctrine  it  was,  that  blood  must 
cement  all  revolutions,  and  that  it  was  impossible 
to  answer  for  their  partizans,  unless  they  implicated 
them  in  the  commission  of  crimes,  to  cut  off  all 
hope  of  retreat.  They  raised  the  cry  of  imbecility 
and  treason,  and  demanded  vigorous  measures 
Several  provincial  lodges  hastened  to  send  deputies 


TO  THE  TRANSLATOR.  l65 

to  Naples,  in  order  to  stir  up  the  Carbonaro  popu- 
lace, and  to  arm  it  tumultuously.  But,  whether  it 
was  that  the  deputies  acquitted  themselves  imper- 
fectly of  their  commission,  or  that  the  Committee  of 
Public  Safety,  v/ith  Borelli  at  its  head,  had  coun- 
teracted them  effectually;  they  were  but  coldly 
received. 

But  the  ultras  of  the  capital  were  not  disheart- 
ened at  this  first  repulse :  they,  on  their  part,  des- 
patched emissaries  into  the  provinces.  Paladini, 
Vecchiarelli  and  Maenza,  were  of  the  number : 
they  went  to  Salerno  on  the  2d  September,  thence 
to  A  veil  i  no  on  the  5  th,  and  came  back  to  Naples 
on  the  night  between  the  5th  and  6th ;  they  were 
arrested  in  their  carriage,  in  the  Square  of  La  Ca- 
rita. 

It  appears  that  letters  from  the  Governor  and 
from  the  General  Commandant  of  Avellino  gave 
the  first  alarm  concerning  their  mission.  They 
were  accused  of  "  attempting  to  stir  up  sedition  in 
the  three  provinces,  Naples,  Salerno,  and  Avellino^ 
in  order  to  overturn  the  high  government  autho- 
rities ;  and  of  conspiring  against  tlie  sacred  persons 
of  the  King  and  other  members  of  the  Royal 
Family."*  The  suspicions  against  them  were  in- 
creased, by  their  destroying  their  papers  the  mo- 
ment they  were  arrested. 