

The  deputy  Arcovito  brought  up  a  report,  in  the 
name  of  the  Committee  of  Legislation,  upon  the 
prisoners  of  the  province  of  Lecce,  endeavouring 
to  prove,  in  the  first  place,  that  real  anarchy 
reigned  in  that  province  in  1817,  &amp;c. ;    in  the 


16S     author's  letter  to  the  translator. 

second,  that  it  arose  from  the  strife  of  political 
parties  ;  and  in  the  third,  that  the  crimes  committed 
by  the  prisoners  in  question  were  all  in  conse- 
quence of  their  various  political  opinions.  He 
therefore  ended  by  proposing  a  decree  to  suppress 
all  criminal  proceedings  against  such  as  had  not 
been  tried,  and  to  remit  the  remainder  of  the 
punishment  of  such  as  had  been  already  condemned. 

The  deputy  Nicolai,  and  several  of  his  colleagues, 
declaimed  vehemently  against  the  proposal  of  the 
Committee :  they  observed  that,  far  from  extenua- 
ting the  enormity  of  crime,  the  pretence  of  com- 
mitting it  for  the  sake  of  liberty,  only  served  to 
aggravate  it. 

The  majority  of  votes  in  the  assembly  rejected 
the  proposal  of  the  legislative  committee,  and  by 
their  decision,  confirmed  the  general  opinion,  that 
the  associations  of  Lecce,  in  1817,  only  used  the 
pretence  of  politics,  to  cloak  their  infamy  and 
rapine. 

Accept,  Sir,  the  assurance  of  the  very  highest 
consideration. 

&amp;c.  &amp;c.  &amp;c. 


END    OF   the    MEMOIIU 


APPENDIX   I 


\ 


Baillet  (Vie  des  Saints,  ler  Juillet,  9nie  siecle,  vers  Tan 
1017,  Paris,  1704,)  informs  us  that  St.  Thibault  or  Theo- 
baldus  was  descended  from  the  first  Counts  of  Brie  and 
Champagne.  Surrounded  with  luxury  and  riches,  his  fond- 
ness for  solitude  displayed  itself,  notwithstanding,  at  an 
early  age ;  Thibault  refused  to  marry,  or  to  command  the 
companies  which  one  of  his  uncles  had  levied  in  1037 
against  the  Emperor  Conrad  the  Salic* 

He  quitted  his  father's  house,  with  a  nobleman  (Gautier), 
a  friend  of  his,  about  1053  ;  they  left  their  followers  and 
equipage  at  Rheims,  and  proceeded  on  foot  into  Germany, 
and  in  the  forest  of  Piting  in  Suabia  they  began  to  live  as 
poor  hermits. 

•  If  St.  Theobald  was  descended  from  the  first  Counts  of  Brie  arid  Cham- 
pagne, he  could  scarcely  be  the  nephew  of  Eudes  II.  fifth  Count  of  Cham- 
pagne, who  claimed  the  crown  of  Burgundy,  in  opposition  to  Conrad  the 
Salic,  and  was  killed  in  battle,  1037,  as  Eudes  himself  only  succeeded  to  the 
title  of  Count  of  Champagne  and  Brie,  on  the  death  of  Count  Stephen  without 
heirs.  He  might,  however,  be  the  nephew  of  Eudes,  if  we  suppose  him  the  na- 
tural son  of  Theobald,  or  Thibault,  Count  of  Blois,  who  was  never  married, 
the  brother  and  predecessor  of  Eudes,  in  the  county  of  Blois.  This  line  of 
Blois,  Count  of  Champagne,  descended  from  Thibaut  le  Tricheur,  whose  daugh- 
ter Leutgard  married  Herbert  of  Vermandois,  of  the  House  of  Charlemagne, 
and  first  Count  of  Champagne.  This  Thibaut  was  the  son  of  Gerlo,  the  near 
relation  of  Rollo,  first  Duke  of  Normandy,  and  the  intermarriage  of  his  poste- 
rity with  that  of  Rollo  connects  them  almost  equally  with  the  royal  race  of 
England. — See  Art  d€  Verifier  Its  Dates.  T. 