

In  fact,  it  is  a  system  universally  observed  by  the  Carbo- 
nari, that  every  one  of  them  should  be  armed  with  a 
poignard,  as  the  hand  grasping  a  dagger  upon  the  seals  of 
the  order  denotes ;  nor  do  they  deny  this. 

When  a  new  member  is  admitted  to  their  Society,  they 


APPENDIX    II.  177 

brandish  these  weapons  before  the  novice  ;  intimating  that 
they  will  be  always  ready  in  his  defence,  if  he  is  faithful  to 
the  Society,  and  that  they  will  shed  his  blood  if  he  violates 
his  oath. 

It  is  on  this  account  that  al  the  accused,  in  whatever 
manner  they  have  confessed,  tremble  lest  they  should  fall 
beneath  the  stilettoes  of  their  colleagues,  which  would 
infallibly  happen  if  their  confessions  were  made  public. 
It  is  on  this  account  they  entreat  secrecy.  The  ex- 
pressions employed  by  Massone,  President  of  the  Supreme 
Vendita  of  the  Carbonari,  and  of  the  Guelph  Council  at 
Ancona,  on  this  subject,  are  very  remarkable. 

"  Giacomo  Papis,"  (this  particular  mention  of  his  name 
seems  to  prove  that  he  is  fully  informed  on  this  subject) 
&lt;*  Giacomo  Papis  fears  the  vengeance  of  the  sect  much 
more  than  the  decision  of  justice  in  the  present  cause." 
This  terror,  unlike  other  circumstances  of  which  this  is  not 
the  place  to  treat,  accounts  of  itself  for  the  crimes  above 
alluded  to.  Poison  was  at  last  called  in  to  aid  the  poignard, 
as  fitter  to  destroy  in  some  circumstances,  by  placing  the 
assassin  in  less  danger.  This  atrocious  system,  notwith- 
standing the  restriction  of  the  chief  sectaries,  is  at  this 
moment  followed  up  by  the  most  abandoned  of  the  order, 
who  are  not  easily  shaken  in  their  resolutions.  But  their 
audacity  went  still  farther,  although  the  vigilance  of  go- 
vernment, towards  the  end  of  1816,  was  enabled  to  check 
the  course  of  these  proceedings,  by  the  arrest  of  some 
individuals  at  Ascoli.  The  sectaries  did  not  desist  from 
the  practices  above  alluded  to,  but,  more  insolent  then  ever, 
dared  to  conspire  against  the  sovereign  and  his  throne. 

A  general  revolt,  intended  to  begin  in  the  Marches,  and 
to  extend  to  Bologna,  was  the  object  of  their  earnest  and 


178  APPENDIX    II. 

incessant  labours.  They  would  have  hailed  the  moment 
which  ended  the  precious  days  of  the  adorable  Sovereign 
Pontiff,  (whom  God  long  guard  and  preserve.) 

In  fact,  it  was  in  the  month  of  April  or  May  of  last 
year,  (1817)  exactly  the  period  when  the  recovery  of  his 
Holiness  was  doubtful,  that  the  Supreme  Central  Council 
of  Bologna  committed  to  Paolo  Monti,  Grand  Master  of 
the  Vendita  of  the  Carbonari  of  Ferrara,  a  sketch  of  a 
plan  of  revolution,  which  the  latter,  by  means  of  the  con- 
fidential emissary  first  sent  to  Bologna,  drew  up  on 
principles  suggested  partly  by  the  Central  Council,  and 
partly  by  his  own  judgment,  and  that  of  the  other  chief 
sectaries  in  that  province.  The  period  at  which  this  revolu- 
tion was  to  take  place  was,  as  soon  as  the  chair  of  St.  Peter 
should  be  vacant;  its  extent,  all  Italy,  except  Naples; 
its  object,  the  attainment  of  liberty  and  independence :  in- 
tending, if  they  failed  to  obtain  it,  to  place  themselves 
under  the  protection  of  a  foreign  power.  This  plan  was 
sent  to  Count  Vincenzo  Fattiboni,  at  Cesena,  in  order  that 
he  might  communicate  it  to  the  Supreme  Central  Council 
in  Bologna.  He  returns  for  answer  to  Monti,  that  "  the 
plan  was  excellent,  and  that  it  was  accepted  by  the  Council 
itself,  but  that  it  was  necessary  to  await  the  decision  of  the 
Grand  Dignitaries  of  Milan  (the  precise  expression)  upon 
whom  two  commissioners  (sectaries)  had  waited  to  hasten 
their  ratification." 