

N 


170  APPENDIX    T. 

Convinced  that  they  could  live  only  by  labour,  they  oc- 
casionally went  to  the  neighbouring  villages  and  hamlets 
where  they  worked  as  journeymen,  carrying  stones  and 
mortar  under  the  direction  of  the  masons,  or  laboured  in 
the  fields  under  the  reapers,  assisted  in  loading  and  un- 
loading carriages,  cleaned  stables  with  the  farmers'  ser- 
vants, and,  above  all,  prepared  charcoal  for  the  forges,  &amp;c.  &amp;c. 
Notwithstanding  their  humility,  the  respect  which  their 
virtue  gained  them  in  the  villages,  procured  for  them 
honours  which  they  were  resolved  to  avoid  by  pilgrimage. 
They  returned  to  France,  after  having  walked  barefoot  to 
St.  Jacques  de  Compostella  in  Gallicia.  Thibault  met 
his  father  at  Treves  in  1054;  but  that  he  might  not  be  af- 
fected, and  so  turned  from  his  devotion,  he  renewed  his 
pious  travels  with  the  blessed  Gautier.  After  having 
adored  the  tombs  of  the  Apostles  at  Rome,  they  went  to 
Venice  to  embark  for  the  Holy  Land,  but  the  war  between 
the  Christians  and  Saracens  prevented  them  from  reaching 
it.  In  1056  they  set  about  travelling  through  various 
parts  of  Italy,  and  after  wandering  up  and  down  they  came 
to  a  woody  place  called  Salanigo,  near  Vicenza,  where  they 
Established  themselves  in  an  old  chapel  dedicated  to  the 
martyrs  St.  Hermagoras  and  St.  Fortunatus.  Gautier  died 
in  1059.  Thibault  continued  in  the  same  place,  and  lived 
in  the  greatest  austerity.  The  Bishop  of  Vicenza,  called 
Sindeker,  raised  him  to  sacred  orders,  and  made  him  a 
priest.  He  obtained  from  God,  even  in  his  life-time,  the 
gift  of  miracles ;  but  he  was  tormented  by  temptations 
which  ceased  only  two  years  before  his  death,  at  the  end  of 
a  painful  and  offensive  disease.  The  fame  of  his  sanctity 
reached  his  parents,  who  went  to  see  him,  and  his  mother 
established  herself  in  a  little  cell  not  far  from  his  own.   He 


APPENDIX    I.  171 

expired  the  last  day  of  June,  IO66.  Three  days  before  his 
death  there  was  a  considerable  earthquake  ;  Thibault's 
dwelling  received  five  shocks,  which  were  followed  by  a 
violent  agony,  in  which  he  suffered  extremely. 

There  are  various  opinions  as  to  the  place  where  his  re- 
mains were  deposited  ;  the  most  authentic  account  is,  that 
they  were  carried  back  from  Vicenza  to  France  some  years 
after  his  death.  His  relics  were  distributed  in  France, 
Switzerland,  and  Upper  Germany,  as  far  as  Vienna  in 
Austria,  and  in  Venice  itself,  where  a  parish  was  founded 
in  his  name  in  1171,  which  was  called  by  corruption 
S.  Baldo. 

It  is  said  that  Thibault  was  canonised  by  Pope  Alex- 
ander III.  His  principal  festival  is  celebrated  in  some 
places  on  the  30th  June,  the  day  of  his  death ;  in  others,  on 
the  1st  July,  &amp;c.  He  is  sometimes  confounded  with  St. 
Thibault  de  Vengadice,  St.  Thibault  d'Alba,  and  St.  Thi- 
bault de  Marly  de  Vaux  des  Cornay.* 