

It  was  also  about  the  same  time  (27th  of  March)  that 
the  person  called  Papis  sent  a  letter  from  Ancona  to  Count 
Cesare  Gallo,  at  Macerata,  relative  to  the  object  of  the 
revolt ;  it  contained  the  following  passage  : — "  Be  active 
then :  for  if  ever  an  opportunity  was  propitious,  it  is  cer- 


APPENDIX    II.  179 

tainly  the  present,  when  the  just  indignation  of  the  people 
favours  our  design,  and  the  information  we  have  received 
assures  us  of  success  in  our  enterprise." 

It  was  also  about  the  same  time,  that  is,  between  April 
and  May,  that  the  ex-gendarme  Francesco  Riva,  of  Forli, 
one  of  the  principal  executive  agents,  presented  at 
Ancona  a  plan  of  a  revolt  throughout  the  state,  to  Papis, 
who  threw  it  back  to  him,  saying,  that  he  had  not  sufficient 
talents  to  draw  up  a  plan  of  such  importance.  Finally,  it 
was  at  the  end  of  this  period,  viz.  May,  that  Count  Gallo 
proposed  to  the  sectaries  of  Macerata  the  execution  of  the 
revolt. 

In  the  mean  time  nothing  was  left  undone  which  could 
tend  to  alienate  the  attachment  of  the  subjects  from  the 
Sovereign,  and  excite  their  indignation  by  ascribing  to  him 
(a  lui)  the  scarcity  of  provisions,  although  occasioned  by  the 
inclemency  of  the  preceding  seasons.  A  sonnet  was  read 
in  a  baracca  at  Ascoli,  whose  seditious  and  sacrilegious 
meaning  may  be  gathered  from  the  following  triplet,  re- 
membered by  one  who  was  present : — 

*'  Figli  di  Bruto,  11  brando  omai  scuotete, 
Poiche  spunta  nel  ciel,  di  sangue  tinta, 
Stella, che  batte  il  rio  Tiranno  il  Prete."* 

But  in  the  following  spring,  that  of  the  last  year  (1817), 
a  secretary  in  Fermo  composed  another  not  less  impious, 
which  was  circulated  among  the  inferior  Vendite. 


*  Now,  Sons  of  Brutus !  lift  the  blade  on  high. 
For  lo !  emerging  from  the  blood-stained  sky. 
The  star  that  blasts  the  priestly  tyranny. 


180  app:endix  ii. 

Sceso  dall'  Alpi  sitibondo  il  Tauro 
Alia  Ligure  donna  il  sen  trafisse, 
L'Aquila  avvezza  all'  Italo  tesauro 
Suir  Adiiatico  Lion  gli  artigli  infisse ; 
L'irsute  orecchie  awolte  entro  il  Camauro 
II  Lupo  Tiberin,  che  in  lacci  visse^ 
SpezzoUi,  e  sete  di  vendetta,  ed'auro, 
Quanto  ha  dal  Tebro  al  Tronto  e  al  Reno 

afflisse : 
Fame  intanto  di  vita  i  germi  adugge, 
Senza  che  i  mostri  rei  v'  abbian  riparo, 
E  pestifero  morbo  il  popol  stnigge  : 
E  che  pi^  Italia  sonnachiosa  aspetti  ? 
Perche  non  string!  il  preparato  acciai'O, 
E  il  gran  momento  del  tuo  scampo 

affretti?* 

*  Fierce  from  the  Alps,  the  Bull  intent  on  spoil. 
The  bosom  gores  of  the  Ligurian  dame. 
The  Eagle,  wont  to  batten  on  our  soil. 
Seeks  Adria's  Lion  with  his  grasp  to  tame  ; 
His  shaggy  ears  in  the  tiara  twin'd. 
The  Tyber  wolf,  who  long  in  thraldom  pin'd. 
Bursts  from  his  bonds,  and  eager  to  destroy, 
Spreads  desolation  wide  thro'  central  Italy.* 
Famine,  the  while,  checks  every  germ  of  life. 
Nor  guilty  rulers  shelter  us  from  ill. 
Death  gains  the  victory  that  hath  no  strife : 
Then  why,  0  !  slumb'ring  Italy,  dost  wait  ? 
"Where  is  the  sword  that  thirsts  for  vengeance  still. 
To  speed  the  crisis  of  thy  better  fate  ? 