

*  The  existence  of  secret  religious  societies  in  the  reign  of  Alexander  III. 
has  been  noticed  in  the  extract  from  Miiller,  given  in  the  text.  It  is  remark- 
able that,  about  the  period  of  the  canonisation  of  St.  Theobald,  the  patron  of 
the  Carbonari,  Panvuiius  placed  the  foundation  of  the  order  of  Umilianti  by 
certain  Ftiorusciti,  or  banished  men  of  Milan. — See  Cronologia  Ecclesiastica.  T. 


I 


N    2 


(     172     ) 


APPENDIX  II. 


The  minutes  of  the  proceedings  (at  Rome)  against  the 
conspiracy  of  the  Carbonari  discovered  at  Macerata  have 
been  often  mentioned  in  the  preceding  Memoir.  They 
contain,  in  fact,  a  correct  statement  of  their  intentions  and 
mode  of  proceeding  in  the  Papal  states. 

These  minutes,  presented  by  the  Advocate  Leggieri, 
Recorder  of  the  ordinary  criminal  court  of  Rome,  ap- 
pointed to  conduct  this  celebrated  cause,  were  printed  by 
order  of  Government. 

The  title  is — "  A  sua  Eccellenza  reverendissima  Mon- 
signor  Pacca,  Governatore  di  Roma  e  Direttore  Generale  di 
Polizia,  e  sua  Congregazione  Criminale — Macerata  ed  altri 
luoghi  di  fellonia,  contro :  Giacomo  Papis,  il  Conte  Cesare 
Gallo,  Luigi  Carletti,  Francesco  Riva,  il  Conte  Vicenzo 
Fattiboni,  I'Avvocato  Pietro  Castellano,  Antonio  Cot- 
toloni,  e  Pio  Sampaolesi,  ed  altri,  inquisiti,  arrestati  ed 
assenti.  Ristretto  del  Processo  informativo.  Roma,  nella 
Stamperia  della  Rev.  Camera  Apostolica.'' 

But  as  very  few  copies  were  printed,  it  is  now  become 
almost  impossible  to  procure  one.  It  has  therefore  been 
judged  necessary,  in  order  to  complete  and  vivify  the  pic- 
ture that  has  been  just  drawn,  to  add  an  extract  from  these 
official  notes.  The  introductory  part  has  been  selected  in 
preference,  as  embracing  the  whole  subject. 


APPENDIX    II.  173 

"  Towards  the  end  of  June  in  the  year  1817,  a  regu- 
lar proceeding  was  instituted,  by  the  delegation  of  Mace- 
rata,  against  certain  individuals  who  were  discovered  to  be- 
long to  secret  societies,  and  who  had  made  attempts  against 
the  public  tranquillity  and  safety. The  active  machina- 
tions in  which  the  Carbonari  of  the  Papal  departments 
were  indefatigably  engaged,  particularly  in  the  beginning 
of  the  autumn  of  I8I6,  were  directed  to  the  same  object. 
They  began  to  unite  more  closely,  and  established  Vendite 
in  many  places  where  they  had  never  existed.  As  they 
increased  in  force  they  sent  a  confidential  agent  from  Fermo 
to  Bologna,  believing  that  there  existed  in  that  city  a  Su- 
preme Vendita,  which  regulated  all  the  others.  Instead  of 
this  they  found  there  the  Central  Council  of  the  Guelphs, 
which  received  the  petitions  conveyed  by  the  agent,  and 
concerted  with  him  on  the  means  of  instituting  Guelph 
Councils.  The  plan  laid  down  was  effected  by  instituting 
these  councils  in  places  where  they  had  not  before  exist- 
ed, as  far  as  the  Marches,  and  composing  them  of  secta- 
ries of  all  kinds,  and  particularly  of  Carbonari. 