

Meanwhile  the  police  of  Macerata  lost  no  time  in  making 
the  necessary  investigation  of  the  events  of  the  night.  Some 
of  the  criminal  agents  were  arrested  and  imprisoned  during 
the  following  days.  The  necessity,  however,  of  becoming 
fully  acquainted  with  all  their  depositions  in  order  to  crush 
future  plots,  delayed  to  the  end  of  last  November  the  arrest 
of  the  principal  delinquents,  who  were  seized  about  the 
same  time  in  their  respective  provinces  and  conveyed  to  the 
castle  of  St.  Angelo  and  the  prisons  of  the  capital. 

The  trial  of  all  the  accused  having  been  at  last  terminated 
by  means  of  special  Pontifical  powers  extended  to  eccle- 
siastics, the  minutes  of  the  investigation,  as  far  as  it  relates 
to  the  projected  revolt  and  the  particular  offences  of  those 
most  heavily  implicated,  (for  the  other' offenders  will  be 

o  '2 


188  APPENDIX  II. 

treated  of  separately)  are  here  given.     The  names  of  these 

delinquents  are 

Giacomo  Papis,  of  Rome,  merchant,  residing  in  Ancona ; 

Conte  Cesare  Gallo,  di  Osimo,  residing  in  Macerata ; 

liuigi  Carleiti,  of  Macerata,  formerly  a  soldier ; 

Francesco  Riva,  of  Forli,  ex-gendarme ; 

Cojite  Vincenzo  Fattibo?ii,  of  Cesena;    together  with  the 

Advocate 
Pietro  Castellano,  of  Ancona,  residing  in  Macerata ; 
Antonio  Cottoloni,  of  Macerata,  and  the  notary  Pio  Sam- 

paolesi,  of  Ancona.^ 

The  following  was  the  sentence  pronounced  and  put  in 
execution  against  them,  in  the  month  of  October,  1818  : — 

The  Ordinary  Criminal  Court  of  the  Government  Tribunal, 
composed  of 

His  Eminency  Monsignor  the  Right  Reverend  Tiberio 
Pacca,  Governor  of  Rome,  President ; 

The  Most  Illustrious  and  Right  Reverend  Signor  Mon- 
signor Marcantonio  Olgiati,  Clerk  of  the  Chamber,  re- 
presenting the  first  Assessor  of  Government; 

Monsignor  Carlo  Alessi,  second  Assessor; 

The  Signori 

Camillo  Benzi,  first  Lieutenant ; 
Vincenzo  Trambusti,  second  Lieutenant; 
Niccola  Bruni,  exercising  the  functions  of  third  Lieute- 
nant, all  in  quality  of  Judges. 

Francesco  Leggieri,  Assessor  of  the  General  Direction  of 
Police,  in  the  quality  of  Recorder,  under  the  direction 
of  the  Most  Illustrious  and  Right  Reverend  Signori 

*  Then  follow  the  minutes  of  the  trial. 


APPENDIX  II.  189 

Monsignor  Belisario  Cristaldi,  Pro-Attorney-General; 
Monsignor  Filippo  Invernizzi,  Attorney  for  the  Poor, 

(Avvocato  dei  Poveri),  and 
Signor  Quirino  Francini,  Chief  Notary  of  the  Govern- 
ment Tribunal — 
assembled  at  24  o'clock  of  this  day  in  conformity  with  the 
intimation  published  eight  days  previously,  in  one  of  the 
chambers  of  the  Apostolic  Palace  of  the  Government,  the 
usual  place,  to  judge 
Oiacomo  Papis,  of  Rome,  &amp;c. 
Conte  Cesare  Gallo,  &amp;c.  8cc. 
accused  of  felony,  together  with  others  under  arrest  and 
absent. 