

(The  Pagan  relates  accordingly.) 

Gr.  M.  The  first  journey  is  the  symbol  of  human  virtue  : 
the  rustling  of  leaves,  and  the  obstacles  you  have  met  in 
the  road,  indicate  to  you,  that  weak  as  we  are,  and  strug- 
gling in  this  vale  of  tears,  we  can  only  attain  virtue  by  good 
works,  and  under  the  guidance  of  reason,  &amp;c.  &amp;c.  Let 
him  make  the  second  journey. 

(The  Pagan  is  led  away,  and  is  made  to  pass  through  fire ; 
he  is  made  acquainted  with  the  chastisement  of  perjury  ; 
and,  if  there  is  an  opportunity,  he  is  shown  a  head  severed 
from  the  body,  &amp;c.  &amp;c.  He  is  again  conducted  into  the 
Baracca.) 

Gr.  M.  The  fire  through  which  you  have  passed  is  the 


196  APPENDIX    III. 

symbol  of  that  flame  of  charity,  which  should  be  always 
kindled  in  our  hearts,  to  efi'ace  the  stains  of  the  seven 
capital  sins,  &amp;c.  &amp;c. 

Make  him  approach  the  sacred  throne,  &amp;c. 

Gr.  M»  You  must  take  an  irrevocable  oath ;  it  off'ends 
neither  religion  nor  the  state,  nor  the  rights  of  individuals  ; 
but  forget  not,  that  its  violation  is  punished  with  death. 

The  Pagan  declares  that  he  will  submit  to  it ;  the  Mas- 
ter of  the  Ceremonies  leads  him  to  the  throne,  and  makes 
him  kneel  on  the  white  cloth. 

Gr,M.  Order! 

The  Oath. 

I,  N.  N.  promise  and  swear,  upon  the  general  statutes 
of  the  order,  and  upon  this  steel,  the  avenging  instrument 
of  the  perjured,  scrupulously  to  keep  the  secret  of  Car- 
bonarism ;  and  neither  to  write,  engrave,  or  paint  any  thing 
concerning  it,  without  having  obtained  a  written  permis- 
sion. I  swear  to  help  my  Good  Cousins  in  case  of  need,  as 
much  as  in  me  lies,  and  not  to  attempt  any  thing  against 
the  honour  of  their  families.  I  consent,  and  wish,  if  I  per- 
jure myself,  that  my  body  may  be  cut  in  pieces,  then  burnt, 
and  my  ashes  scattered  to  the  wind,  in  order  that  my  name 
may  be  held  up  to  the  execration  of  the  Good  Cousins 
throughout  the  earth.     So  help  me  God. 

Gr.  M.  Lead  him  into  the  middle  of  the  ranks  (this  is 
done).  What  do  you  wish  ?  The  Master  of  the  Ceremo- 
nies suggests  to  the  Pagan,  to  say  Light. 

Gr.  M.  It  will  be  granted  to  you  by  the  blows  of  my 
axe. 

The  Grand  Master  strikes  with  the  axe — this  action  is 


APPENDIX    III.  197 

repeated  by  all  the  apprentices — the  bandage  is  removed 
from  the  eyes  of  the  Pagan — the  Grand  Master  and  the 
Good  Cousins  hold  their  axes  raised. 

Gr.  M.  These  axes  will  surely  put  you  to  death,  if  you 
become  perjured.  On  the  other  hand,  they  will  all  strike 
in  your  defence,  when  you  need  them,  and  if  you  remain 
faithful.  {To  the  Master  of  the  Ceremonies,)  Bring  him  near 
the  throne,  and  make  him  kneel. 