

«  The  Reno  is  the  main  branch  of  the  Po  di  Primaro,  on  which  Ferrara  is 
built,  a  few  miles  South  of  the  Po  Grande.  The  Tronto  is  a  considerable 
stream  in  the  March  of  Fermo,  which  it  separates  from  Abruzzo  Ultra,  and 
consequently  divides  the  States  of  the  Church  from  the  kingdom  of  Naples. 

— r. 


APPENDIX    II.  181 

During  the  last  winter  and  spring  (1817)  fires,  which 
were  reported  to  have  succeeded  each  other  rapidly,  took 
place,  accompanied  with  the  escape  of  convicts  and  pri- 
soners in  various  places,  from  Bologna  to  Spoleto,  where 
the  sectaries  particularly  abounded.  These  fires  were 
discovered  to  be  generally  supposititious,  although  some 
were  really  accidental.  The  escape  of  prisoners  could 
only  have  been  effected  by  co-operation  from  without. 
This,  with  the  support  of  other  arguments,  warranted  the 
conclusion,  that  all  was  owing  to  the  sectaries,  whose 
object  was  to  unsettle  the  people  of  those  provinces,  to 
promote  brigandage,  to  call  the  attention  of  the  govern- 
ment forces  against  robbers,  and  to  divert  them  from  their 
stations,  by  which  means  the  intended  revolt  would  have 
been  easily  and  securely  effected. 

The  sentiments  expressed  in  the  letter  of  Papis,  quoted 
above,  were  echoed  by  the  speeches  of  the  members  in 
language  equally  specific,  and  corresponding  with  the 
object  of  the  revolt.  Such  too  were  the  discourses  held 
by  the  chief  orators  and  sectaries  in  various  meetings, 
both  before  and  after  the  date  of  Papis's  letter.  In  one 
of  these  meetings  held  at  S.  Elpidio,  the  sacred  purple 
was  strongly  inveighed  against,  and  it  was  announced  that 
the  day  would  come  when  it  would  be  changed  into  a 
mantle  of  blood. — Proc.  Mac.  fol.  85.  In  another,  held 
subsequently  in  the  same  place,  the  necessity  of  destroying 
monarchy,  and  especially  the  holy  authority  of  the  Pope, 
was  set  forth ;  and  the  sectaries  were  exhorted  to  under- 
take any  project,  however  difficult,  for  the  purpose  of 
regaining  liberty.— Proc.  Mac.  fol.  828.  841.  86l.  In 
another,  held  at  S.  Ginnesio,  it  was  recommended  to  the 
members  to  provide  themselves   with  arms  and  ammuni- 


182  APPENDIX    IT. 

tion  to  serve  as  occasion  offered;  for,  they  were  told, 
liberty  and  independence  would  soon  be  attained. — Proc. 
Mac,  fol.  1470,  &amp;c.  In  another,  held  at  Macerata,  in  in- 
culcating the  necessity  of  rigid  attention  to  secrecy  with 
respect  to  the  operations  of  the  Society,  a  threat  of  death 
by  the  poignard  was  expressed  against  those  who  should 
attempt  to  violate  their  oath,  and  it  was  hinted  that  the 
same  means  would  be  necessary,  ere  the  happy  moment 
would  arrive,  when  liberty  would  be  regained,  and  the  yoke 
of  the  present  government  thrown  off. — proc,  Mac,  fol. 
218.  296.  690.  979.  1317.  &amp;c.  At  Loreto,  on  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Guelph  Council,  a  discussion  was  held  on 
the  revolution  which  was  shortly  to  take  place,  and  on  the 
satisfactory  accounts  of  preparations  for  it,  in  consequence 
of  which  all  the  sectaries  evinced  a  determination  to  follow 
it  up. — Proc,  Mac.  111.  &amp;c.  At  Monte  Lupone  the  same 
subject  was  discussed,  and  the  members  animated  each 
other  to  action,  declaring  themselves  eager  for  the  crisis, 
and  exulting  in  the  prospect  of  establishing  an  indepen- 
dent republic— Proc.  Mrtc.  fol.  137.201.  220.  236.  283. 
467.  594. 605.  704. 