

Again,  at  Montolmo,  in  another  assembly,  the  members 
were  assured  that  liberty  and  independence  would  be  soon 
regained. — Proc.  Mac,  fol.  781.  In  another,  at  Monte 
Lupone,  held  on  the  5th  of  June,  one  of  the  sectaries, 
grasping  a  dagger  in  his  hand,  caused  his  companions  to 
renew  their  oath  of  secrecy,  and  declared  that  whoever 
betrayed  it  should  perish  by  the  weapon  he  held.  After 
this  preface  he  showed  the  advantages  that  would  be  ob- 
tained by  taking  the  reins  of  power  out  of  the  hands  of  the 
actual  government,  and  by  erecting  an  independent  re- 
public.    Another  member  recommended  the  imitation  of 


APPENDIX    II.  183 

Brutus,  by  dethroning  tyrants  and  destroying  monarchy, 
and  by  erecting  upon  their  ruins  an  independent  republic — 
and  concluded  that  in  a  short  time  the  yoke  of  the  present 
government  would  be  thrown  off,  exhorting  his  associates 
to  provide  themselves  for  this  object,  even  with  poisoned 
weapons  (arme  anche  avvelenate)  and  with  ammunition,  in 
order  to  be  ready  on  the  first  opportunity. — Proc»  Mac, 
fol.  100.  105.  114.  124.  138.  140.  155.  l60.  180.  201.  209. 
211.222.  224.  239.241.  284.286.298.  596.  607.  1559, 
1562. 

The  plan  for  the  execution  of  the  revolt  was  the  most 
terrible  and  sanguinary.  An  incendiary  proclamation  was 
to  have  been  circulated  in  the  Marches  and  other  provinces 
of  the  state,  immediately  on  the  breaking  out  of  the  con- 
spiracy in  Macerata,  to  excite  the  people  to  join  it.  To 
that  place  the  various  Vendite  of  the  Carbonari  and  Coun- 
cils of  the  Guelphs,  expressly  informed  of  the  event,  were 
to  have  sent,  in  the  same  night,  a  number  of  armed  rebels 
of  their  order.  These  were  to  have  been  admitted  into 
the  city,  in  which  part  of  the  Sectaries  were  to  have  been 
ready  to  act.  The  watchword  for  the  rebel-bands  in 
answer  to  the  challenge,  "  Chi  evviva?'*  was  to  have  been, 
"  San  Teobaldo"  (whom  the  Carbonari  consider  the  pro- 
tector of  the  order.)  The  other  secret  word  among  the 
leaders  was  "  Vendetta  al  Popolo."  Having  insinuated 
themselves  by  stratagem  into  the  places  where  the  govern- 
ment troops  are  stationed,  they  would  have  overpowered 
them  and  deprived  them  of  their  arms,  confining  such  as 
were  unwilling  to  take  a  part  in  their  operations.  In  the 
same  manner,  entering  the  public  prisons,  they  would  have 
confined  the  keepers,  and  released  the  prisoners,  selecting 
from  the  latter  those  who  are  fit  to  bear  arms. 


184  APPENDIX    ir. 

Afterwards  dividing  the  number  of  the  rebels  into  pa- 
troles  of  twelve  men,  some  were  to  have  attacked  the 
public  treasuries,  others  the  habitations  of  rich  private  in- 
dividuals whose  property  was  to  have  been  plundered ; 
and  some,  known  to  be  hostile  to  the  sect,  were  to  have 
been  seized  and  conducted  to  the  deep  subterraneous  cells 
of  the  Monastery  of  Santa  Chiara,  which  was  fixed  upon 
as  a  rebel  station — there  they  were  to  be  destroyed  by  fire 
or  poison,  their  relations  being  made  to  believe  that  they 
were  sent  as  hostages  elsewhere.  The  plunder,  under  the 
faith  and  responsibility  of  the  appointed  heads  of  the 
patroles,  was  to  have  been  deposited  in  the  Convent  "  del 
Bernabiti,"  where  others  would  have  registered  it,  to  be 
afterwards  employed  in  the  necessary  expenses.  The 
principal  civil  and  ecclesiastical  authorities  would  not  have 
been  exempted  from  seizure  and  imprisonment. 