

Gr.  M.  Repeat  your  oath  to  me,  and  swear  to  observe 
exactly  the  private  institutions  of  this  respectable  Vendita. 

The  Candidate.  I  ratify  it  and  swear. 

Gr.  M.  Holding  the  specimen  of  wood  in  his  left  hand, 
and  suspending  the  axe  over  the  head  of  the  candidate  with 
his  right,  says.  To  the  great  and  divine  Grand  Master 
of  the  universe,  and  to  St.  Theobald,  our  protector — In 
the  name  and  under  the  auspices  of  the  Supreme  Vendita 
of  Naples,  and  in  virtue  of  the  power  which  has  been  con- 
ferred upon  me  in  this  respectable  Vendita,  I  make,  name 
and  create  you  an  apprentice  Carbonaro. 

The  Grand  Master  strikes  the  specimen  which  is  held 
over  the  Apprentice's  head,  thrice  ;  he  then  causes  him  to 
rise,  and  instructs  him  in  the  sacred  words  and  touch. 

Gr.  M.  Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  let  him  be  acknow- 
ledged by  the  apprentices. 

The  Assistants  anticipate  the  execution  of  this  order,  by 
saying  to  the  Grand  Master,  All  is  according  to  rule,  just 
and  perfect. 

Gr.  M.  Assistants,  tell  the  respective  orders  to  acknow- 
ledge, henceforth,  the  Good  Cousin  N.  N.  as  an  active 
member  of  this  Vendita,  &amp;c.  &amp;c. 

The  Symbolical  Picture  is  explained  to  the  new  appren- 
tice. 


198  APPENDIX    III. 

Gr.  M.  At  what  hour  do  the  Carbonari  terminate  their 
sacred  labours  ? 

First  Assistant.  As  soon  as  the  Sun  no  longer  enlightens 
our  forest. 

Gr,  M.  What  hour  is  it  f 

Second  Assistant.  The  Sun  no  longer  enlightens  our  forest. 

Gr.  M.  Good  Cousins,  as  the  Sun  no  longer  enlightens 
our  forest,  it  is  my  intention  to  terminate  our  sacred  la- 
bours. First,  let  us  make  a  triple  salutation  (Vantaggio), 
to  our  Grand  Master,  divine  and  human,  (Jesus  Christ). 
— To  St.  Theobald,  our  protector,  who  has  assisted  us 
and  preserved    us  from  the  eyes   of  the  pagans — Order ! 

To  me, &amp;c.     The  signs  and  salutations  (Vantaggi) 

are  performed. 

Gr.  M.  I  declare  the  labours  ended ;  retire  to  your  Ba- 
racche — retire  in  peace. 


Reception  to  the  Second  Rank. 

The  signs  of  the  Masters  are  made,  and  they  arrange 
themselves  in  order. 

The  Grand  Master  on  this  occasion  is  called  the  Presi- 
dent— The  assistants.  Counsellors  of  the  College  of  R. 
(Respectable)  Carbonarism. 

The  President.  At  what  hour  do  the  Counsellors  meet  ? 

First  Counsellor.  When  the  cock  crows. 

President.  Second  Counsellor,  what  hour  is  it  ? 

Second  Counsellor.  N,oon  by  the  Sun. 


\ 


APPENDIX    lir.  199 

The  Counsellors  make  the  triple  salutation  to  the  Grand 
Master,  divine  and  human,  and  to  St.  Theobald,  and  in- 
voke their  blessing  on  their  labours. 

The  President  puts  on  a  robe,  and  takes  the  name  of 
Pilate  ;  the  First  Counsellor  that  of  Caiaphas  ;  the  second 
that  of  Herod;  the  Adept  (Esperto)  calls  himself  the  chief 
of  the  guards;  the  Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  the  God- 
father ;  the  Good  Cousins  generally  are  called  the  People. 