


APPENDIX  II.  191 

proclamation   in    the   Marches,    and  other   parts  of   the 
Papal  States — 

5.  Having  found  that 

Pietro  Castellano  was  fully  acquainted  with  the 
correspondence  between  Papis  and  Gallo  to  effect  the  re- 
volt, and  that  he  himself  provoked  it  by  distributing  the 
above  seditious  proclamation — 

6.  Having  found  that 

Antonio  Cottoloni,  secretary  of  the  society  of  Car- 
bonari, in  Macerata,  who  kept  the  above-mentioned  cor- 
respondence between  Papis  and  Gallo,  as  well  as  other 
papers  relating  to  the  same  subject,  together  with  the 
arms  of  the  latter — 

That  Pio  Sampaolesi,  Secretary  of  the  other  society 
of  Carbonari,  in  Ancona,  was  also  fully  acquainted  with 
the  intended  revolt,  and  had  also  knowledge  of  the  cor- 
respondence between  the  said  society  of  Ancona  and  the 
Central  Council  of  the  Guelphs  at  Bologna — 

That  Vincenzo  Fattiboni,  also  acquainted  with  the  in- 
tended revolt,  was  the  intermediate  organ  of  this  corre- 
spondence between  the  said  society  of  Ancona  and  the 
Central  Council  of  the  Guelphs  at  Bologna,  and  tliat  by 
his  means  a  plan  of  revolution,  to  be  extended  even 
beyond  the  Papal  Dominions,  was  presented  to  the  said 
Central  Council — 

Has  declared,  and  declares 

Giacomo  Papis, 

Conte  Cesare  Gallo, 

Luigi  Carletti, 

Francesco  Riva,  and 

Pietro  Castellano,  Guilty ;  partly  by  their  own  con- 
fession, and  partly  convicted  of  felony,  by  the  whole  tenor 

o  4 


192  APPENDIX  II. 

of  the  evidence  on  the  trial,  and  therefore  has  condemned 
them  to  suffer  death — 

Has  declared  again,  and  declares  convicted  of  partici- 
pation in  the  same  crime, 
Antonio  Cottoloni, 
Pio  Sampaolesi,  and 

Vincenzo  Fattiboni ;  but  as  they  co-operated  less 
directly  and  efficaciously  in  the  seditious  plot,  has  con- 
demned them  to  the  punishment  of  the  Gallies  for  life  : 

Has  also  condemned  all  the  above-named  eight  indivi- 
duals to  the  payment  of  the  expenses  of  the  trial  and 
sentence :  has  also  appointed  a  day  for  another  court  to 
try  the  remaining  prisoners  under  arrest  and  absent: 

Has  also  ordered  that  the  present  sentence  be  commu- 
nicated, in  due  form,  to  the  prisoners  condemned  : 

Has  ordered,  finally,  that  the  present  sentence  be  printed, 
and  affixed  not  only  in  Rome,  but  in  all  parts  of  the  Papal 
States,  to  the  number  of  500  copies. 

Done,  closed  and  judged,  in  Rome,  this  day  and  year 
above-mentioned,  all  the  members  of  the  court  having 
subscribed  the  original,  together  with  me  the  undersigned. 
Chief  Notary  of  the  Government  Tribunal. 

T.  Pacca,  Governor  of  Rome  and 

Vice-Chamberlain. 
Marc'  Anotnio  Olgiati,  Clerk  of 

the  Chamber. 
Carlo  Alessi,  Assessor. 
Camillo  Benzi,  Lieutenant. 
Vincenzo  Trambusti,  Lieutenant. 
Niccola  Bruni,  Pro-Lieutenant. 
Francesco  Leggieri,  Assessor-Re- 
corder. 
Quiring  Francini,  Chief  Notary. 