


APPENDIX  ir.  193 

The  above  sentence  having  been  reported  by  me,  the 
undersigned,  to  his  Holiness  our  Lord  Pope  Pius  VII. 
happily  reigning,  his  Holiness,  by  an  act  of  his  natural 
clemency,  has  determined  that  the  punishment  should  be 
lessened  and  reduced  for 

Giacomo  Papis, 

Conte  Cesare  Gallo, 

Luigi  Carletti, 

Francesco  Riva,  and 

Pietro  Castellano,  to  Perpetual  Confinement,  under 
strict  custody,  in  a  fortress  of  State;  and  for 

Antonio  Cottoloni, 

Pio  Sampaolesi,  and 

Vincenzo  Fattiboni,  to  Confinement  for  10  years, 
under  the  same  custody. 

T.  Pacca,  Governor  and  Vice-Chamberlain. 

A  true  copy, 
Quiring  Francini,  Chief  Notary. 

The  8th  day  of  October,  1 8  J  8. 


(     194    ) 


APPENDIX  III. 


Reception  of  a  Carbonaro. 

1  HE  Preparatore  (preparer)  leads  the  Pagan  (uninitiated) 
who  is  to  become  a  member,  blindfold,  from  the  closet 
of  reflexion  to  the  door  of  the  Baracca.  He  knocks  irregu- 
larly ;  the  Copritore  (coverer)  says  to  the  second  assistant, 
*'  A  Pagan  knocks  at  the  door."  The  second  assistant  re- 
peats this  to  the  first,  who  repeats  it  to  the  Grand  Mas- 
ter; at  every  communication  the  Grand  Master  strikes  a 
blow  with  an  axe. 

Grand  Master.  See  who  is  the  rash  being,  who  dares  to 
trouble  our  sacred  labours. 

This  question  having  passed  through  the  assistants  and 
Copritore  to  the  Preparatore,  he  answers  through  an  open- 
ing in  the  door. 

Preparatore.  It  is  a  man  whom  I  have  found  wandering 
in  the  forest. 

Gr.  M.  Ask  his  name,  country  and  profession. 

The  secretary  writes  the  answer. 

Gr.  M.  Ask  him  his  habitation — his  religion. 

The  secretary  notes  them. 

Gr.  M.  What  is  it  he  seeks  among  us  ? 

Prep.  Light ;  and  to  become  a  member  of  our  society. 

Gr.  M.  Let  him  enter. 


I 


APPENDIX    III.  195 

(The  Pagan  is  led  into  the  middle  of  the  assembly ;  and 
his  answers  are  compared  with  what  the  Secretary  had 
noted.) 

Gr.  M.  Mortal,  the  first  qualities  which  w^e  require, 
are  frankness,  and  contempt  of  danger.  Do  you  feel  that 
you  are  capable  of  practising  them  ? 

After  the  answer,  the  Grand  Master  questions  the  candi- 
date on  morality  and  benevolence ;  and  he  is  asked,  if  he 
has  any  effects,  and  wishes  to  dispose  of  them,  being  at 
the  moment  in  danger  of  death  5  after  being  satisfied  of 
his  conduct,  the  Grand  Master  continues,  "  Well,  we  will 
expose  you  to  trials  that  have  some  meaning — let  him  make 
the  first  journey."  He  is  led  out  of  the  Baracca — he  is 
made  to  journey  through  the  forest — he  hears  the  rustling 
of  leaves — he  is  then  led  back  to  the  door,  as  at  his  first 
entrance. 

Gr.  M,  What  have  you  remarked  during  this  first  jour- 
ney? 