

Four  cauldrons  of  burning  pitch,  on  the  summit  of  the 
tower  of  Macerata,  together  with  sulphur  rockets  let  off 
from  the  square,  would  have  announced  to  the  other 
cities  the  completion  and  success  of  the  revolution. — At 
sight  of  this  a  number  of  fires,  on  appointed  heights, 
would  have  communicated  the  result  from  the  Marches  to 
Bologna,  in  order  that  the  dreadful  enterprise  and  example 
might  have  been  every  where  imitated. — The  tolling  of  all 
the  bells  on  the  following  morning  would  have  attracted 
the  peasants  of  the  neighbouring  country  into  the  city. 
This  was  to  give  the  appearance  of  an  insurrection  of  the 
people,  and  to  conceal  the  operations  of  the  sectaries. 
They  would  then  have  proclaimed  a  free  and  independent 
government,  and  the  Conte  Cesare  Gallo  would  have  been 
elected  Consul  with  pretended  reluctance  to  assume  the 
office.     An  inviolable  law  was  to  have  reduced  the  most 


APPENDIX  II.  185 

necessary  articles  of  support  to  a  just  price. — All  taxes 
were  to  have  been  abolished.  Public  thanksgiving,  with 
the  performance  of  the  Ambrosian  hymn,*  was  to  have 
been  appointed  in  the  Cathedral.  A  regiment  of  infantry, 
and  a  corps  of  cavalry  were  to  have  been  organized  with 
the  tempting  pay  of  five  pauls  a  dayf  to  each  soldier,  in 
order  to  ensure  the  immediate  consummation  of  the  work. 

It  appears  however  that  some  of  the  less  violent  secta*- 
ries  differed  as  to  the  necessity  of  accompanying  the  revo*- 
lution  with  these  horrors. 

The  auspicious  improvement  and  final  restoration  of  the 
health  of  the  Sovereign  Pontiff  disconcerted  the  seditious 
intentions  of  the  Central  Council,  which  decided  on  de- 
ferring their  execution.  But  the  plot  was  already  too  ripe 
to  be  laid  aside,  and  the  inferior  sectaries  in  the  Marches 
were  too  deeply  involved  to  free  themselves  from  their 
engagement  or  to  listen  to  delay. 

The  execution  of  the  revolt,  after  having  been  already 
fixed  earlier  in  the  month  of  June,  was  finally  appointed 
for  the  night  of  the  24th  of  that  month,  the  anniversary  of 
the  festival  of  St.  John — and  the  impious  attempt  proceeded 
to  its  execution  by  the  shortest  means.  An  incendiary  pro- 
clamation, which  had  been  probably  sent  from  the  Marchies 
to  Forli  to  be  printed,  had  been  previously  affixed,  during 
the  day,  in  various  parts  of  the  former  province,  and  even 
in  Umbria.     Its  tenor  was  as  follows  : — 


•  The  Ambrosian  chant  is,  or  was  till  very  lately,  used  in  the  Cathedral  ser- 
vice of  Milan  in  honour  of  its  bishop  and  benefactor,  St.  Ambrose  ;  the  other 
Latin  churches  having  for  many  centuries  adopted  the  Gregorian  chant.     T, 