

■f  About  2s.  6d.  sterling.     T. 


186  APPENDIX   II. 


Proclamation* 


People  of  the  Roman  States  (Popoli  Pontifici) !  when 
it  is  the  will  of  the  Most  High  God  to  punish  nations,  he 
consigns  them  to  the  government  of  idiots. 

When  He  sees  that  they  are  sensible  of  their  error* 
and  wills  their  happiness,  he  inspires  them  with  courage 
and  commands  them  to  shake  off  the  yoke  of  oppression 
(il  barbaro  giogo).  People  of  the  Roman  States  1  you 
have  already  suffered  long  enough — the  scythe  of  Pestilence 
and  Famine  will  complete  your  destruction  and  that  of 
•  our  children,  if  you  delay  any  longer  to  protect  yourselves. 
1.  arms,  then!  to  arms!  Let  your  battle-word  be  the  love 
of  your  country  and  compassion  (carit^)  for  your  offspring. 
To  overthrow  the  despot,  to  tax  the  rich  and  to  succour 
the  indigent  be  your  sole  objects.  You  have  only  to  show 
yourselves  resolutely  (col  vostro  aspetto  imponente)  and 
order  and  justice  will  triumph.  History  already  prepares 
for  you  a  distinguished  rank  among  her  heroes.  People, 
to  arms !  He  alone  is  worthy  of  life  (viva  solo  chi)  who 
loves  his  country  and  succours  the  wretched.  The  people 
of  the  Marches  and  of  Romagna  are  devoted  to  our  cause. 
Last  evening  they  embraced  it,  and  are  you,  blind  people, 
asleep  ? 


In  the  night,  within  and  without  the  city  of  Macerata, 
the  sectaries  mustered  in  companies,  waiting  for  their  as- 
sociates, who  were  to  join  them  in  greater  numbers  from 
the  neighbouring  towns.  Some  of  these  repaired  punctu- 
ally to  the  appointed  places  a  few  miles  from  the  city;  but 
two  muskets  were  incautiously  fired  near  the  walls  at  a 


APPENDIX  II.  187 

sentinel  who  observed  them.  The  Carabiniers,  commanded 
by  Captain  Pesci,  instantly  hastened  to  the  place,  as  well 
as  to  the  other  points  where  the  rebels  were  assembled. 
The  latter  were  disposed  to  attack,  and  thus  make  a  begin- 
ning of  their  enterprize,  previously  to  completing  it  within 
the  walls.  They  would  have  done  this  had  the  reinforce- 
ment of  the  principal  body  of  the  insurgents  arrived  as  had 
been  previously  concerted — but  the  want  of  these  auxilia- 
ries, who  did  not  appear,  obliged  them  to  abandon  their 
evil  intention  and  to  separate.  The  principal  agents  in  the 
plot  did  not,  however,  lose  sight  of  their  object,  but  con- 
tinuing a  close  correspondence  reserved  its  execution  for 
some  fitter  opportunity,  and  in  particular  that  of  the  vacancy 
of  the  Papal  throne.  With  this  idea,  spreading  false  poli- 
tical intelligence  among  themselves  which  seemed  to  pro- 
mise new  troubles,  new  wars  and  successive  changes,  they 
kept  alive  and  stimulated  the  spirit  of  sedition. 