

The  Roman  Catholic  and  Apostolic  Religion,  that  which 
our  fathers  have  ever  maintained  unimpaired  (intemerata), 
that  which  acknowledges  in  your  Holiness  the  Vicar  of 
Him  who  was  God  and  man,  who,  with  his  Divine  blood, 
founded  the  sublime,  true,  and  only  religion,  this  is  the 
only  one  which  in  the  spirit  of  truth  is  preserved  and  pro- 
fessed by  the  Society  of  the  Carbonari. 

Every  Society  has  its  liturgy.  That  of  the  Carbonari 
breathes  only  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  cross,  the 
sign  of  our  religion,  forms  a  principal  part  of  its  rites — 
Faith,  Hope,  Charity,  devices  of  the  Catholic  church,  ac- 
cording to  the  Apostle  St.  Paul,  form  the  language  which 
distinguishes  the  Society,  and  by  means  of  which  it  com- 


► 


APPENDIX  V.  2117 

munlcates.  The  conduct  which  is  inculcated  in  the  edu- 
cation of  the  Carbonari  is  precisely  the  practice  of  the  mo- 
rality of  the  Gospel.  The  most  eminent  among  the  pre- 
cepts of  this  divine  morality,  that  of  universal  charity,  not 
only  binds  them  together,  but  obliges  them  to  practise  it, 
even  towards  those  who  do  not  belong  to  the  Society.  It 
is  true  that  such  a  society  has  a  political  object ;  but  this  is 
not  in  the  slightest  degree  contrary  to  the  maxims  of  reli- 
gion. It  preserves  that  respect  to  sovereignty  which  the 
Apostle  requires  from  Christians — it  loves  the  Sovereign, 
it  preserves  the  State,  and  even  the  succession  of  families; 
but  it  supports  a  democracy,  which,  instead  of  offending 
monarchy,  forms  that  happy  addition  to  it  which  endears  it 
more  to  the  nation,  and  which  alone  can  render  the  rights 
of  empire  and  those  of  the  citizen  less  fluctuating,  and 
which,  therefore,  prevents  political  disorders  by  constitu- 
tional means,  and  consolidates  the  true  basis  of  national 
felicity,  a  felicity  to  which  the  Christian  religion  directly 
leads  those  nations  that  have  the  glory  to  profess  it. 

Such,  most  blessed  Father,  is  the  state,  the  object,  and 
the  secret  of  the  Society  of  the  Carbonari.  Far  from  that 
secret,  now  no  longer  such,  be  every  suspicion  as  to  its 
dogmas  or  morals.  If  it  separate  itself  from  the  public, 
if  it  hold  its  meetings  apart,  if  it  have  its  peculiar  rites,  it 
is  answ^ered  that  all  this  is  necessary  to  preserve  the  spirit 
that  distinguishes  it.  Man  is,  in  a  manner,  subject  to  the 
senses. — Truth  veiled  in  rites,  which  are  its  symbols,  insi- 
nuates itself  more  lirmly  into  the  mind ;  and  a  ceremony 
which  inspires  the  new4y  initiated  with  a  sacred  horror,  is 
warranted  even  by  that  once  imposed  upon  the  proselytes  of 
the  church. 

The  rite  which  is  still  preserved  in  the  administration  of 