

Dated  at  the  Secretary  of  State's  Office,  the  15th  Au- 
gust, 1814. 

B.   Card.  Pacca,  Chamberlain  of  the   Holy 
Church,  and  Pro-Secretary  of  State. 


(     213     ) 


APPENDIX  V. 


Remonstrance  of  the  Society  of  the  Carbonari  ta 
the  Sovereign  Pontiff  Pius  VII. 

O  Blessed  Father, 

If  it  behoves  every  man  to  preserve  his  own  honour 
uninjured,  and  to  keep  his  own  reputation  unspotted,  how 
much  more  jealous  of  these  ought  any  Society  to  be, 
living  in  the  state  ;  especially  where  the  religion  of  the 
country  is  the  same  as  that  which  the  Society  professes. 
It  is  this  sentiment  so  worthy  of  citizens  professing  the 
Catholic  and  Apostolic  religion  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
that  animates  the  Society  of  the  Carbonari  to  appeal  to 
your  Holiness  with  that  humble  respect  which  is  due  to 
the  Vicar  of  Him  who  was  God  and  man,  in  order  to  pre- 
pare your  Holiness  to  receive  the  petitions  and  to  under- 
stand the  feelings  of  the  Society — that,  when  it  is  found 
to  be  irreproachable  in  religion  and  morals,  and  that  it 
conforms  to  the  laws  of  the  Gospel,  your  Holiness  may  be 
disposed  to  alter  the  opinion  you  once  conceived  of  it,  as 
well  as  the  decrees  which  your  Holiness  thought  proper  to 
issue  against  it  in  your  Bull  of  the  year  1815.  This  will 
not  be  the  first  time  that  the  visible  Head  of  the  Church, 
undeceived  by  evidence,  has  revoked  Bulls  and  Decrees. 
The  example  of  your  predecessors  will  be  imitated  by 
your  Holiness  in  circumstances  of  much  greater  impor- 
tance  than  the  quarrels  of  monasteries  and  the  scholastic 


214  APPENDIX  V. 

disputes  of  friars,  on  which  subjects  justice  often  thought 
fit  to  recall  decrees  which  had  been  the  result  of  an  igno- 
rance of  facts.     Let  your  Holiness  deign  then,  with  your 
superior  intelligence,  to  examine  the  petitions  of  this  So- 
ciety, and  weigh  their  arguments  with   that  spirit   which 
does  not  belong  to  human  policy,  but  which  is  worthy  of 
the  Vicar  of  Christ,  whose  kingdom  is  not  that  of  the  world. 
It  appears  that  the  fears  and  suspicions  of  the  Popes  have 
been  excited  by  the  formation  of  Societies,  which,  separa- 
ting themselves  from  the  rest  of  the  people,  have  adopted 
a   secret  discipline.      The   vigilance   of  the  head   of  the 
Church,  suspecting  that  the  secret  might  contain  sentiments 
contrary  to  the  true  religion,   and   the  sound  morality  of 
the  Gospel,    has    threatened  to   employ  its    thunders   to 
separate  from  the  communion  of  the  Faithful  those  who 
endanger  its  unity.     Hence  the  Bulls  of  the  former  Pon- 
tiffs, and  above  all,  that  of  your  Holiness,which  is  particularly 
aimed  at  this  Society  of  the  Carbonari,  who  are  now  at  your 
feet  to  remove  from  the  mind  of  your  Holiness  the  suspi- 
cions which  induced  you  to  take  that  step.  Polished  nations, 
from  the  remotest  antiquity,  have  had  their  Secret  Societies, 
either  Philosophical  or  Sacerdotal.     Philosophy,  knowing 
tbe  vulgar   to  be  incapable   of  understanding  theoretical 
truths,  which,  if  made  public,  instead  of  instructing,  would 
have  involved  men  of  no  education  in  scepticism,  endea- 
voured to  spread  over  certain  physical  and  moral  truths  a 
veil  through  which  it  was  given  to  the  learned  alone  to 
penetrate.     The   priesthood  adopted    its  fables,  in  order 
that,  while  the  people  were  satisfied  with  these  and  with 
the  outward  apparatus  of  Mythology,  the  Sacerdotal   So- 
cieties might  keep  to    themselves  the  sacred    science  for 
which  the  vulgar  have  been  ever  unfit.     The  History  of 