


APPENDIX  Vi  215 

%ypt&gt;  that  of  the  Assyrians,  of  the  Schools  of  Philoso- 
phy, in  Greece,  the  Traditions  of  Cosmogony,  the  Systems 
of  Mystic  Regenerations,  the  Sacred  Colleges  of  the  Sy- 
rites,  are  all  so  many  proofs  of  these  truths — while  the 
fate  of  Socrates,  the  greatest  philosopher  of  antiquity, 
who  did  not  sufficiently  conceal  from  the  vulgar  the 
secret  of  his  school,  was  the  means  of  rendering  the  dis- 
cipline of  the  Sacerdotal  as  well  as  Philosophical  Societies 
even  still  more  impenetrable  from  that  period. 

But  in  the  mean  time,  why  did  not  the  Sovereigns  take 
any  umbrage  at  these  societies  ?  It  can  only  be  accounted 
for  by  supposing  that  they  were  fully  instructed  in  this 
secret  discipline ;  and  hence,  knowing  it  to  be  in  confor- 
mity with  good  order,  and  analogous  to  social  happiness&gt; 
notwithstanding  the  vain  attempts  of  ignorant  and  impa- 
tient curiosity,  they  deigned  to  aiford  them  protection. — » 
Was  not  the  Church  itself,  of  Jesus  Christ,  from  its  origin 
to  the  period  of  the  Victory  of  Constantine  over  the  tyrant 
Maxentius,  a  secret  Society  ?  Was  not  its  discipline  con- 
cealed ?  What  monstrous  ideas  against  the  Society  did 
not  the  concealment  of  its  mysteries  and  sacred  rites  excite, 
not  less  in  the  minds  of  the  Sovereigns  than  of  the  Pagans 
generally  ?  A  glance  at  the  works  of  our  Apologists  shows 
us  that  the  secret  so  jealously  kept  by  our  fathers  was 
the  means  of  their  being  looked  upon  as  infanticides,  as 
adorers  of  beasts,  as  magicians,  and  as  sworn  enemies  to 
the  State,  notwithstanding  the  sanctity  of  those  who  be- 
longed to  the  society,  and  in  spite  of  their  good  conduct 
and  of  that  spirit  of  charity  which  taught  them  not  only  to 
obey,  but  even  to  offer  up  their  most  fervent  prayers  to  God 
for  the  happiness  of  a  state  in  which  their  life  was  daily 
sought.     Constantine  himself  entertained  such  an  idea  of 


216  APPENDIX    V. 

the  Christian  society  till,  he  was  acquainted  with  its  true  and 
genuine  object — so  that,  although  from  being  a  fresh  con- 
vert he  could  not  penetrate  to  the  knowledge  of  the  mys- 
teries, as  soon  as  he  found  that  the  secret  kept  by  the  so- 
ciety was  not  only  not  opposed  to  the  happiness  of  the 
state,  but  formed  its  most  solid  support,  he  immediately 
declared  the  Christian  church  a  legitimate  body,  protecting 
it  against  the  eflforts  and  most  earnest  petitions  not  of 
the  vulgar  alone,  but  of  the  powerful  class  of  Pagan 
Priests.  The  Society  of  the  Carbonari  does  not  doubt, 
therefore,  that  as  soon  as  the  secret  discipline  it  pre- 
serves (and  which  ought  not  to  be  suspected  because  it  is 
secret,  but  only  because  it  may  be  contrary  to  the  pro- 
fession of  the  Catholic  religion)  is  made  manifest — the 
knowledge  of  its  purity  and  adherence  to  the  Gospel,  and 
to  the  most  holy  laws  of  the  Church,  will  secure  it  from  the 
prejudices  which  the  vulgar  entertain  against  it,  as  well  as 
from  the  threat  which  your  Holiness  thought  fit  to  pub- 
lish in  your  last  Bull. 