


APPENDIX    III.  205 

Art.  9.  The  number  of  active  officers  is  thirty-one ;  it 
will  be  increased  in  proportion  to  the  increase  of  the  Good 
Cousins  Carbonari. 

SECTION    IV. 

Art.  1.  The  Supreme  Vendita  has,  besides  its  general 
assemblies,  three  private  divisions ;  that  is  to  say,  one 
Grand  Vendita  of  Administration,  one  of  Legislation,  and 
a  third  of  Counsel  and  Appeal. 

On  the  day  of  St.  Theobald  all  those  in  office  or  who 
are  in  any  way  responsible  must  give  an  account  of  the 
discharge  of  their  duties. 


H  5 


(    W6    ) 


APPENDIX  IV, 


Edict, 


Hercules,  Deacon  of  S.  Agata  alia  Suburra,  Cardinal 
Consalvi,  Secretary  of  State  to  His  Holiness  Our  Lord 
Pope  Pius  VII. 

If  from  the  period  of  the  ancient  Roman  Legislation 
severe  penal  prohibitions  have  been  issued  against  secret 
and  hidden  Associations,  whose  clandestine  proceedings 
were  sufficient  to  give  room  for  supposing  either  that  some 
seditious  conspiracy  against  the  state  and  the  public  tran- 
quillity was  plotted,  or  that  a  school  for  depravity  existed 
in  them  ;  with  much  more  reason  have  the  Sovereign  Pon- 
tiffs been  justified  in  looking  in  the  same  light  upon  the 
Associations  known  under  the  names  of  Free-Masons,  II- 
luminati,  Egiziani,  and  such  like.  And  as  they  accom- 
pany their  works  of  darkness  with  forms,  ceremonies,  rites, 
oaths  of  secrecy,  suspected  at  least,  and  especially  with  the 
indiscriminate  admission  of  persons  of  all  classes  and 
nations  and  of  whatever  conduct  or  religion :  it  is  im- 
possible not  to  entertain  a  just  suspicion  that  they  aim  not 
only  at  the  subversion  of  thrones  but  also  of  Religion,  and 
especially  of  the  true  and  only  one  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  which 
the  Roman  Pontiff  was,  by  its  divine  Founder  and  Legis- 
lator, constituted  the  Head,  the  Master  and  the  Guardian. 


APPENDIX    IV.  207 

Influenced  by  these  reasons  and  animated  by  their  zeal, 
although  they  did  not  witness  the    ruinous  development 
(too  plainly  apparent  in  our  own  time)  of  these  secret  and 
infernal   societies :  the   Popes  Clement   XII.  and  Bene- 
dict XIV.  of  glorious  memory,  resisted,  with  all  the  vigour 
of  their  Apostolic    Office,   the    already  threatening    dis- 
order.    The  first,  with  his  decree  beginning  '*  In  eminenti 
Jlpostolatus  specula,^'  published  27th  April,  1738,  not  only 
prohibited  and  condemned   altogether  the  assemblies   and 
meetings  of  the  said  Free-Masons,  or  such  like,  whatever 
denomination  they  might  assume,  but  also  passed  on  the 
individuals  enlisted  and  initiated  in  the  same,  in  whatever 
rank,  and  on   their  advisers  and  abettors,  the  sentence  of 
excommunication,  to  be  incurred  ipso  facto,  without  need  of 
any  information,  and  for  which   absolution  could  only  be 
given  by  the  Roman  Pontiff  pro  tempore,  except  in  case  of 
death.  His  immediate  successor  Benedict  XIV.,  perceiving 
the   high  importance  and  necessity  of  this  measure,  espe- 
cially for  the  good  of  the  Catholic  Religion  and  for  the 
public  safety,  in  another  decree  beginning  "  Providas  Ro- 
manorum  Pontificum/'  published  18th  May,  1751,  not  only 
fully  confirmed  that  of  his  predecessor,  inserting  it  in  his 
own,  word  for  word,  but  moreover  with  his  usual  wisdom 
stated  in  detail  the  weighty  reasons  which  ought  to  induce 
every  government  in  the  world  to  join  in   the  same  prohi- 
bition, which  public   experience  had  rendered  almost  su- 
perfluous to  repeat  even  to  the  simplest  of  people.     Nor 
did  their  care  and  foresight  stop  here.     The  mere  horror  of 
crime   and   the  thunders   of  the    Ecclesiastical    censures, 
which  are  sufficient  to  warn  and  shake  the  conscience   of 
the  good,  have  generally  little  efl'ect  on  the  depraved  unless 