

The  Godfather  blinds  the  eyes  of  the  novice,  and  makes 
him  journey  through  the  forest ;  he  afterwards  leads  him 
towards  the  President,  who  causes  his  crown  of  thorns,  and 
specimen,  to  be  brought,  and  questions  him  on  the  cate- 
chism of  the  apprentices. 

The  President.  Good  Cousin,  your  trials  as  anovice  are  not 
sufficient  to  raise  you  to  an  equality  with  us ;  you  must 
undergo  more  important  trials ;  reflect  upon  it,  and  tell  us 
your  intention. 

The  Apprentice  declares  that  he  is  ready  to  undergo  the 
trials. 

President.  Conduct  him  to  the  Olives. 

He  is  led  to  the  place  so  called — he  is  placed  in  a  suppli- 
cating attitude,  his  hands  lifted  towards  heaven — the  God- 
father causes  him  to  repeat  aloud  : 

If  the  pains  I  am  about  to  suffer  can  be  useful  to  man- 
kind, I  do  not  ask  to  be  delivered  from  them.  Thy  will  be 
done,  and  not  mine. 

Pilat.  Let  him  drain  the  cup  of  bitterness. 

He  is  made  to  drink,  and  he  is  then  led  bound  to  Pilate. 

Pilat.  Who  is  this  you  bring  me  ? 

Chief  of  the  Guards.  One  accused  of  sedition  ;  we  found 


200  APPENDIX  III. 

him  in  the  midst  of  wretches  who  listened  to  him,  and  who 
are  witnesses  of  his  wicked  precepts. 

The  People.  He  is  a  seducer  of  the  people,  who,  to  go- 
vern despotically,  and  to  overthrow  our  religion,  calls  him- 
self the  living  God. 

Pilat.  The  crime  is  heavy ;  I  cannot  judge  him  alone. 
Take  him  to  Caiaphas. 

The  Chief  of  the  Guards  accompanies  him. 

Chief  of  the  Guards,  Pilate  sends  you  this  man,  to  judge 
him  according  to  his  crimes. 

Caiap.  From  what  I  have  heard,  he  is  guilty ;  his  punish- 
ment belongs  to  the  Sovereign,     Lead  him  to  Herod. 

Herod,  Who  art  thou  ? 

The  Godfather  instructs  the  novice  to  say, 

I  am  the  Son  of  God. 

The  People,  You  hear  him,  he  blasphemes,  and  de- 
serves the  severest  punishment. 

Herod,  Is  it  true  that  thou  art  the  Son  of  the  living  God  ? 

The  Godfather  instructs  the  novice  to  say. 

Thou  sayest  it. 

Herod,  People  !  This  is  a  man  who  is  beside  himself; 
put  a  white  robe  upon  him,  and  lead  him  to  Pilate,  to 
judge  the  man  as  he  thinks  fit. 

The  tunic  is  put  upon  the  novice,  he  is  led  to  Pilate  who 
shows  him  to  the  people. 

Pilat,  The  Prince  sends  me  this  man ;  what  will  you  that 
I  shall  do  to  him  ? 

The  People,  Condemn  him. 

Pilat,  I  will  not  condemn  him  without  having  heard 
him.     Who  are  you  ? 

The  Godfather  for  the  novice — Jesus  of  Nazareth,  King 
of  the  Jews. 


APPENDIX    III.  201 

Pilat,  If  he  is  a  king,  let  a  crown  of  thorns  be  put  upon 
his  head,  and  a  sceptre  in  his  hand  :  (turning  towards  the 
people)  Are  you  satisfied  ? 