

With  respect  to  the  civil  court.  His  Holiness  is  willing  to 
extend  his  sovereign  clemency  here  also,  as  far  as  is  com- 
patible with  the  police  regulations  of  a  well  conducted 
state,  as  to  what  might  have  occurred  during  the  un- 
fortunate times  of  disorder  and  impiety  which  have  pre- 
ceded his  happy  return,  and  the  publication  of  the 
present  Edict.  Before  those  times  this  deadly  pestilence 
had  scarcely,  if  at  all,  infected  the  territory  and  subjects 
of  the  Pope.  Many  however  have  suffered  themselves 
to  be  seduced  by  circumstances ;  and  as  the  Holy  Father 
deplores  the  fatal  error  of  these  men,  so  he  would  wish  to 


210  APPENDIX    IV. 

be  able  for  ever  to  forget  it — but  it  is  for  them  to  merit 
such  clemency  by  a  speedy  and  lasting  repentance,  at  least 
in  their  external  conduct,  for  which  every  citizen  is  re- 
sponsible to  society.  For  the  present,  therefore,  it  is 
sufficient  for  them  to  know^  and  to  bear  in  mind  that  the 
government  is  acquainted  with  them,  that  it  knows  the 
precise  places  where  they  were  accustomed  to  meet,  that  a 
strict  watch  will  be  kept  upon  them,  and  that  the  names 
of  their  principal  agents  will  be  communicated  to  the  Pre- 
sidents of  the  courts,  in  order  to  prevent  any  recurrence  of 
the  offence.  And  in  any  case  of  such  recurrence,  past 
transgressions  will  be  brought  forward  in  aggravation.  No 
person  can  henceforth  protect  himself  with  the  old  pretext 
that  he  did  not  see  any  harm  in  that  preparatory  course  of 
actions  sometimes  indifferent  and  ridiculous,  by  which  the 
initiated  were  artfully  amused,  in  order  to  be  afterwards  em- 
ployed in  the  mysteries  of  this  wicked  system.  In  order, 
therefore,  to  establish  just  and  necessary  precautions  for 
the  future: — 

It  is  forbidden,  in  conformity  with  the  dispositions  of  the 
above  mentioned  Edict  of  the  14th  January,  1739,  in  the 
first  place,  to  any  person  whatever,  as  well  in  Rome  as 
in  the  whole  Papal  dominions,  to  continue,  renew,  re- 
establish, or  institute  assemblies  of  those  persons  called 
Free-Masons,  or  other  similar  assemblies  of  whatsoever 
denomination,  ancient  or  modern,  or  recently  invented 
under  the  name  of  Carbonari,  which  last  have  circulated  a 
pretended  Pontifical  Brief  of  approbation,  which  bears  on 
its  face  the  evidence  of  falsehood  and  fabrication.  It  is  for- 
bidden to  be  enrolled,  or  to  be  present  in  any  of  these 
societies,  even  for  once,  under  whatever  colour  or  pretext, 
or  to  seek  for,  instigate,  or  tempt  any  one  to  join  tl^em,  or 


APPENDIX    IV.  211 

to  afford  knowingly  the  accommodation  of  a  house  or  any 
other  place  for  their  meetings,  either  for  rent,  as  a  loan,  or 
according  to  any  contract  whatever,  or  to  afford  them  aid, 
counsel,  or  protection,  in  any  way  whatever. 