

This  commission  assembled  the  following  day,  in  the 
house  of  Curci  and  Gagliardi,  and  determined  that  the 
moment  of  the  enterprize  should  be  the  night  between  the 
29th  and  30th  of  May. 

In  consequence  of  this  decision,  Curci  set  out  to  give 
information  of  it  to  the  Magistracy  of  Salerno ;  Gagliardi 
proceeded  to  Aversa,  and  Gennaro  de  Blasiis  to  Marsico- 
nuovo.  The  necessary  orders  were  issued  from  these  diffe- 
rent points  ;  proclamations  were  addressed  to  the  army  and 
to  the  people  of  the  united  kingdoms,  and  complete  suc- 
cess was  expected,  when  Acconciagiuoco  revealed  all  to  the 
police.  On  the  night  of  the  26th  May,  Ferrante,  Addiechi, 
Villascosa,  Chianese,  Formica,  Clementi  and  Majorano, 
were  surprized  and  imprisoned ;  Gagliardi,  Curci  and 
Giannone,  were  attacked  but  had  time  to  fly  ;  the  rest  for- 
tunately escaped  the  vigilance  of  the  police,  because 
Acconciagiuoco  had  forgotten  their  names,  and  was  igno- 
rant where  they  lived. 

The  news  of  this  misfortune  flew  to  the  points  of  corre- 
spondence, and  prudence  determined  that  the  proceedings 
should  be  stopped.  The  Princess's  regiment  of  infantry, 
ready  to  make  a  retrograde  movement  in  its  march  from  Sicily, 
already  begun,  was  obliged  to  proceed,  in  consequence  of 
this  event.  It  had  received  orders  to  fall  back,  from  the 
Supreme  Magistracy  of  Salerno,  through  the  G.  C.  Gaetano 
di  Pasquale  of  Naples,  employed  in  the  office  of  the  At- 
torney General.  He  had  the  courage  to  abandon  his  situ- 
ation, and  to  rejoin  these  brave  men,  led  by  the  excellent 


APPENDIX  VI.  227 

G.  C.  Colonel  Costa,  in  order  to  unite  their  arms  with  those 
who  were  to  raise  the  glorious  standard  of  the  Hermit  Pro- 
tector (St.  Theobald). 

Notwithstanding  the  most  obstinate  persecution,  those 
who  had  escaped  the  danger  did  not  relax  in  their  ardour. 
Gagliardi  and  Curci  repaired  to  Nocera  and  its  environs ; 
they  agreed  with  the  general  guards  (guardie  generali),  Pasr 
quale  Lombardi  and  P.  Amabile,to  fix  the  centre  of  the  ope- 
rations in  that  town,  and  to  raise  the  first  shout,  announcing 
the  political  resurrection  at  that  place,  in  the  night  of  the 
10th  of  June.  They  returned  from  thence  to  Naples,  to 
give  [the  necessary  directions.  The  captain  of  dragoons, 
G.  C.  Rignano,  the  lieutenants  GG.  CC.  Zimeo  and 
Gennarelli,  and  the  GG.  CC.  Gr.  Principe  P.  Strina,  Fr« 
Antonio  Ceravolo  (a  priest),  Antonio  Albini  and  Benedetto 
Polvani,  took  part  in  the  new  enterprize ;  the  last  invited 
the  General  Vairo  also  to  join  the  engagement.  Gagliardi 
went  to  Aversa  to  re-organize  that  quarter.  He  communi- 
cated to  Lombardi,  at  Nocera,  the  adherence  of  Vairo,  and 
the  steps  taken  by  the  G.  C.  Michele  de  Blasiis,  for  gain- 
ing possession  of  the  castle  of  St.  Elmo.  Some  officers  of 
the  Prince's  regiment  of  cavalry  sent  the  lieutenant-colonel 
to  Naples,  to  ascertain  whether  Vairo  persisted  in  his  in- 
tention. Colombo  confirmed  it  in  confidence  to  the  G.  C. 
Tronna,  of  Nocera,  who  was  then  at  Naples.  This  person, 
full  of  distrust  as  to  the  success  of  the  aflfair,  dissuaded 
Vairo  by  means  of  Polvani.  A  similar  feeling  filled  the 
mind  of  the  G.  C.  Pagliara,  President  of  the  Supreme  Ma- 
gistracy of  Salerno,  with  a  panic  fear;  and  the  friends  of  their 
country  saw  with  grief,  their  third  project  come  to  nothing. 
In  the  mean  time  Gagliardi,  Curci,  Principe,  Guadalupo, 
de  Blasiis,  Ranieri,  and  Ceravolo,  had  repaired  to  Nocera. 