

Art.  2.  The  Grand  Master,  after  regular  notice,  opens 
the  labours  (travagli)  with  the  usual  signs,  salutations 
(avvantaggi)  and  invocations  of  ceremony. 

Art.  3.  The  Grand  Master,  after  regular  notice,  causes 
the  table  of  past  labours  to  be  read  :  the  same  is  ratified  by 
plurality  of  votes.''^ 

Art.  4,  The  Good  Cousin  Grand  Master  regularly  in- 
vites the  G.  C.  Master  Adept  to  go  into  the  forest,  in  order 

afterwards  broke  out  into  the  war  of  the  peasantry,  whose  chief  complaint 
against  the  nobles  at  that  time  seems  to  have  been  the  severity  of  the  Game 
Laws  f  a  subject  on  which  the  Carbonari  have  more  than  once  remonstrated 
and  even  taken  up  arms. — T. 

*  If  any  observations  are  made  on  its  articles,  those  observations  are  to  be 
noted. 

*  See  Jortin's  Life  of  Erasmus. 
R 


234  APPENDIX   VII. 

to  see  if  there  are  any  GG.  CC.  visitors ;  the  same  being 
returned,  reports  if  there  are  any,  and  they  are  introduced.* 

Art.  5,  The  G.  M.  regularly  invites  the  G.  C.  Master 
Adept  to  go  into  the  cabinet  of  reflection,  in  order  to  see 
if  there  are  any  pagans  to  be  initiated.  The  same  being 
returned,  reports  accordingly,  and  also  repeats  to  the  Ven- 
dita  the  answers  of  ceremony  which  they  have  given,  such 
answers  being  conformable  to  justice  and  propriety. 

Art.  6.  The  G.M.,  after  regular  notice,  causes  the  recep- 
tion of  the  Pagan  to  be  sanctioned  for  the  last  time,  and 
invites  the  G.  C.  Master  of  the  Ceremonies  to  take  the  ne- 
cessary steps,  in  order  that  the  Pagan  may  be  introduced  to 
the  door  of  the  Baracca. 

Art.  7.  A  knocking  is  heard  at  the  Pagan  door — the  G. 
M.  asks  who  is  the  rash  person  that  dares  to  disturb  our 
sacred  labours: 

Art.  8.  The  Pagan  is  introduced  into  the  Vendita,  and 
after  some  questions  of  ceremony,  the  G.  M.  directs  him  to 
make  his  first  journey,  then  the  second,  and  afterwards  the 
third — upon  which  he  causes  him  to  take  the  oath  of  cere- 
mony. 

Art.  9.  The  Pagan  being  led  into  the  middle  of  the  Or- 
doni,  and  the  bandage  being  taken  from  his  eyes,  the  G. 
M.  makes  him  repeat  his  oath,  and  then  communicates  to 
him  the  signs,  touch,  and  sacred  words,  and  causes  him  to 
be  acknowledged  by  the  ordone. 

Art.  10.  The  G.  M.  causes  a  salutation  of  ceremony  to 
be  made  to  the  new  member ;  the  G.  C.  Master  of  the  Cere- 
monies thanks  all  the  GG.  CC.  of  the  Vendita  for  the 
new  member,  with  the  usual  signs  and  salutation^* 

*  Tlic  imniber  of  visitors  is  noted  in  tlic  Table,  with  their  Ciiristian  and  Sur- 
names, country,  quality,  rank  in  the  order,  and  the  Vendita  they  belong  to. 


APPENDIX   VII.  ^35 