

q2 


220  APPENDIX    V. 

the  feelings  of  the  Pontiff  (Santa  Sede)  and  which  will 
secure  the  public  tranquillity  of  the  State,  so  that  every 
avenue  may  be  shut  against  the  ill-intentioned,  and  the 
perfidious  enemies  of  national  happiness,  and  in  this  So- 
ciety may  the  Holy  See  (Santa  Sede)  at  all  times  meet  with 
respect,  obedience,  docility,  and  the  most  lasting  and  hum- 
ble gratitude. 

Naples,  9.0th  September,  1820. 


1 


(221      ) 


\ 


APPENDIX  VI. 

The  following  document  is  translated  as  literally  as  pos- 
sible, some  lines  of  introduction  only  are  suppressed,  and 
some  inflated  phrases,  as  well  as  the  eternal  epithets  of 
valiant,  excellent,  &amp;c.  &amp;c.  with  which  every  name  is  loaded 
in  the  original. 

Historical  Statement  of  the  Facts  which  preceded 
and  produced  the  Movement  of  the  Second  Batta- 
lion of  Nola, 

Et  quorum  pars  magna  fui. — Virg. 

Let  the  friends  of  their  country  deign  to  read  a  rapid 
statement  of  operations  which  are  perhaps  worthy  of  a 
tribute  of  love. 

The  Good  Cousin  Francesco  Maria  Gagliardi,  of  the 
Province  of  Salerno,  so  far  back  as  the  month  of  May, 
1817,  had  conceived  the  plan  of  a  revolution.  He  con^ 
ferred  to  this  effect  with  the  Good  Cousins  Domenico  and 
Gabriele  Abatemarco,  brothers  and  his  countrymen,  and 
with  the  Good  Cousin  Michele  de  Blasiis,  of  Basilicata. 
The  Good  Cousin  Ferdinando  Arcovito,  who  now  presides 
at  one  of  the  Government  Courts  of  Justice,  joined  them 
and  promised  them  the  co-operation  of  the  brave  General 
Arcovito,  his  relation.  It  was  resolved  to  despatch  Ga- 
gliardi to  Calabria,  to  the  G.  C  Rinaldi,  a  Carmelite^  w  ho 

^  &lt;^ 


222  APPENDIX  VI. 

possesses  great  influence  in  that  province.  A  plan  was 
formed,  and  the  establishment  of  a  Central  Committee  of 
correspondence  was  attempted  at  Naples.  To  accomplish 
this,  the  GG.  CC.  Gagliardi  and  Abatemarco  contrived 
an  interview  with  the  G.  C.  Rosario  Macchiaroli,  then  Pre- 
sident of  the  Supreme  Magistracy  of  the  Carbonari  of 
Salerno.  This  interview  took  place  at  Pompeii,  in  the 
presence  of  some  other  GG.  CC.  from  Naples  and  Sa- 
lerno. It  was  not  till  after  this  time  Gagliardi  proceeded 
to  Calabria,  to  confer  with  Rinaldi,  while  the  brothers 
Abatemarco  sent  circulars  from  Naples  in  order  to  be  in 
correspondence  with  several  points.  Gagliardi  returned, 
and  it  was  thought  proper  to  defer  the  enterprize,  it  being 
found  that  the  province  of  Principato  Citra*  alone  was  well 
organized,  and  that  it  was  necessary  to  wait  till  the  others 
were  equally  so.  Let  it  be  permitted  to  us  here  to  pay  a 
just  tribute  of  gratitude  to  this  noble  province,  which, 
under  the  direction  of  the  brave  Macchiaroli,  invited 
that  of  Basilicata  and  Avellino  to  follow  its  glorious 
example. 