

Above  all  let  there  be  no  distinction  of  persons  when 
it  is  your  business  to  unite  yourselves  to  put  down  ex- 
cesses. Fraternal  love  places  all  the  Good  Cousins  on  the 
same  level. 

But  we  are  speaking  to   Carbonari,   and   the  path  to 


230 


APPENDIX    VII. 


glory  is  not  unknown  to  them ;  this  renders  any  further  ex- 
hortation useless. 

We  salute  you  with  the  honours  due  to  you. 

District  (Ordone)  of  Naples,  the  24th  October,  1820. 
The  Good  Cousin  President  Casigli,  Domenico. 
The  G.  C.  First  Assistant  Rossarolli,  Giuseppe. 
The  G.  C.  Second  ditto  Capuano,  Buonaventura. 
The  G.  C.  Orator  Doria,  Francesco. 
The  G.  C.  Secretary  Rossetti,  Gabriele. 

(L.  S.)  The  Seal  represents  the  Goddess  of  Liberty,  with 
the  fasces  and  axe  in  her  left  hand,  and  with  a  spear  bear- 
ing the  cap  of  liberty  in  her  right  hand,  treading  upon  a 
serpent — around  it  "  The  General  Assembly  of  the  G. 
C.  of  the  Two  Sicilies." 

Form  of  the  Table  of  Labours^  ( extracted  from  the  Codice 
della  Carboneria,  part  1,  of  the  First  Rank  of  Apprentices, 

A.  G.  D.  G.  M.  D.  U.  e  del  nostro  Protettore  S.  T. 

(Al  Gran  Dio  Gran  Maestro  del  Universo  e  del  nostro 
Protettore  San  Teobaldo.) 

To-day  being  the  first  of  August  in  the  year  SOO'*  of 

*  "  Tavola  del  Travagli"  is  the  term  in  Carbonarism  to  express  the  order  of 
the  day  and  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting. 

f  This  epoclia  corresponds  with  tliat  ascribed  to  the  foundation  of  the 
Society  of  Carbonari  in  the  "  Historical  Essay  on  the  Origin  of  Carbonarism," 
from  which  an  extract  is  given  in  the  text,  namely,  the  reign  of  Francis  the 
First  of  France,  which  reign  extended  from  1515  to  1547.  Now  the  date 
300  falling  in  with  1520,  agrees  well  with  this,  and  is  the  year  of  the  condemna- 
tion of  Luther  by  Leo  X.,  and  of  the  formation  of  many  secret  and  religious  so- 
cieties  in  France  and  Gcnnany,  particularly  that  headed   by  Muncer,  ivhich 


I 


APPENDIX   vri.  233 

true  light,  being  met  together  in  a  very  strong  and  illumi- 
nated place,  far  from  the  eyes  of  Pagans — The  Respectable 

Vendita,  under  the  distinctive  table  of to  the  orders  of 

— —  opens  the  labours  in  the  First  Rank  of  Apprentices. 
The  Good  Cousin  N.  N.  holds  the  first  axe — (There  are 
a  Grand  Master  and  Assistants.)  N.  N.  the  second,  N.  N. 
the  third.  The  Good  Cousin  N.  N.  officiates  as  Orator. 
The  office  of  Secretary  is  entrusted  to  the  Good  Cousin 
N,  N.  Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  N.  N.  First  adept 
(Esperto)  N.  N.  The  remaining  dignitaries  are  noted  in 
the  margin  of  the  present  table,  together  with  all  the  Good 
Cousins  present  at  these  labours. 

Art.  1.  The  Grand  Master  examines  the  first  assistant  on 
the  duties  of  his  office  in  the  Vendita,  and  desires  him  to 
put  them  in  execution.  This  is  done  by  means  of  the 
Master  Adept  (Esperto)  and  the  Master  of  the  Ceremo- 
nies. 