


(     230     ) 


APPENDIX  VIL 


A.  G.  D.  G.  M.  D.  U. 

The  Respectable  General  Assembly  of  the  Carbonari 
to  all  the  Good  Cousins  of  the  Two  Sicilies. 

Good  Cousins, 

With  deep  grief  the  General  Assembly  thinks  it  ne- 
cessary to  announce  to  you,  that  the  many  outrages  which 
are  every  day  committed  in  the  public  roads,  by  low  people, 
against  peaceful  travellers,  as  they  tend  to  cast  a  stain  upon 
the  glorious  epoch  of  our  bloodless  (incruenta)  regenera- 
tion, demand  that  the  honour  and  zeal  of  the  whole  popula- 
tion of  the  Carbonari  should  be  exerted,  in  desiring  and 
accomplishing  their  cessation. 

It  is  true  that  such  disorders  belong  unfortunately  to  all 
times,  and  to  all  nations,  even  to  the  most  civilized,  for 
where  there  are  passions  and  wants,  crime  often  takes 
place.  It  is  also  true  that  the  virtuous  man,  and  the  honest 
citizen,  should  at  all  times  feel  regret  and  aversion  for  such 
disorders ;  but  there  are  times  when  the  same  crime,  from 
the  change  in  circumstances,  should  excite  greater  hatred 
and  indignation  in  all  minds,  attached  to  virtue,  and  to  the 
glory  of  the  age  they  live  in. 

Yes,  Carbonari,  this  age,  in  which  the  wish  of  a  free  na- 


APPENDIX    VI r.  231 

tion  and  a  virtuous  order  alone  should  triumph,  this  age 
must  be  pure  and  immaculate.  See  how  our  enemies,  en- 
vying our  happiness,  exult  as  they  contemplate  the  distress- 
ing events  which  may  diminish  or  destroy  it.  And  who 
knows  whether  those  enemies,  always  ready  to  obscure 
your  glory,  are  not  now  calumniating  you,  and  accusing  you 
of  being  the  quiet  spectators,  and,  perhaps,  the  promoters 
of  the  disorders  committed  in  the  public  highways  r" 

Good  Cousins,  the  General  Assembly  feels  assured  that 
as  soon  as  this  idea  presents  itself  to  your  minds,  there  will 
not  be  a  man  among  you  who  will  not  experience  a  feel- 
ing of  horror.  But  this  is  not  sufficient :  inactive  virtue, 
although  it  has  its  merits,  in  such  cases  is  easily  confounded 
with  vice.  Your  country,  your  honour  demand  from  you 
not  regret  alone,  but  exertion  and  energy,  and  the  Assembly 
invites  you  to  employ  them. 

Let  robbers  and  those  who  commit  excesses  in  the 
public  ways  be  incessantly  watched  and  arrested  by  such 
of  you  as  belong  to  the  public  force,  and  let  your  calumni- 
ators know  that  you  do  not  approve  of  crime,  but  eradicate 
it  wherever  it  is  found — be  careful,  however,  to  preserve 
the  greatest  order  among  yourselves,  when  you  oppose  dis- 
order— the  slightest  inattention,  the  most  trifling  want  of 
discipline,  the  least  opposition  to  the  public  authorities  may 
destroy  the  merit  of  the  good  intentions  you  may  have,  and 
bring  upon  you  blame  instead  of  honour. 