

The  grenadiers  of  the  guard  were  also  placed  in  the 
Castel-nuovo  (in  which  was  a  garrison),  together  with  that 
part  of  King's  and  Queen's  regiment  of  artillery,  which, 
gained  by  the  agent  Pellegrini,  had  embraced  the  general 
cause. 

It  was  thought  fit  to  correspond  with  the  provinces  of 
the  kingdom,  that  they  might  be  prepared  to  rise  on  the 
first  movements  at  Naples.  Gagliardi,  Raffaello  and 
Marco,  Scarpa  and  Ranieri,  proceeded  to  Aversa,  to  com- 
municate the  plan,  and  to  come  to  an  understanding  with 
the  captain  of  militia  Andrea  Forfante,  and  with  the  cap- 
tain of  the  Queen's  regiment  of  cavalry  Giuseppe  Acerbo, 
both  firmly  attached  to  their  country.  They  received  the 
proposition  with  enthusiasm,   &amp;.c. 


APPENDIX  vr.  223 

The  line  of  correspondence  extended  itself  as  far  as  Be- 
nevento,  Sessa  and  S.  Germano.  Lieutenant  Bologna, 
Gherardo  Curci,  and  Tommaso  Scarpa,  proceeded  on  the 
same  errand  to  Nocera,  whence  they  passed  on  to  Salerno, 
to  invite  the  Supreme  Magistracy  there  to  act  in  concert. 
That  body  promised  to  convoke  a  regular  meeting  to  answer 
the  invitation ;  and  two  days  afterwards  sent  the  lieutenant 
of  militia  Raimondo  Grimaldi,  and  F.  B.  the  younger,  of 
Rocca  Piemonte  (Casale  of  Nocera),  to  Naples,  through 
whom  it  conveyed  an  assurance,  that  the  forces  of  the  Car- 
bonari in  its  dependence  w^ould  march  on  the  first  intelli- 
gence, and  that  it  was  about  to  communicate  the  plan  to 
the  neighbouring  provinces  of  Avellino  and  Basilicata. 
Meanwhile  frequent  meetings  were  held  to  mature  the 
project ;  they  took  place  for  the  most  part  in  the  house 
of  Curci,  where  Gagliardi  lived,  and  to  which  the  deputa- 
tions, which  were  constantly  arriving  from  the  provinces, 
repaired. 

We  must  mention  with  honour,  among  the  individuals  of 
these  deputations,  the  GG.  CC.  Domenico  Cicalese,  of 
Nocera,  and  Vincenzo  Franco,  lieutenant  of  the  Prince's 
regiment  of  cavalry.  They  certified  that  the  provinces  of 
Avellino  and  of  Basilicata,  whither  they  had  been  sent 
from  Salerno,  as  well  as  some  corps  of  the  army,  had  joined 
the  cause.  The  last  meeting  took  place  on  the  23d  May, 
in  the  house  of  the  G.  C.  Francesco  Clementi  de  Padula,  of 
the  Principato  Citra,  who  had  resided  for  several  years  at 
Naples ;  at  this  meeting  were  present,  for  the  first  time^ 
C.  Guadalupi,  and  Oronce  Piccioli  of  Lecce,  and,  un- 
fortunately, Francesco  Acconciagiuoco,  known  as  a  popu- 
lar man  ;  the  particulars  of  the  plot  were  developed  to  all ; 
the  oath  of  fidelity  and  firmness  was  renewed,  and  a  com- 


J226  APPENDIX  VI. 

mission  of  seven  individuals  was  appointed  to  regulate  the 
operations  of  the  forces,  to  fix  the  day  and  hour  of  rising,  to 
give  the  word  of  command,  and  to  do  all  which  it  might 
deem  useful  to  the  desired  end. 