

In  the  mean  time  all  the  GG.  CC.  hereafter  named, 
never  ceased  their  exertions,  and  despised  the  dangers  with 
which  they  were  menaced  by  an  active  and  vigilant  police. 
But  after  three  years  of  constant  care,  the  force  of  the  Car- 
bonari had  become  formidable,  a  great  portion  of  the 
troops  had  joined  this  liberal  order  ;  several  provinces  were 
organized  and  united  by  correspondence  with  the  Supreme 
Magistracy  of  Salerno,    &amp;c. 

In  the  month  of  March  of  the  present  year,  the  example 
of  Spain  raised  enthusiasm  to  its  height.     Gagliardi  was  at 

*  Under  the  name  of  the  Lucullian  Republic. 


f 


APPENDIX   VI.  223 

Naples,  and  lived  with  Gherardo  Curci,  of  Basilicata. 
Both  perceived  that  the  epoch  of  the  regeneration  of  their 
country  was  arrived.  The  first  project  they  formed,  was  that  of 
revolutionizing  the  troops,  when  they  should  be  encamped 
in  the  plains  of  Sessa.  This  plan  was  communicated  to 
the  G.  C.  Vincenzo  Bologna,  lieutenant  of  dragoons,  an 
officer  distinguished  by  his  patriotic  zeal. 

He  consented  and  promised  to  range  his  whole  regiment, 
which  had  already  received  orders  to  prepare  to  march  to 
the  camp,  under  the  sacred  standard  of  liberty.  A  meet- 
ing took  place  between  Gagliardi,  Curci,  Bologna,  the  bro- 
thers Raffaello,  and  Tommaso  Marrello,  Scarpa  of  Prin- 
cipato  Citra,  the  brothers  Michele,  and  Gennaro  de  Bla- 
siis,  and  the  brothers  Abatemarco  ;  and  the  operations  were 
arranged,  which  were  to  be  carried  into  effect  at  the  camp, 
on  the  arrival  of  the  dragoons ;  but  this  plan  did  not  take 
effect  because  of  a  counter-order,  which  kept  the  regiment 
where  it  was. 

It  was  then  resolved  to  have  recourse  to  new  measures. 
Towards  the  end  of  April  the  above-mentioned  GG.  CC. 
met  for  the  second  time.  It  was  praposed  to  concentrate 
a  sufficient  force  at  Naples,  to  be  able  to  take  the  King  and 
royal  family  as  hostages,  and  conduct  them  to  a  place  of 
safety,  in  order  to  force  them  to  grant  a  liberal  constitution. 
They  swore,  on  the  altar  of  the  country,  to  preserve  the 
highest  and  most  inviolable  respect  to  the  sacred  persons  of 
the  royal  family.  Their  only  object  was  to  protect  the 
throne,  which  had  begun  to  totter,  from  ministerial  perfidy. 
The  plan  was  approved  by  all ;  and  they  turned  their  atten- 
tion to  the  means  of  carrying  it  into  effect. 

It  was  then  that  every  one  sought  to  invite  such  Carbo- 
nari  as  were   thought  the  most  courageous,   and  of  tried 

q4 


224  APPfiNDix  yi. 

firmness,  more  especially  those  who,  gifted  with  these  qua- 
lities, could  also  command  any  force  whatever,  in  order  to 
further  the  salutary  enterprize.  These  were,  Agostmo 
Ferrante,  serjeant  of  the  marine  artillery,  who  invited 
Raffaello  Villascosa,  serjeant-major  of  the  second  regi- 
ment of  grenadiers  of  the  guard;  Antonio  Lazzaro,  serjeant 
of  the  same  regiment,  together  with  Filippi  Pareti ;  Fran- 
cesco Addiechi,  serjeant-major  of  the  horse-artillery ; 
Giuseppe  Formica,  serjeant  of  the  royal  marine  regiment ; 
and  L.  Chianese,  halberdier.  They  also  invited  Francesco 
Ranieri,  of  Satriano  (in  Calabria  ultra) ;  Ferdinando  Gian- 
none,  and  Raffaello  Majorano,  both  Neapolitans.  The 
force  was  then  examined,  and  it  was  found  to  amount,  be- 
tween soldiers  and  citizens,  to  nearly  2000  men,  all  sworn 
sons  of  St.  Theobald ;  besides  the  brave  regiment  of  dra- 
goons under  the  above-named  Lieutenant  Bologna  and 
Captain  Permasilico ;  and  ten  pieces  of  artillery  under 
Addiechi,  Ferrante,   Scotto  and  Esposito. 