

[805](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_805)
on public credit was observable than 6s. 2d. per cent. on the loan, and about 5½ per cent. on the former interest. This might be considered to result from an Astonishing increase of public credit since the period to which he had referred, or to the improved situation of the country. And which ever way it was viewed, the effect was equally gratifying. To provide for the annual charge of 3,689,000l., the House had already supplied by taxes of Customs and Excise on tobacco, and on Excise licences, about 600,000., and there were now under the consideration of the House additions to the Stamps and Postage to the amount of about 1,200,000l. more, making in the whole a provision by new taxes of about 1,800,000l. Thus it would be seen about half the necessary supplies were provided by taxes now agreed to, or in progress through the House. For the remainder, he proposed to take a sum of from 1,800,000l. to 1,900,000l. out of the sums in the hands of the commissioners for liquidating the national debt, as he was authorized to do by the Act of 1813. The sum in their hands was at present about 70,000,000l., and he proposed to cancel so much of that as would suffice to meet the remainder of the charge created by the loan. He wished it to be borne in mind, as a consideration of no small importance, that a large proportion of the immense sum called for must have been supported by the country as arrears of the late war, had not the recent events again placed us in a state of hostility to France. On the most moderate calculation, no less than 21,000,000l. would have been sufficient. Of this 12,000,000l. were for the arrears of the Army Extraordinaries: for the payment of the Naval Debt, 2,000,000l. more; for Bills of Credit and arrears of Subsidies, 3,000,000l. for the Commissariat department in Portugal, not less than 2,500,000l. These sums together made 19,5001,000l. The 2,000,000l. for the Army Extraordinaries, which he had mentioned, were for the former year, though included in the grant for the present. The payment of the sum which continued due on account of the Commissariat in Portugal beyond what had been already discharged, had been suspended during the war. The parties interested had acquiesced cheerfully in the arrangement made, and consented to receive the interest, without complaining that the principal would not be paid. This was satisfactory, as it
[806](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_806)
showed that the monied men of the country (for the greater number of the creditors were British merchants) had the interest of the nation more at heart than their own private profit. They had made a considerable sacrifice, as the state of the exchange would have given them a great advantage, which must be wholly lost to them by this arrangement; which however would prove beneficial to the public service, and from its effect upon the exchange greatly promote economy in those departments in which our service had hitherto been conducted abroad at an immense expense; and thus our operations would be carried on with new vigour. The Committee must see with pleasure, that even under the pressure of present circumstances, the precious metals had been reduced in price since last April. Gold, which had then been 5l. 7s. the ounce, had been reduced to 5l. 5s., and the price of dollars had sunk within the same period to 6s. 3d. per ounce. Ha stated this to show that we had been enabled, not only to meet, but in part to surmount the difficulties of our situation. Returning from this digression, he observed, that he had brought up his statement of the charges which the country must have borne, if a new war had not broken out, to 19,500,000l. One million more was to be added as the balance due to the achievements, of our brave army; for the capture of stores. Five-hundred thousand pound of the sum called for in the present session would also have been necessary in aid of the Civil List. Thus this made up the 21,000,000l. he had mentioned, which were to be provided for in the present year, which did not arise from the renewal of war, and must have been borne had no such event taken place. He was aware it would be asked, if the war should continue, how would such expenses be met in a future year? He would not say that there would be no difficulties to contend with, but it was not probable that those difficulties would be of equal magnitude with those surmounted in the present year. He could hardly think it possible that this country would be engaged in an extensive naval war, while making such exertions as she was now displaying on the Continent. Either the attention of France would be so much directed to the confederated armies, that she would not be able to make any great effort with her navy: or, supposing any arrangements to be made by her with the