

He intreated the House to observe the effect which the measures of the right, hon. gentleman would have on the Sinking Fund. In the present year they were taking actually from the Sinking Fund 900,000l. He wished the House not to shut their eyes to the fact, that they were going backwards instead of forwards in all their prospects respecting the National Debt—while new incumbrances were added, the Sinking Fund was, from day to day, becoming less. If they took 900,000l. from 11,400,000l. the previous amount of the Sinking Fund, it would be reduced to 10,500,000l. If instead of having ten and a half millions, we had between sixteen and seventeen millions to go into the market with, what a difference would that make in favour of the credit of the country! So that what the country gained on the one hand by the measure of the right hon. gentleman, they lost on the other. However unpleasant it might be to bring forward new taxes, yet there was no other possible way of meeting the evil. The subject was desening of the most serious attention of the House; and it was the more important at a time when we were starting on a new war. He hoped they would not shut their eyes to the consequences, if we continued to go on in this career of expenditure; and we must bear in mind, that if the war was persevered in, we could not look for any reduction of expenditure. He meant no

[813](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_813)
disrespect to the right hon. gentleman, or his calculations, when he said he put no faith whatever in them—he would not, if Mr. Pitt, or any other financier were to rise from the dead and give these statements, place the least reliance in them. We were starting on a new career of expenditure—we did not know what would he the amount of our expenditure when war was once determined on, and to be pushed at every expense. Let us only see how things stood now, compared with what they did three months ago: Buonaparté then had made his appearance in France, and a mad Declaration was signed by the. representatives of the different Sovereigns at Vienna; and by one man, who, he believed, would be the last person in the world to give his cool approbation to the doctrines which that Declaration contained. But his associates naturally felt a good deal mortified at the event which had taken place—it had knocked all their labours on the head. That Declaration was, however, confirmed by the Treaty of the 25th of March, in which the Allied Powers agreed never to lay down their arms till Buonaparté was driven from the throne of France. Would not one have supposed, that, after such declaration, something would have been done to control the man whom they had thus proscribed? But they had not done any thing. The noble lord had told them, the night before last, that the Treaty which gave validity to the contracts with Russia, which he then produced, were only signed on the 19th of May; and he had also told them, how very improvident it would have been to sign that Treaty till the 19th of May, when they understood what the Allies were about. Why, then, it seemed, that up to that period we did not understand in what manner we were to act. But what had been actually done from the 19th of May up to this day? Nothing had, in fact, been done—nothing but making preparations, and marching troops from a great distance. All this was certainly in favour of Buonaparté, as it allowed him time to make preparations against the attack with which he was menaced. It had been said, that he had not derived the least advantage from this delay. Was it nothing to have consolidated the government of France? Was it nothing to have obtained the assembly of the Champ de Mai, and the sanction of the nation to the [Additional Act](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/acts/additional-act)? Was France in the same situation now, that she
[814](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_814)
was in when a King had just been pushed from the throne, and there was no Legislative Assembly or any other body through which the voice of the nation might be pronounced? Having now been recognized by the nation as Emperor, his cause became united with that of the nation. The right hon. gentleman had told them that in some parts of France there were suppressed murmurs against his authority. However much he might admire the budget of the right hon. gentleman, he had no doubt that even it would be received with suppressed murmurs in many parts of England—[A laugh]. The fact was, that a rapid progress had been made in consolidating the government in France. He was convinced that an honest and sincere wish was entertained by a majority of the people of France to have a good constitution. He saw nothing in the proceedings of the Chamber of Representatives to induce him to draw the inferences which some people had drawn from them. It had been said, that their proceedings were irregular—that propositions were received with murmurs; but if any foreigner were to judge merely from the appearance which this House often exhibited, he would say that they were all going to loggerheads, and that the constitution could not last a month. But what were the propositions which were received with murmurs? They were always propositions in favour of Buonaparté; these were the propositions which were always put down. It had been said, that we went to war to get rid of Buonaparté, to prevent another military despotism from being established. Now, it was his opinion, that there would be no military despotism in France, unless we contributed to enable Buonaparté to establish it. Vast preparations of defence had been made in France. There might be a difference, in the accounts, more or less; but no man could doubt that at present there were 500,000 men in France, properly equipped. The noble lord had indeed told them, that the Allies were to bring one million and eleven thousand men into the field against France. But even were there to be one million and eleven thousand men led against France, if that country was united, he did not believe that they could make any impression on it. He was supposing France to be united. It would be ridiculous to suppose, that in a country which had just experienced a revolution, all parties saw things in the same point of view;