

[809](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_809)
suffer himself to be led into the discussion of topics, however interesting and important, which were not immediately under the consideration of the Committee, and was not aware that he had omitted to state any thing necessarily connected with the business of this evening; but he should hold himself ready to offer any further explanation which might be required by the Committee. He then moved his first resolution, which was, "That, towards raising the Supply granted to his Majesty, the sum of 36 millions be raised by Annuities, whereof the charges of 27 millions are to be defrayed on the part of Great Britain, and 9 millions on the part of Ireland."

Mr. Turney

declared, that the proposition with which the right hon. gentleman had concluded his speech was one of the most alarming that he had ever heard. At the same time, he must do justice to the right hon. gentleman for the clearness and fairness of his statements with respect to the existing ways and means, on which, upon the whole—although it was probable that there would be some deficiency in the property-tax—he agreed with him. As to the supplies, the right hon. gentleman had endeavoured to convince the committee that they ought not to contemplate a similar account next year, for that at least 21 millions could not recur. The committee should, however, bear in mind, that they were ignorant of the nature of that arrear of 21 millions. To him there seemed no reason to doubt that similar arrears would again accumulate. In the article of Army Extraordinaries, liberal as the annual grants had been, they had never covered the actual expenditure; and it was not to be supposed that they would do so in future. The estimate of the Commissariat appeared to him to be under-rated by the right hon. gentleman. Last year the expenses of that department were three millions, and the year before two millions and a hall; but this year they were estimated by the right hon. gentleman at only 1,100,000l. In future years they would be much more. The Barrack estimate this year, in consequence of the sale of old barracks, was only 99,000l.; but that cause of diminution was temporary, and next year that item of expenditure must necessarily be increased.—Before he said any thing on the general subject of foreign troops, he observed that we gave to Austria 400,000l. and to Russia 200,000l. in addition to the former sum
[810](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_810)
of 500,000l., for taking care of her own ships. The amount of the sum appropriated to foreign Powers was three millions, of which 1,600,000l. had been already voted by Parliament, and the remaining 1,400,000l., though altogether a new proposition, was now very quietly and without remark proposed as a vote to the committee by the right hon. gentleman. In the first place, no information had been given to the committee of the nature of the sums composing this vote. He had apprehended that all our subsidies had been made good. If not, why had not that been stated? It seemed as if the right hon. gentleman was not in the secret on the subject, but merely said the demands came upon the Treasury in the shape of bills, for which it was neceseary that he should provide. As to the Army Prize-money, it might be very proper to pay at once a million of arrears on that subject; which, however, nobody looked for. But should the war continue, we should, in all probability, have brave men distinguishing themselves, for which his Majesty's faithful Commons would of course be called upon to provide. Of what value, therefore, was the right hon. gentleman's supposition, that such arrears would not recur? In fact, they would go on at a rate more rapid than ever. The total amount of the supplies of the year was 89,728,926l.; from which, if the 21 millions of arrears were deducted, how much still remained! But the right hon. gentleman seemed to think that we were a very happy people, if we had only 60 millions to provide. Let the committee look at the progress of our expenditure, creeping up as it had been for the last six or seven years. In 1808, it had been 45 millions; in 1809, 50 millions; in 1810, 48 millions; in 1811, 52 millions; in 1812, 55 millions; in 1813, 57 millions; in 1814, 63 millions; and now, in 1815, 72 millions. Willing as he was to admit that the right hon. gentleman fulfilled the duties of his high office with exemplary attention, he must contend, that he was mistaken when he conceived it possible to carry on the war without an increasing instead of a diminishing expenditure. It was quite astonishing, therefore, to hear the right hon. gentleman attempting to form an estimate of the loan for next year. It was in the nature of such an expenditure to be rapidly increasing. Circumstances were perpetually starting up to produce this effect. This was a frightful