

[815](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_815)
but from every thing which had taken place in that country, from all the different accounts which had been received, he thought he had a right to lay it down that France wished for a free constitution, with the exclusion of the Bourbons from the throne; and though they might not all be attached to Buonaparté, yet they considered it necessary to have a military character at their head, capable of wielding the resources of the nation in an able manner, in the present critical emergency. He warned them to stop before the blow was struck. They ought to reflect on what might be the consequences if Buonaparté should be successful, and see if peace could not yet be made. If France were to be attacked without having committed any acts of aggression against this country or the rest of Europe, those who so attacked her would be guilty of as deliberate a crime as ever was committed. But he believed we might have reasonable security against danger from France, if we went the right way about it—we might yet make a peace, if we went about it properly. But this was not the object of his Majesty's ministers; their object was to put down Buonaparté, for the sake of the restoration of the Bourbons to the throne. They must know how inimical this was to the wishes of the people of France. They might yet have reasonable security, if they would be satisfied with it; but he was not convinced that they would always have it in their power to get it. After they had Spent these 36 millions, he was not satisfied that they would be able to have it. It was probable that the war on which we were entering would be a protracted war, as it was engendered in a degree of animosity, which had not been witnessed since 1793. Did the right hon. gentleman think that there was any probability that this war would be a short one? It might all be very well if there was to be but one great effort, and that a short one; but he saw no probability of any thing of the kind; the war could be determined by nothing but the overthrow of the people of France. The great object for which the country was to submit to all these privations, was the overthrow of the present Government of France, in order to bring the people of France to their senses. Now, he believed, that this was a thing which it was impossible for all the people in the world to do. They would find the people of France more disposed to sub-
[816](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_816)
mit to privations in defence of their country, than those would be disposed to submit to who attacked it. The great Vote of Credit of six millions, meant nothing more than that it secured ministers against a meeting of Parliament for some time. The circumstances under which they were to meet again, might well alarm the right hon. gentleman and his colleagues. If the war should not be terminated soon, there would be a general gloom from one end of the country to the other. He had made diligent inquiries into the situation of the country, and he knew that a very general distress was at present felt by the middle ranks, which was working up to the higher ranks of course. If the country remained at peace, he saw no reason why we should despair of our situation; but a fresh war might be attended with the most ruinous consequences to the country.—Again he would implore them to pause before striking a blow—they would have no other moment to deliberate. This was the first time that the country had had a budget to the amount of nearly 90 millions. The way in which the interest of the Loan was provided for, had sapped and undermined the vitals of the country, by the deterioration of the Sinking Fund, and the consequent deterioration of all funded property. It would be impossible lo borrow money in any part of the country, when people were tempted by the high rate of interest which would be obtained from holding Government securities. The plan of Mr. Pitt was now abandoned. If ministers should not succeed in their project, France would be justified in waging eternal war with this country. The insolent manner in which we conducted ourselves in every question, made us very generally hated throughout Europe, and was greatly injurious to the interests of the country.—[Hear, hear! from the Ministerial benches.] It would be said by the noble lord opposite, perhaps, that this was a proof they feared us. He would repeat the word insolence, which was cheered by the noble lord. What could be a greater instance of it, than those medals which had lately been struck? Forty or fifty medals in gold had lately been struck, and presented to all the foreign Powers with whom we were on good terms. On one side there was a very fine likeness of the Prince Regent, which did great credit to the artist—greater credit than to the person who ordered it—with