

[819](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_819)
Comptroller on the spot, and was directed for that purpose to call upon each individual accountant for a weekly statement of his receipts and issues, and a weekly schedule of his balances either of cash or stores. Under such a system he (the Chancellor of the Exchequer) would not undertake to say that an excess of expenditure was impossible; but he saw great reason to hope it would not take place, and that at any rate it could not happen, as it had on other occasions, unforeseen and unexpected.

With regard to the Barrack estimate, he thought the narrow limits within which it was reduced this year, rather a subject of congratulation than of suspicion. After some other observations on this head and other branches of public expenditure, he proceeded to observe, that it appeared to him unnecessary to enter into any defence of the different heads of foreign subsidy, en which the right hon. gentleman had descanted, as they all arose out of engagements recognized and approved by Parliament.

Having touched upon the several matters of detail on which the right hon. gentleman had observed, he proceeded to subjects of a more general nature, involving principles of the highest importance. He should be sorry indeed to think that be had deviated from those principles of finance by which his predecessors, and especially the great founder of the Sinking Fund, had acquired high and deserved reputation, though not much of the right hon. gentleman's approbation and support. But he denied that he could be justly charged with any such deviation. He denied that any of his predecessors, and especially that Mr. Pitt had ever attempted to cover the charge of a great and extraordinary exertion, not apparently likely to be of long continuance, by supplies raised within the year. The principle on which Mr. Pitt, no less than other ministers, had acted, was that of endeavouring to provide for permanent expenditure by permanent income, and to have recourse to means of credit for raising extraordinary supplies. There were three periods in which great attempts had been made to provide for a large proportion of the public expenses within the year, and they had been eminently useful and successful. The first was by Mr. Pitt in 1797 and 1798; the second, and much the most considerable, by lord Sidmouth in 1803; and the third by lord Grenville, and lord Henry
[820](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_820)
Petty, in 1806. The first arose out of an extreme depression of public credit, occasioned partly by a variety of, political calamities, but principally by a succession, of loans larger than the money market was then prepared for, or able to bear. The second and third were distinctly explained by the ministers who proposed them, as intended, with the assistance of a small annual loan, to meet the permanent, and ordinary war expenses. So carefully, indeed, was any misapprehension on this point guarded against, that in the printed; explanation of lord Grenville's plan in? 1807, it was stated, that any expenses arising from expeditions abroad, or from foreign subsidies, were to be provided for by other means—that is, undoubtedly, by borrowing. So completely successful had been the efforts made by the country for meeting the ordinary expenses of the war, that in 1808, when the resources proposed by lord H. Petty came into full operation, there was a small diminution of the capital of the funded debt, instead of any increase. It was true, that from the same year commenced that arduous struggle on the continent of Europe which had entailed upon us so large an addition of public debt, but which, with so much expense and difficulty, but also with so much glory, had at length brought the war to a successful termination. For these immense expenses it had been the duty of Mr. Perceval and himself to provide; but he denied that it could be expected of them, or would have been practicable, to raise such sums within the year. They were only bound to propose such measures as were consistent with sound principles of finance, and adapted to the occasion; and it had been his happiness to provide for the most arduous and pressing period of ibis great contest, without imposing any additional burthens on the country. But he was ready to admit that the system on which he was then, and now acting, was one suited to a temporary emergency;—and it was only under the conviction that the struggle was likely to be short, and that the ordinary resources of the country were sufficiently great to bear the more permanent expenses, that he could forbear from recommending to the House some additional and extraordinary measures of taxation even in the present session.