

The Chancellor of the Exchequer then referred to the measures of Mr. Pitt at different periods, and particularly in 1805, to show that he did not in great and ex-

[821](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_821)
traordinary emergencies, attempt to raise the whole of the expenses by taxation, but by an increase on the amount of the loans; and to justify his own present proceeding by the authority of that great man's precedent. He likewise entered into a variety of calculations showing the effect of the system introduced in 1813, respecting the Sinking Fund, and proving that the progress of the redemption of the national debt would be perfectly satisfactory, notwithstanding the relief afforded to the public burthens.

He next adverted to the right hon. gentleman's observations on the doubtful success of the war. He did not mean to deny that the forces of France were formidable, and conducted by a leader of great military talent, or that the events of war were always uncertain; but as greater exertions were making on the part of the Allies than on any other occasion recorded in history, it was only reasonable to hope for corresponding success. The roads of Europe from the Oder and the Vistula to the Rhine were literally covered with the successive columns of their forces; and though the right hon. gentleman thought it not possible for them to make any impression on France, he was disposed to augur more favourably of the event, and to congratulate the House on the probable result of such an unexampled union of exertions. It was evident, even by the right hon. gentleman's statement, that France would have to encounter fearful odds. But were the prospect less favourable, he should not be less of opinion that the effort ought to be made with the utmost resources of the country—for on this effort hung the subjection or independence of mankind. It appeared to him a weak and childish delusion to think that the French had expelled their King for the purpose of obtaining peace and a free constitution. They already enjoyed peace and a free constitution under that mild and benevolent monarch; and the very last thing that the people of France could have thought of, if they had really wished to have a free constitution, was to put Buonaparté at their head. His conduct had always been the very reverse of that of the amiable monarch whose government they had overthrown. The King had imposed no arbitrary laws upon them; he had made no infringement on their personal liberty, nor torn away their children by odious conscriptions.

The right hon. gentleman was himself
[822](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_822)
so sensible of the ambitious and domineering spirit of the present French Government, that he talked of requiring securities for the preservation of peace. What securities he could ask, or the French Government would be disposed to give, he had not explained, nor could he (the Chancellor of the Exchequer) conceive any that would afford any solid ground of confidence; but it would at any rate be time enough for the House to consider them, when the right hon. gentleman should be authorized by the French Government to communicate them.