

[817](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_817)
the Latin inscription, "Seipsum constantiæ exemplum Europæ præbuit." On the other side was a figure of Britannia supporting Europe. One of the Potentates to whom a medal was sent, if he was not misinformed, had said, that this was one of the most singular examples of modesty he ever knew.—He conceived that it must be attended with intolerable misery to Europe to place France in a state of war. Did ministers suppose that they could draw a line round France, and confine the consequences of the war to that country? It was impossible that France could suffer without giving rise to great agitation in all the neighbouring countries. This was his sincere opinion. Gentlemen might make a clamour, but they could not oppose any satisfactory arguments to what he had advanced. What he said, went home to the feelings of men; at least it would six months hence. He would defy the Chancellor of the Exchequer to meet the expenditure of the war for two years on the present scale.

[§](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#S1V0031P0_18150614_HOC_27) [Mr. Arbuthnot](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/people/mr-charles-arbuthnot)

would only say, that in every part of the world, except France, the name of the Prince Regent, and the unblemished honour of this country, were most highly respected and extolled.

The Chancellor of the Exchequer

entered into an elaborate reply to the comments of Mr. Tierney. He began by expressing his satisfaction at the approbation given by the right hon. gentleman, in general, to the statements he had made, and the measures he had proposed. The candour shown by the right hon. gentleman made him the more desirous of entering into such explanations as his (Mr. T's.) observations appeared to require; and he trusted that he should be able to give such an answer to so many of the right hon. gentleman's observations as were of a financial nature, as he would admit to be satisfactory, though he could not flatter himself they should so readily agree upon the political topics which the right hon. gentleman had introduced.

There were two principal points relating to finance, to which the right hon. gentleman had directed his observations, viz. the amount of our foreign expenditure, and the alteration which had taken place in the management of the Sinking Fund, and which the right hon. gentleman represented as a dereliction of those principles of finance upon which Mr. Pitt had acted. With respect to our foreign expenditure, the right hon. gentleman had
[818](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1815/jun/14/separate-charges#column_818)
asked what security we had, that the extraordinaries of this year would not as much exceed the provisions made for them as those of the last year had done. On such a subject it was obvious that no positive security could be obtained. But there was every reason which the nature of the case allowed of, to hope that such an excess would not take place. In the first place, the provision made in the present year for extraordinary expenses was greater than it had been in the former; and as almost one half of the year was already elapsed, we were able to reason with a considerable degree of certainty as to a large proportion of the expense. In the next place, it should be observed, that the contest now unhappily renewed, differed materially in its nature from the war which had so long been carried on in the Peninsula, and did not seem likely to lead to an expense either so great or so uncertain. In so unproductive a country as Spain, the supplies of the army were necessarily brought from great distances, at an expense of carriage many times exceeding the cost of the articles themselves. The difficulties increased with every movement the army made in advance, and rendered it necessary to scatter the commissariat establishment over the country in such a manner that upwards of 800 officers were employed at once. From this resulted such a multiplication and intricacy of accounts as was incompatible with any system of economy. The circumstances under which the present war was to be carried on were in many respects the very reverse of these. It was conducted in one of the most fertile and productive countries in Europe, where every kind of necessary was to be obtained in abundance, where every commercial arrangement was perfectly understood, and where the facility of water-carriage, so essential to the abundant supply of a large army, was afforded to the greatest extent. In addition to these advantages every effort had been made by the Government to improve to the utmost the system of account and the control of expenditure. An additional Comptroller of Army Accounts had been appointed with an immediate view to this object, and under his examination monthly estimates of the expense of every department of the service were directed to be prepared and transmitted to the Treasury. A special Accountant-general had also been appointed to prepare and render the accounts of the commissariat to the