

Baring’s personal capital in London was only £2,457.3.6d. He told
Lord de Dunstanville that he had begun with a fortune of £10,000
and had spent all but a few hundred before ‘he acquired anything
but a knowledge of trade and commerce’.!” It cannot be called a
gloriously successful start to a career in business, and there can have
been few who would have foreseen what immense rewards that
‘knowledge of trade and commerce’ were soon to earn.
   Francis Baring himself admitted that inexperience and lack of
caution were at the root of his problems, but he also blamed the asso-
ciation with the house in Exeter. His brother Charles, he claimed,
was ‘not calculated for the management of the house, an establish-
ment which depended on steady order and attention, ill suited to his
disposition of catching at every new project that offered’. Charles
had travelled in Spain and Portugal; journeys which had proved
expensive both in ttme and money and had involved John and
Charles Baring and Co. in a number of unprofitable connections:
‘This is not stated as a reflection on his intention, but solely to
impeach the want of commercial knowledge and judgment, which
he has manifested through life.’ Nor was it merely in Spain and Por-
tugal that Charles had blundered; not only had he ‘interfered too
much with the house in London, but by degrees he formed partner-
ships, connexions and speculations, of a wild, strange, incoherent
description; and what is particularly unfortunate, not one of them
has proved successfull’.'8
  John Baring was even stronger in his condemnation of his brother.
‘The weakness, the capriciousness, the greediness, the shabbiness of
Charles are so abominable it is hoped no occasion will arise again to
mention him,’ he wrote in his sketch of a family history.19 In fairness
to Charles one must wonder why, if his shortcomings were really so
glaring, his elder brother and senior partner did so little to check
them. Charles for his part complained that John had been guilty of
undue severity and of never giving him a fair chance.2° To this
Francis retorted that the accusation reminded him of their mother,
who had once been told that she sang out of tune. ‘She said it was
impossible for she could not sing out of tune if she would, and this
may be correctly applied to my Brother, who could not be severe if
he would.’2!
  It is possible to sympathize with Charles, who had been promoted
                   The Birth of Barings:   1483-1776                 23
too young and given authority which he was not fit to wield, but
even with the most loving supervision it seems unlikely that he
would ever have made a competent businessman; his judgement
was too uncertain and his impetuosity too unbridled. Add to this
vanity, and the arrogance of a weak man determined to prove him-
self strong, and all the ingredients were there for a disaster. It never
quite came, but near enough; in June 1774 matters were so bad that
the three brothers signed a memorandum agreeing that, if one of
them died, £2000 should be deducted from his capital as his share of
the likely total loss.??
   For Francis Baring the most vexatious aspect of Charles’s enter-
prises was that constant demands were made on the capital of the
London house, thus preventing him using it for more profitable and
enduring enterprises. ‘Your unceasing projects, by absorbing so large
a part of the family and of the Bank, hung as a dead weight and
impeded my progress for many years.?3 Whether, at that period, the
money would have been used more gainfully by Francis is open to
question, but he had no doubt himself that Charles was squandering
the vital resources of the house. His brother compounded the
offence by maintaining that it was he who was making a success of
the business and Francis who was bungling, telling all and sundry
that in his opinion Francis’s family must in the end come to the
 parish.2# Mrs Baring had said, ‘the whole Family are embarked in one
 Bottom’; Francis regretted the truth of the statement and was more
than ready to leave the ship and venture forth on his own.
    The opportunity came in the autumn of 1776. Charles arrived in
 London accompanied, said Francis, by ‘three low persons, projec-
tors, who had offered a plan for spinning Wool by Machinery’.?®
Francis was ill at the time, and under considerable financial pressure,
which he attributed entirely to Charles’s thoughtlessness and mis-
management. He met Charles and his cronies with a notable lack of
enthusiasm, an attitude which became more marked when he heard
of his brother's plans to build woollen mills in Devonshire. The party
departed for Lancashire with Francis still urging extreme caution; he
was therefore not unnaturally disturbed when Charles returned tri-
umphant announcing that ‘he had found everything so satisfactory,
that he had signed an agreement for a partnership with those per-
sons, wherein he had stipulated to advance a Capital of £20,000’.?6
24                       The Sixth Great Power