

merchants, as a fully fledged merchant adventurer. Generally he
kept his investment in any transaction to a level he could afford, but
risks were high and one disastrous speculation in soda ash in 1774, in
which his share of the loss was over £2000, must have come close to
putting him out of business.'*
   The greatest need in international trade in the eighteenth century
was for someone to fill the gap between buyer and seller. Smith had
2000 Ibs of best tea lying in his warehouse in Calcutta, Jones knew
that he could profitably dispose of it in Mincing Lane, there was no
dispute over price or quantity, but Smith did not wish to dispatch his
tea without being certain that he would be paid for it, and Jones did
not wish to pay until the tea had arrived and was in his possession.
The essential was a middleman who had confidence in and who had
gained the confidence of both parties, who would accept the bills of
exchange issued by one party and guarantee to pay that amount to
the other. Francis Baring did not invent the business of acceptances,
but he came into it when it was still relatively undeveloped and is
associated as much as any other individual with its growing sophisti-
cation. Five years after John and Francis Baring and Co. was set up,
its liabilities on acceptances stood at some £12,000. By 1776 they
were more than three times as great.
   Elizabeth Baring was somewhat alarmed at her son’s growing
independence and adventurousness. Business was booming in Exe-
ter and there was no need to branch out. She wrote tartly to him in
March 1766:
     As it was so long since I heard from you I imagined you had
     forgot you had a Mother. I am glad your business bears so
     promising an Aspect. I see you have begun in the Exchange
     way, as you Say tis nota lucrative thing, advise you to be care-
     ful you do not run out of your depth. I am satisfied tis
     attended with risk and many houses called considerable
     abroad have often disappointed and sometimes absolutely
     ruined those who have placed Confidence in them, am sen-
     sible you may be drawn in to be answerable for large Sums
     before you are aware of it, and let Mr Touchet’s example of
     grasping at too much and not being contented with a very
     handsome profit which he might have had without running
                   The Birth of Barings: 1483-1776                  21
   such enormous risks, be a warning to you. Consider the
   whole Family are embarked in one Bottom, our trade here is
   surprizingly great, in short we cannot get goods to supply the
   orders, nor money to pay for what we do buy, nor hands to
   finish them, a great deal we do, and more we might if we
   could procure the 3 very necessary ingredients, our people
   work from 5 in the morn to 9 at night and there is yet no
   prospect of coming to the end of it.'¢
   She was right in believing that her son was embarking on danger-
ous and largely uncharted waters. The secret of successful merchant
banking is above all good intelligence; to be well informed - and to
be the first to be informed - about the resources, the policies and the
capacities of all the companies with whom one deals, and about
political and economic developments which will affect the course of
their business. A merchant banker must not only be a mathematician
buta historian and a geographer as well; he must know about church
and state, not to mention the possibility of a revolution or a coup
d’état; he must be agronomist, mineralogist and weather forecaster;
a psychologist able to detect the hidden strengths and weaknesses of
those with whom he works; a futurologist qualified to predict the
vagaries of diet and fashion. Since he can hardly hope to unite so
many parts in one mind, the essential is that he should havea great
many informants and be skilled at collating and interpreting their
information. Francis Baring was quick to see this, and to learn his
trade, but networks of informants are not built up overnight and he
made expensive misjudgements, both of people and of circum-
stances.
   In the fourteen years in which the partnership with Exeter existed,
Francis Baring lost money in eight of them. Profits were above £3000
in one of the remaining years but otherwise were far lower. When
the joint partnership had been set up the personal property of the
family, amounting to some £50,000, had been allocated £20,000 to
                                                                at
London and £30,000 to Exeter, but in practice Francis had £4200
his disposal when he opened his office off Cheapside in 1763. He
inherited £5000 from his mother in 1766 and drew £2000 from his
original inheritance in 1769. John Baring put in £7810 in 1766,
£1500 in 1767 and £3000 in 1769. Yet by January 1777 Francis
22                      The Sixth Great Power