


 My first acknowledgement must be to Nicholas Baring, who almost
 ten years ago suggested that I might write this book, and to those
  partners of Baring Brothers who have helped and encouraged me in
 my work. I have been given every facility and total freedom to
 express the truth as I saw it.
     Mr T. L. Ingram, archivist of Barings between 1959 and 1978, was
 largely responsible for the formidable task of putting this enormous
 quantity of records into order. Without his efforts I would have
 found it impossible to write this book.
     He was succeeded by DrJohn Orbell. Dr Orbell not only possesses
 an encyclopaedic knowledge of the affairs of Barings and a wide
understanding of economic and financial history, but also wisdom
and - for me most important of all - endless patience. He and his
staff have made my work not merely feasible, but enjoyable as well,
and he has saved me from innumerable blunders and omissions.
    Professor Christopher Platt of St Antony’s College, Oxford,
worked for several years on Barings’ archives and related papers. I
have been fortunate enough to see many of the fruits of his labours,
both published and unpublished. They have been of inestimable
value to me. His mastery of international finance and the history of
Latin America give his work unique authority. I only wish I knew
half as much on either subject.
    I owe much to the assistance of Mr Christopher Cooper, Keeper of
Manuscripts at Guildhall Library; Mr Henry Gillett of the Bank of
England; Mrs Hodge and Miss Mace of the Rothschild
                                                     Archive
(London); Mr Thomas Dunnings, Curator of Manuscripts
                                                       of the
New York Historical Society; Ms Anne-Marie Schaaf of the Histori
                                                                 -
cal Society of Pennsylvania; Mr John Cushing of the Massachusett
                                                                 s
Historical Society; Mr Albert Gordon of Kidder Peabody; MrJames
Hutson of the Manuscript Division of the Library of
                                                    Congress; Ms
Anita Burdett and Miss Kennedy of the Public Archives of
                                                           Canada;
                                  8
                          Acknowledgements                           9
Mr R. H. Harcourt Williams, Librarian and Archivist of the
Marquess of Salisbury; Mme Brot, Conservateur aux Archives
Nationales; Mlle Marie-Aimée Carli of the Européenne de Banque.
   Anyone who ventures for the first time into a world as complex as
that of the merchant bank must owe a great debt to all those who
have gone before or who are currently working in the field. I am par-
ticularly grateful for help and advice to Dr Stanley Chapman, author
of the invaluable The Rise ofMerchant Banking; Professor H. S. Ferns,
leading authority on the history of Britain and Argentina;
Professor Vincent Carosso, historian of Kidder Peabody and of
Morgans; Dr Samuel Amaral of the Instituto Torcuato di Tella in
Buenos Aires; Dr Kathleen Burk and Dr Richard Roberts, respec-
tively historians of Morgan Grenfell and Schroders.
   Apart from those Barings and their colleagues who are active in
the house I have been given much help and treated with great gener-
osity by the Earl of Cromer, Lords Ashburton and Northbrook, Sir
Mark Baring, The Hon. Mrs Mildmay-White, Miss Anne-Cecilia
Baring and the late Mrs Daphne Pollen. The Marquess of North-
ampton kindly allowed me to see Baring papers in his possession.
Among former members of the house or those closely associated
with it, I have especially valued the opportunity of talking with Sir
Andrew Carnwath, Mr John Phillimore and Mr Duncan Surling.
   So many people have helped me along the way that I hesitate to
mention any for fear of the inevitable omissions, but I could not pass
over Mr Ismael Benavides, Mr Leslie Bethell, The Hon. Raymond
Bonham Carter, Mr Robert Cross, Mr Benjamin Davis, the late Mr
Geoffrey and Mrs Gibson, Mrs Cecily Glazzard, Mr R. C. Haskell,
Mr and Mrs Philip Jebb, Mr and Mrs David McCosh, Dr Miguel
Mancera, Mr George Nissen, Mr Archie Norman, Mr Henry Rob-
erts, Mr and Mrs John Shakespeare, Mr John Shepherd, Lord
Sudeley, Dr Claudio Veliz, and Mrs S. D. Wyles.
   My agent, Mrs Diana Baring, has managed with characteristic
grace the difficult task of having a husband in one camp and a client
in the other. Happily the two have never come to blows.
   Finally my wife and children have once again endured with equa-
nimity the inconveniences and irritations of having an author in the
family. My wife’s support has been, as always, the one element
wholly indispensable to my work.
‘There are six great powers in Europe: England, France,
Prussia, Austria, Russia and Baring Brothers.’
                                    Duc de Richelieu, 1818
                            PREFACE