

but fell under the influence of Martin Luther and ended his life as
pastor ofaparish near Hamburg. Franz’s son was also Franz, and also
a pastor.* His son Johann, a senior civil servant, married a pastor's
daughter and settled in Bremen, and his son, Franz again, became a
Professor of Theology. This tradition of diligent service to God or
the state was now broken. The latest Franz married Rebecca Vogds,
the daughter ofone of Bremen’s leading wool merchants. Franz died
in 1697, aged only forty, and his son Johann was born a fortnight
later. The Vogds found themselves charged with bringing up the
fatherless boy.’
   They elected to direct him towards their own rather than his
father’s interests. North Germany imported much wool and serge
from Britain and exported large quantities of linen in return. A high
proportion of the wool came from the West Country and this was
almost all collected at Exeter for dyeing, finishing and shipment
abroad. In the early eighteenth century Exeter was a boom town,
with some 12,000 inhabitants and four out of five earners deriving
their income in one form or another from the wool trade. The Vogds
family firm imported most of its coloured serge from the largest Exe-
ter merchant, Edmund Cock, and it was probably to this house that
Johann, or John as he soon became, was apprenticed when he was
sent to England in 1717.4
   Though John Baring brought with him a handsome £500+ as his
share of his father’s estate it seems unlikely that he expected when he
first arrived to spend more than a year or two in Exeter learning
about the trade from the English end and making contacts that
would be useful to his mother’s family. He liked the place, however,
and soon felt thoroughly at home. His first task was to dispose of
consignments of linen from the Vogds in Germany, which he sold
on commission; doing so with such success that other merchants
from Bremen invited him to handle their goods as well. From this he
expanded into the wool trade, found it more profitable and gradu-
* The Barings were always parsimonious over Christian names. Among thirty Baring
or near Baring partners in the house since 1762 there were five Thomases, four Johns,
four Charleses and three Francises. This does not make life easy for the historian
                                                                                    (or
the reader).
+ Attempts to translate the currency of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries into
a contemporary equivalent are wayward and inaccurate. A guide of a sort is
                                                                                  con-
tained in appendix VI.
                   The Birth of Barings: 1483-1776                  15
ally let his interest in linen dwindle. By 1723 he had become so
well established that he decided to become a British citizen. In this
he set something of a fashion. He was the first foreign merchant
to settle in Exeter, but John Duntze, also from Bremen, followed a
few years later, with the Passavants from Frankfurt, the Mandrots
from Amsterdam      and other traders from the continent not long
behind.’
   He completed the process of assimilation by taking an English
wife. He chose judiciously, marrying Elizabeth Vowler, daughter of a
merchant who was then styled a ‘grocer’, but was in fact a substantial
wholesaler of tea, coffee, sugar, dried fruits and other such
commodities. John’s father-in-law had already retired by the me
his daughter married but was able to give her a handsome dowry
which, at his death, was made up to some £20,000; in the first half of
the eighteenth century a very considerable sum indeed. That Baring
secured such a prize proves that he must have won a respected posi-
tion in Exeter society, but also says something about his personality.
Elizabeth Vowler was a most resolute young lady, who would not
have allowed herself to be fobbed off with a German immigrant
however well established, unless she had loved him. John was, wrote
his son, ‘a man of exceeding good parts, of a most pleasant, excellent
disposition’. He had ‘an admirable head and an excellent heart’.
Without the first he would not have made such a success of business;
without the second he would never have won the esteem of his fel-
low citizens or the hand of Miss Vowler.
   What he lacked was good health. He was never robust and he grew
worse; the last part of his life, wrote his son, ‘passed away very
uncomfortably’. This did not prevent him having five children: the
eldest, also John, was born in 1730, Thomas three years later, Francis
in 1740, Charles in 1742 and a daughter, Elizabeth, in 1744. Nor did
it stop him expanding his business and adding to his already consid-
erable fortune. By the time Francis was born the family had moved
from the centre of town and had settled in the substantial but unpre-
tentious Larkbear House, standing in thirty-seven acres on the
fringes of Exeter. When John died, probably of consumption, at the
age of fifty-one, he was a landowner on a considerable scale and one
of the richest merchants in the West Country. He, the bishop and the
recorder were the only people in Exeter to keep their own carriages.’
16                       The Sixth Great Power