


Francis Baring established his house in London in 1762; 225 years
later it is still managed and controlled by his direct descendants. It
was the longevity ofthis dynasty which first intrigued me. What was
there about the family which had enabled it to survive through so
many vicissitudes and changing circumstances? The history of Bar-
ing Brothers must first and foremost be a history of the Barings
themselves.
   It is also to an extent a history of British merchant banking, for
Barings blazed the trail along which so many have since followed. At
first I thought that it would be the sociopolitical aspects of the story
that would most interest me, but it did not take me long to discover
the extraordinary fascination, and indeed excitement, inherent in
this kind of banking. The expert will perhaps find my treatment of
the financial issues too superficial for his taste, the general reader
may wish that he was told less about issues and acceptances, but I
hope that some at least will feel that I have hit a proper balance
between the work of the banker and the personalities involved.
   When to stop was an almost insoluble problem. No banker in his
senses is going to tell inquisitive historians everything about the
transactions in which he is currently engaged or in which living
clients were involved. If I had continued the book beyond 1945, it
would have taken on a different nature. By ending it at an earlier date
I made it possible to claim that nothing had been concealed from me
and nothing censored.
   The possible points at which to cut off the history seemed to be
1918, 1929 and 1939. 1918 would have been too early, and involved
the sacrifice of a lot of interesting material. At first glance 1939 was
the obvious date. Yet 1929 was the year of the 2nd Lord Revelstoke’s
death. With his departure the bank took a fundamentally different
course - or, perhaps more accurately, his existence had masked a
change that was already happening. The process was exaggerated
                                   11
12                            Preface
and speeded up by the slump and the decline of sterling. Interna-
tional issuing withered, corporate financing throve. The decade
between 1929 and the Second World War looks forward to the
postwar world rather than back to 1918 and the years before it. Any
cut-off date would have been arbitrary and unsatisfactory, but I felt
that 1929 was less so than any other. I have added a short and non-
critical epilogue, to give some indication of what has happened
between then and the present day.
                                   l
                                pm Sa




               The Birth of Barings
                     1483-1776


The Barings were not Jews. So bald a statement may seem unduly
negative as an introduction to the history of a dynasty. It may even
inspire disquiet among those who consider that to betray an interest
in whether or not an individual is Jewish is evidence, if not proof, of
anti-Semitism. That the Barings were gentile, however, is by far the
most important fact to emerge from a study of their eminently
respectable but undramatic genealogy. It shaped the growth of their
banking business throughout the nineteenth and into the twentieth
century; dictated with which houses they should cooperate and with —
whom they should do battle; led them to involve themselves in cer-
tain countries and to eschew others. If the Barings had been Jews, the
history of British merchant banking would have been different.
  They were, in fact, low churchmen from North Germany. Some
nineteenth-century historian, no doubt owing them money, once
linked their name with that of the hero of the Baring Saga, a Norse
translation of an old German romance which featured a young
knight who travelled from tournament to tournament, defeating all
his adversaries with monotonous ease, and became first King of Sax-
ony and then Emperor of Byzantium.! Another antiquarian claimed
to have had access to the ‘most indisputable documents’ establishing
the family’s Saxon origins. Their ancestor, S. Beeringe, had been
accepted as a proper attendant on a Norman baron because of his
‘absolute Saxon worthiness and knightly birth’.? Reality was some-
what less romantic.
   The first Baring about whom there is any accurate information 1s
Peter, who was born in about 1483 in the free city of Groningen in
West Friesland. His younger son, Franz, became a Carmelite friar
                                  13
 14                           The Sixth Great Power