

   Impressive though these achievements were, they did not suffice
to bridge the gap between trade and the landed gentry. Referring to
those who belonged to county society, Anthony Trollope wrote: ‘It is
very rarely indeed, that money alone will bestow this acknowledged
rank; and in Exeter, which by the stringency and excellence of its well
defined rules on such matters, may perhaps be said to take the lead
of all English provincial towns, money alone has never availed.’® He
was writing of Exeter a century later, but the pattern was unchanged.
To move to a spacious house outside the town availed nothing.
Trollope’s Miss Stanbury, a stalwart of cathedral society, pro-
nounced that ‘there was doubtless a respectable neighbourhood on
the Heavitree side of the town, but for the new streets, and especially
for the suburban villas, she had no endurance’.? Larkbear House, one
fears, would have been categorized by Miss Stanbury as a suburban
villa. To break through the social barrier required measures more
extreme than John had ever contemplated adopting; he had laid the
foundation, however, and the next generation was to build on it
most handsomely.


In 1748, with John dead and his eldest son only eighteen, prospects
for such promotion must have seemed, at the best, uncertain. There
was no shortage of money. John had left some £40,000; of which his
widow received £17,000, his eldest son £15,000, and the other four
children £2000 apiece. Mrs Baring could have lived comfortably on
her inheritance and let the business go. She had, however, no inten-
tion of doing anything of the sort. While her husband had been
dying she had already played an active part in managing the wool
factory; now she took over the business altogether and did so to such
good effect that the family property had grown to £70,000 by the
time she died in 1766.
   There were setbacks. In 1763 a fire destroyed the new press house
and finishing room and at one time seemed likely to consume the
rest of the factory buildings as well. Goods worth £8000 had to be
carried into the grounds and exposed to the torrential rain, which
helped put out the fire but did no good to the woollen products.
Worst of all, the new buildings were uninsured. ‘Tis a bad beginning
for the two younger ones [Francis and Charles],’ she told a friend,
                   The Birth of Barings: 1483-1776                   17
‘but otherwise the year must have proved a very advantageous one,
this I hope will not carry off all the profit!”
   She had found it hard to surrender control and her easy-going
elder son John did not press her unduly. Technically he and Thomas
were in charge of the business after John’s return from a period on
the continent in 1755, but she continued to interfere and, in particu-
lar, to direct the lives of her younger sons. Charles, the youngest,
complained ruefully that it had been his lot to grow up ‘under the
Eye of a Mother, excellent in many respects, but very severe’. Francis
and Charles were sent off to London to be apprenticed to suitably
distinguished merchants, but when their brother Thomas died sud-
denly in 1758 Charles, aged only fifteen, was recalled to Exeter to
take his place. It was a misfortune both for him and for the family; in
London he would have continued to learn the job in subordinate
positions, in Exeter he was given too much responsibility too fast
and made a lamentable mess of it.
    Francis, the most talented of the children, indeed one of the most
remarkable men of his generation, remained in London. He had
already been educated there - at Mr Fargue’s French school at
Hoxton and at Mr Fuller’s Academy in Lothbury'! - and had shown
an aptitude for algebra and mental arithmetic which was then and
remained throughout his life phenomenal. More significantly, he
proved capable of dedicated hard work and a degree of concentra-
tion on the matter in hand which raised him far above his fellow
scholars. As a New Year’s gift in 1743 his maternal grandfather, John
Vowler, had given him an anthology of improving verses for chil-
dren, recommended by the Rev. Dr Doddridge, a distinguished
hymnologist.!? The Rules for Youth included:
          Shun Idleness, the cursed Root of Vice
          Whence Shame, Disgrace and Poverty do nse;
          Yet worse than these, deplorable you'll find
          Is Ignorance, and Poverty of Mind.