

          Save what you can. Contrive with prudent Care
          Costly superfluous Trifles to forbear.
           Imploy your Head and Hands, stick not at Pain,
          Plenteous Supplies by Industry you'll Gain!
18                       The Sixth Great Power

  Even Francis Baring would not have made much of these exem-
plary precepts when he was only two, yet he could hardly have taken
them more to heart. He was never idle, never ostentatious, stuck not
at Pain, and did indeed by his Industry gain Plenteous Supplies. He
also abhorred Poverty of Mind; his range of interests was wide, his
curiosity insatiable, he never had much tume for reading but liked
having books around him and possessed that precious knack of
establishing what lay inside them without actually reading the con-
tents. He was serious but not solemn, from a very early age he com-
manded respect and people listened to what he had to say confident
that it would be worth hearing. His thoughts were clear and their
exposition invariably lucid. Small, sharp-featured, even when young
a little deaf, he was not immediately impressive to meet but soon
asserted himself in any society. Though a tough businessman, he
was tolerant and generous in private life. When two unknown and
very distant cousins from Hanover wrote to say that they were
imprisoned for debt in Lymington, Francis Baring sent them £60
without demur, ‘and they need not trouble themselves about the
reimbursement’.!3 Similar acts of benevolence abound; he could
well afford them but not all rich men see this as a reason for help-
ing others.
   For seven years from 1755 Francis was apprenticed to Samuel
Touchet, one of the leading Manchester and West Indian mer-
chants. By the me his apprenticeship was over he considered that
he had learned enough; what is more, he had considerable and, as it
turned out, well-justified reservations about the way Touchet ran his
business. He had no wish to return to Exeter, where Charles was
firmly installed and opportunity limited. London was where he saw
his future. Yet his capital was limited and he would have been hard
put to start up in business on his own. A solution was offered by
Nathaniel Paice, who for many years had been a close friend of the
Baring family and their agent in London. He had for some time been
contemplating retirement; now he proposed that Francis take over
the business and develop it as a branch of the house in London.
Barings would become, in effect, a partnership with two seats of
business, in Exeter and London, and two sets of managers.!* On a
domestic scale, it was the same system as the Rothschilds were to
practise internationally a quarter of a century later. For its success it
                   The Birth of Barings: 1483-1776                  19
depended on harmony between the different branches. It soon
became clear that this would not be forthcoming.
   John Baring, the eldest son, was the link between the two wings
ofthe partnership, senior partner of John and Francis Baring and Co.
in London, and of John and Charles Baring and Co. in Exeter, and in
theory supervising the work of his younger brothers in both cities. In
fact he rarely visited London and left Francis to his own devices. Nor
did he occupy himself much more conscientiously with the business
in Exeter. A gregarious, easy-going character, he found it more
satisfying to cut a dash in West Country society and nurse political
ambitions. In 1755, for 2000 guineas, he bought the Mount Radford
estate with a fine, three-storeyed Georgian house fit for a country
gentleman. This part he now proceeded to play with vigour and
considerable success. it did not leave much time for matters of
commerce.
   Francis Baring’s original and for some years main role was to be
the agent for the Exeter business, buying the raw materials needed
for its factory and seeking new markets for its products. He did the
same for other Exeter manufacturers, but his brothers’ company was
much his most considerable customer. The financial services which
he rendered these houses were equally important, collecting money
due to them and arranging to honour their bills when presented to
the new house.
   But even if Francis Baring had been content to stick to this
homespun fare, he would have found it difficult not to get drawn
progressively into more ambitious enterprises. The eighteenth cen-
tury witnessed a phenomenal growth in international trade, fuelled
by increasing European penetration of the Indian subcontinent,
South-East Asia and the Far East and by the expansion of the market
in North America. The demand was there, the goods were there, the
ships and entrepreneurs were there, but the financial machinery for
making the process work evolved more slowly. Wools, dyes and
cloths were the commodities with which Francis Baring felt mostat
home, but there were bigger profits to be made in other spheres. He
began to take afinancial interest in shipments of such things as coch-
ineal, copper, diamonds, cream of tartar, sometimes merely handl-
ing the property of others on commission but increasingly buying
cargoes on his own account, or more often joint account with other
20                        The Sixth Great Power