


He was not entirely alone. His brother John was still with him and
could be counted on for encouragement at least, and probably a
measure of financial assistance. Nor was he without other support.
In 1767 he had married Harriet Herring, who being both an heiress
and a cousin to a former Archbishop of Canterbury, neatly united
God and mammon in the service of the new house. In the long run
she was to bring a fortune of £12,000; not much of this was available
on marriage but Baring immediately benefited by a share in the
proceeds of the Prerogative Office (predecessor of the Court of Pro-
bate), which produced an average £156.11.4%4d per annum.’ He
needed this increment; the year after his marriage he spent £180 on
his wine cellar, £160 on silver plate and £350 on furniture, but
Harriet Baring proved a good and frugal manager, running a com-
fortable and well-conducted household ata cost of £800 a year. ‘I can
now   assert,’ wrote   her husband    after her death, ‘that if those
expenses had amounted to £1200 a year for the same period, it must
have ruined me for ever.”
   Given a chance Harriet would have been convivial as well as cap-
able. A description of her written in 1805 reported that she had a
sociable nature and never missed a party if she could help it. Her
own receptions were ‘among the most brilliant in town’ though her
husband was seldom among those present, preferring ‘the more
tranquil enjoyment of a domestic circle to those gay but promiscu-
ous assemblies’.3 John Mallet, married to Francis Baring’s niece,
went further and described Harriet as a ‘vain, worldly, fine woman,
whose life was devoted to fashionable society’.* This may have been
true of her in later life but certainly it was not the case in the years
after her marriage, when she was not only short of money but had to
bear twelve children and bring up ten, for the most part above the
offices of Barings 1n Mincing Lane, in the City of London.
                                                                  ,
  Francis Baring was a loving and conscientious father. Mallet
                                                                 ng
indeed, describes him as being ‘the mamma of the family’, orderi
                                                            of their
shoes and frocks for the children, fussing over the details
28                        The Sixth Great Power

nursery life and organizing schools for his sons.’ The author was
probably more intent on blackening Harriet’s reputation than on
giving an objective portrait of her husband. Francis Baring never
seems to have felt that he was unreasonably put upon. If he did
behave in a way so uncharacteristic of the late eighteenth century, it
was because he wanted to. He never ceased to concern himself with
his children’s welfare and to applaud or rebuke them as seemed
appropriate, always with patently sincere affection.


Mincing Lane was to be Francis Baring’s office until 1793. At first he
ran affairs with the help only of a handful of clerks, no doubt dis-
couraged from taking on partners by the thought that he had a pleth-
ora of sons to support him in due course. He took the first £500 of
any annual profit and split what was left with his brother John. By
1781, however, the burden had become impossible to bear alone. A
young man called Charles Wall was admitted as a partner and the
senior clerk, James Mesturas, promoted at the same time. They were
given a generous salary of £900 a year (three times what Mesturas
and more than ten times what Wall had been earning previously)
and one seventh of the profit each. The fact that Francis Baring could
afford to offer these lavish rewards showed how the business was
prospering. In 1777, the year after the new partnership had been in1-
tiated, a profit of £3400 was recorded; in 1779 1t was £4400. By 1781,
when the new partners were appointed, it had risen to £10,300, and
by 1788, admittedly an exceptional year, the profit reached a spec-
tacular £12,000.
     It was, in fact, a period of steady growth, with the occasional vio-
lent leap forward and less dramatic moments of recession. Most of
the business, though not necessarily the most profitable element,
was an extension of what the partnership had done in the past. There
was a marked change in emphasis, however. Little by little the old
connections with the West Country withered and were replaced by a
network of international relationships. By 1780 the evolution was
already clearly marked. Of the seven accounts that turned over more
than £10,000 a year, only one was in Exeter and one in London. Two
of the others were in Amsterdam, and one each in Cartagena, Leg-
horn and St Petersburg. This list excludes the substantial business
                Laying the Foundations: 1776-1793                    29
done with John and Charles Baring and Co., still by far the largest
single item on the books, but that too was in decline. By 1790 the
West Country clients had almost disappeared, while business with
the United States grew steadily more important. Trade across the
Atlantic was back to the levels ruling before the revolution and
Francis Baring was pre-eminent among British merchants who fos-
tered this swelling commerce.®
   Successful merchant banking depends on confidence, most of all
in the world of acceptances where the banker is playing the honest
broker between two other parties. It is essential that a house should
be known to be rich, secure and well-informed, but its reputation,
particularly in the eighteenth and nineteenth centunis, could be no
better than that of its senior partners. John and Francis Baring and
Co., in the 1780s, was Francis Baring, and it was in him that were first
clearly marked those characteristics which subsequent generations
have come to expect in members of the family. Lord D’Abernon
summed it up as successfully as anyone in 1931 when he described
the Barings as: ‘Strong, sensible, self-reliant men, with a profound
belief in themselves, in their family and in their country - eminently
just and fair; no trace of hypocrisy or cant; not only solid and square
but giving the impression both of solidity and squareness . . . not
subtle or mentally agile, but endowed with that curious combination
of character which lends authority even to doubtful decisions, and
makes those who possess it respected in counsel and obeyed as
rulers.” The Barings were above all reliable, on that everyone agreed;
as also on the fact that their attitude towards the rest of humanity
was detached and cool, at its best manifested in a balanced objec-
tivity, at its worst disdainful and indifferent. Lord Welby in the mid-
nineteenth century described Lord Northbrook’s ‘essentially Baring
character’ as being ‘rather unsympathetic outwardly, certainly very
undemonstrative, with a tendency to strong prepossessions, some
would say prejudices’, but always ‘just and anxious to do justice’.
Barings were not expected to be warm, at any rate to the outside
world. Fifty years later Christopher Sandeman found Maurice Bar-
ing ‘tenuous and even ghostlike. Distinction certainly, in a high
                                                                      so
degree, but possibly the family coldness, which Strachey detested
in Evelyn Baring’s replies to Gordon’s frenzied telegrams.’? Nor were
                                                                   Lady
they supposed to be brilliant. ‘We had a dull dinner at
30                         The Sixth Great Power