

in September 1806 ‘to paint three portraits in one picture, viz: Sir
Francis Baring, His Brother John and Mr Wall, his Partner’.** In the
picture Wall and John Baring are posed over an open volume while
Sir Francis looks away from them with his hand raised to his ear. This
caused some ribaldry. ‘Sir George [Beaumont] remarked on Sir
Francis turning his head from those He was listening to as if to hear
Thunder; Beechey sd He turned his head from Mr Wall as if the lat-
ter on looking on the Book before him announced a deficit of
£100,000.’35 James Ward engraved the portrait for three hundred
guineas, but when it was proposed to publish the print the project
was vetoed by Sir Francis’s sons - ‘because they do not like to have
their Father exhibited with a Ledger before him, surmised
Farington.?¢
   Stratton was furnished with a fine collection of paintings, notably
Dutch. Like many collectors, Baring repented in old age the enthusi-
asms of his youth and by 1804 was telling his son-in-law that he had
‘done with all except the very superior’ and of those it was only
‘Rembrandt, Rubens or Van Dyck that tempt me, and the first must
not be too dark, nor the second indecent’.3”7 He had a good opinion
of his purchases, noting, on the catalogue of an exhibition in Paris in
1802, of Cuyp, ‘229 and 230 the best but none equal to mine’; of
Ostade, ‘some fine specimens but not equal to mine’; of Adrian Van
der Velde ‘not equal to mine’; of Rembrandt ‘none fine or equal to
mine’; of Wouvermans ‘many pretty, none v. fine. I prefer my own’.38
His farm was probably as close to his heart as any of his pictures. He
kepta farm of 600 acres in hand, tended it lovingly, and took particu-
lar pride in his ‘famous flock of sheep’.3
   That he bought pictures because he liked them and reared sheep
because he enjoyed doing so, is incontestable, but equally the acqui-
sition of estates and a stately home was an essential step in the pro-
cess of social consolidation. It was commonly believed that Baring
was angling for a seat in the House of Lords. When in May 1806 he
was one of only four Directors to support Lauderdale’s nomination
as Governor General, Colonel Toone told Hastings that this was
because he wanted a peerage.*? When the Duke of York’s alleged
corruption was debated by the House of Commons in 1809, it was
whispered that Baring and Sir Robert Peel had both paid Mrs Clarke
£5000 for a peerage.*! That he would have been delighted to receive
                     The French Wars: 1793-1815                       pl
one is undoubtedly true, that he would have bribed Mrs Clarke to
that end would have been wholly out of character. Nor can he
seriously have expected such an honour. As F. M. L. Thompson has
convincingly shown, Disraeli’s claim that Pitt ‘created a plebeian
aristocracy and blended it with the patrician oligarchy. . . He caught
them in the alleys of Lombard Street and clutched them from the
counting-houses of Cornhill’ is picturesque nonsense.*? The only
peer created by Pitt from a similar background to Baring was Robert
Smith, Lord Carrington, and Smith had severed his connection with
banking long before his elevation. The best that Baring could real-
istically hope for was that he might procure aristocratic marriages
for his children and that his descendants might one day achieve
nobility.
   By 1810, when Francis Baring died, there was no house 1n which a
Baring would have been socially unacceptable. But this did not mean
that they were wholly integrated with the aristocracy. If one of his
daughters married a lord, it was taken for granted that a fat dowry
would garnish the mésalliance. When Alexander Baring was admitted
to that elite Whig dining club, the King of Clubs, Sydney Smith told
Lady Holland that this was ‘upon the express promise that he lends
£50 to any member ofthe Club when applied to’.## Smith was joking,
of course, but there was a half truth concealed in the jest. The Barings
had gone astonishingly far in a short time, but there was still some
way to go.
   When he died Francis Baring left £625,000. Four hundred thou-
sand pounds was in land, £27,000 in pictures, furniture and jewels.
His capital in Barings, Baring Brothers as the house had been called
since 1807, was £68,507; an enormous sum, but notas large as that of
Charles Wall, who was credited with £86,126, and only a little more
than his eldest son, Thomas, with £67,448. It is a testimony to the
skill with which the house had been built up that his death caused it
hardly a tremor. ‘At his death,’ wrote Lord Erskine, ‘he was unques-
tionably the first merchant in Europe; first in knowledge and talents,
and first in character and opulence.’## To him, almost alone, Baring
Brothers owed the stability of its foundations; it was largely his
doing that it had so far sailed successfully through the perilous
waters of the war with France.
                            *       *       +
a2                      The Sixth Great Power