

compensated for the loss in trade that that war had involved; the
revival of international trade after the war filled the gap left by the
disappearance of public loans. The years between 1777 and 1793,
despite occasional vicissitudes, were ones of almost uninterrupted
growth for John and Francis Baring and Co. Capital grew from
£20,071   to £66,177.   Profits   inevitably fluctuated,   but reached
£13,268 in 1792. Commission income and acceptances rose from
year to year. By the outbreak of the French wars in 1793, Barings
were among the best known and strongest houses in the City. The
foundation had been well laid for the extraordinary expansion that
was to come.
                                        3
                                    ope Swede




                    The French Wars
                                1793-1815


The always inconspicuous part that John Baring had played in the
affairs of John and Francis Baring and Co. dwindled almost to noth-
ing in the years after 1793. He remained a partner until the end of
1800 but his share of the profits was reduced to a quarter after 1796.
‘Our ancient Firm will henceforward cease;’ it was announced some-
what grandiloquently on 1 April 1800, ‘but the remaining Partners
will continue the Business under that of Francis Baring and Co.’ The
new partners were given as Francis, his elder son Thomas - twenty-
eight years old* - and Charles Wall, the son of an attorney who had
married Sir Francis’s daughter Harriet in 1790.! Farington described
Wall in 1806 as ‘the principal manager of the business’, and it was
certainly he who did most of the day-to-day labour while Francis was
relaxing his hold on affairs.
   John retired a prosperous and contented man butin old age things
went wrong. Two daughters died and then his second son commit-
ted suicide. He retreated into melancholic solitude. He ‘has the fam-
ily characteristic’, the Rev. Mr Patch told Farington. ‘He never shows
distress, but suppresses His feelings so far as not to make them
apparent. He looked up to his brother [Francis] as being a very
superior man.’ When Patch complimented him on his firmness of
mind John Baring replied: ‘Look to my Brother. He is the firm man.”
   Francis’s firmness, indeed hardness, was shown in his relationship
with his brother Charles. In 1801 he was called in to unscramble the
affairs of John and Charles Baring and with bad grace made Charles
a loan to help him through his difficulties.* He never expected to get

* Most sources give 1804 as being the date Thomas became a full partner.
                                       43
44                       The Sixth Great Power

the money back and made his opinion contemptuously clear. “You
are exalted with every success, I am of late oppressed with many
troubles,’ wrote Charles pathetically. “Your letter is a cruel one. |
have never deserved from you such expressions.’’ Francis’s riposte
was crueller still. ‘You never did understand your own Character and
your own situation,’ he told his brother. ‘We have had a very long test
of your conduct in the almost monstrous management of the origi-
nal and chief dependence of the Baring family and you are disposed
to impute your want of success to the want of luck . . . In this I
cannot agree with you as there is not a single instance which has
come to my knowledge in which ultimate miscarriage was not to be
discovered in the outset.’
   Though the performance of his brothers did not inspire him with
great confidence, Francis Baring felt strongly that he was building for
future generations and that his children and children’s children
should carry on where he had left off. Yet the problems that would
beset any such dynasty were very obvious to him. Writing to his son
Alexander’s father-in-law in 1803 he admitted he was worried:
     Unremitting attention and exertion through a long life have
     placed objects within my reach, the value of which are
     acknowledged by all, but the difficulty to acquire them, and
     the facility with which they are lost, appear to me to be
     appreciated by none. . . Money or Fortune derive no secu-
     rity from the magnitude or amount, as it cannot be expected
     that the next in succession will possess equal prudence with
     the person who acquired . .. A man is considered as mean
     who does not spend his income; and although there are
     instances of young misers, they are very rare, and the impu-
     tation of meanness is so insupportable to a young man, that
     they never fail to plunge into the opposite extreme. It is for
     this reason that families founded on the acquirements of an
     individual do not last above sixty years one with another:
     families which are founded on the success of public Service
     continue longer, because the Children and Grandchildren of
     the founder are generally inclined to pursue the same line of
     Service: but the posterity of a Merchant, Banker etc., particu-
     larly when they are young, abandon the pursuit of their pre-
                     The French Wars:    1793-1815                   45