


In 1786 Francis Baring told Lord Lansdowne:
    My time and attention is chiefly employed by three great
    objects, my Commercial concerns, the public, and the East
    India Company. The first is the sole object to which I look
    for a pecuniary provision for my family; at present I am well
    supported, the business is in a very flourishing situation,
    totally divested of moonshine, and the attention which |
    bestow is fully sufficient, but if that support should fail, I
    should not hesitate a moment about renouncing every other
    consideration to my duty to my family. The public requires
    time and I am fully possessed with a hope of doing some
    good, but the time which is employed is not embarrassing to
    my mind. I have men of sense and conversant with business
    to work with and am under no apprehension about discharg-
    ing my duty satisfactorily.'?
  The references to ‘the public’ - by which he meant above all the
world of politics - showed how far Baring had advanced from being
the mere agent of a West Country wool firm. The fact that the letter
                                                                 e
was written to the Marquis of Lansdowne, former Earl of Shelburn
                                                    ,  marked  the
and one of the most notable grandees in the kingdom
move still more clearly. It was a move which took him away from his
occupation as a merchant and to that extent was detrimental to his
financial wellbeing. Yet, eighteenth-century Britain being what it
was, the mové also opened up new possibilities that would never
34                       The Sixth Great Power

have existed for him if he had stuck to his counting house. The time
that Francis Baring devoted to ‘the public’ was as valuable to John
and Francis Baring and Co. as any spent poring over manifests or cal-
culating the profit margin on consignments of cochineal.
   Baring’s introduction to politics came through John Dunning,
nine years his senior, the son of a successful attorney from Devon
who had made himselfa fortune at the bar and was said by Burke to
be ‘the first of all his profession . . . there is not a man in any situa-
tion, of a more erect and independent spirit, of a more proud hon-
our, or more manly mind, or more firm, determined integrity’.?°
Gainsborough credited him with sober sense and great acuteness; ‘I
begin to think that there is something in the air of Devon that grows
clever fellows’.2! Dunning became Solicitor General and later Chan-
cellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, was created Lord Ashburton in
1782, and two years earlier married Elizabeth, the sister of that other
clever fellow from Devon, Francis Baring. He was a close friend of
Colonel Isaac Barré, who in 1782 was to become Pitt’s Paymaster
General and thus a man of almost limitless patronage. Dunning,
Barré and Baring became a formidable triumvirate; so much so that
in 1787 Baring commissioned Joshua Reynolds to paint a group
portrait of the first two and Lord Lansdowne, their great
patron. Lansdowne, while still Shelburne, had served briefly as
Prime Minister with Pitt as his Chancellor of the Exchequer. While
Prime Minister, and presumably on Dunning’s recommendation,
Shelburne wrote to Baring, to say he needed ‘to have recourse from
time to time to Mercantile advice’, and that he hoped Baring would
supply the need. The recipient proudly annotated the letter
‘received and answered the same day, 31 July 1782. N.B. the first let-
ter or message I ever received from His Lordship.’2? It was far from
being the last. In the Baring archives lie copies of a plethora of letters
in which Baring proffered his advice on one. subject or another.
Shelburne asked how important Senegal was to the French slave
trade. ‘Senegal is not of the smallest importance to France with
regard to negroes but solely with regard to gum,’ Baring answered
firmly. ‘The Slave trade from Senegal is trifling as the Natives are a
flimsy enervated race, unfit for labor.’23
  In his dealings with Shelburne - or indeed any other politician -
Baring never missed a chance to speak up for the mercantile interest.
                 Laying the Foundations: 1776-1793                 35
In June 1783, for example, he argued that taxation fell more heavily
on merchants and small shopkeepers than on country gentlemen.
‘Commercial and personal property has very seldom been fairly rep-
resented in the House of Commons. . . When the tax on wheels was
proposed there was a general clamor, and for which very few gentle-
men can pay above £5 or £10 a year, whereas a tallow-chandler, gro-
cer, or an obscure tradesman must under the stamps upon receipts
pay £30, £40 or £50 per annum and some a good deal more.’?+
Shelburne for his part played Baring the compliment of being frank
to the point of bluntness in his letters. When Baring complained that
one of his greenhouses had burnt down, Lansdowne, as he had by
then become, replied with some brutality that it was not much loss:
‘It was   not handsome    of its kind or, I think, particularly well
placed.’25
   William Cobbett, in the splenetic vein which ran particularly rich
when financiers of foreign origin were in question, referred to
Francis Baring as being a merchant’s clerk who owed his rise to ‘hav-
ing become a handy city-man to the father of the present Marquis of
Lansdowne’.*¢ In fact Baring seems to have done little in the way of
promoting Lansdowne’s personal finances, which presumably was
what Cobbett had in mind. But he felt considerable loyalty to his
patron, and since Lansdowne remained in opposition, he never grew
close to the Prime Minister, William Pitt. This did not stop Pitt
appealing to him for advice on a wide variety of subjects: on Turkey;
on Gibraltar - only of value if Britain possessed a superior fleet;
on Customs House reform - ‘To obtain admission to the
Commissioners is almost impossible; to obtain information from
them is equally so.”27 Baring was never slow to produce such replies,
always decisive and to the point. But he was more hesitant when he
was asked by Pitt to become one of the Commissioners enquiring
into the fees and perquisites of certain public offices. He accepted in
the end, but only on condition that he got no remuneration for his
work and after first securing Lansdowne’s blessing.”
   In April 1786 Baring was accused in the press of having used his
connection with the East India Company to make a profit out of
sales of tea. The sales had in fact been made by Robert Voate on
behalf of Hopes and other companies. Hopes and the other houses
involved signéd a declaration stating that, though they would have
36                       The Sixth Great Power
been delighted to include Baring in their number if he had wished,
no such request had been made. Vodte went further and said that he
had repeatedly pressed Baring to take an interest in the transaction,
but his friend ‘constantly and firmly refused ’.2? In spite of this it took
Baring nearly three years to clear his name. He felt particularly bitter,
because he had only become involved in the business some two
years earlier at the direct request of Pitt, when large stocks of tea were
bought up in an attempt to defeat the widespread smuggling that
was going on.30 He had been impressed by Pitt at the time, telling
Shelburne in some surprise that the Prime Minister was ‘not only
fully informed but appears equally well to comprehend the whole
extent’ of the Commutation Bill,}! but approval turned to rancour
when Pitt and Dundas not merely failed to come to his defence but
seemed positively to egg on his accusers: “The attack was rather
encouraged than otherwise, my temper would not permit me to
bring forward what would have justified me in a moment, namely,
the papers and authorities under which I acted from Mr Pitt from
whence it appeared that I had exceeded, and very considerably sur-
passed those expectations which I had held out and which Mr Pitt
had entertained.’32 Baring continued to work with and for Pitt, but
he never wholly forgave him. After Pitt died he wrote to The Times to
deny that he had contributed to the settlement of the Prime Minis-
ter’s debts. “With the highest respect for the talents, the integrity, and
intentions of Mr Pitt,’ he wrote, ‘I have not been able to concur with
him on any great political question for above 20 years, our political
opinions and principles being different.’33
   Lansdowne was constantly urging Baring to ‘put his views before
the Publick’. In terms that were presumably well intentioned but
strike the contemporary reader as a little tactless, he told Baring that
he should seek to ‘lay the Foundation of solid Reputation and Char-
acter. It’s the highest Injustice to consider every Merchant as a Jew,
as if he was incapable of looking forward to anything but a Fraudu-
lent Contract or a Line of Stockjobbing - the consequence of which
is that their talents are left to prey upon the Publick instead of serv-
ing it... Dirtiness of character will occur in all Professions . . .’34
When he urged Baring to ‘put his views before the Publick’, he meant
that the banker should seek election to the House of Commons. By
entering the House he would transcend the status of a mere mer-
                 Laying the Foundations: 1776-1793                     wll
chant, enter as of right into the empyrean of the ruling classes, and
not merely lay but build upon ‘the Foundation of solid Reputation’.
It was not a new idea to Baring, indeed it was one that had occurred
already to both his brothers.
   Charles, characteristically, was the first to chance his arm and,
equally characteristically, failed. He stood for Tiverton, offering not
merely to live in the town but, more extravagantly, to buy all their
wool products into the bargain. In spite of this he was rejected,
probably because he insisted that, if elected, he must also take over
the lucrative post of Receiver of the Land Tax. The Tivertonians
preferred another Exeter merchant, John Duntze, also a first-genera-
tion emigré, who was somewhat less exigent in his demands.?5
   John tried next, for Honiton in 1774. He too was defeated, in spite
of the support of the Courtenays, and resolved never to stand again,
but was provoked to change his mind when the son-in-law of John
Duntze, John Cholwich (or sometimes Cholwych), contested Exeter
in 1776. The Duntzes and Barings were the Montagus and Capulets
of Exeter and a plank in Cholwich’s platform was that the Baring
influence in the city should be reduced. The challenge could not be
refused. John stood against him, spent £6000 on the election and
won the day.3¢ Presumably he thought the money well spent, for he
remained MP for Exeter until 1802. ‘My supporters were fond of me
as a candidate free with my money, he wrote a little ruefully, and he
calculated that the seat cost him in all more than £25 ,000.37 By far the
most expensive election was 1790, Baring spending some £10,000.
His rival, Sir Charles Bampfylde, told the Prince of Wales that Baring
was almost certain to be unseated as the result of a petition alleging
bribery, corruption and undue influence: ‘I have every reason to
assure myself he would not venture a second contest.’ Bampfylde
might well have been right, but had no chance to find out, since the
House of Commons decided Baring had been properly elected.?*
   Francis Baring prudently waited until his London business was
well established before following his brothers into a pursuit that was
certain to be both costly and time-consuming. He first came in for
the rotten borough of Grampound in Devon at the cost of £3000,
and then in 1790 decided to switch to IIchester, agreeing to pay
Samuel Smith £1500 for his interest in the borough. *. . .1n case Mr
Baring is not seated the sum of Two Hundred Fifty Pounds is to be
 38                      The Sixth Great Power
returned to him by Mr Smith. This agreement to remain secret.’3?
