

Ashburton’s,’   recorded    Thackeray gloomily, ‘A party of Barings
chiefly.’!° But they were sound.
   Francis Baring was not in all ways typical of the dynasty which he
founded. He would never have been so successful had he not pos-
sessed a strain of adventurousness, sometimes even of recklessness,
which was not often to be found in those who built on his founda-
tions. But in most respects he would have been instantly recogniz-
able to Lord D’Abernon or Lord Welby.
    ‘His manner was cold and his disposition reserved, wrote Sir
Denis le Marchant, ‘so that he had few friends or even political fol-
lowers, but no man was more respected and trusted by those who
had to deal with him.’!! By no means everyone would have agreed
about the coldness of his manner - he seems often to have been posi-
tively jovial for a Baring - but on the respect and trust that he
inspired there was no dispute.
    It was this that contributed above all to the great growth of Bar-
ings’ business in acceptances between 1776 and the French wars. The
total of their liabilities rose from £42,000 at the end of 1777 to
£121,000 in 1793, but the quality of the business they did was more
important than the quantity. Like Othello, Francis Baring would
have cried that he who stole his purse stole not trash perhaps, but
certainly something of secondary importance, but ‘he that filches
from me my good name robs me of that which not enriches him, and
makes me poor indeed’. At any time Baring would have sacrificed
the whole of his house’s profits to preserve his reputation, because
he knew that without reputation his house would be worth nothing.
His reward was that during this period Barings became one of the
most respected houses in the City. The fact that their name was on a
bill, that they had guaranteed it, gave it credibility and ensured that if
itcame to be sold or discounted before it fell due, it would be done at
the most favourable rates.
   Acceptances trebled in the seventeen years after Francis Baring
broke with his brother Charles. In the same period commission
income - the fees Barings levied on the issuing of acceptances, han-
dling consignments of merchandise, and a wide variety of banking
transactions - more than doubled, from £4000 or so per annum to
£10,000. It was an important element in the house’s affairs, but less
so than previously. It was made the more profitable by the fact that
                Laying the Foundations:    1776-1793                31
Baring was always ready to act, in effect, as an insurance broker;
sometimes carrying the risk of a cargo himself, more often passing it
on to others. In 1771 he had been appointed a director of the Royal
Exchange Assurance, an association which must have helped con-
siderably in building up this useful though never substantial line of
business.
   But the association which contributed more than any other to the
growth of Barings’ business and reputation was with the Amsterdam
house of Hope and Co., probably at the time the richest and most
powerful in Europe, and therefore in the world. Francis Baring
always had a partiality for the Dutch. In 1787 he told Pitt’s Treasurer
of the Navy, Henry Dundas, that a commercial treaty with Holland
would be ‘preferable to one with any other nation as she can pro-
mote the sale of our Indian products and manufactures in a superior
degree; and at the same time contribute very important political
assistance. The two Countries have one great original object in view
and which do not clash in the smallest degree. That of Great Britain
is to maintain and preserve the Empire which she has acquired, in
comparison of which, Trade is a subordinate, or collateral considera-
tion. The great object of Holland is in the first instance to secure to
herself the monopoly of the Spice Islands, and secondly to extend
her general trade.’!
   What was true for Britain was equally true for Barings. The Dutch
mercantile houses had many interests in common with their British
counterparts and were rarely in direct competition. But Hopes
bulked far larger on the European scene. They were in origin a Scot-
tish family, tenuously connected with the Earls of Hopetoun, who
had settled in Holland in the sixteenth century and established
themselves as the first bankers of the land. Henry Hope, head of the
family and of the bank, lived in seigneurial style at Welgelen, near
Haarlem, a palace modelled loosely on the Villa Borghese, but most
of the day-to-day dealings with such houses as Barings were done by
Robert - ‘Little Bob’ - Voate, the son of a Huguenot emigré who had
settled in Amsterdam."3 To bring his house into intimate association
with such a concern was one of Francis Baring’s more remarkable
achievements, and one which owed far more to his character and
personal ability than to the resources at his disposal.
  According to one report, the relationship between Hopes and
22                        The Sixth Great Power
Barings began when the Dutch bankers decided to try out the fledg-
ling house by passing them a few trifling bills for sale. Francis Baring
executed this task so promptly and secured so favourable a rate of
exchange that Hopes at once sent him £15,000 in bills with the same
instructions. Baring had never dealt with anything like so large an
order before, but undeterred he went to his bankers, Martin and
Stone, and possibly assisted by the fact that Richard Stone was about
to become his brother-in-law, had the bills discounted and imme-
diately remitted the exchange to Amsterdam. The transaction dem-
onstrated what Baring already suspected to be the case, that friends
or relations in the right place could be at least as useful as money in
the bank. “The Hopes were exceedingly struck with the transaction
which bespoke not only great zeal and activity, but what was still
more important in the eyes of the mercantile men, either good credit
or great resources in their correspondent. From that day Baring
became one of their principal “friends”.”!*
     They became friends, as well as ‘friends’ in the business sense.
By 1790 William Hope was apologizing that pressure of work had
prevented him writing before, but that he considered ‘my communi-
cations with you, my dear Sir, as a family correspondence, and in fact
it is so on the footing you have been good enough to admit me’.!5
When the Hopes visited London they stayed with the Barings and
were passed on to grand friends, like Lord Lansdowne at Bowood.!¢
‘It was a notable characteristic of the Baring House,’ wrote the Cana-
dian historian, Adam Shortt, ‘that, once an intimate connection was
established between it and the chief personages in any house, the
world around, that connection was maintained, not only for the lives
of the original heads, but for the lives of their successors to the sec-
ond and even third generation.”!7 In the case of Hopes it was still
more long-lived, lasting from 1766 when the two houses first corre-
sponded, to far into the twentieth century when Hopes ceased to
exist as an independent entity, or, indeed, until the present day, with
the successor firm of Bank Mees and Hope and its parent company,
the Algemene Bank Nederland.
   The relationship was not always beneficial. In 1787 and 1788
Voate involved Barings in an ill-judged scheme to corner the market
for cochineal. Secret purchase orders were sent out to correspon-
dents all over Europe but stocks proved more substantial than had
                Laying the Foundations:   1776-1793              33
been expected and extravagantly large prices had to be paid for the
final deposits. Even when almost all the cochineal in Europe had
been procured the price was obstinately slow in rising, and the dis-
comfiture was complete when the new crop arrived from Mexico
months earlier than expected. Barings only bore a quarter of the cost
of this escapade but they still had to find some 500,000 guilders.18
Such incidents were exceptional, however. On the whole Barings
benefited immeasurably from their association with Hope and Co.,
both in directly financial terms, and from the prestige which their
intimacy with so great a house earned them among competitors and
potential clients.