

Générale des Jeux in Paris. Such a hobby was, however, deemed
inappropriate to his role in the City.'¢ For this, or for other reasons,
he was never encouraged to play a prominent role in the house,
though he remained technically a partner until 1823. He and
Alexander married sisters, but Henry divorced his wife Marie in
1824. Alexander deplored this step; Marie had undoubtedly com-
mitted adultery, but to divorce her would be to ‘throw her absolutely
on the Dunghill’. Anyway, Henry’s own ‘anti-domestic life is of great
notoriety and must tell heavily against him’. He might well fail to
secure a divorce and ‘both parties will come out of court covered
with dirt’.!7 Henry paid no attention, got his divorce and in due
course married a second time, to Cecilia Windham. Like Banquo, he
got kings though he was none; inconsiderable in the bank himself,
his son and grandson were to dominate it for well over fifty years.
The mud of the divorce court did not stick to Henry; he became a
popular figure, prominent in the London clubs and asked to all the
best shoots - ‘Mr H. Baring’s shooting quite wonderful,’ recorded an
awe-struck Henry Fox.!8
   The two youngest brothers, William and George, were both
dispatched to the East. William showed promise - ‘he will at no dis-
tant period be fully capable of conducting his own private Business
without Assistance,’ a Baring correspondent reported from Canton’?
- but he frequently fell ill. ‘My hopes of enjoying very robust health
are frail and I must be contented in being free from violent irritabil-
ity,2° he wrote wistfully in 1806, and it was judged by the doctors
that banking and irritability too often went hand in hand. He died in
 1820. George was a raffish figure. He married against his family’s
will, lost a lot of money speculating in opium, then left the East India
Company to join the Church. However, wailed his brother Henry,
‘the quiet and useful life of a respectable Country Clergyman was
much too tame and unobtrusive for him’ and he became ‘the ranting
preacher of a wild Sect’?! He combined this activity with an extrava-
gant style of living that drove him to bankruptcy in 1827. Thomas
Baring was for letting him stew in his own juice but Alexander
insisted that ‘we must extricate him. I say we because it is quite clear
that his family must come to the aid of this unfortunate member of it
and that you as our head must proceed to make the necessary
arrangements.22George was packed off to live in a villa in Florence
48                      The Sixth Great Power

where Henry Fox found him in 1828 puffing cigar smoke at Lady
Dudley and decidedly the worse for drink, surrounded by his daugh-
ters, ‘tall, raw-boned, vulgar misses, very underbred and unladylike
in their conversation and manners’.23 William and George both had
sons, but though one of William’s descendants found his way back
into the bank, it was the progeny of Thomas, Alexander and Henry
who were to ensure the future of the house of Baring.
  It was these three brothers who took formal control of the house
when Francis Baring retired. He gave up his share in the profit and
loss of the house from mid-1803, leaving as much of his capital
behind as his sons cared to use and charging only a generous 4 per
cent interest. Unlike most people who have built up their own
businesses, he was delighted to pass over power to his successors,
would indeed have done so earlier if he had felt his sons were ready.
By early 1803 his doubts about their capacity had long been put at
rest. He told John William Hope that his sons were anxious to show
that they could stand alone and he quite as anxious to give them the
chance, ‘for the Success of which I do not entertain the slightest
apprehension . . . They all possess abilities and although differing
from each other in qualifications yet each has something which the
other wants and. . . there can be no doubt that they will act with the
most perfect cordiality in support of acommon Cause.’2+ By October
1807 he was able, no doubt with some satisfaction, to refuse a loan to
the Duke of Kent on the grounds that he was retired and his property
‘disposed of and dispersed’. ‘Although I have appeared as Contrac-
tor for loans’, he wrote, ‘yet I have not for three years had the least
concern, nor gained or lost myself a single penny; but I have
appeared because it was thought my name would be useful in the
opinion of the publick, and at the desire of my successors.’25 His
retirement was shortly followed in 1805 or 1806 by the move of the
business from Devonshire Square, where it had been since 1793, toa
much larger building at 8 Bishopsgate. This solid Georgian house,
with garden at the back, was approached from the street through an
archway and open courtyard with stables on one side. Its site was to
accommodate Barings’ headquarters until the present day.26
   Francis Baring had begun the transition from banker to gentleman
of leisure in 1796 when at an auction at Garraway’s Coffee House he
had acquired a reversionary interest in 623 acres and the manor
                        The French Wars: 1793-1815                     49
house of Lee, near Lewisham. Lee had a distinguished pedigree; a
continuous line of lords of the manor descending from Aluuin, the
last recorded Saxon thane, by way of Lord Montifichet, one of the
barons at Runnymede, and the Marquis of Dorset whose daughter
married Edward      IV, to Baring’s friend Joseph Plaice.2” Baring
bought the reversion for £20,000 with a Mrs Angerstein in residence
who had a life interest. When she died unexpectedly four years later,
putting Baring into possession far earlier than he had expected, he
insisted on paying his friend an additional £7000, saying it was ‘abso-
lutely necessary for my peace of mind’ and that the money should
not be returned, even in Plaice’s will.28 By then he had already
acquired a further 583 acres from Lord Sondes, and he settled
contentedly into the ‘Capital Uniform Modern Brick and Stone
Mansion House’, which had probably been built by Richard Jupp,
architect of the East India Company’s building in Leadenhall
Street.?? To run his establishment, a modest staff fora medium-sized
country   house,   he    had   a butler,   under-butler,   two   footmen,
housekeeper, cook, laundry maid, two housemaids, two kitchen-
maids, a coachman, and a second coachman.
  But this was only a sighting shot for finer things. In 1801 Francis
Baring laid out £150,000 on the purchase of an estate from the Duke
of Bedford near Micheldever in Hampshire. George Dance was
commissioned to refashion the house, which he adorned with a mas-
sive portico of Doric columns. This was much admired in the neigh-
bourhood and inspired the banker Henry Drummond to add a still
mightier portico to his neighbouring house, the Grange. Dance’s
work cost £25,000 or so, extravagant enough but trifling compared
with the £400,000 Beckford squandered on Fonthill.*° Baring spent
another £40,000 planting the grounds and never missed a chance to
snap up an adjoining property. ‘Sir Francis Baring is extending his
purchases so largely in Hampshire that he soon expects to be able to
inclose the county within his own park paling, wrote some contem-
porary satirist.?!
   By mid-1801 Farington was describing the alterations as ‘nearly
finished’, but it does not seem that the house was fully habitable tll a
couple of years later.32 It was about that time that Count
Stahremberg, the Austrian minister, wrote to thank Baring for ‘your
kind reception in your Kingdom of Stratton’.33 Lawrence went there
50                      The Sixth Great Power