Smith proved unable to supply what he had promised and Baring
lost the election. Not long after Lansdowne offered him one of his
boroughs, and from 1794 to 1806 he sat either for Calne or for
Chipping Norton.
   He was not a natural orator, nor did he ever feel at home in the
House of Commons. He wrote to Lansdowne to deny having said
something attributed to him by the press: ‘My voice is so very un-
equal to the House of Commons, and I am consequently very much
misrepresented in the papers.’*° The True Briton, admittedly well-
disposed to his politics, thought better of his efforts. In his speeches,
it said, he was ‘neat, flowing and perspicuous, aiming more by solid-
 ity of argument to arrest and convince his hearers, than by beautiful
 figures and impassioned eloquence to mislead the minds of men’.*!
 He was, in short, a humdrum but competent performer who com-
 manded the respect of the House not by fine words but by his com-
 mand of his subject and obvious sincerity. The views that he
 expounded were much as might have been expected from a promi-
 nent merchant, and on the lines every Baring in Parliament was to
 follow for the next one hundred and fifty years. He advocated /aissez-
faire, in its most sweeping form. ‘Every regulation’, he said, ‘is a
 restriction, and as such contrary to that freedom which I have held to
 be the first principle of the wellbeing of commerce.’#? Trade must
 follow its own course, any interference with it could only stunt its
 growth and distort its proper pattern. He was consistent in his'views,
 even when it was possible that their application would in the short
 term at least work to his disadvantage. In a memorandum that he
 prepared for Lansdowne he argued vigorously that there should be
 free trade with the United States and no limitations imposed on the
 use of American shipping.*3
    This condemnation of monopolies as much as any other artificial
 restraint on trade was qualified in the case of India. Baring had
 begun to invest in the East India Company in 1776, though never on
 a large scale, and in 1779 he became a Director. The Company more
 or less monopolized imports and exports from and to India; a breach
of his principles which Baring tolerated with apparent equanimity.
 He fiercely opposed Charles James Fox’s attempt to capture this rich
fount of patronage for his section of the Whig party. ‘It is such a Sys-
                 Laying the Foundations: 1776-1793                  39
tem ofinfluence and corruption as amazes me. . .’ he told Shelburne
of Fox’s India bill. ‘It will for ever remain as a monument of the
boldest and most artful effort ever attempted by any subject since
the restoration.’# But he did not deny that government had a right to
influence the doings of the Company; on the contrary, he cham-
pioned the right of ministers to make their opinions heard and, gen-
erally, heard with respect.
  By 1783 Baring was accepted as the leader of the City interest on
the Court of Directors of the East India Company, and he worked
closely with a colleague and old friend, Robert Atkinson, in support
of Pitt. Wraxall said of Atkinson that he ‘possessed a long mathemat-
ical head, sustained by vast facility and rapidity in calculations of a
pecuniary nature: qualities held in high esteem by Pitt’,45 and the
same was a fortiori true of Baring. Atkinson, however, was dying of
consumption, and when Laurence Sullivan also died in 1786, Baring
was left as by far the most able and experienced member of the
Court. He continued to work closely with Pitt and Dundas when he
became Chairman in 1792-3, refusing to bring forward any nomina-
tions for senior posts without Dundas’s previous agreement. But he
was nota docile servant of ministers, opposing Dundas in 1791 when
the minister wanted to abolish the Secret Committee, the inner
Council of the Company, and to reduce the number of Directors.*6
When   Dundas resolved to reform the structure of the Company,
Baring was chief negotiator for the Directors. Dundas believed they
could work together successfully and urged Pitt to take Baring fully
into his confidence: ‘If you do give him one of the papers, let him
knowitis done in concert with me, and that. . . we shall from time to
time expect a return of unreserved communication from him.” On
the whole the partnership worked smoothly. It was in recognition of
Baring’s work as Chairman of the East India Company that in 1793
he was created a baronet.*8 ‘I don’t congratulate you on your Title,
wrote Lansdowne loftily, ‘because I think in these times you do it
more honour than it does you.’*?                                .
   Though Baring dominated the Council, he       never really enjoyed
his time on it. ‘The more I work,’ he complained to Lansdowne, ‘the
greater degree of jealousy and difficulty I have to encounter amongst
the Directors, who are in general composed of either Fools or
Knaves.’5° The main reason for staying on was that he wished to
40                      The Sixth Great Power
provide for two of his sons in the East; an end which he duly
achieved in 1790 when Tom was packed off to Bengal, and Henry to
China. Nor was this the only benefit gained from membership of the
Council. The East India Company continued to buy woollen goods
from the West Country for export to India long after it became clear
that they would inevitably be sold at a loss. The records do not give
reasons for the decision, but it is hard to believe that Baring’s long
association with Exeter was not in part responsible.*!
   Baring’s close involvement with ministers and the confidence that
they placed in him, won him important benefits when government
contracts came to be placed. One such was for supplying British
forces in the field at the tail end of the American War of Independ-
ence and related conflicts. Isaac Barré said of contractors as a class
that they were ‘animals of a greedy nature, always craving and never
satisfied, their appetites for dishonest lucre and foul gain were as
insatiable as their consciences were easily satisfied’.5? Baring
calculated that the profit made by his predecessors on government
contracts in 1781-2 was 13.4 per cent, and that it had been even
higher in previous years. He offered to do the same job fora commis-
sion of | per cent, and when Shelburne gave him responsibility for
victualling the armed services in 1783, he did so ata total cost of Sda
head instead of the previous 5'/2d - thus saving the public some
£70,000 and earning his own house over the same period a modest
but satisfactory £11,000.53 By March 1783 the end of hostilities
meant that the operation had to be run down and much surplus dis-
posed of. This too Baring handled successfully. About a third of the
overstock had to be sold ata loss, but this was never more than 20 per
cent; a result significantly better than that achieved by the
Victualling Board when in a similar situation some twenty years
before.5+
   In its minute recording the decision to award the contract, the
Navy Board stated: ‘Mr Francis Baring being represented to My
Lords as a merchant of great character and responsibility, every way
equal to the Trust, and the due execution of so important a Service;
he 1s called in and asked at what rate he will execute the Business,
which he offers to do for a Commission of £1 per cent.’55 The fact
that the recommendation came from Shelburne was all-important,
yet no one doubted that Baring was indeed ‘a merchant of great
                 Laying the Foundations:    1776-1793                 41
character and responsibility’. The same was true in another new field
for the expansion of John and Francis Baring and Co. in the 1780s -
that of public loans. Baring’s connections with the mighty ensured
him an inside track in the negotiations, but he would not have main-
tained himself there if he had not showed himself fully competent.
   When in the early 1780s the Government wished to raise money
to finance the American War it selected a banking house which
would accept responsibility for the entire amount and raise it from
its own resources, its clients or outside investors. Provided ministers
got the money they needed, they were not too concerned about the
amount the chosen banker charged the public. If he got his figures
right, therefore, the banker had the chance to make a fat profit; if he
got it wrong, however - put too high a price on the stock, misjudged
the public mood, or was unlucky in his timing - then he could find
himself with a lot ofunsaleable paper on his hands and in a very dif-
ficult position. It was a high- profit, high-risk business. No one got it
right all the time; the most successful banker was the one whose
information and acumen enabled him to get it right more often than
the others. Between 1780 and 1784 Baring made a profit of £19,000
out of raising money for the British Government; not a sensational
figure but eminently satisfactory and a harbinger of the far bigger
business to be done in the French wars.
   Baring’s forays into public life reaped rich dividends for his busi-
ness house, but it would be wrong to deduce from this that financial
profit was his only, or even primary, consideration. Baring did not
court Pitt or Lansdowne because he foresaw pickings for John and
Francis Baring in so doing. He did so because he was flattered to
receive advances from such magnificos, because he relished the
power and consequence earned by such associations, and because he
sincerely wished to serve his country. But in the eighteenth century -
as in the twentieth - those in power liked to deal with those they
knew and trusted. Ministers knew and trusted Baring, they liked him
and respected his ability, they felt they owed him something. What
more likely then that they would push in his direction whatever
plums were theirs for the giving?
   With the ending of the war, the number of plums diminished.
Merchant banking is often a matter of swings and roundabouts. The
                                                                  War
profit made from raising money to finance the American
42                      The Sixth Great Power