

Bankers do not like war. There are already too many imponderables
in their lives without the extra financial, military and political haz-
ards that accompany hostilities. What they hope for is steadily
expanding trade in a predictable economic climate and with a mini-
mum of political interference. But though war carries alarming risks,
it can also yield amazing profits. Traditional fields of business may
wither, but there are always opportunities for something new, and
the banker who is resourceful, bold and resolute; who possesses a
cool head and a long purse; above all, perhaps, who knows the right
people, and who enjoys the priceless gift of being 1n the ght place at
the right time, will make a great deal of money. Barings had all these
advantages and they made the money.
   Francis Baring approached the war in a spirit of detached prag-
matism. He disliked the Bourbons but found the revolutionaries
even more alarming. He thought the émigrés and their pretensions
absurd and believed that what France needed was a constitutional
king, but since Britain was committed to the unconditional restora-
tion of the Bourbons he accepted resignedly that the war was likely
to continue for many years.*’ In the meantime, he sagely observed:
‘People will eat, drink and be cloathed in defiance of their rulers.’4¢
He agreed with his son Alexander that it was certainly futile and
probably mischievous for a government to attempt to interfere with
the course of trade. In a memorandum of 1805 Alexander argued
that the blockade of the continent had done more harm to the Brit-
ish than the French. “The most desirable system for the trade of this
country is to abstain from all restrictions, to leave it as free and
uncircumscribed as possible, and to desist from, or mitigate all Naval
blockades as much as other more important considerations will per-
mit.’47 To this view he remained consistent.
   The question of whether there was a conflict of interest between
the mercantile community and the nation as a whole, or whether
official policy corresponded with the real national interest, did not
cause the Barings many sleepless nights. They went on trading wher-
ever it was possible, avoiding the overtly illegal but not too
preoccupied with the spirit of the law. In 1802 Cobbett wrote to Wil-
liam Windham to complain: ‘The French fleet and army in St
Domingo continue to be supplied with provisions and other
necessaries by Willings and Co. of Philadelphia who draw on Barings
                     The French Wars: 1793-1815                       53
and Co. for payment.’#8 At that moment the war was in temporary
abeyance but Cobbett would probably have had as much andas little
justification for his accusation two years before or two years later.
Certainly he could not have proved his case. Through Willing and
Francis, who were Barings’ closest correspondents in the United
States, and many other American merchants, Barings were involved
in much trade with continental Europe conducted under the cloak
of ‘neutrality’. Barings’ money in part at least must have financed
many cargoes that were smuggled illicitly under the noses of the
Royal Navy and the French authorities. Barings themselves were not
and did not need to be involved in smuggling. They cannot possibly
have been ignorant of what was going on, but did not wish to have
any formal knowledge of it. In this they differed little from those in
authority. Though the official policy of the British government was
that the trade should be stopped, it is doubtful whether the breaches
of that policy caused much greater real concern in Whitehall than in
Bishopsgate.
   Of course there was much international trade that was in no way
questionable. A typical adventure in July 1801 concerned the Can-
ton, a vessel valued at $50,000 with a cargo worth four times as much:
nankeens and silks, porcelain, sugar and Bohem, Souchong and
Hyson tea. The ship arrived in mid-September and Barings wrote to
reassure the American merchants who shared the profit or loss on
joint account: ‘The cargo is very valuable and will find a ready sale at
good prices, as our Market is again bare of Indian goods.’*” The voy-
age was made during the short-lived peace after the Treaty of
Amiens, but even if it had not been, it would have been entirely legal.
Yet the markets of Europe were still more bare of Indian goods than
those of London and in wartime the prices paid there might be twice
as high. It would be surprising if none of that silk and tea ended up
across the Channel.
   There were periods during which trade was severely curtailed. In
the autumn of 1805 Francis Baring described his business as having
‘sunk to nothing’.°° Yet this was the exception. In the first five years
of the war commission income grew by more than 150 per cent, and
it only dropped     below £20,000     once   between   then and    1815.
Liabilities on acceptance rose even more dramatically from £89,458
in 1793 to £454,807 in 1797, and remained over £200,000 for the rest
54                       The Sixth Great Power