

    decessor as beneath them, or they follow it by agents without
    interfering themselves, which is only a more rapid road to
    ruin.”
   That the Barings avoided this risk is attributable above all to the
fact that they were philoprogenitive and tenacious in retaining fam-
ily links. At any given moment, therefore, there was likely to be a
plentiful supply of cousins acquainted with each other and eager for
a job in the bank. Elder sons might drop out, deeming the work ‘as
beneath them’, but there were plenty of hungry younger sons who
needed to make their fortune. Those at the head of the bank were
also ruthless when it came to disposing of the second rate; to carry
the name of Baring was not enough, if one could not do the job suc-
cessfully one was quickly banished to an outpost or consigned to
some less exacting line of business. If the nght Baring was not there,
then somebody was brought in; in ten or twenty years a Baring
would no doubt be available to take on the task, but in the meantime
it was better that it should be well done by an outsider than bungled
by a member of the family.
    In 1803 Francis Baring doubted whether the nght Barings were
there. Thomas, the elder son and future baronet, had served the East
India Company until 1801. He showed neither aptitude for nor
interest in banking and made it clear that when his father died he
expected to tend his estates, collect pictures, sit in the House of
Commons, and generally behave in a gentlemanly way. He was tech-
nically a partner in the house but retired even before his father’s
death. The future seemed to lie with his younger brothers, Alexander
and Henry; and Francis Baring did not look to them with great
expectations. ‘It would afford me some comfort if I could perceive
anything that was rational or manly in their pursuits, he wrote
despairingly. ‘I can make allowance fora considerable degree of friv-
olous dissipation on the outset of life, but when it carries the appear-
ance of degenerating into system, I must withdraw that indulgence
for it merits none.’®
    So far as Alexander was concerned, these strictures are extrava-
gant. He was an eminently, even depressingly, assiduous young
man. He started his career at Hope and Co. in Amsterdam, where
he showed himself ‘very sensible for his age’ but at the same time
46                     The Sixth Great Power

  headstrong and impatient: ‘His character was not yet modifyed in
  such a manner, as to act constantly with such an application as
  would be more agreeable to Mr Hope.’? When Hopes were chased
  from Holland by the invading French, Alexander was sent to the
  United States. He won good opinions there. General Cobb found
  him ‘a Dutchman in negotiation’ - by which he seems to have meant
 that Baring was tough, shrewd, but never unreasonable - yet with ‘no
 art or cunning about him’ and ‘a good heart’.!° Another American
 businessman described him as ‘an extraordinary young man, of great
 mercantile talents and possessed of much information. Though a
 young man of about twenty-five [in fact he was twenty-three] he is
 respected by all the old characters who know him.”!! The mistake
 over his age was typical; Alexander was born middle-aged and never
 failed to impress by the gravitas which throughout the generations
 has been the hallmark of his clan. In business this inspired confi-
 dence; in the more frivolous reaches of London society the enthusi-
 asm was less marked. Miss Berry sat next to him at dinner and found
 him ‘rather a heavy-looking young man, with a hesitating manner,
 but seems very clear in his ideas’.!2
    Francis Baring was unimpressed by reports from America of his
 son’s good sense and maturity. The ‘superior tone of mind’ that
Alexander had taken with him to America had been ‘visibly
impaired’; he had acquired ‘enervating habits’; a trip to Paris that
Alexander undertook with his new wife and American father-in-law
was responsible for the rebuke that ‘frivolous dissipation’ was
‘degenerating into system’.'3 The real cause of offence seems to have
been that on his return from America he had refused to take upa
partnership in Hopes, thus thwarting his father’s dream of a grand
Anglo-Dutch consortium that would rule the commercial world.'4
Not unreasonably Alexander felt that he should be allowed to spend
some time at home again, but to Francis Baring it seemed that this
wilful opposition to his views arose only because ‘the pleasures of
the present moment must not be sacrificed to the most brilliant
prospects’. 15
   Alexander’s brother Henry was more deserving of criticism. A
shadowy figure, he seems to have been both more brilliantand more
wayward than his brother. A passionate gambler, he was also a suc-
cessful one, several times breaking the bank at the L’Entreprise
                    The French Wars: 1793-1815                       47