

   Francis had no intention of being dragged into this morass, a view
of the affair justified by the fact that two of Charles’s three putative
partners were shortly made bankrupt. He suggested that the partner-
ship should continue on its present basis but that Charles should
accept sole responsibility for and take all the benefit from this latest
enterprise. Charles treated this proposal with contempt, and
accepted with alacrity when Francis said that in that case the only
thing to do was to dissolve the partnership. Without the support of
the Exeter house, Charles believed, John and Francis Baring and Co.
would quickly founder; and he advised John ‘to consider well the
hazard he ran by continuing the partnership’.?” In the end John Bar-
ing decided to continue as a partner in both houses; perhaps still
hoping that in time the family might be reunited. Bad debts were
written off on each side and Charles Baring contributed £1000
towards a ‘desperate debt of about £5500’ which was outstanding 1n
London. The ending of the partnership was deemed to take effect at
the end of 1776 and the articles of dissolution were finally signed by
the three brothers on 29 March 1777.
                                     Z
                                ew       nate




           Laying the Foundations
                   1776-1793


Britain in 1776 was economically, and probably politically and
socially as well, the most advanced country on earth. It was still dom-
inated by a few hundred aristocratic families who monopolized a
grotesque proportion of the nation’s wealth, but though this caste
jealously guarded its status and its privileges it was by no means
immutable. The rule of primogeniture ensured that its poorer mem-
bers were constantly dropping off to join the professional classes or
landed gentry, while new blood could buy its way in if the price
offered were high enough. Nor did its members disdain the delights
of money-making; they usually ensured that their estates were run
efficiently and that the coal, tin or other such resources found on
their estates were mined to best advantage. They contributed to the
nation’s wealth.
   If the aristocrats still largely ran the country, it was the 12,000-
13,000 families of the country gentry that made it work. They ranged
from baronets with a seat in parliament, whose large estates and
grand houses made them the equal of most of the continental and
some of the indigenous nobility, to impoverished squires who
worked their own land and were barely to be distinguished from the
yeoman farmers who were their neighbours.
   The more they looked like farmers, however, the more they were
aware of their gentility. They sometimes disliked but always
respected the aristocracy; they always disliked and usually despised
                                                                      to
the industrialists and merchants who were bringing the country
undreamt-of prosperity. It was not until the nineteenth century that
                                                                    was
the phrase ‘in trade’ gained wide currency as a label for all that
mean and socially inferior, but the eighteenth-century squire knew
well what the description signified.
                                     25
 26                      The Sixth Great Power
    Few of the country gentlemen realized that their importance in
 the social order was about to be overshadowed by this new breed of
 men. The nouveaux riches made their money in ways barely contem-
 plated a century before. Wool was still Britain’s leading export, em-
 ploying one way or another some three quarters of a million people,
 but the metal trades were in violent upsurge and exports ofiron and
 steel manufactures were doubled, redoubled and doubled again ina
 mere 75 years. The coal required to fuel these industries brought vast
 wealth to those lucky enough to own the mines, and also gave
 employment, brutish.and ill-paid perhaps yet still acceptable, to
 many thousands more. The Industrial Revolution was rolling, towns
 such as Birmingham and Sheffield took on a new significance, and
 though London was still by far the largest city of the realm, its rela-
 tive importance dwindled.
    In one field, however, it remained not merely pre-eminent but
 unique. Birmingham and Sheffield might be generating the money,
 Liverpool and Bristol might be the entrepéts for a flourishing com-
 merce, but London was the financial centre of Britain. Francis Baring
 could not have achieved, could not have attempted to achieve, what
 he did in any other city. London was also, of course, the seat of gov-
 ernment; indeed, if it had not been the seat of government it could
 never have been the financial centre of the country, for, as Baring was
 soon to find out, the two were inextricably meshed together.
_ When the first Baring partnership began to operate in January
 1763 George III had been a little over two years on the throne. It was
 to be another seven years before he was able to settle his pliant
 instrument, Lord North, in the office of prime minister. Increasing
 ill feeling between the Baring brothers in Exeter and London was
 matched on an international scale by the growing acrimony between
 North’s government and the settlers in America. The United States’
 declaration of independence of 4 July 1776 preceded by six months
 Francis Baring’s escape from the shackles of Exeter. It did not seem a
 wholly propitious prelude.
    The American War of Independence not only tarnished Britain’s
 military reputation but also gravely damaged her economy. Exports,
 which had grown steadily for a quarter of a century or more, fell by
almost 20 per cent. To the North American market, much the most
important to Britain outside Europe, they were halved. There was
                Laying the Foundations: 1776-1793                    27
unemployment in the industrial towns and consternation in the City
of London. It was hardly the ideal moment for Francis Baring to
escape from the family bottom and paddle his own canoe.