

    The Merchants in this Country are generally speaking a low
    Class of Man, having all raised themselves from Nothing, the
    best at this place [Philadelphia] and New York are travelling
    Clerks to English manufacturing houses .. . The Northern
    States are always some degrees above their Neighbours in
    everything and the scale sinks lower as you go South . . . to
    the south of Baltimore I understand there is nobody worth
 66                        The Sixth Great Power
      trusting. The proper mode of doing business with this Coun-
      try to most advantage is certainly to give a large Credit to very
      few, selecting only one or two houses you can depend on in
      each place, and then to give the others liberal assistance in
      their houses on proper Security which will attract as much as
      any one Establishment can wish. The Rage for Speculation 1s
      so great and the ups and downs in fortunes so sudden that it
      is necessary to keep up a constant Communication with your
      confidential Correspondent.??

    Despite the hauteur with which he spoke of American merchants,
 Baring in fact soon built up excellent relationships with several of the
 most important. The Codmans in Boston; Willing and Francis in
 Philadelphia; Robert Gilmor and Co. and Robert Oliver and Broth-
ers in Baltimore were all felt worthy of large uncovered credits.
Credit of a year or more was by no means unusual, but the money
was usually safe and the return substantial. Alexander told Charles
Wall that one of Barings’ correspondents in Philadelphia was ‘the
most barefaced liar and dirty equivocator’ he had met in his life,28
but he eventually concluded that such scoundrels were few and far
between. By 1798 Alexander Baring’s business in America was bring-
ing in a profit of £10,000 a year.
   He visited Canada in 1797. Upper Canada, he reported, was
‘beyond the reach of any export market and must like Switzerland
subsist from its own resources’. Both it and Lower Canada were ‘a
perfect deadweight to Great Britain’. The settlers were without any
kind of patriotism and as soon as self-interest dictated a change of
policy, ‘the same scene will be played which we witnessed in these
States [he wrote from Philadelphia] with the only difference that the
Contest will be much shorter’. The only reason for occupying the
Canadas had been to secure the northern frontier of what was now
the United States, ‘but since the loss of the latter they are of no serv-
ice but to the empty vanity of large territorial possessions and to
increase Ministerial patronage at the expense of the Nation’.?9
   He had no such doubts about the future of the United States. ‘The
accession of MrJefferson may have excited apprehensions,’ he wrote
early in 1801, ‘but you may depend on it that they are unfounded.’
Jetferson might be personally disposed to favour France if the Euro-
                    The United States:   1783-1828                   67
pean war was renewed but the country as a whole did not share this
predilection. “The consequences of a war with England would be
fatal to every description of people throughout America... . You
may rely on it that there is no danger from this side at present unless
goaded by increasing aggression of the British ministers.’3°
   One of the reasons for his journey had been to investigate the mer-
its of American stocks. Alexander soon concluded that these were
eminently suitable for investment, giving a high yield and offering as
much security as anything in Europe. The problem would be to con-
vince the British capitalist that this was the case. The French Revolu-
tion, Alexander believed, had persuaded the monied classes that
republicanism was synonymous with Jacobinism,; to express any
sympathy for the United States was to lay oneself open to a charge of
condoning violent revolution if not regicide. In fact the British were
by no means so hostile to their former colonists as Alexander imag-
ined, but it was not until he saw the names of the Duke of Northum-
berland and some European princelings on a list of those who held
large quantities of American stock that he accepted this might be
Sut?
   Cause and effect is as difficult to establish in banking as in any
other branch of history. American stocks would undoubtedly have
become acceptable in London even though Barings had never sup-
ported them. The fact, however, that so powerful and generally
respected a house was known to be investing in the United States,
both for its friends and on its own account, must have been an
important factor in shaping the opinion of the public. Once the first
steps had been taken there was no looking back. At the very end of
the eighteenth and in the early nineteenth century British invest-
ment in US stocks rose rapidly; by 1803 almost half the total $32
million of stock held by foreigners was domiciled in Britain. And
Barings were at the heart of the business; from 1799 indeed they
                                                                    on
acted in conjunction with London merchants, Cazenove and Co.,
                                                                 on  all
behalf of the Bank of the United States in paying dividends
American stock in Britain.
                                                                 a new
   In 1799, too, Alexander Baring was closely associated with
                                                              him the
$5 million loan. He was dismayed by what seemed to
                                                           of America
naivety of the Treasury in Washington. ‘Our Financiers
                                                        to  his father,
as well as our Politicians are quite Novices,’ he wrote
68                      The Sixth Great Power