

American wife, ‘a wife is best suited to the home in which she was
raised, and cannot be formed or trained a second time’.!3 The first
piece of advice was obviously never given; and the second, if given,
was to be ignored.
   By the tme Alexander arrived Bingham was growing desperate. If
Barings did not buy, he told his partner General Knox, he would be
‘in a most cruel and embarrassed situation’.!* Another partner, Gen-
eral Cobb, was sent to meet Baring ‘accidentally’ at Boston, and other
local worthies were briefed to speak warmly to him of the prospects
for Maine. Baring was sufficiently deluded to report that he found
the Maine lands ‘well thought of, collectively considered’, but he was
in no hurry to commit himself. He made a point of speaking, and
being seen speaking, to people with land to sell in other parts of the
United States. In fact he had already made up his mind that the
Maine lands would be an excellent investment, that the population
would inevitably increase, that the demand for cultivated lands
would grow proportionately, and that these factors would put ‘the
real solid value of the article beyond the reach of almost any
events’.!5 Bingham, however, was thoroughly alarmed and reduced
his price still further. In the end Baring settled to buy a million acres
at 33 cents an acre ~ he later proudly claimed that he had been ready
to pay considerably more.!* The total cost to Hopes and Barings was
£106,875. ‘Itis, Gentlemen,’ he wrote on 26 February 1796, ‘with the
greatest pleasure I inform you that every circumstance weighed and
every object worth attention in this Country considered I have after
much discussion and treating closed this important bargain with the
most perfect confidence of its being a most lucrative and secure
investment.’!7 In fact it proved to be reasonably secure but far from
lucrative; when the partners finally extricated themselves from the
property fifty years later they got little more than they had originally
paid for it.8
   Alexander liked America. “This is not a country to afford great
Luxuries as enjoyments for a young man, he wrote with some
pomposity to Henry Hope, ‘but I am sure he will very shortly
perceive that though the curiosities of Rome are not to be found in it
nor the refinements of London and Paris, it offers a curiosity
                                                               of a
larger and more gratifying import, of a rising country, a spectacle the
most grateful to a liberal mind and the most instructive, whether
                   The United States: 1783-1828                     65
considered with the eye of the Philosopher, the Politician or the
Merchant." In June 1797 he proposed to his father that he should
stay in America to manage the Maine lands. Later Francis Baring
endorsed the letter: ‘His object must then have been a marriage with
Miss Bingham.’2°
  During the negotiations Alexander had been a regular visitor to
William Bingham’s home and duly fell in love with the Senator's
seventeen-year-old daughter Anne. The Times was uncivilly to
suggest that this was little more than a business arrangement,?! but
there is no reason to believe the charge. Anne, though by 1844 she
was severe and solid,?? was pretty enough as a girl. Some people in
later life found her cold and snobbish, but Alexander’s nephew H. B.
Mildmay voiced the general opinion when he described her as ‘a
kind and good woman, thoroughly subordinate to her husband’.?3
However, though the match may not have been made for money, it
was financially advantageous. Bingham gave his daughter a marriage
settlement of £500 a year and the elegant Powel House on Third
Street in Philadelphia.?* At his death it was said - though probably
with some picturesque exaggeration - that his daughter inherited
$900,000.75
   Alexander was not given the management of the Maine lands - a
task for which he would have been singularly ill-equipped - but he
did remain for a while in America. The purchase of the land was only
part of his brief, and from the moment of his arrival he had been on
the lookout for new business. His impressions were not entirely
favourable. He found the Boston merchants well established and
respectable, but unfortunately ‘people in general have all some
peculiar tye to some house in England’.?6 Connections could be built
up, but it would take time. Outside Boston things were still less
hopeful: