

   In 1801, when the Portuguese had to raise a large sum to pay off
their war debts, the question of a loan was revived. This time, with
Pitt out of office, Francis Baring decided to go it alone: ‘Just at the
crucial period,’ he told Labouchére, ‘it may be desirable not to have
the subject to discuss with our own Ministers, as you know very well
how ignorant they are of foreign finance.’6° Labouchére and George
Baring were sent on a taxing midwinter journey by mule across the
Pyrenées to Lisbon. The negotiations proved almost as exhausting as
the journey, Labouchére complaining that the Portuguese ‘con-
stantly alter the text, and I have to puzzle my brain to find out in a
language which I do not understand the nght from the wrong’.é
Urgency was lent to the affair when, in March 1802, Baring reported
‘a competition in the persons of some Jews, which is formidable
from the powers they possess as they have money, but there is noth-
ing more to fear as they cannot afford to pay so high a price as our-
selves. A competitor however is always dangerous and must be
attended to.’6? It was attended to, and the Portuguese Diamond
Loan of 1802 ensued, initially for 6.5 million guilders but eventually
for 13 million. The loan was not a total success; Hopes took the
larger part but Barings were responsible for 5 million guilders, and
by the end of 1802 had placed only a little over 1.5 million on the
British market.
   The conclusion drawn from this début was that international
loans were potentially profitable but needed to be handled with cau-
tion. In 1800 Francis Baring was urging the claims of his house to
handle the Austrian account in London, but when it was a question
of a small loan of £150,000 to be transmitted immediately to Vienna
he was more reticent. It was not the amount, which was guaranteed
by the British government, but the impossibility of ensuring that it
would reach its destination; ‘they could as soon undertake, that the
Enemy shall not cross the Danube’.6+ Canning, the Foreign Secre-
tary, gloomily accepted that Barings must do their best nevertheless.
If they failed, then future subsidies to Austria would have to be sus-
pended, ‘For I think you will agree with me that there could be no
great use in sending money to the Continent to subsidize Buona-
parte’.65
   Sometimes an immense profit seemed possible but had to be
rejected on grounds of principle. In 1799 Barings had the opportu-
                     The French Wars: 1793-1815                       df
nity to collect silver in Spanish America and pay dollars to the
Spanish government, making a profit of some 80 per cent on
the transaction. The risks would be high, wrote Francis Baring, ‘But
the second objection decided us - namely that it was conveying the
treasure from America to Spain for the use of the Government and
of course the King’s enemies. It is possible we might have obtained a
licence as nothing can exceed the ignorance of our Ministers. . . But
to have obtained that licence we must have presented a memorial so
equivocal and in truth so unfounded that it would not suit us and
therefore was abandoned.’ The distinction between financing
trade of which the British government officially disapproved and
giving direct aid to the enemies of Britain might sometimes appear a
fine one, but it was very clear to Baring.
   In business like the loan to Austria, Barings were in effect acting as
the agent of the British government. This was not the first ume that
they had been approached this way by ministers. In 1803 Vansittart,
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, asked Barings whether they could
hire ships, clothing and provisions for an expeditionary force under
Home Popham of 2000 infantry with supporting cavalry and artil-
lery to capture Buenos Aires. Barings expressed their willingness, but
the matter was never followed up. Francis Baring wrote the minister
a slightly injured letter: ‘I never solicited, nor ever invited, to be
employed by Government for the sake of emolument. I can there-
fore assure you very sincerely that it is a disappointment to me that
the service should be performed by another.’” In fact the service was
not performed by another until Home Popham’s expedition to the
River Plate finally took place three years later under another govern-
ment. To add insult to injury, ministers used Baring’s supposed
                                                                       of
reluctance to cooperate as a reason for inaction - ‘New evidence
                                                   avail themselves,   to
what little, miserable Schemes these people
                                                               wrote the
delay doing what all the world says they ought to do,’
                                                            the question
American chargé d’affaires.°® Ten years later, when
                                                     troops  in Holland,
arose of supplying money for the use of Allied
                                                            offered their
Vansittart made amends. ‘Many houses have already
                                                             me on every
services to me,’ he reported, ‘but Barings. . . appears to
score the most proper channel for our many transactions.’°?
                                                             that Barings
   It was in loans raised by the British government itself
                                                         the confidence
made the greatest profits and benefited most from
 58                      The Sixth Great Power
reposed in them by ministers. Between 1793 and 1815 the govern-
ment borrowed some £770 million at varying rates ofinterest. Until
1799 the market was dominated by William Boyd, but after he ran
into difficulties early that year Barings took the lead. In twelve out of
the next fifteen years they headed the list of successful contractors
for public loans.”° Even before his father retired, Alexander Baring
made this line of business his particular responsibility. Profits on the
loans were usually high: £21,000 in 1799 and a spectacular £77,000
from two loans in 1813 yielding a total net profit of £190,000 over
the next seventeen years. But it was not easy money. The public had
to be persuaded to subscribe and this meant that their confidence
both in the government and in Barings must remain unshaken.
When confidence failed, an expensive catastrophe could follow. In
 1810 a combination of the death of Sir Francis Baring and the
activities of the Bullion Committee of the House of Commons - a
Whig-dominated body, on which Alexander Baring was prominent,
which urged a substantial reduction of paper money and the
resumption of payments in gold by the Bank of England - caused a
panic in financial circles. The £22.3 million loan, for which Barings
and Abraham Goldsmid were jointly responsible, fell to an 8 percent
discount.7! Goldsmid committed suicide and the year ended with a
heavy loss - in the short term at least costing Barings more than
£43,000. When Goldsmid and Baring were described in The Times as
‘the pillars of the city’,7? Cobbett exploded with indignation. ‘A
couple of dealers in funds and paper,’ he described them. ‘I look
upon the life of Sir Francis Baring or that of Goldsmid as being of no
more, if so much, value to England, as that of any one of your
apprentices or plough boys.’73