

 his head was at war with the other; ‘his eyes go one road and his legs
another ’.83 It was fortunate for Baring Brothers that Alexander's dif-
fidence was more marked in the House of Commons than in the
counting house; in business he was shrewd, and though generally
prudent he was capable of striking boldness.
    By the end of the Napoleonic wars Barings had by far outdis-
tanced their rivals. The merchant bankers had established them-
selves as an indispensable instrument by which government could
finance its operations and manage them overseas.8* A crop of new
houses had sprung up: N. M. Rothschild and Sons and J. Henry
Schroder in 1804; Wm Brandt and Sons in 1805; Antony Gibbs in
1808; Brown, Shipley and Co. in 1810.85 Of these, Rothschilds at
least were providing formidable opposition. Barings were still
supreme. Yet the future was uncertain. With the end of the waritwas
reasonable to suppose that government borrowing would dwindle if
not cease and that the merchant banks would be thrust back upon
their traditional means of making money. For Barings there could
be no doubt that such means were to be found above all in the
United States.
                                  4
                               ope
                                 © eee




            ‘The Highest Fame for
                Respectability’
             The United States, 1783-1828




Barings’ involvement with America was older than the United
States. One of the best markets for the British cloth industry was
North America. American exports had to be fostered if they were to
be able to pay for what they bought, and in both these traffics
Barings were busily engaged. The War of Independence put an end
to that and it was not until 1783 that Robert Morris of Philadelphia,
one of the new republic’s most prominent and successful financiers,
wrote on behalf of a group of Philadelphia’s leading merchants to
urge Barings to enter into correspondence with them.! A few months
later, Senator William Bingham, a millionaire from Philadelphia
whose family as well as financial future were to become entwined
with those of Francis Baring, extolled the excellent prospects for
commerce with England and offered to settle there as resident Min-
ister. He wrote from London and was already a regular visitor at Bar-
ing’s house.?
    Barings welcomed such overtures with enthusiasm. But they were
not content with a profitable trading role. The next step in their
march to pre-eminence among the ‘American’ houses - a phrase
loosely used to describe houses either American in origin or special-
izing in American trade - came in 1795. The American Minister in
Lisbon, David Humphreys, was negotiating with the Barbary powers
of North Africa over the free movement of shipping in the Mediter-
                                                                    .
ranean and needed funds with which to satisfy their demands
                                              stock from  the United
Francis Baring was sent $800,000 of 6 percent
                                                         Lisbon: ina
States and told to remit the proceeds to Humphreys in
                                 61
62                       The Sixth Great Power
 way characteristic of treasury officials, the American authorities
 both stressed the extreme urgency of the transaction and enjoined
 Baring to sell the stock ‘without causing a depression in the prices
 and thus injuring the credit of American funds’? Various things
 went wrong - there were difficulties in procuring the necessary silver
 bullion and still more in delivering it in the night place - and Barings
 in several cases ran a considerable risk by taking what they believed
 to be essential action without waiting for authority from Washing-
 ton. The Treaty could not have been carried into effect, Francis Bar-
 ing told the American Minister in London, ‘if I had not acted with a
 degree of zeal, perhaps imprudence, in going beyond the letters of
 my orders’.* The stocks sold slowly, and Barings mildly complained:
 ‘Our respect for the United States and zeal for their interest will not
permit us to proceed to an instant sale if you shall think it desirable
to wait for a reasonable time,’ but they were still making consider-
able sacrifices ‘in being deprived of a beneficial arrangement of our
funds for many months’.’ Yet only a month later they put up a fur-
ther $200,000 to meet Humphreys’s urgent needs. Francis Baring
could reasonably feel he had served the Americans well, and King
wrote to congratulate him on ‘the liberal and skilfull manner in
which you have assisted Col. Humphreys in a very critical operation.
I have written to the Secretary of the Treasury on this Subject and
shall communicate to him the assurance that I have given to you of
my conviction that the United States will entertain a proper sense of
your Services in this Business.’7
  At much the same time Barings were scouring the market for mus-
kets and cannon to equip the United States for what seemed an
imminent war with France. It proved a frustrating commission. One
thousand five hundred muskets were shipped on the Woodrop Sims
and captured by the French; another 2000 were put aboard the
Washington, which also fell in with a French privateer and had to put
back into Lisbon for repairs.’ In the end some £45,000 was spentand
nearly 10,000 muskets and 330 cannon reached America.? By the end
of the eighteenth century Barings, though not yet appointed agents
of the US Government, were established as the British bank to
whom the Americans turned when they wanted something done in
Europe.
                          *        *       *
                    The United States:   1783-1828                   63
In 1793 William Bingham headed a syndicate which bought three
million acres of Maine lands ata little over 10 cents an acre. The area
- about the size of Yorkshire - was a remote and rugged wasteland.
Bingham was pledged to establish 2500 settlers on the land by 1803,
and would be fined $30 per settler if he failed. It did not take him
long to realize that a large part of this bleak empire would have to be
disposed of at a profit if financial disaster were to be avoided. A Vir-
ginian gentleman, Major William Jackson, was sent to Europe to try
to find a market.!°
   Jackson was the very pattern of an estate agent; plausible, enthusi-
astic and not over-preoccupied with the need for rigorous accuracy.
When he compared description with reality, Alexander Baring wrote
from New York: ‘All Americans that go to Europe to sell lands make
up their speeches and character with hypocritical art, and from a
general deficiency which certainly exists throughout this country of
that nice honour which is not merely contented with being exactly
within the pale of the law.’!! Francis Baring was not wholly taken in
by Jackson but he was interested in principle in investment in unde-
veloped lands in America. It was a curious choice for one who, like
every merchant banker, hated to lock up his precious capital in long-
term enterprises that would prevent him using it more profitably
elsewhere. He must certainly have been strongly encouraged by
Hopes, who were anxious to invest as rapidly as possible some part
of the money they had brought with them from Holland. Hopes
were partners in the enterprise from the start, agreeing to put up
three-quarters of whatever was invested.
   By April 1795 Jackson had concluded that Barings were the best, if
not the only serious prospect among possible purchasers in Britain.
He reduced the asking price to 44 cents an acre and urged instant
acceptance of the unrepeatable offer, ‘the most certain and the most
profitable that ever was offered to the public’.!2 Alexander Baring
was under-employed, having recently returned from Amsterdam,
and his father decided that it would be to everyone’s benefit if he
                                                              the
now visited America, to look at the Maine lands and to assess
market generally. Nolte - a close associate of Barings over many
                                                                      of
years - in his memoirs claims that Alexander was given two bits
                                                ated lands which ‘can be
advice by his father: not to invest in uncultiv
                                                                      an
more readily bought than sold again’; and not to bring home
64                       The Sixth Great Power