


Francis Baring’s association with the East India Company had dwin-
dled as he grew older. In 1792 he was vigorously defending the new
Governor of Bengal, Sir John Shore, against Burke, who claimed that
Shore was too closely involved with Warren Hastings. However that
might be, said Baring, he was ‘one of the ablest and most upright Ser-
vants of the Company in India’.’”4 In 1798 he got the credit for find-
ing the indigent Charles Lamb a place as clerk in the India Office, but
his contribution seems in fact to have been small.75 When the Court
                    The French Wars: 1793-1815                     59
of the East India Company debated what reward Nelson should
receive for destroying Napoleon’s fleet at Aboukir Bay, and thus
frustrating his designs on India, Baring pointed to the statues of
Clive, Lawrence and other worthies and proposed they should ‘place
the Hero of the Nile by the side of the Heroes of the Ganges’. The
Court instead voted Nelson £10,000; a reward which the Hero of the
Nile would have felt decidedly more appropriate.’6
   But Baring never supported the expansion of Bnitain’s role in
India. When Dundas, speaking of private trade with India, wrote
that the Company’s monopoly did not ‘rest on principles of colonial
exclusion’, Baring noted in the margin: ‘India is not a Colony and
God forbid that it ever should be one.’’? He opposed the majority of
the Directors when they wanted to impose severe curbs on American
trade with India, arguing that American prosperity would increase
the market for British products and that, anyway, India needed the
trade.’8 Progressively, he grew more disenchanted with his fellow
Directors, and more spasmodic in his attendance. In 1808 he argued
that the Christian missions were responsible for the recent mutiny.
He was voted down. His colleague Sweny Tone commented: ‘Sir
Francis has lost much of that consequence with the Court which his
superior knowledge, experience and abilities entitle him to, by rarely
appearing among them.’”?
   In the House of Commons, too, increasing deafness and disincli-
nation to put himself out led to his playing an ever smaller role. He
was still canvassing support with some enthusiasm in 1802 - ‘I must
devote the remainder of this week to expressing my gratitude to my
constituents through the solid medium of roast beef, plumb pud-
ding and suet,’ he told his American friend Rufus King? - but it did
not go much further than that. His sons Thomas and Alexander were
left to carry the family fortunes in the House. Alexander sat for
Taunton from 1806. He was always listened to with respect on finan-
cial questions but his painstaking fairness of mind did not equip him
                                                                  as ‘a
to be an ideal party politician. Daniel Webster described him
                                                     two sides toa
good man to deal with, who could see that there were
                                                                vigor-
question’.8! The trouble was that he expounded one side as
                                        speech one  way  and  his vote
ously as the other: ‘He always gave his
                                                              and told
another.’2 His brother Henry wrote of his ‘hesitating Spirit’
                                                           one side of
Peel that when he was a boy a phrenologist had said that
60                      The Sixth Great Power