

 ‘they know nothing ofwhat Mr Burke called the small ware of either
 Diplomaticks or finance.’ The Secretary of the Treasury borrowed
 his wants by ‘fixing his interest and opening a Great Book for sub-
 scriptions without ascertaining by receiving offers the Minimum of
 interest it could be obtained for’.3? Francis Baring agreed with his
son’s strictures, quoting with approval Talleyrand’s dictum that
Americans ‘sont des ostrogothes qui ne se connatssent pas en affaires’?
The Secretary, Oliver Wolcott, compounded his folly in Alexander’s
eyes by his reluctance to entrust the London end ofthe loan entirely
to Barings. ‘I positively declined taking any share in such a scramble
unless I could be put on higher ground than my competitors,3+
wrote Baring, with an arrogance that would have been only too easily
recognizable by anyone who had dealings with successive genera-
tions of the family. His father was wise enough to realize that
Wolcott would have to take endless pains to avoid giving the impres-
sion of favouring anyone, least of all a foreign banker.
   Thomas Willing of the Bank of the United States had been one of
Francis Baring’s staunchest allies since the early 1790s. Cazenoves
had previously been the closest associate of the Bank and were not at
all pleased to see their cosy relationship disturbed. In July 1793 Bar-
ing wrote to thank Willing for trying to steer all the Bank’s business
in his direction. ‘I flattered myself, however, that our rivals would
have been contented with a fair participation to which they solicited
us strongly, and as we conceived that their interest would have
induced them to conciliate on all occasions with us, we so far yielded
as to write to the bank that we should readily concur with them in a
joint operation, whenever circumstances would permit.’ Cazenoves’
response had been to pocket the entire commission on a loan that
had been raised in Holland. ‘Although we think ourselves equal to
any degree of fair competition, yet we know from experience that we
have no chance against Men of an intriguing disposition, that I beg
to mention to you in perfect confidence the determination of my
house not to act in concert with them on any occasion whatsoever,’35
   Such dire threats are usually soon forgotten, and Barings were
associated with Cazenoves only two years later in a new $600,000
issue of certificates.36 In February 1803, however, Willing, with some
help from Rufus King in London, secured Barings the prize they had
long coveted - the agency of the government of the United States in
                   The United States:   1783-1828                   69
London. When Barings took over the payment of dividends on US
governmentstock, Alexander had argued that in this way they would
‘secure a species of monopoly in the direction of American Stocks in
Europe and become more obvious for individual operations of
Commerce’.3? The government agency was the logical next step.
After the failure of the previous agents Bird, Savage and Bird, Rufus
King told Barings, the American government had decided to employ
‘an English house of the first Reputation and Solidity’ to make the
‘large Remittances to the Continent’ which were periodically neces-
sary and to keep in funds various US diplomatic missions.3 The
work was often troublesome and the recompense in commission
income insignificant, but the prestige was all important. From 1803
no one could doubt that Barings were the leading ‘American’ house
in London.