


‘I have been so often disappointed about Alex’s return,’ Francis Bar-
ing wrote to Bingham in November 1800. ‘His presence is so indis-
pensable to a Man of my Age, infirmities and numerous family, that
I must request of you to bind him hand and foot, and put him on
board some Ship bound to England.’3? Baring could only regain his
son at the price of Bingham losing his daughter, so it is perhaps not
surprising that Alexander was not pressed too vigorously to move. At
one time it seems that he contemplated settling permanently in Phil-
adelphia but ‘it is by no means a desirable country to live in and will
never be so in my days,’ he concluded.*° By mid-1802 it seemed that
he was at last on the move, Willing reporting that he was in Philadel-
phia ‘perhaps for the last time’,*! but it was not until February 1804
that he wrote from New York to Albert Gallatin at the Treasury in
Washington to thank him for his kindness and assistance. ‘Like an
itinerant peddler,’ he told Gallatin, ‘I have been opening my shop.’
He had left Washington charged with the placing of the latest loan,
had sold $200,000 worth in Baltimore at about par, the same amount
                                                         many
in Philadelphia and $100,000 in New York, ‘and I find in
instances the first purchasers have resold with a profit’. If he had
                                                     not much
stayed longer he might have sold more, but there was
point in doing so if the stock would be at once put back on the mar-
ket, perhapsinEurope where he hoped to place the rest of the loan
 70                       The Sixth Great Power

himself.4? Besides, his father-in-law and wife were already in Europe,
and the thought of a holiday in Paris was most appealing.
      Some time before, Bingham had written from London: “None of
my friends have as yet informed me, what Impression the Cession of
Louisiana to France had made on the United States.’#3 The omission
is surprising, because little else was being talked of in America at the
time. Louisiana had been a French colony until 1763, then was ceded
 to Spain, only to be restored to its original owner in 1800 by the
 treaty of Saint-Ildefonse. The Americans disliked having the Span-
 iards there, but at least could rely on them to remain inert. The
 thought of a French army installed to their south appalled them.
 The British obligingly offered to conquer the area and hand it over to
 the United States after the war. This alarmed the Americans even
 more. Instead Jefferson sent an emissary to Paris to see if Napoleon
 might be prepared to sell part of the area. To his surprise he found
 that the Emperor was happy to dispose of the entire territory. Napo-
 leon needed the money and had no real interest in Louisiana, indeed
 his main reason for demanding it back from Spain had been to frus-
 trate any similar move from Britain: ‘Pour affranchir les peoples de la
tyrannie commerciale de l’Angleterre, ilfaut la contrepoiser par une puis-
sance maritime qui devienne un jour sa rivale: ce sont les Etats-Unis.’+4
    The United States in 1803 were thus offered the chance of doubl-
ing their land space and acquiring the entire Mississippi valley at a
single throw. It was an opportunity that could not be missed. ‘A little
more or less money cannot be an object with a Country circum-
stanced like ours,’ wrote Rufus King, ‘especially when it is applied to
secure advantages so important.’#5 In fact the price was a bargain -
$15 million from which $3.75 million were to be deducted for Amer-
ican claims against France - but the negotiators were still stupefied
by the immensity of their undertaking. Someone announced that a
pile of 15 million dollar pieces would be three miles high, a calcula-
tion of dubious relevance but symptomatic of the disquiet felt in
many circles.*° Where was the money to be found?
   The answer was to hand. Alexander Baring had been in Paris
throughout the negotiations in an unobtrusive role and, according to
his father, was largely responsible for reducing the French demands
to so low a figure.*” Barings and Hopes, it was understood, would
underwrite the purchase. Francis Baring, normally imperturbable,
                    The United States: 1783-1828                        71