

was almost overwhelmed by the responsibility his son was incurring.
‘] must request that no calculation may be made,’ he wrote to
Labouchére, ‘those sent to Alexander Baring should be burnt, and
even this letter after extracting such notes as you may think useful.
My nerves are equal to the operation, but not to the imprudences
which I see committed to paper. We all tremble about the magni-
tude of the American account.’ At the very most Barings might con-
tract for 60 per cent of the whole.*8 But though the risks were great,
the potential rewards were still greater. ‘I am satisfied if we can man
age this business well,’ he told his son, ‘we shall have frequent occur-
rence to us in circumstances or events that must arise and keep the
Ball at our feet for many years to come.’#? The final agreement was
that Barings and Hopes would acquire $11.25 million of 6 per cent
American bonds against payment to the French of 52 million francs.
The bonds would be handed over in three tranches, and similariy
payments to the French would be spread over two years; 6 million
francs payable in the first month and 2 million a month thereafter.
What in fact happened was that the two banks bought Louisiana
from France and resold it to America.
   A curious feature of this operation was that, while Britain was still
at peace with France, it seemed certain that war would soon be re-
sumed. The money Napoleon obtained through the sale of Louisi-
ana could be used to launch an attack on Britain. Rather belatedly,
Francis Baring in June 1803 told the Prime Minister, Henry
Addington, what had been done. ‘I asked distinctly if he approved
the treaty and our conduct. He said that he thoughtitwould have
been wise for this country to pay a million sterling for the transfer of
Louisiana from France to America, that he saw nothing in our con-
duct but to approve.’%° With this ministerial blessing Alexander
                                                                        the
Baring set off for Washington to settle the last details with
Americans.*!
                                                                          It
   By June 1803 the war with France had already been renewed.
                                                                     could
was not long before Addington began to wonder whether he
                                                         remitt ing  2 mil-
really justify a situation in which a British bank was
                                                                at war. In
lion francs a month to a country with which Britain was
                                                to cease   paying   remit-
December he formally requested Barings
                                                           the  contin ent
tances to France. If there were sums of money on
                                                                  have the
which were due to France on this account, ‘and you should
 72                     The Sixth Great Power