

of the war, again with the exception of one year. The United States
was responsible for the greater part of the growth; in the last five
years of the war nearly 80 per cent of commisssion income was
attributable to ‘American and Colonial’ trade. British exports
remained remarkably stable throughout the wars, and the propor-
tion of the world’s trade carried in British ships and financed by Brit-
ish money grew considerably as the merchant fleets of the continent
were driven from the seas. But Barings prospered more greatly than
the national norm. There were not many houses that could match
their resources, expertise and worldwide connections.
   Their resources had been greatly strengthened in 1795 by an
inrush of funds from Hope and Co. ‘I am so completely in the habit
of considering Holland and England as the same Country that I can
very easily find myself as much at home in the one as in the other,
Henry Hope wrote to Francis Baring in January 1794.5! Within a
year he was forced to put his words to the test. As the French revolu-
tionary troops advanced into Holland, the Hopes fled to London.
The Royal Navy sent a frigate to escort their ship - not so much to
protect the Hopes themselves as the gold and other forms of wealth
they brought with them. Alexander Baring and the youngest
and most capable of Hopes’ partners, Peter César Labouchére,
stayed at their posts until the last minute and then escaped across
the ice-packed estuaries just as the French troops entered
Amsterdam.*?
   Labouchére was one of the most talented bankers of his genera-
tion. Itis said that, aged only twenty-two, he asked Hopes if he might
be made a partner. He was refused. ‘Would itbe different if I were Sir
Francis Baring’s son-in-law?’ he asked. ‘Yes,’ he was told. ‘Well,     lam
going to be.’ He then rushed to Francis Baring and asked for the
hand of his daughter, Dorothy. Baring refused. ‘Would it be different
if | were a partner in Hope.and Co.?’ he asked. ‘Yes,’ he was told.
‘Well, lam going to be.’ He brought off a left and right, winning both
partnership and wife.53 In fact, he does not seem to have become a
partner of Hopes for several years, but the spirit of the story at least is
true. Dorothy may have felt that she was the only loser by the trans-
action. Labouchére was an ungainly figure; short on wit and educa-
tion; generous, honourable and exceedingly astute but with a touch-
ing determination to ape the manners of a pre-war French aristocrat.
                     The French Wars: 1793-1815                       55
He spoke his native French with an English accent and English with
a French.54
   When the Treaty of Amiens brought fleeting peace to Europe in
1801, Hopes planned to return to Amsterdam, but it was November
1802 before they finally reopened in Holland and even then much of
their capital remained effectively at the disposal of Barings. It was at
this point that Alexander caused such offence to his father by refus-
ing to take up a partnership in the Dutch house.5> He was proved
right when the French returned and Hopes’ fortunes waned.
Labouchére was briefly prominent in 1810 when he acted as mouth-
piece for a group of French dissidents - Fouché and Ouvrard among
them - who were trying to negotiate peace with England. Francis
Baring put him in touch with Wellesley, the Foreign Secretary, but
Napoleon discovered what was going on and quickly put a stop to
it.%6 By 1813 Hopes was an empty shell. Alexander Baring took it
over at a cost of £250,521 and at first intended to strip its assets and
close it down. On second thoughts, however, he decided it was worth
preserving, if only to provide a berth for his brother Thomas’s sons.*7
Hope and Co. resumed life and was to be an active trading partner of
Baring Brothers for more than another century.
   Their virtual integration with Hopes was as much as anything
responsible for Barings’ increasing involvement in a new field; they
had long financed international trade; now they began to concern
themselves with the affairs of foreign governments. The negotia-
tions with Portugal illustrate well the hazards and tribulations of
such work. In March 1797 the Prince of Brazil sought to raise £1.2
million in London. He was prepared to pledge diamonds and the
revenue   from   the snuff contract    as security, or if these were
unsatisfactory, ‘the rich Kingdom and Islands of Mozambique’.
Francis Baring was tempted but referred the matter to Pitt,** who
expressed extreme distaste for the proposed colonial quid pro quo,
and said that, in the ‘particular distressed situation of this country’,
he was unenthusiastic about the loan in principle. If Barings wanted
to make it privately, then he would not oppose it, but there would be
no official backing. In view of his attitude Baring concluded that
negotiations should be continued but ‘the terms must be onerous
and the conditions rendered very flattering to the publick’.*” The
terms were too onerous and the matter was allowed to drop.
56                      The Sixth Great Power