

 Means of withdrawing them, or of diverting them into other Chan-
nels, I fully rely on your doing so’.5? Barings dutifully passed this on
to Hopes, in a letter that was cautiously phrased, ‘from a persuasion
that our correspondence is watched’.53 Hopes’ reply was blunt: ‘We
have no objection to the discontinuance of your Remittances as we
shall not want them. But we cannot comply with the rest of your
 request. 54 It is hard to believe that this somewhat formal exchange is
 all that passed between the two houses. Barings must have known
 that Hopes would continue to pay remittances to the French, and
 Hopes must have known that Barings would make only a token pro-
 test: if the British government expected anything else then they were
 deluding themselves.
    Albert Gallatin estimated the profit which Hopes and Barings
 made from this business at $3 million.’ No precise figures exist, but
 though Gallatin’s figure must be too high, there were undoubtedly
 rich pickings. There was some rancour between the two partners
 over the division of the spoils. Labouchére claimed that he had origi-
 nated the operation and that a sixth of the profit was due to Henry
 Hope in London. Barings denied the claim. ‘To put an end to such
discussions, which can answer no good purpose,’ Francis Baring
wrote finally, ‘we are compelled to state to you that we claim as “a
Right” one moiety of the profits as proposed to you by Alexander
Baring. We do not ask this as a favor, for we should think meanly of
ourselves if we received a single penny as a concession or favor, but
we claim it as a strict indisputable right.’ He dismissed the argument
that Hopes deserved more because of the political risks to which
they had been exposed. His own political situation had been far
worse; ‘what I suffered can never be described and it completely
overpowered my nerves for the first and I hope the last time’.%6
    The fact that Barings were the foreign bankers most trusted by the
American government did not mean that they were treated as sacro-
sanct or given the benefit of every doubt. In 1806 the former Vice-
President, Aaron Burr, was accused of plotting to dismember the
Union and was widely believed to have British backing. Vincent
Nolte found himself looked on with suspicion by the commanding
general in New Orleans, ‘since he had ascertained that the house of
Baring, at London, had placed itself in readiness to furnish the funds
necessary to secure the success of Burr's conspiracy; and I was well
                    The United States: 1783-1828                       wi,
known to be the agent for that firm’.5? Such rumours were fantastical
and easily disproved - nothing would have suited Barings less than
the disintegration of the United States - but they illustrated the
alarm with which Americans viewed British intentions and also the
mounting hostility between the two nations.
   Barings were constantly preoccupied by the bad relations between
Britain and the United States. The problem was personal - with both
Alexander and Henry married to daughters of Senator Bingham,
they could hardly contemplate the threat of war without distress -
but it was also, and more immediately, a business one. ‘American
stocks have fallen here in consequence of the alarm generally
prevalent of War with this Country,’ wrote Alexander to a friend in
Philadelphia in October 1807.58 For a house that dealt so largely in
American stocks, that was bad news. In 1807 the risk receded. The
following year Alexander argued cogently that the Orders in Coun-
cil, which sought to curb American trade, should be rescinded. He
inveighed against the ‘injustice as well as impolicy of ruining one
trade to support another’, and urged the need to increase trade with
the United States by every means. What Britain most needed, he
claimed, was an American nation ‘politically independent, but
commercially as dependent on us as habits and interest can make
them’. France had largely succeeded in excluding British trade trom
Europe, ‘but with prudence and skill we might move our island,
commercially speaking, out of Europe’.*?
   Baring indignantly denied that he was actuated by anything
except the most disinterested and patriotic motives: ‘It can hardly be
supposed that merchants, naturally more interested in preserving
than in acquiring, should be occupied with collecting a few paltry
                                                                   ’©° His
profits from their trade, at the expense of their dearest interest.
protestations did not convince everyone. In the House of Commons
J. Marryat complained that he too had commercial interests and
                                                            bim to
family connections in America but ‘these should not induce
                                                     ’? Wnung of
forget his great and paramount duty to his country          was an
                                                   alleged that he
Francis Baring later in the same year The Times
                                              are fixed on that
American merchant ‘whose heart and affections           jibe was
                                                is’.62 The
 country where the fountainhead of his treasure
                                                        had no doubt
largely unjustified; in the last resort the Barings
                                               lay, but they would do
where both their loyalties and their interests
74                       The Sixth Great Power