


With so much goodwill working in their favour, immense financial
resources and unrivalled connections, Barings should have contin-
ued to dominate Anglo-American trade in the decades after the
Napoleonic wars. Certainly no one house can be said to have
displaced them, but their prominence was not so absolute as at first
seemed probable. This was due more to a lack of interest and energy
on the part of Barings than to any machinations of their rivals.
Things began well. In 1817 John Sergeant came to London on behalf
of the Bank of the United States to select as agent for the Bank the
house that would ‘be of the greatest solidity and integrity and pos-
sess, in the highest degree, the confidence of the public’.’”? To no
one’s surprise, the choice fell on Barings. The distnction may have
seemed of questionable value when mismanagementin the Bank led
to its being $1.76 million in debt to Barings and other European
houses by the middle of 1818 but the problems proved transitory.”!
By the time its greatest, if most erratic President, Nicholas Biddle,
took over in 1823, affairs seemed soundly based. The Montagu
Norman of his days, he believed that his task was to fuel the growth
                                                                    his
of the American economy. He scorned the cautious attitude of
predecessor and embarked on a bold, and at times alarmingly    expan-
                                                                   fact
sjonist course. Some dismissed him as a playboy but he was in
                                                       when he wrote:
supremely professional. He was not belying himself
               I prefer my last letter from Barings or Hope
               To the finest epistles of Pliny and Pope.’
                                                his mark strongly
   Ambitious, autocratic and impetuous, he left
                                                         itself.
upon American banking and, indeed, upon America
 76                     The Sixth Great Power
    His recklessness must have been one factor in Barings’ noticeable
 caution in American affairs. It was anyway a period of transition so
 far as loans were concerned. Capital was no longer so hard to come
 by across the Atlantic and the Bank of the United States tended more
 and more to take responsibility for Federal indebtedness. The
 amount of British capital invested in American funds, according to
 S. C. Holland, fell from some £5.7 million in 1805 to £1.3 million in
 1818.73 It was only slowly that the individual states began to emerge
as serious borrowers in their own right. When they did so Barings
regarded them with marked caution.
   New York, whether for banks or State loans, was held to be in a
class of its own. In 1823 Barings placed £200,000 Bank of New York
stock and found little trouble in doing so. The ‘old States north of the
Chesapeake’ were felt to be almost as sound. But more far-flung
regions were a different matter. ‘The credit of Virginia is not good,
we hardly know why,’ Barings wrote in 1825 to Le Roy Bayard of
New York, ‘and we find with difficulty buyers for some of it which
we hold.’ They saw no reason for believing that the Stock of Ohio, ‘a
State the name of which is hardly known in Europe’, would appeal
any more to the British investor.’* They were not wholly consistent
in their position. Their interest in the cotton trade made them more
sympathetic to Louisiana than they would otherwise have been, and
in 1829, to finance the Planters’ Bank, Barings made a public issue of
Louisiana securities, the first to be made payable in London ata fixed
rate of exchange.’ But their attitude was more often that which was
shown   to one of the most eminent of Philadelphians, General
Cadwalader, when in 1824 he tried to involve them in an operation
in bank shares: ‘In other times,’ Barings apologized, ‘it might have
suited us... to have entered into your views, but at the moment,
being engaged in large financial operations in France, we do not feel
disposed to divest ourselves of our own Capital, by placing it at a
distance from us. Indeed, our object always is to have our Capital
within reach that we may command it as necessary.’7¢
   In the event they relented far enough to buy 4000 US Bank shares
on joint account with the General at £25. Their initial caution
seemed justified when the economic crisis of 1825-6 sent prices
tumbling. By the end of 1825 the theoretical price of the shares was
£22. 10s., ‘but we doubt whether any buyer would now be found
                      The United States: 1783-1828                     es
even at a considerable reduction’.??7 Three months later £21 was
quoted, again with no takers.78 It was not until the middle of 1827
that Barings finally extricated themselves, and even then ata loss of
8 shillings a share.”°
  In ordinary trading transactions also, Barings did not expand as
vigorously as in 1815 had seemed likely. It was not that the
opportunities were not there. Between 1820 and 1830, 36 percent of
American exports went to and 43 per cent of their imports came
from Britain; 80 per cent of Lancashire cotton came from the
Southern States.8° Yet Barings did not maintain their market share.
In part this reflected increased competition, from the United States
 as well as Europe; in partit reflected the personalities of the partners.
Alexander Baring was bored by the bread-and-butter business of
American trade; he concerned himself mainly with the more
 glamorous European loans or was often absent from his house.
 Swinton Holland, who was charged mainly with the routine side of
the business,    knew a lot about American        trade but was     ultra-
conservative, cautious, restrictive in granting credit and singularly
graceless in refusing it. He made many enemies in the United States
and lost the house much business.
   An example was John Jacob Astor. Astor had regularly used
Barings to draw on and treated them with considerable confidence,
in 1814 sending them $200,000 of government stock to sell or hold
as security for bills drawn on them, as they should prefer.®! It was
often convenient to him to leave a large debit in his current account
                                                            no one
at the end of the year, and since his credit was undoubted,
had objected. Holland, however, who was by nature inflexible and
saw no reason to treat one American house differently from another,
                    to   protest,   in terms   ‘couched   in very   sharp
wrote    to Astor
                                                                    his
 language’.8? Astor was not surprisingly displeased, and though
 name continued to appear in Barings’ American         and   Colonial
                                                                   last
 Ledgers until 1829, the account dwindled markedly in the
 decade.                                                      .
                                                          Barin gs still
    By 1828, a particularly shrewd observer commented,
                                                            ’ in the
 enjoyed the ‘highest fame for respectability and wealth
                                                         high’.83 The
 United States but ‘for business it did not stand very
                                                        was   urgently
 potential for renewed growth was there, but someone
 needed to take the task in hand.
                                   .
                                pte
                                  @ ate