

everything they could to prevent that last resort being reached. They
were not optimistic. Francis Baring wrote to Rufus King in May 1809
to thank him for the assurance that the Americans did not want war:
‘You may entertain the same confidence on our side with regard to
the sober-sided part of the nation, and even those of the high ranks
in ostensible situation, but the farceurs and intrigants have always
too much to say, and in truth generally rule.’6
  War came 1n 1812. Barings took the line that, as British citizens,
they would do nothing of which their government would disap-
 prove; but that the war was a temporary aberration and they would
never cease to plan beyond its ending. Alexander Baring said frankly
that it was his object to help maintain the credit of the United States,
and it is an interesting comment on the attitude towards war in the
early nineteenth century that ministers felt this to be not merely
reasonable but actually desirable. Barings continued to pay interest
to holders of American bonds, even though the funds were not
available from the United States, and to perform other routine
transactions like the liquidation of outstanding converted 6 per cent
bonds, but they refused to sell new Federal issues.6+ Their main
preoccupation was to support any initiative that might lead to peace.
‘A senseless war,’ Alexander described it to Gallatin. ‘That we wish
fora restoration of peace with you need not be argued. Our situation
... makes it impossible that we should be otherwise than heartily
desirous of putting an end to a contest from which we suffer
considerably . . . and from which no good can result.’65
  In July 1813 Gallatin came to Europe as one of a commission
nominated to negotiate for peace. The commission went first to St
Petersburg, in the mistaken belief that the British would welcome, or
at least accept, Russian mediation. Alexander Baring found himself
acting as middleman between Gallatin and the Foreign Secretary,
Castlereagh. He had to tell his American friend that the British
would never accept a Russian role in ‘a sort of family quarrel, where
foreign interference can only do harm’.* Gallatin finally reached
London in March 1814. ‘I find London very dull in comparison to
Paris and St Petersburg,’ complained his son James. ‘Our position is
not a very pleasant one; we have many invitations, and I think all
mean to be civil and kind, but there is always a feeling of constraint.
... The only house where we seem to be really welcome is Mr Bar-
                     The United States: 1783-1828                   75
ing’s.’°7 A year later, when Gallatin finally left, James had evidently
had a change of heart. ‘All the Barings were so kind. The dinner was
delightful and we parted with them with deep regret. I will be glad to
get home; after all it is my home and I love it. But I want to come
back.’¢8 Alexander Baring, said James Gallatin, ‘had done more than
any other man in England, or perhaps, with one exception, even in
America, to hasten the peace, and had, with the knowledge and con-
sent of his own government, rendered very important financial
assistance even while the war was going on’.°?