

  Baring described his nephew when he visited the United States in
  1825. Francis had been there a short while before. ‘The last visitor of
  our name was perhaps rather more shewy, but I think this one will
  please better in your country where the steady and sedate is more
  praised than the volatile.’5?
     In 1817 Sir Thomas suggested that Thomas should join Baring
  Brothers. Alexander was still cautious. He would like to help ‘if it can
 be done in a manner consistent with the interests and safety of the
 establishment’. Tom too had better learn the job at Hopes. After he
 had been there for some years, the time might be ripe for considering
 his future in Barings. ‘When the time for decision arrives it will be
 made with a strict reference to merits. If I had a boy of my own to
 hand his case would be exactly the same and so far I can assure you
 that my anxiety for yours will be quite as great.’ The essential thing
 was that the partnership should work asa team: ‘Ill-assorted partner-
 ships can produce no good results, and not only all the essential
 qualities of character and temper are requisite, but every partner
 must be able to contribute to the general stock of execution and use-
 fulness.’6°
    Alexander seems to have been playing for time, hoping that if the
 matter was postponed for long enough his nephew would become
inextricably involved elsewhere. He was disappointed. In 1825 Sir
Thomas returned to the attack. Tom was now a partner in Hopes but
the future for that House looked gloomy, while John had no imme-
diate prospects. Sir Thomas proposed that John at least should now
join Baring Brothers. He was rebuffed. He wrote to his sons in dis-
may about ‘the unexpected determination of your Uncle to exclude
him [John] from the London House, of which I shall say no more
than that it was a great disappointment to my expectations’. Partly,
one suspects, to induce his brother to change his mind, he now pro-
posed advancing £40,000 with which his sons could start a ‘House of
Trade’ in London. ‘It might be in some respects objectionable to
your Uncle that another House of the same name should be formed
in England, yet I am well persuaded that his opinion of you and his
affection for me will induce him to take an interest in your welfare
and probably to assist you.’6! If he really entertained so sanguine a
hope, he was soon disillusioned; Alexander made it clear he would
neither help this new enterprise nor take his nephews into the Bank.
         ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’:   1815-1828            93
Sir Thomas told his sons ‘it was the wish at the Grange to fix Tom
permanently at Amsterdam and to find an opening for John at Ham-
burg or some other place upon the continent, and thus to exile you
both from your Country and family’.62 Tom soldiered on at Hopes,
John went to the United States where in 1826 he set up in business
with a Boston merchant called Joshua Bates. But for the blighting of
ta rosy prospects, they might well have stayed there all their
 ives.
    Pending Alexander's change of heart, Baring Brothers drifted on
with the somewhat shoddy personnel that was left to man it. In 1824
Alexander had given a partnership to Humphrey Mildmay, husband
of his eldest daughter Anne. Mildmay had been a Captain in the
Coldstream Guards. He was prudent, diligent, and considered fit to
be a Director of the Bank of England, but he had no experience of
mercantile matters and never overcame his extreme timidity in mak-
ing decisions involving large sums of money. He was quite unfit to
run the Bank. Most of the work was done by Swinton Holland. Hol-
land was a Liverpool merchant who had done business in many parts
of the world and established a reputation for diligence and rocklike
probity. In December 1814 he noted in his diary, a document rich in
sanctimonious prosing: ‘This day is a remarkable event in my life as
promising an increased degree of prosperity . . . Mr Baring of the
house of Baring Brothers and Co. of London, perhaps at this day the
first mercantile house in the world, made me a proposition to
become a general partner in their concern: giving me one sixth share
of the whole business after the next 30 June. . .Omnipotent Ruler of
the Universe, may I be grateful to thee, for this mark of thy goodness
in elevating my situation in Life.’
                                                      served
   Holland brought £30,000 with him, and on the whole
Barings well. If Alexander had been there to temper his pettifogging
                                                                       ted
inflexibility and inject a little imagination and vision, his undoub
                                                         applica tion   and
skills might have been properly used. ‘Industry,
                                                                I have any
commonplace talents I can promise. . . but I do not feel
                                                                  work. He
extraordinary talents,’ Holland wrote on taking up his new
                                                                  e he was
was right. He was no leader and the house suffered becaus
                                                                and a new
forced to act as one. In June 1823 Henry Baring retired
                                                     g  a  half  share and
partnership was formed, with Alexander holdin
                                                                 uction of
Holland and Francis Baring a quarter each. The introd
 94                      The Sixth Great Power