



                                                       a very convincing attribution.
* This aphorism is frequently quoted but never with
                                           is in Lady Doroth y Nevill’s My Own Times
The earliest printed citation I have found                           been.
                                              said, it should have
(London, 1912, p. 24). But even if it was not
86                       The Sixth Great Power
The problem lay with the men in charge of the house, particularly
with the main partner. Alexander Baring had never taken any very
 keen interest in the bread-and-butter business of commissions and
acceptances, and the negotiations for the French loan - during which
he had hobnobbed daily with men like Wellington and Richelieu
and savoured the delights of being at the centre of the stage - had not
disposed him to buckle down to it in future. From 1818 onwards he
largely withdrew from the day-to-day management of the bank,
devoting his time to travels on the continent, political activities and
the demanding grind of establishing himself as a country gentleman
on the largest scale.
   In 1816 or 1817 Baring bought for £136,620 from his fellow-
banker Henry Drummond an estate adjoining his brother's property
at Stratton. The house, the Grange, had been entirely remodelled by
William Wilkins, architect of the National Gallery, and completed
only seven years before. A passable sighting shot for the Parthenon,
its relevance to the Hampshire countryside was not immediately
apparent: the sun never filtered through its vast Doric portico; the
damp and cold, on the other hand, were omnipresent. It had cost
Drummond some £30,000 to build and Baring spent as much again
trying to make it habitable. The result was never comfortable, still
less cosy, but it was indubitably imposing. ‘The place is like, not one,
but a conglomeration of Greek temples,’ wrote Jane Carlyle some
years later, ‘set down in a magnificent wooded park some five miles
in length. The inside is magnificent to death - the ceilings all painted
in fresco - some dozen public rooms on the ground floor all hung
with magnificent paintings and fitted up like rooms in an Arabian
night’s entertainment - but the finest part of it is the entrance hall
and staircases, which presents a view of columns, frescoes and carved
wood and Turkey carpet that one might guess a quarter of a mile
long!’ Alexander Baring himself stated it more modestly. ‘Our air is
healthy,’ he told Rufus King in 1825, ‘and you may rely on a warm
and comfortable room.’33
  The ‘magnificent paintings’ admired by Mrs Carlyle followed the
fashion of the time in being predominantly Dutch. Baring seems to
have had a sound if not particularly sensitive taste; his collection
included good examples of work by Rembrandt, Hals and Cuyp. In
1826 he bought Lord Radstock’s pictures, including an
                                                      undoubted
          Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828               87
Titan of Herod’s daughter for 1800 guineas and a somewhat less
certainly attributed Giorgione - ‘the latter a charming picture’ - for
700.34 He was well known as being ready to pay high prices for what
he wanted. Sheridan, short of money as usual, planned to sell his pic-
tures, which contained two Gainsboroughs and two by the then
much-sought-after Morland. ‘The Good you can do me,’ he told
Samuel Whitbread, ‘is to speak to some fair men like Baring or
Angerstein etc. etc. who will deal liberally that I may not be forced to
take half their value for them.’35
   It was not until the next generation that the Grange became a cen-
tre for the haut ton of the intelligentsia, but Alexander Baring enter-
tained lavishly. The results were not always applauded. Emily Eden
confessed that she found ‘the Barings rather failures - I mean as to
agreeableness. It will be some time before Mr Baring fails in the
moneyed sense of the word: but I see you, in fact, think of the
Grange just as I do - charming place and family, but a dull visit.’
But others were less censorious or perhaps less sophisticated: the
Gallatins ‘had a delightful Christmas with the Barings, who are hos-
pitality itself. There are Barings of all shapes and colours, all sizes -
tall ones, short ones, lean ones, fat ones, but all are so nice and cheer-
ful; they seem indeed a united family. We played all sorts of silly
games and became children again.’>”
   Nothing was spared to make the estate the non-pareil of stately
residences. Colonel Peter Hawker, who devoted his life almost
exclusively to the destruction of miscellaneous fauna, grumbled in
1826: ‘The whole county was, and 1s now for ever likely to be, ruined
by the presence of Mr Alexander Baring, of the Grange Park, who
feeds and monopolizes, merely to ornament his water and tickle his
fancy, half the fowl in Hampshire. I drove there expressly to see his
collection, and I am confident I saw not less than 8000 fowl on the
water before his house.’3* But it was in the acquisition of land that
Baring’s presence was most felt. He was resolved to match if not sur-
pass the territorial conquests of his brother. In 1818 he bought
                                                                 to swell
Abbotstone and Itchen Stoke from Lord Bolton for £64,200
                                                                follies  in
the Grange estate. This would be, he wrote, ‘the last of my
                                                              propertyis
the way of land purchases. . . . I pay very fully, but the
                                                            purchaser.    39
very essential to me, and I am therefore a very willing
                                                            acquired    the
Far from being the last, 1t was a mere apéritif. In 1824 he
 88                       The Sixth Great Power