

 had been £20,000 the feeling of the House would have been the
 same.
    On his chosen subjects he could be an effective debater, specializ-
 ing in a line of bloodcurdling gloom. “You have no conception with
 what attention Baring was heard in a full house last night,’ Fremantle
 told Buckingham, ‘when for an hour or so he described the commer-
 cial state of England in the most lamentable terms.’4? In partnership
 with Brougham he was instrumental in organizing the unexpected
 defeat of the Government over the income tax. He was particularly
 disturbed by the ‘inquisitorial’ nature of the tax: ‘He would much
 rather be summoned before the bench of bishops to be questioned
 about his beliefinthe doctrinal points of religion than appear before
the commissioners under the property tax.’5° His belief in the right
of a businessman to do what he wanted with his own money made
him an impenitent opponent of any legislative interference with the
slave trade. In a debate in 1828 he argued that the misfortunes of the
slaves were much exaggerated by ill-informed meddlers; they were
in reality well fed and housed and generally treated with justice and
kindness, living in conditions ‘in many respects superior to that of
most of the peasantry of Europe’. He appealed for moderation, caus-
ing the abolitionist Fowell Buxton to protest that his speech was ‘the
most immoderate, intemperate, violent and exasperating that ever I
heard in my life’.*! Though a Whig, Baring could never have been
called liberal. “He pretends to be a great Whig, but he is just as bad as
any of the Tories,’ wrote Cobbett indignantly.52
  Alexander Baring’s eldest son, William Bingham, did not follow
his father into the House of Commons. Shy and maladroit, he did
not do justice to his in fact considerable intellectual powers and
interests, ‘Giving an impression of mental weakness and even moral
inferiority,’ wrote Lord Houghton.’3 There was never any question
of his going into the bank; not for want of aptitude, but because it
was considered no place for an elder son. The same was true in most
banking houses. ‘It will not be necessary that my Grandson, who is
likely to be Heir to the Estate, should be brought up to the Banking
Concern,’ wrote Sir Richard Glyn to his son. ‘His Fortune will I trust
be ample and sufficient to give him consequence in life and in
                                                                   the
Country.’ Possible professions for such a favourite of fortune were
deemed to be ‘the Guards or the Law and Parliament’.5+ No
                                                              Baring
          ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828            91
was ashamed of his association with the counting house, but equally
it was not something of which he talked too much in polite society.
When William married Lady Harriet Montagu, daughter of the Earl
of Sandwich, he was left in no doubt that he was being done a singu-
lar honour. His father made a settlement of £25,000 and a jointure
for the bride of £3000 a year, while his mother - an American as well
as a banker’s wife - was treated with much disdain: ‘I am told that at
her son’s marriage she was not invited to the déjeuner,’ wrote one
generally reliable observer. ‘Certainly Lady Harriet, who was the
most perfect example of insolent ill-breeding I ever saw, treated the
poor old lady in her own home with great coolness if not imperti-
nence.’55 Lady Holland described Mrs Baring dining with the Sand-
wiches and looking ‘quite mortified and wretched’ while Lady
Harriet brushed aside her future husband’s views on travel: ‘He is
but a boy just out of College. What can he know or what can he like?”
Lady Harriet was just seventeen.*®
  It was Alexander’s second son, Francis, who was destined in his
father’s eyes to take over Baring Brothers. He seemed eminently well
equipped for the role. ‘Bountiful nature,’ wrote Nolte, ‘had endowed
this man. . . with so lavish a hand, that it might almost be termed
spendthrift profusion.’ He was intelligent, quick, perceptive, with a
phenomenal memory and ‘iron strength of will’.57 It was not until he
took off on his own and involved the House in some disastrous spec-
ulations in Spanish America that his volatility and lack of judgement
became evident. He was an attractive figure, and always his father’s
favourite, but he never played an important role in the Bank again.
   Only after Francis’s career foundered was Alexander forced to
consider the possibility of taking his brother's sons into the business.
                                                              son in
Like Alexander, Sir Thomas felt no wish to involve his eldest
                                                   and John,  were a
commerce, but his second and third sons, Thomas
different matter. Whether from doubts about their capacity ora wish
                                                                   reluc-
to keep the plums for his own children, Alexander was at first
                                                   dispatc hed  to  Hope
tant to fall in with his brother's plans. John was
                                                                  assidu-
and Co., where Labouchere described him as being ‘steady,
                                           would continu e to encoura  ge
ous and of an obliging disposition’. He
                                                    advice will render it
him, ‘and the docility with which he follows our
                                                        sensible and
an easy and grateful task’.** He sounds a dull dog. ‘As
                                                          Alexander
as sedate a young man as I have ever known at his age,’
 92                      The Sixth Great Power