




           ‘Accidental Chances’ and
                        ‘Lucky Hits’
                            1815-1828


 In the eighteenth century France was the richest country in Europe.
The Revolution and twenty-five years or so of almost unbroken war
had left its wealth essentially unscathed. Francis Baring had told
Voate in 1801 that France was ‘the pivot on which the Commerce of
Europe depends’,! and his son would have seen no reason to revise
that opinion in 1815. But there has always been a striking distinction
between the prosperity of the French people and their government.
The French investor was dubious about lending money to his lead-
ers, never more so than when he surveyed the uncertain future of the
restored Bourbons in a country garrisoned by allied troops. When
the Duc de Richelieu, Louis XVIII’s Prime Minister, found it neces-
sary to raise money to pay the indemnities owing to the victorious
allies, he realized that he would have to look abroad. It was not
impossible for a French government to obtain money from its own
people. The Parisian haute banque - the private banks of important
standing who operated in rivalry with each other and yet with a com-
mon purpose ~ had raised a substantial sum early in 1816.2 But
something vastly greater was now in question. Few believed that
Richelieu would be notably more successful in London or Amster-
dam than he would have been in Paris. The country’s most eminent
financier, Jacques Laffitte, predicted boldly, ‘La France ne trouverait
pas un petit écu a emprunter sur aucune place de |‘Europe.’
  It seems to have been Gabriel-Julien Ouvrard who first ap-
proached Barings. Ouvrard had been Napoleon’s financial adviser
                                                                .
‘A clever good-for-nothing man,’ the future Lord Northbrook
                                   78
           Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828              79
described him in 1826, who nevertheless would make ‘a very decent
figure in history.’* In this he underestimated that ingenious Artful
Dodger, who enjoyed the resourcefulness and the indestructibility
of a Talleyrand ora Fouché. Ouvrard’s original idea had been to float
a vast issue, large enough to pay off the allies for once and for all,
and persuade the allied powers themselves to take over the issue in
settlement of their debts. This failed to inspire enthusiasm in Lon-
don, Berlin or St Petersburg.’ When the Duke of Wellington, then
British Ambassador to France, was staying with him in Paris towards
the end of 1816, Ouvrard raised the possibility of persuading Hopes
and Barings to find the money. Wellington cautiously approved and
Richelieu agreed that it was worth a try. Hastening to London,
Ouvrard persuaded Alexander Baring and Labouchére to say that
they might be prepared to undertake the operation if the British gov-
ernment approved it. With the French Ambassador he then tackled
Castlereagh, who said that he would not merely approve but would
strongly support the proposal - ‘en se chargeant de cette transaction,
qu’ils rendraient un service éminente a |’Europe entiere’.” The report of
the conversation comes from the French Ambassador; it suggests a
change of heart on the part of Castlereagh, who the previous year
had been disposed to veto any attempt by France to borrow her way
out of her difficulties with British money.®
    Ouvrard almost over-reached himself. He told Baring that
 Richelieu and the Minister of Finance, Corvetto, had specifically
 instructed him to negotiate with the Anglo-Dutch consortium for a
 loan,? and told the French minister that Baring and Labouchére were
 committed to the deal. Neither statement was wholly true, as quickly
 transpired when Baring called on Richelieu, but Ouvrard cheerfully
 admitted that he had strained the truth in the interests of getting
 negotiations started. Fortunately for him all the principal parties
were sufficiently keen on doing business to treat his misrepresenta-
 tions as established fact. Baring, as it turned out, was keener than
 Labouchére. At the Tuileries the two were cornered by men who
 wished to see the negotiations fail and regaled with accounts of
 France’s economic weakness. Labouchére stayed and listened; Bar-
 ing shrugged his shoulders and moved on. Next day, when negotia-
 tions resumed, Labouchére began to go back on what had previously
 been agreed but ‘Ja franche loyauté de Baring s'y opposa, et il combattatt
80                       The Sixth Great Power