

lui-méme les arguments de son associé’ 1° Talleyrand, who had his own
 private fish to fry, was one of those who would have liked to see the
 talks break down. Louis XVIII told Baring that France was happy to
 have him in Paris. ‘Placer la bonheur de France chez un banquter anglats
n'est pas bien noble de la part du souverain du pays,’ wrote Talleyrand
bitterly. ‘Mats on fait comme cela a present.’'!
    In December 1816 things had advanced far enough for Welling-
ton in Paris to write formally to Castlereagh. The sum initially in
question, he said, was 300 million francs (about £12 million). Of this,
£2 million would probably have to be found in London. Baring had
originally hoped to get a guarantee from the allied governments, but
had quickly been convinced that this was out of the question. There
was no law to prevent him going ahead nevertheless, but he had
made it clear he would not proceed without at least the tacit blessing
of the British government. Wellington felt strongly that this should
be forthcoming: ‘It is my opinion that unless some arrangement of
the description proposed is adopted, France will be aground this
year, and our settlement of last year will be entirely destroyed.’!2
Back in London, Baring was confronted by Liverpool, the Prime
Minister, as well as Castlereagh and the Chancellor, Vansittart. ‘He
distinctly intimated that his share and Mr Hope’sin the business was
to be that of an agency to realise the scrip . . . upon a moderate com-
mission; but they were not to be contractors, or to take the profit or
loss of the French stock upon themselves.’!3 He was told that the
British government had no objection to his proposals.
  In fact Barings were very definitely acting as contractors, and the
size of their profit would depend on the price they paid for the stock
and the price they got for it. This was shown in February when they
tried to force the price of the loan down from the proposed 55 to
522. Richelieu consulted Wellington and said he would agree if
advised by the Ambassador that it was necessary. This Wellington
refused to do, ‘first, because it is not true; secondly, it would have
brought on me and the British government all the odium of this bad
financial bargain’.!* He urged Richelieu to stick out for 55, and it was
at this price that the deal was done.
   In all Barings raised 315 million francs for the French government
in 1817, in three tranches of 100 million, 100 million and 115
                                                               mil-
lion. The issues were an unqualified success; so much so that the
John Baring (1697-1748) by                      Elizabeth Baring (1702-1766) by
William Hoare.                                  Thomas Gainsborough.

              Sir Francis Baring (1740-1810) by Benjamin West.
Sir Francis Baring, John Baring (1730-1816) and Charle
                                                      s Wall, the three
partners at the end of the eighteenth centur
                                             y, y Thomas Lawrence.
The ledger is open at the account of Hope
                                             and Co. of Amsterdam.
  lexander Baring (1774-1848), first Lord Ashburton of the second
creation, by Thomas Lawrence.
           Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828             81
 third tranche was brought out at the higher price of 6112 and the
 French bankers took half the amount instead of the quarter which
 they had put up for the first two tranches. If there is one thing
 for which Barings deserved the gratitude of the French government
 and people, it is that they re-established public credit and restored
 the morale of the French bankers. Even the stock which was offered
 for sale in London and Amsterdam largely ended up in Paris; it
 was French money that paid off the indemnities, but without the cat-
 alyst provided by Hopes and Barings it would not have been forth-
 coming.!5
    Despite his success, Alexander Baring at the end of 1817 was ina
 cautious mood. ‘Too much stock has been emitted and credit
 thereby overstretched, he complained to Wellington. The last 115
 million had been too much. ‘Our sales move very heavily, or rather
 for a long time we have sold nothing, and | should calculate that
 there must be in our hands, or in those of other speculators, at least
  80 million unliquidated.’ British demand seemed to have been sati-
  ated. What the French government now called for was one last mas-
  sive operation to pay off all the foreign claims, but he had no wish to
  handle the business himself: ‘I should much wish to withdraw if I
  could do so decently ... but at the same time, after the liberal
  manner in which I have been treated, and the very profitable opera-
  tion I have made, I cannot with propriety withdraw as long as I can
  really be of service.’!6 His disenchantment may have been fanned
  by the hostility that his operations aroused in some quarters in
  England: the Commercial Chronicle attacked ‘the base and wretched
_ avidity of the Monied Interest, which at the prospect of gain, 1s ready
  to forget all the claims of patriotism’, while The Times complained
  thata moment when industry and agriculture were so depressed was
  not appropriate for transferring funds to Britain’s most dangerous
  rival.!7
    Wellington did not take Baring’s protestations too seriously. “The
                                                                    the
 fact is,’ he told Liverpool a few weeks later, ‘that Baring having
                                                      in fashion in
 French finances in his hands, and French loans being
                                                                   market
 England, has to a certain degree the command of the money
                                                              task to suc-
 of the world. He feels his power, and it is not a very easy
                                                           least going to
 ceed in counteracting him.’!® The Rothschilds were at
                                                      as well as London,
 try. With powerful branches in Vienna and Paris
 82                           The Sixth Great Power
 they considered it monstrous that they had not been involved in the
 business from the outset. ‘You are writing that I should not worry,
 because these people [Hopes and Barings] cannot take all the world,’
James from Paris had written to his cousin Salomon in London at
the beginning of March 1817. ‘However, you don’t know how clever
they are.’19* A few days later James met Labouchére: ‘A nice and
intelligent man. I never saw like him. And I assure you they are
expert merchants, clever ones, and they do merit the business they
get. Unfortunately, they are getting so big that others therefore are
dwarfed.’ James offered, somewhat optimistically, to take over the
whole Barings-Hopes interest, on the grounds that if Barings tried to
handle it alone, ‘the business world would become frightened and
the quotations would fall’. Labouchére replied that some £600,000
was the maximum needed; of this Rothschilds could have £50,000.
So far as the 1817 loans were concerned, that was that.?°
   Relations became more embittered when negotiations began for
the 1818 loan. In October 1817 rumours began to circulate about a
new loan to pay off all the remaining reparations so that the foreign
occupation forces could be withdrawn. Baring was alleged to have
told Lord Liverpool that the money would be raised exclusively by
French bankers. If he made any such statement it was inaccurate.
Salomon Rothschild told Nathan from Paris that Barings and Hopes
in fact had a 50 per cent interest. ‘He is quite a crook, this Baring... .
We must certainly watch our step as far as he is concerned. The Bar-
ing lot is and was well versed in the way of using influence, as we are.
There is not a single man of importance among the authorities here
who would not work with Baring hand-in-glove . . . Baring and the
French Minister of Finance are sharing the profit. The Minister is
reported to be one of the most corrupt of all.’2! Barings’ leading ally
in Paris was Jacques Laffitte of the bank Perregaux-Laffitte. In a
postscript to Salomon’s letter, James Rothschild reported that he
had just called on Laffitte. ‘He gave me his word of honour that we
are not going to be left out in the next loan. . .. However, I don’t
believe a single word of what the Frenchman says. The following
* Quotations from Rothschild correspondence at this period
                                                              are usually translations
from the Jiidendeutsch made by immigrants whose comma
                                                             nd of English was less
cae perfect. Hence the fact that, though the sense is clear,
                                                             the phraseology is often
clumsy.
          Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828             83
month Alexander Baring called on Rothschilds and tentatively sug-
gested a deal by which Rothschilds would take a share equal in size
to that of Hopes and Barings.?? This offer was still supposedly the
basis for negotiations at the end of the year, but Baring was now
expressing doubts about Labouchére’s attitude. ‘Baring again and
again uses the expression “If my partner agrees .. .” However,
Labouchére, who thinks himself greater than the Messiah himself,
wants to rule alone.’?3
   It may have been a case of Dickens’s celebrated couple, Spenlow
and Jorkins, with Labouchére playing the role of the invisible but
allegedly intractable partner, but if conflict really existed, it was
Jorkins/Labouchére who won. As late as 9 February the Duke of
Wellington was giving ‘his word of honour that Baring had not yet
got any further in this matter’,?+ yet within a few days came a scream
of rage from Paris. ‘In Frankfurt one got used to confront anti-
semitism, so one is not astonished,’ wrote James Rothschild, ‘but
here the case is the contrary, and if something of the kind happens
here one is more amazed.’ Baring had assured Laffitte that he had no
objection to working with Rothschilds; now he had changed his
position and said that his associates would not allow him to do busi-
ness with any Jew. ‘It all originates in Labouchére’s pride and in
Sillem’s envy and greed; as these two are Hopes, they think that their
honour would suffer if they would have to get in line with a Frank-
furt Jew.’ Rothschild   poured out his woes to David Parish, the
Anglo-German banker from Hamburg, who told him that it was not
Hopes alone who were recalcitrant. Baring had told him: “Those gen-
tlemen are working like Jews. How could we co-operate if their prin-
ciples are different? They are working on 20 transactions at the same
time. . . with the only aim to do business. It is like stock-jobbers.2
   The Rothschilds meditated organizing a party in opposition to the
                                                                groups
Barings-Hope coalition, but thought better of it. ‘Opposition
                                                                  make
are an abomination,’ wrote Salomon. They did not want to
                                                        nment  gives us
themselves too unpopular in London. ‘This Gover
                                                 this Government
our bread and butter, further, our accounts with
                                                                     said:
are still open.’ There could be unpleasant repercussions if it was
                                                  fell through, the
 ‘The Rothschilds organized a diversion, the loan
                                                        make too
troops can’t be withdrawn.’ Besides, he did not want to
                                            Membe r of Parlia ment
pronounced an enemy of Baring, who was a
