

 Brown and Chilton Candover estates from Sir Thomas Freeman
 Heathcote for £85,000; in 1835 the Itchen Abbas estate was added.
 And these were just the more conspicuous transactions. ‘The Barings
 are now the great men in Hampshire,’ wrote Cobbett in 1822. “The
 small gentry are all gone, nearly to a man, and the small farmers along
 with them. The Barings alone have, I should think, swallowed up
 thirty or forty of these small gentry without perceiving it. They,
 indeed, swallow up the biggest race of all, but innumerable small fry
 slip down unperceived, like caplins down the throats of the sharks,
 while these latter fee/ only the codfish.’4° Mallet noted in 1825: ‘Alex-
 ander Baring has invested nearly a million sterling in land; probably
 the largest purchase ever made by any one individual.’*! Mallet exag-
 gerated, but Baring paid high prices for the land he bought and at his
 death his estates were estimated to be worth about £800,000. Even as
 late as 1843 he was acquiring a property of 160 acres belonging to a
Mr Brittingham on the grounds that ‘it is the only speck of alien
 property in five adjoining parishes’.42
    Cobbett accused him of being a notably inefficient landlord, far
worse than his brother Thomas. His trees were covered with moss
and dying at the top. ‘Everything that has been done here is to the
injury of the estate, and discovers a most shocking want of taste in
the proprietor.’#3 Certainly he did not devote as much attention to
his estates as did Sir Thomas Baring. When in England he was more
often to be found in London. In 1821 he rebuilt the Pulteneys’ old
Bath House at 82 Piccadilly in the most sumptuous style: ‘the
Palazzo di Piccadilly’, Swinton Holland called it, and Cobbett more
unkindly ‘Scrip Castle’. Even before that his parties were among the
best in London. ‘Think of the pineapples and strawberries and ices
and temporary rooms and magnificent hangings and beautiful flow-
ers at Mrs Baring’s,’ wrote Emily Eden enviously. ‘I wish I was a rich
old banker, but then I would not have, or own, so many fellow crea-
tures as the Barings do.’4+ He loved to do everything in the grandest
possible style, with generosity as well as flamboyance. He could
sometimes be impulsive, but there was usually calculation
                                                          some-
where behind it. He was apt to say that there were two things he par-
ticularly disliked, ‘an abolitionist and a saint’, yet he did
                                                                not allow
these prejudices to deter him when young Henry Thornton, who
was both, appealed for a loan so that he could start a business.
          ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828           89
Instead ‘he very carelessly offered him £200,000 to begin with’.45 It
was a splendid gesture - but he knew that Thornton had plenty of
money behind him and a shrewd business head as well.
   Of the 31 millionaire merchant bankers who died between 1809
and 1939, 24 were Jewish and only 4 were Anglicans.*¢ As a gentile
and a member of the Church of England, Baring was therefore in a
minority, a fact which could generally be turned to his advantage but
sometimes led to his being excluded from business in which he
could profitably have taken a share. As a gentile, too, a range of dis-
tractions was open to him from which his Jewish rivals were exclu-
ded. In the eyes of the Rothschilds the fact that several Barings were
members of the House of Commons was an unfair advantage which
gave them the chance to pull strings, secure confidential information
and pervert policy to their own ends. To some extent - though less
than the Rothschilds supposed - it was all those things, but it was
also an unconscionable distraction. If Alexander Baring had passed
in the counting house the time he spent in the House of Commons,
or gossiping about politics in the clubs, then Baring Brothers would
have benefited greatly by his increased attention. Whether they
would have gained more than they lost is an open question; given
Baring’s personality, probably not, but the balance was by no means
so heavily tipped in his favour as the Rothschilds imagined.
   For most of his political career Baring remained a Whig, suffi-
ciently prominent to be numbered among the grandees of the party
who met at Brooks’s in February 1821 to discuss the possibility of
making some financial provision for the beleaguered Queen.*?
Though not an orator, his obvious honesty, independence of mind
and determination to seek the truth won the respect of the House. In
1826 a Mr Alexander Robertson claimed to find something sinister
in the fact that the grant by the President of the Board of Trade of a
licence to incorporate a silk company in which Baring had invested
                                                                   the
£200 was shortly followed by Baring proposing an increase in
President's salary. Robert Peel replied that if Robertson was suggest-
                                                                might
ing that Baring ‘on account of the miserable profits which he
                                                              propose
realize from a venture of £200 was induced deliberately to
                                                                    look
an increase of the salary of his right hon. friend, he would only
                                                                   sat
for the answer   to so unfounded an imputation, in the smile which
                                                             if the sum
upon every face from the moment it was uttered’.48 Even
 90                      The Sixth Great Power