 84                      The Sixth Great Power
and as such could make trouble when the accounts came to be
debated.?6                                                   val
   No papers survive to give the Baring point of view on this imbro-
glio. Where the letters are to be found in both archives it is usually
the case that Rothschild complaints about the duplicity and arro-
gance of the Barings are matched by equally vehement Baring
denunciations of the skulduggery and malevolence of the Roths-
childs. Both points of view were sincerely held and no doubt had
some justice in them. Whatever the rights and wrongs in 1818, how-
ever, the Rothschilds were bitterly aggrieved and the Barings had
made dangerous enemies. The Rothschilds did not wreak revenge
on this occasion, but they almost had the last laugh.
   On 30 May 1818 Barings and Hopes contracted for a loan of 265
million francs. They offered 20 million to Laffitte and only 10 mil-
lion to Rothschild, to share with David Parish. Laffitte wrote later,
‘M. de Rothschild, qui n’était pas encore un si grand personnage, trouva le
procédé abominable.’?’ But he had to accept or get nothing. He was
soon to rejoice at his ill-treatment. In view of the success of the pre-
vious loans, and no doubtalso in consideration of being given exclu-
sive control of this one, Barings, who had originally agreed to take it
at 66, with payments in twelve instalments,?8 under pressure raised
the price to an optimistic 76. They thus set themselves a formidable
task of salesmanship. Simultaneously Lord Liverpool removed any
 possibility that they might escape from the consequences of their
rashness by insisting that the contractors would have to take full
responsibility for the payments, if the allied troops were withdrawn
before the full amount had been received: ‘We could not look with
such an object to mere French contractors; . . . the intervention of
Baring, Hope etc. is absolutely necessary to give credit to the transac-
tion.’?? This was no doubt very flattering to Baring, Hope etc., but it
was a compliment they could well have done without.
   All would have gone well if the public response to the loan had
been the same as in 1817. Instead purchases were sluggish and by 8
September the stock was at a discount. The English investors pan-
icked and threw their holdings on to the market. Soon the quoted
price was 71 with few takers. Baring appealed to Wellington. To con-
tinue to make the scheduled payments to the allies would be ruin-
ous: ‘As far as we are concerned we are amply prepared and could. . .
           ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828                       85
make all our payments withouta single further sale, but in collecting
our own funds we should produce the same distress as if we were to
sell stock.’ The Foreign Secretaries of the allied powers were at that
moment in Congress at Aix and fortunately for Baring the principals
among them - Metternich, Nesselrode and Hardenberg - had all
participated personally in the loan and would have lost heavily if the
terms had not been amended. It was agreed that the second half of
the loan should be cancelled and payment of the rest deferred to
 1819.
    The Duke of Wellington, who had been instrumental in bringing
about this - for Hopes and Barings anyway - happy result, was
widely accused of having taken a bribe. The charge caused him little
unease. He told Lord Colchester ten years later that he and
Castlereagh had saved Barings from absolute ruin, but, he main-
tained, ‘neither Castlereagh or I ever thought that we had done more
upon that occasion than our Duty towards our own Country and the
World at large’.3! Certainly the consequences would have been dire
for France and Europe if Barings had been forced to default at this
crucial moment.
   All was well that ended well. The allies got their money, France
was relieved of the burden of the occupation, and Barings had no
cause to feel themselves inadequately rewarded. ‘Mr Baring
returned from Paris a few days before me and we shortly afterwards
settled the affairs relating to the French loan,’ wrote one of the part-
ners in Barings, ‘which produced to the House the enormous and
unheard of profit of about £720,000 . . . forming as I conceive the
most profitable undertaking in which any mercantile House ever
engaged.’32 Nor was their reward only financial. Their reputation
                                                                      six
stood higher than that ef any other banking house. “There are
great powers in Europe, said the Duc de Richelieu:            ‘England,
                                                                     They could be
France, Prussia, Austria, Russia and Baring Brothers.”*
                                                                before a
forgiven for feeling pride; but pride went, if not in this case
fall, then at least before a slow decline.