

 Mildmay did something to relieve the pressure on Holland, but by
 1826, with Alexander out of touch and Francis in disgrace, it was
 clear reinforcements were urgently needed.


It was not only the personnel of Barings which was weak; the house
was starved of capital as well. Holland, like Alexander Baring,
fancied himself as a landowner, acquiring an estate from Lord
Somers for £80,000% and another eighteen months later for £66,000.
Both Alexander and he could afford the purchases, but they still
needed to withdraw large sums of money from the business, which
otherwise would have been available for profitable investment. The
capital of the house, which amounted to £622,000 in 1821, fell to lit-
tle more than a third of that in 1823, and though it recovered, it was
never at this period at the proper level to support the international
loans on which Alexander Baring wished to concentrate. Roths-
childs, with their greater resources and branches all over Europe,
were better placed to secure new business abroad, while the British
government largely stopped borrowing once the war was over.
   It was a sign of the times that it was James de Rothschild who in
 1824 called together his London cousins, Barings and Laffitte, when
the French Prime Minister, Villéle, put forward a scheme for con-
verting the French debt. Public response was unpredictable and the
preliminary negotiations were conducted in great secrecy. Old
animosities were forgotten, or at least temporarily buried. James de
Rothschild urged Alexander Baring to come to stay in his house on
the outskirts of Paris for discussions with the minister,> while Bar-
ing assured Villéle: ‘Jai la conviction que je pourrai toujours agir avec
M. de Rothschild de Londres dans une parfaite intelligence.’ Rothschild
and Laffitte had perhaps something less than perfect confidence in
Barings’ intentions, in that they put a clause in the contract stipulat-
ing that they would manage the affair themselves if Barings dropped
out. In the event the project foundered when it was not ratified by
the Senate, but it was an alarming affair while it lasted.
                                                           At one
moment Barings found themselves in advance to Rothschilds by
some £625,000. ‘I must candidly confess that I have not nerve for
                                                                  his
operations,’ Holland told Baring. ‘They are generally well planned,
great cleverness and adroitness in execution — but he isin money
                                                                 and
          ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’:   1815-1828           95
funds what Bonaparte was in war, and if any sudden shake comes, he
will fall to the ground like the other. I really wish we were out of his
clutches.’7
   Collaboration, even abortive, was the exception rather than the
rule. In 1818 Barings, in collaboration with Hopes and Bethmanns,
raised some £3 million for the Austrian government. Rothschilds
were offered financial participation but no share in the management
of the loan. ‘These people behave with incredible pride, complained
James de Rothschild. ‘I was yesterday speaking to Bethmann at the
Minister of Police’s when Labouchére came and took him from my
side without even a “good evening”. Baring is giving a big ball tomor-
row and Laffitte asked me whether we could talk over the French
loan on this occasion. Well, Baring didn’t even invite me.’¢8 From
Berlin, Carl was more philosophic. ‘Pro primo, we are Jews; pro
secundo, we are not born millionaires; pro tertio, we are fighting Bar-
ing. Why should he be so great a friend?”6?
  Russia was another battleground. Traditionally Hopes and
Barings had enjoyed a monopoly of Russian bonds, with the Dutch
house taking the larger share. The loans of 1817 and 1818 were
organized on this basis, with less than a quarter of the bonds sold in
London. Yet in 1822 a loan for £6.5 million was brought out by
Rothschilds - only, believed Sillem of Hopes, because they had sub-
orned the Russian Ambassador in London, Prince Lieven.7° To
Barings’ gratification, the issue was a failure with much stock left
unsold.
   Foreign loans were risky work, and though the rewards could be
great, they were at the best erratic. Swinton Holland stated his view
of the problem when reviewing the excellent results for 1820/21:
                                                              rather
    These profits do not arise from any merit of mine, but
                                                             as well
    from accidental chances, lucky hits in Stocks foreign
                                                  of  all count ries
    as domestic. The Stocks for Public securities
                                                            who do
    _. are a dangerous commodity to deal in, by those
                                                           deceived
    not understand them, and the wisest . . . are often
                                                      they  depend
    with regard to them: probably in ordinary times
                                                    in the market,
    more on the scarcity or abundance of money
                                                 ng  around Lon-
    than on-any other circumstance. . . . Looki
                                                          erous are
    don in the present day we find that the most prosp
 96                       The Sixth Great Power