

 on the instructions of their principals in London and that Staples
 and others of Barings’ partners in Mexico had been grievously
 injured as a result of these machinations. Lord Denman summed up
 in favour of Barings and the jury acquitted them.?#
    Not everyone was convinced, however. ‘Did you see that cause of
 Lord Ashburton’s [as Alexander Baring had by then become] where
he was indicted for a conspiracy to bribe the Mexican Government?”
asked Sydney Smith. ‘The letters directing his agents to do so, and
mentioning what each man was worth were read in open Court, and
the fact was not denied. The Jury found him not guilty, but it was
a narrow escape, for the Jury were out of court for an hour and a
half.’25 Baring’s partner, Joshua Bates, not surprisingly saw things
a little differently. The only reason the verdict took so long to reach
was because ‘one ignorant man’ was put in to fill the place of one of
the Special Jury. ‘It was the most abominable suit that ever was
undertaken, and that by a man whose bills the old House held for
£160,000 for which they never could get sixpence. It sickens one of
human nature.’26 On the whole the evidence suggests that the part-
ners in London were ignorant of the skulduggery being practised by
their associates in Mexico; that they would tacitly have condoned it
seems probable at least; that tactics quite as questionable were prac-
used by the other parties to the dispute is likeliest of all.
   This was an unhappy start to Barings’ relationship with Mexico,
but it did not alter their opinion that the country had much to offer.
In 1826 the agents of the Mexican government in London, Barclay,
 Herring Richardson and Co., were one of the many firms that
foundered in the crisis. Barings took on the agency, servicing the
country’s external debt and accepting responsibility for payments to
the Mexican legations in Europe. It proved an expensive and time-
consuming business. Time and again Barings found themselves
having to make payments before they had received funds from Mex-
ico City, and sometimes the delays were embarrassingly protracted.
The sums involved were not enormous, but the uncertainty, with the
consequent need to tie up funds unprofitably, was a constant irri-
tant. ‘We are sorry that your caution not to trust the Government
came rather too late,’ they wrote in 1832 to their correspondents
                                                                    in
Mexico City, ‘for we had unfortunately by advancing the deficien
                                                                   cy
for the Dividends and the monthly payments to the
                                                            Legation,
                         Latin America to 1848                          107

already allowed it to become our debtor to a very large amount.’
They would make no further payments to the legations until matters
had been put in order.27                           |
   A few years later they had had enough. The Mexican economy was
in total disarray and it was clear that the government would only
with the greatest difficulty be able to maintain the interest payments
on its external debt. When Lizardi and Co., a Mexican house which
had recently opened up in London, offered to take on the agency,
Barings did nothing to defend their position. They had by this time
disposed of part of the government stock which Francis had so
improvidently secured but quite enough remained to provide an
unappealing souvenir of their involvement with Mexico. Even with-
out the long-drawn-out unpleasantness over the Parral estate,
Barings had little reason to view their association with Argentina and
Mexico with satisfaction. Not until they took on the agency for the
Chilean government in 1844 did they again play an important part in
the part of the world with which they were thenceforward to be so
 intimately concerned.