

  that the government would at once resume full payment of interest.
  ‘The first thing you must do 1s to make up your mind by all the infor-
 mation you can get, how much they can pay annually and then make
 your arrangements accordingly.’38
     Falconnet’s initial report was gloomy and his second gloomier
 still. There was a war in progress over Uruguay and the condition of
 the country’s economy was as chaotic as ever: ‘It is almost impossible
 to give you an idea of the wretched state in which matters stand here,
 both in a moral and physical point of view.3? He was modestly
 encouraged by an interview with Rosas. The dictator said bluntly
 that he thought the loan had been useless and expensive but that he
 was nevertheless anxious to satisfy the bondholders as soon as pos-
 sible.#° But the method that he proposed early in 1843 was quite as
 unpromising as any that had been advanced before. The Argentine
Minister in London, Rosas told Falconnet, had ‘been authorized to
propose the absolute cession of the Malvina Islands to the English
Government on condition it should take charge of the Loan’.
Falconnet expressed ‘surprise and disappointment’ but asked that
the proposal should be put into writing, and this was duly done a few
days later.*!
   Barings were no less surprised and disappointed than their repre-
sentative. The Falkland Islands seemed no more appropriate in set-
tlement of the debt than two frigates or part of Patagonia. Besides, as
the British government was quick to point out, there was nothing to
cede; Argentina had no claim to the Falkland Islands, which were
 British territory. This contention Rosas, not surprisingly, did not
accept; he ‘expected a just compensation from the English Govern-
 ment for the entire cession of their rights of Sovereignty, upon which
they partly relied to enable them to settle the claims of the
Bondholders’. It is interesting to speculate how different the his-
tory of the last few years might have been if the British government
had taken over the loan as Rosas asked and thereby gained title to the
Falkland Islands unquestioned even by the Argentines.
   This was not Rosas’s last word, however. Under a Convention of
1840 the Argentine government was bound to set aside 5000 silver
dollars a month in settlement of certain French claims. These claims
would be metin full by April 1844. Falconnet suggested that the
                                                                    pay-
ments should then be transferred to the bondholders. Rather
                                                                  to his
                         Latin America to 1848                       it

surprise, Rosas agreed. Falconnet was jubilant. The payments would
only amount to some £12,000 a year, as opposed to the £60,000
which was properly owing, but they were still a start and they reaf-
firmed the existence of the debt and the acceptance of responsibility
by the Argentine government. ‘However limited is this first step
towards a final arrangement,’ wrote Falconnet, ‘I have the con-
science that nothing else could be obtained for the present. . . and
great credit must be given to the Governor for what he has done.’
   Even this first step proved precarious. After the payments had
been continuing for little over a year, an Anglo-French fleet, for reas-
ons which were presumably clear to Lord Aberdeen at the time but
now seem singularly obscure, blockaded Buenos Aires.*# One imme-
diate result was that the bondholders once more lost any interest on
the loan. Like most British businessmen, Joshua Bates of Barings was
outraged by this intervention. ‘The Buenos Aires affair is one of the
most infamous interference and the most stupid in my opinion,’ he
wrote to T. W. Ward, the house’s agent in Boston. ‘It 1s much the
same as if the United States had sent a fleet to Vera Cruz and had
seized all the Mexican ships and said, “You shall make peace with
Texas. Commerce suffers by your contest. . . therefore we will stop
all Commerce.” "45 Barings protested to the Foreign Office and in the
end the British element in the fleet was withdrawn and the blockade
broke up, having achieved little. It was not until January 1859 that
payments were resumed. This time it was for good, however. It was
the beginning of a new and vastly important chapter in the history of
Barings’ involvement with Argentina and the rest of Latin America.
                                     r
                                 pt
                                  @ ee