

   The cautious Barings eschewed such exotic delights and had cause
to congratulate themselves when the financial crisis of 1825 crippled
international trade and caused almost every borrower in Latin
America to default on his payments of interest. To quote Peacock
again, the British people belatedly discovered “That paper is not
metal, and promises of payment are neither food nor raiment’.8° In
December 1825 it was even feared that the Bank of England might
fail. One Saturday night it closed with only a few thousand pounds
of gold left in its vaults and applied to the Government for an Order
in Council to suspend cash payments. An emergency meeting of Liv-
erpool, the Chancellor Huskisson, the Governor of the Bank and
Alexander Baring agreed to postpone this disastrous measure and
the Bank was saved; chiefly, Baring told Greville, ‘by the accidental
discovery of a box of one-pound Bank of England notes, to the
amount of a million and a half, which had never been issued, and
which the public were content to receive’.®!
   Barings did not emerge unscathed. In October 1825 Alexander
reported to Francis: “There is considerable distress and difficulty
about money... . An extensive Cotton Speculation failing has upset
Liverpool, Manchester, and by a contre coup the United States. The
bubble has also burst of all joint stock companies and loans... . All
houses lose because all houses have their joint capital in something
and everything has fallen in value. We are caught with Consols and
French 3 per cents and must lose considerably. Nolte is completely
wrecked, fortunately we are likely to be paid and lose nothing by
him. This however is the only piece of good luck and this year cannot
fail to be largely a losing one.’82           |
   It was. In July 1825 Barings had divided profit of £120,000; a year
later it was a loss of £56,000. In fact things were less disastrous; sub-
stantial sums were transferred from Profit and Loss to meet esti-
mated losses on French stock which turned out to be smaller than
expected. It was a bad business, though, and exposed brutally how
dependent Barings had become on their profit from foreign loans.
The economic stagnation that followed the Napoleonic wars had
been gradually relieved, but Barings had not taken their proportion-
ate share of the reviving trade. In 1824 Holland surveyed the scale of
their business with some satisfaction but observed ‘its profits are
derived more from loans to foreign Governments [and] the rise in
          ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828        99
English Stock, than from mercantile operations’.83 Between 1813
and 1817 accepting and commission income had averaged a little
over £50,000 a year, between 1818 and 1822 it fell to £35,000 and
between 1823 and 1827 to £26,000. In 1827/28 the figure was a piti-
ful £20,672 and capital was only £310,000, of which much was
locked up in more-or-less worthless stock. Barings’ reputation in the
world still stood high: the Comte de Bertrand, secluded in Elba with
the Emperor Napoleon, gave them carte blanche to do whatever they
thought best with his property;8* they found themselves responsible
for procuring four small enamelled gold watches from Mr Pybus of
Old Compton Street at a price of £220 for the Emperor of China.*5
But serious business was in short supply. Something needed to be
done, and when, on 17 December 1827, Swinton Holland died at his
desk, it was clear that it would have to be done immediately. Before
describing what came next, however, it is necessary to go back in
time and consider what was going on in a part of the world which
was to bulk large in the history of Barings - Latin America and, in
particular, Argentina.
                                   6
                                ope
                                  @ onde