

difference less expenses and whatever they had to allow to Barings
would be theirs to pocket. Barings for their part could hope to do
well, though not so well, taking a fee of £30,000 to cover expenses,
and a 1 per cent commission on the stock they sold.?
   Hopes were disappointed. Barings dismissed the idea of floating
the loan at 90 as absurd, but against their better judgement offered
the bonds at 85. This would have given the investor a 7.05 per cent
return on a stock emanating from a country about which he knew lit-
tle or nothing. Speculators briefly kept the price at a premium but
they soon cut their losses and threw their stock on the market.
 Barings bought much of it back in an effort to keep up the price, but
their exertions meant that they had an uncomfortably large amount
of capital locked up in virtually unsaleable bonds. By October
Robertson was regretting ‘that you are under the necessity of consid-
ering the Buenos Ayres Loan as a failure’. The government and the
contractors, he assured Holland, ‘feel themselves under peculiar
 obligation to your House for the decided and most liberal support of
 the Loan’.!° On the whole Argentine historians have supported his
 view. ‘The name of Alexander Baring,’ concluded the first serious
 study of the loan from the Argentine point of view, ‘. . . is worthy to
 figure among the loyal servants of our country.’!!
    Not everyone has been so kind. Revisionist historians have pre-
 sented Barings as unscrupulous adventurers who took an unfair
advantage of the inexperienced Argentines and made monstrous
profits at their expense. The 1824 loan, according to this thesis, was
just the first of a long series of misfeasances, by which Argentine
industry was crippled to serve the needs of British exporters, and its
workers exploited to enrich British capitalists.12 A second line of
attack, somewhat more moderate, while not acquitting Barings
altogether of sharp practice, suggested that the main blame must
be borne by Argentine politicians who were certainly inept and
probably corrupt as well.!3 The assumptions common to both sets
of historians are that Barings made a fat profit out of the loan and
that the Argentine government received only a small part of what
it was entitled to expect.
   Neither contention is correct. The decision to buy in the bonds
when they went to a discount may be attributed to self-interest or
chivalry according to taste, but it certainly ensured that Barings
                                                                    lost
                        Latin America to 1848                         103

money on the deal. If anyone made money it was the original con-
tractors. As for the amount received by the Argentine government,
they contracted for £700,000 and that is what was paid to them. The
Argentine dictator Juan Manuel Rosas contended that the money
had not been needed and had been squandered shamefully, but he
never denied that it had been received.!* Seven hundred thousand
pounds was perhaps not an over-generous amount to receive against
a debt of £1 million, but the reception the loan received in the British
market showed that it was a realistic approximation to what people
were prepared to pay.
   The investors’ scepticism was soon proved justified. Things went
merrily for two or three years, Robertson reporting from Buenos
Aires in 1825: ‘Nothing can be more satisfying than to observe the
rapid strides which the Country makes in every branch of publicand
domestic economy.’!§ But war with Brazil changed all that, draining
the National Bank and making the currency almost worthless. Bue-
nos Aires ‘has been gradually sinking into a state of Poverty and
Disorganization, from which it will require many years for her to
emerge,’ Robertson wrote gloomily at the end of 1827." The hero of
the Liberation, San Martin himself, provided an ironic commentary
on the prospects for his continent. He came to London with money
to invest and called at Bishopsgate to seek advice. Barings offered
him a tempting range of Latin American stocks, including the 1824
Argentine loan, which was now at so much of a discount as to be
yielding a return of nearly 9 per cent. He rejected them all in favour
of British 3 per cent Consols.'7 He was proved right in January 1828
when the Argentine government defaulted on its interest payments.
For Barings this was the most painful of the many shocks they had
suffered in the previous two years.