


By then some progress was at last being made in Argentina. From the
time of the Argentine default in 1828 Barings had been preoccupied
by the need to secure a settlement which would give partial satisfac-
tion at least to the people who had invested on their recommenda-
tion. Though Barings had originally retained part of the 1824 loan
for its own account, and had bought back more to protect the price,
                                                                          the
the bulk was still owned by private investors in Britain and on
                                                                           to
continent. So far, so good, but no merchant banker who wished
                                                                       of the
survive as a leading house could afford to ignore the woes
                                                     If a  loan  backed    by
bondholders who had bought stock from them.
                                                               their  judge-
Barings ended in such abject failure, who would trust
                                          as a sense of   honour    dictated
ment in the future? Self-interest as well
                                                             resumpt  ion of
that they should do all they could to ensure a speedy
                                                                during the
payments and compensation for the loss of interest
period of default.
                                                           sh government.
   Not much help was to be expected from the Briti
                                                        investment over-
Canning had defined the official position towards
                                                 defau lted    in 1823. He
seas when the Colombian government had
 108                     The Sixth Great Power

 refused to make a resumption of payments a precondition for diplo-
 matic recognition. Not only would he not send a gunboat to mani-
 fest British displeasure, he declined to allow British diplomats and
 consular agents to bring pressure on the defaulters. If British invest-
 ors chose to risk their money overseas, then it was their own funeral
 if they lost it.28 Lord Aberdeen was somewhat less austere in his
 approach, but though he would allow his diplomats to give such
help as they could and to make sympathetic noises, there was still no
question of official intervention. Not until 1847 did Palmerston sug-
gest in the House of Commons that in certain circumstances it
would be permissible for Britain to take action in defence of its
holders of foreign bonds.??
   Barings were on their own. Their strongest card was that the
Argentine government wanted a settlement, since until one was
reached there would be no hope of returning to the European
money markets. But good intentions alone availed little, and
Argentine politics were in such turmoil that successive Ministers of
Finance were quite unable to do anything in practice. It was not until
the end of 1829, when Juan Manuel Rosas was elected Governorand
Captain General of the Province of Buenos Aires, that some hope of
stability returned. Woodbine Parish, the British chargé d'affaires,
praised Rosas’s ‘modesty and moderation’, and predicted that his
regime would last.3° On the second point he was right - Rosas’s rule
continued for 21 years; but neither modesty nor moderation was
ever a conspicuous attribute of the dictator.
   Rosas was more concerned with paying his army and domestic
creditors than with satisfying foreign investors, but he was enough of
a realist to stress in his first message to the Assembly that it was ‘nec-
essary to recover our credit jeopardized abroad’. It was some time,
however, before he could do much about it, since virtual civil
                                                                war
continued in parts of the country and drought aggravated his already
crippling problems.3! In 1828 the Minister of Finance had tenta-
tively suggested that an easy way to settle the debt would be for them
to hand over a couple of unwanted frigates in final settlement.32
Barings had dismissed the idea out of hand, but when Rosas took
power he cast around for something else which might satisfy
                                                                    the
British investor without involving a drain on Argentina’s currency.
                                                                      It
took him eighteen months to concentrate on the matter but at
                                                                    the
                        Latin America to 1848                       109
end of 1831 his Finance Minister, Manuel Garcia, approached Par-
ish with the proposal that repayment should be made in the form of
land in Patagonia. “The fine and healthy Climate of these Countries
is known in Europe to everyone of ordinary information,’ he told
Parish.33 The notorious fact that no Argentine citizen was prepared
to brave the rigours of that bleak, southern outpost did not dispose
Barings to look kindly at what would anyway have been a far-fetched
expedient. ‘The holders of Buenos Ayres securities,’ wrote Francis
Baring coldly, ‘are principally among a class of persons little inclined
by habits or experience to adventures of this kind.’34 Barings contin-
ued to deplore the duplicity and incompetence of the Argentine gov-
ernment: ‘We are unable to meet the charge against the good faith of
 Buenos Ayres with any defence which would appear to justify it in
the eyes of its creditors,’ they complained to their new representa-
tives, Zimmerman, Frazier and Co. ‘If the Buenos Ayres government
wishes to be put by the sides of those other civilized countries, she
 must lose no time in removing the blot which has for so long tar-
 nished her credit.’35
    For a decade or so little was heard except the grumbling of the
 British bondholders. Not everyone despaired. In 1832 a Miss E.
 Caton wrote eagerly: ‘I have an inspiration about Buenos Ayres
 bonds and must have some, even though I have to part with some of
 my Spanish bonds.’ Barings do not seem to have tried to dissuade
                                                            she was
her, but the inspiration soon faded. Some three years later
                                                                      I
writing: ‘If I can get out of the Buenos Ayres bonds without loss
                                                    consider able dis-
should like to do it36 She at least had bought at a
                                                      the chances of
count; for those who had taken up the original offer,
                                                                      did
getting their money back seemed slim indeed. Their indignation
                                                            ders    were
not diminish with time. At the end of 1842 the bondhol
                                                              hard that,
planning a protest meeting: ‘They naturally think it very
                                            their public  debt   and sev-
while Chile and Mexico have provided for
                                                         do  so,  Buenos
eral other South American states are making efforts to
Ayres should do nothing.’*”
                                                               modestly
   The increasing turbulence of the bondholders and
                                                           gs that they
encouraging signals from Buenos Aires convinced Barin
                                                         an intelligent,
mustat least appear to be taking action. In April |842
                                                               to reopen
young Spanish speaker, Francis Falconnet, was dispatched
                                                    too much to hope
negotiations. No miracles were expected. It was
 110                     The Sixth Great Power