




                    Baring and Bates
                         1827-1847


With Holland dead at the end of 1827, Alexander Baring taking ever
less interest in the bank and Francis discredited, it was clear that Bar-
ing Brothers needed reinforcement, not only at the top but in the
 middle echelons as well.
   Alexander was still in charge, but he was disenchanted with rou-
tine and resentful of the fact that Holland’s death forced him to
spend more time than he liked in the partners’ room. He was rich
enough to live in style on his estates without bothering about his
income from the bank and his main interest was now in the world of
public affairs. In 1830 he retired. T. W. Ward wrote in alarm: ‘I do
not think it would be advisable for Mr Baring to leave at a time when
the eyes of the World are on the House as the sheet anchor of mer-
cantile safety and confidence.’ In the United States everyone would
be asking how much money had been withdrawn and whether the
house could now meet its commitments.! Joshua Bates, one of the
two new men broughtin to take over Baring Brothers, scoffed at such
fears: ‘For my part, I cannot say I regret it, he said of his senior part-
ner’s retirement. There was plenty of talent left, and capital too.
‘Besides, it is ridiculous to have a partner who has long since given up
all connexions with mercantile men. The Americans who come over
~ some of them - expect that Mr Alexander Baring will shew them
some attention, and they go back dissatisfied if he does not.. . . If in
losing Mr Baring we lose the advantage of his individual respectabil-
ity and great wealth as a security for the funds placed in our hands,
we are called on to use double diligence and endeavour to acquire
that fame for ourselves that he has so justly attained.’? Six months
later Bates concluded that time had proved him right: ‘As the wheel
                                   112
                    Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                    113

moves round this seems to be now forgotten; and as your House is
not a common House, it is not to be measured by common rules -
and | have no doubt that the judgment, character and talent which
conducts its operations will give it a standing even higher than it has
yet attained.3
   It was freely surmised that Baring’s retirement from banking was
the step on the road to the peerage he sought so earnestly. ‘He has
money and lands and Parliamentary influence enough to procure
anything he may desire,’ Bates told Ward.* Only his everyday assoct-
ation with commerce seemed a bar.
                 Bob Smith lives here,
                 Billy Pitt made him a peer,
                And he took the pen from behind his ear,

ran the jingle when Pitt ennobled Robert Smith as Lord Carrington
in 1797.5 Now Baring’s pen had been taken from behind his ear as
well. For him to become a peer would still have been something
freakish. He would only have been the second banking creation, and
no industrialist or heir to an industrial fortune was to become a lord
for twenty years.¢ But the possibility, even the probability, existed.
   That Baring wanted a peerage seems evident. He had already mar-
ried his son into the aristocracy, and in 1830 engineered a match for
his daughter Harriet with Lord Henry Thynne, future Marquess of
Bath. It cost him £50,000, as against the £10,000 his son-in-law put
into the marriage pool, but he felt the money well spent.” ‘As the
Barings want connection and he wants money, it was a natural mar-
riage for all the world to insist upon, commented Emily Eden. Yet if
a title was indeed his primary objective, he behaved with remarkable
independence of mind. All his political life he had been a Whig; then
when the Whigs were at last in office, and he might hope to reap the
rewards of loyalty, he defected to the Tories.
   His waning enthusiasm for the Whig cause had long been appar-
                                                                    his
ent. His conservatism was notorious. In July 1830 he had done
best to restrain his colleagues from an all-out onslaught on the wilt-
                                                                   mob
ing Tories? and he inveighed publicly against the perils of
                                                                   wit-
rule.!° ‘Such a finished blockhead as the great Baring 1s, | never
                                                       offended when
nessed,’ complained O’Connell.!! He was somewhat
                                                              more put
offered no job by Grey in the Whig administration and still
114                      The Sixth Great Power