




           ‘Magnificent in Promise’
                    Latin America to 1848




Barings had been interested in a small way in Latin America since
almost the time that they involved themselves in international trad-
ing, but any idea that they should play a more prominent role in this
remote and alien continent was far from their minds before the end
of the Napoleonic wars. In 1807 the Southern Star, first English-lan-
guage paper on the River Plate, announced that there would shortly
arrive ‘an accredited Agent from the House of Baring and Co.. . . It
will be a great accommodation to the inhabitants of this country,
through the medium of this house, to place their money in safety in
Spain, Portugal, China, the East Indies, or indeed in any part of the
world, without any possible risk."! The news was premature, the
inhabitants would have to wait some time yet for such a facility.
  The recession that afflicted Europe after 1815 and the end of the
Spanish and Portuguese empires kindled a new interest in Latin
America. By 1817 Brougham was declaring in the House of Com-
mons: ‘There can be no field of enterprise so magnificent in promise,
so well calculated to raise sanguine hopes, so congenial to the most
generous sympathies, so consistent with the best and the highest
interests of England, as the vast continent of South America.” Pro-
fessor Platt has ably demonstrated how very limited that magnifi-
cent promise in fact was.} Barings were intrigued enough to commis-
sion a report on the trade of the River Plate from the British firm of
John Parish Robertson,* but they remained cautious about the pros-
pects of the area as a whole. For this they earned the abuse of
Disraeli, who had himself put money he could ill afford into Mexi-
can mining shares and was most upset when Alexander Baring
decried the investment, supporting his criticism of the security
                                 100
                         Latin America to 1848                        101

offered, said Disraeli, ‘by statements which are so utterly unfounded
that they might make mendacity blush and so awfully ridiculous
that they might make folly grave’.5
  But Barings were not averse in principle to investment in Latin
America. In 1820 they offered to subscribe £10,000 to a Chilean loan,
only to see the project disavowed by the Senate in Santiago. The fol-
lowing year they almost contracted for a small loan to Colombia, but
backed out when their agent was discovered to be both a gunrunner
and dead. The Colombian government negotiated a second loan
elsewhere.” They saw no reason to lament the loss of these two pieces
of business, yet they had an uneasy suspicion that they were missing
the bus. They felt this particularly about the River Plate, to which
area the British exported more than £1 million worth of goods in
1824 alone. If the right opportunity offered, Barings would grasp it.
   An opportunity soon offered. In 1822 Congress authorized the
raising ofaloan of £1 million to builda port at Buenos Aires, provide
running water for the capital and finance frontier settlements. The
loan was to pay interest of 6 per cent and the minimum price was 70
- that is to say £100 worth of stock would be offered to the public for
£70, plus whatever commission was taken by the middleman. The
government would receive £700,000 against a debt of £1 million and
would in effect be paying 8.7 per cent interest on the money. The
authorities in Buenos Aires might not seem to have made a particu-
larly good bargain, and even at the time there was criticism of the
terms, but if they had tried to raise the money at home they would
have had to pay considerably more, perhaps even twice as much.
    By the time William Parish Robertson and various Argentine asso-
ciates finally contracted to take the loan early in 1824 the purposes to
which the money was to be applied had been modified but the terms
remained the same. The Minister of Finance in Buenos Aires had
urged them to involve Barings in the transaction if they possibly
 could, since nothing would help more to establish the country’s
 credit. Robertson spared no pains to bring this about. He assured
                                                                     Gov-
 Barings that the business was absolutely safe: ‘In resources, in
                                                                         t
ernment stability, in every regard Buenos Ayres holds a differen
                                                            potenti ally  a
 rank from the other Independent States.’ For him it was
                                                           at 70, they
most lucrative deal. The consortium took the loan
                                                  at 90; the  £200,000
believed they could sell it to the British public
 102                      The Sixth Great Power