

out when he asked that his son should be made a Lord of the Treas-
ury and instead saw the job given to his nephew Francis, Sir Thomas
Baring’s eldest son. ‘I suspect he would have lost no time acting like
Lord Carnarvon,’ wrote Brougham’s secretary, Denis le Marchant,
referring to a recent Whig renegade, ‘had not the hopes of a coronet
kept him with his party.’!?
   But not even the certainty of acoronet could have stifled his grow-
ing doubts about the Whig Reform Bill. The measure, he told the
House of Commons, amounted ‘as much to a new Constitution as if
it had been drawn from the pigeon holes of Abbé Sieyés’. He
objected to the Bill’s ‘democratic tendency’. The Commons were
made all-powerful, the influence of the aristocracy swept away. ‘He
should be as sorry as any man to see the lower classes, even the
lowest classes, of this country, without considerable influence in that
House,’ but enough was enough. What he wanted was ‘liberty for
alli’
   The Duke of Wellington believed that Alexander’s change of heart
~ ‘See-saw Baring’ he was nicknamed henceforth - would herald the
move of the rest of the clan to the Tory ranks. In this he was over-
optimistic. The new minister, Francis Baring; his father, Sir Thomas;
Henry Labouchére; Charles Baring-Wall (the only son of Charles
Wall by Sir Francis’s daughter, Harriet); and even Alexander’s elder
son, William Bingham Baring: all voted for the Reform Bill - ‘as I
believe will in truth my uncle,’ wrote Francis Baring, ‘and conse-
quently Francis [Alexander’s second son, and the villain of Mex-
ico]’.!* He was mistaken; Alexander remained loyal in his disloyalty,
but for the moment at least the other Barings stayed in the Whig
ranks. Alexander was said to have been indignant with his two sons
for not following his example and to have tried to turn them out of
their seats, but if displeasure there was it can only have been fleeting.
Alexander’s relationship with his sons remained amicable and Wil-
liam, anyway, soon rallied to Peel. There can be no doubt that Alex-
ander’s defection was made on principle and against his personal
interests. Nevertheless, there were to be times in the next decades
when it was advantageous to the Barings to have afoot in both politi-
cal camps.
   It was anyway far from certain that Alexander would have gained
his longed-for peerage even though he had stayed with the Whigs.
                    Baring and Bates:   1827-1847                  115

Grey was notoriously fastidious about opening the delights of the
House of Lords to those who had sprung from outside the ranks of
the aristocracy, or, at the worst, the country gentry. According to
Creevey he at one time seriously considered offering a peerage to Sir
Thomas Baring as a reward for his loyalty and ‘as an additional mor-
tification’ to his brother.!’ The rumour was heard by Disraeli, who
had high hopes ofinheriting Sir Thomas's seat at Wycombe.!¢ When
it came to the point, however, Grey was deterred by the fact that
Thomas had sons. To turn a banker into a lord might - just - be
acceptable if the title died with him, but to create a dynasty was
another matter. As it turned out, Alexander’s change of loyalty was in
the long run to serve him well. For the moment, however, his only
reward was to have his windows smashed by the mob, which at least
put him in the distinguished company of the Duke of Wellington.
   The association was not confined to broken windows. In May
1832 Baring was a key figure in the Duke’s misguided effort to form a
Tory administration which would pass a measure of reform. He at
first refused to serve as Chancellor of the Exchequer, ‘on account of
the state of his health’, according to Bates,!7 but in fact because he
felt the Duke was opposed in principle to even the modest measure
of reform which he himself felt desirable.!8 Soon he changed his
mind, agreeing to serve if the Speaker, Manners-Sutton, would take
the lead. His decision was felt by some to be of crucial importance -
‘The Whigs    say we   are landed    if we   get Baring,’ wrote   Lord
Ellenborough hopefully!’ - but in fact this belated effort by the
Tories to take over and themselves pass a Reform Bill was greeted
with fury by a rampant House of Commons. Baring spoke four times
in the debate and in the end was personally responsible for propos-
ing that the Whig ministers should resume office.2° ‘I would face a
thousand devils rather than such a House of Commons, he told the
Duke.?!
   He remained on reasonable terms with his former colleagues, if
only because so many of them were his relations. ‘I have a favour to
ask,’ Sydney Smith wrote to Alexander's wife in July 1834 when the
death of Lord Althorp’s father meant that a new Chancellor had to
be found from the House of Commons. ‘Could you lend our side
such a thing as a Chancellor of the Exchequer? . . . We will take great
care of him, and return him so improved you will hardly know
116                     The Sixth Great Power