

      those who had to do with Loans and Stocks of different
      Countries. This is the advantage of dealing in Stocks, to all
      other commodities, if you purchase what you have money to
      pay for and they afterwards fall, by holding on, if the security
      is good, you are always receiving some capital, in lieu of your
      invested capital.7!

   Francis Baring for one would not have found much consolation in
this last consideration. He believed that nothing was more unfortu-
nate fora merchant banker than to see his capital indefinitely locked
up, and few lock-ups were so intractable as an unsaleable foreign
 stock. Nor was Holland’s certainty that at least there would always
 bea regular income coming in borne out by events; it was to be onlya
few years before the apparition of countries defaulting on their
foreign debts arose to haunt the sleep of the less wary merchant
banker.
    By 1825 Rothschilds, when it came to international loans, were
unequivocally the most powerful house in Europe. At this period the
capital of the London house alone was £1.14 million, against
£490,000 for Barings;?? the capital of all the branches of the
Rothschild empire put together was probably over £5 million. In
part at least because of the default of Alexander Baring, Nathan
Rothschild had become the leading figure - ‘maintemant sans conteste
le commercant le plus entreprenant d'ici,’ the Prussian Ambassador,
Humboldt,     described him. ‘C’est aussi un homme str, avec qui le
gouvernement anglais traite beaucoup daffaires.73 It was indeed to
Rothschild that the British government was becoming accustomed
to turn in need; ‘L’intérét du ministre anglais pour M. Rothschild est
bien vif, reported the French Ambassador.
   Nor was Barings even wholly secure in second place. In 1818
Byron asked:

        Who holds the balance of the world? Who reign
          O’er congress, whether royalist or liberal?
        Who rouse the shirtless patriots of Spain
          (That make old Europe’s journals squeak and gibber all)?
        Who keep the world both old and new, in pain
          Or pleasure? Who make politics run glibber all?
            ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’:            1815-1828               97
         The shade of Buonaparte’s double daring?
         Jew Rothschild and his fellow, Christian Baring.’* *
   If Byron had written Don Juan a few years later and had known his
facts, he would have had to consider substituting Brown, Shipley for
Barings (though for reasons of rhyme and scansion if no other he
would certainly not have done so). Barings were still ahead on most
counts but Brown, Shipley, blood brothers to the Baltimore, New
York and Boston firm of Brown Brothers, were uncomfortably close
behind. Their capital was already £350,000 and growing at a faster
rate than Barings’.”5
   In fact an unadventurous approach to foreign lending was no bad
thing in the 1820s. In 1819 Alexander Baring had declared that never
before had so much money been withdrawn from enterprise at
home to invest in foreign funds: ‘There was a general sauve qui peut
among monied men.”¢ The speculation mania of the next few years
was by no means confined to foreign funds. Over 200 new joint-
stock companies were approved by parliament, ranging from highly
respectable railways to a Cemetery Company which promised ‘to
combine the beauties of the celebrated Cimetiére du Pére Lachaise
with perfect security for the dead’.’” But it was the foreign loans that
the investor found most alluring; Latin America in particular, with
loans to among others Chile, Colombia, Brazil, Buenos Aires, Mex-
ico and, especially bizarre, a little loan of £200,000 to the republic of
Poyais, which was supposed to exist somewhere in Honduras but
appeared in the works of no cartographer.’* Peacock’s Sir Flimsy
Kite extolled the beauties of his bank’s holdings:
                      Good bills a monstrous lot, sir;
                      And Spanish bonds a store, sir;
                      And Mining Shares still more, sir;
                      Columbian scrip and Chilian;
                      And Poyais half a million:
                      And what will make you sleek, sir,
                       Fine pickings from the Greek, sir.’?
                                                                   only make sense if one
* The usual reading is ‘fellow-Christian Baring’. This would
                            t (1) the Barings were  Jews   and   (2) the Rothschilds tried
assumed that Byron though                                                   absurd. Surely
                                                           y,  the  second
to pass themselves off as Christians. The first is unlikel                 (and, no doubt,
                                            s  were  equall  y  powerf ul
Byron meant that, Jew or Christian, banker
equally odious)?
98                       The Sixth Great Power