


They had already had a nasty fright in Mexico. Apart from Brazil,
                                                                       was
Mexico, with its long-established and profitable export of silver,
                                                                    s were
economically the strongest country in Latin America. Baring
                                                     and   perhap   s even
interested in the possibilities of increased trade
                                                             second son,
some investment. In 1825 Francis Baring, Alexander's
was sent out on a fact-finding mission.
                                                                 ,’ he told
   His first reactions were of dismay. ‘This country is a desert
104                     The Sixth Great Power
 Humphrey Mildmay. He urgently requested six boxes of Seidlitz
 powders and ‘a stoutish hunting crop with bronze handle, the dogs
 are wolves, and one’s legs are always in danger’. The country could
 be prosperous if properly run, but ‘I do not see any material in this
 country out of which they could form a good set of ministers, and
 even were such treasures to be found, there is not public spirit or
 intelligence sufficient to support them in their measures’. Mexico
 would go on borrowing so long as England would lend, ‘and they
 will end up by a complete break up or bankruptcy’.!8
    What happened next is hard to establish with any exactness, but it
effectively ended his career in banking. He found the climate
oppressive, took to drink, and was still further borne down by a
shooting accident, in which he contrived to kill an English friend,
Augustus Waldegrave.!* Then he fell among thieves, in particular
one Robert Staples who had previously been British Consul in Mex-
ico City. Egged on by these new acquaintances, he concluded that
Mexico was the country of the future - ‘When I was in Mexico,’ he
wrote long afterwards, ‘I believed - God help me! in Mexican stabil-
ity.’0 He began to invest largely in mining shares and miscellaneous
bonds. His crowning folly came when he bought for 800,000 pesos
(about £160,000) 9 million acres of the Parral estate in northern
Mexico from the creditors of the Marqués de San Miguel de
Aguallo.?! ‘I mention for the information of the gentlemen of your
house,’ he wrote proudly to Le Roy Bayard in New York, “. . . that I
have lately made an extensive purchase of land here in conjunction
with Mr Staples’s house, and that I have great confidence in the
soundness of the operation.’22
   His confidence was not shared by his partners in London. He had
committed Baring Brothers to pay 25 per cent of the purchase price
immediately and this obligation was duly honoured, but enough was
enough. Alexander Baring wrote in outrage to his errant son:
     Our position with respect to your operation is the most per-
    plexing possible. After repeated readings of your letter I can-
    not make out what you have been doing. . . . If you have
    been buying a large tract of land, with herds of oxen, sheep
    and all the appendages of farming, I have only to say that
    however the world may consider your bargain, I have no
                        Latin America to 1848                        105
   doubt that it would prove ruinous to you if for your own
   account, and that for ws it is totally unsuited. We are a house
   of trade, and have no business with any adventure of the
   kind, to say nothing ofone out of all proportion to the extent
   of our capital... . You may conceive the surprise and uneasi-
   ness which your letters and projects have created, and being
   quite unable to reconcile them to my opinion of your con-
   duct and judgment, I live in hope that I have not properly
   understood you, and that on further reflection you will have
   been able to back out, and remit your money home in safe
   bills before you leave Mexico... .
      Mr Holland and I have work’d hard for our fortunes and
   do not wish to risk them. Humphrey, just beginning to get
   on his legs, cannot afford such risk, and I know pretty well
   what your position requires. . . . One of your bad qualities,
    my dear Francis, and I do not attribute many to you, 1s that
   you are a bad taker of advice, but if, on this occasion, I
    administer mine rather harshly, it is because I have no time
    for circumlocution and because you are entitled to have
    from me my unequivocal sentiments. At all events, what I
    must insist on is, that if you have made any landed or mining
    adventure for us to the extent of £40 or 50,000, you do not
    leave the country until you have placed it in good hands and
    that you in any case come straight to me.”?
  There was no escape for Barings from the portfolio of dubious
                                                          the
investments with which Francis had endowed them, but from
contract to buy the Parral estate at least they were able to extricate
themselves with no more than the loss of their original £40,000.
Nationalist sentiment in Mexico had always been hostile to the own-
                                                                        g
ership of land by foreigners, and it did not take more than lobbyin
                                                bribes to contriv e  that
and a few small but judiciously apportioned
                                                                     ing
the Chamber of Deputies passed a bill retrospectively forbidd
                                                              s in Lon-
foreigners to buy country property. How far Baring Brother
                                                              in Mexico
don were aware of the activities of their agents and friends
                                                               question.
City in bringing about this happy conclusion is an open
                                                   and Co.  broug    htan
Formally they were acquitted. In 1844 Staples
                                                            been   acting
action against them, claiming that Barings’ agents had
 106                     The Sixth Great Power