

  then I have all the disadvantage of not being supported by my part-
  ners. No one lends a helping hand to render myself or my family
  more respectable, and they never take the least notice of my country-
  men unless I request it. Then the timidity of Mildmay will spoil any
  business.’85
     The timidity of Mildmay was a constant cause for complaint. In
  1837 he unusually succeeded in winning the support of John and
 Francis and blocking some new business which Bates and Thomas
 Baring - the two activists - wished to introduce. ‘Someone else
 should therefore take the lead, complained Bates, but he had no
 intention of letting anyone do so,’ and as Mildmay became more
 preoccupied with his parliamentary life, his power to irritate van-
 ished. By 1844, with Thomas Baring also active in parliament, Bates
 was taking 7/24 of the profits, against ¢/24 to Thomas, §/24 to Mildmay
 and */24 to Francis. The remaining 2/24 went to Charles Baring Young,
 a grandson of Charles Baring of Exeter, who had come to
 Bishopsgate in 1843 to take some of the load off Bates. Young was
assiduous and able but had only one leg and was in poor health;
there was never any possibility that he would play a more responsi-
ble role.87
    Mildmay considered retirement as early as 1841 but stayed on to
build up a larger fortune for his sons. By 1847, however, it was evi-
dent even to Francis Baring that he was increasingly a liability to the
house: ‘The man is to be pitied for his mind is in a morbid state. . . .’88
Finally he agreed to retire at the end of the year. The retirement of a
partner who owned as large a proportion of the capital as did
Mildmay was bound in some measure to reduce the resources of the
house, but this was greatly mitigated by the fact that the partnership
contract stipulated that capital should only be withdrawn in stages
over a period of years. ‘If we have our ordinary luck,’ Bates assured
Ward, ‘his retirement will produce no diminution of the Capital of
the House.’ In every other way it was an unmixed blessing. Thomas
Baring and Joshua Bates were now in undisputed control.
                                      8
                                  >    ent




          The Trade in Bishopsgate
                   1830-1848


The house as reorganized by Joshua Bates was altogether more
orderly than it had been under his predecessors. Alexander Baring
understood the need for system. “You should well impress on your
mind the importance in a counting house of many clerks is the
necessity of minute punctuality, he told his nephew Thomas. ‘It
is not generally a Baring virtue and therefore requires some self-
command. This is more important in the management of business
than genius or higher talent, and you may rely upon it that your
business will move unsatisfactorily and in some degree unsafely
unless you attach importance to the apparent trifling circumstance
of minute discipline.’! But he himself had rarely found ume or incli-
nation to practise what he preached, and though Holland kept the
clerks to their office hours, he had little idea of more sophisticated
measures to improve the running of the office.
   With Bates’s arrival a new system is apparent in the records of Bar-
ing Brothers. Correspondence was properly entered and copies of
the replies retained; reporting on economic and commercial matters
from all corners of the earth was vastly increased and rationalized,
annual trial balances were henceforth struck. Barings in 1830 were
one of the largest houses, employing some 30 clerks in their
Bishopsgate office against 40 to 50 at Rothschilds and 10 to 15 at
most of the other important houses.? They were well paid, earning
                                                                        £40
between £250 and £500 a year for an experienced clerk down to
                                               that their  number     could
for a beginner. Bates started with the view
                                                                   fast that
be reduced, but by early 1831 found that business grew so
                                                                            a
even more were called for. ‘It is extremely difficult to arrange
                                                   go on  as it should   go,’
counting house so as to have so much business
                                      Izy,
 128                      The Sixth Great Power