

turers led to questions being asked in the House of Commons, and
the radical member ‘Orator’ Hunt inveighed against monopolies.??
Nor did Barings have it all their own way in the market. Stieglitz was
told about ‘the violent opposition of the Jews, who have made use of
every stratagem in their power to depress prices and deter buyers
from coming forward ’.2} There were rumours that the duty on can-
dles was about to be taken off. Barings sold most of their holdings at
a respectable price but were left with an uncomfortably large quan-
tity which they had to dispose ofata loss. At the end ofthe year Bates
claimed that none of the operations he had championed had been
misguided; ‘the tallow spec 1s proved to have been night, we wanted
courage to hold’.*# Overall Barings probably lost money on the oper-
ation, but it was not a disaster and, as Thomas Baring told his part-
ner: ‘You needed some such contest to put you fairly on your legs in
London!’ Bates drew a different moral from the affair. ‘I never wish
to grapple with a whole community again.25
  There is nothing to indicate what havoc the tallow speculation
wreaked on the frail nerves of Humphrey Mildmay. He had, how-
ever, little reason to be disturbed by any other feature of Bates’s trad-
ing activities. He may have felt that some advances to tea planters in
Ceylon were made injudiciously, so that after the crisis of 1847
Barings found themselves unwilling proprietors of three planta-
tions, but though this locked up capital that could have been better
employed, in the short and middle term it did not prove a bad invest-
ment. Bates’s most important contribution was to build up Barings’
representation abroad, by picking the right men and offering them
financial backing. T. W. Ward, with the American agency in Boston,
was immeasurably the most important but by no means unique. In
1833, for instance, Bates was considering strengthening the house of
Gisborne and Co. by putting in a partner and ‘furnishing him with
capital sufficient to enable them to assume an importance in Cal-
cutta worthy of our patronage’. Shortly afterwards John Richards
joined Gisbornes with a £20,000 advance from Barings by way of a
dowry. After the disasters that had afflicted Calcutta in the previous
years, felt Bates, ‘we cannot fail to become receivers of a large pro-
portion of the goods from that country’.26
   It was only a short step from financing international trade and
organizing transport and insurance, to taking an interest in
                                                             the
                  The Trade in Bishopsgate: 1830-1848                 133

vessels themselves. In October 1833 the newspapers reported that
Barings were building a ship that would be manned exclusively by
seamen who had taken the pledge not to drink alcohol or to indulge
in blasphemy; the reports were true, wrote Bates, ‘and may do some
good by calling public attention to the subject, which is one of deep
interest’.2”7 The ship was the Alexander Baring of 550 tons, built
mainly for the East India and China trades. In February 1835, carry-
ing freight worth £150,000, she reached Canton after a rapid 103
days’ transit. By that time Barings also owned the Antoinette of 350
tons, General Palmer of 531 tons and Diana of 487 tons.
    Usually, however, they chartered ships for each operation. A typi-
cal venture of 1839 involved sending an American ship, the Wasb-
ington, to Canton. It was anticipated that the Bocca Tigris would
 shortly be blockaded by British naval units, so the captain, Francis
 Booth Wells, was told, ‘you will do well to avoid speaking to any
 British ship, particularly ships of war. . . . Of course you will be igno-
 rant of any Blockade and are justified in proceeding until you are
 notified of itand warned off by competent authority.’ In Canton the
 Washington was to discharge her cargo of woollen and cotton goods
 and iron and stock up with tea and raw silk. ‘Be as quick as practic-
 able as it is probable a Blockade will be declared.’ The ship should
 then continue to Singapore and Macao to ‘transfer your cargo to a
 good English boat, ideally the Alexander Baring if it can be found’.
 The Washington itself should try to get a freighting job between Sin-
 gapore and Manila; at Manila or Batavia 1t should load up with sugar
 and continue to Cowes. Various alternative instructions covered the
 action the captain should take if Canton was blockaded before the
 Washington arrived.