

 Free Trade has with him irresistible attraction’ - but he felt he should
nevertheless resign in solidarity with his father.36 Peel replied that
 Bingham’s resignation would be absurd; as to the point at issue
Ashburton was ‘the practical founder of the School of Free Trade.
The Doctrinaires could have done nothing without your help and
the help of men in your position. It was your hand that shook the
fabric of Prohibition and of Protection.’3? There was no shortage of
unkind critics who saw a link between Ashburton’s conversion to
protection and his acquisition of vast agricultural estates.
   Bingham did not resign but his political career never prospered.
He retired with some relief after his father’s death and devoted him-
self to more congenial pursuits, such as being a Trustee of the
National Gallery and President of the Royal Asiatic Society. His
nearest approach to fame came in 1830 when he confronted a group
of riotous rustics, who were apparently bent on burning down the
Grange. One of them, a ploughboy aged nineteen called Henry
Cook, hit him on the head with a hammer and was later hanged for
his pains. ‘It was worse than treason to knock off the hat of a Baring,’
commented Cobbett bitterly,38 but in fairness to British justice an
eyewitness recorded that Cook had knocked his victim down and
was on the point of finishing him off when bystanders intervened.39
There was much agricultural disorder in 1830 and the Baring lands
were in the thick of it. At neighbouring Stratton, Francis Baring
found his father Sir Thomas policing the neighbourhood ‘at the
head of tag, rag and bobtail, looking all very gallant with laurel leaves
in their hats - many of them the very fellows who had broken his
machinery ~ so laid hold of one to my father’s utter astonishment’.4°
   After his uncle Alexander’s defection, Francis Baring became the
family’s most prominent representative among the Whigs. ‘A
morose and rigid millionaire,’ Greville described him;*! ‘very rigid
and severe in his principles’ was Sir James Graham’s verdict,#2 and
though many disliked him, no one questioned his total reliability. ‘A
thoroughly honest man, and an able public servant, Melbourne
called him to Queen Victoria.4? His cautious attitude towards
reform - ‘I consider all organic change an evil,’ he told a constitu-
ent*# - would certainly have commended him to Lord Melbourne,
and in 1839 he was offered the Exchequer. ‘I told him that I did not
wish it,’ Francis Baring told his father, but Sir Thomas
                                                         persuaded
                     Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                      119
him to take a more robust view, and in the end he accepted.*5
   He did not have an easy time. ‘We have everything excepting a
revenue and a majority,’ he wrote gloomily in his journal.*6 There is
nothing in his papers, or in those of Baring Brothers, to suggest that
while he was Chancellor he had any close dealings with his uncle,
brothers or cousins at the bank. Equally, they must often have been
in each other’s company, both in London and in the country. They
had no need to put anything on paper. Matters must from time to
time have been discussed which bore on the affairs of the house, and
it would be surprising if Baring Brothers never gleaned information
of interest and value from such conversations. So, no doubt, did the
Exchequer. What does seem supremely unlikely, given the awesome
rectitude of Francis Baring, was that any disclosures were improp-
erly made or any unfair advantage given to his kinsmen. The
Rothschilds would never have believed it, and their scepticism 1s
wholly pardonable, but though Francis and Thomas Baring were
affectionate brothers, the Chancellor and the banker treated each
other with cautious restraint.
   Francis Baring never considered that his own son Thomas, heir to
a great fortune and a baronetcy at least, should go into the bank.
‘Your position is fixed,’ he told him, ‘that of an English country gen-
tleman, and it will be your business “to do your duty in that station
of life to which it has pleased God to call you”.’ Ideally, he felt, that
duty should take his son into public life, but ‘a quieter life’ could also
be useful. Banking might be good enough for his cousins, or his
uncles Thomas and John, but not for an elder son.*”
  Of the older generation, Alexander's son Francis remained as a
partner after 1830; technically, indeed, the senior partner. The dis-
                                                               es to trust
tinction meant little; his record hardly induced his associat
him very far. His career in politics was as undistinguished as in bank-
                                               Zealand in the
ing; once, when he introduced a bill about New
                                                            not
House of Commons, he lost his audience so rapidly that soon
                                                       daughter of
even a quorum was left.48 In 1833 he married Hortense,
                                                                    springs
the Duke of Bassano, and henceforth spent the winters and
                                                                position in
at his house in the Place Vend6me in Paris. He treated his
                                                               letter: ‘The
the bank with some levity, once replying to an urgent
                                                                   ly races
senior partner in the first house in the first city was at Chantil
                                                             I can assume
when your letter arrived . . . it will be clear to you that
 120                     The Sixth Great Power