

 insignificant,’ commented Bates. “These periodicals cut one up or
 praise one just to suit their own purpose.’73                   |
    He ‘has a trial in his wife as great as almost any person living’,
 wrote Ward.74 Another American described her as an ‘audaciously
 vulgar old woman’. She had been complaining that her daughter had
 nowhere fit to live, in spite of the fact that she had huge houses in
both London and the country: ‘This kind of whining comes from a
woman who was born in a four roomed log house in Massachusetts
and never saw a carpet until she was a woman grown.’75 Mrs Bates
must have been one of the factors that made it hard for Bates to win
the place he felt he deserved in British society.In theory he despised
the fripperies of fashion, in fact he hankered after them. One of his
few weaknesses, Ward felt, was undue deference to wealth and
 rank.”6 Bates believed he got the balance just right. He told Ward
 that a certain new American arrival in London was too voluble and
 noisy, ‘but that will wear off. A residence of one year in London
 would make a perfect gentleman of him ... In London no
 extravagance of word or gesture is allowed in good society and since
 I have got a little into it I am charmed with that which I at first
 thought objectionable.’7”
    He wrote thus confidently as early as 1831, but his progress into
high society was in fact slow and arduous. It was from the Barings
themselves that he received the most painful rebuffs. Lord
Ashburton’s return from the United States in 1844 ‘renewed the
mortification and pain I have always felt in consequence of my social
position. On joining the house of Baring Brothers and Co. when
Lord Ashburton was a partner, I found that he and Mr Mildmay did
not consider that by forming a co-partnership with me they had
incurred the so-called necessity for any intercourse with me and my
family.’78 He was almost never invited to the Grange and only to din-
ner in London when there were American visitors - and even then
Mrs Bates was not included. ‘This must not continue,’ wrote Bates
angrily, but it did.?? When Bates asked if Lady Ashburton would pre-
sent his wife and daughter at Court, Ashburton found some polite
excuse. ‘This is the first favor I have asked of this family and it will
                                                                          be
the last.’8°
   Fortunately Thomas Baring, more easy going and good-natur
                                                                         ed
than his uncle, and witha far clearer appreciation of Bates’s
                                                                qualities,
                     Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                     125
showed no such arrogance in his attitude to his partner. Indeed, he
treated Bates to all intents and purposes as the senior partner.
Though Baring made the running where international loans were in
question, Bates ruled supreme over all the routine trading business
and the administration of the office. In particular, he took responsi-
bility for the rapidly increasing American business. He was a first
port of call for all important American visitors to London and
regarded by most of them as the ultimate fount of wisdom on British
and international affairs. ‘Have you letters for Mr Bates?’ Charles
Summer asked his brother. ‘You will find him a person of sterling
honesty and sense.’8! Louis McLane advised his successor at the
American Legation to use Schultz as his tailor and Adams as his hos-
tler. ‘Lady Wellesley . . . will instruct you in the mysteries of fashion
and Mr Bates, your Banker - whom you will find the kindest man in
the world - will instruct and aid you essentially in all matters of busi-
ness and housekeeping.®?
  Thomas Baring and Joshua Bates liked and respected each other,
and admirably complemented each other's abilities. On them
depended the future of Baring Brothers. When Alexander Baring
retired in 1830 he left five partners: his brother Francis, his son-in-
law Humphrey Mildmay, his nephews Thomas and John, and
Joshua Bates. In theory three partners had to endorse any decision of
importance, but with Francis often in Paris and generally ignored
and John withdrawing in 1837 and anyway disposed to follow his
brother’s lead, the practice became that the three managing partners
did all the business and only invoked the other two in case of dis-
                                                               a con-
agreement.®} At the end of 1835 there had been something of
                                                        free capital
frontation, when Mildmay had tried to limit the house’s
                                                                    to
at any one time to £100,000 and had recruited Lord Ashburton
                                                             essential
support him. Bates argued that £5 00,000 was the minimum
                                                  business that might
fora reserve sufficient to embrace any profitable
                                                    with him, and
come along, established that John and Thomas agreed
                                                       reduce the
convinced Ashburton that Mildmay’s course ‘would
                                                as not  to make it
profits of the House in a short time so much so
                                             He won the day, but
worth anyone's attention to the business’.**
                                                                  in his
remained dissatisfied. ‘Too much falls on me,’ he complained
                                                       plans for opera-
diary. ‘To talk to everybody, sell the goods, draw the
                                           and hard thinking too;
tions which require a vast deal of thought
126                      The Sixth Great Power