

 ‘Tom will do us credit. He should be Chancellor of the Exchr.’*! Peel
 did in fact seek to push him forward, asked him to second the
 address in February 1845 and proposed that he become President of
 the Board of Trade a few months later. Baring refused - ‘the
 Bishopsgate House has too many temptations yet,’ wrote Bates, but
 it was felt by most people that he would become a minister within a
few years.
    He never did. The following year he joined his uncle in opposing
 Peel’s policy on Free Trade. Disraeli much admired his performance:
‘The member for Huntingdon brought the great name of Baring, and
all the authority of his pre-eminent position in the commercial
world, to support the principle of regulated competition. His mas-
tery of the subject would under any circumstances have commanded
attention. The house liked to receive the latest and most authentic
information as to the state of the markets from the greatest merchant
in the country.’ Nor was this praise exceptional; in 1848 Disraeli
was extolling Baring for ‘one of the best speeches ever made in the
House of Commons. Few more combine mastery of the case with
parliamentary point than this gentleman.’6+
    In time Disraeli was to press him to join his government, but for
the moment Baring was more than satisfied with the back benches.
Not that his freedom from ministerial office meant that he was
under-employed. ‘The fact is,’ said Bates, ‘he is the best worker I ever
saw. This, combined with his ability, makes him sought after as
Chairman and on Committees, Irish relief, etc.’65 He tried to do too
much, and as a result was often in bad health. His frequent absences
also imposed an additional burden on the third of the new partners
introduced by Alexander Baring in 1828. Fortunately it was a burden
Joshua Bates was well able to bear.
   Bates was the most imaginative of Alexander Baring’s appoint-
ments: not a member of the family, not an Englishman, not even
with a particularly brilliant career behind him. Massachusetts born
and bred, he had spent much of his career in the counting house of a
Boston merchant specializing in trade with Russia and Calcutta. He
had worked in Europe and had an unrivalled knowledge of Ameri-
can business and businessmen. His association with John Baring had
been soundly if not sensationally prosperous, and it must have been
the fact that both his partner and Peter Labouchére confidently
                    Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                      123
recommended him that Jed Alexander to make the experiment.
Clearly he had the experience and skills to be a useful partner;
whether he had the temperament took longer to establish.
   Bates was pawky, dour, charmless; with little imagination and less
humour. ‘His tone was dry, his words tew, wrote Samuel Ward,
whose father T. W. Ward was an ardent admirer and protégé of his
fellow countryman.® He could be touchingly naive. He noted in his
diary that he was charmed by Boswell’s Johnson: ‘perhaps this partly
owing to the fact that I find Johnson’s opinion on many subjects
coincide with my own, and as I have never derived any great advan-
tage from Books, never having read much, this is greatly in favour of
my intellect’.67 A man of grinding conscientiousness, his joy was
work; ‘You are the most uniformly laborious man I know,’ wrote
T. W. Ward.¢8 Bates sometimes tried to persuade himself that there
were other pleasures in life than those of the counting house. ‘I
would rather make a quarter of the money I do and free myself from
the necessity of that day and night attention to business which
becomes irksome to me,’ he told Ward.°? No doubt he believed it at
 the time, but if ever he tried to put it into practice he quickly found
 himself pining for the delights of trading. ‘The man was illiterate and
 ignorant but possessed a strong mind and much business ability,’
was the verdict of one of the many Americans who visited him in
 London, and it does not seem unfair.7°
    Bates displayed in his private life the same rectitude and
 meticulousness as in the office. ‘From this date Mrs Bates to be
allowed £150 per year for her dress, thread, tapes, needles, pins and
for charitable purposes; Tolls, expenses in carriage, ices at Gunter’s,
he noted in his diary.7! It was not ungenerous, but woe betide Mrs
Bates if she exceeded her allowance. Bates was a hard man. ‘My
gardener seems to be much in debt, he noted. ‘He has too many chil-
dren, which is the great difficulty with all labouring men. | must dis-
charge him.’7? Another time two of his house servants fell in love and
conceived a child. They were ready to marry but Bates dismissed
                                                                      ser-
them. It was ‘more important to set a good example to the other
                                                                 realistic
yants than redeem these servants’. But he could be as coolly
                                                             gh   Review
about himself as about others. In 1833 the Edinbur
                                                                ‘unques-
described him as ‘the first Merchant of the country’ and
                                                   y  style me  the  most
tionably the ablest’. ‘The Quarterly will probabl
 124                       The Sixth Great Power