

 he complained to Ward. ‘As soon as I get proper clerks and the bust-
 ness goes easy, it is found that the increase of work requires addi-
 tional hands.’3 Four years later, with the total now over 40, he was
looking for yet more staff.+
   But though he did not succeed in reducing numbers, and actually
raised the basic salaries, he cut down on the commissions, unofficial
but tacitly condoned, which the clerks had grown used to taking. He
made himself exceedingly unpopular as a result.’ His advice to him-
self in his diary on how to run the office is typical both of the man
and his regime. ‘Having been generally successful in business we
have become too free and open in our conduct and have incurred
risks that it will not be wise to repeat. A system of secrecy should be
encouraged and. . .none but clever persons admitted into the office.
A rigid economy should also be enforced as much as in less prosper-
ous times. Avoid all pride, ostentation and unnecessary show.”6
   The regulations laid down for the clerks suggest that their life was
austere but not over-taxing. Juniors arrived at 9.30 a.m., seniors at 10
a.m., there was an hour for lunch, and all left at 5 p.m. except when
the international mail was departing. Anyone under the age of sixty
had to sign a book on arrival; after one’s sixtieth birthday it was pre-
sumably hoped the habit of punctuality would have been finally
inculcated. “Unnecessary conversation in the Office, one with
another, was deplored, as were visits by friends or disappearances
from the office on personal affairs. ‘When it is considered that these
Regulations, on ordinary days, only require attendance for the
Superior Clerks about Six Hours per day, and the Junior Six and a
half Hours, and Two Hours additional on Post and Packet Days, it
cannot be thought severe,’ concluded the notice somewhat defen-
sively. ‘It is therefore insisted on that the short time be devoted ear-
nestly to the duties of the office.’7
  William Rathbone, who joined Barings in 1840, would not have
felt this unreasonable. He found his life ‘full of very hard and varied
work, but of perfect health and freedom from anxiety or disturbance
or worry of any kind’. Bates was an exacting but not unreasonable
taskmaster, he ‘had the knack of seeing everything without appear-
ing to take any trouble to do so’.8 Humphrey Mildmay’s son Henry
Bingham was taken on in 1845, initially to copy letters. His hand-
writing was not considered to come up to the required commer
                                                                  cial
                  The Trade in Bishopsgate: 1830-1848                      129
standards and he was sent to take lessons from an expert in the
Gray's Inn Road. His only complaint was that he had to work on Sat-
urday afternoons.?
   In 1828 Labouchére took a young American, Russell Sturgis, to
Bishopsgate. Sturgis was amazed by the volume of business trans-
acted. The postage on the letters each day amounted to £25. Sturgis
remarked that the partners must have an easy time of it since all they
had to do was sign their names, and was told that on that one day
they would have 3000 cheques to sign for French dividends and 500
for American.!° (The same was still true in 1912, when Patrick Shaw-
 Stewart, confronted by 500 dividend warrants, cursed the day he had
 opted to sign with his full name rather than as P. Stewart.)!! The rit-
 ual was that all the letters, often 200 a day, were looked at by Bates,
inspected more meticulously by Mildmay and then distributed
around the office. An immense part of the burden was borne by
 Bates, who personally handled almost all the correspondence with
 the United States as well as making regular visits to Exchange to buy
 and sell bills, draw and remit. ‘This requires promptness and deci-
 sion, and a degree of experience,’ wrote T. W. Ward, who visited
 Bishopsgate when the new partnership was forming. He noticed
 how conscientious Bates was in his attendance compared to his col-
 leagues or those from other houses: “This is an advantage Bates has -
 he is devoted to business and willing to labor.’
    [t was almost certainly Bates who propounded the golden rule on
 which Baring Brothers based its operations: °. . . by being too liberal
 we lose our money and not being sufficiently liberal we lose our
 business. Therefore the middle course is the one it should be our aim
 to follow.13 Admirably rational though it was, the precept still
                                                                              d
 comes into the category of ‘easier said than done’. Barings operate
                                                        safegua  rded     them
 under certain self-imposed restrictions, which
                                                                          They
 from much loss but at the price of missing many opportunities.
                                                                         it had
 would rarely enter into business with a house abroad unless
 been introduced by one of their own trusted corresp         ondents  .   They
                                                                            the
 never parted with bills of exchange endorsed by themselves until
 bills fell due: ‘It is a source of pride and  satisfac tion  to  me,’   wrote
                                                                              of
 Bates of the 1837 financial crisis, ‘that by foresight on the part
                                                                         never
 myself and partners our House has never discounted a bill and
                                                           grantin  g   credits
 had aid from the Bank in any way’.'* They disliked
 130                      The Sixth Great Power