

 unless assured that the correspondent kept his account solely with
 Barings.                                                    )
    In applying such rules they were deemed ultra-conservative by
 many of their most successful rivals. Rothschilds habitually bor-
 rowed large sums from the Bank of England and discounted many
 bills with Overend, Gurney, the leading discount house. Brown,
 Shipley were more adventurous over accepting clients who took
 credit elsewhere, and won much good business from Barings by their
 policy. Their record hardly proves them wrong. Yet as Barings suc-
cessfully rode out the successive economic crises of the 1830s and
 1840s, their prudence did not seem misplaced. They missed
opportunities for profit but they slept more securely in their beds,
and in the circumstances of the time that was a comforting reflection
for their correspondents as well as for themselves.
   Sometimes profit was not a consideration. In November 1845 the
failure of the Irish potato crop led to the government ordering
£100,000 to be spent on buying maize in the United States. The
problem was that as soon as the buyer was known prices would soar.
Sir Randolph Routh, head of the Commissariat Department of the
British Army, suggested his brother-in-law in Quebec should do the
job, but the Chancellor of the Exchequer politely replied that, while
this gentleman was ‘doubtless respectable’, he was ‘hardly likely to
 be a first-class merchant’. He preferred Baring Brothers.!5 Thomas
 Baring offered to put their agent, T. W. Ward, at the disposal of the
government and in December they undertook to procure £100,000
worth of ‘Indian Corn and Meal’ to ship to Cork.16 The business was
done with extreme discretion; no one in the United States had any
idea what was going on and the maize was bought at rock-bottom
prices. C. E. Trevelyan was so impressed by Barings’ performance
that he tried to use them ona similar job in Britain a year later.!7 This
Barings declined, but they did not take a penny in commission for
their trouble in the Irish business.
   The Liverpool office was the brainchild of Joshua Bates, set up
                                                                        to
foster the American trade which was his special pride and which
demands attention in a separate chapter. He had envisaged a Liver-
pool house as early as 1830, but hesitated to establish it in case ‘we
may be thought too grasping and people will be set against
                                                                    us’.18
Mildmay was characteristically reluctant to endorse so bold
                                                                   a step
and it was not until 1832 that the office was opened, under
                                                                 Charles
                  The Trade in Bishopsgate: 1830-1848                 131
Baring Young and SF. S. Gair. ‘It is a grand move,’ wrote Thomas Bar-
ing from Paris, ‘which has been wanting for the last three years but
nots I hope, too late.’ It was not. By 1833 twenty clerks were
employed and Bates could report proudly that ‘We are No. 5 in the
list of receivers of cotton, and may be no. 2 before the year is out.. . .
I foresee that this Liverpool House will one day rival ours in London,
and I am quite enamoured of it.’!9
   The business in Liverpool, with its concentration on cotton, admi-
rably exemplified the sort of general trade in which Barings excelled.
Thomas Baring relished the major deal which might take years to set
up but could yield a fortune if it came off; Bates favoured a multi-
plicity of minor bargains, each one producing a small but sure return.
Unlike Rothschilds, who specialized in bullion, mercury or dia-
monds, Barings were interested in any commodity that was widely in
demand, which could be bought and sold or on which advances
could be made or shipping and insurance organized: tea, sugar, cof-
fee, indigo, copper, grain, rice, tobacco... . But Bates was a prudent
man and he was always quick to retreat from a field if he felt that the
future was uncertain. He withdrew almost entirely from advances to
the European wool growers, and cut off credit to Calcutta in 1832
and 1833 when the tea planters failed to produce enough to cover
their bills. He was criticized at the time, but saved Barings a great
deal of money.?°
   Very occasionally Bates could be adventurous, however, as in
1830 and 1831 when political disturbances on the continent meant
that the amount of capital deposited with them had become almost
embarrassingly large. The knowledge that many cattle in Russia
had died of distemper made him think that the price of tallow was
bound to rise, and Barings bought large amounts for their own
account. Then he decided that they would do well to control the
                                                           Baron
market, so in collaboration with the St Petersburg banker,
                                                                    By
Alexander Stieglitz, he set out to corner all the existing stocks.
                                                                   was
mid-December Barings had bought 44,000 casks and the price
                                             had invested  more   than
beginning to rise, and a month later they
£120,000 and could claim ‘to have under our control all the yellow
                                                             order not
Candle Tallow in the market. . . but for distant delivery in
                                                      gain £70,000   by
to affect the market. Now the chance is that we shall
it and Stieglitz as much more.?!
                                                             manufac-
   But a storm arose. Furious protests from importers and
132                      The Sixth Great Power