

no responsibility in the matter.’#? But he took offence if he thought
he was being slighted. In 1845 he discovered that Barings had given
their closest associates in Paris, Hottinguers, power to sign for them.
‘| do not understand upon what principle this is done when I am on
the spot,’ he wrote indignantly, ‘and I cannot for one moment allow
any business to be carried on in a manner which I consideras a reflec-
tion upon myself.’5° His cousin John Baring good-naturedly apolo-
gized - ‘If there has been any error or irregularity. . . itis Iwho must
cry peccavi'>! — but they had done the same thing in the past and were
to do so again.
   Thomas Nixson, clerk promoted partner, had retired in mid-1828,
so that Humphrey Mildmay was the only other partner surviving
after Holland’s death. His new partners treated him with affection-
ate contempt. ‘He is a most estimable man and his punctuality and
attention to business deserve great praise,’ wrote Joshua Bates, but
he ‘suffers from weak nerves, and having had but little experience his
natural timidity is thereby heightened.’s? On one occasion he pan-
icked, decided the house would need at least £400,000 within the
next few weeks and wrote letters appealing for help to Hope and Co.,
Hottinguers and other close friends. Bates went into the matter and
found Barings had funds perfectly adequate to meet any conceivable
need - ‘Some arrangement must be made by which I can avoid this
annoyance of Mr Mildmay’s weak nerves.’%3
  Sir Thomas’s third son, John, was one of the new partners who
began work in July 1828. A curiously elusive figure, his main signifi-
cance to the house was that he had gone into business with Joshua
Bates and now brought his partner back to join Barings in London.
‘Able but indolent,’ was how Ward described him, and all the - not
very plenuful - traces of his tenure in London suggest a man who
was affable, easy-going and somewhat diffident. ‘The truth was I was
very tired of the thing,’ he told Bates, when he retired in 1837. If he
had been senior partner it might have been different, ‘but being
junior I could not give myself airs, particularly as my seniors are
workers, and as really it requires pretty close working and watching
to keep the house at its present pitch’.5+ After ten years in the busi-
ness he retired with £180,000; ‘probably the largest fortune gained
by any one individual in business in which there is very little specula-
tion,’ commented Bates.55 He flourished in retirement for fifty years,
                     Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                     121

living alone and modestly and giving the surplus of his income to the
poor. ‘He 1s one of the best and most pure-minded of men,’ wrote
Bates.*¢
   His brother Thomas was altogether more formidable. Tactful,
witty, affable, yet with the Baring aptitude for ensuring that he was
taken seriously, he was as ready as his brother to relax when the occa-
sion offered, but far more ready to work when the need was there. ‘I
feel a want of the desk, and a yearning after the dear Bankers’ book
and the insinuating book of acceptances,’ he wrote when on holiday
in Paris.57 But in fact the book of acceptances was far from being his
favourite reading. He hankered after the more glamorous side of
banking and like Alexander before him preferred the world of high
finance and international loans to the more humdrum business of
the counting house. He not merely enjoyed such work, but he was
outstandingly good at it. ‘Tom Baring writes you about stocks,’ Bates
told Ward. ‘He does that sort of correspondence to admiration - so
 much better than I can that I have made him take charge of that
 department.’*8
    In 1835 he joined the family contingent in the House of Com-
 mons; a conservative like his uncle, and thus at odds with his father
 and brother. In 1843 he fought a particularly spirited by-election in
 the City of London. ‘You must read Tom’s speeches,’ Bates told
 Ward. ‘He has astounded everybody by his readiness and even elo-
 quence, his manner and fluency are quite remarkable.’5? Unfortu-
 nately he was opposed by the Anti-corn Law League, who had been
 stirred up by the great financier, Lord Overstone. Overstone, a pas-
 sionate free-trader, denounced Baring as being at the best lukewarm
 on the theme. ‘I see by the papers that you have given me a very hard
 hit, which falls the heavier on me as it had not been expected,’
 Thomas Baring wrote to his fellow banker. ‘I hope you do not
 approve of the coarse manner in which Mr Pattison speaks of Lord
 Ashburton and my family’ - a reference to the claim of his opponent
 that Baring was standing only to satisfy the ambitions of his uncle
 and had quarrelled with his own family in consequence.°°
                                                                      lost
    Baring spent £5485.6.3d. on the City of London election but
                                                        r, he  enjoye d  a
 by 6367 votes to 6532. The following year, howeve
                                                                  and  we
 walkover at Huntingdon. ‘Our business is in good order now
                                                            wrote Bates.
 can spare one or two partners a portion of the time,’
 122                     The Sixth Great Power