

him.’2? In fact Althorp’s resignation led to the downfall of the Whigs
and Robert Peel’s brief Tory administration. Baring agreed to serve
as President of the Board of Trade and was alarmed when he found
that he was also being referred to as Treasurer of the Navy - “This
Treasurership is of all inflictions that which I should most lament.??
Disraeli states Baring took the job on the promise that he would be
given a peerage:*4 it is unlikely that the bargain was struck in so many
words, but when Peel resigned after only a few months Baring got his
reward in the dissolution honours. He called himself Lord
Ashburton, reviving the now defunct title of his uncle by marriage,
John Dunning. He got his title, commented         The Times unkindly,
 ‘since no human being can assign a valid reason why he should not
 have been made a lord’.?5
    In the House of Lords, Ashburton discarded the last shackles of
 his former liberalism and spoke invariably as champion of capital-
ism incarnate. When Lord Ashley tried to introduce a bill limiting
working hours, Ashburton commented that he had no idea whether
a ten-, eleven- or twelve-hour working day was most desirable, ‘but I
should be sorry to incur the responsibility of any restrictions at all.
. . The most mischievous men of our day are our conceited political
economists and our ultra-humanitarians, good men some of them,
but theirs is a description of cant just suited to the capacities of the
majority of our electoral body.’?6 One of his speeches stung Lord
Clarendon to almost hysterical rage: ‘There was no exploded fallacy,
no stupid prejudice, no reference to selfish interests, which this
faithful representative of his own breeches pocket did not hash up
together in language mainly characterized by spite against those
whom he supposed to be meddling with his interests.’ He com-
pounded his offence in Clarendon’s eyes when he referred to ‘the
bloated mass of commercial prosperity’ which existed in Britain.
‘He! Lord Ashburton! whose £40,000 a year was made by commerce
- whose connexions are all in trade.’27
    In 1839, and again in 1841, Ashburton forestalled any plan Peel
might have had for offering him another place in government by
insisting in advance that he did not want one. ‘The truth is that my
work is done and my lease of life too near its natural close to under-
take efficient occupation.’28 He did, however, hold out for a job for
his son William Bingham; ‘The Vice Presidency of the Board of
                    Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                     Hh?

Trade would suit and satisfy him.’ This vacancy was booked for
Gladstone, wrote Peel apologetically, but the Board of Control (of
Indian affairs) was ‘of equal importance’.2® The Board of Control it
was.
   At the end of 1841 Lord Aberdeen persuaded Ashburton that his
work was not done and despatched him on a special mission to solve
the boundary disputes still outstanding between Britain and the
United States. He was, Aberdeen told Queen Victoria, one of the few
eminent Englishmen who would be acceptable to the Americans.3°
Some thought he was too acceptable. ‘There is much of popular
objection to him from his American connections and his supposed
strong American interests, wrote Lord Melbourne. ‘He is supposed
to possess much funded property in that country, and to have almost
as strong an interest in its welfare as in that of Great Britain.’3! The
settlement he brought back certainly gave away more than ardent
British patriots thought proper, but Melbourne spoke for the more
moderate opposition when he concluded that nothing of real impor-
tance was lost and ‘any settlement is better than none’.}? Ashburton
himself felt the government did not do enough to show that they
approved the terms he had secured. He told Peel he should be made
an earl. Peel countered with the offer of a viscountcy and the Order
of the Bath. ‘Probably many would prefer the more flashy distinction
of a Star and Ribbon,’ wrote Ashburton, ‘but I feel so strongly that
this does not suit me, and that the decoration would attach a certain
degree of ridicule to me, that I hope Ishall lose nothing of your good
opinion of me if I adhere to my first impression of the case.’33 Peel
maintained that an earldom for Ashburton would suggest ‘undue
exultation on the part of this country,’ and lead the Americans to
question the justice of the settlement.** It was an ingenious argu-
                                                                  ended
ment, butit did not convince his correspondent; the exchange
with Ashburton embittered and still a baron.
  The men were reconciled at the end of 1844 when Ashburton
                                                               1846
played with the idea of rejoining the Cabinet, but fell out in
                                                agreed, he told
over Peel’s commitment to Free Trade. Ashburton
                                                                 entre
Peel, with all previous relaxation of protection, ‘but to the
                                                   I have an  insupe r-
removal of all protection from domestic industry
                                                       agree - ‘he ais
able objection’.35 His son, William Bingham, did not
                                                           hing called
devoted disciple of the School of Doctrinaires, and everyt
118                      The Sixth Great Power