

shorta tack for that character of steadiness which gives us a superior-
ity over the Jews and makes people prefer doing business with us, it
was because I was not on the spot and could not understand all the
circumstances of the case.’4? At the height of the crisis Ashburton
told John Baring that the house was ‘very snug and comfortable’.*°
Not many houses could have said the same.


In 1831, when Ward had urged Bates in future to concentrate exclu-
sively on commission and acceptance business, Bates replied: ‘What-
ever may have been the character of our House formerly, it is no
longer a House concerned in foreign loans. At the same time, with a
constantly accumulating capital [in 1831, £326,424], it is not worth
while to say that it will not suit us to enter into any monied opera-
tions that we deem safe. Indeed, our capital is too large unless we
were to take an interest sometimes in operations that require money
in large sums.’5!
   Though the first part of Bates’s statement may have been true at
the time it was made, it did not remain so for long. What is certainly
the case, however, is that it was not a house concerned in domestic
loans. If the British government was in the market Barings were pre-
pared to participate, but even then not very enthusiastically. When
the Chancellor raised £8 million in 3 per cent Consols in 1847
Barings did a deal with Rothschilds. Each made a tender for the
whole loan at the same price and then divided it. Since they were the
only competitors, they not surprisingly secured the loan: ‘Our bid
was, we have reason to believe, close to the minister’s minimum, if
indeed it was not exactly the same.’s? The views of the Chancellor on
what he might reasonably have felt to be a somewhat unsporting car-
tel, are not recorded. So far as British industry was concerned, with
the freakish exception of Weardale, where they set up their own
company, Barings felt they had nothing to contribute. Nor, indeed,
were they asked to; the merchant banks were not seen as a source of
funds for industrialists in Britain in the mid-nineteenth century. The
exception for some banks, but not for Barings, was railways.
   In the 1840s the railway boom in Britain absorbed the best part of
£60 million a year.5? In Endymion Disraeli marvelled at the reluc-
tance of British bankers to take part in this orgy: ‘The mighty loan-
                 The Trade in Bishopsgate:    1830-1848                £39
mongers, on whose fiat the fate of kings and empires sometimes
depended, seemed like men who, witnessing some eccentricity of
nature, watch it with mixed feelings of curiosity and alarm. . . 1t was
only by the irresisuble pressure of circumstances that a banking firm
   - was ultimately forced to take the leading part that was
required.’** The reluctant leader was Glyn, Hallifax, Mills; though
few if any loan-mongers were mightier than Barings they viewed
such operations with distaste. “There seems to be an increasing
mania for railroads, Bates wrote in his diary in 1836, *... which
must lead to confusion and embarrassment before a year.’ He com-
forted himself with the thought that, since the money would be
spent at home, it would at least ‘have been scattered to do good in
the country’.**
   The same could not be said of the European loans in which they
were engaged. When Bates said that Barings was no longer a house
concerned in foreign loans, he tacitly conceded that the pre-
eminence Rothschilds had established in this field was theirs to
keep. Thomas Baring was less ready to yield the day. He did not
find it easy to reassert himself. In Vienna, indeed, Barings suffered a
further reverse when Hopes were replaced as agent of the Austrian
government - ‘It is probably that the Jews have been paying for the
                                                                       In
agency ... as they usually do, commented Barings darkly.*¢
                                                                       in
 Portugal Barings provided a small short-term loan of £140,000
 1846, but against the better judgement      of several of the partners.
                                                                   of the
 ‘Portuguese credit has been so tainted by the mismanagement
                                                       not be a very
Jews and Jobbers,’ wrote Mildmay, that *. . . it would
                                                                  with the
desirable connexion for any House wishing to stand well
                                                               they    were
Public.’57 The Mildmay view prevailed when in 1847
                                                                    govern-
invited to take on the financial agency of the Portuguese
                                                     unflatterin g  alacrity
ment; Barings refused the poisoned chalice with
and left the field to their competitors.
                                                                   put up a
   Spain was another Rothschild preserve but here Barings
                                                                 reason   to
stouter fight. They steered clear of a loan in 1834 and had
                                                             ked and the
congratulate themselves when the Stock Exchange panic
                                                    from  exper ience and
price fell heavily: ‘I hope they will take a lesson
                                                           smugly.** But
never carry their operations so far again,’ wrote Bates
                                                         an essential ele-
there was money to be made in Spain. Mercury was
                                                            source of the
ment in the refining of silver, and Spain controlled the
140                      The Sixth Great Power