

best and cheapest mercury. Every so often the Spanish government
would contract for the disposal of the mercury production over the
next few years. In 1835, 1838 and 1843 Rothschilds secured the con-
tract and Barings held off; then in 1847 Francis Falconnet was
dispatched to Madrid, among other things to look into the
possibilities of intervention in the mercury market. Through the first
half of 1848 desultory negotiations dragged on. “Thank God that
Barings do not intend interfering in the quicksilver business,’ wrote
Anthony de Rothschild in June, but his relief was premature.5?
Barings were far from having withdrawn, yet were ready to accept
that Rothschilds could not be wholly driven from the field. The pos-
sibility of some sort of joint operation was taking shape by the time
the 1848 revolutions put a brake on the pace of business all over
Europe.
   In Paris the ascendancy of Rothschilds was still more evident; they
were indeed so strongly entrenched there that at any time they were
ready to pay above the odds to keep rivals at bay. From time to time
Hottinguer tried to put together a gentile syndicate to disturb their
hegemony but rarely with success. In 1841, when a huge loan was in
prospect, Hottinguer had to accepta quarter share from Rothschilds
and Barings ended up with only 54,000 francs of rentes. In 1844
Hottinguers insisted on taking half and, when this was refused, went
into opposition. Thomas Baring visited Paris to join the battle.
‘Hottinguer is decidedly of opinion that my arrival had better not be
known,’ he told Bates, °. . . because if it did not bring Rothschild to
terms it would induce him to raise his bid... . 1am to be shut up tll
after Monday, which seems rather absurd but I obey orders.’6°
Whether or not he knew of Baring’s presence, Rothschild outbid
Hottinguer handsomely: Baring comforted himself with the reflec-
tion that it was of the greatest importance for ‘our rival to be success-
ful, while. . . itis of little consequence to us’.6! By the time another
loan came up in 1847 Rothschild was alone in the field. It was a
costly victory, for the growing economic and political problems of
1847 and 1848 made it almost impossible to dispose of the stock.
‘The Jew took the loan out of vanity,’ wrote Francis Baring, who reg-
ularly showed himself the most vigorously anti-Semitic of the part-
ners, ‘not chusing that any great arrangement should be made with-
out him.’6
                  The Trade in Bishopsgate:     1830-1848                141

_ It was a different matter when it came to the French railways,
in which some £40 million was invested in the 1840s.° In 1843
Barings joined a consortium to oppose Rothschilds in their bid for
the railway concession from Paris to the Belgian frontier. ‘Barings
have joined the rival company,’ reported Anselm de Rothschild; and
two days later, ‘The rival company intrigues like the devil against
us.’6¢ In the end neither group obtained the concession. But there
were plentiful pickings for everyone and a formula was generally
worked out by which the profits were spread around the interested
 parties. Barings never took the lead in the negotiations but did quite
 nicely all the same. When the shares in the Northern Railroad were
 distributed in August 1845, Bates reported that they had taken them
 at £12 and sold at £20: ‘I hope it is not wicked to make money so fast.
 I settle the account with my conscience in the belief that a share 1s
 really worth £40.'¢
     Though Francis and Thomas Baring were both made directors of
 the Northern Railroad, the part played by Barings in the financing of
 the French railways was not considerable. Except for a brief flurry
 around 1845 the British investor's interest was cautious and limited.
 The significance of Barings and other British banks, as Professor
  Platt has put it, was that they ‘stimulated the haute banque and
  opened the floodgates for domestic speculation and investment             .*°
                                                 with  even  this  seconda ry
  By 1846 they were decidedly disenchanted
                                                                     . .. they
  role. ‘There is now a very general gloom and depression .
  told Hottinguers. ‘All foreign rail are a deadletter. . . .'°”
                                                                         s or
     If in France Barings played second fiddle to Hottinguer
                                                               Tradit ionall y
  Rothschilds, in Russia it was Hopes who took the lead.
                                                              The few rela-
  Amsterdam was the main centre for Russian stocks.
                                                      1830s  and   1840s met
  tively small loans that were brought out in the
                                                            was   repell ed by
  with a poor response in London, where the public
                                            ment of his neighbour,
 the Tsar’s autocratic rule and harsh treat
                                                     moderation which
 Poland. ‘If the Emperor continues the system of
                                                          t a new Rus-
 he is following in Poland. . . then the prejudice agains
                                                 told Hopes in 1831,%%
 sian loan here will entirely subside,’ Barings
                                                placed 500,000 roubles
 but though on this occasion they successfully
                                                 seemed incompatible
 of stock in London, sustained moderation
                                                   other hazards too. In
 with the nature of the Russian state. There were
                                                   been observed that
 November 1832 Barings reported: ‘It has
 142                    The Sixth Great Power