

Rothschild paid yesterday a long visit at the Russian Embassy where
he has not been seen for the last 3 years.’? Ten years later the threat
became reality when Rothschilds in Berlin and Frankfurt handled
the larger part of a new 4 per cent loan raised to finance a railroad
from St Petersburg to Moscow.7°
   In spite of this setback Barings still hoped to secure the agency for
the Russian government in London; not that it was likely to prove
lucrative but because, as Mildmay modestly admitted, ‘there is a cer-
tain credit even to such a House as Baring Brothers and Co. in being
appointed to such an Agency’?! From retirement Lord Ashburton
urged his nephew on, but he was sceptical about the chances. ‘I am
 afraid your competitor will prove too strong for you,’ he wrote. ‘He
 has winning ways which you cannot imitate. . . . You will gain noth-
 ing by stooping too low and though the Agency is very desirable it
would not even be worth having with engagements which would
leave the Court masters of your Capital at all time.’72 When the nego-
tiations went sour, Barings consoled themselves with the thought
that they were well rid of what could have been an embarrassing
encumbrance. The grapes were, perhaps, genuinely sour, but in Rus-
sia as in almost every country in Europe the power of Rothschilds
had proved superior.
   Looking at Europe alone, Bates’s contention that Barings were no
longer a house interested in foreign loans, though not the whole
truth, was at least a large part of it. Such loans contributed only a
small element to the total turnover and were generally more trouble
than they were worth. But Europe was not the whole story. There
was a world elsewhere; and it was across the Atlantic that Barings’
business, in loans as well as in the more traditional trading, pros-
pered most mightily.
                                    9
                                >   ex

      ;
 American Resources and Wealth’
                North America, 1828-1848




Given the experience and predilections of Joshua Bates it would
have been amazing if North America had not witnessed Barings’
most dramatic growth in the 1830s and 1840s. But it was not Bates
alone who was responsible. When the firm of Bates and Baring had
been taken into Baring Brothers in 1828 it brought with it business
worth some £14,000 a year, and though no one doubted that Bates
had been the most active partner, the name of John Baring was
remembered and well liked in business circles throughout New Eng-
land. Thomas Baring was also well known in the United States. He
was introduced to the former President, James Madison, as being
one of those ‘whose interests, as well as their feelings, are interwoven
with the prosperity of this country". The house of Baring had been
less conspicuous over the last decade than directly after the Napole-
onic wars, but there was still a solid basis of reputation and good will
on which to build.
   In London it was Bates who made himself responsible for the
American visitors to London, a stream which became a torrent after
the steamboat service was established in 1838. Even in 1833 some
100 or 150 Americans might be in town at the same time with intro-
ductions to Barings. ‘I doubt if anyone goes away under the idea that
                                                                        he
his business is neglected but he may have an idea that personally
has received but little attention,’ wrote Bates. What was    to be done?
Even if he were able to ask them all to his house it would be at the risk
                                                                       the
of ‘offending the higher by mixing them with the lower, and
                                                                     feel-
Americans display none of that equality or want of aristocratic
ing, which they are so famed for at home’.
                                                                         in
   It was, however, Thomas Baring who went to the United States
                                    143
144                      The Sixth Great Power