

   Rothschilds were inconsiderable in the commercial field, but after
their setbacks in 1830 in France they began to look with interest at
the United States. In 1834 this brought them into direct conflict with
Barings. The new administration under President Andrew Jackson
was known to be violently opposed to Nicholas Biddle’s Bank of the
United States, with which Barings were closely allied, and Barings
had also been somewhat less than sympathetic when the Secretary of
the Treasury carelessly drew a bill without first appropriating the
necessary funds. It seemed possible the United States government
might wish to change its agent. Rothschilds evidently volunteered
for the role, for in July 1834 the Treasury Department wrote to thank
them: “The high standing and character of your house 1s well under-
stood in the United States, and I take pleasure in saying that the
Government of this country will probably avail itself of yr offer.’
   The first Barings heard of it was a brusque note from the Secretary
of the Treasury telling them that the account would be transferred in
just over two months.!5 The news was received, wrote the historian
of Rothschilds, with ‘un mélange dorgueil froissé et d'amertume’.'6
Certainly the identity of their replacement caused them more dis-
tress than the loss of the account, which in financial terms was more
trouble than it was worth. “They might have written us a more civil
letter,’ was their temperate comment.!” They comforted themselves
with the reflection that they had kept the far more profitable US
Navy account, and that since the change had been a political one,
‘and as parties are rapidly changing, it is probable that we shall have
it back in two or three years’.18
   In this they were proved right. In 1843 Tyler became President,
with Barings’ staunch friend, Daniel Webster, as Secretary of State.
At once the account was restored to Barings. Webster then resigned.
Rothschilds’ man in America, August Belmont, saw a chance to
regain the prize. ‘It would be an easy matter to get the account back,’
he wrote, ‘provided, however, the place 1s not filled by a creature of
Webster's, who for weighty reasons is very attached to Barings.”!9
Some months later, he was pointing out to all and sundry the merits
of transferring the account to Rothschilds in Paris, arguing ‘how
impolitic it is on the part of the United States Government to keep
her accounts for the disbursement of her diplomatic agents and
a great portion of her foreign fleet not only in England, the only
                      North America:    1828-1848                     147

country with which ever a collision is likely to occur, but moreover in
the hands of a banking house whose close connection with a mem-
ber of the House of Lords puts the accounts of this Government
almost under the immediate eye of the British Cabinet’.2° Ingenious
though his arguments were they availed him nothing, and the
Rothschilds in London did little to urge him on. It was more than
twenty years before Barings finally lost the agency, and then only to
an American bank.