

— ~But it was iron that introduced Bates to one of his few ventures
into British industry. Since the early fifteenth century when the
Bishop of Durham began to produce at his own forge, Weardale had
been a cradle of the English iron industry.3? In 1844 Mr Chas.
Attwood, who had secured leases of mineral deposits in the Wear
Valley, tried to interest Barings in a new process for manufacturing
 pig iron. The present price was £5.10/- and Attwood calculated he
 could produce it at 16/-, giving a potential annual profit of £350,000.
 ‘This may well seem incredible, wrote Bates. ‘In about one month
 we shall know about it and decide.’33 It was nails all over again, but
 this time the outcome was different. By May 1845 the only question
 was whether Weardale ironstone and coal would together make
 good iron: ‘] entertain no doubt.’34 He took his partners along with
 him. Thomas Baring found it hard to believe so good a thing had
 been so long undiscovered, but was prepared to let Bates have his
 head; Francis Baring and Charles Baring Young had no objections.
 Even Mildmay was ready to support the enterprise on the grounds
 that he had some friends who had done well out of iron. Usually he
 would have opposed it, he said, as not being the right sort of
employment ‘for the capital of a House of business’, but he was
prepared to make an exception because of the ‘unusually tempting
circumstances ’.35                                         |
  Thomas Baring remained mildly sceptical. He had been in Paris
pursuing a loan. ‘Now that our French much ado about nothing 1s all
over and ended in smoke,’ he wrote, ‘you can only look to your
Weardale project for a fortune. I hope that will end in smoke and
something else.’ By late 1846 Barings had paid Attwood £14,000
                                                              d £100,000
 for half his leases of ironstone and coal and had advance
to the Weardale Iron Co. ‘Secret, Bates told Ward. ‘We are making
                                                                it in reply,
Iron very fast and ata very cheap rate, but don’t mention
                                                        us  of being   con-
for it so happens that no one appears to suspect
                                                           but every   me
cerned in Iron making.’37 A triumph seemed at hand,
                                             technic al   hitch  occurred.
that production began to build up, some
                                                             dreame   d of,’
‘There are more difficulties in Iron making than I ever
                                                           on the edge of
Bates wrote in his diary.38 The dream was to teeter
                                                         course.
nightmare before the saga of Weardale had run its
                                                         by Barings, how-
   No house doing business of the kind undertaken
                                                        vagaries of world
ever astutely run, could flourish irrespective of the
 136                     The Sixth Great Power
 trade. In 1831 all seemed set fair. Alexander Baring’s retirement had
 done good, declared Bates. ‘Each man in the House now sees the
 necessity of taking a stand for himself; the consequence is an aggre-
 gate mass of influence which will in a short time carry the House
 above what it ever was as a commercial establishment.’3? Rothschilds
 had been caught with huge holdings of French stocks after the 1830
 revolution and their credit had suffered. ‘It is really unpleasant,’
 wrote Bates with transparent insincerity, ‘to see Mr R. drawing at 25
 1212 on Paris while we find eager takers at 25 21/2. I cannot under-
 stand it, for altho’ he has lost by the turn of events he must be a man
 of great wealth; to be sure, he draws on his Brothers, while we draw
on Hottinguers, Baguenault and Hope.’#°
   The euphoria did not abate in the following years. Profit for 1832
was £98,000 and the following year £119,000 ‘Between ourselves,’
Bates boasted to Ward, “BB and Co. are as much beyond what they
ever were as a Commercial House as Prime is beyond Shipman or
any other small concern.’ The problem was how to escape being
overwhelmed by the flood of business.+! The economic crisis in the
United States in 1837 involved them in severe losses at the time but
in the end strengthened their position by removing some of their
more dangerous rivals from the field.*
   In 1839 it was a British crisis, brought about by an outflow of ster-
ling to pay for wheat imports from the continent and the unre-
stricted growth of joint stock banks, all merrily issuing Notes in spite
of their inadequate capital.42 The Bank of England, drained of its
gold reserves, was close to having to stop payments. The Comte
d’Argout, Governor of the Bank of France, was in London             and
offered to help. The Bank of France could not lend itself, but would
advance £2 million on bills payable in Paris. Barings were asked to
help in the operation and at once put together a syndicate of Paris
bankers, led by Hottinguers; ‘the operation of which this forms part
is intended to set at rest the agitations of our money market and pre-
vent any further export of gold,’ they explained to J. B. Gossler and
Co. of Hamburg.* Barings, who took a 1 per cent commission on
                                                                   the
transaction, sent Thomas Baring to Paris to supervise it. Rothschilds
refused to join the syndicate, though they belatedly tried to getinon