

* See pp. 148-9 below.
                 The Trade in Bishopsgate: 1830-1848                137
the act. Why not approach the Bank of England and offer to sell
them franc bills at a cheap rate? suggested Baron James to his Lon-
don nephews. ‘Lam sure that the Bank encounters difficulties when
buying through Barings, because as soon as Baring shows up every-
body knows that it is for the Bank and people start to speculate.
Transactions through the House of Rothschild would be a relief to
all concerned.’+
   The 1840s were at first marked by the recovery of the world econ-
omy and proved extravagantly fat years for Barings. ‘Our business is
too good and too extensive for us to keep it many years. . . . As we
now stand the permanent means of the House would enable us to
buy all our competitors out and have half a million to spare,’ wrote
Bates vaingloriously in 1846.45 But at the same time Barings were
battening down the hatches against the storm they believed Robert
Peel’s free trade legislation of 1845 was certain to conjure up. Huge
imports of corn from the continent and the outflow of sterling to
finance the new European railways once again put the Bank of Eng-
land under pressure. “There seems to be a dreadful crumbling to
pieces around you,’ wrote Thomas Baring to Bates from Aix, ‘and it
shows your good management that we are notas yet hit harder than
we are and that according to prospects we seem tolerably safe.’*¢
Once again Bates could legitimately congratulate himself on having
saved his house from great loss: ‘We do not hold on our own account
£20,000 worth of goods, and our consignments, which are also mod-
erate, will sell for enough to cover our advances.'#7
   Bates put the blame for the crisis on the folly of the British govern-
ment and British merchants - ‘The developments that are daily tak-
ing place surpass anything American. Inevitably the crisis spread
                                                                    that
to the continent and was fomented by the wave of revolutions
                                              keep  credits  to  a mini-
swept Europe in 1848. Bates’s answer was to
                                                                 variant
mum and treat commodities as if he was playing a mercantile
                                                                y, even
of pass-the-parcel, shifting them on with the utmost rapidit
                                                 Thoma  s   Baring   dis-
though the profit was minimal or non- existent.
                                                               probably
liked the policy but generously accepted that his partner
                                                             my confi-
knew best: ‘I have no doubt that you are right - indeed
                                                            to  shut up
dence in your judgment is so implicit that if you were
                                                         doing so, and
shop I should be sure that you had the best reasons for
                                              showed    too  rapid and
if I thought that one or two of your moves
 138                    The Sixth Great Power