


Ward felt that Barings did not use their pre-eminence in Anglo-
American trade to full advantage, and that they underestimated the
potential of the New World: ‘You have altogether too low ideas of
American resources and wealth, intelligence, efficiency of labour,
extent of production, ease of subsistence.’?!Bates had said scoffingly
that there were 3000 houses in England as powerful as the largest in
the United States and that the capital of Barings was almost equal to
that of Boston. ‘We have 15 millions of people active, intelligent,
industrious, full of eager competition and free of taxes,’ retorted
Ward. ‘We have a fertility of soil unexampled . . . So far as wealth
consists in commodities, good land, houses, people, power, roads,
canals, it would seem that we have both wealth and the means of
increasing it.22 When things were going badly Barings were too
quick to apply restrictions: ‘By acting with freedom I have done you
great good .. . Is it not desirable that your commercial correspon-
dents should feel that in times of security . . . they can have some
advantage from the resources of so great a House in delay or accom-
modation? Is it not very important to keep up the impression that
there is nothing like Barings, and is there no danger that the charm
may be broken?’3 When things went better they were too slow to
relax: ‘Two years ago, Ward wrote in 1835, ‘we seemed to be monop-
                                                                     com-
olizing the business of this country, but. . . various causes have
bined to lessen the proportion you have of the American business.
Your prudence has been a leading cause.’
                                                              1832, the
   He scored the occasional debating point. When, in
                                                 consi derab le   loss to
Hamburg firm of Sillem and Co. closed with
                                                                satisfac-
Barings among others Ward wrote with barely concealed
                                                         you, and that
tion: ‘I must say Iam surprised at such an event so near
148                      The Sixth Great Power

you should not have kept clear - not that the amount is anything of
importance, but I have valued your watchfulness and sagacity.’ How
much better things were ordered in the United States.’ But Barings
changed their policy not one whit. Constantly they were calling
Ward to order and reminding him of the rules of the house: ‘It is a
bad way to get into to allow people to postpone remittances and we
wish your particular attention to this point now’; ‘As it is probable busi-
ness will become unprofitable it will be absolutely necessary to limit
the issue of credit . . .’26 By the end of 1836, when the economic
storm had already broken over the United States, what had been pre-
viously pettifogging conservatism suddenly seemed the acme of wis-
dom. ‘It is now easy to perceive how wise Messrs Barings have been
in that restricted course which they have lately pursued, in conse-
quence of which they are now so snug and easy, wrote a friend in
London to Thomas Ward. ‘The other American acceptors, tho’ they
will get safely through, will have an anxious and painful time of 1t.’27
The writer thought the storm was almost over, in fact the worst was
still to come.
   The long period of American expansion, with an inflow of foreign
goods and capital paid for by the issue of more and yet more stocks,
was halted abruptly when the European investor lost interest and
confidence in these securities. In the crisis that followed, American
merchants found themselves unable to remit the huge sums owing
to their European creditors, and brought down not only their own
houses but the houses of their creditors as well. Barings, who had
been systematically running down their American commitments for
a year or more, and anyway had far larger capital reserves than their
rivals, were seriously inconvenienced, recording a loss of £168,000 in
1837 and writing off bad debts of some £118,000 the following year.
For the other ‘American’ houses it was disaster. The Bank of England
gave help to tide the weaker houses over the worst of their
difficulties and give time for remittances to resume. The Committee
of Treasury concerned itself in the matter. ‘Barings stood up to the
Committee as equals,’ recorded the historian of the Bank of Eng-
land, ‘gave them much and rather patronizing advice through their
American specialist,   Mr Joshua Bates, and were never in danger’, but
by mid-1837 Wiggins had £384,000 acceptances with the Bank and
Wilson and Wildes some £250,000.28 The ‘three Ws’ were effectively
                    North America: 1828-1848                     149
driven out of business; W. and J. Brown survived, but only with
much and prolonged aid from the Bank and a rescue operation by
other houses.
   Rumours abounded that Barings too were heavily over-com-
mitted, that they had outstanding acceptances of£1.5 million. ‘Even
the House of Baring are in a frightful dilemma, reported a letter to
Thomas Raikes in April 1837. ‘Lord Ashburton has been obliged to
support them with £800,000 and the Bank is called upon by them for
fresh advances.’2? When the dust settled and they were seen to be
hardly impaired, their stature was immeasurably increased. ‘There is
very great reliance on your House,’ wrote Ward in May 1837, ‘and it
will be the sheet anchor of the commercial world, and command the
deposits of the shipping interest of the United States and any other
business which may be desirable to you.3°This for a time was liter-
ally the case; at the end of 1837 there was no rival in sight.
   It could not last long, of course. As the American economy slowly
recovered, other houses returned to the scene. To the chagrin of
Ward, Barings had no inclination to relax the prudence that they had
showed before the crisis or to go out hungrily for new business.
Lizardi and Co. and Huth and Co. began to reassert themselves.
W. and J. Brown and Co. were particularly active in taking on small
accounts and had none of Barings’ reticence when it came to offering
credit to houses which did not deal exclusively with them. Barings’
power remained massive, but as the 1840s wore on their attention
was more and more focused upon the public borrowing on which
the future of the United States seemed so much to depend.