


By and large the American investor looked after the needs of the
                                                                    to
Federal government; it was the individual States that turned
                                                                 and
Europe for development capital. With high interest rates
                                                 richer  and  longer
security believed to be complete at least in the
                                                                    In
established States, it seemed a promising field for investment.
                                                            for Mas-
1828 Alexander Baring urged his partners to take up a loan
                                                         sober  state
sachusetts: ‘I should think the engagements of this old
                                                                  y.’
the very best security in which any man could invest his propert
                                             was  always  necessa ry:
New York was another favourite. But caution
                                                      a good judge
‘You may find the public not so discriminating as
150                      The Sixth Great Power

would be between the credit of Massachusetts and Louisiana.3!
Barings saw their role as being, if not to educate the public, then at
 least to protect it by offering only stocks in which they had confi-
 dence and which they would be happy to hold on their own account.
    Curiously, Louisiana was one of the first States in which Barings
became deeply involved. Before the first Massachusetts loan had
been floated, Thomas Baring’s friend Edmond Forstall had talked
him into taking 1250 of the $1000 bonds raised to finance the bank
which the Planters of Louisiana were intent on establishing. Two
years later he again involved Barings in the setting up of the Union
Bank in New Orleans.3? In 1832 a Louisiana Loan was introduced
and Barings secured it. ‘We shall all make money, and pretty easily
too,’ Bates wrote with satisfaction. ‘At one time. . . Rothschild gave
out that he should take the loan. When he found out we had got it he
said he hoped we would give him a part of it. We told him we would
gladly do so at the same price that we gave it to the public, which he
declined.’33 Rothschild had the last laugh, however. In July 1833
Bates was ruefully admitting: ‘It was probably a mistake bringing the
Louisiana Loan out in the market, altho’ at the time it was thought it
would go off. . . the takers bring it to market for a /2% or 1% profit
and if you do not support the market by buying at 1% premium one
gets the reputation of not supporting one’s loan.’34
   Barings were far from being the only house dealing in American
securities, and Rothschilds became more interested as the scale
expanded. Their motives seem to have been as much to spite Barings
as to make money. Urging his nephews in London to buy American
State bonds, James de Rothschild wrote, ‘I do this, so that Barings
should not be in the position to say: “I forced Rothschild out of the
way.” Therefore, even if there is nota penny profit, so long as there is
no loss - I shall carry on with the business.’35 When Barings’ closest
New York associates, Prime, Ward and King, made a joint offer with
Rothschilds for a Maryland loan and offered Barings a share, Barings
remonstrated with their friend in tones more of injury than anger:
‘Such an interest as you contemplated giving would not have been as
satisfactory to us as what you do for us usually is.’36 But though the
Opposition was real, it was erratic, and there were not many contracts
which Barings could not obtain if they set their heart on it. They
remained as clearly the leading house in American loans as
Rothschilds were in Spain or Austria.
                       North America: 1828-1848                       151