

   Barings continued to be discriminating about the States whose
loans they would handle. Mississippi they espoused with caution,
and were confirmed in their doubts when they failed to persuade
Hopes to join them. In general ‘old’ States were felt desirable, ‘new’
were to be eschewed. ‘The Public here do not like the Securities of
the new States, wrote Bates. ‘I do not think they offer the same secu-
rity as the old States, for the population of all the new States is neces-
sarily rude and not much used to the possession of Money.’ Barings
would not touch Indiana but Ohio was very popular ‘owing to its
being an old State, the oldest of the Western States, and was peopled
from New England’.3”
   As directly relevant as any State loan to the development of North
America was the close relationship that grew up between Barings
and the Bank of the United States under its ambitious, headstrong
and sometimes maverick President, Nicholas Biddle. Biddle was an
economic nationalist, who felt that the Bank should be used to free
the United States from the shackles of European capitalism.38 Up to
a point Barings supported him in the enterprise, and even the cau-
tious Mildmay was in 1829 prepared to increase the Bank's credit
from £100,000 to £250,000: ‘We will not deny that the mortification
would be great were we to see the Institution in correspondence with
any other House in London as their Agents.’*? With Biddle at the
helm, things rarely ran altogether smoothly ~ in 1831 Barings seri-
ously considered giving up the agency*? - but a more or less amicable
relationship was maintained until the crisis of 1836 and 1837.
   In April 1836 Samuel Jaudon arrived in London on behalf of the
Bank, demanding an extended credit of £1 million. It was a moment
at which Barings were cutting back on their American commitments
                                                                         in
and though the credit was not refused outright it was granted only
                                                                      been
part and grudgingly. When it was discovered Jaudon had also
                                                         Bates    lecture d
in touch with the Governor of the Bank of England,
                                                                       else
him on the impropriety of opening negotiations with anyone
                                                was affront ed.   The  fol-
while Barings were still in the field.*! Biddle
                                                              to   replace
lowing year Jaudon returned to London, with orders
                                                                 d exclu-
Barings as agent and thus provide a representative ‘devote
                                                 Jaudon  did   as  well as
sively to American concerns.” But though
                                               the Bank of the
 could have -been hoped for in London, Biddle,
                                                     were drifting
 United States and the American economy generally
                                                   Americ a and a
 into ever stormier waters. Crop failures in North
152                      The Sixth Great Power