

 1829 to consider how best Barings’ business should be built up. The
obvious course was to appoint an agent, but Bates had doubts about
this. ‘.. . an Agent, unless he is a very clever man and stands high,
does an injury to any House,’ he had written while he was still work-
ing in Boston. ‘People are perfectly sick of the name of Agent, both
here and in New York.’3 Baring was quite ready to echo this opinion
- ‘In general agents don’t succeed here,’ he concluded while in New
York* - but by the tme he reached Boston he found Bates had
changed his mind. “This relieves me from the decision of a question
of which I can be in no way a competent judge, he wrote with some
relief.5 The favoured candidate was T. W. Ward, who had
unfortunately just blown off his left hand in a gun accident and was
in peril from lockjaw; but once this hazard was overcome, Baring
thought well of him.
   Thomas Ward was an old colleague of Bates; slow, somewhat
unprepossessing, brusque and graceless in manner:        ‘What would
you think of a man,’ asked Bates, ‘so forgetful of himself and every-
one else as to come into your room while your family was at break-
fast, put his hat, gloves and spectacles down on the breakfast tray,
take a sausage with his fingers out of the dish and, holding it by its
two ends, bite off the middle and put the two ends back into the dish
without a word being said?’ But Ward was honest, meticulous, and
with an encyclopaedic knowledge of American business and busi-
nessmen. Trading on his own account he would never have made a
fortune, as Barings’ agent his value was immense. On 1 January 1830
he took up his duties at a basic salary of £2000 ayear. Bates told him
later that he had the entire confidence of the house and that they had
permitted him to enjoy power which no one partner would have
been allowed to exercise in London.’ In fact he was constantly being
enjoined to do this and eschew the other, but he was still given wide
discretion. He took his duties with becoming seriousness. His new
role, he wrote in his diary, ‘makes it important I should rise early and
do up my business in the morning, that I should keep a memoran-
dum or diary of occurrences. . . If lam to succeed as an agent I must
be more attentive to the minor modes of pleasing others, and mix
more with the busy world. The great object, however, is to do what I
think right on all occasions, and to be deliberate in my decisions.’8
   His main task was to select the individuals and houses with which
                      North America: 1828-1848                       145

Barings should do business, to assess their credit-worthiness, probe
their weaknesses, gauge their honesty, secure information on their
bank balances. His instinct was to expect the worst: ‘My own conft-
dence in our mercantile community as a whole was never great, and
is now lessened by what I see. We have bad habits, and not easily
cured.’? His assessments of the people concerned were brisk and to
the point: in a typical list, one was ‘poor and miserable’; one ‘doing
nothing, safe’; one ‘snug, has some property’; one ‘capable, an only
son and his father is rich’.!° Barings meanwhile responded with
information about their clients in England: one was ‘very safe and
very respectable’; another was a ‘3rd or 4th rate cotton broker. Habits
not the best.’ But it was not just people about whom Ward kept
Barings informed: political trends, projected railroads, prospects for
crops, all were relevant; even the level of the Mobile River was of
interest, since this affected the shipping of cotton and might give
Barings a chance to dispose of stocks in Liverpool.'!
   The branch of Barings at Liverpool was one of the most important
factors in the development of their American business, putting them
into direct competition with one of their most formidable rivals,
W. andJ.Brown and Co. in the United States, Brown, Shipley in Brit-
ain. It did a healthy export and import trade in many commodities,
but cotton was its speciality and the huge resources Barings could
deploy quickly made it one of the largest importers. The business
was conducted on the lines Bates had laid down in London - dispose
of a consignment quickly and accept a smaller profit rather than
hold and risk a loss. For this they were criticized, sometimes with
reason, but it stood them in good stead in times of crisis.'?
   ‘I feel quite satisfied with the position of the House in the United
                                                                       ss
States,’ wrote Ward in 1831. ‘The foundation is good, the busine
increasing. . . You can hardly do justice to the great increas e of trade
                                                                   fail to
in this country. There is much competition, but you cannot
                                                       and gain from
take the lead and the best business. . . We lose none,
                                                                 fiercest
others and take the best of the new ones.’ Traditionally the
                                                                 “Ameri-
opposition came from ‘the three Ws’, the long-established
                                                           and  Co.  and
can houses’ of George Wildes and Co., Thomas Wilson
                                                                growing
Timothy Wiggin and Co., but W. and J. Brown and Co. was
                                                               this fam-
fast - ‘This house,’ admitted Barings in June 1831, ‘or rather
                                             in the US.’3
 ily of houses, commands an immense business
146                     The Sixth Great Power