

Germany, Sturgis’s share of the profits was doubled to “iz. At the
same time two young men were brought into the counting house ata
salary of £1000 a year: Humphrey Mildmay’s son Henry Bingham
and the young Edward Baring who had so impressed Bates a few
years before. Mildmay was brought in as a sop to his father, who was
still offended at having been eased out of the house in 1847 - ‘a very
good young man, but can never become a manager of the House,’
judged Bates.38 Ned Baring was a different matter. ‘His morals are
bad, but he is clever, felt Bates. The extent of his immorality, to
judge from other entries in Bates’s diary, was that he was fond of
society, slovenly in his accounts, expensive in his habits, apt to hurry
his business and not stay late in the office, and ‘desirous of playing
the first fiddle’ — hardly the pinnacle of viciousness but black enough
in the eyes of Bates.3? ‘I doubt his judgement’ was Bates’s summing
up - which was in time to be proved perceptive indeed.#9 ‘My
impression is that neither of them will make a good merchant,’ he
concluded gloomily. If he and Thomas Baring were to retire, with
more than £1 million of capital between them, there would be little
left in the way of capital or talent. ‘I suppose I must continue two
years longer during which T. Baring will do very little.’*!
   In spite of these misgivings, Mildmay and Ned Baring were
admitted partners at the beginning of 1856: of the 24 shares, Francis
Baring, still the senior partner, retained 3; Joshua Bates 6; Thomas
Baring 5; Charles Baring Young and Russell Sturgis 3 each and
Mildmay and Ned Baring 1 each. The remaining 2 were kept in
reserve against possible needs. The business they had joined could
hardly have seemed more prosperous. In 1858, Bates noted proudly,
Baring Brothers were agents for the governments of Russia, Norway,
Austria, the United States, Chile, Buenos Aires, New Grenada, Can-
ada, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and Australia; they had 1200
                                                               cor-
respondents in different parts of the world; they held the personal
accounts of the Emperor of the French, Count Chambord,
                                                       King
Leopold of Belgium: ‘No House ever had such a business and were |
20 years younger I should delight to conduct it.’#2 Neither the gov-
ernmental nor the private accounts were necessarily a source
                                                                    of
profit - in 1863 Barings found themselves suddenly having to come
to the rescue of the Prince of Orange, who had lost his entire allow-
ance and £2000 besides on the Derby*} - but they gave the
                                                               house
prestige of inestimable value.
        ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’:     1848-1873      165
    But Bates was not twenty years younger, and as he edged into his
‘seventies he became more and more doubtful whether the house
 had any future after the departure of himself and Thomas Baring.
 Sturgis was spending £11,000 a year and the amount was increasing
 even faster than his income. He had only £20,000 in the business and
 showed no signs of increasing his stake appreciably. Edward Baring
 lived at the rate of £8400 a year and was far too fond of hunting.
 Bates remonstrated with them both. After some grumbling Sturgis
 agreed to give up his house in town, but the economy achieved was
 trifling and he made such a fuss about it that the word went around
 that Barings were in financial difficulties. Ned Baring promised to
 reduce his expenditure to £3000 a year, but signally failed to do so.
 Bates’s preferred solution was to dismiss them both, replacing them
 by a senior clerk, George White, and his own grandson, Victor Van
 de Weyer. Whether he put this proposal to Thomas Baring is not
 clear; if he did he must have been persuaded that it was unduly dras-
 tic. The same partners were in charge in 1864; the two managing
 partners still agreeing that they would have the gravest doubts about
 leaving the business in the hands of their juniors, but doing nothing
 very much to put the matter nght.#
     By then Bates’s health was clearly failing. Several times in the pre-
 vious years he had proposed that Barings should go into voluntary
 liquidation rather than face inevitable decline. When he died in Sep-
 tember 1864 it seemed that his suggestion might have to be adopted.
 Francis Baring ceased to be a partner almost immediately afterwards
 and the joint effect of these two departures was that the house's capi-
 tal fell from £1.41 million in 1862 to £0.63 million in 1865, while the
 Reserve Account was reduced from £0.67 million to £0.13 million.
 Barings had either to reduce its commitments, rapidly build up its
 resources, or give up the struggle. It was Thomas Baring who had to
 find the solution, virtually single-handed.