

open question; Thomas Baring believed they would only have done
so if they had been in sole charge of the negotiations.6! What is
certain is that Rothschilds had no intention of being driven from the
field. Baron Lionel told Weisweiller ‘to offer $60 in case he has good
reason for believing that Baring intends opposing us and making an
offer, but if not, he is to offer 53 and to try to get it at 55.’62
   The Spanish government continued to make overtures to Barings
over the next decade but the only time that anything came near a
conclusion was in 1853 when Barings were ready to sponsor a £9.5
million loan. Hopes flatly refused to cooperate - ‘We have had such
repeated proofs of the little faith that can be placed in the assurances
of the Spanish Government that we should not wish to place our-
selves again in their power’ - and were proved right when a politi-
cal storm in Madrid led to the government reneging on the deal. It
was not until 1867 that Barings again undertook any operation on
behalf of Madrid, and then it was on a limited scale and rendered
nugatory by a revolution the following year.


Spain was Rothschild territory into which Barings rarely and timidly
ventured; the reverse was true in Russia which was to be for seventy
years or more the European country with which Barings were most
intimately involved. When Baron Stieglitz, the Berlin-born financier
who enjoyed a semi-official status in St Petersburg, wished to raise a
large loan for the Russian government in 1849, he this time went
directly to Barings rather than first approaching Hopes. Barings were
sceptical; they wanted Hopes to take the lead and, anyway, felt that
with the war in Hungary undecided and doubtful, and all European
policy uncertain, the chance of profit at 95 does not seem to us at
present to compensate for the risk of loss’.6+ Russia at the time was in
one of its phases of full-blooded self-assertion, its armies rampantin
Poland and Hungary. Barings’ calculations were coloured by the fact
that Richard Cobden, the influential economist and politician, was
being vociferous even by his own high standards in denouncing Rus-
sian aggression, and at a well-attended meeting at the London Tay-
ern only a few days before had inveighed against any possible loan.
‘We do not attribute much importance to the circumstance,’
                                                                Barings
told Stieglitz,$> but they did.
      ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873         171
   By the end of the year, however, the war in Hungary was to all
intents and purposes over and the loan which the Russian govern-
ment was seeking was presented as being for the completion of the
Moscow-St Petersburg railway and not for any military purpose.
Cobden duly denounced it as an ‘unholy and infamous transac-
tion,66but the average British investor was more concerned with the
prospects of profit. Bates was uneasy - £5.5 million seemed to him
too large an amount and 93 too high a price - but he allowed himself
to be over-persuaded.*” His doubts were quickly appeased, the issue
was six times oversubscribed and opened at a 2 per cent premium.
An anonymous letter received at Bishopsgate which threatened dire
consequences to all concerned did nothing to damp the euphoria.**
The commission earned by Barings, apart from any profits made by
dealings in the bonds, was £105,000.°° Bates’s only complaint was
that by August 1850 Barings still held £150,000 worth of Russian
stock on their own account and Thomas Baring was reluctant to sell
it off. It was the old difference of attitude between the two men; in
Bates’s view, ‘the object should be to close an operation and secure
the profits - if it can be done without injuring the general impression
in regard to the well conducting of the Loan, and as there have been
eager buyers I cannot account for the disposition to hold’.”° But this
was a minor blemish; reflecting on the loan Bates concluded: ‘I don’t
know that B. B. and Co. can stand any higher, they are undoubtedly
the first Commercial firm in the world which is a great achievement
when it is considered that there is no stain on their fame of any kind.
We are always liberal to all, honest as a matter of course. We work
hard, perhaps too hard.’7!
   Two years after the loan had passed off so successfully, a credit
was opened at Barings in favour of the Imperial Court. In effect
Barings were now the official agents of the Russian government. It
was unfortunate that this happened at a moment when Britain and
Russia seemed on the brink of war over Turkish territorial problems.
One of Barings’ first tasks was to remove the Russian deposit of
about£1 million from the Bank of England, retain a third of it for the
payment of dividends and ship the rest to Holland in Gold Impert-
als. ‘This will make a sensation when it becomes known,’ com-
mented Bates, and a few days later: ‘This move is either a political
manoeuvre or there must be fear of war on the part of Russia.’7?
 172                     The Sixth Great Power