

caused the greatest problem. There was genuine distrust of Ameri-
can securities on the part of the British investor, and plenty of
bystanders who for one reason or another wanted to keep these
doubts alive. The Times was one of the more conspicuous of these.
Joshua Bates professed to dismiss its operations as insignificant. ‘The
Times has always had a spite against B.B. and Co. on account of polit-
ical differences, he told Ward 1n 1845. “They have usually attacked
every American loan or anything else that they could trump up a
story about, but the result of these attacks has, I believe, almost
always operated in favour of the project or operation attacked. Pub-
lic attention was drawn to them and the attacks only served as an
advertisement. Newspapers in this country do not represent public
opinion.’6? But in this case at least The Times was articulating the
fears of its readers rather than creating them. It was not until Europe
slipped into political chaos in 1848 that the British investor began to
think that there might be something to be said for the New World
after all.


One part of North America was not directly affected by the problems
of the defaulting States; but Canada had more than enough of its
own problems. Alexander Baring had visited the colony in 1797 and
reported that it was economically beyond hope: barren, bleak, cut off
from access to any seaport, it was ‘a perfect deadweight to Great Brit-
ain, serving only to feed the empty vanity of large territorial posses-
sions and to increase Ministerial patronage at the expense of the
nation’.¢8 Early approaches for loans from the government of Upper
Canada were dismissed by Barings as offering flimsy security and
inadequate interest. To geographical remoteness and inhospitable
terrain, the region now added extreme political instability; the
French population had been by no means successfully assimilated
and the growing power of the United States posed a constant threat
from the south.
   It was not until 1835, when money was particularly plentiful, that
Barings could be prevailed on to tender for a small £400,000 loan to
Upper Canada, and even then they did so without marked enthusi-
asm. They were glad to split the loan with the rival bidders, Thomas
Wilson and Co. Even this they had cause to regret, the financial crisis
                       North America: 1828-1848                     157

of 1836 and 1837 soon spread to Canada and by 1838 Wilsons were
bankrupt and Barings still had £60,000 worth of stock on their
hands. It was an unpromising start to what was to be a long and close
association.
   Why Barings did not cut their losses and have done with Canada ts
hard to see. Probably it was that combination of obstinacy and hon-
our which so often led them to continue to fight for causes which, if
not losing, at least promised to be unprofitable in the short and
medium term. Having backed Canada once, they would continue to
do so. In 1837, in place of the tottering Wilsons, they took over as
 financial agents in partnership with Glyn, Hallifax, Mills.6? Ward
strongly approved ofthis new interest. “They appear to be thriving in
Canada, he told Bates in 1841, ‘and to be a prudent, frugal and good
 sort of people. . .7° The following year, fortified by a guarantee from
 the British government, Barings and Glyns raised £1.5 million for
 public works in Lower and Upper Canada.
    They were still, however, something less than whole-hearted in
 their support. At the end of 1848, the Canadian government sug-
 gested that Barings should now take over the sole agency. Barings
 refused; out of friendship to Glyns, they declared. If the Canadians
 insisted ona sole agency, then Glyns were ‘fully as able and willing as
 ourselves to promote the interests of the Colony’.’! No doubt they
 were sincere in their protestations of affection for Glyns, but itis not
 over-cynical to detect also some uncertainty about the future for
 Canada’s economic development. It is also fair to say that, at the end
 of 1848, the partners in Baring Brothers had other, more pressing
 considerations on their mind.
                                  10
                                opm
                                  @ =t4-