

 original: ‘I offered to make him a duplicate for twenty or thirty
 guineas according to the time spent upon it and ifIdid my very best
 for forty. He at once commissioned me to make a duplicate for forty
 guineas.’6 From then on Baring collected avidly. In 1846 he com-
 bined with Humphrey Mildmay and Lord Overstone to buy the cel-
 ebrated Dutch pictures of Baron Verstolk van Soelen. They acquired
 the collection en bloc and then held a private auction, splitting the
 profit or loss between them.2’ By the time he died his collection of
 Dutch and Flemish pictures was spectacular, including works by
 Lucas Cranach the Elder, Jan Gossaert, Jan Van Eyck, Mabuse, Bol,
 Dou, Peter de Hooch, Metsu, a doubtful Rembrandt and a splendid
Hals. He paid more money for Murillo’s portrait of Don Andres de
Andrade - £1020 - than for any other single picture; his Mantegna
from Cardinal Fesch’s collection cost him £420, his Titian portrait of
Charles V £204.15/- and his small Zurbaran of St Francis in Medita-
tion a mere £12.78 The total value of his collection was put at about
£100,000.?9
   An American railway tycoon in London in 1853 remarked how
curious it was that in the greatest city in the world, ‘there should be
only one man to look to and consult, and to guide action in impor-
tant financial matters. . . Ask about anything and the reply is, “What
does Mr Thomas Baring say, or think?” ’30 With all these extra-
curricular activities, it is amazing that he managed to devote as much
time as he did to the affairs of Baring Brothers. These remained his
prime concern, however, and he was painfully aware that he and
Bates were a two-man band, with no one clearly destined to succeed
them. This was not at all what he wanted: ‘Half my pleasure,’ he
declared in 1849, ‘is to work for a house which we intend to be
perpetual; /e Roi est mort, vive le Roi.3!
  Where to look for the next king was the problem that exercised
Bates and Baring. Young, wrote Bates dismissively, ‘is a useful part-
ner, discreet and gentlemanly but he has no head for business’. The
only member of the family who seemed likely ever to come into the
house was the child of Henry Baring’s second marriage, Edward, and
he was only twenty. He had stayed with Bates in 1845 and had been
found to be ‘evidently fond of business and only wants good advice
and opportunity to make himself master of it, but it would bea long
tuume before he would be ready to be made a partner, let
                                                           alone to run
       ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873          163

the house. ‘I can’t wait for him. . . What is to become of the House
after a few years I know not, but I am quite sure that it will never be
organized as efficiently as now.’??
   Bates was now sixty and very conscious of it. It was to take death to
release his tenacious grip on the affairs of the counting house, but
business from 1848 onwards was increasingly conducted against a
background rumble of threats to resign and complaints at the unfair
burden put upon him. In 1849 a step was taken to relieve the strain
by the appointment of a new partner, an American, Russell Sturgis.
Sturgis was a lawyer by training who had then worked in the family
mercantile house, mainly in the East. ‘Query: is he the man for us?’
Bates asked himself.33 He was taken on for an initial three years at a
salary of £2000 a year and within a month had won golden opinions.
‘I judge he is just the man for us,’ concluded Bates. ‘Good manners,
agreeable temper, industrious and attentive to his business, knows
how to receive Strangers and will by and by relieve me very much.’34
A note of caution crept in towards the end of 1850 - ‘Mr Sturgis is a
little too vain and jumps to a conclusion without sufficient thought’
— but the faults were felt to be trivial and easily corrected.?*> He was
admitted into partnership in 1851, taking ¥¢ of the profits.
   Then the snags began to appear. He was industrious enough when
in the office, but left his work behind him when he went outside,
conduct unaccountable to the dedicated Bates. He was extravagant,
too; spending his income on good living instead of ploughing it back
to build up the house’s capital. He was ostentatious and inclined to
frivolity; when his father died, ‘he puts on no mourning and has gay
company at his Country House which looks very odd. It is some-
thing more than eccentricity.’*6 His vanity was not so easily cured as
Bates had hoped and he began to put on airs, professing himself the
equal of Bates in matters of American trade and his superior in other
fields. Crowning offence to the staunch Bostonian Bates, he took the
side of the South in the American Civil War and treated Barings’
trading partners from the North with scant courtesy - ‘He is now
anti-American in everything,’ commented Bates sadly.*”
   But he was there; and Baring had a better opinion of him than
                                                                  con-
Bates. In 1853, indeed, when Baring was becoming increasingly
                                                        other matter s,
cerned about the amount of time he was devoting to
                                                                      in
including long stints on his doctor's orders taking the waters
 164                    The Sixth Great Power