


 The firm over which he presided had come a long way since the trau-
 mas of 1848. Barings in particular, and the British economy in gen-
 eral, had benefited by the flow of capital from the continent - France
 and Spain above all - as European capitalists tried to find a safe
                                                                      to
 home for their resources. But to amass these funds was one thing,
 deploy them profitably another. The late 1840s and early 1850s were
 166                      The Sixth Great Power

 nervous years. There were plenty of openings on the continent - in
 the last few weeks of 1848 Barings were approached about possible
 loans for Sardinia, Austria, Tuscany, Denmark and the City of Paris*5
 - but none of them seemed possible in the political climate of the
 day. ‘John Bull is in a sort of maze what to do with his money, Bates
 told Thomas Baring. *. . The American stocks are likely to attract his
 attention.'*6 But here too confidence took time to rebuild and it was
 to be some years before sales of American securities could be
 undertaken in London without extreme prudence. Yet somehow
 business continued buoyant; distributed profit for 1849 was
£168,000 and only a little less in 1850. ‘What enormous gains,’ won-
dered Bates, and made with little risk, but he characteristically found
grounds for despondency about the future: ‘There seems abroad a
growing indifference and unbelief in regard to Religion which more
than anything indicates the decline of nations.’47
   Barings putat least part of their profit into bricks and mortar. The
business had now wholly outgrown the Georgian buildings at 8
Bishopsgate into which they had moved some fifty years before, and
early in 1853 Lewis Cubitt, brother of William Cubitt, the architect
of Belgravia, and himself responsible for the Great Northern Rail-
way terminus at King’s Cross, was called in to remodel the premises.
Amazingly, he had completed his work, which included building
over the old courtyard and installing gas lighting, within seven
months and the imposing new office block was in full operation by
the end of the year. ‘I hear that you are making yourself very smart
and comfortable in Bishopsgate Street,’ wrote Charles Labouchére.48
 Bates simply wondered how they had ever managed to make do with
the old premises.*? In accordance with the rules of business proce-
dure throughout the ages, it was a matter of months rather than years
before there were discontented murmurs that more space was
required.
   In January 1854 Baring Brothers gave a dinner at the London Tav-
ern to their forty clerks. ‘I hope we are setting a good example,’ wrote
Bates rather dubiously in his diary. ‘They are certainly very excelle
                                                                       nt
clerks.’*° Ward told his son that they were ‘so able in their respec
                                                                     tive
places’ that everything ran smoothly. ‘Mr Bates says that they
                                                                     have
several who are equal to everything required, and know
                                                             just what to
do whatever comes up, and that when anything is wanted
                                                                   of the
       A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’:     1848-1873      167
partners, the matter is placed clearly before them by the Clerk in
whose care it is in a few words together with his reasoning on it. The
principals only have to assent to the conclusion arrived at, as they do
usually, or decide what else shall be done.’s! One of these super-
clerks was presumably the George White whom Bates had wanted to
make a partner in place of Russell Sturgis, and who was in time to
play an important role in Argentina.
   Barings were good employers. Recognizing that the road to the
partners’ room was all but impassable to those who did not belong to
the family, they were always ready to help an ambitious youngster
get on elsewhere. Charles Dickens's son Charley, who had been
strongly recommended to them, was first put into a broker’s and
then offered a place in Bishopsgate at £50 a year. ‘I suspect the
 Brokers to have been a device and trial altogether, wrote his father ‘-
to get a telescopic view of a youth with a double suspicion on him
arising out of being an author's son and an Eton boy.’s? Charley
 Dickens did well, and a few years later was sent off to set up his own
 business in Hong Kong with Barings’ blessing and financial support.
When George Knapp fell ill in 1860 Barings tolerated his frequent
 absences for almost eighteen months and only then retired him on a
 pension of £150 a year. His pension was continued to his widow
 when he died in 1865 and a cash payment was made to his two
 daughters when she followed her husband.**
    The Liverpool house never expanded to the extent Bates had once
hoped, but it continued to make a useful contribution to profits,
usually between £20,000 and £30,000 a year. For twenty years from
1848 it was run by James Price, who became a partner in the London
house in 1867. Price was a bachelor, a fact which proved profitable
to his second-in-command, Mathias Purton, who found himself
responsible for the house’s entertainment of American and other vis-
itors. ‘I should wish to do the thing in proper style,’ he wrote, ‘and
this I have no doubt you also would expect.’** Presumably they did;
anyway, they raised no objection when he increased his expenditure
by £800 a year and bought a new house for £2850. Price was a pru-
dent man and objected when Bates played with the idea of taking an
interest in a line of packet boats to the United States. Cunard had
more than enough screw boats to cope with any foreseeable demand
and would be formidable competitors. ‘The management of steam-
168                       The Sixth Great Power