

   Bates owed his breakthrough into high society largely to his
daughter, who married Jean Sylvain Van de Weyer, the Belgian min-
ister in London. The Van de Weyers were befriended by Queen Vic-
toria and their children invited to play in the royal nurseries. ‘I
started at Weymouth with $5 in my pocket and have increased it to
$4 million,’ wrote Bates in wonder. ‘I am on friendly terms with King
Leopold and the French Emperor, my Grand Children play with
Princes and Princesses. The world, as old Rothschild used to say, has
been very kind to me.’!° Perhaps the most notable victory was that he
and Mrs Bates were now received at the Grange. ‘Hada very pleasant
time,’ he noted with satisfaction in 1850.1! What Harriet Ashburton
said of him once his back was turned is another matter.
   Bates still ate, drank and breathed his work but a suggestion of
mellowing was apparent. He paid several visits to the Great Exhibi-
tion, for which he had put up £500 and offered a further £10,000.12
‘Great curiosity to see the Nepalese Ambassador and the Hippopot-
amus,’ he wrote in June 1850, demonstrating a finely eclectic
approach to sightseeing. '} But he remained touchy and preoccupied
with his dignity. In 1855, when Louis Napoleon visited Windsor,
Bates was only belatedly invited to join a party of City dignitaries
who presented an address to the Emperor. ‘I declined to go - not
knowing what position I might be placed in. . . I feel that I should
not expose myself to the chance of mortification. This is always the
case with the British merchants, as they are called, they are so push-
ing for notoriety that a Modest Man is always neglected.’1+
 _ Bates’s invitation to go to Windsor on this occasion arose because
Thomas Baring, who had been asked to read the address, had better
things to do. When Ward dined with him he noted, ‘Mr Baring’s
house is very simple compared with Mr Bates’s.’'5 But though Baring
may have been more unassuming than his partner, he possessed in
full the gravitas which marked his family through the generations.
He was a perfect choice for all those semi-public posts that call for
men of patent integrity, stature and sound judgement: chairman
                                                                   of
Lloyds, deputy-chairman of the Royal West India Mail Steam
Packet Co., chairman of the Savings Bank, trustee
                                                  of Merton Col-
lege. “He will damage his health if he is not careful,’ wrote
                                                                Bates, ‘but
he is a most generous, talented and agreeable man
                                                  and well calcu-
lated to lead in anything.’16
Joshua Bates, by an unknown artist.
‘Thomas Bar ing (1799- 1873) by George Richmond
       ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’:     1848-1873      161

  With more enthusiasm on his part Baring could certainly have
played a leading part in politics. Disraeli’s admiration for his ability
was undiminished; he possessed, wrote the Tory leader, ‘a talent for
the exercise of which he is responsible to his sovereign and his coun-
try’.!7 Baring did not accept the responsibility. In June 1851, discour-
aged by some minor setbacks, Disraeli urged him to take over as
leader of the party in the House of Commons. Baring professed to
find the suggestion a joke, but Disraeli renewed it.' Baring was
unmoved; he had too many other commitments, he said, even if he
was up to the task. Derby spoke bitterly about the reluctance of cer-
tain Tories to take office; ‘the one whose private affairs prevented
him,’ wrote Greville, ‘was Tom Baring.’!? Derby had no more luck
the following year. ‘It is supposed Lord Derby may be sent for to
form a ministry,’ wrote Bates. ‘If so they will want my partner Tho.
Baring for the Exchequer but I doubt if they will get him.?° The invi-
tation duly came, and Bates was right.?!
   But though he eschewed office, Thomas Baring could not avoid
being one of the most influential of the Tories - ‘the most sensible
and respectable of the Derbyites, Greville described him.?? His
instincts were conservative: ‘In dealing with great commercial ques-
tions and with great interests,’ he declared in the House of
Commons, ‘sudden revolutions are the worst and most dangerous
experiments.’? But unlike some members of his family, he was in
social terms never illiberal. He was the only leading Conservative of
the main stream to give Disraeli full and effective backing in his
battle for Jewish emancipation, aligning himself on this and similar
issues with Peel and Gladstone rather than his usual allies.”
   He had many interests to distract him from both politics and busi-
ness. He was already a very rich man when, in 1853, his cousin,
                                                               at
Charles Baring-Wall, left him his house and fortune, estimated
between £350 and £450,000. Norman Court was a pleasant if
undistinguished house set in 7000 acres near Stockbridge in Hamp-
shire. The house was not large for the park, noted Mrs Reeve, ‘but
pictures and china are renowned; so is the cooking; and with such
wealth as is at our host’s comman4, all the details are in perfection’.?°
                                                                       his
It was the pictures that Baring particularly cherished. In 1838
                                                  of Rome    by  Samuel
younger brother John gave him a drawing
                                                                than the
Palmer; a replica, but one which the artist thought better
 162                    The Sixth Great Power