

that the fate of the new South American Republics 1s as yet so
uncertain, that notwithstanding the great differences in the Origin,
habits and pursuits of the Texan population, there 1s no saying what
will ultimately grow out of the sort of anarchy which prevails in
Mexico.’58
   Even if they had not been agents for the American government,
Barings could not possibly have washed their hands of the defaulting
States. They had too much at stake. Thomas Baring, perhaps because
he felt less personally involved than Bates, was the more optimistic
of the two. ‘It seems that all goes on le mieux du monde dans ce meilleur
des mondes except that dark spot America, he wrote to Bates in
August 1842, ‘but I cannot help believing that we shall see a clear up
there.’5? Though several of the States seemed particularly loath to
resume payments, even if the money could somehow be raised, only
Mississippi had gone so far as formally to repudiate its debts. There
was still hope. The most practical step that Barings could take to
restore American credit was to persuade the more respectable of the
defaulting States to resume payment; with luck the rest would then
come into line. Pennsylvania, Maryland and Louisiana were the
three States with whom they felt a particular involvement, and it was
on these that they instructed their agent, Ward, to concentrate.
  Ward's campaign in Pennsylvania was a model of lobbying and
media-manipulation. Politicians were persuaded that self-interest
demanded a rapid resumption of payments; the press was fed with
letters and articles arguing that the economic development of the
State would be crippled unless access to foreign funds was restored;
appeals were made to pride and a sense of propriety; the clergy was
enlisted to preach that credit-worthiness was next to godliness,
‘every Christian man and woman. . . will feel this obligation when it
is presented to their attention’.6° He laid out about £1500 on the
operation and thought that every penny had been well spent when
Pennsylvania resumed payments early in 1845. He did not hesitate
to use occasional small but well-placed bribes or promises of favours
to come. His activities filled Bates with fastidious horror. ‘What you
say and what I see of many people in the United States makes me
think that you and I on the whole are very respectable Gentlemen. I
have asort of instinctive horror of doing one thing to effect another,
or using any sort of subterfuge or reserve. It never was practised...
                     North America: 1828-1848                       155

by any of the Barings. My whole life has been a stranger to any such
doings.”¢!
   Bates’s chief preoccupation was that Barings should not expose
themselves to any charge that they were interfering in American pol-
itics. ‘Your payment to Mr Webster would not appear well if it
should get out, he wrote anxiously to Ward. ‘Itis very important that
we should not in any way interfere in the Elections. . . The claims of
the creditors of the States rest on a firmer basis than that which 1s
influenced by party politics and we must not damage our case by
doing that which we are bound not to do.’¢? Daniel Webster was one
of the most talented and influential figures in American public life, a
man whose oratorical powers and lucid, powerful mind were
matched by his greed and unscrupulous pursuit of self-interest.
Ward had given him $500 in 1839 to subsidize a visit to London and
 Barings had looked after him while he was there.* It had proved a
good investment, but Webster was an instrument that had to be used
with care. ‘I do not give him my confidence,’ wrote Ward in 1843.
‘That he is desirous of sustaining his reputation as a great statesman
_. I do not doubt; but he wants and must have money, and will in
what he does or omits look very much to its results to himself.’¢* On
the issue of State debts he proved a redoubtable champion, and did
as much as anyone to ensure that one by one the sinners returned to
the fold.
   By the mid-1840s Barings were beginning tentatively to reintro-
duce the better American securities to the European market. There
were obstacles beyond those caused by the defaulting States. For one
thing, railroad fever was consuming most of the capital Europe had
to offer.6° For another, the possibility of war over the north-west
                                                                remote.
frontier between the United States and Canada was real if
                                                            e   regions
 ‘Go to war about the snow peaks and desolat
                                                                      ‘A
of Oregon!’ protested a friend from Illinois to Thomas Baring.
                                                               who like
country thought of as a residence only by restless pioneers
                                                                 French
the buffalo fly before civilization, or perhaps by Canadian
                                                                as soon
who find a copper-coloured wife in every wigwam! I should
                                                   of the Arctic  Sea.’*
think of getting into contest about the navigation
                                                was one more factor to
 But wars had begun for odder reasons, and it
disquiet the market.
                                                   defaults that
   It was nevertheless the rancour inspired by the
156                      The Sixth Great Power