

 ers is a business ofitself and with which the less such Houses as ours
 have to do, the better.’55 His words were heeded, Barings’ direct
 involvement in transport by sea was not revived for a decade or
 more.
    Screw boats were one factor that transformed the business of mer-
 chant banking, the telegraph was another. ‘All news is now made by
 the electric telegraph common property,’ Barings told Hottinguers
 in 1853, in mingled gratification and alarm.** The new development
 had its influence in every field, but above all in the world of inter-
national finance which Thomas Baring had made his own, and
which occupied more and more of the house’s energies as Joshua
Bates lost his grip on the day-to-day business of acceptances and
credits. The day of hurried missions and face-to-face negotiations
was by no means over, but it became increasingly possible for
bankers to appoint representatives abroad and control them closely.
   So far as Europe was concerned, Thomas Baring’s main preoccu-
pation in the years after 1848 was to practise the art of refusing grace-
fully. In 1849 Count Tojal, the Portuguese Minister of Finance,
asked for a small loan of £45,000 for the repair of roads. Barings
replied:
      Nothing would be more agreeable and flattering to us than
      to be able to co-operate efficiently with advantage to the
      Government of Portugal . . . That desire on our part has, we
      can assure Your Excellency, not been diminished when we
      find that the department of the Finances has been confided
      toa minister of such acknowledged talents and experience as
      yourself. . . We have not the slightest distrust of the honour
      or good faith of the Government of Portugal or of its full
      determination to keep strictly to its engagements, but we
      unfortunately had during the last operation a proof that
      inevitable events may baffle the best intentions, and that
      perfect reliance cannot be placed on the exact payments at
      times fixed, and Your Excellency is aware how important
      such punctuality is in the business of merchants.57
In a case like this, Barings concluded, the best solution was
                                                                to let the
local population pay.
   Even where the prospects did seem more enticing Barings
                                                           were
       ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873         169
hesitant. Towards the end of 1848 they advanced £170,000 to the
Spanish governmentagainst the delivery of mercury, a safe and prof-
itable business even if it involved tying up capital for a period longer
than they really liked. But when the proposal was renewed they
proved reluctant. Their correspondent in Madrid, Henry O'Shea,
was told that Barings, ‘as a matter of delicacy and good feeling’, were
anxious to avoid ‘direct and repeated competition’ with their neigh-
bours, Rothschilds.’ This was the first manifestation of a trend
which was to become more and more apparent as the nineteenth
century wore on; Rothschilds and Barings no longer seeking to cut
each other’s throats in every corner of the world, but tacitly accept-
ing that each had a sphere of influence in which they were pre-
dominant. Partly this stemmed from recognition of the fact that in a
conflict of this kind there could be no winner, only greater or lesser
losers; partly it was a banding together of the two oldest and
grandest houses against the threat of the joint stock banks and the
emergence of new competitors on both sides of the Atlanuc.
    The new spirit of conciliation wore pretty thin in Spain, however,
when the two houses found themselves vying for the 1849/50 mer-
cury contract. The problem for Barings was that the Spanish govern-
 ment was too deeply committed to Rothschilds to shuffle them off
altogether, yet wanted to have a rival conspicuously in the offing to
ensure that its regular bankers did not exploit it unmercifully.
 Barings were cast in this dispiriting role. Weisweiller, the Roths-
 childs’ representative, at one point suggested that the two houses
should tender for the mercury on joint account, conduct the sales
jointly and split the profit fifty-fifty.*° Thomas Baring, who had gone
out to Spain for the auction, was cautiously interested, but negotia-
tions foundered when the Spanish government set a price for the
mercury far higher than Barings were prepared to pay, and
Rothschilds took the contract for the next two years. From London
Joshua Bates complained that Barings’ agents, O’Shea and Co., had
time and again been outmanoeuvred by Weisweiller and the
Rothschilds. Baring defended them: ‘They have certainly not the
shrewd cunning nor the active talent for intrigue of Weisweiller, but
in these qualities Jews beat Christians all over the world. They are,
                                                         Roths-
however, honest, straightforward and zealous.’6° Whether
childs would in fact have gone through with the compromise is an
 170                      The Sixth Great Power