




       ‘A House Which We Intend
                    to be Perpetual’
                            1848-1873




The year 1848 saw the end of the second generation of the Barings
of London: Sir Thomas; Alexander, Lord Ashburton; and Henry
Baring all dying within a few months of each other. The head of the
family was now Sir Thomas’s eldest son Francis, who served in Lord
John Russell’s Whig administration from 1849 to 1852 asa modestly
innovative First Lord of the Admiralty. According to Francis Baring’s
journal he tooka day to consider John Russell’s offer: ‘In the evening
more talk and I accepted. Alas!’! Greville, however, suggests he
grasped the offer with almost unbecoming alacrity.2 He never took
office again but soldiered on as a reliable and influential member of
parliament, representing Portsmouth until he was created Lord
Northbrook in January 1865. The honour bore heavily upon him; he
died eight months later.
   That other Baring peer, the 2nd Lord Ashburton, was equally
remote from the bank. Thomas Carlyle thought he found little pleas-
ure in his new glory. ‘He is immensely rich, but having no children,
and for himself no silly vanity, I believe does not in the least rejoice
at such a lot. Poor fellow! He looked miserably ill the day I called on
him . . . One could not but ask oneself, thinking of £60,000 a year,
“Alas, what is the use of it?” ’3 His gloom was possibly induced by his
wife Harriet, who knew only too well what was the use of £60,000 a
year. Greville called her ‘perhaps the most conspicuous woman in
the society of the present day’,+ she was intelligent, quick-witted,
with just enough education to pass for a bluestocking and enough
vivacity to pass for a wit. She was anxious to shine in the high aes-
                                 158
       ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873         159

thetic line, and turned the Grange into a menagerie where literary
lions like Carlyle and Thackeray grazed among politicians and
assorted grandees. Her main defects were arrogance and a propen-
sity for conversational bullying so marked as to verge on sadism. ‘I
don’t mind being knocked down,’ complained one victim, ‘but I
can’t stand being danced upon afterwards.’’ Anything to do with the
bank seemed to her tedious and common: when the wife of a new
Baring partner, Mrs Russell Sturgis, asked to be introduced to her at
a party, she replied ‘in a dawdling tone that she must decline as she
had already been introduced to two ladies of that firm’.6 But she
 made sure that her guests enjoyed the best: what impressed an
American visitor, Mrs Laurence, when she visited the Grange was
not so much the resident physician; the groom of the chambers, but-
ler and under-butler; the spectacular silver and the turkey stuffed
with truffles; but the fact that at breakfast the boiled eggs were
marked with the day of the month on which they were laid.’
  When the 2nd Lord Ashburton died without a son in 1864, the
title went to his brother Francis. Until then Francis had gone on liv-
ing mainly in Paris, paying little attention to the bank of which he
was technically senior partner, but complaining querulously if neg-
lected: ‘I have not had a line from Mildmay or anyone since Ileft,’ he
wrote to Thomas Baring, ‘but I suppose I am not thought of suffi-
cient consequence to be written to.’* He retired from even nominal
partnership when he inherited the title.
   Joshua Bates and Thomas Baring were thus very much in charge;
at first in that order, then, as Bates aged and the bank became more
involved in international loans, with the balance of power shifting to
the younger man. Bates by 1848 was an extremely rich man, living in
great grandeur. He bought a mansion standing in 24,000 square feet
on the site of what is now the Ritz on Piccadilly and Green Park.
T. W. Ward was overawed by its splendour: ‘Most magnificent,
adequate for Royalty itself; the ceilings some 20 or 25 feet high in the
                                                           damask,
drawing rooms; the walls of the rooms all lined with satin
and the painting white and gold.” The guests were as imposing as
the drawing rooms; at dinner on 24 March 1858 were the Duchess of
Cambridge and Princess Mary, the Duke and Duchess of Manches-
                                                      and, among
ter, the Duchess of Inverness, Earl and Countess Grey
many others, the Bishop of Oxford.
 160                      The Sixth Great Power