

recession in Europe combined to make it almost impossible to sell
American stocks in London. With a million pounds of notes matur-
ing in the autumn of 1839, Jaudon’s position became impossible.*
   Biddle saw no recourse but to swallow his pride and ask Barings to
resume the agency. Nor surprisingly, Barings did not make it pleas-
ant for him. ‘We do not consider ourselves in any way pledged to
resume the agency of the Bank,’ they wrote loftily in August 1839,
‘which if hereafter desirable must be open to fresh negotiations.’##
They insisted that the Bank should forthwith cease borrowing on its
bonds, a condition Jaudon had to accept. That done, they contrib-
uted £100,000 to a subscription of £740,000 designed to assist the
Bank through its worst problems, and in November helped raise
another £300,000 - ‘Jaudon was with me on Saturday, wrote the
great financier, Lord Overstone. ‘He wants another lift. . . Bates also
came up on the same errand. I gave a positive refusal to have any-
thing to do with the business - stating distinctly that I was disgusted
with the whole concern.’#5
   Ward, who loathed Biddle, regretted that Barings had come to the
rescue. ‘I think the Bank should never be allowed to rise again into
power, he wrote, ‘.. . and were I not in your service I should con-
sider it a high public duty to use my influence to put it down for
ever.'#6 He was particularly incensed when the New York Courier and
Enquirer accused Barings of double-crossing Jaudon and working to
destroy the Bank.*” Jaudon was enlisted to deny the story in the
Morning Chronicle** and an injured rebuttal of the charges was sent
to all Barings’ favoured correspondents.*?
   By the middle of 1840 it was clear that Barings had done no more
than buy a breathing space for the Bank, and they did all they could
to dissociate themselves from its death throes. It was finally sus-
pended in February 1841. ‘What a set of swindlers the Directors
must be,’ wrote Bates to Ward. ‘I think you will stand very high in the
opinion of the people for your judgement in this matter.’5° He
thought that this was the last act in a protracted tragedy; he soon
found that it was only a curtain raiser. In F ebruary 1841 Ward
warned Barings that it was unlikely that several of the Western States
would be able to pay the next dividends on their loans, and that even
Pennsylvania was in trouble.5! ‘I feel ashamed of my country,’ wrote
Bates. Maryland caused him the greatest concern. Barings had
                        North America: 1828-1848                         153

recently sold £700,000 worth of this State’s securities and were the
agents for paying the dividends. ‘If we can keep Maryland night |
shall be very happy,’ he wrote. ‘It is the only one which our fame
would suffer by in case of default, therefore pray look to it without
delay.’® 2 Ward was not surprisingly baffled by this somewhat exigent
instruction. ‘I cannot comprehend your thinking I should be able to
do anything with Maryland,’ he protested. The State government
continued to claim that it intended to pay but his guess was that both
itand Pennsylvania would soon default, joining Florida, Mississippi,
Indiana, Illinois, Arkansas and Michigan.*?
    European bankers and investors were outraged. American resi-
dents in London encountered a hostility they had never experienced
when the two countries were at war - cut in the streets and black-
balled in the clubs. ‘The State of Pennsylvania cheats me this year
 out of £50,’ complained Sydney Smith. ‘There is nothing in the
 Crime of Kings worse than this Villainy of Democracy. The mob
 positively refuse all taxation for the payment of State debts.’5+ Bates
 bemoaned the fact that his homeland was disgraced; finding a little
 comfort in the fact that Massachusetts at least was sound but still
 concluding, ‘the damning proofs against the moral honesty of the
 States and individuals are so numerous. . . that all efforts are useless
 and Americans abroad are doomed to that sort of sorrow that I can
 conceive a brother to feel for a loved sister who had deviated from
 the paths of virtue’.*
    Though the federal government was in no way legally responsible
 for the plight of the States, its credit was inevitably tarnished by what
 had happened. In 1842 agents of the US Treasury came to London to
                                                                        and
 try to raise a new loan. ‘The United States are wealthy, thrifty,
 rapidly increasing in wealth, and as         a govern ment   out of  debt,
                                                                      Euro-
 pleaded Ward.*¢ Such arguments made no impression on the
                                                                           de
 pean investor. "You may tell your government, said James
                                                   seen  the man  who   1s  at
 Rothschild grandiloquently, ‘that you have
                                                                  that they
 the head of the finances of Europe, and that he has told you
                                                                 enjoyed
cannot borrow a dollar, not a dollar.’*7 Barings would have
                                                       for   the   British
proving him wrong, but they knew that he spoke
                                                              to interest
investor as much as the French. They tentatively tried
                                              of Texas  but   found the
Hopes in a loan to the fledgling Republic
                                                          ‘It  strikes us
Dutchmen disinclined to anything so adventurous:
154                      The Sixth Great Power