

 of late and he shrinks from the risks that must be met in a business
 like ours... . . But we shall lose a genial, kindly and popular partner,
 who used to work very hard.’!?
     Sturgis’s departure was preceded by one of the few serious rows
 between the partners in the whole of Barings’ history. Sturgis
 insisted that his son Harry should become a partner. His colleagues
 refused to agree. Harry could be made a partner in the Liverpool
 office but that was all they would concede. When Sturgis persisted,
 Ned Baring drew up a grand remonstrance. ‘We think itis hardly fair
 that he should ask us on purely personal grounds to satisfy the
 expectations of his family to do what has never been done before for
 anyone and what we all consider is detrimental to the future inter-
 ests of the House.’ If he and Bingham Mildmay had been inclined to
 behave in the same way they would have sought to reserve the place
 for their own sons. As it was, his brother Tom had a prior right to a
 partnership and ‘it would be unfair to overlook the claim that the
 Hodgson interest has to be represented in the House’. Bob Hodgson
was at least as strong a candidate as Harry Sturgis. ‘I am the last to
underrate Mr Sturgis’s constant and valuable services to the firm,’
Ned Baring concluded his memorandum, ‘but supposed that (like
the rest of us) he found a fair compensation in an annual accumula-
tion of fortune as well as in the consideration which he enjoys as the
head of Baring Brothers and Co.’ At the bottom, undera laconic ‘We
fully agree’, were the signatures of J. S. Hodgson, Charles Norman,
T. C. Baring and Henry Bingham Mildmay.'3 Robert Hodgson and,
eventually, Tom Baring, became partners or directors of Baring
Brothers; Harry Sturgis was a managing partner in Liverpool from
1880 but never entered the partners’ room in Bishopsgate.
    Sturgis’s demands on behalf of his son had been inspired by the
fact that Francis Henry Baring, son of the Ist Lord Northbrook by his
second wife, had recently been granted procuration, a step on
                                                              the
road towards full membership. Francis Baring had dithered for some
time before joining the house at all. In March 1874 T. C. Baring
reported that he was ‘hesitating between a desk here with a large for-
tune in prospect and a private secretaryship with a view to a life
purely political’.!* Francis did not abandon his political ambitions
but concluded: ‘Business will, I suppose, lead pretty safely to
                                                                   the
House of Commons in good time and is not a bad training for
                                                                 poli-
                    Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                    191
tics or official work if it should come.’ He had no anxiety to be very
rich, he told his father, ‘but it does seem a useful work in the World
to keep up a house of high business character’. Besides, if he did not
go in, within twenty years there would be little connection between
Baring Brothers and the Baring family, and ‘this is a prospect that
Ned and Charles both seem to dislike very much’.!5 Given the pleth-
ora of Baring sons, nephews and cousins available to fill any and
every vacancy, this last concern is hard to take too seriously, but the
problem of the succession always preoccupied the senior Barings in
the house, and anyone who was both able and bore the sacred name
would be made to feel welcome.
    Francis Baring was exceptionally able. His political career never
came to anything and could not have been expected to; his health
 was poor, his oratorical powers conspicuously lacking and his shy
 and reserved nature wholly unsuited to the hurly-burly ofthe hus-
 tings or convivial caballing in the clubs or the House of Commons.
 But he was a classical scholar and a mathematician of real distinc-
 tion, with a lucid mind and a rare capacity for seeing the essential
 facts in any situation and holding to them tenaciously. His value to
 the firm was obvious from the start and was to become more so in
 the times of crisis that lay ahead.
    Ned Baring’s brother Tom, whose pretensions had been defended
 against those of Harry Sturgis, had begun his career in Liverpool,
 and continued it in the New York firm of Kidder Peabody. His twin
 passions were classical literature and various types of sporting activ-
 ity. The latter was the more apparent of the two. A large, red-faced
man of blimpish manner, he had been Captain of the Boats at Eton,
hunted vigorously when in England, had fished many Canadian riv-
ers and spent his holidays pursuing grizzly bears, moose and wild
goats around the Rocky Mountains. When stirred, he could be active
                                                          brother,
and efficient, but the Baring indolence, so absent in his
often possessed him. He enjoyed his life in New York but was
vaguely disgruntled that he had never been offered a niche in
Bishopsgate and regularly awaited a call that was a long time in
coming.
  Another Baring recruit to the house was Revelstoke’s son, John.
                                                            y feat
An oarsmanlike his Uncle Tom, he achieved the extraordinar
                                                                At
of coxing the Eton eight one year and rowing stroke the next.'¢
 192                     The Sixth Great Power