




                   Riding for a Fall
                       1873-1890


For the next fifty years of Baring Brothers’ history, the house was
dominated by a father and son, Edward and John Baring, Ist and
2nd Barons Revelstoke. The two men were in many ways similar.
Both were intelligent and cultivated, self-confident to the point
of arrogance. They were dignified in manner and imposing in
appearance, men accustomed to and demanding the deference of
their inferiors, and putting into this category the generality of man-
kind. They were generous and public-spirited, not over-endowed
with a sense of humour but felt by most people to be good company.
The indolence that the family were apt to claim as their leading
weakness was even less apparent in them than in most of their
relations; they had immense application and zest for work. They
differed most markedly in that John had the better judgement, more
discretion, and a larger share of that most valuable of commodities,
luck.
   Ned Revelstoke was a man of deeper and more varied intellectual
interests than his eldest son. His mother, Cecilia Wyndham, spoke
fluent French, German and Italian, loved poetry and had a fine con-
tralto voice which had been trained by Rossini.! Her passion for
music was transmitted to her son and grandson. Ned was weaker in
Italian but spoke excellent Spanish. He greatly enjoyed the theatre
and held strong views about it: watching Irving play Romeo
                                                                    he
punctuated the performance with indignant snorts of ‘Remove
                                                                  that
man from the stage’? In this he was no more intemperate than
                                                                    in
every other field: sitting next to him ata banquet at Plymouth
                                                                 Lady
Monkswell observed with some amusement that when he
                                                             thought
the speeches were going on too long he began to swear to
                                                          himself ina
                                 186
                     Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                       187
far from inaudible undertone - ‘one really did not know what he
would say next’.
    His generosity was as unbridled as every other aspect of his char-
acter. He used to collect Bréguet watches; not to keep but to give
away to people whom he thought would appreciate them. One day,
walking in the garden of his Devonshire home with his son Maurice,
he announced: ‘This is your path; I give it to you and the gate at the
end.’ It was the inclusion of the little iron gate at the end, recalled
Maurice Baring, ‘which made that present poignantly perfect’. He
had a contempt for half-measures and liked both himself and others
 to do things on the grandest possible scale. ‘So and so,’ he used to say,
 ‘has behaved well’; by which he meant ‘big and free handed, and
 above small and mean considerations’. He liked the best.* ‘C’était
 magnifique,’ some financial Bosquet might have remarked, ‘mats ce
 n était pas la haute finance.’
    Nor was his recklessness an attribute generally to be recom-
 mended in a banker. His father, Henry, had been a celebrated gam-
bler and was said to have won his house, 11 Berkeley Square, at cards
from Lord Orford. Ned Baring was no card player but he hada gam-
bler’s instinct which caused frequent distress to his more prudent
partners. For a long time the gambles came off. Baring’s reputation
became ever more established and his renown spread as the first
banker of London, and hence the world. In 1885 he was offered a
peerage in Gladstone’s dissolution honours. His companion in en-
noblement was Nathan Rothschild - ‘It was thought desirable at this
                                                                        of
moment to give an addition of commercial strength to the House
Lords,’ noted Edward Hamilton, Gladstone’s private           secretar y.®
                                                                     arly
Neither the reason nor the company could have been particul
                                           was not to be  looked   in  the
appealing to Baring, but such a gift horse
                                                             and distin-
mouth. Thanking Gladstone for this ‘entrely unexpected
                                                                      was
guished honour’, he assured his patron that the pleasure
                                                       as  yourself ,  for
enhanced by its coming ‘from one so distinguished
                                                           Lord   Revel-
whom | entertain a sincere admiration and respect.’
                                              first active banker to
 stoke, as he now called himself, was not the
                                                             George Glyn,
 become a peer - Lord Overstone had been the firstand
                                                    it was still a rarity and
 Lord Wolverton, had followed soon after - but
                                                            his admira-
 he could justly take pride in his achievement. But though
                                                      sincere, they did
 tion and respect for Gladstone were undoubtedly
 188                     The Sixth Great Power