

    ‘You see, Mr Mallet,’ Bates said to the envoy of the Crédit
 Mobilier, ‘we consider ourselves a sort of Crédit Mobilier, ourselves,
 alone.’!?° The argumentis not unlike that of the headmaster of Eton
 contending that his school is really a glorified comprehensive - the
 same tone of patronizing broad-mindedness is apparent. Bates felt
 that a joint-stock bank was no more than ‘large capital, collected for
 purposes of speculation’.!21 The idea of limited liability was
 ungentlemanly, a true Englishman (or American for that matter)
 should stick by his commitments to the last penny. They were also
 inefficient; sooner or later, Thomas     Baring predicted, the public
 would appreciate ‘that business can be conducted with greater econ-
 omy, activity and attention by private establishments where every
  partner has a direct interest, than by boards playing with the money
  of others’.!?? But in the meantime they were there and notably pow-
 erful: ‘It appears to me that these sort of Banks will get all the Public
  Loans and that B.B. and Co. must content themselves with the Com-
 mission and Banking business,’ wrote Bates gloomily in 1863.123
    Three years later the bubble was, if not burst, at least partially
 deflated. Feverish speculation against a background of ancestral
 voices prophesying war had been the order of the day for more than
 twelve months, and the more prudent houses like Barings had with-
 drawn their money from the discount houses and battened down the
 hatches. Then on 9 May 1866, Overend Gurney suspended pay-
 ments. This great Quaker house had been by far the largest of the dis-
 count brokers, but it had lost heavily for several years and in 1865
 had tried to redeem the position by turning itself into a limited liabil-
ity company. The Bank of England appointed George Glyn, R. C. L.
Bevan of Barclays Bevan Tritton and Co. and Kirkman Hodgson,
who was soon to join Barings, to judge whether a rescue operation
could be mounted. Their conclusion was that things had gone
                                                                       too
far. Overend Gurney failed, and in their failing dragged down
                                                                    a host
of lesser businesses. The result was temporarily to discredit
                                                                  the lim-
ited liability company and to lead to the return to Barings of
                                                                 much of
the commercial credit business that they had lost over the
                                                                 previous
years.


Joshua Bates was not there to weep crocodile tears
                                                         over his rivals’
      ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873          183
misfortunes. With his death in 1864 Thomas Baring depended
largely on Russell Sturgis for the running of the business. The
thought gave him little satisfaction. His colleague, he felt, was intent
on taking profit from the firm and uninterested in the need to build
up its depleted capital. Sturgis thought himself quite as capable of
managing the concern as ever Bates had been. “That arises from a
constitutional self-esteem which nothing shakes. Of course Ameri-
cans look more and more to him as the great authority . . . There
would be no harm in this if I could always feel perfect reliance on his
sound judgement, but he seems to me to be disposed to form too
rapid decisions and to act before due reflection, and then never
thinks himself wrong.’!?4
    Sturgis saw no reason why the house should be reinforced, either
 in management or in capital, and felt himself fully capable of carry-
 ing on if Thomas Baring were to follow Bates. The younger partners,
 Bingham Mildmay and Ned Baring, agreed. Thomas Baring, sup-
 ported by Young, thought otherwise. He played with the idea of
 bringing in another American but was dissuaded by Ward - ‘Two
 Americans would in all probability quarrel or combine. Equally bad!’
 What was needed was ‘an Englishman of ability and large capital
 with whom you had a perfect understanding’.!75 By 1867 Baring
 decided he had found such a man. Ignoring the opposition of his
 partners - ‘It was difficult to oppose Thomas Baring when he had
made up his mind,’ wrote Mildmay’s son Alfred!26 - he forced
through an amalgamation of Baring Brothers with the house of
 Finlay Hodgson     and Co. It was, indeed, more like an amicable
takeover than a merger: the name of Baring Brothers was retained,
and though the result of the new combination was that the capital
                                                         incoming
 recovered from £760,000 to £1,390,000, none of the four
 partners received more than '¥44 of the profits, as against Thomas
 Baring and Russell Sturgis who took 24444 each. From Thomas
                                                                    was
 Baring’s point of view the most attractive element of the merger
                                                                Kirkman
 the arrival in the house of Finlay Hodgson’s senior partner,
                                                              long-time
 Hodgson, a former Governor of the Bank of England and
                                                         of  Canada.
 colleague on the board of the Grand Trunk Railroad
                                                                 empha-
    The predominance of the Barings in the new house was
                                                           Charles, son
 sized the same year when Thomas's nephew Thomas
                                                     the  firm.  He had
 of Charles Baring, the Bishop of Durham, joined
 184                     The Sixth Great Power