

  Crimean War, Barings were the only foreign house to be asked to
  join the Parisian banks, but the demand in Paris was so great that
 their list of subscribers was returned to them unused.!° According
 to the French financier, Baron d’Eichthal, they suffered more than
 disappointment. When the French Minister of Finance, Achille
 Fould, first approached Barings, Thomas Baring apparently argued
 that, as banker for the Russian government, he could not undertake
 the issue. He was over-persuaded, and the Russians, attributing the
 loan’s great success to Barings’ participation, took their revenge in St
 Petersburg when their latest loan was put out to tender in 1858.1
 The story seems unlikely; Barings’ role in the French loan was in fact
 insignificant and, if the Russians had felt vengeful, it would presum-
 ably have been in 1856 that their displeasure would have been most
 evident. It is possible, though, that while they accepted that Barings
would have actively to support the British government in the
Crimean War, they felt it unfriendly to extend that aid to France, and
that the memory of this made them more ready to abandon Barings
when Thomson Bonar or Rothschild were in contention for a loan.
    What small contribution Barings did make to French financing lay
in the development of the railways, and here too the French could
provide all their own needs and more. Whatever share Barings were
willing to take, they found themselves cut down to a tithe or less.
They were reduced to arguing that they should at least be placed ona
parity with the London Rothschilds, ‘that there should be no superi-
ority granted to them, and no power or privilege granted to them
which we do not enjoy. That is requisite for our position here.’ 105
    Under Louis Napoleon, indeed for the rest of the nineteenth
century, foreign capital had little place in France. After the Franco-
Prussian war, with French morale shattered and a need to raise
                                                               an
£80 million indemnity loan within a few months, it seemed that out-
side help would once more be essential.19% Barings and Rothschilds
jointly issued the prospectus and Barings offered to guarantee £2
million for themselves and £2.7 million for ‘our friends under our
responsibility’.°7 But even this modest contribution proved un-
necessary; Paris alone subscribed more than was needed
                                                       to cover the
indemnity, and the French provinces half as much again.

                          *        *        *
      A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873            179
Except for Russia, therefore, Barings’ role in international finance
after 1848 was concentrated heavily on North and Latin America.
They made occasional forays elsewhere. In 1857, for instance, young
Hugh Childers was sent out to Australia to act as Barings’ confiden-
tial representative to negotiate a £7 million loan needed by the Colo-
nial Treasurer of Victoria - ‘All is settled with the Barings. They offer
very liberally, wrote Mrs Childers appreciatively. Childers went,
negotiated, and returned to report. ‘Met Mr [Thomas] Baring and his
cousin Mr Edward Baring,’ he recorded. ‘Norman Courta fine place.
Full of curiosities. Edward Baring a capital fellow.’ The trip had
proved abortive, however. While he was en route to Australia the gov-
ernment had changed and the new ministers preferred to deal with
the local banks. 1°
   Barings were not beyond investing in stocks for which they had no
personal responsibility. Thomas Baring rejected as sancumonious
humbug a sentence in a draft letter which stated Barings never spec-
ulated in this way. ‘Our books would show that we have speculated
for our own and for joint account in English, French, Russian,
Austrian, American stocks which we did not ourselves bring out,
lately in Panama Bonds and Australian Railroad shares. And I pre-
sume we should do it again if there was a good prospect of profit.'°?
It was notable that members of the family were decidedly more
robust than outsiders like Bates or Sturgis when it came to balancing
profit against prestige. Writing about a Mexican loan Francis Baring
commented: ‘... the question of dignity remains for the house,
which I am less solicitous about if the thing goes down. | don’t
believe in dignity in our days. See how the Jew gets on!'4!°
   Perhaps not surprisingly for a house that every year was concen-
trating more on the international field, Barings’ one large investment
at home continued to give trouble. ‘1858 has certainly been a won-
derful year for profits, Thomas Baring wrote to Bates. ‘Luckily it has
                                                  Weardale, or
been an expensive one and we have Grand Trunk and
we should become too fat and saucy.’!!! Grand Trunk was the North
                                                             to his
American railroad which was Thomas Baring’s contribution
                                                         £10,00 0 a
house’s losses; the Weardale ironworks, losing a regular
                                                             y. In
year, was the cross that Bates had made and now bore manfull
                                                          retrieved. Iron
 1848 he was still hopeful that the situation could be
                                                                    rably
was being produced at a little over £2 a ton, which if conside
 180                     The Sixth Great Power