

 been working in the United States for the previous decade and not
 much was known about him, except that he had been a distinguished
 classical scholar and was devoted to his old college, Hertford.
 Thomas was dubious about his nephew's potential, and inclined to
 wonder whether he was not filling a place that would be more use-
 fully occupied by someone of greater efficiency, ‘But there is room
 enough,’ he comforted himself.
    The first few years of the new partnership were comfortably suc-
 cessful. Profits rose from £297,000 in 1866 to £446,828 in 1869, but
 thereafter fell away. By the end of 1871 the capital had swollen to
 £2.4 million, with acceptances totalling £7.4 million. But it was still,
if nota one-man band, then at least a house in which one partner was
very evidently predominant. Thomas Baring’s share of the capital
was £609,000, almost as much as the next two put together - Sturgis
and Mildmay with £320,000 apiece. Kirkman Hodgson had
£261,000 against his brother J.S. with £251,000. Ned Baring came
next with £222,000 while the newest recruit, Thomas Charles, had a
mere £71,000.!?7 In reputation and influence as well as fortune,
Thomas Baring took the lead. There were many who speculated on
the future of the house after he had departed.
   Not least among these was Thomas Baring himself. From 1870
onwards he had been receding from the direction of the firm. It
arose, he wrote, ‘in part from age and natural indulgence. . . butalso
perhaps from the difficulty that may occur in free communications
between as many as eight partners’. To the outside world he was still
in charge, within the house more and more decisions were being
taken without reference to him: ‘I do not altogether like when I have
been put on the top of the tree, to be regarded as a dead branch,’
                                                                      he
complained.!?8 Unlike Bates, he had many things to do outside the
world of banking and no wish to cling on where he was not welcome.
But his readiness to withdraw did not prove thar he was entirely
happy with what he left behind. About a year before he died, Lady
Northbrook asked him whether she should encourage her
                                                                  son
Francis to enter the bank. He advised her not to. ‘I suspect,’
                                                                wrote
Lady Northbrook, ‘from what I picked up that the Halcyon
                                                              days of
the Baring House are past and that there is no talent in the
                                                               young
men that have entered that are of My Boy’s standing, and
                                                            probably
Tom Baring with his quiet discernment saw that the
                                                      House would
      ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873         185
not keep up its reputation very many more years.    !?9
   The testing time was about to come. In the spring of 1873 Thomas
Baring was convalescing in Torquay and finding it on the whole ben-
eficial; in the autumn he moved to Bournemouth and, for that or
other reasons, lost ground rapidly.'3° On 19 November Bertram
Currie of Glyn’s wrote to his father, ‘Poor old Thomas Baring went
off at4 p.m. yesterday. . . He was certainly a proof, if any were want-
ing, that a merchant may be as good a gentleman as an acred lord or
squire and he was wisely content with and proud of his trade. I don’t
think he has left his equal behind.’!3! On this point Ned Baring at
least was resolved to prove Currie wrong.
                                  11
                                >> en,