

 not stop him accompanying the main weight of the City interest in
 its drift towards the Tories. When in May 1886 there was a meeting
 at the Westminster Palace Hotel of dissident Liberals intent on pre-
 serving the Union with Ireland, the Lords Rothschild and Revel-
 stoke were among those appointed to the General Committee.®
    It was shortly after he received his peerage that Revelstoke began
the lavish refurbishment of his house in Charles Street, Mayfair. No.
37, an already substantial mid-eighteenth-century terrace house of
grey brick which he had bought fifteen years before, was united with
No. 38 and £55,000 spent gutting the interiors and creating a rich
French-style ensemble with sweeping marble staircase, riotous
rococo ornamentation and decorative panelling looted from the
houses of France. Into this opulent showcase Revelstoke poured his
outstanding collection of French furniture and objets d’art - an item
typical of his taste was described, in auctioneer’s English, as ‘Pair of
Louis XVI or-molu candelabra, each with an undraped female figure
bearing a cornucopia, supporting poppy branches for three lights
each, on plinths chased with oak branches, foliage and acorns, by
 Goulliére - on circular pedestals of red and white marble, decorated
with festoons of vine foliage and flowers of chased or-molu’.? The
 pictures were less distinguished than the other furnishings: there
was a fine Cuyp in one of the two downstairs drawing rooms but a
vast Birket Foster view of Venice on the landing outside was more
illustrative of the owner’s taste.!° Within this cadre Revelstoke enter-
tained in a style as lavish as the furnishing. It was always a home,
however: a visitor remembered seeing its splendours tarnished by
three small sons of the house lined up on the great staircase, seeing
who could pee furthest towards the hall.1!
   As befitted a public figure of his grandeur, Revelstoke became a
landowner. The Baring estates were concentrated in Hampshire
where they had now accumulated 89,000 acres, There they lived in
princely style; in 1887 4076 partridges were shot on Lord Ashbur
                                                                       -
ton’s land in four days, beating the previous record of 3392
                                                                       at
Holkham in 1885. Revelstoke decided not to compete with his
                                                                     sol-
idly established cousins. He had married Louise-Emily Bulteel, from
an old Devonshire family, and it was to the county that had first
received the Barings in 1717 that he now returned. He bought the
estate of Membland, twelve miles from Plymouth, near
                                                     the Bulteels
                      Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                      189
of Pamflete and the Mildmays of Flete. There he remodelled the old
manor house, converting it into a large, square mansion of Jacobean
style built of white brick, with green shutters, ivy and a tower.
Houses on the estate were all painted in a distinctive shade some-
what pretentiously described as ‘Revelstoke blue’; the ‘Bull and Bear
Gate’, set with figures of appropriate design, commemorated his alli-
ance with the Bulteels; the church at the neighbouring village of
Noss Mayo was demolished and rebuilt; Revelstoke’s 150-ton yacht,
the Waterwitch, was berthed in the Yealm river thereby: everything
was done in the most lavish style.
    Ned Baring had not started rich. In 1873, when Thomas Baring
died, the total capital of Baring Brothers was about £2.2 million, of
which Thomas Baring owned a quarter. Much of this went to his
 nephew, T. C. Baring, and thus stayed in the firm; but by 1874 the
 capital had still dropped to just under £2 million. Of this Edward
 Baring’s share was £222,000, which compared favourably with the
 pittance with which he had begun but was significantly smaller than
 the holdings of Sturgis, Bingham Mildmay and J. S. Hodgson. Four
 years later, so ambitious was his spending, his share of the capital
 had slipped to a mere £78,000, the smallest of all the partners. It did
 not even begin to build up substantially until the mid-1880s, and
 even by 1890 the two Hodgsons, Mildmay and Francis Baring had
 far larger holdings. But this in no way indicated his importance and
 activity within the firm, which related more closely to the share he
 took of the profits. In 1873 this had been "14s, against Russell
 Sturgis’s 24/144; by 1887, with Sturgis departed, he took ?%20, H. B.
 Mildmay being the only other partner to receive as much.
    Even this did not reflect the extent of his real authority. It was his
 young brother Evelyn, later Lord Cromer, who earned the nickname
 ‘Over-Baring’, but it could as well have been applied to Ned. With
                                                                     to con-
 the death of Thomas Baring he became increasingly difficult
                                                                        tion
 trol and determined to control others. The only effective opposi
                                                 partner , Russell  Sturgis ,
 from within the house came from the senior
                                                               that  Sturgis
 and the workings of the partnership made it certain
                                                                   not even
 would never be more than primus inter pares and sometimes
                                                   C. Baring’ s  comme  nts
 that. When he retired in 1882, the tone of T.
                                                            strong  as  ever,
 was almost contemptuous: Sturgis was physically as
                                                        have grown weaker
 he told T. W. Ward’s son, Samuel, but ‘his nerves
 190                     The Sixth Great Power