

 more than the 16/- predicted by Attwood, was still a competitive
 price.!!2 But to produce iron consistently at a price and quantity
which could compete in a glutted market proved beyond Attwood’s
powers. By 1859 Thomas Baring had largely lost hope. ‘I thoroughly
deserve my name Thomas for I am incredulous of the existence of
miracles. . . 1confess that Iam notin love with the present system of
management and do not think that I disparage the great talents and
knowledge of yourself and Mr Attwood when I say that I have not
implicit confidence in either as an experienced and _ practical
ironmaster.’!!3 The annual loss was a trifling matter, the lock-up of
funds far more serious, but there seemed nothing to be done but jog
on as we best can together’. The moral was that merchant bankers
should stick to doing what they knew how to do; something which
neither Baring nor Bates would have disputed in principle but some-
times found harder to follow in practice.


What they still did best in practice, though the emphasis was shift-
ing, was the nuts-and-bolts work of international trading. Accept-
ances were at £1.57 million in 1848, rose above £2 million in 1851,
soared to £4.2 million in 1855, fell back in the troubles that followed,
but quickly recovered and averaged over £7 million a year towards
the end of the 1860s. In 1850 their acceptances were almost four
times as large as Rothschilds’, figures which contrast strikingly with
those for foreign and colonial issues, where the Rothschilds’ total
was five times that of Barings;!!+ Profits mounted proportionately:
£11,209 in 1848; £217,863 by 1862; and £480,011 in 1868. There
were setbacks, exceptional losses, lean years when        international
trade withered because of some crisis - but the trend was ever
upward.
   One such setback came in 1857, with a banking crisis in the
United States spreading to Europe, in particular Hamburg and other
northern cities. Given their strong American connections it was
                                                                  not
surprising that people looked to Barings to see how they were weath-
ering the storm. For some reason, persistent gossip maintained
                                                                 that
they were in trouble, so much so that Brown Brothe
                                                   rs in New York
removed them from the list of houses on which Brown,
                                                          Shipley
might safely take bills. Brown, Shipley protested: Baring
                                                          s were
      ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873           181
‘among the undoubted English Houses; notwithstanding all the
rumours [we] cannot bring ourselves to believe in the possibility of
their being in any difficulty’.1!5 When George Peabody and Co.
came near default, the rumours about Barings redoubled and Brown,
Shipley began to trim their sails - ‘You need not attach more weight
to our confidence in them than our assertions warrant, and an addi-
tional good name never hurts a Bill.’!!6 First thoughts were best,
Barings came through almost unscathed, losing only £15,000-
£20,000, ‘but it will be prudent to leave a considerable sum in Profit
and Loss to meet any loss that may happen,’ wrote Bates."?’ With a
profit of £175,000 in 1857 they could well afford to; Peabody and
Co. needed a loan of £800,000 from the Bank of England to carry on.
Barings were ready to act as one of the guarantors but previously
they had pressed hard for the immediate settlement of outstanding
bills and caused the other firm considerable embarrassment. Ran-
cour remained. ‘Mr Peabody was so averse to have assistance from
Barings . . . that he requested the withdrawal of their names. '!!8
   The revolution of 1848 had switched investment from Europe to
the United States, now the threat of civil war in the United States
moved it back again. The war caused schism in Barings - Joshua
Bates sturdily supporting the North, Sturgis the South - but more
immediately it bit deeply into the cotton trade of the Liverpool
house, whose commission        income fell from £32,000 in 1861 to
£14,000 in 1862.
                                                                 y banks,
   Fresh turmoil was caused by the joint-stock limited liabilit
                                                                        of
whose intervention in matters outside their traditional field
domestic banking threatened the hegem      ony  of the traditi onal  mer-
                                                                  willing
chant houses. Drawing their capital as they did from any
                                                               the giants
investor, these new banks swiftly became larger even than
                                                   er  in Paris  was the
like Barings and Rothschilds. The Crédit Mobili
                                                                potential
first great exemplar; Barings gave ita cautious welcome as a
                                                                  should
counterweight to Rothschilds and agreed that Francis Baring
                                                   reach  London     until
become a director.!19 The movement did not
                                                            Many theof
1863 in the shape of the International Financial Society.
                                                                 Herman
great names of the City - Junius Morgan of Peabody's,
                                                    among the directors,
 Stern of Stern Brothers, Frederick Huth - were
                                                       were inveter-
 but Barings and Rothschilds stayed aloof. Rothschilds
                                                     attitude.
 ate in opposition, Barings more ambiguous in their
 182                      The Sixth Great Power