

 autocratic tendencies which had so recently been an enemy, and
 partly on the alleged riskiness of the investment. In Birmingham
 Peel made a speech warning the public not to hazard their money in
 such a field, but his words were dulcet compared with those of the
 press. Under the headline ‘Patriotism and Five Per Cent’ the I/lus-
 trated London News speculated whether Barings could be considered
 good patriots - ‘naturally no direct answer can be given to such a
 ticklish question’.83 Punch broke into verse:
            Can anybody of the British nation
            Attempt a railway loan’s negotiation
               His countrymen in Russian toils ensnaring?
            No firm in England, sure, could be so base,
            Let us then hope that such is not the case,
              Although reported of the House of Baring.84
   But it was The Times that produced the most sustained and
rebarbative abuse, causing particular offence to Bates by a piece that
accused Barings of rigging the market. The newspaper adduced a
 pair of apparently respectable clergymen who had been put forward
as would-be buyers of the stock but in fact were pawns of the unscru-
pulous promoter. ‘False, wicked and malicious,’ Bates described it:
‘It is inconceivable that malice can invent such falsehoods.’85 Small
wonder that Bates had been outraged when assured in Paris that
Barings were proprietors of The Times: ‘Of course I denied it and
informed that it was hostile to the Barings and had abused them
from the late Lord Ashburton down to the present Generation.’86
   The hostility of the press, a shortage of money, the low interest
offered by the Russian government, and reasonable doubts about
the viability of the project, combined to make the issue a disaster.
Under 19,000 shares were applied for, and though others were grad-
ually disposed of in Amsterdam or St Petersburg, Barings were left
holding more than 100,000 shares at the end of 1 857. They
                                                             remained
obstinately optimistic, however; Thomas Baring told Stieglitz that
he was certain the shares would soon win the approval of the British
investor while Hottinguers were confidently assured: ‘The more
                                                                 we
hear and learn of the Grand Russian Railway the better we think of
                                                                   it
... We hope the opening 100 miles towards Warsaw may
                                                             make a
sensation that the London press will have to notice.’87
      ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873          7/3
   Unfortunately their optimism proved ill founded. Within a few
months they were grumbling about the extravagance of the enter-
prise and the refusal of the Russians to employ a British engineer.’*
Costs were consistently exceeded, schedules not held to, those lines
that were operating were run inefficiently. Thomas Baring tried to
withdraw from the Board of the Grande Société on the grounds that
there were few British shareholders and he had no useful role to
play.8? The foreigners on the council were invariably ignored and ‘I
do not wish to expose myself to such complete neglect,’ he com-
plained in 1868. ‘I suppose that the foreign members are considered
ornamental but they are evidently of no weight.’ For Barings the
Grande Société meant a lock-up of much-needed capital and much
worry and frustration.
   Nor did their support for Russian railways guarantee their posi-
tion when other loans were in question. At the end of 1858, when the
 Russian government wanted to raise £11 million, it disconcerted
 Barings by announcing that it proposed to offer the contract to sev-
eral tenderers. ‘We cannot forbear from expressing the painful regret
that we experience in observing that the Russian government, in
applying to others, should seem to manifest a distrust of the ability
and zeal of those who have in past times been entrusted with similar
negotiations,’ wrote Thomas Baring reproachfully to Baron Stieglitz.
‘| cannot help fearing when not an open but private competition 1s
involved . . . that we may be defeated by arts which we could not
employ.’#! The arts he had in mind were of course those of
Rothschilds, but when the bids were put in it was found that by far
the best came from the respectable but relatively minor firm of
Thomson Bonar.
   The loan was not a success and Thomson Bonar proved them-
selves incapable of sustaining the credit of the Russian government.
For several years Barings and Rothschilds then boxed and coxed in
                                                                      in
the favour of St Petersburg; Barings having an expensive time of it
                                                                     ng
1860 repairing the damage done by Bonars, Rothschilds managi
                                                       fortuna tely  for
no better in 1862. Then in 1864 the tide turned;
                                                                   1866
Barings on a loan which they and Hopes controlled. The year
                                                a vast subscri ption  of
proved still better, with Barings harvesting
                                                             had  to  be
£18.6 million against a total loan of £6 million which
                                                                 ahead.
shared with Hopes. It seemed that a prosperous future lay
 176                    The Sixth Great Power