

    The fears were justified. In March 1854 Britain and France
 declared war on Russia. Barings’ well-known association with the
 Russian government did not make things easy for them. In the
 House of Commons Palmerston described Thomas Baring as being
 the private agent of the Emperor of Russia.7* The relationship
 between international finance and foreign policy, or to particularize,
between Barings and the Foreign Office, is always hard to define
with any precision.’* Thomas Baring constantly met members of the
government in the House of Commons, private houses and the
clubs. Often his relations were among them. He was considered by
them to be a member of the establishment, whose discretion could
be relied on and whose opinion on many issues was well worth elicit-
ing. He, for his part, made it his business to know the main lines of
British policy. It is hard to conceive any circumstances in which he
would deliberately have taken action likely to frustrate it, and impos-
sible to believe that he would ever have ignored a direct instruction,
or even request from the British government - self-interest as well as
patriotism would have precluded any such behaviour.
   But it did not follow from this that Barings were a docile tool of
British policy. On the contrary, they could often take an indepen-
dent line. Thomas Baring liked to know what the government was
about, but he retained the discretion not to know if it suited his book.
There was in fact nothing ministers could have done to block the
transfer of the Russian deposits out of the country, but if there had
been and Baring had thought it possible that there might be opposi-
tion, he would have been capable of making the transfer first and
telling the government later. As for the Crimean War, he never
viewed it as anything but a calamity, and an unnecessary one at that.
‘Decidedly and foolishly war-like,’ was how Barings described the
public mood to Hottinguers in February 1854.75 Of John Russell’s
peace mission in 1855, Barings feared that ‘public opinion may be so
goaded by the press and so irritated by the failure of immediate and
complete success in the war as had been absurdly anticipated,
                                                              that
national vanity may be a hindrance to a reasonable peace’.76
   Nor did Barings pretend, even in wartime, that their relations with
their commercial contacts in Russia were ever less than cordial. In
June 1854 Baron Stieglitz rather bizarrely offered Barings participa-
tion ina 50 million rouble war loan. He made it clear he did not anti-
       ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’:    1848-1873       173
cipate acceptance and Barings duly refused the offer, but ‘we are not
the less obliged to you for this evidence of a friendship which we
always value’.?7 When peace came in 1856, Barings were quick to
assure Stieglitz that ‘one of the most awful results of the war has been
the interruption of our full and confidential correspondence. We
trust that such a disastrous state of events may not again occur.’
   During the war Barings continued to market enough Russian
bonds through Hopes to meet the interest due to British investors on
earlier issues. This activity caused some confusion. ‘Only think of the
Russian loan being levied here!’ wrote the Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, Lord Clarendon, indignantly to his wife. ‘In the
ordinary way of business, too, so I don’t see how it can be inter-
fered with! £200,000 left London yesterday . . .7° It sounds as if
Clarendon was equating payment of interest on the 1850 loan with a
new loan. A surprising number of people, though few of them as
well-informed as Clarendon should have been, imagined Barings
were in some way associated with Stieglitz’s 50 million rouble war
 loan. Legally this would have been impermissible, economically
 injudicious, and politically and socially inconceivable.*
    As soon as the war was over Barings plunged back into the fray.
 The insatiable appetite of the Russian railways for fresh financing
 led to negotiations in April 1856 for a huge loan to cover the con-
 struction of a network of 2500 miles at an eventual cost of some £40
 million. The Grande Société des Chemins de Fer Russes, as the enterprise
was called, was to build a line from St Petersburg to Warsaw and
other links, mainly radiating from Moscow. Stimulated in part at
least by the knowledge that Rothschilds were showing interest,
Barings played an unwontedly aggressive role, and in October
Thomas Baring led a group of French and English bankers to St
Petersburg. Bates was initially suspicious; “Unless they make a very
favourable contract they will, I trust, make no engagement. For my
part I rather wish to have nothing to do with it.’8! Once the contract
                                                                     ‘If it
was signed, however, excitement overcame his habitual caution:
does not prove a brilliant affair I shall be much disappointed.’*?
Barings agreed to place in London 140,000 shares of £20 each.
  An extraordinary outcry greeted the announcement of this agree-
ment, based partly on the argument that British capital was needed
                                                                   y of
urgently in Britain, partly on the impropriety of helping a countr
 174                    The Sixth Great Power