

But the fickle British public soon concluded that there was a limit to
the quantity of Russian stock it was prepared to stomach. The Dutch
market too showed signs of being sated. A succession of railway
loans proved that the money was more easily raised in Paris, Berlin
or Frankfurt, and inevitably the Russians began to look in that direc-
tion. Between 1870 and 1886 three fifths of foreign investment in
Russia came from Germany.®? It was a development that left little
room for Barings.


 While Russia was hungry for foreign capital, France was very capable
 of looking after its own requirements; indeed French capitalists were
 more and more in competition with the British in the European
 money markets. Bates told Lord Shaftesbury that ‘he had more
 hopeful views of French finance than of any other country on
earth,’? and though the country’s wealth was more latent than
apparent in the years that immediately followed the revolution of
 1848, Louis Napoleon’s coup d’état at the end of 1851 restored the
confidence of the monied classes.
    Barings flattered themselves that they enjoyed a special relation-
ship with the future Emperor. In 1885 they were to write to the Edin-
burgh Review, complaining of a story that in 1866 Louis Napoleon
had deposited nearly £1 million with them as a hedge against pos-
sible future trouble: ‘This statement is entirely erroneous. In 1866
we had neither money nor securities belonging to the Emperor of
the French. . . Neither then, nor at any other time during his reign,
did the Emperor remit to us any large amount either of money or
securities.°*The statement was carefully phrased and somewhat
disingenuous. Louis Napoleon during his exile in Britain had been a
frequent visitor to Joshua Bates’s home and during his time as
Emperor from time to time deposited a few thousand pounds with
Barings, notably after a visit Bates paid to St Cloud in November
1860.°> Nothing remotely approaching £1 million was involved, but
Louis Napoleon was still aware that Barings were his trusted friends.
   It must have been in part at least this familiarity which led him in
September 1855 to write directly to Joshua Bates with a most singu-
lar proposal. There had been a bad harvest in France. If the French
government were known to be in the market, prices would
                                                               soar.
      A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873         177
Would Barings procure 3 million hectolitres of corn in the United
States? This would be sold in France at the current price: if Barings
gained on the deal, it would be their good luck, if they lost, the
French government would make up the deficit. It was Ireland and
1845 over again; no one could be better qualified for the task than
Barings, Bates assured the Emperor, ‘having executed a similar com-
mission for the late Sir Robert Peel’.°7 They would prefer not to
make a profit on the deal, but would charge 2 per cent commission
on the purchases and 5 per cent on any money they had to advance
for the purpose.*8 Louis Napoleon was so far satisfied with this offer
that he broke off negotiations with the French houses with whom he -
had also been treating and entrusted the business to Barings.
    The operation could hardly have been better carried out. A poor
 harvest in Germany and the devastation of the Russian crops
 by drought and locusts drove prices upward, but in Boston Ward
 handled the purchases with skill and discretion. ‘We repeat our anx1-
 ety that this order be executed in the best manner possible,’ read
 Ward’s instructions. ‘As great confidence has been placed in us by
 His Majesty the Emperor we should be very sorry that he should in
 any way be disappointed,’ - exemplary sentiments, though rendered
 a little less inspiring by the fact that the letter was copied to Louis
 Napoleon.9? By mid-February, 1856, corn to the total value of
£1,864,940.6s.3d. had arrived in France - ‘There was a heavy loss on
 the operation,’ reported Barings, ‘which however was a gain to the
 people of France by the influence which our sales had on the general
 prices.’!0° The only snag was that Barings had to wait a long time for
 their money. Francis Baring in Paris was responsible for pressing for
 payment. He found it an ungrateful task. ‘This is the shabbiest Gov-
 ernment going,’ he grumbled. ‘After going from one Minister to
 another I have only half done my job.’!°! The trouble was that if he
 pressed too hard he gave the impression that Barings were in urgent
need of their money and thus not so affluent as generally believed.
To be deprived of the money was indeed more inconvenient than
they liked to admit; in February 1856 they had to draw on Hopes for
£100,000 to tide things over.'°
  Apart from this unusual enterprise, Louis Napoleon’s favour did
Barings little good in France. When the French government wanted
to raise 500 million francs as a loan in 1855, to help pay for the
 178                     The Sixth Great Power