

intended to run from the Mersey near Liverpool deep into industrial
Lancashire. It was an ambitious and most desirable project but it
failed to appeal to the investor. ‘Barings’ beer is more successful than
Rothschilds’ water’ was a saying of the times, but it was unfair to
Rothschilds, for the first £4 million in preference shares were issued
at par on joint account between the two houses. Only 18 per cent
were subscribed by the public, almost entirely in Manchester and its
vicinity. A syndicate had been set up, including Cazenove and
Akroyds, Morgans and Hambros, which took a large proportion of
the remainder, but Barings were still left with 39,881 shares. By
March the following year this total had risen to 42,738 as more
shares were acquired on the market to stop the price going to a dis-
count. Only Rothschilds, with 45,317 shares, held more.*? The issue
had been a failure, and locked up capital at a time when it was badly
 needed.
    The routine trading business of the house meanwhile carried on,
 not in spite of the partners, but without any sustained energy being
shown by them. Revelstoke was apt to argue that there was no differ-
ence in principle between accepting bills on commission and issuing
loans on commission; the bills were private while the loans were
public and usually of longer duration, but both called for the same
calculations and involved the same risks.5° No doubt this reflected
his views, but he found the loans altogether more glamorous and sat-
istying and concentrated his attention largely on this side of the busi-
ness. The strength of Barings and its reputation, and the efficient
organization of the house, is shown by the steady growth of its
acceptance income during this period in spite of Revelstoke’s indif-
ference. Liabilities on acceptances had been £6.7 million at the end
of 1870; by the beginning of 1890 they were £15 million. The next
largest issuer was Kleinworts, with £4.9 million; Rothschilds had a
mere £1.4 million.
   The days in which Barings would trade in goods on their own
account were almost over. The collapse of Russell Sturgis’s family
firm in 1875 gravely damaged Barings’ traditional network of agents
around Asia and nobody was particularly concerned to renew it. The
Liverpool office made fitful efforts to get into new lines, rubber and
guano among them, but the field was already crowded with special-
ist firms better qualified to undertake such trade. It was safer and
                     Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                  203

more profitable to provide the money that enabled others to do the
work. Not that the task of granting credits was necessarily less oner-
ous or risky than the trading which it subsidized. It used to be rela-
tively easy for private bankers to know to whom it was safe to lend
money, mused Bagehot, but now ‘the world has become so large and
complicated that it is not easy to tell who is rich and who poor’.*!
There seemed no end to the proliferation of new companies or indi-
viduals clamouring for money to finance their favoured projects.
Barings took refuge in their habitual caution. ‘We have hitherto not
even heard the name of the Company mentioned in your letter and
therefore can give no advice worth giving as to its merits or demerits,
they typically told Hopes in December 1884. ‘But there can be no
 question that the three noblemen, whose names appear in connex-
 ion with it, are utterly wanting in business knowledge and commer-
cial standing, and none of them 1s rich.’5?
    One line of business which had been discontinued was now
 renewed. Finlay, Hodgson had owned two sailing vessels, the Chaa
Sze and the Black Prince. The Chaa Sze was soon disposed of, but
rather than abandon ship management a second time Barings com-
missioned from a Glasgow yard the Norman Court, called after
Thomas Baring’s country house, a clipper ship designed to ply
between Britain and Australia or the Far East. The two ships
remained in operation throughout the 1870s but the competition of
steam proved too strong. The Black Prince was finally sold in 1880,
the Norman Court the following year.
   The tradition that Barings, as a merchant house, would deal in
anything that might show a profit, was never abandoned. Ventures
into strange territory could be risky unless great care was taken. In
1874 the Chinese had urgent need of an ironclad frigate. Barings
were asked to purchase one from the Danish government and pro-
                                                                     a
cured it for £200,000, paying £20,000 of their own money as
deposit. By an aberration which suggests some carelessness     on the
part of the negotiator, they had agreed to a contract which gave the
Danes the right to deliver the ship where and when they wanted.
                                                                    in
This was unacceptable to the Chinese, who insisted on delivery
                                                                    in
China. The Danes argued that the war which was currently raging
                                                     involved  by this
the Far East-made this impracticable. The delay
toing-and-froing proved disastrous, since the Chinese maintained
 204                    The Sixth Great Power