

 Mendelssohns. Hopes and Barings protested jointly to the President
 of the Grand Company, but got little for their pains. They were not
always excluded; several times Barings and Hopes participated in
 railway loans over this period, but the results were not much to
crow over. In 1890, for instance, when a loan of £2.5 million was
contracted for, the total subscription in London amounted to a
miserable £25,000 - “We can only regret that we have had so little
success, Barings wrote apologetically to Hopes.3+ Three months
later Hopes still had £423,000 worth ofunplaced stock, and only the
intervention of a French syndicate saved Barings from a lock-up of
funds at a particularly awkward time.
   Not many people realized how insignificant a role Barings - or for
that matter any other British house - were playing in continental
financing. In 1871 and 1872 huge loans were floated by the French
government to finance the indemnities owing after the Franco-
Prussian war. Barings and Rothschilds jointly handled the London
end. The loans went conspicuously well. Joseph Laurence wrote to
congratulate Barings on ‘the marvellous success of the colossal
French loan, in great measure due to the influence of your name’.
How splendid it was, rhapsodized Mr Laurence, ‘in these days of
 competition’ to see ‘the house in Bishopsgate maintain its undis-
 puted place as the first Commercial House in the World’.35 Yet in
 fact its name was just about all that Barings did contribute. Only
 about 10 per cent of the £200 million which was raised came from
 London, and of this modest amount by far the larger part was sub-
scribed by Rothschilds.
    For the rest Barings’ role was as often as not confined to variations
on the theme of saying no. An application for £1 million for the
drainage and water supply of Lisbon was rejected on the grounds
that the bonds would be issued in Portuguese currency and would
therefore not be saleable in London.36 For Norway in 1876 there was
not even that excuse - ‘For years past no time has been so
unfavourable as the present for introducing new schemes of any
kind to the English public.’37 Six years later, when it was the Span-
1ards who wanted a loan, things had evidently not improved. In ordi-
nary times Barings would be delighted to employ their money in this
way but times were far from ordinary, ‘and we, like everybody else,
prefer keeping ourselves as strong as we can’. Of course if Barings
                      Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                       199

were official bankers to the Spanish government it would be a differ-
ent matter. ‘I confess I don’t quite see why they should not apply to
their friends in New Court with whom I believe they have a large
account, wrote T. C. Baring.38 It would be going too far to say that
Barings opted out of Europe in the last quarter of the nineteenth
century, but promising opportunities were limited and such as did
exist were not pursued with any zest.
    This perhaps over-cautious inertia was counterbalanced, how-
ever, by a dramatic new departure at home. In 1886 Sir Edward
 Guinness, whose family had been brewing their dark brown liquid
 since the mid-eighteenth century, decided to float the business as a
 public company. According to Lord Rothschild, the business was
 first offered to his house and turned down. ‘When | agree to any pro-
 posal, I am immediately filled with anxiety,’ he told Frank Harris.
 ‘To say “Yes” is like putting your finger in a machine - the whirring
 wheels may drag your whole body in after the finger.*? Revelstoke
 was the last man to suffer from such exaggerated timidity. He at once
 told Guinness that Barings would be happy to undertake the flota-
 tion. ‘I think Guinness ought surely to yield profit to Baring Brothers
 and Co.,’ wrote Thomas Baring from New York. He agreed it would
 be absurd to place any of the shares on the American market; Lon-
 don could easily find the money.                                  .
     Six million pounds’ worth of preference and ordinar     y  shares    and
  debenture stock were to be issued, of which the Guinness family
 elected to keep £800,000. That left £5.2 million, to satisfy what it was
 clear was going to be a very substanual public demand. Applications
 were invited for Saturday morning 23 October and extra policemen
 were brought in to be on hand in case the traffic proved unusually
  heavy. Nothing prepared Barings for the frenzied tumult that in fact
                                                                        Daily
  ensued. ‘Barings’ place was literally besieged,’ reported the
                                                         crowd    of   clerks,
  News. ‘Special policemen kept back the pushing
                                                                  have one
  agents, messengers and City men, and pains were taken to
                                                                        clerks
  of the swing doors only partly open, so that none but spectral
                                                             squeeze     in.’4°
  and Stock Exchange men of the Cassius cut could
                                                            wrapped their
  Frank Harris wrote that some resourceful applicants
                                                     the  windows    .*! The
  forms around stones and flung them through
                                                        total  somewh     ere
  Times reported that applications were said to
                                                         good reason for
  between £60 million and £130 million: ‘We have
 200                      The Sixth Great Power