

Cambridge he was master of the University Drag, ‘always splendidly
mounted,’ noted a contemporary, ‘and did justice to his horses too,
being a fine horseman whose seat in the saddle was akin to perfec-
tion’.!7 But at the age of twenty he left university to join Barings,
spent two years going through the mill in the counting house, then
did an extensive tour of North and South America and finally
became a partner early in 1890. To those who studied the fortunes of
the house it seemed that he was the most likely of the younger gener-
ation to steer it into the twentieth century.
   Whether it was - as their father suspected - to keep the line of suc-
cession open for John Baring, or because he had doubts about their
capacity, Lord Revelstoke flatly refused to take any of Lord
Ashburton’s sons into the bank, even on a trial basis.'8 Certainly the
field was left clear as a result. Charles Norman, one of the old Finlay
Hodgson partners, died in 1889 with £600,000 of Barings’ capital to
his name, to be replaced by his son Archie; but Archie Norman,
though well liked and no fool, was not a contender for the leader-
ship. By 1890 he and John Baring were the only two partners who
could reasonably expect to survive when Lord Revelstoke and
Francis Baring finally departed.
   In the meantime T. C. Baring played the part of Revelstoke’s right-
hand man. Thomas Charles was one of those conscientiously
grumpy characters who are always assumed to have a heart of gold
but gives few grounds to support such an assumption. His irritability
and cantankerousness can be excused by his sufferings from gout,
but did not make him appealing in society; indeed, he cultivated
few acquaintances, ignoring his neighbours in Roehampton and
throughout the year driving the few hundred yards to church in a
closed carriage with his children, even on the hottest day, dressed in
scarlet comforters and goloshes. When his sons went to Harrow the
family moved to the area so that the children could live near by ‘and
be spared the contamination of other boys’.19 Two of them were
sacked.                               |
   Anecdotes abound of T. C. Baring getting the better of other peo-
ple, and usually jumping on them afterwards. At night when he was
being driven back to his house on the outskirts of London he would
sleep soundly in his carriage. Suspecting, however, that his coach-
man was giving an illicit lift to a friend, he one night changed places
                                                   by Rudolf   Lehmann.
Edward Baring (1828-1897) _ first Lord Revelstoke,
              Wk
               hy




                                   “SAME          OLD   GAME!”
) Lavy or TurgapNerpee   Srerer.   ‘YOU ’VE GOT YOURSELVES INTO A NICE   MESS   WITH   YOUR   PRECIO!
         “SPECULATION!?            WELL—I "LL HELP YOU OUT OF IT FOR
                                                                         THIS   ONCE!!”

            A cartoon from Punch, 8 November 1890, referring
                                                             to the Baring Crisis
            of that year,
                    Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                    193
with him and donned the cloak and hat. Someone duly signalled to
the carriage to stop and prefaced his thanks by saying that he sup-
posed the old so-and-so was safely fuddled inside as usual. Baring
threw off his passenger, drove home at full speed and fired the
coachman. Another time a clerk made a foolish error in a letter to
Hopes. Baring discovered the man responsible and dictated to hima
letter to Hopes beginning: ‘Owing to the gross carelessness of a
member of our staff who has since been dismissed. . . .. To be fair to
Baring, this was the last the wretched clerk heard of the incident.?°
  T.C. Baring retired at the end of 1888, aged only fifty-seven. When
disaster overtook the firm two years later many people assumed that
he had foreseen it and had resigned since he could not change what
he regarded as Revelstoke’s misguided policies. There is no evidence
to suggest this was true and it was denied by other members of the
family.?! Certainly there is nothing in his farewell letter to indicate
he was unhappy about the running of the firm. ‘I have at least the
satisfaction of knowing that I leave the conduct of the firm . . . in
exceptionally able hands,’ he told Lord Revelstoke, ‘and I have great
confidence in its new future, as John has shown what Iconsider great
fitness for City life.’ Increasing age and failing health were the only
reasons he gave for his premature disappearance; ‘I have had warn-
ings enough that my powers will not bear the double strain of steady
Parliamentary and City work.’ Between the two he would have put
business before politics, but having only recently been elected for
the City of London, he felt that to throw up the seat so soon would
not ‘have reflected much credit on the firm’.”?
   T. C. Baring was a Member of Parliament, with one brief interrup-
tion, from 1874 until his death in 1891. His style was as truculent in
the political field as in any other. Standing as a Tory against the Lib-
eral brewer, Edward North Buxton, he took as his slogan ‘Barings’
brains are best’ as a riposte to his opponent's celebrated ‘Buxtons’
beers are best’. ‘Thank God I’m a churchman,’ declared Buxton.
‘Thank God I’m a Christian!’ retorted Baring.?? He was neither
offered office nor would have accepted it. He was the last Baring
prominent in the bank to combine the task with a parliamentary
                                                         The fact
career, while Ned Revelstoke was the first not to do so.
marked a change in the attitude of the partners towards their work.
 Francis, Alexander,   Thomas    Baring had all been hard-working
 194                     The Sixth Great Power