

 that there was now no time to get a crew to Copenhagen and to take
 delivery ofthe vessel there.53 They refused to complete the purchase.
 Barings asked for the return of the deposit from the Danes but were
 met with a counter-claim for the rest of the purchase price. The Chi-
 nese showed no interest in paying anything. All they had accom-
 plished, Barings told their correspondents in Shanghai, was to fall
out with the Danish government and risk losing a lot of money.%4
 Barings never got back their £20,000, though in the end they were
absolved from any other liabilities under the contract. To avoid ‘the
scandal of a lawsuit with a foreign Government’, they cut their losses
and called it a day.°5
   The increase of business led to demands for extra staff. The num-
ber of clerks continued to grow and the first woman joined the house
in 1873. Within a decade there were ten of them, who had of course
to be provided with a separate entrance and their own amenities so
as to protect them from lascivious male colleagues. Cubitt’s work of
less than thirty years before had already been found inadequate.
Richard Norman Shaw, the architect who was associated above all
with the revolt against fashionable Victorian design and a return to
the eighteenth-century tradition, was     commissioned     in 1880 to
retain Cubitt’s old banking hall but create a new facade in Queen
Anne style and expand behind it. His heavy red brick doorway with
broad, open pediment and slit-like windows gave the building some-
thing of the air of a fortress. ‘For myself, I have no objection to its
high narrow windows and stony front, wrote a correspondent of the
Daily News, ‘for that means the safety of valuable property; nor can
you cavil at the low, arched doorway, with its two swinging doors,
through whose glass panes you look up the long passage into the
serene and mystic interior, where gentlemanly clerks deal with heaps
of gold as children deal with a handful of hazelnuts.’56
   Though ‘heaps of gold’ can hardly have been a common feature of
the counting house, the ‘serenity’ was real. J. Walter Wood joined
Barings in the autumn of 1888. The general office was a large room
without windows, illumination coming from sky-lights or the single
candlestick fixed to every desk.
   The silence was impressive, and the great banking room,
   with its mellowed features seen through the soft light, was
   very dignified.
                    Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                      205
      No one seemed in a hurry. Business did not really begin till
   about 11 o’clock and was usually over by 4 o'clock. For those
   clerks who remained at work till 5 o'clock, tea with thin slices
   of buttered bread was served by the liveried ‘walkers’ [bank
   messengers]. The partners’ room adjoined the general office,
   and was more like a gentleman’s library, with a cheerful open
   fire in a marble mantelpiece at the end of the room, and a
   soft red and blue rug. The mahogany desks were massive,
   and the chairs deeply upholstered in dark leather. In the cen-
   ter of the room was a large table with a limited number of
   necessary reference books, and from the walls deceased part-
   ners of the House looked down from mellowed gilt frames.
   In spite of the upheaval caused by the building of Norman Shaw's
new offices, changes to the procedural rituals were accepted only
after due and sometimes agonizing deliberation. After an important
draft had been lost for several hours, Wood suggested the introduc-
tion of what were, in effect, In and Out trays. His senior colleague, to
whom he put forward the idea, ‘after mature reflection admitted
advantages but said that such a thing “had never been done” ’. The
matter was one for the Head Clerk. The Head Clerk listened care-
fully, added his meed of mature       reflection, and said the matter
would have to be referred to a partner. A partner eventually
appeared and the proposal was expounded fora third time. Whether
a partners’ meeting was summoned to discuss the issue is uncertain,
but the upshot was that the trays were installed and proved notably
successful.*7
   As the 1880s wore on, it must have seemed to the outside world
                                                                 as the
that the partners of Barings had every right to be as cheerful
                                                                capital
fire that burnt beneath their marble mantelpiece. Their
                                                                profits
appeared to be large enough for any likely contingency, their
                                                      as ever. Perhap s
were more than satisfactory, their reputation as high
                                                              by the lim-
most remarkable, they had survived the challenge posed
                                                                  the pri-
ited liability joint-stock banks. As The Statist argued in 1885,
                                                              becaus e he
vate banker would always score over the joint-stock bank
                                                             ver, he has
could act with greater promptitude and decision. ‘Moreo
                                                     dge, and 1s pos-
a skill and training, has accumulated special knowle
                                                       to an extent the
sessed of the traditions of the business, in a way and
                                                     while in addition
directors of a joint-stock bank cannot pretend to;
206                      The Sixth Great Power