

 believing that the latter figure is the more nearly correct of the two.’#?
 They were well informed: the actual figure was £114 million. By
 Monday morning the £10 ordinary shares were changing hands at
 £16 10/-, the preference shares at £13 10/-.
    With people wanting twenty times as many shares as were avail-
 able, it was obvious Barings would have to apply some kind of
 rationing. ‘Itis doubtful whether Messrs Baring have any discretion-
 ary powers atall... , ‘Q’ wrote to The Times. ‘Once they allow that
 they have such power, then they may, if they like, allot the whole of
 the shares to themselves. I imagine their duty is to divide the shares
pro rata to the applicants. . . Ithas been too much the custom to con-
 sider that shares may be given away at the sweet will of the issuer.’#3
‘Q' must already have suspected what was indeed the truth, that the
sweet will of Barings had been paramount in the allotment of the
shares. Of the £4.5 million ordinary and preference shares, where the
largest profit was to be found, Barings kept something over £800,000
for themselves. The individual partners took a further slice: £70,000
for T. C. Baring, £20,000 for Thomas Baring. There was an allocation
for family and friends outside the house: Lord and Lady Ashburton
got £35,000 between them, Lt-Gen. Baring £10,000, Colonel Baring
£2000,   Lord   Rosebery £40,000.     Favoured    merchant    banks   and
stockbrokers got handsome helpings: Glyn Mills took £250,000;
Hambros    £105,000; Morgans £100,000;         Rothschilds £350,000      -
according to the Morning Advertiser, in exchange for a large share ina
new Chilean loan. Little over a quarter of the shares was available to
the general public.
   There was nothing illegal in what Barings did. By the standards of
the day their behaviour can hardly even be described as immoral.
Lord Rothschild - more in admiration than disapproval - said that
they had made £1 million profit on the affair.4+ This figure is too
high, but the total benefit to the house and individual partners was
enormous, probably in excess of £500,000. Their defence
                                                              would
have been that flotations were risky businesses; that when
                                                           they went
badly they accepted their responsibility to maintain the price
                                                                     by
holding stock and, if necessary, buying it back when it came on to
                                                                    the
market; and it was therefore only fair that they should get a share
                                                                     of
the takings if things went well. The defence was not unreasonable,
the Financial News was doing them less than justice when it
                                                                wrote
                     Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                   201
that it was convinced ‘that if the floating of this company had been
no great success the general public would have been favoured with a
full allotment and thus have been obliged to hold the baby for all
time to come’.*5 The question was, how big a profit was reasonable
compensation for the risk? That Barings felt somewhat ashamed of
their performance on this occasion was indicated by their reluctance
to release the original list of subscribers. Instead, they published the
names of those who held shares on 1 March 1887, and the original
allocations were released only after they had appeared 1n consider-
able detail in the press.
    The newspapers and public had no doubt that Barings had been
guilty of something approaching sharp practice. Money accused
them of ‘a career of shabby evasion and (in the moral if not in the
 legal sense) concealment’.*¢ Mr R. Cecil, who had applied for Guin-
ness shares and been refused, wrote        from the Carlton Club to
denounce ‘one of the most disgraceful Frauds on the Public that in
my experience has ever been concocted’.*?7 Mr Charles Hodgson
returned a prospectus for an issue of mortgage bonds in the
Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé Railroad, saying he was so outraged
by the way his Guinness application had been treated that ‘I have
resolved if I can possibly help it to have no further dealings with your
firm of any kind’. Those who knew rather more about the current
practices of the market would not have criticized Barings so harshly,
but even among insiders who had benefited from the operation
there was afeeling that things had gone a bit too far. Even within the
partners’ room at Bishopsgate there was some disquiet; if a flotation
of a similar nature had come up in 1887 it would have been handled
                                                             was
differently. In fact, when a smaller brewery, Combe and Co.,
floated in 1888, they were given no chance to repeat their conduct.
Charles Combe wrote pointedly: ‘For fear of misunderstanding we
think it better to remind you that our customers are to have a preter-
ential allotment, even though their applications come in after the
close of the subscription list.’#8 Two directors were appointed by the
company to sit in Barings when the allotments were decided.
   Evidence that Barings had some reason when they argued that flo-
                                                                      in
tations were a matter of swings and roundabouts was forthcoming
                                                                      s
1887 when an issue of shares and debentures was made by Baring
                                                     Canal, a waterw ay
and Rothschilds to finance the Manchester Ship
 202                     The Sixth Great Power