

 Commenting ona Treasury Bill in 1877, Bagehot discussed the need
 for a new kind of security that the Treasury might offer similar to a
 bill of exchange, which would be ‘the finest security in the world’.
 Racking his brain for a phrase that would sum up the splendour of
this new device, he concluded: ‘Such a bill would rank before a bill of
 Barings’.’27 Bagehot was far from being typical of the general public
 but his words reflected the opinion of the informed man-in-the-
street. As a brand image Barings was unsurpassed: not as glamorous
as Rothschilds, not as thrusting or adventurous as one or two of the
younger Anglo-American houses, but supreme for reliability, stabil-
ity, honest worth. The Bankers’ Magazine, referring to that ‘unim-
peachable virtue known as first class credit’, cited Barings as being
the house which ‘have never known, during the present century,
anything but first class credit, into which enters the elements of dig-
nity - moral, personal and commercial alike’.28 Yet its reputation
concealed certain weaknesses. Now more than ever its prosperity
was built on the shifting sands of international financing, and in this
world of high risks and vast rewards the discretion and good judge-
ment of the man who made the decisions was of paramount impor-
tance. In Barings the decisions were increasingly made by Edward
Revelstoke, and the doubts about his judgement first raised by
Joshua Bates had never been totally removed.
   In the last thirty or so years of the twentieth century, British
investment in foreign securities rose from about £775 million to
£4500 million. The greater part of this vast increase was organized
through the agency of a handful of merchant banks, based predomi-
nantly in London. Among these Rothschilds still had the largest
share but Barings were catching up. So much business was done in
conjunction with other houses that precise comparisons are impos-
sible, but a rough indication is provided by the fact that between
 1860 and 1890 Barings contracted for 62 public issues worth a total
of £560 million; Rothschilds for 43 worth £896 million.2? Increas-
ingly Hambros and Morgans were featuring as prominent rivals, but
the big two still prevailed. In an article at the end of 1888 The Statist
named Barings as being the house most responsible for the drain of
gold resulting from foreign issues. They had raised £95 million in
                                                                      six
years, complained The Statist, all for foreign countries except for
                                                                     two
breweries and the Manchester Ship Canal (three pretty substantia
                                                                       l
                     Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                   197
exceptions, as will be seen). ‘It will be noticed, too, that Messrs Bar-
ing have been growing bolder and bolder in their invitations to the
public’; in 1884 they had sought to raise £6.5 million, in 1886 over
£18.25 million, in 1888 with a month still to go, £28 million.3°
   This overseas investment was heavily concentrated on the Ameri-
cas, particularly Argentina and Uruguay, but the traditional Euro-
pean clients were not wholly neglected. The efforts to meet the
financial needs of Russia illustrate well Barings’ struggle to remain in
this field and their comparative lack of success. The opposition was
strong and formidably well entrenched, the London market disin-
clined to participate substantially in Russian investments. In 1877
Hopes approached Barings to ask whether they would be prepared
to put up some part of the money needed to tide the Russian govern-
ment over until a large new loan could be issued. The trouble was
that the operation was being set up by Mendelssohn and Co. of Ber-
lin, and the role of the Dutch and English houses would be subsid-
iary. ‘This, it seems to us, as we believe it will to yourselves, wrote
Hopes, ‘would be an entirely new mode of coming in contact with
the Russian Government.’3! It was not a mode that appealed to
Barings: they excused themselves politely on the grounds that Euro-
pean politics were at the moment too uncertain to permit of any
important new commitment being taken on.’
   The new loan, when it came, was also handled by Mendelssohns,
and when in 1884 Barings approached Baron Stieglitz to say that the
time had at last arrived when ‘the issue of a large Foreign Loan for
Russia might be made with every chance of success,#?the answer
was unenthusiastic. It was not until 1888 that Barings participated in
a government loan, this time in conjunction with Hambros, and they
then discovered that the British public were so unenthusiastic about
Russian securities that they took up only £0.55 million out of a total
international loan of nearly £20 million. Even in the financing of rail-
road building Barings found that continental competition and the
indifference of the British investor ensured that they could secure
only a small part of the market. In mid-1880 a large loan was raised
                                                                     for
for the Grand Company, to build a new line. Hopes took it
                                                               to their
granted that they and Barings would get first refusal, but
                                           any  warning   being  given
dismay the- stock was sold, without
                                                            ubiquitou s
them, to the Banque Russe et Frangaise of Paris, and the
 198                     The Sixth Great Power