

with his own comparative ill treatment, but the story was night in
essentials. Ward had been talking about retiring since 1845 and was
now anxious to go: ‘I am growing old, and cannot do what Is neces-
sary for Messrs Barings’ interest and my own satisfaction.’ |
   Bates was undismayed by the prospect. He was apt to claim that
the vast increase in American business had come in spite of and not
because of Ward: ‘The liberality and high character of the House
drew the business and not T.W.W.’s influence, which was rather a
drag.’’ After talking to Ward in Boston he complained that he was so
slow and prolix that it took twenty-four hours to establish his views
about the future. It was high time he went.* But when it came to
deciding on a replacement, the problem grew more difficult. The
most obvious course was to follow the move of big business to New
York and establish a new agency there, but though Bates accepted
this, he was a loyal Bostonian and found himself reluctant to take the
step.’ T. W. Ward’s son Samuel was put forward as a possible
replacement for his father. Bates was at first unimpressed. ‘Sam has
no energy and the whole agency would be a rickety concern,’ he told
Thomas Baring.’ Sam was an unprepossessing figure; small, with a
nasal twang and mustachios curling up to his eyeballs. But he was
there. Bates’s attitude towards him softened. The two men had a
long talk and Bates decided Sam was ‘not wanting in ability and
seems to have the right view of things’. Perhaps T. W. Ward should
be persuaded to stay on for a few years longer in partnership with his
son. “The great prosperity of this Country, assisted as it will be by
immigration and Californian gold, will lead to hazard, and Ward is
just the man to hold people back and keep them safe.’?
   From London Thomas Baring was sceptical. He declined to give
advice - “How can we at this distance give an opinion as to people we
have never seen?’ - but wondered whether the retention of Ward
would achieve the main objective, that of setting up an agency that
would last for many years.'° Bates persisted, however, and the
agency in fact lasted another thirty years. When T. W. Ward finally
retired in 1852 Sam Ward was appointed sole agent. It proved an
unexpectedly successful solution. Sam Ward was as much astick-in-
the-mud as his father and lacked the latter’s knowledge of American
business, but he was shrewd, conscientious and much the more
                                                             aff-
able and approachable of the two. His contacts were excellent and he
                     North America: 1848-1890                      209

did much to maintain, if not enhance, the standing of Barings in
American trading.
   Writing from Havana in 1859 Baron Alphonse de Rothschild told
his cousins in London that Barings were the chief among a handful
of houses making all the profit from commission, credits and
consignation - ‘Barings has immense connection everywhere in
America and I have no doubt, my dear Cousins, should you enter
business in this country with some confidence, you will find enough
to extend greatly the already existing sphere of operations in Amer-
ica.’!! Rothschilds were never to challenge Barings’ supreme posi-
tion in the field of credit. Others did better, notably Brown Brothers.
Browns were the more aggressive and picked up much business
which Barings either scorned or let slip by. Yet in 1855 Brown,
Shipley, Browns’ English associates, were still complaining that ‘we
aim, and with perfect right, at a rank and position equal to Barings,
but were still far from achieving it.!? Barings’ credits on American
account rose from £1.3 million at the end of 1848 to £2.6 million in
 1852, £3.2 million in 1857 and £3.6 million in 1860. The totals were
impressive enough, what was still more remarkable was the quality
of the accounts involved. Throughout this period Barings could pick
their clients almost as they chose. In 1867, Brown, Shipley reported,
Kidder Peabody were beginning to issue credits for use in the East
and South America; ‘They rely on Barings being able to do less than
formerly, which .    . would be a reasonable expectation from Mr
Ward’s limited powers and not acceptable manner.’? Yet, reason-
able or not, the following year they were bewailing the fact that they
had just lost another customer to Barings.'* Viewed in terms of the
expansion of the American economy and the growth of its rivals,
Barings’ position was slipping; but the change was self-willed, at any
moment they had the ability to take on whatever business they felt
judicious. ‘The great house of B Band Co [is] now decidedly the first
in the world in the estimation of the Americans,’ announced Bates
smugly in 1849.15 ‘The Administration is entirely in the hands of
Barings’ friends,’ Belmont told Rothschilds in despair.!6 They had
their setbacks, and the Administration in particular did not always
remain so securely in their hands, but the authority of Barings
remained virtually unshaken until the great crash of 1890.
   The possibilities for involvement in the flood of new American
210                       The Sixth Great Power