

he is a specialist no more liable to abuse the secrets of his customer
than their doctor or solicitor, whereas the joint-stock director may be
a competitor in their own trade.’ As to the superior resources of the
joint-stock bank, The Statist dismissed them as unimportant; because
his liability was   unlimited   the private banker, provided he was
wealthy, offered security greater than that provided by any but the
largest of the joint-stock banks.*8
  That was all true, as far as it went, but it took no account of the pos-
sibility that the private banker, because of that very freedom of
action which was put forward as being his advantage, might involve
himself in commitments greater than his assets. Though almost
everyone in the City would have laughed at the idea until the very
end, this in fact was what Lord Revelstoke was bringing upon his
house by his policy in North and, still more, Latin America.
                                    12
                                >   eae




        An ‘Immense Connection’
               in America
                North America, 1848-1890




‘| have pretty well made up my mind,’ wrote Joshua Bates in Sep-
tember 1848, ‘that the interests of the House will be best consulted
by wasting none     of our resources      on European    business but
turn{ing] our greatest attention to the United States and to the
East.’! The following year he visited the United States and was
enraptured by all he saw. Business was booming, confidence high,
the network of roads and railways spreading with astonishing speed,
the States were resolved never to get deep into debt again. “There
never was a country so prosperous. The progress of everything in 8
years is almost incredible.’? Though he was better informed than
most of them, Bates was doing no more than reflect the views of Brit-
ish investors. The revolutions in Europe had convinced them that
their money would not be safe the other side of the Channel; the
efforts of the American States to extricate themselves from their
difficulties and the ardent championship of Barings had won back
confidence in London; money was plentiful and opportunities for
investment scarce; the time was ripe for the United States to become
once more the fashion.
   Bates’s visit stirred up speculation in financial circles in America.
Belmont, Rothschild’s representative, was well informed: Bates’s
                                                                       s
principal object, he wrote, was to find a new general agent, ‘Thoma
                                                        s of retir-
Ward, having made a considerable fortune, being desirou
ing. He is said to have made $600,000, having had a considerable
                                                             on the
salary and a-share in the business.’? Belmont’s figures were
                                                               ers
generous side, being no doubt intended to impress his employ
                                    207
208                     The Sixth Great Power