

professional bankers but they did not see themselves as being mer-
chants first and foremost. The first and second Lords Revelstoke
accepted many responsibilities not directly related to their work at
Bishopsgate, but they never doubted that Baring Brothers was by far
their most important occupation. Banking after the 1880s did not
allow of any parallel career.
   There were still Barings, however, prominent in public life outside
the City. The 2nd Baron Northbrook was appointed Viceroy ofIndia
in 1872, became an Earl, was given the Admiralty under Gladstone
in 1880 and was as responsible as anyone for sending Gordon to
Khartoum. His cousin, Evelyn Baring, younger brother of Ned
Revelstoke, was one of the most remarkable public servants of the
period, benevolent dictator of Egypt from 1883 to 1907 and created
Baron then Viscount, finally Earl of Cromer - fourth of the five
extant Baring peerages. In India, where he served before going to
Egypt, he was called ‘the Vice-Viceroy’; in Cairo he became ‘Over-
Baring’; after he became a peer he was known simply as ‘The Lord’.
All three nicknames indicate the strength of character and autocratic
disposition which marked his public as much as his private life.
   Neither Northbrook nor Cromer was associated directly with the
bank, but it did not follow that they took no interest in its concerns.
Both were on the short list of ‘friends of the house’ who could expect
a share if some issue was to be floated on advantageous terms, and
both felt it entirely natural to brief their relations on events in the
public sphere which could bear upon financial developments. This
suggests impropriety; none existed. Both Northbrook and Cromer
were honourable men, who would never have contemplated
                                                       taking
advantage of their position to feather their own nest or do a good
turn for their relations. By the standard of the time their behaviour
was wholly proper; even in these more censorious days little would
have been found to criticize.
  In 1889, for instance, Lord Revelstoke heard that
                                                    the Egyptian
government might soon be seeking to appoint a new agent for
                                                                   the
payment of the interest on the loans they had raised in Londo
                                                               n and
Paris. They would like the job, Revelstoke told Evelyn Baring
                                                              , ‘and I
think we may say that their interests would be honourably
                                                            and care-
fully looked after. If under the circumstances it would
                                                        not be agree-
able to you that our name should be brought forward,
                                                         we are quite
                     Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                    195
willing to leave the matter entirely alone, but if otherwise, the busi-
ness is a valuable one and quite in our line, so that it is worth while
making an effort to get it. The Jew has no doubt already applied, but
perhaps the Government may not be sorry to avoid being entirely in
his clutches.’2+ Evelyn Baring replied that he saw no objection to
Barings offering themselves for the task. It was nota matter in which
he would expect to be consulted, but, ‘in order to avoid any possibil-
ity of misrepresentation, I will ask the various authorities concerned
to settle it in any manner they may think most conducive to the
interests of Egypt and without communication with me in any form
whatsoever’.25 There is every reason to suppose that he was as good
 as his word; Barings did not secure the agency.
    Not everyone was ready to assume that the Barings were automat-
 ically public-spirited and high-principled. In 1884 Northbrook was
 despatched to Cairo on a mission to enquire into the state of Egypt's
finances. Evelyn Baring, already ensconced in Cairo, was appointed
 his expert adviser. Randolph Churchill protested in the House of
Commons. Traditionally, he said, the public service of the country
 had been free from any connection with commercial or financial
 enterprises. This appointment was flagrantly contrary to such a prin-
 ciple. ‘Two members of the great house of Baring are to be entrusted
 with the sole disposal and almost unlimited control of England’s
 political and financial interests in Egypt... . There literally would be
 no difference whatever in sending out two members of the House of
 Rothschild. The two are almost equal in greatness and in their great
 pecuniary interest in the East.’ Hugh Childers, the minister respon-
sible, argued that Northbrook had no link with Baring Brothers. His
father had been Chancellor of the Exchequer. Would Churchill have
objected to that appointment? ‘Certainly!’ interjected Lord Ran-
dolph. As usual he spoilt his case by overstatement, yet there were
some members of the House of Commons who felt he had a point.
But Northbrook was certainly depicting the truth as it was at the
time when he told Childers positively: ‘I have, of course, nothing to
do with Baring Brothers’ affairs, and I don’t believe they have any
concern with Egypt.’¢
 196                      The Sixth Great Power