

 securities that reached London in the early 1850s were similarly
 unlimited. Barings had done more than any other house, British or
American, to reestablish the credit of the United States in Britain and
 Europe and they could have participated in virtually any venture
 that appealed to them. They chose to follow a policy of extreme
 restraint. In 1852 Thomas Baring visited America on a fact-finding
 mission. He found a country bursting with optimism, convinced
 that ‘the prosperity would last and encrease’.!7 Ward assured him
 that all was indeed for the best in the best of possible worlds, that
 there was wealth enough to take up all that was on offer, ‘no
 overstrained use of credit, no kite-flying, no large circulation of
 Banknotes, no inability to meet a sudden call for the settlement of
 pending engagements’. Baring was sceptical. There were too many
 railway projects and too much speculation, a crash must come, but
while Californian gold continued to be produced and England
bought cotton and took American bonds, there would be rich pick-
ings for the investor. ‘Our policy it seems to me is to take only what is
really good and which even if sales are stopped we can hold with per-
fect security.’!8
   The American railway system was by far the most rapacious con-
sumer of capital and the sector in which fortunes could most easily
be lost or made. Increasingly the United States itself found the
money needed for such enterprises, but periodic injections of for-
eign capital were still necessary, if only to give an air of respectability
to what might otherwise have seemed an insecure adventure. No
name offered greater respectability than that of Barings, yet there
were few houses less eager to lend their name, let alone their money.
‘I cannot help thinking that there are too many railroads on foot in
the U. States. . . and this country is lending too fast,’ remarked Bates
in 1852.19 To Ward he criticized those ‘go-ahead’ people who
derided Barings for not promoting the sale of railway bonds. Some
of these bonds were undoubtedly sound but ‘if we bring forward the
good we shall be promoting the bad, and I have great doubts if we
should touch them’.2
   In fact Barings had already touched American railway shares as
early as 1839, choosing the Baltimore and Ohio as the favoure
                                                              d
exception, in a complicated arrangement which involved exchang-
ing state bonds for iron rails. They believed this to be the safest rail-
                      North America: 1848-1890                      Zi

road investment in North America and as such fit to be associated
with the name of Barings: ‘Before bringing forward this new kind of
Bond here,’ they told Ward, ‘it is indispensably necessary that the
character of the security should be such as we can offer with credit to
to ourselves and with safety to the public.’?! Limited investment in
the choicest securities was to be their rule, and in 1853 even this pru-
dent policy was deemed too adventurous. ‘We begin to fear that the
Country has already got nearly as many railway Bonds and shares
from foreign Countries as she can hold,’ Barings told Ward. ‘At any
rate we must see a little clearer into the future before we load our-
selves with any more.2? But there could be exceptions, especially
when Weardale benefited. In 1855 a transaction involved the West-
ern Railroad Company. Barings took the bonds at a price that
included a 5 to 6 per cent commission and would yield 7 per cent
interest. The rails would come from Weardale, ‘the quality being
superior owing to the great strength and toughness of the iron’. The
high commission was justified by the fact that ‘we shall not be able to
sell the bonds without our guarantee’.?3 Whether the eventual buyer
was told of the hidden benefit to Barings through the sale of iron
from Weardale, and whether the prospects of such a sale to any
extent affected Barings’ judgement of the merits of the Western Rail-
road, must remain uncertain. In fairness, however, it must be said
that the investors were never given cause to regret their purchase,
and Barings ensured that the interest was paid when the line was in
temporary difficulties.
   It was not only over railroads that Barings showed caution. In
October 1850 ‘a Mr Vanderbilt and MrJ.H. White’ were in London
trying to raise money for a canal to link the Atlantic and Pacific
Oceans through the Lake of Nicaragua. The estimated cost was $4
million, Bates believed £10 million would be nearer the mark but felt
it was ‘a great work and should be accomplished if possible’.2# To put
up money for it was another matter, though; Barings agreed with
Rothschilds that a feasibility study by British engineers was an essen-
tial first step.2* By September 1852 the idea had been dismissed as
impracticable and an alternative canal through Panama to cost £14
million was being considered. ‘My impression, wrote Bates in one of
his less prescient moments, ‘is that none of these canals will ever be
constructed for the simple reason that they will not pay.¢
242                     The Sixth Great Power