

shares for which they had been responsible and those for which
financing was now being invited. ‘We cannot disguise from our-
selves that American Rail Roads in general have lost favour,’ they
told Ward.5? They blamed the trouble largely on the lack of discrimi-
nation of the British investor, who could not see the difference
 between good and bad, but the following year they found them-
 selves guilty of the same offence when their much- favoured Louis-
 ville and Nashville Railway ran into trouble. ‘Not only have we lost a
 large interest in the Bonds,’ they told Ward, ‘but, which touches us
 more nearly, is the fear of loans introduced by us proving other than
first class.’53 When the railroad defaulted the following month
 Barings found the money to pay the balance of the interest. “You will
 have understood . . . how deeply we feel the unfortunate collapse of
a security we have recommended with so much confidence,’ they
told Ward.**
   Not surprisingly this disagreeable experience led them to look
sceptically on future railroad offers. They quite agreed with Lee,
Higginson in 1876 that the Chicago, Burlington Railroad was secure
but declined to participate on the grounds of ‘the very unsettled
state of European politics’ - hardly an argument they would have
advanced in 1849.55 They refused to have anything to do with the
New York and New England Railroad the following year: “There is a
feeling of distrust of American Railroads growing out of the condi-
tion of several of them.’*¢ When Ward, in 1885, pressed them to join
a consortium to buy railway land for the North Pacific Railroad Co.,
they replied bluntly that it ‘would not suit’.4”7 Ward was indefatigable
in his efforts to persuade them that they were missing excellent
opportunities. In 1883 he suggested that George Morrison, an
authority on railroads, should be recruited as a partner. ‘The taking
of a new partner is almost as serious a matter as a second marriage,
replied T. C. Baring, ‘and the fact that the person is a stranger renders
the advantage of the act certainly not less problematical.’ They did
not want an expert on railways in the partners’ room. ‘As we have
more than once pretty clearly stated, our experience in the business
of railway loans in the US, though profitable in the main, has not
always been of so satisfactory and smooth a character as to make us
very passionately enamoured of it.’**
   One major issue which slipped through in the early 1880s was the
 218                    The Sixth Great Power

Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé Railroad; strongly championed by
Barings’ closest ally, Kidder Peabody, and endorsed by Sam Ward as
being ‘unexceptionable, the road finished and earning 12 per cent on
its stock, and rapidly developing and without complications’.5? In
 1883 Tom Baring was to be found ‘shaking and rattling’ along the
line and forming an excellent opinion of it. More money would be
needed, but it would be found in America.®° It was, to disastrous
effect. Within three years the company’s debts had tripled and it was
weighed down by interest payments, as well as beset by strikes and
involved in a ferocious rate-cutting war with the neighbouring Mis-
souri Pacific Railroad.*! The quarterly dividend was slashed and the
price of the stock tumbled. Things then appeared to mend a little. By
early 1889 Tom Baring reported: ‘I think we have seen the worst of
Atchison.’6? Once again he was too sanguine. Within a couple of
months it was clear that a serious cash shortage lay only a few
months ahead. After that horror was piled upon horror: the directors
had lied about the floating debt, they had falsified the figures for the
payment for cars and locomotives: ‘The swindling, extravagance,
incapacity, nepotism - as Ward used to say, general wickedness - of
 the past two years exceeds belief.’6
    Barings and Kidder Peabody mounted a coup d’état. The old
 board was forced out of power and a new finance committee set up
in New York under the chairmanship of Kidder’s expert on corpor-
ate reorganization, George Magoun, and with Tom Baring reluc-
tantly recruited as a director. Barings authorized further advances
not to exceed $1.5 million and by the autumn of 1889 all seemed to
be running relatively smoothly. The two banks congratulated them-
selves that they had made the best of a bad job and that, though their
clients whom they had put into the railroad had certainly suffered,
they could have done a great deal worse. Not all the clients agreed.
From Stockholm the Duc d’Otrante wrote indignantly to complain
about his reduced dividends. Revelstoke’s reply was a fine piece of
measured disdain. ‘I do not wish to avoid any responsibility I may
have incurred in recommending the investment to you,’ he wrote,
‘and you will today receive a letter from my firm crediting you with
the sum you paid for the Bonds. As however you think proper to
                                                                   say
you think the whole thing isa “swindle” I should prefer that our
                                                                  bus-
iness relations should cease and I have to request that you
                                                               will as
                     North America: 1848-1890                       219