

plaque commemorating Lord Desborough’s feat in swimming the
river at that point. ‘I looked at Baring, Baring looked at me. “I don’t
see why we shouldn’t do it too,” ’ he observed. When the two young
men emerged naked on the Canadian bank they were confronted by
a reporter who tried to interview them but, hearing they had not
done it for a bet, said ‘Hell!’ and walked off.8¢
   Cecil Baring drifted into banking for want of an alternative and
never really gave his heart to it. He joined his uncle in Kidder Pea-
body in 1887 - ‘Cecil has plunged headlong into work and is doing it
all as well as possible,’8? Tom Baring wrote appreciatively - and was
still there when the dual Boston and New York house was dissolved
three years later. Two firms took its place: Kidder Peabody in Boston
and Baring, Magoun, a partnership of Thomas Baring and George
Magoun, the specialist in railways, in New York. Both houses acted
as Barings’ agents, and in New York Baring, Magoun continued to
 operate a joint account, with a capital of£1 million or a little more.
 Cecil Baring went with his uncle, with the promise of a partnership
 in Bishopsgate in 1891 if all went well.88 By the time that moment
 came, the situation of Barings was very different and the future of
 Tom or Cecil in London looked, to say the least, precarious.


In economic terms Canada was far behind the United States, its
industry primitive and kept in that state by the dumping of cheap
exports from the south, its agriculture hamstrung by inadequate
communications. Politically it was still frail; even in 1848 many
people believed it must in the end throw in its lot with the States. It
had the same hunger for capital as its neighbour but far less capacity
to develop it for itself. If it was not to keep up with the United States,
for that was far beyond its powers, but to advance at all, then it
urgently required money from abroad. The only source of capital for
Canada was London, and all that came was raised by the efforts of
Barings and Glyns.
   It might be going unnecessarily far to accuse Barings of a crime so
heinous as altruism, but their policy towards Canada was consis-
tently generous and liberal. When in 1849 the Inspector General of
Public Accounts, Francis Hincks, tried to explain various temporary
problems which led to a pressing need for funds, Barings brushed his
 224                    The Sixth Great Power

words aside; the explanations ‘were in no wise required by us to con-
firm our opinion of the honour and resources of the Government or
People of Canada’.®? Barings and Glyns found themselves regularly
in advance by £100,000 or more, sometimes as much as £450,000,
and charging a rate of interest noticeably lower than they could have
got in London. ‘We do not wish and we feel we ought not to enforce
our full right on such a valued and valuable connection as that with
the Province, wrote Thomas Baring, but the value, whatever it was,
was certainly not monetary.
   The greatest problem was to persuade the British investor to take
an interest in the affairs of this remote and precarious colony. In the
late 1850s £400,000 was urgently needed to meet a deficit on current
account. Barings and Glyns were in despair. They wrote jointly to
assure the Canadian government that debentures could only be sold
at a price so lowas to alarm every holder of Canadian bonds. ‘We are
most desirous not only to prevent such an occurrence but to aid to
the utmost of our power in the advancement of every work likely to
promote the prosperity of the Province. . . . We see no other mode,
therefore, than to purchase a portion ourselves and by that means to
try to give confidence to others, as well as to meet your immediate
wants, and though not anxious to buy a security for which we as yet
see no chance of a re-sale, we consent . . . to buy debentures to the
extent of £100,000 nominal capital.’ At the end of 1858 a powerful
delegation came to London to discuss the political and economic
future of the provinces. Joshua Bates acted as a kind of unofficial
Canadian ambassador, advising the delegates on the people they
would be meeting and accompanying them when they called on the
Prime Minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer.” As one result of
the visit Barings and Glyns brought out a £2.8 million loan at the
beginning of 1860. They were not particularly optimistic about the
prospects - ‘our people will not take much interest in it,’ they told
Hopes gloomily® - but in the event it proved a triumphant success.
The loan was going ‘like hot rolls’, Bates noted in his diary, and the
issue was ten times oversubscribed.94
   As in the United States, it was the development of the railway sys-
tem that needed most capital. Between 1850 and 1870 expansion
was particularly feverish, and nearly £30 million was called for to
finance the new lines, a demand which the Canadian econo
                                                             my could
                     North America: 1848-1890                        225