


 Recovery after the Civil War was a slow and painful business. T. C.
 Baring toured the South early in 1866 and was dismayed by what he
                                                              in part
 saw. He found a population in part hankering after the past,
 dreaming of the future, and in both cases disinclined to face the
 problems of the present. The old aristocracy, who had lost almost
                                                               late Con-
 everything, ‘sit listlessly in their houses and mourn for the
                                                                         or
 federacy. You would hardly believe that I did not see in Richmond
                                                                        the
 Petersburg one gentleman’s house with the shutters open.’ As for
                                                 ed   off the  face  of the
 negroes, they were ‘gradually being improv
                                                                      about
 earth like the red man’. A few worked ‘but the lazy ones hang
                                                                 they have
 the bureau for a scanty support. Unfortunately for them
                                                        ment   is sooner or
 become possessed by the idea that the U.S. Govern
                                                              former mas-
 later going to distribute among them the funds of their
                                                                 coming.*”
 ters and they live, or rather die, in hopes of the good time
                                                            tion    gone to
 America emerged from the war with its cotton produc
                                                                maimed or
 ruin, its countryside devastated, the cream of its youth
 dead and a national debt swollen to £555.6 million.
 216                    The Sixth Great Power

   Nevertheless, the corner was turned by 1870. The loss of the gov-
 ernment agency coincided with the start of an astonishing boom in
 American securities in which Barings vigorously participated, under-
 taking twenty-two new issues in the 1870s and 1880s. The days in
 which they could operate on important government issues single-
 handed, however, were over. For Grant's first refunding loan of
  1871, five houses were named, including Morgans and Rothschilds
 as well as Barings. ‘Of course these arrangements are not what would
 be most agreeable to us,’ Barings told Hopes, ‘nor what we should
 have recommended as the best mode of bringing the loan under the
 favourable consideration of the public, but we do not think that it
 would be becoming to refuse to act. We none of us shall make for-
 tunes out of the agency. . . .’48
   When the process was repeated in 1873, Barings, Hopes and Mor-
ton, Rose were pitted against Rothschilds and Jay Cooke, and the
American government asked the two groups to unite in a single syn-
dicate. Belmont, on holiday in Nice, urged Rothschilds to agree. ‘]
think most favourably of the combination of the five houses,’ he told
Nathan Rothschild, ‘and I am only sorry it was not effected before
the two separate offers were handed in, because you would have had,
then, the game in your hands, and could have forced the Secretary to
better conditions, as no other houses here or in America would have
 ventured to bid against you.#?Barings were by now well accustomed
 to working 1n conjunction with Rothschilds and accepted the forced
 union with equanimity. Hopes were less amenable and protested
 strongly when they found that the acceptance of subscriptions in
Amsterdam was to be made under the instructions of Rothschilds.
 ‘We cannot but regret that we were not aware of the real state of the
case, they declared,%° though they did not push their dislike of
Rothschilds to the point of turning down the business.
    Fourteen of the twenty-two issues were for railway compa
                                                                nies.
Between 1865 and 1890, Barings were responsible for 28.7
                                                             per cent
of the North American railroad stocks issued through Londo
                                                              n mer-
chant banks, worth £34.68 million. Morgans were next with
                                                              21.6 per
cent or £26.09 million. No other competitor took as much
                                                            as 10 per
cent; Rothschilds’ share was a mere £800,000.5! And yet,
                                                            like Eng-
land’s Indian empire, it happened largely by mistake. The
                                                           year 1874
found Barings surveying with some dismay the pletho
                                                       ra of railway
                     North America: 1848-1890                        217