

same letter he complained about Kidders’ recruitment of a Mr H. L.
Griggs, sharp and active enough, to be sure, but ‘a disagreeable
hog’.76 Revelstoke was dubious. The sort of arrangement his brother
had in mind would entail Barings giving up all their New York and
Boston business to another house and abandoning their own indi-
viduality. For Kidders to take in Tom Ward as a partner would avail
nothing. The only way the new arrangement could be acceptable
would be to have ‘a partner in New York who would really represent
 us and safeguard our interests’. Would Tom Baring be that man?7’
 With some reluctance Baring agreed he might.
   The proposal was duly broached to Mr Kidder, who was
disconcertingly unappreciative of the honour being done him. ‘He
appears altogether to ignore the value of our offer,’ wrote T. C. Bar-
ing indignantly. ‘Perhaps what we should bring to his firm would at
the outset not be very much, but it involves the potentiality of the
best and largest American credit business, not only in New York but
throughout the United States and Canada. His firm would no doubt
have to work for this, but it would be owr standing that would make
it attainable.’78 Kidder flatly refused to accept Tom Ward as a part-
ner - ‘he thinks him absolutely useless, even as a clerk’ - and did not
even seem very gratified by the thought of Tom Baring joining the
firm; ‘he is afraid of taking ina partner who might very shortly be the
chief and controlling influence in the firm,’ was Baring’s somewhat
complacent explanation.’?
    Possibly Kidder wanted not to appear too anxious to grasp at what
was, in truth, an enticing proposition. Negotiations were quickly
under way and virtually completed by October 1885. Now it was
Tom Baring who was anxious not to seem too eager. ‘| wish it to be
                                                        New York,’ he
most clearly understood that I do not ask to be sent to
reminded Revelstoke. ‘On the contrary I should much prefer to stay
                                                         the firm desires
here [Liverpool] and I only go to New York because
                                                               away I do
me to. Therefore I hope I may assume that by thus going
                                                              of 15 years
not forfeit or lose any claims or rights that my partnership
                                                                    assur-
may have given me.’8° Presumably he received a satisfactory
                                                      taking 20  per  cent
ance. He joined Kidder Peabody as a full partner
                                                            a year). Tom
of the profits (which had recently totalled some £36,000
                                       but  was taken  into the office at
Ward did not get his partnership
$7500 a year.®!
 222                     The Sixth Great Power

    The association proved on the whole fruitful and harmonious.
 Tom Baring’s own role in the enlarged business is more question-
 able. Peabody was apt to refer to his ‘apprehension and uneasiness’.
 He complained that good business was lost because of Baring’s lack
 of confidence in his partners’ ‘conservatism and judgment’.8? To
 Tom’s loyal nephew Cecil, however, the advantage he bestowed on
 Kidders was of inestimable value. “There is no doubt that his pres-
 ence here makes a very great difference to the tone as well as to the
 volume of the business. . . . Itis the one thing you want here, a man
 who is to begin with a gentleman, and who has strength of will
 enough to have his own way. Of course the ways of doing business
 are odious and must be distasteful to him, and he frets at not being
 “boss” of the whole place as he was at Liverpool, but I am perfectly
certain that every day he is here makes a difference to the business.’
One of his chief contributions was establishing a better relationship
between Kidder Peabody and such rivals as Browns or Drexels. ‘They
used to snarl at each other, but now the partners of both houses have
all been in here, and we have dined with them and what not...
Belmont also, Rothschild’s agent - a dog Jew - has been v. civil and
appeals to Uncle Tom’s stomach - which is more than one can say
for any of the others.’
   Cecil Baring was much more likeable than this letter might
suggest. He was Ned Revelstoke’s second surviving son and was
academically as formidable as any of his relations, having won the
Newcastle Scholarship at Eton and gota first in Greats under Jowett
of Balliol. He claimed to base his outlook on life on Aristotle’s
                                                                    Ethics,
 but he by no means confined himself to the classics, studied the
works of Darwin and Huxley, and took a passionate interest in the
flora and fauna wherever he might be. He contrived to be in a lot of
far-flung places.8+ He first went to America in the vacations from
Oxford, travelling with his Uncle Tom: ‘Cecil is a real good fellow
and a most pleasant companion, especially for me. We read
                                                                    the
Antigone through on the steamer and are about to begin
                                                                on the
Acharnians. On the 11th we proceed West to Garrison (Monta
                                                                   na)
and then to Melrose in Idaho. There the guides and horses
                                                                will be
ready and we disappear into the Bitter Root Mountains
                                                               and Big
Hole Basin.’*s In the course of this visit Cecil found himself
                                                               inspect-
ing the Niagara Falls with Lord Frederic Hamilton.
                                                           They saw a
                      North America: 1848-1890                        223