

   ‘Our unpopularity is awful, wrote Thomas Baring in March 1861
when they were launching their legal action against the railway. ‘I
hope that we may not be the cause of the stoppage of the Road. We
should be as much abused in England as in Canada.’!°* One of
Baring’s stauncher allies in his battle to involve the Canadian gov-
ernment in the affairs of the Grand Trunk had been the Governor
General, Sir Edmund Head. ‘I believe that the future prosperity of
Canada is intimately connected with the speedy and successful con-
clusion of this great work,’ he told Baring.1°5 His intervention
became well known and the more ardent nationalists deplored what
they saw as his subservience to British interests. When, in August
 1858, Head somewhat controversially refused a dissolution, the
opposition press abused him. Under the headline ‘Sir E. Head’s
Closet Councillors’, The Globe accused him of taking orders from
Barings. Why not, it suggested, do away with all pretence and ask
Barings to nominate the Inspector General and the merchants of
 London, Manchester and Glasgow the two Attorney Generals?10%
Not the least disagreeable feature for Barings of the Grand Trunk
affair was that it drew them into Canadian politics and associated
them in the public eye with the government as against the opposi-
tion.
    It was some time before Barings made any other important sorties
 into the world of Canadian railway finance, but in 1884 George Ste-
phen - later Lord Mount Stephen - reckoned that they should by
now be ready to supporta yet more grandiose project, the Canadian
Pacific Railroad, a line to link east and west and unite the nation.
Alexander Baring, a distant cousin who was working for the Cana-
dian Pacific’s agents in New York, was dispatched to take the tem-
perature of his kinsmen. He was reasonably well received but
reported that at that moment all transatlantic enterprises were
viewed suspiciously in London.'° The following year the Canadian
                                                                 of
government authorized the Canadian Pacific to raise $35 million,
which they would put up $20 million and the directors must find the
                                                                       to
rest. This time George Stephen himself took the proposition
                                                                    Lord
Barings. Before he had even completed his exposition
Revelstoke interrupted: ‘We have been looking into        this question
                                                                      the
carefully, and if agreeable to you, we are prepared to take over
whole issue of £3 million of stock at 92%4.’ It was a characteris tically
 228                      The Sixth Great Power

flamboyant gesture and Stephen exultantly cabled Canada. His fel-
low directors were anxiously awaiting the news: ‘In the tumult of our
feelings we began capering about like schoolboys, even bestowing
sundry kicks on the furniture of the board room.’!98
   The story almost missed its happy ending. The London Stock
Exchange did not take kindly to the first issue and Barings were left
with a great deal of stock on their hands.1°? ‘Between ourselves, |
doubt if much over half have actually been sold to investors,’ wrote
Stephen. ‘There was a dead set against the bonds by Grand Trunk
Railroad folks, and there is not another House in London could have
 done what Barings have accomplished.’ Little by little the bonds
 became established and on 5 November Stephen cabled: ‘Railway
 now out of danger’.!!0 The Americans proved more resistant. From
 New York Cecil Baring reported the Canadian Pacific was little
 bought, ‘and most of the people here abuse it like the devil’. Even if it
did well with the eastbound freight, ‘all their cars will have to run
back empty to the West again without the remotest chance of any
compensating traffic’.!"1 Undiscomfited, Barings pushed on with
fresh issues. A loan for something over £4 million was floated in
 1886. They farmed out shares to Glyns, Hambros, Morton Rose and
other allies, but once again the market proved sluggish and at one
point they had to buy £325,000 worth themselves to support it. The
final profit was almost £60,000. A further issue of £3 million in 1888
was still more successful. Over £26 million was applied for and
Barings’ total profit on expenses and account amounted to nearly
£130,000. It was a welcome success after the troubles of the
                                                             Grand
Trunk and provided a moment of satisfaction before the storm
broke in Argentina several thousand miles to the south.
                                   ie
                                 eon