

   Thirty years later another equally futuristic opportunity occurred,
when in 1881 the United States Electric-Light Co., controlled largely
by Grace and Co., and The Edison Company belonging to Drexel
Morgan, more or less simultaneously solved the problem of using
electric light to replace gas for all purposes. A merger was mooted
and Barings were asked to assume the management for England, ‘so
that you would have a commission on the future use of the inven-
tion, in return for the Service it would be to them to have their inter-
ests in the best and most influential hands’. It was all very indefinite,
Ward apologized, but ‘if we wait tll the thing is a success it would be
too late to take hold of 1t’.27
   They waited and it was. Perhaps in this case a fortune was lost, but
in general Barings’ prudence was amply justified by the crisis of
1857. They had seen it coming for some time and Ward had been
busily reducing acceptances and pressing for early remittances. Bates
had little sympathy for those less prudent. ‘Mr Wildes of Henry
Wildes asked if we could assist their House in case they should
require it. Their Bankers should assist them,’ he noted severely in his
diary. ‘It is impossible to foresee what inconvenience we ourselves
may experience, therefore we cannot promise aid to others.’28 In fact
their practice in the United States was considerably more liberal
than this might suggest; they came to the help of several of their
long-standing correspondents, one at least of whom would have had
to close but for Barings’ assistance.2? They had some uncomfortable
moments, but the result of the crisis in the long run was to weaken
others and thus to strengthen them. By the beginning of 1858 Bates
could claim with justified pride that ‘the losses to my house by bad
debts arising out of the crisis are not much and will be more than
compensated by increased business’3°
  Any disposition Barings might have had to playa larger part in the
financing of America’s development was curbed by the increasing
likelihood of war between North and South. By December 1860,
when South Carolina set the ball rolling by seceding from the Union,
Barings had reduced their holdings of American securities to a
handful of railroad bonds and had ceased to trade in new issues.
Thomas Baring pleaded with the Foreign Secretary, John Russell, to
mediate between the two parties, but Russell politely declined the
invitation.*! For the next few months Bates continued to hope that
                      North America: 1848-1890                       213

the worst might be avoided,}2 but by May it was plain thata long and
bloody war was beginning. ‘During its continuance trade must be
comparatively at a standstill, Barings warned Ward. “Those who
considered themselves rich may find themselves poor from the great
depreciation of property of all kinds. This will increase the risk of Bill
operations.’ Ward was advised to ‘lessen your operations until it can
be seen how things are going, confining your remittances to bills
drawn on first class firms’ - a counsel which he might reasonably
have felt superfluous, since it had been pressed on him repeatedly
even in times of peace.??
    Barings as a house unequivocally supported the North and
deplored the British government’s policy of non-intervention. So
much might have been expected of a staunch New Englander like
Joshua Bates, but Thomas Baring was little less enthusiastic. ‘People
in this country look upon you as a friend of the country, Samuel
Ward assured him. ‘. . . Iwas applied to lately for your autograph to
go in an album containing autographs of “our friends in Europe”.’
 Benjamin Moran, at the American Legation, noted with approval a
speech that Baring made in the House of Commons in May 1864:
‘The man is a gentleman. . . . It is mortifying to me that while he is
loyal to us, the only citizen of the United States belonging to his firm,
Mr Russell Sturgis, is a rebel sympathizer.’3+ Sturgis was indeed a
considerable embarrassment to his colleagues. While Samuel Ward
 deplored the fact that he ‘did not take the view of American affairs
 natural for a Northern man,’ he thought Sturgis’s ‘personal friendli-
 ness and efficiency’ would make up for this.3> The American govern-
 ment took the matter more seriously. ‘The man’s disloyalty has
 caused the Government to think seriously of transferring its busi-
ness to some other House,’ recorded Moran. The Minister, Charles
Adams, formally called on Sturgis to express his displeasure.*¢
   Barings sometimes tempered their zeal for the North with finan-
cial prudence. In 1875 the New York Tribune complained that, in
the early 1860s, Barings had sought to embarrass the American
government by demanding immediate payment of a small debt of
$50,000.37 The matter was hurriedly cleared up; it was true that the
diplomatic account had been overdrawn by that amount but Barings
                                                        who, with-
had not been in the least concerned. It was Samuel Ward
out London knowing, had called on the State Department to draw
 214                      The Sixth Great Power