

soon as possible inform my firm to whom they can transfer the
Stocks and money they hold for your account.’
   Railways seemed constantly to be demanding exertions outside
the normal scope of merchant banking. Barings, on the urgent
encouragement of Sam Ward, had invested largely in the St Louis
and Iron Mountain Railway. Gross mismanagement had reduced
the line to chaos and the only recourse was a radical reorganization
and the expulsion of the directors. At first it seemed as if the board
would go quietly, then the President, Thomas Allen, telegraphed: ‘I
can before answering only ask you if it means unconditional sur-
render. If it does, count me out.’’ It plainly did, and a protracted
proxy battle ensued, with Thomas and Francis Baring on a visit to the
United States urging on Sam Ward to fresh efforts. Then the battle
was transferred to the courts, with the directors trying to rally patri-
otic sentiment on their side by claiming ‘a London party’ was aiming
to secure control of the line for its own - no doubt nefarious -
purposes.® Francis Baring became almost as obsessed with the issue
as Ward himself: ‘It is a scandal to civilization,’ he wrote, ‘that a
good road should not be run to best advantage.’ Allen was wholly
incompetent, ‘stupid, short-sighted and pigheaded’.*” In the end a
compromise was reached, by which the board was remodelled but
the stupid, short-sighted and pigheaded Allen allowed to remain
President. The result was not notably satisfactory and it took the
intervention of Jay Gould, as part of his titanic battle to impose
order on the American railways, to allow Barings to escape with
credit. ‘No railroad can reckon without Jay Gould,’ Sam Ward con-
cluded philosophically.*8 ‘The man’s power is uncomfortably great,
whether for good or evil,’ wrote Thomas Baring some years later, ‘but
we must take him as we find him now and thank heaven he is on the
side of law and order.’
   The Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé was far from being the only
railroad in which Kidder Peabody involved Barings, and the other
ventures proved happier. Kidder Peabody were a powerful and
                                                           in
ambitious house based in New York and Boston, who believed
playing a more active role in running the enterprises in which they
took an interest than was usual in British merchant banking. In par-
ticular they specialized in rescuing and reorganizing railways which
were in financial trouble, no rarity in America at that period. Barings
 220                     The Sixth Great Power

 had been closely associated with them since 1878. Ward’s sub-agent
 in Boston (the headquarters of the agency had now been transferred
 to New York), perhaps saw a threat to his own position in the con-
 nection - at any rate, he deplored it, ‘they were not the sort of people
 you have heretofore corresponded with, over-sharp, standing low in
 public esteem, ‘the arrangement would create great surprise in Bos-
 ton’.’° Barings paid no attention. Even Ward, who had shared his
 sub-agent’s doubts about the future of the house, was impressed by
 their profits, capital and leadership. ‘Mr Kidder is in good health and
 attends actively to business. He is 59 years old. Peabody, 10 years
 younger, [is] the genius of the concern; his health suffers from over-
 work and [he] absents himself agood deal in winter. Magoun. . . is
 entirely devoted to business yet seems to take it easy and I believe
 that your experience shows that he does it well.’7!
    On the whole Sam Ward had served Barings well. Extolling his
 own achievements when it was proposed to cut his pension, he
claimed that the credit business had doubled in value during his
time as agent. He had maintained a virtual monopoly of the East
 India business so long as that business existed, sorted out the prob-
lems of the Eastern Railroad, carried on the great battle over Iron
Mountain: ‘What House in the American business can show such a
record during all that time?’?? He had a good case, but by 1884 the
days of glory were far behind him. He was a sick man, whose ability
to transact business efficiently depended on his taking long and fre-
quent holidays. His brother George suffered from ‘softening of the
brain’ and what Sam described as ‘self- interest and mental sluggish-
ness’.’3 His son Tom was very deaf. Tom Baring started with a poor
view of his namesake but gradually thought better of him; Magoun,
however, described him as ‘quite infantile, absolutely incapable
                                                                 of
understanding business matters’.74 Old clients were being lost and
new not gained. It was only too plain that if Barings’ business in
                                                                   the
United States was to survive, rapid changes were essential.
   Ward’s proposed solution was to bring in the newly appointed
sub-agent in New Orleans as reinforcement. To Revelstoke
                                                            - signing
himself thus for the first time - this seemed wholly inadeq
                                                              uate.75
Tom Baring agreed and had no doubt that the future should
                                                               lie in a
closer association with Kidder Peabody - they could not
                                                         possibly be
in safer hands, he commented; a generous verdict, seeing
                                                          that in the
                     North America: 1848-1890                        221