

not begin to meet. The Grand Trunk Railway was the most ambi-
tious of the various undertakings, and from the point of view of
Barings at least, the most disastrous. Weardale Iron and the Grand
Trunk were Barings’ two great blunders of the mid-nineteenth cen-
tury; the first was primarily the responsibility of Joshua Bates, the
second of Thomas Baring.
   The Grand Trunk was a noble concept: 1112 miles driving west
and opening up the heartlands around Lake Huron. It offered ‘the
certainty of a great traffic’, observed no less an authority than Robert
Stephenson; Lord Elgin, the Governor General, eulogized it; it
promised a dividend of 11 percent. Barings supported the idea from
the start, but baulked at naming one of their partners to serve on the
London board - it was not the sort of thing they did. When the pros-
 pectus arrived, however, both Thomas Baring and George Glyn were
 named among the directors; they protested but gave way on the urg-
 ing of John Ross, the President of the railway, who pointed out that
 they would be keeping company with the entire cabinet of Northern
 Canada.*5
    ‘The Grand Trunk business will go right, I think,’ Bates reassured
 Baring. His cautious qualitication proved all too necessary; within
 a few years it was going badly wrong. By the end of 1857 funds were
 exhausted, traffic failed to grow as had been anticipated, the public
 lost confidence in the securities. Glyns and Barings urged the Cana-
 dian government to come to the rescue, otherwise the concern
 would collapse.?7 The Finance Minister, A. T. Galt, was hardly
 encouraging; he ruled out any idea of the government taking over
 the line or providing direct aid; the only long-term solution lay in
 increased traffic.%8 The line had become an embarrassingly live polit-
 ical issue, and no government was likely to risk the explosion of pop-
 ular indignation which would have followed intervention. In any
 case the finances of the Canadian government were almost as preca-
 rious as those of the railway. In July 1860 the company made a final
 appeal. The Grand Trunk ‘had scrupulously completed a line of rail-
 way of undoubted excellence’; it had bestowed on the province
 4ncalculable advantages from its expenditure and works’; it had
 crowned its labours by ‘erecting at enormous cost the Victoria Bridge
                                                                    yet it
 which must always be considered as an honor to Canada’; and
 was now about to ‘sink under the pressing load of present debt’.
  226                     The Sixth Great Power

 Galt’s reply was sympathetic but noncommittal. ‘Unfortunately the
 visit of the Prince of Wales absorbs a large share of our time and
 attention at this moment.’! Since the main purpose of the Prince’s
 visit was to open the Victoria Bridge, Galt could have found a
 happier excuse.
    Bates continued to keep a commendably stiff upper lip. When
 asked whether to sell or keep Grand Trunk shares, he replied, ‘Keep
 to be sure. It will be good property for the grandchildren. Lock up
 the shares. There is nothing more to pay on them.’!°! To Young, in
 November 1860, he maintained that the railway was bound to suc-
 ceed some time or other ‘and those who buy at the low price will
 make money’.!° But Baring, who felt himself personally responsible
 and, as Chairman of the London board, was the all-too-visible mani-
festation of the company in London, took the matter more tragically.
Certainly it was hard to find a bright side. By the end of 1860 the
Grand Trunk was unable even to cover its running costs, let alone
pay interest on its shares. For Barings the consequences were
extremely serious. After the first issue they found themselves left
with £361,000 worth on their hands and debts from the company
amounting to more than £125,000.1%          In 1860, after the second,
almost entirely unsuccessful issue, they had more than £800,000 of
unsaleable stock and were owed well over £400,000. When
                                                                Bates was
totting up his personal wealth in 1863, he found that his Grand
Trunk stock was valued at £219,000, while when Thomas
                                                           Baring
died in 1873 his holding was worth a theoretical £600,000.
   _ By then the railway, though still a drain on Barings’ resources,
                                                                       was
 no longer a total disaster. At the end of 1860 Barings and Glyns
                                                                      took
 joint action to distrain on the company’s property. Their
                                                                  move at
 last forced the Canadian government to intervene to preven
                                                                  t a dis-
astrous breakdown of communications. A commission
                                                               was set up
and recommended that certain parts of the revenue
                                                            should be set
aside for the payment of creditors; it also propo
                                                          sed important
economies in the running of the railroad of a kind which
                                                              the London
board had been urging for years but had wholly
                                                     failed to impose on
their headstrong Canadian colleagues. The Grand
                                                          Trunk Railway
was   never to bea favourite of the British invest
                                                   or, nor spoken of with
affection inside the partners’ room at
                                            Barings, but the worst was
over.
                     North America: 1848-1890                       227