

 their attention to the matter. The explanation was accepted, yet on 9
 May 1861 Moran had recorded in his journal that Bates had spoken
 of Barings’ doubts ‘about letting our Government have more money
 on account of Diplomatic salaries, as they might not get paid. This is
 the confidence of Barings after being our bankers for nearly 70
 years!’38
   On the whole, though, Barings proved loyal friends of the Federal
 government. William Aspinwall visited London to buy ironclads for
 the Northern government and paid a rousing tribute to Barings’ role
 in the transaction. “These gentlemen unhesitatingly authorized us to
 draw on them, at sight, fora very large amount - some millions - and
 on terms at once liberal and most considerate as to the time of reim-
 bursement by our Government, thus showing a most exceptional
 degree of confidence and sympathy ata period when the public feel-
 ing in London was almost universally in favour of the South. . . .
 From motives of delicacy, no public mention has been made of this
honourable act, which certainly no other house in Europe could
have or would have done.’? In August 1861 Barings advanced
 $500,000 so that George Schuyler could purchase arms for the
 American government even though the documents he produced did
 not authorize any such activity. By the time the proper authorization
 was received in October the amount had risen to $634,000.40
    With so creditable a record Barings had reason to feel a little
 aggrieved when they lost the agency of the United States govern-
 ment in 1871. It was by no means the first time such a setback had
 seemed possible since they had recaptured it from Rothschilds in
 1843. Rothschilds, Peabody, Rothschilds again, and Brown Brothers
 each in turn thought that the prize was theirs.*! Yet as late as 1869 the
 Secretary to the Navy had gratuitously assured Barings that ‘we have
 every reason to be satisfied with the transactions that have taken
 place between yourselves and the Government, and hope the feeling
 may long continue’.42
   It did not. Pressure to transfer the account to an American house
was becoming irresistible. That resourceful and well-connected
financier Jay Cooke was particularly eager to secure the naval
agency, which would ‘aid in the cultivation of a very large and
                                                                    profit-
able business which Barings have monopolized for years, namely
                                                                        the
accounts of American merchantmen’. Cooke’s desire to rob
                                                                  Barings
of the agency was no doubt fomented by the story that,
                                                           when Barings
                     North America: 1848-1890                        215

were asked for an opinion ofhis house, they loftily replied that they
had hardly heard ofit, nor any ofits directors. In the summer of 1871
he prevailed, and the account was removed from what Cooke
described as the ‘Anglo-Russian-Chinese’ house of Baring to his own
London house.*} At the same time Clews, Habicht and Co. were
given the diplomatic and consular account. Who was responsible for
the change is unclear; Hamilton Fish, the Secretary of State at the
time, was recorded as saying that it was none of his doing and he
deplored the decision.*#
   In less than two years Barings had the satisfaction of seeing their
rivals in the bankruptcy court. Many people, who felt that they had
been hardly used, now clamoured for their recall, and Fish cabled the
President to ask that no appointment should be made until he had
had a chance of arguing the case for Barings.**
   ‘Though we should of course be proud to be once more the agents
of the United States Government, Barings told Ward, ‘we can quite
understand the difficulty which the existing cabinet would have in
appointing us.’#6 They were right, and not only for the existing cabi-
net. Morton, Rose and Co. were appointed. The days were past when
a British bank could represent the American governmentin London.