




                    Overcommitted
                  Latin America, 1849-1890




Barings’ commitments in Latin America between 1850 and 1890
were so heavily concentrated in Argentina and Uruguay that it is
easy to ignore their activities in other countries of the region. These
did not, in fact, add up to very much. In Mexico their chief function
was that of agent for the disgruntled British bondholders who had
lost years of interest on their investment as the result of defaults by
the Mexican government. The bondholders fondly hoped that tri-
partite intervention by British, French and Spanish forces would
secure them their money, but when an expedition was finally
mounted, its object was to benefit only foreign merchants who had
claims against the Mexican government.                          ,
    A French army eventually fought its way to Mexico      City    in 1863
and it was in an effort to defray the cost of its operations that the
French Minister of Finance approached Hottinguers and Roths-
childs about a possible loan. Barings were involved from the start,
through their close alliance with Hottinguers, but the reluctance of
the French government to guarantee the loan ensured that their any-
way tepid interest quickly chilled into extinction. Not even a direct
appeal to Thomas Baring from ‘the great Baron James’ had any
                                                                  ready in
 effect, though Baring told Hottinguers he was perfectly
                                                                     of the
 principle to act with Rothschilds; ‘since the establishment
                                                 did, however,
Crédit Mobilier here we must look about us’.! He
                                                      by the
promise to discuss with Rothschilds any approach made
                                                     avec M. Baring,
French government to either house: ‘Cette entente
                                               non seulemen t a cause de
Rothschild told Fould, ‘nous a paru opportune,
                                                               & cause des
la position difficile ou se trouve le Mexique, mais aussi
                                                         intermédaire.? In
emprunts antérieurs dont cette maison a été le principal
                                   229
  230                     The Sixth Great Power

 the end Glyns and that threatening new apparition, the Crédit
 Mobilier, handled the loan.
    Barings retained the financial agency for the Chilean government
 until the 1870s. It was a costly distinction. In November 1858 the
 house issued a £1.5 million government loan. Thomas Baring, who
 was abroad at the time, had been pouring cold water on the enter-
 prise, to the chagrin of Joshua Bates. ‘I am very sorry that the absence
 of Francis and myself and our letters should prevent you from con-
 cluding what you think right about the Chile loan,’ wrote Baring. ‘I
always consider that the principle of our house is that the partners on
the spot, especially when you are one of those, should decide all mat-
ters of business as they alone can judge oftime and circumstances.”3
Unfortunately a combination of political disorder in Chile and what
Baring called ‘the uncertainty and languor of the money market’
proved damaging. Some half of the loan went the first day but little
of this was for permanent investment. ‘So small a loan a few years
ago would have been taken in a few hours,’ Bates wrote in his diary.*
One million pounds had been allotted a few days later but Barings
had already had to buy back £200,000 so as to keep the stock at a pre-
mium. Early in 1859 still only half the original amount had been
taken, and in 1867 Barings were com plaining bitterly that fresh loans
 issued through Morgans were undermining the value of the earlier
issue.
   Nor was their experience in Venezuela any happier. In 1862
Barings floated a £1 million loan secured against customs duties, but
within two years the government took over all the income from
                                                                    the
customs and suspended payments. Barings plagued successive
                                                                  Brit-
ish Foreign Ministers to protest, and in 1867 Thomas Baring headed
a deputation that urged Lord Stanley ‘to take active and energe
                                                                   tic
measures’. Stanley had no intention of getting into the same
                                                               sort of
mess as the French had contrived for themselves in Mexico
                                                              . ‘Her
Majesty’s Government,’ he replied, ‘do not feel justifi
                                                        ed in seeking
the sanction of Parliament to adopt coercive measures
                                                           which might
involve this country in a war with the Republic of Venezu
                                                             ela.’5 The
bondholders had to wait a long time for their money.
   Brazil was Rothschild country and the fact that Barin
                                                            gs opened a
small credit for the Bank of Brazil in 1879 did notal
                                                      ter the situation.¢
Nor did a £1 million short-term loan for the gove
                                                     rnment of Peru in
                      Latin America: 1849-1890                       231