

was ‘a little too easy in business’, but the man who provided most of
the management ‘I consider to be very active and intelligent’.
 Bouwer recommended that the house should be given a credit of
£40,000 to £50,000. Barings turned down the proposal, but Bouwer
later returned to the charge. ‘I can assure you from the intimate
knowledge I now have of the firm, that your relations with it will be
both satisfactory and remunerative, and that you may grant it
facilities with perfect confidence.’32 On the basis of this resounding
recommendation Barings granted a credit of £15,000. The intumacy
of Bouwer’s knowledge is attested to by the fact that he soon after-
wards became engaged to Mr Pearson’s daughter; its accuracy can be
judged by the fact that he was reporting by mid-1879 ‘with very great
regret’ that Hales were in serious difficulties and would have to be
rescued if they were not to collapse, probably taking the provincial
government with them.}3 Against their better judgement Barings
agreed to accept the proffered security and enlarge their credit, find-
ing themselves by 1880 inextricably engaged with the affairs of this
volatile company, and the somewhat perplexed owners of a country
house, two ranches and a large quantity of cattle.34
   It was no time for volatility. After so many years in the doldrums,
the Argentine economy found itself on the high seas with a strong
wind behind it. The country was as hungry as ever for fresh capital
and suddenly the British investor was eager to supply it. ‘The Com-
mercial crisis which has so long weighed upon your country may be
said to have disappeared,’ wrote Barings exultantly to the new Presi-
dent of the Banco de la Provincia in Buenos Aires, ‘and she appears
to be entering once more upon a career of prosperity.’35 When Gen-
eral Roca became President of the Republic in October 1880 and
Buenos Aires was forcibly and finally integrated with the rest of the
country, British investment in joint-stock enterprises in Argentina
was worth about £25 million, by 1885 it was £45 million, by 1890
nearly £150 million. In 1889 Argentina absorbed 40-50 per cent of
all British funds invested outside the United Kingdom.3¢
   By no means all this vast inflow came through Barings but a strik-
ingly large proportion did. In the first five years there was some
restraint but in the four years beginning in 1886 loans were raised of
£4 million, £4.3 million, £3.9 million and £5.3 million, the first two
jointly with Morgans. Barings enjoyed a special relationship, even at
                      Latin America: 1849-1890                        237

those times at which they were unpopular for having refused to do
all the government asked ofthem. They supplied the Finance Minis-
ter with a complimentary copy of the Economist and in 1882 were
talked into selecting and sending outa racehorse for the Governor of
Buenos Aires. They at first refused this potentially hazardous
request and were reproached by Bouwer. The Governor, he told
them, was ‘very sorely disappointed, as he had hoped that you would
have consented to render the country the service of securing a good
stallion. He reckoned that some of you being good judges of horses,
there would be no objection on your part to undertake the commis-
 sion, the more as it was intended to leave you entirely free in your
 choice.’37 Barings eventually took on the task. The stallion turned
 out to be ten years older than its proclaimed age, it had bandy legs
 and the first two foals which it sired were both stillborn.
     Barings’ close relationship with the government did not assure
 them a monopoly. In 1881 they refused to accept that the time was
 yet ripe to launch a new loan in London, whereupon a French syndi-
 cate moved in and seized the contract. It seemed as if the French had
 established themselves so firmly that they would take over the chief
  role of raising money abroad for the Argentine government, but the
 Argentines were delighted to play one banker off against the other.
  Early in 1884 Roca sent for Bouwer and asked whether Barings
 would take charge of a new $30 million loan to be raised for certain
  public works. Bouwer pointed out that the French were on the point
  of raising a $12 million loan in London. Roca said there was no
                                                                         the
  immediate hurry for the larger loan. ‘From the manner in which
                                           is heartily tired of  the way  in
  President spoke I am convinced that he
                                                                very  much
  which the French houses have treated him, and that he
                                                                 the affairs
  regrets ever having allowed himself to be induced to place
                                                          There    was evi-
  of the Government in other hands than yours.’
                                                                 of waiting
  dently more hurry than Bouwer thought; Roca got tired
                                                               of Morgans
  and negotiated the loan with a powerful combination
                                                        this rebuff   which
  and the Crédit Industriel in Paris. It was possibly
                                                              all events, in
  determined Barings to be more aggressive in future: at
                                                          million govern-
   1886 they combined with Morgans to take the £4
                                                         for Buenos Aires
   ment loan and added a loan for almost £2 million
   on their own account.
                                                              gs’ policies.
      There was still evidence of some restraint in Barin
238                       The Sixth Great Power