

 Rosas had offered was ‘promises and a Guano contract, with both of
which,’ Thomas Baring told Southern, ‘I fear that a meeting of bond
 holders would not be at all pleased’."
    Southern and Ned Baring cooperated closely in their efforts to
 make Rosas improve his offer. Together they regularly visited his
country house, where they paid court to the dictator and his formi-
dable, Eva Peron prototype, daughter Manuelita. Baring was not
wholly seduced by Rosas, whom he found ‘from his vanity and habit
of doing just as he pleases’ a difficult man to deal with,'* but he con-
cluded he genuinely wanted a settlement of the debts and would put
forward a reasonable proposition as soon as circumstances allowed.
Rosas never got a chance to prove his good will. Within two years of
Baring’s visit the dictator and his daughter were deposed and had
fled the country. The news of his downfall arrived in London only a
few days before Major Ferdinand White was dispatched to Buenos
Aires as Barings’ new agent and negotiator for the bondholders.
   White was a curious choice. He listed his qualifications as being
‘Integrity, Secrecy, Tact, and a knowledge of Spanish’,!5 but the last
at least was exiguous. He was offered £1000 and expenses for his
trouble, and demonstrated his integrity by keeping a low profile and
his expenses to a minimum, living in humble lodgings, distributing
no bribes and doing no entertaining. He brought out with him a
handsome rifle and pair of pistols, purchased originally as a gift for
Rosas and subsequently intended for whoever seemed to be in
power, but rapidly concluded that all the ‘dignitaries and officials I
have had to deal with are learned Doctors of Law and peaceful Civil-
ians. The era of the caudillos has passed away: thank God.’!¢ He sold
the rifle for rather less than had been paid for it to an officer in the
Royal Navy and brought the pistols back to England. In this he dem-
onstrated his inadequacy; the new and ferocious military dictator,
General Urquiza, would have relished the present, but White never
aimed so high. Not that it would have helped much if he had.
Urquiza was soon ejected from Buenos Aires and the country lapsed
into chaos in which no negotiations over debt settlements could pos-
sibly be expected. White sadly left for home: ‘I am sorry to say the
aspect of affairs is more gloomy than ever.’ A protracted civil war
seemed inevitable.!7
   It was 1856 before things had mended sufficiently for hopes of a
                      Latin America: 1849-1890                        233

final settlement of the debts to be revived.'® Zimmerman, Frazier
and Co. had become Barings’ correspondents in Buenos Aires after
the departure of Ferdinand White, and in April Charles Cabot of that
firm wrote to report that the situation was now more tranquil, reve-
nues were growing and ‘I therefore cannot but think that the Gov-
ernment will be enabled before long to do something more for the
English Bond holders’.!9 Ferdinand White’s former deputy, con-
fusingly called George White, was sent out to try at last to put a stop
to this unhappy saga. He was speeded on his way by a blast of indig-
 nation from the bondholders. They considered Barings had been
weak and dilatory and nothing would satisfy them but terms sub-
 stantially better than any so far offered: “The Committee 1s so angry
 that they will throw the whole blame upon Barings.?°
    Fortunately the improvement was forthcoming. By the time
 White arrived, indeed, the only point at issue was the rate of interest
 to be paid on the bonds in lieu ofthe thirty years or so oflost interest.
The bondholders wanted 3 per cent; Roberto Norberto de la Riestra,
the Minister of Finance, offered only 1 per cent. Riestra was ‘very
stiff on the subject,’ reported White.! In the end he relented, and a
sliding scale of interest was agreed which gave the bondholders their
3 per cent from 1871.2? The settlement meant that the bondholders
got only £7000 less than they demanded. ‘I have therefore thought it
best to close at once,’ White told the British Minister, ‘and I trust the
affair may now be considered as virtually settled.’”°
   After this chastening experience it not surprisingly took some
time before Barings were disposed to lend more money to Argentina.
The surprising thing, indeed, is that within a few years they were at it
again. The fact was that Argentina enjoyed immense natural wealth,
and that though incompetence, corruption and political instability
might from time to time put foreign investors at risk, in the long run
their profit was likely to be secure. The very fact that the risks were
                                                                        in
there meant that the profits would be greater than those secured
                                                                         a
 more stable areas. Up to 18 per cent interest could be secured on
well-secured short-term loan. Handled with       discreti on, investm ent
                                                                  Barings
 in Argentina could be an eminently satisfactory enterprise.
                                                                        to
 lost a great deal of money there, but that should not be allowed
                                                    They   were in a posi-
 obscure the fact that they made a great deal too.
                                                                      t of
 tion of peculiar responsibility. The British investor was ignoran
234                     The Sixth Great Power