

When the National Bank in 1886 wanted a credit of £200,000,
Barings told Bouwer tartly: ‘It is impossible for us to grant all the
credits and advances sought for by the Governments, Institutions
and individuals in the Republic. The applications we receive are
especially numerous just now, while we, from our own point of view,
are of opinion that we have already quite as much interest there as
we care to have.’3? Yet the pickings were often sumptuous. In 1887,
when they closed the books on two loans of £400,000 for the West-
ern Railway of Santa Fé, the profit that remained from commission
and dealings on their own account was £182,334 4s.9d. With
fortunes like that to be made, it was hard to blame the partners for
yielding to the temptation always to add one more commitment to
their existing list.
   Meanwhile neighbouring Uruguay was making heavy demands
on the resources of the house. At the end of 1887 Bouwer reported
that the government in Montevideo wanted Barings to issue a new
$20 million loan on their behalf: ‘It is willing to leave the time and
price of issue to you, and further to bind itself that all future financial
operations shall pass through your hands.’4° The list opened and
closed on 5 April 1888 with applications for nearly £30 million. After
so heady a success it took some self-discipline to turn down a
Montevideo City loan. ‘The number of loans and schemes of all
kinds connected with the Argentine Republic and Uruguay which
are likely to be offered here in the next few months,’ Barings told
Hales, ‘is so great that it seems almost impossible that the European
market can absorb them satisfactorily.’#1 The letter ended with a
mention of the fact that Hales’ director, C. H. Sanford, was expected
to call at Bishopsgate after lunch. Barings’s self-discipline was about
to run out.


There was no prejudice in favour of Sanford within the partners’
room at Bishopsgate. He was by origin an American and had come to
Argentina as representative of a firm selling ‘Florida Water’, a propri-
etary medicine of questionable efficacy made from the flower of the
elder tree.42 Somehow he became a director of Hale and Co.
                                                           and,
almost by default, rose to be its manager. When Hales were heavily
in debt to Barings in 1882, it was Sanford who was held particularly
                       Latin America: 1849-1890                          239

to blame in London. ‘It is difficult to believe that his two senior part-
ners are unable to control Mr Sanford sufficiently to force him to act
honestly,’ they wrote indignantly to Bouwer.*? When Ward asked for
a report on Hales some three years later Barings told him that the
house had recently been doing well through government loans and
that Mr Hale was an old man of whom nobody spoke ill. ‘Besides this
there is a Mr Pearson, whose daughter our agent married and whom
we do not know. The controlling partner is Mr Sanford, in whom we
 have no confidence.’*+ And yet this man, who could not be induced
 to act honestly and in whom Barings had no confidence, was not
 merely received by Lord Revelstoke, but listened to with respect and
 treated as a sound authority on the Argentine economy.
    He seems, indeed, to have been an uncommonly plausible trick-
 ster; not, perhaps, consciously a rogue, but carried away by his
 enthusiasm and with an alarming capacity to carry others away as
 well. He had greatly impressed the President of Argentina by his
 business acumen and it was this connection which had secured for
  Hales the concession to take over and extend the waterworks and
  drainage system of Buenos Aires. They purchased this concession for
  $21 million, payable in three annual instalments, and in exchange
  for this and the construction of the works were to receive £10 million
  shares and debentures in the newly formed Buenos Aires Water Sup-
  ply and Drainage Company for sale to the public. If all went well, the
  construction work proceeded to schedule and to budget, and the
                                                         alacrity,
 public bought the shares and debentures with reasonable
 then an immense profit would be made. If things did not go well,
 then the loss would be correspondingly calamitous.
    Revelstoke saw only the possibilities of profit. He agreed to enter
                                                                          that
 into the business on joint account with Hales, though knowing
                                                           help   in  case   of
 that house lacked the substance to give any effective
                                                                          pay-
 trouble, and thus committed Barings to a series of enormous
                                             money   was   to  come      from.
 ments with no certainty as to where the
                                                                        ion of
 The first tranche of shares offered to the public gave an indicat
                                                                     to offer
 the problems that lay ahead. Writing on 16 November
                                                  £25,00 0,   Baring   s told
 Messrs Ephraim and Co. a participation of
                                                                  to  various
 them that the issue ‘was brought out yesterday and owing
                                           ably  receive d  by   the   Public,
 circumstances has not been very favour
                                                       sed    us.  We     have
 which we are bound to say has not much surpri
240                      The Sixth Great Power