

assure the safety ofahouse, in which the Imperial Treasury still had
immense interests involved. If anything could add to the renown of
the great name you bear as a financier, this would be the assistance
which you have just accorded to rivals of yesteryear. This deal will
occupy, as I am sure, a place of honour in the annals of the world of
finance.”!! In fact Rothschilds were neither as chivalrous as the Rus-
sians claimed nor as base as Colonel Baring believed. Certainly they
had played no part in the withdrawal of Russian funds, any more
than they could claim credit for a subsequent change of heart in St
Petersburg, as a result of which the outstanding £2.4 million was left
in entirety with Barings.!2 This decision, probably made at the
request of the Bank of England, was to be the first break in the clouds
that now enveloped the house of Barings.
   Revelstoke’s meeting with Lidderdale must have been disagree-
able. The Governor took no trouble to hide his indignation at the
conduct of affairs. He believed that even without the Argentine
imbroglio Barings would have run into trouble sooner or later, and
probably sooner, ‘because the business was entirely managed by
Revelstoke and he did not seem the least to know how he stood; it
was haphazard management, certain to bring any firm to grief’.43 But
fume though he might, he could not afford to stand aside; there was
too much at stake. As soon as Revelstoke had gone he sent off a mes-
sage to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, George Goschen - himself
a former partner in the financial house of Fruhling and Goschen -
asking him to stand by for an urgent meeting on Monday morning.
‘Mysterious letter from Governor of the Bank, hoping I should be in
town early tomorrow - very alarming,’ wrote Goschen in his diary;
and then the following day: ‘Found him in a dreadful state of anxi-
ety. Barings in such danger that unless aid is given, they must stop.’!4
Lidderdale insisted that the government must come to the rescue. If
they would put up £1 million, the Bank would do the same and the
City could find the rest. Unless something like this was done, banks
would be closing all over London and house after house would have
to stop. Goschen expressed good will but insisted that the City must
find its own solution, there was nothing the government could do to
help. When W. H. Smith, the Leader of the House of Commons and
First Lord of the Treasury, was brought into the picture he took the
same line. There could be no question of government credit, the City
                        The Baring Crisis: 1890                      247

magnates must provide the necessary guarantees themselves. “But
do you realize, Mr Smith, asked Lidderdale, ‘what the amount 1s
which has to be guaranteed?’ ‘Perfectly,’ replied Smith, ‘and though |
have nothing to do with the firm or the interests involved, you can
put my name down for £100,000.’'5
   Gallant gesture though this was, it did not go far to solve the prob-
lem of Barings’ indebtedness. Goschen now involved the Prime
Minister, writing in terms of cautious optimism. Smith and he, he
told Lord Salisbury, had agreed ‘that any direct intervention on the
part of the Government would be impossible under any circum-
 stances. . . Tremendous pressure may be brought on us to help, but
 think that it will be necessary for “Ja haute finance” to find its own
 solution. The Rothschilds are sure to put the screws on, but it won't
 do . . 16 Salisbury, who knew Lord Rothschild well, now sent for
 him. He found that the great financier was sceptical about the
 chances of cobbling together a syndicate of City magnates to save
 Barings. Part of the liabilities was £15 million of bills scattered over
 the commercial world; any attempt to raise money by a syndicate
 would reveal the fact that these bills were jeopardized and lead to a
 general sawve qui peut. The government must assist, either directly or
 through the Bank of England.
    As to Barings, Rothschild’s tone was frankly vengeful. ‘He spoke
 with the utmost certainty that the house must disappear. On the
 most favourable hypothesis they would only save £2 million of their
 capital. No one would trust them with large operations again: they
 could not make more than 5 per cent on the £2 million: and as there
 were ten partners [in fact there were seven] that would mean an
 income of £10,000 a year each. He thought they would prefer to cut
 up their remaining capital and retire into the country on 4 percent or
 £8000 a year each.’ Rothschild was ambiguous about the effect the
 disaster would have on his own affairs; he insisted ‘that he was quite
                                                                       the
 indifferent - that he had no liabilities’, but went on to admit that
                                                   the year, would
 accounts of his house, when made up at the end of
                                                                   more
 not be pleasant reading: and that he should have to live
                                                           catastro phe
 quietly. ‘I thought him very anxious. He said that if the
                                                               habit of
 came, he thought it would put an end to the commercial
                                              bills on London.’ !”
 transacting all the business of the world by
                                                                 ns as a
   Rothschildfollowed up what he described to his Paris cousi
248                       The Sixth Great Power