

same time the company still had to pay interest to the shareholders
and the next slice of the purchase price to the government. ‘The only
chance,’ John Baring concluded, as he surveyed the dismal future for
Barings in Argentina, ‘is to absolutely refuse any new business and to
trust to events taking a more favourable turn in the near future.’**
   Unfortunately there was more than enough old business on hand
already. Barings were committed to go on issuing debentures to
finance the instalment payments due to the Argentine government,
yet did not dare to offer them to the public. Of the £2 million ordi-
nary shares theoretically allotted, only about £150,000 were in fact
placed with the public. The greater part remained as a gigantic mill-
stone round the necks of Hales and Barings - which in effect meant
the neck of Barings alone. In an article in November 1890 the Econo-
mist complained about the unscrupulous efforts made by Barings to
promote the sale of these securities; ‘the market devices that were
employed to attract investors’ were deliberately calculated to mis-
lead.5+ Sir John Clapham, historian of the Bank of England, agrees
that Barings’ issuing and underwriting methods were indefensible, ‘a
great and wealthy house should not have stooped to them’.* If
Barings were really employing every market device to persuade the
investor to take the stock of the Waterworks Company, they were
singularly unsuccessful. The impression one gains a hundred years
or so later is of a doomed passivity, the resignation of men who see
an avalanche about to descend upon them but can do nothing to
save themselves.
   The disaster was now compounded bya political crisis in Argen-
tina. The grossly inflationary policies of President Celman so
alarmed his Minister of Finance that the latter issued an ulumatum -
either he would resign or the President of the National Bank must be
dismissed. Celman accepted his resignation. The gold premium
jumped from 118 to 165 ina single day and Barings were warned that
the quarterly dividends on the bonds of the Republic could not be
paid.5¢ Revolution broke out and the Navy backed the insurgents.
Celman fled, and the Vice-President, Carlos Pellegrini, took over.
‘The nomination of Dr Pellegrini has had a good effect,’ wrote
Alphonse de Rothschild, ‘and doubtless should restore some calm in
the minds of . . . Messrs Barings.’7 It was too late for any such reas-
surance. The chaos in Argentina made it more than ever certain that
                     Latin America: 1849-1890                      243
no British investor would hurry to risk his money in such a land.
Whether Pellegrini would manage to restore financial order in a year
or two was, for Barings, of academic interest.
   ‘Financial affairs critical,’ cabled Hales on 20 November 1890.
‘Minister of Finance requests us inform you it of the utmost impor-
tance loan should be arranged without delay in order to avoid bank-
ruptcy. If conditions are not such as Argentine Government can
honourably accept, Minister of Finance and Cabinet will resign. This
would be fatal as will probably result in anarchy.’’8 If anyone in the
partners’ room at Bishopsgate was still capable of raising a wry smile,
then surely this cable would have provoked it. They knew by then
that not merely could they not provide a new loan, but they could
not even find the money to pay the next instalment due under the
waterworks agreement. The Argentine ministers were not the only
people to be facing bankruptcy.
                                    14
                               >>    e+.