

1874 establish a pattern for the future.” Barings’ serious efforts were
directed towards Argentina, and the resumption of payments on the
1824 loan in 1859 opened the way for a new and more vigorous
expansion of activities. In view of what was to come, it was not with-
out significance that young Ned Baring chose the same year for a
first tour of the Americas. ‘Edward Baring’s . . . news is interesting,
reported Thomas Baring. ‘I have a few very sensible lines from him.
_.. The youngster promises well.’ He was not enamoured by what
he found in the various countries he visited. In Mexico he concluded
that the real reason for the failure to satisfy the bondholders was ‘the
antipathy of the majority of the Congress to see so large a sum of
money as $412 million go to pay their just debts to foreigners, thus
 precluding the possibility of any of it going into their pockets’.? In
 Peru he commented, ‘an infusion of Anglo Saxon blood into this
 country would no doubt be of the greatest service; but the intoler-
 ance with respect to religion is still so great that it presents a great
 barrier to any project for immigration’.!° When he finally reached
 Argentina he was still further dismayed: ‘There is certainly a marked
 difference between the Argentine Confederation and any other part
 ofS.America as this so called Republic is possibly under a more des-
 potic rule than any other country on the face of the earth.’!!
   Baring found himself seeing a lot of this despot, Juan Rosas, over
                                                                  had
the next few months. The British Minister, Henry Southern,
been sent out with instructions to get on good terms with Rosas and
he performed this task manfully. Southern had a close relationship
with Barings, and though Thomas Baring was at pains never to treat
him as a supernumerary employee, he larded his letters to the
                                                                    or
diplomat with casual references to what he had said to Palmerston
                                                       at dinner   the
Palmerston had said to him when they had met
                                                                   the
previous night. Baring was equally close to Lord Eddisbury,
                                                who  advised   him  to
Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,
                                                             disliked;
avoid writing to Rosas on blue paper, which he much
                                                            to extend
svhilst on the other hand if your letter were to be made
                                                       together with a bit
 beyond one sheet, and if the sheets were to be tied
                                                       a ridiculous
 of Red Ribbon, Rosas would be more gratified by such
                                   make him a large Loan’.!? What-
 bit of homage than if you were to
                                               however, it did not
 ever the colour of the paper and ribbon used,
                                                         Buenos Aires, all
 alter the fact that by the time Ned Baring arrived in
MSy)                     The Sixth Great Power