

‘satisfactory interview’ by helping Lidderdale build up the reserves
of the Bank of England to support any possible rescue operation. ‘I
called on the Governor of the Bank of France and had the satisfac-
tion of sending you a telegram announcing the Bank’s readiness to
make a further advance of £1 million to the Bank of England,
reported Alphonse de Rothschild.!8 This advance was only part of a
larger operation, in which the Bank of England borrowed £3 million
in gold from Paris and purchased a further £1.5 million from St
Petersburg to shore up its inadequate reserves. The fact that the
money was known to be there made it unlikely that it would be
needed; if there had been any suspicion that the Bank of England
was unable to cope with the crisis then the sauve qui peut that
Rothschild had predicted would indeed have started. Fortunately
things were calm at the moment in Paris and, as Hottinguers told
Barings, there was a determination to do all that could be done to
avert disaster.19
  Indeed, the solidarity shown by the financial world was impres-
sive. In London, though Barings were regularly condemned, the feel-
ing was that the City was all in it together. ‘What a season of disaster!’
recorded Reginald Brett, future Lord Esher, in his diary. ‘Had
Barings been allowed to collapse, Natty [Rothschild] says most of
the great London houses would have fallen with them.’?° From Paris
Alphonse de Rothschild urged his London cousins to make ‘the
greatest effort to forestall a catastrophe’! ‘It is frightful to think
what might have been the consequences if Barings had not been
carried through,’ wrote Brown Brothers. ‘It is sad enough and bad
enough as itis, and with you we are quite ready to make the best of it,
hard as it is to be discredited as every private banker will be because
of their actions.’2? The New York Times proclaimed that this was like
no other banking catastrophe; Barings were ‘the greatest banking
house of all the world’ whose ‘signature has stood always and every-
where for an absolute guarantee’.?? Only Edward Wagg, the senior
partner of Helbert, Wagg, greeted the disaster with British phlegm.
He was on holiday in Scotland and received a telegram from his part-
ners, ‘Barings in difficulties. Return at once.’ He replied, ‘If by
returning can save Barings will come: otherwise propose finishing
holiday.’ He stayed.?+
   But on 11 November the prospects of saving Barings still seemed
                        The Baring Crisis: 1890                      249
slight. Rothschilds were opposed to the setting up of a syndicate
from within the City unless the government would join in, and the
stature of Rothschilds was such that if they abstained the operation
would never get off the ground. Yet the government was in principle
still opposed to lending assistance. To a nineteenth-century Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer, the idea that he might intervene in a matter
of private business was anathema. The government had no money at
its disposal, Salisbury told Rothschild; even if it was minded to help,
the mechanism did not exist to enable it to do so. The only recourse
would be by putting the matter to the House of Commons, which
would inevitably provoke acrimonious debate of a kind certain to
 precipitate rather than avert disaster. ‘How defend a supplemental
estimate for a loss of half a million?’ Goschen asked himself in his
 diary. ‘And would not immediate application put the whole fat in
 the fire?’25
    Only one man was ina position to bridge the gap between govern-
 ment and City, and that was Lidderdale at the Bank of England. He
 was ready, indeed anxious to try, but had first to be sure of his
 ground. As a preliminary step, he asked Bertram Currie to investi-
 gate the exact state of Barings’ finances and to report whether the
 house was solvent - not solvent in the short term, which it was pain-
 fully clear they were not, but with assets sufficient to meet their
 liabilities if they were given time to realize them. At first it was sug-
 gested that a partner in Brown, Shipley should share the labour, but
 Currie objected that then both investigators would be closely
 involved with the affairs of Barings. Benjamin Buck Greene, another
 director of the Bank of England, eighty-three years old but singularly
 sharp and tenacious, was appointed instead.26 The two men worked
 with exemplary speed and reported back within three days. Their
 finding was that Barings’ assets exceeded their liabilities, but that
  many of the securities which formed part of those assets were
  ‘though valuable, virtually unsaleable in any quantity’. If they were
                                                                     then
to be able to meet all their obligations over the next few weeks,
                                                                    to
something over £8 million to £9 million was going to be needed
top up the liquid portion of their assets. Their conclusion, assented
                                                                     it
to with some reluctance by Greene because he knew that without
                                                     was that: ‘On
the Governor would be unable to take further action,
                                                                     time
consideration of the whole question we believe that if sufficient
250                      The Sixth Great Power