

almost everything to do with Latin America, confusing Argentina
with Chile and Mexico and wholly unable to follow the intricacies of
Argentine internal politics.24 They depended on the judgement of
Barings as to whether or not the money would be safe. On the whole
their confidence was justified.
   Not that the public blindly followed the bankers’ bidding. Barings
re-entered the market early in 1866 with a small loan of £1.25 million
to help the Argentine government finance a war the latter and Brazil
were jointly waging against Paraguay. Argentina’s ‘progress in mate-
rial resources was rapid and satisfactory, Barings told Baron
Stieglitz; the security was good, the timing seemed right, yet less
than half the subscription was taken up. Throughout 1866, a year
disastrously marked by the failure of Overend Gurney, Barings kept
up the price of the loan by buying shares as they came on to the mar-
ket, but the war dragged on, money in London grew no easier, and
1867 found them holding an embarrassingly large amount ofunsale-
able stock as well as having advanced over £300,000 to meet the
immediate needs of the Argentine government. There was no hope
of issuing the further loan which Argentina now desperately needed.
It was not until June 1868 that a further £1.95 million was offered to
the British investor, and not until the following year, by which time
the war was clearly won, that the full amount was subscribed.
  Two years later, with the war against Paraguay over, and the
Franco-Prussian war causing European investors to look farther
afield, it seemed the tide of public opinion must turn. Yet it obsti-
nately failed to do so. In 1873 Barings brought out a small loan for
the province of Buenos Aires. The subscription went well and the
following year the Argentines came back for more. But the British
investor still would not accept that Argentina was a proper resting
place for his money. The 1873 loan was soon ata discount and there
were no buyers to be found. ‘It would be impossible to offer a new
loan except at a much lower figure than the last, which would be
derogatory to the dignity of the Government, Barings told the
Argentine Minister of Finance. ‘We may add for your private infor-
mation that, in order to secure the success of the loan of 1873, we
were obliged to take a considerable amount ourselves, and of this the
principal part remains, still unsold, in our possession.’26
   Barings did not lose their faith in the long-term future of
                     Latin America: 1849-1890                       235

Argentina but they had to defend its reputation against ferocious
attacks by Stock Exchange speculators and certain financial journal-
ists, particularly from The Times. Barings believed that this was a
systematic campaign intended to drive down the price of Argentine
securities, and it succeeded in lowering the price of the 1873 loan
from its original 89.5 to a mere 63.27 Letters from Barings to the
editors of The Times, the Morning Post and other newspapers to some
extent checked the rot, but prices still drifted down. ‘We have the
strongest interest in seeing the credit of the Republic maintained,’
Barings told a new Minister of Finance in August 1876, ‘and we have
seen with the greatest pain the serious and continued depreciation in
Argentine securities . . . We have made large purchases of Argentine
 Bonds on our own account to endeavour to arrest the fall, but with-
 out success.’?8
    Three months later Barings took a step that seemed relatively
 unimportant at the time but was to have the most direful conse-
 quences. It dispatched to act as its agent in Buenos Aires, for an ini-
 tial three years, Nicholas Bouwer, a clerk of Dutch extraction who
 had been employed by Barings for some thirteen years. His terms of
 reference were to urge retrenchment on the Argentine government,
 but also to look out for suitable mercantile operations, and to pay
 particular attention to the Buenos Aires Drainage and Waterworks,
 which had been the beneficiary of the 1873 loan.?? “Buenos Ayres on
 the whole is nota bad place to live, the climate doing much to recon-
 cile a foreigner to the country,’ Bouwer told Ned Baring. ‘The popu-
 lation however leaves much to desire; the foreign element, generally
speaking, is not of the best, and as regards the natives, though
exceedingly polite, they invariably betray their descent from the
Spaniards.’3° It was almost the only deprecating phrase about the
country that he was to utter; after his first meeting with the Finance
Minister he reported: ‘It cannot be gainsaid that all the Argentine
Republic requires to recover itself from its financial embarrassment
is peace and prosperity. The latter appears to be returning and as to
the former, I think, from all I hear, that it is decidedly secured.’3!
   It was Bouwer who introduced Barings to the affairs of the well-
                                                          Co. Hales,
 established Buenos Aires trading house of S. B. Hale and
                                                                   r-
 Bouwer reported, had lost a lot of money recently but were ‘honou
                                                                    ,
 ably run and basically sound’. The principal partner, Mr Pearson
236                     The Sixth Great Power