




                The Baring Crisis
                       1890


Until the middle of October 1890 there were not halfadozen people
in London who suspected that Barings were under serious pressure.
Plenty of people were uneasy about what was going on. Within the
house T. C. Baring had been predicting disaster in Argentina for sev-
eral years.! Tom Baring was said to have ‘spoken very strongly’ to
Revelstoke some months before.? The Statist had been particularly
prescient. As early as the middle of 1889 it had deplored the huge
proportion of the issues made on behalf of Uruguay and Argentina
which had had to be taken up by the houses involved; only a few
weeks later it stated bluntly: “The truth is that even the most san-
guine can no longer shut their eyes to the fact that a crash is inevit-
able.’? Yet nobody really believed that Baring Brothers could be in
danger. Even Revelstoke, who should have known the situation if
anyone did, deluded himself that all would be well: ‘He of course
knew the engagements were very heavy but he had always been con-
fident that money would come in and carry them through as it had
on other occasions.’
   By 13 October, however, he at least accepted that temporary help
was needed. Through the agency of a broker, MrS. Brunton, Bertram
Currie of Glyn, Mills was told that Barings needed a large sum of
money immediately and did not wish to cause alarm by appearing in
the market as borrowers. On enquiry Brunton established that the
gap between Barings’ acceptances and the bills in its portfolio
amounted to about £1 million: Glyns thereupon made an advance of
£500,000 on the security of some of the Guinness stock still held by
the house or its partners and subsequently put up a further £250,000.
Martins also helped to the tune of £500,000. At the end of the month
                                    244
                        The Baring Crisis: 1890                      245
Currie was given a statement of Barings’ position which showed
liabilities of £20.96 million against a shaky list of assets which
included £4.16 million for Argentine securities held jointly with
Hales, a similar amount for ‘Baring Brothers’ own securities’, and
‘Partners’ houses, lands, contents etc.’ valued at £1 million. Currie at
least was left in no doubt that the situation was desperate.
   The secret was well kept. When Brown, Shipley cabled Brown
Brothers with the news on 12 November, Browns professed their
astonishment. ‘House referred to much talked about lately,’ they
replied. ‘General impression nothing could be wrong.’s The impres-
sion that nothing could be wrong with Barings was so general and
 deeply held that it was to take much disturbing. On Friday 7 Novem-
ber Everard Hambro of C. J. Hambro and Son, a house which was
also deeply involved in the affairs of Hales, called on Revelstoke to
discuss what was to be done. At 8 a.m. the following day he was with
Lord Rothschild in St Swithin’s Lane - the first indication for some
people that a crisis was afoot was said to be the apparition of so
senior a figure in the City on a Saturday morning at so intemperate
an hour.’ Rothschild was inclined to wash his hands of the whole
affair; nothing could now be done to save Barings. Undiscomfited,
Hambro moved on to visit the Governor of the Bank of England,
William Lidderdale. Lidderdale immediately undertook to meet
 Revelstoke and Francis Baring in Hambro’s office that afternoon.
   The story Revelstoke had to unfold was darker even than had been
expected. Argentina was not Barings’ only worry. At the end of June
the Russian government had recalled £2 million of the immense
 deposits they had lavished on Barings the year before.® This followed
withdrawals of another £3 million in the previous ten months.
 Barings were already anticipating the blow that was to fall on 11
                                                          £2.4 mil-
 November, a demand for a further £1.5 million out of the
                                                            of the
lion that remained.’ ‘Many people think they see the finger
Jew in the large Russian withdrawals of cash which were one of the
                                                         in it,’ wrote
 causes of the downfall. | think that there is something
                                                                    peo-
 Revelstoke’s brother, Colonel Robert Baring.!° Who the ‘many
                                                           is singular ly
 ple’ were and what grounds they had for their belief
                                                                  Minis-
 obscure. Only a few days after this letter the Russian Finance
                                                   Baring undoubt  edly
 ter was writing to Rothschilds - whom Robert
                                                          had   made   ‘to
 had in mind - to thank them for the contribution they
246                     The Sixth Great Power