

however every confidence in the future of the undertaking.’** Some
of Barings’ rivals were equally unsurprised but not so confident.
Writing in early October about the news that Barings were to issue
‘yet another Argentine loan,’ Alphonse de Rothschild commented
sceptically that ‘the Argentine Republic had to grow rapidly very rich
indeed, also with a growth of producing, thus enabling her the lux-
ury of these numerous successive big loans’.4¢ When the subscrip-
tion was complete, more than half the preference shares were still
held by the syndicate of nine banks and brokers which Barings had
set up to handle the issue. Prospects for the second and third
tranches seemed increasingly precarious. And yet more or less at the
same time Barings and Hales found themselves having to take up
£300,000 stock for the Western Railways of Santa Fé and Barings
advanced more than £500,000 for the Curamalan Land Company, a
vast estate of 600,000 acres in the south of Buenos Aires province.
   With reasonable luck things could still have turned out well, but
the luck was running out. General Roca’s successor as President, Dr
Miguel Celman, was a weak man who allowed the railway building
mania to get out of hand and ran up debts out of all proportion to the
immediately realizable assets of the country. ‘The Confederation is
piling up liabilities after much too wholesale a fashion, and great as
are 1ts resources, 1t cannot stand such a strain as this threatens to be,’
wrote the Bankers Magazine at the end of 1888.47 A year later even
Revelstoke was showing alarm. “The accounts we get from B. Ayres
are not very satisfactory, he told Sanford. ‘It seems to us that a crisis
is almost inevitable and the consequences may be very serious. Our
money market is getting tighter daily, and with the great expansion
of trade and continuous outflow of Gold, there will probably be a
considerable pinch for money towards the end of the year. Argentine
securities of all kinds are depressed and practically unsaleable in any
quantity and are likely to remain so for the present.’ He ended his
letter by saying that his son John was coming out to view things on
the spot.48 John might as well have stayed at home, the damage was
already done.
   John Baring arrived in Buenos Aires at the very end of 1889. Like
so many visitors he found himself divided between wonder at the
vast potential of Argentina and dismay at the mess the inhabitants
were making of it. ‘A glorious country’ he considered it - ‘I mean
                       Latin America: 1849-1890                          241

exclusively from a financial point of view, aesthetically it is hideous.’
If only its rulers would behave decently then the value of its stock
would soar sky high. “There really is no limit to the riches of the
republic.’ But decency was the last thing to be expected. “The bribery
and corruption 1s really quite awful,’ he told his father. ‘After glean-
ing the principles of business in the moral atmosphere of No. 8
Bishopsgate, I assure you I am perfectly aghast at what goes on.’#?
Yet in spite of the worst that humanity could do, he still felt reason-
ably confident about the future of the country. ‘Of a “crash” I think
there is no chance whatever. Business is at an absolute standstill as tar
as brokers etc. are concerned. But I think each day amejoras the posi-
tion of the country. Of their defaulting on their Bonds I do not
believe there to be the least chance.’5°
    His initial reaction to the great waterworks project was to be
 impressed by its efficiency but dismayed by its size. ‘I confess I was
 surprised to see what a big thing this waterwork business is,’ he wrote
 after his first inspection. ‘You have no idea, I am sure, of the scale it is
on.’ Rather in the same way as the Grand Trunk Railroad in Canada,
the enterprise had been identified with the government and was
therefore abused by the opposition; the company being daily
denounced in the press as a monstrous creation designed to benefit a
few corrupt Argentine politicians and foreign capitalists at the
expense of the inhabitants of Buenos Aires. ‘I’m bound to say, the
works do not conduce to the comfort of the town,’ admitted Baring,
‘as they have rooted up most of the streets and excavate huge pits in
them. The other day the President was gaily tooling along in a vic-
toria, when his horse disappeared into an abyss and broke its neck.
This was rather unfortunate.*!
   Soon he ceased even to be impressed by the efficiency of the man-
agement. Work was almost at a standstill for want of drawings and
shortage of materials, labour was extravagantly deployed, money
was being squandered. To ensure a safe income for the company tt
had been provided that the users of its services should pay not in
paper pesos, which were swiftly devalued, but at the rate of six gold
dollars per house. The householders met this demand either by
refusing to avail themselves of the services offered them or by using
the water and then failing to pay for it. By the end of October 1890
customers owed the company arrears of $1.65 million.*? Yet at the
242                    The Sixth Great Power