

daughter, Ruth, nearly died of a broken heart at having to leave her
home and in consequence of the great anxiety they passed
through.’78 In April 1893 he disposed of the last of his pictures to
Agnews for £25,000, making the total value of the sale £43,000.7°
Even as far away as Boston Sam Ward suffered in the disaster. For a
time Barings kept his and other pensions going but the slow rate of
improvement finally forced them to suspend all those where no
acute hardship was involved. Ward acquiesced but protested when
he saw references to what appeared to be a surplus in Barings’
accounts. It was a paper surplus, Francis Baring explained, and pro-
duced nothing for the firm. ‘To tell the truth my conscience has been
a good deal strained the last 4 years by continuing any pensions at all
and if things had gone hopelessly wrong there would have been a
very unpleasant discussion with the guarantors. . . . After all, you
must be a richer man at present than any of us and the old arrange-
ments would seem almost absurd.’8°
   The death of T. C. Baring in April 1891 may have eased John
Baring’s efforts to establish the new house but seriously complicated
the liquidation of the old. “You know he behaved so nobly all
through /a crise,’ wrote Lady Revelstoke to Everard Baring, °. . . that it
is just possible to wind up the Fairy Tale by his leaving his million to
Papa on condition he becomes chairman of the Reconstruction!!!
but I fear not even could such a thing figure in an Arabian Nights story
or Monte Cristo... . Financially I believe it makes no difference as he
executed a deed making the whole of his personal estate responsible
for the liabilities of the New House for 5 years.’§! Revelstoke did not
get his second chance, nor were the financial consequences as Lady
Revelstoke had hoped. When T. C. Baring died he still had £113,000
at Barings, the last part of his capital which had not been due for
withdrawal until the end of 1890 and which he therefore considered
to be liable to the risks of the business and not to be included among
the house’s liabilities. His executors, however, were told that the
money was as much due to his estate as if he had been an ordinary
depositor.8? They felt themselves ‘bound to take the most strenuous
steps’ to recover the £113,000 plus interest, even if it meant forcing
an immediate bankruptcy. Eventually they were persuaded to accept
50 percentin full discharge; ‘and though we feel that the payment of
even this amount is quite contrary to T.C.B.’s intentions,’ John Bar-
                       The Baring Crisis: 1890                    263

ing told Lidderdale, ‘we have no alternative. . . but to recommend it
to the Board.’8
    Early in 1893, with the guarantee due to run out in November, the
Bank of England began to press for faster action in disposing of the
various assets of the old house: ‘We shall be glad to hear from you
what you are doing with a view to accomplish this, what sales of
securities you can shortly effect, and what arrangements have been
made for disposing of the partners’ private property, which latter we
feel must now be dealt with.’8* Argentine securities were not the only
assets which proved difficult to dispose of. Revelstoke’s house in
Charles Street was put on the market but found nota single bidder.
 In the previous three years, said the agents, only two houses of com-
 parable size in London had been sold, Mr Brassey's Bath House in
 Piccadilly (oddly enough, itself once the property of Lord Ash-
 burton) and Count de Santurce’s palace in Carlton House Terrace.
 Both had been sold at a considerable sacrifice and to foreigners. ‘We
 consider your house quite unique in its way, being freehold in the
 first place and having been almost rebuilt and then arranged and
 decorated in a style that is not equalled in any London mansion and
 having all the modern appliances such as Electric Lighting from its
 own Dynamos, Hydraulic Lifts etc. There are absolutely no buyers
 for this sort of House at the present time.’8’ The house was still
 unsold when Lord Revelstoke died four years later. Nor was it always
 easy to pick the right moment to sell pictures. A sale of pictures at
 Christies had to be postponed because a particularly important col-
 lection of French pictures came on the market. In the end sales
 through Christies yielded £215,000 - £50,000 from 37 Charles
 Street, £40,000 from the Mildmays’ house at 46 Berkeley Square,
£30,000 from the Hodgsons’ at 50 Grosvenor Street, £50,000 from
Flete and £10,000 from Membland.*¢
   By April 1893 it was clear that more time was going to be needed.
The Bank of England recommended extension of the guarantee bya
year to November 1894, with the option to renew for a second and
final year. On the record of this debate Lidderdale minuted: ‘We had
a hard fight to get the extension of time - several Banks and the
Rothschilds standing out fora long time.’87 Since the guarantee only
needed to be for a quarter of the original amount and it was almost
certain that two extra years would be more than enough to meet
264                      The Sixth Great Power