

Plate.©3 Prominence proved the last thing that was wanted. Argentine
government bonds and railway stock worth an average 100 in March
1889 fell to 60 per cent of that value by March 1891 and 40 per cent
by July 1891.%# If the Argentine government defaulted on its debts
for any lengthy period, then the loss would be even worse. All hope
of meeting Barings’ liabilities would have to be abandoned.
   Fortunately the Argentines had no intention of letting this hap-
pen. The committee of bankers under the chairmanship of Lord
Rothschild which was set up to negotiate a settlement with the
Argentine government was met with a request for a new loan to tide
them over the next six months and a sensible plan for staggered pay-
ments and a gradual resumption of full interest. The committee
quickly reached agreement, subject to the proviso: “This scheme will
only be recommended. . . on the understanding that the agreement
of the Government with the Buenos Ayres Water Supply and Drain-
age Company be duly satisfied.’** Only when this incubus had been
erased from the balance sheet of Baring Brothers would the
liquidators be able to see their way towards a final settlement.
   In May 1891 provisional agreement had been reached that the
waterworks would be sold to the government for £6.325 million in 5
per cent bonds.** The works had to be completed and accepted as
satisfactory before the agreement would become effective. Unfor-
tunately progress was imperilled by the ineffable Sanford, who made
extravagant claims on behalf of Hales. ‘Mr Sanford has relapsed into
almost open hostility,’ Barings told their new agent in Buenos Aires,
Essex Reade, ‘and his last move is a threat to impede the completion
of the Waterworks contract unless we agree to certain conditions.
These included the provisos that £50,000 worth of shares should be
transferred to him and that he should be paid £5000 immediately
and £100 a week for the next three years. It seems to us an outrageous
proposal, and we have no intention of yielding.’? In the end Sanford
got £16,000 in cash and East Argentine railway stock with a face
value of £54,000 but in fact worth about half of that.68
   Unfortunately the government kept finding fault with the build-
ing when it was done. Some at least of the criticism was justified, but
Barings were in no position to supervise the contractor or speed up
the work. Meanwhile the final settlement was held up. The
Rothschild committee appealed to the Foreign Secretary, Lord
                       The Baring Crisis: 1890                     259

Rosebery, who in turn cabled the British Minister, instructing him to
press for ‘equitable and considerate treatment’ of Barings and the
contractors by the government. ‘The matter involves large interests,
and on it depends in great measure the issue of the Baring liquida-
tion. A want of good faith on the part of the Argentine government
will have the worst possible effect.’
   It was as well for Barings that negotiations on the waterworks
contract and on a general settlement of Argentina’s debts, though
theoretically distinct, were in fact intimately connected. At the end
of 1892 the Argentine Minister of Finance, Dr Romero, underlined
this fact when he put a proposal for further negotiations not to the
Rothschild committee but to Barings. Barings suggested politely
that it would be better if the minister sent somebody to London,
since so many other interests were involved. Romero declined with
equal politeness. He wanted to negotiate with someone who could
speak Spanish, knew the country and would see for himself how
things stood. A representative of Barings, after all, had negotiated
the settlement of the 1824 debt. ‘I rely, Romero ended, ‘on the recol-
lection of the old link of friendship which has always existed
between Messrs Barings and the Argentine Republic.’7°
   It is a measure of the rehabilitation of Barings that John Baring
went out to Buenos Aires as de facto representative of the Rothschild
committee. The offer that he passed to London asa result of his visit
was hardly generous, yet gave a promise of a final solution. Argen-
tina would pay the Bank of England a lump sum of £1.5 million for
distribution to creditors over the next five years. Full payment of
interest would resume in 1898. Rothschild quibbled over details but
in effect accepted the proposal, subject only to his insistence that the
waterworks question should at last be settled. The government must
take over the works as they stood. The Argentine government, who
hadas little reason to spin things out as the Rothschild committee, in
their turn accepted without demur, only retaining £500,000 in bonds
until the claims against the contractors had been settled. The deal
was done and heralded a spectacular improvement in the Argentine
economy; payment of full interest in fact began a year before the
scheduled date. The last serious obstacle in the path of the
liquidators had been removed.
            =               *       *       *
260                     The Sixth Great Power