

to reproach him. “The burthen of every comment on all sides was the
extreme loyalty and uprightness with which the firm behaved... .1
am not exaggerating when I say that over and over again I have got
up from a dinner with a sort of wish that I should like my name to
have been Baring so as to have heard such praise of1t.’56 ‘One thing 1s
beyond question,’ wrote the future Lord Mount Stephen, ‘that is
their honor and honesty. . . . Their character stands as high today as
it ever did and this ofitself will prove as good to them as an extra mil-
lion of capital.’57 It was this sympathy that was John Baring’s greatest
asset when he came to establish the new house.
    On 25 November a circular letter announced that Baring Brothers
and Company had transferred their business to a new company with
limited liability to be called Baring Brothers and Co., Limited. The
directors were to be T. C. Baring, Francis Baring, R. K. Hodgson and
John Baring. The paid-up capital was said to be £1 million. ‘It has
been arranged that the whole of Mr T. C. Baring’s property shall be
liable for the Company’s engagements, ’** read an announcement of
the period. T. C. Baring was inevitably the titular senior director. ‘I
can see that the general feeling here, among people that know me
ever so little even, is that Jshould be conducting the new Co.,’ wrote
Thomas Baring, ‘but of course with Charley [1.e. T. C. Baring] here
that is impossible. But it is a physical impossibility for his personal
management to go on for long.’’? John Baring would have agreed
with the second but not the first part of his uncle Tom’s pronounce-
ment. T. C. Baring had to be the leader because of his great financial
contribution and the staunch loyalty he had shown the house, but
the appointment was nota wholly happy one. He was elderly, ill and
curmudgeonly: ‘I fear he will drive away what little business there is
left,’ wrote John Baring gloomily.® But it did not follow that because
T. C. Baring was to be viewed as no more than a temporary stopgap,
Tom Baring should be the heir apparent. To John Baring it was clear
that the effective work in the limited company would be done by the
new generation and that they - or, to be more precise, he - should
lead it.
   Of the £1 million capital, T. C. Baring put up by far the largest
share, £210,000. Tom Baring produced £25,000, John and Francis
Baring and Robert Hodgson, who had been partners in the old
house, would have no funds available until it had been liquidated
                       The Baring Crisis: 1890                        257

and perhaps not then, but Evelyn Baring contributed £10,000.
Hopes and Hottinguers added £50,000 and £40,000 respectively.
George Stephen offered £50,000 and said that he could easily raise
another £200,000: ‘You never in your life saw anything like the effect
of this prompt response upon their spirits. It seemed to lift a cloud
off their minds and since then all has gone on most swimmingly.’
Stephen recommended John Macdonald, Canada’s first Prime Min-
ister, to come over personally to consider the question of Barings’
replacement as Canada’s financial agent, since he feared this might
be secured by some second-rate firm; then cabled in relief to report
that Barings had set up a new house which would be ‘strong beyond
question’. There was no need for a change.*!
    Things have turned out more satisfactorily than we dared
    hope...’ John Baring told his uncle Evelyn at the end of
    January 1891. ‘My own feeling is that we ought to finish the
    crying and all buckle to and make a fight for it, so as to cir-
    cumvent if possible the machinations of these blasted Jews. I
    would like to see them all crucified upside down, but in the
    meantime they are reaping a huge advantage from what the
    newspapers delight in calling the ‘Baring smash’. The ‘new
    firm’ is fairly started. There is lots of business left. The glory
    of the past and the prestige of the name have I fear disap-
    peared for ever. But still a great many people will not go
    away. I have no doubt that as far as a financial investment
    goes, the Company will show a very good return on its capt-
    tal.6?
While Baring Brothers and Co. Ltd began to find its feet, the painful
task started of liquidating the old house. This work was made more
laborious by the degree to which it was involved with recovery, or
lack of recovery in the Argentine economy. Before Barings could
                                                          liabilities,
 realize their assets and thus free themselves from their
                                                                     d
their enormous holdings of Argentine securities had to be dispose
of; yet the news of Barings’ troubles had  provok ed  a  catastr ophic
                                                                   the
drop in this market. ‘The widespread nature of the disaster and
                                                              brought
importance of those who attempted to prevent a panic,
                                                 had    never   before
Argentine matters into a prominence they
                                                           ofthe River
occupied in the world’s estimation,’ reported the Review
258                      The Sixth Great Power