

recklessness and folly. ‘The name and the glory and the position and
everything is gone,’ he told Evelyn Baring. ‘Ned would have it all —
glory and wealth. He might at least have guarded our good name.
But it has all gone, offered up to his insatiate vanity and extravagance
... I never thought I should have to write such a letter as this. Verily
“A great Nemesis overtook Croesus.” The line has never been out of
my head since the Guinness success.’36 But his rancour did not pre-
vent him cabling his total support for whatever phoenix might rise
from the ashes of the old house. Indeed, he hastened home, confi-
dent that he would be begged to play an important role in the work
of reconstruction, only to find that ‘I am asked to take a back seat: to
stay as long as I will in New York or take Liverpool! where there is
nothing to manage. However, I won't cut up nasty.’37
   Members of the family who had no direct connection with the
bank had still less reason to put themselves out to save it, but did so
nevertheless. Lord Ashburton was so far out of touch with events at
Bishopsgate that when Lord Northbrook arrived at the Grange for a
day’s shooting and took his host aside to announce with an ashen
face that the house was in trouble, Ashburton’s mind flew to what he
knew to be a regular problem at Stratton Park and he replied: ‘Ah,
that damned roof leaking again!’38 But when the time came to put up
money as a guarantee of Baring Brothers’ liabilities, Northbrook
came forward with £250,000 and Ashburton with £50,000. Nor was
it just the family who rallied in this way. Markby, Stewart had long
been solicitors to Baring Brothers. On 17 November Henry Markby
and Charles Stewart wrote to say that their firm had areserve against
contingencies of £10,000. ‘We do not know anything . . . beyond
what we read in the newspapers. It is possible that we may be totally
misapprehending the facts. But we trust that we are not committing
any impertinence in saying that we shall feel honoured if you will
allow us to place these securities, of comparatively trifling amount
though they may be, at your firm’s disposal.’3
   Generous though the gesture was, £10,000 was indeed trifling
compared with the sort of sum Lidderdale was looking for. Armed
with the imprimatur of Currie and Greene, he on Friday renewed
his assault on the government. The Bank, he said, could not alone
bear the risk of what might happen if Barings were to founderwhilea
rescue operation was being mounted: ‘Unless the Government
                       The Baring Crisis:   1890                      253
could relieve us of some of the possible loss,’ he said, ‘I should return
at once and throw out all further Acceptances of the Firm.’*° In the
face of this ultimatum, ministers made a grudging but all-important
concession. They agreed to bear half any loss that might result from
Barings’ bills taken in between 2 p.m. on Friday 14 November and
the same time on the 15th. Lidderdale, in fact, had twenty-four
hours in which to save Barings.*!
   Imprecise though the promise was, it gave the Governor grounds
to act. He summoned a meeting of the Court of Directors of the
Bank of England and announced that he was setting up a Guarantee
Fund to cover any possible long-term deficit in Barings’ finances.
Once it was known that the City was backing Barings and that
nobody risked loss, then the pressure would be off. The Bank of Eng-
land, he said, would put up £1 million provided at least £3 million
was guaranteed by others. Currie then took over and said that, hav-
ing investigated the affairs of Barings with Mr Greene, he was pre-
pared to offer £500,000 on behalf of Glyn Mills, provided that
Rothschilds would do the same. Lord Rothschild had just arrived.
‘When informed of the circumstances of the case and the conditions
I had made, he hesitated and desired to consult his brothers,’ rec-
orded Currie, ‘but was finally and after some pressure persuaded to
put down his firm for £500,000.’#2 Word of the hesitation was seized
on by those who wished to portray Rothschilds as a half-hearted or
even unwilling rescuer. ‘I was told that Rothschild had behaved well
but I believe that this is not the case,’ Tom Baring told his brother.
‘He guaranteed £500,000, but only because Bertram Currie shamed
him into doing so.’#3 Though Lord Rothschild may not much have
relished his role it is hard to believe that he seriously doubted it was
inevitable. As Baron Alphonse wrote to him from Paris: “By saving
Barings from this catastrophe [the English house] are serving their
own interests, for at this moment the House of Baring 1s the keystone
of English commercial credit and its collapse would provoke terrible
consequences for English trade in all parts of the world. You must
feel very proud about the contribution you have made, by your per-
sonal efforts, towards avoiding the worst misfortune.'*
   Once it was certain that Glyn, Mills and Rothschilds had joined
the Bank of England in arescue operation, all doubts were put aside.
Within half an hour Lidderdale had promises of £3.25 million, with
254                       The Sixth Great Power