

be given for realizing the assets, the Firm will be left with a substan-
tial surplus after discharging their liabilities.*7
   Even three days was dangerously long. John Daniell, senior part-
ner of the government brokers Mullens and Co., came into the Bank
of England crying: ‘Can’t you do something, or say something to
relieve people’s minds? They have made up their minds that some-
thing awful is up, and they are talking of the very highest names, the
very highest.’ Lidderdale vividly remembered the words he spoke and
‘the way he lifted up his arms when speaking’.”8 As the word spread
that Barings were in trouble, so their paper began to be presented
and anyone who had advances outstanding began to call them in.
The situation cannot have been made any easier by the attitude of
houses like Martin and Co. who, when the crisis was still far from
resolved, asked for the immediate repayment of £150,000 of their
total advance of £500,000, and then demanded the rest the following
day: ‘We are under no anxiety as to any of our accounts, but we are
anxious to strengthen our cash as much as possible.’29
   For the partners of Barings there must have been some consola-
tion in the loyalty shown by family and friends. T. C. Baring was the
first and most conspicuous example. ‘When C. T. Baring [sic] heard
of his late firm’s disaster he offered them all his fortune to the last
farthing, reported Reginald Brett. ‘This was generous, as he left the
firm two years ago upon differences with Lord Revelstoke in connec-
tion with their Argentine speculations. He took the old-fashioned
view.3°This story that T. C. Baring had left the house because he dis-
approved of the house’s commitments in Argentina was revived a
year or so later in what Revelstoke’s wife described to her son
Everard as an ‘odious paragraph’ in the Pall Mall Gazette; ‘Whereas
the truth is he [T. C. Baring] had a cute for Papa and wrote a letter on
retiring (solely on account of bad health) to Papa, quite the nicest and
most touching letter you can conceive from a man as undemonstra-
tive. . .also asa fact the fresh engagements in Argentina and Buenos
Ayres Waterworks were entered into while he was still a partner -
and not objected to by him.’3! Lady Revelstoke’s comment was fair
enough: though T. C. Baring told Francis Baring that for years he had
been ‘shy of S. America’ and had thought the house was getting too
deeply involved, the fact remains that he made little effort to check
Revelstoke’s madcap course. He must accept some part of the blame.
                        The Baring Crisis: 1890                           251

   But legally he was now free ofthe house and its commitments. He
had no obligation to come to its support and most people would
have felt he had done his bit if he had merely left in Barings what
money he had which was still there. Instead he told Francis: ‘Of
course what I have is at your disposal to pledge or sell. You have my
full power of attorney and may use it.’3? Legend has it that he went to
the Bank of England and withdrew all his cash and securities. Then
he proceeded to Bishopsgate with several bulging Gladstone bags,
only marring this dramatic gesture by allowing one of the bags to
burst open and spill over the road while he was arguing with the cab
driver over an alleged overcharge of sixpence.}? So picturesque a ges-
ture would not have been beyond him. Not merely did he pledge his
entire fortune, at the end of November he circulated a memoran-
dum to his future partners:
    As I retired at the end of the year before last I am still rich, as
    folk count riches. You have been, are not, but, I think, will be
    again.
       Can this inequality be partially remedied in the mean-
    time? I think so. Iam prepared from | January next to place
    annually at the disposal of members of the old firm .. . the
    sum of £23,000 as follows: £5000 a year each to the 3 senior
    members, £2500 a year each to the 3 junior members, £500 a
     year to the only bachelor.
        The conditions are:
        (1) That nothing shall be said about this to anyone, espec-
     ially to me. Any speaking about it might strain relations,
     which are naturally a little strange, and which I should like
     restored to those of 1888.
        (2) That this offer ceases in case of my death. .. .
        There must be no hesitation on the part of all or any of you
     in this matter on the ground of delicacy. I don’t make this
     offer as a gift, but as a loan.*#
   Tom Baring in New York was more bitterly critical of Revelstoke’s
behaviour. He had no responsibility for the disastrous decisions that
had been taken and was shocked by the unexpected news. As late as 6
                                                                     out
November he was writing: ‘I feel in my bones that they will come
all right.’35 When they came out all wrong, he bewailed his brother's
252                      The Sixth Great Power