

our Debt to the Bank.’ Under pressure, the establishment had
closed ranks and saved its own. It remained for Barings to prove that
they were fit to resume their former place.
                                 15
                               rend




            The Road to Recovery
                   1890-1914


With the death of T. C. Baring in 1891, formal recognition was made
of what was already a reality; a new generation took over Baring
Brothers. The Mildmay family hoped that Henry Mildmay might be
rehabilitated and put in charge, but even if this could have been
done without involving the return of the rest of the old gang,
Mildmay was too close to nervous collapse to make the idea practi-
cable.! Francis Baring inherited as titular head of the new company.
Even if his abilities and temperament had inclined him to become an
autocrat in the style of Lord Revelstoke, his frail health would have
curbed his ambitions. He remained leader until 1901, but never
sought to exercise his authority.
   The second of the surviving partners from the old house, Robert
Hodgson, was a worthy but curiously dim figure. His role was des-
tined to bea minor one, though it lasted until his retirement in 1908.
That left John Baring undisputed master. His only possible rival was
his uncle Tom, much richer and with more experience of financial
matters, but remote from City affairs and without his nephew's cun-
ning and determination. After his somewhat cool reception in Lon-
don, Tom Baring returned to New York with moderate good grace
and did fine work looking after Barings’ interests there. In 1892 he
at last joined the partners’ room at Bishopsgate. (It could equally,
perhaps, have been called the directors’ room, since with the crea-
tion of the limited liability company the term ‘partnership’ was more
properly applied to the old house. In practice, however, the two
terms were used interchangeably and the ‘partners’ room’ was
always so called; more justifiably after 1896 when a new partnership,
Baring Bros and Co., was set up to control the limited company.)
                                 267
268                     The Sixth Great Power

  In maturity and old age Tom’s mild eccentricity hardened into an
almost unbreachable mould. ‘A large, red-faced, shrewd, irascible
but lovable man, his great-niece Daphne described him, ‘[who] con-
cealed considerable erudition and love of literature behind an
improbably Blimpish facade.’? Helena Gleichen was one of the sev-
eral attractive young women with whom he enjoyed a platonic
friendship. He taught her about birds and birdsong - on which sub-
ject his knowledge was imposing - and they used to visit the ‘anu-
quity dealers’ shops’ together. ‘His presents were an unending joy.
An early Ming dynasty bronze horse, a lovely cane with an old
Dresden china top, a large comfy sofa for my cottage, and a salmon
rod, were among the treasures he gave me. 3The friendship perished
when he startled everyone by getting married at the age of sixty-two.
He proposed to Constance Barron at his home in Norfolk. Halfway
through his passionate declaration he noticed that she was resting
her foot on a precious glass fire screen and broke off to snap, ‘For
goodness sake, take your foot off my screen!’ At the end of his
speech, without even waiting for the formality of an acceptance, he
pulled five magnificent rings from his pocket. ‘Choose one,’ he said.
The girl hesitated, so he went on impatiently: “You'd better take
them all.’ In spite of this somewhat brusque wooing, she took him,
bore him two sons, buried him when he was eighty-four and out-
lived him by a quarter of a century.*
   Tom Baring was not the man to compete seriously with his ambi-
tious and dynamic nephew. In short bursts he could be formidable.
When things went badly wrong in New York in 1904, a new director,
Gaspard Farrer, wrote to John Baring: ‘Your Uncle Tom has been
quite splendid through all the trouble. I had no conception he was
such a man and so capable. If only he could be roused, as he has been
during the last few days, there is nothing he would not be able to do
in the way of business.’’ But he could rarely be roused, while his
nephew could hardly be induced to rest. John Baring, or Lord
Revelstoke as he became after the death of the first baron in 1897,
was as autocratic as his father and in time almostas vain, but enjoyed
better judgement and a capacity for calculation. If there had been no
Baring crisis he might have inherited his father’s recklessness as well,
but he had learned prudence the hard way and was never to forget it.
He hated being in debt or liable for more money than he had imme-
                  The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                   269
diately available; ‘keep down the overheads and know where your
own money 1s, were the words of wisdom which he imparted to new
recruits to the house.¢ In its obituary The Times recalled that many
years after the crash he was still refusing to take an important role in
a certain enterprise. His firm was not yet sufficiently recovered, he
said. ‘I am going to take no risks.”
   He was as much at home in Paris as in London and spoke excellent
Spanish and passable German and Italian as well: ‘I fancy the Latin
mind is one which appeals particularly to your brother, Gaspard
Farrer told Hugo Baring.® He was celebrated as a conversationalist,
but with a tendency to the pontifical, good sense and wide know-
ledge more evident than wit ora sense of fun. ‘I had a solid regard for
John Revelstoke, wrote W. B. Maxwell, ‘because I knew him to be
remarkably kind, considerate to his friends, and never wearying in
the service ofunfortunate people.’ But though the benevolence was
real it seemed to some that his charity was bestowed in a manner that
was intolerably patronizing. The natural hauteur that had been
curbed by disaster reasserted itself as prosperity was regained: Jews,
the middle classes, almost all Americans, were viewed if not with
contempt, then at least in the sublime awareness that they were part
of a lower breed. ‘I always deprecate the suggestion that any relation
of my friends should go on the Stock Exchange,’ he told Sir Edward
Hamilton; ‘. . . the whole profession is so very much over-run that I
consider it a dangerous and rather demoralizing vocation to suggest
fora young man.’!° He would have been outraged if he had heard the
verdict on him of Billy Grenfell - marginally less odious than his
brother Julian but still a horror by any standard: ‘Dear God, what a
man! He has the mind of a haberdasher who reads the social column
in the Daily Mail every morning before retailing second-hand
trowsers and “Modern Society” and Browning on Sunday after-
noons.’!!
   Curiously enough this letter was written by the son of Lady
Desborough, John Revelstoke’s first great love, to Nancy Astor, who
was his second. ‘Love’ is perhaps the wrong word. Revelstoke liked
to be seen with attractive and distinguished women. ‘Lord Revel-
stoke is in Paris at the moment, enjoying the Champs Elysées and
the boulevards in the company of Mr Arthur Balfour and a large
number of beautiful ladies, wrote Natty Rothschild, his derision
270                     The Sixth Great Power