

perhaps touched with jealousy." Itis hard to believe there was much
more than parade and mutual convenience in his relationship with
Ettie   Desborough,   that prodigy   of synthetic   passion.   In   1915
Asquith wrote that Revelstoke had been ‘more or less’ in love with
Lady Desborough for twenty years; “The years have rattled by, and
every kind of water has passed under the bridge, but plus ¢a change,
plus c’est la meme chose."'3 Nicholas Mosley suggests that the relation-
ship between the two was ‘almost certainly sexual’.’* It would be
impossible to prove him wrong, but what sex there was must have
been suffused by snobbery and etiolated almost beyond recognition.
    In his love for Nancy Langhorne it is possible to detect more real
feeling, though she found it hard enough to recognize. At first she
thought him an Apollo but later ‘I came to my senses and discovered
that he was an appalling snob’. She was dismayed when she discov-
ered that his affair with Lady Desborough was still in progress and
infuriated when he asked her: ‘Do you really think that you could fill
the position that would be required of my wife? You would have to
 meet kings and queens and entertain ambassadors. Do you think
you could do it?’ She accused him of putting his social and business
 interests before his love for her and was not appeased by his denials:
 ‘Nancy doesn’t come after Russian loans, or 8 Bish (Within) or Aix!
 How can you pretend to think so?’ His remark about kings and
 queens, he explained, had mainly been a warning of the tedium she
 might encounter. He probably meant what he said; he formally pro-
 posed to her in February 1906, but by that time Waldorf Astor was
on the scene. Revelstoke bowed out in style and possibly with some
relief; his wedding present to them was a diamond bow modelled on
a piece in the crown jewels of Louis XV.15
   Nancy Langhorne would indeed have had to mix with frequent
ambassadors and the occasional king or queen in Lord Revelstoke’s
salons. After a decade of comparative austerity, he indulged himself
by living in the grandest manner. By 1905, within a few weeks, he was
ordering twelve dozen Margaux, a Bechstein grand, a red enamel cig-
arette case and yellow flacon from M. Fabergé of St Petersburg and
two jade dogs from Cartier in Paris. He was hunting regularly with
the Pytchley and the Fernie and keeping a house in Market
Harborough for the purpose. The following year he applied for a
licence to drive an Electric Carriage in Hyde Park, and he bought a
                   The Road to Recovery:   1890-1914                 ee |

series of ever more powerful and luxurious motorcars. Three times
within a week a wheel fell off his 60- horsepower, six-cylinder Napier.
After the second occasion a mechanic announced it was impossible
for the mishap to recur. Revelstoke changed both garage and car.
   He leased a splendid house in Carlton House Terrace, furnished it
sumptuously and employed the best cook in London, the celebrated
Rosa Lewis, who was to go on to still nobler things in the Cavendish
Hotel and the pages of Evelyn Waugh. He was, said Edward VII, the
‘Prince of Bon Viveurs’. The food and wine were superb but the dis-
cipline was also strict; women were only allowed one glass of wine
since Revelstoke disliked seeing them with flushed faces. Lady Airlie
went to the house for the first time as escort to the Princess of Wales,
who was curious to see the objets dart. After dinner more guests
arrived and a concert was given: “The artists were always world-
famous - usually brought over from the Continent for fabulous fees.
I believe Sarah Bernhardt was the only one who ever refused to
appear.’'¢ On another occasion he decided to organize a theatrical
entertainment in French for the Queen and the Prince and Princess
of Wales. The company was to come over from Paris. Rostand’s
‘Pierrot qui pleure et Pierrot qui rit’ was proposed. This would do,
Revelstoke decided, provided it was followed by something light
and amusing, ‘not too proper, not too improper’.!7 The royal visitors
were charmed.
   This was not just empty show. Barings had a reputation to regain;
the affluence of their senior partner and his acceptance by the
greatest in the land was a significant element in their rehabilitation.
It would have availed nothing if John Revelstoke had not also been
uncommonly good at his job. A somewhat chilly remoteness was not
the only Baring characteristic which he had inherited; he enjoyed in
large measure the self-evident reliability, the dignity, the gravitas of
his ancestors. To a friend who was enquiring about a career in the
City for his son, Revelstoke observed: ‘It is almost a platitude to say
that I consider that character and power of application count for
more in the City - or indeed in most careers - than brains or brilliant
abilities.’!8
   Revelstoke himself had good brains but little brilliance; character
and power of application were his hallmarks. They carried him
through. ‘John ... is daily gaining power and influence both in
pak                      The Sixth Great Power