

substantial contributions from Brown, Shipley, Antony Gibbs, Mor-
gans, Hambros and all the rest of Barings’ former rivals. Not every-
one gave gladly. ‘The Bank people think there will be no loss, we are
not so sanguine,’ Raphaels, who contributed £250,000, told their
New York agents. They had joined in, they admitted, not from love
of Barings but to protect their own interests.*5 But their names were
on the list. The following day the joint-stock banks joined in, with
£750,000 each from the London and Westminster, London and
County, and National Provincial. To be mentioned in the Guarantee
 Fund became fashionable, though those who had hoped to secure
 some easy advertisement by appearing 1n such distinguished com-
 pany were disappointed when it was decided not to publish the list.
 By the end of the Governor's twenty-four-hour deadline £10 million
had been pledged; the final figure was more than £17 million.
   Lidderdale was the hero of the hour. With a less courageous or less
energetic Governor, Barings would certainly have collapsed. ‘I don’t
know what to say or how to thank you but we will do our best not to
be unworthy of what has been done,’ Revelstoke wrote to him.*¢
Goschen recommended him to Salisbury fora GCB - ‘He is not rich
enough for a baronetcy.’#7 It is pleasant to know that in due course
Barings were to return the compliment. In 1897 Lidderdale found
himself in financial difficulties, urgently needing £35,000. The secu-
rity he could offer was inadequate and for £10,000 ‘my request is for
an advance on my bare word that I will repay it if I can’. The money
was instantly forthcoming.*8
   Barings were saved, but at a calamitous cost. When Rothschild
had told Salisbury that nobody would trust them with large opera-
tions again*? he spoke too soon, but there were few people in the
City who would have contradicted him at the time. Sanford, who
had done more than anyone except Lord Revelstoke to lead the
house to its doom, had the effrontery to remark to a City acquaint-
ance after the crash: ‘I madea mistake going to Barings. Had I known
that they were such a weak firm, I would have let them alone.’5°
Coming from him the comment was outrageous, but even if Barings
could survive they would have to prove that they were not ‘a weak
firm’. At first even its survival was in doubt. In the eyes of the general
public it was written off. When Alice James early in 1891 gave
Barings as a reference to a house agent, ‘he knew them not;
                                                                       this
                         The Baring Crisis: 1890                      255

  winter, when the world has rung with their downfall, makes the
  cessation of his business consciousness just without their radius
  the more remarkable’.5!
     Clearly the old partnership must be liquidated. Lidderdale had
  made ita condition ofhis support that Revelstoke would resign from
  its management, and this he did on 22 November. ‘He is about
  broken hearted, I think, but now less worried than he was ten days
  ago, wrote his son John. ‘We have had a ghastly time here. The
  question now is whether we cannot do something to carry on the
~ business. New capital is necessary, as the liquidation of the old firm
   must take 2 or 3 years.’5? Lady Revelstoke bewailed her husband’s
  fate: ‘No longer young, to have as it were to begin again.. . . To have
   to endure this and to cut down every expense is very hard for him -
   coupled with the thought be by one mistake has done this.’*? The
   saddest thought must have been that for him there would be no
  beginning again. Discredited as he was, the association of his name
  with any new firm would have been a guarantee of failure. Henry
  Mildmay was displaced as well. Some thought that he had been
  unfairly victimized for a blunder that was not of his creation. He
  himself contested this. He told his son ‘that he had never for a
  moment doubted the prudence of the firm’s policy and that it was
  humiliating to him that his responsibility as a senior partner should
  be minimized or that it should be suggested either that he condoned
  imprudence or that he did not realize what was going on.’5# Even if
  he had been wholly innocent, he was the old guard and he would
  have to go.
     Some people frankly rejoiced at Barings’ downfall. They had for so
  long assumed the role of leaders, had wrapped around themselves
  the imperial mantle, had shown such condescension towards their
  lesser rivals, that even the most benevolent extracted some satisfac-
  tion from the situation. ‘Fancy the Barings being brought so low,’
                                                                    ride
  wrote Randolph Churchill. ‘Lord Revelstoke will not be able to
  the high horse as much as he used to.’** But though their judgement
                                                                   and
  had been faulty, their probity was undoubted, and the courage
                                                               disaster
  resolution with which they accepted responsibility for the
                                                     their sourest crit-
  and set about retrieving it, won the admiration of
                                                                       r of
  ics. Evelyn Baring wrote to his friend C. Moberly Bell, manage
                                               dishono urable’ . Bell wrote
  The Times, about the affair being ‘tricky or
256                      The Sixth Great Power