

Meanwhile the liquidated had been going through what Revelstoke
described as ‘the Agonies of the Damned’.”! As partners they were
personally responsible for all the debts of Baring Brothers. No one
was going to reduce them to a point where they had no roof over
their heads or food to eat - T. C. Baring’s generosity alone was
enough to make sure of that - but the life they had enjoyed in the
past was over. ‘In reference to the kindness and assistance granted to
my firm by the Bank of England,’ Revelstoke wrote to the Governor,
‘I beg to assure you on my own behalf and that of my partners that
we shall hold all our property of every kind at your disposal and be
guided in every way by your advice and guidance.’7? Lidderdale’s
advice, in a sentence, was that everything had to go: lands, houses,
pictures, horses, anything that could make a sensible contribution to
liquidating the debts of the partnership.
  Revelstoke, who had been the highest, had the furthest to fall. His
entitlement to the largest share of the profits now made him respon-
sible for a similar proportion of the losses. To the pain of stripping
himself of beloved possessions and the humiliation of feeling him-
self degraded in the eyes of the world, was added the shame of hav-
ing almost single-handed brought ruin upon himself, his family and
his partners. He was not the most likeable of men, his arrogance and
complacency had alienated many who would otherwise have sym-
pathized fully with him, yet it is impossible to contemplate his suf-
ferings at this tme without feeling acute pity. There was no question
that Membland and the house in Charles Street would have to go,
with all the furniture and pictures. Membland, with 4500 acres, was
valued at £150,000, with a further £10,000 for the contents; 37
Charles Street at £75,000, with £50,000 for Revelstoke’s splendid
French furniture, pictures and olyets d'art. The work of stripping the
houses of their rich contents began at once. ‘When we went back to
Membland at Christmas everything was different,’ remembered
Revelstoke’s son Maurice. “There was no Christmas party and the
household was going through a process of gradual dissolution.
Chérie [the French governess] was leaving us, the stables were
empty, and the old glory of Membland had gone for ever.’73
    Revelstoke at first retreated into apathetic misery, then erupted
into fresh activity. ‘Such a Metamorphosis in the space of one month
it is impossible to conceive,’ Lady Revelstoke told Everard. ‘Tearing
                        The Baring Crisis:   1890                    261
spirits - and at the sight of the sideboard with nothing on it, exclaim-
ing “By heaven, I cannot be starved! Let’s have enough to eat!” So
things must be better,7* His wife and children not merely refrained
from reproaches but defended him fiercely against all criticism. Nor
was the more extended family less loyal. Two of Lord Cork’s daugh-
ters had married into the house - one to a Baring, one to a Hodgson -
to the considerable satisfaction of Lady Cork, who thought they
would be most handsomely set up. ‘They knew what their mother
would feel, and went off to break the news to her with cheerfulness
and never to this day have said a word of grumbling.’”5 Revelstoke’s
children, brought up to take it for granted that they would be rich,
found themselves abruptly impoverished. ‘My darling child, the
House is spared at the expense of our being ruined for the moment,’
Lady Revelstoke wrote to her youngest daughter Susan. ‘Papa will
not rest until all is paid, and there will be little left. The one of our
children we feel for is you, my darling; however you must make eyes
at a good rich man! for our gendre.’76 Susan Baring was twenty at the
time; nine years later she married James Reid, Queen Victoria’s doc-
tor, an alliance which was hardly considered glorious at the time and
would have been felt wholly undesirable by Lord Revelstoke before
the crash. Susan had been a Maid of Honour at court. The Queen
sulked for three days when the engagement was announced, ‘but
finally laughed when Sir James promised never to do it again’.’7
   Henry Mildmay let his country house, Norman Shaw's majestic
fastness at Flete, and in London sacked the under-butler, the two
footmen and the schoolroom footman. The governess voluntarily
halved her salary. The butler stayed on for a year but then left as
there were no guests to give tips and no prospects of a pension. The
fine collection of pictures and china was dispersed. Mildmay initi-
ally bore the disaster with greater sang-froid than Lord Revelstoke,
but in the autumn of 1891 the problems with the Argentine govern-
ment over the waterworks and a further sharp fall in the value of all
South American securities, finally broke his nerve and thence-
forward he lived in constant dread of insolvency; a fear rational
enough at first but as time wore on less and less close to reality.
  Stewart Hodgson, least responsible of the partners of the old
house, was nevertheless ‘plunged from his riches and beautiful
houses at Lythe Hill and in South Audley Street into poverty. His
262                       The Sixth Great Power