

what was left of the liabilities, the reluctance of certain of the guaran-
tors seems decidedly unchivalrous. A year later more than £2 million
Argentine waterworks remained unsold; £204,000 Manchester Ship
Canal, £165,000 City of Montevideo, £517,000 Anglo-Argentine
Trams, £529,000 Curamalan       Land, £537,000 Uruguay 32 per cent
bonds, and a bunch of smaller holdings. The Bank of England con-
tinued to press for as swift a sale as possible: ‘There are still a good
many small amounts of Securities, not of the South American Class,
which could probably be sold at a slight reduction on the quoted
prices, and, bad as the market is, we should be very glad to hear that
progress is being made in the direction indicated.’** When the guar-
antee was renewed for its final year Barings’ liability to the Bank had
shrunk to less than £2 million.8?
   The Bank nevertheless continued to insist that Barings should
wind the matter up. Even as the second renewal was effected
Lidderdale told Francis Baring that they would have to reach an end
within six months. It was in their own interests to do so: “The sooner
the thing is taken seriously in hand the more likely you will be to
escape from being squeezed in the end.’ Barings had no doubt that
this was true and had already made their own plans. In November
1894 a new public company, the Baring Estate Company, was set up.
All the capital was owned by Barings. Its raison détre was to issue £1.5
million of debentures, the proceeds of which would be used to take
over the assets of the old partnership of Baring Brothers and Co.
lion of quoted securities, for the most part Argentine, and substan-
tial unquoted assets, mainly what was left of the partners’ personal
property. Other assets, including the Uruguay bonds, remained tem-
porarily with the Bank against the balance of the debt, but were to be
taken over within a month or two.?!
   There was no shortage of investors ready to take up these deben-
tures ~ ‘a raging demand’, Cecil Baring described it. Finding directors
proved a little more troublesome: ‘We want a friendly man, accept-
able to the Bank - who will mot interfere.’ Francis Baring proved
exceptionally adroit in ironing out any legal problems while Lord
Revelstoke    was ‘now in a good temper and does what he is asked’.
Hopes and Hottinguers were prodigal in offers of any help that was
needed. ‘Lord Rothschild has been very humane,’ reported Cecil
Baring. Only Lord Ashburton disgraced himself, he ‘behaved like a
                        The Baring Crisis: 1890                      265
dog and positively refused to see Ned at all!’?2 The Company did not
take long in organizing its own demise. The Argentine shares were
swiftly disposed of at a good price as soon as the Argentine govern-
ment announced its resumption of full interest payments in 1897,
and the first issue of debentures was redeemed. In December of the
same year the final settlement of the waterworks dispute enabled the
Company to take up what was left of the debentures. Having done
its work the Baring Estate Company formally expired. It was, in the
words of the Daily News, ‘one of the most important and skilfully
managed financial operations on record’.% The credit for its success,
indeed for the whole operation of winding up the old partnership
and constructing the new company, belongs to Francis Baring more
than to any other individual. His skills, never completely relevant to
the career of amerchant banker, were peculiarly adapted to this task.
He laid the foundations on which John Baring was to build.
   For the Bank of England the operation had concluded in 1895
when the Estate Company took over Barings’ remaining assets. ‘I
congratulate the Sinbad of Threadneedle Street that he is delivered
from the Old Man of the Sea,’ wrote the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer, William Harcourt. ‘The Baring Guarantee was a bold and
probably a necessary stroke. It has ended well. May it never be
repeated. Such turns of luck do not often occur in the nature of
things.’* The word ‘probably’ strikes a rather grudging note but
illustrates well with what distaste politicians of this period looked on
such excursions into the private sector. Viewed from the 1980s the
bold stroke seems not merely necessary but essential. Disaster was
averted and at the end of the day the only victims were the partners
in Barings.
   For them a nightmare was over. The way ahead was by no means
comfortable, but at least they now knew where they were going and
could tackle the journey without distractions. ‘We should be doing a
great injustice to our own feelings,’ they wrote to Lidderdale, ‘if we
allowed the present moment to pass by without expressing to you
and to our friend Mr Greene the deep sense of the obligation we feel
we are under to you both for your cordial help and advice during the
trying years we have gone through - without this continuous and
hearty cooperation it would have been most difficult, if not impos-
sible for us to arrive, as we have done, at a satisfactory liquidation of
266                     The Sixth Great Power