

   If neither Revelstoke nor Farrer was personally enthusiastic about
an enterprise it did not stand much chance in Barings. British rail-
ways came in this category. In 1901 Cecil Baring wrote in high excite-
ment from New York to report that E. H. Harriman was ready to
spend $500 million to consolidate and modernize the British system.
J. P. Morgan too was interested. ‘I am sure this is well worth your
thinking about, because we are in an ideal position in the matter, as
Harriman would like to be associated with us, and have the whole
Jew element behind him without being too conspicuous, while Mor-
gan would come in on such a scheme, and if it ever got as large as it
seems to me it might, we could be the leaders with all interests
behind us.’8? Revelstoke was unimpressed by this rosy vision. Clearly
there were possibilities, but ‘in this small country there are limita-
tions as to the fares and as to the carrying capabilities, impediments
created by the Board of Trade, difficulties caused by the Trades
unions’. The whole subject was a tricky one and had better be
eschewed. Eighteen months later Farrer was ready to concede that
the situation seemed more hopeful but he still did not see it as a
profitable field for investment. ‘We shall be agreeably surprised if in
the long run the increase of capital account, and the increase of rates
and taxes and labour bills, do not compensate for any increased earn-
ings which more intelligent operation may effect.’#!
   It was different where the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board was
concerned. The Board wanted to raise £3.5 million at 32 per cent.
Barings insisted that the price to them could not exceed 9412. It was
vital that the first issue should be a success: ‘We are proud of our
long connection with Liverpool . . . and would strain every nerve to
prove our loyalty to you and justify your Board’s to us.’92 This emo-
tional appeal prevailed, and the stock was issued at 9612, the 2 per
cent difference being Barings’ profit after all expenses including
underwriting were deducted. The issue was a success, though not
sensationally so, and the house’s direct gain on the operation was
some £23,000. More important, however, was the fact that Baring
Brothers applied for £7 50,000 worth of stock on its own account and
allotted itself £740,000 (in no way an echo of the Guinness affair,
since in this case the issue was undersubscribed and Barings’ large
holding was needed to maintain the price). The investment eventu-
ally proved a good one: at the end of 1903 a little over £30,000 was
                  The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                  289
transferred to the Investment Account as profit from the trans-
action. In January 1906 Barings felt able to contract for a further
£500,000 ‘on terms which give us a reasonable profit and at the same
time are very fair to the Dock Board’.?} By June all the old stock had
been sold, almost half the new, and it was expected that what
remained would be gone within a few weeks.**
  There were a few cases in which Barings became involved with
those industrial companies which Revelstoke deplored. Usually
these rose from his close friendship, or perhaps alliance would be a
better word, with the German Jewish financier Sir Ernest Cassel,
who by 1900 was a naturalized Briton, one of the dominant forces in
the City of London and personal adviser to the Prince of Wales. It
was on joint account with Cassel that at the end of 1902 Barings
undertook to raise £1 million for the great armaments firm, Vickers
Sons and Maxim, though their name was not mentioned in the pros-
pectus. The relationship with Cassel was conducted on the most
gentlemanly lines. Cassel wrote to say that he felt he should give the
stockbroker Akroyd an interest of £20,000: ‘You will understand that
as this is in recognition of services rendered in connection with the
issue before you had anything to do with it, the cession will fall on
my shoulders only.’* Revelstoke protested: ‘We should very much
prefer, if you will allow us to do so, to bear our share of the cession
made to him. We should thus be consistent with the idea of a joint
account with you, which has been one of the pleasantest features of
this particular business.’%6 Another pleasant feature was that every-
one concerned made a handsome though not indecent profit; by
February all the stock had been taken and Arthur Balfour had
received a cheque for £4277.14.9d for the first £4000 of the £10,000
participation which Barings had reserved him.
   William Beardmore was another industrial company in which
Barings became involved, and the Cunard Steamship Company a
third. For Cunards they provided a series of short-term financial
credits, totalling about £1.2 million, to finance the building of their
                                                       a, which
new liners of 19,500 tons, the Caronia and the Carmani
joined the Cunard fleet in 1905. It was something, but it was not
much. Barings’ attitude was more often that which they adopted
                                                                   .
when the German firm of Siemens considered a flotation in London
They might bé interested, said Barings cautiously, ‘though it is only
290                      The Sixth Great Power