

Cromer halfway through his time in Egypt. Sir Edward Hamilton
deplored the creation: ‘I do not think a peerage to a Baring 1s the
most appropriate of honours. To begin with there is hardly any
precedent this reign for ennobling two brothers: the Baring family
has already peerages in it; and just now to single out a Baring for a
hereditary distinction when the name is in such odium among so
many people, is rather a gaucherie.’3? It seemed that no one else in
authority agreed; Cromer continued to progress, becoming a vis-
count and finally making the Baring family’s tally two earls -
Northbrook and Cromer - and two barons - Ashburton and
Revelstoke. His son, Rowland Errington, spent ten years as a diplo-
mat; was stationed in St Petersburg where he impressed Lord
Revelstoke;*° moved to the bank in 1911; became a director two
years later; left for the war in 1914 and thence entered the service of
the royal family.
   Lord Cromer himself continued his somewhat wary relationship
with the family firm. In 1905 he consulted Barings about the sale of
some Egyptian bonds. When the time came to sell them, however, he
refused to make use of Barings’ services, even though he knew ‘you
would do the business for us much better than anyone else’, and ‘it is
equally clear that I should not gain a farthing by it’. The trouble was,
he explained, he was constantly assailed by ‘a very vigilant, very hos-
tile and utterly unscrupulous opposition’. If he employed Barings on
this business it would give his enemies the opportunity they were
seeking. So instead he would use Sir Ernest Cassel. ‘Of course, if
Cassel likes to associate Baring Brothers and Co. or anyone else in
the business, I don’t mind. That is his affair. . . .’41 Since Cassel, as
Cromer well knew, was Revelstoke’s closest ally, and the two men
had already cooperated on Egyptian affairs, Cromer could reason-
ably congratulate himself on having had his cake and eaten it too. To
No one’s surprise, Barings participated in the business.
   There was one more, and surprising, appointment to the board of
Barings before 1914. Patrick Shaw-Stewart had been the most bril-
liant scholar in an outstanding generation at Oxford, winning the
Craven, Ireland and Hertford Scholarships followed by a first in
Greats. His contemporaries admired his intelligence, but distrusted
his self-interest and aggressive ambition: ‘like the electric eel at the
zoo, said Julian Grenfell; ‘not quite long enough in the bottle’ was
                  The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                ar
Raymond Asquith’s astringent verdict.#? Ettie Desborough adored
him, preached his virtues to Lord Revelstoke, and won the day:
‘Bishopsgate is yours if you want it,’ she wrote in triumph, ‘over
Edom shall you cast your shoe.’#3 Shaw-Stewart did want it. ‘On
Tuesday morning, he told Ronald Knox, ‘I put on my little round
black coat, my paper cuffs, and take the tube at Chancery Lane at
about 9.15 a.m.’ It pleased him, he said, to be in a place ‘where you
referred to eight thousands of pounds simply as “eight” ’.#4# Gaspard
Farrer reported that the partners had found him ‘charming, very
modest and gentle, anxious to learn and, needless to say, extraordi-
narily intelligent’*#5 - a judgement which suggests that Shaw-Stewart
was quite as able to advance his own interests as his friends sup-
posed. Early in 1913 he was made a director, a promotion which
delighted him though the honour of signing for the firm had its
drawbacks: ‘My virgin document was a cheque for £100,000, which
gave me an exquisite sensation, but since then I have had to sign 500
dividend warrants in 20 minutes, and wished I had taken one of the
partners’ advice and used “P. Stewart”.’#6 The only fault the firm
could find in him was that night after night he would stay up tll
4 a.m. at fashionable dances, ‘which is not a good beginning for a
day’s work at No. 8’.47 They tried to cure this weakness by despatch-
ing him to New York, a remedy which the war cut short before its
efficacy could be proven.
   Nobody in the bank played any active part in politics. Lord
Ashburton’s brother Guy was MP for Winchester and Alfred
Mildmay’s brother Francis for Totnes; the partners applauded
politely and Alfred Mildmay went to canvass for his brother, but,
even if they had aspired to a more active role, the demands of their
profession would have made it difficult. This did not mean, how-
ever, that they had no concern for politics. The City interest had on
the whole moved right with the Liberal Unionists and now sup-
ported the Conservative party. Revelstoke, in particular, was tem-
peramentally akin to Tory ministers and especially close to Arthur
Balfour. Cromer found this useful when he wished to get his ideas
across to the government without committing himself officially. In
1900 it was rumoured that Kitchener might be appointed to the War
Office. Cromer wrote that he personally saw a lot in favour of the
idea, and then proceeded to say the opposite to devastating effect.
278                       The Sixth Great Power