

New York and he returned to London, where he spent the next dec-
ade in semi-retirement, contentedly creating a home on the island of
Lambay off Dublin, with a castle extended and remodelled by
Lutyens, and gardens planned by Gertrude Jekyll. There he con-
ducted a survey ofthe wild life: five Lambay species - three worms, a
mite, and a bristletail - were new to science; twelve others were addi-
tions to the British fauna. He introduced mountain sheep from
Corsica, a chamois (which worried the sheep), a kinkajou (which
teased the chamois), rheas, bustards, peacocks and, in fine defiance
of St Patrick, grass snakes. In 1906 Farrer found him ‘entirely blissful
and content... . He amused us by ordering a thousand new shillings
to take back with him, presumably for currency in his own island;
though we believe the inhabitants are confined to his family, the
nurse and the bootboy.? Though he was used for odd missions by
the house, the scandal of his divorce and his own lack of enthusiasm
for along time kept him from playing a full role, and it was not until
 1911 that he became a partner.
    His younger brother, Hugo, worked with him in New York,
mainly because there was no room for him in London.}° ‘He is very
young, but it seems to me that he has the makings of a man of affairs,’
reported Robert Winsor from Kidder Peabody in 1903.3! Hugo was
twenty-seven, young enough, but at the same age his brother had
been grappling with the Baring crisis. His impetuosity and uncertain
judgement alarmed his colleagues and were in the end to spell disas-
ter. Everard, the third son, always known in family circles as ‘The
Imp’, had been a soldier and made a reputation for himself as
Curzon’s Military Secretary. John Revelstoke brought him into the
house in 1905: ‘He is a person of character and Capacity, wrote
Farrer, ‘and I think will be useful to us here if not in direct money-
making, at least in important negotiations where dealing with fellow
creatures plays a more important part than knowledge of markets or
businesses.’32
   Maurice Baring came between Everard and Hugo in the roll call of
John Revelstoke’s brothers. He had a small but genuine literary tal-
ent, a genius for languages, vast exuberance and a wild imagination
veering erratically between fantasy and whimsy. He was one of those
people of whom it is difficult to see the point unless one actually
knows them. He was loved and despaired of by his brother, who was
                   The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                   275
perpetually paying his bills, and trying to impose some order on him.
‘I can hardly think that it is necessary for you to patronize so expen-
sive a tailor as Davies?’ Revelstoke pleaded with him. ‘And Bain’s bill
of £64 for books could be avoided, could it not? Now that, by your
brains, you have acquired a position in the literary and journalistic
world, you should be able to make both ends meet.’33 Once, in St
Petersburg and under the supervision of the local Barings’ represent-
ative, he was allowed to take part in some financial negotiations over
a tramways loan. ‘You will find him eager and anxious to second
your efforts, wrote Mildmay, ‘but he is entirely without business
knowledge and we therefore look to you alone to see that our
requirements have been satisfied.’3+ The story on which Maurice
Baring dined out for many years was that he committed his desired
terms to paper, locked himself away and ‘sat like the Mikado in the
hotel and refused to see a soul, whereby he got the reputation of
being an inflexible Lord of Finance,’ and prevailed on every point.35
The truth is not quite so picturesque; Barings’ representative con-
ducted the negotiations and had to make several important conces-
sions.36 Certainly Maurice Baring developed no taste for business
and this was his only foray into international finance.
    Yet two more members of the family were prominentin the bank’s
affairs at this period. Windham Baring, Lord Cromer’s second son,
joined the house in 1903 fresh from university. Like every recruit, of
the blood royal or not, he served his time in the galleys before earn-
ing promotion. John Revelstoke told Windham’s father he had
found him late one evening ‘engaged in copying one of the yearly
statements of account sent to clients. This consists, as you know, in
transcribing entries from a ledger to a sheet of paper. He confided to
me that he considered it “devilish tricky work”.’37 He made a good
impression and three years later was despatched to Buenos Aires; the
idea being, Farrer explained, that he would spend ten years at least
there; ‘It is plain that there will be no room for him here for the pres-
ent, and his best chance of attaining to the private room 1s by making
himself useful where Baring Brothers and Co. require representa-
tion.’38
   His elder brother, Rowland, had become Viscount Errington
when his father Evelyn was created an earl in 1901. Evelyn Baring
had taken thé first step in the peerage in 1892 when he became Baron
276                      The Sixth Great Power