

London and in continental financial centres,’ wrote Gaspard Farrer.
‘If his health remains good then really there seems to be no reason
why this house should not come right to the front again, at least as far
as English commerce and finance are concerned; but it will need
patience and control and a willingness to give up present profits for
the sake of the future.’!% Patience and control were also among
Revelstoke’s most marked qualities and his influence grew, as Farrer
had predicted. It is typical that Sir Edward Hamilton, that most stal-
wart pillar of the establishment, in 1903 named Revelstoke, Lord
Rothschild and Sir Ernest Cassel as his ‘first counsellors’, the ‘repre-
sentative men’ whom he felt it essential to introduce to incoming
Chancellors of the Exchequer.?° It was no mean tribute to a man
who, a little over a decade before, had seen his father disgraced and
his family firm brought to the verge of bankruptcy.
   Gaspard Farrer had been imported into Barings by John Baring
from the small merchant banking house of H. S. Lefevre and Co.,
where he had acquired a reputation as an expert on transport matters
in general and American railroads in particular, and in which he
remained a partner - a confusing doubling of roles which could have
aroused concern if he had not been so patently honourable. He was a
man of extraordinary kindness, common sense and humour; tainted
by the fashionable anti-Semitism of his time but in most respects
humane and liberal: ‘he was essentially Aristocratic, socially and eco-
nomically, concluded his protégé, Duncan Stirling.2! Farrer was a
genius with figures, who derived delight from the work of reshaping
balance sheets and company reports, but he knew that human
beings, not statistics, made a business work and he valued friendship
highly. ‘I am afraid I may be prejudiced in the matter of individuals,’
he told Hugo Baring; ‘if I like a person I will go far with him, even
unreasonably far. . . and equally I am perhaps unreasonably timid
where I take a dislike to an individual.’22 He loved his work and
made it his main interest in life, but he would never have allowed its
needs to overrule his loyalties. In 1914, though only fifty-four, he
decided that he was blocking the promotion prospects of the
younger men and should retire; the war disturbed his plans but the
fact that he intended such a sacrifice illustrates well the scale of val-
ues which shaped his character and career.?3
  Such a man could not, nor would have wished to be a rival to John
Wy




                      Fig
            sei ill halt




Wi yyri HiMy ithiy ie
                    ie
             | hill Hy
                                                                                feiba                    HANA




                                                                                                     -
                                                                                               inna ee
                                                                                        tom!