


By the turn of the century it could fairly be said that Barings had
recovered. The feat was impressive but needs to be viewed in propor-
tion. Between 1890 and 1914 the City of London was losing its lead
as financial céntre of the world, the merchant banks were losing
284                      The Sixth Great Power

ground to the giant joint-stock banks, and Barings were slipping
behind certain of the other merchant banks. They were still a big fish,
but in a smaller pond and with more and even bigger fish around
them.
   The competition from Paris was ever more formidable. ‘The
Crédit Lyonnais,’ wrote Farrer, ‘is the most powerful institution in
the world with investors; we should not care to propose to them a
business involving less than $50 million, and they would probably
prefer $100 million. ... The Crédit Lyonnais’ yearly power of
placement is at least £30 million, and practically every client follows
the institution’s advice blindly.’* But the German banks were
equally aggressive. In the United States the opposition became ever
more powerful. It is notable that in 1900 Barings employed seventy
clerks; the comparable figure for Morgans in New York was twice as
great. Within Britain the merchant banks were still powerful but
they had shown themselves conservative in the development of new
business, had left the financing of the railways largely to contractors,
the handling of new industrial issues to company promoters. Their
resources were small compared with those of the joint-stock banks,
who lured away many of their employees and made incursions into
their historic business.75
   The gulf was wide between the old and traditionally minded
merchant   banks, among which       Barings, Rothschilds,   Schroders,
Hambros and Gibbs were pre-eminent, and the newer, more aggres-
sive houses, mainly of German origin, Kleinworts, Speyer Bros,
Brandts, the French-American Lazards. The partners in the former
group sent their sons to public schools, married into the English
gentry, spent time on their country estates - a typical August
found Revelstoke at Aix, Tom Baring shooting grouse in Scotland
and Cecil Baring collecting bugs in the wilds of Mexico. The direc-
tors of Kleinworts and Speyers took continental brides and rarely
had a country house. They sent their children to learn their job in the
German banks, where the clerks worked from sixty to seventy hours
a week; in the purely British houses the working day was usually
from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., with one half day a week.76 A Russian corre-
spondent told Farrer that he only took on young men able to read,
write and speak in four languages. ‘I told him that in this country we
might search from Land’s End to Cape Wrath without finding a
                  The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                285

young man with such qualifications; it is hard enough to find one
who can write a decent letter in English.” Rothschilds were no
longer Barings’ most formidable rival; instead they were an ally,
deploring the vulgarity and unscrupulousness of the new wave. Nor
did Barings find them particularly effective even in this role. ‘New
Court is so unreasonable and so lazy that it is difficult to ensure a
business being properly carried through under their direction, com-
plained Revelstoke. “They refuse to look into new things . . . and
their intelligence and capacity is not of a high order.’78
   Barings in the early twentieth century, then, were a powerful and
thriving house, but no longer the innovative force they had been in
their youth, nor enjoying the undisputed mastery that had belonged
to them in their prime. Their expansion, however, was marked by
developments in the offices at 8 Bishopsgate. The first operation
of any significance came in 1906 with an attempt to improve the
ventilation in what Farrer described as ‘our abominable partners’
room’. ‘It is difficult to please them all, complained Farrer, and in
fact it seemed almost impossible to please any of them. ‘Yesterday
when every inlet and outlet was hermetically sealed half of them
complained of draughts; today when the hot air is on and the fans
going Bob [Hodgson] talks of training for another and presumably
worse world, while John shivers and suggests that trips to Brighton
are no longer necessary.’7? In 1912 more drastic schemes were afoot.
The watchmaker’s shop and public house next door had been
acquired, the upper part of the house demolished, the general office
boarded up, and fierce redevelopment begun. ‘We are promised five
to seven months of knocking and hammering, wrote Mildmay
gloomily.®°
   But in spite of the knocking and hammering, and in spite - or per-
haps because - of the comparatively relaxed atmosphere of the part-
ners’ room, Barings remained a good place to work. Whatever the
blandishments of the joint-stock banks, most of the staff remained
loyal. Mr John Warry was hardly typical, but his attitude was that of
many others. ‘On 15th May next,’ Barings wrote to him, ‘you will
have completed sixty years service with the Firm and we understand
that, now being in your eighty-fifth year, you would be glad to be
relieved of your duties... . Such a desire is but natural,’ admitted
Barings handsomely. He was to retire in June, receive full pay until
286                     The Sixth Great Power