

overboard. In 1911 a plausible young man called on the Commercial
Credits Department and asked for £10,000 to finance the shipment
of Manchester goods to the East. The capital, all owned by him, was
said to be £15,000 and was shortly to be raised to £30,000. It took
careful enquiry to establish that only £3207 capital was actually paid
up and that no confidence was to be placed in the young man or his
firm. ‘We naturally declined to have anything to do with the busi-
ness. It was discovered that he was seeking credit all over London,
and he failed shortly afterwards.’ Precise information was as essen-
tial as ever. In the same year Barings lost a substantial sum through
the unexpected failure of Messrs Leontieff in St Petersburg. ‘It is
apparently difficult, if not impossible, to obtain reliable information
about firms in Russia, complained the Credit Department. ‘Personal
knowledge of members of firms with whom one does business, and
frequent personal intercourse is very desirable.’*”
   Any inclination to indulge in more ambitious adventures was
sternly curbed. In 1900 Cecil Baring reported from New York that it
was said on the Metal Exchange that Barings were at the head of a
speculative movement in tin and that they actually controlled three-
quarters of the visible supply. The days were long past when Baring
Brothers could set out to corner tin, indigo, or any other commodity.
Cecil Baring told everyone that the story was a lie, ‘and that you and
we were only interested in tin from time to time, just as we are in
other sorts of merchandise, as Bankers’.*8
   Barings had always done well for themselves as well as for their
clients by managing the affairs of the affluent and well connected. In
1891 clients’ accounts totalled £2 million; by the end of 1914 the
figure was £9.5 million. Sometimes there was a family connection
and the motive was to oblige rather than to make a profit. In 1913
Lord Revelstoke found himself called upon to sort out the financial
problems of his brother-in-law, Lord Spencer. The difficulty was one
of cash flow rather than anything more fundamental. ‘I dislike the
idea of fine works of art being sold to liquidate deficiencies of
income,’ Revelstoke told Gaspard Farrer’s solicitor brother Henry.
‘You are well aware how many beautiful things are at Althorp and in
Spencer House, and of all these I believe my brother-in-law has the
free disposal without any entail.’? Such duties could be trouble-
some, but at least where no relationship was involved the honour
                   The Road to Recovery:   1890-1914                 283
could be declined. When Lady Cunard suggested Barings should
look after her affairs, Revelstoke commented: ‘She is an extremely
tiresome woman, and is mixed up with speculative people, so that, as
far as | am concerned, I should consistently refuse to have anything
to do with her affairs.’7° In 1913 Barings took over the small firm of
Mormis, Prevost, an old, well-established but sleepy house which
specialized in looking after bonds and other securities held by for-
eign customers, collecting interests and dividends and doing any
other business that had to be done. Barings’ list of foreign clients was
thereby embellished by a rich selection of the noblesse of France: the
Duc d’Abrantes, the Duc de Broglie, the Comte de Fitzjames and
many others.
   Providing credits for foreign travellers was also an increasing if
minor line of business. The most eminent of such clients was
undoubtedly   Jules Verne’s Phineas Fogg, who was entitled to draw
on Barings to ‘an extent unlimited’ in the course of his journey
around the world in eighty days. The majority of foreign travellers
came from the United States; in 1902 Cecil Baring was reporting
from New York that some of his richer clients would like to have
‘check books on your esteemed firm bound in a rather more expen-
sive way than the regular paper cover’. Samples of various luxurious
forms of binding were asked for.7! It was the dawn of the traveller's
cheque. In 1905 Kidder Peabody reported that the American
Express Company was selling a great many such cheques, but for
small amounts and at greater cost than those issued by the merchant
banks: ‘The business which they take from us is the most trouble-
some and least profitable part of the travelling Credit business.”
Barings were not so sure. Gaspard Farrer supposed that, in self-
defence, they would have to go in for ‘travellers’ Circular Notes’. A
visiting American lady had just been extolling their delights; ‘the
womenfolk prefer something that can be easily cashed - and easily
stolen - to the necessary formalities which a letter of credit entails’.’?