

the end of the year, and then get a pension of £250 a year.*! One
hopes he enjoyed it for a decade at least.
   Two hundred and fifty pounds was quite generous. In 1914 a
junior clerk was taken on probation at £1 a week. A year or so later, if
accepted for the regular staff, this would rise to £70 a year. ‘A hard-
working clerk who gives general satisfaction without possessing
exceptional abilities’ would expect to work up in the end to about
£400 a year. A thorough knowledge of French, Spanish or German
was very desirable (though if Farrer is to be believed a considerable
rarity) - ‘A slight knowledge of a Foreign language is useless.’ No
social or educational qualifications were necessary, but ‘our experi-
ence leads us to the conclusion that the training afforded by the Eng-
lish Public School has the effect of cultivating a wider field of view,
and a greater spirit of self-reliance, than any other type of school at
the present time’.82 Women were now taken for granted at any
except the highest and lowest levels. They were mostly employed in
the Travellers’ Letters Department (which at the peak period in
August might handle as many as 1500 letters in a single day) or the
Coupon Department. The former were in a special category ‘in that
they have to pass frequently through the public parts of the office;
we have therefore decided that in future black dresses must be worn.
There is no objection to white collars and cuffs, but the Directors
desire that no coloured trimming or fancy blouses be worn during
business hours.’83


The British merchant banks were often criticized for failing to play a
large part in the financing of British industry. Certainly Revelstoke
regarded the business with some caution. In 1911 he disclaimed any
interest in a concern for making use of coal products: ‘I confess that
personally I have a horror of all industrial companies, and that |
should not think of placing my hard-earned gains into such a ven-
ture.’§* His attitude may have been coloured by a brush which
Barings is supposed to have had some years earlier with Ernest Terah
Hooley, the most notoriously crooked of the company promoters of
the age. Barings had unwisely been drawn into helping him float his
Trafford Park Estates, and though they had contrived to disentangle
themselves with no more than a nasty scare, the unpleasant memory
                   The Road to Recovery:   1890-1914                 287
lingered on.85 But though it was rarely indeed that the house partici-
pated in any fully-fledged industrial enterprise, their role in what
might be called the infrastructure of British industry was by no
means inconsiderable.
   In 1900 and 1901 came their first association with public transport
in London, two issues of £316,000 and £840,000 respectively for
London United Tramways. Revelstoke told James Stillman of the
National City Bank in New York that, though a small beginning, the
first issue was likely to lead to something big. ‘Electric traction and
surface roads have not reached the same popularity in England as
they have in the States ... the conservatism of my countrymen
would seem to render them content with a means of locomotion
which would appear quite antiquated to the average American.’ This
was the first proposition to finance ‘electrification for surface roads’
in London. ‘I am quite convinced that the thing 1s only in its infancy
as far as this metropolis is concerned, and that when the English
public is educated to take an interest in such schemes, we shall see a
huge development on the lines which have been so successful in
your country.’ The English public were not the only people who
needed education. The Astronomer Royal and the other Observa-
tory authorities from Greenwich waged a vociferous campaign to
stop the development of the system and it took a long me to con-
vince them that ‘the disturbances created by the electric currents’
were not so damaging as they feared.87
    From trams to the underground railway was a natural progress.
 Barings never themselves made an issue for the Central London
 Railway but they took stock for their own and their clients’ account,
and Farrer, in particular, had a keen interest in it. He was worried
about the increasing competition from the electrified Metropolitan
and District Railways and anxious to reduce costs in every way. ‘The
 snipping of tickets at the barriers’ he believed to be ‘perfectly useless
and a great expense’. The occasional fraud would cost little com-
 pared to the wages of the staff, and inspectors on the trains would be
 just as effective. He also thought a rise in fares would be justified: ‘I
do not believe people travel by Tube unless they are obliged. Itis not
like a surface tram where the sight of the passing car and a very low
fare may tempt a man to ride a few hundred yards when he would
otherwise walk.’88
288                     The Sixth Great Power