

Kitchener had already produced a mutiny in the army and if he had
stayed in the Sudan ‘would have stifled trade and have produced a
civil upset by over-taxation, and general incapacity to understand
that there is a great deal of human nature in men. The only thing
which appears really to have interested him was the building (with
forced military labour) of a ridiculous huge palace wherewith to
 entertain the Duchess of Portland, Lady Cranborne etc.’ Kitchener
was ‘the most arbitrary and unjust man I have ever met’. If there was
a pleasant and unpleasant way to do something he would unfailingly
choose the latter. ‘He is devoured by personal ambition and, I
should say, wholly unscrupulous. . . . Truthfulness and loyalty are
not his strong points.’ He had no powers of persuasion, no tact, no
sense of proportion. In every other way he would do a splendid job
at the War Office.*8
   Revelstoke had already had a ‘quiet conversation’ with Balfour in
which he had reported Cromer’s limited enthusiasm for Kitchener.*?
Armed with this diatribe he hastened back. Cause and effect are
always difficult to establish in politics: all that is certain is that, while
on 12 February Balfour had been ready to ‘acquiesce with some
equanimity’ in Kitchener's translation to the War Office, once the
South African war was over it was in India and not Whitehall that the
newly created viscount found himself installed.
   But though Revelstoke was closer to Balfour than any other politi-
cian, he considered himself in particular and bankers in general to be
above the political conflict. On 20 July 1905 he gave a large dinner
party at his house in Carlton House Terrace and invited more people
in later to dance to a Viennese band. At | a.m. Lord Spencer burst in
to announce that the government had fallen. ‘He was shortly fol-
lowed by a jubilant Asquith and by several other citizens, who evi-
dently think they are going to be members of the next Ministry.
Margot appeared, as usual very lightly clad, and talked wildly about
her approaching occupation of 10 Downing Street.’5° When the Lib-
erals swept in at the election of 1906 Farrer pronounced that it was
inevitable, ‘and right as well for the good of the country that there
should be a change’! Revelstoke gave a large dinner to introduce
Asquith to the senior officials of the Bank of England, and financial
heavyweights such as Lord Rothschild, Lord Mount Stephen and
Edgar Speyer.®2
                   The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                    279
   Asquith might be acceptable but Lloyd George went a little far
even for the most open-minded banker. Alfred Mildmay noted scep-
tically that the new Chancellor had said he did not intend to bring in
‘any measures of a socialist nature’; the speech was all night as far as it
went, ‘but it did not seem to me to contain much more than
platitudes’.53 Revelstoke referred gloomily to ‘the eccentricities of
our Radical Government’.s+ When Lloyd George introduced his
controversial budget in 1909, Revelstoke was one of the more well-
informed ofthe peers to oppose it. In his speech, the first after twelve
years as a member of the House of Lords, he spoke as ‘one brought
up in the midst of financial and commercial operations, in the con-
duct and consideration of which I have endeavoured to follow the
traditions and to be guided by the experience of many generations of
financiers in my own family’. The Finance Bill penalized capital and
destroyed credit. What was being sacrificed was confidence: ‘Confi-
dence in financial prudence, confidence in ability to pay, confidence
in financial equity, confidence in the sanctity of property.’** His
speech deserved the highest praise, judged Almeric Fitzroy, ‘as it was
a maiden effort, and by universal consent an extremely effective con-
tribution to the debate’.5* But when the issue turned to one of Lords
against Commons and the call went out for all moderates to rally to
the government, Revelstoke knew where his loyalties lay. He even
volunteered to return specially from his beloved Aix to go into the
government lobby, ‘it being understood, of course, that in that case
 an opportunity should be given me of registering my protest against
 the measure in question’.*”
    Though their views on foreign policy might differ from ume to
 time, on one thing all the partners of Barings were united: that if war
broke out between two major European powers, then, irrespective of
who won or lost, ‘as far as banking and commercial circles are con-
cerned, the result would be disastrous’.** Gaspard Farrer confessed
to an ‘old craze of mine of fear of the German and all his works’,5? but
he was still convinced that no sane man could contemplate war and
ready to deride the various scares which from time to time swept
Britain in the early twentieth century. ‘If you can come,’ he wrote to
an American friend in 1906, ‘you will find Englishmen who can still
sleep soundly in their beds without fear of waking to the boom of
German guns and the news of German warships in the Thames. Can
280                     The Sixth Great Power