




                                                                                                 1
                                                                                         |) SEM ( .
                                                                                        As
                                                                                 ‘}




                                                                                                                a =:
                                                                                                           ir a
                                                                                                             ==
                                                                                tly




                                                                                                         Uae
             it
                                                                                 TH



                                                                                 NR




                                                                                               je aL




                            The Norman Shaw facade to the Bishopsgate office, built in 1880 and
                            sketchéd by Geoffrey Fletcher shortly before its demolition.
mae   Lpreaticwe Bo
The senior partners in 1926
(from left to right): John
Baring (1863-1929), second
Lord Revelstoke; Cecil
Baring (1864-1934), later third
Lord Revelstoke; Gaspard
Farrer and Alfred Mildmay,
by Ambrose McEvoy.
The first Earl of Northbrook by Spy               The first Lord Revelstoke by Lib
                       Cartoons of four distinguished Barings
The second Lord Revelstoke by Spy                  The first Earl of Cromer by Spy
                  The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                   273
Revelstoke. There was, indeed, no one within the house who could
come near to challenging his authority. William Bingham Baring, a
remote cousin but of the same generation, had been one of the few
members of the family to oppose setting up the Estate Company. He
had been ‘recalcitrant and peevish,’ wrote Cecil Baring contemptu-
ously. ‘He is indeed a poor thing.’* His punishment was to be
packed off to Liverpool at £500 a year. Henry Mildmay’s son Alfred
became a director in 1897 and remained one for forty-three years,
but he was not the sort of man to rule, or wish to do so. Apart from
Gaspard Farrer, John Revelstoke’s most effective support came from
his own siblings. Of these the eldest, the most remarkable, and the
eventual heir to the title was his brother Cecil.
   Cecil Baring was one of the most attractively eccentric members of
a family in which unconventionality was no rarity. Long after the
fashion had changed he continued to dress in square bowler hat and
‘coachman’s’ topcoat, not from conservatism or any wish to attract
attention but because he could not be bothered to adjust his style.
A dedicated classicist, he was found at his desk when a financial crisis
was raging, peacefully reading Homer. The advice he gave on this
occasion was felt to be particularly prescient.’ His ruling passions,
however, were those of the naturalist: he would always walk straight
into a rock pool to inspect the contents, without waiting to remove
his brogues or to dry them out afterwards. Once he was in Madrid
negotiating a loan of particular importance. His partners were wait-
ing anxiously when at last a telegram arrived. It read: ‘Have my
blackcaps arrived??? He found the routine of the office always
tedious and often repulsive; he could rarely bring himself to con-
form to its shibboleths. Totally unpretentious, while his brother
John was conveyed to work top-hatted in an electric brougham, he
went ina bowler hat by tube. Yet once at Bishopsgate his mind was as
shrewd and his judgement as sound as anybody’s.
  He had lived and worked in New York, first in Kidder Peabody,
then in Baring, Magoun, and had acquired a considerable reputation
there. At one point he had been about to marry the future Mrs
Cornelius Vanderbilt Junior, but the engagement was broken off -
allegedly because he had lost all his money in the Baring crash.?8
Then he eloped with Maude Tailer, née Lorillard, wife of one of his
partners in Baring, Magoun. This did not improve his prospects in
274                      The Sixth Great Power