

a powerful American group.5! Kuhn, Loeb and the National City
Bank were powerful enough to satisfy anyone and by February 1904
Barings were telling Hottinguers that ‘unless any very untoward
circumstances arise we shall find ourselves in the position ofcontrol-
ling the European side of the business’.s? The untoward circum-
stance proved to be Edgar Speyer, descendant of a Frankfurt banking
family that had once been more eminent than the Rothschilds.
Speyer had settled in London but maintained a close relationship
with the Deutsche Bank in Berlin. Together these two now put in a
bid for the Cuban loan and suggested to Barings that the groups join
forces. ‘It was obvious that they had only come in at the last moment,
and were anxious to gather the fruits of our labours,’ wrote
Revelstoke crossly.53 Barings were grudgingly prepared to give
Speyer some share, but only if they retained the leadership and
issued the prospectus; Speyer insisted on equal participation; the
Deutsche Bank suggested that everyone’s honour would be satisfied
if the firms were both mentioned on the prospectus, but in alphabet-
ical order.5+ Then the Russo-Japanese war broke out and gave
Barings a reason - or perhaps an excuse - to quit the field. Speyer
persisted, secured the loan, and compounded his offence by making
a success of it. ‘I can’t help feeling, quite between us two, that we will
appear perhaps a little too conservative in the eyes of our American
friends,’ suggested Noetzlin of the Banque de Paris.°5 Speyer cer-
tainly felt so, though he was effusive when he shortly afterwards met
Hugo Baring in New York. ‘He said that nothing would please him
more than to do business with us and that he wished very much that
when I wrote to you I would tell you this!!! Dirty little beast!’5¢
   Only in Argentina were Barings prepared to maintain their posi-
tion with tenacity. Speyers at one point challenged their authority
but were bought off after three years of more or less open hostility.
The two houses did a deal, ‘the basis being,’ reported Farrer, ‘that
they should leave our clients alone and we leave theirs, they keeping
out of Argentine government and certain other specified business in
that country, and we out of Mexico and Cuba’.57 Morgans were the
only other international house which played a significant role in
Argentina. They proved formidable rivals but it was not until 1907
that they achieved parity with the long-established Barings.
   Until 1905 Barings’ affairs in Argentina were managed by Essex
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                       305
Reade: ‘a charming man, agreat reader, rather aesthetic and dainty in
his manner of living, wrote one of the most distinguished of the
Anglo-Argentine settlers, Herbert Gibson.5* Reade was at first much
preoccupied with unscrambling the affairs of the old partnership but
gradually the possibility of doing new business arose, and by 1898, in
collaboration with the Buenos Aires house of Ernesto Tornquist,
he was busily negotiating a short-term loan of £300,000. It was not
until the Boer War was raging, with the demand it generated for
hides, beef, horses, mutton, wheat and wool, that the Argentine
economy really expanded, but already the political stability at the
end of the nineteenth century was allowing its huge potential to
develop.*?
   The only flaw was the incipient war with Chile, which in both
countries diverted capital badly needed for other purposes into a
wasteful arms race. Anyone who believed that merchant bankers
took pleasure in fomenting conflicts for the sake of the pickings to be
derived from them would be confounded by Barings’ reactions to
the possibility of war in Latin America. Like seconds anxious to pre-
vent a duel, Barings and Rothschilds fussed around their respective
champions, urging restraint, suggesting compromises, surrept-
tiously removing the bullets and substituting blanks. “The views of
Messrs   Barings and Messrs Rothschilds are in complete accord,’
Reade told Tornquist. ‘They are both imbued with the friendliest
feelings to the respective countries with which they are related in
business, but they have naturally no wish to help to keep up the pres-
ent wasteful competition in expenditure. Of course all they can do is
refuse to assist itand to discountenance it in every way they can. This
is a very repugnant course to have to take, but it is less repugnant
than assisting both countries to cripple themselves to the verge of
bankruptcy.’
   In this pacifist policy they were consistent. Three years later Chile
ordered two ironclads from Maxim and Armstrong. Argentina
promptly began to negotiate a similar purchase. ‘If these purchases
will be effected, it will be financial ruin to both countries,’ cabled
Tornquist. Could not the British government intervene in the dis-
pute?®! With Barings already involved with Vickers Sons and Maxim
it was a tricky request to make, but Revelstoke faced it manfully. He
called on Lansdowne and extracted a promise from the Foreign
306                     The Sixth Great Power