

City Bank was revived. Then Kidder Peabody decided that, after all,
it was not out of the question that they should open an office in New
York. Obstacles melted away, and in November 1907 Baring Broth-
ers had the pleasure ofinforming their correspondents ‘that our old
and valued friends Messrs Kidder Peabody and Co. of Boston have
decided to reopen their house in New York on 1 January 1908, and
will represent us there from that date; the firm of Baring and Co.
ceasing to exist’.4?
   For what it was worth, Kidder Peabody also concerned themselves
with Barings’ business in Canada. This was but a shadow of its for-
mer glories, however. At the end of 1892 the financial agency of the
Canadian government had been removed from Barings and given to
the Bank of Montreal. Barings were aggrieved, as they had just
offered what they felt to be generous terms for continuing the
agency for a further decade and had been ready to puta credit of £1
million at the disposal of the government. Probably the Canadian
government's decision represented no more than a desire to employ
a national bank, but to Barings, coming so soon after their disaster, it
seemed unnecessarily harsh. ‘It is a matter of satisfaction to us, they
concluded with some dignity, ‘that during the long period of 50
years for which we have acted as Agents for the Dominion of Canada
in London, we can recall no occasion upon which we have not been
willing to place our services at the disposal of the Government,
either by way of temporary advances or by giving very substantial
support to the loans which have been issued by us from time to
time.’#3
   Barings were not to undertake any more Canadian issues and,
though from time to time they took an interest in Canadian financ-
ing, the subject provoked a note of rancour in Bishopsgate. In 1908
Farrer was grumbling about Canada’s spendthrift ways and deplor-
ing the scale of her debts,*# and three years later he called her ‘the
most importunate of beggars: £7 million one day for the Canadian
Northern, £5 million the next for the Canadian Pacific, besides innu-
merable other issues of similar dimensions. It will be a miracle if
there is not trouble there before long.’45 The wish, one feels, was
father to that thought.
                     High Finance: 1890-1914                       303
Given the disaster of 1890 it would not have been surprising if
Barings had chosen wholly to eschew Latin America in future inter-
national financing. The contrary was true. By the early twentieth
century they were once more engaged in Argentine loans, and
involved to a lesser extent in other countries of the region. But their
policies were shaped by an almost exaggerated respect for the
susceptibilities and interests of their rivals. In 1902, for instance,
when an alliance with the Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas was being
forged, Revelstoke stressed that ‘it is understood, of course, that the
preserves of Brazil and Chile will be respected as belonging to our
noble friends in New Court [Rothschilds]’.4¢ When the American
firm of Grace Brothers wanted them to join in a bid for the construc-
tion of a railway in Chile, Barings were happy to undertake it pro-
vided that, if a government loan was involved, it should first be
offered to Rothschilds: ‘This stipulation we made so as to maintain
our friendly understanding with them, that we would not interfere
with Chile so long as they did not with Argentina.’#” Unfortunately
these elaborate courtesies sometimes meant that the business was
snapped up by less gentlemanly rivals. In this case there was a gov-
ernment loan, Rothschilds did bid for it, but the business ended up
with Deutsche Bank. The noble friends in New Court, Mildmay
complained, were ‘hardly sufficiently active in their business meth-
ods to be even with a German firm’.*8
   In some countries syndicates were set up on the understanding
that any business acquired would be shared among the participants;
in Peru Barings, Morgans, Grace Brothers and the London Bank of
Mexico united and agreed with a French group including the
Banque de Paris that each would give the other 25 per cent of any-
thing that came out of Lima.*? Morgans were Barings’ most usual
American partners, and Revelstoke was even more anxious not to
offend them than he was Rothschilds. In 1902 he declined to join the
 Banque de Paris in a Mexican loan unless Morgans were first invited
to participate: ‘We should take care not to make ourselves disagree-
able to them by endeavouring to take away business to which they
might conceive they had a prior claim.’*°
  This genteel and unaggressive approach was very marked when a
Cuban loan was mooted late in 1903. Revelstoke refused even to
contemplateitunless the operation was placed under the auspices of
304                      The Sixth Great Power