

[Boston, 1987], pp. 446-7).
298                      The Sixth Great Power

could not exist without him as a partner’.25 Revelstoke had been
playing with the idea of persuading Kidder Peabody to open in New
York, but the partners in Boston were reluctant and he anyway
found this new grand design most alluring.
  Then J. P. Morgan began to back pedal. He was worried by the
future of his protégé, Sir Clinton Dawkins, who would be broken-
hearted if any radical change were made to his position. “There is a
berth vacant and likely soon to be filled under the Indian Govern-
ment, for which he is eminently qualified,’ cabled Farrer hopefully,
but Dawkins proved most unreasonably reluctant to remove himself
to the Orient. J. P.Morgan came to London, but was evasive: ‘He has
been entirely occupied through the last month with the Archbishop
of Canterbury,’ reported Bob Winsor of Kidder Peabody, ‘and appar-
ently has nothing else on his mind.’?* Dawkins made up for his
obduracy over India by having a heart attack and retiring, but still
J. P. Morgan would not move. The real stumbling block, Revelstoke
later decided, had been the position ofJ.P.’s son Jack, who was now
spending six months of the year in Britain. ‘I expect there is little
sympathy and less confidence between father and son... . The Lon-
don lot, as at present constituted, are so entirely useless and so out of
touch with anything which is of value in English financial and com-
mercial life that Morgan’s people will find their power constantly
decreasing on this side.’27
   In October 1904 Barings decided the matter could no longer be
left to drift. Revelstoke wrote Morgan a letter, ‘which will necessitate
his answering and deciding one way or the other’.?8 J. P. Morgan was
assured that Barings would welcome a situation in which they
looked after all Morgans’ interests in London and Morgans all theirs
in New York. The letter was carefully phrased so that it would not do
too much damage if shown to Jack Morgan in London, but the
implication was clear - there was no room for Baring, Magoun orJ.S.
Morgan. ‘It would be particularly agreeable to me to be able to look
forward to opportunities of being brought into closer contact with
yourself; |have remembered that you have more than once told me
that you considered that your firm and mine should be as intimate as
possible in view of the growing power and aggression of our compet-
itors.? But by now J. P. Morgan was committed to the view that
while he could to good effect take on the work of Baring, Magoun in
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                       299
New York, J. S. Morgan should continue to coexist with Barings in
London. Early in 1905 he arrived in Europe, resolved to convert
Revelstoke to his point of view. “The old man will have to talk to
Doomsday before he convinces John,’ said Farrer.3° He talked until
July, or at least desultory negotiations went on until then, but
neither man had any real hopes of success. ‘We have made up our
minds that nothing will come of this alliance, though from no fault
of ours, concluded Farrer regretfully. “We must therefore look else-
where.3!
   Where to look was more difficult to decide. Baring, Magoun must
either be reinforced with a new American partner and new capital,
reduced to the level of a mere agency as Wards had been, or dis-
solved altogether and the business handed to some third party. At
one moment Lazards were tentatively considered. What reputation
did they have in New York? asked Farrer. ‘We know the London
partner, Kindersley, whom they took in about two years ago, and like
him particularly. Are his New York colleagues of the usual repulsive
Jewish type, or are they men with whom it would be possible for you
or us to work?’32 James Stillman and the City Bank were canvassed
more seriously, and George Baker and the First National Bank were
also in contention. In the end, however, and somewhat against their
better judgement, Barings set up Hugo Baring with a capital of $1
million in a new firm to be called Baring and Co. He began work to a
chorus of anxious voices advising him not to allow his capital to be
locked up in speculations. ‘Enterprises such as Coal properties or
Mexican land thrill us with horror, wrote Farrer. It was quite
unnecessary for Bishopsgate to thrill with horror, replied Hugo
Baring rather crossly, he had no intention of risking all his capital in
any enterprise.33 He had, of course. The doings of Hugo Baring in
New York and the reactions of his colleagues in London demon-
strate vividly the limitations on the role that Barings played in the
world after 1890. It was Gaspard Farrer who saw most clearly
what could and could not be achieved. ‘We are not capitalists,’ he
emphasized, ‘cannot undertake the business of a capitalist, and are
only prepared to act as intermediaries between the borrower and the
public... . We cannot compete with the big capitalists and it ts silly
and dangerous to pretend we can. Still less will you be able to in New
York... 3+ THere was nothing in this with which Revelstoke would
300                       The Sixth Great Power