

due respect and consideration, but if not we are quite content to take
off our hats and say goodbye and leave him strictly to himself.’7?
  Windham Baring, author of this somewhat disingenuous compo-
sition, had gone out to Buenos Aires at the end of 1905. He worked
in the office of Ernesto Tornquist; a difficult role, since though he
found Tornquist not merely well disposed but also ‘one of the most
powerful and capable men in the country, having the advantage of
knowing everybody, being a deputy, being rich,’ there was no disput-
ing the fact that his first loyalties were to certain German houses.
Farrer had advised Baring to keep his eyes and ears open and his
mouth shut, and this he did to good effect, but he felt inhibited from
seeking business outside since it would seem to be going behind
Tornquist’s back.73 Baring was an activist who itched to better the
position ofhis house as rapidly as possible. He suggested advertising
in the local press: ‘I know it is a practice thatim England would not be
regarded favourably, especially by my Uncle Tom, but however here
I don’t see why it could do any harm and it would show that we are
alive and always ready to take on good business.’”* Farrer found the
concept quite as distasteful as would Uncle Tom and was sceptical
about the benefits; ‘I am in hopes, he concluded gently, ‘that
through your presence in Buenos Aires the idea will get abroad that
we are alive and able to undertake any sound business.’75 The nearest
thing to advertising Barings could contemplate was a dinner for
General Roca when he visited London. There was a three-line whip
to all senior members of the family, Revelstoke made an excellent
speech, and the only setbacks occurred when the toastmaster
insisted on calling the guest of honour General Roco, and when the
band, called on to play the Argentine national anthem, produced
some tune recognized by neither the British nor the Argentine din-
ers. When Revelstoke expostulated the bandmaster made his men
pack up their instruments and stalked out of the hall in dudgeon.76
Banquets for Argentine dignitaries were rather a speciality of
Barings. Ata dinner for the Argentine Ambassador in 1910 they infu-
riated the partners of J. S. Morgan by excluding them from the
planning of the occasion and only inviting them to attend in a very
off-hand way.?77
   After Ernesto Tornquist died in 1908 Barings played with the idea
of acquiring a stake in the company but were not prepared to tie up
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                       309

the necessary capital when there was so much to be done with it at
home.’8 Gradually the interests of the two houses diverged and in
1912 Barings transferred their business to Leng, Roberts, a small
house of limited capital, but staffed by ‘men of high character’, who
were English and could be relied on to put Barings’ interests first.7?
Everard Meynell, a young man who had been working at Bishops-
gate, was sent to join Lengs at a salary paid by Barings of £800 a year.
On 1 January 1913 he became a partner of Lengs. Barings offered to
put £20,000 into the house on his behalf, but he declined gratefully.
The association lasted until the present day, the business being now
known as the Banco Roberts.
    The break with Tornquists followed abortive negotiations in 1911
for one of the few major loans in which Barings took no interest.
They felt that a new loan for £14 million was both more than the
market would stand and - at 412 per cent - insufficiently tempting to
attract whatever money there was. ‘We know exactly what margin is
required to ensure a successful issue, declared Mildmay with
uncharacteristic arrogance, ‘and, were we to depart from the lines
which experience has taught us are the limit of safe business, we
should not only damage ourselves but deprive ourselves of influenc-
ing people to invest in future Argentine Government loans.’*°
 Instead, the loan was taken by a consortium of French andBelgian
bankers, with Schroders, who had previously protested that they
were most unwilling to compete with Barings, somewhat shame-
facedly taking a share on the grounds that they could not offend
their close associate Bembergs. ‘If they were a little bigger people,’
wrote Revelstoke loftily, ‘they might have told Bemberg to go to
 blazes and come round here to say they had done so, but the semitic
 blood which runs so freely through their veins does not seem to per-
 mit them to take the course which would have been obvious to a
good Englishman.’*! This comment would have been particularly
 offensive to Schroders, who with reason felt themselves quite as gen-
 tile and almost as English as Barings.
   Barings regretted the break in their relationship with the
Argentine government and felt it ‘a great bore losing the commission
on the service of the loan, which would have rolled in regularly for
the next thirty years,’ but they did not doubt that they had made the
right decision.*? Their view was reinforced by the relative failure of
310                      The Sixth Great Power