

Secretary that, if the two governments were to make a formal
request, he would do all he could to mediate. But Chile was not the
only country to pose athreat to Argentina. In 1906 Brazil entered the
field with an expenditure of £10 million on two new battleships.
Once again Argentina felt bound to match them and once again
Revelstoke was called upon to check the lunatic arms race, perhaps
by persuading Rothschilds and the British government to cut off
credit to Brazil.62 He failed, and in 1908 a partner ofthe shipbuilders,
John Brown, called to ask whether Barings would assist if the
Argentine government ordered new warships. ‘We told him frankly
that we should do all in our power to advise the Government against
embarking upon warships, but that, if we found building was inevi-
table, we should . . . be willing to render the Company some finan-
cial assistance.$? The result was that by 1914 Argentina was saddled
with three battleships. Barings hoped they might be allowed to sell
them on commission elsewhere, but they did not rate the chances
very high. ‘Argentina will be difficult to deal with in a matter of this
kind,’ wrote Farrer, ‘and even a very large cash insult [would be]
probably insufficient to prevail against her sense of dignity. I only
wish we could find some way of relieving the country of these useless
luxuries... . Argentina has no need for a navy, no men to man it, no
docks in which to repair it, and no harbour in which it can lie.’
   The first important loan to Argentina in the twentieth century
came in 1902 with an advance of £1.5 million. The opposition press
had a field day over what they called the ‘scandalous and ruinous’
conditions attached to the loan, but though the 6 per cent interest
was unusually high, everything else seemed normal.*s Certainly it
did no harm to Barings’ relations with the Argentine authorities:
between 1902 and 1914 they were directly responsible for thirteen
issues for the country or for Buenos Aires, worth in total a little
under £27 million. Any doubts that Barings might have had about
this market were now dispelled. ‘Have you got anything that you
specially recommend?’ asked A. J. Balfour. ‘Are Argentine Rails
desirable?’6 They were, and another favoured client, Admiral of the
Fleet the Earl of Clanwilliam, was urged not to put his money into
Uruguay: “The Governments there are anything but trustworthy and
the country a very poor place compared with neighbouring Argen-
tina.’67
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                        307
   Nearly all the issues were successful, some remarkably so. One of
the few exceptions came in 1907, when Barings were pressed to issue
£2.58 million of a larger international loan. It was a difficult year and
they put the loan on the market with trepidation. This was more
than justified; the public were unenthusiastic and the underwriters
left with three-quarters of the stock on their hands.®® It was on this
issue thatJ.S. Morgan and Co. first appeared with Barings as joint
leaders on the prospectus. Revelstoke had initially opposed the pro-
posal but Jack Morgan was obdurate: “The whole matter most trying
and very sorry it has come up now, he telegraphed to his colleague,
E. C. Grenfell, ‘but see no reason why we should submit to being
squeezed out without saying anything or why all friction should be
on our side.’¢?
   Barings and Morgans had battled for supremacy in Argentina
since the last years of the nineteenth century, but the struggle now
reached its climax.7° Barings were handicapped by the fact that
Argentina wanted direct access to the New York market, and that the
combination of J. P. and J. S. Morgan could guarantee this in a way
impossible for the English house. When in September 1908 the
Argentine government opened negotiations with J. P. Morgan and
Co. for a new £10 million loan, Morgans insisted that J. S. Morgan
should handle the London end ofthe loan on joint account and deal
with Barings on that basis. The Argentines retorted that they pro-
posed to ask Barings for a separate bid and for a ume it seemed as if
rival syndicates would contest the contract - to the benefit, no
doubt, of the would-be borrowers but at the expense of both Mor-
gans and Barings. ‘I don’t care how we fight him [Lord Revelstoke],’
wrote Jack Morgan defiantly, ‘but am quite ready to fight him when
we need to.7! Sanity prevailed, and the two houses did a deal which
concededJ.S. Morgan’s parity on this and future loans. Barings were
relieved but disgruntled. Ina   letter to G. A. Schwenke of Tornquists,
Windham Baring made the best of a bad job. Barings, he insisted,
wished ‘to do what is absolutely fair, being well convinced that the
only way to retain the confidence of successive Argentine Govern-
ments is to do their business to better advantage than any other firm.
At the same time I wish. . . for you quite clearly to understand the
feeling here, which is that we are not running after the business, and
we are only too desirous of helping the Minister if he treats us with
308                      The Sixth Great Power