

fair to say that it is only in very rare cases that we ourselves issue
industrial Stocks’.97 They saw themselves as they had always been,
an international merchant banking house. International trade was
their bread and butter; international loans their jam; the financing of
British industry was fare for the servants’ hall or, worse still, fit only
for the dogs.
                                  16
                                pe
                                 @ te




                     High Finance
                        1890-1914


By the end of the nineteenth century Barings was once more a force
to be taken seriously in the world of national or international financ-
ing. The test came in 1900 when the British government, in need of
money to finance the war in South Africa and aware of the Bank of
England’s dangerously depleted gold reserves, turned to the United
States for a loan. If the crisis had come five years before, Barings
might well have been by-passed and negotiations have taken place by
way of J. S. Morgan in London and J. P. Morgan in New York, prob-
ably with the participation of Rothschilds and Ernest Cassel. As it
was, Revelstoke was from the start consulted by the Chancellor and
the Governor of the Bank of England; and when J. P. Morgan in July
1900 showed himself less eager than the Chancellor thought proper
to raise the £5 million or so which the government wanted from the
United States, it was Barings who were invoked to share the burden.
Morgans were most put out - the Chancellor, Hicks-Beach, was
‘notoriously stupid and most unbusinesslike,’ wrote Morgan’s part-
ner in London, Sir Clinton Dawkins - but they had either to swallow
the condition or lose the business, and chose the former.'
   It was some years before this that they had begun to venture back
into international financing. From 1895 onwards, somewhat timidly
at first, they had begun to handle the London end of minor Ameri-
can issues: $500,000 for the Minneapolis Western Railway, $4.5
million for the Park Steel Company of Pittsburgh. It was the start of
greater things; between 1890 and 1914 the house handled twenty
United States issues and had a finger in the pie of many more.
   It was a battle to become re-established. No British banker com-
manded the deference in New York that he would have enjoyed
                                  291
292                      The Sixth Great Power

twenty years before. Farrer remarked in 1904 that he had seen for a
long time ‘that it cannot be very long before New York becomes the
financial centre of the world; but I fear for our sakes it is coming too
quickly’? Barings were doubly devalued. Even after they had reha-
bilitated themselves in London, they were considered small fry
across the Atlantic. In 1901 Dawkins observed that: ‘In London, the
resuscitated Barings are the only people nearly in the same rank with
us. In the US they are nowhere now, a mere cipher, and the US 1s
going to dominate in most ways. The Barings have nobody but
Revelstoke [Farrer was recruited a few months later], a man com-
monly reported to be strong, but a strange mixture of occasional
strength and sheer timidity. He has no nerve to fall back on.. . . He
has greatly irritated the Morgans once or twice by want of tact and by
talking loosely (after they helped Barings largely in 1891) and it cost
me a good deal of difficulty this summer to patch up the old alliance
between the two houses.”
   Even in 1901 Barings were deemed more considerable in New
York than this account suggests, but Farrer at least had no illusions
about the power they wielded. When Revelstoke returned from the
United States in April 1902 enthusing about the warm reception he
had encountered, Farrer commented that he wished there ‘had been
a little more business and a little less civility, but I have no doubt the
trip will have done some good’.* It did do some good, and every suc-
ceeding trip did more, as the position was laboriously retrieved.
Barings would not have been Barings if they had not occasionally
made the work unnecessarily hard. Only a few months after
Revelstoke had returned in such satisfactionan important American
client called Charles Alexander visited London. After a few weeks he
wrote in indignation to Tom Baring in New York: ‘I doubt very
much whether Baring Brothers and Company will care to be both-
ered with my presence at their banking house. I don’t believe they
very much appreciate me there... . While the Union Bank people all
called upon my arrival in London. . . and while also Mr Morgan did
all that was polite, I have yet to receive a card from anyone con-
nected with your correspondent. . . . My time is very valuable and I
don’t intend to waste it in trotting down to Bishopsgate unless I have
some evidence that they want to have me.’s
   The issues that put Barings back into the first division in the
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                        293