

United States were those of American Telephone and Telegraph Co.
(ATTC) and its subsidiary, the New York Telephone Co. (NYTC).
The story began gloomily in 1904, when Kidder Peabody and
Barings were unable to secure a slice of the business: “La maison
Speyer devient de plus en plus difficile a combattre, noted the Banque de
Paris et des Pays Bas.® Early the following year, however, Morgans
and Kidder Peabody were back in the battle, this me successfully,
and it was Speyers, Kuhn, Loeb and Rothschilds who were excluded.
Barings were invited to take over the European end of the issue,
making themselves responsible for $25 million on joint account with
Kidder Peabody. Initially Barings were hesitant, especially since
Morgans’ London house would have somehow to be accommo-
dated. ‘An American bond of this nature would be such a novelty
here and on the Continent that the placing would be a matter of
work and education. ... We do not want to educate the old man
[J. P. Morgan] to imagine that we are willing to make public issues in
conjunction with his present London house, especially as we know
that 90 per cent of the work would have to be done in our office.”
Courage prevailed, Hopes took $1 million, and the issue was made
in early March. The response was cautious - ‘We suspect that the
voice of your Stock Exchange was influenced by some of your
Hebrew friends,’ wrote Kidder Peabody, ‘as they made a strong sub
rosa effort, on this side, to discredit the issue’’ - but soon caught on,
and by the end of the month the issue was oversubscribed, with
applications ‘almost entirely made up of genuine investors.
   The following year, when another ATTC loan was offered, Barings
were again hesitant. It was only fifteen years since they had met dis-
aster and they were understandably reluctant to involve themselves
in any potentially precarious commitment. Initially they declined to
take the lead in Europe on the grounds that money was scarce and
investors likely to be backward. The idea of a combination with
Speyers and the French Rothschilds was mooted. Yet at the same
time they were doubtful about their doubts. Perhaps they were ‘actu-
ated by excessive caution’, mused Farrer.!° In the end the robust
encouragement of Morgans, and their own fear of losing the position
which they had just begun to recapture, prevailed over their midity.
 Barings and Morgans’ London house took on the $15 million
offered in London.
294                   The Sixth Great Power

   The following year a further $40 million was thrown on to the
market. This time it seemed that Barings’ scepticism was justified.
Everyone agreed that the stock was an excellent long-term invest
ment, that no political hurricane could seriously shake the stability
of the American investor, yet ‘the response made by the public was
practically nothing’.!! Barings had never wanted to make this further
issue, explained Mildmay, and had only done so out of loyalty to
their friends in the syndicate. Yet though they suffered fleeting
embarrassment they were never in real danger. They were not
exposed as they had been in Argentina. The ATTC stock continued
to sell quietly, and Barings’ resolution in sticking by their syndicate
was amply rewarded in 1909 when the ATTC subsidiary, the New
York Telephone Company, went to the markets for a total of £5 mil-
lion, of which £2 million was raised by Barings in London. ‘There is
only one City of New York,’ wrote Gaspard Farrer triumphantly;
‘only one Telephone Company operating in it, and these bonds are
secured on the only First Mortgage which it can issue. In our opinion
it is as good as a telephone security can be.’!? This time the public
agreed and there was a hectic struggle for shares. Barings as always
protected the interests of their favoured clients: Gordon Cunard,
Evan Charteris, the Lords Lansdowne, Allendale, Cromer and
Mount Stephen, Robert and Hugo Baring, Revelstoke’s favourite,
Lady Desborough, were all on the ‘red list’, as it was called, among
the fortunate recipients of allocations of the stock. It was ‘one of the
best pieces of business we have put through of recent years,’
announced Farrer,!3 and psychologically it provided a spectacular
boost, announcing to any remaining doubters that Barings were still
the house to turn to for a successful American issue.
   Not that such reaffirmation was really needed by 1909. The pre-
vious year Jacob Schiff of Kuhn, Loeb had offered them a large issue
for the Pennsylvania Railroad. Revelstoke called'in Rothschilds and
Cassel, to such effect that he felt able to dispense with underwriting
and thus swell an already comfortable profit. The loan ‘has exceeded
our wildest expectations,’ Revelstoke told Windham Baring. The
‘ordinary applicant’ was getting little more than 3 per cent of what
he asked for.!* The ‘ordinary applicants’ did not include Lord
Lansdowne, Lord Allendale and the rest.
  The fact that Kuhn, Loeb put this business in the way of Barings
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                       295
shows both how the latter's standing had been restored and how far
the traditional alliances between British and American houses had
fluctuated with the years. For the first decade after the crash, such
American business as Barings did was conducted through its old ally,
Kidder Peabody, in Boston and the partnership of Tom and Cecil
Baring and George Magoun in New York. Baring, Magoun was never
a total success. Their relationship with their cousin house in Boston
veered between the suspicious and the hostile and they were rarely
treated as a major contender by their other rivals in New York. Out-
side the - highly important - work of commercial credits, their inde-
pendent activities were almost entirely confined to operations with
the railroads. Their main value to Barings was as a sort of superior
posting house and intelligence agency, reporting on new issues and
from time to time negotiating on behalf of the parent house.
   When Hugo replaced Cecil in 1902, things got worse. Hugo
Baring was a man of outstanding decency who seta high value on his
own intelligence and acumen, a judgement that was not entirely
shared by the partners in London. Conrad Russell, a young
employee, found him kind and generous but ‘unattractive and with-
out charm’, and marvelled at the lack of discipline within the office -
‘very different from the atmosphere of Schroders’.'* Baring often
took a view of business matters radically different from that held in
Bishopsgate. In 1903 he was enthusiastic about the prospects of the
Wabash Railroad and wanted to make them a $4 million advance for
the purchase of equipment. Barings responded coolly: ‘Regret Com-
 pany’s past record here makes business unadvisable for us.’ ‘Regret
Wabash decision, cabled Hugo Baring. ‘Would you object our nego-
tiating with Robert Fleming, who seemed interested in such things
while here?’ If this was a bluff to bring his brother into line it failed
signally: ‘None whatever, came the reply. ‘Wish you every success.’
That Hugo’s self-confidence masked doubts about his real stature is
indicated by his readiness to take offence. Revelstoke often had to
 soothe the injured dignity of his younger brother. ‘You must | think
 be affected - even you - by the New York climate, if you are inclined
to suggest that we intended any slight to your firm. You know how
 long-standing a jealousy there has been between the firms in New
York and Boston; and we also look to your beneficent and indepen-
dent influence minimizing this as much as possible, so you must
 296                    The Sixth Great Power