

the issue.8? Barings in fact contributed to this happy result. They
brought considerable pressure on their friends among the French
banks not to help place the loan and made sure that none of the tra-
ditional British investors in Argentine stock came forward on this
occasion. Something of the sort had to be done, wrote Windham
Baring, so as to prove to the Argentine authorities ‘the necessity of
dealing with first class banking houses’. Otherwise, he concluded,
‘our power for any future business will vanish’.4 It did not vanish:
1912 and 1913 found them involved with substantial loans for
Buenos Aires and in March 1914 Farrer was able to announce trium-
phantly, ‘we have apparently collared the Government business fora
year to come to the exclusion of our neighbours’.*5


Barings’ inhibitions about trespassing on their neighbours’ territory
in Latin America were felt still more strongly in Europe. In 1897 they
refused to bring outa Spanish loan, since they did not think it would
go well in London: ‘We should besides be disinclined to incur the
hostility of the Jewish Houses, who look on the Spaniard as their
exclusive property.’8¢ In Portugal they were so anxious not to steal
business from the Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas that they gave
Speyer and Hambros the chance to slip in and secure a share of the
action.’7 They were equally reluctant to break new ground. They
rejected a pressing invitation from the Foreign Office to issue a loan
for the Turkish government in 1908,88 brought outa £1 million loan
for the City of Constantinople in 1910, but were cool again six years
later: "We are none of us very keen on. Turkish things,’ said
Revelstoke when the Banque de Paris offered him a share of a new
loan, though in view of his relationship with the French bank he felt
bound to take a token Frs 2.5 million.8° He resisted even stronger
efforts to induce him to raise a loan of £2 million to £3 million for the
Romanian railways and in the end sold the idea to Schroders, who
took it on with alacrity.%° Barings did good business in Europe from
time to time, notably in Belgium, for which two loans of £6 million
each were heavily oversubscribed, but even here they insisted that ‘it
would be politic and expedient to invite the London Rothschilds to
figure in the London issue’.?! With the exception of Russia; they did
not feel that Europe fell properly within their sphere of influence.
                     High Finance: 1890-1914                        311
   Russia was an important exception. Though the French banks
provided the bulk of Russia’s capital needs, Barings’ heavy
involvement in Russian railways and long enduring relationship
with its government ensured that they would always feel some sort
of obligation to help it if help were needed. A complicating factor
was Barings’ newer but still most friendly relationship with Japan.
Barings had discovered Japan in 1898 when they were considering a
loan of £1 million to Nippon Tetsudo Kaisha Ltd of Yokohama. ‘It
has been gratifying to us to have the opportunity of learning the
details of such a well-managed business, they wrote admiringly.
‘The accounts seem to us to be kept in a manner which merits warm
praise.’°? They never lost this belief in Japanese efficiency and in
 1902 joined with the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank to bring out a
750 million yen (£5.1 million) loan in London to finance the build-
ing of railways. It proved a great success, applications pouring in
from members of the public who were remote from the City but for
some reason warmed to the idea of Japan. The issue was four times
oversubscribed.%
   It was a propitious start to what Barings hoped would be a long
and close relationship. The imperialist ambitions of Russia and
Japan were, however, on collision course in Manchuria and Korea.
At first this did not seem to Barings an impediment to their business,
indeed they conceived a splendid scheme by which they would serve
the interests of two of their clients and get a handsome commission
for their trouble by organizing the sale of the Argentine battleships
to Japan. Unfortunately, by the time the proposal was made, war
with Russia was so nearly imminent that any such purchase would
have come too late.?* Convinced that they would win an easy victory
and thus rally a dissident nation behind them, the Russian govern-
ment refused to contemplate any compromise. The Japanese struck
without the preliminary formality of a declaration of war and Pearl
Harbored the Russian fleet in Port Arthur. What seemed likely to be
a prolonged war had begun.
   Early in 1904 the Japanese came back for a further loan. Barings
                                                                    and,
were in, not two, but at least three minds. Business was business
as they told the Banque de Paris, this was likely to be ‘business of an
attractive nature’.95 On the other hand, they had served the Russian
government for many years and were reluctant now to succour its
oe                       The Sixth Great Power