

realize how much we have in heart your credit and prosperity.'17
Constantly he urged Hugo to work more closely with Kidder Pea-
body. ‘Looking to the much greater wealth of our competitors,’       he
wrote early in 1904, ‘the only chance for yourselves, Kidder Peabody
and ourselves is to work loyally together whenever we can.’!8
   Wealthiest and most powerful of those competitors were Mor-
gans. The received wisdom in London was that New York bankers
were devious and unscrupulous. Hugo Baring loved to tell the story
of the young man who asked whether he would be able to make an
honest living in New York. He was told the chances were excellent,
there would be no competition at all. To this Morgans were - some-
what grudgingly - admitted to be an exception. They were the lead-
ing Protestant house and prided themselves on it. Talking to
Revelstoke in 1904,J. P.Morgan urged him to playa more active part
in New York. ‘He inveighed bitterly against the growing power of the
Jews and of the Rockefeller crowd, and said more than once that our
firm and his were the only two composed of white men in New
York.’!9 Revelstoke for his part admired J. P. Morgan and wrote of
him that he was ‘a great, big, large-hearted generous man... witha
character which is remarkable for straight dealing’.2° But the real
sympathy between the two houses did not alter the fact that they
were frequently in conflict. “We have no wish to act in any way inimi-
cal to him,’ Revelstoke told Cecil Baring, “but it is obvious that our
interests are such as to render our position one of constant and active
competition.’2! In the past it had usually been Barings who pre-
vailed, now it was more often Morgans, and the older house did not
find it easy to stomach this change in their position. To their mind
they were constantly going out of their way to conciliate Morgans
and not to trespass on their preserves, and met with scant courtesy
and a minimum of consideration in return. To Morgans it seemed
that Barings were jealously clinging on to a role that they were no
longer qualified to play and seeking to exclude others from delights
they could no longer experience themselves.
  The fiercest clashes between the two houses came in Argentina,*
but tension mounted from the beginning of the twentieth century,
when J. P. Morgan began to build up his house in London and to

* See pp. 307-10.
                           High Finance: 1890-1914                                  297

bribe up-and-coming City men with promises of partnerships and
lavish salaries. It was his intention, said Cecil Baring, ‘without regard
to expenditure of money, to make the position of said firm un-
rivalled for the next generation’.2? Revelstoke protested that his
house were excellent friends with the London Morgans, ‘but we real
ize their attitude is one of active competition with us, and while we
do not suppose that they would act in any manner calculated to take
from us any business which is already ours, we feel strongly that a
real community of interests with them is impossible’.
   Morgans were not the only pebble, or perhaps boulder, on the
beach. Revelstoke’s remarks were made in response to a query from
James Stillman, President of the National City Bank of New York, as
to whether Barings would cooperate with him on the British govern-
ment’s issue business, or whether their existing commitments would
prevent such an arrangement. Revelstoke hardly knew what to reply.
His instinct was to cooperate whenever possible with the City Bank
and to risk the breach with Morgans that might follow, but his
brother Cecil was strongly opposed to any such behaviour: ‘In any
Government loan matter we take it absolutely for granted that we
are committed to them [Morgans]. . . . Of course on any really big
loan, the City Bank ought to be included on the ground floor, and
whenever the time comes J.P.M. will be the man to offer Sullman the
business.’ The relationship with Morgans was all important, ‘in culti-
vating harmony with them lies our best chance of success’.’*
   Cecil Baring’s hurried departure from New York with his former
partner’s wife precipitated the need for some long-term decision.
Tom Baring declared that, with only juniors running the office at
Baring, Magoun, he had no intention of leaving his money there for
more than a few months. Almost at the same tme J. P. Morgan pro-
posed a grandiose merger, with Barings closing Baring, Magoun in
New York and acting as sole correspondent for the new combination
in London.* This would involve sacrificing the London subsidiary,
J. S. Morgan and Co., but that did not appear to worryJ.P. Morgan,
who said cheerfully that J. S. Morgan ‘ought to be liquidated and
                                                                          initiative came
* In his history of Morgans, Vincent Carosso suggests the original
                                    the concept   emerge d in convers ation  between the
from Lord Revelstoke. No doubt
             ls, each being convinc ed  that the other was the more  eager  (The Morgans
two principa     A