

have dissented, indeed he said much the same thing on several occa-
sions, yet a part of him craved for madder music and stronger wine.
Farrer was aware and concerned about the difference between them.
Writing abouta possible new partner for Barings, he remarked: ‘I am
not like John - I neither want to have the earth nor to rule - and
should be far better content to have a bit ofadrudge of high charac-
ter than the most brilliant financier liable to take chances in morality
or business risks.’35 Hugo Baring was no drudge, and saw himselfas a
brilliant financier. John Revelstoke had enough of his father in him
to sympathize with his younger brother’s aspirations. If he had fully
supported Farrer’s efforts to curb Hugo Baring’s exuberance, Baring
and Co. might have had a very different history. In 1904 Gaspard
Farrer had written Hugo Baring a letter of most prescient advice
which he would have done well to heed; if it had come from Lord
Revelstoke he might well have heeded it, but it was not a letter
Revelstoke could have written:
      I hope you will bear in mind, and bear in mind continuously,
      that our credit is the only asset which the firm of Baring
      Brothers and Company possesses, that and character which
      is part and parcel of credit. We cannot hope to vie with these
      nimble Jews in point of brains and sharpness, and are not in
      it for weight of metal in comparison with the rich men of this
      country and the multi-millionaires of the United States. I
      have always told John that for his lifetime and mine we must
      be content to work slowly and build up the business to its
      former pre-eminence; and if I am content to do that, I am
      sure anyone of your name should be willing to follow the
      example. I think only one who has been brought up outside
      the business like myself can realize how fatal a single mistake
      would be. Through the efforts of those who have been work-
      ing here since 1890, mainly through those of John and
      Francis, a great advance has been made and everywhere
      people are disposed to be friendly, but I know that the least
      lapse into speculative finance, even if successful, would
      immediately raise a storm of criticism.36
  Speculative finance was just what Hugo Baring now indulged in.
Within a few months of the new business opening, Farrer was writ-
                     High Finance: 1890-1914                       301
ing anxiously to friends in New York of his fears that his young
colleague was lending too rashly: ‘If you can do anything to keep
Hugo straight in this matter I shall be eternally obliged, but for
Heaven's sake do not give me away.3” By early the following year
alarm became vociferous dismay. Baring was speculating on his own
and on the firm’s account in Great Northern Ores, to the extent of
£100,000 or more    and was showing a heavy paper loss.38 Then
Baring’s partner, George Hallock, casually reported the firm had
taken an interest of $250,000 in the Union Pacific Syndicate.3? In
June 1907, when Hugo Baring was in London, the full truth was
revealed. Not merely were there heavy losses on stock purchases for
Baring and Co. but large advances had been taken from the firm to
finance private speculation. A halt was called. E. W. Theobald was
sent out from the Liverpool office to take charge of the firm: Hugo
Baring was allowed to return to New York but only for a few months
and with no effective power - ‘our object being, of course, to keep
secret the unfortunate occurrences . . . and to avoid the publicity
which might injure our name and credit’.*°
   Hugo Baring had extremely bad luck. He was put into a job for
which he lacked the necessary experience, was given inadequate sup-
port from Bishopsgate, and was then unfortunate in his ming. Like
his father before him he had chosen to gamble at a moment when
extreme prudence was called for; 1907 was a year of sharp economic
crisis in the United States. His colleagues in New York pleaded for
him touchingly: ‘Let us beg of you that any change that you may
effect will be accomplished in a way that will . . . make sure that his
power and loyalty and affection for and his desire to exalt the name
of Baring, shall not be destroyed.’*! No one doubted that his conduct
had been honourable and his intentions excellent. But he was in
some disgrace. The Governorship of New South Wales not being
immediately available, he was found a directorship of Parr’s Bank
and subsequently served a long and successful stint as Resident
Director in Paris of the Westminster Foreign Bank. His relationship
with his brothers remained affectionate and he was high on the list of
Barings’ favoured clients. But he never served again in Bishopsgate,
nor was it contemplated for a moment that he might.
   Once again the question of Barings’ representation in New York
was for discussion. The idea of handing over all their business to the
302                      The Sixth Great Power