

half of 1914 was not surprisingly poor, bringing total UK accept-
ances for the year down to £5.5 million. By the end of 1915, though
Mildmay complained that ‘business is very quiet and will probably
become quieter’* and only twenty-five new credits were opened
against seventy-eight closed, acceptances were at £6.3 million. They
did not maintain this improvement, but in the last few years settled
down at an average ofa little over £4.5 million; by no means a negli-
gible figure, though well below that to which Barings had grown
accustomed.
   The issuing business, on the other hand, was almost entirely at an
end. One loan for the Argentine government in 1915 was unavoid-
able, otherwise the government vetoed any transaction that might
draw money from the country. As a result, a lot of good and tradi-
tional business was lost. In January 1915 Barings got so far as to offer
Kidder Peabody participation in an issue for Toronto Terminals,
only to be told at the last minute that the business was contrary to
public policy. ‘I do not think we have ever told you how Treasury-
ridden we are these days,’ grumbled Farrer. ‘No fresh loan can be
made, and not even a renewal of an old loan carried out, without per-
mission for the issue of fresh loans. .. . No doubt in principle the
Government are right, that we must not place ourselves under fresh
obligations while there are so many calls upon our gold.’!5 Only the
chivalry of Kidder Peabody saved Barings from being totally
excluded. In 1916 they offered Barings participation in a new issue
for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company. Barings were
compelled to decline the invitation, whereupon Kidder Peabody
insisted that the operation had nevertheless been conducted on joint
account and credited Barings with a profit of $32,599.60.16 ‘What a
triumph your Telephone issue was, and how utterly quixotic the
behaviour of your firm to us, wrote Farrer. ‘I do not know what to
say to you about it, but you know we feel a good deal.’!7
   The 1915 Argentine loan was nota success; the passenger liner the
Lusitania has been sunk a fortnight before and, according to
Windham Baring, ‘investors in the City were in far too infuriated a
mood with this terrible crime of the Germans to think of paying any
attention to an Argentine issue’.!® Though the stock was gradually
placed, 88 per cent was initially left with the underwriters. It was the
more disappointing because Barings knew that it was likely to be the
                     Barings at War: 1914-1918                    325

last loan in which they would be able to participate for several years
at least. Instead they had to sit back in chagrin and watch the Ameri-
cans, notably the National City Bank, take over the business. To be
forced to quit the field of Argentine finance, which they had for so
long dominated, was particularly hard for them to endure. ‘For a
century past Argentina has honoured us with its confidence,’ wrote
Farrer in elegiac mood, ‘and as a result of intimate association
through several generations it has become a proud tradition of our
house to sympathize with the country’s aspirations, to respect its
susceptibilities and to do our best to uphold its credit; and nothing
will give us greater pleasure than to see the country regain complete
financial independence. But there is only one way to attain this end:
Argentina must make up her mind to go slow for some years to
come.'!?
   But Argentina did not wish to go slow, and the American banks
proved distressingly ready to gratify its ambitions. The National City
Bank caused great offence to Barings’ agent, H. H. Leng, by sending
to Buenos Aires as their representative a certain John H. Allen who
was ‘not a gentleman, simply a common North American bounder-
bully, entirely unscrupulous’. Allen said that the day of Barings was
over, the United States would in future provide all the capital Argen-
tina needed. Barings took the news philosophically. Allen was quite
as much disliked by the Argentines as by the British; “We must there-
fore pray for long life to Mr Allen and for similar successors on his
departure.’2° For better or worse, the immediate future was with the
Americans; the best the British could hope was that they could keep
the door open for an eventual return. For this reason Barings were
relieved when Leng Roberts agreed to work with the National City
Bank, Morgans and Kuhn, Loeb in organizing Argentine credit:
‘When the London market is once more open to fresh operations on
foreign account, it will be of great advantage that you should not
meanwhile have been deprived. . . of the close touch with Argentine
Government finance and financiers which can only be maintained
by active business.’?!
   ‘We have been doing quite a big business in some ways, wrote
Farrer early in 1915, ‘genuine commercial business on a large scale
and certain banking business connected with allied countries, which
has been profitable; otherwise we are idle, did not expect much
326                     The Sixth Great Power