

against it, so that no one can be fairly criticized for the trials all are
undergoing.”
   Within Barings the most obvious result of the war was an imme-
diate exodus of staff to join the services. First of the partners to go
was Patrick Shaw-Stewart, who started as an interpreter, served in
Gallipoli and was finally killed in France at the end of 1917.
Windham Baring stayed on with the firm until the outstanding
problems with Argentina had been cleared up, during which time he
spent every other night on top of some high building manning a
searchlight; then in mid-1915 he joined the Navy and saw out the
war in the Mediterranean and North Sea. Errington rejoined the
Grenadier Guards and went out to India; at the end of 1916 he was
lost to Barings for ever when he became Assistant Private Secretary
to the King. By 7 October thirty-one of the staff at Bishopsgate had
enlisted; none had yet been killed, though Gaspard Farrer had five
cousins at the front at the beginning of September and only one left
alive a month later. By mid-1915 more than half the male staff had
gone and there were more women than men in the office: ‘We are
now reduced to a very elderly party, wrote Farrer ruefully, ‘old
crocks who ought by this time to have been on the shelf.’8
   So far as the greatly diminished day-to-day banking operations
were concerned, a skeleton staff of old crocks could manage very
well. But Barings were London bankers for the Russian, Italian and
Portuguese governments, and the first of these in particular caused a
vast amount of work. The result was that the office as a whole got
busier as the war progressed: 5850 letters had been written in Jan-
uary 1914, in 1916 the figure was 7450. Sixty-seven women were
employed against forty-three in 1914; sixty men against seventy-five
- of whom eighteen were of military age and eight under eighteen.
The introduction of conscription early in 1916 alarmed Revelstoke,
lest he should lose some of the key men handling the Russian
accounts. After a certain amount of prompting, the Russian Ambas-
sador wrote to Revelstoke, hoping that ‘the correspondence of a par-
ticularly confidential nature should continue to be dealt with by
those of your staff by whom it has been conducted since the out-
break of hostilities’? Revelstoke made good use of this letter before
the City of London Tribunal, and successfully protected the most
cherished members of the staff. The threat was not renewed until
                     Barings at War: 1914-1918                        323
almost the end of the war when a new Manpower Bill was intro-
duced. ‘It looks as if every clerk of capacity here will be swept off into
the service, as well as Alfred Mildmay. . . , wrote Farrer gloomily. ‘I
expect before long John and I will have to take it in turns to sweep
the office out.’!®
   It was not only his staff that Revelstoke sought to protect. Late in
1917 the military proposed to requisition his house in Carlton
House Terrace. ‘I should have the very strongest objection,’ wrote
Revelstoke. ‘My business duties, which are of an important charac-
ter, Mecessitate my constant presence for at least eleven months in
any year... . | trust therefore that the War Department will not find
it necessary to inflict upon me what I really believe would be an
extreme hardship.’!! His domestic staff, after three years of war, con-
sisted of housekeeper, three housemaids, one kitchenmaid, one
scullerymaid, two parlourmaids, one valet and one odd man. But it
was not only his own interests which he sought to defend. An old
crony, the Marquise de Villa-Urrutia, was most disturbed because
her son at Oxford could not get as much meat as he was used to.
Would you please, Revelstoke instructed his doctor, ‘send the boy a
certificate to the effect that he is suffering from diabetes and there-
fore entitled to a more generous allowance of meat’.!?
   Conditions at Bishopsgate were not easy, especially when air raids
on the City extended from the night to daylight hours. There was a
large basement, and a system was introduced which would allow the
staff and the more essential records to be evacuated there in three or
four minutes from a warning being given - ‘I have not yet been told
where my own funk hole is,’ wrote Farrer, ‘but I intend to get there at
the double when the time arrives.’3 The only trouble was that the
warning was scarcely ever given: one bomb fell within fifteen and
one within thirty yards of the office without any previous indication
that a raid was in progress. Neither did damage except to the nerves
of the staff. The British guns provided a more serious threat; the
head of a shell came through the skylight and would have put paid to
anyone who had happened to be below.
   The work that was done at Bishopsgate differed largely from that
of peacetime. At first it looked as if acceptances would survive more
or less unscathed, as the immense demands of the Allied forces for
food and material replaced the traditional lines of trade. The second
324                      The Sixth Great Power