

enemies. On a third hand, their sympathies were privately with
Japan and they had been more closely associated with the Japanese
in recent years. Lord Lansdowne consulted the Prime Minister and
reported that the British government had no objection to the loan
being made.%° The Banque de Paris regretted that, ‘juicy and safe
enough’ though the business would be, their relationship with Rus-
sia forbade their proceeding.?” The Jewish houses, delighted that
anyone should be at war with Russia, which had pursued a rabidly
anti-Semitic line for so many years, were more than ready to take on
the loan. Revelstoke wavered, and finally concluded that Barings
could not take part in a public issue. “The fact is,’ he told Hugo
Baring, ‘that there is a feeling here amongst the highest people that it
would be well to preserve a more or less neutral attitude.’%8
   He then proceeded to give a masterly demonstration of how to
have one’s cake and eat it too. Formally Barings had no connection
with the loan, their name did not appear on the prospectus; so far as
the Russian government knew they disapproved of it. Yet they per-
suaded Schiff of Kuhn, Loeb to take up a £5 million loan and
charged '/2 per cent commission for the introduction (£25,000), and
they underwrote £300,000 of the loan (£6007). When an additional
£30 million was called for at the end of the year Barings again
declined to appear on the prospectus - ‘for various internal reasons,
among them that we have valuable Russian Government Accounts’
as Farrer cheerfully admitted’? - but undertook the negotiations
with   Kuhn,   Loeb, Warburgs     in Berlin   and      Rothschilds.   They
emerged with a profit of £110,000, having earned the gratitude of the
Japanese and left untroubled their relationship with the Russians.
‘John seems to have managed the whole matter with great skill,’
commented Farrer.!°° The compliment does not seem extravagant.
   By mid-1905 the Russian fleet had been destroyed and their defeat
was certain. It was now the turn of Russia to be inneed of money and
their thoughts turned naturally to their tried and trusted friends at
Bishopsgate. Barings were at first doubtful whether the British pub-
lic would look kindly on such an issue,!®! but Lord Hardinge, the
British Ambassador in St Petersburg, urged them to do their best,
                                                                  if
only in the interest of improving the difficult relations between the
two countries.!°2   In October   Revelstoke      was   in St Petersburg,
escorted by his brother Everard. He found a situation of almost
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                        313
laughable complexity: the German bankers not talking to the
French; the Russians at loggerheads with the latter; the Dutch -
Hopes - sulking because they had been asked to share their market
with another house; the Americans - Morgans - declining to attend a
meeting at the Ministry of Finance and, as Revelstoke complained,
‘talking, rather “through their hats” if I may say so, of an indepen-
dent attitude etc. etc.’!°3 It was above all due to Revelstoke’s efforts,
after what he described as ‘days of the hardest and most complicated
work I’ve ever experienced’,!° that the broad outlines of an agree-
ment were reached for a loan of £50 million at 4 per cent, of which
the British and American share would be £8 million. Public discon-
tent, fanned by the débacle in the Far East, then exploded. Rail travel
was suspended, there was widespread noting and talk of a general
strike. ‘If things get worse we shall have something uncommonly like
a revolution, reported Revelstoke, ‘in which case it will obviously
not be the moment to embark on a public issue.’!°5 Things did get
worse. The international financiers fled the city. John Revelstoke
found a tiny steamer called the Stave going to Stettin and paid the
captain £100 for the use of his cabin. Morgan did a little better. A
passenger liner bound for Stockholm arrived unexpectedly and he
took the entire accommodation.!% It was a sad end to laborious
negotiations but Farrer derived some comfort from the thought that
the interruption would only be temporary: ‘Their visit to Russia,’ he
told Hugo Baring, ‘will be productive of great good to the firm here,
and neither of them will have an excuse to regret the work and incon-
venience.    1°
   He proved right. The revolution was quickly quashed and by
March 1906 the question of the loan was once more under discus-
sion. Revelstoke canvassed his friends in the government and got
assurances from Asquith and Grey that they were still in favour -
‘Speaking for myself and between ourselves,’ wrote Asquith cau-
tiously, ‘we shall give all the good will we can.’1°* One complicating
factor was that the German bankers were ordered to abstain, partly
because the Emperor was displeased with the Russian attitude at the
Algeciras conference, partly because the money was needed at home.
It did not take too much bargaining to divide up their commitment
among the other participants; London’s share rose to just over £13
million, the total loan being a massive £89 million.
314                     The Sixth Great Power