

purporting to come from the Chancellery of Credit and signed
Axelrod, which instructed them to make a dollar payment to the
Guaranty Trust of New York. Barings appealed to the Treasury, who
on | February 1918 formally ordered them to hold all transactions
on the Russian accounts in abeyance until the situation had evolved.
The British government would indemnify them fully against any
consequences. Fortified by this, Barings ignored Axelrod’s telegram,
and the stream of subsequent instructions that arrived from
Petrograd.
   But though Barings were ready to freeze the Russian funds, they
were more reluctant to countenance their confiscation. In March
 1918, after the Russians had left the war, the possibility was raised
that their funds should be distrained and in some way applied to the
war effort. Farrer wrote in dismay to the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer: ‘I am convinced such a seizure would be considered as a
blot on the past record of this country as the safest centre for banking
funds.’ If it had to be done, then let it at least be done by all the allies
acting in unison. ‘It would be grievous if this country were placed ata
disadvantage with our competitive neighbours.’4+ For this or for
other reasons the idea was dropped. Peace came with Barings still in
possession of approximately £3.5 million of Russian money and no
very clear idea what to do with it.
                                 18
                                pe   oat




            ‘The Concern Remains
                a Family Affair’
                            1918-1929




Barings at the end of 1918 was dominated by Lord Revelstoke even
more than had been the case before the war. He had been on the
Court of the Bank of England since 1898 and a Privy Councillor
since 1903. He had become Receiver-General of the Duchy of Corn-
wall in 1908, was George V’s closest financial adviser as well as being
a personal friend, and became Lord Lieutenant of Middlesex in
1926. He was the indispensable man of British financial life; indis-
pensable, that is to say, until he died, when - like all indispensable
men - he was rapidly dispensed with. “The Chancellor of the
Exchequer is overwhelmed, Thomas Jones told Hankey in 1919.
‘One feels he is fighting a losing battle. Ought he not to have at his
elbow someone of the calibre of Reading or Revelstoke?’! His rule at
Barings was autocratic; though he never ignored his partners as his
father had done, he generally considered that he knew best and was
reluctant to accept the contrary.
   On his normal working day he would come in to lunch at Barings,
and be served a sole. He would open it and peer suspiciously at the
backbone. If it seemed to him darker than it should be, he would
push it to one side and march off to the Bank of England in search of
better pickings.? His life in Carlton House Terrace was as grand as
his demands in the office were simple. The new ‘concealed electric
lighting’ in the reception rooms illuminated gatherings even more
magnificent than those before the war, royalty was still more often
present, the artists who performed after dinner yet more distin-
guished. People rarely felt at home with Revelstoke, not many even
                                     333
334                      The Sixth Great Power