

   ‘I quite agree with you that those that have undertaken to fund the
Russian Government this enormous sum of money, are undertaking
a huge responsibility, wrote Lord Rothschild to his French cousins.
‘No doubt they are well paid for their trouble and their risk, but |
must confess that, anxious as I am for business, quite apart from the
Jewish question, I should not care much for the responsibility.’1°
The Jewish banks greeted the loan with dismay, as also did the liberal
members of the Duma, who feared that it would reinforce the auto-
cratic tendencies of the Tsar and his ministers. The regrets of
Rothschilds turned to rage when the press suggested that they
had covertly taken a share of the loan. They indignantly denied the
story and the Jewish Chronicle, picked up by The Times,!'° suggested
that the imperial government was responsible for spreading it.
Routkowsky, of the Imperial Russian Financial Agency in London,
demanded that Rothschild deny ‘this astonishing, unwarranted,
obviously unfounded and ill-intentioned statement. Rothschild
blandly if evasively replied that Routkowsky’s short residence in
Britain obviously disqualified him from understanding the workings
of free institutions. Routkowsky hastened to Revelstoke to ask for
help in drafting a reply. Nothing could have pleased Revelstoke less
than to be drawn into a quarrel of this sort. He suggested a temperate
response, but Routkowsky elected to pepper the final version with
references to lies and dishonour. It is unlikely Rothschild knew that
Revelstoke had had any hand in the letter - if he had, the relation-
ship between Bishopsgate and New Court would have grown even
more sour than the Russian loan rendered it.1!1
   In spite of the ill-timed intervention of the San Francisco earth-
quake, which induced extreme caution on the part of any investor
concerned in the world of insurance, the subscription went well. ‘We
have a splendid list,’ reported Revelstoke. *. . . The Russian govern-
ment should be pleased to realize that this issue has really appealed
to the genuine British investing public.’!12 Most of the Jewish houses
refused to participate even in the underwriting, but some took the
line that ‘the more money they could mulct the Government of the
better pleased they would be’.!!3 Rothschilds were not among them.
   Though they would undoubtedly have prevented it if they could,
Barings made an uncommonly good thing out of the Russo-
Japanese war. They even derived a little extra benefit from Russia’s
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                     315
defeat by financing the ships that brought the troops back to Europe.
It had been a troublesome business to get started, wrote Farrer, but it
promised to be very profitable and with little risk.!!4 By the autumn
of 1906 Barings’ reputation should have been sky high. Yet in fact
rumours abounded that huge amounts of Russian stock had been
left unsold and that Barings were in trouble. The Argentine papers
trumpeted the story that 1890 was here again.!!5 It was a disconcert-
ing but no doubt salutary experience for the partners in Bishopsgate
to find that they had not yet exorcized this bogey. ‘Our position 1s
that of intermediaries between the public and the borrower,’ expos-
tulated Mildmay. ‘Our resources are not nearly large enough to en-
able us to retain any considerable portion of any loan we may
happen to bring out.’!'6 Farrer, hearing the stories in Canada, wrote
that he had no idea what Barings’ holdings of Russian stocks might
be but that ‘ifwe lost every penny of our holdings it would not hurt
us’.117 Nor would it have, but the man in the street thought he knew
better, and the man in the Stock Exchange was almost as ready to
believe the worst.
    In 1909 came another substantial Russian loan, the British share
this time being £6 million and most of the work being done by the
French. Once again Barings secured underwriters for the whole
issue. ‘The underwriting has been a great success here,’ Lord
 Rothschild told his Paris cousins with some regret, but - more hope-
fully - ‘opinions are absolutely divided whether the public will want
it or not.’ Revelstoke, said Rothschild, was ‘very highly pleased, and
naturally enough’.1!8 He was still more pleased when the public
responded hungrily and the lists had to be closed at 4 p.m. on the
first day.!!9 All applications were scaled down: the larger ones by 50
per cent or more, those under £1000 to an automatic £100.
Revelstoke apologized to the Russian Minister of Finance for what
he recognized must seem an inexplicable attempt to disadvantage
the small investor, but ‘the art of “stag-ing” as it is called here, or
applying so as to sell instantly ata premium, has been carried to such
perfection by the small applicant, that even people who are well off
send in countless applications for £100 apiece, without any sense of
shame, in the hope of securing a larger proportionate allotment.’!?°
   This was the last Russian loan to be brought out before the war. If
                                                                      ’
only because of the dividends they had to pay, however, Barings
316                         The Sixth Great Power