

general business and really do not want it; conditions are so abso-
lutely artificial here that we are scared to death to let any money out
of our sight.’2? But though the bank as such may from time to tme
have been under-employed, the partners never were. Links between
the government and the City, always strong, became doubly so in
times of war. Revelstoke told the King’s private secretary, Lord
Stamfordham, that ministers were closely in touch with City opin-
ion, had set up capable committees to consider all the urgent eco-
nomic problems of the day, and were giving ‘intelligent and expert
attention . . . to responsibilities, the magnitude of which were quite
unheard of two years ago’.23 There were no City men more in
demand for these capable committees than Revelstoke, Farrer and
Mildmay, and the close relationship between Barings and the British
government ensured that they were asked to undertake certain odd
jobs that could not conveniently be done by any official agency.
Indeed, to a great extent Barings between 1914 and 1918 operated as
a wing of government.
   Both Revelstoke and Farrer had a high respect for Arthur Balfour -
‘head and shoulders above any of our statesmen on either side in pol-
itics’ was Farrer’s verdict?* — and they got on well with Asquith. By
1916, however, like most of the country, they had lost confidence in
the Prime Minister’s leadership, and they accepted his extinction
with equanimity. ‘City people dislike a crisis of any kind, wrote
Mildmay, ‘but I think that they like the idea of being governed by Mr
Lloyd George, who has almost qualified for the post of idol of the
Tory party.?5 With resignation, indeed almost with relish, Farrer
announced that he was anticipating a level.of super-tax practically
amounting to confiscation, and to a great increase in death duties. In
terms that would have outraged some of his wealthier clients he
admitted that to him ‘the very big individual incomes have always
seemed a danger in the community and a very moderate blessing to
the possessor, and the inheritance of big fortunes an unmixed evil for
the inheritors’.2¢
   Barings worked with the Bank of England in taking over American
securities held by the British to help finance the war - a measure
which would have reduced Revelstoke to apoplexy in other times.
Observing that most of the partners of Morgans were in London,
Farrer announced that he was proposing ‘embargoing them and
                     Barings at War: 1914-1918                       327
offering them as collateral for the next loan’.2” Barings contributed
to the compilation of a black list of German banks working in South
America, particularly Argentina.?8 Cecil Baring was recruited by the
government to assemble information about ‘the character, standing
and capacity of suppliers and manufacturers in. . . North and South
America’.?? Barings were insistent that they intended to keep out of
the direct negotiation of government contracts, a field in which they
felt themselves notably inexpert, but they still hoped that Cecil
Baring’s activities would generate a little business for the house:
‘There is no reason why we should not undertake all the banking end
of contracts, so long as the end is safe and profitable.’3°
   In fact, with Kidder Peabody, they became more deeply involved
with government orders from United States manufacturers than
they had intended. Insofar as the British government could have
 been said to have an agent formally charged with the purchase of war
materials in the United States, it was J. P. Morgan and Co.,3! but
there was still a lot of business which, particularly in the early stages
of the war, was handled otherwise. In December 1914, for instance,
Kidder Peabody, on Barings’ instructions, contracted for the pur-
chase from the American Woollen Company of 250,000 yards of
cloth for jackets, 475,000 for trousers and 750,000 for overcoats.
Other contracts were for telephone cable, hematite ore, picric acid,
oleum, trinitrotoluol, gun cotton and fishing boats. Gradually the
government set up its own purchasing agencies, but there were some
unpleasant contretemps in the meanume. In July 1915 the Director
of Army Contracts complained that Kidder Peabody were claiming
for certain administrative expenses that should properly be to their
own charge. Cecil Baring hotly defended his American colleagues
but could get nowhere. ‘I am ashamed,’ he told Bob Winsor of
Kidder Peabody, ‘that proposals of such incredible meanness should
be made, by a responsible officer of the British Government, to
people who have rendered them such signal service.’32 Winsor was
unperturbed; American officials were just as bad, he said. Anyway,
the disputed $45,000 was fortunately in their possession and, egged
on by Barings, they refused to part with it.’?
   Kidder Peabody were not the only victims of governmental mean-
ness or chicanery. The Munitions Department contracted to buy one
million Mauser rifles, and put in a clause saying that the supplier
328                      The Sixth Great Power