

links with St Petersburg remained close. One trivial manifestation of
their interest in the country arose in 1914 when Commissioner
Mapp of the Salvation Army called on Barings’ agent armed with a
letter in which ‘I was requested to show him every civility and to
assist him in every way possible. Messrs Baring Brothers further
informed me that their house was in close relationship with the
Salvation Army.’!2! War and the Revolution sadly put an end to
what might have been an interesting experiment.


Russia also was involved, though in a very different role, in abortive
negotiations over railways in the Middle East; two episodes which
illustrated vividly both Barings’ close links with the British govern-
ment and the frustrations often inherent in any such relationship.
First came the Baghdad railway, a project to link the Persian Gulf to
the Mediterranean by way of Baghdad. Lord Lansdowne set the ball
rolling in February 1903 when he obligingly showed Revelstoke the
draft of a letter which the Foreign Office might send to Barings on
the subject.* His Majesty’s Government, said the draft, attached
considerable importance to this enterprise and might even grant a
subsidy for the carriage of mails to India and help provide a terminus
near Kuwait. ‘I am directed by His Lordship to inform you that it
would give great satisfaction to His Majesty’s Government if the
management of the British participation in the scheme were to be
placed in your house.’!?? Revelstoke not surprisingly approved this
amiable letter with only trivial amendments, and a consortium was
quickly set up with Britain, France and Germany all taking 25 per
cent of the interest, other countries a total of 15 per cent, and the
Anatolian Railway Company - the holders of the previous conces-
sion — 10 per cent.!?3
   Then things began to go wrong. The first hint of trouble came
when Lord Rothschild announced that he had consulted his cousin
Alphonse in Paris and that the French house did not ‘take a favour-

* Given the close relationship between Lord Lansdowne and Barings and the con-
siderable correspondence between them it is interesting to note Lansdowne stating
in the House of Lords on 5 May 1903 that it was a ‘rare occurrence’ for H.M. Govern-
ment to be in confidential communication with the City - ‘probably much rarer in
this country than in any other country in the world’,
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                       st7

able view of the operation’.!2+ Almost simultaneously the Spectator
and the National Review violently attacked the project on the
grounds that it was tailored to favour German rather than British
interests, and a debate in the House of Commons gave rise to similar
accusations. Joseph Chamberlain was said to be making mischief
within the Cabinet. Revelstoke told Cromer that he had no intention
of proceeding with the affair unless Downing Street backed him
wholeheartedly: ‘I have no wish to be gibbeted as promoting a Tur-
kish Railroad for mere motives of cash gain.’!?5 To Lansdowne he
said that the press reactions must cause everyone to think again: ‘I
hoped he would not allow any feelings of loyalty he might have for
us to lead him to havea tussle with other members of the Cabinet.’ !?6
Lansdowne acted accordingly and the Cabinet concluded that it
could not actively support the scheme or provide any sort of subsidy.
‘The decision of the Government not to countenance the Bagdad
Railway is wise . . .,. concluded Almeric Fitzroy. “The scheme was as
much financial as political, though no doubt the two elements were
inextricably interwoven.  ’!27 Barings can hardly be blamed for taking
a different view. Revelstoke complained that he had been made to
‘look small’.!28 He would have echoed his uncle’s lapidary judge-
ment: ‘I have been serving the British Governmentall my life,’ wrote
Cromer, ‘but I never yet knewa British Minister    who had a policy.’1?°
   Much the same thing happened seven years later, when Russia
mooted the construction of a railway running 1600 miles across
Persia to link Russia with India. The old guard of the India lobby
maintained that such a railway would pave the way for a Russian
attack on India, but Hardinge, former Ambassador in St Petersburg
and now Viceroy of India, dismissed such fears as chimeras. Both the
Russians and the French were ready to give the lead to the British,
and wanted Barings to look after their interests. The first step would
be to set up a Société d’Etudes to consider the possibilities. At the
end of 1910 Revelstoke extracted from the Permanent Under-Secre-
tary at the Foreign Office, Sir Arthur Nicolson, a cautious blessing
for the enterprise and the Société was set up, Barings contributing 40
per cent of the £30,000 initially subscribed. The British representa-
tives in the Société kept closely in touch with Whitehall; one of
them, Colonel H. D. Napier, was in and out of the Intelligence
Department of the War Office, whose attitude was predictably
318                      The Sixth Great Power