

Janus-faced. They disliked the idea of the railway but, if it had to be,
considered it essential that the British should participate and as far
as possible control it.13°
   By mid-1912 a point had been reached where the scheme either
had to press ahead or die of inanition. In the House of Commons
Edward Grey indicated that the government looked with a benevo-
lent eye on the enterprise, but in the Lords the powerful voice of
Curzon besought ministers ‘to think not once or twice, or even
twenty times, but a hundred times, before committing themselves to
a project fraught with such grave danger to India’.13! The reply of
ministers, complained Revelstoke, was ‘emasculate and unsatis-
factory ’;!32 Lord Morley timidly suggesting that the government was
‘in no way committed not to oppose the construction of the railway
when the time came’.!33
   Not unreasonably fearful that he was about to be left in the lurch
again, Revelstoke tackled the Foreign Office, insisting that the time
had come when Barings must know finally ‘whether His Mayesty’s
Government view with favour or disfavour the prospect of direct
railway communication between India and Europe via Russia’.134
Favourable in principle, was the reply, but so hedged about with
qualifications as to route and timing as to be almost meaningless. !35
From Paris André Benac of the Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas
offered sympathy: ‘Je comprends que c'est surtout l'attitude de votre
gouvernement qui vous cause des ingquiétudes. ... Nous connaissons,
bélas! cette situation.’ Patience and diplomacy, he insisted, would see
things come right.136 But Barings felt the time for patience was past.
In June 1913 Lord Errington, their representative on the Société,
bluntly told Louis Mallet of the Foreign Office that he was going to
Paris to announce Barings’ withdrawal from the consortium. Mallet
‘expressed great surprise and evinced much annoyance’, but though
Errington’s ultimatum produced some movement, the British goy-
ernment could not bring itself to agree to the last link of the railway
from Isfahan to Karachi. The most they would contemplate was a
temporary line to Bunder Abbas on the Persian Gulf, with the possi-
bility of an extension to India in due course. Long before the course
was due, other more pressing considerations supervened. ‘Cette ques-
tion de concession ayant dormi depuis 1912, wrote Errington wearily in
November 1914 to the President of the Société d'Etudes, ‘il serait
                        High Finance: 1890-1914                         312
peut étre possible de la laisser sommeiller jusqu’a la fin de la guerre.’137
Like so much other unfinished business, the Trans-Persian Railway
went into the pending tray until 1918 and the birth of a very different
world.
                                  1,
                                >>
                                 @ a+




                    Barings at War
                        1914-1918


‘Austria-Servia grave but not hopeless, Barings telegraphed their
representative in Buenos Aires on 28 July 1914, ‘although such war
would endanger Russo-German relations. Paris banking situation
black. We fear banking troubles inevitable.”! It was hardly surprising
that a banking house should view the mounting crisis mainly in the
light of the financial problem, but at the end ofJuly there were few
even in government who foresaw the greater dangers. Even if Russia
and Germany went to war, it was by no means certain that France
and Britain would be drawn in; if they were it would all be over by
Christmas. The day after this telegram was sent, Revelstoke was still
debating whether to postpone his annual holiday at Aix. The fact
that he contemplated the possibility shows what alarm the situation
inspired; the fact it was still a matter for debate shows how little the
magnitude of the incipient disaster was appreciated. Yet within
forty-eight hours messages were pouring in from the continent
reporting that no remittances were available to meet the outstanding
debts, brokers were flooded with selling orders, the Stock Exchange
closed its doors. With general war more and more certain, it became
patent that the machinery of international credit had broken down.
‘I do not see how it is possible to guard against.such a general cata-
clysm as we have had,’ wrote Farrer, ‘but itis none the less mortifying
in the extreme to find how instantaneously the credit edifice which
we have been building for generations could tumble to pieces in a
night.’
   Monday 3 August was a bank holiday. Early that morning the
leading bankers met at the Bank of England and decided that
the holiday must be extended by three days to bring some order into
                                  320
                     Barings at War: 1914-1918                     321
the growing chaos. On Tuesday, reported The Times, the only house
with its doors actually open was Baring Brothers, though there was
plenty going on inside the others. It was not difficult to establish
that those banks which relied heavily on remittances from the con-
tinent, from Germany and Austria in particular, were going to be ina
disastrous plight if nothing was done to help them. If they failed,
then the rest of the City would be in an almost equally desperate
state. No one doubted that the government would in some way have
to shoulder responsibility for the German debts, but how and when
were exacting problems: ‘If you saw the length of the faces of those
who know, wrote Shaw-Stewart excitedly, ‘you would realize this is
one of the most terrific things London has been up against since
finance existed.”
   The bank holiday could hardly be prolonged indefinitely, so as an
interim measure a moratorium was declared, permitting the renewal
for one month of all acceptances granted before the declaration of
war on 4 August. For those whose business was mainly with the con-
tinent this provision was essential for survival; even for those like
Barings whose acceptances mainly related to other parts of the world
it was most desirable, since the outbreak of war briefly interrupted
remittances from North and South America as well as the Far East.
As much by good luck as by good management, however, Barings
were in an extraordinarily strong position. They had just received
£200,000 in gold from Kidder Peabody and another £600,000
arrived on 8 August, the proceeds of North Western Telephone
Notes and of Austrian Treasury Bills, which had been paid off on 1
July.s Though acceptances totalled £5.35 million, only £700,000 of
these were at risk and less than half that amountat serious risk. Debts
from German firms amounted only to £144,000, just over half of
which was an unsecured debt from D. H. Watjen of Bremen.® With
payments from the United States being quickly resumed, Barings
only availed themselves of the moratorium for two days and then
resumed paying in full. They were the only accepting house in Lon-
don which could afford to behave in such a way. ‘We particularly do
not wish to herald that we are doing any more than our neighbours
or are any better than they,’ wrote Farrer. ‘The catastrophe that has
                                                            and
overtaken the financial world could not have been foreseen,
even if foreseen no effective preparations could have been made
322                      The Sixth Great Power