

a virtually risk-free transaction involving not much in the way of
work, the profit was substantial. Itis not surprising that some oftheir
rivals felt jealous, and that Gaspard Farrer’s protestations about his
house’s reluctance to make money out of the war might have been
somewhat cynically received by Barings’ rivals.
   Early in 1917 Revelstoke was given the honorary title of Minister
Plenipotentiary and dispatched with Lord Milner to St Petersburg.
The Russians were demanding economic and military aid on an
impossible scale - a further £400 million was their starting point -
and the mission was supposed to establish how much was really
essential and by what dates it was needed. Revelstoke was dismayed
by the sense of incipient chaos that hung over the city. Rasputin had
been murdered only a short time before, authority was crumbling
from the centre, the mission had grave doubts about the capacity of
the imperial government to survive: yet all plans had to be made on
the basis that the Russians would continue the war against Germany.
The report was completed in a matter of weeks rather than the
months that were desirable. ‘It is hurried, therefore incomplete, and
by no means a good document, wrote Revelstoke. “During all the
years I have been at Bishopsgate, I have never once allowed so hastily
composed a paper to leave the office.’38
   By the time the mission left St Petersburg the first phase of the
Russian Revolution was already under way. Revelstoke had con-
ducted most of his negotiations with M. Bark at the Ministry of
Finance; now Bark had gone and his place had been taken by
M. Michel Terestchenko, who at once cabled Barings to ask for con-
firmation that the firm would continue to put their services at the
disposal of the provisional Russian government and that all the
existing agreements would remain in force. Revelstoke’s immediate
response was to welcome Kerensky’s government. The new minis-
ters, he wrote, ‘are said to be honest and upright, and I trust therefore
that the risk of disorganization and disorder, which would be the
consequence of the direction of affairs by extremists, may be
avoided’.3? He recommended to the Foreign Office that Barings
should continue to make payments on the basis of instructions from
St Petersburg just as they had done before the Revolution, and got
the ea that anything else would be bound to have damaging
results.*°
                     Barings at War: 1914-1918                        331

   The Treasury was more sceptical than the Foreign Office; or per-
haps more concerned about its balances. By April 1917 most credits
were being refused. Cecil Baring called on Sir Robert Chalmers at the
Treasury on behalf of Kerensky’s provisional government, and got a
cool reception. Chalmers was extremely sceptical about the future of
the regime and disinclined to pour good money after bad: ‘The more
roubles you buy, the more orders will be placed here. ... It is a
morass that we have no intention of paving.’*! Revelstoke would
sometimes speculate whether a more generous attitude towards the
provisional government might not have helped it to establish itself;
it seems unlikely that anything could have checked the march of the
better organized and more ruthless Bolsheviks, but Kerensky had
grounds for complaint that he was shabbily treated by his allies.
   In October 1917 the Bolsheviks struck, Lenin and Trotsky seized
power and began to negotiate a separate peace with Germany. Farrer
comforted himself with the thought that the regime could not last,
but saw much pain for the Russian people in the meantime: ‘Starva-
tion and great distress of every kind is inevitable this winter, espec-
ially in the big centres, and it is better that this should occur under an
anarchical so-called government than under a strong despotic head.
The time for the latter has not yet come.’#? But even as he wrote the
despots were establishing themselves. The moment could not long
be postponed when Barings would have to decide what to do with
the Russian funds in their possession. At the end of 1917 they had
nearly £1 million in the Comte Spécial set up in October 1915 for
arms purchases in Britain, and well over £1.5 million in other
Russian accounts. On 14 December M. Ermolaieff, speaking as a
representative of the Treasury of Russia’s last and only legal govern-
ment, told Barings that they should accept no instructions from ‘the
persons who have temporarily seized the power in Petrograd’.#3
Barings agreed that they would not; but though they did not say so to
M. Ermolaieff, the question of whose instructions they should accept
was more difficult to resolve.
   Early in 1918 a firm of solicitors acting for the Bolshevik govern-
ment notified Barings that Maxim Litvinoff would shortly be arriv-
ing as Chargé d’Affaires. All official Russian funds should for the
moment be frozen. Barings gave an equivocal reply, but equivoca-
tion was no longer possible when a telegram arrived from Petrograd,
332                        The Sixth Great Power