



                                                                    onrsennsststh




                                                              AAI
                                                              lsSA
                                                              i|
                                                              auaerlecicnnansesmasnmionenin..o
                                                               NNR




                          Ra




                                                                                                 SQL




The partners’ room at 8 Bishopsgate, designed by Lewis Cubitt in 1853,
as 1t appeared shortly before its demolition in the early t
Thomas (“Tom”) Baring (1839-1923) by   Sir Edward Peacock by James Gunn.
Sidney Kent.

Windham Baring (1880-1922)
photographed in naval uniform during
the First   World War.                 Hugo Baring (1876-1949).
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’: 1918-1929          337
   He joined Barings on the implicit understanding that, whoever
the senior partner might be in title, he would effectively run the
house after Revelstoke’s departure. Whether some of the partners
felt chagrin at this appointment is unknown. Cecil Baring certainly
welcomed it from the start. ‘Peacock is a man of strong character and
wide experience,’ he told the King’s secretary, Lord Stamfordham,
after Revelstoke’s death. ‘The principal driving force in our manage-
ment now resides in him and it is inevitable that a large share of the
work and responsibility will devolve upon his shoulders.’!5 An out-
standingly clear mind, integrity, determination and a readiness to
suffer fools, if not gladly, at least with a measure of patience, were
Peacock’s most marked characteristics. Taciturn and largely indiffer-
ent to the delights of London society, he did not fit readily into Lord
Revelstoke’s gilded soirées, but his good looks and natural dignity
carried him through such occasions as he felt it is duty to attend.
   The house which he joined was still a gentlemanly affair. In his
diary in March 1929 Lord Revelstoke wrote with some wistfulness of
Barings’ closest allies in France, the house of Hottinguer. ‘Their life
seems to be one happy unity. They are extremely rich, they have
beautiful houses with fine works of art, and have such a solid posi-
tion in the banking world that they seem to be content to manage
their fortunes and those of their many rich (Protestant) clients with-
out any nervous desire to compete with more modern conditions, or
to be tainted by the “get-rich-quick” feeling which is so prevalent
nowadays.’!6 He recognized that Barings could not survive on such a
basis, yet part of him hankered for it. He introduced an internal tele-
phone system into Bishopsgate, but could rarely make it work and
preferred to stump around the building seeing people for himself.
Statements of account were still sent out in longhand. “They also
impressed me by the simple grandeur of their notepaper, wrote one
young correspondent. ‘Thick, cream, of beautiful quality, it carried
as the sole heading, die-stamped in square, black letters: “8
 Bishopsgate Within. London E C”. Doubtless it reflected the convic-
tion that the letter was a private communication from one gentle-
man to another.’!”
   With such a disposition it would have been surprising if
Revelstoke and the other partners had not been conservative in poli-
tics. So, indeéd, they were, but their approach was pragmatic and
338                     The Sixth Great Power