

another job,’ reported Peacock. ‘I have been told that he is very able
and has many of the qualities of a good chief.’#* Possibly the BBC
proved more time-consuming than Reith had expected; anyway, the
job in the end went to General Dawnay.
   Early in 1929 a drastic reorganization was put in hand. Fourteen
million pounds in accumulated losses were written off; the New-
foundland paper mill was at last disposed of. If the scheme goes
through, declared the Economist, it will be ‘the greatest achievement
of financial salvage ever recorded’.*5 It did go through, though there
were angry shouts at the shareholders’ meeting and Mr W. J. Smith
complained that the proposals ‘simply weren't cricket’.*¢ It would be
pleasant to record that recovery followed rapidly, but in mid-1931
Peacock was admitting that: ‘Vickers Armstrong has been a great
disappointment. . . . The whole difficulty, of course, is based upon
very much wider considerations than those affecting Armstrongs
directly. The deterioration in the industrial position of England. . .
has been even greater than that of Armstrong and is mainly respon-
sible for the whole of the difficulties.’4” It was 1936 before the Bank
of England recovered the greater part of its losses.
   Compared with this the Underground Electric Railway was a
model enterprise. In 1926 Lord Ashfield asked Barings to raise the
capital for and tender advice on the expansion and reconstruction of
the underground railway. Peacock went on to the board and took a
keen interest in the railway’s running, complaining that the curved
platform at the Bank Station meant that an unacceptably large gap
was left between carriage and terra firma. There were solutions,
replied the manager, but they were all extremely expensive. ‘I had a
look at it again this morning,’ retorted Peacock, ‘and quite expect to
break my leg there some day.’48 He had still not done so when he
died in 1962. An issue of £4 million was made in May 1928 in con-
junction with Rothschilds, Schroders and Speyers. Barings kept all
the underwriting to themselves on the grounds that ‘our profit on
the issue is so small that we have perforce had to eke it out by making
what we could out of the underwriting ourselves’.#? Fortunately for
them the issue was subscribed ten times over, though Lord
Revelstoke still managed to reserve £50,000 for Lady Desborough
and suitable amounts for other cronies.
   ‘Compared with foreign Government loans, an issue such as this
        ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’: 1918-1929          345
seems to involve a great deal more work at a great deal less profit,’
complained Evelyn Bingham Baring.5° He could hardly have said
the same of the flotation of the brewing company, Taylor Walker.
Early in 1927 Barings agreed to place £600,000 ordinary shares and
£414,000 debentures. For these Taylor Walker would receive
£912,000, the £102,000 difference covering Barings’ costs and profit.
Lady Desborough for some reason was not among those allotted
ordinary shares but Princess Troubetzkoy, Lord Lansdowne, Lord
Allendale and other close friends of Barings or Lord Revelstoke were
given a slice of what promised to be an appetizing cake. The only
condition made was that the shares should not be resold within six
months, but Revelstoke in fact sold Lansdowne’s after only two -
making a profit of £4300 on an investment of £10,000: ‘It was my
opinion that the shares were a good investment at 20/-, but the
present quotation would seem to discount to a marked degree the
prospects of prosperity which the Company undoubtedly has.’s! A
few weeks later Barings financed Taylor Walker's takeover of a
smaller brewery, Smith Garrett and Co., for a little over £900,000.
Barings’ commission on this transaction was £37,500, and their
profit on the sale of shares £82,000.
   These were by no means the only excursions made by Barings into
the field of British industry, though they were cautious about enter-
prises on which they felt themselves inadequately informed.
Yardleys, the scent and soap manufacturers, approached them in
1927 about a projected financial reorganization. ‘It is only in very
exceptional cases that Baring Brothers undertake the responsibility
of sponsoring an industrial concern, wrote Arthur Villiers, ‘but in
view of the high standing and excellent record of your company we
should be very happy to look further into the matter.’ Evidently the
further look was displeasing, the approach was not followed up. The
Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co., the American firm that was the
world’s biggest tyre manufacturer, got a better hearing when they
asked Barings to raise money to pay for a British subsidiary. Farrer
was sceptical - ‘Such a business is good so long as tyres are required
and can be made and sold ata profit and almost valueless unless'*? -
but the other partners took a rosier view of the prospects for the
motorcar and Barings agreed to place £800,000 of 6'2 per cent
debentures provided Goodyear would take up the same number of
346                      The Sixth Great Power