

and established the credit of the fledgling republic in a way few other
houses could have matched.
   Of the other loans raised in London for the continental countries,
those for Hungary were managed by Rothschilds: “We value very
highly your unfailing friendship and much of the success of the loan
was due to your wise and able guidance,’ Lionel Rothschild assured
Revelstoke.8¢ With a £3.5 million loan for the City of Berlin it was
Schroders who led. But they were not the only London houses with
whom Barings worked. Morgan Grenfell and the Westminster Bank
were the partners when a loan for Belgium was mooted in 1926.
Here, as so often in this period, Barings found themselves expected
to act in part as an arm of British foreign policy. The British govern-
ment were preoccupied by the risk that Belgium might slip into
chaos and, perhaps, then into communism, and felt a loan might
save the day. Peacock saw the force of this, ‘but I cannot help think-
ing a good deal also of the danger to Barings and our colleagues if we
should issue something that is not sound that might come to grief in
the very near future’.8? In the end a £7.25 million loan was issued and
heavily oversubscribed: the profits from underwriting alone netted
Lord Revelstoke’s various accounts (including the assets he man-
aged for other people) £15,000, Lord Lansdowne £300, and Sir
Edwin Lutyens £37.10/-.
   The fact that Barings were almost always working in partnership
with at least one other house did not diminish the conviction of the
partners that there was something very special about their status. In
1928 a loan to the Portuguese was in question but was being viewed
with some suspicion in London because of the doubtful constitu-
tional standing of their government. ‘We must remember,’ wrote
Mildmay, ‘that in American as well as British opinion, the Baring
Brothers and Co. trade-mark will be regarded as sufficient evidence
of legality, as good or better than the League of Nations.’88
   Outside Europe it was Brazil that provided the most business.
This was traditional Rothschild territory and Barings were scrupu-
lous about taking no initiative which might suggest they were any-
thing but junior partners. Such an attitude might have caused
embarrassment when the Permanent Under-Secretary at the For-
eign Office in 1926 tried to use his friendship with Peacock to stop
the issue of a loan to Brazil. The British government were annoyed
          ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’: 1918-1929           355
with the Brazilians for blocking German entry to the League of
Nations. ‘It is obvious we can do nothing except to restrain, for the
moment only I hope, any intempestive enthusiasm on the part of
Messrs N.M.R. and Co.,’ Revelstoke commented. ‘It would be well to
keep in close touch with the F.O.’8? The enthusiasm was duly
restrained and the business lost to the United States, but Barings
were still involved in seven Brazilian issues between 1921 and 1930.
A £25 million Japanese loan to repair the damage done by the earth-
quake of 1923 was also a formidable success. For this Morgan
Grenfell and other banks were added to the more usual triumvirate
of Barings, Schroders and Rothschilds: the result was ‘quite satisfac-
tory to us from a pecuniary point of view,’ said Farrer; a modest rep-
resentation of what had been an extremely profitable operation.®°
   In the Middle East the Société d’Etudes for the Trans-Persian rail-
way lingered on as loth to die. After characteristic shilly-shallying the
Foreign Office in 1919 finally committed itself to a blunt: ‘Present
circumstances certainly render desirable the dissolution of the
Société in question.’%! Inexplicably, the following year Revelstoke
assured Routkowsky: ‘I have had no indication that the British Gov-
ernment has expressed a desire to see the Société d’Etudes wound
up.’%2 Possibly there had been a change of heart in Whitehall. Cer-
tainly Barings could not have been playing some deep game on their
own behalf, since they had no interest in the Société’s preservation
and welcomed the death of its chairman in 1932 as a reason for giv-
ing the enterprise its final quietus. This did not imply a lack of inter-
est in Persia. In mid-1925 Villiers wrote to Sir Percy Lorraine, the
British Minister in Teheran, to deplore the fact that ‘the Americans
are endeavouring to retain the Persian business for themselves to the
exclusion of British interests,’ and that the restrictions on foreign
issues imposed in London made their task lamentably easy. Could
not some help be given under cover of development by the Anglo-
Persian Oil Company?% Lorraine cautiously replied that the worst
thing for Persia would be cut-throat Anglo-American competition.
Barings persisted, and armed the local representatives of Anglo-
Persian with a letter stating that in principle Barings and Schroders
were disposed to help develop the national transport system. ‘T can-
not give you a very encouraging account of conditions over here,’
Villiers told Lorraine. ‘We are lending abroad more than would
356                      The Sixth Great Power