

Barings first heard of the possibility in November 1921 from
Michael Spencer-Smith, a former colleague of Farrer’s and a
Director of the Bank of England, who had promised the premier,
Dr Befies, that he would try to help him raise money in London.
Spencer-Smith did not pretend that it would be easy, and Farrer was
also without illusions. Czechoslovakia seemed more likely to prove
solvent than any other of the Central European states but the politi-
cal risks would make the public chary of investing in such an area.’8
Anyway, the country had only recently been conjured from the old
Austro-Hungarian empire and the man in the street hardly knew
what or where it was. The man in the bank was not much better
informed; as late as April 1922 Barings were having to instruct
Kidder Peabody that Czechoslovakia should be written as one word
and with a small ‘s’.
   In February 1922, while Barings were still hesitating, Dr Befies
arrived in London. ‘A nice little man,’ Farrer judged him, ‘bright,
quick on the uptake, very human, and so far as we can see entirely
simple and straightforward.’7? Serious negotiations then began,
made more troublesome by the fact that the Czech negotiator, Dr
Vilem Pospisil, spoke no English and very little French; considering
this, said Farrer handsomely, ‘it is creditable to him to have got
through at all’.8° The Czech team needed as much education as the
British public. Seeing that would-be underwriters were quick to
come forward, they assumed the loan could be for as much as they
wished. ‘It is hard to get them to realize that selling loans to
underwriters is a very different matter from placing a loan with the
permanent investor. At the first breath of an adverse wind, every
underwriter 1s a seller and the credit of a country may be damaged
for months or years to come.’$!
   In the event Barings apportioned the first tranche of what was
eventually to be a £10 million loan so that $14 million was issued by
Kidder Peabody in the United States, £2.8 million in conjunction
with Schroders and Rothschilds in London and £500,000 by Hopes
in Amsterdam. The issue got away to an excellent start and was soon
at a premium of 2 per cent. Masaryk, the President of Czechoslo-
vakia, called personally on the British Minister in Prague, Sir George
Clerk, to express his pleasure. The success had been almost too great,
Clerk told Revelstoke, ‘for besides increasing an already sufficiently
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:    1918-1929        353
developed conceit [in the Czechs], it has led some people to think
that the terms might have been less stringent’. With a bluntness that
was something less than diplomatic Clerk pointed out that Czecho-
slovakia had to pay ‘for being a fraction of Central Europe - not an
encouraging field for the British investor - and for its comic opera
name, and so on’.82
   The advice was ineffective. Within a few weeks Helbert, Wagg
were back in the market with a £1.5 million loan for the City of
Prague. The State of Czechoslovakia stock promptly went to a dis-
count, and though Barings propped it up fora while they were not at
all dissatisfied by the chagrin which this setback caused the Ministry
of Finance in Prague. Farrer read Dr Pospisil a stern lesson when it
was rumoured at the end of the year that enquiries were being made
about a further national loan. ‘Even in London millions do not grow
like cherries on a cherry tree. . . , he wrote. ‘We and our associates
would not fora moment pretend to claim the monopoly of Czecho-
slovak business, but we do think it was due to us, if such an operation
was contemplated, that we should have been first consulted in the
matter.’83 Pospisil denied that any such move was in the air, and it
was not until mid-1923 that Barings were asked to bring out the
second tranche of the loan.
   Politics then intervened. The British Foreign Office had been
instrumental in urging Barings to take up the loan in the first place,
now they were displeased with the attitude of the Czechs on the
Reparations Committee. The government ‘would not go so far as to
veto our raising further money for the Czechs,’ Farrer told ter
Meulen of Hopes, but ‘it would no doubt be sorry to see us doing
it’.84 Barings urged the Czechs to discuss the matter direct with the
Foreign Office, and only when this had been sorted out did they feel
free to proceed with the second tranche. It went even better than the
first. Barings paid 91 and offered the bonds to the public at 96%,
yielding interest of 8.3 per cent. Of the £1.85 million issued in Lon-
don, Rothschilds were allotted £337,000 and received applications
for £1.7 million and Schroders £236,000 against £1.4 million.
‘Messrs Barings have undertaken all the negotiations and arrange-
ments for the loan, including the underwriting,’ Lionel Rothschild
told his cousins in Paris.8* Though they had exacted a substantial
payment for the trouble and the risk, they had given value for money
354                     The Sixth Great Power