

they were remarkably ready to contemplate working with a Labour
government if need arose. In the election of 1918 Mildmay admitted
to a lack of enthusiasm for the Conservative/Liberal coalition but
concluded that ‘the Labour party, which includes many patriotic and
disinterested men, is clearly too inexperienced to take over the gov-
ernment of the country at the moment’.!8 In 1922 Farrer rejoiced at
the setback experienced by Lloyd George and said of the greatly
increased Labour vote: ‘I for one do not regret their large representa-
tion in Parliament. If, as is probable, some day they will be in actual
control, itis better that they should have this preliminary training in
opposition.!?Even Revelstoke, as close to being a diehard as was to
be found in the partners’ room, noted with some amusement that
Ramsay MacDonald, so recently the bugbear of the capitalists, had
only been Prime Minister for a few weeks when he found himself
‘the hero of the hour’.2° He seemed, said Mildmay, ‘a cautious man,
very well-intentioned and of a rather sympathetic personality’?!
   Open-mindedness did not extend to taking the side of the unions
in the General Strike. Barings hired hotel rooms to accommodate
those of their staff who lived out of London, and motorcars to fetch
in those in the suburbs. ‘We have also been able to encourage some
of our young men to take up emergency work, as of course the vol-
ume of business has very much diminished.’ One of the not-so-
young men was Evelyn Bingham Baring, who paraded the streets of
Bow and Hounslowin the guise of a special constable.? In Liverpool
Alan Tod was busily distributing posters and copies of Churchill’s
brainchild, the British Gazette: ‘There are very few “dismal Jimmies”
and good spirits showing everywhere,’ he wrote proudly.?3


The ‘new conditions in business’ which Gaspard Farrer had said
would need new men to cope with, were most notably the decline of
Britain’s economic standing in the world and the readiness of the
government to interfere in matters that had traditionally been dealt
with entirely in the private sector. It was a matter for conjecture
whether the merchant banks would be able to thrive, or even survive,
in these new circumstances. Farrer confided his thoughts and
worries to C. E. ter Meulen of Hopes, Barings’ ally for nearly 150
years.
        ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:     1918-1929         339
   My own feeling is that the private firms are on their trial; if
   they have not gone back during the war, they have at least
   not made the progress of the Joint Stock Banks. . . . Never-
   theless, Iam convinced that there is still room for the private
   firms, but they must be sure of themselves, and I think such
   as yours and ourselves must not only set their own houses in
   order but make fast their alliances with houses similarly situ-
   ated in other countries. Houses such as Hottinguers, Kidder
   Peabody, Morgans or whoever they may be. You will notice
   that I include ourselves among the private houses, for such
   we still consider ourselves; though we think that our consti-
   tution gives us a great advantage, not only from the fact of
   publishing our accounts yearly, but from the nature of our
   constitution, which provides for a continuing capital which
   remains irrespective of death... . . At the same time the con-
   trol of the firm is absolutely in the directors’ hands. You
   would perhaps be amused to hear that during my sixteen
   years here, we have only once had a shareholder at our
   Annual Meeting, and he came at our special request.”
   The interference of government was mainly confined to those
transactions which involved the export of British capital - particu-
larly in the financing of international issues. What money there was,
was needed at home. Barings admitted a patriotic duty to abide by
the spirit as well as the letter of the law. When Maurice Jenks wanted
Barings’ help in transferring £150,000 of Hong Kong money to New
York and undertaking its management there, the business was
refused. ‘Even if the operation were not found to be contrary to exist-
ing regulations, we should not wish to facilitate the removal of so
large a sum from London to the United States.’?° Control of trade
was another matter, and Barings deplored any restraint put upon the
free market forces. Not surprisingly it was acceptances that were the
first part of Barings’ peacetime business to recover. In 1918, by far
the worst war year, the annual total granted had fallen away to £14
million, of which only £3.9 million related to British trade; in 1919,
aided by the boom as European industry rebuilt its depleted stocks,
the British figure rose to £7.7 million; while in 1920, the London
acceptance figure rose to £12.1 million and the grand total including
Boston and New York to £30 million. There was a sharp drop when
340                     The Sixth Great Power