

issue was heavily oversubscribed and went immediately to a pre-
mium of 12 per cent. For Barings this happy result was doubly gall-
ing. In Argentina it gave rise to bitter complaints that the price was
too low and Barings had made extravagantly large profits - the pre-
mium was, indeed, striking, admitted Mildmay, ‘but the margin
between success and failure is very small. That is to say, either people
throng to apply fora loan or people do not apply at all.’°? In London
it showed how much money there was waiting to be invested in
issues ofthis kind. Yet Barings were not allowed to bring the horse to
the water. In 1925, when the Argentine government offered Mor-
gans and Barings the chance to bring out a $40 million loan on most
generous terms, Barings had to refuse: “The embargo on foreign
issues is stronger than ever.’7° ‘Barings must of course cooperate with
those who have the good of our country at heart,’ commented
Mildmay sanctimoniously, but doing so left a sour taste in the
mouth.7!
   It was not until the end of 1925, with a return to the gold standard,
that the merchant banks were once more free to raise money for any
part of the world that took their fancy. Lord Beaverbrook character-
istically marked the occasion by sending a messenger to Barings with
a bill for which he demanded payment in gold. “His action was only
taken, of course, to embarrass us,’ wrote Revelstoke, ‘and he must
have been disappointed to have had his £25 paid to him in gold with-
out demur. But it is a vicious move on his part, and shows an
unnecessarily unreasonable, vindictive spirit.’72
_ What the Treasury gave with one hand, it took away with the
other. The unkindest cut came in 1926, when another $25 million of
Argentine bills had to be placed. This time the British Treasury for-
mally placed no obstacle, but the stamp duty which they levied
forced Barings to tender at a price 1'/2 per cent worse than that avail-
able in New York, a difference which the Argentines could hardly be
expected to ignore. In 1927 Barings for the same reason had to refuse
to participate in a number of issues where they knew they could not
compete with the American price. Still the Argentines remained
remarkably loyal to their old friends. In 1929 a request was made for
an immediate advance of £5 million. Mildmay for the first time
talked to Everard Meynell in Buenos Aires by telephone. The result
was not wholly satisfactory; Mildmay knew that it was Meynell by
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:     1918-1929        351
the tone of his voice but: ‘What you said was indistinguishable; it
sounded as if you were trying to shout with pebbles in your
mouth.’73 The attitude of the Argentine President, on the other
hand, could not have been bettered. He had, reported Evelyn
Bingham Baring, who was visiting Buenos Aires, ‘an insane desire to
deal with London and Baring Brothers and Co. Ltd at all costs’. He
had turned down a multiplicity of offers from New York. ‘Cannot we
and Great Britain profit by this unique opportunity?’7* This time all
went well; after a frantic flurry of telegrams, terms were agreed by
the end of the year. It did not represent a real turn of the tide, but it
was comforting to find that after more than a hundred years so much
good will persisted.
   This falling away of Barings’ traditional issuing business was in
part compensated for by the great increase in loans raised for
Europe. It was not until after 1926 that this really gained its
full momentum - between 1926 and 1928 Barings made twelve
issues in London for continental governments, Hambros thirteen
and Morgan Grenfell six’5 - but a new pattern had long before been
established. ‘I am sure that if private firms are to survive amidst the
constantly increasing competition of companies, the more friendly
terms on which they are with each other, the better it will be for their
wellbeing,’ Farrer told J. S. Morgan.’¢ Barings acted on this precept
by forging the closest possible alliance with two other veterans of
merchant banking, Rothschilds and Schroders. Forgotten - or at any
rate concealed - was the animosity of the nineteenth century;
together these three banks established a powerful cartel which com-
peted for business as a unit, one bank taking the lead in each country
and dividing up the liabilities and the profits between them. So close
was the relationship that Barings practically refused to join a syndi-
cate raising a French loan in 1927 unless Schroders were also
included. Lazards, another participant, pleaded that Schroders were
a German house, with no standing in this business, but Barings were
obdurate. Only the fact that Lionel Rothschild told Arthur Villiers
that his house had agreed to Schroders’ exclusion induced Barings
reluctantly to give way.’’
   Czechoslovakia was a country in which Barings took the lead and
controlled the negotiations, and since it was also the first country in
Central Europe to receive a loan, the case deserves a little study.
352                     The Sixth Great Power