

Loewenstein’s vast and ramshackle shareholdings and thus save a
market collapse: Loewenstein, or people acting on his behalf, was
meanwhile busily manipulating the market, forcing up the price of
one share and undermining another to suit his own advantage. ‘No
doubt we shall come through in the end,’ wrote Peacock philosophi-
cally, ‘but we are having a new experience meanwhile which is far
from pleasant. It involves also having L or his accountant in our
office day by day, all day, and as he is ina state almost of collapse and
the accountant much the same, and as his accounts are of the
strangest order, we are making the slowest kind of progress.’36 The
omelette was still largely unscrambled when Loewenstein, theatrical
to the last, disappeared from his personal Fokker aircraft over the
Channel. His body was eventually picked up off Cap Gris-Nez. He
must have jumped, but whether to commit suicide or as the result of
another mystical experience has never been established.


The government's embargo on foreign issues impelled Barings to
take more interest than they had done previously in British industry.
Early in 1919 they were struck by the fact that both Kuhn, Loeb and
the City Bank were prowling around London looking for profitable
enterprises in which to invest. ‘It looks as if some business should be
possible,’ wrote Farrer, ‘and we for our part will assuredly keep our
eyes open.’37
   They did, but not always to good effect. The most protracted and
painful saga was that of Armstrong Whitworth, the engineering and
armaments firm. A central figure was Montagu Norman, Governor
of the Bank of England, who saw himself as the man who would res-
cue British industry from its decline.38 It was Norman who early in
1924 introduced Armstrongs to Barings, originally with the proposal
that a joint company should be formed to set up and develop prom-
ising enterprises. Barings declined this honour but were happy to act
as financial advisers.39 Armstrongs were short of capital, mainly
because they owned an exceedingly costly paper company in New-
foundland, which they believed would eventually yield handsome
profits but currently produced nothing but headaches and a crippl-
ing loss. Barings raised £2 million for Armstrongs, and at the end of
1924 a further £3 million - ‘The fact is,’ commented F arrer, ‘they
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’: 1918-1929          343
require a very stout Godmother that can hold babies till they are well
grown... . and this takes time and money.’#°
   By 1925 the situation had deteriorated so far that Barings felt
bound to intervene. At Peacock’s instigation, the Bank of England
imported and placed on the board a tough Aberdonian called Frater
Taylor, so cautious that his most enthusiastic recorded reaction was
‘I’m not against it’, and so cheeseparing that, when the chairman of
Armstrongs was eventually forced from office, Taylor refused him
the use of a company car to travel home after the decisive meeting.*!
Sir Glyn West, the chairman in question, accepted Taylor’s original
arrival with apparent equanimity, but the Aberdonian met with stiff
resistance when he tried to pry too deeply into the company’s
accounts. It was in February 1926, with Armstrongs more than £5
million in debt to the Bank of England, that a balance sheet was
finally approved. ‘The story is going to be a very unpleasant one and
must result in drastic action, commented Peacock grimly.* First
drastic action was to evict the chairman; the second might have been
to put the company into receivership but this would have resulted in
the loss of all its government contracts and destroyed any chance of
its rehabilitation. Instead, the Bank of England was persuaded to put
 up yet another £500,000 and to allow a further twelve months’
breathing space. ‘The time has come when we should establish the
relations between Armstrong and Barings on a more business-like
basis,’ wrote Peacock. Hitherto Barings had received nota penny for
all their trouble, in future they would work on commission.*3
   They certainly gave service for their money. Throughout 1926 and
 1927 Revelstoke and Peacock tried to secure Armstrongs contracts in
a variety of countries and enterprises: a floating dock for the St Law-
rence, locomotives for Argentina, Rhodesia and the Great Western
Railway, destroyers and frigates for the Royal Navy, liners for
Cunard, steamers for the Canadian lakes, a tanker for the British
Molasses Company, steel sleepers for Rhodesia. A merger of
shipbuilding interests was arranged with Vickers, and the joint
Board had its first meeting in January 1928. The search for a chair-
man proved particularly taxing. Lords Southborough and Verulam
came and went. ‘I have heard from an intimate friend of Sir John
Reith, Managing Director of the British Broadcasting Company, that
he would like additional work and has plenty of time to look after
344                      The Sixth Great Power