

the postwar boom ended, a gradual recovery, another sharp relapse
in 1926 caused by lower prices for wool, cotton and rubber and the
increasing ability of German banks to finance their own national
trade, then a resurgence in 1928 to £22.6 million in Britain alone - a
figure which would not be surpassed for many years as the Wall
Street Crash of 1929 led to the world’s most calamitous slump.
   It was the growth in continental credits - ‘insatiable’, Farrer
described the demand in 192526 - which contributed most to the
excellent figures for the 1920s; American acceptances fell away as
more and more of their trade was financed through dollar credits.
Barings viewed the trend without too much regret: ‘We have
watched the falling-off with some equanimity,’ wrote Farrer, ‘In view
of the rates of commission at which US credit business is now being
generally done.’27 They valued the connection with Kidder Peabody
more than the credit business they did on joint account. ‘Our Joint
Account operations have not only been eminently remunerative,
declared Revelstoke, ‘but have been conducted in a manner which
has made the business a pleasure for us all.’28 It was this, more than
any possible profit, which led Barings to increase their existing stake
of $2.5 million, when Kidder Peabody developed a more or less dere-
lict concern, called first the New England Yarn Company and then
the New England Investment Company, into the Kidder Peabody
Acceptance Corporation. For a time it did remarkably well and by
1929 its outstanding acceptances had risen to $40 million, making it
the second largest specialized acceptance house in the United
States.2? Then the business was overwhelmed in the disasters of 1929
and 1930, Kidder Peabody retreated from the field of acceptances,
and the joint account was wound up. Barings at least were able to
repay some of the support Kidder Peabody had offered during the
war by contributing $600,000 to the operation that Morgans organ-
ized to rescue its old friend and rival.           ;
   Barings were as conservative as ever when it came to advancing
money to industrial concerns or trading houses. They had an almost
inviolable rule against advancing cash against shares, and would
only do so against goods in store if the margin was satisfactory and
the facility requested by a first-class firm. In general, they felt that
they could not compete with the joint stock banks and did not
intend to try. When they offered to advance up to £500,000 against
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:   1918-1929      341
cotton they emphasized that this was an exception, undertaken only
‘to keep up our connection with our cotton friends in Liverpool’3°
They were restrictive of credit even to an international company as
well established as Lever Brothers. ‘I cannot believe that sensible
business people such as the Directors of Messrs Lever would take
umbrage ata refusal which is based on our unwillingness to increase
our acceptances, wrote Farrer in what one assumes was feigned sur-
prise.3! Levers had indeed taken umbrage and their indignation was
redoubled when Barings not only refused to double their existing
£200,000 credit, but withdrew even this on the ground that Levers
were drawing bills ‘upon nearly every institution in London’.3?
Barings knew that they were taking a different line to many of their
rivals - Kleinworts, in particular, were conspicuously more liberal
in their grants of credit - but, wrote Farrer, ‘I do not think
that any action of our neighbours should influence us in our
policy’.33 Barings always had been prudent in such matters and
they were not going to start changing their attitude after more than
150 years.
  In other respects Barings could be curiously gullible, or perhaps
more accurately, had a weakness for a particular type of flamboyant
adventurer. The first Lord Revelstoke had had his Sanford, the sec-
ond his Albert Loewenstein. Loewenstein was a Belgian stockbroker
who had made a fortune in dealing in various Latin American shares
and was habitually referred to in the popular press as “The Belgian
Croesus’ or ‘The Mystery Millionaire’. In May 1926 he fell on his
head from a horse, became prone to mystical experiences, and began
to behave with marked eccentricity. He acquired a large number of
shares in the Brazilian Traction Co.,a concern in which Barings were
interested, and then began to plan a gigantic merger without any
prior consultation with the boards concerned.** ‘He is adopting his
usual peculiar, theatrical methods which are very unpleasant to me
and harmful to the business,’ complained Revelstoke. “Nevertheless,
from what I can learn, I should think he has a reasonably good
chance of putting the business through and if he succeeds in doing
so, the new Company will be a strong one.’*
   It was a marked misjudgement. Barings put £300,000 into the
group which backed Loewenstein, but soon regretted it. By early
1927 Peacock was trying to set up a syndicate to take over
342                      The Sixth Great Power