

ordinary shares at par. The public subscribed £955,000, and the
enterprise flourished. Mild alarm was experienced when Firestone
opened its sumptuous new Art Deco factory on the Great West Road
but the managing director of Goodyear reassured the partners that,
though the site had great advertising value, the costs of the final
product would certainly be too high.*#
   Barings were cautious when Mr Ullner of the Deutsche Erdoel
Aktiengesellschaft approached Arthur Villiers about stopping a
price-cutting campaign which was damaging the coal industries of
both Britain and Germany. Ullner wanted Barings to set up a new
Anglo-German company which would, inter alia, investigate the
potential of producing oil from coal. He was convinced that this
was the way of the future. ‘It was calculated that existing supplies of
oil in the USA, Persia and elsewhere would not last much longer
than 12 years, and that when they were exhausted the only
method of obtaining oil would be to extract it from lignite and
coal.’55 Villiers was sufficiently interested in the possibility to try to
set up a meeting between Ullner and a colliery owner, but not to
pursue it further when the British coal producers proved con-
spicuously unenthusiastic.


It was in the field of international financing that Barings felt most
markedly the changed world conditions. Determined to protect a
weakened sterling and to prepare the way for a return to the gold
standard, the Treasury in 1918 imposed an almost complete
embargo on the issuing of foreign loans. When loans did again
become permissible it was only under licence, and they were
directed above all to the monetary reconstruction of Europe.
   A radical change in the direction of Barings’ business inevitably
resulted. The United States was now a creditor nation on a majestic
scale, able to finance its own needs and much else besides. To a lesser
extent the same was true of Canada, which anyway looked more and
more to its southern neighbour for finance. Schroders were anxious
to involve Barings in the development of Ontario, arguing that the
potential of the province was so enormous that it would not matter if
the underwriters were landed with the stock for a year or two.
Revelstoke demurred and Peacock, for all his Canadian loyalties,
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:    1918-1929       347
fully supported him: ‘This is undoubtedly a very rich and progres-
sive province but it has been adding to its debt rather rapidly and its
bonds sell upon a basis which would make it very difficult to offer
them in London.’’¢ A loan to Canada was, indeed, one of the few
issues for a country outside Europe that the Bank of England would
have tolerated before the end of 1925. Montague Norman ‘says he
cannot possibly bar a Colonial issue on this market,’ reported
Revelstoke.*” Australia would have been equally favoured, but there
was little likelihood of Barings chancing their arm in that direction.
Farrer had an especial dislike of the Antipodes. Denouncing the
‘spendthrift democracies’ who would go on borrowing till nobody
was left to lend, he concluded, ‘I have always thought our Australian
cousins a particularly vicious example and do not believe for a
moment that they would continue to pay even their interest if we
were unable or unwilling to continue to lend’.*8
   Despite his caution over Ontario, Peacock’s membership of
Barings did lead in the end to an increased interest in Canada. In
 1927 a small company was set up, with a capital of $1 million - half
British, half Canadian - to take advantage of any promising invest-
ment opportunities that might develop in Canada. Of the British
 $500,000, Revelstoke put up $200,000, Cecil Baring, Mildmay and
Peacock $50,000 each and Robert Fleming, of the eponymous bank-
ing house, $100,000.59 The hope was that the capital would build up
substantially out of profits, and with holdings in enterprises like the
Ford Motor Co., Massey-Harris and the Canada Cement Co. it
would certainly have done so swiftly if the recession after 1929 had
not set back investment prospects in Canada, and indeed the world.
   Of Barings’ other traditional clients, loans to Russia ended with
the Bolshevik Revolution and the prospect of recovering money
already lent seemed remote. Barings had no inclination to plunge
deeper into this morass and early in 1919 refused to advance money
on the security of vineyards in the Crimea. ‘I confess that the idea of
discharging the debts of the Grand Dukes leaves me absolutely cold,’
                                                         were
Revelstoke told Stamfordham.® Their sympathies, however,
with the White Russian government in Omsk, and when this govern-
ment proposed to export £10 million in gold to Hong Kong as secu-
rity against a loan to finance the forces of the Omsk government and
General Denikin in South Russia, Barings were ready to help. Alfred
348                      The Sixth Great Power
Holt and Co. provided steamers to pick up the gold but were uneasy
about their strongrooms - eventually it was decided to put the bul-
lion in the deep tank and then to pour in water; ‘this treatment
would in their opinion entirely eliminate the risk of theft’.6' The
Omsk government refused to sell the gold and Barings made them-
selves responsible for placing £3 million of the loan at 7 per cent per
annum for eighteen months. The largest shares went to the joint-
stock banks, though Revelstoke personally took £300,000 and Farrer
£100,000. It was a silly way for the White Russians to do business.
‘The expense . . . to our friends seems to me a crime, commented
Farrer. ‘At the end of the period they will have disbursed some £1.2
million in interest and expenses without any advantage that I can
foresee which they would not have obtained by selling their gold
now.62
   By early 1920 it was clear that the Omsk government was in dis-
array. The Foreign Office declined to say whether it was still in
existence or not and for some months no instructions of any kind
were received, but finally it became clear that Denikin was de facto in
control of whatever White Russian government was left and his
representative authorized the selling of the gold. Barings offered it to
the Treasury but Norman would pay only a very low rate of exchange
between sterling and the dollar on the amount due to be remitted to
New York. Farrer indignantly refused: ‘I told him we could never
justify such a transaction to our clients, and that it was most
unreasonable of the Treasury to hold us up because we wished to
behave like white men.’*? Norman increased his price, but not
enough, and Farrer threatened to sell the gold elsewhere. ‘Don’t do
that,’ said Norman. ‘[The Treasury] would be dreadfully upset, so
would I, and so I believe would you.’ Reluctantly Farrer accepted the
Bank’s offer. ‘It is not as good a settlement as I had hoped to make
nor as good as | think we had a right to make, but we concluded it
would be unwise to go our own way and leave Norman and the
Treasury with sore heads.’6* It was May before Denikin’s successor,
General Wrangel, retrospectively authorized the sale, and it was not
long afterwards that he and what was left of his army were driven
back to the Crimea and fled to Constantinople.
   So far as the Bolshevik government was concerned, Barings con-
sidered that until they would acknowledge and put forward some
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:    1918-1929       349
scheme for repaying the imperial debts, then there could be no fur-
ther dealings with them. They remained convinced that in the end
economic forces would make a settlement inevitable: ‘It is as certain
as night follows day, wrote Farrer in 1923, ‘that before long the
people of that country will of themselves acknowledge the necessity
of recognizing the debt.’¢ It was a long time before Farrer’s logic was
accepted in Moscow. Meanwhile Barings retained the £3.5 million-
odd of Russian funds that had been in their possession at the end of
the war, paid the interest regularly and wondered when they would
be relieved of the responsibility. It was not until 1986, by which
time the total had risen to some £48 million, that a settlement
was reached with the Soviet government and Barings’ stewardship
was over. The imperial treasure which it was so often alleged was
mouldering in the cellars at Bishopsgate existed only in the popular
imagination: the Russian royal family had no account with Barings
and deposited no assets there.
   There could be no equally abrupt severance with Argentina; too
much unfinished business needed to be done. From 1918, however,
Barings were fighting a rearguard action against the superior power
of the American banking houses. At first they could not even get into
the fight. Late in 1919 a gloomy Windham Baring reported that
Buenos Aires was making overtures to New York bankers, including
Barings’ traditional allies Morgans and the City Bank. “There is no
getting away from the fact that the Americans will have the field to
themselves as far as Argentine finance is concerned, as it will cer-
tainly be some time before our Government allows us to take part in
any Argentine finance on a large scale.’** When he visited Buenos
Aires in 1921, however, he found that the name of Barings stull
enjoyed a prestige in Argentina which he feared would long have
been lost.67 The Americans seemed chivalrously reluctant to take
advantage of Barings’ temporary disablement - “Morgans. . . have
been particularly civil and anxious to defer to us, reported Farrer.®®
It seemed that one day Barings might after all be able to reclaim their
former fief.
   The prospects seemed even brighter when in 1923 Barings, in con-
                                                               ,
junction with Morgan Grenfell (as J. S. Morgan had now become)
were exceptionally allowed by the Treasury to issue £2.5 million 5
per cent bonds for the development of the Port of Buenos Aires. The
350                     The Sixth Great Power