

felt at ease — his niece Daphne Pollen recalled the ‘chill atmosphere’
of the great rooms, with their ‘well-varnished and discreetly lit
Canalettos and polished parquet floor - but in his own style he did it
very well. In 1922 he was thinking seriously of adding a country
house to his other possessions, sending inter alia for the particulars
of Mereworth, a Palladian villa in Kent, but the impulse passed
before he had indulged it.
   One day in Bishopsgate he wanted to speak to the book-keepers
and got the postal department by mistake. He asked the boy who
replied to let him know the balance of Princess Troubetskoy’s
account. There was a baffled silence. Revelstoke repeated the ques-
tion. ‘Who are you?’ asked the boy cautiously. ‘Lord Revelstoke!’
‘Lord who?’ Revelstoke in his turn now asked, ‘And who are you?’ ‘I
am Barings,’ replied the boy with some magniloquence. ‘So am I!’
retorted Revelstoke. So, in the eyes of the outside world, and indeed
in the eyes of his partners, he was.
  The only one among them who could hold his own was Gaspard
Farrer, and he reserved his fire for occasions that he felt of real
importance. But Farrer was almost sixty at the end of the war, and it
was five years since he had first announced his intention to retire. At
the beginning of 1924 he handed over virtually all his interests in
Barings to the younger generation, and though he did not formally
cease to be a partner until the end of the following year, his attend-
ance in the partners’ room became more erratic and he devoted him-
self to his work with his first love, H.S. Lefevre and Co. Alfred
Mildmay soldiered on, did not retire as a director until 1940, and was
indeed technically a partner when he died aged seventy-three in
1944. His influence on Revelstoke had never been great, however,
and did not increase with the years. When asked what Mildmay did
all day, an unkind colleague remarked that he used to spend his time
adding up his money on a piece of blotting paper, but had had to
renounce this pursuit when the blotting paper became too small.3
Cecil Baring too remained from the older generation, but he re-
garded his elder brother with a certain amount of awe and rarely
took a different line to him.
   Of those others who had been partners or near-partners before the
war, Shaw-Stewart was dead, Errington - now Lord Cromer - was at
court, and Everard Baring had gone back to the army and ended up
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’: 1918-1929           335
as Chairman of the Southern Railway. Windham Baring was the
only partner to return. He was one of the first to be demobilized,
having had the good fortune to be serving ona ship that was paid off
in November 1918. He was in the office before Christmas: ‘It seemed
rather strange coming back to this life again, he told Leng in Buenos
Aires, ‘but nevertheless I can assure you I am very glad to return.’* He
took responsibility for Latin American affairs again, and also for the
office in Liverpool, where Alan Tod was put in charge the following
year. In due course he would probably have become senior partner.
Then, at the end of 1922, he was convalescing after an operation for
appendicitis. A blood clot reached his heart and he died suddenly,
aged forty-one. ‘We were devoted to him and he to us and we shall
miss him sadly,’ Farrer told Leng. ‘He was too young to die... . . His
great interest in life was his business here and most particularly its
connexion with Argentina.’
   Even before he died it was obvious that new blood was needed.
‘We shall have to bestir ourselves and try to make arrangements for
the Future here,’ wrote Farrer in 1919, ‘as we are all getting old and
past work, and I at least am certainly not fit to cope with the new con-
ditions in business which we shall all have to face. We badly need
men here of sound sense and strength, who are not afraid to tell
unpleasant truths, but sympathetic enough to command attention.’¢
Arthur Villiers was sympathetic enough, though perhaps not too
eager to tell unpleasant truths. He had joined Barings before the war
but had been lured away to help George Schuster set up an invest-
ment company and excelled in this arcane science. Two wounds and
a DSO later he returned to Barings. He professed dislike of Jews and
foreigners, particularly Germans, but went to France to be best man
at Antony de Rothschild’s wedding and did more than anyone else
to strengthen his house’s relationship with Rothschilds and
Schroders.” Villiers was thirty-six when he rejoined Barings in 1919;
ten years older than Evelyn Bingham Baring, a descendant of Sir
Francis’s fourth son, William, who became a director in 1923. Evelyn
Baring - ‘little Evelyn’, not to be confused with Lord Cromer’s third
son, Evelyn, who served briefly in the bank but made his name in the
public service and ended as Lord Howick - was said by Cecil Baring
to be ‘gifted with ability and insight’.8 He went with Windham Bar-
ing to Argentina in 1921 and was described as ‘getting on first class
336                      The Sixth Great Power
and is a great help to me, talks Spanish whenever he gets an opportu-
nity and makes friends wherever he goes’.? He never seems to have
made any marked impression, however, and did not stand outas the
natural leader who would take Barings into the 1930s and 1940s.
   Still younger blood was introduced in the next decade. Edward
Reid was the son of John Revelstoke’s sister Susan. He became a
director in 1926, one year before his cousin Alexander, who was to
succeed as 6th Lord Ashburton and remain with Barings till 1969.
‘Both shew great capacity for work,’ wrote Cecil Baring, ‘and one
feels sure that when it comes to their turn to exercise judgment, there
need be no lack of confidence as to the outcome.'!°
   All of these except Villiers were members of the family, and all of
them were out of the same intellectual and social mould. Revelstoke
could not see among his junior partners any who were suitable to
take on the leadership when he died or retired: some were too old,
some too young, and those that were neither were too deeply
imbued with the values and shibboleths of establishment merchant
banking to grapple with the problems that lay ahead. Barings needed
a new Joshua Bates, and like Alexander Baring before him
Revelstoke looked for him from the New World.
   Edward Peacock was the son of a poor Presbyterian minister in
Ontario. He worked his way through college, had a few months as
motorman on a streetcar, taught English for five years, and in 1902
joined Dominion Securities, a Toronto financial company, which
sent him to manage its affairs in London." His already considerable
reputation was enhanced when Dr Pearson, the international finan-
cier, was drowned in the Lusitania and Peacock was putin charge of a
motley collection of ill-managed and under-funded enterprises and
‘brought them through in a marvellous way’.!? Revelstoke was much
struck by him and was instrumental in securing his election to the
Court of the Bank of England in 1921: ‘I shall look forward to the
certainty of having gained a most esteemed new colleague,’ he wrote
in congratulation.!3 He then proceeded to get his protégé out of the
Court again by persuading him to join Barings - tradition dictating
that two partners from the same house should not serve with the
Bank simultaneously. Peacock made up his mind at the end of 1923:
‘He is another man since the decision was made,’ wrote Farrer,
‘comes in here fairly often and in the highest spirits.’!4
John Baring (1863-1929),   , by Ambrose
McEvoy.
                                                                ;