

profits” ’.1°3 The growth of Barings over the previous decade had not
been spectacular, especially when compared with certain of their
rivals, but the business was sound and prosperous. Alfred Mildmay
was now the senior partner, but everyone accepted that it was to Pea-
cock that the house looked for its future direction.
  ‘You will see, Cecil Baring, now Lord Revelstoke, wrote to
Stamfordham, ‘that the concern remains, as a whole, a family affair,
although it has always been laid down here, and we of the family
constantly recognize, that there can be no place for one of our
members unless he shews the requisite character and brains. It is a
team that I feel sure will pull together, and to which the term “happy
family” can unhesitatingly be applied. In spite of the loss which we
have suffered, which cannot in its entirety be made good, we are
going to do our best to meet the responsibilities which are entrusted
to us, and to conduct our business with the same impersonal ends
which have guided our predecessors.’!°4
   Stamfordham in his reply spoke for George V, who had profited
so signally from Lord Revelstoke’s advice throughout his life. The
King was confident, he wrote, that ‘with the varied personnel of the
Baring family, strengthened by the addition of Mr Peacock, the
Board of Directors will not only be “family” in character, and a
united “happy family”, but remain a powerful national institution,
animated by the great traditions of which John was so justly
proud’.!°5 Those traditions, established   towards   the end of the
eighteenth century, had been carried through for almost one hun-
dred and fifty years with astonishing consistency. The language was
different, the sums of money vastly greater, but the spirit of Francis
Baring’s partners’ room still ruled in Bishopsgate. Intelligence was
desirable, clubability no defect, but integrity was indispensable.
Lord Revelstoke had done as much as anyone to ensure that this
scale of values had survived. He had good reason to be proud of his
accomplishment.
                          Epilogue
                           1929-1987


It is now nearly sixty years since the death of Lord Revelstoke, some-
thing over a quarter of Barings’ total life span to date. The period
between 1929 and 1939 was marked by a radical reshaping of the
house’s activities in the field of issues. The slump between 1929 ana
1934 shook still further the strength of sterling and disrupted the
world’s monetary order. New issues for overseas borrowers were less
than half what they had been in the previous decade, while issues for
British borrowers were three times as numerous. Peacock made a
speciality of corporate finance, and under his direction Barings
played an important part in financing and reorganizing British busi-
ness. The formation of the Lancashire Cotton Corporation, the
reconstruction of the Royal Mail Group, the electrification of the
Southern Railway and the extension of the Piccadilly Line to
Finsbury Park in the north and Hammersmith           in the west, the
takeover by Charringtons of Hoare’s Brewery, were only some of the
larger enterprises in which Barings were involved.
   During the Second World War, as between 1914 and 1918, tradi-
tional merchant banking was almost impossible to practise. Issuing
stopped altogether, the credit business collapsed, and with all the
partners involved in some kind of war work, the house was con-
cerned mainly with routine banking business such as the payment of
dividends and the management of client accounts. Though Bishops-
gate never closed, most of the remaining staff moved down to Lord
Northbrook’s old family home, Stratton Park - acquired from the
school which by then occupied it - where they stayed for the dura-
tion of the war.
   After 1945 Peacock continued to lead the house. He was assisted
                                 359
360                     The Sixth Great Power