

appear to be justified by the amount of goods which we export, and
our home trade has hardly fulfilled expectations.’ But things were
looking up; ‘every year since the war we have made distinct progress
towards sounder and more settled conditions’.**


Unfortunately the sounder conditions were never established, in
part because of the speculative fever in the United States and the
scale of their foreign lending. Revelstoke wrote in alarm of a situa-
tion in which, even in the more remote hamlets of the West, the
‘ticker’ buzzed busily all day as the speculators gambled on perpetual
growth,5 while Farrer remarked that they were ‘aghast at the size
and number of their foreign loans. . .. How can these borrowers
fulfil such obligations? or is London judging from her past experi-
ences as complete a back number as I feel and know I am myself?’%
   It was against this background of incipient disaster that Revel-
stoke, at the end of 1928, accepted Winston Churchill’s invitation to
join Sir Josiah Stamp as British delegate at the forthcoming con-
ference on German reparations in Paris. Revelstoke was by then
sixty-six, and had been carrying the brunt of the responsibilities at
Barings for almost forty years. He must from time to time have con-
templated retirement, but he showed no signs of any such intention
when he wrote to Peacock from Paris urging his partner to accept the
task of Chairman of the Channel Tunnel Committee. The confer-
ence could not last much longer, he wrote: ‘I hope and think that at
any rate by the end of April I ought to be free, and in that case I can
assure you that it will be with particular pleasure that I shall return to
my Penates at Bishopsgate.’97
   The work in Paris was gruelling. Moreau, the head of the French
delegation, refused to modify the existing reparation terms by one
iota ~ ‘he shuts his mouth like a steel trap when Schacht pleads pov-
erty and inability to pay’.°8 Schacht, the German delegate, was
equally intransigent: ‘with his hatchet, Teuton face and burly neck
and badly fitting collar ... ,’ wrote Revelstoke in his diary, ‘he
reminds me of a sealion at the Zoo, which is half out of the water on a
rock, and is waiting to catch a fish thrown to him by his keeper’.9
The Italians felt it their duty to be as difficult as the French. J. P.
Morgan, for the Americans, was ‘like a wild bison in a shop that sells
          ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:    1918-1929      357
Dresden china’. Revelstoke, in atrabilious mood, deplored the power
of the United States and the unhappy lot of the British who, ‘in spite
of their loss of blood and treasure since 1914, find themselves
ground under the iron heel of the insolent wealth of aTrans-Atlantic
people who must be considered the greatest profiteers that the
World has ever seen’.!°° Finally the representatives of the British
Treasury drove Revelstoke to despair, with their ‘supercilious man-
ner and sneering attitude for the whole of the rest of mankind’ and
their ‘impossibly inelastic preconceptions’.!°!
   Most of these disobliging observations, it is only fair to say, were
written when Revelstoke had fallen prey to the virulent flu epidemic
that was ravaging Europe. He was ill and tired but the demands of
the conference did not allow him to relax. Sometimes the leaders of
the delegation would convene at his bedside to argue acrimoniously
over his ailing body. By mid-April a complete breakdown of negotia-
tions was imminent. On 18 April the committee sat until 6.45 p.m.
and the Germans walked out in high anger: ‘Schacht was quite
impossible today, Revelstoke wrote in his diary in a shaky hand. It
was his final entry. He suffered a major heart attack in the early
hours of 19 April and was dead when his servant came to call him in
the morning. His body was brought back to England and buried at
Membland. A special trainload of family and friends travelled to
Devon for the funeral. ‘It seemed to be a matter of course,’ wrote his
niece Daphne, ‘that Lady Desborough and her daughter Imogen
should take their places as chief mourners.’1°
  Lord Revelstoke left unsettled estate of £2,492,000, of which
£1,087,000 was paid in duty. To the National Gallery he left his
Guardi, his Van de Capelle and the ‘well-varnished Canalettos’; the
National Portrait Gallery got his pictures by Hone and Chandler. He
left £100,000 to King Edward’s Hospital, whose Treasurer he had
been for many     years; £50,000   to Guy's; £25,000 to St Mary’s,
Paddington, Medical Schools and £5 to a Baring godchild. Though
his death inevitably diminished the money immediately available to
the house for day-to-day operations, it did not affect the capital or
reserves. Besides the £2 million or so which figured in the published
balance sheet there was, Cecil Baring told Lord Stamfordham, ‘at
least as much more money in the business which might, if the need
for strict accounting arose, be set down as “surplus or undivided
358                     The Sixth Great Power