

by Howard Millis, a solicitor formerly with the City firm of
Slaughter and May, who specialized in corporate finance. Invest-
ment expertise was supplied by Arthur Villiers and Evelyn Baring.
Sir Edward Reid looked after the banking business and Lord
Ashburton played an important general role with responsibility fora
number of orporate relationships. Lord Errington and John Philli-
more respectively represented the younger element of the family
and brought Argentine experience. Errington, who succeeded his
father as Lord Cromer in 1953, was to take leave of absence from the
firm in 1959 to become Minister at the Embassy in Washington and
without returning to the firm went on to become Governor of the
Bank of England at the age of forty-three. When Millis retired in the
1950s, his place was taken by Andrew Carnwath who with A. W.
Giles led the house team in many important mergers and takeovers
during the 1960s. It was Giles who was above all responsible for
keeping alive Barings’ connection in South-East Asia - particularly
with Jardine Matheson, a significant holding in which was acquired
in the late 1950s.
   When Peacock retired in 1954 his role as senior partner was taken
over by Evelyn Baring. He in turn was succeeded in 1963 by Sir
Edward Reid, followed in 1967 by Lord Cromer, at the end of the
latter’s five-year term of office as Governor of the Bank of England.
In 1971 Cromer was appointed British Ambassador in Washington.
His place as senior partner was filled for brief periods, first byJohn
Phillimore and then by Sir Andrew Carnwath. John Baring, the
eldest son of Lord Ashburton, was appointed Chairman of the Ex-
ecutive Committee on Lord Cromer’s departure and on Sir
Andrew’s retirement in 1974 was named the first Chairman of
Baring Brothers.
   The change in the traditional business of Barings became still
more accentuated after 1945. With sterling far weaker even than
before the war, issues for overseas borrowers became a rarity in the
1950s, 1960s and 1970s. The sterling market was opened to overseas
borrowers, however, on a number of occasions during this period.
Barings led sterling debt issues for the World Bank on two occasions
in the 1950s and again in 1972, for the Inter American Development
Bank in 1964 and for the Government of Japan in 1963. It was a par-
ticular feather in the firm’s cap to be selected as lead manager for the
                         Epilogue: 1929-1987                         361
two international agencies; in the case of the World Bank, Barings
were unanimously put forward as lead manager by the group of six
banks (Barings, Hambros, Lazards, Morgan Grenfell, Rothschilds
and Schroders) whom the World Bank had selected.
   While the sterling market was only opened to foreign borrowers as
an exception between 1945 and 1979, Barings remained active as a
manager of new issues of equity and debt securities for UK issuers
during this period - though the market for new issues of debt saw
little marked activity in the 1970s. The firm also featured among
those London houses who took part in the development of the
Eurobond market, and kept its relationship with foreign clients alive
in that way. It was not until 1979 that exchange controls were aban-
doned and Barings availed themselves of the possibility of issuing
long- or medium-term sterling debt for countries like Finland and
Sweden. The house has since emerged as a leader in new issues of
sterling debt securities.
    Acceptances, the other pillar on which the prosperity of Barings
 traditionally rested, have remained a feature, though far less signifi-
 cant than in the past as a measure of business activity, since they are
 today just one of a number of facilities offered to clients. Liabilities
 on acceptances at the end of 1987 stood at over £350 million. In 1981
 Barings, with Rothschilds and Samuel Montagu, were responsible
 for setting up a syndicate of more than fifty banks to finance an
acceptance credit of £365 million for Petroleos Mexicanos, at that
time the largest acceptance credit ever arranged in London.
   Corporate finance has played an increasingly significant part in
the bank’s activities. Most of the acquisitions and mergers which
Barings have organized have taken place with relatively little bother,
but from time to time contested bids have commanded the head-
lines for weeks or even months ata time. A particularly conspicuous
example was the great battle in the early 1960s, when Barings
advised Courtaulds in their fierce and finally successful resistance to
a takeover bid from ICI. Breweries, textiles and overseas trading
companies were the industrial sectors in which Barings were particu-
larly active. They were involved in takeover transactions for Watneys
                                                                     of
and Whitbreads, and played an important part in the building up
                                                          was the
Allied Breweries, now Allied-Lyons. Another cause célébre
                                                           an
takeover of AEI by GEC in which Barings managed to achieve
362                      The Sixth Great Power