

increase in the value of the offer, though AE] lostits independence at
the end of a hard-fought battle.
   The corporate finance business has never been more active than it
is now. The roll of clients for whom the firm has recently acted, or
whom it has advised, includes national and international names
such as Royal Insurance, Pirelli, Blue Circle Industmes, Cathay
Pacific Airways, Allied-Lyons, Ferranu, Philips, W.H. Smith, Bank of
England, H.M. Government, Royal Bank of Scotland, Union Bank
of Switzerland, The World Bank, and this is but a selection of some
of the better-known names.
   Investment managements a part of the business in which growth
had been outstanding. Before 1939 this was done on an informal
basis for frends and clients; by the mid-1950s the securttes man-
aged on a discretionary basis for clients were valued at some £15
million. The growing complexity of the securities market, together
with an immense upsurge in the amount of money available for
investment, especially in pension funds, has led to a wide range of
charities, trusts and funds, as well as private clients, concluding that
their affairs would be better looked after by professionals. At the end
of 1987 Barings managed about £10.7 billion for a wide range of cli-
ents through companies in London, Boston, Tokyo and Hong Kong.
   Compared with the Bntsh clearing banks, Barings is a minnow
among whales. In comparison with the other merchant banks, it can
hold up its head, but is notamong the largest. Yet in 1987 its balance
sheet stood at some £2.7 billion, having grown from £276 million in
a little over a decade. The old offices in Bishopsgate have vanished,
replaced by a twenty-storey tower block. The worldwide staff of the
Barings Group is not far short of two thousand and growing.
   In the mid-1960s existing inheritance tax laws and the possibility
of a wealth tax being introduced by the ruling Labour Government
were seen to pose a threat to the continuity of Barings in its then
form. Partly in order to meet this threat it was decided in 1969 to
transfer a majority stake in the equity of the business to a newly-
formed charity called The Baring Foundation. In 1985 a major capi-
tal reorganization took place with a new top company, Barings ple,
being set up and the balance of the equity being transferred to the
Foundation. Baring Brothers remains the merchant banking subsid-
iary, with the investment management business being grouped in a
                        Epilogue: 1929-1987                        363
parallel operating company. Control of the policy of the Barings
Group rests with the directors of Barings ple while the economic
interest in its equity is owned by the Foundation, which applies the
flow of dividends to charitable purposes. In 1987 it made grants
totalling £2.6 million to a wide range of national and other charities
with particular emphasis on social welfare.
   Two hundred and twenty-five years after Francis Baring opened
his agency in London, his four-times great-grandson, John, is
Chairman of the house, and his three-times great-grandson,
Nicholas, is Deputy Chairman. Nicholas’s brother Peter is group
finance director and another Baring is a director of Baring Brothers &
Co. Limited, while three more are working in the house. Of the eight
men and women who sit on the board of The Baring Foundation,
five are members of the family. Sixty years ago Cecil Baring told Lord
Stamfordham, “The concern remains, as a whole, a family affair.’
Immense though the growth has been in the business and in the
number of individuals involved, there is still strong family represen-
tation at the top level today working in partnership, as has so often
been the pattern in the past, with non-family colleagues of great
ability. There is nothing in the constitution of Barings or of the
Foundation which requires family involvement, and its conunua-
tion depends on a flow of suitable individuals. However, there is no
lack of up-and-coming Barings in the wings, and this, together with
the interest of other members of the group in seeing the traditional
spirit of the house maintained, gives good reason to hope that the
business will continue to have a distinctive feeling for some time yet.
                                                                                                                           Ww       i