

And, naturally, as we saw in the ten preceding volumes, it is military affairs which take up the lion's share of the corpus of this volume XI. Two statistics say it all: Clarke, War Minister, alone received 1,149 letters (36 % of the total), and Lacuée, War Administration Minister, got 247 (8 % of the total). Nor should we forget here the abundant correspondence with Davout, commander of the Army in Germany, Berthier, supervising (from Paris) Spanish operations, Dumas, Director General of Conscription, generals, and ordnance officers sent to the four corners of the Empire, etc.. In the end, 60% of the texts published in the present volume concern the army.Nothing escaped the Emperor at work; not even the tiniest details, whether of uniforms, arms, saddles, sabres, or lances. He corrected the ideas of others, developed his own, encouraged, ordered, reprimanding when necessary, offering praise from time to time. He even once again became an artillery general, studying new types of mortars, calculating trajectories, and giving – often from far away – precise orders on the position of cannon facing estuaries, on islands, or on ships positioned in defence of the coast. In short, the whiff of powder seemed to have brought him to life. Spain, the only active war front on the continent, was about to get worse, after a period of definite improvement. Wellington was campaigning there against more than 300,000 French soldiers, ranged in several different armies, whose generals were quarrelling. As for Joseph, he was thought to have “gone native” to such an extent as to be deemed not worth talking to. His brother wrote only one letter to him during the nine months at issue here. It was essentially Berthier's job to run the war in the Iberian Peninsula. How much of the 238 (occasionally extremely detailed) letters Napoleon sent to him did the Major General during this period send to the generals or to Joseph? Surely the King had to be informed of what was going on in his kingdom? This year of ‘nearly-peace' was also dedicated to dreams of the sea and the provisional reactivation of the project for a military landing in England. It also primarily marks the beginning of the most phenomenal martial enterprise of Napoleon's reign, namely, the invasion of Russia. From 19 April, 1811, the die was cast: the huge machine of the organisation of the Grande Armée was put into gear and nothing was to halt it.(21) In December, Clarke was informed that the creation of the 4th battalions of each regiment had but one aim: war; starting in March 1812.(22)Gathering warclouds, indeed. The story of this increase in tension is well known. Though it was exacerbated by specific ‘sore points' (the annexation of Oldenburg, the Czar's refusal of the Russian marriage, the non-respect of the Blockade, the Ukase on French produce, etc.), the fundamental cause was the incompatibility of the French and Russian Emperors' European projects, in Germany, in Poland, in the Mediterranean, and in the Balkans, where what is more Russia and Turkey had been fighting for the previous two years.(23) Alexander finally decided to switch roles, moving from “insidious enemy to declared adversary”.(24) But he was to meet his match. It is true that Napoleon – who was not always the bad guy – had allowed Alexander to steal a march on him the previous year, with the troop movements on the Duchy of Warsaw frontier, but thereafter, the French Emperor stepped up his game. And his response was fully commensurate with his power. First of all, he detailed Davout to prepare immense forces which he hoped to unleash on the “barbarians of the North”: as governor general of the Hanseatic Provinces, commander in chief of the Armée d'Allemagne, renamed in October “Observation Corps on the Elbe”, Davout received no less than 229 letters, to which should be added orders to the Governor General of Illyria, Bertrand, and to the viceroy of Italy, Eugène, to levy troops and to send them to the north-east. Orders were also sent to the Commander of the Garde, Mortier, to the finance ministers and, of course, to the War Administration headed by Lacuée, who was required to provide all the necessary equipment. Leafing through this mass of documents, one is left with no doubt that preparation for the “guerre suprême”, as Napoleon would later term it, was well in motion at the beginning of 1812.Caulaincourt was forced to leave St Petersburg. He was replaced by General Lauriston. On the occasion of the change in ambassadors, Napoleon had delivered to the Czar a long letter in which he dwelt on the difficulties within the Tilsit alliance, reiterating his complaints with respect to Russian policy, threatening slightly but nevertheless begging his correspondent “ to see in his missive only conciliation, fitting for the elimination of all distrust on either side and for the unification of our two nations, in every respect, in the intimacy of an alliance which for four years now had been a happy one”.(25) The reply of the autocrat would be similarly ambivalent. Then, on 17 April, 1811, Maret replaced Champagny as Minister of Foreign Relations. The choice of this devoted servant was a change of policy rather than one of personnel. The 120 letters which the new minister received up to December are those preparing for the pursuance of diplomacy by other means. The compliments addressed to other European sovereigns should be put under the same heading,(26) as indeed all the words written on the subject of how necessary it was for the “Warsovians” (Napoleon never officially used the word “Poland”) to have an army worthy of the name.