---
source_url: "https://www.napoleon.org/en/history-of-the-two-empires/articles/gathering-warclouds/"
final_url: "https://www.napoleon.org/en/history-of-the-two-empires/articles/gathering-warclouds/"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "d9f42827fde01e68b0969c63d9b6a380c5130fcbf20b85e0424c4c23f0ea058c"
title: "Gathering warclouds - napoleon.org"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

Gathering warclouds - napoleon.org

- Go to menu
- Go to content
- Go to search

# Gathering warclouds

Author(s) : LENTZ Thierry

Share it

Introduction to Volume XI of the Correspondance Générale de Napoléon I, Fayard, 2015

1811 could have been a good, or at least a promising year for the French Empire. Peace on the Continent (since 1802) had never been closer, and even in Spain the situation seemed to be stabilising. Britain was suffering badly from the Continental Blockade; indeed, the annexations of 1810 had tightened the screw. After the integration of a great part of Hanover to Westphalia (14 January, 1810), the addition of the Papal States, the Hanseatic cities and Holland to France (17 February and 9 July, 1810), and the creation of military governments in the north of Spain (8 February, 1810) – the annexation of Catalonia would be decided upon in the autumn of 1811 and officialised in January 1812-, Napoleon continued his restructuring of Europe (this time with delicate touches here and there), and by and large, the continent was not unhappy with French dominance. The alliances with the Confederation of the Rhine, with the Duchy of Warsaw and with “Papa Franz's” Austria seemed solid. The Bonaparte family reigned over half of the continent: Joseph in Spain, Jerome in Westphalia, the Murat-Caroline husband-and-wife team in Naples, and Eugène in Italy.(1) A son of Louis, Napoléon-Louis, was the titular Grand-Duc de Berg, with uncle Napoleon as regent.(2) Within the Empire proper, the Grand Duchess Elisa ran Tuscany,(3) and Camillo Borghese, husband of Pauline, managed the French departments beyond the Alps. Who could contest the Emperor of the West's right to proclaim before the Corps législatif: “A new order rules the universe”?(4) At home, opposition seemed to have melted away, and the few priests who were stirring up trouble were quickly dispatched to Corsica where, though the weather was naturally nicer, the surveillance was tight. This firmer stance by the regime, marked by the arrival of the ruthless Savary as Minister of Police, did not trouble the people; indeed they were almost behaving as if the country were at peace. The arrest of a few trouble-makers and the close surveillance or detention at Vincennes of certain cardinals was not going to make public opinion abandon the Emperor. And to cement the whole, the marriage alliance with Austria brought forth the finest fruit in the form of the birth of the King of Rome, on 20 March, 1811. In 1810, however, the Emperor had given the impression that he was resting on his laurels. He had been slow to appreciate certain difficulties, in particular reacting sluggishly to the economic downturn, showing lack of concern for the agitation in Germany, underestimating the difficulties in Spain, and remaining blind to the rising impatience and later downright hostility of Russia. Even physically, he appeared a changed man. At this time, one person found him “jaundiced, obese, bloated”, adding: “I was expecting a God; I saw only a fat man”.(5) Later, Jacques Bainville was to say that Napoleon was “drunk on fatherhood, dreaming of an empire that could never be too large for his son”.(6) In that spring of 1811, the Emperor now knew that dark clouds were gathering. Thunder rumbled, the premise of the violent storm that was to break in June 1812 with the invasion of Russia and start of the beginning of the end. The 3,144 letters in this volume XI of the Correspondance générale (7) of Napoleon give a startling snapshot of the paradoxes in these nine months – from 1 April to 31 December, 1811 – during which scales wobbled and then tipped sharply down towards the politico-economic disruption of the Napoleonic Empire and war.(8) At home, the letters tell of the final festivities related to the King of Rome and his solemn baptism at Nôtre-Dame, organised down to the last detail by the Grand-Maréchal du Palais, Duroc.(9) We read of the Emperor and his visits to the provinces: Cherbourg in May and then the Belgian and Dutch departments over the summer. Here the Emperor is still recognisable, hyperactive, passing from one subject to another, no detail too humble, imaginative and imperious. It was still the time of the grand projects, for Antwerp, Cherbourg, the Zealand islands, but also Paris and Versailles. He wanted the city-hub of the Empire to become “unique, beyond compare with any other capital”.(10) As for Louis XIV's château, it was to be returned to its former glory. Indeed Napoleon taxed the Interior Minister on this point in several of the 67 letters addressed to him, cheek by jowl with remarks on matters of public order, food supplies and reprimands to be given to this or that government department. There was not to be enough time for the completion of all the Parisian projects;(11) and lack of money was to sound the death knell for the one at Versailles. Two major events however darkened the horizon in France: new developments in the religious crisis, beginning with the annexation of the Papal States and followed by the arrest of Pius VII, and the initial effects of the economic downturn which, gradually, extinguished the “prosperity and growth” of the first years of the Empire.(12)