

The grave nature of the religious crisis appears only in side-shots in this volume of the Correspondance générale.(13) The crisis itself took place for the most part during the Emperor's stay in Paris, and it was probably his priority to deal with it during councils and in conversation with the Minister for Religion and the other main players in the matter. That being said, Bigot de Préameneu received forty or so letters, and ecclesiastical matters are the subject of several dozen letters to Savary, Fesch and Montalivet. We see here the Emperor adopting different strategies, namely:– The fixing of imperial authority in the ex-Papal states now French departments. The resistance of local clergy was to cease, and for that to happen, Savary had to take “firm measures to put an end to this ridiculous situation”.(14)– The bypass of the recalcitrant Pope's “investiture bottleneck” by reactivating the Gallican practice of getting diocesan chapters to appoint un-invested Bishops as “Vicars Capitular”. These men could thus administer their districts without needing any Papal approval whatsoever. It was an issue however that would not go away, because Pius VII, as he said, was ready to sacrifice himself in order to bequeath to his successors an unbroken heritage.(15)– An attempt to negotiate with Pius VII, given that Napoleon could not force the Pontiff to accept the Gallican rules; after a meeting of an Ecclesiastical council, in January 1811, a delegation went to Savona where Pius was being held under house arrest. However, the Pope remained unmoved, to Napoleon's huge annoyance.(16)– Having the unilateral decisions of the Imperial government ratified by a “National Council” opening on 17 June, 1811. Another failure. Napoleon fumed, made threats and then took action: the recalcitrant cardinals saw their detention prolonged, and relations with Uncle Fesch reached a new low.(17) The conflict with the Holy See was not even close to being over, and there were to be yet further developments.(18) In particular, this issue would provide more troops for opponents of the Empire. Another disturbing element on the home front was that the Empire was suffering the results of an economic downturn, one that had begun at the beginning of the previous year and got steadily worse. The abundance of letters to the Treasury and Finance ministers, Mollien and Gaudin, (98 and 40 letters respectively) denotes the Emperor's vigilance but also his largely financial view of the question. There were several causes for the downturn: a drop in military orders as a result of the end of the continental wars (except in Spain); the tightening of the Blockade which added complexities to trading almost on a daily basis; monetary tension as a result of the excess of loans offered by banking houses; a shortage of liquidity as a direct result of an attempt to solve the loan problem; the collapse of the real estate market; sequential bankruptcies; and the laying-off of tens of thousands of workers. Confidence took a hit, trade slowed, and certain prices and salaries began to drop. The downturn reached a new low in 1811, but it was far from over. And to add insult to injury, though the harvest in 1810 had been acceptable, that of 1811 was frankly rotten. The price of a hectolitre of wheat had averaged 15.17 Francs in 1809. It rose to 20.26 Francs in 1810, 26.33 Francs in 1811, and reached 33 Francs in 1812.(19) With this rise in the price of living, the downturn also became a social issue. For the first time in fifteen years, the people suffered food shortages. This time the State was forced to intervene, naturally with public orders and police measures, but also with a slackening of certain rules for the Blockade.(20) The consequences of these crises one on top of the other would be felt right up to the end of the Empire, bringing with them political consequences. Support for the regime began to falter tangibly, both in the world of business and amongst workers, craftsmen and rural folk.