
 

 
 At Oxford I was most fortunate in having Roger Owen as my supervisor. His help, advice and supportive comments
 were very valuable in guiding me throughout the difficult task of writing my D.Phil, dissertation. His insistence
 on rigorous scholarship and his love of, and dedication to, his students will always be most inspiring. Michael
 Gilsenan, although not supervising my work in an official manner, gave freely of his time and assistance in
 guiding me through writing my dissertation. During numerous walks in the beautiful gardens of Magdalen and St.
 John’s Colleges I came to develop a friendship that added considerable warmth to my “Oxford experience.”
 

 
 For valuable comments on the present text and its earlier drafts I would like to thank, first and foremost, my
 D.Phil, examiners Eugene Rogan and Sami Zubaida who read the dissertation carefully and critically. Tim Mitchell,
 too, was most generous with his insightful comments and criticisms. I extend my thanks also to the many friends
 who have read parts of the text; these include: Nadia Benabid, Elliott Colla, Arthur Denner, Mine Ener, Jan
 Goldberg, Shamil Jeppie, Ussama Makdisi and Letitia Ufford. Both Youssef Nabil and Andy Shanken helped me with
 the illustrations, and Mrs. Virginia Catmur of Cambridge University Press copy-edited the text with care.
 

 
 There are many persons who have contributed in more than one way to this project: Reem Saad by her unfailing
 support and most lively company has added much joy and richness to my stay in Oxford. Her perceptive comments and
 often deserved criticisms of the text were most valuable in helping me revise it. I would
 also like to thank my friends who were kind enough to tolerate me over the years with my burdensome companion,
 Mehmed Ali: Iman Hamdi, Hager Hadidi, Hania Sholkamy, Manal Fouad, Nadia Kamel, Naira Ijja, Randa Shaath, Sohail
 Luka and Ziad Bahaeldine.
 

 
 I owe a very special debt to every individual member of the Egyptian National Archives, especially to Mr. Ibrahim
 Fathalla, Ms. Afaf Ragab, Mrs. Nadia Mostafa and, of course, Madame Sawsan Abdel-Ghani. The staff of the
 Radcliffe Camera of the Bodleian Library, Oxford, of Dar al-Kutub, Cairo, of the Firestone Library, Princeton,
 and my former colleagues at the Library of the American University in Cairo were all very helpful.
 

 
 Last, but in no manner least, I wish to offer my deepest thanks to my sister, Rania, and her husband, Hany, for
 their support and understanding, and, above all, to my parents who have given me all their love and care and who
 encouraged me throughout my academic career.
 
 
 
 

### FILE: Text/kf_9774246969_09_note.html
 
 
 
 All the Pasha's Men 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note on transliteration, dates
 and references 
 

 

 
 Both Arabic and Turkish words are transliterated using the conventions of the International
 Journal of Middle East Studies . Names of Arabic-speaking persons are transliterated as if they were Arabic
 names, while those of Turkish-speaking persons are transliterated as if they were Turkish.