
 

 
 Plate 6: “Encampment of Ibrahim Pasha, near
 Jaffa,” by W. H. Bartlett, reproduced in his Syria, the Holy Land, Asia Minor, etc . (London:
 Fisher, 1836) 
 

 
 Plate 7: “Le Serment au drapeau” [The speech at
 the flag], by Prisse d’Avennes, reproduced in Gabriel Hanotaux, Histoire de la nation
 égyptienne . Volume VI: L’Egypte de 1801–1882 (Paris: La Société de l’Histoire Nationale,
 1926) 
 

 
 Plate 8: “Henry-John Temple Vicomte
 Palmerston,” reproduced in Maxime Weygand, Histoire militaire de Mohammed Aly et ses fils 
 (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1936) 
 

 
 Plate 9: “Reschid Pacha,” reproduced in
 Weygand, Histoire militaire 
 

 
 Plate 10: “Egyptian soldier,” by Prisse
 d’Avennes, in his Oriental Album 
 
 
 
 

### FILE: Text/kf_9774246969_07_preface.html
 
 
 
 All the Pasha's Men 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Preface 
 

 

 
 Although this book is a study of the army that was founded in Egypt in the first half of the nineteenth century,
 it does not offer a straightforward account of military history. While dealing with Egypt’s history during the
 reign of Mehmed Ali Pasha (1805–48) by closely studying the army the Pasha founded midway through his long
 career, it does not follow the generals and officers of this army whilst they trained their men in camps,
 commanded their troops in battle, or basked in their military victories. Rather, this is a book that is primarily
 interested in the men who did most of the “dirty work” of this army, those thousands of Egyptian peasant-soldiers
 who were conscripted to serve in this army: it follows the soldiers from the time they were recruited, to the
 time they were sent to the training camps, then to the bloody sites of pitched battles, and finally back to their
 barracks where they recuperated from past battles and prepared for future ones.
 

 
 The purpose of following the soldiers of this army so closely is not only to document their unprecedented
 experience and to check their reactions to what were novel and unfamiliar practices and institutions; it is also,
 and primarily, to check the validity of the common belief that this army was instrumental in raising Egyptian
 national consciousness and, indeed, in founding modern Egyptian nationalism specifically by giving these
 thousands of men the opportunity to bear arms and to defend their nation, a “right” that they were denied for
 centuries, if not millennia.
 

 
 By closely studying this army – how it was fed, supplied, and medically cared for, and more importantly, how its
 soldiers were conscripted and trained, how they reacted to their officers’ commands, and how they resisted the
 military authorities – this book argues that this army was, indeed, instrumental in founding the modern Egyptian
 nation. This it did, though, not by enlightening Egyptians regarding the essential truths of the “nation,” but by
 instituting novel practices of surveillance, control and management that radically altered the nature of the
 government in Cairo and fundamentally changed the manner in which it dealt with the Egyptian
 population. This army was also a crucial element in changing the ethnic and linguistic configuration of Egypt’s
 middle and upper classes in a manner that unwittingly gave rise to “nationalist” sentiments among the soldiery
 who were mostly Arabic-speakers and who resented being ruled and dominated by a Turkish-speaking
 military/bureaucratic elite.