
 

 
 Hijri dates mentioned in the notes are always cited with their Gregorian equivalents. The Ottoman abbreviations
 for the names of the months, which were used in the original documents, have been adopted here. These are:
 

 
 
 
 M: 

 Muharrem (Arabic Muḥarram) 
 

 
 S: 

 Safer (Ṣafar) 
 

 
 Ra: 

 Rebiülevvel (Rabī ‘ al-Awwal) 
 

 
 R: 

 Rebiülahir (Rabī ‘ al-Thānī) 
 

 
 Ca: 

 Cemaziyülevvel (Jumādā al-Ūla) 
 

 
 C: 

 Cemaziyülahir (Jumādā al-Ākhirā) 
 

 
 B: 

 Receb (Rajab) 
 

 
 Ş: 

 Şaban (Sha ‘bān) 
 

 
 N: 

 Ramazan (Ramaḍān) 
 

 
 L: 

 Şevval (Shawwāl) 
 

 
 Za: 

 Zilkade (Dhū al-Qi‘da) 
 

 
 Z: 

 Zilhice (Dhū al-Ḥijja) 
 
 
 

 
 As mentioned in the comprehensive bibliography at the end of this study, material from Dār al-Wathā’iq
 al-Qawmiyya, the Egyptian National Archives, are either from sijill ā t (bound registers) or maḥ ā fiẓ (boxes). The
 latter are referred to in the notes by name of the archival heading, then box number, followed by the document
 number within that box. For example, Sham 2/45 is document no. 45 of the 2nd box of Maḥāfi al-Shām .
 References from the sijillāt , on the other hand, use the system devised by Dār al-Wathā’iq
 in its mimeographed subject heading list, Qawā’im bi-Ni ām Tartīb Sijillāt al-Dār . Accordingly, S/5/51/2/4
 refers to letter no. 4 of the 2nd sijitt (register) of the 51st sub-division of Sijillāt
 ‘Ābdīn, which is given the code S/5. S/1: Ma‘iyya Saniyya (Viceregal Department), S/2:
 D īwān Khedewī (Department of Civil Affairs) and S/3: D īwān 
 al-Jihādiyya (Department of War) are some of the other codes.
 

 
 In both the maḥāfi and the sijillāt , the documents were overwhelmingly Ottoman and it is to
 these originals, rather than to their Arabic translations, that reference is made.
 
 
 
 

### FILE: Text/kf_9774246969_10_introduction.html
 
 
 
 All the Pasha's Men 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 

 

 
 On 25 November 1826 Mehmed Ali Pasha, the Ottoman Governor of Egypt, received in his palace Mr. John Barker in
 order to accept his credentials as the new British Consul in Alexandria. In a sign of deference, the Pasha stood
 up to greet the new consul, but ignored the official papers containing his credentials that he had in his hand.
 After a brief discussion of Mr. Barker’s predecessor who, the Pasha said, never contradicted “his will, or
 dispute [d] his opinions,” the Pasha then embarked upon a monolog that lasted for more than half an hour in which
 he told his British visitor a story about his childhood in Albania.
 

 
 “I was born in a village in Albania and my father had ten children besides me, who are all dead; but, while
 living, not one of them ever contradicted me. Although I left my native mountains before I attained to manhood,
 the principal people in the place never took any step in the business of the commune, without previously
 inquiring what was my pleasure. I came to this country an obscure adventurer, and when I was yet a Bimbashi (captain), it happened one day that the commissary had to give each of the Bimbashis a tent.
 They were all my seniors, and naturally pretended to a preference over me; but the officer said, – “Stand ye all
 by; this youth, Mohammed Ali, shall be served first” and I advanced step by step, as it pleased God to ordain;
 and now here I am” – (rising a little on his seat, [Barker comments] and looking out of the window which was at
 his elbow, and commanded a view of the Lake Mareotis [to the south of Alexandria]) – “and now here I am. I never
 had a master,” – (glancing his eye on the roll containing the Imperial firman ). 1 