
 

 
 While some of the British Foreign Office documents housed in the Public Record Office, London, were of some value
 in understanding how the army functioned, these offer mostly an outsider’s view of the events and personalities
 touched upon in this study and, therefore, they have been used only minimally. Similarly some accounts by
 contemporary travelers and military observers are used, but again only to give further descriptions to material
 gathered elsewhere. More substantially, this book relies on material collected from the Egyptian National
 Archives and, to a lesser extent, from the Egyptian National Library, both in Cairo. Broadly speaking, these are
 of three different kinds. On the one level, there are the numerous letters and regulations issued by the Pasha
 and his top officials. These include the correspondence between Mehmed Ali and the Commander-in-Chief of his
 forces, his son Ibrahim Pasha, letters to and from the Sublime Porte and various notables in Istanbul, as well as
 the numerous letters of the top officials issuing regulations to make sure that the army was well trained, well
 fed and regularly paid. The various military laws and training manuals which were the earliest publications of
 the Būlāq Press and which are housed in the Egyptian National Library make up the second group of contemporary
 documents that this study relies upon. In contrast to the very monolithic picture of power that comes across from
 reading these sources, the Archives, fortunately, also contains very valuable information in the form of the
 “journals” ( yevmiyyet , lit. daily accounts) from the military camps and war fronts that
 include such documents as roll calls, inventory lists, courts martial, pay rolls and descriptions of marches and
 of battles. By relying on this diverse array of official documents it is possible to present an integral view of
 the army which not only avoids the usual concentration on the person of Mehmed Ali that often characterizes the
 historiography of Egypt during his reign, but also allows one to have a closer look at the every-day performance
 of that army and the manner in which the soldiers reacted to their officers’ commands and
 orders. While this book does not claim to have “captured the voice” of the soldiers, given that the sources it
 relies on are still the sources of power itself, it attempts to challenge the monolithic picture that is usually
 offered of the performance of such an impressive institution of power and provides instead a more fractured, and,
 for this reason, a more telling image of that army.
 
 
 
 

### FILE: Text/kf_9774246969_08_acknowledgement.html
 
 
 
 All the Pasha's Men 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 

 

 
 This study is the result of several years of work in Cairo, Oxford and Princeton and has benefited greatly from
 the help and guidance of various people to whom many thanks are owed. Foremost are my professors at the American
 University in Cairo, and especially Galal Amin and Enid Hill to whom I am grateful for their unmatched generosity
 with their time and assistance as well as for showing me an example of dedication to teaching and encouragement
 of young scholars that I have rarely seen elsewhere.