
 

 
 Another traveler who had visited Egypt fifteen years earlier was surprised by how the Pasha, in spite of his old
 age, still managed to mesmerize his audience by his looks. “[T]he energy of his mind, the vivacity of his
 features, and the piercing lightning of his glance have undergone no change since I first saw him in the year
 1825, nearly 15 years ago.” 11 Still another traveler was
 disconcerted by the Pasha’s “piercing eye [which was] incessantly rolling about.” 12 These descriptions were valid not only for the old-aged Pasha: as early as 1823 it was noted
 that although “the Pasha has a vulgar low-born face, [he has] a commanding intelligent eye.” 13 
 

 
 Even those visitors who saw the Pasha as “undignified and ridiculous” could not help but comment on the “glance
 of his bright and restless eye,” noting that “as his unquiet eyes glided incessantly from one to the other of the
 party around him, or glanced stealthily at the door beyond, [they] could trace, in their workings, the restless
 and ever-watchful spirit of Mehemet Ali.” 14 Shortly after his death
 A. Paton, one of the shrewdest observers of mid-century Egypt, admitted that the Pasha’s “features were
 remarkable neither for beauty nor the reverse; but, [he hastened to add] if ever a man had an eye that denoted
 genius, Mohammed Ali was that person. Never dead nor quiescent, it was fascinating like that of a gazelle; or in
 the hour of storm, fierce as the eagle’s.” 15 Charles Murray, the
 last British Consul-General during the Pasha’s long reign, summed it up well when he said
 

 
 his eyes were of that peculiar grey which seems especially to belong to remarkable men; they were bright and set
 deep in the head. A strange wild fire gleamed in them at times, and they shot forth ireful glances, which few
 could withstand; but when in a mirthful mood they twinkled with a droll, malicious fun. Sometimes anger and
 humour were so quaintly blended in their expression that it was difficult to know which predominated. 16 
 

 
 Staging the gaze 
 

 
 At first sight, these stories woven around the person and gaze of Mehmed Ali appear anecdotal and marginal in the
 writings of contemporary European travelers, intending to add flavour to their accounts of what was already an
 exotic, unfamiliar and fascinating oriental tour. On the other hand, one can already detect some common themes
 and even expressions in this rich repertoire of stories concerning the great Pasha, suggesting perhaps that these
 European travelers were aware of each others’ writings and that they had come to Egypt having read each others’
 work. The “I-was-born-in-a-village-in-Albania” story, for example, besides being told twice by Barker in his
 dispatches to London, 17 was reproduced in St. John’s published
 book. 18 Furthermore, one occasionally comes across an allusion to
 the effect that what is being watched had already been seen before: “I can agree with former travelers . . .
 ” 19 
 

 
 Alternatively, the remarkable common features in these accounts might suggest that what these European travelers
 were audience to constituted part of a scene/act that was well rehearsed and carefully produced. It is perhaps no
 accident that nearly all visitors start their accounts by describing the busy, loud and ornamented antechamber
 full of officials and members of the public coming mostly to present petitions to the Pasha. Then they give an
 account of the “presence-room”, a grand hall “belle dans sa nudité” 20 and bare of everything but a sofa in a corner of which sat a figure shrouded in shadows.
 During the ensuing conversation they were surprised to discover that the mysterious figure was none but the great
 Pasha himself, but since they could not see his face nor “detect the expression of his countenance,” they were
 left literally in the dark. This feeling of mystery and suspense was amplified by the impression that the source
 of light had on them: the chandeliers that were brought in, oddly enough, “gave but little light.”