
 

 
 In December 1836, a British nobleman, Lord Lindsay, paid the Pasha a visit in his palace in the Citadel in Cairo.
 

 
 We visited the old spider in his den, the citadel [he began] . . . Ascending a broad marble passage on an
 inclined plane . . . and traversing a lofty antechamber crowded with attendants, we found ourselves in the
 presence-chamber, a noble saloon . . . but without an article of furniture, except a broad divan, or sofa,
 extending round the three sides of the room, in one corner of which squatted his highness
 Mohammed Ali. Six wax-candles . . . stood in the center, yet gave but little light. 5 
 

 
 This excerpt is typical of descriptions given by foreign visitors to the Pasha in his palace. The themes of light
 and darkness, of shadows and hypnotic gazes, figure prominently in their accounts of the encounter with the
 enigmatic Pasha. Two years after this visit, for example, another British traveler on visiting Mehmed Ali’s
 palace commented on “a score of yellowish-brown candles [that were hung from the chandelier] . . . by their light
 we could only indistinctly see to the extremity of the apartment.” 6 
 When ‘Abdallah Pasha of Sidon, whom Mehmed Ali’s forces had besieged for more than six months in his formidable
 fortress of Acre, finally gave in, he was brought on board an Egyptian vessel to Alexandria where he was received
 magnanimously by the Egyptian Pasha. Here is the contemporary newspaper account of the encounter of these two
 bitter enemies.
 

 
 People had gathered in masses to see [‘Abdallah Pasha] and a larger number of statesmen [ arbāb
 al-dawla ] were waiting on shore to receive him. On disembarking . . . he was escorted to the palace . . . and
 when he entered the audience chamber he found among those waiting for him His Highness, Mehmed Ali Pasha,
 and the place was badly lit . Smilingly, the Pasha stood up to receive him and to calm him
 down. ‘Abdallah Pasha lowered his head and threw himself at His Highness’s feet kissing his cloak and asking for
 forgiveness. 7 
 

 
 Besides light and shadows, it was the Pasha’s eyes that provided the other theme that visitors regularly
 commented on. Mr. Ramsay, Lord Lindsay’s friend who accompanied him on his trip to Egypt, had the following to
 say about the Pasha’s eyes.
 

 
 He did not address any of his subjects, but I observed his sharp cunning eyes fixing itself on every one. The
 light was not strong enough to remark minutely, but I can agree with former travellers as to the vivid expression
 of his eye, and, for the rest . . . it is absurd to talk of, or have any idea of his face. 8 
 

 
 At around the same time that this account was written another British traveler, a certain Dr. Wilde who was
 attending a “gentleman [making] a voyage for the benefit of his health” 9 made a point of visiting the Pasha’s other palace in Shubra, in the outskirts of Cairo.
 

 
 Seeing a company of Franks [in his garden, the Pasha slackened his] pace to salute us; thus
 affording us a view of this extraordinary character. He is a fine-looking old man, now [September 1837] upwards
 of seventy (1769 was, I believe, the birth year of Napoleon, Wellington and M. Alee [sic]) with a very long
 silver beard . . . Slight as was our view of him, it did not pass without making us feel the power of an eye of
 more brilliancy and penetration than I ever beheld. 10 