
 

 
 This book, then, is not a biography of Mehmed Ali; it does not follow him from the time he arrived in Egypt in
 1801 till his death nearly half a century later, tracing his wonderful deeds; nor does it give an account of this
 long period as if seen from his perspective. Rather, its subject is the army he founded and the men who fought in
 it. Instead of looking at the army as the national institution that gave those conscripts
 the “right” to bear arms and to defend their nation, or of writing its history in a manner that the Pasha himself
 would have liked, this book sees it as an institution of power that forced these tens of thousands of men to
 carry arms and to fight for Mehmed Ali and his family, and in the process changed the nature of Egyptian society
 and affected the lives of the men who served in it. The book tries to investigate how these men resisted and/or
 accommodated this most powerful of the Pasha’s institutions, an institution which was unrivaled in the way in
 touched their bodies and sought to control their minds.
 

 
 Besides being a study of nationalism and nationalist historiography, therefore, this is a book on power and
 resistance. Looking at the army as the modern institution of power par excellence this book
 attempts to see how power with its modern manifestations and institutions is perceived, accommodated and resisted
 by its subjects. While finding Michel Foucault’s notions of power useful and insightful, this book critiques a
 particular reading of his work that stresses the monolithic nature of the institutions of power and accepts the
 inevitability of its forms. Instead of an impressive and consistent picture of how modern power objectifies its
 subjects, what is offered below is an attempt to present a more complex, and – intentionally – more blurred
 picture of power, one that can incorporate fractures, dissonance and resistance. By highlighting the small acts
 of defiance and resistance undertaken by the soldiers in this army, the intention is to undermine the impressive
 representations of power and its unceasing desire to silence its subjects. These small, every-day acts of
 resistance, while not grand or heroic, were still effective in challenging the attempts of power to control and
 manipulate the soldiers’ lives and bodies, and alarmed the military authorities precisely by showing them that,
 through these small acts of resistance the soldiers managed to distance themselves from the Pasha and his grand
 projects.
 

 
 This obviously leads to the question of whether it is feasible to write a history of an
 institution of power in a manner that not only avoids reproducing its own narrative but which can also
 incorporate the dialog that it constantly has with resistance. Given that the overwhelming majority of the people
 with whom this book is concerned were illiterate and did not leave behind written accounts which could inform us
 of what it was like to be objectified in this insistent manner, the question is whether it is still possible to
 include them as subjects and not merely as objects of power. Fortunately, the documents that this book relies
 upon made possible the incorporation of the soldiers’ perspective in narrating the history of Mehmed Ali’s army.