
 

 
 This was a strange introduction indeed: having received the. Ottoman Sultan’s approval to represent British
 interests in Alexandria, and going to present himself with the Sultan’s firman in hand, the British Consul was
 surprised to be received by a story of Mehmed Ali’s childhood in Albania. As strange as this reception might have
 appeared to the British Consul, this first encounter with the Pasha was full of political intent which was too
 obvious for the Consul not to notice. Besides referring to Barker’s predecessor as having the wisdom not to
 contradict the Pasha in any of his opinions “which, he observed, was very easily done, because they were always
 founded on reason and justice,” and thus insinuating that he expected the same from him, it was clear to Barker
 that the Pasha had also intended to pass on to him the message that “he was as little awed by the power of the
 Sovereign of Great Britain as that of the Sultan.” 2 
 

 

 
 Plate 1
 “Mehemed-Aly” 
 

 
 As much as Mehmed Ali wanted to impress upon his visitor that he was an independent ruler, technically and
 legally he was only a vali of an Ottoman province, which meant that he had the right to
 receive consuls (and not ambassadors) of European countries but was denied the right to appoint political
 representatives to their capitals. Keen on improving his image in Europe, however, and interested in affecting
 public opinion there, the Pasha was left with few tools to do so. One such tool, though, was the interviews he
 was in the habit of giving to European visitors some of whom, he was well aware, would proceed to write and
 publish their accounts of their encounters with him. As such, the coup de théâtre that
 Barker was audience to in his first interview with Mehmed Ali, far from being strange or atypical, was a “very
 characteristic anecdote” 3 and it was not entered upon accidentally
 or unintentionally. Rather, it constituted part of a repertoire of stories and performances that were
 meticulously performed to influence the views of these European visitors.
 

 
 For their part, these visitors were interested in meeting the famous Pasha who had been vali of Egypt since 1805,
 making him one of the longest serving provincial governors in the Ottoman Empire. These tourists, who would
 mostly be visiting Egypt as part of a longer trip that included a visit to the Holy Land, would typically
 disembark in Alexandria, sail down the newly dug Maḥmūdiyya Canal linking the port city to the Nile, and from
 there proceed all the way to Cairo. While visiting that most colorful of cities, they would make a point to visit
 the Pasha himself, who already by the 1820s had become “one of the curiosities of Egypt” 4 owing to the reforms he had introduced in Egypt and his efforts in making
 the country safer for tourists. From these accounts one can have a glimpse not only of how the Pasha was seen by
 his contemporaries, but also of how he intended to be seen.
 

 
 “The old spider in his den”