
 

 
 More concretely, this book attempts to argue that the nation was brought into being through the agency of a
 multiplicity of “national” institutions, the army being the prime example of them, which together worked to
 homogenize the nation, to coerce and discipline its citizens, and to silence and exclude its minorities, its
 “deviants” and its “outcasts.” As such, and concentrating on the national institution, the
 army, this book takes acts of resistance (to conscription and to other policies of the various national
 institutions) not as showing their true and umbilical attachment to their lands, but as testifying to the
 conscripts’ aversion to their officers’ elitist policies and as showing their resistance to having their bodies
 used for causes that were not theirs.
 

 
 The Pasha and Palmerston 
 

 
 It is here that we come to the second assumption of nationalist historiography, namely, that the Egyptian
 nationalist project of gaining independence from the Ottoman Empire and of establishing the basis of an
 independent, self-sustaining “take-off” failed not through “any shortcoming of the Egyptians” but because of
 European intervention. Having seen “Egypt” as a clearly defined nation and given the honest, unceasing efforts of
 “her children,” and after stressing the consistent policies of Mehmed Ali, the reason Egypt did not “take off”
 during the first half of the nineteenth century and become one of the leading nations of the world is always
 attributed to European intervention. Protective of their privileged position and determined to prevent latecomers
 from joining the highly competitive race to modernity “European powers, at Britain’s instigation, joined forces
 against Egypt and denied her the fruits of her [military] victory.” 44 
 

 
 The argument that foreign, mostly Western forces are primarily to blame for the “wrong” turn taken by Egypt
 during the nineteenth century is clearly represented by M. Fahmy’s La Révolution de l’industrie
 en Egypte et ses conséquences au 19e siècle . 45 In a typical
 manner Fahmy plays down the significance of the problems that the Pasha faced with his “factories,” and the
 inherent bureaucratic complications which accounted for the fact that when a director of a factory, for example,
 needed “a pound of grease the whole process [could] take up to four days” 46 receive no mention in his study. Nor does he allude to the fact that the Pasha’s
 industrialization plan had faced enormous difficulties to start with, not because of competition with the West,
 but because Egypt lacked any substantial sources of motive power or trained labor. Fahmy, furthermore, is
 satisfied to call a manufacturing scheme in a country that had only six steam engines 47 a “revolution in industry.” In his mind there is no doubt that it was mostly due to
 opposition by the West that this consistent industrialization program failed. 48 In a similar fashion a recent study of the history of health care in nineteenth-century
 Egypt effectively dismisses the serious problems that the Pasha and his top medical advisors faced when they
 attempted to found a modern medical institution. These problems, it is argued, were
 practically and perceptively ironed out thanks to the Pasha’s determination and genius; the study concludes by
 saying that it was only the advent of the British in 1882 that destroyed the indigenous health establishment by
 forcing it to shift from treating the local population to serving the much smaller and essentially elitist
 colonial community. 49 