
 

 
 By the early 1820s, then, the Pasha had managed to undertake what every Ottoman governor before him for the
 previous three centuries had tried but failed to do, namely, to organize the economy of the province of Egypt and to reap its considerable potential wealth. Had the Pasha died in 1820, he would have
 been fifty years old and he would have already secured for himself a distinguished place in the history of Egypt
 and of the Ottoman Empire. He would have been known as the longest serving Ottoman governor of the province of
 Egypt, one who had managed to make its economy more efficient and to improve the performance of its bureaucracy.
 He would also have secured for himself the reputation among Egyptians of being one of the most brutal of the
 Ottoman governors who, through monopolies and corvée, had pushed them to unprecedented levels of poverty and
 misery. For by the early 1820s labor shortages were already in evidence, resistance to the corvée was acquiring
 an alarming momentum, resentment to the Pasha’s monopolies system had forced the government to amend its policies
 and, most significantly, “the rural society was pushed to the limit of its ability to produce and pay
 taxes.” 33 
 

 
 Yet instead of being the beginning of the end of government oppression or a marker of the apogee of the Pasha’s
 rule, the years 1820–1 constitute a watershed, dividing the Pasha’s rule into two periods of nearly equal length.
 For the Pasha had the good fortune to live for nearly another thirty years, during which time he introduced
 institutions and ushered in policies that make the already impressive policies of 1805–20 and the suffering they
 caused the Egyptians to fade by comparison. Two developments in particular assume gigantic proportions and mark
 1821 as a crucial year in the Pasha’s career, namely the successful experimentation with the cultivation of
 long-staple cotton and the founding of a modern conscription-based army. While both these developments took place
 in the same year, there was no causal link between them. Nonetheless, from that time onwards very strong links
 existed between these two developments of the Pasha’s policies which proved to be the cornerstones of his entire
 regime: through cotton cultivation, which grew exponentially in the 1820s, the Pasha managed to reap
 unprecedented profits from its sale, which he then monopolized and used to construct his army, build his navy,
 establish his factories and construct numerous schools, hospitals and palaces.
 

 
 Together, these two developments, the introduction and cultivation on a large scale of long-staple cotton and the
 building of a modern army, formed the twin pillars of the Pasha’s regime and none of the other institutions that
 Egypt witnessed during the first half of the nineteenth century parallels their importance. While cotton
 cultivation radically changed the nature of Egyptian agriculture, altered Cairo’s relationship with the provinces, increased Egypt’s link to the European economy and significantly
 increased the government’s budget, 34 the army had an unparalleled
 impact on society since besides conscripting Egyptians for the first time in centuries, it triggered the need to
 found more and more institutions which together radically transformed the face of Egyptian society. The army
 occupied central stage among the Pasha’s numerous institutions and was the raison d’être of
 various other impressive institutions. For example, the many factories that were founded were intended mainly to
 produce commodities for the use of the army, which was their most important market. Similarly, most of the
 schools that were opened were aiming at graduating officers for the army. Likewise, the earliest modern hospitals
 to be built in Egypt were essentially military hospitals that were constructed near camps with high troop
 concentration. Moreover, the army, since it was a conscript army, changed the lives of thousands of Egyptians who
 were dragged into its service and radically changed the lives of their families who were often left behind trying
 to do their best after losing an important, if not also the primary, bread winner. Moreover, using this army
 Mehmed Ali managed, albeit for a short period of time, to extend his control over wide areas of the Middle East
 including the Hijaz, the Sudan, Syria and parts of southern Anatolia, and naturally Egypt’s relationship with
 these areas changed radically.