
 

 
 The Pasha and his men
 

 
 The army that the Pasha founded is seen as giving the “fellahin” of Egypt the chance to bear arms, to defend the
 fatherland and thus to come to discover their true identity, i.e. that they were essentially and truly Egyptians
 and that their identities as Muslims or Ottoman subjects were either artificial or secondary. It is commonly
 argued, for example, that the fellahin “who for centuries had been tied down to the land and cheated of their
 liberties, were at last to be resurrected from oblivion and to be taught for the first time since Saladin the
 fundamental lessons of citizenship and nationalism.” 40 
 

 
 The problem with this argument insofar as it pertains to the army, besides the obvious one of lumping together
 the entire rural population of Egypt under the general rubric of “fellahin,” is that the population of Egypt, far
 from enthusiastically flocking to serve in the army, was in fact very resentful of military service and strongly
 resisted serving in the army. Recognizing that the scale of this resistance was alarming, that it was not
 localized but was widespread throughout Egypt, and that the rural population went out of their way to make this
 resistance obvious, it is still commonplace to argue that this was only a temporary reaction caused above all by
 “the fellah’s strong attachment to his land and the unfamiliarity of military life to him.” 41 The opposition to the service in the “national” institution, therefore,
 something that might have appeared somewhat paradoxical, is explained away by insisting that this opposition was
 caused by the “fellahin’s” strong attachment to the land, a sentiment that proves their “nationalist” feelings.
 Once the “fellahin” came to appreciate the benefits of military life and that serving in the army was the most
 truthful way of defending the lands they loved so much, they ceased to resist it and ultimately even became proud
 of belonging to it. 42 The rural population of
 Egypt was, accordingly, taught that serving in the army, while requiring their abandoning their much beloved
 lands, was in fact the best way to express their loyalty to them and to defend them with their lives if need be,
 and the Pasha’s army was seen as the “school” in which they were “taught” how to identify themselves as
 “Egyptians.” This identity now appeared as natural and more essential than any local or religious identity that
 they might have adopted. Being a Muslim or an Ottoman subject was suddenly seen as either “artificial” or
 secondary compared to this more “primordial” identity. In that sense the army that Mehmed Ali found is seen as
 “the prime pillar of Egyptian independence.” 43 
 

 
 This book challenges this powerful, monolithic discourse of Egyptian nationalism. It argues that the Pasha’s army
 did indeed turn the population of Egypt into loyal and devoted citizens of Egypt. This it managed to do, however,
 not by “opening their eyes” to their true identities, or helping them to discover their hidden sentiments, but by
 subjecting them to a rigorous and tight disciplining regime whereby their bodies and minds were minutely
 controlled so that the Pasha and his elite could accomplish their own ambitions. In that sense the Pasha’s army
 was crucial for “educating” the population of Egypt to believe that fighting for Mehmed Ali and his family was
 tantamount to giving one’s life for the sake of the “nation,” a nation that was now thought to have always
 already existed and which, moreover, demanded the sacrifices of its own citizens. In other words, this book tries
 to critique that powerful discourse of nationalism by challenging the assumptions on which it is based and
 specifically by arguing that the “Egyptian nation” was not a primordial, pre-existing entity waiting to be
 realized as argued in the nationalist discourse which claims to be only describing it, but that it was a product
 of that very same discourse which attempted to write it into being.