
 

 
 Yet, in the discussion that ensued St. John soon realized that he was involved in a game of gazes and
 manipulations, and that the Pasha, knowing that his British visitor was about to write a book on His “Highness’s
 government, and the present state of the country,” was clearly trying to impress him. Rather than give in to
 Mehmed Ali’s manipulation, the shrewd visitor set out to demystify the mysterious Pasha and instead of starting
 his account with a description of the Pasha’s physical features, he ends with it:
 

 
 Mohammed Ali is a man of middling stature . . . His features . . . are plain, if not coarse; but they are lighted
 up with so much intelligence, and his dark eyes beam so brightly, that I should not be surprised if I found
 persons familiar with his countenance thought him handsome. In dress he differs but little, if at all, from any
 other Turkish gentleman; he has, however, a certain dignity in his manners which . . . borders upon majesty. But
 this dignity seems almost inseparable from the possession of power: the man who can do much good or harm,
 whatever may be his stature, form or features will always appear to exhibit it; as the scorpion, in size no
 larger than a snail, is viewed with awe, because he is supposed to carry death in his sting. 25 
 

 
 In other words, instead of proceeding to give an account of the Pasha’s rule in Egypt that would border on being
 a dictated autobiography (the way most other accounts were), St. John realized that the Pasha’s mesmerizing
 presence is ultimately connected with the power he holds; and that this power is essentially an effect not of the
 Pasha’s inherent genius, but of the elaborate mystique of his court ceremonials that attempt to impress the
 spectator into thinking that what goes on there is “not merely important but in some odd fashion connected with
 the way the world is built.” 26 
 

 
 Taking its lead from St. John, this book attempts to see if it is possible to write the history of Egypt in the
 first half of the nineteenth century without being stung by the Pasha or hypnotized by his gaze. The reason it
 opened with an account of his body and his gaze is to introduce a theme, or more precisely a technique, that runs
 throughout this book: each of the chapters that follows, with the exception of chapter 5 , opens with a spectacle that is intended to be evocative
 and mesmerizing, but which, it is argued, is still possible to see through and deconstruct. In one sense, then,
 this is a book about spectacles of power: how they are staged and watched. It deals with numerous such spectacles
 mostly staged by a man who, as we have seen and as we shall see further, was a master of the
 art of staging spectacles and of influencing audiences. Another reason for opening with a glimpse of the Pasha in
 his palaces is to warn the reader about the Pasha’s gaze and to stress the fact that while attempting to avoid
 it, this book is still written with the knowledge that his controlling gaze continues to exert its influence.