
 

 
 This book offers a critique of this particular reading of Egyptian history. While not
 concentrating on the person of Mehmed Ali Pasha, it investigates his career closely to see how it is read in a
 manner that makes the three centuries preceding it appear as tyrannical and foreign. More fundamentally, it deals
 with Mehmed Ali’s long career as a way of explaining how “Egypt” came to be seen as a nation with a purposeful,
 clear identity. Rather than taking “Egypt” as referring to a nation with an unadulterated identity inhabiting a
 territory with distinct borders that sharply distinguish it from other nations, this book argues that “Egypt”
 came to refer to a nation so defined only in the nineteenth century and mostly as a result of Mehmed Ali’s
 policies.
 

 
 The belief that “Egypt” refers to a pre-existing nation, i.e. that it is an eternal, primordial entity, so
 characteristic of nationalist historiography, can probably best be detected by reviewing how Mehmed Ali’s army
 has traditionally been written about. In discussions of the Pasha’s army, three assumptions, central to the
 nationalist argument, are usually reiterated. The first supposes that the soldiers of this army were fighting in
 what they believed to be national wars, wars that were waged to defend “Egypt” or to expand its borders. In spite
 of some isolated acts of resistance to the novel practices of the modern army, these peasant-conscripts, it is
 commonly argued, came to realize that by participating in these wars they discovered their true sentiments,
 viz . that they were Egyptians first and foremost, and not Muslims or Ottoman subjects, for
 example. In this manner the nationalist argument assumes that the army was only a catalyst that helped Egyptians
 discover their true identity – something that was bound to happen, but which in the absence of that “national”
 army might simply have taken a longer time to materialize.
 

 
 Having assumed that the army taught those innocent and naive peasants the essential truths of the nation, its
 unadulterated personality and their umbilical attachment to it, the nationalist argument proceeds with a second
 assumption, namely, that any problems that this army faced were not the result of “any shortcomings on the part
 of Egyptians,” but were due to “external” malice and conspiracy. In this sense, the failure of Mehmed Ali’s
 entire “experiment” and not only his military establishment, was the result of British machinations aimed at
 frustrating the Egyptian nation’s attempts at development, independence and dignity.
 

 
 The third assumption that is repeatedly reiterated in nationalist accounts of Mehmed Ali’s army is the
 unproblematic characterization of the Ottomans as the “enemy.” Having stressed the pure personality of Egypt that
 could be traced back in its pristine form to pharaonic times, fighting the army of the
 Ottoman Sultan is seen as the ultimate sign of nationalism, since the Ottomans have already been identified as
 the “other”—a backward, stubborn and dogmatic enemy, one that had been occupying Egypt for long, dark centuries
 causing her to “lag behind” the humanist and scientific developments that were taking place in Europe.