
 

 
 This is how Maḥmūd Taymūr, the famous Egyptian novelist, commemorated the centenary of Mehmed Ali’s death. This
 love letter from the Sphinx to his beloved city is “translated” by Taymūr from the original Hieroglyphics, “my
 own native language,” the Sphinx explained, “for in spite of all the different languages that my soul has been
 carrying for ages, Hieroglyphics is my favorite. I cannot part with it.” In the modern Egyptian collective
 consciousness – in novels, films, cartoons – it is the Sphinx more than any other monument that stands for Egypt;
 his massive solidity symbolizes her endurance, his faint sarcastic smile refers to her subtle way of answering
 her enemies, and his silence is believed to be more eloquent than the hefty tomes written by
 the numerous sages who dwelt there and more effective than the adventures of all the conquerors who have passed
 though her lands. Yet Taymūr is now making him speak. The Sphinx’s words are worth listening to, for, as Taymūr
 would have us believe, if ever one wants to listen to Egypt’s true voice and her own self-perception, one would
 not find a purer, more authentic voice than that of the Sphinx.
 

 
 So what did Taymūr read in the Sphinx’s letter written in 1949? In that most telling letter he read a concise
 nationalist version of Egypt’s long history in which she appears as having a clear unadulterated identity that
 goes as far back as her pharaonic past, hence the language in which the letter is written and the Sphinx’s
 insistence that it is the dearest to his heart. But Egypt, personified in the city of Cairo, also has an Islamic
 component that is constitutive of her identity and which is here represented by al-Azhar and its minaret
 dominating the cityscape. Conspicuously absent from Taymūr’s version of Egypt’s history is a long period of over
 three centuries of Ottoman rule. Having avoided any explicit reference to this period by name, he conflates it
 with Mamluk rule to which he alludes when he has the Sphinx refer to the tutelage of the “Mamluk.” Echoing a
 widely believed notion, Taymūr refers to this period as one of oppression and tyranny. With all her past glory
 and previous power behind her Egypt could not deliver herself from this oppression; she had to await a Savior, a
 Prince, who would appear as in an Epiphany to deliver her from her misery and restore her previous glory and
 prominence. This Deliverer finally appeared in the person of Mehmed Ali who, as soon as he heard Egypt’s pleas to
 be saved, descended literally from the sky to lift her from her misery and sorrow.
 

 
 In a nutshell this is how Egyptian historiography of Mehmed Ali is written, although never so passionately and
 seldom so eloquently. In a sense it calls to mind Marx’s comment on the place of Napoleon in French historical
 consciousness. “Historical tradition,” he said, “gave rise to the belief of the French peasants in the miracle
 that a man named Napoleon would bring all the glory back to them. And an individual turned up who gave himself
 out as the man . . . ” 39 Marx could very well have been referring
 to the Egyptian fascination with Mehmed Ali. Like Napoleon III, Mehmed Ali “turned up” ( “es fand
 sich” are Marx’s untranslatable words), mysteriously appearing on the Egyptian historical landscape.
 Answering Egypt’s pleas, the Great Pasha descended from heaven to deliver her from oppression, and to lift her
 from the dark recesses of centuries of Ottoman neglect and misery into the bright sunlight of dignity and
 national independence.