
 

 
 Mehmed Ali: the “founder of modern Egypt”
 

 
 Owing to the introduction in Egypt of so many novel institutions in the first half of the nineteenth century
 Mehmed Ali is commonly believed to be “The Founder of Modern Egypt.” 35 Through his various public projects – the opening of schools, the building of hospitals, the
 founding of factories and the creation of a modern army – the Pasha is seen not merely as having improved the
 finances of Egypt or as having enhanced the efficiency of the bureaucracy of Cairo, but as having laid the very
 foundation for a “national” take-off. These efforts at “modernization” on the part of the Pasha are usually
 portrayed as being part of a master-plan, a well-integrated scheme of development that was aimed not only at
 “modernizing” Egyptian society and transforming its economy, but also at gaining independence from Ottoman
 control from which it was believed to have been suffering for nearly three centuries. As said above, not only did the Pasha found a modern army, he also founded countless educational, medical and
 infrastructural bodies to serve it. Yet in spite of these co-ordinated efforts on the part of the Pasha to
 reactivate the Egyptian economy after centuries of stagnation and even decline, the “experiment” failed. Even
 before the Pasha’s death a large number of the factories, schools and other establishments that he had founded
 were either closed down or were abandoned and neglected. European, especially British, intervention is usually
 identified as the cause of the failure of this ambitious, well-planned and impressive “experiment,” and two
 episodes are often mentioned as examples of how Europe managed to frustrate Mehmed Ali’s ambitious policies. The
 first was the 1838 Balta Liman commercial treaty between Great Britain and the Sublime Porte, aimed at abolishing
 commercial monopolies throughout the Ottoman Empire at large but targeted specifically at Mehmed Ali’s
 monopolies. These monopolies were believed to have been the backbone of the Pasha’s economic policy and to have
 given his industries the protection they needed to compete with European goods. Having lost that protection, the
 infant industries and the services connected to them fell to ruins. The second incident that is usually
 highlighted to stress how European efforts were most instrumental in aborting this impressive “experiment” in
 development was the firman of 1841 which was passed by the Ottoman Sultan but which was a result of European
 pressure. This firman stripped Egypt of the territorial possessions that it had managed to acquire during the
 preceding two decades and, of equal significance, reduced the size of its armed forces to 18,000 men during
 peacetime, only a small fraction of its original size.
 

 
 Having been deprived of its “colonies,” and losing the army which constituted a large market for its products,
 the Egyptian factories found it difficult to produce commodities that could compete with foreign, mostly British,
 goods. In Egypt itself, local industries were closed down after losing their protective tariff barriers. At the
 same time foreign merchants flooded the Egyptian market with their cheap goods after the collapse of the Pasha’s
 monopoly system. Soon afterwards they established financial houses and started extending numerous loans to
 members of the ruling family as well as to the rural population that triggered a debt spiral that forced Egypt to
 become more and more economically dependent on the West. Nearly thirty years after the death of Mehmed Ali a
 severe financial crisis offered a pretext for foreign intervention which eventually led to an invasion by British
 troops, thus effectively reducing Egypt to the position of a British protectorate and ushering in a period of
 military occupation that lasted for seventy years.