
 

 
 In this way one of the earliest, most ambitious development plans outside Europe came to a
 dramatic end. After being one of the first countries to promote industrialization outside Europe in a manner that
 “partly prefigured the models of state-induced growth championed by Japan and Czarist Russia during the latter
 half of the 19th century,” 36 Egypt was reduced to something like a
 mere colony of the British Empire. Not before another century had passed would Egypt witness any establishments
 of the size of those founded by Mehmed Ali. By that time, however, it would be too late, and Egypt would be
 strongly entrenched as a Third World country with the gap separating it from the leading industrial nations of
 the world widening more and more.
 

 
 Briefly put, this is how the history of Egypt during the first half of the nineteenth century is written about by
 most Egyptian nationalist historians. 37 They see in Mehmed Ali’s
 “experiment” an interesting “chapter” in the long history of Egypt, a chapter that was supposed to witness the
 lifting of Egypt from the pre-modern, feudal rule under the Ottoman Empire to “catch up” with modern, capitalist
 Europe. In effect they argue that if it were not for European intervention Egypt would have continued her
 ambitious modernization efforts, efforts that were begun in earnest by Mehmed Ali from as early as the first
 decade of the nineteenth century and before any other country outside Europe.
 

 
 The Sphinx, the Pasha and the Egyptian nation
 

 
 Yet in spite of his frustrated efforts and his aborted projects (and probably precisely because of them) Mehmed
 Ali occupies a unique place in modern Egyptian nationalist historiography. In him Egyptian nationalists see the
 prototype of a national hero who, through determination and good work, attempted to resurrect his country from
 the brink of total collapse under the Ottomans and deliver her into the modern age. Let us listen to the Sphinx
 himself describe the career of the Great Pasha in a letter he sent to his beloved Cairo on the centenary of
 Mehmed Ali’s death.
 

 
 I have been harboring overflowing feelings that I can no longer contain, passionate feelings that pull me towards
 you, in spite of being tied here to my place with the Pyramids behind me. The Sphinx today will speak, but with
 no voice to be heard. He will unveil his secrets in this letter to you, Cairo, and to you
 alone. You might have thought that I am nothing but a piece of solid stone . . . but have you ever thought that
 this solid mass might have a heart like other living hearts? It is time that this heart speaks its buried love .
 . . I have seen days and years pass by and you have always remained my beloved and my passion for you has always
 kept its purity. I can recount how you remained for a while an Arab girl, in your bedouin Fusṭāṭ . . . Then
 Djawhar the Sicilian came bestowing on you the treasures of the Maghreb . . . until you became, indeed, the
 Conqueror of the Hearts [ Qāhirat al-Qulūb ] . . . In this Fatimid glory you put on your best
 garments . . . and people’s hearts came seeking you from all corners of the world . . . Yet, with your wisdom and
 sagacity you . . . were a patron of the Faith, and on your bright cityscape the minaret of al-Azhar could be seen
 proclaiming the Word of God, and at your gates multitudes came seeking knowledge and bounty . . . Times, however,
 changed, and after your wealth and glory, you saw misery and weakness . . . My heart was bleeding for you, and
 how could I remain still seeing you suffering under the tutelage of this Mamluk eyeing you like a tiger eyes his
 prey? Yet even in your difficulty and frailty you were noble, and in due time the power of this tyrant was
 eclipsed and you came out Victorious [ al-Qāhira ] again. And how couldn’t you when God has
 sent you this genius, the son of Kavala? I could see him in his distant place of origin sitting for long hours
 fixing his eye on you, penetrating with his piercing insight the layers of time . . . and listening to your
 imploring plea. He then could not but jump to your rescue, saying “Here I come, here I come.” I saw him
 descending on you stretching his arms wide open and you threw yourself into his embrace, with a trembling heart
 and overflowing yearning, as if this embrace would last forever. He disappeared in you and you in him and
 together you became one indivisible person. Can anyone mention Cairo without the phantom of Mehmed Ali leaping to
 his mind? Doesn’t he, till this day, hover high above you from his citadel, defending and protecting
 you? 38 