
 

 
 The army, the economy and society
 

 
 Only after warning the reader by introducing the “old spider in his den” and seeing him manipulating his audience
 can one feel safe in stepping back to narrate Mehmed Ali’s story and to place him in a wider historical context.
 This narration will not start at the beginning, as he would have liked, with his childhood in Albania or with his
 arrival in Egypt, or at the end, as some nationalist historians would have preferred, highlighting his showdown
 with Great Britain, but in the middle of his long career as governor of Egypt, and precisely in the year AH
 1236/AD 1820–1. This is the year that Mehmed Ali started to found a modern army in Egypt, an army which was based
 on conscription and which relied on the institutions of the modern state that he founded mainly to serve that
 army. It is this army, rather than Mehmed Ali’s character or his person, that is the subject of this book, and it
 is this central institution that is studied below in order to analyze the nature of Egyptian society in the first
 half of the nineteenth century.
 

 
 By the time Mehmed Ali started to found this army in 1820 he had already been occupying the prestigious and
 lucrative post of governor of Egypt on behalf of the Ottoman Sultan for fifteen years. During this long period he
 had managed to tighten Cairo’s control over the provinces by fighting corruption in the local
 bureaucracy, 27 by conducting a cadastral survey (1813–14) that was
 crucial in abolishing the tax farming system ( iltizām ) and in the cancellation of the
 immunities on agricultural land belonging to mosques and pious foundations ( awqāf ), 28 and, most importantly, by getting rid in the infamous Massacre of the
 Citadel (1811) of the power of the military landlords, the Mamluks, who had been in effective control of the
 province for centuries in spite of Ottoman legal suzerainty. 29 Centralization of political and administrative control was also enhanced by a rapid increase
 in agricultural productivity based on an expansion of the cultivated area and an increase in the area of
 perennial irrigation. Having done away with the power of middle-men in the shape of former multazims , religious men who were managing the awqāf , or the Mamluks, more and
 more revenue was funneled to Cairo and into the Pasha’s coffers. In addition, the Pasha introduced a wide-ranging
 policy of monopolies whereby staple goods as well as cash crops were to be sold only to government warehouses and
 at prices fixed by the Pasha. As a result of these measures annual revenue increased from 8 million francs in
 1805 to 50 million francs in 1821, 30 allowing the Pasha to
 undertake projects that were not even conceivable in the long period of Ottoman rule.
 

 
 The digging of the Maḥmūdiyya canal offers a graphic example of the degree to which the Pasha had managed to
 secure his control over the province of Egypt and is a testimony to his ability to undertake huge infrastructural
 projects that none of the Ottoman governors before him had managed to undertake. Started in April 1817, the
 project lasted for three years and was aimed at linking Alexandria to the western branch of the Nile. The
 ambitious project involved coercing thousands of men and women from all the provinces of Lower Egypt to work on
 it. During the month of March 1819 the number of laborers working on the project was said to have been as high as
 300,000. After its completion the canal was 72 kilometers long and had cost 35,000 purses (around 7.5 million
 francs). 31 Although contemporary reports stress the appallingly
 high rate of casualties (estimates range from 12,000 to 100,000) and the highly improvised manner in which the
 canal was excavated, 32 still, the sheer size of the labor force
 involved as well as the cost and duration of the project testify to the ability of the Pasha’s administration in
 Cairo to tap and control the human and material resources of his province.