
 

 
 During the conversation with the Pasha a climactic point was usually reached when he suddenly leaned forward or
 pushed back his turban from above his eyebrows to allow the light to fall on his eyes. This final act of haunting
 theatricality was brought about by
 

 
 a peculiarity in his mode of wearing the turban – close down over his eyes – [which] takes off much from the fine
 character of his countenance, concealing his handsome forehead, compressing the eyebrows,
 throwing the eyes into shade, and giving them a sinister expression. 21 
 

 
 But having seen the final act in this staged encounter, the visitor discovered that what he visibly saw did not
 “illuminate” him to the extent of understanding this enigmatic character. In fact, listening to his laugh and
 seeing his gaze, he felt a chill of terror pass through his body and, failing to demystify it, ended up alluding
 to previous descriptions of the Pasha (“an expression I have read somewhere . . . came suddenly into my
 head”) 22 thus reinforcing the “textual” approach to the person of
 Mehmed Ali, and perpetuating the awesome, enigmatic side of his character.
 

 
 The encounter with the Pasha, thus, besides being a tourist stop in the itinerary of European visitors, was a
 highly theatrical one: in it the Pasha comes across clearly as being aware that he is being seen, reflects this
 awareness and catches us, the readers of accounts of these encounters, unawares. Few visitors managed to escape
 the effect of that spell that Mehmed Ali would cast on his audience; most of them felt that the Pasha was in
 control of not only Egypt but even the encounter that they were part of. They were consciously aware of the
 Pasha’s piercing gaze seeing through them, and they often quoted the Pasha saying, “The only books I ever read .
 . . are men’s faces, and I seldom read them amiss.” 23 As such,
 they, too, come across as accomplices in this haunting theatricality, and by transcribing their encounter into
 their published memoirs they made sure that the Pasha’s powerful, enigmatic aura would perpetually live on.
 

 
 One visitor, though, came very close to avoiding that piercing look of the Pasha; he was James Augustus St. John,
 who visited Egypt in the early 1830s and met the Pasha on 21 November 1832. His description of the encounter with
 the Pasha starts off as most other accounts do:
 

 
 arriving at the entrance [of the palace, we] found a number of janissaries, and other attendants, in their costly
 and gorgeous uniforms, lounging about the grand flight of steps which leads to the divan. Having ascended these
 stairs, we crossed several spacious halls . . . and, making our way through crowds of courtiers of all nations,
 arrived at the audience-chamber . . . [There the Pasha had] placed himself as usual [!] in a corner of the room;
 where, his whole body being involved in shadow, it was extremely difficult to detect the
 expression of his countenance, or the uneasy rapid motion of his eyes. 24 