
 

 
 What is offered below is an attempt to engage with Mitchell’s argument by questioning, not his characterization
 of what preceded the introduction of modern “reforms,” 81 but by
 elaborating on his analysis of how they did in fact work in the Egyptian context. For Mitchell, in his attempt to
 uncover the logic of these modern institutions of power and their physical representations, is not interested in
 showing how they actually worked in the specific case of Egypt. While recognizing the fact that there often
 existed a discrepancy between the blueprints he studied and their implementation, arguing, in fact, that the
 whole process of “colonization” was to effect this discrepancy, Mitchell’s main task remains, however, to see how
 these “enframing devices” (laws, blueprints, maps, plans, etc.) were drafted and conceived of, rather than how
 they were implemented and executed. For example, while ostensibly showing how Egyptian
 schools were refashioned towards the end of Mehmed Ali’s reign, Mitchell confines his analysis to explaining the
 rationale behind the new schooling system without in fact studying the actual implementation of that system in
 its new locale. In 1843, he says, a model school fashioned along the Lancaster system was opened in Cairo. It was
 a school “in which the exact position and precise task of each individual at every moment was coordinated to
 perform together as a machine.” While admitting that it “is not known how faithfully [the school] was modeled on
 the English original,” Mitchell implicitly assumes that the actual performance of this school could be “read”
 from the blueprint that was set down in England since “the Lancaster school was actively promoted . . . as a
 model [which] could be exactly reproduced abroad . . . ” 82 What we
 are offered here is a concise history of the idea of discipline as formulated by British
 (and Egyptian) educationalists and not a historical account of the performance of Egyptian schools, which, while
 they attempted to follow the Lancaster system in all its Foucauldian details, could not be expected in all
 probability to have done so in the neat and automatic manner assumed by Mitchell.
 

 
 This book seeks to understand the nature of the discrepancy between the plan and its execution, between the law
 and its implementation that Mitchell takes to be due only to the very nature of modern institutions of power and
 their representations. By looking at the specific Egyptian context where these modern devices were applied and
 basing itself on an imposing and impressive institution of power, this book offers alternative explanations of
 the nature of this gap that separated model from reality. Specifically, it is concerned with the question of
 whether discrepancies arose as a result of misreadings of the law by government officials, scribes or
 bureaucrats, whether they were caused by internal contradictions in the letter of the law itself that could only
 (or more easily) be detected on implementation, or whether they were the result of resistance by those on whom
 the law was applied. This book, then, tries to complement the imposing picture that Mitchell offers of
 nineteenth-century Egyptian society as it comes across in the official blueprints which he studied with the
 every-day accounts of how these laws and blueprints were in fact implemented, negotiated and resisted. The army
 that is studied below, besides representing in as pristine a form as could be expected an ideal model for society
 to follow, was also an army whose soldiers, NCOs, army scribes, and occasionally its officers themselves came to
 subvert and challenge this oppressive order.