
 

 
 More problematic is the insufficient attention given in Toledano’s account of the people at these uneasy
 peripheries, these borders separating the two groups one from the other. Scribes, guards, lower-ranking
 government bureaucrats, non-commissioned officers, nurses and servants: these are examples of people who stood at
 the peripheries of these two groups and facilitated the communication and the interaction between their
 respective members. Instead of highlighting the roles of these people as negotiators of boundaries and
 facilitators of the dialog between the two groups, Toledano in fact highlights the distinctiveness of both groups
 and the near impossibility of a dialog. Consider, for example the case of Mutawallī, an Egyptian servant of a
 member of the Ottoman–Egyptian elite who was involved in a fight with a certain Hasan Efendi, a middle-level
 bureaucrat. Toledano relies on police records to reconstruct the story of that fight whereby Hasan Efendi accused
 Mutawallī of beating him in the street at night. Mutawallī answered by denying the charges and said that he only
 got involved in a fight that Hasan Efendi had had with another Turkish-speaking man, a certain police guard by
 the name of Salih. He said that he could not understand the reason for the brawl since they were speaking
 Turkish. Toledano appreciates the implausibility of this allegation, since, as a servant in a Turkish-speaking
 household Mutawallī must have had some knowledge of Turkish. And so he writes, “Servants were addressed by their
 Turkish-speaking masters in Arabic when service was needed. Otherwise, they were excluded from the
 Turkish-speaking world around them by the sheer barrier of language. Whether true or invented, Mutawallī’s story
 had to make sense if he had any chance of being believed.” He then underscores his point by saying, “[t]he
 picture of these two linguistically segregated worlds coexisting in the same place was very
 much a reality in Egyptian cities and towns at mid-century.” 74 
 

 
 The problem with Toledano’s reading of that telling case is that, in stressing the mutual exclusivity of the two
 cultural groups, Toledano seems to have accepted Mutawallī’s allegation that he could not, in fact, understand
 any Turkish and hence could not ascertain what the original fight was about. Mutawallī had to make this
 allegation so that his claim of having became involved in the fight only to separate the two men could be
 believed. As it turned out from further questioning (which Toledano does not reproduce), Mutawallī had been lying
 and it seems that he was engaged in the fighting in a much more active manner than he had claimed. It follows
 that his claim of ignorance of Turkish should have been as questioned by Toledano as it must surely have been by
 the investigating authorities. Toledano, however, accepts Mutawallī’s claim of his inability to speak or
 understand Turkish, thus reinforcing his point of the mutual exclusivity of these two linguistically segregated
 worlds. Be that as it may, what is more significant was that the case, as preserved in the police records, was
 recorded by a scribe who was obviously bilingual: while set down in the same Arabic script, the report is in fact
 written in two different languages, Arabic and Ottoman Turkish, Turkish being the language of the elite-member
 plaintiff and Arabic that of the non-elite-member accused. The fact that the scribe could move so easily from one
 language to the other testifies to the fluidity and facility with which certain people navigated their way
 between these two groups and so could and did lubricate their interactions with each other. In short, these two
 worlds could not have been as mutually exclusive as Toledano has pointed out and the various intermediaries of
 guards, scribes, servants, etc. must have played a crucial role as social lubricants.