
 

 
 The Pasha and his nizam 
 

 
 The aim of stressing the role of these crucial intermediaries, therefore, is not only to argue that communication
 was possible between the Turkish-speaking elite members and the Arabic-speaking masses they ruled, but also to
 elaborate on the discrepancy that often existed between the laws and regulations issued by this elite and the way
 they were implemented on, or understood by, the “masses.” For it was these “social lubricators” who helped to
 translate the often inaccessible laws and regulations issued by Mehmed Ali and his military authorities into a
 language and into practices that would be understood by the “masses.” This discussion of laws and their
 implementation brings us to Timothy Mitchell’s Colonising Egypt which offers, among other
 things, a rigorous attempt to deal with the complicated question of Egyptian nationalism. 77 Mitchell criticizes the traditional view that saw the appearance of
 nationalism in the second half of the nineteenth century in Egypt as an “awakening,” an unproblematic coming to
 terms with the “singular truth about ‘the nation’ [which is] waiting to be realised.” This view, he argues, sees
 nationalism as “something discovered, not invented.” 78 Drawing on
 the ideas of French postmodern theories, specifically those of Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida, Mitchell
 offers a radically different approach to understand how the modern Egyptian nation-state came into being. From
 Foucault, and specifically from his Discipline and Punish , 79 he draws on the new notions of “disciplinary power” of how bodies were counted and surveyed,
 spaces created and organized, activities monitored and classified. From Derrida, he draws the notion of
 representation, that is, the effect of this new system of disciplinary power that helped it in being perceived as
 “a structure standing apart from things in themselves, a separate realm of order and meaning.” 80 
 

 
 The net result is a work that offers an original way to view Egyptian history in the nineteenth century and one
 that challenges the traditional manner in which it has been viewed. For the novelty of Mitchell’s Colonising Egypt lies in its ability to show the peculiarity of the process of introducing “modern”
 institutions in Egypt, a process that has been taken so much for granted and mistaken so often as humanist,
 progressive reform, and in showing how these “reforms” were a result of a modern conception of power that was
 both corporal and disciplinary (in the Foucauldian sense) and which was also metaphysical and representational.
 For him the colonization of Egypt is not to be understood in the traditional manner of the process of structuring
 Egyptian society after the British military takeover in 1882. Rather, it was a process that
 had started much earlier and which entailed the complete restructuring of Egyptian society – the government
 bureaucracy, the military, the schools, cities, towns, streets, houses, families and the body of the individual –
 in such a way that made Egypt not only more profitable, more productive, but also represented the country in a manner that produced the same division of the world into two domains
 that had been accomplished earlier in Europe and which made it more accessible to European control.