
 

 
 It has to be admitted, however, that not all nationalist historians are so dismissive of the inherent problems
 encountered by the Pasha’s “experiment” and some of them do highlight the significant obstacles that were faced
 in founding the modern army with its related institutions of hospitals, schools, “factories,” etc. Nevertheless,
 after pointing out the serious problems that his various educational, military, “industrial,” and irrigation
 projects encountered, they nevertheless insist that the Pasha eventually surmounted them by his characteristic
 energy and skill. In effect, they argue that the failure of Mehmed Ali’s “experiment” stemmed not from any
 inherent problems in how it was run but could be attributed to such things as the Pasha being “ahead of his
 time,” 50 or his successors’ not finishing the job he
 started. 51 Or else it is claimed that, all problems
 notwithstanding, he succeeded in putting the country on the right path for its “renaissance and
 development.” 52 
 

 
 The clearest representative of this line of argument is A. L. Marsot’s Egypt in the Reign of
 Muhammad Ali . 53 While recognizing that the Pasha faced
 significant problems in his attempt to develop Egyptian society and economy, Marsot argues that he managed to
 overcome them with characteristic tact and skill. The main problem, she insists, lay with European opposition
 which was championed by Britain and was personally led by Lord Palmerston, the British Foreign Secretary.
 Palmerston, Marsot argues, took a very strong dislike to Mehmed Ali whom he used to compare to a coffee shop
 waiter “seeking to be commander of the faithful,” 54 and succeeded
 in rallying the European powers behind him to bring about the “undoing” of Mehmed Ali and his reform program in
 Egypt. The reason why Palmerston was so adamantly opposed to Mehmed Ali, Marsot believes, was the Pasha’s
 economic policies which Palmerston viewed with suspicion since British goods were barred
 from Egyptian markets as well as from other areas under the Pasha’s rule. In other words, while enumerating other
 potential reasons for Palmerston’s opposition to Mehmed Ali, Marsot argues that it was mostly the fear that
 “Muhammad Ali could well become a tiresome [commercial] rival” 55 to
 the British that caused Palmerston’s venomous hostility to the Pasha leading to the latter’s eventual “undoing.”
 Her study of the Pasha concludes by saying that “[industrialization was doomed to fail in Egypt, not through the
 shortcomings of the Egyptians, but because of external European pressures which used Ottoman legal control over
 Egypt to kill off any potential rivalry to their own industrial ventures.” 56 
 

 
 The present book, while accepting the assumption that Britain did indeed view Mehmed Ali’s activities
 suspiciously and that her policies as represented and pursued by Lord Palmerston were, in fact, instrumental in
 curbing Mehmed Ali’s power, does not unproblematically assume that the reason for this hostile stance was its
 fear of the Pasha’s industrial schemes. Rather, it argues that Mehmed Ali’s imperialist expansion over wide areas
 of the Ottoman Empire seriously challenged Britain’s more ambitious imperialist designs and was regarded in
 London and Bombay as a threat to Britain’s possessions in Asia, her communications with India and her influence
 in Istanbul. While this point is dealt with separately in chapter 7 below, it is important to point out at the outset that this book does not try to ascertain
 whether it was external opposition to Mehmed Ali’s policies or some inherent difficulties that caused the
 frustration of the Pasha’s ambitious “experiment.” Indeed, this book brings into question this very distinction
 between “internal” and “external” factors and will argue that it is an outcome of the Pasha’s policies and,
 significantly, of the manner in which they have been written about, and is not something that Mehmed Ali
 confronted at the outset of his long career.