
 

 
 These then are the main questions that this book is interested in. To recapitulate: What was the nature of
 Egyptian society in the first half of the nineteenth century insofar as its national identity was concerned? How
 did the Pasha and his elite identify themselves: as a Turkish-speaking elite that ruled an Arabic-speaking
 province of the Ottoman Empire or as a proto-national elite that attempted to deliver Egypt from the heavy burden
 of the Ottoman yoke? How did the non-elite members of Egyptian society react to their rulers’ struggles against
 the “men from Istanbul,” as the officials of the central administration of the Ottoman Empire were referred to?
 And, finally, given the importance of the modern disciplinary and representational devices in transforming
 Egyptian society and introducing a new colonial order in it, how were these devices “read” and reacted to by the
 people on whom they were applied?
 

 
 The modern army: the nizam-i cedid 
 

 
 Before summarizing the broad lines of the arguments pursued in the chapters to follow, a word is in order
 regarding the reason for choosing the army to answer the questions raised so far. First, and as argued in
 nationalist historiography, this army offered the rural population as well as the townspeople of Egypt the
 opportunity to bear arms and presumably gave them the right to defend their country for the first time in
 centuries, probably in millennia, and thus allows one to check the validity of the nationalist assumption that by
 doing so it helped nationalistic feelings to spread among the Egyptians during the first half of the nineteenth
 century. It has been argued that wars are essential for the creation of the nation, 83 and that “to make the citizen a soldier is to give him a sense of duty to the country and
 the consciousness of doing it which, if spread through the whole population, will convert it into . . . a
 nation.” 84 Being a conscript army and one that fought a number of
 victorious battles, Mehmed Ali’s army offers a good opportunity to check the validity of the Egyptian
 nationalists’ claim that the army allowed the population of Egypt to come to terms with the essential truth of
 the “nation,” i.e., that it is there waiting to be awakened. 85 
 

 
 Second, all modern armies are a microcosm of their larger societies in a crucial sense: by erecting and
 maintaining clear distinctions (in dress, pay, rights and duties) between soldiers and officers and in sharpening
 distinctions within each group by an elaborate hierarchical structure, armies reflect the class divisions within
 society at large. This sharp stratification was even more apparent in the case of Mehmed Ali’s army than with
 most other contemporary armies since the officer corps was ethnically and linguistically different from the
 overwhelming majority of the soldiery. Studying the internal relationship between soldiers and officers within
 that army, therefore, allows us to see how a representative proportion of the masses dealt with members of the
 elite and how these conflictual boundaries between the Turkish-speaking elite and the Arabic-speaking lower
 classes were constantly fought and challenged.