
 

 
 The Pasha and his Sultan
 

 
 This brings us to the third assumption of the Egyptian nationalist discourse, the assumption that the Ottoman
 context of the Pasha’s rule could be easily dismissed as a mere pretext that allowed Palmerston to fight Mehmed
 Ali and to frustrate his policies. As noted above in reference to Taymūr’s translation of the Sphinx’s letter,
 the easy dismissal of three centuries of Ottoman control as a backward, oppressive period that represents Egypt’s
 “dark ages” is characteristic of the general amnesia that afflicts all nationalist
 discourses. Having assumed the primordial, unadulterated existence of the Egyptian nation and insisting on its
 inherent, essential qualities, it becomes easy to view three centuries of Ottoman rule as “foreign” and “alien.”
 In other words, the nationalist argument not only starts from the assumption that “Egypt” was a distinct national
 entity but further insists that she kept her pristine nature pure and uncontaminated even after three centuries
 of Ottoman control. 57 Accordingly, these three centuries of Ottoman
 control that began in 1517 with the Ottoman victory over the Mamluks who had based their empire in Cairo are seen
 as a period of foreign occupation, and Ibrahim Pasha’s successive victories over the Ottoman Sultan’s armies in
 the 1830s as a long overdue revenge for that earlier defeat. 58 
 

 
 It is Marsot’s book that offers the clearest recent example of the view that the Ottoman rule was not only
 oppressive but also alien and foreign, and that Egypt’s position within the Ottoman Empire was similar to that of
 an occupied country seeking deliverance from foreign, oppressive rule. Throughout the book Marsot claims that
 Mehmed Ali was despite his “foreign” origins a nationalist hero who “drew the outline of a
 nation-state.” 59 While acknowledging that the Pasha “despised the
 Egyptians and . . . would only speak Turkish [and adding that] to deny that [he was an Ottoman] would be a denial
 of his roots and being,” 60 she still concludes that his policies
 “inevitably put Egypt on the path of independent statehood and self-recognition as having a separate identity
 distinct from other Muslims and Ottomans . . . [and] without his efforts it might have taken Egyptians much
 longer to be able to call Egypt their own.” 61 
 

 
 Realizing that Mehmed Ali had “foreign” origins that might have compromised his position as a leader of an Egypt
 that is otherwise assumed to be ethnically pure and uniform, Marsot attempts to resolve this apparent
 contradiction by resorting to the argument that the personality of Ibrahim Pasha (the Pasha’s eldest son)
 complemented that of his father in this respect. “Ibrahim [,she argues,] had no problems of self-identity; he
 liked the Egyptians and hated and despised the Turks . . . Together these two men and their
 associates were to carve out an empire for themselves out of Ottoman territories . . . ” 62 Nevertheless, the same characteristic problem of nationalist discourse
 remains: Marsot assumes the pre-existence of national sentiments, arguing that they simply needed a great
 reformer to rekindle them, even if that figure was of a different ethnic, linguistic and cultural background from
 his subjects and even if he was not explicitly fighting for their sake and, moreover, despite their ostensible
 opposition to him. In other words, Mehmed Ali is a national hero in spite of himself. 63 