
 

 
 This book, however, and as mentioned above, is not a study of the Pasha and his psyche, important and interesting
 though a psychological profile of the Pasha would surely be. It seeks, instead, to challenge the nationalist
 argument that sees the Ottoman background of the Pasha’s career as a mere pretext that Palmerston, for example,
 was clever enough to have used to bring about the “undoing” of Mehmed Ali and his “empire.” 68 Instead, this book looks at the Pasha’s career in an Ottoman context and
 starts from the assumption that three hundred years of Ottoman rule must have had a significant impact on the
 legal, cultural and economic position of Egypt, and that only if “Egypt” is taken to refer
 to a nation with a clearly defined identity could these three centuries be seen as foreign and alien.
 

 
 In contrast to the nationalists’ insistence on the pure essence of the Egyptian nation that led to the easy
 dismissal of three centuries of Egypt’s history as unworthy of study, scholars are now taking this long period
 more seriously, seeing in it a lively and vibrant society. 69 A good
 example is Ehud Toledano’s State and Society in Mid-Nineteenth-Century Egypt which seeks to
 challenge the notion that Egypt constituted a distinct entity within the Ottoman Empire and instead stresses the
 Ottoman nature of Egypt during the nineteenth century. 70 Toledano
 argues that under Mehmed Ali’s successors and even more so during the Pasha’s reign, occupiers of the highest
 positions in the military and the bureaucracy and holders of large land estates formed a distinct group that he
 calls the “Ottoman–Egyptian” elite. These people were marked off from the non-elite members by the fact that they
 “spoke Turkish; shared the values and heritage of Ottoman culture . . . came from various parts of the [Ottoman]
 empire . . . [and] were committed to serve in Egypt under an Ottoman–Egyptian dynasty . . . ” 71 Toledano rightly points out one of the most important characteristics of
 the upper echelons of Egyptian society in the nineteenth century, namely the fact that its members had more in
 common with the urban elite members of other provinces of the Ottoman Empire than with the Arabic-speaking
 inhabitants of the province they were ruling. Also useful is his description of Egyptian society as essentially
 composed of two clearly demarcated groups, the first being the Turkish-speaking elite and the second composed of
 the Arabic-speaking masses.
 

 
 Useful as this welcome reminder is, however, Toledano’s picture of Egyptian society in the “middle decades” is
 heavily influenced by the views of these Turkish-speaking elite and although he attempts to get closer to the non-elite members of Egyptian society it is difficult to see clearly from his narrative
 how these two groups interacted with each other. While he argues, for example, that “[t]he socio-cultural process
 of boundary drawing and redrawing was constantly acted out in mid-nineteenth-century Egypt,” 72 and that the peripheral zone between these two groups was “the twilight
 zone where limits are blurred, where boundaries overlap,” 73 the
 very form the book takes – being divided in two parts, one devoted to the study of the elite and the other of the
 non-elite, and having a separate chapter on the “Great social divide in Egyptian society” – makes it difficult to
 see how exactly these social barriers and boundaries were crossed or negotiated.