
 

 
 The problem with this line of reasoning lies not in the difficulty of clearly identifying the true sentiments of
 the Pasha but in the underlying assumptions of a pre-existing Egyptian nation that was waiting for a hero to
 deliver it from the heavy Ottoman yoke. For it is the nationalists’ taking for granted the uncontaminated
 presence of an Egyptian nation that forces Marsot to find a problem with Mehmed Ali’s ethnic background and to
 try and resolve it by adding Ibrahim’s personality to it. The root of this problem ultimately lies in the
 nationalists’ insistence on looking at the nation as undivided, homogenous and, above all, ethnically pure
 entity. Consequently the discovery that there was a “foreigner” leading the nation towards autonomy and
 independence in its struggle against its equally “foreign” enemy becomes very disturbing. In a number of places
 this insistence on drawing clear boundaries around “Egypt” and on seeing it as a clearly identifiable entity
 within the Ottoman Empire when none existed leads Marsot to interpret certain documents in a most peculiar way as
 when, for example, she translates a key letter that Mehmed Ali sent to his agent in Istanbul, Najib Efendi, in
 1827 at the height of the Greek War. In this letter the Pasha was contemplating the efforts he had made so far in
 helping his Sultan and was gloomily thinking of the prospect of fighting a combined European naval force that he
 would have little chance of defeating. “Here I am at a loss,” he said: “shall I be grieved at the calamity of the
 Sublime State ( devlet-i aliyye ) or at my own lost effort?” 64 Instead of translating devlet-i aliyye as “the
 Sublime State,” the conventional term for the Ottoman Empire, Marsot in her citation of that letter translates it
 as “ my country .” 65 This particularly skewed
 reading of an important and telling document is partly due to the fact that Marsot seems to have been relying on
 an Arabic translation rather than the original Turkish text of the document. 66 However, it is mostly due to a particular reading of Egyptian history and specifically of
 Mehmed Ali’s career, a reading that sees his reign as a chapter in the never-ending saga of Egypt’s struggle to
 express her true identity.
 

 
 Rather than viewing Mehmed Ali as a national or proto-national hero, the present book argues that the Pasha did
 have ambivalent feelings towards both his Egyptian subjects and his Ottoman Sultan not because he was suffering
 from an identity crisis caused by the fact that he was an Albanian who “had no cultural identity other than the
 Ottoman one,” causing him to have a “love-hate relationship with the Ottomans and [to fear] a loss of
 identity,” 67 but because of his untenable position within the
 Ottoman Empire. For it was the Pasha’s desire to carve out an empire for himself at the expense of the Sultan’s
 own empire, an act that could only be seen as one of rebellion and aggression, and at the same
 time his desire to be forgiven by the Sultan that caused the Pasha’s conflicting “psychological” problems.