
 

 
 Third, the army, being the institution of power par excellence , is a suitable institution
 for observing the process of state formation in nineteenth-century Egypt. Similar to the role played by
 eighteenth-century armies in the creation of the rising European nation-states, Mehmed Ali’s army could be said
 to be “one of the instruments with which [the state’s] political power [was] originally created and made
 permanent.” 86 European nation-states came into
 being not only through the spread of nationalist feelings and sentiments but also through the states’ monopoly of
 means of violence and their amassing of administrative and military measures that enabled them to extend their
 authority and control over remote regions in a permanent and stable manner. Studying Mehmed Ali’s army offers a
 good opportunity to verify whether a similar process could be detected in the Egyptian case, and if the growing
 power of the Egyptian state in the first half of the nineteenth century could be attributed to its effective
 monopoly of means of violence.
 

 
 Finally, being an institution of order and discipline, the army is a good place to see how this new “colonizing”
 order played itself out in the specific Egyptian context and how it was received, accommodated and/or resisted by
 those on whom it was applied. Specifically this book follows the army not only to see how this novel idea of
 “order” was “written” and drafted by senior officers and generals, but also to check how it was “translated” and
 implemented by middle-ranking officers and scribes, how it was imposed by guards and sentries, and, finally, how
 it was “read” and resisted by the young conscripts.
 

 
 Since this book is not a study of the Pasha’s military career but an investigation of how his army functioned, it
 does not review all the campaigns that this army waged. It concentrates on the Syrian campaign (1831–40), being
 one of the Pasha’s best organized military ventures. Chapter
 1 argues that this campaign differed from other campaigns both in its causes and in the manner in which it
 was conducted. Accordingly, and given its importance in understanding how the army functioned, the second half of
 the chapter is devoted to reviewing how the campaign started and how its major battles were fought. This chapter
 concludes by analyzing the ambivalent “Peace of Kütahia” that ended this first round of military confrontation
 between Mehmed Ali and Sultan Mahmud II.
 

 
 Having seen the Pasha in his palace at the beginning of this Introduction and having placed his military career
 in a wider context in chapter 1 , chapter 2 takes a step back in time, as it were, and tries to
 uncover the origins of the idea of creating a modern army. The chapter proceeds with a review of the earliest
 steps taken to create the army, namely the training of what was to become the nucleus of the officer corps and, more importantly, the beginning of the conscription policy as initially applied to Upper
 Egypt. It also reviews the initial problems encountered in collecting the men from their villages and in securing
 their delivery to the training depots. Since this book is more interested in the soldiers who fought in the
 Pasha’s wars than in their commanders or in the Pasha himself, this chapter marks the beginning of the main story
 that this book is concerned with: the story of a hypothetical soldier whose connection with the army starts with
 conscription then proceeds to training, then follows him to the battle scene, and from there to see how he
 recuperated from the aftermath of the battle. The subsequent chapters proceed along these lines.