
 

 
 Chapter 6 raises the central question of the role the army
 played in the creation of Egyptian nationalism during the first half of the nineteenth century. By analyzing how
 the Pasha, his officers, and his soldiers viewed the army and the battles they were fighting in, the chapter
 re-examines the common allegation that by being allowed to bear arms for the first time in centuries the
 population of Egypt came to think of itself as forming a distinct people with a different identity and group
 personality. The chapter then ends the story of the hypothetical soldier’s connection with the army, that is,
 with desertion. After that the chapter proceeds to answer a perplexing question of how an army whose soldiers
 were reluctant conscripts, dragged into it against their wishes, could still manage to produce the spectacular
 victories that the Pasha’s army accomplished. In an attempt to answer this question it compares the performance
 of the Pasha’s army with that of the Ottoman Sultan. It also offers a comparison with Napoleon’s army which was
 the first army to use conscripts on a national scale and along whose lines the Pasha’s army was partially
 modeled.
 

 
 Throughout this study the army that the Pasha founded and indeed his entire regime are put in a wider Ottoman
 context. Chapter 7 closes then with an account of what the
 career of Mehmed Ali might look like if placed in this larger context, and specifically seeks to view Mehmed
 Ali’s encounter with Palmerston from that Ottoman perspective. The aim of this final chapter, then, is not to
 restore Mehmed Ali to center stage by closing the book with him, but to offer one last
 challenge to the nationalist account of the Great Pasha and of Great Britain’s hostility towards him. In contrast
 to the nationalist view according to which Mehmed Ali’s efforts were frustrated by Great Britain, this final
 chapter argues that the Pasha’s career was a highly successful one: he fought for hereditary rule for himself and
 for his sons who were to follow him, and this is precisely what he managed to accomplish.
 

 
      1   FO 78/147, Barker, 25 November 1826.
 

 
      2    Ibid .
 

 
      3   James Augustus St. John, Egypt and Mohammed
 Ali (London: Longman, 1834), I, p. 543.
 

 
      4   A. A. Paton, History of the Egyptian
 Revolution (London: Trubner, 1863), II, pp. 82–3.
 

 
      5   A. W. C. Lindsay, Lord, Letters on Egypt,
 Edom, and the Holy Land (London: Henry Colborn, 1938), I, p. 34.
 

 
      6   Anon., “Interviews with Mehemet Ali,” Tait’s Edinburgh Magazine , 5(1838), p. 696.
 

 
      7   Ḥaidar al-Shihābī, al-Ghurar al-Ḥisān fī
 Akhbār Abnā’ al-Zāmān , ed., Asad Rustum and Fouad al-Bustānī (Beirut: The Catholic Press, 1933), pp. 860–1.
 The newspaper, which is not named, is dated 5 June 1832. Emphasis added.
 

 
      8   Mr Ramsay’s Journal, quoted in Lord Lindsay, I, p. 35n.
 

 
      9   W. R. Wilde, Narrative of a Voyage to
 Madeira, Teneriffe and Along the Shores of the Mediterranean Including a visit to Algiers, Egypt, Palestine,
 etc . (Dublin: William Curry, 1844). p. v.