
 

 
 Chapter 3 , therefore, follows from where the previous
 chapter left off and reviews the process of training the new, young and often reluctant conscripts. It starts
 with an analysis of the regime of isolation and surveillance that was intended to mark off life on the training
 camps from civilian life outside the camps. It also seeks to contrast the new military legal codes that were
 intended to discipline the new recruits with civil laws that were applied in the countryside and to see how the
 army could be looked to as the kind of model for society to follow. Finally, it gives a brief review of the
 training manuals that symbolized in a pristine manner the machine-like image of the military and that reflected
 the new modes of authority, the continuous monitoring of behavior and the meticulous control of every movement
 and gesture of the trainees. Besides continuing with the story of the young reluctant conscript, this chapter,
 therefore, introduces the Foucauldian notion of power and presents in a pure form the logic of that power as
 detectable from the military manuals and military laws that attempted to regulate all details of military life.
 

 
 Chapter 4 opens with a description of a key battle that
 Mehmed Ali’s army fought, the battle of Konia against the Ottoman army (December 1832). Although the Egyptian
 army had a decisive victory in that battle, it was discovered that serious mistakes were committed by a leading
 brigadier who participated in the battle and whose performance comes somewhat as a surprise after reading the
 laws, regulations and training manuals reviewed so far. The chapter takes its lead from this particular incident
 and seeks to contrast the cohesive, machine-like manner in which the army was supposed to perform as has been
 described in the previous chapter with various accounts of the manner in which the army did actually perform.
 This serves to introduce a theme that is further elaborated upon in the following chapter, that of the
 discrepancy that separated the various military laws from the manner in which they were actually applied.
 

 
 Chapter 5 follows on from there and
 attempts to offer a view of the soldier not on the battle scene where he is probably conditioned to act in the
 manner depicted in the training manuals, but on the camps and the barracks where he lives recuperating from past
 battles or preparing for future ones. One particular aspect is highlighted to draw a picture of the daily lives
 of the soldiers in the camps, namely, the manner in which the authorities attempted to control the health and
 hygiene of the soldiers, and how the soldiers, in turn, attempted to evade this tight system of control. Besides
 attempting to get as close as possible to the soldiers and trying to see how they led their daily lives on the
 camps, this chapter seeks to see how the monolithic picture of the army that comes across from reading its laws
 and regulations (a picture that is presented in chapter 3 )
 contrasts sharply with the less impressive, but arguably more interesting (and also more blurred) picture of the
 soldiers evading this tight control over their bodies. Put differently, while chapter 3 , and to a lesser degree, chapter 4 , are interested in the notion of power and use the
 discourse of law to analyze it, chapter 5 is concerned
 with the notion of resistance and approaches it through studying the practice of medicine.