
 

 
 The Syrian campaign, the most important of the Pasha’s wars, is seen to have a number of interrelated causes. On
 the one hand, Mehmed Ali felt that after all the help he afforded to the Porte in subduing both the Wahhabi and
 Greek revolts he was entitled to a handsome reward, 11 and during
 the Morean war he had, in fact, asked for the four pashalɩks of Syria to be given to him as that most coveted
 reward. Once the Morean war was over, however, it became clear that the Sultan (under the influence of Mehmed
 Ali’s arch-enemy, Husrev Pasha) 12 decided to turn down the Pasha’s
 request and Mehmed Ali was determined to take by force what, by then, he considered to be rightly his. 13 Other reasons are cited for this most important of Mehmed Ali’s
 campaigns. Among them was his desire to create a buffer-area between the heartland of his dominions in the Nile
 valley and the center of Ottoman power in Anatolia, 14 as well as
 his realization that the Ottoman Empire was decaying and his wish to fill the gap that would ensue from the
 decline of its dominion by engaging in a “delicate diplomatic balance between England and France by playing one
 against the other.” 15 Pretexts abounded, the most important of
 which was a quarrel with ‘Abdallah Pasha of Acre whom Mehmed Ali had accused of giving refuge to some 6,000
 Egyptian fellahin who, in an attempt to evade taxes, had fled across the borders to neighboring Syria. 16 
 

 
 Most historians, therefore, highlight the different causes behind the various campaigns that
 the Pasha was engaged in. Nevertheless, they are in agreement in arguing that he had always desired to extend his
 dominions out of Egypt and that he was seizing the various opportunities that he was offered to achieve this
 goal. The clearest in expressing this idea is Dodwell who argued that “[f]rom the day when the idea of seizing
 the government of Egypt first occurred to him as a practical measure he had probably always nursed the thought of
 ruling, not on behalf of another but as an independent sovereign.” 17 In a similar fashion Driault says that the Pasha undertook this huge military expansion
 because he “had the dream and the desire to be grand.” 18 In another
 place he argues that after the Pasha had succeeded in founding a modern army and a formidable navy, and after he
 had significantly enhanced the productivity of Egypt, the Pasha “wanted to deliver [Egypt] from the guardianship,
 that is, the economic domination of an outside power. Was this not pardonable?” 19 
 

 
 Egyptian historians are, for the most part, similarly fascinated by the great Pasha. For them there is little
 doubt that his greatness is due, most of all, to his unceasing effort to attain independence for Egypt from the
 Ottoman Empire. al-Rāf‘ī, for example, argues that the struggle of the Pasha against the Sultan was a struggle
 for national independence and that “all the wars that Egypt entered during Mehmed Ali’s rule paved the way for
 its independence and enhanced its position among other nations.” 20 
 That Mehmed Ali was fighting for the independence is so blindly taken for granted by most Egyptian historians
 that while basing their argument on the need for Egypt to get rid of the “Ottoman yoke,” the same right is denied
 other provinces that were also supposedly suffering under Ottoman suzerainty. These arguments with strong
 imperialist overtones are best represented in recent studies by two Egyptian historians. The first is J. ‘Ubaid’s
 study of Mehmed Ali’s expansion into Greece. In it he argues that the reason why Mehmed Ali expanded out of Egypt
 was to protect the economic and military reforms that he had succeeded in introducing in Egypt “with the help of
 its people” and his wariness of the Sultan’s attempts to depose him. He was thus, ‘Ubaid continues, constantly
 looking for guarantees that would entrench his position in Egypt, “guarantees that could only be secured if he extends his control [not only] over Egypt but also to Syria, the Arabian coast [of the
 Red Sea], and Iraq, if possible. The reason [for annexing these areas] is that they complement each other
 economically, making the task of defending them militarily easier.” 21 More glaringly, another Egyptian historian, in referring to Mehmed Ali’s expansion in Syria,
 says