
 

 
 Egypt undoubtedly had a civilizing role, since she had always embraced civilization and was generous with it . .
 . She therefore extended her hands magnanimously to its neighbors at a time when she was filled with a feeling of
 strength and leadership. She believed that her duty was to work on a new wide-sweeping renaissance especially
 since the area that she had her eyes on was deficient and faulty. 22 
 

 
 The question of whether the wars that the governor of Egypt waged during the first third of the nineteenth
 century were dynastic wars of imperialistic expansion or national wars of independence is central to
 understanding the whole of Mehmed Ali’s career and, indeed, of the history of Egypt during his reign. If, as
 Toledano argues, Egypt was very much an Ottoman province, ruled by an Ottoman–Egyptian elite, 23 then Marsot’s claim that, unlike contemporary Ottoman notables “who had
 merely sought quasi-independence for their provinces but were content to remain within the empire, Muhammad Ali
 sought independence,” 24 has to be qualified. For even if it is
 granted that Mehmed Ali was seeking to get rid of the “Ottoman yoke” right from the beginning of his career, the
 question remains as to the nature of this independence. Could it be viewed as similar to the independence sought
 by the Greeks during their War of Independence when large sections of the population rose against their Ottoman
 rulers? Or is it more plausible to link Mehmed Ali’s wars, as Shaw does, with a series of internal wars within
 the Ottoman Empire that were waged by local governors against central government control? If so, Mehmed Ali would
 appear, like Ali Pasha of Janina, Davud Pasha of Baghdad, or Amir Bashir of Lebanon as a local governor of an
 Ottoman province who seized the opportunity of the difficulties that the Ottoman Sultan was facing both
 internally and externally to try and expand his own local dominions. 25 The reason why he succeeded where most of these local governors failed is seen as stemming
 from the fact that he managed to prepare for his military ventures by a complete and thorough reorganization of
 the province’s economic, administrative and, above all, military systems. In doing so, the
 Pasha enlarged “the scope of the state . . . beyond that traditionally accepted by the Ottomans . . . [and he did
 this] with a severity far in excess of other Ottoman reformers.” 26 
 This still begs the question of how precisely Mehmed Ali succeeded where other reform-oriented valis in the
 Ottoman Empire failed, and how the reforms he introduced within his province enabled him to expand at the expense
 of neighboring valis and, indeed, at the Sultan’s own expense.
 

 
 Marsot, in contrast, does not see that Mehmed Ali was blindly driven toward expansion, and argues that his
 expansionary policy could best be understood in economic terms. “The value of conquest [did not lie] in conquest
 itself. It was always posited in terms of what conquest could add to Egypt’s financial situation . . . Expansion
 was economic planning carried out by other means.” 27 This argument,
 however, raises more questions than it seeks to answer. Although it is true that the economic growth that Egypt
 witnessed during Mehmed Ali’s reign required finding markets, the Egyptian market, as Marsot herself states, was
 far from saturated. 28 That there were economic benefits to be
 gained by military expansion does not necessarily mean that these economic benefits were the reason behind such
 expansion. 29 It might be true, for example, as Lawson argues, that
 the Hijaz campaign was influenced by the Pasha’s desire to redirect some of the profits of the Red Sea trade
 towards Egypt; that the Pasha was lured by the alleged gold mines in the Sudan; that the Greek war was entered
 into partly to re-establish the Egyptian trade with the Aegean; and that Syria provided the Pasha with badly
 needed sources of timber necessary for his navy, and coal for the production of gunpowder. But to argue that
 these considerations were decisive in shaping Mehmed Ali’s policy of expansion is to ignore the fact that two of
 these campaigns were ordered by his Sultan, and that Mehmed Ali agreed to comply with these orders only
 reluctantly and after considerable hesitation. Moreover, that some economic benefits could be reaped from
 annexing a certain province does not mean that military occupation was cost-free, and neither Marsot nor Lawson
 show anything resembling a calculated economic assessment done by Mehmed Ali or Ibrahim weighing the costs and
 the benefits of military annexation. In fact, when something resembling this assessment was carried out it was to
 show that the costs of maintaining the army in the annexed provinces far outweighed the revenue accruing from
 them. With regard to the economic benefits of the occupation of Syria, for example, which was arguably the
 wealthiest and most productive province that Mehmed Ali annexed, it was eventually realized
 that there were serious problems in reaping the economic fruits of the occupation. It was suggested, for example,
 that in an attempt to “increase the productivity” of the province the local peasants should be given the freedom
 to plant whichever commodities they wanted. 30 Towards the end of
 the occupation when these problems were still being strongly felt, Ibrahim suggested to his father that taxes be
 reduced so as to encourage people to be more productive. Mehmed Ali responded by saying that “to increase our
 revenues we should [encourage the population to] work harder rather than lower our taxes.” He added that he could
 not accept that the tax burden on the Syrians was heavy since “what we have taken is like an ear from a camel. We
 should have done as the Europeans do and collected [a flat rate] of 5 percent.” 31 This was after he had received conclusive and clear reports confirming what has been feared
 all along, namely, that the cost of maintaining the army in Syria was not covered by the revenue raised
 there. 32 