
 

 
 Looking at Mehmed Ali in this light most historical accounts that follow his military career chronologically
 share a number of assumptions which are sometimes explicitly, at other times implicitly, stated. One is that
 right from the beginning of his career Mehmed Ali was never content with ruling Egypt alone; and that he was set
 on extending his control over neighboring provinces, taking Egypt as a base for further expansion. In other
 words, this chronological narration implicitly assumes that Mehmed Ali, in addition to working stoically and
 persistently towards achieving independence for Egypt from the Ottoman Empire, also had a “master plan” that
 guided him in his efforts in achieving this goal.
 

 
 This chapter attempts to check whether Mehmed Ali did in fact have such a “master plan” for expansion, and if he
 did, whether achieving independence was the motive force behind his incessant activities. It proceeds with a
 brief review of how Egypt’s military expansion in the first half of the nineteenth century has been explained by
 various historians. Then it seeks to place this military expansion within a wider Ottoman
 context. For reasons that are mentioned below, the Syrian campaign is reviewed in some detail to show how Mehmed
 Ali was responding to, and was influenced by, developments in the Ottoman Empire at large.
 

 
 Understanding the Pasha’s military expansion
 

 
 In dealing with the different campaigns that Mehmed Ali engaged in individually rather than as episodes that
 could fit in a grand strategy most historians acknowledge the fact that every one of these campaigns was dictated
 by unique historical causes. The Hijaz campaign, for example, besides being a response to the Sultan’s order to
 subdue the Wahhabi rebellion, 3 is seen as serving a number of the
 Pasha’s own aims. Among these were the desire to get rid of the turbulent and undisciplined mamluk and Albanian
 troops in his army, 4 the hope to get Syria as a reward for helping
 the Sultan in his war against the Wahhabi rebels, 5 and the desire
 to win fame and prestige in the Muslim world for capturing the holy cities of Islam from the rebellious Wahhabis
 who were seen in Istanbul as heretics and whose rising power in Arabia had allegedly caused the annual pilgrimage
 to cease. 6 
 

 
 The Sudan campaign is considered to have provided the Pasha with an opportunity to rid himself of even more of
 the undisciplined and quarrelsome Albanian troops who had survived the Wahhabi wars. The Pasha might also have
 been lured by the alleged abundance of rich gold mines in Sinnār. More important was the need to conscript the
 black Sudanese in the army he was contemplating and which he had already undertaken the first steps to create.
 Finally, Mehmed Ali was also eager to be rid of the remnant of the mamluk forces who had taken refuge in Dongola
 and whom he considered a constant source of menace. 7 
 

 
 The Greek campaign, like the Hijaz campaign, is seen as a response to an order by the Sultan
 to subdue the rebellion that erupted among some of his subject population and to his inability to deal with such
 a challenge by relying solely on the forces of the central government. Like the previous two campaigns, this one
 is seen as having its specific reasons as well. The most important of these was the desire on the part of the
 Pasha to mask his true intentions of invading Syria, 8 a desire to
 increase his own influence in the Ottoman capital, 9 and also to
 revitalize Egypt’s Aegean trade, disrupted by the Greek revolt. 10 