
 

 
 I am now the most important man [ l’homme du jour ] in the entire Ottoman Empire. I have
 returned the Holy Cities [of Mecca and Medina] to the true believers; I have carried my victorious armies to
 places where the power of the Grand Signor [i.e. the Ottoman Sultan] was not known, and to places whose people
 had still not heard of gunpowder. My right arm, my son Ibrahim, will conquer Morea and the moment his mission is
 crowned with success, I shall call him back and return these lands to their legitimate master. I will call back
 my forces, raise [new] conscripts, complete my regiments and then grab the pashalɩks of Damascus and Acre . . . I
 will organize une grande armée and I shall not stop except at the Tigris and Euphrates.
 

 
 Startled at the frankness and seriousness of this monolog, the French visitor said that the Pasha, in addition,
 confided in him his desire to invade Yemen and the Strait of Bāb al-Mandab, occupy the Port of Sawākin on the
 western coast of the Red Sea, “cover the entire Arabian peninsula with his troops and plant his banners in
 el-Katif on the Persian Gulf.” 1 
 

 
 Less than ten years later these words would prove to be most prophetic. In 1833, indeed, Mehmed Ali appeared as
 the most important vali in the Ottoman Empire, his strength and resources favorably competing with those of the
 Sultan himself. By the mid-1830s the Pasha had carved a small empire for himself at the expense of the Sultan’s
 own dominions. After firmly entrenching himself in Egypt he extended his control to Syria, the Hijaz, the Sudan,
 Crete and most of Yemen and Eastern Arabia, that is, most of the Sultan’s Arabic-speaking lands and some of his
 wealthiest provinces. Having wiped out two huge armies that the Sultan had mustered to confront him with, his
 forces then penetrated the heartland of the Ottoman Empire, Anatolia, and threatened the capital itself.
 

 
 Before seeing how these spectacular campaigns were conducted a word is in order as to the
 reasons behind Mehmed Ali’s undertaking this extensive, unprecedented military expansion. Studies of Mehmed Ali
 almost invariably proceed in a chronological order following him as he conducts one campaign after the other,
 starting with his early expedition against the Wahhabis in the Hijaz (1811–18), then tracking him to the Sudan
 (1820–22), from there to the Morea (1824–27), and ending with his climactic confrontation with the Sultan and the
 European powers in his most ambitious and significant campaign in Syria (1831–41). 2 Portrayed in this chronological manner Mehmed Ali’s career immediately seems consistent,
 purposeful and progressing teleologically towards a climactic, well-thought-out goal, which Egyptian historians
 have consistently argued to be the seeking of independence from the Ottoman Empire. At the heart of these
 narrations and occupying central stage (sometimes literally as was shown in the Introduction above) Mehmed Ali
 appears as a solitary, romantic hero who was ahead of his time, little understood by his own people and betrayed
 by his allies, but who, through perseverance, persistence and insight was determined to fulfill his civilizing
 mission of pushing Egypt into the modern age and of lifting her out of what is perceived as centuries of Ottoman
 stagnation, tyranny and oppression.