
 

 
 Mehmed Ali still had his eye fixed on Syria, though, and on several occasions he asked to be given the eyalet of
 Damascus in addition to that of Egypt. In 1812, for example, he spoke to the British consul about his designs on
 the area. 44 The following year while his forces were having
 difficulties trying to subdue the Wahhabis in Arabia, he wrote to the Sadrazam telling him that he could offset
 the reverses suffered by his army in Arabia only if he was given the eyalet of Sham (i.e. Damascus) in addition
 to Egypt. 45 Two years later he repeated the same request. When his
 supply lines got longer and longer in his war against the Wahhabis and in order to prepare for the final attack
 on the Saudi capital, Dar‘iyya, it was realized at least 20,000 camels were required, only 3,000 of which had
 been secured from Syria in spite of repeated promises of help from the vali of Damascus. He again wrote to Nagib
 Efendi in Istanbul telling him to try yet another time to convince senior officials in the capital to bestow on
 him the eyalet of Damascus. 46 In 1821 he again
 showed a keen interest (and influence) in Syrian affairs when ‘Abdallah Pasha, the vali of Sidon, requested his
 mediation with the Porte to reinstate him in his pashalɩks after falling out of favor with the Sultan. He agreed
 to play the role of mediator and, thanks to his efforts ‘Abdallah Pasha was pardoned and reinstated in his
 post. 47 
 

 
 Long before the actual invasion of Syria the Pasha of Egypt, therefore, had had a strong influence there. In an
 interview that Henry Salt, the British Consul-General, Mehmed Ali showed not only how influential he was in
 Syria, but also how conscious he was of his own power. When asked by the Consul-General what he would do if it
 was true that a certain Yusuf Pasha was sent to Aleppo with 10,000 men to fight him, he answered,
 

 
 The man is an ass, he cannot maintain [his men] and has sent already to me for supplies. He wished to make a
 figure for his own no doubt or perhaps to please me as he might imagine, but I want no great men for my friends .
 . . As to doing anything against me if that should be his idea, it only shows his folly; if I were to send
 against him 2,000 of my disciplined troops only they would destroy him. ‘Abdallah Pasha is with me, the Druses
 are on my side. I can command the Arabs of the desert. The man is a fool . . . 48 
 

 
 This old and deep seated interest in Syria and Syrian affairs had its reasons. In the first place, Syria was
 famous for its raw materials, most importantly, its wood and timber that was in abundant supply in the woods of
 its northernmost regions. The Pasha, very conscious of the fact that Egypt lacked wood, 49 took various measures to encourage the fellahin to plant trees. 50 However, he was also aware that no matter how successful he was in this
 respect, the quality of wood grown in Egypt was not as good as that imported from abroad. 51 He thus undertook to import wood from any place he could find it, be it
 from the Sudan, 52 Cyprus, 53 Greece, 54 Anatolia, or Europe. 55 