
 

 
 This desperate need for wood was necessitated by the need to build a formidable fleet and,
 to a lesser extent, to provide the “factories” with a reliable supply of fuel. Given its large wooded areas,
 Syria was an attractive region, especially in light of its proximity to Egypt which reduced transportation
 costs. 56 Furthermore, because it had extensive forest lands Syria
 was producing different kinds of wood that were suitable for the Pasha’s various needs. 57 In a clear reference to its importance in this respect Ibrahim wrote to
 his father in the wake of the negotiations that eventually led to the “peace of Kütahia” in 1833 telling him that
 out of all lands in their possession they must not give up the three districts of Alaiye (Alanya), Adalia
 (Antalia) and Içel (Cilicia), all on the south coast of Anatolia.
 

 
 As for demanding these regions [he explained,] it is based on the fact that they are well-wooded regions, and
 verily the nation that possesses no timbered land will find excessive difficulty in maintaining her fleet. All
 this is self-evident. As you know, England is a poorly wooded country, and when it sought to obtain timber from
 Austria, the latter country rejected the request. Indeed, Egypt is in the same position. In confirmation of my
 suggestion is the instruction I previously received from you in which you said, “My son, give as much care to the
 matter of timber as you would to crippling the army of Constantinople.” 58 
 

 
 Secondly, Syria also promised to be a good source of manpower for the Pasha. Although Egypt was one of the most
 populous provinces in the area, the Pasha’s conscription policy as well as the different wars his forces were
 engaged in meant that there was a very real danger that the agricultural fields would be left
 unattended. 59 The Pasha was also concerned about the effect that
 wars could have on his economically productive population. 60 He is
 reported to have once said, “Countries with no subjects are no countries.” 61 In that respect, too, the Pasha had every reason to look to Syria. With a population said to
 be around two million people, 62 it was very attractive for the
 Pasha to contemplate using its manpower. As early as 1825 he is said to have had in mind the possibility of conscripting the inhabitants of Mount Lebanon who were reputed to make brave and
 strong soldiers. 63 
 

 
 It is clear, therefore, that the Pasha had always desired Syria and that he had various reasons for wanting it so
 dearly. He, however, dared to annex it only in 1831, i.e. twenty-six years after he had secured for himself the
 governorship of Egypt. Why did he do so only then and not before? What events prompted him to undertake this bold
 move? Acknowledging that there were deep-seated reasons for Mehmed Ali to contemplate invading Syria this chapter
 attempts to argue that what finally prompted him to do so was the feeling of hostility and mistrust that he felt
 toward Sultan Mahmud II personally, and the “men in Istanbul,” i.e. the Ottoman viziers and courtiers in Istanbul
 in general. 64 It was during the Morean war and specifically the
 years 1825–27 that this feeling of animosity was intensified and proved decisive in turning the Pasha against his
 Sultan. This was the period that witnessed Mahmud’s success in abolishing the old Janissary corps, thus
 strengthening his control over the capital and making Mehmed Ali wary of his Sultan’s increased military power;
 and it was also the period that witnessed the Sultan’s ever increasing demands on Mehmed Ali to help him in his
 fight against the Greeks.