
 

 
 the ruler who is obsessed with tradition and who is oblivious of his own interests becoming the slave of
 tradition, such a ruler the people do not call ruler. [On the contrary], they refer to him as a madman and
 lunatic. It is clear to all those who can see that the Ottoman State, although once a strong and powerful state .
 . . is now feeble and rampant with problems because of its viziers’ obsession with ceremonies and
 tradition. 69 
 

 
 On another occasion he showed even more disdain towards the Ottomans. At the height of the Greek campaign the
 British Ambassador in Istanbul, Stratford Canning, asked Salt to see if the Pasha would use his influence in
 Istanbul to convince the Porte to accept British mediation to end the conflict. When approached by Salt the Pasha
 declined, explaining that “they [i.e. the viziers in Istanbul] are too unsettled, too warring in that quarter and
 the Grand Signor [i.e. the Sultan] too much a bigot and too much in the hands of the Ulemas [sic] ever to consent
 to such a proposition.” 70 
 

 
 Earlier in that year a certain incident happened that can be taken as a sign that the more or less amicable,
 ambivalent relationship that once existed between the Sultan and his vassal was nearing its end. When Mahmud
 succeeded decisively in getting rid of the power of the Janissaries in June of 1826 he summoned Mehmed Najib
 Efendi, Mehmed Ali’s agent, and asked him to write to the Pasha in Cairo requesting his help in founding a new
 nizami army. He explained that it was due to Mehmed Ali, after all, “that we saw the
 importance of training the troops along modern lines.” 71 Nagib
 Efendi wrote to the Pasha asking him to dispatch instructors who had been drilled in his army to train the
 imperial army. 72 Although the Sultan gave Mehmed Ali the credit for
 initiating such important reforms, the Pasha refused to help his Sultan giving such excuses as the fact that the
 officers in his army were better paid than Ottoman officers and that this might cause friction and envy between them. 73 The most he did was
 to send a letter to the Grand Vizier congratulating him on the bold move and expressing his personal delight in
 it. 74 Privately, however, he harbored different opinions. In an
 audience he gave to the British Consul-General in Egypt the Pasha made it clear that he had other reasons to
 refuse to help his sovereign. “The Pasha informed me,” Salt says, “that an application had been made to him for
 instructors but as the Grand Signor [i.e. the Sultan] had the same means open to him as himself he had evaded
 complying with the request – but they are too bigoted, he said, to employ Franks.” 75 Having refused to send instructors from Egypt and believing that the Ottomans would not
 employ Europeans to train their new troops, the Pasha must have hoped that their efforts would be frustrated.
 

 
 Whether or not he was contemplating the likelihood of fighting the Sultan’s own forces at some time in the future
 cannot be ascertained, although the evidence does not rule this out as a possibility. What is clear is that from
 that moment onwards the latent suspicion and mutual hatred that the two men felt towards each other became more
 and more manifest. When in 1828 the Sultan appealed to his vassal to help him face Russian military advances into
 Moldovia, the Caucasus and eastern Anatolia, Mehmed Ali refused to send in troops unless the Sultan granted him a
 governorship in Anatolia in return, 76 a request he knew full well
 would not be granted.