
 

 
 they are so helpless and inefficient that they cannot even fix the masts of their frigates . . . Your Highness
 knows only too well the amount of supplies you were kind enough to offer them. You also know the amount of food
 they ate and swallowed when they were in Alexandria. 81 
 

 
 Moreover, in spite of the effort and expenses that he claimed he took to supply the imperial fleet with food,
 equipment and ammunition, 82 Mehmed Ali was reprimanded for not
 doing enough to help the Sultan. When the Pasha said that his transport vessels could not ship the required
 equipment of both fleets and that European merchant ships refused to transport the supplies on the pretext of
 neutrality, Husrev Pasha, Mehmed Ali’s old enemy who by then had been promoted to the position of Grand Admiral
 of the Ottoman navy ( Kaptan-ɩ Derya ), rebuked him saying it was he (i.e. Mehmed Ali) who was
 making up pretexts. He added that he should get down to business and that “what suits the house is not suitable
 for the market,” in essence, that he was not talking business and was behaving as a housewife. The Pasha would
 not tolerate such language. In strongly worded letters to the Grand Admiral himself, to Ibrahim Pasha, to Najib
 Efendi, and to Husni Bey, the Bailiff of the Imperial Palace ( Divan-ɩ Hümayun Çavuşbaşisi ),
 he reminded them that he would not accept being rewarded by ingratitude and insult when he was doing his best to
 meet the Sultan’s demands. He wondered why it was only he who was called upon to assist the Sultan in times of
 crisis. He specifically reprimanded the Grand Admiral for using such language with him. 83 In fact, the mere presence of Husrev Pasha in joint command of the
 combined Ottoman–Egyptian fleet was a source of constant irritation both to Mehmed Ali and to his son Ibrahim,
 and the Pasha used all his influence in Istanbul to have Husrev removed from the joint command and Ibrahim given
 a free hand to conduct naval operations as he saw fit. For his part, and in addition to complaining about Husrev,
 Ibrahim was also annoyed by the interference of Mehmed Raşid Pasha, the vali of Rumeli, in his operations on the
 ground, and all attempts to have an amicable working relationship between the three men
 failed. The language that Ibrahim used to refer to the vali of Rumeli, for example, shows how uncomfortable he
 was with the idea of collaborating with the Ottomans. Specifically he was complaining of the impossibility of
 co-operating with Raşid Pasha, since the vali was constantly giving “silly pretexts [ leyt ve
 lealla , lit. “if’s and but’s”] and unnecessarily delaying the whole affair.” He added that he was sent to the
 Morea to fight the infidels and not the vali of Rumeli. 84 To deal
 with these complaints the Porte appointed two men in Istanbul (Husni Bey and Najib Efendi) to supervise the
 operations of the joint command of Ibrahim-Raşid-Husrev. Ibrahim, however, would not accept being supervised by
 men in Istanbul and would not recognize any authority except that of his father. He wrote to his father
 complaining: