
 

 
 Given the Pasha’s legal position within the Empire and given the ambivalent feelings he had
 towards his Sultan it is therefore crucial to place his military activities within the larger Ottoman context.
 Mehmed Ali might have had desires to expand his dominions out of Egypt, but he certainly took his legal position
 as a vali very seriously. The question that should be asked in this respect is why Mehmed Ali agreed to fight
 along with the Sultan against the Wahhabis and the Greeks and then turn against him in 1831.
 

 
 In all the points mentioned above, Syria holds the key. It was in the Syrian war that the modern army was fully
 employed, an army only at its infancy during the Morean campaign and virtually non-existent in the Arabian and
 Sudanese campaigns. Furthermore, it was only by the late 1820s that the finances of Egypt had been sufficiently
 restructured and its productivity sufficiently increased to sustain a military expedition with the size and
 organization of that of the Syrian campaign. 40 Above all it was in
 the Syrian war that the Pasha fought his Sultan, Mahmud II, hence marking it as distinct from earlier wars in
 which he was helping the Sultan. The remainder of this chapter therefore concentrates on the Syrian campaign
 first by explaining the reasons for the Pasha’s desiring Syria. Second it attempts to trace the steps that
 ultimately led to that blatant act of rebellion by Mehmed Ali against the Sultan and argues that it was the
 Pasha’s growing dislike of the Sultan and the demands he was putting on him during the Morean campaign that
 finally forced him to defy his sovereign when the opportunity presented itself. Third, it proceeds to follow the
 army into Syria and attempts to draw a rough sketch of how it conducted the campaign there. The chapter then
 concludes by reviewing the so called “Peace of Kütahia” and questions the allegation that it was Europe’s and
 specifically Britain’s machinations that frustrated Mehmed Ali’s efforts at achieving independence from the
 Ottoman Empire at the end of the first round of confrontation with Istanbul.
 

 
 Syria: the cornerstone of the Pasha’s “empire”
 

 
 Unlike other provinces that Mehmed Ali conquered, there are various incidents that show the Pasha’s very early
 interest in Syria, and there is enough evidence to show that out of all the provinces he eventually occupied,
 Syria was the one he most coveted and that he had his eye on it, as it were, right from the beginning of his
 career. Indeed, one can view the enormous military build-up since the early 1820s as
 preparing the way for the invasion of Syria, an operation that, by its own nature, had to wait for the opportune
 moment to be launched.
 

 
 As early as 1810 Mehmed Ali showed his interest in the neighboring province and his willingness to interfere in
 its internal affairs, as well as his ability to influence developments there to suit his interests. Capitalizing
 on the enmity between Süleyman Pasha, the vali of Sidon, and Yusuf Genç Pasha, the vali of Damascus, Mehmed Ali
 decided to side with the latter and mediated with the Sublime Porte to reinstate him in his pashalɩks. 41 He wrote various letters to the Sublime Porte and to his agent in
 Istanbul, Najib Efendi, insinuating that he would not dispatch his almost ready campaign to the Hijaz unless
 Yusuf Genç were reinstated in his post, and adding that he was insisting on this demand “not out of personal
 reasons but to facilitate the Hijaz affair.” 42 Mehmed Ali finally
 succeeded in his demands and his friend was pardoned although he was not reappointed to his pashalɩks. He spent
 the last six years of his life in Egypt. 43 