
 

 
 Mehmed Ali was constantly aware that his position as vali of Egypt rested more on his personal strength than on
 the Sultan’s consent and satisfaction with him. The possibility of the Sultan expelling him from his post by
 force was therefore a likely one and if it were to happen, Syria would most probably be the place from which such
 an attack would be conducted. 65 The reason for this mutual mistrust
 and apprehension goes back to the very early years of Mehmed Ali’s governorship. The previous Sultan, Sultan
 Selim III, did not forget the fact that Mehmed Ali was only installed in the pashalɩks of
 Egypt against his imperial wish. During the power struggle in 1803–5 Mehmed Ali proved himself to be the most
 capable commander among the various warring factions in that relatively remote but significantly wealthy province
 of the Empire, and the Sultan had to accept grudgingly the fact that Mehmed Ali did indeed control matters in
 Cairo whether he liked it or not. 66 Jealous of his power and afraid
 of his influence and the possibility of his secession, the Sultan attempted to transfer Mehmed Ali to the
 pashalɩks of Salonika in 1806 only one year after he had been invested in the eyalet of Egypt. Musa Pasha of
 Salonika had actually arrived in Egypt to fulfill the imperial edict to replace Mehmed Ali as vali. On his
 arrival, however, Musa Pasha found that Mehmed Ali had much stronger support than the Ottomans originally thought
 he had and the Ottoman commanders were convinced that the force that Musa had with him was inadequate to dislodge
 Mehmed Ali from Egypt. 67 
 

 
 This attempt to depose Mehmed Ali from his power base was repeated in more cunning ways by Sultan Mahmud II in
 1813. After Mehmed Ali’s forces succeeded in capturing the cities of Mecca and Medina from the Wahhabis he sent
 one of his mamluks, a certain Latif Ağa, to Istanbul to present the keys of both cities to the Sultan as a sign
 of obedience and servitude. During his stay in Istanbul, however, Latif Ağa was given the title of Pasha and
 encouraged to rebel against his master in Egypt. On his return to Cairo rumors were circulating that he had
 returned armed with a firman to depose Mehmed Ali and to replace him as vali of Egypt. Mehmed Ali, who was in
 Arabia at this time overseeing the campaign against the Wahhabis, was informed of this conspiracy at the last
 moment by his friend and deputy, Mehmed Lazoğlu, and hurried back to Egypt to attend personally to that challenge
 to his authority. He arrived too late, however, to take personal revenge against Latif Pasha whom Mehmed Lazoğlu
 had summarily beheaded at the foot of the Citadel. 68 Mehmed Ali was
 aware of these moves and was constantly on his guard concerning Ottoman attempts to depose
 him.
 

 
 Moreover, the Pasha held a rather negative opinion of the way the Ottoman Empire was run and would occasionally
 voice his contempt and disdain when referring to things Ottoman. For example, when it became clear that his
 nephew, Ahmed Pasha Yeğen, was not fulfilling his new job as Governor of Mecca properly and showed himself to be
 over-enthusiastic about pomp and ceremony, he wrote to him saying