
 

 
 Similarly, to argue that these wars did benefit a number of interrelated social forces within Egypt who were able
 to use foreign military expansion tactfully in their struggle for survival and hence that these wars must have
 been dictated by these social groups is tantamount to putting the cart before the horse. The fact that the
 coalition of state bureaucrats and urban merchants, for example, in their fight against multazims and urban artisans, stood to benefit from the resumption of the trade with the
 Aegean 33 does not necessarily mean that this particular coalition
 was behind the dispatch of Egyptian troops to Morea, and Lawson does not clearly show how the Pasha might have
 been pressured by them or how their interests were foremost in his mind.
 

 
 In explaining Egypt’s military expansion during the first third of the nineteenth century one has to bear in mind
 a number of general points. First, one has to make clear how and when the different campaigns were conducted.
 Traditional accounts of Mehmed Ali, by following him chronologically from one campaign to the other, ignore
 important distinctions that differentiate these campaigns from each other and portray them as if they were all
 fought by the same army. The fact remains, however, that the Pasha started building his modern army only in the
 middle of his career – after he had already conducted his Arabian and Sudanese campaigns,
 thus marking them off distinctly from the Morean and Syrian campaigns in so far as the size
 and nature of the military forces engaging in them are concerned. The way the Hijaz campaign was conducted, for
 example, with serious logistical problems 34 and a badly trained
 soldiery which was a mixture of Maghribis, Sudanese, Greeks and Armenians, 35 contrasts sharply with the superb logistical organization and the well-trained, disciplined
 troops under the command of Ibrahim Pasha in the Morean and the Syrian wars.
 

 
 Second, a thorough analysis of the links between the military and the economy should be carried out. To explain
 how the Syrian war differed from the Sudan campaign, for example, one has to explain how it was possible to
 create the economic infrastructure that enabled a fifty-thousand-troop army 36 stationed hundreds of miles away from home to be well fed, adequately clothed and regularly
 paid. This, in turn, necessitates understanding how the economy was run and knowing what links existed between
 economic needs and military expansion.
 

 
 Third, and most importantly, one has to bear in mind that Egypt for all practical purposes was an Ottoman
 province and that Mehmed Ali was an Ottoman governor who received an annual investiture firman from the Sultan in
 Istanbul. Without bearing that in mind it would be difficult to explain why Mehmed Ali agreed to comply with the
 Sultan’s orders to help him in the Hijaz and Greek wars. Having said that, however, it should also be pointed out
 that Egypt had always had a unique position within the Ottoman Empire, that its wealth far surpassed that of most
 other provinces within the Empire (with the exception of the Balkans and Anatolia), 37 and that it always had an influence on its neighboring provinces in Syria and the
 Hijaz. 38 Similarly, Mehmed Ali was not a mere vali among other
 Ottoman valis; he was “the most famous modernizer in the nineteenth-century Middle Eastern history” whose reforms
 in Egypt “served both as a model and an incentive” for what the Sultan himself was later to do in the Empire at
 large. 39 