
 

 
 The reason for turning down the Sultan’s request was due less to differences in character than to a real clash of
 interests. Being an Ottoman governor himself, and realizing how serious the situation of the Empire had become in
 his time, the Pasha was sharing feelings with other nineteenth-century Ottoman reformers concerning the urgency
 of instituting an ambitious reform program in the Empire. The problem, however, lay in the fact that whereas the
 changes that these reformers were contemplating and which Mahmud II was spearheading meant, among other things,
 strengthening the central government’s authority over that of the provinces, Mehmed Ali’s reforms in Egypt meant
 exactly the opposite. For what Mehmed Ali had managed to accomplish was to create another center within the
 Empire that rivaled Istanbul in its ability to control neighboring provinces and, in effect, challenged its
 superiority as a leading political center in the Empire. And in that sense Mahmud II and Mehmed Ali were
 essentially rivals. As was aptly put by Asad Rustum, “Mahmud II had actually crushed the Dereh Beys of Anatolia, Daud Pasha of Bagdad, and Ali Pasha of Janina . . . Thus, in his struggle with Mahmud II
 Mehemet Ali Pasha fought for his wealth, for his position and prestige, and very probably for his life
 also.” 77 
 

 
 The last straw: Morea
 

 
 Although it might be true that Mehmed Ali felt this fundamental incompatibility of interests right from the
 beginning of his career, it does seem that what finally prompted the Pasha to rebel against his Sultan’s imperial
 wishes was the manner in which the Morean war was conducted for it is during that campaign that the seeds of
 rebellion were sown that ultimately led to this first clear act of defiance by the vali of Egypt against his
 Sultan. Specifically, it was concerning the manner of conducting the war against the Greek rebels in the Morea
 that the Pasha discovered that it was impossible to collaborate with the Ottomans in any future wars.
 

 
 The story of Mehmed Ali’s involvement in the Morean war goes back to 1824 when an imperial order was dispatched
 to Egypt appointing Mehmed Ali to deal with the Greek uprising. 78 
 Five months later the Pasha sent a force a force comprising 17,000 newly trained infantry troops and 700
 cavalrymen assisted by four artillery batteries to the Morean peninsula in the south of Greece. These were four
 of the first six regiments that had been recently trained, and as far as the Pasha was concerned the Morean
 theater of operations provided a good opportunity to try them out, checking how loyal, disciplined and well
 trained they were. 79 
 

 
 The new regiments were very successful and “caused as much alarm by defeating the Greeks as the Sultan had done
 by failing to do so.” 80 However, being a real war and not simply a
 drilling ground, the Morea gradually became a source of extreme anxiety for the Pasha, and the longer the
 campaign dragged on, the more its effects were felt on his finances and resources. This was so not only because
 of the increased numbers of troops sent to the area of conflict with all that that entailed in terms of sending
 their pay, clothes and equipment, but more importantly because, in addition, the Sultan asked Mehmed Ali to
 furnish his navy’s needs as well. The imperial navy was thus sent to Alexandria to be
 repaired and replenished with equipment and food before it set out again to the Aegean. Ibrahim, clearly
 disgusted at the way the Ottomans were incapable of supplying their own navy and dependent instead on Egyptian
 resources, wrote to his father saying that