
 

 
 The Porte, in contrast, did not see any reason for alarm nor did it take the assembly of European fleets in the
 Aegean seriously. The Grand Vizier wrote to Ibrahim telling him not to “take heed of the noise and clamor that
 the Europeans are making ( ayaği patirdilar ).” He added that since “victory does not depend
 on the number of ships but on the strength of men’s hearts,” he should stand fast in front of the feeble threats
 that the European powers had issued against the “formidable Ottoman State.” 93 Neither Mehmed Ali nor Ibrahim shared the Grand Vizier’s optimistic assessment of the
 situation, however, and they both viewed the presence of the combined British, French and Russian fleets in front
 of Navarino very gravely. 94 Before the naval battle of Navarino, in
 which he lost most of his beloved fleet, Mehmed Ali wrote a frank and rather desperate letter to his agent in
 Istanbul, Najib Efendi, anticipating the disaster, and saying that he was neither prepared nor willing to
 confront the European powers. The letter is interesting enough to merit quoting in full.
 

 
 Regarding the present situation there are two issues worth thinking of. The first is that the moves of the
 Europeans are merely a bluff; the second is that the fleets will, in fact, try to intercept our navies. If they
 are only bluffing then this is exactly what we want . . . However, you know well that when those who take charge
 of states and kingdoms confront such issues, they anticipate the worst outcome rather than [simply] hoping for
 the best. If, therefore, the Europeans are not bluffing . . . then we have to realize that we cannot stand up
 against them, and the only possible outcome [if we do so] will be sinking the entire fleet and causing the death
 of up to 30 or 40 thousand men . . . Then it will be said that Mehmed Ali Pasha was the cause of this disaster
 and my name will always be stained with such a disgrace . . . Taking the responsibility of wasting thirty or
 forty thousand lives is no easy task. I have, therefore, stopped sending letters to my son encouraging him to
 fight on. Wars are not won only by depending on God and trusting in Him, but also by putting all possible human
 effort into it. God has ordered us in His Book [not only] to stand up to the enemy [but also] to spare no effort
 in confronting him. This, however, necessitates a thorough knowledge of the art of war. Unfortunately, my dear
 friend, although we are men of war ( ehlli harbdan ), yet we are still in the A B of that art
 ( alif ba ), whereas the Europeans are way ahead of us and have put their theories [about war]
 into practice . . . [Contemplating all of this] one thinks of accepting the lesser of two evils, namely, the
 principle of independence [for the Greeks] and [conducting it through] Austrian mediation. This will mean
 unfortunately that . . . all the effort and money that I have put into this affair will have been wasted together
 with my soldiers and officers . . . Here I am at a loss: shall I be grieved at the calamity
 of the Sublime State ( devlet-i aliyye ) or at my lost effort? I am, therefore, most sorrowful
 and anguished. 95 