
 

 
 Everyone knows that I showed no signs of negligence or laziness in this whole affair . . . But even if I did, why
 reprimand me via Istanbul? Your Highness is more than capable of punishing me through your agents here, why then
 resort to Istanbul to accuse me of negligence? 85 
 

 
 Seeing that his requests to depose Husrev went unanswered, Mehmed Ali finally resorted to threat. He wrote to the
 Sublime Porte saying that unless Husrev were removed from the command of the navy and unless his son were given a
 free hand to conduct military operations as he saw best, he would ask Ibrahim to stop fighting the Greeks
 altogether. 86 Fifteen days after the arrival of this “ultimatum” in
 Istanbul the Porte acceded to Mehmed Ali’s requests and Husrev was relieved of his post as Grand Admiral, adding
 another grudge to the number that the old man held against Mehmed Ali. 87 Mehmed Ali then wrote to Ibrahim Pasha telling him not to obey any orders issued from
 Istanbul unless they were approved by him, i.e. Mehmed Ali, first. Ibrahim, naturally, was delighted to
 comply. 88 
 

 
 In this respect Mehmed Ali succeeded in imposing his will on the Sultan and in spite of the dangers that were
 naturally involved in this great campaign, he continued to play the role of the helpful, albeit reluctant and
 complaining vali. His position as vali, however, weighed heavily on him and there is some evidence that suggests
 that as early as that time he was considering what it would take to rebel against the authority of the Sultan. In
 January 1827, for example, the Pasha had a long conversation with Salt and touched on the
 difficulty of any Pasha succeeding in rendering himself independent of the Sultan. In one of his characteristic
 story-telling moods he told the consul
 

 
 a story of a Pasha on the borders of Kurdistan who had rebelled against the Porte with 8,000 men under his
 command. The Grand Signor issued his order and another Pasha went against him with only 1,500 men yet the latter
 soon got the better of the first Pasha, the soldiers of this one falling from him like sand from a pilgrim’s
 feet. 89 
 

 
 As much as he hoped to get rid of the “Ottoman yoke,” and as much as he was getting more and more confident of
 his troops and their loyalty to him and that they would not “fall from him like sand from a pilgrim’s feet,”
 Mehmed Ali was “wary of Ottoman military rejuvenation” 90 and of the
 fact that the Sultan had military forces to be contended with. Furthermore, the Pasha knew that he also had to
 contend with the moral authority that the Sultan had in the land of Islam. It was one thing for Greek Christian
 subjects to rebel against the Ottoman authority, but quite another thing for a Muslim vali to rebel against the
 Defender of the Faith. Furthermore, the Pasha still had hopes of the Sultan rewarding him with his long cherished
 province, Syria. 91 
 

 
 In 1827 developments finally soured and the Pasha had to reconsider seriously his position in the war. During the
 summer of that year it became clear that the European powers were united in granting the Greeks their
 independence from the Porte and that his involvement in the Greek campaign might lead to a head-on confrontation
 with Europe. He increasingly found himself (in the words of the British Consul-General) “in a very difficult
 position. Much was expected from him by the Porte at the same time that he was anxious not to do anything
 contrary to the wishes of the British and French governments.” He even suggested to Salt that if the negotiations
 between the European powers and the Porte on the issue of Greek independence fail, then he would be looking for a
 pretext to get out of the war. This he suggested could be done if the French and the British sent a joint naval
 force to Alexandria to “make a demonstration of compelling [him] to desist from the war [in
 which case] he would immediately withdraw his troops and son from the Morea.” 92 