
 

 
 was received by him with the greatest marks of distinction. A salute of seventeen guns was fired. On reaching the
 palace at the foot of the flight of stairs, Haleel Pacha [sic] was assisted by two officers of the Viceroy . . .
 each supporting an arm, as he advanced to ascend the steps. The Viceroy descended at the same time, and they met
 nearly in the middle, Haleel continually entreating His Highness not to descend. On meeting, Haleel Pacha
 attempted to seize the Viceroy’s hand with the intention of carrying it to his lips, but the Viceroy prevented
 him by embracing him and kissing him on the cheek; but Haleel Pacha succeeded in imprinting a kiss on the hand of
 His Highness. They then made their way through a dense crowd to the Hall of Audience, the Viceroy’s hand being
 locked in the right hand of Haleel Pacha, who had his other hand round the waist of His Highness. 146 
 

 
 These are not the actions of someone who intends to pass on to his negotiating partner that his are going to be
 difficult terms to meet. Having won a decisive military victory this would have been the time to press with his
 demands for independence assuming that this was his desire and that he had been contemplating secession right
 from the start. However, in his negotiations with Halil Pasha, Mehmed Ali did not raise the issue of
 independence; again it was Ibrahim who was urging his father to do so. Mehmed Ali started asking for independence
 only in 1838; back in 1833 he could still not think of himself as being outside of Ottoman authority altogether.
 The inconclusive nature of the peace of Kütahia, therefore, was representative of the Pasha’s own ambivalent
 feelings towards the Ottoman Sultan and towards his own military activities against him. Reviewing the Pasha’s
 position from the time of starting hostilities until their cessation can illustrate this point further.
 

 
 After sending his troops to Syria and after undertaking what could only be taken as a blatant act of rebellion
 against the authority of the Sultan, Mehmed Ali was still hoping to acquire Syria and to be
 pardoned by Mahmud at the same time. Documents abound showing how Mehmed Ali in 1832 still thought that he could
 get away with his act and that he could, in effect, both have his cake and eat it too. While besieging the
 fortress of Acre for eight months during which numerous letters were sent from Istanbul
 urging him to desist and warning him of the consequences if he did not, he was still pleading for forgiveness
 from the Sultan and asking to be given Syria without being declared a rebel. When he knew that all his pretexts
 for his bold military move were not accepted by the Sultan, he wrote to the Grand Vizier telling him
 

 
 I think that I have not done anything that could not be forgiven. Unfortunately, I did not think that the issue
 of [besieging] Acre would not be covered by an imperial pardon. This is why I undertook it without thinking that
 by doing so I was overstepping the limits of obedience and submission [to the Sultan]. 147 