
 

 
 In the meantime the Egyptian forces were busily tightening the siege on the city of Acre, a city which had
 withstood Napoleon’s siege thirty-two years earlier. After a period of nearly six months the city finally fell on
 27 May 1832. 121 Ibrahim then proceeded northward to capture
 Damascus, which city he entered on 16 June 1832. 122 He then rushed
 further north to meet Mehmed Pasha’s army before he could be joined by Hüseyin Pasha. He succeeded in doing so
 and met Mehmed Pasha who was heading an army composed of four infantry regiments, three cavalry regiments and
 15,000 irregulars. A fierce battle took place near Horns on 8 July 1832 and ended with the defeat of Mehmed
 Pasha’s army. Around 2,000 of his men were killed and between 2,500 and 3,000 were taken prisoners as well as all
 his ammunition, tents and twenty-four cannons. 123 
 

 

 
 Plate 2 “The
 capture of Saint-jean d’Acre by Egyptian troops” 
 

 
 Ibrahim Pasha was determined, however, to confront “the murdar (dirty)
 Hüseyin Pasha who has been appointed sirdar (Commander-in-Chief).” 124 Hüseyin Pasha was late in departing from Anatolia and instead of meeting
 Mehmed Pasha before the latter had confronted Ibrahim’s army, he was met instead by the defeated remnants of
 Mehmed Pasha’s army that had fled from the battle of Ḥomṣ. 125 
 Ibrahim Pasha did meet his rival, Hüseyin Pasha, however, at the famous battle of Bilan at the northernmost
 borders of Syria just to the south of the Taurus mountains. On 29 July 1832, the Turkish army, composed of around
 20,000 men, half of them regulars, under the command of Hüseyin Pasha, met the Egyptian army totaling around
 16,000 men forming four infantry regiments assisted by three cavalry regiments and four artillery batteries all
 under the command of Ibrahim Pasha. After three and a half hours of heavy fighting Ibrahim won a decisive
 victory: the Ottomans lost around 1,000 men and 1,900 were taken prisoners. In addition, twelve pieces of cannon
 were captured by the Egyptians. For his part, Ibrahim lost 102 men and 172 horses, and 162 men were
 wounded. 126 
 

 
 Up until that moment the ostensible reason for forwarding these troops to Syria was to punish ‘Abdallah Pasha of
 Acre for giving refuge to a number of Egyptian peasants who had fled to Syria in an attempt to evade conscription
 and taxes levied by the Pasha’s government. 127 When Mehmed Ali
 complained to the Sublime Porte about ‘Abdallah Pasha’s refusal to hand back the peasants, the Porte replied by
 saying that as far as it was concerned both Egypt and Syria were imperial eyalets and the Sultan did not mind
 where his subjects wished to dwell as long as this was within his dominions. 128 Obviously this was not the true or main reason for undertaking such a
 bold and dangerous expedition and the Porte knew very well that it was only a pretext. 129 However, this continued to be the official line issued from
 Cairo. 130 
 

 
 In the meantime Ibrahim was marching northward and his army thus crossed the Taurus mountains and captured the
 strategic cities of Tarsus and Adana (31 July 1832). He then halted any further advance waiting for instructions
 from his father. There was no danger of the Ottomans attacking since their army was in no position to assume
 offensive action. 131 The vast territory now under Ibrahim Pasha’s
 command, however, had to be secured and garrisons had to be distributed among the different cities. After gaps
 had been filled by new recruits from Egypt 132 and after new
 equipment and supplies had arrived, the city of Urfa was captured to control routes leading to Sɩvas, Diyarbakɩr
 and Erzurum. Maras was also captured to control possible army movements in the area of the Taurus mountains. Most
 communications with Egypt were by sea where the Egyptian navy had a comfortable command over the waters of the
 eastern Mediterranean. 133 