
 

 
 Two years later the preparations for the invasion of Syria were almost complete. Naturally, their true intention
 was not declared and throughout the summer of 1831 speculation had been going on in London, Paris and Istanbul
 about the purpose of the increased military activity witnessed in Alexandria and Cairo. 104 Conscription waves were intensifying at such a rate that the European
 powers were getting suspicious as to their true intention. 105 The
 naval arsenal in Alexandria also showed a frenzied increase in activity. 106 Military factories were geared to high production and the Friday holiday was canceled to
 meet targets set by the Pasha. 107 
 

 
 Finally on 2 November 1831 the crucial hour arrived and two expeditions were given orders to move with Syria as
 their destination, one by land and the other by sea. (The troops were supposed to leave in
 the summer but their departure was delayed until autumn owing to the outbreak of cholera in Cairo which took a
 heavy toll on the army.) 108 Four infantry regiments 109 and a similar number of cavalry regiments 110 left by land from Ṣālḥiyya in the north of Cairo via al-‘Arīsh and finally to
 Jaffa. 111 In Jaffa they were met by Ibrahim Pasha who had arrived
 by sea on 9 November, 112 and entered the city three days
 later. 113 Ibrahim Pasha was heading a formidable fleet composed of
 sixteen ships of war and seventeen transport vessels which carried on board his staff officers 114 as well as forty small cannons and a number of siege cannons in addition
 to food, ammunition, fodder and medical supplies for the combined sea and land forces that numbered 30,000
 men. 115 
 

 
 After capturing Jaffa, Ibrahim entered the city of Haifa without much effort on 17 November 1831. Immediately
 afterwards, Sidon, Tyre, Beirut, Tripoli, Latakia, Jerusalem, and Nablus all gave their allegiance to Mehmed
 Ali’s son thus allowing him to concentrate his efforts on capturing the strategic city of Acre. 116 The army arrived at the outskirts of that formidable fortress in
 November and laid siege on it on 4 December 1831. 117 
 

 
 Alarmed at the spectacular success of the advance of Ibrahim’s army into Syria, the Sultan sent a special
 emissary to Alexandria in an attempt to persuade Mehmed Ali to pull back his forces and to
 warn him that if he did not comply, then a huge army of newly trained nizami troops would be
 assembled against his son’s forces. 118 When it became clear that
 the Egyptian Pasha had no intention of pulling back his forces, the Porte ordered the Syrian valis to raise men
 and send them to Aleppo in preparation for fighting Ibrahim’s troops. Mehmed Pasha, deputy of the vali of Aleppo,
 was given the title of Serasker (Commander-in-Chief) of Syria and Arabia and was entrusted with heading this
 force that it was hoped would stop the advance of the Egyptian army. 119 Furthermore, on 3 March 1832 the annual tevcihat (imperial
 appointments to the posts of provincial governors) were announced leaving the positions of the governors of the
 eyalets of Egypt, Jedda and Crete vacant until Mehmed Ali and Ibrahim should respond positively to the Porte’s
 request to withdraw. When this failed, a fetva (religious edict) was issued, in effect,
 excommunicating both Mehmed Ali and Ibrahim Pasha and appointing in their respective pashalɩks Hüseyin Pasha, the
 destroyer of the Janissaries, who was then Governor of Edirne. In addition, the same Pasha was appointed head of
 the Ottoman forces in Anatolia with the task of joining Mehmed Pasha of Aleppo and preparing jointly the task of
 stopping Ibrahim Pasha. 120 