
 

 
 In this candid letter Mehmed Ali was clever enough to know that the Europeans were not bluffing. Moreover,
 besides being clear that the outcome of any confrontation would be grave, he came very close to anticipating the
 magnitude of the horrible disaster that befell the combined Ottoman–Egyptian fleet in Navarino on 20 October
 1827. 96 In less than three hours the entire Ottoman fleet was lost
 and most of the ships of the Egyptian fleet were either sunk or burnt. 97 This was the fleet that Mehmed Ali had gone to great lengths to buy and improve, and it was
 the fleet that he used to boast about acquiring saying that the world of Islam had never witnessed anything like
 it. 98 And it was lost not through any negligence or misconduct on
 his part but because of the “obstinate and arrogant refusal of the Porte to accept European mediation” in the
 whole issue of Greek independence. 99 This intransigent position on
 the part of the Porte did not change after Navarino: the Porte refused to hear of any requests by Ibrahim to
 withdraw to Egypt and instead kept on pressing on him the importance of holding on to all territories under his
 control as well as initiating further campaigns against the Christian population in the Morean peninsula and, if
 need be, to burn all villages on his way. 100 Mehmed Ali refused to
 listen to these stubborn and unrealistic demands of the Porte and proceeded to sign a treaty with the European
 powers guaranteeing the safety of his son’s withdrawal from the Greek mainland. 101 Moreover, and this must have been felt more heartily, the Sultan refused to give Mehmed Ali
 Syria as he had hoped and instead gave him the island of Crete to govern, an island he had already captured and
 which was in a constant state of rebellion since the start of the Greek revolution. Furthermore, its resources
 and importance were not to be compared to those of Syria. Never again would he accept the docile role that was
 expected of him and he would always be on the look-out for any pretext to take what he had been coveting for a
 long time: Syria.
 

 
 The invasion
 

 
 For two years Mehmed Ali set about repairing the damage he suffered in this Morean debacle in preparation for
 taking what, by then, he must have felt to be rightly his. (During this period he was approached by the French to
 undertake an expedition to capture the Barbary states of Tripoli, Tunis and Algiers. After some consideration and
 a lot of diplomatic exchange, however, the Pasha realized that the expedition was too costly to merit taking the
 risks involved and that it would divert him from the provinces he strongly desired.) 102 Following the destruction of his fleet in Navarino the Pasha was determined on acquiring a
 new fleet, this time not only by buying it from whomever would be kind enough to sell him ships, but also by
 attempting to build himself one in Egypt. With this end in mind he secured the services of a French engineer, M.
 de Cerisy, who started to construct an arsenal in Alexandria in June 1829. 103 