
 

 
 Confronted with these defeats Sultan Mahmud II decided to raise yet another army in an attempt to “arrest the
 progress of an army whose success endangered the stability of his throne.” 134 He therefore summoned the Sadrazam Mehmed Raşid Pasha (an ally and protégé of Husrev) and
 entrusted him with raising a new army from different provinces of the Empire. Towards the end of October 1832 the
 Sadrazam was able to raise a formidable army composed of 80,000 men divided into four major sections. The first
 comprised about 20,000 men, mostly Albanians and nizami troops who were stationed in Scutari
 in Albania and was headed by the Sadrazam himself. The second section was composed of a similar number of men
 raised from areas around Erzurum and headed by Osman Pasha, vali of Trabzon. The third section numbered around
 10,000 men under the command of Süleyman Pasha and was stationed to the north of Ibrahim
 Pasha’s army in the south of Anatolia. The fourth and last section was composed of 20,000 to 30,000 men who were
 the remnants of Hüseyin Pasha’s army and these were gathered around Konia under the command of Raouf
 Pasha. 135 Aware of these preparations on the part of the Ottomans,
 Ibrahim was pressing his father to give him permission to proceed northward to deal with this troop concentration
 before they joined forces and formed a formidable front which would be more difficult to deal with. Finally in
 October he ordered his men to move northward towards the strategic city of Konia at the very center of the
 Anatolian plateau. Two months later, on 21 December 1832, the two armies met on the plain to the north of the
 city, and during the seven-hour battle Ibrahim’s army managed to inflict a heavy defeat on the Ottomans who were
 headed by the Sadrazam, Raşid Pasha. 136 
 

 
 This was the clearest victory Ibrahim had secured so far: the Ottomans lost ninety-two cannons, suffered 3,000
 casualties and 10,000 were taken prisoner. Most significantly, the Egyptian army captured the Sadrazam himself
 who was led to Ibrahim Pasha as a prisoner. For their part, the Egyptians only suffered 262 casualties and 530
 men were wounded. The remnants of the Ottoman army were gathered in Eskisehir and on hearing news of the defeat,
 the Sultan acceded to most of Mehmed Ali’s demands. According to the official Takvimi-i
 Vekayi the Sultan “in his customary graciousness and generosity decided to send special envoys to the vali of
 Egypt to find a way to stop the bloodshed of His subjects.” 137 
 

 
 The “peace of Kütahia”
 

 
 Halil Pasha, the head of the Ottoman navy, was thus dispatched to Alexandria with offers of peace to the Pasha of
 Egypt. This initiated a long and arduous process of negotiation which culminated in the peace of Kütahia agreed
 upon in May 1833. In this peace, brokered by the European powers (mainly Russia and France), the Sultan
 reluctantly conceded to his rebellious vali the eyalets of Egypt, Hijaz and Crete. Furthermore, Ibrahim Pasha was
 given the eyalets of Acre, Damascus, Tripoli and Aleppo, and after considerable hesitation, the post of muhassil (i.e. collector of taxes) of Adana as well. 138 It is important to note, however, that the “peace of Kütahia” was not a permanent
 settlement, it was not a peace treaty but an agreement between Mahmud II and Mehmed Ali to end the state of war
 that had existed between them for over a year. Rather than finding his position more secure than before the
 campaign had started, the Pasha soon discovered that his osensibly improved status was dependent on an annual
 renewal by the Sultan, and was thus subject to his whims and to the intrigues of various courtiers in Istanbul.
 For after all, Mehmed Ali was not granted an independent status that would be recognized by the European powers
 and hence the agreement did not secure for him “the much desired legal independence as a sovereign” that he had
 been supposedly fighting for. 139 As such, the agreement ending the
 Syrian war left none of the principal parties involved completely satisfied. “The Sultan had suffered the
 vexation of defeat by a contumacious pasha; Muhammad ‘Ali had secured neither independent status nor a
 controlling influence at the Porte; the western powers were annoyed at the opening which Ibrahim’s victories had
 offered to the Russians; while the Russians were disappointed at having been unable to entrench themselves more
 securely at Constantinople.” 140 