
 

 
 After the fall of Acre the Pasha might have felt more confident and it appears that he was harboring more
 negative views toward the Sultan and his viziers. (In a letter to Ibrahim Pasha, he described them as people who
 had been “tyrannical and treacherous for five hundred years.”) 148 
 Yet even then he was still writing to senior officials in Istanbul asking for the Sultan’s forgiveness, saying
 that he was approaching seventy years of age and did not want anything except to act as a “humble servant to the
 Faith and the [Ottoman] State.” 149 Furthermore, after his armies
 had defeated the Ottomans in these successive battles and when the imams of various city mosques asked whose name
 should be mentioned in the Friday prayers, Mehmed Ali’s or Sultan Mahmud’s, they were answered that they should
 continue to use the Sultan’s name. 150 This caused Ibrahim to be so
 distressed that he wrote a strongly worded letter to his father urging him to order the use of his name in the
 prayers and to start minting coins in his name. 151 Finally, after
 the battle of Bilan on 29 July 1832 when the Vekayi-i Mɩsɩriyye , which acted as a government
 bulletin and which was aimed at Ottoman officials as much as at his own employees, started to drop its cautious,
 conciliatory tone and to become more candid and less apologetic, Ibrahim was thrilled. He wrote to his father
 saying, “Egypt’s independence has now become evident, and I am more pleased with mentioning this matter in the
 Vekayi-i Mɩsɩriyye explicitly and without hypocrisy ( riyasɩz ) than with
 the victories themselves.” 152 
 

 
 Still, it was only in 1838 that Mehmed Ali decided to get rid of the Ottoman suzerainty altogether and to ask for
 independence. For the seven-year period from the inauguration of hostilities and up to that time the Pasha was only claiming to be after reforming the Ottoman Empire. 153 This does not seem to have been a mere pretext on the part of the Pasha.
 He might not have believed in it entirely himself, but at the same time he could not think of himself as an
 outcast vali rebelling against the Ottoman Sultan; he needed to think of himself as doing something from
 within the Ottoman Empire and not against it.
 

 
 This hesitation can only be explained by the Pasha’s own ambivalent feelings toward the Ottoman Empire and his
 position within it. Rather than seeing himself as a leader of a province seeking independence from the Ottoman
 Empire, Mehmed Ali was only too aware of the fact that technically and legally he was still a vali appointed by
 the Ottoman Sultan in Istanbul to rule a province within the Empire. There are various signs that show that the
 Pasha did indeed take this aspect of his rule seriously and though he appears independent-minded, often taking
 decisions in his province without consulting his sovereign, this does not mean that he dismissed Ottoman
 authority altogether. For example, the annual firman of investiture re-appointing him in his pashalɩks was
 received in great pomp and splendor and a big celebration was held to read it aloud in the Citadel. 154 The Pasha himself was Turkish-speaking and as far as is known he never
 spoke Arabic (although it is difficult to believe that he did not understand it). 155 As a further example of his Ottoman character, when the canal joining Alexandria to the
 Nile was dug he decided to name it the Maḥmūdiyya, after Sultan Mahmud II. 156 The Pasha was also very well informed about developments in the Ottoman capital Istanbul.
 His agent in Istanbul, Najib Efendi, and other informers, updated him regularly about developments there and
 looked after his interests in the capital. 157 In his attempt to
 keep in touch with developments there as closely as possible he ordered Boghus Bey, his chief foreign advisor, to
 buy a brig that would be fast enough to transport mail swiftly to and from Istanbul. 158 To increase his influence in the capital he was in the habit of regularly sending
 “presents” to various officials in the Ottoman government as well to members of the imperial
 family. 159 The Ottoman “sentiments” of the Pasha’s rule and outlook
 is probably best shown in his ideas about culture and good manners. When he decided to educate his nephew,
 Ibrahim Yegen, in “good manners,” it was not to London or to Paris that he sent him but to Istanbul. 160 His palaces, furthermore, were designed in an explicitly Ottoman
 style. 161 Similarly, the imperial looking mosque that he built in
 Cairo and which dominates the city’s skyline was also built in the Ottoman style. His culture and court etiquette
 were fashioned around his understanding of Ottoman models. In short, the Pasha’s world was an Ottoman world; he
 understood things within that context and it made sense to him to view matters from that perspective.