
 

 
 While it might be true to argue that the inconclusive and ambivalent nature of the “peace of Kütahia” had its
 reasons not in any European conspiracy designed to deny Mehmed Ali the fruits of his military conquests, or in
 British attempts to thwart his efforts at gaining independence, it was also the result of Mehmed Ali’s own
 cautious and often shifting stand during the difficult negotiations that led to that agreement. There can be
 various reasons for Mehmed Ali’s caution. One main reason was his receiving conflicting messages from the
 different European powers regarding their respective possible reactions to his moves against the Sultan. During
 the Morean war he once wrote to Nagib Efendi in Istanbul telling him “although I may be well versed in European
 mercantile affairs, I am ignorant when it comes to its political situation.” 141 Four years later his position was not much better and that remark was equally applicable to
 the new situation. In 1832 the French were passing on messages that they would stand by him
 in his struggle with the Sultan; the Russians, for their part, sent him an envoy, General Mouraviev, only one
 week before Halil’s arrival in Alexandria with a verbal threat that they would oppose him “with their forces by
 sea and by land if he persisted in advancing on Constantinople.” 142 
 And the stand of the one European power that mattered most, Great Britain, Mehmed Ali could not figure out,
 partly because of his own ambivalent position towards the British (a point that will be dealt with later) and
 partly because of British indecision and wavering attitude regarding the Pasha’s war with the Sultan. Since this
 is a point of considerable importance and since the European powers (especially Britain) are usually blamed for
 aborting Mehmed Ali’s bid for independence, 143 it is worthwhile
 dealing with it in some detail.
 

 
 Although John Barker, the British Consul-General during the Syrian campaign, “was always opposed” to the Pasha’s
 policy towards the Sultan, the “British Cabinet did not declare its policy, and Mr. Barker did not receive from
 home any instructions favorable to Meh’med Ali’s projects.” 144 
 Mehmed Ali knew that the messages he was receiving from Barker were the Consul’s own personal opinions and
 Palmerston, the British Foreign Secretary, who was later adamant in upholding the principle of preserving the
 integrity of the Ottoman Empire, was completely silent on the issue of his struggle with the Sultan. “There is
 not a single word either to Constantinople and Alexandria or to the British ambassadors at Paris, Vienna, and St.
 Petersburg; hardly any observation can be noticed during 1832 on despatches coming from these centers and
 touching on the subject of the Syrian war.” 145 The hostility that
 Palmerston felt towards Mehmed Ali developed later and, as will be shown in chapter 7 below, had other causes.
 

 
 Be that as it may, what is important to note is that independence was not one of the
 conditions set forth by Mehmed Ali when he met Halil Pasha in Alexandria; this demand was persistently demanded
 by Ibrahim Pasha in letters sent to his father from his camp near Konia, but was not voiced by Mehmed Ali himself
 until much later. When Halil Pasha arrived with an offer of peace in Alexandria on 21
 January 1833, Mehmed did not intend to raise the issue of independence with him, not only because he was
 wondering about European reactions to this bold move, but more probably because he could not
 contemplate it himself . A look at how he received the Sultan’s envoy might shed some light on how he
 attempted to deal with the whole arduous negotiation ahead of him. Halil Pasha