
 

 
 The problem, however, was that the vali was too ambitious to be content with his position as a subservient
 vassal, and as time went on and as he grew stronger and stronger, he began to have aspirations of more
 independence from Istanbul. As is shown above, this inherent tension acquired momentum during the Greek debacle
 and surfaced in 1831 when he ordered his son to lead an expedition to invade Syria without the consent of the
 Sultan. Yet, as is shown above, he was still uncomfortable with his latest bold move and found it difficult to
 legitimate his shaky position. Given his outlook and background, it is only natural to expect him to hesitate
 when deciding to cast off the Ottoman garb altogether, not only because of the moral and religious issues
 involved in fighting the Muslim Sultan but also because by doing so he would seriously challenge the only world
 that he could associate with and felt, as it were, comfortable in.
 

 
 Conclusion
 

 
 This chapter opened with an account given by Mehmed Ali himself in 1825 expressing his intentions to spread his
 influence over neighboring provinces of the Ottoman Empire and to effectively create a mini-empire at the expense
 of that of the Sultan in Istanbul. The chapter ended with events in 1833 that go a long way
 towards showing that the Pasha appears to have fulfilled his prophetic prediction made eight years earlier. Yet
 this chapter has argued that this apparently teleological progression of events hides considerable tensions,
 tensions that relate to the Pasha’s own aims and aspirations and how to read them.
 

 
 While acknowledging the fact that Mehmed Ali might have always harbored a strong desire to cast off Ottoman
 control and even to expand his areas of control beyond Egypt, he still thought this to be a dangerous course of
 action. It was dangerous not only because it invited the possibility of European hostility towards him, but also
 because he found it difficult to contemplate his rule outside Ottoman sovereignty altogether. Being declared a
 rebel weighed heavily on his soul and he found it difficult to imagine himself stripped of Ottoman legitimacy.
 What finally tipped the balance towards rebellion was the Greek war which the Sultan had asked him to intervene
 in, thinking that it would weaken his strong vassal. Instead, the Pasha used it as an opportunity to try out his
 new troops and by the end of it he came out more resolved than ever before not to co-operate with the Sultan in
 the future. As far as can be discerned from his own letters it does not appear that he had contemplated military
 action against the Sultan before that time.
 

 
 Four years after withdrawing his troops from Morea his son marched on to Syria at the head of a mighty military
 machine and started a ten-year period of occupation of the Syrian provinces; during this time his forces clashed
 with those of the Ottomans four times, and in all of them he snatched spectacular victories. These military
 victories, however, were not translated into new legal realities. The peace of Kütahia reached at after the
 cessation of hostilities did not grant Mehmed Ali the independence he was supposedly fighting for. As has been
 shown above, the inconclusive nature of this verbal agreement was not due to British or European hostilities to
 Mehmed Ali’s schemes or to their interference in Istanbul to prevent him from pressing his demands. Rather, it
 was a reflection of the Pasha’s own confused and ambivalent feelings regarding his position within the Ottoman
 Empire and his inability to come to terms with the legal implications of his rebellious moves, viz , to be declared a rebel by the Ottoman Sultan and to have Ottoman legitimacy withdrawn from him.