
 

 
 Immediately after the departure of the French army from Egypt Husrev Pasha, the new Ottoman Vali (whom we have
 already seen in the previous chapter and who would later become Mehmed Ali’s life- long
 nemesis) set out to train some of the mamluk soldiers along French lines after enlisting in his service all those
 French officers who stayed behind when their army left Egypt. Husrev also formed a Sudanese regiment and trained
 it in the French style after tailoring for them “tight” French uniforms. These he formed into a private escort
 guard for himself, and he appointed an officer to “teach them the positions of the French.” 9 
 

 
 These attempts at borrowing from the French, crude as they were, must have struck Mehmed Ali when he first came
 to Egypt in 1801 and, as will be shown below, they influenced him when he tried to introduce new tactics and
 training drills to the Albanian troops that formed the backbone of his military force in the 1810s. When in the
 early 1820s he resorted to building a new army by gathering slaves from the Sudan and then by conscripting the
 fellahin of Egypt the Pasha came to depend heavily on French advisors to run his army and train his soldiers.
 Chief among these advisors was “Colonel” Sèves, more famously known as Süleyman Pasha, who was employed by Mehmed
 Ali in 1820 10 and who eventually became second-in-command of the
 army ranking only below Ibrahim Pasha. Furthermore, when Mehmed Ali wanted to establish a “strong and consistent
 order along which [his] soldiers [were] to be trained” he decided to ask the assistance of M. Drovetti, the
 French Consul-General, who suggested the name of General Boyer, a French officer who had previously been to Egypt
 among Napoleon’s expedition. 11 In due course General Boyer arrived
 in Egypt at the head of a military mission which it was hoped would be able to “arrange the administration of
 [the Pasha’s] new disciplined troops.” 12 
 

 
 It is therefore clear that the Pasha was informed about Napoleon’s army and that he was influenced by it when he
 came to organize his own army. However, Mehmed Ali’s fascination with western models of reform, and French ones
 in particular, seems to be overstated. As obvious as it is that he was borrowing from the French, it is clear
 that he was equally influenced by the Ottomans who themselves had been borrowing from the French and adopting
 their models to suit their own needs. There is some evidence that suggest that the Pasha was
 familiar with contemporary Ottoman reform attempts especially in the military field 13 and that he was influenced by them in his attempts to create a modern army of his own.
 

 
 Most important of these Ottoman attempts to create a disciplined army was Sultan Selim’s new army, the nizam-i cedid . Selim’s formation of the nizam-i cedid was a phenomenal act that
 caused much uproar in the capital and whose reputation far exceeded the boundaries of Istanbul and spread all
 over the Empire. So famous were the tactics that Selim introduced in his army that when in 1802 Husrev Pasha
 attempted to organize his troops in Egypt along modern lines with the assistance of some French officers, he gave
 them the Ottoman name, the nizam-i cedid . 14 
 Moreover, some of these new nizami troops of Sultan Selim had a chance to come to Egypt as
 part of the Ottoman forces that were sent by sea under the command of the Capitan Pasha to expel the French from
 the country. 15 An avid defender of the new nizami troops had this to say about the 4,000 troops that were sent as part of a larger Ottoman
 force: