
 

 
 Second, this chapter has another intention – that of explaining the connection between the army and the modern
 state that was created in Egypt in the first half of the nineteenth century. Specifically, it introduces a main
 theme that will be picked up later, namely, that of seeing how the army completely changed the nature of the
 Egyptian state and fundamentally transformed its relationship to the population of the country. Besides being an
 army that relied on conscription, the Pasha’s army was novel in its reliance on the central government for its
 provisions and supplies. This was an army whose soldiers were issued uniforms designed, tailored and distributed
 from Cairo, and which had, among other things, an unprecedented medical establishment catering for it. It was an
 army that also depended on the central bureaucracy for its food, ammunition and supplies. Moreover, it was an
 army which triggered, through its reliance on conscription, considerable opposition from the population. In
 dealing with this opposition, the state resorted to various policing and surveillance practices and institutions
 that together changed the manner in which the state controlled society and altered the relationship that the
 population had with the government. It is the intention of this chapter to investigate this novel aspect of the
 army and to see how it was a crucial stimulus behind the formation of the modern state in Egypt.
 

 
 First, though, what follows is a short survey of the early steps of founding this army and of how it came to rely
 so squarely on conscription.
 

 
 Origins of the idea of a disciplined army
 

 
 No one living at the turn of the nineteenth century could evade the effect of Napoleon and his armies that swept
 the entire European continent and the devastation and havoc that they caused in their wake. Being a military man
 himself and living on the fringes of this continent, Mehmed Ali must have been curious to know more about these
 armies that were the talk of the day. Indeed, the Pasha was a great admirer of the Emperor and even during his
 lifetime his flatterers used to “persuade him that he is a second Napoleon.” 6 Later in his life he ordered a biography of Napoleon to be translated into Turkish and to be
 printed in the government press at Būlāq. 7 
 

 
 Moreover, on his landing in Egypt in 1801 he had a chance to see Napoleon’s army for himself. Although Napoleon
 had left Egypt two years earlier in search of greater glory in France, and although this act had a significant
 effect on the morale of his troops who stayed behind in the hostile lands of Egypt, it would be wrong to assume
 that the Armée d’Orient had completely disintegrated after the departure of its charismatic
 leader. Furthermore, in spite of the short period during which it stayed in the country, the French Army did make
 a noticeable impact on Egypt. Though they did not try to enlist the Egyptians at large into their Armée d’Orient , the French nevertheless did form a regiment of some 2,000 Copts who were trained by
 French officers, clad in French uniforms and attached to the French army. A number of mamluk youths were also
 drafted in the French army and were said to make very good soldiers. Furthermore, some Maghribi soldiers were
 also organized according to the French system and drilled along French lines with the words of command issued in
 French. 8 