
 

 
 In a similar way the career of Mehmed Ali during the first half of the nineteenth century in Egypt is usually
 described as the “superimposition” of badly needed reforms on the traditional, stagnant and backward Egyptian
 society. At center stage appears the solitary figure of Mehmed Ali as a sole reformer who was determined to
 “pull” Egypt out of her misery, and rarely are we given an explanation of how it was precisely that this seemingly illiterate, 2 uninformed tobacco
 merchant who lived in a small town in northern Greece came to understand the importance of such things as modern
 medical science, the disciplining of troops and the new schooling system. “The founder of Modern Egypt,”
 therefore, appears as a towering figure who is closer to a prophet than he is to an Ottoman reformer and whose
 failure lies in the unfortunate fact that he was ahead of his time and that his people did not understand
 him. 3 While acknowledging how important and impressive Mehmed Ali’s
 military reforms were, most historical accounts of Mehmed Ali make little attempt to explain how these reforms
 were linked to developments in Egypt before he appeared on the scene, how they relate to other contemporary
 reforms, or, even, how Mehmed Ali himself came across such ideas. ‘Abdel-Rahmān Zakī, the Egyptian military
 historian of Mehmed Ali’s reign, for example, when describing the early stages of forming the modern army,
 alludes to nothing but the character of the Pasha. He says that from his arrival in Egypt as an officer in the
 Ottoman contingent that was sent to evict the French from the country Mehmed Ali had always harbored the idea of
 forming a “disciplined army which would be his tool for founding his new rule. From the day he was installed as a
 vali in Egypt he did his best to create a national army . . . He had to keep this idea as a secret, however,
 waiting for the opportune moment to put it into practice.” 4 
 

 
 There is no doubt that the creation of a modern standing army that was disciplined, well trained and regularly
 paid was the creation of the Pasha and that his close advisors did not receive the idea with much
 enthusiasm. 5 However, little is known about the origins of this
 idea and how it gradually developed in the Pasha’s mind, or, indeed, how it was eventually made possible by the
 help and collaboration of his assistants and advisors.
 

 
 It is the intention of this chapter to attempt to unravel the origins of the idea of founding a modern,
 disciplined army, and to suggest what influences might have prompted the Pasha to undertake
 this bold step. As such this chapter serves two purposes. First, having seen in the last chapter how Mehmed Ali
 succeeded in using his military force to capture his long-coveted province, Syria, this chapter and the following
 ones try to see how he managed to muster this military force in the first place. As said in the Introduction
 above, the story told here is not that of the great Pasha, his ambition or his designs; it is a story of an army
 and of the thousands of men from all over Egypt who served in it. The story therefore proceeds not
 chronologically following the Pasha waging one campaign after another, like most military history accounts do
 following great commanders in their glorious exploits. Rather, we follow a hypothetical soldier in the Pasha’s
 army from the time he is conscripted, and we trace him to the training camp, then to the battle, and finally we
 watch him during the aftermath of the battle. This chapter starts the story and deals with the first of these
 processes, namely conscription; the following chapter will pick up where this one leaves our soldier and will
 deal with training. Subsequent chapters will proceed likewise.