
 

 

 
 Plate 3 “Massacre
 of the Mamluks” 
 

 
 After years of attempting to pacify them the Pasha finally decided to get rid of their
 influence by expediently killing their leaders. On 1 March, 1811a festive ceremony was held in the Citadel to
 celebrate the appointment of his son, Tusun Pasha, to fight the Wahhabi rebels in Arabia. Mehmed Ali saw this as
 a golden opportunity to execute his deadly plan. He invited the heads of all the Mamluk households to attend the
 festive celebration and once they were on their way up a narrow alleyway leading to his court in the Citadel, he
 ordered his Albanian soldiers to open fire on them. Over four hundred and fifty of the Mamluk emirs were killed
 in that incident. This was followed by a ferocious pogrom against any Mamluk leaders who had succeeded in
 escaping the massacre in the Citadel. The Pasha’s Albanian troops were allowed to enter the Mamluks’ houses in
 Cairo plundering their property and raping their women. In the event around 1,000 Mamluk emirs and soldiers died
 in the city of Cairo alone during the few days that followed the massacre in the Citadel. 21 This was followed a year later by a military expedition led by Ibrahim
 Pasha to Upper Egypt to pursue those Mamluks who had succeeded in evading the massacre in Cairo, and another
 1,000 were said to have been killed. 22 
 

 
 This dramatic incident is invariably highlighted in nearly every book that deals with the Pasha’s reign arguing,
 in effect, how he was thus successful in fulfilling a “dream that Egypt had had for seven centuries
 [sic].” 23 However, it is important to remember that even in this
 incident Mehmed Ali was not as pioneering as first appears, and that there had been earlier and very similar
 attempts by the Ottomans to get rid of the Mamluks. The last such attempt took place after Mehmed Ali had arrived
 in Egypt. On 22 October 1801 Hüseyin Pasha, the Grand Admiral of the Ottoman navy (who had arrived with the new
 nizami troops to assist the British in evicting the French from the country) invited the
 leading Mamluk emirs to a banquet on board his flagship and confronted them with an imperial invitation to go
 with him to Istanbul. Seeing the “invitation” for what it was, the emirs attempted to escape the ship and in the
 ensuing struggle a large number of them were killed and others were arrested only to be rescued later by the
 British and allowed to flee to upper Egypt. 24 
 

 
 Disciplining the Albanians
 

 
 Although it is argued that by employing these “Cromwellian measures [Mehmed Ali finally managed to become the]
 undisputed master in the country,” 25 he still had to contend with
 the unruly Albanian forces. These proved more difficult to deal with than the Mamluks mainly because the Pasha
 was an Albanian himself and it would not have been that expedient to kill his own soldiers. This was so not
 because this would have been judged unethical or immoral but because the Albanians continued to be the backbone
 of his strength for some time. Counting nearly as mercenaries within the larger Ottoman contingent that brought
 them to Egypt, however, they were not a very orderly body of troops and they often revolted in small uprisings in
 the streets of Cairo asking for their pay or to be returned home. They also retained their tribal structure and
 recognized Mehmed Ali only as a “first among equals,” resisting any attempt by him to impose discipline on them.