
 

 
 By working closely together, both father and son managed to come up with solutions to most questions that were
 raised. The size of the regiment ( alay ), for example, was initially
 fixed at 4,000 troops divided into five battalions ( orta ) with 800 men per
 battalion. 70 It was later decided that the regiment should be
 composed of four instead of five battalions, each containing 816 men with their officers thus bringing down the
 number of officers and soldiers per regiment to 3,264 men. It was also decided upon the names to be given to the
 different ranks. 71 
 

 
 Formation of the first regiments
 

 
 After settling these questions pertaining to the structural organization of the army and the composition of the
 officer corps Mehmed Ali still had one major problem to contend with, namely, the performance of the Sudanese
 troops. The Sudan campaign had so far yielded mixed results. While Ismail Pasha, and later Mehmed Bey Defterdar,
 were able to gather a significant number of slaves and send them to Egypt, a lot of them either perished on the
 way or proved incapable of bearing arms. 72 Out of 20,000 slaves
 gathered between 1820 and 1824 only 3,000 remained alive in 1824. 73 
 Moreover, the campaign itself was facing significant problems and had cost the Pasha a lot of money and one of
 his sons.
 

 
 As the option of training his Albanian soldiers had failed, the alternative was to depend totally on the Egyptian
 fellahin and go beyond the 4,000 troops that he had conscripted early in 1822. As was shown above, these peasants
 were to be conscripted only for three years after which time they would be returned to their villages. Moreover,
 the main purpose of conscripting them was to relieve the Turkish soldiers in the Sudan from the main task of
 gathering Sudanese slaves. Any attempt at gathering more Egyptian fellahin carried with it the danger of moving
 significant numbers of laborers out of the agricultural sector. 74 
 Moreover, the Egyptian fellahin had not been used to military service and during Ottoman
 rule were, de jure , forbidden to bear arms. 75 
 Nevertheless, the Pasha had no other option and was determined to try things out. In a frank letter to Ibrahim he
 referred to the problems he might encounter if he decided to conscript more peasants. He said that although
 European governments were conscripting their own peasants
 

 
 the people of Egypt are not as accustomed to military service as the people of Europe. Moreover, our government
 is not as strong as theirs. This being the case . . . we have to accommodate our needs to our capabilities and .
 . . to advance one step at a time putting things right as we go along. We also have to be realistic and remedy
 our deficiencies as time goes by. 76 
 

 
 Having made up his mind to rely on the peasants of Egypt, conscription waves spread throughout the country and
 less than a year later 30,000 troops were already being trained in a new camp that was established in Banī ‘Adī
 near Manfalūṭ in Middle Egypt. 77 