
 

 
 The following month, i.e. April 1824, the new troops had yet another chance to show how loyal, disciplined and
 reliable they were. A big revolt erupted in Upper Egypt against the Pasha’s conscription and tax policies. Over
 30,000 men and women joined this rebellion which was headed by a certain Shaykh Raḍwān who claimed himself to be
 the mahdi and declared Mehmed Ali to be an infidel. In various incidents the local
 population marched to the residences of local governors and took them prisoner. 90 The rebellion seemed to be very serious and was starting to spread to neighboring provinces
 in Middle Egypt where conscription had already been applied earlier in the year. The authorities attempted to
 subdue the rebellion using various means of intimidation and terror 91 but when such measures proved ineffectual and the rebellion showed no signs of abating, it
 was finally decided to send some of the newly trained troops to fight the rebels. This was a serious decision,
 indeed, since most of the soldiers at that time were conscripted from villages in Upper Egypt, the same provinces
 to which they were being sent to quell the uprising. Initially, the troops met fierce resistance from the
 villagers and some officers were attacked and killed. 92 There were
 even rumors that the rebellion spread to the army itself and that some 700 of the soldiers joined the rebels. The
 Pasha ordered an immediate investigation warning the culprits that they would be executed. In the event,
 forty-five officers were shot in front of their soldiers. 93 
 

 
 Eventually the rebellion was brought down by Osman Bey, the colonel of the first regiment, which was on its way
 to the Sudan. Heading a force of 500 cavalrymen and 3,000 infantrymen of the newly trained troops, he attacked
 the center of the rebellion near Qina where the “lunatic Raḍwān” was hiding. The shaykh fled to the desert and
 arrest warrants were issued to all provinces to catch him. In two weeks’ time the rebellion was completely put
 down with more than 4,000 people killed. 94 
 

 
 This was the clearest proof yet of the loyalty of the new troops and the Pasha was greatly impressed by them
 knowing that they did not hesitate to fight the rebels who were sometimes their own neighbors or relatives. 95 In one incident it was reported that one
 of the sergeants of Osman Bey’s regiment, when attacking a certain village found his own father among the rebels,
 and failing to convince him to give in peacefully, proceeded to kill him. On being informed of this incident
 Mehmed Ali wrote to the Director of the War Department, Mehmed Bey Lazoğlu, praising the soldier and promoting
 him to the rank of lieutenant. 96 
 

 
 All these spectacular accomplishments of the new troops “completely hypnotized Muhammad Ali and he now set the
 machinery going for the development of his fighting services on as large scale as possible.” 97 Seeing how difficult it was to transport the Sudanese slaves and how
 miserably they fared once they arrived, and having tested his fellah troops on more than one occasion, Mehmed Ali
 eventually put aside any hesitations he might have had regarding the conscription of the fellahin, and from that
 time onwards conscription waves franctically followed each other so that by the mid-1830s the number of
 conscripts had already reached 130,000. 98 Given a population figure
 of around five million 99 this means that the army made up 2.6
 percent of the population, a high percentage, indeed, and one that caused significant disruption to family and
 village life. 100 