
 

 
 In an attempt to secure staff for the new schools the Pasha had already sent to his agent in Istanbul, Najib
 Efendi, asking him to despatch an engineer and two teachers fluent in both Turkish and French. 65 The principal teacher, however, was to be Sèves who was also responsible
 for supervising the training of both the cadets and the soldiers. Specifically, he was to co-ordinate the
 activities of the various schools so as to form new battalions from the recently trained soldiers to be headed by
 the new cadets. 66 
 

 
 While both the officers and soldiers were being trained consultation was going on among top officials to devise
 an organizational structure for the new army. 67 People involved in
 these consultations were Ibrahim Pasha, Süleyman Ağa (Sèves), Ahmed Pasha Tahir (Governor of Jirja), Mehmed Bey
 Lazoğlu (head of the military school established in Aswan, and later to be appointed as Director of the War
 Department) and, of course, Mehmed Ali himself. At issue were the following points: the size
 and internal division of the regiments, the ratio of officers to soldiers, and the ethnic composition of the
 officer corps, in addition to the pay of the different ranks.
 

 
 The consultations reflect a big degree of flexibility and pragmatism and decisions were often taken only to be
 repealed after discovering that in application they proved to be faulty. Mention had been made, for example, of
 adopting Sultan Selim’s model rather than Napoleon’s because it was seen as more appropriate to a small army
 which was still in its formative phase. Similarly, the names of the military ranks used in Sultan Selim’s army
 were changed since they were unfamiliar to the cadets. Moreover, although according to an initial plan it was
 possible to promote evlad-ɩ Arab , (lit. sons of Arabs, i.e. Arabic-speaking Egyptians) to
 the rank of Binbaşɩ Mülazimi , Mehmed Ali insisted that no fellahin should be promoted beyond
 the rank of bölükbaşɩ “commanding twenty-five soldiers.” 68 
 

 
 Furthermore, during this early training of the new troops a number of problems were spotted and action was taken
 to remedy them. For example, Ibrahim Pasha wrote to his father that some of the exercises looked good on paper
 but turned out to be inconsistent and self-contradictory in practice. In addition, it proved difficult to instill
 in the new cadets the idea of military hierarchy and some of the younger officers had still not got the habit of
 obeying their senior officers. On investigating the reasons behind some of the early cases of desertion of
 soldiers, it was discovered that it was caused more by “following their own whims” and not standing their
 officers’ punishment rather than by their low pay. He, nevertheless, suggested that the salaries of the soldiers
 and of the NCOs be raised, the private’s to 18 piasters, the corporal’s to 25 piasters, the sergeant’s to 30
 piasters, and the sergeant-major’s to 40 piasters. Mehmed Ali approved all of these recommendations suggested by
 Ibrahim except the one concerning the increase in the soldiers’ pay. He added, however, that if he, i.e. Ibrahim,
 had already announced to the soldiers that their pay was going to be increased, then he should not go back on his
 word. He explained that he would have preferred the officers, not the soldiers, to get this pay rise. 69 