
 

 
 It had earlier been realized that the army sent to the Sudan was much larger than the number of slaves captured,
 which defeated the purpose for which it was sent in the first place, and so it was decided that for every 1,000
 men sent 3,000 slaves must be collected. 54 However, even this
 principle now did not make sense, since those who had been collected were in very poor health and were dying
 “like sheep with the rot.” 55 In desperation
 Mehmed Ali wrote to Boghus Bey, his Armenian advisor on foreign affairs, ordering him to hire a number of
 American doctors to treat the slaves. These were preferred to European physicians since they had experience of
 dealing with “this race” ( bu tayfa ). 56 
 

 
 Conscripting the Egyptians
 

 
 It soon became obvious to the Pasha that something was going drastically wrong with his plans to raise an army of
 these Sudanese men. When, for example, he knew that out of 2,400 slaves arriving in Aswan only 1,245 managed to
 reach Cairo, he said “My wonder! We spend so much energy to fetch these slaves, healthy and capable of work, from
 remote areas only to perish in our midst and in front of our eyes!” 57 To add to his problems, the Turkish and Albanian soldiers that were sent to the Sudan were
 not accustomed to the weather there and soon fell victim to dysentery and other fevers. 58 The troops also started to grumble and to demand to be sent back to
 Egypt. It was then that the Pasha thought for the first time of conscripting the natives of Egypt in order to
 relieve his Turkish soldiers from this task. In a letter dated 18 February 1822 to the Governor of Jirja, Ahmed
 Pasha Tahir, he said
 

 
 It is obvious that we are sending troops under the command of our children to the Sudan so as to fetch us blacks
 to use in the affair of the Hijaz [campaign] and other similar services . . . However, since the Turks are
 members of our race, and since they must remain close to us all the time and should be saved from being sent to
 these remote areas, it has become necessary to gather a number of soldiers from Upper Egypt. We thus saw fit that
 you conscript around four thousand men from these provinces. 59 
 

 
 This is the earliest decree by the Pasha ordering the conscription of the fellah population of Egypt to the army,
 and it is clear from it that nothing of the nature of the levée en masse was contemplated.
 Rather, the idea was to replace those Turkish soldiers who for one reason or another objected to being sent to
 the Sudan. The new conscripts were to be drafted only for three years at the end of which time they were to be
 given a stamped certificate and allowed to go back to their villages. 60 
 

 
 For the time being, however, the slaves that were gathered from the Sudan continued to form the bulk of the
 soldiery. These Sudanese slaves together with the limited number of Egyptian fellahin who were conscripted from Upper Egypt were sent to a training camp in Aswan that was directed by Mehmed Bey
 Lazoğlu, the Pasha’s trusted deputy. 61 At the same time the nucleus
 of the officer corps was being formed by training a number of mamluks of Mehmed Ali and Ibrahim Pasha in addition
 to a number of mamluks donated by key officials. 62 These mamluks
 were sent to Upper Egypt to be trained where two special schools were built for them, one in Aswan and the other
 in Farshūṭ slightly to the north of Aswan. As a rule Mehmed Ali’s slaves were trained in the Aswan school, while
 Ibrahim Pasha’s mamluks were trained in Farshūṭ. 63 In addition to
 these mamluks other young Turkish-speaking soldiers from the old army were sent to the Farshūṭ school for
 training, although the mamluks were given priority over them when it came to assigning the graduating cadets
 their new officer ranks. 64 