
 

 
 No sooner had the two expeditions been dispatched, however, than they started to encounter serious problems. It
 was soon realized that the forces sent with Ismail Pasha and Mehmed Bey were insufficient to conquer and control
 the vast areas of the Sudan. 40 More Hawwāra bedouins were
 dispatched to Ismail Pasha to assist him in keeping order in Sinnār since “it is a vast country.” 41 Eventually, the army’s advance had to be halted to consolidate areas
 already conquered and to wait for more supplies and reinforcements from Egypt. 42 
 

 
 Moreover, Ismail Pasha proved to be utterly incompetent in managing the army. He was inexperienced, indecisive,
 stubborn and un-charismatic. His father was constantly urging him to seek the advice of older men in his
 company. 43 Ismail, however, did not listen to his father’s advice
 and eventually lost the confidence of his own men. An alarming number of his artillerymen deserted him at a time
 when he most needed them. 44 Furthermore, the whole province of
 Sinnār broke out in revolt as a result of the new taxes he was levying and the manner by which he was collecting
 them. 45 His brutality, rashness, and impetuous
 nature ultimately cost him his own life in a tragic incident: he was burnt alive during a banquet that Nemr, the
 King of Shindī, ostensibly held in his honor. This was in revenge for Ismail having previously humiliated him by
 slapping him on the face. 46 
 

 
 As serious as Ismail’s bad command was, the main problem facing the army was how to secure the transportation to
 Egypt of the slaves who had been rounded up. The first consignment of these unfortunate beings totaling 1,900
 men, women and children arrived in Isna north of Aswan in August, 1821. Those who were suitable were selected for
 military service; the others were to be sold in slave markets in Cairo. 47 Later these slaves were sent to Aswan where a special barracks was built specifically for
 the purpose of receiving them. 48 However, a large number of the
 Sudanese slaves perished on the way before reaching the Aswan depot. Mehmed Bey Defterdar, Mehmed Ali’s
 son-in-law, who assumed control of the campaign after the death of his brother-in-law, Ismail Pasha, wrote to
 Mehmed Ali in Egypt telling him that the slaves could not stand the trip they had to endure from Kurdufan to
 Haifa to the south of Aswan and suggested that ships be built to transport the slaves down the Nile. 49 
 

 
 The same problem was encountered when the slaves arrived in Egypt: a large number of them perished on the long
 march from Aswan to Cairo. Mehmed Ali soon ordered that they be transported by Nile boats, 50 and orders were issued to build forty such vessels every month. 51 He also ordered all the warehouses in Aswan and Manfalūṭ to be
 replenished and ready to feed the slaves that were arriving there in larger and larger numbers. 52 Moreover, he sent a senior official (Kasem Ağa, Governor of Qina) to
 supervise the whole process of transporting the slaves “without losses”. 53 