
 

 
 As large as this figure might seem, the importance of conscripting the fellahin into Mehmed Ali’s army does not
 only lie in its size. Given the Pasha’s imperial designs on Syria and his effective, albeit reluctant, assistance
 to the Sultan in his wars in Arabia and Greece, his reign cannot be viewed in isolation of conscription; as such,
 it was a cornerstone of his regime and his survival depended on it. Moreover, conscription, like corvée, was an
 important link between Mehmed Ali and his government machinery, on the one hand, and the
 peasant population of Egypt, on the other. As will be shown below, conscription and the population’s reaction to
 it ushered in a new relationship between the government and the governed. Gone were the days when an Ottoman vali
 or a Mamluk emir could issue an order or declare a wish and be practically ignored, cannily evaded, or met by
 cold indifference and a calculated lack of interest on the part of the population. Conscription was to transform
 the face of Egyptian society and to drastically alter the relationship between the government and the populace.
 

 
 Given the singular importance of conscription for Mehmed Ali’s regime, the remainder of this chapter describes
 the methods employed by the authorities to gather men from their villages and attempts to trace how this policy
 developed over time. No accurate account of conscription will be complete without incorporating the population’s
 reaction to it; the remainder of this chapter therefore attempts to describe how the fellahin dealt with this
 novel and often brutal encroachment of the state on their lives. In doing so the aim is to draw attention to the
 fact that conscription and the military institution in general were to transform the nature of the government in
 Cairo drastically by introducing new techniques of control and surveillance that had not been tried in Egypt
 before.
 

 
 Conscription methods
 

 
 As was said above, the first attempt at conscripting the Egyptian fellahin stemmed from the desire to relieve the
 Turkish soldiers in Mehmed Ali’s pay from serving in the remote and hot lands of the Sudan. The 4,000 peasants
 who were gathered from villages in Upper Egypt to replace them were to be conscripted for only three years at the
 end of which they would each be given a stamped certificate and allowed to return to their villages and resume
 their normal, civilian lives. The conscripts would also be exempted from the head tax ( firda ) and other financial liabilities that the fellah population was subjected to. More importantly,
 these early conscripts were to be collected not by the village shaykh, but by a conscripting officer sent from
 Cairo for that purpose. The shaykh was only to assist him in finding men in his village who were suitable for
 military service. The conscript had to be from the same village from which he was drawn and not “from those who
 roam around from one village to the other . . . His name has to be registered in a special register ( defter ), together with the name of his village, his father’s name, and their titles.” 101 