
 

 
 In August 1815, however, the Pasha decided to impose order on the troops by force, and “to put their pay and
 expenses under an organized principle ( rabita ve nizam ).” 26 Influenced by a certain Ibrahim Ağa who had recently arrived from Istanbul, 27 the Pasha gathered his Albanian soldiers in Maydān al-Rumayla at the foot
 of the Citadel for target practice. For over three hours the soldiers fired their guns in “successive volleys
 making a thundery noise like the French.” The following day it was rumored that the Pasha wanted to have a count
 of the soldiers and “to train them according to al-nizām al-jadīd , copying the positions of
 the French. He wanted them to put on tight clothes and to change their appearance ( ughayyir
 shaklahum ).” 28 
 

 
 The attempt failed miserably. The soldiers reluctantly complied with the Pasha’s orders on the first day only to
 conspire to kill him the following night. The Pasha was informed of the plot in time to escape the assassination
 attempt, and when the rebels knew that their conspiracy was foiled, they went on the rampage in the streets of
 Cairo looting and damaging a considerable amount of property and Mehmed Ali was able to pacify the merchants and
 the populace only by returning their stolen property or compensating them for the damages. 29 
 

 
 Having failed in imposing order and discipline on them, he decided to get rid of them, not
 in the dramatic way of massacring them like the Mamluks, but by sending them to their deaths in the Arabian
 desert. When the Sultan ordered Mehmed Ali to fight the Wahhabis in Arabia he was reluctant to agree to comply
 with the imperial order considering the amount of time and money that would have gone into fulfilling it.
 However, he realized that this would be a golden opportunity to get rid of many troublesome groups, foremost
 among whom were the Albanians. During the seven-year conflict against the Wahhabis he sent wave after wave of
 them to face their destiny in the barren deserts of Arabia, thus effectively ridding himself of their
 nuisance. 30 
 

 
 Enslaving the Sudanese
 

 
 The ground was now prepared for the introduction of the new tactics. Initially the Pasha did not think of
 conscripting the fellahin of Egypt mainly because that would have meant moving productive labor from the
 agricultural sector which was the main source of revenue. 31 
 Instead, he had his eye on the Sudan to supply him with docile, obedient soldiers for his new army, and in the
 summer of 1820 the Pasha dispatched two expeditions to the Sudan, one under the command of his son, Ismail Pasha,
 and the other under Mehmed Bey Defterdar, his son-in-law. The two expeditions numbered ten thousand soldiers and
 were composed of Maghribi and Egyptian bedouins as well as a force of Turkish-speaking infantry and
 cavalry. 32 
 

 
 As said above in chapter 1 , the Sudan campaign had various
 purposes. The exploitation of the gold mines that were alleged to be in abundance there is one of them. 33 Another reason was the desire to catch the remnants of the Mamluk emirs
 who had taken refuge in Upper Egypt and then in Kurdufān. 34 So was
 the desire to control the Red Sea trade. 35 al-Rāf‘ī
 characteristically alleged that it was aiming at “ensuring the security of Egypt and establishing its political
 unity with the Sudan.” 36 Although there might be some truth in
 these allegations 37 the main reason for invading the Sudan as far
 as could be detected from the Pasha’s own letters to his commanders was undoubtedly to capture as many of the inhabitants there as possible and send them to Egypt to form the soldiery of the new
 army that the Pasha intended to create. When Ismail Pasha wrote to Mehmed Ali informing him of the amount of
 taxes levied in the conquered areas, his father wrote back telling him to pay more attention to collecting men
 not money “since the reason for incurring all these expenses and undertaking all these troubles is not to collect
 money, as I have repeatedly written to you, but to raise men who would be suitable for our affairs.” 38 In another letter he added that “the value of slaves who prove to be
 suitable for our services is more precious than jewels . . . hence I have ordered you to raise 6,000 of these
 slaves.” 39 