
 

 
 Testing the new troops
 

 
 In the meantime, however, ten battalions of 800 men each were formed in the camps in Aswan and Farshūṭ. These
 were made up of the Sudanese slaves in addition to the Egyptian fellahin who were initially conscripted from
 villages in Upper Egypt. 78 On hearing that a new Wahhabi revolt had
 occurred in ‘Asīr in the south of Hijaz, Mehmed Ali decided that it was time to try out his new troops. In July
 1823 he wrote to Ibrahim Pasha telling him to form a regiment out of the newly formed battalions and to dispatch
 it immediately to Arabia even if the soldiers had not yet finished their proper courses of training. 79 A certain Mehmed Bey was appointed in command of this force and was
 ordered to receive his orders from Ahmed Pasha Yeğen, Mehmed Ali’s nephew, who was then governor of
 Mecca. 80 In addition, Mehmed Ali decided to form two more regiments
 out of the newly trained troops and to dispatch them to help the forces already in the Sudan. 81 
 

 
 In November 1823, while waiting for news of these new troops to arrive, the Pasha went to
 Banī ‘Adī to oversee the process of training himself. He invited both the British and French Consuls-General to
 accompany him to the camp. 82 The results were more than
 satisfactory and the new troops made a great spectacle that the Pasha was certainly pleased to watch. Both
 Consuls, moreover, were greatly impressed by the new troops. Drovetti, the French Consul-General, said that they
 had “reached such a degree of precision that gives honor to the French officers who were in charge of training
 them.” 83 “Pride, pomp and circumstances of glorious war,” wrote
 Salt, the British Consul-General. “Every other day,” he adds, the Pasha “has a grand Review and four regiments
 are exercised in the plain [to the west of the camp] not as an ordinary Review but as a ‘petite guerre’ and it
 really is astonishing the figure they make.” 84 While staying in the
 camp, the Pasha decided to invite various provincial governors from different parts of Egypt, ostensibly to
 report to him about the problems of conscripting soldiers as well as other administrative and financial
 matters. 85 Having seen how impressive the new troops looked, the
 Pasha also wanted to impress his governors with his assembled troops so that “a true report of them might
 circulate through the country.” 86 
 

 
 While the Pasha was still in Manfalūṭ news arrived of an impressive victory that his new troops had won against
 the Wahhabi rebels in ‘Asir: a contingent of only 2,500 Egyptian infantry soldiers had succeeded in defeating a
 Wahabbi force ten times its size. 87 It had become obvious that no
 matter how semi-trained these troops might have been, even the ferocious Wahhabis were no match for them. A short
 while later the new nizami troops had another chance to prove themselves to the Pasha. On 22
 March 1824 a big explosion took place in a powder magazine inside the Citadel in which more than 4,000 people
 were killed. There were rumors that the explosion was caused by some of the old troops of Albanians and mamluks
 who were not pleased at the Pasha’s introduction of the nizami troops. This posed a grave danger to the Pasha
 whose position was being compared to that of Sultan Selim when he attempted to get rid of the Janissaries
 seventeen years before. 88 A single battalion
 of the new troops, however, rushed to the scene, isolated the powder magazine, and quickly brought the situation
 under control. 89 