
 

 
 It ought to be generally known that, whilst many thousands of our undisciplined forces were unable to obtain the
 least advantage in the war they waged in Alexandria and Cairo against the reprobates of France, our gunners and
 regular infantry, although few in number, bravely combated the infidels and defeated them incessantly; and the
 flight of a single individual of that corps was never seen nor heard of. 16 
 

 
 It is not known for certain if Mehmed Ali did see for himself the performance of these new troops of the Sultan,
 although it is unlikely that they would have gone unnoticed by him given the fact that he was in Egypt at the
 same time. 17 In any case, when he was devising an organizational
 structure for his army Mehmed Ali clearly preferred the one put down by Sultan Selim to that of Napoleon. In 1822
 he commissioned Süleyman Ağa (Colonel Sèves), Osman Efendi Nureddin (whom he had earlier
 sent to France on an educational mission) and Ahmed Efendi Mühendis (who was translating military and naval books
 from French) 18 to draw up a plan for the organization of the army;
 it was turned down because it was blindly copying the structure of Napoleon’s army. “Although the plan that
 Süleyman Ağa had put down is a wonderful one,” Mehmed Ali told his son, Ibrahim Pasha, “it has been implemented
 by Napoleon to lead an army composed of several thousand troops. Our army, however, is a new one which we have
 only recently begun creating.” 19 Two weeks later he ordered his son
 to have a meeting with the same officials who had drafted the original plan and ordered them to draft a new
 organizational scheme for the army which he explicitly said should be along the lines of Sultan Selim’s
 army. 20 
 

 
 These then were the influences on the Pasha’s mind when he decided to form a disciplined army and it is clear
 from other reform attempts in the Ottoman Empire at large that his was not the only attempt at founding a modern,
 disciplined army, and that he was not as pioneering in this respect as he might appear if developments in Egypt
 are studied in isolation of the wider Ottoman context. Looking at the army he created at the end of his reign,
 however, one thing stands out as significantly different from other Ottoman military reform attempts, namely,
 adopting something close to universal conscription whereby masses of peasants were drafted in the new army. Yet
 again, in this respect the Pasha was being more pragmatic than radical. By following the steps he took in coming
 to this decision it becomes clear that he did not originally contemplate conscripting the fellahin of Egypt when
 he was thinking of founding his new army; rather he was pushed to taking this bold step only after he had run out
 of other alternatives.
 

 
 Massacring the Mamluks
 

 
 Before he undertook to train any troops along the new lines he was contemplating, however, the Pasha had to
 strengthen his own position as master of Egypt. This necessitated getting rid of the power of the Mamluks who had
 effectively been the warlords of the country for centuries. Learning from Sultan Selim’s unfortunate experience
 in dealing with his own old guard, Mehmed Ali knew only too well that any attempt to introduce modern tactics and
 training drills would have been met with staunch resistance on the part of the Mamluks who would rightly see in
 these new military techniques an attempt to abolish the old system which they had been monopolizing for centuries
 and to replace it by a new system in which their privileged positions would be seriously challenged.