
 

 
 In issuing the conscripting officers their orders Mehmed Ali tried to impress upon them that
 they had to handle this important task delicately. He wrote to Ibrahim Pasha telling him that he had been
 informed that the conscripting officers were gathering men from the villages in the same manner as collecting men
 for corvée. He told him that this method had to be stopped at once.
 

 
 Since the fellahin are not used to military service, [he explained], they should not be dragged into the army by
 force. We have to attract their minds to it . . . This can be done by employing some preachers who should
 convince the fellahin that [serving in the army] is not like corvée . . . Alternatively, we can remind them of
 how easy it was for the French [while they were in Egypt] to collect Copts to serve in their army owing to their
 eagerness to serve their faith. If that was the case with the Copts, it will certainly be more so with the
 fellahin whose hearts have been enflamed by their piety and their zeal in defending Islam. 102 
 

 
 This was wishful thinking on the part of the Pasha. In fulfilling their duties, the conscripting officers
 encountered problems that were much more serious than could be solved simply by appointing preachers to attract
 the minds of the fellahin to military service. In addition to lacking any detailed information about the
 population, the authorities also did not as yet have a reliable medical system to screen the conscripted. This is
 something that had to wait till 1830 after Clot Bey had managed to create the Abū Za‘bal medical school (later to
 be moved to Qaṣr al-‘Ainī) and to use its graduates to examine the conscripts. 103 Moreover, unlike the recruiting officers of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic
 armies, 104 for example, the officers sent from Cairo to conscript
 the fellahin had no guidelines with regards to the age, marital status or number of brothers of the men they
 should conscript. Lacking this vital information, the conscripting officers, on receiving their orders, would
 descend upon any given village and seize as many men as could be found “without any order, arrangement,
 inscription, or lot-drawing.” 105 These men would then be tied
 together with ropes around their necks in groups of six or eight. 106 They would then be marched off to the training camps escorted by the
 “conscription gang.” leaving behind a “heart-stricken, sorrowful group” of wives, mothers and children wailing
 and screaming and hopelessly trying to prevent the soldiers from taking away their men. 107 
 

 
 All attempts to persuade the fellahin that serving in the army was a religious duty and that being drafted was
 not like corvée labor fell on completely deaf ears. Even before the Pasha had turned against the Ottoman Sultan,
 the call to arms in defense of the faith, against the Persians, 108 
 the Russians or the Greeks, 109 was a completely alien and
 meaningless call with little or no emotional appeal. “A recruiting party with all the allurements of drums,
 ribbons, and promises, might march from Rosetta to Assouan without picking up a single volunteer . . . ” 110 Anxious about the lot of their families left behind and the land that
 would necessarily lie fallow, the peasants found little incentive to join the colors, and given the illogical,
 “most arbitrary and unsparing” method of conscription, 111 they
 attempted to resist it through all means possible.