
 

 
 Given this importance of inscription, of the written word and of registers, the scribe appears during Mehmed
 Ali’s reign as an official of utmost significance. It was upon him that the government’s machinery of
 manipulation, surveillance and control was based, and it was with him that the key to the power of its impersonal
 nature was to be found. A law passed in 1844 organizing the internal structure of the civilian bureacuracy
 explicitly stated that the pages of the bureaucracy’s registers had to be clean and tidy. “The pages of the
 register ( defter ) have to be stamped and numbered. Writing has to be continuous with no
 blank pages in the middle. It has to be clear and legible, without any crossings-out or corrections.” 159 The clean, blank page which was sequentially numbered and neatly bound
 in a register was a symbol of the new power of the state: self-assured, rational, and consistent. When words were
 crossed out, when gaps existed between writing, or when the register itself was lost the
 whole system and machinery of the government was implicitly challenged. For example, on being informed that the
 scribe of the military hospital in Haifa had fled taking with him the hospital’s registers, Lokman Efendi, the
 director of hospital, was ordered by the administrative governor of Syria under Egyptian rule to set out
 immediately to catch him and to take even more care to find the registers at any cost. 160 
 

 
 There is nothing that represents this overpowering nature of the written word and its effect on things than the
 term qayd , which in Mehmed Ali’s Egypt was the term used to mean conscription. Originally
 the term meant nothing more than “drafting” or writing a name in the conscription registers. The Arabic origin of
 the word, however, implies in addition to writing or inscribing the act of binding or tying (e.g. binding an
 animal to a tree). Moreover, it also implies subjugation, manipulation and control ( inqiyād ). A qā’id , for example (which has the same root), is a leader, or a
 driver, i.e. a figure of power and influence. Thus, the term chosen from among many other possible terms to
 signify the process of conscription can hardly be described as a neutral, “objective” term. It is a term that is
 loaded with ideas of power and control, and connotes ideas of subjugation and bondage. Similarly and more
 concretely, the act of conscripting the fellahin into Mehmed Ali’s army was an act that ushered them into a
 regime of control and bondage, and into a system in which they found themselves being inscribed upon, sometimes
 even literally. It was an act that ushered them into a system of organization ( tertip ), 161 manipulation and control.
 

 
 Conclusion
 

 
 This chapter has attempted to uncover the factors that prompted Mehmed Ali to conscript the male population of
 Egypt and has shown that the Pasha did not originally intend to press them into military service but was forced
 to do so only after his Albanians troops resisted his efforts at imposing discipline and after he failed to raise
 troops from the Sudan in any efficient way. It then reviewed the methods that were employed to collect peasants
 from their villages and showed that the authorities encountered serious resistance from the peasants in this
 respect and in a couple of cases the resistance took the form of massive, popular revolt. In response, the
 government changed its policies and instituted a new technique of accounting for the population in the first
 place even before conscripting the peasants, a technique of control and manipulation whose
 power lay in its ability to predict their actions and account for them even before they occurred.