
 

 
 The tezkere , the census, and the various lists that preceded it were important tools that
 the government used to tighten its grip over the population and to usher in the system of strong and effective
 governmental control that is characteristic of Mehmed Ali’s reign. At the heart of these new tools was the
 government’s desire to control the entire population in such a way that no one would evade profitable and
 efficient employment. The early methods of gathering peasants from their villages have shown that reliance on
 naked force was not efficient enough: the fellahin had discovered ways to evade it and were assisted in this by
 the village shaykhs. What the desertion lists, the registers of absconders and, above all, the census, represent
 is a new method of control and manipulation in which the authorities aimed at always having the initiative and
 tried to avoid being at the mercy of the local, unreliable officials.
 

 
 The importance of a tezkera , a register, a list, or a census does not lie only in the fact
 that these tools enhance the efficiency of the bureaucracy or make it capable of proper book keeping. Registers,
 timetables, training manuals, medical reports and other such bureaucratic, textual devices all share a common
 characteristic: they attempt to break time and place into similar, comparable, abstract units. As will be seen in
 the following chapters, once these devices were used time would no longer be measured in terms of the temporal
 space a given act occupies (e.g. time of harvest, or of learning the Quran), but in abstract, quantifiable units
 of hours, minutes and seconds. Human motion would be broken down, as described in the training manuals, for
 example, into uniform, measurable movements that could be standardized down to the inch. In short, people and things would be squeezed in to fit in an “inscribed” place, a slot, imposed on them
 by a printed register, a map, a roll call, an inventory list or a timetable.
 

 
 These new tools that the bureaucracy introduced were tools of standardization and compartmentatization, of
 manipulation and control, tools that ushered in what could be termed a process of “inscribing reality.” This
 process assumed that the starting point of managing people and things would be the place they occupied not in
 their natural environment, but on paper, e.g. in the inventory list, the roll call, or the census. Unlike a
 soldier whose body had been tattooed by the authorities and whose desertion was discovered after he was found, a soldier whose name appeared in a village conscription register would have his
 desertion detected even before he was found. Any missing item could only be truly missing if
 it did not show up in the list; otherwise it was still considered present albeit only in name ( ismi var cismi yok .: lit. having a name but no body). 156 Thus when someone presented a petition to be exempted from certain government obligations,
 paying taxes for example, the answer would take the form of ordering his name to be crossed out ( desid ) from the relevant register. 157 On finding that
 five “strangers” ( goraba ) caught in Cairo had deserted from a certain village, the shaykh of
 that village after handing them in was given, in exchange, a similar number of receipts and told to cross out
 their names from the conscription register of his village. 158 