
 

 
 A solution had to be found for this situation in which the central authorities found themselves at the mercy of
 the village shaykhs, the nā irs and the ḥākims and subject to their intrigues. New techniques of
 surveillance were introduced to enable the government to have a tighter control over the population both in the
 cities and in the countryside. For example, in an attempt to curb the phenomenon of fellahin fleeing their
 villages and escaping to neighboring ones where they might be caught by the shaykhs of these new villages, the
 authorities decreed that every villager should carry a stamped certificate or passport ( tezkere ) which should state his name, his father’s name, his physical description, and his village.
 If found without this certificate he would immediately be sent back to his village. Even village shaykhs were
 ordered to carry such tezkeres when visiting Cairo. 140 More radically, the authorities resorted to tattooing some soldiers’ bodies in order to
 facilitate catching them in case they deserted. When it was discovered that sailors were escaping from their
 ships every Friday, the day on which they were given leave to go ashore, it was decreed that all marine soldiers
 should have their arms and legs stamped with the signs of a ship and an anchor. 141 (This was also done in the case of convicts sent to prison for life: their arms were
 tattooed with the Arabic letter “Lām” standing for “Liman” which was the name of the infamous prison in Abū Qīr
 near Alexandria.) 142 
 

 
 In another way of increasing their surveillance and tightening their control the authorities
 appointed special guards to prevent the new conscripts from escaping on their way to the conscripting
 depots. 143 Bedouins were also asked to hand in any deserter to the
 authorities. 144 Eventually this task was given specifically to
 special forces, the baltaci ortas , i.e. the sappers’ regiments, 145 whose earlier tasks had included guarding the corvée laborers working to clear the
 Maḥmūdiyya canal. 146 
 

 
 “Inscribing reality”
 

 
 However efficient these new tactics might have been, the authorities continued to suffer from the critical lack
 of any reliable information about the population: its size, its age composition, location, professions, etc. From
 the early years of the “conscription waves” the authorities in Cairo knew that no consistent conscription policy
 could properly be implemented without such information, however vague it might be. As early as 1825, for example,
 it was realized that to replace the soldiers who had fled or who were sent back to their villages, local
 officials had to know how many men were to be conscripted from their provinces in the first place. When Mehmed
 Ali was informed that 7,494 men were gathered in the year 1240 (1824/5), he wrote to the Director of his War
 Department, telling him “we have to know in the first place the number [of men] demanded from each province and
 the number actually gathered [in order to know] the number still remaining.” 147 A similar order was earlier issued to the same Director to prepare a register giving the
 names of those soldiers who had been raised so far with the information broken down to the province, department,
 district and village from which they were gathered. 148 Similarly,
 in order to replace those soldiers who had died or deserted detailed registers were drafted stating, name by
 name, the provinces which they had originally been conscripted from, 149 and a register of absconders ( mütesehhips ) was compiled in
 1842. 150 Various lists were compiled giving the name, physical
 description, village and province of the deserter so as to make it easy for the authorities to catch
 him. 151 Of equal importance were the registers
 numbering and marking houses giving the number of inhabitants in each one for taxation purposes. 152 All these registers had to be updated periodically so as to take into
 account births and deaths and other changes. 153 Believing that “the
 welfare of the people depends on a good census” the Pasha as early as 1827 ordered the drafting of a general
 census for the Northern Provinces. 154 Eventually, this process of
 gathering detailed information about the population and categorizing it under different headings culminated in
 1845 in the drafting of the first national census based on the number of households. 155 