
 

 
 Central to the success of any attempt by the authorities in Cairo to conscript the fellahin was the role played
 by the village shaykhs. It was realized as early as 1822 that it was the shaykhs who exclusively had the detailed
 information needed to implement the conscription policy at the village level. Initially, as was described above,
 the conscription gang would arrive in the village and would round up as many men as could be found. However,
 given the speed by which news of its imminent arrival would spread to the villages, a wave of desertion ensued
 making it impossible for the Turkish-speaking officers to ascertain if the men currently present in the village
 were the only men available or if others had already fled the village. It soon became evident that without the
 collaboration of the shaykhs the authorities could not be sure that the men actually present were all the men
 that could potentially be gathered from any given village. Village shaykhs were therefore asked to assist the
 conscription officers in their task. However, many shaykhs refused to collaborate with the authorities against
 their fellow villagers and often resisted the pressure from above to comply with the system
 by employing various ways that ranged from a calculated lack of interest in government policies to deliberate
 attempts to frustrate such policies. The Qānūn al-Filāḥa that was passed in 1830 abounds
 with regulations that show government attempts to curb this non-compliance of the shaykhs with its
 policies. 135 In spite of the harsh penalties by which the
 authorities attempted to bring them under firm control, some shaykhs managed through various ways to side with
 their fellow villagers rather than act as reliable agents of the government in Cairo blindly executing its
 orders. This was the case not only with the village shaykhs, but also with the district governors ( ḥākims of the khuṭṭs ) and the department governors ( nā irs of the qisms ) 136 who showed their loyalty to their fellow
 countrymen by a tightly guarded silence and a calculated pretense at ignorance of their local environment.
 

 
 In this respect the different shaykhs and governors were caught between a rock and a hard place: even if it is
 assumed that they were genuinely interested in fulfilling the government’s orders and that they had no loyalty to
 the people of their administrative units, a serious problem remained: on the one hand, these orders meant moving
 men away from agriculture, and on the other hand, the local officials had to make sure that production did not
 get disrupted by the government’s continuous and seemingly unsatiable demand for manpower. Nowhere was this
 conflict more evident than in the case of applying the conscription policy. The different local officials, from
 the shaykhs to the department governors, often refused to hand in the men needed for the army to the conscripting
 officers and instead allowed them to “disappear” in their provinces and sometimes gave them refuge by hiding them
 in their own houses. When Mehmed Ali was informed of this he wrote an open decree ( buyrultu )
 to forty-two governors warning them of the consequences of their acts. He swore by God and His Prophet that when
 discovered he was going to “aim at their souls with the arrows of subjugation” and would mercilessly kill them
 with his own hands. 137 More cunningly, the shaykhs would sometimes
 meet government demands for men by conscripting peasants not from their own villages but from neighboring ones.
 Mehmed Ali ordered this practice to be stopped at once. Any conscript sent in this way would be asked from which
 village he was taken and which shaykh conscripted him and if this was discovered not to be
 his own shaykh, this latter would then have either his own son or one of his relatives taken for the army
 instead. 138 Another way by which the local officials attempted to
 deceive the authorities was to conscript men who had already been “conscripted,” if not for the army, then for
 one of the government works. For example, three men from the department of Zifta were sent to the army only to be
 discovered that they were already registered as workers in the “factory” of Zifta. The same fate awaited the
 shaykhs who conscripted them: their sons or their relatives were sent instead of the three men. 139 