
 

 
 As we shall see below these “gaps” were filled not simply by grabbing more men from the villages to replace those
 who “were not in their places.” New techniques were implemented to deal with the different kinds of “gaps”: the
 deserters, those who were medically unfit in the first place and were therefore returned to their villages, and
 those who died of old age after being conscripted ( firar ve murteci ve muteveffi ). 131 Accordingly, deserters would be caught by instituting a country-wide
 system of policing and surveillance; the medically unfit would be treated in newly founded hospitals that would
 be linked to a modern medical establishment; and the problem of wrongly conscripting old men would be solved if
 precise information had been collected about the population of the entire country that would be broken down by
 age, gender, residence, occupation, etc. In short, to fill these “gaps,” the Egyptian state would undertake new
 tasks that it had hitherto not considered to fall within its duty nor its ability to perform. Let us see how this
 was brought about.
 

 
 Government’s response
 

 
 From what we have seen so far it becomes clear that the Pasha’s earlier wish that the fellahin’s aversion to
 military service could be countered simply by employing religious men to convince them that serving in his forces
 was tantamount to defending the faith proved to be naive and optimistic. The fellahin’s reaction to conscription
 was as drastic and unprecedented as the Pasha’s orders had been and for some time the authorities seemed to have
 lost control over the process of collecting and guarding the conscripts. Furthermore, it had
 become obvious that this process was far from efficient and although it succeeded in gathering a considerable
 number of men from their villages, this had not been without its costs. Dr. Bowring, who was against conscription
 as a matter of principle, also opposed it not only for the brutal means that were employed to carry it out but
 also because it “removes from labor a far greater number of men than are required for the army as multitudes
 abandon their lands, and multitudes deprive themselves of their limbs for the purpose of evading the
 conscription.” 132 Besides the problem of the land left unattended
 by fugitives evading conscription, the policy applied to date produced men who were old or physically unfit for
 “this fine and delicate matter.” 133 In the absence of any criteria
 as to whom to conscript the conscription gangs were eager to collect as many men as could be found without any
 regard to age or physical fitness. It was reported that out of 48,000 men collected throughout the 1820s and sent
 to the Hankah camp to the north of Cairo only 20,000 men were fit for military service. “Lame, blind, decrepid,
 all were sent without distinction.” 134 A new technique had to be
 found to redress the problems arising so far as well as to replace the existing system with a tighter, more
 efficient, one.