
 

 
 When the fellahin saw that open revolt and group desertion were ineffectual in evading the conscription gangs of
 the Pasha they resorted to individual acts of rebellion. One such method was to maim themselves deliberately so
 as to be declared medically unfit for service. 123 The exact ways of
 maiming and the government response to it will be dealt with in chapter 6 below; suffice it to say here that the most common
 techniques employed were chopping off the index finger, pulling the front teeth and/or putting rat poison in
 one’s eye so as to blind oneself hopefully only temporarily. When the extent of these practices became “very
 common” 124 the Pasha resolved to punish the mutilated men and their
 accomplices severely by sending them to prison for life, as well as conscripting their relatives instead of
 them. 125 Another method to avoid conscription and probably the most
 instinctive one was to resist the conscription officers physically. Naturally the fellahin had no chance of
 getting around conscription that way and even when they occasionally managed to escape one conscription gang they
 would soon be found by another and instead of being punished, by being sent to prison, for example, as some of
 them hoped, they were sent to the army instead. 126 
 

 
 Nevertheless even after being taken by the conscription gang, many fellahin did not give up all hopes of evading
 the Pasha’s military service and attempted to desert either on their way to the conscription depots from which
 they would be distributed among the various units, or from the training camps in which these units were being
 drilled. It should be noted here that desertion was a perennial problem for the authorities and as such will be
 dealt with in more detail in chapter 6 . What is of concern
 here is to chart the methods employed by the authorities to safeguard the delivery of the conscripts to their
 training camps after they had been rounded up, a process that was considerably more difficult than conscription
 per se .
 

 
 Given their “intense love of home” 127 it was often during the early
 days or weeks after being taken away from their villages that the young fellahin found army life most unbearable,
 when the memory of home and of the family left behind to its own devices was still fresh and when the new values
 and disciplinary methods of the army had not yet struck root in their minds. 128 Even before reaching their training camps, a large number of the conscripts managed to
 escape and got back to their villages. It was soon discovered that the total number of men
 arriving at the conscription depots was often smaller than that originally raised from the villages. Out of a
 total of 14,426 men raised from the Northern Provinces (Gharbiyya, Minūfiyya, Manṣūra, Sharqiyya, Gīza, and
 Qalyūbiyya), for example, 428 men died just after being gathered from their villages and another 622 men either
 fled or were sent back because they were unfit in the first place. When Mehmed Ali was informed about this
 discrepancy in numbers he wrote to the Governor telling him that he had to “fill these gaps.” 129 These problems were not peculiar to the Northern Provinces: out of a
 total of 1,960 men gathered from the Middle Provinces (Banī Suwayf, Fayyūm and Aṭfīḥ), nearly a third were not
 “in their places ( bulmamuş )”. Mehmed Ali wrote to the governor, Halil Bey, reprimanding him
 heavily and warning him that if he did not do his best to fill these gaps, he would live to regret it. 130 