
 

 
 Resistance to conscription
 

 
 It is here that we come to the nub of the problem facing Mehmed Ali and his military authorities: the Pasha never
 succeeded in inducing the fellahin to join the colors out of their free will by employing ideological or
 religious arguments. Soon after the new conscription policy had become known in the countryside the fellahin
 employed different methods to escape the Pasha’s men who were sent to press them into service. One such method
 was open rebellion and at least two such rebellions are known to have occurred and to have been directly
 connected to the Pasha’s conscription policy. Mention has already been made of the big revolt in Upper Egypt in
 1824 in which 30,000 people rebelled against Mehmed Ali’s authorities, attacked the officials sent from Cairo,
 and refused to pay taxes. 112 Earlier, in May 1823, immediately
 after conscription had been introduced in Lower Egypt, a smaller yet significant uprising erupted in the province
 of Minūfiyya and to quell it Mehmed Ali had to go there in person armed with his palace
 guards and six field cannons. 113 
 

 
 Besides open revolt another tactic the fellahin often used was to desert their villages altogether to avoid being
 taken into the army. As soon as news of the approach of the recruiting party reached a village, “– and it spread
 over the country like wildfire –” 114 a wave of desertion followed
 with masses of families fleeing their homes and villages desperately trying to evade the conscription gangs. By
 the late 1830s this practice was so widespread that entire villages were found completely abandoned leaving
 behind sad, deplorable villages “buried in their stillness . . . where the dwellings of the poor inhabitants . .
 . still standing, neither blackened by fire, nor destroyed by war, nor decayed by time, but deprived of their
 inhabitants [who attempted to avoid the agents of the Pasha] by giving up house and home, and deserting,
 en masse , the devoted town or village.” 115 
 Naturally this could not be tolerated by the authorities for, besides evading conscription, the fugitives would
 thus leave their land fallow and unattended. One of the duties of the bedouins who were in the Pasha’s service
 was to catch any peasant who might desert his village with his family in an attempt to evade
 conscription. 116 Ultimately, however, it was with the village
 shaykhs that responsibility effectively lay in detecting and catching such village absconders ( mütesehhips ). 117 Even when it happened that a fellah
 left his village for Cairo where he hoped that he would be relatively more anonymous and thus more difficult to
 catch, orders were sent to shaykhs of al-ḥāra [residential quarters] to find the strangers
 and send them back to “develop” their villages ( imarlik için ). 118 
 

 
 Controlling the absconders, however, proved to be more difficult than initially imagined. A large number of the
 village shaykhs connived with the peasants instead of handing them to the authorities, and in some cases the
 shaykhs were accepting bribes from the fugitives in order not to turn them in. Article 36 of
 Qānūn al-Filāḥa which was passed in early 1830 stipulated that any such shaykh, if found guilty, would receive
 200 stripes of the whip ( kurbāj ). 119 To a
 lesser extent the task of catching the village absconders, i.e. those peasants who deserted their villages to
 avoid conscription or any of the other government demands, was one of the responsibilities of the directors of
 departments (the nā irs of the qisms ). This was particularly the case when the fugitives were
 found in a department which originally they did not come from. 120 
 It appears, however, that even the nā irs were not fulfilling this task properly and some of them would not report on the
 fugitives found in their departments. In the case of a nā ir being found to harbor fugitives in his department it
 was decided that he would receive 100 stripes of the bastinado as well as being imprisoned for life in Abū
 Qīr. 121 In spite of all these regulations to curb the desertion of
 the peasants from their villages, the phenomenon continued and the village shaykhs on whom the responsibility of
 catching fugitives squarely rested proved unreliable. Their role was thus reduced to simply reporting the
 presence of the fugitives rather than capturing them. Article 118 of al-Qānūn al-Muntakhab 
 passed in February 1844 stipulated that the village shaykhs should search for the fugitives in their villages and
 instead of catching them themselves, as the earlier law had stipulated, they were now asked to report to the
 mudīr of the district. If four days had passed since the fugitive had left his village
 without being found, and if during that time the shaykh failed to report him, the shaykh would then be considered
 an accomplice of the fugitive, and in this case he would be hanged. 122 