
 

 
 Five days later the French army was seen to the north of Imbābā “and an innumerable throng surpassing all
 description gathered at Būlāq [on the other side of the river].” 4 
 When the actual fighting began
 

 
 the mob started screaming and shouting such things as “God Almighty” and “Men of God” as if they were fighting by
 shouting and yelling. Wise men urged them to quit this [useless mode of fighting] and told them that the Prophet
 and His Companions fought with swords and pikes not by shouting, yelling and barking. People did not listen,
 though, and neither did not desist. No one reads. No one listens. 5 
 

 
 In the meantime and on the other side of the river a band of Mamluk soldiers charged upon the French who fired at
 them “in successive volleys.” On retreating to their entrenchments and seeing that shells were still pouring down
 on them some of the Mamluk emirs started to cross to the other side on horseback. “They jostled with each other
 on the ferryboats . . . [and] sand rose in clouds which the wind blew in their faces. [The battle continued] and
 the rifles of the French were like a boiling pot on a fierce fire.” 6 
 

 
 Commenting on the battle, al-Jabartī says of the Mamluks that they were
 

 
 irresolute and at odds with one another, being divided in opinion, envious of each other, frightened for their
 lives, their well-being and their comforts, immersed in their ignorance and self-delusion, arrogant and haughty
 in their attire and presumptuousness, afraid of decreasing in number, and pompous in their finery, heedless of
 the results of their action; contemptuous of their enemy, unbalanced in their reasoning and judgement.
 

 
 Immediately after such a harsh rebuke of the Mamluks and their style of warfare, al-Jabartī describes the
 performance of the French during the same battle.
 

 
 The French were a complete contrast in everything mentioned above . . . They never considered the number of their
 enemy too high, nor did they care who among them was killed . . . They follow the order of their commander and
 faithfully obey their leader . . . They have signs and symbols ( ‘alāmāt wa ishārāt ) which
 they all obey to the letter. 7 
 

 
 From their perspective, the French in their description of the battle realized that the
 Mamluks’ reputation was completely unwarranted.
 

 
 Our entrance to Cairo will certainly cause such an uproar in France [General Boyer wrote home] . . . but when the
 people know what kind of enemy we were fighting . . . this campaign will cease to be seen as a miracle . . .
 Those Mamluks, famous among the Egyptians for their bravery, have no idea about military tactics, except how to
 draw blood with their weapons. 8 
 

 
 Describing the battle itself, he says
 

 
 I have never seen soldiers who charge with such valor, depending on nothing but the speed of their horses. They
 were descending like a torrent on our soldiers . . . [who] stood still waiting for them until they were only ten
 feet away and started firing at them and, in a twinkle of the eye, 150 Mamluks fell to the ground and the others
 fled. 9 