
 

 
 To elaborate further on this aspect of the new regime of power this chapter describes how the military
 authorities attempted to turn the fellahin into disciplined, well-trained soldiers, and argues that at the heart
 of the new technique of training and disciplining that the authorities used was a notion of power that, as Michel
 Foucault has described it, “operate[s] . . . without recourse, in principle at least, to excess force or
 violence. It is a power that seems all the less ‘corporal’ in that it is more subtly ‘physical.’” 17 Although Foucault’s work is mostly concerned with French and European
 history, his ideas of power “as something which circulates [which] is never localized here or there,” 18 but as something which is constantly exercised by means of “continuous
 and permanent systems of surveillance” 19 seem particularly useful
 in understanding how Mehmed Ali’s army functioned. This is so partly because, as was shown in the previous
 chapter, this army was partially modeled along French lines and because a lot of the instructors who trained its
 officers and soldiers were French officers who had earlier served in Napoleon’s army and who were familiar with
 the European military scene, a scene that is central to Foucault’s analysis of what he calls modern disciplinary
 mechanisms. 20 More specifically, relying on Foucault’s insightful
 ideas about how modern regimes of power were able to create docile bodies, this chapter describes how Mehmed
 Ali’s military authorities attempted to turn the new conscripts into manageable, docile soldiers whose discipline
 and training were brought about not only by severe corporal punishment or by the “physical effect of terror,” but
 by a calculated, graded, and predictable application of force that made “punishments [function as] a school
 rather than a festival.” 21 
 

 
 Foucault’s ideas have rarely been used to gain insight into nineteenth-century Egyptian history. One important
 exception, though, is Timothy Mitchell’s Colonising Egypt which deals with so many of the
 “reforms” that Egypt witnessed in the nineteenth century, especially in the last third of it. Drawing heavily on
 Foucault’s work and especially on his Discipline and Punish, Mitchell shows how so many of these “reforms”
 were informed by ideas of power, order and progress that worked on physical bodies and
 material space in a minute, exact and meticulous manner, exhibiting what Foucault called disciplinary,
 microphysical power. In addition, and drawing from Derrida’s work on language, signs and the production of
 meaning, Mitchell argues (and here he differs from Foucault) that the system of power and order that Egypt
 witnessed in the last third of the nineteenth century had a metaphysical aspect to it. “It worked [he argues] by
 creating an appearance of order, an appearance of structure as some sort of separate, non-material realm . . .
 [The modern forms of] power now sought to work not only upon the exterior of the body ‘from the inside out’ – but
 by shaping the individual mind.” 22 