
 

 
 This dramatic confrontation of two kinds of warfare, one disciplined and orderly, and the other characterized by
 reliance on the bodily strength and personal courage of the warriors was repeated thirty-three years later in the
 battle of Acre in 1832. This time it was the turn of the Egyptians led by Ibrahim Pasha to reveal signs of the
 new type of warfare: hierarchical subordination, Frederickian discipline, and machine-like order. His adversary
 ‘Abdallah Pasha, Vali of Sidon, had closed himself up in the formidable fortress of Acre that Napoleon himself
 could not take some thirty years earlier. For six months Ibrahim besieged the city and it was constantly showered
 with shells. The Egyptian artillerymen fired literally thousands of shells and it was said that not a single
 house had escaped uninjured. 10 Finally the city could stand the
 siege no longer and when on the night of 26/27 May 1832 the Egyptian engineers and artillerymen effectively
 improved their precision and succeeded in making four breaches in the wall, Ibrahim Pasha summoned his senior
 officers to discuss with them the plan of attack that would take place the following day. At 9:15 in the
 morning 11 three successive shells were to be fired as signals
 ( işaret olmak için ) for the troops to start the attack. The four breaches in the wall were
 assigned to four senior officers to storm with their soldiers: two brigadiers, a colonel, and a major. Each one
 was given a battalion of specially trained men to be under his command. Other units were set aside for
 emergencies and supplies. 12 
 

 
 Finally, Ibrahim had to boost the morale of his men to prepare them for the coming battle.
 For this purpose he wrote a lengthy letter to the soldiers which was printed in the camp press and circulated
 among senior officers to read aloud in front of the soldiers.
 

 
 Because of what we know of your courage and valor in the previous wars that you have witnessed in the Hijaz [he
 told them,] we have selected you from among other soldiers for the duty [of attacking the fortress] of Acre,
 which is now ready and exhausted. We remind and alert you that once you receive orders of attack hold your rifles
 tight in your hands and storm your targets like fire . . . Do not fear the enemy, because if they come with
 swords, then your bayonets will be longer; and if they come with muskets, then the continuous volleys that you
 have been trained to perform over the past eleven years will make every one of you count as ten of the enemy
 soldiers. You have to remember our order: first, storm quickly and forcibly and then strengthen your footholds;
 and, second, listen very carefully to the orders of your commanders and execute them without using your minds in
 understanding what they mean [ wa lā ta‘malū shai’an min ‘aqlikum ]. 13 
 

 
 On the morning of 27 May the attack took place as planned. All the details were executed as previously laid down.
 Ibrahim Pasha was even capable in the midst of the three-hour battle to send 100 cavalrymen to move the wounded
 to the camp to be treated by the army doctors and surgeons who were waiting there. 14 Finally at sunset four notables came out of the castle asking for safe-conduct ( amān ) and when they were granted it ‘Abdallah Pasha gave himself up to Ibrahim Pasha. 15 