
 

 
 The performance of the Mamluks at the battle of Imbāba and that of the Egyptian army at the battle of Acre more
 than thirty years later could hardly be more sharply contrasted. The Mamluk attitude to war and fighting shown in
 the 1798 battle against the French was an example of a method of warfare made obsolete by the new evolving drills
 and technology. al-Jabartī’s and Boyer’s accounts of the battle show clearly how they relied on their personal
 bodily strength; how important cavalry was for their army so that nearly no infantry is mentioned in the accounts
 of the battle; how decisions to charge or retreat were left to the personal initiative of the warriors; how their
 dress in its embroidered caftans and colorful turbans was an expression of their social
 status not of their military ranks; and finally how out-of-date their weapons were, comprising as they did
 swords, pikes, maces and muskets.
 

 
 Ibrahim’s army was a complete contrast to all of this. Instead of relying on cavalry, there was a nearly total
 reliance on infantry. The successful execution of the battle drew mainly on training drills that the soldiers had
 been exercising literally for years prior to the battle. Personal strength, courage and valor, were supplanted by
 strict discipline, blind obedience to superiors and literal implementation of orders. Instead of individual
 initiative, hierarchical subordination became the norm. Instinctive reactions had been replaced by strict
 implementation of a plan that had been previously laid down and meticulously rehearsed. In short, the army
 started to fight as a unit with the soldiers all acting in unison, following commands, orders and signals.
 

 
 In the thirty or so years that separate the battles of Imbāba and Acre something dramatic had taken place. The
 haphazard, instinctive “art” of warfare had given place to the planned, hierarchical “science” of war. The
 warrior had become an extinct species and was replaced by the disciplined, trained soldier. In less than thirty
 years, in fact in a little more than ten years, a “modern” army was built in Egypt, an army that was essentially
 different from that of the Mamluks, different not only in its size or in the method of recruiting its soldiers,
 but also in the manner in which its soldiers were trained and disciplined. Having seen in the last chapter how
 the Egyptians were conscripted from their villages, this chapter attempts to continue with the story, as it were,
 by reviewing the process of training and disciplining that these soldiers were subjected to after being
 conscripted.
 

 
 What follows, however, is not only an attempt to describe the process of training the soldiers and imposing
 discipline on them; this chapter also tries to understand the theoretical and epistemological notions on which
 these new techniques of discipline and order were founded. As was briefly outlined in the previous chapter, the
 gradual elaboration of the tasks of the government bureaucracy that was expressed by the new position of the
 scribe, together with the introduction of the new system of surveillance represented by the tezkere system, indicates that a new system of power was introduced in Egypt, one that was more
 efficient and centralized than that which had been employed earlier by either the Ottoman authorities in Egypt or
 the Mamluk emirs. Paradoxically, it was also one that was, at the same time, more diffuse and impersonal. What
 the scribe’s register and the tezkere represented was a new concept of administrative
 authority which was introduced in Egypt and which was based not only on the systematic
 collection, integration and classification of information about the population but also on the need to monitor
 and supervise its activities. 16 