
 

 
 In Mehmed Ali’s Egypt the different orders of the Pasha and the various laws that were issued during his reign
 also reveal that punishment, when applied in the civilian sector, was often characterized by an excessive, and
 probably unwarranted, use of force. Qānūn al-Filāḥa , for example, which was passed to deal
 with offenses relating mostly to damages to public property, land cultivation and the conduct of public
 employees, stipulated in twenty-six of its fifty-five articles the use of the kurbāj , the
 whip. 73 As in military punishments the idea seems to have been to
 inflict pain on the body of the culprit as well as to humiliate him in public. More importantly, physical
 punishment was also used as a deterrent to others to show in a clear, unambiguous way the fate awaiting those who
 dared to transgress the boundaries of the permissible. The European consuls in Cairo and Alexandria were fond of
 recording such cases of public punishments. In one incident, for example, when the protracted siege of Acre
 caused disquiet in Cairo and rumors started spreading among the civilian population, Mehmed Ali ordered three
 people to be beheaded and their bodies to be hanged on one of the old gates of Cairo with labels on their breasts
 reading “This is the fate which awaits those who cannot govern their tongues.” 74 During the Syrian uprising against Mehmed Ali’s rule in 1834 a man was hanged and left
 hanging for a long time for spreading rumors. 75 
 

 
 In this respect Mehmed Ali and his authorities were not real innovators. The sharī ‘a, as is well known, uses the body of the culprit in a similar way to bring about some kind of
 connection between the crime committed and its appropriate punishment. Theft, for example, is punished by
 amputating the hand. Similarly, the old Ottoman criminal code introduced by Süleyman the Lawgiver (r. 1520–66)
 expanded on the corporal punishments mentioned in the sharī ‘a to include such cases as
 “castration for abducting . . . a woman, girl, or boy . . . and for sodomy; . . . the branding of the forehead
 for procuring and for fraud . . . the branding of the vulva of a woman or girl who voluntarily elopes with a man;
 the slitting of the nose or cutting off of the ear of an army deserter, and . . . the cutting off of the nose of
 a professional procuress.” 76 The intention of all these punishments
 that exhibited itself so spectacularly on the body of the culprit was, in one sense, to make the body of the
 culprit a book to be read, as it were, by the illiterate spectators, urging them to draw connections, however
 vague, between the crime committed and what was believed to be its appropriate punishment.
 

 
 There is, moreover, another logic behind these spectacular punishments, one which could be detected by seeing the
 reaction of the Pasha to the particular incident of a certain local governor who cut off the ears of a man and
 slit his nose after hanging him because he was caught trading in goods monopolized by the Pasha. When Mehmed Ali
 heard about this he was so furious that he expelled this governor from public service. He
 explained that he did so not because of the brutality of the punishment, but because he was not authorized to do
 so by the Pasha in person. 77 Here we come at another logic of these
 “inhumane,” severe corporal punishments. They were seen as acts of retribution exacted by the Sovereign against
 someone who dared to violate his wishes. Again the Old Ottoman Criminal Code offers a good example of how certain
 acts were punishable because they were seen as infringements of the Sultan’s rights, e.g. forging decrees and
 legal certificates and counterfeiting currency. In Egypt Mehmed Ali approved some severe corporal punishments by
 his market inspector because he considered the acts of the merchants a direct attack on his sovereignty. “I have
 extended my authority to lands far and distant, he is reported to have said. “I am feared by the bedouins, by
 highwaymen and by others. Except the rabble of Cairo: they are not deterred by what [my] market inspectors do to
 them. They deserve to have a new market inspector ( muḥtassib ) who will show them no mercy
 and give them no reprieve.” 78 