
 

 
 In the light of the power he wielded and given how his contemporaries understood and literally perceived him, and
 more significantly how his “presence” was felt by his officials and his subjects, it becomes easier to understand
 how a breach of any of his laws were considered an attack on his person. Mehmed Ali’s wish was almost literally
 law. “So completely have [Egypt’s] interests been identified with those of its ruler that to speak of the
 government, commerce, policy, etc. of Egypt is to speak of the character of Mohammed Ali, who may justly apply to
 himself the noted words of an equally despotic potentate: ‘L’Egypte, c’est moi .’” 90 
 

 
 Underlying all the examples of “spectacular” punishment mentioned above is an attempt to restore the sovereignty
 of the Pasha which had been momentarily injured by the criminal’s act. These public punishments, therefore, were
 

 
 carried out in such a way as to give a spectacle not of measure, but of imbalance and excess; in this liturgy of
 punishment, there must be an emphatic affirmation of power and its intrinsic superiority . . . The ceremony of
 punishment, then, is an exercise of “terror” . . . [which intends to make everyone] aware, through the body of
 the criminal, of the unrestrained presence of the sovereign. 91 
 

 
 It is this necessity of proving the presence of the Pasha’s body and of making the populace aware of his
 omnipotent, penetrating gaze that is at issue in these “liturgies of punishment.”
 

 
 The representation of the legal code
 

 
 The spectacular use of the culprit’s body as a deterrent or as a site of retribution, however, had its own
 limitations. After all, the body of the culprit can sustain only a limited amount of pain that may or may not be
 an effective deterrent to others from committing a similar offense. Furthermore, for this kind of deterrence to
 work the spectacle had to be massive and the audience great, hence the public hangings in big squares and
 important gathering places in urban centers. This, again, had its limitations, since only a limited number of
 people could be present at any one moment to watch the spectacle. And if the severity and “enchanting” nature of
 the spectacle of the gallows was intended to be part of a gradually expanding repertoire of stories to be
 circulated by the spectators to those who were absent, then more abstract means were soon to be discovered that
 would convey, in a more efficient way, the idea of the inevitability of the punishment and its link to the crime
 being committed.
 

 
 Furthermore, the use of the sovereign’s body had its limitations, too. For inasmuch as Mehmed Ali wanted to
 convey the idea that he, like God, could be at more than one place at the same time, he was, after all, only too
 human. Moreover, if the Pasha, by constantly roaming around looking over his officials’ shoulders, hoped to
 produce in them the feeling that he was perpetually present, then more subtle ways were soon to be discovered
 which, it was hoped, would substitute for his body, represent him in his absence, and so perpetuate the feeling
 of his ever-powerful presence.