
 

 
 As said above this shift from a system of enforcing order by resorting to a brutal and excessive use of force to
 a more subtle, distant and impersonal one should not be read as a move to a more enlightened, reformed
 application of the law. Rather, it testifies to what Foucault calls in his Discipline and
 Punish a shift from spectacular to representational and finally to disciplinary punishment. What informed
 this shift was not the humane, rational and progressive ideals of the Enlightenment as much as the need to make
 the power of the sovereign (in this case Mehmed Ali) tolerable and acceptable to his subjects. For “power is
 tolerable only on condition that it mask a substantial part of itself.” 65 Hence this shift to what appears as a humane execution of the law was in fact a shift to a
 more cunning, cynical and hidden kind of power. To examine how this shift in the idea of power and its different
 respresentions was brought about and, more specifically, to see how power was instrumental in imposing discipline
 on the new conscripts, various examples follow of the way in which punishment was carried out in the military and
 in society at large. This is important since, as will be argued below, it was this shift in the meaning and
 manifestation of power that made the training of the new conscripts possible.
 

 
 The spectacle of corporal punishment
 

 
 At first glance physical, corporal punishment appears to have been a common feature of both civilian and military
 laws: the use of the culprit’s body as the site of punishment was as common in military camps as it was outside
 them. In the army the frequent and extensive use of the bastinado and the whip was one such means of executing
 corporal punishment. For example, two soldiers were given twenty lashes each for quarreling
 with each other during the march of their battalion. 66 When a
 certain soldier was proven guilty of losing a water bucket, he was given fifty lashes in front of his
 battalion. 67 Another soldier was given 150 lashes also in front of
 his battalion for stealing some apricots from the local market. 68 
 As a matter of principle the physical punishment of soldiers was supposed to take place in front of their
 battalions in order for the spectacle to be watched by their colleagues. 69 
 

 
 In this respect there was nothing unique or strange in such corporal and spectacular “liturgies of power” in
 Mehmed Ali’s army. Indeed, a lot of army and naval laws passed in Europe in the seventeenth and early eighteenth
 centuries were characterized by this emphasis on brutal force in the application of punishment. The 1652 Articles
 of War, for example, which were applied to the British navy and which formed the basis of all subsequent naval
 laws, “sound exceedingly fierce in the reading, for of the thirty-nine articles one-third carry the death penalty
 without alternative, and in another third of them death looms as a possibility.” 70 In the first half of the eighteenth century the regimental courts martial of the British
 army often meted out “such unmerciful corporal punishments which have made even Death more desirable.” 71 The Russian army in the first half of the nineteenth century employed
 corporal punishments on such a scale that “desertions, deaths, immorality, evasion and fear of service [were
 often attributed to these] ‘despotic punishments.’” 72 