
 

 
 The first incident is recounted by Henry Salt, the British Consul-General in the 1820s, and concerns an officer,
 a certain Kurd Ali, who, after being taken prisoner by his soldiers because of a delay in the distribution of
 their pay, talked them into ending their mutiny and giving themselves up since “it could be of no service but
 only involve them in rebellion and certain ruin.” After he had freed himself he “seized two of the ringleaders,
 cut off their heads and put some thirty of the rest in prison.” The officer under his command subsequently
 released them from prison telling them that those who chose “to serve the Pasha and rest in obedience” might stay
 and return to their duties; as for those who did not want to stay they would be free to leave the camp. “On this
 a part of the thirty prepared to leave the camp, when an order was given to fire upon them and they were for the
 most part slaughtered.” 59 
 

 
 Admittedly, the brutality used to punish the soldiers who attempted to leave the camp in this case might be due
 to the fact that they had mutinied and had gone so far as to hold their commanding officer
 prisoner. This case is significant, however, for it shows that the regime of internment that was based on the
 actual or implicit threat of the use of force was not effective: it proved inadequate to deter the soldiers from
 passing out of the gates of the camp. What was aimed for was a system that would have the very idea of internment
 and of the impossibility of desertion imprinted on the minds of the soldiers so as to prevent them from escaping
 in the first place and to spare the authorities having recourse to this kind of brutal force.
 

 
 The second incident took place five years later; the authorities responded to it by hitting upon a simple
 technique that proved to offer precisely that solution: the roll-call. Immediately after the fall of Acre in May
 1832 the Egyptian soldiers we saw at the beginning of this chapter as an organized, well-trained and highly
 disciplined body of troops who enabled Ibrahim to accomplish what Napoleon failed to do thirty years earlier,
 these very same soldiers went on the rampage looting the city, attacking its inhabitants, and destroying their
 property. All semblance of order and discipline disappeared in the havoc that followed and a large number of
 soldiers seized the opportunity to desert the army altogether. Ahmed Bey, the Colonel of the 10th Regiment, who
 was appointed in charge of the fortress of Acre after its fall, wrote to Ibrahim Pasha complaining of the
 situation, and instead of requesting the dispatch of bedouin troops to catch the deserters, he suggested a
 simple, but effective solution: a roll-call ( tadad ), he said, should be taken twice a day;
 those found missing would be recorded as firar , i.e. as deserters, and when found a day or
 more later the penalty for desertion would be inflicted on them. 60 
 

 
 The contrast between the brutality and, arguably, the excessive use of force that the act of the officer in the
 first case exhibited, on the one hand, and the more impersonal, distant and subtle means of control that the
 officer in the second case suggested, on the other, should not be read as a movement towards a more humane,
 “enlightened” application of the law. Rather, it suggests that the idea of the law itself had changed and with it
 a new conception of discipline and how to enforce it was brought into play. The best example of this new
 technique of imposing order and discipline that targeted the minds rather than the bodies of the soldiers and
 that attempted to imprint on them the idea that they were constantly under surveillance was, again, the tezkere: it was declared that once interned, the soldier could not leave the camp unless he had a
 stamped certificate issued by his commanding officer specifying the nature of the leave and
 its duration. 61 Local Syrian workers who were performing jobs for
 the Egyptian authorities there were also ordered to carry such tezkeres “so that if any one
 of them does something [wrong], he can be caught.” 62 Earlier in
 1829 when it was feared that conscripts might escape to Cairo in the hope of finding refuge there, an order was
 given asking all arrivals in the city to have such stamped tezkeres on them. 63 Even high-ranking officers were ordered to carry stamped certificates all
 the time. 64 