
 

 
 Surveillance
 

 
 The isolation and segregation that the soldiers were subjected to in the barracks were enforced by a strict
 regime of surveillance. In that respect bedouins continued to play a decisive role in guarding the recruits after
 delivering them to their training camps. But as happened in the case of the village shaykhs
 reviewed in the previous chapter, relying on the bedouins was not without its problems. The ‘Abbādī and Hawwāra
 tribesmen, for example, who guarded Ismail Pasha’s troops that accompanied him in his ill-fated Sudan
 campaign, 47 occasionally deserted and fled back to their
 provinces. 48 Moreover, the different tribes were in constant
 rivalry with one another and when they thought that they were not treated equally by the authorities, they
 rebelled and attacked the countryside, the very thing the government had sought to prevent by employing
 them. 49 Even during the march of the army to Syria, a time when the
 whole military machinery was supposed to be on maximum alert and discipline, the mounted bedouins appointed to
 safeguard the rear of the army attacked and looted the villagers who had come out to watch the army . 50 More importantly, some tribesmen were in the habit of giving refuge to
 deserters rather than handing them over to the authorities. 51 In
 response, Art. 15 of Qānūn al-Filāḥa passed in 1830 stipulated that
 

 
 In the event of a fellah hiding himself among the bedouins, wearing their clothes, and being discovered among
 them afterward . . . the tribesman who hides him will be conscripted into the military service if he is a young
 man ( shabb ), and if an old man ( ikhtiyār ), he will be sent to jail
 (Liman) for six months. 52 
 

 
 Ironically, having been employed by the government to help create a tightly supervised and controlled army, the
 bedouins often proved to be a menace for the authorities who frequently had to employ the army itself against
 various tribes to bring them under control. 53 Relying on the
 baltaci ortas (sappers’ regiments) to undertake the same task, namely guarding the soldiers
 in their camps, 54 was not very effective since they, as much as
 other regiments, were rampant with desertion. 55 
 

 
 The appointment of bedouin guards to patrol training camps, military schools and barracks was obviously
 ineffective, or at least not without its own problems, for it raised the difficult and seemingly paradoxical
 question of who was to guard the guards. 56 
 Gradually the authorities came to realize that what was needed was a system of control and surveillance that
 would be similar to that reached to circumvent the role of the village shaykhs reviewed in the last chapter.
 Rather than depending on sentry guards and bedouin patrols catching deserters, the aim was to imprint on the
 minds of the soldiers the idea of internment in the first place and to subject them to a regime of surveillance
 that would make obedience and discipline seem natural and be habitually practiced. That system, it was hoped,
 would target the minds of the recruits and not only their bodies; a system that would, in the words of an
 eighteenth-century French military thinker, bind them “by the chain of their own ideas” rather than “constrain
 them with iron chains.” 57 A couple of incidents can be used to
 illustrate Mehmed Ali’s authorities’ gradual shift to a system of control that was subtle and less visible, one
 that did not depend on the spectacle of punishment but on the idea of
 order, a system that could be described as “governing at a distance.” 58 