
 

 
 Internment
 

 
 When Mehmed Ali told his officials that they had to convince the fellahin that serving in the army was
 essentially different from corvée 28 he was probably addressing a
 common perception among the potential conscripts and their families, one that equated the two institutions and
 saw little difference between them. During the early years of the army the peasants’
 knowledge about it was patchy, and given the similar manner in which government officials grabbed the men from
 their villages, it is doubtful that the men or their families initially saw much difference between conscription
 and corvée. The authorities therefore felt that they had to impress on the new conscripts that what they were
 about to experience was to be different from corvée or anything else they might have experienced so far. The way
 the fellah dealt with his time, his physical environment, and above all, his own body was to be radically
 transformed. As will be shown below, the new military life would impose timetables, medical checks and strict
 surveillance systems the net effect of which was intended to impress upon the new soldier the formidable barrier
 that would distinguish his new life in the army from his previous civilian life.
 

 
 The starting point of imposing this new lifestyle on the new recruits was to isolate them from their habitual
 environments and to create as big a rift as possible between their new modes of living and their lives before
 being recruited. One way of doing this was to prevent the new soldiers from engaging in any agricultural
 activities, either alone or in collaboration with others. 29 More
 importantly, limits were placed on time spent with their children and families. So long as the soldiers were in
 Egypt their wives and children were allowed to follow them from camp to camp and to build shanty-towns close to
 the training camp, living as best as they could by sharing the meager rations of the soldiers. An estimated
 22,000 women and children, for example, are supposed to have lived on the outskirts of the Hankah camp near Abū
 Za‘bal. 30 Ultimately, however, and mainly for health reasons, this
 practice was stopped, the shanty-towns appended to the camps were dismantled, and strict regulations were
 enforced preventing the soldiers from having access to their families. 31 
 

 
 As severe as this measure might have appeared to the soldiers it was still not considered enough for the new
 military psychology to penetrate into the soldiers’ minds and for the training and indoctrination process to have
 their full impact. The soldiers were therefore isolated from outside influences by being interned in clearly
 segregated training camps. Like most internment policies applied in European countries,
 housing the soldiers in barracks, training the new recruits in clearly demarcated training camps, and teaching
 the young cadets in the new military schools were all examples of a general policy of the state to demarcate as
 clearly as possible the military and isolate it from the larger society. 32 The new “army was no longer to be thought of as an occasional body, brought together for
 seasonal campaigns. It was to be an organized force, created out of men compelled to live permanently together as
 a distinct community, continuously under training even when not at war.” 33 In other words, isolating the recruits in barracks, training camps and military schools was
 the first essential step towards the creation of the professional, disciplined soldier.