
 

 
 Contrast this with the manner in which the Pasha exhibited his own body when he attempted to
 deal with the uprising that erupted against his rule in Syria in 1834, specifically in the manner in which he
 disembarked in Jaffa:
 

 
 The “Marina” street in Jaffa was lined with the finest troops of the army, and a large band of music was placed
 in the center. At one o’clock two beautiful corvettes arrived and commenced firing a salute, which was instantly
 returned by the whole fleet and batteries. At four o’clock the yards were manned and with the roar of cannon from
 the fleet and forts His Highness Mehmet Ali Pasha disembarked.
 

 
 Then comes the description of the appearance of the Pasha in person, which for a moment appears rather
 disappointing and anticlimactic.
 

 
 Having mounted his splendid horse, he saluted everyone, bowing gracefully to the crowd on either side. This
 conduct greatly surprised the people, who, when their previous pashas condescended to walk abroad, had been
 obliged to bend the knee, and bow the head, scarcely daring to raise their eyes, until the August presence had
 passed by. 85 
 

 
 As disappointing as the conclusion of this impressive spectacle might appear, Mehmed Ali knew only too well that
 he could afford this anticlimactic appearance on center stage for there is enough evidence that suggests that
 even during his own time an aura of sanctity and mystique had already been formed around his own body, his name
 and his dwelling place. It was enough for an unarmed foreign traveler when he was close to being attacked by a
 local mob to utter the word “Pasha” and “Firman” for the local governor (who was leading the mob) to grow “very
 civil and humble.” 86 Furthermore, by insisting on doing everything
 himself and on overseeing all the details of the government Mehmed Ali managed to convey the impression that his
 residence was the real center of power in his realm. As early as 1817 it was reported that “everything now is
 settled there [i.e. in the Citadel], The Pashaw [sic] himself and the Kiya-Bey [i.e. Kâhya
 Bey , Mehmed Ali’s deputy] – a much devoted adherent – looking into everything themselves with a scrupulous
 attention that baffles intrigues and [which] renders all opposition to their orders dangerous in the
 extreme.” 87 
 

 
 Moreover, the Pasha was never content to sit in the Citadel managing affairs from afar. Never completely
 satisfied with the reports that he was receiving regularly, he constantly went on inspection tours to investigate
 things for himself. His visits were rarely announced in advance, giving rise to a feeling among his officials
 that the Pasha was omnipresent and all-knowing. Just like the stories woven around his
 physical person which we read in the Introduction, those unannounced visits helped to usher in his presence and
 to mark the areas he visited “like some wolf or tiger spreading his scent through his territory.” 88 In 1826, for example, he went in one of his typical rages, convincing
 himself that his governors and officials were cheating him. Feeling that he was understood by no one, he issued a
 general decree addressed to all of his provincial governors saying that he decided to tour the entire country and
 gather all those governors whom he considered to be lax and inefficient and would dig a hole in the middle of a
 wide field and bury them alive with his own hands for everybody to see. 89 