
 

 
 There is more than a desire to establish law and order in this statement; what we see is a hint of revenge
 depicted here. The Pasha is saying that he takes these offenses very seriously because he considers them an
 attack on his sovereign person. It is his “momentarily injured sovereignty” that had to be avenged and the public
 punishment was seen as a way of reconstituting this sovereignty. It does so “by manifesting [that sovereignty] at
 its most spectacular . . . [O]ver and above the crime that has placed the sovereign in contempt [public
 punishment] deploys before all eyes an invincible force. Its aim is not to re-establish a balance [as much] as to
 bring into play, as its extreme point, the dissymmetry between the subject who has dared to violate the law and
 the all-powerful sovereign who displays his strength.” 79 
 

 
 In other words, what informed the logic of the public punishment and its spectacle was not only the need to
 terrify the spectators into submission, nor the need to bring about an association of crime and punishment but
 also to remind them of the gulf that separates the vulnerable, expendable body of the culprit from the
 sanctified, central corpus of the Sovereign. This is why Foucault said that one should see public, spectacular
 punishments as making up one side of the equation of rituals of power; the other is made up of rituals in which
 the Sovereign spectacularly portrays his body in its magnificent glory in front of his subjects, e.g.
 coronations, submission of rebellious subjects, entering conquered cities, etc. 80 Mehmed Ali was aware of the power that these rituals had and, as was
 shown in the manner he received European visitors, he used his own body as the focal point of these rituals to
 express the juridical aspect of his political power. That his body was the law and hence was
 central and essential for the maintenance of order in the realm, and, in contrast, that the body of the criminal
 was to be used to remind people not only of its redundancy and its expendability, but also of the central
 importance of Mehmed Ali’s body, is what lies behind a lot of the spectacular punishments that were carried out
 in the streets and squares of Cairo. This is best expressed by contrasting the following examples of how the
 Pasha staged these two diametrically opposed rituals of power: staging his own body and exhibiting the body of
 his nemesis – the criminal.
 

 
 Those “rabble of Cairo,” the merchants who were cheating in weights or prices, 81 were punished in a manner that was hoped would not only set an example for others who might
 be thinking of doing the same but also remind the onlookers of the ever-presence of the Pasha. A counterfeiter of
 coins was hanged from Bāb Zuweila, one of the gates of medieval Cairo, with a coin hanging from his nose. The
 market inspector slit the noses of some butchers and hanged pieces of meat from them as a punishment for selling
 meat at a price higher than those fixed by the government. The kunāfa merchants cheating in
 weight and prices were punished by being forced to sit on their hot pans while they were still on fire. 82 That what informed these kinds of punishment was not only an attempt to
 link crime to its appropriate punishment but also to bring about the idea of the expendability of the body of the
 criminal and to remind onlookers of the huge gap that separated the body of the criminal from that of the Pasha
 is further illustrated by the following two examples. When the extent of maiming to avoid conscription became
 known and when it was reported that it was the wives and mothers of the potential conscripts who were assisting
 them to maim themselves, Mehmed Ali ordered these women to be hanged at village entrances “so as to be an example
 to others.” 83 Similarly, in an effort to stop the 1824 rebellion
 from spreading further Mehmed Ali wrote to the governor of Isna in Upper Egypt ordering him to hang some of the
 elderly or disabled villagers at the entrances of their villages to be a deterrent to others. The choice of the
 elderly and disabled was explained by saying that “they were useless and could not perform any task.” 84 