
 

 
 Besides insuring that the training and education of the new recruits were to be conducted with minimum
 disruption, this process of internment had other purposes. One was an attempt to reduce the possibility of
 conflict with the civilian population, especially those residing in urban centers. This might have been one of
 the reasons behind choosing Aswan as the site for the first training camp, because of its distance from
 Cairo. 34 It was outside Egypt, however, that the need for interning
 the soldiers was most acutely felt. Problems arising from the uncontrolled encounter with the civilian population
 were paramount when the army was on the march or when residing in conquered territories. For example, some of the
 problems the authorities had with the early army that was sent to Arabia arose out of the soldiers’ mingling with
 the local population and the ensuing complaints that they were attacking the pilgrims and stealing their
 animals. 35 After the creation of the new army this disruptive
 mingling with the local population continued to be a problem especially when the army was outside Egypt, notably
 in Crete, Cyprus and Syria, and the records abound with complaints by civilians against the unruly, impetuous
 behavior of the soldiers. In Cyprus, for example, various reports were sent to Mehmed Ali in Egypt informing him
 of the unruly conduct of his troops. In one case Ismail Bey, the commander of the Egyptian forces there, wrote
 that a number of soldiers had stolen 20 kises (purses) 36 and then, out of fear of getting arrested, had taken refuge in the French consulate. Another
 group of soldiers attacked the residence of the French consul (who was visiting Sidon at the time) and cut
 down the trees in his garden. 37 In Syria, the
 situation was not much different. During and after the siege of Acre the authorities had enormous difficulty in
 controlling the soldiers who often went to the nearby markets and attacked the merchants, 38 robbed the villagers, 39 got
 drunk and caused havoc, 40 borrowed money from the merchants and did
 not pay it back, 41 and even attempted to sell military supplies to
 the locals. 42 
 

 
 These problems and others could be avoided, it was believed, if the soldiers were strictly interned in their
 barracks. Besides holding in check the unruly behavior of the soldiers, thereby helping to calm the civilian
 population, the barracks helped the authorities to keep a tighter control over the soldiers and assisted in
 preventing desertions. In addition, they insured that training and education were to be conducted with minimum
 disruption. Internment thus seems to have fulfilled several purposes at once and the need for such buildings was
 therefore felt from an early time. 43 However, these new
 institutions, like their earlier counterparts in Europe, were slow to develop; 44 even by the end of Mehmed Ali’s rule not all soldiers were housed in them. Sometimes
 barracks were specially constructed for the soldiers; 45 more often,
 and to cut down on expenses, an old building would be converted to fit the amy’s requirements. 46 Yet there was a determined effort to keep the soldiers in barracks and to
 subject them to a tight system of surveillance and a new technique of training.