
 

 
 In addition to the above-mentioned cases those who were sent to the Liman of Alexandria included robbers and
 highwaymen, 102 those peasants who dared to uproot their cotton
 fields and plant them with maize instead, 103 those who engaged in
 counterfeiting coins, 104 merchants who sold rat poison (which was
 banned because conscripts were using it to blind themselves to evade conscription), 105 soldiers who maimed themselves to evade military service, 106 and those who were accomplices in murder cases. 107 
 

 
 The Liman of Alexandria thus became an internment house, a huge prison, housing a variety of people who were
 banished from their habitual locales. At one point the Arsenal had between five and six thousand people. 108 Most of those imprisoned there were interned for some offense that they
 had committed and were mostly kept there by the explicit wish of the Pasha: an amnesty issued by Mehmed Ali was
 all that was needed to free the detainees regardless of the crime that they might have committed or the danger
 that they were supposed to have posed to society. 109 Furthermore,
 the conditions of their imprisonment were far from healthy; at one time an investigation had to be undertaken to
 determine why a large number of the prisoners were dying. 110 Those
 interned in the Liman, moreover, had little control over their bodies and the authorities could use them for
 whatever purpose they saw fit. In 1843 the Pasha issued the following order to the Deputy of the Shūrā
 Al-Mu‘āwana:
 

 
 Owing to the arrival, lately, of a number of men from Russia who intend to undertake some experiments related to
 the plague, which would entail clothing some healthy people with clothes of those who were
 infected . . . and since it is certain that no one would approve of doing this experiment [voluntarily], it has
 been decided that some convicts in the Liman be chosen for this experiment which is beneficial to
 mankind. 111 
 

 
 The Liman of Alexandria came to represent the internment policy of the civilian authorities in a very physical
 way. It was a prison that was interning all kinds of people that the authorities had declared “outlaws.” This
 undifferentiated internment of “alienated” beings is partially due to the fact that a lot of those interned were
 so interned not because they violated a given law but because the sovereign, Mehmed Ali, decreed so after their
 cases were brought in front of him. More importantly, however, the generic law that functioned as the original
 penal code, namely Qānūn al-Filāḥa , was itself an undifferentiated, ungraded, non-codified
 legal text that retained a lot of the features characterizing old civilian laws. The frequent use of the whip and
 the bastinado, as well as the type of imprisonment explained above, points to the fact that the main aim of such
 law and its appendices was to make the Pasha’s “presence” visible precisely by highlighting the “absence” of
 those who dared to violate his wish as represented in the law. In this case the Liman, like Mount Fayzuğlu, was a
 place of banishment and exile, not a place of correction and rehabilitation. Rather than bringing about a close
 association of crime and punishment in the minds of the populace, civilian laws as exemplified by this one were
 aimed at terrifying the people into submission by resorting to the image of the prison looming above society and
 reminding them of the fate of those who violated the law. So impressive was the idea of that prison in the
 Egyptians’ mentality that the word “Liman,” which in Turkish means simply a port or harbor, came to be synonymous
 with “prison.” It still retains this meaning in Egyptian Arabic down to the present time. 112 