
 

 
 One of the clearest and most characteristic ways of marking the soldiers in the army was, of course, the uniform.
 Significantly, uniforms of soldiers not only differed from those of officers, but the law was detailed enough to
 specify which set of officers’ uniform was to be worn at which hour of the day. 132 Furthermore, the headpiece that the soldiers had to put on during daytime had to be
 different from that used when going to bed. The corporal had to check this himself before taking the evening
 count. 133 Different kinds of soldiers had also to put on different
 uniforms. Those soldiers who were ordered to undertake special duties in the marketplace or in neighboring cities
 had to put on a colorful outfit to mark them off and they were not to put on their normal uniforms except on
 Fridays and during general inspection; 134 soldiers imprisoned in
 the jail ( kolluk ) had to wear gaiters ( tozluk ) with different-colored
 legs. 135 
 

 
 “Fixing the soldiers” in their places takes a graphic form in the barracks as well as in the camps. Different
 laws and regulations were passed specifying in detail the position of every battalion and company in relation to
 each other, as well as the positions of every soldier within that of his company. Arts. 32–49 of Kanun-u Seferiye , for example, specifies the formation in which the tents of the entire regiment
 should be set up. The distance that separates each tent from the one next to it is given as well as the distance
 that separates the tents of one battalion from those of another. It goes on to specify the number of soldiers in
 each tent and goes so far as to specify the positions that these soldiers should adopt
 during their sleep. 136 Even the shabby encampments of the women
 adjoining those of their husbands at the outskirts of the army camps proper had to be regulated. In a special
 health report by Clot Bey suggesting measures to stop the spread of contagious diseases, it was ordered that the
 lodgings of these women “should be lined up in two straight parallel rows with a wide road separating them. The
 lodgings should also be raised above the ground by a certain, unified height.” 137 
 

 
 Inside the barracks every soldier and piece of equipment had to be accounted for. Its exact location was
 specified in the law and a daily check was conducted to ensure that these regulations were carefully enforced.
 

 
 The kit ( jarabandiyya ) of every soldier has to be firmly closed and fastened in such a way
 that would make it possible to carry it . . . It has to be placed on the first shelf above his bed. The soldiers’
 cloaks ( burnus ) have to be folded according to the regulations and be put on the same shelf
 as well. Their clothes also have to be folded with their lining facing outward and they should be placed under
 the jarabandiyya . The fezzes ( ṭarābīsh ) have to be placed on the upper
 shelf. The rifles have to have their triggers released . . . The swords have to be hung from their belts on nails
 specified for this purpose . . . Shoes have to be cleaned and placed on the upper shelf with their soles facing
 upward. 138 