
 

 
 This shift to more “representational” types of control and surveillance was not unique to the Egyptian army. In
 Europe of the eighteenth century this gradual realization that punishment “should strike the soul rather than the
 body” 119 is best shown in the debates surrounding British naval
 discipline that followed the mutinies of 1797. Representative of the new voices of skepticism are the works of
 Philip Patton who wrote a number of pamphlets criticizing, among other things, the regime of punishment and the
 system of discipline applied in the Royal Navy. “Whatever may be the influence of [fear],” he wrote, “it has been
 found insufficient to produce concord . . . and it can never procure unanimity in arduous situations which
 integrity and the social virtues tend directly to establish in all cases whatever.” 120 
 

 
 In Egypt, the change in the aims and purposes of punishment and of the meaning of discipline in general is
 probably best represented by two things, the decline in the number of public executions and the developments in
 the new connotations of the word siyaset . Dr. Bowring, who visited Egypt in the late 1830s,
 said that as a result of the more efficient police surveillance in Cairo and in Egypt in general the number of
 public executions had been brought down to a trickle. “I have little to do now,” the public executioner told
 him. 121 Of equal significance, the word siyaset started to acquire new connotations. Originally, and in its Ottoman legal context, the word
 denoted punishment in its most general sense. “As a technical term, however, it generally means either execution or severe corporal punishment or both.” 122 
 Siyasetnames, therefore, originally did not mean more than a criminal code which “chiefly prescribed siyaset , i.e. capital punishment or severe corporal punishment (cutting off a hand, the male organ,
 or the nose, branding the forehead), and, in a few cases, exposition to public scorn, cutting off the beard,
 etc.” 123 
 

 
 Gradually, however, and in its specific Egyptian usages in the first half of the nineteenth century, the word
 came to acquire its original Arabic connotation of managing or governing. Edward Lane who also visited Egypt in
 the 1830s gives the following meaning to the word in his Lexicon : “Management, rule,
 government, or governance.” 124 The Siyasetname 
 of 1837 125 is, therefore, not a criminal code like earlier
 siyasetnames but a truly “political” law, managing and regulating the affairs of the
 government. This shift in the meaning of the word siyaset reflects a shift that had taken place in the meaning
 and nature of politics and power. Rather than relying on naked force the way the Mamluks used to do, for example,
 Mehmed Ali’s government was more and more relying on other more representational tools that manipulated the minds
 as well as the bodies of the subjects.
 

 
 Disciplinary power
 

 
 Disciplining and training soldiers, however, could not be brought about only by passing laws, even if these laws
 differed in nature from earlier ones in that they no longer aimed at gaining retribution and intended instead to
 make obedience more habitual by drawing a closer association between crime and punishment. To increase the
 effectiveness of guards, sentry officers and patrol soldiers the legal codes designed for the army and reviewed
 so far were supplemented by other techniques of keeping order, imposing discipline and exhibiting power. These
 new techniques represent a new kind of power, what Foucault calls “disciplinary power,” which, it was hoped,
 would not only instill the feeling of the perpetual presence of surveillant and watchful guards but also would
 adjust the body of the soldier so finely that its movements would be reduced to stable, standardized, comparable,
 and combinable units.