
 

 
 This attempt to control the presences of the soldiers and their equipment is further shown in the regulations
 ordering the march of the army from one camp to the other or, more importantly, to battle. It was during such
 marches that the danger of desertion was at its highest, probably because of the belief among soldiers that since
 the army was on the move, they were no longer as vigilantly watched as when the army was in its barracks or on
 the camps. To counter this feeling a strict surveillance regime was enforced. The position of every soldier and
 officer had to be known during the march and the army ammunition, horses and equipment had to be accounted for.
 At the end of the day a report had to be written recording in detail the events of the day ( vukuat ). A typical “ yol curnal ” (lit.: “Report of the Road”) would begin with
 the dates of the start and end of the march. Then it would give details of the number of transport animals,
 usually camels, that the army used and how many of these were hired from the bedouins and how many owned by the
 government. The report would then give details about who was heading the march and which
 battalion functioned as the vanguard. Then there would be specific details of how the march itself conformed to
 the regulations.
 

 
 The distance separating every battalion from the one following it was between fifteen and twenty steps according
 to the quality of the road. The soldiers mounted their horses with their boots on. Every hour of marching was
 followed according to the regulations with a half hour of rest. After resting, they marched
 along with their horses, putting on their marching shoes and hanging their boots as well as their swords on the
 saddles.
 

 
 At the end of the day a count would be taken giving the number and description of broken or lost equipment as
 well as the number of desertions. 139 So meticulous was the control
 of the soldiers during the march that even going to the latrine was specified in the law: Art. 432 of Qānūn al-Dākhiliyya stipulated that any soldier or corporal wanting to go to the latrine during the
 march should give his rifle to one of his colleagues and march quickly to the latrine and be back with no delay,
 otherwise he should be imprisoned in the military jail. 140 
 

 
 Fixing the soldiers was not only done in reference to the place they occupied, but also to the time they spent in
 performing whatever acts were demanded from them. The time of the soldiers was effectively dictated by timetables
 and schedules that aimed not only at regulating their movements and presences, but also at adjusting one
 soldier’s time to that of others “in such a way that the maximum quantity of forces may be extracted from each
 and combined with the optimum result.” 141 The infantry training
 manuals probably show this new conception of time most clearly. Art. 33 of the Ta‘līm al-Nafar
 wal-Bulok stated that the forward step was to be measured from the ankle of one foot to that of the other and
 it should measure 24 inches; the speed of the soldier should be 76 such steps per minute. 142 