
 

 
 This stipulation is strengthened by other articles that together would imprint upon the minds of the soldiers in
 the school the fact that they were indeed in an enclosed place, segregated from the outside world by fences and
 gates as well as by a legal code that created the “ideas” of outside and inside, presences and absences. Art. 12,
 for example, punished those soldiers who argued with the locals with eight days’ imprisonment under surveillance,
 i.e. “house arrest” ( göz habsi ). Arts. 13–16 punished soldiers who were not present at the
 various roll-calls taken in the school with imprisonment as well as extra physical exercise. Furthermore, Art. 33
 sentenced soldiers who absented themselves for more than twenty-four hours to eight days’ imprisonment in the
 jail as well as deducting their pay according to the number of days they were absent. 116 
 

 
 The second law, Qānūn al-Dākhiliyya , passed in 1834 as a generic law to organize the
 military camps, 117 showed a much more refined conception of
 imprisonment. Instead of lumping together all offenders in one place for long periods, this law specified that
 there were to be three kinds of imprisonment. Art. 361 stipulated that, firstly, there was “light house arrest”
 ( ḥabs ai-‘ayn al-khafīf ) which should not exceed two months and in which the wrongdoer was
 kept aside in his own chamber and not allowed to be visited by anyone. Secondly, there was “heavy house arrest”
 ( ḥabs al-‘ayn al-thaqīl ) which was limited to one month and in which the offender was to be
 kept aside in his own chamber with a sentry watching him and in which he was not allowed to speak to anyone.
 Finally, there was imprisonment in the camp jail, the ḥabskhāna , which should not exceed
 fifteen days. 118 
 

 
 It is clear that a change has taken place in the meaning and intention of punishment where it was no longer seen
 as a means of exacting vengeance from the offender, or a way by which the sovereign attempted to restore his
 momentarily injured sovereignty; rather, it became a way of making sure that no crime went unpunished. This new
 conception of punishment, represented in the specific example of imprisonment and internment
 in general, reflected a change in the meaning of discipline and the ways to bring it about. To create a body of
 disciplined troops, the authorities initially relied on the use of brutal force so as to terrify the soldiers
 into submission. This was not without its effects and it undoubtedly succeeded in keeping a lot of the soldiers
 in their places. Reliance on physical force alone, however, could not ensure that the techniques of discipline
 had sunk deep into the minds of the soldiers. At a certain stage the effectiveness of the brutal use of force was
 questioned and other abstract, non-physical modes of imposing discipline were brought into play. As said above,
 this was a process that, it was believed, would insure that the idea of discipline had been internalized by the
 soldiers and that boundaries and barriers had been erected in the minds of people and not only around their
 bodies.