
 

 
 What prompted this shift to disciplinary power was the desire to turn the “rabble” of Egypt
 into reliable, dependable body of troops. This was made possible not only through the vigilant and untiring
 efforts of people like Ibrahim and Süleyman Pashas; it was the result of the combined activities of the drill
 masters who attempted to execute the blueprints that these top-ranking officers had issued; of the physicians who
 subjected the bodies of the troops to a minute, careful scrutiny; of the quartermasters who issued calculated
 rations of food to the men to sustain their health and to prevent them from living off the lands that they had
 conquered; and finally of the legal experts who manned the military courts that tried deviations from military
 codes in exact, predictable manner.
 

 
 In other words, what informed this new disciplinary power was a new science of government that was based on new
 disciplines that differentiated the healthy from the sick, the productive from the idle, the normal from the
 abnormal. In fact, the very notions of health, productivity and normality were by-products of these disciplines.
 To see how this new regime of power manifested itself in the army, with the result of properly training and
 disciplining the soldiers, let us follow their daily lives in the barracks and the camps as far as can be
 detected from the blueprints, the training manuals and the regulations that were set down by the authorities.
 

 
 Numbering and labeling
 

 
 For this strict regime of control to succeed the soldiers had first to be “fixed” in positions assigned to them.
 This was done through a number of techniques. First the soldiers were each given a number by which they were
 identified. It was not enough simply to register the names and physical descriptions of the soldiers in every
 regiment to be able to control them; each soldier came to be identified by a number he was given, i.e. the place
 he occupied in the bigger unit. The army payrolls were also numbered accordingly and when these registers were
 not properly prepared, it proved impossible to know how much every soldier was to be paid as well as how often to
 issue him a new uniform. 126 Low-ranking officers were also numbered
 in a similar fashion. When a woman merchant complained that a certain officer did not repay her money he had
 previously borrowed from her, it was not enough to refer to the officer in question by name; but she also had to
 give his number in his military/administrative unit: the first captain of the 4th Battalion of the 10th
 Regiment. 127 Similarly, identifying the dead
 had to be done by referring to the specific regiment and even battalion of the dead soldier; his name was not
 enough for that purpose. 128 
 

 
 This procedure of numbering the soldiers was reinforced by a finer one of labeling and registering. Art. 239 of
 Qānūn al-Dākhiliyya specified that each soldier had to have his name clearly written in big
 letters above the headboard of his bed. 129 (Naval officers had to
 be identified in a similar fashion: the cabin beds had to be marked with the names of their occupants.) 130 Furthermore, Art. 179 of the same Qānūn authorized
 the sergeant-major to order the quartermaster to “hang the required papers on the door of every chamber of the
 barracks giving the names and numbers of the soldiers in every battalion and company lodged therein” as well as
 the names and locations of their commanding officers. 131 