
 

 
 Military codes
 

 
 In contrast to Qānūn al-Filāḥa the various military codes passed to regulate different
 aspects of life in the army attempted to draw a closer link between crime and punishment. To ensure blind
 obedience to its regulations, Mehmed Ali’s army could not rely on the blurred definition of crime or the
 haphazard application of punishment that characterized a number of laws passed to regulate
 aspects of civilian life. A number of laws, therefore, were passed each dealing with a specific aspect of
 military life and each giving detailed definitions of various offenses and the exact corresponding punishments.
 In order to see in detail how these laws differed from those mentioned above specifically with respect to their
 views of punishment, two of them are reviewed below.
 

 
 The first such law is a law governing an infantry school; it was drafted in November 1834, approved by Mehmed
 Ali, and sent for implementation to Hurşid Bey, Deputy Director of the War Department. 113 An initial glance at this law shows clearly how different it is from the
 earlier Qānūn al-Filāḥa , for example. The first thing that strikes one when reading this law
 is that it was tabulated with the main divisions being those of the type of offender: students and NCOs, officers
 and teachers. For every one of these divisions the law is further subdivided into three divisions: the offense
 ( cürm ve zenub ), its corresponding punishment ( tedibat ), and the
 officer who is to execute the punishment ( müeddib ). The mere form the law now takes, the
 table, strongly leads the mind to the correspondence between crime and punishment. The law is no longer a
 collection of articles loosely connected to each other whose only order is the chronology of their promulgation;
 rather, the very form it takes shows the gradual realization that the effectiveness of the punishment stems not
 from its spectacular severity but from its inevitability; “it is the certainty of being punished and not the
 horrifying spectacle of public punishment that must discourage crime.” 114 Furthermore, there is a conspicuous absence of bodily punishment and a reliance instead on
 imprisonment. Out of the eighty-nine articles of the law, only four articles resorted to the whip as a
 punishment. These were reserved for the punishment of desertion and sodomy. 115 
 

 
 More characteristic of the different nature of the military laws as represented by this one is the new meaning of
 punishment that it embodies and which is, again, best exemplified by the regime of internment. It has to be
 remembered in the first place that the area of jurisdiction of this law is a military school, i.e. a place of
 internment in its own right. The segregation of this school must undoubtedly have been
 brought about by appointing guards and patrol soldiers to catch any deserters. However, more effective was the
 stipulation mentioned above that any soldier who succeeded in deserting, on being caught, would be sentenced to
 fifteen days’ imprisonment as well as being given 200 lashes of the whip.