
 

 
 Time thus ceased to be the amount of temporal space a certain act “naturally” occupied but became a specific
 allotment, measured in minutes and seconds, in which that act had to be performed. Moreover, these acts were to
 be conducted not only within these new boundaries, but also regularly, i.e. according to the schedule imposed
 from above and specifying how frequent a certain act was to be performed. For example, soldiers were ordered to
 wash their clothes every Thursday. 143 Imprisoned soldiers in the barracks were ordered to shave their heads once a week. 144 Corporals and privates had to change their uniforms every
 Friday. 145 During the other days of the week, i.e. Saturdays
 through Wednesdays, the soldiers were to do their military exercises once a day in winter and twice a day during
 the months of May to August. Target practice was to start on 20 April and end on 20 September of each
 year. 146 Bed sheets had to be changed once every twenty days during
 summer, and every thirty days during winter. 147 Besides regulating
 the life of the soldier in the barracks these manuals also made sure that the men were not to be left idle in the
 barracks or in the camp: their daily lives were constantly filled with numerous often trivial tasks which lacked
 a strictly military aspect, but which were required as a deliberate attempt to keep the men constantly engaged in
 useful tasks. 148 
 

 
 “Presences” and “absences”
 

 
 After interning the soldiers in barracks it was not enough to control their movements; a need was felt to have a
 close inspection and analysis of their stillness. A strict regime was established creating presences and checking
 them. Similarly, absences had to be known, proven and accounted for. The most powerful tool in controlling men,
 their activities and their bodies appeared to be no more than a piece of paper: the roll-call and the inventory
 list. It was through these tables that the authorities came to observe the presences of the soldiers and their
 absences; it was according to the inventory list that equipment was accounted for and distributed; and it was by
 the drawing up of hospital journals ( yevmiyyet ) that patients were distributed in hospitals,
 segregated from each other and their diseases systematically classified.
 

 
 Kanun-u Seferiye stated that three roll-calls were to be conducted each day: the first half
 an hour after dawn, the second at noon and the third half an hour after sunset. 149 Such roll-calls usually gave specific details accounting for every soldier, officer and
 member of the administrative personnel of the regiment. It would specify the number of soldiers sent to hospitals, or to specific destinations, the dead, wounded, and most importantly, deserters
 ( nakis , lit. deficient). 150 
 

 
 Similarly, Qānūn al-Dākhiliyya stipulated that the basçavus 
 (sergeant-major) was to compile a detailed register giving details about all events happening in his company.
 Most importantly, he should register the names of the soldiers sent to hospital, those who were discharged
 therefrom, the dead, and the POWs. 151 The daily journals ( yevmiyyet ) of the hospitals show clearly that the aim was not simply to intern patients there; the
 classification of various diseases, the segregation of the patients according to the type of disease they were
 inflicted by, and the calculated use of supplies, e.g. medicine, food, clothes, etc., are all a regular feature
 of these journals. The process of writing them was so routinized that they eventually were handed in to the
 various hospitals in a pre-printed table with the respective doctors simply filling in the blanks. 152 