
 

 
 Qānūn al-Filāḥa
 

 
 Although imprisonment is certainly less harsh and less spectacular than the scaffold, the way it was stipulated
 in Qānūn al-Filāḥa shows that it still retained conceptions of revenge
 against the culprit rather than of using him as a deterrent to stop further crimes. The idea was not to
 rehabilitate him so that he could be reintroduced into society as a better citizen, but to deprive him of his
 freedom and control over his own body since he dared to violate one of the Sovereign’s laws. Rather than meaning
 reform and cohabitation, imprisonment increasingly took the form of exile and banishment. The Qānūn al-Filāḥa . mentions two such places of exile: Mount Fayzuğlu in the Sudan and the Arsenal Works
 in Alexandria, the infamous Liman. The offender was sent to one of these two places of exile as punishment for
 any number of offenses. Art. 18, for example, stipulates that any fellah or village shaykh who attempted or
 succeeded in burning a jurn (i.e. storehouse of crops) would have to pay for the cost of the
 damage he caused; if he could not, however, he would be sent to Fayzuğlu for one year in the case of his burning
 a jurn ; in the case of his burning a house, on the other hand, he would be sent to the Liman
 for the same period. 97 If this offense was committed for the
 purpose of evading the land tax, Art. 20 stipulated that the offender be sent to the Liman for life. Art. 27
 sentenced those fellahin or village shaykhs who participated in the uprising of a village against the authority
 of the ma’mūr or the ḥākim by sending the chief instigator ( akbar al-mufsidīn ) to Fayzuğlu for five years, the other instigators to the Liman for the same
 period, and any other fellahs or shaykhs who might have participated in the revolt would each be punished with
 400 stripes of the kurbāj . 98 Art. 56 punished
 any official who stole public money by sending him to Fayzuğlu for a period of two to five years to be tied in
 iron chains, if the amount of his theft exceeded 5,000 piasters; if it was less than that amount, he would be
 sent to the same place for a period ranging between six months and two years; all this was to be done after the
 amount of money stolen was extracted from him. 99 
 

 
 Furthermore, the first article of Lā’iḥat al-Jusūr (Ordinance of the Dykes) passed in Rajab
 1258 (1842) and which functioned as an appendix to the original Qānūn stipulated that if
 negligence was proven by a village shaykh or qāi’mmaqām in repairing a dyke and if damage
 had reached the neighboring villages, those responsible would be sent to the Liman for a period ranging between
 six months and two years if the damage was partial; if it was total, they would be sentenced to a period ranging
 between two and three years. 100 The clearest example of the fact
 that revenge, more than reform, was what was sought is to be found in Art. 83 of Qānūn
 al-Muntakhabāt published in 1258 (1843) which stipulated that any “public employee who, on receiving an
 order, pretends not to have understood it and writes an answer showing this . . . [and] if
 he repeats the offense for a fifth time, he will be sent to Abū Qīr [i.e. the Liman] for six months.” 101 