
 

 
 Above all, this was the role that the Law played, namely to “represent” the sovereign in his absence. The state
 of “law and order” that so characterizes Mehmed Ali’s reign and which was a feature constantly-referred to by his
 admirers who said, for example, how “a Christian’s head is as safe on his shoulders at Cairo as it is in London,
 and his purse safer in his pocket,” 92 and thanked him “for the
 perfect security with which the traveler may . . . visit the interesting ruins of Egypt,” 93 was a direct result of the deliberate use of law to represent the power
 of the sovereign, except that this power was now couched in juridico-legal terms. 94 This shift from the “rituals” of public punishments to the “routines”
 of the legal code 95 was intended to overcome the limitations
 mentioned above that circumscribed the intimidating, deterrent effects that the spectacle of the gallows had.
 What was targeted now was the minds of the populace and not their “gazes.” The goal was to “represent” the Pasha
 in his absence and to use the law as an ever-potent symbol expressing his wish and desire. In this more subtle
 manifestation of power “the ‘mind’ [is used] as a surface of inscription for power . . .; the submission of
 bodies [is brought about] through the control of ideas; [and] the analysis of representations as a principle in a
 politics of bodies [becomes] much more effective than the ritual anatomy of torture and execution.” 96 
 

 
 By defining offenses, fixing scales of punishments, identifying who in the bureaucratic-legal hierarchy is to
 execute the punishment, the legal code also functions as one of the ever-potent tools of power. By creating a
 mental association of crime and punishment, the legal code instills in the minds of people the feeling of the
 inevitability of punishment and its link to the crime being performed. Laws, civilian or military, owing to their
 abstract codification of crimes and their corresponding punishments, and to their association of the possible
 benefits of crime with the greater disadvantages of punishment, function as an effective deterrent to crime, and
 thus as a powerful means to impose discipline.
 

 
 More than in other fields in the wider society, it was the army and the military institution in general that
 exhibited a clearer understanding of this new conception of power and it is by comparing the systems of
 punishment in the military and the civilian sectors that one can understand the logic that informed these new
 techniques of power. To see how the army differed from society at large in this respect, a number of civilian
 laws are compared below to a couple of military laws that were passed to regulate life in the military schools
 and camps. The aim of this comparison is to see how imprisonment, in particular, as the extreme case of
 punishment by internment, was used as a means of imposing discipline and how the military laws in general were
 different from civilian ones in stressing indirect, representational techniques of exhibiting power.