
 

 
 When Ibrahim Pasha reminded his soldiers of their duties before storming the fortress of Acre in May 1832, he
 significantly urged them to listen to their commanders’ orders and execute them without thinking. 175 For the unit of the army to function as a unit, be it a company,
 battalion, or regiment, the combined forces of the soldiers had to be carefully measured and meticulously
 directed. This, in turn, necessitated the formulation of a system whereby the soldiers would be trained to obey
 orders in a mechanical way, without pausing to think of their meaning. During battle seconds count and a delay in
 minutes can dramatically change the outcome. Soldiers, therefore, were trained to be attentive to orders
 delivered by their officers in the form of signals “whose efficacity rests on brevity and clarity; the order does
 not need to be explained or formulated.” 176 Ta‘līm
 al-Nafar , therefore, stipulated that the command shout should be divided into two parts; the first was the
 “attention” order, and the second was the “execution” order. The attention order had to be loud, clear and long,
 especially in its last syllable. The execution order, on the other hand, had to be brisk and short. 177 The question was not whether the order was logical or sensible, but if
 it was clear and audible.
 

 
 The orders were, furthermore, directed at manipulating very specific movements and gestures of the soldiers. The
 bravery and strength of the soldiers are done away with, and instead a minute and very fine adjustment of the
 soldiers’ bodies was conducted aiming at aggregating the isolated movements of the soldiers into one, massive
 force, that of the battalion. To be able to add up movements necessitates, in the first place, some kind of
 standardization, for only similar things can be added up. The process of training the new soldiers, therefore,
 started with an attempt to regularize and standardize their appearance.
 

 
 Since only a minority of the new soldiers are by nature ( fī muqtaḍa al-khilqa ) similar to
 each other in terms of the size of their shoulders, chests or thighs, the officer training them, before giving
 them their weapons and teaching them how to stand attentively ( hazir
 dur ), must to do his best to rectify these defects and amend them ( iṣlāḥ al-quṣūr wa
 taṣlīḥahu ). 178 
 

 
 Similarly, soldiers, when asked to stand still, had to be told how they were to conduct this apparently easy task
 in a uniform, standard manner.
 

 
 The ankles of every soldier must be close to each other and be aligned on a straight line . . . and the angle
 between the foot and that line should be acute . . . The body must be as straight as a post. The shoulders must
 be held back and the elbows must touch his body. The palms must be turned outward a little, and the little finger
 must be placed along the plaited cord ( qītān ) of the pocket of the trousers. The head must
 be held upright with no fatigue in such a way that the chin be close to the neck, but without covering it.
 The eyes have to be looking ahead at a distance of approximately fifteen feet . 179 