
 

 
 There is one main complaint to be made about Mitchell’s description of how modern disciplinary techniques are
 supposed to work. This has to do with the confusion and helplessness that the observing subject typically (in
 Mitchell’s analysis) experiences when confronted by these modern techniques of power which leaves him no room for
 resistance, accommodation or negotiation. It is true that the picture presented in this chapter appears to corroborate this view. But this is so because most of the sources used here were
 intentionally selected to present the military authorities’ viewpoint and their desires regarding how the soldier
 was supposed to behave. So was the language used, a language of precision, discipline and order. Together, the
 sources and the language employed in them represent an ideal world, a world in which every action is controlled,
 every object accounted for and every person thoroughly manipulated.
 

 
 Yet it is doubtful that this is how the soldiers viewed reality and what was happening to them. This doubt is not
 based only on the fact that what was produced above were training manuals, blueprints, programs that often
 reflected reality in a neat, abstract manner, and represented the authorities’ wish of what this reality ought to
 be rather than how it actually was. For Mitchell’s point is precisely to argue that the blueprints are not
 representations of mere wishes of the authorities about how best to restructure society: they lay claim to
 certain knowledges that are inherently powerful and do in fact have the potential of restructuring society and
 the way we look at it. Thus, the yevmiyyet (the daily report) does already have a slot for the number of deserters every day, the training manual does already acknowledge that the bodies of the conscripts are not uniform, the military law does
 already realize that soldiers might have sex with each other. The power of these devices,
 however, lies precisely in their ability to predict inconsistencies, to detect gaps, to acknowledge deviancy. In
 addition, this inherent power emmanates from the fact that such devices have an already given answer to the
 problems they address, whereby deserters are disciplined, law-breakers are reformed, and sodomites are cured.
 Ultimately the power that these different textual devices have is based on an assumption that “the real is
 programmable, that it is a domain subject to certain determinants, rules, norms and
 processes that can be acted upon and improved by the authorities.” 186 
 

 
 The doubt remains, however, as to whether the soldiers did read the new military machine as such, as a machine,
 as an apparatus that “appeared somehow greater than the sum of its parts, as though it were a structure with an
 existence independent of the men who composed it.” 187 There is no
 doubt that the new conscripts felt this new machine encroach on their lives, snatching them
 from their homes, fields and villages, subjecting them to tiring, exhausting drills, ordering them to change
 their daily routines and affecting their modes of talking, sleeping, eating, etc. What is less certain, however,
 is whether they were conditioned to read reality and perceive it in terms of the distinction
 between the material and the conceptual realms that is central in Mitchell’s argument. In other words, although
 the material presented in this chapter gives the impression that the authorities managed not only to capture the
 bodies of the young men but also to control their minds and to “work from the inside out,” there is considerable
 doubt that the young conscripts did in fact see reality in that “enframed” way.