
 

 
 In short, every person and piece of equipment had to be accounted for and this was best done by checking the
 thing itself against the place it occupied in the list. These lists had to be kept constantly updated to account
 for all the changes that might have occurred. Deserters leaving their equipment behind had their belongings
 collected by their corporals and delivered to the sergeant-majors. 153 On being informed that any soldier had had his name removed from the registers because of
 his desertion, death or being sent to the Liman of Alexandria, the sergeant-major had to collect his belongings
 immediately within forty-eight hours and send them to the government together with his registers. 154 
 

 
 It was through the processes reviewed so far that it proved possible to impose order on the new recruits and to
 turn the peasants into disciplined soldiers. Passing laws with a strict punishment regime was not sufficient for
 the soldiers to internalize the different army regulations that they were asked to obey. For this to succeed
 these soldiers had to be interned and isolated from outside influences. Then they had to be “fixed” in their
 positions through such devices as the timetable and the weekly schedule.
 

 
 Inspection and training
 

 
 This process of creating presences was intended, among other things, to subject the bodies of the soldiers to
 minute inspection by the army doctors so as to identify those who were capable of bearing arms and discharge the
 rest. Concern with the health and welfare of the new conscripts came about through the need to monitor the health
 of thousands of men cramped together in barracks, schools and camps with the obvious threats to hygiene that this
 situation entails. Specific instructions were given concerning the sanitation of the soldiers’ lodgings: “The
 barracks has to be built on dry, high ground. It has to be well ventilated . . . and its windows have to be
 facing each other so that the air can pass through.” 155 When these
 regulations failed, as indeed they had when, for example, a big rise in the cases of syphilis ( frengi ) and scabies ( cereb ) was recorded among the soldiers, Clot Bey, in
 another specially printed manual, ordered army doctors to inspect their men, soldiers, NCOs and officers to
 isolate those afflicted with either of these two diseases. This check-up was to be conducted once every
 week. 156 Similar inspections were conducted after battles to
 identify the wounded and treat them appropriately. 157 The disabled
 ( sakat ) were set aside to be “dealt with according to the regulations.” 158 Other times, they were isolated in special localities in the desert if
 it was proven that they could not perform any useful job. 159 The
 sick were also identified and further subdivided into those inflicted with contagious diseases ( müşevveş ) and those who were not. 160 Furthermore, those
 inflicted with contagious diseases were treated differently after the kind of disease and the manner of its
 spreading were identified. Strict quarantines were imposed on places infected with the plague, be it a
 city, 161 a hospital, 162 or even a specific location within a city. 163 Furthermore, and for sanitation purposes, bodies were not to be buried in the old
 cemeteries which were sometimes deemed dangerously close to the cities and, instead, special remote locations
 were specified for them. 164 