
 

 
 What we are witnessing here is more than simply an attempt to maintain a healthy sanitary environment; this is
 the first manifestation of a new kind of power that exhibited itself on the body of the conscript, not in the
 spectacular way of his being beaten in front of his battalion, but in a more subtle, diffuse and cynical way.
 This is what Foucault calls “disciplinary power,” disciplinary not only because it attempts to manage the body
 (of the citizen and the conscript alike), but also in the sense that it created disciplines, discourses, that
 took the body of the individual to be its primary concern, e.g. medicine, psychology, criminology, etc. Out of
 the need to train the new conscripts and to subject them to the new techniques of discipline as will be shown
 below, the body of the conscript became the object, not only of manipulation, surveillance and control, but also
 of analysis and study. In order to have a healthy body of troops capable of bearing arms and of performing the
 taxing tasks set out in the training drills, let alone in battle, Clot Bey, as chief physician of the army had to
 give specific instructions based on “scientific” data on the amount and quality of food the soldiers should be
 fed, the distance they could reasonably be expected to march every day and the kind of clothing that had to be
 handed to them to protect them from the hot sun of the summer as well as the cold winter. 165 
 

 
 The body thus became the subject of power, not in the manner it was used as its spectacular exhibit but by being
 the domain on which discourses and practices of power were tried out, refined and adjusted so as to render it,
 the body, docile, manageable and curable. Before seeing how this was specifically done with regard to the body of
 the conscript as detailed in the training manual let us illustrate the various shifts in the manner by which
 power exhibited itself and which have been reviewed so far, by following how a specific body, that of the
 sodomite, was dealt with in the different regimes of power reviewed so far.
 

 
 In 1824 Mehmed Bey, the colonel of one of the first six regiments of Mehmed Ali’s new army,
 wrote to the Pasha telling him he had a problem with those who committed sodomy: should he treat them as
 adulterers (and thus apply the punishment for adultery on them) or should he apply a different law? Mehmed Ali
 responded by saying that the colonel had to consult the military regulations and apply what they said. 166 The problem was that by that time the military regulations and laws that
 had been translated and published in the Būlāq Press made no mention of sodomy or how to deal with it. What
 Mehmed Bey had at his disposal was either to apply the sharī ‘a with its punishment of either
 death or ta‘zīr , i.e. chastisement, 167 or the
 Old Ottoman Criminal Code which stipulated in its different versions either chastisement or castration. 168 The shift from this kind of punishment in which the body of the sodomite
 was made to bear the sign of his transgression to another kind of punishment in which he was punished in a manner
 that was supposed to represent the idea of law, of transgression and “outlawedness” is
 expressed in the law regulating the Infantry School referred to above. 169 Although homosexual offenses were dealt with in this law in a physical manner using the
 whip as the main kind of punishment, the law, nevertheless, by making distinctions between students, NCOs,
 officers and teachers gives the impression of the gradation of punishment, its predictability and its
 appropriateness to the crime being punished. This, as said above, was also brought about through the very form
 the law assumed, the table, helping to draw connections between crime and punishment. It was gradation and
 predictability, this connection between crime and punishment, that was aimed for and which the legal code was
 supposed to express and represent.