
 

 
 All the movements of the soldiers, however small, however minute, were punctuated by the command shouts and
 performed according to their rhythms. “The single shout, although constituting one command, has to be divided
 into sections so that the soldiers can grasp the complexity of the movement and act in unison. Every single
 action should be performed within half a second.” These actions were to be performed immediately on hearing the
 shouts issued by the officer. 180 For example, on hearing the second
 word of the command “ sağa bak ” (Eyes Right!), “the soldier has to turn his head in small
 uniform movements to the right until the inner corner of his left eye is aligned with the buttons of his jacket,
 in such a way that the eyes of all the soldiers standing in the front row should be looking in the same direction
 (‘ ala tartīb wāḥid ). 181 
 

 
 It was in such a manner that the soldiers were trained. Every action, however complex, was broken down into its
 most basic constituent parts. The soldiers were then trained in how to perform these simple movements in a
 standard, unified way, and in unison with each other. Only after they had been thoroughly trained in these small
 units of movement were they allowed to move to more and more complex ones and within larger and larger
 formations. 182 
 

 
 Training manuals thus appear to be one of the most important tools by which discipline was imposed on the
 soldiers. Laws, however detailed and specific, were still too general for the purpose at hand. The specific laws
 reviewed in this chapter and dealing with particular aspects of army life were, admittedly,
 aiming at some degree of standardization among the soldiery. The aim of these laws was stated specifically to be
 

 
 to prevent absolutely and completely the officers and soldiers from acting according to their own choice and
 accord ( biḥasb ikhtiyārihim wa hawāhim ). [The aim is to reach such a level of uniformity]
 that would allow any soldier on being moved from one unit to another or on being promoted to a higher rank to
 still be able to recognize the same system and not encounter what he is not accustomed to ( la
 uṣādif . . . mā ughayyir ma’lūfiyatahu ) . . . The basis of all military strength is order and complete
 obedience ( al-ni ām
 wa kamāl al-ingiyād ). 183 
 

 
 Training manuals, nevertheless, were the tools by which this goal was finally reached. By specifying the detailed
 manner in which the most basic acts were to be performed, these texts brought about a much stricter way of
 disciplining the soldiers. Through observing and controlling the most simple act (the glance) of the soldiers,
 and by manipulating their actions, breaking them down to their constituent units, and then ordering them to be
 executed according to the signals issued by the officers in the form of the command shouts, the body of the
 soldier was finally reduced to performing a function similar to that of a cog in a machine. The soldier ceased to
 be an individual, an integral human being and instead he came to occupy a unified slot, a standard position that
 did not, in fact, should not differ from that of any other soldier. All were soldiers in a row, numbers within a
 line, units that could be manipulated, moved around and articulated with each other. It was the spectacle that
 was aimed for, not the spectacle of the gallows, though, but the spectacle of order, regularity and intervals.
 The training manual, by fragmenting the soldiers and moving them around in the mobile space it created, was the
 most effective way of imposing discipline, exhibiting power and displaying order. The modern army became order,
 nizam, par excellence .