
 

 
 Ultimately, the problem lies in the mutually contradictory assumptions about the nature of the observing subject
 implied by the notion of “enframing.” On the one hand, his body and mind are subject to the meticulous, minute
 manipulation of disciplinary power that leaves nothing unaffected by it including the very self of this observing
 subject. 188 And at the same time, he is assumed to still retain the
 autonomy and “insight” that enables him to read through these devices some kind of inherent order, concealed
 plan, subterranean structure. These two kinds of subjects do not go hand in hand. “A subject on whom power
 operates through the incessant reading of textual inscriptions is sharply distinct from one whose mind and body
 themselves are nothing other than products of the workings of power.” 189 
 

 
 From the material presented so far we cannot tell if in fact the conscripts in Mehmed Ali’s army acted in the way
 they were supposed to act. So far it is impossible to tell if they were able to read through, as Mitchell would
 assume, the various textual devices that were presented above (the training manual, the military law) the
 structure of power that lies underneath them. For us to see how the soldiers reacted to this new system we have
 to wait for the following two chapters to come as close as possible to the every-day workings of the army.
 

 
 Conclusion
 

 
 This chapter attempted to explain in detail how the young recruits (and others who were not so young, for some of
 the recruits were over forty) who were conscripted into Mehmed Ali’s army were disciplined and trained, and
 eventually transformed into a reliable, well-trained, efficient body of troops. By quoting from the training
 manuals, the regulations and the military laws that this army habitually used this chapter aimed to see how those
 early recruits who had no prior knowledge or experience in military life were transformed into a well-trained and
 modern army that secured spectacular victories for Ibrahim Pasha and his father.
 

 
 Yet on another level, this chapter also attempted to argue that this remarkable achievement was not the result of
 the insightful, progressive ideas of Mehmed Ali and his advisors, nor was it the outcome of the ceaseless,
 untiring efforts of Ibrahim Pasha and his generals. Rather, it appears to have been the product of a discursive
 shift that had taken place in the nature and meaning of power, a shift that was witnessed in society at large but
 which was most apparently manifest in the military and one that, it was argued following Foucault, displayed
 itself first in a spectacular, then a representative and, finally, a disciplinary manner.
 

 
 Finally this chapter raised some doubtful remarks regarding the precise manner in which this disciplinary power
 worked itself out on the body of the conscripts. Specifically, what was raised was the question of the
 reliability of the various textual devices of power that the army used in allowing us to come to an understanding
 of the reality of that army. To know how the army attempted to apply the plans and blueprints set down for it, to
 understand how the men in the army felt and perceived the new disciplinary power over their bodies, we have to
 rely on sources other than those that this chapter has employed. The following two chapters attempt to do so.