
 

 
 An “enframed” or an “inscribed” nizam? 
 

 
 The training manual thus helped to bring about this regime of disciplinary power that Foucault refers to in his
 Discipline and Punish. In the manual the body of the conscript is subjected to a meticulous ordering that
 manipulated every movement he made, no matter how small or inconsequential. Moreover, it also helped create this
 metaphysical effect that Mitchell refers to in his argument about enframing, for the different military laws,
 regulations and training manuals reviewed above aimed at organizing the daily lives of the
 troops, their activities and their drills in such a way that it offered a spectacle of order, regularity and
 intervals. This, as Mitchell rightly says, had the effect of conjuring up the ideas of order itself, of
 discipline, the law and reason.
 

 
 At first glance, then (and since this chapter has been dealing with spectacles, first glances are important), the
 image of Mehmed Ali’s army that comes across from reading the manuals that were used to train its officers and
 soldiers appears to be enframed as understood by Mitchell. To recall, the act of enframing involves two separate,
 but closely related processes. First, there is the action of the Foucauldian microphysical power that inscribes,
 arranges, calculates, manipulates and adjusts different spheres of modern life. This we have seen working itself
 out in detail in the training manual, exhibiting itself on the body of the conscript, manipulating his glance,
 controlling his stride, arranging his stance and adjusting his movements to fit with that of other soldiers.
 Second, there is the non-material, metaphysical aspect of this power that allows these acts of violence to be
 hidden and to present in their place the orderly, impressive image of the soldiers marching in unison, attacking
 together at the sound of a trumpet or a command shout from their commanding officer. This image, argues Mitchell,
 appears as a picture in an exhibition, having the effect of conjuring up the ideas of order and discipline.
 

 
 While acknowledging the seductive appeal of viewing Mehmed Ali’s army, or Egypt at large for that matter, as an
 enframed reality, as a picture in an exhibition, I prefer to refer to what the Pasha and his men did in Egypt as
 a process of “inscribing” reality rather than “enframing.” This is not simply a linguistic ploy (if linguistic
 ploys could ever be simple); rather, it is a preference for a term that, while acknowledging the violence
 involved in discursive techniques of ordering and managing modern societies, still assumes an agent behind these
 techniques.
 

 
 “Enframing,” as used by Mitchell, assumes only one subject: that of the observer before whom the world appears as
 a picture in an exhibition, a picture whose “order occurs as the relationship between observer and picture,
 appearing and experienced in terms of the relationship between the picture and the plan or meaning it
 represents.” 184 The power of the “enframing” effect of modern
 techniques of power, Mitchell argues, lies precisely in presenting the world as if it stands for some plan, a
 deeper, hidden meaning. Every time the observer tries to see beyond the picture, beyond the
 exhibition, he/she encounters even more representations and the “real world beyond the gates [of the exhibition]
 turn[s] out to be rather like an extension of the exhibition.” 185 