
 

 
 The shift to the final form of power, disciplinary power, can be detected by looking at the various letters and
 injunctions that Clot Bey wrote to address the issue of homosexuality in military schools. His main concern was
 with syphilis which, he said, was getting out of control since there was no law that forced prostitutes to be
 medically examined, 170 prompting men “to replace them [i.e. the
 afflicted women] with a greater vice that is against human nature, by which we mean those
 young boys who, on the pretext of [public] dancing, commit what is improper [even] to be said.” 171 What was of concern to Clot Bey, besides the affront to decency and
 public morals, was the cost to the government resulting from treating the syphilitic young boys, as well as the
 time they had to spend away from their lessons to be treated in the Qaṣr al-‘Ainī Military Hospital. 172 Eventually in the 1860s pederasty was made punishable by six months’
 imprisonment, and it required the collaboration of the health, educational and legal professions to detect,
 prove, control and ultimately punish acts of homosexuality and specifically of pederasty. 173 
 

 
 In dealing with homosexual violations in the army the authorities never resorted to the spectacular way of
 castrating the offender that was suggested in the Old Ottoman Criminal Code. To deal with these and other
 violations the authorities had recourse to a different kind of power, and to a different set of tools by which
 they attempted to control and manipulate the body of the conscript in a subtle, more cynical manner. By viewing
 transgressors not as individuals who were to be spectacularly punished, banned or exiled from public space but as
 subjects to be studied, understood and ultimately cured, the authorities managed to transform the body of the
 offender from one on which punishment was exhibited to one that became the domain of scholarly, professional
 concern, and around which disciplines and discourses were produced. It was this regime of power that was at work
 in transforming the body of the young recruits into a well-trained, disciplined body of troops. Let us continue
 to review this process and pick up where we left off, with the soldiers being subjected to the medical
 examinations of Clot Bey and his authorities.
 

 
 After being interned and fixed in their barracks, their daily schedules punctuated with specific, routine tasks,
 and their bodies examined closely for signs of disease, the new recruits were ready for training. The imprecise
 distribution of population in villages and towns was now eliminated; the diffuse circulation and the uncontrolled
 disappearance of the men from the barracks were properly dealt with. What remained to be
 done was to mold the now docile bodies of the soldiers into one unified body of disciplined troops. This was the
 task of training proper, a process that could best be grasped by analyzing the training manuals. 174 
 

 

 
 Plate 4 “Victory
 at Konia” 