
 

 
 Throughout the month of December 1832 Ibrahim was busy preparing his men for battle and training them on a site
 to the north of Konia where he chose to confront the Ottomans. Every soldier, it was reported, had become
 acquainted with the exact movements he was expected to perform when the actual fighting started, 1 and the battle was said to have been exercised twenty times before it
 actually took place. 2 Detailed reports were regularly received
 about enemy movements 3 and precise information was gathered about
 the terrain. 4 
 

 
 Finally on the morning of Friday 21 December 1832, the two armies met on the plain just north of the city of
 Konia in the central Anatolian plateau. The Ottoman forces numbered 53,000 men and were
 headed by the Sadrazam Raşid Pasha himself. Ibrahim’s army was composed of less than a third of that number,
 15,000 men. 5 These were composed of five infantry
 regiments, 6 four cavalry regiments, 7 and the Guardia Regiment 8 under the command of
 Selim Bey “the Mamluk,” and were assisted by six cannon batteries containing altogether thirty-six guns under the
 command of Selim Sati‘ Bey. 9 Precise orders were issued to all
 commanders as to their exact duties during the battle giving such detailed orders as where they were supposed to
 stand in relation to their respective regiments and units, as well as how to receive orders from the
 Commander-in-Chief, Ibrahim Pasha. 10 
 

 
 Ibrahim arranged his forces in a way that clearly showed his talents as a commander. He put his forces in three
 rows dissected by the road leading from Konia to Istanbul. On the first row he placed two infantry regiments led
 jointly by Selim Bey Manastirlı. Five hundred feet behind this row he placed two other infantry regiments under
 the command of Süleyman Bey. The Guardia Regiment under the command of Selim Bey was placed three hundred feet
 behind that second line together with two cavalry brigades. Behind this third row he placed the irregular bedouin
 forces. As for the artillery, he placed three batteries along the first row, two with the second row and one
 behind the Guardia Regiment. In addition to this arrangement, and to safeguard against any attempt by the enemy
 to encircle his forces, only six of the eight battalions in the second infantry line were deployed in column,
 while the remaining two battalions were put one at each flank, and were ordered to assume the square formation.
 

 
 At noon the battle started with the Ottomans firing cannon balls at the Egyptian side. Heavy
 fog, however, prevented the Ottomans from knowing the exact location of their enemy and thus this artillery
 bombardment was not very effective. Ibrahim Pasha, nevertheless, ordered the second row to come closer to the
 first one to avoid the cannon balls that were falling behind it and which were causing some casualties.
 

 
 Then the Egyptian artillery started firing continuous volleys from both left and right and with minute precision
 in aiming until the earth was shaking on all sides . . . When the fog lifted for a brief time, Ibrahim saw that
 during their advance the Ottomans had created a gap of 1,000 feet between their cavalry and infantry forces and
 effectively isolated the left wing [i.e. the cavalry] from the army at large. Ibrahim immediately seized the
 opportunity and decided to lead a force himself of his cavalry and Guardia Regiments. The Guardia Regiment
 followed by the cavalry regiments . . . stormed northward, fiercely attacked the left wing of the Ottomans. It
 was assisted by the artillery batteries which showered their volleys on the Ottomans so strongly and accurately
 that the Ottomans’ positions were badly shaken causing them to retreat northward in disarray. Thus the left wing
 of the Ottoman army was defeated. When [the Sadrazam] Raşid Pasha realized that his left wing had been hit by
 confusion and defeat, he attempted to gather its forces and encourage its men to fight back. He went there in
 person but lost his way in the fog before reaching his men and was captured by some Egyptian soldiers who . . .
 disarmed him and led him prisoner to [Ibrahim Pasha,] the son of Mehmed Ali the Great . . . Nevertheless, there
 was still some hope for the Ottoman commander who took charge after the collapse of the centre and left wing of
 the army. He saw that to succeed, he had to use his right wing . . . to encircle the left flank of the Egyptian
 army . . . The Egyptians faced this attack with strength and fortitude. Immediately [after the beginning of the
 Ottoman counter-attack] an artillery battery from the second row rushed forward to assist the left-wing battery
 in the front row. The combined artillery forces, both in the centre and on the left, aimed at the enemy and mowed
 them down. At the same time the [infantry] forces, realizing that the result of the battle rested squarely on
 them, courageously withstood the attack. This confrontation lasted three-quarters of an hour and resulted not
 only in breaking the Ottoman counter-offensive, but also in defeating them and causing them to retreat in
 disarray.