
 

 
 Such is the way that the famous Egyptian military historian, ‘Abdel-Raḥmān Zakī, chooses to narrate the battle of
 Konia. 11 The reason for reproducing his account of the battle more
 or less in full is that it represents clearly a style of writing the history of wars and campaigns that was once
 described by the leading European military historian, John Keegan, as “the battle piece.” 12 Such accounts typically portray battles as orderly and organized events
 in which thousands of men are moved around on the battle plain in neat machine-like
 precision. Essentially bloody, tense and chaotic happenings, battles are transformed in these accounts into
 orderly events which are executed exactly as planned, and in which the successful commander is he who is able to
 conceive of the better plan and to stick to it. Confusion thus becomes the sign of the losing side and is a
 direct result of either bad training or deviation from the plan. It is no accident therefore that the “battle
 piece” is usually written from the point of view of the victorious army and hence its troops are always seen as
 “storming,” “fiercely attacking,” “facing the attack with strength and fortitude,” and “showering their volleys .
 . . strongly and accurately”, whereas the enemy is seen as “badly shaken,” “mown down” and “retreating in
 disarray.”
 

 
 Graphically, this way of recounting battles is represented in the way the maps of the battles are drawn.
 Regiments are represented by neat and tidy geometric shapes: cavalry regiments, for example, are represented by
 rectangles and infantry ones by squares; troop movements are shown by straight dashed, broken lines; new
 positions are referred to by adding markers to the letters denoting old locations, A to A′ to A′′, for
 example. 13 This manner of graphically representing battles is
 characteristic not only of some military historians recounting certain events decades or centuries later, but is
 often the manner chosen by the commanders themselves in describing the same events. In representing the minor
 skirmish that took place between the vanguards of the Egyptian and Turkish armies two days before the battle of
 Konia, for example, Kani Bey, assistant to Osman Nureddin, the Chief of Staff, followed the same simplistic
 procedure: the Egyptian units were drawn in nice and neat squares, red rectangles for the infantry, and yellow
 ones for the cavalry. The Turkish troops were represented by rectangles that were scattered with no order all
 over the map. 14 
 

 
 Most significantly, “battle pieces” are always written from the viewpoint of the commanding officer. A sign of a
 good commander is his ability to think in abstract terms, to see units rather than individuals, to notice flags
 and banners rather than the men doing the actual fighting and killing, and to impose the map he so well rehearsed
 reading before the battle on the rugged terrain he now sees in front of him. Soldiers for him are not visible;
 instead what he sees are their battalions, regiments, and divisions; groups of men that he maneuvres around
 within the confined arena of the battle field and in the limited time he has. The soldier
 appears in these classical pieces of military history following orders with “no sudden burst of undisciplined
 valour.” 15 He obeys orders, acts in unison with his fellow soldiers
 and together he marches forward with them to “engage with the enemy.” In other words, the “battle piece” portrays
 the soldier as the kind of man that the training manual we saw in the last chapter wanted the conscript to
 become: a man robbed of his instinctive reactions who shows no fear, feels no grief; is moved by no horror;
 instead he appears as a characterless, machine-like, alienated being.