
 

 

 
 Plate 5 “Ibrahim
 Pasha, Commander-in-Chief of the Egyptian army, 1840” 
 

 
 This particular document is interesting because it offers us an image of the workings of an army during battle
 that is considerably different from the one portrayed in the training manuals and military laws that were
 reviewed in the last chapter. The difference between the two images is not accidental: it is based on the
 essentially different natures of the documents portraying them. The training manual, as we have seen, describes
 an ideal situation in which the men and their equipment, their bodies and their minds, appear to be thoroughly
 manipulated, controlled and “inscribed.” The court martial, on the other hand, in its attempt to identify the
 culprit and assign blame, describes the battle situation as actually experienced with all the confusion, havoc
 and panic that characterize it and distinguish it from training drills. What makes a record of a court martial
 interesting for our purposes, moreover, is that, besides recording the testimony of soldiers and offering a
 unique insight into how they might have perceived the battle, it does this always in contrast to what they were
 supposed to have done. A court martial is convened in the first place to investigate a
 deviation from the plan, a violation of the regulations put down in the training manual or an infringement of the
 regulations. The law always looms large in these accounts. The court martial is always in the shadow of the
 training manual, the military law. But it is the law not as neatly conceived of by the legal experts and military
 planners but as actually understood by the officers and practiced by the soldiers. What is interesting, moreover,
 about this particular court martial is that it offers a picture not only of soldiers in panic and fear, but also
 of a rather pathetic performance of a senior commander in a crucial battle, a battle in which all small details
 were supposed to have been brought together with as much machinelike precision as possible. It is also
 interesting for the rather lenient sentence that the brigadier in question received.
 

 
 This chapter takes as its starting point these unexpected moments in the performance of a machine-like structure
 like that of Mehmed Ali’s army. It seeks to go beyond the veneer of orderly spectacles that often characterized
 the army to see how it was actually functioning, as opposed to how it was supposed to function. The main question
 that this chapter attempts to answer is the following: how faithfully did the daily workings of that army
 approach the blueprints that were regularly issued to guide it and organize its functioning? Using the training
 manuals, penal codes and military laws that were reviewed in the last chapter can be a good way to write the
 institutional history of Mehmed Ali’s army. They can also be useful in writing the history
 of mentalities , the aims and goals of those who were structuring it. However, they offer
 little insight into how this institution actually worked and how it was received by the society into which it was
 introduced. The intention, though, is not to argue that these blueprints and programs count for nothing or that
 they offer a simplistic picture of the performance of the army. For, as was said in the previous chapter, these
 programs and blueprints assume that what is out there is programmable and hence they carry within themselves an
 impressive element of power; the picture they offer is impressive, in spite of their simplicity, indeed,
 because of their simplicity. Rather, the intention is to explain the nature of the
 discrepancy between the plan and its execution, and elaborate on the gap that separated the officer’s view of the
 battle from the soldier’s manner of actually fighting it.