
 

 
 This chapter has a wider interest, though. This manner of writing Egyptian military history as exemplified by
 Zakī’s “battle piece” of the battle of Konia has its echo (and a much louder one at that) in the way of writing
 Egyptian history at large during the Pasha’s reign – not only his military career. It has to be pointed out that
 the Pasha, although illiterate, was constantly “writing” letters (strictly speaking,
 dictating them to his scribes), issuing decrees and granting interviews, a point that was not lost on his
 contemporaries: as the Austrian internuncio once remarked: “The Pasha has not always the virtue of silence or
 simulation.” 21 The result is countless letters and interviews that
 have been used by historians to construct a history of his reign, using his own words . The
 outcome is not surprising: his rule appears impressive, orderly and neat. 22 Mistakes are corrected, crimes are punished, irregularities are standardized and
 inconsistencies are ironed out. In these accounts it is possible to argue how the Pasha “was capable with his
 genius mind [to] . . . spread education, introduce industry, improve administration . . . and build a modern
 army.” 23 
 

 
 Using the military institution as an example this chapter attempts to come to a closer and, hopefully, more
 critical reading of these letters. It does not start with how “insightful” the great Pasha was or how ahead of
 his time he might have been. Instead, it argues that the Pasha, besides issuing often impressive, orderly
 regulations, was also under severe time and financial constraints that frequently forced him to deviate from the
 very laws he was issuing. Moreover, between the “insightful” command of the Pasha in his palace in Cairo and the
 soldier on the field or in his barracks stood hundreds of officers and commanders. An army the size of Mehmed
 Ali’s, dependent on the state for its upkeep and maintenance, obviously also depended on hundreds of bureaucrats
 and scribes for the procurement of its provisions and supplies. These men often did not form a homogeneous group
 and their internal feuding occasionally affected the soldiers in ways that were most probably not envisaged by
 the Pasha. How can one read the letters of these innumerable bureaucrats and assistants of the Pasha who helped
 run his bureaucracy: as reflecting keen attempts of obedient, disinterested aides to fulfill blindly and lovingly
 the orders of their patron, or were they also sometimes moved by their own intrigues and internal fights and
 quarrels as well as by their limited understanding of their paymaster’s wishes? In short, whilst appreciating the
 inherent power implied by the training manuals and the military laws which were reviewed in the last chapter and
 the impressive nature of the letters and regulations of the Pasha, this chapter attempts to contrast the image
 that comes across from reading these documents with other less impressive, but arguably more telling, documents and to understand the nature of the discrepancy between the two pictures.