
 

 
 Again, the language is one of order, discipline and uniformity. This is particularly so in the case of documents
 pertaining to the army which, by their own nature, attempt to describe things in a standardized, “recognizable
 and universally comprehensible vocabulary” 16 which leaves very
 little space for human emotions and feelings. What complicates matters further is that the fellahin of Egypt,
 those thousands of soldiers who made up the bulk of the fighting force of Mehmed Ali’s army, were, for the most
 part, illiterate and did not leave us written material to tell how they felt and what they thought of this “new
 order” of the Pasha. What we are left with, for the most part, are documents that offer accounts of battles as
 experienced by officers: orderly, neat, exact.
 

 
 It is very doubtful, however, that this is how the soldier actually fights. Nor is it likely that the neat and
 orderly account of battles such as the description of the battle of Konia mentioned above is how battles appear
 to the fighting soldier who sees death a few feet away and who, in order to execute the command issued to him,
 often has to step over the bodies of his dead or wounded comrades and also over those of the enemy. Occasionally
 another view of the battle, a view that is characterized by fear, confusion and horror, comes to the surface even
 in some official accounts that otherwise strive to portray a semblance of order and regularity. The battle of
 Konia, for example, is described in most of the documents in that neat and orderly manner: troop distribution,
 names of commanders, orders by Ibrahim to his men and actual reports of the “magnificent victory of our
 victorious army.” 17 Five months after the battle had been
 “successfully” fought, however, a military tribunal was convened to investigate the reasons why the 1st Cavalry
 Brigade, comprising the 1st and 3rd Cavalry Regiments under the joint command of Ahmed Bey Istanbullu, did not
 participate at all in the battle. The picture that evolves out of this single document is very different from
 that which is usually portrayed: “horses were trembling when the enemy fired their volleys at us,” “we had to
 retreat here and there to avoid the fire of the enemy,” “the colonel was late in ordering the trumpeter to issue
 the call to take the line formation.” These and other statements in this single document show that what the
 soldiers experienced was fear, confusion, agony, a far cry from the neat and orderly impression one gets from the
 “battle piece.” Most importantly, the account of the court martial goes on to reveal that
 Brigadier Ahmed Bey was not to be found in the position specified for him in the training manuals which give
 exact locations of every officer during battle. 18 Zakī, in his
 account of the battle and in an attempt to explain this rather perplexing absence, says that that brigade lost
 its way in the fog. 19 On investigation, however, it transpires that
 Brigadier Ahmed Bey had fled the battle scene with his entire brigade probably to await the result of the battle
 and then side with the victor. When confronted with these accusations he denied the charges and blamed Hüseyin
 Bey, the colonel of the 1st Cavalry Regiment, instead. Moreover, he attempted to bribe some of the soldiers and
 NCOs of his brigade to witness in his favor during the court martial and when they betrayed him he spat in their
 faces in front of the tribunal. Having proved all the charges against him, namely, violating military rules
 regarding his location during battle, giving a false account about it to the tribunal, and finally insulting his
 soldiers and NCOs, Ahmed Bey was only demoted one rank to the rank of miralay (colonel), “as
 a punishment for him and a deterrent to his peers ( kindisi tedip ve akranlarınıs terhip
 olmak)” although the same document says that according to military law he was supposed to be
 executed. 20 