
 

 
 Financial constraints seem also to be behind the turning of a blind eye to the law in the following case
 involving Mohtar Bey, the first Director of the Schools Department. The case related to a serious incident
 concerning one of the students of the Translations School, Captain Abdallah by name, 39 who dared to verbally abuse and hit the Director of the school, Rifā‘a Bey al-Ṭahṭāwī,
 himself. Owing to the seriousness of the case, a special council was convened which decided after long deliberation to punish the student by demoting him two ranks, from captain to second
 lieutenant. When Mehmed Ali was informed of the case he wondered why the letter of the law (which stipulated that
 in such cases the offender should be imprisoned for five years) has not been implemented, especially since it was
 Rifā‘a Bey and not an ordinary officer who was involved. 40 To this
 Mohtar Bey answered saying that the reason for not executing the letter of the law was that he felt that since
 Abdallah Efendi had previously been sent to France and given that the government had incurred considerable
 expense in sending him on this mission, it would not have been very wise to expel him from school. Mehmed Ali did
 not like this answer and said that the student in question should be given three hundred lashes and then expelled
 from school. He explained this harsh treatment by saying that Rifā‘a Bey had trained many people with the rank of
 captain; in effect, that it was more profitable to appease him than be concerned about the money spent on the
 student. 41 
 

 
 Besides the time and financial constraints that he was under, restrictions placed on him by his having only a
 limited pool of experts to draw on, and the fact that he sometimes had to contravene the law to avert certain
 serious situations, the Pasha was also in desperate need to create an elite around himself and his family. This
 reciprocal dependence prompted him to bestow favors that were sometimes undeserved and occasionally to turn a
 blind eye to mistakes committed by members of his elite. In his attempt to strengthen his rule and found a
 dynasty Mehmed Ali had to play his cards delicately and avoid unnecessarily antagonizing some members of his
 entourage only so as to uphold the letter of the law. For example, there is the case of a certain Ali Bey who was
 appointed as a captain but discharged because of his “lax and loose behavior.” He presented a petition to the
 Pasha requesting to be reappointed in the army and Mehmed Ali accepted it because “the man was the nephew of Ali
 Bey Maraşlı” who had been working in the War Department and “was a member of an old family.” 42 A certain captain, Yakup Efendi, was once ordered to go to Cyprus to join
 the Pasha’s forces there. He took forty-five days’ leave to go to Cairo first. However, he stayed three more
 months in the city without permission. When the case was brought to the Pasha, he wrote to Ibrahim Efendi, the
 governor of Cyprus, telling him that, so long as the man had stayed in Cairo for “only” four and a half months,
 then the case should be dropped; if, on the other hand, it was discovered that he had stayed longer than that,
 then he should be punished. The officer’s full name was Yakup Arnavut which suggests that
 this exception might have been due to the fact that the man in question was, like the Pasha himself, of Albanian
 origin. 43 In another case Brigadier Omer Bey held an investigation
 into the regiments under his command and found the regiment of Colonel Selim Bey, which was stationed at Rosetta
 at that time, improperly kept with “serious violations regarding the health conditions of the soldiers and in
 their training.” During the court martial of Selim Bey, the Colonel was found guilty of negligence and sentenced
 to fifteen days in prison. The sentence was later reduced to only five days. Mehmed Ali wrote what was, given the
 gravity of the offense, a surprisingly softly worded letter to Selim Bey and told him to bear up under the
 sentence, that it could have been much harsher, and “warning” him that next time he would not interfere. 44 The whole incident sounds more like a nursery spanking than an attempt to
 impose military discipline.