
 

 
 NCOs were also constantly presenting petitions to the authorities about irregularities in promotion. In 1836, for
 example, a certain second lieutenant in Ahmed Pasha Menilikli’s Guardia Regiment presented a petition directly to
 the Pasha saying that he had graduated from the Giza School of Cavalry among a class of forty students. Since
 then his colleagues had been distributed among the various regiments and promoted to higher ranks, some having
 even been promoted to the ranks of captain and major, while he remained a second lieutenant for six years. The
 reason, he said, was that his major, Ahmed Efendi, the first Major of the Guardia Regiment, “does not like me
 very much [ lays bayni wa baynahu maḥabba zayida ]. The major [he added] holds drinking
 parties every night in his tent and invites the captains of his battalion who back him up in front of his colonel
 [ yaṣīr baynahum rabiṭa bi’annahum uṣaddiquhu ‘ind miralay ]. In return, the major promotes
 these members of his entourage ( hamshariyatahu).” He concluded by saying that the same was
 being done by Brigadier Selim Bey. Significantly, in his response to this petition, Mehmed Ali did not order an
 investigation into the behavior of the senior officers whose names were mentioned by the petitioner; he only
 ordered the Deputy Director of the War Department to investigate the matter and “please” the man if he had a
 case, and “silence” him, if he did not. 60 
 

 
 The problem in fact lay deeper than addressing a particular grievance or correcting a minor mistake. If these
 senior officers had been appointed to their positions mostly on the strength of their personal relationship to
 Mehmed Ali or some member of his household, why should they not do the same thing themselves and appoint or
 promote some of their own friends or members of their families?
 

 
 The sinews of power
 

 
 If this is how things looked liked in the sanguinary fields of battle, the situation was not much different in
 the dimly lit offices of the bureaucracy. As well-knit as the military elite of the army might have been, between
 the strategic planning mind of Mehmed Ali and the insightful command of Ibrahim Pasha, on the one hand, and the
 fighting soldiers in the fields, on the other hand, lay hundreds, if not thousands, of bureaucrats, clerks and
 scribes. It was these meticulous officials and bookkeepers “with ink-stained hands rather than bloody
 arms” 61 who helped lubricate Mehmed Ali’s military machine and it
 was that bureaucracy that sustained the army and enabled it to wage its numerous victorious battles.
 

 
 Sustaining an army of around 130,000 men on a more or less constant war footing was no easy task, though. The
 problems encountered in keeping this army well fed, adequately clothed, and regularly paid were as significant as
 collecting the peasants from the villages and turning them into disciplined soldiers. This massive task demanded
 the build-up of state power to an extent unprecedented in Egyptian history and an encroachment by the state on
 people’s lives in a way previously unparalleled. It entailed levying higher rates of taxation to enable the
 government to pay the soldiers and officers more or less punctually, requisitioning foodstuffs and sending them
 to the troops on the front and in the camps hundreds of miles away from home, manufacturing uniforms for the
 troops and finding men and women who were capable of working in the various factories that were geared to
 military production. In addition, it meant securing horses, mules, cows and oxen that were for the most part the
 motive force of these factories. Attention had also to be given to such logistical considerations as policing the
 passage of more and more troops to the battle areas (which by the mid-1830s had covered wide areas of the
 far-flung Ottoman Empire), establishing a proper communication network that would guarantee the delivery of these
 various requisitions to the troops, as well as sustaining an efficient postal system, which an army of that size
 necessitated. Of more importance, the modern army necessitated the founding of a modern medical system that would
 be capable of treating the wounded in battle, preventing diseases from spreading among the soldiers in the highly
 crowded camps and barracks, and finally of treating the officers and soldiers from the diseases that they were
 constantly afflicted by. In short, the importance of Mehmed Ali’s army lies not only in its size or in the fact that it relied on what appears to have been universal conscription, but also in the
 economic–bureaucratic structure that supported and sustained it. Without an analysis of the working of this war
 machine no clear understanding of the performance of this army would be complete.