
 

 
 It could be argued in this respect that good handwriting was a sign of more than knowledge of reading and
 writing: it “supposes a gymnastic a whole routine whose rigorous code invests the body in its entirety, from the
 points of the feet to the tips of the index finger.” 31 Good
 handwriting in that respect was another spectacle that the Pasha was interested in, a minor spectacle, probably,
 but one that was supposed to be a sign of discipline, and a corollary of good training. Be that as it may, when
 sitting for this “exam” a lot of the candidates devised easy ways to get around this stipulation for promotion.
 Knowing that it was their handwriting that was decisive in getting them the jobs, they would repeatedly practice
 only one given text and would use it as a model ( meşk ) neglecting other tasks that they were
 supposed to be practicing “like dictation and composition.” When the Pasha heard about this trick of the
 students, he wrote to the Director of his War Department telling him to inform the students that he was keeping
 samples of their handwriting that had been previously sent to him. On arriving at the camps, he said, he would
 dictate an unprepared text and then compare their previous handwriting with that of the dictated text, and
 “whoever is discovered to have been cheating in the above-mentioned way will be dealt with
 in the appropriate manner.” 32 
 

 
 Another example of how difficult it was for the Pasha to insure that his new institutions functioned the way he
 wanted them to is provided by the operation of the postal system. In order to insure that the Pasha in Egypt was
 kept informed about his army in Syria, Ibrahim Pasha devised a postal system that was intended to keep his father
 in constant touch with the army. Ibrahim divided the distance between the army HQ in Syria and Cairo into twelve
 equal intervals; at the end of each a postal station was to be built. In each of these stations an official was
 to be appointed and given a silver watch to check if the postmen relaying the letters between the stations
 arrived on time or not. In implementing this new order, however, it was discovered that although the postmen to
 be appointed to these new stations should have been able to read and write, not enough literate officials could
 be found to man them. To save time, it was decided to choose some officials and teach them the numbers from one
 to twelve only so as to be able to check on whether the postmen arrived on time or not. 33 It is doubtful whether an illiterate official who only knew the numbers
 from one to twelve could use a watch, silver or otherwise, and write a report about the punctuality of mail. What
 appears in principle to have been a modern way to deal with time and space, with time measured in minutes and
 seconds and space divided up into uniform, standardized distances, turns out to have been compromised in its
 implementation owing to serious pressing factors. However, in choosing the timing for launching his Syrian
 campaign Mehmed Ali did have other considerations more important than making sure that his postmen mastered the
 principles of mathematics.