
 

 
 The picture of the logical, consistent and predictable law offered in the last chapter need not be challenged
 when we compare it to these cases of how the law was actually applied and punishment orders implemented. Like
 other spectacles that the Pasha was fond of, legal codes, courts martial and predictable punishments were all
 part of a new way of imposing order and discipline on society. He seems to have believed that it was in the
 military that these modern methods of order and discipline could best be tried out. However, being a practical
 man he also understood that given his limited resources these new techniques of ordering and organizing society
 should function only as models to be approached as closely as possible and which could, and indeed should, be
 violated if need be.
 

 
 Ibrahim Pasha and his officers
 

 
 One of the problems that faced the Pasha in founding his army was how to create a well-trained and reliable
 officer corps, and it might be said that the problems he faced in creating such a group of men who would lead his
 soldiers in battle with efficiency and who, at the same time, would owe him respect and loyalty was as serious as
 the problems he faced in conscripting the peasants into the army. To a large extent, it could also be said that
 he succeeded in creating such a group of loyal and reliable officers. However, given the high priority he
 attached to their loyalty, they were often inefficient and many of them made bad officers.
 Moreover, given the ethnic origins of the majority of them, they were very different and distant from the men
 they were commanding.
 

 
 The men who formed the senior echelons of the officer corps were composed of three main groups. At the heart of
 the officer corps and occupying the most senior military posts were the Pasha’s blood relatives, his in-laws or
 his personal freed slaves. Even a cursory look at the composition of the top positions in the army at any moment
 in time will reveal this aspect of Mehmed Ali’s army, namely that this was a “household army.” 45 During the Morean war, for example, the head of the Egyptian navy was
 Müharrem Bey, the Pasha’s son-in-law. Later on Mehmed Said Pasha, his fourth son, was appointed as head of the
 navy. The army that invaded Syria was headed by his son, Ibrahim Pasha; the head of the infantry force was
 Ibrahim Pasha Yeğen, his nephew (who had earlier been governor of Yemen); the head of the cavalry forces was
 Abbas Pasha, his grandson. After capturing Syria, Mahmud Şerif Pasha, another nephew of the Pasha, was appointed
 as its governor. Fourteen months after the outbreak of the Syrian war Mehmed Ali decided to replace his Director
 of the War Department. The new nā īr was to be Ahmed Pasha Yeğen, who had been military commander of the Hijaz but whose most
 important credentials for the job was the fact that he was yet another nephew of the Pasha.
 

 
 As peculiar as this aspect of the army may appear it allowed the Pasha to create a nucleus of officers which by
 the very nature of things were closely tied to him and stood to rise or fall with him. To cement this core of
 officers the Pasha appointed his own personal mamluks in senior positions in the army to form the second
 component of the officer corps. Those were the mamluks whom Süleyman Pasha was training in the Aswan school back
 in 1820–3. The problem with these mamluk officers was not lack of loyalty to the Pasha but insufficient training.
 Although a staff college was established as early as 1825 for these mamluk cadets to be trained and although it
 was reputed to be one of the best of the Pasha’s educational institutions, 46 it shared the same problems as the other schools, namely, students were recruited to it
 before they had finished their courses in the preparatory schools and were discharged from it before they had
 properly finished their study there. 47 This low level of competence
 of the new officers showed itself clearly during the Syrian campaign. One of the things Ibrahim was constantly complaining about to his father was that whereas his soldiers showed “exceptional signs of
 bravery and courage,” 48 the same could not be said about his
 officers. When the siege of Acre was prolonged and the city did not fall immediately as expected, Mehmed Ali
 wrote to Ibrahim suggesting that he should offer the besieged some money so as not to waste time and proceed to
 fight the Ottomans before they amassed their troops against him. Ibrahim answered by saying that he had yet to
 learn that cities were taken by money and that he intended to reduce it to a heap of rubble until it
 surrendered. 49 The problem he was facing, he insisted, was not lack
 of money or soldiers, but of trained officers. This was the reason he gave for the prolonged siege of the
 city. 50 Finally when the city did fall Ibrahim could not but admire
 the courage and fortitude of the soldiers attacking the city and said that he had yet to see other soldiers who
 could match them. He had no such complimentary words for his officers. 51 