
 

 
 On the face of it, Mehmed Ali seems to have seen the connection between his fighting force and a strong economic
 base. Both he and Ibrahim Pasha took care, for example, that their soldiers were regularly paid and well provided
 for and that they were not allowed to live off the land they marched through. Plunder and booty were strictly
 forbidden. 62 Orders were issued attempting to send pay, food and
 other supplies to different army units, wherever they were. 63 This
 is one of the most important features that distinguished Mehmed Ali’s army from previous armies: whereas soldiers
 in previous armies were left to their own devices, Mehmed Ali’s army depended on the modern state structure that
 had been founded primarily to support it. However, in spite of these orders, the pay of the soldiers was
 continually several months in arrears, 64 and the soldiers were
 often complaining and causing disturbances and sometimes rising in open rebellion against their commanding
 officers. 65 In one incident, troops sent to Cyprus to subdue a
 rebellion themselves revolted against Mehmed Ali and his government on the island; the Pasha wrote them an open
 order to be read aloud in front of them warning them of the consequences. He said, “I know that you still have
 not received a fifteen-month pay in arrears since you were in the Hijaz, and another fifteen-to-twenty-month pay
 since you were in the Sudan . . . You have to know, however, that you are not alone in this respect and that
 other troops in the Morea and in Crete also have their pay in arrears.” He then warned them that if they did not
 end their rebellion, he would send troops by sea to deal with them and would write to the Sadrazam asking him to
 block their way to the north in case they fled. 66 Even during the Syrian campaign, which was arguably the best organized campaign, Ibrahim was
 writing to his father urging him to send the pay of the troops regularly since the revenue he had been able to
 raise from Syria was not enough to meet the various expenses of the campaign and “the men are left penniless in
 these strange lands ( şimdi asker bu gurbette parasɩz kaldɩ ).” 67 This was the case not only with soldiers’ pay; army physicians and instructors were also
 complaining that their salaries were six months in arrears. When once they refused to accept a two-month pay out
 of the six-month pay that they were owed, Mehmed Ali wrote to Osman Nureddin, the Chief of Staff, telling him to
 try to convince them to be more patient. 68 
 

 
 Feeding the army was considerably more complicated than paying the troops, if only because of the logistical
 problems involved. The same discrepancy between the authorities’ blueprints and their actual implementation by
 the bureaucracy existed in the case of requisitioning food for the troops as in that of sending them their
 monthly pay. When the Pasha dispatched one of his earliest regiments to the Hijaz to quell the ‘Asīrī revolt in
 1823 he soon realized that their monthly pay would not be enough for their subsistence and that his new troops
 had to be fed by their units and not be allowed to live off the land as the old troops used to do. “Although
 these new troops are well trained and follow known and fixed regulations,” he told his nephew, Ahmed Pasha Yeğen,
 who was then governor of Mecca, “their pay is only 15 piasters and hence they will not be able to subsist in the
 way the old infantry soldiers used to do. It has been decided, therefore, that their food rations be sent with
 the army and distributed to them daily.” 69 However, in implementing
 these orders of the Pasha enormous problems were encountered. Sea captains ordered to deliver the army’s supplies
 of food and military equipment from the Egyptian ports of Suez and Quṣair to the Arabian port of Jedda complained
 of low pay and refused to undertake the job. 70 The amount of food
 sent to Arabia, when it did arrive, was discovered to be insufficient and it was suspected that the sea captains
 might have been stealing from it. Since on being loaded in Quṣair, however, it was not weighed, it was impossible
 to ask them to make good the difference. 71 