
 

 
 Later on, and during the course of the Syrian war, Ibrahim came to develop a very smooth working relationship
 with Süleyman Pasha. However, he was well aware that in general his officers were not as reliable as his soldiers
 and that his presence was crucial for the cohesiveness of the entire officer corps. He therefore dealt very
 firmly with any attempt to challenge his authority. An example might show how careful he was in stressing his
 authority in the army, particularly among his senior officers. At the height of the Syrian war and after
 capturing Damascus, Ibrahim Pasha issued orders to Brigadier Ahmed Bey Istanbullu to march
 from Damascus to Tripoli and to stay there until further notice. Ahmed Bey, however, disobeyed orders and
 initiated a march towards Ibrahim Pasha’s camp. When Ibrahim heard about this he ordered a court martial to be
 convened at once “because we do not have beys or princes [in the army], and whoever has his leg slipping
 ( ayağı kayan ) is immediately led to the court for his case to be reviewed there.” Ibrahim
 wrote to Abbas Pasha asking him to convene a court martial immediately, and sure enough his nephew was soon
 presiding over one that was composed of six brigadiers, four colonels and a lieutenant-colonel. The military
 tribunal found Ahmed Bey guilty of violating military laws in times of war and sentenced him to five months’
 imprisonment in the Liman of Alexandria. Because of the army’s need for such a senior officer and owing to the
 “delicacy of the situation,” however, Ibrahim Pasha reduced the sentence to only thirty-one days’ imprisonment.
 Furthermore, it soon became clear why the original harsh sentence was passed in the first place: Ahmed Bey had
 dared to send his daily reports directly to the War Department in Egypt rather than sending them to Ibrahim Pasha
 first, thus appearing to ignore and circumvent the authority of Ibrahim Pasha. It was this action rather than the
 alleged disobeying of orders that prompted Ibrahim Pasha to humiliate the officer since he “pretended that I am
 not Serasker [i.e. Commander-in-Chief].” 57 
 

 
 As watchful as Ibrahim was of his commanders, he could not, of course, control the activities of every officer in
 the army. One problem was particularly difficult: nepotism in promotions. Given the very nature of the army,
 however, it is not surprising to find nepotism at work whether in cases of appointments, promotions, or
 exemptions from punishments. Bearing in mind the composition of the officer corps of the army and in particular
 appointments to the senior positions, nepotism appears to have been an essential element in the army and not a
 mere aberration to be corrected. As early as 1823 when the first regiments were being formed, complaints about
 irregularities and inconsistencies in promotion were being reported. 58 In 1838 Mehmed Bey, a colonel in the artillery corps, promoted a certain soldier – who had
 been studying in the School of Accountants – from student to chief instructor to second
 lieutenant. When Mehmed Ali heard about this, he sent a letter to Kani Bey who had been promoted to become Deputy
 Director of the War Department and asked him how Mehmed Bey could do this knowing that the student had committed
 many crimes before and had been previously sentenced to stay a private for life ( kaydihayatla
 nefer kayd ). He was answered that the colonel had not been aware of this. The Pasha refuted this allegation
 saying that the student’s papers clearly showed his previous record and that this promotion could not have been
 done except with prior agreement between the student and the colonel. 59 