
 

 
 The Pasha and the spectacle of the army
 

 
 On the face of it, the army offered a very impressive spectacle of order and discipline that is often said to
 have characterized Mehmed Ali’s entire reign. Its machine-like, disciplined and orderly appearance was not
 something that was discovered intuitively, or on closer inspection; rather, it was one of its essential
 components and its visual aspect was intended to be stunning and overwhelming. It was, literally, a spectacular
 thing. There is some evidence that this nature of the new army that clearly distinguished it from previous armies
 (e.g. the Mamluk army) was already apparent to Mehmed Ali and his senior officers. We have already seen in
 chapter 2 how impressed he was when he saw his assembled
 troops for the first time in the Banī ‘Adī camp in 1824. On a number of other occasions we see the Pasha using
 the army to impress the spectator, whether a foreign visitor or the local population of a conquered country. When
 in 1827, for example, the Pasha was visited by Süleyman Pasha, the vali of Crete, orders were issued to the
 Director of the War Department to chose 200 of the best officers, have them wear their “ceremonial uniforms”
 ( kisvet-i divaniye ) and stage a small parade for the visitor to watch. 24 Shortly after the fall of Acre in May 1832, the fortress was visited by
 an English officer who had recently arrived from Egypt. To impress him, orders were issued to all officers and
 soldiers in the castle to put on their new uniforms and “to be in the most perfect order.” 25 On victoriously entering cities in Syria the soldiers were ordered to put
 on their special uniforms and to march in an orderly way through the cities for the inhabitants to see
 them. 26 (When a certain lieutenant refused to put on his ceremonial
 uniform he was sentenced to three days’ “light arrest”). 27 
 

 
 Beyond these spectacles of order and discipline, however, lay a different picture altogether. What one sees
 behind this spectacular façade is indicative of the problems that the Pasha encountered in building his new army: officials cheating him, corrupt officers abusing their power, inefficient
 bureaucrats trying only to appease the Pasha, and even the Pasha himself occasionally passing inconsistent and
 sometimes contradictory orders.
 

 
 A good example of the problems lying behind these façades of orderly spectacles is the way the officers attempted
 to get around the conditions laid down by the Pasha and his military authorities. In the early years of the army
 Mehmed Ali could not afford to wait till all his officers learned how to read and write. He wrote to Ibrahim
 Pasha telling him that “although the European armies have literate officers and engineers, we cannot afford to do
 the same when we establish our new regiments.” 28 Eventually,
 however, literacy, and (oddly enough) good handwriting became a condition for promotion, 29 and it was decided that all candidates should provide samples of their
 handwriting for the Pasha to make sure that they were indeed literate. 30 