
 

 
 Supplying bread and meat are probably the best examples of the authorities’ frustrated
 attempts to feed the soldiers properly and of the logistical problems encountered in making sure that these
 essential food supplies reached the soldiers regularly and in good condition. The military journals of the army
 in Syria are full of administrative orders attempting to supply bread (usually peksimet ,
 i.e. hard, dried biscuits) and meat to the soldiers in various localities and, in particular, those on the march
 so that they would not attack peasants’ lands on their way. 72 
 However, in actual fact, these orders were very difficult to implement. The bread issued to the soldiers was
 often either rotten or improperly cooked, and Ibrahim Pasha had to order an investigation into why it was
 constantly inedible and black in color. 73 Earlier in Arabia the
 situation was not much better. In response to repeated complaints that the warehouses in Jedda were empty, Mehmed
 Ali wrote to the governor of Mecca insisting that enough food supplies had already been sent and it could not be
 true as was claimed by his officials there that the supplies had already been used up. 74 It was later discovered that these warehouses were unsuitable for storing
 food and that in consequence a lot of the peksimet sent had gone bad and “entered the state
 of that which has a name but no body ( ismi var cismi yok ).” 75 The problems of inadequate storage conditions, bad quality of food and untimely deliveries
 to the army in Arabia continued to irk the authorities which could not find proper ways to keep the army well
 fed. When Mehmed Bey, the Colonel of the 2nd Infantry Regiment stationed in Hijaz, complained about these
 problems, Mehmed Ali answered him by saying that he had had enough of his complaints and that the governor should
 be satisfied with whatever was sent to him. 76 More than ten years
 later the governor who replaced him was still inundated with complaints by officials about the quality of food
 which they insisted was inedible. He answered them by saying that there was nothing he could do since it was the
 Pasha in Egypt who had to decide on matters like this. He therefore sent the Pasha a sample of the food that was
 given to the soldiers so that he could see it for himself. He was not deterred by the fact that it would have
 taken weeks before his shipment was received by the Pasha in Cairo, and that in itself would
 have made the bread even worse. 77 
 

 
 Meat was another item that the authorities were desperate to make sure that the soldiers receive in good
 condition. In principle, besides properly baked bread, rice, lentils and beans, 78 soldiers were supposed to be given meat once every five days. 79 The scribes accompanying the army in Syria repeatedly wrote in their journals how every
 effort was taken to ensure that meat was supplied to the army. Usually this was done by ordering local governors
 to buy animals from the farmers at “just prices.” 80 However, and in
 spite of these measures, there were repeated complaints that meat was not delivered to the soldiers on time. An
 investigation into the condition of the troops in Tripoli conducted by Colonel Yusuf Bey revealed that the
 soldiers there were left with no food for three days. 81 The
 Infantry School in Hankah, near Cairo, received no rice or meat for such a long time that the director had to go
 to the market and buy food with his own money. 82 When the
 Department of Civil Affairs (the Divan-ɩ Hidiv ) heard that the students in a certain
 military school in Cairo had received meat only once a month the head of the Divan wrote to
 the master of the school and reprimanded him strongly telling him that if the Pasha found out about this, he
 would be punished “together with every one of us.” 83 Soldiers,
 finding themselves penniless, forbidden to live off the land and, in addition, inadequately fed by their own
 army, sometimes had to report their commanding officers to higher authorities. In a certain case seven soldiers
 of a sappers’ regiment were left with no food for three days. When they went to their captain to complain he
 forced them to lie on the floor and gave every one of them four lashes with the cane. They decided to bring their
 case before a court martial which imprisoned the officer in question for ten days. 84 