
 

 
 The problems of the composition of the officer corps are compounded, moreover, when we add
 its third component. In addition to the students whom the Pasha had sent to Europe in the late twenties and who
 came back during the mid-thirties to be appointed to senior positions in the army and the bureaucracy, this group
 also included men from all corners of the Ottoman world, Albanians, Circassians, Georgians, Moreans, Anatolians
 and Istanbullites. These men came to Egypt with their families seeking employment and entered the Pasha’s service
 both in his civil bureaucracy and his army and navy, gradually becoming members of the new elite centered around
 Mehmed Ali and his family. 52 But again, as enthusiastic as they
 might have been in their new posts they were often at odds with their fellow officers with whom they had nothing
 in common except the desire and willingness to appease the Pasha and members of his family. In the middle of
 battle the officers would encourage their soldiers to fight telling them not to take heed of the approaching
 danger and writing in their reports (which they knew quite well would be sent to the Pasha in Cairo), “What do
 you think we came here for except to sacrifice our souls for the sake of our lord.” 53 
 

 
 The officer corps of Mehmed Ali’s army was thus characterized by an odd mixture of their members; and their
 failure to create a working esprit de corps was offset only by Ibrahim Pasha’s strong and
 decisive leadership. Realizing that they were profit-seekers and unwieldy he was constantly complaining of their
 impetuous behavior to his father in Cairo. In one stormy letter to his father’s chief secretary, Sami Bey, the
 baş-mu‘avin , he described the officers of the 9th Cavalry Regiment as “Turks with mixed
 ancestries [who were] nothing but drunkards and rascals ( çapkɩn).” He suggested getting rid
 of them all and replacing them with natives. 54 Occasionally
 personal, unprofessional rivalries would break out in open conflict and Ibrahim would rush to defuse the
 situation. At the very start of the Syrian campaign, for example, and just after the army had departed from
 Ṣālḥiyya a big fight broke out between Saleh Bey, Colonel of the 3rd Cavalry Regiment, and Süleyman Bey (i.e.
 Colonel Sèves – he had not yet acquired the title of Pasha) who was heading an infantry regiment. The fight seems
 to have been about how to secure the transportation of the army and its equipment: whether to hire camels from
 the bedouins or to depend completely on government camels. 55 
 Whatever its cause the dispute was a serious one and news about it reached Mehmed Ali in Cairo who wrote to
 Ibrahim asking him to investigate the matter immediately. Ibrahim reprimanded Saleh Bey so heavily that he told
 his father that he doubted that a court martial would have been that harsh. The reason he went so far, he
 explained, was that Saleh Bey was a stubborn, thick-headed man ( kafasɩ kalɩn ). Ibrahim did
 not have very kind words to say about Süleyman Bey either. He said that since he was originally French, he is
 known be rude and quick tempered. 56 