
 

 
 It was these time constraints that often forced the Pasha to deviate from the original models he was following in
 building his army. At the outbreak of the Syrian war, for example, Ibrahim was repeatedly urging him to send him
 ammunition and supplies promptly “so as not to suffer from the lack of ammunition as I used to do while in the
 Morea.” His father answered him by saying that he was doing everything possible to meet his requests. Ibrahim
 replied by saying that it seemed that Engineer Cerisy, who was in charge of the Arsenal in Alexandria, was very
 slow in preparing ships and sending them to Syria because he was insisting on doing things
 the “French way.” He proposed to hand over the task of preparing the ships to Hajj ‘Umar
 

 
 because we do not have time to organize our affairs along French lines. What we need now is to prepare our ships
 with cannons and other supplies. When we finish our business here, and His Highness becomes the [undisputed] lord
 of these areas, then we can prepare our ships along French and English lines. Only then will we have ample time
 to do this. 34 
 

 
 Mehmed Ali had no problems with this kind of logic and, keen as he was to follow the models he was borrowing
 from, he was aware of the practical problems he had to contend with. Similarly, impressive and spectacular as he
 might have found his new army, he was not bound by its visual order nor was he taken in by its spectacles. For
 example, when in 1824 he detected signs of a serious mutiny among his newly founded army he knew that he had to
 take some drastic measures to deal decisively with such an alarming situation. In doing so he showed that he
 understood something about the effect that orderly spectacles had, but that he was not bound by the idea of order
 that informed them, nor by the principle of “cynical,” diffuse power (in the manner used by Foucault) that is
 also linked to them. For he then ordered all the soldiers of the regiment in question (the 1st Regiment that was
 on its way to Sudan) to stand in a row and every tenth soldier to step out of line. The soldiers thus selected
 would then form a line of their own and be shot in front of their colleagues “to be an example to
 others.” 35 This can hardly be described as a just or predictable
 application of the law, yet it is one that is understandable, given the alarming nature of the situation. The
 following year when another mutiny broke out among the same troops who had taken up positions in the Sudan, this
 time he had no such qualms with “order.” He told them that at a time when their “brethren in faith” had been
 fighting the Greek rebels in Morea and others were engaged in subduing the Wahhabi rebels in ‘Asīr, they had been
 disobeying orders to march with their new leader, Moho Bey. He swore by God, the Lord of the Ka‘ba, that he would
 severely punish them by strangling them as dogs and throwing them to their deaths in the desert. 36 
 

 
 The Pasha was a practical man and finding himself faced with situations like this he often had to violate some of
 the very principles which at other times he was seen to stress and to punish whoever deviated from them. Even the
 stern stance he took against corruption amongst his officials was sometimes compromised when
 this was expedient. It was once reported to him, for example, that the French instructor of the 19th Infantry
 Regiment had stolen 30 ardabbs of barley. The Pasha wrote to the Director of the War
 Department telling him that the instructor should be expelled from government service after giving him his
 salary. However, since he was an expert in his job and since his services were needed, “we should forget about
 the matter and have the lid covered on it ( mektum kalmasi matlubumdur ),” 37 In another case on 2 August 1832 a court martial was convened to try two
 officers from the 7th and 8th Infantry Regiments which were fighting in Syria at that time. The first case
 concerned a certain adjutant-major of the 8th Regiment, Mehmed Efendi by name, who had deserted from his regiment
 during battle. Although the law stipulated that in such cases the offender should be executed, the court martial
 ordered Mehmed Efendi to be sent to the Liman for life. The second case concerned another officer, Raşid Ağa, a
 second lieutenant of the 7th Regiment, who had deserted for the third time. The court martial changed the
 original sentence stated in the law (execution) to lashing and a three-month imprisonment. Seeing that there was
 a discrepancy in the application of the law, since the offense in both cases was the same (desertion) whereas two
 different sentences were passed on the same day, Mehmed Ali sent a strongly worded letter to Mahmud Bey, the
 Director of the War Department, ordering him to tell the members of the court martial to follow the letter of the
 law. At the same time, however, he said that these two officers should be sent to the Liman for life, although he
 acknowledged that the law said that they should be executed. 38 A
 dead man was of no use to the Pasha, whereas a trained officer on whose education and training the Pasha had
 spent valuable money could, if sentenced to hard labor in the Liman for life, at least be of some value in the
 form of productive hard work.