
 

 
 Moreover, besides the bad quality of supplies sent to the army, there were also constant complaints of untimely
 deliveries. In the summer of 1832, for example, when it started to become obvious that the troops might have to
 spend the winter in Syria and that they were not equipped to face the cold weather, Ibrahim Pasha wrote to the
 authorities in Egypt requesting the dispatch of proper winter clothes. 103 By December, however, the clothes had still not arrived and the soldiers had to use carpets
 as coats to protect them from the cold Anatolian winter that they were not accustomed to, 104 and Mehmed Ali was still writing to the Director of
 the War Department urging him to send the winter clothes that his son had been requesting since the previous
 summer. 105 In the event, and because of inadequate clothing, some
 soldiers could not stand the cold and had to be declared medically unfit for service. 106 Even well into the Egyptian occupation the army was still suffering from late delivery of
 clothes: in December 1834 the 20th Infantry Regiment had been repeatedly asking for its uniforms to be delivered
 and the soldiers were “left almost naked” ( neferat . . . pek cɩplak kalmɩştɩr ). 107 Moreover, and in spite of repeated orders not to send army units without
 their equipment, regiments were often ordered to be dispatched to their destinations without having “any of their
 equipment ready.” On the very same day of the departure of the army to Syria the 10th Infantry Regiment still had
 no uniforms and “none of the necessary equipment of the 12th Infantry Regiment had arrived.” 108 After the battle of Konia a number of cavalrymen were sent to Anatolia
 to fill the gaps of the 5th Regiment stationed there. They arrived, however, with neither horses nor saddles.
 Instead of waiting for their equipment to arrive from Egypt, Ibrahim Yeğen decided to collect between five and
 ten horses from each tribe in the area as a tax. 109 On arriving in
 Syria, the 3rd Cavalry Regiment was discovered to have been sent without its uniforms. Ibrahim Pasha wrote to the
 Director of the War Department telling him that whereas the main responsibility of this lay with the brigadier
 and the colonel and other senior officers of the regiment he, too, was not blameless. Anticipating that the
 Director would answer saying that he could not issue such military equipment without having a receipt in
 exchange, he told him that if he was so concerned about proper proceedings, he should have forged a receipt and
 sent it to himself “so as to keep your books tidy.” He added that such silly bureaucratic excuses should not
 stand in the way of the execution of those important orders. 110 
 

 
 These might have been silly excuses for Ibrahim; they were hardly so for the hundreds and thousands of scribes
 and bureaucrats who had to fulfill these orders. Their daily routine was spent attempting to meet some impossible
 targets of the Pasha, his son or some senior official. A provincial governor, for example, was ordered to collect
 350 qintārs 111 of ghee from his province. He
 was only able to collect 100 qintārs and said in his letter to the
 Pasha that asking more from the fellahin would result in widespread famine and wholesale absconding. Mehmed Ali
 did not accept such excuses and merely repeated his order to the official. 112 Moreover, these officials often had to fulfill some order by the Pasha only to discover
 that it was wrongly issued in the first place: a zero was once missed in an order for a quantity of coal supplied
 to the army and, of course, the Pasha had to immediately issue another order rectifying his first one. 113 Even if the targets were reasonable and consistent, this did not mean
 that the orders were executed without difficulties. A missing order would cause unnecessary delays, but the
 officials in charge would still hesitate to act without documents lest they be accused of corruption. 114 Efficient as the postal system appears to have been, keeping the Pasha
 in touch with his troops in Syria or the Hijaz hundreds of miles away, different government departments in Cairo
 would sometimes find difficulty in communicating with each other, even though they might have been located across
 the same street in Cairo; and “missing letters” were always referred to for not fulfilling orders. 115 