
 

 
 Conclusion
 

 
 Like the case of the incomplete printed military regulations, this case is interesting because it draws our
 attention to the problems inherent in writing the history of nineteenth-century Egypt using the official
 pronouncements of Mehmed Ali or the various blueprints, laws and regulations that were passed during his time. As
 Mitchell has cleverly shown in his Colonising Egypt and as the previous chapter has
 attempted to make clear, these were impressive texts and do carry within themselves an important inherent element
 of power. Nevertheless, behind the neat, clean façade of these impressive texts lay a much more complicated
 reality. The tension inherent in the text is not only based, as this chapter has attempted to show, on the
 discrepancy that separates it from the reality it tries to regulate; that text is itself a reflection of this
 reality, in spite of its pretence to the contrary, in spite of its presumed primordial, detached nature. Even
 before seeing how the soldiers might have reacted to the power of the modern state, the texts which annunciate
 that power, the laws, blueprints and government regulations, are themselves already 
 compromised and “contaminated” by the reality they set out to organize, regulate and “inscribe.” Although these
 laws and official pronouncements claim to represent reality in what Mitchell called an “enframed” manner, a
 representation of something as profound as the very concept of order, progress or rationality, they appear as if
 they themselves have been inscribed upon by that “debased” reality.
 

 
 In short, the point to be made is that no matter how impressive certain texts appear to be, they still do not
 write themselves: they are a reflection of the vested interests of a certain group of people who are trying to
 hide these interests behind some idea of universal truth or abstract writ and couch it in some consistent,
 impressive language. This chapter has attempted to go beyond this impressive language of Mehmed Ali’s
 bureaucracy. It argued that, besides coming very close to expressing in a nearly pristine manner an ideal order
 for managing society at large, the Pasha’s army also reflected, in the way its highest echelons functioned, the
 social and economic conditions of Egyptian society. The following chapter completes the picture, as it were, and
 sees how the men at the lowest echelons of the military hierarchy, the soldiers, understood and reacted to this
 new order.
 

 
 
 

### FILE: Text/kf_9774246969_14_ch04_split_001.html
 
 
 
 All the Pasha's Men 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
      1   Sham 15/157, on 23 B 1248/17 December 1832. See also Marshal
 Marmont, Turkish Empire , p. 254; Abū-‘Izzeddīn, Ibrāhīm Bāshā fī
 Sūriyya , p. 113.
 

 
      2   Cadalvène and Barrault, La Guerre de
 Méhémet-Ali , p. 292.
 

 
      3   Sham 15/148, on 23 B 1248/16 December 1832. This was the
 task of Kani Bey who was assistant to Osman Bey Nureddin, the Chief of Staff; see Dhawat 5/146, on 2 Z 1246/14
 May 1831.