
 

 
 Asakir-i Makhuremiz Enferden . . .
 
 Asakir-i Mansuremiz Alaylanndan 128 
 

 
 What is interesting in this case is that it shows that in spite of the explicit regulations of the Pasha that the
 registers of the bureaucracy be kept clean, with no scribbling or scrawling, the chief scribe of the army
 saw clearly that he was facing a situation that dictated his violation of this order. What
 he was faced with was a scribe of a rival army which was defeated, and crushed, but still claimed to be
 victorious. Mehmed Munib’s witnessing of the act of recording the list of POWs, what for him was tantamount to an
 act of official surrender, had to be unambiguous, clear in its recognition of the defeat that Ibrahim had
 inflicted on the Ottomans, even if this implied referring to the Ottoman army by using a title that was different
 from its official one. The act of crossing out these three key terms and jotting his own words above them was,
 therefore, symbolic of Ibrahim Pasha’s military might and that of his father behind him vis-à-vis the Sultan and
 his pashas 129 in Istanbul.
 

 
 The tension apparent in this act of defacing and disfiguring an official text was not only caused by two
 competing scribes with different systems of inscription, though. Like the case of the incomplete training manual
 mentioned above this tension that is already manifest in the text is symptomatic of deeper tensions in society.
 For Mehmed Munib could have asked for the Ottoman scribe’s words to be simply replaced by his; rather, he kept
 the Ottoman scribe’s words and crossed them out and then wrote his words above. This, arguably, is a reflection
 of the ambivalence that the scribes in Mehmed Ali’s service and especially those in the army felt when referring
 to the defeats inflicted on the Ottoman army, the army of the “Defender of the Faith,” the “Protector of the Two
 Holy Shrines,” as the Ottoman Sultan was known. We have already seen Mehmed Ali being ambivalent himself
 regarding his act of rebellion against his master in Istanbul. It is true that Ibrahim, and probably his men in
 the army, too, did not have so many scruples and were keen on asserting their victories in a clear, unambiguous
 way. Nevertheless, it has to be remembered that the battle of Horns was the first real encounter in open field
 between Ibrahim and the Ottomans. (The siege of Acre, although it took place two months earlier, was, firstly, a
 siege and not an open battle, secondly, it lasted for an entire six-month period, and, thirdly, was not fought by
 any Imperial forces dispatched from Istanbul the way the Ottomans fought in Horns.) Referring to the Ottoman
 defeats was an embarrassing matter for the officials in Mehmed Ali’s administration. There is also the added
 tension embedded in the term “The Crushed Soldiers” since it implies “The Crushed Soldiers of Muhammad,”
 something that Mehmed Munib obviously tried to hide by putting the possessive suffix “miz” 
 after the word “makhure” to try, firstly, to apply the defeat inflicted
 to the Sultan’s own army and, secondly, to avoid implying that it was the Prophet Muhammad’s soldiers that were
 defeated!