
 

 
 Clothing the army was another task that caused enormous problems for the authorities in their attempt to meet the
 Pasha’s targets. Right from the early days of the army Mehmed Ali had decided that like the modern armies of
 Europe, his soldiers were to be clad in standardized uniforms and his officers were to be dressed in fine, even
 extravagant costumes. 85 Initially some soft
 cloth ( bafta ) was chosen, but seeing that it would not withstand the tough exercises of the
 soldiers, broadcloth was chosen instead 86 and orders were sent to
 provincial governors to collect such cloth from the fellahin. 87 A
 foreign craftsman was invited to start a broadcloth industry in the country, and to guarantee him a regular
 supply of wool all the sheep in the country were to be registered, 88 and eventually the trade monopolized by the Pasha. 89 Later on it was decided to build cloth factories with the main intention of supplying the
 army with its cloth needs. 90 In addition to producing the army’s
 uniforms domestically, the Pasha also issued orders for the manufacture of fezzes 91 and shoes. 92 Before the departure of the
 various campaigns the Pasha used to write to the directors of the various manufacturing establishments as well as
 to the various army administrators in an attempt to make sure that the uniforms and equipment of the soldiers
 were sent with them, 93 and he also decided that, as a matter of
 principle, the soldiers should be issued a new set of uniform every two years. 94 
 

 
 However, in spite of these ambitious policies of the Pasha and the various decrees he issued whilst attempting to
 put them into action, there were enormous obstacles in implementation and rarely did things happen exactly as
 planned. The factories were always given short notice to fulfill the requirements of the army and were constantly
 late in supplying them. 95 Although the Pasha
 considered that the local production of fezzes should take first priority and insisted that they should not be
 imported, 96 he found, during an unexpected visit to one of the
 frigates of his navy, the sailors wearing French headpieces. The factory in Fuwwa was said to have an abundant
 supply of them but, Motoş Bey, the head of the navy, who was accompanying the Pasha, said that he had not
 received any fezzes from the factory in question. 97 Moreover, those
 that the factory did produce were sometimes discovered to be the wrong size and moth-eaten and had to be
 returned. 98 This in spite of the fact that the fez factory was
 supposed to be one of the Pasha’s best industrial enterprises. 99 
 

 
 The cloth factories also very often produced defective uniforms and Ibrahim Pasha repeatedly complained to Edhem
 Bey, the Inspector of Munitions, about the quality of uniforms supplied to the army and told him that “military
 matters are not to be compared to other matters.” 100 The quality of
 footwear was another matter about which Ibrahim complained. 101 In a
 certain incident 10,000 pairs of shoes were made in Egypt and promptly sent to the army in Syria only for it to
 be discovered that they were all so small as to fit only children’s feet! 102 