
 

 
 Cracks in the edifice of order
 

 
 The various cases of bureaucratic complications and logistical difficulties mentioned above are only some
 examples of wider problems that characterized the every-day working of such a huge army as that of Mehmed Ali.
 The aim of producing these cases is to contrast the image of the army as a consistent structure that functioned
 in a machine-like manner as argued in the last chapter with the more blurred picture that this chapter has
 attempted to present. By reading the records of the courts martial and the daily journals of the army, the image
 that comes across is one that is considerably less impressive than that of the machine-like structure that was
 presented in the last chapter. The aim of painting this picture that is full of fractures and inconsistencies is
 not to argue that the Pasha utterly failed in founding a functioning fighting machine or that the victories that
 Ibrahim secured in the various battles he waged against the Ottomans were exaggerated. In other words, the aim is
 not to argue that this picture, blurred as it is, takes precedence over that presented in the last chapter, since
 it approaches more closely the every-day functioning of the army. For as was argued in the last chapter the
 blueprints, the training manuals, and the military laws that were put down to organize the army were based on the
 assumption that men’s bodies and minds could indeed be thoroughly manipulated and controlled. The point, though,
 is that no picture of the every-day working of the army can be complete by looking only at these manuals and one
 has to supplement their impressive picture with other accounts of the ceaseless attempts to make the army
 function in that neat, machine-like manner.
 

 
 If the intention of mentioning these inconsistencies in policies, these logistical problems and bureaucratic
 complications is not to refute the picture presented in the last chapter but to complement it, it is also
 important to stress that these were not unique features of Mehmed Ali’s army since, for
 example, compared to contemporary European armies, his was a hastily prepared and badly copied army. In other
 words, these problems were not characteristic of attempts at “importing the European army,” the assumption being
 that this latter did not suffer from these problems. 122 For even if
 one assumes that Mehmed Ali was mainly borrowing from the French, Napoleon’s army was not as well supplied and
 properly organized as those studies that concentrate on the Emperor’s military genius would like us to believe. A
 recent study of Napoleon’s Grande Armée finds that a lot of its campaigns were highly
 improvised, with corruption, looting, arrears in pay and low morale hitting it and affecting its performance
 years before the disastrous Russian campaign of 1812. 123 
 Furthermore, the French had themselves borrowed from the Prussians the famous Frederickian discipline and harsh
 order. But again, the Prussian army was never as well governed as its admirers in the eighteenth century assumed
 it to be, and Frederick’s iron-fist disciplinary methods could not effectively eliminate desertion that in some
 crucial moments threatened to make the army melt away. 124 The
 process of borrowing goes even further: Frederick, in devising his military system, was influenced (ultimately)
 by Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange (1567–1625), who perfected army drill to create the modern Leviathan that
 fascinated him. Yet Maurice of Nassau looked to ancient Rome for his model, 125 and Rome of course looked to Greece for inspiration. Here, however, the borrowing ends
 since the Greeks, as is well known, were inspired by the gods.