
 

 
 The point to be made regarding this seemingly endless process of borrowing of military models by “great men” is
 that there is nothing peculiar about an “oriental prince” borrowing from the “West.” The process of
 simplification and abstraction, of idealizing the situation of the army that is taken as a model goes on at all
 levels of the “borrowing” process regardless of who is doing it. At every stage there is the belief that the
 model had indeed been implemented in a pristine, neat fashion in an earlier time and that what is needed is to
 try to recreate this past as well as to adapt the model to suit the new reality.
 

 
 This chapter has argued that in thinking about ways of organizing his army Mehmed Ali saw no
 problem in borrowing both from the French and from the Ottomans and in fusing together both models to suit his
 interests and capabilities. He showed the same flexibility when it came to adapting what he borrowed to his own
 needs. It is this flexible approach that accounts for much of the discrepancy between the laws, regulations, and
 blueprints, on the one hand, and their implementation and execution, on the other. Rather than taking them as
 fixed rules not to be deviated from, the Pasha and his senior officials approached them only as guidelines to be
 applied as well as possible, which they also felt had to be contravened if they were faced with some pressing
 factors. This chapter showed what some of these pressing factors might have been. As much as the Pasha would have
 liked his army to function in a machine-like manner, he himself was under pressing time and financial constraints
 that forced him to compromise some of the impressive laws he was passing. Moreover, he had a limited pool of
 experts to draw upon in putting these regulations in practice. Finally, he was limited by his need to create a
 loyal elite, a consideration that forced him to turn a blind eye on some of the “extra-legal” measures that some
 members of this elite were taking and that undermined the machine-like manner in which the army was supposed to
 have functioned. His son, Ibrahim Pasha, faced similar pressing constraints. In his need to create a reliable
 officer corps he resorted to appointing men who were often incompetent and whom he had to keep a watchful eye on.
 As reliable as his soldiers were in battle, securing for him his most important military achievements, his
 officers, although remaining mostly loyal to him and his father, were corrupt, incompetent and often at odds with
 each other.
 

 
 Finally, the huge bureaucracy that managed to sustain this army on its various campaigns encountered considerable
 problems. Because the Pasha was very unrealistic in the demands he placed on his bureaucracy, the thousands of
 scribes and bureaucrats who were fulfilling his demands could not cope with what was asked of them. For a
 bureaucracy still in its infancy, sustaining an army of over 100,000 men scattered over wide areas of the Ottoman
 Empire was a daunting task that was not made any easier by the Pasha’s impossible targets and unrealistic
 deadlines.