
 

 
 The other reason for highlighting the various bureaucratic problems and logistical obstacles that the army
 suffered from is to draw attention to the fact that behind the discrepancy – between the neat and precise picture
 of the army presented in the last chapter and the more complicated one presented in this one – is the different
 kind of sources used in both chapters. For whereas the previous chapter had relied mostly on
 the military laws and the training manuals printed at the Būlāq Press, this chapter found the army journals and
 specifically the records of the courts martial very useful. The intention of using these latter sources was not
 to argue that the training manual and the military law present a simplistic picture of the army to be replaced by
 the more complicated and more realistic one offered by the record of the court martial. For the records of the
 court martial like the reports of the daily checks on the soldiers are in fact applications of these laws and
 blueprints.
 

 
 The point to be made, therefore, about relying only on blueprints and official programs to detect and highlight
 the logic of the new forms of power (as Mitchell and Foucault argue), is that these sources are bound to present
 too monolithic a picture of this power that impresses us with its logic and consistency. What this chapter
 attempted to do is to unveil this charade of power to see it for what it really was: offering an impressive
 façade, it is true, but a façade nevertheless. And one that is full of cracks at that. To rely solely on these
 sources, therefore, is to overstate the consistency of these new forms of power. This is so not only as mentioned
 above because there is bound to be considerable difference between the plan and its execution, but also because
 even on the textual level, even before seeing how the army applied these blueprints, these texts were not as tidy
 and neat as is often assumed. They are full of gaps, omissions, moments of silence and embarrassing
 inconsistencies that are often brushed aside in the attempt to produce the logic of these texts. A couple of
 examples might help illustrate the point.
 

 
 The Qānūn al-Dākhiliyya that was referred to in the last chapter to depict the duties and
 responsibilities of the soldiers and officers in each battalion appears on paper as an impressive, consistent
 and, hence, powerful text. It is printed in a neat and tidy manner, giving detailed instructions for each man in
 the battalion regarding his daily tasks, whom to report to, and how to punctuate his daily life with these
 numerous tasks. However, there were two different versions of this manual, one in Arabic and
 the other in Turkish. Both were supposed to be exact translations of an original French manual; 126 a crucial difference, though, was that the Arabic version was
 considerably shorter than the Turkish one: whereas the Turkish version starts on page 1 with Article 1 dealing
 with the duties and responsibilities of the colonel of the regiment, the Arabic version starts on page 1 with
 Article 147 specifying the duties and responsibilities of the adjutant-major. The reason for the different
 versions is that, as will be shown in chapter 6 , senior
 ranks in the army as well as in the civilian bureaucracy were reserved for members of the Egyptian–Ottoman elite
 who spoke Turkish as a sine qua non of membership in that elite. Hence, there was no need to
 print a complete version of the manual for Arabic-speaking officers since there could be no hope for them to be
 promoted to these higher ranks, and therefore no need to spell out the duties of these higher ranks in the copies
 of the manuals handed to them. This crucial omission, this important moment of silence in the text itself, is a
 reflection of a tension in the society which found its way in the text. In spite of its pretense to be complete
 and thorough, leaving no small matter in the daily lives of the soldiers untouched, by being itself incomplete,
 the law in its physical form betrays its own logic.