
 

 
 The best example of the inefficiency of the army bureaucracy is probably provided by the different letters issued
 by Nazif Efendi, the Commissary-General of the army during the early months of the Syrian campaign. In one of the
 reports sent routinely to the Divan Efendisi (Ibrahim Pasha’s Aide-de-Camp) he wrote
 

 
 I have managed today to ship the artillery equipment that I have here [in the army HQ] to where it was needed by
 loading it on board small boats with the help of Motoș Bey. I still have sixty crates containing the miners’
 equipment and a further sixty crates containing seven-pound howitzers ( obüs ), thirty wooden
 boards for cannon bases, and eight light-cannon wheels . . . I was going to send this equipment tomorrow with
 Hafiz Efendi, the artillery lieutenant who is in charge of this equipment here. But he refused to transport it
 saying that the army has no need for these things [which he mentions again in the same order and with the same
 details]. Motoș Bey was witness to that. I am afraid, therefore, if I send this equipment, it will not be needed.
 Motoș Bey suggested that I write to Your Excellency asking whether I should send it or not.
 I am therefore asking you for permission to send these things.
 

 
 The Divan Efendisi answered him saying that Ibrahim Pasha said that he should send these
 equipment only if he received a receipt ordering him to do so. Then the Divan Efendisi 
 commented that it took Nazif Efendi eleven lines to state his simple question and adds that Ibrahim Pasha was
 wondering “whatever happened to Nazif Efendi? When he was in Egypt he used to complain about lengthy, detailed
 letters. I wonder where he got this chatty attitude from?” In response, Nazif Efendi wrote back to the Divan Efendisi saying, “I have received your letter in which you requested that I be brief and
 concise in my letters. I wish to draw Your Excellency’s attention, however, to the fact that my original letter
 was eleven lines long and your response was fifteen lines long. In the future I promise to be brief, although I
 know that to fulfill the tasks diligently one needs to go through the details properly and to do that in a
 meticulous and thorough manner.” 116 
 

 
 Nazif Efendi continued to have problems in meeting Ibrahim Pasha’s orders, however. When he received orders to
 unload a shipment of bread, for example, he said that he had been doing his best to fulfill this task until it
 started to rain. Knowing that rain would cause the bread to get wet, he ordered the unloading process to be
 stopped. “They took no heed of my warning, though, and I am now writing this to free myself of responsibility
 later when I am asked about the wet bread.” 117 His efforts were not
 much appreciated by his superiors, nevertheless, who continued to press him to be more prompt in executing orders
 issued to him. Shortly afterwards when he said that he was doing his best to unload the barley from the ships
 lying off shore to deliver it immediately to the army kitchens, Ibrahim Pasha apparently had had it with him: he
 told him that if did not get the barley out of the ships, he, Ibrahim Pasha, would get the guts out of his
 belly. 118 In this respect Nazif Efendi was a typical bureaucrat who
 seemed to have been torn by the pressing need to execute orders promptly and at all cost while at the same time
 paying scrupulous attention to details and proper regulations in order not to be blamed later on. When he was
 ordered to supply the officers with bread, rice and ghee he asked if he should charge them for the price of the
 sacks and urns in which these foodstuffs were put. He explained that he was asking this question because he knew
 that in the future he would be asked for everything and if there was a shortage, he would
 have to pay for it from his own pocket. “This in addition to being reprimanded heavily in spite of being
 constantly worn out doing my best to fulfill orders issued to me.” 119 Ibrahim Pasha could not stand the view of an expert whose only claim to be one was his
 ability to explain why things could not be done rather than execute his duties
 professionally and efficiently. In the event Nazif Efendi was sacked 120 and sent back to Egypt. 121 