
 

 
 This example is useful because it shows that relying only on laws, manuals and official pronouncements to
 approach the reality of a certain historical period is useful insofar as it portrays what the officials had in
 mind and what their tools in shaping society might have been. Whether reality was shaped by these tools in the
 neat and exact manner that they envisaged is another point altogether, not only because there was bound to be a
 discrepancy between the textual plan and its implementation, but also because this differentiation between tool
 and reality, between the text and its context is an arbitrary one. As was shown above the text itself could not
 be viewed in isolation of its social context, in spite of its attempts at portraying itself as a detached,
 primordial and abstract writ.
 

 
 Another example might help illustrate the problems of relying only on the blueprints and the letters of the Pasha
 in writing the history of Egypt in his reign. As said in chapter 2 above, the impressive nature of the Pasha’s bureaucracy is reflected in its very documents
 which appear to be following the orders of the Pasha regarding how to organize the administration. A law passed
 in 1844 organizing the internal structure of the civilian bureaucracy explicitly stated that the pages of the
 various registers had to be clean and tidy. “The pages of the register have to be stamped and numbered. Writing
 has to be continuous with no blank pages in the middle. It has to be clear and legible, without any crossings-out
 or corrections.” 127 The clean, blank page which was sequentially
 numbered and neatly bound in a register was a symbol of the new power of the state: self-assured, rational, and
 consistent. Scribbling and scrawling in government registers, like losing them, were considered a crime, an
 affront to the authority of the state. For the most part this is how the registers of Mehmed
 Ali’s government look. Occasionally, however, we come across a case of a mistake, an omission, a word that is
 crossed out, that betrays the very logic of the text and through which a deeper reality comes across challenging
 the very image that the bureaucracy had striven to maintain of itself.
 

 
 For example, after the battle of Horns on 9 July 1832 against the Ottoman army a large number of Ottoman soldiers
 were captured by the Egyptians. Also captured and taken prisoner was the chief scribe ( muhasebetci ) of the “Istanbullite regular army” who was ordered to compile a list of the soldiers and
 officers captured, all 1,791 of them. When the report was handed in to his captors Mehmed Munib, the Aide-de-Camp
 of Ibrahim Pasha (his Divan Efendisi ), could not accept it because, he said, it was wrongly
 titled. At the top of the list the Ottoman official had written Asakir-i Mansuremiz Alaylar :
 “The Regiments of our Victorious Soldiers.” This was supposed to allude to the official title of the new
 nizami army that Sultan Mahmud II had founded in 1826, Muallem Asakir-i
 Mansure-i Muhammadiye , “The Trained Victorious Soldiers of Muhammad.” Nevertheless, Mehmed Munib would not
 allow the word Mansure , Victorious, to be used, and ordered the Ottoman scribe to use the
 word Makhure , Crushed, instead! Stunned, the scribe had to make sure that he had not
 misheard what Mehmed Munib had told him. “Do you mean I cross out Mansure and right
 Makhure instead?” he asked “with extreme unease.” At this moment the Chief Financial
 Supervisor of the Egyptian administration in Syria, Hanna Bahari, intervened in an attempt to ease the tension.
 He suggested to Mehmed Munib that the Ottoman scribe did not mean that the Ottoman army was victorious; only its
 soldiers were, “since now they have joined our army.” Munib Efendi still could not approve the title and said
 that it would be accepted if the scribe would write Asakir-i Mansure-i Neferat , “The
 [Companies of the] Privates of the Victorious Soldiers.” To this Hanna Bahari “could find no
 answer.” In the end the original words of the Ottoman scribe were recorded, but they were crossed out and Mehmed
 Munib’s suggestion was written above in the following manner: