
 

 
 “. . . no prayers nor bells” 4 
 

 
 The silence with which the authorities met these two petitions represents a more general silence about the dead
 and how to treat them. So far every chapter of this book has opened with a scene, an anecdote or a spectacle that
 set the tone for the chapter to follow. This chapter, however, opens with an absence of a
 scene, a scene that one would expect, but is found missing. Given the two cases of death mentioned above and
 given that the last chapter opened with a scene of battle, this chapter should have opened with a scene of a
 funeral. However, in all the thousands of documents about Mehmed Ali’s army and his various campaigns there is
 not a single description of a funeral either of an officer or of a soldier. As illustrated by the example of the
 two petitions mentioned above, highlighting the absence of the funeral, the hundreds and thousands of men who
 died in Mehmed Ali’s various campaigns received no dignified burial and the only concern of the authorities was
 that prompt notification be given about dates of death so as to cut salaries that were sometimes delivered to the
 men’s families back in Egypt. 5 As far as the authorities were
 concerned a dead man, officer or soldier, was only a name to be crossed off the army registers and
 payrolls. 6 More importantly, and as shown in the two cases
 mentioned above, the authorities were also concerned to have the deceased man’s belongings, claiming that they
 were miri property and had to revert to the government. 7 
 

 
 Apart from these “bookish” concerns of the authorities the dead in Mehmed Ali’s wars receive
 no attention. The thousands of men who died in the barren deserts of Arabia, in the hot lands of Sudan, in the
 cold steppes of Anatolia, and in the deep blue seas of the Mediterranean figure only accidentally in the
 contemporary documents. Commemorating the dead was not something that the authorities were particularly concerned
 about. Not only are the documents devoid of accounts of funerals, whether of soldiers or officers, but we also do
 not have any reference to war cemeteries or war memorials. As the two petitions mentioned above reveal, the
 officers, let alone the soldiers, were apprehensive that even after their death they were not going to be treated
 with dignity by the authorities and they had to arrange for their own funerals out of their own money – or what
 they thought was their own money until the authorities intervened, laying claim to that as well. One’s
 “inscription” in the Pasha’s registers was not to end with one’s death.
 

 
 The difficulty of writing the history of the men who lost their lives in Mehmed Ali’s campaigns and of their
 comrades who survived them is not only due to the absence of headstones in beautiful garden cemeteries, however.
 The fellahin of Egypt, who made up the overwhelming majority of Mehmed Ali’s fighting force and certainly
 represented the bulk of the casualties, were illiterate and did not leave us written testimonies of what it was
 like to fight in the Pasha’s armies; they had no Graves, Owen, Remarque or Sassoon among them to speak on their
 behalf and to tell us how it must have felt to confront the horrors and fears, the tension and bloody heaps, of
 the battlefield “Where God seems not to care.” 8 