
 

 
 This chapter does not attempt to tell the story of this lost generation. It opens with the silence of the
 authorities in dealing with death, not in order to fill this vacuum, to speak on these soldiers’ behalf, but in
 an attempt to pose an important question. Having seen in the last chapter how badly fed, irregularly paid and
 improperly clothed the soldiers were, and, in addition, having seen how they lacked the opportunity of a
 dignified burial, why then did these men keep on fighting? Judging from the record these men not only kept on
 fighting for Mehmed Ali and his elite but did so with spectacular success. Was coercion the only thing that kept
 them fighting? And if coercion can provide an explanation of how they were sent to the killing fields, can this
 also be an adequate explanation of how well they fared once the actual fighting began?
 

 
 The task, one has to admit, is not an easy one, not only because of the scarcity of source
 material describing the soldiers’ feelings and emotions during these tense times but also because the question is
 generally a difficult one to deal with regarding any battle and any army. Facing the closeness of death when all
 his senses are stretched literally to the limit, when obeying an order often meant dragging “their feet / Sore on
 the alleys cobbled with their brothers,” 9 what, it should be asked,
 impels the soldier to obey orders, march onto the enemy and gallantly “engage with him” and pour out “that red /
 Sweet wine of youth”? 10 
 

 
 One possible answer is to argue that the soldiers could not physically leave the battle site because they were
 prevented from doing so. In almost all descriptions of Ibrahim’s distribution of his forces in battles, we always
 see the irregular cavalry forces standing on guard at the rear of the army. These might have functioned as
 reserve troops that Ibrahim kept there in time of need. Given the traditional role that bedouins played in Mehmed
 Ali’s army, however, it seems equally plausible to argue that they were placed there to catch any deserters from
 the Egyptian side. When the actual battle started a large number of soldiers felt trapped not only between their
 ever watchful sentries behind them and the enemy ahead, but also between the strong urge to flee and desert the
 army altogether, on the one hand, an urge that was never really effectively quenched, and, on the other hand, the
 obligation to obey orders and “engage with the enemy” in a courageous, “manly” way. And unless one uncritically
 believes accounts of nationalist historians arguing that Mehmed Ali’s troops were willing to give up their lives
 for the sake of “Egypt,” these men had still not lost their instinct of self-preservation that kept them human in
 spite of years of training and indoctrination. “Placed in intolerable and unprecedented circumstances of fear and
 stress, deprived of their sense of control, and expected to react with . . . unnatural ‘courage’” 11 a lot of these men could not continue fighting, broke down, and reacted
 in a manner that recalls the behavior of many British soldiers in the Great War of 1914–18.