
 

 
 Faced with a near epidemic outbreak of “home-sickness” Clot Bey, the Chief Physician of the army, felt it
 necessary to refer to it in a booklet that he wrote for young army doctors “so that they can consult it at ease
 without having to refer to other larger tomes.” 21 In it he gives
 special instructions to the officers and doctors telling them how to deal with home-sickness among the soldiers.
 

 
 Home-sickness [ al-ishtiyāq ila al-waṭan ] is a disease that often afflicts the new soldiers
 after leaving their homes, families and things familiar to them. This leads them to depression, melancholy,
 soreness, tiredness and sometimes to death. Therefore, they have to be kept occupied as much as possible and to
 be promised their imminent return home . . . As much as possible soldiers have to be kept in a happy, content
 state and their officers have to be ordered to be gentle with them . . . and to make them believe that the
 dangers they are about to encounter are not grave. 22 
 

 
 In that sense Mehmed Ali’s soldiers, like all soldiers facing any battle, were caught between the devil and the
 deep blue sea. Before the tense few hours of battle they were confronted with the prospect of meeting the enemy
 with all the feelings of fear and horror that fighting entailed. Behind them were the memories of home, of fields
 left unattended, of deserted families, of wives and loved ones abandoned, left to their luck. Leaving the battle scene to return home was impossible since guards and sentries were always looking
 over them. When the battle started the tension heightened: to do nothing and to stay still or to fall back to the
 relative security of the reserve lines was always risky, since this carried with it the certainty of being court
 martialled. Being trapped in this manner, the soldiers had nothing better to do than obey the orders issued to
 them in the form of command signals and shouts from their officers. An example from the battle of Konia might
 make this clear. During a minor counter-attack by the Ottomans the Egyptians lost all order and the whole 1st
 Cavalry Brigade was thrown into confusion. Here is the testimony of one of the majors.
 

 
 When the Guardia Regiment started to engage with the enemy both our colonel and our lieutenant-colonel gave
 orders to assume the line formation. I did not hear the Brigadier give this order. Before we had assumed the new
 formation however both the brigadier and the colonel gave the orders to attack so we attacked but our left wing
 started to retreat and the whole brigade got muddled with itself ( liva beraberine karişdi ).
 The standard bearer was wounded and the officers were forcing the soldiers to return by forcing them around with
 their swords ( zabitan kiliçlar ile askeri cevirdi ). We then gathered our battalions,
 separated them from each other and put them in order . . . The trumpeters then gave the signal to deploy in
 column and we soon took that formation. 23 
 

 
 If ever the Egyptian army could be said to have been superior to its Ottoman adversary, it was in situations like
 this when it was not the courage, honor or high morale that came to the rescue, but the constant drilling and
 repetitious training that induced the soldiers to recognize in the midst of the hubbub and clamor of the battle
 the familiar sight of a banner or the decipherable sound of a trumpet that signified something meaningful to
 them. These signals, banners and command shouts seemed to give the illusion of order in such tense moments.
 During the taxing hours of battle soldiers had no choice but to obey commands, not only because not obeying them
 brought with it the likelihood of punishment but also because disregarding them seemed to bring death closer
 still. The soldier stood to benefit personally from obeying orders during the decisive hours of battle since
 these orders gave at least a semblance of order and organization. 24 