
 

 
 Shell shock and home-sickness
 

 
 On the face of it the Syrian campaign of 1831–40 and the First World War of 1914–18 are so different in nature
 and distant in time that the comparison between them becomes nearly untenable. For one
 thing, the Great War was fought between European powers in the twentieth century and the Syrian campaign was an
 inter-Ottoman military conflict that took place nearly a century earlier. The tactics employed, the weapons used,
 and the intensity of the battles of both wars make them look radically different. One was a campaign of swift
 movement, where thousands of troops marched over hundreds of miles in short spans of time; the other was a war of
 trenches, of countless abortive attacks, and of millions of troops “entrenched” in their positions for years on
 end. In addition, the causes of the wars and the quality of the military leadership make comparison even harder.
 In contrast to the remarkable imagination, the sly wit, and the insightful character of Ibrahim Pasha, Sir
 Douglas Haig, the commander of the British forces in the Great War, was lacking in “wit and invention . . . [in
 addition to being] stubborn, self-righteous, inflexible, intolerant . . . quite humourless . . . provincial [and]
 bullheaded.” 12 
 

 
 Be that as it may, as far as both wars were experienced by the soldiers who did the fighting and not by the
 commanders who drove them to their deaths there are significant similarities between them that make comparison
 worthwhile. In both wars there was an underlying current of discontent with the war, of “pacifism,” to use a
 modern term, a feeling that the war was futile, purposeless and unnecessary. In spite of the subsequent attempts
 to write such “pacifist” tendencies out of the official narratives of both wars, the record shows that in
 addition to their reactions to the horror, anguish, fear and panic of the actual combat situation the men often
 broke down and refused to continue with the slaughter. During the Great War such cases were referred to as “shell
 shock”; by 1916 such cases had accounted for 40 percent of the total casualties in the combat zones. 13 W. H. R. Rivers, the noted anthropologist and clinical psychologist who
 treated numerous cases of “shell shock” during the war, concluded that the “quantity of neurotic symptoms
 correlated not with the intensity of battle, the length of an individual’s service, or his emotional disposition,
 but with the degree of his immobility.” 14 In
 the Syrian war it was during the prolonged siege of Acre (early December 1831 to late May of the following year)
 that thousands of Egyptian troops were feeling vulnerable, sitting immobile as they did in the sappers’ trenches
 that they were digging to approach the walls of the fortress and falling prey to the shells that were being fired
 from the defiant city. It was then that the men started showing signs that could only be read as “shell shock”
 and resembled the experiences of the British soldiers eighty years later.