
 

 
 In one incident during that siege a soldier was killed by the shells fired from the fortress. On seeing his body
 his comrades panicked, left the battle scene together, and headed back to the relative security of the trenches.
 Their captain also deserted his position and went all the way back to the army camp to inform his commander of
 the incident. Four days later these men were court martialled. The captain was told that his reasons for
 deserting his position were not accepted since it was ridiculous to go and inform the commander of every soldier
 who died. The soldiers were also told that their actions were unmanly and cowardly, and violated the law which
 said that “if a certain soldier dies and in order to prevent fear spreading his body should be promptly hidden
 from his colleagues.” 15 In another incident during the same siege,
 a soldier threw himself on the ground in an attempt to escape the shrapnel of the cannon balls fired from the
 castle. Unfortunately for the poor soldier, Ibrahim Pasha was passing by and happened to witness his behavior
 which he considered unbecoming to a soldier. He summoned the soldier in question and ordered all the men in the
 vicinity (“one or two companies”) to spit on his face because he dared to show his fear. 16 
 

 
 What was of concern to Ibrahim Pasha, besides the implicit challenge that such acts pose to the very concept of
 “manliness,” was the possible effects they might have on general morale and discipline: an army whose men crack
 up and desert on the first opportunity is no army at all. Severe punishments faced those who dared to violate
 military laws governing the actual combat situation as well as those who transgressed general cultural norms
 defining “manly” behavior. But “law” alone was not enough, and occasionally “medicine” was resorted to in dealing
 with other cases of “unmanly” behavior. One such was the feelings of home-sickness that a lot of soldiers fell
 prey to often immediately after being conscripted.
 

 
 Anxious about their families left behind and about their lands whose productivity was
 certainly affected, many men found it extremely painful to be forced to leave their villages for destinations
 mysterious to them and for a period of unknown duration. And it was not uncommon for the men, on finally
 returning to their villages, to “find the wives and daughters, whom they, perhaps, loved and cherished,
 irremediably lost: many families are thus entirely broken up.” 17 
 English travelers could not understand this attachment that the fellahin had to their villages and often saw it
 as a pathetic case of home-sickness from which they should be cured. “To us Englishmen,” one of them wrote, “it
 appears almost incredible that young men of from eighteen to twenty-five years of age should regard as hardship
 the being obliged to leave home.” 18 Similarly Dr. Bowring on
 visiting the troops in Syria found “the numbers of persons who pined to death, sinking under the influence of
 this unmedicable malady . . . very considerable.” 19 When he
 discussed the matter with the physician of the camp, the doctor told him, “‘I cannot keep them alive . . . when
 they begin to think and talk of home.’ And long before they die [Dr. Bowring adds,] they sink into a listless,
 careless inanity. . . ” 20 