
 

 
 This one case is significant for a number of reasons. First, it undermines the impression one gets from reading
 the military laws which organized the daily lives of the soldiers in the barracks. In spite of the sentry
 officers, the soldiers guarding the gates and fences of the camps, the bedouin forces roaming the vicinities of
 the camps, and the stipulation that all visitors be forbidden from entering such exclusive areas, this fellah not
 only succeeded in penetrating these supposedly insurmountable barriers but continued to live undetected with his
 friend for fifteen days. The presumably impermeable boundaries that were erected by the various laws, decrees and
 manuals were in fact constantly negotiated and crossed by the soldiers during their daily lives in the camps, a
 fact poignantly illustrated by the ability of the soldier to shout back at his officer from behind bars.
 

 
 Second, it shows that in spite of years of training, of being subjected to a strict system of surveillance and
 control and in spite of continuous drills and exercises, the sergeant-major in question did not show signs that
 all this had had any significant effect on the way he was supposed to think and act – i.e.
 as a soldier and not as a fellah/civilian. Having come across a fellow villager, it was natural for him to extend
 him an invitation to stay with him on the camp and he could not see why his commanding officers were so harsh and
 inhospitable to his visitor. When his friend was arrested he could not see why he was being reprimanded and
 punished. His body might seem to have been closely controlled, but his heart and mind appeared to still belong to
 a different world, that of civilian life back in the nostalgically remote lands of Egypt.
 

 
 Third, it throws doubt on the nature of the soldier–officer relationship, a relationship that is defined in the
 training manuals and in the different military laws as a hierarchical and clearly defined one. When he was caught
 and put in jail the only reason he could give for his captain’s “odd” behavior was that they had not known each
 other personally; if they had, this whole issue could have been avoided. 26 Again years of training and indoctrination seem not to have had any significant impact on
 the manner in which the soldiers thought about and felt towards their officers.
 

 
 This chapter, having failed to take its lead from a funeral scene, follows on from this scene of “life behind the
 bars.” It is interested in the men at the lowest echelons of the military hierarchy – the soldiers – and
 specifically seeks to contrast the impressive and monolithic picture of the army as portrayed in the training
 manuals and the various military laws with accounts of the daily lives of the soldiers in the camps and barracks.
 It attempts to understand how these seemingly beneficial regulations and orderly manuals were actually applied,
 and to elaborate further on the reasons for the discrepancy that invariably existed between these model orders
 and regulations and the way they were performed. Since this chapter is interested in soldiers and their
 understanding of, and reactions to, the programs and blueprints that were set down to manage their bodies, one
 particular aspect of their lives in the camps is analyzed, namely their health, which the authorities, in their
 constant fear and worry of spread of disease, kept a diligent eye on. Here the manuals and regulations that the
 following argument takes as its point of departure are not training ones, but medical and hygiene blueprints and
 regulations that aimed not to turn the new recruit into a well-disciplined soldier, but into a healthy, clean
 man.