
 

 
 Early in 1826 the Pasha wrote to his agent in Istanbul asking him to find a doctor capable of dealing with
 scabies and venereal diseases since, as he said, “although we have doctors who are adept in dealing with a
 variety of diseases, we lack doctors knowledgeable about treating these two ailments.” 54 It is not clear if any of these doctors were actually sent from Istanbul;
 nor is it clear, assuming they were in fact sent, if they accompanied the army on its Syrian campaign. If they
 did accompany the army, then it is obvious that they were not very successful in dealing with these two particular ailments. A couple of months after the outbreak of the Syrian campaign scabies and
 syphilis were high on the list of diseases prevalent among the soldiers. 55 The hospitals in Syria could not cope with their rapidly increasing numbers and many of the
 patients had to be sent back to Egypt for treatment. 56 During a
 particular medical examination, the number of patients afflicted with syphilis was equal to the number of all
 other patients put together. 57 Recognizing the seriousness of the
 situation Mehmed Ali had to order his nephew, Ahmed Pasha Yeğen, to supervise checking the soldiers
 himself. 58 Eventually, and as evidence that these two ailments
 received particular attention, the pre-printed daily reports of the hospitals in Syria had separate entries for
 them in which the director of the hospital simply filled in the number of syphilitic and scabietic
 soldiers. 59 
 

 
 The young doctors who had recently graduated from the Abū-Za‘bal hospital faced enormous difficulties in the
 near-epidemic proportions of these two diseases. At the outbreak of the Syrian campaign the Abū-Za‘bal school was
 still in its formative years and was suffering from managerial, financial and technical problems which seriously
 undermined its performance and greatly affected the level of competence of its early graduates. 60 
 

 
 Two particular problems seem to have tainted the performance of the school. The first concerned the language to
 be used as a medium of instruction and the second related to the time spent in the school before graduation.
 While the Pasha and the chief physician of his army, Clot Bey, resorted to the logical choice of recruiting
 graduates of al-Azhar since this formed the only pool of young literate men in the country, these men certainly
 had no knowledge of French or any other foreign language. At the same time, most of the doctors who were employed
 in teaching in the school had no knowledge of Arabic. To surmount this problem, a number of translators were
 assigned to each lecturer and asked to translate the lecture while it was being delivered.
 

 
 It was a most curious situation; a hundred Egyptian students from al-Azhar who knew only Arabic and who had never
 received any training but in Arabic grammar, Koranic Exegesis, Fikh, etc. gathered together in order to be
 trained in medical and scientific subjects of which they had not the slightest idea by a number of European
 teachers who did not know the language of their students and who themselves were not homogenous [four being
 French, three Italians, a Spaniard], a Piedmontese and . . . a Bavarian. 61 