
 

 
 However, it was the narrower concern for the health and hygiene of the soldiers that attracted most of the
 Pasha’s attention and that of his chief medical advisors. The concentration of large numbers of men in the
 military schools, training camps and, of course, in the field camps along the different warring fronts, brought
 with it the possibility of widespread disease which could have posed serious threats to a country whose manpower
 was already drained by the Pasha’s insatiable needs. As in his attempt to control smallpox, the plague and
 cholera, the Pasha learned his lesson the hard way. In the early months of the disastrous Sudan campaign the army
 that he sent down there lost 600 men who fell dead of various diseases. Owing to the lack of doctors, medicine
 and qualified medical personnel the number of dead in September 1821 rose to 600 in addition to 2,000 men who had
 fallen prey to various diseases. The following month the number of dead rose even further to 1,500: this in an
 army of three thousand troops. 43 Even after that army had managed
 to secure 20,000 black slaves and to send them down the Nile to Egypt, these unfortunate people could not survive
 the trip and were falling “like sheep with the rot” prompting the Pasha, as we saw in chapter 2 above, to ask Boghus Bey, his Armenian advisor for
 foreign affairs, to fetch him some American doctors who might be useful in treating the
 slaves. The Morean campaign was similarly ill equipped, with doctors and medical supplies often sent after the
 departure of the military units they were supposed to serve, 44 and
 when these medical supplies were finally received, they were often found to be defective. 45 
 

 
 When he set out to found his new nizami army the Pasha could not afford to lose men in that
 most costly way. In that respect it was Dr. Clot Bey who proved most useful for him. One of the earliest
 accomplishments of Clot Bey 46 was to build two permanent military
 hospitals, one for the army and the other for the navy, near areas of high troop concentration. In 1827 the
 military hospital of Abū-Za‘bal was built near the Jihad Abad training camp in Hankah in northern Cairo, 47 and in Alexandria the Maḥmūdiyya Hospital was constructed to serve 26,000
 soldiers and 11,000 laborers employed in the infamous Liman. 48 
 

 
 These two hospitals were reputed to be impressive medical institutions conforming “to the pattern of
 hospital-affiliated training centers that had become the norm in France and England by 1830.” 49 Besides being a military hospital, the Abū-Za‘bal hospital (later to be
 known after its new location, Qaṣr al-‘Ainī) also functioned as a medical school. On graduation, the students,
 mostly Arabic-speaking Egyptians, were appointed as military doctors and attached to the various infantry and
 cavalry regiments thus forming the nucleus of the new military medical corps. On the eve of the Syrian campaign
 the blueprint creating this corps was put down by Clot Bey and approved by the Pasha in consultation with his
 chief physician, the Italian Gaetani Bey, and members of the War Department. It was decided that each infantry
 regiment was to have one European doctor supervising three Egyptian ones. The cavalry regiments were to have one
 European doctor in addition to two Egyptian ones. Those Egyptian doctors were to be given the rank of second
 lieutenant. All doctors were to be under the supervision of their respective colonels and brigadiers without
 these latter, however, interfering in their professional work. The regulations proceeded to give such details as
 the position of the tents of the various doctors in respect to those of senior officers in
 the regiments and the brigades. 50 