
 

 
 In a revealing letter, Munib Efendi, Ibrahim Pasha’s Aide-de-Camp, wrote to Ahmed Bey, the
 Governor of Damascus, complaining about the problems of securing a sufficient number of these servants ( hizmetkar ). He said that although the army hospitals in Syria were arranged according to European
 regulations ( Avrupa kanunu üzere ) which stipulated appointing one servant per twelve
 patients (and one per six patients if they were segregated), he admitted that these regulations could not be
 carried out. The main reason was lack of funds. He elaborated by saying that there was no problem in appointing
 barbers for the patients, since these could always be secured from the soldiers of the regiment at large. The
 problem, he explained, was securing servants to cook and clean the hospitals. These had to be hired from the
 local population, something that obviously cost money. To cut down on expenses, he suggested the appointment of
 some of the “semi-disabled” ( yanm sakatlar ) as servants. Since these might not be able to
 walk, he soon realized, animals would have to be hired to transport them to their jobs, something that would
 entail more, and not less, expense. After waffling on in this manner, Munib Efendi was at a loss over what to
 do. 84 
 

 
 The hospitals in Syria were also suffering from being overcrowded with patients and understaffed by doctors. An
 investigation was once conducted into the performance of the hospital in Acre. Munib Efendi conducted the
 investigation himself and cleared the hospital’s director of responsibility. The problem, his report said, was
 that the hospital was overcrowded and the doctors could not cope with the number of patients they were receiving
 every day. At that particular time it had over 300 inmates and was expecting forty-five more patients that day.
 This large number made it impossible to order the patients to have their regular baths, something that the
 patients afflicted with scabies had to do as part of their treatment. The other problem, Munib Efendi added in
 his report, was that the doctors had no control over the patients, who were constantly going out to the markets
 and no one could stop them. 85 
 

 
 When contrasted with Clot Bey’s regulations, these accounts of the way the regimental field hospitals in Syria
 functioned show the enormous gap separating model from reality that so characterizes the entire reign of Mehmed
 Ali, and not only his health policy. As seen above, the regimental hospitals were underfunded, overcrowded,
 lacked qualified doctors capable of dealing with the health problems of an army at war and, above all, suffered
 from all the problems that were characteristic of other establishments of the Pasha, namely
 corruption and inefficiency.
 

 
 Having seen the scale of the problems pertaining to the health and hygiene of the soldiers in Syria it is now
 possible to explain the problems that the authorities faced in their attempts to deal with the two diseases that
 we are concerned with, scabies and syphilis. As far as the spread of scabies was concerned, one reason seems to
 have been the overcrowded nature of the barracks and camps. 86 More
 importantly, the logistical and bureaucratic problems reviewed in the last chapter meant that, as was seen above,
 the soldiers were rarely issued new uniforms and that they had to stay in their old, often dirty ones for a long
 time. When Hassan Efendi, the adjutant-major of the 8th Infantry Regiment, received orders to investigate the
 appearance and uniforms of his soldiers he found most of them in direct violation of the regulations. In a report
 he sent to his major he said that their uniforms have worn out and “hardly anything is left of the shoes on their
 feet and a lot of them walk bare-foot in the markets.” 87 A general
 investigation ( yoklama ) was ordered into the appearance and discipline of all the soldiers
 in various regiments in Syria. Its findings are interesting enough to justify quoting extensively from them.