
 

 
 This weird system invited all kinds of problems. On one occasion, for example, a certain translator, Shaykh
 Harrāwī, objected to having to translate some of Clot Bey’s lectures because he disagreed with the doctor’s
 opinions. Clot Bey wrote to Mehmed Ali, who in turn wrote to the Deputy Director of the War Department telling
 him that he was surprised that the Health Council had not reprimanded the Shaykh strongly enough. He then said
 that the Shaykh should be written a strong letter telling him to mind his own business and not to interfere in
 Clot Bey’s lectures “since he is a translator no more.” 62 
 

 
 Eventually this problem was surmounted. On his return from Paris Shaykh Rifā‘a al-Ṭahṭāwī was intended to be
 attached to the School of Medicine in Abū-Za‘bal and to have twenty students working with him on translating
 medical books from French into Arabic and to compile a French–Arabic dictionary. 63 When it was deemed more suitable to employ Shaykh Rifā‘a elsewhere, the first batch of
 graduates of the Medical School were themselves employed to teach another generation of
 students, and this time instruction was conducted in Arabic. In due time Arabic lexicons were compiled and
 medical books were translated and even written in Arabic. 64 
 Eventually the entire process of medical education was Arabized. 65 
 These measures, however, because of their very nature, needed time to come to fruition, and during the Syrian
 campaign the language problems encountered in instruction were reflected in the low standard of the early
 graduates.
 

 
 More important than the language problems was the habit of appointing the early graduates of the Abū-Za‘bal
 School as regimental doctors and attaching them to the army in Syria before they had received enough training in
 the school. Time constraints meant that these students were discharged from school and sent to field service
 before they had completed their proper training courses. On being sent to active duty they “neglected the medical
 books they had studied and never went back to consult them. Since they knew that they no longer had to sit for
 exams, they had no recourse to these books . . . They thus forgot whatever they had learned.” 66 Occasionally, having been proven to be unqualified to deal with the
 various cases they had to face in Syria, these young graduates were charged with incompetence and sent back to
 Egypt to finish their studies. 67 
 

 
 Faced with a near epidemic of scabies and syphilis, and having unqualified doctors to deal with them, Clot Bey
 wrote a special treatise about the subject. 68 Translated into
 Arabic and printed in the Army Press, the treatise took the form of a personal letter from the chief physician of
 the army to each regimental doctor. This treatise is significant because it shows the alarming spread of these
 diseases, something that necessitated the intervention of the chief physician of the army himself. It started by
 saying that “it has lately been reported that a large number of soldiers had been afflicted with scabies and
 syphilis, which are highly contagious. It is feared that if no strong and effective measures are taken, they will
 spread even further.” 69 More significant is the tone in which the
 treatise was written. It was not enough for the head of the military medical establishment
 to say that particular care should be given to treating these two ailments; he also had to write in detail how
 the physical check-up was to be conducted, and how the patients were to be isolated, treated and regularly
 examined to make sure that they were cured. Given the low level of competence of the regimental doctors, Clot Bey
 had to write the book as a manual describing in very simplistic language how to conduct the check-ups so that any
 doctor with the most basic knowledge of medicine would be able to follow it using a minimum degree of
 discretion. 70 