
 

 
 Another area in which the problem of lack of funds manifested itself was the quality of food issued to the
 military hospitals. In spite of Clot Bey’s explicit regulations that soldiers should be fed clean, well-cooked
 food and to have a healthy diet, 76 the soldiers in Qaṣr al-‘Ainī
 hospital were constantly complaining of bad food and this was a regular complaint throughout the hospital’s
 history during Mehmed Ali’s reign. When in 1836, for example, an examination was conducted on the conditions of
 the Tura and Qaṣr al-‘Ainī hospitals in Cairo, it was discovered, among other things, that both hospitals were
 issuing less meat to their patients than was stipulated by the regulations. When the report was sent to Mehmed
 Ali he forwarded it to the War Department to take the necessary steps to alleviate the problems. The Deputy
 Director of the War Department returned the report to the Pasha, however, claiming that this was not the War
 Department’s business but that of the Health Council. The Pasha refused to accept this pretext, and insisted that
 the War Department deal with the complaints. 77 Two years later,
 when the Pasha saw for himself the appalling condition of the hospitals in Cairo, he wrote to both Clot Bey and
 the Deputy Director of the War Department urging them to co-ordinate their efforts in
 improving the conditions of the hospitals. 78 
 

 
 Nevertheless, eight years later Clot Bey was still writing to the War Department complaining of the quality of
 food in Qaṣr al-‘Ainī hospital. In an extensive report he wrote that the
 

 
 food of both officers and soldiers is the same and is composed of: rice, broiled meat, and bread that is most
 often of bad quality . . . [Moreover,] the patients’ food, according to medical regulations, should not be
 composed of rice and meat, but they should occasionally be offered chicken, pigeons, eggs, milk, fish,
 vegetables, and fruit, in addition to other items ordered by the doctors as stipulated in the Hospital
 Regulations that have been translated into Turkish and approved by Khedival Order. Accordingly, we hope that
 attention and revision be given to improving the above-mentioned hospital especially since this will not only be
 an act of mercy to the poor patients, but also [this will be important] for the fame of this hospital, since all
 notable European tourists [make it a point to] visit it [while touring the country]. 79 
 

 
 More than ten years later doctors were still complaining of the quality of food issued to the patients and saying
 that meat in particular was “causing diseases to the patients rather than helping them in their
 convalescence.” 80 
 

 
 Given this problem of lack of funds it should not be surprising to discover that the hospitals in Cairo, let
 alone the regimental ones in Syria, were not particularly hygienic. When Selim Bey, the Colonel of the Guardia
 Regiment, went on an investigative tour of the barracks of his regiment in Syria, he found the whole place
 stinking deplorably. 81 This, he discovered, was caused by the fact
 that no one was assigned to clean the bathrooms and that the rooms where the wounded were kept smelt foul because
 their occupants were still wearing blood-stained clothes. On visiting the hospital he found more than 200
 patients with scabies sleeping on the floor because their mattresses were not filled with straw. 82 When the nurses were asked why the mattresses were empty, they answered
 that they could not do all the jobs themselves and that they had no workers to help them. 83 