
 

 
 But how does the soldier behave, not during, but before and after battle? If he was conditioned to behave during
 battles as the training manuals portrayed him, i.e. as a soul-less, machine-like being, did he also behave
 likewise even after the immediate danger of death had receded? To answer this question we
 have to move from “battle pieces” to accounts of the daily lives of the soldiers in their barracks and training
 camps; we have to go behind the lines where the soldiers prepared for battles or recuperated from them. It is by
 studying the lives of the soldiers in the relative security of the barracks and military camps that a true
 assessment of how successful the authorities were in transforming the peasant into a disciplined soldier can be
 made.
 

 
 The image we have from the various training manuals and military laws reviewed in chapter 3 leaves one with the impression that the barracks,
 training camps, naval hospitals, and military schools were heavily guarded, tightly controlled, and closely
 watched. Like the various orders of Mehmed Ali reviewed in the last chapter, however, the laws governing these
 institutions were not applied without difficulties and invariably there was a considerable discrepancy between
 how the training manuals wanted the soldier to behave in the military camp and how in fact he spent his daily
 life. An example might make this discrepancy clear.
 

 
 On roaming the camp of the 8th Infantry Regiment a certain captain found an outsider in the quarters of his
 company. He asked him where he was from, and the stranger answered that he was a fellah from Egypt who had been
 visiting a relative of his, a sergeant-major in the same company, and had been staying with him for fifteen days.
 This was at the height of the siege of Acre when the entire army was supposed to be on high alert and when
 civilians, Egyptians or not, were forcibly refused entry to the camp unless they carried a stamped certificate
 stating explicitly the reason for and nature of their visit. Alarmed, the captain summoned one of his lieutenants
 to order the sergeant-major in question to ask his friend to leave the camp, since, as he said, “there is no
 business for strangers here ( barrani adamin işi yoktur ).” When later it was discovered that
 the fellah was still on the premises, the captain summoned the fellah again and asked him why he had still not
 left. The fellah answered that he had nothing to do in the camp but had come to see his relative and now that
 this had been done he would be moving out. The captain then threatened him that if he did not leave at once, he
 would arrest him and have him beaten. When the sergeant-major heard this he went to the captain and complained of
 the way his friend was being treated. He explained that he and the fellah were from the same village and added
 that he would not order his friend out unless there were a ship available and ready to take him back to Egypt.
 The captain then arrested the fellah and beat him. In addition, he also arrested the sergeant-major and had him
 imprisoned. While in prison, and from behind bars, the sergeant-major shouted at his captain that it was only
 because the captain had recently been moved from another company that they could not get
 along together and that if they had been serving together in the same company, all this could have been avoided,
 and “I would have been accepted by you ( senin yaninda makbul olurdum ).” 25 