
 

 
 Although the low level of competence of the new doctors might have been a serious problem, the main difficulty in
 dealing with scabies and syphilis lay in the appalling condition of the army hospitals in Syria that militated
 against a healthy, sanitary environment, an obvious essential condition for preventing the spread of disease. It
 was one thing for Clot Bey or the medical authorities in Cairo to stipulate that soldiers were to be segregated
 and regularly examined, it was another thing for this segregation and these examinations to be carried out as
 planned.
 

 
 Lack of funds seems to have been one of the principal reasons for the dilapidated condition of the army hospitals
 in Syria as well as those in Egypt, and Clot Bey was in the habit of writing bitter letters to the War Department
 complaining about the insufficiency of medicine and food issued to the hospitals. “I do not understand,” he said
 in one such letter, “why there is always a readiness not only to belittle the [entire] medical service but also
 to abolish [things] related to it . . . [This in spite of the fact] that the medical regulations used in the
 various hospitals in Egypt stipulate the expenditure of only one-twentieth of what hospitals in Europe
 spend.” 71 In that respect the Chief Physician of the army sometimes
 had the backing of the Pasha; more often, however, the Pasha in his typical thrifty manner would require him to
 make do with what was available. For example, when it was brought to his attention that students in the School of
 Medicine were issued with small uniforms that did not fit them, he characteristically answered that “each person
 has to extend his legs as much as could be covered by his trousers.” 72 
 

 
 Another example of this stinginess had to do with what appears to have been a trivial matter, but one which was
 central for the performance of the medical establishment and the subject of a voluminous correspondence, namely,
 the quality of surgical bandages used to dress wounds. In spite of having a special book translated and printed in the Būlāq Press on that subject, 73 doctors
 were constantly complaining about the bandages that were issued to them. 74 In one letter Clot Bey wrote in desperation complaining of the quality of the bandages in
 Qaṣr al-‘Ainī hospital.
 

 
 Since the quality of bandages is considered to be one of the key issues in surgery, we have conducted an
 examination of these bandages used in the hospital and found that they are very bad indeed. They were coarse and
 dirty, contaminating the wounds that they are supposed to dress . . . [Then he gives his explanation for this
 situation:] An order has been issued from the War Department to the Director of the Central Depot of Medicine to
 hand in used and semi-used [ nisf isti‘māl ] cloth to the Chief Pharmacist accompanied by a
 stamped receipt. The Chief Pharmacist is then supposed to hand the cloth to the Chief Surgeon also accompanied by
 a receipt. The Chief Surgeon, in turn, is then to hand in the cloth to the Director of the Hospital who would
 then distribute it among the patients to make the bandages themselves. He is then supposed to collect them from
 the patients. In this manner the bandages would have already changed hands four times. This is against the
 Hospital regulations that should not be violated. 75 