
 

 
 The piercing medical gaze
 

 
 Besides feeding, clothing and training the troops, the authorities paid considerable attention to the state of
 physical health and general hygiene of the conscripts. Mehmed Ali appears to have realized that to have a healthy
 body of troops care had to be given to the general health situation of the population at large. His concern with
 medical matters was not limited to the troops but included “students in state schools, workers in state
 industries, and urban and rural communities related to any government activity.” 27 The Pasha is often described as opening hospitals, sending students to Europe to study
 medicine, ordering the vaccination of the population against smallpox, and instituting quarantines around major
 ports and cities in an attempt to control the spread of contagious diseases, mainly cholera and the plague. His
 measures to design a modern military and civilian public health program is seen as one of his greatest
 achievements that laid the basis for the creation of a modern medical profession in Egypt and which “helped get rid of the clouds of ignorance that have been hovering over the country for
 centuries.” 28 
 

 
 Examples abound of the Pasha’s health concerns. As early as 1819 he ordered his deputy to institute a program of
 vaccination against smallpox throughout the country. 29 This must
 have been prompted by the exceedingly heavy toll it took on the population: Clot Bey says that on his arrival in
 Egypt in 1825 smallpox was “cruelly ravaging the country. Every year it killed no fewer than fifty to sixty
 thousand children,” 30 making it alone responsible for increasing
 the infant mortality rate by 40 or 50 per thousand, in turn raising the overall annual death rate to something
 between 3 and 4 per thousand. 31 In 1824 the Pasha requested M.
 Drovetti, the French Consul-General, to secure a number of doctors from France who would administer a wide
 vaccination program in the countryside. Three such doctors arrived in Egypt and started to vaccinate the fellahin
 against smallpox in various provinces in Lower Egypt. 32 A year
 later they were sent to Middle Egypt to extend vaccination there. 33 
 After Clot Bey’s arrival and his taking over the entire health establishment 34 vaccination was extended all over the country, and in 1834 he wrote a treatise that was
 translated into Arabic and printed in the Būlāq Press concerning how vaccination was to be performed by the
 various doctors and the village barbers and how it should be recorded in registers specially prepared for that
 purpose. 35 As a result of these efforts, by the late 1840s the
 Azbakiyya Hospital in Cairo was vaccinating children at the rate of 600 per month. 36 
 

 
 Besides being hit by smallpox, Egypt was repeatedly visited during the first half of the nineteenth century by
 two other deadly diseases, cholera and the plague, which prompted the authorities to take serious action to limit their impact on the population. 37 In
 1812 the Pasha’s Italian physicians suggested that he should restrict the entry of ships coming from Istanbul
 which had been hit by the plague that year. 38 The following year
 after plague had spread in different parts of Lower Egypt, having presumably hit Alexandria first, the Pasha
 expressed his desire to establish a lazaretto in Alexandria to quarantine passengers and sailors from ships
 arriving from plague-stricken areas. 39 In 1828 he ordered Müharrem
 Bey, his son-in-law who was governor of Alexandria, to consult with the foreign consuls in the city to draft
 quarantine regulations and enforce them in the rapidly expanding port city. 40 Besides Alexandria, quarantines were imposed on the ports of Damietta in 1829 and Rosetta in
 1831. 41 Eventually, and facing the alarming outbreak of cholera in
 1831, an international quarantine board was established in Alexandria composed of the different foreign consuls
 in the city, the first such attempt at international disease control. 42 