
 

 
 Impressive as all these measures might appear, we do not know how they were actually implemented nor how they
 were received by the soldiers. As far as the civilian population is concerned, very little is known about the
 response to the new and unprecedented ways in which people’s daily lives were managed by the medical
 establishment that the Pasha created in Egypt. A recent book on the history of the introduction of modern
 medicine in Egypt in the nineteenth century, for example, failed to take account of the reaction of the average
 Egyptian to such novel practices as vaccination, post-mortems and/or autopsy. It also lacked any information
 about the every-day functioning of the numerous health offices ( makātib al-siḥḥa ) which were
 established in Cairo in the late 1840s. Moreover, it paid no attention to the functioning of the various field
 hospitals that were founded in the different localities in Syria in spite of these being the first medical
 institutions that the earliest Egyptian medical students were employed in. In addition, by limiting itself to the
 performance of the School of Medicine (attached to Qaṣr al-‘Ainī hospital) and uncritically accepting Clot Bey’s
 testimony about the performance of that school and indeed about the whole medical establishment, it becomes
 inevitable to argue that the school was “more than another academic institution; [that] it played a central role
 in the creation of a medical profession in Egypt, and [that it] thereby came to represent a center of
 civilization that was to have an enlightening effect on the country as a whole.” 51 
 

 
 What follows is an attempt to assess the degree to which the different medical establishments faithfully followed
 the blueprints that were set down mostly by Clot Bey to organize them. Again the intention
 is not only to highlight the difference between the simplistic picture drawn in the blueprint with the more
 complicated account of the daily workings of the medical establishments, but also to understand something about
 the social and intellectual context of these medical blueprints: who wrote them, what scientific ideas informed
 them, what interests they served, etc. Furthermore, particular attention is given both to the reaction of the
 soldiers to having their bodies so minutely scrutinized and to the performance of the regimental field hospitals
 in Syria, which more than the remote hospital of Qaṣr al-‘Ainī bore the brunt of caring for the soldiers’ health
 during the Syrian campaign.
 

 
 Syphilis and scabies
 

 
 The difficulties encountered by the health authorities in controlling the spread of disease among the soldiery,
 as well as providing them with some medical services, were caused in the first place by the serious structural
 problems that were endemic to the entire medical establishment, and that were most clearly seen in the military
 field hospitals. To analyze the nature of these problems, and to try and understand their underlying causes, it
 is probably useful to look closely at how the health authorities attempted to deal with two ailments that raised
 particular problems, namely scabies ( uyuz ) and syphilis ( frengi ). 52 There are a number of reasons for choosing
 these two diseases. First, and most obviously, these were diseases that the authorities themselves were very
 concerned about both because of their high incidence and because they required a long period of treatment which
 meant significantly reducing the strength of the fighting force. 53 
 Second, they were both diseases whose detection necessitated close and regular examination of the soldiers’
 bodies, especially since soldiers often lied to the authorities rather than admit that they had contracted one of
 these diseases. This close medical scrutiny prompted the resistance of the soldiers to the authorities in general
 and also exposed the inadequate medical knowledge of the Egyptians doctors in dealing with these diseases. Third,
 being highly contagious, they required strict segregation of the afflicted, as well as some basic sanitary
 conditions for treatment, conditions that were often unmet by the regimental field hospitals that were erected in various parts of Syria. Fourth, and most importantly, dealing with syphilis
 necessitated a rigid control of the men’s sexual behavior, something which, in turn, required a strict
 segregation from the outside world which often proved difficult to enforce.