
 

 
 Life behind the lines
 

 
 After dealing in some detail with the problems facing the authorities in their attempts to cure the soldiers, namely the conditions of hospitals, the unqualified doctors, the unco-ordinated
 attempts of the bureaucracy in Cairo and the resistance of the patients themselves, what needs to be done now, by
 way of contrast, is to understand the causes behind the apparent failure to prevent diseases
 from spreading among soldiers. However successful the regimental doctors were in treating syphilis, the real
 problem lay in the authorities’ attempts to prevent the diseases in the first place. This obviously entailed a
 strict system of control of the soldiers’ sexual lives and a strong prohibition on women entering the camps or
 barracks, 109 something that the authorities singularly failed to
 do. As said in chapter 3 above, as long as the regiments
 were still in Egypt, the families of the soldiers were allowed to join them and to follow them from camp to camp,
 but for health reasons this practice had to be stopped. Forbidding the soldiers from having access to their wives
 proved to be difficult to enforce, however, and some of the women disguised themselves as men and followed their
 husbands all the way to Syria. 110 When the authorities insisted on
 forbidding the wives from accompanying their husbands, the men grumbled strongly “and in order to counteract the
 feeling of despondency as far as possible, the wives, concubines, and parents of the conscripts have been allowed
 to accompany them.” 111 
 

 

 
 Plate 6
 “Encampment of Ibrahim Pasha, near Jaffa” 
 

 
 By giving way to the soldiers’ needs on that front Mehmed Ali proved to be more flexible and pragmatic than the
 contemporary British naval commanders who were aiming at a moral standard “altogether too high for the people
 with whom it dealt . . . [especially by insisting on] the whole illogical system of indiscriminate pressing with
 its corollary of not allowing the men shore-leave when in port.” 112 Allowing women to join their husbands in Syria, however, created hygiene problems which
 certainly contributed to the spread of syphilis and other venereal diseases among the soldiery and which the
 authorities now found difficult to address.
 

 
 In the second section of his Risāla Clot Bey, in a characteristically simplistic and
 didactic manner, set out a method that he thought would be effective in controlling the spread of syphilis
 through prevention rather than cure. It had to do primarily with the health condition of the women’s lodgings and
 their bodies. He said that the wives of the soldiers of each regiment were to be divided into four sections. Each
 of these sections was to be composed of the wives of the soldiers of each battalion within the regiment. They had
 to be set aside and examined by the wives of the doctors in charge of the men of the corresponding
 battalion. 113 The doctors had to teach their wives how to detect
 signs of syphilis in the women they were to examine and the “women doctors” had to report to their husbands their
 findings after each examination, which was to be conducted every Thursday. More importantly, the soldiers were
 ordered not to allow into the camps any women except their wives “even if these women are their mothers or
 sisters since this will increase the financial burden of the soldiers, in addition to contributing further to the
 spread of diseases.” 114 Finally, the lodgings of these women had to
 be regularly cleaned and this process had to be supervised by the colonel of the regiment himself. In addition,
 their lodgings had to be built “along two neat parallel lines with a wide street separating them and they have to
 be above the ground by a standardized height. In this manner disease could be stopped from spreading.” 115 