
 

 
 The treatise proceeded to tell the regimental doctors how precisely to examine the bodies of the soldiers, how to
 prepare a special ointment for treatment and finally how to apply this ointment on the soldiers’
 genitalia. 90 
 

 
 During these medical inspections the soldiers found their bodies minutely examined and closely inspected as
 reflected in the following typical report about one such inspection conducted by the doctor of the Guardia
 Regiment and ordered by Ibrahim Pasha.
 

 
 At eight o’clock on Thursday 3rd of Şaban 1247 [7 January 1832] on investigating the soldiers of the eight
 companies of the 1st Battalion of the Guardia Regiment, no disease was discovered among the
 musicians of the companies ( musikicilerde hasta yoktur ). Their tents were also found clean
 and warm. However, the sergeant-major of the 5th Company had hurt the thumb of his left hand while pulling a
 cannon. It was also discovered that a thorn had penetrated the skin between the fourth and little toes of the
 right foot of the fifth corporal of the same company causing an inflammation . . . One of the soldiers of the 1st
 Company of the 2nd Battalion of the same regiment had the skin of his right ankle scratched as a result of his
 [tight] shoe rubbing against it . . . On seeing signs of syphilis in the mouth of the sixth corporal of the 7th
 Company of the 3rd Battalion of the same regiment his major was ordered to send him to the [field] hospital. .
 . 91 
 

 
 Despite the benefits of routine medical examinations, there does not seem to have been any effort to convince the
 men of them or to enlist their support. Soldiers resented being so minutely examined by the doctors and often
 lied about their physical condition in order to avoid being sent to the field hospitals. For example, a general
 medical examination was once conducted on the soldiers of the 12th Infantry Regiment in Syria. The European
 doctors found that twelve men were infected with syphilis and 210 with scabies. None of them was sent to the
 hospital and they were still living side by side with the regiment at large. When the Egyptian doctors were asked
 why the sick had not been interned in the hospital as the regulations stipulated, they answered that whenever
 they asked them, the soldiers denied being afflicted with any diseases. 92 On inspecting the army hospital in Haifa Mursi Ağa, the adjutant-major of the 10th Infantry
 Regiment, found it in an unkempt, messy condition. Contrary to the regulations, those afflicted with syphilis
 (“about twenty”) were not segregated but were found mingling with other patients and with the wounded. When he
 asked the director why these men had not been set aside as the regulations stipulated, Mursi Ağa received the
 answer that he did not have enough room to do so, and that neither Nazif Bey, the Commissary-General of the army,
 nor Abdallah Bey, the Governor of Haifa, had given him enough assistance in that respect. 93 
 

 
 At the same time soldiers, and occasionally officers, often feigned sickness to avoid being sent to the front and
 to have a pretext for staying in the relative security of the field hospital. 94 Cadets in military school sometimes acted similarly; on being sent to the hospital it would
 soon be noticed that they had not lost their appetite and that “each one of them was eating as much as
 four.” 95 Officers who were discovered to have been cheating in this
 manner were discharged from service altogether, sent to the Liman of Alexandria, and were
 stripped of their medals and uniforms. 96 