
 

 
 Concerning the soldiers of the 13th Regiment in Jaffa . . . Their new footwear was two months overdue and we
 found some of the soldiers barefoot . . . Their fezzes were old and their new ones three months overdue. Their
 kits and the straps of their rifles were dirty and have not been cleaned since they left Cairo . . . The patients
 in the hospital there had no one to look after them day or night and there were no officers [to supervise them].
 

 
    Concerning the soldiers in Ḥaifa . . . We found their bodies, their weapons, and their
 belongings dirty and unclean ( wiskha lam na īfa ). They were disorderly and doing whatever pleased them ( mashiyīn min gheir tartīb ‘ala keifhum ). The patients in the hospital were sleeping on the floor with
 no mattresses and nothing but a carpet. Their places were absolutely dirty ( maḥallāthum wiskha
 lam fīhi na āfa ‘andahum
 kulliyyan ). When we asked to see the director, we could not find him, and when he came back from the market,
 he said that he had written various letters about the mattresses [but had not been answered] . . .
 

 
   Concerning the soldiers of the 4th Battalion of the 18th Regiment . . . We found them wearing their
 [ceremonial] broadcloth uniforms. When we asked their lieutenant why his soldiers were wearing their broadcloth
 uniforms day and night, he said that they had not been issued either with flax or woollen uniforms and they had
 no choice but to do so. This is something against the regulations . . .
 

 
 Concerning the artillery soldiers in Acre . . . Some of them were sitting in the sun with no tents and sleeping
 on the ground with no mattresses . . . They had their food on the fences and were making the fence dirty and
 stinking . . . Their ammunition was lying in the sun and their tents were thrown against the fence without being
 put up . . . The [other] soldiers were roaming the markets as they wish. This is all against the Laws of the
 Military ( Qānūn al-Jihādiyya ). 88 
 

 
 If these were the conditions in which the soldiers lived, it is no wonder that they easily fell prey to scabies.
 And seeing how overcrowded, badly equipped and inefficiently run the hospitals were, then it should not be
 difficult to see why the authorities found it difficult to control the spread of disease to other unaffected
 soldiers.
 

 
 Compared to scabies, dealing with syphilis presented much more formidable problems. Detecting and treating
 syphilis necessitated a much closer scrutiny of soldiers’ bodies. The first article of Clot Bey’s Risāla , written specifically for the treatment of syphilis and scabies, went as follows.
 

 
 On receiving this letter you must conduct an examination of all the men whose health you are required to look
 after, officers, NCOs and soldiers. Those afflicted with one of those two diseases [i.e. scabies and syphilis]
 have to be set aside, and particular care has to be given to those afflicted with syphilis. You have to check
 their genitalia and their mouths. This examination is to be conducted once every week. 89 