
 

 
 Who is to guard the guards?
 

 
 Although this problem of the uncontrolled mingling of the soldiers with the civilian population at large was
 encountered by the military authorities in various lands that Mehmed Ali’s army fought in, it was particularly
 noticeable in Syria. Unlike the barren deserts of Arabia or the Sudan, Syria was a rich province dotted with big
 towns and cities offering all kinds of attractions for the soldiers to leave the camps and have a taste of the
 civilian life they must have missed. And unlike Morea or the Mediterranean islands that Mehmed Ali sent troops
 to, Syria was also an Arabic-speaking province, a fact that allowed the soldiers to mix with the local population
 for all the reasons mentioned above. And this at a time when, as was said in the last chapter, life in the camps,
 in terms of food, clothing, pay or lodgings, was not particularly pleasant.
 

 
 There were thus enough pull and push factors to induce the soldiers to cross camp boundaries and mingle with the
 local population nearby. Obviously this was something that the authorities had expected, and the various
 blueprints, laws, manuals and official pronouncements of Mehmed Ali, or Clot Bey for that matter, had intended to
 create a strict regime of internment which aimed at preventing such undisciplined activities. This chapter,
 however, attempted to contrast the impressive picture presented in previous chapters that comes across from
 reading these blueprints with the more mundane accounts of the actual performance of the soldiers in the camps.
 To explain the reasons behind the authorities’ failure to prevent the spread of syphilis, one area was
 highlighted, namely the encounter with women and especially with prostitutes. 139 For this encounter to be controlled a diligent watch had to be kept on the gates and
 boundaries of the camps. The duty of executing Clot Bey’s strict regulations preventing
 prostitutes from ever approaching the camps 140 lay squarely on the
 shoulders of sentries guarding the gates of the camps.
 

 
 Ironically, it was invariably these very same sentries whom the authorities had problems controlling and it was
 the guards themselves who often violated the law. The guards controlling the camp in Tyre, for example, forced
 the local merchants to give them half their loads or else they would not allow them in. 141 After the fall of Acre it was the guards who, more than the soldiers,
 attacked the local population 142 and robbed the merchants. 143 When their attacks on the local merchants could not be stopped, the
 merchants refused to supply the castle with food altogether. 144 The
 general investigation report ( yoklama ) mentioned above was very apprehensive about the way
 the guards in particular were behaving. “The guards [in Haifa] were sitting in the sun . . . not asking anyone
 anything, he who wants to enter [the camp], enters, and he who wants to get out, gets out. This is against the
 regulations that they [are supposed to] follow. All this is due to the soldiers not caring about what happens.”
 The guards appointed to the hospital in the city were not preventing the patients from leaving the hospital and
 going to the market. In Acre “the soldiers are roaming the city as they wish ( ‘ala keifhum )
 against the regulations, and the guards are not doing anything to stop them. This is the reality ( hukm al wāqi‘ ) that we saw of the soldiers in Acre.” 145 