
 

 
 Tucker attributes this sudden prohibition to public pressure led by the ‘ulamā’ which
 convinced the Pasha to ban all prostitution in Cairo, “thereby assuaging public opinion and adding another
 feather to his cap of reform.” 125 This could hardly be the reason
 why Mehmed Ali gave up a considerable source of government revenue. 126 For one thing Mehmed Ali could not have been so keen to assuage the ‘ulamā ’ and he could, and did, disregard their opinion on various other occasions. It is significant,
 for example, that during the deliberations that were held in the Department of Civil Affairs concerning the
 abolition of the tax, it was suggested that the punishment stipulated in the Islamic religious law be applied to
 prostitutes. In the event it was decided on the punishment mentioned above and it was the civil administrators,
 not the shaykhs, who were to execute these punishments.
 

 
 That prostitutes were considered a menace more to discipline and health than to morals and good manners is also
 clear from the fact that they were prohibited from practicing their trade only in big cities and around the
 camps. When Flaubert visited Egypt in 1849–50 he knew that no prostitutes could easily be found in Cairo, that
 they had moved on to Upper Egypt and that “good brothels no longer exist[ed] in Cairo.” 127 This ban on prostitution In Cairo was largely imposed for fear of its
 effect on soldiers’ health and their discipline. As lenient as the Pasha might have been in allowing the soldiers
 to bring their wives to live with them in Syria, no concessions were given in allowing them to solicit the
 services of prostitutes. This was true both for European officers “whoever they might be,” 128 and for Turkish-speaking officers. 129 
 

 
 Apart from the threat to the health of the soldiers and officers, prostitutes were also
 banned from the vicinities of camps and barracks because a lot of them on entering the camps brought with them
 liquor with all that that entailed in terms of threat to the discipline of the troops and to public order. For
 example, when the wagoneer ( arabaci ) Derviş and the sapper ( baltaci )
 Osman were punished by seventy-five and 150 lashes of the whip, respectively, it was more for the disturbances
 they had caused after getting drunk than for being caught in a brothel. 130 Many cases concerning the undisciplined behavior of soldiers in Syrian cities were due to
 the soldiers getting drunk in the taverns and taking to the streets, “abusing the old and the young and the
 Christian population with no reason.” 131 Taverns ( meyhaneler ) were thus banned as forcefully as brothels, although it was difficult to separate the one
 from the other. But again, and as was the case with brothels, the ban was not categorical; it was only the
 taverns in close proximity to the camps that were ordered to be shut down. When a foreigner opened a tavern near
 a mosque in Acre he was politely asked to close it down and to move it to the Frankish
 quarter. 132 This might have been due to the fact that he dared to
 open his tavern near a mosque. But the fact that he was still allowed to open it in a more distant place means
 that the authorities were not that concerned with matters of public morality or decency. In any case, and as
 proof that Mehmed Ali’s administration in Syria was not so keen on the outright prohibition of taverns, Şerif
 Pasha, the governor-general of Syria, was ordered by the Pasha to compile a list of the revenue accrued by all
 taverns in the province. 133 