
 

 
 This discrepancy between “hukm al-wāqi‘” (reality) and “al-qānūn” (the
 law, the regulations) was also to be seen in the performance of the guards inside the camps. On passing in front
 of the camp jail one summer night, Colonel Ayup of the 11th Regiment could not find the guard who was supposed to
 watch over the jail. Looking for him, he found that he had gathered some of his friends together and they were
 chatting, laughing and telling stories in the middle of the night. 146 During one cold December night some soldiers lit a camp fire and sat around it chatting and
 joking. The fire was close to the ammunition dump, however, and could have blown up the whole camp. When the
 guard on duty was asked why he did not forbid the soldiers from lighting their fire at such close proximity to
 the ammunition dump, he claimed not to have seen them. On another rainy night, two soldiers
 who were appointed as guards on Abbas Pasha’s tent left their site and went for shelter in the stable. 147 Soldiers left on guard duties for long periods without enough sleep
 could not help falling asleep. 148 During the bombardment of the
 castle of Acre a certain soldier, Ibrahim by name, was left with a number of his colleagues to act as sentries
 overnight guarding the cannon bases that shelled the city during daytime. On making his regular round, their
 commanding officer, a certain Hassan Ağa, found Ibrahim asleep. He attempted to take his rifle to show it to
 his commanding officer to prove that the soldier was asleep while on duty. The guard woke
 up, however, when he felt his rifle being taken from him. When the captain insisted on taking the rifle, the
 guard hit him in the face, knocking out some of his teeth. 149 
 

 
 Conclusion
 

 
 This chapter opened with an account of death, of how officers and soldiers attempted to confront it, and of how
 the authorities avoided dealing with it in a manner that could be remotely described as respectful to the dead.
 It attempted to explain how the soldiers in the Pasha’s army were able to confront the fatal dangers of the
 battlefield with such success but, admittedly, was unable to offer any explanation other than to argue that years
 of training might have had their impact on how the soldier behaved in battle: obeying orders issued from
 commanders he did not know, orders that were heard from afar and carrying, if executed, the close possibility of
 his own death. It was argued, however, that this is not a good criterion to measure how well disciplined the
 soldiers were: under stress soldiers might, indeed, behave in the manner in which the authorities attempted to
 train them. To see how well disciplined soldiers were we have to look at them in more relaxed times and to follow
 their lives as much as possible not on the fields of pitched battles, but in the relative security of the camps.
 One particular aspect of their lives was highlighted, namely their health and general hygiene.
 

 
 It is here that we come to focusing on problems that characterized Mehmed Ali’s military authorities and indeed
 his entire reign: impressive blueprints and programs that gave stunning spectacles of order, but which floundered at the first attempt at implementation. Besides the usual problems that were
 mentioned in the previous chapters that related to lack of funds, cumbersome bureaucratic regulations,
 unrealistic demands by the Pasha, and internal divisions among the elite itself (represented by the problems that
 Clot Bey had with the War Department), this chapter touched on the issue of resistance by the soldiers to the
 authorities’ regulations and concluded with the apparently trivial, but crucial problems that the authorities had
 with guards and sentries. Passing laws that forbade prostitutes from ever entering or approaching military camps,
 issuing regulations that prevented soldiers from having access to the outside world, printing tezkeres that soldiers had to have on them if they left military precincts – all were impressive
 innovations that characterized Mehmed Ali’s regime. Impressive as they might be, however, they did not guarantee
 that the Pasha’s will went fulfilled. Inasmuch as modern laws, regulations and disciplinary devices might create
 a framework which, as Mitchell would say, appear prior to things in themselves, “conjuring up . . . the prior
 abstractions of progress, reason, law, discipline . . . and order,” 150 the fact remains that these devices still do not execute themselves; they needed an agency
 to come to life, in spite of their pretence at autonomy and self-enunciation. And as was seen with the case of
 the sentries and guards who were expected to execute the laws and regulations aiming at creating ideas of
 “inside” and “outside,” these agencies were often behaving in a manner that was not particularly representative
 of any abstract notions of “progress, reason, law, discipline . . . [or] order.”