
 

 
 Judging from the performance of the regimental doctors, it is doubtful that their wives, who had not received any
 medical training whatsoever, could have been more successful than their husbands in treating these sensitive
 diseases. Furthermore, seeing how unhygienic and dirty the field hospitals were, it is also doubtful if the
 soldiers’ barracks, let alone the lodgings of their wives, were as healthy and properly built as Clot Bey desired
 them to be. But even if they were, there still was another considerable problem to deal with, namely the
 uncontrolled encounter not with the wives, but with women from outside the camps, and specifically prostitutes.
 

 
 There is some evidence to suggest that prostitution in big cities in Egypt and Syria was on
 the rise during the first half of the nineteenth century. This occurred not so much because of any sudden
 appearance of vice, as represented in a person such as al-‘almeh Kuchuk Hanim 116 on her divan, or because of a sudden increase in the number of khawal s 117 dancing in the streets in their female
 dresses. Nor is it, as Clot Bey opined, because of the high rise in the rate of divorce or the “voluptuous
 temperament of Egyptian women.” 118 Rather, it was caused by the
 unprecedented social mobility, with thousands of men moving around from camp to camp and from city to city and
 also with thousands of women left behind by their husbands, fathers and brothers. “Numbers of young wives thus
 abandoned are compelled by starvation, or to prevent their children from perishing to join the almé [i.e.
 prostitution], all whose profligate habits they must soon acquire.” 119 In March 1833, during a visit to Banī Suwayf in Middle Egypt, St. John described what was
 most probably a typical scene.
 

 
 On reaching [the town] unusual bustle and activity were observable in the streets . . . The cause was soon
 discovered: Ahmed Pasha [Yeğen], with a division of the Egyptian army, had just arrived from the Hedjaz, 120 and the soldiers . . . were spreading themselves through the city,
 snatching in haste the coarse pleasures within their reach. All the dancing girls, singers and musicians were
 consequently employed, and we found the caravanserai so entirely occupied by this military rabble, that not a
 single apartment could be obtained. 121 
 

 
 Until that time prostitution had been, strictly speaking, a legal profession 122 and a tax was even levied on this “trade” which Mehmed Ali’s government was keen on
 collecting. 123 In May 1834, however, the Department of Civil
 Affairs (Divan-ɩ Hidiv) debated the matter and decided to abolish the tax and ban the whole trade from the city
 of Cairo. The shaykhs of the quarters were ordered to compile lists of the brothels in the quarters and of the
 prostitutes working there. The brothels were to be shut down and the prostitutes warned that on being caught practicing their trade they would be given fifty lashes of the whip, to be doubled if caught a
 second time. 124 