
 

 
 This resistance to the self-declared right of the medical authorities to scrutinize bodies in the search for any
 signs of disease was to be seen not only amongst soldiers in the camps but was also encountered by the
 authorities in Qaṣr al-‘Ainī hospital in Cairo whose patients were not spared this minute, often humiliating
 inspection. The following is Flaubert’s description of the syphilis ward in the hospital that he visited while
 touring Egypt in 1849:
 

 
 . . . Kasr el-‘Aini hospital. Well maintained. The work of Clot Bey – his hand is still to be seen. Pretty cases
 of syphilis . . . Several have it in the arse. At a sign from the doctor, they all stood up on their beds (it was
 like army drill) and opened their anuses with their fingers to show their chancres. Enormous infundibula . .
 . 97 
 

 
 Given this humiliating treatment it is not surprising to read about soldiers in that particular ward resisting
 treatment 98 and sometimes physically fighting the authorities. In
 one incident the patients went on the rampage in the hospital taking the glass out of the window frames and
 urinating on the floor and in the drinking water containers. Since most of them were young and “able-bodied” and
 since they “were not afflicted with diseases that would prevent their doctors from treating them harshly,” it was
 suggested that they be punished with “severe bodily penalties . . . because reprimanding them has not worked so
 far.” 99 
 

 
 The resistance of the soldiers to these regular medical check-ups was mirrored in the larger society by the
 civilians’ resistance to vaccination. What appears to have been a policy which intended their own benefit and
 well-being, vaccination was seen by peasants and city folk alike as yet another way of marking their children for
 conscription. 100 The authorities appear to have made no effort to
 overcome their expected resistance by enlisting the support of the village shaykhs or the
 shaykhs of the quarters, for example. The villagers did everything possible to resist vaccinating their sons;
 they fled from the doctors, hid their sons, 101 attacked the
 barber-vaccinators, 102 bribed the local officials to leave their
 children unmarked, 103 and forged vaccination certificates. 104 
 

 
 The reaction to the imposition of quarantines was no different. Seeing this as another abrupt intervention in
 their lives, soldiers attempted to evade the quarantines by all means. After spending nearly two years in Syria
 and being excited about going back home, soldiers disembarking at Damietta were asked to stay on board their
 ships for the duration of the quarantine. When they staged a minor mutiny in which the captain of the ship as
 well as the sentries were beaten by the soldiers, 105 a battalion
 had to be sent from Cairo to assist the quarantine officials to restore order in the port. 106 Quarantines imposed around certain camps in Syria were also difficult to
 maintain. In one incident, even after soldiers were warned that if they attempted to break through the quarantine
 they would be shot, 107 they still dared to break the rules and
 eventually a trench was dug around the camp to force the soldiers to comply with the regulations. 108 