
 

 
 Impermeable boundaries?
 

 
 The real problem underlying the authorities’ attempt to control the soldiers’ encounters with prostitutes lay in
 the fact that, in spite of all the regulations reviewed in this and previous chapters aiming at forbidding the
 soldiers from mingling with the local population and at creating formidable boundaries
 around the barracks and training camps, the men continued to filter through to the surrounding areas. Although
 the military and health authorities wanted to have tight control over the soldiers’ bodies, a control that is
 graphically represented by the policy of segregation and internment in the camps, the soldiers were always
 crossing the supposedly insurmountable boundaries enclosing their camps. These simple acts of negotiating and
 crossing boundaries, even though they were not as dramatic as desertion (which will be dealt with in the next
 chapter), were still quite alarming, for they undermined the whole logic of the modern army, a logic that saw the
 best way of disciplining and training an army in isolating it from the wider society and in drawing sharp
 distinctions between civilian and military lives.
 

 
 There are various examples that show the discrepancy between the impressive picture portrayed by such internment
 devices as the tezkere , for example, and the actual performance of the soldiers on the
 camps. For instance, on visiting the local market in Acre, Vehid Efendi, Ibrahim Yeğen’s scribe, saw Egyptian
 soldiers roaming in the market, abusing the local population and insulting the shopkeepers. One of these
 shopkeepers approached him and complained bitterly of the behavior of the troops. He told him that they had never
 been so humiliated and insulted before, and that even the irregular troops of the previous Ottoman vali, Dervis
 Pasha, had been behaving better, adding that “when we heard that Ibrahim Pasha was arriving at the head of a
 formidable regular army we were relieved, thinking that you will comfort us ( rahat edeceğiniz
 deyerek ).” 134 
 

 
 Besides going to the neighboring towns and cities in search of pleasure, the other main reason for the soldiers
 to go there was to buy and sell goods. There is the case, for example, of a certain private, Ali by name, who
 took a rifle and a carpet from a colleague’s tent and then went to the market to sell the carpet and exchange the
 rifle for a pair of shoes. (According to the law he was supposed to be imprisoned; instead he was given 300
 lashes of the whip.) 135 After the fall of Acre, the soldiers
 pillaged the whole city and sold their booty in the local market. 136 Their activities could not be controlled and Munib Efendi had to write in his report that
 “their officers are either unable to control them or are turning a blind eye to what is happening. This is
 certainly against the regulations and might turn the locals against us.” 137 When Ibrahim Pasha was informed about how unruly the city had become,
 and that “the soldiers are behaving like senior officers,” he wrote a stern letter to the colonel in charge of
 the city warning him of the consequences if he did not restore discipline. 138 