
 

 
 Having opened this chapter with two moments of silence on the part of the authorities regarding death, let me
 then close it on an arguably more positive note: two accounts of marriage by an official and a soldier that went
 contrary to the authorities’ wish to interfere in this aspect, as in all others, of the soldiers’ and officers’
 lives.
 

 
 The first case concerned the governor of Safad after it fell to Mehmed Ali’s control: the governor was suspected
 of forcing a local muleteer ( katircɩ ) to divorce his wife to allow him to marry her himself.
 On investigation it was discovered that the muleteer had two wives, that they were constantly fighting with each
 other and that in fact they had come to the governor to help them with their husband. The governor told the
 muleteer that he was too poor to keep two women and that he had to divorce one of them. After they left, the
 governor sent a special messenger to one of the women telling her that if her husband divorced her, he would be willing to marry her himself. When the muleteer got to know about this, he took it
 to be the governor’s wish and divorced his wife in court after writing a testimony ( hüccet )
 saying that he did so voluntarily. When Munib Efendi heard about the case, however, he reprimanded the governor
 politely and told him that since he was a high-ranking Egyptian official ( cenab-ɩ şerifiniz
 devlet-i Mɩsɩriyyenin ümerasindan madud olub ), and although he was not, strictly speaking, a military man, he
 should have sought permission from the military authorities to get married. 151 In response, the governor said, “I have been married a number of times while I was in
 Egypt, and never before was I asked for a permit. It did not occur to me that I needed one now.” 152 The fact that he took no heed of the authorities’ opinion on what he
 regarded to be a private matter and, moreover, the apparent abuse of his position, is an example not only of how
 difficult it was for the authorities to control the activities of its senior officials, but more generally, of
 the discrepancy between al-qānūn (the law, the regulations) and ḥukm
 al-wāqi‘ (reality) that is characteristic of Mehmed Ali’s rule.
 

 
 The second case concerns a soldier, ‘Alī Khalīl by name, who was wounded and sent to hospital to be nursed there.
 While hospitalized he met a Christian Syrian girl and fell in love with her. After she had agreed to convert to
 Islam, they decided to get married. His colonel, however, refused to allow the marriage to take place saying that
 “all the activities and stillnesses ( harekat ve sekenat)” of the soldiers should be approved
 by their officers and the soldiers should keep themselves busy only with their weapons. On hearing this the
 soldier heedlessly and without asking permission ( hodbehot bila istizan ) left the camp. The
 colonel said that he thought that that was against regulations. 153 
 That a woman could be found in an army hospital, that a soldier fell in love with her and decided to marry her
 and that his colonel could not stop him from doing so attest to the fact that the authorities had as much
 difficulty in controlling “all the activities and stillnesses of the soldiers” as they had with keeping an eye on
 the behavior of the senior officials.