
 

 
 And if this were indeed the case, can one argue that the soldiers, in spite of knowing that they were fighting
 the Pasha’s own wars, still managed to produce all the victories that they did? Was there at least an attempt on
 the part of the Pasha and his authorities to sell these wars, so to speak, to the soldiers as their own wars? As
 the example mentioned above shows, the language used both to incite the soldiers to fight and to describe their
 performance afterwards was often a religious language. Referring to the Egyptian fighters as the “believers,” to
 the enemy as the “infidels,” quoting from the Quran, and citing particular episodes from Islamic history, all
 show that defending the faith, rather than the patrie , was, in this case, the prime concern
 of officers and soldiers alike. In the Morean war, when the enemy was composed of the Christian Greek subjects
 who had rebelled against the authority of the Ottoman Sultan, this could very well have been the case. However,
 the situation was essentially different during the Syrian campaign, when the enemy was nothing other than the
 army of the Ottoman Sultan, the Defender of the Faith and Protector of the two Holy Cities of Mecca and Medina.
 Using religious language to incite the soldiers to fight the Asakir-i Mansure-yi
 Muhammadiyye (The Victorious Soldiers of Muhammad), as the new Ottoman army was called after 1826, would not
 have been appropriate. How then did the men think when they were fighting not the Greek rebels but the Ottoman
 Sultan?
 

 
 This obviously is a difficult question since, as has been said in the previous chapter, the overwhelming majority
 of these soldiers were illiterate and have not left us written records of how they might have conceived of the
 army and of their role in it. Nevertheless, this is an important question and one that needs to be raised if the
 nature of that army, and indeed of the Pasha’s regime in general, is ever to be assessed. This chapter is mostly concerned with this question, namely, the alleged national character of the
 army. It attempts to address it by closely studying the ideas and sentiments of Ibrahim Pasha as the
 Commander-in-Chief whose views regarding the army, the nature of the wars it waged, and the character of its
 adversaries are said to have differed from those of his father. In addition to alluding to Ibrahim’s character
 and his sentiments, this chapter deals with the officer corps that Ibrahim headed which we have seen to have been
 formed of a motley group of disparate factions. Finally, the chapter tries to come as close as possible to the
 thoughts and feelings of the soldiers regarding the army and serving in it. Although it casts doubt on the
 traditional view that saw the army as giving the opportunity for the men to “discover” their true identity as
 Egyptians and to be able to “call Egypt their own,” the chapter tries to see if it is possible to argue that,
 nevertheless, whilst lacking strong nationalistic feelings, joining the colors was still a “colorful” experience,
 as it were, that allowed the soldiers to take pride in their uniform, for example, or that gave them the
 opportunity to foster links with each other that marked them off from the rest of the population and which in due
 time would have made them proud of belonging to an institution that cared for and looked after them.