
 

 
 When the infidels saw these troops approaching from the sea-side they fired their cannons and their guns like
 rain on the believers’ heads, who in spite of this, kept on advancing towards the shore heedless of the danger
 befalling them. When they nearly reached the shore, however, the Cretan soldiers as well as the Anatolian ones
 stopped advancing and only the [Egyptian] nizami troops were proceeding giving up their
 lives for the sake of the faith and the [Ottoman] State . . . During the advance of the nizami troops, however, the standard-bearer of the 20th Battalion could not advance because of
 difficulties in walking in the mud. He was then approached by Hamza Ağa, the major of the same battalion, who
 took the banner from him . . . Shortly afterwards his adjutant-major approached him and insisted on carrying the
 banner himself . . . and marched a few yards with it before being hit by a bullet fired by the infidels. Seeing
 this, one of the evlad-ɩ Arab [lit. sons of Arabs] lieutenants rushed to his side and took
 the banner from him, but was soon hit himself and the banner was taken by a corporal who was also hit and killed
 on the spot. Then one of the sergeants took the banner but was hit by various bullets in different parts of his
 body. A soldier rushed to carry the banner but was also soon hit by bullets and the banner was then carried by
 one of the corporals, Hüseyin the namesake of the Martyr of Kerbela. 3 When the Serasker, Ibrahim Pasha, saw that the signs of defeat were spreading among his
 troops he shouted at them saying, “I am not one of those who turn their backs on fighting when the going gets
 tough. Look at me and see my forehead stained with blood and sand.” He then pulled his sword from its sheath,
 dismounted from his horse, and marched forward through the water until he was submerged up to his neck . . . On
 seeing this, the soldiers were filled with faith and courage and soon followed their commander depending on no
 one but God who said in His Book, “It was incumbent upon Us to assist the believers.” 4 
 

 

 
 Plate 7 “The
 speech at the flag” 
 

 
 It appears from the behavior of the soldiers in this particular incident and specifically from the courage and
 valor with which they were following and defending the banner that they were implementing the Pasha’s orders to defend the flag, “the symbol of victory [and] . . . pride,” at whatever cost. It is
 not known what was inscribed on the banners at this particular battle; in other battles, however, the flags and
 banners carried during the actual fighting as well as the medals cast to commemorate the subsequent victories
 were decorated with Mehmed Ali’s name and nothing else. It has often been argued that it was during the first
 half of the nineteenth century and mostly by being allowed to carry weapons and to defend their own country that
 the fellahin of Egypt came to think of themselves as Egyptians first and foremost. Given the fact that most
 banners of Mehmed Ali’s battalions had his name on them, would it be more accurate to argue that this was the
 Pasha’s personal army fighting what were in essence his own wars and not those of “Egypt,” and that the men who
 fought in them conceived of it as such, i.e. as a personal not a national army?