
 

 
 In spite of this clear and stern warning, however, it proved difficult to force the officers to treat the
 soldiers respectfully and complaints about such bad treatment would not stop. 41 Even if one believes that Ibrahim’s sympathies were with his Arabic-speaking soldiers, the
 problems he had with his officers that were highlighted in chapter 4 (above) were deeply ingrained in the army and were much more formidable than could be
 solved by his kind-heartedness or his ostensibly liberal ideas. In other words, when push came to shove Ibrahim
 knew where his true interests lay: with his father and the mamluk–Turkish elite that formed the heart of the
 officer corps. This comes through clearly from the following letter in which he was responding to a letter from
 his father implicitly blaming him for lax discipline which Mehmed Ali thought had caused disturbances in Syria to
 go out of control. 42 Ibrahim responded by saying that, in effect,
 he could not be more strict for he was faced with the possibility of officers defecting and with the likelihood
 of a massive mutiny by the soldiers. The matter, it seemed, concerned harsh penalties that were needed to
 maintain discipline and his belief that they might be counter-productive.
 

 
 These severe punishments are not unknown to me and I saw them in Morea. [Back then] in one incident [one senior
 officer] whipped more than sixty men in one day with his own hands including an officer with the rank of
 adjutant-major. In another incident Süleyman Pasha [Sèves] lowered one officer from the rank of adjutant-major
 all the way to second lieutenant. Time will only tell what the effect of this policy will be on the defection of
 officers [to the Ottomans]. Of course, injustices and misapplication of the law are inevitable. Be that as it
 may, however, everyone knows that those who commit injustice are officers and those on whom
 injustice is committed are soldiers . . . If the men lose their patience, things can go completely out of our
 hands, and then neither Your Highness, nor your humble slave, author of these lines, will be able to do anything
 about it. If these were some fellahin from the villages, we would have expected them to bear up with this system.
 Since they are [not peasants, however, but] soldiers, we have to think of the dangers if they lose their
 patience. 43 
 

 
 In that sense Ibrahim was faced with the usual problems confronting a commander of any of the European armies
 that preceded the rise of the modern nation-state: a mercenary officer corps that was on the “job market” seeking
 employment in the expanding armies of this or that prince or king and a disgruntled peasantry which had been
 conscripted by force but which had not yet been fooled into thinking that it was their own interest that they
 were fighting for. Force and lucrative pay were the only way to keep such armies intact. It follows that too
 little pay might push the officers to defect and seek another career opportunity elsewhere, and too much force in
 imposing discipline might incite the soldiers to open rebellion.