
 

 
 If the language that was used to refer to the army was not a national language, could it be argued that the
 soldiers, nevertheless, saw the army as a national army, i.e. an army that was fighting for the defense or the
 glory of the fatherland? Having seen how badly treated they were and how remote they were from the Pasha and what
 he stood for, can one still present an argument that within that particular institution the soldiers had the
 opportunity to participate in an experience that would distinguish them from their fellow Egyptians in a positive
 manner? Could it be said that the army, although not intended to create such feeling, might have created it
 unwittingly? Can one say, for example, that the soldiers eventually came to feel proud of belonging to an
 institution that cared for them, an institution in which they were better paid than they could have been
 otherwise? Apart from the grandiose nationalistic slogans (or the absence of them) can one say, as a further
 example, that joining the colors was a special experience because of, for example, the colorful uniforms, regular
 pay, or assured pension, practices that might have made the soldiers feel distinguished from their fellow
 fellahin and that could have induced in them some feeling of pride in belonging to such an institution?
 

 
 The answer to all these questions is “no.” The way the army functioned as an institution could not have allowed
 the soldiers to think of it in a proud manner. Not only were they badly treated by their officers, but they also
 soon realized that even in law they were discriminated against. Ibrahim might have been against the degrading
 treatment of the soldiers by their officers, but he was even stricter about the principle
 that no officers were to be punished by being beaten in front of the men: only soldiers were to be punished that
 way. 53 The soldiers were also much less regularly paid than their
 officers. 54 Moreover, the difference in pay between their salaries
 and that of their senior officers was phenomenal: the ratio of the soldier’s salary to that of a colonel in the
 Sultan’s army was 1:60; in the Egyptian army it was over 1:500. 55 
 It has also been seen in chapter 4 how ill equipped the
 soldiers were in terms of their uniforms. Here again they were discriminated against. The uniforms they were
 issued were worn out not only because the new ones were overdue, but also because the Pasha occasionally insisted
 that if insufficient funds were to force him to cut expenses, then it would be the soldiers and not the officers
 who would bear the brunt of the cuts. When the soldiers in the Sudan were to be issued new uniforms to celebrate
 the Islamic feast of al-Aḍḥa, Mehmed Ali saw it fit to send new uniforms only to the officers “so as to be
 distinguished from the soldiers.” 56 In short, service in the army
 was an ever-present reminder to the soldiers of the injustice and misery that were reigning all over the country
 during Mehmed Ali’s rule.