
 

 
 No full analysis of the nature of this army and of the wars it was fighting in could be complete if we do not
 study the views and sentiments of one key player in this whole equation, the Pasha himself. Since these are
 important and complicated in and of themselves, I will be dealing with the Pasha and his thoughts in the
 following chapter.
 

 
 The “Turkish” officers
 

 
 As Mehmed Ali’s son and Commander-in-Chief of his army, the sentiments of Ibrahim Pasha toward the Turks and the
 Ottoman Empire have been the subject of a lot of speculation. It is claimed that unlike his father, Ibrahim could
 not see himself as a Turk or an Ottoman; he “identified with Arabs, spoke Arabic and admired the Arabs where he
 despised the Ottomans and Turks.” 5 He used to say that his Turkish
 officers were good for nothing, “smoke[d] all day and [had] people to wash their hands.” 6 When he was heard expressing similar views, one of his Arab soldiers asked
 him how he could say such things given the fact that he was a Turk himself. “I am not a Turk,” he replied. “I
 came as a mere child to Egypt, and since then the Egyptian sun has changed my blood and made
 me wholly Arab.” 7 It has been claimed that this feeling of
 “outright animosity and contempt for [the Ottomans], their government and their military character” might have
 had its origins in a year he spent when a teenager as a hostage in Istanbul. 8 
 

 
 We have already seen Ibrahim forcefully expressing these sentiments against the Ottomans during the Morean
 campaign, and the record shows that his contempt for them only grew stronger in the course of the Syrian war.
 After the Sultan had decided to strip him and his father of their titles, he wrote to Mehmed Ali telling him that
 he was very pleased that that sign of slavery ( bendelik ) had been removed and that “we have
 been relieved of this burden” ( bu gaileden halas olduk ). He added that the fame and glory
 that they would accomplish would make the Ottomans envious and think of restoring their titles to them; this
 time, he said, he would not accept them. 9 On another occasion, he
 wrote to his father telling him that he was thanking God because “the independence of our family and the freedom
 of Egypt ( Mɩsiɩ’in serbesti ) are gradually being realized.” 10 Sentiments like these that Ibrahim often expressed to his father prompted some historians to
 argue that it is Ibrahim rather than his father who “certainly deserves the place of honor in the history of
 nationalism in the Arab East.” 11 
 

 
 Ibrahim, however, does not appear to have had any illusions as to the dynastic nature of the struggle between his
 family and the Ottomans. After each military victory he accomplished in the Syrian campaign
 he wrote to the various notables ordering them to pray for the health and happiness of “our father, the vali of
 Egypt.” 12 When he thought that the Ottomans were spreading rumors
 about him and his father in their Vekayi , he ordered a scribe to write down his version of
 events and to send it to Acre to be translated there into French so as to dispatch it to Europe. On receiving
 these orders, Vehid Efendi, Ibrahim Yeğen’s scribe, suggested that it might not be the right moment to do so
 considering that fighting was at its peak; Ibrahim answered angrily, “These matters will be written in history
 books, and a hundred years from now it will be said that Mehmed Ali did this and that. Is
 this not so, you animal?” 13 Like his father, Ibrahim was also
 ordering medals to be cast with the words “Mehmed Ali” inscribed on them. But whereas his father was honoring
 senior officers and officials in his administration by such medals, Ibrahim had them given to soldiers who
 distinguished themselves on the battlefield. 14 