
 

 
 Serving in Mehmed Ali’s army was, therefore, a dreadful experience. The Pasha’s army was an army which the
 soldiers were dragged into against their wishes and with minimal use of persuasion. It was an army that they were
 conscripted to practically for life and in which they were forced to fight wars that made little or no sense to
 them. It was an army in which they were continuously humiliated and in which the conditions of camp life were
 appalling. They were insulted, abused and humiliated by an officer corps that was ethnically, linguistically and
 socially different and with which they had very little in common. They were, moreover, poorly fed, poorly clothed
 and poorly paid. It was an army that did not recognize the sacrifice given by those who were wounded while
 serving in it. Above all, and as was shown in the previous chapter, it was an army that did not respect its dead.
 

 
 The deserters
 

 
 If that was the case, why then did these men continue to fight? If it is true that life in the camps was so
 intolerable, why did these thousands and thousands of men put up with it? The answer is that they did not. The
 soldiers fighting in Mehmed Ali’s army deserted when they were given the slightest opportunity. They fled from
 the camps 71 and during marches. 72 They escaped from military hospitals, 73 from
 military ships, 74 from military schools, 75 and from military establishments. 76 Not only soldiers, but NCOs also fled. 77 More
 significantly the guards themselves fled 78 and the elite regiments,
 the Guardia Regiments, that were created to catch deserters, among other things, were
 rampant with desertion themselves. 79 
 

 
 Desertion was not a matter of individual isolated cases that the authorities succeeded in limiting and
 controlling; it was a phenomenon that continued to irk the authorities because of its frequency and magnitude, as
 attested to by the fact that the regiments’ scribes were given pre-printed tables with “noksan,” i.e. missing, as one of their standard headings. 80 Seeing these reports, both Mehmed Ali and his son were alarmed at the scale of the problem.
 Ibrahim rejected the officers’ claim that it was the increased duties of the soldiers that prompted them to
 desert. He said that this was a mere pretext and that desertion was more due to the laxity and carelessness of
 the officers. 81 His father was of a similar opinion. He wrote to
 the Director of his War Department telling him that he had seen reports of the various regiments and that all
 suffered from desertion. There was, however, one exception, the 18th Infantry Regiment, which he took to be proof
 that desertion could be prevented. He therefore suggested that the colonels of the other regiments be court
 martialled. 82 
 

 
 Having succeeded in escaping from their units, where did these men go? One obvious place was to go back to their
 villages. After the registers had been checked and the villages of these deserters identified, however, an order
 would be issued to the governor of the province in which these villages lay. 83 The order would give the names and descriptions of the deserters; the shaykh of the village
 would be fined fifty piasters for every deserter found in his village as well as receiving 100 stripes of the
 whip. 84 Spies ( baṣṣāṣṣīn ) were also sent
 roaming the countryside searching for deserters. 85 Otherwise,
 deserters left for Cairo in the hope that they would not be be found since it was supposedly more difficult to
 spot strangers there. 86 To curb this practice, the Director of the
 War Department would write orders to quarter and street shaykhs to keep an eye open for all deserters who might
 have found refuge in the city. 87 This was also
 one of the important functions of the Cairo Police ( Zabtiyyat Miṣr ). 88 