
 

 
 Ibrahim might have felt that it was thanks to his Egyptian soldiers that he was able to achieve the victories he
 accomplished, or that his insightful command was instrumental in securing them. He knew too well, however, that
 it was to his father’s ability to raise and maintain such a large army that he was ultimately thankful. 15 During the siege of Acre he had secret negotiations with ‘Abdallah
 Pasha’s deputy who came out of the castle to negotiate with him.
 

 
 He then said that they had a lot of ammunition [Ibrahim wrote to his father about the failed negotiations.] I
 answered him by saying “We are speaking about friendship, so why refer to ammunition? However, mentioning
 ammunition, do you think we care about how much you have, when we receive from Egypt 1,200 ship-loads of
 ammunition annually? Your case is like someone who has a lot of food when another man with an iron fist comes
 along and grabs all the food he has.”
 

 
 Then he told him that although they had been able to withstand Napoleon’s siege thirty years earlier, they had no
 chance of succeeding this time, since he was much better prepared than Napoleon and his army had been. He added
 that if 200,000 shells were fired, “the price of each being three piasters, the total will be 1,200 kises , which is nothing for Mehmed Ali Pasha.” 16 
 

 
 Similarly, Ibrahim might have felt closer to his Egyptian subjects than his father did; still he had no illusions
 that they were his slaves fighting for the fame and glory of his family. When his father first opened the subject
 of conscripting men from Syria to join his army, he replied saying that he did not see it fit to do so in that
 year. Nor did he approve of his father’s coming to Syria to supervise the process. He explained that “the
 problems we are facing in Egypt due to conscripting our subjects ( reayamɩz ) are not over
 yet, in spite of the fact that Egypt is in our possession and its inhabitants are but our
 common slaves ( Mɩsɩr mülkümüz ve ahalisi bayağɩ memlukümüz iken ).” 17 
 

 
 The characterization of an army as a national institution, however, cannot be done solely by analyzing the
 sentiments and personality of its commander-in-chief, as crucial as these surely are. No matter how “liberal” or
 “enlightened” one wishes to judge Ibrahim, the performance of the army was much more influenced by the
 composition of the officer corps and by the problematic relationship that existed between officers and their men.
 Naturally, any army is bound to have serious problems between the officers issuing the commands and the men doing
 all the dirty work, problems that emanate from the social and economic backgrounds of both groups. 18 Yet, in addition to these problems, Mehmed Ali’s army also had an
 important point of tension that had its origins in the ethnic and linguistic differences between officers and
 soldiers.
 

 
 When he first conceived of founding a conscript army in his province, the Pasha’s plan was to appoint
 Turkish-speaking officers to lead and command the Arabic-speaking fellah conscripts. The idea was to appoint his
 personal mamluks ( gulam ağalar ) to high positions, and Turkish-speaking officers ( Türk askerler ) to lower ranks, while the fellah conscripts would make up the soldiery. 19 Eventually, mamluks and “Turks” fused together into one group and it
 became difficult to differentiate between them. The main distinction, however, was between soldiers and officers:
 soldiers were Arabic-speaking, while officers spoke Turkish.