
 

 
 In spite of these problems Ibrahim could not afford to do away with the ethno-linguistic distinction between
 officers and soldiers since this was an important cementing element that kept the army together, albeit by force.
 Retaining this ethno-linguistic distinction was not without its own problems since the officers felt, not without
 reason, that the regime so heavily depended on them that they could get away with nearly anything. Ibrahim or his
 father might have reprimanded this or that officer for mistreating the soldiers; ultimately, however, the very
 fabric of the army depended on the need to control the fellah conscripts by appointing ethnically different
 officers to command them. Whatever his true sentiments might have been regarding the qualities of the “Arabs” vs.
 “Turks” under his rule, Mehmed Ali knew that it was only by appointing Turkish-speaking officers that it was
 possible to prevent the fellah conscripts from turning against him and his ruling family. The Pasha knew too well
 that if “Arabs” were allowed to assume leadership positions, whether in the army or the civilian administration,
 they would challenge the very basis of his power, viz . the Turkish–mamluk coalition that he
 had so laboriously formed. 44 
 

 
 Of equal importance was the fact that both father and son saw senior positions in the army as rewards to be
 personally given to particular individuals who were flocking to their service from different corners of the Ottoman Empire. Besides prisoners of war, a number of senior officers in the Ottoman army
 approached Mehmed Ali requesting employment in his army. 45 These
 were received with dignity, and medals and ceremonial uniforms were issued to them. 46 However, as much as Mehmed Ali and his son were offering lucrative employment opportunities
 to potential defectors from the Ottoman army, if they were not careful with the manner in which they treated
 their own officers they stood the danger of losing them again to the Sultan’s service. This comes across clearly
 in a letter Ibrahim sent to his father answering an earlier letter in which Mehmed Ali was asking for his son’s
 opinion regarding the promotion of a senior officer, Menilikli Ahmed Pasha, the second brigadier of the elite
 Guardia Regiment. Specifically, Mehmed Ali was asking his son what the reaction of other officers would be if
 Ahmed Pasha was promoted to the newly introduced rank of Mirmiran , and whether Mehmed Bey,
 another brigadier, would get jealous and defect to the Ottomans. In response, Ibrahim said that he trusted Mehmed
 Bey to be totally devoted to “our Sublime Family” and did not think that the brigadier was contemplating
 defection since he had tested him previously and on all occasions Mehmed Bey had shown himself to be genuinely
 dismayed at the repeated defections of other officers to the “opposing side.” However, he suggested that to save
 themselves any problems, Mehmed Bey should be promoted to the same rank as his colleague Ahmed Pasha. 47 