
 

 
 This linguistic basis for differentiating between officers and soldiers was characteristic of the civil
 bureaucracy as well. Members of the high echelons of the bureaucracy and the “aristocracy” at large were
 Turkish-speaking, people from all over the Ottoman world who had come to Egypt seeking employment in the Pasha’s
 administration and, depending on their connections, would be given a position in the civil service. 20 Indeed, the “meanest man who [spoke] Turkish [was] ipso
 facto considered as belonging to a caste high above the indigenous inhabitant.” 21 Lower down on the administrative scale Arabic was more common, giving
 rise to a duality in administrative language that often caused considerable confusion and ambiguity. 22 
 

 
 Membership in the higher echelons of the society, the elite, was not only based on linguistic differences.
 Belonging to what has been termed the “Ottoman-Egyptian elite,” while necessitating knowledge of Turkish, also
 meant “shar[ing] the values and heritage of Ottoman culture . . . [being] mostly, but not exclusively, Muslim . .
 . [coming] from various parts of the [Ottoman] Empire . . . [and sharing certain ideas about] dress, etiquette or
 manners and customs, and . . . verbal forms of entertainment.” 23 
 The boundaries separating core members of this “Ottoman–Egyptian elite” from those outside this privileged group,
 however, were not water-tight and, given time, individuals within that group started to learn Arabic, took Cairo,
 rather than Istanbul, to be their main dwelling place, and came to identify more and more with Egypt as their
 country. At the same time, those outside the group, anxious to improve their lot, started to learn Turkish,
 intermarried with elite members and gradually assumed more and more of “Ottoman” manners and etiquette. Indeed
 the history of Egypt in the nineteenth century, and especially the second half of it, can be seen precisely as
 showing this tendency to cross and transgress these boundaries.
 

 
 During the first half of the century, however, and especially in the military, these boundaries were much more
 difficult to cross. The Pasha clearly had in mind the idea of creating a conscript army in which the soldiers
 would be firmly dominated by their officers. He once told a distinguished French visitor, “I have not done in
 Egypt except what the British are doing in India; they have an army composed of Indians and ruled by British
 officers, and I have an army composed of Arabs ruled by Turkish officers . . . The Turk makes a better officer,
 since he knows that he is entitled to rule, while the Arab feels that the Turk is better than him in that
 respect.” He added, however, that he was determined to forbid these Turkish-speaking immigrants from legally
 acquiring land in Egypt and “from becoming proprietors and creating for themselves a personal leverage over the
 population.” 24 
 

 
 As a rule Egyptians, referred to as evlad-ɩ Arab , were not allowed to be promoted beyond the
 rank of yüzabşi (captain) and very few of them were even promoted to
 that rank in the first place. 25 As for the ranks of mülazim evvel and mülazim sani (lieutenant and second-lieutenant, respectively),
 half of them had to be “Turks” and the other half “Arabs.” 26 Before
 signing the orders promoting men to these ranks, Ibrahim Pasha had to inquire if the nominees were from “those
 who can be promoted to these ranks, since it is against the rules to have more than four Arab lieutenants per
 battalion.” 27 Nominations for promotions to upper ranks, on the
 other hand, usually stated the place of birth of the candidate, to make it clear that he was a “Turk.” 28 Otherwise, it would be stated clearly that the candidate was a
 mamluk. 29 These guidelines were strictly followed and Mehmed Ali
 insisted that his son not promote “Arabs” to senior ranks even if he was in short supply of “Turkish” officers.
 During the Morean campaign Ibrahim was urging his father to send him Turkish officers ( evlad-ɩ
 Türk ) since he was forbidden from replacing dead or wounded officers by “Egyptian” ones that he had with him
 in Morea. 30 