
 

 
 Being a Turk, that is, speaking Turkish and having one’s origins in Anatolia, Istanbul, Albania, or other parts
 of the Ottoman world, was therefore enough for a man to be considered a candidate for a senior position in Mehmed
 Ali’s army 31 even if he had originally been caught as a POW! After
 the defeat of the Ottoman army in the various battles in Syria, a considerable number of officers and soldiers
 were taken prisoner. They were given three choices: either to agree to go back to their countries (but via
 Alexandria so as not to join the Ottoman army again), to join the Egyptian army by enlisting at the HQ in Acre,
 or to be sent to join one of the schools in Cairo. 32 Eventually an
 entire regiment was formed from prisoners captured after the Ottoman army was defeated. 33 More significantly, a number of the men taken prisoner were appointed as officers in the Egyptian army. Aref Bey, one of the officers in the Ottoman army,
 for example, was taken prisoner at the battle of Konia and was appointed as colonel to a newly formed regiment,
 created out of Turkish prisoners captured in the same battle. 34 
 Other prisoners were appointed as lieutenants and captains over the soldiers who had captured them: the main
 criterion qualifying them for these positions was their Turkish identity. This caused much resentment among the
 soldiers who complained, “Why do we sacrifice our lives and put ourselves in danger to capture these men only to
 find them appointed as our officers ruling over us?” 35 Neither
 Mehmed Ali nor Ibrahim found any problems with this practice, although Ibrahim, being closer to the soldiers and
 more sensitive to their sentiments, might have been more apprehensive than his father about it. 36 As far as both men were concerned, these were evlad-ɩ
 Türk who were more entitled and capable than “Arabs” to be appointed as officers.
 

 
 These basic and essential differences between officers and soldiers caused considerable tension between the two
 groups. Interestingly, communicating in different languages did not in itself create serious problems. As was
 shown in chapter 3 command shouts and signals were given
 in Turkish. These need not have been understood linguistically; indeed the soldiers were not 
 supposed to think of their meaning. They were intended to function as signals inducing the soldiers to perform a
 given act without hesitating to think of their meaning. It was in the daily encounters on the camps, however,
 that the tension between the two groups manifested itself. This tension was essentially due to the fact that the
 officers did not appreciate the efforts of their men, nor deal with them respectfully. A certain captain, Dervis
 Ağa by name, once asked a soldier (his servant, hizmetkar , as he called him) to fetch him a
 water bottle. When the soldier brought him an empty one, he shouted at him, cursing his faith, and beating him on
 the back of his neck. When he was court-martialled he said defiantly, “If you want to punish me for insulting a
 fifteen-piaster fellah, then go ahead. As far as I am concerned, the fellah is not worth more than
 this.” 37 When a certain regiment was dispatched to Damietta and
 paraded through the city, a Turkish official there publicly cursed the days in which the “blind fellahin” had
 been made soldiers. He added that they would never be as good as Turkish ones. 38 Some officers cheated their soldiers, selling them goods at ten times
 their price on the market “until they were left penniless.” 39 The
 habit of insulting and abusing soldiers was so widespread that Ibrahim had to write and distribute a general
 pamphlet to all the regiments in Syria reminding the officers that it was due primarily to the “bravery and zeal”
 of the soldiers that the army was victorious in its numerous battles. He ordered them not to abuse or insult
 their soldiers and to send them to a court martial ( divan ) to be tried there according to
 the laws, rather than take the law into their own hands. He warned the officers that whoever was found violating
 these orders would be expelled from service altogether. 40 