
 

 
 The “fallen”
 

 
 The clearest example of how that particular institution, the army, did not care for its members was in how the
 disabled were treated. After being treated for their wounds, the sakat (lit., the fallen),
 as the disabled were referred to, were checked by the hakimbaşɩ , the chief doctor of the
 hospital. Those who were found not to be completely disabled and who were still capable of bearing arms would be
 designated as yarɩm sakat , i.e. half-disabled, and would be retained in the army. 57 When enough of those half-disabled soldiers had been so designated they
 would be grouped together to form a battalion and a sakat officer would be appointed as
 their commander. 58 Alternatively, they were appointed within
 military units, not in fighting positions, but as, e.g, trumpeters or drummers. 59 When the army had no need for them but they could still be used for
 other jobs, they were not released or sent back to their villages, but were formed in companies, had a
 “half-disabled” officer appointed as a commander and assigned to perform various tasks. 60 These might be to assist in guard duties, 61 in repairing and fortifying buildings, 62 or as
 servants in military hospitals. 63 
 

 
 On the other hand, those who received serious wounds and were of no use whatsoever to the army were designated by
 the chief physician as disabled, given a certificate to the effect that they were unfit for military service, and
 sent to Egypt by ship. 64 According to an order from the Pasha those
 sakat were entitled to a monthly salary. 65 
 However, judging from the number of petitions requesting a pension, it does not seem that this order was strictly
 adhered to. 66 Some of the petitioners felt betrayed by the army
 which they had spent their whole life serving, as the case of a certain soldier named ‘Abdallah shows. He said in
 his petition that he had fought against the Wahhabis in Arabia, with Ismail Pasha in the Sudan, and then in both
 Crete and Morea. He was then wounded and released from service. He said, however, that he could not work and had
 a lot of children and was thus requesting the Pasha to give him a regular pension. 67 Another soldier was declared sakat and given an exemption after losing
 an eye. In spite of having an exemption certificate, however, he was asked to join the army again. He presented a
 petition to Mehmed Ali in person asking for his “merciful consideration of my blindness.” 68 On receipt of such petitions, the Pasha would pass them to the Deputy
 Director of the War Department to find a solution for those disabled men “who are bothering us with their
 petitions” ( bizleri taciz etmişler ). 69 
 

 
 The “fallen” in Mehmed Ali’s army were people who had spent their whole lives serving the Pasha and on being
 disabled as a result of fighting in his army would not be rewarded or treated with dignity. As far as the
 authorities were concerned, these people would be “utilized” to the limit, and once they lost their utility they
 would then be discharged from service since they would then become a burden on the finances
 of their units. 70 