
 

 
 In short, the composition of the officer corps in the Pasha’s army was problematic, to say the least, and both
 father and son were well aware of its precarious nature. The officers, rather than thinking of themselves as
 serving in a national army, were behaving as mercenary officers who moved from one patron to the other depending
 on who paid better. Joining the “Egyptian” army for them meant joining the force of an Ottoman pasha who had a
 better organized and better paid army than the Sultan. It was an army that was fighting the Ottoman Sultan, it is
 true, but that fight was not an example of a national struggle of a people against their foreign oppressor. It
 could even be said that, as far as these officers were concerned, the “other” was more the fellah soldiers that
 they were commanding than the Ottoman army they were fighting. It was not completely unusual, for example, to
 find two brothers fighting in the two opposing armies. 48 Having
 previously served in the Sultan’s army, or at least being familiar with the world that it
 represented, the Ottoman world, the officers in the Pasha’s army were closer to the officers and soldiers of the
 army they were fighting against than to the soldiers of the army they were fighting in, soldiers who spoke a
 different language, came from a completely different social and economic background and believed in a different
 set of cultural and moral values.
 

 
 The fellah soldiers
 

 
 If this was how the officers behaved towards their soldiers and if they did not view the struggles that they were
 engaged in as national struggles against an enemy that was gradually conceived of as the “other,” how then did
 the soldiers themselves think of the army at large and their role in it in particular? None of the battles that
 these men were about to fight in were ever portrayed to them as national battles, i.e. battles in which the word
 “Egypt” as meaning a nation-state was referred to. Instead, to incite them to fight or to encourage them to excel
 in training, reference was made either to religion or to their superior training and better organization. When
 the earliest conscripts were being trained in Aswan, Mehmed Ali wrote to Mehmed Bey, head of the military school
 there, telling him that soldiers had to recite the Fātiḥa (the first chapter of the Quran)
 every day before training. 49 When the soldiers misbehaved and when
 examples of undisciplined behavior were reported to the Pasha, he would write to them an order reminding them
 that Jihad was a religious duty and quoting extensively from the Quran verses stressing the importance of
 discipline and obeying orders. 50 Furthermore, the official name by
 which the new army was known in Egypt was Cihadiye-i Mɩsɩriyye , i.e. the Jihadiyya of Egypt,
 a name that had more religious than nationalistic connotations. 51 
 As we saw at the beginning of this chapter, Mehmed Ali could afford to evoke religious
 feelings and use religious language to incite his soldiers to fight when he was sending his army to the Hijaz or
 to the Morea. The situation was essentially different, however, when the fight against the Ottoman Sultan
 started. During the Syrian campaign the enemy was no other than the Sultan of the Muslims, and the Protector of
 the Two Holy Shrines himself. In that case, as was shown during the storming of the fortress of Acre, it was the
 superiority of their training and their organization that the soldiers were referred to in order to encourage
 them before battle started. The soldiers themselves had no doubt in their minds that they were fighting for
 Mehmed Ali. When soldiers in Aleppo received news of the victory in Horns, they shouted together “God saves our
 master” ( Allah yunṣur afandīīnā ). 52 