
 

 
 These apparent similarities, however, are misleading since they conceal far more important differences in the way
 both armies functioned – differences in the performances of both armies, and in particular of their respective
 officer corps, that account for most of the spectacular defeats of the Ottomans by Mehmed Ali’s army.
 

 
 The Pasha’s officers might have had different origins and social backgrounds from the men they led. They also
 might have formed conflicting factions and cliques. They were, however, extremely loyal to the Pasha and to
 members of his family. The stipulation that no evlad-ɩ Arab be promoted to senior ranks
 might have created a rift between soldiers and officers and weakened the link that the officers might have had
 with the land on which they were serving: that stipulation, however, was crucial for the creation of a loyal
 officer corps. By inviting “Ottomans” to be employed in his service, by opening schools in which young men from
 various parts of the Ottoman world were given subsidized and sometimes even free education, by employing these
 men in his bureaucracy and army and by further promoting those people up to the higher ranks of the military,
 Mehmed Ali succeeded in founding an elite which was deeply dependent on the Pasha and firmly
 loyal to him.
 

 
 Similarly, the Europeans who flocked to Egypt seeking to work for the Pasha were given terms of employment that
 compared very favorably with any other that they might have sought. Differences in religion did not prevent them
 from rising in the military and civilian hierarchy and accordingly they received some of the highest salaries
 that the Pasha was offering. These included not only Süleyman Pasha, who by the early 1830s had become the
 second-in-command in the army after Ibrahim Pasha, but also Engineer Cerisy who constructed the new arsenal for
 Mehmed Ali in Alexandria, M. Planat, Director of the Staff College, 140 Col. Seguera, the head of the Artillery School, Clot Bey, the head of the military medical
 establishment, and numerous other Europeans.
 

 
 Moreover, the army that the Pasha established benefited from a remarkable working relationship between Mehmed Ali
 and his son, Ibrahim Pasha. Occasionally tensions would surface between father and son, but on the whole and for
 the best part of the Pasha’s rule the relationship between these two remarkable men was amicable, and it allowed
 Mehmed Ali to devote his energy to the exploitation of the province’s manpower to enhance agricultural and
 commercial revenues, while leaving for his son the task of exploiting the services of the male population for the
 military.
 

 
 Above all, the army that the Pasha founded in Egypt was fortunate enough to have Ibrahim Pasha as its commander.
 There is no doubt that Ibrahim made one of the best military commanders in the history of the Ottoman Empire and
 that most of the victories that his army achieved were a direct result of his perceptive and insightful command.
 This expertise expressed itself not only in his skillful deployment of troops before battle, 141 but also in his adept choice of terrain, his ability to engage the enemy
 at the right time, 142 and his seizing the advantages he had over
 his adversary and forcing the enemy to give battle at his own opportune moment and at a spot
 of his choosing. 143 Commenting on the battles of 1832 that Ibrahim
 waged against the Ottomans in Syria and Asia Minor, a contemporary French military observer said that “the
 campaign of 1832 was highly honorable to Ibrahim Pasha, and I believe all intelligent military men will admit
 that it is not open to criticism, having been conducted with prudence, sagacity, and vigour . . .” 144 