
 

 
 The Ottoman army with which Sultan Mahmud replaced the Janissaries was a complete contrast
 to all this. Although the act of getting rid of the Janissaries was important, it was neither as decisive nor as
 successful as Mehmed Ali’s massacre of the Mamluks in 1811. Unlike the Mamluks who had succeeded in secluding and
 isolating themselves from the population of Egypt for centuries, 145 
 the Janissaries had, by the time Mahmud managed to get rid of them, penetrated Ottoman society and “branched out
 from the military to penetrate and overlap other social strata.” 146 
 Getting rid of them, therefore, was not as “neat” an operation as massacring the Mamluks. Moreover, the
 Janissaries were fulfilling tasks other than purely military ones, the most important of which was keeping the
 peace and security in the capital, Istanbul. Abolishing that most prestigious of military castes within the
 Empire left the capital defenseless in the face of possible riots. Unlike the situation of Mehmed Ali whose
 massacre of the Mamluks helped him restore security and order in Cairo and in Egypt at large, the Sultan, by
 getting rid of the Janissaries, felt even more insecure in his own capital. That sense of insecurity limited his
 course of action in his attempt to spread his reforms over wider segments of his army. 147 
 

 
 Furthermore, when the Sultan decided to seek the assistance of Europeans in helping him create his new Mansure army, these were employed only as advisors or instructors and none of them was allowed to
 assume posts even half as important as that of Süleyman Pasha in Egypt. Whether because of religious reasons, or
 the sense of pride and jealousy with which the Ottomans regarded their military past, when Europeans were
 employed in Sultan Mahmud’s new army every effort was made to ensure, as an official directive put it, that
 “foreign officers will not gain influence and independence. Thus they shall have authority only in matters of
 training, and in all matters of command, discipline, and the like they shall operate only through . . . Ottoman
 officers.” 148 This inferior position of the Europeans who were
 employed in the new army was also reflected in the low salaries that they were paid: whereas Süleyman Pasha was
 said to receive a monthly salary of 17,500 piasters, his compatriot, Gaillard, who was Sultan Mahmud’s chief
 infantry instructor, received less than one-tenth that amount. 149 
 

 
 Another major problem that affected the performance of Sultan Mahmud’s army was the training
 and composition of his officer corps. Shortly after the Sultan got rid of the Janissaries, and in order to create
 a new nucleus for his officer corps, he founded the Battalion of the Agas of the Court’s
 Inner Service (the Enderun-i Hümayun Ağavati ) in which young slaves from the Sultan’s own
 household, as well as from those of important notables and officials in the Empire, were enrolled. This unit, in
 effect the first modern Ottoman officer training institution, was, however, a battle-ground for intrigues and
 feuds among many dignitaries who tried to ensure that their sons would find a place in it. Dissatisfied with its
 performance, the Sultan finally abolished it in May 1830, only four years after it had been created. 150 The lack of well-trained officers to lead the Sultan’s new army was felt
 more desperately after the successive defeats at the hands of Ibrahim’s army in 1831–2, and a new school for
 cadets had to be opened. In 1834, therefore, the School for Military Science ( Mekteb-i Ulum-u
 Harbiye ) was opened, although initial problems arising from opposition by leading dignitaries, as well as
 lack of funds, books, qualified teachers and a place suitable for instruction, all meant that the school came
 into real existence only in October 1837. Even then its curriculum was limited to such traditional subjects as
 reading, writing, arithmetic, Arabic, and military tactics. 151 