
 

 
 As early as the mid-1830s, when John Bowring visited Egypt, the resentment of Egyptians, in the full sense of the
 term, against their Turkish-speaking rulers was starting to become obvious, mainly in the army. “An Arab soldier
 of the last generation was wholly at the mercy of his Turkish officer; it is so no longer . . . [T]he whole
 character of the population is undergoing a silent but obvious change. The Egyptian element is gradually
 replacing the Turkish . . . ” 135 By the late 1870s this “Egyptian
 element” had acquired enough self-consciousness such that it “dared to acknowledge its own existence,” 136 and to express itself in open rebellion.
 The ‘Urābī Revolution of 1881–2, in addition to being a revolution by various sectors of the urban and rural
 population against European dual control, was also a revolt of these estranged Arabic-speaking fellah officers
 against their Turkish-speaking superiors. 137 This domination was
 represented most clearly by the system, initially put down fifty years earlier by Mehmed Ali and Ibrahim Pasha,
 whereby only Turkish-speaking officers were allowed to be promoted to high ranks in the army as well as in the
 civilian bureaucracy. The “Egypt for the Egyptians” slogan of the ‘Urabi Revolt, therefore, represents this
 rising sense of Egyptian nationalism that was directed partly against the Turkish domination, a domination that
 was a central feature of Mehmed Ali’s army and which was best represented in the figure of the Pasha himself.
 

 
 In that respect, the main difference between the Pasha’s army and that of Napoleon is that whereas the former
 preceded the national bourgeois revolution, the latter succeeded it. It is this difference that accounts for the
 fact that when fighting for “Egypt” the soldiers in Mehmed Ali’s army were marching under banners with the
 Pasha’s name inscribed on them, while the French soldiers, when fighting what were essentially Napoleon’s wars
 and not those of the Revolution, did so under the tricolored standards of the Revolution. “Thousands of young
 Frenchmen might seek to avoid serving beneath [the army’s] standards. But as long as the standards were
 tricolored, as long as they proclaimed Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, those who still cared could console
 themselves with the belief that the Revolution [still] lived.” 138 
 This pretense of fighting a national war was not even attempted as a consolation for sending thousands and
 thousands of Egyptian men to their deaths for the glory of Mehmed Ali and his family.
 

 
 It could be argued, however, that Mehmed Ali’s army was instrumental in propagating the idea of Egyptian
 nationalism, albeit unwittingly. It did this not because the Pasha, his son, or any of their chief military
 commanders thought of the various wars they waged as “national”; the dynastic aspect of these successive military
 confrontations, as was shown above, was clear to all to see, and Ibrahim, in spite of his often-quoted “Egyptian”
 sentiments, had no doubts about it. At the same time, the fellah-soldiers never questioned the fact that they
 were fighting for the Pasha and his family. To judge from the record, “selling” the battles
 against the Sultan to the men as being necessary to the defense of the “fatherland,” important for protecting the
 “Faith,” or upholding their pride and dignity was not even attempted.