
 

 
 This romantic account of the French army at the time of the Revolution overlooks the important fact that
 desertion and other means of resistance to conscription were as central characteristics of that army as they were
 of Mehmed Ali’s. Apart from the single spectacular response to the Legislative Assembly’s call to arms to defend
 la patrie after the initiation of hostilities against Austria and Prussia in 1792, 120 resistance to conscription was rampant right from the beginning of
 systematic conscription in 1798. 121 During Napoleon’s disastrous
 Russian campaign “pillaging, indiscipline and desertion soon became rife on an unprecedented
 scale.” 122 Two years later, in 1814, resistance to conscription was
 so high that only one-eighth of those who were supposed to report to the army depots saw active service. 123 This high level of desertion might have been due to the prolonged wars
 that the Emperor was waging and his “insatiable appetite for conquest [which] did nothing to dispel traditional
 distrust of the recruiting-sergeant.” 124 However, it is wrong to
 assume that resistance to serving in the army reached alarming proportions only after 1812. A study conducted
 about the scale of desertion during the nineteen-month period from December 1804, to July 1806, a period that
 witnessed the peak of Napoleon’s popularity, estimates that the number of men who deserted from all over France
 was around 800 per month, i.e. 9,600 a year. If draft-dodgers (i.e., those who evaded being conscripted in the
 first place) are accounted for this figure reaches 15,000. These were alarming figures for the authorities, but
 nothing that they did “had the desired effect of completely and finally solving difficulties resulting from this
 opposition [to conscription]”. 125 Even before the advent of
 Napoleon, and during the early years of the Revolution, desertion amounted to 2 percent of the total strength of
 the regiments, a figure which “rose considerably whenever the threat of war loomed.” 126 In spite of all attempts by the revolutionary authorities to curb desertion and other means
 of resistance to conscription “the problem of disobedience and the connivance of parents, officials, and entire
 communities remained a serious rebuke to a state which claimed to control the persons of its citizens.” 127 
 

 
 The claim that the French Revolution “had transformed the ethos and size of the French army, and had based it
 spiritually and physically at the heart of the nation” might be correct. It might also be true to argue that with
 the outbreak of the Revolutionary Wars, “the army assumed simultaneously the defense both of France and of the
 new order, and that in consequence all three – army, nation, and Revolution – were identified together.” 128 This, however, does not mean that the French peasants accepted service
 in the colors without hesitation. Indeed, “for many Frenchmen the service demanded by the
 government quickly assumed the guise of a new and unwelcome corvée , a tax in blood to a
 distant and impersonal master, imposed in the name of a national cause that they understood only in the dimmest
 terms.” 129 “Nationalism, the dream of ‘la grande nation’ so dear to
 the historians of the First Empire, had little appeal to those who were called on to fight in its name.” 130 