
 

 
 After thinking about it, Mehmed Ali saw the logic of his son’s suggestion and wrote back telling him that he had
 decided to limit the period to fifteen years! Ibrahim said that he was going to announce this good news to the
 soldiers thinking that this showed how merciful and benevolent the Pasha was. 113 On second thoughts, however, his father said that this way they would lose a lot of men and
 suggested that this new system be applied only to the new conscripts and that those already in service be treated
 as if they had spent five years already. 114 
 

 
 Given this mentality it was natural for the male population of Egypt to hate the army into which they were
 dragged by Mehmed Ali’s military machine and to seize every opportunity to evade it whenever and wherever they
 could. Nothing can be further from the truth than al-Rāf‘ī’s allegation that the fellahin eventually saw that
 “military life was more comfortable than their village life [which, in fact, is not saying much], and even became
 proud of it.” 115 In all the numerous cases about conscripting the
 male population of Egypt into Mehmed Ali’s army there was only a single instance of a man voluntarily requesting
 to join the army. He had been released and allowed to go back to his village, then some time later came back
 saying that he had heard from some pilgrims that his village had been deserted and that none of his relatives or
 friends had remained behind. 116 This could hardly be viewed as a
 positive reason for joining the army that Mehmed Ali founded, the “prime pillar of Egyptian
 independence.” 117 
 

 
 Yet is it plausible to argue that the spectacular victories which that army secured were
 accomplished by peasants who were dragged in it completely against their wishes? Lacking the positive incentive
 of fighting in defense of the fatherland, and at the same time being prevented from looting and pillaging the
 lands they conquered, how then can one account for the successive victories that these soldiers were able to
 secure? In an attempt to answer this important question the following section compares the Pasha’s army with that
 of Napoelon, an army on whose example it was partly modeled and one which shows that it is possible for a
 disgruntled peasantry which had been pressed into military service to produce successive victories for its
 commanders. This is followed by a comparison with the Sultan’s own army – which was Mehmed Ali’s most formidable
 adversary – a comparison that is intended to show how Ibrahim’s victories were not that hard to come by in the
 first place.
 

 
 The Pasha’s Cihadiye and the Emperor’s Grande Armée 
 

 
 As the French Revolution was approaching, an already existing feeling of common citizenship was gaining more
 ground while a common psychology was diffusing among all Frenchmen. “France was becoming a nation or a patrie and ceasing to be a mere royaume .” 118 As far as the military was concerned more
 and more people were gradually allowing themselves “to trust to something other than Prussian discipline for
 getting apt performance out of the troops . . . Were soldiers not also men? And who should
 fight better for his regiment, king or country than a man and a patriot who could feel loyalty and affection and
 who could fight for motives of love and belief, rather than from routine, roughness, and fear?” 119 