
 

 
 Nevertheless, the army did unwittingly contribute to the rise of Egyptian nationalism by homogenizing the
 experience of tens of thousands of Egyptians over a period that exceeded twenty years by instilling in them the
 feeling of hatred of the “Ottomans,” and thus helped in their collective “imagination” of the nation. 139 This creation of the “other” that wars are singularly successful at
 doing was operational in Mehmed Ali’s army not in directing the men’s sentiments of animosity against the army of
 the Greek rebels, or the Wahhabi brigands, let alone the army of the Ottoman Sultan, but against their own
 Turkish-speaking officers. These feelings of animosity towards the “Ottoman” eventually came to fruition two or
 three generations later when the frustrated leaders of these fellah-soldiers, the middle-ranking, Arabic-speaking
 officers, broke out in open rebellion together with other disgruntled members of Egyptian society against
 Turco-Circassian domination.
 

 
 These developments, however, needed time to come to the surface and during the Pasha’s reign their manifestations
 were hardly perceptible. Yet, their seeds had already been sown, giving rise to an inherent paradox of the
 Pasha’s army and of his entire military career, namely, the absence of legitimacy for his incessant expansionist
 military activities. For while using a religious argument to justify fighting against a state that claimed to be
 upholding the Faith for five centuries could not have sold very well, at the same time using an argument based on
 ethnicity, as nationalist arguments necessarily do, would have been counter-productive for the Pasha, his
 household, and his entire elite, the very same elite that was leading their ethnically different soldiers in the
 various wars.
 

 
 The Pasha’s Cihadiye and the Sultan’s Asaker-i Mansure 
 

 
 Lacking this essential ingredient for their militaristic exploits, namely, a legitimate excuse, however vaguely
 defined it might be, how then can one explain the successive victories that Ibrahim and his men snatched from the
 Ottomans? Furthermore, having argued that the soldiers were not well paid, that they were not allowed to loot and
 pillage the countries they were fighting in, and that at the same time they lacked the positive incentive of
 thinking that they were fighting for the glory of the fatherland, how can one explain the
 fact that they still managed to accomplish these successive victories? Comparing the Egyptian Pasha’s army to
 that of the Sultan against which it fought most of its battles might provide an answer for this intriguing
 question.
 

 
 On the face of it, the military reforms of both Mehmed Ali and Sultan Mahmud II look strikingly similar. Both men
 were influenced by the nizam-i cedid army that Sultan Selim III established prior to his
 deposition in 1807. Both also realized that to start introducing new tactics and drills in their respective
 domains, they had to get rid of the traditional military castes that saw the introduction of such new techniques
 as a direct threat to their privileged positions. Mehmed Ali thus got rid of the Mamluks in the infamous massacre
 of the Citadel in 1811, and Mahmud got rid of the Janissaries in 1826, to pave the way for the introduction of
 new drills. Furthermore, they seem to have realized that the new European states had gone a long way towards
 monopolizing the means of violence and enhancing the deadly capacity of their armies, and in that field, the
 field of military reform, both Cairo and Istanbul had lagged behind. They seem to have understood that without
 borrowing from the Europeans and seeking their assistance in founding their new armies, their reforms would be
 seriously undermined. In that manner both Pasha and Sultan sought the assistance of various European military
 advisors, the most famous of whom were Süleyman Pasha (Colonel Sèves) and Lieutenant (later Field Marshal)
 Helmuth von Moltke.