
 

 
 The French peasant, then, like the Egyptian peasant was an unwilling conscript fighting for a distant and
 impersonal leader whom he could neither comprehend nor sympathize with. Both were reacting to despots who had
 ambivalent feeling towards the men they led. Like Mehmed Ali, Napoleon knew too well that his glory could only be
 built on the sacrifices of his men, and for this he was grateful to them. But also like him, he had the sense of
 self-importance and contempt for human life (life of the poor peasant, that is,) that is characteristic of Great
 Men in the battlefield and which allowed him to say in a letter to Metternich in 1813, “Un homme comme moi ne
 regarde pas à un million de morts.” 131 The men, for their part, had
 no ambivalence towards their despotic leaders and saw service in their respective armies not as an honorable duty
 owed to a larger community but as a heavy tribute exacted by an oppressive and distant regime.
 

 
 If the comparison between the two armies shows that in both of them the distance was great between the poor,
 oppressed soldiers and their alien, impersonal despot, there is, however, a crucial difference between the two
 armies. This concerned the type of people who lay between the soldiers and their distant sovereign, viz . the officers. Napoleon was successful in bringing together members of the old nobility and the new, rising bourgeoisie and in making a more-or-less homogenous officer corps that was loyal
 to his person. “The corps of officers was to be a melting-pot in which people who belonged to the ‘two Frances,’
 so to speak, would be reconciled. Sitting together in the military schools and, even more, fighting at the front
 against the enemy, they would learn to respect one another.” 132 
 More importantly, they would try to sell the idea of nationalism, as it were, to their soldiers, convincing them
 that in giving up their lives in defense of the Emperor, they would in fact be defending the nation as
 represented in him. In these schools they would be taught that the “courageous soldier was one who worshiped
 honor and was ready to sacrifice [his life] . . . for the sake of the community.” 133 Judging from the record, it does not seem that the officers succeeded in
 convincing the soldiers that what they were fighting for was the nation. It was only towards the end of the
 nineteenth century that the soldiers came to think that what they were doing was fighting for their patrie; only in the 1890s is there “persuasive evidence that the army was no longer ‘theirs’ but
 ‘ours’ . . . At least for a while, the army could become what its enthusiasts hoped for: the school of the
 fatherland.” 134 This was possible not only because the soldiers
 believed this to be the case, but more importantly, because their officers, since their Great Emperor’s time, had
 been convinced strongly enough of this themselves and were then able to pass on this feeling to their
 subordinates.
 

 
 In that respect Mehmed Ali’s army was different. Two crucial features characterized his officers. Like
 Napoleon’s, they were loyal to their master, owing him allegiance and devotion, and strove to appease him and his
 family. However, unlike the Emperor’s officers, they were not from or of the country they were defending. Being
 themselves newcomers to Egypt, the officers in Mehmed Ali’s army had no roots in the country that they were
 supposedly fighting for and the ethnic and linguistic differences that separated them from their soldiers made
 any attempt to convince the soldiers of any nationalistic argument nearly impossible. The officers could not
 attempt to “sell the idea of nationalism” to their soldiers, not only because they spoke different languages, and
 communication with their soldiers was kept to the absolute minimum, but also, and above all, because they
 themselves did not believe that they were fighting for the nation. It took at least two or three generations for
 the Turkish-speaking officer corps to settle in Egypt and to start to think of Egypt as their country. By that
 time, however, resentment among the lower ranking Arabic-speaking officers was high and eventually led to open
 rebellion.