
 

 
 A clear message was being delivered to the Pasha and his military authorities: the fellahin resented his army and
 were going to extreme lengths to resist serving in it. In response, the Pasha was sending back an equally clear
 message to anyone who might be thinking of mutilating himself to evade conscription: he would still be taken for
 the service – if not for the army, then for any of the Pasha’s projects. In short, it proved extremely difficult
 to evade the army for it seems that there was a stubborn determination on the part of the Pasha that the
 mutilated would not escape conscription. When all methods failed in preventing the fellahin from stopping the
 terrible practice of mutilation, the authorities went ahead with drafting the maimed all the same. On visiting
 Asyout in 1834 St. John described a scene where “there was a whole regiment which had been composed of mutilated
 conscripts, every one of whom had either lost an eye, a finger, or the front teeth.” 109 
 

 
 Ultimately, Egyptians, seeing that life had become so unbearable under the new “enlightened” regime of Mehmed Ali
 because of corvée, taxation, monopolies, imprisonment and, above all, conscription, decided that even if they
 could bear these atrocities themselves, there was no reason why they should see their own children subjected to
 the same fate. Thus a new method of resistance developed which reflected the Egyptians’ utter despair: they
 simply refused to marry and have children. In 1828 Mehmed Ali wrote to the Director of his War Department, Mahmud
 Bey, telling him that a lot of fellahin were abstaining from marriage in order to avoid seeing their children
 being subjected to these various government demands, e.g. taxation and imprisonment. He therefore ordered him to
 suggest means to issue orders to the shaykhs that would meet government demands and at the same time pacify the
 fellahin and discourage them from this habit, since “the prosperity of the country depends on increasing its
 population.” 110 
 

 
 One of the main reasons behind the fellahin’s hatred of conscription was that it was not limited by any fixed
 period of time in spite of the Pasha’s initial order to have it limited to three
 years. 111 When Ibrahim Pasha realized this – after more than ten
 years of active conscription, during which time the countryside had been drained of its male population – he
 wrote to his father suggesting that they limit the service to a fixed period. He explained:
 

 
 It is natural for any sane person to resist conscription, since conscription and captivity are [practically] the
 same. No conscript would ever have the hope of saying “I will be conscripted for a fixed period, then I will be
 discharged and live the remaining years of my life [outside the army].” Men have the right to think likewise
 since we do not discharge men unless they receive serious wounds in their hands, legs, eyes or heads; that is,
 they are not discharged unless they are good neither for the army nor [any other] service. This is why we face
 resistance in conscripting them. 112 