
 

 
 Finding it difficult to go back to their villages or to disappear in the anonymity of Cairo, some soldiers
 attempted to leave Egypt altogether, although even that proved difficult since the bedouins were always on the
 look-out for any soldiers who succeeded in escaping from their camps. 89 In spite of this strict surveillance, however, some soldiers managed to escape to the Hijaz
 and the Pasha had to write to his nephew, Ahmed Pasha Yeğen, to ask him to catch all deserters who sought refuge
 there. 90 When it was discovered that some soldiers were posing as
 pilgrims to escape to Arabia, 91 all pilgrims were ordered to have a
 stamped certificate stating their names, the names of their villages and their physical descriptions. 92 Finally, when one of the Egyptian officials that the Pasha had sent to
 France told the Pasha that he had found a number of deserters in Paris (!), Mehmed Ali desperately admitted that
 desertion was impossible to stop, but that did not mean that nothing could be done about it and he urged senior
 officers to have a discussion about ways of limiting desertion from their regiments. 93 
 

 
 Besides ordering the shaykhs to capture any deserters who might have taken refuge in their villages, and
 threatening them that they would be whipped if they did not comply, 94 Mehmed Ali also threatened his own officers “for any negligence that [they] showed in that
 respect.” He said that any officer from whose unit a deserter fled had to find a replacement himself. Otherwise,
 if he failed, a percentage of his salary would be deducted. 95 
 Furthermore, it was decreed that deserters who had decided voluntarily to return to their units would be
 pardoned; otherwise on being caught they would each receive 500 stripes of the whip. 96 In another desperate attempt to control desertion people who caught deserters were rewarded
 with fifty piasters for each soldier they caught. 97 Yet, the Pasha
 knew quite well that responsibility for catching deserters ultimately rested with the local
 and provincial officials whom he warned that if they were not strict in that respect, he would forget their
 previous services and would beat them up himself. 98 
 

 
 In spite of all these orders and decrees, in spite of the heavy surveillance that they were under, and in spite
 of the drastic punishments inflicted upon those who were caught, the fellahin were deserting in a steady stream
 and nothing that the authorities did was effective in stopping them from doing so. During the early years of the
 Syrian campaign it was difficult to know exactly how many men went missing from their units at any one time; the
 roll-calls gave estimates as low as 10 percent and as high as 25 percent of the size of any one
 regiment. 99 Six years into the campaign, however, Mehmed Ali
 received a report which was most alarming regarding deserters. It said that as many as 60,000 men had gone
 missing from the army in addition to 20,000 from the navy! 100 
 Bearing in mind that the army could not have been larger than 130,000, this means that for every two conscripts,
 one soldier managed to desert.