
 

 
 The size and scale of desertion is more eloquent that any allegations by nationalist historians regarding how the
 population of Egypt thought of the Pasha’s army and his regime in general. The scale and regularity of desertion
 was the most striking testimony to the fellahin’s willingness to resist a regime they found oppressive,
 intolerant and inhuman. There is something almost splendid about defying Mehmed Ali and his authorities in that
 way and at that level. Desertion and the authorities’ frustration with it show how much Mehmed Ali’s policies
 found no echo in the fellahin’s minds and souls. The Pasha might have created an elaborate machinery to conscript
 and train the fellahin. He managed to aggregate their forces and organize them along European lines and to fight
 his wars with them successfully. But just as he managed to create what appeared as a disciplined soldiery, the
 fellahin, through desertion, asserted their power to disrupt his machinery and to contest his wish to subjugate
 them.
 

 
 As alarming as the issue of desertion was to the authorities, it was not the only way that the fellahin showed
 their dissatisfaction with the Pasha’s army and with serving in it. They also developed more subtle and cunning
 techniques to evade the service. One way was to make cross tattoos on their arms to try to
 convince the conscripting officers that they were Copts and hence should be exempted from the tertip . 101 Mehmed Ali wrote to Nazif Bey, who had
 recently been appointed in charge of conscription after losing his job as Commissary-General, 102 telling him not to be taken in by this trick and to conscript all
 healthy men who could be found, whether they claimed to be Copts or not.
 

 
 The self-maimed
 

 
 More seriously, many fellahin went as far as maiming themselves in the hope that they might be declared medically
 unfit for service in the army. Initially, the most common way of maiming was to remove the front teeth in order
 to be deemed incapable of loading the muskets. However, when Mehmed Ali was informed that a lot of men in Upper
 Egypt had resorted to this habit, he said that since the training manuals did not specify which teeth should be
 used in loading the musket, these men could use other teeth and should therefore be conscripted. 103 
 

 
 Other ways of maiming were more dangerous and resulted in serious bodily harm. One such method resorted to by the
 fellahin was to blind themselves by putting rat poison in their eyes. On hearing about such terrible practice,
 Mehmed Ali wrote to the governors forbidding the spice merchants from selling rat poison altogether. As for those
 unfortunates who had actually used it, they were sentenced to life imprisonment in the Liman of
 Alexandria. 104 In one case a woman gouged out the eyes of two men,
 one a soldier who had deserted from the army, and the other her son (who might have been asked to join the army
 himself). On being informed about this case, the Pasha ordered her to be drowned in the Nile, the deserter to be
 sent to the Liman of Alexandria, and the son to be pardoned. 105 In an attempt to prevent those who assisted the men in maiming themselves, usually their
 wives or mothers, an order was issued to hang these women at the entrances of their villages so “as to be an
 example to others.” 106 When the maimed were of no practical use to
 the army, they were consistently sent to the Liman in Alexandria to serve there for life. 107 Otherwise if it were judged that they would be useful in other
 government establishments, then they would be sent there. For example, when workers were demanded for a new
 powder-magazine Mehmed Ali ordered 120 of those who had maimed themselves, either by gouging out an eye or by
 chopping off a finger, to be sent to work in his new establishment. 108 