
 

 
 Viewed in the light of these differences, it is not the least surprising that Sultan Mahmud’s army suffered
 successive defeat at the hands of Mehmed Ali’s army. On the face of it, it would seem that the main reason behind
 these humiliating defeats was that, whereas Mehmed Ali started to build his new army and train it along European
 lines in 1820, the Sultan did this six years later. There are, however, much more important reasons for the
 contrasting performances of the two armies. First, there was the important factor that the Mansure army of the Sultan lacked a commander of the caliber of Ibrahim Pasha. Second, although the
 army of the Sultan had been able to secure the services of some European advisors, these were neither authorized
 nor trusted enough to be given high positions in the army; this at a time when Süleyman Pasha had been able to
 rise up in the military hierarchy until he became second-in-command after Ibrahim Pasha. Third, the Ottoman army
 never witnessed anything like the superb working relationship between Mehmed Ali, Ibrahim Pasha and Süleyman
 Pasha; instead, it was a battle-ground for intrigues and internal fights among various officials. A significant
 factor in the defeat of the Ottoman army in the battle of Horns, for example, was the fact that the Serasker,
 Husrev Pasha, was jealous of the authority of Hüseyin Pasha, who was appointed as
 Commander-in-Chief of the army that was to fight Ibrahim Pasha. To curb his influence, Husrev had Mehmed Pasha,
 one of his protégés, appointed to Hüseyin’s staff as second-in-command although the two men could neither work
 together nor agree on common tactics. 152 Fourth, by the time of the
 initiation of hostilities between Mehmed Ali and the Sultan, the Pasha’s new military schools had managed to
 train officers who were capable of leading his army to successive victories, at a time when the Sultan was still
 tampering with the remnants of his old system. The officers graduating from Mehmed Ali’s schools might have been
 discharged earlier than they should have been, and only a few of them ever managed to finish studying the proper
 curriculum set for the school; yet, by comparison, they were better trained and more loyal than the Sultan’s
 officers.
 

 
 In more than one way, therefore, the victories that Ibrahim managed to secure in his illustrious career were as
 much due to the innate qualities of his army as to the shortcomings of his adversaries and in particular, the
 Ottomans. For as Marshal Marmont put it in the mid-1830s, “doubtless it was advantageous to Ibrahim to be opposed
 to troops who are incapable of manoeuvring, and whose invariable practice it is either to await the advantage of
 their enemy or to rush forward to attack without either system or order.” 153 
 

 
 The battle of Nezib (24 June 1839) illustrates very clearly how these differences between the two armies can
 explain the various defeats of the Ottomans by Mehmed Ali’s army. Throughout the second half of 1838 and the
 early part of 1839 Sultan Mahmud was more determined than ever to settle accounts with his rebellious vassal and
 to have back the lands he had acquired against his wishes. He thus sent his Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mustafa
 Raşid Pasha, to Europe to secure the backing of Europe in any confrontation with Mehmed Ali. His mission was not
 successful, however, since Britain, the most important player among the Powers, agreed to back the Sultan only if
 Mehmed Ali declared himself independent. 154 