
 

 
 The Sultan’s policy was therefore based on the principle of avoiding direct confrontation with Ibrahim Pasha’s
 army and of seeking instead to threaten Syria by land and sea so as to provoke an uprising among the inhabitants
 there. This policy was based on erroneous and misleading information sent by Hafiz Pasha, Commander-in-Chief of
 forces in Anatolia, who pointed to the imminence of an uprising against Mehmed Ali’s rule in
 Syria. 155 The Sultan amassed a sizeable force composed of local
 Turkish and Kurdish tribesmen from southern Anatolia whose mere presence was hoped to spark such a revolt. In the
 event, the Syrians were too cowed by Ibrahim’s troops to revolt against Egyptian rule. 156 After a brief period of hesitation and indecision, however, Mehmed Ali
 finally decided that he could not accept this blatant act from the Ottomans and was not deterred by European
 calls for restraint. He thus ordered his son to advance against Hafiz Pasha’s troops and to proceed to capture
 Orfa and Diyarbakɩr after routing the Ottoman army and not to wait for any further commands from him, since “the
 pot has overflown and there is no need any longer for the spoon.” 157 
 

 
 The actual performance of the Ottoman army showed how ill-prepared and badly led it was, and that thirteen years
 of military reforms initiated by Mahmud could not stand the first serious test posed to it. As opposed to the
 superb logistical preparations of Ibrahim Pasha 158 and the
 admirable division of labor between him and his best general, Süleyman Pasha, 159 that eventually allowed Ibrahim’s army to assume an impressive formation at the start of
 the battle, 160 the Ottoman army had a divided leadership, had lost
 the initiative it had had, and was already tired even before the battle had started.
 

 
 On more than one occasion Hafiz had a chance to disrupt Ibrahim Pasha’s movements in preparation for the
 battle. 161 Instead, his troops “took up battle positions in such a
 slow and disorganized manner [and] had to be maintained in combat positions for three days and nights while
 Ibrahim maneuvered in the area.” 162 Furthermore, and against the
 advice of von Moltke who was sent by the Sultan to assist him, Hafiz Pasha ordered his troops to leave their
 fortified positions and to venture out in open country, which is precisely what Ibrahim wanted them to do. This
 he did in compliance with the suggestion of his ‘ulamā’ who first advised him against
 fighting on a Friday and then deemed it shameful to sit behind the entrenchment and instead urged him to advance
 against the adversary in the open. 163 Even after committing these
 grave mistakes, Hafiz could have still salvaged the situation, especially since at one crucial moment Ibrahim’s
 army was lacking in ammunition. However, he missed that opportunity and, again disregarding
 von Moltke’s advice, refused to order the advance of an unbroken column and kept himself busy with stopping the
 chaotic retreat of his own troops. The result of this extremely incompetent leadership was disastrous for, in von
 Moltke’s description of the battle, “the army of Hafiz Pasha has ceased to exist . . . The Turks threw down their
 arms and abandoned their artillery and ammunition, flying in every direction.” 164 In the event the Ottomans lost all their guns and up to 10,000 prisoners were captured by
 Ibrahim Pasha.