
 

 
 This last victory of Ibrahim’s was made possible by his insightful and clever command, by the assistance that
 Süleyman Pasha gave him, by his well-trained soldiers and loyal officers who had been hardened and tried in an
 army that had had a short but successful history, and above all by the infrastructure that was built to feed and
 supply the army. Of equal importance, however, this victory was made possible by the Ottomans’ own dismal
 performance. As opposed to Ibrahim, Hafiz was without previous battlefield experience. 165 He was inflexible, indecisive and stubborn, refusing to accept the
 advice of his capable Prussian advisor, von Moltke. His army was ill-trained, his officers’ loyalty was in doubt
 and above all the directives and instructions he was receiving from Istanbul were contradictory and confusing.
 

 
 By comparing the performance of Mehmed Ali’s army to those of Napoleon and Sultan Mahmud II it is possible to
 come up with suggestions as to how the Pasha’s army was capable of accomplishing these spectacular victories in
 spite of the fact that its soldiers were drafted into it against their wishes and used every means at their
 disposal to resist it. While to argue, as most contemporary observers did, that “the Turkish defeat in the
 conflict with Muhammed Ali [was due] primarily to the inadequacies of the Ottoman military leadership” 166 might be to stress the point too forcibly, it remains true that Ottoman
 incompetence and timid military reform contributed significantly to Ibrahim’s victories, and that had the
 Ottomans been more successful in managing their own armies, Ibrahim Pasha’s career and, indeed, that of his
 father would seem much less impressive.
 

 
 Conclusion
 

 
 This chapter has attempted to challenge the received wisdom that the Pasha, by founding his army and conscripting
 Egyptians into it, was trying to gain independence for Egypt as meaning a nation-state.
 While it is acknowledged that the Pasha himself was Turkish-speaking and that he might not have seen his army or
 his policies in general in an Egyptian nationalistic light, it is sometimes claimed that, nevertheless, he and
 “his new administration inevitably put Egypt on the path of independent statehood and self-recognition as having
 a separate identity from other Muslims and Ottomans. . . [and that] without his efforts it might have taken
 Egyptians much longer to be able to call Egypt their own.” 167 We
 have yet to deal with the Pasha’s own personal feelings towards and thoughts about Egypt; in this chapter we
 questioned the effect of the army on Egyptian nationalism by looking at Ibrahim Pasha’s policies towards his
 Arabic-speaking soldiers, by investigating the composition of the officer corps and the relationship between
 soldiers and officers, and finally by trying to sketch the reaction of the men to the brutal regime of the Pasha
 that they came to experience and confront in a very physical way.
 

 
 One of the main arguments that nationalist historians have put forward to prove that the army was indeed a
 national army in spite of the Turkish ethnicity of its founder is that of how different his son was in this
 respect. Ibrahim, it is alleged, was closer to his Egyptian soldiers and never identified himself as an Ottoman.
 Be that as it may, what this chapter has argued is that Ibrahim had no doubt in his mind regarding the nature of
 the wars that his army was fighting. As far as he was concerned these were wars that he waged in the name of his
 father and for the sake of his family. More important than Ibrahim’s sentiments, though, was the very composition
 of the officer corps that he was leading which, as this chapter has tried to show, was ethnically, linguistically
 and culturally different from the soldiery. Like their leader, the officers in the Pasha’s army had no doubt that
 they were serving the Pasha and his family and had no sympathies in common with the men they were commanding.
 With their origins in different parts of the Ottoman world and having come to Egypt to seek employment in the
 Pasha’s army and bureaucracy, they tied their own destinies to that of the household they were fighting for. Like
 Ibrahim Pasha they, too, thought of the army as a dynastic army fighting the Pasha’s own wars, wars that they
 stood to benefit from since the army that was successful in those wars could give them a better, more lucrative
 employment and, arguably, a better and more prestigious social status in the new province they settled in, Egypt.