
 

 
 The problem, however, was that although the Pasha might have thought that he was rejuvenating the Empire by
 showing the officials in Istanbul how to run it, 4 by the late 1820s
 he had practically managed to create in Egypt another center of power. For while Cairo commanded a smaller
 proportion of the overall revenue of the Empire, it was being turned into a more efficient
 and vibrant centre which diverted more and more resources away from Istanbul. It was this ability of Mehmed Ali’s
 government to extract more revenue and to mobilize the resources of his province that enabled him to invade
 Syria. Seen in this light, the Syrian campaign, therefore, while highlighting the inefficiency and cumbersome
 nature of Ottoman reform to date, pointed out the way as shown by Mehmed Ali of how affairs of state could be
 better organized. It is in this respect that Mehmed Ali could have been sincere (as sincere as he could be, that
 is) in saying that he was interested in reforming and rejuvenating the Ottoman Empire. He had done it in Egypt,
 so why should not his reforms be copied in the central lands of the Empire? Yet the manner he chose to show the
 Ottoman officials the folly of their ways, namely by going to war with them, underscores the problems he had in
 justifying his own actions while still remaining within the Ottoman fold.
 

 
 The Pasha’s feelings towards Egypt were equally problematic. On the one hand, he knew that Egypt was not simply
 another province within the Ottoman Empire. He was aware that whatever he was successful in achieving during his
 long career was possible not because he was a docile, obedient vali of the Ottoman Sultan. Rather, he was clearly
 conscious that his fame and prestige within the Ottoman world was based on his being the vali of Egypt, a wealthy
 province in the Empire that he had managed to organize in an efficient manner and whose enormous potential wealth
 he had realized. 5 He also knew that his prestige in the Ottoman
 world rested on his ability to control and rule that particular province properly and efficiently. In a letter to
 Ibrahim he once complained of the enormous wage bill that he had to face each year because of the ever-increasing
 duties that his government was undertaking. He added, however, that “Egypt’s ability to pay all these salaries
 increases its reputation and its honor.” 6 When an Ottoman spy was
 captured during the early days of the Syrian campaign, Mehmed Ali wrote to his son: he said he should show him
 around the camps and tell him, “You have now known how much the Egyptian officers and soldiers are paid and have
 seen the degree of comfort and freedom they enjoy. Now go and report this to your Istanbullite colleagues who
 live in misery and shame and you will have served your faith properly.” 7 Just after the fall of Acre the Pasha wrote a general letter to his men to congratulate them for their “courage and chivalry . . . From now on we want you to show the same
 qualities . . . towards any one who wants to harm the Egyptian lands [lit. al-diyār
 al-Miṣriyya ], lands which have enhanced our position and increased our reputation.” 8 