
 

 
 On the other hand, the Pasha harbored very negative views towards the population of Egypt. He despised the
 fellahin and could not respect them except as a source of cheap and hardworking manpower. He once ordered a
 certain legal code to be translated from a European language so that it could be applied in Egypt. He told the
 translator, however, not to copy the European model blindly, since the law suited the “Europeans [who are]
 enlightened and civilized people. Our people, however are like wild beasts [ vahşlar ] for
 whom obviously this law will not be suitable.” 9 On another occasion
 he said that “the inhabitants of our province, Egypt, are of three kinds. The first does not care except about
 themselves. The second, although they can be loyal and kind, are devoid of any sense of discretion. The third are
 in the same position as animals.” 10 
 

 
 Yet, he obviously knew that it was these “animals” who were the source of his wealth and good fortune. Moreover,
 they were cheap and docile for the most part. When he imported two steamships from Britain, the British
 technicians and workers manning them caused a lot of problems, basically because they were expensive, “stubborn
 and unreliable.” The Pasha then thought of appointing a couple of Egyptian men as assistants to the British
 workers to learn from them the job so that he could get rid of them eventually. 11 
 

 
 The Pasha’s opinions about his Egyptian subjects are probably best shown by reviewing the rationale behind his
 educational policies. In spite of the fact that the Pasha is often praised for spreading education, opening one
 school after the other, sending students to Europe and founding a modern press and the first regular newspaper in
 the East, he still had strong reservations regarding educating the masses. In a letter to his son, Ibrahim,
 answering his request to open new schools and to admit more native Egyptians, the Pasha said that he had no
 intention of spreading education among the masses in Egypt. He told his son to look at what happened to European
 monarchs when they attempted to educate their poor. He added that he should satisfy himself with educating a
 limited number of people who could assume key positions in his administration and give up
 ideas about generalizing education. 12 Even after founding these
 schools he was displeased because they were mostly full of Arabic-speaking Egyptian students. He wrote to Ibrahim
 while he was in Anatolia at the height of the war against the Ottomans telling him to try to attract ( riza ile alɩnɩp ) some Turks from areas around Adana, Maraş and Orfa and send them to schools in
 Egypt. 13 
 

 
 In short, Mehmed Ali’s position vis-à-vis the Ottoman Sultan, on the one hand, and the fellah subjects, on the
 other, is very similar to that of a feudal lord. Above him loomed the authority of the Sultan, an authority that
 resembled that of a feudal overlord above that of his vassals and an authority that Mehmed Ali could, and did,
 challenge. Similarly, the Pasha viewed Egypt as his own personal fief. “Our lord, the Wali
 al-Ni‘am” a report published in the Vakayi-i Mɩsɩriyye proclaimed, “is so dedicated to
 the welfare of the country . . . that he aims at viewing all Egyptian lands ( al-aqālīm
 al-Miṣriyya kāffatan ) as his own personal domain ( kadā’iratihi al-khāṣṣa ), and to have
 all who live on it, young or old, grow up in his grace as his own children.” 14 Given his inherently contradictory position vis-à-vis both the Sultan in Istanbul and the
 Egyptian population, Mehmed Ali had nothing to resort to but his own self and his own name to legitimate his
 rule. When in 1826 he decided on a design for his army’s flags, an important symbol of power, the Pasha chose one
 that was similar to that used by Sultan Mahmud II, 15 and to mark
 his insignia of power in a manner that would distinguish them from those of his nominal ruler, he had nothing to
 resort to except his own name. To honor the two regiments which were particularly brave during the siege of Acre,
 the Pasha ordered two flags to be handed to the regiments’ colonels, with the words “Mehmed Ali” inscribed on
 them. 16 Similarly, to commemorate the fall of Acre a medal was cast
 with his name inscribed on it in precious stones. 17 In 1836 he
 ordered the head of his navy to hang wooden plaques inscribed with his name in the cabins of every line-of-battle
 ship. 18 Most telling is the answer he gave to Ibrahim when the
 latter had reached Kütahia, a day’s marching distance from Istanbul, and when his victorious
 son was pleading with him to press for independence. In response to these repeated pleas, and finding no
 plausible excuses to legitimate his rebellion against the Sultan, Mehmed Ali replied saying, “My Mehmed Ali-ness
 is enough for me.” 19 