
 

 
 This chapter attempts to view developments from the Pasha’s perspective and tries to understand the nature of
 this ambivalence that he felt towards both his awliā’ al-ni‘am , the fellah and the Sultan,
 i.e. Egypt and the Ottoman Empire. In addition, this chapter is interested in analyzing the nature and the aims
 of the wars that the Pasha fought against the Ottoman Sultan. These wars, in particular, are usually highlighted
 to argue that Europe, and specifically Great Britain, by backing the Sultan in his fight against his Egyptian
 vali, dismantled Mehmed Ali’s “empire,” weakened Egypt and placed its power and progress under a weighty
 vassalage. 2 Seen from a modern, nationalist perspective that takes
 “Egypt” to refer to an undivided entity capable of sovereignty and autonomy, this may well be the case. However,
 what is asked below is how these struggles would look if viewed from an Ottoman perspective and placed in their
 original nineteenth-century context. In other words, is it possible to view the wars that the Pasha waged during
 his illustrious career, and specifically against Sultan Mahmud II, not as wars of independence as is often
 claimed but as an example of an inter-Ottoman rivalry, or even a civil war within the Ottoman Empire?
 

 
 Let us begin with the Pasha’s own apparently confused feelings about what he set out to accomplish. We have
 already referred to Mehmed Ali’s ambivalent feelings towards the Ottoman Empire and his position as a nominal
 vassal within it, an ambivalence that shaped his outlook and policies towards Istanbul and the viziers there. To
 recapitulate, the Pasha was torn between two feelings. On the one hand, he was familiar with the Ottoman world:
 he was knowledgeable about the Empire’s past, well informed about developments in its capital and knew which
 options were available to decision-makers there and, moreover, he believed that he had a role to play in shaping
 its future. More importantly, his culture, his manners, and his language were all “Ottoman” in the sense that
 they were more connected to, and influenced by, the Turkish centre of the Empire than its Arabic-speaking
 provinces, of one of which he was governor. On the other hand, he also disdained and was disgusted by the way the
 Empire was run and came to realize, especially when he was repeatedly called upon to help the Sultan out of his
 troubles, that the Empire was not run in the most efficient way. As was shown in chapter 1 , this feeling was especially exacerbated during the
 Morean campaign when the eventual confrontation with the Sultan was becoming more likely, a
 confrontation that finally surfaced during the Syrian conflict.
 

 
 This conviction of the inefficiency and feebleness of the Ottoman administration was due not only to a difference
 in temperament between him and the Ottoman officials or to variations in the style of governing. There was
 essentially a qualitative difference between the Sultan’s and the Pasha’s views of what a government was supposed
 to be and how it was supposed to function. The way Mehmed Ali organized the government of his province, Egypt,
 and the manner in which he reaped its potential wealth immediately threw into high relief the inefficiency and
 corruption of the central government in Istanbul. The developments and innovations that the Pasha introduced in
 Egypt were not only unprecedented in the Ottoman Empire; they also ushered in a new conception of government
 which was essentially interventionist rather than merely preservationist in nature. The new bureaucracy, the modern schooling system, the health system and
 above all the new model army that the Pasha founded in Egypt all pushed the realms of government into unchartered
 waters seldom navigated by an Ottoman government before. Looked at from this perspective, the reforms of Mehmed
 Ali were closer to those of Mahmud II than to those of Selim III. While both sultans were trying hard to arrest
 the decline of the Empire basically by having tighter control over the provincial economic and administrative
 activities, Mahmud went much further than his predecessor in extending the aggressive hand of the government to
 control his subjects’ lives both in the central lands as well as in the provinces. In doing so he was certainly
 inspired by his vali’s “experiments” in Egypt. Since coming to power more or less at the same time and for nearly
 two decades both Sultan and vali had “compatible, even complementary policies in regards the establishment of
 strict, efficient administrative control over the empire’s revenues.” 3 Indeed, the Sultan stood to benefit from the Pasha’s services in dealing with the Wahhabi
 unrest, in the extension of control over the Sudan, in attempting to subdue the Greek revolt, and, above all, in
 his better organization of Egypt itself.