
 

 

 
 Plate 8
 “Henry-John Temple, Viscount Palmerston” 
 

 
 That some of the country’s products were processed locally rather than exported in a raw form to British
 factories must have been irksome to Palmerston. He might also have been affronted by the Pasha’s “illiberal”
 policies of conscription, corvée and high taxation. 56 Palmerston,
 however, was concerned above all about the dangers that the Pasha’s territorial expansion were causing to
 Istanbul. These military activities, Palmerston rightly believed, were pushing Istanbul to seek assistance from
 the Russians who were only too eager to provide the Sultan with all the help he needed, thus giving them the
 perfect opportunity to interfere in Ottoman affairs. It was the prospect of Russia’s increased influence in
 Istanbul and its southward expansion towards India rather than any loss of actual or potential markets in the
 eastern Mediterranean that inflamed Palmerston’s feelings against Mehmed Ali’s monopoly policies. For it was
 precisely the system of monopolies that the Pasha had introduced, Palmerston again rightly thought, that allowed
 the Pasha to syphon profits accrued from the agricultural and commercial sectors to the military, thus enabling
 him to build a powerful army and a formidable navy that he then used to threaten the Sultan’s dominions.
 Ultimately Palmerston’s greatest concern was for British possessions in Asia; his greatest fear was that Russia
 might interfere there. In other words, what was at stake was the British market in Asia rather than the much
 smaller ones in the eastern Mediterranean. Both London and Bombay viewed Mehmed Ali as causing a grave threat to
 these important markets by his giving the Russians the opportunity and the pretext to encroach onto Ottoman
 lands, and possibly to do away with the Ottoman Empire altogether. Palmerston’s motto of
 “the preservation of the integrity of the Ottoman Empire” was his most effective bulwark against possible Russian
 aggression and was not a “malicious” act directed at Egypt. 57 
 

 
 That it was fear of Russia’s expansion more than concern over British markets in the eastern Mediterranean that
 caused Palmerston’s alarm at Mehmed Ali’s monopolies is further corroborated by following the British Foreign
 Secretary’s policies towards the Pasha from the early months of the first Syrian crisis of 1831–3 to the crucial
 ones of the second crisis of 1839–41. As mentioned in chapter
 1 during the early months of the first crisis the British Foreign Secretary had almost nothing to say,
 apparently preferring to view the crisis as a purely Ottoman affair. “There is not a single word [from
 Palmerston] either to Constantinople and Alexandria or to the British ambassadors at Paris, Vienna, and St.
 Petersburg; hardly any observation can be noticed during 1832 on despatches coming from these centers and
 touching on the subject of the Syrian war.” 58 This has prompted
 some historians to argue that Palmerston had not made up his mind yet as to which horse to back, as it were, the
 Sultan or Mehmed Ali. 59 At this crucial time the question in
 Palmerston’s mind was: would British interests be harmed more if Mehmed Ali was opposed by Britain, which would
 cause him to be swayed even more towards France and therefore increase that country’s influence in Egypt, or if
 he were allowed to get away with his attack on the Sultan, thus jeopardizing the very existence of the Ottoman
 Empire? Palmerston made up his mind as early as September 1832 that