
 

 
 It would be erroneous therefore to argue that when the Pasha decided to officially ask for independence from the
 Ottoman Empire in May 1838 he was acting on behalf of the Egyptian population and expressing their sentiments,
 sentiments that made them see themselves as different and distinct from other subjects of the Ottoman Sultan.
 What prompted the Pasha to make this bold move, rather, was his desire to secure his efforts in Egypt to his
 family and his sons after him. As John Campbell, the British Consul-General in 1838, said “he cannot. . . ever
 permit all [the] establishments [that he founded in Egypt over thirty years] to revert to the Porte and be lost
 at his death, and that he should have the pang of feeling that all his labours should merely have been for the
 Porte which would allow them to go to ruin, whilst his own family and children would be exposed to want and
 perhaps even to be put to death.” 20 These were the reasons he put
 to the British government for his asking for independence from the Ottoman Empire. There is nothing here or
 elsewhere in the contemporary documents to show that he had any illusions about the nature of his struggle with
 the Sultan. That struggle was a dynastic one and it was conceived of as such by him and his contemporaries.
 

 
 The wars that the Pasha fought, and in particular those that were waged against the Ottoman Sultan, could not
 therefore be viewed as wars of national independence, aimed at liberating the Egyptians from the “Turkish yoke,”
 nor could they be compared to those that the Greeks fought against the Sultan. Not only would the thousands of
 fellahin who made up the bulk of his fighting force have found this claim difficult to believe, but also the
 Pasha himself could think of these wars only along dynastic lines. He repeatedly said that what he was seeking to
 do was to foil the intrigues directed against “our family,” 21 and
 hoped for nothing more than to “strengthen the foundations of my dynasty,” 22 and to “carve a place for my family and my dynasty’s families in history to be remembered in
 four or five centuries’ time.” 23 
 

 
 The Pasha and his foes
 

 
 If one sees Mehmed Ali as a governor of an Ottoman province who was constantly concerned about his position
 within the Empire and was anxious about the future of his family after his death, as he himself certainly was,
 then the person who appears as the Pasha’s nemesis whom he spent all his life fighting was not Sultan Mahmud, not
 even Lord Palmerston, the British Foreign Secretary (to whom we will turn shortly), but Mehmed Husrev Pasha, his
 old enemy whom he first encountered in 1801 and who since then had been appointed as governor of various
 provinces in Anatolia and Rumelia, as Grand Admiral of the Ottoman navy, who eventually became Grand Vizier more
 than once in his long career of public service. In fact, the careers and mentalities of both men appear
 remarkably similar: both were keen, yet distant, observers of the European scene; both were interested in
 military reform; and both were concerned about the fate of the Empire and eager to help defend it. But whereas
 Mehmed Ali succeeded in making Egypt into his own fief and in exploiting it for himself and his family while at
 the same time thinking that he was thus offering a model of how the Empire could be reformed, Husrev was much
 less fortunate. He never had a wealthy province like Mehmed Ali’s on which to try out on a small scale his ideas
 of how to rejuvenate the Empire, and while being a protégé of reform-minded officials, he was never as successful
 as the Egyptian Pasha was in putting his ideas of military refom into practice, this in spite of occupying very
 senior posts in the Empire’s military and civilian administration during his long and active career. While there
 were many obstacles that stood in Husrev’s way of implementing his ideas, one of the most important was Mehmed
 Ali himself. This feeling of animosity was heartily reciprocated since the Egyptian Pasha was convinced that
 Husrev was leading a faction in Istanbul that was determined to thwart his efforts and to deny him the fruits of
 his various military victories over the Sultan’s armies. 24 