
 

 
 Their story together starts in 1801 when they independently joined an Ottoman naval force that the Sultan
 dispatched to Egypt to help British troops evict Napoleon’s Armée d’Orient from the wealthy
 province. 25 The force was headed by Küçük Hüseyin Pasha, a close
 friend of Sultan Selim who was appointed as Grand Admiral in 1792 and who was a strong
 supporter of naval reform. 26 Since Husrev was himself a protégé of
 the Grand Admiral, he was appointed as his lieutenant and joined him on his expedition to Egypt. 27 For his part, Mehmed Ali was appointed as second-in-command of a force of
 300 troops of Albanian origin that was headed by a certain Tahir Pasha. 28 After the British had managed to evict the French from Egypt, it was natural for Istanbul to
 appoint the most senior Ottoman official in the campaign as governor of Egypt in recognition of his efforts in
 collaborating with the British in their military activities. Since both the Grand Vizier and the Grand Admiral
 had earlier left for Istanbul, Husrev was the Sultan’s best choice and he was soon appointed as vali of Egypt. In
 that way Husrev found himself with a wealthy province to rule in the name of the Sultan and he began to try out
 his ideas of military reform. He did not have much time to do so, however; soon after he was confirmed as vali
 the Albanian troops under Tahir revolted and forced him to flee for his life to Damietta. Tahir himself was then
 assassinated, apparently at the hand of some of Mehmed Ali’s men, and in time Mehmed Ali turned against Husrev,
 took him prisoner and eventually had him deported from Egypt. Two years later Mehmed Ali was himself confirmed as
 vali of the prized province. Thus, through trickery and deception Mehmed Ali managed to deny Husrev his precious
 prize and instead snatched it for himself. Their deep-seated mutual hostility can be said to have started from
 that early time and it continued throughout their long lives. 29 
 

 
 After being appointed to other posts including that of Governor of Bosnia during the Serbian revolt of 1806 and
 later as vali of Erzurum during the Kurdish rebellion (1818), Husrev was finally appointed as Grand Admiral of
 the Ottoman navy during the Greek war (December 1822). While he managed to construct a fleet of small vessels
 capable of maneuvering in the shallow waters of the Aegean and was thus successful in cutting the lines of
 communication of the Greek rebels, he could not reap the rewards of his innovative moves because of the
 appearance of Mehmed Ali’s son, Ibrahim, on the theater of operations. We have already seen how much Husrev’s
 position as Grand Admiral was resented by Mehmed Ali since he was believed to have been
 interfering in the activities of his son. After months of trying to work together, Ibrahim wrote to his father’s
 agent in Istanbul, Najib Efendi, informing him that there was little chance of the success of the joint efforts
 of the Egyptian and Ottoman naval forces since their commands were not unified. He added that they could not be
 unified or coordinated, however, because of the “old and well-entrenched hatred that Husrev has towards our
 family.” 30 In the event, and as we saw in chapter 1 above, Husrev was removed from the command of the
 Ottoman navy as a result of Mehmed Ali’s pressure, adding yet another grudge to those that Husrev held against
 his old enemy.