
 

 
 Not before putting up a strong and hopeless resistance, though. 40 
 On 7 August 1839 the young Sultan dispatched Munib Efendi, Mehmed Ali’s new agent in Istanbul, with a clear and
 stern message to Cairo telling the Pasha that the matter was now not in his or Husrev’s hands but was being
 decided by the European representatives in Istanbul. 41 Ten days
 later the British and French Consuls-General in Cairo met with the Pasha and told him that if he did not comply,
 then he stood a chance of having both the British and French fleets “arriving” at Alexandria. To this he
 responded by saying that he would block the port of the city with an iron chain, summon his troops from Arabia,
 and order Ibrahim to march on to Anatolia. Campbell told him that this would be fatal and if he did proceed with
 such a plan, then he would have to fight the Russians, not the Turks. The Pasha was still adamant and said that
 if the Powers wanted blood to be shed, then blood he would shed. 42 
 

 
 Finally, in desperation, and when it became clear that the European powers were not bluffing, he wrote to Ibrahim
 on 23 August and confided in him what he suspected most: a Russian-British agreement to split the Ottoman Empire,
 whereby Russia would occupy Istanbul and Britain Egypt. He added that if his suspicions were not correct and if
 the European powers were sincere in what they said, then it would mean that they would force him to withdraw his
 troops from Syria and Arabia to prevent the partition of the Empire. 43 Given these two bleak alternatives, he said, there was no choice for him but to fight. “And
 if you [i.e. Ibrahim] think that it would not be wise to fight the Europeans and that we have no chance of
 defeating them, then I will have to agree with you. But not all things are to be conducted
 rationally, and occasionally one has to face matters that are contrary to rational and political calculations by
 trusting in Fate as destined by God, and depend on His mercy and His Prophet’s intercession.” 44 
 

 
 True to his word, and riding a false sense of elation, he ordered his son not to withdraw from Syria or to pull
 back any forces from any other provinces. And for an entire year there was a tense deadlock of the “Eastern
 Question”: the Pasha would not withdraw his troops nor return the navy to the Sultan and, at the same time, the
 Sultan would not grant Mehmed Ali the much desired recognition of independence. In response
 to the Pasha’s intransigent position, Palmerston convened a Convention in London in July 1840, “The Convention
 for the Pacification of the Levant,” to which all the major European powers (this time, however, France declined
 to join the Concert of Europe) were invited; this gave the Pasha an ultimatum to withdraw from Syria, Adana,
 Crete and Arabia. 45 When he still refused to comply, a British
 force landed in Beirut in September and forced Ibrahim to withdraw to Egypt. By December the Pasha had no choice
 but to accept the conditions laid down by the British-led European powers. Finally, on 1 June 1841, the Sultan
 issued a firman naming Mehmed Ali as governor of Egypt for life and granting his male descendants the hereditary
 rights of the governorship of Egypt. In addition, though, the firman stipulated that the Pasha reduce the size of
 his army to 18,000 troops in peace-time. Moreover, the Sultan added that “all the Treaties concluded and to be
 concluded between my Sublime Porte and the friendly Powers shall be completely executed in the Province of Egypt
 likewise.” 46 