
 

 
 However, instead of finding himself being invited to Istanbul to accept these terms graciously, he discovered to
 his greatest dismay that his old enemy, Husrev Pasha, had literally seized power in Istanbul: during Mahmud’s
 funeral he had snatched the imperial seals and appointed himself as Grand Vizier. 33 Immediately after being informed of Husrev’s dramatic coup de force and
 his “appointment” to the Grand Vizirate, Mehmed Ali started a ferocious campaign to have him
 deposed. On 16 August he sent a letter to the new Serasker, Halil Pasha, urging him to depose Husrev. 34 The following day he wrote a letter to the Valide Sultan, the Sultan’s
 mother, to the same effect. 35 This was followed by a stern letter
 to Husrev himself warning him that if he did not resign, then the bloodshed would not be stopped. 36 Other letters and circulars were also sent to various senior, and not so
 senior, officals in Istanbul, all pressing for Husrev’s dismissal. 37 
 

 
 Husrev, however, was not dismissed; on the contrary, he was stubborn and himself asked his old rival to give up
 all his possessions and be satisfied with the pashalıks of Egypt alone. When Mehmed Ali received these “peace
 offers” he wrote to his old enemy wondering what would force him to accept such terms when he had earlier refused
 better ones offered by Mahmud. He again repeated his demand to Husrev to resign and told him that if he was
 concerned about his livelihood after retirement, then he, Mehmed Ali, promised to meet all his expenses and those
 of his household, no matter how large these might be. He even invited him to retire with him in the Hijaz where,
 he explained, he had built himself two residences, a winter one in Mecca and a summer one in Ṭā’if where they
 could both retire in peace, devote their time to prayer and meditation, and preserve good and illustrious names
 for themselves in history books! 38 
 

 
 What prevented their age-old rivalry from being resolved in this happy and blissful manner was not the
 stubbornness of Husrev, who, as much as he hated Mehmed Ali, would not have been able to stand this formidable
 pressure. It was, rather, the unified position that Europe took for the first time in the rivalry between the
 Sultan and the Egyptian vali: at five in the morning of the very same day that Husrev was to reply to Mehmed
 Ali’s demands (27 July 1839) the representatives of the five European powers (Great Britain, France, Prussia,
 Austria and Russia) handed the Grand Vizier a collective note asking the Porte “to suspend any final
 determination [of the Eastern Question] without their concurrence.” 39 This gave Husrev the breathing space he needed, and with a unified Europe behind him, which
 denied Mehmed Ali the French assistance he was counting on, he not only rejected the vali’s
 demands for his own resignation, but repeated his demands that the vali hand back areas he
 had occupied and return the Ottoman fleet that had defected to Alexandria. In the event, and mainly because of
 British pressure, Mehmed Ali was forced to comply.