
 

 
 Shortly afterwards and soon after the formation of Mahmud’s new nizami army, the Asaker-i Mansure-yi Muhammadiyye , Husrev was appointed as Serasker and began to introduce military
 refoms in a way that resembled those that Mehmed Ali had been introducing in Egypt, although on a smaller scale.
 He continued to occupy that position until the outbreak of the Syrian war. It was Husrev’s personal former slave
 and protégé, Mehmed Rasid Pasha, whom Ibrahim captured in Konia only a few months after Rasid had been appointed
 as Grand Vizer at Husrev’s insistence. Given Husrev’s influence in the capital, his easy access to the Sultan and
 his ability to affect matters in the Palace, Mehmed Ali and Nagib Efendi felt that his personal presence there
 damaged their interests. After the conclusion of the truce of Kütahia (March 1833) whereby Ibrahim was named as
 governor of the Syrian provinces, while Mehmed Ali was reinstated in his position as vali of Egypt, Husrev
 continued to be seen by Mehmed Ali as his main obstacle in Istanbul.
 

 
 The truce of Kütahia, it has to be remembered, was not a permanent settlement; it was an agreement that neither
 Sultan nor vali put their signatures to and, moreover, its terms were to be renewed each year, giving Mehmed Ali
 the feeling that he had still not guaranteed for his family the secure future he was striving for. In addition,
 Mehmed Ali was required to pay an annual tribute to Istanbul, the amount of which was one of the most contentious
 issues in the years between 1833 and 1839: while the Sultan was claiming significant arrears, the Pasha refused
 to pay them. This issue became more acrimonious since the Pasha was convinced that the presence of Husrev as
 Serasker in Istanbul and his proximity to the Sultan made Mahmud particularly susceptible to his intrigues. The
 Pasha attempted, therefore, to impress upon the Sultan that as long as his old enemy continued to be present in
 the Divan, there would always be problems between Sultan and vali. He therefore proposed
 that “if the Sultan would only consent to remove [Husrev] from his councils, he [i.e. Mehmed Ali] would not only
 pay the tribute regularly . . ., but he would also pay a great part of what the Sultan demanded as
 arrears.” 31 
 

 
 The rivalry between the two old men had its final showdown immediately after the battle of Nezib (24 June 1839).
 As we have seen, the battle resulted in an astounding victory for Ibrahim. A week later and before news of the
 disaster reached him, Sultan Mahmud died and was succeeded to the throne by his sixteen-year old son,
 Abdul-Mecid. In the panic that followed in Istanbul the Grand Admiral, Ahmed Fevzi Pasha, instead of
 co-ordinating his efforts with those of the Serasker, as had been planned, and effecting a popular uprising among
 the Syrian population against Mehmed Ali’s rule there, decided to head for Alexandria not to bombard it but to
 hand the entire Ottoman fleet to Mehmed Ali. 32 Thus in little less
 than a month the Ottoman Empire lost its Sultan, its army, and its navy and Mehmed Ali was left as the single
 most powerful man in the Empire. He had under his command a powerful army that had so far been victorious in all
 the major battles it had fought. He also had in Alexandria a combined Ottoman-Egyptian fleet that was capable of
 establishing effective control over the waters of the eastern Mediterranean and which was an important bargaining
 card to use in the coming negotiations with Istanbul. Mehmed Ali thus thought that the scene was set for him to
 appear on center stage in the capital and to dictate to the young Sultan and his defenseless Porte his conditions
 of “peace”: recognition as independent ruler of all the lands he had seized and for this recognition to be passed
 on to his children after his death.