
 

 
 This last stipulation was the most significant for it clearly referred to the Balta Liman Commercial Convention
 that had been signed in 1838 between the Sublime Porte and the British Empire. In that Convention the Ottoman
 Empire’s import and export duties were fixed, the level of internal duties was drastically reduced and, most
 importantly, monopolies within all the provinces of the Ottoman Empire were banned. 47 Having effectively stripped the Pasha of his army which formed a significant outlet for his
 locally produced commodities, forced him to withdraw from Syria, Crete and Arabia, and coerced him to abolish
 internal monopolies, Britain, it is argued, succeeded in ruining Mehmed Ali’s commercial and industrial
 enterprises and thus aborted one of the most impressive development projects outside of Europe. 48 Since these crucial events are often presented in a manner that shows
 European malice towards Egypt which prevented her from gaining full independence, 49 it is necessary to discuss this issue and in particular Britain’s reasons for opposing
 Mehmed Ali.
 

 
 It is often asserted that the reason why Britain opposed Mehmed Ali was because the “industrialization” policy
 which he was introducing in Egypt threatened British economic interests in the area. The Pasha was considered a
 menace for Britain and her economic interests because he attempted to produce more and more commodities locally,
 had a “textile industry [that] was growing, and [through monopolizing trade] dominated the potential markets that
 Britain coveted.” 50 Realizing that her economic interests would be
 harmed by his policies, Britain was determined to frustrate them. She was given such an opportunity when the
 Porte agreed to sign the Balta Liman Convention of 1838 banning monopolies throughout the Empire, and was
 specifically aimed at the Pasha’s monopolies that barred British goods from the areas under his control and at
 the same time allowed him to have the protection needed to defend his nascent industry. As a result of the
 Convention “his attempts at economic self-sufficiency and industrialization were to be arrested, and in their
 place he was assured of a permanent influx of foreign capital and foreign goods, which would indubitably deprive
 the country of any financial and economic independence.” 51 
 

 
 This, however, is to misread British interests in the Middle East in the nineteeth century and her entire foreign
 policy during the crucial decades of the 1830s and 1840s. There is no doubt that Britain opposed Mehmed Ali
 strongly and resolutely and that this animosity was best represented by Lord Palmerston, the Foreign Secretary
 for most of the 1830s (1830–4, 1835–41, and later 1846–51) who took a strong personal dislike to the Pasha. It is
 also true that in his fight against Mehmed Ali Palmerston wanted to abolish his monopolies and that the Balta
 Liman Convention was categorical in its insistence on banning all commercial monopolies throughout the Empire.
 Yet British hostility and Palmerston’s personal animosity could not have been caused only by any perceived threat
 posed by the nascent Egyptian industry to the mighty British manufactures. For at the peak of the Pasha’s
 “industrialization” schemes the country had no more than seven or eight steam engines, most of the power of the
 thirty-odd “industrial” establishments being supplied by the workers themselves. 52 (St. John in his tour of the country in the 1830s said that “the mills are in ruins, and
 immense heaps of machinery, no longer employed, are covered with rust, and mouldering to
 decay.” 53 ) Nor was Britain concerned about Mehmed Ali closing off
 the Egyptian market to British goods for, as Marsot states, the Pasha “tried to woo British friendship by
 promising all manner of facilities to British trade.” 54 Partly as a
 result of this assistance the value of British exports to Egypt increased from £49,377 in 1827 to £237,444 in
 1840, while its exports of cotton textiles, supposedly the one item that the Pasha’s “factories” were most
 efficient at producing, increased from £27,939 to £179,328 over the same period. 55 