
 

 
 However, the problem as far as Palmerston was concerned was that Mehmed Ali was controlling these lands and
 “while promising aid to the Expedition ‘as far as his authority extended,’ he actually employed every possible
 device to thwart the success of the experiment. In this he was largely successful.” 71 Protective towards the overland route to India that he already controlled, the Pasha was
 determined not to have the expedition succeed. In spite of repeated remonstrations from the British consuls in Syria and Egypt and in spite of presenting the Pasha with a firman from the Sultan himself
 permitting the expedition to go ahead, 72 Ibrahim Pasha, on orders
 from his father, did everything possible to obstruct it. 73 “The
 most astonishing accidents occurred: waggons were overturned, machinery was broken, draft animals were stampeded
 – all without rime or reason – . . . Very soon it became obvious that an organized system of sabotage was in
 operation . . . ” 74 These moves were not lost on Palmerston: when
 Samuel Briggs, who was acting as an agent of the Pasha in London, presented a report urging Palmerston to support
 the Pasha’s bid for independence and arguing that the Pasha’s rule in Egypt was important for British “valuable
 possessions in India,” Palmerston wrote in the margins to that memorandum “Mehemet Ali controls the Euphrates
 route.” 75 
 

 
 Not only was Mehmed Ali menacing such important work on the Euphrates, he also had his forces, Palmerston must
 have thought, all over the Arabian peninsula, an area that was gaining more and more importance for British
 control of India. Significant improvement in steam ships and the rapid expansion of their use to carry mail and
 passengers to India led to heated discussion in London in the mid 1830s about who was to pay for the mail
 steamers: the government or the East India Company. After that issue had been resolved and more and more steamers
 were making their way regularly up and down the Red Sea, the pressing question was that of finding suitable
 coaling stations. In that respect Mehmed Ali “was quick to meet British requests for the establishment of coaling
 depots.” 76 Yet Palmerston continued to view the Pasha’s military
 presence in Arabia with suspicion, especially his operations in Yemen. What made matters more alarming for the Foreign Secretary was a report he received from a British captain, Captain
 Mackenzie, on the condition of south-west Arabia. His main findings confirmed Palmerston’s worst fears: Mackenzie
 wrote that “Muhammad ‘Ali was intent on the conquest of the whole [Arabian] Peninsula, that he had designs on
 Aden, and once there, would push through the Hadhramawt to overturn the rule of the Imam of Musqat – the only
 Arab ruler on whom the British could rely.” 77 
 

 
 Besides the reports mentioned so far, namely, the Ellis report on Mehmed Ali’s territorial expansion and its
 effect on British possessions in India, the Chesney report on the navigability of the Euphrates, the consuls’
 reports on Ibrahim’s lack of co-operation with Chesney in his endeavors, and Mackenzies’ reports on Mehmed Ali’s
 territorial ambitions in Arabia, Palmerston was constantly fed by Ponsonby’s alarming reports about the
 possibility of an Egyptian-Russian alliance. As a result of all these reports Palmerston became convinced that
 Mehmed Ali had expanded beyond the permissible. His mini-empire was threatening not only the Sultan’s but His
 (after 1837, Her) Britannic Majesty’s. The main beneficiary, Palmerston feared, would be the Czar, Emperor of all
 the Russias. But Palmerston could not devise a way of containing the Pasha of Egypt within his original pashalıks
 without, at the same time enhancing the power of either the Russians in Istanbul or the French in Cairo. This
 opportunity presented itself when he read the report that Bowring submitted upon his return from Egypt in 1839 in
 which he assumed a very positive tone on the vali’s policies in Egypt. Besides the tone, however, the one thing
 that mattered most to Palmerston was Bowring’s highlighting the fact that it was the monopolies that enabled the
 Pasha to finance his military machine. 78 If only the Pasha could be
 forced to give up his monopolies, Palmerston thought, then his wings could be trimmed and thus India would be
 saved from the Russian menace. But the only person who could force the Pasha in this matter legally was the
 Sultan, and the Sultan of course was in no position to do so.