
 

 
 For his part, Mehmed Ali was aware that his continued existence depended on British support. This support could
 have been secured if he had confined himself to Egypt; his expansionary policy, however, was necessarily harmful
 to Britain’s interests. This he seems to have realized but it also appears that he had managed to fool himself
 into thinking that if he were allowed to annex Syria and Mesopotamia in addition to Egypt,
 he would then be able – together with Persia and the Sultan in Istanbul – to pose a united front that would
 repulse any Russian move against India. This, as was shown above, Palmerston found to be unnecessary and too
 risky.
 

 
 When this card did not succeed, Mehmed Ali tried to impress upon Palmerston that he was the liberal reformer he
 was looking for and with whom he could do business. He is famously reported to have told Palmerston (through Dr.
 Bowring): “Do not judge me by the standards of your knowledge. Compare me with the ignorance that is around me .
 . . I can find very few to understand me and do my bidding . . . I have been almost alone for the greater part of
 my life.” 80 At the height of the second Syrian crisis he had not
 given up: he was still trying to force Palmerston to take him seriously as a liberal reformer. In June 1840 he
 told Colonel Hodges, the new British Consul-General, “When I came to Egypt it was really barbarous, utterly
 barbarous. Barbarous it remains to this day. Still I hope that my labours have rendered its condition somewhat
 better than it was. You must not however be shocked if you do not find in these countries the civilization which
 prevails in Europe.” 81 Palmerston was not impressed by any of these
 allegations. He wrote to his ambassador to Paris, “For my part I hate Mehemet Ali, whom I consider as nothing but
 an ignorant barbarian . . . I look upon his boasted civilization as the arrantest humbug; and I believe that he
 is as great a tyrant and oppressor as ever made a people wretched.” 82 In other words, Palmerston did not judge Mehmed Ali’s “reforms” to have gone far enough or
 to have been genuine enough.
 

 
 In Mustafa Rasid, on the other hand, Palmerston found the man who could fulfill his dream of imperialism couched
 in liberal terms: an Ottoman official who was bent on genuine reform but who acknowleged European superiority. It
 was Rasid after all who had drafted the imperial edict of Gülhane, the main piece of legislation that ushered in
 the Tanzimat period in earnest and which used a language of liberalism, equality and freedom, a language that
 Palmerston could understand and deal with. By drafting that imperial edict, Rasid proved himself to be the one
 person in the capital who could frustrate Mehmed Ali’s ambitions. He did this by beating Mehmed Ali at his own
 game: that of trying to impress the West, especially Great Britain, of how reform-oriented he was. These reforms,
 Palmerston believed, were necessary if the Sick Man of Europe, as the Sultan’s empire was
 infamously known, was to regain some of his former strength in order to fight the menacing Russian colossus. The
 Pasha tried half-heartedly to introduce some of these reforms but his efforts did not go far enough. Mehmed
 Rasid’s did, however. 83 