
 

 
 if the Sultan is beat his empire may tumble to pieces, and the way in which the fragments may be disposed of may
 essentially affect the balance of power in Europe; Russia would profit by the scramble, to a degree which might
 be highly inconvenient to her neighbors. It is true that if we repel Mehemet’s advances & the French receive
 them, and he should hold his ground, French influence will gain strength in Egypt, but after all perhaps that
 would not do us any great harm till we went to war with France, and then our naval superiority would bring us
 back the friendship of Mehemet who would not like his navy to be sent to an English port. 60 
 

 
 Five months later whatever hesitation he had earlier had on the relative benefits of
 supporting Mehmed Ali or the Sultan was gone. He had decided that British interests were certainly to be served
 if Britain stood by the Sultan.
 

 
 We ought to tell the Pasha forthwith to retire to Egypt [he wrote to Granville, the Ambassador to Paris] . . .
 That the possession of Syria must carry with it that of Bagdad, a glance of the map will serve to shew . . . But
 it is very doubtful whether it could be for the advantage of England that the Sultan should be so weakened and
 that a new state should be created in Egypt, Syria and Bagdad. It is obvious that so great a defalcation from the
 territory and resources of the Sultan would render him less able than he is now to resist Russia, and that he
 would really become her vassal . . . This is by no means what we wish . . . ” 61 
 

 
 Nevertheless, and in spite of this clear position, when in November 1832 the Sultan requested British naval
 protection to defend Istanbul, Palmerston answered him four months later saying that Britain could not order the
 dispatch of the required squadron. This he was forced to do not out of lack of conviction, but because his
 colleagues in the cabinet thought that the navy could not be spared to leave the European theater of operations
 where it was needed to enforce economic sanctions against Holland. 62 The Sultan therefore was left with no option other than to ask for Russian
 assistance. 63 Palmerston’s worst fears came true: instead of seeing
 British ships in Istanbul, it was the Russian fleet that was allowed to moor there in February 1833. As if this
 was not enough Russia and the Ottoman Empire together signed the Hünkar Iskelesi Treaty in July which had a
 secret clause changing the traditional policy of the Porte of excluding all foreign ships from the Sea of
 Marmara, by excepting Russian ships from that stipulation. When informed about the treaty, Palmerston was enraged
 not so much about the secret clause as about the stipulation that both signatories consult each other before
 taking any step regarding foreign affairs. As far as Palmerston was concerned, this meant that “the Russian
 Ambassador becomes chief Cabinet minister to the Sultan.” 64 It was
 this increased influence of Russia in Ottoman affairs that Palmerston was most apprehensive about. This
 apprehension was based on his gradual realization that British interests in Europe, which he
 believed to be best protected by maintaining the existing balance of power, were equally threatened by the
 Pasha’s latest moves as were Britain’s interests in Asia which, in turn, he believed to be best protected by
 strengthening Turkey to function as a buffer between Russia and India. For as Palmerston himself said he did not
 object, in principle, to Mehmed Ali’s gaining independence or to his founding “an Arab kingdom including all the
 countries of which Arabic is the language. There might be no harm in such a thing in itself; but as it would
 necessarily imply the dismemberment of Turkey, we could not agree to it.” 65 