
 

 
 Conclusion
 

 
 This chapter has attempted to challenge the popular view by which Mehmed Ali appears as a strong, perceptive
 reformer who tried to improve the position of Egypt and to deliver her from Ottoman control, and whose efforts
 were frustrated by European, especially British, opposition. Far from being a champion of Egypt’s interests (if
 by Egypt we mean a modern nation-state) Mehmed Ali was an ambitious governor of an Ottoman province who managed
 to introduce various reforms in his wealthy province and who was anxious lest the fruits of his labors would not
 be reaped by his family. As we have seen, the dynastic dimension of his struggle against the Ottoman Sultan was
 never far from his sight and it could be said that the various wars he waged against the Ottoman Sultan, far from
 being nationalist, could more appropriately be seen as dynastic struggles within the Empire at best, or a civil
 war at worst.
 

 
 This dynastic rivalry was not directed at the Sultan himself, for after all Mehmed Ali’s lineage was not so
 illustrious as to enable him to compete successfully with the House of Osman. Rather, it was at Husrev Pasha that
 his rivalry was directed. While to reduce all the Pasha’s military activities in the second half of his reign to
 an attempt to frustrate and baffle his old rival would be to stress the point too forcefully, it remains true
 that Mehmed Ali’s struggle against the Ottomans was shaped in no small degree by the age-old hatred of these two
 old, grumpy men. The irony of course is that the Pasha turned out to have been fighting the wrong man, and the
 one person who contributed more than any other to his alleged “undoing” was not Husrev but Mustafa Rasid, the man
 who would later play the reform game, the Tanzimat, much more adeptly. 84 
 

 
 This chapter has also argued that Britain’s opposition to Mehmed Ali’s policies was not informed by any perceived
 threat that his “industrialization” schemes posed to British trade, but that it was his imperialist expansion
 that was the target and cause of British hostility. By expanding far beyond the borders of
 his province, Mehmed Ali attracted the attention and hostility of Great Britain, who saw in his policies a grave
 danger to her imperial interests in Asia. It was this perceived danger rather than any threat to losing potential
 markets in the eastern Mediterranean that attracted British hostility to the Pasha’s expansionary policy. By
 aligning herself with leading men in Istanbul and by presenting Mehmed Ali with a unified European stand, Britain
 succeeded in averting the danger of partitioning the Ottoman Empire. This she managed to do not only by waving
 the stick of military confrontation and warning him of serious repercussions if he did not comply, but also by
 offering him the carrot of legal recognition of himself and his heirs as governors of Egypt. The 1841 settlement
 of the “Eastern Question,” therefore, does not demonstrate any malice against Egypt or its ruler, for if by
 “Egypt” we mean the people of Egypt as a “nation,” then this “Egypt” had nothing to do with the Pasha’s wars. And
 if we mean by “Egypt” its ruler, then he was certainly content with the resolution of the crisis: to have Egypt
 as his province for himself and for his children after his death is what he had been striving for all his life
 and this is what he finally achieved at the age of seventy. This was the crowning success of the Pasha’s long
 career and he lived the remaining nine years of his long life basking in it until he literally went mad at the
 age of eighty.