
 

 
 It was not the Pasha’s monopolies policy as such that Palmerston attacked, rather, it was Mehmed Ali’s
 expansionist policy which posed serious challenges to the Sultan’s empire, as had been made clear by the Hünkar
 İskelesi Treaty of July 1833. As far as Britain was concerned this treaty highlighted the failure of the Sultan
 to fulfill the duties that his empire as a European and an Asiatic one was supposed to perform: the European duty
 of defending the Straits, and the Asiatic one of checking Russian designs on areas bordering India. By prompting
 the Russian fleet to dock in Istanbul and by increasing Russian political influence there Mehmed Ali was seen in
 London and Bombay as giving the Russians the opportunity to undermine the stability of the Ottoman Empire, and so
 Palmerston believed that Mehmed Ali “might not himself destroy Turkey; [but] he might give Russia the chance to
 do so later.” 66 
 

 
 It appears that the Pasha was aware of these British fears and that he attempted to allay them by suggesting that
 Britain join a coalition of forces composed of the Sultan in Istanbul, the Shah of Iran, and himself as an
 aggrandized Pasha in Cairo who would be allowed to control, in addition to Egypt, Syria and Mesopotamia. Such a
 coalition of forces, Mehmed Ali argued, would be a strong deterrent against Russian designs in Asia. 67 As early as January 1833, however, Palmerston had already received a
 report from Henry Ellis, a member of the influential Board of Control of India, strongly arguing against such a
 scheme. In this report Ellis warned the Foreign Secretary against ignoring the Pasha’s expansionary moves and
 argued that Britain would not have her interests served by allowing the Pasha to delve in Indian affairs. For
 Ellis was convinced that “the political and commercial interests of Great Britain . . . will
 be best consulted by having these provinces placed, as they are now, under the Government to whom relations with
 India, and Persia, are matters of very secondary, rather than primary importance.” 68 In other words, Mehmed Ali’s suggestion that through this coalition he could better defend
 Britain’s interest against Russia’s designs was not to be accepted. It was a risk not worth taking.
 

 
 From that time onwards and throughout the 1830s Palmerston’s hatred of the Pasha intensified. He came to see the
 Pasha as undertaking actions that could only attract the further interference of Russia in Ottoman affairs. This
 viewpoint was fueled by the blatantly Russo-phobic reports that his new ambassador in Istanbul, Ponsonby, was
 constantly sending him. 69 Furthermore, as Palmerston had predicted,
 Mehmed Ali spread his influence further east and was threatening British interests in Mesopotamia. By the early
 1830s these interests were centered around the exploration of the Euphrates river with a view to checking whether
 it was navigable. The British parliament had allocated the sum of £20,000 for such a project which a certain
 Colonel Chesney was to lead. Two steamships were especially constructed (appropriately called the Tigris and the Euphrates ) which were to be shipped in pieces to the Syrian coast
 and then carried overland from there to be assembled on the Euphrates. The whole project was of considerable
 importance for British communication with India since it was expected to shorten the distance from Bombay to
 London and also reduce the time taken to cover the distance. Furthermore, if successful, it would prove that
 steamships would be able to reach India all year round instead of the eight months per year that they were
 restricted to by taking the Red Sea route. 70 