
 

 
 Palmerston finally found his answer in the person of another rival of Mehmed Ali in Istanbul, a man much less
 known to the old Pasha in Cairo than Husrev was, but much more resourceful and perceptive of the grave condition
 of the Empire than either old men had ever been. He was a man of a younger generation who did not inherit their
 personal, mutual grudges and was much better informed about the European scene and about the interests of the
 main European player, Great Britain, a fact that was to prove decisive for the future of the Ottoman Empire. This
 was Mustafa Rasid Pasha, later to become Grand Vizier for the exceptionally long period of six years and one of
 the most original of the so-called Tanzimat men.
 

 

 
 Plate 9 “Reschid
 Pacha” 
 

 
 In contrast to the pro-Russian Husrev, Mustafa Rasid was decidedly an Anglophile. In 1833 he
 was actively involved in the negotiations of the peace of Kütahia which followed the Sultan’s defeat at the hands
 of Ibrahim Pasha. Like Palmerston, Rasid was dismayed at the opportunity that this defeat gave the Russians to
 increase their influence in Istanbul and he was disappointed at the British reluctance to assist the Sultan
 during the early months of the year. His disappointment at British policy was repeated five years later when he
 went to London in late 1838 after he had been appointed as Foreign Secretary to secure an alliance with Great
 Britain against Mehmed Ali to force him out of Syria. In spite of his failure in negotiating an agreement with
 Palmerston about joint military activities, Rasid Pasha remained convinced that it was only Britain which could
 curtail the power of the rebellious Pasha and thus stop Istanbul from slipping further in the Russian trap.
 

 
 During his long stay in London (he returned to Istanbul in August 1839 after Mahmud’s death) Rasid realized that
 although Britain had repeatedly denied the Porte military assistance, Palmerston was not uninterested in limiting
 the power of the Egyptian Pasha. After initially disagreeing about how best to achieve this, Rasid and Palmerston
 finally concurred that a new commercial treaty between the Sublime Porte and Great Britain that would ban
 monopolies in the Sultan’s empire would be the sure way of fighting Mehmed Ali. Both men believed, and in this
 they were soon joined by Ponsonby, Palmerston’s ambassador in Istanbul, that demanding that the terms of the
 treaty be applied to Egypt would weaken Mehmed Ali both politically (by treating his dominions as part of the
 Ottoman Empire) and economically (by drastically limiting his monopoly revenue). Both Britain and the Sultan
 would stand to benefit from this: Britain would benefit from a reduction in the Ottoman Empire’s dependence on
 the Russian Tsar because of the lowered risk to its stability; the Sultan from the enforced withdrawal of the
 Pasha’s troops from Syria due to the squeeze on his revenue. After lengthy and difficult negotiations the Balta
 Liman Treaty was signed which, while reducing the Sultan’s own revenue was, Rasid thought, a fair price to be
 paid if the Empire was to be saved from Mehmed Ali’s menace without being caught in the Russian trap. 79 