
 

 
 The army and the modernization of Egypt
 

 
 Besides writing the history of this constant struggle between Mehmed Ali and his soldiers, this book is also
 interested in showing how the army, given its centrality, helped to “modernize” Egypt or, as Mitchell has put it,
 to “colonize” it. This it does by critically presenting the logic of the military machine as depicted in the
 different laws, regulations and manuals that were issued to regulate various aspects of military life. For these
 laws and manuals not only affected and shaped military life; they also offered a model of how society in general
 could be organized, as indeed it was. For example, as we have seen, effective surveillance and policing systems
 that would enable the military authorities to track down and catch deserters were
 generalized throughout the country to establish a truly controlled society where individuals and their movements
 were monitored. In addition, the army’s need to screen the conscripts medically, to treat them for disease, and
 to maintain a healthy environment in the crowded camps and barracks provided the impetus to found a medical
 school, to institute a country-wide vaccination program, and to make the bodies of the soldiers (and eventually
 of civilians as well) available to the self-assured medical gaze. Finally, the requirement that the soldiers
 should not live off the lands they marched through or ended up occupying, and that their food, clothes and
 equipment should be sent from central depots in Egypt to whichever war front they happened to be stationed at,
 meant that an efficient administrative system was needed that would ease the functioning of the army, and would
 also provide a model for the civilian bureaucracy to copy.
 

 
 As said above, this attempt at representing the underlying logic of the “modern” institutions of power was done
 by Mitchell in his Colonising Egypt , and with the exception of chapter 3 there has been no deliberate attempt to reproduce this
 logic in its own terms elsewhere in this book. Rather, the aim was to complement the impressive picture of the
 law that Mitchell provides with the more fractured one of its implementation and to elaborate on the nature of
 and reasons for the discrepancy between both pictures. Specifically, the aim was to contrast a decree of Mehmed
 Ali, for example, with the understanding of a petty bureaucrat to whom it was addressed for implementation, to
 juxtapose a sanitary manual by Clot Bey with the soldiers’ resistance to having their bodies so minutely
 investigated, and to compare a “neat” conscription order with the repeated attempts – sometimes successful, at
 other times not of the soldiers to escape their units and desert the army altogether. This contrast of the law
 with its implementation was not reproduced here to argue that these institutions of power completely failed or
 that they were practically ignored by the people; rather this juxtaposition was required for two main reasons.