
 

 
 Furthermore, and contrary to the attractive nationalist allegation that Mehmed Ali’s efforts were frustrated by
 Great Britain, this book has attempted to show that his policies in Egypt did in fact benefit Britain: through
 allowing more and more British goods to find their way to Egyptian markets (albeit through him as sole
 intermediary), through constantly wooing British officials, and above all through protecting British merchants
 resident in Egypt and establishing a state of law and order in Egypt that secured British overland communication
 with India. As was shown above, British hostility to Mehmed Ali was caused by his military expansion that was
 seen in London and Bombay as threatening British possessions in Asia by giving the Russians a pretext to
 interfere at their expense in Istanbul. Once this menace had passed, the British were well disposed towards the
 old Pasha and he was equally well disposed to them, something that the popular Illustrated
 London News was quick to notice. In an article appearing in August 1844 it commented on the possibility of
 the Pasha’s death and on the numerous services he had afforded the British Empire. It said, “Even when we were
 battering down his forts and beating his troops, the old Pacha escorted the mail-bags and passengers across the
 desert as if nothing had happened . . . We are glad that Mehmet Ali is . . . smoking his pipe, levying taxes, and
 abusing his councils in Alexandria.” 7 
 

 
 In short, rather than seeing Mehmed Ali as striving to achieve independence on behalf of the Egyptian nation, and
 instead of viewing Great Britain as the main obstacle in this endeavor, this book has argued that Mehmed Ali was
 seeking the establishment of a secure personal rule for himself and his household in Egypt. His efforts in this
 regard were crowned with success when in 1841 the Sultan, with the acquiescence of Britain, granted him a firman
 bestowing on him the hereditary rule of Egypt.
 

 

 
 Plate 10
 “Egyptian soldier” 
 

 
 Moreover, the main criticism that this book has leveled against the nationalist version of Egyptian history is
 its assumption that “Egypt” has always had a unified, self-contained, clearly recognizable identity, and that its
 inhabitants have always realized – through their strong attachment to its soil, and through their conscious links
 to its history that they are, and have always been, clearly and exclusively “Egyptians.” In other words, the main
 problem of Egyptian nationalist historiography, like all nationalist historiographies, is the assumption that
 Egypt is an undivided subject and that the Egyptian nation is a primordial, eternal entity possessing a unified,
 conscious will potentially capable of autonomy and sovereignty. 8 Studying the army of Egypt in the first half of the nineteenth century, an army that is
 supposed to have been the national institution par excellence , this book found no evidence
 that this central institution functioned along national lines. Not only did the idea of the army as being a
 national one never cross anyone’s mind from the Pasha all the way down to any of his soldiers, there was not even
 a pretense at portraying the wars that the men were dying in as national wars waged to defend “Egypt” or to
 deliver her from foreign tyranny. As such, this book has attempted to show that the nation has been written into
 existence by nationalist historians and that it is partly an outcome of nationalist historiography and not a
 given that already existed prior to it.