
 

 
 First, given that one of the intentions of this book is to demystify the aura of Mehmed Ali, reproducing the
 letter of the laws and regulations without stressing the difficulties that were encountered in implementing them
 would have enhanced, rather than diffused, the Pasha’s mystique. Instead, what this book has attempted to do with
 regards to the premier institution of power in nineteenth-century Egypt is to stress the imperfect, contingent
 and incomplete nature of these laws and regulations. Seeing how Ibrahim dealt with his
 officers, for example, was important for the understanding, as attempted in chapter 2 , of how these laws and regulations as well as the entire organizational structure of
 the army were decided upon after a long and tedious process of negotiation and deliberation. In spite of the
 pretence of the texts which enunciated modern notions of power at presenting themselves as if they were
 primordial, self-contained and self-perpetuating texts, they were in fact negotiated, amended and refined by
 conscious agents whose conflicting interests and confused, fractured vision of society were reflected in these
 very same texts. As we have seen in chapter 4 for example,
 the training manual, that most powerful of military texts, had an important “moment of silence” that reflected a
 wider conflict in society, a conflict that existed between the Turkish-speaking officers and their
 Arabic-speaking subordinates regarding how far these latter could be promoted up the military hierarchy. While
 bringing to light the problems inherent in writing the text was intended to argue that texts
 do not write themselves, stressing the problems of reading the text, on the other hand,
 served to argue that laws and regulations also do not implement themselves; they need an agency for their verbal
 content to be translated into tangible reality. As was shown with the apparently trivial example of sentry guards
 mentioned in chapters 4 and 5 the policy of surveillance that was crucial for the disciplining
 of the army was never as neatly and unproblematically implemented as Foucault or Mitchell have argued: it was
 constantly compromised by the activity of the one minor agent who was supposed to carry it through, the sentry
 guard.
 

 
 Second, as Mitchell himself acknowledges in the preface to his book, there is a danger of “overstat[ing] the
 coherence of [the] technologies [of power] . . . disciplines can break down, counteract one another, or
 overreach.” 9 This book has shown precisely how military discipline
 was constantly breaking down in the Pasha’s army, a notion that Mitchell, in spite of his warning, does not
 stress enough in his book. Since the present book is about the history of the every-day functioning of the army
 and not only a study of the concept of power that informed it, analyzing the underlying notions of power that
 helped shape the structure of the army has to be complemented with accounts of how this power was implemented,
 negotiated, accommodated, and, most importantly, resisted by its supposedly mute objects. Through numerous
 rebellions and mutinies, and by repeatedly performing small acts of defiance, and, above all, through desertion
 and countless, tragic acts of self-mutilation, the soldiers showed that they could and did retain for themselves
 an area from where they could resist power, a territory from which they were able to assert
 their own wills above a system and a regime that attempted to enslave and dehumanize them. Not that the
 authorities were helpless in confronting these repeated acts of resistance and defiance; as we have seen, the
 Pasha and his officials passed numerous decrees to curb the phenomenon of desertion and to punish all acts of
 insurrection that they found most alarming and undermining to the whole performance of the entire army. Power, in
 other words, as much as it attempts to silence, to be all-inclusive and to penetrate minds and control bodies, is
 always constantly negotiated, suspended, and resisted.