
 

 
 This book, however, has also argued that “Egypt,” as referring to a nation-state, was not simply a result of a
 semantic shift brought about by the dominant discourse of nationalism. Neither was the birth of the Egyptian
 nation in the nineteenth century a result only of the modern state’s ability to monopolize the means of violence
 by reorganizing the administrative and military apparatuses so that it could extend its control over wider areas
 in a permanent manner. The Egyptian nation was brought into being as a result of a multiplicity of practices and
 discourses that transformed the administration in Cairo from being interested mainly in taxation and in
 maintaining law and order to a government devising modern techniques of control and using more effective and more
 subtle ways of manipulating its population. As we have seen throughout this book by concentrating on the Pasha’s
 army, examples of such novel practices were the issuing of tezkeres which functioned as
 identity cards that people had to carry all the time in order for the authorities to be able to catch deserters;
 regularly checking the bodies of conscripts for signs of diseases that were now treated in newly constructed
 hospitals; subjecting the bodies of the soldiers to a strict regime whereby all their movements were supposed to
 be subject to control and surveillance. In the wider society similar practices were instituted that together
 turned Egypt from a province within the Ottoman Empire into a modern nation-state.
 

 
 Mehmed Ali’s army was instrumental in founding the modern Egyptian nation not by enlightening its soldiers as to
 their true and hidden identity. It was not by fighting their supposedly foreign enemies that Egyptians came to
 call Egypt their own. Rather, by relying on thousands of Egyptians to man his army, and at the same time by
 making sure that none of these evlad-ɩ Arab was to be promoted to
 senior ranks, the Pasha inadvertently helped to homogenize the experience of these thousands of Egyptians in a
 manner that was crucial in the founding of their “imagined community.” The deeply felt sentiments of injustice,
 frustration and animosity that the Arabic-speaking soldiers and their junior officers had towards the
 Turkish-speaking military elite was a powerful ingredient in forging the rising national consciousness and was
 made even more potent by being echoed in the civilian society at large. For the ethno-linguistic “division of
 labor” that characterized the Pasha’s army was mirrored by a similar one in the civilian administration where the
 ruling elite remained “Turkish” and where “Arabs” were prevented from being promoted to higher posts.
 

 
 The Pasha’s army was above all crucial for the rise of the modern nation-state of Egypt by introducing practices
 that together changed the nature of the Egyptian state and its relationship to its “citizens” and completely
 transformed the very fabric of Egyptian society. By catching its deserters, punishing its criminals, educating
 its youth, vaccinating its children, silencing its women, interning its insane, and by doing all this in a
 subtle, “humane” and “rational” manner . . . this is how the Egyptian nation came into being in modern times. It
 was by a process of violence, silence and exclusion that Egyptians were taught the essential truths of the
 nation.