
 

 
    80   Bowring, “Report on Egypt,” p. 146.
 

 
    81   FO 78/405, Hodges, 18 June 1840; quoted in Dodwell, Founder of Modern Egypt , p. 195.
 

 
    82   Temperley, Near East , p. 89.
 

 
    83   On Raşid’s efforts in drafting the Gülhane Edict, see Bailey,
 British Policy , pp. 183–6.
 

 
    84   It should be added that Raşid was equally effective in the
 “undoing” of Husrev Pasha: he had him deposed as a traitor soon after the promulgation of the Gülhane edict.
 
 
 
 

### FILE: Text/kf_9774246969_18_conclusion.html
 
 
 
 All the Pasha's Men 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 

 

 
 By studying the army of Mehmed Ali this book has attempted to challenge the powerful Egyptian nationalist
 discourse on Mehmed Ali Pasha’s reign, according to which the Pasha is seen as laying the foundations for a
 national recovery of Egypt aimed at gaining her independence from the Ottoman Empire. The thousands of Egyptians
 who served in the Pasha’s army, while not seeing themselves yet as Egyptians first and
 foremost, are claimed in this powerful, dominant nationalist discourse to have eventually discovered their true
 identities and to have seen themselves as Egyptians fighting for the glory of the fatherland. The Pasha’s policy
 of conscription pushed the inherent nationalist feelings of these conscripts to the surface and gave the fellahin
 a chance to express their true sentiments after centuries of being silenced by Ottoman domination. The three
 centuries of Ottoman rule, thus, suddenly appear as foreign and oppressive, and Mehmed Ali’s greatness is seen as
 allowing, even if inadvertently, these sentiments to be finally exhibited.
 

 
 Following this nationalist tradition, al-Rāfū, for example, while recognizing that there was a personal dimension
 in Mehmed Ali’s struggle with the Ottoman Sultan, could not but see that “all the wars that Egypt waged during
 Mehmed Ali’s rule paved the way for her independence and enhanced her position among other nations.” 1 Marsot, similarly, as we have already seen, concludes her book by
 insisting that, in spite of not intending to do so, “Muhammad Ali . . . put Egypt on the path of independent
 statehood and self-recognition as having a separate identity distinct from other Muslims and Ottomans.” 2 
 

 
 This book showed a number of problems with this argument. One such problem with the nationalist argument insofar
 as it pertains to Mehmed Ali’s army was the fact that the soldiers, far from rushing enthusiastically to join the
 colors and defend the nation, came to view conscription as a heavy tax exacted by an already oppressive and
 intolerant regime that they found it difficult to sympathize with. The soldiers gradually
 came to see their own commanding officers and not the enemy they were fighting as the “other.” How does the
 nationalist discourse explain the fact that the Egyptian soldiers resisted serving in the army, allegedly
 the national institution, or that they saw their own officers and not the Ottoman army as
 the other? In other words, having insisted that the Egyptian nation has always already existed and that “Egypt”
 refers to a conscious subject acting clearly towards independence, autonomy, sovereignty and dignity, but faced
 at the same time with the historical fact that the nation was not always manifesting itself in this manner, how
 then could the nation be forced to exhibit itself and to strive for its own independence and dignity? Herein lies
 the importance of Mehmed Ali for Egyptian nationalist historiography. He appears literally from nowhere to show
 Egyptians that they are really Egyptians and to force them, even against their own wishes and contrary to his own
 intentions, to fight for their own nation. In this sense his foreign origins paradoxically become an asset since
 they give him the necessary vantage point from which to see clearly with his penetrative gaze the suffering that
 his people were beseeching him to deliver them from.