
 

 
 The Pasha and his men
 

 
 Like St. John’s book, this study has tried to avoid the trap of writing Egypt’s history in the first half of the
 nineteenth century as if it were Mehmed Ali’s biography. Ideally it would have been better to avoid referring to him altogether, but that would have given a version of Egypt’s history as incomplete as
 a history of Germany in the 1930s without mention of Hitler. Instead, this book, by concentrating on his army,
 the key institution around which all his reforms were centered, challenged the nationalist version of Egyptian
 history that sees in Mehmed Ali a proto-nationalist leader. It argued that the Pasha did not aim to achieve
 independence for “Egypt,” but intended to carve out a small empire for himself and for his children after him. It
 also argued that Great Britain, who is usually taken to have opposed Mehmed Ali ferociously and to have
 “prevented Egypt from reaping the fruits of her military victories” was not antagonistic to the Pasha’s “reform”
 policies in Egypt, but was against his empire-building efforts that she saw as challenging and endangering her
 own possessions in Asia. In addition, it argued that neither the Pasha himself nor his senior military commanders
 and top advisors including his own son, Ibrahim Pasha, ever thought of this whole exercise as being aimed at
 achieving the independence of Egypt from Ottoman rule, if by “Egypt” we mean a clearly identified nation-state.
 

 
 Instead, this book has placed Egypt and the Pasha’s long rule within the larger Ottoman world. It argued that not
 only was Egypt technically and legally an Ottoman province, but that Mehmed Ali and his officials were also
 “Ottomans”: they originated from different parts of the Ottoman Empire, spoke Turkish, were familiar with the
 history of the Empire and of the dangers that confronted it, and thought of themselves in Ottoman terms, their
 eyes set on horizons that were essentially those of the Ottoman world. Seen in this light the career of Mehmed
 Ali appears not as that of a national leader who fought hard to deliver Egypt from the heavy burden of foreign
 oppression, but as a problematic reformer of the Ottoman Empire who, through the numerous changes he managed to
 effect in the Egyptian economy and society, showed the administrators in Istanbul an example of how to introduce
 much-needed reforms in the central lands of the Empire. In so doing, Mehmed Ali was not moved by any desire to
 improve the lot of the Egyptians, let alone to deliver them from “foreign oppression,” but by his constant,
 pressing desire to make more secure his precarious position as governor of Egypt.
 

 
 Mehmed Ali was clearly aware that his appointment to that important and lucrative post was made against the
 Sultan’s wish and he was equally aware that first Sultan Selim III and then Sultan Mahmud II had tried to have
 him removed from Egypt. Realizing that he lacked an effective military force that would enable him to rebuff any
 attempt by Istanbul to dislodge him forcibly from his wealthy province, he made numerous attempts to found one, culminating in the crucial attempt to create a modern army based on
 conscripted fellahin in 1820–1. Once he had taken that fateful decision, not only was the efficiency of his
 administration and its ability to affect and touch the daily lives of the average Egyptians greatly enhanced; his
 relationship with the Sultan in Istanbul was also radically changed. As was shown above, the crucial turning
 point came during the Greek war when he first agreed to send some of his newly trained troops to fight alongside
 the Sultan’s forces; after suffering from the major disaster of Navarino in 1827, he seems to have decided not to
 assist the Sultan any more and to engage in his own military exploits instead, even if these were at the expense
 of the Sultan himself.