
 

 
 Besides challenging that dominant discourse of nationalism, this book also seeks to offer an account of Mehmed
 Ali’s army in a manner that does not reiterate the world view of great generals and romanticizes their military
 exploits; rather, it has attempted to come as close as possible to the soldiers’ perception of the army and their
 experiences in it. It attempts to deny the Pasha the privilege he has always been given in most books about Egypt
 in the first half of the nineteenth century: that of dictating his own story. This book started from the
 conviction that it is much more interesting and useful to write the history of the Egyptian army, or any army for
 that matter, from the point of view of the people who did the actual fighting and suffered most from its
 atrocities, rather than from the viewpoint of their commanding officers, watching from a safe distance on
 horseback. It has therefore attempted to give these soldiers a chance of narrating their own experience and
 writing their own history.
 

 
 This, however, was not possible since the men left us no accounts of their own which, if reconstructed, would
 give them back the voice they have been denied. Furthermore, when these men appear occasionally in contemporary
 records, they do so as “criminals” who were tried for a “crime” they had committed, as young men whose names had
 to be registered in the conscription register, or as deserters who had been caught and were
 then brought in front of a court martial. In these situations the “voice” of the soldier, when it is recorded,
 appears not as an “authentic,” personal voice, but as an already censored one, muzzled by the intimidating
 circumstances in which it was recorded. The records of the court martial, therefore, that most precious source
 through which one would expect to get as close as possible to capturing the voice of the illiterate soldier, turn
 out to be a means of silencing him and of incorporating him within the power structure that he was resisting.
 

 
 So how can this problem be solved? Being, in effect, shouted at constantly by the Pasha to write at his
 dictation, and at the same time being denied the real voice of the soldier, how then can an historian write a
 history of the Pasha’s army, a history that gives justice to the soldiers, without at the same time romanticizing
 them and their acts of defiance? This is the central question of this book and there was a deliberate attempt not
 to resolve that tension since, as has been shown, the soldiers did resist the army, yet found themselves,
 nevertheless, winning for the Pasha his great victories. It is this tension, this constant struggle between the
 Pasha and his men, that is the central theme of this book. Because of its centrality, the very format the book
 takes is intended to echo this tension: a soldier’s story of his service from conscription to desertion flanked
 by two scenes of the Pasha entertaining his guests. Nevertheless, and as far as the soldier’s own story is
 concerned, this book has attempted to argue that desertion offers a historically more nuanced ending than
 nationalist versions do with their emphasis on “martyrdom” or “fighting for Egypt’s independence.” In other
 words, I find acts of desertion to be a much more eloquent testimony of how Egyptians felt towards the Pasha’s
 regime than all the tomes written on Mehmed Ali’s nationalist enterprise.