
 

 
 If this is why Mehmed Ali is useful for the Egyptian nationalist project, his appeal exceeds it to touch on other
 nationalisms, too. For the Pasha was equally mesmerizing for European as well as Egyptian historians, and this
 requires an explanation. The cases of Dodwell and Driault offer good examples. Dodwell was fascinated by the
 character and policies of the Great Pasha because he found in Mehmed Ali’s career an echo of what he believed the
 British were doing in India. For like the British viceroys in the sub-continent Mehmed Ali “hated disorder and
 corruption and misgovernment. Like them, he desired freedom in order that a new and better form of government
 might be framed.” 3 Dodwell, therefore, offers a good example of a
 British historian who had a wonderful topic at hand that allowed him to look back a hundred years and
 nostalgically write about a time when Britannia could comfortably and uncontestedly rule the waves and when she
 was still confident that she could carry the “white man’s burden.” In other words, Dodwell’s book is as much a
 book on British imperial history as it is a study of the Egyptian Pasha.
 

 
 For their part, French historians saw Mehmed Ali as owing a lot of his greatness to his resemblance to Napoleon.
 Both men, it is argued, had a dream they wanted to fulfill and both had their dreams frustrated by the British.
 In his Mohamed Aly et Napoléon Driault, in typical romantic manner,
 accepted both men’s self-characterizations: while the great French Emperor saw himself as a descendant of the
 Caesars, Mehmed Ali was more like a Pharaoh. Both, Driault believed, shared a deep-seated desire to revive a
 great power and to found an enlightened regime. 4 Driault takes the
 existence of the French or Egyptian nation as given, nations whose ancient glories were waiting to be rekindled
 and awakened.
 

 
 There are therefore various factors that contributed to the positive image that Mehmed Ali has received
 throughout the ages. Besides his usefulness to nationalist historiography where he is depicted either as a
 founding father, a liberal legislator, or a romantic hero, the Pasha had the good fortune to have lived till the
 age of eighty. His long and, as this book has tried to argue, successful career (for only if one accepts the
 nationalist argument would the Pasha’s efforts look thwarted and frustrated) offers numerous episodes and
 material that historians could chew on. In addition, and as has been shown throughout this book, the Pasha was
 able to manipulate his various interlocutors and successfully influenced their portrayal of him. Let us visit the
 “old spider in his den” one last time to see how this successful manipulation was not limited to his contemporary
 observers but outlived them to influence more recent historians.
 

 
 Date: 21 November 1832. Location: the Pasha’s palace in Alexandria. Players: the Pasha and St. John, a British
 traveler who wrote one of the most perceptive and accurate books on Egypt and the Pasha’s government.