
 

 
 “I understand it is your intention to write a book. Is it so [the Pasha asks his British interlocutor]?”
 

 
 “Your highness has been rightly informed.”
 

 
 “In that case, I shall be happy to afford you all kinds of facilities. But do you confine your researches, as is
 the custom, to ruins and other remains of ancient art?”
 

 
 “On the contrary, my principal object is to obtain an insight into the character of your Highness’s government,
 and the present state of the country.”
 

 
 When I had spoken these words [St. John continues] a remarkable change, I thought, took place in his manner. He
 seemed more polite than before, but was evidently more grave and thoughtful.
 

 
 “Ah! Then,” he continued after a brief pause, “you do not run about after antiquities; your object is wholly
 political.” . . .
 

 
 [They then entered into a long discussion about the Pasha’s image in Europe and the Ottoman campaign in the
 Western press to tarnish it].
 

 
 “I have hitherto been accustomed to reply to words with actions: but since the Sultan lays so much stress on
 words – on articles of a mere journalist – I also will have my newspaper, which shall be published here at
 Alexandria.” . . .
 

 
 “No one can doubt that your Highness has acted prudently; for the influence of newspapers is
 incalculable . . . After all, the opinion of Europe is of consequence.”
 

 
 At this he seemed to start as from as dream [St. John explains]; became fidgety upon his divan; and, making a
 slight movement towards me, replied in the most animated manner, – “Oh, do not mistake me: I am not indifferent
 about the judgement which the world may form of me; and of this I will give you a convincing proof. For a long
 time I have been engaged in composing the history of my life. During every moment which I can snatch from public
 business, from the affairs of my people, I am attended by a secretary, whose sole employment is to write down
 what I dictate, in my own words; and to obviate the objections which might be urged against a history of so long
 a period, composed from recollection, I may remark that nature has endowed me with a very strong memory. I can
 describe, as if they occurred yesterday, events which took place forty years ago. In consequence, my biography
 will be very full. It will contain the history of my youth, before my arrival in Egypt. I shall describe the
 state of this country when I came into it; and all the events of any importance, which happened during my
 military expeditions in Nubia, Sennar, Kordofan, the Hejaz, and Syria.” 5 
 

 
 St. John did not fall in the trap, however, and his book did not proceed chronologically
 following the Pasha from his childhood to his old age, the narration culminating with his different military
 adventures. More than a hundred years after his death, though, books are still being written which, having been
 based on an archival material that had been cleverly selected in the first place, appear as if they had been
 dictated by the Pasha himself, and in his own words. They proceed with an account of the situation of Egypt
 before the appearance of the Pasha on its landscape, then proceed chronologically, following him through one
 after the other of his adventures, and end with his supposedly aborted attempts to gain independence from the
 Ottoman Empire highlighting Britain’s role in frustrating these attempts. 6 