
 

 
 This book is not a study of how modern discourses and institutions of power manage to achieve an unprecedented
 hold over the body through its capture, isolation and surveillance. It is, rather, a study of the dialog that
 power constantly has with resistance. My main subject is the army that Mehmed Ali managed to found in Egypt in
 the first half of the nineteenth century, an institution that represented the modern notions of power in as
 pristine a form as could possibly be found. It argues that it is true that the Pasha and his authorities managed
 to capture the bodies of tens of thousands of Egyptian men and that it is correct that they succeeded in training
 them and in aggregating their efforts to form a modern, disciplined army. As a result, the Pasha was capable in
 his old age of achieving what he had always aspired to, namely, to secure for himself and for his children after
 his death rule over the rich lands of Egypt, and for the hundred years after his death Egypt was, indeed, ruled
 by his descendants. Yet the soldiers, by resisting him and his authorities and by undermining his impressive,
 powerful structure, proved that they were not part of this project, that they were implicated in it against their
 will, and that they attempted to resist it by all means possible and imaginable. Only if one uncritically
 believes nationalist accounts of the Pasha and his military machine, could one accept that these soldiers were
 indeed all the Pasha’s men. I have no doubt, however, that he was not their man.
 

 
      1   al-Rāf‘ī, ‘Aṣr Muḥammad ‘Alī , p. 117.
 

 
      2   al-Sayyid Marsot, Egypt , p. 264.
 

 
      3   Dodwell, Founder of Modern Egypt , pp.
 263–4.
 

 
      4   Edouard Driault, ed., Mohamed Aly et
 Napoléon, 1807–1814 (Cairo: Royal Egyptian Geographical Society, 1925), pp. xxxviii-xxxix.
 

 
      5   St. John, Egypt , I, pp. 51–5.
 

 
      6   Marsot’s book, for example, starts with a chapter entitled
 “Egypt under the mamluks,” which is followed by another with the title “Muhammad Ali the man,” then “A country
 without a master,” “Master in his own house,” and culminates in a chapter whose heading is “Expansion to what
 end?” The book ends with two chapters, “The undoing: Muhammad Ali and Palmerston” and “The aftermath”: if Mehmed
 Ali’s proposed autobiography had been written, and had it survived, it would hardly have offered a more
 uncritical account.
 

 
      7    Illustrated London News , 31 August
 1844..
 

 
      8   For an insightful critique of the remarkably similar Indian
 nationalist discourse, see Gyan Prakash, “Writing post-Oriental histories of the Third World: Perspectives from
 Indian historiography,” Comparative Studies in Society and History , 32 (1990), pp. 383–408.
 

 
      9   Mitchell, Colonising Egypt , p. xi.
 
 
 
 

### FILE: Text/kf_9774246969_19_bibliography.html
 
 
 
 All the Pasha's Men 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bibliography 
 

 

 
 PRIMARY SOURCES
 

 
 ARCHIVAL MATERIAL 
 

 
