 Egyptian National Archives (Dār al-Wathā’iq al-Qawmiyya), Cairo Sijillāt (Registers )
 

 
 Sijillāt D īwān al-Ma‘iyya al-Saniyya 
 (registers of the Viceregal Department), designated by the code S/1.
 

 
 Sijillāt D īwān Khedewī (registers of
 the Department of Civil Affairs), designated by the code S/2.
 

 
 Sijillāt D īwān al-Jihādiyya, Mashūrat
 al-Ṭibb (registers of the Health Council, a subdivision of the War Department), designated by the codes
 S/3/122.
 

 
 Sijillāt ‘Ābdīn (collection of registers of various departments
 originally housed in ‘Ābdīn Palace), designated by the code S/5.
 

 
 Sijillāt al-Waqā’i‘ al-Miṣriyya (photocopies of the original
 copies of this newspaper), designated by “Vekayi-i Mɩsɩriyye.” 
 

 
 Sijillāt D īwān Taftīsh Ṣiḥḥat al-Maḥrūsa –
 Ṣādir (outgoing letters from the registers of the Department of Health Inspection of Cairo), designated by
 the code M/5.
 

 
 Sijillāt D īwān al-Tarsāna: Dafātir Qayd
 Asmā’ al-Mudhnibīn bi-Līmān Iskandar-iyya (registers of the Navy Department giving names of the convicts of
 the Liman of Alexandria), designated by the code M/14.
 

 
 Maḥāfi 
 (Boxes )
 

 
 Maḥāfi 
 al-Shām (boxes containing the original documents pertaining to the Syrian campaign), designated by “Sham.”
 

 
 Maḥāfi Baḥr
 Barra (boxes containing the original letters written to and received from foreign dignitaries), designated by
 “Bahr Barra.”
 

 
 Maḥāfi 
 al-Hijāz (boxes containing the original documents pertaining to the Arabian campaign), designated by “Hijaz.”
 

 
 Maḥfa at Awāmir
 lil-Jihādiyya (one box containing Mehmed Ali’s orders to the Cihadiye Nazin , Director of
 the War Department), designated by “Awamir lil-Jihadiyya.”
 

 
 Maḥāfi Dhawāt 
 (boxes containing original letters to and from members of Mehmed Ali’s family), designated by “Dhawat.”
 

 
 Maḥāfi D īwān Khedewi (boxes containing original documents issued by the
 Department of Civil Affairs), designated by “Divan- 1 Hidiv.”
 

 
 Maḥāfi 
 D īwān Katkhoda (boxes containing original documents issued by the Department of
 the Pasha’s First Deputy), designated by “Katkhoda.”
 

 
 Public Record Office, London
 

 
 FO 78. General Correspondence, Turkey, 1817–58.
 

 
 OFFICIAL EGYPTIAN PUBLICATIONS 
 

 
 Clot Bey, Antoine B. al-‘Ajāla al-Ṭibbiyya Fīmā lā Budda Minhu l’Ḥukamā’ al-Jihādiyya [A
 Short Medical Treatise Necessary for Army Doctors] Trans. August Sakākīnī. Cairo: Matba‘at Madrasat al-Ṭibb bi
 Abī Za‘bal, 1833.
 

 
 Mabḥalh Ta‘īlmī fī Tat‘lm al-Judarī [An Educational Treatise in Smallpox Vaccination].
 Trans. Aḥmad Ḥasan al-Rashīdī. Cairo: Būlāq, 1843.
 

 
 Risāla min Mashūrat al-Ṣiḥḥa ila Ḥukamā’ al-Jihādiyya [A Treatise from the Health Council to
 Army Physicians]. Cairo: Maṭba‘at D īwān al-Jihādiyya, 1835.
 

 
 Kanunname-i Bahriye-i Cihadiye [Naval Regulations]. Cairo: Būlāq, AH 1242/AD 1827.
 

 
 Kanun-u Seferiye [Campaign Regulations]. Cairo: Būlāq, Ramaḍan AH 1258/October 1842.
 

 
 al-Lāi‘ḥa al-Muta‘alliqa bi-Khadamāt al-Mustakhdimīn wa Muta‘allaqātiha [The Decree
 Regarding the Duties of (Public) Employees and its Appendices], Cairo: Būlāq, AH 1260/AD 1844.