                                     English summary

The Netherlands under Napoleonic Influence. Party Quarrels and Nation-Building (1801-
1813)

The Napoleonic period is probably one of the most dynamic episodes in the early modern
history of the Netherlands. Following the Batavian Revolution, the Napoleonic influence and
annexation deeply altered the political structure of the Dutch Republic and set in motion its
permanent transformation into a modern unitary state. The Netherlands under Napoleonic
Influence sheds light on processes of nation-building and changing identities during the
Napoleonic dominance in the Netherlands between 1801 and 1813.

The main goal of this PhD thesis is to gain a more detailed understanding of the development
of a ‘Dutch national consciousness’ during the years of Napoleonic dominance. The thesis
defines national consciousness as the attachment to one’s own nation as expressed in
language, political and cultural unity and sovereignty. By studying political debates and
protests, The Netherlands under Napoleonic Influence answers three research questions: How
was a national Dutch identity constructed in pamphlets, journals, songs and literature? How
was the relationship towards Napoleon altered? And how did the French influence contribute
to the process of nation-building? This dissertation argues that vaguer notions of nationhood
and love for the fatherland were transformed into a much more specific form of national
consciousness, which was connected to a clear idea of national sovereignty. In reaction to the
Napoleonic stranglehold, ‘the own nation’ became the most important point of reference. This
does not mean, however, that debates about the ‘nation’ ceased to exist, nor was there a
consensus about the meaning and political direction of the fatherland.

This thesis analyses two types of source material. In the first place, there are texts, pamphlets,
journals and poems that were written by the Dutch in the years 1801-1813. These sources are
connected to the second type of material: governmental and police reports from the Ministry
of Internal Affairs and the Napoleonic police and justice department. By using this approach,
the study focuses on the interaction between the Napoleonic authorities and the Dutch
population. Much attention is given to the professionalisation of the Ministry of Justice and
Police and to the consequences of the rigid imperial censorship laws that controlled Dutch
writers and pamphleteers.
        During the Napoleonic years, political and cultural discourses were rapidly altered to
fit changing circumstances. However, at the same time, the way identity is referred to in these
discourses remained remarkably stable. Therefore, this study argues that a better way to grasp
the meaning of these discourses is to look at the party quarrels that produced references to
identity. These quarrels revolved around a few important moments: the declaration of the new
constitutions of 1801, 1805 and 1806, and the annexation of the Dutch territory in the
Napoleonic Empire in 1810. These events raised new questions about political legitimacy and
identity.

                                                                                              303	
  
	
  
