To describe these events, the study is divided into three parts. The first three chapters
concentrate on the years 1801 to 1806: the period of the Staatsbewind (‘State Council’).
During this period—which has not yet received much attention from historians—the political
landscape was divided into three parties: republicans, orangists and moderates. Between 1801
and 1806 the Napoleonic efforts to end the revolutionary wars created a new balance of power
in Europe, in which the Dutch Republic had to find a new place. As republicans and orangists
debated about the new direction of the Republic, the moderate party dominated the political
arena. In his efforts to control the Dutch Republic, Napoleon appointed the moderate Rutger
Jan Schimmelpenninck as the new head of state in 1805. Although Schimmelpenninck
abolished the last revolutionary ideals and embodied a new form of administrative
pragmatism, he did not reach any real consensus with the other parties.

Part two of this study focuses on the years 1806 to 1810, when Napoleon intervened in the
Dutch Republic and placed his brother Louis Bonaparte on the Dutch throne. The Netherlands
became a monarchy. The party quarrels from the years 1801 to 1806 lost their significance
and the focus shifted towards debates about maintaining a certain degree of independence.
The republican ideals lost relevance because of the monarchy, as did the orangist agenda
when the old Stadtholder William V passed away in exile in 1806. Instead, a pragmatic
constitutional ideal emerged, that would guarantee Dutch sovereignty within the new
Napoleonic European constellation. Nation-building processes were also stimulated from
above. King Louis Bonaparte tried to nationalise politics to legitimise his position. He tried to
learn the Dutch language, propagated a new national cultural policy (cultuurpolitiek) and
secured (a certain degree of) Dutch sovereignty while Napoleonic soldiers dominated Europe.
He also invested in the professionalisation of his administration. Some old republicans and
orangists were keen to accept important positions in this new government. The king also
sparked protest, however, for instance because of his French roots and his monarchical
appearance. The strongest protest concerned the new conscription law. Louis Bonaparte’s
legitimacy had been based on the promise of sovereignty for the Dutch territory. In 1809,
when an English army invaded and the new conscription laws were enforced, Louis
Bonaparte lost most of this authority. That year, protest was mostly expressed using an old
orangist discourse.

The third part of this thesis focuses on the period after 1810, when the political landscape
changed once again because of the Napoleonic annexation that formally ended Dutch
sovereignty. In January 1811, the Napoleonic laws were implemented in the Netherlands by
establishing a ‘Napoleonic police state’ including a rigid system of censorship and the
notorious Napoleonic secret police. During the first two years of the Napoleonic annexation,
protest was mainly directed at the Napoleonic imperial laws, such as the conscription. It was
articulated mainly by means of a cultural discourse in which the memory of the Dutch Golden
Age was evoked and the losses of Dutch values were lamented. Dutch resistance to Napoleon
differed from that in other European regions, such as Spain (were a Catholic, anti-
enlightenment discourse was prominent). The situation in Europe changed drastically after the
Napoleonic campaign in Russia in 1812. Napoleon lost his aura of invincibility. Quite

                                                                                             304	
  
	
  
