spontaneously, a new ideal for an independent nation state arose. This ideal was soon
connected to the son of the old Stadtholder, William Frederick (often referred to as William
VI). Although little was known about the latter’s whereabouts and political ambitions, the
protest against Napoleon in the year 1813 was formulated using this new orangist discourse.
Unconfirmed rumours about William Frederick’s return to the Netherlands were connected to
new protests against the draft in the spring of 1813.
        The European coalition against Napoleon grew stronger. When Napoleon lost the
decisive Battle of Leipzig in October 1813, the French troops started to retreat from the
Netherlands. To prevent a power vacuum and rioting, the republican and orangist elites in The
Hague and Amsterdam acted quickly to find a solution. It would soon be clear how much had
changed since Napoleon came to power. The ideal of a constitutional republic no longer held
any significance. The old protagonists of the republican party embraced a new form of
constitutional orangism in which party quarrels would be forgotten. The orangists’ protest
discourse that had been introduced in January 1813, proved to serve as a new national ideal
for the oppressed nation. In November 1813 William VI returned to the Netherlands, where
he was later crowned King William I.
        The most important step in the development of a new national discourse in 1813 was
the transformation of the orangist discourse from a politicised ideal into a depoliticised
national ideal. This process provided the nation with new legitimacy. It was created by the
shared discontent about the Napoleonic influence and the French imperial laws. In the last
months of the Napoleonic period, orangism became synonymous with nationality, identity
and sovereignty. This national consciousness was expanded after 1813.

By studying national identity discourses through the lens of party quarrels this thesis reaches a
deeper understanding of processes of nation building during the last years of the Dutch
Republic and the first years of the monarchy. It argues that this process of nation-building
developed from a republican and orangist party quarrel, via a national cultural ideal into a
new form of national consciousness. This consciousness was based on a strong sense of
independence, national mores and political reconciliation, and, by attaching itself to the
hereditary prince, made a new monarchical ideal conceivable. In other words: from a
depoliticised idea of the fatherland and an idea of national unity, towards national sovereignty
connected to orangism. These discourses did not appear simultaneously, but sequentially,
revealing a certain development in the attempts to construct a renewed Dutch identity. It
should be noted, however, that these developments are still a far cry from the programmatic
‘nationalism’ that characterised processes of nation-building in the second half of the
nineteenth century.
	
  




                                                                                             305	
  
	
  
