


Digitized  by  Google 


«v!  MOTTCB  HEOARDINO  THE  BCAP. 

becai!'?*»  it  ]<!  procured  from  the  natives;  and  it  might  be  urged,  that  the 
Algiiauns  are  remarkable  for  observation  and  veracity,  and  that  it  is  common 
among  them  ibr  a  man  to  repeat  a  route  alter  a  long  interv  al,  without  vas)' 
ing  ddier  in  fbe  diatttice  <u  direction  «f  •  noj^  stage ;  but  ibts  qnefltion  ' 
if  of  tiie  lew  cootequeDoe^     noUung  is  Imown  of  the  geogiiplij  of  tihe 
oountriet  in  question  that  il  not  derived  from  the  natives.   Mr.  Foster,  it 
il  true,  lias  publidied  tiia  route  througli  the  Caubul  dominions,  but  he  gives 
the  number  of  Jarsangs  in  each  stage,  according  to  the  information  he  re- 
ceived, and  not  the  number  of  mileSf  as  he  wouid  liave  done  had  his  distances 
been  the  result  of  his  own  observations.    I  consider  this  preference  of  Mr. 
Ibster's  as  a  proof  of  his  judgment,  for  he  had  no  instnunents,  and,  how- 
ever  soperior  he  waa  to  the  natives  in  all  tlie  other  zequiaitea  of  a  traveller* 
he  could  not  he  so  good  n  judge  of  the  length  of  «  stage  as  a  perHm  who 
had  often  travelled  il*  and  nw  bcsidas  accustomed  to  esttmate  the  rate  at 
which  camels  move. 

The  principal  alterations  I  have  myself  made  in  the  map  lie  to  the  south 
of  Ghuznee,  and  to  the  north  of  Hindoo  Coosh.    Mr.  Macartney  ])osscssed 
fewer  routes  in  the  south  of  Afghauuistaun  than  in  any  otiier  paii.  of  die 
hangdom*  and  the  infonnation  I  obtained  in  the  Deocan  refimed  principally 
to  that  quarter;  I  therefbra  constructed  the  southOTi  part  of  the  niap  anew, 
and  am  answerable  for  as  much  of  the  tract  between  the  parallds  of  Ghuznee 
and  Shikarpoor,  as  lies  west  of  the  range  of  Solimaun,  and  south  of  the 
river  Tumuk.    In  framing  this  I  derived  great  advantage  from  using 
Kelauti  Nusseer  Khann  (the  position  of  which  has  been  ascertained  by 
Messrs.  Christie  and  Fottinger)  lur  one  of  my  dxed  points,  as  well  as  from 
the  meaw  I  possessed  of  tettling  the  position  of  Dauder  with  tolerable  pre* 
dsion.  It  stiU  stands  nearly  ^riiere  LUutenant  Macartnej  put  it  (  but  hu 
judgment  has  been  confirmed  by  many  routes  of  mine,  and  by  a  map  drawn 
up  by  Mr«  Fbttinger,  in  which  it  is  placed  within  a  few  mil^  of  its  position 
in  Mr.  Macartney's  map.    All  to  the  south  of  the  parallel  of  Shikarpoor 
will  be  found  in  the  printed  maps:  I  have  notliing  to  add  to  the  public 
information.    In  the  south  west  I  have  availed  myself  of  Mr.  Christie's 
route,  (published  fay  Mr.  Macdonald  Kinnier)  for  fixing  the  position  of 
JeUsUabed  in  Seestaun.  i  have  nuMle  but  a  alight  deviation  fronithe  panted 
jvatB,  and  that  ibr  leaaoos  #hich  appeared  to  jnstiiy  the  change ;  but  I 
have  retained  Furrah  wd  Hennt  in  ^  situations  assigned  to  them  by  Mr. 
Macartney.  No  other  position  of  Heraut  would  agree  with  Mr.  Macartney's 
routes*  or  my  own  inlbrmation*   I  have  not  indeed  been  able  to  ascerlam 