


Digitized  by  Google 


KOrrCB  BEOABDIKO  THE  ICAP. 

the  authority  on  wliich  it  has  been  placed  in  the  position  now  generally 
adopted-  Major  Rennell  proceeded  on  the  information  ot  Mr.  Foster ;  but 
that  traveller  observes  that  the  road  from  Gimmuch(Diinmuk)toHerautUa8 
nearly  a  northern  course  (VoL  IL  Page  115),  and  if  audi  ft  dinctkn  W«fe 
^ven  fioD  the  point  fixed  fbr  Gimmudi  in  M^or  Bcnndl's  Mtip,  it  mwld 
bring  HefMttnMMrtotbepoatiittMMgiiedtoitby 
other  that  lies  jet  been  thought  of. 

Mr.  Macartney  liad  placed  Bokhara  in  latitude  37=  45'  north,  and  longitude 
6f  10  east,  which  was  so  contrary-  to  received  opinious,  that  i  was  induced  to 
exanune  it  particularly ;  and  I  soon  found  it  equally  inconsistent  with  my 
own  information.  1  have  no  doubt  Mr.  Macartney  was  under  a  mistake  and 
lhat  he  was  led  into  it,  partly  by  a  very  enooeods  mte  (the  only  one  hepoe* 
aesaed  between  Heraat  and  Bokhara),  and  partly  by  hia  overlooking  the  pro- . 
veriiial  length  of  the  marches  in  Toorldstaun.  My  information  confirms  his 
poflitiona  on  the  toad&  to  Bokhara,  south  of  Hindoo  Coosh  ;  but  from  that 
mountain  I  find  many  of  them  too  short.  I  am  not  satisfied  witli  my  own 
position  of  Bokhara,  which  is  in  39°  27'  north  latitude,  and  62°  45'  ea.^t  lonc^i- 
tude.  Anthony  Jenkinson,  who  took  an  observation  in  155B,  declares  tiie 
latitude  to  be  39*  10' $  while  lfr.lliofiHWBi»  win  viaM  Bokhaia''kk.i74o, 
aMertB  it  to  be  in  latitude  39*  30^*  though  without  wyiag  whillier  <he  bad 
obterved  it  or  not  Mfl|or  Rennel  places  it  some  ndniftes  to  tlie  south  of 
jqT  30^:  but  the  greatest  variation  is  in  the  longitude,  wliich  Major  Rennel 
fives  upwards  of  forty  minute;  further  west  than  I  have  done.  I  should  have 
bcvA)  inclined  to  adopt  his  account  irom  respect  ibrtusauthorily,  but  it  could 
not  be  reconciled  to  my  intormation.  • 

On  the  whole«  I  cannot  hope  for  nuch  aecuracy  in  rajdabai^  of.tfie  ni^ 
haniig  never  before  attempted  an j  thing  of  the  Idnd  |  but  I  hope  it  may  be 
niefiil  till  noinething  better  ia  hrout^t  forward,  and  that,  even- itfler  the  priiu 
cipal  poinia  are  Hxed  with  flKne  acoisacy,  the  Intermediate  rootea  will  be 
found  of  some  aervioe*  - 


•  The  route  from  Bokhara  to  Cliushmch  Morco,  and  that  from  Bulkli  to  tho  same  place  were 
taken  down  from  the  infornoation  of  a  rery  intelli^enl  native  of  tlie  last  named  city  :  they  were 
dten  protracted  without  the  least  alteratioa  in  the  distances  or  directions,  and  agreed  within  a  m3« 
«rtirointli«MMitioBofCbiwhindiMot«e.  I  «m  obliged  to  alter  Ui«  directum  of  m/im^riMle 
from  Ghoafanm  Mbrae  to  Herant.  The  ftmner  direction  would  fan  placed  Henuit  twenty 
■tlee  weat  of  it*  present  Kituatioo,  wlridi  could  not  have  been  reconciled  to  die  route  to  the  same 
dty  ftom  Merocnaak.  The  third  rente  fVoni  Kubbermauch  was  taken  Iroin  Mr.  Macartney's 
mop,  without  any  alteration  in  the  distances.  It  was  inserted  into  mine  after  all  the  a  ljoiiiing 
posilions  had  been  fixed,  aud  titttd  its  place  with  the  utmost  exactuess.  it  i*  worth  wltile  to 
observe  that  (he  place  where  Mour  or  Mcrvc  falls  in  these  routes,  is  nfwrljf  Thtl  MOW  m  AM 
wtigiied  to  it  by  Mr.  Macdonald  Kionier  on  grounds  cattirdy  diMinct. 