


bigitizea  by  Oougle 


i 


^  FK£FACG. 

fOBBoved  tiie  eonfiinoo.  Hie  moit  material  ifwd$,  lioweter;  ate 
pretty  'wiilbniiijr  apdlftd,  and  I  hope  no  great  embamannent  will 
ariae  fiovi  the  in^olari^  of  the  othera. 

The  ei^gnmngtaKe  all  portniia»  except  mmnbect  IIL  XIIL  and 
XIV.f  which,  though  aconnite  rapieaentationa  of  the  dreawB  iaiid 
e(|iupment8  they  are  designed  for»  are  not  likeoeaaeB  of  Individuals. 
Hmj  are  all  done  by  Iiulian  artists*  eioqpt  numbers,  V.  VL  VIL 
and  VULy  which  are  sufficiently  distinguished  by  the  superiority  of 
their  execution  :  for  them  I  am  indebted  to  Lieutenant  R.  M.  Grind- 
lay  of  the  I^ombay  establishment,  who  drow  thODl  firom  A^jhaiUia  juflt 
acrived  ixom  their  own  country. 


PoflWA*  JuMx  4.  1S14. 


Digitized  by  Google 


■ 

KOtlCE  BEGABDING  THE  MAP. 

T  INTENDED  in  this  place  to  have  given  an  aooomt  of  tht  node  adoptad 

*■  by  Mr.  Macartney  in  the  construction  of  his  map,  and  to  have  shiini  in 
detail  what  part  of  niv  {geographical  information  was  borrowed  from  hint,  awf 
on  what  points  his  opinion  and  mine  disagreed  ;  but,  on  consideration,  I 
think  it  better  to  give  tiie  most  important  part  of  Mr.  Macartney's  memoir  in 
an  Appandti^  and  to  it  I  beg  leave  to  veftr  my  readers  1m  will  them  ftid> 
hmdm  tiie  aurtter  'to  whidi  I  piinc^paBy  alhid^  good  aooounts  of  the  (ham, 
the  livon  of  die  Funjaub  and  other  interesting  aobjecta.  I  have  atiU,  ho«w 
ever,  some  observations  to  o£fer.    Mr.  Macartney's  design  in  forming  his  map 
was  to  embody  all  the  information  he  had  himself  collected,  and  to  leave  the 
task  of  comparing  it  with  the  <jjnaions  of  other  geographers,  to  those  who  had 
txu)ite  lebure  and  better  opportunities  of  consulting  printed  authorities.   It  is 
not*  tfaerefiir^  to  be  ondentood  when  he  diffiaa  flom  hit  pfedeoeNOca,  that 
ho  had  annMiwwod  and  revened  thdr  deeiaiona*  but  menly  that  die  aooomrta 
he  had  received  differed  £n»  those  already  in  the  poaiewion  of  the-  pnUic^ 
Of  the  value  of  hia  accounts,  it  may  be  well  to  say  a  few  words.   The  foun- 
dation of  the  whole  rests  on  the  lines  formed  by  the  route  of  the  mission, 
where  the  bearings  and  distances  were  taken  by  three  different  geutlenxen, 
each  of  whom  had  a  purambulator  of  his  own.    The  latitude  of  the  hahing 
places  was  also  ascertained  by  observatioo*  aa  waadieloiigitude  of  the  principal 
•pointa  on  the  route* 

Mr.  Macartney  h«e  hunaelf  exphbod  (Appendix  D.)  manner  in  which 
be  kid  down  the  country  beyond  thoae  bgr  meana  of  native  inftmiation. 
It  is  obvious  tliat  tliis  part  cannot  be  so  accurate  as  the  former,  and  can 
scarcely  hope  to  go  beyond  an  approximation  to  the  tnith  ;  but  it  dii^^JLt  to 
hi  imic  li  more  exact,  as  well  as  more  liili,  tixan  any  thing  we  alrcxuiy  possess 
on  the  subject.  The  surveyed  line  is  advanced  many  hundred  milea  beyond 
what  it  waa  when  the  lait  m^»  waa  roade^  and  the  number  of  rontea  collected 
fim  the  people  of  the  country  give  a  great  adnbtage  over  the  alender  mate- 
rials before  obtained :  nothiilg  indeed  gives  a  higher  idea  of  the  genius  of 
Miyor  Rennell  than  a  comparison  of  the  matcrialH  he  possessed  with  his  suc- 
cess in  setthng  the  geography  of  the  countries  iu  questioti.  A  good  deal 
floigfat  be  said  to  prove  that  the  new  informa^on  is  not  to  he  disr^arded 