

From  the  late  Lieutenant  Macartney  T  have  taken  the  direction  of 
the  mountains,  the  course  of  the  streams,  the  relative  position  of  the 
townt;,  and,  in  short,  almost  the  whole  of  the  information  contained 
in  the  map.    I  have  also  obtained  from  that  officer*s  memoir  many 
particulars  wiiicli  I  have  used  in  my  descriptive  and  statistical  accounts 
of  the  country.    The  zeal  and  abiliiie:*  of  the  Iftte  Mr.  ii^fljcartiaey  arje  ■  ;* - 
well  known  to  the  government  which  he  served;  and  his  finnk  and  ' 
disinterested  liberality  in  conmumicating  hia  ]nfonnatibni'wSBP''lDDg.-  . 
be  lemetaibered  by  all  who  were  mteieited  in  the  geography^iaf-tfiflttr  v' 
oountries  to  whidh  he  had  at  ^ffbrent  llmea  directed  his  attention* 
'I  eould  not  lefoun  fitom  thia  tribute  to  the  merita  of  thia  mmch  re*. 

gMtted  officer  ^  but  it  would  Bl  eoooid  with  tlie  moden^  aid  enreiw 

-  » 


« 


Digitized  by  Google 


vi  VREFACE. 

sion  to  dispky  for  which  he  was  Jiiinself  tUmkin^iia^pA^  to  indnlge  Is 
•ny  further  panegyric.  * 

I  take  this  method  of  returning  my  best  thanks  to  Mr.  W,  Erskine 
at  Bombay,  for  his  readiness  in  repljino;  to  my  references  on  many 
points  connected  with  the  geography  and  history  of  Asia,  The  Pub- 
lic will,  I  trust,  ere  long  be  enabled  to  judge  of  the  raiue  of  the 
time  which  he  sacrificed  from  so  kind  a  motive. 

It  will  be  sufficiently  obvious  that  I  have  not  had  any  professe<lly 
litenay  assiatance  in  the  composition  or  correction  of  my  book ;  but 
I  have 'not  neglected  to  aviil  mjMlf  of  tin  adiriee  of  my  friends,  by 
nUdi  many  impeifectiona  liaivie  been  removed. 

Meiefindta  of  it^noidd  be  of  little  cooaeqnenoei  if  the  subaCamse 
of  my  aooount  were  firee  ftom  error.  SVom  the  nature  of  my  undeiw 
taking,  many  mMkm  will  doiibtlew  be  diacovered,  wben  onr  ae- 
qoaintanee  with  ibe  ocamtries  I  treat  of  ia-iuGieaaedi  but  in  the  pr^ 
lent  state  of  onr  kaawhiigb,  no  attempt  to  elucidate  iJiem  can  be 
ledumed  presumptimufi,  and  whatever  errors  I  may  be  found  to  bave 
committed,  will  not,  I  troat^  be  ascribed  to  want  of  indnatij,  or  to 
Hidifference  about  truth. 

Among  tlioae  to  whom  I  am  moat  indebted  for  advice,  I  may  take 
the  liberty  of  naming  Mr.  Jenkins,  resident  at  the  court  of  Nagpore» 
and  Captain  Close,  a.ssistant  to  the  residency  at  Poona.  To  the  latter 
gentleman,  indeed,  I  am  bound  to  acknowlcHcro  my  obligations,  as 
well  for  the  aid  he  affordrd  in  collecting  and  arranging  some  parts  of 
mv  materials,  as  for  the  brnofit  T  derived  from  his  judgment  in  the 
general  execution  of  my  work.  I  In  lieve  I  have  now  noticed  all  the 
:f«^.6uxi'.l  ^Ety0  received,  which  are  not  adverted  to  in  the  places  to 