3  3433  00005630  3 


Digitized  by  Google 


j 

4 


1 

I 


/ 


V 


DigHized  by  Google 


I-'-' 


Digitized  b' 


y  Google  j 


Digitizer  by  LiOO^itl 


DigilizeKi  by  Goo^  ' 


ACCOUNT 


KINGDOM  OF  CAUBUL, 

AND  rrS  DEPENDENCIES 

« 

IN  FERSIAy  TARTARY,  AND  INDIA} 


A  VIEW  OF  THE  AFOHAUN  NATION, 


A  HiJiTOHY  Of  THE  DOOBAUNEE  MONARCHY. 


By  the  Hon.  MOUNTSTUART  ELPHINSTONE, 

OF  THE  HONOURABLE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  SERVICE;  RESIDENT  AT  THE 
COUBT  OF  POONA  J  AMD  LATE  ENVOY  TO  THK  KING  OF  CAUBUL. 


LONDON: 


Digitizea  by  Uoogle 


I 


Prinlad  by  A.  Sirtbtn, 


Digitized  by  Google 


niEFACE. 


As  I  hm  mm  but  a  part  of  ihe  eountriet  wlncli  I  «n  Bbout  to 
.   dBtaibe,  h  ia  wBemary  that  I  flhoold  g^e  an  aeooimt  of  tiio 
'  ^w"—  fioiD  wfaidi  I  haro  diawn  vay  iiifiiniiatioii  j  and  I  taka  tbo 
oppoftmutjt  thus  aflbrdoili  of  adouMrledgpig  my  ofaUgHtionft  to  die 
^mllmeii  fion  iHMm  I  lime  veeoivad  iMiitaDGaii 

I  wm  apgnffd  fer  a  ynr  on  my  jouniej  to  the  Kuig  of  GMtfafnTa 
court,  and  another  year  elapsed  bdbfe  the  mianon  was  finally 
dinolved.  The  whole  of  that  period  was  employed  in  such  encjuiries 
regarding  the  kingdom  of  Caubid  as  were  likely  to  be  useful  to  the 
Bntiflli  government.  The  first  part  of  the  time  was  spent,  by  all  the 
members  of  the  mission,  in  the  acquisition  of  general  information  j 
but  during  the  remainder,  ;i  prrrisc  ninn  wns  arranged  among  the 
party,  and  a  partii  ular  bratich  ot  the  iuvestigation  assigned  to  evesj 
gentleman  who  look  a  share  in  it. 

The  geoj^rapli}  w  allotted  to  Lieutenant  Mnrartnev,  (Mr.  Tickell, 
the  other  8ur\eyor,  having  been  sent  back  to  India  v>ii  duty;)  and  he 
was  assisleil  by  Captain  llaper,  already  known  to  tiic  rubhc  by  his 
account  of  a  Journey  to  the  Sources  of  the  Ganges.  The  climate, 
toil,  piodnoe  end  Imebandiy  irare  mdeitakeii  by  Lie^^tOfiJir^ine; 
nd  the  tiade  and  xerome  by  Mr.  Ridund  Stfadicj.'  "iPY^er^tory. 
fell  to  Mr.  Robert  Alexander,  and  the  goveniment  and  tfae^mdiiji^fs: 
ef  ibe  people  to  me.  L 3  v*N  AI'C  Y 

We  bad  abundant  opportunities  of  enquiiy  wbtle  in  the  A^ion 
dominioni;  and*  after  our  .  return  we  oontiniied  to  eseniine  the 
nomenMie  nali?ei  of  tboee  countries  that  aooomponied  ih^  and  those 
whom  we  eonld  meet  wilb  at  Belly  and  in  iti  ne^bowbood.'  We 

A  8 


Digitized  by  Google 


PREFACE. 


also  wciiL  to  the  fair  at  Hurdwar  (the  great  rendezvous  for  natives 
of  the  countries  north-west  of  India)  and  into  the  Aigliaun  colony 
of  Rohilcund.  By  these  means  we  completed  our  reports,  which 
were  transmitted  to  Government  in  the  end  of  1810 ;  at  wiiicli  time 
I  aeC  out  for  Hie  Deckaa»  and  ooiuidered  my  datre  in  the  trans- 
actkms  of  the  Caubul  munon  §■  afc  an  end.  Mr.  Irvine  had  then 
lihoui^  of  writuig  an  aoooimt  of  the  A^aiuia,  for  which,  fiom 
Uie  diligence  and  extent  of  his  rewarcfaes,  he  waa  wdl  prepared; 
hat,  aa  it  had  fimn  die  fiiit  been  lew  his  btgeet  to  describe  a  par- 
tiotthr  people^  than  to  cnlsige  his  acquaintanoe  with  the  histoiy  of 
human  sodety,  his  jnyestigBtions  mxm  led  him  to  some  geneial 
ykm»f  whidi  he  thenceforth  determined  to  pumna  For  this  pur- 
pose he  has  been  occupied,  during  the  last  three  years,  in  iaborions 
enquiries  into  the  condition  of  different  oriental  nations^  and  his 
acoonnt  of  Caubul  has  in  consequence  been  abandoned. 