

We- set  dff  ftom  .Gbnound  on  the  2l8t  of  October,  and  in  the  course 
of  the  march  we  quitted  the  dependencies  of  our  own  Government, 
and  entered  the  district  of  Shekhawuttee  (so  called  from  a  predatoiy 
tribe  of  Raujpoots  who  inhabit  it),  the  country  becoming  more  and 
more  desart  as  we  advanced.  On  the  22d,  we  reached  Singauna,  a 
handsome  town,  built  of  stone,  on  the  skirts  of  a  hill  of  purplish  rock, 
about  six  hundred  feet  high.  I  was  here  met  by  Raja  Ubhee  Sing, 
the  principal  chief  of  the  Shekhawut  tribe.  He  was  a  little  man  w  ith 
large  eyes,  inflamed  by  tlie  use  of  opium  :  He  wore  his  beard  turned 
up  on  each  side  towards  his  ears,  which  gave  him  a  wild  and  fi^ce 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  ^ 

tffemnce ;  his  dven  wm  pliin ;  and  his  ipeech*  and  ninuMit*  Wot 
tfiose  of  all  his  countrymen,  rude  and  unpolidied*  He  wm»  however* 

very  civH,  and  made  manj  fMPofesaians  of  respect  and  attachment  to 
the  British.  I  saw  him  several  times,  and  he  was  always  drunk  either 
with  opimii  or  brandy.  This  was  indeed  the  case  with  all  the  Shek- 
hawiittee  Sirdars,  who  are  seldom  in  a  condition  to  a|ipear  till  the  ef4 
feet  of  their  last  dehuiich  is  removed  by  a  new  dose ;  consequently  it 
is  only  in  the  interval  betwe^  sohrietv  and  absolute  stupe&ctiou  that 
they  are  fit  for  buiiiness.  Two  marches  irom  SLn|!:Enna  brought  us  to 
Jhoonjhoona,  a  handsome  town,  witii  some  trees  and  gardeuH,  which 
look  well  in  such  a  depart.  Each  of  the  Chi^,  who  are  five  in  num- 
ber, has  a  caiitle  here ;  and  here  they  assemble  when  tlie  public  af- 
isirB  require  a  oomfidL  At  this  place*  1  saw  the  rpjnaining  four  Shek- 
hsint  diiefe ;  they  were  pilatn  snoi.'  One  of  theaii  IShsam  8ing, 
was  remarikaUy  mild  and  well  behaved;  but  some  c£.the  otihen  hose 
strong  marka  of  the  eflhcts  of  opium  in  thieic  ef^and.oountaBana& 
Thiey  were  aU  eonsias,  and  seemed  to  lire  in  great  baimoiijr-;'  biai 
scanely  had  I  cromed  the  dssart*  when  I  heard  lhat  Shaim  Sing  had 
niodered  the  'tfavte  odiets  at  a  6aife»  stahbing  the  £nt  of  than  witk 
his  own  hand.  * 

■After  another  march  and  a  half  over  sand,  from  Jhoonjhoone  io» 
wards  Chooroo,  we  quitted  the  Shekhawuttee.  This  cuiuilry.eartendi 
about  eighty  miles  from  north  to  south,  and  less  from  east  to  west 
It  has  the  extensive  dominions  of  the  Raja  of  J_vT>oor  on  tlie  s<^uth  ; 
on  the  oast  iho  (lepeiiHencreH  of  the  British  (iovernment ;  and  on  the 
west  the  terriii»ries  of  iiikaneer ;  on  the  iionh-west  it  has  the  barren 
country  of  the  Bailees,  a  plundering  tribe,  remarkable  for  carrying  on 
their  depredations  on  loot,  and  still  more  so,  for  the  length  and 
rapidiiy  uf  the  incursions  thus  made  :  on  the  north  is  Hunecaua,  tlie 
scene  of  the  exploits  of  George  Thomas,  which,  though  on  the  bor- 
ders of  the  desart,  is  celebrated  for  the  verdure*  from  which  it 