


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


INTRODUCTION.  0 

if  the  rear  was  detained,  lest  that  division,  being  separated  from  the 
guides,  might  lose  its  way  among  the  «and  hills.  To  prevent  this,  a 
siijnal  was  pnst  along  the  line  by  beat  of  drum,  when  anv  rirentn- 
stauce  occasioned  a  stoppage  in  the  rear,  and  a  tnimpet,  sounded 
tirom  time  to  time  at  the  heatl  of  the  line,  kept  all  informed  of  the  di- 
rection in  which  the  column  was  proceeding.  The  heavy  sand  made 
marchiiig  iaiiguuig  that  we  were  obliged  to  allow  camels  ibr  half 
tlie  iofiuxtry  S^ys,  thit  Hiey  might  ride  by  turns,  twa  on  a  camel ; 
we  hid  besides  ci;|s«as  (or  large  pannkn  on  cameb),  for  the  sick. 
Hie  wmojanoe  of  Che  march  was  greatly  moreased  by  the  mcredible 
mnnber  of  a  sort  of  small  biin»  which  stuck  to  every  thing  diat  toadi- 
ed them*  and  occasioned  great  uneasmess.  They  aie  however  useful, 
inasmudi  as  they  farm  a  fivoorite  fiiod  Ibr  horses*  and  the  seed  is 
eaten  even  by  men.  Hie  wmt  of  water,  and  the  quality  of  that  wUdi 
we.  met  with,  was  also  a  great  hardship  to  our  men  and  followers ; 
and,  though  the  abundance  of  water  mektos  sfibrded  occasional  relief 
to  their  thirst,  its  effect  on  their  health  was  by  no  means  salutary. 
Such  were  the  combined  effects  of  fatiffue,  bad  water,  and  the  exces- 
sive use  of  water  melons,  that  i  L^reat  proportion  of  the  natives  who 
accompanied  us  became  aMicted  with  a  low  fever,  accompanied  by  a 
dysentery  ;  and  to  such  a  degree  did  this  extend,  that  thirty  Sepoys, 
without  reckoning  followers,  were  taken  ill  in  tlie  course  of  one  day 
at  Nuttoosir,  and  forty  persons  of  all  descriptions  expired  during  the 
first  week  of  our  halt  at  Bikaneer.  The  great  difference  between  the 
temperatine  of  jdie  days  and  n^hta  no  doubt  ooirtribated  to  this  moiw 
taiUl^.  Even  the  English  gentlemen'  used  to  su£kr  fiom  cold  doicing ' 
the  night  marphes,  and  were  happy  to  kindle  a  large  6re  as  soim  aa 
we  reached  our  ground  j  yet  the  sun  became  poweefol  90  early  in  (he 
.  moffttii^  that  we  always  yfoke  with  a  fiveiiah  heat  whidi  lasted  till' 
sunset  The  Europesns,  howevo',  did  not  suffer  any  serious  iUness.' 
Some  instances  of  violent  inflamation  in  the  eyelids  wet^  the  only  dia> 
orders  of  which  we  had  to  complain. 

Our  march  to  Bickaneer  was  attended  with  few  adventures.  Parties 
of  plundoeis  were  twice  seen,  but  did  not  attack  our  baggsge.  Some 


Digitized  by  Google 


XO  INTBODDCTIOH. 


of  the  people  also  lost  their  way,  and  were  mif<s?n<^  for  a  day  <»r  two, 
during  wbicb  time  they  were  in  danger  ot  being  lost  in  the  uiuulia- 
bited  pHrLH  tjl  the  desart,  and  were  fired  on  by  all  the  villages  which 
they  a]>proached  in  hopes  of  getting  guides  or  directiom  ibr  tbeir 
journey.  -    ;     ■     '"       .     •.    I  '  .  ^^ 