


16  '  IHTRODUCTnON. 

On  the  22d,  we  made  a  inarch  of  thirty  miles  to  Moujgur ;  the 
heat  of  the  aftefnoon  was  intenset  while  we  halted  as  usual  in  the  - 
nsked  plain,  to  give  our  people  some  water,.and  to  take  some  refresh- 
ment ouisdves.'  In  the  coarse  of  the  day  sevml  hundred  skins  of 
water  came  to  us  firom  Moujgur,  where  BoJiawul  Khaun  had  sent  his 
prindpal  c^lcers  to  reoeiye.us.  Towards  evening  many  persons  were 
astonidied  with  the  appearance  of  a  long  lak^  enclosing  several  little> 
islands ;  notwithstmiding  the  well  known  nature  of  the  country,  many 
were  positive  that  it  was  a  lake }  and  one  of  the  surveyors  took  the 
bearings  of  it.  It  was,  however,  only  one  of  those  illusions  which  tlie 
French  call  mirage^  and  the  Persians  sirrnuh.  I  had  ininirined  this 
phenomenon  to  be  occasioned  by  a  thin  \a|)i  ui  (or  soinetiung  resem- 
bling a  vapour),  which  is  seen  over  the  ground  in  the  hot  weather  in 
India,  but  this  appearance  was  etitirely  different,  and,  on  looking 
along  the  ground,  no  vapour  ^^i^alever  could  be  perceived.  The 
groimd  was  quite  level  and  smooth,  composed  ol'  dried  mud  or  day, 
mixed  with  particles  of  sparkling  sand :  there  were  some  tufls  of 
grass,  and  some  little  bushes  nie»  at  this  qpot,  which  were  re- 
flected as  in  water,  and  this  .appearance  continued  at  the  ends,  when 
viewed  ftom  the  middle.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  aocount.for  tlus  apr 
pearanoe,  but  diaU  merely  remark,  that  it  seems  only  to  be  fivund  in  . 
Ipvel,  smooth,  and  dry  places.  The  ppsitioa  of  the  sun  with  refer^ 
ence  to  the  spetkator,  iqppears.  to  be  immaterial.  I  thou^  at  first 
tibat  great  heat  always  accompanied^  its  appearance;  but  it  was  afteiw 
wards  seen  in  Damaun,  wh«i,  the  westher  was  not.hotter  than  is 
experienced  in  England, 

About  sun-set  w(>  descried  the  high  wall  and  towers  of  Mouj^ir, 
with  u  conspicuous  mosque  which  stands  over  the  gatewav,  and  a 
tomb  with  a  cupola,  ornanu-nted  with  painted  tiles,  resembling,  as  I 
was  told,  tlip  tombs  of  Iniaumzjuldahs  in  Fersia.  We  arrived  a  little 
after  dark,  and  encamped  near  the  fort,  which  is  small  and  weak. 
We  winidned  b«e  two  days,  taking  in  water.  Bahawul  Kliaun's 
Dewaiin,  and  another  of  his  <^cer8,  who  joined  ua  here^  were  Hin- 
doos, the  third  was  a  MonUah  of  Monltaun,  whose  dress,  language, 

10 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  .  17 

iiid  manners,  were  very  like  those  of  Persia.  Even  the  Ifindoot 
HwnetimeH  used  the  Persiwi  idom  in  speaking  Hindodtanee,  and  the' 
Dewaim  looked  and  spoke  more  like  a  Persian  MooUah  than  «  Hin- 
doo. On  the  25th  of  November,  we  nuBched  tweii^-Mrven  miles  to 
two  wells  in  the  desart.  In  the  way  we  saw  a  most  magnificent 
mirage,  whicli  looked  like  an  extensive  lake,  or  a  very  wide  river. 
Tho  water  seemed  clear  and  beautiful,  and  the  figures  of  two  gentle- 
men who  rode  along  it,  were  retlected  as  distinctly  as  in  water. 
A  small  but  neat  tower  was  seen  in  this  inarch,  and  we  were  told  it 
was  a  [dace  of  refuge  for  travellers,  against  the  predatory  hordes  who 
inlest  the  route  ot  caravans.  There  were  some  stunted  bushes  ot  the 
IfinKNMi  Arabica  on  the  iiiiicliv  and  at  the  ground  was  something  that 
niglit  be  odled  ft  tree. 