

It  h  obvious,  that  a  desartt  sodi  as  I  have  described,  could  not  be 
passed  without  preparation  ;  camels  had  accordingly  been  hirctl  at 
Canoimd  to  carry  wat^  and  pioviaiiHia»  which  completed  the  number 


*  Who  hai  aent  oat  the  wild  tm  free?  or  who  has  kxwod  the  bond*  of  the  wild  a^? 
whose  house  I  have  made  the  wilderness,  and  the  barren  land  Ids  dwellings :  he  soora^ 

the  multitude  of  the  city,  neither  rc^j  irtl;  tli  lu-  the  crying  id' tin-  driver.  Tlie  range  of  the 
mountainB  i»  hi*  pMture,  and  he  eearciies  after  every  grocn  thing.  Job  xxxIx.  5,  6,  7> 
ndS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


S  INTRODUCTION. 

of  our  fsttudft  to  six  hundred,  besidet  tmelwe  or  thirteen  elephants* 
Our  water  was  carried  in  leathern  bags,  made  of  the  skins  of  riieep, 
besides  some  mudb.  huger  one^,  made  of  the  hides  of  oxen,  and 

twenty-fonr  large  copper  vessels,  two  of  which  were  a  load  for  a 
camel.  These  were  made  for  the  Hindoo  St-fioys,  and  proved  the 
best  contrivance,  as  the  skins  gave  a  j^jreat  ileal  of  trouble,  atxl  spilled 
much  water  after  all.  In  providing  water  for  the  animals,  we  took  no 
account  of  the  camels,  that  creature  bearing  thirst  for  a  period  which 
is  almost  incredible. 

The  women  who  had  accompanied  the  mission  were  sent  back  I'rom 
Chooroo  with  a  guard,  and  manj  of  our  servants  were  allowed  to  re- 
turn by  the  same  opportunity,  but  this  itid  not  secure- us  the  services 
of  the  remamder ;  finr  such  was  their  dread  of  die  desart,  that  men  of 
all  descriptions  deserted  bj  twenties  and  thirties  till  we  were  so  &r 
advanced  as  to  render  their  return  impossible.  As  there  was  a  war 
in  ffikaneer*  ai^  as  the  road  was  at  all  times  exposed  to  the  depre- 
dations of  the  Bhuttees  and  other  plunderers^  we  eng^iged  one  hun- 
dred horse  and  fifty  foot  in  the  Shekhawnttee^  to  assist  our  regular 
escort  in  protecting  our  long  Ime  of  baggage. 

All  these  arrangements  being  completed,  we  marched  from  Choo- 
roo on  the  30th  of  October.  VVe  marched  in  the  night  as  we  had 
done  since  we  entered  the  Shekhawuttee  ;  we  generally  begun  to  Ifiad 
by  two  or  three  in  the  afternoon,  but  it  wm  long  before  we  w(  i  r  ^ihle 
to  proceed ;  and  the  head  of  our  line  never  reached  the  encamping 
ground  till  tweh'e  or  one.  On  manv  occasions  we  were  much  later; 
aad  once  or  twice  it  was  broael  da>  Ijefore  we  arrived  at  our  stage. 
The  marches  were  seldom  very  long.  Hie  l<»gest  was  twenty-six 
miles,  and  tibe  shortest  fifteen ;  but  dw  firtigne'iHddi  our  people  su£> 
iered  bore  no  proportion  to  the  distance.  Our  line»  'when  in  the 
closest  Older,  was  two  miles  long.  The  path  fay  which  we  travelled 
•wound  mudi  to  avoid  the  sand  hills.  It  was  too  niirow  to  allow  of 
two  cameb  going  abreast;  and,  if  an  animal  stepped  to  one  side,  it 
sunk  in  the  sand  as  in  snow ;  so  that  the  least  obstruction  towards 
the  head  of  the  line  stopt  the  whole,  nor  could  the  head  move  on 