

In  the  mGantime,  I  was  aaseilefl  1)V  both  parties  with  constant  ap^ 
plications,  the  Joudpoor  general  urging  me  to  come  to  his  camp,  and 
the  Aa)a  desiring  me  to  Like  part  with  him.  The  former  couid  only 
throw  out  hinto  m£  danger  fimn  omitting  to  comply  with  his  wishes, 
bat  the'Baja  oonU  at  pleaane  accelerate  or  ictvd  the  proniion  -of 
oar  catde-and  wppUot  t  and  by  placing  a  guard  ovnr  tfae  ifdl  miAA 
had  been  allotted  to  iM>  he  one  day  shawad  to  opt  no  small  friieasineaa 
hoWoomplekelylielMd-iw  in  his  power.  l!heieilri<tiocilio««»erw*i 
leinoTed  on  a  renaonibanee,  and-ini|^  have  been'oooaaioned  b^*  tbe  . 
water  being  leqoired  ebewbere^  iir  while  we  were*  taking  m-tntter 
§m  our  janmey,  we  were  ouaetrts  obliged  to  place  guards  over  die 
vttU,  and  to  vrithhold  water  entinly  ton'  onr  camels  ibr  the tifo  or 
three  la.st  days  of  our  stay. 

The  time  of  our  residence  was  variously  occupied.    At  first  there 

was  some  novelty  in  observing  the  natives,  with  whom  our  cainj)  was 

crowded  like  a        Nothing  oonld  exceed  their  curiosity ;  and  when 

■    0 «  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


IS  INTRODUCnOM. 

one  of  us  appeared  abroad,  he  was  stared  at  like  a  prodig>'.  They 
wore  loose  clothes  of  white  cotton  or  muslin,  like  the  people  of  Hin- 
doostaii ;  but  were  distinguished  from  them  by  their  Kaujpoot  teatures, 
and  by  their  remarkable  turban,  which  rise*  high  over  the  hem!  like 
a  mitre,  and  has  a  cloth  of  some  other  colour  wound  round  the  hui- 
tom.  Some  of  our  party  went  into  the  town,  where,  althou^i  curio- 
aky  drew  a  mob  round  them,  they  were  treated  with  great  cirUity : 
Odien  rode  out  into  the  deaaart,  but  were  soon  wearied  with  tJiedieMj 
and  mnwied  prospect  it  afibfded ;  'for  frithin  ten  yards  of  the  town 
as  waate  aa  the  wUdeat  part  '<o(  AxAim.  On  the  northan  aide  alone 
there  waa  aometlung  like  a  woody  vallefr.  The  moat  curioiia  ai|^  at 
Bikaneer  a  well  of  fine  water,  immediately  undte  the  toii»  which 
ia  the  reaidmce  of  the  Raj^  It  was  three  hundred  feet  deef^  and  M- 
teen  or  twenty  feet  in  dianieter.  Four  buckets,  each  drawn  by  a  pur 
of  Qzeu,  worked  at  it  at  once  f  and*  when  a  bucket  waa  let  down,  ita 
atriking  the  water  made  a  noise  like  a  great  gun. 

Great  part  of  our  time  was  taken  up  with  the  Raja*s  visit,  and  our 
attendance  m  his  palace.  The  Raja  came  to  my  camp  through  a 
street,  fornied  by  his  own  troops  and  joined  by  one  of  our's,  which  ex- 
tended from  the  skirts  ot  the  camp  to  the  tent  where  lie  was  received. 
He  was  carried  on  men's  shoulders  in  a  vehicle,  like  the  bndv  of  an 
old-faaliioned  coach,  lie  was  preceded  by  a  great  uiauy  cliolxiars, 
bearing  slender  silver  maoes,  with  laxge  knoba  at  the  top,  whidi  they 
waved  over  their  heads  in  -the  -airs  and  foDowed  by  a  nomeibaaTfr* 
tanue.  He  aat  down  on  a  mnannd  (a  kind  of  throne  composed-of 
owhiont)*  under  a  canopy,  or  rather  an  awmng  of  red  vdvet,  embxot- 
deved  and  hioed  .with  gdd,  and  auppovted  b)r  fiNtf  aOver  pillais,  all  of 
whidi  be  had  aent  out  iae  the  puirpoae.  We  comiaed  on  varioni 
aiifajecta  for  an  hour.  Among  other  topics,  the  Raja  enquired  about 
the  age  of  the  King,  the  climate  of  England,  and  the  politics  of  the 
nati<»i.  He  ahowed  a  knowledge  of  our  relation  to  Fiance ;  and  one 
of  the  company  asked,  whether  my  mission  was  not  owing  to  our  wnr«i 
with  that  nation.  Presents  were  at  !nst  put  before  him  mid  his  COUT* 
tiers,  according  to  the  Indian  custom,  after  which  he  withdrew. 