

to  ' 


Digitized  by  GoQgle 


INTRODUCTION.  $ 

C3KX»ao^  wfakli  nuy  be  x^Asmui  the  aeocmd  town,  in  lib  dommioiM. 

Ik  is  near  a  in&  aod  a  half  round,  without  counting  its  large  but 
mean  subuibe  $  and*  diough  situated  among  naked  sand  hills,  it  has  a 
very  handsome  appearaaoe.  The  houses  are  all  terraced,  and  boththef 

and  the  walls  of  the  town  are  built  of  a  kind  of  lime-stone,  of  so  pure  a 
white,  that  it  gives  an  air  of  great  neatness  to  every  thing  composed 
of  it.  It  is  however  soft,  and  cnimhies  into  a  white  pov.  <l(<r,  mixed 
here  and  tliere  witli  shells.  It  is  lumid  in  large  beds  in  iri  mv  parts 
of  the  desart.  The  chief  of  Chooroo  is  a  dependent  ratlier  than  a 
subject  of  the  Raja  of  Bilianeer. 

The  Shckhawuttce  couiiti  y  seenui  to  lose  its  title  to  he  included  in 
the  desart,  when  compared  with  the  two  hundred  and  eighty  miles 
between  its  western  frontier  and  Baliawuipoor,  and,  even  of  this,  only 
die  la^  hundred  miles  is  absolutdy  d^tute  of  inhabitantSt  water,  or 
vegetation.  Our  joomqr  Bnmi  the  Shekhawut  frontier,  to  Pooggul,  a 
distance  of  (me  hundred  and  miles,  was  over  hills  ud  TsUefs 
of  loose  and  heavy  sand  Hie  hiUs  were  exactij  Uke  those  idueh 
are  sometimes  fiirmed  bj  the  wind  on  4he  sea  shore,,  hot  frr  exoeed- 
ing^  them  in  thefar  heig^  whidi  was  from  twenty  to  one  hundred  feet, 
niey  ate  said  to  shift  Ihmr  positions,  and  to  alter  their  sbipeB,  aooord* 
ing  as  dMy  are  affected  by  the  wind ;  and  in  Summer,  llie  passage  oH 
many  parts  of  the  desart  is  said  to  be  rendered  dangerous  by  the 
clouds  of  moving  sand ;  but  wh«a  I  saw  the  hills  (in  winter),  they 
seemed  to  have  a  great  d^ree  of  permanence,  for  they  bore  a  sort  of 
grass,  besides  llioke,  and  the  thorin  hushes  of  the  Baubool,  and  the 
Rnir.  or  Jujube,  which  ahoixptlii  r  gavf  tin m  :in  ^pearanr(  tliat  some- 
times amounted  to  verdm  f.  Among  the  most  dismal  hills  of  sand, 
one  occasionally  meets  wilh  a  village,  if  sucli  a  name  can  be  given  to 
a  few  round  huts  of  straw,  with  low  walL  uud  euriical  rool's,  like  little 
stocks  of  com.  These  are  surrounded  by  hedges  ol"  tliorny  brandies 
stuck  in  the  sand,  which,  as  wdl  as  the  houses,  are  so  dry,  that  if 
they  happened  to  catch  Bre,  the  village  would  be  reduced  to  ashes  in 
five  minutes.  These  misendile  abodes  are  sorroanded  by  a  few  fidda, 
whidi  depend  Ibr  water' on  the  rains  and  dews,  and  .whidi  bear  thii^ 


•   Digitized  by  Google 


6 


INTEODUCTION. 


Crops  of  the  pooreat  kind  of  pulae^  and  of  Bajri,  or  Hdon  SpicHtea, 

and  diia  hat,  though  it  flourishes  in  the  most  sterile  countries,  grows 
hoe  with  difficulty,  each  stalk  sevenl  &et  fiom  its  aei^ibour.  The 
wells  are  often  three  hundred  leet  deep,  and  one  wia  Ihxet  hundred 
and  ibrty-five  feet.  With  this  enormous  depth,  aome  wete  only  three 
feet  in  diameter ;  the  water  is  always  brackish,  unwholesome,  and  ao 
scanty,  that  two  bullocks  \vorkIn<r  for  a  night,  easily  emptied  a  well. 
The  water  was  poured  into  reservoirs  lined  with  clay,  which  our  party 
drank  rlr^  in  an  instant  after  its  arrival.  These  wells  nrp  all  lined 
witii  niasonrv.  Tlie  natives  have  a  way  ot"  covering  them  with  boardsi 
heaped  with  suiul.  that  effectually  conceals  them  from  an  enemy.  In 
the  midst  of  so  arid  a  conntrv,  the  water-melon,  the  most  juicy  of 
ftiiits,  is  iit>und  in  profusion.  It  is  really  a  subject  ot"  wonder  to  see 
melofis  three  or  four  £eet  in  circumference,  growing  fit>m  a  stalk  as 
dender  aa  that  of  the  common  melon,  in  the  diy  aand  of  the  deaart  ' 
They  eve  aown,  and  perhaps  require  some  colthratioo*  but  dwjr  are 
acattered  dbKmt  to  aU  apfpeasance  aa  if  they  grew  wild. 