

Hie  oonupon  inhabitants  axe  Janta.  The  upper  daaaea  areRatfaore 
Ratgpools.  The  formor  ave  little*  hla^  and  iU  looking,  and  bear 
strong  aqapearanoea  of  poverty  and  wretchedness  The  latter  are 
atout  and  handsome,  with  hbolced  nbeea,  and  Jewish  featnres.  They 
are  haugh^  in  their  maunen,  very  indolent,  and  almost  oontinuaUy 
dnmk  with  opium. 

The  atock  consists  of  bullocks  and  camels,  which  last  are  kept  in 
nnmerous  herds,  and  are  used  to  carry  loads,  to  ride  on,  and  ev  en  to 
plough.  Of  the  wild  animals,  the  desart  rat  deserves  to  he  men- 
tioned for  its  numbers,  though  tiot  tor  its  size;  the  innumerable  holes 
made  by  these  animals  where  tlie  ground  is  solid  enough  to  admit  of 
it,  are  indeed  a  serious  iticonvenience  to  a  horseman,  whom  they  dis- 
tress even  more  than  ilie  Ju-avy  sunii.  it  is  more  like  a  squirrel  than 
a  rat,  has  a  tuft  at  the  end  of  its  tail,  and  is  often  seen  sitting  upright, 
with  ita  finoifeet  croaaed  like  a  kangaroo.  It  w  not  unlike  the  jerboa, 
bnt  ia  much  leas»  and  naeaall  ita  feet  lit  ia  not  peculiar  to  the  d»> 
aact,  bemg  found  in  moat  aandy  placea  on  the  weat  of  die  Jumna*  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


IKTftODfJCXIOW 


•7 


ndld^ctedin  tbebookof  Job*.  This  nimal'Mi  eametimeg  found 
ilooe,  but  giA«ner  in  heidi.  It  resenlbleB  a  mule  ndwr-tfaan  ah  ai^ 
bill  is  of  the  colour  of  tbe  latter.   It  is  remarkable  ftr  its  ibynBMb 

and  still  more  for  its  speed:  at  a  kind  of  shuffling  Hot  peculiar  to 
itaelf,  it  will  leave  the  fleetest  horses  behind.  Hie  foxes  may  also  be 
mentiooed;  they  are  less  than  our  fox»  but  somewhat  larger  than  the 
common  one  of  India ;  their  backs  are  of  the  same  brownish  colofur 
witli  the  latter,  but  in  one  part  of  the  desart,  their  legs  and  belly  up 
to  a  certain  height,  are  black,  and  in  another,  white.  The  line  be- 
tween those  colours  and  the  brown  is  so  distinctly  marked,  that  the 
one  kind  soems  as  if  it  had  been  wading  up  to  the  belly  iu  mk,  and 
the  other  in  wliite-wash. 

The  rest  oi  the  desart  lor  about  one  hundred  miles  from  Poc^gul 
to  Bahawuipore,  "wsm  a  flat  of  hard  clay  which  sounded  under  our 
bcwses  feet  like  a  board.  In  lome  places  siuall  hills  were  formed  by  saiul 
apparoiiUy  blown  offier  |be  clay ;  on  these  were  aamebinhes  of  Fhoke^ 
sad  seme  little  plants^  wild  ni^  and  of  a  kind  called  Linri»  wbidi 
besrs  a  strong  resemblance  to  eyfiriastingb  aiid  wbidi »  said  to  yieU 
idmhdanoe  of  alkali  when  bailed.  Tbe  da^  was  destHute  of  all 
veg^tatioDf  and  in  tliis  .tractt  «iee|pfting  the  ftrt  andpocd  of  Moajgnr, 
snd  two  wells  about  siztesn  miles  fiom  Bshawnlpooir,  there  is 
neithw  water  nor  inhabitants  to  be  fimnd ;  jet,  as  we  traveled  fiom 
the  first  on  tbe  rOad  adopted  by  all  caravans,  it  may  be  psciiimed 
that  we  saw  the  most  habitable  portion  of  the  whole. 