

.We  at.  )aii(.nwiwMfimnBSIwk9eroa  .«lie  of 
November.  Thf)i«Hiiiti^.>rapMBed.aii  thetvofinj^ 
llwife  tUnmSi^:  ^fmtSbed^  and  opir  .  people  irera  10  6tigind«ft«r  the 
■eqoQ^ innnih,  4t«t  ye.mteoded  to Iwte lialtedft  daj  to  nfietb  tliem» 
when  lihA  Demiim  of.  tli0  Bej»of  Bikaneer  wcgueinted  iiaivith  loiiie 
movement^'Of  a  certain  partizan,  and  some  of  the  predatory  tribet 
of  the  desart,  which  induced  us  to  move  in  the  dUy  Uliteed  of  -the 

•  B%ht,  to  enable  us  the  better  to  protect  our  baggage. 

In  consequence  of  this  clnin«je,  the  generale  beat  at  two  o'clock  in 
the  mormng  (November  iyth),  l)ui  it  was  day-light  before  our  water 

•  and  all  our  other  loads  were  prepared,  and  it  was  dark  before  we 
reache<l  our  iriouiul  iii  Vuo<z^i\j  after  a  march  of  twenty-four  miles. 
The  whole  was  wavy  baiui-inlls,  some  of  them  of  aii  tuilonishing 
height  Ojir  people  were  in  great  distress  for  water  during  the  whole 
daj*  v'At  Pooggulf  bbire^er,  we  fetuid  abimdaiioe  of  good  water  fof 
«lew  .It  wea  nvwailer  pieiefved  hi  anall leienroin^  vaiilted  over 
irith  brick  and  mortar,  Hieie  wu  wdUHvatar  alao^'vdiidi  waa 
hnddah*  Iwt  «ot  .noadaiiBi  Ilka  waUa  wm  not  mart  than  half  aa 
deep  aa  thoae  of  Bikaiieer,.  .  . 

We  haked'on  the  @Otb  of  November,  to  take  in  waleiv  and  I  had 
a  good  opportune  oC«xamining  the  place.  If  I  eoold  present  to  my ' 
readier  the  fore-ground  of  high  sand  hills,  the  village  of  straw  huts^ 
the  clay  walls  of  the  Httle  fort  going  to  ruins,  as  the  ground  which  ' 
supported  them  was  tilown  away  by  tlie  wind,  nnd  the  sea  of  sand 
without  a  sign  of  vegetation,  which  formed  the  rest  of  the  prospect, 
he  probabljr  would  feel  as  I  did,  a  sort  of  wonder  at  the  people  who 


Digitized  by  Google 


HOTRODUCnON. 


15 


eoiild  voiide  m  «o  dismal  a  wUderne^'  and  of  lunar  at  the  life  to 
iriudi  they  seemed  to  be  mndemned 

On  the  21st,  we  marched  at  daj-breftk,  and  for  the  Qitf,  tenor 
twelve  miles  were  in  sand  as  above  described,  after  which  we  reached 
the  !\ard  plain.  No  sooTier  were  we  clear  ot"  the  snnd-hills,  than  our 
camels  movoi  up  into  a  line  of  twelve  or  fifteen  al)reast,  and  the 
whole  of  our  caravan  begun  to  move  with  tolerable  speed.  The  con- 
trast beivviM?n  this  and  the  sand-hills  was  very  exhilarating,  though* 
even  those  had  not  been  unpleasing,  while  they  had  nuvelty  to  re- 
oommend  them%  In  the  course  of  the  day  we  were  overtaken  by  a 
■tdgectof  Btlkumvii  XhaunB,  irfioliad  kMt  liiM  way  fai  traddng  some 
Gamda  cmied  <tf  in .  an  .eiaitriaii  ojT  die  Baigpoots,  had  eihamitcitf 
bis  akin  of  water,' and  had  tasted  no  food  Ibr  two  days.  We  fed 
and  put  Imn  on  a  eameL  Bdbve  dad^  we  met  a  party  of  one  lno^ 
dredand  fifty  toildien  on  donda*  betonging  to  Bahawnl  Khiun,  the 
cbief  of  one  of  the  king  of  Gaiilml's  eaatam  proriiMies. '  Hiere  were 
two  men  on  each  camel*  and  each  had  a  long  and'gUttering  match-' 
lock.  They  advnnoed  and  saluted  in  three  or  fear, very  good  lines, 
llwir  camels  seemed  as  manageable  as  horses,  and  their  ^pearanoe 
was  altogether  novel  and  striking;  their  commander  had  a  long 
beard,  and  was  dressed  in  a  Persian  tunic  of  buff  broad  cloth,  with 
gold  butttnis,  and  a  low  cap  like  the  crown  of  a  hat.  He  was 
mountetl  on  an  excellent,  light,  speetly,  and  easy  camel,  with  a  very 
showy  saddle  and  two  reins,  one  passing  through  a  hole  in  each  nos- 
toil  of  the  camel.  His  language  was  scarcely  intelligible  to  any  of 
our  party.  He  brought  us  one  hundred  caiwels,  carrying  four  hun- 
dred skins  of  water  from  Moujghur.  He  had  fdso  fbnr  brazen  jam  of 
water  from  the  Hyphasis,  whidi  was  intended'  fi»r  oar  own  diinking, 
and  was  aesled  up  widi  the  Khaon's  signet  We  soon  after  en- 
camped in  the  midst  of  the  desait,  sboat  twenty^wz  nules  flom 
PoogguL  We  enjoyed  the  water  of  the  Hyphasis  extremely,  and 
were  all  ddig^itfed  widi  the  new  people  we  wore  gettmg  among,  and 
the  new  scenes  we  were  appioacliing. 