


Digitized  by  Google 


26 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  Indus,  besides  itfl  great  nalne,  and  the  interest  it  excites  as  the 

boundary  of  India,  was  rendered  a  noble  oJbgect  by  its  own  eactont,  and 
by  the  lofty  hills  wliich  Unmied  the  back  ghmnd  of  the  view.  We 
were  however  a  little  disappointed  in  its  appearance,  owing  to  an  is- 
land, whiili  divitled  it,  and  impaivpil  the  effect  of  its  stream.  There 
were  other  islandit  and  sand  banka  in  the  river  •  hut  near  the  side 
where  we  stood,  it  came  up  to  the  edge,  and  seemed  deep  and  rapid. 
Wliile  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  we  met  a  native,  to  whose  conversa- 
tion, and  tliat  of  the  guide,  we  listened  witii  great  interest  and  curi- 
osity. The  plains  on  the  opposite  shore  we  found  were  inlmbited  by 
Beludies,  and  the  mountains  by  the  Sheeraunees,  a  fierce  and  turbu- 
lent tribe.  On  the  o^er  side  of  the  range  were  tribet  and  places,  of 
which  we  had  never  beard  the  nanea^'whUetlMMe  we  hid  learned 
fym  our  maps,  were  equally  new  to  onr  informants.  AH  we  could 
learn  wbb»  that  beyond  the  bills  was  aoinfifhing  wi3d» atrange,  andnew» 
wbidi-  w^  m%bt  hope  one  day  to  eqilore. 

-  EnxiB  Oodoo  da  Kote^-  near  wbidi  we  fiiat  aaw  the  IndMUh  to  tibe 
hny  of  Kflheeree*  where  we  created  it»  ia  about  aevenfy^^lire  milei. 
It  is  a  narrow  tract,  conteated  between  the  inver  and  the  deaait»  If 

in  hunting,  we  were  led  many  miles  to  die  west  of  the  road,  we  got 
into  branches  of  the  river,  and  troublesome  quicksands,  among  thick- 
eta  of  tatnurisk  or  of  reeds;  and,  if  we' went  as  &r  to  the  right,  the 
appearance  of  sand,  and  even  in  some  places  of  sand  . hills,  admonish- 
ed us  of  the  neighbourhood  of  the  desart.  Many  parts,  however,  were 
cultivated,  with  great  pains  and  metho<l,  and  produced  good  crops  of 
wheat,  hnrl{>v.  turni})s,  and  cotton.  Tlio  fi(»lds  were  always  enclosed, 
either  with  huil-^cs  of  dry  tliorn,  witii  lua  dies  of  willow,  or  with  fences, 
made  ol  stiff  mats  (  f  reeds,  supported  by  stakes.  The  houses  were 
often  built  ol  the  same  material.  We  were  struck  with  thv  neuiness 
jof  the  farm-yards,  so  unlike  those  of  Uindostan.  They  were  regularly 
endoaed;  Irad  gates  of  three  or  four  hoxs ;  and  contained  sheds  Ibr  ' 
the  cattle,  dung-hills,  Bus,  It  was  alao  new  to  ut  to  obaenre  band- 
binsofwa,  and  to  aee  oxen  ted  witii  tuisipa.  Some  of  the  hooaes'near 
die  river  attracted  our  attention,  being  raiaed  on  platfonna,  auppairted 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  ^ 

bf  aferoog  posts,  tweke  or  fifteen  &et  liigfa*  We  told  diej  wieie 
iiMMBt  to  take  nibge  in  dnriiig  the  immdiirioo,  iduaa  theaninAi^.fcv 
ten  or  twdveoOM  (twenty  or  twoatj-ibar  inileB)*  hmitrnhnHawtn 
uideff'initer.  -i-. 