

The  city  ot  Moultaun  stands  about  four  rnik  s  fixmi  the  lett  bank 
of  the  Chenaub,  or  Acesines.  It  is  abt)ve  fuur  miles  and  a  half  in 
circumference.  It  is  surrounded  with  a  line  wall,  between  forty  and 
fifty  feet  high,  with  towers  at  regular  distances,  it  has  also  a  citadel 
on  a  rising  ground,  and  several  fine  tombs,  particularly  two,  with  very 
high  cupolas,  ofnemented  with  tlie  painted  and  i^aied  tile  alieadj 
notieedf  which  altogether  give  it  a  magnificent  appearance.  Theae 
tomba  are  seen  itom  a  great  diataaoe  all  lound  the  town.  Mtndtaim 
ia  fiuKMia  toot  ita  ailka»  and  lor  a  aoit  c£  carpet,  mndi  inferior  to  thoae 
cf  Fenna.  Hie  oountiy  immediately  nrand  the  cily  W!aa  vecy  pleaa* 
hm^  firtile»  well  cultivated,  and  well  watered  from  wcilla.  The  pedple 
were  like  those  at  Bahawulpoor,  except  that  there  were  more  men 
who  looked  like  Persians  mixed  with  thcan ;  theae^  however*  were  in- ' 
^viduala,  and  chiefly  horsemen. 

The  mission  remained  for  nineteen  days  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Moultaun,  and  as  most  of  the  party  were  out  almost  every  day  from 
seven  or  oi^ht  to  three  or  ibur,  shooting,  hunting,  or  hawking,  we 
had  froocl  opportunities  of  observing  the  country.  The  land  was  flat, 
ami  tlio  soil  excellent,  but  a  large  proportion  ot  the  villages  were  in 
ruiuti,  and  iliere  were  other  signs  of  a  well  cultivated  country  going 
to  decay  ;  about  one-half  was  still  cultivated,  and  most  abundantly 
watered  by  Persian  wheels :  the  produce  was  wheat,  millet,  oottOD» 
. turnips,  eanrota,  and  indigo.  The ireea  wcie  chiefly  neem*  and  date^ 
with  here  and  there  a  peepnl  f  tie&   The  uncokivated  country  near. 


9 


IK  INTRODUCnOM. 

the  river  was  covc?red  with  thick  copse-wood  of  tamarisk,  mixed  with 
a  tree  like  a  willow,  about  iwcnty  feet  high:  at  a  distance  from  the 
river^  it  was  bare,  except  for  scattered  tufts  of  long  grass,  and  here 
and  there  a  date  tree.  The  country  abounded  in  game  of  all  kinds; 
The  weather  was  delightAil  duniig  chut  staj ;  the  thermometer,  when 
«l  file  lomti  wat  A  SB*  at-miMiae:  thaie  were  slight  fioste  ia.^ 
ni^t,  but  die  days  vrme  nther  warn. 

We  were  detained  tfaoa  long  at  Monltaini  hy  the  ntemity  ci-  piuv 
cfaMUig  and  hiring  eundai  and  of  obtaining  eoneot  intelligence  <^ 
tfie.Sing  of  CSaiibal'a  motiona,  aa  well  aa  of  wndang  for  »  Miehnian- 
danr*  from  His  Majesty,  to  accompany-tlie  miaaion  after  it  enteied 
the  lands  of  the  Afghaim  tribes.  We  were  alao  occupied  in  change 
ing  the  camels  vhidi  we  brought  from  Hindoatan»  for  thoae  o£  the 
country,  in  making  warm  clothing  for  the  Sepoys,  and  in  procuring 
horses  to  mount  many  of  our  attendantSt  ■*^H'"g  to  the  CUItom  of 
the  country  we  were  about  to  enter. 