

Thcf  people  were  remarkably  civil  and  well  behavecL  T^eir  feii^ 
tures  were  "moTO  pleasing  than  those  of  the  people  at  Bahawulpore 
and  ]\Ioiiltnun  ;  and  their  nppcarance  and  complexion  continuwl  to 
improve  as  we  got  nortlnv-nd,  till  we  reached  the  ferry  :  their  dress 
improved  in  the  same  manner.  Even  towards  the  south,  the  men 
were  ali  dre^.8ed  in  gowns  of  white  or  bine  cotton,  and  had  no  part  of 
their  bodies  exposi  il,  which,  with  their  ix  aids,  and  th^  gravitv  and 
decencv  of  their  bf  fi  iviour.  tvkuIc  them  look  like  Moulavees  (or  di>c- 
tors  of  Mahomuiedaa  law),  in  llindoostan.  Even  there,  they  wore 
brownish  grey  great-coats  of  coarse  woollen  cloth ;  and  that  dress  be- 
came iiM»e  copunoD  towards  the  north,  where  all  the  people  wore 
eo1<mred  dodiea, blue,  red,  orchMiE;  die  tnitNUi  aim  la  tharo  ev*- 
changed  fyt  caps  of  gilted  8ilk»  not  ttnUke  Wdah  wigs,  and  OMCaifilji 
not  handaome.  Oar  ludting  placea  were  generally  at  large  villager 
One  waa  tA  hem,  wbich  although  it  girea  its  name  to  the^pio^iiMte^'  b 
apoor  plaee^  eontainingabont  fiye  hnndied  hoiuea. 

At  nUBj  of  liheae  viUagea.jae  tombai  like  tfaoae  aliead^  oa^oed 
Ibe  handaomeat  k  iShtA  ■  of  MahonuiMd  Baojlui,  it  e  irjUt^je  .tbaA 
hem  hia  name.  It  b  an  octagon  buildiug*  tfaaree  or  four  atories  high* 
and  covered  with  painted  tika»  At  .^h  comer  of  the  lower  story  la 
a  onall  loond  tower,  ammoiinted  hy  a  little  minaret,  vbich  has  a  gdod 
cAbct  lliese  tomba  aie  teoepicuoua  objecti,  hsmg.gmaiify  amx 
fiom  stage  to  stage. 

T  ouijht  also  to  notice  a  hijih  bank,  which  ran  to  the  rifjlit  of  our 
road,  from  the  march  north  of  Leia  to  the  ierry  ;  thougii  now  seven 
miles  from  the  Indus,  it  is  said  to  have  been  the  eastern  bank  of  that 
river  at  no  very  remote  periotl,  and  its  appearance  is  favomable  to  the 
storv.  At  T^eia,  I  was  joined  by  two  Lk>oraunee  horsemen,  the  first 
I  had  an  opportunity  of  observ  ing.  They  were  sent  by  the  governor 
of  the  province  to  accompany  me  to  lua  imuts.  They  botii  wore  laxge 

E  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sg  INTRODUCTION. 

fed  mantles,  lined  or  edged  with  fiir.  One  was  fair,  with  a  high  nose, 
and  a  pleasing  countenance :  he  wore  a  silken  tui  ban  owr  a  small 
cap.  The  other  was  dark,  with  coarse  blunt  fratiurs,  and  a  hardy 
look:  he  wore  a  sheep-skin  raj>,  like  a  Persian,  but  lower,  lioth  were 
civil  and  attentive.  Al  Lt  aki),  I  was  visited  by  a  Persian  attend- 
ant ol*  the  King's,  and  hy  a  voung  Hindoo,  a  bioLlier  of  Muddud 
Khaun's  De^  aun,  who,  though  dressed  like  a  Dooraunee,  still  bore 
strong  traces  of  his  origin.  I  was  a  good  deal  surprised  at  the  free- 
dom with  whicii  all  my  viaitors  spoke  of  the  Govenunent;  and  of  the 
civil  1VBR.  Boides  tbove  peiwns  whom  we  met  in  towns,  and  the 
labouring  people,  the  genenl  desiie  to  aee  us  gave  us  oppoi^- 
'tiuitiea  of  obaemng  afanoat  all  descriptions  of  men.  Sbmetimes  a 
niunber  of  honiiBmen  would  join  us  on  ihe  line  of  march,  twoor  thtee 
sallying'  fimm  ereiy  Till^e  we  passed:  they  were  often  on  maref, 
with  die  fbak  nmning  after  them*  and  armed  with,  long  spears.  Hmj 
were  always  very  dvIL  The  notions  entertwned  of  us  by  the  peo- 
ple were  not  a  little  extraordinary.  Th^  had  often  no  conception  of 
our  nf^on  or  religion.  We  have  heea  taken  for  Syuds,  Moguls, 
A%haun8,  and  even  for  Hindoos. 