

The  principal  events  of  our  stay  were  our  meetings  with  the  governor 
of  the  province.  Tlie  natnc  of  tliis  personage  was  SeralVaua  Khaun, 
and  as  his  government  wa^  in  India,  he  ha<i  l  lie  title  of  Nabob.  He  was 
©t  an  Ai^imun  family,  of  the  royal  tribe  of  Suddozye,  but  his  ances- 
tors had  so  long  been  settled  in  Moultaun,  that  he  had  lost  most  of 
the  chamcteriatica  of  hia  nation.  He  aeema  to  have  been  aeised  with 
•  fMHiie  at  aoon  aff  faeheeid  of 'the  approodi  of  the  miaaioD,  and  the 
whole  of  hia  bduvnonr  to  the  end,  was  nuuhed  with  BDapidon  and 
diatnJat  He  ahut  the  gpitea  oif  the  dly  ^^ainat  na,  and  allowed  none 
of  dormen  oribUowecatoentetyWithooteBqweaapeniiiadon*  He  alao 
doubled  his  guards,  and  we  hefffd  fiom  good  authority,  of  debatea  in  - 
hia  council,  whether  it  wet  moat  probable  that  we  ahould  endesvour 
to  surprize  the  city,  or  dut  we  ahoiild  procure  eoesaioii  of  it  to  us 
from  the  King.  He,  however,  agreed  to  visit  me  on  the  15th  of  De- 
oember,  and  a  veiy  laige  tent  waa  pitched  Ibr  hia  reception.  One  end 


*  An  officer  appointed  to  iMciff*  Hid  do  tins  banonn  to  Midi  goeito  as  ibm  IDagigiAm 
19  dww^attCQtioii  to. 


Digitized  by  Google 


oi  it  .fpas  open*  and  from  the  entrance  two  canvass  skrecns  ran  out* 
9Q,«k'to  baa.  «i  dUey  abonfc  tirqity  yards  long,  which  was  lined  with 
wnaato-  in  Ihroy,  otibcr  aerviBts  extending  beyond  iL  The  troops- 
veie  alao  dnam  iq>  m  ltne  'aloqg  the  road  to  the  tent 

Mn  Stmdbjay  mwt  to  meet  tl»  governor,  and  fiiimd  him  mounted  • 
en' ft  uliite  hone»M*idi  gold  tiappingay  attended  hy^hia  offioeia  end 
iinnmiatea^  aniromided  with  laige  rtandarda>  and  haam 
dred  horse,  and  three  tfaooaand  foot  The  dust,  crowd,  and  coninsUm 
of  the  meetings  efe  repreaented  by  Mr.  Strache^,  aa  be^nrnd  ail  d»^ 
scription.  The  governor  weloomed  Mr.  Sirachey  according  to  the 
Persian  custom,  after  which  they  joined,  and  proceeded  to  the  tent,; 
the  pressure  and  disorder  increasing  as  they  went.  In  some  places 
men  were  fi«;hung,  and  in  others  people  were  ridden  down ;  Mr." 
Strachey's  own  horse  was  nearly  lx>rne  to  the  ground,  and  onlv  re- 
covered hi  tnseli  by  a  violent  exertion*  When  they  approat  Ik  d  the 
tent,  they  missed  the  road,  came  in  front  of  the  line  of  troops,  and 
ruslied  on  tlie  ~  cavalry  with  sucli  impetuosity,  that  there  was  barely 
timeto  whed  badiCy  eo  tti  to  alloar  a  paasi^  In  thia  manner  the 
tide  poured  on  tovards  the  tent:  the  line  'of  aervants  wereewept 
awftff  the  akieena  were  torn  ddwn»  andtranq^led  undertfeot,  and  even 
the  tent  ropea  were  aaaailed  with  ancfa  fiuy,  diet  the  whole  tent  wai 
nearly  struck  over  our  heads.  The  inside  was  crowded  and  darkened 
in  an  inatanfe.  Th6  governor  and  about  tea  of  hia  oompaniona  aati 
the  rest  aeemed  to  be  armed  attendants ;  and,  indeed,  the  governor 
seemed  to  have  ettouied  to  nothing  but  the  numi )or  of  his  guacdii 
He  sat  but  for  a  very  short  time,  during  the  whole  of  which  he  was 
telling  his  beads  with  the  utmost  fervency,  and  addressing  me  with 
*'  You  are  welcome,  you  are  very  welcome,"  as  fast  a^  ho  could  re- 
peat tlie  words.  At  last,  he  said  he  was  nfraid  ihe  crowd  must  annoy 
me,  and  withdrew.  Suralrauz  Khaun  was  a  good  looiiiri;^:  voung  man, 
he  wore  tlie  Persian  dress,  with  a  cap  and  a  shawl  turban  uver  it,  and 
spoke  very  good  Persian.  His  attendants  were  large,  lair,  and  hand- 
some A%hauns,  most  of  them  very  well  dressed,  but  in  no  aevt  of 
eider  or  diactjpline.   On  the  same  evening  I  letomed  hia  viait»  and 