


Digitizer  by  LiOO^lC 


INTBODUCriOM. 


found  him  littiBg  under  an  ftwning,  on  a  temioQ>  in  one  of  hii  gu^ 
deoB, '  He-had  s  huge  company  sitting  with  him  in  good  Ofder.  ttuj 
diflered  greatly  in  appearanoe  fiom  Ibe  natives  of  India,  but  wero 
neither  ao  handaomdy  dresied^  nor  ao  deoonNia  aa  Feraiana.  The 
Kabob  being  now  fiee  fiom  alaim,  waa  dvi]*  and  agreeable  enoii|^ 

While  at  MoiiItaun«  and  in  the  neigfabonihood,'  I  leceiTed  visita 
from  Molla  Jaffer  Seestaunee,  from  the  kin^a  deputy  Hircana  Baa- 
shee,  or  Newswritert  and  from  various  other  persons.  My  intercourse  . 
with  one  person  deserves  to  be  mentioned,  as  characteristic  of  the 
government  of  Moultaun.  Secunder  Khaun,  the  Nabob's  uncle,  be- 
in^  once  hunting  near  my  camp,  sent  to  me,  to  say  that  he  had  en- 
closed tliree  wild  boars  within  his  nets,  and  to  beg  I  would  come  and 
join  in  the  chace  of  them.  I  thought  it  prudent  to  excuse  myself, 
but  I  sent  a  native  gentleman  with  a  civil  message,  some  fine  gun- 
powder, and  a  spy-glass.  Secunder  Khaun  returned  me  an  indifferent 
horsct  and  sent  a  boar  to  be  hunted  at  leisure.  Thus  far  all  was  well* 
but  two  days  afterwards,  he  Beat  back  my  present,  and  desired  to  have 
his  horse  iMdc,  aa  he  waa  in  danger  of  being  oonfiiied>  or  pot  to  death 
.  frr.  intriguing  with  the  English. 

On  the  16th  of  December,  we  moved  to  the  banlDi  of  the  Acesines^ 
.  hcae  called  the  ChenanK  It  has  received  the  waters  of  the  Hjda^ea 
and  Hydraotesi  befisre  it  readiea  ibis  plaoei 

We  pasaed  the  rirer  on  the  2l8t  of  December  (our  baggage  having 
taken  some  days  in  crossing  before  us),  and  we  pitched  about  three 
miles  from  the  right  bank  of  the  river.  From  this  ground  we  first 
discerned  the  mountiuns  of  Afghaunistaun.  They  appeared  at  a  great 
distance  to  the  west,  and  must  have  been  the  part  of  the  range  of  Soli- 
maun,  which  is  to  the  north-west  of  Dera  Ghauzi  Khaun,  and,  con- 
set|uciill\.  seventy  or  ei^^lirv  iniieH  firom  Mooltaun.  At  length  our 
prepHr;itioiis  were  completed,  and,  after  many  pro>iects  for  overcoming 
tlie  diiiicuiti^  of  a  journey  thiougli  tlie  snow  to  Candahar,  we  had 
the  satisfaction  ot  learning  that  the  King  h;ul  set  out  on  the  road  to 
CSaubui.  We,  therefore,  renewed  our  marcli  on  tlie  29tli  ot  Decem- 
her«  and  bqgan  to  cross  the  little  desart,  whidi  extends  from  north  to 

^  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


INTRODUCTION.  ^ 

'WOttOsk  npwirdi  of  two  Imndred  ud  fi%  buImi  bat  the  braadHh  of 
wliidi'wai  BO  little  mdiispert,  Uut  we  croMed  it  in  two  nuocfaee. 
It  fills  up  tluit  past  of  the  oouatiy  betvreeo  the.Hydaipeft  and  In- 
dna,  whidi  is  not  inundated  by  those  rivers,  and  ezfeoids  from  H^ie 
ktitude  of  Oooh,  where  the  inundated  knds  of  both,  join,  to  the  Salt 
raige.  It  seems  to  be  a  part  of  the  great  deaart  cot  off  fimn  the 
main  body  by  the  ziveis  and  their  rich  banks.  We  entered  it  a  fear 
miles  west  of  our  encampment  near  the  Acesines.  Tlie  line  between 
Ae  cultivated  country  and  the  desart,  wa.s  marked  and  decided,  and 
we  fownd  ourselves  at  once  among  sand  hills,  stunted  bushes,  burs, 
and  pfiokc :  vet  those  were  not  so  c(»niinon  as  to  preclude  the  necos^ 
«ity  of  airrying  torage  tor  our  cattle,  fhe  sand-hills  were  lower  than 
those  of  the  great  desart,  and  here  they  were  grey,  while  those  had 
been  reddish  yellow.  Tlie  water  was  bradcish.  At  the  end  of  our 
second  march,  we  were  within  the  limits  of  the  irumdation  of  the 
Indus ;  and  on  the  morning  of  the  .31st  of  December,  Mr.  Strachey, 
Lieuteuaiit  Alacartney,  and  I,  iicl  out  for  the  banks  of  Uiat  celebrated 
nf&[.  We  had  a  guide  on  a  camel,  some  troopers,  and  three  or  four 
servants  on  camels  and  horses.  .  We  passed  over  a  rich  aoQ,  covered 
with  long  grass,  in  ivhich  were  nuxed  many  trees  of  the  kind  like 
willow,  and.  hero  and  there  patches  of  odtivatioD*  The  day  was 
doudy,  with'Oocaaiaaal  drops  of  rain,  and  a  veiy  cold  wind  Uew  till 
after  noon.  The  hills  were  dirtnictly  in  sig^  during  the  whole  of 
eur  ride^  Their  wppetxmce  was  beautifidj  we  dearly  jsaw  dme 
nBgea,  the  last  of  wlddi  was  vmy  hi^  and  we  often  doubted 
rVdiether  we  were  deceived  by  the  clouds,  or  really  saw  atiU  hi^er  ranges 
beyond.  While  we  were  looldng  at  the  hills,  a  mass  of  heavy  clouds 
-rolled  down  those  most  to  the  north,  so  as  entirely  to  conceal  them 
fiom  our  sight,  and  a  line  of  clouds  rested  on  the  middle  of  those  to 
the  west,  leaving  the  summits  and  the  bases  clear.  On  the  next  dav, 
these  clouds  had  passeil  away,  and  had  left  the  hills  covered  with 
snow.  We  were  anxious  and  Iiappy  as  we  approached  the  river,  aiid 
were  not  a  little  gratihed  whraatlast  we  fi>und  ourselves  upon  its 