


20  WTRODUCTION. 

liberal  and  kind  to  ut  during  our  stay,  .without  over  cxnlkj  or  oer^ 
mony ;  and»  he  liad  an  appearance  of  sincerity  in  every  thing  be  taid, 

which  made  lus  diew  of  friendship  the  more  agreeable. 

We  lode  out  during  our  luJt  at  Bahawulpoor,  and  saw  the 
town  and  its  environs.  The  town  is  about  four  miles  in  circumfe- 
rence ;  but  there  are  pirdens  of  mangoc  trees  within  the  walk.  The 
houses  are  of  unburiit  bricks,  witli  terraces  of  mud  :  Tlie  city  wall  is 
of  mud,  and  very  thin.  Bahawulpoor  is  remarkable  for  the  manufac- 
ture of  lougees,  or  silken  girdles,  and  imhans.  The  inhabitants  of 
tliis,  *antl  all  the-  lu  iglibouring  countries  on  the  west  and  north,  are 
principally  Juts  and  Beloches,  who  profess  the  Maliommedaa  reiigion. 
There  are  more  Hindoos  at  Bahavrulpoor  than  any  of  the  other  pro- 
vinoea  the  miaiion  peaaed  through :  A^anna  are  fiweigners  thera 
Hie  oountiy,  ibr  four  or  Bve  milea  on  each  aide  of  th6  Hyphasis,  ia 
Jbrmed  of  Ihe  alime^  depoaited  b^  the  river.  It  ia  very  rich*  and  o£> 
len  ao  aoft  that  it  «annot  be  ridden  on.  Some  parte  are  highly  cuUi- 
vaM»  and  othera  are  covered  with  ooppioe  of  low  tamariak^  in  which 
pre  many  wild  boars,  and  hog  deer;  wild  geese,  partridtges*  florilEcna, ' 
and  other  game  are  alao  abundant  on  the  banks  of  the  river. 

The  river  winds  much  at  this  pUce,  and  is  very  muddy,  but  the 
water,  when  cleared,  is  excellent  It  is  here  called  the  Gfaarra,  and 
ia  formed  by  the  joint  atreama  o£  the  Hyphasiai  or  -Begah|  and  Hyni^ 
dnis,  or  Sutletlge. 

The  mission  marcheil  on  the  5th  of  Der(  nil>er  from  the  right  bank 
of  the  Hyphasis,  and  re  u  hed  Moultaun  on  the  11th,  a  distance  of 
near  seventy  miles.  Alter  the  first  five  or  six  miles,  the  country  was 
in  general  dry,  sandy,  and  destitute  of  grass,  l)ul  scattered  with 
bushes.  Immediately  roiuid  tiie  villages,  which  were  pretty  aumep* 
ous,  were  fields  <^  wheat,  cottcua,  and  turnips,  in  a  thriving  condition* 
Them  were  ao  great  a  number  of  laige.  and*deq»  water-ooniaea 
throughout  the  whole  joumey*  that  judging  ficoin  them  aloo^  one. 
would  have  suppoaed  the  ooontiy  to.be  highly  coHivited. 

Aefoff^  we  reached  Koultaun,  we  f«m  .overtaken  by  twenty^* 
cimela^  aent  op  by  Baiunrul  JKhaun.  .Ihet  cfai^  ia  fionoua  for  hia: 


Digitized  by  Google 


nmoDucTioM.  .21 

.  ♦ 

enndi)  ioine  of  which  he  kaept  tat  his  own  nie,  waA  dwaji  himti 
upon  them.  TTiey  are  very  generally  jised'  in  dl  the  deaart  ooantiyv 
and  are  admirably  calcnkitod  for  long  jonmejs.  An  elderly  nunirter 
of  the  Raja  of  BUunoieen,  whom  I  met  at  Sii^puu,  had  just  oome.dn 
a  camel  from  Bikaneer  (a  distance  of  one  hundred  and  aeveaty-'&ve 
miles)  in  three  days.  Several  of  our  party  liked  them  so  weU,  as  to 
continue  to  ride  them  for  pleasure,  after  we  had  croaaed  the  Indilt. 
Their  walk  and  trot  are  far  from  being  very  uneasy. 