

They  believed  we  carried  great  guns,  packed  vp  in  trunks ;  and  that 
we  had  certain  small  boxes,  so  contrived  as  to  explode,  and  kill  half 
a  dozen  men  each,  without  hurting  us.  Some  thought  we  could  raise 
the  dead ;  and  there  was  a  story  current,  that  we  had  made  and  ani- 
•  rnatod  a  wooden  ram,  at  Mooltaun  ;  that  we  had  sold  him  as  a  ram, 
and  that  it  was  not  till  the  purchaser  began  to  eat  him,  that  the  mate- 
rial of  which  he  was  nia<lo,  was  discovered. 

At  the  ferry  on  die  Indus,  we  met  some  siik-merchants,  who  had 
gone  as  far  as  Demaun  to  purchase  madder.  T^iey  described  the 
Afghaun  tribes  us  generally  kind  to  travellers,  and  hoiiei>t  in  their 
dealings ;  but  one  tribe  (tlie  V^izeerees),  tliey  said  were  8avages,  and 
eat  human  flesh.  .    .  .  .. 

We  crossed  the  Indus  at  the  Kaheiee  ferry,  on  the  7ih  of  January. 
The  main  stream  was  there  1010  yardr  broad,  though  its  breadth 
WW  'dirnhDshed  by  sevend  parsUel  branches,  one'of  which  was  tvn 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


hnndred  and  fifly  yards  broad.  We  passed  in  good  fl«t4lOttOMWwl 
^iO«tfl»  made  of  fir,  and  capable  of  csnybig  &mn  thirty  to  forty  tons. 
Our  camels  had  their  feet  tiedt  and  were  thrown  into  the  boats  like 
any  other  baggage ;  our  horses  also  crossed  in  boats.  Tlie  elephants 
alone  swam,  to  the  f?rpat  astonishment  of  the  people  of  the  country, 
who,  probably,  had  never  seen  an  animal  of  the  kind  before.  1  t  orn 
tlie  ferry  to  Dcra  Ismael  Khaun  waa  tliirty-five  miles.  The  country 
was  covered  with  thickets  of  long  grass  and  thorny  shrubs,  full  o( 
game  of  all  kinds,  from  partridges  to  wild  boars,  and  leopards. 

The  cultivation  was  flourishing,  but  was  not  extensive,  though  wa- 
ter is  dljundant ;  and  the  soil  to  appearance,  enjoys  all  that  richness 
and  fecundity,  (or  «lu^  inundated  countries  are  so  &mous. 
.  We  lencfaed  Den  Isnuel  Khaim  on.t]ie  11th  of  January;  Befaie 
we  entered  Dei^  we  were  met  by  Tutteh  Khaun,  a  Belocbe,  who  go- 
▼ems  ihia.provmoe  as  deputy  for  Mahonuned  Khaun»  to  iriiam  it>  as 
weU  as  Lda,  is  asngned  by  the  Kug.  He  was  splendidly  atdiedt  and 
accompanied  by  a  few  infimtijt  and  a  troop  of  ill  drened  and  01 
nioonted  horsey  armed  with  long  spean.   He  and  hiaeompanioiis  ex- 
patiated on  the  greatness  of  their  master;  on  the  strength  of  bis  twen-- 
ty  feitSy  the  number  of  his  cannon,  the  forty  blacksmiths  who  were 
employed  night  and  day  to  make  shot  for  them,  and  other  topics  of 
the  same  kind.    In  the  coui^se  of  the  day,  Tutteh  Khaun  sent  na  m 
present,  including  six  bottles  of  Caubul  wine,  and  two  of  the  essence 
of  a  plant,  much  vaunted  in  the  £ast»  and  called  the  bedee  mishk  or  - 
musk  wilUtw. 