


Digitized  by  Google 


$B  INTRODUCTION. 

While  in  the  Esaukhtul  oo«iiitry»  we  were  met  by  Moossa  Khaun 
Akkkasy^  the  Doominee  nobleman  who  wee  tent  by  the  King 
to  oondnct  UB  to  court.  He  was  a  tall  man,  rather  corpulent,  but  of 
a  good  figure.  He  had  a  fine  beard,  and  was  handaomely  drcaecd  in  ' 
doth  of  gold,  with  fine  shawls ;  his  sword,  and  other  accoutrements, 
were  mounted  in  cro\d  ;  his  horses  were  good,  his  trappings  hand- 
some, and  lie  hnd  ;jf)mi  pistols  in  his  holsterv,  with  lions'  heads  in 
gold  upon  the  bulls.  Though  he  scarroh-  looktMl  forty,  he  was  near 
sixty,  had  been  engaged  in  civil  anti  iurciMn  wars,  and  had  been 
raised  by  his  party,  dunn<^  a  rebellion,  to  ilc  liigh  rank  of  Sirdar. 
He  had  travelled  in  his  own  country,  and  hatl  lonfi  heen  stationed  in 
Cashmeer,  in  praise  ol"  which  country,  or  rather  of  its  liceiiUous  plea- 
sures, he  used  oflen  to  enlarge.  Altogether  I  found  him  very  lively 
and  entertaining,  and  perfectly  gentlemanlike  in  his  manners.  He 
w«8  accompanied  by  a  party  of  four  or  five  hundred  horse,  who  be> 
longed-  to  a  Caltnuk  Duatdh,  or  regiment,  though  I  saw  no  OBlmnka 
amon^  them.  He  was  also  aooompanied  by  the  diieft  of  the 
A%baun  tribes  of  Bungush  and  Khiittukt  and  by  the  diief  of  the 
town  of  Kam^bangh,  pUiin  men  like  Anba»  -who  aooompanied  ua  as 
6r  aa  the  plain  of  Feriunrer,  each  bringing  a  ftroog  body  of  mUitia 
as  we  entered  hia  landa. 

'  Galla^baiigb»  where  we  left  the  plain,  well  deaerves  a  minute  de- 
•criptibn*  The  Indua  is  here  compressed  by  mountains  into  a  deep 
diannel,  only  three  hundred  and  fifty  yards  broad.   The  moontaina 

on  each  side  have  an  abrupt  descent  into  the  river,  and  a  road  is  cut 
along  their  base,  for  upwards  of  two  miles.  It  had  been  widened  for 
us,  but  wa,<^  st?]!  »o  narrow,  and  the  rock  over  it  so  steep,  that  no 

camel  with  a  bulky  load  could  pass:  to  obviate  this  inconvenience, 

twenty-eight  boats  had  horn  ])repared,  to  convey  our  largest  packages 
up  the  river.  The  first  part  of  this  pass  is  actually  overhung  by  the 
town  of  Calla^bflUgh,  which  is  built  in  a  singular  manner  upon  the 
face  of  the  hill,  every  street  rising  above  its  ni  i;^'^liliour5  and,  1 
imagine,  onlv  accessible  by  means  of  the  flat  roofs  of  ihe  houses  be- 
low it.    As  we  pa^ed  beneath,  we  perceived  windows  and  balconies 


Digitizer  by  LiOOgle 


INTRODUCTION. 


n 


«t  ft  gtta^  hdi^t,  crowded  with  women  and  children.  Tbe  road  be- 
jond  WW  cat  oot  of  sckUd-Mk,  at  the  foot  of  cliffs  of  that  mineral,  in 
aame  places  mofe  dian  one  hundied  feet  high  above  the  river.  Hie 
nlt'ia  hard,  clear,  and  almost  pine.    It  would  be  like  chrystal,  were 