

The  lain  continued  aU  nij^  and  neKt  moEBiDgwefqiiBd  it  almost 
impossible  to  move.  It  waa  neoesaaiy»  however,  to  try,  aa  onr  prarnh 
aions  irefe  likely  to  nm  ahoit;  and»aooordinj^,  we  be^  our  maidif 
amidst  a  diMnil  aeene  of  mountains,  sommiided  with  doada» 
flhioded  vaUeys,  and  btating  rain.  Our  road  lay  down  a  steep  ytmh 
and  then  down  the  channel' of  a  salt  torcent*  which  was  running  with 
gntm  Som  Though  we  began  to  load  the  cattle  at  noon,  it  was  kte 
at  m^jtk  befere  any  of  us  reached  a  reces8  between  the  torrent  and  the 
IWdkB,  <Nlly  a  mile  and  a  half  fi-om  the  place  we  had  left;  Many  of 
Cttr  people  wandered  about  all  night  in  the  rain  and  cold ;  and  all 
were  not  arrived  by  two  on  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day.  Some  of 
our  camels  died  during  the  march,  and  the  Bauriks  took  advantafre  of 
the  fonfiision  and  disorder,  to  plunder  some  of  our  baggage.  The 
rain  fell  heavily  during  the  whole  of  the  next  day. 

On  the  momint?  of  the  19th,  it  was  fair  when  the  dav  firoke,  and 
at  ;^f  ven  we  proceetied  on  onr  journey.  The  torrent  had  run  off,  and 
its  bed  was  now  an  excellent  road.  The  air  was  clear,  and  the  moun- 
tain scenery  picturesque  and  agreeable.    Ln  the  course  oi'  the  niorch 


Digitized  by  Google 


r 


"I 


IMTBODUGTXON.  ^ 

wt  had  nMMe  tliMi  onoe  lo  CMMt  a  rapid  toif«iit».ii  deep  ia  could  wij| 
befittded.  OtoitobMik«>  we  met  Moow  Shmt  who  wefimiidl^ 
hhbwIk^  fbrwwd  on  the  lGth«  and  waa  soon 

er  lebim :  hia  proviaiiNu  hed  ran  out ;  and  thefe  bad  been  a  battle 
in  faia  oanip»  and  aevend  penona  wounded.   Some  of  his  men  had 

been  carried  down  in  endeavouring  to  swim  the  torrent ;  but  thagt 
had  legpuned  the  shore,  and  no  lives  were  loiL  We  afterwards  went 
en  through  the  hills,  and  croaaed  two  cotuls  or  passes ;  froBL  the  laal 
end  steepest  of  which,  we  descended  into  Malgeen.  This  wa«.a.gte8A 
and  pleasant  valley,  about  twelve  miles  long,  and  five  broad,  surround- 
ed by  mountains,  of  which  the  most  remote  (those  on  the  north  and 
west)  were  covered  witii  snow.  The  troops,  and  part  of  the  baggage 
had  arrived  by  sunset,  when  a  report  was  brought  that  our  rear  was 
attacked.  Our  own  cavalry,  and  some  of  the  Calmuks,  were  sent 
back,  antl  arrived  in  time  to  prevent  aii^  serious  loss.  ll  was  how- 
ever too  iate  ibr  the  rest  of  the  ba^age  to  cross  the  cotul ;  and  a 
eompany  of  Sepoys  T,vas  sent  over  to  protect  them.  Next  morning 
we  were  all  assembled,  and  ejiabled  to  enjoy  a  day's  rest,  which  was 
much  required  aller  the  distresses  of  the  journey.  Our  Sepoys  and 
ibllowers  had  not  had  a  regular  meal  for  three  days,  during  which 
time  they  were  ea^KMed  to  aU  tbeindemencj  of  die  weedier.  Itmm 
aurprising  how  wdl  thejr  boore  die  ooldt  idiich  (although  there  waa  no 
finat)  waa  ao  aevwe,  diat  aome  even  of  the  European  part  of  die  mis^ 
aion  wan  glad  to  wear  a  Ibr  peiiaae  and  omaUa  and  daj,  d»- 
ling  the  nuL 