

We  luitl  now  time  to  examine  our  lodging,  which  liad  been  built 
by  the  King's.  Aubtiaur  liaiishee  (chief  butler),  not  very  long  belbie  he 
went  into  rebellion.  It  was  large,  and  though  quite  unfinished,  it 
was  a  muich  loote  (SawmaaA  house  than  could  have  been  expected, 
•i  a  tiMiii  wlilflb  ia  not  the  fiaied  reridence  of  the  couft»  and  whae 
many-  of  the  prindpel  nobility  were  finroedt  during  their  stay,  to  put 

'  up  with  very  mean  dwellings.  Die  whole  of  our  premiaea  conaiated 
of'a  flqoai%  endoaed  by  a  rampart  of  earth,  m  unbumed  bridk,  within 
which  waa  another  aquaie^  endoaed  by  high  waUa.  The  space  be- 
tween the  waUa'andthe  iampart  waa idivided  into  manyoourta,  in 
one  of  whiah  waa  e  little  gaRlen»  where  there  were  amall  treea*  -  foae 
bushes,  stock  gilliflowers,  and  other  flowers.  Ihe  inner  square-  waa 
divided  hy  a  high  wall  into  two  courts,  and  at  one  end  of  each  was  e 
boose,  containing  two  large  lu^jis  c^the  whole  he^it  of  the  buUding: 

'  on  each  side  of  the  halls  were  many  smaller  rooms  in  two  stories, 
some  of  which  looked  into  the  halls.  One  of  the  courts  contained  no 
other  building  ;  but  the  three  remaining  sides  of  the  other  court  were 
occupied  by  apartments.  All  the  windows  in  this  last  court  were 
furnished  with  sashes  of  open  wootl  work,  which,  while  they  admitted 
the  air  and  light,  prevented  the  room  from  being  seen  into  from 
without  ;  and  there  were  fire-pliicen  in  several  of  the  rooms  in  both 
courts.  VV'hat  struck  us  most,  was  the  cellars  mtended  for  a  retreat 
from  the  heats  of  summer.  There  was  one  under  each  house:  one 
was  only  a  spacious  and  haadsoiiio  hall  i>l  burnetl  brick  and  mortar  j 
but  tiie  other  was  exactly  of  the  same  plan  aud  dimensions  as  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


46 


INTRODircriON. 


home  tiadfr  wilh  the  same  halls  and  the  same  tputttenls  in  two 
il6rie8>  as  above  ground.  The  whole  of  lihis  subtetfineoiii  imuirioii 
was  lighted  by  broad  but  low  window*  near  the  top.  Hie  one  I  ain 
fl|»eaking  of,  was  unfinished;  but  when  complete,  the  cellars  are 
painted  and  fumiKhed  in  the  same  manner  as  the  rooms  above,  and 
have  generally  a  fountain  in  the  middle  of  the  hall.  These  apart- 
ments are  called  Zeerzemeenes  and  Tehkhaunelis.  Even  the  poor  at 
Peshawer  have  them  under  their  houses,  but  they  are  not  refjuired  in 
the  temperate  climates  further  west.  I  al\yays  sat  in  mine  in  the  hot 
weather,  and  found  it  equally  agreeable  and  whol^ome. 

'  On  the  day  of  our  arrival,  our  dinner  was  coniposed  of  the  dishes 
sent  us  by  the  King,  which  we  found  excellent.  Afterwards  we  had 
always  our  English  meals ;  but  the  King  coutinue<l  to  send  breakiast, 
liuicheon,  and  dinner  for  ourselves,  with  provisions  f(«  two  tbousftiid 
perijon.s  (a  numba'  eatoeeding  that  of  the  anbassy),  and  two  hniidrad 
liorsea»'  beaMles  el^hanta,  ftc  nor  waa  it4ril]iout  great- difficuitf  th«t 
I'pe^Milecl^ii  His  Majesty,  ait  the  6»d  of  a  moiith»  to  dupenae  with 
Uib  eaqpcnaive  proof  of  his  hospitality. 