

Ln  the  evening,  I  went  to  a  tent'pitdied  about  one  bnndred  yards 
from  mj  camp,  to  receive  a  dress  of  honour  sent  me  fiom  ibe  King. 
I  found  die  tent  filled  with  the  principal  people  fiom  the  King,  stand* 
ing  with  tbe  same  reqpect  as  if  Hu  M^esty  had  been  present  I  was 
instruoted  to  bow  to  the  dress^  and  was  afterwards  invested  widi  a 
laige  flowing  lobe  of  goild  dotib,  lined  widi  sstin*  wbidi  I  was  toM 
die  King  bimself  bad  worn :  a  sbawl  was  wound  round  my  hatp  and 
tbe  King's  letter  was  stuck  in  it;  another  shawl  was  ghren  to  me  for  a 
girdle,  and  all  present  said  a  short  prayer.  Tlie  dreis  was  ridbt  and 
the  shawls  costly. 

Next  day»  after  passing  through  a  country  like  that  of  the  last  day, 
we  came  to  sand,  and  soon  after  reached  the  village  of  Paharpoor, 
which  is  scarcely  less  than  Dera.  We  had  hea:vy  rain  that  night,  and 
at  day-break  we  were  struck  with  the  appearance  of  the  mountains  of 
Solimnim,  which  had  been  concealed  for  a  week  or  more,  by  tliick 
vapour,  and  now  stood  forth  in  new  splendour ;  the  pure- 
ness  of  the  air,  and  the  great  addition  of  snow  making  them  seem 
higher  and  nearer  than  ever.  (Xir  march  lay  over  sand,  but  betbre 
the  end  of  it,  we  reached  scattered  hills. 

Our  camp  w  jus  pitched  near  the  village  of  Puneealla,  in  a  cheerful 
and  beautiful  spot,  sucli  as  one  would  iiguiu  a  scene  in  Arabia  I'elix. 


Digitized  by  Google 


nrrAQDucTiOM. 


h  WM  a  andy  filtegr,  bagnded  bjr  craggy  hiDi,  vMeraA  by  4  Utile 
droimj  and  intefapanad  with  dtnnpt  of  date  traet*  tod  widi  patcbei. 
of  gveen  oofo.  llwviUi^iladf  atood  in  s  deep  grove  of  diile.tiMi» 
on  the  aide  of  «  biU,  Aom  ^^ikh  manj  atnama  goalied  tfavoqgli  litllat 
cavema  in  tlie  tfaidioat  part  of  die  wood.  The  inhabitanta  tram 
Brioches  and  flbaifcha,  of  Aiebian  deacent  Hiey  plunderodaome  of 
our  people^  and  made  odian  priaonen ;  and  thonigh  tlda  wae  macbt 
np,  and  we  hiied  a  atio^g  lafe-guard  from  them,  we  still  lost  aone 
eamela>  and  had  atnggjbit  plunderod  after  we  had  left  the  place.  ■ 
'  The  next  forty  nulea  of  our  jouni^  were  up  the  valley  of  Laijga^ 
.  frtiidi,  thoi^  oolj  aepaniled  fay  a  ridge  of  hills  fitom  the  Indus,  was 
so  dry  and  aandy>  tliat  we  wpie.obUged  to  carry  water  as  in  the 
desart;  yet  even  there  we  saw  some  camps  of  shepherds  of  the 
Afghaun  tribe  of  Murwut,  to  whom  the  country  belongs.    After  two 
dreary  marches  through  the  valley,  we  came  into  a  rich  and  beautiful 
plain  thirty-five  miles  in  diameter,  encircled  witli  mountains,  and 
dividpf?  by  the  Indus.    We  encamped  that  day  on  the  river  Koor- 
nuTi,  then  shallow,  though  broad,  but  in  Summer  a  deep  and  rapid 
river.    From  this  we  made  three  marches  across  the  plain  to  Calla- 
baugh,  or  Karra-baugh.     The  country  belonged  to  the  tribe  of 
EsaukhaiL    It  was  naluially  fertile,  highly  cultivated,  and  watered 
bv  canals  four  feet  broad,  and  as  many  deep.  The  people  were  more 
swarthy  than  we  expected  to  see  men  of  their  nation,  and  looked 
more  like  Indians  than  Persians ;  they  were,  however,  easily  distin- 
guished fiom  the  finnier  people,  by  their  kmg  and  thick  hidft  liieir 
beaida,  the  iooae  felda  of  tfadr  tulMnia,  and  a  eertatn  independent 
and  manly  air,  that  mafked  tlienL  finr  A%iiauna.   They  are  notorioua 
fobben^  and  carried  off  aome  of  our  cameiat  and  of  the  Sng^a  Imniei 
but  their  otdinaiy  behaviour  waa  civil  and  decent   I  wm  auipmaed 
tt  ihmt  simplicity  and  equality:  though  they  ave  a  wealthy  and 
floDiiahing  tribe,  their  dne^  who  aooompooied  me  throu|^  the  whole 
of  their  knds,  waa  aa  phnn  m  hia  dieaa,.«iid  aa  aimple  hi  hia  manneia, 
as  the  moat  orduuny  peraon  in  the  txibOi 