

ti 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTBODUCTIQN. 


«ld^8fter  ghring  preMnta  to  the  diief  and  his  bnitfaer,  they  set  out 
far  camp.  Hicj  both  spoke  highly  of  the  kindDess  of  Omar  Ehami, 
and  were  alsopleased  vHh  the  attentions  of  one  of  the  leaders  of  the 
party  opposed  to  him. 

t  On  Iheir  way  htnA^  as  they  approached  a  mined  viUage,  they  saw 
spears  rise»  and  seven  horsemen  issue  forth ;  the  gentlemen  had  but 
one  innn  ^vith  them,  but  Ibftnnately  he  was  the  guide  furnished  by 
Omar  Khaun:  the  party  in  ambuscade  was  commanded  by  that 
chief  s  nephew,  who,  thou^  he  probably  was  as  hospitable  as  the 
test,  while  tho  o;entlemen  were  his  guests,  thought  himself  at  fuU 
liberty  to  plunder  them  after  they  had  quitted  the  lands  of  his  tribe. 
He  was,  however,  persuaded  by  the  guide  to  go  away  without  injurirjg 
them.  Sooti  after,  tliey  were  called  to  bv  a  man  on  foot,  and 
desired  to  stop;  on  their  disrpj:?nrdin<i  liim,  the  man  lav  down,  and, 
fixing  his  matchlock  on  its  rest,  took  a  verv  liberate  aim  at  Mr. 
Harris.  Here,  however,  the  guide  again  interposed,  and  they  reached 
camp  without  any  farther  ailventures.  Some  of  the  people  of  Derau- 
bimd  afterwards  came  to  our  camp,  and  received  ample  returns  of 
hospitality  Irom  the  gentlemen  who  had  visited  them. 

Near  the  end  of  January  we  received  intelligence  ftom  Mahomr; 
med  Shaan,  that  the  King  was  oertunly  coming  to  Besbawer,  and 
diat  Moolla  Jaftr  Seestaimee  was  appomted  to  attend  us.  till  some 
person  of  rank  could  join  us.  After  the  passage  of  several  chupperst 
or  couriers,  on  horseback,  ftom  the  court,  Moolla  Jafier  joined  us, 
and  we  beg^  to  get  ready  far  our  march*  Moolla  JwSEst  had  heep 
a  schoolmaster  in  his  native  country  of  Seestsun*  but  had  afterwards 
oome  to  court  to.  better  his  fartnne :  he  had  some  success  in  com- 
merce and  had  an'  cppcnrtunity  of  obligbg  the  King,  and  enricliing 
faimadf  at  onoe^  by  purchasing  some  of  His  Miyesty*s  jewels,  duihaig 
his  mitfartunes,  and  flight  to  the  mountains.  He  was  now  in  grei^ 
&vour,  ihou^  he  maintained  .the  style,  and  manners  of  an  ordinary 
merchant.  He  was  a  grave  old  gentleman,  shrewd,  sensible,  and 
good  humoured^  but  blunt,  and  somewhat  passionate.  Under  his 
guidance  we  set  out  fiom  Deralsmael  Khaun  on  the  7th  of  Ffsbruaiy. 

p 


Digitizixi  by  Google 


8(  INTRODUCTION. 

Our  road  kj  through  thickets,  as  above  described  on  the  river  side. 
When  we  got  near  the  end  of  our  mardi,  we  diaoovered  a  party  of 
Peisian  or  Doonumee  horse,  drawn  up  across  the  way,  and  soon 
learned  they  were  one  hundred  horse  who  hm}  come  from  the  King, 
and  brought  me  a  letter.  Tlie  whole  of  the  trooj>s  were  dressed  like 
Persians,  with  coloured  clothes,  boots,  and  low  sheepskin  caps.  They 
hatl  verv  neat  honsinj^s  of  lw]iard  skin  and  other  materials.  They 
wore  Persian  liilted  swords,  and  had  generally  matchlocks  ;  some  had 
very  short  blunderbusses,  with  verv  small  stocks,  and  barrels  of  ex- 
ceedingly thin  iron,  tied  to  their  girciles.  They  had  small,  but  light 
aad  good  horses.  Tliey  were,  on  the  whole,  a  ve  ry  lieat  and  orderly 
party.  After  we  came  to  our  ground,  they  sent  us  twenty  mule  loads 
of  the  Emits  of  Caubul,  apples,  grapes,  &c. 