

it  not  in  some  parts  streaked  and  tinned  with  red.  In  some  places, 
salt  springs  issne  from  the  foot  of  the  rocks,  and  leave  the  ground 
t  oNored  with  a  crust  of  the  most  lirilliant  whiteness.  All  the  earth, 
particularly  near  the  town,  is  aliuusi  l)lu<Hi  red,  and  this,  with  the 
strangle  and  beautii'nl  spectacle  of  the  salt  rocks,  and  tlie  Indus  flow- 
in^;  in  a  deep  and  clear  htieam  through  lofly  mountains,  past  thia 
extrai>rdinarv  town ;  presented  suclt  a  scene  of  wonders,  as  is  seldom 
to  be  witnessed.  Oui  camp  was  pitched  beyond  the  pass,  in  the 
mouth  of  a  n^ow  valley,  said  in  the  dry  bed  of  a  torrent.  Near  it 
were  pQw  of  Mkin  ktgefalodn  QSkBHUfom  at  a  quarry),  lying  ready  for 
ex|wttalaoii,  cither  to  Indk  or  KhorMtam  It  would  have  taken  a 
wedc  to  aattify  oa  with  the  sight  of  CaUa4NH]g|i }  but  it  threatened 
nun,  and  had  the  tonrcnt  Med  while  we  were  tbm  our  wMe  camp 
moat  have  been  swept  into  the  Indus. 

'  On  the  16th  of  Februaiy  we  wv^*^  vp  the  ytSkjt  which  became 
narrower  as  we  advanced.  After  proceeding  about  seven  miles,  we 
entered  a  winding  passage^  so  namnr  that  in  many  placet  our  camds 

could  scarody  pass :  the  rock  rose  some  hundred  feet  on  eadb  side* 

This  passage  continued  with  a  gentle  ascent  for  three  or  four  miles, 
during  which  time  we  saw  nothing  but  the  rocks  on  each  aide,  and 
the  sl^  overhead ;  at  length  the.  ascent  giew  more  sudden,  the  hills 
on  each  side  became  gradually  lower,  and  more  sloping,  and  after 

going  over  some  ven'  rough  and  steep  road,  we  readied  the  top  of 
the  ])afis.  The  view  thnt  now  presented  itself  was  singularly  wild  and 
desolate.  We  were  on  tlu' 1ii:;he^  part  of  the  mountains,  anil  be- 
neath us  were  tlip  barr.  broiven,  and  irregidar  bumraits  of  the  rest  of 
the  ran^c,  aiuoiiji  which  we  saw  several  vnllevs  Jike  that  we  had 
ascended.  Tliere  were  also  still  higher  muuniains  to  the  north, 
covered  with  snow.  We  were  sliow  n  w  hat  seemed  a  little  brook  for 
the  Indus  ;  and  some  smoke  on  its  banks,  was  ndid  lu  mark  the  sitCt 


Digitizer  by  Google 


38  .  INTRODUCTION. 

of  the  town  of  Muckud.  Many  other  places  were  pointed  out,  but 
m  MMdi  ft  ooniniion  of  hills  and  vaUe7a»  ilotfaiiig  made  a  distinct  im- 
pression.   From  this  pcnnt  we  descended  a  steep  and  ragged  mfld* 

where,  for  the  first  time,  we  saw  the  wild  olive.  We  encamped  in  m 
hollow  in  the  face  of  the  mountains,  ei<yhtecn  miles  from  our  last 
ground.  This  place  was  called  Cluishmeh  (the  spring),  from  the 
rare  eircumstancc  of  its  having  tVcsh  water ;  it  had  also  some  deep 
soil,  and  hail  been  cultivated  by  the  Bauriks,  a  wild  trilie.  to  whom 
these  mountains  belong.  It  rained  hard  before  we  <T<)t  t  o  our  ground, 
aiiii  in  the  midst  of  it  I  observed  iVloolla  Jafier  trotting  on,  sheltered 
by  a  cloak  of  stiff  lelt,  which  came  to  a  point  over  his  head,  and 
Coveretl  him  and  all  the  hinder  part  of  his  horse*  like  a  tent ;  behind 
him  was  iiis  servant,  with  a  cullean  packed  into  boxes,  which  were 
fixed  to  his  saddle  like  holsters,  and  a  chaffing-dish  of  burning  char- 
eoai  swinging  fimli*  a  dbain  benaedi  his  hone*s  belljr,  and  sparkling 
in  tpite  of  the  ibid.' 