

6  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


44  IKTBODUCnON. 

DoQMiiiees,  wdwkhed  to  treat  with  xm  thxoagli  Us  penonil'nd 
confidentul  i^ents ;  and  Akram  sent  me  a  meMsge  hj  an  adherent 
of  hit  imni,  to  say  that  he  wished  me  well,  and  deured  to  be  employ- 
ed in  my  negotiatioiu»  but  that  if  I  left  him  out,  I  must  not  complain 
if  he  did  all  in  his  power  to  cross  me.  From  that  time  his  oondulBt 
was  uniformly  and  zealously  friendly,  nor  dad  he  expect  that  anj  ie> 
serve  should  be  maintained  with  the  opposite  party,  a  circumstanoe 
in  his  character  that  prevented  much  embarrassment.  He  had  how- 
ever marched  for  Cashmcer  when  1  arrived,  and  to  this  I  attribute 
many  :i1t(Vcntions  to  nhich  I  was  at  first  exposed. 

On  the  nirirniijg  ot  the  25th,  after  some  cnnfnsion  nhont  the  mode 
of  our  rece]>li()ii,  we  made  our  entry  into  iVsliawer.  Uiere  was  a 
great  crowd  all  the  wav.  The  banks  on  each  side  of  the  road  were 
covered  with  people,  and  inaiiy  ci imbed  up  trees  to  see  us  pass.  The 
crowd  increased  as  we  approached  the  city,  but  we  were  })ut  to  no  in- 
convenience by  it,  as  Uie  Kiug's  horse,  tliat  liad  come  out  to  meet  us, 
charged  the  mob  vigorously,  and  used  their  whips  without  the  least 
compuiHsli<m.  One  man  attracted  patticidar  notice  t  he  wore  a  hi^ 
red  ci^  of  a  conical  ahape,  with  aome  fidda  of  cloth  round  the  bot- 
tom, and  a  white  plume  j  he  had  a  short  Jacket  of  akin.  Mack  panta- 
loona,  and  Ivown  boota :  he  waa  an  uncommonly  fine  figure,  tall, 
and  thin,  with  awdling  muades,  a  h^'  nos^'  and  an  animated  coun- 
teoaaioe:  he  was  mounted  <m  a  vei^  fine  grey  horae^  and  rode  with 
kmg  sthvups,  and  very  well  He  carried  a  long  spear,  without  a 
head,  with  which  he  cbai^ged  the  mob  at  speed,  shouting.with  a  loud 
and  deep  voice.  He  not  only  dispersed  die  mob,  but  rode  at  grave 
people  aitting  on  terraoea  with  the  greatest  fury,  and  kept  all  clear 
wherever  he  went.  His  name  wa6  Russool  Dewauneh,  or  Ruaaool  the 
Mad.  He  was  well  known  for  a  good  and  brave  soldier }  but  an  iiw 
regular  and  unsettled  person.  He  aiierwards  was  in  great  favour  with 
most  of  the  mission  ;  and  was  equipped  in  an  English  helmet,  and 
cavalry  uniform,  which  well  hccamc  liiin.  By  the  time  we  had  entered 
the  town,  the  roads  were  so  narrow  that  our  progress  became  very 
alow,  and  we  had  time  to  hear  the  remarks  of  the  spectators,  which 


Digitized  by  Google 


nmaaacnoiiu  ^ 

*i#ere  expremn  ei  wonder  at  the  prooflwaii,  and  of  good  will  towards 
us }  but  the  crowd  and  bustle  was  too  great  to  adnut  of  any  ^"t'TYf 

observations.  At  length  we  reached  the  house  prepared  for  us,  and 
were  usliercd  into  an  apartment,  spread  with  carpets  and  felts  for  sit- 
ting on.  Here  we  were  seated  on  the  f^round  in  the  Persian  manner, 
and  trays  ot  swe<  f meats  were  plticed  betbre  us.  They  ronsisted  of 
sugaretl  almonds,  ami  there  was  a  loal  of  '^nfjar  for  making  sherbet  in 
the  midst  of  tiidi  tray.  iSoon  atter,  our  conductora  obi>erved  tfayq^  we 
required  rest,  and  withdrew. 