

The  court  was  oblong,  and  liaci  high  walls,  painted  witli  the  figures 
of  cyprpssps.  In  the  middle  was  a  pond  fuid  fountains.  The  walls 
on  each  side  were  lined  with  the  King's  guards  three  deep,  and  at 
various  places  in  the  court,  stood  the  officers  of  state,  at  difterent  dis- 
tances  tVom  the  Kin^,  iiccoi  ding  to  their  degree.  At  the  end  of  the 
court  was  a  high  buiidmg,  llie  lower  story  of  whicli  was  a  solid  v.  all, 
ornamented  with  ^se  arches,  but  without  doors  or  windows  ;  ovei 
this  mm  anothw  story,  the  roof  of  which  was  supported^  by  pillars 
and  Moorish  ardies,  highly  ornamented. '  In  the  eentve  ardi  sat  the 
Kin^  on  a  rBty  large  thnme  of  goAd  or  gilding.  His  iqppearanoe'waa 
magnifioent  and  rojral :  his  crown  and  all  his  drew  were  one  Uace  of 
jewiia.  He  was  denoted  above  the  heada  of  the  eunndia  who  snr* 
nmnded  his  throne,  and  who  were  the  onlj  persons  in  the  krge  hafl 
where  he  sat :  all  waa  silant  snd  motioniesB.  On  oondng  in  aiglit  of 
the  King*  we  all  pulled  off  our  hats,  and  made  alow  bowt  we  then 
held  up  our  hands  towards  heaven,  as  if  praying  for  the  King,  and 
afterwarda  advanced  to  the  fimntatn,  where  the  Chaous  Banshee  re-^ 
peated  our  names,  without  any  tide  or  addition  of  respect,  ending 
"  They  have  come  from  Eiux>pe  as  ambassadors  to  Your  Mqeslrjr. 
"  May  your  misfortunes  lie  turned  upon  meV*  The  King  answered 


*  Some  fowo  of  prayer  lifa  thh  ii  ahfayi  mad  on  addiwring  the  King^  ItcoR«|Mnda  • 
tothe  **Okii^Hvefacva>,'*€fdieaticM»tBeniBiii. 

H 


Digitized  by  Google 


50 


INTRODl  LTION. 


ilk  a  loud  and  Honorous  voioe»  They  are  welomie;"  on  whidi  we 
pmyed  tor  him  again,  and  repeated  the  ceremony  enoe  niore»  when 
lie  ordered  as  dresses  of  hofiour.  After  this^  some  officer  of  the 
ODiirt  called  oat  something  in  Turkish,  on  which  a  division  of  the 
floldien-on  each  side  filed  off,  and  ran  out  of  the  court,  with  the 
UFnml  noise  of  their  boots  on  the  pavement,  accomjianied  by  the 
(.lashinjT  of  their  armour.  The  call  was  twice  repeated,  and  at  each 
call  a  division  of  troops  ran  oft  :  at  the  foiirtli,  the  Khauns  ran  off" 
aJso.  with  the  exception  of  a  certain  number,  wlio  were  now  ordered 
to  come  tbrward.  The  King,  in  the  mean  time,  rose  majesticnily  from 
liisihrone,  descended  the  steps,  leaning  on  two  eimuchs,  and  witli- 
drew  trom  our  sight.  ITie  Khauns  who  were  .suuuuoned,  ran  on  as 
usual,  while  we  walked  on  to  the  toot  of  a  slair-case,  covered  witli  a 
very  rich  carpet :  we  paused  here  till  the  Khauns  had  run  up,  and 
ipere  amngiBd }  after  whidi  we  ascended,  and  entered  the  haU,  vHheie 
the  King  was  now  seatedon  a  low  throne  opposite  the  door.  We 
stood  in  a  line,  wliHe  the  King  of  Gnibul  asked  after  the  health  of 
His.Majesty  and  the  Govemdr  General,  inquired, into  the  length  of 
our  joumej,  and  opieaaed  hia  wiah  that  the  firiendaiiip  betwixt  his 
nation  alid  oura  might  be  increaaad ;  to  all  which  I  made  veiy  brief 
regies.  The  gentlemen  of  the  embaasy  now  retired,  leading  me  and 
'  Me^  ftracheji  who  were  desired  to  seat  ourselves  near  His 
Mqeatgr.  The  Imaum  and  the  Moonshee  Bamhee  (or  head  secretary), 
stood  near  m,  and  the  other  Khaima  stood  along  one  side  of  the  hall. 
The  Governor  General's  Persian  letter-  was  now  opened  and  r^ul 
with  striking  distinctness  and  el^ance,  by  the  Moonshee  Baushee, 
and  the  King  made  a  suitable  answer,  declaring  his  iriendship  for  the 
English  nation,  his  desire  of  an  intimate  alliance,  and  his  readiness  to 
pay  the  utmost  atte?ition  to  any  connnunication  with  which  1  might 
be  charged.  At  u  r  i  had  replied,  PI  is  Majesty  changeil  the  subject  to 
inquiries  respecting  our  journey,  and  questions  about  our  native  coun- 
try. When  he  understood  that  the  climate  and  productions  of  Eng- 
land greatly  resembled  those  of  Caubul,  he  said  the  two  kingdoms 
were  made  by  nature  to  be  united,  and  renewed  his  professions  ol' 