


48  INTRODUCTION. 

|pe  i^proached,  and  we  were  received  by  a  fair  and  poitly  personage^ 
whom  I  afterwards  understood  to  be  the  King's  Iinaaiiiy  and  the  head 

of  the  religious  eatabliahment  He  bowed  as  T  rfime  up,  took  my 
hands  between  his,  and  placed'  me  by  him,  aller  which  he  went 
through  the  usual  forms  of  welcome  and  inquiries.  Opposite  to  me 
were  many  of  the  chief  lords  of  tlie  ccnii  t.  some  of  whom  had  their 
caps  ornamented  with  jewels,  and  suruiouutei)  hv  plumes :  lower 
down  were  msny  pei\soii>,  some  like  Persianis  and  some  like  Doorau- 
U^»;  aud  st  iil  lower,  were  some  of  the  chiefs  of  the  hill  tribes  near 
Peshawer ;  at  the  bottom  were  several  persons  in  the  strange  fancifiil 
caps  whu  ii  are  employed  to  distinguish  the  officera  of  the  household. 
They  are  generally  black  and  red,  but  their  varicU  and  their  whimsi- 
cal shapes  baffle  all  description :  little  taste  is  displayed  in  them,  and 
tfa«  efl^  IB  not  good. 

ThelflUHim  was  »  ruddy,  good^bumoaied  jboking  mnif  abdut  fiwrty^ 
dreseed  in  a  abawl  mantle^  lined  with  fur,  and  in  all  respects  like  • 
layman,  Ha»  however,  soon  cleaced  up  bis  diaractarf  by  beginning- 
a  diapQurse  on  leligion.  He  inqiuied  leapectiag  tlie  difbrent  secli 
aa^ong  Chiistia&a,  and  eKpUdned  dioae  of  bis  own  feligion.  A  good 
looking  and  wdl  dressed  man,  wbo  aat  on  die  opposite  aide  of  the 
foom,  at  some  distance,  then  inquired  into  the  state  of  kaming  in 
Pngland,  the  number  of  umversities,  and  the  sciences  taug|it  at  those 
seminaries;  when  these <  questifNis  were  answered,  the  same  person 
desired  an  explanation  of  our  astronomical  system ;  but  at  tliis  time, 
tlie  Chaous  Baushee  entered,  and  called  out  some  words,  on  which  all 
present,  except  Mecr  Abool  Hussun,  and  his  son,  rose  and  followed 
him.  We  had  before  this,  more  than  once,  heard  a  noise  like  a 
charge  of  cavalry,  vvhich  was  occasioned  by  tlie  iron  heeled  boots  of 
the  guards  and  otlu'rs,  who  were  introduced  by  divisions  to  salute  the 
King,  and  wlio  retired  at  a  run,  alter  the  ceremony  was  over. 
■  We  were  now  lefl  for  some  time  in  the  Kishik  Kliaum  li,  dm  11114 
vvhich  Meer  Abool  Hussun  converseil  with  us,  and  discovered  a  luoat 
extraordinary  ignorance  of  every  thing  concerning  us.    He  had  at 

^st  thou^t  Uiat  Calcutta  was  in  England,  and  now  discovered  his 

I 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  49 

bdief  that  the  gendemen  of  the  embtMy  im  bom  in  lodb  tfioiii^ 
of  En^idi-pannts.  At  length  the  Chaoiis  Bauahee  cmme  to  lis :  he 
hod  been  lobburing  hoid  at  o  liat  of  our  nuam,  and  gare  it  up  with 

the  fqipearanGe  of  estipetne  vexation*  in'  deqiair  of  maatering  audk  a 
collection  of  stm^  words.  He  now  ezpkined  the  ceremoniea  to 
be  obaerved,  in  a  Tery  ooniteoua  manner,  and  then  entreated  us 
aeFOvaUy  to  whisper  our  names  tohim»  when  he  should  touch  ua» 
He  then  oondacted  us  up  a  sloping  passage,  and  through  a  gate,  after 
which  we  passed  behind  a  sort  ot"  screen,  and  suddenly  issued  into  a 
hrrre  court,  at  the  upper  end  of  which  we  ww  the  King  in  an  elevated 
building. 