


Digitized  by  Google 


INTEODUCTION.  51 

friendihip.-  I  thai  inqniied  whether  It  was  Hb  Majest/s  pleaaute  to 
enter  .oD  businen  it  that  time?  To  which  he  replied,  that  I  nt^^ 
consult  mj  own  .oonreniettoe  letpecting  the  time^  and  might .  oom** 
mwiieate  with  hia  miniflterty  or  with  himself*  as  I  diose.  I  that 
eaq^ained  the  olQeots'of  my  mission  at  length;  to  which  His  Mtyes^ 
made  aTery  fiieodly  and  judidofiia  lepfyf  and  soon  after  I  Withdrew. 
The  King  of  Canbid  was  a  handsome  man^  ahoat  thirty  yeati  of  age^ 
of  aniolive  oontplexion,  with  a  thick  black  beard.  The  eiqpreflsion  of 
his  countenance  was  dignified  and  pleasing :  his  voice  deu,  and  his 
address  prhioely.  We  thought  at  first  that  he  bad  on  armour  of 
jewda,  hnlv  on  dose  infection,  we  found  this  to  be  a  mit^ake,  and 
his  real  di^  to  consist  of  a  green  tunic,  with  large  flowers  in  gold, 
and  precious  stones,  over  which  were  a  large  breast-plate  of  diamonds, 
shapod  Tike  t\ro  flattened  flenr  de  lis,  an  ornament  of  the  same  kind 
on  e:t(  li  ihiuli,  lai  Lre  emerald  bracelets  on  rlie  arms  (above  the  elbow), 
jiTid  iiumy  otliei  jewels  in  ditierent  places.  In  one  of  tiie  liracelets 
was  the  Cohi  Noor,  known  to  be  one  of  the  largest  diamonds  in  the 
world  *.  There  were  also  some  strinjjs  of  verv  large  pearls,  put  on 
like  cross  belts,  ljuL  kM>se.  The  crou  u  was  about  nine  inches  high, 
not  ornamented  with  jewels  as  European  crowns  are,  but  to  appear- 
ance entirely  formed  of  those  precious  materials.  It  s^med  to  be 
radiated  like  andent  cMsms*  and  beihind  the  rays  appeared  pei^  of 
purple  velvet :  aome  smaE  brandieB  with  pendanta,  seemed  to  project 
fiom  Uie  craam  $  but  the  whole  was  so  oomplicatedt  and  so  dasaling, 
that  it  waa  diffiodt  to  understand,  mA  impossible  to  descnboi  The 
throne  waa  covered  with  a  doth  adorned  with  pearls,  on  whidi  lay  a 
aword  and  a  small  mace,  set  with  jewels.  The  room  was  open  all 
romid.  Ihe  centre  was  sii|»ported  by  Ibur  faigfi  pillars,  in  the  midst 
of  which  was  a  marble  fi>imtain*  Hie  floor  was  covered  with  the 
richest  carpets,  and  round  the  edges  were  slips  of  silk,  embroidered 
with  gold,  for  the  Kliaans  to  stand  on.   The  view  from  the  hall  waa 


*  8e»  •  pnnt  of  it  in  Tnvernier's  Tlravels.  « 
H  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


52 


INTRODUCTIOK. 


beauti&L  Immediately  below  was  an  extensive  jrarrlen,  full  of 
cypresses  and  other  trees,  and  beyond  was  a  plain  of  the  richest  ver- 
dure :  here  and  there  were  pieces  of  wntcr  and  shinino;  streams  ;  and 
the  whole  was  bounded  by  mountains,  some  dark,  and  others  covered 
with  snow.  When  i  letl  the  King,  I  was  recondm  (lmI  to  the  Kishik 
Khaiineh,  where  all  the  gentlemen  of  the  nnssion  receivetl  rich 
dresses  of  honour.  In  the  above  description,  I  have  chiefly  confined 
myself  to  what  ^vas  splendid  in  the  ceremony.  I  must  however  men- 
tion, before  1  conclude,  that,  although  some  things  (tlie  a|>peuiance 
of  the  King  in  particular)  exceeded  my  expectations,  othei^  fell  far 
abort  of  tbem,  and  all  bote  lees  the  appearance  of  a  state  in  pK»- 
perity»  Uian  of  a  splendid  monarchj  in  decay.  *' 
.  Such  is  the  pnbUc  ceremofiial  of  the  Court  of  CmbuL  I  had  afters 
wards  an  opportunity  of  aemag  the  forms  observed  by  the  King  in 
more  fimiliar  'interoourse.  Hu  Majesty  had  eipressed  a  desire  to  see 
Mr.  Stiacbey  and  me  in  private^  in  an  ifwrtment,  bdongiI^^  to  flie 
Sen^io ;  and,  as  this  was  not  a  place  to  which  strangers  were  usuaUy 
admitted,  we  were  requested  to  come  slightly  attended,  and  in  the 
.night.  Accordingly  we  were  conducted  by  the  son  of  our  Mehmaun- 
dsur»  to  the  side  of  the  Balla  Hissaur,  opposite  to  that  where  our  pub- 
lic reception  took  place.  When  we  reached  the  foot  of  the  hill,  we 
left  the  few  attendants  that  hnd  accompanied  us,  and  clambered  up 
witli  some  difficulty  to  a  narrow  Hitjht  of  steps,  which  our  conductor 
could  scarcely  find  in  tlie  extr(  nir  diirkness  of  tlu-  [liiiht.  At  the 
bead  of  these  steps,  a  small  door  opened  into  tlie  castle  j  and  we  found 