


Digitized  by  Google 


56  INTB<H>UCTI01«. 

afferent  parts  of  the  town ;  and,  even  there,  nro  skiited  wt^  willows 
and  mulberry  trees.    They  are  crossed  by.brid^iy  none  of  whicfat 

however,  are  in  the  least  remarkable. 

There  are  m^ivw  mosques  in  the  town  ;  but  none  of  them,  or  of  the 
other  public  buldings,  deserve  notice*  except  the  Balla  Hissaur.  and 
the  fine  Caravansera.  The  Balla  Hissaur  is  a  castle  of  no  sirejigtii, 
on  a  hill,  north  of  (he  town  :  it  contains  some  fine  halls,  com- 
mands a  romantic  jnospect,  ami  is  adorned  with  some  very  pieati- 
ing  and  spacious  gardens;  but,  m  it  oiilv  tlie  occasional  residence 
of  the  King,  it  in  now  much  neglected.  On  the  north  it  presents  a 
commanding  aspect ;  but,  a  \  iew  of  it  from  the  side  nearest  the  town, 
discloses  strong  signs  of  weakness  and  decay.  .  Some  of  the  palaces  of 
the  great  are  splradid,  but  fern  of  the  nobiiity  have  houses  here» 

The  inhabitants  of  Feshawer  are  of  Indian  origin,  but  speak  Fkiah^ 
too  es  wdl  as  Hindkee.  Hiere  ue,  howeirer,  many  other  inhafaitanta 
of  an  nations }  and  the  concourBe  is  increased»  daring  the  King's  visits 
to  Peahamer.  We  had  many  opporti&iities  of  observing  this  assem- 
bh^  in  returning  fiDom  our  morning  rides  {  and  its  efiect  was  height- 
ened by  the  stillness  and  solitude  of  the  streets,  at  the  .early  hour  at 
wiaxh  we  used  to  set  ont  A  little  before  sunrise^'  people  began .  to 
assemble  at  the  mosques  to  their  morning  devotions.  After  the  hour 
of  prayer,  some  Sew  appeared  sweqiing.the  streets  befine  their  doofs^ 
and  some  grei^  men  were  to  be  seen  going  to  their  early  sttendamce 
at  Court.  They  were  always  on  horseback,  preceded  by  from  ten  to 
twelve  servants  on  foot,  who  walked  pretty  fast,  but  in  perfect  order, 
and  silence :  nothing  was  heard,  but  the  sound  of  their  feet.  But, 
when  we  returned,  the  streets  were  crowded  with  men  of  all  nations 
.  and  languages,  in  every  variet^  of  f^rrss  and  npp<  nratice.  The  shops 
were  all  open.  Dried  fi^iits,  and  auis,  bread,  meat,  boots,  slioes,  sad- 
dlery, bales  of  cloth,  hardware,  ready-made  cloaths,  and  posteens, 
books,  ike.  were  either  displayed  in  tiers  in  front  of  the  shops,  or 
hung  up  on  hooks  trora  the  roof.  Amongst  the  handsomest  shops 
were  the  li  uiu  rers,  (where  apples,  melons,  plums,  and  even  oranges, 
thougli  th^ti  are  rare  at  Teshawer,  were  mixed  iii  piles  witii  some  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


IKTRODUCnOH  57 

13»  lodSm  htSA) ;  aod  die  eook-ihap^  iphm  every  thing  wtmmn^A 
in  eutfaen  dishes,  painted  and  j^ased,  so  as  to  look' like  china*  v  ht 
Am  streets  were  pMpfe  cijing  gieBnSf-cmd%  ftQ^.  and  ]Bsn»  esnjing 
water  in  leadfeem  higi'at  their  faapfis^r«Qd  'amMnmring  liieir-ooniniD- 
dity  beating  en  m  InaM  eop^  in  vhich'  they  gite  e.  dBpagiii  a 
posenger  ftr  4  triflbg  pasoe  «f '  meMjr.  With-  titee.  vere  nlM 
peopledf  the  town  in  white  tmfcaiis,  some  in  laige  white  or  darit 
blue  frbdEBy  and  others  in  sheep-skin- clpaia ;  Fersiaiis,  and  Afghauns» 
in  brawn  wooUan  tunics,  or  flowing  mantles,  and  cafB  of  black  sheep- 
Mb  ■  er  eoioered  sflk ;  Khybere»^  with  the  straw  sandals,  and  tlse 
wild  dress,  and  air  of  their  mountains ;  Hindoos,'  uniting  the  peculiar 
features  and  manners  of  their  own  nation,  to  the  long  beard,  and  the 
dress  of  the  country  ;  and  Hazaurehs,  not  more  remarkable  for  their 
conical  caps'  of  skin,  with  the  wool,  appearing  like  a  tViTiije  round  the 
edge,  and  tor  their  broad  laces,  and  little  oses,  than  lor  their  want  of 
the  bearil,  which  is  the  ornament  ot  ev  pi  v  otlun  tace  in  the  city. 
Aniontj  these,  might  be  disOTvered,  a  few  women,  with  long  white 
veils,  that  reached  their  feet,  and  some  of  the  King's  retinue,  in  the 
grotesque  caps,  and  fantastic  habits,  whicli  mark  the  class  to  wiiich 
each  belongs.  SoiiicttmcH  a  troop  of  iinued  horsemen  passed,  and 
their  appearance  was  announced  by  the  clatter  of  their  horses  iioofs 
on  the  pavement,  and  by  the  jingling  of  their  bridles.  Somedmeii 
idieQ  t^e  King  was  gouig  out,  the  streets  wvve'cfaoaked  with  hotse 
and  foot,  and  dnMnedariea  beerii^  awivels»  and  largs  mmng  red  nfi 
green  flags ;  and»  at  aO  times,  keded  dxomedaiiea,  or  heavy  Bactrian 
esmds,  oorared  with  ahagyy  hair,  made  thdr  way  slowly  lihrough  the 
streets ;  and  mnles»  fistened  together  in  drdes  of  &ffxt  ot  ten*  were  • 
seen  (tf  the  road,  going  round  and  round  to  cool  them  after  dielr  W 
hour,  while  their  keepers  were  Indnlgu^  at  an-efting-hoiiaek  or  cigoy^ 
faig  e  amake  of  e  hiied  oiilleeann  in  the  street.'  Amidatallitliia 
throng,  we  generally  passed  without  any  notice,  ex6ept  a  salaom  ahd- 
kum  flrom  a  passenger,  accompanied  by  a  bow,  with  the  hands  crossed 
m  ftxmtt  or  an  application  from  a  beggtu-,  who  would  call  ont  fer- re- 
lief from  the  Teringee  Khaons,  admoniah  us  that  life  was  short,  and- 