

■  I  receiyed  visits  after  mj  snbrtl  from  many  persons  of  iank»  ivlio 
GBitte  on.  the  King's  part  or  tlieir  own.  I  had  mudi  intensomse  with 
Sheer  Mahomed  Kinun,  the  brother  of  Aknm  Khann,  and  Meef^ 
•anee  Sbaiiht  the  VHwmm  of  the^sameministerr  who  had  both  heia 
left  on  purpose  to  ttioawer  the  mission ;  I  also  saw  a  good  deal  of 
Mehmanndaur,  Meer  Abool  Hussun  Khaun,  a  Persian,  whose  famUy 
had' long  been  settled  in  Caubul,  and  who  had  himself  risen  from  the 
hnmhle  rank  of  a  private  soldier  (report  said  even  from  that  of  a 
taylor),  to  be  Sundookdaur  Bauahee  (keeper  of  the  wardrobe),  Kooler 
Aghassee  (commander  of  the  guards),  and  Governor  of  Peshawer. 
He  hatl  ii  very  fair  complexion,  and  red  cheeks,  but  his  person  was 
small,  his  voice  feeble,  and  his  manner  timid,  so  that  our  first  im- 
pression of  him  wa-s  unfm oui  able  :  he,  nevertheless,  turned  out  to  be 
one  of  tlie  best  of  his  nation,  anil  to  have  a  degree  of  simplicity 
about  him,  seldom  met  with  in  a  Persian. 


Digitized  by  GoQgle 


IKTHUDUCTlOli;  47 

tbe  fint  wmk  iBmsat  mrMk  part  wUhmt  m  kmng  iakM(dMi 
the  taag,  m  oMMqnaBOtt  of m diipnte  1110111; tlie ibnis <£»iint'ff&' 
wntatloo.  The  comnM:  ftnns  df  the  coiBlh*'  tiiough  ^tlie  sihiiMen 
alleged  that  they  had  btm  oonfonned  to  by  jmbaitidan  from  PeMii^ 
•nd  U^iiek  Tartary,  and  er«n  by  the  brother  of  the  ktter  Monaicht 
appeared  to  us  a  little  unseasonable.  The  innbassador  to  be  intro* 
duced,  .k  bdougfat  iodo  a  coBrt  by  two  officers,  who  bold  -him  firmly 
faj  the  armiB.  On  coming  in  si^t  of  the  King,  who  appears  at  a  fai^ 
window,  the  ambassador  is  made  to  run  forward  for  a  certain  distance, 
when  he  stops  for  a  moment,  and  pravs  for  the  King.  He  is  then 
made  to  run  forward  again,  and  pravs  once  more  ;  nnd,  ailer  another 
run,  the  King  calls  out  "  Khellut."  (a  (ircjss,)  which  is  followed  by  the 
the  Turkish  word  "  Getsheen,"  (begone,)  irom  an  officer  ot  state, 
and  tht  untortunntp  ambas^iador  is  made  to  run  out  of  the  court,  and 
sees  no  more  ot  the  King,  unleia  he  is  summoned  to  a  private  audi- 
ence ill  His  Majesty's  closet. 

Every  thing,  hovve\  er,  wa.s  ui  the  end  adjusted,  and,  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  5th  of  JVlarch,  we  set  out  in  procession  for  the  palace. 
Wepassed  for  about  three  quarters  of  a  mUe  through  the  streets, 
Kfaicfa  as  well  aa  the  windows  «kd  saoft  cf  HbB  hoMMt,  im^  cMnvded 
nsth  spectetots.  At  -length  we.mdied  an-^pan  ipaee  under  llie 
pakuse^  or  cartfe»  in  wlucii  the  king  xendeB:  diia  apen  wia  filled  ivith 
people,  wlio  eonrerad  the  tide  of  the  hill  on  «4ndi  iSbit  caade  standi* 
like  the-  anriifwi*  at  a  thcatra.  When  we  niached  the  gate,  over 
niiich  tfaeKing^a  band  was  pitting,  w»  we  raqneiled  to  teeve  the 
greater  part  of  our  attendenta  behind,  end-bete  oar  dilutta  and  trum- 
pets ivere  leqnind  to  oeaae  gpkyii^  Some  time  aftat^  we  entered 
tlua  gitfearay,  we  diamounted,  and,  after  walking  abont  one  hundred 
jBids,  we  Mcended  a  flight  of  steps,  and  entered  a  long  narrow  room, 
where  about  one  hundred  and  fifiy  persons  were  seated  in  greet 
ecder  akkig  die.  walla.  This  was  caUed  the  Kidiik  Khauneh,  or 
guard-roooa.  ite.had  never  been  handsome,  and  was  now  out  of  re- 
pair. It  was  spread  with  carpets  and  felts.  We  were  led  straight  up 
to  the  head  of  the  room,  wheie  eevend  men,  richly  dresfled,  rote  aa 