


Digitized  by  Google 


54 


INTRODUCTION. 


koi'Up  by  the  LiiAum,  who  enlarged  on  its  beauties,  and  then  eniime- 
rated  every  province  in  His  Majesty's  extended  domini<)ina»  pratnng 
arid  magnifying  each,  but  giving  Caubul  the  preference  over  them  alL 
Hie  King  smiled  at  the  InvHun^s  harangue,  and  said  it  shewed  hit 
potiaHty  for  his  native  country.  He  ^en  said  lie  hoped  we  should 
see  Guibul  and  all  his  terntoiies»  which  were  now  to  be  considered  as 
oar  owni  He  then  made  some  enquiries  respecting  the  places  I  liad 
fleen ;  after  which,  he  told  Mr.  Strachey,  he  understood  he  had  been 
in  Persia,  and  asked  him  some  questions  respecting  that  country. 
Daring  this  conversation,  n  eiiinirh  brouglit  in  I  lis  Majesty's  cuUeaun. 
T  nvvev  saw  uny  thing  more  nui^rnilicent :  it  was  of  p-oM,  cnainclled, 
and  richly  set  wit li  jewels.  Tht-  jmrt  where  the  tobacco  wus  placed, 
was  in  the  sliujjc  of" a  peacock,  about  the  size  ot  a  pigcHjt),  with  plum- 
age of  jewels  and  enamel.  It  was  late  at  night  when  tlic  Jniaunigave 
us  a  hint  to  withdraw.  We  were  let  out  as  we  came  in ;  and  return- 
ed through  the  town,  winch  wai*  now  quiet  and  silent.  This  inter- 
view with  the  Shauh,  made  a  very  lavoiuabk  impression  on  us.  It 
will  scared}  be  believed  of  an  Katitera  monarch,  how  much  he  luid 
the  manners  of  a  gentlenuuii  or  how  well  he  preserved  his  digiiily, 
while  he  seemed  only  anxious  to  pleaae. 

Tin  oar  presentation  to'  the  King  was  Gver»  none  of  the  gentlemen 
of  the  miBsion  went  bat,  except  once  to  an  entertainment  $  but  after 
that  time  we  generally  rode  dbout  the  ooantiy  far  tome  horn  in 
the  mocningi  and  evenings ;  and,  as  we  abo  went  to  different  parts  of 
the  town  to  wait  on  the  great  men  who  had  visited  me»  we  soon  be- 
came  well  acquainted  with  F^shawer  and  its  environs.  . 

The  plain»  in  ^diich  the  city  is  situated*  is  nearly  drcnUuv  and  about 
thirty-five  miles  in  diameter*  Except  for  a  small  space  on  the  Eastt 
it  is  suiTounded  widi  mountains,  of  which  the  lai^  of  the  Indian 
Qsucasns  on  the  north,  and  the  Peak  of  8u£bidooh  on  thesputb^esti' 
are  the  most  conspicuous.  The  northern  part  is  divided  by  three 
branches  of  the  Canbnl  riA  er,  wliich  unite  before  they  leave  the  plain* 
It  -is  also  watered  by  the  rivulets  of  Barra  and  Budinib  which  flow 
from  the  mountains  to  the  river  of  Caubul. 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTKODUCnON.  55 

•  '  ■      ,  ♦ 

IVIitt  «e  entond  PadiiMvr  in  Muclit  theopper  pa^ 
timt  flraund  weie  oofeied  wkh  maofWt  while  the  plain  was  cbtbad 
with  the  richest  vesduie^  and  the  cSinute  was  deiickmSi  Most  o£.th* 
tieea  wave  then  haic^  hut  cnou^  wece  in  leaf  to  ^veriohnes&andiVa- 
riely  to  die  prospect  j  and,  in  the  comae  of  a  finfcni^itf  the  dnmaidue 
gardens  and  scattered  trees  were  coveved  with  new  fiiliage^  which  haid 
a  fieshneas'and  hrilfianc^,  ne^er  sete^in  die  peipetnal  aunmier  of  ha^ 
dia.  Many  streams  ran  through  the  plain.  Their  banks  were  fringed 
with  willows  and  tamarisks.  The  orchards  scattered  over  the  oooh 
tKjt  oootained  a  profusion  of  plum,  pkach,  apfde*  pear,  qmnce^'  and 
jpieineipranate  trees,  which  afforded  a  greater  display  of  blossom  than 
I  ever  before  witnessed ;  and  the  uncultivated  parts  of  the  land  were 
oomed  with  a  thick  elastic  sod,  that  perhaps  never  was  equalled  but 
in  England.  The  greater  part  of  the  plain  was  highly  cultivated,  and 
irrigated  by  many  ^Mttt  r  courses  and  canals,  Nover  was  a  spot  of 
the  same  extent  lietter  peopled.  From  one  hei^^lit.  Lieutenant  Ma^ 
cartnev  took  the  bearings  of  thirtv-two  villages,  all  withiu  a  circuit  of 
four  miles.  The  villages  were  gctierally  large,  and  remarlvably  clean 
and  iicati  and  almost  all  set  oti  with  trees.  There  were  iiitle  bridges 
of  mason rj,  over  the  strums,  each  of  whicli  had  two  small  towers  for 
oruaniciil  at  each  end.  The  greater  part  of  the  trees  on  the  plain 
were  mulberries,  or  other  fruit  trees.  Except  a  few  picturesque 
groupes  of  dates,  the  only  tall  trees  were  the  Ficus  Religiosa  or  pee- 
pul,  and  the  tamarisk,  which  last  grows  here  to  the  height  of  thirty 
or  finty  feet.  Its  leaves,  being  like  those  of  the  cypress,  and  verjR 
thidE,  the  groves  compoaed  of  it  are  eitremefy  dark  and  ^£x>wlj. 
Hie  town  of  Pesfaaiw^  itsdf  standa  on  en  nnevoi  suzfiee.  .  It  is  1^ 
waida  of  five  miles  soond ;  and-  contains  about  lOOyOOO  inhabitants. 
Hie  houses  are  built  of  farick  (generally  unbnxnt),  in  wooden  fiRsmes : 
they  are  conunoalj  three  stories  high,  and  die  lower  story  is  gene- 
laUy  occupied  by  shops.  The  streets  are  narrow,  as  might  be  eiq»ect^ 
ed,  where  no  wheeied<»rriages  are  used:  they  are  paved,  but  the 
pasnement  sloping  down  to  the  kennd,  whidi  is  in  the  middle»  they 
ana  slippory,  and  inconvenient.   Two  or  three  brooks  run  through 