

The  villsge,'  at  which  we  encamped,  was  a  small  one,  distinguished 
Ibr  a  sort  of  fort,  said  to  be  Iniilt  by  Nadir  Shauh,  and  for  a  fine 
aqoedoct  made  by  some  fimner  chief  of  the  Khuttuks,  to  water  the 
aeighbourmg  lands. 

Notwithstanding  the  violence  of  the  stream,  the  boats  passed 
quicker  here  than  at  any  river  we  had  yet  crossed.  We  also  saw 
many  people  crossing,  or  floating  down  the  riv^,  on  the  skins  of  oxen 

♦a  5 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


inflated,  on  which  thcv  rode  astride,  but  with  most  of  their  bodies  in 
the  water.  This  contrivance  is  also  jnade  use  of  in  the  Oxus,  and 
appeals  to  be  as  ancient  as  tlie  days  of  Alexander*  * 

We  crossed  on  the  20th,  passed  through  the  loil,  and  were  wel- 
comed to  India  by  all  the  Atghauns  of  our  party.  We  halteti  for  two 
days  at  Attock,  and  were  visited  by  the  chiefs  of  the  neiglibour- 
hood. 

The  Governor  of  the  provmise  was  a  respectable  Dooraimee^  with  the 
oomplexioii  and  dfeaa  of  Khonumun  j  but  the  people  of  the  country, 
whether  fiiuofzyes  or  DoomuneeB,  (&r  many  of  that  tribe  have  been 
settled  here  lor  seven  gener>timi8»)  had  a  dress  and  ^pearance .  re* 
sembUog  tfaotfe  of  Ihdianib  One  man  strode  me  pertbularlyf  who 
belonged  to  the  Kantir8»  so  Indian  tribe,  who  inhabit  the  ahnoat  in- 
aoeesaible  hUls  to  the  south  eeat  of  Attock.  He  was  vei^y  blade,  with 
a.kmg  beard ;  and  had  the  shy  look  of  a  savage,  without  any  appear- 
jsnce  of  ferocity  :  he  had  dirty  clothes,  with  a  small  turban,  strangely 
put  on,  and  clutched  his  beard  as  he  sat,  like  the  picture  of  Judas 
Iscariot  in  Lavater. 

The  heat,  during  the  last  night  of  our  stay  at  Attock,  was  extreme. 
A  strong  hot  wind  blew  all  nif?ht  over  the  low  hills  to  the  sotitli  of 
our  camp  ;  and  the  thermometer  was  at  96 '  between  three  and  ibur 
in  the  moriiuig. 

From  Attock,  the  mission  made  three  marches  to  Huhsiui  Ab- 
daul.  The  first  was  over  the  plain  of  Chuch,  which  was  en- 
tirely covered  with  wheat,  and  nearly  flat,  except  for  a  hillock  here 
and  there,  on-  iduch  was  dways  a  viBage.  other  two  were 

through  a  oountiy,  whidi  rose  into  high  waves,  wkh  deep  nmnes  in 
the  hollows.  It  was  generally  dry,  and  unicultivBteiL  'Hie  ooantzy 
began  to  resemble  Hindoostan,  dthon^  a  willow  was  still  now  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTIOM.  f$ 

ikm^-tkmne^^  11iepeapb)wtookoflltediiiig^)  li^ftfiUa^ 
bundled  oonU  ipMk  Ttnum,  «ad  the  A^^taunaliad  loflk  the  M  €f 
the  Fkiihtoo  lan^dtga  They  iHock  ne*  m  the  Mdeif«  and  raort^ 
aannt  people  I  had  y A  ittD.  I  ivas  adoompaaied  fiom  AtliMfc 
Hobeb  Khaun,  the  chief  df  BcxMraun,  and  Hussun  AbdiuL  Hfl  had 
•boot  one  hundsed  horse,  all  dresaed  in  the  Indian  way»  willi  wbaibk 
turbans,  white  coats  of  quilted  cotton,  IndiaD  hilts  t6  thttr.awdrdn 
Indian  Aaabxae  on  their  honesy  and  no  boots }  but  they  all  wofo  ei- 
ther cuirasses  of  leather,  or  shirts  of  mdl,  and  carried  loi^  •pean* 
Their  long  beaidt,  and  wild  auTf  diatingniahed.lhani  at  once  from 
Hindofltoupeei ;  and  their  appeaianoe  was  akogether  peculiar.  Amidst 
bU  these  signs  of  India,  the  valley  of  Hussun  Abdaul  recfdled  to  our  re^ 
collection  the  country  we  had  lelL  It  had  indeed  been  famous  in  all  ages 
for  its  beauty,  and  had  been  a  favorite  resting  place  of  the  great  Moguls, 
on  their  annual  migrations  to  Cashmeer ;  nor  could  there  have  been 
a  scene  better  fitted  for  the  eniovment  of  their  easy  and  hixorioiis 
grandeur.  The  mHuence  of  tlie  rains  of  Hindoostaun,  which  now  be^ 
gan  to  reach  us,  iiad  cooled  the  air,  nnd  jjiven  it  a  peculiar  soilness 
and  pleasantness,  which  disposed  us  to  a  more  perfect  enjoyrtient  of 
the  beauties  ol  the  place.  There  also  was  a  garden,  which  resembled, 
and  almost  equalled,  that  of  Cohaut.  Near  this,  was  the  tomb  of 
Hussun  Abdaiil,  from  winch  the  place  is  named.  It  is  partly  Com- 
posed of  nunbie,  and  stands  in  a  square  enclosure,  within  which  are 
two  very  fine  old  cypresses,  of  remarkable  height.  Hussun  (whose 
surname  Abdaul  is  the  Pushtoo  for  inad,)  was  a  famous  saint  of  Can- 
ddbar,  where  he  is  known  by  the  name  of  Babba  WuUe(6.  About  two 
miles  off,  was  a  royal  garden,  now  gone  to  decay.  There  was  sCtme* 
thing  mebmcholy  and  desolate  in  erety  thitig  about  it,  whidi  iMs 
soaice  less  impMsirotban  its  original  ^endonr*  U  tentained  soma 
daqisndateBQvehasoa^  filled  wi^  the  pm  water  <»f  these  Idlk 
some  jmincd  hniUhigs  (one  of  wfakli  was  imoaibdjlj  deganl) } 
here  we^  ibr  the  hist  time,  saw  the  plaoe-tKeet  wfaieh  iortna  tbe  fiivOu^ 
rite  omamaiit  of  all  the  gardens  of  die  West. 