


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


71 


Dooraunee  dans.  Aooor^iigly  all  parties  seemed  t9  look  ftrward 
with  certainty  to  the  suooeBS  of  Shauh  £Sli4<u**  cause,  an  event  ^hich 
mw  called  for  by  the  prayers  of  the  people,  to  whom  the  Shauh'a 
moderation  and  jusfioe  had  greatly  eodeaied  him.  » 

Our  first  march  was  to  Chumkuny,  a  villa^'o  oiil  v  four  miles  from 
Pesliawer.  The  country  was  now  becoming  a  little  unsettloti,  and, 
instead  of  a  few  foot-patb  who  iisetl  to  plunder  single  men  when  we 
first  arri\  ed,  there  were  now  bands  of  robbers  who  carrieil  otf  se\'cral 
loadL-d  camels  that  were  going  to  camp  wiilinut  a  guard.  The 
accouiilant  of  the  mission  allowed  a  mule  of  own,  lotuled  with 
rupees  to  tiie  \itine  of  ^'1000,  and  also  with  fine  shawls,  to 
loiter  behind:  the  mule  having  thrown  the  muleteer,  and  laid 
him  wmwlm  on  the  ground,  fan  through  the  crowd,  and  shook 
off  itai  valnaUe  Imiden,  idiich  was  instantly  pillaged  by  the  by« 
standeia. 

On  the  15th  we  continued  our  inardit  The  appearance  of  oor 
line  was  now  much  altered  by  the  great  proportion  of  mulea  and 
ponies  employed  in  caoying  die  baggi^>  by  the  number  of  good 
horses  which  were  to  be  seen  mounted  or  led,  by  the  use  of  Persian 
and  Uabek  saddles  and  bridles,  as  well  as  of  boots  and  mantles 
among  the  upper  classes  of  our  Indian  attendants,  and  by  the  num- 
ber of  Peshawerees  and  other  people  who  spoke  Persian,  that  now 
accompanied  us  in  various  capacities.  A  rmniber  of  persons  followed 
us  from  the  city  as  lar  as  this  day's  march,  some  to  show  tlieir  atten- 
tion, but  more  to  importune  us  for  presents,  of  which  all  the  people 
at  Peshawer,  except  the  highest  classes,  wer«'  inordinatelv  f^reedy. 
Our  march  on  this  day  lay  through  a  good  deal  of  wood  ot  tamarisk 
trees. 

On  the  16th  we  left  tlie  wood,  and  marched  over  an  extensive  plain 
of  green  turf,  only  varied  by  the  low  plant  called  Jouz  by  the 
A%haun8,  and  Ehauree  Sbooiuree  by  the  Persians*  and  by  a  plant 

•  K  4 


72 


DnmoDucnoN. 


very  common  about  Pcslmwer,  which  much  resembles  that  m  Enghab 
gardens  caJltnl  Devil  in  the  bnsh. 

We  encamped  on  a  very  agreeable  spot,  where  a  point  covered 
with  green  sod,  and  sliiided  by  some  trees,  projects  into  the  deep, 
cl^r,  and  rapid  strciiiu  of  the  Caubul  rivert  here  about  four  hundred 
yards  bioad ;  on  tlic  oppmite  shore  is  llie  village  of  Nou^hehra. 
Mauy  Eusoizyes  crossed  the  mer  to  see  us.  I  waa  much  stnidk  on 
this  day  with  llie  long  duratioD  of  the  twilight,  which,  with  the  length 
of  the  day,  is  novel  to  a  tmyetter  fiom  India:  day  luoke  (on  the  16kh 
June)  at  .a  quarter  after  three^  and  the  sun  did  not  rise  tall  within  tan 
minuttti  of  five. 