

On  the  morning  after  the  bad  news  (July  4th,)  we  set  out  on  our 
march,  as  had  been  previously  settled  ;  we  first  went  to  the  camp  of 
the  haram  to  take  leave  of  Meer  Abool  Hussun  Khaun.  The  camp 
00ntaine«5  nttmerous  enclosures  of  serrapurdahs  or  canvas  screen^?,  and 
a  vast  number  of  cajawas  or  (  an^t  l  panniers,  in  which  women  travel, 
and  we  wanderp<l  long  through  them  betorc  we  couhl  find  the  Khaun. 
He  was  much  less  dcprcssofl  tliaa  I  had  expe<  teil ;  but  talked  with- 
out reserve  of  the  hopelc  ssik  ss  of  the  King  .s  ailairs,  and  of  the  un- 
certainty of  the  rereption  tlie  haram  would  m&it  with  from  the  Siks. 
We  took  a  uidaru  lioK  leave;  and,  crossing  the  hills  Lu  the  south. of 
the  valle),  we  quitted  the  King  of  Cauburb  doiiiiniona.      '  '  ' 

We  were  received  by  a  party  of  Siks  soon  after  we  passed  their 
fiY>ntier ;  and,  from  this  time,  we  met  with  no  trace  of  Dooraunee 
language  or  nunmna  among  the  people,  lliough  pleased  with  the 
flUw  on  the  borders*  we  could  not  but  be  struck  with  the  rough  man- 
ners,'the  barfoatous  language,  and  the  naked  bodies  of  the  people, 
amof^  whom  we  were  oome ;  nor  waa  it  with  any  partiality  thiBt  we 
peiodhred  an  inereared  roflcmbhmce  to  the  cnatomaof  Ifindoatan.  in 
three  mardiet  we  readied  Rawil  Findeen  .  The  country  waa  uneolti* 
vated,  and  much  intersected  by  deep  and  eoLtenarre  ravines.  In  the 
ooone  of  theteoond  march*  we  paased  a  ridge  of  hiUs*  which  would 
hsvebeeo' difficult  to^  cross  had  not  die  Mogul  emperors,  with  (heir 
wonted  nufflificenoe,  cut  ,  a  road  through  the  solid  rocL  lliia  road 
ia  about  three-feurths  of  a  mOe  long,  and  paved  with  great' masses  of 
a  haid.Uue  stone,  well  fitted  in,  and  still  in  good  repair. 

Hie  town  of  Bawil  Findae  is  large  and  populous.   It  ia  a  prett;f 

L  2 


7i 


INXaOOUCTIOM. 


place,  is  compoaed  of  tenmoed  hiMMW»,  mdis  vtgy  like  fttovtt  w«t  of 
the  Indiii*  The  oonntiy  idubiI  b  <^>en,  acefetared  with  fingle  hilky 
and  toknUy  oiihivated.  We  halted  here  no.  d&ya  to  get  Runjeet 
Sing^B  leave  to  advaooei  *  We  now  iaw  a  good  deal  of  the  Sika,  whom 
we  ibnod  diapoaed  to  be  oiTQ,  end  by  no  meana  impleaaing.  They 
were  manly  in  their  appearanco ;  and  weie  tall,  and  thm,  though 
muacolar.  They  wore  little  dolihe^  thdr  legsy  half  their  llii|^  and 
generallj  thdr  arma  and  bodiea,  being  bare;  but  they  bad  often  huge 
aoarfa,  dnown  looadjr  over  one  ahoulder.  Their  tuibana  were  not 
larger  but  high*  and  rather  flattened  in  front.  Their  beards,  and  heir 
on  their  heada  and  bodiea*  ane  never  touched  by  sciusra.  They  ge> 
nemUy  cany  matchlocka,  or  bowa,  the  better  sort  generally  bows } 
and  never  pay  a  visit  without  a  fine  one  in  their  hand,  and  an  emlmtt- 
dered  quiver  by  their  side.  Tliey  speak  Punjaubee^  and  aometimeA 
attempt  Hindostauneei  but  I  aeidom  understood  them  without  an  in* 
terpreter.  Petaian  waa  quite  unknown.  They  do  not  know  the  name 
of  the  Dooraunees,  though  that  tribe  haa  <rfUn  conquered  thair  oomi" 
try.  They  either  call  them  by  the  general  name  of  Khorassaunees,  or 
by  the  erroneous  one  of  Ghtlj^  Jewun  Sing,  the  chief  of  Ravdl 
Pindee,  and  one  of  the  greatest  in  the  Punjaub,  visited  me  here.  He 
was  a  plain,  civil  man,  only  distinguished  from  his  followers  by  his 
decent  appearance  and  manners.  His  numerous  companions  and  at*  ' 
tendants  sat  down  promiscuously  in  a  circle,  and  seom«„Hl  nil  on  a  foot- 
ing of  eqiialitv.  A  Sik  in  my  sm  ice,  once  dined  wiili  tliis  Sirdnr, 
and  found  at  least  two  hundred  and  tifty  guests,  all  the  soldiers  in  his 
immediate  employ  partaking  of  his  fare  even-  day.  When  we  wished  to 
return  his  visit,  we  found  that  he  and  all  his  attendants  were  dnmk ; 
but,  about  four  in  the  afternoon,  he  was  reported  sober,  and  received 
us  in  a  little  smoaky  hovel,  in  a  small  garden,  his  people  in  confu- 
sion as  before.  Most  of  them  continued  to  sit,  while  he  got  up  to  re- 
ceive us.  While  we  were  al  Hawii  Pmdee,  the  haram  overtook  us, 
and  with  it  came  Shaiili  Ztjuiaun.  We  visited  him  on  the  10th  of 
July,  and  were  not  a  little  inleiej^led  by  the  sight  ol  a  2klunaich,  wiiose 
reputation  at  one  time  spread  bo  wide  boiii  m  Persia  and  India.  We 