


Digitized  by  Google 


INTBQDUCTIONv 


at  the  top  of  whick  was  a  luge  afarer  balL  The  canvas  itsdf  wiM 
led.  Its  me  wm  to  made  the  encamping  ground  The  King's  tents 
were  nfberwafds  sent  out  The  finest  was  about  thirty  feet  bfoadi 
and  very  Icmg.  It  was  formed  of  wooden  frMneSf  in.  which,  were 
placed  canvas  pannels  in  compartments  -of  various  colours.  The 
roof  was  pink,  mid  was  supported  by  four  poles,  each  of  wliich  had  a 
silver  ball  nt  the  top.  Behind  this  we  re  many  other  tents  of  a  smaller 
size,  and  tfic  whole  wa-s  surrounded  l)^'  ji  wall  of  cotton  skrcens. 
Two  sets  ot  tfiits  like  this  always  accoin|)aii\  tlu-  King,  and  with  each 
is  a  wooden  lunise  two  stories  high,  whit  li  ovic  luiin lied  workmen  can 
pitch  in  an  hour.  The  town  was  full  oi  bustle  4  a  number  ol  troops 
were  encamped  under  llu  b.dla  Hissaur.  and  the  streets  were  crowded 
with  horsemen  ;  but  the  tranquillity  ol  the  city  was  not  otherwise 
disturbed.  At  length  the  King  moved  out  to  his  cauip,  and  a.H  it  was 
not  the  policy  of  the  British  government  to  take  any  share  in  the  civil 
war ;  it  became  necessary  to  fix  on  a  spot  to  which  the  mission  should 
retire.  All  the  ministers  agr^d  in  representing  that  Feshaw^  waa 
an  imfit  . place  to  nmiam  m-dnring  troufaled'  timea  :  md  AkiMB 
BbaiiOt  after  oonaideiiiig  and  rejeding  a  plan  £ir. our  retiring  into  the 
mountains  of  the  Euaofyzes,  offered  to  allow  na'to  occupy  the  &it  of 
Atfcoek»  which  woiild,  be  peffeetly  safe  in  all  extnemitiea.  Thialwiaa 
dedtned,  and  it  waa  fixed  tfaait  we  thoold  go  to  the  eaatcm  fiontief» 
whidier  die  KngV  femily  waa  alsp  to  be  aent  lliia  being  Brranged; 
we  went  on  the  ISth  of  June  to  the  £3ng^8  camp  to  take  leaTe.  The 
atieeta  were  more  crowded  than  ever»  and  we  aaw  many  partiea  of 
cavalry,  and  aome  exodlok  horaeiB. 

The  King^a  tents  Were  pitched  in  a  g»den  on  the  banks  of  a  pond> 
round  which  was  a  temkoe  of  masonry.  The  great  tent  occupied  one 
side  of  the  pond:  <»  two  of  the  other  sides  were  the  Khauns  of  the 
oourt»the  greater  on  the  King's  right,  and  the  lesser  on  his  left(  the 
kmrth  side  waa,  open,  so  as  to  allow  of  the  King's  seeing  down  a  street 
finrraed  by  two  raidcs  of  guards^  which  eattended  from  the  pond  to  the 
prindpal  gate  of  the  garden.    We  were  introduced  by  a  side  gate, 

and  led.  op  tQ  the  .ri^  hand»  where  we  stood  with  all  the  gre«t 

10 


Digitized  by  Google 


TO  INTRODUCTION. 

Khauns.  While  m  were  tliiere,  several  parties  who  hadootfne  ovif 
filnn-  llie  enemy,  were  suocessiYely  introdliocld.  Xhejr  catered  by  the 
gate  opposite  the  King's  twt,  where  they  were  drawn  up  in  aliMb 
Uieiff  namte  were  announced,  and  they  went  through  the  usual  form 
of  praying  for  the  King,  after  which  they  retired.  At  the  end  of 
each  prayer,  the  whole  of  the  guards  called  out  Aumeen  (Amen). 
Wlien  this  waK  over,  we  were  requested  to  go  up  close  to  the  King, 
accompanied  bv  Akram  and  Muddud  KJiaun.  The  Kin£j  thou  ad- 
dressed me,  saying,  that  we  must  be  unaccustomed  to  so  luisettleti  a 
govemmpnt  as  his  was  at  present,  and  that  altlumgh  he  parted  with 
us  with  reluctance,  yet  he  was  uuwiliing  to  ex[>osc  us  to  the  incon- 
venience of  a  campaign,  and  he  therefore  wished  us  to  retire^to  some 
place  on  the  frontier,  from  which  we  could  either  join  him,  or  return 
to  Intlia,  as  suited  our  convenience.  In  the  course  of  the  conversa- 
tion-which  followed,  His  Majesty  spoke  in  high  terms  of  the  British 
nAdon,  and  hoped  he  should  be  able  to  cany  vm  with  fasm  to'  Candid 
hvendHennitt  When  be  had  conelq<ied>  Aknm  Kh«un»  Miiddnti 
KiMim,  iad  the  fibgf •  Jnumm,  leveielly  made  ipeeohei  eiMiewwi  t» 
the  Kiiig»  eommwting  on  What. His  Majesty  had  said,  and  enlaignDg 
in  the  jiutio^  good  laith»  and  military  rqmtation  of  the  Britiah,  Mid 
en  Uie  advaiiti^et  to-be  derived  from  an  alliance  with  sudi  a  people* 
At-thia  audience^  the  Kinig  wore'a  hig|i  cap  of  plain  red  docfaf  widi » 
blaek  Tehret  band  nmnd  the  bottom.  He  had  no  jewda  on:  a  maoe^ 
a  iwoidt  and  a  caibine^  lay  bafeie  hkn  on  a  cnahion.  Several  penona 
were  'in  the'  tent- with  hiraf  ftnning  him  by  turaa*  and  among  lh«n 
was  Meer  Abool  Hnssun  Ehaun.  Th»  King  looked  iU  and  haggaid*' 
as  if  exhavflted  by  the  heat,  and  by  anxiety  of  mind. 
-  On  the  two  nest  daysi  we  had  latewell  visits  from  Akram  Ehatni 
and  many  other  persons ;  andon  the  1 4th ,  i  n  the  ev^iing»  we  commenced 
our  march  ibr  the  Indus.  The  King's  affairs  were  now  in  a  highly- 
prosperous  oot^dition.  He  had  equipped  a  tolerable  army,  and  was 
ready  to  mc>ve  against  the  enemy,  whose  dissensions  had  come  to 
such  ;i  pitc  h,  that  Futteh  Khaun  had  seized  his  rival  in  the  midst  of 
the  court,  and  had  thus  occanmsed  the  deiection  of  two  oi'  the  great 