

Soon  «fter'  the  arrival  of  then  Khauna,  and*  befeie  the.fint;alam 
oieated  by  the  bad  man  tpw  ofinv  a'Hmdoo  waa  aeised  m  ooeof  the 
passes  on  the  way  to  Gailbul»  and  a  report  immediately  spread  throe^ 
Feshawer,  that  he  was  a  servant  of  mine,  charged  with  lettera  to 
Shauh  Mahmood,  begging  him  to  pnah  on  to  Peahawer,  and  engaging 
for  the  capture  of  the  Balla  Hissaor,  and  the  seizure  of  Shauh.  Shujan. 
This  story  was  accompanied  by  a  rumour,  that  the  King  wa*  on  the 
point  of  giving  up  bur  property  to  phmder.  Tlie  whole  town  was, 
in  consequence,  in  a  ferment ;  peoplr  were  runninf;  up  and  down  in 
alf  fhrocfrons,  getting  their  arms  in  mder,  and  lighting  theii  matiht^s, 
and  a  great  mob  soon  assembled  at  our  gates.  All  tlie  gentlemen  of 
the  embassy  wore  sitting  at  this  time  in  the  liail,  receiving  company ; 
but  Captain  Pitman  quietly  doubletl  the  guards,  and  took  other  mea- 
sures of  defence.  In  the  mean  time,  Mooiia  Jaflfer  and  another  of 
4>ur  friends  urived  in  much  alarm,  and  there  was  a  great. deal  of 

K  2 


0B 


INTRODUCTION.' 


whispering  and  agitation  ;  but  when  things  were  at  their  height^ 
Akram  Khaun  liappene<l  to  come  in  on  a  visit,  and  it  may  be  sup- 
posed that  (lie  crowd  did  not  remain  long  after. 

Notliing  else  took  pla<  c  tliaf  need  be  mentione*!  here,  except  that 
on  the  4th  of  Jtnie,  tlie  ^mty  of  troops  with  the  mission  was  exer- 
cised in  honour  ol  His  Majesty's  birth  day.  Akram  Khaun  and  many 
other  persons  of  all  ranks  were  present.  The  spot  was  achnirably 
calculati  (1  lor  a  small  body,  bcmg  a  green  plain,  coufmed  by  hillocks. 
The  Dooraimees  werc^  orreatly  delighted  with  the  cxhiijition,  and 
even  the  King  viewed  iL  liirough  a  telescope  from  the-  top  of  the 
Balhi  Hissaur. 

During  this  time,  the  King  was  exerting  liimself  to  get  together  an 
army.  Many  of  the  troops  who  had  been  taken  in  Cashineer,  were 
allowed  to  letuni,  but  half  of  them  were  dismount^  and  disarmed, 
aDd'the'rest  were  full  of  latitude  to  the  gov^Kur  of  Caduaeer*  and 
morK  inclined  to  ium  'than'  to  tbe  fijog.  'Bte  army*  indeed,  waa 
generally  disafleoted  { the  chiefr  wefe  disgusted  wifli  Aknm  Khaun* 
and  the  aoldien  eoxaged  at  their  diagraoea  and  diaaateia»  and  dio- 
treased  for  want  of  pay.  They  acarcely  attempted  to  eonoeal  thia 
diqpoaition,  but  openly  ocooated  .gentlemen  of  the  miaoon  in  the 
atieeta, .  ainudng-  Alaram  Khann,  and  not  even  aparing  the-Kuig; 
Akfam*i  weight  hod  indeed  declined  even  with  Hia  M^jeaty^-  and 
Abool  Husaun  Khaun  uaed  aometimea  to  expreaa  his  bopes-of  being 
able  to  grt  him  removed^-  and  the  diieotion  of  afiiia  given  to  Miid> 
dud  Khaun.  Hie  eflbct  of  thia  change  was  felt  in  the  King^a  council) 
where  the  opiniona'  of  the  chieb  of  dans  were  at  all  timea  .treated 
with  great  attention,  hut.wheiew  at  present,  nobody  had  a  preponder- 
ating influoice ;  consequently,  'nothing  was  evear  brought  to  a  deci- 
sum  at  their  debates,  which  often  ended  in  mutual  reproach  and 
recrimination.  It  was  .at  length  detennined  to  march  lor  Caubul, 
and  the  King's  tents  were  ordered  to  move  out.  A  gun  was  fired  at 
an  hour  fixed  by  the  Imaum,  and  at  the  same  time  the  King's  mun- 
zilnoomau  was  crectctl.  This  was  a  kind  of  obelisk  formed  by  can- 
vas mad.  iu  a  particular  manner  round  a  pole  about  thirty  ieet  high* 