

It  was  at  Hussun  Abdaul  that  tihe  mission  was  to  have  KBmaumd 
tiailw  teof  dmldiHsdomof  OsobnlwAsdeoidads  Ira^bafim 

h 


Digitized  by  Google 


74  INTRODUCTION. 

od  thit  plaoe^  I  had  NoeiTed  oidan  to  retum  to  the  British  provinoM^ 
ind  had  ttmounoed  my  lecill  to  the  King.  Ifc  was,  however*  neoef^ 
nij  to  wait  Hia  M^esty's  answer,  and  also  to  settle  with  the  Sika 
about  a  passage  through  their  territories,  which,  at  first,  they  positire- 
Ij  refused.  This  occasioned  a  halt  of  ten  days ;  during  which  time, 
I W9B  Tisited  by  some  chiefs  of  the  neighbourhood,  and  received  a  lei^ 
ter  Jrom  the  Sultan  of  the  Guckers,  aceompanied  by  a  vast  quaatil^ 
of  grapes,  which  grow  wild  in  his  country.  The  Guckers  are>wdl. 
known  for  the  trouble  they  used  to  occasion  to  the  great  Mbguls. 
They  once  possessed  the  whole  country  between  the  Indus  and  lly- 
daspes,  but  have  been  driven  out  by  the  Siks.  They  have  still  a  high 
military  reputation. 

I  also  receiv  ed  a  visit  from  Moolla  Jaffer,  who  liad  come  with  the 
King's  ha  ram  to  Attock,  whence  they  were  to  fly  to  the  Sik  coun- 
try, if  the  Kiii  L^'s  affairs  took  an  unfavourable  tnrn. 

8()(  >ti  iitter,  1  received  my  answer  from  the  King ;  and,  every  thing 
being  settled  with  the  Siks,  T  was  preparing  to  commence  niy  march, 
when  one  night  I  was  surprised  to  hear  that  the  peesh  khauneh  or  ad- 
vanced tents  of  the  haram  had  arrived  close  to  camp.  This  boded  no 
good,  and  reports  were  soon  circulated  th^  the  King  had  been  de- 
feated. 

The  next  day  showed  a  great  change  in  the  state  ol'  atlans,  the  re- 
port being  now  generally  believed.  All  the  King's  partisans  were 
depressed,  while  some  adversaries  of  his  started  up  where  they  were 
litde  eiqpected. 

MooQa  Jaflkr.  arrived  m  Ihe  ooune  this  day*  and  produced  a  let*- 
ter  fiom  the  King ;  in  which*  he  8aid»  that  his  troops  had  hdiaVcd 
with  fidelity,  hat  that  he  was  defeated;  that  sncfa.  and  sncfa  chiefi 
were  sale;  and  Uiat  no  expense  was  to  be  spared  in  conveying  the 
haram  to  a  place  of  secority.  It  turned  out,  that  the  army  was  at* 
tacked  by  a  small  fiwoe  under  Tntteh  Khaim,  as  it  was  straggling  ofi» 
mixed  with  the  baggage».  after  a  very  long  march  through  the  moun^ 
tains.  Hie  King  and  Akram  Khaun;  were  in  the  rear ;  bot  the  ktteri 
who  had  his  aruKmr  on,  rode  strai^  to  the  scene  of  action.  He  had 
not  above  one  or  two  fanndied  men  when  he  set  out,  and  moat  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


75 


Itoe  were  left  bfihind  as  he  advanoecL  The  day  was  dedded  before 
he  irrivvd;  but  he,  nevertheleaa,  puihed  on,  and  had  penetrated  to 
iSttB  place  whore  Tutteh  Khaim  wa.s,  ^vh^^  he  was  overpowered  and 
daiDf  after  a  Terjr  brave  resistance.  The  King  fled  to  the  moimtaiD^ 
ftom  whence  he  soon  after  issued  to  take  Candahar.  That  enterpriae 
was  alao.  uHimately  unsuccessful.  He  hat  made  two  more  attenqrta 
dnoe  tlieas  and haa  twice  takoa  Beshswert  but  is  now  onoe  more  in 
exile. 