

a  abo  of  the  lebel^ 

lipiia  vtrier. ... 

Not  long  after  their  march,  newt  amvad  of  the  aqptnie  of*  Caada- 
hir  hy  Shaiih  Mahmoodi  irfiich  at^first,  oeoanoned  lome  depnameat 
liiit  that  waa  removed  by  &vouraUe  rejports  from  the  wert. .  ^tha 
nme  time,  newa  daily  arrived  of  Akram  Khaun's  successful  ptofprieM, 
and  all  Periiawer  was  in  daily  expectation  of  the  fall  of  Caahmeer, 
and  the  return  of  the  army,  whidi  would,  have  been  attended  with 
tiie  immediate  dispersion  of  the  rebels  in  (he  west.  All  these  hopes 
were  quashed  by  intelligence  which  was  received  on  the  23d  of  Aprtl» 
of  the  entire  defeat  and  destruction  of  Akram  Khaun's  army. 

That  minister  had  reposed  r^ront  confidence  in  Mofnwnllv,  the  hill 
chief  of  Mozufferabad,  and  h;iti  depended  on  liiin  fin  sii|)])lies  and 
guides  ;  at  the  same  time,  hi.s  ungovernable  pride  ami  a\  aiice  led  him 
to  offeTid  this  very  man,  in  whose  hands  he  had  put  the  safetv  of  his 
whole  army.  The  effect  of  these  mistakes  was  soon  felt  in  the  want 
of  supplies,  but  Akram  had  now  arrived  at  the  last  pass,  which 
though  defended  by  a  wall  and  towers,  would,  probably,  have  soon 


Digitized  by  Gopgle 


INTRODUCTION. 


been  carried*  iiod  the  anaOents  been  apimateri  by  that  spirit  irbidt 
has  always  enabled  the  needy  armies  of  the  west  to  finoe  Ihe  entrance 
of  this  ridi  valley.  Akiam,  however,  lent  an' ear  to  the  persoasions 
of  Motawulleet  who  undertook  to  shew  him'  a  pass,  by  whidi  he  mig^ 
turn  the  flank  of  the  enemy's  work*  Aeoor£ii^y  the' army  marched 
off  fiom  the  front  of  the  entrenchmenty  and  moved  up  a  vaiUey»  secur- 
mg  the  mountains  on  each  ride  by  parties  of  Khyfoeree  and  Chiljie 
infantry.  Its  march  was*  however^  soon  discovered,  and  its  infimtiy 
dcit-munbered  and  driven  in  $  in  additicm  to  which»  it  was  ascertained 
rumoured,  that  the  upper  put  of  the  valley  was  choked  with  im- 
panable  snow.  Akram  Khaun  now  lost  all  confidence :  he  remained 
for  a  day  in  the  valley  without  supplies,  and  exposed  to  the  fire  of 
the  enemy's  in&ntiy,  which  was  disheartening  to  his  troops,  thou^ 
too  distant  to  be  injurious.  This  situation  produced  many  desertions, 
which,  added  to  the  perfidy  of  Motawiillee,  completed  Ak ram's 
alarm,  and,  knowing  liow  unpo]in]:ir  ho  in  the  army,  he  began  to 
fear  that  he  would  be  seized  and  delivered  to  the  chief  of  Cashnieer, 
the  disgrace  and  death  of  whose  fatlier  he  had  ocoasione<l.  The  result 
was  a  resohition  to  fly ;  and,  accordingly,  in  the  course  of  the  night, 
all  the  chiefs  abandoned  the  army,  and  each  separately  endeavoured 
to  effect  his  escape  through  the  passes  of  the  mountains.  Most  of 
theiu  were  |iluiiilpred  by  Motawullee's  mountaineers,  before  they 
passed  Mi>/iiiieial)ail ;  and  Akram  himself  is  said  to  have  been  sur- 
rounded, and  only  to  have  escaped  by  scattering  pieces  of  gold  among 
the  plunderers,  and  flying  during  the  scramble^  At  length  he  crassed 
the  Indus,  and  leached  the  town  of  Aeora}  where  he  received  thoae 
who  went  to  meet  him  without  the  smallest  abatement  of  his  former 
pride*  The  troops,  when  deserted  by  thehr  chiefi,  Bar  the  most  port 
laid  <k>wn  then  arms.  Some  endeavoured  to  force  their  way  throui^ 
the  hiDs,  but  shared  the  fiite  of  thc9T  superiors.  Of  the  whole  army, 
not  above  two  thousand  men  arrived  at  Peshawer,  dismounted*  dis* 
anned,  and  almost  naked.  This  disaster,  great  as  it  was,  was.ezag« 
gerated  when  first  heard  of  at  Peshawer ;  the  whole  army  wiis  said  to 
be  annihilatiadr  Aknan  Khann  was  missing,  and  JMuddud  Khann  had 