

Our  neit  maich  waaalong  the  Caubul  river  to  Aooia,  the  princqial' 
town  of  the  Khuttuks,  where  we  mw  Asoph  Khaun,  the  diie^  and 
many  of  the  principal  men  c£  the  tribe.  Asoph  Khaun  was  a 
very  respectable  looking  man,  very  handsomely  drened,  and  well 
lUt^ded.  The  others  were  m<»tly  elderly  men,  dressed  in  dark 
blue,  or  black,  with  fiur  csomplei^ona,  long  beards,  and  reverend 
countenances. 

The  whole  of  our  march  had  hitherto  betn  between  a  range  ot 
hills  on  the  south,  and  the  Caubul  river  on  tJir  north,  which  had 
approached  each  other  at  Noushehra,  so  as  only  to  leave  room  to 
.  encamp  between  them. 

On  the  march  of  the  18th,  which  reached  to  the  Indus,  the  hills 
came  dose  to  the  nver  of  Caubul,  so  that  we  were  obliged  to  cross 
them.  Ihfij  belong  to  the  same  range  which  we  paieed  near  Cohauft, 
and  we  were  reminded  that  Ihey  contained  the  lame  iwtWM^^mj  bj 
finding  Khuttuk  guar^  poeted  in  the  paaa  to  protect  our  baggage 
fiom  the  KheibCTcci* 

Fam  the  top  of  the  pass  we  eaw  to  the  nag&t  the  Indus  iseuing 
In  a  vaat  number  of  channela  fiom  a  mass 
.  aearoe  allowed  ua  to  see  the  toountains  thiou^  which .  it  had 
llmd.  It,  however,  fi>imed  but  two'  channela  when  it  readied 


Digitized  by  Google 


JNTRODUCnON. 


tlie  hill  wbiaee  we  Hood,  at  the  IboC  of  ubicli  it  was  jdned  by  the 
t  Ginbiil  river«  lliere  were  nunMRMu  Tocks  et  the  point  of  junotioiir 
and  as  bodi  riTets'ian  with  great  impetiioei^,'  ilie  tifftk  and  the 
aaand»  pcodnced  by  the  daahing  of  tlieir  waten»  were  very  noble. 
After  this  tbe  riven  were  coitteoted  intoone  disnnel,  and  r»itlii«Nigb 
the  moontsins  in  a  deep  but  nanow  stream'  between  high  banks 
of  perpendicular  rock.  The  fixt  of  .  Attock  was  also  plainly  seen 
from  this,  and  on  desooidin^  we  encamped  On  a  qpot  oppose  to 
that  place. 

The  Xndm  was  here  about  two  hundred  and  sixty  yards  broad, 
but  too  deep  and  rapid  to  be  correctly  sounded.  Its  banks  are  of 
black  stone,  polished  by  the  force  of  the  stream,  and  by  the  white 
sand  which  it  carries  along  with  it,  so  as  to  shine  like  black  marble* 
and  always  to  look  as  if  it  were  wet. 

In  the  midst  are  the  famous  rocks  of  Jellalleea  and  Kenialleea; 
but  the  whirlpool  oi'  which  we  had  heard  so  much,  did  oot  rage 
at  the  season  when  we  passed. 

The  fort  of  Attock  stood  on  a  low  hillock  on  the  left  bank.  It 
is  a  parallelogram,  of  which  the  shortest  Aces  (tliose  parsllel  to  the 
livw)  are  about  four  hundred  yards  long,  the  others  are  of  twice 
diat  kngth.  Ihe  walls  are  of  polished  stone^  but  tfaoni^  the  place 
.  makes  a  handsome  show,  it  is  commanded  hy  a  louj^  bill,  only 
divided  fiom  it  by  a  laTuie ;  and  being  on  a  dofe,  almost  the  whole 
of  the  interior,  and  the  lerccse  of  the  walls  on  three  &oes»  are 
Tunble  from  the  opposite  bank.  The  town,  though  now  decayed,  was 
once  very  considerable. 