


Digitized  by  Google 


XKTRODUCTIOli. 


rr 


Saaod  him  amded  on  a'  phtn  ocmch,  in  a  neat,  but  nM  » large  tent, 
qpiread  widi  cafpets  and  fdts.'  We  stood  opposite  to  him,  till  he  de*> 
lired  ua  to  be  seeted.  Hia  dsesi  waa  plain ;  a  white  mantle,  faoed 
vith  FBnian  brocade,  and  a  bhnk  shawl  tmban;  but  his  afipearanoa 
waa  yety  kingly.  He  looked  about  forty  when  we  mw  him.  He  had 
a  fine  fboe  and  person.  His  voice,  and  maimer,  strongly  resemUed 
Shauh  Shujaua  $  but  he  was  taller,  and  had  a  longer,  more  regular 
laoe,  and  a  finer  beaid.  He  had  b^  no  means  the  appearance  of  a 
blind  man :  his  eyes,  thou^  phdidj  injured,  retained  black  enoo^ 
to  give-nvaci^  to  his  countenance;  and,  he  always  tinned  ihem  to 
wadk  the  petaon  with  whom  he  was  cokirening.  He  had,  however, 
some  appearance  of  d^ectioa  and  melaachofy.  Afixr  we  were  soeted, 
a  hmg  sQence  ensued,  which  Shauh  Zemaun  broke,  bj  -ifjeaildng  cf 
his  bvothei^s  misfortmic^  and  saying  they  had  prevented  his  showing 
lis  the  atientlim  he  otherwise  woold.  He  then  spoke  of  the  state  of 
affiun,  and  expressed  his  hopes  of  a  duu^e.  He  said,  such  reversti 
were  the  cMumoh  portion  of  Kings ;  and  mentioned  the  hi^rical  ao* 
counts  of  astonishing  revolutioDS  in  the  fortones  cf  various  princes, 
particularly  in  thai  of  Tamerlane.  Had  he  gone  over  all  the  history 
of  Asia,  he  could  scarcely  have  discovered  a  moce  remarkable  instance 
of  the  mutability  of  fortune  than  he  himself  presented ;  blind,  de« 
throned,  and  exiled,  in  a  conntry,  which  he  had  twice  subdued. 

We  marched  from  Kawil  Pindee  on  the  i2th  of  July*  and  reached 
the  Hvdaspes  in  ten  marches.  The  first  six,  were  like  those  already 
meiilioned,  unniltiyatCKl  country,  niuf  }i  c  ut  with  dee|>  ravines  and 
torrent-coui s(  s,  and  (like  the  whole  country  between  the  Hvdaspes 
and  Indus,)  pastured  on  by  droA  e*j  of  horses  of  a  very  good  breed. 
The  part  most  to  the  east  was  l^etter  cultivated  than  the  rest.  In  the 
first  oi  tiiese  marches,  we  crossed  tlie  8vvun,  a  large  rivulet,  which, 
though  only  up  to  our  horses  girths,  Mas  so  rapid  as  scarcely  to  be 
fbrdable.  Several  of  our  camels  w^e  swept  down  by  the  stream. 
The  la,st  four  marches  were  among  hills,  interj^eraed  with  country 
like  tliat  already  described.  The  high  hills  on  'the  north  were  ge- 
nerally concealed  by  fogs,  but  sometimes  we  saw  them  rifling  to  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


78  INTRODUCTION. 

great  hmfjOA  above  the  douds.  The  whole  of  our  joiimcj  acroM  the 
tcact  between  the  Indiu  and  Hydaspes  waa  about  one  hundred  and 
aixty  miles ;  for  which  flpaoe»  the  oountiy  ia  among  the  ationgest  I 
haye  ever  aeen.  The  difficulty  of  our  passage  across  it  was  increaaed 
by  heavy  rain.  On  one  oocaBion»  the  rear  guard*  with  some  gentle- 
men of  the  mission,  were  cut  off  from  the  rest  by  the  awdling  of  a 
brookf  whk^  had  not  been  a  foot  deep  when  they  be^n  to  cross.  It 
came  down  with  suiprising  violence»  carrying  away  some  loaded  ca- 
mels that  were  crossing  at  the  time^  and  rising  about  ten  feet,  within 
a  minute.  Nothing  could  be  grander  than  this  torrent.  Such  was 
ita  force,  that  it  ran  in  waves  like  the  sea,  and  rose  against  the  bank 
in  a  ridge,  like  the  surf  on  the  coast  of  Coromandel. 