


M  INTRODUCTION. 

Ths  iMtiires  called  it      Tope  o£  Afiutiiof Miit»  iad  «dd  k 
buill  by  the  9odi.  *  ■ 

MiDy  bwheit  and  cue  pretty  kiige  BiDyaii  tiee^  grew  out  of  Uie 
building. 

Befiire  we  reached  the  Hydaspes,  we  had  a  viev  of  the  famous  foft 
of  Rotas,  but  it  waa  at  a  great  distahoe^  owing  to  our  having  left  the 
main  road,  and  crossed,  fifteen  or  sixteen  miles  lower  donm  than  the 
oinal  lerxy  at  Julum.  Rotaa  ire.utidenrtood  to  be  an  estebaEvre  bat 
strong  fort  on  a  low  Iiill. 

We  crossed  the  Hydaspes  at  Jellalpoor,  in  the  course  of  fire  days, 
from  the  22d  of  July  to  the  2Gth  inclusive.  I  was  greatly  struck 
with  the  difference  between  the  banks  of  this  river ;  the  lefl  bank  had 
all  the  characteristics  of  the  plains  of  India,  it  was  indeed  as  flat  and 
as  rich  as  Bengal,  which  it  trreatly  resembled  :  the  ri;iht  hank,  on  the 
contrary,  was  formed  bv  the  end  of  tlu^  ranjio  of  s  alt  liills,  formerly 
seen  at  C  alla-baugh,  and  had  an  air  of  extreme  ruggedness  and  wildness, 
that  must  inspii  e  a  fearful  presentiment  of  the  country  he  was  entering, 
into  the  mind  oi  a  traveller  from  tlie  east.  The  hills  still  retain  the  red 
colour  for  which  they  were  so  remarkable,  where  we  crossed  them 
before.  Tliev  came  lu  the  edge  of  the  river,  which  being  also  divided 
by  islands,  presents  exactly  the  appearance  one  expects  from  the 
accounts  of  the  ancients.  So  precisely  does  Quintus  Curtius's  de- 
scription of  the  scene  of  Poms's  battle  ccurrespond  with  die  part  of 
the  Hydaspes  where-  ire  crossed,  that  several  geutkmen  of  die  mi^ 
SHKi  iribo  leUdthepaasage  on  the  spot,  were  pertnaded  that  it  reftfied 
to  the  Teiy  ]^Acd  befivre  their  eyea. 

After  passing  the  Hydaspes,  ire  continnad  our  march  aanoas  the 
P^anb,  vduch  oeenpied  fiom  the  flSdi  ef  My  tOl  the  99th  of  An. 


*  Tope  i»  an  eiqpreuion  used  for  a  mound  or  burrow  as  far  west  as  Peshawer,  and 
itaanioynh  ivtlieiHme  of  •»  adjoining  village.  The  chawing  was  made  at  Pbouaundtf 
my  direction,         sketches  made  by  different  gendomcn  on  the  day  after  our  viait  t» 
Maunicyaula.    In  such  circumstances,  minute  accuraqr  cannot  be  expected,  but  ifae 
neral  idea  oiuiT^ed  by  the  drawing  is  I  tliink  correct 


4 


.  Digitized  by  Google- 


■ 

I 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  S| 

giMb  Mj  acooimt  of  thb  pwt  of  the  journey  need  not  bt  long :  as 
&r  weA  it  Lahore  has  been  visited  by  English  gentlemcai ;  mil  Snr 
John  Malcohn  hm  alraadjr  given  all  that  is  datiiable  to  know  iMpect 

ing  the  Siks,  the  most  wwqarlmMe  part  of  the  population. 

The  fertility  of  the  Punjaub  appears  to  have  been  too  much  ex- 
tolled bv  our  fTfOfrraphers  :  except  near  rh  ers,  no  part  of  it  will  bear 
a  comparison  witli  the  British  pro\  ince.-,  in  Hindostan,  and  still  less 
witii  Jieiifral,  which  it  has  been  thouglit  to  resemble.  In  the  part  T 
passed  through,  the  soil  was  generally  sandy)  and  by  no  means  rich  : 
the  country  nearer  tiie  iiiils  was  said  to  be  better,  and  that  further  to 
the  south,  worse.  Of  tlie  iour  divisitHih  oi  the  I'unjaub  east  of  the 
Hydaspes,  the  two  nearest  to  that  river  are  chiefly  pastured  on  by  herds 
of  oxen  and  buffaloes  :  and  that  most  to  the  east,  towards  the  Hysu- 
drus,  or  Sutledge,  though  most  sterile,  is  best  cultivated.  The  two 
former  are  quite  flat ;  the  latter  is  wavyt  but  there  is  not  a  hill  to  the 
east  of  the  Hjrdaspes,  and  nrdj  a  tiee^  except  of  the  dwarfish  race 
of  BaubooL  On  the  wholes  not  a  third  of  the  oountxj  we  aaw  was 
eoltivated*  It,  iMwerer,  oontained  many  &ie  villages,  and  acme  laige 
towna,  hnt  moat  of  the  latter  bore  'strong  marks  of  decay.  Unuitsb 
slone^  lihe  sacred  dty  of  the  SBks*  and  IsAdy  the  seat  of  thdr  nadonal 
oouncils,  fl|ypesired  to  be  mcreasing  $  on  die  contrary,  Lahore  is  has- 
tening fint  to  ruin,  bnt  the  domes  and  minarets  of  the  moaqjues,  the 
lofty  walls  of  the  fort,  die  Qiassy  terracea  of  the  garden  €)£  Shaulimar, 
llie  iqp]en£d  mansoieum  of  the  emperor  Jehangew,  and  the  number^ 
less  inferior  tombs  and  places  of  worship  that  surround  the  town,  stiU 
render  it  an  object  of  curiosity  and  admiration. 