

While  in  the  hilly  country,  our  road  sometimes  lay  through  the 
beds  of  torrents  like  this,  between  moderately  high  hills,  which,  though 
by  no  means  so  strikinjj  as  the  passes  of  the  same  sort  in  Afrrhaunis- 
taun,  were  no  less  dan^a  rous.  In  one  of  these  defiles  the  mission 
was  stopped  by  a  body  of  Siks,  who  occupied  the  liills,  and  commen- 
ced an  attack  on  us ;  first,  by  rolling  down  laigt  stones,  and,  at  last, 
by  opening  a  fire,  which  was  immediately  returned.  Tlieir  fire  was 
at  length  put  a  stop  to,  by  the  interposition  of  the  Siks,  wiio  attended 
the  mission  on  the  pan  of  Jewun  Sing,  l  inturtimately  not  till  one  maa 
had  been  killed  in  the  valley,  and  1  uptaui  i'lLnian  shot  through  the 
arm,  while  ascending  the  hill,  at  ihe  head  of  a  party  of  Sepoys. 

The  most  remarkable  sight  we  met  with  in  this  part,  and  perhaps 

in  the  whole  of  our  journey,  was  an  edifice  About  fifteen  miles  fixim 

Banda,  our  aeoond  march  fiom  Hawil  findee.   The  heaviness  of  tfie 

rain  prevented  our  tpfiwKmg  from  that  place  on  the  day  after  we 

leachod  it;  and  as  we  were  near  the  [dace  which  Ma|or  l¥i]fovd  sup- 

poaes  to  have  bean  the  site  of  Taxila,  a  party  determined  to  set  oat 

in  quest  of  die  ruina  of  that  ckj.  In  the  conne  of  a  drcuit  of  about 

forty  milea,  we  eaw  the  nuns  of  some  Gucker  towns,  destroyed  by  the: 

Sik%  and  thoae  of  aome  othera  still  more  andent*  which  had  sufoed 

the  same  fote  from  the  Mnaaufanans.s  we  alao  saw  one  or  two  cara-. 

wmmi  here  called  Rabauts;  and  we  heard  of  an  obdiaic  of  a  ain|^ 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTBODUCTION.  f9 

■tone,  fifly  or  asty  feet  at  ft  plioe  oiled  Rswieey  which  wis  too 
distant  to  visit:  but  we  met  willi  no  ruins  of  such  antiquity  as  to 
have  any  pietenaioos  to  a  connection  with  Taxila.  however,  at 
length  discovered  a  remarkable  building,  which  seemed  at  first"  to 
be  a  cupola,  but  when  approaclied,  was  found  to  be  a  soHd  striiutare, 
on  a  low  artificial  mound.  The  height  from  the  top  aiibe  momid  to 
the  top  of  the  building  was  about  seventy  &et,  and  the  drcumferenee 
was  found  to  be  one  hundred  and  fifi^y  paces.  It  was  built  of  large 
pieces  of  a  hard  stone  common  in  the  neighbourhood  (which  appeared 
to  bo  composetl  of  petrified  vegetable  matter),  mixed  with  smaller 
pieces  of  a  sandy  stone.  The  greater  part  of  the  outijidc  was  cased 
with  the  first  mentioned  stone,  cut  (^nite  smooth,  and  the  whole 
seemed  intended  to  liave  been  tluis  tuf  ril,  (iu)ii£^b  it  had  eulu  r  Ijocii 
left  iiicompiete,  or  the  casing  hatl  tailen  down.  The  plan  ot  the 
whole  could,  however,  be  easily  discovered.  Some  broad  steps  (now 
mostly  ruined)  lead  to  the  base  of  tiie  pile :  round  the  base  is  a 
mouitiing,  ou  which  are  pilasters  about  four  feet  high,  and  six  feet 
asunder ;  these  have  plain  capnals,  and  support  a  cornice  marked 
with  parallel  lines  and  headings.  The  whole  of  this  may  be  seven  or 
cigliL  feet  high,  firom  the  uppermost,  step  to  the  top  of  the  cornice. 
The  building  then  retires,  leaving  a  ledge  of  a  foot  or  two  broad, 
fiom  whidi  fises  a  pcrpen^cular  wall  about  six  feet  higli :  aboitt  a 
loot  ab07e  the  ledge  is  a  fiUet,  fonned  by  stones  projecting  a  veiy 
little  ttom  the  wall,  and  at  the  top  of  the  wall  is  a  more  pio|ecting 
Qornloe^  fipom  which  the  sphere  springs.  Hie  stones  of  the  fiidng  are 
about  three  feet  and  a  half  k)n|^  and  one  and  a  half  broad*  and  are 
so  pot  in,  that  the  ends  only  are  exposed.  The  top  is  flat,  and  on  it 
thcf  fenndations  of  walls  are  disooveiaUe,  endbphig  a  qpaoe  of  eleven 
paces  long  by  five  broad ;  a  third  of  this  area  is  cut  offby  the  feun- 
dation  of  a  cross  waU.  These  was  nothing  at  all  Hindoo  in  the  ap- 
pearance of  this  building ;  most  of  the  party  thoui^t  it  decidedly 
Grecian.  It  was  indeed  as  like  Grecian  architecture  as  any  building 
which  Europeans,  in  remote  parts  of  the  country,  could  now  construct 
by  the  hands  of  unpractised  native  builders. 