

snow  on  its  summits  throughout  the  most  part  of  the  year,  at  lea^jt  as 
far  as  its  junc  t  ion  with  Mooz  Taugh.  It  leaves  the  range  of  Hindoo 
C«H»^h  in  longitude  71 '  east,  and  runs  in  a  direction  to  the  ea<;t  ot 
north,  till  it  rneets  Mooz  Taugh :  a  range  of  mountains  running  also 
north  and  south,  is  crossed  further  north  hy  tiie  road  from  Kokaun 
to  Cashgar,  and  niuA  be  considered  as  a  continuanoii  of  this  chain. 
It  is  there  lower  ilian  before ;  so  that  it  is  only  hi  severe  seasons  that 
it  retains  its  snow  longer  than  the  beginning  of  summer :  a  little 
to  the  north  of  this  road,  it  gives  rise  to  (he  Jaxartes ;  and  beyond 
tius  my  inlfaffmfltiffli  oenes.  Our  maps,  however,  continue  it  towsfds 
the  nozth,  till  it  leaches  a  lange  of  mountains  which  divides  Chinese 
Tartaiy  from  SQwria,  and  separates  the  wsitav  of  the  fonner  .oountiy 

j  fiom  those  that  flow  into  the  Aictic  Ocean. . 

Our  nu^  call  the  range  which  runs  fiom  Moos  Tau^  to  Hindoo 
Cooah»  Bdnr  Tag,  whidi  is  evidently  a  corruption  of  the  INirkiah 
wQiA  BdwA  Tmi^  oar  Cloudy  Mountains ;  as  I  know  of  no  g^oeral 
name  iqpiilied  fay  the  people  of  Toorkistaun  to  this  range,  I  shall  use 
Ihe  term  Beloot  Tsn^  ibc  it,  on  the  &w  occasions  I  shall  have  for 
moitioning  it 

Beloot  Taug^  forms  the  boundary  between  the  political  divisions  - 
of  Independent  Toorkistaun  and  Chinese  Toorkistaun.  It  also  forms 
I  these  two  countries  into  two  ni^ural  divisions,  since  it  separates  thdr^ 

istreamSf  and  gives  rise  to  rivers  which  water  both  countries. 

I  know  of  no  branches  sent  out  by  Beloot  Taugh  towards  the  east. 
To  the  west  it  sends  out  several  branches,  which,  with  the  valleys  be- 
tween them,  form  the  hitiv  rotnUries  of  Kurrateggeen,  Slioi^'hnaun, 
and  Durwaus.  The  most  southerly  of  them  bounds  Budukhahaua  on 


Digitized  by  Google 


88  OXU& 

die  north,  aa  Hindoo  Coosh  does  on  the  souIJl  .  I  know  little  of  the 
extent  or  direction  of  these  beanches,  but  one  of  them  seems  to 
stretch  westerly  to  n^r  Samarcand.  These  are  the  principal  ranges 
of  mountainf?  north  of  Hindoo  Coosh  ;  hid  a  fow  words  are  required 
respecting  the  rivers  and  coimtries  between  that  rapge,  ilfeioot  Xaugh, 
and  tlie  Caspian  sea. 

I  have  already  mentioned  the  source  of  the  Jaxartes.    It  holds  ft 
course  to  the  north  oi  west,  till  it  falls  into  the  Lake  of  Arul. 

The  Oxus  rises  in  a  glacier  near  Pooshtee  Khur,  a  loftv  peak  oi' 
Beloot  Taugh,  in  the  most  northerly  part  ot  iiudukhshuun.  Its  ge- 
neral course  is  west  as  liir  tui  the  sixty-tliird  degree  of  longitude,  from 
whence  it  pursues  a  north-westerly  course,  through  a  desai^,  to  the 
lake  of  And.  The  rough  oountry  about  the  sounse  of.  the  Jaxartes* 
is  udbabited  by  waadeihig  Kirghizzes  s  but,  from  the  fdeoe  ivbere  h 
kftvee  the  hOls  to  longitiide  66*  or  67^*  east*  both  banks  are  oecn|iied 
by  the  tlriiek  kingdom  of  Ferghauiwy  called  also  KcJawm  from  Ihe 
lesideBoe  of  die  sovereign.  To  the  west  of  longitude  W  easti  llie 
northem  batik  is  inhalnted)  fint  by  JQighiises»  and  than  by  Eusf' 
aanksy  both  rude  ^nd  pastoral  nations.  On  the  sonthem  bank^  ta 
the  ivest  of  longitude  66"  east,  is  a  desatt,  wliich  extends  m  a  soutli- 
^pesterly  direction  to  the  inhabited  couhtiy  of  Kkoiassaun.  Its 
breadlli  varies,  but  in  latitude  40 it  is  seven  days  journey  broad,  and 
it  there  separates  the  Uabek  kingdoms  of  Orgunge  and  Bokhaura  ; 
the  first  of  which  lies  on  the  Caspian,  and  the  other  between  the 
Oxus,  the  desart,  and  the  mountainous  countries  under  Beloot  Taugh. 
The  character  of  these  kingdoms,  or  at  least  of  Bokhaura,  is  that  of 
desart,  enclosing  oases  of  various  size  and  fertility.  All  the  country  • 
west  of  Bf'loot  Tan»h,  and  north  of  the  Oxus.  is  railed  Toorkistaun, 
a  term  which  m;»v  be  extended  to  the  east  oi  Ht  loot  Taugh,  as  far  as 
there  is  reason  to  think  the  f  urkish  language  is  spoken ;  but  when  I 
have  occasion  to  speak  of  that  division,  I  shall  call  it  Chinese  Toor- 
kistaun, and  the  oilier  Toorkistaun  alone.  The  name  of  Tartary  is 
unlmown  in  those  regions.    There  remains  a  tract,  bebweea  the  Oxm» 