

Our  geographers  lay  down  a  fange  of  mountauia  under  the  name 
of  Mns  Tag,  which  aeema  to  oommeace  to  the  north  of  the  eastern 
extremity  of  Hemalleh,  and  to  run  paraUel  to  that  numntain  on  the 
north,  as  fir  as  the  sixty-seventh  degree  of  east  longitnde. 

The  inquiries  made  on  the  Ckubul  miaaion,  have  tiaoed  but  a  small 
part  of  the  extent  of  this  diain.  LAeutenant  Macartney  could  follow 
it  with  certainty  no  fitfther  than  from  Auksoo  to  the  west  of  Leh,  or 
Ladauk,  but  the  reaming  part  of  its  alleged  course  is  probable,  and 
thom^  I  have  not  access  to  the  proofs  of  its  existence,  I  have  no 
reason  to  doubt  it ;  I  shall,  therefore,  take  that  part  of  the  chain  finr 
granted,  and  include  it  in  the  namp  of  Mooz  Taugh.  * 

Though  this  mountain  stands  on  hio;licr  ground  than  Hindoo 
Coosh,  its  height  i'ram  its  base,  and  perhaps  the  absolute  elevation  of 
its  summits,  are  inti  rior  to  those  of  the  hitter  mountain. 

It  is  in  the  southern  side  of  Mooz  Taugh,  tliat  the  Indus  appears 
to  have  its  source,  and  on  the  opposite  side  the  waters  run  north  into 
Chinese  Toorkistaun. 

The  slope  of  the  countries  on  each  side  of  the  mountains,  is  pointed 
out  by  the  direction  of  the  streams ;  but  on  the  north,  the  descent, 
«a  far  at  leaat  aa  my  inlbnnation  goes,  is  generally  gradual  and  unin- 
terrupted: while,  on  the  aouth,  (iiere  is  a  table  land  beneath  Moo* 
Taugh,  which  ia  supported  by  Hemalldi  and  Hindoo  Gioah,  and 
from  which  the  deseent  is  oomparativdy  sudiden  mto  the  plama  of 
Hindostan,  and  of  the  north  cmHtom  part  of  the  Gmbul  dominions. 

The  medium  breadth  of  this  Table  Land  may  be  about  two  hun- 
dred milea,  but  I  have  before  said  that  I  hsTe  no  mfoimation  about 
it  eaat  of  the  meridian  of  Ladauk.  The  eastern  part  of  it  ia  oocnpied 
by  the  extensile  country  of  Tibet;  weat  of  which  are  Little  Tibet 

*  'Diis  term,  which  in  Turklsl!  signifies  ice-hill,  is  appli«?<l  to  onr  plnrr  in  t>if  range  at 
Ittist,  where  it  m  occasioned  by  a  glacier  uear  ihe  rotui  Irum  Varciuid  tu  Laudauk.  Tliis 
tmge^  oraiMrtiGiibrpassini^iiMrdMnMd  jwtnMtte  Is  «dl  lawmiaToiMlM» 
t«m  b!f  the  mm*  of  .KaRflMcimiiii. . 


Digitized  by  Google 


IT 

I 
I 


BEIXXn' TAtJOH.  ffj 

"  -  • 

and  Kauflhkaur,  mountainous  countries  df  no  great  extent.  To  the 
north-w^.  of  the  kit  mentioned  country,  is  the  pbin  of  Funcm 

I  Kaothkaur  uid  Famere  are  bounded  on  the  west  hy  a  range  of  mouiip 

;  tuns,  which  runs  from  the  chain  of  Mooz  Taugh  to  that  uf  Hindoo 

Coosb,  and  which  supports  the  western  face  of  the  Table  Land. 

;  This  range,  though  inferior  in  height  to  that  of  Hindoo  Coosh,  has 