

The  inhabitants  become  more  and  more  like  the  natives  of  Hin^ 
doetan,  as  we  move  towards  the  east :  the  most  numerous  class  were 
the  Juts,  and  next  to  them  the  Hindoos :  the  Siks,  though  the  mas- 
ters of  the  country,  were  few  in  nninber  ;  we  ot)cn  made  a  whole  march 
without  seeing  one,  and  ihev  no  wiiere  bore  any  proportion  to  the  rest 
of  the  population.  Afler  crossing  the  Hydaspes.  we  found  the  Silcs 
unmannerly  and  sullen,  probably  firom  political  caui»es>  for  they  are 

M 


Digitized  by  Google 


i 


$2  IHTRODUCTION. 

naturally  a  merry  people,  careless,  chiUlish.  nncl  easily  amused,  fond 
of  hunting,  and  friven  up  to  driukiiig  and  (kl)auchery.  Almost  the 
whole  of  the  Tunjaub  belongs  to  Runjeet  tjiiig,  who  in  1805  was  but 
one  of  many  (  hicts,  but  who,  when  we  passed,  had  acquired  the 
sovereignty  of  aii  the  biks  in  the  Punjaub,  and  was  assuming  the  title 
of  King.  Towards  the  east,  his  territories  are  bounded  by  states  un- 
der the  protection  oi  the  British,  but  on  all  the  other  sides  he  is 
busied  in  subjugating  his  weak  neiglibours,  by  the  same  mixture  of 
force  and  Liati  that  he  so  successfully  employed  against  the  chiefs  of 
bis  own  nation.  On  crossing  the  Sutledge,  we  reached  the  British 
cantonment  of  Lodeeana,  firom  whence  the  mission  proceeded  straight 
to  DeUy,  a  diitanoe  of  two  himdied  mika. 


Digitized  by  Google 


BOOK  I. 

GEOGRAPHICAL  DESCRIPTION  OF  AFGHAUNISTAUN. 


CHAP.  L 

i  SITUATION  AND  BOUXDABIfS  OF  iVPGHAUNISTAUN. 

¥T  b  dHBcuIt  to  fix  the  limits  of  the  Idqgdom  of  CmbuL  Tfaa 
^  oountnet  under  flie  wvenaffOj  oi  the  King  of  Craln]],  onoe  eix^ 
tended  iny^f*"  degrees  in  longitude  from  Siriiindf  about  cme  hnndied 
and  fifkjr  mike  fiom  Dolly,  to  Meshhed,  about  an  equal  distuMO  fiom 
the  Caspian  sea.  In  breadth  they  reached  firom  the  Oxus  to  the 
Persian  gulph,  a  space  indnding  thirteen  dc^greee  of  latitude^  or' nine 
hundred  and  ten  miles.  ' ; 

But  this  great  empire  has,  of  late,  suffered  a  considerable  diminu> 
tion,  and  the  distracted  state  of  the  government  prevents  the  King's 
exercising  authority  even  (n  er  sevt  ral  of  the  countries  which  are  still 
iiicUuled  in  his  domiuious.  In  thi^  uik  ortaintv  I  shall  adopt  the  test 
made  use  of  by  the  Asiatics  themselves,  and  sliail  consider  tlie  King's 
sovereignty  as  extending  over  all  the  coiinLriea  in  which  the  *  KhooUia 
is  read,  and  the  money  coined  in  his  name. 

In  this  view  the  present  kmgdom  of  Caubul  extends  from  the  west 
of  Heraai  iti  longitude  62',  to  the  eastern  boundary  of  Cashmeer  in 
longitude  77"  east,  and  from  the  month  of  the  Indns»  in  latitude  24% 
to  ixe  Oxus,  in  ]«Utude»  nocth. 