

I  shall  now  mention  the  minor  hills,  which  run  east  and  west  from 
the  great  chwin  just  describeti.  The  first  tliat  occurs,  proceeding 
from  tlie  southward,  is  a  range  which  seems  to  Gommence  to  the 
north  of  Kughzee,  and  extends  to  Punniallee. 

This  branch  is  steep,  craggy,  and  bare,  and  can  scarcely  be  crossed 
except  in  one  plaoe»  where  there  is  a  breach  in  the  hill.    It  ends  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


MURWUT& 


103 


an  abrupt  diff, '  about  nine  hundred  feet  high,  opposite  the  viUi^  of 
Fbnoiallee.  Its  whole  length  is  not  above  sixty  miles,  but  it  desem» 
to  be  mentioned,  as  it  mariB  the  boundary  between  the  phun  of  the 
Indus  and  the  hilly  country  which  I  am  next  to  mention. 

The  next  branch,  which  may  be  called  the  Salt  Range,  ^loots  out 
from  the  south-eastern  side  of  Sufiaid  Coh,  and  extends  in  a  south- 
easterly direction,  bv  the  south  of  Teeree  to  Calla-baugh,  It  there 
crosses  the  Indus,  stretches  across  part  ot"  the  Funjmib,  and  ends  at 
JellaiiIpor)r,  on  the  right  \>ank  of  the  Hvfiaspes.  It  becomes  lower 
as  it  tjets  tarther  from  the  mountains  ol  iSol  innun.  This  ranjje  is 
both  hi<;her  and  broader  than  the  last.  It  abounds  in  sah,  which  is 
dug  out  in  various  forms  at  dillV  i  c ni  phu  es.  To  the  eastward,  it 
yields  a  rock  salt  of  a  brownish  < ulour,  which  is  imported  into  Hin- 
dooslitn,  arid  kiiiiv.  ri  by  the  naiiu:  of  l^^ore  salt. 

The  third  range,  to  the  northward,  extends  from  tfie  eastern  side 
of  Sufiald  Coh,  straight  to  tlie  Indus,  which  it  crosses,  but  doi>$  not 
rwch  6r  beyond  its  eistem  side.  As  it  lies  durii^  the  whole  of  its 
eonne  betiroea  the  durty-lUnl  and  thuty-fonfth  fines  of  latitude*  I 
AaU  call  it  the  range  of  d4f  north  latitnde.  It  is  much  hi|^  thaa 
my  of  the  other  Mnges,  and,  thoui^  its  valleys  are  wider,  its  ridjge  is 
move  diiBcdt  tb  pass.  Like  those  ranges,  it  decreases  in  height  aa  it 
runs  eastward,  but  as  &r  east  as  Cohant,  the  snow  Mes  on  its  summits 
tiU  the  spring  is  &r  adiranced,  and  a  little  snow  fidls  in  winter  even 
on  the  parts  towards  the  Indus.  Hie  hig^iest  parts  of  it  bear  pineq, 
and  the  lower  oliTes. 

Between  the  Range  of  d4°  and  the  Ssk  Range,  lie  some  plains  and 
TaUeys,  belonging  to  the  tribes  of  Bungusli  and  Khuttuk.  Tliejr  slope 
towards  the  Indus,  but  are  separated  from  the  river  by  a  low  range  of 
liiUs  running  north  and  south.  In  the  northein  part  of  the  space  be> 
iweeu  the  Salt  Range  and  that  of  Punniallee,  the  valleys  of  Dour, 
Bunnoo,  ^lutuk,  and  Esaukhail,  descend  like  steps  from  the  Soli- 
maun  ee  ridge  to  the  Indus,  in  the  southern  part  of  the  same  space 
are  the  hills  and  valleys  of  the  Murwnts,  and  the  desart  valley  of 