

•Tlie  hiflj  tract  formed  bj  the  inferior  ranges,  is  nariiiw  an^ 
in  tins  pact  of  the  ^ain  $  and  particularly  at  the  point  of  the  southem 
ptoyection»  where  the  snowy  mountain  descends  abruptly  into  the 
low  plain  of  JeDaUafaod.  When  the  range  resumes  iits  westerly 
course^  the  hills  at  its  foot  recover  their  extent  and  their  character ;  , 
tiiey  then  form  the  Odiistann,  or  High  Lands  of  CSaubul,  a  country 
watered  by  many  streams,  and  described  as  even  more  dehghtlul  than 
Swaut. 

o 


Digitized  by  Google 


AUNGAUR. 


The  nature  ot"  the  valleys  in  this  part  of  the  range  caiiiiot  well  be 
understood  until  i  Imve  described  the  space  into  which  thev  all  open. 
1  iiib  is  the  valley  of  the  Caiibul  river,  which  separates  tlie  southern 
projection  of  Hindoo  Coosh  from  the  mountains  of  Solimaun,  and 
seems  to  be  a  breBch  in  a  continued  chain  once  formed  by  those 
lidgea.  Hie  breidlii  between  them  is  now  in  loiiie  pieces  twoity- 
fiyetnllefl. 

U  is  occupied  towaids  tbe  east  bj  hilb,  wbicb  stretch  from  iiioinw> 
tain  to  moiiiitauii,thoi]^  firom  their  very  inferior  height,  they  cannot 
'  be  said  to  preserve  the  continiiify  of  the  range.  West  of  those-  hiDs 
is  the  plain  of.  JeUallabad,  and  still  fiurthor  west  the  country  rises  so 
much,  that  although  Gundamnk  be  in  a  valley  with  respect  to  the 
Bouthem'projection,  or  to  the  hills  of  Solimann»  it  is  on  a  mountain 
when  compared  with  Jellallabad*  The  river  of  Caabid  flows  through 
the  oentie  of  the  space  which  I  have  been  describing)  and  into  k,  as 
I  have  already  mentionedf  all  the  vaUeys  in  this  part  of  Hindoo 
Coosh  open*  The  first  of  these  to  the  west  of  B^nr  is  Coonner, 
through  which  the  great  river  of  Kanshkanr  runs  to  join  that  of  Cau- 
buL  The  cUmate  of  the  lower  part  of  Coonner  is  very  hot.  The 
U^per  part  terminates  In^  long  glens,  many  of  which  point  north-west 
towards  the  high  snowy  peak  of  Coond,  which  is  probably  the  point 
of  the  southern  projection.  Coonner  is  inhabited  by  a  peculiar  peopfe 
called  Derrcrauns,  who  will  be  mentioned  hereafter. 

At  Mundroor,  about  twenty  miles  to  the  west  of  Coonner,  the  water 
of  Alingaur  joins  the  Caubul  rive::.  It  comes  down  a  valley,  at  the 
upper  part  of  which  two  others  join,  and  form  a  figiue  like  the  letter 
Y;  the  ea^stern  one  is  calierl  Alingaur,  and  the  western  AHshung. 
Each  of  them  runs  into  (he  inouni  .lins  for  about  twenty  miles.  These 
valleys,  with  the  plain  of  Jeilaliabad,  aiiri  the  surrounding  mountains, 
form  the  district  of  Lnghmaun.  Alingaui  is  a  widt  \  alley  inhabited 
by  Ghiljies.  Its  head  inclines  nortli-east  towards  Cooiid.  It 
duces  all  sorts  of  grain,  and  many  glens  open  into  it  on  the  right  aiul 
left*  some  of  which  are  only  s^arated  by  narrow  sunmiits  Irom  those 