

The  part  inhabited  by  the  Wuzeerees,  is  probably  as  nmcli  raised 
above  the  surrounding  country,  as  that  which  belongs  to  the  Jadraunsj 
but  its  abst^te  height  is  in^k>r,  as  the  country  at  its  base  slopes 
mtKh  to  the  soodiward.  la  tiie  southern  part  of  the  Wnseeree 
countiy>  where  tins  range  is  passed  through  by  the  nTer  Gomul*  it  is 
low  in  bodi  sensest  but  it  rises  again  in  the  Sbeeiannee  coontry,  and 
finrns  tile  Idfy  mountain  of  Cussay  Ghur,  of  wiiidi  the  Tokbt  SoE- 
mauUf  or  Solomon's  lliron^  is  the  highest  pealt  *,  snow  lies  on  this 
peak  Ibr  three  months  in  the  year,  and  on  the  surrounding  mountains 
for  twob  The  countiy  of  tfae  Zmursees  is  certainly  as  hi^  as  most 
parts'  of  Cussay  Gbur,  but  I  hanre  not  the  means  of  judging  of  the 
heigiit  or  character  of  the  range  to  the  southward  of  this  point 

From'  the  southern  boundaiy  of  A4^iannistann»  as  %  north  as.the 


Digitized  by  Google 


river  (jiomul,  the  descent  from  the  Solimauny  raiign  into  the  lof- 
huids  on  the  riizlit  bank  of"  the  Tnfhi«.  is  deep  arul  sudden  :  on  the 
opposite  side,  tlic  lU  sceul  seems  to  be  as  abrupt,  tiiough  by  no  means 
so  considerable,  the  country  to  the  west  of  the  range  b^iiig  moie  ele- 
vated than  that  on  the  east. 

To  the  north  of  the  Gromul,  both  sides  of  the  range  become  per- 
plexed by  tlie  numerous  minor  hills  which  it  sends  out  to  the  east 
and  west ;  but,  ^us  ikr  as  1  can  conjecture,  the  descent  becomes  more 
gradual  on  the  east,  as  it  certahdy  does  on  the  west ;  where  the  plain 
country  rises  to  meet  it,  and  is  perhaps  as  high  to  the  east  of  Ghuz- 
nee,  as  manj  parts  of  the  nsge  itself  to  the  BonlJi  of  that  point . . 

Thore  are  two  minor  ranges  paralld.  to  the  range  of  Snlgmawp> 
which  accon^Masy  it  on  its  eartm  ude  fiom  the  soutfaem  borden  of 
AilljuwinMtamn,  as  ftr  at  leaat  as  Rughzee  in  latitude  aS*  Hie 
tint  of  tfaeae  langea  ia  lower  than  the  principal  ridge.  The  leoond  ia 
still  lowers  and  between  it  and  the  fiivt  ia  a  counftiy  wtadk  I  ma^im 
ia  nigged,  but  cultivated  by  the  Shecfannees*  All  of  tliaee  vu^bb 
are  pierced  bj  yallc^  which  nin  fiom  the  higli  oonntiy  on:  the  west* 
and  lend  out  itreama  into  Banunm:  other  stseama  liae  in  the  prin4»> 
pal  range*  and  run  through  valleys  which  cut  the  lower  <«ies. 

The  Solimauny  range  ia  described  aa  being  composed  of  a  hard 
black  stoneL  The  next  range  is  a' red  stone  equally  hard:  but  the 
lowest  range  consists  of  a  friable  grey  sand  stone.  The  topa  of  all 
these  moontaina  are  bare ;  the  sides  of  the  high  range  are  covered 
with  pineaj  and  those  of  the  mast  with  olives  and  other  trees:  the 
lowest  range  is  entirely  baie^  except  in  the  hoUows,  which  contain 
some  thickets  of  brush-wood. 