

There  are  tluee  Inanches,  which  stretch  from  the  ridge  at 

right  angles  to  the  inferior  ranges.  The  first  is  close,  to  the  InduSf 
and  ends  at  a  point  opposite  Torbaila.  •    r       ./  . 

The  next,  which  is  called  Ailum,  and  is  of  considerable  heigiit  and 
breadth*  is  divided  fiom  the  fbnner  hy  the  valley  of  JBoonere.  Ths 
fluid  is  divided  Born  Ailum  by  ihe  vaU^  of  fliraHt»  mfp  wfaidi  md> 
ther  vsUegr*  ceUed  Fimjcora,  op^  fiom  the  iioi(ik*wesb :  TI16  bet 
fasanch  is  nmch  breeder  thn  either  o£the  tilhens  end  extends  ee'ftr 
to  the  sonith  as  to  join  ^  voota  of  So&id.Goh^  the  nkiat  nofifaerly 
point  in  the  range  of  Solimaun.  Ihoi^  not  high,  it  is  steq>f  and 
rugged.  It  is  covered  with  pine  fimts,  and  inhabited  by  the 
A%baun. tribe  of  OtmaunhhaiL  Between  it  and  the  southern pngec- 
tion,  is  the  low  and  hot  plain  of  Bigour.  .  .  •  . 

The  lower  hills  may  be  imi^pned  ftom  a  description  of  those  hi  Ihe 
district  d  Swaut  In  that  disfatict  snow  lieson  them  fiir  finir  jtnontbs 
in-  the  year.  Their  'tops  have  but  few  trees,  hot  their  skies  are 
onvered  with  forests  of  pin^  oak,  and  wild  olive ;  lower  dtzwii  ate 
many  little  valleys,  watered  by  clear  and  beautiful  streams,  and  eor 
joymg  a  delicious  climate.  Their  sides  afford  a  prolusion,  of  JSurk 
pean  fruits  and  flowers,  which  grow  wild  in  the  utmost- variety  and 
perfection.   The  hiUa  bear  many  pretty  sorts  of  fern  and  simOar 

10 


Digitized  by  Google 


€AUFIBI8TAUN*  97 

pknts,  with,  several  elegant  shrubs,  aodmn  the  rocCs  are  rendved 
beautiful  by  the  rich  verdure  of  the  mosses  with  which  they  are 
eovered.  In  the  midst  of  ihe  pnncqp«i  vaUey»  is  the  river  of  Swaut, 
wetenng  a  rich  though  narrow  plain,  which  yields  two  harvests,  and 
produces  most  sorts  of  grain :  on  the  plain,  bendes  cultivated  fruit- 
trees,  are  numerous  mulberry  trees  and  planes. 

The  hills  of  Boonerc  greatly  resemble  those  of  Swaut ;  thev  enclose 
many  litlle  valleys,  all  opening  on  one  great  one,  which  nms  south- 
east,  and  contains  the  brook  of  Bnrrundoo.  Tliese  valleys  are  nar- 
rower, and  worse  watered  than  those  of  Swaut,  and  are  consequratly 
less  fertile. 

I  have  now  come  to  the  seeming  cur\'e,  which  is  observeti  from  the 
south  of  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  wliich  rises  over  Bajour  on  the  west.  That 
projection,  with  the  nearest  jints  of  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  some  of  the 
neighbouring  branches,  is  inhabited  by  the  Seeapoosh  Cauhrs,  a 
straui^e  and  interesting  people. 

The  ascent  to  their  country  leads  along  fHghtful  precipices,  and 
through  deep  and  narrow  hxdlowa,  where  the  traveller  is  exposed  to 
danger  by  the  pieces  of  rock  that  roll  ftom  the  mountains  above  him, 
cither  looaened  by  rain  and  wind,  or  pot  in  motion  by  the  goata 
and  wild  MiiiwaU  that  browse  on  die  diffi  wliich  omhang  the  road. 
Hie  Cnfiit  inhabit  nanow.hiife  nch^and  pleasant  spots,  producing 
abundance  of  grapes,  and  for  the  moat  part  innnoonted  by  anow^r 
sanmnts.  Hie  ooontiy  of  the  Caufira  extends  b^ond  the  western 
ai^le  finmied  bj-the  curves  and  the  xi^^  then  pursues  its  ooiuae 
westwavdf  until  it  is  lost  in  the  PBropsmisan  mountains. 