


Digitized  by  Google 


HINDOO  COOSH.  99 

of  Coonner.   Alisbung  is  narrower*  liii  &ircr  ifm,  sod  »  chiefly  in- 

halMtod  by  converted  Cauiirs. 

The  abort  vallej  of  Oo2beeii»  inhabited  bj  Ghiljies,  lies  next  on  the 
weaty  aifter  which  that  of  Tugow  opens  on  the  river  of  Caubul,  at  ita 
junction  with  that  of  Punjsh^r.  Tugow  is  considerably  longer  than 
any  of  the  vaUeys  yet  mentioned.  The  lower  part  is  inhabited  by 
the  Saufees  (an  independent  Afghaium  tribe,  whom  I  may  not  have 
occasion  to  mention  again);  but  the  upper  part,  which  is  nanrower 
and  less  fertile,  belongs  to  Cohistaunee  Taujiks.  * 

The  mouths  of  these  vallevs  are  hif^hcr  in  [>roportion  as  they  are 
further  west ;  but  those  of  Oozbeen  and  Tugow  are  very  sensibly 
elevated  above  Uic  others,  and  have  the  climate  of  CaubuL  For  tliia 
reason  thev  nre  sometimes  included  in  the  Cuhislaun  of  Caubul, 
wliich,  in  strictness,  only  consists  of  the  valleys  of  Nijrow,  Fuujsheer, 
and  Ghorebund,  with  the  minor  valleys  which  open  into  them.  Of 
these,  the  most  remarkalile  are  Sunjt  c  r  (between  Nijrow  and  Pimj-  . 
sheer),  and  Doomaumeh,  and  Saulch  Ouluug  (bcLwcen  Punjsheer  and 
Ghorebund).  South  of  the  Cohistauu  is  the  Cohdaumun,  a  country 
Ibnned  of  little  fertile  plains  among  the  skirts  of  Hindoo  Coosh. 

The  Pan^pamisan  chain,  which  bounds  the  Cohistaim  on  the  west, 
aitenda  thjtee  handled  and  fifty  miles  from  eaat  to  weit»  and  two 
Inndrad  finn  north  to  aoutl).  Tliewfaoleorthiaaimceiaiiidiamaae 
of  momitaina  as  the  inoat  intiniafce  knowledge  w«^ 
to  tneet  and,  tfaouf^  it  affiwda'a  habitation  to  theEhnauka  and 
Haaanrdiflf  k  ia  ao  difficult  of  aoeesa*  and  io  little  frequented*  tliat  no 
ivedae  aooovnta  of  its  geogr^hy  aio  to  be  obtainedi 

ii  ia  eertaint  hoiwever,  that  the  range  of  Hindoo  Goodb  ia  no  longer 
Mo  lofly,  aa  to  be  conapicuoua  among  tbe  moontaina  by  which  it  ia 
uniiiuiidedf  and  dut  no  oontmned  bne  of  pefpetnal  anow  can  aity 


*  Thu  term  is  applied  to  aii  people  of  A^haunistaun,  wbow  vemscular  language  » 

o  2  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


100  MOUNTAINS  OF  SOLIMAUN. 

more  be  traced.  The  eastern  half  of  this  elevated  region  is  inhabited 
by  the  Hazaurchs,  and  is  cold,  rugged,  and  barren :  the  level  spots 
are  little  ciiltivatcdv  and  the  hills  are  naked  and  abrupt.  The  western 
part,  which  belongs  to  the  Eimauks,  though  it  has  wider  valleys,  and 
is  better  cultivated,  is  still  a  wild  nnd  poor  country.  Tlic  northern 
face  of  these  mountains  has  a  .Multlcn  dcsrent  into  ilio  province  of 
Bulkh  :  their  acchvity  is  loss  on  their  other  extremities,  except  per- 
haps on  the  west  or  houih-wrst.  On  the  north-west  they  seem  to 
sink  gradually  into  the  plain  which  borders  on  the  desart. 