

The  snowy  raiif^e  is  bv  no  means  of  equni  elcvnfion,  bf  iri^  in  some 
places,  surmounted  by  peaks  of  jxreat  height  and  magnitude,  which  do 
not  taper  to  a  poiiu,  but  rise  at  once  &om  their  bases^  with  amaaing 
boWnrss  and  andeiir. 

.  Tlie  stupendous  height  of  these  mountains  ;  the  magnificence  and 
variety  of  their  lottv  summits  ;  tlie  various  nations  bv  whom  thov  are 
seen,  and  wdo  seem  to  be  brought  together  by  this  common  object ; 
and  the  awtiil  and  iindistiubed  solitude,  which  reigns  amidst  their 
eternal  snows;  fill  the  mind  with  admiraiion  and  astonishment,  that 
no  language  can  express.  The  height  of  one  of  these  peaks  was 
taken  by  Lieutenant  Macartney,  and  appeared  to  be  20,493  feet.  If 
this  measurement  be  correct,  the  peaks  of  Hindoo  Coosh  are  higher 
than  those  of  the  Andes,  f  The  meajsuienifliit  made  by  lieotenint 
Webbf  in  the  eteventfa  Volume  of  the  Asiatic  Reieaiehes,  givte  a.atill 
perter.'hei^it  to  thete.af  Hemalleh. The'  height  of  Hindoo  Coo^ 
is  mdoubtedly  very  great;  .imee  we  oonULpereeivci  no  dinunution  in 

*  •  •  *  « 

'  -  *.  I  liftfe  aen  ibe  ridge  of  Imtos  (or  Sfenalldt)^  at «  dbtMneeof  150  mSicB  t 
Uare,  they  were  to  be  seen  at  950. 

f  (The  followin<fiN  Lieutenant  Macartney's  account  of  the  opcrntion,  which  he  givef 
wUh  consulerable  dit»iru8t).  "  I  txMik  the  distance  of  tome  of  the  most  remarkable  peaks,  in 
**die  ridge,  by  cron bearings,  with  die  dieodolitei  and  fimtid,  at  tfaedistanoeof  onehniidTed 
"jsiloii  the  apparent  altitude  of  some  was  i""  30',  which  gives  a  perpenAndar  hnifiltt't£ 
**  20,493  feet  But,  of  course,  this  could  not  l>e  jiositively  depciuiwl  on  for  so  smnll  an  angle^ 
<•  and  so  great  a  distance.  The  most  triiiiug  eiTor,  which  might  not  appear  in  the  corrco- 
"tion  of  tiieliutnuiMn^  iiwld  here  make  a  great  dil^^  It  wai,  bowncr,  lo  correct, 
*'  that  I  have  taken  the  sun's  altitude,  and  the  latitude  came  out  within  two  of  the  latitude 
*'  taken  mth  the  sextant ;  and,  thr  distunoe  may  be  dopapded  on»  for  I  hada  baiwlinei  mfn* 
"  surcd  of  forty-hve  miles,  which  gave  a  good  angk/'  ^       •  , 


Digilized  by  Google 


96  BAJOint 

the  snow  on  my  part  of  the  range  in  the  month  of  Jiiii%  wliflB  Ae 
thermometer  in  the  plain  of  Pesliawer  was  at  113  '. 

The  inferior  ranges  decrease  in  height,  according  to  their  distance 
from  the  principal  cliain.  The  tops  of  the  highest  are  bare ;  but 
their  sides,  and  the  whole  of  the  lower  ranges,  are  well  woodpd. 
niouffh  three  lower  ranges  onl\  are  distinguishable  when  seen  from 
the  plain,  many  more  are  probabiv  passed  before  reaching  the  snowy 
ridge.  There  is  a  phiin  between  tlie  first  and  second  ranges;  and,  it 
is  probable,  that  narrower  and  more  elevated  valleys  separate  the 
higher  ranges,  till  the  increasing  rouglniess  of  the  country  makes 
them  scarcely  observable ;  and,  that  the  distinction  between  the 
ranges,  is  at  lentrth  lost  in  a  confused  mass  of  niountainiS. 