


Digitized  by  Google 


AFGHAUNISTAUN. 


98 


ihiUt  tbenfere,  use  it  in  future  to  myfmB  the  country,  of  wbidi  i 
hum  just  deflcribed  the  limits.  As  much  of  the  A%haun  country  aa 
lies  to  the  west  of  the  parallel  of  Mookioor,  in  longitude  GH^  80^  if' 
included  in  the  celebrated  and  extensive  province  of  Khorassaun* 
The  remaining  part  of  Khonssaun,  (the  boundaries  of  which  may  be 
lootely  fixed  by  the  Oxus,  and  the  desart,  through  which  that  rhrer 
runs ;  the  Selt  Desart ;  and  the  Caspian  Sea),  belongs  to  Feida. 
Kermaun  is  said  to  have  been  <Mice  included  in  KhoTWiwanni  aa  ' 
Seeircotlann  ficequenily.  ia  ftilL 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  »4  > 


CHAP.  IL 

MOUNTAINS  OF  AFOHAUNISTAVN. 

I HAVE  alieady  described  the  general  ooune  of  the  great  ridge  of 
Hiiidoo  Goodi,  and  have  traced  the  lower  ranges  on  its  touthem  aide 
aa  &r  east  as  the  Indus.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  a  particular  descrip- 
tion of  the  part  which  bounds  A^aunistaun  on  the  north. 

From  the  Indus  to  longitude  71%  it  pursues  a  westerly  oouise ;  but, 
from  that  point,  its  directum  becomes  uncratain.  To  a  person  view- 
ing it  from  the  south,  the  snowy  ridge  appears  to  make  a  considefable 
cnrre  towards  him :  but,  our  information  leaves  it  doubtfu],  whether 
it  does  make  such  a  curre^  whether  the  principal  range  oondnues  ita 
weateily  oouisef  and  sends  out  a  branch  towards  the  south»  or  wh^ 
ther  It  is  crossed  by  Beloot  Taugh*  which  joins  it  at  the  point  oppc^ 
site  to  the  place  where  the  mountain  i^pears  to  behd. 

From  the  Indus  to  this  curve  is  the  part  of  these  mountains  with 
which  I  am  best  aoqnaintecU  having  seen  it  for  some  months  frnm 
Peshawer  $  and,  a  particular  account  of  it,  may  serre  to  ffve  an  idea 
of  the  rest  of  the  range. 

On  entering  the  plain  of  Peshawer,  on  the  21th  of  February,  1809, 
four  ranges  of  mountaiiis  were  distinctly  seen  on  the  north.  The 
lowest  range  had  no  snow.  The  tops  of  the  second  were  oomed 
with  it,  as  was  the  third,  half-way  down. 

The  Iburtli  wa-s  tlie  principal  range  of  the  Indian  Caucasus,  which 
is  always  covered  with  snow,  is  conf?p!cuous  from  Bactria,  and  the 
borders  of  India,  and  is  seen  from  places  far  off  in  Tartary.  We  first 
saw  these  mountains  at  tlie  distance  of  one  hundred  miles  ;  but,  they 

would  have  been  visible  long  before,  if  the  view  had  not  been  shut 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


MOUHTAINS  OF  AVOIlAUNISTAUN. 


95 


ont  by  the  lulli'tliioiigli  trliich  ire  tnrdkd*.  In  appt«Mice»'  hami 
ever,  -they  were  very  near.  The  ridges  and  hollows  of  their  sides 
were  dewly  diMemable  ;  and,  this  distinctness,  jmned  to  the  softneat 
tad  transparency  which  their  distance  gave  them,  piodnoed  a  siiiga> 
-lar,  and  very  pleasing  effect. 