

The  slope  of  the  wliole  tract  is  towards  the  west. 

The  range  of  Solimaun  commences  at  tiie  lofty  mountain  which 
has  derived  the  name  of  Sufiaid  Coh,  or  White  Mountain,  from  the 
snow  with  which  it  is  always  covered  *.  Suifaid  Coh  stands  to  the 
south  of  the  projection  of  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  is  only  separated  fiom 
H  by  the  yalley  of  the  Caubul  nver,  fiom  ivhidi  it  rise*  with  a  rerj 
steep  aoeliTily.  It  is  oonnected  with  Hitidoo  Coosh  fay  the'hitts  of 
die  Otmiuiiidiail*  and  odier  subofdinate  langes  extending  acroiM  ^be 
CBufanl  liver^  in  whidi  they  cause  iiumeioug  lapidS)  in  some  places 
flifanost  amoimting  to  cascades.  On  these  grounds^  the  range  of  Soli* 
maun'  otigbtt  periiaps,  to  be  Tcgaided  as  a  bnmch  of  Hbdoo  GMsh, 
and  even  as  a  eontinuadon  of  Beloot  Taog^,  but  it  willy  nevenhelcss» 
be  oonyenient  to  oonrider  it  separately.  fVom  Snffidd  Coh,  the 
hig^ieBt  ridge  of  the  range  runs  8ontfa.soiitb«a8t,  and  passes  thimigfa 
ihe  Jaigee  country  near  Huiyoob,  twdlve  miles  sooth  of  which  it  is 
pierced  by  the  river  Koorrum.  It  then  proceeds  in  a  southerly  diree- 
tion,  and  ibrms  the  mountainous  country  of  the  .Tadrauns,  whiefa  ex^ 
tends  to  the  southward  of  latitude  dl"  north.   Thus  far  the  course  of 


*  Tli«  A%lMiiMiBoiiefieqpiaittycaU  Aiiinoimtim  Speenghur  Aan  SnAid  Colk  Tlie 

former  has  the  same  meaning  in  Pushtoo  that  the  latter  has  in  Persian.  I  may  here  re- 
mark that  as  Persian  was  the  langiiage  In  which  I  conununicntrd  '«vith  the  Afghnuns,  I 
have  often  made  use  of  Persian  word^  and  phrases,  where  they  would  have  used  Pu&htoo 


Digitized  by  Google 


SUFFAID  COH.  101 

like  ridge  is  aatjM  to  liMJe  dodbt  From  Uie  Jadmiti  oomitty,  its 
direetioDf  sod  even  its^odntiiudty  become  mora  questioiisble^  bui»  ss 
it  is  certain  that  hills,  which  it  takes  two  days  journeys  to  pass 
arm,  are  cvossed  faj  traveUers  from  Kauneegoonum  to  Ootj^maa^  ?re 

may  safely  conjecture  that  this  is  the  ridge  in  question,  and  may  pre- 
sume that  the  hills  irtiich  we  find  still  farther  south,  •  on  the  left  <)£ 
the  river  Gomnl,  are  a  continuation  of  it:  certain  it  is»  that  from  the 
Jaudraun  country  to  the  Gomul,  is  a  mountainous  cotmtiys  t**'^*^ 
with  pine  forests,  which  shelters  the  wild  hill  tnbe  of  Yizeeree. 
From  the  Gomul  the  course  of  the  hills  again  becomes  certain,  and 
is  continued  tlirongh  the  country  of  the  Sheeraunees,  and  that  of  the 
Zmurrees,  from  whence  it  eztenda  to  latitude  2Q\  where  k  seems  to 
end. 

Tlic  hoifrlit  of  the  Solimaun  range,  thouLrli  much  interior  to  that  of 
Hindoo  Coosli,  is  still  consideralile.  Its  fii^hest  pnrt  is  undoubtedly 
near  its  commencement.  Suftaid  Coh  is  covered  with  snow  through- 
out the  year,  but  I  believe  no  odier  part  of  the  rnnffe  has  snow  after 
the  end  of  spring;  some,  however  of  those,  as  f":ii  south  as  latitude 
81",  have  snow  upon  tlu;ai  in  \s  inter,  which  is  a  proof  of  no  incon- 
aiderahlc  altitude  in  so  low  a  luLilade. 