


104  WE8TEBN  BRANCHES. 

Largee,  which  last  is  separated  from  tiie  Indus  by  a  hill  about  thirty 

miles  long. 

These  three  branches  are  crossed  by  low  ranges  mnning  north  and 
south,  two  of  whirli  mav  y)orhaps  be  consiclerwi  as  coiiliuuatidns  of 
those  already  mentioned  as  parallel  lo  ihe  mountains  <A'  Solimaun. 
They  divide  Dour  from  Bunnoo  ;  Bunnoo  Irom  Esaukliail ;  and  Lar- 
gee from  the  Murwut  country,  which  is  itself  so  crossed  by  ilitK  icnt 
ranges,  that  it  resembles  a  network  of  hills  enclosing  cultivated  plums. 
None  of  the  inter\  als  between  the  Uircc  great  branches  are  indeed  to 
be  considered  as  uninterrupted  valleys ;  besides  the  ranges  which 
cross  them  at  right  angles,  they  are  rou^ened,  particokrly  towards 
the  west,  by  minor  projections  from  the  principal  chain*  aooe  of 
which,  homevetf  are  deserving  of  much  notioe^  even  if  it  were  posnble 
to  acquire  accurate  notions  regarding  them.  As  the  Salt  Range,  the 
Range  of  84'.  >nd  the  low  ridges  whidi  run  across  the  valley  of  the 
Gaubul,  all  issue  from  the  eastern  side  of  Suffii^  Coh»  and  graduaflj 
divei^  from  ^tut  mountain,  the  country  near  the  point  of  their 
separation  is,  of  course,  veiy  mountainous.  It  is  inhabited  by  fixir 
tribes,  who  are  comprehended  under  the  general  name  of  Khjiieiee. 

The  branches  which  issue  fiom  the  Solinuumy  range  to  the  west^ 
ward,  are  more  difficuk  to  trest  of,  than  those  I  have  jusi  mentioned. 

I  shall,  however,  give  such  conjectures  as  my  infoimation  has  led 
me  to,  which  althou|^  they  will  probably  not  be  correct,  may  be  near 
enough  the  truth  to  assist  in  finmiag  a  general  idea  of  the  oonfop- 
mation  of  the  country. 

,  The  space  induded  between  the  valley  of  the  Caubul  river,  the 
parallel  of  Ghuznce ;  the  meridian  of  Caubul,  and  the  Solimannee 

range,  appears  to  be  a  mountainous  region,  containing  some  laige 
valleys.  I  cannot  discover  by  how  many  branches  it  is  formed,  or 
whether,  as  is  probable,  they  are  crossed  by  ridges  parallel  to  tlie 
principal  chain  :  but  the  mountains  certainly  extend  nearly  to  tlie 
road  from  (.huznee  to  Caubul,  nm\  leave  but  a  narrow  valley  between 
tliem  and  tiie  Paropamisan  hiiis.  Their  Streams  flow  towards  the 
west,  into  the  valley  just  mentioned. 

10 


Digitized  by  Gopglc 


TUKKATXKX  105 

Tbe  first  branch  of  which  I  hm  aaj  SifltiiiGt  inforinfltum,  leaves 
the  great  chain  to  the  eaai  or  north-east  of  Sirufza,  passes  to  the 
north  of  that  place,  runs  in  a  southerly  direction  alidiig  the  wetUni 
bank  of  the  Gomul,  passes  to  the  west  of  Mummye,  and  aeparatea 
that  small  country  from  Kuttawauz.  Beyond  this,  its  course  becookflt 
uncertain,  and  I  believe  it  siuks  into  low  and  sqattcred  hills. 