

Thero  are  three  branches  more  to  the  south,  wliich  scarcely  deserve  ' 
to  be  mentioned,  one  of  them  scparaten  Simtza  from  Oorglioon, 
another  passes  to  the  noi  tli  of  Wauneh.    None  ot  these  ranges  ex- 
tend further  west  than  the  ( .rnnuL 

I  liave  no  distinct  accounts  of  any  hills  issuipg  £rom  the  range  of 
Solimauii  to  tlie  south  of  the  Gomul. 

I  am  still  less  acquainted  with  the  hills  in  the  west  of  Aighaunis- 
taun,  than  with  those  I  have  been  describing. 

A  chain  of  hills,  which  coimuences  at  the  northern  extremity  of 
the  Table  Land  of  Kelaut,  appears  to  extend  to  the  north-east  as  far 
as  the  Ghiljie  country  in  latitude  32'.  It  at  first  separates  Shoraubuk 
fimn  Fisheeii»  being  called  the  hill  of  Speen  Taizheh  in  this  part  of 
,  kitaant.  It  then^under  llie  mmies  of  Eochnk  and  IDiojeh  Aini^ 
fimna  the  mrthem  boimdarjr  of  Pisheen,  and  afterwards  takes  thi 
name  of  Toba,  from  a  ocnnitiy  thiou^  which  it  nins.   Hie  inort 
norllierly  part  of  it  is  a  pass  called  Gul  Iftsrrye,  east  of  the  vaUej  of 
Ui^eaaan,  and  not  fir  from  the  laaige  of  Toriowinea 
-    I  shaD  call  the  whole  cange  I  have  been  describing,  by  the  name 
of  Khqjdi  Ami«nn»  &r  the  convemenoe  of  »  genend  name.   It  Is 
inoady  but  not  hi||^  nor  abeep :  mow  only  liea  for  «  short  time  on 
Speen  Taiahebt  but  furtfaer  to  tbe  noitb^eaa^  it  liea  Ibr  tbiee  nUmliha 
in  the  year. 

Anodier  range  appears  Co  leave  the  TableLand,  neady  at  Ibe  same 
point  witb  that  I  have  joat  deacribed.  It  nms  eaat,<  and  fimns-tlie 
sonthem  boundary  of  Fisheen,  which  it  divides  from  £9iawl.  The 
part  nearest  the  Table  Land  is  called  Musailugh,  and  towards  the 
€entie»  it  is  called  Tukkatoor  whidi  being  the  h^eat  part  of  tt^  may 

p 


Digitized  by  Google 


KtJND. 


give  it  s  najno  to  the  range.  1  can  only  trace  this  range  about  fifty  tniles 
to  the  east  ot  tlic  pl  ice  where  it  leaves  the  Table  T^aiid,  but  it  is  not 
improbable  that  it  iiiav  be  connected  with  one  ot  tliose ranges  which 
will  be  iierealler  nientioned  as  crossing  the  country  of  the  (^aukcrs, 
and,  in  that  case,  its  length  will  be  much  more  considerable  than  I 
have  stated. 

It  seems  to  be  steep  and  high  in  proportion  to  the  neigiil>oiinng 
hills,  as  snow  lies  on  it  as  long  as  on  any  ot  those  before  mentioned* 

Another  range  called  Khurleekkce,  leaves  the  Table  Land  of  Ke- 
laut  nearly  in  latitude  30  north,  and  extends  to  the  east^  as  as 
the  67  of  east  longitude,  separi^ing  the  iiigli  plain  of  Bedowki  from, 
the  low  andhot  countiy  of  Seewiintnui. 

A  range  of  hills,  risuig  over  tbe  llrtter  oountiy  neerljr  in  latitude  89* 
north,  has  already  been  mentioiied  as  Ibnning  the  southern  boundaiy 
of  Ai^aoniststuL   The  spacer  extending  firam  the  sbcty-eighth  de- 
gree of  east  longjtudei  lo  the  rahge  of  SoUmaun*  and  lying  between 
the'twenty-ointh  and  tbirtj4lrst  degrees  of  north  ktitiidei  b  &U  of 
hills,  chiefly  in  ranges  running  east  and  west  It  also  contains  mmf 
plains,  jMirtictdiurly  in  the  eastern  part  of  the' division.  The  west  is 
Ihe  most  hiUy,  and  there  are  even  traces  of  a  veiy  hig^  range  in  dMt 
quarter,  which  seema  to  run  north  and  south,  and  to  connect  afl  the 
minor  ranges  just  mentioned.    Hie  existence  of  audi  a  range  is 
ibunded  on  the  facts,  that  liCDoa  Dbugh  arid  Toba  are  separated  iiom 
Zpope  by  a  rai^  of  mountains,  which  is  known  to  be  continued  to 
Tubbye,  the  source  of  the  river  Loca.  Still  fiuther  south,  in  the  same 
line,  is  a  high  motmtain  called  Kund,  which  is  said  to  run  noith  and 
south ;  similar  ridges,  running  in  the  same  direction,  are  met  at 
C'hirry  (south  of  Kund),  and  at  Isupper  (south  of  Chirry),  and  a  high 
ran^':c  continues  to  the  left  of  the  road  from  Shawl  to  Dander,  nearly  , 
to  thr  l  iit  mentioned  place.    The  line  I  have  marked  out,  whether 
occupied  by  a  range  of  mountains  or  not,  certainly  divides  the  waters 
of  this  part  of  Afghaunistaun,  some  of  the  streams  which  rise  in  it 
luaning  east,  and  others  west.    There  only  remain  to  be  mentioned 