

The  Lora  rises  at  TVibbye,  in  die  mcuntam  of  Kund,  and  nms 
through  Burdkore  into  FisheoL  Itifaerereoeivea  as  much  aa  escapes 


Digitized  by  Google 


117 


trom  tlie  cultivation,  of  the  Soorkaiib,  a  rivuJet,  which  rises  in  the 
hill  of  Kund,  near  the  source  of  tlie  Zhobe.  It  aiWwarils  runs 
through  a  narrow  delile  iii  the  hills  of  Speen  Taizeh  into  Shoraubuk, 
where  it  breaks  iuto  two  branches.  They  unite  again  to  the  west  of 
that  country  ;  and  the  whole  is  lost  in  the  neighbourhowl  ol  Choghje 
in  tlie  (lunnseer.  The  length  of  Lora  is  near  two  hundred  miles, 
aad  it  ia  of  a  considerable  breadth ;  but  never  too  deep  to  be  forded, 
fixr  more  than  a  weA.  at  a  time.  h»  banks  are  bo  high  in  Fiaheen,  as 
to  prevent  its  bdng  employed  for  irrigation }  but  in  Shoraubuk  they 
are  lower,  and  it  supplies  almost  all  the  water  nsed  in  agriculture. 

The  river,  which  was  anciently  caUed  the  Orchufl»  can  scarcely  be  - 
reckoned  to  belong  to  A%hauni8taun.  It  rises  at  Oba  in  the  Fkuo- 
pamisan  mountains,  and  nms  past  HerauL  U  continues  to  run 
westerly  for  a  short  distance,  through  A^l^aun  and  Persian  Khoras- 
saun  ;  after  which,  it  runs  north,  and  enters  the  deaart  on  the  left  of 
the  Oxus.  It  is  said  formerly  to  have  reached  the  Caspian  Sea;  but 
I  believe^  it  is  now  lost  in  the  desart.  It  is  crossed  between  Merve 
and  Meshhed ;  but  I  have  no  particular  information  regarding  ita 
lower  course.  It  was  anciently  ciilled  Herirood  j  but  is  now  known 
to  the  Persians  and  Afghauns  by  the  name  of  PooUee  MauUum,  and 
to  the  l^zbeks  by  that  of  Tejend. 

Thouiih  there  are  m an v  streams  in  Aftrhaunistann  as  larfje  in  thorn- 
selves  as  some  of  those  I  have  mentioned,  i  need  take  no  noiice  of 
them,  unless  their  importance  is  raised  by  their  contributing  to  a 
great  river,  or  by  some  other  circumstance  of  that  kind.  It  there- 
fore only  remains  to  mention  tlie  streams,  which  form  the  only  lake 
of  which  I  have  heaid  ia  A^haunistaun.  The  Pultsee,  the  Jiiga, 
and  another  rivulet,  issue  from  the  mountains  of  Solimaun,  north  of 
the  range  of  Sirrufka,  and  flow  west  into  the  lake,  irihich  is  situated 
to  the  south-soiitb-west  of  Ghnaneo»  and  about  two  mazdbes  south- 
west of  Mybolank. 

It  was  on  one  of  these  stranns  that  Sukaun  Mahmood  huQt  his 
fiunous  embankmoit,  which  siqiplied  the  city  of  Ghusnee^  and  ita 
neig^bouiiiood,  with  water  $  and  whSdi  was  destroyed  by  one  of  the 

•  ♦  Q  3 


lis 


AUfilSTAMDEH. 


early  Afghaun  kings,  before  he  iiad  succeeded  in  overturning  the  em- 
pire of  Ghuznee.  Besides  other  little  streams,  tlie  lake  receives  a 
rivulet  from  the  souUi,  which  rises  near  Gwaushta ;  and,  the  whole 
united,  make  apiece  tii  witer,  wbidi  in  die  dzy  weiHier ii  oaljrdiiee 
or  four  mfles  in  diameter,  and  about  twice  as-mudi  after  floods.  Hie 
water  of  the  lake  i>  aalt,  as  is  that  of  some  of  the  rivdeta  which  join 
it  ft  is  caUed  Aiibistandeh»  which;  in  Fenian,  means  sbundlu^ 
water* 