


•  See  an  account  of  their  journey  in  the  eleventh  volume  of  tht>  A'^intit-  RpMeflrchcK. 
1  It  i»po«abie  du^  the  ttreaiais  which  are  said  to  mae  from  tb«  lak«  Mamaroor  to 
die  MMdi  cf  the  liver  of  Ladauk,  may  be  die  msia  etnam  of  tlie  httu. 


Digitized  by  Google 


nmua  iii 

Mid  iiuediate^  ipreMk  llidf  over  tiie  p]am»  sndmloMiimninier* 
■ble  iffliiM^i 

FbttyinilM  kiwer  doim,  nd  new  diA  ibit  of  Atto^ 
npid  m«r  of  Caubul,  and  soon  after  rushes  throng  a  narrow  open- 
ing into  the  nudst  of  the  bsanchet  of  the  Soliniaimy  range.  Even 
when  the  water  is  lowest,  the  meeting  of  those  riverSf  and  their  course 
through  the  rocks  before  they  are  buried  in  the  mountainst  is  full  of 
waves  and  eddies,  and  produces  a  sound  like  that  of  the  sea.  ^t, 
when  they  are  swelled  by  the  melting  of  the  snow,  they  create  a  tre- 
mendons  v  hirlj^ool,  the  roaring  of  which  can  be  heard  at  a  great  din- 
tance,  and  which  often  swallows  up  boats,  or  daslies  them  against  the 
rocks.  The  Indus,  which  is  so  widely  spread  in  the  jihiin,  is  contract- 
ed at  Attock  to  the  breadth  of  about  three  hundred  yards.  It  be- 
comes still  Tiarrower  where  it  enters  the  hills  ;  and  at  Neelaub,  a 
town  fifteen  miles  below  Attok,  it  is  said  to  bv  no  more  ilian  a  stone's 
throw  Hcross,  but  exceediugly  deep  and  rapid.  1  rum  Neelaub,  it 
winds  among  bare  lulls  to  Clarrabauijh,  where  it  passes  tiirough  tlie 
salt  range  in  a  deep,  clear,  and  tranquil  st  i  t  ani.  From  this  to  the 
sea  it  meets  with  no  interruption,  and  is  no  loisger  shut  iu  by  hills. 

It  now  runs  in  a  southerly  course,  and  is  poured  out  o%  er  the  pl  iia 
in  many  channels,  which  meet  and  sepu'ate  again,  but  seldom  are 
found  all  united  in  one  stream. 

[  Nou"  Ouch,  it  receives  the  Punjnud,  a  riverformed  by  the  junction 
of  those  of  the  Fkmjaub,  which,  though  a  great  body  of  water,  is  much 
inferior  to  the  Indus  above  the  jnnction.  .  Hie  river  then  mns 
sonthnvest  into  Sind>  where  it  is  discharged  through  many  mouths 
into  the  Giilph  of  Arabia.  In  the  part  of  its  comsei  south  of  noon- 
tainsi  it  fiequently  eats  away  its  banks;  and  gradually  changes  its 
course;  and,  at  its  annual  risin|^  it  inundates  the  country  for  many 
miles  on  each  side  of  its  bed  *. 


"  Sincf  fh<>  account  of  the  source  of  the  Indus  wrut  written,  I  hare  received  a  highly 
iaU;rtrt>uog  journal  from  Meer  Izzut  Odlab,  a  veiy  mtd%ent  native  of  Delly,  who  vt» 


112  KAITSHKAUR.. 

I  ahall  my  nothing  in  this  place  of  the  rivers  which  join  the  Indus 
fiom  the  east,  which  are  fully  described  by  Lieutenant  Macartney.* 

Of  those  which  join  it  from  the  west,  I  have  already  menticmed  the 
Abbft  Seen.   The  next  river  is  that  of  Kauahkhiiwr»  which  tmm  in 