

It  occasiiimed  great  regret  to  Mr.  Mscaitney,  that  he  ivas  not  able 
to.fiz  the  somoas  of  the  Indus}  but  if  we  consider  the  desotete  die- 
laeter  of  tiie  oounby  thxou^  whicfa  that  riyer  nms,  before  it  enten 
A%baimlstBun,  we  shaU  find  aooie  season  to  be  smprised  at  the  suo« 
oeas  with  which  he  haa  traoed  the  early  part  of  its  ootnrpe^  than  at  his 
Mure  in  discovering  its  remotest  spring. 

His  discovery  regaiding  the  course  of  the  river  of  Ladauk  is  a 
point  of  great  intefest*  and  ^e  coincidence  between  his  informadoa 


forty  miles  longer  than  that  of  the  Elbfl^'  and-  otiy  dxty  less  than  timt  of  the  BUbcu 

Pvr  n  the  river  of  Kashkmir  i^:  eighty  miles  longer  thm  the  Pn ;  ami  the  AbboflOeo,  thfl 
Kisurruin,  the  Gooaul,  and  the  Swati,  are  none  of  tbem  much  inferior  in  length  of  ooufM 
l»  As  Tksdwii  tkwgh  tbty  axu  Among  ||ie  mtUm  of  fbm  vmn  tfuS  gonfribntf  ip 

■tMorniftisdM. 


110 


INDUa 


wd  tite  wmy  of  die  Gwiges  made  by  lieutenint  Webbe  ib'180I^ 
9Cives  to  ttfengthen  die  wdicmtj  of  both. 

.It  was  ftnrmcrly  belieT'ed  diet  the  river  of  Ladauk mm  one  of  die 
principal  streams  of  the  Geiiges,  and  th«k  opinion  'mv  iiqpptNrted  by 
the  hi^  withoritv  of  Major  Reimei  ;  but  that  esuneiit  Geo||pnpfaer 
»eems  to  have  been  led  to  this  conclusion  by  the  erroneous  acoounte 
el*  the  huBUM,  and  of  P.  Tiefentaller.  Captain  Baper  and  Mi*  Webbe 
were  sent  on  puq)ose  to  ascertain  the  souioe  of  the  Ganges,  and 
found  it  to  be  in  the  south-eastern  side  of  Hemalleli ;  far  to  the  south 
of  what  was  formerly  supposed  *.  It  was  now  proved  that  the  river 
of  Ladauk  did  not  flow  into  the  Ganges,  but  its  re;il  course  remained 
unknown,  till  Mr.  ^lacartuey  ascprtained  its  junction  wit  h  the  Indus 
near  Draus  t.  From  Draus,  the  Indus  pursues  its  solitary  course 
through  a  mountainous  country,  Kttie  visited  by  travellers.  Mri 
Macartney  had  information  to  which  he  gave  credit,  that  a  branch 
separated  from  the  Indus  below  Draus,  and  passing  tlu  oiigh  (^ash- 
meer,  formed  the  principal  stream  of  the  Hvdaspes.  Though  such  a 
separation  often  occur  in  champaign  countries,  as  in  the  instance  of 
the  Ganges ;  there  is  some  improbability  in  its  taking  place  in  a 
rapid  river,  and  in  a  mountainous  country:  yet  even  in  such  situations 
we  sometiiiieB  aee  riven  divided  by  rocky  ialanda;  and,  whca  die  8e» 
paration  is  onoe  Biade»  tliere  la  na  difficult  in  mqppoaing  tbenatnie 
eiftheooantijtobesochaa  tD  oontaniieit*  At  Mnllau,  after  It  baa 
pasnd  thzoagb  die  mnge  Hindoo  Cooiii*.  the.  Indus  leeeivea  fieaa 
the  north-weat  the  Abbaaeen*  a  amaU  river  whidi  riaea  in  that  tn§t 
about  'one  hnndied  and  twenty  mflca  o^  and  which  thend^^ibeiinng 
Afghanna  aecnn  fidadfjr  to.hanw  im^pnedtebediepiindpal  ateea^ 
die  InduB.  It  th«i  proceeda  for  fifly  milea,  through  the  lower  hilla 
of  Hindoo  Coodi,  to  Toibailai  where  it  iaauea  into  an  open  eountiyy 