


Digitized  by  Google 


SOOEGHUB.  107 

tmo  nmges  of  biHst  one  .of  nbkii  oommencei  to  thejoutli  of  Kim^ 
boDj^  at  no  greit  distanoe  fiom  tlie  PiniopuniMin  niouptenii»  and 
nm»  paraUd  to  die  left  bank  of  the  Tumuk,  almoat  to  the  67'  of  eaat 
.longitude:  the  other  range begina.  neizly  where  the  jfifit  enda,  and 
-nuia  eaat  Thia  range  la  called  Socar^ur  to  the  weat,  and  Tue 
^ninee  to  the  east ;  and  With  It  I  believe  I  have  completed  the  meiw 
tkn  of  aU  reniaihableniigea  of  hilla  in  A%hanniataun. 


(    108  ) 


CHAP.  IIL 

UVnS  OF  AroHAOKISTAUll. 

\  FGHAIJNISTAlJNhaBfeiirlargerivefsfbraGotmtryofsuchei;- 
'^^.teht.  Ezoqpt  the  Indm,  there  is  no  river  in  all  theooimtiy  which 
is  not  fbidable  throu^ioat  its  course  for  the  greater  part  of  the  jear. 
The  hngeit  partake  of  die  character  of  tOTToits,  and  though  diey  often 
oovne  down  with  great  Ibrce^  they  soon  run  off  Their  importance  is 
diminished  by  the  drains  which' are  madefiom  them  for  the  purpose 
of  irrigating  the  fiddss  by  which  a  laige  stream  b  sometimes  entirely 
consumed,  before  it  reaches  any  other  river.  It  may  be  observed  of 
all  the  rivers  in  Aighaunistami,  that  their  size  at  their  mouths  is  never 
equal  to  the  ezpectatioas  they  raise  when  they  first  issue  from  the 
mountains. 

The  supplies  which  they  yield  to  the  cultivation,  and  the  interrup- 
tion they  occasion  to  travellers,  are  the  only  considerations  whicli 
make  thcni  of  importance.  The  Indus  alone  is  always  navigable^  and 
httle  use  is  made  even  of  its  navigation. 

The  Indus,  from  the  lenfrth  of  its  course,  and  the  volume  of  water 
which  it  carries  to  tlie  ocean,  must  be  reckoned  among  the  first  n\  ers 
in  tlie  world.  Tlie  distance  from  its  head  to  the  sea,  cannot 
be  exactly  aHcertained.  but  it  has  been  traced  for  1.3.50  miles,  and 
there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  its  whole  leni^th  is  much  greater  j  many 
of  its  tributary  streams  are  themselves  littlt  interior  in  extent  to  some 
of  the  most  considerable  rivers  of  Europe  *.    The  source  of  this  noble 


*  In  length  oF  course,  tlioiigh  not  in  deptli  or  pcrmnnmrc,  the  I  lydnspcs,  the  Hy- 
draotes,  and  the  Uytudrus,  arc  sttperior  to  the  Khoae;  the  course  of  the  Hyphatw  w 


Digitized  by  Google 


I19DU& 


109 


river  is  not  yet  euo^y  ascertained.  The  stream  is  traced  with  cer- 
tainty only  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Draus,  a  town  in  Little  Tibet, 
which  Lieutenant  Macartney  places  in  longitude  76  '  48',  and  latitude 
35  '  55*.  The  main  strenm  comes  to  this  point  from  the  north  of  cast, 
hut  its  course  higlK  r  up  is  unknown.  At  the  point  nbo"\  e  Dr.niH  just 
meiitioued,  the  mam  stream  is  met  by  a  smaller  hrauch  whkh  ha» 
been  traced  from  Rodauk  in  Tibet,  a  distance  ot  two  hundred  and 
fifty  miles.  It  passes  near  Ladauk,  the  c  apital  of  Little  Tibet,  irom 
which  it  is  callod  the  river  of  Ladauk.  it  is  joined  near  that  citv  by 
aiiudier  .'.uearn  from  the  north-west,  which  Mr.  Macartney  coujecLures 
to  issue  from  the  lake  of  Surickol.  I  have,  howe\'er,  been  informed 
by  an  Uzbek  of  Ferghamia,  that  a  stream  issued  tVoiii  a  glacier  in 
Mooz  Taugh,  on  the  road  between  Yaurcund  and  Ladauk,  and  that 
he  followed  it  from  the  glacier  to  near  Ladauk,  without  noticing  the 
jimetMm  of  any  conridenble  atieim  bom  ihe  westmu-d ;  by  Us  ks 
<XNiiit,  tlmefiife^  the  mer  has  its  soiin»  hi  diis  ^ader  $  and  though 
I  do  not  think  his.  infinnnatiea  to  be  oompased  to  that  aequiied  fay 
I  limtflnant  Macartnty»  yet  it  may  ^fnefid  to  stateit  on  so  abscue  a 
point. 