

Allthetormer  part  of  its  course  is  tbrouL'li  uninlmliitetl  motintains. 
The  stream  is  everywhere  fordable,  except  when  swelled  with  rain, 
,  and  even  then  the  water  soon  runs  off. 

Difierent  streams  issue  from  the  mountains  at  Zirkmiee,  Derau« 
bund,  Choudwa,  and  Wukwa.  They  all  run  through  valleys  ;  and,  the 
two  last,  completely  pierce  the  range  of  Solimaun ;  one  rising  in 
Spusta,  and  the  other  in  the  Moosakhail  country,  both  west  of  the 
range.    The  two  last  reach  the  Indus,  when  swelled  with  rain. 

The  greatest  of  the  rivers,  which  run  through  the  west  of  A%hau- 
nifltflon,  ia  the  Hebnund,  or  Etymander.  It  liaea  wt  Gohee  &ba» 
twenty  or  thirty  nitea  weat  of  Caubul,  on  the  eaatem  edge  of-tiia 
PluOpaonaan  ntt^  It  luna  through  thoaemoiaitehia  for  upwarda. of 
two  handled  mOear  wad  then  isauea  into  the  cuhivifted  pUdna  of  the 
Doonumeeai  -  Hik  tract,  however,  ia  not  at  the  pUwe  alluded  to,  of 
any  greet  breadth}  and  the  Hellnund  aoon  entera  e  deaart, -which 
estenda  -to  ita  termination  in  the  lake  of  Seestaun.  Hie. immediate 
hanka  Of  the  Hdmmid,  and  the  coontrjr  within  half  a  mile  or  emile 
of  them»  ate  eveiywhere  lertfle^  and,  in  moat  plaoea,  waU  eohivated. 
-  'The  iHiole  loigth  of  the  courae  of  the  Hehnni^  ia  about  four  hundred 
miles.  Though  fordable  for  moat  pert  of  tiie  year  throoghout  the 
whole  of  ita  coarse,  the  Helraund  is  rtill  a  considerate  streun :  even 
in  the  dry  seaaon,  it  ia  breaat  deep  at  the  fords  nearest  to  the  place 
where  it  leaves  the  mountaina;  and,  at  the  time  of  the  melting  of  the 
imowa,  il^  ia  «  deep  end  rapid  river.  Beaidea  the  riven  which  will  be 

•  a  8 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


116  LOEA. 

hereafter  enumerated,  it  roceives  a  stream  from  Seeahbund,  which 
leaches  it  fourteen  miles  alK>vr  dirislik,  alter  a  course  of  oifrht\' mi^es. 

The  LTrjrhimdaub  rises  at  a  piace  in  the  Hazaureii  inouatLiins, 
eighty  miles  north-eft,'<t  of  Candahar,  and  (  onsiderably  to  tlie  south  of 
the  source  of  the  {lelmund.  Its  eouise  lies  to  the  southward  of  that 
river,  which  it  joins  below  C.inshk,  after  ])a.ssing  within  a  few  miles 
of  Candahar,  and  watering  the  richest  part  of  the  Doorraunee  coun- 
try. It  is  a  suiiili  stream  in  winter,  but  deep  ■diid  rapid  when  swelled 
by  the  melting  of  tlie  mow.  It  is  never  more  tliau  one  hundred,  uiid 
fifty  yarda  broad. 

The  Khaahrood  rum  at  Saialdlir,  mmetj  milet  sotilJi-eaat  and  by 
aoiilh  fiom  HesMil)  and*  after  a'coune  of  one  hundred  and  fifty 
miles,  joins  die  Helmwnd,  near  Khooniwaheen  in  the  Gwmaeer.  -  It 
ia  a  iBpid  river,  and  laiger  tliaa  tbe  Uighondaub. 

Tlie  FmraliHrood  riiea  near  that  last  mentioned,  and  is  s  mndi 
move  oonsidBrBble  stream.  It  is  uncertain  whether  it  reaches  die 
hdce'  of  Scestaun  or  is  lost  in  the  aands ;  but»  in  either  case^  its  oouiae 
is  not  lam  than  two  hundrad  miles  long.  Hie  Turauk  rises  near 
Mooklcoor,  and  at  first  pursues  a  soirfh^^wcsteffy  ooutse  along  the 
road  to  Candahar.  It  then  turns  west,  peases  to  the  south  of  Canda- 
har, and  joins  the  Ur^undaub,  about  twenty-five  miles  west  of  that 
dty.  The  Tumuk,  generally  speaking,  runs  through  a  plain  country, 
and  is  not  remarkable  for  rapidity.  To  the  south  of  Candahar,  it  le* 
ceives  the  Urghessaur),  wliich  rises  near  Caufirchauh,  and  waters  a 
country  which  is  known  by  its  name.  It  is  a  rapid  torrent,  never 
remains  deep  for  more  than  two  or  tlivcc.  days,  and  leaves  its  bed  dry 
for  a  great  part  of  the  year.  Still  lower  down,  the  Turnuk  receives 
the  Shorundaum,  a  petty  rivulet,  and  the  Doree,  which  rises  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Rabaut.  Notw^ithstanding  tliese  additions,  it  seems 
rather  to  tlecrease  in  size  from  the  losses  it  suflers  from  the  dryness 
of  the  couiiLiy,  and  the  demands  of  the  cultivation  ;  so  that,  irifter  a 
course  of  two  hundred  mUes,  it  is  still  asmiall  stream  when  it  joins 
the  Uij^undaoh. 