


Digitized  by  Google 


MUTH.WE8T  MONSOON. 


QfVfT  »  gntt  extant  of  knd.  F<ir  Hiii  tmamk  tfae  nfin  isa  vidie  «t 
kM  plcntifbl  in  eftch  cotmtrjr,  ■coording  to  te  dntanoe  from  die  ■e*^ 
except  in  those  neAr  high  niouiit«u»  wfaieli  nrait'ihe  ekndit  mmI 
procure  skiger  supply  ^ndn  for  the  ttei|^ibouriDgtnoti»  thunroold 
hnre  fidlen  to  iheir  diare^  If  the  pMsige  of  the  chmd^ 
stfucted* 

Hie  obstacle  presented  to  the  donds  and  winds  by  the  mountifais 
hes  another  eflbct  of  no  small  importance.  The  souA-Weat  mnasomi 
blowa  over  the  ocean  in  ka  natural  direction ;  aild,  thoogh  it  hh^ 
expenence  smne  diveirities  after  it  readies  theland^  ita  general  ooorae 
over  India  may  attll  be  said  to  be  tomuds  the  hartb4»8t,  till  it  is  eot^ 
hauatedoblhe  western  and  central  parts  of  the  peninsula.  Hie  prvM 
viiioes  in  the  north-east  recei^ra  the  monaoon  m  a  diiSerent  manner  i 
the  wind  which  brings  the  raina  to  that  part  of  the  continent,  origK 
naUy  blows  from  the  south-west,  over  the  Bay  of  I^ngal,  till  the 
mountains  of  Hemalleh*  and  those  which  join  them  from  the  souths 
stop  its  progress}  and  oompd  it  to  follow  their  cour^  towards  the 
north-west.  The  prevailing  wind,  therefore,  in  the  region  south-west 
of  Hemalleh,  is  from  the  south-east,  and  it  is  from  tliat  quarter  that 
our  provinces  in  Bengal  receive  their  rains.  But  when  the  wind  has 
reached  so  far  to  the  north-west  as  to  meet  with  Hindoo  Coosh,  it  is 
again  opposed  by  that  tnountain,  and  turned  off  along  its  face  towards 
the  west,  till  it  meets  the  projection  of  Hindoo  Coosh  and  the  range 
of  Solimauii,  whicli  prevent  its  further  progress  in  that  direction,  or, 
at  least  compel  it  to  part  with  the  clouds  with  which  it  was  loaded. 
Tlie  viYvct  of  the  mountains  in  stopping  the  clouds  borne  by  this 
wind,  is  different  in  different  places.  Near  the  sea,  where  the  clouds 
are  still  in  a  deep  mass,  part  is  discharg( d  on  the  hills  and  the  coun- 
try beneatli  tli  la,  and  part  passes  uj)  to  the  north-west;  iMit  part 
makes  its  way  over  the  first  hills,  and  produces  the  rains  in  Tibet* 
In  the  latitude  of  Cashmeer,  where  the  hills  are  considerably  ex- 
hausted, this  last  division  is  little  perceived :  the  southern  face  of 
tiie  hills  and  the  country  still  farther  south  it>  watered }  and  a  part  of 

s 


Digitized  by  Google 


180 


SOITTH-WEST  MONflOOM. 


the  ckNids  oontinue  their  progresA  to  Aff^hauniitMiii ;  but  few  malBft 
their  way  over  the  mountains,  or  reach  the  valley  of  Cashmeer.  Hie 
douds  which  pass  on  to  Afghaunistaun  are  exhansted  as  they  go : 
the  rains  become  weaker  and  weaker,  and  at  last  are  merely  sufficient 
to  water  the  mountains,  without  much  affecting  the  plains  at  their 
base. 