


•  Hmm  ii  no  maikfid  ll]iiit.betwwa  the  bason  of  the  AnbiataiidBl^- 
«ad  the  eonrt^  want  of  ihe  ineiidian  of  Hookhoor ;  ihehrfier»'  ho^ 
€vitr>'has  a  westesn  nchnatMNi*  ■ 

It  is  indodadbefcwoen  the  Paropamisan  moimtains  sod  the  range  of 
Khcg^  Amrann,  mtA  may  be  divided  into  the  talleyof  the  Uigbe»» 
saun,  that  of  the  Tumuk,  and  the  high  country  between  those  mank 
The  former  is  not  broad,  nor  remarkably  fiertile :  it  slopes  to  the  north- 
west It  is  inhabited  by  Doorraunees ;  and  the  mouth  of  it  extends 
to  the  neighbourhood  of  Candahar.  To  the  south-east  of  it,  is  a  hilly 
and  pastoral  country,  extending  to  Shoraiibuk.  Tlie  country  between 
the  Urghessann  and  Turniik.  is  composed  of  the  ranges  of  MookkoOf: 
and  Torkaunee,  and  the  plains  which  i  liey  enclose. 

The  general  slope  of  the  valley  ol"  Turnuk,  from  Mookkoor  to 
Kelauti  Ghiljie,  is  to  the  south-west.  It  also  shelves  towards  the  river 
firom  the  Paropanii»an  mountains,  and  from  the  high  land  before  men- 

B 


Digitized  by  Google 


OOUNTEY  "WEST  OF  THB  HELMTJND. 


tioned,  in  the  parallell  of  Kellot  e  Abdooreheem.  But.  except  in  the 
most  northerly  part  of  this  natural  division,  these  slopes  are  so  modf»- 
rate  that  the  tract  may  with  propriety  be  described  as  a  wavy  pium, 
scattered  with  hills.  It  is  not  infertile,  and  in  many  places  it  is  well 
cultivated  ;  but,  in  general,  it  is  tlry,  and  a  large  portion  of  it  is  lelt 
waste  for  that  reason.  It  is  destitute  of  trees.  The  uncultivated  parts 
abound  in  buolies,  which  serve  for  fuel  and  for  the  food  of  caiuels,  but 
which  do  not  form  continued  tracts  of  brushwood,  such  as  are  common 
in  India.  The  breadth  of  this  valley  is  about  sixty  miles,  and  the 
Imigthof diepart IhairedeacsribeduTeiy UttlemoiA  HuiBbabitod 
by  Ghfljies. 

Hie  Urg^nndanb  is^iies  from  the  mouiituiis  to  the  north  of  Kdauti 
Ghtljie.  From  that  river  to  the  Udmund,  i*  »  hilly  oountcy,  cnnnectfid 
on  the  north  with  the  Fuopamiaan  mountainst  end  reaching  nearly  to 
the  paraUd'ofCandahar  on  the  south.  The  aouthem  part  of  this  tiaet 
ia  unfertile.  Tbe  rest,  in  which  are  tnduded  the  districts  of  Khauk-* 
nix,  Laum,  and  perhaps  some  others,  contains  some  fertile  plains^ 
among  hiUSf  which  bear  al  m  ond  and  other  trees. 

The  country  round  Candahar  is  fertile^  and  highly  cultivated.  Still 
fiuther  soothe  it  is  poor,  and  becomes  more  so  as  it  extends  west  |  so 
that,  for  many  marches  towards  the  left  bank  of  the  Uelmund,  it  Is  a 
complete  desart.  Both  banks  of  the  Helmund,  however,  are  fertile, 
and  compose  the  country  of  (lurmsecr.  Its  limits  on  the  east  and 
west  are  formed  by  the  desart ;  on  the  south  it  has  Seestaun,  and  on 
the  north  thr-  part  of  the  Doorraunoe  countrv,  lower  down  the  Hel- 
-  mimd  than  dirishk.  This,  and  the  countiy  round  Girishk,  are  fertile, 
near  the  Helmund.  At  a  distance  from  the  river  it  is  sandy,  but  not  a 
desart*  Still  further  up  the  river,  on  its  right  bank,  lies  the  rich  coun- 
try of  Zemeendawir,  which  has  the  I'aropamisan  niountain.s  on  the 
north,  and  some  bills  connected  with  that  range  are  found  within  its 
limits.  This  fine  country  exteiub  for  fer^  or  fifty  miles  to  the  west  of 
theHdmund.  To  the  nocthFweat  of  Zemeendawir,  lies  the  oonnlay  of 