

Peshawer  is  situated  on  a  low  plain,  surrounded  on-  idl  sides  except 
the  east,  with  hills.  Tlie  air  is  consequently  much  confined,  and  the 
heat  greatly  increased.  In  the  summer  of  1809,  which  was  reckoned 
a  mild  one,  the  thennc  inotor  was  for  several  days  at  112'  and  113',  in 
a  large  tent  artificially  cooled,  whicii  is  as  liifrh  as  in  the  hottest  parts 
of  India.   The  duration  of  this  heat  is  not,  however,  so  great  aa  that 


Digitized  by  Google 


of  an  Indian  Summer,  and  it  is  compensated  by  a  mucli  ceider 
Wiitter.  The  ibUowiag  is  an  acoaunt  of  the  piogres»  of  tike  seasons 
at  Pesliawer. 

The  mission  arrived  in  the  plain  of  Peshawer  on  February  23d, 
Tlie  weather  was  then  cold  at  night,  bitt  perfectly  a^eeabie 
in  t  he  day,  and  not  hot#  even  m  the  sun,  at  any  part  of  tl  ie  twentj- 
four  hours.    The  ground  was  frequently  covered  with  hoar-frost  in 
.  the  morning,  as  late  as  the  8th  of  March,  but  by  the  middle  of  that 
montii  the  sun  was  dLsagreeable  by  eight  in  the  morning.    The  wea- 
.   tber  after  this  became  gradually  hotter,  and  the  heat  of  the  sun  grew 
more  intense,  but  the  air  was  often  refreshed  by  showers,  and  it  wa» 
always  cool  in  the  shade,  till  the  first  week  in  Ma}-,  when  eren  the 
u  iiitl  b<jgau  lo  lie  heated.    At  ilie  time  of  our  arrival,  the  new  grass 
wa»  springing  up  throagh  the  withered  grass  of  the  last  year ;  some  of 
the  early  trees  were  budding,  but  all  the  other  deciduous  plants  were 
lMEe»   Xlift  appieaeh  of  Ae^  Spring  was  howevi^  veiy  rapid.   In  the 
fiiit  wsfikin  Maidhy  pcadi  and  plum  tiM  began  to  Uonom ;  apple, 
qmnce»  and  miilbeiij  UiMWurote-ip  bloom  kilbeooaafaeoftiheaeeoiKt 
iWflks  bdmthe  end  of  Mndit  tbe^ trees- were  in  fiill  i>fiag^  vasfy 
in  A|^  barley  began  to*  be  in  ear,  and  it  began  to  be  cat  down  dol- 
ing the  fint  W9A  in  Ma^   Amn  that  timetbe  heat  incKeaaed,  and 
WW  ofteniiteir^  aefere»  eveft  in  the  night,  tiOlihe  beginning  o(  Jmti, 
wfaen  Awlibfe  nig^  of  itraiig.het  wind  firom  dte  norlih-weBt  was  buc- 
cseded  faj  aoaii  a  coolneas  in  the  air  as  was  nneomibrtable  in  ifiet 
morning,  bnfc  pJeiwiuit  during  the  rest  of  the  day.  Tfais  oodness  was 
not  of  any  great  duration,  and  the  heat  was  at  its  utmost  heag^  hj* 
^  88d  of  Jnnei  wlien  we  awiscd?  tlie  Indus.   Vblent  hot  winds 
iixMn  the  aoodi  Mew  aU  ni^it,  tiH  the  kst  day  we  were  in  the  plain 
of  Peshawer,  when  the  wind  came*  RNmd  to  the  north-east,  and  waa' 
<ttJigli*Aillj  oool.  From  that  time  we  undeistood  that  the  heat  would- 
Hgpin  inrrmiMT  till  the  middle  of  July,  when  a  cold  wind  would  set  in- 
from  the  east,  and  be  snooeeded  by  oool  and  dondy  weather.  The 
lart  half  of  Septanbcv  m  ondeMtoed  was  thnjn  so  oold,  as  to  be 