

The  above  obscr\'ation.s  will  explain,  or  at  least  connect  the  follow- 
ing facts.  The  south-west  monsoon  commences  on  the  Malabar 
coast  in  May,  and  is  there  very  violent ;  it  is  later  and  more  mo- 
derate in  Mysore;  and  tiie  ( Oroniandel  coast,  covered  by  the  moun- 
tainous countries  on  its  west,  is  entirely  exempt  from  it.  Further 
north,  the  monsoon  begins  early  in  June,  and  loses  a  ^no{\  deal  of  its 
violence,  except  in  the  places  influenced  by  the  neigh ix)urhood  ot  the 
mountains  or  the  sea,  where  the  fall  of  water  is  verv  considerable. 
About  I)t  it  does  not  begin  till  the  end  of  June,  and  the  faU  of 
rain  is  greatly  inferior  to  what  is  felt  at  Calcutta  or  Bombay.  In  the 
north  of  the  Puiijuub,  near  the  hills,  it  exceeds  that  of  Delly ;  but, 
in  the  south  of  the  Punjaub,  distant  both  from  the  sea  and  the  hills, 
very  little  rain  falls.  The  countries  under  the  hills  of  Cashmeer,  and 
those  under  Hindoo  Coosh,  (Fukhlee,  Boonere,  and  Swaut)  have  all 
didr  shaie  of  the  rains ;  but  ihey  diminidi  as  we  go  west,  and  at 
Smut  are  leduoed  to  a  month  of  clouds,  with  oocasi  In 
the  same  month  (the  end  of  July  and  beginning  of  August)  the  mon* 
soon  appears  m  some  cJouds  and  showers  at  Peahawer,  and  m  .die 
Bwngnah  and  Khuttok  oountries.  It  is  stiU  kssifelt  in  the  yalley  of 
the  Cauhvd  river*  where  it  does  not  extend  bejond  Tiughmaun; 
but  in  Bigour  and  Fhmjoora,  under  the  southeni  pnjection*  in  th^ 
pnt  of  the  Caufir  conntxy,  which  is  situated,  on  the  top  of  the  same 
prqjectiont  and  in  Teera,  .situated  in  the  angle  formed  by  Tukhti 
SoUmaun  and  its  eastern  branches,  the  south-west  monsoon  is  heavy, 
and  finrns  the  prindpal  rains  of  the  y&a.  There  is  rain  in  this  sea^ 
son  in  the  country  of  the  Jaujees  and  Torees,  whidi  jnrobably  is 
Inonglit  fiom  the  nocth  by  the  eddy  in  the  winds;  but  I  have  not  in^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


t 


WINTER  RAINa  181 
Jbnliitiiiii  OKNiglli  to  enabk  me  to  oaig^^ 

in  Bmiiioo  hmI  the  nd^boiiriiig'coimtries  is  to  be  lacribed  to  tibit 
cause,  or  to  the  rcguhr  monsoon  from  the  aonth-wcat. 

The  regular  monsoon  is  felt  as  fiur  west  as  the  utmost  boundaiy  of 
Mekraun  ;  it  is  not  easy  to  fix  its  limits  on  the  north-west  with  pre- 
dsUMit  but  I  have  no  accounts  of  it  beyond  a  line  drawn  through  the 
nogrthem  part  of  the  table  land  of  Kelaut  and  the  northern  parts  of 
Shoiaubuk,  of  Pisheen,  and  of  2bobe,  to  the  source  of  the  Kooiv 
rum ;  it  £Jls,  however,  in  very  different  quantities  in  the  various 
countries  south-east  of  that  line.  Tlie  clouds  pass  with  little  obstruc- 
tion over  Lower  Sind,  but  rain  more  plentifully  in  Upper  Sind  and 
Domaun,  where  these  rains,  though  not  heavy,  are  the  principal  ones 
in  the  year.  On  tlie  sea-coast  of  Luss  and  Mekraun,  on  the  other 
hand,  they  are  arrested  by  tlie  moantains,  and  the  monsoon  resembles 
that  of  [ndia.  In  Seweestauu  the  monsoon  is  probably  the  same  as 
,  in  Upper  Sind  and  Duiviann  :  in  Boree  it  is  only  about  a  mouth  of 
cloudy  and  showery  weather  :  it  is  probably  less  in  Zhobe :  and  in 
the  other  countries  within  the  line  it  only  appewrs  in  showers,  more 
precarious  as  we  advance  towards  the  north.  * 