

Seeahhund,  dong  thefeot  of  the  Paiopamisan  mountains..  It  is  nat»>. 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


COUNTRIES  WEST  OF  THE  80UMAUN. 


12S 


nUy  fstUi^  and  w«U  Mood;  but  k  u  Uttte  cuiavirted,  and  chiefly 

used  for  pasture. 

To  the  aoutfa-weii  of  Seeahbundy  and  east  of  Furrah,  the  oountiy 
becomes  move  and  inoEe  arid  aa  it  feoedeafironi  the  hilla*  till  it  eodi  in 
the  desart 

Furrah  is  a  considerable  town,  and  the  country  round  it  is  fertile,  but 
it  is  of  no  great  extent ;  so  that  Furrah  itself,  and  some  other  tracts  to 
tbe  north  and  south  of  it,  seem  rich  islands  in  the  midst  of  a  waste, 
approaching  in  appearance  to  a  desart.  Yet,  this  land  dcM  s  not  appear 
to  be  naturally  incapable  of  cultivation  j  and,  it  is  probable,  that 
^vherever  there  is  water  it  is  productive. 

About  twenty  miles  to  the  north  of  Furrah,  wc  meet  the  mountains, 
which  stretch  across  from  tiie  Paropaiiiisan  range  into  Persian  Kho- 
rassttun.  Among  these  mountains,  which  are  covered  with  ibrests, 
we  find  the  extensive  and  fertile  plain  of  Subzaur  or  Isfezaur. 

Some  more  bairen  country  intervenes  before  we  readi  Horaut, 
whidi  ia  aituated  in  an  ample  plam  of  nnequaUed  iertilityy  and  aof* 
vounded  by  hi^mountainSi 

.  The  idiole.fif  tlie  country  I  hanre  been  deaaihing,  fiom  Kdbnti 
*  Cad^  to  HcttHitt  encgpt  Seeahbwnd  and  flnhnaiir,  ie  inhaliifaHi  byiSbm 
tribe  of  BoorauDee*  whidi  is  the  greateit  among  the  A^haulu.  Its 
l^eDeral  alope  ia  to  the  south.  randahar»  and  the  country  to  the  weat 
itf  lUavethebweatof  ail  the  tiacta  I  haive  yet  deacribedweatof  the 
wage  of  Solimawn ;  butt  even  they  are  much,  more  elevated  than  thd 
plaina  on  the  east  of  thoae  mountains. 

Returning  to  the  neiglibourhood  of  Ghfimee,  we  find  Zoonnool 
divided  firom  Sirufze  on  the  south,  by  a  branch  from  Cohee  Solimaun. ' 

'  CBni&a,  Oorghoon,  and  Wauna,  have  been  described  as  descending 
in  stages  to  the  Gromul,  which  bounda  them  on  the  south,  and  as  sl<^ 
inlg  from  the  mountains  of  Solimaun  westward  towards  the  upper 
course  of  the  same  river,  which  fonns  their  western  boundary.  They  are 
divided  from  each  other  by  branches  of  the  Solimnunco  mountains,  and 
are  «11  little  cleared  plaina  among  mountains,  covered  with  forests  of 

E  8 


124 


DUSHn  BEDOWLER 


pitaK  Tkey  are  higlii  «nd<Gold  countries ;  but  all  theaer  qualities  mn 
found  less  in  the  southern  parts  than  the  northern.  Sumfita  belongs 
to  the  Kharotee  tribe  of  Ghiljies,  as  does  the  southern  part  of  the 
plain  of  Oorghoori,  under  the  name  of  Seroba.  Ooorghoon  itself 
belongs  to  the  FermoollcFs,  a  Persian  tribe.  Waunch  belongs  to  an 
A%haun  tribe  called  Durataumi).  To  the  west  of  Wauneh,  beyond 
a  range  oi  hills,  in  the  mountainous  country  of  Mumniye,  the  slope 
of  which  is  east  towards  the  (romuL  Mummye  is  divided  on  the 
west  by  the  same  branch  which  pasaes  to  tlie  west  of  Sirutza,  from 
the  bason  of  the  Aubistaudeh. 