


Digitized  by  Google 


(  1«  ) 


CHAP.  V. 


OP  THE  CUMATE  OP  APGHAUNISTAIIN.  KAIN. 

« 

S  the  occasional  showers  which  fidl  throughout  the  year  in  England, 


aie  unknowii  in  most  Anadccoiintries,  the  first  particular  toattend 
to  in  f«ft"*'"Hg  thnr  dimale,  is  the  season  and  die  quantily  of  the 
periodical  laina.  It  is  this  which  regulates  husbandr)^,  and  on  which 
in  many  countries  the  temperature  and  suooeasion  of  the  seasons  in  m 
great  measure  depoid. 

The  most  rfwnarirahle  rainy  season,  u  that  called  in  India  the  soutb- 
west  monsoon.  It  extends  fix»m  Africa  to  the  )dal*  peninsula,  and 
deluges  all  Uie  intnmediate  countries  within  ceattam  lines  of  Isftitude^ 
ibr  fiHir  months  in  the  year.  In  the  south  of  India  this  m<msQon  com- 
mences  about  the  beginning  of  June,  but  it  gets  later  as  we  advance 
towards  the  north.  Its  approach  is  announced  by  vast  masses  of 
clouds  that  rise  from  the  Indian  ocean,  and  advance  towards  the  nattb- 
east,  gathering  and  thickening  as  they  approach  the  land.  After  some 
threatening  days,  the  sky  assumes  a  troubled  appearance  in  the  even- 
ings, and  tho  monsoon  in  general  sets  in  during  the  night.  It  i» 
attended  with  such  a  thunder-storm  as  can  scarcely  be  imagined  by 
those  who  have  only  seen  tlmt  plu  iioiiit  iion  in  a  temperate  Lliniate. 
It  generally  begins  with  violent  blasts  of  wind,  wliich  are  siicceeded  by 
floods  of  rain.  For  some  hours  ligiitning  is  seen  ahnost  without 
intermission,  sometimes  it  only  illuminates  the  sky,  and  shows  the 
clouds,  near  the  horizon  j  at  others  it  discovers  the  disLauL  lulls,  and 
again  leaves  all  in  darkness,  when  in  an  instant  it  re-appears  in  vivid 
and  auocessive  flashes,  and  ezliibita  the  nef^^st  objects  in  all  the  bright- 


Digitized  by  Google 


SOUTH-WEST  MONSOON.  Ig7 

Bcnofd^.  DnringaUthii  tune  the  distal 
nU,  andiBonljailoioed  by  Mmie  meaierpeilfiHiicli  bunts  on  the  ear 
with  such  a  sudden  and  tremendous  crash  as  csn  scwcely  &0  to  strike 
the  most  it) sensible  heart  with  awe*.  At  length  the  thunder  ceases* 
and  nothing  is  heard  but  4he  oontinned  pouring  <^  the  zsan,  and  the 
rushing  of  the  rising  streams.  The  next  day  presents  a  j^oomy  q^ecv 
tacle :  the  rain  still  descends  in  tonent8»  and  scarcely  allows  a  view 
the  bkudcened  fields :  the  rivers  are  swoln  and  discoloured*  and 
sweep  down  along  with  them  the  hedges,  the  huts,  and  the  remains 
of  the  cuhOTatikn  which  was  carried  on,  during  the  dry  seasout  in 
tlieir  beds. 

This  lasts  for  somr  da vs,  after  which  the  sky  clears,  and  discovers 
the  tact  (»f  nature  clianged  as  if  by  enchantment.  Before  the  "^torm 
the  fields  were  pardied  up.  and  except  in  the  beds  of  the  rivers, 
scarce  a  blade  of  vegetatiuu  was  to  be  seen  :  the  clearae«s  of  the  sky 
was  not  interrupted  by  a  single  cloud,  but  the  atmosphere  was  loaded 
with  dust,  which  was  sufficient  to  render  distaui  objects  dim,  as  in  a 
mist,  and  to  make  the  suu  appear  dull  and  discoloured,  till  he  at- 
tained a  considerable  elevation :  a  parching  wind  blew  like  a  blast 
from  a  furnace,  and  heated  wood,  iron,  andevery  other  scdid  material, 
•ven  in  the  shade }  and  immediately  belbre  the  monsoon,  tins,  wind 
had  been  snooeeded  by  still  more  sultry  calms.  But  when  the  first 
violeooeofthe  storm  is  over,  the  whole  earth  is  covered  with  asudden 
but  hizuriaiit.vefdure :  the  rivers  are  full  and  tranquil:  the  airis  pure 
and  delidoas}  and  the  sky  is  varied  and  embellished  with  douds; 
The  effiict  of  the  change  is  visible  on  aD  the  anhnal  creation,  and  can 
only  be  imagined  in  Europe  by  anpposing  the  depth  of  a  dieaiy  wio-t 