

In  the  riKuint  tins  to  the  south  of  Mummye,  are  the  valleys  of 
Oozdeh,  Couzidour,  (ScC  and  the  plains  of  Doclieena,  Turrukghuz,  &c. 
all  sloping  east  to  the  Gomul.         ...  .    • . 

To  the  west  of  these  is  a  high  tableland,  sloping  west,  supported  on 
the  north-wertby  the  range  of  Qiajdh  AmTatiti»  and  oontainiug  Can- 
ftidiaiihtiSnildi  Yeacx>n,  Secoona  Baug  and  Tob^  The  Tnliey  of 
Boiehim  deaeenda  from  thia  table  land  into  Fiaheen»  which  atao  lies 
MMith  of  Toba.  Bnnhofe  is  a  fertile  vaUey^  watered  by  the  Lofa. 
Elaheen  i»  low,  biit.  higher  than  Gndihar.  It  is  a  plain  not  miafk- 
flfely .fertile.  To  dieaonih  tif  Pitheenia  Shawl,  diiridedfrom  it  by  the 
lange  t»f  Tnkkatoa  It  is  higher  than  Sidieen^  but  lowop  than  Mooa- 
tODog,.*  plam  to  the  wesb  of  it,  odder  the  table  land  of  •  Kebmt,  Sfa«wl 
and  Moostoong  both  belong  to  the  Bdodhe  Flrinoe  of  Eelaut,  tfKNi^ 
the  former  is  chiefly  inhabited  by  A%hauns.  Both  areftitile^  Imt 
from  £3iawl  .the  land  rises  gradually  to  Khmlukkeef  and  gets  mbfe  dry 
and  barren  as  it  iqpproadies  that  lange;  a  pzoc^  that  the  range  is  not 
high,  though  it  rises  so  much  above  Sweestann  on  the  south. 

The  barren  country  between  Khurlukkee  and-  Shawl,  ut  called  the 
Dushti  Bedowleh,  or  The  Unhappif  Plain. 

To  the  oHst  of  it  and  Shawl,  are  the  mountains  which  I  suppose  to 
fiurm  a  continued  rang^  ljx>m  Khurlukkee,  by  Tsupper  and  Chirry,  to 


*  Dang  is  the  Piuliioo  Imr  a  plaii^  Seeoons  it  Ae  warn  of  •  tiibe  «f  Onkm 
lAo  inhabit  this  qpaoew 


Digitized  by  Google 


B01i£E.— ZHUBE.  125 

KiDid.  Eflit  of  tihose  nunmtainsi  I  have  described  diflerent  langee 
of  bills*  as  nmnii^  east  towsids  the  ningeof  Solimaun.  The  most 
tootberty  of  tlwse  bounds  A^^kannistsun  on  the  souIIl  Betwoen 
that  lange  end  the  next,  lie  tfie  vallej  of  Zawuia  and  the  plain  of 
Tul  and  CShooteeallee.  The  latter  places  are  in  one  plain  of  oonsi- 
derable  extent,  of  hard  day  like  that  of  the  Indus.  Zawura  is  much 
narrower  than  TutXIhooteeallee,  but  both  are  fertile,  and  inhabited 
hy  Speen  Teieens,  a  diviaiott  of  the  Al^iaun  tribe  that  possesses 
Hsheen. 

To  the  north  of  these,  and  divided  from  them  by  hills,  is  Boree,  a 
more  extensive  plain  than  cither  of  the  former,  and  rich  and  well  wa- 
tered. Other  hills,  some  of  which  appear  to  be  a  continiMition  of 
Tukkatoo,  bound  Boree  on  the  north,  and  separate  it  iirom  other  dis- 
tricts less  level  and  less  fertile.  r    .         •  . 

North  of  this  tract,  is  Zhobe,  so  (  ;iIIp(1  from  the  river  which  waters 
it.  It  is  a  diversified  country,  but  tlie  wliol<-  is  ill  cultivated  :  some 
parts  are  hilly:  in  I'tliers  are  open  plains;  ami  on  the  river  are  plains 
covered  with  i  tiiiiarii.k  trees  and  busiies.  To  the  north-west  of  Zhobe 
is  Khyssore,  which  seems  to  be  a  valley  under  the  hills  which  support 
the  table  land  of  Seeoona  Daug :  x>n  the  north-east  Zhobe  opens  on 
the  valley  of  the  Cdmul,  and  on  the  east  ittiM  theliilly^coiintflesiin- 
dHrtteimgeof  fiolhnaitn*  the  most  northeHy^fivlHdilidb^ 
Huirepind  diviskm  of  the  Sheenttmeea^  to  the  soudi  of  wfaocn  a<e  a 
drvisioii  of  the  Bsnboorsi  sad  then  Cankers,' in  ttome  pfaMes.  mixed 
wiUi  Bdocbesr  .  I  conceive  Boree  end  INill-Cliooteeallee  to  be  about 
as  hi^asCandahar:  ftom  Boree  the  eountxy  rises  to  the- noithwaxd^ 
as&r  astfaehotdmof  Zhobes  and  then  descends  tosrarda  the  GomoL 
The  narrow- valiey  of  the  GomuU  thou^  sank  among  the  samranding 
hiUa,  is  modi  move  eleVated  than  tlie  pUun  of  the  Indns,  -andplobably 
even  than  Ciindahflr ;  the  paits  near  the  mcuntainsk  to  rthe  east  and 
west,  are  higher  than  those  in  the  Centre,  but  the  greatest  elevatibo  ia 
tomfirda  the  west 