

The  cats  must  also  be  noticed,  at  leaat  the  long-haired  apedea 
called  Boorauk,  as  th^  are  exported  in  great  numbers,  and  every 
where  called  Persian  cata,  thou^  they  are  not  numeroua  in  the  ootu^ 
try  firom  which  they  are  named,  and  are  seldom  or  never  exported 
thence. 

A  aimple  enumeration  may  suffice  for  the  few  birds  I  can  remem- 
ber.   Hiere  are  two  or  three  sorts  of  eagles,  and  many  kinds  of 

hawks  ;  among  wliich  are  the  gentle  falcon,  which  is  the  best  of  all ; 
the  large,  grev,  short  winged  bird,  called  Bauz  in  Persian,  and  Kiizzil 
in  Turkish,  which  I  believe  is  the  fjoshawk  ;  the  shauheen,  which  is 
taught  to  soar  o%'er  the  iiiiconer's  ht  ad,  ;iiKl  strike  the  quarrv  as  it 
rises.  The  chirk,  which  is  taught  to  strike  the  antelope,  and  to 
fasten  on  its  head,  and  retard  it  till  the  grey-hounds  come  up :  and 
several  other  kinds.  Nor  is  there  any  want  of  game  for  liawking; 
herons,  cranes,  and  storks  are  common,  as  are  wild  ducks  and  geese, 
swans,  partridges,  quails,  and  a  bird  whicli  is  called  Cupk  by  the  Per- 
uana and  Ai^hauns,  and  the  hill  Chichore  by  the  Indians,  and  which 
I  undetatand  ia  known  In  Europe  by  the  name  of  the  Gredt  P^v- 
tridge.  There  ia  a  amiUer  bird  called  Sooae^  whidi  baa  a  reacm  - 

lO 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


VEGETABLES.  X4S 

blance  to  that  lait  maitioii«d»  and  wfakh  I  hsve  nerer  faevd  of  bnl 
Bi  A%haMnirtainn.   Pigeons,  dovwt  eR>w%  qniioira,  &c  are  aamMm 

to  all  countries ;  cuckoos,  which  are  rare,  and  magpies,  which  are  uh> 
known  in  India»  are  abundant  in  the  cold  climates  of  Afghaunistum, 
while  peacokS)  so  common  in  India,  are  there  only  to  be  found  do- 
meaCkated  as  in  England ;  and  parrots  and  njnaa  (Coraciaa  Indica) 
are  only  found  in  the  east  ' 

Hie  reptiles  do  not  call  for  much  notice.  The  snakes  are  mostly 
innocent ;  the  scorpions  of  Pcshawer  are  notorious  for  their  size  and 
venom,  yet  their  bite  is  seldom  or  never  fatal.  I  have  not  heard 
much  of  the  fishes  of  the  country.  Hiere  are  no  crocodile.  Xurtlea 
are  comintm,  as  are  tortoises. 

Greut  tiigbts  of  locusts  are  not  of  frequent  occurrence,  yet  the  lew 
famines  that  have  been  felt  in  Khorassaun,  were  occasioned  by  their 
devastations.  Bees  are  comnmn  in  tliej*e  countries,  especially  to  tlie 
eaiit  of  the  range  ol  ISolimaun,  but  are  domesticated  in  Cashmeer 
alone.  Mosquitoes  are  less  troublesome  than  in  India,  except  in 
Seestaun,  where  they  are  very  formidable :  the  inlialjitants  are  there 
obliged  to  iiave  mosquitoe  curtains,  as  in  Bengal  ;  and  either  these 
animals,  or  a  sort  of  gad-fly,  often  harrass  horses  till  they  pine  aiid  die.  ' 