

liona. 

Tsgen  are  found  in  most  of  the  countdea  eaat  of  the  range  of  Soli- 
mamiy  and  it  is  there  that  leopards  are  moat  common.  They  are^ 
)ioiwever»  to  be  met  with  in  moat  of  the  woody.parta  of  Afghauni- 
ataun. 

Wolves,  hyaenas,  jackalls.  foxes,  and  liurcs,  ;irc  common  every 
where.  Tlic  wolves  are  particularly  tbrniidable  during  the  winter  in 
cold  countrief?,  whtii  (litv  form  into  troops,  frequently  destroy  cattle, 
and  somt  times  even  attack  men.  Hyaenas  never  hunt  in  liodies,  but 
th(  V  Mill  sometimes  attack  a  bullock  singly;  and  both  they  nnd  the 
wolves  always  make  great  Iiavoc  among  the  sheep.  Hares  are  kept 
for  the  market  at  Caubul,  and  two  sell  for  a  rupee. 

Bears  arc  very  common  in  all  the  woody  mountains,  but  they  sel- 
dom quit  their  haunts,  except  where  sugar-cane  is  planted,  whidi 
t^pts  them  into  the  cultivation.   Th^  are  of  two  kinda,  one  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


143  ANIMAIS  OF  AFDHAmnSTAUN. 

wiiich  is  the  black  beax  of  India,  the  other  is  of  a  dirty  whit^  or  rather 
of  a  yellow  colour. 

Wild  boars  abound  in  Persia  and  India,  but  are  rare  in  Caubul ; 
and  the  wild  ass  appears  to  be  confined  to  the  T>ooiaunoe  country, 
the  (lumscer,  and  the  sandy  country  south  of  Candahar.  iMany  kinds 
of  deer,  in  which  the  elk  is  inchitieti,  are  found  in  all  the  mountains ; 
but  antelopes  are  rare,  and  confined  to  the  plains.  The  wild  sheep 
and  wild  goat  «ie  commoo  in  the  emtm  bSlB.  The  BMMt  remark- 
able of  the  deer  spet^ed  is  one  which  I  think  is  called  Pause»  in 
flian.  It  is  remarkable  fiir  the  use  of  its  honiB>  and  fixr  the  strong  but 
iiot  dlMg^eeble  amdl  of  its  body*  Ibe  Tolgar  believ9  thit  it  Vtfe§ 
on  annkes;  and  a  hard gioen  snbatanoe»  sibout  the  sise  of  a  Windsor 
bean,  is  found  la  some  {Mvt  of  ift,'«faicli  is  ledraoed  an  inftlltbte  ouve 
ibr  the  bite  of  a  serpent 

The  only  wM  animals  that  I  fanre  beanio^  boiidss  those  aliieii^ 
aK»  poreu|M]MS,  hadgahogs»  and  monkies,  (which  lastm 
only  fivond  in  the  noxtih-east  part  of  A^haunistaun).  MongtNisasy 
ferrets,  and  wild  dogs.  Moles  are  only  found  in  Cashmeer.  The 
King  has  a  few  elcfihantS)  but  they  are  all  brought  from  India ;  nei- 
ther that  animal  nor  the  ihinoceros,  being  found  in  any  part  of  hia 
own  dominions. 

The  horse  claims  the  first  notice  of  all  domestic  animals.    A  omi- 

siderable  number  are  bred  in  the  A%haun  dominions,  and  those  of 
Heraut  are  ^■ery  fine.  I  have  seen  one  or  two  that  had  the  figure  of 
the  Arab  with  superior  size.  A  good  breed  of  the  Indian  kind  called 
Tatizee,  is  also  found  in  Bunnoo  and  Damaiin  ;  and  ex<%llent  horses 
of  the  same  s<^rt  are  bred  between  the  Hyda^jx  s  and  Indus ;  but  in 
general,  the  hors^  of  the  Afghan n  Lioininions  are  not  remaikably 
good,  excepting  in  the  province  ot  Balkh,  where  they  are  excellent 
and  very  numerous,  A  very  strong  and  useful  breed  of  ponies, 
called  Vaudoos,  is  however  reared,  especially  about  Baumiaun.  Tliey 
ate  used  to  carry  baggage,  and  can  bear  a  great  load,  but  do  not 
sbnd  a  kiig  oontmiuaoe  ctf  hard  vork  so  well  as  mules. 