


DISEASES. 


warning  to  a  pexMn  ■ft|HMnt4»<  with  it,  to  allow  of  hit  nmiii^g  into 

shelter  tiU  the  simoom  has  passed  over.  When  a  man  is  caught  in 
it,  it  generally  occasions  instant  death.    Tlie  sufiferer  fiills  senseless, 

and  blood  bursts  from  his  mouth,  nose,  and  oars.  His  life  is  'some- 
times saved,  by  administering  n  strong  acid,  or  by  immersing  him  in 
water.  The  people  in  places  where  the  simoom  is  frequent,  eat  gar- 
lic, and  rub  their  lips  and  nose*?  with  it,  when  they  go  out  in  the  heat 
of  summer,  to  prevent  their  sufTci  iiig  by  the  simoom.  This  wind  is 
said  to  blast  trees  in  its  passage  ;  and,  the  hydropiiobia,  which  affects 
the  wolves,  jackails,  and  dogs,  in  some  parts  of  the  country,  is  attri> 
buted  to  it. 

To  sum  up  the  cliaracter  of  the  climate  of  the  whole  country, 
A%haunistaun  must  be  pronounced  dry,  and  little  subject  to  rain, 
doudi^  or  Iag9.  Its  annual  heat  on  an. average  of  different  places,  is 
greater  thaii  that  of  England,  and  Imt  than  that  of  India.  Hie 
difeenee  of  temperature  between  aimiiiier  and  winter,  and  ewm 
between  day  and  night,  is  greater  than  in  either  of  those  eoun- 
tiiei.  Judging  from  the  sisoi  strength*  and  activity  of  the  in- 
habitants* we  should  pnmounce  the  climate  finrourable  to  the  human 
otmsdtution ;  and  ioany  parts  of  the  oountiy  are  certiinly  remark* 
able  fiv  their  salubrity.  But^  on  an  inflection  of  ftetSi  it  sp- 
pesrs  doubtfiil  wheth^  tlw  diseases  of  A^j^iaunistann  are  not  move 
fiUal  than  those  of  India.  Yet,  those  diseases  are  not  numennis,  and 
few  of  them  are  of  those  deicriptionB  which  make  most  havock  in 
otfa«r  countries.  Fevers  and  agues  are  common  in  antmnn,  and  are 
also  ftk  in  spring.  Colds  are  very  troublesome^  and  sometimes 
daogorous  in  winter.  The  small-pox  carries  off  many  persons,  though 
innoculation  has  long  been  practised  by  the  Moollaha  and  S^fuds  in 
the  most  remote  parts  of  the  kingdom.  Opthalmia  is  comrooiL 
These  are  the  principal  disorders  of  A%jbaunisteu& 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  I4X  ) 


CHAP.  VL 

ANIICALS,  YJBOETABLES,  AND  MINERALS  OF  AFOHAUNISTAUN. 

1 

T  CAN  bjno  m«HU  prebend  to  give  a  ioU  aoooimt  of  the  antmiib  ef 
the  ooimtries  I  am  deacribing.   I  dull  011I7  mentioo  a  £bw  that  I 

have  heavd      withoat  tahhig  it  upon  me  to  nj  that  I  have  not 

omitted  more  than  I  have  stated. 
The  lioDt  ihoof^  ab  common  in  Fenia,  and  lately  found  in  such 

nnmben  in  Gnieiat  and  in  ^  Huniana»naith-iwe0t  of  Belly,  is  veiy- 

me  m  A^jfaannifltann.  The'odj  place  irheate  I  have  heard  of  liont,. 

ia  in  the  hiUy  country  about  Caubul»  wad  there  they  are  small  and 

iraah;  oompared  to  the  African  lion.   I  even  doubt  whether  they  aie 