

Betoming  to  the  south  of  the  fierdooraunee  country,  Bunnoo  ap- 
pears to  be  as  hot  as  Feshawer,  and  the  Fmiukhail  perhaps  hotter. 
Khost  and  Dour,  as  they  are  hi^ber  than  Bunnoo,  are  probably  cooler* 

The  Murwut  country  is  made  up  of  hills  and  plains,  and  consequent* 
ly  has  not  a  uniform  climate.  The  plains,  at  least,  are  very  hot,  and 
parched  up,  by  the  heat  of  summer.  Laigee  was  fiur  firamcool,  .even 
in  January. 

The  winter  of  Damaun  is  very  agreeable,  being  colder  than  any  part 
of  Ilindostaun.  Frost  is  common  in  the  morning  ;  and,  the  tliermo- 
meter,  in  1809,  was  generally  some  dt^irrees  below  the  freezinp  point  at 
cLiv-brrak.  The  summer  is  intolerably  liot.  I  have  lieard  mhabitants 
ot Damaun  say,  that  they  have  never  e\'|)iTienced  in  India  any  weather 
so  oppressive  as  that  ot"  Damaun.  Ttie  lieat  of  tlie  niglits  is  scarcely 
iiilrriiir  lo  that  of  the  day.s.  The  inliabitants  are  obliged  to  wcl  iheir 
clot  1  It  -  before  they  €»n  go  to  sleep  ;  and,  every  man  places  a  large  ves- 
sel ol  water  by  his  bed  to  relieve  the  thirst,  with  which  he  is  sure  to  be 
tormented  during  the  niglit.  The  climate  of  the  countries  in  the 
range  of  Solimaun,  varies  of  course  with  their  level.  In  general  they 
are  cold,  and  moat  so  towards  the  north.  The  valleys  between  the 
parallel  ranges  are  little  cooUer  than  Damaun.  The  heat  of  8sad  is 
at  least  equal  to  that  of  Damaun ;  and,  probably,  increases  as  we  go 
towards  the  south,  till  itismodentedbybreeies  fimnthesea.  See- 


Digitized  by  Google 


1S6  TEMPERATURE. 

wwitiim  it  •  verj  faoi  oountty;  sad  Scwee  is  ptanMuHj  His 
iMitteitfikoe  in  die  Idngdom  of  Citib^ 

TiiltGiooteeBllee,and  Zawurehuo,  Biebjno  meini  so  betas  fiewee  i 
■nd  the  dimate  of  Boree  is  temperate  thnmi^out  the  jesr ;  the 
winter  leans  to  be  ss  cold  a.s  that  c£  Feshswer,  and  the  summer  less 
hot  I  can  only  speak  of  Zhobe  by  conjecture}  but  I  should  think  it 
iKSs  oooUer  than  Boree.  If  we  ascend  horn  Seweestaun  into  Khoras« 
san,  at  a  point  to  the  westward  of  the  countries  I  have  just  described« 
we  find  the  Dushti  Bedowleh,  the  cold  of  which  is  described  as  being 
very  levevs  in  winter ;  in  Shawl,  it  is  more  moderate ;  and  in  Pisheen 
still  more  so  than  in  Shawl ;  yet,  even  in  Pisheen,  standing  water  freezes, 
and  snow  sometimes  lies  for  a  fortnight.  Burshore  is  st  ill  colder  than 
Pisheen  ;  but  Shoraubiilv,  lying  lower  than  Plshecn,  and  bordering  on 
thcdosart,  has  a  hot  climate  ;  snow  never  falls  ;  the  edges  and  sur- 
face ot  standing  water  freeze  in  winter;  but,  in  summer,  the  siiul  is 
heated  to  such  n  degree  as  to  render  it  impossible  to  walk  on  it  bare 
footed.  North  of  Pisheen  are  the  hills  of  Toba,  in  which  was  situated 
the  summer  retreat  of  Ahmed  Shauh.  Of  them,  and  oi  the  other 
mount;iiiis  .ilioul  Pisheen,  and  tliosr  in  the  west  of  the  Canker  country, 
which  aiijoiu  to  tiiem,  I  can  only  make  the  same  obvious  remark  whicli 
I  have  applied  to  other  mountains,  that  the  climate  of  |)laces  in  them 
raries  witii  the  elevation.  Going  nortii  trora  Pisheen,  the  heat  increases 
till  we  reach  C'antlahar.  The  Doorannee  country  is  generally  tempe- 
rate towards  the  north,  and  hot  towards  the  south,  but,  probably,  in  no 
part  so  hot  as  Peshawer ;  where  it  includes  part  of  the  Paropainisaa 
range,  as  to  north  of  Candahar,  the  cold  in  winter  and  heat  in  sum- 
mer  ave  both  severe.  Zemindawer,  which  lies  immediately  to  the 
south  of  those  moiBitatns,  is  described  as  a  temperate  and  sgreesble 
diniate.   In  the  most  northerly  part  of  the  Dooraunee  ootmtiy,  nest 