

Gold  does  not  seem  to  be  tbund  in  Afghaunistaun,  except  in  the 
streamn  th;it  flow  from  the  Hindoo  Coosh  range.  Tlie  fable  which  is 
current  respecting  vegetable  gold,  said  to  be  produced  in  the  country 
of  the  Eusofzyef,  no  doubt  arises  from  the  particles  washed  into  the 
fields  by  those  streams.  Silver  is  found  in  siii;il]  quantities  in  the 
cotmtry  of  the  Caufirs.  Rubies  are  found  in  Eudukhshaun,  but  not 
in  the  A^^iaun  side  of  Hindoo  Coosh :  whole  cliSli  of  lapis  lazuli, 


Digitized  by  Google 


MINES.  147 

however,  onAuuig  the  river  of  Kiimhkiwr,  between  Chitzeol  end  the 
£uso&ye  country. 

There  are  mines  of  lead  and  taojaoony  mixed  in  the  country  of  the 
Afieede^  and  in  that  of  the  Hazaurehs ;  and  of  lead  alone  in  Upper 
Bungiuih,  and  in  the  coontriea  of  the  fihainwaurees,  Kaukers, 
urehs  and  Eimanks,  as  well  as  in  the  province  of  Bulkh.  The  coun- 
try of  the  Vizeerees  abounds  in  iron,  as  does  Bajour  and  the  adjoin- 
ing hills,  where  there  are  also  indications  of  copper.  Sulphur  is  found 
in  BuUvh  and  in  Seeweestaun.  The  crreatest  place  for  salt  has  been 
mentioned :  rock  salt  is  also  found  in  Bulkli,  and  salt  is  made  from 
Sj)rintjrs  and  ponds  in  Khorassaiin.  Saltpetre  is  made  every  where 
from  the  soil,  AUum  is  got  from  the  clay  at  Caila-baugh,  and  orpi- 
ment  is  found  in  &ilkh  and  in  the  Hazaurdi  country. 


v  9 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


(    148  ) 


BOOK  11. 

GENERAL  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  INHABITANTS  OF 

AFGHAUNISTAUN. 


CHAP.  L 

IKTSOOUCTION*  <MUCIN,  AND  £A£JLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  AFGHAUNS. 

THE  description,  which  T  have  attempted,  of  the  country  of  the 
Afguauns,  has  been  rendered  difficult  by  the  great  variety  of 
tlie  regions  to  be  described,  and  by  the  diveisitj,  even  ol  contiguous 
tiactfl.  No  less  a  diversity  will  be  discovered  in  the  people  who  in- 
habit it;  and,  amidst  the  contrasts  that  are  apparent,  in  the  govern^ 
ment,  mannen»  diew>  and  babita  af  4be  difimit  txibeS)  I  'find  it 
difficult  to  adect  those  grea£  &atuTea»  which  all  poasesa  in  oommout 
and  which  ffve  a  mailed  nadonal  character  to.  the  whole  of  the 
A1^anna>  Thiadifficuity  ia  increaaed  by  thefitct,  that  those  qualities 
which  distinguish  them  fiom  all  their  neighbouis,  are  by  no  means 
the  same^  which,  without  reference  to  such  a  comparison*  would 
appear  to  Europeans  to  predominate  in  their  character.  Thefireedom 
which  Ibims  their  grand  distinction  among  the  nations  of  the  East, 
m:^ht  seem  to  an  Englishman  a  mixture  of  anarchy  and  arbitrary 
poww  I  and  the  manly  virtues,  that  raise  them  above  their  nei^-* 
hours,  might  sink  in  his  estimation  almost  to  the  level  of  the  opposite 
may.  tfaetdbre^  assist  in  appreciating  their  situation  and 