


Digitized  by  Google 


cnevML 


148 


■  Moles  are  little  used  in  India,  and  are  moil;  wratalfeed  where  thc^ 
do  exiflt.  In  the  west  of  the  Punjaub  however,  are  some  bettor 
mules :  those  west  of  the  Indus  are  better  itiU,  and  they  (xmtinue  to 
Improve  as  we  get  westward,  though  they  never  equal  those  of  f^ig- 
land.  The  same  obser\*ations  apply  to  the  asses,  and  these  animfds 
are  of  much  importance,  tlie  mules  hf^'mfr  much  used  in  carrying  the. 
baggage  ot  avmi(?s.  atid  the  asses  being  the  principal  moans  of  carry- 
ing manure  and  other  futicles  from  one  part  of  a  to  another^  aa 
well     of  transporting  the  produce  to  market. 

Camels  are,  however,  on  the  whole,  the  animal  most  r'm))lo\eci  for 
OBrriage.  The  dromedary  is  found  in  nil  tlic  plain  country,  but  most 
fal  sandy  and  dry  parts  ;  this  is  the  tall,  long  legged  animal  common 
tn  Tiulia.  The  Bactrian  camel  (which  I  understand  is  called  Uzhree 
in  Toofkee)  is  much  more  rare,  and  I  believe  is  brought  from  the 
Kuzzauk  coumtry  beyond  the  Jaxartes.  He  is  lower  by  a  third  at 
iaaat  than  tiM  otbor,  is  very  stout,  and  ooyered  with  shaggy  black 
hairy  and  hm  tm  ^ystiBct  Immps,  instead  of  the  one  bnndi  of  tfie 
dKonedaiy*  The  Boghdee  cflnid»  in  the  loiitb^mBt  <ii  KhorMDomii 
if  ahaped  like  the  .  last  mentioned,  but  is  as  tall  as  the  dzomedsij. 
Ihren  this  last  varies,  the  diOBedaffies  of  Khoiassaim  bemgloperaad 
aloater  then  those  of  India. 

BidBdoas,  which  aflhct  hot  and  moist  eountries,  are  natuiaUj  rare; 
they  are  howerct  to  be  found  in  many  parts  of  A^hannlstaink 

Hie  OK  M  used  to  i^mifjlk  att  over  the  Gsirinil  dominions,  imless^ 
periiiqp8»  in  Bulkh,  where  horses  are  so  common.  The  species 
sembies  iheox  of  india,  In  having  a  bump }  but  it  is  inforior  in  most 
leapects.  Oxen  are  imfioited  from  the  Bi^poot  country,  where  thero 
ase  the  best  in  India,  except  perhaps  Guiexat.  No  herda  of  oxen 
ero  k^  except  round  the  lake  of  Seestaon,  and  according  to  some 
aeoounts,  in  part  of  the  Canker  country. 

llie  great  stock  of  the  pastoral  tribes  is  sheep,  and  those  of  the 
kind  called  in  Persian  Doomba,  and  remarkable  for  t«ils  a  foot  broad, 
and  ahnost  entirelj  composed  of  &t.   This  kind  in  other  respecta  re- 


144  WKI» 

sembles  the  English  sheep,  and  is  both  handsomer  and  better  thaa 
that  of  India.  Tlie  Indian  species,  wiiich  has  not  Uip  tajt  tail,  is  the 
only  sort  in  Sind  and  Seweestaun. 

Goats  are  common  in  all  the  n^puntainoua  parts  of  the  country,  and 
are  by  no  means  scarce  in  the  plains.  Some  breeds  have  remarkably 
long  and  curiously  twisted  horns. 

TTie  dogs  of  Afghaiitiistaun  deserve  to  be  mentioned.  The  grey- 
hounds are  excellent  i  they  are  bred  in  great  numbers,  particularly 
among  ihe  pastoral  tribes,  who  are  much  attached  to  hnnting.  What 
k  mm  remarkablfi,  punten  leaemlilhig  our  own  m  ahape  and  qiift- 
Utj,  axe  by  no  meana  unoommon,  though  I  cannot  aacertain  firom 
whence  the  breed  was  procured.  Tbey  are  called  Khnndfle.  I  had 
two,  one  of  whidi  waa  a  very  fine  one;  and  another  gentleman  had 
one  that  would  have  been  much  admued  in  any  oountiy. 