

In  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  Aighaun  tribe  pf 
Ghiljie  fMinded  an  empire  which  included  all  Persia,  and  extended 
on  the  west  to  the  prea^  Umita  of  the  Buaaian  and  Turkish  empires. 
Part  <Mily  of  Afghaunistaun,  however,  acknowledged  their  dominionu- 
Naudir  Shauh  overtlirew  tliis  dyniisty,  and  annexed  most  of  Afghauni- 
staim  to  Persia ;  and,  on  his  death,  the  present  Afghavm  monarchy 
was  founded  ;  whicli  at  its  height  extendtnl  from  tlie  nciHi!)ourltood 
of  tlie  Caspian  sea,  to  that  of  the  river  Jiinma,  and  iix>m  Uie  Oxna  to 
the  Indian  ocean. 

After  this  cursory  notice  of  the  facts  relating  to  the  Afgliauns, 
whicii  are  ascertained  by  authentic  history,  we  may  now  examine 
what  they  say  of  themselves.  The  account  they  give  of  their  own 
Origin,  is  worthy  of  attention,  and  has  already  attract  ed  the  iiotice  of 
an  eminent  orientaliat*   They  maintain  that  they  are  descended  &om 

II 


Digitizeo  by  LiOOgle 


DESCENT  OF  THE  AFGHAUNS  FROM  THE  JEWS.        .  1^ 

Ai^aun.  the  son  of  Irmia,  or  Berkia,  son  of  Saul,  King  of  Iflfae!; 
and  all  their  hiatories  of  their  nation  begin  with  relating  the  tmnwr 
tions  of  the  Jews  from  Abtaham  doim  to  the  (Mf»tivity.  Their  naiw 
rative  of  those  transactions  appears  to  agree  with  that  of  the  other 
Mahomedans ;  and  though  interspersed  with  some  wild  fables,  does 
not  essentially  differ  from  Scripture.  After  the  rapti\nty,  they  allege 
that  part  of  the  children  of  Ai'ghaiin  withdrew  to  the  moimtaios  erf' 
Giu)r(\  n??H  part  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Mecca  in  ArahiH. 

So  tar  tiiis  account  is  by  no  ineans  tlestitiite  of  probabihty.  It  is 
known  that  ten  of  the  twelve  tribes  rem;iii)eil  in  the  east  after  the  re- 
turn of  their  brethren  to  Judea ;  and  liie  supposition  that  the 
A^;faauns  are  their  descendants,  explains  easily  and  naturally  both 
tfie  disappearance  of  the  one  people,  and  the  origin  of  the  other. 
Hie-  reat  of  the  atoi7  »  contniied  by  the  &ct,  that  the  Jeira  wen 
very  nmnerow  in  Afibk  al  the  dme  of  Mahomet,  and  that  the  pnn- 
<ipaldt?iraof  Ifaem  botetheappeUfllieiiof  JDiyte  adU 
tfae  Mraeof  sdutrictm  A^^iaoniataun,  if  not  of  an.A%h«nn  tribft. 
The  theory  is  plaoaible,  and  may  be  true;  buft  whan  doidy  ^afnniiMMi 
it  wiU  appear  to  leat  on  a  Tague  tradidon  akme;  and  even  that  tnidi* 
tion  is  clouded  with  many  inooBiialeiiclea  and  contradictions. 

The  Afghaun  historians  proceed  to  rekte,  that  the  children  of 
Israel,  both  in  Ghore  and  in  Arabia,  preserved  their  knowledge  of 
the  unity  of  God,  and  the  purity  of  their  religious  belief,  and  that  on 
the  appearance  of  the  last  and  greatest  of  the  prophets  (IMahomet), 
the  Afi^liauns  of  Ghore  listened  to  the  invitation  of  tlieir  Arabian 
brethren,  the  chief  of  whom  was  Khauled  (or  CAled)  the  son  of  Wa^ 
leed,  so  famous  for  his  conquest  of  Syria,  and  marched  to  the  aid  of 
the  true  iaith,  under  the  command  ol"  Kyse,  aitervvards  surnamed 
Abdoolre^eed.  The  Araluan  historians,  on  the  contrary,  bring  the 
descent  of  Khaided  from  a  well  known  tribe  of  their  own  nation, 
omit  the  name  of  Kyse  in  their  lists  of  the  prophet's  companionit  or 
sifiea,  *  and  an  entirely  silent  on  the  airibject  of  the  A^unm  sue- 