

From  the  four  sons  of  Kyse,  Serrabim,  Ghoorghooaht,  Bctnee»  and 
Kurleh,  sprung  the  four  great  divisions  of  the  A^hauns,  which  still 
bear  their  names.  The  Afghaun  tribes  are  the  faniihes  of  the  de- 
scendnnts  of  these  ibur,  and  each  bears  the  name  of  its  immediate 

progenitor. 

Taking  the  descent  of  the  Afghauns  from  one  ancestor  for  granted, 
it  is  probable  tliat,  as  long  as  the  number  of  families  was  small,  they 
were  all  under  the  direction  of  their  common  progenitor  :  that  as  they 
grew  aioio  lumu  l  ous,  the  four  great  div  isions  separated,  ami  were 
each  under  the  head  of  its  eldest  branch,  but  that  when  the  nation 
spread  over  an  extensive  country,  and  the  tribes  <£  the  same  division 
began  to  be  remote  fiom  each  other,  theb  Gonnectitm  loosened*  and 
each  tribe  at  last  remained  under  its  own  hereditary  diiei^  entirely 
independent  of  the  common  head  of  the  raofe 

Hie  fimr  original  divisions  ate  tuvw  disused,  and  aie  only  men- 
tioned in  the  genealogies  of  the  tribes. 


Uigitizeo  by  LiOggle 


OOV£RNMENT  OF  AN  OOLOOa  THE  KHAUN.  159 

The  trite  oootiiiiie^  in  m  gem  n«tniro  wmwiwi,  {mA  hmring 
territory  coinpfld;).  Tkey  fltOl  letitui:  die  ]MtriBdial  ywfmiiMnt  I 
hefe  eilndeil  toi  and  the  operation  of  the  prihcqfiie'iHbjdr  I  iinnwitn. 
to  have  sepanted  them,  is  attU  very  obiervaUe.  Eadi  tribe  hag 
brandrad  into  several  divisions,  and  in  the  move  nnmemii  and  the 
more  scattered  tribet>  those  branches  have  separated,  and  are  each  ^po> 
vemed  by  its  own  independent  chief;  they,  however,  retain,  tjiei 
common  name,  and  an  idea  of  community  of  blood  and  interests; 

The  name  of  Oolooss  is  applied  either  to  a  whole  tribe,  or  to  one 
of  tliese  independent  l)ranches.  The  word  seems  to  mean  a  clanish 
commonwealth.  An  Oolooss  is  divided  into  si  n cral  branches,  each 
under  its  own  chief,  who  is  subordinate  to  the  chief  of  the  Oolooss. 
Th^e  branches  are  again  divided,  and  this  operation  is  repeated  (more 
or  less  often  according^  to  the  size  of  the  Oolooss),  till  the  last  subdi- 
vision coiuains  but  a  few  iauiilies.  Each  subdivision  has  its  chiei  man, 
subordinate  to  the  chief  of  the  division  in  which  it  is  comprehended. 

Eacfi of  tiiefle  bmdies  has  Ha  own  immediate  ancestor*. 

The  Cbae£c£  m  Oolooss^  is  called  Khaon.  He  is  always  chosen 
fimn  tlie  ddest  fiuiuly  of  the  Oolooss.  In  most  casei^  the  selecdon 
rests  with  the  JSjog^  who  can  remove  a*  Khaon  at  pleasure,  appointing 
one  of  kis  relations  in  his  stead.  In  some  Ooloosses,  Ibe  Khaun  Is 
elected  by  the  people.  In  both  cases,  some  attention  b  paid  to  pri- 
mogeniture {  but  more  to  age»  experienee^  and  character.  This  un- 
settled nicccsaioo  occasions  many  disputes.  When  the  Khaun  dies, 
two  or  more  of  his  sons  or  nqphews  endeavour  to  make  parties  in  the 
tribe  I  to  conciliate  the  King,  by  promises!^  contributions  or  attach- 
ment ;  and,  to  bribe  his  ministers.  The  unsuccessful  party  continues 
his  exertions  after  the  successor  is  choem.  Sometimes,  but  rarely» 
part  of  the  Oolooss  secedes  with  him.  More  firequently,  he  continues 
his  iBtngues  at  Court*  or  stirs  up  open  war  in  the  Ooloos*  |n  whid^ 