

tt 


Digitized  by  Google 


AFOHAUN  CHARACTER.  14^ 

character  to  figiiietfae  aspects  they  WMld  poreaant  to  a  -titviiUer  from 
B^g^md,  and  to  one  from  lpdi>. 

Ifu  iii«D:00ii]d  be  traiuported  from  England  to  the  Afghaun  obunp 
try,  without  passing.  tbroii|^  the  dominions  of  Turkey,  Persia,  or 
Tartary,  he  would  be,  amazed  at  the  wide  and  iinfreqiiented  desarts, 
and  the  mount^i»,  covered  with  perennial  snow*  Even  in  the  culti- 
vated part  of  the  country,  he  would  discover  a  wild  assemblage  of  hills 
and  wastes,  unmarked  by  enclosures,  not  embellished  by  trees,  and 
destitute  of  navigable  canals,  public  roadn.  and  all  the  fjreat  and  ela- 
borate productions  of  hnmnn  industry  and  retinement.  He  would  find 
the  towns  few,  and  far  (ilstaiit  from  each  other  ;  and,  ho  would  look  in 
vain  for  inns  or  other  convenuMicies,  which  a  traveller  vxnild  meet  with 
in  the  wildest  piwrts  of  Great  Britaiii.  Yet,  he  would  sometimes  be 
delighted  with  the  fertility  and  populuusuc^s  of  particular  plains  and 
valleys,  where  he  would  see  the  productions  of  Europe,  mingled  in 
profusion  withtiboae  of  the  torrid  aone ;  and,  the  land,  laboured  with 
en  indniCfj  and  a  judgment  no  where  aiirpiMcd.  He  ironld  see  llie 
'  uihihitMit8»  ibUowing  their  flodb  in  tcnta»  or  Msemhled,  in  viUagei^ 

which  the  teifpobd  roofii  and-  mud  walla  gjlvean  appeannee.eiitMj 
new.  He  would  be  atruck  wt  fiiat  wttli  their  blf^  and  em  hanh  . 
ieatnre^  their  fpivbumed  oountenattOBt*  their  long  beards*  thtir  loose 
gnments,  and  dicir  ahi^ggj  mantles  of  skms.  When  he  entered  Into 
the  Bocietr*  he  would  notice  the  ribsancft  of  femilar  coufts  of  iiistioBb 
and  of  ereiy  thing  l|ke  an  ciigantaed  police.  He  would  be  surprised 
at  the  fluctuation  apd  instability  of  the  dvU  institutions.  He  would 
find  it  difficult  to  compr^end  how  a  nation  oould  anbsist  in  suchdl^ 
order ;  and  would  pity  those,  who  were  compelled  to  pass  their  dAys 
in  such  a  scene,  and  whose  mindv  txained  by  their  unhappy  situ- 
ation to  fraud  and  violence,  to  rapine,  deceit,  and  rer^nge.  Yet,  he 
would  scarce  fail  to  admire  their  martial  and  lofty  spirit,  their  liospi- 
tality,  and  their  bold  and  simple  manners,  equally  removed  from  the 
suppleness  of  a  citizen,  and  tlie  awkward  rusticity  of  a  clown  ;  and^ 
he  would,  probably,  before  long  discover,  among  so  many  ij^ualitiea 
th»t  e;}u;it^  his  disgu^^      rudiments  of  mapy  virtues. 


Digitized  by  Google 


150  •  •  AFGHAUN  CHAllACiER. 

Bat»  an  EngHi'FK  tiwetter  fimn  Lndia,  would  view  them  with  a  more 
fiic70iiniUe  eye^  He  would  be  pleased  with  the  cold  diiiiiite«  elevated 
by  the  wild  and  novel  scenery,  and  del^hted  by  meeting  many  of  the 
productions  of  his  native  land.  He  would  first  be  iCnick  with  the 
thinneBB  of  the  fixed  population,  and  then  with  the  appearance  of  the 
people ;  not  fluttering  in  white  muslins,  while  half  their  bodies  are 
naked,  but  aobeily  aad  decently  attiied  in  dark  coloured  woollen 
clothes;  and  wrapt  up  in  brown  mantles,  or  in  large  sheep-skin 
cloaks.  He  would  admire  their  strong  and  active  forms,  their  fkir 
complexions  and  European  features  ;  their  industry,  and  niteqinse ; 
the  hospitality,  sobriety,  and  contempt  of  p!p:i<;ure,  which  appear  in 
all  their  habits  ;  and,  above  all,  the  indej)riidriice  and  energy  of  their 
character.  In  India,  he  would  have  left  a  country  where  every  move- 
mcnt  orijrinates  in  the  government  or  its  agents,  and  where  the  peo- 
ple absohiteij  go  for  nothing ;  and,  he  would  find  himself  among  a 
nation  where  the  controul  of  the  government  is  scarcely  felt,  and 
where  every  man  appc  irs  to  pursue  his  own  inclinations,  undirected 
and  unrestrained.  Auudbl  ihe  sLorjuy  independence  of  this  mode  of 
life,  he  would  regret  the  ease  and  security  in  which  the  state  of  India, 
and  even  the  indolence  and  timidity  of  its  inhabitants,  enable  mo^ 
parts  of  that  country  to  repose.  He  would  meet  with  many  produc- 
tioiiB  of  ait  and  naibife  lliat'do  not  exist  in  India;  but,  in  general,  he 
mwM  find  the  aita  life  less  advanced,  and  many  of  the  luxuries  of 
HindDStao  unknown.  On  the  wholes  his  impression  of  his  new  ao^ 
quaintances  would  be  fevonrable;  althou|^  he  wouM  feel,  that 
williout  having  lost  die  ruggedness  of  a  bariiaxons  nation,  they  were 
tainted  with  the  Tioes  eommon  to  aU  Asiatics.  Yet,  he  wonld  reckon 
them  virtuous,  compared  with  the  people  to  wbom  he  had  been  aceus- 
tonaeds  would  be  inclined  to  regard  them  with  interest  and  kindness; 
nd  could  scarody  deny  them  «  portion  of  his  esteem* 