


Digrtized  by  Google 


174 


ADVANTAGES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT. 


most  oonneded  with  the  oouft;  and  the  relitunu  borne  by  all  the 
great  loida  to  the  crown,  resemble  each  other  so  closely  in  the  imo 
■tatea,  that  it  will  throw  light  on  the  character  of  the  Doonmnee 

gov^emment  to  keep  the  parallel  in  view. 

The  defects  of  this  system  are  obvious,  and  when  we  come  to  ob- 
mrre  in  detail  the  anarchy  and  disorder  which  so  often  arise  under 
tiie  republican  government  of  the  tribes,  we  mi|^t  be  induced  to  un- 
deaMrate  the  quantum  of  happiness  it  produces,  and  to  suppose  that 
the  country  would  derive  more  advantage  &om  the  good  order  and 
tranquillity  which  an  absolute  monarchy,  even  on  Asiatic  principles, 
would  secure ;  but  .the  more  I  have  learned  of  the  actual  state  of  the 
Aighauus,  the  stronger  ia  my  convictioQ  that  such  an  estimate  would 
be  erroneous). 

We  may  easily  ajiprLNL'Iate  tho  benefits  of  an  exemption  froni  the 
vexatious  interfeix^nce  ot"  ilu-  ofHccrs  of  a  illstanr  King,  and  from  the 
corruption  and  oppression  with  which  such  iuleiiereiice  is  alwavs  ac- 
companied in  Asia ;  nor  must  we,  amidst  the  alarms  and  contusion 
which  will  he  forced  on  our  attention,  overlook  the  pai  tiality  of  the 
Afghauns  for  their  preiient  ccmsiitution  ;  the  occupation  and  interest, 
the  sense  of  independence  and  persoual  conseipience  w  hich  result 
from  a  popular  government,  however  rudely  formed ;  and  tlie  cou- 
rage, the  intelligence,  and  the  elevation  of  character  which  those 
occupations,  and  that  independence  can  never  fail  to  inspire.  * 


*  Hie  iUgfaauns  theouelTes  endt  in  ihe  free  <ipirit  of  their  institution*.  Those  who 
an  little  imdcT  ll»c  royal  nnfhorit}'.  arc  protid  of  their  independence,  which  thoso  undt-r 
the  Kiag  (though  not  exposed  to  the  tyranny  common  in  every  other  country  in -the  east) 
•AdN^  end  fldnirodd  imitale;  iWy  »ti  i—mtiA«j  A.»  «  .11  a^^>««— 

•re  equal,"  which,  though  it  i$  nOi,  nor  ever  was  true,  still  ihein  tibeir  notions  and  their 
wishes.  I  once  stronp-ly  urged  to  a  very  intelligent  old  man  of  the  tribe  of  Meeankhail, 
the  superiority  ot  u  quiet  and  iieciire  life,  under  a  powerful  monarch,  to  the  discord,  the 
abrm,  and  theUood,  irludi  diey  oiwed.  to  their  pnatBt  wjfUm,  The  old  men  rcfiKad 
witih  great  warmth,  and  thus  concluded  an  indignant  harangue  against  arbitrary  power, 
f  We  aire  eontent  with  djsoordt  we  are  coDtent  with  alenns,  we  aire  eontou  wiUi  blood. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ADVANTAGES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT.  175 

Another  incakailable  advantage  of  the  present,  syvtem  is,  that 
.tiMUgb  it  mBOangjBB  attie  diaofrden,  it  idBbids  m  effectual  security 
agnost  the  general  revoliitioni  and  calamities  to  which  despotic 
.  oountries  in  Asia  are  so  frequently  wrti^ect.  In  Persia  or  India,  the 
passions  of  a  bad  king  are  felt  through  every  part  of  his  dominioiu} 
And  the  civil  wars  which  ooair  almost  as  often  as  a  Kuig  dies,  never 
fail  to  throw  the  kingdom  into  a  state  of  misery  md  disorder :  part 
of  the  inhabitants  are  exposed  to  the  licence  and  cruelty  of  the  am- 
tending  armies,  and  the  rest  suffers,  nearly  in  an  equal  degree,  from 
the  anarchy  that  follows  a  dissolution  of  the  government  which  has 
hithprfo  maiTttain^  the  pubhc  tran(|uillity.  The  consequence  is, 
that  a  tyrant,  or  a  disputed  succession,  reduces  the  natiou  to  a  state 
of  weakness  and  decav,  from  which  it  cannot  wholly  be  retrieved, 
before  its  recovery  is  checked  by  tlie  recurrence  of  a  sinular  calaniitv. 
In  Afghaunistaun,  on  the  contrary,  the  interiiel  government  ol  the 
tribes  answer-;  its  oiul  so  well,  that  the  utmost  disorders  of  the  royal 
goveniiiieiit  never  derange  its  operations,  nor. disturb  tiie  lives  of  the 
-people.  A  uumber  of  organised  and  high-spirited  republics  are 
readv  to  defend  their  rugged  country  against  a  tyrant;  uikI  are  able 
to  defv  the  feeble.efforts  of  a  party  in  a  civil  war.  Accordingly,  if  we 
compare  the  condition  of  tlie  two  kingdoms,  we  find  Persia  in  a  state 
of  decay,  after  twenty  yean  ci  entire  tranquillity  j  whUe  A%hauni* 
staun  omtinaes  the  progressiye  impiovement*  wludi  it  haa  kept  up 
during  twdve  yeaia  of  civil  warfare^  New  aqiiedncta  aie  constantly 
made,  and  new  lands  bibii|^  into  cnltiTation:  llie  towns  and  the 
oowrtry  roond  theni»  indeed^  as  well  as  that  on  the  great  roads*  are 
declining ;  bat  the  cause  u  obvious*  in  tiheir  being  immedistd^  ex* 
posed  to  the  power  of  the  competitois  &r  the  oown^  and  to  the  pil- 
lage of  their  annies. 