

•  On  the  whole,  these  judicial  Jeergas  are  useful  inst  il  utions.  In 
most  cases  they  conduct  themselves  with  tolerable  impartialiLVs  al- 
though they  cannot  be  exempt  from  the  influence  of  friendship  and 
enmity,  and  may  perhaps,  in  some  instances,  be  accessible  to  solicita- 
tiOD^  snd  even  to  oonuptioik  Oae  Bstmally  imagines  their  debates  to 
be  tmrndtuoiis  and  dtsoiderly,  but  I  enderstand  tbat  this  U  not  often 
tbe  case;  and  in  some  tribes,  tbe  Jeergas  are  remadoiUe  Ibr  order 
and  gravity,  and  for  a  rnde  kind  of  eloquence^  mudi  admired  by  thor 
countrymen. 

Hie  Jeeiga  is  rendered  umeoessaiy  in  sonoe  cases  by  the  extenstre 
powers  of  the  Khann,  and  in  odieis  it  is  rendered  nugatory  by  tiie 
mnnUness  of  tbe  people.  Tbe  moat  powerful  Khaun,  however,  is 
glad  o£  the  countenance  of  a  Jeeig^^  when  he  has  to  deal  with  a 
powttful  oflbider.;  and  among  the  Doocaonees,  where  the  chief  acts 
by  the  Kingf  s  sinthority,  and  is  supported  by  hu  power,  he  still  finds 

E 


170  OTHER  MODES  OF  ADJUSTING  DISPUTES. 

* 

it  convenient  to  Avail  himself  of  the  advice  of  a  Jeeiga:  this  hwt  ob^ 
sen  ation  applies  to  deliberations  on  all  sulyecto,  as  well  aa  to  the 
trial  of  offences.  Even  where  Jeeigas  are  in  use,  all  crimes  are  not 
brought  before  them.  It  u  always  reckoned  an  admission  of  weak- 
ness to  complain  to  a  JeergSy  and  consequently  less  honourable  than 
to  obtain  Justice  by  force ;  accordingly  men  of  lank  in  the  Ooloos8» 
and  powerful  people  (that  is,  people  who  have  many  xelati<His)»  are 
always  unwilling  to  compromise  an  affront,  and  to  agree  to  a  recon- 
ciliation, till  the  injuries  on  both  sides  are  etjual.  Tliis  U  carried  so 
far,  that  the  injured  party  affects  reluctance  to  be  reconciled,  even 
when  the  affair  has  been  brouf^ht  to  the  Jeerga  at  his  own  request. 
In  many  tribes,  tlie  Jeerga  docs  not  interfere,  until  a  complaint  is 
made  to  it ;  and  iu  some,  not  till  botli  parties  are  persuaded  to  sub- 
mit to  its  award ;  but  in  others,  the  local  chief  assembles  a  Jeerga 
whenever  he  hears  of  any  serious  ofieiice,  and  brings  the  parties  be- 
fore it. 

In  serious  cases,  sudi  as  murder,  the  ofi^nder  often  flies  the  coun- 
try, but  if  he  is  unwilling  to  leave  his  tribe,  he  is  sensible  of  the 
danger  he  incurs  by  remaining,  and  determines  to  submit  and  obtain 
forgiveness  from  the  person  he  has  injuretl.  In  that  case,  lie  goes  as  a 
suppliant  to  the  house  of  some  considerable  man,  and  begs  liim  to  in- 
tercede, and  procure  his  pardon.  By  the  custom  of  the  A%hauns,  a 
suppliant  can  seldom  be  refused,  and  the  person  applied  to,  is  obliged 
to  agree.  He  assembles  some  other  respectable  moi,  some  MooUahs 
and  Syuds,  and  proceeds  with  the  oflender  to  the  house  of  theii\}iired 
person,  The  whole  of  the  party  are  now  suppliants ;  and,  as  they 
oumot  be  refiised,  the  peraon  oflended,  if  unwUling  to  make  up  the 
quarrel,  leaves  his  house  before  they  arrive,  or  endeavours  to  conoeal 
himsdfi  When  he  is  found,  the  criminal  a|^peais  dressed  in  a  shroud, 
puts  a  naked  sword  into  the  hand  of  his  enemy,  and  teUs  him  that 
hia  life  is  in  his  power.  At  the  same  time  the  chieft  and  MnnJi^f 
put  themsdvea  in  an  attitude  of  entreaty,  and  h^  foig^vencstf  for 
the  suppliant.  It  ends  in  the  uyured  pefsoniiaidoQing  the  ikflbnoe^ 
wnd  reoeivuig  a  oompenaatibii*  .  . 