

'  The  vribole  constitutioa  is  also  sometimes  overturned.  In  sonse 
rare  cases,  the  Khaun  establishes  arbitrary  powert  and  acts  without 
consulting  any  of  the  Jeergas  under  him ;  and  his  example  is  ibUowed 
by  the  subordinate  diieft.  But  more  frequently,  the  cfaiefii  are  ne- 
glected, and  every  subdivision,  every  quarter,  and  even  every  family, 
throws  off  its  dependence  on  its  superiors,  and  acts  according  to  its 
own  interest  or  inclination.  This  last  evil  is  remedied  in  some  cases 
by  the  appointment  of  a  temporary  magistrate,  chosen  on  account  of 
his  abilili(  s.  A  sort  of  Dictator,  who  has  great  powers  during  the 
war  or  other  occasions,  for  which  he  is  appointed  ;  but,  who  returns 


tiw. 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


AFOHiLtTMS  NOT  ATTACHED  TO  THE  CHIEF.  X68 

tD  dw  iilnitfaoii  of  •  privilep«fm  when  llw  period  of  fab  ofltebas 

expired. 

It  mmy  be  wtalk  while  to  remark  the  circuniitinoet  on  whkh  die 

extent  of  tlie  power  of  the  chiefi  dep^d«.  In  tribes  that  are 
to  the  King,  the  Khaun  derives  much  influence  firom  his 
iployment  of  collecting  the  royal  revenue  and  raising  the  militwy 
and  indirectly,  firora  the  emoluments  attached  to  those  duties.  His 
personal  character  materially  affects  his  power  and  influen<»  The 
possession  of  wealth,  by  enabling  him  to  keep  numerous  retainers, 
and  to  confer  obligations  on  the  heads  oi  his  Oolooss,  igfreatly 
strengthens  his  power.  On  the  other  hand,  where  the  tribe  is  smaU^ 
or  its  inhabited  lands  very  compact,  the  heatU  of  all  the  divisi^nns, 
great  and  small,  often  meet  in  one  Jeerga,  which,  uniting  the  whole 
strength  of  the  Oolooss,  can  never  be  controuled  by  the  Khauu.  The 
Khaun's  having  a  powerlul  rival  in  Ins  iaiiiily,  tlie  facility  which  a 
discontented  division  may  possess  of  seceding  and  joining  some  other 
Oolooss ;  aadi  any  circumstance  which  disposes  the  people  to  con- 
tentioManesB  and  jealousy,  always  ttml  io  Vaat  theKh«an*8  authority. 
On  the  wheleii  it  it  generally  obflcmble  that  €be  tribea  nkwt  nndat 
tlie  Kng*a  inftnwice  ue  moit  obedient  to  their  EhHm»  thoii|^  them 
ale  Kime  atriking  esoqBtianB  to  this  ndew 

Throughout  all  die  tribes*  the  danniah  attaduneiitof  the  AJfffmmh 
nnlike  that  of  the  Hi^dander^  b  father  to  the  commmiit^  than  to 
the  cfaiaf  I  an^  thoogh  in  their  notion  of  their  Ehaiin,  ike  idea  of  a 
mi^iatraie  set  upftr  the  pnUUc  good  ia  oertainlj  mixed  with  that  of 
n  painaichal  md  natmd  aoperiort  yet  the  former  impiMrion  will 
always  be  Ibond  to  be  die  Wrongest.  Accordingly  the  power  of  *  life 
and  death,  so  commonly  exeiciaed  by  cfaie6  in  (he  Hi|^hlands  wheH 
chMwhip  was  in  its  vigour,  is  scarcely  ever  poaaewed  by  an  Afghaun 
Khaun ;  and  it  is  but  rardty  that  the  personal  interests  of  the  KhalHl 
would  lead  a  tribe  to  take  any  atep  inoonaiatent  with  its  own  honour 
or  advaoti^ 