

Y  2 


I 

Digrtized  by  Google 


.:DniBBNAL  MILITART  ESTABUSHBimrr. 

Hie  western  A%fa«iintf  with  the  enepdon  of  the  Ghiljies  in  the 
muOk^Batt  have  no  qiianek  with  their  countrymen  *,  but  there  is 
scarcely  any  tribe  among  those  of  the  east,  that  is  not  in  a  state  of 
actual  war,  or  suspended  hostility.  Most  of  them  have  lasting  enmi- 
ties with  each  other,  but  do  not  break  out  into  open  violence,  unless 
when  some  circumstinu  e  has  inflamed  their  animosity;  and  this 
sometimes  does  not  happen  lor  several  years.  A  few  (as  the  jfc^usot- 
syes)  are  never  at  peace. 

Those  who  have  only  occasional  wars  (which  happenn  oftenest  in 
Damaun),  join  in  temporary  confederacies,  and  the  .Teergas  of  all  the 
allied  tribes  I iieel  ni  one  a^ssciublyto  concert  plans  of  operations,  or  to 
consider  terms  of  peace.  Tliose  most  engaged  in  war,  often  have 
p^manent  alliances,  like  thoee  of  Gem  and  Saumil,  among  the  Bin^ 
doorsimees,  and  the  Uack  and  white  leagues  in  Khoat  llieae  wan 
are  aoinetiniea  confined  to  piedatoiy  incunions  of  amall  parties  on 
eadi  side,  but  when  the  occasion  is  important,  the  Khaun  and  die 
leeiga  call  out  all  the  fighting  men  <^  iJie  Oolooss.  Hie  tribes  vAn 
engage  little  in  wars,  call  on  vohinteen,  and  every  man  who  has  affmi 
coines.  Tboae  who  have  occasional  wan,  make  eveiy  ^own  up  man 
serfoi  and  the  Euso&yes,  whose  ooiitiniial  atrife  baa  made  tbebi  sys- 
tematic in  war,  require  the  service' of  a  foot  soldier  fiir  every  pkraglh, 
or  of  a  hoiseman  for  every  two.  Shame  is  in  geneiai  powerfid' 
enongjb  to  prevent  non^rttendance,  but  a  fine  is  also  prescribed  to 
punish  it,  among  the  tribes  yrtach  have  frequent  wars.  Large  hot 
undisciplined  bodies  are  thus  assembled:  a  tumultuous  conflict  takes 
place :  one  party  is  defeated  without  any  great  8lau|^iter:  the  victors 
waste  the  lands  of  their  enemy ;  and  the  war  is  then  suspended,  till 
the  vanquished  is  able  to  take  the  field  again,  or,  perhaps,  till  a  new 
provocation  is  given.  Tlie  troops  nrc  ;i!mo:^t  all  foot.  The  chiefil 
retain  the  same  stations  of  command  in  war  as  in  peace. 


*  Tht  war  for  sovereignty  between  the  Ghiljies  and  Duoraunecs,  i»  obvMiuly  ol  a  Uil- 
ferait  iMtoM  from  the  CMrtiaawi  petty  miftte  here  rilnded  to. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  mm  ttemmnopiyi  bm  in  aome  tiilwib  if  *  iMmip 

UHedt  the  mriMCfao^tvMtlMi  price  0mn  afiindibrmedby  fiiM«,iuid 
fay  atn  on  ihe  tiibft 

'  This  pnctioe  k  oonfined  to  the  nmlli  ceilii  ii  tribci»  wiu>  inilrfd 
•ie  the  enlj  onet  that  have  any  fevenue  at  all.  Even  widi  thiaiii» 
taxes  are  only  impoaedt  when  money  ia  netaMaiy  Ibr  Bome  puipoia  of 
public  utility.  Their  amount  depends  on  the  sum  required,  and  tht 
money  ooUeded  is  ^ricdy  applied  to  the  public  tervice.  I  do  not 
know  two  instances  of  a  Khaun  taxing  his  Oolooss  for  his  own  bene* 
fit ;  but  the  regular  tax  on  Humsauyas,  the  infidel  tax  on  Hindoos, 
and  the  custonis  collected  on  merchandise  pa.ssiiig  through  the  lands 
of  tiie  Oolooss,  are,  in  several  cases,  appropriated  by  the  Khaun.  The 
two  first  of  tliese  3m]>osts  will  be  explained  hereafter.  They  are 
generally  rolletled  by  individuals ;  but  the  custoni^i,  tlujugli  some- 
times divided  fiTDonf?  the  Oolooss,  are  more  li-equently  received  by 
the  Khaun  :  they  are  only  le\  ied  by  Ooloosses,  a  little  under  the  King, 
who  sometimes  have  fixed  rates,  and  sometimes  make  a  bargain  with 
the  merchant  j  in  whicli  case  the  merchant  may  cither  be  considered 
as  paying  duties,  or  as  compounding  with  the  Oolooss,  to  prevent 
being  plundoed. 