


Digitized  by  Google 


HUMSAUYAHa  171 

oommu- 

nitjr,  tbe  oomponent  parts  of  whidi  are  classed  aooording  to  llidr  de^ 
•cent ;  but,  thoni^  this  is  the  conunoiiett  fonn  of  die  society,  U  is 
not  wHhout  varisdons  and  exoejitions.  Itos  of  two  subdiTuions  may 
inhabit  the  same  viUage^  andinthat«ase,ihoii|^eadihasaheadof 
Its  own,  they  hold  their  Jeeigas  in  common*  and  act  eiactly  as  if 
iSm^  were  one  subdivision. 

A  divinon  whidi  quits  its  own  Odiooss,  may  be  adopted  into 
another.  It  lipart  of  the  A^iaimrnlesofhos|^aUty,totrest  stran- 
sucii  drcumstanoes  with  particnhur  sftootion.  lliey  are  as- 
signed lands  by  t]ie  tribes  which  they  jdn.  Their  chief  has  a  seat  at 
the  principal  Jeeiga,  his  people  retain  their  tnteiiial  government,  and 
axe  exactly  on  a  Noting  with  the  ocigbal  members  of  the  Odooss: 
they  are  suigecttothe  same  laws,  enjoy  the  same  privil^es,  enttiK 
into  the  wars  and  alKsnees  of  the  Oolooss  which  they  have  joined^ 
and  thougli  they  retain  the  name  of  that  from  which  they  are  sprang 
they,  Ibr  die  time,  lose  aQ  oonnectioii  with  it.  .  Thsj  dcs  however, 
sometimes  return  to  their  original  Oolooss,  and  in  the  ,event  of  a 
war  between  it  and  that  which  has  idopted  them,  they  would  not, 
among  the  western  tribes,  be  expected  to  take  any  part.  Among  the 
eastern  Afghauns,  they  would  be  obliged  to  assist  the  Oolooss  with 
which  they  lived. 

These  adopted  divisions  are  much  infierior  in  numbers  to  the.  rest 
of  the  Oolooss. 

Individuals  who  leave  their  tribe  from  disgust,  without  selling  their 
lands,  arc  in  many  cases  received  into  the  Oolooss  which  th^  join, 
and  have  lands  assigned  them ;  but  persons  who  sell  their  lands,  and 
'leave  their  tribe  firom  poverty,  are  placed  in  the  dass  of  daiiaen% 
which  is  next  to  be  mentioned. 

£very  Oolooss  has  many  people  attached  to  it,  who  are  not  Af- 
ghauns.  These  are  called  Humsauyaba.  * 


* 

Digitized  by  Google 


172  KING'S  POWER. 

'  ITiey  have  no  place  at  the  Jeeiga»  but  their  interests  are  watched 
over  by  the  divisimi  to  which  they  belong,  and  by  the  individuals  ib 

whom  they  have  attached  themsdres. 

It  is  a  point  of  honour  for  every  man  to  protect  his  Huirtsauyehs  j 
andi  consequently,  their  condition  is  little  inferior  to  that  of  the 
members  of  the  Oolooss.  * 

AighiHins  who  join  an  Oolooss,  afler  quitting  their  own  from  po- 
verty,  are  considered  a.s  Humsauyehs,  but  arc  treated  with  more  re- 
gard than  the  rest  of  that  class.  In  one  tribe,  the  Gundehpoors,  the 
numbers  of  Humsauyehs,  of  the  Beloche  and  other  nations,  greatly 
exceed  those  of  the  Oolooss  ;  and  there,  1  believe,  they  take  the 
name,  and  enjoy  all  tlie  privileges  of  members  of  the  Oolooss, 
which  is  constantlv  reproached  with  this  corruption.  In  general, 
they  are  very  interior  in  numbers  to  the  Oolooss,  and  in  some 
of  the  tribes  at  a  difstancc  from  the  great  roads,  there  are  scarce 
any  Humsauyehs  at  all.  Humsauyehs  have  not  in  general  landed 
propertyli 