

Hmk  it  acaroely  a  aobdtviaion  tbroug^nt  tbe  nationy  which  doea 
notmaike  Ita  own  arrangementa  toptoHdefiir  the  maintenance  >of 
MooTlaiha  (Mahommedan  prieat8)f  and  fyr  the  leoeptwn  of  gneatai 
bnt  the  manner  m  which  those  fimda  are  jwovided*  will  be  fidly 
■eipbnaied  hereafter. 

The  geneial  hrar  of  the  kingdom  is  that  of  Mahomet,  which  ia 
adopted-indvflactioBa  in  the  Oolooaaea  also;  but  their  peculiar  oodo, 
and  the  only  one  applied  to  their  MmuU  aidhninistration  of  oiminal 
jnatioe,  is  the  PooshtoonwuUe*  or  usage  of  the  Afghauna;  a  rude 
vyttem  of  customary  law,  founded  on  principles  such  as  one  woidd 
suppose  to  huve  prevailed  before  the  inatitution  of  civil  government. 

The  opinion  that  it  is  every  man*s  right  and  duty  to  do  himself 
•  justice,  and  to  revenge  his  own  injuries,  is  by  no  means  eradicated 
&om  among  the  Afghauxu;  and  the  right  of  the  society  .even  to  re- 

il 


Digrtized  by  Google 


166 


PRIVATE  KEVENOfi. 


atnin  4be  r>><oii>b1e  pmaooM'^  in#ridmii,  tmd  to  Ukm  tbe  nAtem 

«f  wToaipt  iadii^  pm&ikmmA  of  crimei,  into  Its  ofm  lmds*  M-^fiU 
ray  imperfecdyuiideiatood;  or  if  it  it  im^entoodf  it  ■dMpm.pwcnt 
iotiieilioiiglilt  bf  difi  people.  This  piwtioe  wait  hava  JwA  ittixi* 
gin  at  a  tinffe  idien  the|;ovenimeiit  afoded  no  protectioo  to  indi* 
viduals,  and  in  inch  Girosmstaiices,  it  must  be  allowed  to  be  bene- 
ficial,  and  eraa  necessary ;  but  it  has  taken  foot  in  the  lulails  of  the 
A^aun  nation,  and  aithoagh  in  moflt  paito  of  their  country,  jua* 
tioe  mig^  now  be  obtauied  by  other  means ;  and  though  private  re- 
venge 18  every  where  preached  against  by  the  Moollahs,  and  forbid- 
den by  the  government,  yet  it  is  still  lawful,  and  even  honourable,  in 
the  es  of  the  people  to  seek  that  mode  of  redress.  The  injured 
party  is  considered  to  be  entitlpd  to  strict  retaliation  on  the  aggres- 
sor: an  eye  for  an  eve,  a  tootli  tor  a  tooth,  and  so  on.  If  the  offender 
be  out  of  his  priwer.  lie  may  wreak  his  \  t ugeauce  on  a  relation,  and 
in  some  cases,  on  any  man  of  the  tribe.  If  no  opportunity  of  exer- 
cising this  right  occur,  he  may  defer  his  revenge  for  years ;  but  it  is 
disgraceful  to  neglect  or  abandon  it  entirely,  and  it  is  incumbent  on 
his  relations,  and  sometimes  on  his  tribe,  to  assist  him  iu  his  re- 
taliation. 

ReteiiaCion  thus  exercised,  of  confae  'leada  to  new  digpates ;  the 
tpaacnA  beoomel  invMerate,  and  in  aerioiis  caaea,  it  ia  often  tmm^ 
milted  fiom  fttfaer  to  aon  finr  aeveral  generatimia.  . 

Hie  remote  eflbcte  of  thia  ayatem»  in  cncomaging  aawwinarion  wifli 
■  ita  attendant  habita  of  diaaimnlation  and  cruelty,  and  in  wnwttltng  tlie 
aodety,  and  aoeuatoming  ita  members  to  scenes  of  tumolt  and  blood, 
ne  probably  not  diaoovered  by  the  rude  legialatora  of  A^^ianniatmni 
bat  the  alarms  and  diaoideni  wideh  It  immediately  {wodueea,  muat  be 
felt  by  allt  and  accordingly  we  find  in  eveiy  trib^  aome  meaaorea 
adopted  for  repressing  ita  activity.  In  a  few  Oolooaiea,  the  adjust- 
ment of  disputes  is  left  to  mediation  and  persuasion,  to  which  the 
chief  and  elders  always  lend  their  weight,  but  if  these  means  are  in- 
sufficient to  prevail  on  the  aggressor  to  ofier  compensation,  or  the  in- 
jured person  to  imgiv^  the  aociety  learea  the  httter  to  parane  hia 