

An  assemblage  of  many  commonwealths  such  as  I  have  described, 
composes  the  Afghaun  nation,  and  the  whole,  or  nearly  the  whole,  is 
formed  into  one  .state  by  the  supreme  authority  of  a  common  sove- 
reign. 

The  King  is  the  natural  head  of  the  tribe  of  Dooraunee,  the 
greatest,  bravest,  and  most  civilised  in  the  ni^on ;  but  his  paramount 
authority  over  the  other  tribes,  has  been  superinduced  by  causes 
which  will  hereafter  be  eKplamed. 

That  authority  extends  to  a  genersl  superintendanoe  over  the 
whole  kingdom,  and  to  die  levying  fixed  proportions  of  troops  or 
money,  or  both,  from  each  tribe,  for  the  conmion  defence.  The  whole 


*  One  of  the  few  quarn-ls  I  have  beard  <tf  among  the  Dooraunees,  origitiated  hi  m 
injury  oArad  to  a  Hmmauy*  )i.   A  Hindoo  Hvmiaiiiydi  at  one  Noonye  due^  hod  gone 
*  to  the  village  of  another ;  while  on  Us  return,  he  was  seized  by  a  third,  on  pretence  of 

his  owint'  tills  chiet"  money.  The  two  other  chiefs  joined,  lUid  attacked  the  one  who  hod 
seized  the  i^iummuycli,  Uluud  wax  shed,  aud  it  required  the  interposition  of  the  Naib  of 
Gandabar  to  oompow  die  qoarrd. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


  KINGS  POWEB.*  ,173 

iwtidtit  howmr;  ia  seldoiii  animated  by  one  iBpHt»  and  tbe  individwl 
intererta  of  eadi  Ooloow  attrad  more  of  Ha  attention  than  the  gener 
fal  wMte,  Some  of  the  flaim  round  towns,  mudb  of  the  portion 
of  A^^iaimistaim*  which  is  exclusively  inhabited  by  Taujeksy  and 
an  the  focdgn  provinces  of  the  states  are  entirely  under  the 
authority  of  the  King,  who  is  thus  enabled  to  collect  a  revenue 
independent  of  the  tribes*  and  to  maintain  an  amy  without  their 

In  consequence  of  these  drcnmatances,  thece  is  some  distinction  of 
interests  between  the  King  and  the  nation,  and  a  still  greater  differ- 
ence of  opinion  regaidtng  his  l^al  powers ;  the  King,  the  Courtiers, 
and  the  MooUahs,  maintaining  that  he  has  all  the  authority  pos- 
sessed by  Asiatic  despots ;  and  the  people  in  the  tribes  consider- 
ing him  as  a  monarch  with  very  limited  prerogati\ es-.  Tliis 
produce^i  a  good  deal  of  divearaity  in  the  actual  exercise  of  the  royal 
ftutliurity. 

The  government  of  the  tribe  of  Dooraiinee  centres  in  iht  King-, 
though  even  there,  he  is  generally  obliged  to  attend  to  the  wislu  s  of 
the  lieads  of  clans.  He  also  interferes  in  the  interior  management 
of  the  tril)L's  on  the  plains,  and  near  great  towns ;  but  he  contents 
himself  w  itli  levying  liis  supplies  of  men  and  money  from  the  rest, 
without  any  iurther  interference  in  their  af&irs,  than  is  occasionally 
required  to  preserve  the  public  triui^iuillity.  One  or  two  tribes  are 
independent  of  his  government.  This  is  not  tlie  place  to  enter  into 
a  detailed  aecount  of  the  royal  governinerit,  but  a  loose  reference  to 
a  monarchy  whidi  is  better  known,  may  serve  to  render  the  aubfl^ 
quent  account  intelligible  to  the  reader,  till  he  arrives  at  the  infermA^ 
tion  whicb  will  enable  him  to  form  a  judgment  for  himsel£  With 
the  exception  of  the  rqpiiblican  govemmeut  of  the  Ooloosaesi  the 
situatioa  of  the  A^^bann  country  appean  to  me  to  bear  a  strong  ^ 
semUanoe  to  that  of  Sootknd  m  ancient  times:  the  duect  power  of 
the  Ejnff  over  the  towns  and  the  countrjr  immediatdj  around;  the 
pceanioua  submiiaion  of  the  nearest  dans*  and  the  independence  of 
the  remote  ones;  the  tnoidinate  power  and  ftction  of  the  nobility 