

The  foneiais  of  the  Afghaima  do  not  difier  from  those  of  the  otiiar 
Mahommedans ;  a  man  in  his  last  moments  k  attended  by  a  Moolla^ 
wAiA  admonishes  him  to  repent  of  his  sins;  the  sick  man  repeats  his 
creedf  and  appropriate  prayers,  and  expires  with  his  to  Mecca^ 
proclaiming  that  there  is  no  God  but  God,  and  that  Mahomet  is  his 
prophet  When  he  is  dead,  the  corpse  is  washed,  wrap^ied  up  in  a 
shroud,  and  huried,  after  the  usual  prayers  have  been  said  \>y  a  M00I+ 
lah,  and  joined  in  by  the  numerous  relations  and  neighbours,  who 
attend  the  funeral.  If  the  deceased  was  rich,  MooUahs  ore  empioyad 
to  re;ad  the  Koraun  for  some  days  over  his  grave.  •    •  ■ 

The  ceremonv  of  circuniciiiion  is  the  same  in  all  Mahommedan  . 
countries.    It  is  attended  with  a  feast  and  great  rgoicing. 


B  ■  8 


Digitizeo  by  LiOOglc 


(   188  ) 


CHAP.  XV. 

EDUCATION,  LANGUAGE,  AND  LITERATURE  OF  THE  AFGUAUNS. 

A  LL  the  Afghauos  are  sent  in  ti^ir  infimc^  lo  •  Moolkklbc 
education.  Some  leam  no  more  than  their  regular  Namau2> 
and  oilier  occasional  prajert  and  passages  of  the  Koraun,  with  the 
ceremonies  of  their  reli^on,  and  the  duties  of  a  Mussulman.  About 
Pcshawer,  and  among  the  Dooraunees,  the  next  step  is  to  learn  to 
read  the  Koraun  in  Arabic,  often  without  understanding  it ;  but  in 
other  tribes  tins  studv  is  reserved  for  a  more  atlvanced  stno^e.  This  is 
tlie  cdti  cation  of  the  lower  orders^  of  whom  not  a  quarter  can  lead 
their  own  language. 

The  rich  keep  MooHahs  in  their  boases  to  teach  their  children,  but 
allow  them  all  tlie  power  of  a  cormnon  st  hcjolmash  r.  The  Moollah 
who  had  ehar,(:^e  of  the  prime  minister'-,  son  {a  liov  of  sixteen  vviien  1 
saw  lumj,  told  mc  that  he  kept  him  to  his  booii.  lor  almost  the  whole 
daj. 

There  is  a  schoolmaster  in  every  village  aud  camp,  who  is  main- 
tained by  a  piece  of  land  allotted  to  him,  and  by  a  small  contribution 
which  he  receives  from  his  scholars.  His  office  is  sometimes  united 
wUh  diat  of  the  prieat  the  village ;  but  H  ia  oftener  distinct,  espe- 
cially in  lai^  places.  In  towns  there  are  legular  scliocdss  like  those 
in  European  countries,  where  the  master  is  maintained  bj  hii 
scfaolais  alone.  Die  sum  commonly  paid  to  a  sdwolmaster  m  VeAu^ 
wer,  is  about  fifteen  pence  armonth ;  but  the  paymenta  are  in  propoi^ 
tion  to  the  circumstances  of  the  boy's  fiitlier.  In  most  parts  of  die 
country*  the  boys  live  with  their  fiidiers,  and  only  attend  the  school 
dtaang  the  day ;  hut  among  the  Berdooraunees,  a  boy  is  sent  at  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


J 


'  EDUCATION. 


189 


rmyMy  ig»  diftiAt  nUige^  nh/ke  he-Uwrn  m-  the  wnqmi  tub* 
fliilB  fa^  tiuBf  ■m^iiM'Iittle.otiiio  iutereoone  with  hu  paraoti,  but  ii 