

♦ 

i:  A 


Digitizeo  by  LiOOglc; 


lURBUGE  CUSTOM&  181 

tioM  MmMiiilea' occupy  a  year  or  tw9i  hat  whea  he  19  iicli«  tibf 
period  if  not  abo^e  two  or  three  numtha.  The  eeremonle^  of  the 
marriage «se  w  ezacdj  the  same  with  those  of  the  Persians,*  that  a 
a  ahoft  teoouift  of  them  here  wfll  suffice. 

The  marriage  contract  is  drawn  up  by  the  Ganay*  and  ^nmally 
igreed  to  hy  the  woman  as  weO  as  by  the  man,  (the  consent  of  teta^ 
tionsbemgof  noavail).  The  articles  simulate  fiv  a  pnmsion  for  the 
wife^  in  ctoe  of  a  divorce  or  of  her  husband's  death ;  and  are  s^ed  by 
'both  parties,  as  well  as  by  the  Cauay  and  competent  witnesses.  Soon 
aftor  this,  the  bride  andhridiegroom  dye  their  hands  and  feet  with  por- 
tionsof  the  same  henna,  (a  (htant  used  for  this  species  of  ornament  by 
women  and  young  men  in  Aiost  Asiatic  countries).  On  the  next  night, 
the  bride  goes  in  prcHsession  to  the  houseof  her  future  husband,  attended 
by  a  band  of  nuiue  and  singers,  by  the  relations  of  both,  and  by  parties 
of  the  neighbour,  wheeling  in  circles  on  horseback,  firing  their  match- 
locks, and  flourishing  their  swords.  When  the  bride  reaches  the 
house,  she  is  presented  to  her  husband,  and  the  whole  condudee  with 
a  wedding  fuy^per. 

A  marriage  is  conducted  in  the  same  matiner  in  the  country  j  but, 
as  the  women  there  to  unveiled,  and  there  is  less  restrairtt  in  the  in- 
tercourse i)olwe«n  the  sexes,  the  match  generally  ori^inati's  in  the 
^tachmeiU  of  (be  parties,  and  all  the  previous  negoci;! lions  ;in-  saved. 
It  is  even  in  the  power  of  an  enteq)riziiig  lo\  t  1  to  obtani  his  mistress 
without  the  consent  of  her  parents,  by  seizing  an  opportunity  of  cutting 
off  a  lock  of  her  haii,  snatching  away  her  veil,  or  throwing  a  sheet 
over  her,  aiul  proclainiing  her  his  affianced  wife.  These  proceedings, 
which  are  supposed  to  be  done  with  the  girl's  comiivaiice,  would  pre- 
vent any  other  suitor  proposing  to  her,  and  would  incline  the  parents 
to  bestow  her  on  the  declaared  lover ;  but;  as  they  would  not  exempt 
him  from  the  necessity  of  paying  some  price,  and,  as  they  mi^  be 
taken  up  aa  an  affiont  by  the  relations,  they  are  not  often  resorted  to  i 


•  gee  FwaMiBfti  Ten  to  Blwicgw 


Digitized  by  Google 


1S2 


MARRIAGE  CU8T0lf& 


ted»  when  the  oonMt  of  the  paienti  cuaiot  be  obtained,  die  most 
oommon  eiqiedient  is  to  elope  with  the  girL  This  is  bonsideied  ss  sa 
outrage  to  a  &siilj9  eqnal  to  miiideringoiie  of  its  membeny  laid  is 
pursued  with  the  same  fanoour,  but  the  possession  of  the  gitl  is  se» 
cured,  the  ftigitiTes  take  refuge  in  the  lands  of  some  other  tribes 
and  are  slue  of  the  protection  which  the  A^^uum  customs  s£^Mrd  to 
.  every  guest,  and  still  more  to  every  suppliant. 