

Among  the  Eusofip^,  no  man  sees  his  wife  till  the  marriage  oeio* 
monies  are  completed ;  and  with  all  the  Burdooraunees,  there  is  great 
reserve  between  the  time  when  the  parties  are  betrothed  and  the  ma^ 
riage.  Some  of  them  live  with  their  future  father-in-law,  and  earn 
their  bride  by  their  services,  as  Jacob  did  Rac  hel,  without  ^ver  seeing 
the  object  of  their  wishes.  But,  all  the  rest  of  the  A%hauns,  the 
Eimauks,  the  Hazaurehs,  the  inhabitants  of  Persian  Khorassaun,  and 
even  the  Taujiks,  and  many  of  the  Hindoos  in  those  countries,  have  a 
far  different  practice,  and  permit  a  secret  intercourse  between  the 
bride  and  bridegroom,  which  is  called  naumzud  bauzce,  or  the  sports  of 
the  betrothecL  With  them,  as  soon  as  the  parties  are  affianced,  the 
lover  steals  by  night  to  the  lioiisc  of  his  mistress.  The  mother,  or 
some  other  of  the  feniali-  r(  lations,  favours  his  design  ;  but  it  is  sup- 
posed to  be  entirely  coucealeii  {i^om  the  men,  who  would  affect  to 
consider  it  as  a  great  affront.  He  is  admitted  by  the  niother> 
and  conducted  to  his  mistress's  apartment,  where  the  lovers  are 
left  alone  till  the  a})]  M oach  of  morning.  The  freest  intercourse,  the 
most  imreserved  conversation,  and  even  kisses,  and  all  other  innocent 
freedoms,  are  allowed  ;  but,  the  l;ust  liu  our  is  always  to  be  withheld, 
and  tlie  strongest  cautions  and  prohibitions  are  used  by  Uie  mother  to 
both  partis  separately.  Nature,  however,  is  generally  too  strong  ftir 
hyonctiohs,  and  the  marriage  begins  with  all  the  diMciuhy  and  inteiAt 
tsf  aa  micit  amour.-  There  have  e?en  been  esses  where  the  bride'has 
brou^t  her  husband  two  or  three  children  when  she  was  ibtmally  re* 
ceived  as  his  wifej  but,  this  is  very  scandalous,  and  sddbm  hippens. 
The  custom  prevails  eren  among  men  of  rank ;  and  the  King^  himself 


Digitizeo  by  Google 


CONDITION  CM?  THE  WOMEN. 


sometimes  exposes  his  perscm  alone  in  the  midnight  advie^ures  of 
naumzud  ban  zee. 

Polygamy  is  known  to  be  allowed  by  tin  MuhdiniiuMl  lu  law  i  but» 
the  bulk  of  the  people,  cantioL  afford  to  avail  Lheniselves  of"  the  per- 
mission. Tlie  rich,  indeed,  exceed  ihe  legal  number  of  four  wives, 
and  keep  crowds  of  female  slaves  besides.  But  the  poor  content 
themselves  with  one  wife;  and  two  wivjes^  with  as  many  concubines, 
ifi  nxkfrnH  iililrmil  ffrtiMiAitiflnfi  firrthiT  mMiftn  Tlmwii.  ' 
.  The:opiKUfcio^    Uie  wopien  Ttriei  with  tbdr  iank. ;  Tlioae  of  iJm 

-  upper  elmm  we  efitiiely  copccdted ;  but  iiiedUoirodaUdieoda^nMa 
•nd  luziiries,  wlacli.tlieir  sitiMitioii  Mbnits  o£:  Thomt  of  die  poor,'  do 

.die  KOik  of  the  hoiuey  and  bring  in,  witery  &o.  Among  the  rudeii 
tribeiy  they  bsirct  4i.ah«ie.ui.t]ie  work  of  the  men  out  of  doocs:;:but» 
m  .no  part  of  tlie  conntryiaie  they  .en^Ioyiid  ai  in  Indi%  where 
ba^f.tl^.  luted  labouiera  in  biu]din|^.&&  ace  wpmeoj  and  where  tibiere 
i«r.0carei9  ^'difibtcnoe-  between  the.  work  done  by  ihe  two  aeiaea. 
Thie.jMrfHMnmedan  law  aUowa  the  husband  to  beat  his  wife ;  but  it  ia 
reckoned  discreditable  for  a  man  to  avail  himself  of  this  privily.'  . 