

the  p^ple*8  ignorance  of  the  national  exigencies,  a  bar  to  their 
gmating  any  addition  to  the  estabUflhed  supplies  1  and  it  auieljr  woidd 
not  be  an  unnatural  expedient  to  preml  on  them  to  dapnto  one  or 
two  of  the  wisest  of  their  Mulliks,  to  asceMlUn  at  the  court  the  real 
akate  of  the  public  aflbirs.  An  elective  aasemhly  would  thus  be 
formed,  of  which  every  individual  would  be  dosdy  coimeoted  with  his 
constituents,  and  would  be  r^arded  by  them  as  their  natural  and 
hereditary  head ;  they  would  represent  a  people  accustomed  to  re- 
spect their  chiefs,  but  as  much  accustomed  to  debate  on,  and  to  ap- 
prove or  rejert,  the  measures  which  those  chiefs  proposed.  'Vhe 
militia  of  the  tribes  woukl  (  oustitute  an  armv  whi(  li  would  be  invin- 
cible by  a  foreign  in\  aik  r,  while  the  King  would  he  without  any 
fore  0  Uiat  could  offer  a  moment's  resistance  to  a  general  combina^n 
of  liis  subjects. 

The  sUghtest  alteration  would  Ibrm  a  combination  between 
the  Jeergas  and  the  Cauzees  ajipoiutrtl  by  the  King,  which 
would  be  admirably  adapted  to  the  administration  of  justice, 
and  a  government  would  thus  be  established,  as  well  suited  as  any 
that  can  be  imagined  for  promoting  the  gr^Uaiess  and  happiness  of 
the  nation. 

Such  are  the  pkaai^g  reveiiea  to  which  we  are  led  by  a  eonndanh 
tkm  of  the  mataSala  cif  which  the  A%haun  goventment  ia  composed* 
Init  a  veij  Utile  reflection  muit  convince  ns,  that  tfacae  ipecnUrtioBa 
are  never  likely  to  be  realtaed.  Hie  example  of  nei^bonrmg  dea- 
potimu^  and  the  notiona  abeady  imbibed  by  the  court  of  CanbuU 
predode  the  hope  of  our  ever  aeeing  a  Ku^  capable  of  fimning  the 
deoffki  and thare  ia  leaaon  to  fear  that  the  locietieB  into  wfaidi  the 
natioD  b  divided,  poneia  within  thanuelvea  aprincqpleof  repulnon 


Digitized  by  Google 


J  78 


ADVAJJTAGES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT. 


and  disunion,  too  strong  to  be  overcome,  except  by  such  a  force  as» 
while  it  united  the  whde  into  one  solid  body»  would  crash  aod  oUi- 
tente  the  features  of  ereiy  one  of  the  parts*  * 


•  Tliere  arc  trn(  ( s  in  the  vilhiL'P  government  of  India,  of  the  existnioe  of  a  sjatem 
iwiwnHing  that  of  the  A^^auu  OolocMaoi;  the  remaiiM  of  it^  whidb  bsvc  MirviMd  • 


long  coniie  of  oppretsion,  ttill  dfiird  waant  Mfief  fitm  As  ^lovdnt  of  die-goTaD« 
SMttt,  and  »»pflfy  die  solution  of  a  difficulty,  whidi  muit  be  cqpcrienced  by  dl  tl^ 

VellcTS  in  the  centre  of  India,  re<poctinp        flnnrishiiig  elite  tt  |Mlti  t£  tlw 
from  which  all  gov«nuu£Qt  appears  to  be  witiuirawn. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


{  ITO  .) 

•» 

CHAP.  m. 

JCABUAOSS.  — CONDITION  OP  WOMXN.^FUNUULSy  && 

THE  Aig^iwmii  pprdune  ihgfcr  wiyet.  lliepnctioe  10  xeeogDlsed 
'by  the  Mahometan  linr,  and  ia  followed  ih  moat  parts  of  Aaia^ 
even  among  nafeiona  IBoe  tihe  CSunew^  wfaeielihe  Maaaufananteii^on 
-ia  unknown.  The  price  variea  among  the  A^haimg,  accowKng  i» 
the  qrcumalMMiea  of  the  hrideggoomir  The  eAcC  of  thepracttoe  ia, 
ibat  .womeOf  tboa|^  genernQj  well  treated,  are  in  some  meaanie 
ooaisidered  as  prapeity;  A  husband  vm  divorce  his  wife  wHhont 
.  niinigning  anj  leaMXDi  but  the  wife  cannot  divorce  her  huisband ;  -  ahe 
may  sue  for  a  divorce  on  good  grounds  before  the  Cauzj,  but  even 
thia  ia  little  practised.  If  the  husband  dies  befiMre  his  "wi^  his  rehp- 
tions  receive  the  price  that  is  paid  fiir  her,  in  case  of  a  second  mar- 
riage; but  among  the  A%hauns,  as  among  the  Jews,  it  is  thought  in- 
'combent  on  the  brother  of  the  deceased  to  marry  his  widow,  and  it  is 
a  mortal  affiront  to  the  brother,  for  any  other  person  to  marry  her 
without  his  consent.  The  widow,  however,  is  not  compelled  to  take 
,  a  husband  against  her  will,  and  if  she  have  children,  it  18  thoog^ 
most  becoming  to  l  emain  sinrrle. 