

The  common  age  i'or  marriage  throughout  the  Afirhaiin  conntry 
is  tweJiLy  for  the  man,  and  fifteen  or  sixteen  for  the  woman.  Men 
vmable  to  pay  the  price  of  a  wife,  are  otien  mimarried  till  forty,  and 
women  are  sometimes  single  till  twenty-five.  On  the  other  liand, 
the  rich  soinetimes  marry  before  the  age  of  puberty  ;  people  in  towns 
also  marry  earlv,  and  the  eastern  Afghauns  marry  boys  of  fifteen  to 
.  giik  of  tweh  o,  and  even  ertrlier  when  they  can  afford  the  expense. 
The  western  Aigiiauua  iieicloin  marry  till  tiie  maii  lia^  attaiued  his 

A  A  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


180 


MARAIAOEa 


611  ■trengtfay  and  till  hii  beard  is  grown  $  and  the  Ghi^ea  bare  stifi 
later  maini^;eB.  In  all  parts  of  the  oountiy,  the  age  at  which  eveiy 
individual  marriiefly  is  rcigulated  by  his  ability  to  puidiaae  a  wile^  and 
to  maintain  a  fimily.  In  general,  men  marry  among  their  own  triboi 
but  the  Ai^iauna  olten  take  Taujik,  and  enrea  Fenian  wives.  Tliese 
matches  are  not  at  all  discre^table»  hvA  it  is  reckoned  a  mark  of  in- 
feriority to  give  a  daughter  in  mamagei  and,  consequently,  the  men' 
of  rankt  and  the' whole  of  the  ]>ooraunees»  refuse  ihek  daugjhters  to 
men  of  any  odusr  nation* 

In  towns,  mm  have  no  opportunities  of  seeing  the  women,  and 
matches  are  generally  made  from  connderations  of  expediency. 
When  a  man  has  thoi^^  of  a  particular  ^r1,  he  sends  a  female  rela- 
iion^  dt  neighbour,  to  see  her,  and  report  on  her :  if  he  is  pleased,  the 
same  lady  sounds  the  girl's  mother,  and  discovers  whether  her  fiunily 
are  dispose<3  to  consent  to  the  rnatch  :  and  if  the  result  be  &vourablei| 
she  msk^  an  ofi't  r  in  plain  terms,  nrtd  settles  n  ilav  for  a  public  pro- 
posal. On  the  appointetl  day,  tlie  tkther  of  tlie  suitor  goes,  with  a 
party  of  his  male  relations,  to  the  girl's  father :  while  a  similar  depu- 
tation of  women  waits  on  her  mother,  and  inalces  the  ofter  in  torm. 
The  suitor  si  uds  u  ring,  a  slias\  1,  or  some  such  present  to  his  mis- 
tresii,  and  his  lather  begs  the  girl's  faliK  r  to  accept  his  son  ior  his 
servant;  the  girl's  father  answers  MolHiurik  baitxhud,  "  May  it  be 
auspicious  upon  this,  sweatmeats  arc  brought  in,  of  which  both 
parties  partake,  after  solenuily  repeating  the  Fauteheh,  or  opening 
verse  of  the  Korauii,  and  praying  ibr  a  blessing  on  the  couple:  the 
girl's  father  makes  some  trifling  present  to  the  lover,  and  trom  this 
jthne  the  partis  are  considered  aa  affianced.  A  considerable  time 
e^pses  befiim  the  mamage  is  edehmted.  It  is  employed  by  the  re- 
ktiona  of  the  bride  in  preparing  her  dowry,  which  generally  consists 
in  artidei  of  hoasehold  iisEiiitarek  eaipets^  plates,  brsBen  and  iron 
vessds,  and  personal  acnameota.  The  biidegroem  m  llie  mean  time^ 
is  collecting  the  price  of  his  wifek  whsdi  always  greatly  exceeds  her 
dower,  and  in  preparing  a  honaae^  and  whatever  -eilae  Je-niiBeauai'j  Ar 
actth^  up  a  .Aanily.   Wben  the^bridegmim  Sn-pa^f/.tbeBeprepaca- 