

The  ladies  of  the  upper  classes  frequently  leam  to  read,  and  aonae 
of  them  .  shew,  .oonaidierable  talents  for  literature.  At  the  same  time, 
it  is  thou^t  immodest  in  a  woman  to  write,  as  she  might  avail  herself 
of  her  talent,  to  correspond  with  a  lover.  I  have  known  several'  fa- 
milies, which  were  principally  guided  by  women  of  more  than  ordi- 
nary talents ;  and,  in  tliose  cases,  they  never  hesitated  to  correspond 
on  any  business  that  concerned  their  sons.  These  are  chiefly'  the 
mothers  of  families,  hut  the  wives  also  otteii  gam  a  great  ascendant; 
and  all  the  advantages  given  by  the  Malidninietlan  law  are  not  always 
sutHcicnt  to  prevent  the  husband's  sinking  into  a  secondary  place  in 
his  own  house.  Women  of  the  lower  orders  have  ail  the  domestic 
amusements  of  their  husbands  ;  und  none,  that  I  know  of,  peculiar  to 
themselves.  Those  in.  towns,  are  always  wrapped  up  in  a  large  white 
dbeet,  which  covers  them  to  their  feet,  and  completely  hides  their 
figure.  They  are  oiabkd  to  see  by  means  .of  a  net-work  in  thawhite 
hood,  .whkdi.  (oovoi.  tfaeb  bead.  .  Wonueii  of.  ioonditiufi  alM>  wear  tbia 


184 


UQVB. 


dreMf  when  they  come  out  ;  and,  as  tiiey  arc  then  gt^nerally  on  hors^ 
back,  they  weai  a  pair  of  large  white  cottttn  Ixjots,  which  hide  the, 
shape  of  their  legs.  They  also  travel  in  c  a  |a\\  as  (or  hampers,  one 
on  each  side  of  a  camel),  which  are  lon^'  ( nou^'li  to  allow  a  womwi  io 
lie  nearlv  at  length  ;  but,  as  they  arc  coveictl  \Mth  a  case  of  broad- 
cloth, they  must  be  suffocating  in  hot  weailu  r.  The  women  are  al- 
lowed to  go  about  the  town  \  t  iled  in  tlie  manner  I  have  described, 
and  they  form  a  considerable  p:irt  of  all  the  crowds  that  gatlu  r  to  see 
spectacles.  Thev  also  make  parties  to  gardens ;  and,  though  more 
scrupulously  concealed,  are  not  much  more  confined  than  women  in 
India.  On  the  whole,  their  conditiua  is  veij^  Iki  troni  Ik  ing  un happy, 
compared  w  uh  that  ol  the  women  of  the  neighbouring  countries. 

In  the  country  they  go  unveiled,  and  are  under  no  other  restraint 
among  people  of  their  own  camp  or  village,  than  what  is  imposed 
by  the  general  opinion,  that  it  is  indecent  to  associate  with  the  men* 
But  ihey  innmeduitdy  eover  didr  fimiB,  if  tiiey  lee  •'insn  wA  whom 
ihey  ore  not  intimatei  mnd  iddom  oome  into  the  pnbKcapaitnientQf 
tfadrlMUMif  if  Ifaflro  b  a  stranger  thwe.  Thief  do  nott  ham&m, 
itsnd  on  ihia  emmooj  with  Aimomatta»  Pendapw,or  Hindoos^  ^trlioni 
iSbof  conttt  tat  nothing.  Thejr  receive  gueata  wbon-  their  husband 
era  fiom  home^  and  tmt  them  with  dl  the  attentioii  theft  Is  veqiiiied 
by  hospitality  %  but,  Ae  c^iaati^  €>f  the  ooontiy  women,,  and- padkv- 
Iffdy  of  ihoie  of  the  shepherdst  if  a  theme  pf  piaiie  to  aU-peoplfr«o- 
qtu^nftedwith  their  nunnen.  Thei^  are  no  cooinion  proaCittitai 
flompt  in  the  towns,  and  Teiy  tew  even  there*  pntioalailjr  In  the 
weet  It  is  reckoned  very  disreputable  to  fiequent*  them ;  . but,,  their 
knowledge  of  the  world,  die  polish  of  theur  mannenii  and  the  arts  they 
use  to  attract  admiration,  afibrd  so  much  interest  and  vari^,  thai  all 
the  ktkude  allowed  in  wives  and  concubines,  is  insuffidceA-to  |Mrei>«i 
ndinicn  from  seeking  their  socieQr. 