


Digitized  by  Google 


£02  CONDUCT  TO  HINDOOa 

tomed  in  tli«i^  iown  eonntiy  to  treii  the  MaMalniaai  ai  jiiieiion,iiid 
would  thetefine  be  pirtioilialjr  iensible  of  my  inaak  or  eontempt 
from  people  of  thit  permuuion )  yet  tJiey  always  ipeak  well  of  the 
uMge  they  feoetre^  and  one  Sik  Goldsmith  in  particular  (idio  waa  e 
▼eiy  inteUigent  man,  and  had  travelled  over  great  part  of  Aj^^uunu* 
ataun,  Persia,  KhotaBsan,  and  Tartary),  always  spoke  of  the  Wndnqai 
and  hospitality  he  received  m  the  former  eoiintfy,  which  he  eQn«> 
treated  with  the  contempt  with  which  he  was  treated  by  the  Pernans* 
who  would  not  allow  him  to  draw  water,  for  fear  of  polluting  the 
weU,  or  to  walk  in  the  streets  during  rain,  lest  he  should  splash  some 
Mahomedan',  and  thus  render  him  impure.  Hie  Uabeks  used  him  welL 
It  must  however  be  admitted,  that  the  Hindoos  are  obliged  to  pay  a  light 
tax,  from  which  Mussulmans  are  exempt,  that  they  are  considered  as  an 
inferiorrac^thattheyareparticttlarly  exposed  tothe  tyranny  of  theMool* 
lahs.  That  tyranny  must,  however,  be  exercised  under  colour  of  law,  and 
the  following  case^  which  took  place  in  the  Berdooraunee  country  (where 
ihe  people  are  a  thoumind  timefl  more  btgotted  and  intolerant  than  in 
any  other  part  of  Afghaunistaiin),  will  shew  the  means  made  use  of  on 
those  occasions.    A  Moollah,  having  been  crofssed  in  some  love  ad- 
venture by  a  Hindoo,  gave  information  to  the  Cauzce  that  his  enemy 
had  embraced  Tslaum,  and  had  relapsed  into  idn]nfrv.    The  Cauzee, 
ailer  examining  witnesses  (who  swore  to  the  Hindoo's  conversioTi, 
and  to  his  having  repeated  the  Maliomedan  creed),  ordered  the  pri- 
soner to  ho  circumcised  against  his  will.    Thv  sentence  reiiiiii  rd  to 
be  executed  by  tlie  civil  ma^ish  ate,  and  the  Douraunee  governor  of 
Peshawcr  could  not  he  |ii  f'\  ailed  on  to  rarry  it  into  effect.    On  tJlis 
the  Mooilali  assenibled  t>ome  others  ot  his  order,  and  by  degrees  was 
joined  by  some  tliousand  Moolialis  (w  ho  sw  arm  about  Peshawer) ;  he 
marched  to  the  principal  mosque,  stopped  the  usual  call  to  prayers, 
and  suspended  all  the  ceremonies  of  religion,  as  if  the  country  were 
under  an  interdict,  till  at  last  the  governor  was  compelled  to  give 
way,  and  (after  fruitless  attempts  to  malfe  the  witnesses  contradict 
themselves),  he  ordered  the  Hindoo  to  lie  circuiiiciscd.     The  opera- 
tion was  perloimed  with  much  harshness,  and  tlie  new  convert  im- 


Digitizeo  by  LiOO^lc 


GOKPUCT  TO  CHRISTIANS. 


908 


tditiily  iad  to  Lihcw^  wtoe  he  retained  toliii  IbtiiMr  &Ml  Ik 
18  prabflble  tlurf*  junoc^  the  BordDorautieet*  any  MnniwImMi  wooM 
ninii  e  wyeriontj  orer  e  Hindioo  ef  et^ualiiak}  itleait  Iioimbi* 
bar  A  Bmdooiwiiee  cuBeUdiiver  in  my  aerviee,  who  hed  seme  die- 
pake  with  a  Hindoo,  and  fan  to  my  tentf  eocdeinuu^  with  cnrecy 
appewtmnt  of  ampriae  and  mdignatioa,  Juadce !  Juatioe !  Hem  la 
«  »  HaadDD  lenlliig  e  Mmaafaoaen  in  the  voy  nidafc  of  the  eemp 