

■  In  ^  Weitf  however,  a  Hoaaalman  haa  no  such  adranti^;  and 
Hz.  Durie  rdbtea,  that  he  haa  aean  many  diapntea  between  WiwAM^a 
and  Mnatmlmana  in  Cludahar»  in  winch  the  .Hnidooa  were  quite  aa 
Yioknt  as  their  o|iponent8»  wiihont  ^mng  the  leaat  odfenee  to' any  of 
other  Mahometans. 
I  must  own  that  I  am  somewhat  at  a  loss  respecting  the  tre^miM 
of  ^Ti^tie?**'  There  is  no  doubt  they  enjoy  a  free  toleration 
dffDughoofc  the  kingdom^  but  Mr.  Foster  (whose  authority  is  not  to  foe 
diluted),  represents  the  usage  he  received  while  in  the  character  of  n 
rhritrienj  to  have  been  conlemptuoas  and  degrading.  My  own  ex- 
fieinnee  wendd  lead  me  to  a  very  different  conclusion ;  but,  Gmm  the 
situation  in  which  I  was  placed,  it  was  not  likely  that  I  should  meet 
witli  any  slight.  T  have,  however,  had  many  opportunities  of  hearing 
of  the  treatment  ot  Christians  from  a  native  of  Constantinople,  who 
professed  the  (^atholic  relicfion  ;  and,  as  he  had  resided  from  ten  to 
twenty  years  in  the  country,  he  could  scarcely  be  supposed  to  bo  ill 
informed.  He  sometimes  complained  of  the  Atgliauns  in  other 
respects  ;  but  alwavs  said,  that  thev  had  not  the  'Smallest  aversion  to 
a  Ciiristian.  He  look  care  never  to  attack  the  ^lahoinedan  doctrines, 
imle^i?;  he  was  well  a^jisured  of  the  free  sentiments  of  his  company  j  but, 
ill  all  respects  uik  onnectt d  with  religion,  his  conduct,  and  the  treat- 
ment he  received  were  those  ot  a  tbreign  Mussulman.  I  have  had 
opportunities  of  witnessing  the  tidelity  of  his  Mahomedan  servants, 
to  whom  lie  sometimes  entrusted  secrets  which  would  have  cost  him 
his  lite,  lie  was  always  treated  with  respect  hy  men  ot'  all  ranks; 
and,  among  others,  by  the  Iviug's  Imaun,  the  bead  of  the  Mussulman 
religion  in  Caubul.    Wliat  proves  the  geueral  toleration  is,  that  he 

D  o  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


204  CON0UCT  TO  CHKlsmANa 

very  obncodoiu  to  the  Ynme  Mmiater  for  his  altachmMit  tor 
Mokhtiutr  Oodoula  (on  wfaoae  rain  the  other  had  Tisen)*  and  was  for 
Bome  time  in  a  state  of  confinement  within  the  Bulla  Hiasanr  on  that 
aooomit ;  yet  his  religion  nerer  was  thought  of  as  a  pretence  for  in- 
jnring  him.  There  is  a  Catholic  priest  of  Greek  descent  at  Caubnl, 
who  seems  to  be  well  treated*  as  he  is  mentioned  with  respect  in  » 
letter  from  tiie  Vimer  to  me ;  and  I  hare  seen  an  Armenian  soldiart* 
who*  though  very  debauched  and  oiien  intoxicated,  seemed  to  be  ex- 
actly on  a  footing  with  the  Persians,  with  whom  he  served.  But  the 
bast  evidence  on  this  head  is  that  of  Mr.  Durie,  who  travelled 
through  the  Afghaun  country  as  Hir  west  as  Candahar,  in  the  disguisa 
of  a  JBdahominedan ;  and»  though  his  real  religion  was  often  suspected^* 
and  several  times  discovered,  he  never  observed  any  change  in  the 
bdiaviour  of  the  people^  I  refer  to  his  Journal  for  particulars  * ;  but 
I  cannot  refirun  horn  inaertuig  two  passages,  the  first  of  which  I  took 
down  from  his  own  month,  and  the  second  was  contained  in  the 
papers  he  wrote  before  I  had  conxcrscd  with  liim.  Both  relate  to 
the  siibi(x^  of  toleration  :  but  the  first  jilso  gives  a  striking  picture  of 
the  impression,  made  by  the  mixture  of  hospitality  and  rspacil^t  so 
remarkable  in  the  Afghanns. 