

with  liie  uotiuiis  ut  an  iutgUshman}  v*ua  therdure  a  great  actjuiiiitioii,  and  one  wliicii  i 
■CMvdy  hoped  to  htm  obtained. 

Witli  all  Mr.  Foster's  merit,  his  account  did  not  answer  my  piirpo  r.  I  To  travelled 
with  caravans  during  the  ni^t ;  saw  little  of  the  country  he  passed  through ;  and  had  no 
cominunirarion  with  the  inhabitants,  except  in  towns ;  and,  mm  therv,  faia  interoourae  waa 
restrained  fay  the  alarm  so  natural  to  a  meat  who  has  entered  on  an  untried  iiilwaitlin  The 
aame  unca^ine*-!  mny,  pcrlmps,  have  given  n  colour  to  the  objects  whirli  ho  -mw;  and  his 
views  must  uodoul)t  have  been  oilected  by  the  hardsliips  ut  the  mode  ui  traveitmg  he  un- 
dertook, to  which,  ftoin  hia  rank  in  Itfe^  he  ooidd  have  faaoi  bat  little  accustomed. 

ISfr.  Diirio,  on  the  other  hand,  had  lic-n  i!sr>d  yovrrtv;  •.w.d.  a  lie  ti-  ivt  llfd  'flaurely 
and  almost  aione^  and  lodged  everywhere  with  the  people  of  the  country,  he  could  acanie 
Ulof  knofwing  ^eir  real  character  and  sitaatian.  As  soon  as  I  lad  diacovered  hii  story, 
and  before  I  had  any  conversation  with  him  on  liis  travels,  I  requeatad  him  to  conunit  his 
af1vfnt'!rf>^  nnd  opinions  on  the  Afghann  country  to  writing.  It  gave  me  real  satisfaction 
to  hnd  tiicm  entirely  coincide  with  my^own ;  and,  I  cannot  but  consider  the  agreement 

to 


Digitized  by  Google 


206 


CONDUCT  TO  SHEEAHS. 


Hie  flbeeahs  we  mora  discountenance  dMUt  any  otfaor  fdigidnt 
■act  i  jefcf  all  the  numerous  Persians  in  the  country  are  Sheeahs,  wai, 
many  of  them  bold  high  offices  in  the  state  and  housdiokL  Xlieir  re- 
ligion allows,  and  evm  «iQoins  them  to  dissemUe^  when  in  heBetk 
INT  infidel  oountries ;  and,  oonsequentljt  they  are  put  to  no  incoove- 
Bience  by  the  restrictions  impoaed  on  Cfaem.  Hioae  restrictiooa  pre- 
vent  their  praying  in  the  attitude  peculiar  to  their  sect.  Their -cuiaiiig 
the  three  firat  caliphi,  and  their  exhibiting  puhlw  prooaaaiona,  and 
odier  representi^ions,  during  tl^Mohunem;  but  de  net  obl%e  them 
to  renounce  their  faith,  or  to  aubmit  to  any  inconvenience  or  d(Bga4^ 
tion.  The  Sheeaha»  however,  (perhaps  because  they  are  the  depressed 
party),  are  far  more  bigotted  than  the  Sunnees,  and  never  scruple  to 
attack  the  opposite  sect  when  they  think  they  have  favourable  or 
neutral  hearers.  From  a  storv  of  some  Christian  ambassador,  under 
the  fifth  Calif,  who  declared  tor  the  so^is  of  A!i.  and  suffered  martyr- 
dom tor  his  zeal,  they  have  a  notion  tluit  all  Christiiius  are  convinced, 
by  the  force  of  natural  reason,  oi  the  justicse  of  Ali's  claims.  T  have 
often  be^n  asked,  with  ^rcat  earnestness,  to  give  my  real  sentiments 
on  the  case  ;  and,  it  was  only  by  saying  that  1  was  not  a  Moollah,  and 
could  not  pretend  to  give  an  opinion  on  such  subjects,  that  1  evaded 
so  embarrassing  a  question.  I  had  a  good  opportimity  of  seeing  the 
spirit  of  toleration,  or  at  least  of  forbearance,  of  the  A^haun  ^vem- 