

jBauyazeed  was*  a  man  of  great  genius,  and  lus  religion  spread  ra- 
pidly among  the  lierdoorauneesi  till  he  wa«  able  to  aiisemble  armies, 
and  to  eettar  on  «  ee§ahr  conteii  with  the  govermneot:  he  was 
henmtm  efc  length  defeated  by  the  voyel  tioopa,  and  died  of  frtigue 
andmitation.  Hie  aons  attempted  to  aupport  hie  aeet,  m  whidi  thej. 
weeelong  enoeenful*  but  moat  of.  them  were  out  off ;  and  two  black 
iDciEB  in  the  Indus  ave  pointedoutae  the  tnuufixmed  bodies  of  Jflial- 
loodeen  and  Kemaloodeen»  the  sons  of  tlie  FeereTauredt,  who  were 
duown  into  the  river  by  command  of  Aukhoond  J>erweiclk  llMee 
socks  are  still  called  Jellalleea  and  Kemanleea,  and  being  ritaaated 
near  the  whir^poois  nuuie  by  the  junction  of  the  riiver  Caubul,  thsgr 
furnish  a  figure  to  the  orthodox,  who  say  that  it  is  natonJ  that  boots 
dMMild  be  dashed  to  pieces  against  the  bodies  of  those  heretics,  who 
had  already  caused  the  shipwreck  of  so  many  souls.  The  great 
opponent  of  the  Peeree  Tsnireek  wns  Aukhoond  Derwezeh,  a  Saujik 
of  Ikwnere,  who  now  ilie  greatest  of  all  the  saints  of  Afghauni- 
staun.  He  ha«  composed  many  voluminous  works,  u  hii  h  enjoy  an 
extensive  reputation  among  his  countrymen:  but  judging  from  what 
I  have  seen  of  them,  the  Peere  raureek  would  lonjj  have  remaineti 
unoonfuted,  d  the  argumentti  of  Aukhoond  Derwezeh  had  npt  been 
supported  by  the  arms  of  the  Mogul  emperors. 


Digitized  by  Google 


EFFECT  OF  REUGION  ON  THE  PEOPLE. 


Then  are  doubdms  mmy  odwr  aecto  ama^  the  A^^mms  the 
BMBM  cf  uliicli  have  ^teaped  my  otwcfwrtkii,  or  are  not  prwt  to 
vy  mcBMiiy ;  hat  the  nation  is  still  exempt  from  the  iaftianeg  ci 
dieir  They  are  all  strict  Soonnee  Mahomedaiw,  and  at 

they  are  occupied  about  their  own  &ith  and  observances,  without  in* 
terfering  with  other  people,  their  religious  spirit  is  far  from  being  un- 
pleasin*?,  even  in  fo11f>wers  of  Tslam.  From  their  ronvprsation,  one 
would  think  the  whole  }ieo}ile,  from  the  King  to  the  lowest  peasant, 
was  alway  s  occupied  in  holy  reflections:  scarce  a  sentence  is  utter(*d 
without  MMiie  allusion  to  the  Deity,  and  the  slightest  ocrurrenre  jji  u- 
duces  a  pious  ejaculation.  For  example,  they  never  ak  ot  any 
fiiture  event,  however  certain,  without  adding  "  Inshauiia,  '  (please 
God.)  They  even  apply  this  phnae  to  past  time,  and  will  aoswor 
A  quartkn  aboBtdiBbr  age,  "  Flowe  God,  I'«iftity<4Kre  jmn  M,^- 
Mtay  people  have  ahnrfi  a  fosary  hanging  raaad  their  wriiti  mad 
gintoteMtlMirbeada  wlwnewiiiBroiiapaiMe  in 
they  are  suppoaed  to  npeat  tho  name  of  God  iriwii  erer  the^  dnp  m 
kaad»  faufe  tlief  oAen  go  on  wliilo  tbiqr  Mte  Kitaniiiig  rttwrtitdy  to 