


Digitized  by  Google 


LIBERTINE  SECT  OF  MOOLLAH  ZUHKEE.  209 

be  nfldifld  an  iptttment  where  «iglik  penm  wcw^aeeted.  tlliegr 
MtiniH-tH  twupoited  and  discndered  by  thmr  own  nflectbiM,  «aiid 
tbeir  ooontenaiioeft  bene  the  tnaiks  o£  impintKML  Hie  Dervue'tikace 
ioimod  miwtfrfile  Akig%  apdacquirod  moie  knowledge  od  themoflt 
nibliine  uelijecia  from  a  momeDt's  intercourse  with  thow'aageiy  dun 
eould  ha^  been  gained  by  yean  of  kborious  study. 
-  Aoother  sect,  which  is  aometimes  confounded  with  the  Soolboa>  :ia 
one  which  bears  the  name  of  Moollah  Zukkee,  who  was  its  great 
patron  in  Gaubul.  Its  followers  hold,  that  all  the  prophets  were  im- 
postors, and  all  revelation  an  invention.  They  seem  very  doubtful  of 
the  truth  of  a  future  stntc.  and  even  of  the  bein^  of  a  God.  Their 
tenets  appnar  to  be  vcrv  ancit  iit.  and  are  prcrisfly  those  of  the  old 
•  Persian  poet  Kheioom,  whose  works  exhibit  such  specimens  of  im- 
piety, as  probably  never  were  equalled  in  any  other  language. 
Kheioom  dwells  particularly  on  the  existence  of  evil,  and  taxes  the 
Supieiiiu  Being  with  the  iuLruiiuction  of  it,  in  terms  which  can 
scarcely  be  believed.  The  Soofees  have  uuaccountably  prised  tins 
writer  into  their  service,  they  explain  away  some  of  his  blasphemies 
by  forced  interpretadona,  and  others  they  represent  aa  iimooeiit  frae^ 
doma  and  feproacfaea,  aedi  aa  -e  Um/t  may  pour  out  i^^ainat  hia  be- 
loved. The  ftkUoweia  of  Moollah  Zokkee  are  said  to  take  the  fidl 
advHita0e  of  iheir  feleaaefiom  tbeftar  of  heU,  and  the  awe  of « 
SopieBie  Bemgf  and  to  be  the  moat  diaaelute  -and  unprincipled  pnifli- 
gatea  In  the  Mngdonu  Thi&a  opiniona,  nevertheleaa,  are  chariahed 
in  aeeret,  and  ace  aaid  to  be  veiy  pievalent  among  the  licentioaa 
nobleaof  the  court  of  Shauh  Miahmood. 

The  Rouahnmeea  aect  made  e  greek  noiae  among  the  Afghauns  in 
the  nzteenth  century ;  bat  it  is  now  ehnost  cKtinot  It  wea  ftunded 
in  the  reign  of  the  'Emperor  Acbar,  by  Bauyazei  d  Ansauree,  who 
wntB  called  by  his  enemies  the  Peeree  Taureek  (or  Apostle  of  Dark* 
ness),  in  derision  of  the  title  of  Peeree  Roushen  (or  Apostle  of 
ii^t),  which  he  had  himself  assumed.  He  held  the  same  tenet.«? 
widi  the  Soofees,  but  aa  he  added  a  belief  in  the  traasmigratiofi  oH 

K  S 


Digitized  by  Google 


flO  10USHUM££A  SECT. 

■wb,  it  k  pialMid*  lie  derived  bii  creed  from  die  Yogeei*  a  sect  of 
Ifindoo  phOowiplMniy  whoidd  tome  of  the  dogmas  of  the  r^gkn  in 
wfaidi  they  were  educated,  to  those  of  the  SoaSae  sohool*  Od  tliifli 
however,  he  ingciiAed  some  doctrines  of  his  own,  the  moil  -remark- 
able of  wluch  were,  thi^  the  mo^  complete  manifestations  of  the 
Dvnmty  were  made  in  the  persons  of  holy  men,  and  particularly  in 
his  own  ;  and  that  all  men  who  did  not  join  his  sect,  were  to  be  con- 
sidered as  deatl,  and  that  their  goods,  in  consequence,  fell  to  the  lot 
of  his  partizans,  as  the  only  survivors:  the^^c  self-created  heir^  were 
entitled  to  seize  on  their  inheritan<re  when  (lu  y  pleased,  without  any 
regard  to  the  dead  proprietors,  who  might  affect  to  be  alive  in 
spile  of  the  Peere's  decision. 