

Aiiotht  r  sect  in  Caiibiil  is  that  of  ilir  Soot'ces,  who  ought,  perhaps, 
to  be  coiisidei  (  I  I  as  a  (  hi^ss  of  philosopbi  i  s.  l  ather  than  of  reiigionist3. 
As  far  as  I  can  understand  their  mysttM  ious  <l<^ctriue,  their  leading 
tenet  i^enis  to  be,  that  the  whole  of  the  animated,  and  inanimate 
creation  is  an  illusion  ;  and,  that  nothing  exists  except  the  Supreme 
Being,  which  presents  itself  under  an  infinity  of  shapes  to  the  soul  of 
man,  itself  a  portion  of  the  divine  essence.  The  coriteinpiation  of 
this  th)ctrine  raises  the  Soofees  to  the  utmost  pitch  of  enthusiasm, 
Tliey  admire  God  in  every  thing;  and,  by  frequent  nteditation  on  liis 
attributes,  and  by  tracing  him  through  all  his  forms,  they  imagine 
that  they  attain  to  an  ineffitble  love  for  the  Deity,  and  even  to  an 


Digitized  by  Google 


^  SOOFEES. 

entire  itaioa  with  his  subttaoee.   AM  A  neoeBsexy  oonieiiaMioe  of  thk 

theory,  they  consider  the  peculiar  tenets  of  every  religion  as  supers 
flnities,  and  discard  all  rites  and  religious  worship,  regarding  it  as  li 
matter  of  little  importance  in  what  manner  the  thooglits  m  turned 
to  God,*  provided  they  rest  at  last  in  contemplation  cm  his  goodness 
and  greatness.  This  sect  is  persecuted  in  Persia,  and  though  not 
discountenanced  by  the  government  in  Caubul,  is  held  in  great  aver- 
sion by  the  Moollahs,  who  accuse  its  followers  ot"  Atheism,  and  often 
endeavour  to  entrap  tliem  into  some  doctrines  which  are  liable  to 
punishment  by  the  Maliomedaii  law;  but  these  attempt >i  are  seldom 
successful  J  one  obstacle  to  Uieir  accomplishment,  that  many  of 
the  Soofees  are  sincere  Malionnnediins,  notwithstanding  the  inconsis- 
tency of  the  two  doctrines.  I  have  heard  a  mfm  ex]iatiate  with  rap- 
ture on  the  beauty  of  the  Soofee  system,  and  on  the  enlarged  and 
liberal  views  of  humaii  actions  to  which  it  leads  ;  wliu  lias  soon  after, 
in  the  same  company,  stick  ltd  tl>r  every  tenet  of  Isluum,  and  rejected 
v\  11  li  horror  the  idea  of  douhi  nig  the  eternity  of  hell  fire  :  when  tlie 
(lithculty  of  reconciling  thi.^  doctrine  with  the  belief  that  nothing 
existed,  but  C^od  was  pointed  out ;  he  said  that  the  system  of  the 
Soofees  was  certainly  true,  but  that  the  eternity  of  hell  was  proved  by 
the  word  of  God  himself. 

The  sect,  however,  is  gaining  ground,  particularly  among  tiie  higher 
orders,  and  such  of  die  Moollahs  as  apply  themselves  to  general 
literature  and  its  obscure  sublimity,  is  admirably  suited  to  the  taste 
of  that  dass.  Hie  love  of  mystery,  indeed,  wbidi  ia  so  reniazldble 
among  them,  induces  tiiem  to  ftrm  the  highest  notions  of  mrj  thing 
that  is  concealed*  and  has  even  occasioned  a  lively  curionty  about 
free  maisoiuy.  I  have  often  been  questioned  reganiing  it,  and  have 
heard  the  opiniottB  which  have  been  formed  of  its  nature.  All  that 
Is  known  of  it  was  communicated  by  a  obtain  Dervise,  who  traveled 
into  European  oountriesj  and  who  gave  this  account  of  his  initlatioin 
in  4he  mysteiy.  He  was  dirbcted  to  enter  a  particular  building,  and 
after  passing  throu^  winding' passages,  4nd  crossing  several  courtly 