


V 


Digrtized  by  Google 


GHOSTS. 


an  IndiiD*  and  performing  a  variety  of  incwtatioiMi  lor  the  tnupoie-of 

fascinating  the  affectima  of  his  miatreia»  - 

Near  Candahar  is  a  cam  called  the  cave  of  Junuhaedf  to  the  end 
of  which  it  is  impoaaible  to  penatnto*  apparently  on  account  of  a 
torrent  whidi  obstructs  the  paange}  but  tkH  A%hMiii»  ralate^  thai 

after  advancing  a  certain  distance,  one  hears  the  roar  of  winds  and  the 
rushing  of  waters,  and  that  all  progress  is  soon  stopt  by  a  wheel 
armed  with  swords,  which  is  whirled  round  wit!?  such  force  an <1  velo- 
city as  threatens  to  annihilate  every  thin^  that  approaches  it.  Some 
bold  adventurers,  however,  have  overcome  these  obstacles,  and  reached 
a  most  enchanting  garden  in  the  bowds  of  the  earth.  Thev  di  scribe 
the  verdure  of  this  delicious  region,  its  bowers,  woods,  fliul  lawns; 
its  transparent  streams,  and  its  flowers  ol  a  ilu>usaiid  biillianL  hues,  as 
far  surpassing  anv  scene  that  the  human  imagination  can  figure; 
while  the  exquisite  iiuit.s,  ihe  perfumed  breeze:5,  aaici  Uie  ravishing 
music  which  fior  ever  resounds,  are  equal  to  the  warmest  pictures  of 
the  Mahommedan  paradise. 

Hie  ^fjjf^mmm  .bdieve  cadi  of  the  nmnesoiu  mUtmbsi  m  the 
moimtaina  and  desarts  of  thdr  ooimtiy  to  be  inhabited  by  a  kndljr 
demODt  whom  they  call  the  GhooUee  Beeabaun  (the  Goule  or  ^imt 
of  the  waile)  $  they  represent  fahn  as  a  gigantic  and  frightful  spedMb 
who  devoma  way  pasaangv  whom  diance  may  hdog  within  his 
haunts.  It  is  to  Ihb  spirit  that  th^  ascribe  liie  illutton  by  whldi 
traveUera  are  often  led  to  believe  that  they  see  sheets  of  water  in  the 
midst  of  the  desait,  and  they  figure  him  watching  near*  to  sciae  the 
unhappy  wanderer  who  may  be  misled  by  his  aitifice»  and  tear  him 
to  pieces.  * 

They  haveall  a  great  reverenoe  for  burial  grounds,  which  they  some- 
times call  by  the  poetical  name  of  cities  of  the  silent,  and  which  they 
people  with  the  ghosts  of  the  departed,  who  sit  each  at  the  head  of 


*  Ynok.  diis  popular  superstilkHO,  they  often  iUuttmte  an  scoount  of  the  vildness  of  anj 
sequestered  tiib%  by  Mjing  that  tfasgr  «n  Glkook*  Bahnm  (wildwtlie  d«BMns  cf  tfc* 


uiyiiizeo  by  LiOOglc 


DIVINATION. 


hit  iftm  gn/n,  asvMUb  tO'moct»l  ejnetf  md  e^foj  the  odoufs  of  the 
gniands  iiliidii«  fanng  oil  and  of  die  moenae  wluch  is 

bonied  by  thmr  surviving  relations*  Tbey  believe  in  nmay  other 
IdndB  of  genii  and  spirits  ;  but  I  do  not  think  I  hove  ever  heard  of 
the  apparition  of  the  i^ioeta  of  the  dead  The  glorified  spirits  of  the 
four  first  Caliphs,  however,  were  seen  clothed  with  fire,  on  ahillom 
Caubul,  during  the  battle  between  the  Sheeahs  and  Soonnees. 