

The  tifbes  most  addicted  to  rapine  in  the  West,  are  iht  Atdbndtsje 
IvnuKdi  of  the  Do(»aaneeB»  and  those  of  the  Noorzyes,  idio  hdiahit 
the  desart  eountiy  on  die  borden  of  Penia  and  Bdonhistan,  and  Aat 
part  of  the  Toikfaee  bianch  of  the  Ghiljiesr  which  oGoupies  »  poition 
of  die  Paiopsmisan  mountains.  Tlie  hn^  of  the  lest-  na^tA  be 
passed  with  tolerable  safety,  unless  in  times  of  great  oon&aion  ;'-biit 
the  long  diaocders  of  the  government  are  p^i^  akeiing  th^  dw- 
TBcter  in  this  respect  for  the  worse.  Hie  pastoral  tribes  in  the  West 
ere  said  to  be  more  gnea  both  to  robbery  and  theft,  than  those  who 
live  by  agriculture  All  the  tribes  of  the  range  of  Solimann,  eap^ 
dally  the  Khyberees  and  the  Viateerees,  are  notorious  plunderers,  and 
rob  under  the  express  direction  or  sanction  of  their  internal  govern- 
ment. The  othor  Eastern  Afghauns  are  all  disposed  to  plunder 
when  they  dare.  When  quite  free  from  all  apprehension  of  th  e  roya 
power,  they  openly  rob  on  the  highway.  When  their  security  is  not 
ao  gieatt  they  levy  excnbitaat  customs,  or  b^  in  a  manner  that  is  not 


Digrtized  by  Google 


SaO  SAFEGUARDa 

to-be  ■efivedf  Mid  steal  when  they  due  not  rob ;  but,  fot  $,  pomidef^ 
dbJe  exteot  roimd  the  towns,  »  trvvdler  it  tolenljlj  safe  under  the 
protectioii  of  the  royal  anthoritj. 

It  18  pQMible,  in  all  tribes,  ezoept  the  Khybeceet,  tDobtamsaecaie 
passage  through  their  territories  by  a  prerious  agreeaaent  with  the 
MeA,  who,  for  a  small  present,  wUl  liiniish  an  esoort,  under  whose 
protection  a  stranger  may  travel  with  perfect  safety.  A  single  man  is 
asnflBdeat  esoott  in  most  tribes  $  but  where  the  internal  government 
Is  vay  weaik,  4xe  where  there  is  much  fear  of  tiie0,  it  is  usual  to  ghre 
a  psitj  proportioned  to  the  quantity  of  property  to  he  defended.  It 
is  remaritable  that  these  arrangements  are  mo«t  eAbctualwith  the 
tribes  who,  having  least  connection  with  the  Kio^  have  usually  most 
predatory  habits*  In  those  tribes  it  seems  to  be  thought  that  the 
Oolooss  having  no  relations  with  a  stranger,  is  at  liberty  to  attack 
him,  and  that  such  an  attack  is  to  be  considered  as  honourable  war*, 
but  that  when  they  have  promised  protection,  they  are  bound  in  good 
faith  to  afford  it :  the  people  of  the  subject  tribes,  on  the  other  hand^ 
are  well  aware  of  the  guilt  of"  robbery,  and  when  any  of  them  are 
depraved  enough  to  practise  it,  little  sense  of  honour  is  to  be  ex.- 

pectrd  ot  lliem. 

In  all  cases,  it  must  be  observed,  to  the  honour  of  the  Afn^hauns, 
th:if  their  robberies  are  never  aggravated  bv  murder :  a  ni;in  ii\a\  be 
killed  in  defending  his  property,  but  he  wiU  not  be  put  to  death  atler 
he  has  ceased  to  resist. 