

I  say  iioihing  of  the  plunder  oi  whole  caravans  by  the  leaders  of 
parties  during  civil  wars.  This  is  acknowledged  to  be  an  expedient 
only  justified  by  necessity,  ar^d  a  promise  of  rq[»ayment  in  better  times 
is  always  held  out  to  the  ^uiierers.  • 


Book  L  diipi  5* 


Digitizeo  by  LiOO^K 


(   281  ) 


CHAP,  m 

MANNXBS)  COfTOMS,  AND  OHAKACTER  OP  THE  APGUAUNS. 

THE  manner  of  life  of  the  A%hauns  is  by  no  means  uniform 
throughout  the  country,  and  for  varieties  I  must  again  refer  to 
thr  detailed  accounts  of  the  tribes,  but  T  shall  adlicre  to  my  plan  of 
)ni  iitioning  in  this  place  all  that  is  common  to  the  whole.  One  great 
cause  of  flivprsity  it  is  nec  essary  to  mention  even  here.  This  is  the 
division  ot  the  nation  into  inhal)ilanls  of  tents  and  of  houses.  Those 
who  live  in  tents  are  chieiiy  to  be  loimd  in  the  West,  where  tliey  pro* 
bably  amount  to  one  half  of  the  populat  ion  ;  but  as  all  over  the  East 
the  people  live  in  houses,  the  proportion  of  that  last  class  must  greatly 
preponderate  in  the  nation.  It  is  probable  that  the  number  of  those  in 
tents  has  diminished,  and  I  am  oi  opinion  tiiat  it  is  still  diminishing* 
The  facility  with  whicii  tribes  clianged  their  residence  in  former  times, 
appears  to  countenance  the  belief»  that  most  of  them  were  shepherds^ 
and  lired  m  tonto;  thougii  it  cannot  be  denied  that  great  emigrar* 
^onsof  agrienkuiftl  tribes  hsre  also  taken  plaoe. 

The  nMMremflnt  of  the  Eniofrjpca  from  t£e  frontiers  of  PeraaBro*' 
per  to'tboae  mS  Indk  is  xebted  in  another  pUce.  The  other  tribes 
voond  Pedunrer  are  alao  tnwed  from  the  east  of  KhcMcassami  of  their 
present  seats :  at  a  stiU  later  period,  the  Ghiljies  moved  from  a  great 
part  of  dieir  lands,  at  the  command  of  Nsndir  Sliaub,  and  made 
room  for  a  portion  of  the  Doomtmees.  This,  however,  was  a  com- 
pulsoij  lemovalf  enfiwoed  faj  a  powerfid  oonqueror,  end  no  Tokm^ 
iaty  emigfilionis  knoimto  have  oocorred  within  a  centuiy  i  a  pmol^ 
as  it  appears  to  me^  that  the  people  hare  betaken  themselves  to  agri* 
cohnfi^  A  pwnnt  which  naturdl/  attadies  fliemsdves  to  the'soiL  It 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


88S 


PA8T0IUL  tIFE. 


is  not,  perhaps,  so  evident  that  this  disposition  is  still  increasing,  but 
we  find  numbers  of  people,  who,  though  tliey  still  live  in  tents,  yet 
arc  employed  in  husbandrv,  and  never  move  from  their  fields  ;  and 
this  seems  very  obviously  to  be  a  stage  in  their  progress  from  raovitrg 
with  the  seasons,  and  cultivating  a  spot  ot"  ground  at  their  sumiiu  r 
station,  to  building  houses  for  permanent  residence.  A  recent  exam- 
ple is  found  in  the  Stooreeaunees,  of  a  tribe  which  has  abandoned 
pasturage  for  tillage,  but  on  the  other  hand,  there  do  not  want 
examples  ol'  people  who  have  exchauged  a  fixed  iur  a  wandering 
life. 