•oon  form  a'  connection  sufficiently  strong  to  preirent  tiieir  injuring 
mch  other  after  the  rights  of  hospitality  have  ceased ;  and,  in  fact, 
there  h  no  point  in  the  Af^aun  charact  er  of  which  it  is  more  difficult 
to  get  a  dear  idea,  than  the  mixture  of  sympathy  and  indifference,  of 
generosity  and  rapacity,  which  is  ob^crvfif^lr-  in  fhrir  conduct  to 
strangers.  In  parts  of  the  country  where  the  government  is  weak, 
they  seem  to  think  it  a  matter  of  course  to  rob  a  stranger,  while  in 
all  other  respects  they  treat  him  with  kindness  and  civility.  So 
much  more  do  thev  attend  to  grantiti^  favours  than  to  respecting 
rights,  that  the  same  Af'Miaun  who  would  plunder  a  traveller  of  his 
cloak,  li' he  had  one,  v  oald  give  him  a  cloak  if  he  had  none.  If  these 
inconsistencies  only  appeared  in  their  own  country,  their  behaviour 
might  be  owing  to  their  natural  love  of  gain  ;  and  their  point  of  ho- 
nour, with  respect  to  guests.  But,  \io\v  are  we  to  explain  the  suuie 
conduct,  when  their  meeting  in  a  foreign  country  gives  tlic  stranger 
no  claims  on  their  hospitality  ?  All  the  authentic  accounts  I  have  of 
the  treatment  of  atcsngers  by  Atghauns,  either  m  liheiv  own  country 
or  ebeipfaere,  give  ma  nii|»eui<m  of  phihaidiropj  and  poiiteneflB, 
^niien  dbere  was  no  temptatkm  to  cleptrt'fiNim  those  princ^les.  But* 
Inhere  theie  was  any  ukUicement  to  plunder  the  stranger,  and 
sometimeB  when  mndi  was  to  be  gained  by  dec^ving  him«  there  was 
no  great  appearance  of  justice  and  good  fiuth.  Hie  traldi  is,  those 
viitues  are  not  neoessaiy  oonoomitants  of  general  kindness^  norougjit 
we  to  infer  the  want  of  the  one  from  the  absouse  of  the  other.  Jus- 
tke  and  good  fidth,  cannot  peihflps  subsist,  unless  they  are  supported 
hy  laws  and  goremment  $  while  the  veiy  drcumstance  of  the  pobHe's 
leaving  men  to  themselves,  obliges  individuals  to  assist  andtodepen4 
on  each  other*  It  is  probably  to  this  last  cause,  that  we  are  to  aftti>' 
bote  the  siqieriority  of  most  Asiatics  in  the  minor  points  of  general 
humanity  over  Englishmen  of  the  same  rank  in  life^  to  whom  they 
are  &r  inferior  in  all  other  good  qualities. 

Th6  frequency  with  which  travellers  are  plundered,  iqypears  to 
originate  in  the  defects  of  the  Pooshtoonwullee.  That  law  relies  on 
the  eiertioDs  of  the  ii^ured  person,  his  relations,  and  his  tribes  for 


Uigitizeo  by  LiOOgle 


-RAPINE. 


229 


otenring  him  joilioei  iad,  as  s  rtwiger  Int  nsitliar  fobtiflni  not 
tnbe»iM>proviai0n'i8iiiBdB  for  liu  wearily    In  ptoof  of  diis  pnipo- 

sition,  it  may  be  observed,  that  tlie>A%^uns  do  not  in  ganenl 
plander  the  lands  of  their  nei^iboiin>  or  rob  individualsy  who  reside 
in  thdr  part  of  the  eumilry,  and  that  it  is  only  tfsreUers  who  are 
H^le  to  this  oppression.  This  habit  of  rapine  prevails  in  vetj 
difibrent  cbgrees,  at  difierent  times,  and  in  different  parts  of  the 
toaatry.  The  King^s  government  protects  people  of  all  deacriptioM 
alike,  as  far  as  its  power  extends ;  and,  in  conaequenoe^  when  the 
government  is  established,  a  man  runs  little  risk,  except  among  the 
tribes,  wliose  situation  enables  them  to  set  the  King  at  defiance* 
During  civil  wars,  on  the  rontrary,  the  whole  kiTiirdom  is  let  loose  ; 
and  a  traveller  may  be  plundered  with  as  much  impunity  within  sight 
of  Caubul  as  in  ihe  mouniaiii.s  of  the  Vizeerees.  The  habit  of  cood 
order,  however,  prevents  the  inhabitants  of  the  parts  of  the  country 
which  are  usually  settled,  from  runumg  into  tlit.se  excesses,  and  it  is 
probably  only  the  worst  individualii  among  them  who  betake  them* 
selves  to  habitual  rapine.  *  ■ 