


•  Tt  appoured  to  rae  at  first  that  tht-ro  wns  gome  rcscmblnncr  b,mvf-cn  nannnw  nyfee  and 
the  wdl  known  Indian  custcm  of  Dbunuu    They  are,  however,  entirely  unlike.  In 


1 


Digrtized  by  Google 


HOOPmUTV.      :  :  227 

A  stiU  ftntnger  appeal  is  made  when  a  woman  sends  her  veiLto  «ii 
^%haun,  and  implores  his  assistance  for  heraelf  or  h^  ftxhily.  Jt 
was  by  this  expedient  that  Timour  Shauh*s  queen  prevailed  on  Sirir 
^auz  Khaun,  (the  father  of  the  present  Grand  Vizier),  to  afford  his 
pssistance  in  the  elevation  of  Sliauh  Zemaun  to  the  throne)  suievtsotq 
phieily  brourrht  about  by  his  intiuciu  i\  '  . 

This  last  custom  is  not  connot  t  i  d  with  the  laws  of  hospitality  ;  but 
it  is  those  laws  alone  which  proti  ct  everv  individual  who  has  entered 
the  house  ot  an  Atghaun.  A  nmn  s  l)itterest  enemy  is  sale,  wliilc  he. 
Is  under  his  roof;  and  a  stranger,  who  has  come  into  an  Atghaun's 
house  or  tent,  is  under  the  protection  of  the  master  as  long  as  he 
9tays  in  the  villa^je.  From  this  principle,  arises  the  obligation  of 
protecting  and  delendiug  a  fugitive,  whatever  may  be  his  crime  ;  aud 
hence  the  fretjuency  of  elopements  with  women  from  one  Oulooss 
|«  another,  and  of  the  refuge  found  by  murderers  in  a  similar  flight 

The  protection,  which  the  rights  of  hospitality  confer,  does  not, 
iKmever,  extend  beyond  the  lands  of  the  viUaget  or  at  moflt,  of  the 
tiibe;  and,  there  ve  undoubted  tertimonies  of  AJ|^Miuns,  of  predatory 
tribes  entegrtaining  a  ti«reiUer»  and.  disnuaring  him  with  presents,  and 
jet  robbing  htm  when  they  met  him  agam,  after  he  mi  out  of  their 
pioteotion*  * 

It  seems  astonishing  to  an  Eoropeanf  -  that  the  redpioeal  good 
offices,  which  must  pass  between  the  host  and  the  gnest^  should  not 


^hurna,  both  parties  fast;  and  it  is  hvmgor  ivfiicfi  cnfhrcc,  n  ronTfjlinnrc  ^vitli  theilemaad. 
Jn  Kunmtwautee^  oo  th«  conttarjr,  there  is  no  restraint  on  either  party's  eating,  and  the 
Ibreeof  die  pnctioe  bewi  on  Ae  honour  done  of  Ihe  penon  to  whom  it  bcBfected.  '  It  it 
.aomeChitig  like  the  castom  of  the  Romaiu,  by  which  a  suppliant  enlmd  •  house,  and 
IHftti.'d  liimselfin  silence,  with  his  head  veiled,  on  the  heart li.  Thr  custom  of  thr-  GrrfV^s 
resembles  that  now  alluded  to ;  and  the  bdiaviour  ot  Ul^-i>&e»«  to  Circ^  when  he  ro- 
to  partdw  of  her  binqiMl^  tin  aihe baa  diaendianted  Ui  iHends,  (Od.  K.  verse  375, 
&c)  is  exactly  in  the  spirit  of  amiiawaiitcr.  • 
•  A  mo«t  remarkable  instance  of  this  spirit  has  l>oen  mentioned,  in  ( 
of  two  gentlemen  of  the  Mia«ion,  who  went  to  Deranbund. 

G  G  2  .  .  . 


M  H08PITAX.TIY  JlVD  EAFAGITr: 

