

Hie  most  elegant  means  employed  to  prognosticate  liituie  events, 
is  one  which  answers  to  our  Sortes  Viigilianss.  It  is  perfiirined  bgr 
opening  a  book  at  random,  and  applying  the  fint  vene  tliat  meets  the 
eye,  to  the  snlgect  of  the  inquiry:  th^  best  book  for  the  purpose  is 
the  Korann,  and  the  trial  ought  tobe  pteoeded  by  finting  and  prayer, 
which  indeed  ate  necessary  in  all  attempts  at  dhinayon:  othcrbooki 
aie^  however,  employed,  and  the  poems  of  Haufia  ine  perhaps  as  much 
used  as  the  Koraun.  The  following  happy  ooinddcnce  oocuned  to  a 
person  at  Lahore,  who  consulted  Haufiz  at  the  beginning  the 
troubles  produced  by  the  deposition  of  Shauh  Zemaun,  which  ended, 
after  three  years  of  confusion,  in  the  elevation  of  Shauh  Sbooja,  Hia 
object  was  to  ascertain  which  of  the'  sons  of  Timour  Shauh  would, 
obtain  tlie  throne  in  the  end,  and  the  verse  that  met  his  ejre  was  die 
fijUowing: 

**  Sdber  iukutiice  ghee  bum  resecd  uiuzh  dch  bcgooiti, 
f*  JUk  Down  Shanbi  Skkotjau  lut  mye  dilcer  be  nooah." 

to 


Digitizeo  by  Googlc 


S0BTE8  VmOHJANiE. 


S85 


**  At  the  (liiwn  a  voice  firom  the  invisible  world  brought  these  giad  tidinga  to  my  ear. 
« It  ii  die  ni^  of  SliMdi  Shoc^  %  drink  wiM  ind  be  ImU 

The  A^hmww  believe  in  the  power  of  tiJiiimaiMs  in  the  poaaibility  ^ 
of  eoquiring  a  oontiotil  over  genii  and  diBmoDs,  and  hareniunberleM 
other  aopentitioiu ;  but  I  Have  already  given  a  sufficient  Bpecimen 
of  Ihmt  nature. 


! 

•  Shenh  Shoojau  means  a  brave  king  in  Persiaiit  in  which  saue  it  seems  to  be  used  bgr 


Digitized  by  Google 


(    226    )  ' 

♦ 

CHAP.  VL 

BOiPtTAUTT.— 'PKEDATOBT  HABITS,  &C 

/^NE  of  the  most  remarkable  characteristics  of  tlie  Afghauns,  is 
their  hospitality.  The  practice  of  this  virtue  is  so  mucli  a 
iMtiftiMil  point  of  honour,  that  tliar  reproach  to  inheritable  man, 
is  that  he  has  no  Pooahtoonwuliee,  (nothing  of  the  customs  of  die 
A)%^nni8).  All  peraons  mdisczuninately  are  entitled  to  profit  by 
this  piacCice;  and  a  man,  who  travelled  over  the  ^ole  oountiy 
ivithout  money,  would  neirer  be  in  want  of  a  mealr  unless  peihaps  in 
towns.  Itistheg^reatestofaffirontstoanA4;|ia«ntoGaiTyoffhisguest; 
but  his  indignation  is  never  directed  against  the  guest  who  quits  him, 
but  the  p^son  who  invites  him  away*  AH  thedetula  of  the  practkse 
of  hospitality  will  appear  in  the  particular  account  of  the  tribes ;  but 
I  idiall  here  mention  some  customs  connected  with  that  principle. 

The  most  remarkable  is  a  custom  peculiar  to  this  people  and  called 
Nannawantee,  (from  two  Pushtoo  words, meaning  *<  I  have  come  in"). 
A  person,  who  has  a  &vour  to  adk,  goes  to  the  house  or  tent  of  the 
man  on  whom  it  depends,  and  refuses  to  sit  on  his  carpet,  or  partake 
of  his  hospitality,  till  he  shall  grant  the  boon  required.  The  honour 
of  the  party  thus  solicited  will  incur  a  stain  if  he  does  not  grant  the 
favour  askrd  of  him  ;  nnd,  so  far  is  the  practice  carrieil,  that  a  man 
over-matched  by  his  enemies,  will  sometimes  go  inmnawautee  to  the 
.house  of  another  man,  and  entreat  him  to  tal<o  nyi  his<|uarrel ;  which 
the  other  is  obliged  to  do,  unless  he  is  utterlv  unable  to  mierfere 
with  effect,  or  unless  some  circumstance  render  his  mterference 
obviously  improper.  * 