

?  F 


I 


Digitized  by  Google 


.    MANN£tU$  OF  THE  MOOLLAH& 

of  the  Lmded  properly  of  the  Ungdovii.  Bwt,M  all  do  not  piactue 
wury*  it  may  excita  some  curioaty  to  know  how  ao  nnmerooa  •  body 
can  bcmrinteined 

Besides  those  who  have  ecclesiastical  offices,  or  pensiona  from  the 
ccown  (who  will  be  mentioned  in  another  phwe)i  and  the  more  nume>- 
rooa  daaa  of  village  Imaims,  who  receive  &  certain  ahare  of  the 
produce  of  the  crops  andflocka  in  their  districts,  maay  luwe  gianta 
of  land  from  the  King  and  from  heads  of  villages  ;  and  some  have 
received  legacies  of  land  from  individiml?!.  Some  subsist  by  teaching 
and  practising  the  law  ;  others  trach  scIiooIb,  or  are  tutors  t(»  t!ie  sons 
of  ricli  men;  some  preach,  and  are  paid  by  their  congregations  j 
some  live  hv  the  charitable  allowances  grante  il  by  the  crown,  and  by 
viilapcs  to  shulents,  or  by  tlie  alms  and  hospitality  of  ]k'c)[)Ic.  through 
whose  country  they  travel  ;  and  others,  follow  trac{(  ov  tarniing,  or 
live  on  their  own  means,  and  pursue  their  studies  and  amusements 
at  leisure. 

The  character  of  a  Moollah  is  conferred  by  an  assembly  of  members 
of  that  order  on  peramiB,  libo  heve  gone  throuj^  the  proper  course  of 
Btndy,  and  paaaed  Ihe  requiaite  esaminotion.  The  admiaaion  of  a 
candidate  ia  attended  with  a  pKBcribedftnn;  the  chief  pert  of  which  . 
ia  inveating  him  with  the  turban  of  a  Moollaht  which  ia  bound  rannd 
hia  head  by  the  prindpel  peraon  in  the  aaaembly* 

The  Moollaha  are  diatinguiahed  'by  a  partionlar  dieaa,  eonaiating  of 
a  hoge  hioae  gown  of  white  or  Uadc  cotton,  and  a  vecy  large  white 
tniban  of  a  peculiar  shape. 

There  are  no  corporate  bodies  of  MooUaha  aa  there  are  of  monka 
in  £arope»  nor  ia  the  whole  order  under  the  command  of  any  chief, 
or  anbject  to  any  particular  discipline,  likethe  dei^  in  England.  All, 
catcq>t  those  who  hold  oihcea  under  the  crown,  are  entirely  indepemdU 
ent ;  and,  the  co-operation  among  them  is  only  produced  by  a  sense 
of  common  interest.  They  all  marry,  and  live  in  other  respects  like 
laynM'Ti.  1  do  not  know  that  tliey  have  any  peculiar  manners,  except 
an  aticctation  of  strictness.  Some  of  them  affect  great  gravity,  and 
othera  take  pleasure  in  frequenting  all  companies,  and  meddling  in  all 


Digitized  by  Google 


MAKNERS  OF  THE  MOOLLAHS. 


affiurs.  One  of  thew  may  oflen  be  seen,  wiQi  a  large  titrbui.  Mid  a 
Wue  liMidkeTchier,  a  couple  of  yank  long,  over  his  shoulder,  parad. 
ing  the  streets  at  the  head  of  a  dozen  of  his  diadplca,  with  a  long 
staff  in  his  hand,  and  a  large  law  book  under  hb  armj  or  sitting  in  the 
houses  of  the  rich,  hfjranL'ninfr  the  company,  enfordng  his  doctrines 
with  his  tore  hnger,  and  shaking  his  wide  sleeve,  or  amusinp;  the  mas* 
ter  of  the  house  with  his  jokes  and  stories,  and  handin<>;  rouiul  his 
enrinuous  snutf-box  amon^  the  rest  of  the  party,  Moollahs  of  this 
sort  are  reckoned  very  pleasant  companions  ;  thev  are  i^renf  froquen- 
ters  of  .Teergas,  where  indeed  their  knowledge  gives  the  wliole  order 
much  weight  in  civil  matters. 