

The  dress  of  the  men  varies  ;  bui,  tliat  now  used  in  the  West,  ap- 
pears to  mc  to  be  the  original  dress  of  the  whole  nation.  It  consists 
of  a  pair  of  loose  trowsers  of  dark  coloured  cotton ;  a  large  shirt  *, 
like  a  waggonette  fioc]i»  but  widi  wider  sleeves,  and  only  reaching  a 
little  below  the  knee ;  a  lowcap^  (shaped  like  a  Hulan'a  cap),  tli» 
iidee'of  wbich  are  of  black  silk  or  sirtin,  and  the  top  of  gold  brocade^ 
or  of  somelnig^teoloiiied  dodi;  and  a  pair  of  half  booisy' of  brown 
leather,  laoed  or  buttoned  up  to  the  calf:  over  this,  for  a  great  part- 
of  die.  jear^  ia  thrown  a  large  doak  of  well  tanned  aheefMkin,  witb 
die  wool  inside^  or  of  soft  and  pliant  grey  fyt.  This  garment  ia  worn 
loose  over  the  shoulders,  wHh  die  sleeves  hanging  ddwn,  and  readies 
to  tiie  andes  f*  In  the  cities  and  more  dviUsed parts  of  idiecountiy, 
the  diess  geneially  worn  resembles  that  of  Ftersia  }'and»  sJong  the 
eestem  holders  of  A%hanniBtaun»  it  in  some  respects  iqppfoecfaesthit' 
eflndia.  .. 


*  Tbcjr  call  tbi»  shirt  Cameew,  whidi,  I  believe,  is  alao  the  Arabic  tor  a  shirt.  The 
Uffian  ii  c«niMiB,'aiid  flw  IVaidi,  diemue;  but,  at  it  «m  not  tiS  afkcr  tlie  Oundtib  . 
dHS  thic  garment  was  irom  IB  Euop^  the  tem  jMMt  bmiB^fiMiloil  in  die  £sat 

tSssflMalL 


Digrtized  by  Google 


240 


HORSES  AND  THEIR  FURNITURE. 


The  women  wear  a  shirt  like  that  of  the  men,  but  much  longer. 
It  is  made  of  finer  materials,  and  generally  coloured  or  embroidered 
with  flowers  in  silk :  in  the  West,  it  is  often  entirelj  of  silk.  Thef 
wear  coloured  trowsers,  tighter  than  those  of  the  men;  and  ha;ve  a 
gmall  cape  of  bri^  coloured  silk,  embroidered-  With  gold  thread« 
which  scarcely  comes  down  to  the  forehead  or  the  ears ;  and  a  large 
riieefe»  either  plain  or  printed,  which  they  throw  over  their  heads,  and 
with  which  they  hide  their  faces  when  a  stranr^cr  approaches.  In  the 
West  the  women  often  tic  a  blnrk  handkerchief  round  their  heads 
over  their  caps.  They  divide  tiie  hair  over  their  hces,  and  plait  it 
into  two  locks,  which  fasten  at  the  back  of  their  heads. 

Their  ornaments  are  strings  of  Venetian  iie(|uiiis,  worn  round  their 
heads,  and  chains  of  gold  or  silver,  wiiich  are  hooked  up  over  the 
forehead,  pass  round  the  hciid,  and  end  in  two  large  balls,  which 
hang  down  near  the  ears.  Ear-rings  and  rings  on  the  fingers,  are 
also  worn,  a^.  arc  pendants  in  the  middle  cartilage  of  the  iiosi-,  which 
was  formerly  the  custom  in  Persia,  and  still  is  in  India  ami  Arabia. 
Such  is  the  dress  of  the  married  women,  tlie  unmarried  are  diiitm- 
guished  by  wearing  white  trowsera*  and  by  having  their  hair  loose. 