


288  SPORT&  DANCES.  GAMES. 

Urd  ao  rest,  till  it  beoomei  too  muok  tiled  to  flj,  when  tlMj  ride  it 
orer  is  it  runs,  or  knock  it  down  with  rtidc*. 

Tliou|^  liMw*™g  be  a  very  popular  amuaemait  ihroii^ioat  €he 
ivliole  kingdom,  it  is  most  pract  ised  by  the  Western  Afghauns  ;  among 
whom  also  the  songs  and  tfdes  befivre  described  are  fiMmd  in  most 
perfection,  and  to  whom  the  amusements  I  am  about  to  mention  are 
in  a  great  measure  confined.   Races  are  not  uncommon,  especialij 
at  marriages*   Hie  bridegroom  |^yes  a  camel  to  be  run  for  i  twenty 
or  thirty  horses  start,  and  they  run  for  ten  m  twdve  miles  over  the 
best  ground  they  can  find.    They  have  also  private  matdiei ;  but  no 
plates  given  by  the  King,  as  is  usual  in  Persia.    It  is  a  common 
amusement  with  the  heft  or  sort  to  tilt  with  their  lances,  in  the  rest, 
at  a  wooden  peg,  stuck  in  the  ;ir(m!Kl,  which  they  endeavour  to  knock 
over,  or  to  jiick       on  the  point  of  tlieir  spears.    They  also  practise 
their  carbnies  and  niatciilocks  on  horseback;  and,  all  ranks  tire  at 
marks,  with  guns,  or  with  bows  and  arrows.    On  these  occasions, 
there  are  often  from  tin  to  twenty  ol'  a  side,  sometimes  men  of  dit' 
ferent  villages,  or  dilibrent  quarters  of  the  same.    ITiey  bhoot  for 
some  stake  ;  commonly  for  a  ilinner,  but  never  lur  any  large  sum  ol 
monev.    Their  amusements  at  home  are  also  very  numerous,  though 
cm-iU  are  unknown,  and  dice  liardly  ever  used.    The  great  delight  of 
ail  the  Western  Afghauns,  is  to  dance  the  Attum  or  Ghoomboor. 
From  ten  to  twenty  men  or  women  stand  up  in  a  drde,  (in  summer,  be- 
£>re  their  houses  and  tents,  and  in  winter,'round  a  fire) ;  a  person  standi 
within  the  drde,  to  sing,  and  play  on  some  instrument.  Hie  dancers 
go  throng  a  number  of  attitudes  and  figures ;  shonting,  clapping 
ibmx  hands,  and  snapping  their  fingers.   Eveiy  now  and  then  they 
join  hands,  and  move  dow  or  fiut,  aoeoidiog  to  the  musics  all  joining 
in  ciiorua.   When  I  was  diewed  this,  a  lo?e  song  was  sung  to  .an 
extremdj  pretty  tune^  tcij  simple,  and  not  unlike  a  Seottidi  air. 

Most  of  theb  games  appear  to  ns  mj  diildish,  and  can  scarodjit 
be  leoondledio  their  long  beatds,  and  grave  bdiavioar.  JMarbleaare 
pkyed  by  ffomk  up  men,  throu^  all  the  Aighaun  'Country  and 
Penu»  wad,  I  .believe^  m  1>irkgr«  ▲  gwae  verygmially  pk^mli ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


'  t  ••  ■..-.» 


.4' 


Digrtized  by  Google 


DRESS  or  THE  UE^ 


ig  <Hie  iaJIed  Kkomjft  by  the  Boomineei,  aafl  Chiiwiiee  ty  Tto- 
Jikfl.  A  nun  ttket  hb  left  IboC  m  his  ri^^'  hand,  and  hop*  about  on 
one  tegt  aideavouring  to  ovenet  his  adveriaiy,  who  advances  in  thm 
aame  way.  This  is  played  by  several  o£  a  aide*  and  ia  move  oompU* 
cated  tlian  I  hanre  made  it,  but  still  a  strange  game  for  grown  up  men* 
Prisoners*  base,  quoits,  (played  with  circular  flat  stonea) ;  and  a  game^ 
like  hunt  the  slipper,  (played  with  a  cap)»  are  also  very  commcHit  as 
are  wrestlii^  and  other  trials  of  strength  and  skill.  Fighting-quails* 
cocks,  dogs,  rams,  and  even  camels,  are  also  much  admired.  I  have 
seen  camels  matchetl;  nnd,  during  their  rutting  senson,  they  fight 
with  great  furv.  When  the  battle  ends,  the  speriutors  had  neod  to 
clear  the  .  for  the  beaten  camel,  who  runs  oti  at  lus  utmost  '^ix.  ed, 
antl  is  otten  pursued  by  the  Victor  to  a  tlistanre  from  tlie  tic  Id  of 
battle.  All  these  games  are  played  tor  some  stakr  ;  somotiiuei*  for 
money  ;  6oni<  times  the  \\  intu  i  takes  the  beaten  cock,  ram,  or  camely 
but  the  general  stake  is  a  dinner. 