


{    254  ) 


CHAP.  Via 

OP  THl  INHABITAKTS  OP  TOWNS. 


I HAVE  hitlierto  contined  myself  to  those  points  of  character  or 
niuiijiers  which  apply  to  the  whole,  or  iiciiily  the  whole,  of  the 
Atghaiin  nation.    I  shall  now  proceed  to  tic.scribe  the  peculiaxities  of 
the  different  classes  of  which  it  is  composed.    Enough  has  been  said, 
for  the  present,  ol'  the  difference  betwaen  the  eattem  and  western 
A^iamiB ;  aome  particular  orders  of  men  hsTe  also  beai  incsidentally 
described ;  and  tl^  pastoral  and  agricultural  chases  will  be  ^oken  of 
in  great  detafl  hereafter.   Tlie  first  description  of  people  whom  I 
have  now  to  examine,  aie*  theieifoie>  the  inhdbitanta  of  towns;  and  here 
one  is  struck  with  the  circwmatance,  that  the  greater  part  of  this  branch 
of  the  popnlation  is  not  composed  of  Aigftanns.  ItmajseemstiaD^to 
a  person  in  £aiope»  that  thie  towna  should  not  be  inhabited  bjr  the 
nuMrtera  of  the  country,  yet  such  was  the  case  in  England  after  the 
Nonnan  inrasbut  and  such  it  still  is  In  Uabek,  Tartaiy,  and  m  aome 
meaaune  in  Fersk  $  and  probaUy  the  reason  has  in  all  caaes  been  the 
same;  the  ruling  nation  has  though  it  degrading  to  pumue  the  trades 
.which  assemble  men  in  towns,  and  none  have  revded  there  but  great 
men  and  their  retainers,  who  are  drawn  thither  by  the  court;  ao> 
ooldingly,  the  only  A%hauns  who  reside  in  towns,  are  great  men  and 
their  followers,  soldiers,  Moollabs,  a  few  who  Ibllow  commerce  (a  pur- 
suit not  despised  among  this  people),  and  wma  of  the  pooiest  of  the 
nation,  who  worit  as  labourers.    No  Alghaun  ever  keeps  a  shop^  or 
exercises  any  handicraft  trade.    The  greater  part  of  the  people  em- 
ployed in  these  occupations,  are  Taujiks,  a  nation  who  are  intermixed 
wUh  the  A%hauns  in  great  numbers,  throughout  all  the  western  part 


Digrtized  by  Googl 


BANKERS. 

tt  tbeur  Qoimtiy,  and  who  are  imiiid  erm  in  the  eMt|  wheiei  how* 
Vflr>  ^  tradei  alliidad  tis  toe  xnoce  fieqiiodj  aeieiBed  Hj  Hiiid- 
.keeB,  .a  people  of  Indian  origin,  -who  are  aoattered  over  that  .part  of 
A%hauni8taun/ as  the  Taijika^aie  in  the  west  Theae  iiationi^  atid 
the  others  which  contribute  to  &e  populadon  of  A%|iaun  towns,  will 
be  oonaidered  as  distinct  raoas^  after  I  bave  descrflbed  the  Afghauna  ( 
at  preieiiA  I  .hanre  only  to  ^peak  of  the  place  they  oeciipy  as  citizena 
of  thoae  towns.  In  this  point  of  view,  we  find  them  divided  into 
bankers,  merdiants,  artisans,  and  labourers. 

The  prohibition  in  the  Koraun  against  Mussulmans  taking  intereat, 
makes  most  of  the  business  of  banking  fall  into  the  hands  of  Hindoos, 
whose  warv  and  penurious  habits  snit  them  atlniirably  for  the  trade. 
They  derive  their  profits  Iroin  leiniin;^  monpv,  whirh  they  do  at  an 
enormous  interest,  by  nrfjnciat  inL^  bills  of  exchange,  and  by  transac- 
tions i  riiuieeled  with  tlie  Jluetuaiions  of  the  exchange  in  the  place 
wheie  they  reside.  They  also  mix  tra<le  and  agency  witli  their  regu- 
lar banking  business.  Aiioilier  source  of  profit  arises  from  advancing 
money  to  government  for  bills  on  tl  ic  revemie  of  {mn  iiiccs,  and  this 
hazardous  speculation  is  lecunnnendc'd  by  a  premium,  always  large, 
and  increasing  with  the  risk  of  non-payment.  Some  of  the  bankers 
are  very  rich,  but  there  arc  numberless  little  shops  set  up  with  very 
small  capitals,  which  practise  the  same  trade  as  the  great  ones,  aniong 
the  poor  people  of  their  particular  neighbourhood. 