

K  K  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


£52 


CHARACTEB. 


Ibejr  «ra  aJI  kind  to  their  Immediate  dependents,  of  whateTer  na- 
tion or  religion,  but  the  cam  is  different  with  people  who  are  under 
their  authority,  without  being  personally  connected  with  them.  The 

countries  which  are  completely  subdued,  as  Cashmcpr  and  the  pro- 
vinces on  the  Imhis,  suffer  mudi  from  tfif  r;ipnritv  of  individuals, 
and  if  they  do  not  often  undergo  the  extremes  of  tyrainiv.  it  onh 
because  wanton  cruelty  and  insol^ice  are  no  part  of  the  A%haun 
character. 

Their  independence  and  pretensions  to  (Mnialitv  make  fheni  view 
the  elevation  of  their  neighbours  with  jealuuNV,  ami  conuimnicates  a 
deep  tintre  of  envy  to  their  disposition.  Tlie  idea  tliat  thev  are 
neglected  und  passed  over,  while  their  equal?*  are  atteiuled  to,  will 
lead  them  to  renounce  a  frieudship  oi'  long  standing,  or  a  party  to 
which  they  have  been  zealously  attached.  Unless,  however,  they 
meet  with  particular  wrongs  or  insults,  they  are  said  to  be  fidthibl  in 
fikndtiiip  onoe  ftnned,  md  mindiiil  of  fimiun>-if  not  eAced  by 
•nbieqtient  slights.  I  cm  anawer  for  tfaie  peculiaiily  in  tlieir  chareo* 
ter,  thit  the^  will  do  any  tlung  tbat  ia  wanted  of  them  with  much 
more  Mel,  if  a  present  is  made  to  them  in  advance^  thn  if  it  ii  witb* 
hdd  in  the  hope  of  quickening  them  by  expectancy. 
'  Itma^  befoioiocp  htm  their  cwtoms,  which  moke  private  levei^ 
a  duty,  tbat  th^  wiU  kmg  retain  tiie  lemembiaaoe  of  iiguriea  i  but 
this  ia  tme  only  such  serious  injuries  as  thcg^  are  bound-in  honour 
to  retaliate ;  in  tMn  of  less  ooosequenee^  they  are  neither  iirilable 
nor  impJaoble. 

I  know  no  people  in  Asia  who  .have  Jfewer  vices,  or  are  lesa  volup- 
tnous  or  debauched;  but  thia  ia  most  remarkable  in  the  west :  the 
people  of  towns  are  acquiring  a  taste  for  debauchery,  end  those  in 
the  north-east  of  the  country,  are  alreao^  fiur  from  bong  pure.  The 

A%hauns  themselves  complain  of  the  corruption  of  manners,  and  of 
the  dedine  of  sincerity  and  good  faith,  and  say  that  dieir  nation  is 
assimilating  to  the  Persians.  Their  sentiments  and  conduct  towards 
tliat  nation,  greatly  resemble  those  which  we  discovered  some  years 
igo  towards  the  French.   Their  national  antipathy,  and  a  stioiig 


Digrtized  by  Google 


CHABACTEB. 


S58 


tenia  of  their  aim  8uperiotit)r»  do  not  prarent-tlieir  imitating  Fenian 
niiiinen»  while  they  dedaimi^faiiiat  thepractioe>  as  deprsnng  Uieir 
own.  They  are  fuUj  senatble  of  the  advantage  which  Ferti*  has  over 
diBBi  at  prawLPt,  fiam  the  ooaqpandve  union  and  vigour  of  her  coun- 
dla*  and  they  icgavd  the  increase  of  her  power  with  same  d^;ree  of 
iqpprehension,  which  is  diminished  by  their  inattention  to  the  foture* 
and  by  their  confidence  in  themselves.  To  sum  up  the  character  of 
the  A^hauns  in  a  few  words}  their  vices  are  revenge,  envy,  avarice* 
rapacity,  and  obstinacy  ;  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  fond  of  liberty, 
£uthfiil  to  their  fri^da,  kind  to  their  dependantSy  hospitable,  brave, 
hardy,  thigal,  laborious,  and  prudent ;  and  they  are  less  dif^poscd  than 
the  natkms  in  their  ne^bourhood  to  fakehnod,  inirigue*  and  deceit. 