

•  All  oommimieitum  with  the  Afghanm  is.  rendend  agneaUe,  by 
tli0  dq^adflioe  wUch  can  be  placed  OA  what  tiiey  say.  Thoa^lhef 
tie  &r  belund  Emopeana  in  madtj,  and  woukl  seldom  scruple  to 
deceive  bolh  in  fttetfrmfinti  sad  praoiina*  if  llieir  own  iHtveatweve 
to  be  promotod-bf  tiieb  iSelumesty,  yet  they  hanre  not  that  indilfte« 
ence  to  tnOif  and  that  afyle  of  habitiial  and  gntoitoiiB  ftlsehood 
which  aitoniafaea  an  European  in  natives  of  Indie  and  Beisis:  a  mm 
of  the  fint  notion  seems  incapable  of  observing  sny  thing  eoenntlefy» 
and  one  of  iSbe  second4»f  deacribing  it  trnly ;  bnt  unlem  some 
Set  can  be  diacoveted  to  TOiaioad'  the  obaetver,  or  some  mofetvisk  is 


•  My  own  ignorance  of  the  subject,  nnd  flic  difficulty  of  finding  n  person  here, 
who  is  botli  a  Persian  scholar  and  a  jnsthematidani  has  hitherto  preveuuxl  iuj_  teflj' 
ktg  Id  this  paper. 

t  Us  Pmfaw  are  too  aeoie  nd  iBtdi%ent  to  hnre  any  of  Ai»  ■■uMiliillljV  iMt 
lih^  sse  too  M  of  diamdm  to  bs  ymj  esrisni  sbooft  olbci  nalkini. 


Digitized  by  Google 


apparent  for  mifirepresenting  the. truth,  one  may  genmdly  rely  on  the 
Afghaum  both  far  ttvnctnen'aiid  fidelity. 

JLll  the  AfghaniM  are  remarlcably  hardy  and.aotm  From  die  iiji^ 
twe  of.  dieir.  oountry,  they  are  exposed  to  the  neoesuty  of  enduring 
oold  and  heat,  and  accustomed  to  the  ezertion  of  clhnfauig  mountainat 
making  long  jouniiea  on  foot  and  on  horsebadfi  and  swimmmg  luoad 
and  rapid  torrents.  Nor  u.this  confined  to.the  ]0iner,orden»  'oc  to 
men.ln  the  vigour  .of  youth.  As  diere  is  no. easier  ooDveyance  m  the 
country  than  a  horsey  all. ranks  .acqoire  these  habita:  so  that  old 
Meeraas  (or  secretaries))  who  seem  .kanUy.able.to  .sit  on  horaehackt 
will  ride. at  .a good  pace  jnp.aod  down  the  steepest. and  .rau^jbest 
passes^  bf  akmg  the  edge  of  precqpioesi  where  one  is  almoat^afinid  to 
walk.  .Ahnost  all  of  them.ane,  hosrerer,  impatient  of  hotdimatos; 
aad»  when  on  campaignB  in  India,  the  approach  .of  summer  used  to 
dun  .their  armi^  by  desertions,  even  in  the  vigoiouB  reign.of  Ahmed 
Shauh.  This  is  the  more  mrprising,  when  .  it  is  resnembeeed  how. 
much  of  the  Afghaun  country  is  in  a  hot  dimate. 

They  are  industrious  and  laborioas,  when  pursuing  any  object  of 
business  or  pleasure.  No  people  are  more  diligent  in  hmthandryj  and 
many  of  them  are  indefirtigabie  in  the  chaoe;  but.  when  not  so  ex- 
cited, th^  are  indolent. 

Hie  love  of  gain  seems  to  be  their  .ruling  passion ;  most^of  the 
Dooramiee  chi^  prefer  hoarding  their  great  but.useless.tveaaHies, 
to.  the  .power,  reputation,  and  esteem,  which  the  circumstances  of  the 
times  would  enable  .them  to  command  by  a  moderate  liberality.  The 
influence  of  money  on  the  whole  nation,  is  spoken  of  by  those  who 
know  them  best,  as  boundle.ss,  and  it  is  not  denied  by  themselves. 