

It  may  not  be  amiss  to  mention  in  this  place  the  way  in  which  the 
day  b  divided  in  Afghaunistaun.  The  day  begins  at  SeAr,  which  is  a 
little  before  the  commencement  of  the  morning  twilight,  and  which 
is  enjoined  as  the  hour  of  the  first  prayers.  Tlic  next  mnrkod  period 
is  Aft  and  Boanrnnd,  or  sun-rise,  after  which  is  Chamhty  or  luiicheon 
time,  about  eleven  o  clock.  Neemrnoz  (or  noon)  is  the  f^hort  period 
bcLween  Cliausht  and  AuuUee  Pcsltcm  (or  Zohr),  an  hour  [irescribed 
for  prayers,  and  marked  by  the  first  inclination  of  t lie  shadt)\v  towards 
the  east.  The  next  time  is  about  four  in  the  afternoon,  when  a  man*8 
shadow  is  as  long  as  himself ;  this  is  called  Aukhiree  PcKheen,  next  is 
AtTy  or  Decger,  an  hour  of  prayer  about  five.  S/iavm  is  another  time 
for  prayer  soon  after  sun-set.  Khooftun  is  the  last  prayer,  at  the  end 
of  twilight ;  and  Tvblee  Sehum  (the  third  drum)  is  the  last  time  the 
King's  band  pkys  (about  half-past  eleven).  These  are  die  terme  em- 

L  L  S 


§B0:         MEALS  OF  THE'COini<»l  PCXIPLB  3K  TOWN& 


ployed  to  mark  time,  instea<i  of  the  hours  of  the  dayV  which  are  nev&t 
mentioned  in  common  discourse.  The  day  is,  liowever,  divided  into» 
twenty-four  hours,  which  are  counted  firom  six  in  the  momhlg  to  tt3& 
in  the  evening,  and  then  begin  again. 

The  year  b  dhridad  into  ibur  weuoaa  m  in  Europe,  4soinmflneing 
fiom  ihe  tenul  equinoXs  "wbea  spring  is  conridered  to  he^n.  Thd 
Mahomedan  lunar  months  are  most  oommonly  used,  but  as  they  do 
BGi  suit  the  seasoiis,  the  signs  of  the  mdiec  tie  very  ofted  adopted^ 
and  m  the  east  the  Hindoo  months  are  better  knount  than  the  Mar 
homedan* 

To  return  to  the  inhalnbtots  of  towns,  the  common  peqple  rise  afc 
Mr,  and  rqpair  to  the  mosque  to  pray;  Hfter  piayers,  they  goior 
tiicir  shops,  which  are  always  disdnct  from  their  houses.  In  the  west, 
they  take  a  light  break&st  after  prayers,  which  some  do  also  in  the 
east.  At  eleven,  they  eat  their  luncheon  of  bread«  Vegetables,  oirds,' 
and  flesh  when  they  can  afford  it  In  summer  thej  deqp  for  a  txMipIe 
of  hours  after  their  luncheon ;  those  who  hare  apprentices  to  take 
care  of  their  shops,  take  their  -  lancheon  and  nap  at  home,  which 
others  do  at  their  shops.  We  are  apt  to  consider  this  habit  as  a  great 
jiroof  of  the  laziness  of  the  people  in  hot  climates;  hut  it  is  to  be 
remembered  that  they  do  not  rjn  to  rv^t  till  ten  or  eleven,  and  in  sum- 
mer (tlie  only  season  when  they  isleejj  m  the  day)i  they  rise  at  half- 
past  three,  wincli  does  not  make  their  whole  sleep,  including  that 
taken  in  the  day,  more  than  ec^uai  to  what  the  most  moderate  enjoy 
iu  Jb]ngland. 