


Digitized  by  Google 


272 


HOUSEHOLD  mrwErarvE  or  tbb  gbbat. 


gniflbed  from  die  ongiiialk  Ail  makB  go  tttnimed*'  ODeept  §t  Courts' 

or  on  a  jouniiey* 

Tbe  kdies  wear  the  Penum  dress,  aad,  of  course,  have  an  endlesa 
vtantty^  of  dothes  and  onumwEits.  The  most  remsrlnble  parts  of  tlieiv 
dress  Bre  thdr  pantaloons  of  stiff  vdvet,  or  highly  wrought  shawl,  or 
of  silk ;  and  their  jackets,  of  velvet,  brocade,  &c  which  niudl  resemble 
those  worn  by  our  dragoons.  They  have  three  rows  of  buttons*, 
joined  by  broad  lace  ornamented  with  «)loured  flowers  wrought  into 
it.  The  back  part  of  the  sleeve  comes  down  beyond  the  fin  rrnrs,  and 
is  worn  doubled  back,  so  as  to  shew  thv  lining  of  tissue  or  iM  cn  ade. 

The  ceremonies  of  the  great  are  on  the  same  model  as  those  oi'  the 
common  people.  The  place  of  honour  is  in  the  corner  of  the  room, 
at  the  end  opposite  the  entrance.  The  master  sits  there,  ii^ng  the 
entrance,  and  with  his  side  to  the  (garden  or  court-yard.  A  row  of 
servants  is  drawn  up  immediately  below  him  (in  the  Court) ;  and, 
from  the  usual  lieight  of  the  hall  above  the  ground,  their  heads  are 
not  high  enough  to  admit  of  their  seeing  the  compiuiy  inside.  If  the 
owner  of  the  house  is  visited  by  a  superior,  he  advances  to  meet  hiin, 
but  only  rises  in  his  })lace  to  receive  an  equal :  to  an  inferior,  he 
merely  rises  on  his  knees.  It  is  a  mark  of  great  attentioii  in  the  mas^ 
ter  to  place  a  guest  in  his  own  st  at  ;  and  iljc  nearer  to  him,  the  more 
honourable  the  post.  The  great  uiaintain  liouseholds  on  the  plan  of 
the  King's.  They  have  porters,  called  Caupehees  *,  who  stand  at  die 
outer  gate,  with  long  staves  in  their  hands.  A  visitor  is  received  here 
by  one  or  two  Ishikaghaussees  f,  who  conduct  him  through  the  first 
court.  At  the  next  door  are  other  porters,  with  ivory-headed  staves  \ 
and  he  is  there  received  by  officers,  M/ho  lead  lam  liirough  different 
courts,  always  Hie  Mine  ibniii»  till  tlie  Arsbegoe  proeuCB  Inm  1» 
die  greBt  tiiin»  and  points  eol  the  proper  place  ftr  hiln  to  t^e  Ik 
9ttt»-  Afier'this,  thcve  ate'  no  ttioie  ftviiM>'  ted  no  ibilienit  oB'COIH 


•  From  tlie  Turkish  word,  for  a  gate. 

t  A  Turkish  word*  mesoing  '*  Matter  of  the  Door." 


Digrtized  by  Googb 


HOUSEHOLD  AMD  atOIMUB  OP  IHE  GREAT. 

vtrsfi^oni  but  what  must  be  uii|Med  in  mcMt'coBDtriet,  by  the  par* 
ticukr  temper  of  the  great  man,  andtlie  degree  of  d^endence  of  the 
Tisitor.    The  manners  of  the  great  are  mild  and  iphua^  Mld^  «t-  the 

same  time,  dignified  and  manly.  The  officers  I  have  mentMMtd  m 
dressed  like  [gentlemen  of  the  country,  and  their  appearance  improves 
as  thtMr  statiiiii  is  nearei-  tiic  reception  room  ;  hut,  the  other  attends 
ants  are  tar  trom  showy :  and  the  great  ill  Caubul,  seem  w  be  averse 
to  parade,  and  to  pique  themselves-  more  on  the  order  and  silence  of 
their  attendants,  than  on  their  mniiber  or  the  splendour  of  their 
appearance.  In  like  manner,  when  they  go  out,  their  followers  are 
by  no  means  numerous  ;  but  are  marshalled  wah  greui  legidaritv,  and 
march  in  silence  and  irood  (^rder.  In  India,  the  cominfj  of  a  great 
man  may  be  known  wiiiie  he  is  a  mile  off,  by  the  siiouiing  of  his 
attendants,  the  blowing  of  trumpets,  and  beating  of  drums ;  and, 
though  iiis  retinue  is  very  picturesque,  from  tlie  number  of  men  on 
tbot  and  horseback  who  compose  it,  the  rapidity  and  confusion  <yf  th^r 
movements,  the  lively  ooloura  of  tfcteir  dieaaes*  the  shining  of  their 
arms,  and  the  gUtlerof  diestalidmEdacf  idothof  gold  i^id^ 
with  them  i  yet,  iioditag  can  give  »lfl8i  Iddi  o£  diadpUne  and 
In  Otabul,  on  tfaecoatraty,  a  nobleman  udunts  liia  liprae»  «nd  ti 
Alighted,  and  ahnoat  in  the  room,  ht&te  ywL  hAfe  notice  of  liii 
approodi. 