

The  conunou  people  in  the  Afghaun  towns  wear  the  dress,  and 
retain  the  customs  of  the  country  to  which  they  happen  to  belong  ; 
and,  in  consequence,  the  streets  exhibit  a  curious  spectacle  in  the 
assemblage  of  people  from  the  different  tribes  and  nations  of  the 
empire,  each  distinguished  by  the  peculiar  dress  and  manners  of  his 
race.  Notwithstanding  this  circuinstance,  and  the  diversity  of  habits, 
language,  and  religion,  which  must  be  found  iji  such  a  society,  they 
all  seem  to  mix  well,  and  to  live  in  perfect  harmuuy  with  each  other. 
The  only  exception  to  this,  is  the  enmity  between  the  Sheaiis  and 
Sooimeea  of  Ganiiiilt  and  evea  thc^  associate  and  intermarry  with 
eacii  oAciK 


*  Tbe  wocda  between  comnuM  ai»  Mr.  Dnziak 
M  If 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONDITION  OF  THE  INHABITANTS. 


•  Viam  iSi  ihA  T  have  Men -or  hfittd,  and'paitieiikiiy  tttm  the'iMK 
cottulf  of  Mtt  Dinieb  I  dioiild  not  sihudobo  die  anidkioii  of  tlie  wwJo 
in  towiU'tobe.iitilia|ip^.  BbtlliebaibiitiixnwoiildBeilnaaM  to» 
Sng^dimin;' andf  the'eMe'tfaey^cqjoy,  intuk.be  atftribuled-to  tfa« 
piMtiisil  philoMipkyf  'which  idl  moD'acquive  in  mBflur  cucumfimdcij 
amA  vHuA  MtAm  tfaem  to  .  bov '  the  erila  ho  ^hkk  'thej 
liaUtDited»'«itfamit  feflectkni'on  the  pMt  or  fnn  ftrthe  fultito^ 


Diglized  by  Google 


♦ 


CHAP.  DL  . 

OF  THb'gBBAT. 

«        ■  ,  <  ' 

THE  only  class  of  inhabitants  that  remains  to  be  described  is 
composed  of  the  great;  under  which  denoniinalion,  I  include 
all  the  Dooraunee  chiefs,  and  the  hMds  of  the  trIlKs,  with  tiie  princi- 
pal persons  who  follow  them  to  Court,  and  ail  the  Persians  and 
Taujiks  who  hold  offices  about  the  Kin^.  The  first  classes  of  these 
iK^leSf  occasionnlb-  reside  at  their  castles ;  but  that  is  only  when  thiey 
are  af  \  ariancewith  the  King,  or  during  short  periods,  when  the 
Court  i^:  in  the  neif^^hbonrhooJ  ;  and  they  can  make  expeditions  to 
their  own  castles  to  avoid  the  heat  ol  summer,  or  to  enjoy  the  amuse- 
ments of  hunting.  Their  permanent  residence  is  always  with  the 
Court. 

Their  honses  arc  on  tlie  plan  of  those  which  I  have  seen  at  Pes- 
hawer  *;  but,  their  resificnce  at  that  city  being  only  temporary,  they 
are  not  so  magniticeiiL  there,  as  in  other  parts  of  the  country. 

Iliev  are  all  enclosed  by  high  walls,  and  contain  (besides  stables, 
lodgings  for  servants,  &c)  three  or  four  different  courts,  gcnci  ally 
laid  out  in  gardens,  with  ponds  and  fountains.  One  side  of  each 
court  is  occupied  by  a  building,  comprising  ^  arious  small  apartments 
in  two  or  three  stories,  and  some  large  hails,  which  occupy  the  mid- 
dle of  the  building,  tor  its  whole  height.  The  halls  are  supported  by 
tall  wooden  pillarb,  and  Mooribli  arches,  carved,  ornamented,  ami 
painted  ixke  the  rest  of  the  lialL  The  upper  rooms  open  oo  the  haik. 