

The  aeiranla  in  A^jliainuetaun  are  lemarkafale  fof  activity  and 
ildelity.  They  do-  eveiy  sort  of  iroik  with  cfaeeifalne88|  attend  their 
master  momited  and  wdl  armed  when  he  troika*  And  -Arfe  ^ften 
truited  widk  his  moat  important  8ei»el&  Their  maalen  aend  diem 
with  the  mpit  ooofi'dential  meaaagea,  without  taking  anj  ipiecaiitabn» 
but  that'of  providing  for  their  being  beilieved  by  the  person  to  wiioai 
they  ne  sent.  For  thia  purpose,  the  master  givea  his  ring,  or  some 
other  article  which  is  generally  about  his  own  person,  or  else  instnsbis 
the  servant  to  allude  to  some  indiffercsit  matter,  th^  is  only  known 
to  his  master  and  the  person  to  whom  the  ineisage  is  to  be  delivered. 
For  eiample,  a  servant  begins  bis  Jnessag^,  with  saying:     If  you 


274 


.  LIFE  OF  THE  ORSAT. 


and  wj  master  were  sitting  bj  yourselves  in  such  a  garden,  and  he 
told  jou  that  he  had  counted  thirty-four  different  kinds  of  flowers 
within  a  few  yard<;  in  the  hills  of  Caubul*  that  is  to  be  a  aigu  to  you 
4hat  what  I  say  is  from  liim." 

The  servants  are  ied  in  the  hon^^c,  and  clothed  at  their  master's 
expense,  besides  wliich  thcv  get  tlieir  wages  once  a  quarter.  They 
are  oiteii  soldiers,  in  the  Dusteh»  or  regiment»  which  their  master 
comiiiaiiLls. 

The  iile  of  the  great  naturally  differs  from  that  which  I  have  attri- 
buted to  the  common  people.    They  do  not  get  up  till  sun-rise,  when 
they  pray  and  read  the  Koraiui,  and  religious  books,  for  an  hour  or 
thereabouts.    They  then  have  a  breakfast  of  bread,  butter,  honey, 
eggs,  and  cheese :  after  this  they  repair  to  court,  where  the  o£Bofln 
of  tlie  hoaMbaid  ]iave  MaemUed  iit »  madb.  eadier  hour.  Tb^ 
UMtn  «t  the  pdaice  tOl  CSkemki,  wad  during  that  period  they  sit  in  the 
apHttaients  allotted  to  their  leaqpeotive  ovdeiSt  tmmot  bqinneas,  le- 
iseiTe'petitioneEBy  aiid  do  a  great  pert  of  their  official  duty:  thoae  who 
tee 'most  emi^byed,  have  their  luncfaeoii  broi^t  to  them  at  the 
palace^  and  xemain  thore  till  the  cort  breaks  up  for  the  day;  but  the 
ijeneiaUtjr  gohome  to  this  meal*  and  in  summer  take  their  usual  nap 
efter  it.   Whan  they  awake^  they  perform  their  devotions^  and"  read  a 
little,  then  receive  visitors,  and  dispatch  such  business  as  .could  not 
be  done  at  the  pahKse^  tiU  De^gur,  nhen  they  again  repair  to  court 
■At  dark  they  return  home,  and  amuse  themselves  till  a  late  hour, 
when  they  dine,  and  afterwards  many  drink  win^  when  they  have 
private  parties.    At  their  great  entertainments,  of  course,  nothing  of 
this  kind  is  thought  of,  but  unless  on  such  occasions,  they  have  <mly 
intimate  friends  at  dinner,  Chausht  being  the  meal  to  which  they 
usually  ask  strangers.    It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  all  the  great 
drink  winej  on  the  contrary,  the  hulk  of  the  Dooraiinee  Sirdars  ab- 
stain from  it,  and  all  try  to  reconcile  tlie  prnctice  with  decency  ;  but 
as  their  debauches  are  always  carried  on  in  company,  this  seldom  can 
be  done.    It  may  be  supposed  that  all  ^Toat  men  have  not  their  time 
fto  hilly  occupied  as  those  I  h^ve  described ;  they  do  not,  however, 