

The  Haieni  (or  aeaaglio)  ie  ahragFe*  in  die  imuvmoat  ooi^t   it  haa 
e  aapeiiite  entmice,  Iwt  .eommnnie^  by.  a  piivete  peaai^  with  tbe 
apartuenta  whew  conpaay  aee  leccivedt 
'  lliepdacea  owait  OanhnlocCandaheraieyB^ 
t^tibeaeijf  Peiiiai  and  certainly  none  of  them  woidd  bear  a  nuft» 
manC'a  jbenaparison  with  a  highly  finmiriied'  hooae  in  'fai^and: 
'  The.dieaa  of  the  great  is  on  the  Ferstan^aedel  $  it  oonaists  of  a  shiit 
of  Kuttaun  (a  kind  ^  linen  of  a^  wide  textoiey  the  best  of  which  is 
hnported  ftom  AlepiKS  and  tbe  oominoii  ^rt  from  Persia)!  a  pair  of 
wide-  ailken  trowseta  j.  en  under  tunic  of  fine  MasuUpetani  diint% 
with  some  smaQ  pettem,  whkh  iiaadiea  beknr  the  middle  of  the  caU^ 
end  eompletely  covers  the  thighs  and  upper  part  of  the  leg,  and  whidi 
is  fastened  close  to  the  body  with  strings ;  an  upper  tunic  of  the  same 
kind,  but  of  different  materials ;  a  shawl  girdle,  aad  an  A%haun  cap, 
with  a  shawl  loosely  twisted  round  it,  in  the  form  oi  a  turbans  to  tbii 
must  be  added,  white  cotton  or  shawl  stockings,  and  Persian  shoes ; 
and  a  large  mantle  thrown  over  the  sboulderB,    There  are  rows  of 
buttons  and   loops  down   the  breast  of  the  tunic,  and  at  the 
aleeveB9  and  one  kind  of  .mantle,  has  a  row  of  immenae  angar  loaf 


MwJhh  Jdftc  vi  BmHam  had  a  dimr]  cwpet  of  great  wbrn,  inlih  wepmttt  pieon 

tar  ntting  on,  which  was  bespoke  for  Shauh  Mahmood,  and  which  wac  bouglit  §»  m 
quarter  of  its  price  after  that  prince  wa«  dethroned.  Moollah  Jaffer  asked  jfTcoco 
ftr  it,  vfaich  he  aakl  was  tat  below  its  vafaie :  h«  intaided  to  .try  to  sell  it  tA  the 
cauli  of  Benia  snd.BiHNia,  md  iS  Im  fiOIed,  'tocnftilvpandidl  itin  piaon  la 
die  T^triuu 


870 


DSSSS  AND  ORNAMENTS  OF  THE  MEH 


bufctoM,  wttb  ocwwpoBdiiig  loopsi  thenfiper  tmictt  gmndlj'fnada 
of  Bome  oortlj  but  plain  material:  a  ituff  called  Ooniiiilct  made  cf 
fiamd'i  htkf  and  geneiallj  of amne  ahade of  browiit  ia  oamBaon;  aa 
IB' doth  o£  fltvong  dark  odoured  oDttaib  fialiii»  alunrU  and/Penun 
liroGMie  arc  also  worn ;  ami  for  fiiU  dress,  they  have  very  magnificent 
timiGS  <^  doth  of  gold.  The  shawl  round  the  waiitr  is  of  a  lund  sel* 
dom  seen  either  in  India  or  in  England,  it  is  long  and  narrow  (about 
a  fisot  and  a  half  broad),  and  is  wrought  all  over.  As  the  price  oC 
shawla.dqiends  on  the  ^pHntity  of  work  in  them»  it  is  of  course  verjF 
expensive;  a  good  one  can  scarcely'  be  purchased  under  j^l^O.  of 
£200,  The  shawl  round  the.  head,  is  the  kind  worn  by  ladiet  in 
Ellwand,  and  by  all  rich  people  in  India.  The  shawls  worn  for  tunica 
are  made  for  the  purpose,  and  sold  in  pieces ;  they  are  covered  with 
small  flowers  on  a  coloured  ground.  The  mantle  is  of  the  same  kind 
of  shawl,  with  very  large  flowers,  such  as  are  seen  on  the  borders  of 
Indian  sliawls.  It  is  also  made  of  all  the  other  materials  already  men- 
tioned, which  vary  with  the  season  :  in  summer  a  single  robe  of  ]\gh% 
silk  is  enough,  and  in  winter  the  mantle  is  often  lined  and  trinime4 
with  expensive  furs.  When  thev  travel,  tliey  generally  wear  broad 
cloth,  and  then  they  are  always  in  boots,  which  are  of  the  same  kind 
through  all  ranks,  viz.  high,  with  a  peak  and  tassel  in  front  of  the 
knee,  made  of  very  strong  brown  leather,  witli  imnow  heels  shod 
wirli  uon.  The  rich,  however,  sometimes  i^ve  Uiem  of  green  or 
black  shagreen  li  atli<  r.  '  '  • 