

Tlie  great  meal  ui  all  lunkh  is  called  Shawnee^  and  is  taken  aft«r 
the  last  prayers.  They  all  bathe,  generally  twice  a-weuk,  bnt  always 
on  Friday.  At  Peshawer  they  often  merely  wash  in  the  open,  air, 
but  in  the  towns  of  die  cold  country,  they  always  use  th«  Hummaum, 
or  hot  bath.  These  baths  have  been  often  described.  They  oontam 
three  rooms  heated  to  difl^rent  temperatures,  and  in  the  hottest  the 
bather  is  scnibbed  by  the  men  of  the  bath,  till  every  partide  of  dirt 
«r  scurf  is  cleared  off  his  skitti  Ilbe  entnnce  money  is  less  than  » 
penny,  and  all  the  operationa  of  the  balh,  uidndingahaving,  burning 


Digrtized  by  Google 


WOOD,  WITH  THE  BRiaBI  OF  SOME  AETICLE&  M 

tiie  hair  off  the  body,  aiid  dying  the  beard,  only  cost  one  hundred 
dinars  (three  pence  hal^enny)  ;  an  Abas&y  (less  than  one  shilling)  Is 
IBdconed  liberal  payment  finm  a  rich  maxL  The  baths  are  appro- 
priated to  llie  women  Ibr  aonne  bonis  every  day,  and  during  ihal; 
time  no  man  is  allowed  to  approach  them. 

.  The  feod  of  the  cominon  pec^  is  leavened  bxead,  rice,  flesh,  ve^ , 
gatafales^  sometimes  dhees^  and  always  Sjoot  or  Koroot  *.  Rovio^ie 
aie  dieap^  and  the  people  denre  a  great  ^nxmy  fiom  the  pvodiglniiit 
abondance  of  firait  At  Canfanlt  grapes  are  dear  whoi  they  seQ  Sor 
mora  than  a  findiing  afKmnd;  pomegianates  ace  Utile  mora  than  m 
Ini^pemiy  a  ponnd;  apples  adl  at  two  hundred  pomds  Ibr  a'ropee 
{£1 : 4 : 4)  ^  two  saHs  of  sptiooCs  are  equally  diesp*  and  the  dener 
sorts  are  less  than  a  hal^pomy  a  pound;  peaches  are  deaier,>biit 
qoindes  snd  phnns  are  as  chesp,  and  makms  much  cheaper ;  grapee 
often  bear  scaroe'  any  price,  and  the  coarse  sort,  which  is  exported' 
with  so  much  care  to  India>  is  sometimes  given  to  cattle.  Nuts  of  all 
kinds  are  very  cheap,  ai^  walnuts,  with  whidi  the  hUls  north  of 
Canbui  are  covered,  sell  at  two  thousand  tor  a  rupee.  The  price  of 
TfgHtablp"  is  also  extremely  low;  The  smalla^  piece  of  coppec 
money,  much  less  than  a  halfpenny,  purchases  ten  pounds  of  spmagei 
twoity-five  of  cabbage,  and  of  carrots,  turnips,  pumkins,  or  cucum- 
bers. Coriander  seeds,  turmeric  and  ginger  also  sell  extremely 
cheap.  Ice,  or  rather  snow,  is  to  be  had  in  Caubul,  during  the  sum- 
mer, for  a  mere  trifle.  It  is  dearer  at  Caiidali;ir,  but  still  within  the 
reach  of  the  poorest  people.  A  favourite  i'vod  at  that  season  is  ftilo- 
deh,  a  jelly  strained  from  boiled  wheat,  and  eaten  witli  the  L  X|>ress^ 
juice  of  fruits  and  ice,  to  which  cream  also  is  sometimes  added.  In 
xvinter,  living  is,  of  course,  more  expensive,  and  this  is  particularly 
felt  in  the  city  of  Caubul,  where  provisions  become  dearer  j  it  is 