

o  o  9 


m  AHMED  KHAUN  HOOBZyK 

treachery  during  the  time  1  was  at  Poshawcr,  niatic  liim  ]oud  in  liis 
£eal  for  Shaiih  Shuja's  cause;  and  to  draw  off  tlir  pubhe  attention 
from  his  own  proceedings,  he  affected  great  alann  from  the  EngUsh, 
and  harangued  against  foreigners  and  their  arts  on  oc  casioiis.  His 
stratagems  were,  however,  unsuccessful :  his  correspondence  was  dis- 
covered, and  he  was  a^aiu  thrown  into  prison  aljout  the  time  I  left 
Peahaw^er.  Tlie  success  of  Mahmood's  party  procured  him  his 
liberty  for  a  time,  but  his  own  ill  conduct,  or  his  bad  character,  ex- 
posed him  again  to  suspicion,  and  he  ended  his  days  in  a  prison. 
£ven  when  I  saw  him,  he  had  jiut  ■ii0bred  a  long  imprisonmeiit,  baft 
th6  Klng^  in  his  distiest*  had  rdeased  hhn,  and  endeavoaxed  to  lis- 
gain  his  attadunent  He  had  been  restoied  to  his  tank*  and  had  ie> 
odved  great  honoon  firom  the  King ;  but  as  he  was  afiaid  of  being 
telied  on  to  oofntribate  to  the  support  of  the  goirenment*  he  aUbcted 
extKme  poverty*  I  ibund  him  in  a  house  which  had  gone  to  .ruin 
'during  Ilia  long  ctnifinenient ;  it  was  at  some  distance  fiom  the  town* 
'and  the  hall  where'he  leoeiTed  us^  opened  on  a  neglected  gudni 
part  of  the  roof  had  fidknin*  andthewaUsy  whidi  seemed  to  have 
been  well  finished,  thou^  plain,  bore  evident  maths  of  decay }  4hne 
was  no  carpet,  nor  even  ielts  to  sit  on. 

W«  fimnd  the  Khaun  seated,  with  four  or  five  other  p***""*-  He 
was  dressed  in  th^  usual  manner,  and  very  pkin :  He  rose,  and  onne 
forward  to  meet  me ;  and,  on  my  holding  oat  my  hands  to  rec^ve 
him  in  the  Ptnisn  &shion,  he  declared  in  a  rough  voice  that  he  was  for 
no  Persian  professions,  and  said  something  of  A%baun  siDoedtjr  and 
true  friendship  :  He  then  seized  me  by  tlie  arms  with  a  rude  gripe, 
and  pressed  me  with  great  vehemence  to  his  breast.  We  then  sat 
down,  and  the  Kliaun,  after  inquiring  about  my  health,  and  paying 
the  usual  compliments,  begar«  to  declaim  against  the  Persians  and 
Persian  refinements ;  praised  iiis  own  Ooloos,  which  he  said  was 
l(X),UOU  strong;  and  talked  of  the  devotion  of  the  Dooraunees  to  the 
Kins'  and  royal  family,  and  of  the  im  possibility  oi  supplanting  it. 
The  meaning  ot  this  harangue  appeared  lo  be,  to  make  a  shew  of  his 
attachment  to  the  King  on  so  public  au  occasion  {  and,  also  to  prove 

It 


Digrtized  by  Google 


IfBGOTIATIONS  WITH  PERSIAN  MINISTERS,  ^ 


lot  pstaotimi,  by  impraMing  me  •mfh  an  idea  of  the  fruitlesmoM  df 
any  design  on  the  Doonumee  state.  I  made  such  replies  as  wem 
iikely  to  convince  him  and  the  bywrtanders  of  the  vanity  of  his  appre-r 
iiensions,  without  appearing  to  apply  what  he  wd  to  myself.  Not- 
iivithstanding  his  affected  roughn^s,  lus  behaviour,  and  his  ordinaij 
conversation,  during  my  visit,  were  perfectly  polite  and  attentive, 
lie  sent  me  a  present  next  day,  as  is  usual  ;  and,  as  he  was  unable 
to  return  my  v!«?it,  T  sent  him  a  present,  without  waiting  for  that 
cotenuiny:  He  sent  a  polite  message  of  thanks;  and  was  highly 
pleiised  with  a  pair  of  spectacles,  with  which  he  said  he  iihould  be 
able  to  read  the  Korniin  bettor  ll»;in  with  those  ot"  his  own  country; 
but  he  returned  a  peii-kaile  witii  iviany  blades,  begging  me  to  give 
him  a  larger  one  instead.  And  I  learned  from  a  by-stander,  that 
when  he  first  saw  it,  lie  had  said  "  what  am  I  to  do  with  this  tliiriff 
like  a  scorpion  ?  1  wiijh  the  Envoy  would  give  me  a  knife,  thai  umim 
could  make  some  use  of."  When  this  was  related  to  me,  it  intro- 
duced many  stories  from  my  visitors  about  Ahmed  Khaun's  manners. 
All  said  that  he  would  eat  three  sheep's  heads  for  breakfast,  and  the 
greater  part  of  a  sheep  for  dinner.  On  another  occasion,  when  Ahmed 
■Khaun's  maiuaecs  were  talked  of  among  two  or  three  people  whom  I 
knew  well»  I  luppeiked  to  mentioii  the  land  of  sahite  lie  .had  ^ven 
me^  wliich  aflbsded  great  etrfsertaiamflnt  to  Ae  company.  Bat  jaisxt 
-dayt  the.stoiy  came  to  Ahmed  Khami's  ears ;  and  be  tfiought  it  ne» 
ieciiy  to  aendgfcfmal  apology,  explaining  that  the  kindof  embnoe 
lie  had  given  me'wM  leallj  in  the  old'  A^ann  fittluon»  and  waa  Jiiy 
constant  practice  with  peo|ile  tm  whom  he  had  a  tefftd* 