


Diglized  by  Google 


278 


ENTERTAOniENT.  * 


pepul  tree.    In  sonic  j>lace8,  the  ground  belov/  (he  trees  was  sowed 
with  beans,  whicli  were  then  in  flower.    The  appearance  of  the  gar- 
den, scttiiu' aside  the  recollections  of  FiUrope  which  it  excited,  was 
really  delightful.    The  scents,  which  sometimes  came  on  the  wind» 
were  enchanting,  and  tiie  whole  was  completed  hy  the  singing  ot  (he 
birds,  whose  not  es  we  thought  we  recognized ;  and  every  one  was 
anxious  to  attribute  them  to  some  of  those  which  he  had  most  ad- 
mired in  ^England.    Tcjits  had  been  pitched  in  the  garden  ;  aud  one 
in  particular  had  a  very  pleasing  effect,  iu  ihe  midst  of  the  whole,  at 
the  place  where  the  avenues  cross  each  other.    The  roof  of  it  was. 
green  and  red,  and  the  walls  were  of  open  work,  so  as  to  admit  the 
air,  without  permitting  those  in  the  tent  to  be  seen  from .  without 
The  interstices  were  to  ehaped,  and  the  ooloiin  of  the  aolid  puts  to 
diipoBed*  as  to  make  the  whole  Tery        and  dc^gnt.   After  a  long 
waiky  we  sat  down  under  a  tree,  listened  to  the  birds,  and  talked  with 
the  son  of  our  Mehmanndaur  about  our  country  and  Caobul*  of  which 
he  gKre  an  enchanting  account :  that  city,  and  ita  100^000  gardens^' 
were  indeed  a  common  topic  of  praise  and  admiration.   When  we 
went  to  the  tent,  we  found  our  Mehmaondanr,  aooompanied  bj.tbe. 
King's  Imaum  and  some  other  Moolhhs.   The  Imaum,  who  was  a 
plain,  open,  talkative  pleasant  man,  expatiated  on  the  beairties  of. 
Caubid,  which,  he  said,  we  must  se^  and  launched  out  tu  piaiaes  of. 
the  A%^auns  and  their  country.    On  this,  or  some  other  occasion,  he' 
was  Teiy  inquisitive  about  the  reason  of  our  cropping  and  docking 
our  horses  ;  laughed  heartily  at  the  practice ;  and  said,  if  ever  he  had 
a  vicious  hors^  he  would  send  him  to  us  to  be  made  an  example  o£' 
After  some  time,  these  gandemen  went  away,  and  left  us  to  take 
some  relief  from  the  fatigue  we  suffered  in  sitting  cross-legged,  which, 
though  entreated  to  sit  at  our  ease,  we  always  continued  to  do,  as  we- 
knew  how  nidc  any  other  posture  would  be  thought.    After,  some- 
time our  Chausht  or  luncheon  was  brought  in.    Basons  and  ewem* 
were  handed  round  to  wash  our  hands.     After  which,  they  spread  a 
large  tiowered  chintz  table-doth,  ornamented  with  Persian  ^  rrsos  on 
the  bounty  of,  God,  and  other  motto^  such  as  were  il^oi^t  lit  Im  a:. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ENTERTAINMENT. 


tafaJfi-dbtiL  Trmj^  covered  with  while  cdicoe^  wm  tfafln  pot  dawii» 
;flnd  Ihe  calico^  when  unfdided,  was  ipfcad  over  our  lmeei.  -Eidh 

tmy  contained  fifteeo  or  inoce  dishes,  aancers,  and  cups,  large  and 
small,  in  whidi  were  two  large  pilaws,  several  little  dressed  dishes, 
•relbhes,  pickles,  and  preseri  es.  A  bowl  of  sheriiet  was  in  the 
middle  of  each  tray.  Besides  these,  there  were  dishes  of  the  Doomba 
lamb,  dressed  plainly ;  but  full  of  juice,  and  much  improved  by  the 
flavour  of  the  sauce  and  stuffing.  There  were  also  flat  cakes  o 
loave!ied  bread  to  sene  for  plates,  besides  the  bread  for  eating. 
Wiien  we  had  done  eating,  which  we  did  most  heartily,  warm  water 
was  handed  round  for  washing,  the  dishes  and  table-cloths  w^e 
removed,  and  our  culleeauns  were  brought  in.  As  soon  as  this  was 
done,  three  dancing  girls  were  introduced  to  amuse  us  with  their 
singing  and  dancing,  Thev  were  iucomparably  superior  to  those  of 
India  in  face,  figure,  und  peiiurmauce.  Their  dress,  though  not  so 
Tich  as  is  usual  ui  iluidostan,  was  in  much  better  taste.  They  wore 
caps  of  gold  and  silver  stuffs.  Their  hair  was  plaited  in  a  very  be- 
'  coming  manner  ;  and  little  curls  were  allowed  to  hang  down  round 
•their  ibrebeads  and  cheeks,  with  a  wery  -j^ntty  effect.  They  had 
peffecdy  white  teeth,  red  lips,  and  dear  complexions,  set  off  by  little 
artificial  molea  like  patchea.  Hieir  complexions,  however,  were  perhi^ 
indebted  to  art|  aa  rouge  is  very  oommon  among  the  ladies  of  CauboL 
Their  ^^■"'^"g  had  a  great  deal  of  action.  Hie  girl  acarcelf*  ever 
'atanda  while  she  sings,  (aa  thoae  in  India  do) ;  but  maheB  fixward* 
daspa  her  lumd8»  aometunea  ainlta  on  her  and  duowa  heraelf 