


Digrtized  by  Google 


MUDOUD  KHAUN.  SBT 

erimei  nd  oonoplions  of  the  court  would  wea^  down  those  of  all 
die  fleet  of  the  population.    As  fiu-  as  mj  opportunities  of  clbmimF- 
tion  went,  I  muit  own  I  found  the  Dooraunee  Sirdars  sincere  and. 
direct^  and  had  every  reason  to  believe  them  high  minded*  and  as 
honourable  at  least  as  any  other  nobility  in  Asia ;  bat  tlie  rest  of  the 
people  about  the  government  were  very  generally  mean,  false,  and 
rapacious.    Even  the  Sirdars-,  when  in  power,  matle  money  by  the 
most  disgraceful  extortion  ;  nunib*  i  s  of  them  had  deserted  from  one 
party  to  another,  with  shameless  perfidy  j  and  none,  ho\M  \  l  r  nttacHcd 
to  the  causL'  in  which  he  was  ent]^a«;ed,  was  at  all  inclineti  lo  make 
pecuniai  V  sacririces  to  promote  its  interest.     Much  jealousy  and  dij*- 
cord  also  prevailed  among  the  most  powerful  Sirdars,  imd  in;iiiy  open 
or  secret  acta  of  enmity  were  put  in  practice  by  them  against  each 
other;  but  on  the  whole,  their  character  was  greatly  superior  to  that 
of  the  other  classes  about  the  King.    Every  day  furnished  some  ext 
ample  of  the  bold  intrigues,  open  falsehoods,  and  daring  forgeries  of 
the  Peruana ;  and  no  experience  in  India  could  prepare  a  foreigner 
for      inqpodenoe  and  beggarly  importunkf  of  oMMt  of  tiie  liywer 
dBoen  of  the  state.   Even  this  genenl  foct,  however,  was  not  witkt- 
Mit  esceptuMlfl ;  and  if  the  beat  of  tlie  eourtiera  were  not  quite  ^ 
cnipt  from  the  Tusea  imputed  to  dieir  order»  tliei^  were  aome  mm  of 
deeent  cbaneter  even  among  the  Feniaas* 

Die  dumcter  of  the  A^^bunm  chieft  wiU  be  in  a  greit  measure 
mftUed  in  die  historical  sketch  annexed  to  diia  aooount,  and  in 
variioaspaita  of  mjjouiitdl}  hut  an  aecoont  of  thoae  wiio  were  at  tii9 
oomt  of  Shauh  Shi^au»  when  I  was  there,  may  serve  to  give  a  general 
idea  of  tlieb  dispoaition  and  manners.  The  chief  was  Ahiam  Khauiw 
of  whom  enough  has  aheady  been  said. 

The  next  man  was  Muddud  Khaun,  the  chief  of  the  Iskhanki^fei{» 
yAkoae  grand&ther  distinguished  hims^f  greatly  in  the  Persian  warSf 
and  is  said  to  hare  wounded  Naudir  Shauh  in  battle ;  his  fiUher  was 
one  of  the  greatest  and  most  warlike  of  the  Dooraunee  Sirdars,  and 
Muddiid  JOiann  himself  was  possessed  of  great  weahh^  and  was  eso 


:  AXJXm  KHAUN. 


fvemdy  smpoeted.  manners,  dress,  and  behaviour  were  alwi^ 
spoken  of  w  particulfurly  decent  and  dignified,  though  he  lived  in  no 
kind  of  splendour.  He  was  said  to  be  a  man  of  talents,  and  of  a  good 
education  ;  but  it  gives  no  great  idea  of  his  capacity,  that  his  studies 
were  chieflv  in  physic  and  astrolnnry  ;  the  first  of  which  wm  recom- 
mended by  his  weakly  constitution,  and  the  second  by  ilw  unsealed 
times  in  wliich  lie  lived;  he  was,  however,  very  popular,  and  had  a 
great  reputation  for  his  knowledge  of  the  art  of  commanding,  for  his 
skill  and  courage  in  war.  and  for  every  thing  but  liberality.  His 
character  for  faith  was  so  ^ood,  that  even  in  the  troubU-d  times  he 
had  witiiessed,  he  had  never  been  required  to  take  an  oath ;  and 
although  it  could  not  be  concealed  that  he  had  given  up  the  city  of 
Heraut,  with  which  he  was  entrusted  by  Shauh  Zemauii,  to  that 
prince's  rival,  yet  from  the  account  he  himself  gave  of  the  transac- 
tioDy  it  appeared  that  he  was  driven  to  it  by  the  suspicions  and  de* 
ngna  of  a  bod  of  Shauh  Zemaun*s,  to  whom  the  nonunalgovenuneni 
of  Heraut  belonged. 