


Digrtized  by  Googl( 


LIFE  OF  THE  GREAT.  275 

WMit  ways  of  filling  it  up  agreMbtyy  for  though  their  lives  are  more 
austere  than  thote  of  the  oomBioii  people^  thej  delight  in  hunting  and 
hawking,  and  hayemany  resouroea  m  reading  or  hearing  books  read 
to  than  :  it  ia.evieii  a  profession  to  read,  and  the  Shauh  Naumeh,  the- 
great  heroic  poem  at  Ferdausi,  has  a  large  class  of  roaders)  called 
Shauhnaumeh  Klioons,  whose  bosbiess  it  is  to  read  it,  or  recite  thq 
fine  passages  with  proper  emphasis  and  action.  Thooe  who  are  not 
disposed  to  literature,  have  Persian  and  Pushtoo  singers,  and  play  at 
chess,  backgammon,  or  cards.  The  two  first  games  are  nearly  the 
same  ours,  but  the  tliird.  whic-h  is  more  rare,  is  played,  as  in  India, 
with  round  cards,  ami  (liffi  is  in  ?nanv  respects  from  what  we  play. 
They  also  have  ^iiT  dcas  near  the  u>u  n,  wliere  they  retire  with  a  few 
friends,  and  where  tliey  sometimes  give  large  parties.  On  the  whole, 
iiowever,  their  style  ot^  living  is  very  inferior  to  that  of  the  nobles  of 
Persia,  and  does  not  correspond  with«  the  v»at  fortuneii  wliidi  some 
of  them  are  said  to  possess. 

AIJ  that  I  know  ot  their  entertainments  may  be  comnmuicatcd  by- 
a  description  of  one  which  was  given  to  the  British  mission  at  Pcsha- 
wer,  by  Me^  Abool  Hussun  Khaun,  the  Mdimaundaur  of  the  em« 
batay.  We  were  first  introdiioed  into  a  ]ai]ge  oourt,  in  the  centre  of 
which  was  a  pond,  surrounded  by  many  rows  of  small  lamps,  the  li^it 
ef  which  was  reflected  firom  the  wsAeft  where  other  lamps  flcwted  en. 
boards ;  many  torches  were  also  stuck  up  round  the  ooort,  and.  all- 
together  gave  a  light  as  strong  as  that  of  day,  *and  showed  the  ph»a 
fiOed  with  attendants  and  spectatota. 

We  entered  thzoii|^  a  Yufjtk  gat^  on  each  side  of  whkh  were  some 
btaOdin^  and  over  all  an  opien  gallery.  Opposite  ,  to  ua  were  the 
painted  pillars  and  arches  of  a  hall,  and  on  each  side  were  buildings* 
the  lower  part  of  which  only  contained  Otoe  or  two  doors,  but  whidb 
I  bdieye  had  windows  in  the  upper  story.  We  were  received  in  the 
hall  opposite  the  gateway^  which  opened  on  the  court,  and  partook  of 
the  illumination.  We  entered*  as  is  usual*  by  a  door  at  the  lower  end 
of  the  room,  and  took  our  seats  at  the  top.  The  floor  was  covered, 
with  nfifih  and  besntifial  carpet;  along  three  sides  of  the  room  wetv 

H  N  i  ■ 


976 


AN  £NT£BTA1NM£NT  AT  FESHAWER. 


Ms  OQfvtrad  vich  doCh  of  gold,  ibrdie  gneita  toal  on:  thoteatllie 
vpper'OMl  were  partieulaily  ihigpififleBt,  bang  vdret  of  fiift  bfrig|itegt 
eohmnt  licfalj  embioiidevtli  with'  goid*  The  doom  weie  biaig  with 
curtaini  .of  4lQlii  of  gold*  or  of  hiigUj  ombioidered  aSki^  and  tho' 
galkries  Mtond  the  ufipet  parts  of  the  'room  were  dioted  wHh  FefHtn 
pietoreur  vound  wfakh  appealed  a  piollisiaii  of  gold  dodr  and'  eoU 
heoideiy.  Among  other  thingm  I  obaerved  with  lome  auipii^  e 
lacge  pieoe  of  nlvcir  doth,  id  'which  the  sun  rising  over  s  lion  (the 
royal  endgQ  of  Persia),  was  wrought  in  gold.  There  were  hiiiRin 
in  diflfetcoi  porta  irf'the  roomy  and  we  were  astonished  to  observe  two 
of  dimensions  wup^sdot  to  any  of  those  which  we  Iiad  brought  with 
so  mudi  difficulty  over  mountiuns  and  deauts,  to  give  the  King  an 
idea  of  IZngtiA  manufactures.  Those  in  the  room,  we  understood, 
had  all  oorae  orerland  £rom  Europe,  through  Persia  or  Tartaiy.  Along 
the  middle  of  the  room  was  a  row  of  lights :  thick  candles,  surrounded 
with  wreathes  of  flowers  in  coloured  wax,  were  piacetl  alternately  with 
artificial  trees,  in  u!iirh  the  lights  were  (lis{)o.setl  among  leaves, 
flowers,  grape>.  a?ul  t)ilier  fruits,  represeiited  in  wax  in  ihvlr  iintural 
colours.     Oi}  llu  and  velvet,  with  wliich  the  upper  part  of  the 