

room  was  spread,  were  placed,  with  more  civilitv'  than  good  taste, 
a  row  of  plain  chairs  for  our  accommodation  ;  and  soon  after  we  were 
seated,  trays  of  sweetmeats  were  handed  round,  boon  alter  a  dance 
of  women  begaji,  and  fire-works  were  let  off  in  the  court ;  and  our 
attempts  at  conversation,  amidst  the  din  of  the  instmnients,  the  shouts 
of  a  dozen  male  and  lemale  singers,  and  the  noise  ol  the  fire-works, 
were  disagreeable  and  interrupted.  Tea  was  served  ruurid,  in  China 
oips,  without  aeam,  very  sweet,  and  rendered  most  disagreeable  by 
an  tafuaion  €»f  aniae  seed.  When  dinner  waa  announced,  the  dancing 
eeaaed»:and  our  entcftamer  (who  waa  a  Sheeah)  ftund  aome  pretence 
to  withdiBW*.   We  aat  down  on  the  ground  to  dmner,  whidi  wu 


*  The  Sheeahs  (in  Qtubul  at  lout)  are  very  strict  in  eating  with  none  but  Mussul- 
mB^  IB  nUdl  ihtj  form  a  contraat  to  the  Soonneet.  Colonel  FnuikUn  makes  the 
MM  Mnnk  of  the  Soonees  in  Pcnbi  aMi  it  U  probable  ifaat  'dM  leipt  'mmumoOi 
and  moat  penecoted  of  tke  aecta,  it  matt  acrnpukm  in  cadi  coontxy. 


Digitized  by  Coogic 


AN  ENTERTAmifENT  AT  FBSHAWER.  ^ 

placed  before  us  on  tngrt  with  wrapped  up  ia  ynhke  doth,  oon. 
oealed  by  brocade  covers  with  gold  fringes. 

The  dishes,  according  to  the  Persian  fashion,  were  dyed  of  all 
colours,  and  ornamented  with  a  profusion  of  gold  and  silver  leaf. 
Thcv  were  served  in  Chuaa  dishes,  and  consistetl  of  all  kinds  of 
roasted,  boiled,  and  baked  meat,  pilaws  and  ragouts,  witfi  many  things 
which  it  would  be  difHc  ult  to  describe.  We  were  attended  by  well 
dressed  servants,  mostly  i'erstans,  who  are  reckonetl  the  best  servantSf 
and  whom  the  Alghauns  employ  as  .  (  x  ks.  laaitres  d'liotel,  &c.  as  we 
do  Frenc  [linen.  In  the  midst  of  so  much  magnificence,  and  really  so 
miicli  neatness  and  arrangement,  it  was  curious  to  see  the  servants 
snuffing  the  candles  into  a  ttii  cup  with  a.  pair  of  scissars,  and  uiliers 
jointing  the  meat  with  a  large  penknife,  and  then  tearing  it  to  pieces, 
and  laying  it  on  our  plates  with  their  hands.  It  is  however  but  just 
to  aay,  that  this  was  no^  done  till  they  had  washed,  their  hands^  and 
twkfld  their  deem  ap  .J»  their  elbowv.-  The  ^dinner  waa  ooldf  and 
eoiiaeqaently  not  much  raiiafaed ;  amd.the  unlibnn  danring,  and  iodifi 
ftraot  fiie-worics,  which  huted  without  intenniadon  till  two 'in  .  the 
momiiii^  daaBnrclnit  little  pwliei 

The  flntestaimnent  on  the  whole  waa  rather  aplendid  tliaii  i^ajree- 
aUe^  {pnrticnlarly.aa  aome  honia  of  the  time  were  apeut  in  a  p^vaie 
apartment*  diaramwiig  the  oeranonial  of  our  leoepdon  lyf  the  jKing) } 
hot  onc^  which  we  soon  after  received  at  a  garden,  waa  &t  more  to 
our  taate;  and  I  shall  add  a  deacription  of  it  to  shew  the  nature  of 
this  sort  of  party  among  the  great.  It  was  given  in  the  gai^den,  whidi 
ia  called  after  Timour  Shauh,  who  laid  it  out.  It  ^as  a  vecy  exten- 
nve  aquare,  enclosed  by  brick  walls,  and  4ivided  -by  two  veiy  broad 
svenues  of  ahemate  cypresses  and  planes,  croitSig  eadi  other  at  right 
angles  in  the  middle  of  the  square.  The  open  space  in  the  centre  of 
each  avenue  was  filled  with  a  very  long  and  broad  bed  of  poppies,  on  - 
each  side  of  which  was  a  walk  between  borders  of  flowers.  In  the 
four  squares,  into  whit  ii  tlio  avenues  divided  the  garden,  were  in- 
Munierablc  fig,  iieach,  [)lunu  apple,  pear,  pomegranate,  quince,  and 
muibeny  tse&h  in  iuii  blossom :  here  and  there  was  scattered  a  hi|^ 