

I  eannoi  give  a  better  Idea  of  the  Dooiraunee  JSifdais;  or  oontarast 
•them  more  with  ihe  PenianB,  than  by  lehting  a  part  of  my  owm 
.transactiona  with' them  both.  '  At  atime  when  Shauh  Mabmood  waa 
admaneuig  fnm  the  wertt  Sbauh  Sbi^jau*8  aimy«  wbidi  bad  been . col- 
lected at  a  great  CTpenae,  was  defeated  and  dispersed  by  the  rebdb 
4n  Caahmeer,  And  he  was  entirely  destitute  of  the  meana  of  raiaing 
Aiother  ^  the  defenoe  ^  .his  throne.  In  these  circumstanjBes,  it 
^vas  of  the  utmost  importanoe  to  him  to  obtain  pecmipiy  assiataiwe 


Digitized  by  Google 


^  KfiGOTIATIONS  WITH  PERSIA-R  HDlUrrEBa 


from  us  ;  but  our  policy  preventer!  our  taking  part  in  the  civil  wars  of 
the  country,  and  our  public  declarations  to  tli;it  pffcct  did  not  leave  us 
at  liberty  to  do  so,  consistently  with  good  taith,  even  if  we  had  been 
so  inclined.  The  ministers,  v-!io  were  employed  to  persuade  me 
to  deprtrt  from  this  line  ol  conduct ,  w  ere  two  1^  rsians  and  a  Moollah  ; 
but  otlier  persons  of  the  same  lU  st  i  i|ition  were  employed  to  influence 
me  in  the  shape  of  ordinary  visitors  .md  disinterested  friends.  I 
frequently  tound  some  of  these  in  ni}  liall  when  I  rose;  and,  although 
the  necessity  of  retiring  to  Chausht  procured  me  a  respite  of  some 
hours  during  the  day,  the  ministers  were  often  with  me  till  two 
hours  after  midnight.  There  was  no  argument  or  .solicitation  which 
they  did  not  employ  -.  They  even  endeavoured  to  persuade  me  tliat 
our  Indian  possessions  would  be  in  danger  if  we  refused  so  reasonable 
a  request ;  but,  even  lAigf  never  insinuated  tluit  I  should  be  exposed 
(o  any  pecwmel  risk.  The  ntnuMt  of  their  thieats,  (and  thoie  eeiw 
tabdj  were  embarnming),  oonsisfced  m  aaramccB  that  the  ^leen 
wvMiId  tend  her  vetl  to  me;  and  that*  when  Akram  Khann  letomed 
from  Gaahmeer,  he  would  certainly  come  nunnawaotee  to  mj  honaa 
Bnt  dieae'lban  were  dispelled  on  Akiam  Kfaamn'i  anhraL  At  my 
interviews  with  him',  the  same  solgeot  was  renewed;  but  all  hBaptn^ 
timity»  and  even 

direct  tetms,  schemes  of  mntoal benefit!  whidi»  while  they  provided 
ibr  the  Sng  of  Caubal*s  wants,  imdoubtedly  ippeared  to  1^  to  olfer 
great  md  immediate  advantage  to  the  British ;  andt  wliich  shewed 
entire  confidence  in  onr  sincerity  aikd  good  fiuth.  Whenitwasobnoos 

that  these  plans  were  not  acceptable,  they  were  instantly  dropL 

The  King's  difficulties,  however,  ccmtinued  to  increase.  Gaubid 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  i  and  his  S|iproach  was  dai]^e9q>eeU 
edat  Pesbawer.  The  King  tried  all  means  of  raising  money.  His 
jewds  were  offisred  for  sale  at  less  than  half  their  vahiOi  bnt  nobody 
dared  to  venture  on  a  purchase,  of  which  the  opposite  party  would 
have  denied  the  validity.  In  all  his  distreRses,  the  King  never  re- 
sorted to  violence.  He  was  at  one  time  advised  to  seise  a  lai^  sum 
of  money,  which  some  merchants  were  osirying  hnia  Canhul  to  Caah* 