

Idaiqr  Jaonto  are  sold  in  the  country*  and  great  numbte  meA  to 
be  skit  on  to  Iddin.  The  internal  sale  ia*  increasing;  matiy  of  the 
farmers  buying  horses  now,  that  formerly  never  thought  of  doing  s6i 
but  the  exportation  to  India  has  greatly  fallen  off.  Wherever  the 
British  dominion  extends,  large  armies  of  horse  are  chantrpd  for 
small  onfs  of  infantry:  and  there  the  gentlemen  prefer  jVraba.  The 
native  arinios  also  have  diniinishod,  as  the  circle  of  their  deprndationH 
has  been  circnTn5?rribo(l ;  and  li'  the  Company's  breeding  studs  are 
succesainlf  the  txade  between  India  and  Toorkiataun  will  be  amuhit 
iated.  <: 

'  'S 

...  ■    ■  .  • 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  «•  ) 


CHAE  XL 

f 

HUSBANDBY  OF  CAUBUL. 

THERE  aM'  five  classes  of  cultivators  in  AfghauniBtaun :  1st, 
Proprietors,  who  cultivate :  thor  own  land ;  2di  Tenants,  wfad 
hire  it  for  a  went  ia  moaey,  or  lor  a  fixed  proportion  of  the  produce; 
Sd,  Buzgurs,  who  are  the  same  as  the  Metayers  in  France ;  4th, 
Hired  labourers ;  ud  Stb,  Villaina,  who  cultivate  their  lord'a  lands 
.without  wages. 

The  estates  of  the  proprietors  are,  of  course,  various  in  their  ex- 
tent, ljut  on  the  whole,  the  land  is  more  equally  divided  in  A^faauni- 
staun  than  in  most  other  countries.  There  n re  a  great  number  of 
small  proprietors,  who  cultivate  their  laiuls  t  lu  uiselves,  assisted  by 
their  families,  and  sometimes  by  hired  htbourers  and  Buzgurs.  The 
reason  of  the  equal  liiv  isiou  of  property  will  be  easily  perceived,  by 
adverting  to  the  nature  of  the  goverameiitiof  tribes.  That  distnbu- 
.  tion  seems  to  have  been  Liieneral  in  former  tim^,  and  to  have  been 
disturbed  by  various  causes.  Ilxtraviiijancc  or  misfortune  compel 
many  to  sell  their  lands ;  tpiarrels,  or  a  desire  lor  cliange,  induce 
others  to  part  with  them,  that  they  may  quit  the  neighbourhood  in 
which  they  live,  and  the  divimm  of  .every  man's  estate  among '  all 
his' SOBS,  which  it  enjoined  by  the  Mahommedan:  ]aw,  '  socta  'nDdBn 
eadi  lot  too  unaUto  nuuntaiii  its  proprietor,  who  ooniequeatly  aidiit 
g^ves  it  up  to  one  of  his  bradien,  or  tdla  it  Ptawhwicffii  are  fimnd 
among  those  who  here  been  enricbed  by  the  Ktng^s  aervice^  by  wart 
and  by  succesafbl  agriculture  or  commerce.  Much  has  likewise  been 
brouglht  under  eoltivation  by  individuab  or  sodeties*  who  have  taken 
meaauKs  to  ptoeure  water  for  tnigaCion,  on  which  so  mncfa  depeodi 


Digrtized  by  Google 


LABOURERS.  Ml 

'  '  ' 

is.  A^^wnnirtaun,  tDd  tlw  kDd  thus  nMatAf.  beeoiiiei4li«ipiWit» 
^paapttty  of  the  adveotorM-  -FmaU^i  aome  lunr^  ftwcifmi  ipcMfc. 
l^tB  ifiNictly  from  the  crown. 

Uw.inte  of  ]tfi4  in  Caubul  it  tlited.bj  Mr.  Bbnthej  to.bd  Aav 
nine  to  twelve  yon.  purchase. 