

fcanieiinn  Ibr  Ae  notloBi  I  ondd  hear  of  w  ertriMWimcnt  of  Aabt  oeenr  tftaB 
Orenburg  (to  the  MtA  of  flw  CoigieB  8«k)b  cKMpt  theiv  oanqoBrta  fm  Aa  MrttH 

west  of  Persia. 

Befiwe  I  quit  this  subject,  I  may  mention  tiie  Europeans  whom  I  have  heard  of 
ae  havb^-  visited  A^haunistaun  in  modem  times.  Besides;  Ifr.  IVxter,  a  French  gen> 
tleman,  named  M.  Massy,  went  from  India  to  Europe  by  tliiit  route.  A  German  Officer 
who  aftenrards  had  a  command  in  the  service  of  the  Indian  Bt^guni  SuomK)^  was  for 
loma  tunfe  wi  ^annjof  Tiaour  Shsuh.  Another  Cnropean  dlied  at  Bolkh  aooae  yean 
ifgo,  on  his  wi^  from  India  to  Europe.  He  was  dei^cribed  to  be  a  man  of  a  melan- 
cholv  turn,  but  mild  and  wp]|  informed;  he  was  called  Yar  Fatizil  (an  Arabic  name  of 
liu  own  inventioa»  probably  intended  to  mean  the  friend  of  learning}.  While  I  was  in 
Ae  Ckiifaid  doninioUf'aTeiy  mldUgnt  Frnehi^ 

the  name  of  Jean  Thomas,  and  who  had  latterfy  been  i^trongly  suspected  of  heiag  a  gpf^ 
ceciqped  from  India,  and  pa&sed  through  part  of  the  A%haun  dominions.  He  managed 
his  journey  with  great  courage  and  address,  and  eluded  all  the  attempts  which  were  made 
to  ^prebend  him.  Two  Froichmen  also  were  rtated,  in  letters  from  Heraut,  to  have 
arrived  nt  thnt  city,  not  long  after  I  left  the  country.  Conwdering  ho^v  loug  the  French 
had  a  uunaiuu  at  Teheraun,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  have  good  information  re- 
specting dweeoottBtriea;  hot  thenetnre  of  their  govemment  predndei  all  hope  that  they 
f^ghiedievorid  their  information,  which  must  be  eo  anfimNBeafala  to  die  hopes  of  dioia 
wlifi  count  on  penetrating  to  India  by  that  route. 

1  have  heard  of  no  other  Europeans  in  the  A^^iaun  dominioQf  beyond  the  Indita^ 
fart  llHPe  I  hna  BMnlionaiL 


(   290  ) 


CHAP.  X. 

TBADZ  OF  CAUBUl.. 

TN  an  inland  country*  desdtote  of  navigable  riverit  and  not  suited 
to  ivfafided  carnages,  oonuneioe  must  of  couise  be  carried  en  hj 
beaata  of  burthen  $  of  these^  ounels  are  found  to  be  the  b^  as 
horn  their  strength,  as  thdr  pati^oe  of  thirst,  and  the  ease 
with  which  they  are  fed  on  any  kind  of  bush,  and  almost  on  any  Idnd 
of  vegetable.  The  tribes  whose  country  enables  them  to  maintahi 
camels,  or  rather  restrains  them  to  that  description  of  stock,  therefore 
naturally  turn  their  attention  to  commerce,  and  often  combine  it  with 
the  migrations  which  they  undertake  in  quest  of  forage  for  their 
h^rds,  and  of  an  agreeable  climt^  for  themselves.  When  the  lands 
of  these  tribes,  as  la  generally  the  case,  neither  furnish  any  produce 
of  their  own  nor  afibrd  a  market  for  that  of  other  countries,  the 
owners  of  camels  are  cliiefly  employed  in  carrying  the  commodities 
of  one  ricli  country  to  he  sold  in  another,  ^^^en  thev  have  a  little 
rapitnl,  they  do  this  on  their  own  account,  accompanying  their  mer- 
chandise, and  selling  it  tlicmselves ;  but  those  whose  onh  wealth  con- 
sists in  a  few  camels,  are  nnabie  to  engage  in  thin  tiMilic,  and  content 
themselves  with  hiring  out  their  camels  to  the  merchants  of  the 
richer  tribes,  and  of  the  cities,  who  either  accompany  their  merchan- 
dise themselves  to  tlie  place  of  its  destination,  or  send  ii  under  ser- 
vants (whose  duty  answers  to  that  of  supercargoes),  according  to  their 
own  wealth  and  habitsof  life.  Some  of  these  merchants  alsokeep  camels 
of  their  own,  which  they  feed  in  the  wastes  near  the  towns  where 
they  reside;  and  some  professed  carriers  also  keep  camels  in  the  same 
manner,  which  they  hire  out.  Camels  hired  from  a  particular  tribe, 
usually  make  their  journey  in  company  with  the  tribe  to  which  they 