

•  .  r 

22  «  ,  .    •  t 


Digitized  by  Google 


TBADE.  ggS 

iifim  and  itt  the  tponitoj  eome  lij  ibis  diaiind,  ag  do  noit  of  tfaie 

Gowikt.   Hones  are  alio  e&poiCed  hj  tliu  raufte. 

:  .The  exports  to  indepflndent  Tobrkutena,  connst  chiefly  of  ortiides 

previously  im|M>rted  from  India,  or  made  in  the  LDdian|iiioviiioiBe-of 
CaubuL  White  doth  of  all  kinds,  shawls,  Indian  tnifaaaty  Moidtauii 
'dbintSy  and  indigo,  are  the  chief  of  than.  t  : 

■i  .  Hie.  principal  of  the  imports  are  horses,  gold,  and  silver.  The  laU 
tBtp  oonsiat  of  tillas  (the  gold  coin  of  Bokhara),  Dutch  ducats,  Vene- 
tian sequins,  and  yamboos  (or  ingots  of  silv^  irom  ChioA).  Coehinaalt. 
broad  cloth,  purpet,  and  tinsel,  together  with  cast  iron  pots,  cutl^, 
and  other  hard  ware,  are  imported  from  Bokhara  ;  to  which  place 
they  are  brought  from  Russia,  either  by  land  from  Orenburg  across 
the  detiart,  or  by  sea  from  Astrachan  to  Anil,  or  Ming  Kishlauk  in 
Orgunge.  NeefUes,  looking  glasses,  Russian  leather,  tin  bends, 
^qpe^ades,  and  some  osIh  i  tritliag  European  articles,  are  also  brought 
hj  the  same  route.  Oormuk,  a  fine  cloth  made  of  camel's  wool,  a 
quantity  oi  cotton,  and  some  lamb  skins,  are  iin)ioi  U'il  liom  the  Bok- 
hara (  c  iuiitry  itsell'}  as  are  a  &w  of  the  two-humped  camels  hrom  the 
Kuzzauk  c  ountry.  '  ^ 

-  To  Persia,  are  exported  shawls,  nnd  shawl  goods,  indigo,  carpets 
of  Heraut,  Moultaun  chintz,  Indian  biocmkb,  muslins,  and  other  cot- 
ton cloths.  ■  The  shawls  exported  to  Persia  are  of  a  pattern  entirely 
^iifierimt  fiom  thoae  aeen  in  India  or  Eng^d.  Hiey  were  aniYin^ 
aally  wotn  till  lately*  when  the  King  of  Ferue  fixbade  the  uae  of 
ttm»*widi  eview  to  encourage  the  mamriartageB  of  his  own  country. 

Thb  imports  are' raw  silkof  Gheekim  and  Resht,  silken  rtuA  nude 
at  Vcitd  and  Kaahann ;  a  sort  of  strong  cotton  manufiuture  of  various 
cbtoiirs,  called  Kuddiik,  (the  best  of  whidi  is  made  at  Isphahaun), 
and  silken 'handkerchiefti  worn  by  the  women.  These  manufiiptuies 
ase  ua^-in  lugs  quantities  by  all  nuduh;  -  Embroidered  satin,  velvety 
and  TetmuL  brbcade^  are^  of  coarse^  bonfined  to  the  great.  GMn  and 
bullioD  are  also  among  the  imports ;  but  the  moat  remariEaUe'  is  ln- 
dian  'ehitota,'  whidi  is  nUaniifiKAiired  at  Masulipatam,  on  the  coast  of 
BoiaMiaridel,  and  comes  by.sea  to  Basfaeer*  in  the  Peisian  Gidph*'  It 


p 


996  TRADE. 

Mi'tltaenoe  carried  by  kod  to  the-A^lwiiii  eoanfeiy,  iribM  ii  U  ntiy 
much  used. 

The  exports  to  Cliinesc  Tonrkaitattii  az^  nearly  the  same  as  those 
to  Bokhaura.  The  imports  an  woollens  of  a  particular  kind,  fa»infft 
mSkt  and  satin»  tea,  ,  (in  amall  boxes  of  thin  leacU  china,  porcelun,  raw 
silk,  cochineal,  crystal,  gold  dust,  golden  ingots,  and  yamboos  of 