

ijeases.  Thet  ahmgliieGomul  withhitfaebedof  a  ^m;  an^^ 
IfMb'stfeattt  riaes)  the  caravan  is  obliged  tO  Seek  shelter  ih  some  nook 
between  It  iud  the  hills,  and  thero  to  lemain  till  the  witter  Idkt 
l^ese  Kiada  attr  e)sD  inliMtM  by  Shemunees,  and  stall  mofe.by 

Vizeerees,  who  oome  fiom  the  nearest  part  of  their  own  oouatiy  to 
jplund^  the  Oarovamt.  The  taravftn  to  Candahar,  after  passing  the 
mountains,  joumies  over  waste  plains,  divided  by  rocky  ridges,  and 
ha  some  places  by  mountains.  During  the  whole  march,  it  is  obliged 
to  carrv  provisions,  and  often  water,  {thai  on  the-  road  bcin?  salt,  or 
lbf»Tc  boin  j  nonn  at  all).  Shrubs,  which  tceti  ihe  t-amc  Is  and  serve 
for  tiiel,  are  the  only  nsefid  produce  of  those  countries.  Small  vil- 
lages are  met  with  rarely  on  this  long  march ;  but,  at  some  seasons, 
tamps  of  wandering  shepherds  are  more  frequent. 

While  passing  the  country  intcsU-il  by  the  predatoj  >  tribes,  they 
ttiarch  in  great  order,  with  parties  at  proper  stations  tor  covering 
their  line  of  march.  Even  when  haltetl,  a  party  of  horse  are  alway* 
tnounted,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  carrying  off  camels  that  are 
foraging.  iV  Iffrge  proportion  of  the  caravan  keeps  watch  at  night. 
In  the  rest  of  their  journey,  thej  observe  little  precauUtHi  in  the 
maMil,  and  sleep  secure  at  night  In  narrow  peases,  the  chieft  fyi 
the  Older  of  passing,  and  sometimes  send  parts  of  the  caravan  by 
other  roads.  Their  marches  are  about  ei^  or  ten  ,miles  a  day ; 
and,  when  tli^  leadi  their  destination,  those  who  haye  aooompaniiBd 
tile  caravan  disperse,  and  tiie  people  of  the  tribe  aepd  Mt  /their 


Digrtized  by  Google 


CABAVAK& 


fimt^  tff  pMtiye^  and  nuniin  ilwiwiidyco  it  mm  in  Ihefar  canpii  ui 
Am  noidil  of  a  wdnft  and  pleadng  oo«itiy>  wliifii  atjsjn  a  ttmf^ 
rate  dimato.  They  do  not  coatimie  to  duft  about  Kka  tii<  ahgyiwri^ 
whoM  nioda  of  maidung  a&d  gnenllialN^ 
ilicMe  I  have  beea  dcecribing.  One 

mm  dnpafcched  to  the  cities  to  sell  the  goods  tbak  they  kate  faaon^ 
sp,  and  to  provide  othan  fiv  their  retaa.  Many  niMcinola  of  ether 
tribes  flttichthenuidvea  to  one  of  these  carayans.  Hiey  pe^  a  rupee 
and  a  ^puatter  fiar  every  camel  load,  to  defray  the  expcnces  of  the 
guards,  and  the  same  sum  is  levied  fiom  the  members  of  the  tribe  te 
which  the  caravan  belongs. 

The  arrangement  of  the  caravans,  which  go  to  India  and  Pepsia, 
resemble  those  I  have  mentioned ;  but  the  camels  are  hired  from 
carriers  about  towns,  and  the  whole  is  under  a  Caufila  Baushee, 
fleeted  by  the  people  ot  the  caravan.  This  (ttfucr,  however,  is  more 
common  with  the  Tanjilcs  and  citizens  timii  with  the  Aj^haunSy 
often  march  together  without  any  chief  or  any  regulation. 