


Digrtized  by  Google 


4QS  GARDEN  6TUFF&   SUGAB  CANE.  PLANT& 

lyi^'j  I  hat  in  vtry  unequal  ipiantities  and  qualities:  it  is.iiiMt 
abundant  in  Swaut,  and  Ijert.about  Pediawer.  It  is  almost  the  aalfy 
itoA,Q£.  the  people  of  Cashmeer.    Wild  o«U  are  iaaad.  at  Peshawer^ 

wno'wliare  ctdtivated. 

The  garden  fllu£&  of  the  country  are  curatay  tnniqpSi  beet  root, 
lettuce,  oniooif  gvlicy  ftnnel»  9gg  plant,  apinage^  .and  greens  of  all 
lands,  cabbages,  and  cauliflowers :  there  are  also  many  of  the  Indian 
v^etables.  Turnips  are  cultivated  in  great  abundance  in  some  parta 
o£  the  country,  and  are  used  to  feed  the  cattle.  It  is  not  improbable, 
that  the  same  observation  mny  be  true  of  carrots  :  In  the  Punjaub,  at 
least,  horses  are  often  fed  \\  itii  this  vegetable,  which  is  very  whole-! 
some  tor  them.  Giii<^er  ami  turmeric  arc  grown  m  the  eastern  coun-^ 
tries,  particularly  in  Bunnt)o.  The  same  may  be  said  of  sugar  cane, 
but  the  cultivation  of  it  is  c  otifined  to  rich  plains.  Most  of  the  sugar 
in  Aighaunislaun  is  brouglit  trom  India. 

,  Cotton  is,  with  a  few  exceptions,  confined  to  tlie  hot  climates,  and 
moat  of  the  cloth  of  that  material  used  in  the  West,  is  imported  ready 
nooven  from  India. 

.The  Paiina  Chnsti,  or  castor  tii!  jilaiil,  is  roinnion  over  the  whole 
country,  under  the  name  of  liuduujeer.  I  iinaginc  it  iurnishes  most 
of  the  oil  of  the  country,  though  sesanium,  mustard,  and  perhaps  some 
other  oil  plants,  are.yery  abundant  Madder  abounds  over  all  the 
Wait..  It  ia  onlj  faand  in  cold  climates,  and  most  of  India:  ia  aup? 
plied  from  Afghaiuufltmn* ,  It  k  aown  in  annimer,  on  land  ^wMch  hat 
bevi  carefiilly  prepaied  and  manuved.  Its  Icaifwaie  cot  mnally 
fer  die  cattle;  but.  the  loot,  (whidi  fonuahea  the  dye),  knot  tafca. 
up  till  the  third.year.  . 

-  The aaaa teida pbat  ia immd  wUd  in. Hie  hiJla  ip  mmj parta ti 

the  West.  •  It,  leqaiiea  no  attention,  fautthet  whicli  ia  neceataiylbf 

estiaeting-tfae  gmn.   h  la  .a  loir  boafa,  with  long  lesfea,  .winch  are 

fenenUy  eat  off  near  the  bottom  of  the  atenn :  A  niULJ^nidn  fiom 

lihe  part  entj  and  gfaduattjr  hmdena  like  opifem.   Itia  iipoi]ed.fa7flB> 

pbiiin  to  Hw  aun..  .lhe,A%hanna,  therafine^  take  can  tQ;die]ter.|t» . 

II 


Dig'itized  by  Googb 


ARTIFICIAL  GRASSEij.   SYixlEM  Oi  FARMING.  aog 

pikMiiig'iwo-iiifeiitOiies  over  it,  in  sudi*  u  .tMQiier  that  they  suppocft 
olher.    Vast  quantities  of  this  drug  are  exported  to  India,  where 
it  IB  a  £ivoiiiite  ingredient  in  the  cookery  iioth' of  Hindooa  .and  Ma*- 
hommedana.   Tobiooo  is  produced  in  moat'  pests  of  the  country. 

Amdng  the  most  inqpoitant  productions  of  the  husbandij  e£  tbe 
West  are  Lucerne,  and  a  sort  of  trefoil,  called  Shuflut.  Laioerne  is 
teyed  BaBihkay  .in  Persian,  and  Spusta,  in  Pushtoo.  It  is  generally 
town  in  autumn,  and  allowed  to  lie  thrmigbout  the  winter  under  the 
anow ;  ibut,  in  some  places,  it  is  sown  in  spring.  It  takes  three 
months  to  attain  perfection  ;  after  which,  it  may  be  cut  onre  a  fort- 
ciiiht  for  three  monlhs  or  more,  provided  it  be  walcred  alter  each 
cutting.  The  ]>lant  lasts  in  (general  iive  \ears;  but  i  have  heard  ot' 
its  remaiuing  lor  ton  and  eve  n  titteen  yeans.  It  requires  a  great  deal 
of  "manure.  Shuftui  is  oliener  sown  in  spring  than  in  autumn.  It  is 
ready  to  be  cut  in  less  than  two  montl\s,  and  the  operation  may  be 
repeated  once  or  twice.  It  never  lasts  longer  than  tiiree  years,  and  sel- 
dom longer  than  one.  Both  these  gra&.ses  are  given  green  to  the  cattle, 
and  also  storetl  for  liay  :  more  is  consumed  green  than  is  made  into 
hay.  Besides  tiie  natural  grasses  and  the  two  artiticial  ojiei>  just  men- 
tioned, there  are  other  kinds  of  &MMer  in  Afghaunistaun.  Arzuu  and 
gall,  as  well  as  jowauree,  arc  often  sown  tor  the  sake  of  the  straw^ 
which  is  very  nourishing,  and  which,  wlien  dried,  will  last  all  tb^ 
winter.  It  is  also  common  to  cut  down  the  greooi  wliest -  aiid  hukpf 
before  the  ear  is  fimned  fir  hafBee  and  odier  cattlei  end  t]u8  piaofekB 
4a  thou^  to  be  -laot  only  aefe  fast  burfoiel.  It  ia  .often  repesied 
^ieranl  tiineB  with  bedey ;  biit»  if  iqipljed  noie  tiMa  ooDe  lo^-wliarf; 
it  ii  diought  to  injme  ^  cropw  It  .ie  elao  nraal  to  torn  cattle sin^ 
tke  eolnmnFaown  gndii>  to  eet  doim  the  plBiita,HriiiGli  hawe  apmnjg 
vpbefine  winter* 