

The  water-mills  are  also  exceedingly  different  trom  any  that  I  havo 
,  seen,  tliough  1  understand  a  similar  kmd  is  used  in  the  Shetland  isles. 
The  wheel  is  horizontal,  and  the  feathers  are  disposed  obliquely,  so 
a.s  Lo  resemble  the  wheel  of  a  smokc-jack.  It  is  witliin  the  mill,  and 
immediately  below  the  mill-stone,  whicli  turns  on  the  same  spindle 
with  the  wheel.  The  water  is  introduced  into  the  mill  by  a  trough, 
jM>  fli  to  fiU  en  the  wlieeL  lliewheelitfldf  ianetaifl  leobDect  right, 
moie  than  four  feet  in  diameter.  Thia  aoft  of  mill  b  ttsed  all  over 
A%|^uHUUitaun»  Penia»  and  Toofklataun.  It  ia  ako  uaed  in  the 
noriih  c£  lodiaf  nnder  the  Sifeeniiggqr  hi]la>  lmt»  in  genflnl»'  no 
wHer-miUa  are  known  in  lindia*  wheie  all  grain  is  groond  wilih  the 
hnid. 

EES 


Digrtized  by  Google 


/  llM.liaoir]iun  ii:iited  I17  die^pHt  of  jKspditMp  ^  liro  III 
tcoCB,  and  alio  .in.  the  rudest  part* 'of  liwooiiiitfy;  tt  is  Bbt^ljtini 
flit>ibiiiid  fkbneB,  the  uppenmoat  of  wlaA  nato  on  a  pirot  foM  m 
dwiowaa^'  and  ia.tiiiii«d  bjr  arnkko  pagt  irfuoh  iaftataned  mit 
Ibr  a  handle.  Excqpt  where  haiul^uUa  are  iiaed,  a  miliar  haa  a 
tmet  tnde^  and-ia  paid  bj  a  ahm  of  the  oocn  whk^ 
;  I  .can  ^7  little  about  tbe  aneoeaaian  of  aa|M'ai£pted  h^liie 
hnabandman  of  A^fmipaitHmm^  '•  it  seems  to  be  only  in  the  very 
poorest  .parts'of  the  .oonntiy- that  land  is  allowed  to  Ue  '  fiiUoir  ftr  a 
year.  It  ia  more  frequent  to  cultivate  the  autumn  harveit  one  year, 
and  the  spriiig  one  the  next»-  but  in  Home  plabaa  where  manure  is  ia 
pleutgTt  both  are  niied  in  one  year.  Tlx-  man  tire  used  is  composed 
ef  dm^  and  straw  collected  in  dunghills,  of  ashes,  the  mud  of  old 
walls,  and  various  other  substanoea.  Hie  dung  of  camels  is  carefully 
aroided, .  from  a  notion  that  it  iinpr^gnateB  the  land  with  saltpetia 
Lima  and  maEle  seem  both  to  be  unknown.' 

-  Horses  are'  employed  to  drew  the  plough  in  Tooridstaun,  and  in 
the  Eimauk  country,  but  in  no  other  part  of  A^unmistaun,  nor  in 
Persia  nor  in  India.  That  task  is  generally  perform^  by  oxen,  but  in 
Shoraubuk  and  in  Seweestaun,  it  is  done  by  camels  (which  animal  is 
also  used  in  the  kingdom  of  Cokaun  or  Terghauna,  and  in  the  Indian 
Desart),  and  asses  are  employed  in  gome  parts  of  Af^dinnni«?taun. 
Grain,  manure,  Sic.  are  generally  carried  about  the  farm  by  asses  or 
bullocks,  and  sometimes  by  camels;  cartsy  as  has  been  oHuetvedf  do 
not  t  exist  in  the  country.  !•«  ,.<:' 


Digitized  by  Gopgl 


(   309  ] 

#  1 


CHAP.  XIL 

TAUJJKSi  MINDKEES,  AND  OTHER  INHABITANTS  OF  AFGUAUXISTAUN. 

IT  hae  been  obienred,  that  there  is  scarcely  any  piirt  of  Afghaun- 
^istann  in'ipliieh  the  whole  population  is  Afghaun,  and  that  the 
mixture  is  con^poaed  of  Taujika  in  the  West,  and  of  Hindkees  in  the 
East.  I  now  proceed  to  give  an  account  of  those  classes,  and  of  the 
other  tribes  and  nations  that  are  to  be  met  with  in  A^haunistaun.  * 
■  The  situation  in  which  we  find  the  Taiijiks  is  calculated  to  excite 
a  degree  of  curiosity,  whicli  my  information  is  ill  calculatetl  to  rpmovf. 
The  Tftujiks  are  not  utiiled  into  one  body,  liko  mostt  other  nations,  or 
confined  to  one  country,  but  are  sratlcrcd  uruoniiect cd  throng;h  a 
great  part  of  Afii a,  Tlu  v  ar(>  mixotl  witli  the  Uzbeks  tlirough  the 
greator  part  ot  their  dominions,  in  the  same  manner  as  with  the  Ai- 
ghauns.  The  fixed  inhabitants  of  Peroia  are  called  Taujiks,  in  con- 
tradistinction to  their  Tartar  invaders  ;  and  abo  to  the  moving  tribes, 
who  8eem  to  have  been  orignialiy  Persian.  They  are  found  even  in 
Chinese  Toorkistaun  ;  and  they  possess  independent  governments,  in 
the  mouiitanioub  countries  6f  Kurrategeen,  Durwauz,  Wukkeekha, 
and  Budukhshaun.  Except  in  those  strong  countries,  and  in  a  few 
sequestered  placeti,  which  will  be  mentioned  hereafter,  they  are  never 