

I  haye  hitfaorto  been  speaking  of  those  intemixed  with  the  Af- 
f^mam.  Those  who  live  in  diadnct  eocietiea  are  all  in  retired  and 
luaiUBiiiblu  parte  of  the  country ;  and  they  differ  from  the  test  in 
many  other  particulars.  The  first  of  those,  which  I  am  to  mention^ 
is  the  dass  who  are  called  Cohistaunees,  and  who  inhabit  the  Cohi- 
staun  of  Caubul.  This  country  is  surmounted  on  the  north  and  east 
bv  the  snowy  ridges  of  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  its  sourhcm  projection. 
On  t ho  west,  it  comprehends  part  of  the  Paropainisim  rairii^e,  and  la 
bounded  l)v  the  country  of  the  Hazaurehs :  on  the  south,  it  yinks  into 
the  Cohdautriiin,  already  described.  The  Coiiistaun  in  composed  of 
three  long  valleys,  Nijrow,  Pimjsheer,  and  Ghorebund,  into  which 
open  innumerable  narrow  and  rocky  jjlens,  whence  many  little  streams 
issue,  and  uniting  in  the  principal  valiies,  Ibnn  the  rivers  that  bear 
their  names.  These  streams  are  crossed  bv  wooden  bridges ;  and 
their  banks  arc  naturally  the  be.st  cultivated  puiL  of  the  country.  They 
bear  but  a  tiaiail  proportion  to  the  mountains,  which  are  high,  steep* 
and  covered  with  firs.  The  cultivated  parts  yield  wheat,  and  some 
other  gruns  ;  and,  what  is  surprising  in  so  elevated  and  cold  a  n^on, 
they  produce  tobacco*  and  even  ootton.  But  the  groat  sobsiftBiio*  of 
the  people  ia  dmi^  fiom  tfaar.rametoot  and  fliteiutvie  pkntetions 
of  innlbeny  Izeea.  TliofiiittofdiiBtmiBdriodiDllio'siiBtaifed'tfaeii 
grduiid  into  fldnrt  of  wbidi  faead  k  niade.  If  we  judge  ittfm  the 
appeaianoe  of  tlie  Gobutannees*  Uie  food  ii  wboleioiiie^  and,  by  a 
eakiiieftioo  of  Mr.  Imne's,  ii  can  support  a  &r  greater  ntimber  of 
people  in  a  given  space  liiaD  'ooiild  be  mamtwiied  by  tiUi^  *  Thaaijtk 
llie  population  be  a  good  deal  scattered,  it  ia  ooDaidera|>lek  and  its 
■undien  aiegenenUj  stated  to  amoimt  to  4(MXX>fiun3iefer  One  pert 
eftheCohistaiiD'ia  tobeeBEcqptedfiN»iliiiadeacf%^  Ebalittle 

s  s 


Digitized  by  Google 


314  COHISTAUNEES. 

pitch  of  tlniMt.  called  Reg  Rowaun,  or  moving  sand,  iriudi  is  the 
acme  of  some  romantic  talei  alluded  to  by-  Aboolf-uzl. 
The  Cohiataim  does  not  contain  many  cattle..  The  wild  animali  . 

must  be  numerous.  The  lioo  b  taid  to  be  among  theip,  and  the  wolf 
and  leopard  certainly  are  common.  Many  falcons  are  ^fixmd  in  the 
Cohistaiin,  which  is  said  also  to  abound  in  nightingales. 

Tlif  strength  of  this  country,  gives  to  its  inhabitants  a  character 
very  different  from  that  of  the  Taujiks,  whom  I  have  already  describ-. 
ed.  Tliey  are  almost  independent  ot  tin  King,  and  kept  in  imperfect 
subjection  by  their  own  chiefs,  lu  their  personal  character,  they  are 
bold,  violent,  and  imruly  ;  and  so  much  givtMi  to  war,  that  they  reckon 
it  a  disgrace  for  a  man  to  die  in  his  betl.  They  are  excellent  inikutry, 
particularly  auiung  lulls  j  but  their  courage  is  generally  wasted  in 
internal  dissensions.  They  have  seldom  disputes  between  tribes  or 
villages,  but  many  quaireb  4Uid  assassinations  among  individuals. 
Diainitea  between  villages,  when  Ihej^  do  h^pen,  are  more  .aeriom  in 
^bebt  oonaeqisoiceB  than  daewfaere»  ainceit  is  almoiC.aa  eaaf  to  ftil  a 
phntatkm  of  mnibeny.treea  ai  to  reap  afield  of  com*  and  the  '^nmy 
la  fiurmotfedlflknilC  to  repair. 