

The  Judoon'^  en^t  of  the  Indus,  possess  Drumtore,  or  Durntour,  a 
narrow  vallo\  alono-  the  rivulet  of  Door,  which  runs  south-west,  and 
fiills  into  the  Indus  near  Torbela.  The  country  seems  to  resemble 
Juower  Swaut,  tliough  it  probably  is  not  so  fertile. 

The  mouTitaina  are  high,  and  on  one  side  at  least,  produce  oaks, 
pines,  Avalnuts,  wild  olives,  and  other  hill  trees ;  but  none  of  the 
European  fruits  or  flowers  are  found  here,  and  every  tiling  begins  to 
have  some  resemblance  to  the  produce  of  India.    The  trees  uu  the 


o  o 


Digitized  by  Google 


330  HISTORY  Oh  THE  KUSOFZYES. 

filiuii  ne£Bw,  Hie  oountiy  is  well  inhabited,  and  ooiitaina  aone  very 

pt^olous  villages. 

Hie  Eiuao&>y&i  have  possessed  these  countri^  for  upwards  of  three 
lumdred.yean  J  and  though  moat  of  thein  have  heard  that  their  ori> 
gok  ia  from  the  west,  few  possess  any  knowledge  of  the  orig^ial  leil-, 
dence  and  former  fortunes  of  their  tribe.  The  Allowing  aeooimt  k. 
abstracted  from  a  histcwry  of  the  Eusofzyes,  written  in  a  mixture  of 
Pushtoo  and  Persian,  in  the  year  1184  of  the  Hejira  (A.  D.  1771). 
The  orit>;inaI  historv  is  of  considerable  leiifrth,  and  though  mixed  \"rith 
sucli  fables  as  the  superstitious  and  romantic  notions  of  the  country 
suggest,  it  has  a  consistency  and  an  appearance  of  trutli  mikI  i  \;u  t- 
ness,  which  would  entitle  it  to  credit,  even  if  it  were  not  corroborated 
by  the  Emperor  Banhcr,  who  is  one  of  the  prim  i pal  nctors  in  the 
e^  ents  which  it  describes,  and  is  besides  one  of  the  most  correct  his- 
torians in  Asia. 

The  original  seats  of  the  Eusoliyes  were  about  Garra  and  Noshky>. 
the  last  of  wliirh  places  at  least  is  on  the  borders  of  the  Dushtee 
IxK>i,  or  Great  Salt  Desart.  and  now  held  by  the  Beloches  under. 
Kelauti  Nusseer ;  their  numbers  at  that  time  muyt  have  been  very 
inferior  to  what  tlu  v  are  now,  a.s  they  only  formed  a  branch  of  tiic 
tribe  of  Khukkye  ;  ilie  other  branches  of  which  were  the  Guggeeaa- 
nees,  the  Turcolaunees,  and  the  Mahommedzyes.  They  were  ex- 
pelled fiant  G«na  .and  Koahky,  about  the  end  of  the  thirteenth,  or 
Bcj^ning  of  the  fimrteenth  century  .the  QiriBti«n.«a»  and  aoiBn, 
after  settled  in  the  neighbomfaood  of  OrobuL  BeAn  tli^  had.beta 
long  there,  they  aflbfded  their  pvoteption  to  Meetn  Uluj^  l^eg,  the 
son  of  Meena  .^boosaidt  of  the  home  of  .Timour*  and  were  very  in-, 
■trumental  in  raising  him  to  the  throne. of  Ganbtil*  .irhi€fa.had  hetoj 
heett  held,  by  hia  anoeatora,  hut  whidi  probably.  Waa  -loat  .in  eooae-; 
qaence  of  the  c«Jftmitieg  whieh  beftl  the. home  of  Thnour,  on  the 
death  of  Meersa  Abooaaid*.    Ulugh  "Beg,  on  hia  first  aecscaaion, 