


Digrtized  by  Google 


Digrtized  by  Google 


HlNDOOa 


81? 


.  eonndtnd  at  a  Mpnate  people  in  Btebei^s  tima :  tlMjjr  an  mm  otfy 
nmaikable  ht  bcnig  gnat  OBiian,  and  oondndcns  of  caisfaiia. 

T!he;flinilVofii  are  nmneraitt  found  Fealiamr  and  m  Btj/aatf  and 
■omedassesof  tfaam  are  fbandm  the  rmititrj  of  thnPiniinftyftj  mdiH^hra- 
tribes  in  the  nortb-eart  af  the  Afghaun  country.  Their  hmguaga  ia 
a  kind  of  Hindostaimee,  resembling  the  dialect  of  the  Punjaub. 

Hie  Hindoos  ou^it^  perhaps,  to  be  enumerated  with  this  class. 
They  are  .to  be  found  over  the  whole  kingdom  of  .Caubul*.  In 
towns  they  are  in  considerable  numbers  as  broken,  mexchanta*  ban- 
kers, goldsmiths,  sellers  of  grain,  &c.  There  is  scarce  a  vUlage  in 
the  country  without  a  family  or  two.  who  exercise  the  above  trades, 
and  act  a*?  accountants,  monev  t haii<j;ers,  &c.  They  spread  into  the 
north  of  Persia,  but  in  small  nuniiu  is.  owing  to  the  bad  treatment 
tlicy  receive.  They  are  encouraged  iu  Bokhaura,  uid  other  towns  ia 
Tartary. 

They  are  all,  or  almost  all,  of  the  military  class  of  Koiietrce,  but 
it  must  not  be  supposed  that  they  are,  therefore,  soldiers  ;  on  the 
conliary,  the  idea  of  a  Hindoo  soldier  would  be  thought  ludicrous  in 
Caubul.  They  retain  tlie  Hiiidoo  leatures,  and  some  of  thein  liave 
nearly  the  Hindostaunee  dress ;  but  most  allow  their  beards  to  grow, 
and  wear  a  dress  n^ly  r^embling  that  of  the  oo«intiy«  -  They  have 
got  rid  of  manj  of  their  ffindoo  prejudices,  so  Hut  they  do  not 
scruple  to  eat  bread  baked  at  a  oonunon  oven  s  still  leea  do  tfaej 
attend  to  therule^  which  enjoins  bathing  after  bemg  poUoted  hy 
the  touch  of  a  Mnaswlman,  an  injunction  never  intended  finr  cold 
.  riKmatas.  hk  most  respectSt  indecdi  th^  mix  weU  with  the  Muaiul- 
mans,  though  tfaeur  tunidil^*  tbehr  craft,  aUd  their  parsimony,  eipoae 


*  They  are,  indeed,  to  be  found  as  far  west  as  Astrachan,  and  they  are  niuneroiM  in 
Arabia;  while  on  the  eaat,  they  extend  as  &Lr  as  Pcldn,  where  they  are  said  to  have  a 
tMiplik  Thiir  rdigioo  has  spread  cfea  beyond  these  liinits.   Thewondaipof  BooA, 

umk-r  the  name  of  Fo,  i;*  known  to  be  very  general  throughout  China;  mid  in  the  go<!s 
of  the  CalBWicin,  «■  rq>rc«e&ted  by  Dr.  Oaxife,  m  at  once  ttcogum  the  idioU  of  the 


Digrtized  by  Google 


318 


DEOOAUN& 


them  to  ridicida  Thsj  are  often  employed  about  tlie  court,  in 
offioet  connected  with  money  or  accomrta ;  the  doty  of  stevraxd  aad 

treasurer  about  every  greet  'man»  is  eKeraaed  eidier  by  a  Hindob  or 
a  Feraian.   There  ham  even  been  Hindoo  governors  of  proiruioeib 

and  at  this  moment  the  great  government  of  Feshawer  has  bean  pnt 
into  the  hands  of  a  penNm  of  that  leUgUm.   The  people^  bewever, 
view  the  appdintment  with  more  surprise  than  approbation,  and  the . 
government  must  be  strong  to  be  able  t  o  support  such  an  agent. 