

II 


i 

$86  WAISHL-  j 

and,  in  consequence,  there  have  been  two  oomplete  interdiangei  of 
luid  within  the  last  fourteen  years.    It  is  impossible  not  to  snppote 
that  the  uncertain  tenure  on  which  the  lands  are  held  under  this  in-  .  | 
stitution,  must  be  a  great  bar  to  improvement ;  but,  in  spite  of  this  j 
obstacle,  the  Eusofzvc  country  is  cultivated  with  (^rcat  industry  and 
success,  and  the  villages,  water-courses,  and  other  immoveable  pro- 
perty, are  as  good  as  in  most  parts  of  Afgliaunistaim.    It  might  also 
be  expected,  that  there  would  he  a  civil  war  in  the  Oolooss,  hs  often 
-    as  tlie  land  was  to  be  exchanged;  and,  in  fact,  at  the  expiratioii  of 
the  last  term  but  one,  the  half  of  the  Naikpeekhail  wliicli  was  in  pos- 
session of  the  best  lands,  refused  to  subaiiL  Lo  the  usual  custom  of  ; 
drawing  lots.    The  Mulliks  of  the  other  half  complained  loudly  of  1 
this  injustice,  and  called  on  all  the  other  Accozyes  to  preveaL  the 
sul)\  eision  of  the  ancient  custom  of  the  tribe;  so  many  Ooloosses  : 
declared  in  ilieir  favour,  that  their  opponents  were  forced  to  give  way, 
and  to  draw  lots  as  usual. 

This  custom  is  called  Waish.  It  prevails  through  tlie  whote  of  tlio 
£aio&yes,  and  also  among  the  MahommedsTM.  Tbe  period  iat 
iduch  tha  Unds  aie  to  be  nteined»  homevm,  ym§  iSbmffMjnt,  la 
BooDO^  fye  instanoe^  the  Waiah  ia  petftcmed  anmuUtf »  Among 
the  Jodoooiy  a  bianch  of  the  Eosoizyes,  iadrndnala-  mtncfanga 
among  themselves,  bat  ihere  is  no  Waidi  emong  dan.  ■  With  the 
OtmaunkhaQ,  on  the  oontraijtthe  whole  tribe  cast  lota  every  twenty 
yean.  Among  ihe  Gnndefapoon  m  Damaim,  abo»  the  hmda  iie 
divided  into  tix  aharaa,  ooneapondh^  to  the  mimber  of  dana  in  dw 
tiib^  and  all  the  dana  dravr  lola  6r  the  aider  in  tdiidi  thsf  aie  to 
diooae  Iheb  diarea.  The  paiiod  at  wMdi  this  cermonj  ia  to  be 
lenewed,  is  not  fixed  permanently  as  anuHig  tlie  Eoaofiiyeas  bat  while 
one  Waish  is  takiiig  place,  it  ia  delennined  in  die  coundl  of  the 
tribe»  vrtien  the  rwj^t  is  to  hqppen  ;  the  term  is  generally  fiom  three 
to  five  yean.  What  is  most  surprising  is,  that  all  tbeae  tranaafHona 
take  place  among  the  lawleaa  Gundehpoony  without  qpianeb  or 


Digitized  by  Google 


ANARCHY  OP  THE  EUSOFZYES: 


337 


NoM  ef  die  eastern  Afghauns  but  thoae  already  mentioned,  sod 
tiro  or  three  dans  oi'  the  Oorookzyes,  have  this  custom.  There  are 
some  traces  of  its  having  prevailed  among  some  tribes  in  Khoras- 
saun,  but  the  only  renininin^r  instance  of  its  existenre  that  has 
reached  me,  is  among  the  Baraiclics,  where  villap'e  sometimes  dravr^  ^ 
lots  with  villager  or  man  with  man,  but  without  uny  Watsh  amoug 
dans.  * 