

An  account  of  a  particular  quarrel,  wliich  I  sliall  relate  almost  in 


*  Anwar  Kbnii^  die  MuUik  of  tfie  QhaMiwl,  ahoft  sleeps  in  hh  Hoqjra,  or 

public  npnrtmenf,  nwny  from  hh  women,  snrroiiixled  by  his  male  relations ;  his  ser- 
vants all  sleep  round,  except  tour  or  five,  w1k>  keep  WBteb;  aU  have  their  arms  ready 
hf  Hmo,  and  if  OM  of  tbem  goen  beyond  Ae  AndiBld  cf  iko  lyatif,  W  awe 

be  guided  by  four  or  five  armed  men.    I  have  been  told  by  Mosirrib  Khaun  (the  nephew 

of  Anwur  Khnim,  a  lad  about  l■iL''•t»'<•T^  years  old),  that  he  has  seen  several  attacks 
oo  this  apartment  by  one  of  the  (Jundies  of  the  tame  village^  but  they  failed  froiu 

Hw  ateaiMi  of  Hi*  d«lnd«i^ 

X  Z  S 


340  AOOOUNT  OF  A  PARTICULAR  FEUD. 

4fae  wards  of  Ifoilcrib  Khnm,  will  dww  the  nature  of  the  feudi 
end  TeconcflMrtiom  among  the  EuaoftyeS}  the  weaimeas  of  the  duaAb 
end  tlie  tmlNilance  of  the  danamenf  better  dian  any  general  lemaifa 
•I  can  oiflfer. 

Moautib*&  father  bade  diapotewidi  a  men  named  Siiundam,  about 
die  boondariea  of  their  landa :  high  words  paat>  and  in  the  end  M(K 
■tnrib*s  fidiQP  was  wounded.  Anwur  Kbaun*  his  brodier,  and  nude 
to'Mc»irrib»  is  the  head  of  all  the  GhaHedchai],  jet  he  hadjio  means 

of  redress  beyond  those  possessed  by  any  Other  individual.  A  Jeerga 
was  heid  on  the  occasioot  which  does  not  seem  to  have  had  much 
effect.  A  few  days  afterwards,  when  Anwur  Khaun  went  to  the 
Hoojra,  accompanied  by  Mozirrib,  then  only  »ii\teen,  and  ten  or 
twelve  his  relations,  some  well  armed,  and  others  having  only  their 
swords,  they  found  Sinindauz  there,  with  twenty  of  his  friends  in  full 
wmour.  This  did  not  deter  Anwur  Khaun  from  reproaching  him  with 
his  behaviour  ;  his  attack  broupjht  on  the  usual  consequences,  a  des- 
perate affray  took  place,  in  wliicli  Mozirrib  received  a  severe  cut  ou 
his  head,  and  An\vur  Kliaun  was  covered  with  wounds;  mfmy  of  his 
rehitions  were  also  wouiuk  d,  A  son  of  Sirumlauz,  and  another  of 
his  partisans  wer  •  kilKd.  As  Anwur  Kliaun  hafl  killed  the  hvst 
man,  he  was  consuitTed  to  be  ui  the  wrong,  and  was  obliged  to  flv 
with  all  his  family.  At  last  he  was  wearied  with  his  exile,  and  sul>- 
mitted  to  Siruiulaijz,  givii)*i,  han  his  sister  and  his  niece  (a  sister  of 
Mozirrib's).  Sirundauz  behaved  with  courtesy  ;  he  said  he  considered 
Anwur's  sister  as  his  own,  and  restored  her  to  lier  relat  ions ;  but  he 
kept  the  other  without  manyii^  her  (for  the  Naikpeekhail  never 
many  a  woman  given  in^  price  of  blood)}  and  from  that  day  Mozirrib 
saw  his  aster  no  more.  The  pursuit  of  Uood  Inid  indeed  beai  pul 
an  end  to»  but  no  intercourse  took  place  among  the  ihmilies;  Stron- 
daux  and  Anwur  never  meet  when  they  ou  avoid  it»  and  when  they 
do,  the^  torn  their  heads  siway.  Mbeirrib*  in  answer  to  a  qnestion> 
what  he  would  do^  if  he  met  Sirundaua  alone,  replied,  that  he  would 
instantly  attack  him,  (hat  he  might  antidpote  the  assault  whkli  Sbni^ 
dans  would  assuredly  make  on  himl.   Sudi  fiiiy  after  •  leooneOistiott 