

During  these  wars,  Ulugh  Beg  hacl  died,  and  the  kingdom  of  Cau- 
bul  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  famoua  Emperor  Bauber,  adio 
waa  then  rising  into  notice.  He  several  times  attacked  the  Euaofi^ieii 
bat  made  no  great  impression  on  them,  as  they  always  found  a  seeoore 
retreat  among  their  hills.  At  last,  Bauber  made  peace  with  them, 
and  acMnired  them  in  his  interests,  by  marrying  a  daughter  of  their 
Khaun.  Bauber  himself  describes  these  campaigns  in  his  Commeo- 
taries,  and  confirms  the  story  of  his  marriage. 

Tlip  operations  of  which  I  have  given  a  summary,  nccup\  the 
greater  pavt  of  a  pretty  large  volume  in  the  Afghaun  history  ;  l)ut  the 
details  would  not  repay  the  room  they  would  occupy,  and  T  can  ex- 
hibit in  a  few  words  the  little  light  they  throw  on  the  maimers  and 
character  of  the  Eusofiiyes. 

The  whole  tribe  was  under  one  Khaun  during  thesr  conquests,  and 
his  power  seems  to  have  been  much  greater  than  what  the  nuHlem 
Khauns  enjov.  The  people,  however,  seem  still  to  have  been  turbu- 
lent ami  unruly  ;  their  first  quarrel  with  the  ( iiirr^c  eaunees  origmated 
in  an  el*>jicment  with  the  aifianced  bride  ui  a  dnciOf  that  tribe,  and 
was  pursued  by  the  Guggeeaunees  with  the  same  implacable  spirit 
which  such  an  outra<re  would  excite  at  this  day.  The  customs  of 
Naunawautee,  and  of  respect  to  guests,  seem  to  have  existed  then  ss 
at  present,  and  to  have  been  sometimes  infringed,  as  they  are  ^dSL 
One  anecdote  may  be  mentioned,  wfaidi  Aoim  the  mannen  of  the 
times  in  a  strong  light. 

After  a  great  hattJe  between  the  Eoaofiiyes  and  Pjlaaanksj  MnUik 
Ahmedf  the  chief  of  Hie  £aao&jes,  was  deputed  to  Hie  Dlbanka  ta 


Digitized  by  Google 


MANNEiiS  IN  FOKMER  DATS.  ^ 

sneforpcMfe  On  hii  ttrival  among  tlut  . tribe,  they  resolyedt»8ac^ 
tfice  him  to  their  resentment  for  the  loss  of  their  rehutions,  who  had 
fidlen  IB  the  battfe;  hot  Jdullik  Afamed'a  aEtbation,  and  perhaps  the 
beauty  of  his  person,  excited  the  compMaon  of  the  wife  of  the 
Dilazauk  chi^,  who  informed  him  of  his  danger,  and  concealed  hin 
tin  the  indigiMitiQii  of  her  clansmeii  had  subsided ;  they  then  re- 
pented of  a  resoliition  so  much  at  variance  with  the  respect  which  the 
J^haun  customs  exact  towards  a  guest  and  suppliant ;  and  when 
MuUik  Ahmed  discovered  himself,  they  received  him  with  distinc- 
tion, and  prepared  an  entertainment  in  honour  of  him.  Tlie  bard 
who  sung  to  them  while  thev  were  seated  at  tlie  feast,  appears  to 
have  been  less  generous  than  the  vest,  for,  as  he  simg  the  wars  and 
victories  of  the  tribe,  he  introdutecl  tlie  suhject  of  the  late  battle,  and 
in  some  extemporary  verses,  urged  the  chiefs  to  put  to  death  their 
enemy,  who  was  in  their  power.  This  advice  was  now  thought 
so  base,  that  thov  rose  in  indignation,  and  stoned  the  hard  out  ol  the 
assenibly.  Mullik  Aliiiied  was  allowed  fo  return  to  his  lube,  where 
beiiiL':  asked  his  opinion  of  the  Dilaeauks,  lie  declared  the  bard  was 
the  only  wise  man  among  them.  ' 