

In  tiieir  behaviour  to  other  tribes  or  nations,  they  appear  to  have 
united  the  ferocity  and  craft  of  sa;  ages,  with  the  moderation  of  a 
more  advanced  stage  of  civiiization.  iliey  i^re  stated  to  have  given 
quarter  to  Alghauns  taicen  in  battle,  through  respect  to  their  origin  j 
from  whence  it  may  be  inferred,  tliat  they  gave  none  to  Swatttee'pri* 
aoners}  jret  they  tieated  the  inhabitarita  <i>f  the  cooqntned  coontriea 
wbih  nuUfaieH^  andtiiij  aaem  to  hm  finnly  adhtted  tar.l3i*riiitaun 
of  mirer  engaging  in  mose  tlun  one  WW  at' e  tima 

WhoBT  lihe^.  bed  compieted  their  conqiieati,  they  prooeeded^  to 
divide  the  oountrieft  they  had  acqpared.  They  assigned  Huahtouggnr 
to  the  MahommedxycBy  who  had  amved  from  Khoraaaann  about  that 
period ;  and  in  their '  poaaeiaion  it  atill  lenlaiiiB.  '  llie  Giigigeeaiineea 
alao  had  been  cKpeDed  from  the  nei^^ilioiizhood  of  Gauhul  by  the 
Emperor  Bnber,  end  had  been  leoondkd  to  the  Enaofisyevt  who 
aUotted  to  them  the  VtrnMb^  which  they  atiU  bdd,  end  pert  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


334  DIVISION  OF  LANDS. 

Baujour,  item  which  they  have  since  been  expelled.  All  the  xeei  of 
the  country  remained  to  the  Eusofzyes,  who,  however,  engaged  to 
provide  for  certain  in&sif»  tcibes  j  the  piincipel  emong  these,  were 
the  Otmeimkheil,  to  whom  they  assigned  their  preeent  tenitory  ia 
tlie  mountains  east  of  Bejour.  Punjcora,  which  s^m»t]ien  tO'ha?e 
been  part  of  Bajour,  remained  to  the  EuHofzyes,  and  the  rest  wm 
some  years  afterwards  occupied  bv  its  present  possessors  the 
Turkolauneesy  or  TuiJ&aunees,  who  probably  took  it  izom  the  Deg- 
gauns. 

.  The  interior  division  of  the  lands  among;  the  subordinate  brandies 
of  the  tribe  of  Eusofzye,  and  among  the  individual  members  ot  those 
branches,  is  not  recorded:  it  may,  however,  be  easily  ascertained 
trom  the  present  state  of  property  in  the  Eusofzve  country,  and  it 
will  be  found  to  involve  some  verv  singular  nistiLuLioiih.  The  tribe 
of  Eusofzye  is  divided  into  two  great  branches,  Eusof  and  Muntler, 
the  first  of  which  acquired  Swaut,  Funjcora,  and  Booiieic,  and  the 
latter  the  ])lain  north  of  the  Caubul  river,  with  the  valley  <>(  Chunila. 
The  Eusot  are  again  divided  into  three  separate,  and  auw  independent 
clans,  the  Accozyes,  Moollez)  es,  and  Lawczyes,  of  whom  the  turiiiei 
obtained  Swaut  and  i'luijcora,  and  tlic  two  latter  Boonere.  The  com- 
plete property  of  the  soil  was  vested  in  eadi  clan,  and  the  Swaufees 
who  remained,  rare  redbced  to  the  condHioa  of  villains,  or,  as  the 
Enao&yescalltbeni  FakeecB*.  Tliia  is  tlte  state  in-whidi  things  ai^ 
at  this  dsjr.  .  '       i  .  i 

•■■  "Eadi  of  these  dans  divided  its  leads  among  its  Khails  f,  at  a  geoe- 
laTmeeling  of  .the  daiii  and  this  anaogement  wai  repeated*  tfaraii||^ 
out  all  the  subordinate  divisions.  ■  Each*  of  the  Khaila  leoeived '  its 
lands  in  perpetuity ;  but  s  di£Eeient  aKrangement  wai  adopted  widib 