

The  nunten  hanre  not  the  power  of  estoituig  money  fioan  dieir 
.Faheeia.  Ihcj  levy  finea:OB  theaetdement  of  .a  new  Fakeer  bi.their 
.hoidat  and  on.  the  morrii^  of  thev  Fakeen»  and  alao  aa  a  pvnuhp 
.ment-fer  mutdera  and.  other  crimea;  but.  the  amount,  like  that  of  the 
tax,  ia  fixed  hy  cnitom,  and  it  would  be  ledconed  grosa  oppreaaum 
to  levy.moie  than  waa.  due^ '  The  Fakeera  have  their  quarrela  and 
.iSbrnt  Hff?ftdthfiU  aa  w^U  aa  the  Eusofzyes,  hut  in.  a  far  less  degree. 
Ihey  are  nideed  an  hnmUe  and  unwarlifce  people,  and  aeldom  cany 
«ina,  thm^  they  are  not  forbidd^  to  do  so.  Their  houses  are 
.l^aacraDy  worse,  and  their  dreea  ia  plainer  than  that  of  the  A%hauns. 
Ihey  aie  all  ficiiiflal».md.aften  amaia  eoaiiderabie  auma  by  the  profits 

T.T  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


CUflfTOM  S  LEVIED  FT  OaiL0Ofi8B& 


«f  <kair  labour,  particolflriy'iiiiflii  tiMgr  «e  artimuy  tqd  faj  tiie 
cniinf  of  their  herds. 

Besidflstke  Fakeeni -employed  in  husbandry,  ihtte^mt  vijmy  ^tko 
tmsfk  as  maaeiM,  weaven,  dyers,  &c.  the  Afghattns  ne^er  praotilii^ 
•tay  1^  these  crafts.  Hie  situi^ion  of  some  of  these  h  ndenmen  is  pe- 
culiar. The  blacksmiths,  carpenters,  and  barbers,  together  with  the 
drununerB,  are  attached  to  particular  Cnndies,  have  a  share  of  land, 
and  work  gfratis  for  the  Cundv,  which  thev  follow  when  it  chancres  its 
residence.  All  the  others  remain  tixetl,  and  are  pnirl  hv  individiiais  ; 
even  the  rnfif^tcr  of  an  artiza?i  is  ohligcd  to  pay  liiin  tor  liin  work. 
Aighauns  who  come  from  distant  tribes,  and  wiiose  connectiotis  are 
not  known  arnonu  the  Eusofzyes,  are  ohli{?ed  to  settle  as  Fakeeis  ; 
but  Eusofzyes,  who  move  from  one  Oolooss  to  another.  ytHrticularly 
if  they  have  not  been  obliged  by  poverty  to  sell  their  lands,  are  re- 
ceived as  equals,  and  a  portion  of  land  is  ai>>si^iu d  to  them  on  con- 
dition of  serving  in  war,  like  tlie  members  of  the  Oolooss.  They  are 
not,  however,  consultetl  on  public  aiiaiib,  but  are  under  the  jjroU'o- 
tion  of  some  individual  who  looks  after  their  interests.  Some  of  the 
Deggauns,  who  are  reckoned  a  manial  people,  are  also  allowed  to 
serve  with  Eusofzyc  Ooloosses,  and  their  assistance  is  repaid  by  grants 
of  lands,  where  they  live  together,  under  chie&  of  their  own. 

Tbeatftte.of  tlie  Faikeers  is  not  exactly  the  aame  in  all  dans ;  -in  flonie 
Hiey  are  exenqii  from  paying  a  tax ;  and  the  amount  of  it,  and  ofllife 
'finM,  vmry  in  othfiocs. 

Mbiie  I  qiik  the  genefal  conoenw  of  thie  Ooloow>  I  h«ve  to  ob- 
iwrrc,  that  most  tribes  levy  tidatoma  on  goods,  that  enter  or  paaB 
Ihniiig^  their  oountiy.  The  produce  aometimea  goea  to  tlio  Oo- 
looaaea^  but  oftener  to  the  dikf. 