


344  CONDITION  OF  THE  FAKEERS  OR  VILLAINS 

<M]lie8  in  |iiMin|j;  'otiit  thr  mamy  iiiountaiiit»  took  die  capitdlt  and»  1 
bdieve^  dediraDed the  pfinoe;  bo*  he «Ud  not-  ettempt  to  liatBiii  tin 

country. 

The  whole  of  his  Ooiooaa  are  now  completelj  at  hk  devotion.  He 
can  iniprbon,  inflict  ooipofeel  punishment,  a&d  even  put  to  death.* 
He  has  edaipated  domertic  feuds,  and  has  establiahed  a  good  polioef 
so  that  his  government  is  far  from  being  unpopidar  even  among  hii 
£uaofiEye  subjects.  All  the  Fakeers  in  Punjcora  now  belong  to  bioi> 
and  pity  him  a  tax,  but  he  derives  no  revenue  from  his  clan. 

Kaussim  Khaun  has  shewn  a  disposition  fo  encroach  on  some  of 
the  democratic  laisotz\es  in  his  nei^lil>oui hood,  hut  ns  vet  without 
success.  On  tiiese  occasioas»  it  seems  to  have  beeu,his  plan  to  form 
a  party  within  the  tribe. 

It  is  impossible  to  enumerate  all  the  httle  republics  ol  ibc  l^u- 
sot/ves.  I  have  got  the  names  of  at  leust  tliirtv  of  fliem,  all  as  little 
connected  with  each  other  as  the  Naikpeekhail  are  w  ith  their  neigh- 
bours; but  it  is  probable  the  number  of  indepcndeiu  comnnniiiies  is 
still  more  considerable.  The  whole  numbers  oi'  the  Kusof/ves  are 
reckoned  by  the  Atghamis  at  900,000 ;  but  on  a  calculation  of  the 
extent  and  fertility  of  their  country,  I  should  be  inclined  to  conjec- 
ture that  their  numbers,  including  all  their  Fakeers  and  dependantSt 
did  not  exceed  700,000  souls. 

The  Faksen  are  mach  man  numeroua  than  the  Euso^yes.  The 
greatest  part  of 'them  aie  Swauteea,  who  wnamed  in  their  cooitiy 
after  it  wae  eonqneied*  »  oonaldenhle  muoiber  ot  DeggMuiSi  ■oaie 
Hmdkewi,  (who  hsre  been  driven  bj  fianine  to  tmnig^mt^  ham*  the 
Poii^ub,)  a  few  ■Cadimeereea  end  Hindooa»  (clanei  which  ero  led 
mlo  all  ooautries  bj  the  denie  of  geaiit)  end  aome  memben  cf 
JJjfmau  tribea  (who  have  Bugnted  into  the  EnaeAgfe  ooontij  m 
circmuHiioea  iMfh  have'depaded  them.to  the  nnk  of  Fakeen)» 
fbnndiefeiitof  thetbodj.  Moat  of  the  Fafcem  work  m  bnabandiy, 
and  many  feed  heidi  of  bufialoea  on  tihe  mowttamt.  - 

llie.Fekeen  h0ve  no  landt  they  are  not- oiMd«ed  M  mentea 
the  oominoinraallil^  nor  aflcwpeA  to>'  be  pment  nt  Jen^m.  Mifmy 


'   Digitized  by  Google 


'  OONDITIGN  jW  THK  FAXEERS  OR  VILLAINS.  345 

Fakeer  is  subject  to  die  penai  on  whoM  land  Jbe  residet,  wlio  it 
called  his  Khawund,  or  master.  He  pays  a  tax  to  his  iiiaitcf»  and  is 
also  obliged  to  work  for  him  gratis,  like  the  villains  id  Europe.  The 
master  can  also  beat,  or  evea  kill  his  Fakeer»  ^rithout  bdi^  ji]iiefH 

tioncd  for  it  On  the  other  hand,  the  Fakeer  is  sure  of  zealous  pro- 
tection from  his  mastor,  who  wouici  enter  into  the  most  desperate 
.quarrel  latlier  than  suttbr  another  persou  to  injure  his  Fakeer.  The 
Fakeer  is  at  liberty  to  pursue  any  trade,  to  work  as  a  labourer  for  his 
own  profit,  and  even  to  rent  lund  a  Buzgur  or  Metaver  ;  his  mas- 
ter having  no  demand  on  lum  hut  lor  his  estahhstied  tiix,  some  fixed 
dues,  which  will  be  mentioned  hereailer,  and  a  share  ot  his  labour. 
The  treatment  the  Fakeers  receive  from  their  masters,  is  gem  rallv 
mild.  The  master  is  deterred  from  aeveiity,  by  the  disgrace  which 
attaclie.s  to  oppression,  arul  still  more  by  the  right  of  the  Fakeer  to 
jremove  to  the  laacis  oi'  another  Eusoizvu ,  a  right  which  he  can  al- 
ways exercise,  as  tliere  is  a  great  competition  for  Fakecrs,  and  many 
men  will  always  be  found  ready  to  receive  and  protect  one  who  is 
disposed^  to  change  hb  master.  The  number  of  indqieadent  copp 
munities  is  also  a  proteti;km  to  theFakeers;  as  ona  of  them  who 
had  received  any  mortal  injury  (as  the  tunider  of  hia  idatM%  or  dbe 
■ednctldii  of  his  wife),  could  ze?enge  himaeif  bj  the  death  of  hia  op- 
|ifCiMr»  and  then  aeoure  hunaelf  by  flying  inio  tfie  ooantiyof  another 
Ooloofa. 