

Their  dress  and  ibod  are  like  thoae  of  Baioor,  but  their  dweUin^ 
are  hovels  made  of  mats. 

They  live  in  very  small  hamlets,  and  the  shepherds  are  scnttrred 
o^  er  the  hills  in  single  cottaf?es,  winch  are  only  inhabited  in  suniiner. 
Dieir  hirge  villages,  Laulpoora,  Katimeh,  and  Goshtpli.  contain  only 
texracetl  houses,  and  are  consider;)} )le  places.  Tiie  two  last  are 
Willed.  They  are  inhabited  by  chiets  and  their  retainers  (who  are 
not  generally  Momunds),  and  by  Hindkees. 

Most  of  the  country  people  are  employ eil  iu  agriculture,  and  some 
in  feeding  flocks  on  the  uninhabited  parts  of  the  hills.  In  winter, 
-these  emplo^Tjicnts  are  suspended,  and  they  fill  up  their  time  at 
home,  with  making  inaLs,  saiululs,  &c,  fecm  the  leaves  of  the  dwarf 
palm.  They  export  their  mats  to  Peshawer,  uud  al»io  carry  grain  to 
diedarge  villages,  receiving  returns  in  salt,  cotton  cloth,  coarse  silks, 
inft  flonie  other  articles. 

z  z  9 


Digitized  by  Google 


356 


KHYBEREESL 


Two  KhiOs  of  the  Upper  Momundi  Uve  in  black  tents,  keep 
aunelfly  taod  move  in  spring  with  their  flodu  to  (he  'upper  put  of  (he' 
Heehnund  in  Khofeasaun.  Ttteae  are  the  onfy  nknring  hordfit 
among  the  Berdooranneei. 

The  Klijberees  live  aanang  the  iieads  of  the  nnmeroua  branchea 
which  issoe  from  the  northern  and  eaatern  ftcea  'of  Bpeengliur^  er 
Su&id  GohJ  Ibej  derive  thdr  name  from-  the  valky  or  paaa  of 
Khyfaer,  which  extends  on  the  fi^  of  the  CSiabul  river*  between 
Fediawer  and  JdhiUabad*  and  fimna  the  notthem  border  of  their 
poaaceaioni  thejr  are  bounded  on  the  weat  by  the  uninhabitable  smn- 
mita  of  Sufiud  Cah ;  on  the  south,  they  have  the  Bungnah  oomrtiy* 
and  on  die  north-ea^t  the  plain  of  Peshawer ;  but  on  the  aouth  coat 
they  extend  ahx^  the  Range  of  S4"«  nearly  (o  the  Indus. 

Hie  country  is  very  diversified.  The  upper  part  is  litoated  on 
the  steep  side  of  a  lofty  ni6untain>  and  the  lower'  amcHig  bare  and 
rugged  hills,  and  rich  but  narrow  vallgra. 

The  climate  varies  from  great  cold  to  excessive  heat  In  general  it 
is  cool,  but  the  lower  valleys  arc  hot,  from  the  stagnation  of  the  air 
occasioned  by  the  mountains  which  siirround  them,  and  the  low  bare 
hills  are  there,  a.s  every  where,  intolerably  hot  in  summer. 

The  Khyberees  consist  of  three  indt  |h  ndeiit  tribes,  exclusive  of 
the  Upper  Momunds.  These  arc  tlu  Atu  i  cK  t  s,  Shainwaurees,  and 
Oorookzyes.  Altogether  ilicy  ■,ivv  about  120,000  souls.  The  Shain- 
waurees are  the  least  immerous,  but  they  are  the  best  people  of  the 
three,  and  most  subject  to  the  King's  authority.  The  others  are 
secured  from  subju^raf  ion  bv  the  strength  of  their  country;  but  the 
importance  of  the  Kiij,ber  });iss  (the  great  communication  between 
Peshavvci  and  Caubul),  rentiers  it  necessary  for  the  Iviiig  to  have 
some  control  over  their  proceedings.  They  accordingly  receive  great 
pensions,  on  condition  of  answering  for  the  quiet  of  the  road ;  but 
auch'  ara  Iheir  habits  of  rapine,  thi^  thqr  can  never  be  tntiidy're- 
atramed  ilrein  plundering  passengers and  liliai  lfaeve:  ut  any  confix 
aiofi  in  the  atate,  it  is  impoaaihle  to  paaa  ifardng^'their  coinCry.  '  The 
Khyber  paaa  ia  about  twenty-£ve  mileB  long,  over  ateep  ridg^  tfid 