

to 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPEARANCE,  MANNERS.  AND  CHARACTER.  557 

dttongh  wy  nainm  dcfilei.  The  nMd  is'  oAm  aloi^  the  bedi  of 

torrents,  and  18  eoctmaely  dangMWiB  in  the  event  of  nddm  &]]s  of 
rain  itt  the  bills.    In  quiet  tunes,  the  Khyberees  have  itetioiis  in 

different  parts  of  the  pass^  to  collect  an  authorised  toll  on  passengers, 
but  in  timfle  of  trouble,  thej  are  all  on  the  alert  If  a  single  traveller 
endeavours  to  make  his  way  threi^gb*  the  noise  of  his  horse's  feet 
sounds  up  the  long  narrow  valleys,  and  soon  brings  the  Khybeiees  in 

troops  from  the  hills  and  rMvines  ;  but  if  they  expect  a  caravan,  th^ 
assemble  in  hundreds  on  the  sirlr  of  a  hill,  and  sit  patiently*  with 
their  muttlWock;^  in  their  iiunds,  watcliiiin^  its  approfich. 

The  Khyberees  are  lean,  but  muscular  mt  n,  whh  long  gaunt  faces, 
high  noses  and  cheek-bones,  and  black  complexions.  They  wear, 
in  winter  at  least,  dark-blue  turbaus,  and  long  dark4}iue  tunics,  sit- 
ting close  to  the  bmly,  but  reaching  to  the  middle  of  the  leg.  They 
wear  n&ai  sandals  of  straw,  or  the  leaf  of  the  dwarf  palm  ;  carry 
matchlocks,  with  a  wooden  fork  attached  to  the  barrel  lor  a  r^t, 
swoidis,  and  shfirt  spears  j  and  have  altogether  an  appearance  more 
strange  aud  uncouth  than  any  other  Atghauns  1  ever  saw. 

In  their  valleys  they  have  terraced  houses,  but  in  the  mountains, 
which  diey  chiefly  inhabit  m  summer,  they  haye  movealiile 
huts  of  mat,  like  thxwe  of  the  Upper  Momunds.  They  come  down 
into  the  law  hOk  in  winter,  where  tfaej  chiefly  live  m  caves  cut 
out  of  the  endiy  pwt  of  the  hills*  They  sre  extremely  impatiant  of 
hfitrtt 

Hiejr  are  exeeQcBt  marksmen,  and  are  ledconed  good  hill  soldien, 
tibouglh  of  no  great  account  in  the  plain.  They  are  often  employed 
in  this  sort  of  waxfiu:e»  as  &r  ^em  their  oountiy  as  Kbte  Kaungm  In 
the  eastern  atramily  of  the  Fm^anb.  They  aiC!»  hiywever,  more  di»> 
poaed  to^ondv  than  war,  and  will  fill  on  the  baggage  of  the  army 
diey  bdkMig  to,  if  they  find  it  unguarded.  It  was  thus- they  behaved 
to  Shah  Shujah  in  the  heat  of  die  battle  of  Eahpaun,  and  fay  these 
means  lost  him  the  day.  .  • 

,  ;On  the  wholes  they  are  the  graatest  xobban  among  the  A%hauns, 
and  I  imagine  have  no  faith  or  sense  of  honour,  for  I  never  heard  of 


558  TBIBIS  OP  PESHAWBB. 

any  body  hiiiqg  an  escort  of  Ehjfanaes  to  Moiirehis  passage  thnmgh 
their  countxyj  a  step  which  aiwagfa  eoiOMa  •  tnveUor'a mfiBtj  in  the 

lands  of  any  other  tribe.  ^ 

Tbe  plain  of  Feshawer,  which  Hesi  immediately  to  the  south  of  the 
Ikisoizyes,  is  nearly  circular,  and  about  thirty-five  miles  in  diameter. 
It  Is  surrounded  by  mountains  on  all  sideS)  except  the  east,  where  a 
narrow  slip  of  barren  coLinti  j  runs  along  the  banks  of  the  CaubiJ 
river  to  the  Indus.  Tliis  slip  is  about  fifteen  milt  s  hroad,  aiul  litjs 
between  the  mountains  of  Boonere,  and  the  Ran^'e  oi  latitude  34", 
which  bounds  the  plmn  of  i^esliawer  on  the  south  ;  on  the  south-west 
of  the  plain  are  the  hiUs  of  the  Kiijberees,  round  the  lof^v  peak  of 
Suffkid  Cob  ;  on  the  west  are  the  hills  of  the  Otmauiikliuil  iuid  the 
Upper  jN'Jomunds,  over  which  are  seen  far  higher  mountains. 