

Above  BimnoOy  and  divided  from  it  by  hills,  is  the  long  Irat  narrow 
.fliley  of  Doirar,  which  sli^tches  up  to  the  country  of  the  Jadrauni^ 
en  tbe  ridge  of  the  Solmumny  mountaiiis.  It  is  a  populous  country, 
ihU  of  walled  villages,  always  at  mr-wifli  each  other.  Theve  can  be 
little  or  no  govemment^  auoe  e  poratM  peffon  een  aeieethe'cfafl^ 
idfim  V»  weak  oDo,  tod  leD  them  fiiT'dsFee.  Thqr  aW'Tiinniliiili 


Digitized  by  Google 


TUNNEES  IN  DRUGGYE.   VIZEEREES.  ^ 

for  their  diigiistiiig  vices,  and  indeed  there  ia  notJiing  to  piaiae  in 
their  maimen.  Those  of  Bunnoo  are  not  niMsh  better,  and  the 
MooUahs,  as  usual  in  mch  oountriet*  h«ve  greet  power,  whidi  they 

do  not  fail  to  abuse. 

To  the  north  of  Dower,  between  it  «n(l  the  Koormnif  lies  Khoflif 
•  email  country,  peopled  like  Dower  and  Bunnoo,  by  niei^  Rmell 
dans  of  various  descent.  It  lies  as  high  as  Dower,  but  ia  aepanted 
firom  it  by  hilU.  It  is  in  obedience  to  the  King,  and  is  governed  bj 
one  of  its  own  chiefs,  who  acts  as  deputy  to  the  King's  Sirdar.; 
nevertheless  it  is  torn  by  internal  dissensions.  The  whole  vall^  is 
divided  into  two  factions,  called  the  Tor  Goondee,  and  Speen  Goon- 
dee  (i.  e.  the  black  and  white  leagues),  which  are  perpetueliy  at  wa^ 
about  the  rpiarrels  ot"  one  or  other  of  their  member*!. 

East  of  Khost  is  Drugye,  a  small  rountrv  irilKiluted  by  a  tribe 
called  Tiinnee,  of  which  I  know  nothing  but  the  name. 

Till'  hilLs  wliicli  .surround  tlie  foiy  last  countries^  are  inhabited  bjr 
the  inountaia  tribe  of  V  iaeeree^- -      '    •     <         -  '   • ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


{   9G6  ) 


CHAP,  a 

•  -  • 

•  » 

lASTinr  TUBES  — CONTINUED. 

DAMAUN  in  its  most  extended  sense,  comprehends  all  the 
country  belweeti  tlie  Salt  range,  the  Solimauny  mountains,  the 
Indus,  and  Sungur  in  Upper  Sind.  I  have  ahready.  dispotied  oi  the 
part  of  it  which  lies  to  the  north  of  the  Koorrum  and  Gombela,  and 
now  prot^ed  to  the  remainder.  This  may  be  di\  ided  into  three 
parts.  The  plain  of  the  Indus,  generally  inhabited  1)\  liduclies,  and 
called  Muckelwaud  *  ;  the  country  of  the  Murwuls  j  and  the  plains 
and  low  hills  (about  the  roots  of  the  mountains)  which  (xtmtitute 
Damaun  proper. 

Muckelwaud  extends  along  the  Indus  for  about  one  hundred  and 
twenty  miles.  Its  mean  breadth  s  irom  twenty-five  to  thirty  miles. 
h.  is  ftpkinof  hard  smiocidi  day,  quite  flat,  bare  of  grass,  but  sprinkled 
witli  bmbeB  about  a  fbot  high,  and  still  mofe  tliinlj  seattered  with 
■epaiata  tamafaaB  of  tamariAi  and  of  the  thorny  shrub  caOed  m  india 
Kured;  with  here  and  there  a  tree  of  the  sort  called  Jant,  from  fif- 
teen to  twenty  feet  high-  The  soil,  when  much  trodden  on,  turns 
hifto  a  very  minute  whitiih  duat  It  seems  to  be  composed  of  the 
slime  of  the  liver,  which  in  smnmerinundatea  this  oountiyfbragEeal 
exteiit;attfae  same  tune  the  moimtain  streams,  swdkd  by  the  md^ 
anow,  pour  down  and  cover  all  the  flats  with  water.  It  ia  soldom  ▼cry 
deap,  but  it  seema.  to  He  long  fiom  the  appearance  of  the  ground* 