

The  pecidiarities  common  to  the  tribes  of  Damaun  will  be  best 
shewn  by  comparing  them  with  the  other  division  of  the  eastern 
Afghauns.  They  difi^  £rom  the  Berdoorauneen  in  appearance,  being 
large  bony  men,  often  fiur,  and  ahrajs  wenrin^  long  iiau:  and  beards. 
Tbeij  bcTiikM  of  tbe  look  of  IndlaDS  than  the  otfattiy  though  their 
•nmmer  dieit  is  nevly  the  moe  m  that  olt  Indk.  IntteMl  ol'tlie 
.  long  wide  ahirt  and  cap  of  tlue  Afghauns,  tliey  wear  a  doaedran  of 
iriiite  qotton*  tied  acaroaa  the  bneat*  and  leadiiiig  a  little  baloir  the 
knee ;  even  in  winter  they  wear  taibana,  but  they  afe  ektramely 
koge  and  loose,  whOe  those  of  the  Indians  are  rbUedeldse  round  tbair 
head»  in  e  fc|;alar  slMpe  that  has  litde  grace  or  tieganoa  At  Aal 
season,  they  aba  wear  brown  and  grey  woollen  great  coats,  and  poe- 
tcena.  Ilieir  houses^  fiiod,  and  habits  of  life  resemble  those  of  the 
Berdooiannees,  but  tibiey  live  more  on  fleah,  cioot,  and  odier  pioduce 
of  their  flodo,  and  th^  hsnre  less  feim  than  matey  of  the  olhen, 
plajing  at  all  games*  and  allowing  their  women  to  appear  in  public 

8  a 


070     TEMPORARY  IfAOIflTRACT  OF  THE  CHBLWASHTfcC 


widioot  tbe  l€Mt  restniiit.  Ji^y  of  them  are  paatonUt  .ifid-tliiiott 
all  are  merchaB^  or  icanien.  Part  of  every  tribe  -  goea  upl  vwf 
^ik^  to  Khorassann ;  firom  this  and  other  reasons,  they  have  a'gveater 
mixture  of  the  manners  of  that  country  than  the  Berdooraunees } 

though  they  retain  strong  marks  of  their  original  connection  with 
Hindostan.  They  are  generally  simple  and  honest,  less  litigious  than 
tiietiil)cs  with  which  I  am  comparing  them,  less  bigoted  and  in- 
tolerant, and  less  addicted  to  every  kind  of  vice  and, debauchery. 

Being  still  more  remote  from  the  seat  of  the  royal  aiilhdiity,  they 
are  under  little  control  from  the  government ;  and  some  of  them 
seem,  till  witlnn  tin  s(~  tilty  years*  to  have  lived  in  as  nuich  anarchy 
as  the  KiKsotives.  l^ut  this  has  been  correcte<l  in  the  greater  part 
of  them  bv  the  election  of  temporary  magistrates,  invested  with  suf- 
ficient powers  to  preserve  the  public  peace,  but  prcvt;nted  by  the 
short  duration  of  their  office  from  appl)  ing  it  to  any  purpose  incon- 
sistent with  the  freedom  of  the  tribe.  Tliis  magistracy  is,  iudeetl,  the 
featiue  in  the  tribes  of  Damaun  which  most  distinguishes  them  Irom 
the  other  A%hauns.  It  prevails  among  all  these  tribes  except  two, 
and  also  in  the  neighbouring  mountain-tribe  o£  S3keerauDee.  It  is 
aiho  in  me  among  the  Ghiyiea  of  Kiitte«raii%  and  the  Kaners,  but 
among  no  other  people  of  whom  I  hasre  information. 

llieae  magistratea  are  in  aome  tribes  eUcted  by  the  MnUika*  in 
others  b/the  heads  of  ftmiliea.  They  are  chosen  fat  their  personal 
qualities^ 'the  number  of  their  relations,  and  their  general  wei|^  in 
the.  tribes  and  are  anned  with  power  to  maintain  order,  and  to  punish 
the  breadi  of  it  by  fines*  end  in  some  tribes,  even  by  corporal  punish- 
ment. ,  They  are  selected  fiom  eadi  Ehul  in  fixed  proportions,  whidi 
were  at  first  deugned  lo  make  up  the  number  of  ibity  (whence  these' 
cffieeia  are  called  Chelwaahtees*),  and  they  are  under  the  anthdrit^ 
of  one  chief,  called  the  Ifeer  of  the  C3ielwa8htees»47ho  is  elected  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  rest.   The  duty  of  the  Meer  of  the  Chel-  ' 