

The  soil  of  the  plain  is  a  rich  black  mould.  The  surface  is  wavy, 
but  the  whole  plain  lies  scmudi  lower  than  the  surrounding  countries) 
that  the  water  feadbflft  ilmoat  jevery  part  of  -  it,  and  secures  it  a  per- 
petual Teidiii«b.  ThiB  abundaiioct  of  watar  it  even  aomeliiaaB-Aik-aa 
an  inoonvenience  in  the  lower  paita  of  tlie  plain,  and  partioularly  in 
the  town,  part  of  wluch  ia  flooded  in  the  ^)ring  raini. 

Tbe.iblJowing  aie  generally  called  the  tribes  of  PesbAwar : 

Hie  Mafaommedajea* 
-  Giiggieeaaneea* 
Mehm^dfl. 
Khnlleela,  and 
Dawoodxyear 

The  M^ommetkyes  and  Guggeeaunees  live  on  the  Eosofzye  side 
of  the  Caubul  river;  their  settlement  has  already  bean  related.  Th^ 
manners  resemble  those  of  the  Eusofzyes ;  but  thej  are  in  obedience 
to  the  King,  and  under  strict  subjection  to  their  owh  chiefs.  The 
chief  place  of  the  Mahommedzyes  is  Hushtnuggur,  which  may 
either  be  considered  as  one  veiy  huge  town^  or  aa  eigjht  oonftigooua 
Tillages,  .  . 


Digitized  by  Googic 


DR£S£^  MAMtOiiUB^  AliD  CHAEACTEa.  iM 

Guggeenneat  it  fiwthouwmd'fiiiBwii.  " 
HM'tJntevdien  fim.tlid''GlioiKieTir  (ShoraeddniL  Xb&at  tki 
middle  of  the'  fifteenth  naaturj,  the^  w«»  iMtded  to  Hieifeit  i|f 
Giinmnn;  aloiig  the  river  Tliimiks  and  in  teibei'sitinie  (ebeiit  A.  H» 
915),  tHe  Mefamendt  «t  leert  ieem  to  hivve  been  to  the  Mmth  of 
Gtimee,  Tlief 'ippeer  at  that  penbd  «o-h«ve-  been  peitlj,  if  not 
entinly  peatdieL 

They  descended  to  Peahwfer  in  the  reign  of  Canmreim 
Bnbar»  end'witlilheeMistaneeof  'dut'prinoey  drove  thelXhuHmks 
nacbas  the  Indnsrof  tfait  'niuneroas  and'  pbwerM  trib^  there  are 
IMnrenlytVfo'or  three  villages,  tothe^weat  «f  the  Indus.  Them 
are,  however,  some  tfaouaand  DUaaanka  0D1  the  Indian  aide  of  the 
iiver*  '  ■  •  ..  .  » 

From  their  leaidence  in  an  •open  plain,  these  tribea  moat  a}w8ys 
have  been  in  complete  dependence  on  the  King.  Ihey  aaret  indeedf 
the  itiost  ndgeet  of  the  Afghaun  tribes,  and  are,  in  consequence,  ex- 
posed to  iJ)p|niaaaioii,  which  they  bear  with  a  good  deal  of  impatience. 
The  chief  injury  which  they  sufier,  is  from  the  troops  foraging^  in 
their  fields' while  the  King  is  at  Peshawer.  They  have  twice  rebelled, 
and  are  said  to  have  had  a  design  of  expelling  the  King^s  governor, 
and  imitntinn;  the  independeiice- of  the  £iuoizye8,  which  they  ccr* 
tainlv  admire  and  env^'. 

The  chiefs  of  the  tribes  are  here  called  the  .Urbaubs  ;  their  powers 
vary  in  i\w  ditit  rent  tribes  ;  they  are  greatest  among  the  Mehmends. 
Tritiing  disputeb  tween  individuals  are  ^t  ttU  d  hy  the  chief,  or  by  a 
Jeerga,  but  all  important  causes  are  investigated  bv  the  ('auzy,  or 
the  Sirdar  oi  lho  city.  In  general  there  is  great  tranquillity  in  Pesha- 
war, but  in  suinuier,  when  the  Kin^^  and  his  troops  are  absent,  strong 
sign;>  of  the  turbulence  of  the  Berdooraunees  break  out,  and  tribes 
oiieii  fight  iibout  water  for  their  fields.  * 