

The  clan  of  Bungush  has  the  hills  of  the  Khyberees  on  the  north» . 
the  Kliiittulcs  on  the  cast  and  soitth-eaat,  oome  of  the  Viieereea  on 
the  sontli,  and  the  Toorees  on  the  west. 

•  Tlieir  counti;.  c  onsists  of  a  long  vaHev  widening  into  a  plain  about 
twelve  miles  in  tiiarneter.  The  valley  is  called  Upper,  and  the  plain 
^wer  Bungusli.  The  plain  is  fertile  and  well  watered ;  the  uncul- 
tivated parts  are  covered  with  dwarf  palm,  but  there  are  few  trees, 
^cept  in  some  pleasing  ganlens  alx)ut  Cohaut,'the  residence  of  the 
chief.  Tliis  has  been  a  neat  little  town,  but  has  been  reduced  by  ilie 
distractions  in  the  tribe,  to  the  size  of  a  considerable  village.  Upper 
Bungush  is  wvW  watt  red,  and  productive  in  the  bottoms^  but  the  hills 
are  steep  and  rugged.  '  "  ^  '• 

.Both  the  Khuttuk  and  Bungush  countries  have  great  variety  of 
climate.  Some  parts  of  the  hills  are  covered  with  snow,  as  lale  ;is 
March,  while  others  are  saircely  whitened  in  the  depth  of  winter ; 
and  some  are  never  visited  by  snow.  In  general,  the  hills  and  vallics 
are  colder  as  they  are  nearer  the  Solimauny  mountains.  The 
plains,  though,  colder  than  Pediawer/'have  seldotti,  if  ever>  fidlaof 
ano^. 

.  The  people^'liower  ^Bungush,  are  very  obedieiKt  to  dieijr  Khaun 
and  to  the  Ki^  fhose  of  Upper  Bunguth  lew  ao. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ESAUKHAOS.  S6S 

They  have  something  of  the  appearance  of  the  tribes  of  PeduNPer^ 
bofc  diess  like  Khjberees.  The  fiunilj  of  Brngmh^  which  has  mads 
w»  great  a  figure  in  India^  and  fieosn  wfaiclft.ara  sprung  the  Naboba  of 
Fumikabad,  is  descended  Gtom.  ft  poMant  of  Upper  Bunguah. 
-  .West  of  Upper  Bungush,  aiellie.Toofeab  Inhabiting  a  condnua- 
tion  of  the  same  vallagr.  .  The  coantrjr  nd  produce  are,  of  course, 
much  the  same.  The  people  are  independent  on  the.  King,  and* 
what  is  surprising  among  Aighmins,  thegr.aie  i  muty  of  the 

Uppeir  Bungush  also  belong  to  this  sect.  : , 

Farther  up  the  same  valley,  which  continues  to  stretch  west  neady 
parallel  to  the  Koorrum,  are  the  Jaujees,  the  inveterate  enemiea.  of 
the  Toorees.  Their  valley  runs  up  the  steep  side  of  the  range  of 
Solimaun,  and  is  narrower,  poorer,  and  colder  than  that  of  tlie  Toorees. 
Tlie  sides  ot  ihc  vallov  are  covered  witli  pines  ;  the  chief  animals  are 
goats.  The  inliahitants  live  iniitjuscs  iialt"  sunk  in  the  frround,  wear 
Afghniiii  shirts  of  blanket,  and  bum  tires  day  and  night  iov  thv  greater 
^>art  of  the  year.  One  road  from  the  Indus  to  Caubul  runs  up  this 
long  valley,  and  atter  passing  the  Jaujee  coiuitry,  issues  through  a 
defile  in  the  highest  ridge  of  the  Solimauny  range*  into  the  high 
countries  north-east  of  (ihuznee, 