


*  The  tame  who  wa»  afterward*  (ieckred  i^ng  by  the  Ghiljies. 


374 


U8UEPATION  OF  SUKWUR  KHAUN. 


In  the  mean  time*  Gool  Khaim  had  bflgim  to  be  he^^ 
his  magistracy.  The  tribe  had  tiitned  into  a  turbulent  demdcia^, 
over  vhich  he  eKordaed  a  feeble  and  precaribm,  jet  mvidkNia  audio- 
riQr;  a  sedition  had  biokeSn  out  about  the  property  left  bj'Knttau], 
which  Gobi  Ehaun  wished  to  appropriate  to  himselC  Tfaue  Dowlnt- 
khail  began  to  nnirmur  at  his  govemment'i  and  csie.of  them  hauA 
drawn  his  swoid  oa  him,  and  asked^  if  .he  thought  they  had  killed 
Kuttaitltb  msike  him  thdr  master?  He  was,  therdbrey  eqmillj  terri- 
fied at  the  prospect  of  Surwur*s  success*  and  at  the  continuance  of  the. 
democracy;  and  listened  with  pleasure  to  an  overture  which  Surwur 
made  to  him,  and  which  seemed  to  present  the  ottty  sale  retreat  from 
his  perilous  situation.  Accordingly,  when  Surwur  approached,  Gool 
Khaun's  management,  supported  k>y  the  terror  of  the  royal  arms,  .dii»- 
posed  the  Dowlutkhaai  to  submit,  and,  Surwur  taking  a  solemn,  oath 
to  forget  past  iiyuries,  thej  oameoted  to  receive  him  as  their 'diie£ 
This  appearance  of  forgiv^ess  was  kept  up  till  all  the  leading  men 
had  been  got  together,  when  eighteen  of  them  were  seized  and  put 
to  death.  Gool  Khaun  was  sjiaied,  but  on  .  a  subsequent  quarrel, 
SurwuT  put  him  also  to  death. 

His  government  was  now  established,  all  those  that  could  ojipose 
him,  h;\(\  been  m&dc  away  with,  and  noliody  in  the  tribe  had  the 
courage  to  rebel.  He  continued  to  stren^'^tliLn  liiniseli,  and  to  put 
the  murderers  of  his  fatlior  to  death  as  they  ieli  into  his  hands,  till 
twelve  years  ago.  when  ail  his  enemies  were  extirpated,  and  his 
power  was  at  its  lu  i^ht.  Since  then  he  has  governed  with  great 
justice  and  moderation  ;  his  sleaJy  and  impartial  administration  is 
popular  among  the  Ryots,  but  odious  to  the  JJowlutkhail,  whose  in- 
dependence it  restrains. 

Surwur  now  maintains  about  five  hundred  soldiers  in  his  own  pav, 
all  the  customs  and  the  revenue  derived  from  the  Ryots  are  Ins,  but 
he  takes  nothing  from  the  Dowlutkhail. 

Like  Haussim  Khaiim  of  Deer,  he  cannot  rest  without  reducing 
^  firee  tribes  amund  vBoda  his  dominion.    His  chief  designs  have 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


GUNDliHPOORS.  375 

beeo  agftaut  the.  Gundehpoon,  who  we  hk  neemt  B^gbbonrs. 
Thej  tee  little  lees  nmneroiM  dian  the  Doirhitkhei1»  with  all  their 
Rjote,  but  Surwur  can  always  impede  iheir  opcnaooa*  bybribipg 
some  of  their  Afulliks ;  and  even  when  they  eng^  heaitify  in  a  ww» 
there  is  a  great  difference  betw^n  viOagerB*  under  the  temporacy 
authority  of  a  CIk  1  w  ashtee,  and  the  troopa  of  an  established  govern- 
ment  like.Stirwur  Khaun's. 