

■  The  d^ef  of  the  Sheeraunees  is  called  iheNeeka  (which  in  Push- 
too means  the  grandfather).  He  has  very  great  authority  in  hm 
tribe,*  which  is  partly  derived  from  his  being  the  efaosen:  head  of  the 
oki^t  family,  and  partly  from  the  belief  of  the  Sheeramites^  that  he 
18  under  the  immediate  guidance  and  protection  of  Providence.  He 
'has  alarfte  estate,  and  consequentiv  fmploys  many  people  in  husban- 
dty,  but  he  has  ni)  domosnc  8ervaiit>.  He  rccpive*;  n  Inmb  annually 
from  everv  mnn  in  the  tribe  who  has  sheep,  and  :i  calt  trom  those 
who  have  mnu\  rattle.  No  force  is  employed  to  reahze  this  tax,  but 
it  is  rea(lil\  p  nitL  from  the  conviction  of  tiie  people  that  some  gr^  ' 
misforti  u  [  tlu  death  of  a  child  for  inrtawre)  will  fall  oa  &nry  po^ 
son  wh<i  rckises  to  pav. 

Thovi^'h  men  oth'ti  rrdrt'ss  tlieir  owD  injuries  bv  mere  Ibrce,  yet  tlie 
Neeka  is  the  only  regular  dispenser  of  justice.  He  hears  the  parties, 
and  after  sayinji  a  prayer,  decides  the  cause  by  the  inspiration  of  the 
Divinity.  His  order  is  alwa;^s  obeyed  from  the  dread  of  supernatural 
punishment,  : :  .    .     •  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


PREDATOBT  CHARACnft  Or  THE  SHfiERAlWEEa  38.^ 

■  fjhiinniiinirn  have  also  Cbelwashtees,  but  they  leab  intended 
nther  to  supply  the  place  of  the  Neeka  in  distaafc  pnis»  than  to 
itrangthen  bis  power.  They  are  appointed  by  the  Neeka,  uid-Mt 
under  his  orders.    The  Sheeraunees  have  little  internal  dissension. 

There  is  a  Moollah  in  every  village,  who  receives  a  tythe  oi'  the 
produce  of  its  lands  nnd  flocks.  The  simjilicity  of  the  Sheeraunees 
isahewn  in  aRtron^i;  \i<A\t  bv  one  of  the  i  unctions  of  this  priest,  winch 
ia  to  sew  the  shrouds  tor  thi- dead.  great  many  of  the  Slieerau- 
nees  learn  to  read  tiic  Korauii,  though  uoue  but  Aloollaiis  learn  to 
tead  Pushtoo,  and  none  rersian.  Thev  are  very  punctual  in  their 
prayers,  but  apparently  feel  little  real  dt  votion.  * 

The  Sheeraiinees  are  at  war  with  all  the  tribes  that  pnm  through 
their  country  in  tlieir  annual  uiigratioas.  They  may,  indeed,  be  said 
t6  be  at  svar  with  all  the  world,  since  they  plunder  every  traveller  that 
comes  witliin  their  re^h  ;  and  besides,  make  incursions  into  parts  of 
Damaun,  with  the  inhabitants  of  whicli  they  have  no  quarrel.  "While 
I  was  in  their  neiglibourhood,  they  stopped  the  body  i>t  a  Dooraunee 
of  rank,  which  vva.s  guing  through  their  coimtry  to  be  buried  at  Can- 
dahar,  and  detained  it  till  a  ransom  had  been  paid  ibr  it. 

All,  however,  agree  that  their  fiuth  is  unblemished,  and  that  a 
tntteller  who  hires  an  escort  of  Sheevaunees,  may  pass  tfarooi^  tbeb 
coHBtry  in  peiftitt  security.  • 