

Theie  wte  still  to  be  ibund  in  Bamaun,  some  ftmilies  of  the  tribes 
of  Sofliee  0d  libdi,  to  the  fint  of  which  bekngad  the  djfiitttycf 
CMiom^  0ne-tini»theim0st  powerfbl  mJUiss*  theseoon4  fivna  long 
than gnse Kingi to Hindostaaii*  '      i.-  •  v 

'  BeM(ke  ihe  tribes  I  have  mentioned,  all  Damaun  and  Mdckelwaxidf 
ace  fified  in  winter  with  camps  of  Sofimamikhails*  Kharotees,  'Saman 
sers,  and  other  wwnderiqg  tribes,  who  ocMue  there  to  avoid  the  ri  <i(>nT 
ef.  their  native  climates.    Those  who  have  caoieH 'move  mto  Moo- 

•  *       f    '  I 

..J  - 

|.  •  •  .It '<.<»  < 
•  .... 


kelwand,  but  those  with  sheep  leknain  in  Dnnaiuk 


S  c  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  -  •  '(   880   )  r 


CHAP.  IIL 

MOUNTAIN  TUBES. 

I AM  now  to  speak  oS.  the  tribes  which  inhabit  the  range  of  Soli'* 
mmi ;  and  as  I  propose  to  begin  from  the  ioath,  I  oi^^  finfe 
to  describe  the  ^nurrees  (who  inhabit  that  part  of  the  mountaine 
iriikh  it  to  the  weit  of  the  ^NxxneeeimeoB),  but  as  that  tribe  doielj 
Mtembles  the  Sheeraunees,  I  shidl  proceed  to  describe  the  latter,  re- 
flecting whom  I  am  better  in^Mmied.  I  onist,  however,  notice,  thai 
the  Zmurreea  are  aflowed  to  be  exempt  from  the  habits  of  npiae  for 
which  the  Sheeraunees  are  so  renunkaUa 

The  Sheeraunees  inhabit  the  mounttdns  north  of  those  of  the 
Zmurrees.  Their  country  overloc^  that  of  the  Bauboors  and  Mee- 
aunkhails,  and  they  have  the  Vueerees  on  the  north ;  their  westem 
boundary  will  be  mentioned  hereafter. 

Great  part  of  this  country  is  occupied  by  the  lofty  mountain  of 
Tukliti  Solimaun,  and  the  hills  which  surround  its  base.  Many  parts 
of  it  are  nearly  inaccessible;  one  of  the  roads  is  in  some'  plact  s  rut 
out  of  the  steep  face  of  the  hill,  and  in  others  supported  by  beams 
inserted  in  the  rock,  and  with  all  this  labour,  is  still  impracticable 
for  loaded  bullocks. 

The  population  is  Roaften d  in  villages  of  from  twenty  to  forty 
houses,  through  the  valleys  and  the  lower  parts  of  the  mountains. 
TTiey  cut  out  the  sites  of  their  liouses  in  the  slopes  of  the  hills,  so 
that  on  three  sides,  the  earth  forms  the  lower  part  of  the  wall.  Each 
cottage  contains  but  one  room,  and  has  only  one  entrance,  wliich  is 
closed  at  night  with  a  branch  of  a  thorny  tree.  Even  in  winter  they 
have  notliing  to  shut  out  the  cuid  j  but  sleep  on  black  carpets,  round 


Digitized  by  Google 


SUEKBAUNlia  'JSHI 

':llie;fiie^  waupt  vip  ia  thor  sheep-skin  doaka.  TlMW'ftMrti^fimiiih 
tben  with  pkntj  of  firo-wood,  and  thdr  haom  wevl^bted  fntb 

»bgMidieaof  »  pwtiniliir  sort  of  fir  which  borna  like  »  UttdL 

The.  SheariiiBeCB  un  genenlly  of  middling  stature,  thin,  bi|t  itoiit, 