

He  W98  entrnated  with  the  command,  and  thus  olHalncxl  a  pretext 
for  raising  troops,  which  the  contributions  of  the  Dowhitkhail,  and 
his  eaactions  from  the  conquered  tribes,  gave  him  the  means  of  main^^ 
tainm^.  By  these  means  he  collected  about  three  hundred  Beloches 
and  Sindees,  and  proceeded  to  build  a  after  which  he  thought 
himself  secure,  assumed  the  right  to  levy  a  r^penoe  fibm  the  pvdilic 
Ryots,  and  began  to  tjTannize  over  his  own  tribe. 

The  tribe  was  at  first  struck  with  dismay,  and  submitted  to  his  op- 
pression, till  at  length  he  oponlv  assum^f!  tlic  character  of  a  sove- 
rcitrn,  and  ordered  the  people  to  pay  their  duty  at  his  ctmrt  every 
morniTi£f.  Two  of  the  Mulliks,  to  whom  he  first  proposed  thib  ho-  . 
mage,  refusing  to  comply,  Kuttaul  told  them,  that  if  they  did  not 
attend  in  the  conrse  of  two  mornings,  their  heads  should  be  hung  up 
over  their  own  dcxjrs  by  the  third. 

TTie  Miilliks  withdrew,  and  ha-^tily  assembling  the  tribe  and  the 
Ryots,  pointed  out  Kuttaul's  designs,  and  engaged  them  in  a  conspi- 
racy against  him,  which  was  confirmed  by  solemn  oaths.  Next 
morning  the  whole  assembled  in  arms,  and  besieged  Kuttaul  in  Ins 
fort.  After  a  siege  of  three  day:.,  m  which  many  people  were  killed, 
the  water  in  the  fort  wud  exiiausted,  and  the  garrison  wa»  obliged  to 


Digitized  by  Google 

i 


USURPATION  OF  SURWUR  KHADH  873 

enusBite  it}  and  KuttMii£Mq»ed  on  hocadbacky  aeoompnied  by  tome 
tniat^  attendants  on  . fix)t.  Hu  fliglitwaa  aoon  duMDovavady  hia  cn^^ 
fliiea  aet4iff  in  aO  difectkms  to  puiaiie  him*  and  mffA  of  Cbem  took 
tbe  load  by  wbkh  fiottaul  waa  flying.  Hia  attendanta  veie  aoon 
4ttigoed»  and  one  man  alone  lenuined  wiili.him.  Knttanl  (sbjb  one 
of  my  infiinnanAa)'at  tbia  tune  wore  e  lobeiHiich  waa  gmt  hka  by 
a  Debiac^'  and  by  tlie  TOtue  of  irbadi  be  bad  obtained  bag  pnajnit 
gwatneaa;  m  (be  precipitation  of  big  fiigbt«'  tbis  robe  fell  iS,  and 
tnuaediately  bu  femaimng  attendant  becmiiB  bone^  and  bigged.'bei> 
bind$  iMDon  after  bii  punuera  appeared;  KattaoFs  courage  bad  kft 
faim  widi  bia  zobe,  and  be.  bad  zeooime  to  bmnble  entraatieaAr 
mete^ ;  some  of  hia  pmsuen  anawered»  that  tbey  were  awom,  and 
elibeis  that  be  bad  never  shewn  mercy  to  them,  and  at  Ust  one  of 
them  ran  bim  thioi^i  with  a  spear.  Kuttaul's  fiunily  were  all  seized. 
Gool  KhauD,  one  of  the  principal  conspiitrtxoa,  waa  put  at  the  head  of 
the  tribe,  and  thus  was  baffled  the  first  attempt  at  the  aobreqnon  of 
the  liberties  of  the  DowlutkbaiL  u*^  ." 

Surwur  Khamu  the  eldest  <son  of  Kuttaul,  was  at  this  time  only 
sixteen,  but  he  was  well  educated,  and  endowed  with  great  natural 
e^iacity  i  by  the  assistance  of  his  mother,  he  effected  his  escape  from 
pnscoi,  and,  by  a  train  of  reasoning  which  could  only  have  occurred 
to  an  Afghaun,  he  was  led  to  go  straight  to  Zuffer,  the  brother  of 
Gool  Khaun,  and  throw  himself  on  his  protection.  He  reached  this 
chief's  lioiise  withf)ut  discovery-,  and  Zntfer,  in  the  tnie  spirit  of 
Atghaiiii  honour,  immediately  resolved  to  protect  him,  even  at  the 
risk  of  his  brother's  destruction.  Ho  accordinglv  fled  with  him  to 
the  Murwiit  country,  and  soon  after  began  to  intrigue  at  Caubul  for 
assistam  (•  from  the  court.  Their  intrigues  were  scxm  successful,  and 
Abilooieheeni  Ivliaun  *  was  sent  witii  ibur  thousand  men,  to  restore 
Surwur  to  hia  father's  office.  '  '       ;  • 