

The  general  jealousy  of  Surwur's  desilpia  however,  induces  the  Mee- 
aunkhail  and  Bauben*  usually  the  bitter  demies  of  the  Gundehpoors^ 
to  unite  with  thm  in  their  struggles  against  that  ambitious  chie^  and 
these  means  have  hitherto  been  sufficient  to  keep  bis  power  frithin 
due  bounds. 

The  Dowlutkhall,  with  all  their  Byots  and  conquered  tribes  amount 
|x>.eight  thousand  families. 

The  Gundehpoors  have  a  hereditary  Kliaim,  and  hereditary  i\Inl- 
liks,  hut  their  power  is  very  slight,  and  the  tribe  lead  a  lawless  life, 
phuidering  strangers,  stealing  from  the  Hocks  of  the  wandering  tribes 
whicli  come  into  their  neighbourhood!,  and  continually  quarrelling 
among  themselves.  Their  weapons  on  these  (x^easions  are  sticks  of 
wild  olive ;  so  that  murders  are  rare,  but  when  one  happens,  it  en- 
tails a  dcaiilv  tf.Hid  on  the  familv,  as  is  usual  auioiig  the  Afghauns. 
Their  public  aifairs  are  conducted  by  an  aiiseinbly  of  all  the  heads  of 
families  in  the  tribe,  those  who  cannot  attend,  sending  some  of  their 
Ikmily  to  represeuL  them.  "    •    '  '  - 

WTien  they  have  a  war  with  Surwui,  all  disputes  are  laid  aside,  a 
Chelwaditee  is  named,  who  sends  a  drummer  round  each  village  to 
proclaim  the  time  and  place  where  the  tribe  is  to  assemble  in  aims, 
and  any  man  that  AOs  to  attend,  is  fined. 

Ihe  Gundehpoors  are  great  merchants,  fifty  or  dsty  go  every  year 
to  Khorassaumi  and  fi>ur  times  as  many  to'India;*  but  this  cucum* 
stance  has  little  effbct  in  dviliang  them>  and  they  have  a  degree  of 
rudeness  and  brutality  in  their  i^ipearanoe  and  mamMn»  .which  I 
never  saw  in  any  other  tribe. 


Digitized  by  Google 


MEEAUNKHAtL. 


.  .;The  Meeaunkiiailaie  about  three  thmiifiwl  Amilieg,  of  which  num- 
ber a  fouith-  is  oomposed  of  Bukfateteurees.  Of  this  tribe,  which  is 
nid  to  htBtre  oome  originally  firom  llie  banks  of  the-TigriB,  and  which 
it  very  numerous  in  the  south-west  of  Persia,  there  are  about  aevtti 
or  flight  hundred  families  at  Dcranbimd,  and  about  ^e  hundred  at 
Mingha.  Those  at  Deraubund  are  completely  inoofporated  with  the 
Meeaimkhail.  Tliey  have  a  share  in  their  councils,  giuns,  and  lometi 
and  are  almost  identiiied  with  the  tribe.  The  others  are  connected 
with  them,  atid,  though  not  united  with  the  Meeamilduult  therf  send 
succours  to  that  tribe  in  its  wars  in  Damaun. 

■  The  Khaun  of  the  Meeaimkhail  has  httle  power,  he  has  an  eightli 
of  all  customs  collected  at  Deraubund,  but  no  share  in  the  collections 
from  the  Ryof  s.  Public  affiiirs  arc  managed  by  a  number  of  Mulliks, 
who  take  care  lo  c  niMilt  the  mterest  n?id  disposition  of  their  Kbaiisi 
but  do  not  refer  to  tiiem  on  every  question  that  arises. 