


Snd 


(    388  ) 


CHAP.  IV. 

WEBTEBM  AfGHAUNS,  DOO&AUXKES,  CITY  OF  CANOAiUAllt  TEEJBBMS  AMD- 

BABAICHSS. 

'npHE  countries  hitherto  described,  consist  of  flat  and  low-ljSiig 
plains,  or  of  strongly  marked  ranges  of  mountains.  The 
plains  arc  hot  and  fertile,  generally  ]H>pu)ous,  and  almost  all  in- 
habited by  fixed  residents.  The  mountains  are  high  and  rugged, 
the  tops  covered  with  forests,  and  llic  sides  pierced  bv  deep  valleys: 
inhabited  by  tribes  separated  from  each  other,  and  only  known  to 
the  rest  of  the  world  by  their  assaults  on  strangers  who  penetrate  td 
their  haunts,  or  by  their  incursions  into  the  neighbouring  plains. 
Those  which  we  arc  now  to  review,  have  an  op]iositc  character. 
They  are  mostly  high  and  bleak  downs,  intersperseii  witli  moderate 
hills,  in  some  places  desart,  and  in  others  ill-cultivated ;  bare,  open, 
better  fitted  for  pastura^  than  for  the  plough  ;  and  much  inlinliited 
by  shepherds  in  moveable  camps.  The  characters  of  the  hiiJ\  and 
plain  countries  run  into  each  other ;  nor  is  there  any  more  marked 
Ime  of  separation  between  the  chaxacten  of  their  inhabitants.  Both 
axe  nmple,  honest,  and  peaceable;  and  diougli  there  ia  a  dttferenoe 
in  the  degree  in  whidi  thoae  qualitiea  are  pooncoaed  bj  difeent 
tribeai  there  axe  none  who  wouU  be  remarkable  among  Asiatic  ne* 
tiona  ibr  the  want  of  them.  Ibe  western  tribes,  especially  those  of 
KhoraflBaim,  understand  Persian  much  more  generally  than  the 
Eastern  onea  do  ]ffindostaune^  and  thdr  dreasj  arms,  and  habi- 
tations, while  they  retain  th«r  national  peculiarities,  i^roach  to 
thoae  of  Feiaia.  The  character  of  the  people,  however,  ia  essentially 
diflbrent  fiom  that  of  fhe  Peruana ;  and  peifaapa  the  diffarenee  is 


Digitized  by  GoogI 


GENERAL  DESCRIPTION. 


880 


jwnrR  rtriking  than  that  he-ttmm  thp>  wMtom  A^iuiimi  the  IndilttM; 
tboqgh  that  abo  u  great  Scattered  orer  an  estebuve  eoaattf,  the 
WaatflfD  AigbaniM  are  too  distant  ham  each  other  to  acquire  either 
the  vices  or  the  habits,  of  strife  which  belong  to  a  cxowded  pc^ndadoii : 
each  horde  dxtVM  its  flock  over  Ha  CKteiittTe  lands,  or  the  wider 
faingB  of  unappropriated  pBBtme;  mlhaiA  a  rival  and  often  without  a 
ncigywur.  In  the  same  manner,  each  society  of  tlie  fixed  inhabi- 
tants cultivates  the  banks  of  a  river,  or  the  ground  commanded  by  a 
Cahreez,  at  a  distance  firom  all  other  agricultural  people ;  and  indivi- 
duals of  those  societies  are  prevented  from  quarrelling  about  their 
lliaiesy  bj  the  abimdance  of  waste  land,  and  the  facility  with  which 
the  surplus  of  their  population  can  be  provided  for  in  pasturage. 
This  thinness  of  the  population,  while  it  retards  the  progeesa  of  the 
arts  of  lite,  is  doubtless  equally  effectual  in  checking  the  increase  of 
the  vices  wliich  abound  in  populous  countries  ;  and  accordinglv  we 
■find  among  the  Western  Afghauns,  a  sort  of  primith  e  simplicity, 
which  reminds  us  ratljer  of  the  scriptural  accounts  o{  the  early  ages, 
than  of  any  thing  wliicli  lias  been  observed  bv  motK  i  tis  in  nations 
where  society  is  still  in  its  infancy.  In  s<nne  parts  of  this  tract  the 
character  nf  the  ])eople  seems  to  have  undergone  some  change,  in 
consequence  of  tiie  impii'ssion  made  on  the  governments  of  their 
tribes  by  the  neighbourhootl  of  the  munaichy.  Among  the  Ghiljies 
and  Dooraunees,  the  hereditary  chiefs  of  the  tribes  have  suci  essively 
tbuiided  great  kingdoms,  of  which  the  latter  is  known  stUl  to  subsist. 
Among  the  Dooraunees,  the  heads  of  clans  also  form  the  nobility, 
who  enjoy  the  great  offices  of  the  court,  the  state^  and  the  army ;  and 
they  appear  in  the  doable  character  of  patriarchal  dbiefr,  and  of 
wealthy  and  powerihl  noblemen,  deriring  oonunand  and  influence 
fiiom  the  Kingfs  authority,  and  firom  thar  own  riches'  and  magnifi* 
canoe*  In  this  atuatiMii,  many  of  the  republican  insdtutions  of  the 
tribes  disappear,  but  other  orcumstaaces  oontribote  to  preserve  the 
imptmance  of  the  daasmen,  and  to  prevent  their  sinking  into  entire 
depfndfftce  on  their  lord.  A  degree  of  order  and  tranquillity  i8.se^ 
onedf  si^flrior  to  what  is  ever  attahted  m  the  democmtic  trfbess  jt 