

The  Houthern  part  of  the  tract  I  have  been  d^cribing,  is  by  no 
means  so  mountainous  as  the  northern,  and  it  seems  not  improbft!>le 
that  it  may  oiice  have  been  a  fertile  r^ion,  and  may  have  been 
encroaclu  d  on  by  the  desart  like  the  contiguous  country  of  Seestaun, 
This  opiniuii  Ls  supported  no  less  by  the  magnificent  ruins  whitli  :ire 
still  to  be  seen,  thaii  by  the  recorded  accounts  of  the  fertility  and 
extent  of  Seestaun,  to  which  the  tract  in  question  i&  biud  to  have 
belonged.  * 

From  longitude  6S  east,  .e  tract  of  very  considerable  extent 
stretcfaea  eastward  ior  upwards  of  two  hundred  miles  to  the 
of  Qmdahar.   Its  genend  breadth  is  near  100  miles.   Its  boundaries 
are  ill  defined,  for,  on  the  north,  the  hills  sometimes  run  into  the 
phun,  .  and  the  southern  parts  of  the  inhabited-  country  are  not  easily 


*  Seestaun  is  said  to  have  contained  1 20,000  ploughs.  For  an  awmmt  «£  die  nUM 
■en  bijr  Ctftmu  Cbiutia^  lee  Mr.  Kimieu^*  Owgttfbf  at  Pntila.  . 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


MERIDIAN  OF  CANDAHAft. 


4iac2iq{iiiiM  fiNjm  the  denrt  in  mhaA,  th^f  barte.  .  Th»  vlult 
Mmft  approadiet  to  ih»  mtaie  of  a  demt  The  fonthBrn  paiti  m» 
•ndj,  md  tiia  notthem  cammt  of  hard  emth*  miiiwi  ■omgtimieiwith 
fDcte  hud- ofwwkh  loir  hllki  bntattisaqnaUy  iiii|«odiidlvo.^ 
ft  traa  it  to  be  fiMilid  m  die  wliolo  ccgion,  lint  the  plains  ve  .wared 
widk  km  biiihet ;  of  - which  the  prim^pal  are  llioae  called-  jons  aiid 
iaMath.hy^  A^^l^luaMi  «idt«Pp]owtt  btuheB.fEom  which: kali  is 
pitodBDed.  YetthfadiicoigagingjtK)deialy  iw:iBeap(i  ,dearitiito  <rf 
kihabifaiita.  The  banks  of  the  Fucrah  RMid»  the'  Ehwuh  foodt  and 
other  str^xoB,  are  well  cultivotedf'jfebd  piodDee  wheat,  barley,  pulsar 
aMd  abnndanee  of  exeelknt  melons.  "Ena  at  •  distanoB  6Bom  lim 
8treaiiM»  aonse  petcfaea  of  coltivation  are  wetered  by  raeana  of 
Cahreezes,  and  acairce  any  part  of  the  country,  especially  <^  the 
■OKth*  k  ao  badaa  not  to  affivdherbage  and  water  in  the  Cool  aeaaoB 
to  nmnerous  campe  of  Dooraunees  who  diive  their  flocks  in  summet. 
nto  Saeahbund,  the  countiy  of  the  Tymunees.  There  are  villaget 
among  the  cultivated  lands,  but  none  of  them  are  large,  and  certainly 
the  mass  of  the  inhabitants  are  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  country 
in  tents.  Some  parts  of  Uiis  country  also,  appear  to  have  lost  a  jrrcat 
deal  of  their  fertilit\'.  The  south  POTtcrn  part  of  it  cfjiitain.s  the 
brooks  of  Dohree  and  Cudduii)  e,  which  within  the  last  century  were 
considerable  streams  thioughoiit  the  year,  but  which  are  now  dij 
eiCcept  in  spring. 

The  banks  of  the  Helmmid,  though  within  the  tract  of  wliich  I 
have  described  the  limits,  must  be  entirely  excepted  from  all  the 
above  obaervations.  That  river,  even  after  it  has  left  the  hills,  con- 
tinues to  be  accompMiied  on  each  side  by  a  stripe  til  icrlile  and 
cultivated  land,  the  southern  part  of  which  forms  the  singular  country 
of  Gurmseer.  This  district  occupies  a  hollow  stretching  along  both, 
banks  of  the  Helmnnd  fieen  the  neighbomhood  .of  Gizishk  to 
SoGstann*  It  aeaiea  in  awtiawit  lamea  to  faaife  bean. an  arfenaife'tepp*. 
toxy,  and  to  he?e  bean  nded  brf.aa  Indflf^eodent  prince }  but  itianiMr- 
confined  in. gaufel  to  aqnanteEofB  nife  on  each8id»of  the  ritery 