

edl  ilewUe  bieadlfa  lie  wbere  exceeda:  tiro  Diite 

a  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


COUKTRY  ROUND  CAia)AHAR. 

9mAf  dauattexlM^&irmmydayBymmey.  The  Gunnaeer  itsdf  k 
SHHiC,  and  sometimes  ersn  mszsby ;  many  psits  of  it  tie  cnltinrted 
BOd  aBM  plentaftil  raturns  to  Hie  hmbudmsn.  '  In  those  spots,  «i» 
oMtles  wad  -Ibftified  villages,  but  the  ^^reater  part  is  cormd  widi 
herbage,  mshos  sod  tsmsrish  boshes,  among  which  are  meny  campt 
of  ^Tiepherds. 

To  the  northward  of  the  desait  tract  last  described  Is  a  hiUy  teffoa 
dependent  on  the  Ptupopamisan  nnge.  It  difos  greatly  horn  the 
countrira  we  have  hitherto  been  considerini^  bttng  formed  of  rang^ 
of  hills  including  fertile  plains.  The  hills  arc  covered  with  woods  of 
the  shnee  tree,  the  wild  almond,  wild  fig,  wild  pomegranate,  the  ori- 
ental plane  and  the  walnut  tree.  The  plains  are  rich,  are  well 
watered  by  calirecsc-.  and  spriiifrs.  and  produce  abundance  of  wheat, 
barlev,  and  rice,  together  wit!)  madder  and  the  artiticial  grasses.  The 
wild  trees  of  the  plains  are  tamarisk  and  mulberry,  and  a  few  willows 
and  poplars,  but  the  numerous  orchards  are  conijioscd  of  all  the 
fruit  trees  of  Europe.  Many  pastoral  camps  are  ali,o  ibund  in  thb 
tract,  probably  in  the  hilly  parts  of  it  j  and  though  it  contains  many 
good  villages,  yet  a  great  proportion  even  of  the  agricultural  inhabi- 
tants live  in  black  tents.  The  climate  is  :il\v;i\  s  temperate,  but  in 
winter  the  northern  pails  suffer  from  cold.  Zeiueendawer,  tiie  most 
westerly  part  of  this  division  of  the  country,  deserves  particular  men- 
tion on  account  of  its  fertility.  It  is  joined  on  the  north-west  by 
8eeabimd,  a  momtainous  tegum  aboonding  in  oool  and  grassy  Tal- 
Hes»  whidiy  Ihoagli  it  bdongs  to  the  lymunee  Eimauk,  leqinres  to 
be  mendoned  here^  as  aflbrding  a  aummcr  retreat  to  so  iaige  a 
paopottion  of  the  Dooraonee  shephegda. 

llieooimtiynMmd  Candahair  is  level,  naturally  of  tolsndble  fertilii^, 
'  irrigated  both  liywateMNuaea  fiom  the  riven  and  by  cafareeaes*  and 
nostindnstrioudyeuHtvated.  It  in  consequence  abounds  with  grain, 
sod  its  gardens  contain  good  vegetables  and  eiceUent  ftuit  i  besides 
melons,  cucombers,  &c  which  are  cultivated  in  the  fields,  as  i»  usual 
in  Khorassaun.  Madder,  assafoetida,  spusta  (lucerne)  and  shuilal 
(a  lliild  of  dover)  are  also  ahwndanfc  The  tohaooo  of.  Candahar  ha» 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


8  great  reputation.  The  country  near  the  hills  ia  probably  the  nidat. 
fertile,  and  that  round  the  town  beat  caltiraitedi  the  ooilQtfy  to  the. 
wat  fa  mdy  at  no  great  dfatance  fitm  the  dty»  and-'liiat  ta  tha 
aoirili beooDiea dij  and impiodiictive a  nmuh.  of  Gmdahn:. 
that  to  the  eaat  is  fertile  and  much  better  coldyated  than  the  rest  of 
the  valley  of  the  Tumiik,  which  will  heieafter  be  described. 