

In  treating  of  this  country,  I  shall  begin  at  the  west  (where  the 
ywrtflst  conlraat  will  be  found  to  what  has  been  already  mentioned) 
and  proceed  eaatward  till,  as  I  approach  the  division  fonnedy  de< 
acribedy  aome  tnoes  will  appear  of  the  manners  alieadj  known  to  the 
reader  as  peculiar  to  the  eastern  Aigbanna.  In  pursuance  of  thia 
phm,  I  shall  begin  with  the  Doonninees  and  their  southern  neigh'- 
hours  the  Baraiches  and  Tereens ;  and  then  stretch  east  with  the 
Ghiljies,  till  I  reach  the  valley  of  the  Caubul  river  and  the  mountains 
of  Solimaun.  The  Caukers,  whose  lands  extend  from  those  of  the 
Tereens  to  the  mountains  just  mentioned,  will  end  all  the  part  of  my 
account  which  is  connected  with  fifeoL'rnpIn-  ;  ;ind  the  pastoral  and 
unsettled  thbe  of  Nausser  will  conclude  the  deschptioa  of  the 
A%hauiis. 

The  length  of  the  country  of  the  Dooraunees  may  he  loosely  said 
to  be  400  miles,  and  except  in  the  north-w^  the  general  breadth  is 
from  120  to  140  miles. 

It  is  bounded  on  the  north  by  the  Paropamisan  mountains,  ialiii- 
bited  by  the  Eiiuauks  and  llazaurch.s  j  on  the  west  it  has  a  sandy 
dejiai  t  of  various  breadth,  beyond  whicli  are  the  Persian  dominions : 
on  the  south' west  it  has  Seestaun  and  a  deiait  wfaidi  aepaiaitta  it' 
from  TModuataim  t  Hs  southern  boundary  is  ftimed-  by  flhcnauiiuk 
and  die  hflJa  of  Khaujeh  Anuami,  wluch'SeparateitfiomtlieTereena 
and  Gaaiken  i  and  on  the  east  it  iias  no  naitaral  boimdary,  but  joins 
la  the  lands  of  tiie  6hi|^  $  into  wliidi  tlie  valley  of  Urgheasaunt 
part  of  tiie  Dooiaunee  territoij,  mns  iat  a  o6nsidend>)e  extent.  The 
number  of  sqoaie  miles  in  thie  Dooiaunee  ooontiy  is  inobably  aupe- 
rior  to  that  in  Eng^nd}  but  it  includes  acme  laige  spaces  of  desatt, 
and  the  ^^ft*^^  country  is  ]Riobably  little  superior  to  Scotland  in 


S9S  MERIDIAN  OF  CANDAHAR. 

4 

extent,  MoA  inftrior  in  popuktMML  The  popuhtion  is  liy  no  mawii 
evenly  spreadt  nor  is  the*  ftce  of  the  countij  thjou|^  all  its  estent 
the  same.  Thep«rtwhidi]iesi«eitoflon^tiide63eaat  (•  ili^  not 
exceeding  seventy  or  nules  in  faveadth)*  is  situated  between 
tbe  sandj  desart  aheadj  described  and  the  Ftaopamisaa  momitaini^ 
andpactakesof  the  nature  of  both  of  those  tracts.  Ingenefal  it  con^ 
sista  of  arid  and  uncultivated  pkuns*  crossed  by  ranges  of  hills  lumiing 
westwvd  ham  the  Paropamisan  mountains  into  Penian  Khonasaan  i 
but)  thongh  its  general  appearance  be  waste  and  barren,  most  paits 
of  it  supply  water  and  forage  to  the  pastoral  hordes  that  fiequent  it, 
and  it  is  not  destitute  of  many  well-watered  and  pleasant  valleys,  and 
some  fertile  plains  surrounded  by  mountains.  In  those  tracts  are 
many  villages,  but  the  only  town  in  this  part  of  the  country  is  Furrah, 
on  the  river  of  that  name,  which  was  once  a  place  of  j^rreat  extent, 
and  is  still  a  considerable  walled  towTi.  This  appears  to  be  the 
antient  Parra,  by  which  name  indeed  the  A%hauns  still  distin- 
guish it. 