


Digitized  by  Google 


ATCHIXZTS& 


hm  made  the  Suddozyet  be  oomiderod  as  a  tegntte  daiu  ^tkonffk  m 

branch  of  the  Populzyes. 

Their  principal  residence  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sliehcr  Sufik,. 
in  the  lower  part  of  the  valley  of  the  Turnuk.    Some  also  reside  at  . 
Candahar,  and  a  considerable  colony  has  found  its  way  to  the  distant 
city  of  Mouitan,  to  which  they  have  probably  been,  driveii  by  some 
pohtical  events  in  their  tribe. 

The  rest  of  the  Populzyes  chiefly  reside  in  the  hilly  country  north 
of  Candahar.  Tliey  are  a  numerous  clan,  ^^enerally  reckoned  by  the 
most  moderate  natives  at  twelve  tliousarul  lauulios  *.  Though  some 
of  them  are  shepherds,  by  much  the  greater  number  are  cn^ged  in 
agriculture.  They  are  reckoned  the  most  civilized  of  the  Dooraunee 
dans.  The  grand  vizier  ought  always  to  be  a  member  of  the  Bau- 
mizye  division  of  them,  and  it  ia  fipom  among  the  Populzyes  that 
most  of  die  great  offioot  of  state  were  chpsen  by  Ahmed  Shah. 

The  nest  dan  to  the  Popuhy^  ivfaidi  it  fiur  eauseeda  m  nwnben^  is 
lihe  Banrikiyes.  This  great  dan  inhabits  the  oomtij  south  of  Can-  - 
dahar,  the  yalley  (tf  Urghessann*  the  hanks  of  the  Hdmiind»  and  thct 
dry  plains  whidi  that  river  divides.  Those  neat  . CandahaTf.  and  many 
of  those  in  Uq^iessaun,  and  on  the  Hdmund,  are  led  by  the  fertility 
of  iStakt  soil  to  agricalture>  and  the  indnstiy  of  otfaen  haa  even  pn>- 
duoed  cdneeses  and  oiltiTMion  in  the  midst  of  the  deflnrt;  hut  the 
greater  part  of  the  tribe  is  oompoaed  of  shepherds.  .  They  are  a 
spirited  and  warlike  dan,  and^  as  I^itteh  'Ehann  is  now  their  chieC 
they  make  a  miidi  more  oonspieqoos  figwe  than  any!  other  tribe, 
among  the  A%hauns.  At  present*  the  grand  viaier,  nd  dmost  dL 
the  great  officers  of  the  state*  are  Bauriksyes,  and  th^  owe  their, 
elevation  to  the  courage  and  attachment  of  their  clan. 

Their  numbers  ate  not  less  thati  thirty  thousand  families. 

The  Atchikzyes  were  a  branch  of  the  Baurikayes*  but  were  sept^ 
rated  by  Ahmed  Shah  to  reduce  the  formidable  numbers  of  that  dan^ 


*  T  p^irr  the  nT^mhrri;  of  the  clnns  to  Amm  Am»  vtMtAa^  lH|ITFrtMlBf^.  UMI  jBOtdfclMB 

confidence. iu  their  iiulividnAl  aocunuy* 


Digitized  by  Google 


lCAUKO€)S  ASD  KttOUOAUNEES.  ^ 

They  are  now  under  a  separate  chief,  and  entirely  unoomiected  with 
the  clan  from  which  they  spring.  They  inhabit  the  range  of  Khojell 
Amraun,  from  the  Lora  to  the  Cuddenye,  together  with  some  of  the 
■adjoining  plains,  anrl  nre  the  wildest  of  the  Doorauneea :  theit  only 
employments  are  pasturage  and  plunder. 

The  Noorzyes  arr  finally  numerous  with  the  Baurikzyes  ;  hut.  as 
thpY  are  scattered  through  the  hills  in  the  west,  and  the  desert  tract 
in  the  south,  of  the  Dooraunee  comitry,  they  by  no  means  make  so 
great  a  figure  in  the  Af'o;haun  nation.  They  are  however  a  martial 
tribe,  and  those  on  the  irontier  towards  Seestaun  find  constant  exer- 
cise for  tlieir  courage  and  enterprize  in  the  mutual  depredations  in 
which  thev  are  engaged  with  tlie  Beloche  borderers.  Almost  the 
whole  ot  them  are  shepherds,  who  spend  the  winter  in  tiie  grassy 
apots  which  are  found  in  the  barren  region  they  inhabit,  and  who 
xcitife  in  the  middle  of  sprmg  to  SeeahlNiiid. 