

mending  I  'but  they  are  gentle  and  good  tempered  in  (heir  interooone 
with  their  gneate,  and  with  each  other.  Siudi  ia  their  veracilj»  that 
if  there  is  a  dispute  about  a  stray  goat,  and  one  partjr  willsay  it  is 
hia>  and  oonfem  his  assertioii  by  stroaking  his  beavd*  the  odier  in- 
atantly  givea  it  up,  without  suspicion  of  fraud. 

Their  amusements  are  listening  to  songs  (for  they  never  deign  to 
sing  themselves),  and  dancing  a  sort  of  i^rirluc  dance,  in  which  they 
go  tfarou^  some  warlike  attitudes,  and  leap  about  flourialiing  their 
awotds. 

The  food  of  the  Vizeerees  is  the  flesh  of  sheep,  oxen,  or 
which  they  eat  half  raw,  with  czoot  and  unleayened  bread  of  the  wont 
description. 

The  women  are  not  required  to  labour,  lliey  wear  a  long;  thick 
shift  of  red  cotton,  with  sandals  like  the  men,  and  have  as  many  gold 
and  silver  ornaments  as  their  husbands  can  afford.  A  most  ext  raor- 
dinary custom  is  said  to  prevail  anK>ng  them,  which  gives  tlie  women 
the  choice  of  their  husbands.  II'  a  woman  is  pleased  with  a  man, 
she  sends  the  drummer  of  the  camp  io  pin  a  handkerchief  on  his  cap, 
wIlIi  a  ]iin  which  she  has  used  to  fasten  her  hair.  The  (huiiiirier 
watches  his  ojipoi  t  unity,  and  does  this  in  public,  naming  the  woman, 
and  the  man  iii^  i  in  mediately  obliged  to  marry  her,  if  he  can  pay  her 
price  to  her  father. 

The  Jadrauns  have  the  \  izeciccb  on  the  east,  the  ivliarotee.^,  and 
the  country  dependent  on  Ghuznee  on  the  west,  and  the  Jaujees  on 
tiie  north.  Their  dress  and  manners  are  said  to  be  like  those  of  the 
Vkeereeb  Towards  the  Kborrum,  they  cultivate  some  of  the  in> 
firior  sorts  of  gram,  but  towaids  the  Kfaamtees,  they  winder  with 
their  goato,  throu|^  the  tiikk  pine  fimsfc^  and  aie  (aa  •  Klittotea 


Digitized  by  Google 


DUMTAUNEES  OF  WAUNER 


887 


obsen'ed  of  them),  in  appearfknce  and  habits  of  life,  more  like  moun- 
tain bears  than  men.  They  are  not  an  extensive  tribe,  and  their 
oountzy  is  nenx  Tuited  faj  trweDen.  They  ham  win  with  tbe 
Kharotees,  and  plunder  travellers  on  the  road  from  Caubul  Uirough 
Bungush,  new  the  pan  of  Peiwsur.  I  need  acaice  say  that  they  aie 
never  to  be  met  wi^  out  of  their  hQla. 

The  ooontcies  along  the  western  nde  of  l^ikhti  So1hnaun»  which 
aooompeny  those  which  I  h«ve  been  describing*  in  tiieir  progress  to- 
waids  the  mnth,  do  not  call  Son  any  particular  nodoe.  To  the  north 
of  the  Huncepsnl  is  the  countiy  near  the  jonction  of  the  Gomul  and 
aiobe^  sometimes  pastured  on  by  wandering  Gauhers.  North  of  it 
is  Wannehf  a  low  pUin  situated  on  tiie  hills  that  slope  down  to  the 
vidky  of  tbe.Gomii].  It  is  an  open  tract,  inhabited  by  s  small  tiifie 
called  Bumtanny,  and  much  frequented  m  summer  by  shepherds  of 
the  Splimaun  Ehail  and  Kharotee  tribes ;  some  of  tlie  tribes  depen- 
dent on  the  Dowlutkhail,  also  drive  up  their  flocka  to  Waun^  in 
winter.  N<»rth  of  Wamieh  is  Oorghoon,  the  country  of  the  Per* 
moollees ;  and  then  a  tract  belonging  to  KhaioteeS)  snd  other  clans 
of  Ghi^pesi  of  all  which  I  shall  hereafter  have  oocasioii  to  speak  at 
laiget 