

Hough  the  qpirit  of  lerenge  blood  is  no  leas  Mt  beie  than' 
Aewbm,  yet  Tetaliation  is  miicfa  repressed  by  the  atrength  of  the 
goveniment. '  The  Dootaunees»  howerer,  never  put  e  man  to  death 
lor  killing. another  m  expiation. of  a  murder  previously  eommittedt 
as'long  08  the'  muiders  on  hoth'  aides  'are  equal*'  diey  tfiink  natonl 
justice  satiafied,  though  th^  banidi  ihe  second  nnirdezer,  to  preserve 
the  quiet  of  their  own'  soiciety.  If  the  oftnded  petty  oom^ains  to' 
die  Srdar,  or  if  hears  of  a  murder  committed,  he  first  endHivoun 
to  bring  about  a  compromise,  by  offering  the  Khoon  Behau,  or  price 
of  blood ;  but  if  the  injured  party  is  inexorable^  the  Sirdar  lays  the 
aflair  before  the  King,  who  orders  the  Causy  to  try  it ;  aiid,  if  the 
eliminal  is  convicted,  gives  him  up  to  be  executed  by  the  r^tiom 
of  the  deceased.  This  last  mode  of  ac^ustment  throu^  the  Sirdar* 
is  the  most  usual  near  towns,  and  in  civilised  parts  of  the  country.' 
Private  revenge  prevails  most  in  the  camps  of  shepherds,  who  wan- 
der in  the  hills  and  desarts,  remoto  from  all  seats  of  authority  and  of 

jtisdfiei  but  even  these  disputes  seldom  gp  beyond  r^;ukr  eacoun** 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


HOUSES  AUD  FURNITURE.  405 

ten  wHk'  tticks  and  stones ;  and  IhtaaffumA  all  ilie  Doonninees, 
lik)od.b'  scsicdy  ever,  shed  in  dmuestie  qaarrek  $  it  is  looked  on  as 
flagitious  to  dzaw  on  acountiTinan }  and  a  tradition  even  exists  of  an 
o<^  imposed  on  the  peofde  of  the  tribe  bjthe  Suddoe3re8  of  ancient 
days,  wbidft  bound  them  far  erer  to  abstain  from  the  nse  of  swosds  in 
disputes  among  themselves.  -  - 

Civil  disputes  are  either  settled  by  the  elders  of  the  village,  and 
the  friends  of  the  parties,  bj  the  arbitration  of  MooUahs ;  or  by  the 
decision  of  the  nearest  Cauzy.  When  the  Sirdar  or  other  chid»  is 
absent  from  the  tribe,  his  duties  are  performed  by  a  Naib,  or  deputy f 
of  his  own  appointing,  generally  a  brother  or  a  son,  but  always  a  near 
relation.  When  the  King  is  not  in  the  Dooraunee  country,  hia  place 
is  supplied  by  the  prince  who  has  the  governmeut  of  Candahar.        . . 

I  have  mentioned  that  the  I^)oraunees  are  part]\  pnstoral,  and. 
partly  agricultural ;  this,  of  course,  makes  a  difference  in  the  habits 
and  manner  of  life  ot  tiiiierent  parts  of  the  tribe.    I  shall  first  de- 
scribe those  who  live  in  villages,  taking  my  observations  generally 
from  the  neighbuLit  IiocmI  of  ('aiuialiar.  ' 

It  is  a  common  lorm  oi  the  Dooraunee  villages,  to  liave  iuur  streets 
leading  into  a  square  in  the  centre.  There  is  sometimes  a  . pond,  and 
alwajs  some  trees  in,thx8  space,  and  it  is.  here  that  the  young  men 
oiMcoihlo  in  iSke  evening.^  lo  pursue  their  sports,  while  the  old  men 
loolt'oUf  and  tdk  over  the  exploits  of  their  yontli»  or  Ihm  pieaen* 
csies  and  ocmpations. 