

At  one  of  the  gates  of  every  castle,  is  a  Mehniaunkiiauneh,  or 
house  of  guests,  where  travellers  are  entertained,  and  where  the  [)eo- 
ple  of  the  village  oiien  come,  to  talk  with  the  strangers,  aud  hear 

the  news.       •  •       ■  -  

•  The  Khaun't^  apartments  arc  iliniished  according  to  the  fashion  of 
the  country,  and  though,  as  may  be  expected,  the  poorer  Khauns 
live  in  great  stmplicity,  yet  the  richer  have  rooms  painted  with  vari- 
una  patterns,  and  spread  with  fine  caipeta  and  felts.  - 

The  Khamu  iSbaxutShns  (1  here  speak  of  the  ooinnion  mn  ot 
Khaima  over  the  country)  appeair  to  be  sober,  deeent;  moderate  menf 
who*  diough  very  plain,  have  still  horses  and'aervants,  and  are  au- 
perior  to  the'  oommon  Doonuineea  in  dresa  and  niailnera.*  They  are 
geneinttjr' an  induatrious  and  respectable  aet  'of  inen^  attached  to* 
agricuknre,  md  anxious  to  improve  their  lands,  treating  tbor  inh 
ftrion  with  mildness  and  good^HU,  and  rtegarded  bj  tliem  witH  re- 
spect and  esteem.  -   .  . 

■  The  title  of  Khaun  is  never  given  in  public  documents,  but  to  the 
noUes  who  hold  it  by  the  King's  patent,  but  the  courtesy  of  the 
country  gives  it  to  the  description  of  men  I  have  been  mentioning; 
as  the  title  of  Laird  (Lord)  in  Scotland  is  given  to  a  class  of  country 
gentlemen,  who,  in  their  tank  in  society,  and  their  relation  to  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


PASTORAL  I>OORAUNjE£& 


409 


munott  people^  beviiotU||^  i«Mmblnoe  to  petty  klmtnB  of 
the  Doorauiiees. 

Be&fte  I  qiiit  the  agricultural  part  of  the  Doofaukiees,  I  ou^  to 
say  something  of  the  Twgikiif  snd  other  people,  not  belonging  to 
the  tribe  whcs  iat  die  moat  put,  rende  mith  thU  cImb  of  the  oom^ 

ihunity. 

Ibe  TauiikB  bev  a  laige  ptoportUni  to  the  DooMuneoa  them** 
eehres. 

Neither  they  nor  the  Afghaun  Humsauyehs,  pay  iny  tax,  or  are 
subject  to  the  servitude  to  which  the  £u8ofzye8  have  reduced  their 

Fakeers ;  tlioy  are  not  considered  as  equals,  but  the  superiority 
claimed  by  the  l>ooraunees,  rests  ratlier  on  their  more  noble  descent^ 
and  superior  courage*  than  on  any  li^gal  advantage  they  poiocii  in 

the  society. 

Tlie  Afghani!  Hiinisaiijehs  mix  well  with  tlie  Dooraujiees,  and,  as 
they  never  come  among  them  overbiiideiied  with  property,  tiiey  are 
in  a  situation  rather  to  proht  by  their  hospitality,  than  to  sufier  by 
their  rapacity. 

The  pastoral  part  of  the  Dooraunee  population  is  chiefly  to  be 
ibmid  in  the  hiUy  tract  betireen  Hermt  end  Seestauu,  and  in  the 
weate  plains  of  the  aootli.  Tlie  people  to  die  aontfai  east  of  Candahar 
avB-elto  nittdi  employed  in  pasturage.  Tlierene  otberahiplieards  in 
tauaj  of  the  agpeakaal  pirte  of  the  eoontiyy  ae  tfaera  aie  hiiaband- 
flm  in  thoee  moat  devoted  to  pMtorek 