

S  F  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


4M 


THE  KINO  CHIEE 


of  liiB  liflnditiiy  doeii}  thu^'ibft  heid  of  «  dan  cp«Din«t!d«  ^ 
tmdpi  "Mdk  it  fimuBhea^  and  Ae  auhiirtiniile'  offim  ^  te.Miil^ 
liin  and  Mnahiza  of  Umib  and  anbdirliioDa  niidcff  Mnu  aach  cork 

It  is  ob?ioua  Aat  thia  military  command  must  render  tins,  power  of 
the  Sirdars  greater  llian  that  of  the  chiefs  of  other  tribes,  and  theit 
antiiority  is  fiirther  strengthened  by  the  wealth  and  splendor  which 
fliej  derive  from  the  sitoatKMia  about  the  comt,  whege  att  great  cttioea 
are  in  the  hands  of  Doocaunces.  As  these  advaoti^^  oonfenrod 
by.  the  Eu^i  it  might  be  expected  th^  the  Siidaia  would  bei^ept  liy, 
them  in  a  state  of  entire  subservience  to  the  government ;  and  this  is 
rendered  the  more  natural,  as  the  people  hold  their  lands  directly  of 
the  Crown,  and  consequently  have  not  that  dependence  on  their 
chiefs  which  characterized  the  feodal  system.  The  independence  oi 
the  Sirdars  is,  however,  maintained  by  the  influence  over  their  clans, 
which  they  derive  from  their  birth,  and  from  the  patriarchal  institu- 
tions of  the  Afffhaun  tribes.  This  is  at  once  sufficient  to  estabhsh 
their  importance,  for  the  dynasty  of  Suddozyo  is  mainly  upheld  by 
the  Dooraunees,  and  the  crown  would  be  transferred  wilhout  a 
struggle  iVmu  one  member  of  it  to  another  by  a  general  combination 
of  that  tribe;  consequently  the  King  iis  in  a  great  measure  dependent 
on  the  good'nin  the  Booraunee  chiefs,  and  is  obliged  to  conciliate 
that  Older  hy.  bestowing  on  it.  a  large  portion  of  power  and  honor, 
though  in  Rality  he  viem  it  with  jealousy,  and  ia  ootrtawa%  Bt^ 
ployed  in  indiiect  attempts  to  imdermine  it  Hie  poweis  of  the 
parties  m  pretty  nearly  halancej.  In  disputed  auooeasions,  tfaecfaief 
Buy  often  kad  his  dan  to  the  candidate  for  whom  ha  is  be^ 
yet  no  DcM»amiee  dan  haa  ever  risen  against  the  fimfly  of  SudUosye 
QB  aeaouut  of  the  penenal  ii^uxieB  or  diigtiflt  of  its  Sfiidar :  on  the 
ether  hand,  though  the  Kii^  has  been  known  to  exerdae  the  pcmet 
of  nominating  men  not  descended  from  the  head  &mily  to  be  Sirdan» 
and  even  of  appointing  a  man  of  one  clan  to  be  Sirdar  of  another ; 
yet  in  these  cases  he  aeems  to  have  pushed  his  authorily  fifftherfhan 
the  Dooirnimees  wwe  iriUing  to  submit  to;  chieft»  soiypointedj  were 


Digitized  by  Google 


obeyed  with  reluctance,  and  the  dam  wiuted  imprtkiiflj  Sot «  rebels 
lion  headed  by  a  Suddozye,  to  throw  off  their  new  chie^  andfAiB 
King  who  appointed  him,  and  to  receive  their  heredStaxy  JSuttin  with 
open  arms.  The  clans  near  Candahar  probably  look  up  most  to  tlw 
IGng,  while  those  who  inhabit  remote  and  unfrequented  cduntcies 
(as  the  Noorzyes  and  the  Atchikzyes),  ;u  o  more  attached  to  their  Sir- 
dars. Even  in  those  tribes,  the  Sirdar  derives  a  ^rcai  jnirt  of  his 
power  from  the  King,  but  he  exercises  it  subject  to  less  control,  than 
the  chiefs  of  tribes  near  the  roval  residence,  and  lie  is  less  npl  to  he 
eclipsed,  or  set  aaide,  by  the  .immediate  iateFve&tioa  gi*  tke  jtov&i 
reign.  *  * 