

They  wear  their  clothes  unchanged  for  months,  their  beards  un* 
dipped,  and  their  hair  long  and  shaggy.   They  are  very  huEge  and. 
strong  men. 

Their  manners  are  rou»;h  and  barbarous,  but  they  are  not  quarrel- 
some among  t  lu  inselves.  Their  cudo;elling  matches  are  fierce,  wiien 
they  hn\c  ihcm,  but  they  arise  in  disputes  about  prop^:^,  and  uot 
in  high  wordsi  or  offences  to  personal  pride. 

They  are  not  hospitable,  they  ha\  e  no  mosques,  and  seldom  pray, 
or  trouble  themselves  about  religion;  the  few  Moollahs  they  have, 
say  their  Namaua  at  hmnei  All  tribes  are  load  in  their  complaints 
i^^iinst  them,  and  the  Boofannees  win  hardly  acknowledge  them  ibr 
danamon* 

They  are,  however,  excdlent  soldien.  The  talents,<  courage,  and  , 
fidditj  of  iheir  late  Sirdar,  Goolistaon  Ehaon,  were  long  the  st^^mt 
of'^Shaiib  ShqauV  cause,  m  defence  of  whii;h  he  ^lost  his  fife  i  and 
his  justice  and  moderation  are  atill  gratefully  remembered  hj  the 

II 


Digitized  by  Googl 


CANDAHAK.  4^$ 

ifthabttants  of  Peahairar  and  Gaubo],  vlio  hmridf  ai  djflbnnt  tDM, 

been  under  his  government. 
The  city  of  Candahar  is  large  hkI  pc^ulom.  Uennt  and  Candafaar 

are  the  only  c  it  ies  in  the  Doorauncc  country  ;  and,  except  Furra,  pro- 
bably the  only  places  which  even  merit  the  name  of  a  town.  The 
ancient  city  is  ^cmik  Mines  said  to  have  been  founded  by  Lohrasp,  a 
rerwiaii  Knig  who  floiti  ished  in  times  of  very  remote  antiquity,  and 
to  wiiom  also  the  founding  of  Heraut  is  attributed.  It  is  lusserted 
by  others,  with  far  greater  piubability,  to  have  been  built  l>y  Secun- 
der  Zoolkurnyne,  that  by  Alexander  the  Great.  The  tradiiious 
of  the  Persians  here  agree  with  the  conjectures  of  European  geo- 
graphers, who  fix  on  this  tite  for  one  of  the  dtiea  caUed  Alexandria. 

The  ancient  <aty  atood  till^  feign  of  the  Ghiljiea,  when  Shenh 
Hooaadn  founded  a  new  city  under  die  name  of  HnaieindbedL 
Nadir  Shaidi  attempted  again  to  alter  the  adte  of  the  town,  and  boiU 
Nadirabads  at  laat  Ahmed  Shauh  founded  the  proaent  cily*,  to 
iriiidi  he  ganre  the  name  of  Ahmed  8hauhee»andthe  title  of  ufiAfw^wil 
Bdnit  or  the  nofaleat  of  dtiea ;  by  that  name  and  title  it  ia  atill 
mentioned  in  public  papers,  and  in  the  language  of  the  court  {  but 
the  old  name  of  Candahar  still  prevails  among  the  pec^le,  thou^  ii 
has  lost  its  rhyming  addition  of  Dourool  KurraTt  or  the  abode' of 
quiet  Ahmed  Shauh  himself  marked  out  the  limits  of  the  present 
cits',  and  laid  down  the  roirular  plan  which  is  still  so  remarkable  in 
its  execution  i  he  sm  i omuk  d  it  with  a  wall,  and  proposed  to  have 
added  a  ditch  ;  but  the  Ddoraunees  arc  said  to  have  objected  to  his 
-  fortifications,  and  to  have  declared  that  their  ditch  was  the  Cheracn 
of  Bistaim  (a  meadow  near  Bistaun  in  tlie  iuost  western  })art  of  Per- 
sian Kliora.'>.'»auJi).  Candahar  was  the  capital  of  tlie  Doorauoee  em- 
pire in  Ahmed  Shauh's  time,  but  Timour  changed  the  seat  of 
government  to  CauboL 