

Yet  tfaas.pcacofiil  and  sodable  diqwaition  must  not  be.ima^ned  to> 
aniBKte.liiepastoial  tribes  on. aU  qepiaions:  those  wha.bhahit  the 
fionticr  tofwaids.Feraia  and  Bdoehistann,  are  fiesoe  and acdre  in  their 
border  wars.  Even  the  Atchikzyes*  whose  ooontiy  iSidie.scene.of. 
the  tranquil  and  simple,  hfe  I  have,  been  describing  are  tiie  most 
Wttdik^  tmd  by  far  the  most  predatoiy  oi  the.  X)ooraunee  tribe.  TUa. 
may  seem  inoonaiatent,  but  it  is  by  no  means  the. first  instsnoe'Of  Ihe. 
union  of  a  predatory  aod.mardal  spirit  with  the  innocanoe  of  *  ptf- 
tocal       and  even  .within  great  degree  of  sensibilitj.to.  the.chaima. 


*  Tlw  harfwiwl  curd  already  described. 

f  A  sort  of  soft  curd,  which  is  slightly  ad^  hut  niy  ^prtniMs  to  Ihs  ImUl  II  ii  cdW* 
dhye  in  Indisi  and  yourt  in  Turkey.  .  ^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


EMPLOYMENTS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 


of  romantic  scenery  and.cC  lodAl  enjoyincBi:.  All  Gieece,  in  the  ag«^ 
of  Homer,  furnished  wmpilMi:  of  the  ^^une  appomit  inconaiitenfSjr;. 
The  Scottish  border,  in  modem  times,  bore  the  same  character,  and. 
the  songs  of  its  inhabitants,  alternately  exult  in  the  pillage  and  hovoe. 
of  a  (bray,  and  breathe  the  softest  and  tcndercst  sentiments  of  love 
and  purity.  Even  the  Arcndinns  themselves,  from  whom  we  draw  all 
our  notions  of  the  gold-  ri  n'^a  oi  she|)lu  i  ds,  were  a  warlike  race,  and 
it  was  the  mutual  depredations  of  the  little  cantons  into  which  Ar- 
cadia ilividpd,  that  at  length  drove  her  shepherds  tirom  thein 
flocks  and  mountains  to  the  safety  of  walled  towns.  * 

To  return  to  the  composition  of  Dooraunee  camps,  t  ik  h  cump  is 
composed  of  men  of  one  family,  but  there,  are  in  each  a  rmmber  of 
Humsauyahs,  chiefly  Caukers  and  Ghiljies.  They  have  sometimes 
Taujiks,  and  mote  fiieqiieatly  Ehnmiks,  among  them,  who  work  as 
nnithB,  caipentero,  and  (noelayers)  buzgura.  The  eKisleiice;  ofi  tiheM 
lart  m  tfa«  eampa  majaeem  mnpriaing  |  but  all  the-nun  lug  hoidea.af 
DoftMnmeaa  cokivate  a  little  ground*  and  they  leave  ihe.ciiarge  of.  it 
to  tfaeir  huagim  while  they  are  abaent  from  their  own:  conntiyv. 
Thej  even,  cany-  on.  a  little  - husbandry  at  thdr  eiladn  or'aqmnitf 
»tationa>  but  k  does  not  leem  to  gf>  mudi  beyond  laiaing'nidbiisjani' 
a  yeiy  small  quantity  of  grain. 

TheyaQ  give  ashareof  the^increaae  <^thflir<flo(^Cotlie'personin 
whose  landb.thcy.encamp  while  out  of  their  own  countiy.'. 

Far  the  greatest  .pert  of  their  flocks  canaiat  m  sheep--  TUey'^aiiBD: 
keep  goets»  the  numbers  of  whidk  lu-c  great  or  small  in  praportkn  to. 
the  sheep,  as  the  country  is  more  or  less  hilly.    In  some  parts,  onei 
third  of  the 'flock  is  composed  of  goats,  in  others  they  only  keep  a 
few  goats  to  lead  the  sheep  in  grazii)g.    Those  near  the  desart,  and 
those  in  easy  circumstances,  have  camels  on  whidi  they  carry  their 
tents  and  baggage:  thev  sell  the  Tnale<<  and  rftain  the  females  for. 
breeding.    The  poor  use  bullocks  and  asses.    Almost  every  man  has 