


430  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  COUNTRY. 

there  is  little  reason  to  regiei  the  unpatubility  of  mmigning  wHh  pre- 
cision the  shares  cf  the  two  tribes. 

Hie  country  comprehended  within  these  limits  is  VMrioiis.  The 
valley  of  the  Tumuk,  enclosed  between  the  Paropamisan  mountains 
on  its  north-west,  and  the  hilLs  which  run  from  Mooker  to  Kellace 
Abdoo  Rehcem  on  its  south-c;iHt,  is  a  plain  diversified  by  swells  and 
hollows  ;  its  leno;th  is  upwards  ol  sixty  mik-s.  ;ind  its  breadth  under 
twenty.  It  is  high  and  ill  watered,  and  the  la^i  defect  increases  with 
its  height)  so  that  neai  iVlookkoor,  it  is  scrarcelv  fittetl  either  for  agri- 
culture or  pasture ;  of  the  remainder,  the  central  part  on  the  river  is 
partially  cultivated ;  beyond  that,  on  each  side  is  unfertile ;  it  is 
covered  with  bushes  «lone»hM  few  QJaeeies,  mdfiwmyillsges,  and 
is  only  used  as  pasture  land  m  aaminer*  bj  tribes  who  wididnw  to 
edier  eUmates  when  the  cold  sets  in.  The  villages  which  have 
flourished  in  this  district}  sofleied  greatly  in  -the  Ghiljie  rebetUoii» 
and  are  now  in  a  state  of  decay  $  Kdaut,  the  largest  of  them,  which 
le  consideMd  as  a  town*  and  is  the  residence  of  - the  chief  of  the  den 
of  Tohheei  contains  only  two  or  three  bundled  houses.  The  hordiefa 
part  under  the  hiUsy  affinds  more  gyasi*  md  is  fiiU  of  camps  in  tlM 
aeason. 

The  tract  dependmit  on  the  Paropamisan  monntnns,  is  inhabited 
by  predatory  Tokhees,  and,  from  the  character  of  the  inhabitants, 
one  would  expect  it  to  be  rough  and  poor ;  it  seems,  accordingly,  to 
be  composed  ol  hills  destitute  of  water,  and  perhi^s  of  soil,  with 
vallevs  too  narrow  to  admit  of  much  cultivation.  The  inhahitanti 
hve  m  tents,  an<i  are  supported  by  their  flocks. 

To  the  south  of  the  range  of  hills  which  runs  from  Mookkoor  lo 
Kellace  Abdooreheem,  is  a  tract  of  country,  of  which  the  pait  to  the 
north  of  the  32d  parallel  of  latitude,  is  crossed  by  hills  enclosing 
plains,  which  in  many  places  are  watered  by  CahrecioSj  and  in  ottMcs 
support  nnmeioua  biNNles  of  shepherds.  Among  the  bat  cultivatod 
WfotB,  ere  HuUatauglit  GhoQudann,  and  ftantonyes  init  Kellaoe  Ab- 
doeiebeem  Khaun  done  deserves  particular  noiioe»  aa  being  the  capital 
of  the  dan  of  Hotukee^andthechiaf  fortofthedescendantiof  the- 


Digitized  by  Googl 


BASOM  OF  IBB  AIIBISTAlTBm  4S1 

Ghiljie  Kings.  It  is,  however,  a  place  ol'  no  strength,  and  is  sur* 
rounded  by  black  tents,  with  a  few  houses.  It  stands  in  a  small 
district  called  Ghwurra  Murgha ;  wliich  is  divided  by  hills  from  the 
valley  of  the  Urghessauji,  into  whicli  the  stream  that  pabses  Keilace 
Abdooreeheem,  Devertheless  makes  its  way. 