

The  GhOjie  cmmtiy  to  the  wMStk  of  kdtode  SSf,  oonaiflti  ddsAj 
of  MBdy  plans»  and  hi^  stony  tracts*  Of  .hmea  hUls :  Uiat  is  the 
Booth  cesti  near  die  junction  of  the  Cpoodoofr  and  the  Gomult  is  of 
the  last  description ;  but  iheiei  in  the  midst  .of  - lofty  and  inaccessible 
mountainat  ta  the  little  TaHoj  of  Mammyet  where  Abdooredbeon 
Khann  (the  heed  of  the  GhlQies*  and  their  King  dining  the  rebdr 
Uoa)f  has  found  a  aeouie  retreat  from  the  real  or  imagined  resent- 
ment  of  the  Dooi-aimee  government.  It  is  inhabited  by  diqdieida  in 
tents,  but  Abdooreheem  has  founded  »  fort*  and  is  making  a  gaideds 
and,  perhaps,  introducing  agriculture. 

From  the  meridian  of  Mookoor,  to  the  hills  on  the  right  bank  of 
the  Gomul,  and  from  Ghwashta  to  Ghuznee,  is  the  bason  of  the 
Aubistaudeh,  an  open  country  of  varioxis  fertility,  and  in  different 
states  of  iropro%  i  ll  1011  (  :  the  districts  of  Mookoor,  Karrabangh,  and 
Nannee,  to  thti  west  ol  Ghuznee,  are  naturally  unfertile,  and  thinly 
inhabiteil :  the  testimony  of  the  natives  assigns  one  iiuiulrcU  and 
twenty  forts,  or  castles,  to  Mookoor,  and  one  hundred  to  Karra- 
baugh ;  and,  as  almost  every  village  in  the  Ghiljie  country  is  a  fort, 
and  none  in  this,  part  contains  motre  than  fire  o^  six,  froiiiieSf  the 
eocount  ia  piofaafaAy  conecL 

The  ooimtry  to  the  atnith  of  these  distndai,  and  thet  called  Entti^ 
muOf  irtoA  eKtends  Scoot  6hwashta»  to  within  twenty  miles  of 
Glwi«nee>  are  open*  partially  cnkiTated,  'and  waterad  by  jCaiueeie«» 
and  by  smne  bvooki  that  nm  into  the  Anbutsudeh.  The  benders  of 
that  lake  are  covered  with  low  tamarisk^  and  a  plane  tree,  a  poplar, 
or  a  wiUow,  may  be  found  here  and  there  near  a  Cahrees}  but  there 
is  no  natural  wood,  and  the  country  is  naked  and  uniform. 

Divided  from  this  tract  by  the  Gonial,  and  the  kills  on  its  tight 


Digitized  by  Google 


CITY  OF  OHUZNEE. 


bank,  are  the  woody  mountains  and  narrow  plains  of  the  Kharateef; 
but  I  shall  leave  them  lor  a  fuller  description  hereafter. 

Immediately  to  the  south  of  (ihnznee  is  the  rich  district  of  8hil- 
gur,  which,  with  tlie  country  rounti  tlie  city,  is  hii|;hly  cultivated,  and 
abounds  in  villages  and  gardens.  Though  it  has  little  natural  wood, 
many  plane  trees  and  poplars  are  planted,  for  the  sake  of  the  timber; 
the  want  of  which  article  is,  however,  felt  in  all  tliia  country,  and 
is  remedied  in  building,  by  the  use  of  the  arched  roof.  . 

CHiQtfnee  itself,  which  eight  centuries  ago  wm  the  capital  of  an 
empire,  readiing  from  the  Tigria  to  the  Ganges,  and  from  the  Jaw^ 
tea  to  die  Persian  gulf,  ia  now  reduced  to  a  town  containing  about 
fiftem  hundred  houaea,  besides  anbuiba  without  the  walls.  Hie  town 
stands  on  a  height,  at  the  foot  of  which  flows  a  pretty  large  stream. 
It  is  surrounded  by  stone  walls,  and  contains  three  baMurs  of  no  grept 
breadth,  with  high  houses  on  each  side,  and  a  covered  Chaursoo^ 
besides  seranl  dark  and  narrow  streets.  Some  few  remuns  of  the 
ancient  nrandeur  of  the  city  are  still  to  be  se^  in  its  neighbourhood! 
particularly  two  lofty  minarets,  which  stand  at  some  distance  from 
each  other,  and  are  of  different  heights,  the  least,  upwards  of  one 
hundred  feet  hi<rh.  The  tomb  of  the  great  Sultan  ^lalimood  is  also 
standing,  about  three  miles  from  the  city.  It  is  a  spacious,  but  not 
a  magnificent  building,  covered  with  a  cupola.  The  doors,  which  are 
very  large,  are  of  sandal  wood,  and  are  said  to  have  been  brought 
by  the  Sultan  as  a  trophy  from  the  famous  temple  ol'  Somnaut  in 
Guzerat,  which  he  sacked  in  his  last  expedition  to  India.  Tlie  tomb- 
stone is  of  white  marble,  on  which  are  sculptured  Arabic  verses  from 
&e  Korann,  and  at  its  head  liea  liie  plain  but  weighty  mace,  idiidi 
is  said  to  hove  been  wielded  by  the  monardi  liimael£  Itis.ofwood, 
with  a  bead  of  metal  so  heavy*  that  lew  men  can  use  it.  Tltere  aie 
also  some  ttnones,  or  durirs,  inlaid  with  Diotlier<4ifipeail,  in  thetoDh^ 
■Ufaidi  are  said  to  have  beloog^  to  Mahmood.  Tlie  tombiBtone.ia 
under  a  canopy,  and  some  Mnollaha  are  still  maiiitained,  who  iocob* 
aaqiiy  read  die  B^onmn  .aloud  over  the  fpmwHy  ■ 