

Tlic  jHincipal  employment  of  the  people  is  arrriculture,  but  a  great 
propoition  r»t  tin  in  is  occupied  in  trade  between  Candaliar  and  Up- 
per Sindc,  and  iii  the  business  of  carriers. 

Their  manners  have  a  great  resemblance  to  those  of  the  Doorau- 
nees,  with  whom  they  are  dmeiy  eomieGted  both  by  descent  and 
fiienddiip^ 

Tbe  Kbami  ia  on  the  same  Ibotiiig  as  a  Dooraime  Sirdar;  but  the 

8  I  S 


428  SPEEN  TEREENS. 

ESng  Dever  interferes  with  lum,  mept  to  call  Sot  the  iervioe  p£  hii  * 

oontingeDt,  or  hia  personal  attendance  at  oanrt.  • 
The  number  of  inhabitants  of  fisheen  may  be  guessed  at  or 

ten  thousand  families. 

A  great  part  of  the  po'pulation  consists  of  Sytids,  whose  habits  and 
employments  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Tcreens.  In  common 
with  the  wholo  of  the  prophet's  family,  they  have  the  reputation, 
and,  in  consequence,  perhaps  the  merit,  of  courage  and  good  morals. 
The  Tor  Tereen^  the  Syuds,  and  some  Cauker  Humsauyehs,  are  the 
only  people  in  Pisheen. 

The  Speen  I'ereem  possess  the  long  valley  of  Zawura,  and  the 
open  plains  of  Tull  and  Chooteeallee,  countries  which  extend  fitom 
near  Fisheen  to  the  range  of  ,SolliDattn,  withm  amaich  or  two  of 
Upper  Shud.  .  They  are  separated  fimn  the  Tor  Tereens  by  a  portkm 
of  the  Canker  oountij^  but  diey  are  under  the  anthorily  of  the  com- 
mon Khaun»  who  makes  an  annual  journey  to  assapibJe  their  share 
of  the  Teresn  oontii^ent»  or  to  leodve  die  fine  which  they  generaUj 
pay  in  preference  io  personal  service.  Thar  manners  are  those  of 
the  Tor  Tereens,  greatly  mixed  with  those  of  the  Cankers*  m  the 
midst  of  whom  they  zesidei 


Digitized  by  Google 


(   429  ) 


CHAP.  V. 

Tflx  omum,  arm  of  okubnis  and  cAimoLf  wuBBUKt, 

AND  CAUnRS. 

THE  lower  part  of  the  valley  of  tho  Tiirnnlv  has  been  described 
38  belonsfinfir  to  the  Dooraun^s ;  a  ruined  brid^i-  to  the  east  of 
'Tool,  \s  liicli  IS  cidkcl  I'oolee  Sun«;ee  for  the  stone  brldj^e),  lies  be- 
tween tiieir  tenitory  and  that  of  the  (Tliiijies,  an(i  the  boundary  line 
will  not  be  very  incorrect,  if  it  be  (ir:t\vn  through  that  point,  north 
and  south,  tirom  the  Paropamisan  inountains,  to  the  hills  on  the  right 
of  the  Urghessaun.    The  north-western  boundary  may  be  said  to  be 
formed  by  the  Piux>pamisaD  moimtaina,  though  some  hilly  tracts  de- 
pendant <m  tint  range,  are  included  intiie  Ghiljie  landas  and,  on  the 
odinr  liand*  a  nanofir  tract  of  shtj  miles  long,  is  cot  out  of  tham  be- 
tween Ganbul  and  Gfansnee,  and  beknoigi  to  the  Wiuduka.   On  the 
north,  the  river  of  Fungaheer  dmdea  it  for  atnne  dirtanee  fiom  the 
Cohutann'of  Ganbol;  but  after  that  river  haa  joined  the  rnrerof 
Ceabul»  the  GhiQie  oonntiy  croiaei  it,  and  tKxnpies  bodi  banks  aa 
&r  eart  as  the  hei|^  abonre  Jellallabad,  whcae  it  meets  the  coontiy 
of  the  Berdpoiaunees.   The  vest  of  fts  eastern  frontier  is  formed  by 
the  moontains  of  Solimaun.    Its  southern  limits  are  on 
the  south-east  it  haa  Wanneh,  and  some  other  barren  tracts  about 
the  Gomul:  on  the  south-west  it  is  divided  by  hills  from  Urghessaun, 
and  in  the  intermediate  portion  of  the  southern  frontier,  the  pasture 
grounds  of  the  Ghiljies  are  sometimes  intermixed  with  those  of  the 
Caukef^,  and  sometimes  separated  from  them  hy  wastes  of  coiiHider- 
able  extent  but  as  they  are  departs  ibr  which  no  one  would  contend. 