

The  town  is  divided  into  many  Molvullas,  or  quarters,  each  of 
which  belongs  to  one  of  the  numerous  tubes  and  nations  wliich  form 
the  inhabitants  of  the  city.  Almost  all  the  great  Dooraunees  have 
houses  in  Candahar,  aud  Hume  of  theui  are  bald  to  be  large  and 
elegant.  ' 

There  are  many  caravanserais  and  mosques ;  but  of  the  latter,  one 
only  nearUie  palaoe,  usaid  to  be  faandsoma  The  tomb'Of  Ahmed 
Sfaanh  also  stands  near  the  palaoe;  itianot  a  large  building,  but  lias 
a  handsome  cupola,  and  ia  elegantly  painted,  gilt,  and  otherwtae  orn*- 
mented  within.  It  is  held  in  h^  ▼eneratioh'  by  the  Doorannee^ 
and  ia  an  mylum  against  all  enemieii  even  the  King  not  venturing 
to  toadi »  man  who  has  taken  rafiige  tiiere.  VHnea  any  of  tiie  great 
lofdi  are  discontented,  it  is  common  tor  them  to  give  out  that  tiutgr 
intend  to  ({uit  the  world,  and  to  spend  their  lives  in  prayer  at  the 
tomb  of  Ahmed  Shauh ;  and  certainly,  if  ever  an  Asiatic  king  de» 
served  the  gratitude  of  his  coM!)try',  it  was  Ahmed  Shauh. 

On  the  whole,  Candahar,  tiioiifrh  it  is  superior  to  most  of  the 
citif^s  in  Asia  in  its  plan,  i'^  by  no  means  magnificent.  It  is  built  for 
the  most  part  of  brick,  otten  with  no  other  cement  than  mud.  The 
Hindoos,  as  usual,  have  the  best  houses  of  the  common  people,  and 
tliey  atlhere  to  their  custoni  oi  building  them  very  iiigh.  Tlie  streets 
of  Candahar  are  veiy  crowded  from  'noon  tOl  evening,  and  all  the 
various  trades  that  have  been  described  at  Peahawer,  axe  also  earned 
on  thme,  except  that  of  water- adlers,  whidi  ia  hera  unnecessary,  as 
iihnfi  we  ifmtvtwn  vnatf  where,  fumialied  with  leathern  buckets, 

8  I 


40B  BARAICHE& 

fitted  to  hAodktf  of- wood,  or  hotn*  ibr  poople  to  draw  wBlbttmStht 

Ballad-singers  and  story-tdkfs  9te  also  numerous  in  the  bazars,  anA 
•U-aiUcles  ftam  t]ie:w«it»  are  m  much  greater  plentf.andpwffectiflrf 
<iuuii  at  Peshawer. 

Contran'  to  what  is  the  case  with  other  cities  in  A%haunistaun,  die 
greater  part  of  tlie  inhabitants  of  Candahar  are  Afghaims,  and  of 
these  \yy  far  the  greater  nimiber  are  Dooraunees.  But  tin  ir  condition 
here  bears  no  rpsf»mhlan«j  U>  lliat  of  their  lirethren  in  the  country. 
The  peculiar  institutious  of  the  A%haun  tribes  are  sii})crj«eded  by  the 
existence  of  a  strong  government,  regular  courts  of  law,  and  an 
efficient  poUce.  The  rustic  customs  of  tlie  Alghauns  are  iilso  iu  a 
great  measure  laid  aside ;  and,  in  exteriors,  the  inhabitants  of  Gui<> 
diduur  a  good  deal  resemUe  die  BBniana ;  the  reModbiaiice  ia,  hoir* 
ever,  confined  to  the  extorior,  for  their  characters  are  still  meiked 
wid&  eU.the  pecoliaritiea  of  ftliflir  neti^  The  other  mhabitanto  aie 
TMQikB,'  Einumkih.  -Hmdooe,  Perneiifl^  Rnwitinnfinij  end  Bnlnrheri 
with  e'few  XJiMa,  Aah»,  Aimeniam,  and  Jewv» 