

NotwidiBtandhig  their  domestic  qoanda  .and  fends  m&  odier 
tribes^  thsy  areb^  no  means  a  violent  or  initahle  people.  Tbey 


'  Digrtized  by  GoogI 


I 


I 


u\^u\^c6  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


geoaaiXy  live  in  tolerable  hannoiiy,  and  have  their  meetings  and 

amiuements  lite  the  Dooraimees,  imdisturbed  by  the  constant  alarm,  - 
and  almost  as  constant  fVnvs  of  tlie  Eusofzyes.  Thev  are  verv  hos- 
pitable, and  have  a  regular  offii  ei  whose  duty  it  is  to  receive  and 
provide  for  guests  at  the  oxjionce  ol  the  villa<?('.  Instead  of  tho  Per- 
sian cubba  of  the  1  )ooraiinr'es,  or  the  original  *  cameess  ot  the 
Afghauns,  (w}iu  li  is  here  oalv  worn  by  old  men,)  the  generality  wear 
the  Indian  tiress  oi  white  cotton,  which  has  been  described 
ai,  worn  by  the  inhabitants  of  DaniauTi,  to  whom  these  Ghiljies  bear 
some  resemblance  in  their  appearance  and  manners.  Their  dres*  is 
also  distinguished  from  that  of  the  tribes  farther  west,  by  the  use  of 
wliitiB  tpibmi  wUdh  diejr  wear  in  the  maiinef  leprasiBBteil  in  Vwb^ 
UL  They  also  wear  •  cap  like  that  of  die  Dowaunees  but  modi 
Wffiier*  ■  " 

ThtSt  anna-  are  the  same  as  tiiofe  of  llie  Dobranncea;  with  ih» 
addition  of  a  shield  of  MUde'a  Bide*  inr,  wlien  it  en  lie  pvocnied* 
oCtlie  akin  of  a  ihinooenM* 

'  Moat  meii  hare  a  «tn|ie  ahaved  in  the  middle  ef  their  hands,  like 
tfaeDoorauneea;  botthoaewhoaetnpibrproleaaedduimpionsletall 
their  liair  grow :  it  is  eostomary  with  each  of  those,  when  he  is  jiiit 
about  to  cloae  with  the  enemy,  todrophia  cap»  and  ratherto  give  up 

his  life  than  retreat  beyond  the  spot  where  it  has  fallen. 

I  have  mentioned  that  ^e  Kalunder  Khail  are  almost  all  husbttod^ 
men :  there  are,  however,  five  or  six  families  of  shepherds  among 
them,  who,  like  the  other  numerous  shepherds  of  Kuttawauz,  leave 
their  frozen  plains  durinfr  part  of  the  ve^r,  for  the  low  and  sheltered 
country  among  the  intniutains  (in  the  banks  of  the  Cxomul.  Wauneh 
in  particular,  is  a  fkvourite  retreat,  and  the  small  number  of  its 
owners,  the  JJumtaunees,  alike  prevents  their  resisting  this  invasion 
of  their  property,  and  their  suffering  liy  sucli  an  addition  to  their 
populadtMi.   It  is  generally  thouj^t  that  men  often  quit  the  life  of 


The  large  loose  shirt. 
8  L  d 


Digitized  by  Google 


shepherd  for  that  of  a  husbandman,  but  never  return  frofn  an  agri- 
cultural to  a  pastoral  life.  'J'lie  few  shepherds  of  the  Kalunder  Kliail» 
however,  furnish  an  example  to  the  contrai  \ .  The  uncle  of  a  man 
from  whom  I  had  the  story,  was  possessed  ot  land  in  Kuttawauz,  hut 
he  married  into  a  pastoral  family,  and  being  struck  with  the  pleasuren 
of  a  wandering  life,  he  laid  out  a  sum  of  money  he  had  gained  by 
some  madder  which  he  had  cultivated,  on  the  purchase  of  aheep, 
and  joined  the  moving  horde  with  which  he  was  connected.  The 
pleasures  which  seduced  huii,  must  seem  great  even  to  the  husband- 
ineU)  for  those  of  the  Kalunder  Khail,  at  least,  annually  betake 
themselTes  to  the  imitatkm  <€  m  pastoral  life.  Every  summer  they, 
pitdb  their  teato  at  fome  diatanoe  fiom  tbe  fi»t»  wliidi  ia  aa  a&tifely 
ftbandooed  that  tlie  gptea  aie lodced:  they  lemain  in  .tento  during 
the  whole  of  the  saminer,  movmg  OGGaabDaQy  within  a  moderate 
ifMoe-roiind  their  iotU  The  enjoymeata  of  this  aeaaon  .are  great/' 
(aaja  one  of  my  infiwrnanta)  **biit  its  pleaaurea  are  equalled,  if  not 
aurpaased,  by  the  idloaeas  and  repoee  of  wintw."  Besidea  the  ahcp- 
hetda  who  only  move  to  the  Gomtdf  there  axe  others  who  prolong 
their  march  to  Damaun.  These  are  joined  by  merchants  from  the 
fixed  iiAabittfnts,  and  the  whole  number  is  ooosiderible.  Such  are 
the  mann^  of  the  inhabitants  of  Kuttawauz,  and  probably  of  the 
Alizyes  of  ZooTmool,  the  Suhauks  of  Khurwaur,  and  of  all  the 
southern  Solimaim  Khail:  but  the  interposition  o£  the  village  in 
checking  disturbances  is  more  marked  in  many  divisions,  and  in  some 
they  even  compel  the  parties  to  submit  to  a  Jeirga,  or  to  quit  the 
villnm'.  In  some  clans  too,  the  form  of  government  is  more  decidedly 
republican,  and  the  sentiments  ot  t  ry  individual  must  be  taken 
before  any  measure  ot  importance  is  decide<l  on. 