

Tln'  inotintains  to  tlir  tiortii  of  Seewee  are  inhnfiitctl  by  Beloches 
(as  are  the  southern  parts  oftlie  rauire  of  Solimaun),  but  in  the  hills 
to  the  south  of  Chooleealltie,  w  c  tiud  some  independent  Afnrhauns, 
principally  composed  of  the  remains  of  the  tribe  of  Lonee,  whii  li  ui 
one  period  made  a  great  figure  in  the  transactions  of  India.  1  he 
history  of  the  Dilazauks  may  throw  some  light  on  the  fortunes  of  this 
tribe,  and  it  is  mnarkable,  that  most  of  the  tribes  of  A%haan8  who 
have  andeatly  beea  distinguished  in  India,  haive  nearly  diaa|>peaKed 
fiom  iheb  native  ooimtiy.  It  is  natoial  to  conchide  tfasft  tii^  havie 
mt  merely  poai»d  Ibith  thdur.  xednmlant  popuktion  (aa  the  Em^es 
ha«e  mote  .leoently.  done  into  Bcdiilwind),  bnt  have  been  driyen  fiom 
thair  originai  seats,  and  compelled  to  enter  on  the  adrentuses  to  ^ihich 
ttagr  nwB  their  lepulatint  abroad 

Zsamia^.TiiUt  and  Chooteeallee  msj^be  oensidened'  as  one  vaUqr 
wdmaaaifU  last  into  a  plain.  Zsiinira,  the  nppet-pait  of  Hbm  wtSkifi 
comasences  near  ChiipiMK  and  to  the  noilih  east  ef  Boahiik.  It  is  st 
first  confined  between  the  mountama^  but  soon  expands  sufficieaSt^ 
to  admit  of  a  degrae  of  cukivatioii»  sod  tmsk  of  one  or  two  vary  con* 
sider^le  villages. 

TuU  is  still  wider, .  and  the  cessation  of  the  hills  which  bounded  ii 
eathe  north,  aUowa  ^  plama  of  fiorae  and  CbootaeaUee  to  woat^ 

fi    .  ■ 


u\^ui^c6  by  Google 


^OBE.  4gl 

The  nil  of  TnU  md  QMwIeedlM  qpfwan  to  -feMRiiAilietlii^'Of  Soft* 
wM»  but  tlie  dimate  ig  nuve  finrourable^  andtheciiltivirtaoii  vh  pflv» 
hiq^  mora  flBDtMulsdp 

Boree  is  frequently  comgmtedf  both  in  extent  and  fertility,  to  the 
plain  of  FeehawOT :  I  hare  no  oppostmiity  of  judging  of  the  justice 
of  the  comparison ;  but  it  may  be  preaomod  that  Boree  is  fertile  and 
well  cultivated,  as  it  is  certainly  populous,  and  inhabited  entirely  by 
husbandmen.  A  considerable  stream  runs  through  Boree  towards 
the  south-west,  and  the  land  is  wrttcrnd  bv  some,  other  brooks,  and 
bv  a  considerable  niinil)er  ot"  Cahreezes.  The  productions  of  the 
country,  and  ihe  manners  oi  the  pcojilc  arc  still  the  «iame  as  have 
been  described  in  Kboraasaun, .  though  the  dr^  begins  to  resemblQ 
that  of  India.  ' 

Between  the  hills  to  the  north  of  Boree,  and  those  on  the  68th 
line  of  longitude,  is  Hindoo  Baugh,  the  source  of  the  river  Zhobe. 
From  this  place  the  Zhobe  pursues  a  north-easterly  course,  till  it 
joins  the  Ciomul  at  Sirmaugha.  I  imagine  the  Zhobe  to  be  at  first  a 
small  brook  in  a  narrow  valley ;  it  never  becomes  a  considerable 
str^un,  but  in  m  eaily  part  of  its  course  it  dividea  an  estandre  plain 
ihomkHng  in  twattisk,  partially  eii]lifa4ed«  and  prodncing  wbei^ 
berley,  rice,  and  aome  otfaev  gininB  $  but  principally  grran  op  to  pa#n 
turage»  and  scattered  with  large  and  nmnecoua  campa  of  AepberdAi 
Some  eeeomitih  indeed,  represent  the  whole  of  thelnfaabitenta  m 
Vmag  in  tents }  while  ollien  deacribe  a  iintile  traot»  ooTeied:^itli 
eukivfltion  and  viUagea;  md dieae  appaient  oontiadidiooa  caA  'onlj 
be  feconciled,  by  sappoong  Uiem  to  applj  to  difleMOt  peita  Ihia 
wtaniivB  diitncta 