

This  is  the  case  among  the  Ahmedzyes  who  possess  the  east  of 
Logur,  find  all  the  southern  part  of  the  valley  of  tlie  Caubul  river  as  far 
as  JeilallnbiKl.  Yet  as  they  are  in  perfect  obedience  to  the  King,  the 
Khaun  of  the  whole  division,  who  is  the  representative  of  the  sove- 
reign, has  much  more  influence  than  among  the  southern  Sollmaun 
Khail»  and  the  whole  division,  ^ough  it  consists  of  12,000  ftmiliest 
looks  up  to  him  aa  its  head  in  all  cases. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Ghiljies  in  the  four  Tuppehs  of  Caubul.  are  a  quiet,  orderly, 
uidustrioijs  set  of  people,  entirely  obedient  to  tiie  Kinff.  and  subject 
to  the  authority  of  their  own  KhauDS.  lu  dress,  aud  in  aome  re^^dcts 
in  nuuiners,  they  resemble  tlie  citizens  of  Caubul.         •       '      ,  ' 

The  King  derives  a  uiodeiate  revenue  from  the  whole  of  the 
Ghiljies ;  buC  it  has  idmost  all  been  allotted  to  difiereut  persons,  so 
that  httle  now  oofmesiiirto  the  xojvltieasu^^  Bat.ii  gnmted  to  the 
KhAUDft  of  the  Glul)ies  ihemielfes;  ptft  (a  the  Doocaunee  GSnUr 
who  conunwids  their  contiiigent  of  troops ;  aad  m  comiderehle  poirtkrt 
w«t  anigiiedto  AbdoorcfaeenLKhiiiii;  Mid  has  not  ben  resumed  flinoe 
hk  Tebellion. 

In  their  cheracter  the  Ghsljiea  m  confrMedly  <he  aeoond  tribe  in 
Ae  Canbiil  dondnioiM.  '  Thejr  are  more  tnrbnientand  lem  dviliaed 
than  the  DoaffanneeB»  but  thej  are  a  brave  and  reapedaUe  people 
In  their  perwnB  they  are  pgpbebly  the  hurgMtyhanifaorociit,  and  &^ 

of  the  A%hauns. 

Hie  dissimilarity  of  their  country  to  that  of  ihe  tribe  they  belong 
to,  gives  the  Klinrotees  the  same  claim  to  leparate  mention  which 
has  been  allowed  to  the  Atchikzyes  among  the  Dootamiees.  Thdr 
manners  indeed  do  not  differ  so  much  from  those  of  their  brethren* 
but  their  interests  are  more  distinct,  and  they  really  form  a  oommu* 
hit)'  onlv  connected  with  the  Ghiljies  in  immo. 

The  Kharotees  inhabit  the  country  situated  to  the  east  of  Km  I 
waua,  among  the  branches  of  the  range  of  Solimaun.  Tliey  liavc 
the  principal  ridge  of  that  chain  on  the  east ;  and  a  branch  which  it 
sends  out  separates  thera  from  Gmdaiz  on  the  north;  the  Gomul  is 
their  bouiul;irv  on  the  west,  as  it  would  be  on  the  south,  but  for  the 
interposition  ot  liic:  little  territory  of  Wauueh.  The  Kharotee  country 
encloses  the  little  district  of  Oor^oon,  belonging  to  the  Poormoollees 
or  Foormoolles,  an  ind^endent  Izibe  of  Taigiks. 
.  l%e  KharoCeeaposMfs  a  ftnr'nanow  plains  and  valleys,  divided  by 
Jii|^  and  iwftWMrible  mountains^ 

Tb^.  count  finv  towns»  or  iatber  viUi^as^  sinee  Sirufiaw  the  Uugest 


Digitized  by  Google 


446         EMPLOYMENT  OF  THE  PASTORAL  KHAROTEES. 