

Among  the  eastern  Ghiljies,  and  especially  among  the  SoIimMU 
Khails,  the  power  of  the  chief  is  not  considerable  enough  to  form  a 
tie  to  keep  the  clan  together,  and  they  are  broken  into  little  societies, 
(like  the  Kusoizyes)  which  ue.^uite  independent  in  ail  jFA^emal  tjua^ 

10 


Digitized  by  Googl 


EXAMPLE  OF  THE  KALimDSR  KHAIL. 


441 


•actions.  Their  connection  wit^i  the  Kincr,  however,  makes  a  difference 
between  their  situation  and  lh;it  oi  thf  Eiisofzves,  and  in  consequence 
each  chief  has  power  over  the  whole  ot  his  clan,  in  all  matters  con- 
nected with  the  furnislujig  of  troops  to  tlie  King,  or  the  payment  of 
the  royal  revenue.  This  limited  authoi  iiy  preserves  some  connection 
between  the  diifcrent  subdivisions  under  one  Kliaun,  and  often  delays 
the  breaking  up  of  a  dan,  after  it  has  i^tained  the  number  which 
iiiliiMlJy  reqiMKM  ■tyniteduaft.  It»cfaimiigliowgMit«diflhreiiGe 
the'diwnniftmcM  I  ham  been  ttating  mint  make  in  the  livies  'of  the 
Gfailfiee  and  Doomniiee%  but  lliis  will  be  mm  evident  fiom  e 
deeoiption  of  a  viUiig^  of  the  soodiem  Snlimawn  KhuL 

The  Eahmder  Ehail  live  in  Knttawans,  about  thirty-miles  to  the 
•ontfa  of  Ghuaneeb'  They  an  abnost  all  huabandme^p^  and*  abaiioe 
keep  any  ed£ie,  thoae'iMed  m  lyicnltnie  being  genefally  hiiedfixira* 
peatotal  hoidei»'  who  pais  the  spring  and  summer  in  KuttsnranaC 
Their  oooutry  is  not  ridi,  itonly  piodnoeB  grain  nhere  there  ape 
Gshteopesi'  and  yidds  but  one  harvest  in  the  year:  it  will  not  bear 
wheat  two  years  on  the  same  groundt  and  even  with  the  peoper-suc- 
oessioD  of  crops,  it  requires  manure.  The  climate  is  very'  ciAd. 
Their  village  contains  about  100  families:  some  Humsauyahs  assist 
in  the  cultivation  of  their  fields,  but  reside  in  a  village  at  some 
distance.  'Iheir  wood  ami  iron  work  is  performed  by  travelling 
artisans. 

Their  Jntul  is  their  own  property  ;  or  if  they  have  the  fiction  of  a 
lleodal  tenure  from  the  KiriL',  il  does  not  affect  their  rights,  either  in 
reality  or  in  form  :  every  man  disposes  of  his  land  :is  he  pleases,  and 
at  death  it  is  divided  amon<T  his  children.  Small  aa  it  is,  their 
village  is  an  independent  republic  it  it*  indeed  in  the  ShumnmLzye 
division  of  the  clan  of  Solimaun  Kluul,  and  the  Khaun  of  that  divi- 
sion collects  the  King*s  dues ;  but  he  interferes  in  nothing  else,  snd 
were  it  notfiv  his  employment  under  the  royal  govenmient,  aH  con- 
nection between  him  and  his  diTifion  would  long  since  hme  ceased. 
The  village  is  dhkled  mto  two  Mohulles,  or  quarters,  under  two 
diteA,  Mofvud  and  TjratuUub^  Morand  Is  the  head  of  the  wfadte 

9  L 


ICAXNEBS. 


villa^»  and  is  called  MuUick.    Their  authority  is  entirely  confined 
to  external  affairs,  and  they  never  interfere  in  the  disputes  of  the 
people*  unless  when  one  of  them  is  armed  with  the  temporary  powers 
of  a  Chdwashtee.    Quarrels  are  privately  mMle  iip 'Or  alkyMed  to 
oontiniie  till  they  become  troubleioiiie  to.tfa« oDmiiiiiiuly*  when  om 
or  both  of  the  diaputntib  art  oxpeikd  iha  viUi^Vdvil  mks  «v» 
■Bttled  ty.MoollaB.   RiUic  affiun  joe  mMiagad  hy  the  MnlUk  in 
eomwltiiMoP  with  TjfStuUub }.  but  in  may  tnuHctioo  which mig^  kid 
towir»  orothennaeterionaLja^ctthevillagey  theMuHihMwiiihlet 
th9  Men  aad  takea  tfaeir'advice.:  do  qiiettnni  of  oounw  m  put  to 
the  votei  bot-fhe  MhUiIl  gpthen  the  aeoae  of  the  nwinmhly,  ubiutvoa 
whether  their  inewt  ugleee  with.hia,  and  jndjget  how  fir  he  mi^  tdy 
on  their  wuppait  t£.  he  finds  thet  their  opinion  is  diftrinil  horn  hh 
own-   When  a  war  if  reaohred  on,  CSiciwaafateei'  are  immediate]; 
appointed,  and  the  ftnmmwufl  of  them  is  invariably  conferred  on 
Tyztullub,  who  in  ooompieiiGe  is  called  the  Merr,  n  title  which  he 
retains  at,  all  times,  as  Moraud  does  that  of  Mullik.    He  is  Ibnnally 
invested  with  his  office  by  the  Mullik,  who  binds  a  turban  round  Kb 
head  in. the  presence  of  the  whole  village,  of  which  he  immediately 
asflumes  the  control.    lie  calls  out  the  fighting  men,  poeto  centinels, 
and  makes  all  military  arrangements ;  while  he  prevents  internal 
disorder  hv  imposintr  fines  on  all  who  break  the  peace.    The  Mullik 
loses  his  iiiiporiaru  e  fiom  the  tinir  the  Chelwaslitee  is  ap{K>ink'(l:  he 
still  retains  his  superior  rank  ami  honour,  hut  he  interferes  in  nothing, 
and  would  be  as  liable  to  juinishment  as  any  other  individual,  if  he 
engaged  in  any  quarrel  or  disturbance.    The  custom  of  appointing 
Chelwashtees  prevails  all  over  Kuttawauz :  it  seems  indeed  to  be 
rendered  equally  necessary  in  all  parts  of  that  country,  by  the  feuds 
winch  subsist  between  neighbouring  villages.    I  am,  however,  in- 
clined to  think  tiiat  iliii^  state  of  things  lias  not  always^  existed,  because 
the  custom  of  fortifying  the  villages  seems  only  coming  in,  and  most 
cf  tlKMe  in  Kuttawanx  are  still  open. 