

A  few  words  win  suffice  for  the  Wurduks.  I  have  mentioned  that 
they  are  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  Paropomisan  mountains,  and  on 
the  other  three  sities  by  the  Ghiljies.  Their  country  is  a  long  hollow 
between  the  hills  (v  hich  separate  them  trom  Logur  ami  Khunvar), 
and  the  Paropamisan  unniutaiiis,  the  latter  are  penetrateti  by  boiue 
deep  valleys  also  belonging  to  the  Wurduks.  The  river,  inaccurately 
named  from  from  CFhuznee.  rises  in  the  south  of  their  lands,  and  runs 
tiirougli  the  centre  for  the  whole  ot  tiic  ir  cxicnt. 

The  \\  urduks  are  ail  agricultural.    They  are  a  quiet,  sober  people, 


•  It  w  CM  «r  dm  cnyi  liUcft  b  dmrilMd  in  Ihe  fliiralh^ 


4 


Digitized  by  Google 


44S 


CAUKESa* 


perfpctly  obedient  to  the  King,  to  whom  they  pay  revenue,  and  fur- 
nish a  Jarpe  porrlon  ot  troops.  They  hnve  no  wars  with  their  neiMi- 
hours,  and  their  own  MooUahs^  or  the  King's  Cauzy  at  JL(^pir,  settle 
their  internal  disp\it(^s, 

WTiat  remains  unmentioned  of  the  country  inhabited  by  the  AT' 
^hauns,  belong  to  the  tribe  of  Cankers.  Surrounded  by  the  Beloches, 
oi  by  reinoLL'  Lubes  of  Alghauns,  it  is  nearly  inaccessible  to  enquiry  ; 
and,  tliough  1  have  obtained  particular  anxmnto  of  some  parts  of  it, 
and  have  heud  numy  Tague  idatioaa  from  tnvellfln  mpedJiig  tbe 
lanamder,  my  notboi  da.  Hie  Mibject  ate  atill  indiatinct,  and  I  muit 
fiiTCgo  the  attempts  I  have  latheito  made  at  minute  deicriptioii,  both 
with  regard  to  the  Cauken  and  their  oomitzy. 

"Hie  boondaiy  of  the  Canker  tanatxy,  on  the  noith»  ia  the  aame  aa 
the  aouthem  bonndaiy  of  the  GhiQiea:  on  the  noitb-weet  it  haa  Up> 
gjhemaun*  the  part  of  Toba  ' which  beloiigi  to  the  Atcfaifcayeat  and 
Mieen  j.ob  Ae  wert,  the  conhtacy  of  the  Belochea  i  od  the  south,- that 
of  the  Speen  Tere^ ;  and  on  the  east*  the  range  of  Solimaiin  and 
tome  of  the  little  countries  at  ita'baifl^  whidi  have  been  already  de^ 
•cribed.  The  whole  forms  a  square  of  about  a  hundred  miles. 
■  The  west  of  the  Cauker  country  is  mountMnoitt. '  Its  most  distin- 
guishing feature  appears  to  be  the  range  which  I  have  mentioned  as 
running  north  and  south  between  longitude  68'  cast,  and  longitude 
6^)  oast.  West  of  that  ranfrc.  the  iirst  ]ilace  in  the  Cauker  country, 
coming  from  ilic  aortli,  is  Setoona  Daug  (a  high,  cold,  and  barren 
plain,  suited  only  to  pasturajjc)  aiul  ihe  Cauker  part  of  Toba,  which, 
thougii  more  mountainous,  piDbahly  resembles  the  part  already  d&. 
scribed  as  belonging  to  the  Atchikzyes.  Further  srnith,  this  high 
plain  ceas^  but  there  are  mauv  vallevs  in  the  hills,  and  l  or  Alurgha, 
Burshore,  Nareen,  Togy  e,  and  iiuima,  are  particularly  conspicuous 
among  those  which  open  to  the  west.  Still  further  south,  the  hills  in 
queation  are' only  aeparated  from  the  taUe  land.crf'  Edant  by  the  oar- 
■ow  valley  of  Bolaon.  The  valley  of  Burahore  deaervea  nuxe  part^ 
Golar  mention* 