


Digitized  by  Google 


'    1CA1INE1E&  <-  459 

t&t  to  any  Nsusser  thit  .&Ub  into  their  hands.  .  At  length  idiejr 
neach  the  pass  of  Zirkunny,  issue  out  into  the  phuns,  and  are  spread 
over  the  whole  of  Dam  aim  from  the  frontier  of  Upper  Sind  to  the 

hills  of  the  Murwiits.  Each  horde  bus  a  particular  tract  where; it  is 
accustomed  to  encamp,  and  round  v^hich  it  ranges  aa  the  supply  of 
forage  requires.  Thev  en  cam  |)  in  t  lit  los,  within  which  they  shut  up 
their  catt  le  at  iii^liL  i  heir  lite  is  now  idle  and  unvaried,  except  when 
eniiveneti  by  huuting,  which  they  keenly  pursue,  and  whicli  is  ahnost 
their  only  active  euiployment.  The  Wduien  do  all  die  lalxjur,  pitch 
the  tents,  gather  the  wood,  bring  in  water,  and  cook  the  dinner : 
the  men  only  saunter  out  with  the  sheep  and  camels,  and  for  this 
labour  a  very  few  men  suffice.  The  rich  hire  out  their  cattle  during 
their  long  halts,  but  tl^  owner  -majkes  over  the  duty  of  accompany-^ 
ing  them  tQ  aome  poor  maOt  who  geU  a  tihinL  of  the'  luie'for  kk 
'hboixr. 

aie  nerer  concealed;  bat  the  .aame  ohastHj  and 
modesty  whieh'diatinguiak  all  rude  tribes  is 
.  IVhen  the  maw  ha»  melced  on  Solomon's  ymme^'  the  chief  of  the 
Namser  camps  sand  to  the  Khaim  of  the  wbole»  to  &c  a  time  for  e 
ooondl:  on  the  appcnnted  day  thejeUNpatrto  his  cam^  detennina 
tiieir  roote,  appoint  Chelwashtees»  and  soon  after  bnak  up  iheir 
camps,  and  commence  their  return  to  Kboraasaun. 

The  Nanssem,  as  has  been  seen,  depend  entirely  on  their  flocks 
and  herds :  the  fleeces  of  thmr  sheep  supply  the  materials  for  theti 
tents,  their  carpets,  and  the  sadcs  which  hold  their  flour :  their  pos- 
teens,  and  some  other  articles  are  made  of  sheep-skins :  the  milk  oi 
the  ewe  afibrds  the  cheese,  butter,  and  oooroot,  which  is  their  usual: 
diet,  and  its  flesh  is  their  only  luxury. 

The  produce  of  their  sheep,  and  the  hire  of  their  camels,  also 
furnish  the  means  t)f  obtaiinng  the  few  articles  they  require  from 
without  ;  and  the  cnrrin^rc  of  their  tents  and  other  property,  which  is 
so  material  to  wandcrinL,'  <>pli ,  is  entirelv  ]>erfonned  by  tlie  camels. 
Their  shee]i  and  camels  are  extremely  numerous,  and  every  part  of 
their  economy  ia  adaptfid>tO;tbe  moving.  Uie  whioh     occessfycy  to. 

3  N  2 


Digrtized  by  Google 


.460    ckviasa  of  theib  waamiQ  a  free  government. 


feed  such  a  number  of  animals  :  their  tents  are  siu.ill  aiul  Hjl;IiL  :  tlieit 
whole  property  ib  a  suit  or  two  of  clothes,  a  lew  sacks  of  iiour,  witli 
half' a.  dozen  earthen  poU,  and  one  or  two  of  brass. 

Their  dress  i.h  between  those  of  the  cast,  and  the  west ;  but  their 
loose  white  turban  seems  to  make  it  most  resemble  the  former.  < 