

3  0 


Digrtized  by  Google 


466  BULKH. 

as  tiidr  TORMCDlar  Jitigtiage :  it  ii  to  be  ibuiid  in  ggrttewd  ivwdi 
thioiiglioiit  Rumay'  and  in  wlidle  daMes  ni  tenna  in  die  kaguafoamf 
Qnibiil  and  Htndoostan.  It  ia  tlioiiglit  to  be  ipokcn  in  moit  pnrily 
in  Ferghauna.  Ibe  ipeedi  of  IVirkey  ia  nqtorioody  coi'iuptoil  by 
the  intannizCofe  of  foreign  teims  ;  tiiat  of  Fenria  haa  alio'  ioflbrad 
from  the  great  lue  of  the  original  language  of  the  coontij  amcog  iti 
Toorkee  conquerors  ;  and  even  the  Uxbekairf'  Rolrhamn  aie  wafptmeA 
to  have  refined  and  enridied  their  tongne'at  the  expenoe  of  in 
purity. 

Nothing  can  exhibit  a  more  striking  contrast  to  the  govemmoit  of 
the  Afghauns  than  that  of  the  Uzbeks.  In  Bokhaura  and  Ferghauna 
at  least,  every  thing  is  in  the  hands  of  the  sovereign ;  there  is  no 
vestige  of  popular  government,  and  scarcely  any  trace  of  aristocracy. 
The  Uzbeks  of  those  kingdoms  are  every  where  divided  into  C)o- 
rooghs  or  tribes,  liut  that  division  has  no  relation  to  thf  i^Mu  ernraent: 
no  separate  Jurisdictions  exist  even  in  the  wandering  hordes.  There 
are  no  assemblies  of  tlie  tribe,  or  its  elders,  as  among  the  Afghauns, 
either  for  the  conduct  of  its  afikirH,  or  for  the  settlement  of  disputes 

The  country  is  ^vided  into  distrietay  iiiid»-  officers  appointed  by 
tiieiov«gre%n.  These  aie  subdiTided  into  amaUerdiitiicts,  in  iriiidi 
the'tevenue  is'  collected  and  jnstice  administered  by  inferior  cAesn. 
^bordinate  to  these  are  village  govemment^  such  as  are  found  sD 
overthe  east  $  and  here  at  length  some  ^rmptomsef  popular  huflnewee 
and  of  attention  to  birth  a|»pear  in  tiie  appointment  of  the  Anhtolranl 
Of  head  of  the  TiU^ge.  That  officer  is  named  by  the  sovenign,  at  the 
lecomnMndatioB  ef  the  richest  people  of  the  village,  and  thoi^^  their 
adeetion  is  influenced  by  the  wealth  and  abilities  of  the  candidates, 
yet  they  often  continue  the  offioe  for  a  long  time  in  one  family.  The 
power  of  the  Auksekaid  is,  however,  inconsiderable;  lie  ii^  indeedi 
rather  an  agent  empiioyed  by  the  TiUagers  then  an  officer,  on  the  part 
of  the  King. 

Besides  this  chain  of  ci\nl  officers,  and  those  wlio  have  commands 
in  the  armv,  the  only  people  of  consequence  among  the  laity  are 
those  called  Baueea,  whose  authority  and  iufiuence  is  entirely  derived 

II 


i^iyui^ud  by  Google 


BULKH.  iffj 

torn  tlieif  weJtli.  •  In  like  minner,  in^mnjt  emy  thfngdgpfpdi 
on  tbe  appoinbiMnft  of  die  govmnent*  We  find  MeengbaudieeB, 
fiwbnidmsy  Cbora^ausees  (oommanders  of*  thonimnd,  of  an  fam^ 
dvedt  sod  of  ton),-  wUdi  ahem  that  the  division  of  the  army  is  atbi* 
traryf  and  does  not  proceed  on  the  .principle. of  leaving  the  ooii> 
tingent  of  each  tribe,  clan,  <xt  fUhga,  under  its  hereditary  chie£ 