

In  their  persons  they  are  small,  black,  and  ugly :  they  ne  buha> 
nous  m  their  .manners,  toad  rude  and  squalid  in  th^  general  i^pear* 

■ 

lliey  are,,  holrerer,  a  ranarkably  honest  and  harmless  people. 

They  an  lecbmed  . to  amount.  DD  12,000  ftnufies.  Tbeirgo«eni» 
mcnt  leaemfolea  thait  of  die  independent  tribes,  a  dNumstnesr  idncb 
at  fitist  exeitea  aome  suiprise  in  a  people  entirely  pastoral ;  but  nbasb 
is  perfwpa  to  be  aooounted  iixr  by  tbe  peeuliartey  of  thssr  sitnatieni 
The  eSbiBt of peatomJ  habita  in  inlzoducing  despotic pow,  haa'lq^g 
been  observed  by  writers  on  tbe  bistoiy  oif  human  society,  and  dwir 
opimons  have  been  strengthened  by  the  example  of  almost  aU  the 
tribes  of  ancient  Sc^thia  and  modem  Tartaiy  $  but  thia  ebeervadoOi 
and  the  reasonings  of  the  authors  who  support  it,  appear  to  be 
derived  from  the  practice  of  countries  entirely  pastoral,  inhabited  fay 
aeteral  distinct  and  indepmdent  liationA,  where  the  simultaneous 
increase  of  the  flocks  'of  diiSerent  tribes  baaipeb.eadi  to  extend  its 
limits,  and  leads  to  wars,  which  oblige  each  tribe  to  encamp  and 
march  in  a  body,  and  to  secure  the  co-operetioii  of  all  its  parts  by 
implicit  sTihmission  to  a  common  head.  These  reasons  do  not  exist 
in  ft  tribe  ji laced  in  a  kingdom  chiefly  inhabited  by  hiisbanclinr n,  nnd 
fet  diiio;  its  flocks  on  waste  laiuls  at  a  ilij>tance  from  liiose  adapted 
to  agriculture ;  and  for  this  n  ason  perhaps  it  is  that  we  find  the 
Naussers  enjoving  the  same  lil)erty  as  most  of  the  other  Afghauns. 
The  established  government,  and  the  habits  of  the  nation  secure  their 
peace,  so  that  when  stationary  they  scatter  over  an  extensive  tract, 
according  to  the  inclination  of  ^ich  individual,  and  live  almost  entirely 
free  from  the  restraint  of  govienunent,  while  the  temporary  appoiutmeot 
of  a  liaiciwashtee  ia  aofieiint  to  providefer  llie  otd^ 
mudiM   'Che  actual  sitwrtion  of  the  chief  of  tbaKanssen  afpeaa  to 


Digrtized  by  Google 


0 


CAUSES  OF  THEIR  ENJOYING  A  FREE  GOVERNMENT.  4<jl 

ta»  to  affiird  proo&  of  the  trutli  of , this  rappodtion.  Wb^  the 
people  aie  collected  into  cunpi,  they  m  governed  by  their  own  « 
Mooshirs,  without  any  reference  to  the  Khaun,  and  whoi  they  aie 
•oattered  over  the  country,  they  subsist  without  any  government  at 
all ;  but  when  a  march  is  contemplated,  they  immediately  look  to 
the  Khaun,  and  where  they  have  to  pass  an  enemy's  country,  he  is 
appointed  head  of  the  Chelwashtees,  nssuines  an  absolute  authority, 
aiuJ  l)c(()mes  an  ohject  of  respect  and  anxiety  to  all  the  tribe.  A 
proot  of  the  important  •  of  the  Khaun  (hiiing  a  march,  is  shewn  by 
the  conduct  of  the  Naussers  at  one  time  when  Jurms  Khaun.  their 
present  chief,  reiiised  to  accompany  them  in  one  of  Iheir  migrations. 
He  was  anxious  to  remain  in  Damaun  with  200  or  300  of  his  rela- 
tions, to  assist  Surwur  Khaun  against  tiie  Vizeerees  ;  but  his  resolu- 
'  tion  occasioned  great  distress  in  the  tribe,  who  declared  it  was 
impossible  to  mardi  without  their  Khaun.  So  earnest  were  their 
representations,  that  Jnffus  was  at  hat  compelled  to  abandon  hia 
Ibrmerdesi^  oul  to  aooapipain  them.  on.  their  naioh  to  Xhoriuh 