


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  muajKSL 


her  testifiefi  that  many  of  the  Hazaurehs  spoke  the  language  of  the 
Moguls  up  to  his  time ;  but  he  occasiona  some  firesh  difficulties  by 
speakhig  of  di«  Twirtiuiiiii  Hwijuidi^  amd  abmyB  coupling  tlM 
Togdeneea  mth  the  Hasaurdis  ia  tihe  hiUs,  ^vlifle  he  asaeits'tfad 
Tftotto  and  EiiniMilni  to  hm  been  Inhiibitinta  of  the  plains  K  Ihae 
■eenis  no  raaaon  to  doubt  that  the  Einumlu  -and  Haaaiirefaa  ate  (be 
same  people  tlwugh  sepanted  ance  their  oonvenlon'  to  -Mahonir 
medaniain  by  the  different  sects  they  have  adopted ;  the  ESmauha 
being,  rigid  Soonee8»  and  the  Haianiehs  Tiolent  Sheeaha.  they  ne 
indeed  often  confiMmded)  notwithstanding  thia  marked  didtuictiony' 
nor  will  the  confusion  appear  at  all  unnatural  if  it"be  letnembered 
that  they  resemble  each  other  in  theb  Tartar  features  and  habits,  and 
in  the  despotic  diaracter  of  their  governments,  'the  ptHnts  in  which 
they  form  the  strongest  oontrast  to  the  A%haun8.  They  differ,  bow- 
ever, -firom  each  other  in  so  many  points,  that  it  will  be  expedient  to 
treat  themaeparately,  and  I  shall  b^gin  with  the  £imauks  who  inhabit 
the  western  half  of  the  mountains. 

The  country  of  the  Eimauks  is  reckoned  less  mountainous  than 
that  of  the  Hazaurehs  ;  but  even  in  it,  the  hills  present  a  steep  and 
loftv  face  towards  Heraut :  the  roads  wind  throucirh  vjilleys  and  over 
high  ridges,  and  some  of  the  forts  are  so  inaccessible  that  all  visitors 
are  obliged  to  ho  drawn  up  with  ropes  by  tlie  garrison.  Still  the 
rallies  are  culti\  ated,  and  produce  wheat,  barley,  and  millet ;  and 
almonds,  pom^ranates,  and  barberries  are  found  wild.  The  north- 
west of  the  country,  which  is  inhabited  by  the  Jutnsheedees,  is  more 
level  and  fertile,  the  hills  are  sloping  and  well  wooded,  the  valleys 
rich  and  watered  by  the  river  Margus  or  Moorghaub.  The  south  of 
the  Tymunee  lands  also  contains  wide  and  grassy  valleys.  The  whole 
of  the  mountains  aie  full  of  springs. 


•  ■  *  I  liad  it  diiiicult  lo  utxuuut  ft>r  tht:  uuiuber  of  Toorkee  words  which  are  met  with  in 
die  language  of  thoae  tribes.  Wlij,  if  di^  be  Magld%  tbanii  dMjr  ipofcen  Toorkeei 
and  why,  it Tnorkee  was  their  Ifingiiage,  should  they  havr  !o=;t  it,  redding  n*^  tht-r  tfn  on 
the  borders  of  Tuorkistauu  ?  Why  should  th^  have  adopted  the  I^enian  toogu^  whik 
'  dnbolkofUicir  iMff^haniid^boani|i«kToariM^  «ad.tiihamciaiSbittaaAVoA»ooi 


I 


480  THE  EIMAUKS. 

Hia  Zoovees  poaieM  Suhstor'or.IiteHir,  an  evfeenihre  pWiu  tmimg 
monntams  covond  with  pineB*  mbaaM  to  the  east  of  the  foad  fiom 
Furra  to  HmAr  and.  in  aome  nwaanie  diachgd  ham  the  other 

Eimauks. 

