

Kilhch  Ally  is  honest,  just,  well  disposed,  kind  to  his  subjects,  ju- 
dicious and  discriminating  in  his  treatment  of  liis  servants,  economi- 
cal in  his  expences,  vigilant  and  well  iulbrmed  in  the  affiuis  of  his 


Digitized  by  Google 


BULKIf.  477 

gorenuiMnt.  He  gprea  bread  and  brolih  to  a  hnndrad  poor  penoof 

Kbondooa  beiloogft  to  the  Usbdk  tribe  of  Knttaghun*  the  chief  of 
^riiicli  is  yhmldtHid  KhaniiT '  He  ooald  niae  iifteep  thCTitand  manit 

and  his  revenue  b  about  £3(^fi0fK 

Taulikaun  is  poas€Med  a  small  but  warlike  and  Indepepdent 
tribe  of  Uzbeks,  who  molest  the  neighbouring  countries  of  Eoon- 
dooa  and  HnHnkhnhiin,  with  their  incursions.  They  are  too  weak 
to  make  ccmqaerts,  and  too  spirited  to  submit  themselves  to  a  con- 
queror. MeimHna  Andkhoo,  Shibberghaun,  and  some  other  little 
districts,  nrv  iiui(  pendent*  most  of  them  under  J:*er(uaa  cbie&»  and 
with  Persian  inhabitants. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


) 


CHAP.  IL 

OP  THB  XniAUKS  AND  VABAUBIRS, 

THE  Eimauks  fin<\  Hazaurelt.s  have  been  stated  to  iniiabit  the 
Paropauiii^uii  inuuatains  between  Caubul  and  Heraut,  having 
the  Uzbeks  on  their  north,  and  the  Dooraunees  and  GhiljieiJ  on  their 
south.  Their  countries  have  been  stated  to  be  rugged  and  rnouu- 
tainoiu.  Bodi  muted  exlteaaiA.  more  dum  tJnree  Imndfed  miles  in 
l^gdi,  and  about  two  huiuired  miles  in  breadth. 

One  is  surprised  to  find  within  the  limits  of  Afghaunistaun,  and 
In  that  very  part  of  it  which  is  said  to  be  the  original  seat  of  the 
A^hauns,  a  pec^le  differing  enturely  from  that  nation  in  appearance 
language,  and  manners.  The  wonder  seems  at  first  removed,  when 
we  find  that  they  bear  a  resemblance  to  thdrToorkee  neighbours, 
but  points  of  difference  occur  even  there,  which  leave  us  in  more 
perplexity  than  before.  The  people  themselves  afibrd  us  no  akl  in 
removing  this  obscuri^,  for  iJiey  have  no  account  of  their  own 
origin ;  nor  does  their  language,  which  is  a  dialect  of  Persian,  afibrd 
any  due  by  which  we  might  discover  the  race  firom  which  they  are 
sprung.  Their  features,  however,  refer  them  at  once  to  the  Tartar 
stock,  and  a  tradition  declares  tbem  to  be  the  ofFsprino;  of  the  Mo- 
guls. They  are,  indeed,  It  etjucntly  called  by  the  name  of  iSIoguls 
to  this  day,  and  they  are  oiten  contomuK d  with  the  Moguls  and 
Chagatyes,  who  still  reside  in  the  neiglilx  iirhood  of"  Heraut.  They 
themselves  acknowledge  their  affinity  to  those  tribes,  as  w(  11  as  to 
the  Calniuk.s,  now  settled  in  Caubul ;  and  they  intermarry  with  both 
of  tliObe  nations.  They  do  not,  however,  understand  the  language  of 
.  Ihe  Mogiils  of  Heraut 

Aboolfiud  alleges  that  they  are  the  remaina  of  the  army  of  the 
Mogul  prince  Mwfai  Khaun*  the  grmdaoa  of  Chiiq^ieef;  and  Biii> 