

This,  however,  is  not  an  event  very  likely  to  happen,  for  thoiij»h 
Killicli  Ally  may  be  reorder!  an  independent  prince,  he  is  never 
deficient  in  respect  to  tlie  King ;  and  as  the  only  advantage  that 
monarch  ever  derived  from  Bulkli,  was  the  protection  of  his  frontier 
from  the  Uzbeks,  he  is  probably  not  ill  pleased  to  sec  the  control  of 
it  in  the  bauds  of  a  chief,  so  able  to  maintain  its  trauc^uillity,  and  so 
willing  to  acknowledge  his  dependence. 

Th^e  are  few  princes  in  this  part  of  Asia  who  enjoy  so  extensive, 
and  so  well  merited  a  reputation  as  Killidi  Ally.  A  trnveHer  towaedi 
the  west  from  Hindnitan>  hears  the  praises  of  his  good  govemment 
from  the  G8imvans»  long  before  he  reaches  the  Indus;  and  all  meiw 
chants  who  have  passed  thn>u|^  his  country,  speak  With  equal  ap* 
plause  of  the  exemption  item  duties  which  he  aUoWs^  and  of  the 
eflbrtual  protection  he  aflbrds* 

His  army  may  consist .  of  about  twelve  thousand  hcaie,  of  whtcli 
two  thoosaod  are  in  hk  own  pay,  and  the  rest  are  fiimlshed  by  men 
who  hold  lands  of  him,  on  condition  of  militaty  service.  He  could 
also  draw  about  five  thonsand  men  fimn  Ebondoos.  Zfis  revenue, 
after  deducting  the  eqieiice  of  his  army,  may  be  estimated  at  a  lacE 
and  a  half  of  riipeea  (about  i£l9,000).   His  eldest  Mm  had  a  grant 

3  p  « 


Digrtized  by  Google 


476  BULKH. 

of  jeOOOO,  ^Mi  <lie  title  xif  Wadke;  or  Fdnee  of  fiulkh,  fiomdM 
Kii^  of- GbuboL  He  ia  the  head  of  the  Uriiek  tribeof  Bfoocetan, 
wlueh  m*^!wV»  the  princ^  put  of  the  inhebitaati'of  Khbonoom* 
The:  fiilkiiwiiig  account'  <^  his  perBon  and  mannen,'  wm  ooaunmii- 
cBtad  h^.the  Reudent  at  Deli/e  ' agents  mentioiied  in  a  note  on  a 
former  page. 

Kiliibh  Ally  Beg  is  about  sixty  yean  old ;  be  it  a  handsome  man, 
with  a  red  and  white  complexion.  He  has  a  few  grey  hairs  on  bit 
chin  for  a  beard,  small  oves,  broad  forehead,  and  Uzbek  attire.  On 
his  head  he  wears  a  cap,  and  over  it  two  turbans  twisted  up  to^ctlier. 
He  wears  an  Uzbek  shirt  and  a  gown,  over  which  is  a  girdle,  wound 
round  his  loins,  with  along  knife  stuck  in  it ;  and  over  the  whole  he 
generally  has  a  robe  of  cotton  or  other  cloth  of  some  sober  colour, 
such  as  ash-colour,  or  the  like.  He  does  not  always  wear  boots,  or 
nubus^s,  as  the  other  Uzbeks  do,  but  only  when  lie  rides ;  he  car- 
ries a  short  stick  in  his  hand,  and  takQsi  a  great  deal  of  snuiF. 

He  takes  his  seat  in  his  pubUc  apartment  every  day  about  two 
houia  after  aiiMa&  He aitacnacarpet,  widbout  pillotra  oTcoslikNU} 
hia  inthnatai,  and  thoee  to  whom  he  wiahes  to  do  hoooar,  ait  on  the 
aanieeaipet  with  hien;' taut  all  other  persons  who  come  to  him  en 
buainefle  sit  on  the  bare  ground.  Every  nian>  aa  he  enteNf  wty  Si^ 
lanm  Ahdkoom,  hefene  he  takes  his  aeat'  He  bqimca  int6  «very 
aflair  oonbeeted  with  the  administration  of  the  government  himself} 
bat  .those  which  involve  law  questions,  he  refers  to  the  Cauzee.  He  - 
does  not  put  thieves  to  death,  but  bangs  them  up  by  the  hand  on' an 
iron  pin,  fixed  in  a  wall  in  the  midst  of  the  nMurket  place.  Highway 
robbers  and  murderers  he  always  puts  to  devlh.  He  walks  on  foot 
through  the  bazars,  and  examines  them  every  market-day.  He  hat 
more  thai\  once  discovered  light  weights  and  overcharges,  by  means 
of  his  own  penetration,  and  he  has  now  made  regulations  to  pi^ 
vent  tliose  abuses  in  future. 