


&ther  was  an  Uzbek  and  his  mother  a  Syud.  An  Uxbdt  of  pure  descent  would  perhapt 
have  hanber  fisatorea,  mi  onairiio  iahahiiwl  the  deaart,  nider  gwrmentei  ' 


i^iyui^cd  byGoogle 


BULKH. 


471 


India  nd  Alfbia.  Notwithstanding  tlw  OM  of  tlieie  la^Offt^'the 
Uzbeks  are  generally  a  sober  peoplew .  ... 
.  Fvt  of  Ihb  Usbeks  live  in  booMti  and  put  in  camps.  Tlieir 
houses,  vill^es,  and  towns,  exactly  resemble  those  of  the  Afghauns, 
but  their  tents  are  widely  difierent  The  Uzbek  tent  is  of  the  kind 
called  Kirgah,  which  appears  to  be  in  use  over  all  Tartary,  in  part  of 
Peraia,  and  even  in  part  of  China.  It  is  round,  and  formed  of  lattice 
work  of  til  in  lilt  I  IS  covered  with  black  or  grey  felts.  The  roof  \h  of 
four  .stouter  hit  lis,  Ix  nt  into  the  shape  of  a  dome,  and  held  togellier 
by  a  round  piece  of  wood  in  the  middle.  The  Khirgah  far  surjiasses 
the  black  tent  of  the  Afghauns  both  in  wuiaiih  and  shelter,  and  it  is 
scarcely  more  difficult  to  carry.  It  is  commonly  called  by  the  Toorks, 
Kan  aooe  or  black  house :  a  camp  is  called  Onool,  aud  consists  of  from 
twenty  to  fitly  tents. 

A  greaC  part  of  the  people  of  Bokhaura  reside  in  tents  and  follow 
pMturage,  to  irhadk  indeed  ihtf  was  catupdM  by  the  unpiodnotive 
dceertn  oCwlucfa  so  mncli  uf  tlioir  conntiy  is  oomposedL  Fi^a^m^ 
andicrooimti7»  whiGhissecme  ofwtar  from  the  neig^ilioiiriiood  of 
^inoiintains*  hes  ftsr  wandering  tribes.  In  Kliirarisn,  and  the  e(wn» 
..tries  between  Bokfaania  and  the  Caspian  Sea,  <lie  wandeiing  tribes 
gieatly  preponderate;  but  in.tfae  piovinoe  of.BoJkh  thejr  era  Vesy 
.inftrior  to*  die  fixed  inhabitants:  diej  bleed  sheep*  camds  and 
horses ;  and  SO  nwnerons'aie  the  latter,  that  there  is  seaiedy  Ionian 
in  Tooikestaun  so  indigent  as  to  walk  on  foot.:  enrion  beggars  jtravc^ 
on  horseback,  or  at  least  upon  camels  and  asses.   As  mi^it  be^ex* 
pected  in  Bach  a  people,  the  Usbeks  produce  swaiBis  niUf^  csfvabjt' 
and  are  renowned  for  their  exertions  in  predatory  war.    Their  arms 
are  a  long  and  heavy  lance  and  a  shield  ;  few  have  swords,  but  many 
long  knives  or  d«fro;ers.    Tliev  charge  in  a  body  with  shouts,  which 
the  Afghauns  who  have  engaged  them  describe  as  loud  and  terrific 
Hiey  form  their  armies  in  three  divisions,  so  that  they  can  rally  • 
twice;  but  the  third  repulse  is  entire  defeat.    They  make  brave sol- 
^  diers,  and  are  astonishingly  patient  of  hunger,  thirst  and  tatigue. 
The  upuuua  commonly  entertained  of  the  ferocity  and  barbarism 


Digrtized  by  Google 


472 


BULKK 


€£ tihe  Uzbeks,  appeui  to  be  unjust,  and  is  pfdbaUy  owing  partlj  to 
our  oonfoundiDg  them  with  the  Gdrnnks,  and  other  rude  Tartar 
tribes  b^w<eeii  llieiii  aod  RuanB,  and  partly  to  the  ^imwlm  through 
which  we  have  received  our  information  regarding  them.  Tfasir 
habit  of  selling  slaves  might  have  justified  the  prgudice  against  them, 
but  this  detestable  traffic  unfortunately  was  not  confined  to  the  Uz- 
beks. T!i('ir  liiws  of  war  are  certainly  most  barbarous.  Thev  give 
no  qiKirtei  to  any  enemies  but  sheealis  or  infidels,  whom  they  can 
sell  for  slaves,  and  men  are  sold  in  Hokliaura  like  cattle;  but  in  other 
respect*?,  by  all  that  I  can  learn,  botli  from  Afghaun  travellers,  and 
from  Taujikii  ot  Bulkli  and  Bokhuura,  I  have  reason  to  think  the 
Uzbeks  as  good  a  people  as  any  in  Asia. 