

Killich  Ali  was  descended  from  the  chiefs  of  Kiioolioom,  and  held 
the  Uzbek  title  of  Atauiik  (equivalent  to  Vizi^)}  firom  the  King  of 

3  r 


Digitized  by  Google 


474  BULKH. 

GndKil ;  iMtt'tt  his  fifat  accenioii  to  his  govenimeiit»  he  ftmid  ISb 
power  veiy  cirGiiBUMSribed. '  His  tbiliti^  howeirw,  sooii  enabled  him, 
SnA  to  reduce  his  lebellious  snlgects,  and  aftemids  to  annex  the 
petty  states  of  E3iii]£«  Ghoiee»  MoMor,  Dem  Gui^  ftc.  whldk  h^, 
in  Ids  neii^ibouihoods  to  his  own  territoiy.  He  afterwanis  took  die 
principal' share  in  the  expulsion  of  Allaverdee  Tauz,  and  acquired  the 
oountiy  of  Huzmt  Imaum,  which  he  delivered  from  that  chief ;  on 
the  same  occasion,  he  gained  an  ascendancy  in  Koondooz,  which  he 
helped  to  detifer.  He  connected  himself  by  marriage  with  the 
chief,  and  has  since  managed  so  dexterously,  that  Khaul  Daud  Khaun 
of  Koondooz,  though  ht^  possesses  more  power  and  resources  thaai ' 
Killich  Ally,  is  as  much  under  his  influeTice  ns  one  of  his  own  depu- 
ties. He  next  made  use  of  his  pown  on  the  spot,  ami  of  all  his 
influence  at  court,  to  acquire  an  asei  iidancy  over  the  Httukim  of 
Buikh ;  and  as  he  had  alway  s  been  a  zealous  and  useful  servant  of 
the  crown  of  Caubul,  he  contrivwl,  by  seizing  tkvoiaable  occasions, 
to  procure  the  transfer  of  some  ol"  the  Haukim's  powers  to  himseil, 
and  even  to  obtain  the  King's  countenance,  or  connivance,  in  the 
open  leriatadce  vAdch.  he  offered  to  that  offioer.  >  At  length,  in  the 
year  1809,  Rnnoe  Abbess,  the  King*8  nephew,  who  had  eaeaped 
fitom  confinement  at  Canbul,  Bed  to  Bulkfa,  and  was  received  and 
supported  by  the  Haukim.  '  It  may  be  supposed  that  Siumh  Shnjan 
irm  readjr  moa^jti  to  issue  otdeit  to  Killidi  Ally,  to  act  apunst  a  pre* 
tender  to  the  throne ;  and,  aoocndinj^y,  Kllidi  Ally  attacked  -and 
expelled  the  Haukim ;  and  since  that  time^  he-has  had  more  ieal 
power  in  Bulkh  than  the  King.  The  Dooraunee  Haukim  cqntinves 
in  possession  of  the  city  and  its  dependencies,  but  he  is  chisAy  sop- 
ported  by  Killich  Ally;  and  all  the  rest  of  the  province^  except 
Taulikaun,  is  either  under  the  government,  or  the.infiuenoe^  of  the 

same  chief! 

The  King  derives  no  benefit  from  the  town,  the  revenues  of  which 
are  consumed  in  grants  to  learned  and  religious  men,  in  pensions  to 
persons  of  other  descriptions,  in  the  expences  of  the  Haukim,  and 

the  pay  of  the  Cuhneh  Nokur,  a  description  of  troops  petniUar  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


BULKH  475. 

this  piovmoe.  They  were  (ffigminyiniaeil  at.Cinbul  fiir  penanaA 
flervice  in  Bolkh,  whidi,  fiom  the  ykixdty  of  tlie  frontier  of  Bofc^ 
iiHm,  always  rei|iiued  %  itrong  feiwe»  Not  lew  dun  five  thffniMmA 
lunre  been  entertained  from  first  to  laat,  but  the  aernce  waa  ao'niqio- 
pillar,  that  althmigh  a  bounty  of  five  tomauns  (equal  to  £10)'  waa 
gtfea  to  recxuits,  none  but  the  lowest  ofders  would endist;  amd.even 
pf  them  so  many  have  retained  to  Ganbul,  that  the.  number  of  the 
Cohneh  Nokur  is  now  under  one  thousand  fiunilies.  They  are  paid 
by  assignments  of  land  which  descend  from  ftther  to  son  |  and  from 
the  interest  which  this  gives  them  in  the  country,  they  have  acquired 
almost  all  the  feelings  of  the  natives*  They  bear  much  the  same  re- 
lation to  the  King  Uiat  the  janissaries  ,  of  Syria  do  the  Forte ;  and  if 
Killich  Ally  Beg  were  to  rebel,  they  would  be  moris  likidy  to  adhere, 
to  him  than  to  their  own  government. 