

llieir  drees  ia  a  dfadit  and  trowBen  of  cotton,  a  cpat  or  tunio  (called 
diuppaun)  of  nUken  or  wooUendotfartied  on  widi  a  girdle}  md  over 
it  a  girnn  of  wodDen'  cfoth*  poateen  >or  £e^  $  .aome  wear  in-,  winter  • 
liUle  cap  of  broad  doth*  lined  with  lur,  sittiog  doae  to  tfaehM4.*end 
others  a  pointed  silken  c^,  called  a  calpapk*  tUmaei  but  the  national 
head-dress  ia  a  large  white  turban  worn  in  genetal  o?er.  a  calpaulu 
All  wear  boots  at  all  hours  ;  the  poor. have  the  same  description  as 
that  used  in  Caubul,  but  those  in  eeny  drcun^vtances  have  a  kind 
called  rauhusee,  for  const^mt  use,  and  only  put  on  the  others  in 
winter  or  on  journeys.  The  muhusee  is  of"  tliia  and  light  shagreen 
leather,  without  heels  or  soles,  so  that  tiie  wearer  is  obliged  to  put 
on  shoes  when  he  ctih  s  out.  All  wear  bandages  round  their  legs 
instead  oi  btcKkinn^N.  :ind  every  man  has  a  kuiie  iiaiigii^  ivQiXL  hifl 
girdle,  and  a  hmt  and  steel  lor  striking  fire.* 


•  Tfir  plate  represents  t1i<'  dress  of  the  Uzbeks  near  towns.  The  fiice  ;ini!  fit/iirr  is  a 
good  likeoew  ot'  Maboauuied  Uuflsim,  a  native  of  Wuidaiuizje  near  fiokhauta,  wluwe 


Digitized  by  Ct)C)gle 


470  BULKR 

Eren  the  women  wear  boots.  The  rest  of  their  dress  is  something 
like  that  of  the  men,  but  longer ;  tliey  tie  a  silk  handkerchief  round 
their  heads,  throw  a  sheet  of  silk  or  cotton  over  all,  wear  golden  and 
silver  ornaments,  m\i\  plait  their  hair  into  a  long  queue,  which  hang^ 
down  from  thi-  middle  ot  the  head,  like  those  ot  the  Chinese. 

The  Uzbeks  breaktasL  oii  Lea  and  leavened  bread,  which,  contrary 
to  the  usual  practice  of  Asia,  they  eat  stale  and  keep  for  a  fortnight. 
Their  ft  a  is  made  by  bulling  the  leaves  :  it  is  mixed  with  millv  and 
bailer,  or  (more  frequently)  the  oil  made  from  the  fat  tailh  of  the 
Doombeb  riieep.  The  rich  alone  use  sugw:.  Hie  great  meal  is  in 
the  evening,  aiid  oooaiato  of  pikvft  or  fleah  and  broth  like  that  of  the 
AfghamiB.  Hie  lidi  of  ONune  huve  a  Tariety  of  dreascd  diahea.  The 
Utbeka  are  kntfini  to  be  fond  of  hone-flesh,  but  aa  that  fiiod  ia  es- 
peniive^  th^  are  in  geneanl  obliged  to  be  oontent  with  bee£  Hie 
wealthj  indeed  firtten  honea  Ibr  the  table  all  the  jear,  and  the  pow 
genendly  get  aome  of  the  aame  aort  of  proviaiona  during  winter.. 

The  niitii?"*^  beverageu  kimmia, an  intoxicattngliqnoriroO known 
to  be  prepared  fiom  mare*s  milk.  The  milk  ia  put  in  the  aftienioon 
into  a  aldn,  audi  aa  ia  uaed  in  India  for  holding  water,  and  is  allowed, 
to  leinain  till  within  two  or  three  hours  of  day  break,  when  it  ia 
beaten  and  rolled  about»  till  morning  at  least;  but  the  longer  Ihe 
better.  The  liquor  thus  made  is  of  a  whitish  colour  and  a  sourish 
taate:  it  is  only  to  be  had  in  plenty  during  the  two  last  months  of 
summer,  and  those  who  can  afford  it  are  generally  drunk  for  the 
greator  part  of  that  period  ;  but  kimmiz  is  not  sold,  and  those  only 
can  enjoy  it  who  have  mares  enough  to  make  it  in  the  iiouse.  Ano- 
ther intoxicating  liquor  called  bozeh  is  more  f  }iea]il\  procured,  but  it 
is  fiuf  more  strictly  forbidden :  it  is  a  ferrnenteil  liquor  made  iVenj 
different  grains,  (particularly  from  Arzun)  which  resembles  water 
gruel  in  appearance,  and  is  sour  to  the  taste.    It  is  also  known  in 