

Shawl,  with  Hurren  and  Daujil  (two  districts  near  Dera  Ghauzee 
Khaun),  were  granted  by  Ahmed  .Shauh  to  Nasseer  Kfiami,  in  reward 
of  his  serv  ices,  and  on  condition  of  his  permanently  supplying  one 
Uiousand  foot  to  serve  in  Cashmeer. 

I  shall  say  but  litCte  of  Sind.  I  made  lew  inquiries  resj^cting  that 
province  while  in  Iihe  Gfubul  domini<ms,  because  theie  was  a  British 
nisnon  si  its  capital }  and  I  haye  since  fimnd  that  an  aeoonui  w31 
probably  be  laid  belbve  the  public  by  a  Gentleman  *  who  has  had 
beUer  opportunities  of  knowing  it  than.  I  possess. 


*  I jfiitffliant  Pottnigeari  to  whom  i  am  indnblwl  for  some  piuticalan  reapecting  Sind. 
3omeoltHn  I  vmm  to  a  ■Mmuatyt  by  t  issfciiiml  MwcMd  <f  the  Bombay  Marine,  wbo 
MCCBipwifld  llw  flUMMB  to  find* 


Digitized  by  Google 


LOWER  SIKD.  4d7 

I  have  here  given  the  name  of  Sind  in  compliance  with  fonner 
mage*  to  the  tract  which  I  have  ebewhore  distinguished  by  the  term 
of  Tjower  Sind.  It  is  bounded  on  the  north  by  Shekarpoor  and  Ba- 
hawulpoor :  on  the  east,  by  the  Indian  desart ;  ou  the  west,  by  the 
mountains  and  hills  of  Belochistaun  ;  on  the  south-east,  by  Cutch, 
and  on  the  soulIi  bv  the  sea.  The  grand  feature  of  the  ronntry  is 
the  Tndtifl,  which  ciivides  it  into  two  parts,  of  which  thul  on  the  east 
of  the  river  appears  to  be  the  largest 

The  resemblance  of  this  country  to  Egypt,  has  often  been  ob- 
served.  One  description  might  indeed  serve  for  both.  A  smooth 
and  Grille  phin  b  bounded  on  one  side  bj  iiioiiiituiifl»  and  on  the 
odier  by  a  desart.  It  ia  divided  by  a  large  river  whidi  fimns  a  Dolta 
aa  it  approacfaet  the  -aeay  and  annually  inundatea  and  enrichea  the 
country  near  ita  banks.  Hie  climate  of  both  ia  hot  and  dry,  and 
lain  ia  of  tare  occurrence  in  either  countiy* 

Even  the  poHtical  circumstances  of  Sind  and  Egypt  have  at  prOBaot 
an  accidental  resemblance:  in  both  a  submissive  people  are  tyran*" 
nised  over  by  a  barbarous  tribe,  who,  in  both  inatances,  yield  a  re- 
luctant subnus8i<m  to  a  distant  monarch.  ;  u 
Egypt,  however,  divides  tlie  sea  which  washes  the  richest  king- 
doms of  the  east,  from  that  which  is  bordered  by  the  active  and 
vvealtiiy  ports  of  Europe  :  its  own  produce  is  also  an  object  of  demand 
in  the  latter  country;  and  hence,  in  s])ite  of  all  the  vices  of  its  govern- 
ment, it  still  presents  populous  towns,  numerous  canals,  and  plentiful 
harvests.    Sind,  which  (besidei>  the  obvious  inlLiiority  of  its  com- 
munications) is  placed  in  the  midst  of  couutrics  destitute  of  the  in- 
dnstiy  <^  JEurope*  and  difoing  little  firom  each  other  in  their  produce 
and  wants,  ia  deprived  of  all  the  stimnlns  whkh.  conuneice  can-  fae> 
Stow,   Hence  the  rich  lands  en  the  xiver  are  allvwed  to  waate  their 
fiftility  in  the  production  of  weeds  and  boshesb  while  those  inland 
ai)B  neglected*  and  left  to  their  original  aterility.  The  evils  of  this 
negleot  of  agriculture  are  heigktened  by  the  bszhaions  luxury  of  the 
diteft,  who  appropriate  vast  tracts  of  the  land  best  fitted  for  tllli^^ 
to  maintain  those  wild  betsts  and  birds  which  afibrd  them  the  ple»* 