

-Each  village  has  a  chief  called  the  Hoker,  and  one  or  two  elders 
called  by  the  Toorkiah  word  Aukstdcaid  (which,  like  Speeu  Zheereh 
m  Pushtoo,  and  Heesh  Suffeed  in  Persia,  means  UteraUy  white  beard), 
but  all  entirely  depen^nt  on  the  Sooltatin. 

The  HiranveliB  are  diTided  into  trib«»  of  which  the  DA  Zeogae^ 
Heh  Kbondee*  Jaughooree,  and  Folanda,  are  among  the  moat  oonai- 
detable,  and  each  has  its  own  Sodtami,  wfaoae  power  it  abaolutem 
his  tribe.  He  adnmusten  jnatioe»  impotieB  SsntB,  impri8on%  and  even 
puts  to  death.  Some  of  these  fiooJtamis  have  good  cattka,  fine 
clothes,  and  servants  adorned  with  gold  and  silver.  Dmj  have  ooiv- 
itant  disputes  «wwMig  tiiemsehreS}  so  that  there  is  teacAy  a  Haaai^ 
reh  tribe  which  is  not  at  war  whh  its  neighbours.  Hiey  hsve  also 
foreign  wars ;  and  sometimes  two  or  Uuee  Sookauns  mite  to  rebel 
Slgpunstthe  King:  but  they  have  never  any  solid  Or  useful  confede- 
racy. I  have  been  told  by  a  man  who  had  been  employed  to  collect 
the  revenue  under  Zeinaul  Khaun,  that  he  had  sometimes  b^n 
called  into  Ml  assembly  of  six  or  seven  of  these  chiefs,  who  would 
inform  him  that  they  were  determined  not  to  pay  the  tribute,  and 
that  he  might  go  iifHinL  his  business.  In  tlie  same  uight,  one  eiiief 
would  come  and  declare  that  he  had  no  share  m  this  contumacy ; 
next  momingt  one  or  two  more  would  come,  and  the  whole  confe- 
deracy would  dissolve.  When  it  once  came  to  blows,  they  would 
often  hold  well  tog^ber }  but  they  were  always  qndled  in  the  end. 
'Una  Zfaauml  Khaon  wis  a  Mognl  of  the  beighboorhood-  of  Heradt, 
irba  was  made  gofvemor  of  Ranmeeaun,  in  flhaob  Zemeun's  reign, 
and  who  dragged  up  a  gun  into  die  s^ngest  parts  of  the  monntainst 
md  rednoed  the  Hatanieiw  to  a  degpree  of  order  and  obedience  never 
eqaaUed.' 

In  geneial,  the  Haiaweha  were  divided  between  the  govenunent 
of  Gfaorant  and  Bauinecaiin ;  and  at  present  they  are  acaiedy  nnder 


Digitized  by  Google 


■466  HAZAUKEHS. 

* 

my  government  at  all.  They  have  wars  with  the  Himauks,  and  also 
idth  Kiliich  Ally  Khaun,  the  great  Uzbek  chief  in  Bulkh,  who  1ms 
Teduced  many  of  the  nearest  Hazaurehs  under  his  authority. 

The  Hazaurehs  are  all  enthusiastic  followers  of  Ali ;  they  hold 
the  Ato;hauns,  Eimauks,  and  Uzbeks  in  dotestsftion,  for  foUowmg'the 
opposit<^  sect^  and  they  insult,  it  they  do  not  persecute,  every  Soonnec 
who  enters  their  country.  They  even  distrust  such  oi'  their  own 
countrymen  a^s  have  been  much  among  the  A^g^uns,  suspecting 
them  of  having  been  corrupted.*  '     ■  ! 

When  this  is  considered,  it  is  not  sui  |H  i.sing  that  there  should  be 
no  Tuujiktf  settled  among  the  Hazaurehs,  and  tliat  they  should  have 
IHde  tnMle  or  inteitxMicte  with  the  Mt  cf  mankind  The  little  trade 
4bey  hsve^  ur  moM.  oa  ib^  bartir :  Migpr  and  rtlt  are  the  fcfei|^ 
comipoditiei  in-  miMt  xequcit  -  ... 
■  -Tba  abm  Mcoimt  of  the  Haauvebs  te^iiot.willioat  tm/p^mu, 