

Hie  Cashmeriana  are  a  dirtinct  natioa  of  die  Hindoo  atock,  and 
difo  in  language  and  maimers  from  all  their  nei^boiirs.  Tbe  men 
are  remarkably  stout,  active^  and  indilstrioos.  Hiej  are  excessively 
addicted  to  pleasuiei  and  are  notorious  all  over  the  East  for  fidsehood 
md  cunning.  By  fiur  (ihe  greater  part  of  the  peculation  are  Mussul- 
mans. Abooliuzl  enumerates  a  succession  of  upwards  of  a  hundred  and 
fifty  Hindoo  King^  who  reigned  over  Cashmeer  before  the  year  742 
of  the  Hijra»  when  they  supplanted  by  a  Mahommedan  dynasty. 
This  last,  after  rdgning  near  tluree  hundred  years,  was  subikied 
Hoomauyoon  the  son  of  Bauber.  Cashmeer  remained  in  the  hands 
of  the  Moguls  till  the  time  of  Ahmed  Sliauh»  when  it  was  taken  by 
the  Doornunees,  who  have  since  possessed  it. 

The  Cashmerians  seem  to  have  been  rebellious  when  their  coimtrv 
was  first  occupied  by  the  Dooraunees,  but  they  are  now  completely 
ffubdued  by  the  strong  measures  of  the  government.  No  Cashmerians, 


uiLjui^'cd  by  Googl 


exoe|A  wldieni  in  the  aemoe  of  the  Mb,  «re:Bllowed  ta  wear  «niis 
widiSn  the  tky.  The  nine  fertrictum  it  not  nnpoaed  in  die  ooontiy, 
hot  the  power  of  the  native  chiefe  is  annihitotei!,  and  e.atnnig  'Ibroe 
of  A%h»ims  and  KuirilbauaheB  is  kept  up  within  the-vallej-*  whicb  is 
8ii£BMaait  to  dieck  any  disposition  to  revolt 

Hie  governor  is  invested  with  all  the  powers  of  a  King,  and. the 
administration  is  very  tyrannical.  From  the  small  number  of  passes, 
the  government  is  enaUed  to  prevent  any  persons  enteringbr  quitt  ing 
Cashmeer  vrithout  its  permission.  Its  numerous  spies  pervade  all 
ranks  of  society,  and  the  inhabitants  are  harassed  by  every  kind  of 
oppression  :  this  misEfovprnment  increase  the  depravity  of  their 
chnrrutor,  but  their  natural  gaiety  prev^ts  its  destroying  their 
hapiiincss. 

The  cit  v  ofCashincer  is  the  largest  in  the  DoDraunce  dominions. 
It  coTitHUiii  tfom  a  hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  thousand  inha- 
bitants. 

The  gross  revenue  of  the  province'  is  said  to  be  4,626>300  rupees* 
which  is  nearly  equal  to  £  500,000. 

The  suni  tiue  to  the  King  deptads  on  the  contract  entered  into  by 
the  governor.  When  at  the  highest,  it  was  2,200,000  rupees,  from 
which  a  deduction  of  700,000  was  allowed  for  .the  pay  of  troops,  so 
diat  1,500,000  was  the  whole  wlucfa  reached  the  rojsl  treasnry.  Up- 
wards of  six  lades  are  assigned  in  Teools  to  the  nd|^ibouring  rajahs^ 
to  Afghaon  chiefi,  and  to  mooDahs,  dervises,  and  Hindoo  fekccre. 
Hie  rest  is  charged  to  the  real  or  alleged  expenoes  of  collection,  and 
to  the  pay  of  dvU  and  military  establishments. 

The  governor  has  constantly  at  his  disposal  ia  force  of  five  thousand 
finir  hundred  hdrs^  and  three  Humsand  two  hundred  foot 