

II 


Digrtized  by  Google 


512  .    1»0WEBS  OF  THE  KING. 


and  chanufter  of  each  of  the  prinoei  j  and  their  voice  secures  the 

possession  of  the  capital,  and  gives  a  great  advantage  to  the  prince  in 
whose  iavour  it  declares ;  but  the  practice  of  conferring  the  different 
great  governments  on  the  King's  sons  generally  leads  to  a  contest, 
which  is  decided  by  the  wealth,  abilities,  and  popularity  of  the 
rivals. 

The  whole  of  the  royal  family,  cxco]>t  those  whom  the  King  [larti- 
cularly  favours,  are  imprisoned  in  the  upper  citadel  of  C'aubul,  where 
they  are  well  treated,  but  closely  cojifined.  Those  who  remain  at 
large  are  appointed  to  the  government  of  provinces  or  the  command 
ol  ariuies,  where  the  ostensible  autlu)rity  of  a  Sialdoz  ve  is  required  to 
secure  the  obedience  of  the  great,  and  to  sanction  capital  punish- 
ments ;  they  are,  however,  in  general,  entirely  under  die  control  of 
a  d^uty  of  the  King's  appointing. 

The  King^B  title  is  Shauhee  Boorree  Doorraiin,  but  it  is  only  used 
in  treaties  and  other  public  instruments.  In  general,  he  is  merdy 
styled  Shanh  or  P^ahauh  (llie  King),  and  the  oommon  people  often 
call  Kim  by  his  name,  Mahmnod,  or  Shi^s,  without  any  addition  aft 
all.  The  court  Is  called  the  Derree  Khauneh,  which,  like  Durbar  in 
jbidi%  and  Aulee  Kaupee  (Sublime  Forte)  in  Turkey,  signifies  the 
gate,  a  form  of  oriental  adulation  which  implies  that  a  sidb^ect  oof^ 
to  intrude  no  further  into  the  palace  even  in  his  thoughts. 

Tlie  King  has  the  exclusive  privilege  of  coining,  and  his  name  is 
put  on  nil  thn  money  in  the  empire.  It  is  well  known  what  conse- 
quence till'  Asiatics  ?ittfirh  to  this  right,  and  that  they  regard  the 
possession  oi  it  iiji  the  chiei  test  ol  sovereignty.  A  similar  test  is  the 
privilege  enjoy^  by  the  King,  of  being  prayed  lor  in  the  Khootbeh 
(part  of  the  Mahommetlan  r(  ligious  service). 

He  has  the  right  of  war  .md  peace,  and  can  make  treaties  of  his 
own  authority.    Notwithstanding  the  example  of  Shawl  *,  it  seems 


But  of  dw  oomtiy  «f  ^  OnfcM,  wUdi  mm  mttmd  hf  Akmd  SMitoifat 

«f]  


Digitized  by  Google 


POWEBS  OF  THE  KING.. 

to  be  understood  that  he  tutsMk  oeds  way  part  of       tenhoty  ooqut 

pied  by  A%hauB  tribak  i 

All  appointments  are  in  his  gift ;  but,  in  many  cases,  his  choice  ia 
confined  to  peiiicular  &miHes ;  of  this  descv^itnncflrethe  chie&hipn 
of  tribes.   Some  offices  of  the  atelie^  end!  many  mea  of  tiie  King's 

household,  are  also  hereditary. 

He  has  the  entire  control  of  the  revenue,  both  in  collection  and 
expenditure.  He  cannot,  liuwever,  incieaj»e  tiie  settlement  of  the 
land  revenue,  fixed  by  Ahmed  Shauh,  which  is  very  light.  The  only 
means  he  possesses  of  incr^sing  liis  resources,  derived  from  the 
Afghauns,  are  tines,  compositions  for  military  service;  and,  in  m>h\q 
cases,  arbitrary  valuations  of  the  produce,  on  which  the  revenue  is 
essessed* 