

At  the  time  of  the  last  miuioii  to  &adif  the  gommnent  mi  in  the 
hands  of  three  brothers,  who  had  divided  lihe  oountiy  into  three 
unequal  ahmtet,  but  who  lived  in  the  same  house,  and  transacted  all 
affairs  in  concert.  Meer  Gholaum  Ali,  the  eldest  of  these,  in  whose 
hands  the  diief  direction  of  the  state  had  been  placed,  has  since  died» 
but  a  new  settlement  has  been  effected  without  any  tumult  or  blood- 
shed. A  small  portion  of  the  province  still  remains  in  the  hands  of 
Meer  Tarra,  a  connection  or  rlrpondont  of  the  house  of  Calhora. 

The  three  chiefs  of  the  Talpoorees  are  called  tlie  Meers,  or  Amee» 
•    (commanders),  of  Sind.    They  rule  in  tlie  name  of  the  King  of 
Caubul,  and  arc  appointed  to  their  government  by  his  letters  patent; 
but  as  they  are  Sheeahs,  ami  as  they  owe  their  government  more  to 
their  own  force  than  to  their  prince's  favour,  they  are  heartily  disaf- 
fected to  tfaeDoorannee  state.   Hiey  ought  to  pay  a  reremie  <^ 
IfSOf^OOO  rupees  annually  to  the  royal  tteasuiy^  but  since  the  troo* 
falsB  in  the  kingdom  of  Caubn],  they  hxre  generally  withheld  it»  un- 
less when  in  immediate  fear  of  the  royal  armies.   Shauh  fiSngau  was 
only  aUe  to  obtain  &^  ladn  fer  the  revenue  of  the  year  before  I 
was  at  Pediawer ;  the  rest  he  aUowed  to  be  deducted  on  pretence  of 
bad  sea.sons.    Even  this  sum  was  not  paid  till  the  King  reached  the 
fiontiers  of  Sind ;  but  his  army,  including  the  Beloches  under  M^- 
mood  Khaun,  did  not  on  that  occasion  exceed  eight  thousand  men. 
J  bnagitte  that  they  are  more  submissive  to  Shauh  Mahmood. 

Sa  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


500  1X)WEH  SIND. 

The  dzesB  of  Sind  is  a  long  cotton  gown,  and  a  quQled  cap  of 
brown  cotton  doth,  ahi^>ed  like  the  crown  of  a  hat,  hot  iiamiwer4 

they  also  wear  trowsm  iuid  a  loongee. 

The  people  are  generally  of  the  middle  sizo,  thin,  though  not 
weal<.  and  blacker  than  most  of  the  people  of  India.  There  is  little 
to  praisp  in  their  character,  which  is  debased  and  degraded  bj  the 
oppression  of  their  government.  The  onlv  tlnng  that  struck  me  in 
the  Sindees  with  whom  I  have  conversed,  is  Liicir  deficiency  of  intel- 
ligence. Those  who  know  them  well,  however,  add,  that  they  have 
all  the  vices  of  an  enslaved  people. 

The  diiefs  appear  to  be  barbarians  of  the  rudest  fltanip» 
anj  of  die  baifaannia  virtaea. 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  Ml  ) 


CHAP.  VI. 

UPPER  SIND,  MOULTAN,  LYA,  &C. 

SHIKARPOOR  is  bounded  fay  the  Indus,  and  the  Beloche  ooan- 
try  on  the  east  and  west}  on  the  north  it  has  the  AlozaureeSy 
and  Sind  on  the  MUth.  The  pnyvince  is  fertile  towards  the  Lidus^ 
but  dry  and  barren  at  a  difltance  from  that  river.    The  town  is  of 