


1 


498  LOWEK  SIND. 

forei  of  the  chaoa  Yet  there  are  some  pazts  of  Stnd  to  which  these 
obMrvsdons  do  not  apptf ;  some  places  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
river,  or  its  branches,  are  cultivated,  and  the  soil  there  dii^lays  its 
natural  fecundity,  in  bringing  forth  most  of  the  productions  of  India ; 
and  the  whole  district  of  Chaudookee,  enclosed  between  the  Indus 
and  a  remarkable  branch  of  it,  is  bifrhly  c^!lti^-atcd,  and  eminently 
productive.  Thiis  branch  of  the  Lulus  runs  out  to  the  west,  and. 
after  spreading  over  a  wide  tract,  which  at  dilK  rcnt  sea.Hous.  cither 
a  marsli  or  a  lake,  it  a^rain  joins  the  main  stream  seventy  miles  be- 
low the  place  of  its  sepatalioii. 

Sind  is  a  bare  country  ;  the  few  tre^  it  prodiu  es  are  of  the  kinds 
common  in  India.  It  has  no  remarkable  animals,  but  the  number 
o£>  camek  which  em  fisd  in  it»  ii  worthy  of  ,ieiiiuk.  They  are  used 
to  di»w  water,  to  tnm  iiiilb»  ftc.  but  the  goods  of  8uid  ore  mudi 
traiuported  by  water  oyrriage*  nor  ie  that  much  employed,  Ihr  a  few 
flat  bottomed  boata  are  sndiraent  for  the  commerce  of  thur  imporer- 
iAed  cfMUitKj. 

The  capital  of  Smd  it  Hyderabad,  a  large  fortified  town,  sitmled 
onarockyhiU*  I  should  ooijeotDTe  it  to  oontam  about' e^ht^tiioai- 

sand  inhabitants. 

Tatta,  die  ancient  Pattala,  which  was  once  a  flourishing  commercial 
town,  is  now  greatly  declined,  but  atili  contaiiis  about  fifteen  thousand 

inhabitants. 

Much  of  the  population  of  tho^^e  towns  is  Hindoo;  but  the  bulk 
of  that  of  the  counirv.  is  rinii[ioseil  of  IVlahommethm^. 

At  (he  time  when  Sind  tell  under  the  A^haun  dommions,  it  was 
governed  by  a  ])rince  of  the  tribe  of  Calhora,  which  I  believe  belongs 
to  the  south  of  Persia.  Abduuhiubbce,  tlie  last  prince  of  this  race, 
disgusted  all  his  subjects  by  his  tyranny  and  bad  government,  and 
embfoiled  hhnself  partaculsriy  with  the  Talpoorees,  a  tribe  which 
finrmed  the  princip^  part  of  the  military  population  of  Mb  countiy* 
The  chiift  of  tibat  tr^  st  Icangdi  entesied  mi  a^oosph-acy  to  d^Kise 
Um  I  but  their  piietioeB  became  known  to  Abdoobrahbefik  who  put 


Digitized  by  Google 


499 


tibeni-lU  to  death.  This  act  of  violence,  accompanied,  it  is  said, 
with  treachery,  prodiiced  an  op«n  rev^M,  and  ended  in  the  expaUaD 

of  Abfloolniibhpp  trom  Sind. 

Timour  Shaiih,  after  some  itnavailing  attempts  to  restore  him,  con* 
ferred  on  him  the  government  of  Leia,  as  an  indc  rnnitv  for  Sind,  and 
formally  invested  tlie  chief  of  the  Talpoorees  with  the  government 
of  that  province.  Abdoolnubbee  repaid  the  Sha«h*s  boniiLy  by  re- 
belling in  his  new  province,  was  defeated  by  the  royal  troops,  and 
ended  his  days  in  poverty  at  Dera  Haiyie  Khaiin  in  Upper  iKnd. 
The  Talpoomes  have  remained  m  poMeaoon  of  Sind  ever  ainoe  Ids 
eKpubioo* 