

of  the  Haukim,  and  by  pecuniary  paym^ts  on  his  part. 
Leia  and  Dera  Ismaei  Khaiin  are  both  under  Mahommed  Khaun 

Suddozye, 

Leia  formerly  belonged  to  the  Heioches*  I  do  not  know  when  it 
was  conquereii  by  the  Doorauuees. 

The  banks  of  the  Induii  are  rich,  but  the  Und  at  a  distance  from 
that  river  is  a  sandy  desart. 

Leia  is  the  capital  town,  but  the  residence  of  the  Nabob  is  at 
Bukhur,  a  small  but  flourishing  town  near  the  Jndas ;  or  at  Mswir 
kaiia*  a  strcmg  (oftt  in  the  most  desart  part  of  the  pocovinoe* 

Bodi  provinces  only  yiekl  five  hundred  thousand  rupees,  of  which 
three  hundred  thousand  go  to  llie  King.  Mahommed  Khaun  has 
two  battalions  of  matchlock-men,  five  thousand  good  horse,  thirty 
guns,  and  two  howitsen.  He  ia  on  friendly  terms  with  the  Sik% 
probably  because  his  oountxy  towards  th«r  frontier  is  pardcularlj 
uninviting. 

Daoira  Deen  Punnah  is  a  little  district  enclosed  within  the  lands  of 
Leia.  It  yields  a  revenue  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  lupeei^ 
and  is  granted  rent  free  to  a  Dooraunee  lord. 

Leia  is  bounded  on  the  nrMth  In  the  salt  range,  iMnond  which  is 
a  rugged  and  inountainous  country  inhabited  by  smnil  nnd  fierce 
tribes,  ol  w  hom  the  most  conspicuous  are  the  Kautirs,  an  Indian  tribe 
independent  both  on  the  King  and  the  Siks. 

To  the  north  of  those  mountains  are  the  fertile  plains  of  Chuch  and 
Haaanrdk,  inhabited  by  Indians  oonverted  to  the  Jbhommedan  rep 
figien,  and  called  Goqjeis.  Among  them  ai»  many  tuifaulent  A£- 
ghanns  of  various  tribes,  and  these  last  aie  the  masteta  of  the 
Qountiy. 

To.the  nortli  of  these  plains-is  Drumtour  (the.ooiAitEy  of  tfap  Ja> 
doons),  already  de^icribed  as  belonging  to  a  branch  of  Eust^yes, 
North  of  it  is  Tomaul*  a  woody  and  molmkainous  oomitry,  which 

It 


Digitized,  by  Google 


BUMBAS  AKD  CUKKA&  5O5 

joins  on  the  north  to  Bikhlee^  s  country  of  the  same  kmd,  but  much 
moceextensiTe^  inhabited  by  Swautees,  and  under  a  separate  governor 
appdnted  by  the  King. 
All  these  countries  stretch  along  the  Indus ;  but  our  progress  to  the 

north  is  noir  stopped  by  snowy  mountfuns. 

To  the  east  of  Pukhloe  are  the  countries  of  the  Bumbas  and  Cuk- 
kas.  Tlie  former  is  under  two  or  three  chiefs  callod  Riyas,  the  prin- 
cipal of  whom  resides  at  Mozzufierabad :  both  tribes  are  Mahonme- 
dans.  Their  countries  are  composed  of  vast  mountains,  difficult  passes, 
and  thick  forests,  Thev  are  of  importance  to  the  DoonumeeSy  as 
foiQUDg  their  only  communication  with  (Jaahmetir. 


(   506  ) 


CHAP.  VII. 

CA8RMBBB. 

'T^HE  vallev  of  Cashmeer  is  surroundeti  by  loftv  mountains,  which 
divide  it  from  Tjttle  Tibet  on  the  north,  from  Ladaiik  on  the 
east,  from  the  Puujunb  on  the  south,  and  from  Pukhlee  on  the  west. 
A  branch  of  the  Spcen  (white)  ("aufirs  approaches  Cashmeer  on  the 
north-west.  There  are  but  seven  passe??  into  the  pro\  ince :  four  are 
from  the  south,  one  from  the  west,  and  tlie  remaininn;  two  from  the 
north.  That  of  Bember  is  the  best ;  but  that  of  iVIozzn  ufFerabad  or 
Barauioolla,  Iviiig  unvards  Aighaunistaun,  is  now  most  used.  I  shall 
not  attempt  to  describe  this  celebrated  valley  after  Bernier  and  Foster; 
the  account  of  the  latter,  in  pfuticular,  canuot  be  surpassed. 