

considerable  size ;  it  is  siirroundetl  by  a  mud  wall,  but  has  no  ditch. 
The  inhabitants  are  almost  all  Hindoos.    They  are  called  Shikar- 
poorer,  and  speak  a  particular  dialect  of  Hindostanee,  called  bv  their 
name.   There  are  many  weaUhy  hankers  iu  the  town,  and  a  consider- 
able traile  is  kept  up  witli  ilie  Rajpoot  country,  Sind,  Candahar,  and 
Pcshawer.    Shikarpooree  bankers  are  to  be  found  in  every  part  of 
the  Doorauuee  dominions,  and  in  all  the  towns  of  Tootkbfsun.  Hiere 
are  very  few  A^j^uuins  (not  above  two  hundred)  aettled  in  die  town 
of  Shikaipoor.  •  The  inhabitanta  of  the  eountxy  are  Jnt%  Bek)dMS|  ' 
and  »  &m  Sindeaa.  ... 
•  Hie  xeraue  paid  to  the  King»  is  tfaiee  lades  of  mpeea.  The 
ly^ilfiin  Iseeps  up  very  few  troops. 

The  lenuskaUe  fofft  of  Bukkux^  situatedon  an  island  in  the  In<hia> 
bclonirs  to  this  pBOvinoe,  but  has  a  separate  governor. 

The  Mozaurees  who  live  to  the  north  of  Shikarpoor,  are  a  tribe  of 
Beloches,  I  believe  of  the  Rind  division.  They  inhabit  a  woodv 
and  ill-cukivatod  country.  They  live  almost  in  a  state  of  anarchyj 
and  have  made  themselves  notorious  for  their  Tobberies  on  ttie  high- 
way >  tor  their  piracies  on  the  Indus,  :ind  ibx  their  predatory  incur- 
sions into  the  country  of  their  nei^bours. 


Digitized  by  Google 


502 


BAHAWALPOOR. 


Dera  Ghauzee  Khaun  lies  between  the  Indus  and  Belochestaiui)  to 
the  north  of  the  Mozaurees.  It  was  conquered  by  Ahmed  Shauh. 
Tlie  country,  I  imagine,  resembles  the  adjoining  tract  of  Muckelwaud* 

already  described,  but  is  much  better  cultivated. 

The  revenue  is  less  than  five  lacks  of  rupees.  The  jirovince  is  in 
complete  subjection  to  the  King.  Tlie  town  is  ncai  l>  a..s  large  as 
Mooltaun,  but  much  ot  it  is  in  ruins.  The  country  suiTers  much  from 
the  frequent  change  of  the  governors. 

.  The  piovinoe  of  Dem  Ismael  Kbatm  iaoompoBedof  iJbetrMCtcaiUed 
MiMifciihrnwii  The  ooaatay  and  its  {noduoe  have  already  been  de- 
scribed :  its  zeveniies,  &&  wiU  be  menfeioiied  under  Lata*  to  whkii  it 
it  at  proaont  anncaicd. 

.  I  'hsve  mantioiied  in  anothac  pfam^  that  the  nottk-weitem  ooiw 
nav  of  (the  Indian  deaait  is  cut  off  by  the  atreanu  of  tbe  Panjaub ; 
and  that  the  tract  thus  formed  is  fertile  within  reach  4>f  the  inunda- 
tion of  the  riTen>  while  the  rest  is  sandy  and  waste.  Thia  -  explaii^ 
the  character  of  the  provinces  of  Bahawulpoor,  Moultaun,  and  1  ria, 
which  are  situated  on  the  east  of  the  Indii8«  and  to  the  south  of  the 
Salt  range. 

The  territory  of  Bahawulpoor  exteiK?^  two  huntlrod  and  eighty 
miles  from  north-east  to  south-west,  and  a  imndred  and  twenty  miles 
from  noith-west  to  south-east,  at  the  broadest  points.  It  !nchi(lo<<, 
for  a  certain  distance,  both  banks  of  the  InduS}  of  the  Hydaspes,  and 
of  the  Aoesines.  The  banks  of  the  riven  are  eveij  iriMVie  vfeh.  To 
(he  west  of  the  Acesinest  the  oountiy  at  a  distance  from'them  ispoor» 
bat  to  the  <eaat  it  is  abaohitely  desart  1!1ie  principal  towna  are 
Bahawulpoor,  Afamedpoor,  Jul|a]lpoor»  Seatpoor,  and  Oosh.'  Hie 
strongest  pbce  Is  Bennnily  a  fint  thai  owes  its  strength  to  the  desart 
with  which  it  is  suiraonded.    It  was  the  oidinaiy  xesidanoe  of 