

The  King's  object  with  the  Alghauu  tribes  is,  to  get  men  fiora  the 
western,  and  money  from  the  eastern ;  with  the  prov  inces  also,  the 
practice  of  the  government  has  been  to  exact  iittle  from  those  in  the 
west,  and  use  them  for  defence  alone ;  but  to  avail  itself  of  the  r^ 
aonroea  of  the.eartem  provinces,  and  of  the  means  they  atfbided  fir 
farther,  extension  of  temtoiy. 

b  like  mamier  in  foreign  policy  the.A4^ianiia  have  aheim.  no  dfr 
aire  for  weatera  cmqpeat  llieir  yknn  townda  "Btnm  and  Tooii* 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAliACT£R  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT. 

fciirfmm-  w&e  oonfinod  to  tho  dafenf^  of  KlionMiiiiiiiii  ind  BuUdi* 
It  wHa  tiidocd*  a  doith'bcitl  iiiiiiiicfcboii'dif  Ahiiifwl  to 
flonii  imt  to  attack'  the'  Uibeint  whom  he  caUad  a  hive  withoul 
hoocj.  - 

Awflthp^'  wise  precept  is  attributed  to  him,  which  was,  to  forbear 
attieJring  the  Siks,  till  their  zeal  had  oubaided,  and  theb  manneia 
softened.  In  &ct,  the  Siks  have  become  attached  to  .agriculture,  and 
hare  entirely  lost  their  aptitude  for  the  protracted  and  desultory 
warfare,  which  enabled  them  to  withstand  the  power  of  Ahmed 
Shauh. 

The  Afghaun  government  has  always  shewm  a  good  deal  of  mode- 
ration towards  its  own  subjects,  its  dependent  states,  and  even  its 
enemies.  It  is  mild  in  punishments,  and  its  lenity  is  more  conspicu- 
ous, iVom  a  comparison  with  the  severity  of  the  Persians.  Tf  is  not 
uncommon  for  a  great  rebeiliou  to  terminato  without  a  sin^'le  execu« 
tion  ;  and  when  there  are  punishments  tor  rebellions,  thev  always 
&11  on  the  chiefs  alone.  The  Persian  practice  of  blinding  or  maim- 
ing the  aim  moil  people  is  unknown.  Ihiring  the  time  the  embassy 
was  at  Peshuwer,  there  was  but  one  execution;  it  was  that  of  a 
Shecali  dervise,  who  was  tried  on  the  accu^aLioii  oi  tiie  Alooliahs, 
and  found  guilty  of  blasphemy. 

The  Af^aun  govenmient,  however,  lihe  mort  others  in  the  east, 
ia  disgraced  by  the  peifidioua  meana  iome^ea  leaotted  to  by  its 
mmiatera  to  leiie  o^den,  and  by  the  use  of  torture.  A  temptap 
tion  to  the  fbtmer  pnctice  may  be  found  m  the  eaae  with  wfaicli  a 
crinunal  cm  elode  the  puranit  of  goverameiits  m  a  oountiy  ao  fidl  of 
^wtniaaMi  and  where  it  ia  a  pomt  of  honour  to  aaaiat  a  fogitive.  The 
vae  of  toMme  wet  learned  fiom  the  Pefaiana:  ithaa  longeadatedt 
but  it  ia  only  under  Mahnlood  that  it  ia  oonmiooly  pvactiaed.  It  ia 
dikfly  made  nae  of  to  eiloit  money,  and*  oonaeqnently,  &Ua  oftenea^ 
ed  the  rich  and  0ceat 

The  government  endeavours  to  maintain  quiet  and  prospeiity 
eniflQg  eU  the  A%faaun  tribea  {  but,  aware  of  their  having  inteieato 

8d  2  ' 


516  PRB8ENT  STATEL  ' 