

The  usefulness  of  the  Canzees'  courts  is  in  a  great  ineu-su  re  destroyed 
by  the  corruption  which  prevails  in  them  ;  and,  in  towns  and  their 
neighbourhood,  justice  is  further  impeded  by  the  power  and  influence 
of  the  great. 

The  Cauzees  are  appointed  by  the  King,  at  the  recommendatioa 
of  the  Imaum  of  the  household. 

A  few  only  have  salaries  from  the  treasury.  There  is,  liowever^ 
in  some  plac^,  if  not  in  all,  a  small  tax  imposed  on  every  family  in 
the  district,  which  goes  entirdy  to  the  Causy.  Hiey  have  also  fees 
on  marriages ;  on  affixing  their  seab  to  deeds.;  and  peiliapa  on  the 
causes  tliev  decide. 

Hie  Mooftees  hare  a  fee  on  every  opinion  they  give  $  but  this  can^ 
not  by  itself  be  enou^  to  maintain  them. 

The  potlioe  of  towns  b  managed  under  the  Srdarby  theMeecshub^ 
the  Mohtesebf  and  the  Baio^a  of  the  Basan. 

The  Meershub  answers  to  the  Cntwal  in  Indi*.  He  has  wtfdmicn 
under  him  called  IQdiikcliees,  who  are  posted  on  diftceot  guards  in 
the  town.  In  Peshawer,  and  probabl}  in  other  towns,  there  are  many 
other  watchmen  paid  by  the  people  of  the  ward  which  they  guard. 
The  Meershub  goes  the  rounds  at  night,  and  takes  up  thieves,  dis- 
turbers of  the  peace,  and  offenders  against  morals.  Both  the  Meeiv 
shubs  and  the  Mohtesibs  are  odious  and  discreditable  offices }  and 
they  are  probably  the  source  of  much  oppression.  In  Peshawer,  at 
least,  the  Meershub  paid  an  annual  sum  for  his  office,  and  extorted 
£ees  irom  gwuing-houses$  wine-shops,  persons  whom  he  tooi^  up  on 


i^iyui^ud  by  Google 


9 


JUSTICE  Am  POLICE  OF  THE  KINGDOM.  S» 

mufkkmf  and  fiom  the  £ew  haaam  of  lD  &ine  tbat  are  tolerated 

there. 

The  Mohtesib  inflicts  the  punishments  prescribed  by  the  Mussul- 
man law,  on  persons  who  drink  wine,  or  are  guilt)'  of  simihir  irregu- 
larities :  ill  Peshawer  he  does  the  duty  of  the  Darogha  of  the  Bazars. 

There  are  Mohtesibs  who  go  circuits  twice  or  thrice  a  year  m  the 
country,  and  inspect  the  conduct  of  the  inhabitants. 

The  ISIohtesibs  in  towns  have  pay,  and  are  entitled  to  a  small  tax 
on  shops. 

Thoae  in  ibe  oounlrjr  levy  their  annual  feaa  wfaeaoii  ^eir  orculMt 
.The  Mblittaib  ia  alwqra  s  Moollah. 

Hie  Bangln  of  the  Daaati  fixea  priGea,  md  auperinlenda  weig^ 
md  iiwipea :  'under  hut  dien  ia  •  head  of  cadi  lrade»  called  Cbid^ 
Uioodahor  Beeshsufised*.  who  ia  alao  employed  in  levying  the. taaaai^ 

In  the  King^  jMhces  and  in  camps  thtse  ia  a  Cauzee  Asker»  or 
Judge  of  the  army»  and  Mnhteaib  of  Iho  amy,  who  do  the  aaMe 
duties  as  those  in  towne. 

In  the  countr}'  the  people  to  whom  the  land  belongs  are  answerable 
for  the  police.  In  cases  of"  robbery  and  the&t  if'  tlie  vh\ef  of  the 
village,  or  of  the  division  of  a  tribe,  in  whose  land.s  the  i  rini<  was 
committed,  fail  to  protiiK  e  t  liL-  thiei,  he  pays  the  value  ol  th&  propei3ty 
stolen,  and  levies  it  on  the  people  under  him.  ' 