

Tlie  other  nine  divisions  are  generally  composed  of  countries  be- 
longing to  Afghaun  tribes.  There  is  a  Dooraunee  governor  ap* 
pointed  to  each,  who  k  called  Sbdar.  He  aem  MsidBi  in  bb 
government  |  but*  once  a  year,  go^  hinnelf  or  aends  a  deputy,  with 
or  without  a  iotot  (aecordtng  to  the  necessity' of  oaing  intimidation)^ 
to  collect  the  revenue.  At  other  timeB»  the  resguladon  of  the  ooun« 
try  is  left  to  the  heads  of  tribes,  anliiect  to  some  oontrd  in  estraor- 
dfaiaiy  cases  firom'the  Stidar.  The  Srdar,  in  moat  oases,  ledoni- 
mends  the  member  of  the  head  fiunfly  whom  he  thinks  fittest^fiir  the 
chtefship  of  each  tribe  under  him.  There  are  Gniaeea  appointed  by 
the  King  in  these  divisicnis,  but  their  anthoiily,  if  supported  at  aD,  is 
enforced  by  the  h«id  of  the  tribe. 

The  governments  of  this  last  description  are  the  ibUowing :  the 
Ghiljies,  which  includes  the  A%haan'  parts  of  Lughmaun  and  Jella- 
labad  ;  the  Saufees  and  Tagou ;  Bungii^haot,  induding  the  Jaujeaa 
and  Torees ;  Damaun,  induding  the  Murwuts,  &c.  up  to  BnnnoO 
and  Dour ;  Kuddeh  Chuchaunsoor  and  Kiahkee  Gundoomee,  on  the 
borders  of  Seestaun  ;  Ghoraut  (the  Hazaurehs) ;  Leeahbund  (the 
Eimauks) ;  Tztezar,  or  Subzewar,  near  Furrah ;  Aiaurdenrdi,  and 
Pooshtee  Coh. 


i^iyui^cd  by  Google 


DIVISIONS  OF  TH£  . KINGDOM. 


52S 


Ihfi  jSidsn  aie  femovaable  it  pleannnek  but  it  seemg-usiul  to  Iceep 
didr  offices  in  particdar  fiunilies. 

Hiese  idiviBioiu,  as  including  more  t!tnscttl6d  puts  of  tiio  coontiyf 
bftve  Men  off  fiom  the  royal,  antliority,  in  a  greater  proportion  than 
those  under  the  Hsukims. 


3x2 


(  ) 


CHAP.  IV. 

TBI  UVENVS* 

THE  whole  revenue  of  the  Caubul  government,  in  settled  times, 
may  be  redoned  at  aomething  near  diiee  cracei  *  of  rupees  j 
tmt  <kf  this  upwards  oi  a  crofe  is  remilted  to  dHfoent  hslPanbdMed 
princes,  who  are  ooiiteiit  to  hold  their  leveinie  as  a  grant  of  the 
King's,  but  who  never  would  hare  oonsented  to  give  it  up  to  him. 
This  description  of  revenue  cannot  be  considered  among  the  King  of 
GHibul*s  resources. 
The  real  revenue  fiills  a  good  deal  within  two  cnnes. 
Of  this  a  great  part  (about  half)  is  aseagped  in  Teoool  (Jegeer)^ 
most  of  it  was  granted  on  condition  of  miUtaiy  service^  and  the  bene- 
fit whidi  the  King  derives  from  it  will  appear  in  the  account  of  his  ! 
army;  the  rest  is  allotted  to  maintain  the  MoolUdu  or  rdigknis  | 
officers,  or  given  in  charity  to  derviaes  and  Syuds.  j 

The  remaining  snm  was  received  by  the  King  till  the  breaking  oat 
of  the  present  troubles.  By  the  best  accounts,  it  amounted  to  upwards 
of  nine  million  of  rupees. 

Tlie  principal  source  of  the  King's  income  is  the  land  revenue, 
whicli  is  assessed  on  the  profluce  according  to  tixed  proportions, 
which  vary  with  the  imUirc  ol  tlie  kind,  and  are  different  in  different 
provinces.  Some  ol  the  A<<^hauu  nilie?,  and  of  the  remoter  provinces, 
are  not  subject  to  this  mode  c>i  assessment,  but  pay  a  fixed  sum  annu- 
ally.   The  other  sources  ol  the  revenue  are  the  town  duties  and 