


A  crare  of         w  dnvt  a  BuUiiNi  of  pomMb  ^ling. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


ftEVENUB.  525 

coitoras ;  the  produce  of  the  royal  demesne ;  the  produce  of  fines 
and  forfeitures ;  the  profits  of  the  nlinU  aod  perhaps  some  other 
trifling  receipts. 

The  provisions  supplied  to  the  J\int;'s  honseliold,  iind  part  oi  his 
armv,  by  the  people  through  whose  country  he  passes,  even  when  they 
are  not  subject  to  the  payment  of  revenue*  must  also  be  reckoned 
among  the  resources  of  the  state. 

Besides  the  above,  another  less  fixed  brandh  of  revenue  is  created 
by  accepting  of  the  commutations  in  money  for  the  troops  i^bidi 
<>U£^  to  be  fiifiiiihed  by  pafdoilar  districto  aod  tribes,  cities  were 
at  dl  times  levied  from  Hsnkiiiis  on  their  appointment  to  profitable 
districts*  and  in  these  nnsettfcid  timesi  an  unavovred  profit  is  derived 
from  the  sale  of  offices. 

The  land  revenue  is  collected  by  the  head  man  of  each  village  and 
paid  in  some  cases  thro^gjh  the  head  of  his  tribes  and  in  otheia 
directlj  to  the  Haukim  or  his  i^gsnta.  The  Haukim  generally  farms 
the  revenue  of  his  province  from  government,  and  lets  out  that  of  the 
djatriots  under  him.  Once  a  year,  he  gives  in  his  accounts,  which 
pass  Ihrough  several  officers  before  they  receive  the  King*»  approba- 
tion. Tlie  expences  of  management,  the  assigpiments  tliat  have  been 
fjiven  on  the  province,  the  price  of  articles  commissioned  by  the 
King,  and  similar  charges,  are  struck  off,  and  the  balance  is  either 
sent  to  the  treasury,  or  more  fre<pn'iit  Iv,  (mlt  rs,  equal  to  its  amount, 
we  given  to  the  troops,  and  others  wiio  have  claims  on  government. 

Both  in  the  course  of  the  collections  and  of  the  pavments,  wlieii 
they  are  made  in  this  last  manner,  great  peculation  is  practised  by 
tly*  Haukim* 

The  smaller  provinces,  under  militaiy  Sirdars,  are  not  filmed. 

The  Kmg's  principal  expences  are  the  payment  of  the  army,  the 
hoosehold,  the  court  estaMishment,  and  the  dergy. 

The  expences  of  the  army  are  small  in  conqMrison  to  its  streng^ 
'from  the  nuipber  of  Tecods  appropriated  to  tgnj^t^^in  it. 

The  expences  of  the  household  are  m  some  measure  lightened  by 
the  payment  in  grain,  aheep^  and  cattle,  appropriated  to  that  branch. 


Digitized  by  Google 


526 


KfiVENDK 


Hie  pfl^r  of  the  great  civil  officers  is  small.  They  are  in  a  great 
meiunire  maintained  by  bribes  and  perquisites,  which,  althotigh  they 
have  the  most  pernicious  ofTect  on  the  resources  of  the  ^etey-do  not 
diminish  the  revenue  actually  brought  to  account. 

The  MooUahs  are  paid  hy  Tecools,  or  receive  orders  on  Haukims^ 
or  money  from  the  treasury  ;  the  expence  is  said  to  be  considerable. 