

The  vviiole  expence  of  the  King  of"  Caubul,  exclusive  of  tliat  de- 
frayed by  Tecbols,  &c  was  not  much  above  half  a  crore  of  rupees  in 
quiet  years  ;  and  what  remained  of  the  revenue,  used  to  be  kept  sm  a 
fund  for  extraordinary  expences. 

The  Creasuret  of  the  crown  Imre  long  since  been  dmipetcd}  md 
the  only  Wieelth  the  King  poneasee  oonsbts  in  -a  veiy  valndile  ooUee. 
tion  of  jevrdst  which,  although  greatly  dhniniahed  dnoe  Tiinooc 
9iaiih*«  xeign,  has  in  amne  measnie  been  pr^erved  by  tiie  diflicalty 
of  finding  parchaaav  to  whom  parts  of  it  n^g^lunre  beeatnniafeiee4 
dnring  the  distreflses  of  the  govemment 


Digitized  by  Google 


(   527  ) 


CHAP.  V. 


JUSTICE  AND  PUUCE  OP  THE  KINGDOM. 


USTICE  is  administered  in  cities  b)^  the  Cauzee,  the  Mooftees, 


the  Ameeni  Mehkemeli,  ami  llie  Daroglm  of  tiic  Aduwliit. 
In  civil  smta,  tlie  Cauzy  receives  complaints  and  sends  a  summons 
by  an  officer  of  his  own  to  the  defendant  Hie  caiue  U  tried  aooord- 
ii^  to  the  mles  and  fixmis  prescribed  by  ihe  or  Mfthcmmiedaii 
Uw>  modifi&d  fay  ceitaiii  adraowledged  parts  of  the  PooahtotrnwuUe^ 
or  customary  law.  In  doubtful  cases,  the  Mooftees  give  their  law 
opinion  supported  by  quotations  from  booiks  of  authority. 

The  Gauay's  oiders  are  nev^  disobeyed;: it  being  reckoned  im- 
pious to  refuse  to  oonlbrm  to  liie  Shizra.  If  he  aluMild  be  resisted*  it 
is  the  .duty  of  the  Sirdar  to  enforce  his  decree. 

The  Ameeni  Mchkcmeh  receives  cdiaige  of  deposits. 
The  Darogha  i  Adawlut  is  supervisor  over  the  wholes  and  his  duty 
is  to  sec  that  all  proceedings  are  conformable  to  law. 

Tn  criminal  complaints,  the  rules  are  nearly  the  same,  but  the 
practice  is  different.  Criminals  aregenerallN  firsf  brou«^ht  to  tlie  Sir- 
dar, and  the  Cauzy's  sentence,  in  all  important  cases,  is  executed 
by  him  :  this  gives  the  Sirdar  a  degree  of  power,  which  is  particularly 
felt  when  he  disagrees  with  the  Caiizee. 

Where  the  King  happens  to  reside,  criminal  complaiuis  axe  made 
to  him.  In  trifling  matters,  he  refers  them  to  the  Cauzy,  or  desires 
the  Arxbegee  (the  officer  through  whom  represootations  are  made  ^ 


him)  to  settle  fheni :  serious  complaints  are  alw^s  referred  to  the 
Cauay,  and  the  King  arden  the  sentoice  to  be  executed,  after  a 
ibmal  protestation,  that  the  guilt  igif  ]t»  if  ui^^st»  U  qd  the  head  of  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


SS»  JUSTICE  AND  POLICE  OF  THE  KINODOSt 

There  are  Causees  in  all  ooiuiderable  towns  in  ihe  Cmbiil'donii- 
niona,  and  they  have  deputies  over  the  whole  countrji  except  that  of 
the  three  or  fimr  tribes  who  are  reckoned  to  be  in  open  rebellion. 

Hie  Cauzccs  no  where  interpose  unless  an  ^pUGSti<ni  is  made  to 
them:  this  happens  mpre  rarely  in  the  more  remote  pacta  of  the 
country,  where  they  are  chiefly  appealed  to  in  civil  cases.  When  a 
crime  is  not  acknowledged  by  the  accused,  it  is  always  referred  to  the 
Cauzy,  but  acknowledged  crimes  are  most  £requently  decided  <m  by 
Jirgas,  in  the  manner  already  described. 