

Hieae.  eaq^ecHenta  ife  not  very  prndnctivc^  and  Hba  use'  of  tben* 
in  caaea  wliew  •the  gowanunfiut  could  vttSij  anfime  91  new  aaaaaa* 
flMnt,  aeema  a  dear  adoimrledgpiaut  that  the  pietqgative  ia'Uinitdl 
in-tiiia  raapect. 

The  King  cannot  feaume  the  granta  of  hia  ptedeoeaMn.  In  ehril 
wani»  the  gvantv'  df  one  pietandav  aae  xeannled  by  the^o^ieitf  nn ihe 
ground  of  their  not  bebg  the  acta  of  s  hnrfiil  monwdi  (  but  .^m 
thh  is  not oftan- done. 

The  customs  have  never  been- altered.  I  do  not  know  whether  the 
King  has  the  right  to  increase  them.;  he  certainly  has  the  power,  as 
his  doing  so  would  not  immediately  afiect-ai^  body  of  niena||Boqg 
enough  to  question  bis  orders. 

The  K  ing  has  the  control  of  military  levies,  and  the  cxunmand  of 
the  army. 

A  part  of  the  administration  of  justice  has  been  b hew u  to  be  left 
to  the  internal  government  of  the  tribes ;  the  other  branches  belong 
to  the  sovereign,  who  appoints  all  Cauzees  ^  and  coniirms  their  sen- 
tences in  places  wh^e  they  have  criminal  jurisdiction.  Inscaaca 
where  the'onme  ia  agrinat'the  aiatc^  the  IQi^'is  Ae  aafe  judga  .Hia 
power,  hewevttr,  deeanet»  aran  in  tbiacaae^'ffitendtoihnHfiielie 

8u. 


Digitized  by  Google 


514 


DOMESTIC  AND  FOREIGN  POLICY. 


Sbddozye  (the  King^s  tribe).  Timoiir  Shauh  put  the  grand  vizier 
to  de«th»  and  the  measure  WM  never  blamed ;  Shauh  Mahmood's 
execotibn  of  Meer  Allum  Buum .  (the  head  of  the  Noonyes)f  mm 

condemned  for  its  injustice,  not  for  its  illegality  ;  but  the  execution 
of  Wuffadar  Khaun  Suddozje  and  his  brothers,  by  the  same  prince 
is  still  universally  reprobatedt  at  contrary  to  the  fimdamental  lawa  of 

the  state. 

The  King  has  the-  direction  of  religious  affairs,  but  the  national 
religion  being  firmly  established,  he  has  little  room  for  interference. 
The  rights  whidi  the  Afghaua  nation  possess  over  the  conquered 
provinces  and  other  dependencies  of  the  state,  are  entirely,  vested  in 
the  down- 

Bendee  tlie  direct  powers  thus  poMeaaed  by  the  Ehtgf  it  ia  obviona 
he  mint  derive  mudi  ipfltience  fimn  the  exeiciie  of  them. 

Id  the  policy  of  the  Court  of  Giubol  towards  ittt'own  salgediit  the. 
inoat  ttriking  ol^jeet  is'  the  doae  connectioii  of  the  ffing.with  the' 
Doorauiieea,  end  rivaby  between  him  and  the  ariatoencj  of  tibat 
liibe.  It  IB  the  King's  poHcy  to  keep' the  Dooraimeea  in  aalQectiaii 
to'  bimaell^  wiiile  be  euka  (hem  over  the  other  Afghauns. 

For  thia  pmpoae*  be  proteota  the  Tta^iks,  and  aU  others  whose 
power  he  can  use  to  depress  the  nobles,  without  endaiigeri]^  the 
ascendancy  of  his  tnl>ei  His  policy  towards  the  Dooraonee  lords, 
the  Taujiks,  and  the  Aighaun  tribes  respectively,  resembles  that  of  a 
King  of  Scotland  towards  the  herons,  the  buigessesy  and  the  clans  of 
tlie  Highlands. 