

The  Eunuchs  have  also  •  good  deal  of  weight,  trom  their  being 
admitted  to  the  King's  presence  at  all  times*  and  being  allowed  to 
be  present  at  the  most  secret  deliberations. 

The  cxppnces  of  the  household  are  defrayed  by  particular  funds 
allotU'd  for  that  purpose,  and  nianatred  b^'  n  particular  establishment, 
of  which  tlie  King  8  private  treasurer  and  the  Mooshiif  or  auditor  of 
accounts  are  the  heads. 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  521  ) 


CHAP.  IIL 

OF  THB  raniibv  or  thz  xzngoom  into  raovxKCBs. 

TTffE  whole  kingdom  is  divided  into  twenty-seven  provinces  or 
district  ;  exclusive  of  Belochistaun,  the  chief  of  whicii  country 
is,  except  in  names  rather  a  party  in  an  unequal  aDianoe  than  a 
subject. 

^Hie  dg^iteen  mo8t  important  aie  each  govanied  by  a 
eoUecta  the  icnrenue  and  commanda  the  nilitia  $  and  a  Sudar,  who 
oommanda  the  regular  troopa,  and  whoae  dufef  it  ia  to  preierve  the 
fmblic  tranqniUitj,  and  to  enfbrae  the  authority  of  the  Haokim  and 
Cauzy:  when  the  Hawlrim  U  »  Dooiaimeei  he  uamJly  hoMatheodloe 
of  SirdM*  alao. 

The  administration  of  civil  justice  ia  conducted  by  the  Caoay. 
Under  the  Haukim  and  Sirdar,  the  revenue  and  police  are  admi- 
nistered by  the  heads  of  tribes }  and  under  them>  by  the  heads  of  the 

subdivisions  of  their  tribes. 

The  imjjortancc  of  the  heads  of  tribes  is  greater  or  less  in  pro- 
portion to  the  degree  of  subjection  in  which  the  country  ia  held : 
where  the  tribes  are  powerful,  every  thing  is  done  through  the 
heads ;  where  they  arc  weak,  as  at  Peshawer,  the  Haukim  and  Sir- 
dar send  their  orders  direct  to  the  heads  of  subdivisions ;  and  in 
Caduneer,  among  the  Tai^)iks,  and  in  the  provinces  on  the  Indu8> 
ndiere  dure  are  many  Hindnkeei^  the  WanHnM  or  Siidara  aend  disr 
effioeia  to  indhridnala,  or  employ  the  heeda  of  TiUagai  at  theb  in 

The  eighteen  provinces  where  Haukims  reside  are,  Heraut,  IVir- 

3  X 


Digitized  by  Google 


522 


DIVISIONS  OP  THE  KINGDOM. 


rah,  Candahar,  Ghuzni,  Caubul,  Baumican  and  Ghorebund,  JellaUA* 
bad,  Lughmauii,  Peshawer,  Dera  Umael  Khaun,  Dera  Ghauzi  Klif^yi^, 
Shikafpoort  Sewee,  Sind,  Caslunear,  Chuch  Hauiudkf  Lya,  and 

Mooltaim. 

In  all  these  places,  the  Haukims  are  removable  at  pleasure  ;  except 
when  tliov  contract  lor  the  revenue,  in  which  case  they  ought  to  be 
left  till  the  cud  of  the  year. 

They  are  still  removed  in  all  but  Sind  (where  tha  Kin^  .ilwavs 
selected  the  llaukim  fiom  a  particular  family,  and  where,  fsuice 
1790,  he  has  lost  all  internal  control) ;  Mooltaim  and  Lya  (where  the 
Kiiifj  lias  not  been  able  to  remove  the  governor  since  Sliauh  Alah- 
niood'h  accession) ;  and  Heraut,  which  has  been  kept  by  Prince  Ferooz 
since  Mali  mood's  expulsion. 