


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX. 


AFP£NDIX  A. 

JUSTOAY  OF  THE  XIMOSOM  or  caubt  t  ,  tuom  THfi  FODVIIlATIOII  Ol  THB 

OOOaAUNKfi  MONARCHY. 

T  ITlliE  tt kam €f fhe <iay  Ustovy  of  tlie  IXn)^^  ]B|^11wb8it 
^■-^  ■oooonts*  I  can  cbtaiii,  ihef  tffen  to iMve  been  cntiiaty  indmifmlBiit 

till  the  beginning  of  tlie  sevantMttth  century,  when,  being  hard  {OeiMil  bjr 
the  Uzbeks,  they  agreed  to  pay  tribute  to  Persia,  as  the  price  of  protection. 
They  perhaps  remained  on  this  footing  till  1708,  when  the  Ghiljieswho  had 
been  subject  to  Persia,  rose  against  the  Georgian  Prince  Bagrathion,  who 
was  guveniur  of  Cantlaliar,  011  tiie  port  uf  the  last  of  the  Sophies.  At  that 
time  the  DooiauneeB  asem  mostl j  to  have  been  aettled  in  the  momttsiitt  near 
Heraott  under  the  name  of  Abdaulees,  and  to  have  been  already  I<Hig  engaged 
in  hostilitiea  with  the  Ghfljies. 

In  the  year  17 16,  the  Abdaullees,  under  AbdooUah  Khaun  Suddozye, 
invaded  the  Persian  territor}',  defeated  the  governor  of  Heraut  in  the  field, 
and  took  that  city  and  many  places  in  its  neighbourhoo'd.  Tliry  were  after- 
wards defeated  in  a  battle  with  Mahniood  Gluljie,  but  us  tiiat  Prince  soon 
after  conqfunA  Penria,  andr  m  liii  dynasty  tm  occupied,  during  liia  ahoit 
period  of  its  doaunion,  in  aettKng  hs  cqB^ncats,  and  in  wan  with  the  Gnnd 
Signior,  the  Abdaidleee  remained  for  a  long  time  unmoleited.  Not  kog 
after  their  defeat,  AbdooUah  was  depo6<»i,  and  perhaps  poisoned,  by  2ieniaun 
Khnun  (the  son  of  ITfowlut  Khaun  and  father  of  Ahmed  Shauh),  who  took 
ttif  If^ad  amontf  tin  Abdaullees,  defeated  a  Persian  army  of  double  his  num- 
ber, and  successfully  resisted  all  attempts  of  thi^  nation  on  Heraut.  So 
^   1   ■•  .  • 

*  Tfaoie  of  Hanway,  who,  from  the  exceOence  of  hit  hwtory  of  the  Afghaun  conquetUt  V  *^ 
litkd  to  UttCDtioa  when  tm^iog  of  tbemoce  otwcure  period  which,  preceded  tbote  tteaU. 


Digitized  by  Google 


542  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  DOORAUNEES.  [Appendix. 

n^d  kdeed  WM  tbe  increase  of  the  power  of  the  Abdaullees,  that  in  the 
year  1722  they  were  able  to  besiege  Meahhed  neaily  in  the  north-western 
extremity  of  Khorassaun. 

A  series  of  revolutions  afterwards  took  place  during  whicli  the  Abdaullees, 
whose  goverument  was  at  all  times  democratic,  were  lelt  for  some  time 
entixdiy  mthout  a  leader,  their  vSun  being  inaiu^;ed  moat  probably  by  a 
Jitgk,  or  council  of  heads  of  fiunilies.  At  hnt  in  1728,  thej  were  for  the 
first  time  attacked  by  Naiidir  Shauh,  and,  after  ft  short  campaign  of  vanoua 
success,  were  reduced  to  submit  to  the  conqueror. 

They-  rebelled  at^why  under  Zoolfikaur  Khaun  (the  son  of  Zeinaun  Khaun 
and  elder  brotiier  ot'  AiimcA)  who  had  alternately  been  in  exile,  and  at  the 
head  of  the  Abdaullees,  during  the  ti  uublesi  above  mentioned.  They  invaded 
ihe  Persian  territoiyp  and  defeated  Ibrahim  (Naudir  ShauVs  brother)  in  a 
pitdiedbatUe.  were  besieging  Meahhed,  when  Nandir  moved  agaimt 