

111  dangerouii  ii;ads  that  are  much  frequented,  there  are  parties 
stationed  to  protect  travellers  i  these  are  provided  by  the  Khaua  of 
the  tribe  in  whose  lands  the  road  lies,  bitt  Me  paid  by  the  King. 

The  poUee  is  after  all  very  bad.  In  many  parts  of  the  kingdom, 
travdlera  enjoy  secorily  by  engaging  an  caooct  of  the  trUMb  cAr  l)gr 
paying  coatoma  to  ita  diief $  hut  the  King  can  do  little  to  piRoleet 
them,  esoefithy  aaiidhigtioopB  to  lavage  the  laada  of  notorkiaaly 
paedatoiy  tribeai  and  to  bring  m  die  cfaiefii  The.  fkoiifie  does  not 
interfere  in  raurden  for  nbdiataon,  except  in  towna  and  their 
vicinity. 


8  T 


Digitized  by  Google 


(   530  ) 


CHAP.  VU 

TMS  MlliITARY  SBTABLISUMEMT. 

nppIE  established  array  consists  of  Dooraunees,  GIkiUhiiiu  bliauhs, 
and   Karra  Nokur ;   there  is   also  a  sort  oi  imlitia  called 
Eeljaiiree,   which  is  called  out  on  extraordiuary  occasions ;  and 
volunteers  are  entertained  in  actual  war  under  the  denomination  of 
Dawatullub. 

The  DoorMineedaiis  sre  obliged  to  fimiahiiMriy  twdve ^noumad 
men,  m  the  eonditioD  on  which  tfaey  hold  llieir  Teooo1a»  oc  lent-fiee 
hmds,  granted  them  by  Ahmed  Shah  «nd  Kandir. '  In  addition  lo 
lhoee>  they  leoeive  three  montht  pay  in  the  year  when  on  actual 
aenrioeb  Thia  ia  a  anm  equal  to  £  10»  which,  with  -tlieir  landau  ia 
Tedconed  to  maike  theb  whole  pay  equal  to    40  per  annum. 

They  are  called  oat  by  ^  Enigma  older,  iaaned  tollie  chief  cfcadi 
dan,  end  by  him  notified  to  the  Khauna  nnder  him.  Tbty  aaaomhk 
the  men  due  by  their  several  subdivirions,  and  bdng  them  to  the 
fdeee  appointed  for  the  rendez%ous  of  tbe  anny,  where  they  ave 
mustered  and  roistered  before  the  King. 

The  men  of  each  clan  form  a  separate  corps,  called  Duateh*  ailb* 
divided  and  oommaxxled  apoording  to  deaoenft,  aa  in  the  civil  airaii0B- 
ment  of  the  claii. 

The  greater  jiart  of  the  JDooraimeea  only  «**cth1  the  liuig  defying 
military  operations. 

In  wars  carried  on  near  the  Dooraunee  country,  the  Kifl^  oould 
raise  as  mai>y  Dooraunees  as  he  could  pay. 

The  establisliment  of  the  Gholaum  Khauneh,  or  corps  of  Ghohimni 
Shauhs,  is  upwards  ol  thirteen  thousand  men. 


L^iyui^cd  by  Google 


OHOLAUMS  OR  KINOES  OUABD&  581 

•  it  wu  fint  Ibfmed  by  Aiuned  Shili»  of  1ih»  HBbbM  foreignm 
whom  he  fimnd  ertablithed  in  the  Doommee  cbuntry*  and  of  the 
trooiw  of  Nandii^s  mnj  and  other  Persiaiui  who  attached  thems^rca 
to  the  Donraimee  govenunent* 

-  He  aftenranb  recruited  them  irom  the  Taiqika  of  Canhul  and  the 
districts  romid  iL  An  arrangement  has  smce  been  made  with  thie 
dbi^  Toimd  Canbul  and  Feshawer*  for  supplying  men  from  their 
tribes  for  this  ooipa*  and  receiving  payment  by  assignments  of  land..* 