


Digitized  by  Google 


584  DAWATULLUB,  OE  VOLUmiSEB&  * 

From  the  smallness  ot"  their  pay,  it  is  found  difficult  to  get  volun- 
teers lor  ttus  service,  and  compulsion  is  almost  always  resorted  to. 
For  this  reason,  it  is  only  anionf^  the  tribes  about  great  towns,  or  on 
the  roads  made  use  of  by  armies,  that  the  Eeljanree  can  be  raised. 
As  in  most  cases  they  cannot  be  kept  long  togetlier,  or  carried  to  any 
distance  from  their  own  neighbourhood,  the  King  makes  little  use  of 
dii«  fiwoe.  Hie  Haakimft  of  provinoef  fiequentljr  Mionble  die  Ed- 
Janree^  whidi*  indeed,  is  in  geneind  ihe  onlj  detcnpUoo  of  troops 
diey  have  to  depend  on.  The  Eeljamee  of  Peshawer  hea,  however^ 
been  levend  times  odled  out  by  the  Kingi  particulsrlj  on  «Q  eoqpedi- 
tions  agunst  Cashnieer.  That  of  Caiibiil  has  aho  been  caUed  outoii 
milkary  service. 

The  numbers  of  the  Eeljauree  of  these  two  provinces  seem  to  be 
nearly  equal,  and  have  betm  of  different  amoant  from  fonr  to 
thousand  each,  according  to  the  state  of  ciioimstances.    Thej  seem 
liable  to  be  employed  on  public  woricB.  as  well  as  on  military  service  ; 
those  of  Caubul,  for  instance,  were  once  assembled  by  Timour  Shauh 

to  clear  a  canal  near  tlio  citv. 

The  Ecija\ireo  arc  ahnohi  all  infantry. 

They  receive  no  pay  wliatt  vor  from  the  King,  unless  they  should 
be  kept  above  three  months  in  the  field. 

Dawatullub  are  only  raised  i'oi  paiUciilar  expeditions. 

They  receive  five,  tomans  {£10)  when  they  enlist,  which  is  suffi- 
cient pay  for  one  csanpaign,  and  they  run  the  chance  of  the  umy's 
remaining  longer  in  the  field,  in  the  hope  of  providing  for  themsdves 
bj  plunder. 

Tliis  descriptioii  of  troops  are  always  most  numerous  in  eapeditions 
to  India.   On  sndbi  occasions  people  even  go>without  pay,  in  hopes 

of  plunder. 

In  foreign  invasions,  use  might  be  made  of  the  general  rising  of 
the  people,  called  in  the  A%haiin  country  Ooloossee.  This  sort  of 
army  has  been  described  in  speaking  of  the  tribes.  Only  those  of- 
the  tribes  nearest  the  scene  of  action  could  be  snqienr«l  toiue} 


Digitized  by  Google 


A£MS  AND  £QU1PH£NT&  ^SS 

iSbej  would  lie  imd«r  no  ragnktkiii  on  die  King's  ptgt,  and  no  good 
oodd  be  ezpeetad*  in  ngolar  «ctioafl»  fimn  ao  ungovernable  it  moliti- 
tude$  but  if  properlj  applied*  tiualund  of.finoe  ivonld  not  be  witb- 
■out  it»  advautagBB.  Lnpoitant  iltings  hm  often  taken  place  ftc 

public  objects,  not  immediately  cxNmected  with  die  tribeB  which  roaob 
Tluis,  in  the  Sbeeaii  and  Soonnee  fiagr  m  Cavbul»  all  the  neighbour- 
ing tribesi  eapeciaUy  the  ^Cohirtanneea,  came  to  the  aid  of  (heir 

religion. 

Ooloossee  troops  get  no  pay. 