

Th^  are  formed  into  Duateha»  and  ooaMuanded  by  DoonNmee 
filfdan ;  piwbably  by  those  who  have  the  government  of  their  tribes. 
Each  division  has,  besidest  a  subotdhiate .  ehicT of  ita  o«m.  iribflk 
When  they  are  ordered  out,  the  MnHIha  call  vpaa  the  esmcn  of 
land  to  furnish  their  proportbn ;  and  they  have  their  choice  tn  asm 
or  pay  fiir  a  snbstitute.  The  sum  to  be  paid  fiir  a  aufaatjUalie^  depends 
on  the  expected  duration  of  the  service  and  generally  is  from  five  to 
aeven  tomans  (firom  jfilO  to  jfil4)}  from  thifcthe  liead  of  the  village 
entertains  a  horseman,  generalfyat  three  tomana}  and.  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  procuring  a  person  to  serve  from  amnng  the  pOflrev 
people  in  the  village  or  its  neighbourhood. 


Dig'itized  by  Googl 


EEUAUBES. 


The  Dooraunee  chief  often  takes  the  money  instead  of  insisting  on 
receiving  the  horseman,  and  hj  this  means  the  real  atrangth  of  lilA 
Karra  Nokur  is  generally  under  what  it  is  rated  at. 

Besides  this,  the  King  not  unusually  receives  pavment  in  money, 
instead  of  tlie  number  ol'  Karra  Nokur  required  irom  a  particular 
tribe  or  district. 

The  men  who  go  on  service,  are  obliged  to  remain  with  the  army 
till  they  are  regularly  dismissed,  without  aiiy  allowajice  horn  tlie 
King,  or  any  further  advance  horn  the  head  of  their  village.  Each 
diviikm  ia»  however,  obliged  to  give  an  flUowmco  of  gNia  to  the 
fimiliwi  of  the  horaeaien  fumiflbed  by  it  SSnce  the  decline  of  the 
monarchy,  the  King  may  have  been  obliged*  by  the  wloit  of  power 
to  oomiieL  the  Eanra  Nolcur  to  swve^  to  make  th^  some  iUovRitoe 
while  on  aeivioe ;  but  that  ia  no.  part  of  the  cwilaitiition  of  this  body 
of  .men. 

Except  a  corps  not  exceeding  two  thowMnd,  which  il.due  fton 
the  Cohiataon  of  Caubnl*  the  Karra  Nokur  are  all  bonwh  •  •  - 

The  Ee^anree  are  a  militia  raised  on  extraordinary  oim^ons.  It 
seems  to  be  understood  that  the  number  to  he  furnished,  ought  to 
be  equal  to  a  tenth  ol'  the  population,  but  \h:it  number  ;>robably 
never  has  been  raised  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a<i milted  that 
the  King  may  call  out  a  stiil  greater  proportion,  it"  he  t) links  it  ne- 
cessary. The  persons  who  serve  in  the  Eeljaurce,  are  of  the  poorest 
classy.  They  receive  a  sum  cuiciil<iU;d  to  support  them  during  the 
time  ibr  which  their  services  are  likely  to  be  required } .  it  seldom  ex- 
ceeds five  rupees.  Thu  money  is  paid  by  the  head  of  each  village, 
end  the  ^Kpcnce  ia  defrayed  by  «  <mk  on  eU  the  iafaibiteDls  <if  die 
village  (Inftlwding  'Homs»uyiba>  or  tradenniD)i  who  do.not  poeiee* 
landt  Mbollahs»  and  other  persons  exempt  from  other  tsaei.  I 
have  heard  that  the  owners  of  land  who  payreveiroe^  are  not  obliged 
to  contrifaute  to  the  £djsm»;  and,  nt  the  lUm  Nokur  ai^  njmA 
aitiidy  at  the  espsnoe  of  this  deacription  of  mmf  the  &ot  of  €bmt 