

On  a  march  the  men  of  each  party  generally  keep  together,  bvA 
on  the  whole  they  move  with  verj'  little  order ;  though  there  are 
manv  officers  whose  duty  it  is  to  enforce  regularitv.  They  have  few 
catiip  followers  compared  to  an  Itidian  army,  and  what  they  have  are 
mostU  niounted.  The  custom  of  carrying  about  women  and  children 
on  service  is  not  practised  among  them.  They  have  light  tents  and 
little  baggage,,  carried  on  horses,  mules*  and  oamels.  A  small  basat 
accompanies  the  army. 

The  government  appears  rarely  to  take  any  trouble  about  provid- 
ing grain,  or  n^aking  preparations  of  any  sort  for  their  armies  ;  and  as 
the  habits  of  the  soldiers  adapt  themselves  to  this  system,  they  have 
less  difficulty  about  supplies  than  maie  legular  tioopa. 

The  usual  «>^«Jw  fiv  annies  are  from  twelve  to  sudden  miles. 

The  government  sometimes  gives  grain  to  the  troops,  and  on  very 
particular  occasions  it  sometimes  distributes  monqr  to  puicfaaae  pio» 
visions:  In  their  eastern  possesaioosb  the  inhabitants  of  wbich  bsnre 
scmcdiingof  the  submissive  cbarader  of  die  Indians,  ihe  a^hw> 
tzoopa  seise  on  gnon,  fevage^  firewood,  and  eveiy  thing  else  thej 
want,  widMNit  pajing  Ibr  any  thing ;  and  since  the  confbsioii  in  the 
government  these  irregularities  hsnre  seldom  or  never  been  punished | 
but  in  the  whole  of  tlie  country  west  of  the  KhjHber  pass,  thejr  are 
obliged  to  pay  for  every  artide  they  require. 

When  their  army  is  in  an  enemy's  country,  they  send  light  detad^ 
ments  to  make  incursions  (which  they  call  by  the  Turkish  name, 
Chepawid  or  Chepow)  either  against  particular  places  whkh  they 
eiMieftvoui  to  suxpiise^  or  to  plunder  the  open  country. 

3  z 


538 


CIVIL  WAHS. 


They  are  long  detained  by  sieges,  at  which,  as  might  be  supposed, 
thev  fire  very  unskilful,  and  which  are  prolonged  bv  the  nature  of 
their  armies  and  the  badness  of  iheir  artillery.  When  they  come  to 
a  general  engagement,,  their  plan  is  to  make  a  fiirions  charge  sword 
in  hand,  on  the  success  of  which  depends  tlie  fate  of  the  Imttle.  The 
Persians  appear  always  to  oppose  the  Hre  of  infantrv  to  this  charge, 
and  frequently  with  success :  this  was  the  ca&c  in  ail  2\uudir's  battles, 
and  in  the  recent  one  at  Heraut. 

The  Qonduct  of  the  Dooraunees  in  dieir  civil  wars,  givee  m  veij 
ipeBxi  idea  of  tlieir  military  chaiacter.  Timt  mam  are  vaj  smalli 
aaldgm.  exceeding  ten  tlwuflaiid  men  on  a  side*  and  these  axe  gene- 
xally  ill  paid  and  diflobiedient  Ibe  victoiy  is  decided  bftonieduera 
going  over  to  the  enemy ;  on  whidi  the  greater  part  of  the  ann j 
either  foUoira  his  example  or  takes  to  flight.  £ven  when  the  battle 
is  decided  by  die  sword*  diere  is  little  bloodshed,  and  thakis  diiefijr 
among  the  great  Khauns,  who  are  interested  in  the  result*  the  cdmR 
mon  s(^ers  shewing  much  indifference  to  the  issne^ 