

thetn  in  person,  and  drove  them  back  into  their  own  territory.  He  opened 
the  ei^e  of  Heraut  in  tJie  beginning  of  1731,  and  took  it  after  a  most  obsti- 
nate and  acti\  e  rcsistanre  of  tt-n  months,  in  which  the  Abdaullees  received 
some  assistance  from  tiie  Ciiuijics.  He  banished  the  leading  Siiddozjres  to 
Mouitan,.  and  compelled  a  large  force  of  Abdaulleeci  to  join  his  army. 

Tlie  of  Heraut  never  id)^ed  again,  but  tite  Abdanlleea  in  tihe 
oounixy  laept  up  tbe  war  for  some  time  hmger,  in  om^unctuNi  with  tfie 
Ghiljies  and  JSimauks. 

In  the  course  of  the  next  six  years  Naudir  reduced  the  Ghiljies  and  took 
Candahar.  Zoolfikaiir  Khaun  and  his  brother  Ahmed  Shauli  were  prisoners 
in  that  citv.  They  were  released  by  Naudir,  and  sent  into  Mazenderaun  in 
command  ui  a  force  of  their  own  tribe.  The  Abdaullees  having  in  tbe  mean 
ttme  dis^tingui&hed  themselves  in  his  servioe  (paiticttiady  against  the  Barte]^ 
ho  rewarded  them  with  the  lands  they,  now  hold  in  Teoofll»  fcnoviqg  them 
fiNun  the  west  of  Heraut  to  their  present  territory.  He  qipears  fiom  tlus 
time  to  have  shewn  great  attachment  to  the  Aighauna,  To  this  postttlily, 
among  other  causes,  is  attributed  his  murder  by  the  Persians  in  .Time  1747. 
On  the  day  which  succeeded  tli-it  event,  a  battle  took  place  between  the 
A%hauns  and  Uzbeks  under  Ahmed  >^liauh  on  one  side,  and  tbe  Persians 
OD  the  other.  It  is  un<%rtain  who  b^an  (ho  attack,  nor  does  the  event 
appear  to  have  decided  any  thing*. 


*  A«  til  a  iliia  I  have  geiwraUy  ioUowcd  Sir  WtUiom  JoDeK*!  tnnilation  of  the  Naudir  Naameh. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ammnz.]      FOEM  OF'AX 


mm 


'SHAUIPS  GOVCSMMENT. 


54d 


Afler  this  affair  Ahmed  Shaufi  fought  hi«  way  Uirough  tlie  greater  part  of 
Khorassaiin,  and  passing  the  tbi  utied  places  without  attacking  them,  repaired 
to  Candahar,  where  he  arrived  with  a  fi»ee  not  exceeding  two  or  thr^ 
thouHukl  hon& 

He  there  found  that  a  treeaiire  commg  fitom  bidiaftr  Nandhr  had[  just.been 

seized  by  the  Dooraunees,  and  he  immediately  claimed  it  for  himself :  some 
of  the  chiefs  at  first  hesitated  to  give  it  up  to  him,  though  liis  authoritv  as 
head  of  the  Sudduzyes  v.  n';  now  backed  hx  :i  militarv  force.  He  put  some  of 
the  most  obstinate  to  death,  and  met  wiUi  no  tiirther  opposition  in  his  tribe. 

lu  October  1747  he  was  crowned  at  Candahar:  Dooraunee»  Kuzzlebausb, 
Bdocfa^  and  HuMitnt-  ohieft  are  mentioDed  ae  aaristiag  at  the  mronatlqn. 
Ahmed  Shauh  was  then  very  ynong  s  a  contcM|iciaiy  butocian  auhca  huu 
only  twenly'three  years  of  age. 

He  spent  the  winter  in  Candahar,  settling  the  country  he  had  already 
acquired,  and  arranging  his  army  for  future  expeditions.  In  framing  his 
government  he  appears  to  have  had  the  model  of  tliat  of  Persia  before  his 
eyes.  The  forms  of  his  court,  the  great  oihcers  of  8tate,  tlie  arrangement 
of  the  annj,  and  thepretensibns  of  the  crown,  me^uetty  Ae  «anie  aa  thoae 
of  Naudir  Shaoh  $  but  the  di&renoe  m  the  sHnationa  4^  the  two  mooardia 
was  apparent  in  the  manner  in  which  Ahmed  Shauh  was  obliged  to  modify 
Naudir's  plan,  both  in  the  administration  of  his  internal  government, 
and  in  the  order  of  his  meaaorea  lor  advancing  his  power  at  home  an^ 
abroad. 