

ffltt«#«iii  cflfact  to  oppose  AhBMd  in  the.Md,  the  empenr  ndwutted,  and 
the  A^^ttnn  entered  DeUj*  ^riiich  raArad  aemfly  fiom  tbe  xipedtT;.  of  tin 

conqueror,  and  the  licence  of  his  troops.  After  remaining  for  some  time  at 
Delly,  Ahmed  Shauh  sent  Sirdar  Jehan  Khaun  against  the  Jauls.  The  Sir- 
dar  took  Bulhimgiir,  and  then,  advancing  by  a  rapid  march  on  Muttra,  sur- 
priscJ  the  place  during  a  Hindoo  festival.  A  promiscuous  shiughter  took 
place  on  tiic  army's  entering  tlie  town,  and  many  ot  tlte  liiuduoti  were  ailer- 
mwds  seUed  and  canned  into  daveiy.  Sirdar  Jebaa  Khaim  thin  advanced 
against  Agia»  and  was  rapnlsed  by  the  Jauts.  -  The  Doonunees  had  now 
passed  the  whole  of  the  summer  in  India,  and  as  they  were  becominig  eiu 
tremely  sickly,  Ahmed  found  it  necessary  to  retire  to  bis  own  dominions. 
During  his  stay  at  Dell> ,  he  and  hin  son  Timoor  Shanli  married  princesses  of 
the  royal  family  of  India.  Large  portions  were  gi\  en  -Mt!i  these  ladies,  and 
the  emperor  of  India  was  compelled  to  bestow  tiie  Punjuub  and  Hind  on 
Timoor  Shaiih*' 

Befofe  iUuned  Sfaanli  left  ])eUy»  he  fK?e  the  office  of  viaier  of  India  to  a 
brother  of  If  eer  Munnook  and  that  of  genecal  in  chief  to  Nujeeb  Khaun,  the 

A4^aun  chief  of  Seharunpoor,  who  had  recommended  himself  to  Ahmed  by 

joining  hiin  near  the  Sutledgc  on  his  advance  against  Delly. 

He  left  Timoor  Shaulj  to  command  flu-  provinces  on  the  east  of  the  Indus, 
under  the  guidance  of  Sirdar  Jehaun  ivliaun.  Their  force  consisted  of  a  lew 
Dooraunees  and  Persian  guaids  with  a  body  oi'  troops  raised  in  the  country. 
The  King  wintered  at  Candahar,  and  was  soon  after  engaged  in  setdh^db- 
tuibanoes  which  broke  out  in  Fecsin  and  Toorkestaim  $  bnt  of  which  I  can 
gather  no  particulars. 

He  had  scarcely  left  India,  when  Ghauzoodeen  Khaun,  who  had  fled  to 
Fnrruckabad,  then  in  possession  of  the  Marliattas,  retnnied  with  an  army  of 
tliat  nation  to  Delly,  and  laid  siege  to  the  city.  After  ounie  defence,  Nujeeb 
ICliaun  evacuated  the  place  and  retired  to  Seharunpoor.  Neaily  at  the  same 
time^veiyssfioasdiaturbancesooamencediotheF^au^  Hiey  were  ezdted 
by  Adeena  Bef^  who  had  iled  on  the  Shauh's  sfiproacli,  and  who  had  after-- 
wards  instigated  the  Siks  to  i  ehel,  and  defeated  a  division  of  the  royal  troops^ 
at  Jalinder.  He  had  also  invited  the  Mahratta  army  which  had  expelled 
Nujeeb  Khaun  from  Delly,  to  assist  in  recovering  the  Punjaub^  and  a  force  of 
that  nation  now  advanced  to  Sirhind,  ccnnmanded  by  Aagoba,  the  lather  of 
the  present  Paishwa. 

On  thii^  Tfanoor  fflumh  and  Sbdar  Jcbaan  Khann,  who  were  already 


Digitized  by  Google 