

.  IViththeodiartribeai  eiocf*  the  Ohiljies,  his  plan  waato  endaaffoor  to 
ftnnatpititef  attachaBent  to  their  native  Kii^*  which  be  might  hope  to 
accowipliwh,  by  delivering  them  from  fttei^  dimiiiiflw,  and  bj  a  modmaCe 

and  gradual  introduction  of  his  own  power. 

His  moderation  towards  the  Afghauns  mav,  however,  have  been  caused  in 
part  by 'other  motives,  as  he  eitiur  felt,  or  [ncUjidt  il  tn  teel,  a  strong  attach, 
ment  to  his  nation,  and  olten  gave  as  his  reaM>n  ior  not  attacking  refractory 
trilM^  dttt  1m  waa  nnwilli^g  to  bring  any  caUmity  upon  b»  countiymen. 

For  dieoonaafidationof  hiapowarathooMik  he  laliadf  in  a  great  aaaaaore^ 
en  the  effects  of  hie  ftieign  wars.  U  tlwaa  ware  auooamAd,  liis  victories 
would  raise  his  rqputatfcwi^  and  his  conquests  would  supply  him  with  tba 
aaaana  ci  nkamtainiDaananBT.andcf  f  ^tr'**ffTfy  *^>'>  Afirhawn  rhkifi  by  ftirwiia 


,  Digitized  by  Google 


Armvau']  FOLICT  OF  AHMED  SHAUH.  545 

and  rewards:  thr  hopes  of- plunder  would  induce  many  tribes  to  join  him, 
whom  he  could  not  easily  have  compelled  to  submit :  by  carrying  the  great 
men  with  his  army,  he  would  be  able  to  prevent  their  increasing,  or  even 
thor  ittflttenoe  in  thdr  tribes ;  and  the  habits  «f  militaiy  obedi- 
«ioe  woidd  prepare  than  for  a  dteofiil  submiaston  to  his  goveinment  at 
home :  the  troops  also,  having  ibe  King  continually  before  their  eyes,  and 
witnessing  the  submission  of  their  hercditan,-  chiefs,  would  learn  to  regard 
him  as  the  heaci  of  the  nation  j  and  lie  might  hope,  as  the  event  proved,  that 
his  popular  manners,  and  the  courage,  activity,  vigilance,  asid  otlier  military 
virtues  which  he  possessed,  would  impress  all  ranks  with  respect*  and  strongly 
attach  Mri  sddins  to  his  person. 

<  Hie  state  of  the  A^haun  natioD  and  of  the  suiroanding  ]dngdoniB»  mk 

favourable  to  the  execntioA  of  this  plan,  as  promising  security  to  his  own 
dominions,  however  ill  oi^ntsed,  and  oflbring  eiveiy  diance  of  success  in 
his  attacks  on  his  neighbours. 

The  Dooraunees  had  acquired  experience  and  discipline  by  their  long  and 
active  warfare  with  the  Persians,  and  afterwards  by  the  employment  of  a 
laige  body  of  them  under  Naudtr ;  and  the  preferenoe  shewn  Hmn  by  'that 
great  commander,  had  raised  their  spirit  and  oonfidcitice;  so  that  they,' with 
reason,  considered  themselves  as  the  best  troops  in  Asia.  Their  enonies, 
the  Ghiljies,  on  the  other  hand,  had  been  broken  and  dispirited  by  a  long 
course  of  defeat  and  disaster.  The  remaining  Af|2rhatins  had  learned  by  the 
events  of  the  period  which  had  just  closed,  to  despise  the  Indians,  and  to 
hate  the  Persians }  and  were,  therefore,  more  likely,  than  at  any  tormw 
period,  to  ftvmirtiie  estaWWmient  of  a  King  of  their  own  nation: 
'  Hie  state  of  foreign  powers  was  eqnaOy  finrouraMe. '  The  wedcness  of  the 
Indian  and  Uabek  empires  had  been  exposed  and  increased  by  their  contests 
with  Naudir.  The  Bcloches  liad  also  suffered  frmn  Naudir,  and,  probably, 
retained  a  sufficient  dread  of  the  Persians,  to  be  well  disposer!  to  snfimitto  a 
moderate  suhiection  to  their  old  allies,  the  Afghauns,  rather  than  expose 
themselves  to  the  severe  government  and  rigid  exactions  of  their  other 
ndghbours.  Nusseer  Khann  (the  brothev  of -Moliulibet  Ihtf  BeloduB  diief ) 
had  been  a  hostage  wllh  Naudir,  and  qipeacs  to  hsvn  fidlen  into  the  iiands 
Ahmed  Shauh.  The  Eimauks  and  Haaauiriis  had  never  been  ftnntddblfl^ 
and  their  vicinity  to  the  capital  and  to  the  country  of  the  Dooraunees, 
prevented  all  apprdiennon  of  thor  endewnunng  to  assert  their  inde*' 
pendence. 