

The  Persians  had  long  been  accustomed  to  entire  submission  to  a  despotic 
govenunent^  and  had  alwaya  been  attached  to  their  aovcreigns.  Tht  dynasty 
which  had  long  nded  them  waa  omtumed  by  the  A%haunss  and  in  the 
beginning  of  Naudir's  career,  Faiaia  waa.gniamng  under  a  fiireign  yoke : 
Naudir  took  on  himself  the  character  of  the  deliverer  of  his  country,  and  the 
restorer  of  its  native  kings  :  he  connected  himself  by  marriage  with  the  royal 
family  ;  and  when  he  hail  siifhciently  secured  tlie  affections  of  the  army,  and 
Che  respect  of  the  people,  he  coniined  the  lawiul  King,  and  traiuiierred  hia 
authori^  to  hin^etf.  . 

Suooeeding  to  an  eatabliahed  monaiehy,  he  mtat  witfi  no  aerionaonpoaitioii 
in  Persia,  and  was  enabled  from  the  moment  of  Mi  accemion,  to  empby  the 
whole  force  of  the  kingdom  in  foreign  conquests. 

Ahmed  Shauh,  on  the  contrary,  had  to  found  a  monarchy  over  a  warhkc 
aud  indepentlpnt  peopk',  by  no  means  attached  to  that  t'ortn  of  government  j 
those  most  accu&toincU  to  be  governed  by  a  King,  hud  only  felt  his  power  in 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


^  ,  POLICY  OF  AHMED  SHAUH.  LArruimx. 

the  means  which  were  used  to  compel  them  to  pay  tribute  to  a  foreign  states 

and  had  ever  regarded  liim  as  a  powei  ful  enemy,  rather  than  a  magistrate  hj 
whom  thev  were  protected,  and  to  wlium  ihev  owed  loyaltv  and  attAcliment. 
They  had  never  been  united  under  a  native  Kmgj  and,  irom  the  love  of  equality 
m  CQia§fAcwm  in  tliQir  chaiMter,  tliuy  ipeie  Ithdy  to  vieir  the  <iilt>tioB  of 

Hiis  difference  of  the  sttiuition  in  which  Ahmed  Shonh  was  placed,  from 
that  of  Naudir,  made  -a  corresponding  variation  in  his  poliry.  His  first 
object  was  to  secui'e  the  atfections  of  his  own  tribe,  on  whom  he  dei)ended 
for  permauent  support,  as  well  as  for  immediate  assistance.  For  thin  pur- 
pose he  confirmed  the  Dooraunees  in  the  poasessicMi  of  theit  lands,  requiring 
no  Mcriflce  ftom  them,  but  the  attei^Mioe  of  tiieir  oontiiigeiit  of  troopg  m 
isod  Iqr  Nindir.  Hedistraniledidl&egMitafficMorhiaMir  ttatea^^ 
tibe  letdiaig  DoofaillieM,  and  established  thoM  oAoea  in  pvtiailar  families 
in  the  same  manner  in  which  he  fixed  the  crown  on  his  own ;  he  M}  the 
hereditar}'  chiefs  in  posses •< ion  of  their  privileges,  and  seldom  interi  m  rod  tn 
the  internal  government  ol  their  clans,  except  in  such  a  degree  m  was  neces* 
Bory  to  keep  up  his  army,  and  to  preserve  the  general  tranquillity ;  which  he 
ihntfi  tfibduaUy  He  took  pmnt  to  mftavt  the  advantage  Jit 

darivcd  fiwD  the  leneot  of  "die  Dtoatamieea  Sot  iht  Suddocvea  •  aWMHwh  he 
probably  regarded  many  of  that  family  with  jealousy,  aa  Ina  rivals  in  the 
attachment  of  his  tribe  ;  he  always  niaintaJned  their  privileges,  and  enforced 
the  exercise  of  the  respect  which  was  due  to  them.  Stories  are  told  of  his 
severely  pumstiing  hyuiwa  to  SuddozyeSt  even  when  offered  in  supporting  his 
own  cause.^ 