

In'  tiie  ooune  of  this  Mason  the  Mahiattaa*  exerted  theniMhret  to  repair 
their  looes^  and  a  powerfiil  amy  of  their  nation  arrived  from  die  Decan, 
commanded  by  Wisswas  Row,  tllie  heir  apparent  of  the  empire,  and  Shed^ 
dasheo  Row,  whom  the  duastrous  issue  of  this  campaign  has  made  so  iamoui 
in  India  under  the  name  of  the  Bhow.  They  besieged  Del!y,  which  WM 
surrcndcretl,  at\er  a  s^pirited  dctlnce,  by  a  small  party  of  Dooraimees. 

The  Sliauli  wa^  at  this  time  cut  oil' by  the  Jumna  from  assisting  tiis  troops 
on  tile  rigiiL  bank  of  that  river.  The  same  cause  prevented  his  relieving 
Cooijpoava,  nxtf  imilea  nc»th  of  Defly,  vrbidi  waa  tidcen  abnoet  in  sight  of 
the  Dooraunee  army,  rurw  advanced  to  the  river ; 

perated  the  Shauh  to  nmch  that  he  reaolved  immediately  to  craaa  the  river  at 
all  ha«atdB»  and  bring  the  enemy  to  aotiML    His  passage  was  effected,  wHh 

Rome  loss ;  and  the  Mahrattas,  discouraged  by  tlic  alacrity  with  whicli  the 
King  sought  a  battle,  retire<J  to  l'anni{)ut,  where  they  soon  after  entrenched 
themselves.  With  thiw  position,  and  their  vaiit  train  of  artillery,  Uiey  were 
secure  from  any  attack ;  but  the  distresses  of  an  army  consisting  cbiefly  of 
hofai^  cooped  up  in  an  entrenched  camp»  may  be  eaaOy  ooncesvedf  and  Ih^ 
were  augmented  by  the  activity  of  the  Doorauneesp  vrlio  were  onremlttiiijf 
in  their  ezertiona  to  cnt  off  all  supplies  from  the  enemy*!  camp.  Hie 
Mahrattas,  however,  remained  in  this  state  for  three  or  four  months,  diuing 
which  time  many  partial  actions  took  place,  and  some  indirect  ovfsrtorea  of 
peace  were  made  by  them  through  Shoojaoodoula. 

The  Dooraunee  army  also  suffered  from  the  want  of  supplies ;  but  the 
patience,  vigilance,  and  activity  of  Ahmed  Shauh,  enabled  him  to  sunnount 
oBOBt  of  the  difficoities  that  he  met  with ;  and  the  confidence  whidi  the  troops 
repoaed  on  him,  and  the  temper  and  moderation  with  which  he  treated  his 


•  The  transaction*  of  tliis  pt-riod,  and  the  details  of  the  battle  of  PannJput,  arc  given  with  great 
■tpiiit  and  appearaace  of  accuracy  hj  a  contemponvy  hiatariait,  wImw  aamtive  appears  in  Ed^IuIi, 
fail»iliiifd«aliraKoftheA)ntie  R«MMcl^  TIptMaeeoint  f  litf  tmetoitleray  indtni  bat 

some  pasvagc!^'  in  it  prctcnt  so  livi  ly  a  pictwre  of.tbe  prioeipil  MtiOCI  IB  time  10608%  that  I  Onotfi* 
jrain  from  q^uoting  them  if  thii  place. 


L^iLjui^cd  by  GoogI 


Apmron.}  BATTLE  OF  PANNTPUT.  553 

Indian  tSBett  prarented  any  discontent  or  disaflbction  in  his  camp}  iHiileflit 
fuflferincrs  of'fTic  Mahrattas  were  home  with  impatience,  aB  tluj  Wtn'VBim^ 
lally  imputed  to  the  errors  ot' their  commander.  • 

