

He  vea  aware  that  'nnoor  Shauh  entered  1900  Ae  mur  with  raiofilanoih 
and  would  be  happy  to  withdraw  from  the  fatigue  and  danger  of  an  UdldB 

campaign,  if  he  could  do  so  without  losing  his  reputation.  He  therefore 
gave  him  the  credit  of  a  victorv  and  sent  the  principn)  Moolbhs  imd  rclipnns 
men  of  Bokhaura  to  huu  to  conjure  him,  by  the  Kuranii,  ami  tlu  ir  commoa 
faith,  to  spare  tiie  blood  of  the  Musauhnan*  by  yielding  10  his  supplicationa 
fir  poaeau  leeee  wm  aceeedingly  made,  and  Shauh  Monnid'a  aan  waaant 
to  l^noor'a  can^  iAuxc  he  ivaa  hauotAlty  received,  and  nunadiately  die* 
miawd.  Xhioug^  the  vhoile  traneaction*  Shauh  Moraud  iheired  tike  utnaet 
aeqteei end  submission  to  Timoor. Shanh  ^  bathe  retained  all  his  conqneilaalr 
the  pence  ;  while  the  other  failed  in  every  object  of  his  eipoditiont  BKioefit 
that  of  securing  his  remaining  dominions. 
The  winter  was  so  iar  advanced  betore  Timoor  marched  on  his  retun^ 

4  c  2  • 


56^ 


WAR  WITH  THE  KING  OF  BOKHAITRA.  CAmmm. 


that  he  was  forced  to  leave  his  artillery  in  Bulkh,  and  many  of  his  tfOOfM 
perished  from  the  cold  and  snow  in  crossing  the  Indinn  CaiirasTii.  ' 

Arsilla  KixauD,  chief  of  the  Upper  Memunds,  wlio  iiati  more  tiian  once 
distinguished  himiielf  in  Tiikioor  Shauh's  foreign  expeditiona,  had'iebdtod, 
dDrii^  the  ivar  in  TooikiBtsOk  and  had  infested  the  loadB  between  Mnwer 
end  the  caf^lal.  f 

-He  afterwafdt  gttve  lumaelf  tip  to  the  prince  irho  eommaiidcil  at  Pesha- 
wer,  and  Timoor,  without  regarding  his  voluntary  surrender,  or  the  prince's 
solicitation  for  his  pardon,  "ordered  him  to  be  delivered  to  some  of  his  trihe 
with  whom  he  bad  a  deadly  feud,  and  by  them  he  was  immediately  put  to 
death.  Tliis  circumstauce  regarded  by  the  A^hauns  m  a  great  staiu  oti 
Timooir'a 

*  In  the  qiting  of  1793,  Hmoor  Shauh  was  taken  ill  cm  a  jooniey  from 
pMhawer,  *  anil  died  at  Caubul  on  the  20th  of  May,  1795. 

•  At  the  time  of  Ttmoor  Shauh's  death  f,  nothing  was  settled  respecting  the 
succesRion  to  the  throne.  He  had  himself  named  no  heir.  Tlie  eldest  and 
most  conspicuous  of  the  prince;?  were  absent.  Hooroayoon  was  governor  of 
Candahar,  and  Mahmooii  held  the  same  office  at  Ueraut.  Prince  Abbass 
«ai 'governor  of  Beahawer,  but  had  joined  hia  father  on  hearing  of  his  iUneea* 
The  other  piinoea  weee  all  at  Canbiil,  except  FetooEthe  fiiU  brother  of  Mah> 
mood*  irfao  wm  with  that  prince  at  Heraut. 

'  Timoor  Shauh  was  no  sooner  dead  than  an  intrigue  was  set  on  foot  to 

secure  the  crown  to  Shauh  Zemann.  It  rrirrifd  on  by  Timoor  Shauh's 
favourite  queen,  who  prevailed  on  Siral'rauz  Khuun,  the  liead  of'tlie  Bawrik- 
zyes  to  join  in  her  scheme,  and  by  iiis  means  secured  the  interest  of  most  of 
the  Dooraunee  Khauns. 