


OMi  3  the  onlf  creditable  account  oi  that  ibroe  I  have  mcd,  ittlial  Ir  tlwAijMk  Rnean^  vhJdi 
Bwhei t^efar.cavdrj  tcyemty  tlyMri>4  ttteir  »&a>ry  jftwa  thaippaA  llff  kid , not, Im that 
two  boadivd  fBiua 

*  Mabijce  Sindii,  wboM  troops  wen  dudplided  m  ike  Ewwffnii  nimr, 

t  About  thu  time  Ahmt  d  Sluufi  sent  an  embassy  to  China,  and  the  envoy  OQ  ijllttVnji.JMMe  iA- 
account  of  bit  embassy     1  could  not  procure  a  copy  of  thi>  curious  work     '  '  . 

'4b  S 


Digitized  by  Google 


SIXTH  AMD  LAST  EXPEDITION  TO  INDIA,  LAmwmk. 


keahh  now  began  to  decline,  and  a  SCDiftle  **ir"  cf  Int  activity  ii 

observable  from  this  time  forward.    His  complaint  was  a  cancer  in  his  face; 

it  seems  to  have  first  afflicted  him  sevprely  in  1 764,  and  it  rontiniied  to  do  sa 
till  his  death,  which  it  occasioned.  He  was,  huwevt  r,  cf)itipL41ed  to  exert 
hiiii!»eli  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  by  the  increased  power  oi  the  Sik^ 
who  seem  to  have  become  masters  of  all  the  open  country  as  far  west  as  the 
Bydaspes,  Aliaiedwtiit  in  pertoB  ^aiMt  lliem  id  1767,  and  drove  Hmoi 
%pMB  inCo  Ute  nountiiiis  j  bul  tlii*  eqieditioD*  dw  laat  he  nede  in  Induib 
WM attended  by  no  petmanent  benefit:  as  toon  at  the  Sbauh  had  quitted  the 
eoontry,  tlie  Sks  speared  in  giceter  force  than  evcft  end  before  the  end 
of  the  next  year  (1768),  they  crossed  the  Hydaspes,  and  took  the  famous 
fortress  of  Rotass  from  the  Daornunees.  The  Sfiaiih  was  about  to  exert 
himself  to  wipe  off  this  disgrace,  when  liis  attention  was  called  to  a  rebellion 
in  Kikorasaaun,  occasioned  by  Naussir  OoUaii  Meersa,  tiie  son  of  iShauh 
Bokh  Sheohi 

The  A%faaiuM  state  that  all  tlie  cfatefi  inBenia,  except  Keieem  Kbaim 
Zen4  ime  engaged  in  thia  war,  and  their  eombined  fiwoe  geve  hattla  t» 

Ahmed  Shauh's  army,  under  the  command  oTfaia  son  prince  Timoor,  in  the 
nej^bouibood  of  Meshhed.  The  battle  was  well  contested,  and  its  issue 
was  more  than  doubtful,  when  it  was  restored  by  the  valour  of  Nuaseer 
Khaun,  the  chief  of  the  Beloches,  and  ended  in  a  complcis  \  ictory:  the 
Fersiaa  army  took  refiige  with  Shauh  Kookh  Shauh,  who  lavoured  their 
Mci^pe,  and  admitted  them  into  tfeihfaed*  It  m  leduMMd  impious  to  fire. 
4NI  diet,  aacnd  diy,  which  eonteui*  the  tomb  of  the  InMunn  Rene  s  and 
Ahmed  Sbauh  wes»  therefore,  obtiged  to  employ  a  blockade  to  lednoe 
which  succeeded  ^er  several  months.  Shauh  Rokh  Shauh  gntn  Ui  dtitf^ 
ter  to  Timoor  Shauht  end  agreed  to  lufniib  »  oentiwgwit  of  tniqpi-to  mrvn 
with  Ahmed  Shauh. 

During  the  siege  of  MesJihed,  a  detachment  was  scut  to  take  Tubbus, 
which  held  out  against  the  Dooraunees.  It  was  defended  by  Alii  Mui  daun 
Khaiin,  an  Arab  chief  of  the  Zengooee  tribe.  The  detachment  was  under 
Sifder  Jeheun  Khaon.  asivm  inpeit  oompoaedef  Bolochmvndcr  Itoem 
Khaun.  It  me  oompleteljr  ancceiafid;  Alfi  Mmdaun  wm  IcBled,  mnl  Tbh- 
bns  taken. 