

it  is  not  ^  leart  zeinailable  divunMrtance  in.tfaii  ainguiar  attempt,  that 
very  few  of  IVsiaooOah's  troops  were  aoquaiiited  with  Ins-  design  against  the 
King,  and,  that  on  discovering  his  intention  after  they  had-  raadbed'Ballft 
Hiasaur,  HMfiy  of  them  refused  to  stand  by  him.  Among  these  was  a  nephew 
of  his  own,  whom  he  rut  down  at  the  gate  for  rcfijsing  to  enter  the  palaces 
No  distinction  was  made  between  the  innocent  and  the  guilty  in  thesUi^glittf 
which  follow  cd. 

In  178 1,  Timoor  Shauh  went  in  pei-son  to  recover  Moultaun,  which  had 
been  betrayed  by  the  govonoi:  into  the  hands  of  Ae  SIks.  He  sent  a  light 
fttoe  in  advanoei^ainst  a  Sik  armj  near  MooHwid,  which  moved  on  lij  Toiy 
nfid  merdies,  surpriBed  the  Siks,  and  totally  defeated  them.  Hie^'dly 

was  taken  after  a  siege  of  a  few  days,  and  the  garrison  was  ordered  tO"  be 
escorted  to  their  own  c.inntr\^  bnt  from  want  of  discipline  in  the  army, 
they  were  afterwards  attacked  and  j)iUaged,  and  some  of  them  murdered. 
■.  About  this  timi^  broke  out  the  rebellion  of  the  Talpoorees,  which  ended 
in  the  expulsion  of  the  governor  of  Sind.  'In  the  oouiie  of  the  -next  yea^; 
the  KuQg  sent  a  fijcoe  onder  Muddnd  Kbaun  to  tednoe  Iheinsnigenl^  whidi 
soon  overran  the  whole  province.  The  Talpooiecs  lethed  to  thm  <»%inal 
desart,  and  the  other  inhabitants  appear  to  have  fled  to  the  hills  and  jungle^ 
to  avoid  the  Dooraimec  army.  Muddud  Khaun  laid  waste  the  coinitry  with 
fire  and  sword;  ami  so  severe  were  his  ravages,  that  a  dreadful  tamiuc  fol- 
lowed his  campaign  i  and  the  province  ol  ibxnd  is  said  not  yet  to  have  recovered 
from  what  it  Btiflbred  on  that  occaikm.  At  hst,  Muddud  Khaun  returned 
to  Csndahar,  leanqg  the  deposed  governor  in  undistnzbed  possession  of  the 
province;  but  thia  quiet  was  of  short  dumtion:  the  lUpooiees  returned  as 

4  c 


Digitized  by  Google 


fifiS  WAK  WITH  THE  KINO  OF  IK>KHAUBiL  CAmvoo. 


Mott  w  Muddud  Khaun  had  nUni,  wffdn  caqNUtd  Iks  gomna^  ni 

recovered  the  whole  of  SimL 

Timoor  Shauh  allowed  a  considerable  time  to  pass  before  he  made  any 
fiirtlier  aUcmin  to  reiiucr  Sind,  and  it  was  proliaUiy  a»  late  as  1786  diat  he 
sent  auother  army  into  that  country,  commanded  by  Ahmed  Khaun  Nooizye. 
Thi«  army  was  inferior  to  the  fint  io  fince,  and  im  Cfvideotly  nnWIWI^ 
tmnmuM,  Hut  lUpoofCM  did  not  now  fly  £nm  Sbd»  Imt  riitilwd 
tmopi  — »^  novied  ^jnwt  itiim<>d  KIimitij  who  iiiiflh'Pil  hinwlf  to  Im  ltd 
into  an  ainbiMGade*  was  defeated  with  grwt  loas,  and  compelled  to  MbMift 
to  i^iikarpoor.  The  Sindees  who  had  before  sent  a  vakeel  to  Timoor  Shauh, 
now  redotibled  their  etibrts  for  an  accommodation.  Their  ^  rikpcl  appeased 
the  King  by  the  most  humble  protessions,  secured  the  ministers  by  great 
bribes,  and  at  last,  on  the  Talpoorees  agreeing  to  pay  the  fiarmer  revenue  to 
tiM  King,  a  lukkitmwM  lined  appointing  the  principal  of  tharii,  liver  I^rilah 
Alii,  to  the  government 