

Hie  decfty  was  oot  severely  feh  in  Tbnoor  Shaufa's  time ;  but  its  oeai> 
meiieement  WW  even  tiiea  observable^  and  it  .has  advanced  bjr  lapid  alfidai 
under  the  reigns  of  his  siiooesBors. 

The  flrHt  remarkable  event  of  Timoor*s  reign  was  the  rebdUai  of  lus  rda* 
tiou  Abdoolkhaulik  Khaun,  which  probably  happened  in  1774-5.  AbdooU 
khauliV:  sncrepfled  in  assembling  a  force  ol"  Dooraunees  and  Ghiljies  superior 
in  numbers  to  tiiose  the  King  luui  embodied}  the  latter,  however,  were  dis- 
ciplined troops  under  experienced  leaders,  and  would  probably  hsnre  bean 
victoiiocH^  even  if  a  detemuned  reatstanoe  had  been  oflbred*  but  two  Mdtj 
who  were  supposed  to  have  raised  their  dans  for  Abdoolkkantik,  earned  tbssa 
straight  to  the  Kingi  and  an  unexpected  turn  of  this  kind  is  generally  decip 
nve  in  a  Dooraunee  civil  war.  Abdoolkhaulik  was  defeated,  taken,  and 
blinded,  and  the  tranquillity  of  the  Dooraunee  couTitry  was  soon  restored. 
From  this  till  1781,  though  there  were  Insurrections  (>t'\ariou«  extent  and 
conaequcuce  lu  Bulkli,  Khorassaun,  See&taun,  aud  Caahmeer,  yet  there  is  but 
one  wbick  requires  particular  nolioB. 

It  took  place  in  the  year  1779,  and  .was  undettahen  bj  the  Sshebaadda  of 
Chumkunee,  a  dervise  of  great  sanctily*  fixr  tiio  purpoae  of  murdering 
Timoor  Shauh  and  placing  his  brother  FriD<^  Seconder  on  the»throne.  The 
instrument  he  employed  was  Fcizoollah  Khalm,  a  chief  of  the  Khulleds, 
who  entered  on  this  conspiracy  as  the  means  of  revenging  his  private 
wrongs. 

ThsB  man  <^tained  the  King's  permission  to  levy  troops  for  an  attack  00 ' 
Ae  FOqanb^  and  abon  assembled  a  ooosidefabla  Munberof  Afghaan%  diU^ 
of  the  Kfaybor  tribes.  Wbea  bis  plot  was  ripe  ftrenevtioo^  he  aiaNMhii 


Digitized  by  Google 


iu-pEBDix.]       EEBELUON  OF  THE  PROVINCE  OF  SIND.  561 

tfOOpf  to  the  citadel  of  Peshawett  jftn  pratance  of  shewing  them  to  the  King : 
when  he  reached  the  citadel,  lie  put  the  guards  at  the  gntes  to  death,  and 
rushed  with  all  his  troop?  into  the  place.  Timoor  Sliauli  had  only  time  to 
retire  to  the  ujjper  story  ot Oin  oi  the  buildings  of  the  palace,  from  whence 
he  made  iiis  situation  known  tu  ius  guaids.  The  Gbolami  5iiaulis,  and  the 
£igw  DoomnKW  Hriio  ware  tim^  nmiMdntdy  MMmlklMlf  Mid  nude  ft  terrible 
dMigliter  among  FeisoQilah's  men.  FeisociUalL and  his-.mm'  were  taken  pii. 
iMNien  and  put  to  death,  after  Inmng  endured  the  torture  without  disooveriog 
iSbar  aoconqilioea.  Stroi^  fuspicion<;  afterwards  fell  on  the  Sahebzadeh,  and 
the  King  was  so  far  conxnnced  of  his  guilt  as  to  order  him  to  be  seized ; 
but  the  whole  of  the  Afgliaun  chiefs  at  court  interpouug  in  his  iavour,  no 
further  enquiry  whs  made.  •  • ' '    •    *  '       '     '  ■  ♦ 