


Digitized  by  GoogI* 


AmDix  j       FUOHT  OF  HAHHOOD  TO  BQKHAtTKA. 


573 


Persians  as  should  enable  him  to  retake  Herant ;  or  at  least  to  «!^riire  fiwr 
himself  «oinc  (uIi'm  part  of  the  Dooraunec  domimons  in  Persian  Khurassaun. 
He  had  not,  however,  be^n  long  at  Ueraut,  whea  he  received  accounts  of 
theratiMlitfnittelkiyit  ShMill,  -wki  lud  fiibd  in  his  attcmpli  in  Kho^ 
riniiwin  s  tiDd  mmu  aftor  Shaoh  Zanunm  vithdreir  to  Candahnv  "tArnt  hft 
remained  during  the  printer  of  1799. 

Not  laog  after  Zemaun  had  arrived  at  Candahar,  aa  vaamuxtm&X  attenqpt 
Has  made  on  Heraut  by  Shauh  Mahmood. 

The  flight  of  tliat  prince  to  Toorshish,  on  the  taking  of  Heraut  (in  1797), 
has  already  been  mentioned }  he  soon  after  repaired  to  the  Persian  court, 
where  he  was  kindly  reoeifed. 

In  die  spring  of  the  next  year  (1798),  he  k£t  iJw  odmt  and  xeCifed  lint  to 
fTantiBniii  and  tbm  to  Twffahtw  He  fcaBakied  thtfo  tiU  ^imm^  of  1900^ 
when  he  acoon^panied  the  King  of  Persia  on  the  expedition  into  Khorassaun, 
whicli  I  have  just  mentioned.  He  remained  in  Khorassaun  after  the  King  of 
Persia  liad  retired,  and  endeavoured  to  stir  up  some  of  the  chief*;  of  that 
country  to  assist  hmi  in  tlie  attack  on  Heraut.  After  failing  in  1  oorsiiish 
and  Tubbus,  he  succeeded  in  procuring  tiie  support  of  Mehr  AlU  Khaun,  the 
ndwof  Kaiiin  andBerjend:  and  be  now  advanoad  agaiwt  Heraot  witli  tan 
thwmand  men  belonging  to  that  chjafc  He  nittt  have  marched  from  Be^«id 
vitbin  a  montli  or  two  after  Shauh  Zemaun  left  Heraut. 

At  Izfezuiir,  lie  was  encountered  by  a  force  sent  by  Prince  Kyser  from 
^eraut,  which  lie  defeated.  He  then  advanced  and  invested  Heraut:  bis 
operations  were  at  tirst  successful,  but  Wuftadar  having  managed  by  an  artful 
expedient  to  render  Mahmood  suspicious  of  a  design  on  the  part  of  Melu 
Alti  to  betnj  hini,  that  timid  prinoe  anddenly  quitted  hia  eamp  in  the  night, 
and  Mehr  Alii  nas  obliged  to  setreat  witli  pi«d|iitalion  to  hia  own  territmy, ' 
which  be  reached  afler  encountarioig  great  difficoHiea  in  the  demrt  tract  be- 
tween Heraut  and  Berjund. 

Mahmoofl  i!i  the  mean  time  continued  his  flight  into  Tartnry,  and  at  last 
reached  tlit  c  t  u  t  of  Hf>khaura,  He  there  met  with  a  friendly  and  honorable 
reception,  aud  had  remained  for  some  time  at  one  of  the  King's  palaces, 
wbm  an  agent  arrifed  fiom  Shauh  Zemaun  to  vamonatrate  with  Sbanh  Mo* 
iaud  for  granting  him  $fi  asylum,  and  to  requeit  that  the  King  of  Boichaora 
would  deliver  bim  up  to  Ua  omi  aovereign,  against  whom  be  bad  rebelled* 
The  agent  is  said  to  have  been  authorized  to  promise  a  large  pecuniarjgrati* 
fication  to  the  King  of  Bokhaura  on  Mahmood's  being  delivered  up.  It  ia 
not  quite  certain  how  these  applications  were  received :  there  can  be  litUe 