

Shauh  Zciiiiiua  tiieii  returning  to  P^hawer,  Hoomauyoon  again  appeared 
at  the  head  of  a  ibrce,  but  he  was  defeated  by  the  King's  lieutenants*  and 
after  a  long  flight»  he  waa  aabed  atleia,  on  tiie  eaat  «f  tfat  Jndni^  waa 
bUndad,  andpaaaadthereitof  UaHfeinoodfawment 

Hmh  fiu-  StiMoh  Zemaun't  government  had  proceeded       reaaonahle  cott* 

duct,  and  with  great  success.    His  claim  to  the  throne  was  now  undiluted, 

and  his  anthority  established  over  all  the  country  left  by  Timoor  Shauh.  The 

King  himself  was  active  and  entcr])ri2ing,  and  his  capacity  seemed  sufficient, 

with  the  support  of  those  quahtiesi  to  have  remedied  the  mistakes  of  hia 

la 


Digrtized  by  Google 


Sn  •  CHARACTER  OF  SILVUH  ZEMAUN.         .  CAnma. 

fiithei^s  admuustration,  and  restored  thd  ■  DoorauniM  afidn  to'the  tmfai'iB 

which  they  were  left  by  Ahmed  Shauh. 

Notwithstanding  some  defects  in  his  character,  and  some  erroneous  mnxtms 
in  his  policy}  Shauh  Zemaun  would  probably  have  fulfilled  theiie  expecta- 
tion^ if  he  liad  resolved  to  govuru  ibr  liinuieli';  but  by  committing  the  whole 
of  fafls  poven  and  duties  to  an' unworthy  favourite,  he  invohwd  hiiiwdf  in  • 
ejniem  of  meeauies' whidi  ww  niinoufl'to^his  o^-fitttanea  and  to  llie  peoa^ 
perity  of  his  nation.  «  > 

The  first  object  of  his  attention  ought  to  have  been  to  secure  the  support 
of  his  own  tribe,  on  wliicli  so  much  depended  in  the  original  plan  of  the 
monarchy  t  liad  lie  succeeded  in  this  particular,  the  internal  quiet  of  his 
country  would  liave  been  at  once  secured.  In  his  Ibreign  policy,  his  first 
nhjcrt  might  tn  harr  hnrn  tn  dnftmd  ffhnT—ann  The'pover  of  Beraieima 
nowxpoBolidated  in  tiie  handa  an  active  prince^  'who  had  akeady  turned 
hia  attontion  to  the.oonquest  of  that  pro\ince ;  and  sooie  eicertioa  on  the 
pmt  of  Shauh  Zemaun  was  obvious^  requifed  to  check  hiapfagieaB }  such  « 
course  was  indeed  nece^sarc  to  the  j«nccess  even  of  his  eastern  expeditions. 
India  was  as  much  altered  as  Persia  since  the  time  of  Alnned  Shauh,  and 
nothing  was  to  be  gamed  Uiere,  but  by  long  and  unmturrupted  operations. 
There  were  no  longer  treasures  ait  DeUy  to  reward  a  mardi  to  that  city ;  and 
the  mote  demnble  ohject  of  xedudng  llie  Punjaub,  was.  not  to  be  aooam-^ 
plished  by  a'  hatty  incursion,  .  The  plan-oppoeed  by  the  Stka  to  Ahosed 
Shauh,  which  was  to  evacuate  their  countr)'  on  his  approach,  and  return 
when  his  army  was  withdrawn,  could  only  be  baflied  by  keeping  a  force  in 
the  country  Hnfficient  to  retain  possession  ;  and  that  measure  could  only  be 
accomplished,  when  the  western  frontier  was  secure. 

.  The  plan,  actually  adopted  by  Sliauh  Zemaun  was  almost  the  reverse  of 
that  which  has  been  sketched.  He  widened  the  breach  between  the  Doo- 
rauneea  and  the  court :  he  made  no  serious  efibrt  to  save  Khonssann ;  and 
his  ill-directed  and  ill-timed  attempts  at  Indian 'ooiqitesC^  tended  oolyto 
frustrate  that  favourite  object  of  his  ambition. 