

.  In  the.  month  .of  December,  1793,  Shaoh.  Zemann  marched  to  Peshawer, 
with  the  intention  of  iaomedistdjr  invading  India}  but  this  resolutton  was 

soon  ilropt,  from  the  Shauh's  conviction  that  his  own  dominions  were  not 
Rufficieatly  settled,  to  admit  of  his  embarking  in  foreign  expeditions.  Great 
confusion  had  indeed  arisen  in  the  remote  provinces  immedi;ite!v  on  the 
death  of  Timoor,  when  tiie  suspension  of  tlie  powers  of  government,  and 
tlie  prospect  of  a  disputed  succestiiou,  encouraged  ibreign  enemies,  and  in- 
dnced  ambitions  sobjecti  to  attempt  their  own  aggrandisement.  . 
■  The  most  serious  danger,  that-wfaich  threatened  him  on  the  aideof -Toor- 
Idstanoy  had,  ,however»  panod  over  by  this,  tiipe.  Sbmh  Moraud,  who  had 


Digitized  by  Google 


BBHBLLIOK  OF.FUNCSV  MAM 


been  checked  in  Ixis  plans  oi  conq  n  >i  lo  the  south  of  the  Oxus,  by  the  ex- 
ertioua  of  Timoor  Shauh,  invaded  Buikh,  muuediately  on  tlial  moaurcU'g 
death.  Mafcoaaroad  Khmt  Sa«di  If  immtuv  the  King  of  Cadbui'a  gfrnmatf 
taoSeerof  gcfafc«ctmtyaiidoeiin^im  dnem  into  an  MBlMHcadab  ^ndi 
tha  gwater  part  of  feroa^  ifiiting  to  four  €^ammd  mn,  mA  wm  tikm 
fmmmta  an  the  defeat  wludk  ouwd.  Stmuk  Moraud,  expecting  to  profit  by 
the  consternation  of  the  remaining  troops,  immediately  aH\'riTtcpd  a^ainnt  the 
capital  of"  the  province ;  but  the  garrison  siiowed  a  'spirit  which  could  scarce 
have  been  expected  in  such  circumstances.:  the  principal  Dooraunee  chiefii 
took,  the  inanagemcat  oi'  affiurs*  on  the  capture  of  dieir  govenior,  and  pre* 
pored  for  a  vigorous  defence.  The  estaaiive  and  niinouB  eSty  of  Biddi  im 
afcandooad;  but  thafiut  hdd  out  Ah-  three  or  four  raonthik  nm  wilhil  ending 
An  utauMt  exertions  the  enemy.  Avnaag  elihar  attempta  to  reduoa  the 
jiacr,  Skusah  Moraud  made  uae  of  the  savage  expedient  of  producing  Ae 
GTovernor  under  the  walls,  and  offering  to  the  garrison  the  ulterfiative  of  pro- 
cuniig  ins  liberty  by  an  immediate  cttpituhition,  or  oi  seeing  him  put  to 
deatli,  if  tb^  ret  used  to  surrender.  The  garruuu  adiikering  to  their  resoluF 
tion  to  dcftnd  the  places  Shenhlfonud'a  tbnnk- «ai  bailiaKMHify  aaecntod 
before  their  ejrea.  At  het  Sbanh  Zenann  anived  at  Canbn^  after  Jut 
ceesm  Khmaanain, and Shanh Motand,  mdioeqpnctodthnfchavDnldiaane- 
diatcly  march  to  the  relief  af  Bulkfa,  aeat  ambassadors*  offering  to  give  up 
liis  claims  on  that  pro\"ince,  on  condition  of  Shairfi  Zem;Hin's  observing  the 
treaty  formerly  concluded  with  Tinm  ii  Shanh.  Shauh  Zenwun,  wlio  was  at 
that  time  intent  on  the  invasion  oi  India,  readily  consented ;  and  peace  was 
concluded  about  the  time  of  the  Kii^s  ardval  at  Peahawer. 