


*  Anilla  Kbaon^wai  it  one  tinw  compelW  to  diq>«n«  hi*  fblioww*  and  to  take  fclnge  in  the 
eeuiitry  of  tlieOtiinttB  Khail ;  nid  tlie  feDowiug  circunntance  of  hi*  i«r«ption  by  that  tribe  it  Ugbly 

characteri'itic  of  AfgKaun  mannert. 

When  Arulla  KJuun  approached  the  first  village  of  the  ^jhaaauo  Khail,  the  heads  of  the  tillage, 
aUrmed  at  the  proapect  of  drawiog  the  King's  ditpleaMnv  on  theoMchtt,  ymA  oat  to  BMet  tbe  fiigw 

tive,  and  told  him  that  tiiotr  granting  him  the  right*  of  hospitality  wuuld  involve  tlu-m  in  a  contc»t 
with  the  JLmg,  to  which  they  were  perfectly  unequal ',  and  that  they  bad  therefore  resolved  to  refuse 

while  they  were  engaged  in  conversation  with  him,  he  sent  a  part  of  his  baggage  into  the  village  by 
a  circuitous  route :  when  the  chiefs  found  that  AriiUa's  people  had  entered  their  village,  they  imme- 
diately acknowledged  that  he  was  aov  under  their  pratccdoot'TCeened  Urn  boapilaUft  and 
noncd  their  tribe  to  defiend  him. 

t  The  facts  contained  in  the  following  pages  are  entirely  drawn  from  Mr.  Alexander's  history. 


Digitized  by  Google 


'  BULKH  INVADED  BY  THE  UZBEKS. 


The  princes  of  the  royal  familj  made  an  nttempt  to  raise  Abbasa  to  the 
throne,  but,  though  they  behaved  with  much  spirit,  they  shewed  little  skill: 
their  persons  were  secured  by  a  stratagem  :  the  gates  of  the  Balla  Hissar,  or 
citadel  of  C^bul,  were  seized  by  Zemauti's  partisans }  aiid  tiuit  prince  was 
decbured  King  in  »  hatly  moetiag  of  tin  Doonmwe  cbieft.  H«  was  imined-- 
itelj  pfodaiined,  m  lugm  «m  imad  to  the  ^larda,  tbe  prinoet  w«»  Mot 
into  oonflnement  in  the  upper  fort  of  Caubul ;  andirom  lint  nioineot  Shaiili 
Zemaun  entered  quietly  on  the  administration  of  the  government. 

Menns  were  taken  for  asscmbhng  an  army  to  establish  the  authority  of  the 
new  King,  and  to  subdue  the  r^eUions  that  might  be  expected  trom  his 
brothers.  *  - 

His  greatest  apptdiemiMi  irMfirom  Hoan^oon*  wbo  wis  oertunly  «d- 
tiiled  to  the  Aroqe^  if -ptiniogemtnre  gave  a.  dainit  and  who  crnnmanded  at 
Candabar,  in  .the  heart  of  the  Dooiannee  coontiy.  Hem»  however,  un? 
popular  I  he  was  deserted  by  some  of  his  .adherents,  was  defeated  by  a  small 
force  commanded  by  prince  Shoojau  (since  King),  and  was  compelled  to  take 
refuge  in  Belochistaun.  Shauh  Zemaun  tooii  possession  of  Candabar,  and 
soon  after  received  the  submissions  of  Prince  Maiimood  (\\ho  as  1  have  men- 
tioued,  was  governor  of  Heraut),  and  then  set  olf  fqr  CaubuL 
-  As  soon  as  Shanb  Zenumn  had  Mcuied  himself  fiom  his  oompetiton  fiv 
tiie  throne,,  he  appears  to  have  detennined  on  an  invasion  of  Indian  a  meaF 
sure  to  which  he  was  stimulated  by  Merza  Ahsun  Bukht,  a  prince  of  the 
royal  family  of  Delly,  who  had  fled  to  Caubul  in  Timoor's  reign,  as  well  as 
b^  ambassadors  wiio  arrived  about  this  time  from  Ti])poo  Sooltaini,  and  who 
made  great  pecuniary  oilers  to  the  King,  ou  condition  that  he  uiiould  attack 
the  British. 