

4d  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


SECOND  INVASION  OF  THE  PUNJAUB.  lAmtmvL 


bled  an  army  of  twenty  thousand  men,  mostly  Fenians  of  KhorasaMUi*  with 
which  he  would  probably  have  attacked  Candahar,  hadhenotbeenprareBled 
by  the  King's  speedy  return. 

Shauh  Z«;maun  marched  against  him  from  Candabar  on  the  8th  ot  .Scpteni- 
ber»  i797>  and  altliough  his  own  injudicious  arrangements  bad  nearly  exposed 
Uu  to  defeat,  yet  1i»  eActs  of  hit  inqpuMlMioa  we  coaatencted  hy  ibo 
treadwiy  of  Mahmooirt  adhenntti  Olidi  Khaon  Teimorae  aeiaed  the 
citadel  of  Heraut  in  his  name,  and  was  joined  by  the  Dooraunee  governor  of 
the  dty :  the  army  followed  the  example  of  disaffection,  and  Mahmood*  n» 
duced  to  def?pair,  fled  to  Tooshish  with  his  son  Cauinraun. 

Shauh  Zemaun  immediately  entered  Hernnt  •  t^\  n  of  Mahmood's  advisers 
were  executed  for  this  rebellion,  but  no  otiier  measures  oi  sc\crity  were 
adopted.  Tlieae  anram^encsts  occupied  Sbanli  Zenann  fiv  aoaae  tinei  but 
at  soon  as  he  had  a  mooMof  t  lefsure,  he  tamed  his  attenttoo  to  the  Puii)aiA^ 
nhere  Ma  eanae  had  with  aoiiie  revewaa  wfafle  he  iras  engaged  in  the 
west.  As  soon  as  he  had  quitted  the  country,  the  Siks  retained  fiMm  their 
hiding  place's  and  began  to  retaliate  on  the  Mussulmans  the  oppression  which 
those  of  their  own  religion  had  suffered  from  the  Dooraitnee^,  They  had 
even  cut  off  a  party  of  five  thousand  eastern  Alghauns  wiuch  had  advanced 
|o  the  Hy  da^spea  under  a  duat  ei the  King's  ^  and  the  whole  of  the  Poi^uib 
was  aa  fiur  aa  ever  6om  being  conquered,  when  the  King  set  out  on  hia  tinrd 
eqaeditioo.  Heaetofffiram  Fedumer  on  the  a5th  of  Oclobtt',  1798,  and 
advanced  without  molestation  to  Lahore.  He  peraevered  in  hia  plan  for  coo- 
ciliatinc:  the  Siks,  and  by  all  accounts  no  outrage  of  any  sort  was  ofteretl  to 
the  inhabitants  of  tlie  Punjaub  during  this  campaign.  Many  Sik.  chiefs,  and 
all  the  Mussulman  Zemeendars  attended  tiie  court,  and  before  the  King 
wiUidrew,  all  the  chie&  had  done  homage  in  person  or  through  their  agents ; 
'  tad  among  the  former  was  Runjeet  Sing,  now  king  of  the  Sfta* 

'  About  the  end  ef  179S,  the  Shanh  received  newB  of  an  invaaioii  of  Kfaonai» 
saun  by  Futteh  AH  Shauh,  King  of  Persia,  and  aet  oot  on  hia  letdni  to 
Fesbawer,  which  he  reached  on  the  30th  of  January,  1799.  His  guns  were 
lost  in  the  Hydaipei,  on  his  return,  by  a  sudden  rising  of  the  river ;  but  tfacj 
were  afterwards  ilni:  out  :ujd  rt  stored  by  Runjeet  Sing  and  Salicb  Sing. 

After  a  sliort  Rtay  at  Tesiiawcr,  Zemaun  repaired  to  Heraut,  where  he  re- 
aolved  to  qwnd  the  rait  of  the  year ;  and  he  now  appeatt  at  hut  to  have 
aei'ieurfy  turned  Ma  attention  to  the  defence  of  hia  'weatefp  doBiinioBa»  Tin 
diqioaition  m^have  been  prodooed  by  the  peeaenoe  of  hia  hrather  Mahmood 
in  the  IMan  ani^»  and  the  Aar  of  hia  reeeiving  auch  airport  finm  the 