


Digitized  by  Google 


576 


MiaCXJMDUCT  OF  SBAUH  mUXJV*^  fAflPPWi(. 


Seestuin ;  who  gave  his  daughter  to  prince  Caumraun.  e{jin}i|)cil  Mahmood's 
frieadfl,  already-  worn  out  witii  their  ioog  march  in  the  desart*  aud  proposed 
tOMrirt Ihat prince widi the  fiuoe «f  Ins prorinise.  Hit  oflerim rejected, 
In  ponuance  of  Tlittah  KliMiii's  phn,  and  Mabmood  «Dt««ed  the  Doowiu— e 
caiutxy  vith  the  remsnu  of  hit  eduuiited  pMlgr* 

His  adviser  had  not  misjudged  tlie  disposition  of  his  countrymen :  thf 
Dooraunee^  flocked  to  Mahmood,  and  on  his  advance  to  Candahar,  he  as. 
sembled  so  preat  a  force  as  to  be  able  to  face  tlie  Meer  Akhor  *,  who  had 
been  left  in  command  of  tlie  province.  That  oflicer  encamped  under  the 
place  till  he  was  ao  much  distxeased  by  the  partial  but  fi'equ^t  fittacks  pf  the 
eoenij,  that  ht  wh  obl^ed  to  retire  within  die  trtdlSt 

Tbe  pbuw  wee  Aen  inveited  by  Mahmood,  wImm  amy  continiied  to  in* 
crease  till  the  forty-second  day  of  the  siege,  when  Ftitteh  Khaun  contrived 
to  get  himself  int  roduced,  almost  alone,  into  the  town,  and  immediately  threw 
himself  on  the  honour  of  Abdoolla,  a  powerful  chief  of  tlie  garrison.  The 
force  of  tliiii  method  of  sohcitatioii  is  explained  in  anotiier  place;  it  had 
complete  efiect  in  tiiiti  instance,  Abduoiia  dechiied  for  Mahmood,  the  Meer 
AklM|r  was  compelled  to  fly  i  and  Candahar.  opened  its  gates  to  the  lebeia. 

While  these,  things  weie  pessing;.  and.  even  after  aocounts  of  theur  oem- 
sqcoieenient  had  reached  him,  Shauh  Zemaun  was  assi<jhioiisly  eoaployed  in 
latcparations  for  another  invasion  of  Hindostan.  It  was  not  till  he  heard 
the  fail  of  Candahar,  by  which  time  he  had  arrived  at  Peshawer,  that  he  was 
ronsed  troin  tins  mfatuation.  He  then  gave  up  his  plans  on  India,  andr^ 
turned  to  Caubul. 

Hte  did  not,  however,  leave  Eeshawer  without  oonunittiqg  eeeae.^ital  ada 
of  impradeoce^ 

AbdooUah  Khaun  Alekkoaye^  die  governor  of  Cashmev,  had  oooie.  to 

court,  and  was  seized  and  tortured}  on  which  his  brother  Sydaul  Khaun 
who  was  at  Candahar,  went  over  to  Mahmpod  with  his  whole  clan  (the  A!pk- 
kozyes).  Zemaiin  next  detached  an  army  of  iiiteeu  thousand  men  against 
Cashmeer,  under  Mooilaii  Ahmed  and  Mee;'  Vise  Noorzye.  Thi&  i'orce 
whkb  nvight  have  been  so  wdl  employed  in  quelling  Mahmood's  rebellion, 
was  dispersed  before  it  reached  Casbmeor,  by  the  imprudaoee  of  its  ^onw 
mander  Moollah  Ahmed. 
Shaoh  Zemaun  left  a  coosideiiaUe  fi»oe  at  Peahaiwer,  under  his  fanilber 


Digitized  by  Google 


ApFEKonc]  Mil 


T  OF  SHAUH  ZSlCikUN. 


577 


Shujau  ool  Moolk,  and  seems  to  h:\vc  l  ail  no  Fiense  of  the  preneral  dicaffec- 
tion,  but  to  liave  reckoned  on  defeating  Mahmood  without  anv  li  t  at  exer- 
tion. When  he  readied  Caubul,  the  true  state  of  aiiaini  broke  «i  on  his 
mind,  and  hi&  security  was  succeeded  hy  the  utmost  disquiet  and  alarm. 
Awire  of  the  diaaflbctioii  of  die  Doovnmee  chie^  he  acarcdf  though  biin- 
fdf  safe  among  them;  his  guarda  were  doubted,  and  their  customary  appeeiv 
ance  at  the  court  was  changed  into  CODltant  duty  over  the  palace.  The 
King's  diitrust  of  his  own  tribe  was  farther  marked  by  his  anxious  endeiF  ' 
TOUTS  to  gain  the  Ghiljies ;  and  these  precantions,  whiJe  they  ga^'e  confidence 
to  the  disi^cted,  disgusted  many  who  were  neutral  or  well  disposed.  The 
terrors  of  the  vizier  were  still  more  couspicuouii ;  and  i'rom  Im  kuowu  timi- 
d^iitiapxobeUe  thepiokhedmedhiiiibcffa^  He 
ina  more  diflcnH  of  eeceiB  than  ever*  hit  nwiiiier  m  become  SMpkioaa 
end  diilnwled ;  end  hii  leaolttdoiia  were  heaty  and  wevering.  The  dutnitt 
wfaid)  the  Court  shewed  of  its  mm  fi»ftiioe,  soon  ^reod  to  the  peqdot  end, 
in  a  strperstitious  nation,  omeoi  were  not  wanting  to  oaafim  tfaoir  eipecte-' 
tion  of  some  great  re\'cr<:e. 