

A  party  of  two  thousand  men,  under  Futteb  Khaun,  was  immediately  sent 
by  Mahmood  to  Caubui,  and  he  soon  after  marched  himseit  in  the  same 
difBGliob. 

In  the  mean  tun^  Shauh  Zemaun  pmrsued  his  fl%ht  with  the  Irtmoat  pra- 
o^tnlunu  tfll  he  reached  Ae  Shainwaree  country,  worn  out  with  hunger 
and  fiitigue.  The  vizier  now  proposed  that  the  King  should  stop  and  refietb 
at  the  ca5?tle  of  Moollah  Aushik,  a  dependent  of  his  :  the  Meer  Akhor  re- 
monstrated arrainsf  the  delay  ;  but  tinding  iiis  arguments  overruled,  he  quitted 
the  party,  ami  aiter  many  adventures  arrived  sale  at  Feijhawer.  The  King^ 
attended  by  the  vizier  and  his  two  brothers,  the  Khauni  Moollafa,  the  Shaotif 
Sauahee^  and  a  finrpurife  Mtkhednmt,  entered  Moollah  Andnk'a  cartle. 
The  Moolah  received  thcan  hoqutaUy  $  but  at  the  aame  tnne  took  moaanrm 
to  prevent  their  escape,  and  sent  off  a  memenger  to  Mfdunood,  who  was  now 
at  Caubui,  to  announce  their  seizure. 

In  tlie  mean  time,  Zemaun  discovered  that  he  was  under  restraint,  and 
tned  all  means  to  persuade  Moollah  Aushik  to  refrain  from  nrt  Adion  so  full 
of  disgrace  as  betraying  a  guest  who  was  at  once  his  King  and  his  benefactor : 
these  arguments  failing,  he  had  recourse  to  jforce,  whidi  also  proved 


Digitized  by  Google 


tiial.    He  then  gave  himseU'  up  to  hi«  £stie»  and  boffe  his  mbaequeot  calami, 
ties  with  patience  and  firmness.  *  . 

Aiisud  Kliaun,  a  bratber  Futteh  Khaun's,  was  instantly  di^iatched  to 
iMUM  Zeoiiiin,  and  aooB  after  in  oBoa  -mm  wnt  nilli  a  nugeoa  to  pot  oat 
bit  eyei.  The  awmgtw  met  Zemanp  oh  hi»'»ny  to  Caobul,  andpetfoniKd 
their  orders  by  piercing  his  eyes  with  »  Inoct.  He  WM  then  OMCried  td 
Caubul  and  conifaed  in  the  Balla  Hissanr.  : 
He  retnained  in  confinement  ail  Mahnit  od's  rei<?n,  but  tvas  released  on 
Shiija's  accession  ;  he  has  since  lived  in  comparative  ease  and  cotni'ort.  ^  Wu^ 
tadar  and  his  brothers  were  executed  soon  after  their  aetzure. 

Mabmood's  accession  was  at  first  joyfully  weloMBed  fej  ell  aaka  of  imeii. 
ViiflUar  had  di^guited  the  gMat  by  his  syitaaMlie  deprewiflri  of  their  ocdef^ 
aa  well  as  the  poq^  bj  ha  enctions  >  and  the  natioQ  Ibndfy  hoped  that  by  a 
diange  of  govanunent  they  might  recover,  if  not  the  glorious  and  pitiqieious 
career  of  Ahmed,  the  tranquiUity  whicli  they  had  enjoyed  under  his  son. 
But  the  character  ot"  Shauli  Mahmood  was  calculated  to  disappoint  all  their 
expectations  :  unprincipled,  uuloleiii,  and  timid,  he  shared  as  little  in  the 
care8  oi'  government  as  in  the  toils  and  dangers  oi'  wai'  ^  and  while  im  own 
eaie  and  n&tj  were  ipenreb  he  was  iadMfcwiit  to,the  conduct  of  hanwinMteii 
and  to  the  welftre  oif  hit  oeonle* 