

Allcr  some  vain  iRguciations,  the  King  marched  against  the  rebels  with 
thirty  thousand  men :  he  sent  on  two  parties  in  front  of  his  army,  of  which 
the  most  advaneed  m»  md»  Ahmed  Khaun  Noofr|re,  and  the  King  soon 
after  ftU  into  the  fear,  and  ever  after  remained  a  mardi  or  two  behind  the 
army ;  a  plan  jtrobaUy  suggested  by  the  ftan  of  the  minister,  iHuch  added 
to  the  alarm  of  the  troops. 

Ahmed  Khaun  had  many  insults  and  injuries  to  revenge  on  the  vizier, 
and  so  little  was  he  trusted,  that  shortly  betbre  he  got  this  inipui  t  int  com- 
mand, he  was  ttiought  to  have  been  marked  out  for  execution  by  the  imni&ter; 
yet  in  tibts  eatxeniiiy  WuAdar  Khaun  seieed  on  the  hope^  that  by  oonftrrii^ 
hononn  and  iiettertng  appointments  en  Ahmed  Khaun^  he  could  hnag  him 
over  to  his  interests.  He  was  accordingly  entrosted  with  the  command  ef 
the  vanguard ;  the  conduct  of  which  former  experience  had  shewn  ge&enflty 
to  deride  the  fidelity  or  desertion  of  the  army, 

Ahmed  Khaun  was,  however,  undetermimHl  what  line  of  conduct  to  pur- 
sue when  he  left  the  main  body  i  at  least  Futtch  iviiuuii  Uiought  he  was  so, 
and  the  steps  lie  ttwh  to  seeiire  hii  eoKipaBtioq,  thougli  perfectly  consistent 
with  the  heedk»g  violence  of  Ibttefa  Khaon's  cbaiacter»  would  be  incraii* 
blsb  if  imputed  to  any  other  pefion.  He  seized  Abdoollah  Khaon,  the 
btcthcr  ef  Ahmed  jiPiann  Noonye^  ,jnd  threw  bin  into  cloie  ooofiotmeol^ 

4b 


Digitized  by  Google 


578  SUAUH  ZEMAUN  BETRAYED.  '  '  LAfpksduL 

tbneatening  to  put  liiiii  to  inttuit  death,  if  hii  Imttbiu  did  not  come  over. 

Abdoolla  had  joined  Mahmood  in  an  important  crisis,  and  his  fidelity  was 
never  doubted  ;  but  Futti'h  Khaun  knew  Ahmed's  attachment  to  his  brother, 
and  was  very  careless  about  the  justice  of  his  measures,  it'  they  answerad 

the  end  in  view. 

U  Ahmed  Khaun  really  wavered,  this  threat  determined  him ;  for,  when 
he  met  Mehmood's  advance  «t  Sirreeasp,  he  jdned  ittrith  the  whole  body 
under  hia  oommand. 

The  mam  army  commanded  by  prince  Naussir  was  at  Aubitauoe^  not  fiur 
from  Sirreeasp,  when  news  was  received  that  the  advanced  guards  were  near 
each  other,  and  soon  after  that  they  had  engapjed ;  on  which  the  army  halted 
and  entrenched.  The  fact  o("  Ahmed's  desertiein  was  soon  after  known,  but 
produced  no  great  sensation  in  the  army.  Its  effect  was  di£R^eut  iu  the 
King's  own  little  camp,  where  every  dediion  was  hiAienoed  hy  WoAdari 
all  was  given  up  for  ka^  and  the  King  fled  whh  ^ecipitalion  towarda  Can* 
boL  It  waa  probably  the  Imowledge  of  thk  desertioairtnchliritalAeredtho 
conduct  of  the  troops  under  prince  Naunir:  tiiey  aoon  became  aomutmoDB, 
tfmt  the  prince  was  obliged  to  quit  the  army,  and  fly  towards  Caidiul ;  on 
which  the  army  fell  into  entire  disorder,  and  probably  broke  up. 