

Tlie  setting  in  of  the  winter  prevented  any  further  hostilities  at  that  time ; 
but,  early  in  the  spnng  of  1802,  the  Ghiljies  rose  as  suddenly  as  before,  and 
with  more  arrangenient :  almost  the  wliole  of  the  Gliiljie  clans  were  now 
engaged.    Their  iurce  is  Haid  to  liave  amuuuted  tu  lilty  tliousand  men. 

It  wee  detcmined  that  a  body  under  Abdooreheem  should  attack  Caubul 
from  the  south,  and  an  equal  body,  under  FUtteh  Khaun  Bahnkmsye*  from 
the  east}  while  aforce  of  ten  thousand  Ghi^ies  should  keep  the  Dodraonees 
employted  within  tiieir  own  boundaries.  To  each  of  these  divisions  a  Doo- 
raunee  army  was  opposed,  and  three -aetioiia  took  plao^  all  of  which  tscmi* 
nated  in  the  entire  success  of  the  Dooraunees. 

It  is  univL  J  salJy  iiaid  (and  the  existence  of  the  report,  whetiier  accurate  or 
not,  sliews  the  state  of  the  country  at  the  time),  that  these  three  battles,  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


584 


WSAKNE88  OF  THE  OOVEBKMENT.  CAmaao. 


defeat  of  the  KhyH+rees  under  Sbauh  Shuja,  and  a  viotoiy  over  the  Uzbdu 
iu  Bulkli,  tcx>k  j>iace  on  tlie  same  day  in  Marcli,  i8oa. 

After  this  struggle,  part  of  the  Kiug's  ibrce  was  detached  to  ravage  the 
Ghiljie  country,  and  iff  the  eoune  «f  Hi  opwtioiia*  it  dcfteted  a  body  of 
tentbcKUMid  GIuliiea  at  MoaUnh  SfaMidee.*,  wliicli.ivM  tbe  kit.  Hand  nude 
ligr  thftt  tribes 

. .  The  seveiitiM  of  the  government  ceased  with  tlie  campaign ;  and  after 
tranquillity  was  restored,  the  Gfailjies  eaq^ieriencedeiactly  the  aMne  tieatnMai 

as  before  their  rebellion. 

It  lias  already  been  mentioned  that  prince  Shujau  sustained  a  defeat  on  the 
same  day  witii  the  three  great  Ghiljie  battles :  that  prince  had  advanced 
^{■>n>t  Peihawer  it  the. bead  of  twelve  thmiiaiid  Kfajbeiea^  and  waaep- 
poaed  by  tbe  ngular  troopa  of  tbe  ci^s  a  battle  took  placid  in  wbick.llie 
Khybeieei  were  detaed  with  great  slaughter,  and  the  battle  happening  in 
aummer,  vait  munbeia  perished  from  heat  and  thirst  before  they  regained 
their  motintfim«.    Shniaii,  with  difficulty,  escaped  to  his  former  retreat. 

The  quiet  ot  tiie  kingduiii  was  now  entirely  restored  ;  but  the  govenimeni 
was  leit  in  a  state  oi  deplorable  weakness;  few  oi'  the  provinces  had  been 
ledneedj  the  Kbaun  of  the  Beiochei»  andmaiiyof  liie  A%hattn  tribea^M* 
^naed  to  achnowjedge  so  unsettled  a  government}  and.  as  the  treasurfwaa 
eaiply»  the  King  was  destitute  of  the  naana  of  makiiv  a  vigofoua  affiift  te 
restore  the  authority  of  the  crown. 

The  Persians  had  profited  by  the  distracted  state  of  the  monarchy,  and 
bad,  iu  one  campaiirrj,  HlinoHt  completed  the  conquest  of  Persian  Khora*» 
saun.  The  last  pbce  they  took  was  Meshhed,  in  wliich  city  Naudir  Mirza, 
and  thirty-eight  other  persons  of  Naudir  Shauh's  family,  were  taken  priso* 
tieiai  and  carried  to  Tebwaun,  where  they  wei«  all  put  to  deaUit  esocft  one 
inftot. 