

<.  A  son  of  Ritteh  AUi  Shauh's  waa  stationed  at  Meshhed,  as  govemor  of 

Persian  Khorasaaun  ;  and  the  conquest  of  that  country  by  the  Persians  may 
be  dated  from  this  period,  though  Toorshish  was  not  reduced  till  1810,  and 
Kelaut  Naudiree,  1  believe,  still  holds  out.  Meslihed  was  taken  in  the  sum- 
mer of  i8o».  .  .  ■  , 
.  At  theciose  of  the  Ghiljie  war.  and  after  the  daAet  of  Shujau  Ool  Moollc» 
the  Court  Ibnnd  itself  fieed  from  all  inunediate  danger,  and  at  leisuxe  to  take 


*  tith  of  May,  ilio«. 


Digitizer 


CONQUEST  OV  PERSIAN  KHOBAMUUnr. 


585 


measures  for  reducing  the  rebellious  provinces ;  but,  as  Tnicrht  bo  expected  in 
sach  a  government,  the  return  of  safety  from  without,  wa'^  accompanied  by 
dissensions  amonij  the  chiefs  of  the  ruhng  party,  and  particularly  between 
the  two  great  Iciulers,  Akram  Kliauu  Alizye  and  Futteh  Khaun.  Tbe  latter 
im,  howem,  at  length  dispiteiwd  wih  afiifoe  towl^  tlie  loiillHnit  of  th« 
Idi^doiii.  ,Heftat|voeeedBdto  Misirar,  >riMli6  extaited  m 
tfM  town,  mi.  received  iiftf  thousand  rupees  from  the  diief  of  Geihneer: 
he  then  marched  to  the  south  through  Cohaut,  Bunnoo,  and  Damaun,  levy- 
ing the  revenue  as  he  past :  he  opent  n  long  time  in  endeavouring  to  reduce 
the  Vizeerees,  and  after  phaiderinL:  tlu  ir  lands,  he  marched,  settling  the 
country  as  he  passed*  to  Candahar,  where  he  arrived  in  tlie  summer  ot 
1803. 

Scveieel  inipwtanl  meatM  bed  takea  pboe  in  thet  qiuitar  dariag  ]m 

Shujau  Ool  Moolk  had  remained  at  Chora  in  the  Afreedee  country,  from 
the  time  of  his  defeat,  till  Futteh  Khaun's  arrival  at  Peshawer.  Hi=:  former 
adherents  still  remained  with  him,  and  still  treat rd  him  King:  but  he 
seems  himself  to  have  given  up  all  tljoughts  oi  any  luitlier  struggle,  and  to 
have  spent  almost  the  wlK>le  of  his  time  in  reading  and  conversing  with  his 
militaij  adhereiite»  and  aome  learned  men,  ^nho  had  eccompeukd  him  in  his 
retreat.  The  arrival  «f  Vuttah  Khaon  iridi  soeh  a  force  in  ftdiawer,  tea* 
dered  Ins  residence  at  Chora  uneeft^  and  he  was  compelled  to  retire  Aulfaar 
south,  and  take  refuge  among  the  mountains  of  the  Caukers,  where  he  con- 
tinned  to  wander  about,  subsisting  himself  and  his  followers  on  the  money 
which  he  oi.ca^!<'ti:iilv  obtained  by  the  sale  of  his  jewels,  and  by  the  casual 
boHpitality  of  tiie  people  whose  country  he  entered.  He  was  in  this  condi- 
tion  in  the  depth  of  the  wuter  cf  1803,  near  the  toum  of  ShaiH,  or.ZiMtta»  . 
inBeiochiataan.  HeaantMeer  AboolHainm]Diaan,aadtheZubthfl!geeihilo 
Sikavl,  to  andaavour  to  sell  some  jeirria;  hotinnidiaplacenopiudiaaarooald 
weU  be  expeeted :  on  dnir  return  they  met  the  prince,  who,  in  his  anxiety,  had 
left  his  starving  adherents,  and  rode  out  to  meet  them  and  leam  their  success. 
He  was  in  despair  when  he  found  they  had  tailed,  and  jmmediately  assembled 
his  principal  adherents,  to  consult  on  the  course  to  be  pursued,  in  this  ex~ 
liaiaity,  lha.Aihtfiegee  mentioned  that  a  large  cara«an>had  Aat  daj  entered 
Shawl,  and,  notwifhahinding  the  prino^a  rdnetano^  it «  aoen  reaohned  to 
jplander  it.  The  princa'a  troopa  acootdiii|^  aurroonded  the  town*  and  the 