

The  government  of  the  state  waa  left  entirely  to  Aknm  Khann  Aliaye  and 
Futteh  Khaun  Baorikaye.  The  first  of  theie  ehiefbiins  had  all  the  charac* 
teristics  of  :i  Dt)oraMnee  nobleman.  He  was  proud,  hitrh-spirited,  and  obsti- 
nate, irugal  Ijnt  not  sordid  in  expence,  steady  in  his  attachment  to  his  party, 
and  strict  in  couiurming  to  the  uotions  of  honor  which  prevail  among  his 
conhcrymen.  F&t^  Khann  hia  dnoe  beoenM  one  of  die  moat  prominent 
chancteiB  in  die  Doofatmee  hiitoiy«  and  now  holds  the  oOoe  of  ^Amm,  attd 
enjoys  the  supreme  power  under  Aa  name  <^  his  rehidant  aovereiglu 
cepting  the  short  and  tnrinilent  paEbd  of  MahnMiod's  sneceMb  the  eerly  part 
of  his  life  was  spent  in  intrigues  and  adventures,  sometimes  supporting  a 
rebel  force  bv  p!im(ipr,  and  sometimes  living  in  jealous  and  precarious 
friendship  witii  the  Kmg.  His  character  is  such  as  such  cu  e  uni-siances 
might  be  expected  to  form.    As  iiis  misfortunes  uever  reduced  him  to  de- 


•  Dnrmjj  his  coiifmetnent  lie  secreted  the  Cohcenoor  (one  of  'lie  nojt  valuable  diamonda  in  the 
w  orld),  with  some  other  jewels,  in  the  wall  of  bis  apartment,  where  thej  were  afterwarda  fuupd  on 
ShajafsttccMioa.  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


$eO  nUKCB  8HDM  PBOCLAHIED  JKna     .  Cteam 


pendence,  his  spirit  remains  unbroken,  and  his  activity  undiminished.  He 
n  acknoirledged  on  hands  to  b*  a  BMm.flf  talattia  ■and  coorage  i  and  by  hit 
own  adbemitai  he  is  greatly  Moved.  He  att^riiea  iiii  fillofim  bgr  the  moet 
pioftNe  VbenHtyi  and  tiie  utaMMt  laadl^  of  diaeiplineb  Aa  lie  it  anreetnioad 

by  principle,  and  accustomed  to  mdden  reverses,  he  emplojrs  the  opportunitice 
that  fortune  throws  in  his  way,  without  discretion  or  moderation,  to  enrich  his 
adherents  and  qratify  their  passions  and  his  own.  Thoup'h  excessively 
addicted  to  w  irx  ,  he  never  remits  his  vigilance  over  the  interests  of  his 
party  j  or  it  iie  dues,  ius  neglect  is  compensated  by  the  promptitude  of  his 
leeolationii  and  faia  vigor  and  dednm  m  egeenting  then*  In  hie  paieon  ha 
ie  laid  to  be  tall  and  very  handeomej  tboiq^  lalihar  tilin :  bis  mennen'  are 
genda  and  modeirt,  and  form  a  etroi^  eonmit  to  hit  oonduct*  wiiich  ie 
equally  exonptfiom  the  influence  of  shame,  fear,  and  con^M^cm. 

There  were  many  otlier  chiefs  at  the  court  of  Mahmood,  who  enjoved  n 
less  share  ol  power  derived  from  their  birtli  or  talents  ;  or  more  frequently 
from  ikvour  and  from  their  tried  attachment  to  tiie  ruling  party.  In  the 
licence  of  this  reign,  each  of  tfaeee  was  able  to  indtdge  Us  rapacity  and 
latiaia  his  private  enmitiee  without  any  reetnuat,  encoept-siich  ae  was  Imposed 
by  fte  passioas  of  his  rivals.  TbeittnMstlieentioiienasapsemdtodamoqgtlie 
soldiery,  on  whom  the  court  relied;  and  fipoDi  the  constant  distiurbanom 
which  lasted  till  Mahmood's  deposition,  his  reign  more  resembled  the  tem- 
porary success  of  a  military  advanturer  Uian  the  establishmoDt  of  a  r^^uiar 
government. 