

.  Mahmood's  government  was  now  fully  established  in  the  capital,  but  the 
fiorinom  wave  as  yet  by  no  meeae  mider  bis  anlJunly 
. .  Heiant  had  been  given  vqp  to  hie  brother  Faroes^  wbo  ackaeviria^ged 
Mahmood  ior  King^  but  gowenied  Hennt  exactly  ea  if  he  bed  been  inde- 
pendent*. 

The  north-eastern  tribes  still  held  out  for  Zemann.  The  other  proWncea 
prnhab]y  \vaited  the  final  settlement  of  the  diyute  Hor  the.crowD,  without 
declaring  lor  either  party. 

The  principal  opponent  to  Mahmood  who  now  remained,  was  Prince 
fifanja  Od  MboU^  the  Ihll  bratfaer  of  Sheuh  Zamenn.  This  piince>  tben 
about  twenty  yeem  of  age^  had  been  left  at  Feshawer  with  a  small  party  of 
guards.  Sliauh  Zemaun's  BuaSfyf  and  almost  all  the  jewels  and  other  pto* 
pcrty  Ot  the  crown  had  been  committed  to  his  charge.  After  the  first  panic 
thnt  followed  his  brother's  defeat,  he  took  the  resolution  to  proclaim  himself 
Kin^  and  prepare  for  a  regular  contest  with  the  usurper.   He  accordingly 


Digitized  by  Google 


Appekdix.1        ,    •  GHILJIE  REBELLION.  581 

liiitributed  large  sums  ammig  At^ribes  round  Peshawar,  aai  loon  Mnr  fbt 

greater  part  of  the  Berdooraimees  flock  to  hi?  "Standard. 

A  considerable  alarm  appears  to  h:i\c  prevailed  at  Mahmooii's  court  in 
consequence  of  this  step  :  his  cause  had  aiready  become  uupopuiar  from  the 
general  relaxation  of  all  government^  vIliGil  Iflft  tlw  bulk  lit  tlie  tnhihitMrti 
of  Ae  countTf  «k  lilM  mercy  of  liie  oouttien  and  ike  tnUSery  $  Mid  «  plot  in 
ftvo&r  of  Shooini  tM*  diwaowgod  to  Iwvo  bean  onlered  on  by  HokfalMir 
OoddoiriK.  That  noUeinaii  mt  iMmww  wnated»  and  tbe  plot  caaw  to 
nothing, 

On  die  loth  of  September,  rSoi,  Shoqjaool  Mooik  marched  from  Peshawer 
to  attack  Caubul.  About  lialf  way  between  those  cities,  he  Ibiind  Mah- 
mood's  fwcCt  consisting  of  three  thou»aud  meu,  drawn  up  at  Eshpaun,  iu  a 
narrow  pUn  innoaiided  ivith  hills,  and  hsving  Ae  bvook  of  SoorkhnMid  in 
tboirfiwit  'fihi^badat  <hia  time  at  kait  ten  thoumid  man$  but  tbagr 
were  Berdoonmnae^' and  thoqg^  aocaalomad  to  tiie  batdei  of. their  dani^ 
thqrvere  strangers  to  djicqdine  and  to  regular  war.  Shtga'a  afma.mia^ 
however,  victorious  in  the  bcgnuiincf  of  the  bnttlo ;  hut  his  Berdooraunee 
troops,  eager  to  profit  by  the  contusion,  quitfrtl  tlicir  line  as  soon  as  they 
thought  the  victory  decided,  and  began  to  plunder  the  royal  treasures,  which 
Shuja  had  imprudently  brought  into  the  field.  Futteh  Khaun  seized  this 
opportmiity,  and  diarging  at  tbe  head  of  bis  Bamik^resb  rompletdl  tbe  eon- 

with  some  difficulty  to  the  Khyber  hills,  where  be  remained  till  afieab  oppofw 

tunity  offered  of  asserting  his  claim  to  the  throne. 