

the  hpiiours  and  confidence  which  he  had  merited  by  hi>  own  great  serv  ices. 
His  qualities  were  such  as  were  sure  to  gain  popularity  among  his  country- 
men. Hi«  bravery  was  distinguished,  and  he  possessed  all  the  military  ac- 
complishments of  hit  nfttion.  He  was  entirely  indifferent  about  money, 
9KC0ft  M  Ml  hut/WBStut  ixf  hu  ■BiMtioo }  be  IumI  tiie  litiiuwfc  oontenipt  Hv 
ponqiv  he  etao  ■ftcf  d  the  itm  aad  ttuamen  of  e  darnge,  and  this  A»* 
f^chj  in  e  man  of  faia'known  rank  and  reputation  as  a  soldier  and  a  statea- 
Buui,  seems  to  have  greatly  endeared  him  to  the  people.  Even  when  he  was 
vizier,  the  meanest  person  had  access  to  him,  either  in  his  house  or  when  he 
went  out*  as  lie  otteji  dui  iin  utended,  and  sometimes  on  fi)ot.  He  scarcely 
ever  refused  a  tavour,  and  it  he  could  not  tire  out  his  suitors  by  his  patience 
and  ee-ynfife  hia  only  resource  wA  in  ptdadtest  ot  whi^  be  niike  mart 
daabaeffercafed  toperfbflflB.  He  had  gteefc  good  aettnp  and  modentida 
towank  hit  ^Mflwrifij,  V^^'y  he  not  only  forgave  for  past  oflhnoei»  hot  aHoweS 
to  molest  him  with  impunity  when  he  had  them  in  his  powo*.  These  quali- 
ties captivated  the  generality  of  n»en,  who  did  not  so  easily  perceive  his  am- 
bition,  his  want  of  principle,  his  fondness  for  intrigue,  and  his  turn  for  art 
and  disaimulation. .  He  was  singularly  qualified  for  conducting  an  insurrec- 
tion ia  wUtSi  nl^jlon  oeold  he  broi^it  toihaie:  he  had  been  obUged  to  fly 
to  Belochiirann  on  Ihe  daeth  of  Ui  fiither  (the  viaier  flhaish  WidIee=Khatui% 
ndhad  oifloyiiA  fais  banishment  in  attidty,  so  tint  be  was  now  leckoned  one 
ef  the  most  eminent  Moollahs  in  the  A%haini  dominions.  He  was  more 
careless  in  the  forms  of  devotion  than  Dooraunees  generally  are,  but  he  had 
alwavs  affected,  Jiiui  probably  feit,  great  zeal  for  the  Soonnee  religion.  He 
was  assiduous  in  paying  court  to  men  of  karuing  and  sanctity,  and  Syud 
Ahmed,  commonly  called  the  Meer  Wae^  who  was  eminent  in  both  those 
ehenotaik  was  Ua  meat'flonfldentiallUend. 

.Thia  MapoMBiiad  graifc  aatoial'taientt^  and  byfteqiMnC  pflgfimageito 
Meccai  lond  fay  the  fMritgr  aad  even  austeri^r  ef  his  life,  had  gained  the 
highest  reputation  and  influence  in  Caubul.  His  authority  was  streiigtliened 
by  the  freedom  with  which  he  preached  acraiTr^t  the  \'ice<^  of  the  court,  the 
general  corniption  of  manners,  and  the  encouragement  which  was  openly 
given  to  Sheeahs,  agauist  wiium,  m  consistency  with  the  prejudice  of  the 
people,  he  Aafiaimed  aa  UaiphenMra  end  iniidali.  The  Meer  Vacs  bed 


V 


Digitized  i)y  Google 


M  BATTLS  BETWEEN  TtlE  8HEEAH6  AND  SOONNEE&  lAwnna. 