

441  S. 


Digitized  by  Google 


596 


ATTACK  OK  HERAUT. 


of  justice  and  his  skill  in  administering  it ;  for  his  liberality,  his  affable  man- 
ners, and  liis  princely  magnificence.  He  \vm  also  a  Great  encom  as^tir  of 
l^uning  and  poetry.  Perhap.H  no  Dooraunec  has  leil  a  ciiiuactei  so  geoe- 
fall  J  admired. 

-  Xhelto  was  defended  for  two  moallis  after  his  doalh^ 
on  condition  that  Abdoolteh  Khaun's  hasSfy  and  the  diie&  in  the  Ibitdiottkl 
be  allowed  to  reside  unmolested  either  at  Qnibul  or  Peshawer.    These  terms 
were  strictly  observedt  and  Cashmcer  was  now  oompleteljr  reduced  under 

King's  authority. 

The  vizier  remained  in  Caahmcer  lor  some  months  ai'ter  the  reduction  of 
the  province  :  but  it  is  now  necessary  to  turn  to  Uie  events  which  took  place 
in  the  west  during  the  period  of  this  kmg  campaign. 

The  reconciliation  between  F^itteh  Khann  and  Kyaer  was  cf  no  loqg  dnia- 
tton :  Khojeh  Mahommed  retained  his  ascendancy ;  and  Futteh  Khann 
retired  to  Girishk,  and  onoe  more  renewed  his  intrigues  with  Caunuaun. 

It  might  have  been  expected  that  this  Prince  would  have  been  slow  to 
embark  in  any  cnterprize  with  a  pcr^jon  who  had  so  lately  deceived  him  j 
but  Cainnraun,  brought  up  amidst  re\  okitions,  and  accustomed  to  put  eveiy 
thing  to  hazard,  had  no  hesitation  in  entering  on  the  projeotheld  OOt  to  hini. 
He  jomed  Futtdi  Khaun,  and,  as  they  advanced  towards  Osndahar*  thegr 
were  met  by  part  of  die  garrison,  while  Kyaer  fled  .into  tfae'coontiy  of  the 
Belochcs,  where  he  waited  for  reinforcements  from  the  King. 

Tlie  King  was  at  Pcshawcr  when  the  tiew<  of  this  misfortune  reached  him. 
He  sent  without  delay  to  recall  the  vizier  from  Cashmeer;  but  that  minister 
was  unable  or  unwilling  to  join  him,  and  he  was  obliged  to  command  in 
person  against  tlie  rebels. 

'  Before  he  reached  Candahar,  his  troops  had  been  agahi  deAafed  by  Cami- 
raun,  whowasidnlbrcedlijabodf  ofsixthonaandm«nfiwnH«M^undet 
the  tottnand  of  Mullik  Gsinstm  l^e  son  of  Priiice  Feemos. 

That  force  was,  however,  soon  recalled  to  Ueraut  bjr  an  attack  of  the 

Persians ;  Canmrann  fled,  the  King  entered  Candahar  1ine||ipaaed«  and 
Futteh  Khaun  was  soon  after  pi  cvuiled  on  to  join  him. 

The  attack  of  the  Persians  which  recalled  Mullik  Caub-im,  liad  been 
brought  on  by  an  ofi^sive  operation  of  Feerooz  Oodeeus,  ai)d  iiad  bceu 
forsome  time  Hireatened;  yet  ao  secure  was  FBeiOQc»  that  he  sent  hii  beat 
troops  to  the  assiatanoe'cf 'Caumraun/  and  made  -no  pr^mrations  fiyr  his  own 
defence  till  the  Persians  were  assembled  in  great; Ibice  within  a  short- distance 
of  his  city.   Ue  then  found- his  force  confined- to*fleven  fauodied  Doaravnecs 