

The  whole  of  the  wc«t  being  now  settled,  the  King  and  the  vizier  set  out 
firoiu  Candahar  in  tiie  end  of"  September,  and  marching  first  to  Smd,  they 
compelled  the  chiefs  of  that  country  to  ackuow  iudgu  the  new  govenuii^t» 
and  4o  pey.Mvenleen  lacks  of  rupees }  after  wbicfa  the  Khg  moved  np  bk 
caatera  fiontier»  and  settled  all  the  provinoas  in  bis  nmta  He  leeched 
Feshawer  in  April,  1805,  and  soon  after .  reoeived  an  ambassador  from  the 
King  of  Bokhaura,  who  came  to  propose  n  renewal  of  the  alliance  concluded 
by  Zeraaiin,  and  to  negociate  the  double  marriage  of  .Shujan  to  the  daughter 
of  the  King  of  Bokhaura,  and  of  that  King  to  a  princess  of  Caubul.  The 
ambassador  was  favourably  received,  but  as  it  is  contrary  to  the  Dooraunee 
onstom  to  give  Ibeir  dautg^tem  in  marriage  to  foreigners,  the  part  of  the  pro; 

10 


Digitized  by  Google 


AwBNDix.]  FUTTEH  KHAON  SUaaOK*  593 

pmal  respecting  the  King  of  Bokhaum's  nMliMgs^  wwcivill^dedilied:  tiMi 
of  Shuja  was  nevertliele<^s  agreed  to. 

During  all  this  time  Kyser  coaiiuued  to  serve  the  King  with  zeal  and 
fideli^  in  the  government  of  Candahar  i  he  had  even  oomtrived  to  seize 
WtMk  KhMio,  Mid  had  nearly  been  perwndnd  to  gratify  the  nvvngn  of  hit 
Iktfaer  Shmh  Zeniaiin»  liy  puttiQg,  him  to  desthj  bat  Fkittdi  Khnuo,  hming 
{H-evailed  on  tiie  prince  to  visit  him  privately  in  prison,  so  far  won  on  him  hy 
his  insinuating  manners,  his  allusions  to  former  services,  and  his  promises  of 
liituro  nttiirhment,  that  Kyser  not  only  set  him  free,  but  resumed  his  old 
connection  with  him,  and  began  once  more  to  aspire  to  the  throne.  Futteh 
Khaun,  on  his  release,  repaired  to  Girishk,  where  be  began  preparations  ibr 
^mtandedentcrprinBs  fautonhit2«lntntoGsiiddMr,hefiHuid  Kyierunder 
the  iaflnenlDe  of  Khqjeh  Mahomed  Khaun,  another  greet  nebkouui,  whohed 
disnaded  him  from  fawderign  of  rebelling.   On  this,  Ritteh  Khaun,  equally 
incensed  at  the  der;ingement  of  his  plans,  and  at  the  preference  of  another's 
advice  to  his,  openly  renounced  all  coiiiiLrtion  with  Kyser,  and  engaged  to 
deliver  up  Candaiitar  to  Cuumrauu,  whom  iie  nivited  to  occupy  it.  Caumraun, 
wlio  was  at  this  time  at  FUrrah,  immediately  assembled  a  body  of  troops,  and 
edvanoed  to  Bedgeoh,  a  ftw  milet  fiom  Cendahar,  and  Kyaar  was  about  to 
^nit  the  cHy,  when  a  scene  ensued,  whidi  is  soavoety  eredtbie  even  to  pecb 
sons  acquainted  with  the  eccentridtj  of  Fttttdl  Khauu's  diaracter,  and  the 
sudden  changes  of  afl'airs  so  common  among  Dooraunees.    On  the  night 
belbre  Kyser's  flight,  he  desired  to  have  a  parting  interview  with  Putteh 
Khaun  j  and  this  meeting  took  place  by  torch  light,  on  an  open  terrace  in 
the  maifcet-place,  which,  with  the  sunonndiDg  streets,  was  filled  with  horse- 
men leady  for  a-  nuuch.  The  conftience  began  widi  mntnal  leproadies  1 
but  the  piinee  gfadnalty  snAeoing  his  tone,  lemmded  SVitteh  Kbnm  of  hit 
having  saved  hk  life,  and  bosoqg^  him  not  to  repay  his  benefits  by  driving 
him  into  exile.    Futteh  Khaun  then  rornpitvdated  his  designs  in  favour  of 
Kysrr,  nnd  complained  oftlie  neglect  with  which  his  advice  wn^  treated  :  on 
tliis  Kyser  assured  him  that  lie  was  ready  for  ever  aller  to  toliow  ijis  counsels 
implicitly,  and  strengthened  his  assertions  by  such  solemn  oaths,  tliat  Futteh 
S3iaini  was  shaken,  and  at  last  Mmt«mM\  ||jg  fmentment,  and  swcfe  to  sup. 
port  the  priooe  in  all  oaitiismitiaB.  Next  moniing  the  prince  and  Fttttoh 
moved  out.  together  to  oppose  Canmmun.  Fkitldi  Khaun  advtaced  with  bis 
OMm  division,  and  calling  out  to  Caumraun,  acquainted  him  with  the  change' 
in  his  senthnents.  mid  iiidnivoured  to  persuade  him  to  retire,  ('juimrann 
was  at  tust  afttomshed  at  this  revolution,  but  he  resumed  his  courage,  and 