


Digitized  by  Googlc 


Jirrmx,}         EXPEDITION  TO  REDUCE  CAS9M££B.  g^S 

to  twiyg  sidfarad  tiw  fztmttiljM  Ipungw  bilbn  Ibo  wm  able  'to  piocave  m> 
Jisf  f<Hr  liMi  Miny.  So  fi^ert  wis  the  Mnm.a£lm  twops,  that  whm  lie  came 

to  a  defile  beyond  which  the  enemy's  army  was  encamped^  he  was  not  able 
to  hold  out  till  he  tried  the  chance  of  a  battle,  which  mit^lit  have  removed  all 
his  embarfa&smeotjs.  He  therefore  began  to  treat  with  Ahilooiiah  Khann : 
he  told  him  his  difficulties  without  reserve  ^  and  AbdooUa,  unwilling  to  drive 
Uai  todoqiwntioD,  liBtenad  to  tbe  tannt  which  nan  dStnA,  aad  i^j|tMd  to 
Mipply  him  with  pnmamis.  Mqhhtoiir  pniloiiged  a  ddimve  napotiation  tilt 
he  had  secured  some  further  advantages  which  he  had  in  view*  he  Ihanllinw 
off  the  mask  and  tuwUlities        immediately  renewed. 

The  armies,  however,  were  still  separated  by  the  Hydaspes.  At  last  Ab- 
doollah  threw  a  bi  ulijL  ovcc  tile  river  in  the  night,  and  crossing  it  without 
delay,  appeared  op  the  vizier's  rear  when  he  was  entirely  unprepared  to 
oppose  him }  tfaegreaier  part  of  hit  tfjoopa  weve  out  Enraging,  aod  he  could 
not  oallect  above  »  hundnd  hoMe  when  he  ihatnioifed  out  agaii^ 
By  dcgtee^  howevar,  l^  idmla  may  was  aumhhrf,  and  na^  adfiacing 
with  .the  viiier  at  its  head,  when  a  party  which  he  had  aent  in  fitrnt  fUl  bade 
on  them  in  the  greatest  confusion.  They  had  been  routed  in  consequence 
of  the  cowardice  of  the  vizier's  son  Atta  Mahomnied,  who  fied  without  strik- 
ing a  blow,  and  was  toUowed  by  his  disheartened  troops.  This  example  had 
nearly  ruined  the  army,  but  its  courage  was  restored  by  the  firmness  of  the 
viaier,  who  reoaivad  the  broken  troops  with  great  aeraittly,  attributed  Ua 
Mpn'a  Hight  to  a  concerted  Aint^  and  advaooed  with  incKaied  xapidi^*  aa  if 
to  take  advantage  of  the  succew  of  bu  atratagem.  This  onset  had  a  very 
di&reot  issue  from  the  former ;  for,  after  an  obstinate  conflict,  in  wliich  the 
vizier's  courage  was  conspicuous,  the  Cnshmeer  nrmy  was  routed  and  driven 
back  on  the  river.  The  bridge  was  chuuked  by  the  crowds  of  fugitives : 
great  part  oi  the  army,  among  which  was  AbdooUa  hLiiauu,  were  forced 
to  aiiiffi>  and  nanj  waie  ant  to  pieces  by  the  victon  or  drowned  in  the 
river* 

Abdoolla  Khaun  now  took  veiuge  in  his  eoH,  wfaaie  be  had  made  av«i7 
fiiaperation  for  a  long  siege ;  and  the  Kiqg's  troopa  were  prevented  fajr  tiw 
season  and  by  the  fatigues  which  they  had- onlferad  fiom  atteaaptipg  aaj  ope- 
ration during  the  rest  of  the  winter. 

Early  in  spring,  the  fort  was  attacked,  and  had  held  out  for  two  months 
when  AbdoG^  Khaun  died.  He  waa  a  nu«  of  good  talenta  and  great 
courage.  He  ja  atiU  apoken  of  with  aftction  by  the  Cashmerian^  and  bgr 
IheDvMfaviiaaa  who  haaaaamdinidQrhinb  Ha  ia  oonuneodad  Jbr  hia- kwa 