

4  o  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


5W  EXPEDITION  TO  REDUCE  CASHMEER.  CAppemdix. 

answered  iii  terms  of  defiance ;  on  whkh  Futteh  Khmin.  without  waiting  for 
the  other  troops,  charged  the  Prince  sword  in  hand ;  and  such  was  the  effect 
of  ihk  unexpected  attack,  that  Caumraun's  troops  brdce,  and  ke  bimseii' 
with  difficulty  effected  his  escape  to  Furrah. 

Rittdi  Khaun's  plan  of  placing  Kyser  on  the  throne  wm  turn  wfmmtA, 
ap|Mi«iilfywidithat  Friooe'BlUUoeiiciiff^^  ImtitscsMoftioiiifwattfiilly 
ddagred  by  Khojeh  Mahommed»  who  left  no  means  of  eperediig  on  the  pe»> 
lions,  the  prudence,  and  even  oa  the  aupentitioD  of  Ae  campntan,  vw 
practised  to  defeat  the  scheme. 

Meanwhile  tlie  King  had  prepared  an  expedition  at  Pe?<hawer  for  the  pur- 
pose  of  I  f  ilucintr  Crishmeer,  the  only  province  that  reiuanied  in  rebellion. 
Abdoola  Khaun,  tiic  governor^  had  fomented  the  troubles  at  Candahar  with 
Hw  view  of  diveftiag  the  attack  on  Umedf,  and  though  diaft  draenaaii 
ftom  at  aa  end,  Abdocdla  wai  Mved  fat  the  preeent  by  the  dwBeneiona  wfaiGh 
prevailed  among  Shuja's  own  courtien.   The  inunutions  of  Akxam  Kbaaa 
induced  the  King  to  refuse  the  command  <^  the  imj  to  the  viaer,  and  evnn 
to  talk  of  assuming  it  himself.    On  this  the  vizier  discouraged  the  expedition 
altogether,  and  found  means  to  put  off  the  march  of  the  troopn  till  a  subse- 
quent period,  wlien  the  King's  views  were  more  accommodated  to  his  own. 
This  opportunity  ofl^red  at  Caubul,  and  the  vizier  was  about  to  commence 
hn  match*  iriien  Akiam  Khaua  prevailed  on  ^  King  to  call  on  him  to  pay 
a  anm  of  money  aa  the  oondition  on  which  he  ihonld  have  the  •ooannand. 
The  King  accordingly  re<)uired  diree  laca  of  rupees ;  but  about  this  time  the 
vizier  lost  his  &vourite  daughter,  and  was  so  much  affected,  that  he  dedared 
he  was  resolved  never  to  quit  her  grave,  or  to  take  any  further  concern  in 
worldly  affairs.    Hie  King  was  now  reduced  to  solicit  him  to  resume  \\\^ 
office  and  carry  on  the  war  against  Cashmeer.    He  consented  with  real 
or  aiBumed  rductance,  and  the  daim  for  money  was  no  longer  mentioned. 

At  teiigth  he  set  out  on  has  maidi  with  aa  amy  of  ten  tbouaiad  men* 
The  ibst  opposition  he  encountered  was  at  Ifoaoflbiabad,  wfaeie  he  Ibraid 
the  h%|i  and  sodtjr  bank  of  a  rapid  branch  of  the  Hydaqw%  occupied  by  the 
Cashmerian  army:  he  nevertlicless  effected  a.  passage  in  four  divisions,  and 
drove  the  enemy  from  their  ground.  One  of  his  nwn  sons  was  wounded  in 
this  engagement.  The  rest  of  the  road  to  Cashmi  i  r  was  throiigli  tteep  and 
barren  mountains,  and  often  along  tiie  iiace  ui  precipicea.  Tiie  vizier^s  ad- 
vance was  consequently  slow,  and  his  previsions  began  to  M  bun  loaf 
bcfixe  be  reached  the  valley*  The  visser,  bgwever*  enconaaged  bis  mm  by 
Aaiiiig  their  suftripgs  %  be  gsvn  op  bis  own  slotn  to  the  saldiSB%  and  ia  mid 