

The  flin*  espidition  was  sent  to  Candahar,  which  was  still  hdd  hy  Jhinoe 

Canmraun  and  Fntteh  Khaun.  The  place  was  taken  without  difficulty,  and 
what  was  of  greater  importance,  Futteh  Khauu  was  soon  after  persuaded  to 
make  his  submissions  to  the  new  Kiug.  An  opportunity  was  now  otlereii  of 
lecaring  the  attachment  of  this  powerful  and  active  chiei';  but  it  was  allowed 
to  eMapCb  and  honoe  ame  the  BoiafiirtiinQa  which  dntnibed  the  raat  of  Shaub 
Shoojau's  rdgii»  imd  which  drove  hioB  at  length  fiom-  hla  thnme.  Viauk 
Kkaun's  demands  from  the  court  were  moderate,  and  did  not  extend  beyond 
the  offices  held  by  his  father ;  but  t))ese  were  withheld,  owing  either  tn  the 
imprudence  of  the  King,  or  the  jealousy  of  the  vizier  ;  and  Futteh  Khaun, 
after  a  short  residence  at  the  court,  quitted  it  m  duigu3t,  and  retired  to  bia 
oaadeof  Giririik.  ■ 

The  elKcIa  of  hia  diMflhotkn  were  earitjr  aad  aevevdy  i^-  for  in  Jaanaiy, 
1804,  when 'the  King  had  assembled  an  army  of  thir^  tibooaand  men  at 
Fethi^wer,  and  was  on  the  point  of  completing  the  settlement  of  his  domi- 
nions, bv  intimidating^  the  chiefs  of  Cashmeer  and  Sind,  he  received  intelli- 
gence ot  a  rebellion  ;ii  Candahar,  which  obiiged  him  jnuiiLLiiateiy  to  relin- 
quish his  design.  Tiie  rise  and  prepress  of  this  tranaactiuu  will  serve  to 
iUmttate  what  haa  been  laidcf  the  levi^<and  inconaiitency  which  distinguisb 


Digitized  by  Google 


REBELUON  OF  PBINCEtK78SBIL 


the  late  Atjy^haun  civil  wars.    The  govenuuent  ot  Caodahar  had  been  giyieii 
puinoft.Kyser  (a  ioq  .of  ^"ih  ZfimtiiiiV Ji  .iii)d0r  tibvgiiUbnca.of  *^*»«^  ' 
■Kbaun  Noonqrc^ .  wlxNe  dflMrtian  cf  8lunih.ZeiiMMiii  bad  botn  dboed  bj  Jm 
iMl^thft  ScwniiM.Teligiaii.   Futteh  KhMmibund  mcaiMLtopwsiiade  the 

young  prince  to  tnopriioii  Ahmed  Kbaun,  and  endeavour  to  nafce  himself 
King.  Ahmed  Khaun  was  accordingly  seized,  but,  though  be  was  treated 
with  many  insults  and  severities,  and  had  been  chained  with  the  chains  of 
Ml  elephant*  in  derision  of  \m  gigantic  stature,  yet,  as  soon  as  the  prince  and 
Fatteb  KhHtti  were  pr^ared  to  move  out  agaiiut  Geubul,  they,  rdeiied  bun^ 
end  entrofted  bun  with  tiie  ddence  of  tbe  dtj. 

The  OQneequences  might  have  been  expectt^d } .  Aluned  Khaun's  son  went 
over  to  Shooja,  and  occasioned  the  defeat  of.Kyser ;  while  beJumeei^  indif. 
fcrent  who  was  Kinf^,  if  hp  coiild  bnt  be  revef\<red  on  Kyser,  gave  up  Can- 
dahar  to  C'aumrauii,  whnra  lie  uu  kcd  ironi  Fmrah  to  occupy  it.  Atter  the 
defeat  of.  Kyser's  army,  the  King  wa&  about  to  enter  once  more  oo  the 
iettlemeiit  of  his  eaalm  domiaion^  when  he  leemed  that  Kjmt  nd  FauA 
KbauD  bed  reeovered  Caadahif,  and  weie  again  aweBibling  troops.  .He 
then  xetoroed  towaidsCandabar,. which  was  evaoualed on  his  appaoech;  and 
Kyser  soon  afler  threw  himself  on  the  King's  mercy,  was  affectionately  re- 
ceived, and  was  rrinstated  in  Ilis  government.  Fntteh  Khnun,  findinj;  his 
adiemes  at  (  andahar  defeated,  repaired  to  Hcraut,  and  insinuating  himself 
into  the  contidence  of  prince  jf  eerooz,  persuaded  him  to  ameit  his  claim  to 
the  Ibnne  of  GMdniL  EMfoos  appearing  in  armSk  Shuja  sent  Kyser  at  the 
bead  of  an  army  to  opfMse  hun,  ai^  at  tbe  same  time  oAied  tanoB^  wbidi 
Feerooz,  who  was  naturally  cautious,  thought  propar  to  aocc^$  while  Atttah 
quitted  him  in  indignation,  and  again  retired  to  Girisht. 