

11    ■  • 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


Amm>n.3    DISSENTION  BETWEEN  THE  KING  AND  VIZIEIL  Sffl 


tod  two  thoosand  "BmUsa  guards,  but  hems  loai  joined  by  five  or  six  tliOQ» 
sand  Eimauks,  who  were  raised  to  great  enthusiasBi  against  thr  Persians 
and  Sheeahs,  by  the  exhortations  of  Soofee  Islaum,  an  Uzbek  M  oollah,  wbo 
had  long:  resided  at  Heraut,  where  he  enjoyed  great  wealth  and  honour. 

With  this  army  Feerooz  marched  out  to  engage  the  Peruauas,  who  were 
superior  in  numbers,  as  well  ai^  in  the  chfliacter  of  tibeir  tioopst  imteid  qf 
ddfending  the  passage  of  the  Pooleemadaun  (Ocbm)t  he  jajadicioud^jr  left 
,  that  river  Mi  his  reaf;  ndnoaooperlMttthiiemiyCTOMed,  than  tte  PawMWt 
sent  a  body  of  excellent  infiuitiy  to  occupy  liie  doty  bridge.  Nevertheless 
the  seven  hundred  Doorannees  charged  the  enemy  with  the  utmost  impetu- 
osity: they  broke  through  the  fir'?t  line  of  the  Persians,  which  was  composed 
of  infantry,  and  threw  the  centre  of  the  cavalry,  who  formed  the  second 
Vaiet  into  great  oonfiitkm }  but  being  greatly  out-nnmbtRd,  they  wve  soon 
surroonded,  and  cot  off  ahnoat  to  a  man.  The  Kmauka  broke  as  eoon  as 
tiie  Dooraunees  were  sunonnded;  and  Feeroos  fled  without  making  my 
exertion.  The  slaughter  was  great:  Soo&e  Islaum  fell  fighting  gallantly 
at  the  head  of  a  b:tntl  composed  of  his  own  retainers,  ami  of  rrlifrioiis  enthu- 
siasts who  accompanie(i  him  as  volunteers.  His  body  tell  into  ilu-  liauds  of 
the  Persians,  who  burned  it  with  every  circumstance  ot  ludigmty.  The 
*  fugitives  And  little  better;  manj'  were  drowned  in  tiie'Odhns  and  Veeioo* 
hmiselfeaeaped  with  great  difficidt^,  after  losing  his  horse.        ^  - 

The  Persians  immediatdj  prepared  to  lay  siege  to  Hcraut)  hot  MsdHk 
Canssim  -vas  now  on  his  return;  the  Eimauks  and  Dooraunees  had  tine 
to  as-^emble ;  and  t^f  Persians  proposed  terms  to  Feerooz,  which  that  cau- 
tious Prince  ;«•«  r;itefl.  They  were  that  he  should  pay  50,000  rupees,  and 
give  his  son  as  a  iio^tage  for  the  discharge  of  the  sum,  and  that  he  abmild 
give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  the  Penrian  PMnce  at  M eririwd.:  the  -two 
lirst  attidee  were  iUMlled,  but  the  third  was  disngnM. 

This  sncoesa  of  the  Peisiana  at  int  excited  a  strong  swiatien  ammg  the 
DoonmneeSf  and  the  King  at  one  time  intended  to  have- moved  to  Heraut 
in  person  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  the  Afghaun  name ;  but  the  internal 
Stat  r  >t  the  kii]>gdom  at  this  time  was  l^-no  means  such  as  to  allow  oi  ibreign 
enterprises.  - 

The  chief  obstacle  anae  fiom  the  increased  disunion  between  the  King 
•and  tiie  Viiier,  whidi  vMm  now  ffq>idly  tending  to  aq  open  rupture.  WlwU 
ever  jeakrasy  tlie  King'aii|^  have  eoteftained  of  the-.viiiit'si'poiRrer»  he-had 