


Digitized  by  Google 


61S 


GAUFnUBTAON. 


hommnlile  m  ibe  innrder  of  •  Momiliinn.  At  lengdi  the  aAnntam  wu  • 
undertaken  by  MboOah  Ki^edi  (a  bioUier  of  MooUah  Bebnaniiid  tkmif 

mentioned),  a  person  admirably  fitted  for  the  task  by  his  telenli  end 
curiosity.  He  left  Peshawer  in  the  middle  of  May,  and  penetrated  into 
the  country  of  the  Caufirs  by  the  way  of  Punjcora.  The  mi!isioii  set  out  for 
India  about  a  month  ailerward^y  at  wbicli  time  uo  news  had  beeu  received  of 
him :  as  long  as  we  continued  in  the  Aigbaun  dominions,  we  entertained 
strong  hopes  of  hit  return;  but  wben  the  seoood  month  had  ehpeed,  and  we 
had  half  ciOMed  the  FkinjaulH  we  began  to  be  unea^  about  htm,  anid  Im 
brother  who  had  aocomiiiiiied' me  so  far,  returned  to  make  enquiries  con> 
cernmg  Km,  under  a  perstiaston  that  he  had  been  murdered  by  the  Caufirs. 
I  had  no  tidings  of  him  from  this  tinu  tili  I  had  been  for  some  months  at 
Pelly,  and  I  bad  given  up  all  h(jpcs  ot  ever  i^eeiog  ium,  wiicn  he  unexpec- 
tedly aimed  in  Camp,  having  undertdcen  Ibis  long  joumejfiom  1m  eunt 
~  eountiy  rather  dum  dinppoint  onr  expectaciane.  He  bad  been  as  €ttm 
^.miuImA^  a  TiU^  within  three  stages  of  Budukhsbaun,  had  made  hinuelf 
master  of  every  thing  relating  to  the  Caufirs,  had  completed  a  voodndaiy  of 
tlieir  language,  and  brought  full  answers  to  a  lorn  h'it  of  queries  with  which 
he  had  been  furnished  at  his  departure.  The  iollowmg  account  is  <^Tef?y 
abstracted  from  his  report,  which  was  translated  Ifr.  Irvine ;  but  as  I  had 
(^jpoftonitieB  of  obtainii^  fiirther  hrfbrmstioa  during  the  VMMfu  abitiiiaft; 
I  have  made  use  of  it  to  dieclc  and  to  illustrate  his  account. 

The  piiac^al  sources  from  which  this  additional  information  was  derived, 
were,  a  young  Caufir  whom  I  bad  opportiinit!P<?  of  interrogating  ;  n  Hindoo 
clerk  of  Mr.  Irvine,  who  had  ^nsitcd  the  country  of  tlif  Caufirs  ;  the  Syud  of 
Coonner's  agent,  who  li\  ed  ou  tlieir  border }  and  an  Eusofzye,  who  bad  been 
engaged  in  a  military  expedition  into  Aeit  emmtrjr.  The  geography  is  taken 
as  oMial  from  Uentenant  Macaitn^. 

The  country  of  the  Gaufirs  occopies  a  great  part  of  the  range  of  Hindoo 
Cooeb,  and  a  portion  of  Tlflf>ot  Taugh.  It  is  bounded  on  tlie  nortii^east  1^ 
Kaushkaur,  on  the  north  by  Budukhsbaun,  and  on  the  north-west  by  Koon- 
dooz  iu  Bulkh.  On.the  west  it  has  Inderaub  and  Kbost,  also  in  Bulkh,  and 
the  Cobistaun  of  Caubul ;  and  on  the  east  it  extends  for  a  great  distance 
towards  tfie  norfli  ofCaihmeer,  wfaeie  its  boundary  is  not  distiaetfy  known. 
-  Tlie  whole  of  tliis  Alpine  oountty  is  eomposed  of  miwy  mouBtafnik  deep 
pine  fiwestB,  and  small  but  fertile  valleys,  which  produce  large  quantities  of 
grapes  wild  and  cultivated,  and  feed  flocks  of  sheep  and  herds  of  cattle, 
whfle  the  hilb  are  covered  with  goats.   Qnun  is  inferior,  boUi  in  impoKtanoe 