

la 


Digitized  by  GoOgle 


I 


cap  on  the  ground  when  he  enters  the  house,  then  draws  his  dagger,  and 
weMag  the  heads  of  the  afflicted  twraon,  mekee  hSm  rae  and  jdn  Utn  in 
dancing  for  some  time  about  the  room. 

I  can  give  but  little  accoant  of  the  government  of  the  Caufirs.   It  il  Itiu 

certain  whether  tliere  are  any  acknowledged  magistrates  ;  if  there  are,  they 
have  very  little  power,  every  thing  being  done  by  consultations  among  the 
rich  men.  They  seem  to  practise  retaliation  like  the  AfghauuH,  and  I  know 
of  no  other  administration  of  justice.  They  have  no  titles  of  their  own,  but 
they  have  bonowed  that  of  Khaun  from  the  Afghauna  Ibr  Hietr  ridi  men. 
nidr  proper^  chiefly  oonnats  in  cattle  and  davei  j  •  rich  nan  at  Camndaiah 
had  about  eight  bundled  goats,  near  three  hundred  oxen,  and  ftmSiet 
of  slaves. 

The  v,ho)e  dress  of  the  common  people  among  tlie  Leaposhe  Caufirs,  is 
composed  of  four  goat-skinn,  two  of  which  form  a  ve&t,  and  two  a  kind  of 
petticoat.  The  skins  have  long  hair  on  the  outside.  The  upper  ones  do  not 
cover  the  arms.  The  whole  is  ftatened  on  -witii  ft  leatiier  bdL  They  gd 
bare  beaded*  unless  they  have  killed  a  Mussulman  |  and  shave  their  beadii 
except  for  a  long  tuft  on  the  crown  and  perhaps  two  curls  over  the  ear& 
They  also  pluck  out  the  hair  from  their  upper  lip^  cheeks^  and  neck;,  but  wear 
beards  four  or  five  inches  long. 

Those  in  good  circumstances  and  those  near  the  Afghauns  wear  a  shirt 
beneath  tb«r  vest*  and  in  sunutter  the  diirt  Ibtma  the  whole  of  llidr  dteaii 
as  it  always  does  witii  the  wonwD.  Thi  great  do  not  wter  goat>akini^  but 
ooCfeon  cloth  or  black  hair  ctoth.  Some  also  wear  the  sort  of  white  blanket 
woven  in  tlie  neiglibouring  country  of  Kaushkaur.  Urn  blankets  are  pat  on 
like  Highland  plaids,  come  down  to  near  the  knee,  and  are  fastened  with  a 
belt.  They  also  wear  cotton  trowsers,  which»  as  well  as  their  shirts*  are 
worked  aU  over  iRlfalki#eis  in  red  and  UackininlBdL  fte  trdWten  ar6  slit 
at  the  bottom,  so  as  to  make  »  soit  of  fiiDge^  ■  Ibey  ab»  #fiar  worsted 
stockings,  or  perhaps  worsted  fllleta  ralled  round  tbab  Iq^ ;  andthe*arfioif 
wear  half-boots  of  white  goat^Idn.  ■ 

The  dress  of  the  women  differs  little  from  that  of  the  men,  but  they  have 
their  hnir  phiti-d  and  lasieiied  on  the  top  of  their  head,  and  over  it  a  small 
cap,  round  wluch  is  a  little  turban.  They  have  also  silver  ornaments  and 
many  cowry  abeUs.  The  virgms  wear  e  red  fillet  round  their  heads. 

Soth  sexes  have  ear-rings,  rings  round  the  neck,  and  bracelets,  which  are 
sometimes  of  silver,  but  often er  of  pewter  or  brass.  Hheaeareleft  odf  duiittg 
nounuiig}  and  Uritk  the  men  they  are  sssumed,  with  much  oefemoiij  and 