


Digitized  by  GoOgI< 


CAUFI&ISTAUM. 


•god-of  the  waters,  ad,  Maunee,  who  expeDad  Yooah,  or  the  evil  principle* 
from  the  world.  3d,  Murrur.  4th,  Umim.  5tli,  Pursoo.  6th,  Geesh. 
7th,  Seven  brothers  of  the  name  of  Paradik,  who  had  golden  bodies,  and 
were  created  from  a  golden  tree.  8th,  Purron,  seven  golden  brothers  of  the 
same  kind.  9th,  Kooniye,  whoui  Moollah  Nujeeb  calls  the  wife  ui'  Adam, 
iftth,  THf—iiiwm,  «ile  of  Geesh.  iitii,  Doolne.  latli,  Surijoo.  And 
lijib.  Niditee. 

Those  of  the  Taookooee*  are  Maunde»  peduiiw  Maune,  before  mentioned. 
Maraist,  Murrasooree,  and  Indeijee,  who  may  perhaps  be  the  Hindoo  god 
Inder,  or  Indra,  with  the  Indian  title  of  Jee  annexed  to  his  name.  Dhun- 
put  Roy  (Mr.  Irvine's  Hindoo)  was  indeed  positive  in  stating  that  the  Cau- 
£ir  idols  represented  the  Hindoo  god  Seddasbeo,  and  always  bore  a  trident» 
which  is  the  ayiiibQl  of  that  god.  Ho  also  nid  that  they  called  some  of  their 
gods  Shee  Mahadeo,  and  that  they  used  the  nine  words  as  a  sahilatmn  to 
each  other :  but  these  circumstances  are  inconsistent  with  other  accounla^ 
and  n*'  Dhunput  Roy  himself  admitted  that  the  Caufirs  ate  beef,  it  seems 
improbable  that  they  bear  so  close  a  resemblance  to  the  Hindoos.  All  ac- 
counts also  represent  them  as  sprinkling  their  idols  with  blood,  uiid  even 
widi  lihe  blood  of  cow^,  which  cannot  be  reoonctled  to  the  Hindoo  religion  ^ 
and'^all  repreient  fire  as  lequisite  at  everjr  rdigious  ceremony. 

Moollah  Nujeeb  was  present  on  an  occasion  of  this  kind  at  Catundaish  j  it 
was  a  sacrifice  to  Imra,  and  was  celebrated  at  a  particular  place  near  the  vil- 
lage where  there  was  a  stone  post,  whfrh  apj^ean;,  by  the  MooUah's  descrip- 
,tion,  to  have  borne  some  resemblance  to  tiie  lliudiX)  emblem  of  Mahadeo  : 
a  fire  was  kindled  before  it,  through  whidi  flour,  butter,  and  water,  were 
thrown  on-the  stone;  at  l^igth  an  animal  was  sacrified,  and  the  blood  tinown 
thioui^  the  fire  on  the  stone;  part  of  the  flesh  was  biixned,  and  part  eaten 
by  the  assistants,  who  were  numerous,  and  who  accompaided  the  priest  in 
various  prayers  and  de\'out  gesticulations.  One  of  the  prayers  was  for  the 
.extirpation  of  the  Mussulmans  *.   The  worship  of'  idols  is  pecibnned  nearly 


*  Some  may  be  lutcreated  hj  the  following  details  of  the  ceremony.    The  wood  UKd  in  the  Hcri> 

fice,  which  MoolUi  Nujeeb  cdbKdiKtofkiianedKMOBOofiwTho^  aeoocdiagto 
Dhttnput  Rvf. 

^  **  Then  k  m  itoiie  wt  upright  aboot  Ibar  ftet  1i%b,  iml  bi  bmddi  about  tbat  of  s  itaol  nm. 

Thit  is  the  Imrtan,  or  holy  «;tor.c,  and  bt-hind  it  to  th?  north  if  a  wall."  This  is  all  the  temple. 
•Tb«  atiMie  rcfinaent*  Cod.  Thcjr  uy  *'  this  sfaods  for  him,  but  we  know  not  bit  ihape."  To  the 
■o«Ui«f  tbttaitaobMBiafiK  of  Kandior,  a^CMof  jAiewbidiiltbram  wgnMtpwpoi^ 