

4l 


Digitized  by  Google 


686 


CAOTIEISTAUM. 


(Anuoub 


expcnm  ftuting,  ate  the  age  of  uiMiliood.  Ilie  hoooniy  dist&iotkMis  & 
the  dM  of  the  olen  iriU  b«  mantMnfid  heiMte. 

The  houses  of  the  Cauiirs  are  often  of  wood,  and  they  have  generally  cel- 
lars where  they  keep  their  cheeses,  clarified  butter,  wine,  and  vinegar.  In 
every  house  there  is  a  wooden  bencfi  rixed  to  the  wall  with  a  low  back  to  it. 
There  are  alan  stooJs  shaped  like  drums,  but  smaller  in  the  middle  thau  at 
the.flitdfl^  and  taUes  of  ^  nme  Mut,  but  larger.  Hie  Gaufirs,  partly  Seom 
their  dn»  and  partly  fitm  habit,  cannot  ait  like  the  other  AaiatioB  j  and  if 
iRMPoed  to  sit  down  on  the  ground,  stretch  out  their  lep  like  European!.  Thef 
have  also  bedsmadeof  wood  and  tboogB  of  neat's  leather-:  the  stools  ane  made 
of  wicker  work. 

Their  food  is  chiefly  Hieese,  butter,  and  iiiiik,  with  bread  or  a  sort  ot  suet 
pudding.  1  iiey  also  eat  llesh  (which  they  like  irnli  raw) }  and  the  iruits  they 
hevf,  inlnuts,  grapes,  apples,  almonds,  and  a  sort  of  indiflbnmt  apiioot  thiA 
groVra  wild.  They  wash  their  hands  before  eatings  and  generally  begin  by 
iome  kind  of  grace.  They  all,  of  both  sexes,  drink  wine  to  great  excess : 
they  have  three  kinds,  red,  white,  and  dark  coloured,  besides  a  sort  of  the 
consistence  of  a  jelly,  and  very  strong.  They  drink  wit>e,  both  pure  and 
diluted,  out  of  large  silver  cupn,  wliich  axe  the  most  preuous  of  their 
possearions. '  They  drink  during  their  meals,  and  are  elevatodt  but  not  made 
quarrebom^  by  this  .indulgence.  They  are  exceedingly  hotfiitables  the 
people  of  a  vill^  come  out  to  meet  a  etnmger,  take  his  baggage  fh>m  those 
who  are  carrying  it,  and  conduct  him  with  many  welcomes  into  their  village^ 
When  there,  he  must  visit  every  person  of  note,  and  at  each  house  he  is 
pres-sed  to  eat  and  drink.  The  Cautirs  nave  a  great  deal  of  idle  time  ;  they 
hunt  a  little,  but  not  so  much  as  the  Afghaun^  :  their  iavounte  amujicmeut  is 
dancing.  Their  dances  are  generally  rapid,  and  they  uaemauy  gesticidatiOQab 
faishur  ihftr  dumlden.  tht^Vftf  thor  h«>*<^*-  muI  flmnyStMiig  rimir  t** «»i^-»w— 
AH  sexes  and  ages  dance.  Tliey  sometimes  form  a  circle  of  men  and  women 
alternately,  who  move  round  the  musicians  for  some  time  With  joil^d  handle 
then  all  spnng  tonvard  and  mix  together  in  a  dance. 

They  dance  with  great  vehemence,  and  beat  the  ground  witli  muclt  force. 
Their  oniy  instmments  ate  « tabwand  pipe*  but  the  dancers  often  accom- 
pany them  with  the  voice*  Tlieir  music  is  generally  quid^  but  varied  and 
wild. 

One  of  their  characteristic  features  is  their  constant  war  with  the  Mussul> 