


CIAUFIRI&TAUII. 


handkerchief  and  some  other  ornaments  and  articles  of  dress  for  the  bride, 
i^d  gives  a  coir,  mod  perhaps  »  dmre  to'  the.bfidcgrooni.  The  girl  is  tbcn 
KmI  out  iritli  ft  faidctt  on  hsr  back  doutiitui^  'fiiiits  and  wahuito  pnpmd 

ynA  hau^f  and  (if  the  family  can  afford  it),  ft  silver  cup.  In  this  manner 
she  proceed^  to  her  husband*s  lioiise,  the  whole  village  attending,  dancing 
and  siugiug-  Some  days  afterwards,  thp  father  receives  the  pric^  of  his 
daughter,  which  is  said  sometimes  to  amuunt  to  twenty  cows.  The  priests 
have  no  share  in  the  ceremony.  The  women  do  all  the  drudgery  of  die 
family.  Dhunpat  Baiy  states  that  tb^  even  till  the  land.  Foljganj  ia 
aliowed.  Tliere  is  no  conoealment  of  iponaeo.  Adnlteiyisnot  thoqghtmiicii 
of,  though  there  is  a poiualunent  for  it.  , 
Besides  their  wives,  the  rich  Canfii  have  male  and  female  slaves.  These 
are  all  Caufirs  (tor  they  take  no  prisoners  in  their  wars  with  Mussulmans). 
Some  of  them  are  laikeu  in  battle  from  tribes  with  which  they  are  at  war,  aud 
etkeis  stolen  ftom  those  with  whom  they  are  at  peace,  but  the  greater  part 
ace  people  of  their  own  tribes  it  beuog  quite,  oommon  fyt  poweffiil  men  tp* 
seize  on  the  duUran  of -wesk  oiies  and  neW  them  to  the  Mussuboans  or  keep 
ibem  for  their  own  use  :  a  person  wlio  loses  his  relations  is  soon  made  a 
slave.  The  slaves  who  are  retained  in  the  tribe,  however,  are  not  ill  tised, 
though  not  exactly  on  a  looUufi  with  the  tre^  people  pf  the  tamiiy  they 
belong  to.  '     .  ', 

V  The  Ibaerab  of  the  Caiifin  difibr  mndi  from  tboee  of  odier  nalaooi^ 
^K^ben  a  person  dle^  he  is  dressed  in  bos  best  dothes  and  extended  en  abed 
on  whidi  his  arms  are  laid  by  bis  side.  Thu  is  oenmd  sboot  by  some  of  bi^ 
rdations,  while  the  rest  sing  and  dance  round  it^  the  men  'performing  a 
sham-fipht,  but  the  women  lamenting:  from  time  to  time  the  body  is  set 
down,  aud  the  women  we^  over  it.  At  length  it  is  siiut  up  in  a  coffin  and 
'deposited  in  the  open  air  under  the  shade  of  treei^  or  in  sooae  oUier  suitable 
<eitiiati(ita.  Every  fimeial  oondudes  with  an  entertainmmri;  ftnd  onee  ft  yesr 
»  ftast  is  given  in  memory  of  tte'deoeeied,  and  some  Ibod  is  eaqMieedAr-iiis 
manes,  which  are  invoked  to  come  and  partake.  It  has  been  mentioned  that 
some  attain  to  the  rjmk  of  gods  after  their  death  ;  there  is  another  way  of 
securing  postimmous  reputation,  by  the  erection  of  a  gate  near  the  way  side. 
It  is  but  a  simple  structure,  consisting  of  four  beams  and  a  i'ew  yank  of 
-masoniy,  and  is  of  no  use)  but  it  is  called  after  the  name  «f  the  ftunder, 
and  the  e^(^ent  of  thb  honour  must  be  purdiased  fay  many  ftmts  to  the 
inUsge*  A.  strange  account  is  given  by  Dhunput  Roy  of  their  ceramemes  of 
,^ondolenoe:  ftpetion  who  vishs  another  thai  has  lost  a  xehrtieq,  throwt  hie 