

4Xr  a 


Mt  BUDDKHBHAUlf.  rAnms. 

high  pole  before  Uieir  doors,  in  wluch  axe  iiuiei  to  receive  a  pm  for  every 
MuMulntio  th«  omwr  haa  killed,  and  a  nag  fat  every  ona  lia  Ini  voaiuled. 
WKJi  mdi  floooangement  to  Idll  tham,  it  k  not  likaly  tiw  Crailn  mmld 
often  maka  Mussulmans  prinmait;  audi  caaas  have  happened  M^ian  Aa 

Caufin  were  defending  their  own  village,  and  they  then  made  a  feaat  niA 
great  triumph,  and  put  the  unfortunata  priaooer  to  death  in  much  forai)  or 
perhaps  sacrificed  turn  to  their  idols. 

They»  however,  soinetiuies  have  peace  or  U  uce  with  Mussulmans.  Their 
way  of  atriking  a  league  it  aa  atnnge  aa  their  mode  <£  war.  Tiwy  k3l  a 
goat  and  draia  the  haart*  bite  off  hal^  and  give  tiie  feat  to  tiie  Hoiaulauaii 
the  parties  then  gently  bite  eadi  about  tiie  lagion  of  the  baact,  and  ^ 
treaty  is  concluded. 

Though  exasperated  to  such  fiiry  by  the  persecutions  of  the  Mahomedans, 
the  Caufirs  are  in  general  a  harmless,  affectionate,  and  kind-hearted  peupie. 
Though  passionate  they  are  easily  appeased :  they  are  merry,  playiUI,  fond 
of  laughter,  and  altogetiier  of  a  aociable  and  jojona  disposition.  Even  to 
MuMulmani,  they  are  bind  when  they  admit  them  aa  guaat%  and  tbongb 
Hoollab'  Nujeeb  was  once  obliged  to  be  kept  by  the  other  GMifiiib  out  «f 
the  way  of  a  drunken  man  of  their  nation,  he  was  never  threatened  or 
affironted  oa  account  of  hia  reiigioa  by  aoy  man  in  possesaaon  of  hia 
&culties. 

Budukhshaun*  though  an  extensive  country,  seems  to  be  but  one  great 
vtSkf  nmning  up  fiom  tibe  province  of  Bulkh  to  Bekxit  T^uigb  behl^en 
die  bighiaiidt  oonneoted  with  the  Funere  and  the  lange  of  Hindoo  Cooab. 
The  nearest  parts  of  Hmdoo  Oooah  and  Beloot  Taugh  are  inhabited  by 

Caufirs,  whose  tcrritorj'  conse<juent!y  bounds  Biuliikhshann  on  the  south 
and  east,  dividing  it  from  tlie  Alghauns,  and  tlic  Cobis  of  Kaiishkaur;  on 
the  west  are  the  independent  Uzbeks  of  Koondooz,  Taulikaun  and  Ui^aur, 
and  on  the  north,  the  Kir^uzaaa  of  Fkmeie  and  the  Taujiks  of  Shoaghnaun* 
Derwans  and  Wnkheeba. 

Ulieae  countries  are  exceediiifi^y  nMmntainoua»  and  are  bounded  co  Ae 
north  by  a  sinMlar  country  called  Kurrategeen  also  inhabited  by  Taujiks, 
and  extending  to  Kokun  or  Ferghauna.  The  King  of  Derwnuz  dainis 
descent  irom  Alexander  the  Great,  and  his  pretensions  are  admitted  by  all 
his  neighbours. 

The  Oxua  riaes  in  the  north«east  of  Budukhshaun,  flows  wiAhi  its 
nortliem  border^  and  afterwarda  aqparataa  it  from  Hiasaur.  The  interior  of 
Biidukihann  ia  watered  by  the.Eoodia,  wbidi  joina  the  Oeob,  It  is  a 


Digitizer 


AmMUEj  KAUSHKAUB.  em 

comidarabb  skretn*  over  vHiSA  tlwre  ak*  levanl  woodtn  luridgmfc  «•. 
seldom  ficdaUe  m  low  as  Fjoabad.  The  part  of  Beloot  Taugfr  withia 