

From  C'a-'hineer  to  Hindoo  Koosh,  all  the  rivers  which  rise  north  of  this  '  • 
ridge  liave  a  uortii-wc&t  course,  with  the  exception  of  the  Indus,  or  Sind,  and 
Kammahi  (these  being  forced  to  the  iondiwsid  bf  other  high  ridges,  wfaida 
run  at  right  angleo  to  the  great  onei}  and  all  thefivanwhidi  nsesontii  of 
them  hnro  a  soutlieriy  course.  Hiv  is  ^  strongest  proof  I  can  give  of  its 
being  a  very  high  ridge,  and  it  was  perfectly  white  in  the  month  of  June, 
when  tiie  thermometer  was  at  Peshour  at  fhnt  time  i  is"  and  113'.  The 
same  thermometer  was  26"  4',  fhrther  south,  ni  the  months  of  December  and 
January,  at  Mooltan,  in  latitude  30*  14^  jo**.  This  great  ndge  fiom  the  poioi 


Digitized  byGoogle 


TUB  VAMER  RIDOE. 


I  commenced  at  north-east  of  Cashmeer,  has  a  south-east  course  running 
along  tiie  heads  of  the  rivers  of  tlie  Pimjaub,  passing  to  tiie  north  of  Kot 
Kangra,  Bilaspoor,  and  Siveuugur,  cnmog  tfac  liMtda  of  the  Jimoift  aad 
-Gn^}  after  whicfa  tiieir  coune  ia  Mmthefly.  This  ridge  is  perfectly  void 
nf  verdura  tomndt  thoranimiiitib  but  their  base  n  well  wooded;  their  eodi^ 
mite  appeer  exoeMdvidy  rogged*  hawing  many  high  and  very  remarkablepeaks, 
but  unfortunately  we  marched  from  Peshour  at  a  time  when  they  were  not 
visible,  otherwi-^e  the  exact  wimlinj^  of  tlie  ridge  irom  Julaiabad  to  &ea- 
nuggur.  might  have  been  got  by  crosa  bearings. 

IL  m  r  Aim  niMK. 

Taoom  this  ridge  u  inferior  in  height  to  the  last,  die  land  on  which  it 
runs,  appears  to  me  much  higher,  for  in  travelling  to  the  north  from  the 
Hindoo  Koosh  ridge,  the  ascent  appears  to  be  very  considerable,  and  as  a 
prooi  of  it,  all  the  rivers  which  have  their  source  in  tliis  ridge,  have  a 
■outheriy  course  tiU  they  aieet  the  high  hud  of  Hindoo  Koosh,  after  which 
thqr  ran  weat  and  weBfeauirth.«est  after  joining  the  Qxni.  Hue  river  meela 
the  high  lands  of  Hindoo  Koosh  north-east  of  Bnlkh  at  Huzmtinieani*  one 
dq^  iKMlJi  of  the  hills  where  the  £U1  from  them  towards  the  iKMrth  appean 
to  terminate ;  and  this  may  be  considered  the  h)wp'?t  part  between  the  two 
ridge'?^  but  as  the  rivers  which  issue  from  the  Pamer  ridge,  have  a  southern 
course  ol  from  two  to  three  degrees,  and  tiiose  from  Hindoo  Ko<^  one 
from  one  to  one-half  degree,  and  both  being  equally  rapid,  I  think  it  is  a 
•mng  proof  that  tho  land  ef  Buner  ia  ooorideraUjr  higher  than  thet  of 
Hindoo  Kooah)  butaatfaehiUa  which  nin  north  of  this  high  kudfiomaboot 
weit-north-west  to  east^oth-eaat  (aa  appears  by  the  joofeea  whidi  cioia  theai 
at  different  distant  point*),  are  only  one  day's  jdurney  across,  and  the  Hin- 
doo Komh  ridge  in  many  places  two  days;  tlie  latter  one  may  be  ron'^idercd 
the  greatest,  though  the  ridge  on  which  they  run  is  mlienor.  Tiiih  ruii^t?, 
like  the  Hindoo  Koosh,  has  unfortunately  no  general  name  by  which  they 
«aa  be  tnoed  and  known  at  dilfaentifialantpointiib  hvt  fidm  the  finowhig 
tnutea  cnwdng  a  hi^  ri4ge  one  daf'a  journey  aeieasb  and  ooveeed  with 
anow  Ar  Ihe  greater  part  of  the  year,  and  at  the  di&rent  points  the  nvtn 
runnins;  north  and  south  from  them,  I  can  have  no  doubt  of  its  being  one 
rid^e  inmi  Aksoo,  south-ca'^t  of  Khoojund  to  near  Leh  or  Luddaclc,  where 