

The  fourth  grand  ponit  is  Bulkh,  the  position  oi  which  is  well  calculated 
for  fixing  the  following  points,  viz.  Herat,  Bokhara,  and  Budukshaun.  Bulkh 
it  eittiated  two  mardiea  ftom  die  left  benk  of  the  Ammoo  4t  Oxat^  on  Urn 
great  road  from  Peihonr,  Cabal»  and  yandahar«  to  Bofchew.  IhvwagiMft 
naoj  excellent  routes  to  it  from  the  ebofve  plaoet,  and  the  most  of  them 
agree  ;  those  wliicb  I  had  reason  to  suppose  incorrect,  I  rejected,  'hu\  from 
having  so  many  which  agree  in  the  places  and  distances,  and  the  points  tbrm- 
ing  great  angles,  besides  numerous  cr<m  routes  to  coxrect  the  distance  in  the 
great  curves  of  the  lohd,  t  ffkl  great  confidenee  in  placing  BuUch  as  I 

I  ihall  take  dusaiapoaiitfiron  vhidi  I  Acan  to  settle  thepoiitkm  of  HewL 
Kandidiar  ehallbethe  second  poiaL  Frain  the  great  distance  of  Herait,andfitMn^ 

the  Hiizara  country,  which  is  generally  avoided  by  travellers,  being  on  the 
direct  road  tirom  Cabul  to  it,  the  road  takes  a  great  curve,  and  I  have  found 
more  difEbul^  in  placing  it  thau  any  of  the  points  hitherto  iaid  down.  The 
lontes,  hoiwerer,  of  Zemnn  Shah  aiid  JIfahinood  Shah  fawn.Heiat  to  Cibu^ 
tfaEoqgh  the  HiBttdi  eooBtiy  in  a  direet  luie  (the  ftiiM 

4M  . 


4m 


OOHSntUCnON  of  the  if  AP.  [Amm 


in  eleven  and  the  latter  in  thirtpen  days),  have  been  of  great  service,  with  the 
routes  from  Kandahar  and  Buikii,  in  fixing  its  position.  Had  it  not  been  for 
dMM  rotttaii  I'dMuldhmve  placed  Herat  modi  Anther  weat,  and  given  a  leal 
mm  to  the  foad  fimn  Kandahar.  I  have  allowed  a'diatanceof  Ibor  faandRid 
and  eighteen  mOes  ftom  Herat  to  Cabnl  in  a  direct  line,  which  I  conceive  to 
be  a  fiill  allowance ;  this  gives,  in  a  direct  line,  thirty-eight  miles  a  day,  which 
Zomatm  Shah  must  have  marclied  ;  and  the  country  being  excessively  moun- 
tainous all  the  way,  I  cannot  allow  less  than  one  in  seven  for  winding,  which 
gives  a  diiitauce  oi'  forty-four  miles  he  must  have  marched  each  day }  this 
diitanoe  for  a  body  of  botae  and  mulei,  fbr  eleven  days  togetiier,  I  think  it 
ftUjrauiBeient.  It  lypeeie  from  the  loirteB  firom  Kandahar  to  Herat  thirt  the 
road  has  a  very  great  bend.  There  are  three  I0ad>;,  one  by  fVimhi  wliich  ie 
west  of  Kandahar  and  south  of  Herat.  The  second  by  Dilaram  and  Gnrra- 
nee,  which  is  the  centre  road,  and  has  also  a  considerable  curve.  The  third 
is  called  the  Sirhud  road,  and  is  the  most  direct  one,  but  it  passes  through  a 
hilly  country  of  the  Tymunees  and  other  Ymalca»  and  is  sddom  travdled. 
All  the  distenceeghren  in  tfaeee  rentes  make  itneoeaeurT'to  give  a  great'cnive 
to  llie  road  in  order  that  the  fidl  diitanee  nuiy  be  given,  and  that  'Herat  may 
be  by  this  means  brought  to  a  reasonable  distance  in  a  direct  line  from 
Cabul,  for  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  Zrmann  Shsih  and  Mahmood  Shah's 
having  perform p(!  the'^e  marches,  it  haMiig  b«.  mi  In  ird  from  so  many  quarters, 
and  all  agreeing  within  a  day.  In  the  routes  trom  Kandahar  to  Herat,  via 
Furrah,  it  appears  that  the  sun  rose  towards  the  traveller's  back  and  set  in 
fiont  as  fiur  as  IWcah ;  and  firom  that-it  rose  to  Ins  ri^  and  set  to  the  left* 
The  same  appears  in  tihe  rmtes  by  Gnrrance,  and  the  dfistance  given  from 
Cabul  and  Bulkh  agreeing  to  this  curv^  I  tliink  Herat  is  near  tJie  trntil. 
Had  I  not  placed  Furrah  at  the  angle,  the  following  routes  would  have 
thrown  out  Musheed  soiitJi-west  instead  of  north-west  of  Herat ;  the  routes 
£rom  l<urraii  to  Ghain  and  Toon,  trom  Ghain  to  Musheed,  fixun  Ghain  to 
Deh  fteis,  from  Brii  Esea  to  Jellakbsd  and  Kandahar,  and  from  Mushud 
to  Herat  The  roed  also  from  tihe  sea-ooest  from  ChoodMur  to  Herat  pesses 
through  Furrah.  There  can  be  Uttle  doubt  of  Chooahar  being  soutib  of 
Herat,  and  as  the  road  leads  by  Fkinah,  it  is  another  proof  that  Rirrah  is 
nearly  south  of  Herat,  and  consequently  the  road  has  a  great  c  urve.  Had 
I  thrown  Herat  further  north,  aiid  given  a  less  curve  to  the  road  in  order  to 
bring  it  nearer  Cabul,  it  would  have  brought  it  too  near  Bokiura  and  Buikh, 
whioh  are  fixed  from  other  points.  I M  petftdiy  satisfiedt  from  these  and 
many  other  dreumstances,.  that  I  'eve  got  Hemt  eoirect  I  shall  noiir  take 