

Budukhshsun  produces,  iron,  salt,  and  wlphur,  as  well  as  abundance  of 

lapis  lazuli ;  but  the  celebrated  mines  of  rubies,  which  occasion  Buduk- 
shann  to  he  so  often  alluded  to  by  tiie  Persian  poets,  are  situated  in  the 
lower  lulls  near  tlie  Oxus.  They  ve  not  now  wrought.  The  plain  country 
and  valli^  are  fertile,  though  not  extensive. 

'  The  inbalutaiita  an  Tau^ilEB,  and  are  called  BuduUuheaB  $  but  towarda 
tbe.weat  are  many  campa  cf  wandering  Udieka.  The  capital  is  Fyzabad,  a 
considerable  town  on  the  Koocha.  The  preaent  chief  is  Sultaun  Mahommei^ 

who  I  In  11  eve  is  absolute.  His  revenue  is  said  to  be  six  lacks  of  ni]>ees 
(about  ii?6o,ooo),  and  his  force  from  seven  thousand  to  ten  thousand  men, 
mostly  matchlockmen,  a  service  in  which  the  Buduksliees  greatly  excell. 
They  are  oocaatonally  banaMed  by  irruptioni  of  tlM  IM»da  of  Taolikaiiii, 
and  llieir  borden  auflRer  from  the  depredations  of  the  Caufira;  but  it  is  long 
since  tfaejr  have  been-  diatuibed  by  any  great  war.  Fyzabad  was  taken,  and 
the  whole  country  nominally  subdued  by  the  Vizier  Shauh  Wullee  Khaun 
in  Ahmed  Shauh's  time,  but  he  probably  felt  himself  unable  to  retain  pos- 
session, for  he  coiiiented  himself  with  taking  some  relicks,  and  evacuated 
the  couutry.  Among  the  relicks  was  tlie  shirt  oi'  Mahomet,  which  in  the 
neighbouring  coimtriea  was  thought  as  great  a  prize  as  the  itatuea  taken 
&om  Italy  by  the  Frendi  were  in  Europe: 

The  (XMintiyof  Kaushkaur  must  be  carefulty distinguished  from  Cashgar  near 
Yarktind  inChincscToorkistaun.  I  liave  endeavoured  to  mark  the  difference  by 
retaining  the  spelling  of  our  majis  for  the  first  place,  and  gi\  ing  that  which 
is  commonest  in  Aighauniiitaun  for  the  other ;  though  in  fact  I  have  heard 
both  called  indiacrimiiwtelyi  Kauahkaur,  Kaushghur  and  Kaushgaur.  The 
resnnUance  of  the  names  led  us  into  great  mutalces  idaen  we  first  arrived 
at  Peshawer.  We  bouglit  tea,  which  we  were  told  was  brought  by  caravans 
from  Kaushkaur  (Cashgar),  and  the  first  people  whom  we  asked  respecting 
the  distance,  told  ns  we  inijrht  easily  go  to  Kaushkaur,  and  return  within 
a  fortnight.  In  time,  however,  we  obtained  more  precise  inl<  imiation.  We 
ibund  that  the  nearest  Kaushkaur  was  aa  extensive,  but  mountainous  and  . 
tU  iDhabited  country,  lying  to  the  west  of  Budntahaim,  fiom  which  it  was 
divided  by  Beloot  Tfnq^;  faanii^  litdeTibeton  the  east,  the  Fimereonthe 
north,  and  the  ridge  of  Hhidoo  CooBh(wfaicli  aeparatca  it  fiom  tlieEuioQsea) 
on  the  south. 

Tbe  Gountiy  is  high  and  <x)ld*  The  inhabitants  live  chiefly  in  tent^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


KA17BHKAn& 


though  there  are  some  towns.  They  belong  to  a  nation  called  Gobi  j 
die  origin  of  which  I  know  notlung,  but  what  is  suggested  by  the  resem* 
bhnceof  flieir  itaiiietothat  of  an  eztaunv^  Thq^ 
are  at  pmcnt  MahonmMdani,  and  are  under  Jiflfei<Bit  petty  detp<>liaiM,  to 
the  number*  I  understand,  of  four.  That  to  the  west  is  called  Chitrau^ 
and  has  been  sometimes  invaded  from  Budukhshaun,  though  defended  by 
Beloot  Tatigh  and  the  river  <>t  Kauslikunr.  Towards  the  Eusofyzes  fs 
Droutih,  which  was  taken  bv  the  Algliauub  ot  Funjcora.  Another  of  t}u>se 
princqtalitiei  n  MasUK>ch,  but  tlie  whole  is  little  known,  especially  to>s  aids 
file  north  and  eaat  Mr.  Macartney  nwntioiM  a  road  ftom  Fkiii|boim  along 
Hie  bocden  of  Katiahkaiir,  rumdng  up  the  valley  of  the  river  of  tbat'name^ 
and  practicable  fbr  camels.  Hiia  diminishes  the  wonder  of  Kaussim  Khana^ 
passage  of  the  perpetual  snow  on  Hindoo  Cooah,  wincb  haa  been  aMntioned 
in  the  account  of  the  EutoQrases* 