

II 


Digitizer 


CONflTRUCTION  OF  THE  MAP. 


635 


it  as  a  point  from  whirh  T  mean  to  fix  the  position  of  Bokhara,  as  it  forms  a 
great  angle  witli  tlmt  and  Bulkh.    The  country,  however,  between  Herat  and 
Bokhara  being  ibr  the  most  part  a  desart,  aad  seldom  travelled,  excepting  by 
CtBkgf  1  haw  only  two  routaa^  iriikdv  however,  agree  i  and  from  the  vwj 
gfMt  wigte  it  fiMmn  wuh  BuDdi,  I  bnw  every  feaaon  to  tuiipoae  it'  oofteet 
The  routes  also  from  Bokhara  to  Kukun  and  round  by  BudukllieDt  eliOMrfrt 
in  correcting  its  position.    The  routes  from  Bulkh  are  numerous,  and  most 
of  thera  agree.    From  Bokhara  and  Bulkh  I  have  settled  the  position  of 
Samarcand.    The  position  of  Kokun  I  have  fixed  from  Bokhara,  Bulkh,  aad 
Budukahan,  which  form  great  angici> ;  aad  iiavmg  mauy  cross  routes  within 
tfa«M  gr««t  angles,  I  feel  giett  ciMmim  in  placiiig  it  ei  it  as.  Synbed  ai 
another  grand  point  of  gnat  consequence  in  the  oomtnactioDof  the  map^  and 
should  have  been  mentioned  before  Kokuai*  as  it  is  a  point  from  iHuc^  I  have 
fixed  Kokun.    I  have  been  enabled  from  the  following  routes  to  fix  this 
point  with  great  exactness,  vh.  Bnlkh,  Cabul,  and  Peshour,  besides  nuinerous 
cross  roiiii  3  to  correct  the  wiiiiiiiiu'^.    Fyzabad  is  the  capital  of  Budukshan. 
It  is  situated  on  the  Kokchanver,  latitude  36°  10',  and  longitude  69^  16  cast* 
I  must  now  fix  the  positiop  cf  Oshmeer,  whadi  I  have  haen  enabled  to  do 
with  the  greatest  oarreetnese  1^  the  ftUowiaig  footesi  all  ef  which  agrees 
Vtt.  Peshour,  Fyzabad,  Jelum,  and  R<^as  (of  which  I  have  the  bearings)^ 
Vizeerabad,  and  Loodeanna,  which  places  are  fixed  by  observation.  From 
this  point,  Fyzahad  and  Huzrutimam,  1  have  placed  Kashgrhnr  and  Yarkund. 
These  routes  lorm  very  great  angles,  and  I  have  everj'  reason  to  suppose 
these  places  are  placed  correctly. .  This  great  angle  has  been  leas  filled  up  with 
erase  routes  than  anj  of  the  others  hiAartomenlaoned}  bat  dds  is  aooMintad 
Jfar  fay  the  greater  part  of  the  eonntiy  being  deaolstSi   The  whole  of  the 
Ponjah  I  conceive  to  be  nearly  as  correct  as  if  it  had  been  surveyed,  for 
having  marched  al!  round  it  and  crossed  the  places  from  so  many  points 
fixed  by  observations  in  our  march,  I  think  there  can  be  but  \  cry  I  ttli  error 
in  their  positions.    Keech  I  have  fixed  by  routes  from  Kandahar,  5hikar> 
poor,  cr  BaUmr  Jdlalabad  in  Sasstan,  and  aloqg  die  eea>oaaat  fiom 

From  this  point  and  three  others  I  have  fixed  the  position  of  Khubees,  viz. 
Deh  Soollum  a  hundred  and  sixty-eiglit  miles,  from  Kykul  two  hundred  and 
fifty,  and  from  Toon  three  hundred  and  fifteen  :  from  Keech  it  is  ten  days 
journey  for  a  Colfclla  at  twelve  hours  a  day,  with  camels  :  all  these  roads  are 
across  the  great  salt  desart.  The  distance  being  so  great,  and  scarcely  a 
phoa  oocmn^g  on  the  way,  I  did  not  think  It  worth  addu^  anedier  sheet 