

m  uvea  sia& 

I  HAVX  been  informed  that  this  river  join?  the  Oxtis  abont  one  hundred 
C03S  west-north-west  of  Bokhara^  but  this  cannot  by  any  means  be  depended 
on  i  and  very  little  information  lias  been  obtained  regarding  the  course  of 
tinsixver.  ItsceoiieMtotheaoirtiiofiiest,  itbemigcnswedbytiie  Bussfam 
caiamuis  noKtii-iiorth.west  of  Bokhan  Inar  or  five  days'  journey,  mid  the 
distance  would  give  it  about  tiiat  coarse,  ftom  Kokun  I  have  got  ftor  d«^ 
march  along  its  left  bank  from  Khoojund  to  Kokuo.  It  is  said  to  be  larger 
here  than  the  Indus,  tind  ^-mailer  ^lan  the  Oxus.  A  stream  joins  it  near 
Kokun,  which  rises  soutli  in  the  Pamer  ridge,  and  nina  north  .seventy  miles 
to  its  junctiou.  At  Kokuu  it  divides  into  two  branches,  and  passes  the  town 
eastsndwest 

4  o  ft 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


65S 


TmrmvER'  8na>  ob  indu&  cAubmi. 


'  rwB  lovxa  sino  or  insus. 

I  AM  uury  to  my  liut  Httie  infiuiiiBtion  hit  been  obtaiiied  regarding 
aouioe  of  tfda  river,  tiKMii^  toine  great  bmndies  have  been  tnoed  for  •  vciy 
GomidenUe  dMtiiioe»  but  not  to  dietf  aoitroe.  It  *ppBtn  dirie  are  two 
great  braoches  join  at  the  town  of  Dras,  eight  days  march  of  a  coflDa,  noftb* 

nortli-cast  of  Cashmcer.  Tlie  left  of  these  branches  was  seventy  yards 
broad  a  Httic  above  the  junction,  and  excessively  ra])id  ;  a  wooden  bridge 
was  thrown  across  it  at  this  point,  it  came  from  the  north  of  east,  and  run 
off  west  aiter  being  joined  by  the  Leh  or  Luddakh  branch :  and  my  infinrm* 
ant  aaya  be  beard  it  joined  the  Abba  Seen  at  BoUaL  Una  I  take  to  lie 
Mullai  on  the  Indns  above  Attoc^  of  triudi  I  have  had  odier  aoooonts.  and 
he  alio  heard  thatit  was  three  mondis'  journey  to  the  head  of  tUa  fafandi: 
but  this  cannot  be  depended  on,  and  it  is  the  only  information  I  have  got 
regarding  this  branch,  and  it  certainly  appears  to  be  the  main  one.  Other 
accounts  agree  that  Dras  is  eight  days  journey  for  a  caffilla  uorth-nortli-ea&t 
of  Caahmeer,  but  they  differ  in  some  degree  r^^rding  the  junction.  A 
Gaihnieerian  inAnned  mo  that  theae  branchea  joined  two  mardiea  abote 
Dkaai  and  that  at  cr  htkm  Draa  it  divided  into  two  biancfaeib  l3m  Icaaar  one 
funnbig  aouth  to  Caahmeer,  and  the  greater  one  he  knew  nodnqg  abooi; 
but  that  it  was  called  the  great  Sinde,  and  tlia  one  which  joina  tiie  Beduata 
at  Cashmeer  the  little  Sind.  lliis  hnter  account  rijipears  to  me  very  correct, 
and  as  a  fiirther  proof  I  have  a  route  from  Deer  in  Punjcora  north-west  of 
Pealiour,  which  takes  a  curve  iirom  east-north-east  to  south-east  to  Cashmeer, 
by  whidi  it  appears  that  the  Sind  was  crossed  seven  days'  joiumey  before  they 
inived  at  Cadunter,  and  tfati  point  nniat  havte  been  nartii*w«8t  Hus  agre^ 
%tl]k  tibe  oUier  acoounta,  md  woold  thhuw  KiOtt  die  point  at  wlneh  tiie  Sind 
'wu  crossed  north-west  of  Gaaiimeer,  about  oIm  hundred  miles  west-south^ 
west  of  Dras,  which  agrees  with  the  first  aooonnts  of  these  joint  streams 
running  ftff  west  from  Dras.  In  the  firet  account  it  does  not  say  that  a 
branch  bi  ealvs  off  from  the  great  one,  but  this  might  be  easily  omitted,  and 
it  appears  irom  other  accounts  that  a  river  comes  from  the  northward  into 
Oniuneer^  ilnd  ia  ealled  the  Lar  by  some  from  its  passing  through  a  district 
«f  that  name  in  thjs  valley  of  Caahmeer,  but  ita  proper  inme  ia  the  litde 
JUnd^  which  Mr.  EoiBlcr  .alad  mentioDa.  Hie  Luddakh  branch  baa  beaft 
traced  to  a  great  distance  to  the  south-east.  This  branch  is  also  joined  by 
another  fiom  the  nortJuwea^  along  %hich  the  road  to  Yarinuid  leada  fiir 