

AH  these  fangea  join  the  de^  groupe  of  hilla  to  the  north-east^  bat  none 
often  cross  tiie  Jduaa.bdvwthe.toiwn  of  Jdum.  Hie  deqi  groupes 
do,  however,  cross  there,  and  nin  on  by  Bimber,  Jomboo  Nurpoor,  and 
down  by  the-  soutli  of  Bil^ispoor,  crossing  the  Jumna  at  Fyzabad,  and  the 
Ganges  at  Hurdwar.  The  whole  course  from  Jelum,  is  as  near  sOuth-east  as 
possible.  They  increase  in  heigivi  gradually  to  the  snowy  ridge  north,  and 
i^ipear  to  form  regular  ranges  nmoii^  parallel  to  each  other  (  but  they  ar^ 
in^fiMt*  deep  groupes  inoiwidng  ia  hei^  m  they  rim  nocth-eHtM    '.j'' ' 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


(Me  THB  RIVEE  AUmJ,  OB  OXDa  C^ffom 


TAsu  LAMP  <nr  urns  tdit  amd  m  hum  mtmmiwi  Mintni>«siT  m 

TABBDMl*. 

It  appears  that  after  five  days' jonmey  north-east  of  Cashmepr,  an  evident 
ascent  commences,  which  is  very  great  tor  three  or  four  days'  journey,  after 
which  it  is  less  on  to  Leh.  The  ascent  continues  even  on  to  the.  great  ridge 
'  jvliicfa  MfMntei  Tibet  horn  Yaricund,  m  appean  by  die  ooone  of  the  ttream. 
wincii  comet  fion  that  pdot  >  lliis  rUge  n  the  one  I  lunre  bdbre  men* 
tioned,  as  having  been  passed  at  several  distant  points,  and  ansiten  to  tbo 
Pamer  ridge.  The  road  from  Leh  leads  along  it  for  twelve  days*  journey 
on  the  road  to  Yarkufjil,  nnd  is  crosspd  fifteen  days*  journey  from  T.ph,  at 
which  place  the  ahove  stream  is  lett,  and  has  probably  a  more  diiitunt  source. 
Tlte  country  to  the  left  was  also  very  mountainous,  but  perfectly  desolate, 
and  on  diia  aooount  but  fitde  mm»  infiirmatioii  baa  been  obtained  regarding 
die  natme  of  it.  lb  appeaa»  however,  fiom  a  nmte  fiom  Dear,  poMOg  Aaoi 
weat  to  ^8t,  through  the  southern  part  of  this  country,  that  the  whole  road 
was  excessively  moi!nt;!itTmis.  and  I, think  there  can  be  little  doidit  of  the 
rest  being  of"  the  same  nature. 

I  shall  now  endeavour  to  give  an  account  of  the  rivers;  any  hdls  which  1 
may  have  omitted  in  this  general  account,  will  come  In  in  the  separate 
aooounta  of  each  oonntiy. 


RIVEAS. 

t  ■ 

L  TBI  Bivmt  AMifu,  OE  ozua. 

This  river,  from  its  source  to  the  country  of  Durwaz,  is  better  known  by 
the  name  Punj  than  Ammu.  It  Iisl^  its  source  from  tiie  high  lands  of  Fwi^. 
lit  iasueafiom  a  jMfTow  valley  tiro  or  duree  bimdred  yarda  broed  in  Wukhan^ 
the  aouthem  faonndaiy  of  Funar.  .  llm  nllay  la,  incloaad  411  tiuM  ndaa  faf 
dw  h^  snowy  nuvntain  called  Pooahtikhnr,  to  the  aoodv  eaat,  and  weat 

IX 


Digitized  by  Google 


AMPnmnc.1 


Ttis  mvcB  ammd;  or  oxusl 


047 


The  stream  is  seen  coming  from  under  the  ice,  which  is  stated  to  be  at  least 
forty  spears  in  depth.    The  spring  ita^  couid  not  be  seen  in  consequence  of 
the  great  maw  of  wa  ftnnodow ii,  bat  tlMm-cn-be  no  doubt  of  tbe  ^ring's 
bcmg  on  tibis  bill  under  the  ioe^  ftr  it  does  niol  appear  that  ^heie  -ivBB^aaj 
open  'Or  bceak  in  any  of  ^  three  sidm  maitioned,  by  which  it  oould'conie 
from  a  more  distant  point.    I,  therefore,  conclude  that  this  is  the' true  bead 
of  the  Ox  us;  at  all  events,  the  greatest  body  of  water,  thoupli  there  are 
otiiers  which  may  have  a  more  distant  source.    It  is  carried  nortii  in  this 
narrow  valley  ibr  tive  ams  i  at  four  cosh  it  is  twenty  yards  broad,  and  breast 
deep}  and  on  leaving  the  vaUeft  ' after  hnriqg  been  joined  by  many  other 
flpriogi  fieas  tibe  fame  hOl,  it  k  fifty  yanh^  and  mid^  deep,  itie  Slnber,  Or 
Adum-Koosh,  jbini  it  five  coss  abo^'e  the-  junotiaiij  %as  niddle  deep,  and 
sixty  yards  broad,  so  that  the  Punj,  or  Ammu,  was  nearly  equal  to  it  at  the 
distance  of  five  cfws  from  its  source,  and  having  twenty  coss  further  to  run 
beture  its  jiiucuuu  with  the  Shibcr,  it  must  have  attained  a  very  considerable 
size,  particularly  as  it  appears  tiiat  seven  or  eight  streams  frooi  knee  to  inidp 
die  deoj^  and  ftom  ten  to  thirty  yardi^broad,  joined  it  in  this  diittanoe  froih 
tbe  left  bank.  'I  think' there  can  be  no  doubt  of  its'  being  mtuh  larger  than 
Hie  S6iber  at  tlieir  junction»  and  It  appears  wdl  aacOrtained  tibat  the  Ammu 
bears  tlie  name  Punj  for  a  considerable  distance  from  its  source.    The  place 
has  been  seen  by  two  people,  who  gave  the  same  accounts,  and  I  have  h^ard 
it  from  several  who  did  not  see  it,  but  Imd  heard  that  it  rose  iu  the  valley  of 
Wuklian,  or  Irom  the  high  snowy  mountain  of  Pooslitikhur.    I  have  routes 
nbjcfa  run  east  and  west  of  this  point  to  Yarimnd*  in  a  northeEly  di^ieGtion»' 
and  meet  to  the  north  of  this  pdhit,  loaWng  it  wtHun  the  aii^e.-  If  tins 
stream  had  a  more  dartant  soiiroe,  one  of  these  two  lOUtss  iBOSt  have  clossod 
it,  which  it  does  not  appear  they  did. 