

of  its  passing  through  that  country ;  when  it  reaches  the  valley  of  Peshour, 
it  breaks  off  into  three  great  branches,  whicli  join  again.  Each  of  these 
branches  has  a  separate  name,  and  it  does  not  retain  one  name  for  four 
marches  togettier.  The  greatest  and  must  distant  branch  rmcs  in  the  iiigh 
lands  of  Pamer,  not  far  from  Pooshtikhur,  the  source  of  the  Oxus,  and,  afler 
a  coiixiK  of  three  hundred  and  eighty  milefl«  joins  die  fodus  dbiee  mfles  above 
the  fort  of  Attock. 

In  its  oonrse  it  receives  several  very  considerable  rivers,  viz.  the  Pung- 
sheer  and  Ghoorbund,  wliich  join  below  Chareekar,  nortli  of  Cabul.  These 
joint  streams  receive  tlie  (_';ihrd  aad  Logur  streams  a  httle  iiirtlier  down,  nnti 
run  parallel  to  the  road  from  Cabul  to  Peshour,  noith  of  it.  At  the  village 
of  Kama  these  joint  streams  meet  the  above  branch  coming  from  the  north. 
Itom  dttt  to  the  valley  of  Feehoiir,  the  joint  streams  are  better  known  by  Ae 
name  of  Kama  Aan  any  oHier.  On  entering  the  valley  of  Peeboor  at  liadv 
nee^  it  breaks  off  into  three  great  branches,  w  hidi  join  twelve  miles  farther 
down  at  Dobnndee,  the  most  northern  or  left  branch,  receiving  the  Swad 
and  Punjc-ora  in  one  !?tream  two  coss  above  Knshnngger,  five  from  Dobundee, 
and  tilteen  miles  noith-eiuit  ot  Pesi>our.  I  saw  all  tiiese  streams  in  one  be- 
hm  Dobundee  ;  they  appeared  about  three  hundred  yai  ds  broad,  and  sailed 
deqi  boots  at  the  Ghat.  I  went  to  Ae  centre  one  of  these  bfancfaeo  »mh 
of  Feshour.  The  flnt  one  was  up  to  the  saddle-akirta,  fear  feet  bnoad,  and 
strong  bottom,  in  most  places  veiy  rapid,  my  hone  oould  scarcely  keep  h» 
feet;  hut  tfiis  was  in  the  beginnintr  of  M:iv,  when  «onie  of  the  snow  water 
had  come  down.  The  second  branch  i  atl(  iiii>tt  1,  l  ut  could  not  lord,  but 
there  are  fords,  and  in  the  cold  season  it  is  tbrdable  all  over  one  place, 
tgriiere  it  is  confined  between  hiOs.  The  Punjsheer  and  Ghoorbood  are  very 
eonsiderable  streams.  The  Ghoorbnnd  rises  with  the  Hindoo  Kooah  peak 
north  of  fiameean,  and  the  Ptanjihetf  fifty  coss  east  of  H,  from  the  same 
hiUs.  Their  course  to  thdr  jondUHi  ivith  the  Kama  is  one  hundred  end 
eighty  miles. 

The  Cabid  stream,  which  is  only  eight  or  ten  yards  broad,  rises  in  the 
snowy  hiU  called  Kohibaba  west  of  Cabul ;  it  joins  to  the  Ghiznee  and  Lo- 
gur streams  east  of  Oshul,  but  the  most  of  its  water  is  expended  in  the  cuL 
tivathm  round  Gsbul  and  Mydan. 

The  Swad  and  Punjooia  river  rise  in  the  same  ridge^  and  are  called  by  the 
cuuuUries  thiouj^  which  th^  pass*  'Qwir  ooune  is  nearly  eqna4  one  com- 


Digitized  by  Google 