

TBB  HUHiAE  OE  sjimnBur  rnn. 

This  river  risee  in  a  bi|^  ridge  of  mountains  which  rum  fiom  tfie  BHner 
lidge  south,  and  s^aniles  Bokhara  from  Kuretageen,  east  and  west.  Its 

course  is  south -sowth-west,  runniiifr  thron?li  the  Kuretageen  country  and 
Uisiiar  Ibr  sixty  miles ;  it  joins  the  ivuratali  river  above  Regur  ami  below 
Uimr  Bala.  The  Kurratak  rises  in  Uie  same  hills,  and  has  a  souUi-east 
comae  to  die  jtmctxnb  Vnm  fids  seme  osU  the  joint  streams  the  HIssar* 
hnt  X  itUnk  improper^,  fiir.the  joint  streams  «hoiiId  retain  the  name  of  the 
largest  river,  which  is  the  Kafir  Nihan ;  and  from  a  route  H^hkh  crosam  H  a 
little  abo\'e  its  junction  with  the  Oxus,  It  is  called  by  this  name.  FVom  Hisar 
to  XinnooSf  above  which  they  join  the  Oauu*  is  seventy  miiea. 

TBB  TimUVSRAlf. 

'  Tbim  river  has  its  source  in  the  same  mountains  as  the  rivers  last  mentioned* 
but  on  the  western  or  opposite  side  to  them.  A  great  branch  of  this  river 
formerly  ran  past  the  town  of  Sheeraz  twenty-four  miles  north  of  Samarlv and, 
but  tor  many  years  the  whole  has  run  past  Samarkand  north  of  it  three  coss 
in  a  w^terly  directiou,  and  aince  tliat  time  tlie  town  of  Sheeraz  has  been 
dmnlahi  i  this  plads  of  cobkm  caanot  be  miat^vii  fu  Ibe  famous  SheeraB  it 
Hhe  .soiitii  oC  FeAia.  This  tmr  has  a  mndi  les^  eaucse  tfann  any  yet 


Digitizer  oogle 


<>iiiwiH  ]  THE  BIFER'fllHR.'  SSI 

mentioned  as  falling  into  the  Oxus,  but  nothing  like  so  great  a  body  of 
water,  being  fordaUe  all  ovw,  woeptiiig  wlmi  ^  mow  nielte.  Tarn  its 
long  ooune  over  a  sandy  oountiy,  the  gveater  part  of  it  is  soaked  beftra 
it  veacfaea  Bolclu«»  aod  att  this  pmnt  tibtere  is  scarceljF  stream  sft  alL  '  It 
fidi  into  the  Oxus  two  marches  west  of  Bolchan  after  a  westeooth-WHt 
ooune  cf  two  hundred  and  qgh^  miles.  » 


Rubs  in  lAe  Huzara  hiUs  noftii  of  the  otmtinoafeion  of  the  Hindoe  Koosb 
fidge,  and  south  of  Mymuna :  it  is  carried  west,  confined  between  hills  for 
seventy  miles,  when  it  passes  to  the  north,  quitting  the  hills  and  parsing 
over  a  desert  country  for  about  two  huudied  miles,  joins  the  Oxns  three 
marches  west  of  Bokhara.  This*  howev£r,  is  only  heard  by  uiy  luiurtnant, 
and  may  be  wrong.  It  i^pcara,  howevei^  very  probable,  fiir.  it  is  crossed 
two  matches  from  the  left  bank  of  the  Oxus  on  the  road  fiom  Bokhantn  " 
Herat  via  Mour,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  joins  the  Oxus  not  ftrfiom 'this 
point,  which  is  also  stated  to  be  the  case  by  the  man  who  gave  this  route.  ' 

The  course  of  fliis  river  from  its  source  is  two  hundred  and  seventy  miles. 
Its  hreailth  in  the  cold  seasou  15  irom  fifty  to  seventy  yards,  auud  two  feet 
and  a  iiail  deep. 