


4n  2 


644  HILLS  EAST  OF  THE  INDOa 


Thb  whole  of  this  country  which  caiteoda  £rom  the  Ghoor  Bund  along  the 
Punjsheer  river  Twhich  furnishes  the  greatest  body  of  water,  and  is  joined  by 
the  Cabul  river),  and  along  t!ie«e  joint  streams  Iiaving  the  Hindoo  Koosh 
ridge  to  the  northward,  tar  as  the  valley  of  Peshfnir,  h  om  complete  ^ 
grotqpe  of  hills  which  increase  in  height  as  they  run  iioiu  die  Cabui  river  to 
join  tiie  tbove  ridge.  The  jbilk  are  hi^  and  rugged,  but  appear  to  be  wtfl 
ivoodid,  and  the  clinMtie  .b  flold.  TIM7  fondih  mny  sprinp  «d  jMini 
vhidi'rimeontb  Mid  Join  Aete  join  afterwards  caHed  Ae  Kam^ 

^01  a  village  at  dbat  name  at  the  junctkm  of  it  with  the  above  streaau. 
There  are  some  narrow  valleys  which  are  inhabited  by  Tajiks,  The  few 
there  are,  are  rich,  and  prodnce  qnnntities  of  Iruits,  chiefly  grapt^,  aprirots, 
and  pomegranates,  but  the  couuuy  does  not  appear  ^racticabie  in  general 
ior  hones. 


BAMflaiov  SLLt  BAtx  oar  TBB  nmiB. 

Ths  country  from  tiie  salt  range  which  crosses  from  Karabagh  to  Jelialpoor 
on  the  Jehim,  in  an  easterly  direction  to  the  northward,  is  hilly  (particularly 
that  part  north  of  the  great  road  iioui  Alloc k  to  ttie  town  of  Jeium,  seven 
0088  ftoB  Mamwh  OB  the  left  hoakof  the  iwer),  eHending  up  to  Oaib. 
'nieer  in^deep  groupes,  and  ipowaawg  in'ha^  aa  they  gor  north.  They  an 
so  difficult,  that  no  tisvdier  goes  the  direct  ioa4  tt><3ai1iinen/lwt  geoeniDf 
takes  the  circuitous  route  of  Salih  Ke  Surai,  where  the  great  road  from 
Attock  to  Cashmeer  joins.  Even  this  road  is  excessively  dtfRcult,  particularly 
as  you  get  near  Cashmeer,  having  only  room  tor  one  hof^eman,  with  per- 
pendicular rocks  on  eadi  side.  There  are  &ev{^  small  but  rugged  ndge^ 
'  widk  d^Bfeult  pum,  tnh  Ihiab'thein  to.ifah  aonlli-^eei  down  the  Doab,  some 
of  them  joining  the  Salt  range.  We  had  an  opportunity  of  itting  tfacae 
laogea^  and  die  nature  of  the  paaaea  through  tbeni.  The  we  paaMd 
after  leaving  Attock,  near  three  miles  and  a  quarter  south-easl^  thirty  of 
Kalake  Surai,  through  which  a  good  road  has  been  cut  by  Shah  Jelum,  and 
paved  with  large  broad  flat  stones,  a  grvat  pnrt  ni'  it  in  perfect  order.  The 
range  is  low,  but  steep  and  rocky.    The  range  runs  iiram  at  north-east  75"  to 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


AgrmoLl  HILLS  SA8T  OP  THE.  ISDUE*  045 

south -east  80°.    TWs  point  appears  about  the  lowest.    To  tlic  east  and  north 
they  increase  in  height,  and  appear  steep  and  ru^ed ;  tliey  joiu  tlie  setioud 
range  of  hUls  south  o£  HmginaJbdal,  and  fiwn-  tiwnce  ran  mtgt  iawnda 
Nihil.  Th^  are  covered  ivith  s  loir  Imaty  jan^e.   I  weut  up  those  to 
the  east  of  the  Tpm,  and  found  them  very  rod^  and  difficult,  and  this  ap. 
poaied  the  eaaicat  point   Hie  irholo  ni  the  covabj  between  the  ranges,  is 
excessively  uneven,  witli  rising  ground,  in  many  places  much  cnt  by  torrent 
coui-ties,  and  quantities  of  jungle,  and  deep  ravines  ;  in  most  places  the  soil 
sandy,  and  a  quantity  oi  luutie  iitones  o\ex  the  surlace.    Tliere  are  some  rich 
plains,  which  produce  grain  in  great  abondanoe^  - but  even  they  ate  mndi 
out  in  aaxiy  places  by  tonent  oouraei  finm  tlut  hillB.; 
•  He  eecond  kange  waa  flie  Nedrliflb,  tsieoty^ve  ntileB  north  north*«att 
t£  Jellalpore  Ghat,  on  the  Jelum.    The  pass  through  this  range  was  very 
ffifficnll,  and  abov  e  five  miles  througli,  it  winding  along  the  bed  of  a  nullah, 
or  tnrrtnit  course,  with  high  peq>cndicnlar  rocks  in  many  places  on  each  side 
close  j  a  fort  on  the  south  side  ol'  the  pass  built  by  Outum  Sing,  about  halt' 
w^.tittough,,  cinnmanda     and  datiea  aeBcaUectad  fioaa  mtrdhaiitB^  "{ThSl 
paaa  ia  bjr  natom  Teiy  atfoag^  and  m^itiie  easily  guarcMt  and.FsmtoUkit 
ii  «  better  road  than  tha  '^i^s  one^  which  leads  direct  ftcni  JELctasgur  to 
Ravilpindee.    Fourteen  miles  south  south-east  of  this  pass,  we  passed  the 
sontli'West  point  of  the  Tilla  hills,  which  run  to  Rotasgtir.    The  rotid  round 
their  puiut  wm  along  the  bi  il  oi  a  torrent  with  high  and  rugged  banks,  and 
broken  ground  to  the  right,  wliich  extends  to  the  Salt  ridge,  distant  six  or 
seven  milea.  After  passing  the  TUla  hills,  a  deep  groupe  of  lower  hilli»  equil 
to  the  Salt  fidge»  commences*  and  ^dends  to  tiie  banks  of  the  Jelum,  having 
them  at  the  distance  of  one  mile  and  a  half  to  the  left  of  the  lOad.    A  mile 
above  Jelalpore  Ghat,  the  Salt  ridge  meets  the  one  in  a  curve,  and  the  road 
leads  out  of  the  valley  between  them  down  a  steep  and  nigged  bank  to  the 
Ghat,  the  latter  jjart  being  along  the  bed  of  a  torrent*  which  carries  off  the 
water  from  the  valley  we  Itave  just  left. 