

tilBHit  ... 

The  greatest  breadth  of  llie  Doab,  between  the  Jebm  and  IndtB»  appears 

to  be  at  the  point  we  cmosed  it  ;  from  Attock  to  Jel!n!porc  Ghat,  on  tlie  Je- 
lum, a  hundred  and  tburteen  miles  horizontal  di  tancL' ;  and  trom  Moultan  at 
iiaj  Ghat  to  Udoo  Kot  (seventeen  miles  from  tiic  Indus),  was  thirty-three 
milefl.  Tile  norlliem  part  of  tint  Doab,  from  33°  up,  is  hilly ;  and  to  tiie 
•outhwafd  b  a  deaavtf  with  the  eicepciaii  of  »  ftw  inflee  IB  fiiom  ^ 
tiw  1X901%  which  ie  ovndown  and  nch* , 


THE  CHUMAB  (ACESIiras) 


leHiabigeetof  tbePkugabmni  itimaiarad  ottte  Wbmnbad  GImI^ 
OB  the  311k  flfJuljr,  one  mile,  .tkioeflixloqgi^  and  twen^peraho^  fiooiedlgi 
to  edge  of  mfter,  and  the  oonndii^  wtn  tfie  Mme  aa  the  Jeium,  fourteeft 
ftok  tlM  greataeW  but  tbe  enmnt  was  more  npid  hj  a  knot  and  a  iHlf  |  the 

4P  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


000  THB  CHUNAa  U^mnu. 

Jdum  «  few,  and  Cbanab  fivi^     flf«  Tii  tlwt  Htj  ttrnmi,  ia 

cfamiMl  doM  not  exceed  two  hundred  and  fifty  ur  diree  hundred  jnds:  tb« 
■eeond  cfaannelt  wfaidi  ms  much  the  broadest^  I  am  told  is  dry  in  the  eoU 

weather.  There  are  many  islands  and  sand-banks  formed  towards  its  centre, 
and  the  measurement  was  taken  between  two  of  these,  as  at  the  Jelum,  The 
size  of  these  rivers  may  be  easily  calculated  for  the  cold  s^ion,  for  the  joint 
streams  of  the  Jelum,  Chunab,  Bavee,  at  Raj  Ghat  near  Moultau,  was  five 
htmdred  yards,  and  the  greatest  depth  seventeen  Act;  bnt  tUa  was  only  fbt 
one  throw,  and  the  average  may  be  eight,  or  eight  feet  and  a  hal^  fi>r  fiom 
this  it  shelved  to  nothing :  allow  two  hundred  and  thirty  jards  for  the  Jeloo^ 
by  eight  feet,  and  two  hundred  and  seventy  for  the  Chimab,  by  eight  feet  f 
and  the  remaining  part  by  five  hundred  for  the  Ravee,  for  I  do  not  allow  the 
HaA-ee  to  be  more  Umu  four  feet  deep,  and  a  little  more  Uiau  a  huadred  yards 
broad  ^  this  may  be  about  their  average  size  in  the  middle  of  December,  the 
time  we  oomed  their  joint  alnam^  ^reeaUe  to  tiheif  breadth  and  daplfa  m 
tiM  raina.  I  allow  fcy  tiiia  calcniatkm  that  these  liveia  mmt  haiae  mm  three 
and  a  half  or  four  feet,  leaving  ten  Vt  ten  feet  and  a  half  far  the  centra  af 
their  channels  for  the  cold  season,  which  I  think  may  be  pretty  near  the 
mark.  1  have  not  heard  of  any  ford  on  this  river  below  the  hills  ;  but  like 
the  Jehim,  it  is  easily  crossed  at  the  pomts  where  it»  banks  arc  low  and  its 
bed  broad,  Uiere  being  only  a  short  distance  to  swim  in  the  centre.  I  iiave 
beard  of  tbo  joint  atreanw  of  the  Jelom,  Chimab^  and  Raifw  being  ibrded  by 
scamdbdktwthe  jmictionof  the  Ravecb  but  if  dui  be  Ae  case  it  must  bavo 
wpnad  at  this  point  considerably.  The  banks  of  the  Chunab  above  are  Iow» 
but  well  wooded,  as  is  the  Jelum  ;  but  the  timbers  are  small,  and  the  wood 
used  in  building  and  making  boats  is  floated  from  the  hills  seventy  aud  eighty 
coss  higher  up,  where  it  is  in  great  abundance.  The  horizontal  distance  from 
JeDalpoor  Ghat  to  Vizeerabad  Ghat,  acmm  tim  Doab,  is  forty-four  miles. 
Hie  oountty  cxoessivi^  low,  and  soil  ricb,  dually  pasture. 