


THE  BEYAH,  OR  BEYA& 


LAmunux. 


OMtiin,  and  that  it  has  taken  a  curve  in  the  hills-ftir  thiM  fmo  nnidbM  and 

oome  round  to  the  right  to  the  point  at  which  he  crossed  it,  ftr  Im  agni  it 
ran  from  his  left  to  ritxht,  which  would  agree,  and  I  have  m  ronseqiience 
given  it  this  cur^'e  atid  made  it  the  Ravee,  or  at  all  events  its  most  distant 
branch*  This  route  also  proves  to  me  that  the  Ciiuoab  does  not  oome  &ota 
die  nortliwwd  of  the  mmy  ridge,  beeauw  tliw  route  mint  heve  ciMnd  it  tf 
it  did,  but  dm  it  nsppoang  the  only  route  1  heve  got  by  diii  roed  to  be 
correct,  which  not  of  course  be  the  case ;  and  without  a  seeond  to  oor* 
roborate  this,  I  would  not  consider  this  as  certain,  though  1  have  every  rea- 
son to  suppose  this  route  correct,  for  it  agrees  with  others  fxoia  Nooipoor 
downward*  ' 


Tm9  river  measured,  at  Bhirowal  Ghat,  seven  hundred  and  forty  yards. 
Its  ngtit  bank  is  very  iiigh,  and  its  current  very  rapid.  The  day  we  reached 
it,  it  was  at  its  greatest  height,  and  so  ra|iid  that  the  boats  could  not  make 
the  kft  benk*  Some  woe  cHiied  down  six  or  aeren  coas  in  attempting  it } 
^  however,  mi  the  neit  dey.  ItisfiMdahle  in  mottpleeM  iadkeooldfM. 
•on,  but  its  bed  contains  many  qiuckraaiMlib-Wid  at  thia  aaeian  theae  are  muay 
islands  and  taad  beds fonrod  towards itscetttre.  Thne  aae  tir«ity4ive  IxMts 
at  this  Ghat  and  its  vicinity,  but  they  are  verv  bad  for  the  rainy  season. 
They  are  made  ol'ilat  planks,  more  like  ratts  tiiaii  boats,  with  a  plank  of  onr 
ibot  all  round,  and  do  not  draw  six  inches  ,  water  when  filled.  There  is  but 
litUe  weed  along  the  banks  of  this  river  what  there  is  it  malL  Itjttnatfae 
Sntlnj  eighteen  cobs  below  Bfajvoowal  neat  the  viUiffe  of  Hurake^  not  ibr 
fioa  Feroozpoor ;  after  their  junction  the  joint  streams  are  called  Beas,  and 
afterwards  called  Ghara,  but  from  wliat  point  T  know  not.  It  is  callpd  the 
Gharrah  at  Gordeean  Ghat  near  i'akputiun,  a  hundred  coss  above  Biitia\v  u!- 
poor.  They  join  the  Chuuab  above  C^h,  as  has  been  mentioned,  tlurty-two 
con  bekyw  Bobawulpoor,  and  fifty-eight  fiem  Moidtan.  The  Beyas  and 
SuUuj  are  nearly  the  aaase  si«^  but  the  Beyaa  ia  xadier  the  laiyciC*  Xlidlr 
couiacb  Umh  is  nearly  the  same  fixHn  die  snowy  ridg%  «  ]iuiidred  and  ilfty 
attlaa  to  their  junction,  and  two  hundred  and  sixty  more  to  thdr  jnnction 
with  the  Chunab  or  joint  streams  of  the  Jelum,  Chunab,  and  Ravee.  Wood 
is  to  be  got  in  abuntlance  tioiu  the  hills  not  fas  disiant  .  The  Begas  Guuga 
and  Baa  Gunga  ixom  the  Beyaa,  the  ibrmer  pas&mg  Kot  kaagra  to  the  siNxthF 


Digitized  by  Google 


» 