


Amm,l  THE  USGHinOliUI  BIVER.  OBBi 

ward  and  the  latter  to  the  noftlimd  in  a  TOterly  directMm  near  and  joining 
at  Hureepoor,  bdow  the  fort  one  match.  The  Ban  Gunga  separates  into  two  ' 
bfandia  near  the  fort,  and  a  branch  pairing  on  eadi  ride  of    tibqr  fimn  an 
iaiand  and  jwi  inunediatety  hdknrit* 

THE  RIVERS  OF  KHORAAAN. 

THB  Mmmm  on  RKLsmiD. 

Tht<5  river  is  the  greatest  of  the  Khorasan  rivers:  it  rises  west  ol"  Cabul 
ill  the  lull  called  Kohi  Baba.  Its  course  is  south-west  throug|i  the  Ua^ara 
country,  and  passing  to  Hie  aouthward,  it  cioflsea  the  gieat  roada  from 
y«iiJA«r  to  Hirat  at  GteeriiTr,  a  distance  of  tiro  hmdred  and  siz^  milea. 
Hm  whole  dUstance  to  within  two  marches  of  this  is  through  very  high  and 
difficult  hills.  From  this  to  where  it  falls  into  the  lake  of  Seestan  is  one 
hundred  miles,  total  three  hundred  and  sixty  miles.  In  the  hot  season, 
when  the  snow  meiis,  it  is  a  very  large  river,  and  it  it  a  common  practice 
with  the  people  oi  Greesbk  to  try  to  shoot  anowB  aciOBB  or.riing  atooes,  but 
it  is  not  to  be  done.  In  the  cold  weather  it  «  neaily  faraiit  decp^  e^ial  to 
tiM  Kanuw  riverat  AlBoaa.  Thsre  are  two  hoala  atthe.Gfeeahk  Ohat,  bet 
it  ia  fordable  for  the  greatest  part  of  the  year ;  it  receives  oonaideraUe 
itreania  in  its  course.  It  is  joined  fourteen  miles  above  Grceshk  by  a  stream 
^hose  roufse  is  eighty  miles,  wiiich  rises  to  the  south  of  the  Huzara  country 
at  Sealibund.  It  also  receives  the  Urghundab  five  coss  below  Greesbk,  and 
part  of  the  Turnuk,  it  is  also  joued  by  the  Khaahrood  at  Kolmidieen 
fiirtiier  down. 

THE  UKOHUKDAB  anTSE         >  ■ 

.     i'      '      ■  ■'  .: 

in  tiie  Husam  hiBs  about  eighty  miles  north-east  by  north  of  -  Kai^ 

dahar,  passes  within  five  coss  of  the  town  to  the  north  and  west  of  it,  and 
joins  the  Hirmund  five  coss  below  Crree^hk  on  its  left:  bank,  after  a  course  of 
one  hundred  and  fifty  miles.  In  tde  ajld  scasou  this  river  is  two  ;ii:tl  a  half 
or  three  feet  deep  and  fiily  yards  broad,  but  in  the  hot  weather,  when  the 
snow  melts  in  the  hUia  it  is  not  ibidaUie  Ibr  daee  attonth^  being  eioearive^ 
tafidt  sand  at  this  season  above  one  hundred  and  fifly  yards  broad. 

II 


I 

Digitizeci  by  Google 


664 


THE  FURRAHROO 
THX  XBABREOOD. 


CAfseniuz. 


This  river  rises  at  6akkir  about  ninety  miles  south-east  by  south  of  Hint, 
and  after  ft  course  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  joins  the  Hirmnnd  «t 
Komiheen  on  its  i%bt  bKnk.  It  is  lai^  tluui  the  Ui^^undab  and  niaOer 
than  the  Hmnund  s  its  depth  in  the  ccdd  season  is  up  to  a  man'i  hip  (tliree 
6et)  and  6%  or  sixty  yards  broad :  it  is  not  ibrdable  when  the  snow  melts, 
is  crossed  on  mussuks  or  leather  bags,  and  smdl  rafts  made  of  wood  and 
reeds.  Its  breadth  in  the  hot  season  is  from  one  hundred  and  fifty  to  one 
hundred  and  aeventy-tive  yards,  and  very  rapid ;  it  also  crosses  the  great 
load  fiom  Kandahar  to  Hiiat  near  Dilaram. 