


THE  TUKNUK. 


Tms  is  a  small  stream,  rises  at  Mookr,  and  afler  a  west-soutli-west  course 
of  two  hundred  milea»  joina  the  Uighundab  near  Doaba ;  in  the  cold  aeaaon^ 
lunrever,  its  water  runs  into  a  long  lake  near  Ddn  (MiollaniaD^  called  die 
Doreeb  vhich  has  been  taken  for  a  river.  When  the  Tumuk  nsss  the 
superfluous  water  runs  to  the  Urghundab ;  in  the  cold  icaion  it  is  knee  deqi^ 
and  it  seldom  rises  above  a  man's  middle. 


TB£  FUBRAHHOOD 

Is  larger  than  any  of  these  rivers  excepting  tlie  Hirmund.  It  is  in  tlie 
oold  season  above  •  man's  and  fiom  fifty  to  axty  yarda  broad;  in  the 
hot  weather  it  is  crossed  on  mussuks  and  rsAi  of  wood  and  reeds.  It »  at 

this  season  very  rapid ;  it  rises  south  of  Pursee,  and  is  joined  above  Fknah 
and  below  Guranee  by  the  Jizeea  Rood.  It  falls  into  the  lake  of  Seestan  at 
the  north-west  angle,  after  a  course  of  two  hundred  miles.  It  appears 
wonderiul  that  this  lake  should  receive  so  many  rivers  without  any  apparent 
vsnt  fiir  the  water:  and  tt  is  slated  not  to  be  alcove  tlurly  or  thir^<4lve  coss 
•Gross  at  the  broadest  part. 


I 


Digitized  by  GoOgle 


Afpbndix.^ 


THE  FOOUMALAN  OR  HIRAT  RIVER. 


665 


TBB  PO0IillCAI«Air  OK  KOkt  BIVXK. 

This  river  n'se*i  near  Oba  (east  of  Hirat)  in  the  Ymak  countr}-,  and 
receives  three  or  four  streams  before  it  reaches  Hirat.  It  is  a  small  river  in 
the  cold  seasou,  but  rises  to  a  cousiderable  size  wheu  tlie  snow  melts.  The 
gmter  part  of  ka  tnter  is  expended  in  the  ykanaty  of  Hint  on  tbe  cul> 
tfvation;  two  or  tfaiee  cuiab  are  cut  firam  it»  and  paaa  through  tiie  town. 
There  is  a  bridga  acrcMs  it  three  cofls  south,  of  tha  town.  .  It  appears  fion  » 
route  from  Mour  to  Musbud,  that  a  river  was  crossed  half-way,  running 
from  left  to  right,  called  the  Tejun,  and  the  routes  from  Hirat  to  Mushud 
po  along  its' banks  by  the  north  road  as  far  as  Kafir  Kila,  w  liere  it  is  lell 
running  to  the  north  or  righL  This  can  be  no  other  than  the  one  which  is  • 
ctooMd  in  tiie  odier  route  half-way  between  Hour  and  Mushud }  but  where 
it  runs  to  after  that,  I  know  not.  I  think  Arrownnith's  map  lias  it  perfbctlj 
correcL  Ifr.  Foister's  route  seems  to  have  led  Kennel  into  an  error,  in 
making  it  run  aoudl  into  the  lake  of  Seestan ;  but  this  rivulet  which  Mr. 
Forster  crofls<'d,  running  south,  does  not  appear  to  be  tJic  Hirat  river,  but 
a  small  stream  which  conies  irom  the  hills,  which  separate  the  north  and 
south  roads  to  Mushud,  and  must  be  lost  to  the  southwaid,  tor  it  appears  by 
several  aoeounts  that  no  stream  is  crossed  fiom  Fuivah  Co  Qhain  ud  Toooi 
or  from  JeUabbad  to  Nih,  exciting  theRirrah  Rood;  bnt  if  the  Hirat  rlvtt 
.  ran  into  the  lake  cf  Seestai^  it  must  have  be^  cmased  in  both  these  nmtes  *« 