

The  following  is  a  list  of  boats  and  ghala  up  and  dowo  the  Jdmn  and 
<}hunab  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  Ghats  we  passed.  On  the  Jelam  HuUp 
gla  four  boat.s,  Jelum  twenty,  Scgonia  ten,  Russoolpoor  and  Dadopoor  five, 
Jeiialpoor  and  vicinity  twenty-five,  Pmdi  Dadun  Klum  and  vicinity  forty, 
Ahmedabad  and  Bhera  twenty,  total  a  liuudred  and  iwenty-four  j  in  the 
diatanoe  of  s«fanly-live  or  eighty  nubs  on  the  Chunsib  above  yiaaandiad  and 
at  it,  Viaeenbad  twelve^  Sodmthiae^  Deena  M6ii|a  two^  Marsf  Kakot  two, 
Noushara  three,  Koolow  al  tw«^  Jmda  Bdiadoorpoor  fiv^  Kbolasake  Cfannee 
t#o^  Kaone  Km  Chock  four,  Aknoon  seven,  total  distance  up  thirty  am, 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  BAVEE. 


661 


lbrtjr4ivo  boBta ;  down  fiom  ViienlNid,  Baanft  Khan  tw<s  SuUooiEe  twcv 

Ramnugger  twenty-one,  Morad  four,  Wannuke  tmOt.  Menbdeea  bod  Mmb* 
deeabad  two,  Bhuttee  Kachuch  Jellalpoor  four,  Khadirabad  Gliat  six,  total 
eighty-four,  in  the  distance  of  fifty-five  coss.  The  course  of  the  Chuiiab, 
from  the  snowy  mountains  to  which  it  has  been  traced  to  Mitten  Kakot,  iive 
hundred  aod  ibrty  miles. 

Is  the  least  hy  far  of  all  the  Punjab  rivers  ;  its  measurement  from  edge  to 
edge  of  writer  wa«  on! v  five  hundred  and  thirteen  yards,  1 2th  of  August, 
when  it  siiuuid  ime  uttuiaed  its  full  height :  its  chamiei  is  very  narrow.  1 
liad  only  two  throws  of  tfie  l««d  in  pMsing  it,  twelve  ftet  The  bottom  has 
a  good  dsal  of  taoA,  much  more  than  any  of  the  other  nven^  OQe>lifth  mejr 
be  mud,  the  remainder  sand.  The  deep  channel  could  not  have  exceeded  in 
bread  til  thirty  or  forty  yards,  the  remainder  was  fiom  three  to  five  feet,  atid 
two  or  three  tiirows  eight  or  nine  feet :  in  thf  cohl  season  it  is  fordable  all 
over,  not  above  tour  feet  deep.  There  are  many  quick-sands,  and  its  banks 
are  low  and  well  wooded.  There  are  but  few  boats  on  this  river,  but  those 
there  M%  are  good,  and  much  the  same  as  are  nsed  on  the  Jumnju  The 
Indus,  Mam,  and  Onmah  have  the  same  kind  of  boeti^  which  erass  fiom  ten 
to  twelve  horses. 

The  distance  from  Vizcerabad  Ghat  to  Meannee  Ghat  on  the  Ravee,  fitly- 
five  miles  horizontal  distance.  This  Doab  is  rich  and  flat,  but  hit^'her  land 
tlian  the  last,  and  the  soil  not  so  very  rich.  The  course  of  the  Ravee  is  very 
oonsiderabliv  bat  I  am  not  quite  certain  of  its  haviiig  the  Ml  coofse  I  have 
givmittoitsjanctioninditheChanahk  cf  fbur  Irandred  and  fifteen  miles  i 
it  appears,  however,  by  a  route  from  Casbmeer,  through  Kishtwnr,  that  after 
crossing  the  high  ridge  into  Kishtwar,  the  road  leads  all  the  way  from  this 
point  along  the  banks  of  a  stream,  tlie  name  of  which  was  unfortunately  not 
known  to  my  informant,  and  it  appears  that  he  had  it  on  his  right  to  within 
tiiree  inarclies  oi'  Noorpoor,  where  he  croiUied  it  and  leil  it  running  o&'  to  his 
left:  in  his  last  nnypch  to  Nompoor  ftooi  Bnssntd,  he  crossed  tfie  Ravee^ 
wbkik  he  said  was  thereabout  the  sine  of  the  stream  he  left  three  mardiea 
back.  It  appears  more  than  probable  that  thi<?  stream  was  the  Ravee,  but 
he  did  not  know  it  as  such  at  the  point  he  left  ;  as  lie  left  it  to  his  left,  it 
must  have  either  g<Hie  to  the  B^as  or  fiavee*  but  I  think  the  latter  is  ahnosfr 