


AnsRHX.}  THE  SWAN  BIVER.  657 

ing  ftom  nofdi-aut,  and  tbe  other  from  iMrUiiiiMit  The  name  of  Funjconi 
« lost  in  that  of  Swoad  at  Tulkan  Matkunnee,  below  wliich  they  unite  and 
pass  to  the  south  by  the  west  of  Kushnuggur,  at  the  distance  oi"  two  coss, 
and  join  the  left  branch  of  the  Kama,  as  before  mentioned.  Their  course  is 
about  ninety  miles  to  this  point. 

TMk  QscB  mni* 

This  is  a  very  small  river,  and  does  not  desen  c  the  name.  It  is  two  feet 
deep,  thirty  yards  broad,  a  c!e:tr  stream,  with  a  strong  bottom*  and  high 
ru^ed  banks.  It  rises  ea^t  nurtli-exist  of  Kiianpoor,  twenty-fives  miles  in  the 
hilb  which  run  up  to  Moorofleimbid.  It  ntns  eigh^  mile*  weti  mm^wcs^ 
and  joins  the  Indoi  two  com  abwra  Nilab.  It  ia  jouwd  wnr  Hwain  Abdal 
by  the  jdnt  livuleta  of  Huaun  Abdal  and  Sab  flawn^*  tnd  Wah. 


TBS  SWAM  aiVXB 

Ricaa  in  the  aame  hiUa  moie  to  (lie  eaatwttd,  but  I  htm  not  faeanl  die 
exact  point.  Its  ooune  is  about  mie  handfed  and  thirty  nulaa  to  where  it 
jonns  tiie  Indus  eight  coss  below  Mukkud.   Its  stream  tt  amell  in  the  cold 

season,  not  more  than  a  foot  of  water,  but  m  the  rainy  season  it  h  broad  and 
excessively  rapid.  When  it  ris^  to  tour  and  four  feet  and  a  half  high,  it  is 
not  possible  to  cross  it ;  but  it  rises  and  falls  tiuddenly.  We  crossed  it  where 
it  was  about  three  or  three  ftet  and  a  half  deep*  and  tbea  several  camds 
were  carried  down.  Its  bed  k  sand  widi  •  ftw  stonas  in  the  stream  $  it  baa 
many  qmck-sanda^  and  its  banks  are  steep  and  m^^d,  with  many  deep 
latvinee  Actending  in  many  parts  in  from  its  banks.  After  we  had  crossed  it, 
it  rose  more,  and  was  not  fordable  for  three  days  ;  tliis  is  the  case  with  most 
of  the  rivers  in  thi':  Doab,  and  some  \  havf  M  cn  i  ist?'  seven  or  eijrht  feet  in 
less  than  hall  an  hour,  from  luivmg  no  water  at  ail,  merely  turreut  courses. 


nXOOBMBlVlB 

Rises  twelve  mile-^  south-west  of  Hiiryoob  east  north-east  of  Giiiznee, 
and  after  an  east  aoutii-east  covrse  oi  one  hundred  and  fifteen  miles,  joins 

4  p 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


ess  7H£  UYJ>ASP£&  CAmmn 

the  JxOm  three  mUes  eait  Mmtb-eait  of  Kagul  Wdb.  The  bad  of  tUi 
nmr  h  braad  at  the  point  we  crossed  it,  three  furlongs  and  aquartef  (  trntthe 
stream  was  small,  not  more  th-m  one  foot  water;  its  bed  was  'iandv,  and  had 
some  quirk-sands.  The  descent  ut  u  bed  was  very  considerable,  and  when 
the  siiuw  luelta,  it  must  be  very  rapid.  There  are  several  canals  brought 
fiom  it  into  the  Eenkhel  valley,  wbidk  hai  reduced  iti  uxe  at  this  point.  It 
ig  joined  by  the  Gombeda  at  Lukkee ;  firom  tiiis  to  tbe  tea  I  have  not  heard 
of  any  rivcra  joining  the  Indus  on  the  ijgllt  bank,  from  the  westward,  nor 
on  t  he  left  bank,  with  the  exception  of  the  rivers  of  the  Punjaub,  which  join 
it  at  Mittanda  Kote,  in  one  stream  called  the  Punjnud.  Xbeaaxiven  I  shall 
give  separa^  accounts  ol^  b^pnning  £rom  the  west. 