


r 


IV  PREFACE. 

Destitute,  in  a  great  measure,  of  official  documents,  to  which  we 
could  recur  for  accurate  information  on  these  subjects,  particularly 
in  regard  to  manufactures  and  internal  commerce ;  we  have  been 
obliged  to  seek  for  information  from  individuals,  and  from  periodical 
and  other  publications  having  relation  to  the  objects  of  our  inquiry. 
And  we  beg  leave  here  to  express  our  grateful  acknowledgments  to 
those  who,  in  answer  to  our  inquiries,  have  obligingly  furnished  us 
with  much  valuable  information — and  among  the  publications  to 
which  we  are  indebted  for  great  aid,  we  would  mention  the  North 
American  and  Quarterly  Reviews,  Wood's  Treatise  on  Rail  Roads, 
(American  edition  by  George  W.  Smith,)  Gales  and  Seaton's  state 
papers,  Armroyd's  Internal  Navigation,  Niles'  Register,  Minor's 
Rail  Road  Journal,  and  Hazard's  periodical,  respecting  the  internal 
improvements  of  Pennsylvania.  But  with  all  these  aids,  much  must 
rest  on  estimates  somewhat  conjectural,  especially  respecting  the  ex- 
tent of  the  internal  commerce  and  the  extent  and  value  of  the  man- 
ufactures of  this  country. 

Indeed  from  the  well  known  difficulties  in  obtaining  statistical  in- 
formation respecting  the  various  and  daily  increasing  productions 
and  improvements  in  a  country  so  extensive,  perfect  accuracy  cannot 
be  expected. 

Enough  however,  we  trust,  is  here  disclosed,  to  prove,  beyond  all 
doubt,  that  the  wealth  and  resources  of  the  United  States  have  kept 
pace  with  their  population ;  and  that  for  the  last  eighteen  years,  the 
progress  of  internal  improvements  has  surpassed  the  most  sanguine 
expectations  of  the  American  patriot,  and  has  exceeded  that  of  any 
other  nation. 

March,  1835. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Fife. 

Difficaliies  with  Great  Britam,  France  and  Spain,  as  to  limits,  at  the  peace  of 
17ei3,  and  long  disputes  about  boundaries  under  the  treaty  of  peace — Some 
of  them  not  yet  settled — Louisiana  purchased  in  1803 — Disputes  about  its 
boundaries — Negotiations  respecting  them — France  joins  Spain  in  these 
disputes — Proceedings  of  the  American  government  in  relation  to  the  oc- 
cupation of  the  Floridas — Conduct  of  the  French  government  respecting 
the  Floridas — The  constitutionality  of  admitting  Louisiana  into  the  union 
doubted  by  Mr.  Jefferson  and  others — The  Floridas  purchased,  and  the  lim- 
its  of  Louisiana  settled  in  1819 1 

CHAPTER  II. 

Colonial  Policy  of  Great  Britain — Amount  of  Exports  and  Imports  prior  to 
the  Revolution — Commerce  interrupted  during  the  war  of  the  Revolution — 
Expenses  of  that  war — Amount  of  Public  Debt  in  1783 — Requisitions  upon 
tht  Stales,  for  provision  for  the  payment  of  it,  not  complied  with — lis  de- 
preciation— Exports  to  and  Imports  from  Great  Biilain,  from  1784  to  1790 
— Distressed  state  of  the  country,  during  this  period — Meeting  of  Commis- 
sioners at  Annapolis,  in  1786 — Adoption  of  the  new  Constitution,  and  the 
organization  of  the  Government  under  it,  in  1789 96 