

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


STATISTICAL  VIEW 


Of    VHP 


COMMERCE 


OP   THE 


UNITED   STATES    OF    AMERICA: 

-^    ^    • ": 

INCLUDING    ALSO    AN    ACCOUNT    Op  *  S       "   " 

BANKS,  MAxNUFACTURES  AND  INTERNAL  TRADE 

AND  LMPROVEMENTS: 

TOGETHER    WITH    THAT    OF    THE 

REVENUES    AND    EXPENDITURES 


or  THE 


GENERAL  GOVERNMENT: 


ACCOMPANIED  WITH  NUMEROUS  TAHLES. 


BY    TIMOTHY    PITKIN. 


/ 

1 


NEW  HAVEN : 

DURRIE   A   PECK. 

1835. 


-"Yd 


Ecov^*l5uC>8>-^5' 


•^. 


^■^  nhu  cou^ 


<?.: 


UL     6  1888 


I 


ic^.  .-^^.. 


^" 


'JLU 


Entered  according  to  an  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1835,  by 

Timothy  Pitkin, 
in  the  Clerk's  office,  of  the  District  Court  of  Connecticut. 


Printed  by  He lekiah  Howe  d  Co. 


vk"^ 


5'^ 


PREFACE. 


In  presenting  the  public  with  a  new  and  enlarged  edition  of  our 
Statistics  of  the  United  States,  we  beg  leave  to  observe,  that  the 
last  edition  was  published  in  1817,  just  after  Europe  had  emerged 
from  a  long  and  unexampled  war — a  war,  in  which  the  United  States 
themselves  at  last,  became  involved. 

Since  that  period,  this  country  has  been  placed  in  a  new  situation, 
as  the  European  nations  on  the  return  of  peace,  returned  to  their 
old  systems  of  commercial  and  colonial  policy.  This  has  driven  the 
Americans  to  look  more  to  their  own  internal  means  and  resources. 
And  as  the  population  of  the  United  States,  has  also,  since  that  time, 
nearly  doubled,  it  cannot  be  deemed  an  uninteresting  subject  of  in- 
quiry, whether,  in  this  situation,  the  wealth  and  resources  of  the 
country  have  kept  pace  with  its  population. 

We  have  brought  down  the  accounts  of  the  external  commerce 
of  the  United  States,  as  far  as  practicable,  to  the  years  1833  and 
1 834.  In  doing  this,  we  have  consulted  foreign  as  well  as  domestic 
official  and  other  documents,  in  order  to  shew  the  extent  of  American 
commerce  and  navigation,  not  only  in  comparison  with  preceding 
periods,  but  also,  in  comparison  with  the  commerce  and  navigation 
of  other  nations.  We  have,  thereby,  been  enabled  to  shew  how 
nearly  the  amount  of  American  tonnage  approximates  to  that  of  the 
British ;  and  also,  to  give  a  more  full  and  accurate  account  of  the 
trade  of  the  United  States  with  China,  than  is  furnished  by  our  own 
custom  bouse  books. 

We  have,  also,  in  the  present  edition,  extended  our  inquiries  to 
the  internal  wealth  and  resources  of  our  country,  limiting  them, 
however,  principally,  to  the  great  subjects  of  banks,  manufactures, 
and  internal  improvements,  by  means  of  canals,  rail  roads,  and  steam 
navif^tion.  Thb  we  have  done,  with  a  view  of  ascertaining,  as  far 
as  practicable,  the  extent  and  \'alue  of  the  domestic  production  and 
coDSumption  of  the  necessary  articles  of  national  supply,  and  to  see 
bow  iar  the  United  States  are  dependent  on  foreign  nations,  for  such 
articles. 