

CHAPTER  III. 

Bxpurts — Divided  into  those  of  Domestic  and  Foreign  origin — Domestic,  de- 
rived from  the  Sea,  the  Forest,  Agriculture  and  Manufacturer — Products 
of  the  Sea  principally  from  the  Cod  and  Whale  fisheries — State  of  the  Cod 
lisherj  prior  to,  and  since  the  revolution — Secured  to  us,  by  the  Treaty  of 
peace  in  1783,  by  the  firmness  and  perseverance  of  the  American  negotia- 
ton— WhaJe  fishery  began  at  Nantucket  in  1690— State  of  it  before  the  Rev- 
olution— Its  great  increase  of  late  years — Number  of  vessels  engaged  in  it, 
in  1^03,  with  thetr  tonnage,  number  of  men— Value  d  the  vesseb  and 
their  outfits,  and  of  their  produce — Value  of  Exports,  the  produce  of  the 
Ushehct,  in  each  jemr,  from  1803,  to  183^— Products  of  the  Forest— viz. 


i 


Tl  CONTENTS. 

Ptfe. 

lamber,  naval  stores,  pot  and  pearl  ashes,  skins  and  Airs,  ginseng,  oak 
bark,  and  other  dyes,  value  and  quantity  of  each,  exported,  from  1803 
to  1833 34 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Produce  of  agriculture  divided  into  that,  1st.  which  constitutes  vegetable 
food;  as  flour,  rice,  indian  corn,  rye,  &c. — 2d.  Of  animals,  as  beef,  pork, 
butter,  lard,  cheese,  &c. — 3d.  Tobacco— 4th.  Cottoiv— and  5th.  Others  of 
minor  importance — duantity  and  value  of  these  exported  at  different  peri- 
ods— The  principal  countries,  to  which  flour,  cotton,  tobacco,  rice,  beef  and 
pork,  are  usually  exported—Amount  of  the  kinds  and  value  of  domestic 
manufactures  exported — A  comparative  view  of  the  value  of  the  produce  of 
the  sea,  of  the  forest,  of  agriculture,  and  of  manufactures,  exported,  from 
1803  to  1833.  95 


CHAPTER  y. 

'^  Trade  of  the  United  States  increased  by  the  wars  in  Enrope — Greater  in  for- 
eign than  in  domestic  produce,  in  1805,  180G  and  1807 — duantity  of  sugar, 
coflce,  cocoa,  pepper,  goods  free  of  duty,  and  paying  duties,  imported  and 
exported  at  diflierent  periods — Amount  of  gold,  silver  and  bullion  imported 
and  exported  from  1821  to  1833,  and  the  countries  from  and  to  which  it  was 
imported  and  exported  during  the  same  period 145 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Value  of  imports  into  the  United  States,  at  different  periods — Mode  of  estima- 
ting the  value  of  imports  and  exports,  in  the  United  States  and  in  Great 
Britain — Amount  of  American  trade,  with  diff*erent  countries,  at  different 
periods,  from  the  commencement  of  the  present  general  government — A 
brief  history  of  the  trade  with  the  British  West  Indies,  of  the  disputes  res- 
pecting it,  and  the  efl^ect  of  the  arrangement  in  relation  to  it,  made,  in  1831, 
npon  American  navigation  and  the  carrying  trade — Comparative  view  of 
imports  and  exports,  at  different  periods — Origin  of  the  American  trade  with 
China,  and  the  amount  of  trade  with  this  country  from  American  and  Brit- 
ish accounts — duantity  of  teas  imported,  from  China,  in  diff*erent  years — 
Amount  of  woollen,  cotton,  and  other  goods  imported  from  Great  Britain, 
at  diff*erent  periods 163 