


CHAPTER  I. 

Difficulties  with  Great  Britain,  France  and  Spain,  as  to  Umits,  at  the  peace  of 
1783,  and  long  disputes  about  boundaries  under  the  treaty  of  peaee — Some  of 
them  not  yet  settled — Louisiana  purchased  in  1803 — Disputes  about  its  boun- 
daries— Negotiations  respecting  them — France  joins  Spain  in  these  disputes — 
Proceedings  of  the  American  government  in  relation  to  the  occupation  of  the 
Floridas — Conduct  of  the  French  government  respecting  the  Fldridas— The 
constitutionality  of  admitting  Louisiana  into  the  union  doubted  by  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son and  others — ^The  Floridas  purchased,  and  the  limits  of  Louisiana  settled 
in  1819. 

Tbi  United  States  of  America,  since  the  acquisition  of  Louisiana 
and  the  Floridas,  embrace  a  territory  nearly  as  large  as  all  Europe. 
Extending  from  the  gulf  of  Mexico,  to  the  middle  of  the  great  lakes, 
on  the  east  side  of  the  Mississippi,  and  on  the  west  side  of  that  river, 
to  latitude  forty  nine  degrees  north,  and  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pa- 
cific ocean,  they  contain  a  variety  of  soil,  as  well  as  climate,  adapted 
to  the  production  of  most  of  the  articles,  now  deemed  necessary,  in 
civilized  life,  and  are  capable  of  sustaining  a  vast  population. 

In  the  view  of  this  extensive  country,  contemplated  in  the  following' 
pages,  we  presume,  a  brief  sketch  of  the  manner,  in  which  the  coun- 
try itself  has,  at  various  times,  been  acquired,  will  not  be  deemed  for- 
eign from  our  main  design,  or  be  found  entirely  without  interest 

Great  Britain,  France  and  Spain,  bad  original  and  undefined  claims, 
to  all  North  America  ;  and,  in  addition  to  the  limits  secured  from  the 
former,  by  the  treaty  of  peace  in  1783,  the  United  States  have  since 
acquired  a  vast  extent  of  country,  west  of  the  Mississippi,  from  France, 
by  purchase,  and,  also  the  Floridas,  from  Spain,  in  the  same  way. 

For  the  extensive  limits  finally  secured,  at  the  peace  of  1783,  the 
people  of  the  United  States  were  indebted  to  the  firmness  and  perse- 
verance of  their  negotiators.  France,  by  her  treaty  of  alliance, 
guarantied  to  the  Americans  their  possessions ;  and,  also,  the  islands 
of  Bermuda,  and  the  British  possessions  in  the  northern  parts  of 
America,  which  they  might  obtain  by  conquest.  The  extent  of  the 
possesions  then  held  by  the  Americans,  was  not  defined  by  the  treaty, 
and  afterwards  occasioned  great  difiiculties,  particularly  with  Spain. 

By  a  special  article  in  the  treaty,  Spain  was  permitted  to  accede  to 
it,  under  such  conditions,  as  might  be  agreed  and  settled  between  the 
parties.  It  is  well  known,  that  Spain  refused  to  become  a  party  to 
this  treaty,  bat  on  the  condition,  that  the  United  States  should  re- 