

^  Bee  4th  volume  of  the  Secret  Journals  of  Congress. 


December,  1782,  in  which  they  say,  **  We  knew  this  court  and  Spain 
to  be  against  our  claim  to  the  western  country,  and  having  no  reason 
to  think  that  lines  more  favorable  could  ever  have  been  obtained,  we 
finally  agreed  to  those  described  in  this  article ;  indeed,  they  appear 
to  leave  us  little  to  complain  of,  and  not  much  to  desire.'^* 

In  settling  the  precise  line  between  the  United  States,  and  the 
eastern  and  northern  British  Provinces,  great  difficulties  have  arisen ; 
ands  ome  parts  of  this  line  remain  yet  unrtettled.  The  north  east 
corner  was  to  begin  at  the  north  west  angle  of  Nova  Scotia,  being 
that  angle,  which  was  formed  by  a  line  drawn  due  north  from  the 
source  of  the  St.  Croix  river,  to  the  highlands,  and  along  the  said 
highlands,  which  divide  those  rivers,  which  empty  themselves  into  the 
liver  St  Lawrence,  from  those  falling  into  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  to  the 
head  of  the  Connecticut  river,  down  the  middle  of  that  river  to 
kL  45^,  then  due  west  to  the  St.  Lawrence,  and  from  thence,  by  the 
St.  Lawrence,  the  middle  of  the  great  lakes,  and  their  connecting 
waters,  to  the  north  western  part  of  the  lake  of  the  Woods ;  and  from 
that  point,  due  west  to  the  river  Mississippi.  At  the  date  of  the 
treaty  of  peace,  the  geography  of  the  interior  of  North  America  was 
little  known.  It  was  then  supposed,  that  a  line  running  due  west, 
from  the  lake  of  the  Woods,  would  strike  the  Mississippi ;  and  it  was 
Dot  ascertained  until  some  years  after,  that  the  sources  of  that  riTer, 
were  about  two  degrees  south  of  that  lake.  To  correct  this  error, 
in  1802,  the  American  Minister  at  London,  Mr.  King,  and  the  Brit- 
ish court,  agreed  upon  an  explanatory  article  ;  by  which  the  line  was 
to  run  from  the  lake  of  the  Woods  direct  to  the  sources  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi. This  agreement  was  not  ratified  by  the  American  govern- 
ment, as  it  might  not  correspond  with  tlie  north  line  of  Louisiana, 
joit  then  purchased. 

This  line,  therefore,  remained  unsettled  until  1818,  when,  by  ano- 
ther agreement  between  the  United  State:^  and  Great  Britain,  it  was 
to  extend  from  the  lake  of  the  Woods  west,  in  the  parallel  of  latitude 
49S  M  far  as  the  rocky  mountains ;  and  at  the  same  time,  **  it  was 
agreed,  that  any  country  which  might  be  claimed  by  either  party,  on 
tlie  north  west  coast  of  America,  westward  of  the  stony  mountains, 
together  with  its  harbors,  bays  and  creeks  and  the  navigation  of  all 
lirers  within  the  same,  should  be  free  and  open,  for  the  term  of  ten 
years  from  the  date  of  the  agreement,  to  the  vessels,  citizens  and 
subjects  of  both  powers,  without  prejudice  to  the  claim  of  either  par- 