

1 


> 


linquish  all  claims  to  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  river,  and,  in- 
deed, to  all  the  country  west  of  the  Alleghany  mountains. 

The  United  Slates  refused  to  purchase  the  alliance  of  Spain,  at  such 
a  price.  These  conditions  were  offered  to  Congress,  by  the  Spanish 
court,  through  the  French  Minister  in  the  United  States,  in  January, 
1760.  These  conditions,  however,  were  not  submitted  to  Congress, 
until  after  Mr.  Jay  had  been  sent  to  Spain,  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
cluding a  treaty  with  the  Spanish  court.  Before  his  departure,  how- 
CTer,  the  French  Minister  intimated  to  him,  that  a  cession  of  the  Flor- 
id«8,  as  well  as  a  relinquishment  of  all  claim  to  the  Mississippi,  would 
be  deemed  an  indispensable  prerequisite,  to  a  treaty  with  Spain.  Mr. 
Jay,  it  is  well  known,  was  unable  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  the  Span- 
ish court,  because,  he  would  not  consent  to  give  up  all  right  to  the  Mis- 
siMippi.  Fending  the  negotiations  for  peace,  in  1782,  Great  Britain, 
for  a  long  time,  insisted  on  the  Ohio,  as  the  western  boundary  ;  and 
Spain  still  urged,  that  the  United  States  had  no  right  to  the  country 
west  of  the  mountains.  In  this,  she  was  countenanced,  if  not  sup- 
ported, by  France. 

Rayneval,  the  confidential  secretary  of  Vergennes,  in  a  written 
communication  made  to  Mr.  Jay,  on  the  subject  of  western  limitSy 
declared,  that  the  United  States  had  no  right  to  the  lands  lying  be- 
tween the  Alleghany  mountains,  and  the  Mississippi :  and,  in  the  same 
communication,  referring  to  the  claims  of  Spain,  he  stated,  that  "  this 
power  cannot  extend  its  claim  beyond  the  bounds  of  its  conquests — 
She  cannot,  therefore,  pass  beyond  Natchez,  situated  towards  the 
thirty  first  degree  of  latitude :  her  rights  are,  therefore,  confined  to 
this  degree — what  is  beyond,  is  either  independent,  or  belonging  to 
England ;  jneitker  Spain  nor  the  Americans  can  have  any  pretensions 
thereto.  The  future  treaty  of  peace  can  alone  regulate  the  respective 
righu."* 

This  extraordinary  private  communication,  with  the  intercepted  let- 
ter of  Marbois,  and  other  circumstances,  at  last,  satisfied  all  the 
American  negotiators  at  Paris,  that  France  was  against  them,  in  re- 
gard to  the  western  country ;  and  they  therefore,  determined  to  con- 
clude a  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  without  consulting  the  French  court, 
although,  by  their  instructions,  they  were  not  only  to  consult  that 
court,  but  be  governed  entirely,  by  its  advice  or  that  of  its  ministers. 

In  vindication  of  their  conduct  in  this  respect,  they  all  joined  in  a 
letter,  to  the  American  Secretdry  of  foreign  affairs,  dated  the  14th  of 