


•  Diplomatic  correspoadence,  vol.  10,  page  190. 


J 


ty  or  any  other  power/'  As  settlements  increased  on  or  near  the 
great  lakes,  it  became  important  to  ascertain  the  line  passing  through 
their  center,  with  a  view  to  their  navigation,  as  well  as  the  rights  of 
the  parties  to  the  numerous  and  valuable  islands,  scattered  through 
these  inland  seas.  Both  nations,  also,  claimed  certain  islands,  in  the 
bay  of  Passaroaquoddy ;  and  serious  difficulties  had  arisen,  as  to  the 
north  west  angle  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  the  highlands,  mentioned  in 
the  treaty  of  peace.  For  an  amicable  adjustment  of  these  questions, 
OTery  day  becoming  more  important,  provision  was  made  in  the 
Treaty  of  Ghent. 

Three  different  boards  of  Commissioners  were  to  be  appointed ;  the 
first,  to  settle  the  rights  of  the  parties  to  the  islands  in  Passamaquod- 
dy  bay — the  second,  to  ascertain  the  north  west  angle  of  Nova  Sco- 
tia, the.  highlands  along  which  the  line  was  to  run,  and  the  head  of 
Connecticut,  and  also,  to  survey  and  mark  the  line  from  the  head  of 
St  Croix,  to  the  St.  Lawrence,  in  lat.  45^ — ^and  the  third,  to  ascer- 
tain, the  middle  of  the  rivers  and  lakes,  from  this  place  on  the  St 
Lawrence,  to  the  lake  of  the  Woods,  and  determine  the  rights  of  the 
parties  to  the  islands  in  the  same.  Each  board  was  to  consist  of  two 
Commissioners,  one  to  be  appointed  by  each  government ;  and  in 
case  of  their  disagreement  the  subject  was  to  be  referred  to  the  de- 
cision of  some  friendly  sovereign  or  State,  to  be  named  by  both  par-  • 
ties.  The  commissioners  composing  the  first  board,  on  the  24th  of 
November,  1817,  amicably  settled  the  questions  referred  to  them,  and 
decided,  that  Moose  Island,  Dudley  Island  and  Frederick  Island  be- 
longed to  the  United  States,  and  that  all  the  other  Islands,  including 
that  of  Grand  Menan,  belonged  to  Great  Britain.  Those  of  the  se- 
eond  board  were  unable  to  agree,  as  to  the  location  and  course  of  the 
highlands  and  as  to  the  north  west  angle  of  Nova  Scotia.  The 
place  for  this  angle,  claimed  by  the  American  Commissioner,  was 
about  one  hundred  miles  north  of  that  claimed  by  the  British  ;  and 
this  subject  by  the  mutual  agreement  of  both  governments,  was  re- 
ferred to  the  decision  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands.  The  quantity 
of  land  in  controversy,  was  said  to  be  between  five  and  six  millions 
of  acres ;  and  the  right  of  jurisdiction,  was  deemed  of  great  impor- 
tance to  the  British  government  as  the  great  road  leading  from  the 
eastern  Provinces  to  Quebec,  run  through  the  disputed  territory. 
The  three  points  to  be  decided  by  the  royal  arbitrator,  were,  first 
the  place  designated  in  the  Treaty  of  peace,  as  the  north  west 
angle  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  where  were  the  highlands,  dividing  the 
rivers,  that  empty  themselves  into  the  rivers  St  Lawrence,  from 