


J 


8 

His  Catholic  Majesty,  not  only  kept  possession  of  the  country,  as 
far  north  as  the  mouth  of  the  Yazous,  but  prohibited  the  Americans 
the  use  of  the  Mississippi,  below  that  place.  Nor  were  the  United 
States  ahle  to  settle  these  important  questions,  until  1795,  when,  by 
the  Treaty  of  San  Lorenzo,  his  Catholic  Majesty,  agreed  to  the  limits 
fixed  by  the  Provisional  Treaty ;  and  accorded  to  the  people  of  the 
United  States,  the  narigation  of  the  Mississippi,  below  that  line,  with 
a  right  of  deposit,  at  New  Orleans,  for  three  years ;  reserving  to 
himself  the  liberty,  at  the  end  of  that  period,  either  to  continue  the 
right,  at  that  place,  or  to  assign  some  other  equivalent,  on  the  banks 
of  the  river.  From  several  causes,  however,  the  disputed  territory 
was  not  delivered  up  to  the  Americans  until  1798. 

In  1796,  Spain  and  the  French  Republic  concluded  a  Treaty  of  al- 
liance, offensive  and  defensive ;  and  at  that  time,  France  contemplated 
obtaining  from  Spain,  the  restoration  of  her  ancient  colony  of  Lou- 
isiana. This,  however  was  not  effected  until  1800,  when,  by  the 
Treaty  of  St.  Udefonso,  his  Catholic  Majesty  retroceded  to  the  French 
Republic,  then  under  the  direction  of  Bonaparte,  as  first  Consul, 
Louisiana,  by  the  following  description — viz.  **  The  Colony  or  Pror- 
ince  of  Louisiana,  with  the  same  extent,  that  it  now  has  in  the  hands 
of  Spain,  and  that  it  had,  when  France  possessed  it,  and  such  as  it 
should  be,  in  pursuance  of  Treaties  subsequently  entered  into,  be- 
tween Spain  and  other  States.*'  This  was  called,  as  it  really  was,  a 
retrocession  of  a  Colony,  first  settled  by  France,  and  which  remained 
in  her  possession,  until  the  3d  of  November,  176%  when,  by  a  secret 
Treaty,  never  yet  made  public,  his  Christian  Majesty  transferred  it,  to 
Spain.  This  was  done,  in  pursuance  of  the  celebrated  Family  Com- 
pact, and  to  compensate  her  ally,  for  the  loss  of  her  territory  on  the 
eitst  side  of  the  Mississippi,  which,  on  the  same  day,  she  had  ceded  to 
Great  Britain,  as  well  as  for  other  losses  sustained,  in  the  preceding 
war. 

Spain,  however,  still  continued,  nominally  at  least,  to  exercise  the 
powers  of  goTernment  in  the  .country;  and  in  October,  1802,  the 
Spanish  Intendant  of  the  Province,  withdrew  the  right  of  Deposit 
at  New  Orleans,  and  without  assigning  an  equivalent  establishment,  at 
any  other  place  on  the  river.  This  extraordinary  and  unexpected  vi- 
olation of  national  faith,  justly  excited  the  indignation  of  the  Ameri- 
cans, particularly  those  residing  west  of  the  mountains ;  and  many 
were  ready  to  take  possession  of  New  Orleans  by  force.  The  Amer- 
ican Executive,  to  secure  the  free  and  peaceable  navigation  of  the 
river  in  its  whole  course,  without  the  liability  of  future  intermptioB, 