

ike  the  line  in  dispute  a  subject  of  further  negociation.    An  award, 
rhelher  between  nations  or  individuals,  in  order  to  bind  the  parties. 


A 


must  be  made  in  pursuance  of  the  authority  given  in  the  submission. 
The  authority  of  the  arbitrator  was,  to  ascertain  a  line  designated  in 
the  Treaty  of  1783,  but  not  to  make  a  new  line  for  the  parties.  The 
Senate,  no  doubt,  in  advising  the  President  in  the  manner  above  sta- 
ted, were  perfectly  satisfied  that  tlie  royal  arbitrator  had  made  an  en- 
tirely  new  line ;  and  particularly  between  the  heads  of  the  St.  Croix 
and  Connecticut  rivers ;  for  it  cannot  be  presumed,  that  body  would 
have  paid  so  ill  a  compliment  to  his  understanding,  as  to  suppose  that 
he  could  have  taken  the  deepest  channel  of  a  river  to  be  highlands  ; 
and  particularly,  highlands  separating  rivers  running  in  opposite  di- 
rections. The  Senate  were  probably  confirmed  in  this,  as  the  arbi- 
trator bad  also  awarded,  that  the  line  to  be  run  along  the  parallel  of 
the  forty  fifth  degree  of  north  latitude,  should  be  run  in  such  a  man- 
ner as  to  include  the  fort  which  the  United  States  had  erected,  at  a 
place  called  Rouse's  Point.  The  language  of  the  award  is  unusual, 
and  indicates,  beyond  a  doubt,  the  intention  of  the  arbitrator,  to  run 
or  recommend  a  new  line.  Instead  of  finding  the  north  west  angle 
of  Nova  Scotia,  and  the  highlands,  the  arbitrator  says,  according  to 
the  translation  given,  **  it  will  be  suitable  (il  conviendra)  to  adopU  ^^ 
the  boundary  of  the  two  states,''  &.c.  The  French  word  here  trans- 
lated suitable,  when  used  impersonally,  as  in  this  case,  is  taken  in  the 
aense  of  expediency,  and  might  have  been  translated,  **  it  will  be  fit, 
expedient,  convenient,  meet,  proper," -^.c.  The  King  of  the  Nether^ 
lands  certainly  had  no  right,  under  the  submission,  to  judge  of  the 
expediency,  suitableness,  or  convenience  of  the  line  he  w^s  to  survey 
and  mark,  either  to  both  or  either  of  the  parties. 

The  third  board  of  commissioners,  after  an  investigation  of  many 
years,  came  to  an  amicable  arrangement,  with  respect  to  a  great  part 
of  the  line,  submitted  to  their  decision,  particularly  the  part  south  and 
east  of  Lake  Superior,  and  made  their  report,  to  their  respective 
governments. 

The  United  States  have  also  come  in  collision  with  Russia,  on  the 
western  shore  of  America  The  Autocrat  of  all  the  Russias,  not  eon- 
tent  with  the  acquisition  of  all  the  northern  part  of  Asia,  at  length 
crossed  Behring's  Straits,  and  has  lately  claimed  a  large  portion  of 
western  America,  and  an  exclusive  right  to  the  navigation  of  the  seas 
adjoining.  These  extraordinary  claims  were  promptly  met,  and  re- 
sisted by  the  American  government ;  and,  in  18^,  were  settled  by  a 
treaty,  ascertaining  and  defining  the  limits  and  rights  of  the  respective 
nations,  in  that  quarter.  By  the  ^ird  article  of  this  treaty,  it  waa 
agreedt  that  no  eitabUahment  should  be  formed  by  the  citixens  of  the 