


9 

■et  on  foot  ft  Degrotiaiion  with  the  French  and  Spanish  goTenimentis 
for  the  purchase  of  the  Island  of  New  Orleant^  and  the  Provinces  of 
EoMt  and  West  Florida,  To  enable  the  President  to  effect  tins  ob* 
jeetv  Congress,  in  January,  1803,  placed  in  his  hands  two  millions  of 
dollars.  Mr.  Monroe  was  united  with  Mr.  Livingston  in  the  negotia- 
tion, and  with  all  possible  dispatch,  sent  to  Paris. 

Great  Britain  had  become  alarmed  at  the  ambitious  projects  of  Bo- 
naparte, and  particularly  in  his  acquisition  of  Louisiana,  and  his  con- 
templated possession  of  that  extensive  country,  with  a  large  army ; 
nnd  at  once,  determined  to  prevent  his  occupation  of  it  With  this 
view,  the  fleet,  and  troops  under  General  Victor,  destined  for  that 
country,  were,  for  a  long  time,  kept  in  strict  blockade,  in  the  ports  of 
Holland,  by  a  British  squadron. 

Bonaparte,  convinced  of  the  impossibility  of  his  being  able  to  oc- 
cupy the  country,  resolved  to  offer  it,  to  the  Americans.  In  this  pe- 
culiar juncture  of  affairs,  Mr.  Monroe  arrived  at  Paris.  The  powers 
of  the  American  Negotiators,  however,  extended  no  further,  than  the 
purchaae  of  the  Island  of  New  Orleans,  and  the  two  Floridas.  In- 
deed, neither  Congress,  nor  the  President  contemplated  the  acquisi- 
tioo  of  the  extensive  country  west  of  the  Mississippi,  called  Looia- 
The  business,  however,  was  too  urgent  to  admit  of  the  delay 
try  for  obtaining -new  powers.  The  Treaty  of  Amiens  was,  in 
fret,  already  broken,  and  a  renewal  of  the  war,  and  particularly  be- 
tween Great  Britain  and  France,  was  daily  ex})ected. 

Under  these  circumstances,  the  American  negotiators,  on  the  30th 
#f  April  1803,  concluded  a  Treaty  for  the  purchase  of  the  whole  of 
die  Province  of  Louisiana,  for  the  consideration  of  fiAcen  millions  of 
dollart;  and  by  the  same  description,  as  that  contained  in  the  transfer 
Drom  Spain  to  France.  His  Catholic  Majesty  was  opposed  to  the 
transfer  of  the  country  to  the  United  States,  and  at  first,  entered  his  pro- 
test against  it;  and  although,  this  was  afterwards  withdrawn,  yet  he 
waa  never  perfectly  reconciled  to  the  measure.  A  difference  soon 
nrose  between  the  United  States  and  Spain,  with  respect  to  the  limits 
of  the  country,  as  described  in  the  Treaties ;  a  difference,  which  oc- 
casioned long  and  expensive  negotiations,  and  at  one  time,  threatened 
a  mpture  between  the  two  countries.  As  Spain  ceded  the  province  " 
to  France,  and  France  to  the  United  States,  with  the  same  extent  it 
iMd,  **  in  the  hands  of  Spain,  and  that  it  had,  when  France  possessed 
it,  and  such  as  it  should  be,  in  pun^uance  of  Treaties  subsequently  en- 
tered into,  between  Spain  and  other  States,"  the  American  govern- 
ckimed,  that  it  extended  east  of  the  Mississippi,  as  &r  as  the 