


17 

In  the  ezecutioii  of  his  tnist,  Mr.  Bowdoin,  it  is  nndentood,  pr<M 
ceeded  no  further  than  Paris ;  where  alone,  this  negotiation  was  to 
aMome  a  shapey  which  could  ensure  its  success.  The  particular  facts 
eoonected  with  this  transaction,  as  well  as  the  motives,  which  led  to 
it»  together  with  the  causes  of  the  failure  of  the  special  mission,  fur- 
niak  materials  not  less  curious,  than  ample,  for  the  page  of  history. 
Pending  this  negotiation,  the  President  assumed,  the  river  Sabine,  aa 
the  western  limits,  and  instructed  Gen.  Wilkinson,  the  Commander 
of  the  American  troops,  to  keep  possession  of  the  territory  between 
that  river  and  the  Mississippi,  and  by  force,  if  necessary,  to  drive  the 
Spaniards  from  the  same.  Gen.  Wilkinson  was,  at  the  same  time 
direeted,  to  leave  the  country  east  of  the  Mississippi,  in  statu  quOf 
the  City  of  New  Orleans  should  be  in  danger ;  but,  in  no  events 
he  to  take  possession  of  any  part,  east  of  Pearl  rive/. 

The  Spanish  troops  having  moved  east  of  the  Sabine,  actual  hoe* 
were  expected.  The  Spanish  Governor,  howerer,  and  Gen. 
Wilkinson,  near  the  close  of  1806,  came  to  an  amicable  arrangement, 
and  agreed  upon  the  Sabine,  as  a  temporary  western  line,  and  the 
Spanish  force  retired  west  of  that  river. 

Id  this  situation  the  business  remained,  during  the  great  struggle 
between  the  French  Emperor  and  the  people  of  Spain,  without  any 
rial  act  of  either  party.  During  this  struggle,  the  Spanish  Amer- 
Colonies  were  necessarily  leA,  to  take  care  of  themselves.  In 
the  oiean  time,  a  number  of  persons,  styling  themselves  the  Repre- 
aentatives  of  the  people  of  West  Florida,  met,  in  Convention,  at 
Baton  Rouge,  on  the  26th  of  September  1810,  and  declared  thera- 


**  Farther  to  exemplify  the  principle,  I  will  state  an  hypothetical  case.  Suppose 
ix  had  heen  made  known  to  the  Executive  of  the  Union,  in  the  Autumn  of  1805, 
thai  we  might  have  the  Floridas  for  a  reasonable  sum,  that  that  sum  had  not  been 
so  appfophated  by  law,  but  that  Congress  were  to  meet  within  three  weeks,  and 
Bight  appropriate  it  on  the  first  or  sec4md  day  of  their  session,  ought  he,  for  so 
great  aa  advantage  to  his  country,  to  have  risqued  himself,  by  traDscendiog  the 
taw  and  making  the  purchase?  The  public  advantage  offered,  in  this  supposed 
caae,  was,  indeed,  immense ;  but  a  reverence  for  law,  and  the  probability,  that 
the  advantage  might  still  be  legally  accomplished,  by  a  delay  of  only  three  weeks, 
were  powerful  reasons,  against  hazarding  the  act.  But  suppose  it  foreseen,  that 
a  John  Randolph  would  find  means  to  protract  the  proceedings  on  it  by  Congreai» 
aatil  the  ensuing  spring,  by  which  time  new  circumstances  should  change  the  mind 
of  the  other  party.  Oui^ht  the  Executive,  in  that  case,  and  with  that  foreknowledge 
to  have  secured  the  good  to  his  country,  and  to  have  trusted  to  their  justice,  for  the 
»n  of  the  law  I  1  think  he  ought,  and  that  the  act  woold  have  been  ap- 