


13 

this  negotiation,  the  American  ministers  were  giren  to  on- 
deratand  that,  the  country  offered  them,  would  include,  not  only  the 
Island  of  New  Orleans,  hut  also,  the  territory  east  of  the  Mississippi, 
as  &r  as  the  river  Perdido,  as  this  was  a  part  of  Louisiana,  wheii 
France  possessed  it ;  and  Marhois,  the  French  negotiator,  told  them, 
thai  the  town  of  Mobile  would  fall  within  the  limits  of  the  cession. 
And  yet,  after  the  completion  of  the  Treaty,  when  called  upon  for  n 
more  particular  explanation,  respecting  Mobile's  being  part  of  the  ce« 
ded  territory,  Marhois  informed  Mr.  Livingston,  that  he  had  no 
precise  idea  on  this  subject ;  that  he  knew  it  to  be  an  historical  fact« 
and  on  that  alone,  had  formed  his  opinion.  He,  also,  informed  Mr. 
Linngston,  that  he  did  not  know,  what  orders  had  been  given  the 
Prefect,  who  was  to  take  possession,  nor  what  orders  had  been  given 
by  Spain,  as  to  boundaries. 

An  explanation  as  to  the  extent  of  the  country,  was,  also,  required 
•f  the  French  minister  of  foreign  affairs,  by  Mr.  Livingston  ;  and  the 
following  singular  dialogue  passed  between  them,  on  this  subject. 
**  I  asked  the  ministeri'*  says  Mr.  Livingston,  in  his  letter  to  Mr. 
Madison  of  the  20th  of  May,  1805,  **  what  were  the  last  bounds  of 
tfe  territory  ceded  to  us  ?  he  did  not  know ;  we  must  take  it  as  they 
kad  received  it.  I  asked  him  how  Spain  meant  to  give  them  posses* 
sian  !  he  said,  according  to  the  words  of  the  Treaty.  But  where  did 
joa  mean  to  take  ?  I  do  not  know.  Then  you  mean  we  shall  con* 
atme  it  in  our  own  way  ?  I  can  give  you  no  directions ;  you  have 
a  noble  bargain  for  yourselves,  and  I  suppose  you  will  make  the 
of  it."* 

It  cannot  fail  to  appear  strange,  especially  to  those  unacquainted 
wilb  the  arts  of  diplomacy,  that  the  French  government,  in  the  third 
after  the  purchase  of  the  country,  and  after  the  lapse  of  six 
ithi,  from  the  date  of  the  order  of  Spain,  before  mentioned,  for 
thed^very  of  the  possession  of  it,  should  be  so  ignorant  of  its 
boundaries,  as  not  even  to  know  what  Spain  meant  to  give,  or  France 
to  receive.  Nor  can  it  appear  less  strange,  that  the  very  next  year, 
any  apparent  new  means  of  information,  the  same  govern* 
It  should  have  so  perfect  a  knowledge  of  the  subject,  as  is  contained 
la  Talleyrand's  letter,  above  mentioned. 

Marhois,  in  his  late  history  of  Louisiana,  and  its  cession  to  the  Uni- 
ted States,  declares,  that,  in  a  conference  with  the  American  Ministers 
oa  the  article  relating  to  boundaries,  he  said  to  them  several  times. 


•  See  Message  of  the  President,  of.  May  SOtb,  1826,  p.  767. 