


13 

indeed,  that  the  United  States  had  no  just  claims  to  territory  far  eaut 
of  that  river. 

The  true  line,  he  declared,  between  Louisiana,  and  the  Spanish 
possessions  in  that  quarter,  commenced  on  the  gulf  of  Mexico,  be- 
tween the  rivers  Caracut  and  Marmentao,  and  from  thence,  run  north 
between  the  old  Fort  Adais,  and  Natchitoches,  until  it  struck  the  Red 
river.  From  this  point,  further  north,  he  said,  the  line  had  never 
been  definitely  settled,  .and  was,  therefore,  a  proper  subject  to  be  re- 
ferred to  the  investigation  of  Commissioners.  This  interesting  ne- 
gotiation  closed,  on  the  10th  May,  1805. 

The  ruler  of  France,  was  not  an  idle  or  a  disinterested  spectator 
of  this  negotiation — and  we  would  here  observe,  that  at  the  time  of 
the  negotiations  relative  to  the  purchase  of  Louisiana,  Mr.  Monroe 
was  desirous  of  securing  the  aid  of  Bonaparte,  in  the  purchase  of  the 
Floridas ;  and  an  article  to  this  effect,  was,  at  first,  inserted  in  the 
Louisiana  Treaty,  but  was  afterwards  stricken  out,  at  the  request 
of  the  first  Consul.  Bonaparte  at  the  same  time  gave  verbal  assu- 
ranceii,  that  his  aid  towards  effecting  that  object,  would  be  readily 
afforded,  at  some  future  svitable  time.  In  consequence  of  this  inti* 
mation,  Mr.  Monroe  relinquished  the  plan  of  immediately  proceeding 
to  Madrid  as  he  had  before  contemplated.  While  at  Paris,  on  his  way 
from  London  to  Madrid,  in  November,  1K)4,  Mr.  Monroe,  in  a  note 
to  Talleyrand,  made  known  the  object  of  his  mission,  and  requested 
the  aid  of  Bonaparte,  agreeable  to  his  former  assurances. 

He,  at  the  same  time,  furnished  the  French  government  with  a  copy 
of  a  memoir,  prepared  by  the  American  Executive,  on  the  subject 
of  the  eastern  and  western  boundaries  of  Louii«iana.     In  answer  to 

« 

this  communication,  Mr.  Monroe  afterwards  received  a  letter  from 
Talleyrand,  dated  December  21  st,  1804.  In  this,  the  Emperor  of 
France,  (for  the  coronation  took  place  while  Mr.  Monroe  was  at  Pa- 
ris, a  little  before  the  date  of  this  letter)  in  the  most  explicit  manner, 
denied  the  right  of  the  United  States,  to  any  part  of  the  territory 
east  of  the  Mississippi,  and  Iberville;  declared,  that  France  had 
never  purchased  it  of  Spain,  and  that  any  attempt,  on  their  part,  to 
take  possession  of  it,  would  be  an  act  of  aggression,  on  the  lawful 
rights  of  Spain. 

The  tone  of  this  letter  was  indeed,  not  a  little  extraordinary,  after 
what  had  passed  between  the  American  negotiators,  and  the  French 
government,  respecting  the  limits  of  Louisiana,  before  and  aAer  the 
conclusion  of  the  Treaty  ceding  that  country  to  the  United  States. 