


IS 

« 

The  grett  difference  between  the  United  States  and  Spain,  with  res* 
pect  to  the  limits  of  Louisiana,  and  the  result  of  the  negotiations  on 
the  sobject,  had  placed  the  former  in  an  unpleasant  dilemma.  The 
western  line,  as  claimed  by  Spain,  was  many  hundred  miles  east  of 
that  insisted  upon  by  the  United  States ;  and  his  Catholic  Majesty 
totally  denied  the  right  of  the  latter,  to  any  part  of  the  country  east 
of  the  Mississippi.  The  American  Executive  could  not  recede  with 
honor;  and  to  enforce  the  claim,  by  a  hostile  occupation  of  the  dis* 
puled  territory,  would  have  brought  the  United  States  in  collision, 
not  only  with  Spain,  but  with  the  French  Emperor. 

This  important  and  interesting  subject,  was  brought  before  Con- 
ai  the  commencement  of  its  session  in  December,  1806.  In  his 
tge  of  the  6th  of  that  month,  secret  at  the  time,  but  since  made 
public,  the  President  officially  informed  the  National  Legislature  of 
the  result  of  his  negotiations  with  Spain ;  and  declared,  that  her  con- 
duct, particularly  in  advancing  into  the  disputed  territory,  had  been 
soeh  as  to  authorise  the  inference,  that  her  aggressions  could  only  be 
repressed  by  force;  and  that  it  rested  with  Congress  alone,  to  take  the 
necessary  measures  for  this  purpose.  The  President  also  declared, 
thmt  the  conduct  of  France,  and  the  part  she  might  take,  in  this  mis- 
vnderstanding  between  the  United  States  and  Spain,  was  too  impor- 
tant to  be  unconsidered.  That  although  she  had  supported  the  latter, 
in  her  claim  on  the  east  side  of  the  Mississippi ;  yet  that,  from  her 
silence  respecting  the  western  boundary,  it  might  be  inferred,  her 
opinion  was  against  Spain  in  that  quarter.  That  whatever  directions 
the  French  Emperor  might  mean  to  give  to  these  differences,  he  had 
not  contemplated  an  actual  rupture ;  but,  there  were  reasons  for  be- 
lieving, that  he  was  disposed  to  effect  a  settlement,  on  a  plan  analo- 
gous to  the  one  proposed  by  the  American  Ministers,  and  so  compre- 
bensive,  as  to  remove  all  grounds  of  future  collision,  on  the  eastern^ 
me  well  ^b  western  side  of  the  Mississippi.  *'The  present  crisis  in 
Eorope,"  the  President  said,  **  is  favorable  for  such  a  settlement :  not 
a  moment  should  be  lost  in  availing  ourselves  of  it.*'  ^^  Formal  war^** 
be  added,  *'  is  not  necessary ;  and  it  is  not  probable  it  will  follow ; 
bat  the  protection  of  our  citizens,  the  spirit  and  honor  of  our  country 
require,  that  force  should  be  interposed  to  a  certain  degree ;  it  will 
probably  contribute  to  advance  the  object  of  peace.  But  the  course 
to  be  pursued  will  require  the  command  of  means,  which  it  belongs 
to  Congress  exclusively  to  yield  or  deny.  To  them  1  communicate 
every  fact  material  for  their  information,  and  the  documents  necessary 
to  enable  them  to  judge  for  themselves.    To  their  wisdom  then  I  look 