


y 


16 

for  the  coarse  I  am  to  pursoe ;  and  I  will  porsue  with  sincere  zetl, 
that  which  they  shall  approve.^' 

The  real  object  of  this  Message  was,  to  obtain  an  appropriation  of 
money,  to  enable  the  President  to  purchase  the  territory  east  of  the 
Mississippi,  including  that  part  claimed  to  be  embraced  in  the  Looisi- 
ana  Treaty.  The  sum  of  two  millions  of  dollars  was,  after  much  de- 
lay, appropriated  by  Congress,  **  towards  the  purchase  of  the  Flori- 
das.*'  The  Message  itself,  and  particularly  the  project  of  appropria- 
ting money  for  the  purchase  of  territory,  already  purchased  and  paid 
for,  created  long  and  violent  debates  in  Congress.  In  the  House  of 
Representatives,  the  subject  was  under  deliberation  and  discussion 
many  weeks ;  and  a  strong  effort  was  made  to  prevent  the  application 
of  any  part  of  the  two  millions,  to  the  purchase  of  the  territory  lying 
between  the  Mississippi  and  the  Perdido,  but  without  success.  John 
Randolph,  one  of  the  Representatives  from  Virginia,  was  Chairman 
of  the  Select  Committee,  to  whom  the  Message  was  referred,  and  was 
violently  opposed  to  the  appropriation  of  money,  for  the  purchase  of 
a  territory,  already  purchased  and  embraced  in  the  Louisiana  Treaty* 
It  was  in  the  debates  on  this  subject,  he  often  declared,  that,  on  his 
first  arrival  at  Washington,  he  was  informed  by  the  Secretary  of  State, 
that  '* France  wanted  money,  and  must  have  it'* 

It  was  said,  at  the  time  of  the  appropriation,  that  the  two  Floridat 
could  be  then  obtained  for  about  five  millions  of  dollars,  and  that 
France  was  to  have  two  millions  of  it,  for  a  debt  due  to  her  from 
Spain* 

Mr.  Bowdoin  was  sent  special  Envoy  to  Madrid,  to  conduct  the 
negotiation,  on  the  part  of  the  American  government  It  is  well 
known,  that  this  negotiation  entirely  failed  ;  but  from  causes,  not  gen- 
erally known.  Mr.  Jefferson,  in  one  of  his  letters,  found  in  his  gen- 
eral correspondence,  &c.  lately  published,  clearly  intimates,  that  one 
cause  of  its  failure,  was,  the  delay  on  the  part  of  Congress,  in  making 
the  necessary  appropriations  *,*  in  consequence  of  which,  new  cir- 
cumstances had  changed  the  mind  of  the  other  party. 


•  The  Letter,  supposed  to  contain  this  intimation,  will  be  foand  in  the  4th  vol- 
ume of  Jefferson's  Writings,  p.  150,  and  was  written  in  answer  to  one  addressed 
to  him,  by  J.  B.  Colvin,  enquiring  his  solution  of  the  question,  whether,  circum- 
stances do  not  sometimes  occur,  which  make  it  a  duty,  in  an  officer  in  high  tmst, 
toa«sume  authorities  beyond  the  law  7  In  answering  this  question,  in  the  affirma- 
tive, in  cases  of  necessity,  where  delay  would  be  highly  injurious  to  the  interests 
of  the  country,  Mr.  Jefferson,  among  other  cases,  to  elucidate  the  principle,  pots 
the  following,  realf  as  an  kfpotkiiical  cast. 