


11 

deposit  at  New  Orleans,  Mr.  Monroe,  then  minister  at  London,  was* 
in  1804,  sent  a  special  envoy,  and  joined  with  Charles  Pinckney, 
then  resident  minister  at  Madrid.  With  respect  to  limits,  Mr.  Mon- 
roe, was  instructed  to  claim,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Mississippi,  to  the 
river  Perdido,  and  on  the  west,  to  the  Rio  Bravo ;  and  from  the  source 
of  this  last  river,  by  a  line  to  run  west  of  the  sources  of  the  rivers, 
which  empty  into  the  Mississippi  from  that  quarter.  The  negotia- 
tions under  this  mission  entirely  failed.  The  Spanish  Court,  not  only 
denied  the  right  of  the  United  States,  to  any  portion  of  the  territory 
east  of  the  Mississippi,  but,  in  the  most  peremptory  manner,  declared 
their  claim  to  the  Rio  Bravo,  to  be  totally  unfounded. 

A  long  and  rather  angry  correspondence  took  place,  between  the 
American  Ministers,  and  the  Spanish  negotiator,  Don  Pedro  Ceval- 
los,  then  Secretary  of  foreign  affairs. 

Various  propositions  were  made  by  the  American  ministers  relative 
to  the  subjects  in  dispute,  but  were  all  rejected  by  the  Spanish  Court 
The  final  propositions  made  by  them,  were,  that  on  condition  Spain 
would  c«de  to  the  United  States,  the  territory  east  of  the  Mississippi, 
mud  would  arbitrate  with  respect  to  her  spoliations  on  American  com- 
merce, agreeable  to  the  stipulations  contained  in  the  Convention  of 
the  11th  of  August,  1802,  to  which  the  Spanish  minister  had  agreed, 
but  which  the  King  afterwards  refused  to  ratify,  the  United  States,  on 
tlieir  part,  would  cede  the  territory  west  of  the  Mississippi,  from  a 
fine  beginning  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Colorado,  and  by  that  river  to 
its  tources ;  and  from  thence,  to  the  northern  limits  of  Louisiana,  by 
a  Kne,  west  of  the  sources  of  the  rivers,  that  run  into  the  Mississippi. 
They,  also  proposed,  that  a  space  of  thirty  leagues,  be  left,  between 
tiM  American  and  Spanish  territories,  never  to  be  settled  by  either 
f^rif. 

The  United  States,  on  these  conditions,  were  to  relinquish  all  claims 
for  French  spoliations  in  Spanish  ports,  engaging  to  compensate  their 
own  citizens,  for  these  spoliations,  in  a  sum  to  be  specified ;  and  were 
to  relinqnish  all  claim  for  damages,  in  consequence  of  the  suppression 
of  the  right  of  deposit  at  New  Orleans.  These  propositions  were 
made,  on  the  12th  of  May,  1805.  The  Spanish  negotiator  promptly 
answered,  that  it  was  inconvenient  for  Spain  to  make  an  exchange  of 
territory,  or,  in  any  way,  accede  to  the  proposed  contract,  declaring 
that  the  United  States  hud  no  claims  on  Spain,  for  French  spoliations, 
or  for  damages,  in  consequence  of  the  withdrawing  the  right  of  de- 
pocit  at  New  Orleans — that  both  the  Floridas  belonged  to  Spain ; 
that  ih4   territory  w(^sl  of  the  Colorado,  tias  her  property,    and 