


J 


14 

**  the  first  article  may  in  time  give  rise  to  difficulties ;  they  are  now 
Insurmountable ;  but  if  they  do  not  stop  you,  I,  at  least  desire,  that 
your  government  should  know,  that  you  have  been  warned  of  them/' 
He  then  adds,  **  The  French  negotiator,  in  rendering  an  account  of 
the  conference  to  the  first  Consul,  pointed  out  to  him  the  obscurity 
of  the  article,  and  the  inconveniences  of  so  uncertain  a  stipulation. 
He  replied,  that  if  an  obscurity  did  not  already  exists  it  would  be 
good  policy  to  put  one  there.** 

Pending  the  negotiation  at  Madrid,  in  the  winter  of  1805,  Bonaparte 
was  sounded  by  Mr.  Armstrong,  who  had  succeeded  Mr.  Livingston, 
as  Minister  at  Paris,  as  to  the  course  he  should  pursue,  in  case  of  a 
rupture  with  Spain.  The  American  Minister  was  explicitly  informed, 
that,  in  such  an  event,  the  French  Emperor  would  not  doubt  or  hesi* 
tote  to  take  part  with  Spain. 

The  American  negotiators,  satisfied  that  Spain,  supported  as  she 
was  by  France,  would  not  quietly  yield  to  the  claims  of  the  United 
States,  informed  the  President,  that  a  **  successful  course  of  events, 
and  an  imposing  attitude  and  decision  of  the  government  and  coun- 
try,^* could  alone  induce  her  to  comply  with  the  ofiered  terms. 

Whatever  might  have  been  the  views  of  Bonaparte  or  his  Minister, 
in  opposing  the  claims  of  the  United  States,  to  any  part  of  the  conn* 
try  east  of  the  Mississippi,  and  in  supporting  those  of  Spain ;  certain 
it  is,  that  not  long  after  the  failure  of  this  negotiation,  a  certain  paper, 
in  the  hand  writing  of  Talleyrand,  but  not  signed  by  him,  was  put  into 
the  hands  of  the  American  Minister  at  Paris.  This  paper  declared, 
that  it  was  then  a  favorable  time  for  the  United  States  to  purchase  the 
Floridas  of  Spain ;  that  the  same  could  probably  be  obtained ;  and 
that  the  French  Emperor  would  assist  the  United  States,  and  use  his 
influence  with  Spain,  to  induce  her  to  part  with  them.  The  Araeri- 
can  Minister  was  requested,  by  the  person  who  handed  him  this  pa- 
per, to  reflect  upon  the  subject,  and  intimated  that  some  further  com* 
munications  might  be  made,  as  to  the  mode  of  efi*ecting  the  object  sug- 
gested. Mr.  Armstrong  was  afterwards  informed,  in  the  same  indi- 
rect way,  that  in  order  to  ensure  a  favorable  result,  the  United  States 
must  assume  a  hostile  attitude  towards  Spain,  put  on  the  appearance 
of  enforcing  their  claims,  and  that  the  French  Emperor  would  second 
their  efforts,  and  secure  the  Floridas  by  purchase. 

These  singular  and  indirect  communications,  were  made  known  to 
the  American  Executive ;  and  it  required  but  little  acquaintance  with 
French  diplomacy,  to  apprehend  their  real  object 