


/ 


so 

The  annexation  of  the  Floridas  to  the  United  States,  had  long  beea 
a  favorite  object  of  the  State  of  Georgia. 

One  of  the  amend  men  t9  proposed  by  that  State,  to  the  articles  of 
Confederation,  in  1778,  was^  that  tlie  Floridas  should  ha?e  the  righl 
of  acceding  to  the  Confederacy.  This  territory  afforded  a  safe  asy- 
lum for  fugitive  slaves,  and  the  people  of  Georgia  urged  the  posses- 
sion of  it  by  the  national  authority.  This  subject  was  again  brought 
before  Congress,  by  a  member  from  that  State,  on  the  19th  of  June 
1812,  the  day  after  the  declaration  of  war,  against  Great  Britain. 
In  the  House  of  Representatives,  a  Committee  was  instructed  to  in- 
quire into  the  expediency  of  authorizing  the  President  to  occupy 
East  and  West  Florida  without  delay ;  and  a  Bill  soon  after  passed 
the  House,  70  to  48,  empowering  the  President  to  take  possession  of 
both  the  Floridas.  This  Bill  was  negatived  by  the  Senate.  Early  the 
next  session,  however,  a  similar  Bill  passed  the  Senate ;  and  although 
supported  by  a  memorial  from  the  Legislature  of  Georgia,  urging 
Congress  to  take  immediate  possession  of  East  Florida  as  well  at 
that  portion  of  West  Florida,  purchased  from  France ;  yet  in  th« 
House  of  Representatives,  it  was  so  amended,  as  only  to  embrace  tho 
tract  of  country  lying  south  of  the  Mississippi  territory,  and  loest  of 
the  Perdido,  and  in  this  shape  passed  both  branches  of  the  Legislature. 

On  the  20th  of  February,  1811,  the  people  of  Louisiana  were  ao- 
thorized  to  form,  for  themselves,  a  constitution,  and  to  become  a  part 
of  the  union.  The  new  State  was  bounded  west  by  the  river  Sabine 
from  its  mouth  to  the  thirty  second  degree  of  latitude,  and  from 
thence  due  north  to  the  northernmost  part  of  the  thirty  third  degree 
of  north  latitude,  and  on  the  east,  by  the  Mississippi,  the  Iberville, 
the  lakes  Maurepas  and  Pontchartrain,  to  the  gulf  of  Mexico. 

The  inhabitants  living  within  these  limits,  were  admitted  into  the 
union,  on  the  8th  day  of  April,  1812,  and  on  the  14th  of  the  same 
month,  the  territory  west  of  the  eastern  branch  of  Pearl  river,  up  to 
latitude  thirty  one  degrees,  was  annexed  to  the  new  State,  which  was 
called  Louisiana.  This  was  done  in  pursuance  of  an  article  in  the 
Treaty  of  cession,  declaring,  *'  That  the  inhabitants  of  the  ceded 
territory  should  be  incorporateu  into  the  union  of  the  United  Statetv 
and  admitted,  as  soon  as  possible,  according  to  the  principles  of  the 
federal  Constitutiun,  to  the  enjoyment  of  all  the  rights,  advantages 
and  immunities  of  citizens  of  the  United  States.*^  This  article,  it 
will  be  remembered,  gave  rise  to  one  of  the  most  important  question* 
ever  agitated  in  this  country,  whether  the  Executive  or  even  Congress 
had  constitutional  power  to  admit  a  foreign  territory  and  its  inhabit- 