


25 

ke  urged,  that  the  line  should  run  to  Clark's  river,  beyond  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  and  by  that  river,  to  the  Columbia,  into  which  it  empties, 
and  thence  down  the  Columbia  to  the  Ocean.  This  proposition,  how- 
ever, was  rejected  ;  and  a  line  direct,  from  the  source  of  the  Arkansas, 
or  bt.  42^,  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  was  ultimately  agreed  upon. 

And  we  would  also  observe,  that  although  Mr.  Adams  was  the  ne- 
gotiator on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  and  has  been  blamed  by 
some  for  yielding  too  much,  at  the  west,  the  President  and  the  Cabi- 
net were  consulted  in  the  various  stages  of  the  negotiation,  and,  as 
to  aoine  parts  of  the  western  limits,  they  overruled  the  American  ne- 
gotialor* 


S 


/ 


CHAPTER  II. 

Colonial  Policy  of  Great  Britain — Amount  of  Exports  and  Imports  prior  to  tlK 
.  ItevolatioB — Commerce  interrupted  during  the  ixrar  of  the  Revolotion — ^Ex- 
penses of  that  war^Amount  of  Public  Debt  in  1783— Requisitions  upon  the 
Slates,  for  provision  for  the  payment  of  it,  not  complied  with— Its  depreciation — 
Exports  to  and  Imports  from  Great  Britain,  from  1784  to  1790— Distressed  state 
of  the  country,  during  this  period — Meeting  of  Commissioners  at  Annapolis,  in 
1786-- Adoption  of  the  new  Constitution,  and  the  organization  of  the  Govern- 
ment under  it,  in  1789. 

Whilk  in  a  colonial  state,  the  European  commerce  of  the  Americans 
was  confined  to  Great  Britain,  and  that  part  of  the  continent  of  Europe, 
which  lies  south  of  Cape  Finisterre. 

The  great  staples  of  the  colonies,  could  only  be  carried  to  the  parent 
state,  and  all  the  imports  from  Europe  came  through  the  same  chan- 
nel. The  exports  from  Great  Britain  to  the  colonies,  now  the  United 
States,  on  an  average  of  six  years,  ending  with  1774,  were  £2^732,036 
sterling,  and  the  imports  from  the  same,  £1,752,142.* 

The  colonial  policy  of  the  parent  state,  was  not  confined  to  the  ex- 
ternal commerce,  but  extended  to  the  internal  concerns  of  the  colonies. 

The  colonists  were  entirely  prohibited  from  carrying  on,  some  kinds 
of  manufactures,  and  in  others,  were  restricted  to  very  narrow  Hmits, 
so  as  not  to  interfere  with  those  of  a  similar  kind,  in  the  mother  country. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  therefore,  the 
Americans  were  without  external  commerce,  or  internal  resources; 
and  during  the  long  conflict,  which  followed,  they  were  compelled  to 
depend  almost  entirely  upon  themselves,  for  supplies,  not  only  of  arms 
and  munitions  of  war,  but  of  those  common  and  necessary  articles  of 
consumption,  previously  obtained  from  Great  Britain  and  elsewhere. 
Those  articles,  which  their  soil  would  not  produce,  or  which  they  were 
unable  to  make  themselves,  they  were  obliged  to  obtain  at  great  risk 
and  expense,  from  other  countries,  or  be  content  without  them.  En- 
couragement was  given  to  all  the  necessary  manufactures,  and  the  zeal, 
ingenuity  and  industry  of  the  people  supplied  the  place  of  a  foreign 
market. 