


84 

tory,  but  from  its  local  gituation,  affording  a  near  and  safe  asylam  for 
their  ships,  in  the  West  India  seas.  In  addition  to  this,  the  United 
States  are  now  secure  against  its  occupation,  by  any  foreign  power^ 
disposed,  by  acquiring  it,  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the  Union.    , 

The  settlement  of  limits  between  Louisiana  and  the  Spanish  terri- 
tories on  the  west  side  of  the  Mississippi,  was  no  less  an  object  of  im- 
portance to  both  countries. 

The  parties,  however,  differed  so  widely  on  this  subject,  that  a  satis- 
factory issue  seemed,  for  a  long  time,  scarcely  possible.  The  country 
in  dispute,  extended  many  hundred  miles  east  and  west,  and  nemrly 
one  thousand  north  and  south.  While  the  American  Elzecutive  claim- 
ed to  the  Rio  Bravo  along  the  gulf  of  Mexico,  his  Catholic  Majesty 
insisted  upon  a  line  east  of  the  river  Sabine,  running  north  to  the  Red 
river,  and  from  a  point  on  this  river,  east  of  the  source  of  the  Sabine* 
running  north  or  north  west  to  the  Missouri,  leaving  the  sources  of  th« 
great  rivers  falling  into  the  Mississippi,  from  the  west,  within  the  lim- 
its of  the  Spanish  possessions.  To  this  line  the  American  government 
refused  to  yield,  and  a  long  and  rather  angry  correspondence  followed, 
between  the  Spanish  Minister,  Don  Onis,  and  Mr.  Adams,  Secretary 
of  State,  without  any  prospect  of  a  favorable  issue. 

The  instructions  of  the  former,  however,  were  afterwards  varied, 
apd  the  aid  of  France,  then  restored  to  the  Bourbons,  was  solicited  by 
SjNiin,  in  the  settlement  of  this  controversy. 

The  French  Minister  at  W^ashington,  M.  Hyde  de  Neuville,  by  th« 
consent  of  both  parties,  acted  as  a  mediator.  Under  the  new  instroc- 
tions,  and  the  friendly  mediation  of  the  French  Minister,  the  negotia- 
tion was  renewed,  at  Washington,  in  the  winter  of  1819,  and  finally 
ended  in  a  cession  of  both  the  Fioridas,  and  a  settlement  of  western 
limits. 

An  historical  view  of  this  important  negotiation,  does  not  fall  within 
our  design ;  we  would  observe,  however,  that  great  difficulties  arose, 
with  respect  to  a  point,  on  the  Red  river,  from  which  the  line  should 
run  north ;  and  many  propositions  were  made  on  both  sides,  and,  at 
last,  a  point  one  hundred  degrees  in  longitude  west  from  London,  and 
twenty  three  from  the  city  of  Washington,  was  fixed  upon.  From  thiv 
point  the  line  was  to  run  due  north  to  the  river  Arkansas,  and  up  that 
river  to  its  source  in  latitude  forty  two  degrees.  The  direction  of  the 
line,  from  the  source  of  the  Arkansas,  produced  another  serious  diffi* 
^culty.  The  Spanish  Minister  at  first  insisted,  that  it  should  go  to  the 
Rocky  Mountains,  and  that  those  mountains  should  be  the  western 
limits ;  and  when  the  American  negotiator  refused  to  accede  to 