

On  the  18th  of  April,  1783,  Congress  again  urged  the  States,  in  the 
nost  pressing  manner,  to  establish  permanent  funds  for  the  payment 
of  the  debts  of  the  Union.  For  this  purpose,  they  declared  it,  "  as 
indispensably  necessary  to  the  restoration  of  public  credit,  and  the 
panctoal  discharge  of  the  public  debts,  to  invest  the  United  States  in 
Congress  assembled,  with  a  power  to  levy,  for  the  use  of  the  United 
States,  the  following  duties  upon  goods  imported  into  the  said  States, 
from  any  foreign  port,  island  or  plantation, 

**  Upon  all  rum,  of  Jamaica  proof,  per  gall.  4-90ths  of  a  dollar. 


all  other  spiritous 

liquors, 

3  " 

do. 

Madeira  wine. 

. 

12  " 

do. 

all  other  wines. 

. 

6  " 

do. 

common  Bohea  tea  per 

lb. 

6  " 

do. 

all  other  teas. 

34  " 

do. 

pepper,    . 

3  " 

do. 

brown  sugar. 

•     w     *" 

do. 

loaf  sugar. 

.     >    2  " 

do. 

all  other  sugars, 

1  " 

do. 

molasses,  per  gall. 

1  " 

do. 

cocoa  and  coffee. 

1  " 

do. 

aod  upon  all  other  goods,  a  duty  of  five  per  cent,  ad  valorem,  at  time 
and  place  of  importation ;  with  a  proviso,  that  none  of  said  duties 
should  be  applied  to  any  other  purpose,  than  the  discharge  of  the  in- 
terest and  principal  of  the  debts  contracted  on  the  faith  of  the  United 
Slates,  for  supporting  the  war,  agreeably  to  the  resolution  of  the  16th 
of  December  last,  nor  be  continued  for  a  longer  term  than  twenty  ^we 
jears.*^  It  was  calculated,  that  the  proposed  duties  would  produce 
an  annual  sum  of  9915,1^.  As  this  would  fall  short  of  paying  the 
annnal  interest  of  the  debt,  a  million  and  a  half  of  dollars,  CoDgreas 


/ 


80 

recommended  to  the  States  "  to  establish,  for  a  time  limited  to  twentjr 
five  years,  and  to  appropriate  to  the  discharge  of  the  interest  and  prin- 
cipal of  the  debt,  substantial  and  effectnal  revenues,  of  such  a  naturet 
as  they  may  judge  convenient,  for  suppl3ring  their  respective  propor- 
tions of  $1,500,000  annually,  exclusive  of  the  aforementioned  dattea.** 

This  system  was  not  to  take  effect  until  acceded  to  by  all  the  States* 
but  when  adopted  by  all,  was  to  be  a  mutual  compact,  irrevocable  hy 
one  or  more,  without  the  concurrence  of  the  whole,  or  a  majority  of 
the  United  States  in  Congress  assembled.  To  induce  its  adoption,  sn 
appeal  was  made  to  the  several  States,  by  Congress,  in  an  able  address* 
in  which  they  urged,  in  most  forcible  language,  the  justice,  ss  well  as 
propriety,  of  making  provision,  for  the  payment,  at  least,  of  the  in- 
terest of  a  debt,  which  was  the  price  of  their  Independence.* 

This  financial  system,  however,  was  not  adopted  by  the  States,  in 
such  a  manner,  as  to  go  into  operation ;  and  Congress  had  no  means 
of  paying  either  the  principal  or  interest  of  the  debt,  but  by  requisi- 
tions upon  the  States ;  and  various  causes  combined,  to  prevent  a  edOBh 
pliance  with  these  requisitions. 