


23 

pie,  into  the  onion,  either  by  a  Treaty,  or  by  a  law  7  Such  a  slip* 
nlntion,  therefore,  they  said,  created  no  obligation,  and  was  roid* 
Mr.  Jefferson  yielded  his  opinion  on  this  important  subject,  to  that 
of  the.  party  which  placed  him  in  power,  and  did  not  interpose  his 
(titutional  veto.  In  181%  as  before  stated,  a  pari  of  this  territory 
admitted  into  the  union,  but  without  an  amendment  of  the  con- 
•titation ;  not,  however,  without  opposition.  In  the  House  of  Rep« 
lescBtatiTes,  the  votes  were  79  to  23,  and  the  opposition  arose  priuci- 
pdRy,  if  not  entirely,  on  constitutional  grounds. 

The  great  mass  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  were  agreed  in 
Um  Importance  of  the  acquisition  of  the  new  territory,  and  therefore 
quietly  acquiesced  in  having  it  incorporated  into  the  union,  without 
ibeir  express  assent,  by  an  amendment  of  the  great  national  compact. 
Few,  however,  it  is  believed,  will  agree  to  admit  this,  as  a  conclusive 
precedent  in  all  cases  which  may  arise  hereafter ;  and  yet,  if  the 
President  and  Senate,  or  Congress  had  the  constitutional  power  to 
hiod  the  nation  in  this  case,  they  must  have  it  in  all ;  and,  can,  here*      ': 
after,  on  the  same  principle,  admit  Texas,  Cuba,  Mexico,  and  Japan,      / 
sad  as  Mr.  Jefferson  supposes,  even  England,  Ireland,  and  Holland,   / 
to  be  a  part  of  the  onion. 

May  the  people  of  the  United  States  never  have  reason  to  regret, 
Ael  the  national  will,  on  this  important  question,  was  not  expressc;^ 
im  a  constitutional  way.  History  too  truly  teaches  us,  that  the  illegfial 
er  oneonstittttional  exercise  of  power,  in  the  best  of  times,  for  the  real 
benefit  of  the  people,  with  their  silent  acquiescence,  has  hardly  ever 
friled  10  be  resorted  to,  as  a  precedent,  in  the  worst  of  times,  and  often, 
ipr  the  worst  of  purposes ;  and  who  will  venture  to  predict,  that  the 
Artore  annals  of  this  country  will  prove,  that  the  people  of  the  United 
8utes  have  formed  an  exception  to  this  general  rule. 

The  sobjects  in  dispute  between  the  United  States  and  Spain  re- 
lined  unsettled,  until  the  22d  day  of  February,  1819,  when  forto- 
nately  for  the  United  States,  they  were  brought  to  a  close  by  sn  amica- 
ble arrangement.  His  Catholic  Majesty,  at  last,  agreed  to  cede  to  the 
Uoited  Suten,  all  the  territory  belonging  to  him,  eastward  of  the  Mis- 
SMsippi,  known  by  the  name  of  East  and  West  Florida.  In  consider* 
atioB  of  this  cession,  the  United  States  relinquished  the  claim  for 
Spanish  spoliations,  and  stipulated  to  make  satisfaction  for  the  same, 
to  their  own  citizens,  to  an  amount  not  exceeding  Rve  millions  of  dol« 
kra.  Isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  Spanish  territories,  its  value  was,  m 
ia  a  great  measure,  lost  to  the  parent  country.  It  was  valuable  to  the  ^ 
Caited  States,  not  merely  for  the  purpoee  of  rounding  their  own  terri- 