


% 
* 


\ 

.1 


22 

/  .  When  the  Treaty  was  submitted  to  the  House  of  RepreientatiTei^ 
/  tof  ihe  purpose  of  having  it  carried  into  efiect,  the  question  as  to  the 
I  constitutionality  of  that  part  which  stipulated  for  the  admission  of  the 
country  into  the  union,  was  mtide  and  warmly  debated.  The  opponent! 
of  this  part  of  the  Treaty,  agreed,  that  foreign  territory  might  be  •€-> 
quired  either  by  conquest  or  purchase^  and  held  as  a  colony  or  pror«l 
ince ;  but  could  not  be  admitted  ii\to  the  union,  without  an  amende 
roent  of  the  Constitution.  In  supj^rt  of  this,  they  urged  that  the 
goTernment  of  this  country  was  formed  by  a  union  of  States,  and 
the  people  had  declared,  that  the  constitution  was  established,  **  to 
form  a  more  perfect  union  of  the  United  States.*^  That  the  United 
States  here  mentioned  could  not  be  mistaken.  They  were  the  States 
Uien  iA  existence,  or  such  other  new  States,  as  should  be  formed 
within  the  then  limits  of  the  union,  conformable  to  the  proTisiont  of 
the  constitution.  Every  measure,  therefore,  they  said,  which  tends  to 
infringe  the  present  union  of  the  States  here  described,  was  a  tiola- 
tion  of  the  first  sentiment  expressed  in  the  constitution.  The  incor* 
poration  of  a  foreign  territory  into  the  union,  so  far  from  tending  to 
preserve  the  union,  was  a  direct  inroad  upon  it ;  it  destroyed  the 
perfect  union  contemplated  between  the  original  parties  by  interpos- 
ing an  alien,  ifnd  a  stranger,  to  share  the  powers  of  government  with 
them,     y 

Pressed  by  arguments  of  this  kind,  and  by  the  opinions  of  Mr. 
Jefferson,  some  of  those,  who  were  in  favor  of  carrying  the  Treatj 
into  effect,  took  a  middle  course,  and  said,  that  the  Treaty  merelj 
stipulated,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  ceded  territory,  should  be  here- 
after incorporated  into  the  union,  according  to  the  principles  sf  the 
constitution.  That  by  taking  possession  of  the  country  under  the 
Treaty,  it  did  not  necessarily  follow,  that  it  must  be  admitted  into  the 
union ;  that  this  question  was  to  be  decided  hereaAer ;  and  the  terri- 
tory would  not  be  admitted  into  the  union,  unless  warranted  by  the 
principles  of  the  Constitution. 

In  answer  to  this,  it  was  said,  that  there  was  no  difference,  in  prin- 
ciple, between  a  direct  incorporation,  by  the  express  words  of  e 
Treaty  and  a  stipulation,  that  such  an  incorporation  should  take 
place ;  because,  if  the  faith  of  the  nation  was  pledged  in  the  latter 
case,  the  incorporation  must  take  place ;  and  that  it  was  of  no  conse- 
quence, whether  the  Treaty  gave  the  incorporation,  or  produced  the 
laws,  which  gave  it ;  that  in  both  cases,  the  Treaty  produced  the 
effect ;  and  that  the  question  returned,  whether  there  exists,  under 
the  constitution,  a  power  to  incorporate  a  foreign  nation,  or  peo- 