

Each  of  these  will  be  considered  in  their  order — 

1st,  The  products  of  the  Sea. 

These  are  derived  from  the  Cod  and  Whale  fisheries,  and  from  the 
river  fisheries,  such  as  herring,  sliad,  salmon,  mackerel,  6lc.  The 
Cod  fishery  has  been  an  object  of  great  importance,  to  the  States  of 
Massachusetts  and  New  Hampshire,  from  their  first  settlement  It 
has  furnished  a  lucrative  employment,  for  many  of  the  inhabitants  of 
these  States,  who  settled  in  its  neighborhood,  along  a  rocky  and  bar- 
ren coast.  It  has  given  employment  also,  to  the  shipbuilder;  and  has 
always  been  considered  as  an  excellent  nursery  for  seamen. 

The  vast  quantity  of  fish,  found,  soon  after  the  discovery  of  North 
America,  along  the  banks  of  Newfoundland,  soon  attracted  the  atten- 
tion of  Europeans. 

The  inhabitants  of  Biscay  in  Spain,  and  of  Brittany  in  France, 
first  engaged  in  this  fishery.  The  French  and  English  afterwards 
claimetl  an  exclusive  right  to  it,  in  consequence  of  owning  the  adja- 
cent coast. 


37 

Previous  to  the  American  revolution,  this  fishery  gave  employment 
annually,  to  about  four  thousand  American  seamen,  and  about  twenty 
eifht  thunsand  tons  of  shipping ;  and  produced  about  three  hundred 
and  fifty  thousand  quintals  of  dsh,  then  valued,  at  more  than  a  million 
of  dollars.  By  the  3d  article  of  the  Treaty  of  peace,  between  the  United 
States  and  Great  Britain  in  1783,  '*  It  is  agreed,  that  the  people  of  the 
United  States,  shall  continue  to  enjoy  unmolested  the  right  to  take 
fish  of  every  kind,  on  the  grand  bank,  and  on  all  other  banks  of  New- 
foundland ;  also,  in  the  gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  and  at  all  other  placeSy 
in  the  sea,  where  the  inhabitants  of  both  countries  used  any  time  to 
ish ;  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  States  shall  have  liberty  to 
take  fish  of  any  kind  on  such  part  of  the  coast  of  Newfoundland,  as 
the  British  shall  use  (but  not  to  cure  or  dry  them  on  the  Island  ;)  and 
also,  on  the  coasts,  bays  and  creeks  of  all  other  his  Britanic  Majesty's 
dominions  in  America,  and  that  the  American  fishermen  shall  have 
liberty  to  dry  and  cure  fish,  in  any  of  the  unsettled  bays,  harbors 
and  creeks  of  Nova  Scotia,  Magdalen  Islands,  and  Labrador,  so  long 
as  the  same  shall  remain  unsettled ;  but  so  soon  as  the  same,  or  either 
of  them  shall  be  settled,  it  shall  not  be  lawful  for  the  said  fishermen 
to  dry  or  cure  fish  at  such  settlement,  without  a  previous  agreement 
for  that  purpose,  with  the  inhabitants,  proprietors,  or  possessors  of 
eke  ground.'* 

For  this  favorable  article,  in  relation  to  the  fisheries,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  boundaries,  the  Americans  were  indebted  to  the  firmness  of 
fbtir  negotiators,  and  particularly  Mr.  Adams,  who  knew  their  value 
aad  importance  to  his  countrymen.  The  British  negotiators,  for  a 
long  time,  refused  their  assent  to  this  article,  and  particularly  to  that 
pnrt,  relating  to  the  coast  fishery,  and  which  acknowledged  the  right 
of  ibe  Americans  to  take  fish,  on  the  grand  banks,  6lc.  and  at  last 
iBBisled,  on  inserting  the  word  liberty,  instead  of  right.  Upon  this, 
Mr.  Adams  grew  warm,  and  declared  to  the  British  negotiators,  he 
would  put  his  hand  to  no  articles,  without  satisfaction  about  the  fish- 
criea:  be  asked,  ^'whether  there  was,  or  could  be  a  clearer  right? 
b  former  treaties"  he  said,  '^  that  of  Utrecht,  and  that  of  Paris, 
Prance  and  England  have  claimed  the  right,  and  used  the  word. 
VThen  God  Almighty  made  the  banks  of  Newfoundland,  at  three  hun- 
dred leagues  distance,  from  the  people  of  America,  and  at  six  hundred 
leaf  ues  distance,  from  those  of  France  and  England,  did  ho  not  give, 
as  good  a  right  to  the  former,  as  to  the  latter  ?  If  Heaven,  in  the 
creation  gare  a  right,  it  is  ours,  at  least,  as  much  as  yours, — if  occu- 
pation, use  and  possession  gives  a  right,  we  have  it  as  clearly  as 