


33 


of  government,  with  the  Father  of  his  country  at  its  head,  trade  and  ] 
commerce  soon  revived,  public  and  private  credit  was  restored,  and  a 
new  spring  given  to  agriculture  and  manufactures,  and  new  security 
afforded,  to  the  various  pursuits  of  individual  industry.  Since  that  aus- 
picious period,  the  United  States  have  peaceably  acquired,  as  before 
stated,  a  vast  extent  of  territory ;  and  the  following  pages  will  show, 
we  tnift,  that  no  country  has  ever  increased  more  rapidly,  in  popula- 
tion* and  in  internal  and  external  resources. 


CHAPTER  III. 

Exports^Dividedinto  those  of  Domestic  and  Foreign  origin— Domestic,  derived 
from  the  Sea,  the  Forest,  Agricnlture  and  Manufactures — Products  of  the  Sea 
principally  from  the  Cod  and  Whale  fisheries— State  of  the  Cod  fishery  prior 
to,  and  since  the  revolution — Secured  to  us,  by  the  Treaty  of  peace  in  1783,  bj 
the  firmness  and  perseverance  of  the  American  negotiators — Whale  fishery 
began  at  Nantucket  in  1690— State  of  it  before  the  Revolution — Its  great  in- 
crease of  late  years — Number  of  vessels  engaged  in  it,  in  1833,  with  their  ton- 
nage, number  of  men — Value  of  the  vessels  and  their  outfits,  and  of  their 
produce — Value  of  Export*:,  the  produce  of  the  fisheries,  in  each  year,  from 
1803,  to  1833 — Products  of  the  Forest — viz.  lumber,  naval  stores,  pot  and  pemrl 
ashes,  skins  and  furs,  ginseng,  oak  bark,  and  other  dyes,  value  and  qoantiqr 
of  each,  exported,  from  1803  to  1833. 

In  our  view  of  the  wealth  and  resources  of  the  United  Statest  at 
different  periods,  we  shall  commence  with  the  exports.  These  con- 
sist of  articles,  either  of  domestic  or  foreign  origin.  At  an  early 
period  of  the  present  government,  provision  was  made,  at  the  Treas- 
ury department,  to  ascertain  the  quantity,  as  well  as  value  of  all 
the  exports  of  the  country ;  but  in  the  general  accounts,  no  dicrimi- 
nation  was  made,  between  the  value  of  domestic  and  foreign  articles, 
until  1802.  To  ascertain  the  value  of  the  exports,  the  several  Col- 
lectors, were  directed,  by  the  Treasury  department,  to  add,  in  their 
quarterly  returns,  the  quantity  of  the  various  articles  exported,  and 
also  their  value,  at  the  places  of  exportation. 

The  quantity  of  the  articles  exported  is  furnished,  by  the  export- 
erf,  and  may  sometimes  fall  short,  and  sometimes  exceed  the  real 
quantity.  At  the  Treasury,  an  average  was  made  of  the  prices 
turned  by  the  collectors,  and  the  value  of  the  articles  exported, 
calculated,  from  the  average  prices  thus  ascertained.  Table  No.  I, 
contains  a  statement  of  the  value  of  all  the  exports,  from  each  State 
and  territory,  annually,  from  the  Ist  of  October,  1790,  to  September 
30th,  1816.  Table  No.  II,  exhibits  a  statement  of  the  value  of  ex- 
ports of  domestic  origin,  from  each  State  and  territory,  from  October 
1st,  180%  to  September  30th,  1816,  and  Table  No.  Ill,  a  sUtement 
of  the  value  of  exports  of  foreign  origin,  during  the  same  period. 
Table  No.  IV,  shews  the  exports  of  domestic  and  foreign  origin, 
from  each  State  and  territory,  in  the  years  1817,  1818,  1819,  I^. 
Table  No.  V,  contains  a  statement  of  the  whole  commerce  of  each 
State  and  territory,  in  each  year,  from  1821,  to  1833,  embracing  not 