

This  fishery,  during  the  war  of  the  revolution,  was  destroyed.  On 
the  return  of  peace,  it  recovered  by  degrees;  and  from  1787  to  1789, 
ninety  one  vessels,  of  five  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twenty  tons, 
were  engaged  in  the  northern  fishery,  and  thirty  one  vessels,  of  four 
thousand  three  hundred  and  ninety  tons,  in  the  southern,  with  one 
thousand  six  hundred  and  eleven  seamen.^    The  quantity  of  sperma- 


L^ 


•  See  Collections  of  the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society, 
t  8se  table  No.  X.  X  See  table  No.  XI. 

6 


y 


42 

ceti  oil  taken  annually,  from  1771  to  1775,  was  thirty  nine  thousand 
three  hundred  and  ninety  barrels,  and  of  coramon  oil,  eight  thousand 
six  hundred  and  fifty ;  while  from  1787  to  1789,  the  quantity  of  the 
former  taken  annually,  was  seven  thousand  nine  hundred  barrels,  and 
of  the  latter,  thirteen  thousand  One  hundred  and  thirty. 

Previous  to,  and  for  many  years  subsequent  to  the  American  revo- 
lution, this  fishery  was  carried  on,  principally,  from  the  Island  of 
'/  Nantucket,  where  it  originated,  a  small  island,  about  fifteen  miles  in 
length,  and  three  in  breadth,  situated,  about  thirty  miles  from  the 
coast. 

Before  the  war  of  the  revolution,  this  Island  had  sixty  five  ships, 
of  four  thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy  five  tons,  in  the  northern 
fishery,  and  eiglity  five,  of  ten  thousand  two  hundred  tons,  in  the 
southern.  This  fishery  suffered  much,  during  the  late  war,  between 
the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  having  lost  twenty  four  ships  by 
the  capture  of  the  enemy.  Since  that  period,  however,  it  has  re- 
vived, and,  we  believe,  has  become  more  extensive  than  that  carried 
on  by  all  other  nations. 

From  the  best  accounts,  we  have  obtained,  the  whole  number  of 
vessels  engaged  in  this  fishery,  in  the  winter  of  1834,  was  four  hun- 
dred and  thirty  four,  of  which,  about  three  hundred  and  eighty  four 
were  ships,  and  fifty,  barks  and  brigs. 

The  greatest  part  of  these,  belong  to  New  Bedford,  Nantucket  and 
New  London.  The  following  is  the  number  of  vessels,  in  these  three 
districts,  with  their  tonnage,  and  number  of  men  employed,  furnished 
us  by  the  collectors  of  these  districts. 

No.  of  vessels. 

New  Bedford,  181 

Nantucket,  76 

New  London,  41 

299  94,075  7,392 

The  remaining  number,  being  about  one  hundred  and  thirty  six,  from 
the  best  information  obtained,  belong  to  the  following  ports. 

Sag  Harbor,  .  .     23  Portsmouth,  .  .  6 

Falmouth,  .  .      6  Bridgeport,     .  .  1 

Warren,  .  .     12  Newburyport,  .  3 

Bristol,  .  •  .13  Edgerton,       .  6 

Newport,  .  6  Salem,   ...  5 

Hudson,  .  .11  Boston,     .      .  .4 

Providence,  .  .      2  New  York,     .  6 