

The  principal  employment  of  the  inhabitants  of  North  America, 
has  been  that  of  agriculture.  The  first  emigrants  soon  found,  that 
Bothing  promised  such  immediate  and  permanent  advantages,  as  the 
caltivation  of  the  new  lands,  which  they  came  to  possess.  The  labor 
bestowed  in  clearing  and  cultivating  them,  afforded  not  only  the 
forest  means  of  subsistence,  but  added  greatly  to  the  permanent  val- 
9t  of  the  lands  themselves.  The  immense  tracts  of  vacant,  uncleared 
lands  in  the  United  States,  has  always  rendered  it  easy  for  those  pos- 
sessed of  an  ordinary  share  of  industry,  to  obtain  more  than  enough 
for  cultivation.  The  facility  of  suj^orting  families,  has  induced  early 
marriages,  population  has  increased  with  the  means  of  subsistence, 
and  wealth,  as  well  as  health  and  happiness  has  generally  attended 
the  independent  cultivator  of  the  soil. 

The  surplus  produce  of  American  agriculture,  has  been  exchang- 
ed for  those  articles,  either  of  necessity,  convenience  or  luxury, 
which  the  inhabitants  did  not  manufacture  for  themselves,  or  could 
only  be  procured  from  foreign  nations  ;  and  the  productions  of  agri- 
cnltore,  both  before  and  since  the  American  revolution,  have  constitu- 
ted much  the  largest  portion  of  the  domestic  exports  of  this  country* 

These  productions,  have  been  classed  into  those — 

1st  Which  constitute  vegetable  food,  as  wheat,  flour,  rice,  Indian 
eom,  rye,  peas,  beans,  oats,  potatoes,  dec. 

2d.  The  products  of  animals,  as  beef,  tallow,  hides,  butter  and 
cbeete,  pork  and  lard,  or  the  animals  themselves  when  exported. 

3d.  Tobacco. 

4th.  Cotton. 

5th.  Others  of  minor  importance,  as  indigo,  flax-seed,  wax,  dLC. 

Wheat,  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  vegetables,  was  brought  to 
America,  by  the  first  emigrants,  and  has  been  cultivated  with  success, 
from  the  first  settlement  of  the  country.     It  has  always  been  the 


/ 


96 


great  staple  of  the  middle  and  western  states^  and  was  formerly  pro- 
duced in  those  at  the  east.  For  many  years  past,  it  has,  in  a  great 
measure,  failed  in  New  England. 

The  states  of  Virginia  and  Maryland  have  exchanged  part  of  their 
tobacco  lands,  for  wheat. 

In  1770,  the  quantity  of  wheat  exported  from  the  American  Colo- 
nies, now  the  United  States,  was  seven  hundred  and  fifty  one  thou- 
sand two  hundred  and  forty  bushels ;  and  of  flour  and  bread,  wai 
forty  five  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty  eight  tons,  being  at  tea 
barrels  per  ton,  four  hundred  and  fifty  eight  thousand  eight  hundred 
and  sixty  eight  barrels ;  both  then  valued  at  about  $2,802,190.  Much  / 
the  greatest  part  of  it  went  to  the  south  of  Europe  and  to  the  West 
Indies-.  The  amount  exported  from  the  United  States,  from  the  peace 
of  1783,  to  the  commencement  of  t}\e  present  national  govemmenl» 
cannot  be  ascertained  with  any  degree  of  accuracy. 