


J 


no 

ioD  was  obtained  before  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States,  in 
which  Judge  Johnson  of  South  Carolina,  lately  deceased,  presided. 
In  his  charge  to  the  Jury,  the  Judge  did  ample  justice  to  Mr.  Whit- 
ney, as  the  original  inventor,  as  well  as  to  the  great  importance  and 
utility  of  the  invention  itself. 

No  inconsiderable  part  of  the  money,  received  from  other  states, 
was  expended,  in  this  long  contest  with  the  Georgians.  The  final  de- 
*  cision  in  his  favor,  came  too  late,  to  enable  him  to  derive  any  advant- 
age from  it.  In  1812,  Mr.  Whitnry  applied  to  Congress  for  a  renew- 
al of  his  patent,  for  a  certain  number  of  years,  and  a  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Representatives,  made  a  report  in  his  favor;  butj  in  conse- 
quence of  the  strong  opposition  of  Georgia,  and  the  peculiar  situation 
of  Congress,  then  preparing  for  war  with  Great  Britain,  the  subject 
was  not  finally  acted  upon.  Georgia,  therefore,  has  had  the  immense 
benefit  of  this  invention,  without  making  any  compensation  to  the  in- 
ventor. And  we  would  here  observe,  that,  during  the  long  continu- 
ance of  that  disease,  which  finally  terminated  his  existence,  Mr.  Whit- 
ney invented  an  improvement  in  his  machine,  which  he  was  satisfied^ 
as  he  has  often  informed  the  writer  of  these  ])ages,  would  so  much 
facilitate  tlie  cleaning  of  upland  cotton,  as  to  benefit  the  planter,  about 
two  cents  on  every  pound.  He  would  not,  however,  apply  for  a  pat- 
enk-for  this  improvement,  unless  he  could  previously  receive^  from 
those,  who  would  be  benefitted  by  it,  the  most  unequivocal  security, 
that  his  children  should  have  some  remuneration  for  it,  without  the 
trouble  and  expense  of  an  infinity  of  law  suits.  By  his  death,  both 
his  country,  and  his  family,  lost  the  advantage  of  this  improvement. 

The  value  of  this  invention  to  the  United  States,  can  only  be  duly 
appreciated  but  by  adverting  to  the  facts,  that  in  lb07,  thirteen  yeara 
after  this  machine  got  into  use,  fifty  five  millions  of  pounds  of  up- 
land cotton,  were  exported,  valued  at  911,500,000;  and  that,  on  an 
average  of  four  years,  from  1^27  to  1S30,  inclusive,  more  than  two 
hundred  and  seventy  millions  of  pounds  were  annually  exported,  Tal- 
ued  at  about  824,000,000  in  each  year,  constituting  nearly  one  half 
of  the  average  value  of  all  the  domestic  exports  during  these  four 
years ;  and  that  in  1833,  the  quantity  exported,  was  three  hundred  and 
thirteen  millions  five  hundred  and  fifty  five  thousand  stx  hundred  and 
aeventeen  pounds,  valued  at  about  $32,000,000.  It  should,  also,  be 
borne  in  mind,  that,  during  this  period,  from  sixty  to  seventy  millions ; 
and  in  1833,  not  less  than  about  one  hundred  millions  of  pounds,  of 
this  species  of  cotton,  was  manufactured  in  the  l-nited  States. 