

The  whole,  or  nearly  the  whole  of  this,  was  consumed  in  the  Uni- 
ted States.  When  we  add  to  this,  the  quantity  then  distilled  in  this 
country  from  molasses,  and  that  which  was  imported  and  consumed 
here,  we  find,  that  the  annual  consumption  of  spirits  in  the  United 
Slates,  at  that  time,  was  no  less  than  about  thirty  one  millions  seven 
hundred  and  twenty  five  thousand  four  hundred  and  seventeen  gallons. 

Spirits  distilled  in  1810,  from  foreign  and  domestic 
materials,  by  the  returns  of  the  marshalls,  (above  ^ye        caik. 
millions  from  molasses,)      ....  25,499,382 

Exported,  during  that  year,  spirits  distilled 

from  foreign  materials,        .  .  474,990 

do.       do.        from  domestic  materials,  133,S53 

: fJ08,W3 


Leaving  for  consumption,  24,^90,539 
The  average  quantity  of  spirits  imported  and  consum- 
ed, from  1801  to  1813,  inclusive,  was  6,834,878 

Making,                         .    .  31,r26,417 


A 


104 

about  four  and  a  half  gallons,  for  erery  pers9B,  then  in  At  United 
States.  We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining,  with  any  degree  of  accu- 
racy, the  quantity  of  spirits  distilled  in  the  United  States,  dther  from 
foreign  or  domestic  materials,  since  1810.  The  importation  and  con- 
sumption of  foreign  spirits,  of  late  years,  has  certainly  greatly  dimin- 
ished— the  quantity  imported  and  consumed  in  1833,  was  only  two 
millions  eight  hundred  and  seventy  four  thousand  five  hundred  and 
ninety  five  gallons. 

This,  has  been  made  up,  in  some  measure,  by  a  greater  importatibn 
and  distillation  of  molasses,  in  consequence  of  the  high  duties,  on  for- 
eign imported  spirits.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  tfte 
greaf  and  successful  exertions  lately  made,  to  prevent  the  evils  of  fn- 
temperancc,  have  greatly  lessened  the  consumption  of  ardent  spirita 
in  this  country. 

These  evils,  heretofore  deemed  irremediable,  had  become  so  great, 
not  merely  to  individuals,  but  to  society  in  general,  as  to  suggest  en- 
tire  abstinence,  as  the  only  certain  means  of  ultimately  preventing 
them. 

Influential  individuals,  in  dififerent  parts  of  the  United  States,  there^ 
fore,  have  set  the  example,  and  numerous  associations  have  beeo 
formed,  composed  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  persons,  upon  the 
plan,  of  abstaining  from  the  use  of  ardent  spirits,  except  as  a  medicine. 

The  appalling  facts,  brought  to  light  by  enquiries,  made,  in  conae* 
quence  of  these  associations,  have  given  a  decided  tone  to  ]{ublic  opin- 
ion, in  favor  of  the  principles  adopted  by  them.  These  enqoiriea 
have  demonstrated,  that  the  evils  of  intemperance  had  affected,  not 
merely  the  lives,  and  happiness  of  individuals,  but  the  morals,  intor- 
ests,  and  happiness  of  the  community  at  large,  to  a  greater  extent* 
than  any  one  ever  had,  or  could  before,  have  imagined-^that  not  only 
thousands,  but  tens  of  thousands  in  the  United  States,  had,  orery 
year,  become  the  victims  of  intemperance;  but  that  about  three  qnar^ 
ters  of  all  the  crimes,  and  all  the  pauperism  of  the  country,  bad  been 
occasioned  by  it.  The  success,  which  has  attended  these  humane  and 
patriotic  exertions,  has  been  unparalleled ;  and  permits  ns  to  hope, 
that  the  time  is  not  far  distant,  when  this  slow,  but  sure  pouon  will, 
like  other  poisons,  be  no  longer  used  in  the  United  States^  but  in  con- 
sequence of  the  prescription  of  physicians. 