

Soon  after  that  period,  it  became  the  great  staple  of  South  Caro- 
lina and  Georgia,  and  lately  of  the  new  States,  at  the  South  west; 
and  is  now  the  most  valuable  of  all  the  export<«  of  the  United  States. 


•  Ramsay '<  History  of  South  Carolina. 


109 

American  cotton  has  been  generally  known,  by  the  names  of  Sea 
Island  and  Upland.  The  former  grows  along  the  sea-coast,  has  a 
black  seed,  long  staple,  and  is  easily  cleaned  or  separated,  from  the 
teed;  the  latter  grows  on  the  upland,  at  a  distance  from  the  coast,  haa 
a  green  seed,  short  staple,  and  before  the  invention  of  a  machine,  for 
that  purpose,  was  so  difficult  to  be  cleaned  or  separated,  from  the  seed, 
•8  to  be  hardly  worth  the  trouble  and  expense  of  cultivation.  This 
machine  was  invented  by  Mr.  Eli  Whitney,  a  native  of  Massachusetts,  ' 
m  gentleman  of  liberal  education,  and  of  great  mechanical  talents, 
who  was  ac(^^nta]ly  in  Georgia,  in  17()3.  This  machine  soon 
enriched  the  southern  planter,  and  enabled  him  to  cultivate,  to  the 
greatest  advantage,  one  of  the  most  valuable  staples,  in  the  world. 

It  has  rarely,  if  ever,  occurred,  that  the  invention  of  a  single  ma- 
chine, has  given  employment  to  so  many  millionit  of  people,  and  has 
added  so  much  to  the  real  wealth  and  resources  of  a  nation.  That  of 
Arkwright,  for  spinning  cotton,  and  of  Fulton  for  propelling  vessels 
by  steam,  can  alone,  in  these  respects,  be  compared  with  it. 

These  inventions  haw;  done  more,  to  increase  the  wealth  and  re- 
sources of  the  countries,  to  which  the  inventors  rcnpectivcly  belong- 
ed, than  all  other  inventions  of  modem  times.  They  have  contributed 
more,  however,  as  generally  happens,  in  such  cases,  to  the  interest  of 
their  respective  countries,  than  to  that,  of  the  inventors  themselves.  Mr. 
Arkwright,  indeed,  after  struggling  with  many  difficulties,  was  finally 
rewarded  with  a  handsome  fortune.  But  it  must  ever  be  a  subject  of 
deep  regret,  that  Fulton  died  poor,  and  left  his  children  dependent  on 
charity,  for  support. 

Mr.  Whitney  obtained  a  Patent  for  his  invention,  at  an  early  peri- 
od, under  the  laws  of  the  United  States,  the  benefits  of  which  he  was 
to  share  equally,  with  his  partner  in  the  business,  Mr.  Miller.     South 
Carolina  gave  them  $50,000,  for  the  right  of  using  the  machine  in  that 
state ;  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee,  made  them  some  compensation 
for  the  same  privilege.     But,  in  the  State  of  (leorgia,  where  the 
benefit  of  the  invention  was  the  greatest,  Mr.  Whitney's  right  to  the 
iarention  was  disputed,  and  his  machine  was  used  by  the  people  of 
that  state,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  individuals,  without  making  him 
any  componsatton.     He  was,  tlierefore,  compelled  to  have  recourse  to 
the  judicial  tribunals  for  redress ;  owing,  however,  to  a  defect  in  the 
first  patent  law,  and  the  powerful  interest  opposed  to  him,  his  first 
ittits  entirely  failed ;  and  before  he  was  able,  under  a  new  patent  law, 
made,  in  some  measure,  to  reach  his  peculiar  case,  to  obtain  a  decis- 
ion ia  his  favor,  thirteen  years  of  his  patent  had  expired.     This  decis- 