

The  National  Legislature,  intended,  no  doubt,  by  this  general  rule, 
to  fix  what,  might  be  supposed  the  general  value  of  these  articles,  at 
the  place  of  importation.  But  it  might  sometimes  fall  short,  and 
sometimes  exceed  the  real  value,  as  this  would  depend,  not  on  any 
general  rule;  but  on  the  quantity  in  market,  the  slate  of  the  demand, 
and  various  other  circumstances.  The  law,  establishing  the  tariff  of 
duties,  in  1816,  varied  this  rule,  and  directed,  that  the  value  of  tlie 
imports,  of  this  description,  should  be  calculated,  **on  the  net  coet 
of  the  articles,  at  the  place,  from  whence  imported,  exclusive  of  pack- 
ages, commissions,  and  all  charges.*' 

The  goods  or  merchandize,  paying  ad  valorem  duties,  then  em- 
braced, with  few  exceptions,  all  the  woollen,  cotton,  linen,  silk,  metal, 
eerthen,  and  peper  manufactures,  with  othen  of  minor  importanee. 


> 


^ 


f 

I 


V 

164 

•  ■ 

The  valwt  of  tbese  kind  of  goods,  but  not  their  quaniiiy^  wu  re« 
turned  to  the  Treasury  department.  Of  all  the  other  various  articles, 
whether  duty  free,  or  paying  specific  duties,  the  quantity^  hiid  not  the 
valuCf  was  returned.  The  Treasury  document^*,  therefore,  prior  to 
1831,  do  not  shew  the  value  of  the  imports,  as  they  do,  the  exports 
of  the  United  States. 

Sensible  of  the  advantage  and  importance  of  obtaining  more  accu- 
rate official  information,  respecting  the  external  commerce  of  the 
country.  Congress,  in  1820,  J^y  wisely,  made  provision,  '*  for  ob- 
taining accurate  statements  of  the  foreign  commerce  of  the  United 
States.*'  The  secretary  of  the  Treasury  was  directed,  annually,  to 
prepare  statistical  accounts,  of  the  commerce  of  the  United  States* 
with  foreign  nations,  including  the  kinds^  quantities  and  value^  both 
of  tlie  imports  and  exports ;  and,  also,  of  the  navigation,  employed  in 
foreign  trade.  The  exports  were  to  be  valued,  at  their  cost,  or  real 
value,  at  the  jdace  of  exportation — the  imports^  at  their  cost  or  worth, 
at  the  foreign  ports^  from  whence  they  wqfe  exported,  for  importa- 
tion into  the  United  States.  Since  the  adoption  of  this  rule,  the  Talae 
of  the  imports^  as  well  as  the  exports^  has  been  ascertained,  at  the 
national  Treasury.  In  addition  to  this  important  object,  the  amount 
of  the  trade  and  navigation  of  this  country,  with  each  foreign  nation 
and  its  dependencies,  is  also,  ascertained.  We  would  here  state,  that 
with  respect  to  imports,  subject  to  ad  valorem  duties,  Congress,  in 
1823,  directed  the  20  and  10  per  cent  to  be  added,  to  their  actual  cost ; 
and,  in  1832,  again  varied  the  rule,  and  ordered  the  charges  only  (in- 
•  Borance  excepted)  to  be  added. 