

By  an  act  of  Parliament,  of  April,  1783,  (23  Geo.  III.  chap.  39) 
the  King  and  council  were  authorized  to  regulate  the  trade  between 
the  two  countries.  This  act  was,  at  first,  limited  to  a  short  period* 
but  continued  in  force,  by  subsequent  acts. 

The  King  and  council,  by  orders  made  in  pursuance  of  this  actf 
prior  to  1791,  permitted  any  goods,  being  unmanufactured^  (ezeepi 
fish,  oil,  blubber,  whale  fins,  and  spermaceti,)  and  also,  any  pif  iron, 

23 


178 

btr  iron,  pitch,  Ur,  turpentine,  rerin,  pot  and  pearl  ashes,  indigo, 
masts,  yards  and  bowsprits,  being  the  growth  or  production  of  any 
of  4he  territories  of  the  United  States,  to  be  imported  directly  from 
thence,  into  any  of  the  ports  of  Great  Britain,  upon  payment  of  the 
■ame  duties,  as  the  like  sort  of  goods  were  or  might  be  subject  to,  if 
imported  from  any  British  island  or  plantation,  in  America.  They, 
also,  ordered  and  directed,  that  fish  oil,  blubhcr,  whale  fins,  and  sper- 
maceti, and  all  other  goods  not  enumerated,  being  the  growth,  pro- 
duction or  manufacture  of  the  United  States,  might  be  imported, 
upon  payment  of  such  duties,  of  custom  and  excise,  as  were  payable 
on  the  like  goods,  on  their  importation  from  foreign  countries;  and 
that  in  cases  where  different  duties  were  imposed  upon  the  like  goods 
imported  from  different  foreign  countries,  then  upon  payqent  of  the 
lowest  of  such  duties.* 

The  same  orders,  regulated  the  intercourse  between  the  United 
States,  and  the  British  West  Indies,  and  will  lie  noticed  hereafter. 
The  intercourse  between  the  two  countries,  was  regulated  by  these 
orders,  of  the  King  and  council,  until  Nov.  19th,  1704,  whena  treaty 
of  amity,  commerce,  6lc,  was  finally  concluded.  By  this  treaty, 
liberty  of  commerce  was  established,  between  the  British  dominions 
in  Europe,  and  the  United  States,  subject  to  the  laws  of  the  respec- 
tiTe  coontries ;  and  by  the  15th  article,  no  higher  duties  were  to  be 
paid  by  either,  than  were  paid  by  all  other  nations ;  the  British  gov- 
ernment reserving  to  itself,  the  right  of  imposing  on  American  ves- 
•elf,  entering  into  the  British  ports  in  Europe,  a  tonnage  duty,  equal 
to  that,  which  should  be  payable  by  British  vessels  in  the  American 
ports ;  and  also,  such  duty  as  might  be  adequate  to  countervail  the 
difiTerence  of  duties  payable  on  goods,  imported  into  the  United  States, 
in  British  or  American  bottoms. 

The  commercial  part  of  this  Treaty,  expired  in  1804.  It  had  long 
been  a  favorite  object  of  the  British  government,  to  equalize  the  ton- 
nage, and  other  duties,  between  the  United  States,  and  the  British  do- 
minions in  Europe,  as  will  be  more  particularly  noticed  hereafter.  The 
American  government,  however,  for  a  long  time,  declined  acceding  to 
any  proposition  of  this  kind.  In  the  treaty  negotiated  by  the  Ameri- 
ean  commissioners,  in  1800,  an  equalization  of  these  duties,  was  agreed 
upon ;  but  this  treaty  was  rejected  by  the  President,  without  even 
consulting  the   Senate.     The   American   government,  however,  in 