

ward cargo ;  and  under  this  article,  American  vessels,  with  their  car- 
goes, went  directly  to  the  East  Indies,  from  Europe,  and  other  places. 
The  commercial  part  of  this  treaty,  as  before  stated,  expired  in  1804. 
1^^  This  trade,  however,  was  suffered  to  continue,  on  the  same  footing, 

generally,  as  under  the  treaty,  until  April  30th,  1811,  when,  in  pur- 
suance of  powers  vested  in  the  East  India  Company,  by  an  act  of 
Parliament,  passed  the  37th  of  Geo.  Ill,  chap.  107,  that  company 
established  regulations,  "  for  the  conduct  of  the  trade  of  foreign  na- 
tions, to  the  ports  and  settlements  of  the  British  nation  in  the  East 
Indies,  and  also  for  defining  the  duties  to  which  such  trade  shall  be 
subject,''  ^c. 

By  these  regulations,  the  vessels  of  the  United  States,  were  obliged 
to  proceed  direct  from  American  ports,  to  the  British  East  Indies, 
without  touching  jat  any  other  port,  in  the  outward  voyage,  except 
from  necessity,  refreshments,  or  repairs,  &c.  While  there,  they  were 
not  to  be  .employed  in  the- coasting  trade  ;  nor  were  they  permitted, 
either  with  or  without  a  cargo,  to  proceed  to  the  settlements  of  any 


187 

other  European  nation  in  India,  or  to  any  part  of  India,  or  to  Chintf 
nor  to  any  place  on  the  river  Ganges,  except  Calcutta.  They  were 
obliged  to  return  direct  to  some  port  in  the  United  States,  and  to  gire 
bond  to  deliver  iheir  cargo,  at  the  port  for  which  their  clearance  WM 
made ;  and  were  subjected  to  double  the  duties  paid  by  British  vessels. 
In  consequence  of  these  regulations,  the  owners  of  some  American 
vessel?,  employed  in  tliis  trade,  were  placed  in  an  unfortunate  situa- 
tion, on  the  arrival  of  their  vessels,  in  the  United  States,  during  the 
operation  of  the  non-intercourse  law.  They  had  given  bond  in  Indity 
to  land  their  cargo,  in  the  United  States;  on  their  arrival  here,  the 
non-intercourse  law  prohibited  the  landing  of  their  cargoes,  becaase, 
coming  from  a  British  port, — if  landed  in  the  United  States,  both  ves- 
sel and  cargo  were  forfeited ;  and  if  carried  to  a  foreign  port,  the 
bond  given  in  India,  was  forfeited.  Thus  situated,  the  owners  were 
obliged  to  apply  to  Congress  for  relief;  and  special  permission  was 
granted  them  to  land  their  goods,  and  to  dispose  of  them  for  their 
own  use. 

On  the  renewal  of  the  charter  of  the  East  India  Company,  some 
years  since,  the  inhabitants  of  Great  Britain,  as  is  well  known,  were 
permitted  to  trade  with  certain  ports  in  the  East  Indies,  under  certain 
regulations. 

By  the  commercial  convention  of  July  3d,  1815,  the  trade  between  ^ 
the  United  States,  and  the  British  East  Indies,  is  confined  to  tlie  same 
ports.  By  the  third  article  of  this  convdhtion,  **  His  Britannic  Ma- 
jesty agrees,  that  the  vessels  of  the  United  States  of  America,  shall 
be  admitted,  and  hospitably  received,  at  the  principal  settlements  of 
the  British  dominions  in  the  East  Indies,  videlicet,  Calcutta,  MadrAs, 
Bombay,  and  the  Prince  ef  Wales*  Island;  and  that  the  citizens  of 
the  United  Slates,  may  freely  carry  on  trade,  between  the  said  princi- 
pal settiemcntj,  and  the  said  United  States,  in  all  articles,  of  which 
the  importation  and  exportation,  respectively,  to  and  from  said  terri- 
tories, shall  not  be  entirely  prohibited,*'  dec.  The  other  provisions  in 
this  article,  are  nearly  the  same  as  in  the  treaty  of  1704.  Amerietn 
vessels,  in  the  course  of  their  voyage  to  and  from  the  British  terri- 
tories in  India,  or  to  or  from  China,  were  permitted  to  touch  for  refresh- 
ment, but  not  for  commerce,  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  the  Island 
of  St.  Helena,  or  such  other  places  as  may  be  in  the  possetfsion  of  ' 
Great  Britain,  in  tlie  African  or  Indian  seas ;  and  in  India,  the  ton- 
nage and  other  duties  on  American  vessels,  were  to  be  the  samey  as 
those  paid  by  the  most  favored  European  nations. 