

The  reasons  of  this  policy  are  obvious, — Great  Britain  has  few  ar- 
ticles to  carry  from  Europe,  to  supply  her  West  India  possessions — 
her  vessels,  therefore,  in  the  direct  voyages  to  these  Islands,  roust 
necessarily  go  nearly  empty,  and  of  course,  can  cam  little  freight. 
But,  by  bringing  a  cargo,  or  even  a  part  of  a  cargo,  to  the  United 
States,  and  from  thence,  carrying  supplies  of  American  produce  to 
the  West  Indies,  and  there  loading  with  colonial  products  for  Europe, 
her  vessels  can  earn  two  or  three  freights,  instead  of  one. 

The  advantages  of  this  circuitous  trade,  are  particularly  noticed, 
bj  the  committee  of  the  British  council,  acting,  as  a  board  of  trade, 
in  a  report  made,  as  early  as  1784. 

**  It  has  been  observed  to  them,''  say  the  committee,  ^*  that  the 
owners  of  British  vessels,  concerned  in  the  West  India  trade,  have 
long  labored  under  great  disadvantages,  from  the  difficulty  of  procu- 
ring OiUward  freights,  for  their  vessels  ;  but  that  now,  by  first  going 
to  North  America,  and  from  thence,  to  the  West  Indies,  and  so  home. 


'«- 


n 


191 

they  will  be  sure  of  two  freights,  and  perhaps  tliree,  instead  of  Kttla 
more  than  one  :  and  it  is  alleged,  that. they  will  reap  this  benefit,  with 
Tery  small  additional  charges,  in  the  paynaent  of  seamen^s  wageSf 
and  port  charges.*' 

In  1785,  Mr.  Adams,  then  American  Minister  at  London,  submitted 
td  the  British  government,  the  form  of  a  commercial  treaty,  embra- 
cing the  principle  of  reciprocity,  throughout  the  dominions  of  both 
the  United  States  and  Great  Britain. 

Sensible  of  the  weakness  and  inefficiency  of  the  American  Confed- 
eracy, and  of  the  impossibility  of  all  the  States  uniting  in  counter- 
vailing measures,  the  British  government  refused  to  accede  to  this,  or 
any  other  commercial  treaty ;  being  satisfied  with  having  the  Ameri- 
can trade,  in  their  own  hands.  In  this  depressed  condition  of  the 
commerce,  of  the  United  States,  Mr.  Adams,  while  at  the  court  of 
London,  constantly  urged  upon  Congress  and  the  States,  the  impor- 
tance, and  the  necessity  of  taking  measures,  to  counteract  this  sys- 
tem of  British  policy.  In  his  letter  tu  the  American  S^rctary  of 
foreign  affairs,  (Mr.  Jay,)  of  the  21st  of  October,  1785,  referring  to 
this  subject,  he  say^  :  ''  Tliis  being  the  state  of  things,  you  may  de- 
pend upon  it,  the  commerce  of  America  will  have  no  relief,  at  pres- 
ent, nor,  in  my  opinion,  ever,  until  the  United  States  shall  have  gen- 
erally passed  navigation  acts.  If  th|^ measures  is  not  adopted,  we 
shall  be  derided  ;  and  the  more  we  suffer,  the  more  will  our  calamities 
be  lausrhed  at.  My  most  earnest  exhortations  to  the  States  then,  are 
and  ought  to  be,  to  lose  no  time  in  passing  such  acts."* 