

The  Chamber  of  commerce  of  the  city  of*  New  York,  in  a  memo- 
rial, sent  to  Congress,  say,  that,  if  the  British  proposition  should  be 
acceded  to,  **  British  vessels  would  then  bring  a  cargo,  from  their  own 
country  to  this,  take  a  freight  here,  to  their  colonies,  where  our  Tea- 
sels are  not  admitted  ;  and  from  thence,  a  third  freight  home,  making 
thus,  three  freighta,  in  one  voyage.*'  This  memorial,  which,  as  the 
reader  will  perceive,  views  the  subject  in  the  same  light,  as  the  board 
of  trade  in  England,  in  conclusion,  says,  **  aAer  all  that  has  been  said, 
it  needs  hardly  to  be  added,  that,  if  our  porta  are  thrown  open  to  for- 
eigners»  on  the  same  terms,  with  our  own  vessels,  as  by  the  repeal,  ia 


•  AchesuD's  colleetion  of  Reports,  Ac.  oa  British  aavigatioa. 

25 


194 

contemplated,  (for  it  is  vain  to  confine  the  measure  to  the  Britiahy) 
they  will  crowd  our  wharves,  underbid  our  freight^  monopoliie  our 
markets,  and  leave  the  American  vessels  idly  to  rot,  in  onr  docks.** 

In  consequence  of  these  remonstrances,  the  report  of  the  committer 
was  laid  aside. 

At  the  close  of  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  however,  Great  Britain  at«  ^ 
tained  her  favorite  object. 

In  the  commercial  Convention,  between  the.  two  countries,  of  July 
3d,  181 5,  the  United  States  agreed  to  the  equalization  of  duties,  in. 
their  intercourse  with  the  British  European  dominions,  while  thai 
with  the  British  West  Indies  and  North  American  Colonies,  was  left 
entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  British  government.  The  policy  of  thia 
measure,  was  then  questioned,  by  the  intelligent  American  merchants^ 
as  well  as  by  others.  Trusting  to  the  enterprise  and  industry  of  the 
citizens  of  the  United  States,  little  fear  was  entertained,  by  any  one^ 
for  American  navigation,  under  equal  circumstances.  But  it  was  feared 
by  many,  that  the  monopoly  of  the  West  India  commerce,  enjoyed  by 
British  vessels,  would  give  them  an  advantage,  in  the  direct  trade^  be- 
tween the  United  States  and  Great  Britain. 

Subsequent  to  the  convention  of  1815,  the  British  government,  at 
peace  with  all  the  world,  returned  to  its  old  colonial  policy ;  and  en- 
tirely excluded  the  Americans,  from  any  participation,  in  the  West 
India  trade.  This  insured  to  Great  Britain,  the  full  benefit  of  the  cir- 
cuitous trade  before  alluded  to,  sp  long  the  object  of  her  wishes. 

The  consequences  were  soon  felt,  by  the  American  merchant  and 
ship  owner ;  and  this,  among  other  general  causes,  tended  greatly,  to 
the  depression  of  American  shipping,  at  that' period.  Such  was  its 
eflfects  on  American  navigation,  the  President  of  the  United  States^ 
thought  proper,  to  bring  the  subject  to  the  notice  of  Congress,  at  the 
opening  of  its  session,  in.December,  1816. 