

Some  of  the  States  passed  acts  of  the  character  recommended  by 
Mr.  Adams  ;  but  the  others  not  concurring,  they  were  unavailing,  and 
were  repealed.  Nor  would  all  the  States  concur,  in  vesting  CongreM 
under  the  Confederacy,  with  the  power  of  regulating  the  general 
commerce  of  the  country. 

This  unfortunate  state  of  American  commerce  it  is  well  known,  wai 
one  of  the  principal  causes  of  the  adoption  of  the  present  Constitu- 
tion. The  acts  passed  by  the  first  Congress  that  met,  under  the  new 
fi»rm  of  government,  imposing  the  discriminating  tonnage,  and  other 
duties,  did  not  escape  the  particular  notice  of  British  statesmen* 
Their  injurious  effects,  upon  the  navigating  interest  of  Great  Britain« 
were,  at  once,  perceived  by  tl)em.  They  saw,  that  American  com- 
merce was  no  lon<rcr,  at  the  mercy  of  tliirtecn  distinct  legislative 
bodies,  nor  subject  to  the  control  of  the  King  and  council.     As  early 


«  4ib  Vol.  of  Diplomatic  CorrespoDdcDce,  from  1783  to  1789,  p.  376. 


i 


192 

ts  September  90th,  1789,  therefore,  the  acts  imposing  those  duties, 
were  referred  to  the  Lords  of  the  committee,  acting  as  a  board  of 
trade,  to  consider  and  report  thereon. 
The  same  committee  was  afterwards  instructed  to  consider  and  re- 

m 

port,  ••  what  were  the  proposals  of  a  commercial  nature,  it  would  be 
proper  to  be  made,  by  their  government  to  the  United  States." 

In  January,  1791,  this  committee  made  a  report,  not  only,  on  the 
subject  of  the  American  duties.;  but  also  upon  the  general  subject  of 
the  commercial  relations  between  th^  two  countries.  This  celebrated 
report,  drawn  up  by  Lord  Liverpool,  clearly  developed  the  Britiah 
system  of  policy,  respecting  the  commercial  intercourse  with  the 
United  States,  previous  to  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  which  soon  after 
followed ;  and  has  been  the  foundation  of  the  policy  pursued  by  the 
British  government,  since  the  termination  of  those  wars. 

As  to  duties,  the  committee  recommend,  an  attem];ft  to  settle  the 
question,  by  negotiation,  before  resorting  to  retaliatory  measures. 
On  the  subject  of  a  commercial  treaty,  especially,  in  reference  to  nai> 
igationj  the  committee  say,  *'  after  full  consideration  of  all  that  has 
been  offered,  on  the  subject  of  navigation,  the  committee  think^  that 
there  is-but  one  proposition,  which  it  would  be  advisable  for  the  min- 
iftrrs  X>f  Great  Britain  to  make,  on  this  head,  to  the  government  of 
the  United  States,  in  a  negotiation  for  a  commercial  treaty,  between 
the  two  countries,  viz. — that  British  ships,  trading  to  the  ports  of  the  i 
Uniti^  States,  should  be  there  treated,  with  respect  to  the  duties  of  I 
tonnage  and  imports,  in  like  manner,  as  the  ships  of  the  United  f 
States  shall  be  treated,  in  the  ports  of  Great  Britain." 