


i 


ao4 

the  interettt  of  other  parts  of  his  Majesty's  dominions,  and  with  a  . 
•onnd  policy,  in  the  relations  of  this  country,  with  all  other  Statet.** ' 

^  The  undersigned,''  his  Lordship  adds,  '^  has  thought  it  desirable, 
that  this  point  should  be  distinctly  understood,  on  both  sides,  in  order 
that  no  doubt  should  exist  of  the  right  of  Great  Britain,  to  vary 
those  duties,  from  time  to  time,  according  to  her  own  views  of  expe- 
diency, unfettered  by  any  obligations,  expressed,  or  implied,  towards 
the  United  States,  or  any  other  country." 

The  British  government  thus  candidly  declared  their  views,  in  regard  . 
to  the  right  of  imposing  duties,  to  foster  the  Northern  colonies,  and  the 
mode  in  which  the  trade  with  the  West  Indies  was  to  be  carried  on  in 
fviiire.  The  proclamation  of  the  President,  therefore,  carrying  this 
arrangement  into  effect,  had  no  sooner  reached  Great  Britain,  than  a 
fldiedole  of  duties,  in  accordance  with  the  above  suggestions  of  the 
British  Minister,  was  introduced  into  Parliament ;  and  Mr.  Herriesy 
the  President  of  the  Board  of  trade,  declared  in  debate,  that  its  object 
was,  ^  to  give  encouragement  to  jbl  supply  of  the  West  India  Isl-  ^ 
andi,  by  the  North  American  colonies  of  Great  Britain,  instead  of, 
by  the  United  States,  or  by  any  other  country."  He  also  added,  that 
'*  America  had  entirely  ^nd  unconditionally,  withdrawn  her  preten- 
dons.^' 

To  accomplish  the  object  thus  openly  and  unequivocally  avowed,  an 
act  of  Parliament,  (passed  in  the  winter  of  1831,)  permitted  the  arti- 
cles of  wl^at  ^our,  coni  or  grain,  rice,  live  stock,  beef,  pork,  hams,    I 
or  bacon,  wood  and  lumber,  to  be  imported,  from  the  United  States,  U 
into  the  Canadas,  Nova  Scotia,  and  New  Brunswick,  free  of  duty  ;  f 
and  the  duties  on  some  articles  carried,  from  the  British  North  Amer-' 
ican  possessions  to  the  Went  Indies,  were  repealed.    And  the  import- 
ant articles  of  flour,  beef,  pork,  hams  and  bacon,  red  and  white  oak 
staves,  white,  )^ow  and  pitch  pine  lumber,  are  now  allowed  to  be  car- 
ried, from  the  Northern  provinces,  to  the  West  Indies,  in  British  vessels, 
only,  duty  free ;  while  the  same  articles,  carried,  from  the  United 
States,  dir^tly  to  the  British  West  Indies,  are  there  subject  to  the* 
following  duties — flour,  bs,  equal  to  $1  16  per  barrel — ^beef  and  pork,  I 
about  $6  per  barrel — red  oak  staves,  21 «.  3J.  per  thousand — white 
oak  stares,  199. 6d.  per  thousand — white  pine  lumber,  $6  60  per  thou- 
sand, and  yellow  pitch  pine  lumber,  $5  50  per  thousand. 

Fjour,  beef  and  pork,  when  carried  from  the  United  States,  to  the  .^ 
Northern  provinces,  are,  by  law,  to  be  put  into  warehouses,  in  certain  '^'^ 
ports,  and  from  thence  taken,  into  British  vessels,  and  carried  to  the 
West  Indies.    The  duty  on  beef  and  pork,  in  the  direct  trade,  as  will 
be  seen  heresAer,  amounts  to  a  prohibition. 