


/ 


ao6 

British  have  gained  what,  as  before  stated,  has  been  their  great  object, 
since  the  peace  of  1783,  the  circuitous  trade,  from  Great  Britain  to 
the  West  Indies,  by  tlie  way  of  the  United  States ;  the  effect  of  which, 
on  the  direct  commercial  intercourse,  between  this  country  and  the 
British  European  dominions,  is  greatly  in  favor  of  the  latter. 

The  attention  of  the  reader  is,  in  the  first  place,  invited  to  the  ef- 
fect this  arrangement  has  had,  on  the  intercourse  with  the  West  In-  | 
dies,  and  with  the  North  American  colonies.     In  1830,  the  trade,  be- 
tween the  United  States  and  the  latter,  was  principally,,  in  American     ^ 
vessels,  their  tonnage  being  one  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  five  hun- 
dred and  twenty  seven,  while  that  of  the  British,  was  only  four  thou- 
sand and  two.     In  1833,  the  amount  of  British  and  American  ton- 
nage, which  entered  the  United  States  in  the  same  trade,  was  about  ^ 
equal,  the  former  being  two  hundred  and  eight  thousand  and  fifty  four, 
and  the  latter,  two  hundred  and  nine  thousand  nine  hundred  and  fifty 
eighL  -  The  amount  of  tonnage,  however,  departing  from  the  United 
States,  to  these  provinces,  was  in  favor  of  the  British,  being  two  hun- 
dred and  forty  five  thousand  seven  hundred  and  seventy  nine,  while 
that  of  the  American,  was  only  two  hundred  and  nineteen  thousand 
four  hundred  and  three,  a  difierence  of  more  than  twenty  six  thousand. 

This  difiercncc,  as  will  be  shewn  hereafter,  was  occasioned,  princi- 
pally, by  the  advantages  of  the  British,  in  the  circuitous  trade. 

In  1830,  thera  was  little  direct  trade  with  the  British  West  India 
Islands.  In  1833,  the  American  tonnage,  entering  from  these  Islands, 
was  fifty  three  thousand  ^sc  hundred  and  thirty  seven,  and  the  Brit- 
ish, twenty  six  thousand  four  hundred  and  thirty  eight;  and  the 
American  tonnage  departing,  was  sixty  four  thousand  six  hundred  and 
fifty  nine,  the  British,  twenty  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  eight. 
It  will  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  tonnage  above  mentioned,  includes, 
in  both  cases,  the  repeated  voyages  uf  the  same  vessels ;  and  of 
course,  greatly  exceeds,  the  real  tonnage. 

The  value  of  the  dirxct  trade  with  the  British  West  Indies,  is  now  ; 
far  less,  than  with  the  North  American  colonies. 

In  1833,  the  value  of  the  exports  direct  to  the  former,  was 
91,814,006,  and  to  the  latter,  was  84,471,084,  consisting,  principally, 
of  flgur,  pork,  hams  and  bacon,  lard,  live  hogs,  beef  and  lumber; 
which  find  their  way,  to  the  British  West  Indies,  through  the  North 
American  provinces.  During  the  same  year,  the  quantity  of  flour, 
ahippcd  to  these  provinces,  was  one  hundred  and  sixty  eight  thousam 
one  hundred  and  twenty  seven  barrels,  while  that,  shipped  direct  U 
ibe  West  Indies,  was  only  one  hundred  thousand  and  fifty  seven  ;| 