

Prior  to  the  French  revolution,  the  national  policy  of  France  and 
Great  Britain,  was  indicated,  by  their  different  regulations,  respecting 
the  trade  between  the  United  States,  and  their  West  India  possessions. 
With  respect  to  exports  from  the  United  States,  both  nations  ad- 
mitted lumber  of  all  kinds,  live  provisions,  vegetables,  rice,  pitch  and 
tar,  because  neither  could  easily  supply  its  islands  with  these  arti- 
cles.  Great  Britain  excluded  American  beef,  pork  and  dried  fish; 
while  France  admitted  beef  and  dried  cod  fish,  subject  to  the  addi- 
tional duty  above  mentioned.  Great  Biitain  admitted  flour,  bread, 
biscuit,  and  all  kinds  of  grain — France,  on  the  other  hand,  by  a  gen- 
eral law,  excluded  flour,  and  all  kinds  of  grain,  except  Indian  corn. 
With  respect  to  exports,  from  the  islands,  France  allowed  rum  and 
molasses  only,  to  be  carried  to  the  United  States ;  while  Great  Britain 
allowed  not  only  these  articles,  but  sugar,  coflee,  cocoa-nuts,  ginger 
and  pimento — the  latter,  however,  as  we  have  before  stated,  confined 
the  carriage  both  of  the  exports  and  imports  to  her  own  vessels ;  and 
the  former  permitted  the  exports  and  imports,  in  American  vessels. 
The  policy  of  Britain  was,  to  monopolize  the  carriage  of  the  arti- 
cles ;  that  of  France,  to  monopolize  the  articles  themselves,  particu- 
larly the  colonial  productions  of  much  value.  Great  Britain  was 
wiHin£^  the  people  of  the  United  States,  should  have  the  articles  of 
sugar  and  cofl'ee,  on  condition,  that  Briiish  ships  might  carry  them. 
France,  on  the  other  hand,  was  willing  the  Americans  should  supply 
her  Hiigar  and  cofl'ee  plantations,  with  certain  articles,  which  she  was 
unable  to  furnish  herself;  but  would  not  allow  them  to  receive  in  re- 
turn, the  most  valuable  productions  of  these  plantations;  these  wer« 
reserved,  for  her  own  consumption  at  home,  and  to  augment  her  own 
national  wealth.  Under  these  colonial  regulations,  the  United  Stateiit 
furnished  the  French  Islands,  with  the  greatest  part  of  their  supplieti 
obtained  from  foreii^n  countries. 

About  the  year  1780,  the  whole  imports  into  these  islands  from  for- 
eign countries,  were  valued  at  20,878,000  livres,  and  the  exports  to 
the  same  places,  at  14,132,000.  Of  the  imporU,  13,263^)00,  wtro 
from  the  United  States,  which  received  in  return,  74^63,000  of  tbo 


818 

exports ;  and  the  American  tonnage  in  this  intercourse,  waa  one  hnn- 
dred  and  fire  thousand  and  ninety  five. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  wars  in  Europe,  however,  and  partic-  * 
uhrlf  that  declared  by  her,  against  Great  Britain,  in  the  winter  of 
1793,  France  foresaw,  that  she  should  be  unable  to  maintain  her  colo- 
nial system,  during  their  continuance ;  and  opened  a  free  trade  with 
all  her  colonial  ports.  This  trade  she  offered,  to  secure  to  the  United 
States  by  a  national  compact ;  but  this  was  to  be  accompanied  with 
e  new  treaty  of  alliance,  by  which  these  islands,  were  again  to  be 
guaranteed  to  France.  The  American  government  did  not  choose  to 
accept  the  ofler  on  these  conditions. 