

The  success,  as  well  as  novelty,  of  Capt.  Greenes  voyage,  attracted 
no  little  attention  in  this  country ;  and  the  second  voyage  to  this 
distant  part  of  the  world,  was.  of  a  more  bold  and  adventurous 
character.  ' 

Capt.  Stewart  Deane,  a  citizen  of  Albany,  who  had  successfully 
commanded  a  Letter  of  Marque,  in  the  early  part  of  the  war  of  the 
revolution,  having  had  a  personal  interview  with  Capt.  Green,  on  the 
subject  of  his  voyage,  resolved  to  fit  out  the  sloop  Experiment,  of 
only  eighty  four  tons,  which  he  had  just  built  at  Albany  as  a  coastert 
for  this  distant  voyage;  and  on  the  19th  of  December,  1785,  this  bold 
navigator,  with  a  crew  of  only  seven  men  and  two  boys,  sailed  in  this 
little  bark  for  Canton.  Such  a  distant  voyage,  in  so  small  a  vesseU 
was,  at  that  time,  considered  so  extremely  hazardous,  that  no  insur- 
ance could  be  procured,  at  any  of  the  offices,  either  in  America,  or 
England.  She  arrived  safe,  however,  at  Canton,  in  May,  1 786;  where 
she  was,  at  first,  mistaken  for  a  tender  to  some  large  ship,  which  had 
been  left  below,  in  Canton  river:  and  the  inhabitants  were  not  a  lit- 
tle astonished,  to  learn  that  this  small  vessel,  with  her  scanty  creWt 
had  crossed  the  ocean,  from  the  opposite  hemisphere. 

This  daring,  and  then  unexampled  enterprise  of  Capt  Deane,  en- 
sured him  a  hospitable  reception,  at  Canton,  and  particularly  at  the 
British  factory  at  that  place. 

Capt.  Deane  returned  to  America,  in  1787;  and  was,  afterwards, 
for  some  years,  engaged,  in  the  same  trade,  as  commander  of  much 
larger  vessels ;  and,  as  we  are  informed,  is  still  living,  in  the  city  of 
New  York. 


/ 


846 

These  two  successful  voyages,  induced  others  to  engage  in  them ; 
and  as  early  as  1789,  fifteen  American  flags  were  seen,  at  the  port  of 
Canton,  a  greater  number  than  from  any  other  nation,  except  Great 
Britain.* 

The  principal  articles  imported  from  this  country,  are  teas,  silks, 
nankeens,  and  china  ware.  During  the  wars,  which  desolated  Europe, 
the  Americans,  not  only  supplied  their  own  country,  with  the  neces- 
sary article  of  tea,  but  shipped  large  quantities  of  it,  to  diflferent  parts 
of  that  continent,  to  supply  the  wants  of  those  belligerent  nations, 
who  were  dependent  on  neutrals,  for  this,  as  well  as  other  necessary 
foreign  articles  of  consumption. 

With  respect  to  teas,  which  are  procured  from  China  only,  we  shall 
here  present  the  quantities  imported  and  exported,  at  diflferent  periods, 
since  the  commencement  of  the  present  national  government,  thereby 
shewing  the  extent  and  value  of  the  American  trade,  in  this  article, 
and  also,  the  quantity  consumed  in  the  United  States,  and  the  pro- 
gressive increase  of  that  consumption. 