

The  national  debt  being  extinguished,  the  public  lands  are  nov 
exonerated  from  the  pledge,  to  which,  they  have  heretofore  been  sub- 
ject on  tliat  account ;  and  in  what  way,  or  manner,  or  for  what  objects, 
they  shall  hereaAer  be  disposed  of,  has  already  become  somethiag 
more,  than  a  mere  subject  of  speculation. 

They  now  produce,  to  the  public  treasury,  more  than  three  mill- 
ions a  year ;  and  if  managed  with  prudence  and  economy,  will  consti- 
tute a  future  fund  of  incalculable  value — and  it  should  be  the  prayer 
of  every  American  patriot,  that  this  rich  inheritance,  OMiy  never  be 
sacri6ced,  at  the  altar,  either  of  avarice  or  ambition.  The  prayen 
of  the  patriot,  however,  are  not  always  heard  ;  and  we  may  be  per- 
mitted to  ask,  whether  there  is  not  some  reason  to  fear,  that,  in  the 
political  conflicts,  which  may  arise,  that  amidst  party,  and  perhape, 
•ectional  strife,  the  true  interest  of  the  union,  in  regard  to  this  prop- 
erly, may  not  be  overlooked,  and  that  of  the  old  sUtea,  entirely  diart- 

garded. 

41 


r 


322 

The  old  states,  have,  indeed,  an  interest  in  the  lands,  north  of  the 
Ohio,  and  east  of  the  Mississippi,  which,  con  only  he  duly  known, 
hut  hy  considering  the  blood  and  treasure  they  have  expended,  in 
securing  them,  first,  in  the  war  of  1756,  and  again,  in  the  war  of  1776. 

The  reader  need  not  be  informed,  that  this  subject,  has  lately  enga- 
ged the  attention  of  the  National  Legislature.  In  the  winter  of  1832» 
a  Committee  of  the  Senate,  wat«  directed  to  inquire  into  the  expediency 
of  reducing  the  price  of  the  public  lands,  and  of  ceding  tkem^  to  the 
several  states,  within  which,  they  were  situated,  on  reasonable  terms. 
On  a  report  of  this  committee,  drawn  up  with  no  ordinary  ability, 
the  senate  passed  an  act,  dividing  the  avails  of  the  lands,  among  the 
states,  to  be  applied  to  certain  objects,  for  a  limited  term  of  five  years — 
this  bill,  was  not  finally  acted  upon  during  that  session,  by  the 
other  branch  of  the  legislature.  The  President,  however,  called  the 
attention  of  Congress,  to  the  same  subject,  in  his  message,  at  the 
opening  of  the  next  session  of  that  body. 

"  Among  the  interests,"  says  the  President,  "which  merit  the  con- 
sideration of  Congress,  after  the  payment  of  the  public  debt,  one  of 
the  most  important,  in  my  view,  is  that  of  the  public  lands.  Previous 
to  the  formation  of  the  present  constitution,  it  was  recommended  by- 
Congress,  that  a  portion  of  the  western  lands,  owned  by  the  states, 
should  be  ceded  to  the  United  States,  for  the  purpose  o(  general  kar» 
moTUf9  and  as  a  fund  to  meet  the  expenses  of  the  war.  The  recommen- 
dation was  adopted,  and,  at  difierent  periods  of  time,  the  states  of  Mas- 
sachusetts, New  York,  Virginia,  North  and  South  Carolina  and  Geor- 
gia, granted  the  vacant  soil, /or  the  uses  for  which  they  had  been  asked. 
As  the  lands  may  now  be  considered  as  relieved  from  this  pledge,  the 
object  for  which  they  were  ceded,  having  been  accomplished,  it  is  in 
the  discretion  of  Congress,  to  dispose  of  them,  in  such  way,  as  best 
to  conduce  to  the  quiet,  harmony  and  general  interest  of  the  Ameri- 
can people." 