

Should  the  general  government,  apply  a  portion  of  the  proceeds  of 
the  public  lands,  in  aid  of  the  states  and  individuals,  towards  these 
and  other  objects  of  internal  improvement,  the  United  States  would 
soon  present  facilities  of  intercoursse,  unequalled,  in  any  country 
whatever. 

This  fund,  we  would  have  applied,  to  facilitate  the  vast  and  increas- 
ing intercourse,  between  the  east  and  the  west — in  improving  the  nav- 
igation of  the  great  rivers  of  the  Mississippi  valley,  and  in  connect- 
ing them,  either,  by  canals  or  rail  roads,  with  the  great  northern 
lakes.  We  would  render  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  the  Mis- 
souri, the  Ohio,  and  their  tributary  streams,  safe,  by  night,  as  well  as 


y^ 


328 


by  day,  by  removing  every  obstruction  from  their  beds.    Ev^ry  dol- 
lar, thus  expended,  in  improving  the  great  national  western  fam, 
^  would  soon  yield  fourfold,  in  return. 

By  appropriating  another  portion  of  these  lands,  to  aid  the  cause  of 
colonization,  we  might  hope  to  see  our  country,  ultimately,  liberated, 
from  an  evil,  which  all  feel  and  all  deplore. 

POSTAGE. 

By  the  constitution,  Congress  have  power  to  establish  post  offices, 
and  post  roads ;  and  soon  after  the  commencement  of  the  general  gov- 
ernment, laws  were  passed  carrying  this  power  into  effect. 

The  rapid  increase  of  settlements  over  such  an  extent  of  country, 
as  that  of  the  United  States,  necessarily  required,  a  great  increase  in 
the  extent  as  well  as  number  of  post  roadn,  and  a  proportionable  in- 
crease in  the  number  of  post  offices.  Table  No.  V,  exhibits  an  ac- 
count of  this  establishment,  from  1789  to  1830,  inclusive,  containing 
the  number  of  post  offices,  amount  of  postage,  compensation  to  post 
masters,  transportation  of  the  mail,  incidental  expenses,  with  the  bal- 
ance for  or  against  the  office,  and  extent  of  post  roads,  for  each  year, 
daring  that  period.  * 

From  this  will  be  seen  the  increase  of  the  post  offices  and  extent 
of  the  post  roads,  in  the  following  periods. 

Number  of  pott  offices.  Extent  of  poet  roada,  in  mike 

1,905 
22,309 
37,035 
48,976 
72,492 
94,052 
115,176 

In  July  1834,  the  number  of  post  offices  was  ten  thousand  six  hun- 
dred and  ninety  three.  On  the  3d  of  March,  1793,  the  weekly  trans- 
portation of  the  mail,  was  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  ninety 
three  miles  in  stages,  eight  thousand  five  hundred  and  sixty  seven  in 
sulkies,  and  on  horseback,  seven  thousand  six  hundred  and  sixty  two ; 
and  yearly  transportation  was,  eight  hundred  and  forty  six  thousand 
four  hundred  and  sixty  eight  miles, — on  the  3d  of  March,  181 1,  the 
weekly  transportation  in  stages  was,  forty  six  thousand  three  hundred 
and  eighty  miles,  and  in  sulkies  and  on  horseback,  sixty  one  thousand 
one  hundred  and  seventy  one,  and  yearly  transportation  was,  five 
million  five  hundred  and  ninety  two  thousand  six  hundred  fifty  two ; 