

The  number  of  vessels  built  in  the  colonies,  in  1772,  was  one  hun- 
dred and  eighty  two,  with  an  aggregate  tonnage  of  twenty  six  thou- 
sand five  hundred  and  forty  four ;  and  of  this  number,  one  hundred 
and  twenty  three,  containing  eighteen  thousand  one  hundred  and 
forty  nine  tons,  were  built  in  New  England  :  fifteen  in  New  York, 
one  in  New  Jersey,  eight  in  Pensylvania,  eight  in  Maryland,  seven 
in  Virginia,  three  in  North  Carolina,  two  in  South  Carolina,  and  five 
in  Georgia.* 

We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  the  amount  of  American  ton- 
nage,  from  the  peace  of  1783,  to  the  commencement  of  the  new  gor- 
ernment.  During  this  period,  some  states,  in  order  to  encourage 
American  shipping,  laid  discriminating  duties,  in  favor  of  vessels  be- 
longing to  citizens  of  the  United  States ;  and,  in  some  instances, 
made  a  difference,  also,  in  favor  of  vessels  belonging  to  nations  hav- 
ing treaties  with  this  country.  In  Pennsylvania,  the  tonnage  duty 
on  American  vessels,  was  about  four  pence  sterling, — on  foreign 
ships,  belonging  to  nations  having  treaties,  eight  pence, — and  on  the 
ships  of  nations  having  no  treaties,  about  two  shillings.  In  Mary- 
land, the  duty  on  domestic  vessels,  was  eight  pence, — on  foreign 
ships  in  treaty,  one  shilling,7— and  on  foreign  ships  not  in  treaty, 
one  shilling  and  seven  pence, — and  on  British  ships,  three  shill- 
ings and  sixpence.     In  Virginia,  while  the  duty  on  American,  was 

•  AchesoQ,  page  87. 


847 

one  shilling  and  three  pence,  it  was  fonr  shillings  and  six  pence  on 
British  ships.  In  New  York,  however,  the  trreat  importing  state* 
the  duty  on  foreign  vessels  was  only  four  or  Bre  pence  sterling. 
This  want  of  uniformity  and  universality  in  this  countervailing  and 
protective  system,  rendered  the  whole  unavailing.  Foreign  shipa 
would  naturally  seek  the  port  where  the  duties  were  lowest,  especial- 
ly under  equal  advantages  for  a  market,  for  their  import  cargoei ; 
and  the  low  duty  in  New  York,  offered  a  premium  on  foreign  trade. 
Under  these  partial  and  inefficient  regulations,  American  shipping  re- 
ceived little  benefit ;  and  foreign  vessels  filled  the  American  porta. 
This  important  subject  was  not  forgotten  by  the  first  Congress,  that 
met  under  the  new  form  of  government ;  and  discriminating  tonnage* 
and  other  duties,  were  first  laid,  in  the  summer  of  1789,  and  haTC 
ever  since  been  continued.  This  encouragement  to  American  ship- 
ping, was  not  confined  to  these  discriminating  duties ;  but  foreign 
ships  were  entirely  excluded  from  the  coasting  trade,  and  from  all 
participation  in  the  American  trade  with  China.  The  latter  was 
done,  i}y  imposing  an  additional  duty  on  all  teas,  imported  in  for- 
eign vessels,  varying  from  four  to  ten  cents  per  pound ;  thereby,  in 
fact,  giving  a  complete  monopoly  of  the  China  trade  to  the  American 
merchant. 