


*  See  Table  No.  V. 


/ 


356 

in  regard  to  the  actual  burthen  of  the  shipping  owned  and  regUterad 
— the  prevailing  practice  being;  to  deduce  the  content^,  from  the 
length  and  breadth,  without  any  regard  to  the  depth  or  cnnre;  to 
that,  in  some  cases,  the  actual  cubical  contents  of  a  vessel,  will  con- 
siderably exceed  the  official  result,  while,  in  others,  it  will  not  be  half 
the  quantity — such  a  practice,  is  as  discreditable  to  official  sen^ice, 
as  it  is,  to  practical  science,  which  seems  more  directed  to  noveltj 
and  experiment,  than  to  correct  existing  error.'' 

Table  No.  VI,  is  an  official  statement  of  British  and  foreign  ship- 
ping employed  in  the  trade  with  the  principal  countries  of  the  world* 
in  1830 ;  and  proves  the  correctness  of  Marshall's  opinion,  in  regard 
to  the  great  diffi^'rence  between  the  actual  and  nominal  amount  of  the 
number  and  tonnage  of  vessels,  employed  in  the  trade  of  that  kingdom. 

The  number  of  foreign  vessels,  that  entered  the  British  ports,  ac- 
cording to  this  official  account,  was  five  thousand  three  hundred  and 
fifty  nine,  with  a  nominal  tonnage  of  seven  hundred  and  fifty  eight 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  twenty — of  these  vessels,  six  hundred  and 
nine  were  from  the  United  States,  with  a  tonnage  of  two  hundred  and 
fourteen  thousand  one  hundred  and  sixty  six,  being  between  a  quarter 
and  a  third  of  the  whole  foreign  tonnage,  shewing  clearly,  that  the 
vessels,  entering  from  other  countries,  were  much  smaller,  and  re- 
peated their  voyages  much  oftener,  than  those  of  the  United  States* 

The  whole  registered  tonnage  of  England  and  Wales,  in  1829,  was, 
as  before  stated,  one  million  seven  hundred  and  fifty  eight  thousand 
and  sixty  five ;  and  the  whule  tonnage  of  the  United  States,  in.  1832, 
was  one  million  four  hundred  and  thirty  nine  thousand  four  hundred  * 
and  fifty,  making  a  difierence  of  only  three  hupdred  ai^d  twenty  eight 
thousand  six  hundred  and  fifteen. 

The  British  board  of  trade,  in  its  second  annual  report,  containing 
a  digest  of  the  revenues,  commerce,  navigation,  &,€.  of  the  United 
Kingdom,  for  1832,  declares,  that  the  actual  number  of  vessels,  em- 
ployed in  the  Baltic  trade  jlhrough  the  sound,  in  1832,  was  one  thon* 
sand  one  hundred  and  fifteen,  with  a  real  tonnage  of  one  hundred  and 
ninety  seven  thousand  six  hundred  and  eleven ;  while  their  number, 
according  to  their  repeated  voyages,  was  three  thousand  three  hun- 
dred and  thirty,  and  their  tonnage  five  hundred  and  ninety  two  thou- 
sand eight  hundred  and  thirty  three,  being  about  three  to  one. 

Taking  this,  as  a  general  rule,  it  will  be  found,  that  the  actual  num- 
ber of  British  vessels,  entering  from  the  countries  mentioned  in  Ta- 
ble No.  VI  will  be  four  thousand  five  hundred  and  sixteen,  instead 
of  thirteen  thousand  five  hundred  and  forty  eight,  and  their  actual 