

In  the  preceding  chapters,  we  have  presented  a  view  of  the  external 
commerce  of  the  United  States,  from  the  commencement  of  the  na- 
tional government  to  the  year  1833,  inclusive ;  a  period  of  more  than 
forty  three  years.  It  cannot  have  escaped  the  attention  ef  the  read- 
er, that  the  time  embraced  in  this  view,  may  very  naturally  be  divided 
into  thrf  e  periods ;  in  each  of  which,  the  peculiar  circumstances  and 
situation,  in  which  the  United  States  were  placed,  had  a  material  in- 
fluence and  bearing,  on  their  internal,  as  well  as  external  commerce 
and  resources,  and  indicated  the  policy  pursued  by  them,  in  relation 
to  both. 

The  first  commenced  in  1793,  when  Europe  generally  became  in- 
▼olred  in  the  wara  arising  out  of  the  French  revolution,  and  ended 


369 

in  1807,  when  the  United  States  entered  upon  a  system  of  conimer: 
cial  restrictions  against  the  principal  European  belligerents. 

The  second  extended  from  1807,  to  the  close  of  the  year  1814, 
when  peace  took  place  between  this  country  and  Great  Britain,  and 
the  wars  in  Europe,  also,,  ceased — and  the  third,  from  1815  to  1833, 
during  which  period,  the  United  States^  as  well  as  Europe,  were  in  a 
state  of  peace. 

It  is  well  known,  that  a  moat  extraordinary  political  revolution 
commenced  in  France,  about  the  time  of  the  establishment  of  a  new 
government  in  the  United  States.  The  abolition  of  royalty,  and  the 
substitution  of  a  republic  in  France,  accompanied  with  the  beheading 
of  the  King  and  Queen,  in  1703,  united  Great  Britain  and  the  other 
principal  European  powers,  in  a  war  with  the  French  nation — a  war 
which  continued,  with  hut  a  short  interval,  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  a 
century.  It  was  the  policy  of  the  rulers  of  the  French  Republic,  not 
merely,  to  enlist  the  sympathies  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  but 
to  induce  them  to  make  common  cause  with  them  in  their  struggles  with 
fhe  European  powers.  President  Washington,  however,  very  wisely 
assumed  the  ground  of  neutrality,  as  alike  consistent  with  the  honor 
and  interest  of  his  country,  and  issued  his  celebrated  proclamation  of 
neutrality,  of  the  22d  of  April,  1793.  This  policy  of  the  father  of 
his  country,  was  continued  by  the  succeeding  administrations,  with 
the  exception  of  partial  hostilities^with  France,  in  1798  and  1799, 
until  1807.  During  this  period,  .n^rly  all  Europe  was  engaged  in 
this  unexampled  contest ;  and  the  old  systems  of  commercial  and 
colonial  monopoly,  were  almost  entirely  abandoned.  This,  as  we 
have  before  stated,  threw  into  the  hands  of  the  Americans,  a  great 
proportion  of  the  commerce  of  the  world. 