

4.S 


J 


378 

with  truth,  an  engagement,  on  the  part  of  the  conquered,  to  aid  ia 
earrying  into  effect  the  continental  system.  This  engagement  waa 
complied  with ;  and  these  powers,  in  the  months  of  September  and 
November  following,  became  the  allies  of  France  against  Grest 
Britain. 

Knowing,  that  the  minor  powers  of  Europe,  particularly,  PortogiA 
and  Denmark,  could  easily  be  made  to  yield  to  his  commands,  Bona- 
parte immediately  after  the  peace  of  Tilsit,  determined,  that  all  neu' 
tral  and  commercial  nations,  should  be  compelled  to  join,  in  his 
commercial  warfare  against  Great  Britain.  With  this  view,  and  with 
this  fixed  determination,  he  returned  to  Paris,  on  the  27th  'of  July 
1807,  where  his  plans  soon  got  into  circulation,  at  first,  indeed,  only 
in  whispers.  Among  other  things,  it  was  said,  that  an  army  was  rais- 
ing in  the  south,  to  take  possession  of  Portugal,  and  another  in  the 
north,  to  seize  upon  Denmark,  and  generally,  that  ha ving* settled  ^the 
affairs  of  the  belligerents  (except  England)  to  his  liking,  he  was  de- 
termined those  of  neutrals  should  be  settled  in  the  same  way.  The 
conduct  of  the  Emperor  towards  the  Danish  and  Portuguese  ministers, 
at  a  general  audience  held  with  all  the  foreign  ministers,  on  the  se- 
cond day  of  August,  confirmed  the  whispers  in  circulation.* 

The  affairs  of  neutrals  were  to  be  settled,  by  uniting  with  France, 
against  Great  Britain. 

Subsequent  events  fully  proved  the  truth  of  the  information,  at  first 
communicated  in  whispers.     Portugal  was  soon  called  upon  **  to  ac- 


*  The  following,  is,  in  substance,  the  letter  of  General  Armstrong,  to  his  gov- 
ernment,  bearing  date  the  3d  of  August,  1807,  giving  an  account  of  this  audience, 
and  of  the  stories  then  in  circulatir.n. 

"  Have  had  an  audience  with  the  Emperor,"  says  Grcncral  Armstrong,  "  since 
Ids  return.  I  stood  near  Baron  Dyer,  the  Danish  minister.  The  Empeh>r  spoke 
to  him  and  said,  '  so  Baron  the  Baltic  has  been  violated ;'  did  not  hear  the  Baron*s 
toswer,  and  the  Emperor  said  to  him,  in  a  voice  more  raised  and  peremptory,  '  so 
Baron  the  Baltic  has  been  violated.'  From  the  Danish  minister  he  proceeded  to 
myself  and  others,  and  went  to  the  minister  of  Portugal,  and  it  is  said,  read  to 
him  a  severe  lecture,  on  the  conduct  of  his  court.  These  circumstances,**  the 
American  minister  adds,  "  go  far,  to  justify  %r  wAtV/ierj  in  circulation,  that  an 
army  is  raising  in  the  south,  to  take  possession  of  Portugal,  and  another  in  the 
north  to  go  against  Denmark ;  and  generally,  that  having  sealed  the  affairs  of  the 
*  kiUigerenU  (exce)^  England)  to  his  likings  be  intends  to  settle  those  of  neutrals^ 
in  the  same  way.  On  this  account  probably,  Baron  Dyer  toqk  me  aside  and  asked 
me,  whether  an  application  had  been  made  to  me,  to  ^oin  in  the  projected  union  of 
all  commercial  states,  against  Great  Britain.  On  my  answering  in  the  negative, 
ht  said, '  you  are  a  favored  nation ,  but  your  turn  must  cowu^  at  last.* 