


<  ..  '  I 


•  C ha Imer's  Estimate,  p.  234. 


371 

rich  products  of  both  hemispheres,  found  their  way  to  Europe,  prin- 
cipally,- in  American  bottom's;  and  the  colonies  of  these  nations* 
were,  also,  supplied  with  European  produce,  in  the  same  way.  Eren 
Great  Britain,  during  this  struggle,  in  which  she  was  left,  at  timea,  to 
combat  alone  against  the  rest  of  Europe,  was  compelled  to  relax  her 
colonial  system,  and  to  permit  a  free  trade,  with  her  West  India  pos- 
aessions. 

We  are  aware,  that  a  different  .cause  has  been  assigned  for  the 
great  increase  of  American  shipping,  at  an  early  period  of  the  na- 
tional gOTernment,  in  an  official  document,  communicated  to  the  Housa 
of  Representatives,  in  February,  1830,  by  the  committee  of  com- 
merce  and  navigation ;  and  we  are  induced  to  notice  an  error,  in  this 
document  in  relation  to  American  tonnage,  because  it  was  the  foun- 
dation of  the  different  views  taken  by  the  committee,  on  this,  as 
well  as  other  subjects;  and  because  the  document  it8elf,.has  been  re- 
ferred to  by  some  English  writers,  as  containing  authentic  statements* 
*'It  is  a  common  impression,"  say  the  committee,  in  the  document  or 
report  alluded  to,  "  that  our  early  maritime  prosperity ^  was  owing  to 
th^  wars  growing  out  of  the  French  revolution,  which  enabled  the 
United  States  and  Great  Britain,  to  monopolize  the  carrying  trade. 
Those,  who  think  so,  take  but  a  superficial  viejuo  of  the  causes,  which 
gave  a  strong  impulse  to  our  navigation,  at  that  early  period.  These 
were,  the  rich  and  increasing  agricultural  resources,  the  removal  of 
all  the  countervailing  laws  of  the  states,  our  commercial  enterprise« 
and  a  foreign  commerce  without  restrictions.  Our  navigation  grew 
more  rapidly,  before  the  continenul  war,  when  we  had  nothing  to 
carry,  but  our  own  productions,  than  it  did,  at  any  period  afterwards. 
For  three  years,  from  1789  to  1792  (see  Table  No.  Ill,)  the  increase 
was  near  three  hundred  thousand  tons  ;  from  1793  to  1796,  it  ought 
to  have  been  increased  to  a  greater  amount,  but  it  was  not  over  two 
hundred  thousand,  shewing  clearly,  a  mure  rapid  increase,  both  in 
ratio  and  amount^  before  than  after  the  war  broke  out*^ 

By  referring  to  (No.  Ill,)  a  Table  annexed  to  this  document,  headed 
**  a  comparative  statement  of  American  tonnage,  employed  in  the  for- 
eign trade,  from  1789  to  1807,  and  from  1815  to  18S9,'*  we  find,  iiH 
deed,  the  tonnage  for  1789,  put  down  at  one  hundred  and  twenty  sev- 
co  thousand  three  hundred  and  twenty  nine,  and  for  17^2,  at  four 
hundred  and  fourteen  thousand  six  hundred  and  seventy  nine,  making 
an  exact  difference  of  two  hundred  and  eighty  seven  thousand  three 
hundred  and  fifiy ;  and  hence  the  committee  infer,  as  we  suppose, 
that  the  actual  increase  of  American  tonnage,  in  foreign  tradoy  dor- 