


874 

under  which,  the  merchants  of  the  United  States,  received  more 
ten  millions  of  dollars,  as  a  compensation  for  property  illegally  takeo* 
under  the  British  orders  referred  to. 

France  considered  this  treaty  as'a  violation  of  prior  engagements 
made  with  her,  on  the  part  of  the  Americans ;  and  its  final  ratifi^tioa 
in  .179Gs  was  immediately  fallowed,  by  a  general  seizure  and  ponden- 
nation  of  American  vessels,  under  several  illegal  decrees  of  the  Ez« 
ecutive  Directory.- 

This  brought  the  United  States  into  partial  hostilities  with  Franeet 
and  which  ended  by  a  treaty  made  with  the  first  consul  in  1800.  The 
treaty  of  Amiens,  in  1801,  gave  a  short  respite  to  Europe.  The  wart 
however,  was  renewed  in  1803,  with  more  determined  animositj,  ihaa 
before ;  and  the  law  of  nations  was  disregarded,  n6t  only  between  the 
belligerents  themselves,  but  between  them  and  neutrals.  In  this  re- 
newed contest,  such  was  the  maritime  superiority  of  Great  Britain, 
that  the  copimercial  vessels  of  France,  Holland  and  Spajn,  were  al- 
most driven  from  the  ocean ;  and  these  nations  were  dependant  upon 
a  neutral  flag,  for  their,  colonial,  as  well  as  other  supplies;  and 
the  United  States  beci^me  their  sole  carriers.  This  interference 
of  neutrals,  in  the  commerce  of  her  enemies,  Great  Britain  consid- 
ered, as  unjustly  depriving  her  of  the  only  means  she  had,  of  an* 
noying  them  and  as  preventing  her  from  bringing  them,  to  joat 
terms  of  peace  ;  and  was  at  last  carried  to  such  an  extent,  that  in 
1805,  she  considered  it  as  a  cover  of  enemy's  property ;  and  denom- 
inated it  '*  war  in  disguise."  A  pamphlet,  under  this  imposing 
name,  was  published  in  Great  Britain,  in  that  year,  well  calculated  to 
excite,  not  merely  the  jealousy,  but  the  hostility  of  that  couutry, 
against  neutrals.  In  this  celebrated  pamphlet,  the  American  people* 
were  referred  to,  as  *'  a  new  power  that  had  arisen  on  the  western  shore 
of  the  Atlantic,  whose  position,  and  maritime  spirit,  were  calculated 
to  give  new  and  vast  importance,  to  every  question  of  neutral  righU^ 
especially  in  the  American  seas."  And  the  author,  also,  declares, 
**  that  not  a  single  merchant  ship,  under  a  flag  inipical  to  Great  Brit^ 
ain,  now  crosses  the  equator,  or  traverses  the  Atlantic  Ocean." 

Under  impressions,  which  such  language  as  this,  would  naturally 
produce,  the  British  government  and  the  admiralty  courtis,  were  con- 
firmed and  supported,  in  the  revival  of  the  rule  of  1750,  by  which,  it 
was  claimed,  that  neutrals,  in  time  of  war,  could  carry  on  no  trade, 
which  they  had  not  been  accustomed  to  carry  on,  in  time  of  peace. 