


i 


376 

the  successor  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  was  unable  to  obtain.  And  we  bef 
leare  here  to  remark,  that,  although  the  American  comroifwionen 
eoufd  not  procure  a  treaty  stipulation,  on  this  important  subject,  ia 
strict  accordance  with  their  instructions ;  yet  the  British  conunis- 
stoners,  in  a  written  communication,  gave  such  assurances  of  iecQ- 
rity,  against  the  future  abuse  of  the  practice  of  impressment,  as  satis- 
fled  the  American  commissioners,  on  this  point. 

Mr.  Muuroe,  in  his  letter  to  the  President,  of  the  28th  of  Febnm- 
ry,  1808,  giving  his  reasons,  for  assenting  to  the  treaty,  on  this  point, 
says — "  We  were,  therefore,  decidedly  of  opinion,  that  the  paper  of 
the  British  commissioners,  placed  the  interest  of  impressment^  on 
ground,  which  it  was  both  safe  and  honorable  for  the  United  States,  to 
admit ;  that,  in  short,  it  gave  their  government  the  command  of  the 
subject,  for  every  necessary  and  useful  purpose.  Attached  to  the 
treaty,  it  was  the  basis  or  condition,  on  which  the  treaty  rested.** 
The  consequences  of  the  failure  of  the  negotiation,  are,  by  Mr.  Munroe, 
described  in  the  follov^angua^e — '*  War,  therefore,  seemed  to  be  the 
inevitable  consequence  of  such  a  state  of  things ;  I  was  far  from  con- 
sidering it  an  alternative,  which  ought  to  be  preferred,  to  the  arrange- 
ment, which  was  offered  to  us.  When  I  took  into  view  the  prosper- 
ous and  happy  condition  of  the  United  States,  compared  with  that  of 
other  nations ;  that,  as  a  neutral  power  they  were  almost  the  ezcln- 
sive  carriers  of  the  whole  world ;  and  that,  in  commerce,  they  flourished 
beyond  example,  notwithstanding  the  losses,  which  they,  occasionally 
suffered,  I  was  strong  in  the  opinion,  that  these  blessings  ought  not 
to  be  hazarded,  in  such  a  question.*** 

The  hasty  rejection  of  this  treaty,  (the  best,  no  doubt,  that  could 
have  been  made,  at  that  time,  as  Mr.  Jay*s  was,  in  1794,)  ultimately 
led,  as  Mr.  Munroe  had  predicted,  to  a  war  with  Great  Britain. 

In  entering  upon  the  consideration  of  the  situation  of  the  United 
States,  during  the  second  period,  commencing  at  the  close  of  1807, 
when  their  whole  external  commerce  was,  at  once,  withdrawn  from 
the  ocean — a  commerce,  which  in  the  three  years  immediately  pre- 
ceding, in  imports  and  exports,  exceeded  three  hundred  millions  of 
dollars  for  each ;  we  deem  it  not  improper  to  advert  to  some  of  the 
immediate  causes,  which  led  to  this  proceeding  on  the  part  of  the 
American  government 

NThe  battle  of  Jena,  in  October,  1806,  placed  the  capital  of  the 
kingdom  of  Prussia,  in  the  hands  of  Bonaparte ;  and  elevated  with  his 
victory,  from  this  capital,  he,  on  the  21st  of  November  following^ 
iifiied  his  iamoos  decree,  usually  bearing  the  name  of  the  place,  from 
whence  it  issued.    This  decree  was  the  commencement  of  a  commer- 