

The  increased  demand  for  the  agricultural  productions  of  this  coun- 
try, daring  the  period  under  review,  raised  their  price  to  a  height  be- 


878 

fore  unknown.    This,  as  well  as  the  trade  in  foreign  productions,  ne« 
cessarily  created  a  demand  for  shipping ;  and  agriculture,  commerce 
and  navigation,  became  the  mopt  lucrative  employments,  and  almost 
exclusive  objects  of  pursuit  in  thb  United  States.     We  have  before 
OS,  a  (able  giving  the  price  of  flour  at  Philadelphia,  from  1785  to  I8289 
a  period  of  forty  four  years,  the  accuracy  of  which,  we  believe,  may 
be  relied  on.    The  average  price  of  flour,  from  1785  to  1793,  accord- 
ing to  this  table,  was  $5  41  per  barrel,  while  the  price,  from  1793  to 
1807,  (excluding  the  years  18Q2  and  1803,  when  Europe  was  at  peace 
under  the  treaty  of  Amiens,)  being  twelve  years  of  the  war,  was  90  12; 
making  a  difference  of  84  71  per  barrel.   This  diflerence,  during  these 
two  periods,  may  be  attributed  by  some,  to  the  depressed  state  of 
commerce,  and  a  want  of  an  efficient  government,  during  a  part  of  the 
first  period.     By  adverting,  however,  to  the  price,  from  1820  to  1828, 
after  Europe  had  settled  down  in  peace,  and  again  returned  to  her  old 
systems  of.  policy,  it  was  reduced,  to  $5  46,  being  only  five  cents 
more  than  in  the  firtit  mentioned  period.     The  advanced  price  of  ag- 
licujttural  productions,  during  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  was  accom- 
panied by  A  great  advance  in  the  price  of  lands  in  the  United  States. 
The  diflference  in  the  valuations  of  lands,  made,  under  the  authority 
of  the  general  government,  between  1799,  and  1814  and  1815,  was, 
as  we  have  before  stated,  $950,293,806.    Taking  into  view,  all  otheir 
causes,  which  contributed  to  produce  this — such  as  the  increase  of  pop- 
ulation, clearing  of  new  lands,  improvement  of  the  old,  depreciation  of 
money,  &c.,  yet  no  small  part  of  it  must  be  attributed  to  the  increase  of 
the  profits  of  the  lands  themselves ;  as  it  is  well  known,  that,  except 
in  the  new  stares,  the  price  of  lands  has  diminished,  since  1815. 

The  American  commerce,  during  this  period,  was  often  interrupted, 
by  depredations,  committed  under  illegal  orders,  decrees  and  block- 
ades of  the  two  great  belligerents,  France  and  Great  Britain.  Theie 
depredations  commenced,  under  the  French  decree  of  May  9th,  1798, 
and  others  which  followed,  and  under  the  British  order  of  the  8th  of 
June,  1793,  prohibiting  flour  and  meal  from  being  carried  to  France, 
or  to  any  port  occupied  by  French  armies.  This  was  followed,  by 
other  British  ordersf  in  relation  to  neutral  trade  with  the  French  West 
Indies.  The  proceedings  of  the  British  government,  under  these  ille- 
gal orders,  as  well  as  other  acts  strongly  indicating  hostile  intentiona, 
would,  probably,  have  brought  the  United  States,  into  open  war  with 
Great  Britain,  as  early  as  1791,  had  not  President  Washington  inter- 
posed a  peaceful  mission  to  that  country^  and  which  ended  in  a  treaty, 
condnded  by  Mr.  Jay,  on  the  19th  of  November  of  that  year;  and 