

Great  Britain  had  not  before  objected  to  the  Americans  bringing 
colonial  and  other  produee  into  the  ports  of  the  United  States,  there 


375 

•eeurio^  the  dutien,  and  then  again  reshipping  it,  with  a  drawback 
of  moat  of  the  duties,  to  any  foreign  country.  She  now,  claimed 
that  the  allowance  of  this,  was  only  a  relaxation  of  the  rule  of  1^66 ; 
and,  on  the  22d  of  May,  1806,  an  American  vessel,  called* the  Essex, 
Ornle  master,  was  condemned,  together  with  her  cargo,  under  the 
rule  before  mentioned,  now,  for  the  first  time  applied  during  this  war. 
In  consequence  of  this  admiralty  decision,  many  American  Tesaeli^ 
in  the  same  situation  as  the  Elssex,  were  seized  and  brought  into  Brit- 
ish ports.  This  immediately  became  a  subject  of  complaint,  on  the 
part  of-  the  American  merchants.  It  will  be  remembered,  that,  at  this 
time,  the  United  States  had  no  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  in  relation 
to  commerce ;  the  commercial  pyrt  of  that  concluded  by  Mr.  Jay, 
hmring  expired  in  1804.  The  British  goTemment,  however,  propos- 
ed in  that  year,  a  renewal  of  this  treaty,  to  continue,  until  two  yean 
after  the  close  of  the  new*  war — but  this  was  declined,  by  the  Ameri- 
can Executive. 

In  this  peculiar  state  of  things,  a  new  negotiation  was  set  on  foot ; 
end  Mr.  William  Pinckney,  who  had  been  one  of  the  commissionera 
under  Mr.  Jay's  treaty,  to  adjust  the  claims  of  the  American  mer- 
chants, was  associated  wilh  Mr.  Munroe,  in  conducting  it.  The  im- 
portant subject  of  impressment,  as  well  as  the  colonial  trade  was, 
also,  to  claim  the  attention  of  the  American  negotiators. 

On  the  31st  of  December,  1806,  Messrs.  Munroe  and  Pinckney, 
during  the  short  period  of  the  Fox  administration,  with  much  diffi- 
culty concluded  a  treaty  with  Great  Britain.  With  respect  to  the 
colonial  anid  other  trade,  the  elewnth  article  provided,  in  substance, 
that,  during  the  then  existing  war,  European  products,  might  be  car- 
ried to  the  port  of  any  colony,  belonging  to  the  enemy  of  Great  Brit- 
ain, provided  they  had  been  entered  and  landed  in  the  United  States, 
and  paid  the  ordinary  duties ;  and  on  re-exportation,  should,  after  the 
drawback,  have  been  subject  to  a  duty,  equivalent  to  not  less  than 
one  per  cent  ad  valorem,  and  were  bona  (ide  the  property  of  Amer- 
ican citizens.  And  the  produce  of  the  colonies  of  the  enemies,  might, 
also,  be  brought  to  the  United  States,  there  entered,  landed,  and  hav- 
ing paid  the  duties,  might  be  re-exported,  to  any  part  of  Europe,  sub- 
ject to  a  duty,  after  the  drawback,  of  not  less  than  two  per  cent  ad 
valorem.  This  treaty,  it  is  well  known,  was  rejected  by  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son, without  even  consulting  his  constitutional  advisers;  principally, 
for  the  want  of  an  express  stipulation,  against  future  impressments — 
a  stipulation  which,  after  immense  sacrifices,  from  commercial  re- 
atrietiona,  for  four  years,  and  a  war  of  two  and  a  half  yeara  nore. 