

Under  this  law,  in  April  following  its  passage,  an  arrangement 
was  made  with  the  British  minister,  (Mr.  Erskine,)  in  which,  he  gave 
assurances,  that  the  orders  in  council  should  be  withdrawn  on  the  10th 
of  June  following — in  consequence  of  which,  the  President  issued  hif 
proclamation ;  and,  on  the  10th  of  that  month,  the  American  trade 
with  Great  Britain  was  opened.  This  arrangement,  however,  being 
disarowed  by  the  British  guvernment,  on  the  ground  that  Mr.  Erskine 
had  exceeded  his  powers ;  the  act  was  revived  against  Great  Britaint 
by  a  second  proclamation  of  the  0th  of  August  of  the  same  year. 

Knowing,  that,  if  the  American  commerce  were  let  loose  upon  the 
ocean,  his  **  peaceable  engine  of  restraint,*'  would  be  injured,  if  not 
destroyed,  Bonaparte  was  extremely  indignant,  at  the  removal  of  the 
embargo,  and  the  substitution  of  a  non-intercourse  with  FraneOf 
against  whom  he  declared  the  United  States  had  no  ground  of  com^ 
plaint  His  indignant  feelings,  however,  were  concealed  until  the 
continental  ports  under  his  control,  were  filled  with  American  veaaela, 
laden  with  valuable  cargoes — these  he  then  ordered  to  be  seiiedt  be- 
icavse,  as  he  alleged,  French  vessels  had  been  seised  by  the  Ameri* 
cans.  Against  these  seizures  the  American  minister  strongly  remon* 
strated ;  and  if  the  seizure  of  these  vessels,  was  a  most  flagrant  ool- 
rage  upon  the  known  principles  of  national  law,  as  well  as  of  common 
justice,  the  answer  to  this  remonstrance  was  a  still  greater  oat- 
rage,  upon  the  honor,  integrity  and  general  character  of  the  Ameri- 
can government  and  people;  and  evinced  Bonaparte's  feelings,  at 
the  removal  of  the  embargo.  On  the  17th  of  February,  ISIO,  G^- 
cral  Armstrong  was  informed,  by  the  French  minister,  ^*that  his 
majesty  could  place  no  reliance  on  the  proceedings  of  the  United 
States,  who,  having  no  ground  of  complaint  against  France^  com- 
prised her  in  their  acts  of  exclusion ;  and  since  the  month  of  May* 
have  forbidden  the  entrance  of  their  ports,  to  French  vessels,  under 
the  penalty  of  confiscation.  As  soon  as  his  majesty  was  informed  of 
this  measure,  he  considered  himself  bound,  to  order  reprisals  on 
American  vessels,  not  only  in  his  territory,  but  likewise,  in  the  coun- 
tries, which  are  under  his  influence.  In  the  ports  of  Holland,  of 
Spain,  of  Italy  and  Naples,  American  vessels  were  seized,  becavsc 
the  Americans  have  seized  French  vessels." 

'*The  Americans  cannot  hesitate,  as  to  the  part,  which  they  are  to 
take :  they  ought  to  tear  in  pieces  the  act  of  their  indepcndencct  and 
to  become  again,  as  before  the  revolution,  the  subjects  of  Eng land. 