


/ 


382 

jestj,  ready  to  consider  the  United  States,  as  assocfated  with  the  ea 
of  all  the  powers,  who  have  to  defend  themselves  against  England,  hat 
not  taken  any  definitive  measure,  towards  the  American  vessels,  which 
may  have  he«n  brought  into  our  ports;  he  has  ordered,  that  ihej 
should  remain  sequestered,  until  a  decision  may  be  had  thereon,  ae- 
cording  to  the  dispositions,  which  shall  have  been  expressed,  by  the 
government  of  the  United  States." 

Not  long 'after  the  date  of  this  extraordinary  letter,  learning, 
haps,  that  the  Unted  States  had  not  in  fact  declared  war  against 
gland,  as  he  had  predicted,  Bonaparte  declared  in  full  council,  that 
the  Americans  should  be  compelled  to  be  his  allies  or  his  enemies; 
and  proceeded,  to  order  the  condemnation  of  some  American  Tessaky 
then  in  a  state  of  sequestration.  This  important  information  waa 
communicated  to  the  American  Executive,  by  Gen.  Armstrong,  in  a  let- 
ter bearing  date  the  22d  of  February,  1808,  and  which,  as  it  derel- 
opes,  in  a  most  unequivocal  manner,  the  views  and  policy  of  tha 
French  Emperor,  in  relation  to  this  country,  we  here  present  an  ex- 
tract, to  the  reader. 

**  Nothing  has  occured  here,**  says  Mr,  Armstrong,  ''  since  the  date 
of  my  public  dispatches  (the  17lh)  to  give  to  our  business  an  aspect 
more  favorable  than  it  then  had ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  I  have  come 
to  the  knowledge  of  two  facts,  which  I  think,  sufficiently  shew  the 
decided  character  of  the  Emperor's  policy  with  regard  to  us.  These 
are,  first,  that,  in  a  council  of  administration,  held  a  few  tiays  past, 
when  it  was  proposed  to  modify  the  operation  of  the  decrees  of  Not. 
1806,  and  Dec.  1807,  (though  the  proposition  was  supported  by  the 
whole  weight  of  the  council,)  he* became  highly  indignant,  and  de- 
clared that  these  decrees  should  suffer  no  change — and  that  the  Amer- 
icans should  be  compelled  to  take  the  positive  character  of  either 
oltiA  or  enemies — secondly,  that  on  the  27th  of  January  last,  twelTe 
days  after  Mr.  Champagny*s  written  assurances,  that  these  decrees 
should  work  no  change  in  the  property  sequestered  until  the  discus- 
sions with  England  were  brought  to  a  close,  and  seven  days  before 
he  reported  to  me  verbally  these  very  assurances,  the  Emperor,  by  a 
special  decision,  confiscated  two  of  o^  ships  and  their  cargoes  (the 
Julius  Henry  and  Juniata)  Yor  want  merely  of  a  document,  not  re- 
quired by  any  law  or  usage  of  the  commerce,  in  which  they  were  en- 
gaged. This  act  was  taken,  as  I  was  informed,  on  a  general  report  of 
sequestered  cases,  amounting  to  one  hundred  and  sixty ;  and  which, 
at  present  prices,  will  yield  upwards  of  100,000,000  of  francs,  a  som, 
whose  magnitude  alone,  renders  hopeless  all  attempts  at  saving  it. 
Danes,  Portugese  and  Americans,  will  be  the  principal  sufferers. 