


388 

or  to  take  such  meaiurest  m  that,  their  commerce  and  indoitrj  ahoiild 
not  be  tarifedi  (tarifi^s)  by  the  English,  which  renders  them  more  de- 
pendant than  Jumaica,  which,  at  least,  has  its  assembly  of  represen- 
tatives and  its  privileges."  *'  Men  without  just  political  yiewt,  (smns 
politique,")  the  French  minister  adds,  **  without  honor  without  eii^r- 
gfft  may  allege,  that  payment  of  tribute  imposed  by  England^  may  be 
submitted  to,  because  it  is  light ;  but  why  will  they  not  perceive,  that 
the  English  will  no  sooner  have  obtained  the  admission  of  the  prin- 
ciple, than  they  will  raise  the  tariff,  in  such  way,  that  the  burden  at 
first  light,  blooming  insupportable,  it  then  will  be  necessary  to  fight 
for  inUresti  after  having  refused  to  fight  for  honor." 

Those  unacquainted  with  the  history  of  this  period,  can  hardly  be- 
Veve,  that  an  answer,  so  much  in  violation,  not  only  of  the  ordinarj 
nilea  of  diplomacy,  but  those  of  decency  itself,  and  which  could  noi 
be  tolerated  in  private  life,  should  have  been  given,  even  by  Bona- 
parte, much  less  that  it  should  have  been  so  tamely  received  by  the 
American  i^overnmcnt. 

The  future  historian  will  be  obliged  to  record,  that  the  American 
Executive  did  not  even  order  the  minister  at  Paris,  to  repel  such  falae 
charges  against  the  conduct  and  character  of  the  people  of  this  conn-* 
try.  That  minister,  however,  without  waiting  for  directions  from  his 
government,  with  the  spirit  and  feelings  of  an  American,  did  immedi* 
ately  repel  these  false  and  unjust  charge  against  his  country.  To 
the  charge  or  declaration,  <*  that  the  United  States  had  nothing  to 
complain  of  against  France,"  General  Armstrong  emphatically  asked, 
*^  was  the  capture  and  condemnation  of  a  ship  driven  on  the  shores  of 
France  by  stress  of  weather,  and  the  perils  of  the  sea — nothing ! 
Was  the  seixure  and  sequestration  of  many  cargoes,  brought  to  France 
In  ships  violating  no  law,  and  admitted  to  regular  entry  at  the  imperial 
custom  houses — nothing  ?  Was  the  violation  of  our  maritime  righta, 
consecrated,  as  they  have  been,  by  the  solemn  forms  of  a  public  treaty — 
nothing!  In  a  word,  was  it  nothings  that  our  ships  were  bumt^  on  the 
high  seas,  without  other  offense,  than  that  of  belonging  to  the  C7jit- 
ted  l^aUs ;  or  other  apology,  than  was  to  be  found  in  the  enhanced 
aafety  of  the  perpetrator!  Surely,''  he  adds,  "if  it  be  the  duty  of 
the  United  States,  to  resent  the  theoretical  usurpations  of  the  British 
orders  of  November,  1807,  it  cannot  be  less  their  duty,  to  complain  of 
the  daily  and  practical  outrages^  on  the  part  of  France.''  Such  was 
Ihe  language  of  the  American  Representative  at  Paris,  against  the 
oetrages  of  France  upon  the  commerce  of  his  country. 