


388 

*<  If  I  am  right  ia  supposing  the  Emperor  has  detiDitively  taken 
his  ground,  I  cannot  be  wrong  in  concluding  that  you  will  immediately 
take  yours.*' 

The  American  government  had,  indeed,  taken  its  ground, 'but  not 
such,  it  is  apprehended,  as  that  contemplated  by  Gen.  Armstrong,  in 
the  above  letter.  It  had  withdrawn  the  whole  American  commerce 
from  the  oceans  and  to  this  proceeding,  we  now  invite  the  attention 
q£  the  reader. 

\pn  the  I4th  of  December,  1807,  despatches  reached  Washingtoui 
from  the  American  minister  at  Paris,  giving  the  first  official  informa- 
tion of  the  application  of  the  Berlin  decree,  to  American  vessels. 
Among  these  was  the  letter  of  Regnier,  the  note  of  Gen.  Armstrongs, 
and  the  answer  of  Champagny,  before  mentioned.  These,  on  the 
18th  of  the  same  month,  were  laid  before  Congress,  together  with  a 
newspaper,  containing  a  proclamation  of  the  British  king  of  the  16lh 
of  October,  recalling  his  subjects  from  abroad,  in  foreign  service,  and 
giving  directions,  as  to  the  mode  of  searching  for  and  taking  them, 
when  found  on  board  commercial  neutral  vessels.  And  we  cannot 
but  here  observe,  that  these  were  the  only  papers  then  submitted  to 
Congress,  although  the  letter  of  Gen.  Armstrong,  dated  August  3d, 
1807,  before  noticed,  disclosing  the  views  and  policy  of  Bonaparte  in 
relation  to  neutrals,  in  a  manner  too  plain  to  be  misunderstood,  must 
have  been  in  the  possession  of  the  Executive.  Nor  has  any  expla- 
nation ever  been  given,  why  a  document  so  important,  should  have 
been  concealed  from  Congress,  at  that  time,  and  not  have  been  com- 
municated to  that  body,  until  long  after  the  embargo  was  laid. 

}n  communicating  the  above  papers  to  the  national  legislature,  the 
President  said  they  would  shew  '*  the  great  and  increasing  dangem 
with  which  our  vessels*  our  seamen  and  merchandize  are  threatened 
on  the  high  seas  and  elsewhere,  from  the  belligerent  powers  of  Eu- 
rope*'— and  he  recommended,  on  this  account,  an  embargo. 

In  consequence  of  this  recommendation,  an  embargo  was  laid,  t>n 
the  22d  of  December,  and  without  any  limitation  as  to  time. 

The  secretary  of  state,  in  communicating  to  the  American  minister 
at  London,  the  embargo  act^e  day  after  it^  passage,  says,  *'  the  policy 
and  causes  of  the  measure  are  explained,  in  the  message  itself;'*  and 
in  a  second  letter,  to  the  same  minister,  not  long  after,  he  says,  **  my 
last,  which  was  committed  to  the  British  packet,  enclosed  a  copy  of 
the  act  of  embargo,  and  explained  the  policy  of  the  measure.  Among 
the  considerations**  he  added,  **  which  enforced  it,  was  the  probability 
of  such  decrees,  as  were  issued  by  the  British  government  on  the  11th 