

49 


886 

utive*  by  Robert  L.  Livingston,  who  had  learnt  them,  from  a  convw* 
sation  with  Bona|>arte  hiroselC 

In  answer  to  Mr.  Livingston's  letter,  informing  him  that  the  rQltr 
of  France,  considered  the  embargo  **  a  wise  measure,**  Mr.  Jefferaoii» 
on  the  15th  of  Oct.  1806  says, ''  The  explanation  of  his  principl€a» 
given  you  by  the  French  emperor,  in  conversation^  is  correct,  as  fiff 
as  it  goes.  He  does  not  wish  us  to  go  to  war  with  England,  knowing 
we  have  no  ships  to  carry  on  that  war.  To  submit  to  pay  England 
the  tribute  on  our  commerce,  which  she  demands,  by  her  orders  in 
council,  would  be  to  aid  her  in  the  war  against  him,  and  wonld  give 
him  just  ground  to  declare  war  with  us.  He  concludes,  therefore,  as 
every  rational  man  must,  that  the  embargo,  the  only  remaining  alter- 
native, was  a  wise  measure,*^ 

Mr.  Jefferson,  however,  in  the  same  answer,  advises  Mr.  Living)^ 
ton,  to  consider  this  explanation  given  by  Bonaparte,  as  *'  confiden- 
tial, leaving  to  the  government  to  retain  or  make  it  public^  as  the 
public  good  may  require.*'* 

The  embargo,  however,  was  as  unpopular  among  the  merchants  of 
America,  as  the  French  decrees  were,  among  the  merchants  of  Hol- 
land ;  especially  after  it  was  avowed  to  be  a  measure  of  coercion,  and 
to  be  continued  for  an  indefinite  period.  AYith  all  Europe  on  his 
side,  the  American  merchants  perceived  that  Bonaparte  would  not 
relax,  much  less  abandon  his  decrees,  aided,  as  they  were,  by  the 
embargo — nor  could  they  believe,  that  Great  Britain,  however  much 
she  might  sufier  by  it,  would  yield  to  the  claims  of  the  Americans 
nnder  such  a  menace. 

While  the  war,  therefore,  continued  in  Europe,  they  saw  little 
prospect  of  saving  their  ships,  from  rotting  at  their  wharves.  The 
people  in  general,  deprived  of  a  market  for  their  accumulated  pro- 
duce, at  last,  became  impatient;  and  it  required  more  than  the  great 
popularity  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  to  persevere  in  his  favorite  scheme ;  and 
his  own  political  friends,  some  of  whom  he  denominated  pseudo-re- 
publicans, compelled  him  to  exchange  the  embargo,  for  a  non-in- 
tercourse with  both  the  great  belligerents. 

On  the  first  of  March,  1809,  a  non-intercourse  with  France  and 
Great  Britain  was  substituted  for  the  embargo,  to  take  effect  after  the 
20th  of  May,  following.  The  President,  at  the  same  time,  was  au- 
thorized, in  case  either  of  the  belligerents  should  so  revoke  or  modify 
its  edicts,  as  that  they  should  cease  to  violate  the  neutral  commerce 


•  See  VoL  IV  Jefferson's  Works,  p.  113. 


of  the  United  States,  to  declare  the  same,  bj  proclamation ;  after 
which  the  trade  with  the  nation  so  doing,  was  to  be  renewed. 