


885 

■ 

It  if  difficult  to  reconcile  these  derlarationSf  with  the  idee,  that  the 
embargo  was  recommended,  for  the  purpose  of  compelling  Bonaparte 
to  revoke  a' decree*  the  full  execution  of  which  on  the  continent  of 
Europe,  was  to  be  so  beneficial  to  the  United  States,  as  to  compel 
Great  Britain,  by  this  **  peaces  ble  engine  of  restraint,"  lb  renounce, 
among  other  things,  *' her  aggressions  on  the  persons  of  our  citiiena*' 
on  the  ocean,  that  is,  renounce  the  right  of  impressment ;  and  wouki« 
also,  **  reduce  her,  to  just  terms  of  peace  with  us."  And  it  is  difficult 
to  see,  how  Bonaparte's  plan  could  be  completely  executed,  if  the 
trade  of  neutrals,  and  particularly  that  of  the  United  Btates,  should  be 
carried  on  as  usual.  It  should  seem,  therefore,  that  Mr.  JefferaoDt 
deemed  it  best  for  the  Americans,  to  keep  their  thousand  shipa  at 
home,  and  wait  with  patience,  for  the  beneficial  effects  of  Bonaparte's 
**  peaceable  engine  of  restraint."  In  the  debates  on  the  embargo« 
in  the  House,  one  of  the  members,  supposed  to  be  in  the  aecreta 
of  the  administration,  did  declare,  **  that  Bonaparte  was  fighting  our 
battles." 

The  French  Emperor  did  not  consider  the  embargo  aa  directed 
against  his  decree ;  but  viewed  it  as  aiding  his  continental  syatem ; 
and  that  in  this  way,  the  Americans  had  become  allies^  in  his  com- 
mercial warfare  against  Great  Briuin. 

The  object  of  bis  Bayonne  decree,  issued  in  April,  I806»  was  to 
aid  in  enforcing  it.  This  decree  ordered  the  custom  house  officers 
**  to  seize  all  American  vessels,  then  in  French  ports,  or  which  migbt 
come  into  ibem  hereafter" — and  the  American  minister  wasinformed» 
that  these  seizures  were  made  ^*  because  no  vessel  of  the  United 
Btates  can  now  navigate  the  seas,  without  infracting  a  law  of  the 
said  states,  and  thus  furnishing  a  presumption,  that  they  do  so,  oa 
British  account,  or  in  British  connection."  The  French  minister  of 
foreign  afl^irs,  who  wrote  nothing,  but  what  was  in  accordance  with 
the  will  of  his  master,  in  his  report  to  the  Emperor,  of  the  8th  of 
September,  180B,  says — **The  Americans,  a  people  who  involve  their 
fortunes,  their  prosperity,  and  almost  their  existence  in  commerce^  •/ 
hare  given  the  example  of  a  great  and  courageous  sacrifice.  Thej 
have  prohibited,  by  a  gener^  embargo,  all  commerce  and  navigation, 
rather  than  submit  to  that  tribute,  which  th^  English  impose."  And 
on  the  5th  of  August,  1810,  the  Duke  of  Cadore,  informs  the  Amer> 
ican  minister,  that  the  Emperor,  *'  had  applauded  the  embargo  laid 
by  the  United  States."  Indeed,  these  views  of  Bonaparte  respee^ 
ting  the  embargo,  were  directly  commnntcated  to  the  American 