


381 

•hovld  eontain  an  order,  that  all  correspondence,  journals,  d&c.  which 
•hould  come,  in  a  neutral  flag,  should  he  seized  and  buTnt. 

On  the  II  th  of  November,  1807,  the  celebrated  British  orders  in 
coancil,  were  issued  in  opposition  to  the  Berlin  decree,  which  waa 
now  to  be  universally  enforced.  By  these,  all  the  ports  and  places  of 
France  and  her  allies,  or  of  any  other  country,  at  war  with  his  Ma« 
jesty,  and  all  other  ports  or  places  in  Europe,  from  which,  although 
not  at  war,  the  British  flag  was  excluded,  and  all  other  ports  or  placeit 
in  the  colonies  belonging  to  his  Majesty's  enemies,  were  to  be  subject 
to  the  saoie  restrictions,  in  point  of  trade  and  navigation  (with  certain 
exceptions)  as  if  the  same  were  actually  blockaded  by  his  Majesty** 
naval  forces,  in  the  most  strict  and  rigorous  manner ;  and  all  trade  in 
articles,  which  are  of  the  produce  or  manufacture  of  the  said  conn* 
tries  or  colonies,  should  be  deemed  and  considered  unlawful ;  and  anj 
vessel  trading  from  or  to  said  countries  or  colonies,  with  all  the  goods 
and  merchandize  on  board,  and  all  the  articles  of  the  produce  or  roan* 
nfiictnre  of  such  countries  or  colonies,  might  be  captured  and  con* 
demiled  as  prizes  to  the  captors. 

To  these  orders  others  were  afterwards  issued,  either  explanatory, 
or  more  particularly  carrying  them  into  effect,  by  which  certain  prop- 
erty passing  through  England  to  a  foreign  country,  was  made  subject 
to  a  transit  duty. 

To  the  British  orders  of  November  11th,  succeeded  another  decreet 
issoed  by  the  French  emperor,  from  his  imperial  palace  at  Milan,  dated 
December  17th,  declaring,  that  every  ship,  to  whatever  nation  belongs 
ing,  that  shall  have  submitted  to  be  searc)ied  by  an  English  ship,  or  to 
a  voyage  to  England ;  or  that  shalf  have  paid  any  tax  whatever  to  tha 
English  government,  shall  thereby,  and  fur  that  alone,  be  denation* 
aKied,  to  have  forfeited  the  protection  of  its  king,  and  to  have  become 
English  property — and  the  ships  so  denationalized,  on  entering  the 
ports  of  France,  or  those  of  her  allies,  or  on  falling  into  the  hands  of 
French  ships  of  war,  or  privateers,  were  declared  lawful  prizes.  And 
by  the  same  decree,  the  British  Islands  were  again  declared  in  a  state 
of  blockade,  both  by  sea  and  land. 

On  his  return  from  Italy  i^bnuary,  1808,  Bonaparte  instructed  his 
minister,  to  inform  Gen.  Armstrong,  tMit,  in  consequence  of  the 
British  orders  of  November  11th,  he  could  not  doubt,  but,  that  the 
United  States  had  declared  war  against  Great  Britain.  "  War  then 
exists,*'  says  Champagny,  '*in  fact,  between  England  and  the  United 
States ;  and  his  Majesty  considers  it,  as  declared  from  the  day,  on 
which  England  published  her  decrees.    In  that  persuasion,  his  Ma* 