


r 


884 

of  NovemW,  the  language  of  the  British  Gazettes,  with  other  iadi- 
cations,  having  left  little  doubt,  ^hat  such  were  meditated.'^  On  ike 
day  the  vessel  arrived  at  New  York,  from  France,  bringing  the  d^ 
•patches  above  mentioned  from  Gen.  Armstrong,  a  vessel,  elao*  ar- 
rived, at  the  same  port,  from  England,  bringing  British  newapepent 
containing  information,  that  retaliatory  orders  against  the  French  Bei^ 
lin  decree,  would  probably  soon  issue.  Indeed,  wh^n  it  is  conaid* 
ered,  that  the  British  government,  as  well  as  the  American  ExecutiTeb 
had,  for  some  time  before,  had  full  information  of  the  fixed  detenqpil- 
aiion  of  Bonaparte,  that  there  should  be  no  neutrals,  and  that  all  ne- 
lions  were  to  be  compelled  to  join  in  enforcing  the  Berlin  decree,  no 
one  could  doubt,  that  Great  Britain,  would  take  some  measures  of  re- 
sistance or  retaliation. 

The  public  at  large,  however,  and,  we  may  add,,  even  the  membeis 
of  the  national  legislature,  not  having  official  information,  on  this  snl^ 
ject,  a  diversity  of  sentiment  prevailed,  in  this  country,  as  to  the  causes, 
as  well  as  the  policy  of  the  embargo.  As  a  measure  of  coercion, 
to  obtain  redress  for  injuries  received  from  foreign  powers,  as  it  was 
afterwards,  avowed  to  be  ;  and  for  this  purpose,  was  to  be  continued, 
until  such  redress  was  obtained,  it  certainly  was  a  severe,  and  we  ntaj 
add,  bold  experiment  on  the  interests,  as  well  as  on  the  patience  and 
forbearance  of  an  active  and  enterprising  people. 

The  correspondence  of  Mr.  Jefferson  with  his  particular  friendst 
now  before  the  public,  61early  shews  his  views  of  the  French  de- 
crees, and  how  far  he  wished  them  to  be  enforced.  To  one  of  his  po- 
litical friends,  under  date  of  January  Ist,  1814,  he  says,  ''  The  tme 
line  of  policy  for  us^  is,  that  Bonaparte  should  be  able  to  effect  the 
complete  exclusion  of  England,  from  the  whole  continent  of  Ewrope^ 
in  order,  by  this  peaceable  engine  of  restraint^  to  make  her  renounce 
her  views  of  dominion  on  the  ocean,  of  permitting  no  other  nation 
to  navigate  it,  but  with  her  license,  and  on  tribute  to  her ;  and  her 
aggressions  on  the  persons  of  our  citizens^  who  may  choose  to  exer- 
cise their  right  of  passing  on  that  element — and  this  would  be  ejfed^ 
ed  by  Bonaparte's. succeeding  so  far  as  to  close  the  BaZ<ic  against 
her.'*  And,  in  the  same  letter  he  adds,  J*  I  wished  such  limits  only, 
to  the  successes  of  Bonaparte,  as  should  not  prevent  his  completely 
closing  Europe  against  British  manufactures  and  commerce,  and 
thereby  reducing  her,  to  just  terms  of  peace  with  us.''* 

*  Jeflerson's  Memoirs,  Vol.  IV,  p.  2S2. 