

On  the  appearance  of  this  declaration  of  the  Prince  Regent,  Mr. 
Barlow  strongly  urged  the  French  government,  to  furnish  the  evi* 
dence  required  by  the  ruler  of  Great  Britain. 

**  It  is  much  to  be  desired,**  says  Mr.  Barlow,  in  a  note  to  the 
French  minister,  of  May  Ist,  '*  that  the  French  government  would 
BOW  make  and  publish  an  authentic  act^  declaring  the  Berlin  and 
Milan  decrees,  as  relative  to  the  the  United  States,  to  have  ceased, 
in  November,  1810,  declaring  that  they  have  not  been  applied,  in  any 
instance  since  that  time ;  and  that  they  shall  not  be  so  applied  in 
future.  The  case  is  so  simple,  the  demand  is  so  just,  and  the  nec^s^ 
gity  so  urgent,  that  I  cannot  withhold  my  confidence,  in  the  prompt 
and  complete  success  of  my  proposition.*' 


397 

This  application  drew  from  the  French  government,  on  the  10th  of 
May,  a  copy  of  a  decree,  purporting  to  have  passed,  on  the  28lh  of 
April  of  the  preceding  year ;  in  which,  after  a  preamble,  Bonaparte 
declares,  that  «*  The  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan  are  definitively^  and 
to  date,  from  the  first  day  of  November  last,  considered  as  not  having 
existed^  (non  avenus,)  in  regard  to  Americen  vessels.*** 

The  French  government  gave  a  copy  of  this  decree,  with  great  re- 
luctance ;  and  it  will,  probably,  always  remain  doubtful,  whether  it 
was  made,  at  that  time;  or  had  been  formally  passed,  at  the  time  it 
bears  date,  to  be  produced  thereafter,  as  occasion  or  necessity  might 
require.  On  the  latter  supposition,  its  long  concealment,  shews  con* 
dusively,  that  Bonaparte  expected  and  required  some  further  act  of 
resistance,  on  the  part  of  the  American  government,  against  Great 
Britain,  than  the  law  of  March,  1811. 

For,  if  the  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees,  were,  "  in  good  faith,  and  mi* 
conditionally"  repealed,  or  intended  to  be  repealed,  on  the  1st  of  No-* 
rember,  1810 ;  whence  the  propriety  or  necessity  of  concealing  a  de- 
cree, made,  as  was  pretended,  in  confirmation  of  such  repeal  ?  And 
particularly,  if  no  further  resistance,  to  the  "  pretensions"  of  Great 
Britain  was  expected  or  required,  on  the  part  of  the  Americans,  than 
the  act  of  March,  181 1 ;  what  plausible  reasons  can  be  given,  why  this 
definitive  decree,  pretended  to  be  passed,  in  consequence  of  that 
very  act,  was  not  immediately  made  public,  and  ofiicially  communi- 
cated to  the  American  government  ? 

The  manner,  in  which  it  was  drawn,  from  the  French  govemmenty 
and  the  extraordinary  circumstances  attending  it,  as  given  by  the 
American  minister,  at  Paris,  will  throw  light  on  this  subject.  In  hia 
letter  of  the  12th  of  May,  Mr.  Barlow  gives  his  government,  the  fol- 
lowing account  of  this  transaction. 