


892 

The  official  declantions  of  the  French  gorernment  ahewt  Aat 
afler  the  Ist  of  Norember,  these  decrees  were  in  force*  wilbovt 
any  exception.  The  Duke  of  Cadore,  in  a  report  made  to  the 
peror,  referring  to  them,  says  :  ^*  As  long  as  England  shall 
io  her  orders  in  council,  your  majesty  will  persist  in  your  decr< 
And,  on  the  31st  of  March,  1811,  Bonaparte  himself,  in  an  address 
to  his  council  of  commerce,  declares,  that  **  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and 
Milan,  are  the  fundamental  laws  of  my  empire.  For  the  neutral  iia¥- 
igation,  I  consider  the  flag,  as  an  extension  of  territory.  The  power 
which  suffers  its  flag  to  be  violated,  cannot  be  considered  as  neatraL 
The  (ate  of  the  American  commerce  will  soon  be  decided.  I  will 
fiiTor  itv  if  the  United  States  conform  themselves  to  these  decrees-^ 
in  a  contrary  case,  their  vessels  will  be  driven  from  my  empire.*' 

After  the  5th  of  August,  and  subsequent  to  the  Ist  of  NoTember* 
1810,  the  American  Executive  pressed  the  British  government,  for  a 
reTOcation  of  its  orders,  on  the  ground  of  the  actual  repeal  of  the 
French  decrees.  The  British  government,  however,  insisted  that  the 
decrees  were  still  in  force,  and  asked  for  some  official  repealing  act 
of  the  French  government,  of  as  high  a  nature  as  that  which  created 
them ;  declaring,  that  the  letter  of  the  Duke  of  Cadore  was  not  a 
doeament  of  that  character — that  it  was  a  mere  declaration  that  they 
would  thereafter  be  repealed,  on  certain  conditions, — that  thiii  decla* 
tatlon  had  never  been  carried  into  effect,  by  any  act  under  the  signa- 
ture of  Ihe  Emperor. 

The  American  government,  on  the  other  hand,  urged,  that  the  for- 
mal declaration  of  the  French  minister,  which  he  was  fully  authorized 
to  make,  the  proclamation  of  the  President,  and  the  non  application 
of  the  decrees  to  American  commerce,  was  sufficient  evidence  of  sudi 
repeal.  In  this  situation,  the  business  between  the  United  States  and 
Great  Britain  rested. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  American  merchants  did  not  give  np  all 
hope  of  some  remuneration  for  the  vast  amount  of  the  property  of 
which  they  had  been  robbed,  until  the  arrival  of  a  new  French  minis- 
ter  (Senrurier)  in  the  winter  of  1811.  He  soon  gave  official  infor- 
mation of  the  settled  determination  of  Bonaparte,  not  to  restore  or 
make  any  remuneration  for  the  property  so  seized  and  sold. 

It  was  confidently  expected,  that,  on  the  arrival  of  a  new  French 
minister,  all  doubts  would  be  removed,  as  to  the  actual  repeal  of  the 
French  decrees — doubts,  which  had  caused  some  division  in  the 
eahlnet,  as  well  as  in  Congress,  among  the  political  friends  of  the  ad* 
ministration.    To  remove  these  doubts,  on  the  20th  of  February,  tho 