

Such,  indeed,  was  the  scanty  commerce  allowed  wiih  France,  after 
the  pretended  repeal  of  the  imperial  decrees,  that  the  Secretary  of 
State,  on  the  18th  of  December,  1810,  says  to  the  French  minister, 
**  If  France,  by  her  own  acts,  has  blocked  up  her  ports  against  the 
iQirodaction  of  products  of  the  United  States,  what  moiive  has  the 
government  in  a  discussion  with  a  third  power,  to  insist  on  the  privi- 
lege of  going  to  France  I  Whence  the  inducement  to  urge  the  a»- 
nvlment  of  a  blockade  of  France,  when,  if  annulled,  no  Americaa 
cargoes  could  obtain  a  market  in  any  of  her  ports  ?  In  such  a  state 
of  things,  a  blockade  of  the  coasts  of  France  would  be,  to  the  United 
States,  as  unimportant  as  would  be  a  blockade  of  the  Caspian  Sea.'* 

In  this  extraordinary  state  of  commercial  relations  with  France,  a 
new  American  minister,  (Mr.  Barlow,)  was  sent  to  that  country,  with 
special  instructions,  to  make  a  commercial  treaty,  with  the  French 
emperor,  hopeless,  as  such  an  event  might  seem. 

Mr.  Barlow  was  amused  with  fair  promises  of  soon  concluding  a 
commercial  treaty,  upon  terms  of  reciprocity,  and  even  including' 
indemnitiea  for  spoliationa. 


396 

Without  adverting  to  the  details  of  this  singular  oegociatioDt  if, 
indeed,  it  mny  be  called  by  that  name,  we  cannot  but  observe,  that 
while  Bonaparte  apparently  agreed  to  the  principles  of  the  proposi- 
tions made  by  Mr.  Barlow,  in  relation  to  a  commercial  intercourse; 
the  continental  system  was  constantly  interposed  as  an  insurmounta- 
ble obstacle,  to  any  arrangement.  One  of  the  propositions  of  Mr. 
Barlow,  was,  that,  as  a  compensation  for  the  loss  of  their  trade  to 
British  ports,  in  consequence  of  the  non-intercourse  act,  the  Ameri- 
cans should  he  allowed  '*  free  access  to  those  of  the  continent  of 
Europe" — and  that  *'  they  might  carry  thither,  such  means  of  purchas- 
ing those  productions,  as  their  own  soil  and  industry,  those  of  other 
neutral  nations,  and  those  of  the  French  colonies,  might  filrnish.'* 
The  note  containing  this  proposition,  was  a  long  time  befure  the  em- 
peror; and,  on  the  19th  of  December,  1811,  the  Duke  of  BassanOy 
informed  Mr  Barlow,  "  that  the  Empcror*s  taking  so  long  a  time  to 
consider  it,  and  make  up  his  decision,  was  not  without  reason,  for  it 
opens  a  wide  field  for  meditation^  on  very  interesting  matters.  That 
the  Emperor  had  read  the  note  repeatedly, and  with  great  attention; 
that  he  told  him,  the  reasoning  in  it  was  every  where  just,  and  the 
conclusions  undeniable ;  but  to  reconcile  its  principles,  with  his  con- 
tinental  system^  presented  difficulties,  not  easy  to  remove.**  And  the 
Duke  himself,  on  the  27th  of  the  same  December,  declared  to  Mr. 
Barlow,  that,  '*  tlie  United  States  would  be  entirely  satisfied  on  the 
pending  questions ;  and  that  there  would  be  no  obstacle  to  their  at- 
taining the  advantages  they  had  in  view,  if  they  succeed^  in  making 
their  flag  safe.'*'' 