


398 

-mm 

secretary  of  state,  Mr.  Robert  Smith,  prepared  a  diafi  af  a 
the  French  minister,  in  which,  among  others,  was  the  folk' 
lions,  **  were  the  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees  revoked,  in 
part,  on  the  first  day  of  last  November  ?  or  have  they,  as 
posterior  to  that  day,  been  so  revoked  ?  or  have  yog 
from  your  government  to  give  to  this  government,  any 
explanation,  in  relation  to  the  revocation  or  modiiicatm  4ff 
decrees  ?" 

Before  preparing  this  note,  the  secretary  had  conferred  vdfc  ikc 
French  minister,  on  the  subject  of  these  questions,  and  olhcn  W  ^ 
culiar  interest,  at  that  period  ;  and  the  result  of  this  eoofmace 
no  doubt,  been  communicated  to  the  President — and  the  objeci  W 
note  was,  to  obtain,  from  the  French  minister,  in  a  written  ItinM.  ^ 
substance  of  what  had  passed  between  them  at  this  conference. 

The  President,  however,  did  not  approve  of  sending  this  note,  m 
proposed  by  Mr.  Smith.  On  submitting  it  to  him,  the  secretary,  m 
an  address  afterwards  presented  by  him  to  the  public,  says,  tkmi  t^ 
President,  '^  to  his  astonishment  told  him,  that  it  would  not  bt 
dient  to  send  Mr.  Serrurier  any  such  note — His  deportment'* 
Smith  adds,  **  throughout  this  interview,  evinced  a  high  degree  •! 
quietude,  which  occasionally  betrayed  him  into  fretful  espr^ 
Mr.  Smith,  also,  says,  *'  he  entreated  him,  but  in  a  manner 
cate,  not  to  withhold  from  Congress,  any  information  that 
useful  to  them,  at  so  momentous  a  juncture.^'  The  note  wm^  $m*i 
and  no  official  enquiry  was  made  of  Mr.  Serrurier  on  this 
subject.  The  reasons  for  this  have  never  been  made  pubMi 
can  be  little  doubt,  we  apprehend,  that  the  answer,  wL«ii^ 
most  have  drawn  from  the  French  minister,  would  have 
the  French  and  American  governments  did  not  agree,  aa 
ing  of  the  declaration  of  the  Duke  of  Cadore,  of  the 
preceding ;  and  that  the  proclamation  relative  to  ike 
decrees,  on  the  first  of  November,  had  issued  prei 

Thus  kept  in  ignorance  of  the  real  views  of  Boi 
ject.  Congress,  on  the  2d  of  March,  IHll,  confii 
tion,  by  passing  a  non-iutcrcourse  act  against  Grant; 

The  secretary  of  sute,  who  certainly  had  the 
was  satisfied,  that,  at  the  time  of  passing  this  l^  -iviw  ^*,^ 
not  revoked.     In  his  address  before  alluded  to«kei 
information,  which  had  been  received  by  Mr.  Jlii^iy^^  ^  l^ 
date  of  the  non-intercourse  law  (that  of  MaaoibftwM  t$  #.««   ^ 
the  lime  of  psssing  it,  evident  to  my  mind, 

60 


/ 


394 

decrees  had  not  been  revoked,  as  had  been  declared  by  the  proda* 
nation.*^ 

Although  Congress  and  the  people  of  the  United  States  were  ibiM 
deprived  of  official  information,  in  relation  to  the  actual  revocation  of 
the  French  decrees ;  yet  they  could  not  be  kept  in  ignorance  of  other 
facts,  evincing  beyond  all  doubt,  the  hostility  of  Bonaparte  towards 
the  American  commerce.  While  he  was  amusing  the  government 
and  people  of  the  United  States,  with  the  honeyed  expressions  of  his 
hve  for  them  and  for  their  *•  prosperity  and  commerce,'*  he  was  pur- 
suing measures,  destructive  of  that  very  prosperity  and  commerce. 
On  the  same  5th  of  August,  when  this  fluttering  declaration  was  made* 
he  imposed  a  duty  of  eighty  cents  on  sea  island,  and  about  sixty  cents 
on  all  other  American  cotton  imported  into  France — nor  would  he  per* 
roit  the  trade  between  the  two  countries,  to  be  carried  on,  except  by 
imperial  licenses ;  and  particular  articles  only,  such  as  cotton,  fish  oil, 
hides  and  peltry,  dye  woods  and  salt  fish,  were  allowed  to  be  import- 
ed, and  oiily  from  the  ports  of  New  York  and  Charleston  ;  and  the  car- 
goes composed  of  these  articles,  were  to  be  accompanied  by  a  cer- 
tificate of  origin  from  a  French  consul.  And  the  Americans  were 
prohibited  from  carrying  sugar  and  cofiee  to  France.  "With  respect 
to  return  cargoes  the  Americans  were  obliged  to  take  wines,  brandy, 
silks,  linens,  cloth,  jewelry,  household  furniture,  and  other  manufac- 
tured articles. 