

If  the  concealment  of  this  decree  for  so  long  a  period,  was  extra- 
ordinary, the  declaration  of  the  French  minister  was  not  less  so,  that 
the  same,  though  not  published,  had  been  communicated  to  the  prede- 
cessor of  Mr.  Barlow,  (Mr.  Russel)  and  also  sent  to  Mr.  Serrurier,  to 
be  communicated  to  the  American  government. 

The  spirit  of  concealment,  in  relation  to  this  transaction,  seems  to 
have  reached  .the  American  Executive ;  as  neither  the  decree  itself, 
nor  Mr.  Barlow^s  letter  of  the  12th  of  May  concerning  it,  although 
they  both  arrived  at  the  office  of  the  department  of  State,  by  the 
Wasp,  on  the  13th  of  Julj)  1812,  were  laid  before  Congress  until 
the  3d  day  of  March,  18f3 ;  and  then  only,  in  consequence  of  a  spe- 
cial call  of  the  House  of  Aepresentatives. 


399 

In  his  message  to  Congress,  at  the  opening  of  its  session,  on  the 
4th  of  Noyember,  1812,  the  President,  alluding  to  the  promulgation 
of  this  decree,  merely  says  :  **  This  proceeding,  although  made  the 
ground  of  the  repeal  of  the  British  orders  in  council,  is  rendered,  by 
the  time  and  manner  of  it,  liable  to  many  objeetionsy 

It  is  difficult  to  imagine  any  other  reason,  for  withholding  these  pa^ 
pers  from  Congress,  than  a  desire  to  conceal  from  that  body  as  well 
as  the  nation,  the  perfidy  of  a  government,  on  whose  conduct  the 
American  Executire  had  before  placed  so  much  confidence.  And  itia 
still  more  difficult  to  imagine  a  reason,  why  the  President  did  not,  in 
sending  these  papers,  inform  Congress,  whether  the  declaration,  made 
by  the  French  minister  to  Mr.  Barlow,  relative  to  its  being  communi- 
cated  to  Mr.  Russel,  and  to  Mr.  Serrurier,  were  true  or  not ;  as  the 
consequences  of  its  concealment,  had,  in  our  view,  been  nothing  leas 
than  involving  the  United  States  in  a  war :  and  the  blame  must  restf 
either  with  the  French  or  American  government. 

As  these  papers  were  sent  to  Congress  on  the  last  day  of  its  sessioot 
no  further  explanation  of  this  mysterious  transaction  could  then  be 
asked  for. 

The  people  of  the  United  States  as  well  as  their  Representatives, 
were  not  a  little  astonished,  at  the  facts  disclosed  in  Mr.  Barlow*s 
letter ;  and  in  June  following,  at  an  extra  session,  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives called  upon  the  Elxecutive  for  a  full  explanation  of  them ; 
end  particularly,  as  to  what  time^  hy  whom^  and  in  what  manner  this 
decree  was  first  communicated  to  the  American  government,  or  any  of 
its  representatives. 

In  answer  to  this  call,  the  national  legislature  was,  for  the  first  time 
informed,  that  Mr.  Russel  had  no  knowledge  of  the  decree,  onlil 
sent  to  him  by  Mr.  Barlow;  and* that'  the  same  had  never  been  com- 
municated to  the  American  government  by  the  French  minister,  or  any 
other  person,  previous  to  the  date  of  Mr.  Barlow*s  letter — and  that 
the  French  minister,  when  inquired  of  declared,  that  the  first  intelli- 
gence he  received  of  its  existence,  was,  by  a  letter  from  the  Duke  of 
Bassano,  of  the  10th  of  May,  1812;  and  that,  in  this  letter,  the  Duke 
expressed  his  surprise,  that  a  prior  letter  of  May,  1811,  in  which  he 
had  transmitted  a  copy  of  it,  for  the  information  of  the  American 
government,  had  not  been  received. 