

•  Palace  of  St.  Clond,  April  98tb,  1811. 
SapoUon^  Emperor  of  the  Prenek,  4^.  4r<^ 

Od  the  report  of  our  minister  of  foreign  relations,  seeing,  by  a  law  passed,  oa 
the  2d  of  March  1811,  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  has  ordered  the  ezeen- 
tion  of  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  non-intercourse,  which  prohibits  the  vessels 
and  merchandize  of  Great  Britain,  her  colonies  and  dependencies,  iVom  entering 
into  the  ports  of  the  United  States :  considering,  that  the  said  law  is  an  act  of 
resistance  to  the  arbitrary  pretensions,  consecrated  by  the  British  orders,  ia  oooa* 
cil,  and  a  formal  rtfusal^  to  adhere  to  a  system  in  fading  the  independence  of 
neairal  powers,  and  of  their  flag,  we  have  decreed,  and  do  decree,  as  follows  .*— 

*'  The  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan  are  defiitively  and  to  date,  from  the  first  daj 
of  November,  considered,  as  not  having  existed,  (non  avenas,)in  regard  to  Amer- 
ican vesseb."  Napolbov. 


396 

**  After  the  date  of  my  letter,  of  which  I  have  the  honor  to  enclote 
you  a  copy,  I  found,  from  a  pretty  sharp  conversation  with  the  Duke 
of  Basisano,  that  there  was  a  singular  reluctance  to  answering  my 
note  of  the  Ist  of  May.  Some  traces  of  that  reluctance  you  will  per- 
ceive, in  the  answer  which  finally  came,  of  which  a  copy  is  here  eo« 
closed.  This,  though  dated  the  10th,  did  not  come  to  me  until  latt 
evening.  I  consider  the  communication  so  important  in  the  present 
crisis  of  our  affairs  with  England,  that  I  despatched  the  Wasp  imme- 
diately, to  carry  it  to  Mr.  Russel,  with  orders  to  return  with  his  an- 
swer, as  soon  as  possible.'^ 

**  I  am  confident  that  the  President  will  approve  the  motive  of  my 
solicitude  in  this  afifair,  and  the  earnest  manner  in  which  I  pressed  the 
minister  with  it,  as  soon  as  my  knowledge  of  the  declaration  of  the 
Prince  Regent  enabled  me,  to  use  the  argument  that  belonged  to  the 
subject.  When,  in  the  conversation  above  alluded  to,  the  Duke  first 
produced  to  me  the  decree  of  the  28th  of  April,  ISll,  I  made  no 
comment  on  the  strange  manner  in  which  it  had  been  so  long  conceal- 
ed from  me,  and  probably  from  you.  I  only  asked  him,  if  that  decree 
had  been  published.  He  said  no,  but  declared  it  had  been  communi- 
cated to  my  predecessor  here,  and  likewise  sent  to  Mr.  Serrurier,  with 
orders  to  communicate  it  to  you.  I  assured  him  it  was  not  among 
the  archives  of  the  legation,  that  I  had  never  before  heard  of  it ; 
and  since  he  had  consented  to  answer  my  note,  I  desired  him  to  send 
me,  in  that  official  manner,  a  copy  of  that  decree,  and  of  any  other 
document  that  might  prove  to  the  incredulous  of  my  country,  (not  to 
me)  that  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan  were  in  good  faith  and  «<n- 
conditionally  repealed,  with  regard  to  the  United  States.  He  then 
promised  me  he  would  do  it,  and  he  has  performed  his  promise.** 