

61 


v. 


40B 

•hip  ihe  Herealett  was  also  condemned,  because,  as  alledgcd  hf 
the  imperial  council  of  prizes,  "  it  was  impossible^  that  she  was  mti 
visitedy  by  the  enemy's  ships  of  war.'' 

Id  this  singular  state  of  things,  in  relation  to  France,  the  Premdenl» 
on  the  1st  of  June,  1612,  recommended  a  declaration  of  war  at^nat 
Great  Britain.  This  declaration  was  made,  by  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, on  the  4th,  but  was  not  finally  concurred  in  by  the  Senate, 
until  the  Hth  of  the  same  month. 

And  we  would  here  observe,  that,  in  our  apprehension,  there  can 

be  little  doubt,  that  the  decree  of  Bonaparte  definitively  repealiof 

y  his  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees,  was  kept  back,  until  such  time,  as,  that 

its  publication  wotild  not  prevent  that  issue  of  the  contest  between  the 
United  States  and  Great  Britain,  to  which  all  his  measures  tended. 
\^  l¥hen  it  was  sent  to  Mr.  Barlow,  on  the  10th  of  May,  1812,  Bona- 

parte, no  doubt,  was  satisfied  that  the  American  government  had  de- 
termined on  a  war  with  Great  Britain ;  and  that  a  declaration  to  that 
effect,  would  be  made,  in  all  probability,  before  the  news  of  the  re- 
peal of  the  orders  in  council  (should  such  repeal  be  the  consequence 
of  the  publication  of  the  decree)  would  reach  the  United  Statea; 
though,  from  the  former  conduct  of  Great  Britain,  he  did  not,  proba- 
bly, expect,  that  such  would  be  the  consequence. 

It  needed  not  all  the  sagacity  of  a  French  diplomatist,  to  ascertain, 
with  certainty,  at  Washington,  in  the  winter  of  181%  that  unleas 
Great  Britain  changed  her  measures,  before  the  rising  of  Congreaa 
then  in  session,  war  would  be  declared  against  her.  Many  things 
erinced  this,  which  could  not  be  concealed  from  any  one,  then  at 
Waahington,  much  less,  from  one,  whose  special  duty  it  was,  to  watch 
the  movements  of  the  government  at  that  place.  In  January,  a  large 
addition  was  made  to  the  army,  and  in  March  a  loan  of  eleven  mil- 
lions was  authorized ;  and  we  know  that  many  of  the  members,  in 
private  conversation,  openly  avowed  their  opinions,  in  favor  of  a  de- 
ehiration  of  war,  before  the  close  of  the  session.  In  addition  to  these 
open  manifestations,  we  would  here  state,  that  on  the  12th  day  of 
March,  the  committee  of  foreign  relations  in  the  House,  requested  a 
private  conference,  with  the  secretary  of  state,  on  this  subject,  and 
that,  at  this  conference,  held  on  that  day  or  soon  a^er,  the  secretary 
distinctly  stated,  as  the  opinion  of  the  President,  that  war  should  be 
declared  against  Great  Britain,  before  the  adjournment  of  Congress ; 
and  that  as  a  preliminary  measure,  an  embargo  should  be  laid  for  sixty 
days — that  the  President  would  reccommend  this  preliminary  meas- 
ure, if  he  were  satisfied,  it  would  be  adopted  by  the  committee  and 