

Y stated,  almost  entirely  neglected* 
This  brings  us  to  the  consideration  of  the  third  period  under  re- 
view, viz.  from  1816  to  1833;  and  we  shall  present,  not  only  a  concise 
comparative  view  of  the  external  commerce,  but  also  a  brief  sketdi 
of  the  internal  commerce  and  resources  of  the  United  States,  dorinf 
this  interesting  peiiod. 

The  new  state  of  Europe,  after  an  unexampled  war  of  a  quarter  of 
a  century,  made  it  necessary  for  the  United  States  to  adopt  some  per^ 
manent  regulations,  in  order  to  secure  and  preserve,  as  far  as  posaibley 
their  external  commerce,  and  particularly  their  navigation,  so  greatly 
increased  in  consequence  of  that  war,  as  well  as  to  encourage  domesiie 
industry,  and  increase  their  own  internal  resources. 

With  a  view  to  the  first  object,  the  National  Legislature,  on  the  8d 
day  of  March,  1816,  repealed  the  acts  imposing  the  discriminating 
tonnage  and  other  duties,  between  American  and  foreign  vessels,  so  fiur 
as  respected  the  produce  or  manufactures  of  the  nation,  to  which  such 
foreign  vessels  might  belong ;  such  repeal  to  take  effect  in  favor  of  any 
foreign  nation,  whenever  the  President  should  be  satisfied,  that  the 
discriminating,  or  countervailing  duties  of  such  foreign  nation,  so  far 
as  they  operated  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  United  States,  had  been 
abolished.  And  we  would  here  state,  that  under  this  act,  the  dntiet 
have  been  equalized  between  the  United  States  and  many  of  the 
countries  in  Europe  and  South  America,  either  by  treaties,  or  mutual 
legislative  acts. 

Prior  to  the  year  1817,  no  act  had  been  passed  by  Congresa,  which 
could  be  denominated  a  navigation  act  Before  that  period,  the  cap* 
tain  or  commander  only  of  a  commercial  vessel,  was  required  to  be 
an  American  citizen,  to  give  a  national  character  to  such  vessel ;  and 
foreign  articles  might  also,  before  that  time,  be  imported  in  foreign 
vessels,  from  any  country  whatever.  On  the  1st  of  March,  1817t  en 
act  was  passed  *'  concerning  the  navigation  of  the  United  Statest'* 
having  two  objects  in  view,  one  to  increase  the  number  of  Americea 
seamen,  and  the  other  to  find  employment  for  them.  To  attain  the 
ftrat,  the  act  declared,  that,  afUr  the  aOch  of  September,  1817,  m 


/  • 


410 

Teasel  or  boat  eogaged  in  the  fisheries,  should  be  entitled  to  the  boM* 
ties  allowed  by  law,  unless  the  qfficerSf  and  at  least  three  fourtk$  of 
the  crew,  should  be  citizens  of  the  United  States,  or  persons  not  the 
subjects  of  any  foreign  prince  or  state ;  and  that  every  vessel  eoiploy* 
ed  in  the  coasting  trade,  (except  those  going  from  one  state  to  ma 
adjoining  state  on  the  sea  coast,  or  on  a  navigable  river  or  lake,  or 
going  from  Long  Island  in  the  State  of  New  York,  to  the  State  of 
Rhode  Island,  or  from  the  Sute  of  Rhode  Island  to  Long  Island) 
should  be  subject  to  a  duty  of  fifty  cents  per  ton,  unlesR  three  fourths 
at  least  of  the  crew  were  American  citizens,  or  persons  not  the  subjects 
of  any  foreign  prince  or  state.  The  same  act  also  declares,  that*  after 
the  same  time,  a  duty  of  fifty  cents  should  be  paid,  on  every  American 
vessel,  entering  from  a  foreign  port,  unless  the  officers,  and  at  least 
two  thirds  of  the  crew,  should  be  of  the  same  national  character  du- 
ring the  voyage,  with  the  exception  of  sickness,  desertion,  &c.  io  a 
foreign  conntry.  These  regulations  were  in  accordance  with  those 
long  since  adopted  by  most  of  the  commercial  nations  in  Europe. 
Great  Britain  in  time  of  peace  requires  three  fourths^  and  in  time  of 
war,  one  fourth,  of  the  crews  employed  in  foreign  voyages,  to  be 
British  subjects.  The  proportions  in  the  same  voyages,  have  varied 
in  France,  from  two  thirds  to  three  fourths.  By  the  regulations  of 
the  nations  around  the  Baltic,  a  major  part,  at  least,  of  the  crew,  most 
be  subjects  of  the  nation  to  which  the  vessel  belongs.  By  the  same  act, 
no  goods  could  be  imported  from  any  foreign  port  or  place,  except 
in  vessels  of  the  United  States,  or  in  vessels  truly  and  wholly  belong* 
ing  to  the  people  of  that  nation,  of  which  such  goods  were  the  growth, 
production  or  manufacture,  or  from  which  the  same  would  only  be,  or 
most  usually  were,  first  shipped  for  transportation  ;  with  a  proviso, 
however,  that  the  act  was  not  to  extend  to  the  vessels  of  any  foreign 
nation,  which  had  not,  or  should  not  adopt  a  similar  regulation. 