


40S 

the  house ;  and  the  committee,  by  a  direct  Tote»  decided  io  (a?or  of 
such  a  measure. 

It  is  well  known,  to  all  acquainted  with  the  management  of  afiiiirs 
at  Washington,  that  a  transaction  of  this  importance  and  characteri 
though  intended  to  be  kept  secret,  would,  in  some  way^  reach  the  ears 
of  foreign  ministers,  at  that  place,  as  soon  as  the  winds  could  carry  ilf 
from  the  capitol,  along  the  Pennsylvania  avenue* 

An  embargo  for  siity  days,  was  recommended,  by  the  President  oi 
the  first  of  April,  and  almost  immediately  adopted  by  both  hooset* 
The  news  of  this  sure  precursor  of  war,  could  have  reached  Fraiie6| 
by  a  fast  sailing  vessel  (and  rumor  at  the  time,  said  that  such  a  Tee- 
■el  was  dispatched  by  the  French  minister,)  prior  to  the  lOth*  and 
even  the  1st  of  May. 

Events  proved  the  truth  of  the  information,  or  verified  the  predie- 
,  tions  of  Bonaparte,  respecting  the  course  of  the  American  govern- 
ment. 

War  was  declared  against  Great  Britain,  five  days  before  her  oi^ 
ders  in  council  were  revoked.  Had  the  news  of  this  revocation  reach* 
ed  Washington,  before  that  declaration  had  been  made,  we  do  not  has* 
itate  io  say,  that  war  would  not  have  taken  place.  Withont  advert* 
ing  to  the  well  known  circumstances,  that  Congress  had  agreed  io  ?•• 
peal  the  non-intercourse  act,  in  case  Great  Britain  would  rescind  her 
orders,  without  insisting  on  her  relinquishment  of  the  right  of  im- 
pressment ;  and  that  the  Erskine  arrangement  was  made  and  carried 
into  effect,  on  the  part  of  the  American  government,  on  the  same 
terms,  we  would* observe,  that  a  majority  of  the  Senate  was,  at  firstt 
opposed  to  the  declaration  passed  by  the  house.  That  body  had  thit 
important  subject  under  consideration,  from  the  6th  to  the  17th  of 
June,  before  a  final  decision  was  had  upon  it.  The  committee  of 
the  Senate,  to  whom  the  bill  from  the  House  had  been  referred,  was 
specially  instructed  to  go  no  farther  than  to  order  reprisals,  by  public 
and  private  armed  vessels,  against  the  commerce  of  Great  Britain;  and 
when  the  committee,  in  pursuance  of  such  instructions,  reported  an 
amendment,  substituting  reprisals  for  war,  the  Senate  was  equally  di- 
vided upon  it;  and  the  substitute  was  lost.  While  this  was  under 
consideration,  it  was  proposed  to  order  reprisals  against  France,  alto ; 
and  thi:<  proposition  was  lost,  by  a  majority  of  two  only.  And  before 
a  final  decision  on  the  bill,  Mr.  Giles  proposed  another  substitute,  ae- 
thorizing  the  Presidont,  to  instruct  the  commanders  of  all  American 
armed  ships  of  war,  to  recapture  any  American  vessel,  bound  to  may 
place  prohibited  to  such  vessel  by  the  British  orders  in  coundlf  wUek 