

\  committee  add,  **  having  been  dedareii)  and  the  case  of  impresament 
being  neceai%ri]y  included,  aa  onettf  the  most  important  caneeti  it  to 


406 

evident  that  it  must  be  provided  for^  in  the  pacification :  the  omit* 
MOD  of  it,  in  a  treaty  of  peace  would  not  leave  it  on  its  former  grouod, 
it  would,  in  effect,  be  an  absolute  relinquishment.*^ 

Id  conformity  with  this  declaration,  the  Executive,  on  the  15th 
of  April,  1813,  instructed  the  American  envoys  sent  to  Europe,  to 
negociate,  under  an  expected  mediation  of  Russia,  not  to  conclude 
a  peace  with  Great  Britain,  unless  they  '^  obtain  a  satisfactory  stipm* 
Zd^ton  against  impressments,  one,  which  would  secure,  under  our  flag, 
protection  to  the  crew."  If  this  could  not  be  accomplished,  all 
further  negociation  was  to  cease ;  and  they  were  directed  to  rettnm 
home,  without  delay.  The  mediation  of  Russia,  not  having  beeo 
accepted  by  Great  Britain,  the  same  instructions  were  renewed,  in 
consequence  of  a  proposition,  to  open  negociations  at  Gottenburg. 

But  when  Bonaparte  was  driven  from  Russia,  and  was  on  his  way 
to  Elba,  tlie  tone  of  the  Executive  was  entirely  changed,  on  this 
subject  The  instructions  given,  on  the  25th  of  June,  1814,  coo* 
tained  the  following  passages — *^It  is  impossible,  with  the  lights 
\  which  have  reached  us,  to  ascertain  the  present  disposition  of  the 
British  government,  towards  an  accommodation  with  the  United. 
States.  We  think  it  probable,  that  the  late  events  in  France,  may 
have  had  a  tendency  to  increase  its  pretentions." 

*'  At  war  with  Great  Britain,  and  injured  by  France,  the  United 
States  have  sustained  the  attitude,  founded  on  those  relations.  No 
reliance  was  placed,  on  the  good  ojices  of  France,  in  bringing  the  war 
with  Great  Britain,  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion.  Looking  steadily  to 
an  honorable  peace,  and  the  ultimate  attainment  of  justice  from  both 
powersytne  President  has  endeavored,  by  a  coni^istent  and  honorable 
policy,  to  take  advantage  of  every  circumstance,  that  might  promote 
that  result.  He  nevertheless  knew,  that  France  held  a  place,  in  the 
political  system  of  Europe  and  of  the  world,  which,  as  a  check  on  Eng* 
land^  could  not  fail  to  be  useful  to  i/s." 

And  in  two  days  after  this,  the  American  negociators  were  instme- 
led,  in  the  following  words — ^^On  mature  consideration,  it  has  been 
decided,  that  all  circumstances  above  dlluded  to,  incident  to  a  prose- 
cution of  the  war,  you  may  omit  any  stipulation  on  the  subject  of 
impressment,  if  found  nesessary  to  terminate  it."  Here,  if  we  right* 
ly  understand  it,  is  an  acknowledgment,  that  the  Executive  relied 
on  Bonaparte,  for  attaining  the  object  for  which  the  war  had  been 
continued ;  not,  indeed,  on  his  *'  good  offices,^'  but  on  the  successful 
efforts  of  that  mighty  power,  which  he  had  acquired — a  power,  which, 