


■) 


404 

had  been  prenotraly  captured,  by  anj  British  armed  resael ;  and  to 
capture  any  British  armed  vessel,  which  should  resist  such  recaptare» 
or  be  found  hovering  on  the  coasts  of  the  United  States,  for  the  pur- 
poee  of  interrupting  their  lawful  commerce — and  that  he,  alaot  be 
empowered,  to  instruct  all  ships  of  war  to  recapture  any  American 
Teasel  navigating  the  ocean,  conformably  to  the  law  of  nations,  pre- 
viously captured  by  any  French  armed  vessel;  and  to  capture  such 
French  armed  capturing  vessel — with  power,  likewise,  to  grant  letters 
of  marque  and  general  reprisals,  against  the  commerce,  both  of 
France  and  Great  Britain. 

The  war  party,  however,  at  last,  prevailed  in  the  Senate,  as  it 
had  in  the  other  branches  of  the  government ;  and  the  substitute  of 
Mr.  Giles  was  negatived,  by  a  majority  of  four,  and  on  the  final  paaa- 
age  of  the  bill,  the  majority  was  six.* 

From  these  proceedings  of  the  Senate,  we  trust,  that  it  may  be 
justly  inferred,  that  bad  the  news  of  the  repeal  of  the  ordem  reached 
Washington,  before  the  final  question  had  been  taken  in  that  body, 
war  would  not  have  been  declared.  And  we  have  always  deemed  it 
a  matter  of  regret,  that  after  that  repeal,  the  armistice  offered  on  the 
part  of  the  British  government  was  not  accepted,  leaving  the  qoea- 
tion  of  impressment,  in  the  situation,  it  had  been  previously  left, 
under 'the  law  of  Congress  before  alluded  to,  and  under  the  Erskine 
arrangement.  The  American  Executive,  however,  did  not  think 
proper,  to  accept  it,  but  upon  terms  relating  to  impressment,  which 
the  British  considered,  as  giving  up  the  question  on  their  part ;  and 
the  war  was,  therefore,  continued,  principally,  if  not  solely,  on  the 
subject  of  impressment. 

If  neither  Washington  nor  Adams,  aided  by  such  able  negociatora, 
aa  Jay  and  King,  at  a  much  more  aunpicious  period,  could  not  obtain 
from  Great  Britain,  a  relinquishment  of  the  right  of  impressment — 
If  the  Fox  administration,  whose  views  were  supposed  rather  favor- 
able towards  this  country,  would  not  yield  it,  in  the  treaty  made  with 
Messrs.  Munroe  and  Finckney ;  what  probable  ground  was  there. 


•  We  have  good  reasons  for  believiog,  that  some  of  the  cabinet,  as  well  as 
some  of  the  members  of  Congress,  assented  to  the  war,  with  reluctance.  And 
we  would  here  observe,  that  this  reluctance  might  have  been  produced,  by  a  pri- 
vate letter,said  to  have  been  whuen,  and  we  believe  was  written,  by  Mr.  Barlow, 
to  some  individual  at  Washington,  (a  copy  of  which  is  now  in  our  possession,) 
stroDf ly  advising  against  involving  the  United  States,  in  a  war,  wiih  either  of  the 
btlligerenti. 