

The  influence  of  state  banks,  was  also,  brought  to  bear  on  the 
great  question,  then  before  Congress ;  and,  when  it  is  considered, 
that  the  number  of  these  banks,  had  at  that  time  increased  to  nearly 
niniety,  located  in  most  of  the  states,  with  a  capital  of  more  than  forty 
millions,  their  influence  could  have  had  no  inconsiderable  weight. 
With  this  union  of  views  and  interest  against  the  bank,  it  is  not  strange* 
that  the  charter  granting  it,  should  be  suffered  to  expire. 

In  the  war,  which  soon  followed,  the  United  States  were  obliged 
to  rely  on  the  state  banks,  not  only,  for  the  collection  and  distribution 
of  their  revenues,  but  for  a  gir^at  proportion  of  their  loans,  to  carry 
on  the  war.  This  required  increased  issues  of  paper,  and  this  cir-* 
cnmstance,  with  the  pressure  of  the  war  upon  the  American  com- 
merce, induced,  or  obliged  the  banks,  south  of  New  England,  in  Sep- 
tember, 1814,  to  stop  paying  specie  for  their  bills.  A  great  deprecia- 
tion of  these  bills,  was  the  necessary  consequence,  as  will  be  more 
particularly  noticed  hereafter.  This  rendered  it  impossible,  for  the 
general  government  to  procure  loans,  for  the  prosecution  of  the  war, 
except  upon  terms  utterly  ruinous. 

A  national  bank,  seemed  to  present  the  only  remedy  for  the  finan- 
cial embarrassments  of  the  country.  The  secretary  of  the  treasury, 
therefore,  (Mr.  Dallas,)  very  early  in  the  session  of  Congress,  which 
met,  on  the  last  of  September,  1814,  presented  a  plan  for  a  national 
bank,  to  consist  of  a  capital  of  $60,000,000,  divided  into  one  hundred 


483 

thoostad  shares  of  9600  each— three  fifths  of  the  capital,  •30,000,000, 
to  be  subscribed  by  corporations  or  individuals,  and  two  fifths, 
$20,000,000,  by  the  United  States.  Of  the  subscriptions  by  corpora- 
tions or  individuals,  one  fifth  or  $6,000,000  to  be  paid  in  specie,  and 
four  fifths  or  $24,000,000,  either  in  specie  or  six  per  cent  stock,  issued 
since  the  declaration  of  war,  and  in  treasury  notes,  in  the  proportion 
of  one  fifth  of  the  latter,  and  three  fiftlis  of  the  former. — The  subscrip- 
tion of  the  United  Sutes,  to  be  paid  in  six  per  cent  stock.  The  treas- 
ury notes  subscribed  might  be  paid,  in  public  six  per  cent  stock ;  and 
no  part  of  the  public  stock,  which  constituted  a  portion  of  the  capital, 
was  to  be  sold,  during  the  then  existing  war,  nor,  at  any  subsequent 
time,  for  less  than  par ;  nor,  at  any  time,  to  an  amount,  exceeding  one 
moiety,  without  the  consent  of  Congress.  The  bank  was  to  be  bound, 
to  loan  to  the  United  Sutes,  $30,000,000,  at  six  per  cent  interest. 

In  submitting  this  general  plan  of  a  bank,  to  be  established  by  na- 
tional authority,  Mr.  Dallas  asked,  whether  it  could  be  deemed  a  vio- 
lation of  the  right  of  private  opinion,  *'  to  consider  the  constitution- 
ality of  a  national  bank,  as  a  question,  forever  settled^  and  at  rest  T' 
The  secretary,  however,  did  not  suppress  his  own  opinion,  on  this 
question,  but  declared,  **  that,  in  these  times,  the  establishment  of  a 
national  bank,  will  not  only  be  useful,  in  promoting  the  general  wel- 
fare, but,  that  it  is  necessary  and  proper^  for  carrying  into  execu- 
tion some  of  the  most  important  powers,  constitutionally  vested  in 
Congress.'* 