

To  those  acquainted  with  the  Congressional  history  of  that  period, 
it  is  perfectly  well  known,  that,  in  the  Senate,  there  was  not  a  ma* 
jority  against  the  renewal  of  the  charter,  on  constitutional  scni« 
pies.  In  the  House,  those  who  voted  against  its  renewal,  may  be 
divided  into  three  classes,  1st  Those,  who  denied  the  constitu- 
tional power  of  Congress ;  2d.  Those,  who  admitted  the  power,  and 
were  in  a  favor  of  a  national  bank,  but  were  indisposed  to  continue 
an  institution  under  the  control  of  their  political  opponents,  and  of 
which  foreigners  owned  much  the  greatest  part,  and  3d.  Those  who, 
without  questioning  the  power  of  Congress  on  this  subject,  gave  a 
preference  to  state  banks.  We  do  not  think,  that  those  of  the  first 
class,  constituted  a  majority  of  the  House,  who  voted  against  the  con* 
tinuance  of  the  charter. 

In  order  to  ascertain  the  various  reasons,  which  governed  those, 
who  constituted  this  small  majority,  it  is  necessary  to  consider,  that 
the  applicants  for  an  extension  of  the  important  privileges  of  banking, 
were  the  political  opponents  of  those,  who  were  cjilled  upon  to  grant 
them ;  and  it  cannot  be  strange,  that  this  should  have  influence  with 
some,  in  the  decii*ion  of  this  question,  even  among  those,  who  deem* 
ed  a  national  bank,  both  constitutional  and  expedient ;  and  that  they 
should  be  disposed  to  grant  these  privileges,  to  their  political  friends, 
rather  than  continue  them,  to  their  political  opponents.  Indeed,  in 
the  debates,  on  this  subject,  it  was  avowed,  that  the  same  party,  which 
opposed  the  original  grant,  must  oppose  the  renewal  of  that  grant. 
It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  also,  that,  before  tlie  final  decision  of  thia 
question  in  Congress,  the  legislatures  of  the  states  of  Massachusetts, 
Pennsylvania,  Virginia  and  Kentucky,  had  expressed  opinions  against 
the  renewal  of  the  charter ;  and  had  instructed  their  representatives 
in  Congress  to  vote  against  it  The  public  mind  generally,  was,  also, 
by  newspaper  publicstions,  not  a  little  excited  against  the  bank  and  its 
supporters.    Those,  who  belonged  to  the  party  then  in  power,  who 


^ 


4SSt 

were  in  favor  of  renewing  the  charter,  were  accused,  not  onl^  of 
lacy,  but  of  being  bribed  and  corrupted  by  the  bank  or  its  agents. 
Mr.  Crawford  of  the  Senate,  who,  as  chairman  of  the  commilteet 
reported,  to  that  body,  the  bill  before  alluded  to,  and  who  sap- 
ported  it  with  all  the  energies  of  his  powerful  mind,  thus  notices 
these  accusations.  *'  The  democratic  presses  in  these  great  states 
(referring  to  states  opposed  to  the  bank)  have,  for  more  than  twelve 
months  past,  teemed  with  the  most  scurrilous  abuse,  against  every 
member  of  Congress,  who  has  dared  to  utter  a  syllable,  in  favor  of  a 
renewal  of  the  bank  charter.  The  member  who  dares  to  give  his 
opinion,  in  fa?or  of  the  renewal  of  the  charter,  is  instantly  charged 
with  being  bribed,  by  the  agents  of  the  bank — with  being  corropl 
with  ha?ing  trampled  upon  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  peoph 
with  having  sold  the  sovereignty  of  the  United  States,  to  foreign  cap* 
italists — with  being  guilty  of  perjury,  by  having  violated  the  constitu- 
tion.** The  reader,  unacquainted  with  the  history  of  that  period,  os 
perusing  this,  by  itself,  wonld  suppose,  that  Mr.  Crawford  must  have 
referred  to  charges,  of  a  much  more  recent  date. 