

Soon  after  the  death  of  continental  money,  at  the  suggestion  of 
Robert  Morris,  superintendent  of  Finance,  Congress  established  a 
national  bank,  by  the  name  of,  **  The  President  and  Directors  of  tha 
Bank  of  North  America.**  This  institution  went  into  fuccessfnl  opa> 
ration  in  December,  1781,  with  a  capita]  of  only  f400X)00,  and  un* 
der  the  management  of  its  projector,  and  others  associated  with  hioit 
contributed,  as  far  as  its  limted  means  would  allow,  to  relieve  tha 
financial  distress  of  the  coontry,  at  that  period.    This  bank  is  still  in 


•  Holmes'  Annals. 


416 

operation  in  Philadelphia,  with  an  enlarged  capital,  and  under  •  new 
charter  from  the  Legislature  of  Pennsylvania ;  and  has  always  sus- 
tained the  eame  character  and  credit,  with  which  it  commenced 
business. 

Such  was  the  scarcity  of  money,  soon  after  the  peace  of  1783,  in 
consequence  of  the  depressed  state  of  American  commerce,  and  the 
want  of  an  efficient  national  government,  that  some  of  the  States  again 
resorted  to  paper  money,  and  tender  laws. — And  some  of  them,  in- 
deed, went  so  far,  as  to  make  personal  property  a  tender  in  payment 
of  private  debts, *at  the  apprisal  of  men,  to  be  selected  for  thai  pur- 
pose. These  extraordinary  remedies,  instead  of  relieving,  increased 
the  evils  complained  of;  and  contributed  not  a  little,  to  the  adoption 
of  the  present  constitution,  by  which,  the  States  themselves  were 
prohibited,  from  issuing  bills  of  credit,  or  making  any  thing  but  gold 
and  silver,  a  tender  in  payment  of  debts. 

The  only  banks  in  existence,  when  the  national  government  went 
into  operation,  were  the  bank  of  North  America  before  mentioned,  the 
bank  of  New  York,  situated  in  the  city  of  New  York,  and  the  bank  of 
Massachusetts,  in  Boston,  with  an  aggregate  capital  of  only,  about 
•%000,000. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  (Mr.  Hamilton,)  very  early  per- 
ceived, that  a  bank  established  by  national  authority,  was  necessary, 
in  the  management  of  the  finances  of  the  general  government.  He, 
therefore,  in  December,  1790,  recommended  to  Congress  the  estab- 
lishment of  such  an  institution.  Banks  had  existed  in  Europe,  for 
about  six  hundred  years.  The  first  was  established  at  Venice,  in 
1200,  when  that  famous  city  was  the  commercial  emporium  of  Europe. 
As  commerce  travelled  west,  banks  followed,  and  were  successively 
established,  at  Genoa,  Amsterdam  and  Hamburg,  long  the  centre  of 
the  commercial  transactions  of  the  Hanseatic  League — from  thence 
they  followed  commerce  to  England ;  and  have  since  been  established, 
with  more  or  less  success  in  France,  and  in  different  parts  of  conti- 
nental Europe. 