

The  benefits,  which  the  commercial  countries  of  that  quarter  of  the 
world,  had  experienced  from  institutions  of  this  kind,  as  well  as  the 
advantages  derived  from  the  bank  of  North  America,  induced  Con- 
gress, no  doubt,  to  comply  with  the  recommendation  of  Hamilton, 
and  to  establish  an  institution  of  a  similar  character,  by  the  name  of 
the  bank  of  the  United  States.  The  act  for  this  purpose,  was  passed, 
on  the  25th  day  of  February,  1791. 


417 

The  power  of  the  general  goTemment  to  establish  such  an  insti- 
lotioD  was  then  questioned  ;  and,  on  this  account,  the  measure  was 
op[>osed,  |>articularly  in  the  House  of  RepreaentatiFes.  President 
Washington,  requested  the  opinion  of  the  Attorney  General,  the  Sec- 
retary of  Slate,  and  the  SecreUry  of  the  Treasury,  in  writing,  as  to 
the  constitutionality  of  the  measure.  The  opinions  of  the  two  former, 
were,  in  the  negative,  and  that  of  the  latter,  in  the  affirmative,  on  this 
Dew  and  important  question  ;  and  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary  of  war, 
although  not  given  in  writing,  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury.  On  this  equal  division  of  his  Cabinet,  the  Presideol, 
after  mature  deliberation,  put  his  signature  of  approbation  to  the  biU. 

The  reasons  then  and  since  urged  for  and  against  this  constitutional 
power,  would  fill  volumes.  And  we  can  here  only  say,  in  general, 
that  the  advocates  for  a  national  bank,  urged,  that  it  was  the  **  necet- 
■ary  and  proper**  meanSt  of  carrying  into  execution,  other  substantive 
powers,  expressly  vested  in  Congress — giving  to  the  word  **  necessa- 
ry,*' as  used  in  the  constitution,  in  connection  with  the  word  **  proper,** 
the  meaning  of  requisite,  needful,  useful,  or  conducive  to.  The  oppo- 
nents however,  gave  a  mvck  more  limited  meaning  to  this  word, 
restricting  it  to  those  means  which  were  absolutely  necessary  in  order 
to  carry  into  effect  other  powers  granted  and  **  without  which  th€ 
grant  of  power  would  be  nugatory.^*  And  we  would  here  obserTe, 
that  the  bill  creating  this  institution,  passed  the  Senate,  with  great 
unanimity ;  and  that  the  votes  in  the  House,  were  thirty  nine  to  twen- 
ty ;  and  that  this  decision  was  not  strictly  according  to  the  parties 
then  known  by  the  name  of  federal  and  anti-federal,  as  some  of  the 
former  voted  against  the  bill,  and  some  of  the  latter  in  favor  of  it. 
Bot  Mr.  Jefferson  and  Mr.  Madison,  then  and  afterwards  leaders  of  the 
anti-federal  party,  were  strongly  opposed,  ou  constitutional  groirods. 

The  capital  of  the  bank  thus  established,  was  $10,000,000;  two 
millions  to  be  subscribed  by  the  United  States,  and  the  residue  by  in- 
dividuals. Two  millions  of  the  sum  subscribed  by  individuals,  was 
to  be  paid  in  specie,  and  six  millions  in  six  per  cent  stock  of  the 
United  States.  This  charter  was  to  continue  until  the  4th  of  March, 
1811,  and  in  the  mean  time,  no  other  bank  was  to  be  establislicd  bjr 
national  authority. 