

Some  brief  sketches  of  the  internal  coinmerce,  wealth  and  resoar- 
ces  of  the  United  States,  especially,  during  the  period  under  immedi- 
ate review,  will  now  be  presented  to  the  reader.  Our  riews,  how- 
ever,  on  this  important  part  of  political  economy,  will  be  confined  to 
the  subjects  of  Ist,  Banks,  2d,  Manufactures,  and  3d,  Internal  im- 
proveroent^,  of  different  kinds,  such  as  canals,  rail  roads,  steam  nari- 
gation,  dec. 

Banking  institutions,  which  will  be  the  subject  of  the  present 
chapter,  have  too  great  an  influence  and  bearing,  on  the  interna^  ai 
well  as  the  external  prosperity  of  this  country ;  and  particularly,  haa 
too  intimate  a  connexion  with  its  currency,  to  pass  unnoticed. 

Before  calling  the  attention  of  the  reader,  however,  to  the  origin* 
progress  and  eflfects  of  these  institutions,  especially  since  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  present  national  government,  we  beg  leave  to  remind 
him,  that  paper  money  of  some  description,  has  constituted,  in  this 
country,  a  great  proportion  of  its  currency  or  circulating  mediom, 
from  the  year  1690  to  the  present  time.  >VhiIe  under  the  guardian- 
ship of  the  parent  state,  this  paper  consisted  of  bills  of  credit*  as 
they  were  called,  issued  by  the  several  colonies ;  and  for  the  pajrment 
of  which,  the  faith  of  the  colonies  themselves,  was  pledged. 


i 


414 

These  bills  were  called  ia  by  taxes,  payable  at  different  periodiy 
and  were  not  only  made  receivable,  in  the  payment  of  those  taxes, 
and  of  all  debts  due  to  the  government  issuing  them  ;  but  were,  also, 
made  a  tender  in  payment  of  private  debts,  until  this  was  prohibited* 
by  act  of  Parliament. 

Massachusetts  led  the  way,  in  making  and  issuing  this  species  of 
paper  money. 

That  colony  incurred  expenses,  in  an  unfortunate  maritime  expe- 
dition against  Quebec  in  1690,  much  beyond  its  ordinary  means  of 
payment ;  and  to  meet  these  expenses,  resorted  to  the  expedient  of 
issuing  bills,  on  the  credit  of  the  colony.  This  was,  afterwards  foU 
lowed,  as  cases  of  emergency  arose,  by  most,  if  not  all  the  other  Brit- 
ish North  American  colonies. 

These  bills,  however,  became  less  valuable,  than  gold  and  silrer, 
in  each  colony,  where  they  were  issued.  In  New  England,  ibey 
were  valued  at  six  shillings  for  a  silver  dollar ;  and  at  this  rate,  were 
denominated  the  lawful  money  of  that  part  of  the  country — ^in  New 
York,  they  were  valued,  at  eight  shillings,  and  in  Pennsylvania,  seven 
shillings  and  six  pence,  for  a  dollar ;  and  hence  arose  the  different 
currencies,  in  these  several  colonies,  and  which  remain  to  the  present 
day ;  and  with  which,  many  of  the  people  are  now  more  famillart 
than  with  any  other. 