

The  plan  of  establishing  a  national  bank  at  Washington  had  lew 
advocates.  The  bill  for  the  renewal  of  the  charter  was  under  debete« 
for  several  days ;  and  a  motion  to  postpone  it  indefinitely,  being  vir- 
toally  a  rejection,  was  negatived  sixty  seven  to  forty  six ;  and  on  a 
question  to  strike  out  the  first  section  of  the  bill,  the  vote  stood,  yeas 
thirty  four,  and  nays  seventy  three.  The  bill  however,  was  aAer- 
wards  suffered  to  lie  upon  the  table,  and  was  not  further  acted  upon* 
during  that  session.  These  proceedings,  and  other  circumstances» 
shew,  that  a  majority  of  the  House,  was  not  then  prepared,  either  to 
adopt  or  reject  the  plan  proposed  by  Mr.  Gallatin,  or  by  the  Commit* 
tee ;  and  evince,  we  apprehend,  that  there  was  not  a  majority  in  the 
House,  against  a  national  bank,  upon  constitutional  grounds.  And 
we  would  observe,  that  in  addition  to  the  expressed  opinions  of  Mr* 
Gallatin,  on  this  point,  as  well  as  upon  the  expediency  of  a  national 
bank,  it  was  well  understood,  that  the  then  President,  (Mr.  Madison) 
although  originally  opposed  to  the  establishment  of  a  bank,  as  un* 
warranted  by  the  constitution,  considered  the  question  so  fully  settled, 
that  he  would  not  on  that  account  have  put  his  veto  to  a  bill  for  the 
renewal  of  the  charter,  had  such  been  presented  to  him. 

Early  in  the  next  session,  the  stockholders  preferred  a  new  peti- 
tion for  a  continuance  of  their  charter ;  and  which,  in  the  House,  was 
referred  to  a  large  committee,  consisting  of  one  from  a  state.  This 
committee,  on  the  4th  of  January,  1811,  reported  a  bill  in  favor  of  e 
renewal  of  the  charter,  not  materially  dififering  from  the  one,  on  the 
same  subject,  reported  the  previous  session,  and  to  which  we  hare 
before  alluded.  This  bill  was  debated  until  the  24th  of  January, 
when  the  same  was  disposed  of  by  an  indefinite  postponement,  by  e 
majority  of  one  only — sixty  five  in  the  affirmative  and  sixty  four  in 
negative.  As  the  charter  expired  on  the  4th  of  March  following,  this 
vote  was  decisive  in  the  House  against  its  renewal. 

Id  the  Senate,  the  petition  of  the  stockholders,  at  an  early  day  of 
the  session,  had  also  been  referred  to  a  committee ;  but  this  com- 
mittee did  not  act  upon  the  subject,  until  after  the  final  vote  of  the 
House  before  noticed.  On  the  6th  of  February,  this  committee  re- 
ported a  bill,  for  the  eontintiance  of  the  charter,  and  which  was  under 


-A 


4S1 

dcbttte,  until  the  90th  of  the  same  month,  when,  on  taking  the  queatioii 
upon  it,  the  rotes  were  equally  divided,  seventeen  in  the  affirmative 
and  seventeen  in  the  negative.  This  necessarily  threw  the  casting 
vote  upon  the  President  of  that  body,  (George  Clinton,)  who  gave 
his  vote,  in  the  negative,  upon  the  ground  of  the  unconstitutionality 
of  the  bill,  and  it  was,  of  course,  lost  The  bank,  therefore,  was 
obliged  to  wind  up  its  afiairs,  and  the  result  evinced,  that  they  had 
been  wisely  and  safely  managed,  so  far,  at  least,  as  the  interest  of  the 
stockholders  were  concerned ;  as  they  were  finally  paid  $10S(,  on 
each  $100  of  the  stock. 