

The  details  of  this  bill  again  became  subjects  of  serious  debate,  in 
the  House.  Its  opponents  urged,  that,  as  the  bank  was  to  commence 
operations,  with  a  small  amount  of  specie,  and  without  the  power  of 
selling  any  part  of  its  capital,  consisting  of  public  stock ;  and  was 
under  obligation,  to  loan  the  government  $30,000,000,  it  roust  neces- 
sarily be,  a  mere  paper  bank.  That  the  loans  to  government  must 
be,  in  bills  to  a  large  amount,  and  which,  would  immediately  retnni 
to  the  bank — and  the  bank,  having  no  means  of  paying  them,  most, 
of  course,  suspend  payment,  almost  as  soon  as  it  had  commenced  op- 
erations— that  these  bills  would  therefore  depreciate,  and  the  country 
would  then  have  a  depreciated  national  currency,  as  well  as  a  depre- 
ciated state  currency. 

Every  attempt,  however,  to  amend  the  bill,  so  as  to  make  it  a  spe- 
cie paying  bank,  was  unsuccessful,  the  House,  being,  on  some  of 
these  amendments,  about  equally  divided. 


485 

Oa  the  third  reading  of  the  bill,  a  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Web* 
ateft  to  recommit  it  to  a  select  committee,  with  special  instructions, 
to  amend  it  by  reducing  the  capital  to  $25,000,000,  by  striking  out 
4he  provisions  allowing  the  bank  to  suspend  specie  payments,  ma- 
king it  obligatory  on  the  bank  to  lend  money  to  the  government, 
and  prohibiting  it  from  selling  its  stock,  during  the  war.  In  support 
of  this  motion,  Mr.  Webster,  pointed  out  the  defects  of  the  bill,  aa  it 
eame  from  the  Senate,  and  the  ill  effects  it  must  necessarily  haye,  on 
the  credit  and  currency  of  the  country,  with  great  force  of  argument, 
and  with  not  a  little  sarcastic  severity.  **  The  loan  of  thirty  millions,** 
said  Mr.  Webster,  **  can  only  be  made  by  an  immediate  issue  of  bills 
to  that  amount.  If  tliese  bills  should  return,  the  bank  will  not  be 
able  to  pay  them.  This  is  certain  ;  and  to  remedy  this  inconveni- 
ence, power  is  given  to  the  directors,  by  the  act,  to  suspend,  at  their 
own  discretion,  the  payment  of  their  notes,  until  the  President  of  the 
United  States  shall  otherwise  order.  The  President  will  give  no 
snch  order,  because  the  necessities  of  government  will  compel  it,  to 
draw  on  the  bank,  till  the  bank  becomes  as  necessitous  as  itself.  In- 
deed, whatever  orders  may  be  given,  or  withheld,  it  will  be  utterly 
impossible  for  the  bank  to  pay  its  notes.  No  such  thing  is  expected 
from  it  The  first  note  it  issues,  will  be  dishonored  on  its  return* 
and  yet,  it  will  continue  to  poor  out  its  paper,  so  long,  aa  the  govern- 
ment can  apply  it,  in  any  degree,  to  its  purposes.** 

««  What  sort  of  an  institution  is  this  ?"    Mr.  Webster  asked,  «•  II 
looks  less  like  a  bank,  than  a  department  of  government.     It  will  be 
properly  the  paper  money  department     Its  capital  is  government 
debts  ;  the  amount  of  its  issues  will  depend  on  government  necessi- 
ties; government,  in  effect,  absolves  itself  from  its  own  debts  to  the 
bank,  and,  by  way  of  compensation,  absolves  the  bank  from  its  own 
contracts  with  others.   This,  indeed,  is  a  wonderful  scheme  of  finance. 
The  government  is  to  grow  rich,  because  it  is  to  borrow  without  obli- 
gation of  repaying  ;  and  i^o  borrow  of  a  bank,  which  issues  paper, 
without  liability  to  redeeflnt    If  this  bank,  like  other  institutions, 
which  dull  and  plodding  common  sense  has  created,  were  to  pay  its 
debts,  it  must  have  some  limits  to  its  issues  of  paper ;  therefore, 
there  would  be  a  point,  beyond  which,  it  could  not  make  loans  to 
government    This  would  fall  short  of  the  wishes  of  the  eontrirera 
of  this  system.    They  provide  for  an  unlimited  issue  of  paper  in  en- 
tire exemption  from  payment    They  found  the  bank,  in  the  first 
place,  on  the  discredit  of  government,  and  then  hope,  to  enrich  for* 
emment  out  of  the  insolvency  of  their  bank.     With  them,  poverty 