

A  bill  was  afterwards  submitted  to  the  House,  substantially,  in  ac- 
eordance  with  the  above  plan.  All  parties  in  Congress  seemed  then 
in  fsvor  of  a  national  bank,  with  the  exception  of  a  few,  who  still  en- 
tertained constitutional  objections. 

Serious  difierences  of  opinions,  however,  existed,  as  to  some  of  the 
principles,  on  which  such  a  bank,  should  be  established.  The  great 
points  of  difi*erence  were,  as  to  the  amount  of  capital,  and  whether  it 
should  chiefly  consist  of  six  per  cent  public  stock  already  usued^  or 
of  treasury  notes  thereafter  to  be  issued — whether  the  United  States 
should  hold  stock  in  it,  and  have  an  agency  in  its  management— 
whether  the  bank  should  be  bound  to  loan  tlie  government,  $30,000,000v 
when  required,  and  be  prohibited  from  selling  public  stock,  during  the 
continuance  of  the  war ;  and  whether,  it  should  have  power,  to  sus- 
pend specie  payments.  These  subjects  were,  for  many  days,  debated, 
with  great  zeal  and  warmth,  and  many  plans  were  suggested,  through 
the  aid  of  a  national  bank,  to  relieve  the  country  irom  the  evils  it  ex- 
perienced from  a  depreciated  currency,  and  from  its  difficulties  in  pro- 
curing loans. 


434       ^-"    ,..^'-     ••■ 


Mr.  Calhoun  proposed,  that  the  capital  shoal^  consist  of  90,000^000^ 
in  specie,  and  $44,000,000,  in  treasury  nutes,  to.  be  thereafter  issued, 
and  which  might  be  paid,  in  six  per  cent  stociSuind  sold  at  the  picaih 
Qre  of  the  bank — that  the  United  States  shoula  not  be  a  stockholdert 
or  have  any  agency  in  the  management  of  the -institution — thai  il 
should  not  be  bound  to  make  loans  to  the  goyernment,  nor  have  power 
to  suspend  specie  payments.  Afler  much  debate  and  dirision,  the 
bill  was  amended  so  as  to  embrace  substantially,  the  above  proposi- 
tions of  Mr.  Calhoun;  and  finally,  the  capital  was  redoced,  to 
$30,000,000.  The  bill  thus  amended,  did  not  meet  the  approbatioo 
of  the  treasury  department,  nor  that  of  a  majority  of  the  House,  and 
was  negatived. 

Soon  after  this,  a  bill,  for  a  national  bank,  in  accordance  with  the 
plan,  proposed  by  the  secretary  of  the  treasury,  was  passed  by  the 
Senate,  and  sent  to  the  House.  This  bill  contained  a  clause,  empew- 
ering  the  bank,  to  suspend  specie  payments,  in  case,  during  the  war, 
or  one  year  after,  there  should  be  such  a  demand  for  gold  and  silver, 
as  to  "  induce  a  reasonable  and  probable  belief,"  that  it  was  intended 
to  be  exported,  so  as  to  endanger  the  specie  capital  of  the  bank,  and 
of  the  country ;  or  to  be  wilfully  withdrawn  from  circulation,  so  as 
to  embarrass,  obstruct  and  discredit,  the  pecuniary  transactions  of  the 
people  and  the  government,  as  well  as  the  bank  itself;  or  should  be 
demanded  in  consequence  of  a  wilful  accumulation  of  bills  of  the 
bank,  with  the  intention  of  destroying  the  credit  of  the  institulioD* 
The  President  of  the  United  States  was  to  have  power  to  direct  the 
bank  to  resume,  or  continue  to  suspend  specie  payments,  as  he  might 
deem  expedient. 