

•  See  Mr.  CrawfordV  Report  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  January 
ltth,l8Qa 


f 


438 

iiyf  or  dispotitioD,  still  declined  paying  specie ;  and  a  depreciatioii,  to  a 
greater  extent  than  before,  followed.  The  bank?,  indeed,  had  an  la- 
*  terest  in  keeping  out  their  bills,  as  long  as  possible,  as  their  dirideodi 
were  thereby  increased.  In  the  spring  and  summer  of  1B10»  aboat 
fifteen  or  sixteen  manths  after  the  arrival  of  the  news  of  peaeet  the 
discount  at  Baltimore  was  20  per  cent,  at  Philadelphia  from  15  lo  IT* 
at  New  York,  12^,  and  at  some  other  places,  it  reached  25  per  cent 
The  debts  due  to  the  United  States,  as  well  as  the  vast  amount  of  rev- 
enue>  arising  from  the  immense  importations  subsequent  to  the  peace, 
could  only  be  paid  in  this  depreciated  paper.  The  government  wm 
under  the  necessity  of  taking  this,  or  nothing;  although,  by  law,  since 
the  dissolution  of  the  national  bank,  gold  and  silver  were  alone  receiva- 
ble in  payment.  Indeed,  the  general  government,  was,  in  this  ra> 
•pect,  entirely  in  the  power  of  the  state  banks,  as  it  had  no  legal  con- 
trol over  them ;  and,  without  their  aid,'  gold  and  silver,  could  not  be 
brought  into  general  circulation. 

In  ihis  unequal  and  disordered  state  of  the  currency,  the  secretary 
of  the  treasury,  in  making  payments,  in  different  parts  of  the  United 
States,  so  as  to  do  justice  to  all  the  public  officers  and  creditors,  bad 
to  encounter  difficulties,  almost  insurmountable.  During  the  years 
1815  and  1816,  he  made  attempts  to  unite  the  state  banks,  in  resum- 
ing specie  payments,  but  without  success. 

This  inequality  in  the  value  of  bills  received  in  the  different  states, 
in  payment  of  the  revenues,  produced,  in  reality,  an  inequality  in  the 
burden  of  taxes ;  and  was,  su  far,  a  violation  of  that  part  of  the  con- 
stitution, which  requires,  that  '*  all  duties,  imposts  and  excises,  shall 
be  uniform  throughout  the  United  States."  Of  this,  the  states,  whose 
currency  was  sound,  had  great  reason  to  complain. 

To  remedy  these  evils  Congress,  as  before  noticed,  in  April,  1810, 
established  a  national  bank.  Time,  however,  was  requisite,  for  the 
organization  of  this  institution,  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  effect  the  ob- 
ject, fift  which  it  had  beeif  created.  As  a  preliminary  step  towards  a 
return  to  specie  payments.  Congress,  soon  afler  the  establishment  of 
the  bank,  directed  the  secretary  of  the  treasury,  to  adopt  such  meaa- 
nres,  as  he  might  deem  necessary,  to  cause  the  revenues  to  be  collected 
in 'the  leg^l  currency  of  the  United  States;  and  gave  him  positiTe 
directions,' after  the^Mhh  of  January,  1817,  to  receive  nothing  in  pay- 
ment, but  the  legal  currency  of  the  United  States,  or  treasury  notes, 
or  notes  of  the  national  bank,  or  notes  of  banks,  which  were  paid  in 
specie,  on  demand.  The  new  bank  of  the  United  States,  did  not 
commence  operationis  until  January,  1817 ;  and  soon  afler,  in  pur- 