

64 


/ 


4S6 

itvelf  is  the  main  source  of  supply,  and  bankruptcy  a.  mine  of  iaez- 
haostible  treasure.  They  rely,  not  in  the  ability  of*  the  bank,  but  ai 
its  beggary  ;  nut  in  gold  and  silver  collected  in  its  vaults,  to  psty  ita 
debts,  and  fulfil  its  promises,  but  in  its  locks  and  barsf  provided  by 
statute,  to  fasten  its  doors,  against  the  solicitations  and  clamors  of 
importunste  creditors.  Such  an  institution,  they  flatter  themselvesy 
will  not  only  be  able  to  sustain  itself,  but  buoy  up,  the  sinking  credit 
of  the  government.  A  bank,  which  does  not  pay,  is  to  guaranty  the 
engagements  of  a  government,  which  does  not  pay !  John  Doe  is  to 
become  security,  for  Richard  Roe.  Thus  the  empty  vaults  of  tkm 
Treasury,  are  to  be  filled,  from  the  equally  empty  vaults  of  the  bank; 
and  the  ingenious  invention  of  a  partnership  of  insolventSf  is  to  re- 
store and  reestablish  the  credit  of  both." 

The  moHon  of  Mr.  Webster  did  not  prevail ;  and  on  the  passage  of 
the  bill,  the  votes  stood  81,  in  the  affirmative,  and  80,  in  the  negative ; 
and  the  speaker,  (Mr.  Cheeves,)  being  opposed  to  tlie  bilU  gave  his 
vote  in  the  negative,  in  consequence  of  which,  the  votes  being  equal, 
die  bill  was  lost. 

The  speaker  was,  indeed,  placed  in  a  most  trying  situation.  Al- 
though a  supporter  of  the  administration,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  de- 
clare his  own  convictions,  that  it  was  a  measure,  **  dangerous,  anez« 
ampled,  and  of  almost  desparate  resort.''  In  briefly  examining  the 
views  of  those,  who  advocated  the  passage  of  the  bill,  as  calculated 
to  resuscitate  public  credit^  to  establish  a  circulating  medium,  and  to 
afford  the  ways  and  means,  for  the  support  of  government,  the  speak- 
er expressed  his  solemn  belief,  that  neither  of  these  purposes,  could 
be  answered  by  it.  He,  at  the  same  time,  expressed  an  opinion, 
that  a  national  bank  bill  might  be  framed,  which  would  unite  a 
jority  in  its  favor.  The  bill  was  reconsidered  the  next  day,  and 
ferred  to  a  select  committee,  who,  soon  after,  reported  the  same,*  with 
Mnendments,  reducing  the  capital  to  $30,000,000,  to  consist  of 
5,000,000  in  specie,  16,000,000  in  Treasury  notes,  and  10,000,000 
in  stock  of  the  United  States,  issued  since  the  dealaration  of  war, 
with  a  reservation  of  a  right  in  the  United  States,  to  subcribe  an  ad- 
ditional 5,000,000,  payable  in  4  per  cent  stock.  Other  important 
amendments  were,  also,  proposed  by  the  committee,  partieularly,  by 
striking  out  the  Clauses,  relating  to  a  compulsory  loan,  and  the  power 
of  suspending  specie  payments.  These  amendments  were  substantially 
agreed  to,  in  ihe  House,  and  the  bill  thus  amended,  was  passed  by  a 
large  majority,  190  to  37 ;  and  was  finally  concurred  in  by  the  Senato. 