


4S1 

This!  bill,  it  is  well  known,  was  returned  by  the  President,  with  hit 
objections.  These  objcctioif^  however,  were  not  founded  upon  the 
question  of  constitutional  power, — a  question,  which  the  President  ex* 
pressly  waived,  as  being  fully  settled  ;  but,  because,  in  his  opinioOt 
it  was  not  calculated  '*  to  answer  the  purposes  of  reviving  pnbHe 
credit,  of  providing  a  national  medium  of  circulation,  and  of  aiding 
.the  treasury,  by  facilitating  the  indispensable  anticipations  of  the 
revenue,  and  by  affording  to  the  public  more  durable  loans.*'  The 
bill,  not  being  repassed  by  two  thirds  of  the  Senate,  to  which  it  waa 
returned,  did  not  become  a  law.  A  national  bank,  however,  seemed 
the  only  resource  left,  to  restore  public  credit,  and  enable  govern- 
ment  to  prosecute  the  war ;  the  Senate  therefore  immediately  paa« 
'ted  another  bill,  substantially  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  the  Hee* 
retary  of  the  Treasury ;  and  which  was  sent  to  the  H6use,  on  the 
13th  of  February,  1815,  and  would,  no  doubt,  have  then  passed,  bnt 
for  the  arrival  of  the  news  of  peace.  At  the  very  moment,  when  the 
question  was  to  be  taken,  on  the  passage  of  the  bill,  the  mail  arrived 
from  New  York,  bringing  a  letter  to  one  of  the  members  put  in  at 
the  mail  was  closing,  informing  him,  that  a  rumor  had  just  reached 
the  city  of  a  vessePs  being  at  the  Hook,  bringing  news  of  peace. 
The  House,  apprized  of  this,  immediately  adjourned  without  taking 
the  question  ;  and  the*  next  day,  the  news  being  confirmed,  the  hill 
itself,  on  motion  of  Mr.  Lowndes,  was  postponed  indefinitely ;  and 
the  subject  of  a  bank,  was  no  farther  agitated,  during  the  remaining 
short  period  of  the  session. 

This  imporUnt  subject  was,  however,  brought  to  the  notice  of  the 
National  Legislature,  early  in  its  next  session,  both  by  the  President 
of  the  United  States,  and  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treatnry.  The 
former,  in  his  opening  message,  referring  to. a  modification  of  the 
taxes,  on  the  return  ^of  peace,  says — **  It  is,  however,  essential  to 
every  modification  of  the  finances,  that  the  benefits  of  an  nnifom 
national  currency,  shoold  be  restored  to  the  community.  The  ah* 
sence  of  the  precious  metals,  will,  it  is  believed  6e  a  temporary  evil ; 
but,  until  they  can  again  be  rendered  the  general  medium  of  ex- 
change, it  devolves  on  the  wisdom  of  Congress,  to  provide  a  snbtli- 
tute,  which  shall  equally  engage  the  confidence,  and  .accommodate 
the  wants  of  the  citizens  throughout  the  Union.  If  the  operation  of 
the  state  banks,  cannot  produce  this  result,  the  probable  operation  of 
a  national  bank,  will  merit  consideration  ;^*  dec. 