


488 

•oaDta  of  a  matoal  arnmgeiDent  between  this  bank,  anu  the  stale 
banks  of  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Baltimore  and  Virginia,  specie  pay- 
ments were  resumed. 

The  erils  experienced,  from  depreciated  bank  paper,  daring  the 
late  war,  and  for  so  long  a  period  after  its  conclusion ;  and  the  proba- 
bility of  a  recurrence  of  the  same  evils,  in  future,  in  consequence  of 
the  multiplication  of  banks,  and  of  their  frequent  failures ;  have  led 
some  to  question  the  policy,  of  depending  upon  banks,  to  supply  the 
country  with  a  circuiting  medium ;  and  to  suggest,  whether  the  Uni- 
led  States,  like  Frsnce,  ought  not  to  depend  on  the  precious  metab 
alone,  for  their  currency.  It  cannot  be  denied,  that  the  evils  arisiiig 
from  a  depreciated  hank  paper,  and  from  the  failure  of  state  banks* 
have  been  great.  From  January  1st,  1811,  to  July  1st,  1830,  no  less 
than  one  hundred  snd  sixty  five  state  banks,  either  failed,  or  discon- 
tinued their  business,  having  an  aggregate  capital  of  about  thir^ 
millions  of  dollars.  These  failures  took  place  in  almost  every  state 
and  territory ;  in  Maine  eight,  Massachusetts  six*  Rhode  Island  two» 
New  Hampshire  two,  Connecticut  two.  New  York  ten.  New  Jersey 
seven,  Pennsylvania  nineteen,  Delaware  one,  Maryland  nine,  Distrkt 
of  Columbia  four,  Virginia  ten,  North  Carolina  two.  South  Carolioa 
two,  Georgia  one,  Louisiana  two,  Alabama  three,  Tennessee  four,  and 
five  branches,  Kentucky  forty  three,  Ohio  twenty,  Indiana  two,  Illi- 
nois two,  Missouri  two,  and  Michigan  one.* 

In  the  vaults  of  the  banks,  which  failed,  the  government  had  aboni 
$1,390,707;  the  greatest  part  of  which  it  will  lose;  but  the  loss  to 
individuals,  amounted  to  many  millions ;  and  unfortunately,  a  great 
share  of  it  fell  upon  the  widow  and  the  orphan,  whose  property  had 
been  vested,  or  deposited,  in  these  institutions. 

These  failures  originated  from  various  causes,  principally,  how- 
ever, from  too  great  a  multiplication  of  banks,  in  placea  not  adapt- 
ed to  the  proper  and  regular  banking  business — from  improvidani 
discounts,  and  from  overissues;  and  this  took  place,  in  many  in- 
stances, from  ignorance  of  the  nature  and  operation  of  banks,  and 
the  principles  of  banking ;  and  in  others,  no  doubt,  with  the  fraud- 
ulent design  of  gain,  at  the  expense  of  the  public  and  of  individoab. 

To  follow  the  example  of  France,  might,  perhapa  be  more  safe  for 
the  community,  especially  in  times  of  great  commercial  or  poUtieal 
embarrassment ;  but  we  spprehend,  that,  in  a  new  country,  like  thai 

•  q>ll>rtn  00  ih»  Ounacf. 
66 


434 

of  the  United  States,  where  capital  is  so  much  wanted,  and  for  to 
many  yeai^  will  be  wanted,  the  benefits  arising  from  institutions  of  this 
kind,  will  over  balance  the  evils;  and  that  banks,  when  properly  used, 
will  continue  to  be  highly  advantageous.  We  say,  when  properly 
used,  for  the  disadvantages  of  institutions  of  this  kind,  arise  from  tke 
ftbase  of  them. 