

We  consider  it,  as  long  since  settled,  that  paper  of  some  kind,  most, 
to  a  great  degree,  constitute  the  medium  of  exchange,  in  all  commer- 
cial countries,  like  the  United  States.  •  And  it  is  difficult  to  see,  how 
the  great  revenues  of  the  government,  can  be  well  collected  and  dia- 
iributed,  throughout  this  extensive  country ;  or  how  the  money  con- 
eems,  arising  out  of  its  vast  agricultural,  commercial  and  manufactnr- 
iag  interests,  can  be  well  managed,  without  the  aid  of  some  kind  of  pa- 
per, to  be  used  as  a  medium  of  exchange.  That,  bills  issued  by  bankit 
under  proper  management,  constitute  a  general  medium  of  exchange, 
more  convenient  and  advantagous,  than  any  other  kind  of  paper,  seems 
now  to  be  generally  admitted. 

The  people  of  the  United  States,  therefore,  must  take  banks,  for 
better  or  for  worse — and  the  exertions  of  all  those,  who  are,  or  may 
be,  entrusted  with  the  creation  or  management  of  them,  should  be 
directed  to  secure  the  good  they  are  calculated  to  produce,  and  to 
prevent  the  evils  to  which  they  are  liable. 

The  great  and  prominent  evil  of  banks  of  circulation,  has  been, 
that  of  over  issues,  or  issues  of  notes  beyond  their  legitimate  and 
proper  demand,  as  a  medium  of  exchange.  To  prevent  this,  varions 
regulations  have  been  made,  by  some  of  the  states.  In  New  England, 
New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  Georgia,  and  probably  some  oth- 
ers, the  banks  or  the  most  of  them,  are  obliged  to  present  annual 
statements  of  their  situation.  These  statements  are  to  contain  the 
amount  of  the  capital  of  each  bank,  its  bills  in  circulation,  its 
depositSt  and  the  specie  in  its  vaults,  at  the  time  of  such  statement 
— and  to  prevent  any  deception,  by  a  previous  preparation,  for  such 
an  exhibit  of  their  jiffairs,  in  Massachusetts,  the  time  for  making 
such  statement  is  not  precisely  known,  but  it  roust  be  made  at  any 
time,  when  called  for,  by  the  governor  and  council ;  and  in  New 
York,  an  examination  of  the  banks  themselves  is  to  be  made  by  spe- 
eial  commissioners,  appointed  for  that  purpose,  who  make  their  an- 
nual report  to  the  legislature. 

Such  statements,  from  all  the  banks  in  the  United  States,  woald 
be  highly  useful,  not  merely  to  the  state  or  place,  where  such  banks 
are  located,  but  to  the  country  generally.    They  would  afford  greater 


435 

security  to  all  men  iii  business,  against  impoaition,  from  bills  of  dis> 
tant  bank«,  of  whose  solidity,  they  can  now  have  no  knowledge. 

They  would,  also,  enable  the  economist  and  statesman,  to  ascertain, 
with  an  accuracy,  not  now  attainable,  the  amount  of  the  circulation 
and  currency  of  this  extensive  country ;  and  to  see,  what  proportion  of 
this  currency  consisted  in  bills,  and  what  in  specie.  In  addition  to 
this,  it  would  furnish  data,  by  which  the  legislatures  of  every  state, 
would  be  able  to  form  a  better  judgment,  ai  to  the  wisdom  or  policy 
of  extending  banking  institutions. 