

66 


eessora,  (Mr.  Madison,)  on  the  sam/subject  The  part  of  the  Teto 
•age  alluded  to,  says :  **  It  is  maintained  by  the  advocates  of  the  Imak, 
that  its  constitutionality,  in  all  its  features,  ought  to  be  considered  ae 
Mettled  by  precedent^  and  by  the  decision  of  the  supreme  court.  To 
this  conclusion  I  cannot  assent  Mere  precedent  is  a  dangerow 
source  of  authority,  and  should  not  be  regarded  as  deciding  qaeetions 
of  constitutional  power,  except  when  the  CLcquieacence  of  the  people 
and  the  states  can  be  considered  as  well  settled.  So  far  from  this 
being  the  case,  on  this  subject,  an  argument  against  the  bank  might 
be  based  on  precedent.  One  Congress  in  1791,  decided  in  favor  of  a 
bank;  another  in  1811  decided  against  it.  One  Congress  in  181&» 
decided  against  a  bank;  another,  in  1816,  decided  in  favor.  Prior  to 
the  present  Congress,  therefore,  the  precedents  drawn  from  th&t  source 
were  equal.  If  we  resort  to  the  states,  the  expressions  of  legislative* 
judicial  and  executive  opinions  against  the  bank,  have  been,  probably^ 
to  those  in  its  favor,  as  four  to  one.  There  is  nothing,  in  precedent, 
therefore,  which,  if  its  authority  were  admitted,  ought  to  weigh  in 
favor  of  the  act  before  roe.'' 

To  those  acquainted  with  the  Congressional  history  of  the  peri- 
ods, above  referred  to,  these  declarations,  in  a  public  document,  from 
the  chief  magistrate,  must  appear  strange,  indeed. 

The  message  declares,  that,  in  the  years  1811  and  1815,  Congress 
decided  against  a  bank,  on  the  ground  of  its  unconstitutionality,  (and 
if  this  is  not  the  meaning,  it  has  no  meaning,  applicable  to  the  point 
there  controverted,)  and,  therefore,  as  to  precedents,  they  were  equaL 
Had  the  President  consulted  the  executive  papers,  then  in  his  pos- 
session, he  would  have  found,  that  Congress,  so  far  from  deciding 
against  a  bank,  in  1815,  actually  sent  to  the  President,  a  bill  establish- 
ing a  bank,  as  we  have  before  stated,  and  that  the  then  President,  (Mr. 
Madison,)  in  returning  it,  expressly  waived  all  constitutional  objec- 
tions ;  declaring  that  question  completely  settled.  On  this  point,  the 
language  of  his  message  is,  **  Waiving  the  question  ef  the  constiiu' 
tional  authority  of  the  Legislature  to  establish  an  incorporated  bajsk* 
as  being  precluded,  in  my  judgment,  by  repeated  recognitions,  under 
varied  circumstances,  of  the  validity  of  such  an  institution,  in  acts  of 
legislative,  executive  and  judicial  branches  of  the  government,  accom- 
panied, by  indications,  in  different  modes,  of  a  concurrence  of  the 
general  will  of  the  nation  ;  the  proposed  bank  does  not  appear  to  be 
calculated  to  answer  the  purposes  of  reviving  the  public  credit,  of  pro- 
viding a  national  medium  of  circulation,  and  of  aiding  the  treasury, 
by  facilitating  the  indispensable  anticipations  of  the  revenues  and  by 
affording  to  the  public  more  durable  loans.** 