


\ 


9  440 

doubt.  It  has  afforded  aid,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  to  the 
chant,  the  manufacturer,  and  the  agriculturalist ;  and  thereby  contrib- 
uted to  the  advancement  of  the  internal  as  well  as  external  resonrca 
of  the  country.  One  of  the  great  objects  for  which  it  was  establitflied, 
and  which  is  of  common  benefit,  has  been  accomplished — it  has  m- 
dered  and  continued  the  currency  as  uniform,  as  any  currency  coBr 
sisting  of  paper  can  be.  The  aids  it  has  afforded  the  loerchaot  ud 
the  manufacturer,  by  loans,  and  by  furnishing  facilities  for  ibreiga 
and  domestic  remittances,  are  too  common  and  too  well  knowo  to  be 
I  here  noticed.  Nor  should  it  be  forgotten,  that  this  institution  haii 
I  also,  furnished  the  East  India  and  China  merchant,  with  a  crecBt 
j  in  Europe,  and  thereby  saved  him  the  necessity  of  carrjring  so  mocii 
specie  to  those  distant  markets ;  and  the  public  has  been  tfaerefaj 
relieved  from  embarrassments,  sometimes  occasioned,  by  a  auddoi 
demand  of  millions  of  dollars,  for  exportation  to  those  countries. 

The  charter  of  the  present  national  bank,  expires  on  the  3d  day  of 
March,  1836 ;  and  we  cannot  but  consider  it,  as  one  of  the  most  un- 
fortunate occurrences  in  the  financial  history  of, this  country^  that 
such  a  difference  of  opinion  should  exist,  between  the  different 
branches  of  the  general  government,  not  merely,  whether  this  par- 
ticular bank  shall  be  continued ;  but  whether,  after  the  expiration  of 
its  charter,  any  national  bank  whatever,  shall  exist  in  this  country. 
Whether  the  present  bank  shall  be  reestablished,  is  a  question,  com- 
paratively, of  little  moment ;  but  whether,  after  the  3d  of  March, 
1836,  any  other  bank  of  a  national  character  shall  be  established,  is  a 
question  of  great  and  vital  importance  to  the  union. 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  this  question,  was  brought.*^  to  the 
deliberate  consideration  of  the  legislature  and  people,"  in  the  message 
of  the  President  to  Congress,  in  December,  1829.  Referring  to  the 
national  bank,  the  message  declared,  that  "  both  the  constitutionaUig 
and  expediency  of  the  law  creating  this  bank,  are  well  questioned^  by 
a  large  portion  of  our  fellow  citizens ;  and  it  must  be  admitted  by 
all,''  the  message  added,  "  that  it  had  failed  in  the  great  end  of  estab- 
lishing a  uniform  and  sound  currency,*^  This  declaration  created 
no  little  surprise,  in  the  minds  of  all  who  had  made  themselves  ac- 
quainted with  the  nature  and  benefit  of  banking  operations ;  and  par- 
ticularly, with  the  effects  produced  by  the  bank  in  question,  on  the 
currency  of  the  United  States.  The  regulation  of  the  currency  of  a 
nation,  is  one  of  the  highest  and  most  important  acts  of  sovereignty; 
and  at  the  same  time,  is  one  of  the  greatest  delicacy  and  difficulty, 
especially  when  it  consists  wholly  or  chiefly,  of  paper.  In  this 
country,  this  high  and  delicate  power  is  vested  in  Congress. 