


•  Blc  CuUoch. 


438 

receiving  them  ;  and  he  is,  also,  at  liberty,  to  repay  in  such  smnt*  and 
at  such  times,  as  may  be  convenient  for  him. 

These  arcoants  are  settled  half  yearly  or  yearly,  and  the  balance 
struck  ;  and  this  balance  carried  to  a  new  account;  and  the  origiiiAl 
bond  still  stands  security,  for  this  balance,  and  other  advances* 

By  this,  it  will  be  perceived,  that  a  great  proportion  of  the  actual 
capital  of  that  country,  which  would  otherwise  lie  idle  and  unproduc- 
tive, is  accumulated  in  the  hands  of  skilful  and  prudent  trustees,  no* 
der  whose  management,  it  becomes  active,  and  contributes  to  the  ad- 
vancement of  the  manufacturing  and  agricultural,  as  well  as  the  com- 
mercial interests  of  Scotland. 

By  thuti  doing  "business,  on  the  actual  capital  of  the  country,  fewer 
bank  notes  are  required ;  and  the  amount  of  these,  as  before  stated*  in 
1825,  did  not  exceed  about  $15,000,000.  The  banks  exchange  notes 
twice  a  week,  and  for  this  purpose,  have  agents  at  Edinburgh, 
where  these  exchanges  are  made,  and  the  balances  paid. 

The  Scotch  banks  have  been  as  profitable  to  the  share-holders,  as 
they  have  been  beneficial  to  the  public.  The  shares,  in  the  bank  of 
Scotland,  originally  £83  68.  Sd.  steriing,  sold  for  £200,  in  1826— the 
Royal  bank,  with  a  capiuil  of  £1,500,000,  divided  annually  £150,000 
and  the  British  Linen  Company,  having  paid  back  their  capital,  being 
£50D,000,  divide  9  per  cent — And  some  of  the  private  banks,  partic- 
ularly, that  of  Aberdeen,  has  been,  it  is  said,  still  more  profitable  to 
the  partners. 

We  would  here  ask,  whether  some  of  the  banks  of  the  United 
States,  could  not,  also,  pay  interest  on  deposits,  and  give  catih  creditSf 
in  the  manner  of  the  Scotch  banks.  The  trust  companies,  lately  es- 
tablished in  the  United  States,  by  paying  low  interest  on  deposits, 
and  loaning  them,  at  a  higher  rate,  have  been  profitable  to  the  stock- 
holders. We  perceive,  indeed,  by  the  returns,  that  the  banks  in 
Massachusetts,  pay  interest  on  $7,949|940,  of  their  deposits. 

The  national  bank,  at  the  beginning,  had  not  only  to  encounter,  the 
difficulties,  arising  from  a  disordered  currency ;  but,  had  also,  as  &r  as 
possible,  to  provide  against  similar  difficulties  in  future. 

With  this  view,  the  Directors  deemed  it  necessary  to  procure  from 
abroad,  a  large  amount  of  specie ;  and  for  this  purpose,  sent  a  special 
agent  to  Europe ;  and  from  July  30th,  1817,  to  December,  1818,  thera 
was  imported,  for  the  use  of  this  institution,  $7,311,750,  in  specie,  at 
an  expense,  including  loss  of  interest  and  premium,  of  $525,277.  In 
addition  to  this,  during  the  year  1817  and  1818,  a  scheme  of  stock 
jobbing  was  devised  and  carried  on,  in  the  shares  of  the  bank,  highly 