


448 

After  Mr.  Madison  had  retired^rom  public  life,  and  had  an  oppor* 
lonity  of  calmly  reviewing  his  former  opinions,  he  fully  confirmed 
those  he  had  given,  in  his  message,  above  referred  to.  This  was  donet 
in  a  letter  to  an  individual*  now  before  the  public,  dated  Jan.  25th« 
1831 ;  in  which,  after  stating,  that  precedents,  expounding  the  con* 
•titution,  should  guide,  and  overrule  individual  opinions ;  and  after 
referring  to  the  Various  precedents,  in  relation  to  the  present  ques- 
tion, he  says,  **  It  was  in  conformity  with  the  Tiews  here  taken  of  the 
respect  due  to  deliberate  and  reiterated  precedents^  that  the  bank  of 
the  United  States,  though,  on  the  original  question  held  to  be  uncon« 
stitutional,  received  the  Executive  signature  in  1817,*'  (meaning  1610.) 

**  The  act  originally  establishing  a  bank,  had  undergone  ample  dia- 
cossions,  in  its  passage  through  the  several  branches  of  the  govern* 
inent.  It  had  been  carried  into  execution,  throughout  a  period  of 
twenty  years,  with  annual  legitdative  recognitions ;  in  one  instancet 
Indeed,  with  a  positve  ramification  of  it  into  a  new  state,  and  with 
the  entire  acquiescence  of  all  the  local  authorities,  as  well  as  the 
nation  at  large ;  to  all  of  which  may  be  added,  a  decreasing  pros- 
pect of  any  change  in  the  public  opinion  adverse  to  the  constitution- 
ality of  such  an  institution.  A  veto  from  the  Executive,  under  these 
circumstances,  with  an  admission  of  the  expediency  and  almost  ns- 
eessity  of  the  measure,  would  have  been  a  defiance  of  all  the  obliga- 
tions derived  from  a  course  of  precedents^  amounting  to  the  requisite 
evidence  of  the  national  judgment  and  intention^" 

Mr.  Madison  was  President  of  the  United  States,  in  1811,  and  1815 
and  1816;  and  had  the  best  means  of  information,  in  relation,  not 
only,  to  the  views  and  opinions  of  Congress,  on  this  great  questioDv 
but,  also,  as  to  those  of  the  local  authorities,  and  of  the  nation  at 
large ;  and  indeed,  called  upon  officislly  to  act,  on  this  question,  it 
became  his  duty,  to  examine  into  precedents,  and  to  ascertain  the 
sense  of  the  nation  in  regard  to  them.  If  then,  a  question  of  consti- 
tutional law,  is  ever  to  be  settled,  by  precedent  and  acquiescence,  the 
declaration  and  decision  of  the  chief  magirtrate,  under  these  circum- 
stances, must  be  entitled  to  peculiar  weight.  Can  it  fail,  thereforst 
to  excite  surprise,  that  after  another  precedent  had  been  added  and 
acquiesced  in,  for  nearly  twenty  years  more,  a  successor  of  Mr.  Mad- 
ison, should  declare,  that,  so  far  as  the  acts  of  the  general  govern- 
ment were  concerned,  the  precedents  were  equal ;  and  that,  as  to  ths 