


•  Charles  J.  iDgersoU,  Esq. 


444 


local  aothorities,  thej  were,  m  ft^lirto  one,  against  the  eonetitoiioftal- 
ity  of  a  national  bank. 

And,  above  all,  must  it  not  appear  strange,  that  his  saccessor  ahoiiM 
declare,  that,  in  1815,  Congreiis  not  only  decided  against  a  bank,  bat 
that  this  decision  was  grounded  on  a  want  of  constitutional  aathor- 
itj ;  when  the  whole  proceedings  of  Congress,  in  relation  to  a  baokt 
in  that  year,  shew  a  large  majority  in  both  Houses,  in  favor  of  a  bill, 
creating  such  an  institution;  and  when  Mr.  Madison's  objectioof 
to  it,  were  expressly  founded,  on  the  details,  and  not,  on  the  catuH^ 
tuHonaliiy  of  the  bill. 

Nor  has  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Madison,  been  less  explicit,  as  to  tlia 
grounds,  upon  which  Congress,  in  1811,  refused  to  continue  the  char- 
ter of  the  first  bank.  In  the  letter,  before  alluded  to,  Mr.  Madiaon 
thus  refers  to  the  supposed  precedent  against  the  constitutionality  of 
a  bank,  by  the  refusal  of  Congress  to  continue  the  first  charter.  **  It 
has  been  contended,  that  authority  of  the  precedents,  was,  in  that 
ease,  invalidated,  by  the  consideration,  that  they  proved  only,  a  re> 
spect  for  the  stipulated  duration  of  the  bank,  with  a  toleration  of  it, 
until  the  law  should  expire ;  and  by  the  casting  vote,  given  in  the 
Senate,  by  the  Vice  President,  in  the  year  1811,  against  a  bill,  for  es» 
tablishing  a  national  bank,  being  expressly  given,  on  the  ground  of 
unconstitutionality.  But,  if  the  law  itself  was  unconstitutional,  the 
stipulation  was  void,  and  could  not  be  constitutionally  fulfilled  or  tol- 
erated. 

*'  As  to  the  negative  of  the  Senate,  by  the  casting  vote  of  the  pre- 
■iding  officer,  it  is  a  fact,  well  understood  at  the  time,  that  it  reaoH- 
ed,  not  from  an  equality  of  opinions,  in  that  assembly,  of  the  power 
of  Congress  to  establish  a  bank,  but,  from  a  junction  of  those,  who 
admitted  the  power,  but  disapproved  the  plan,  with  those  who  denied 
the  power.  On  a  simple  question  of  constitutionality,  there  was  a 
decided  majority  in  favor  of  it" 

If  any  thing  farther  were  wanting,  to  confirm  the  testimony  of  Mr. 
Madison,  on  this  last  point,  we  might  refer  the  reader,  to  a  declaratioD 
made,  in  the  Senate,  in  the  winter  of  183%  when  the  veto  message 
was  under  debate,  by  a  member  of  that  body,*  that,  in  1811,  he  was 
in  the  Senate  and  voted  against  the  bank,  '*  but  not  on  constitutional 
grounds,  and  had  no  doubt,  that  such  was  the  case  with  other  mem* 
bers.** 


•  General  Samael  Smith. 


445 

• 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  the  EieeatiTe,  has  called  in  qaestion, 
not  only  the  constitutionality  and  expediency,  but,  also,  the  solvency 
of  this  institution.  This  was  intimated  too  plainly,  to  be  misunder- 
stood in  his  annaal  message  to  Congress,  of  December,  1832.  To 
pat  the  National  Legislature  on  its  guard,  with  respect  to  the  public 
deposits,  was  the  proper  object  of  such  an  intimation«^-an  intimation, 
indeed,  coming  from  such  a  quarter,  directly  calculated  to  impair,  if 
not  destroy,  the  credit  of  the  institution.  And  it  seems  somewhat 
difficult  to  imagine  why  it  did  not  produce  this  effect,  but  on  the  sap- 
position,  that  the  public  was  better  acquainted,  with  the  affairs  of  the 
bank,  than  the  President,  seemed  to  be ;  or  was  satisfied,  that  the  in- 
timation, was  intended,  for  political,  rather  than  for  financial  effect 