

Most,  if  not  all  of  the  state  banks  have,  heretofore,  issued  notes  of 
a  denomination,  as  low  as  one  dollar;  to  the  almost  entire  exclosion 
of  specie.  We  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  that,  in  our  view,  good  policy 
\  requires,  that  no  bank  should  be  permitted  to  issue  bills  of  a  less  de* 
I  nomination  than  five  dollars.  The  place,  which  the  small  bills  now 
occupy,  would  in  no  inconsiderable  degree  be  then  filled  with  specie. 
This  would  lessen  the  proportion,  between  the  paper  and  specie  cir- 
culation of  the  country :  and  thereby,  give  additional  security  against 
the  evils  and  dangers,  always  attending  an  exclusive  paper  circula- 
tion. The  States  of  Pennsylvania,  Maryland  and  Virginia,  have  late- 
ly excluded  all  bills  below  &ve  dollars ;  and  a  committee  of  the  legie- 
kture  of  the  former  state,  in  a  report,  made  in  January,  1833,  de- 
clared, that,  in  consequence  of  this  prohibition,  the  precious  metals, 
were  **  widely  diffused  and  abundant  in  all  parts  of  the  State.**  And 
the  reader,  will  recollect,  that  the  present  national  bank,  can  issue  no 
bills  ander  five  dollars.  In  England,  in  order  to  secure  a  greater 
amoont  of  specie  circulation,  bank  notes  of  a  less  denomination,  than 
£6  sterling,  are  prohibited ;  and  in  Scotland,  none  are  permitted  to 
circulate,  less  than  twenty  shillings.  The  bank  of  France,  the  only 
bank  in  that  country,  authorized  to  issue  notes,  has  none  less  than 
five  hundred  francs,  about  equal  to  one  hundred  dollars. 

The  circulation  of  specie,  in  England,  is  now  about  equal,  to  that 
of  bank  paper. 


437 

Thr  Vtnk  circulation  of  Scotland  hat  been,  and  is  still  small,  in 
proportion  to  the  banking  business  done,  in  that  country.  In  1825, 
it  amounted  to  only  £3,310,000,  sterling,  or  about  •15,600,000;  al- 
though the  deposites  in  those  banl&s  were  Tery  great. 

To 'this  circumstance,  as  well  as,  their  mode  of  doing  business,  and 
to  the  skill  and  prudence  of  their  managers,  may  be  attributed  the 
solidity  and  security  of  the  Scotch  banks.  The  whole  loss  sustained 
by  the  public,  from  the  failure  of  these  banks,  for  more  than  a  ceoto- 
ry  past,  has  not  exceeded,  it  is  said,  £36344,  or  about  $181,000. 

The  banking  system  of  Scotland,  the  operations  of  which,  haTO 
been  so  profitable  to  the  stockholders,  and  so  safe  for  the  public,  oughts 
we  think,  to  be  more  generally  known  in  the  United  States.     Three 
incorporated  banks,  only,  exist  in  Scotland,  viz.  **  the  bank  of  Scot- 
land,** esUblished  by  Parliament,  in  1695,  the  Royal  bank,  by  a  royal 
charter,  in  1727,  and  the  British  Linen  Company.    These  hare  a  cap- 
ital paid  in,  of  £3,000,000,  being  less  than  $15,000,000.     In  addition 
to  these,  there  were,  in  1826,  twenty  nine  private  establishments,  con- 
•btiog  of  partners,  more  or  less  numerous.    Among  these,  the  na- 
tional bank  of  Scotland,  has  twelve  hundred  thirty  eight  partners, 
the  Commercial  bank  of  Scotland,  five  hundred  twenty  one,  and  the 
Aberdeen  Town  and  Country  bank  four  hundred  forty  six,  and,  of    ^ 
the  remainder  three,  had  more  than  one  hundred  partners,  six,  between 
twenty  and  thirty,  and  seventeen,  less  than  twenty.  These  banks  had 
at  that  time,  one  hundred  and  thirty  three  branches,  located,  in  differ- 
ent parts  of  that  country.    A  great  part  of  the  business  of  these  banks* 
is,  to  receive  the  money  of  individuals,  on  deposit,  at  a  low  rate  of 
interest,  and  to  loan  it,  at  a  higher  rate ;  and  such  was  the  credit  of 
these  institutions,  that,  in  1826,  no  less  than  £18,000;000  was  depos- 
ited in  their  vaults ;  of  which,  about  one  half  was  said  to  be  deposit- 
ed in  small  sums,  by  mechanics,  laborers  and  fishermen.    At  that 
time,  the  usual  interest  given  bjr  the  banks,  on  deposits,  was  3  and  4 
per  cent ;  but  since  that  period,  it  has  been  reduced  to  2^  per  cent.* 
A  considerable  part  of  the  money  thus  deposited,  is  loaned  to  individ- 
uals, on  what  are  called  cash  eredits.    To  obtain  this  kind  of  credit* 
the  borrower  gives  a  bond,  with  two  sureties,  to  the  bank,  to  repay 
the  amount,  for  which  he  has  a  credit,  with  interest,  generally  at 
five  per  cent    The  borrower,  is  then  authorized  to  draw,  for  the 
amount  agreed  to  be  advanced,  from  time  to  time,  as  he  may  want  it; 
and  is  to  pay  interest,  on  the  sums  thus  drawn,  only,  from  the  time  of 