

The  safety  and  security  of  the  Scotch  banks,  consists,  in  a  great 
degree,  in  the  comparative  small  amount  of  their  issues ;  being,  aa 
appears,  by  a  previous  statement,  in  18SM,  about  $15,000,000.  And 
yet,  in  the  evidence  before  the  committee  of  Parliament,  appointed 
to  examine  into  the  subject  of  a  renewal  of  the  charter  of  the  bank 
of  England,  it  appears  that  even  these  prudent  banks,  were  aomatimea 
dependent  on  the  bank  of  England  to  sustain  them. 


454 

England  has  been,  and  still  is,  the  great  banking  hoase  of  tlie 
world ;  and  yet  with  all  her  wealth,  and  with  all  her  resources,  the 
has,  at  yarious  times,  experienced  great  commercial  distress,  arisiiig 
in  no  small  degree,  from  excessive  issues  and  from  over  trading. 
England  has  bat  one  incorporated  bank,  the  bank  of  England ;  but 
she  has  many  hundred  banking  companies,  consisting  of  yolantaiy 
associations  of  individuals,  not  exceeding  six  in  any  one  association; 
which  issue  notes  called  country  bank  notes,  without  restriction,  ex- 
cept that  none  are  to  be  under  £5,  and  for  the  payment  of  which,  the 
private  property  of  all  concerned  is  holden  ;  and  which  are  also  sub- 
ject to  the  bankrupt  laws  of  that  country.  Many  of  these  banking 
companies,  it  is  well  known,  have,  at  various  times,  failed.  Such  wis 
the  pressure  and  commercial  distress  at  the  commencement  of  1798, 
that  one  hundred  of  these  Country  banks  failed.  This  distress  came 
unexpectedly,  and  was  preceded  by  a  time  of  peculiar  commercial 
prosperity,  and  as  usual,  was  accompanied  with  great  bank  issues,  and 
over  trading.  In  1797,  from  the  pressure  of  the  war  and  other 
causes,  the  bank  of  England,  at  the  request  of  the  government,  de- 
clined paying  its  notes  in  specie  ;  and  it  did  not  again  resume  specie 
payments,  until  1821.  In  the  mean  time,  the  notes  of  this  bank,  al- 
though the  bank  itself  was  identified  with  the  government  and  nation, 
did  suffer  a  considerable  depreciation.  In  1814,  1815,  and  1816,  two 
hundred  and  forty  English  country  banks  stopped  payment;  and 
commissions  of  bankruptcy  issued  against  ninety  two  of  them. 

The  great  pressure  and  panic  in  England,  at  a  much  later  period,  in 
1825,  is  within  the  recollection  of  our  readers ;  and  it  was  fortunate, 
that  the  bank  of  England,  although  its  specie  funds  were  then  low, 
placed  its  credit  upon  high  ground,  by  offering  **  to  loan  money  to 
every  body  on  good  security,''  and  in  one  day,  discounted  commercial 
paper,  to  the  amount  of  £15,000,000  sterling. 

The  United  States  have  had  their  days  of  pecuniary  pressure  and 
distress,  and  will  have  them  again ;  and  the  evils  of  so  great  a  dis- 
proportion between  paper  and  specie  circulation,  as  before  stated,  will 
then  be  severely  felt ;  and  must  end  in  the  failure  of  many  of  the  state 
banks,  and  of  hundreds  of  individuals  connected  with  them. 