

We  would  here  observe,  that  the  imports  of  specie,  from  September 
30th,  1833  to  September  30th,  1834,  were  $17,985,910,  while  the  ex- 
ports, during  the  same  time,  were  only  $1,991,459,  leaving  in  the 
country  about  16,000,900.  About  5,000,000  of  this,  went  into  the 
vaults  of  the  national  bank,  and  the  rest  into  those  of  the  state  banks ; 
and  would  vary  the  proportions  between  the  paper  and  specie  of  these 
institutions.  On  the  first  of  January,  1835,  the  specie  in  the  vaults 
of  the  safety  fund  banks  of  the  State  of  New  York,  was  $5,561,745. 

The  charter  of  the  bank  of  England  was  renewed,  on  the  20th  of 
August,  1833,  for  the  term  of  ten  years.  One  of  the  most  important 
new  features  in  it,  is,  that  the  notes  of  the  bank  are  made  a  legal  ten- 
der every  where,  except  at  the  counter  of  the  bank  and  its  branches. 
The  object  of  this  restriction  is,  probably,  to  prevent  a  drain  of  spe- 
cie from  the  vaults  of  the  bank.  It  is  a  new  measure,  and  its  efiects 
on  the  metallic  part  of  the  currency  of  that  country,  may  be  consid- 
ered doubtful.  Other  provisions  of  the  charter  are  that  the  notes 
issued  by  the  branches  of  this  bank,  of  which  it  has  fourteen,  are  to 
be  paid  at  the  places  where  is^tued — the  interest  on  all  notes  or  bills 
of  exchange  discounted,  not  having  more  than  ninety  days  to  ran, 
is  left  free,  and  weekly  returns  of  the  general  state  of  the  bank,  are 
to  be  made  to  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  and  extracts  from 
them  to  be  published  monthly. 

In  a  country  whose  currency  consists  of  bank  paper,  credit  is 
every  thing.  It  is  the  foundation  of  that  medium  of  exchange, 
on  which  every  individual  in  the  community  depends,  not  only 
for  the  fulfilment  of  all  his  contracts,  but  for  the  daily  support  of 
himself  and  family.    The  least  suspicion,  therefore,  respecting  the 


457 

genenl  credit  of  this  paper,  is  felt  like  an  electric  shock,  throughoat 
the  whole  community;  and  while  this  suspicion  continues,  whether 
well  or  ill  founded,  the  whole  business  of  the  country  is  at  a  stand, 
and  cannot  again  be  set  in  motion,  until  confidence  is  restored,  or 
some  other  medium  is  provided.  Thus,  in  1825,  the  bank  of  Eng^ 
land,  by  boldly  furnishing  fifteen  millions  of  its  paper  or  credit  in  a 
single  day,  soon  restored  public  confidence,  and  enabled  the  great  ba* 
siness  of  that  country,  to  take  its  usual  course. 

The  late  removal  of  the  public  deposites,  from  the  vaults  of  the 
bank  of  the  United  States,  produced  a  general  distrust  and  want  of 
confidence,  not  only  in  the  monied  concerns  of  the  banks,  but  of  in* 
dividuals ;  and  for  a  time,  occasioned  such  a  derangement  of  the  greal 
money  transactions,  in  their  infinite  ramifications,  as  to  cause  great 
pecuniary  distress,  throughout  this  extensive  country.  To  a  super- 
ficial observer,  the  cause  appeared  inadequaA  t6  the  efiect ;  not  so,  to 
those  who  had  observed  similar  effects,  even  from  slighter  causes,  in 
commercial  countries,  where  credit  was  the  basis  of  their  various 
monied  operations. 