

Notwithstanding  the  opinion  of  Congress,  that  the  public  money 
was  perfectly  safe,  in  the  vaults  of  the  bank,  -the  President  thought 
proper,  before  the  next  meeting  of  that  body,  to  take  measures,  for 
its  removal  from  thence,  to  the  vaults  of  certain  state  banks. 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  by  the  charter,  the  public  money  was 
to  be  deposited  in  this  bank,  **  unless  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasary 
should  otherwise  direct,"  in  which  case,  he  was  to  lay  before  Con- 
gpress,  the  reasons  of  such  order.  One  Secretary  of* the  Treasury, 
was  removed  from  office,  by  the  President,  merely  because  he  would 
not  comply  with  his  wishes,  and  remove  the  deposits ;  and  another 
was  appointed  who  immediately,  gave  the  order  for  the  removal,  «• 
required  by  the  President ;  snd  submitted  his  reasons  for  the  same,  to 
Ck>ngress,  at  the  commencement  of  its  next  session. 

Without  adverting  to  the  reasons  actually  given  by  the  Secretary, 
we  would  only  observe,  that  he  admitted,  that  the  bank  was  solvent, 
and  that  it  was  a  safe  place  of  deposit.  The  Senate,  declared,  that 
the  reasons  offered  by  the  Secretary  were  insufficient;  and  also, 
declared,  that*  the  interference  of  the  Executive,  in  relation  to  saeh 
removal,  was  an  unwarrantable  assumption  of  power  over  the  public 
money. 


447 

The  Hoote,  without  deciding  directly,  whether  the  reMona  offered  i .  ^ 
by  the  secretary  were  sufficient  to  justify  the  removal,  passed  a 
gif  ing  some  directions  relati? e  to  the  public  deposits,  in  the  state 
banks ;  and  thus  virtually  confirmed  and  sanctioned  the  order  of  re- 
moval. To  this  bill  the  Senate  refused  its  assent ;  but  the  public 
money  has  remained  in  the  vaults  of  such  state  banks,  as  the  Presi* 
dent  and  secretary  think  proper  to  select 

The  declaration  of  the  senate,  in  relation  to  the  unwarrantable  in- 
terference of  the  President,  in  this  transaction,  drew  from  him,  a  pro- 
test against  it,  as  an  unwarrantable  intCLrference  of  the  Senate,  in  the 
affiiirs  of  the  Executive ;  and  justifying  his  conduct,  on  one  groundf 
never  before  assumed,  we  believe,  by  any  of  his  predecessors— that 
is,  that  he  was  the  keeper  of  all  the  property,  even  the  money  of  the 
United  States,  and  that  he  was  repsonsible  for  its  safe  keeping. 

And,  in  a  still  later  communication  to  Congress,  requesting  thai 
body,  to  give  directions  and  to  make  some  regulations,  in  relation  to 
depositing  the  public  money,  in  the  state  banks,  the  President  says 
**  the  powers  of  Congress  to  direct  in  what  places,  the  treasurer  shall 
keep  the  money  in  the  treasury,  and  to  impose  restrictions  on  the 
Executive  authority^  in  relation  to  their  custody  and  removal^  is  nn- 
limited^  and  its  exercise  will  rather  be  courted^  than  discouraged,  by 
those  public  officers  and  agents,  on  whom  rests  the  responsibility,  for 
their  safety." 