

**  They  had  no  manufactures  in  the  province  of  New  York,  thai 
deserve  mentioning ;  their  trade  consisted  chiefly  in  furs,  whalebone, 
oil,  pitch,  Ur,  and  provisions.  No  manufactures  in  New  Jersey  that 
deserve  mentioning ;  their  trade  being  chiefly  in  provisions  shipped 
from  New  York  and  Pennsylvania.  The  chief  trade  of  Pennsylvaniat 
lay  in  their  exportation  of  provisions  and  lumber ;  no  manofactaref 
being  established,  and  their  clothing  and  utensils  for  their  houses 
being  all  imported  from  Great  Britain.  By  further  advices  from  New 
Hampshire,  the  woollen  manufacture  appears  to  have  decreased ;  the 
common  lands  on  which  the  sheep  used  to  feed,  being  now  appropria- 
ted, and  the  people  almost  wholly  clothed  with  woollen  from  Great 
Britain.    The  manufactures  of  flax  into  linens,  some  coarse  and  aoiiie 


/ 


464 

fine,  daily  increased  by  the  great  resort  of  people  from  Ireland  thitheTf 
who  are  well  skilled  in  that  business.  By  late  accounts  from  Maoa- 
chusetts  Bay,  in  New  England,  the  assembly  have  voted  a  bounty  of 
thirty  shilling^  for  every  piece  of  duck  or  canvass  made  in  the  prov- 
ince.  Some  other  manufactures  are  carried  on  there,  as  brown 
holland,  for  womcns  wear,  which  lessens  the  importation  of  calicoes, 
and  some  other  sorts  of  East  India  goods.  They  also  make  some 
small  quantities  of  cloth,  made  of  linen  and  cotton  for  ordinary  shirt- 
ing. By  a  paper  mill  set  up  three  years  ago,  they  make  to  the  yaloe 
of  £200  sterling,  yearly.  There  are  also,  several  forges  for  making 
bar  iron,  and .  some  furnaces  for  cast  iron  or  hollow  ware,  and  one 
slitting  mill,  and  a  manufacture  for  nails.  The  Governor  writes  con- 
cerning the  woollen  manufacture,  that  the  country  people,  who  used 
to  make  most  of  their  clothing  out  of  their  own  wool,  <do  not  now 
make  a  third  part  of  what  they  wear,  but  are  mostly  clothed  with 
British  manufacture.  The  Surveyor  General  of  his  Majesty^s  woods 
writes,  that  they  have  in  New  England,  six  furnaces  and  nineteen 
forges,  for  making  iron ;  and  that  in  this  province,  many  ships  are 
built  for  the  French  and  Spaniards,  in  return  for  rum,  molasses, 
wines,  and  silks,  which  they  truck  there  by  connivance.  Great  quan- 
tities of  hats  are  made  in  New  England,  of  which  the  company  of  hat- 
ers in  London  have  complained  to  ua,  that  great  quantities  of  these 
hats  are  exported  to  Spain,  Portugal,  and  our  West  India  Islands. 
TKtf  also  make  all  sorts  of  iron  for  shipping.  There  are  several 
Wflt  bouses  and  sugar  bakers  established  in  New  England." 

**  By  the  last  advices  from  New  York,  there  are  no  manufactures 
there  that  can  affect  Great  Britain.  There  is  yearly  imported  into 
New  York,  a  very  large  quantity  of  the  woollen  manufactures  of  this 
kingdom,  for  their  clothing,  which  they  would  be  rendered  incapable 
to  pay  for,  and  would  be  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  making  for 
themselves,  if  they  were  prohibited  from  receiving  from  the  foreign 
sugar  colonies,  tlie  money,  rum,  molasses,  cocoa,  indigo,  cotton,  wool, 
6lc.  which  they  at  present  take  in  return  (or  provisions,  horses,  and 
Inmber,  the  produce  of  that  province  and  of  New  Jersey,  of  which 
he  affirms  the  British  colonies  do  not  take  off  above  one  half.  But 
the  company  of  hatters  of  London  have  since  informed  us  that  hats 
are  manufactured  in  great  quantities  in  this  province.^ 