


467 

Nor  could  the  mannfacturen  of  hats  in  Boston,  New  York  and 
Philadelphia,  be  very  easily  induced  to  believey  they  had  not  an  equal 
right  to  employ  as  many  apprentices,  as  those  of  London,  Bristol  or 
Liverpool. 

During  the  war  of  the  revolution,  the  Americans  eondnued  and  in- 
creased their  household  manufactures ;  and  as  far  as  possible  introdu- 
ced the  manufacture  of  various  articles  necessary  for  their  defence. 

From  the  peace  of  1783,  to  the  commencement  of  the  present  na- 
tional government,  some  attempts  were  made  to  introduce  new  man- 
ufactures, but  generally,  in  consequence  of  the  weakness  and  ineffi- 
ciency of  the  government,  without  success.  The  power  to  coun- 
teract the  restrictions  of  foreign  nations,  unfavorable  to  American 
manufactures,  as  well  as  commerce,  was  withheld  from  Congress  un- 
der the  confederation  ;  and  the  want  of  unanimity  and  co-operationt 
prevented  this  from  being  done,  by  the  states  themselves.  Indeed, 
until  the  adoption  of  the  present  constitution,  the  United  States  were 
a  nation  in  name  only,  being  utterly  powerless,  as  to  the  great  objects, 
for  the  attainment  of  which,  the  revolution  had  been  undertaken  and 
accomplished. 

One  of  the  objects,  which  claimed  the  attention  of  the  first  Con- 
gress, under  the  new  form  of  government,  was  the  encourage- 
ment and  protection  of  the  manufacturing,  as  well  as  the  commercial 
interests  of  the  country.  In  laying  duties  on  imports  in  July,  1789, 
Congress  had  reference,  as  the  preamble  of  the  act  imposing  them 
declares,  to  **  the  encouragement  and  protection  of  manufacture^^'* 
This  was,  also,  openly  avowed,  on  the  floor  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, in  the  debates  on  the  first  tarifif,  established  by  the  general 
government. 

The  first  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  (Hamilton,)  whose  powerful 
mind  seemed  intuitively,  fully  to  comprehend  every  subject,  to  which 
it  bent  its  force,  was  the  great  advocate  of  American  manufactures. 

In  his  celebrated  report  on  this  subject,  presented  to  the  House  of 
Representatives,  in  Jaimary,  1791,  every  argument  was  urged,  and 
we  may  truly  add,  exhausted,  in  favor  of  the  policy  and  expedien- 
cy of  protecting  and  encouraging  this  branch  of  domestic  economy. 

The  constitutional  power  of  Congress,  to  afford  such  encourage- 
ment, was  not  at  that  time,  nor  for  a  long  time  after,  questioned  by 
any  one.  Tu  the  principles  contained  in  this  report,  as  well  as  to  the 
proceedings  of  Congress,  in  relation  to  the  first  tarifif,  we  shall  here- 
alier,  more  particularly  refer,  when  considering  the  constitutional 
question  lately  started  on  this  subject 


468 


Some  braoches  of  domestic  manufacture,  had,  at  that  time*  made 
such  progress,  as,  in  a  great  measure,  to  supply  the  home  market 
Among  these  the  Secretary  mentions  those  of  skins  and  leather,  iron, 
wood,  flax  and  hemp,  bricks,  coarse  tiles  and  potters  ware,  ardent 
spirits  and  malt  liquors,  writing  and  printing  paper,  sheathing  and 
wrapping  paper,  press  paper  and  paper  hangings,  hats,  women's  atoff 
and  silk  shoes,  refined  sugar,  oils  of  animals  and  seeds,  soap,  sperm- 
aceti and  tallow  candles,  copper  and  brass  wares,  particularly  for 
distilleries,  sugar  refiners  and  brewers,  andirons  and  other  utensila 
for  househdd  use,  philosophical  apparatus,  tin  wares  for  most 
purposes  of  ordinary  use,  carriages  of  all  kinds,  snuff,  chewing  and 
smoking  tobacco,  lamp  black,  and  other  painter's  colors  and  gun  pow- 
der. These  articles  were  made  in  manufactories,  by  the  way  of  reg- 
ular trades.  In  addition  to  these,  great  quantities  of  cloths  of  wool, 
cotton  and  fiax,  or  mixtures  of  them,  were  made  in  families,  in  every 
part  of  the  country ;  and  to  such  extent,  as  the  Secretary  says,  in  some 
districts,  as  to  supply  two  thirds,  three  fourths,  and  even  four  fiAka  of 
the  clothing  of  the  inhabitants. 