

The  complaints  of  the  London  company  of  hatters,  did  not  pats 
unheeded  by  Parliament     Immediately  after  this  report,  an  act 


•  Macphtrson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  vol.  3. 

69 


/ 


466 

pMsed  (5  George  II,  1732,)  «*  to  prevent  the  exportation  of  hato  ovc 
^\  of  any  of  his  Majesty's  colonies  or  plantations  in  America,  and  to  re- 

strain the  number  of  apprentices  taken  by  the  hat  makers,  in  the  nid 
colonies  or  plantations,  and  for  the  better  encouraging  the  making  of 
hate  in  Great  Britain.'*  By  this  extraordinary  act,  not  only  was  the 
exportation  of  colonial  hats  to  a  foreign  port  prohibited,  but  their 
transportation  from  one  British  plantation  to  another  British  planta- 
tion, was  also  prohibited,  under  severe  penalties ;  nor  could  they 
«^  be  laden  upon  any  horse,  cart,  or  other  carriage,  to  the  intent  or 
purpose  to  be  exported,  transported,  shipped  off,  Slc, — and  no  peraon 
was  allowed  to  make  hats,  unless  he  bad  served  an  apprenticeship  for 
seven  years,  nor  could  he  have  more  than  two  apprentices  at  one 
time ;  and  no  black  or  negro  was  permitted  to  work  at  the  business 
of  making  hats." 

The  manufacturers  of  iron  next  claimed  their  share  in  the  bcnefili 
to  be  derived  from  the  colonies.  They  were  willing  the  poor  colo- 
nists should  reduce  the  iron  ore  with  which  their  lands  abounded, 
iilto  pigs  and  even  bar  iron,  provided  they  could  monopolize  the 
manufacture  of  it,  beyond  this  incipient  stage.  In  1750,  therefore. 
Parliament  permitted  pigs  and  bar  iron  to  be  imported  from  the  colo- 
nies into  London,  duty  free  ;  but  prohibited  the  erection  or  continu- 
ance of  any  mill,  or  other  engine  for  slitting  or  rolling  iron,  or  any 
plating  forge,  to  work  with  a  tilt  hammer,  or  any  furnace  for  making 
«(ee£in  the  colonies,  under  the  penalty  of  two  hundred  pounds.  And 
every  such  mill,  engine,  forge  or  furnace,  was  declared  a  common 
nuisance ;  and  the  colonial  Governors,  on  the  information  of  two 
witnesses  on  oath,  were  ordered  to  cause  the  same  to  be  abated  with- 
in thirty  days,  or  to  forfeit  the  sum  of  £500. 

The  various  acts  of  the  parent  country,  restraining  the  manufac- 
tures, as  well  as  the  commerce  of  the  colonists,  were  considercni  by 
the  latter  as  extremely  oppressive  and  injurious,  and  some  of  them, 
as  a  violation  of  their  rights ;  and  were  regarded  no  farther,  than  was 
necessary  to  prevent  an  open  rupture. 

If  the  colonists  were  indeed  English  subjects,  entitled  to  all  the 
privileges  of  their  fellow  subjects  in  Great  Britain,  they  could  not 
see,  why  they  should  be  placed  on  a  footing  so  different — why  they 
should  not  be  permitted  equally  with  those  in  England,  to  seek  the 
best  market  for  their  produce — why  subjects  in  America,  should  not 
be  suffered  to  manufacture  the  iron  found  in  their  own  lands,  to  such 
an  extent,  and  in  such  a  manner,  as  they  might  think  proper. 