

At  the  date  of  this  report,  establishments  for  the  manufacture  of 
cotton  and  wool  had  commenced  in  Rhode  Island,  Massachusetts  and 
Connecticut ;  and  a  company,  with  half  a  million  capital,  had  been 
formed,  for  a  cotton  establishment  at  Patterson,  in  New  Jersey,  and 
afterwards  commenced  business  at  that  place.  The  first  cotton  Vic- 
tory in  the  United  States,  was  established  at  Providence,  by  Almy 
and  Brown,  and  Mr.  Samuel  Slater,  a  cotton  manufacturer  from 
England.  Mr.  Slater  was,  indeed,  the  father  of  the  cotton  manufac- 
tures in  this  country ;  and  the  United  States  owe  much  to  his  skill 
and  perseverance  in  this  branch  of  domestic  industry.  This  distin- 
gruished  manufacturer,  has  ever  since  continued,  and  still  continues  to 
carry  on  the  same  business ;  and  we  are  happy,  in  being  able  to  say, 
that  his  industrious  and  persevering  efforts  have  proved  advantageous 
to  himself,  as  well  as  to  his  adopted  country. 

A  cotton  manufactory  was,  also,  established  at  Beverly,  in  Massa- 
chusetts, in  1789  or  1790,  by  a  number  of  patriotic  gentlemen  of  that 
town,  aided  by  the  legislature  of  Massachusetts. 

We  had  an  opportunity  of  visiting  both  these  establishments,  in 
the  summer  of  1790,  and  the  articles  then  made  in  them,  were  prin- 
cipally corduroys,  fustians  and  jeans. 

About  the  same  time,  a  woollen  factory  was  established  at  Hart- 
ford, in  Connecticut,  under  the  patronage  of  Ck)l.  Jeremiah  Wads- 
worth,  a  gentleman  whose  patriotic  and  active  efforts  were  alwaya 
directed  to  the  promoti<H>  of  the  best  interests  of  his.  country. 


469 

PrMident  Wuhington  delivered  hi«  speech  to  Congrew,  in  Janua- 
ry, 1790»  dressed  in  a  suit  of  broadcloth  from  this  factory,  presented 
by  its  owners. 

The  protection  and  patronage  thus  given  to  American  roanufae- 
tures,  by  the  government,  and  by  individuals,  would,  no  doubt,  have 
ensured  their  success  and  rapid  increase,  at  that  period,  had  not  a  new 
state  of  things  soon  after  arose  in  Europe,  which  necessarily  turned 
the  attention  of  the  Americans  to  agriculture  and  commerce.  The 
encouragement  afforded  to  American  manufactures,  by  the  national 
legislature,  in  the  tariff  of  July,  1780,  did  not  escape  tlras  notice  of 
British  statesmen ;  and  we  beg  leave  to  call  the  attention  of  the  read- 
er, to  the  celebrated  report  of  the  committee  of  the  board  of  trade 
in  1791,  to  which  we  before  alluded,  when  on  the  subject  of  the  Weil 
India  trade ;  and  which,  also,  had  special  reference  to  this  subject* 
Although,  in  this  report,  it  is  acknowledged,  that  the  United  States, 
have  full  right  to  impose  duties,  **  either  for  the  purpose  of  raising  t 
revenue,  or  of  encouraging  the  produce  or  manufactures  of  ikeir 
territories^^*  yet  the  committee  discover  no  little  anxiety,  to  prevent 
the  increase  of  those  duties,  to  such  an  extent,  as  to  interfere  with 
the  introduction  and  consumption  of  British  manfactures  in  the  United 
States. 