

Unmanufactured  wool,  was,  also  subjected  to  a  duty  of  4  cents  p&r 
pound  and  40  per  cent  ad  valorem.  Additional  duties  were,  also,  laid 
upon  iron,  hemp,  flax  and  molasses ;  and  the  minimum  price  of  cot- 
tons was  raised  to  35  cents  the  square  yard.  The  policy  of  this  act 
was  questioned  by  many  of  the  merchants  of  this  country,  and  its  con- 
stitutionality by  most  of  the  people  of  the  southern  states.  Unfortu- 
nately, it  was  a  compound  made  up  by  its  enemies,  as  well  as  ila 
friends,  and  was  not  satisfactory  to  either. 

The  time  was  now  approaching,  when  the  national  debt,  being 
nearly  extinguished,  the  sinking  fund,  amounting  to  ten  millions  an- 
nually, would  be  no  longer  wanted.  A  new  modification  of  the  rer^ 
enue  system,  would  soon  be  necessary,  to  meet  this  new  state  of  the 
financial  affairs  of  this  country.  In  this  modification  of  the  duliesv 
the  advocates  of  the  protecting  system,  contemplated  a  reduction  of 
the  duties  principally  on  those  articles,  which  had  not  been,  or  conld  not 
be  produced  in  this  country ;  while  its  opposers,  on  the  other  hand,  in- 
sisted, on  an  abandonment  of  the  system  itself,  by  making  the  duties 
00  all  imports  about  equal.  With  a  view  of  obtaining  information 
and  enlightening  the  public  mind  on  this  great  and  interesting  subjeclp 
two  Conventions  were  held,  in  the  summer  and  fall  of  1831 ;  one  in^ 
the  city  of  Philadelphia,  called  the  anti-tariff  or  free-trade  conven* 
lion— -the  other  at  the  city  of  New  York,  called  the  tariff  convention. 


477 

Both  were  composed  of  gentlemen  distinguished  for  talents  and  ex- 
perience ;  and  their  addresses  to  the  people  of  the  United  States,  and 
memorials  to  Congress,  or  as  they  may  be  called,  essays  expressive 
of  their  different  views  of  the  questions  of  political  economy  then 
agitated,  were  drawn  up  with  no  ordinary  care  and  ability,  and  must 
always  take  a  high  rank,  among  the  state  papers  of  that  period.    Un- 
der the  influence  of  these  conventions.  Congress,  after  much  deblite, 
proceeded  to  modify  the  preceding  tariffs,  by  an  act  of  the  14th  of 
July,  183%  to  Uke  effect  after  March  1st,  1833  ;  and  with  respect  to 
woollens,  cottons  and  iron,  provided,  that  foreign  wool,  unmanffac- 
lured,  the  value  of  which  should  not  exceed  8  cents  per  pound,  should 
be  duty  free ;  and  if  its  value  exceeded  8  cents,  should  pay  a  duty 
of  4  cents  per  pound  and  40  per  cent  ad  valorem. — That  woollen 
cloth  called  kerseys,  plains  or  kendal  cottons,  not  exceeding  in  value 
35  cents  a  square  yard,  should  pay  5  per  cent  ad  valorem ;  that  worst- 
ed stuffed  goods,  shawls,  and  other  manufactures  of  silk  and  worsted* 
10  per  cent — worsted  yam  20  per  cent — woollen  yam  4  cents  per 
pound,  and  fifty  per  cent  ad  valorem — mits,  gloves,  binding,  blankets, 
hosiery,  and  carpets  and  carpeting,  25  per  cent,  except  Brussels,  Wil- 
ton and  treble  ingrained  carpeting,  which  were  to  be  at  63  cents  the 
square  yard,  and  all  other  ingrained  and  Venetian  carpeting,  35  cents 
the  square  yard ;  and  except  blankets,  whose  value  should  not  exceed 
75  cents  each,  which  were  to  pay  only  5  per  cent  ad  valorem — flannelf» 
bockings  and  baizes  to  pay  15  cents  the  square  yard— coach  laces  35 
per  cent ;  merino  shawls,  and  all  other  manufactures  of  wool,  and 
ready  made  clothing  to  pay  50  per  cent  ad  valorem. 