

This  vast  influx  of  foreign  goods  not  only  glutted  the  market,  and 
■objected  the  importer  to  great  losses,  but  destroyed  the  hopes  of  the 
American  woollen  and  cotton  manufacturer.  The  latter  effect  was 
i^ew.ed  by  British  statesmen,  with  no  little  satisfaction,  and  nAs  deem- 
ed an  ample  compensation  for  any  looses,  sustained  by  the  English 
manufacturers.  Mr.  Brougham,  referring  to  the  losses  sustained  by 
the  latter,  declared  in  Parliament  that  **  it  was  well  worth  while  to 
incur  a  loss  upon  the  first  exportation,  in  order  by  the  glut^  to  stijle 
in  the  cradle^  those  rising  manufactures,  in  the  United  States,  which 
the  war  had  forced  into  existence,  contrary  to  the  natural  course  of 
things."  American  statesmen  now  saw  the  necessity,  as  well  as  jus- 
tice, of  affording  some  protection  to  those  manufactures,  which,  in  the 
hour  of  trial,  had  been  called,  if  not  forced,  into  existence.  Thej 
had  felt  for  the  sufferings  of  the  American  army,  from  the  want  of  ne- 
cessary clothing,  during  the  short  period  of  the  war ;  and  they  were 
too  sensible  what  the  country  owed  to  those,  who  had  adventured 
their  capital  and  credit,  in  a  new  and  untried  business,  not  to  listen  to 
their  application,  to  be  saved  from  utter  ruin. 

The  national  legislature  were  now  for  the  first  time,  since  the  com- 
mencement of  the  government  in  the  summer  of  1789,  seriously  call- 
ed upon  to  adjust  the  tariff,  with  a  view  to  support  and  protect  Amer- 
ican manufactures.  The  tarifif  act  of  1816,  was  made  with  special 
reference  to  this  object,  particularly  as  to  woollens  and  cottons ;  and 
the  only  difference  of  opinion  in  Congress,  then  was,  as  to  the  extent 
of  such  protection. 


♦  See  Table  No.  V,  Chapter  VF. 


475 

Tbe  duty  on  woollens  and  coUon8«  was  ultimately  fixed  at  25  per 
cent,  ad  valorem,  from  June  dOth,  1816,  to  June  dOth,  1819,  and  after 
that  period,  at  90  per  cent.  With  respect  to  cottons,  however,  it  waa 
provided,  that  all  cotton  cloths,  the  original  cost  of  which  was  leia 
than  86  cents  per  square  yard,  should  be  deemed  to  have  cost  that 
turn,  and  pay  duties  accordingly.  This  was  the  commencement  of 
what  has  been  called  the  minimum  principle;  and  its  real  object waf» 
wholly  to  exclude,  from  the  American  market,  the  coarse  East  IndU 
totton  fabrics.  This,  it  will  be  perceived,  afforded  encouragement  to 
the  American  cotton  planter,  as  well  as  the  American  cotton  ^man- 
ufacturer. 

We  would  here  observe,  that,  by  the  same  act,  a  permanent  duty 
of  thirty  per  cent  ad  valorem  was  imposed  on  various  other  articlei ; 
and  among  these  were  hats,  cabinet  wares,  and  all  manufactures  of 
wood,  carriages  of  all  descriptions,  leather  and  all  manufactures  of 
leather,  and  paper  of  every  description.  And  to  encourage  the  man- 
ufacture of  domestic  sugar,  a  specific  duty  of  three  cents  per  pound, 
was  laid  on  all  imported  brown  sugar. 