

To  prevent  this,  the  committee  recommended,  that,  in  the  negocia- 
tions  for  a  commercial  treaty  with  the  United  States,  then  contem- 
plated, two  propositions  should  be  made,  on  the  part  of  the  BriCiah 
government,  in  relation  to  this  subjecL  The  first  was,  **  That  the 
duties  on  British  manufactures,  imported  into  the  United  States,  shaU 
not  be  raised  above  what  they  are  at  present,*'  (1791.) 

'*  It  may  be  of  use,'*  the  committee  say,  *^  to  bind  the  United  States 
not  to  raise  those  duties  above  what  they  are,  at  present^  by  obtain- 
ing an  express  stipulation  for  this  purpose ;  but,  if  this  concession 
cannot  be  obtained,  it  may  be  sufficient,  perhaps,  to  stipulate,  that  the 
duties  on  British  manufactures  should  not,  at  any  time^  be  raised 
above  the  duties  now  pajrable  on  the  like  manufactures  imported  from 
Great  Britain  into  France  and  Holland,  according  to  the  commercial 
treaties  with  those  powers.** 

The  second  proposition  was,  "  that  the  duties  on  all  other  merehan- 
dize,  whether  British  or  foreign,  imported  from  Great  Britain  into 
the  United  States,  shall  not  be  raised  higher,  at  any  lime,  than  on  the 
like    merchandize    imported    from  any  other  European  nation.*** 


•  AchesoD,  p.  114  sad  115. 


These  propositioDs  evince  a  solicitude  on  the  part  of  the  British  gor- 
ernmenty  not  only  to  secure  the  consumption  of  British  manufactures 
in  the  United  States ;  but  also,  to  secure,  for  British  shipping,  the  cai- 
riage  of  foreign  articles^  on  equal  terms,  with  other  nations. 

The  wars  in  Europe  prevented  the  urging  of  these  propositions ; 
and  little  attention  was  paid  to  manufactures  in  the  United  States, 
from  1793,  until  1807,  when,  in  consequence  of  the  embargo  and  the 
restrictive  system,  the  Americans  found  themselves  deprived  of  many 
necessary  articles  previously  obtained  from  foreign  nations.  This 
naturally.,)^  them  to  inquire,  into  the  state  of  manufactures  in  their 
own  country,  and  as  to  the  best  mode  of  encouraging  them. 

In  1809,  the  House  of  Representatives,  at  Washington,  not  only 
ordered  the  re-printing  of  Hamilton's  report  on  manufactures,  before 
mentioned,  but  directed  the  then  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  (Mr. 
Gallatin,)  to  collect  information  with  respect  to  the  various  manuiac- 
tures  of  the  United  States,  and  to  report  the  same,  "  together  with  a 
plan  best  calculated  to  protect  and  promote  them.'' 

The  information  collected  by  the  Secretary,  although,  as  he  says, 
**  in  general  partial  and  defective,"  was  communicated  to  the  House 
in  April,  1810.  In  consequence  of  this  deficiency,  the  Secretary  rec- 
ommended a  provision  for  obtaining  more  detailed  and  correct  inform 
mation  on  the  subject,  by  the  marshals,  who  were  to  take  the  census, 
in  the  course  of  that  year.  In  pursuance  of  this  recommendation, 
the  marshals,  and  their  assistants  were  directed,  at  the  time  of  taking 
the  census,  ''to  take,  under  the  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  tlie 
Treasury,  and  according  to  such  instructions  as  he  shall  give,  an  ac- 
count of  the  several  manufacturing  establishments  and  manu£ictures 
within  their  several  districts,  territories  and  divisions.'* 