That  the  consumption  of  cotton  has  increased  in  the  United  States* 
since  1831,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  In  1833,  the  number  of  bales  con- 
sumed at  Lowell,  was  thirty  two  thousand  six  hundred  and  seven,  and 
must  also  have  increased  in  other  places.  The  number  of  bales 
therefore,  consumed  in  this  country,  including  that  consumed  in  fam- 
ilies, in  1834«  could  not,  we  apprehend,  be  far  from  three  hundred 
thousand.  If  we  consider  the  village  of  Lowell,  as  consuming  one 
ninth  of  the  whole  used  in  the  United  States,  it  will  exceed  two  hun- 
dred and  ninety  three  thousand  bales. 

This  vast  increase  in  the  manufacture  of  cotton,  in  both  countries, 
has  been  owing  to  the  magic  power  of  machinery — that  for  spinning« 
invented  by  Arkwright,  and  that  for  weaving,  by  Cartwright,  two 
self  taught  EIngliab  artists — and  the  material  for  this  wonderful  ma- 
chinery has  been  principally  furnished  by  the  cotton  gin  of  the  Amer- 
ican artist,  NVhitney.  The  machine  invented  by  this  great  philosophi- 
cal mechanic,  now  produces  in  the  United  States,  nearly  four  hun- 
dred millions  of  pounds  of  cotton  annually,  worth  from  forty  to  fifty 
millions  uf  dollars ;  and  which,  when  manufactured,  furnishes  cloth- 
ing for  the  human  race,  to  the  value  of  more  than  two  hundred  mill- 
ions. 


488 


WOOLLENS.  .^.tK      ^ 


^  The  manufacture  of  wool  has  greatly  iajptfaJMHEiCAiriDg  the  period 
under  review  ;  but  to  what  extent  cannot  be  Aaceiflined  with  as  much 
certainty,  as  in  the  cane  of  cotton.  The  number  of  sheep  in  the  Uni- 
ted States  in  1831,  was  estimated  at  twenty  millions.  This  estimate 
was  not  made  from  actual  returns,  and  of  course,  must,  in  some  meas- 
ure be  founded  on  conjecture.  In  1825,  the  number  of  sheep  in  the 
State  of  New  York,  from  actual  returns,  was  three  millions  foor  hun- 
dred ninety  six  thousand  five  hundred  and  forty  nine ;  and  it  was  sup- 
posed that  this  was  about  one  quarter  of  the  whole  number  in  this 
country,  making  the  number,  at  that  period,  in  the  United  States 
about  fourteen  millions. 

That  the  number  has  increased  since  that  time  no  one  can  donbtt 
so  that  the  number,  may  now  be  estimated  at  more  than  twenty  mill- 
Ions.  Experience  has  proved,  that  flocks  of  sheep  can  be  doubled  in 
this  country,  in  a  very  short  period ;  and  no  doubt  remains,  that  the 
United  States  can  easily  produce  wool  more  than  sufficient  for  their 
own  consumption.  The  committee  of  the  convention,  who  had  this 
subject  under  their  consideration,  estimated  the  quantity  of  wool, 
produced  in  this  country,  at  fiAy  millions  of  pounds,  worth,  on  an  ave- 
rage of  the  years  1829,  1830  and  31 ,  forty  cents  per  pound,  aiaking 
$20,000,000,  and  that  its  value,  when  manufactured,  was  940,000,000. 