

In  Great  Britain,  the  number  of  sheep  is  about  two  to  each  inhab- 
itant— in  France  and  Prussia,  the  number  is  about  equal  to  the  inhab- 
itants, and  in  the  United  States,  calling  the  number  of  sheep  twenty 
millions,  is  about  one  and  a  half  to  each  individual.  In  the  state  of 
New  York,  however,  in  1825,  the  number  was  a  little  more  than  two 
to  each  person ;  and  in  Vermont,  in  1831,  the  number  of  sheep  beinf 
seven  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  six  hundred  and  seven,  the  propor- 
tion was  about  two  and  a  half  to  each  inhabitant. 

With  respect  to  the  value  of  the  manufactures  of  wool  in  €hreai 
Britain,  difi*erent  estimates  have  been  made,  by  the  distinguished  sta- 
tistical writers  of  that  country.  Marshall  estimated  their  value  io 
1828,  at  £1(1,374,000,  calling  the  price  of  domestic  wool  9d.  sterlinf 


•  Dapin's  Forces  prodactivcs  et  eommereiales  de  la  France.  S  tom.  p.  168. 
t  0se  Blarshall'k  itatistics  of  London,  dc 


r 


per  pound,  and  twenty  fire  millions  pounds  of  ibreign  wool  at  %Hm 

making  the  whole  valae  of  wool,  £8,187,000y  and  doublini^  this  wmm 
for  the  value  of  whole  when  manufactured.  BlACoUoch,  however,  es- 
timates the  value  of  woollen  manufactures,  in  that  country^  at  £rom 
90,000,000  to  £22,000,000  sterling. 

Although  the  returns  in  relation  to  the  manufactures  of  the  United 
States,  made  to  the  secretary  of  the  treasury  in  1832,  in  pursuance 
of  an  order  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  were  generally  deficieot; 
yet  they  show,  that,  in  some  of  the  states,  the  manufacture  of  wool*  cot^ 
ton  and  iron  had  been  carried  to  a  great  extent,  in  fixed  establishoieDts. 
In  Massachusetts,  the  value  of  woollens,  in  these  establishments  ex- 
ceeded 86,500,000.  In  the  county  of  Wurcester  alone,  in  that  state,  tbt 
manufacture  of  wool,  amounted  to  $2,409,500,  and  the  value  of  ag- 
ricultural products  consumed  by  the  laborers,  in  the  woollen  estab- 
lishments, in  that  county,  according  to  returns  of  the  manufaciarert» 
was  $1,776,000. 

In  estimating  the  value  of  woollens  made  in  this  country,  it  should 
be  borne  in  mind,  that,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  fixed  establish- 
ments for  the  manufacture  of  this  article,  lately  erected,  household,  or 
family  manufactures  of  wool,  and  mixtures  of  wool  and  cotton,  are 
still  carried  on  to  a  great  extent. 

In  the  year  1810,  the  whole  number  of  fulling  mills  in  the  United 
States,  as  returned  by  the  marshalls,  was  one  thousand  six  hundred 
and  eighty  two,  and  the  carding  machines  one  thousand  six  hundred 
and  thirty;  and  in  1825,  in  the  state  of  New  York  alone,  the  number 
of  the  former  was  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty  two,  and  of 
the  latter^  one  thousand  five  hundred  and  eighty ;  and  it  will  be  re- 
membered, that  the  number  of  looms  in  this  country,  in  18101,  was 
three  hundred  and  twenty  four  thousand  nine  hundred  and  ninstj 
eight,  principally  in  families. 