

In  1825,  the  number  of  yards  of  fulled  cloth  made  in  families  in 
the  State  of  New  York,  as  official  returns  nhew,  was  two  millions 
nine  hundred  and  eighteen  thousand  two  hundred  and 
thirty  three,  valued  at        .  •  .  $2,018,233 

The  number  of  yards  of  flannels,  and  other  woollens, 
not  fulled,  was  three  millions  four  hundred  and  sixty 
eight  thousand  and  one,  valued  at  twenty  cents  per  yard,         603,600 

Making,  $3,611,833 

The  value  of  the  same  kinds  of  cloth,  made  in  families  in  that  state, 
at  the  present  time  (January,  1835)  must  be,  at  least,  $4,500,000;  and 


491 

there  can  be  litde  doubt,  that  the  hoosebold  manufaeturea  of  wooK  in 
New  England,  lAoat  equal,  if  not  exceed,  tboae  of  New  York.  The 
agent  appointed  fay  (he  secretary  of  the  treaaury,  to  aacertain  the 
manufacturca  in  New  Hampshire,  states,  in  hia  return,  that  in  one 
hundred  and  twenty  five  towns,  whose  population  was  one  hundred 
and  forty  eight  thousand  six  hundred  and  forty  seven,  one  half  of  the 
clothing  for  the  inhabitants  was  nnade  in  families ;  the  value  of  ihe 
whole  being  estimated  at  $2,380,04a  The  greatest  pari  of  the  cloth 
made  in  these  towns  must  have  been  woollen. 

We  apprehend,  that  the  aum  of  ten  dollars,  is  not  too  high  an  eati- 
mate,  for  the  annual  cost  of  the  woollen  and  cotton  clothing  of  eaA 
inhabitant  of  the  United  Statea.  It  will  be  recollected,  that  the  ae^ 
retary  of  the  treasury  in  1832,  required,  from  those  selected  to  col» 
lect  information  relating  to  manufactures,  an  answer  to  the  followisf 
questions,  among  others,  **  the  proportion  which  the  production  of 
American  manufactures  bears  to  the  consumption  f"  and,  also,  aa  to 
the  **  extent  of  individual  and  household  manufactures  of  the  United 
States  ?'*  The  6rst  of  the  above  questions  is  certainly  a  very  import^ 
ant  one ;  and  a  correct  answer  to  it,  is  a  great  desideratum  in  this  coun* 
try.  Few  answers  were  given  to  these  questions,  and  the  moat  of 
them  were  generally  vague  and  indefinite,  and  were  not  baaed  on  aneh 
data,  as  would  authorize  a  safe  calculation  for  the  whole  United  Statea. 
The  agent  for  New  Hampshire,  however,  and  those  employed  by  hitaOf 
attended  to  these  subjects  of  inquiry,  much  more  than  the  agenta  in 
the  other  states ;  and  his  answer  will  tend  to  elucidate  the  queatios 
now  under  consideration.  He  states,  in  his  return,  '*  that  in  the  coun- 
ties of  Rockingham,  Stafford,  Grafton  and  Coos,  containing  one  hon- 
dred  and  twenty  tive  towns,  and  one  hundred  and  forty  eight  thousand 
six  hundred  and  forty  seven  inhabitants,  the  expense  of  each  individ- 
ual, annually,  for  cloths  of  all  descriptions  for  wearing  appareU  ia 
$16,00,  making  the  expense  to  the  whole  population,  of  $2,380,000. 
**  Allowing*'  he  adds,  **  seven  persons  to  a  family,  there  would  be 
twenty  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  fifty  families,  the  average  ex- 
penae  to  each  of  which,  for  bedding,  carpeting,  table  linen,  dt.e.  k 
$19,00,  equal  to  $403,712;  so  that  $2,783,860  are  yearly  expended  for 
cloths  for  wearing  apparel,  bedding,  carpeting,  dt.c.  Something  more 
than  one  half  of  theae  cloths  are  manufactured  in  families.*'  The 
expenae  of  clothing  each  individual  in  the  counties  of  New  Hamp* 
ahire,  above  referred  to,  was  $16,00;  and  as  this  clothing  moat 
have  consisted,  principally,  of  woollens  and  cottons,  we  think  the 
anm  of  $10,00  for  each  person  in  the  United  States,  for  this  kind 
of  dothingt  cannot  be  deemed  an  over  estimate. 