

This  included  all  made  in  families,  as  well  as  in  factories  ;  and  the 
same  committee  estimated  the  proportion  of  wool  used  in  the  latter, 
to  that  in  the  former,  as  three  to  two. 

The  amount  thus  estimated  by  the  committee,  we  apprehend,  in- 
stead of  exceeding,  fell  short  of  the  reality ;  and  we  think  that  the 
ralue  of  the  woollen  manufactures  of  the  United  States,  at  the  pres- 
ent time,  (January  1835,)  cannot  be  far  from  sixty  five  to  seventy 
millions  of  dollars.  In  1831,  the  quantity  of  wool  imported  was 
five  millions  six  hundred  twenty  two  thousand  nine  hundred  and  sixty 
pounds,  valued  at  $1,288,909,  and  in  1832,  four  millions  forty  two 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  thirty  eight,  worth  $098,721.  In  the  for- 
mier  year,  more  than  two  millions  came  from  England,  and  in  the  lat- 
ter, only  three  hundred  twenty  three  thousand  pounds,  from  that  coun- 
try, and  about  two  millions  from  the  Levant,  Turkey  and  Egypt,  being 
low  priced  wool.  The  number  of  sheep  in  Great  Britain,  is  estimated 
both  by  Marshall  and  Mc  Culloch,  at  thirty  two  millions,  producing  one 
hundred  sixty  millions  of  pounds  of  wool ;  and  the  quantity  of  foreign 
wool  imported  into  that  country,  is  annually  from  twenty  five  to  thirty 
millions  of  pounds ;  the  greatest  part  of  which  comes  from  Germany. 


489  , 

In  1830,  the  amonit  inporied  wu  thirty  two  millions  three  hundred 
thirteen  thouetnd  ei|bl  liundred  and  fiAy  nine  pounds,  and  of  thii 
there  came  from       ^ 

Germany,  Ibe.  20,073382 

Spain  and  Coloniea, 1,643,616 

New  Holland  and  Van  Dieman^e  Land,  1,907,909 

The  number  of  sheep  in  France  has  been  estimated  at  thirty  two 
millions,  though  the  estimated  quantity  of  wool,  produced  in  that  coun- 
try, falls  short  of  that  in  England.  In  1828,  Mr.  Dopin,  gives  tb« 
quantity  of  wool  in  France,  from  an  account  taken  sometime  previoos 
to  that  period,  at  forty  millions  seven  hundred  fifty  six  thousand  nine 
hundred  and  ^fiy  killogrammes  when  unwashed,  being  only  aboat 
eighty  two  millions  pounds.  He  imagines,  however,  that  at  the  tin* 
he  wrote,  the  quantity  had  increased  one  fifth,  which  would  make  tb* 
quantity  in  1828,  about  one  hundred  millions.*  The  quantity  of  »•• 
rino  wool,  at  that  time,  was  about  one  million  five  hundred  thoaeand^ 
and  mixed,  about  eight  millions  five  hundred  thousand  pounds.  Tlio 
quantity  of  wool  imported  into  France,  was  then  about  sixteen 
millions  of  pounds.  In  1834,  the  value  of  the  manufactures  of  woolf 
in  France  was  400,000,000  francs,  about  980,000,000. 

The  number  of  sheep  in  Prussia  in  1828,  was  eleven  millions  six 
hundred  and  six  thousand  four  hundred  and  twenty,  of  which,  one 
million  seven  hundred  and  thirty  four  thousand  one  hundred  and  five 
were  Merinos,  four  millions  ^we  hundred  and  fiAy  eight  thousand  seven 
hundred  and  seventy  seven  cross  breeds,  and  five  millions  three 
hundred  and  thirteen  thousand  five  hundred  and  forty  seven,  nativee.t 