

To  what  extent  the  manufacture  of  this  article  has  been  carried  in 
the  United  States,  cannot  be  ascertained  with  precision ;  we  can  only 
approximate  the  truth.  It  is  well  known,  however,  that  the  con* 
sumption  of  foreign  iron  and  its  manufacture,  bears  but  a  compar- 
atively small  proportion  to  that  of  domestic  It  will  be  remem- 
bered, that  in  1810,  the  manofactores  of  iron  were  estimated  at 
$14,364,620.  When  it  is  considered  that  the  quantity  of  bar  iron 
made  in  this  country  in  1831,  exceeded  four  times  the  quantity  made 
in  1810,  and  that  the  demand  for  iron  of  various  kinds  has  greatly 
increased  since  that  period,  for  steam  engines,  machinery  for  mano- 
facturing  and  other  establishments,  for  carriages,  for  buildings,  and 
for  various  implements  in  agriculture  and  the  mechanic  arts,  little 
doubt  can  be  entertained,  that  the  value  of  iron  made  and  manudie- 
tured  in  the  United  States,  must  be  from  forty  to  forty  five  millioos 
of  dollars.  The  value  of  nails  alone,  cannot  be  less  than  between 
four  and  five  millions.    In  1830,  one  hundred  steam  engines  were 

t  Dnpin'k  Forces  prodoctivss,  Ac.  ds  la  Fraace,  tooii.  9,  p.  90t. 


496 

/Hade  at  Pittsburgh,  and  in  1831,  sugar  mills  and  steam  en||Mi  I* 
the  Talue  of  9300,000  were  made  at  Cincinnati. 

ifitliring  the  period  under  review,  many  new  branches  of  the  mattv- 
facture  of  iron  have  been  established,  and  are  now  almost  daily  bdng 
established  in  different  parts  o{  the  United  States,  and  which  it  is  ia- 
possible  to  particularize — among  these,  however,  may  be  enameia- 
ted,  in  addition  to  steam  engines  and  machinery  for  a  great  yarieiy  of 
purposes,  the  manufacture  of  stoves,  chain  cables,  mill  and  croaa  col 
saws,  spades  and  shovels,  wood  screws,  sickles,  hammers,  gimblets, 
brazier^s  rods,  door  locks  of  various  kinds,  latches,  surgical  instn- 
ments,  knives,  razors,  and  many  other  articles  of  cutlery,  ▼arioos 
kinds  of  carpenter's  tools  ;  and  there  is  a  vast  increase  in  the  mana- 
iacture  of  muskets  and  rifles,  and  of  edge  tools  generally. 

LEATHER. 

.  The  manufacture  of  leather  is  of  great  importance  in  every  cooa- 
try,  and  particularly  in  the  United  States ;  and  has  been  more  or  ka 
encouraged  by  duties  on  imports  of  articles  of  this  material,  from  the 
commencement  of  the  government.  In  consequence  of  thiji,  the 
home  market  has  long  since  been  supplied  by  the  American  manufte- 
turer ;  and  boots,  shoes,  and  saddlery,  for  many  years,  have  been  ex- 
ported from  this  country,  to  the  amount  of  between  three  and  foor 
hundred  thousand  dollars  a  year.  The  business  of  making  shoes, 
boots,  saddlery,  harness  and  trunks,  is  carried  on  in  almost  every  vill- 
age and  town  throughout  the  United  States.  The  inhabitants  of  some 
towns  are  almost  exclusively  employed  in  making  shoes  alone.  In 
the  town  of  Lynn,  in  Massachusetts,  the  number  of  shoes  made  in 
1832,  was  one  million  six  hundred  and  seventy  five  thousand  seven 
hundred  and  eighty  one — valued  at  $942,101 ;  giving  employment  to 
one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  forty  one  males,  and  one  thooaaod 
seven  hundred  and  seventy  five  females.  Many  of  the  fishermen  of 
Marblehead,  not  finding  a  market  for  their  fish,  have  lately  turned 
shoemakers. 