

Labor  and  board,  estimated  at     .        .        •  $80 

Reeling  the  silk,        ,        .        •        .        .  34 

—  114 

Net  proceeds, §80 

This  subject  is  now  claiming  the  attention  of  people,  in  various 
parts  of  the  United  States ;  and  we  would  here  suggest,  whether  the 
farms,  attached  to  houses  of  industry  for  paupers,  might  not  be  plant- 
ed with  the  mulberry ;  and  a  part  of  the  inmates  of  these  houses,  b« 
hereafter  profitably  employed,  in  rearing  and  feeding  silk  worms. 


604 

CHEMICAti. 

The  application  of  chemistry  to  manufactures  and  the  arts,  is  wefl 
.known ;  but  of  the  extent  of  such  application,  or  rather  of  the  ezleat 
of  the  manufacture  of  chemicals  in  the  United  States,  we  were  igno- 
rant, until  we  saw  an  able  report  on  this  subject  made  by  a  commit- 
tee of  the  New  York  Convention.    This  report  informed  us,  that,  in 
1831,  there  were  not  less  than  thirty  chemical  establishments  in  this 
country,  having  a  capital  of  $1,168,000,  (|pfl||baking  varioas  chemi- 
cal articles,  to  the  annual  value  of  $l,OO^fiiO,  and  emplojriog  nine 
hundred  hands.     This  kind  of  manufacture  was  secured,  principsDy 
by  the  tariff  of  1824.    The  committee  state,  that  the  general  price  of 
chemical  articles,  in  the  United  States,  was,  at  that  time,  one  half  less 
than  before  their  domestic  manufacture,  under  the  tariff  of  1824 ;  and 
In  some  instances,  the  difference  was  much  greater — ^That  in  1820,  the 
price  of  Epsom  salts  was  from  eleven  to  twelve  cents  per  pound — in 
1824  a  duty  of  four  cents,  was  imposed  on  foreign  salts  of  this  de- 
scription ;  and  the  price  in  1831,  was  three  and  a  half  cents  per  lb. 

American  chrome  yellow,  was,  for  a  short  time,  exported  to  Great 
Britain,  not  being  embraced  in  the  tariff  of  British  duties. 

The  British  manufacturer  of  this  article,  however,  soon  procured 
a  duty  upon  its  importation,  amounting  to  a  prohibition.  Ahout  four 
millions  of  pounds  of  copperas  is  now  made  in  the  United  States, 
three  millions  of  pounds  in  Vermont,  five  hundred  thousand  in  Ohio, 
and  five  hundred  thousand  in  other  States.  This  article  is  sufficient 
for  the  supply  of  this  country,  and  in  1832,  was  sold,  at  two  and  two 
and  a  half  cents  per  pound. 

Among  the  articles  made  in  these  various  chemical  establishments* 
are  calomel  and  other  mercurial  preparations,  glauber  salts,  rocheUe 
salts,  tartar  emetic,  ammonia,  sulphate  of  quinine,  oil  of  vitriol,  tar- 
taric acid,  aqua  fortis,  prussian  blue,  chrome  yellow,  chrome  green, 
nitric  acid,  muriatic  acid,  barilla,  oxalic  acid,  chloride  of  lime,  chlo- 
ride of  soda,  refined  salt  petre,  refined  borax,  refined  camphor,  acetic 
acid,  acetate  of  lead,  nitrate  of  lead,  prussiate  of  potash,  bi-chromate 
of  potash,  ^.c. 