

IRON. 

Iron  and  its  various  manufactures,  may,  in  importance,  claim  a 
preference  over  all  others.  For  national  defense  it  is  absolutely  in- 
dispensable ;  and  it  is  essential  to  the  prosperity,  and  even  existence 
of  agriculture,  commerce,  and  the  mechanic  arts.  Without  it,  the 
merchant  cannot  build  his  ship ;  and  if  he  could,  neither  the  farmert 
nor  the  manufacturer,  nor  the  mechanic  could  furnish  him  with  any 
thing  to  carry  in  it.  Without  it,  man  never  has,  and  never  can  make 
much  progress  in  the  arts  of  civilized  life.  The  most  untutored  sav- 
age, in  the  remotest  island  of  the  Pacific,  soon  learns  its  value,  and 
will  barter  any  thing  he  possesses,  for  a  hatchet  or  a  knife,  to  enable 
him  the  better  to  shape  his  canoe,  or  to  point  his  arrow.  Indeed,  it  la 
almost  literally  true,  that  where  there  is  no  iron,  there  is  no  civil- 
ization. Well,  therefore,  might  Hamilton,  in  his  report  on  manufac- 
tures before  referred  to,  recommend  this  branch  of  domestic  economy, 
to  the  special  patronage  and  protection  of  the  national  Legislature. 
**  The  manufactures  of  this  article"  he  says,  referring  to  iron,  '*  are 
entitled  to  a  preeminent  rank ;  none  are  more  essential  in  their  kinds, 
nor  so  extensive  in  their  use.  They  constitute  in  whole  or  in  part, 
the  implements,  or  the  materialM,  or  both,  of  almost  every  useful  oc- 
cupation.   Their  instrumentality  is  every  where  conspicuous.'' 

To  encourage  the  production  and  manufacture  of  this  article,  he 
not  only  proposed  duties  on  imports  of  foreign  iron  and  its  manufac- 
tures ;  but,  also,  with  respect  to  fire  arms,  and  military  weapons  ne- 
cessary for  national  defense,  suggested  the  propriety  of  making  them 
at  the  public  expense. 

This  encouragement  was  the  more  necessary,  at  that  time,  because 
the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain,  had  a  few  years  before,  with  a  view* 
no  doubt,  to  prevent  the  rivalry  of  foreign  nations  in  this  particular 
manoiaeture,  paiaed  an  act  (26ih  Geo.  III.)  prohibiting  the  eanyiog 


4M  *■* 


■ 


* 


tf 


f 


chH  of  the  realm,  all  the  various  tools  or  instruments  then 
the  various  manufactures  of  iron.  This  may  be  considered  a  nopple 
ment  to  the  various  acts  passed  prior  to  the  American  revoluiioif 
prohibiting  the  manufacture  of  iron  in  the  colonies. 

We  have  no  data  by  which  to  ascertain  the  quantity  of  iron  prodo- 
ced  in  the  United  States,  prior  to  1810.    At  that  time,  according  to 
the  returns  of  the  marshals,  the  quantity  of  bar  iron  made  in  this 
country,  was  twenty  four  thousand  four  hundred  and  seven ly  ooe 
tons,  then  valued  at  $%640,778 ;  of  which  ten  thousand  nine  hundred 
and  sixty  nine  tons  were  made  in  Pennsylvania.     From  that  time  to 
1830,  the  quantity  had  increased  to  one  hundred  and  twelve  thoosaiid 
eight  hundred  and  sixty  six  tons.    This  appears,  from  a  report  of  the 
eommittee  of  the  Convention,  in  1831,  appointed  to  investigate  this 
subject — a  report  drawn  up  with  no  little  care  and  attention.    B 
thews,  that  in  addition  to  the  quantity  of  the  bar  iron  above  men- 
tioned, one  hundred  and  ninety  one  thousand  6ve  hundred  and  thirty 
six  tons  of  pig  iron  was  also,  at  that  time  made  in  this  country,  and 
that  the  value  of  both  amounted  to  $13,329,760 ;  and  that  in  making 
this,  no  less  than  twenty  nine  thousand  two  hundred  and  fifty  foor 
men  were  employed,  and  one  hundred  and  forty  six  thousand  two  boa* 
dred  and  seventy  three  subsisted,  whose  annual  wages  was  88^778,490; 
and  that  in  their  support,  the  fiu*mer  furnished  food  to  the  value  of 
$4,000,490. 