

Flint  glass, $1,:K)0,000 

Crown  window  glass,        ....  160,000 

Cylinder  window  glass,      ....  851,000 

Glass  bottles,  phials,  apothecaries  ware,  demijohns, 

carboys,  dbc 200,000 

$2,601,000 

Employing  men, 1,800 

Whose  wages  amount  to  ...  $600,000 

From  additional  information  obtained,  subsequent  to  the  date  of  the 
report,  it  was  supposed,  that  the  amount  of  the  domestic  manufacture 
of  glass,  was  $3,000,000.  In  Dec.  1834,  the  number  of  glass  works 
in  Pittsburgh  had  increased  to  ten. 

The  value  of  window  glass  imported,  and  consumed  in  the  United 
States,  for  five  years  past,  has  not  exceeded  annually,  about  $60^000. 

SPIRITOUS   LIQUORS 

Have  been  generally  classed  among  the  manuiactarea  of  this  countryt 
and  have  constituted  no  small  item  in  the  list  of  mauu&ctured  arti* 
cles.  In  1810,  as  we  have  before  shewn,  the  quantity  made,  was 
about  twenty  five  millions  of  gallons,  five  millions  from  molasses,  and 
the  remainder  from  grain  or  fruit ;  and  the  whole  was  then  valued  at 
$14,088,776,  being  more  than  one  tenth  of  all  the  manufactures  of 
the  United  States,  and  between  one  third  and  a  half  of  the  manufae* 
tures  of  wool,  cotton  and  flax«  at  that  time. 


§ 


SOS 

We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  the  quantity  bow  made  in  tlui 
country.  Before  the  temperance  reformation,  its  increase  kept  pact 
with  the  population.  By  this  ratio,  the  quantity  now  made  and  con- 
sumed, could  not  be  much  less  than  about  fifty  millions  of  gallonst 
and  the  value  about  920,000,000,  but  to  the  consumer,  by  the  quart, 
pint  and  half  pint,  more  than  double  that  sum. 

That  the  consumption  has  greatly  decreased  in  some  parts  of  the 
United  States,  in  consequence  of  the  numerous  aasociations  of  indi- 
Wduals,  against  their  use,  cannot  be  doubtetTl  Yet  It  is  a  lamentable 
£Bu:t,  that  large  quantities  are  still  made,  particularly  in  the  states,  bar- 
ing a  great  surplus  of  grain.  We  regret  to  state,  that,  in  1833,  53,680 
barrels  of  whiskey  were  brought  to  Cincinnati,  by  the  Miami  canal. 
We  cannot  but  hope,  the  people  of  the  west,  will  ere  long,  find  some 
other  mode  of  sending  their  surplus  grain  to  market,  than  through  a 
medium,  so  destructive  to  the  health  and  morals  of  the  people.  To 
the  political  economist,  as  well  as  to  the  philanthropist  and  christian, 
it  is  a  subject  of  the  deepest  regret,  that  so  many  millions  of  doUars, 
should  be  annually  lost,  and  worse  than  lost  to  the  community. 

SILK. 

The  consumption  of  foreign  silk,  in  the  United  States,  in  yearly, 
about  hve  millions  and  half  of  doUars,  and  constitutes  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  domestic  consumption  of  this  elegant  and  valuable  arti- 
cle of  dress  ;  and  yet,  there  is  no  doubt,  that  silk  may  be  made  and 
manufactured  in  this  country,  as  well  as  in  Europe.  The  experiment 
made  in  Connecticut  proves  this.  This  experiment  was  long  since 
made  in  the  town  of  Mansfield  in  that  state,  and  we  trust,  that  the  fol- 
lowing brief  historical  sketch  of  the  first  introduction  of  the  mulberry 
tree  into  that  village,  and  the  progress  and  present  state  of  the  silk 
manufacture  ihere,  will  not  be  found  an  uninteresting  record  of  vil- 
lage industry. 