518 

**  If  the  §jnti&m  o(  perfect  liberty  to  indiistry  and  eommercey**  Mtyv 
Hamilton,  **  were  the  prevailing^  system  of  nations,  the  argomentat 
which  dissuade  a  countrj,  in  the  predicament  of  the  United  States, 
from  the  zealous  pursuit  of  manufactures,  would  doubtless  have  great 
force.** 

**  It  will  not  be  affirmed,  that  they  might  not  be  permitted,  with  few 
exceptions,  to  serve  as  a  rule  of  national  conduct  In  such  a  state  of 
things,  each  country  would  have  the  full  benefit  of  its  peculiar  advan« 
tages,  to  compensate  for  its  deficiencies  or  disadvantages.  If  one 
nation  were  in  a  condition  to  supply  manufactured  articles,  on  better 
terms  than  another,  that  other  might  find  an  abundant  indemnification 
in  a  superior  capacity  to  furnish  the  prodnce  of  the  soil.  And  a  free 
exchange,  mutually  beneficial,  of  the  commodities  which  each  waa 
able  to  supply,  on  the  best  terms,  might  be  carried  on  between  themt 
supporting  in  full  vigor,  the  industry  of  each.  And  though  the  cir- 
cumstances which  have  been  mentioned,  and  others,  which  will  be 
unfolded  hereafter,  render  it  probable^  that  nations  merely  agriculio* 
ral,  would  not  enjoy  the  same  degree  of  opulence,  in  proportion  to 
their  numbers,  as  those  which  united  manufactures  with  agriculture ; 
yet  the  progressive  improvements  of  the  lands  of  the  farmer,  might, 
in  the  end,  atone  for  an  inferior  degree  of  opulence  in  the  mean  time ; 
and,  in  a  case  in  which  opposite  considerations  are  pretty  equally 
balanced,  the  option  ought,  perhaps,  always  to  be  in  favor  of  leamng 
industry  to  its  own  discretion.*' 

"  But  the  system  which  has  been  mentioned,  is  far  from  character- 
ixing  the  general  policy  of  nations.  The  prevalent  one  has  been 
regulated  by  an  opposite  spirit.  The  consequence  of  it  is,  that  the 
United  Slates  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  the  situation  of  a  eoontry 
precluded  from  foreign  commerce.  They  can,  indeed,  without  difi* 
culty,  obtain  from  abroad,  the  manufactured  supplies  of  which  they 
are  in  want ;  but  they  experience  numerous  and  very  injurious  im- 
pediments  to  emission  and  vent  of  their  own  commodities.  Nor  it 
this  the  case  in  reference  to  a  single  foreign  nation  only.  The  regu* 
lations  of  several  countries  with  which  we  have  the  most  extensive 
intercourse,  throw  serious  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  principal  sta- 
ples of  the  United  States.  In  such  a  position  of  things,  the  United 
States  cannot  exchange  with  Europe  on  equal  terms ;  and  the  waol 
of  reciprocity  would  render  them  the  victim  of  a  system  which  should 
induce  them  to  confine  their  views  to  agriculture,  and  refrain  froM 
manufactures.  A  constant  and  increasing  necessity  on  their  part,  §os 
the  commodities  of  Europe,  and  only  a  partial  and  occasional  dsmsmi 