

The  manufacture  of  cotton  bagging  has  increased,  with  the  increase 
of  cotton,  an4  has  become  an  article  of  no  small  importance  to  the 
cotton  planter. 

Aboiit  one  million  and  one  hundred  thousand  bales  of  cotton,  are 
raised,  in  the  United  States,  requiring  about  five  yards  of  bagging  for 
each  bale,  making  dve  millions  and  a  half  of  yards  necessary  for  the 
annual  consumption.  The  average  quantity  of  this  article  imported, 
in  the  years  1832  and  1833,  was  one  million  one  hundred  and  twelve 
thousand  3rards,  leaving  for  consumption  of  domestic  production,  say 
four  millions  and  four  hundred  thousand  yards,  which,  at  20  cents  per 
yard,  is  $880,000.  The  price  of  domestic  linen,  is  now  much  lets, 
than  in  1810 ;  and  the  whole  value  of  the  domestic  manufacture  of 
flax  and  hemp,  in  the  United  States,  ought  not,  perhaps,  to  be  ettimi- 
ted,  higher  than  between  five  and  six  millions  of  dollars. 


510 

Various  other  manufactures  haye  been  established  and  are  sow 
being  established  in  this  country ;  among  these,  we  may  enumerate 
looking  glasses,  the  printing  and  binding  of  books,  umbrellas,  bmalMS 
of  all  kinds,  brass  nails,  stockings,  gloves,  wafers,  webbing,  laee  and 
fringes,  mathematical  and  musical  instruments,  silk,  whips,  pocket 
books,  ready  made  clothing,  earthen  ware,  oil,  powder,  beer,  ale  and 
porter,  wire,  brick,  types,  glue,  clocks,  printing  presses,  lampe,  spec- 
tacles, coffee  mills,  suspenders,  wool  and  cotton  cards,  oil  clotli% 
bellows,  printer's  ink,  India  rubber,  and  many  others  which  hsTC  not 
come  to  our  notice. 

When  the  value  of  these  are  added  to  those  before  mentioned,  the 
aggregate  value  of  the  manufactures  of  the  United  States  cannot  be 
estimated  at  less  than  from  three  hundred  and  twenty  ^ve  to  three 
hundred  and  fifty  millions  of  dollars. 

When  the  reader  compares  this  amount  with  that  of  foreign  articles 
consumed  here,  which,  afier  deducting  teas,  wines,  coffee,  and  spices, 
will  not  exceed  fiAy  millions  of  dollars  a  year,  he  cannot  fail  doly  to 
appreciate  the  importance  of  this  branch  of  domestic  industry ;  and 
must,  we  imagine,  be  sensible,  not  only  of  their  importance,  bat  the 
absolute  necessity  of  sustaining  them. 

With  respect  to  the  total  production  and  consumption  of  the  United 
States,  estimates  have  varied  from  seven  hundred  to  fourteen  hundred 
millions  of  dollars.  This  difference  is  not  surprising,  when  it  is  con- 
sidered, that  all  estimates  of  this  kind  in  this  country,  rest  so  much  oo 
conjecture.  The  first  supposes  the  expense  of  each  person  to  be  fifty 
dollars  a  year,  and  the  latter,  that  this  expense  amounts  to  one  hun- 
dred dollars.  These  are  the  two  extremes — one  is  too  low,  and  the 
other  probably  too  high ;  and  yet  it  is  difficult  to  fix  upon  any  inter- 
mediate sum,  founded  on  such  data  as  will  be  satisfactory.  When  it 
is  considered,  that  the  expense  of  supporting  paupers  in  this  coantrj, 
on  an  average,  cannot  be  less  than  fiAy  dollars  a  head,  or  about  one 
dollar  per  week,  the  first  estimate,  even  including  the  slave  popula- 
tion, must  be  too  low. 