


If 


\ 


/ 


I  515  - 


tatlTes,  the  motion  to  strike  out  this  part  of  the  act,  was  nepitivecl 
a  tnajority  of  thirty  one ;  and  the  journals  will  shew  that  six  out  of 
eight  of  the  memhers  of  South  Carolina,  were  in  the  majority. 

The  power  of  the  national  legislature,  to  afford  protection  to  this 
portion  of  American  industry,  was  not  questioned,  until  182D  or 
1824.  Up  to  this  time,  no  one  seemed  to  doubt,  that  this  power,  ex- 
tended, to  the  promotion  of  the  manufacturing,  as  well  as  the  commer- 
cial interests  of  the  country. 

The  principles,  which  should  govern,  in  the  exercise  of  this  power* 
are  plain  and  obvious.  They  have  reference  to  national,  and  not  in- 
dividual benefit  It  should  never  be  exercised  for  the  benefit  of  the 
few,  to  the  injury  of  the  many.  The  inrrease  of  American  shipping, 
for  instance,  was  deemed  advantageous  to  the  nation  at  large ;  and 
therefore,  the  discriminating  tonnage  and  other  duties  were  imposed. 
And  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  the  navigating  interests  of  the 
country,  the  distant  trade  with  China,  has  been  always  given  to  Amer- 
ican vessels  alone,  by  the  discriminating  duties  on  teas.  This  gave 
the  American  merchants,  a  complete  monopoly  of  that  trade — a 
trade,  which,  now  amounts  to  about  eight  millions  a  year.  And 
when  the  China  merchant,  is  heard  objecting  to  the  tarilF,  on  the  prin- 
ciples of  *'  free  trade,^^  he  might  well  be  asked,  whether  thai  trade  cwbl 
hefree^  which  he  alone  can  carry  on  ?  And  the  manufacturer  or  the 
agriculturist,  might,  also,  ask  him,  whether  tea,  might  not  be  cheaper* 
if  allowed  to  be  brought  here  as  freely  in  foreign,  a«  in  domestic  ships. 

The  power  of  Congress,  however,  thus  to  encourage  and  pnitect 
American  shipping,  has  never  been  questioned ;  and  yet,  who  will 
venture  to  assert,  that  the  manufacture  of  clothing,  is  not  as  necessa- 
ry, for  the  well  being  of  a  nation,  as  the  manufacture  of  ships  ? 

Congress  has  not  limited  its  power  of  protection,  merely  to  the 
imposition  of  duties  for  that  purpose ;  but  has  extended  it,  to  the  ex- 
emption of  raw  materials,  necessary  for  certain  manufactures,  from 
any  duty  whatever.  The  list  of  exemptions  has  increased,  with  the 
increase  of  manufacturrs ;  and  in  ISIO,  protection  and  encouragement 
in  this  way  was  extended  even  to  literature  and  the  fine  arts.  By  that 
act,  philosophical  apparatus,  instruments,  book)*,  maps,  charts,  statues, 
casts,  paintings,  drau-in<:s,  engravings,  specimens  of  sculpture,  cabi- 
nets of  coins,  gems,  medals,  and  all  other  collections  of  antiquities* 
statuary,  modeling,  paintinir*  drawing,  etching  or  engraving,  special- 
ly imported  by  order,  and  for  the  use  of  any  society  incorporated 
for  philosophical  or  literary  purposes,  or  for  the  encouragement  of 
$kefau  artSf  or  by  order  and  for  ibe  use  of  any  seminary  of  learning* 