


i 


/ 


514 

p 

for  their  own,  in  return,  could  not  but  azpoae  them  tH  a  state  of  im- 
pOFerishmentf  compared  with  the  opulence,  to  which  their  political 
and  natural  advantages  authorize  them  to  aspire.'^ 

How  far  the  present  situation  of  the  United  States,  in  regard  to 
foreign  restrictions,  is  similar  to  that  described  in  the  foregoing  ex- 
tract,  will  be  noticed  hereafter.  The  policy  of  countervailing  foreign 
restrictions,  was,  not  only  recommended  by  Hamilton,  but  also,  by 
Jefferson,  in  his  report  made  to  Congress,  in  December,  1703,  in  case 
they  could  not  be  removed  by  negociation. 

The  war  however  in  Europe,  and  the  consequent  relaxation  or  total 
removal  of  those  restrictions,  rendered  any  additional  countervailing 
actff,  on  the  part  of  the  American  government,  at  that  time,  unne- 
cessary. 

On  the  return  of  peace,  however,  for  a  short  period,  in  1801,  under 
the  treaty  of  Amiens,  some  of  the  American  manufacturers,  again,  in 
some  degree,  felt  the  pressure  of  foreign  restrictions,  and  applied  to 
Congress  for  relief;  and  the  committee  of  commerce  and  manufac* 
tures,  (for  both  these  great  interests,  were  then  and  long  after,  entrus- 
ted to  the  same  committee,)  in  their  report  on  these  petitions,  again 
recognize  the  power^  as  well  as  the  duty  of  Congress  to  protect 
manufactures. 

**  In  the  present  juncture,*'  the  committee  say,  *'  our  infant  manu- 
factures peculiarly  demand  and  merit  the  protection  of  government.^ 
The  war,  however,  being  soon  after  renewed,  rendered  any  extensive 
legislative  protection  then  unnecssary.  When,  however,  these  wars, 
as  well  as  that  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  ceased ; 
and  the  nations  of  Europe  again  resorted  to  their  old  restrictive  sys- 
tems, countervailing^  acts,  on  the  part  of  the  American  government^ 
were  indispensable,  for  the  preservation  and  protection  of  the  manu- 
^facturing  and  agricultural  interests  of  the  country. 

The  tariff  of  1SI6,  as  we  have  before  shewn,  was  framed  with  this 
view  ;  and  we  had  an  opportunity  of  knowing,  that  the  constitutional 
power  of  Congress,  to  do  this,  was  then  questioned  by  no  one,  in  the 
debates  on  this  tariff.  And  yet  some  part  of  this  act  presented  this 
question,  directly  to  the  consideration  of  that  body.  We  allude  par- 
ticularly to  that  part,  which  went  entirely  to  exclude,  by  the  minimum 
principle,  the  low  priced  East  India  cottons,  from  the  American  mar^ 
ket.  In  the  debates,  on  this  part  of  the  act,  it  was  declared,  that  a 
total  prohibition  of  these  cottons  was  intended  ;  and  yet  the  constitu- 
tional power  of  Congress  to  do  this,  was  called  in  question  by  no  one« 
though  its  policy  was  doubted  by  many.    In  the  House  of  Represen- 