

Estimates  have  been  made  of  the  total  amount  of  production  and 
consumption  of  several  nations  of  Europe ;  yet  such  is  the  difference 
between  the  state  and  condition  of  the  people  of  most  of  those  na- 
tions, and  the  people  of  the  United  States,  arising  from  a  variety  of 
causes ;  and  such  the  difference  in  the  price  of  many  necessary  articles, 
that  these  estimates  cannot  generally  be  a  sure  basis  of  similar  esti* 
mates  in  this  country.  The  state  and  condition  of  the  people  of  die 
Netherlands,  approximates  nearer,  we  believe,  to  that  of  the  people 
of  the  United  States,  than  any  other  European  nation. 


511 

The  tnoual  productions  of  the  Netherlands,  sboat  ihe  year  1888, 
with  a  population  of  six  millions,  was  estimated  at  £113,370,166 
sterling,  or  about  •544,176,000;  making  the  annual  expense  of  each 
person,  about  ninety  dollars.  If  we  take  this  as  a  rule,  and  call  the 
population  fourteen  millions,  the  total  production  of  the  United  States 
would  be  about  twelve  hundred  millions  and  a  half.  But  as  the  ag- 
ricultural productions  of  the  United  States  must,  we  think,  be  lower 
than  those  of  the  Netherlands,  we  ought  not,  perhaps,  to  estimate  the 
yearly  expense  of  each  person  in  this  country,  higher  than  from 
eighty  to  eighty  five  dollars,  which  would  make  the  total  production 
of  the  United  States,  from  eleven  to  twelve  hundred  millions. 

We  have  before  stated,  that  the  general  government,  under  the 
present  constitution,  at  its  commencement,  in  the  imposition  of  du- 
ties, kept  in  view  the  encouragement  and  protection  of  the  manulae- 
turing  interests  of  the  country.  A  recurrence  to  the  tariff  of  Julyt 
1789,  will  shew,  that  it  was  the  intention  of  Congress  to  encourage 
and  protect  the  production  and  manufacture  of  the  following  artidest 
among  others,  viz. :  malt  liquors,  candles  of  tallow,  spermaceti  and 
wax,  soap,  cheese,  boots  and  shoes,  steel,  paper,  hats,  nails  and  spikest 
hemp,  manufactured  tobacco,  window  glass,  slit  and  rolled  iron  and 
castings,  coaches  and  carriages,  and  wool  cards.  The  debates  on  this 
tariff  clearly  evince,  that  in  imposing  higher  duties  on  these  articles 
than  on  others,  the  great  statesmen  of  that  day  intended  to  promote 
the  manufacture  of  them  in  their  own  country. 

A  difference  of  opinion  then  existed,  as  to  the  extent  of  such  pro- 
tection, but  not  a  doubt  was  expressed,  as  to  the  power  of  Congress 
to  afford  it 

Nor  were  the  people  themselves,  at  that  time,  unmindful  of  the 
principal  reasons  which  induced  them  to  adopt  the  new  form  of  goT- 
emment.  No  sooner  had  Congress  met  under  its  authority,  tlian  they 
presented  petitions  to  that  body,  praying  for  the  immediate  exercise 
of  those  powere  with  which  it  was  invested,  for  the  promotion  of  the 
manufacturing  as  well  as  the  eommercial  interests  of  the  eountry. 
The  petitioners  from  Baltimore  say :  **  The  happy  period  having  now 
arrived,  when  the  United  States  are  placed  in  a  new  situation ;  whea 
the  adoption  of  the  general  government  gives  our  sovereign  legisla- 
ture, the  sole  and  exclusive  power  of  laying  duties  on  imports ;  your 
petitionera  rejoice  at  the  prospect  this  affords  them,  that  America* 
freed  from  the  commercial  shackles  which  have  so  long  bound  befy 
will  see  and  pursue  her  true  interest,  becoming  independent  tn/od, 
as  well  as  in  name ;  and  they  confidently  hope,  that  the  encourage^ 