

The  average  amount  of  exports  of  domestic  produce  from  this  coun- 
try, from  1821  to  1830,  as  before  stated,  was  953,157,206;  and  of 
this,  cotton,  tobacco  and  rice,  was  $33,157,206,  leaving  for  all  others, 
920,368,252 ;  and  if  we  take  from  this  sum,  the  amount  of  manaftic- 
tured  articles,  being  $5,485,661,  it  will  leave  only  $14,664,044.  Thus, 
while  four  millions  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  States,  freely 
export  their  surplus  produce,  to  the  amount  of  more  than  thirty  eight 
millions  of  dollars,  the  other  eight,  export  only  to  the  amount  of 
about  twenty  millions ;  and  more  than  one  quarter  of  this,  is  made  up 
of  manufactured  articles. 

The  value  of  the  imports  consumed  by  these  eight  millions  of  in- 
habitants, must  exceed  the  amount  of  their  exports  of  domestic  pro- 
duce, from  fifteen  to  twenty  millions.  The  difference  must  be  paid 
for,  by  them,  either  by  purchasing  the  produce  of  the  south,  or  by 
the  profits  arising  from  the  carrying  trade,  or  from  both. 

We  may  here  ask,  whether  this  state  of  things,  in  relation  to  the 
intercourse  between  the  United  States  and  the  dilferent  countries  of 
Europe,  so  far  as  respects  two  thirds  of  the  people  of  the  United 
States,  is  that  mutual  exchange  of  productions,  between  nations,  which 
constitutes  commercial  reciprocity  ?  or,  in  any  manner,  can  be  con- 
sidered as  "free  trade?" 

Freedom  of  trade,  as  we  understand  it,  consists  in  an  unrestricted 
exchange  of  productions,  between  nations,  as  between  individuals  of 
the  same  nation. 

**  No  one,"  says  Mc  Culloch,  "  thinks  of  performing  every  thin^^ 
for  himself,  nor  of  making  at  home,  wkA  would  cost  him  more  to 


619 

make  thao  to  bof.  The  Uilor,  as  Dr.  Smith  ban  remarked,  does  Dot 
attempt  to  make  his  own  shoes,  but  buys  them  from  a  shoemaker ; 
the  shoemaker,  on  his  part,  does  not  attempt  to  mak^hiaown  clothes, 
but  employs  a  tailor ;  and  the  farmer  makes  neither  the  one  nor  the 
other,  but  obtains  them,  in  exchange  for  his  corn  and  his  cattle.  Each 
individual  finds  it  for  his  advantaget  to  employ  himself,  in  some  par- 
ticular business,  and  to  exchange  a  part  of  his  peculiar  produce,  for 
such  parts  of  the  produce  of  others,  as  he  may  have  occasion  for.*' 
**  And  it  is  not  very  easy,*'  he  adds,  **  to  see,  how  that  conduct  which 
is  universally  admitted  to  be  wise  and  proper  in  individuals,  should  be 
foolish  and  absurd  in  the  case  of  a  state,  that  is,  of  the  total  number 
of  individuals,  inhabiting  a  particular  tract  of  country.**  Again,  the 
same  author  says,  **  Commerce,  whether  carried  on  between  individu- 
als  of  the  same  or  of  different  countries,  is  founded,  on  a  fair  prit^ 
ciple  of  reciprocity — buying  and  selling  are,  in  it,  what  action  and 
re-action  are  in  physics,  equal  and  contrary.  Those,  who  will  not 
buy  from  others,  render  it  impossible  for  others  to  buy  of  them.  Ev- 
ery sale  implies  an  equal  purchase^  and  every  purchase  an  equal  sale. 
Hence,  to  prohibit  buying,  is  exactly  the  same  thing,  in  effeeU  as  to 
prohibit  selling.** 