

New  England  alone  now  consumes  annually,  at  least,  nine  hundred 
thousand  barrels  of  flour,  brought  from  other  parts  of  the  union. 
This  does  not  rest  merely  on  conjecture.  In  1832,  the  quantity  of 
flour  brought  into  the  port  of  Boston  was  three  hyndred  and  eigUly  six 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  nine  barrels,  and  in  1833,  was  four  hundred 
and  forty  five  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty  five,  making  for  these 
two  years  eight  hundred  and  thirty  two  thousand  one  hundred  and  forty 
four— the  quantity  exported  from  this  place  to  foreign  countries,  in  these 
two  years,  was  one  hundred  and  nineteen  thousand  one  hundred  and  for- 
ty six  barr^j^  leaving  for  home  consumption  seven  hundred  and  twelve 

«  See  second  annual  report  of  the  board  of  trade  to  Parliament,  made  in*  18S3L 

* 

V 


^  68B 

thoastnd  six  hundred  and  sixty  tefeo,  or  three  hundred  and  fifty  six 
thousand  in  each  year.  In  1832,  the  quantity  brought  to  the  mann-  ^  f. 
facturing  town  of  Providence  was  eighty  four  thousand  six  hundred 
and  sixty  seven  barrels,  (none  of  which  we  believe  was  exported.) 
This  would  make  for  those  two  places  four  hundred  and  forty  thou* 
sand  barrels  a  year;  and  this,  we  tpprehead,  could  not  be  more  than 
one  half,  at  least,  of  the  whole  brought  to  New  England.  And 
we  would  observe,  that  the  whole  quantity  of  flour  exported  to  Eu- 
rope in  1833  was  about  two  hundred  and  twelve  thousand  barrelff  * 
and  in  1833  was  only  about  fifty  thousand ;  and  that  the  average 
quantity  exported  to  all  parts  of  the  world,  in  the  same  two  years, 
was  nine  hundred  ten  thousand  and  six  barrels. 

The  quantity  of  Indian  corn  consumed  in  New  England,  brought 
from  other  parts  of  the  union,  cannot  be  less  than  between  two  and  three 
millions  of  bushels  a  year,  when  it  is  considered,  that  in  1833,  one 
million  and  four  hundred  thousand  were  brought  into  the  port  of  Bos- 
ton alone,  and  only  sixteen  thousand  one  hundred  and  eighty  six  bush- 
els of  this  was  exported.  And  the  whole  quantity  of  this  article  ex- 
ported from  the  United  States,  the  same  year,  was  but  four  hundred 
and  eighty  seven  thousand  one  hundred  and  seventy  four  bushels^ 

That  this  great  consumption  of  flour  and  com,  in  New  England,  and 
we  may  add,  of  pork  and  many  other  productioni  of  the  farmer,  has 
been  occasioned,  in  no  small  degree,  by  her  manufactures,  cannot  be 
doubted.  To  tnee  the  great  and  mutual  interests  necessarily  arising 
out  of  this  union  of  manufactures  with  agriculture,  would  lead  us  far 
beyond  our  design.    These  interests  are  seen  and  felt  not  merely  in  ^   ^ 

the  vieioity  of  the  manufacturing  establishments,  but  many  hundreds 
of  miles  in  the  interior,  as  well  as  along  the  sea  coast  The  manufac- 
turer of  Lowell  and  Providence  consumes  the  flour  of  Rochester,  of  ,'■ 
Cleaveland  and  Cincinnati,  as  well  as  that  of  Philadelphia,  Baltimore 
and  Richmond — the  former  takes  the  flour  of  the  latter,  in  exchange 
for  his  cottons— this  exchifige  the  American  wheat  grower  has  not  been 
able  to  make  with  the  manufacturer  of  Great  Britain,  or  any  other 
country  but  his  own,  since  1814. 