

The  different  situations  of  the  people  inhabiting  diflerent  por- 
tions of  this  extensive  country,  in  relation  to  a  foreign  market  for 
their  respective  productions,  as  above  exhibited,  certainly  present  ^ 
subjects  of  serious  consideration  and  reflection,  not  merely  to  the 
American  statesman,  and  economist,  but  to  every  individual,  in  this 
great  community.    ' 

While  the  people  of  the  middle,  eastern  and  western  states,  should 
not  call  upon  those  of  the  south,  to  make  a  sacrifice  of  their  peculiar 
advantages;  yet  they  day  still  ask  them,  to  consider,  whether,  if  their 
fellow  citizens,  inhabiting  higher  and  less  favored  latitudes,  cannot 
exchange  with  foreign  nations,  the  products  of  their  labor,  for  essen- 
tial supplies,  they  are  not  necessarily  compelled  to  make  them  for 
themselves  ?  4 


«  McCoUoch  on  coiniBarce,  New  York  cditioa,  183X 


§ 


593 

Perfect  unanimily.  in  measures,  lenillng  lo  enunterart  ihis 
policy,  so  far  rts  lliatpnlicy  atTccU  a  large  port  iif  ilic  communtty.  WM 
not  to  be  expecftd.  Too  mucli  should  not  be  altcmpieil  ■!  one*. 
Mutual  forbearance,  and  even  miKUtil  sacrifices  to  local  interetU  and 
•^feelings,  are  reijuisiie.  If  the  governuieiii  over  this  exl^Miwt^  caa»- 
■  •try  was  not  established.  Without  n  cumpromise  of  views  Mi^BtemM. 
either  real  or  imaginary.  It  wuuld  bs  a  luiracle,  inileed,  if  its  long  eo>- 
tinuance  can  be  secured  in  any  other  way.  With  theie  vii'w*.  iIm 
eonipromisc  act,  as  it  ia  called,  was  passed  ;  and  ii  is  our  wiah.  ibai  il 
■bould  have  a  full  and  fair  experiment ;  ami  we  most  siocefely  liopc,  il 
will  subserve  ihe  interest  of  every  part  of  this  great  community. — 
Wc*  cannot  but  ubacrve,  howeier,  that  in  the  conllict  of  opiniMt 
which  h>a  arisen,  on  ttis  qtieelion.  New  England  has  been  placed  in  a 
)teculiar,  aiM  we  nay  add,  nnforlunate  siluation.  She  has  been  ac- 
cused of  Ijoing  iht  author  and  supporter  of  the  sysieni :  and  on  that 
accDunl,  Inwards  her,  hare  been  directed  some  of  the  kecnpii  ahafu 
of  reproach  and  calumny.  Whatever  of  good  or  evil  there  may  he 
in  the  By«{em,  New  England  was  not  its  author. 

In  1MI6,  il  i^  well  known,  that  she  voted  with  the  aouih,  and  ■^nat 
NelpTork.  New  Jeraey,  reunsylvanta,  and  ihe  western  sUtea,  on  the 
great  question  of  t(ie  extent  of  pruiectiun  to  be  aflorded,  tu  the  Bmr- 
ufacLiire  of  coiion. 

The  committee,  who  reported  the  tarilT- bill  of  that  year,  rceon- 
mcndcd  a  doty  of  thirty  per  cent  on  all  imported  cotton  good*;  and 
on  the  qmstinn  of  reducing  il  to  tivcniy  £ve.  Warty  two  thirds  of 
the  New  Sp^nd  members  in  ihe  House,  voted  for  its  reduction, 
while  out  <w  ^rty  three  members  from  New  York,  New  Jmty  and 
Pennsylvania,  who  voted  on  the  qucation,  nine  only  were  In  laror  »f 
^  iL  The  question  of  reduction,  was.  therefore,  carried  byjbc  Ntw 
England  votes,  joined  with  those  of  the  souih. 