

a6io 

/ 


540 

at  the  present  time,  (January,  1835,)  cannot  be  mnch  lesa  than 
thousand.  This  astonishing  increase  of  inhabitants,  required  an 
increase  of  buildings,  to  acconnmodate  then),  and,  in  fact,  in  1828t  the 
number  of  houses  built  in  the  city  was  four  hundred  and  ninety  six,  of 
which  two  hundred  and  seventeen  were  of  brick. 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  the  Miami  canal,  which  passes  about 
sixty  five  miles,  through  one  of  the  most  fertile  and  productire  val- 
leys of  the  west,  enters  the  Ohio,  at  Cincinnati,  and  contributes  not 
a  little  to  its  prosperity  and  wealth.  The  flourishing  town  of  Dayton 
is  situated  at  the  head  of  this  canal.* 

Louisville  is  situated  on  the  Kentucky  side  of  the  Ohio,  about  one 
hundred  and  forty. miles  from  Cincinnati.  Its  location  opposite  the 
Mis  of  the  Ohio  liver,  gives  it  the  advantage  of  being  the  great  oat- 
let  of  a  large  portion  of  the  surplus  produce  of  Kentucky,  and  is,  no 
doubt,  destined  to  be  the  largest  commercial  place  in  that  state.  la 
182CH  the  number  of  inhabitants  was  four  thousand  and  twelve,  in 
1826,  seven  thousand  two  hundred,  and  in  1830,  ten  thousand  three 
hundred  and  forty  one.  The  rail  road  now  constructing  from  Lex- 
ington to  this  place,  will  greatly  contribute  to  its  prosperity. 

St.  Louis  is  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi,  about  twelve  hon- 
dred  miles  from  the  mouth  of  that  rirer,  in  the  State  of  Missouri.  It 
was  settled,  principally,  by  French  emigrants  from  Kaskaskias,  soon 
after  the  peace  of  1763,  when  France  ceded  to  Great  Britain,  her 
right  to  all  the  country  east  of  the  Mississippi.  It  came  to  the  Uni- 
ted States  by  the  cession  of  Louisiana  in  1803;  and  its  population  at 
that  time,  was  about  nine  hundred  and  twenty  five.  This  place  now 
commands  the  principal  trade  of  the  state  of  Missouri;  and  bids  fair 
to  be  the  great  emporium  of  the  country  west  of  it.     In  1830,  build- 

*We  shall  never  forget  our  astonishmeDt,  at  the  rapid  improvements,  in  this 
part  of  the  western  country,  when  on  the  first  of  Jaly,  1830,  we  visited  the 
village  of  Dayton,  and  particularly  the  elegant  mansion  and  beautiful  garden  of 
one  of  its  first  settlers,  (Mr.  Philips,)  who  informed  as,  that  only  twenty  four  years 
prerioos  to  that  time,  the  spot  on  which  his  house  stood,  was  a  wilderness,  which 
he  himself  had  cleai;ed — then  in  the  midst  of  a  flourishing  village,  with  a  popu- 
lation of  about  three  thousand,  and  within  a  few  rods  of  a  canal  navigable  to  Cin- 
cinnati. 

The  passage  along  this  canal,  presented  views,  of  extensive  and  Inxurioos 
fields  of  wheat,  com,  oats  and  grass,  and  several  flourishing  villages,  situated  oa 
or  near  its  banks.  The  village  of  Hamilton,  being  several  feet  lower  than  the 
general  level  of  the  canal,  wasleA  three  quarters  of  a  mile  from  it,  bat  its  enter- 
prising inhabitants  by  means  of  artificial  banks,  formed  a  lateral  canal, or  basta, 
tar  tht&r  use,  and  which  was  several  feet  higher  than  the  village  itself. 