

luly  and  Holland  have  the  honor  of  first  introducing  this  kind  of 
internal  improvement  into  Europe — and  it  is  now  calculated,  that 
about  one  twenty  sixth  part  of  Holland,  is  uken  up  by  canals.  Tbof 
were  gradually  introduced  into  the  diflerent  countries  of  Europe,  and 
by  means  of  canals,  and  rivers,  an  internal  water  communication, 
now  eonnecti  the  great  seas,  which  surround  that  quarter  of  tha 


S38 

world.  The  Caspian  is  connected  with  the  Baltic,  through  the  Wol- 
ga.  Lake  Ladoga,  and  intervening  canals — and  the  Baltic  is,  also, 
connected  with  the  Black  Sea,  through  other  rivers  and  artificial  wa^ 
ters.  At  the  west,  the  German  or  Northern  ocean  commoDicates 
with  the  Baltic,  likewise,  hy  canals,  through  Holstein,  and  throngh 
Sweden  by  lake  Wenern.  The  famous  canal  of  Languedoc,  in  tba 
•oath  of  France,  forms  a  communication  between  the  Meditairanean, 
and  the  Atlantic,  and  the  equally  famous  Caledonian  canal,  in  the 
north  of  Scotland,  forms  a  similar  communication  between  the  North- 
ern ocean  and  the  Irish  sea. 

Most  of  the  great  rivers,  in  different  parts  of  Enrope,  are,  abo, 
connected  by  canals,  thereby  greatly  facilitating  the  intercoarse  be- 
tween different  nations,  as  well  as  between  different  parte  of  the  same 
nation.  In  the  north  of  Germany,  the  Elbe,  the  Oder,  the  Vistah 
and  the  Niemen,  are  so  connected  by  canals,  as  to  form  a  water  com- 
nunnication,  about  one  hundred  miles  south  of  the  Baltic,  from  the 
frontiers  of  Russia,  to  the  city  of  Hamburgh,  a  distance  of  about  five 
hundred  miles. 

England,  at  first,  attempted  to  improve  her  internal  navigation,  hy 
removing  obstacles  from  her  'rivers ;  and  numerous  acts  of  ParKa- 
nent  were  passed,  for  this  purpose ;  and  it  was  not  until  1700,  that 
the  enterprising  and  persevering  spirit  of  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater, 
first  introduced  the  system  of  artificial  water  communication  In  that 
country — and  since  that  period,  England,  like  Holland,  has  been  cov- 
ered with  her  hundred  canals.  Her  mountains,  indeed,  presented 
obstacles,  unknown  in  Holland ;  but  her  vast  capital,  and  the  extraor- 
dinary ingenuity  and  talents  of  her  Brindleys,  her  Telfords  and  her 
Smeatons,  overcame  difiiculties  apparently  insurmountable.  Her 
mountains,  to  make  ways  for  canals,  have  been  perforated,  to  the  ex- 
tent,  in  the  whole,  of  more  than  forty  five  miles. 

To  this  kind  of  internal  improvement,  little  attention  was  paid  by 
the  Americans,  until  after  the  close  of  the  late  war  between  the  Uni* 
ted  States  and  Great  Britain. 

Prior  to  their  separation  from  the  parent  country,  they  had  little  in- 
ducement to  undertake  them — from  the  peace  of  1783,  to  the  adop- 
tion of  the  present  constitution,  they  had  not  the  means;  and  their  pe- 
euliar  situation  and  employment  during  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  ren- 
dered internal  improvements  of  this  kind  less  necessary. 