

The  city  of  Pituburgh,  situated  at  the  head  waters  of  the  Ohio^  is 
well  known  to  be  the  manufacturing  emporium  of  the  west.  Its  pop- 
ulation in  18^,  was  seven  thousand  two  hundred  and  forty  eight,  is 
1830,  twelve  thousand  five  hundred  and  sixty  eight,  and  in  ISBit 
with  its  suburbs,  Alleghany  town,  Birmingham,  dec  was  supposed  to 
be  thirty  thousand.  In  December,  1834,  while  we  are  writing,  tho 
Pittsburgh  Gazette  informs  us,  that  there  were  in  that  city,  sixteen 
**  founderies  and  engine  factories*^  of  the  largest  denomination,  besides 
numerous  others  of  less  magnitude — nine  '*  rolling  mills,*'  cutting  two 
tons  of  nails,  and  rolling  eight  tons  of  iron  per  day — six  **  cotton  fac- 
tories,^ having  twenty  thousand  spindles  and  one  hundred  and  sixteen 
power  looms — six  extensive  **  white  lead  factories'' — six  **  steam  saw 
UkWW^ — four  ^  steam  grist  mills" — five  extensive  **  breweries" — ten 
extensive  '*  glass  works,"  and  upwards  of  '*  one  hundred  steam  en- 
gines in  full  operation,"  besides  ^innumerable  establishments  for 
ploughs,  timber,  wheels,  screws  of  all  kinds,  butts,  brass  work  of  ev- 
ery description,  locks,"  dec  dec. 

68 


^ 


536 

The  ipdrease  of  the  population  of  Pittsburgh,  especitUy  since  181^ 
has  arisen,  principally,  from  her  manufacturing  establishments.     la 
the  midst  of  a  vast  region  of  coal,  her  various  manufactories,  worked 
by  steam,  are  furnished  with   fuel  of  this  kind,  at  the  cheap  rate  of 
about  two  cents  per  bushel.    This  city  is  destined  to  increase  ia 
wealth  and  population,  not  merely  from  the  increase  of  her  roanofiie- 
tnres,  bur  from  the  great  advantage  of  her  pcisition,  being  the  point 
to  which  canals  and  rail  roads  already  completed,  or  in  progress,  from 
Philadelphia,  New  York,  Baltimore,  and  Washington  are  directed. 
This  was  the  favorite  spot  fixed  upon  by  the  French,   in  1763,  for 
a  military  station,  for  the  purpose  of  commanding  and  securing  the 
whole  country  west  of  the  Alleghany,  then  claimed  as  their  property. 
Here  the  French  then  built  Fort  Du  Quesne,  so  well  known  in  histo- 
ry, by  which  they  were  enabled,  not  only  to  command  the  navigation 
of  the  Ohio,  which  was  the  great  passway  from  Quebec  to  New  Or> 
leans ;  but  from  whith,  for  the  three  first  years  of  the  war  of  17S0, 
they  issued  to  commit  depredations  along  the  western  frontiers  of 
Virginia  and  Pennsylvania.     In  1758,  however,  the  place  was  aban- 
doned, and  the  fort  destroyed  by  the  French  themselves,  on  the  ap- 
proach of  the  British  and  colonial  troops,  under  the  comnnand  of 
General  Forbes.     Fort  Pitt  was  then  built  near  the  same  spot,  and 
garrisoned  by  British  soldiers.     A  view  of  this  favorite  spot,  and  par- 
ticularly of  the  remains  of  the  British  fort,  still  visible  in  1830,  (the 
stone  magazine  being  in  the  midst  of  a  garden  in  a  dilapidated  condi- 
tion) cannot  fail  to  be  accompanied  with  historical  recoUeetions,  pe- 
cnliarly  interesting  to  an  American.     It  reminds  him  of  the  great 
statesman  whose  name  it  bears,  by  whose  energetic  counsels,  this  vast 
country  was  wrested  from  the  hands  of  France — and,  at  the  same 
time,  brings  to  his  recollection,  that  here,  also,  was  firi«t  displayed 
the  cool  intrepidity  and  military  skill  of  one,  who  afterwards  wrested 
the  same  country  from   the  grasp  of  Great  Britain   herself.     The 
changes  which  this  spot  has  undergone  since  the  period  first  alluded 
to,  excites  in  him  feelings  of  a  different  character,  but  not  less  inter- 
esting.    Difierent  scenes  now  indeed  present  themselves.     The  noise 
of  the  mechanic's  hammer  is  heard,  instead  of  the  Indian^s  yell — the 
smoke  of  a  hundred  steam  engines  is  now  seen,  instead  of  the  smoke 
of  as  many  savage  fires — and  numerous  large  vessels  in  the  room  of 
Indian  canoes,  are  now  seen  stretched  along  the  banks  of  the  Monon- 
gahela  and  the  Alleghany. 