

In  1806,  the  legislature  of  New  York,  with  a  view  of  carrying  this 
plan  into  effect,  directed  the  necessary  surveys  to  be  made ;  and  in 
1810,  appointed  a  board  of  commissioners  to  prosecute  the  business ; 
consisting  of  Gouverneur  Morris,  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer,  De  Witt 
Clinton,  Simeon  De  Witt,  William  North,  Thomas  Eddy  and  Peter 
B.  Porter ;  and  the  next  year  the  names  of  Rubert  R.  Livingston  and 
Robert  Fulton  were  added. 

These  commissioners,  in  pursuance  of  directions,  from  the  New 
York  legislature,  applied  to  Congress,  and  to  some  of  the  states,  for 
aid  in  this  great  work,  but  without  success.  They  were  met  by  sneers, 
sarcasms,  and  even  ridicule  from  some,  and  by  incredulity  and  igno- 
rance from  many. 

Regardless,  however,  of  these,  they  ventured  to  recommend  the 
prosecution  of  the  work,  at  the  expense  of  New  York  alone.  Their 
report  to  the  legislature,  in  1812,  from  the  pen,  no  doubt,  of  Mr. 
Morris,  evinces  an  equal  share  of  talent,  research  and  forecast. 

After  an  estimate  of  the  probable  expense,  they  venture  to  predict 
the  amount  of  tolls,  which  the  state  might  realize ;  and  as  this  pre* 
diction  has  so  soon  been  verified,  the  reader  will  pardon  the  follow- 
ing extract,  from  this  report 

**  It  is  impossible,'*  say  the  commissioners,  **to  ascertain,  and  it  i» 
difiicult  to  imagine,  how  much  toll  would  be  collected.  The  amount 
of  transportation  might  be  estimated,  by  subjecting  probabilities  to 
calculation.  But  like  our  advance  in  numbers  and  wealth,  calcula- 
tion outruns  fancy.  Thingrs,  which  twenty  years  ago  any  man  woqM 
have  been  laughed  at  for  believing,  we  now  see.*' 

"  At  that  time  the  most  ardent  mind,  proceeding  on  established  facta, 
by  the  unerring  rule  of  arithmetic,  was  obliged  to  drop  the  pen  at 
results,  which  imagination  could  not  embrace.  Under  circumstances 
of  this  sort,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  those  microcosmie  minds, 
which,  habitually  occupied  in  the  couKideration  of  what  is  little,  are 
incapable  of  discerning  what  is  great;  and  who  already  stigmatized 
the  proposed  canal  as  a  romantic  scheme,  will  not  oosparingiy  diatrib- 


/ 


544 

ute  the  epithets,  absurd,  ridiculous,  chimerical  on  the  estimate  of  wfatl 
it  may  produce. — The  commissioners,  must,  nevertheless,  have  the 
hardihood  to  brave  the  sneers  and  sarcasms  of  men,  who,  wtih  toe 
much  pride  to  study,  and  too  much  wit  to  think,  undervalue  what  thej 
do  not  understand,  and  condemn  what  they  cannot  compreheod.*' 

**  Viewing,"  the  commissioners  add,  ^Uhe  extent  and  fertility  of  the 
of  the  country  with  which  this  canal  is  to  open  a  communicalion,  it 
is  not  extravagant  to  suppose  that  when  settled,  its  produce  will  equal 
the  present  export  of  the  Atlantic  States ;  because  it  contains  more 
land,  and.  that  land  of  a  superior  quality.'* 