


54S 

To  secure  the  tdranta^es  of  this  grett  and  growing  trade  of  the 
V        west,  Was  one  of  the  principal  objects  of  some  of  the  canals^  alreadj 
completed,  or  in  progress ;  and  to  which,  with  others,  in  the  United 
States,  we  now  in?ite  the  attention  of  the  reader. 

Pennsylvania,  it  is  believed,  first  formed  and  commenced  a  plan* 
for  uniting  the  western  and  eastern  waters,  by  an  inland  water  com- 
munication.  As  early  as  1700,  the  legislature  of  that  state,  at  the 
suggestion  of  a  society  established  **  for  promoting  the  improvement 
of  roads,  and  inland  navigation,"  appointed  commissioners  to  explore 
*  neveral  routes,  for  a  water  communication  between  the  Delaware  and 

the  Lakes  ;  who  reported  in  favor  of  a  route  by  the  way  of  the  Jiioi- 
ata,  to  be  partly  by  canals,  and  partly  by  rivers. 

Towards  carrying  this  plan  into  execution,  two  private  companies 
were  incorporated-^one  called  the  Schuylkill  and  Susquehanna  cob- 
pany,  in  1791 — the  other  by  the  name  of  the  Delaware  and  Schuyl- 
kill company,  in  1792,  each  with  a  capital  of  $400,000. 

The  public  mind,  however,  was  not,  at  that  time,  prepared  for  a 
work  of  this  character  and  magnitude.  After  expending  hetwaeo 
four  and  five  hundred  thousand  dollars,  not  probably,  in  tlie  meet  jn* 
dicious  manner ;  from  a  failure  in  the  payment  of  the  subscriptioDa 
and  other  causes,  the  work  was  abandoned,  by  both  companies,  in 
1795  and  1796. 

This  plan  was  not  again  resumed,  in  earnest,  by  Pennsylvania,  un- 
til 1825.  In  the  mean  time,  the  State  of  New  York,  had  completed 
her  great  canal,  connecting  the  waters  of  the  Hudson  with  lake  Erie, 
and  to  which  the  attention  of  the  reader  is  now  invited. 

It  has  been  a  question,  who  was  the  first  projector  of  this  splendid 
work — for  splendid,  indeed,  it  may  be  justly  called,  when  it  ia  con- 
sidered, that  it  is  the  longest  canal  in  the  world,  and  for  one  of  its 
length,  constructed  in  the  shortest  period.  No  canal  in  the  empire 
of  China,  unconnected  with  rivers,  it  is  believed,  is  of  equal  length. 
That  of  Languedoc,  in  France,  is  only  one  hundred  and  forty  eight 
miles  long,  and  was  fourteen  years  in  building,  although  done,  in  the 
reign  of  the  celebrated  Louis  XIV ;  while  the  Erie  canal,  ia,  in  length, 
^ree  hundred  and  sixty  three  miles,  and  was  constructed  in  about 
eight  years. 

Indeed,  the  whole  length  of  all  the  principal  canals,  in  France,  the 
Briane,  Languedoc,  Orleans,  Centre  and  Saint  Quintin,  is  only  three 
hundred  and  thirty  miles  and  a  half.* 

*  Balletin  de  la  Soci^t6  Francaise  Statistique  Universelle,  1881,  p.  111. 


548 

There  caii  be  no  doubt,  that  Gouverneur  MorrU,  first  suggested  the 
idea  of  uniting  the  eastern  and  western  waters  of  New  York.  In 
1803,  he  mentioned  the  subject  in  earnest  to  Mr.  De  Witt,  the  intelli- 
gent surveyor  general  of  that  state — and  even  as  far  back  as  1777, 
in  descanting  with  his  usual  ardor,  zeal  and  forecast,  on  the  advauta- 
ges  America  would  derive  from  being  independent,  he  mentioned 
among  other  things,  an  artificial  water  communication,  between  the 
Hudson  and  lake  Erie. 