

The  commissioners,  after  stating  certain  facts,  as  the  groand  of 
their  estimate,  say,  '^  standing  on  such  facts,  is  it  extravagant  to  be- 
Here,  that  New  York  may  look  forward  to  the  receipt,  (at  no  distant 
day)  of  one  million  of  dollars  net  revenue  from  this  canal.  The  tile 
of  an  individual  is  short.  The  time  is  not  distant  when  thoiie  wlia 
make  this  report,  will  have  passed  away.  But  no  time  is  fixed  to  the 
existence  of  a  Slate ;  and  the  first  wish  of  a  patriot's  heart  is,  that 
his  may  be  immortal."  $ 

'^  But  whatever  limit  may  have  been  assigned  to  the  duration  of 
New  York,  by  those  eternal  decrees,  which  established  the  heavens 
and  the  earth,  it  is  hardly  to  be  expected  that  she  will  be  blotted  from 
the  list  of  political  societies,  before  the  efiects  here  stated  shall  have 
been  sensibly  felt.  And  even,  when,  by  the  fiow  of  that  perpetual 
stream  which  bears  all  human  institutions  away,  the  constitution  shall 
be  dissolved  and  our  laws  be  lost,  still  the  mountains  will  stand,  the 
same  rivers  run.  New  moral  combinations  will  be  formed  on  the  old 
physical  foundations,  and  the  extended  line  of  remote  posterity,  after 
a  lapse  of  ten  thousand  years,  and  the  repeated  revolutions,  when  the 
records  of  history  shall  have  been  obliterated,  and  the  tongue  of  tra- 
dition have  converted,  (as  in  China,)  the  shadowy  remembrance  of 
ancient  events,  into  childish  tales  of  miracle,  this  naiional  vx>rk  shall 
remain.  It  shall  bear  testimony  to  the  genius,  the  learning,  the  ia- 
dustry  and  intelligence  of  the  present  age." 

Sanguine  as  the  commissioners  were,  as  to  the  advantages  New  York 
would  ultimately  derive  from  the  tolls  of  the  projected  canal — extrav- 
agant as  their  calculations  might  appear  to  many,  if  not  to  most  of  the 
people  of  the  United  States,  little  did  they  imagine,  that  in  the  short 
period  of  eight  years,  from  its  completion,  the  tolls  would  reach  the 
amount  of  their  estimate. 

If  Gouvemeur  Morris  may  justly  claim  the  merit  of  projecting  tUa 
great  work,  the  merit  of  iu  execution  no  less  justly  belongs  to  Do  Witt 


545 

(3uiton«  who,  in  coDJunction  with  hb  able  and  patriotic  coHeagneff 
perse?ered  against  a  powerful  opposition  arising  from  party  politics, 
as  well  as  from  prejudice  and  ignorance.  The  war  between  the  Uni- 
ted States  and  Great  Britain,  which  began  soon  after  the  date  of 
this  report,  retarded  the  commencement  of  this  work,  until  1817.-— 
On  the  4th  day  of  July  of  that  ykar,  the  first  excaTation  was  made, 
and  the  canal  was  completed,  in  October,  l^SfiS,  at  an  expense  of 
•0,027,466.  ^    ^ 

In  October,  1817,  a  eanal  connecting  the  waters  of  lake  Cham- 
plain  with  the  Erie  canal,  nine  miles  from  Albany,  a  distance  of  sixty 
three  miles,  was  commenced,  and  finished  at  the  close  of  1823,  at  an 
expense  of  $1,179,871.  -^ 