

It  is  well  known,  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  money  employed  in 
the  construction  of  these  canalt*,  was  procured  on  loan  by  the  State, 
on  a  long  credit.  The  amount  thus  obtained,  was  not  far  from  eight 
millions,  at  five  and  six  per  cent,  about  half  of  which  was  not  redeeoi- 
able  until  1837,  and  the  other  half  not  until  1815.  The  credit  of  the 
state,  and  the  irredeemability  of  the  stock  for  so  long  a  period,  prodo- 
ced  great  competition  among  the  capitalists  in  Europe,  as  well  as  in 
•  the*United  States,  and  the  premiums  on  the  various  loans  amoantcd 
to  the  sum  of  $223,367. 

Never  was  credit  more  profitably  employed,  both  as  respects  the 
state  itself,  and  its  individual  citizens. 

The  expenditure  of  the  money  created  a  fund,  out  of  which  the 
money  thus  borrowed,  will  be  repaid  in  a  very  few  years,  while  the 
fund  itself,  instead  of  being  in  the  smallest  degree  exhausted,  is  daily 
increasing  in  value.  It  has,  probably,  already  added  to  the  produc- 
tive capital  of  that  state,  not  far  from  one  hundred  millions  of  dollars. 
For  there  can  be  little  doubt,  that  in  the  years  1(^  and  1834,  the 
value  of  the  productions  which  came  to  market  by  the  canals  alone« 
and  which  would  never  have  existed,  or  could  not  have  come  to  mar- 
ket, but  by  the  aid  of  this  internal  navigation,  was  between  ^rt  and 
six  millions  in.  each  year.    The  value  of  timber  and  lumbar  of  all 


647 

Uodtf  it  will  be  percei?ed«  in  1833,  exceeded  two  millions  of  dollara ; 
and  a  very  nmall  proportion  of  this  could  ha?e  found  its  way  to  mar- 
ketf  except  by  canals — nor  can  it  be  doubted,  thai  as  much  or  more 
than  one  half  of  the  flour  which  came  down  that  year,  would  not  ha?e 
been  produced  at  all. 

By  means  of  this  extensive  water  communication,  through  a  coua« 
try  naturally  extremely  fertile,  the  farms  of  the  west,  are  placed  near- 
ly upon  an  equality  with  those  of  the  east,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  great 
market  towns  and  cities.  Indeed  it  has  created  large  towns  and  cities 
at  the  west,  along  the  borders  of  the  canal  itself.  The  effect  it  had 
upon  the  population  of  Albany,  Utica,  Rochester,  and  Buflfalo,  will 
be  perceived,  on  comparing  the  number  of  inhabitants  in  these  placet 
in  1825,  when  the  canals  were  just  completed,  and  in  1830,  five  yean 
only  after  they  had  been  in  full  operation. 

Na  of  inhabitants— 1826.  Na  of  inhabitant*— 18301  . 

Albany,^                           15,971  24,209 

Utica,                   .             6,040  .  8,323 

Rochester,  .                     6,271  9,260 

Buffalo,  .                     2,600  6,321 

And  we  would  here  add,  that  in  1834,  by  actual  enumeration,  the 
population  of  Utica  exceeded  ten  thousand,  and  that  of  Buflfalo,  had 
increased  to  twelve  thousand  five  hundred. 