

The  whole  extent  of  canal  navigation,  therefore,  in  Pennaylvania, 
in  1834,  may  be  estimated  at  eight  hundred  and  sixty  ooe  milesy  and 
the  cost  of  the  same,  at  about  $23,000,000. 

We  would  here  observe,  that  the  principal  bosinesa  of  the  private 
canals  in  Pennsylvania,  and  particularly  those  of  the  Schuylkill  and 
Lehigh,  has  been  from  the  coal  trade  in  that  state,  and  which  ia  ere- 
ry  day  becoming  more  important ;  and  is,  probably,  destined  in  fu- 
ture, to  be  of  the  first  magnitude.  The  anthracite  coal  of  Peim- 
aylvania,  did  not  attract  the  attention  of  that  state,  until  about  the 
years  1821  and  1822.  In  the  former  year,  only  one  thovsand  and 
seventy  three  tons  was  brought  to  market,  and  in  the  latter,  two  thou- 
sand four  hundred  and  forty,  of  which,  one  hundred  and  eighty  Ions 
was  shipped  coastwise.  In  1833,  however,  no  less  than  about  six 
hundred  thousand  tons  were  taken  from  the  anthracite  eoal  fields, 
valued  at  about  $3,000,000 ;  and  this  coal  is  now  extensively  need  in 
diffnrent  parts  of  the  United  States. 

70 


1'. 


&54 

The  Legislature  of  Pennsylvania,  has  lately  reiy  wiaely  inslitiiled 
an  inquiry  into  the  extent  of  the  coal  regions  of  that  slate,  as  wdlaf 
the  extent  of  the  trade  already  carried  on,  in  that  valuable  minertl. 

A  committee  of  the  senate  of  that  state,  has  lately  made  a  Tery  n- 
teresting  report  on  this  subject.  This  committee  did  not  limit  its  is- 
quirics  to  the  anthracite  coal  fields,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Alleghaay, 
but  extended  them,  to  the  bituminous  coal  regions,  on  the  west  aide 
of  the  Mountains. 

According  to  the  report  of  this  committee,  the  anthracite  coftl,  in 
that  state,  is  *^  confined  to  three  fields  or  deposits,  that  of  Manch 
Chunk,  Schuylkill  and  Lyken^s  valley;  of  Beaver  Meadow,  Shamo- 
kin  and  Mahoney  ;  and  of  Lackawanna/' 

- -Without  adverting  to  the  particular  limits  or  boundaries,  assigned 
by  the  committee,  to  each  of  these  fields,  it  is  sufilicient,  in  this  place, 
to  observe,  that  the  committee  was  of  opinion*  that  each  of  these 
fields  was  ''about sixty  five  miles  in  length,  and  five  in  width,  embra* 
cing  an  area  of  three  hundred  and  twenty  five  square  miles,  or  two 
hundred  and  eight  thousand  acres  each,  making  an  aggregate  of  nine 
hundred  and  seventy  five  square  miles,  or  six  hundred  and  twenty 
four  thousand  acres.  Some  of  the  lands'^  the  committee  add,  ''in 
the  first  district  are  worth  three  or  four  hundred  dollars  an  acre ;  oth- 
ers are  of  less  value,  and  some  parts  worth  little  or  nothing.  The 
lands  in  the  third  field,  being  generally  valuable,  as  well  for  miniiig 
as  agricultural  purposes,  may  be  valued  at  an  average  rate  of  thirty 
dollars  per  acre ;  and  taking  the  whole  districts  together,  it  is  believed, 
twenty  dollars  per  acre  is  not  too  ^igh  a  valuation.  At  this  rate  our 
anthracite  coal  fields  are  worth  twelve  millions  four  hundred  and 
eighty  thousand  dollars.''  Although  not  more  than  about  six  hundred 
thousand  tons  of  this  coal,  in  the  year  1833  were  taken  from  these 
fields,  almost  entirely  from  the  first  and  third,  yet  towns  and  villages 
have  grown  up  in  their  neighborhood ;  and  canals  and  rail  roads  have 
been  constructed  in  order  to  bring  the  coal  to  market;  and  the  reader 
cannot  fail  to  be  surprised  at  the  committee's  estimate  of  the  ralne  of 
improTements,  and  property  connected  with  and  consequent  upon  the 
anthracite  coal  trade  of  Pennsylvania,  from  these  three  coal  fields,  yfvu 