

The  spirit  for  canal  and  rail  road  improvements  has  crossed  the  Al- 
leghany ;  and  the  canals  of  the  State  of  Ohio  may  well  claim  the  at- 
tention of  the  economist,  as  well  as  the  traveller.  Nearly  four  hun- 
dred miles  of  artificial  inland  navigation,  have  been  completed  through 
a  country,  a  little  more  than  forty  years  ago  a  perfect  wilderness. 

The  Ohio  canal  unites  Lake  Erie  with  the  Ohio  river,  extending 
from  Cleveland  to  Portsmouth,  and  (including  its  feeder)  is  three  hun- 
dred and  twenty  four  miles  in  length.  It  runs  nearly  through  the 
center  of  the  state;  was  commenced  in  July,  1825,  and  finished  in 
October,  1832.  The  Miami  canal,  situate  in  the  west  part  of  the  state, 
extends  from  the  town  of  Dayton  to  the  city  of  Cincinnati,  a  distance 
of  about  sixty  6ve  miles ;  and  has  lately  been  connected  with  the 
river  Ohio,  by  a  lockage  of  about  one  hundred  and  ten  feet. 

To  aid  in  the  construction  of  these  canals.  Congress  made  liberal 
grants  of  land.  Most  of  the  necessary  funds,  however,  were  pro- 
cured on  the  credit  of  the  state,  payable  at  distant  periods. 

Having  the  benefit  of  the  experience  of  others,  Ohio  has  constmct- 
ed  her  canals  at  a  much  less  expense  than  other  great  works  of  the 
kind,  either  in  this  or  any  other  country.  Their  whole  cost  was  only 
about  95,500,000. 

If  any  thing  were  wanting  to  prove  the  extraordinary,  and  we  may 
add,  unparalleled  enterprise  of  the  people  of  the  west,  such  works  at 
these  would  aflford  such  proof.     The  inhabitants  of  this  new  country 


•  8«t  Reporu  of  the  Board  of  public  works,  for  the  fears  18IS  a&d  MS. 

71 


563 

Tentured  to  incur  a  debt  of  many  millions,  in  anticipation  of  Man 
benefiti*,  and  have  drawn  upon  posterity  for  payment ;  and  there  caa 
be  little  doubt  that  the  expenditure  of  the  money  has  created  a  fosd 
which  will  enable  posterity  to  meet  it. 

The  tolls  already  annually  collected,  go  far  towards  paying  the  in- 
terest of  this  debt.  In  1832,  the  amount  collected  was  #1 11,42^  m 
1833,  •187,026,  and  in  1834,  it  exceeded  two  hundred  and  fiTe  thou- 
sand— and  will,  ere  long,  be  sufficient,  not  only  to  pay  the  iaterest, 
but  to  create  a  fund  for  the  payment  of  the  principal. 

We  would  here  also  state,  that  a  canal  has  lately  been  authorised^ 
beginning  on  the  Ohio  canal  at  Bolivar,  to  meet  the  great  Pennsylva- 
nia canal  on  the  Ohio  river,  about  thirty  miles  below  Pittaburgh,  a 
di^nce  of  seventy  six  milen,  called  the  Sandy  and  Beaver  Caoal; 
the  cost  of  which  has  been  estimated  at  $1,250,000,  and  the  stock 
taken  up  and  the  work  actually  commenced. 

Among  the  canals  at  the  west,  that  round  the  falls  of  the  Ohitt 
called  **  Louisville  and  Portland  canal,*'  though  only  about  two  mileB 
in  length,  ought  not  to  pass  unnoticed.*  It  is  calculated  to  admit  tbt 
passage  of  the  largest  steam  boats  on  the  western  waters.  Its  top 
water  line  is  two  hundred  feet,  its  bottom  fifty  feet,  and  its  deptli  va- 
ries from  four  to  forty  two  feet — its  sides  are  sloping  and  paved  with 
stone,  and  it  has  over  it  a  beautiful  stone  bridge,  between  Louisville 
and  Portland.  Its  locks  consist  of  a  guard  luck  and  three  lift  locks ; 
the  former  is  one  hundred  and  ninety  feet  long  in  the  clear,  forty  two 
feet  high,  and  fifty  feet  wide ;  the  latter  each  one  hundred  and  eighty 
five  feet  long  in  the  clear,  fifty  in  width,  and  twenty  high»  all  baaed  oo 
solid  rock — and  the  stone  masonry  in  these  locks  is  supposed  to  equal 
that  of  thirty  common  locks  on  the  Erie  canal.  These  locks  and 
especially  the  guard  lock,  are  larger  than  any  in  the  United  States, 
and  we  believe  in  Europe,  with  the  exception  of  those  on  the  canal 
lately  constructed  from  Amsterdam  to  the  Helder,  which  admits  the 
largest  East  Indiamen  to  the  former  place. 