


556 

including  fire  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  to  foreign  eoantriea«ftiid  eight 
hundred  thousand  to  Ireland — about  five  millions  of  tons  are  conTCf- 
ed  by  inland  canals  and  rail  roads,  and  the  remainder  is  conaumed  in 
the  districts  of  production,  particularly  in  South  Wales,  Staffordshin 
and  Salop,  in  mining  processes.  The  value  of  this  miDcral  in  Great 
Britain,  is  now  estimated  to  exceed  all  other  mineral  productions; 
coal  being  valued  at  £6,000,000  sterling,  and  all  other  minerals  at 
£5,000,000,  that  is,  iron  at  £3,000,000,  copper,  £1,500,0001,  and 
£500,000  for  tin,  lead,  6lc^ 

The  cheapness  of  coal  in  England  gives  her  a  great  adrmntage  over 
other  nations,  and  particularly  France,  in  various  kinds  of  bnsinesi, 
and  especially  in  that  of  manufactures. 

In  a  late  inquiry  before  a  government  commission,  in  France,  oa 
the  subject  of  manufactures,  it  appeared  in  evidence,  that,  in  the  mas- 
ufaeture  of  cloth  at  Sedam,  the  cost  of  coal,  was  from  two  and  a  bilf 
to  three  per  cent,  of  its  value. 

In  New  Jersey,  the  Morris  canal  was  completed  in  1831,  extending 
from  a  point  on  the  Delaware,  opposite  Easton,  to  Newark,  ninety 
miles.  The  cost  of  this  canal,  was  about  $2,000,000 — ^inclined  planes 
are  here  used,  instead  of  locks.  This  canal,  was  intended  for  the 
coal  trade  of  Pennsylvania. 

During  the  year  1834,  the  Delaware  and  the  Raritan  rivers  have  been 
connected  by  means  of  a  canal  from  Brunswick  to  Borden  town,  about 
thirty  miles.  This  canal,  it  is  well  known,  is  calculated  for  sloop 
navigation,  and  has  been  constructed  by  a  private  company,  at  an  ex- 
pense, with  its  feeder,  of  about  $2,500,000. 

The  Delaware  is  likewise  now  connected  with  the  Chesapeake,  by 
a  canal  for  sloop  navigation,  of  about  sixteen  miles  in  length.  In 
consequence  of  a  deep  cut,  of  about  seventy  feet,  for  a  considerable 
distance,  and  other  unexpected  difficulties,  the  cost  of  this  canal  was 
#2,201,864.  The  United  Sutes,  Pennsylvanis,  Maryland  and  Del- 
aware, contributed  to  its  construction  ;  and  it  first  became  navigable, 
in  October,  1829. 

The  enterprizing  citizens  of  Baltimore,  not  less  desirous  than  their 
neighbors,  of  continuing  and  securing  the  great  and  growing  trade 
of  the  west,  have  commenced  a  rail  road  to  connect  their  city 
the  Ohio :  and  which  we  shall  notice  hereafter,  when  on  the  snl 
of  improvements  of  this  description. 

•  Marthal's  Digest  of  the  Commerce,  &c.  of  Great  Britain,  p.  S37. 


567 


\ 


I 


'  With  lh«  tame  ? iew»  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  canal,  waa«  alio, 
eommenced*  in  1898,  and  b  now  in  progress.     This  canal,  was  ori*  .   y 

ginally  intended  to  extend  from  the  tide  waters  on  the  Potomac,  at 
Oeorgetown,  to  Pittsburgh,  a  distance  of  three  hundred  and  forty  one 
miles,  and  six  hundred  and  seventy  six  yards. 