

Albany  is  the  great  tlioroughfare,  to  and  from  the  western  country, 
as  the  following  account  of  the  numberof  passengers,  on  the  Mohawk 
and  Hudson  rail  road,  for  the  years  1833  and  1834,  will  shew : — 

Passengers  departing  from  Albany  in  1833,  60,509 

**  «*      from  Schenectady       «•     .         .        50,166 

116,764 

Passengers  departing  from  Albany  in  1834,         •        78,188 

«'  *'      from  SchenecUdy,      '*    .  66,290 

143,478 

The  number  of  passengers,  on  the  Mohawk  and  Hudson  road,  in 
1834,  exceeded  the  number  between  New  York  and  Philadelphia,  on 
the  Camden  and  Amboy  road,  more  than  thirty  three  thousand,  the 
number  on  the  latter  being  only,  as  will  be  seen  hereafter,  one  hun- 
dred and  ten  thousand. 

We  would  here  observe,  that  the  rail  road  from  New  York  to  lake 
Erie,  through  Binghampton,  so  long  in  contemplation,  has  been  lately 
accurately  surveyed  and  pronounced  practicable,  to  strike  the  lake 
somewhere  between  Dunkirk  and  Portland,  a  distance  of  four  hun- 
dred and  eighty  three  miles,  the  expense,  with  a  single  track,  being 
csUmated  at  $4,762,260. 

The  Camden  and  Aroboy  rail  road,  sixty  one  miles  in  length  is 
now  completed,  and  brings  the  cities  of  New  York  and  Philadelphia, 
in  the  vicinity  of  each  other,  the  travel  of  five  or  six  hours  being  only 


#' 


568 


required  from  one  city  to  the  other.  The  cost  of  this  road,  iDcIii£of 
real  estate,  steam  boats  connected  with  it,  locomotive  cars*  wbmrvM, 
iLC  was  about  •2,000,000. 

The  number  of  passengers  on  this  road,  the  past  season,  (1834,)  was 
one  hundred  and  ten  thousand,  and  the  gross  income  said  to  be  aboA 
$500,000.  This  road  is  connected  with  the  Raritan  and  Delaware 
canal. 

A  road  from  the  manufacturing  village  of  Patterson,  to  New  York, 
about  sixteen  miles,  is  nearly  finished,  but,  at  what  expense,  we  have 
not  ascertained.  In  addition  to  these  a  road  is  now  in  progress,  froa 
Jersey  City,  through  Newark  and  Elizabethtown  to  Brunswick. 

The  rail  roads  as  well  as  the  canals  of  Pennsylvania,  exceed,  is 
number,  extent  and  expense,  those  of  any  other  state. 

The  Philadelphia  and  Columbia  road,  and  the  portage  road,  over 
the  Alleghany,  constitute  a  part,  as  before  stated,  of  the  great  inland 
communication  between  the  Delaware  and  lake  Erie ;  and  were  con- 
structed at  the  expense  of  the  state. 

The  former  is  eighty  two  miles  in  length,  and  the  expense,  wboi 
completed,  #i]]  be  about  $3,500,000,  or  more  than  $44,000  per  mDe. 

In  crossing  the  Alleghany,  the  Pennsylvanians  had  to  encoanfar 
difficulties,  apparently  insurmountable,  as  the  New  Yorkers  had,  ia 
passing  the  rocky  ridge  at  Lockport.  The  portage  rail  way  across 
the  Alleghany  mountains,  is  certainly  one  of  the  boldest  works  of  the 
kind  undertaken  and  completed,  in  this  or  any  other  country.  Ii  is 
thirty  six  miles  in  length ;  and  in  this  distance,  overcomes,  a  rise  and 
fail  of  two  thousand  five  hundred  and  seventy  feet ;  and  in  one  part 
of  it  has  a  tunnel  of  nine  hundred  feet  cut  through  a  solid  rock  ;  it 
has  ten  stationary  steam  engines,  and  ten  inclined  planes,  five  on 
each  side  of  the  mountain ;  and  the  ropes  alone,  necessary  on  these 
inclined  planes,  would  reach  more  than  eleven  miles,  and  their  ex- 
pense has  been  more  than  twenty  thousand  dollars — and  what  is  still 
more  singular,  a  rigger's  loft  has  been  erected  for  these  ropes,  on  the 
summit  of  the  mountain,  where  riggers  are  employed,  at  an  annual 
expense  of  more  than  sixteen  hundred  dollars.  The  whole  expense 
of  this  stupendous  work,  will  be  about  $1,750,000. 