

Rail  roads  have  been  contemplated  and  commenced  in  North  Caro- 
lina, but  we  have  not  learnt,  that  any  have,  as  yet,  been  completed, 
or  have  been  undertaken,  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  ensure  their  com- 
pletion. 

South  Carolina  has,  already  completed  the  longest  rail  road,  now 
in  operation,  in  any  part  of  the  world.  It  extends  from  Charleston 
to  Hamburgh,  on  the  Savannah  river,  opposite  to  Augusta,  a  distance 
of  one  hundred  and  thirty  five  and  a  quarter  miles.  It  was  commenced 
in  1830,  and  was  opened  for  use  throughout,  in  1833.  It  is  built  on 
piles,  and  may  be  considered  as  a  continuous  bridge.  Its  original 
cost,  including  preliminary  surveys,  locomotive  engines,  cars,  deposi- 
tories, inclined  planes,  stationary  engines,  purchase  of  land,  dec.  was 
$904,500.  Where  these  piles  are  above  the  surface  of  the  ground,  it 
has  been  considered  necessary,  to  fill  up  the  space  with  earth,  and  this 
has  been  partly  done  ;  and  this,  with  other  items,  increased  the  cost 
of  the  road,  up  to  October  31st,  1834,  to  91,336,615  09.  The  stock 
is  considered  valuable.  From  May  to  October,  1834,  a  period  of 
six  months,  the  company  received,  for  transportation  of  passengers 
and  cotton  on  this  road,  $83,445  42.  The  number  of  passengers, 
during  this  period,  was  thirteen  thousand  five  hundred  and  seventy 
five,  paying  $35,140  45,  and  the  quantity  of  cotton  transported  the 


♦  See  eigbteeaih  unnual  report  of  the  Board  of  public  works. 


573 

•tme  time,  was  twelve  thousand  seven  hundred  fifty  six  bales,  and 
which  paid  947,904  97. 

In  Georgia,  a  company  has  been  incorporated  to  make  a  road  from 
Augnsta  to  Athens,  and  we  are  informed  that  the  stock  has  been  ta- 
ken np,  the  route  surveyed,  and  will  probably  be  made,  and  at  an  ex- 
pense of  about  $10,000  per  mile.  The  distance  is  about  one  hundred 
and  fourteen  miles.  This  road  is  considered  a  continuation  of  the 
Charleston  road,  and  naturally  connected  with  it  From  Athens,  it  is 
contemplated  to  extend  it  to  Decatur  on  the  Tennessee  river,  and 
thus,  in  this  direction,  connect  the  trade  of  the  west,  with  the  city 
of  Charleston. 

In  Alabama,  a  rail  road,  round  the  Muscle  shoals  in  the  Tennessee 
river,  was  finished,  about  the  Ist  of  December,  1834.  It  extends  from 
Tuscumbiat  through  Cortland  to  Decatur,  a  little  more  than  forty 
five  miles ;  twenty  fiye  of  which  was  made  in  1834. 

This  road  must  be  advantageous  to  a  great  extent  of  country  ad- 
joining the  Tennessee  river,  above  the  muscle  shoals  ;  as  that  river 
above  these  shoals,  is  navigable  for  steam  boats,  as  high  up  as  Knox- 
ville,  a  distance  of  about  four  hundred  miles. 