

The  completion  of  one  work  of  this  kind  naturally  leads  to  the 
contemplation  of  others  in  its  neighborhood,  either  in  connection  with 
it,  or  to  share  in  the  benefits,  which  it  promises.  Various  roads,  there- 
fore, of  a  similar  kind,  have  been  projected,  in  Georgia,  Alabama,  and 
Tennessee,  some  of  which  have  been  surveyed  ;  but  as  most  of  them, 
are  of  a  recent  date,  our  information,  does  not  enable  us  to  judge  as 
to  the  prospects  of  their  completion. 

An  important  road  of  this  character,  has  been  commenced  in  Ken- 
tucky, and  will,  no  doubt,  be  soon  completed.  It  extends,  from  Lex- 
ington, through  Frankfort,  the  seat  of  government,  to  Louisville,  a 
distance  of  about  ninety  miles.  The  work  upon  it  wa9  commenced 
in  April,  1832,  but  during  the  summer  of  1833,  was  suspended,  on  ac- 
count  of  the  cholera.  In  September,  1834,  twenty  three  miles  were 
finished,  and  by  the  first  of  January  following,  it  was  completed  and 
used  to  Frankfort,  twenty  eight  miles.  The  cost  of  this  road,  with 
a  single  track,  was  estimated  at  $1,032,000;  and  its  actual  expense 
thus  far,  has  not  much  exceeded  the  estimate — the  estimated  cost  to 
Frankfort  being  $356,000,  and  the  actual  cost  to  that  place,  about 
$370,000.  This  road,  we  understand,  has  been  built  in  a  substantial 
manner.* 


•  For  information  respecting  this  road,  we  are  indebted  to  oor  obliging  friend 
Mr.  Winter,  the  sopcrintendant. 


574 

Other  roads  of  this  kind  have  been  contemplated  and  aathorised«  k 
the  western  states,  and  some  of  them  will  no  doubt  ere  long*  be  fia- 
ished.  The  state  of  Indiana  has  lately  authorized  a  loan  of  about  a 
■Billion  and  a  half  to  make  similar  roads  in  that  state. 

In  Louisiana,  a  rail  road  has  been  completed  from  New  Orleana  !• 
lake  Ponchartrain,  about  six  miles,  at  an  expense,  inclading  machioa- 
ry  and  real  estate,  of  $443,443  76. 

The  rail  roads  before  noticed,  which  were  completed  on  the  fint 
of  January,  1835,  or  would  not  long  after  be  completed,  are  in  length 
taken  together,  about  sixteen  hundred  miles,  and  their  cost  not  ftr 
from  $30,000,000.  The  aggregate  length  of  those  in  PennsylTaaia, 
is  about  four  hundred  and  eighteen  miles,  made  at  an  expense  estima- 
ted to  exceed  $7,000,000. 

When  the  cost  of  the  rail  roads  in  the  United  States,  is  added  to 
that  of  the  canals,  it  will  be  found,  that  there  has  been,  or  will  sooa 
be  expended  in  this  country,  on  these  two  kinds  of  internal  improve- 
ment, a  sum  not  less  than  about  $94,000,000;  and  this  has  been  done, 
principally,  since  1817. 

In  reviewing  the  foregoing  brief  account  of  the  canals  and  rail  roads 
of  the  United  States,  it  will  be  perceived,  that  the  two  principal  objects 
originally  contemplated  in  making  them,  have,  in  a  great  measure, 
been  accomplished.  A  safe  internal  water  communication,  along  or 
near  the  Atlantic  sea  board,  has  been  completed — ^large  vessels  can 
now  go  from  the  Hudson  to  the  Delaware,  through  the  Ran  tan  and 
Delaware  canal,  from  thence  through  the  Delaware  and  Chesapeake 
canal,  and  Chesapeake  Bay,  to  Norfolk  in  Virginia,  and  from  Norfolk 
through  the  Dismal  Swamp  canal,  to  Albemarle  Sound  in  North  Car- 
olina. 