

Tlie  great  canal  of  Gotha,  lately  finished  in  Sweden,  cost  $10,430,* 
100,  of  which  $6,378,324  was  paid  by  the  Swedish  government. 
This  canal  connects  the  Northern  sea  with  the  Baltic,  from  Gotten- 
burgh,  through  lake  Wenern  and  other  lakes — its  width  at  bottom  ia 
forty  eight  feet  and  depth  ten  feet,  admitting  vessels  drawing  nine  and  a 
half  feet  water,  and  the  vessels  are  towed  through  the  lakes  by  atotm 
boats.    It  was  commenced  in  1810,  and  finished  in  1832. 

RAIL    ROADS. 

Rail  roads  intended  for  general  trade  have  lately  become  fashiona- 
ble in  Europe  and  the  United  States,  and  have  come  in  competition 
with  canals. 

They  have  long  been  used  in  Europe  in  collieries  and  mines  of  dif- 
ferent kinds,  fur  the  purpose  of  transporting  coal,  iron,  &.c,  to  canalsi 
or  other  water  communication;  and  were  only  considered  as  prop- 
er auxiliaries  to  the  latter.  It  is  only  since  1824,  they  have  been  made 
and  used  for  general  trade,  and  the  transportation  of  passengers ;  but 
since  that  period,  they  have  increased  in  Europe,  and  in  the  United 
States,  beyond  all  ordinary  calculations. 

Among  those  established  and  in  use  in  England,  the  Liverpool  and 
Manchester,  the  Stockton  and  Darlington,  the  Cromford  and  Peak 
Forest,  the  Sirhoway,  the  Brewton  and  Shields  and  the  Glamorgan- 
ahire,  were  the  most  considerable,  in  1831  and  1832;  none  of  which 
exceeded  thirty  three  miles  in  length.  That  of  Liverpool  and  Man- 
chester was  the  most  expensive,  having  cost  more  than  a  million  ster- 
ling. The  most  considerable  in  France,  are  the  following,  viz  :  one 
from  Sl  Etienne  to  Lyons,  thirty  four  miles  in  length,  built  at  an  ex- 
pense of  9,799,247  francs,  or  about  $1,960,000 — one  from  St  Etienne 
to  Andrezieux,  thirteen  miles,  which  cost  1,556,000  francs,  (exclusive 
of  wagons,)  or  about  $31 1,000,  and  one  from  Andrezieux  to  Roanne, 
forty  two  miles,  (exclusive  of  places  of  depots,  and  wagons,)  cost 
3,025,7^  francs,  or  about  $600,000. 

The  longest  road  of  the  kind  in  Europe,  which  is  completed,  or 
nearly  so,  is  from  the  town  of  Budweis  on  the  Moldau  river  in  Bohe- 


•  See  BuUetia  ds  la  Socihtk  Frso^aise  Suiistiqae  Unirerselle,  4me  Livraison, 
Novcmbrtet  DtccBBbrt,  1830,  p.  111. 


I 


J 


^  566 

miat  to  Lintz,  on  the  Danube  in  Austriat  a  distance  of  eighty  ndei. 
the  expense  of  which  was  estimated  at  only  £160,000  sterliog,  or  ahoU 
•800,000.* 

Miyy  others  have  been  projected,  both  in  England,  and  oo  the 
continent  of  Europe,  some  of  which,  in  all  probability,  may  haTe  beta 
completed. 

Rail  ways,  were  first  used  in  the  United  States,  and  particularly  ia 
PennsylTania,  for  the  same  purposes,  as  in  Europe ;  and  ways  of  this 
kind,  rudely  constructed  of  wood,  may  now  be  seen  by  the  traTeller, 
In  the  coal  region  of  the  west,  conducting  the  coal,  from  ita  moontaia 
beds,  to  the  banks  of  the  rivers  ;  and  in  some  instances,  directly  ialt 
the  factories,  where  it  is  used.  Since  the  year  1826,  they  haTe  beta 
extended  through  the  United  States,  and,  as  in  Europe,  haTe  beea 
used,  for  general  internal  trade,  as  well  as  for  the  transportation  of 
passengers. 