

In  addition  to  the  state  rail  roads,  many  roads  of  this  kind  have 
been  made  and  are  now  making  in  Pennsylvania,  by  companies  and 
individuals,  the  most  of  which  are  connected  with  the  coal  mines,  and 
have  been  constructed  for  the  purpose  of  facilitating  the  transporta- 
tion of  coal,  from  these  mines,  to  the  canals,  or  other  water  coromv- 
nications.    The  most  considerable  of  these  are  the  Philadelphia  and 


569  •^\ 

TreDtoD,  which  will  soon  be  completed,  the  Philadelphia  and  Grerman- 
town,  the  Little  Schuylkill,  Mine  Hill  and  Schuylkill,  Mount  Carbon, 
Danville  and  Pottsville,  Schuylkill  valley,  Mauch  Chunk,  Room  RaSt 
West  branch.  Mill  creek.  Pine  grove^  Lykens  valley  and  Carbondale, 
and  many  collateral  roads,  connected  with  these  at  the  mines.  A  lat- 
eral rail  road  is  made  from  the  state  road  to  Columbia,  about  twenty 
miles  from  Philadelphia  to  West  Chester,  a  distance  of  nine  miles,  at . 
an  expense  of  about  $100,000.  About  forty  five  miles  from  Philadel- 
phia, on  the  Columbia  rail  road,  a  road  is  located  to  Port  Deposit, 
on  the  Susquehannah,  through  Oxford,  a  distance  of  about  thirty  one 
miles,  to  meet  a  similar  road  from  Baltimore.  The  whole  extent  of 
rail  roads  in  Pennsylvania,  made  by  computes  and  individuals,  is 
about  three  hundred  miles. 

The  New  Castle  and  French  town  rail  road,  sixteen  miles  in  length* 
connects  the  Delaware  river  with  the  Chesapeake,  in  the  state  of 
Delaware.  This  road  cost  about  $400,000,  and  is  one  of  the  best  in 
the  United  States. 

The  enterprising  citizens  of  Baltimore,  in  1820,  perceiving  that,  in  ) 
consequence  of  steam  navigation  on  the  western  waters,  and  the  ex- 
ertions of  other  states,  they  were  losing  the  trade  of  the  west,  be- 
gan seriously  to  consider  of  some  mode  of  recovering  it  A  commu- 
nication with  the  Ohio,  by  a  canal,  was  first  contemplated.  But  the 
report  of  the  engineers  sent  out  by  the  government  of  the  United 
States,  by  which  the  cost  of  such  a  cansl  was  estimated  at  more  than 
twenty  two  millions  of  dollars,  induced  them  to  substitute  a  rail  road; 
and  for  this  purpose,  in  February,  1827,  they  obtained  acts  of  in- 
corporation from  Maryland  and  Virginia.  The  company  was  author- 
ized to  strike  the  Ohio  river,  at  any  place,  between  Pittsburgh  and  the 
mouth  of  the  Little  Kanaway.  The  distance  to  Pittsburgh  was  about 
three  hundred  and  thirty  miles. 

This  was  the  most  extensive,  and,  we  may  add,  the  boldest  project 
of  the  kind  ever  undertaken,  by  any  government  or  by  individuals. 
The  road  contemplated,  was  about  four  times  the  length  of  any  sim- 
ilar one  in  Europe,  and  over  ground  much  higher,  and  more  difficnllt 
than  any  other  before  occupied  for  such  a  road.  But  neither  the  bold- 
ness of  the  plan,  nor  the  difficulties  attending  its  execution,  prevented 
an  immediate  subscription  to  the  amount  of  $4,000,000,  towards  car- 
rying it  into  effect — the  state  of  Maryland  and  the  city  of  Baltimore, 
each  furnishing  $600,000  of  this  sum,  and  individuals  the  remainder. 
The  work  was  commenced  on  the  4th  of  July,  1828,  but  waa,  for  a 
long  time  retarded,  by  a  dispute  between  the  company,  and  the  Chta* 