

Such,  indeed,  has  been  the  rage  for  this  kind  of  internal  improfe- 
ment,  that  between  one  and  two  hundred  private  conipanies  have 
been  incorporated,  for  t^is  object,  in  different  parts  of  the  United 
States. 

It  is  not  our  intention,  even  were  it  in  our  power,  to  trace  the  vari- 
ous routes,  contemplated,  in  these  various  acts  of  incorporation — 
many  of  them  will,  probably,  never  be  commenced,  or  if  commenced, 
finished. — In  this,  as  well  as  in  every  thing  else,  which  is  new  and 
connected  with  individual  interest,  fancied  benefits  outrun  sober 
calculations.  We  shall  only  notice,  and  that  in  a  general  way,  some 
of  the  principal  of  those  already  completed,  or  in  such  progress,  as 
to  ensure  their  completion. 

In  New  England,  (to  begin  at  the  north,)  a  rail  way  of  three  miles 
in  extent,  was  constructed  at  Quincy  in  Massachusetts  in  1825  or 
1826,  at  the  expense  of  about  $11,000  per  mile,  for  ibe  purpose  of 
transporting  the  valuable  granite  of  that  town,  to  tide  water.  Three 
rail  roads  are  now  constructing  from  Boston,  one  to  the  manufactu- 
ring town  of  Lowell,  a  distance  of  about  thirty  miles,  one  to  Wor- 
cester, about  forty  miles,  and  one,  about  the  same  distance,  to  Provi- 
dence. These  three  roads,  at  an  expense  of  abont  one  million  of 
dollars  each,  will  be  completed,  in  all  probability,  'in  183&.  From 
Providence,  a  rail  road  was  commenced,  in  1833,  to  Stooingtoa,  ia 
Connecticut,  a  distance  of  about  forty  eight  miles,  the  expense  of 
which  is  estimated  at  about  81,140,000. 


*  Wood  on  rail  roads,  editioa  by  Greorg«  W.  Smith. 


667 

In  the  Sute  of  New  York,  the  Hudson  and  Mohawk,  the  Bchenee- 
tody  and  Saratoga  rail  roads,  are  well  known — the  former,  alK>ut  fif- 
teen miles  in  length,  has  cost  nearly  91,000,000,  and  the  latter  twenty 
one  miles  long,  will  haTe  only  cost,  including  every  thing,  about 
•367,000.  A  similar  road  has  lately  been  esUblished  and  the  atoek 
taken  up,  from  Troy  to  Saratoga,  twenty  four  miles,  and  which  it  if 
said  will  be  finished  in  1835,  at  an  expense  of  9300,000.  A  rail  road 
from  Harlaem  to  New  York,  is  nearly  completed.  Further  west 
in  that  state,  a  similar  road  is  nearly  finished,  from  Ithica,  the  head 
of  the  Cayuga  lake  to  Owego,  on  the  Susquehannah,  twenty  nine 
miles,  at  an  expense  of  about  $400,000 ;  and  a  short  road  connecting 
Rochester  with  lake  Ontario. 

The  rail  road  between  Schenectady  and  Utica,  was  chartered  in 
1833 ;  and  it  is  well  known,  that  stock  to  the  amount  of  $14,000,000 
was  aubscribed  by  individuals — this  road  is  now  in  progress,  and  willy 
■o  doubt,  be  completed,  as  soon  as  a  road  of  that  length  and  magni- 
tude can  be  done.  Its  length  is  seventy  seven  and  a  half  miles,  and 
the  estimated  cost  $1,500,000. 