

To  secure  the  trade  of  the  Susquehannah,  a  rail  road  has  been  pro- 
jected from  Baltimore,  to  strike  that  river  in  Pennsylvania,  by  the 
way  of  York ;  but  what  progress  has  been  made  in  it,  we  have  not 
ascertained.  The  citizens  of  Baltimore  had,  at  various  times,  ex- 
pended many  hundred  thousand  dollars,  in  improving  the  navigation 
of  the  Susquehannah,  lying  within  the  limits  of  Maryland,  by  which 
they  had  enjoyed  no  small  share  of  the  trade  of  that  river.  This 
trade,  however,  they  were  losing,  in  consequence  of  the  internal  im- 
provements of  Pennsylvania,  and  of  the  Delaware  and  Chesapeake 
canal ;  and  to  regain  it  this  road  was  projected. 

A  company  has,  also,  lately  been  established  to  make  a  rail  road 
from  Baltimore  to  Port  Deposite  on  the  same  river,  a  distance  of 
forty  one  miles,  to  meet  a  similar  one  to  that  place  in  Pennsylvania. 
This  road  has  beep  surveyed  and  located,  and  will  probably  soon  be 
made  by  the  company. 

As  we  proceed  south,  we  find  that  Virginia,  also,  has  her  rail  roads 
already  in  operation,  and  others  in  contemplation.  In  this  state  a 
rail  road  has  been  constructed  from  the  tide  waters  on  James  river, 
near  Richmond,  to  the  coal  mines  in  Chesterfield  county,  a  distance 
of- thirteen  and  a  half  miles.  It  was  commenced  in  January,  1830, 
and  was  in  operation  in  July,  1831 ;  and  was  made  for  about  88,000 
per  mile,  and  has  been  very  profitable  to  the  stockholders. 


•  See  eighth  annaal  report  of  the  Preaident  and  Directois  of  the  Baitiinore  aod 
Ohio  Rail  Road  company.    1834. 


572 

A  rail  road  from  Petersbur^h  to  Weldon  on  the  Roanoke,  a  dit- 
tance  of  sixty  miles,  has  been  in  operation  for  about  two  years.  In 
NoTember,  1833,  there  had  been  expended  upon  it  $516,334  80,  and 
its  income  for  a  year  ending  October  31st,  1S33,  was  S37,574  14.* 
This  road  was  calculated  to  divert  a  part  of  the  trade  of  the  rirer  Ro- 
anoke, from  Norfolk  to  Petersburgh.  To  prevent  this,  a  similar  road 
has  been  projected,  and  is  now  in  progress,  from  Portsmouth  to  a 
place  on  the  Roanoke,  in  North  Carolina,  opposite  Weldon,  a  distance 
of  seventy  seven  miles ;  the  estimated  cost  of  which  is  only  9475,0001 
A  company  has,  also,  been  lately  chartered,  to  construct  a  rail  road 
from  Winchester  to  Harper's  ferry,  to  meet  the  road  from  Baltimore 
to  that  place,  and  whiok  will  soon  be  completed.  Virginia  has,  also, 
long  contemplated  to  secure  a  share  of  the  western  trade,  by  connect- 
ing James  river  with  the  Ohio,  by  the  way  of  the  Great  Kanaway.  A 
company  has  been  for  some  time  formed,  to  effect  this  ^eat  object, 
by  connecting  the  rivers,  with  canals  or  rail  roads.  The  expense  has 
been  estinutted  at  somewhat  more  than  eight  millions,  but  the  whole 
stock,  it  is  believed,  has  not  yet  been  taken  up. 