merchandizes, or any part thereof’). Over the longer term, this transformation from
uncertainty to risk was one of the key developments which allowed prices to fall. As the
perils of the ergodic future became understood well enough to be assessed, underwriters were
able to find the ‘right price’. This made insurance affordable, and allowed the underwriters to
achieve a long-term profit from underwriting risk, rather than gambling on uncertainties.


The concrete distinction between risk and uncertainty was set out by Frank Knight in 1921,
and yields striking practical implications for marine insurance. In principle, to render
insurable an outcome – the manifestation of one of the perils specified (named) in an
insurance policy – the characteristics of the uncertainties surrounding such an event must be
known with sufficient confidence to transform them into risks. In other words, in principle,
calculable risk can be transferred economically through conventional premium-based
insurance, while uncertainty cannot. Knight stated that, in the case of risk,

                                               the distribution of the outcome in a group of instances is known (either through
                                               calculation a priori or from statistics of past experience), while in the case of
                                               uncertainty this is not true, the reason being in general that it is impossible to form
                                               a group of instances, because the situation dealt with is in a high degree unique ...
                                               The application of the insurance principle, converting a large contingent loss into
                                               a smaller fixed charge, depends upon the measurement of probability upon the
                                               basis of a fairly accurate grouping into classes.14

Writing at almost exactly the same time, and without adopting the nomenclature of risk and
uncertainty, J. M. Keynes, in his A treatise on probability, made the same distinction in a
slightly different way. It is not possible, Keynes showed, to assign a numerical value to every
instance of probability.


                                               Whether or not such a thing is theoretically conceivable, no exercise of the
                                               practical judgement is possible, by which a numerical value can actually be given
                                               to the probability of every argument. So far from our being able to measure them,
                                               it is not even clear that we are always able to place them in order of magnitude.
                                               Nor has any theoretical rule for their evaluation ever been suggested.15

Keynes used legal and insurance-market examples to illustrate this point, and given the
current topic, the latter is worth repeating. The ‘arbitrary element’ in some underwriting

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
14
  Knight, Frank: Risk, uncertainty and profit, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1921, pp. 233-5.
15
  Keynes, J. M.: The collected writings of John Maynard Keynes, Vol. VIII: A treatise on probability.
Cambridge: Royal Economic Society, 1973 (1921), p. 29.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5

	
  
