                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I


As England’s trade expanded during the seventeenth century, the cost of obtaining the
contingent-capital-guarantee offered under premium-based marine insurance policies fell
significantly. This phenomenon was particularly pronounced in London, as the city began
increasingly to dominate the international re-export trade. Between 1550 and 1640, English
merchants assumed control of most of their own country’s foreign trade, and launched a
fundamentally commercial overseas expansion. English penetration of south European
markets and the later seventeenth-century rise of her colonial re-exports, especially of
tobacco, sugar, and calicoes, combined to create what Davis described as ‘a revolution in
trade’. According to his estimates, between 1663 and 1701 imports increased by a third, and
exports, including re-exports, by ‘rather more than half’.4


By this time London already possessed a relatively mature marine insurance market. Italian
merchants had brought the practice to England by the fifteenth century, and introduced a set
of conventions developed in the northern Italy at least a century earlier.5 The ledgers of the
bank Filippo Borromei & Co. show insurance underwriting taking place in London centuries
before the trade boom. For example, in January 1438 the bank’s London branch insured a
shipment of Essex broadcloth for transit to Bruges, at a rate of 5.86%.6 Later ledger entries
show that the marine insurance market operated on a subscription basis, with multiple
underwriters sharing individual risks, and that marine insurance was mutual: Borromei & Co.
operated as a seller, as well as a buyer of marine cover, following the practice developed in
Italy. A century and a half after this earliest concrete evidence of insurance underwriting in
London, formal infrastructure – albeit limited – was established at the direction of the Privy
Council to reduce and manage marine insurance disputes in the city, and in 1601 a marine
insurance law, with the same goals, was enacted.7

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
4
  Davis, R.: English overseas trade, 1500-1700. London: Macmillan, 1973, p. 7; Davis, R.: ‘English Foreign
Trade, 1660-1700’. Economic History Review, New Series, vol. 7, No. 2 (1954), pp. 153, 161.
5
  Bensa, Enrico: Il contratto di assicurazione nel medio evo, 1884, translated to French, Valéry, Jules, as
Histoire du contrat d’assurance au moyen age, Paris: Anciemme Librairie Thorin et Fis, 1897, p. 20.
6
  ‘Rates’ are always given as a percentage of the sum insured (the policy value). Translation and tabulation of
data drawn from the Borromei ledgers by Bolton and Bruscoli is at
www.queenmaryhistoricalresearch.org/roundhouse/default.aspx
7
  Leonard, A. B.: ‘Contingent commitment: the development of English marine insurance in the context of New
Institutional Economics, 1577-1720’, in Coffman, D., Leonard, A.B., and Neal, L.(editors): Questioning
Credible Commitment: Re-thinking the Glorious Revolution and the Rise of Financial Capitalism. Cambridge:
University Press (2013).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2

	
  
