Even if a broker could balance his portfolio of contracts as Keynes describes, such an activity
is ‘in principle one of bookmaking’, he concedes.19 It is market-making in wagers, rather than
genuine insurance – although when the Bristol underwriter Abraham Clibborn accepted the
‘risk’ of ‘Peace till 14th May 1772’, he did not have an offsetting policy to pay out if war
were declared.20 It may be that the contract was called an insurance policy, the bookmaker an
underwriter, and the market Lloyd’s of London, but that does not make such wagers into
insurance. English law specifies that such contracts are not insurance, because the
beneficiaries possess no insurable interest in the outcome of the poll. Section 4 of the Marine
Insurance Act 1906 specifies that: ‘Every contract of marine insurance by way of gaming or
wagering is void’.21 This follows controversial legislation of 1746, which prohibited certain
speculative insurances by requiring that buyers of policies possessed an ‘insurable interest’ in
the object of the insurance.22 In other words, it was no longer possible to insure an outcome
in which had nothing beyond the policy itself to do with the buyer of the insurance.


The distinction between risk and uncertainty, and thus the insurability of a given outcome,
was understood long before Knight’s formal distinction was expressed. According to this
analysis, insurance can operate only in the areas of uncertainty that have been translated into
risk through quantification and statistical or probabilistic analysis, and where a sufficient
number of homogeneous individual risks can be assumed by an individual risk-bearing entity
– the underwriter – to ensure that pricing reflects actual likelihood of loss. In London’s
marine insurance market this was possible in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries –
leading to a revolution in marine insurance pricing. The greater number of voyages
undertaken and insured in the period allowed underwriters to undertake probabilistic
assessments of the likelihood of loss (albeit in a crude, frequentist way), instead of relying on
pure judgement alone. This resulted in more accurate, risk-based pricing, and thus a more
affordable product. Second, the larger risk pool allowed underwriters to offer lower rates due
to the simple advantages of risk diversification. Cheaper insurance attracted a larger,
increasingly diverse group of customers, which in turn further increased the size of the risk




	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
19
   Ibid.
20
   TNA C107/12, Risk books of Abraham Clibborn & Co, II. 10.
21
   1906 c. 41, Reg 6 Edw 7.
22
   19 Geo. II c. 37.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7

	
  
