venture. In competitive import/export markets with resulting tight margins, an additional
expenditure equal to five, ten, or even twenty percent of the value of trade goods – especially
one with no certain return – may have seemed too costly. Rather than engaging in risk
transfer through insurance, merchants could instead practice risk mitigation, for example by
dividing cargoes between multiple vessels, owning only fractional shares in ships, or
travelling in convoy to fend-off belligerents. However, these mitigation measures had
obvious and significant attendant transaction costs.12 If risk transfer through insurance was
cheaper, it would be more attractive. Relative cost restriction is perhaps best illustrated by the
practice, which appears to have been common in the seventeenth century, of purchasing only
partial cover. Such buyers clearly saw the value of insurance, but purchased the minimum to
ensure their solvency in the case of catastrophic loss. To buy more must have seemed too
expensive. ‘It’s my general custom to insure when adventures are anything considerable,
whether at peace or war’, the London merchant William Freeman wrote to his agent in
Montserrat in 1680. ‘When the danger is least, premium is low, and so I look upon it as a safe
way.’13


It is possible, however, to show that the price of marine insurance fell dramatically between
its earliest appearances in England in the fifteenth century, and London’s accession to pole
position in international markets in the early eighteenth. Section III of this article does so
very concretely, through a long series showing the development of marine insurance prices
for voyages to and from London from the earliest for which rates can be established, until the
close of the long eighteenth century. Section II discusses some of the possible reasons for the
decline in prices – and also for several spiky price rises. The latter, it is argued, occurred
when uncertainty, rather than risk, characterised the likelihood of the manifestation of insured
perils (named, with only insignificant variation, in English insurance policies for 400 years
between 1580 and 1980 as ‘the seas, men of war, fire, enemies, pirates, rovers, thieves,
jettizons, letters of mart and counter-mart, suprisals and takings at sea, arrests, restraints, and
detainments of all kings, princes, and people, of what nation, condition, and quality
whatsoever; barratry of the master and mariners, and of all other perils, losses, and
misfortunes, that have or shall come to the hurt, detriment, or damage of the said goods and

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
12
   Price, Jacob: ‘Transaction Costs: A note on Merchant Credit and the Organisation of Private Trade’, in Tracy,
James (editor): The Political Economy of Merchant Empires. CUP, 1991, pp. 288-90.
13
   William Freeman to John Bramley, 16.07.1680. Hancock, David (editor): The letters of William Freeman,
London Merchant, 1678-1685. London: Record Society, 2002, p. 162
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4

	
  
