scenarios is great, he states, citing reinsurance16 rates offered in the Lloyd’s market on the
missing vessel Waratah.


                                               The lapse of time made rates rise; the departure of ships in search of her made
                                               them fall; some nameless wreckage is found and they rise; it is remembered that
                                               in similar circumstances thirty years ago a vessel floated, helpless but not
                                               seriously damaged, for two months, and they fall. Can it be pretended that the
                                               figures which were quoted from day to day – 75 per cent, 83 per cent, 78 per cent
                                               – were rationally determinate, or that the actual figure was not within wide limits
                                               arbitrary and due to the caprice of individuals? In fact underwriters themselves
                                               distinguish between risks which are properly insurable, either because their
                                               probability can be estimated between comparatively narrow numerical limits or
                                               because it is possible to make a ‘book’ which covers all possibilities, and other
                                               risks which cannot be dealt with in this way and which cannot form the basis of a
                                               regular business of insurance,– although the occasional gamble may be indulged
                                               in.17

The rigorous Keynes rather lets his analysis slip near the end of this illustration. While
underwriters do indeed distinguish between risks which are properly insurable and those
which are not, his description of the difference is flawed. Knightian risks, which can be
probabilistically determined, are insurable. For uncertainties (such as the missing vessel)
where this is not possible, at best a wager can be made. If it is possible to collect sufficient
wagers to make a ‘book’ (a bit of terminology borrowed by Keynes directly from the jargon
of gambling), the underlying act remains one of wager, not of insurance. The nature of the
uncertainty has not changed. Further, it seems only a remote possibility that a ‘book’
covering all possibilities could ever be made in the practical world of insurance. Keynes
offers the example of underwriters’ offers on an election outcome in 1912:


                                               60 per cent was quoted at Lloyd’s to pay a total loss should Dr Woodrow Wilson
                                               be elected, 30 per cent should Mr Taft be elected, and 20 per cent should Mr
                                               Roosevelt be elected. A broker, who could effect insurances in equal amounts
                                               against the election of each candidate, would be certain at these rates of a profit of
                                               10 per cent. Subsequent modifications of these terms would largely depend upon
                                               the number of applicants for each kind of policy.18




	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
16
   The insurance of insurers, an instrument to further spread exposure to underwriting losses.
17
   Keynes, Probability, p. 25.
18
   Keynes, Probability, p. 24.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6

	
  
