A series of a dozen policies issued to Bartholomew Corsini in the 1580s illustrates the work
of the Office of Assurances, established as a centre for policy registration. The initiative was
part of the Privy Council’s programme. The policies show that by this time insurance was no
longer the preserve of the Italian merchant community: many underwriters’ names are
distinctly English.8 The Corsini policies also show that practical conventions, such as the
policy wording, the perils specified, and the acknowledgement that custom under the law
merchant was to govern the contract, were already in place, just as extant policies from the
middle of the sixteenth century show that arbitration, rather than the courts, was the generally
preferred route for dispute resolution.9


It is not possible to know what share of merchants trading from London and Britain’s rising
outports purchased insurance for their vessels or cargoes. Nor is it possible to know how
much cover they bought when they did insure: a merchant may ship £100 worth of goods, but
buy insurance to cover only £50. Equally, he may insure the full £100, as well as the his share
of the victuals and armaments on the vessel, and even the insurance premiums, as Bristol
merchant Richard Long ‘thelder’ did in 1646.10 However, it is clear that the market was well
developed – far from the ‘unorganised’ institution described by Kepler.11 Given this level of
development, those merchants who did not buy insurance, or who underinsured, must have
chosen to forgo cover for one of two reasons. Marine insurance provides contingent capital,
allowing merchants to trade with less resource than is demanded by certain risks of shipping.
Some merchants may have felt wealthy enough that insurance was not required. The East
India Company, for much of its active trading existence (although not all of it, as is
commonly asserted), did not purchase insurance, preferring to retain risk.


Alternately, merchants may have forgone insurance because they perceived the cost of cover
to be too high, relative to the perceived likelihood of loss, or to the profitability of the
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
8
  LMA CLC/B/062/MS22281, CLC/B/062/MS22282, the Corsini papers.
9
  TNA HCA 24/29 f. 45, policy underwritten for Anthony de Salizar, 05.08.1555. The policy states: ‘yf godes
will be that the said shippe shall not well procede, we promys to remyt yt to honist m’chaunts and not to go to
the lawe’.
10
   Manuals of merchant practice showed how to calculate sums insured to include premiums paid. Nott, H.E.
(editor): The deposition books of Bristol, Vol. I, 1643-1647, Bristol: Records Society, 1935, p. 141-2; for
merchant manuals, see, for example, Postlethwayt, M.: The universal dictionary of trade and commerce, vol. I.,
fourth edition. London: Printed for W. Strahan and 24 others, 1774 (first published 1755), entry on ‘Assurance’.
11
   Kepler, J.S. 1975: ‘The operating potential of the London insurance market in the 1570s’. Business History
17, p. 44.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3

	
  
