                                                                                                                                          The Pricing Revolution in Marine Insurance

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A. B. Leonard1

                                                                       Abstract.
                                   The widespread adoption of marine insurance by merchants in international
                                   trade was the result of a revolution in the pricing of marine insurance in the
                                   seventeenth century. In London, marine insurance prices dropped by more than
                                   half, and in some cases 75%. The city soon became the leading insurance
                                   centre in the world, as a progressive increase in the number of trade voyages
                                   allowed the transformation of ‘uncertainty’ into ‘risk’, which allowed more
                                   accurate risk-based pricing. This paper is in three parts. The first discusses the
                                   theoretical transformation of uncertainty into risk. The second explores the
                                   reasons behind the fall in marine insurance prices, and London’s resulting
                                   success in this important sector of the international transportation business.
                                   The final, quantitative section examines the fall in prices from the sixteenth
                                   century to the eighteenth, drawing on a new, unique database.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ###


                   For the time to come I resolve to ensure all I send out, which, in times of peace is not
                  above 2 and ½ p Ct., which I think you nor noe other person can thinke much to allow.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Joseph Cruttenden, apothecary of London,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       to Thomas Barton in America, 28 September 17162


Marine insurance allowed, in the words of England’s 1601 Act Conc’ninge matters of
Assurances, amongste Merchantes, ‘the losse [to] lightethe rather easilie upon many, then
heavilie upon fewe’.3 However, this comfort it came at a price, and in the early days of
marine insurance many English merchants chose to venture uninsured or only partially
covered for all but the most risky voyages. That changed over the course of the seventeenth
century, when a revolution in the pricing of marine insurance made the product much more
affordable. By the opening of the eighteenth, insurance had been widely adopted, and London
had become the leading global centre of underwriting. This paper illustrates and analyses
these developments from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives, by focussing on
pricing and the factors that drove it down.


	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
1
          Trinity Hall, Cambridge, abl28@cam.ac.uk
2
 Bodleian Library, Letter book of Joseph Cruttenden, MS Rawl Lett 66, 242.
3
 Anno 43 Elizabethæ Cap. 12, An Act Conc’ninge matters of Assurances, amongste Merchantes. HeinOnline, 4
Statutes of the Realm, 1547-1624, pp. 978-9.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1

	
  
