match the concentration or organisation achieved at Lloyd’s, and had little international
diversification.37


Thus the London product must have been more appealing due to price, security, or some
other significant factor or factors, since distance alone meant that it certainly was not more
straightforward to purchase or claim against. For most of the period of review, a significant
proportion of American risks were added to London risk pool. ‘Our Premium are about 70
per Cent more then are paid in London’, the New York merchant-underwriter Waddell
Cunningham reported to his business partner in 1756.38 Although the institutions of U.S.
marine insurance were to diverge and develop along a different, more corporate path
following the War of Independence, a large share of the country’s marine insurance
continued, and continues, to be underwritten in London, as ship owners and merchants reap
the benefits of the price revolution of the seventeenth century.


It should be observed that the preference for London was not universal. A century before
Cunningham’s correspondence, the Restoration-period merchant-insurer Charles Marescoe
wrote to a Swedish business partner that:


                                               We do not find it advisable to have insurance done here [in London] as most of
                                               the insurers are not to our liking. In case of loss one has to wait, 3, 4, or 6 months,
                                               and then they deduct 15 or at least ten per cent, as well as the premium, before
                                               they pay up. Therefore it is better to have it done in Hamburg or Amsterdam by
                                               those friends on whom you could draw the money ... if you want the business to
                                               remain with us we shall arrange the insurance with the rest, remaining satisfied
                                               with ½ per cent for our outlay.39

Despite these statements, however, Marescoe acted as an underwriter in London, and did buy
many insurance policies there to cover his own trading voyages. It is also worth noting that
the deduction from claims payments he referred to could be avoided through payment of an
additional or higher premium, much like a deductible on a modern insurance policy can be
increased to reduce the cost. Many buyers may have seen this option as flexibility, a


	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
37
   Kingston, C.: ‘Marine insurance in Britain and America, 1720–1844: a comparative institutional analysis’.
Journal of Economic History, Vol. 67, No. 2 (June 2007), pp. 391-393.
38
   Cunningham to Thomas Greg, 10.05.1756. Ibid., p. 114.
39
   Roseveare, Henry (editor): Markets and merchants of the late seventeenth century: the Marescoe-David
letters, 1668-1680, Oxford: University Press, 1987, p. 569.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12

	
  
