consequence was the successful attack on the Smyrna fleet, described above. Another was a
sharp rise in insurance prices.


A familiar risk – for example, the insurance of vessels between London and the Netherlands –
can become an uncertainty due to the unknown and therefore unpredictable nature of the new
threat of military or privateering attacks in wartime. The practical effect of this reduction is
the substitution of wagering for insurance. Prices rise, often dramatically. The underwriting
records of the merchant-insurer William Braund for voyages to and from American in 1759
and 1764 clearly illustrate this. In 1759, during Atlantic naval conflicts of the Seven Year’s
War, Braund charged ten discrete rates, including seven different rates in the month of March
alone, for the voyage from London to a named American port. The destination specified does
not correlate with the fluctuation of rates between 2.5% and 20%. The mean rate is 7.1%; the
standard deviation 5.1. In sharp contrast, Braund charged only three discrete rates in 1764
(2.5%, 3%, and 4%), for a mean of 3.2%, and a standard deviation of 0.76%. From March
1764 his rate for the voyage did not vary from 2.5%. When rates rise in this dramatic fashion,
capital typically piles into the underwriting market, as merchant-insurers are attracted by high
rates. While uncertainty remains, rates are often higher than the unknown level of actual risk
warrants, and therefore underwriting in such periods of uncertainty was very often profitable.


Such shifts into uncertainty create spikes in long-term insurance price trends, and are not the
main concern of this paper. Instead it is the long-term decline in prices arising from increased
demand which advanced uncertainty into risk, and brought greater portfolio diversification,
which the following section illustrates. These constitute the drivers of the marine insurance
pricing revolution.


                                                III


Analysis of marine insurance prices before the middle of the eighteenth century is made
challenging due to the paucity of data which exists. I have compiled a database of nearly
10,000 prices to insure vessels on voyages from or to London or other English ports, but the
vast bulk of these are from the latter half of the eighteenth or early nineteenth century, along
with two large data sets from the mid eighteenth century. Many more price-points have yet to
be digitised. The bulk of the data is from the handful of surviving underwriters’ risk books, in
                                                18

	
  
