risk by increasing the number of cases of loss which could be considered when prices were
set. The second is evident in the publication, as early as 1692,60 of Lloyd’s News and its
successor, Lloyd’s List, and the later introduction of the Lloyd’s Register of Shipping, which
by 1764 recorded details of vessels for risk assessment purposes. These innovations advanced
the classification of outcomes, with similar impact.61


The factors which affect marine insurance pricing described so far are primarily endogenous,
market factors. However, exogenous factors can also have a significant effect on marine
insurance pricing, and can snap the ergodic predictability which allows the conversion of
uncertainty into risk. Uncertainty is of two types: epistemological – a lack of understanding
of the world – and ontological – arising from unpredictability of the world itself.62 The
collective underwriting experience of a market cannot transform uncertainty into risk when
the world changes, and the ergodic maxim does not hold. This can occur when serial
correlations arise, for example when concentrated privateering increases the number of vessel
losses on a specific sea route. Such losses have long been insured, since marine insurance
policies cover two broad classes of exogenous perils: those of the seas, and those of men. Into
the latter category fall acts of war an piracy. War in particular introduced dramatic
uncertainty into marine insurance underwriting – and war at sea was a frequent characteristic
of early modern commerce. Further, preying upon merchant shipping – by both vessels of
states’ navies and by privateers licensed to do so by their governments – was a matter of
policy. For example, France implemented such a naval strategy in the later years of the Nine
Years’ War (1688-1697). It chose to concentrate its diminishing naval resources on
privateering and squadron attacks against merchant shipping. Developed by the military
engineer Sébastien le Prestre de Vauban, the new strategy recognised the reliance of the
allied war effort on seaborne trade. It sought to destroy the English ability to prosecute the
war by devastating this commerce, and to bankrupt England in the process.63 One


	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
60
   McCusker, John J.: European bills of entry and marine lists: early commercial publications and the origins of
the business press. Harvard University Press, 1995, p. 53.
61
   For an extensive discussion of London’s marine insurance market in this framework, see Leonard, Adrian:
‘Contingent commitment: the development of English marine insurance in the context of New Institutional
Economics’, in Coffman, D’Maris, Leonard, A.B., and Neal, Larry: (eds): Questioning 'Credible Commitment':
Re-thinking the Glorious Revolution and the Rise of Financial Capitalism, Cambridge: University Press,
forthcoming 2013.
62
   Scazzieri, Roberto: ‘Similarity and uncertainty’, in Brandolini, S.M. and Sazzieri, R (eds.), Fundamental
uncertainty: rationality and plausible reasoning, London: Palgrave McMillan, 2011, p. 73.
63
   Rodger, Command of the Ocean, p. 172.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17

	
  
