Further, ‘price discovery’ in a market so integrated that many buyers were also sellers must
have led to an equilibrium price in everyday transactions. Knight states specifically:


                                               It is generally not enough that the insurer who takes the ‘risk’ of a large number of
                                               cases be able to predict his aggregate losses with sufficient accuracy to quote
                                               premiums which will keep his business solvent, while at the same time imposing a
                                               burden on the insured which is not too large a fraction of his contingent loss. In
                                               addition he must be able to present a fairly plausible contention that the particular
                                               insured is contributing to the total fund out of which losses are paid as they accrue
                                               in an amount corresponding reasonably well with his real probability of loss.51

The need for a fairly plausible contention that prices are reasonable must have been
imperative in the early London marine insurance market, where buyers were often also
sellers, where brokers controlled the majority of the business (they had been important since
at least the late sixteenth century – at least thirty were active in London in the 1570s52), and
where the business was concentrated within Lloyd’s Coffee-house. The combination of
competition, intermediation, and mutual interest should, in combination, have had the effect
of ensuring that marine insurance prices reached a risk-based minimum, at least where the
extent of specific relevant perils was known. Competition and intermediation will have
pushed prices downwards; vertical integration and information-sharing (symbolised famously
by the publication of Lloyd’s News and Lloyd’s List since at least 169253) among merchant-
insurers provided a floor-price sufficient to limit underwriter failure due to under-pricing.


Supply also has an impact on marine insurance prices. The modern phenomenon known as
the ‘insurance cycle’, which typically operates over seven to ten years, sees capital pile into
the market when prices are high. Barriers to entry are low, requiring only assets to be
committed to support risks assumed. Such assets are typically also invested elsewhere,
allowing double-use of underwriting capital (a benefit extolled in the twentieth century by the
renowned investor Warren Buffet). In the absence of exogenous price factors such as war, the
influx of capital has the effect of forcing prices down to their floor level, sometimes to


	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
51
   Emphasis added. Knight, Risk, uncertainty, and profit, p 235.
52
   Stow, John: A survey of the cities of London and Westminster (Strype’s edition). First published 1598.
London: printed for A. Churchill and nine others, 1720, pp. 242-3.
53
   McCusker, John J.: European bills of entry and marine lists: early commercial publications and the origins of
the business press. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995, p. 53.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15

	
  
