change in the value of currency, for example, will not impact upon the rate. Cotton worth
£100 insured at a rate of three per cent always costs £3 to insure, whether the volume of the
cotton is one bushel or one hundred (the same is not true of, for example, freight charges,
which vary according to the volume of goods shipped). However, marine insurance rates do
fluctuate with changes in the price of the contingent capital which marine insurance provides,
which is in turn affected by the supply of contingent capital available to be deployed by
underwriters (on which more below). Brokers’ commission, if any was also included in the
rate. It was sometimes usual for underwriters to charge a rate in guineas (21 shillings, with 20
shillings to the pound), and pass the ‘extra’ shilling on to the broker.


When marine insurance prices – expressed as rates – had declined somewhat, insurance-
buying decision-making was effected. Expected utility will have increased demand. If a
merchant believes one in twenty vessels is likely to be lost, insurance of £1,000 has an
expected value of £50. At a premium of four percent, the gain is £10. However, while
underwriters may have calculated insurance prices in this way (and I have yet to uncover any
direct evidence that they did so, although the accuracy of their floor-level pricing suggests
they may have done), it seems unlikely that insurance buyers would have made such
calculations. They were perhaps more likely to have considered the cost of insurance relative
to the expected yield of a trading voyage. Margins in ocean-going trade could be very fine,
and in ship-owning even narrower.30 Further, early modern trade was an essentially
precarious, unpredictable system. Huge distances greatly distorted the fundamentals of
supply, demand, and pricing, by depriving merchants of current information. Such challenges
produced an economic rationality, and hence a series of economic behaviours, ‘widely
different from that of the world of modern economics’.31 With trade profits on voyages thus
inherently unpredictable, foregoing insurance may often have seemed a necessary choice.


As prices fell and London’s market developed, the use by foreign insurance buyers of the
London marine insurance market increased. During the English Civil War (1642–1651)
Dutch merchants sometimes bought insurance in London, as Samuel Lamb revealed in 1657:
‘It is the Hollanders custom ... that when they send any single ship to the southward for their

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
30
  Brulez, W.: ‘Shipping profits in the early modern period’. Acta Historiae Neerlandicae, XIV (1981), p. 83.
31
  Musgrave, P.: ‘The economics of uncertainty: the structural revolution in the spice trade, 1480-1640’, in
Shipping, trade, and commerce: essays in memory of Ralph Davis. Leicester: University Press, 1981, pp. 10-19.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10

	
  
