uneconomic levels. Losses at the trough of the cycle usually lead to underwriter failures and
withdrawals, which shrink demand and allow a price recovery.


It appears that the underwriting community in London was growing as prices fell, and was
sufficiently robust to ensure they were near their floor level. Over forty-seven months from
1664, Marescoe purchased 108 policies underwritten by just thirty-one discrete individuals,
ten of whom accounted for almost 84% of the total value of the policies.54 As trade expanded,
so too did the underwriting market. Between 1709 and 1717 Ralph Radcliffe purchased
policies underwritten by eighty-six discrete underwriters.55 No comprehensive enumeration
exists for the sixteenth or seventeenth centuries, but a 1718 petition was signed 163
individuals in London who had ‘actually underwritten policies’.56 Not all of these men would
have been regular underwriters: in 1720 ‘there [were] about one hundred Persons of very
Good Repute [in London], who Insure Ships and merchandizes at Sea’.57


Institutional impacts also brought prices down, as transaction costs in the London marine
insurance market were reduced. As demand began to grow, the institutional structures of the
market were adapted to cope with the arrival of ‘individualist’ traders into a fundamentally
‘collectivist’ market.58 External enforcement of the ‘rules of the game’, which evolved from
the Law Merchant, were introduced to keep that component of transaction costs at its lowest.
In part as a result, contracts were standardised, and over time underwriters modified the terms
and conditions of cover to improve the utility of their insurance offer. Meanwhile, the market
took institutional development steps in the three key areas outlined by North as important to
the reduction of transaction costs: those which increased the mobility of capital, those which
lowered information costs, and those which spread risk.59 The third may be taken for granted.
The first, in which North includes centralisation of trade, was met in part by concentration of
London’s insurance business, first in Lombard Street, and ultimately in a single Coffee-
house, Lloyd’s. This concentration played a key role in the transformation of uncertainty into

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
54
   Roseveare, Markets and merchants, pp. 582-588
55
   Insurance policies of Ralph Radcliffe, Hertfordshire Archives and Local Studies Centre, DE/R/B293/1-47.
56
   Wright, C. & Fayle, C.E.: A history of Lloyd’s. London: Macmillan & Co., 1928, p. 50.
57
   Barnard, Attorney General’s Report, 1720, p. 44.
58
   The collectivist and individualist division, in the context of New Institutional Economics, is proposed in
Greif, Avner: Institutions and the path to the modern economy: lessons from Medieval trade, Cambridge:
University Press, 2006.
59
   North, Douglass: ‘Institutions, Transaction Costs, and the Rise of Empires’, in Tracy, James (editor): The
Political Economy of Merchant Empires. Cambridge: University Press, 1991, pp. 26-29.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16

	
  
