

For location purposes the counties as recorded as they were before the local government reorganization of 1974, putting modern conurbations in their respective counties apart from London, where to assist analysis engines are located to their parish or locale rather than merely "Surrey" or "Middlesex". By and large there were, however, few problems in assigning engines to their correct counties, apart from a significant number of early Coalbrookdale cylinders and some later Carron ones, for which we have only the name of the purchaser, and some engines on the borders of counties, e.g. Leicester and South Derbyshire and the Black Country, but OS maps and local knowledge mostly resolved these issues.

Before 1776 it is simple to categorise the type of engine - apart from a small number of Savery pumps, all were Newcomen engines with a cylinder, beam and pumping apparatus. The entry of the Watt separate condenser meant it was necessary to add a new category, and from 1780 increasing numbers of both B&W and other makers' engines began to be applied to rotary motion, so thereafter engines are identified if known under whether they were rotary or pumping. Piracies of Watt's condenser patents and other designs which began to be used from this period, such as Hornblower's compound engine and Bull's beamless inverted ones, are also noted when known.

For most engines, recording the industry in which it was set to work and the job it performed are relatively straightforward, although some engines worked machinery in different industries at the same time (e.g. a textile and flour mill in different buildings at the same site; or an engine at a mine which both pumped water and would material from the mine. Where possible, explanatory information is included in the "comments" column of the secondary industry or purpose.

Recording the maker of an engine sets problems similar to those encountered with rebuilt and moved plant. Most Newcomen (and, indeed, Boulton and Watt) engines were not really built by any one person or works but were rather the product of several different concerns who supplied parts (cylinder, gearing, wooden parts, boilers, etc.) and an erector who assembled the parts, had them put together and made the whole work (often not an easy task). Where the principal designer is known, that was recorded; otherwise data of the factory or erector, if that was relevant. For over two thirds of these early engines, however, we have no details of the designer, suppliers of parts or the erector.

Likewise, the power and size of the cylinder are not usually recorded, and we have details of dimensions of under half of engines other than Boulton and Watt's production. The horsepower is in any case of limited and contested value - few reliable records of the net power delivered to the pumps or machinery survive, except for some Watt engines and a scattering of others. For Watt engines and some others we have the nominal horsepower, but this is a calculation based on dimensions and declared rate of working rather than a measurement, and is affected by the intensity of the work done - for example, a pumping engine might work all day and night slowly, or at full capacity over restricted hours, depending on the needs of the site and the personnel available.