

Once this was done, on my retirement it was possible to update and extend the listings, involving collaboration with researchers expert on different areas and industries; much studying of research published since the 1970s; additional archives research (principally on newspapers and insurance records); and using the power of the internet. In a relatively short time work it proved possible to complete work which would previously have taken years of research and miles of travelling around the country to achieve, and this has been further augmented in recent years.

The database was put onto the internet in 2020 and is available for use by all interested parties at The Engines Database | Early Engine Database (coalpitheath.org.uk); the complete Excel spreadsheet is available on application for researcher who wish to analyse it by county, industry, date, size, etc.

An update is in preparation and will include new engines which have been identified since the upload, additional data on many entries, and weeding out of inaccurate and duplicated items. This now comprises over 2,500 entries, plus over 200 possible engines for which the evidence is not conclusive.

#### The Data Collected

The original data was logged under as many categories as could be captured on the cards - date, location, type of engine, county, industry, purpose (function), power, size and other useful information.

In many if not most cases, however, several components of this information were not available, and for many engines we have only a location and the industry in which it was used; sometimes even these are not known.

In recording these data, arbitrary decisions as to which of two conflicting pieces of information were to be used were sometimes necessary. In the main, however, the criteria involved in assigning dates, locations, and the like were self-dictating, governed by the nature of the sources. In over a third of the records (38%) the date given is the one when the engine was first reported, the starting date being unknown; for early colliery engines this date could often be many years after construction, for later factory engines a year or two is more usual. Moreover, in some 40 cases an approximate date is recorded in the absence of better data.

For the same reasons, while secondhand engines were in the original list for checking purposes, they are not included in this database. If every move of the materials of an engine were to be counted as a new installation, a very distorted picture would be drawn of certain counties, most notably Cornwall. On the other hand, of course, some of the engines recorded as being new in the absence of information to the contrary were doubtless secondhand, but this is inevitable when reliance must be placed on incomplete data.

A further difficulty arises in distinguishing between secondhand engines and major rebuilds. A new engine in an old house was always counted separately. In some cases, where substantial modifications were made to an existing engine, as for instance Smeaton's rebuild of the Wheal Busy engine, this has been included in the listing. Where there was detail to show that the installation was in essence a move, however, as for instance when the cylinder and other key components of an existing engine was used with new timberwork on a different site, this was generally regarded as a secondhand engine and was not counted, unless there were clear reasons to include. This approach is not without problems, since in the 18th century almost all engines were built up on site from materials assembled from many places, and it is usually impossible to tell their origin. When the timberwork of an old engine was used with a new cylinder on a different site, should this count as a new or a secondhand engine? In the final analysis each case had to be examined and a decision made. Though some of these may be open to objection, the policy adopted is probably the least unsatisfactory overall. Local knowledge is invaluable here, and has led to several deletions and corrections; if knowledgeable users are able to correct errors, this would be invaluable.