The Project Gutenberg eBook of A history of the Peninsular War, Vol. 3, Sep. 1809-Dec. 1810
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A history of the Peninsular War, Vol. 3, Sep. 1809-Dec. 1810
        Ocaña, Cadiz, Bussaco, Torres Vedras

Author: Charles Oman


        
Release date: July 30, 2017 [eBook #55231]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/55231

Credits: Produced by Brian Coe, Ramon Pajares Box and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HISTORY OF THE PENINSULAR WAR, VOL. 3, SEP. 1809-DEC. 1810 ***

TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  * Italics are denoted by underscores as in _italics_, and small caps
    are represented in upper case as in SMALL CAPS.

  * Obvious printer errors have been silently corrected.

  * Original spelling was kept, but variant spellings were made
    consistent when a predominant usage was found.

  * Errata and Notes on illustrations have been inserted into their
    proper places in the text.

  * To aid referencing places and names in present-day maps and
    documents, outdated and current spellings of some proper names
    follow:

                  Albaracin, now Albarracín,
               Albondonates, now Algodonales,
                Albuquerque, now Alburquerque,
                  Alcanizas, now Alcañices,
                   Alemtejo, now Alentejo,
                    Almanza, now Almansa,
                  Almunecar, now Almuñecar,
                    Araçena, now Aracena,
                  Arzobispo, now El Puente del Arzobispo,
          Baccelar (Manuel), now Manuel Pinto de Morais Bacelar,
                Ballasteros, now Ballesteros,
                  Barcellos, now Barcelos,
                     Baylen, now Bailén,
                     Boçaco, now Buçaco,
                    Bussaco, now Buçaco,
                 Cacabellos, now Cacabelos,
                    Caçeres, now Cáceres,
                  Calandriz, now Calhandriz,
                  Campredon, now Camprodón,
                   Cardadeu, now Cardedeu,
                Compostella, now Compostela,
                    Cordova, now Córdoba,
                    Corunna, now La Coruña,
                        Dao, now Dão,
                    Daymiel, now Daimiel,
                  Deleytosa, now Deleitosa,
             Despeña-Perros, now Despeñaperros,
                      Douro, now Duero (in Spain),
                                 Douro (in Portugal),
                   El Moral, now Moral de Calatrava,
                Estremadura, now Extremadura (in Spain),
                                 Estremadura (in Portugal),
                    Golegão, now Golegã,
        Guadalaviar (river), now Turia (río),
                 Guimaraens, now Guimarães,
                  La Baneza, now La Bañeza
                  La Bispal, now La Bisbal,
                       Loxa, now Loja,
                    Majorca, now Mallorca,
                       Meza, now Mesas de Ibor,
                  Momblanch, now Montblanch,
              Nabao (river), now Nabão (río),
                Ona (river), now Güeña (río),
                Oña (river), now Oñar (río),
                  Palleresa, now Pallaresa,
                  Pampeluna, now Pamplona,
                      Ripol, now Ripoll,
                   Sabugoça, now Sabugosa
                    Santona, now Santoña,
                  Saragossa, now Zaragoza,
                   Senabria, now Sanabria,
              Tagus (river), now Tajo (Spanish), Tejo (Portuguese),
                     Tajuna, now Tajuña,
                   Tondella, now Tondela,
                   Truxillo, now Trujillo,
                     Vierzo, now El Bierzo,
                 Villaharta, now Villarta de San Juan,
                   Vincente, now Vicente,
                   Vittoria, now Vitoria,
                      Xeres, now Jerez,