

  [14] For an excellent personal diary of all these operations see
  General Von Brandt’s _Aus meinem Leben_, pp. 100-12. He accuses
  Suchet of grossly exaggerating, both in his dispatches and his
  memoirs, the difficulty and importance of these mountain raids
  (see Suchet’s _Memoirs_, i. pp. 40-74, for a highly picturesque
  narrative). The insurgents were still unskilled in arms, shot
  very poorly, kept bad watch, and were given to panic. That there
  is something in Brandt’s criticism seems to be shown by the fact
  that the whole division of Musnier lost between July 1 and Dec.
  31, 1809, only three officers killed and eight wounded out of
  200 present with the eagles in six months of incessant raids and
  skirmishes (see Martinien’s _Liste des officiers_, often quoted
  before).

These operations had been carried out by Musnier’s division; but
meanwhile movements of a very similar sort were being undertaken by
another division, that of Laval, on the other side of Aragon, along
the slopes and gorges of the Pyrenees[15]. In the end of August a
column of 3,000 men stormed the convent of San Juan de la Peña, close
to Jaca, which Sarasa and Renovales were wont to make their head
quarters. It was an ancient building containing the tombs of the
early kings of Aragon, who reigned in the mountains before Saragossa
had been recovered from the Moor; it had never seen an enemy for
eight hundred years, and was reputed holy and impregnable. Hence its
capture dealt a severe blow to the confidence of the insurgents.
Renovales, however, held out in the western upland, continuing to
defend himself in the valley of Roncal, till he was beset on all
sides, for Suchet had obtained leave from Paris to call up the
National Guards of the Ariége, Basses Pyrénées and Haute Garonne, and
their _bataillons d’élite_ attacked the insurgents in the rear from
across the high mountains, while the 3rd Corps advanced against them
from the front. After much scattered fighting Renovales capitulated,
on condition that he should be allowed a free departure. He retired
to Catalonia with some of his men: the rest dispersed for the moment,
but only to reassemble a few weeks later, under another and a more
wary and obstinate chief, the younger Mina, who commenced in this
same autumn to make the borders of Aragon and Navarre the theatre
of his hazardous exploits. But the region was comparatively quiet
in September and October, and Suchet transferred the activity of
his movable column further to the eastward, where he drove some
_partidas_ out of the valleys of the Cinca and Essera, and tried to
open up a new line of communication with France by way of the valley
of Venasque. This was accomplished, for a moment, by the aid of
national guards from beyond the Pyrenees, who entered the valley from
the north while the troops of Suchet were operating from the south.
But the road remained unsafe, and could only be used for the passage
of very large bodies of troops, so that it was practically of little
importance.