

  [15] Suchet’s third division, that of Habert, was lying out in
  the direction of the Cinca and the Guadalupe, watching lest Blake
  might make a new sally from Tortosa or Lerida.

In December Suchet completed the formal conquest of Aragon, by
moving up the whole of Laval’s division into the high-lying district
of Teruel, in the extreme south-east of the province, the only
part of it that had never yet seen the French eagles. The Junta of
Aragon fled from thence over the border of the kingdom of Valencia,
but Villacampa and his bands remained in the mountains unsubdued,
and while they continued to exist the conquest of the upland was
incomplete. The moment that its towns ceased to be held by large
garrisons, it was clear that the insurgents would descend to reoccupy
them. Nevertheless Suchet had done much in this year: besides the
crushing of Blake he had accomplished the complete subjection of
the plains of Central Aragon, and had obtained a grip upon its two
mountain regions. He had fortified Monzon, Fraga, Alcañiz, and Caspe
as outposts against the Catalans, and, having received large drafts
from France in the autumn, was on the last day of the year at the
head of a fine corps of 26,000 men, from which he might hope to
produce in the next spring a field army sufficient for offensive
operations against Catalonia or Valencia, after providing garrisons
for his various posts of strength[16]. The weak point of his
position was that the guerrilleros had learned caution, refused for
the future to fight save under the most favourable conditions, and
devoted themselves to the safe and vexatious policy of intercepting
communications and cutting up small parties and stragglers. They were
much harder to deal with, when once they had learnt that not even in
fastnesses like El Tremendal or San Juan de la Peña was it wise to
offer the French battle. Unless Suchet left a garrison in every town,
nay, in every considerable village, of the sierras, the insurgents
dominated the whole region. If he did take such measures for holding
down the upland, he was forced to immobilize a very large proportion
of his army. We shall note that in 1810 he was only able to draw out
12,000 of his 26,000 men for the invasion of Western Catalonia.

  [16] The 3rd Corps which had gone down to little over 10,000 men
  in May 1809, counted on Jan. 1, 1810, the following force:

    Division Laval                     5,348

       ”     Musnier                   8,465

       ”     Habert                    4,757

    Cavalry Brigade                    2,172

    Artillery and Engineers              928

    Garrisons of Alcañiz, Jaca,
      Monzon, Saragossa, Tudela        3,110

    ‘Chasseurs des Montagnes’
      [permanently embodied Pyrenean
      National Guards]                 1,425
                                      ------
                         Total        26,205
                                      ------