

The garrison at the moment of Verdier’s first attack consisted of
about 5,700 men, not including the irregulars of the Crusade. There
were seven battalions of the old army, belonging to the regiments
of Ultonia[27], Borbon, and Voluntarios de Barcelona, with three
battalions of miqueletes, two local corps, 1st and 2nd of Gerona,
and the 1st of Vich. Of cavalry there was a single squadron, newly
levied, the ‘escuadron de San Narciso.’ Of artillery there were but
278 men, a wholly insufficient number: the officers of that arm
were given 370 more to train, partly miqueletes of the 2nd Gerona
battalion, partly sailors having some small experience of gunnery.
It was difficult to make proper use of the great store of cannon in
the fortress, when more than half the troops allotted to them had
never before seen, much less served, a heavy gun of position. To the
above 5,700 men of all arms must be added about 1,100 irregulars of
the ‘Crusade’--seven lay and two clerical companies of fusiliers
and two more of artificers. But these were set to guard almost
unapproachable parts of the wall, or held in reserve: most of the
stress fell upon the organized troops. The defence was altogether
conducted on scientific principles, and had nothing in common with
that of Saragossa. Here the irregulars formed only a small fraction
of the garrison[28], and were never hurled in senseless fury against
the French batteries, but used carefully and cautiously as an
auxiliary force, capable of setting free some part of the trained men
for service on the more important points of the enceinte[29].

  [27] Ultonia, the regiment of Ulster, still contained many
  officers of the old Jacobite strain, as may be seen by consulting
  the list of killed and wounded, where such names as O’Donnell,
  Macarthy, Nash, Fitzgerald, Pierson, Coleby, Candy, occur: but
  it had just been raised from 200 to 800 bayonets by filling
  the depleted _cadre_ with Catalan recruits, and all the junior
  lieutenants, newly appointed, were Catalans also. So there was
  little Irish about it save the names of some of its senior
  officers.

  [28] For the details of the composition of the Gerona garrison,
  see Appendix no. 1.

  [29] I know not why Napier, contrasting Gerona with Saragossa
  (ii. 251), says that at the former place the regular garrison
  was 3,000, the armed multitude ‘less than 6,000.’ When it is
  remembered that its total population was 14,000 souls--of whom
  some fled to places of safety before the siege began--and that
  it had already raised two battalions of miqueletes with 1,360
  bayonets out of its able-bodied male inhabitants, it is difficult
  to see how more than 5,000 armed irregulars are to be procured,
  for in a population of 14,000 souls there cannot be more than
  some 3,000 men between eighteen and forty-five. As a matter of
  fact (see documents in Arteche, vii. Appendix 5), the ‘Crusade’
  was about 1,100 strong at most.