

Meanwhile Garcia Conde, whose movements were most happy and adroit,
reinforced the garrison of Gerona up to its original strength of
5,000 bayonets, by making over to Alvarez four whole battalions and
some picked companies from other corps, and prepared to leave the
town with the rest of his division and the vast drove of mules, whose
burden had been discharged into the magazines. If he had dedicated
his whole force to strengthening the garrison, the additional troops
would have eaten up in a few days all the provisions that the
convoy had brought in[46]. Accordingly he started off at two a.m.
on September 4 with some 1,200 men, by the upland path that leads
past the hermitage of Los Angeles: St. Cyr had just placed Pino’s
troops from the covering army to guard the heights to the south-east
of Gerona, but Garcia Conde, warned by the peasants of their exact
position, slipped between the posts and got off to Hostalrich with a
loss of no more than fifty men[47].

  [46] The reinforcements left behind by Garcia Conde consisted of
  two battalions of Baza (one of Reding’s old Granadan regiments),
  with 1,368 bayonets, two Catalan ‘tercios,’ 1st and 2nd of
  Talarn, with 716 bayonets, and select companies of 1st of Granada
  (Iliberia), 2nd of Vich, and Voluntarios de Tarragona--in all
  apparently about 2,707 men.

  The table on p. 375 of Arteche’s vol. vii seems to err in
  crediting the Cervera ‘tercio’ to Garcia: this had come in on
  Aug. 17, as described on p. 35. On the other hand the company of
  Voluntarios de Tarragona should be credited to him.

  [47] St. Cyr tells a story to the effect that he had placed
  Mazzuchelli’s brigade of Pino’s division in ambush behind the
  hill of Palau to intercept Garcia Conde, and that the Spaniards
  would have marched right into the trap on Sept. 3, if the
  Italians had not been stupid enough to sound the _réveil_ at
  dawn, and so warn the enemy of their existence. But the Spanish
  accounts of Minali and Claros are quite different (see Arteche,
  vii. 377); they are to the effect that Garcia Conde had intended
  to start _at dusk_ on the third, but, hearing firing on the side
  of Palau, deferred his exit and took another road. If he was
  starting at 7 or 8 o’clock at night on the third, he cannot have
  been warned by the morning bugles at 4 o’clock on the previous
  morning. See St. Cyr, p. 234, and Napier, ii. 245, for the
  French story, which the latter takes over whole from the former.
  Belmas and Vacani do not give the tale, though they have a full
  narration of the escape of Garcia Conde.

Before he could consider his position safe, Verdier had to complete
the lines of investment: this he did on September 5 by driving off
the intermediate posts which Alvarez had thrown out from the Capuchin
heights, to link the town with the garrison in the hermitage of
Nuestra Señora de los Angeles. Mazzuchelli’s brigade stormed the
hermitage itself on the following day, with a loss of about eighty
men, and massacred the greater part of the garrison. On that same
day, however, the French suffered a small disaster in another part of
the environs. General Joba, who had been sent with three battalions
to clear the road to Figueras from the bands of Claros and Rovira,
was beaten and slain at San Gregorio by those chiefs. But the
miqueletes afterwards retired to the mountains, and the road became
intermittently passable, at least for large bodies of men.