

  [67] De Garay to Wellesley in _Wellesley Dispatches_, p. 92.

Wellington, when these schemes were laid before him, reiterated
his refusal to join in any offensive campaign, pointed out that
the allied forces were not strong enough to embark on any such
hazardous undertaking, and bluntly expressed his opinion that ‘he
was much afraid, from what he had seen of the proceedings of the
Central Junta, that in the distribution of their forces they do
not consider military defence and military operations so much as
political intrigue, and the attainment of petty political objects.’
He then proceeded to make an estimate of the French armies, to show
their numerical superiority to the allies; in this he very much
under-estimated the enemy’s resources, calculating the whole force
of the eight corps in Spain at 125,000 men, exclusive of sick and
garrisons not available for active service. As a matter of fact there
were 180,000 men, not 125,000, with the Eagles at that moment, after
all deductions had been made, so that his reasoning was far more
cogent than he supposed[68]. But this only makes more culpable the
obstinate determination of the Junta to resume operations with the
much inferior force which they had at their disposal.

  [68] Wellington to Wellesley, from Merida, Sept. 1, 1809.

Undismayed by their first repulse, the Spanish ministers were soon
making new representations to Wellesley and Wellington, in order to
induce them to commit the English army to a forward policy. They sent
in repeated schemes for supplying Wellington with food and transport
on a lavish scale[69]; but he merely expressed his doubts as to
whether orders that looked admirable on paper would ever be carried
out in practice. He consented for the present to remain at Badajoz,
as long as he could subsist his army in its environs, but warned
the Junta that it was more probable that he would retire within the
Portuguese border, for reasons of supply, than that he would join in
another campaign on the Tagus.

  [69] See the details in Wellesley to Canning, Sept. 2, 1809.

Despite of all, the government at Seville went on with its plans for
a general advance, even after they recognized that Wellington was
not to be moved. A grand plan of operations was gradually devised
by the War-Minister Cornel and his advisers. Stated shortly it was
as follows. The army in La Mancha, which Venegas had rallied after
the disaster of Almonacid, was to be raised to a strength of over
50,000 men by the drafting into it of a full two-thirds of Cuesta’s
old army of Estremadura. On September 21 Eguia marched eastwards up
the Guadiana, with three divisions of infantry and twelve or thirteen
regiments of cavalry, to join Venegas[70]. The remaining force,
amounting to two divisions of infantry and 2,500 cavalry, was left
in Estremadura under the Duke of Albuquerque, the officer to whom
the government was obliged to assign this army, because the Junta of
Badajoz pressed for his appointment and would not hear of any other
commander. He was considered an Anglophil, and a friend of some of
the Andalusian malcontents, so the force left with him was cut down
to the minimum. All the old regular regiments were withdrawn from
him, save one single battalion, and he was left with nothing save
the newly-raised volunteer units, some of which had behaved so badly
at Talavera[71]. His cavalry was soon after reduced by the order to
send a brigade to join the Army of the North, so that he was finally
left with only five regiments of that arm or about 1,500 sabres. Of
his infantry, about 12,000 strong, over 4,000 were absorbed by the
garrison of Badajoz, so that he had only 8,000 men available for
service in the field.