

  [66] The Valencian troops at Maria were eleven battalions, viz.
  Savoia (three), 1st and 3rd Cazadores de Valencia (two), America
  (two), Voluntarios de Valencia (one), 1st of Valencia (three).
  Of these only Savoia (now two batts. only) and Voluntarios
  de Valencia turned up for the relief of Gerona. Along with
  them came two fresh regiments, 2nd Cazadores of Orihuela, and
  Almanza, which had not been at Maria. But these were Murcian, not
  Valencian, troops.

All the more credit is due to Alvarez, considering the way in which
he was left unsuccoured, and fed with vain promises. A less constant
soul would have abandoned the defence long before: the last two
months of resistance were his sole work: if he had fallen sick in
October instead of December, his subordinates would have yielded
long before. But it is not merely for heroic obstinacy that he must
be praised. Every detail of the defence shows that he was a most
ingenious and provident general: nothing was left undone to make the
work of the besiegers hard. Moreover, as Napier has observed, it
is not the least of his titles to merit that he preserved a strict
discipline, and exacted the possible maximum of work from soldier
and civilian alike, without the use of any of those wholesale
executions which disgraced the defence of Saragossa. His words were
sometimes truculent, but his acts were just and moderate. He never
countenanced mob-law, as did Palafox, yet he was far better obeyed by
the citizens, and got as good service from them as did the Aragonese
commander. He showed that good organization is not incompatible with
patriotic enthusiasm, and is far more effective in the hour of danger
than reckless courage and blind self-sacrifice.




SECTION XVII: CHAPTER IV

THE AUTUMN CAMPAIGN OF 1809: TAMAMES, OCAÑA, AND ALBA DE TORMES


As early as August 30, when Wellington had not fully completed his
retreat from Almaraz and Jaraicejo to Badajoz and Merida, the central
Junta had already begun to pester him and his brother, the Ambassador
at Seville, with plans for a resumption of the offensive in the
valley of the Tagus. On that day Martin de Garay, the Secretary of
State, wrote to represent to Wellesley that he had good reason to
believe that the troops of Victor, Mortier, and Soult were making
a general movement to the rear, and that the moment had arrived
when the allied armies in Estremadura and La Mancha should ‘move
forward with the greatest activity, either to observe more closely
the movements of the enemy, or to attack him when circumstances may
render it expedient[67].’ The French movement of retreat was wholly
imaginary, and it is astonishing that the Spanish Government should
have been so mad as to believe it possible that ‘their retrograde
movement may have originated in accounts received from the North,
which compel the enemy either to retire into the interior of France,
or to take up a position nearer to the Pyrenees.’ On a groundless
rumour, of the highest intrinsic improbability, they were ready to
hurl the newly-rallied troops of Eguia and Venegas upon the French,
and to invite Wellington to join in the advance. Irresponsible
frivolity could go no further. But the Junta, as has been already
said, were eager for a military success, which should cause their
unpopularity to be forgotten, and were ready to seize on any excuse
for ordering their troops forward. This particular rumour died
away--the French were still in force on the Tagus, and, as a matter
of fact, the only movement northwards on their part had been the
return of Ney’s corps to Salamanca. But though the truth was soon
discovered, the Junta only began to look out for new excuses for
recommencing active operations.