

Augereau behaved very harshly to the garrison: many feeble or
diseased men were made to march to Perpignan and perished by the
way. The priests and monks of the ‘Crusade’ were informed that they
were combatants, and sent off with the soldiery. But the fate of the
gallant Governor provokes especial indignation. Alvarez did not die
of his fever: when he was somewhat recovered he was forwarded to
Perpignan, and from thence to Narbonne, where he was kept for some
time and seemed convalescent. Orders then came from Paris that he
was to be sent back to Spain--apparently to be tried as a traitor,
for it was alleged that in the spring of 1808 he had accepted the
provisional government installed by Murat. He was separated from his
aide-de-camp and servants, and passed on from dungeon to dungeon
till he reached Figueras. The day after his arrival at that place he
was found dead, on a barrow--the only bed granted him--in the dirty
cellar where he had been placed. It is probable that he perished
from natural causes, but many Spaniards believed that he had been
murdered[62].

  [62] For details of this disgraceful cruelty, see Arteche’s
  ‘Elogio’ on Alvarez in the proceedings of the Madrid Academy.
  The Emperor Napoleon himself must bear the responsibility, as
  it was by orders from Paris that Alvarez was sent back from
  France to Figueras. Apparently he was to be tried at Barcelona,
  and perhaps executed. There is no allusion to the matter in the
  _Correspondance de Napoléon_.

Great as the losses of the garrison of Gerona had been, they were
far exceeded, both positively and proportionately, by those of the
besieging army. The French official returns show that on June 15 the
three divisions charged with the attack, those of Verdier, Morio, and
Lecchi, had 14,456 bayonets, and the two divisions of the covering
army, those of Souham and Pino, 15,732: there were 2,637 artillerymen
and engineers over and above these figures. On December 31, twenty
days after the surrender, and when the regiments had been joined by
most of their convalescents, the three siege-divisions counted 6,343
men, the covering divisions 11,666, and the artillery and engineers,
2,390.

This shows a loss of over 13,000 men; but on examination the deficit
is seen to be even larger, for two new battalions from France had
just joined Verdier’s division in December, and their 1,000 bayonets
should be deducted from his total. It would seem, then, that the
capture of Gerona cost the 7th Corps about 14,000 men, as well as
a whole campaigning season, from April to December. The attack on
Catalonia had been brought to a complete standstill, and when Gerona
fell the French occupied nothing but the ruined city, the fortresses
of Rosas and Figueras hard by the frontier, and the isolated
Barcelona, where Duhesme, with the 6,000 men of his division, had
been lying quiescent all the summer and autumn. Such a force was too
weak to make detachments to aid St. Cyr or Augereau, since 4,000 men
at least were needed for the garrison of the citadel and the outlying
forts, and it would have been hopeless for the small remainder to
take the field. Duhesme only conducted one short incursion to
Villafranca during the siege of Gerona. In the last months of the
year Barcelona was again in a state of partial starvation: the food
brought in by Cosmao’s convoy in the spring had been exhausted, while
a second provision-fleet from Toulon, escorted by five men-of-war,
had been completely destroyed in October. Admiral Martin surprised it
off Cape Creus, drove ashore and burnt two line-of-battle ships and
a frigate, and captured most of the convoy. The rest took refuge in
the harbour of Rosas, where Captain Halliwell attacked them with the
boats of the squadron and burnt them all[63].