

Meanwhile, when the second half of October had begun, Blake made
the third and last of his attempts to throw succours into Gerona.
It was even more feebly carried out than that of September 26, for
the army employed was less numerous. Blake’s force had not received
any reinforcement to make up for the men lost in the last affair,
a fact that seems surprising, since Valencia ought now to have
been able to send him the remainder of the regiments which had
been reorganized since the disasters of June. But it would seem
that José Caro, who was in command in that province, and the local
Junta, made excuses for retaining as many men as possible, and cared
little for the danger of Gerona, so long as the war was kept far
from their own frontier. It was, at any rate, with no more than
10,000 or 12,000 men, the remains of his original force, that Blake
once more came forward on October 18, and threatened the blockading
army by demonstrations both from the side of La Bispal and that of
Santa Coloma. He had again collected a considerable amount of food
at Hostalrich, but had not yet formed a convoy: apparently he was
waiting to discover the weakest point in the French lines before
risking his mules and his stores, both of which were by now very
hard to procure. There followed a fortnight of confused skirmishing,
without any battle, though Augereau tried with all his might to force
on a general engagement. One of his Italian brigades was roughly
handled near La Bispal on the twenty-first, and another repulsed near
Santa Coloma on the twenty-sixth, but on each occasion, when the
French reinforcements came up, Blake gave back and refused to fight.
On November 1 the whole of Souham’s division marched on Santa Coloma,
and forced Loygorri and Henry O’Donnell to evacuate it and retire to
the mountains. Souham reported that he had inflicted a loss of 2,000
men on the Spaniards, at the cost of eleven killed and forty-three
wounded on his own side! The real casualty list of the two Spanish
divisions seems to have been somewhat over 100 men[57].

  [57] See Souham’s dispatch, striving to make the combat into
  a very big business, in Belmas, ii, Appendix no. 72, and cf.
  Arteche, vii. pp. 430-1.

Nothing decisive had taken place up to November 7, when Augereau
conceived the idea that he might make an end of Blake’s fruitless but
vexatious demonstrations, by dealing a sudden blow at his magazines
in Hostalrich. If these were destroyed it would cost the Spaniards
much time to collect another store of provisions for Gerona.
Accordingly Pino marched with three brigades to storm the town,
which was protected only by a dilapidated mediaeval wall unfurnished
with guns, though the castle which dominated it was a place of
considerable strength, and proof against a _coup de main_. Only one
of Blake’s divisions, that of Cuadrado, less than 2,000 strong,
was in this quarter, and Augereau found employment for the others
by sending some of Souham’s troops against them. The expedition
succeeded: while Mazzuchelli’s brigade occupied the attention of
Cuadrado, the rest of the Italians stormed Hostalrich, which was
defended only by its own inhabitants and the small garrison of the
castle. The Spaniards were driven up into that stronghold after a
lively fight, and all the magazines fell into Pino’s hands and were
burnt. At a cost of only thirty-five killed and sixty-four wounded
the food, which Blake had collected with so much difficulty, was
destroyed[58]. Thereupon the Spanish general gave up the attempt to
succour Gerona, and withdrew to the plain of Vich, to recommence
the Sisyphean task of getting together one more convoy. It was not
destined to be of any use to Alvarez and his gallant garrison, for
by the time that it was collected the siege had arrived at its final
stage.