

  [65] Napoleon’s comments on the operations of his generals
  are always interesting, though sometimes founded on imperfect
  information, or vitiated by predispositions. Of St. Cyr’s
  campaign he writes [Disp. no. 16,004] to Clarke, his Minister of
  War:

  ‘Il faut me faire un rapport sérieux sur la campagne du général
  Gouvion Saint-Cyr en Catalogne: (1) Sur les raisons qui l’ont
  porté à évacuer cette province, lorsque Saragosse était prise
  et sa jonction faite avec le maréchal Mortier. (2) Sur ce qu’il
  s’est laissé attaquer par les Espagnols, et ne les a jamais
  attaqués, et sur ce que, après les avoir toujours battus par la
  valeur des troupes, il n’a jamais profité de la victoire. (3) Sur
  ce qu’il a, par cet esprit d’égoisme qui lui est particulier,
  compromis le siège de Gérone: sur ce qu’il n’a jamais secouru
  suffisamment l’armée assiégeante, l’a au contraire attirée à
  lui, et a laissé ravitailler la ville. (4) Sur ce qu’il a quitté
  l’armée sans permission, sous le vain prétexte de maladie.’

  The first point seems unjust to St. Cyr. From his position
  in front of Tarragona, after Valls, he had no real chance of
  combining his operations with the army of Aragon. But the other
  three charges seem well founded.

Verdier, on the other hand, seems to have felt all through that he
was being asked to perform a task almost impossible, when he was
set to take Gerona with his own 14,000 men, unaided by the covering
army. His only receipt for success was to try to hurry on the matter
by delivering desperate blows. Both the assault on Monjuich on July
8 and that on the city on September 19 were premature; there was
some excuse for the former: Verdier had not yet realized how well
Alvarez could fight. But the second seems unpardonable, after the
warning received at Monjuich. If the general, as he declared before
delivering his assault, mistrusted his own troops, he had no right
to order a storm at all, considering his experience of the way in
which the Spaniards had behaved in July. He acted on the fallacious
theory that a practicable breach implies a town that can be taken,
which is far from being the case if the garrison are both desperate
and ingenious in defending themselves. The only way to deal with
such a resolute and capable adversary was to proceed by the slow and
regular methods of siegecraft, to sap right up to the ditch before
delivering an assault, and batter everything to pieces before risking
a man. This was how Monjuich was actually taken, after the storm had
failed. Having neither established himself close under the walls, nor
subdued the flanking fires from the Calvary and Chapter redoubts, nor
ascertained how far the Spaniards had prepared inner defences for
themselves, he had no right to attack at all.

As to Blake, even after making all possible allowances for the
fact that he could not trust his troops--the half-rallied wrecks
of Maria and Belchite--for a battle in the field, he must yet be
pronounced guilty of feebleness and want of ingenuity. If he could
never bring up enough regulars to give him a chance of facing St.
Cyr, the fault was largely his own: a more forcible general would
have insisted that the Valencian reserves should march[66], and would
have stripped Lerida and Tarragona of men: it could safely have
been done, for neither Suchet nor Duhesme was showing any signs of
threatening those points. He might have insisted that the Catalan
Junta should call out the full levy of _somatenes_ in September
instead of in November. He might also have made a better use of
the irregulars already in the field, the bands of Rovira, Milans,
and Claros. These miqueletes did admirable service all through the
siege, by harassing Verdier’s rear and cutting off his convoys, but
they were not employed (as they should have been) in combination
with the regulars, but allowed, as a rule, to go off on excursions
of their own, which had no relation to the main objects of Blake’s
strategy. The only occasion on which proper use was made of them was
when, on September 1, they were set to threaten Verdier’s lines,
while Garcia Conde’s convoy was approaching Gerona. It may be pleaded
in the Spanish general’s defence that it was difficult to exact
obedience from the chiefs: there was a distinct coolness between the
regulars and the irregulars, which sometimes led to actual quarrels
and conflicts when they met. But here again the reply is that more
forcible captain-generals were able to control the miqueletes, and if
Blake failed to do so, it was only one more sign of his inadequacy.
It is impossible to avoid the conclusion that he mismanaged matters,
and that if in his second and third attempts to relieve Gerona he had
repeated the tactics of his first, he would have had a far better
chance of success. On September 1 only did he make any scientific
attempt to distract the enemy’s attention and forces, and on that
occasion he was successful. Summing things up, it may be said that he
was not wrong to refuse battle with the troops that he had actually
brought up to Gerona: they would undoubtedly have been routed if he
had risked a general engagement. His fault was that he did not bring
up larger forces, when it was in his power to do so, by the exercise
of compulsion on the Catalan and Valencian Juntas. But these bodies
must share Blake’s responsibilities: they undoubtedly behaved in
a slack and selfish fashion, and let Gerona perish, though it was
keeping the war from their doors for a long eight months.