

  [61] Napier (ii. 249) says that the sortie was so far
  successful that the Geronese opened the way for the garrison
  of the Constable fort to escape into the city. But I can find
  no authority for this in either the French or the Spanish
  narratives, see especially Vacani.

The excitement of the sally had drained away the governor’s last
strength: he took to his bed that evening, was in delirium next day,
and on the morning of the ninth received the last sacraments of the
Church, the doctors having declared that his hours were numbered. His
last conscious act was to protest against any proposal to surrender,
before he handed over the command to the senior officer present,
General Juliano Bolivar. Had Alvarez retained his senses, it is
certain that an attempt would have been made to hold the town, even
when the starving garrisons of the forts should have surrendered.
But the moment that his stern hand was removed, his successor,
Bolivar, called together a council of war, to which the members of
the Junta, no less than the officers commanding corps, were invited.
They voted that further resistance was impossible, and sent out
Brigadier-General Fournas, the man who had so well defended Monjuich,
to obtain terms from Augereau. On the morning of the tenth the
Marshal received him, and dictated a simple surrender, without any of
the favourable conditions which Fournas at first demanded. His only
concession was that he offered to exchange the garrison for an equal
number of the unhappy prisoners from Dupont’s army, now lying in
misery on the pontoons at Cadiz, if the Supreme Junta concurred. But
the bargain was never ratified, as the authorities at Seville were
obdurate.

On the morning of December 11 the survivors of the garrison marched
out, and laid down their arms on the glacis of the Mercadal. Only
3,000 men came forth; these looked like living spectres, so pale,
weak, and tattered that ‘the besiegers,’ as eye-witnesses observed,
‘felt ashamed to have been held at bay so long by dying men.’ There
were 1,200 more lying in the hospitals. The rest of the 9,000 who
had defended the place from May, or had entered with Garcia Conde in
September, were dead. A detailed inspection of figures shows that
of the 5,723 men of Alvarez’s original command only 2,008 survived,
while of the 3,648 who had come later there were still 2,240 left: i.
e. two-thirds of the old garrison and one-third of the succours had
perished. The mortality by famine and disease far exceeded that by
the sword: 800 men had died in the hospitals in October, and 1,300
in November, from mere exhaustion. The town was in a dreadful state:
about 6,000 of the 14,000 inhabitants had perished, including nearly
all the very young and the very old. 12,000 bombs and 8,000 shells
had been thrown into the unhappy city: it presented a melancholy
vista of houses roofless, or with one or two of the side-walls
knocked in, of streets blocked by the fallen masonry of churches or
towers, under which half-decayed corpses were partially buried. The
open spaces were strewn with broken muskets, bloody rags, wheels of
disabled guns and carts, fragments of shells, and the bones of horses
and mules whose flesh had been eaten. The stench was so dreadful that
Augereau had to keep his troops out of the place, lest infection
should be bred among them. In the magazines nothing was found save a
little unground corn; all the other provisions had been exhausted.
There were also 168 cannon, mostly disabled; about 10,000 lb. of
powder, and a million musket cartridges. The military chest handed
over contained 562 reals--about 6_l._ sterling.