

  [54] See Toreno, ii, and Arteche, vii. 412.

After having thus wrecked Blake’s second attempt to succour Gerona,
and driven him from the neighbourhood, St. Cyr betook himself to
Perpignan, in order, as he explained to the Minister of War[55],
to hurry up provisions to the army at the front, and to compel
the officers at the base to send forward some 3,000 or 4,000
convalescents fit to march, whose services had been persistently
denied him[56]. Arrived there he heard that Augereau, whose gout
had long disappeared, was perfectly fit to take the field, and
could have done so long before if he had not preferred to shift on
to other shoulders the responsibility for the siege of Gerona. He
was, on October 1, at the baths of Molitg, ‘destroying the germs of
his malady’ as he gravely wrote to Paris,--amusing himself, as St.
Cyr maintains in his memoirs. Convinced that the siege had still a
long time to run, and eager to do an ill turn to the officer who had
intrigued to get his place, St. Cyr played on the Marshal precisely
the same trick that Verdier had played on himself a fortnight before.
He announced that he was indisposed, wrote to congratulate Augereau
on his convalescence, and to resign the command to his hands, and
departed to his home, without waiting for an answer, or obtaining
leave from Paris--a daring act, as Napoleon was enraged, and might
have treated him hardly. He was indeed put under arrest for a short
time.

  [55] See St. Cyr to the Minister, Belmas, ii. Appendix no. 67.

  [56] Augereau to the Minister, ibid., Oct. 8.

From the first to the eleventh of October Souham remained in charge
of the army, but on the twelfth Augereau appeared and took command,
bringing with him the mass of convalescents who had been lingering
at Perpignan. Among them was Verdier, whose health became all that
could be desired when St. Cyr had disappeared. The night following
the Marshal’s arrival was disturbed by an exciting incident. Henry
O’Donnell from his refuge on the Capuchin heights, had been watching
for a fortnight for a good chance of escape. There was a dense fog
on the night of the 12th-13th: taking advantage of it O’Donnell
came down with his brigade, made a circuit round the town, crossed
the Oña and struck straight away into the plain of Salt, which,
being the most open and exposed, was also the least guarded section
of the French lines of investment. He broke through the chain of
vedettes almost without firing, and came rushing before dawn into
Souham’s head-quarters camp on the heights of Aguaviva. The battalion
sleeping there was scattered, and the general forced to fly in his
shirt. O’Donnell swept off his riding-horses and baggage, as also
some prisoners, and was out of reach in half an hour, before the
rallying fractions of the French division came up to the rescue of
their chief. By six o’clock the escaping column was in safety in the
mountains by Santa Coloma, where it joined the miqueletes of Milans.
For this daring exploit O’Donnell was made a major-general by the
Supreme Junta. His departure was a great relief to Alvarez, who had
to husband every mouthful of food, and had already put both the
garrison and the townsfolk on half-rations of flour and horseflesh.