

  [58] See Pino’s and Augereau’s dispatches in Belmas’s Appendices,
  nos. 73 and 74.

The Geronese were now reaching the end of their strength: for the
first time since the investment began in May some of the defenders
began to show signs of slackening. The heavy rains of October and
the commencement of the cold season were reducing alike troops and
inhabitants to a desperate condition. They had long used up all their
fuel, and found the chill of winter intolerable in their cellars and
casemates. Alvarez, though reduced to a state of physical prostration
by dysentery and fever, was still steadfast in heart. But there was
discontent brewing among some of his subordinates: it is notable, as
showing the spirit of the time, that the malcontents were found among
the professional soldiers, not among the citizens. Early in November
several officers were found holding secret conferences, and drawing
up an address to the local Junta, setting forth the desperate state
of the city and the necessity for deposing the governor, who was
represented as incapacitated for command by reason of his illness: it
was apparently hinted that he was going mad, or was intermittently
delirious[59]. Some of the wild sayings attributed to Alvarez during
the later days of the siege might be quoted as a support for their
representations. To a captain who asked to what point he was expected
to retire, if he were driven from his post, it is said that he
answered, ‘to the cemetery.’ To another officer, the first who dared
to say that capitulation was inevitable because of the exhaustion
of the magazines, he replied, ‘When the last food is gone we will
start eating the cowards, and we will begin with you.’ Though aware
that their conspiracies were known, the malcontents did not desist
from their efforts, and Alvarez made preparations for seizing and
shooting the chiefs. But on the night of November 19 eight of them,
including three lieutenant-colonels[60], warned by a traitor of their
approaching fate, fled to Augereau’s camp. Their arrival was the
most encouraging event for the French that had occurred since the
commencement of the siege. They spoke freely of the exhaustion of the
garrison, and said that Alvarez was mad and moribund.

  [59] Alvarez’s letter to Blake of Nov. 3 printed in Arteche’s
  Appendix, no. 18 of his vol. vii, gives this account of the first
  discovery of plots.

  [60] Of whom two, strangely enough, had been specially mentioned
  for courage at the September assault.

It was apparently this information concerning the desperate state
of the garrison which induced Augereau to recommence active siege
operations. He ordered up ammunition from Perpignan to fill the
empty magazines, and when it arrived began to batter a new breach in
the curtain of Santa Lucia. On December 2 Pino’s Italians stormed
the suburb of La Marina, outside the southern end of the town, a
quarter hitherto unassailed, and made a lodgement therein, as if to
open a new point of attack. But this was only done to distract the
enemy from the real design of the Marshal, which was nothing less
than to cut off the forts on the Capuchin heights from Gerona by
seizing the redoubts, those of the ‘Chapter’ and the ‘City,’ which
covered the steep upward path from the walls to the group of works on
the hilltop. At midnight on December 6 the voltigeur and grenadier
companies of Pino’s division climbed the rough southern face of the
Capuchin heights, and surprised and escaladed the ‘Redoubt of the
City,’ putting the garrison to the sword. Next morning the batteries
of the forts above and the city below opened a furious fire upon the
lost redoubt, and Alvarez directed his last sally, sending out every
man that he could collect to recover the work. This led to a long
and bloody fight on the slopes, which ended most disastrously for
the garrison. Not only was the sortie repulsed, but in the confusion
the French carried the Calvary and Chapter redoubts, the other works
which guarded the access from Gerona to the upper forts. On the
afternoon of December 7 the communication with them was completely
cut off, and as their garrisons possessed no separate magazines, and
had been wont to receive their daily dole from the city, it was clear
that they must be starved out. They had only food for forty-eight
hours at the moment[61].