

Augereau was in every way inferior as an officer to St. Cyr. An old
soldier of fortune risen from the ranks, he had little education
or military science; his one virtue was headlong courage on the
battlefield, yet when placed in supreme command he often hesitated,
and showed hopeless indecision. He had been lucky enough to earn
a great reputation as Napoleon’s second-in-command in the old
campaigns of Italy in 1796-7. Since then he had made his fortune by
becoming one of the Emperor’s most zealous tools and flatterers.
He was reckoned a blind and reckless Bonapartist, ready to risk
anything for his master, but spoilt his reputation for sincerity by
deserting him at the first opportunity in 1814. He was inclined to
a harsh interpretation of the laws of war, and enjoyed a doubtful
reputation for financial integrity. Yet he was prone to ridiculous
self-laudatory proclamations and manifestos, written in a bombastic
strain which he vainly imagined to resemble his master’s thunders of
the _Bulletins_. Scraps of his address to the citizens of Gerona may
serve to display his fatuity--

‘Unhappy inhabitants--wretched victims immolated to the caprice
and madness of ambitious men greedy for your blood--return to your
senses, open your eyes, consider the ills which surround you! With
what tranquillity do your leaders look upon the graves crammed with
your corpses! Are you not horror-struck at these cannibals, whose
mirth bursts out in the midst of the human hecatomb, and who yet dare
to lift their gory hands in prayer towards the throne of a God of
Peace? They call themselves the apostles of Jesus Christ! Tremble,
cruel and infamous men! The God who judges the actions of mortals is
slow to condemn, but his vengeance is terrible.... I warn you for the
last time, inhabitants of Gerona, reflect while you still may! If you
force me to throw aside my usual mildness, your ruin is inevitable. I
shall be the first to groan at it, but the laws of war impose on me
the dire necessity.... I am severe but just. Unhappy Gerona! if thy
defenders persist in their obstinacy, thou shalt perish in blood and
flame.

    (Signed) AUGEREAU.’

Stuff of this sort was not likely to have much effect on fanatics
like Alvarez and his ‘Crusaders.’ If it is so wrong to cause the
deaths of men--they had only to answer--Why has Bonaparte sent his
legions into Spain? On the Marshal’s line of argument, that it is
wrong to resist overwhelming force, it is apparently a sin before God
for any man to attempt to defend his house and family against any
bandit. There is much odious and hypocritical nonsense in some of
Napoleon’s bulletins, where he grows tender on the miseries of the
people he has conquered, but nothing to approach the maunderings of
his copyist.

Augereau found the army about Gerona showing not more than 12,000
bayonets fit for the field--gunners and sappers excluded. The men
were sick of the siege, and it would seem that the Marshal was
forced, after inspecting the regiments and conferring with the
generals, to acquiesce in St. Cyr’s decision that any further
assaults would probably lead to more repulses. He gave out that
he was resolved to change the system on which the operations had
hitherto been conducted, but the change amounted to nothing more
than that he ordered a slow but steady bombardment to be kept up,
and occasionally vexed the Spaniards by demonstrations against the
more exposed points of the wall. It does not appear that either of
these expedients had the least effect in shaking the morale of the
garrison. It is true that during October and November the hearts of
the Geronese were commencing to grow sick, but this was solely the
result of starvation and dwindling numbers. As to the bombardment,
they were now hardened to any amount of dropping fire: on October
28 they celebrated the feast of San Narciso, their patron, by a
procession all round the town, which was under fire for the whole
time of its progress, and paid no attention to the casualties which
it cost them.