

  [63] For details, see James’s _Naval History_, v. pp. 142-5.

While Gerona was enduring its last month of starvation, those whose
care it should have been to succour the place at all costs were
indulging in a fruitless exchange of recriminations, and making
preparations when it was all too late. Blake, after retiring to Vich
on November 10, informed the Junta of Catalonia that he was helpless,
unless more men could be found, and that they must find them. Why
he did not rather insist that the Valencian reserves should be
brought up, and risk stripping Tarragona and Lerida of their regular
garrisons, it is hard to say. This at any rate would have been in his
power. The Catalan Junta replied by summoning a congress at Manresa
on November 20, to which representatives of every district of the
principality were invited. The congress voted that a levy _en masse_
of all the able-bodied men from seventeen to forty-five years of age
should be called out[64], and authorized a loan of 10,000,000 reals
for equipping them. They also wrote to Seville, not for the first
time, to demand reinforcements from the Central Junta. But the battle
of Ocaña had just been fought and lost, and Andalusia could not
have spared a man, even if there had been time to transport troops
to Tarragona. All that the Catalans received was honorary votes of
approval for the gallant behaviour of the Geronese. The levy _en
masse_ was actually begun, but there was an insuperable difficulty
in collecting and equipping the men in winter time, when days were
short and roads were bad. The weeks passed by, and Gerona fell long
before enough men had been got together to induce Blake to try a
new offensive movement. Why was the congress not called in September
rather than in November? Blake had always declared that he was too
weak to risk a battle with the French for the raising of the siege,
but till the last moment the Catalans contented themselves with
arguing with him, and writing remonstrances to the Central Junta,
instead of lending him the aid of their last levies.

  [64] The Proclamation of Nov. 29 ordering this levy, written in a
  very magniloquent style, may be found in Belmas, Appendix no. 81.

One or two points connected with this famous siege require a word
of comment. It is quite clear that St. Cyr during its early stages
did not try his honest best to help Verdier. During June and July
his covering army was doing no good whatever at Vich: he pretended
that he had placed it there in order to ward off possible attacks
by Blake. But it was matter of public knowledge that Blake was far
away in Aragon, engaged in his unhappy campaign against Suchet, and
that Coupigny, left at Tarragona with a few thousand men, was not a
serious danger. St. Cyr could have spared a whole division more for
the siege operations, without risking anything. If he had done so,
Gerona could have been approached on two sides instead of one, the
Mercadal front might have been attacked, and the loose blockade,
which was all that Verdier could keep up, for want of more men, might
have been made effective. But St. Cyr all through his military career
earned a reputation for callous selfishness and habitual leaving
of his colleagues in the lurch. On this occasion he was bitterly
offended with Verdier, for giving himself the airs of an equal, and
corresponding directly with the Emperor. There can be no doubt that
he took a malicious pleasure in seeing his failures. It is hardly
disguised in his clever and plausible _Journal des Opérations de
l’Armée de Catalogne en 1808-1809_[65].