

  [85] ‘La perte de cette affaire fut entièrement due à la faute
  que fit le Général Marchand de multiplier ses attaques, et de
  s’engager par petits paquets. Tout le monde se mêlait de donner
  son avis, et on remarquait l’absence de M. le Maréchal,’ says
  Sprünglin in p. 371 of his _Mémoires_.

On the 19th of October the beaten army reached Salamanca by a
forced march. Marchand feared that the enemy would now manœuvre
either by Ledesma, so as to cut him off from Kellermann and the
troops in the north, or by Alba de Tormes, so as to intercept his
communication with Madrid. In either case he would have to retreat,
for there was no good defensive ground on the Tormes to resist an
army coming from the west. As a matter of fact Del Parque moved by
Ledesma, for two reasons: the first was that he wished to avoid the
plains, fearing that Kellermann might have joined the 6th Corps
with his cavalry division. The second was that, by moving in this
direction, he hoped to make his junction with Ballasteros, who had
started from the Asturias to join him, and had been reported to have
moved from Astorga to Miranda del Duero, and to be feeling his way
south-eastward. The juncture took place: the Asturian division, after
an unsuccessful attempt to cut off the garrison of Zamora on the
seventeenth, had marched to Ledesma, and met the main army there. Del
Parque had now 28,000 men, and though still very weak in cavalry,
thought himself strong enough to march on Salamanca. He reached it on
October 25 and found it evacuated. Marchand, learning that Kellermann
was too far off to help him, and knowing that no reinforcements
from Madrid could reach him for many days, had evacuated the town
on the previous evening. He retired towards Toro, thus throwing up
his communications with Madrid in order to make sure of joining
Kellermann. This seems doubtful policy, for that general could only
aid him with 4,000 or 5,000 men, and their joint force would be
under 20,000 strong. On the other hand, by retiring on Peñaranda or
Medina de Campo, and so approaching the King’s army, he could have
counted on picking up much larger reinforcements, and on resuming the
struggle with a good prospect of success.

As a matter of fact Jourdan, on hearing of the disaster of Tamames,
had dispatched, to aid the 6th Corps, Godinot’s brigade of Dessolles’
division, some 3,500 bayonets, from Madrid, and Heudelet’s division
of the 2nd Corps, about 4,000 strong, from Oropesa, as well as a
couple of regiments of cavalry. He made these detachments without
scruple, because there was as yet no sign of any activity on the part
of the Spanish armies of La Mancha and Estremadura. A week later he
would have found it much more hazardous to weaken his front in the
valley of the Tagus. These were the last orders issued by Jourdan,
who resigned his post on October 31, while Soult on November 5
arrived at Madrid and replaced him as chief of the staff to King
Joseph.