

Del Parque, not unnaturally elated by his victory, now nourished
ambitious ideas of clearing the whole of Leon and Old Castile of
the enemy, being aware that the armies of La Mancha and Estremadura
ought now to be on the move, and that full occupation would be found
ere long for the French corps in the valley of the Tagus. He ordered
up his 5th Division, the raw Leonese battalions of Castrofuerte,
from Ciudad Rodrigo, and made vehement appeals to the Portuguese
Government to lend him the whole of Beresford’s army for a great
advance up the Douro. The Regency, though much pressed by the Spanish
ambassador at Lisbon, gave a blank refusal, following Wellington’s
advice to have nothing to do with offensive operations in Spanish
company[86]. But part of Beresford’s troops were ordered up to
the frontier, not so much to lend a moral support to Del Parque’s
advance[87] as to be ready to defend their own borders in the event
of his defeat. Showing more prudence than Wellington had expected,
Del Parque did not push forward from Salamanca, when he became
certain that he would have to depend on his own forces alone. Even
after the arrival of his reserves from Rodrigo he remained quiet,
only pushing out reconnaissances to discover which way the enemy had
gone. He had, in fact, carried out his part in the Central Junta’s
plan of campaign, by calling the attention of the French to the
north, and distracting troops thither from the King’s army. It was
now the time for Albuquerque and Areizaga to take up the game, and
relieve him. Marchand meanwhile had retired across the Douro, and
taken up an extended line behind it from Zamora to Tordesillas--a
front of over forty miles--which it would have been impossible to
hold with his 13,000 men against a heavy attack delivered at one
point. But he was hardly in position when Kellermann arrived, took
over the command, and changed the whole plan of campaign (November
1). He had left two battalions to guard Benavente, two to hold
Valladolid, and had only brought up his 3,000 dragoons and 1,500
infantry. Seeing that it was absolutely necessary to recover the
line of communication with Madrid, he ordered the 6th Corps to leave
Zamora and Toro, mass at Tordesillas, and then cross the Douro to
Medina del Campo, the junction point of the roads from Madrid,
Segovia, Valladolid, and Toro. To this same place he brought up his
own small force, and having received Godinot’s brigade from Madrid,
had thirty-four battalions and eighteen squadrons concentrated--about
23,000 men. Though not yet joined by the other troops from the
south--Heudelet’s division--he now marched straight upon Salamanca
in two columns, one by Cantalapiedra, the other by Fuente Sauco,
intending to offer battle to Del Parque.

  [86] Del Parque’s demands had begun as early as the end of
  September, see Wellington to Castlereagh, Badajoz, Sept. 29,
  _Dispatches_, v. 200-1, and cf. Wellington to Forjaz, Oct. 15,
  ibid. 223.