

Tamames, an unwalled village of moderate size, lies at the foot of a
range of swelling hills. Its strategical importance lies in the fact
that it is the meeting-place of the two country roads from Ciudad
Rodrigo to Salamanca _via_ Matilla, and from Ciudad Rodrigo to Bejar
and the Pass of Baños _via_ Nava Redonda. Placed there, Del Parque’s
army threatened Salamanca, and had a choice of lines of retreat,
the roads to Rodrigo and to the passes into Estremadura being both
open. But retreat was not the duke’s intention. He had drawn up his
army on the heights above Tamames, occupying the village below with
a battalion or two. On the right, where the hillside was steeper,
he had placed Losada and the 2nd Division: on the left, where the
ridge sinks down gently into the plain, was Martin de la Carrera
with the Vanguard Division. The Conde de Belveder’s division--the
third--formed the reserve, and was drawn up on the reverse slope,
behind La Carrera. The Prince of Anglona’s cavalry brigade was out on
the extreme left, partly hidden by woods, in the low ground beyond
the flank of the Vanguard.

Marchand, arriving on the ground in the afternoon after a march of
fourteen miles from Matilla, was overjoyed to see the enemy offering
battle, and attacked without a moment’s hesitation. His arrangements
much resembled those of Victor at Ucles--though his luck was to be
very different. It was clear that the Spanish left was the weak
point, and that the heights could be turned and ascended on that side
with ease. Accordingly Maucune’s brigade (six battalions in all)[82]
and the light cavalry, strengthened by one regiment of dragoons, were
ordered to march off to the right, to form in a line perpendicular
to that of Del Parque, and break down his flank. When this movement
was well developed, Marcognet’s brigade (six battalions)[83] was to
attack the Spanish centre, to the east of the village of Tamames,
while the 25th Léger (two battalions) was to contain the hostile
right by a demonstration against the high and difficult ground in
that direction. Marchand kept in reserve, behind his centre, the 27th
and 59th of the Line (six battalions) and his remaining regiment
of dragoons. The vice of this formation was that the striking
force--Maucune’s column--was too weak: it would have been wise to
have strengthened it at the expense of the centre, and to have made a
mere demonstration against the heights above the village of Tamames,
as well as on the extreme French left.

  [82] 6th Léger (two batts.), 69th Line (three batts.), and one
  battalion of _voltigeurs réunis_.

  [83] 39th and 76th of the Line.

Maucune accomplished his flank march undisturbed, deployed in front
of La Carrera’s left and advanced against it. The Spanish general
threw back his wing to protect himself, and ordered his cavalry
to threaten the flank of the advancing force. But he was nearly
swept away: when the skirmishing lines were in contact, the French
brigadier ordered his cavalry to charge the centre of the Spanish
division: striking in diagonally, Lorcet’s Hussars and Chasseurs
broke La Carrera’s line, and captured the six guns of his divisional
artillery. Almost at the same moment Anglona’s cavalry came in upon
Maucune’s flank; but being opposed by two battalions of the 69th in
square, they received but one fire and fled hastily to the rear.
Maucune then resumed his march up the hill, covering his flank with
his horsemen, and pushing La Carrera’s broken line before him. But at
the head of the slope he met Belveder’s reserve, which let the broken
troops pass through their intervals, and took up the fight steadily
enough. The French were now opposed by triple numbers, and the combat
came to a standstill: Maucune’s offensive power was exhausted, and
he could no longer use his cavalry on the steep ground which he had
reached.