

  [77] Borbon, Sagunto, and Granaderos de Llerena, 1,053 sabres in
  October. These regiments had newly rejoined the Estremaduran army
  from the rear.

The Junta had a deeply-rooted notion that if sufficient pressure were
applied to Wellesley and Wellington, they would permit Beresford’s
Portuguese army, now some 20,000 strong, to join Del Parque for
the advance into the plains of Leon. They had mistaken their men:
Wellington returned as peremptory a refusal to their request for the
aid of the Portuguese troops as to their demand that his own British
army should advance with Albuquerque to the Tagus[78].

  [78] See Wellington to Wellesley, from Badajoz, Oct. 30, 1809.

Nothing could be more hazardous than the plan finally formulated
at the Seville War Office for the simultaneous advance of the
armies of La Mancha, the North, and Estremadura. Even if it had
been energetically supported by Wellington and Beresford, it
would have been rash: converging operations by several armies
starting from distant bases against an enemy concentrated in their
midst are proverbially disastrous. In this particular plan three
forces--numbering in all about 110,000 men, and starting from
points so far apart as Ciudad Rodrigo, Truxillo, and the Passes
by La Carolina, were to fall upon some 120,000 men, placed in a
comparatively compact body in their centre. A single mistake in the
timing of operations, the chance that one Spanish army might outmarch
another, or that one of the three might fail to detain any hostile
force in its front (as had happened with Venegas during the Talavera
Campaign) was bound to be ruinous. The French had it in their power
to deal with their enemies in detail, if the least mischance should
occur: and with Spanish generals and Spanish armies it was almost
certain that some error would be made.

Meanwhile the Junta made their last preparation for the grand stroke,
by deposing Venegas from the command of the united army in La Mancha.
Eguia held the interim command for a few days, but was to be replaced
by Areizaga, an elderly general who had never commanded more than
a single division, and had to his credit only courage shown in a
subordinate position at the battle of Alcañiz. He was summoned from
Lerida, and came hastily to take up his charge.

The sole advantage which the Spaniards possessed in October 1809
was that their enemy did not expect to be attacked. A month after
Talavera matters had apparently settled down for the whole autumn, as
far as the French generals could calculate. With the knowledge that
the Austrian War was over, and that unlimited reinforcements could
now be poured into Spain by his brother, King Joseph was content to
wait. He had refused to allow Soult to make his favourite move of
invading Portugal in the end of August, because he wished the Emperor
to take up the responsibility of settling the next plan of campaign,
and of determining the number of new troops that would be required to
carry it out. The French corps, therefore, were in a semicircle round
Madrid: Soult and Mortier in the central Tagus Valley at Plasencia
and Talavera, Victor in La Mancha, with Sebastiani supporting him at
Toledo and Aranjuez, Ney at Salamanca, Dessolles and the Royal Guard
as a central reserve in the capital. This was a purely defensive
position, and Joseph intended to retain it, till the masses of troops
from Germany, with the Emperor himself perchance at their head,
should come up to his aid. It does not seem to have entered into his
head that the enemy would again take the offensive, after the fiasco
of the Talavera campaign, and the bloody lesson of Almonacid.