

  [70] His head quarters moved from Truxillo on the seventeenth,
  were at La Serena on the twenty-first, and joined the army of La
  Mancha about October 1.

  [71] See the list of Albuquerque’s army in Appendix no. 2. There
  had been twenty-one regular battalions in Cuesta’s army in June.
  Twenty of these marched off with Eguia, leaving only one (4th
  Walloon Guards) with Albuquerque.

Eguia, on the other hand, carried with him to La Mancha some 25,000
men, the picked corps of the Estremaduran army; and, as the remains
of Venegas’s divisions rallied and recruited after Almonacid,
amounted to rather more than that number, the united force exceeded
50,000 sabres and bayonets. With this army the Junta intended to
make a direct stroke at Madrid, while Albuquerque was directed to
show himself on the Tagus, in front of Almaraz and Talavera, with
the object of detaining at least one of the French corps in that
direction. It was hoped, even yet, that Wellington might be induced
to join in this demonstration. If once the redcoats reappeared at the
front, neither Soult nor Mortier could be moved to oppose the army of
La Mancha. Meanwhile Ney and the French corps in Leon and Old Castile
were to be distracted by the use of a new force from the north,
whose composition must be explained. The Junta held that the last
campaign had failed only because the allies had possessed no force
ready to detain Soult and Ney. If they had not appeared at Plasencia,
Wellington, Cuesta, and Venegas would have been able to drive King
Joseph out of his capital. Two months later the whole position was
changed, in their estimation, by the fact that Spain once more
possessed a large ‘Army of the Left,’ which would be able to occupy
at least two French corps, while the rest of the allies marched again
on Madrid. That such a force existed did indeed modify the aspect of
affairs. La Romana had been moved to Seville to become a member of
the Junta, but his successor, the Duke Del Parque, was collecting a
host very formidable as far as numbers went. The old army of Galicia
had been reformed into four divisions under Martin de la Carrera,
Losada, Mahy, and the Conde de Belveder--the general whose name was
so unfortunately connected with the ill-fought combat of Gamonal.
These four divisions now comprised 27,000 men, of whom more than half
were newly-raised Galician recruits, whom La Romana had embodied in
the depleted cadres of his original battalions, after Ney and Soult
had evacuated the province in July. A few of the ancient regiments
that had made the campaign of Espinosa had died out completely--their
small remnants having been drafted into other corps[72]. On the other
hand there were a few new regiments of Galician volunteers--but La
Romana had set his face against the creation of such units, wisely
preferring to place his new levies in the ranks of the old battalions
of the regular army[73]. In the main, therefore, the new ‘Army of
the Left’ represented, as far as names and cadres went, Blake’s
original ‘Army of Galicia[74].’ It had the same cardinal fault as
that army, in that it had practically no cavalry whatever: the single
dragoon regiment that Blake had owned (La Reina) having been almost
completely destroyed in 1808[75]. Each division had a battery; the
guns, of which La Romana’s army had been almost destitute in the
spring, had been supplied from England, and landed at Corunna during
the summer.