

  [87] Wellington to Beresford, Nov. 16, 1809.

But the duke, much to the surprise of every one, utterly refused
to fight, holding the plain too dangerous for an army so weak in
cavalry as his own, and over-estimating the enemy’s force at 36,000
men[88]. He retired from Salamanca, after having held it less than
a fortnight, on November 5, and took not the road to Ciudad Rodrigo
but that to Bejar and the Pass of Baños, as if he were about to
pass the mountains into Estremadura[89]. This was an excellent
move: the French could not pursue him in force without evacuating
Old Castile and Leon, which it would have been impossible for them
to contemplate. For when Kellermann had concentrated his troops to
strike at Salamanca, there was nothing left behind him in the vast
upland save a battalion or two at Benavente, Valladolid, and Burgos.
Mahy, from Galicia, and the Asturians might have overrun the whole
region unopposed. As it was, the whole of the provinces behind the
Douro showed signs of bursting out into insurrection. Julian Sanchez,
the Empecinado, and other guerrillero chiefs, whose names were soon
to be famous, raised large bands during the absence of the normal
garrisons, and swept the country-side, capturing convoys and cutting
the lines of communication between Vittoria, Burgos, and Valladolid.
Porlier came down with a flying column from the Asturias, assaulted
Palencia, and threatened Burgos. The French governors on every side
kept reporting their perilous position, when they could get a message
through to Madrid[90].

  [88] He sent this estimate to Wellington, see the latter to
  Beresford, Badajoz, Nov. 16.

  [89] The Junta afterwards contemplated bringing him down to join
  Albuquerque, via Plasencia, which was free of French troops,
  since Soult had moved to Oropesa. But this does not seem to have
  been thought of so early as Nov. 5.

  [90] See Soult to Clarke, from Madrid, Nov. 6, for these
  movements.

Realizing that he must cover his rear, or the whole of Old Castile
would be lost to the insurgents, Kellermann, after occupying
Salamanca on November 6, left the 6th Corps and Godinot’s brigade
distributed between Ledesma, Salamanca, and Alba de Tormes, watching
Del Parque, and returned in haste with his own troops to the Douro.
He commenced to send out flying columns from Valladolid to deal with
the guerrilleros, but did not work too far afield, lest he might be
called back by a new forward movement on the part of the Army of
the Left. But in a few days he had to recast all his arrangements,
for--as Del Parque had calculated--the campaign in La Mancha had
just opened, and the position of the French in Leon and Old Castile
was profoundly affected by the new developments.

In the south, as we have already explained, the Junta designed
Albuquerque’s army of Estremadura to be a mere demonstrating force,
while Areizaga’s 55,000 men were to strike the real blow. The
Estremaduran troops, as was proper, moved early to draw the attention
of the enemy. Albuquerque’s first division under Bassecourt--6,000
infantry and 600 horse--was on the Tagus from Almaraz to Meza
de Ibor: his second division under St. Juan and the rest of his
cavalry--some 4,000 in all--were moving up from Truxillo. Bassecourt
began by sending a small force of all arms across the river at
Almaraz, to drive in Soult’s outposts and spread reports abroad in
all directions that he was acting as the vanguard to Wellington’s
army, which was marching up from Badajoz. Unfortunately the full
effect that he desired was not produced, because deserters informed
Soult that the British Army was still quiescent on the Guadiana[91].
The French made no movement, and left the 2nd Corps alone to watch
Albuquerque.