

In September and the early days of October the French hardly moved
at all. Ney left his corps at Salamanca, and went on a short leave
to Paris on September 25, so little was any danger expected in the
plains of Leon. The charge of the 6th corps was handed over to
Marchand, his senior divisional general. There was an even more
important change of command pending--Jourdan had been soliciting
permission to return to France ever since July. He had been on
excellent terms with King Joseph, but found it hard to exact
obedience from the marshals--indeed he was generally engaged in a
controversy either with Victor or with Soult. The Emperor was not
inclined to allow him to quit Spain, but Jourdan kept sending in
applications to be superseded, backed by medical certificates as
to his dangerous state of health. Finally he was granted leave to
return, by a letter which reached him on October 25, just as the new
campaign was beginning to develop into an acute phase. But he gladly
handed over his duties to Soult, who thus became ‘major-general’ or
chief of the Staff to King Joseph, and departed without lingering or
reluctance for France, glad to be quit of a most invidious office[79].

  [79] For Jourdan’s personal views, see his _Mémoires_, ed.
  Grouchy, p. 282.

Before Jourdan’s departure there had been some small movements of
the French troops: hearing vague rumours of the passage eastward of
Eguia’s army, King Joseph ordered a corresponding shift of his own
troops towards that quarter. Soult and the 2nd Corps were ordered
from Plasencia to Oropesa and Talavera, there relieving Mortier and
the 5th Corps, who were to push up the Tagus toward Toledo. This
would enable Victor to call up Sebastiani’s cavalry and two of his
infantry divisions from Toledo into La Mancha. Having thus got
together some 25,000 men, Victor advanced to Daimiel, and pressed in
the advanced posts of the main Spanish army on October 15. Eguia, who
was still in temporary command, since Areizaga had not yet arrived,
made no attempt to stand, but retired into the passes of the Sierra
Morena. This apparent timidity of the enemy convinced the Marshal
that nothing dangerous was on hand in this quarter. He drew back
his army into cantonments, in a semicircle from Toledo to Tarancon,
leaving the cavalry of Milhaud and Paris out in his front.

Nothing more happened in La Mancha for a fortnight: but on the other
wing, in the kingdom of Leon, matters came to a head sooner. About
the middle of September the bulk of the Galician army, the divisions
of Losada, Belveder and La Carrera, had moved down the Portuguese
frontier via Alcanizas, and joined Del Parque at Ciudad Rodrigo. On
the twenty-fifth of the same month the Prince of Anglona, with the
cavalry brigade from Estremadura, also came in to unite himself to
the Army of the Left. Del Parque had thus 25,000 infantry and 1,500
horse concentrated. He had still to be joined by Ballasteros and the
Asturians, who had to pick their way with caution through the plains
of Leon. Mahy and the 4th division of the Galicians had been left in
the passes above Astorga, to cover the high-road into Galicia. He
had a vanguard in Astorga, under Santocildes, and the town, whose
walls had been repaired by the order of La Romana, was now capable of
making some defence.