

  [72] The only regiments of Blake’s original army that seem to be
  completely dead in October 1809 are 2nd of Catalonia, Naples,
  Pontevedra, Compostella. Naples had been drafted into Rey early
  in 1809. Of the others I can find no details.

  [73] The new Galician regiments which appear in the autumn of
  1809 are Monforte de Lemos, Voluntarios de la Muerte, La Union,
  Lovera, Maceda, Morazzo.

  [74] For the full muster-roll of Del Parque’s army in October,
  see Appendix no. 4.

  [75] Some small fraction of it reappeared in the campaign of 1809.

But the Galician divisions, though the most numerous, were not
the only units which were told off to the new ‘Army of the Left.’
Asturias had been free of invaders since Ney and Bonnet retired from
its borders in June 1809. The Central Junta ordered Ballasteros to
join the main army with the few regular troops in the principality,
and ten battalions of the local volunteers, a force of over 9,000
men. The Asturian Junta, always very selfish and particularist in
its aims, made some protests but obeyed. Nine of its less efficient
regiments were left behind to watch Bonnet.

Finally the Duke Del Parque himself had been collecting fresh levies
about Ciudad Rodrigo, while the plains of Leon lay abandoned by
the French during the absence of Ney’s corps in the valley of the
Tagus. Including the garrison of Rodrigo he had 9,000 men, all in new
units save one old line battalion and one old militia regiment[76].
Deducting the 3,500 men which held the fortress, there were seven
battalions--nearly 6,000 bayonets--and a squadron or two of horse
available for the strengthening of the field army. These were now
told off as the ‘5th Division of the Army of the Left’; that of
Ballasteros was numbered the 3rd Division.

  [76] One battalion of Majorca, and the Militia battalion of
  Segovia.

The Galician, Asturian, and Leonese divisions had between them less
than 500 horsemen. To make up for this destitution the Central Junta
directed the Duke of Albuquerque to send off to Ciudad Rodrigo, via
the Portuguese frontier, a brigade of his cavalry. Accordingly
the Prince of Anglona marched north with three regiments[77], only
1,000 sabres in all, and joined Del Parque on September 25. Thus at
the end of that month the ‘Army of the Left’ numbered nearly 50,000
men--all infantry save 1,500 horse and 1,200 gunners. But they were
scattered all over North-Western Spain, from Oviedo to Astorga, and
from Astorga to Ciudad Rodrigo, and had to be concentrated before
they could act. Nor was the concentration devoid of danger, for the
French might fall upon the Asturians or the Leonese before they had
joined the Galician main body. As a matter of fact the 50,000 never
took the field in one mass, for Del Parque left a division under
Mahy to protect Galicia, and, when these regiments and the garrison
of Rodrigo were deducted, he had but 40,000 in all, including sick
and men on detachment. This, nevertheless, constituted a formidable
force--if it had been in existence in July, Soult and Ney could never
have marched against Wellington with their whole strength, and the
Talavera campaign might have had another end. But the troops were
of varying quality--the Leonese division was absolutely raw: the
Galicians had far too many recruits with only two months’ training in
their ranks, the Estremaduran cavalry had a bad record of disasters.
A general of genius might have accomplished something with the Army
of the Left--but Del Parque, though more cautious than many of his
compeers, was no genius.