

Facing Del Parque and his lieutenants there were two distinct forces.
The 6th Corps, now under Marchand, was concentrated at Salamanca.
Having received few or no drafts since its return from Galicia it was
rather weak--its twenty-one battalions and four cavalry regiments
only counted at the end of September some 13,000 bayonets and 1,200
sabres[80] effective--the sick being numerous. In the north of Leon
and in Old Castile Kellermann was in charge, with an independent
force of no great strength: his own division of dragoons, nearly
3,000 sabres, was its only formidable unit. The infantry was composed
of three Swiss battalions, and four or five French battalions, which
had been left in garrisons in Old Castile when the regiments to
which they belonged went southward in the preceding winter[81].
The whole did not amount to more than 3,500 bayonets. The dragoons
were very serviceable in the vast plains of Leon, but it was with
difficulty, and only by cutting down garrisons to a dangerous extent,
that Kellermann could assemble a weak infantry brigade of 2,000 men
to back the horsemen.

  [80] See the table given by Sprünglin on p. 366 of his _Mémoires_.

  [81] Apparently Kellermann had at this moment a battalion each of
  the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Swiss, a battalion of the Garde de Paris,
  one each of the 12th Léger and 32nd Line, and one or two of the
  122nd.

It was nevertheless on Kellermann’s side, and by the initiative of
the French, that the first clash took place in north-western Spain.
Hearing vague reports of the movement of the Galician divisions
towards Ciudad Rodrigo, Kellermann sent General Carrié, with two
regiments of dragoons and 1,200 infantry, to occupy Astorga, being
ignorant apparently that it was now garrisoned and more or less
fortified. Carrié found the place occupied, made a weak attack upon
it on October 9, and was beaten off. He was able to report to his
chief that the Spaniards (i. e. Mahy’s division) were in some force
in the passes beyond.

At much the same moment that this fact was ascertained Del Parque
began to move: he had been lying since September 24 at Fuente
Guinaldo in the highland above Ciudad Rodrigo. On October 5 he
made an advance as far as Tamames, on the by-road from Rodrigo to
Salamanca which skirts the mountains, wisely avoiding the high-road
in the more level ground by San Martin del Rio and Castrejon. He had
with him his three Galician divisions and his 1,500 horse, but he
had not brought forward his raw Leonese division under Castrofuerte,
which still lay by Rodrigo. On hearing of the duke’s advance Marchand
sent out reconnaissances, and having discovered the position of the
Spaniards, resolved at once to attack them. On October 17 he started
out from Salamanca, taking with him his whole corps, except the two
battalions of the 50th regiment, which were left to garrison the town.

On the afternoon of the next day Marchand came in sight of the enemy,
who was drawn up ready to receive him on the heights above Tamames.
The French general had with him nineteen battalions, some 12,000
bayonets--his 1,200 horse, and fourteen guns. Del Parque had 20,000
Galician infantry, Anglona’s cavalry, and eighteen guns: his position
was so strong, and his superiority in infantry so marked, that he was
probably justified in risking a battle on the defensive.