

  [102] The only detailed accounts of the Spanish movements that
  I have discovered are the divisional reports of Lacy and Zayas,
  both in the Foreign Office archives at the Record Office.
  Areizaga’s dispatch is so vague as to be nearly useless.

[Illustration: BATTLE OF OCAÑA. Nov. 19, 1809.]

The whole routed multitude now streamed wildly over the plain, with
the French cavalry in hot pursuit. Thousands of prisoners were
taken, and the chase only ended with nightfall. The fugitives headed
straight for the Sierra Morena, and reached it with a rapidity even
greater than that which they had used in their outward march a
fortnight before. Victor’s cavalry arrived in time to take up the
pursuit next morning: they had on their way to the field captured the
whole of the trains of the Spanish army, on the road from Noblejas
to Ocaña. The losses of Areizaga’s army were appalling; about 4,000
killed and wounded and 14,000 prisoners. Thirty flags and fifty out
of the sixty guns had been captured. When the wrecks of the army had
been rallied in the passes, three weeks after the battle, only some
21,000 infantry[103] and 3,000 horse were reported as present. The
divisions of Lacy, Jacomé, and Zerain had practically disappeared,
and the others had lost from a third to a half of their numbers. The
condition of the cavalry was peculiarly disgraceful; as it had never
stood to fight, its losses represent not prisoners, for the most
part, but mere runaways who never returned to their standards. The
French had lost about 90 officers and 1,900 men, nearly all in the
divisions of Leval, Werlé, and Girard[104]. The cavalry, which had
delivered the great stroke and won the battle, suffered very little.
Mortier had been slightly wounded, Leval and Girard severely.

  [103] Viz. Zayas, Vigodet, and Castejon, about 4,000 men each,
  Copons 3,000, Giron 2,500, remains of the other three divisions
  about 3,500. From the returns in the Madrid War Office.

  [104] Martinien’s lists of officers killed and wounded show that
  the German division lost 19 officers, the Polish division 23,
  Girard’s division 28--in all 70 out of the total of 94 officers
  hit in the whole army.

Even allowing for the fact that Areizaga had been the victim of the
Junta’s insensate resolve to make an offensive movement on Madrid,
it is impossible to speak with patience of his generalship. For a
combination of rashness and vacillation it excels that of any other
Spanish general during the whole war. His only chance was to catch
the enemy before they could concentrate: he succeeded in doing this
by his rapid march from the passes to La Guardia. Then he waited
three days in deplorable indecision, though there were only 10,000
men between him and Madrid. Next he resumed his advance, but by the
circuitous route of Villamanrique, by taking which he lost three days
more. Then he halted again, the moment that he found Victor with
20,000 men in his front, though he might still have fought at great
advantage. Lastly he retreated, yet so slowly and unskilfully that he
was finally brought to action at Ocaña by the 34,000 men of Mortier
and Sebastiani. He was sent out to win a battle, since Madrid could
not be delivered without one, and knew that he must fight sooner or
later, but threw away his favourable opportunities, and then accepted
an action when all the chances were against him. For he must have
known by this time the miserable quality of his cavalry, yet gave
battle in a vast plain, where everything depended on the mounted
arm. In the actual moment of conflict he seems to have remained in a
hypnotized condition on his church-tower, issuing hardly an order,
and allowing the fight to go as it pleased. Yet he was, by all
accounts, possessed of personal courage, as he had proved at Alcañiz
and elsewhere. Apparently responsibility reduced him to a condition
of vacillating idiocy. Perhaps the most surprising fact of the whole
business is that the Junta retained him in command after his fiasco,
thanked him for his services, and sent him an honorary present--as it
had done to Cuesta after Medellin with somewhat better excuse. He was
its own man, and it did not throw him over, even when he had proved
his perfect incompetence.