

To complete the narrative of the deplorable autumn campaign of 1809,
it only remains to tell of the doings of Albuquerque and Del Parque.
The former played his part with reasonable success; he was ordered
to distract the attention of the enemy from the army of La Mancha,
and did what he could. Having got some 10,000 men concentrated at
Almaraz, he sent one column over the Tagus to demonstrate against
the 2nd Corps from beyond the river, and with another threatened
the bridge of Talavera from the near side. But Heudelet, now in
command of the 2nd Corps, soon found that there was no reality in
his demonstration, and that he was not supported by the English,
though he had given out that Wellington was close in his rear. After
skirmishing around Talavera from the 17th to the 22nd of November,
the Duke hastily recrossed the river on hearing the news of Ocaña,
and resumed his old positions.

Del Parque’s campaign was more vigorous and more unfortunate. While
he lay in the passes above Bejar and Baños, he got early news of the
withdrawal of Godinot’s and Marcognet’s troops toward Madrid, when
Soult summoned them off to reinforce the main army. He reasoned that
since he had now only the 6th Corps, shorn of one of its brigades,
in his front, he might repeat the success of Tamames, for Marchand
was weaker than he had been in October, while he himself was far
stronger. Accordingly he disregarded an order from the Junta to
extend his operations southward, and to join Albuquerque in the
valley of the Tagus. Instead, he marched once more upon Salamanca
on November 18, the day before the disaster of Ocaña. He drove in
an outlying brigade of Marchand’s force from Alba de Tormes, and
pressed it vigorously back towards the main body. Conscious that with
his 10,000 men he could not hope to face 30,000, Marchand promptly
evacuated Salamanca on December 19, and retired, just as he had done
in October, behind the Douro, concentrating his whole corps at Toro.
He sent urgent demands for help both to Kellermann at Valladolid,
and to Soult at Madrid. By the time that they arrived Areizaga had
been dealt with, and the army in New Castile could spare as many
reinforcements as were required. Marcognet’s brigade, the one which
had been borrowed from the 6th Corps, was first sent back from
Segovia, the point which it had reached in its southward march, and
Gazan’s division of the 5th Corps was ordered by Soult to follow.

Meanwhile Del Parque, still ignorant of the disaster in the south,
had occupied Salamanca on November 20, and on the following day moved
out towards Cantalapiedra and Medina del Campo, with the object of
throwing himself between Marchand and Kellermann and the capital.
This was an excellent move, and, but for what had happened at Ocaña,
might have had considerable results, since the Army of the Left ought
to have made an end of the small French force in Old Castile.

Kellermann, however, had seen the danger of Marchand’s retreat to
Toro, and had directed him to close in towards the east, and to
occupy Medina del Campo, as the strategical point that must be held
in order to maintain touch with Madrid. Thus it chanced that on
November 23 Labassée’s brigade and four regiments of cavalry, coming
from Tordesillas, reached Medina del Campo just as Marcognet’s
brigade, returning from Segovia, came into the town from the other
side. They had hardly met when the approach of Del Parque’s army
along the Salamanca road was reported. The two French brigadiers
thought for a moment of fighting, and the cavalry was ordered to
press back the Spanish advanced guard. They drove off with ease
Anglona’s horsemen, who rode at the head of the long column, but
were repulsed by Ballasteros’s infantry, which formed square in good
style, and drove them off with a rolling fire of musketry. Seeing
that the whole Spanish army was coming up, Marcognet and Labassée
then evacuated Medina del Campo, and retired to Valdestillas.
With one push more the Spaniards could have cut the line between
Valladolid and Madrid.