

The moment that this new departure became evident, Soult reversed
the marching orders of all his columns save Victor’s, and bade them
return hastily to Aranjuez, where the bridge was repaired in haste,
and to cross the Tagus there, with the intention of intercepting
Areizaga’s line of retreat and forcing a battle on him near Ocaña.
Victor, however, had got so far to the east that it would have wasted
time to bring him back to Aranjuez, wherefore he was directed to
cross the river at Villamanrique and follow hard in Areizaga’s rear.

On the morning of the eighteenth Milhaud’s and Paris’s cavalry,
riding at the head of the French army, crossed the Tagus at Aranjuez,
and pressing forward met, between Ontigola and Ocaña, Freire’s
horsemen moving at the head of Areizaga’s column, which on this
day was strung out between La Zarza and Noblejas, marching hastily
westward towards the high-road. The collision of Milhaud and Freire
brought about the largest cavalry fight which took place during the
whole Peninsular War. For Milhaud and Paris had eight regiments,
nearly 3,000 men, while three of Freire’s four divisions were
present, to the number of over 4,000 sabres. On neither side was any
infantry in hand.

Sebastiani, who had come up with the light cavalry of his corps, was
eager for a fight, and engaged at once. Charging the Spanish front
line with Paris’s light horse, he broke it with ease: but Freire came
on with his reserves, forming the greater part of them into a solid
column--an odd formation for cavalry. Into this mass Milhaud charged
with four regiments of dragoons. The heaviness of their formation
did not suffice to enable the Spaniards to stand. They broke when
attacked, and went to the rear in disorder, leaving behind them
eighty prisoners and some hundreds of killed and wounded. The French
lost only a few scores, but among them was Paris, the not unworthy
successor of the adventurous Lasalle in command of the light cavalry
division attached to the 4th Corps.

Moving forward in pursuit of the routed squadrons, Sebastiani
approached Ocaña, but halted on discovering that there was already
Spanish infantry in the town. The head of Areizaga’s long column had
reached it, while the cavalry combat was in progress: the rest was
visible slowly moving up by cross-roads from the east. Soult was
at once apprised that the enemy’s army was close in his front--so
close that it could not get away without fighting, for its train and
rearguard were still far behind, and would be cut off if the main
body moved on without making a stand.

Areizaga, though he had shown such timidity when faced by
Sebastiani’s 9,000 men at Aranjuez, and by Victor’s 20,000 on the
Tajuna, now offered battle to the much more formidable force which
Soult was bringing up. He was indeed compelled to fight, partly
because his men were too weary to move forward that night, partly
because he wished to give time for his train to arrive and get on to
the _chaussée_.