

  [93] _Historia de la Guerra de la Independencia_, vii. 283.

Areizaga was well aware that his best chance was to strike with
extreme boldness and vigour, and to dash into the midst of the French
before they could concentrate. Hence his march was at first conducted
with great rapidity and decision; between the 3rd and the 8th of
November he made nearly fifteen miles a day, though the roads were
somewhat broken up by the autumn rains. On the eighth he reached
La Guardia, eighty miles from his starting-point, and his advanced
cavalry under General Freire had its first skirmish with a brigade of
Milhaud’s dragoons at Costa de Madera, near Dos Barrios. The Spanish
horse deployed in such numbers that the French were compelled to move
off in haste and with some loss, though they had beaten off with ease
the first two or three regiments which had gone forward against them.

The Spanish advance had been so rapid and so unexpected that Soult
and King Joseph had been taken completely by surprise. On November
6 the Marshal had reported to Paris that ‘the troops on the Tagus
and in La Mancha are up to the present unmolested, and as, from all
I can learn, there is no prospect of the enemy making any offensive
movement on that side, I intend to form from them a strong flying
column to hunt the brigands in the direction of Burgos[94].’ Only
four days later he had to announce that an army of at least 40,000
men was close in front of Aranjuez, and not more than thirty-five
miles from Madrid, and that he was hurrying together troops from all
quarters to make head against them. At the moment indeed, there was
nothing directly between Areizaga’s vanguard at La Guardia and the
Spanish capital, save the Polish division of the 4th Corps stationed
at Aranjuez, and Milhaud’s five regiments of dragoons at Ocaña. If
the Spaniard had pushed on for three days more at his starting pace,
he might have crossed the Tagus, and have forced King Joseph to
fight, close in front of Madrid, with an imperfectly assembled army.
On the ninth and tenth Leval’s Germans were in march from Toledo to
Aranjuez to join Sebastiani’s Poles: Mortier’s first division was
hurrying from Talavera to Toledo, and his second division was making
ready to follow. The 2nd Corps, despite Albuquerque’s demonstration
in front of Almaraz, was preparing to quit Oropesa, in order to
replace Mortier’s men at Talavera. Victor, in the meanwhile, with
the First Corps, was lying in front of Toledo at Ajofrin, with his
cavalry at Mora and Yebenes: he reported that no hostile force had
come his way, but that he had ascertained that a large army had
marched past his front along the great _chaussée_ from Madridejos to
Aranjuez. He was in a position to attack it in rear and flank, if
there was a sufficient force gathered in its front to justify him in
closing[95].

  [94] Soult to Clarke, Madrid, Nov. 6.

  [95] Soult to Clarke, Madrid, Nov. 10.

But on reaching La Guardia, Areizaga seemed suddenly to realize
the dangers of his movement. No doubt it was the news that Victor
was almost in his rear that paralysed him, but he halted on the
ninth, when a bold advance would certainly have enabled him to seize
Aranjuez, by evicting the small force under Milhaud and Sebastiani.
For three fatal days, the 9th, 10th, and 11th of November, the
Spanish main body remained halted in a mass at La Guardia, as if for
the special purpose of allowing the enemy to concentrate. On the
eleventh Areizaga at last began to move again: he sent forward the
whole of his cavalry, supported by Zayas and his Vanguard division,
to press back the force in his front. They found Milhaud’s five
regiments of dragoons ranged in line of battle before the small town
of Ocaña, and supported by Sebastiani’s Polish infantry. Freire
advanced, using his triple superiority of numbers to turn both flanks
of the French cavalry; Milhaud, after some partial charges, retired
behind the Poles, who formed a line of six battalion squares. The
Spanish horse made a half-hearted attempt to attack them, but were
repelled by their rolling fire before they came to close quarters,
and drew back. It was now four o’clock in the afternoon, and the
Spanish infantry was only just beginning to come up. Zayas and Freire
agreed that it was too late to begin a second attack, and put off
fighting till the next morning. But during the night the French
evacuated Ocaña and retired to Aranjuez, wisely judging that it would
be insane to wait for the arrival of the Spanish main body. They had
lost about fifty men, Freire’s cavalry just over two hundred.