

On the morning of the nineteenth his army was discovered drawn up in
two lines on each side of the town of Ocaña. There were still some
46,000 infantry and 5,500 cavalry under arms despite of the losses
of the late week[98]. The oncoming French army was smaller; though
it mustered 5,000 horse it had only 27,000 foot--the Germans and
Poles of Sebastiani, Mortier with nearly the whole of the 5th Corps,
a brigade of Dessolles’ division, the King’s guards, and the cavalry
of Milhaud, Paris, and Beauregard[99]. Victor was too far off to be
available; having found the flooded Tagus hard to cross, he was on
this day barely in touch with the extreme rearguard of Areizaga’s
army which was escorting the train. Being nearly twenty miles from
Ocaña, he could not hope to arrive in time for the general action, if
it was to be delivered next morn. If Areizaga stood firm for another
day, Victor would be pressing him from the flank and rear while the
main army was in his front: but it was highly probable that Areizaga
would not stand, but would retreat at night; all his previous conduct
argued a great disinclination to risk a battle. Wherefore Soult and
the King, after a short discussion[100], agreed to attack at once,
despite their great numerical inferiority. In the open plain of La
Mancha a difference of 16,000 or 17,000 infantry was not enough to
outweigh the superior quality and training of the French army.

  [98] Colborne, in a letter dated December 5, says ‘we had 46,100
  infantry and nearly 6,000 cavalry drawn out, in a very bad
  position.’ He was present all through the campaign, but wrote no
  full report.

  [99] Viz.
    Mortier’s Infantry Divisions (Girard and Gazan),
      twenty-two batts. [one regiment deducted]     about 12,000 men
    Sebastiani’s Polish Division and German
      Division (under Werlé and Leval)                ”    8,000  ”
    Rey’s Brigade of Dessolles’ Division of the
      Central Reserve                                 ”    3,500  ”
    The King’s Reserves, viz. four guard battalions
      and three others                                ”    3,500  ”
    Milhaud’s Dragoons, five regiments                ”    1,800  ”
    Paris’s Light Cavalry, attached to 4th Corps,
      three regiments                                 ”    1,000  ”
    Beauregard’s Cavalry of the 5th Corps, four
      regiments                                       ”    1,500  ”
    The King’s Cavalry, one regiment of the Guards,
      one of Chasseurs                                ”      700  ”
    Artillery, Sappers, &c.                           ”    1,500  ”
                                                          ------
                                              Total about 33,500 men

  [100] Joseph declared that he urged instant attack when Soult
  advised waiting for Victor. See his letter in vol. vii of
  Ducasse’s _Life and Correspondence of Joseph Napoleon_.

There is, so to speak, no position whatever at Ocaña: the little
unwalled town lies in a level upland, where the only natural feature
is a ravine which passes in front of the place; it is sufficiently
deep and broad at its western end to constitute a military obstacle,
but east of the town gradually grows slighter and becomes a mere
dip in the ground. Areizaga had chosen this ravine to indicate the
line of his left and centre; but on his right, where it had become
so shallow as to afford no cover, he extended his troops across and
beyond it. The town was barricaded and occupied, to form a central
support to the line. There were olive-groves in the rear of Ocaña
which might have served to hide a reserve, or to mark a position for
a rally in case a retreat should become necessary. But Areizaga had
made no preparation of this sort. His trains, with a small escort,
had not arrived even on the morning of the nineteenth, but were still
belated on the cross-roads from Noblejas and La Zarza.