

On November 24 the whole 6th Corps and Kellermann’s dragoons, with a
battalion or two from the garrisons of Old Castile, were concentrated
at Puente de Duero, with their van at Valdestillas. If attacked, they
must have gone behind the Douro and abandoned all touch with Madrid;
for there were not more than 16,000 men in line, and they were forced
to take the defensive. But, to their surprise, Del Parque made no
advance. He had heard on that morning of the disaster of Ocaña, and
guessed that reinforcements for Kellermann must already be on the
march. Wherefore he resolved to regain the mountains without delay,
and to give up Salamanca and his other conquests. With this prudent
resolve he broke up from Medina del Campo, and marched hastily away
in retreat, making, not for Salamanca, which was too much in the
plains to please him, but for Alba de Tormes. He had gained a day’s
start by his prompt action, but on the twenty-sixth Kellermann set
off in pursuit, leaving orders for the troops that were expected from
Madrid to follow him.

On the twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh the French cavalry failed
even to get in touch with Del Parque’s rearguard, and found nothing
but a few stragglers on the road. But on the afternoon of the
twenty-eighth the leading squadrons reported that they had come upon
the whole Spanish army encamped in a mass around the town of Alba de
Tormes. The duke had flattered himself that he had shaken off his
pursuers, and was surprised in a most unfortunate position. Two of
his divisions (Ballasteros and Castrofuerte) were beyond the Tormes,
preparing to bivouac on the upland above it. The other three were
quartered in and about the town, while the cavalry was watching the
road, but had fallen in so close to the main body that its vedettes
gave very short notice of the approach of the enemy. Kellermann was
riding with the leading brigade of his cavalry--Lorcet’s _chasseurs_
and hussars; the six regiments of dragoons were close behind him, so
that he had over 3,000 sabres in hand; but the infantry was ten miles
to the rear. If he waited for it, Del Parque would have time to cross
the river and take up a defensive position behind it. The French
general, therefore, resolved to risk a most hazardous experiment,
an attack with unsupported cavalry upon a force of all arms, in the
hope of detaining it till the infantry should come up. The Spaniards
were getting into line of battle in a hurry, Losada’s division on the
right, Belveder’s and La Carrera’s on the left, the cavalry--1,200
sabres at most--in their front. The divisions beyond the river were
only beginning to assemble, and would take some time to recross the
narrow bridge: but 18,000 men were on the right bank prepared to
fight.

Without a moment’s delay Kellermann ordered Lorcet’s brigade to
charge the Spanish right and centre: it was followed by the six
regiments of dragoons in three successive lines, and the whole mass
came down like a whirlwind upon Del Parque’s front, scattering his
cavalry to the winds, and breaking the whole of Losada’s and the
right of Belveder’s divisions. A battery of artillery, and nearly
2,000 prisoners were taken. The wrecks of the broken divisions fell
back into Alba de Tormes, and jammed the bridge, thus preventing the
divisions on the further side from recrossing it. Kellermann then
rallied his squadrons, and led them against La Carrera’s division and
the remaining battalions of that of Belveder. These troops, formed in
brigade-squares upon a rising ground, held out gallantly and repulsed
the charge. But they were cut off from the bridge, which they could
only reach by a dangerous flank movement over rough ground. By
continually threatening to repeat his attacks, Kellermann kept them
from moving off, till, two hours and a half after the action had
begun, the French infantry and guns commenced to come up. La Carrera
saw that it would be fatal to await them, and bade his division
retreat and reach the bridge as best it could. This was naturally
done in disorder, and with some loss; but it was already growing
dusk, and the bulk of the Spanish left got away.