

The order of the Spanish army in line of battle is difficult to
reconstruct, for Areizaga uses very vague language in the dispatch
in which he explained his defeat, and the other documents available,
though they give detailed accounts of some of the corps, say little
or nothing of others. It seems, however, that Zayas, with the
vanguard division, formed the extreme left, behind the deepest part
of the ravine, with a cavalry brigade under Rivas on its flank and
rear. He had the town of Ocaña on his right. Then followed in the
line, going from left to right, the divisions of Vigodet, Giron,
Castejon, and Lacy. Those of Copons, Jacomé, and Zerain appear
to have formed a second line in support of the other four[101].
Vigodet’s left was in the town of Ocaña and strongly posted, but
the other flank, where Lacy lay, was absolutely in the air, with no
natural feature to cover it. For this reason Areizaga placed beyond
it Freire, with the whole of the cavalry except the brigade on the
extreme left under Rivas. Unfortunately the Spanish horse, much
shaken by the combat of the preceding day, was a weak protection for
the flank, despite its formidable numbers. The sixty guns of the
artillery were drawn out in the intervals of the infantry divisions
of the first and second line.

  [101] This order seems the only one consistent with the sole
  sentence in Areizaga’s dispatch to the Junta in which he explains
  his battle-array: ‘Inmediatamente formé por mi mismo la primera
  linea en direccion de Ocaña, colocando por la izquierda la
  division de Vigodet, defendida por la frente de la gran zanja,
  y por su derecha las divisiones de Giron, Castejon y Lacy: la
  de Copons formaba martillo, junta á las tapias de la villa,
  inmediata á la de Giron, y las demás la secunda linea á distancia
  competente para proteger á la primera.’ The unnamed divisions
  which must have lain beyond Copons in the right of the second
  line are Jacomé and Zerain.

Soult’s plan of attack was soon formed. The ravine made the Spanish
left--beyond Ocaña--inaccessible, but also prevented it from taking
any offensive action. The Marshal therefore resolved to ignore it
completely, and to concentrate all his efforts against the hostile
centre and right, in the open ground. The scheme adopted was a
simple one: Sebastiani’s Polish and German divisions were to attack
the Spanish right wing, and when they were at close quarters with
the enemy the main mass of the French cavalry was to fall upon
Freire’s horse, drive it out of the field, and attack on the flank
the divisions already engaged with the infantry. For this purpose
Milhaud’s, Paris’s, and Beauregard’s regiments, more than 3,500
sabres, were massed behind the Poles and Germans. For a time their
march would be masked by olive-groves and undulations of the ground,
so that they might come in quite suddenly upon the enemy. Mortier
with his first division--that of Girard--and a regiment of Gazan’s,
followed in the rear of the Polish and German infantry, to support
their frontal attack. Dessolles, with his own brigade and Gazan’s
remaining one, took post opposite Ocaña, ready to fall upon the
Spanish centre, when the attack to his left should have begun to make
way. He had in his front the massed artillery of the 4th and 5th
Corps, thirty guns under Senarmont, which took ground on a low knoll
above the great ravine, from which they could both play upon the town
of Ocaña and also enfilade part of the Spanish line to its immediate
right--Vigodet’s division and half of Giron’s. Finally the King, with
his guards and other troops, horse and foot, were placed to the right
rear of Dessolles, to act as a general reserve, or to move against
Zayas if he should attempt to cross the ravine and turn the French
right.