

Next day [November 12], Areizaga brought up the whole of his army to
Ocaña, and his cavalry reconnoitred up to the gates of Aranjuez and
the bridge of Puente La Reyna. Sebastiani made ready to defend them,
and having been joined by the German division from Toledo, wrote to
Soult to say that he would resist to the last extremity, in order
to gain time for the arrival of Victor’s corps and the other troops
which were marching up from the west and north[96]. The attack
which he expected was never delivered. Areizaga, nervous about the
presence of the 1st Corps on his flank, had resolved to shift his
army eastward to get further away from it. Abandoning his line of
communication by La Guardia and Madridejos, he marched his whole
force by cross-roads parallel to the Tagus up to La Zarza, and seized
the fords of Villamanrique, twenty-five miles above Aranjuez, on the
Madrid-Albacete road. If Victor, as he supposed, had been manœuvring
on his flank, this movement would have cut him off from his base in
Andalusia, and have left him only the mountains of Murcia as a line
of retreat. But, as a matter of fact, the 1st Corps was no longer at
Ajofrin or Mora, but had been called behind the Tagus, so that his
retreat was safer than he supposed.

  [96] Sebastiani to Soult, night of the twelfth-thirteenth, from
  Aranjuez.

Soult and King Joseph, meanwhile, had been completing their
concentration. They had written to Kellermann, ordering him to send
back to Madrid without delay the brigade of Dessolles’ division
under Godinot which had been lent him, and to spare them as well one
infantry brigade of the 6th Corps. These troops were too far off
to be available at once; but of the remainder of their units the
Royal Guard and Spanish battalions of King Joseph, with Dessolles’
remaining brigade, were moved out to support Sebastiani. Victor
had been brought back across the Tagus, and was also marching on
Aranjuez. Mortier’s corps was concentrated at Toledo, while the 2nd
Corps was in motion from Oropesa to Talavera, having discovered no
signs of a serious advance on the part of Albuquerque. The care of
Madrid was handed over to the incomplete French division of the 4th
Corps[97], some of whose battalions were dispersed at Guadalajara,
Alcala, Segovia, and other garrisons. Paris’s light cavalry of the
same corps was also at this moment watching the roads to the east of
Madrid.

  [97] It had still no divisional general, and was officially known
  by the name of ‘Sebastiani’s division’--regiments 28th, 32nd,
  58th, 75th.

On the twelfth Areizaga threw Lacy’s division across the Tagus,
and laid down two pontoon bridges near Villamanrique, so as to be
able to bring over his whole army in the shortest possible time.
But the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth were days of storm,
the river rose high, and the artillery and train stuck fast on the
vile cross-roads from Ocaña over which they were being brought. In
consequence less than half the Spanish army was north of the Tagus
on November 15, though the advance cavalry pushed on to the line of
the Tajuna, and skirmished with Paris’s _chasseurs_ about Arganda.
It seemed nevertheless that Areizaga was committed to an advance
upon Madrid by the high-road from Albacete, wherefore Soult blew up
the bridges of Aranjuez and Puente la Reyna, and ordered Victor to
march from Aranjuez on Arganda with the 1st Corps, nearly 20,000 men,
purposing to join him with the King’s reserves and to offer battle on
the Tajuna, while Mortier and Sebastiani’s Poles and Germans should
fall upon the enemy’s flank. But this plan was foiled by a new move
upon Areizaga’s part; he now commenced a retreat as objectless as his
late advance. Just as Victor’s cavalry came in touch with his front,
he withdrew his whole army across the Tagus, destroyed his bridges,
and retired to La Zarza on the seventeenth, evidently with the
intention of recovering his old line of communication with Andalusia,
via Ocaña and Madridejos.