

  [91] Soult to Clarke, from Madrid, Nov. 6. The deserters were a
  body of twenty-one men of the Walloon Guards, who had enlisted
  from Dupont’s prisoners in order to get a chance of escaping:
  they reached Oropesa on Oct. 25.

Meanwhile Areizaga, within a few days of assuming the command of the
army of La Mancha, commenced his forward movement. On November 3,
having concentrated his eight divisions of infantry and his 5,700
horse at Santa Cruz de Mudela, at the foot of the passes, he gave
the order to advance into the plains. The head quarters followed the
high-road, with the train and three divisions: the rest, to avoid
encumbering the _chaussée_, marched by parallel side-roads, but were
never more than ten miles from their Commander-in-Chief: at any rate
Areizaga avoided the sin of dispersion. His army was the best which
had been seen under the Spanish banners since Tudela. The men had all
been furnished with new clothes and equipment since August, mainly
from English stores landed at Cadiz. There were sixty guns, and
such a body of cavalry as had never yet been collected during the
war. The value of the troops was very unequal; if there were many
old battalions of the regular army, there were also many new units
composed of half-trained Andalusian levies. The cavalry included the
old runaways of Medellin, and many other regiments of doubtful value.
The morale was on the whole not satisfactory. ‘I wish I had anything
agreeable to communicate to you from this army’ wrote Colonel Roche,
a British officer attached to Areizaga’s staff, to Wellington. ‘The
corps which belonged to the original army of La Mancha are certainly
in every respect superior to those from Estremadura, and from
everything that I can learn none of those abuses which were to be
lamented in the army of Estremadura existed here--or, at least, in
a much less degree. But nothing can exceed the general discontent,
dissatisfaction, and demoralization of the mass of the people and of
the army. How can anybody who has the faculty of reason separate the
inefficiency, intrigue, bad organization, and consequent disasters
of the army from the source of all those evils in the Junta? There
is not a man of the least reflection who, as things now stand, has a
hope of success; and this is the more melancholy, because the mass of
the people are just as inveterate in their resentment and abhorrence
of the French as at the first hour of the revolution[92].’ The fact
seems to have been that the superior officers doubted the wisdom of
taking the offensive according to the Junta’s orders, and had no
confidence in Areizaga, who was only known as a fighting general, and
had no reputation for skill. The rank and file, as Arteche remarks,
were disposed to do their duty, but had no confidence in their
luck[93]. Their government and not their generals must take the major
part of the blame for the disaster that followed.

  [92] Roche to Wellington, from Santa Cruz de la Mudela,
  _Wellington Supplementary Dispatches_, vi. 394. Cf. also the same
  to the same, vi. 414.