

The plan, despite of some checks at the commencement, worked in a
satisfactory fashion. The German and Polish divisions of Leval and
Werlé attacked Lacy’s and Castejon’s divisions, which gave back
some little way, in order to align themselves with Vigodet who
was sheltered by the slight eastern end of the ravine. The enemy
followed and brought up six guns to the point to play upon the new
position which the Spaniards had taken up. The forward movement was
continuing, when suddenly to the surprise of the French, Lacy’s,
Castejon’s, and Giron’s men, leaving their places in the line, made
a furious counter-charge upon the Poles and Germans, drove them
back for some distance, and threw them into disorder. This movement
was no result of Areizaga’s generalship: he had betaken himself
to the summit of the church-tower of Ocaña, an inconvenient place
from which to issue orders, and practically left his subordinates
to fight their own battle. Mortier was forced to bring forward
Girard’s division to support his broken first line. It was hotly
engaged with Lacy and Giron, when suddenly it felt the Spaniards
slacken in their fire, waver, and break. This was the result of the
intervention of a new force in the field. The great mass of French
squadrons, which had been sent under Sebastiani to turn the Spanish
right, had now come into action. Arriving close to Freire’s cavalry
before it was discovered, it fell on that untrustworthy corps, and
scattered it to the winds in a few minutes. Then, while three or four
regiments followed the routed horsemen, the rest turned inwards upon
the hostile infantry. The flanks of the first and second lines of
Areizaga’s right were charged simultaneously, and hardly a regiment
had time to get into square. Brigade after brigade was rolled up
and dispersed or captured; the mass of fugitives, running in upon
the troops that were frontally engaged with Girard, wrecked them
completely. Of the five divisions of the Spanish left, a certain
number of steady regiments got away, by closing their ranks and
pushing ahead through the confusion, firing on friend and foe alike
when they were hustled. But many corps were annihilated, and others
captured wholesale. The last seems to have been the fate of nearly
the whole of Jacomé’s division of the second line, as hardly a single
unit from it is reported as rallied a month later, and the French
accounts speak of a whole column of 6,000 men which laid down its
arms in a mass before the light cavalry of the 4th Corps. Just as the
Spanish right broke up, Dessolles with his two brigades, followed
by the King’s reserve, crossed the ravine and attacked the town of
Ocaña, and the two divisions--Vigodet and Copons--which lay in first
and second line immediately to the east of it. These retired, and got
away in better order than their comrades to the right. Of all the
Spanish army only Zayas’s vanguard division, on the extreme left, now
remained intact. Areizaga had sent it an order to cross the ravine
and attack the French right, when he saw his army beginning to break
up. Then, a few minutes later, he sent another order bidding it close
to the right and cover the retreat. After this the Commander-in-Chief
descended from his tower, mounted his horse, and fled. Zayas
carried out the second order, moved to the right, and found himself
encompassed by masses of fugitives from Giron’s, Castejon’s, and
Lacy’s broken divisions, mixed with French cavalry. He sustained,
with great credit to himself and his troops, a rearguard action for
some miles, till near the village of Dos Barrios, where his line was
broken and his men at last mixed with the rest of the fugitives[102].