

  [115] For a typical example of the relations of French governors
  and the King’s officials see Thiébault’s account of his quarrel
  with Amoros in his autobiography, iv. 350-5. Cf. Miot de Melito,
  chapters xi-xii of vol. ii.

Pending the reduction to order of the country-side of the two
Castiles, which he vainly hoped to see accomplished during the next
six months, Joseph found only one expedient for raising money. It was
a ruinous one, and could not be repeated. This was the confiscation
of property belonging to all persons who were in the service of
the Junta, and of all the religious orders. This would have given
him vast sums, if only he could have found buyers. But it was not
easy to persuade any one to pay ready cash for lands overrun by
the guerrilleros, or for houses in towns which were practically in
a state of siege, and were also subject to a grinding taxation.
Property of immense value had to be alienated for wholly inadequate
sums. The _afrancesados_, whom Joseph was most anxious to conciliate,
got such payment as he could afford, mainly in the form of vain
grants of property which they could not turn to account. The only
ready money which was in circulation was that which came from the
coining down, at the Madrid mint, of the considerable amount of
plate belonging to the monasteries and the churches on which the
King had laid hands. Naturally, he was regarded as a sacrilegious
robber by his unwilling subjects--though few, or none, murmured when
the Central Junta filled its exchequer by similar expedients. But
the Junta had not decreed the abolition of the religious orders--it
only purported to be raising a patriotic loan from their resources.
A minister of Joseph sums up the situation sufficiently well in
three sentences. ‘Spanish public opinion was inexorable: it rejected
everything coming from us--even benefits: thus the King and his
councillors spent themselves in fruitless labours. Nothing answered
their expectations, and the void in the Treasury, the worst danger,
showed no sign of diminution. On the contrary, the financial distress
increased every day, and the unpleasant means which we were compelled
to employ in order to supply the never-ceasing wants of the army
completely alienated the nation from us[116].’

  [116] Miot de Melito, ii. p. 351.

The orders issued by the King and Soult after the battle of Ocaña,
show that they had no immediate intention of pursuing Areizaga’s
routed host, and entering Andalusia at its heels--tempting though
such a policy might be from the purely military point of view. After
Victor and the 1st Corps had joined him, on the day following the
battle, Joseph had nearly 60,000 men in hand. But his first move was
to disperse this formidable army: Gazan’s division of Mortier’s corps
was at once hurried off towards the north, to reinforce Kellermann in
Leon--for the battle of Alba de Tormes had not yet taken place, and
it was thought that the 6th Corps needed prompt assistance. Laval’s
division of Sebastiani’s corps was detached in another direction,
being told off to escort to Madrid, and afterwards to Burgos and
Vittoria, the vast mass of prisoners taken at Ocaña. Milhaud, with
his own dragoons, and an infantry brigade taken from Sebastiani’s
corps, was directed to push eastwards by way of Tarancon, and then
to march on Cuenca, where it was reported that many of the fugitives
from Areizaga’s army had rallied. The brigade of Dessolles’ division
which had been present at Ocaña and Joseph’s own troops returned to
Madrid, in company with their master. When the capital was again
adequately garrisoned, numerous flying-columns were sent out from
it, to clear the roads, and disperse the guerrilleros. Mortier, with
that part of the 5th Corps which had not been detached under Gazan,
was drawn back to Toledo. Thus of all the troops which had been
concentrated on November 20th, only Victor’s corps and the Polish
division, with the cavalry brigade of the 4th Corps, were retained in
La Mancha, facing the Sierra Morena. The 1st Corps was pushed forward
to Ciudad Real and its neighbourhood, with its advanced cavalry
watching the passes. The Poles remained at Ocaña and La Guardia,
with Perreymond’s three regiments of light horse in front of them at
Madridejos[117].