

Meanwhile the executive committee, with the Junta’s approval, issued
a long series of edicts concerning the reorganization of the army,
and the defence of Andalusia from the French attack, which might at
any moment begin. The ‘Army of the Centre,’ of which Areizaga was
still, strange to say, left in command, was to be raised to 100,000
men by a strenuous conscription. The press was to be all-embracing,
married men, novices in monasteries, persons in minor orders, only
sons of widows, all the classes hitherto exempt, were to be subject
to it. To provide funds the clergy were ordered to send in to the
mint all church plate save such as was strictly necessary for the
celebration of the sacraments, and all private citizens were bidden
to contribute one half of their table-silver. In order to provide
teams for the artillery--which had lost nearly all its horses and
guns at Ocaña--a strict requisition for draught animals was begun all
over Andalusia. Engineers were sent out to fortify all the passes
of the Sierra Morena, with permission to exact forced labour from
the peasantry of the hill country. Three members of the Junta--Rabe,
Riquelme and Campo Sagrado--were sent to Areizaga’s head quarters at
La Carolina as ‘field deputies,’ to stir up or support the energy of
the commander-in-chief. This was a device borrowed from the practice
of the French Revolution, and had no better effect than might have
been expected. As in 1793, the ‘Representatives on Mission’ were
either useless or positively harmful. They either wished to thrust
amateurish plans of their own upon the military men, or at least
distracted them by constant inquisitorial supervision.

On the whole the effect of this volley of violent decrees was small.
With six months to carry them out they might, no doubt, have produced
great results. But within nine weeks after the disaster of Ocaña
the French had commenced their attack, and in that space of time
little had been accomplished. The money was beginning to come in, the
recruits were being collected, but had not been armed or clothed,
still less drilled. Of the fortifications in the passes many had
been sketched out, but only a few had begun to take tangible shape.
To man them there was still only the wrecks of Areizaga’s old army,
which had hardly begun to receive its drafts of conscripts. Its
whole force at the New Year did not exceed 30,000 men, and these were
distributed over a front of more than 150 miles, for not only the
main group of passes in front of La Carolina had to be watched, but
also the eastern ingress into Andalusia by Baeza and Ubeda, and the
western defiles from Almaden and Benalcazar, which lead directly down
on to Cordova. The whole country-side was in a state of desperate
turmoil and excitement, yet very little in the way of practical
defence had been completed by the middle of January.

Meanwhile, in accordance with the ridiculous constitution of the
‘executive committee,’ half of its members went out of office at the
New Year, and were succeeded by other individuals of the Junta. Among
those superseded was La Romana, who was now directed to go off to
Valencia as captain-general. The Junta seems to have considered that
he would be less dangerous in company with his brother José Caro in
that province, than when posted at the seat of government, with his
brother to back him by threats of Valencian military interference.
Yet La Romana did not depart, and was still lingering at Seville when
the French crossed the Sierra Morena.