

  [107] He then pushed on to Cadiz, where he was on the 6th-7th,
  spent a night at Seville again on the 9th-10th, and was back at
  Badajoz on the 11th of November. At Cadiz he parted with his
  brother, who was just embarking for England, to take up his place
  in the new Ministry.

  [108] As late as Oct. 28 he had written to Colonel Roche, the
  British officer attached to the staff of the Army of the Centre,
  to beg him to press on the newly-arrived Areizaga the necessity
  of adopting a defensive posture, and risking nothing. From the
  wording of the letter it is clear that no hint of the orders
  sent to Areizaga from Seville had reached Badajoz. _Wellington
  Dispatches_, v. 248-9, see also the dispatch to Castlereagh on p.
  267.

  [109] See Wellington to Roche, and to B. Frère, Badajoz, Nov. 19.
  _Dispatches_, v. 292-3 and 294.

  [110] ‘Nothing can save them save a victory by Areizaga, and
  the possession of Madrid, _which are the most improbable of
  events_.... If Del Parque and Albuquerque are destroyed, _which
  is not unlikely, indeed pretty certain_ ... we must make our
  arrangements for the defence of Portugal.’ Wellington to
  Beresford, Nov. 20, 1809.

At the present moment the strength of the French troops in Spain was
not sufficient to provide two armies for offensive purposes, the one
destined to march on Seville, the other on Lisbon. The numbers at the
front had not appreciably increased since the autumn, though already
the reinforcements which the Emperor had set upon the march, after
concluding his peace with Austria, had begun to appear at Bayonne,
and to cross the Bidassoa. But in December and January the roads were
bad, the days short, and provisions hard to procure. Hence Wellington
reckoned that, till the spring should arrive, the allies would have
to face no more than the forces which were already opposed to them.
When, however, the campaigning season should have come round, and the
reinforcements from Germany should have been incorporated with the
old Army of Spain, he thought that Portugal would be the enemy’s main
objective. It was therefore his intention to withdraw his army, or
at least the greater part of it, from Spanish Estremadura, and to
arrange it so as to cover Lisbon, even though by making this movement
he was weakening the left flank of the defence of Andalusia. If he
had to choose between the interests of Portugal and those of Spain,
he was prepared to sacrifice the latter. His reasons were simple: (1)
he considered Portugal more important in the grand strategy of the
defence of the Peninsula than Andalusia; (2) he regarded it as more
defensible, and he had already--as we shall presently see--sketched
out and commenced the construction of his great lines of Torres
Vedras, in which his trust as a final impregnable stronghold was
already fixed; (3) he held that although Great Britain was pledged
to assist both Spain and Portugal, yet her moral obligation to the
latter was far more binding, since Portugal had placed herself
entirely in the hands of her allies, had put her army at their
disposal, and had contributed all her resources to the common cause,
while the Spanish Junta had shown a jealous and suspicious spirit,
had refused to show confidence in Great Britain, and had persisted in
carrying out a military policy of its own, which led to a consistent
series of disasters; (4) the Portuguese army, though its fighting
power was not as yet ascertained, could be at least relied upon for
obedience; experience had shown that the promises of the Spaniards
could not be trusted, and that any campaign undertaken in their
company might be wrecked by some incalculable piece of slackness or
miscalculation[111].