




SECTION XVIII

THE CONQUEST OF ANDALUSIA




CHAPTER I

THE CONSEQUENCES OF OCAÑA. DECEMBER 1809-JANUARY 1810


The news of the disaster of Ocaña gave a death-blow to the Central
Junta. Its attempt to win back its lost credit by an offensive
campaign against Madrid having ended in such a lamentable
fashion, there was nothing left for it but to acquiesce in its
own supersession by the oft-discussed national Cortes. But that
assembly was not to meet till March 1, 1810--a date still four
months in the future,--and even its form and constitution had not
yet been settled. For it would have been absurd to have called it
together in the ancient and unrepresentative shape,--a legacy from
the time of Charles V,--in which it had been wont to meet under the
Bourbon kings. Many regions had few or no members; decayed mediaeval
towns of Old Castile had more deputies than the most populous
provinces. Moreover, it had yet to be settled how that larger half
of the realm which was now occupied by the French was to elect its
representatives. The commission was still sitting to determine these
vital points, and in this moment of dismay the day of the assembly
of the Cortes seemed very far distant. The French might be following
hard on the heels of Areizaga’s broken host, and might enter Seville,
long before it had been decided what sort of a Cortes was to take
over the power from the hands of the discredited Central Junta.

That most unhappy government, therefore, had to face both an acute
constitutional crisis and an acute military crisis. Something had
to be done without delay to satisfy public opinion concerning the
convocation of the Cortes, or the revolution which had been checked
by Wellesley’s aid in September would certainly burst forth again.
But even more pressing was the necessity for rallying and reinforcing
the army which had been crushed at Ocaña, before the French should
resume their advance. The actual administrative power was for
the moment in the hand of the first of those temporary executive
committees to which the Junta had agreed to delegate its authority by
the decree of September 19. This body, composed of six members, among
whom La Romana was numbered, had come into office on November 1. The
rest of the Junta were only too eager to throw on their comrades the
weight of the responsibility which should have fallen upon them all.
The executive committee was accused on all sides of slow and feeble
action. It published, as soon as possible, the details concerning
the constitution of the forthcoming Cortes, which (in pursuance of
the recommendation of the commission of inquiry) was to consist
of two classes of members, elected representatives who were to be
allotted in due proportion to all the provinces of the realm, and
‘privilegiados’ or chosen individuals from the nobility and the
higher clergy. The American colonies were to be given members no less
than the mother country, but their numbers were to be small. Such
an arrangement seemed to foreshadow a double-chambered legislature,
resembling that of Great Britain, and British precedents had no doubt
been running in the minds of the framers of the constitution. But--as
we shall see--the Cortes, when it actually met, took no such shape.
The mandate for the election of the assembly was duly published;
and so far public opinion was to a certain extent satisfied, for it
was clear that the Central Junta was at last about to abdicate. But
though the majority of the Spanish people were contented to wait,
provided that the executive committee should show signs of rising to
the occasion, and doing its best as an _interim_ government, there
were some politicians who saw in the crisis only an opportunity
for pushing their private ambitions. Those veteran intriguers, the
Conde de Montijo and Francisco Palafox, undismayed by the failure
of the September plot, began to make arrangements with the Seville
demagogues for a fresh attempt at a _coup d’état_. Their plots seem
to have distracted Romana and his colleagues from their obvious
military duties--the conspirator at home is always the enemy who
looms most large before the eyes of a weak government. But after some
search both were discovered, arrested and imprisoned.