

  [113] See vol. ii. pp. 168-9.

Joseph Bonaparte would never be King of Spain till every province was
held down by French bayonets. Not only must each corner of the land
be conquered, but after conquest it must be garrisoned. For, where
there was no garrison, insurrection burst out at once, and the weary
process of pacification had to be repeated.

It was this last fact that restrained King Joseph from following up
his pursuit of the wrecks of the Spanish army to the Sierra Morena,
and the gates of Seville, on the morning after Ocaña. To make up
the host that had defeated Areizaga, and the other smaller force
that was dealing with Del Parque in Leon, the King had been forced
to concentrate all his divisions, and the consequence had been that
the control of the broad tracts behind him had been lost. We have
already had occasion to mention[114] that throughout Old Castile and
Leon, the open country was now in the hands of the guerrilleros,
who had been growing in force and numbers ever since the time of
Talavera, and had risen to the height of their confidence after the
day of Tamames, and Del Parque’s repeated occupation of Salamanca.
Navarre, and many parts of New Castile were equally disturbed, and
Aragon, which Suchet had tamed during the autumn, was beginning
once more to move. There were no French troops in the disturbed
regions save scanty garrisons at Burgos, Valladolid, Benavente,
Avila, Segovia, Guadalajara, Palencia, Tudela, Tafalla, and a few
other strategic points. These were cut off from each other, and from
Madrid, save when a governor sent out his messenger with an escort
many hundreds strong, and even such a force had often to fight its
way through half a dozen bands before reaching its destination. The
garrisons themselves were not always safe: so powerful were the
bands of some of the guerrillero chiefs that they aspired to waging
regular war, and did not confine themselves to blocking the roads, or
intercepting couriers and convoys. The Empecinado, whose sphere of
activity lay on the borders of Old and New Castile, got possession
of Guadalajara for a day, though he retired when reinforcements
from Madrid were reported to be approaching. Somewhat later, the
younger Mina--‘the Student,’ as he was called to distinguish him
from his more celebrated uncle Espoz, stormed the town of Tafalla,
and shut up the remains of its garrison in its castle, while the
flying-columns of the governor of Navarre were seeking him in every
other direction. He too, like the Empecinado, had to seek safety in
retreat and dispersion, when his exploit drew in upon him forces sent
from Suchet’s army of Aragon.

  [114] See page 83.

The activity of the guerrilleros did not merely constitute a military
danger for King Joseph. It affected him in another, and an equally
vexatious, fashion, by cutting off nearly all his sources of revenue.
While the open country was in the hands of the insurgents, he could
raise neither imposts nor requisitions from it. The only regular
income that he could procure during the later months of 1809 was
that which came in from the local taxes of Madrid, and the few other
large towns of which he was in secure possession. And save in the
capital itself, his agents and intendants had to fight hard with the
military governors to secure even this meagre pittance[115]. The
King could not command a quarter of the sum which he required to pay
the ordinary expenses of government. His courtiers and ministers,
French and Spanish, failed to receive their salaries, and the Spanish
army, which he was busily striving to form, could not be clothed
or armed, much less paid. Nothing vexed Joseph more than this: he
wished to make himself independent of his brother’s generals, by
raising a large force of his own, which should be at his personal
disposition. He formed the _cadre_ of regiment after regiment, and
filled them with deserters from the foreign troops of the Junta, and
with any prisoners who could be induced to enlist under his banners
in order to avoid transportation to France. But the recruits, when
sent to join the new regiments, disappeared for the most part within
a few weeks. Joseph thought that it was from lack of pay and proper
sustenance, and raged at the idea that, but for the want of money,
he might have at his disposition a formidable army of his own. But he
deceived himself: the ‘juramentados’ had for the most part no desire
save to desert and rejoin their old colours: the real renegades were
few. In the ranks of the Junta’s army the soldier was even worse
clothed, fed, and paid than in that of Joseph. No amount of pampering
would have turned the King’s Spanish levies into loyal servants.