

While the Spaniards were defiling over the bridge, Marchand’s leading
brigade attacked Alba, out of which it drove some rallied troops of
Losada’s division, who held the town to cover La Carrera’s retreat.
This was done with ease, for Del Parque had not brought over his two
intact divisions, preferring to use them as a second line behind
which the others could retire. Alba was stormed, and two guns, which
had been placed behind a barricade at its main exit, were taken by
the French.

Here the fighting stopped: the Spaniards had lost five flags, nine
guns, most of their baggage, and about 3,000 killed or taken--no
very ruinous deductions from an army of 32,000 men. The French
casualties were less than 300 in all[105]. Del Parque was determined
not to fight again next morning, and bade his army make off under
cover of the night. The disorder that followed was frightful: the
three divisions that had been in the battle dispersed, and went
off in all directions, some towards Ciudad Rodrigo, others towards
Tamames, others by the hill-road that leads towards Tala and the
Pass of Baños. Many of the raw Leonese troops, though they had not
been engaged, also left their colours in the dark[106]. It was a
full month before Del Parque could collect his whole army, which,
when it had been reorganized, was found to number 26,000 men,
despite all its misfortunes. It would seem, therefore, that beside
the losses in the battle some 3,000 men must have gone off to their
homes. The duke fixed his head quarters at San Martin de Trebejos
in the Sierra de Gata, and dispersed his infantry in cantonments
about Bejar, Fuenteguinaldo, and Miranda de Castanar. Having only
the ruined region around Coria and Plasencia, and the small district
about Ciudad Rodrigo, to feed them, these troops suffered dreadful
privations during the winter, living on half-rations eked out with
edible acorns. By the middle of January they had lost 9,000 men from
fever, dysentery, and starvation.

  [105] Martinien’s lists show 4 officers killed and 14 wounded.

  [106] There is a long report by Del Parque in the Record
  Office, in which he states that the panic was caused by a stray
  party of his own routed cavalry dashing in among the rearguard
  in the dark, and crying that the French were pursuing them.
  He afterwards court-martialled and shot some cavalrymen for
  cowardice.

Despite all this, it is fair to say that Del Parque’s campaign
contrasts most favourably with that of Areizaga. He showed a laudable
prudence when he twice evacuated Salamanca rather than fight a
battle in the plain. His victory of Tamames was most creditable,
showing that when prudently conducted, and ranged in a well-chosen
hill-position, his army could give a good account of itself. But
for the disaster of Alba de Tormes his record might be considered
excellent. There, it is true, he committed a grave mistake, by
separating his army into two halves by the river when his enemy was
in pursuit. But in his defence it may be urged that his cavalry
ought to have had vedettes out for ten or fifteen miles to the rear,
and to have given him long warning of the approach of the French.
And when the enemy’s horse did make its sudden appearance, it was
contrary to the laws of probability that it would attack at once,
without waiting for its infantry and guns. Kellermann’s headlong
charge was a violation of all rules, a stroke of inspiration which
could not have been foreseen. If the Spanish cavalry had been of
any use whatever, and if Losada’s division had only known how to
form square in a hurry, it ought to have been beaten off. But the
resisting-power of a Spanish army was always a doubtful quantity.
Kellermann resolved to take the risk of attacking, and was rewarded
by a victory on which he was not entitled to reckon. He would
probably have justified his tactics by urging that failure could have
no severe penalty, for the Spaniards could not pursue him if he were
repulsed, while success would bring splendid results. This was true:
and if his infantry had been five miles more to the front, he might
have captured the whole of La Carrera’s division.