

Convinced that no more was to be hoped from Wellington, the Executive
Committee issued their orders for a new arrangement of the line of
defence of Andalusia. Albuquerque was ordered to leave no more than
a small corps of observation on the Tagus, in front of Almaraz,
and to bring back the main body of the army of Estremadura to the
line of the Guadiana, in order to link his right wing to the left
of Areizaga’s forces. On December 24 his new head quarters were
at Don Benito, and he had some 8,000 men collected there and at
the neighbouring town of Merida; the rest of his small army was
furnishing the garrison of Badajoz, and the detached force on the
Tagus, whose duty was to watch the movements of the French 2nd Corps,
which still lay in its old post at Talavera, and remained entirely
quiescent.

From Albuquerque’s post at Don Benito there was a gap of seventy-five
miles to the next force in the Spanish line. This consisted of the
wrecks of the two old divisions of Copons and Zerain from the army
of Areizaga, not more than 4,500 strong[112]. They were encamped at
Pozo Blanco and at Almaden, the mining town on the Alcudia, where the
frontiers of Estremadura, Andalusia, and La Mancha meet. This place
lies near the northern exit of the two passes, the Puerto Blanco and
Puerto Rubio which lead down from La Mancha on to Cordova, the one
by Villaharta, the other by Villanueva de la Jara and Adamuz. Both
are difficult, both pass through a desolate and uninhabited country,
but either of them might conceivably serve for the passage of an
army. Sixty miles east of Almaden was the main body of the rallied
Army of the Centre, occupying the group of passes which lie around
the high-road from Madrid to Andalusia. Head quarters were at La
Carolina, the central point upon which the routes from most of these
passes converge. About 13,000 men were disposed in front, covering
the main _chaussée_ through the Despeña-Perros, and the side defiles
of the Puerto del Rey and the Puerto del Muradal. Here Areizaga had
concentrated the remains of the divisions of Zayas, Castejon, Giron
and Lacy, of which the last two were mere wrecks, while the two
former counted about 4,000 bayonets apiece. Finally, some fifteen
miles off to the right, the remnants of the divisions of Vigodet and
Jacomé, perhaps 6,000 men in all, covered the two easternmost passes
from La Mancha, those of Aldea Quemada and Villa Manrique, which
descend not upon La Carolina, but on Ubeda and Linares, the towns at
the headwaters of the Guadalquivir in the extreme north-eastern angle
of the Andalusian plain. Areizaga’s artillery was all in the passes,
placed in the various new entrenchments which were being thrown up.
His cavalry had for the most part been sent back to recruit and
reform itself in the interior of the province, being useless in the
mountains.

  [112] The papers in the Madrid archives show that Copons had
  about 3,000 men, Zerain (whose division had been almost entirely
  destroyed) about 1,500.