

The mere description of this disposition of forces is sufficient to
show the hopeless condition of the defence of Andalusia. Areizaga
was trying to cover every possible line by which the French might
advance, with the result that his army and that of Albuquerque were
strung out on a front of 150 miles, and could not concentrate 15,000
men on any single point. The passes which they were trying to guard
were not only numerous, but in several cases very practicable,
where roads lay not between cliffs or precipices, but over slopes
which could be ascended by infantry on each side of the pass. The
fortifications and the troops holding them could be turned by enemies
who took the trouble to climb the side acclivities. It was clear that
if the French chose to attack the Sierra Morena with no more than the
60,000 men who had been concentrated after the battle of Ocaña, they
could bring an overwhelming force to bear on any one or two of the
passes which they might select, while leaving the garrisons of the
rest alone, or threatening them with trifling demonstrations. If
the enemy should choose to strike by Almaden at Cordova, the Spanish
centre and right wing would be cut off from their retreat on Seville,
and would have to take refuge in the kingdom of Murcia. If the
Despeña-Perros and its neighbours should turn out to be the selected
objective, Areizaga’s right wing must suffer the same fate. And, if
driven from the passes, the army would have to encounter, in the
broad plain behind, the overpowering force of French cavalry which
King Joseph could bring up. The problem set before the defence was
a hopeless one, and most of the generals under Areizaga were aware
of the fact--as indeed were the rank and file. Disaster was bound to
follow if the enemy managed his business with ordinary prudence.

[Illustration: _Spanish Infantry 1808_
  (_Showing the old Bourbon uniform_)]




SECTION XVIII: CHAPTER II

THE CONQUEST OF ANDALUSIA. KING JOSEPH AND HIS PLANS


When considering the action of the French after the victory of
Ocaña, it is necessary to remember that King Joseph and Soult were
not in the position of ordinary invaders, who have just succeeded in
demolishing the last army of their enemy. In wars of a normal type
the victor knows that the vanquished will sue for terms when further
resistance appears hopeless; he proceeds to dictate the cessions of
territory or payments of indemnities that he thinks proper, as the
price of peace. But it was not a profitable treaty which Napoleon
desired: he had put it out of his own power to end the war in such a
fashion, when he declared his brother King of Spain. For him there
was no Spanish government in existence save that which he had set up
at Madrid: the Central Junta, and the Cortes when it should meet,
were mere illegal assemblies, with which he could not deign to enter
into negotiations. It was now perfectly clear that the Spaniards
would never submit of their own accord. Their position in December
1809, desperate as it might be, was no worse than it had been in the
March of the same year. Areizaga’s army had suffered no more at Ocaña
than had those of Cuesta and Cartaojal nine months before, on the
disastrous fields of Medellin and Ciudad Real. Indeed, there were
probably more men actually in line to defend Andalusia in December
than there had been in April. Moreover, in the early spring Soult had
been in the full career of conquest in Portugal, and nothing save
Cradock’s insignificant force appeared to prevent his onward march
to Lisbon. At mid-winter, on the other hand, the flank of Andalusia
was covered by Wellington’s victorious army, and by the reorganized
Portuguese host of Beresford. If the Junta had refused to listen to
the insidious advances of Sotelo in April[113], there was no reason
to suppose that it would lend a ready ear to any similar advocate of
submission in December. Indeed, its every action showed a resolve to
fight out the losing game to the end.