

There was a larger military problem before the Junta and the new
‘executive committee’ than the mere defence of Andalusia. The whole
arrangement of the national armies had to be recast in consequence of
the black day of Ocaña. The corps of Del Parque and Albuquerque, as
well as all the smaller outlying bodies of troops, had to receive new
orders. Above all it was necessary to discover what were the plans of
Wellington, for the present position of the British army at Badajoz
was the most important factor in the whole situation. As long as it
remained there, in support of the small force under Albuquerque which
was guarding the passages of the Tagus at Almaraz and Arzobispo, the
western section of the front of Andalusia was secure. The defence of
the eastern section, too, was in no small degree helped by the fact
that Wellington’s solid troops were in a position to march up the
Guadiana, and to threaten the flank of any French army which might
intend to attack the Despeña-Perros, or any other of the passes which
lead from La Mancha down to the Andalusian plains.

It was a terribly disquieting fact for the Junta that, even before
Ocaña had been fought and lost, Wellington had begun to announce his
intention of leaving Badajoz and retiring within the boundaries of
Portugal. He had paid a flying visit to Seville on the 2nd-4th[107]
of November, just as Areizaga’s unhappy advance into La Mancha
was commencing. The project had been concealed from him[108], and
when he learnt of it he had expressed his entire disapprobation
of it, and had refused to give any promise to support the Spanish
armies in their offensive movements. For this reason he had been
bitterly provoked when Areizaga and Albuquerque both wrote him, a
little later, to say that they had been promised the assistance of
his army by the Junta[109]. He had consistently prophesied ill of
the adventure, and had recorded his opinion that both Del Parque
and Areizaga would probably lose their armies. In a dispatch of
November 20, six days before the news of Ocaña reached him, he
had announced his definite intention of leaving Badajoz with the
main body of his army, and transferring himself to the north of
the Tagus, where, by posting himself in the Portuguese province of
Beira, he would cover the high-roads to Lisbon from Old Castile. This
decision was founded on his belief that when the French had made
an end of Areizaga and Del Parque--a contingency which he regarded
as almost certain[110]--they would strike at Lisbon and not at
Seville. He had good reasons for holding this view; it was exactly
consonant with Napoleon’s own plan, which was only abandoned by
reason of King Joseph’s pleadings with his brother. For, from the
French standpoint, it was far more profitable to conquer Portugal
and to expel the British army from the Peninsula, than to overrun
Andalusia. Wellington and his troops formed the one solid nucleus of
resistance which still remained; it was clear that the dispersion of
the miserable wrecks of Areizaga’s host would present no difficulty.
And not only was it advisable, from the Emperor’s point of view,
to destroy the most formidable hostile force still surviving, but
the balance of strategical advantage was all in favour of subduing
Portugal, before Andalusia should be invaded. For Portugal flanks
the attack on southern Spain, and a good army based upon it could
check the advance on Seville and Cadiz by demonstrations aimed at
Valladolid or Madrid, which might wreck or delay the conquest of
Andalusia. It may be objected that Andalusia also flanks the attack
on Portugal; but the objection had no validity since the day of
Ocaña, as the Junta had now no longer any striking force in hand. It
would be many months before Areizaga’s host was in a proper condition
for undertaking even cautious defensive operations. A French attack
on Portugal, therefore, would be practically unmolested by external
interference.