

  [132] Gazan’s division, forming the third French column, had
  6,414 bayonets; Dessolles’, the extreme right-hand column, 8,354.

Mortier, like the good general that he was, did not confine his
operations to an attack against the narrow fronts of the two passes,
but assailed the rough hillside on each side of them, sending out
whole battalions deployed as skirmishers to climb the slopes. Of
Gazan’s division, one brigade marched against the Puerto del Muradal,
but the other went up, in open order, on the space between the Puerto
and the Spanish redoubt at the Collado de Valdeazores. Similarly,
Dessolles attacked the Puerto del Rey with a few battalions, but sent
the rest up the less formidable portions of the flanking slopes.
Girard and the King’s Reserves, meanwhile, did not press their attack
on the Despeña-Perros, till the troops on their right had already
begun to drive the enemy before them.

The results of these tactics might have been foreseen from the first:
Giron’s 3,200 men, attacked by 15,000, were driven in at a pace that
ever grew more rapid. They could not defend the passes, because the
slopes on each side were turned by the enemy. Their line was broken
in two or three places, and they fled in haste down the rear of
the Sierra, to escape being captured by flanking detachments which
were pushing on at full speed to head them off. The moment that the
Despeña-Perros was turned by Mortier’s movement, the troops occupying
it had to retreat at headlong speed, just as Girard was commencing
his attack on them. All did not retire with sufficient promptness:
the battalion in a redoubt on the Collado de los Jardines, on the
right flank of the high-road, was cut off and captured _en masse_.
All the guns in the pass were taken, there being no time to get them
away down the steep road in their rear. After two hours of scrambling
rather than fighting, the main passages of the Sierra Morena were in
the hands of the French. The mines on the high-road had been fired
when the retreat was ordered, but did not wreck the _chaussée_ in
such a way as to prevent the enemy from pursuing. The losses of the
Spaniards were no more than a few hundreds killed and wounded, and
500 prisoners; those of the French were less than 100 in all[133].
There had, in truth, been hardly the semblance of a battle.

  [133] Soult’s statement that he lost ‘some 25 men’ (Soult
  to Berthier, Jan. 21) is no doubt a little exaggerated. But
  Martinien’s invaluable tables show that Mortier’s corps, which
  did nearly all the fighting, lost only _two_ officers out of 549
  present, probably, therefore, it lost no more than forty men.
  Dessolles must have lost about the same.

The full results of the disaster were only developed next day: the
troops which had defended the central passes escaped, though in
dreadful disorder. But those further to their right were destined
to a worse fate. While Mortier and the King were forcing the great
defiles, Sebastiani had been fighting all day with Vigodet, in the
defiles about Montizon and St. Esteban del Puerto. He had no such
superiority in numbers over his enemy as had the King on the main
field of operations[134], hence his progress was slower, and his
victory, though complete, was not so prompt and crushing. Vigodet
and his 6,000 men were dispersed by the afternoon, and fled down the
valley of the Guadalen towards the plains, with Sebastiani’s cavalry
in pursuit. Having fought much longer than Lacy and Giron, their
losses were heavier than those of the central division--probably
1,000 killed, wounded, or taken. Shortly after, there appeared on
the scene, moving along the steep hill-path from La Carolina, the
Spanish division of Castejon, which had been sent off on the previous
night to support Vigodet. It found the St. Esteban position in the
possession of the French, and turned hastily back to rejoin Areizaga.
But, while it had been on the march, the Commander-in-Chief and his
army had been routed, and La Carolina was in the hands of the French.
Castejon found himself enclosed between Sebastiani and the King, in
a most perilous position. On the morning of the 21st, he tried to
escape by the by-path to Linares, but on arriving near that place
found that Mortier’s troops were already across his road. A brigade
of Sebastiani’s corps was in hot pursuit in his rear, and Castejon,
seeing himself thus enclosed, surrendered at Arquillos, with his
whole intact division of over 4,000 men and ten guns.