

  [134] Of his whole 10,000 men only 6,400 were infantry, and
  Vigodet (with the wrecks of Jacomé’s division) had nearly as many.

Already, before the capture of this Spanish corps, the King and
Sebastiani had joined hands, their reconnoitring parties having met
in the valley of the Guadalen. On learning of the complete success
of both columns, Joseph and Soult resolved to urge the pursuit in
two separate directions. Sebastiani was told to push forward by
way of Ubeda and Baeza to Jaen, while the main column marched by
Baylen on Andujar and Cordova. It was hoped that news of Victor would
soon be received: if all had gone well, he would have reached the
Guadalquivir somewhere in the neighbourhood of Cordova, so as to be
in the rear of any Spanish force that might have retreated from La
Carolina in the direction of Seville.

As a matter of fact, however, both Vigodet and also Areizaga with the
wreck of the troops from the central passes, had abandoned any hope
of covering Seville, and had retreated southwards on Jaen. There was
no force whatever left upon the Cordova road, and the King met no
resistance upon the 22nd or the 23rd. On the latter day Sebastiani,
arriving in front of Jaen, found the Spanish commander-in-chief with
some 7,000 or 8,000 men prepared to defend the town. He attacked at
once, and routed these dispirited troops, who made little or no show
of resistance. Practically the whole force went to pieces: the French
captured forty-six guns, mostly those of the reserve-park of the Army
of Andalusia, which had been deposited in Jaen. Of the wrecks of that
unhappy force, Areizaga carried off a small remnant to Guadix in the
eastern mountains, near the borders of Murcia. Lacy, with another
fraction, retired on Granada. But the large majority had left their
colours, and dispersed to their homes.

King Joseph and Soult meanwhile, advancing unopposed along the
high-road to Cordova and Seville, got into touch at Andujar with
the advanced cavalry of Victor on the night of the 22nd of January.
The march of the 1st Corps had been toilsome in the extreme, but
almost unopposed save by the difficulties of the road. After driving
Zerain’s little detachment out of Almaden on the 15th, they had
hardly seen an enemy. Zerain and his colleague Copons had retired by
the road towards Seville south-westward. Victor, though he sent out
flying parties of cavalry to threaten Benalcazar and Hinojosa, to
his right, had really pushed further to the left, on the easternmost
of the two rough passes which lead to Cordova. The day after
leaving Almaden he had sent his artillery back to La Mancha, the
dilapidated and abandoned road to which he had committed himself
proving absolutely impracticable for anything that travelled on
wheels. But he pushed on with his infantry and horsemen, and passing
Santa Eufemia, Torrecampo and Villanueva de la Jara, came down into
the plain of the Guadalquivir at Adamuz, fifteen miles to the east
of Cordova, on January 21st, the day after Soult and King Joseph
had forced the Despeña Perros and the Puerto del Rey. Wishing to
get into touch with them before attacking Cordova, he halted his
infantry, but sent out his cavalry to the gates of that city on the
one side, and on the other to Montoro and Andujar, where they met
the vedettes of the main army on the evening of the 22nd. Thus the
French host was once more concentrated: the march on Seville could
be continued without delay. Victor now became the advanced guard: he
entered Cordova, which opened its gates without resistance, on the
24th. There was no Spanish force in front of the French army, since
Zerain and Copons had retired towards Seville by a road far to the
west, while the wrecks of Areizaga’s army had been driven off in a
south-easterly direction.