The plan, an admirable one from the point of view of strategy, had
to be abandoned, for it was found that the country between Almaden
and Cordova was so absolutely barren and uninhabited, and the roads
so bad, that it would be impossible to carry a very large body of
troops across it at mid-winter. It was doubtful whether the passes
were practicable for artillery; it was certain that no food could
be obtained, and the train required to carry rations for 50,000 men
would be so large and heavy that it would probably stick fast in the
mountains.

On January 11, when Mortier, Dessolles, and the rest of the army had
already moved out of their cantonments and taken the road for La
Mancha, the revised draft of the plan of campaign was issued. It was
inferior in unity of conception to the first plan, and did not seem
likely to produce such good results; but it had the merit of being
practicable. By this scheme Victor alone was to march on Cordova,
with the 22,000 men of the 1st Corps: he was to endeavour to take his
artillery with him, but if the passes proved too rough, he was to
send it back by Almaden to join the main army. Mortier, Dessolles,
Sebastiani, Milhaud, and the King’s Reserves were to strike at the
group of passes in front of La Carolina, and to drive the Spaniards
out of them: it was hoped that they would thrust Areizaga’s host
into the arms of Victor, who would be descending into the valley of
the Guadalquivir just in time to meet the enemy retiring from the
defiles. For this operation the King was to take with him rather more
than 40,000 men.

It may be remarked that this plan divided the French army into two
separate columns entirely destitute of lateral communications,
and that, if the Spaniards had been stronger, considerable danger
would have been incurred. Areizaga might have concentrated every
man against one or other of the columns, and have brought it to a
stand, while merely observing the other. But to do so he would have
required a far larger force than he actually possessed: he had, as
we have seen, only 23,000 men under arms, and even if he collected
every available bayonet in one mass, either half of the French army
was strong enough to meet and to beat him. The King, therefore, was
running no real risk when he divided up his troops. As a matter of
fact, Areizaga had made matters easy for the enemy, by splitting his
small and dilapidated host into three sections--Zerain, with 4,500
men only, was on Victor’s road; the head quarters, with 13,000 men,
were at La Carolina opposite the King; Vigodet with 6,000, was far to
the right in the eastern passes[127]. Disaster was inevitable from
the first moment of the campaign.

  [127] See for details pages 111-12.

On January 7 King Joseph and Soult moved out from Madrid in the wake
of the columns of Dessolles and the Royal Guard, which had already
started. On the 8th they were at Toledo, on the 11th at Almagro, near
Ciudad Real; here they conferred with Victor, and, in consequence of
his reports concerning the state of the passes in the direction of
Cordova, recast their plans, and adopted the scheme of operations
which has just been detailed. On the following day Victor and his
corps marched from Ciudad Real for Almaden, to carry out the great
turning movement. The main army waited for six days to allow him to
get far forward on his rugged route, and only on the 18th started out
to deliver the frontal attack on the Despeña-Perros and the other
passes in front of La Carolina.