

  [119] At the New Year Gazan had 6,600 men present with the
  eagles, Rey 4,100. See Tables at the end of this volume.

Still more important was the fact that in the first days of December
the reinforcements from Germany had at last begun to cross the
Pyrenees, and were arriving in Navarre and Biscay in enormous
numbers. Two strong divisions, commanded by Loison and Reynier and
counting more than 20,000 bayonets, had already appeared, and the
head of the interminable column which followed them had reached
Bayonne. It was certain that at least 90,000 men were on the march,
to fill up the void in Old Castile which had been causing the King
and Soult so much trouble. The roads would soon be cleared, the
isolated garrisons relieved, and the communications with Madrid
made safe. The newly arrived generals had received orders to sweep
every valley on their southward march, and to disperse every band
of guerrilleros[120]. Another possible source of danger, which had
preoccupied the minds of Joseph and his Major-general after Ocaña,
had also been removed. The English had made no forward movement
towards the Tagus; they were reported to be still quiescent at
Badajoz, and rumours (which afterwards turned out to be correct)
had already reached the French head quarters, to the effect that
Wellington was just about to retire into Portugal. Moreover,
Milhaud’s expedition to Tarancon and Cuenca, and the excursions of
the flying-columns sent out from Madrid, had all proved successful.
The insurgents had been dispersed with ease, wherever they had been
met with.

  [120] See Orders for Loison (in Napoleon to Berthier of Dec.
  9), and for Reynier (in Napoleon to Berthier, Dec. 14), in the
  _Correspondance_. Reynier was superseded by Lagrange, and sent to
  command the 2nd Corps a little later.

Of all the reasons for delay which were valid on November 20th there
was now none left unremoved save the most important of all. The
Emperor had not yet made his intentions known; though pressed to
declare his will by every letter sent by his brother or by Soult,
he gave no answer as to a general plan of campaign. Several of his
dispatches had reached Madrid: they were full of details as to the
troops which he was sending across the Pyrenees, they contained some
advice as to finance, and some rebukes for the King concerning petty
matters of administration[121], but there was no permission, still
less any order, to invade Andalusia or Portugal; nor did Napoleon
deign to state that he was, or was not, coming to Spain in person.
It was only when Joseph received the first dispatch opening up the
matter of the divorce of Josephine[122], that he was able to guess
that, with such an affair on hand, his brother would not set out for
the Peninsula during the winter or the early spring.

  [121] The Emperor scolds his brother for not sending to Paris the
  flags taken at Ocaña, and for calling Sebastiani’s 3rd Division
  ‘the Polish division’ instead of ‘the division of the Grand Duchy
  of Warsaw!’