

It may be mentioned that Joseph had left behind him to garrison
Madrid the French division of the 4th Corps[128], and not Dessolles’
troops, who had been wont to occupy the capital during the earlier
operations. Both Dessolles’ and Joseph’s own reserves, his Royal
Guard and a strong brigade of his newly-raised Spanish army, joined
in the invasion. Since the German division of the 4th Corps was still
absent, escorting the prisoners of Ocaña, it resulted that Sebastiani
had with him only his Polish division, his cavalry, and some details
sufficient to muster up a total of just 10,000 men. His corps was
never properly reassembled during the whole of the rest of the war,
as some of the regiments which he now left behind never rejoined him
in Andalusia, but were left in garrison in New Castile till 1812, and
practically became part of the ‘Army of the Centre.’

  [128] With the exception of the 58th Regiment, which went on with
  Sebastiani to the front.

Besides the garrison of Madrid, Joseph left to cover his rear the
whole 2nd Corps, still under the provisional command of Heudelet,
which lay at Talavera and was charged to watch Albuquerque. If the
rumour of the departure of the English from Badajoz were true,
there would be no danger in this quarter. But Joseph was not yet
quite certain that Wellington had retired into Portugal. The only
serious preoccupation which vexed his mind, at the moment when he was
preparing to attack, was the idea that the English might still come
up by Truxillo and join Albuquerque in a raid on Madrid. Heudelet,
the constant purveyor of false information, did his best to scare his
master on January 13, by sending him a report that Wellington was
still at Badajoz with 23,000 men[129]. But later and more trustworthy
news from other quarters, showing that the English army had marched
off for Abrantes long before Christmas, at last set the King’s mind
at rest on this all-important topic.

  [129] Heudelet, writing from Talavera on Jan. 13, assured the
  King that he had certain information, by English deserters, that
  Wellington’s army, 16,000 foot and 7,000 cavalry, was at Merida,
  Badajoz, and Elvas on Dec. 31. As a matter of fact, the army had
  marched off between Dec. 9 and Dec. 20, and Wellington himself
  had retired into Portugal on Christmas Eve. On the day when
  Heudelet wrote he and his head quarters were at Vizeu, in the
  Beira.

There was nothing to be feared from the west when Wellington had
taken his departure. Albuquerque’s small force was powerless, and if
Del Parque moved down from the Sierra de Francia into the valley of
the Tagus, the 6th Corps could make a corresponding movement. Ney
had now returned to take command at Salamanca, and the confidence
of his troops, shaken somewhat by Marchand’s incapable leadership,
was now restored. Behind Ney and Kellermann were the innumerable
battalions of the new reinforcements from Germany, the head of whose
column had now reached Burgos. The King’s rear, therefore, was well
guarded when he began his great offensive movement against Andalusia.