

  [125] Soult writes plaintively to Berthier, from Madrid, on
  January 1, 1810: ‘Le Roi croit ne pouvoir différer davantage:
  ainsi il se met en mesure d’exécuter les dispositions générales
  de l’Empereur, lorsque Sa Majesté aura daigné les faire
  connaître; et il est vraisemblable qu’avant que la Sierra Morena
  soit passée, les ordres, qui out été demandés depuis plus d’un
  mois, seront parvenus.’ But the order never came.

Two plans were drawn up for the invasion. The first was more
cautious, and more consonant with the strict rules of strategy. The
second was bolder and promised more immediate results. According to
the first the King was to concentrate his main army in La Mancha, and
to threaten the passes, while two great flanking columns carried out
the preliminary conquest of Estremadura and Valencia. Mortier was to
march with the 5th and 2nd Corps upon Badajoz, to crush Albuquerque,
and to occupy the valley of the Guadiana. Simultaneously Suchet
was to make a push from Aragon into Valencia with the bulk of his
corps, while his place at Saragossa was to be taken by a large force
drawn from the newly-arrived reinforcements from France. Only when
Badajoz and Valencia had fallen, and Suchet and Mortier could advance
parallel with him on either flank, was the King to march against
Seville. The weak point of the scheme was that either Badajoz or
Valencia might make a long resistance; if their garrisons fought like
that of Gerona the central advance on Andalusia might be delayed for
an indefinite time.

The second plan, the one that was adopted, was to leave the 2nd
Corps alone to watch Albuquerque and Estremadura, to order Suchet
to advance against Valencia, but to strike straight at Seville,
without waiting for the completion of either the Estremaduran or the
Valencian operations. In the original draft for this campaign[126],
nearly the whole of the King’s army was to concentrate at Almaden
and Ciudad Real, and from thence to strike straight at Cordova, by
the difficult and little-used passes of the central Sierra Morena.
Meanwhile Sebastiani, with no more than a single infantry division
and Milhaud’s dragoons, was to demonstrate against the main group
of passes in front of La Carolina, along the line of the high-road
from Madrid, so as to distract the attention of the Spaniards from
the real point of attack. More than 50,000 men were to descend
suddenly on Cordova, for the whole of the 1st and 5th Corps,
Dessolles’ Reserve division, the King’s Guard, and Latour-Maubourg’s
dragoons, were to march in a mass by the unexpected route via
Almaden, Villanueva de la Jara, and Adamuz. The Spanish centre would
undoubtedly be broken, and it was probable that Cordova, Seville, and
Cadiz would be carried by the first rush, for Areizaga’s army would
be cut off from them and driven eastward towards Murcia.

  [126] It may be found set forth in full in Soult’s dispatch to
  Berthier of Jan. 1, 1810.

