

  [122] In a dispatch dated from the Trianon on Dec. 17.

By the middle of December Joseph had made up his mind that it would
be politic to attack Andalusia without delay. He had won over Soult
to his ideas--the Marshal having now abandoned the plan, which he had
urged so strongly in the autumn, that Lisbon not Seville should be
the objective of the next French advance. It is easy to understand
the King’s point of view--he wished rather to complete the conquest
of his own realm, by subduing its wealthiest and most populous
province, than to do his brother’s work in Portugal, where he had
no personal interest. It is less obvious why Soult concurred with
him--as a great strategist he should have envisaged the situation
from the military rather than the political point of view. Apparently
Joseph had won him over by giving him all that he asked, and treating
him with effusive courtesy: their old quarrels of the preceding
summer had been entirely forgotten. At any rate Soult had now become
the ardent advocate of the invasion of Andalusia, though--as his
predecessor Jourdan tersely puts it--‘the English army being now the
only organized force in a state to face the imperial troops, and its
presence in the Peninsula being the thing that sustained the Spanish
government and gave confidence to the Spanish people, I imagine that
we ought to have set ourselves to destroy that army, rather than to
have disseminated our troops in garrisoning the whole surface of
Spain[123].’ The same thought was in the Emperor’s mind when he wrote
in January--too late to stop the Andalusian expedition--that ‘the
only danger in Spain is the English army; the rest are partisans who
can never hold the field against us[124].’

  [123] Jourdan, _Mémoires_, p. 294.

  [124] Napoleon to Berthier, Jan. 31, 1810--giving directions
  which could not be carried out, because the invasion of Andalusia
  had begun ten days before the dispatch had been written.

On the 14th of December, 1809, Soult at last made a formal appeal,
in a dispatch to Berthier, for leave to commence the march on
Seville. ‘At no time since the Spanish War began,’ he wrote, ‘have
circumstances been so favourable for invading Andalusia, and it
is probable that such a movement would have the most advantageous
results. I have already informed your Excellency that preparations
would be made for this movement, while we waited for his Majesty to
deign to make known to us his supreme will.’ Soult adds that if only
Loison’s division of the reinforcements may be brought up to Burgos,
and a second division sent to Saragossa, in order to free Suchet for
field service, the invasion can be begun, as soon as the army in New
Castile has completed its equipment and received its drafts.

No direct reply was received to this dispatch, nor to several
subsequent communications, in which Soult and Joseph set forth the
arrangements which they were making, always subject to the Imperial
approval, for concentrating an army for the Andalusian expedition.
Strange as it may appear, it was only in a letter written on January
31, 1810, when the King had already crossed the Sierra Morena, that
Napoleon vouchsafed a word concerning the all-important problem[125].
It is clear that he had ample time to have stopped it, if such
had been his will; the ultimate responsibility, therefore, lay
with him. But he refrained from ordering it, or from approving it,
thus reserving to himself all the possibilities of _ex-post-facto_
criticism. Since no prohibition came, Joseph made up his mind to
strike; it was natural that he should be fascinated by the idea
of conquering in person the one great province of Spain which
remained intact. A brilliant campaign, in which he would figure
as commander-in-chief as well as king, might at last convince the
Spaniards of his capacity. He was prepared to play the part of a
merciful and generous conqueror. At the worst the revenues of the
wealthy Andalusia would be a godsend to his depleted treasury.