

  [130] Viz. by the ‘morning states’ of January 15, in the French
  War Office, Sebastiani had: Polish Division, 4,809 men; 58th of
  the Line, 1,630 men; Milhaud’s Dragoons, 1,721 men; Perreymond’s
  Light Horse, 1,349 men; Artillery and Engineers, 569 men; or a
  total of 10,078 sabres and bayonets.

Next to Sebastiani in the French line was a column composed of
Girard’s division of the 5th Corps, the King’s Guards, and the
Spanish regiments in Joseph’s service[131]. It was nearly 14,000
strong, and advanced straight up the Madrid _chaussée_, aiming at
the Despeña-Perros and the Spanish centre. If the enemy should fight
well, and if the flanking movements should fail, this column would
have the hardest work before it: for, unlike the minor passes to east
and west, the Despeña-Perros becomes in its central length a narrow
and precipitous defile, easily capable of defence. The Spaniards had
run entrenchments across it, and had mined the road at more than
one point. But its fatal weakness lay in the fact that the by-paths
from the western passes descend into it to the rear of the point
where these obstructions had been placed. If they were seized by the
advancing French, the fortifications across the _chaussée_ would
prove a mere trap for the troops which held them.

  [131] Strength apparently: Girard, 7,040; Royal Guards, about
  2,500; Spaniards, about 2,000; Cavalry, about 1,500; Artillery,
  &c., 800.

Mortier, with Gazan’s division of the 5th Corps and Dessolles’
troops, about 15,000 strong, was told off to assail these flanking
defiles on the Spanish left[132]. The two passes are the Puerto del
Rey and the Puerto del Muradal. The former got its name from Alfonso
VIII, who in 1212 had turned the position of the Almohad Sultan
Mohammed-abu-Yakub by this route, and so forced him to the decisive
battle of Navas de Tolosa, a few miles to the rear. In 1810 it was a
tortuous and rough road, but practicable for artillery: the slopes
on either side of it, moreover, were not inaccessible to infantry.
A mile or two to its left, nearer the Despeña-Perros, was the still
rougher path of the Puerto del Muradal, which was practicable for
infantry but not for guns. Between this defile and the entrenchments
across the Madrid _chaussée_, the crest of the Sierra was accessible
to troops advancing in loose order and prepared for a stiff climb:
the Spanish engineers had therefore placed a large earthwork on its
culminating point, known as the Collado de Valdeazores. Giron’s
weak division of no more than 3,200 bayonets was entrusted with the
defence both of the Puerto del Rey and the Puerto del Muradal. Those
of Lacy and Zayas, about 5,000 in all, held the Despeña-Perros and
the entrenchments on each side of it. Areizaga lay behind them, with
a reserve of 1,000 men at most--having sent off Castejon and his
division to join Vigodet on the preceding night, he had no more with
him than his personal guard, the ‘Batallón del General’, and some
detached companies.