




SECTION XVIII: CHAPTER III

ANDALUSIA OVERRUN: CADIZ PRESERVED. JANUARY-FEBRUARY 1810


On the 19th of January, 1810, the unfortunate Areizaga began to
receive from all quarters dispatches which left him no doubt that
the fatal hour had arrived, and that the whole of his line, from
Villamanrique on the east to Almaden on the west, was about to be
assailed by the enemy. From every point on his front of 150 miles,
his subordinates sent him in reports to the effect that strong
hostile columns had come up, and had thrust in their outposts.
Indeed, Zerain, from his remote cantonment on the extreme left, had
announced that an overwhelming force, coming from the direction of
Ciudad Real, had beaten him out of the town of Almaden as early as
the 15th, and had compelled him to retire towards the south-west,
leaving the direct road to Cordova uncovered. This was, of course,
the corps of Victor, whose flanking movement was already threatening
to cut the line of communication between La Carolina and Seville.
But it would take some days for the 1st Corps to pass the rugged
defiles of the Sierra de Los Pedroches, which lie between Almaden
and the valley of the Guadalquivir. An even more pressing danger
seemed to be foreshadowed from the less-remote right of the Spanish
line, where Vigodet reported, from the pass of Villamanrique, that
he had been driven in to his final fighting position at Montizon, by
a French column marching up from Villanueva de los Infantes. In the
centre, the enemy had advanced to Santa Cruz de la Mudela, where the
roads to all the group of passes about the Despeña-Perros branch off,
but had not yet shown how many of them he intended to use. Areizaga
could not determine whether some of the French movements were mere
demonstrations, or whether every one of them portended a real attack
on the morrow. Zerain was too far off to be helped; but Vigodet’s
demands for assistance were so pressing that the Commander-in-Chief
sent off to his aid, on the night of the 19th, the one division
which he had hitherto kept in reserve at La Carolina, the 4,000
bayonets of Castejon. This left him only three divisions--those of
Zayas, Lacy, and Giron, not more than 9,000 men in all, to defend the
high-road to Madrid and the subsidiary passes on its immediate flank.

[Illustration: ANDALUSIA, to illustrate the Campaign of 1810.]

As a matter of fact, the appearance of the French advanced guards
implied a genuine attack at every possible point of access.
King Joseph had resolved to carry the whole of the defiles by a
simultaneous onslaught on the morning of the 20th. His policy seems
to have been one of very doubtful wisdom, for it would have been
as effective to pierce the Spanish line at one point as at four,
and he could have concentrated an overwhelming force, and have
been absolutely certain of success, if he had launched his main
body at one objective, while demonstrating against the rest. He
had preferred, however, to cut up his army into four columns, each
of which assailed a different pass. Sebastiani, on the extreme
French left, separated by a gap of twenty miles from the main
column, was the enemy who had driven in Vigodet at the opening of
the Villamanrique pass. He had with him the remains of his own 4th
Corps--of which such a large proportion had been left behind in New
Castile,--a body of about 10,000 men[130]. His orders were to force
the defile in his front, and to descend into the plain in the rear of
the Spanish centre, by way of Ubeda and Linares, so as to cut off the
enemy’s retreat towards Murcia, and to envelop him if he should hold
the Despeña-Perros too long.