

  [117] For all these details see Soult’s dispatches to the
  Minister of War at Paris, dated Nov. 21 and Nov. 24, from
  Aranjuez and Madrid. Perreymond had received the cavalry brigade
  of the 4th Corps when Paris fell in action.

In the dispatch which detailed to the Minister of War at Paris this
disposition of the army, Soult explained his reasons for holding
back. It was a more pressing necessity to restore order in the
provinces of the interior than to pursue the wrecks of Areizaga’s
force, which was so completely dispersed that no further danger
need be feared from it. Before undertaking any large general scheme
of operation, the King thought it best to consult his imperial
brother as to his wishes. It was rumoured that Napoleon himself
might appear on the scene within a few weeks, and it was certain
that the first columns of reinforcements from Germany, which might
prove to be the heralds of his approach, were just about to cross
the Bidassoa. Moreover, it would be prudent to discover what had
become of Albuquerque and of the English, before any great move to
the southward was made, as also to make an end of the army of Del
Parque, by means of the reinforcements which had just been sent to
Kellermann[118].

  [118] Soult to Clarke, Nov. 21: ‘Sa Majesté a pensé qu’il était
  inutile qu’elle s’engageât vers la Sierra Morena, à la poursuite
  des débris de l’armée de la Manche, qu’on ne pourra plus joindre,
  et qui se sauvent individuellement sur toutes les directions,
  d’autant plus que tout porte à croire qu’il y aura encore des
  mouvements sur la droite, et qu’il convient de se mettre en
  mesure de repousser les nouveaux corps [Albuquerque, Del Parque,
  and the English] qui pourraient se présenter pour la forcer. Il
  est aussi pressant de prendre des dispositions pour rétablir
  l’ordre et la tranquillité dans les provinces de l’intérieur, et
  pour assurer la liberté des communications. Après la bataille
  d’Ocaña le roi a aussi en vue de se mettre en mesure d’attendre
  que Sa Majesté L’Empereur ait jugé à propos de faire connaître
  ses intentions sur les opérations ultérieures qui devront être
  faites.’ The entirely false supposition that Albuquerque and the
  English were on the move was, as Soult afterwards explained, due
  to a dispatch received from Heudelet at Talavera, who sent in an
  alarming report that Wellington was expected at Truxillo in a few
  days. As to the idea that Del Parque might join Albuquerque, the
  Junta had actually given him an order to do so (see page 97), but
  he had ignored it, and marched on Salamanca.

Within three weeks the situation had changed, and many of the reasons
which had induced the King and Soult to adopt a waiting policy had
disappeared. On November 28th, as we have already seen, Kellermann
routed Del Parque at Alba de Tormes, though he had not yet received
the succours which Gazan was bringing up to his aid. The Army of the
Left being no longer a source of danger, Kellermann not only sent
orders to Gazan--who had reached Segovia--to return to New Castile,
since he was no longer wanted in the North, but presently sent back
to the King Rey’s brigade of Dessolles’ division which had been lent
him early in November. Thus 10,000 men who had been detached came
back under the King’s control[119], and were once more available for
offensive operations.