

The obvious ineptitude which the Government had shown, and the
imminent peril to which Seville was exposed, gave another chance
to the local conspirators, who had already twice prepared a
_pronunciamento_ against the Junta. On the 22nd riots broke out, and
demagogues were preaching at every street corner the necessity for
deposing these incapable rulers, and substituting for them a regency
of true patriots, and a Committee of Public Safety, which should
show the energy in which the Junta had been so lacking. The people
clamoured at the doors of the Arsenal, asking for muskets and cannon,
they mustered outside the prisons where Palafox, Montijo, and other
chiefs who had been arrested for their earlier plots, were still
confined. Many of the members of the Junta left Seville on this and
the following day, on the plausible pretext that it was necessary for
them to betake themselves to Cadiz--which, by a decree of Jan. 13,
had been designated as the meeting-place of the approaching National
Cortes--in order to make preparations for the meeting of that august
assembly. Indeed, the Junta had been directed to meet at Cadiz on
February 1 for that purpose. The news that King Joseph had forced the
passes of the Sierra Morena, which came to hand early on the 22nd,
sufficed to make an end of any shadow of power which the Junta still
possessed. Next day those members who had hitherto stuck to their
post, and the Ministers, left the town with elaborately contrived
secrecy. Seville fell into the hands of the mob, who, led by a
Capuchin friar riding on a mule and brandishing a crucifix, burst
open the prisons and the Arsenal, armed themselves, and nominated
a new ‘Supreme National Junta.’ Its executive was to be composed
of Palafox and Montijo, the Marquis of La Romana, General Eguia,
and Francisco Saavedra, an aged and respectable person, who had
been president of the old Junta of Seville, the original committee
which had been suppressed by the Central Junta. He is said to have
been used as a mere tool by Palafox and Montijo, and to have been
disgusted by their acts. This new, and obviously illegal, Government
issued decrees stigmatizing the fugitive ‘Centralists’ as cowards
and traitors, and claiming authority not only over Andalusia, but
over all Spain. They ordered the calling out of the levy _en masse_,
and issued commissions displacing generals and governors in all the
provinces. One of these documents declared Del Parque removed from
the command of the Army of the Left, and named La Romana as his
successor. The marquis, glad to escape from the tumult, rode off
at once, presented himself at the head quarters of the Castilian
army, and was recognized without difficulty as its chief--though his
authority might well have been contested if any general had chosen to
take up the cause of the discredited Central Junta.

But that unhappy body had no longer a single friend: its members
were mobbed and arrested on their flight from Seville to Cadiz; its
President the Archbishop of Laodicea, its Vice-President the Conde
de Altamira, and the War Minister Cornel were seized at Xeres by a
frantic mob, and would have been murdered, if General Castaños, whom
the Junta had treated so badly in December 1808, had not arrived
in time to save their lives. Twenty-three members reached Cadiz,
and there, by a proclamation dated January 29th, abdicated their
authority, and nominated a Regency, to which they resigned their
power, and the duty of receiving and welcoming the expected Cortes.
The Regents were Castaños, the Bishop of Orense, Admiral Escaño,
Saavedra--the president of the new and illegal Junta at Seville--and
Fernandez de Leon, an American Treasury-official, who was to
represent the Colonies[140]. It will be noted that the nominators
were wise enough to refrain from appointing any of their own number
to serve in the Regency.