

On the day following their entry into Seville, Joseph and Soult
directed Victor to march in pursuit of Albuquerque, and to take
possession of Cadiz. So complete had been the _débâcle_ of the
Spanish armies since the Andalusian campaign began, that it seems
to have been supposed that the Army of Estremadura would offer no
serious resistance, even if it should succeed in throwing itself into
Cadiz before it was overtaken. Marching with laudable expedition, the
Duke of Belluno covered the eighty-three miles between Seville and
Cadiz in four days, and presented himself in front of the place on
the evening of February 5th. But Albuquerque, unmolested in his march
from Utrera, had arrived on the 3rd, bringing with him not only his
own troops and those of Copons, but several recruit-battalions picked
up at Xeres, Lebrija, San Lucar, and Puerto Santa Maria, where they
had been organizing. He had some 12,000 men in all, not counting the
civic militia of Cadiz, which had hitherto been its sole garrison.

Cadiz, in the days when the practicable range of the heaviest
artillery did not exceed 2,500 yards, was one of the strongest places
in the world. The town lies on the extreme point of a long sandy
peninsula, which runs out into the sea from the Isla de Leon, a large
island separated from the mainland of Andalusia by the salt-water
channel of the Rio Santi Petri, an arm of the sea varying from 300 to
400 yards in breadth, and flowing through marshes which make access
to its banks very difficult. The Isla, protected by this enormous
wet ditch, has a front towards the continent of about seven miles,
from the naval arsenal of La Carraca at its north end to the Castle
of Santi Petri at its south. Batteries had already been thrown up
at all the commanding points, and Albuquerque had broken the only
bridge, that of Zuazo, which crossed the marsh and the Rio. It would
be impossible to pass the channel save by collecting great quantities
of boats, and these would have to move under artillery fire. Venegas,
the military governor of Cadiz, had already ordered all the vessels,
small and great, of the villages round the bay to be destroyed or
brought across to the city. Moreover, there were a score of gunboats
in the channel, manned from the Spanish fleet, which could be used
to oppose any attempt to cross the Rio. Indeed, naval assistance to
any amount was available for the defence of Cadiz: there were a dozen
Spanish and four English line-of-battle ships in the harbour. All
through the three long years while the French lay in front of the
Isla, no attempt was ever made to throw a force in boats across the
channel: the venture seemed too hazardous.

If, however, Victor had, by some expedient, succeeded in crossing
the Rio, there were two lines of defence behind it, of far greater
strength than that formed by this outer ditch of the Cadiz works.
The triangular Isla de Leon forms with its apex a long sand-spit,
which projects for four miles into the Atlantic. Half way along it
the breadth of the spit is contracted to no more than 200 yards,
and here there was a continuous entrenchment from water to water,
called the Cortadura, or the battery of San Fernando, armed with many
heavy guns. Supposing this isthmus to have been passed, there lies,
two miles further along the sand-spit, the outer enceinte of Cadiz
itself, with a front of not more than 400 yards in breadth, and deep
water on either side.