

  [142] Dessolles’ division had been left behind at Cordova and
  Andujar, to garrison Upper Andalusia, and to extend a helping
  hand to Sebastiani, if he should meet with any resistance in his
  conquest of the kingdom of Granada.

On the afternoon of February 1, Joseph entered Seville in triumph at
the head of his Guard, and lodged himself in the Alcazar, the old
residence of the Kings of Spain. He was welcomed by a deputation
which comprised some persons of mark. The impression made on the
citizens by the conduct of the two Juntas, and the turbulence of
the mob which had ruled during the last eight days, had been so
deplorable that a considerable number of the Sevillians despaired of
the national cause, and rushed to acknowledge the usurper. Indeed,
there were more ‘Josefinos’ found in this city than in any other
corner of Spain. The ‘intrusive king’ released a number of political
prisoners, whom the last Junta had arrested on suspicion of treason.
Apparently this suspicion had been well grounded, as many of the
captives, headed by the Swiss generals Preux and Reding[143], did
homage to Joseph, and accepted office under him.

  [143] Younger brother of the victor of Baylen.

Encouraged by these defections to his cause, and by the fact that
deputations had presented themselves from Cordova and Jaen to bespeak
his protection, Joseph hastened to publish an absurd address to his
army, couched in the magniloquent style which all French writers of
proclamations at this time were wont to borrow from their Emperor.
‘The barriers placed by Nature between the North and the South of
Spain have fallen. You have met with friends only beyond the Sierra
Morena. Jaen, Cordova, Seville have flung open their gates.... The
King of Spain desires that between the Pillars of Hercules a third
pillar shall arise, to recall to posterity, and to the navigators of
both the new and the old world, the memory of the officers and men of
that French army which drove back the English, saved thirty thousand
Spaniards, pacified the ancient Baetica, and regained for France her
natural allies.’ The rather puzzling passage concerning the ‘thirty
thousand Spaniards saved’ refers to the prisoners of Ocaña and the
Sierra Morena, whom the French, according to the King, ‘recognized as
brethren led astray by the common enemy. You spared them, and I have
received them as my children.’

Some elation in the King’s language was, perhaps, pardonable at the
moment. The moral effect of the surrender of Seville was considerable
in France, England, and the rest of Europe, though less in Spain than
elsewhere. The tangible trophies of the conquest were enormous--the
place had been the central arsenal of Spain, and the amount of
artillery, ammunition, and warlike equipment captured was very
large. The cannon-foundry and other military factories were taken
over in excellent condition, and kept the French army of Andalusia
well supplied during the three years of its existence. Tobacco to
the value, as it was said, of £1,000,000 was found in the great
central magazine, and quinine, quicksilver, and other commodities of
government monopoly to a considerable additional sum. Nothing had
been done, since the news of the passage of the Sierra Morena had
arrived, to destroy or remove all this valuable state property.