

Cadiz had been captured more than once in earlier wars, but always by
an enemy who could attack from the sea. Neither the Isla de Leon nor
the San Fernando line could be held against an attack supported by a
fleet which came close in shore, and battered the works from flank
and rear, or landed troops behind them. The sea, it may be remarked,
is four fathoms deep to within a short distance (about 300 yards) of
the shore, all along the south front of the Isla and the Isthmus,
so that there was nothing to prevent a fleet coming close to the
works. But against any naval attack Cadiz was, in 1810, absolutely
secured by the predominance of the English fleet. There was no armed
French vessel nearer than Bayonne or Barcelona, nor any possibility
of bringing one round. All that was done by the besiegers in a three
years’ leaguer was to build some gunboats in the northern inlets of
the bay, and these they never dared to bring out into the open water.

The real danger to Cadiz lay not from the sea side, nor on the Isla
front, but from the inner side of the harbour and the east. Here a
long spit of land runs out from beside the town of Puerto Real in
the direction of Cadiz. It is called the Trocadero, from a village
situated on its south-eastern side. At its extreme point is a fort
named San José, while another fort, named San Luis, lies alongside
of the other on a low mud-island. In advance of both, built right in
the marsh, and surrounded by water at high-tide, was a third called
Matagorda. These three forts were the outer defences of the harbour
against a naval attack, and could cross fires with the town batteries
and a castle called Puntales, which lies on the easternmost point
of the isthmus, a mile from the battery of San Fernando. Matagorda
is only 1,200 yards from Puntales, and 3,000 yards from the eastern
point of the city of Cadiz. If the French took possession of it, and
of the neighbouring San José and San Luis, they could bombard the
Puntales castle and all the neighbouring section of the Isthmus,
to the grave danger and discomfort of all who had to pass between
the city and the Isla de Leon. They would also be able to annoy
ships lying in all the eastern reaches of the great harbour. But
before Victor arrived in front of Cadiz, San José, San Luis, and
Matagorda were blown up, with the leave of the governor Venegas, by a
detachment of seamen from the British fleet. There could, therefore,
be no trouble from this direction, unless the enemy succeeded in
restoring and rearming the three forts,--no easy task under the fire
of the Puntales castle and the fleet. It was not till some months
had passed that the struggle began for these ruined works, the only
points from which the defence could be seriously incommoded.

On his first arrival Victor summoned the town, and received a prompt
and angry answer of refusal from the governor and the local Junta.
The marshal inspected the city’s outer defences, and was forced to
report to the King at Seville that it seemed that nothing could
be done against the place till he had brought up heavy artillery,
and built himself boats. Joseph, unwilling to believe anything
that contradicted the hopes of complete triumph that he had been
nourishing ever since the passage of the Sierra Morena, came up to
Puerto Santa Maria, on the bay of Cadiz, looked at the situation,
did not find it reassuring, and wrote to his imperial brother to
propose that he should send out his Toulon fleet to attack the place
on the sea side[144]. Napoleon, still smarting under the memory of
how Admiral Martin had destroyed an important section of that fleet
in the preceding October, ignored this proposal. He did not forget,
though his brother had apparently done so, the fact that the British
Mediterranean fleet was still in existence.