

Accordingly Albuquerque, instead of returning northward into the
Estremaduran mountains, moved a stage further south, to El Pedroso,
on the road from Guadalcanal to Seville, and sent orders to Copons
and Zerain to join him with their small divisions. Two days later
he received the order which should have been sent him on the 18th,
instead of the insane directions that were actually given; by it
he was directed to march on Seville with all speed. On the 23rd,
therefore, he arrived at the ferry of Cantillana, twenty miles
north of Seville: here he received news that his artillery and its
escort had safely completed its round, and were about to cross the
Guadalquivir at Rinconada, fifteen miles to the south. At Cantillana,
however, the Duke got the last dispatch which the Central Junta ever
issued; it was dated on the 23rd, a few hours before the members
dispersed and fled. By this he was directed to march not on Seville
but on Cordova, which at the moment the document came to hand--the
morning of the 24th--had just been occupied by Victor.

That day Albuquerque crossed the Guadalquivir and occupied Carmona,
where he was joined by his artillery, and by part of Copons’
division, but not (apparently) by Zerain’s, which had retired into
Seville. He had now about 10,000 men, of whom 1,000 were horsemen,
and 20 guns. From Carmona he threw out a cavalry screen on all
sides: his vedettes on the 27th struck French cavalry at Ecija,
and were driven in; they reported that the enemy was advancing
in enormous force from Cordova--as was indeed the case. Meanwhile
news had come up from Seville that the Junta had fled on the night
of the 23rd-24th, that anarchy reigned in the city, and that a new
revolutionary government had been installed. There was no longer any
legitimate executive from which orders could be received. Albuquerque
had to make up his mind whether he would retire into Seville, and
put himself at the disposition of the mob and its leaders, or
whether he should seek some safer base of operations. Without a
moment’s hesitation he resolved to leave the Andalusian capital to
itself, and to retire on Cadiz, which he knew to be ungarrisoned,
yet to be absolutely impregnable if it were properly held. This wise
resolution, it may be said without hesitation, saved the cause of
Spain in the south. If Cadiz had been left unoccupied there would
have been no further resistance in Andalusia.

But we must return to the operations of the French. On the 25th
Victor had advanced from Cordova, taking the direct road to Seville
via La Carlota and Ecija, while Mortier and the Royal Guard followed
him at short intervals. The Duke of Belluno occupied Ecija on the
27th and Carmona on the 28th. On these two days his advanced guard
got into contact with Albuquerque’s cavalry screen, and learnt from
prisoners that the Army of Estremadura, whose presence in Andalusia
thus became known, was in front of them[137]. On reaching Carmona
Victor obtained the still more important news that Albuquerque, after
staying in that place for two days, had not retired into Seville,
as might have been expected, but had marched southward to Utrera on
the road to Cadiz, leaving the greater city uncovered. On the night
of the 29th the leading division of Victor’s corps, the dragoons of
Latour-Maubourg, appeared in front of Seville, and reported that
works were being hastily thrown up around it on all sides[138], and
that they had been fired on by masses of armed irregulars at every
point where they had pushed forward vedettes towards its suburbs[139].