

  [136] There was a considerable controversy among French military
  writers as to whether the omission to march on Cadiz was the
  fault of Soult or of the King. The authors of _Victoires et
  Conquêtes_, having put all the blame on the latter (vol. xx. page
  7), his friends hastened to reply. His aide-de-camp Bigarré,
  who was present with him at the time, explicitly says in his
  autobiography (pp. 265-6) that the King raised the point, but
  was talked down by Soult and Dessolles. Miot de Melito (ii. 385)
  bears witness to the same effect, saying that he heard Soult
  clinch his argument by crying ‘Qu’on me réponde de Séville, moi
  je réponds de Cadix.’ Both say that the final decision was made
  at Carmona. See also Ducasse’s _Correspondance du roi Joseph_,
  vii. 142-3, and x. pp. 395-6, where the same story is given by
  the King himself.

Albuquerque’s operations, which ultimately turned out to be the
most important section of the Andalusian campaign, need a word of
explanation. It will be remembered that, early in January, he had
assembled, at Don Benito and Medellin, the small field-force that he
could command, after providing the garrison of Badajoz and leaving a
detachment above Almaraz to watch the French 2nd Corps. It did not
amount to more than 8,000 men, of which some 1,000 were cavalry. His
position at Don Benito was intended to protect the flank of Zerain
and Copons, who lay to his right, covering the passes that lead from
Almaden on to Cordova. On January 15th he received from Zerain the
news that he was about to be attacked at Almaden by a French column
of at least 20,000 men. The Duke promptly began to march eastward to
join his colleague, and reached Campanario on January 16th. Here he
was met by the information that Zerain had been driven out of Almaden
on the preceding day, and had drawn back by Benalcazar and Hinojosa
on to the Seville road. Copons from Pozo Blanco was retiring in the
same direction. The Duke thereupon concluded that his duty was to
fall back by a route parallel to that of Victor’s advance, and to
draw nearer to Seville, strengthening himself as he approached that
city by Zerain’s and Copons’ small corps.

Accordingly he sent off three of his weakest battalions to strengthen
the garrison of Badajoz, which was very small at the moment, directed
his artillery (with a cavalry escort) to take the good but circuitous
high-road to Seville by Merida, Los Santos, and Santa Olalla, and
started off across the mountains with his infantry and 500 horse.
Marching very rapidly, though the roads were bad and the days short,
he moved by Zalamea and Maguilla to Guadalcanal, on the borders
of Andalusia, which he reached on January 18th. Here he received
from the Central Junta an absurd order, apparently based on the
idea that he was still at Campanario, which bade him stop Victor’s
advance, by falling on his flank and rear by the road to Agudo and
Almaden. But since the marshal had seized Almaden on the 15th, and
was known to have moved southward from thence, it was clear that he
must now be more than half-way to Cordova: if the Army of Estremadura
plunged back into the mountains to seek Agudo and Almaden, it would
only reach them on the 22nd or 23rd, and Victor would be at the
gates of Cordova on the 21st. The Junta’s order was so hopelessly
impracticable that the Duke took upon himself to disobey it, and
wrote in reply that he should move so as to place himself between
Victor and Seville, and would cover the Andalusian capital ‘so far as
was possible with the small force at his disposition.’