

  [140] After a very short tenure of office Fernandez de Leon was
  superseded by Lardizabal, another American.

Meanwhile, the duty of resisting the first shock of the French
advance fell not on the Regency, but on the Revolutionary Government
which had installed itself in power at Seville. These usurpers proved
themselves quite as incapable as the men whom they had superseded.
When once in possession of power, Palafox and his friends had to
count up their resources: they had at their disposal an armed mob
of 20,000 men, and a mere handful of regular troops, consisting of
the regiments which had served as the guards of the late Junta, and
four or five isolated battalions from the division of Zerain, which
had finally sought refuge in Seville. These troops seem to have been
about 4,000 strong at the most[141]. There was an immense quantity
of artillery from the arsenal; it had been dragged out to line the
new earthworks, on which the populace was busily engaged, but not two
hundred trained gunners existed to man the batteries. It was hoped
that Albuquerque’s Estremaduran army would come to their aid, but--as
we have already seen--the Duke deliberately refused to acknowledge
the authority of the Seville Junta, and, instead of falling back upon
the city, marched southwards to Utrera on the Cadiz road, leaving the
great _chaussée_ Ecija-Carmona-Seville open to the French.

  [141] It is difficult to make out what precisely were the
  battalions in Seville on January 23-29. But they certainly
  included a battalion of the 1st Walloon Guards [the Junta’s old
  guard], with 1st and 2nd of España and Barbastro from Zerain’s
  division. It is almost certain that most of Zerain’s other
  battalions were with these three.

On the 28th, the leaders of the Junta having taken stock of their
position, and discovered its danger (for the lines which the people
had thrown up would have required 50,000 men to man them, and not
half that force was forthcoming even if every rioter armed with
a musket was counted), copied in the most ignominious fashion
the prudence or cowardice of the Central Junta, which they had
so fiercely denounced five days before. Under the cover of the
night Eguia, Montijo, Saavedra, and Palafox absconded from Seville
without taking leave of their followers. Saavedra fled to Cadiz,
where it is surprising to find that he was made a member of the new
Regency, Palafox to Albuquerque’s camp, Montijo to the southern
mountains, where (as he announced) he was intending to collect an
army of succour for Seville. When, therefore, on the next evening
Latour-Maubourg’s dragoons appeared before the entrenchments of the
city, there was no longer any responsible government to turn the
ardour of the multitude to account. Nevertheless, mobs, headed by
frantic friars, ran to the entrenchments, and discharged musketry and
cannon-shot at every French vedette that showed itself.

On the afternoon of the 30th, Victor appeared to reinforce
Latour-Maubourg’s cavalry, bringing with him the bulk of the
infantry of the 1st Corps. The King, Soult, and Mortier were close
behind[142]. On this day it had been settled at a Council-of-War
held at Carmona that the whole of the army should march on Seville,
leaving Cadiz alone for the present, and detaching only a brigade of
cavalry to pursue the army of Albuquerque. On the next morning Victor
received assurances, from persons who had escaped from the city,
that it was doubtful whether he would be opposed, since the mob was
panic-stricken at the flight of its leaders, and the senior military
officers were convinced that resistance was impossible. Certain that
the defence would be feeble, if any were offered, Soult gave orders
that the 1st Corps should storm the lines on February 1st. But no
military operations were necessary: on the evening of January 31st
the corporation of Seville had sent out a deputation to negotiate for
surrender. They offered to admit the enemy, if they were guaranteed
security of life and property for all who should submit, and a
promise that no extraordinary war-contribution should be levied on
their city. To this the King, who was anxious to enter the place
as a pacific conqueror, without storm or bloodshed, gave an eager
consent. While the civil authorities were treating with Victor, the
small body of regular troops in Seville, under the Visconde de Gand,
quietly left the place by the bridge leading to the western side of
the Guadalquivir, and retreated in haste toward the Condado de Niebla
and the borders of Portugal.