

  [144] ‘Sire, il paraît que Cadix veut se défendre. Nous verrons
  dans quelques jours ce qu’elle fera lorsque nous aurons quelques
  batteries montées. Si votre Majesté pouvait disposer de l’escadre
  de Toulon, l’occasion pourrait être bonne.’ Joseph to Napoleon,
  Sta. Maria, Feb. 18.

Thus the position in front of Cadiz assumed the shape which it was to
maintain for months, and even for years. Victor’s corps could provide
enough men to observe the whole shore of the bay, and to blockade
the garrison. But the Spaniards recovered their courage when they
saw the enemy reduced to inactivity, and began ere long to receive
reinforcements. The first to arrive were 3,000 of the regular troops
which had been at Seville. This corps, under the Visconde de Gand,
had escaped westward after the capitulation, and, though pursued
by a brigade of Mortier’s corps, reached Ayamonte, at the mouth of
the Guadiana, and there took ship for Cadiz. Somewhat later there
arrived some troops sent by Wellington. The Spaniards in their day of
disaster had forgotten their old jealousy about Cadiz, and asked for
aid. Wellington, though loath to spare a man from Portugal, sent them
in the early days of February three British[145] and two Portuguese
battalions from Lisbon, under General William Stewart. So promptly
were these troops shipped and landed, that they arrived at Cadiz
between the 10th and the 15th of February, to the number of about
3,500 bayonets[146]. Thus the town was placed in security from any
_coup de main_ on Victor’s part.

  [145] 79th, 2nd batt. 87th, and 94th regiments, and the 20th
  Portuguese line regiment.

  [146] See Wellington to Bart. Frère and General Stewart, from
  Torres Vedras, Feb. 5th, and Vizeu, Feb. 27, 1810.

[Illustration: CADIZ AND ITS ENVIRONS.]

The internal situation in Cadiz, however, left much to be desired.
The town had elected a local Junta of defence, of which the governor
Venegas was made President, and this body had frequent disputes
with the new Regency, nominated by the Central Junta at the time
of its abdication, and also with Albuquerque, whom Venegas did not
wish to recognize as his hierarchical superior. The local body could
make a fair show of objections to recognizing the legitimacy of the
Regency: the old Central Junta itself had a doubtful origin, and the
government nominated by those of its members who had taken refuge in
Cadiz could not claim a clear title. But to raise the point at this
moment of crisis was factious and unpatriotic, and the conduct of the
local Junta became merely absurd when it tried to arrogate to itself
authority extending outside its own city, and to issue orders to
the outlying provinces, or the colonies of America. Still worse, it
refused to issue clothing and footgear to Albuquerque’s army, whose
equipment had been worn out by the long march from Estremadura, or
to subsidize the military hospitals, though it had a considerable
stock both of money and of military stores at its disposition. At the
end of February the Regency nominated Venegas Viceroy of Mexico, and
having bought him off with this splendid piece of preferment, made
Albuquerque his successor in the governorship of Cadiz. But even thus
they did not succeed in getting proper control over the city, for the
Junta refused to allow the Duke to place his head quarters within the
walls, or to issue orders to the civic militia. A _modus vivendi_
was only reached when the Regents made an ignominious pact with the
local oligarchy, by which the latter, in return for recognizing their
legitimate authority, and undertaking to pay and feed the garrison,
were granted the control of the port-revenues and other royal taxes
of Cadiz, as well as of all the subsidies arriving from America. How
the functions of government became still further complicated, when
the members of the long-expected Cortes began to arrive, and to claim
their rights as the sole legitimate representatives of the nation,
must be told in another chapter[147].