

Soult and King Joseph, therefore, had leisure to plan out the
remainder of their campaign without any disturbance from the enemy.
On the 25th[135] they resolved to detach Sebastiani and his 10,000
men for the conquest of Granada, to leave Dessolles’ division at
Cordova and Andujar, but to march on Seville in a single mass with
the remaining 50,000 sabres and bayonets of the Army of Andalusia.
The desire to seize the capital from which the Junta had so long
defied him, seems to have mastered every other idea in the mind of
the intrusive King. The rebel government should be captured, or at
least forced to take refuge in Portugal or the sea. Then at last
the provinces would submit, the regular armies would lay down their
arms, the guerrillero bands would disperse to their homes, and he
might reign as a real king, not as the mere tool of his imperious
brother. The capture of Seville would be the last act but one of
the drama: after that he would become the national monarch of a
submissive people, and carry out all the schemes of vague benevolence
on which his mind was wont to dwell in his more hopeful hours. That
the resistance would continue, even if Seville were his own and the
Junta were scattered and discredited, he did not dream. And Seville,
he knew, must fall; to defend it there could be, as he concluded,
nothing but a half-armed mob, backed by the few thousand dispirited
soldiers who had fled before Victor from the western section of
the Sierra Morena. Even if the rebel capital made itself a second
Saragossa, he had at his disposal an army double the strength of that
which had reduced the obstinate Aragonese city.

  [135] For details of their plans see the dispatch of Soult to
  Berthier, from Andujar under the date of that day.

In subsequent years critics, wise after the event, never tired of
declaiming against the policy which Joseph and Soult approved on
January 25, 1810. It was easy in 1811 or 1812 to point out that a
division or two might have been spared from the victorious army to
execute a march upon Cadiz, while the main force was dealing with
Seville. The island-fortress, which was to defy the French during
the next three years, might have been caught while it was still
ungarrisoned and panic-stricken, if only the invaders had detached
a column from Carmona, where the road from Cordova bifurcates to
Seville on the right and Cadiz on the left. It is certain that,
if any suggestion to that effect was made at the time, Soult,
Mortier, and the other generals present at the council of war passed
it over[136]. The fact was that Seville loomed large before the
imaginations of them all: Cadiz seemed but a secondary affair at
the moment. It appeared probable that the whole of the scattered
forces of the enemy would mass themselves to defend the insurgent
capital. On January 25th, when the original plan was drawn up, no one
realized that there was a Spanish army approaching, whose presence
in Andalusia had not yet become known, or that the general of that
army would deliberately leave Seville to its fate, as incapable of
defence and doomed to destruction, and hasten by forced marches to
throw himself into the island-city which was destined to become the
new capital of insurgent Spain. Unable to foresee such a development,
Joseph wrote to his brother on January 27 that Seville would probably
submit without fighting, and that he would then enter Cadiz ‘_sans
coup férir_.’