

  [137] See Soult to Berthier, from Carmona, Jan. 31.

  [138] Soult, in his dispatch of Jan. 31, says that the advanced
  guard of the 1st Corps appeared before Seville _hier au soir_,
  i. e. on the 30th. But the Spanish authorities give the evening
  of the 29th as the true date, and seem to be correct. Possibly
  Soult is speaking of the first solid force of infantry, and
  does not count the cavalry as a real advanced guard, but only
  as a reconnoitring force. As Latour-Maubourg was at Carmona on
  the 28th, it seems certain that he must have reached Seville
  (eighteen miles only from Carmona) on the 29th, not the 30th.

  [139] Napier (ii. 298) seems unjust to the arrangements of the
  King and Soult when he writes: ‘From Andujar to Seville is only
  100 miles, and the French took ten days to traverse them, a
  tardiness for which there appears no adequate cause.’ He then
  attributes it to King Joseph’s wish to make spectacular entries,
  and to display his benevolence to the Andalusian towns. But the
  facts are wrong. Joseph reached Andujar late on Jan. 22; Victor’s
  cavalry was in front of Seville on Jan. 29: this makes seven,
  not ten, days: and the distance by the direct road via Ecija and
  Carmona is not 100, but 130 miles. A rate of eighteen miles a day
  is no bad record for an army advancing through a hostile country,
  even if it is meeting with no actual resistance. And January days
  are short, with sunrise late and sunset early.

Seville was at this moment, and had been now for six days, in a state
of chaos. The Central Junta had absconded on the 23rd, taking along
with it both its Executive Committee and the Ministers of State.
The panic had begun on the 18th, when the news had come in that
Victor’s corps had thrust Zerain out of Almaden three days before,
and was marching on Cordova. It had grown worse two days later, when
Areizaga reported that another French army was marching against the
Despeña-Perros. The Junta published a proclamation on the 20th,
exhorting the Andalusians to have no fear, for Albuquerque had been
directed to fall on Victor’s flank, and Del Parque with the Army of
Castile was on the march to join him, so that the enemy would be
forced to turn back to guard himself. Such orders were indeed sent,
but any man of sense could see that they must arrive too late. If
Victor was at Almaden on the 15th, he might be at Cordova on the
21st: if King Joseph was at the foot of the passes on the 19th, he
might be across them on the 20th. What use, therefore, would be a
summons sent to Albuquerque in Estremadura, or to Del Parque in the
mountains between Bejar and Ciudad Rodrigo? The French would be
in the valley of the Guadalquivir long before Del Parque had even
received his orders to move. As a matter of fact, that general got
his dispatch on January 24, the day that Victor entered Cordova, and
even Albuquerque was informed of the Junta’s behests only on the
18th, when he reached Guadalcanal.