

[Illustration: CENTRAL PORTUGAL.]

There are four lines of further advance open to an invader who has
captured Almeida. The first, a march on Oporto via Pinhel and Lamego,
may be mentioned only to be dismissed from consideration. It is of
no use to an army which aims at Lisbon, and proposes to conquer
Portugal by a blow at its heart. Masséna, whose directions were to
drive the British into the sea in the shortest and most effective
fashion, could not have contemplated such a secondary object as the
capture of Oporto for a moment. There remain three other roads to be
investigated.

(1) The road north of the river Mondego, by Celorico, Vizeu, Bussaco,
and Coimbra. (2) The corresponding and parallel road south of the
Mondego, from Celorico by Chamusca, Maceira and Ponte de Murcella to
Coimbra. (3) The road which, striking south from Celorico, crosses
the headwaters of the Zezere, by Belmonte and Fundão, and then,
climbing the Serra de Moradal, descends to Castello Branco, and from
thence reaches Abrantes by the Sobreira Formosa. It may be remarked,
by the way, that nothing in all the geography of Portugal seems more
astonishing than that there should not be a fourth alternative road,
one down the long valley of the Zezere, which, running in a straight
line from Belmonte to Abrantes, looks on the map as if it ought to
be a main artery of communication, and seems to indicate the obvious
road to Lisbon from Almeida, since a straight line drawn between
these points would run along the river for some forty miles. But as a
matter of fact there was neither a first nor a second-rate road down
the Zezere: the only towns on its course, Covilhão and Belmonte, lie
hard by its sources, and its central reaches were almost uninhabited.
The only good line of communication running near it is a by-road or
duplication of the third route mentioned above, called the _Estrada
Nova_, which, leaving the upper Zezere at Belmonte, keeps high up
the side of the Serra de Moradal, and rejoins the Castello Branco
road at Sobreira Formosa. This route was much employed by Wellington
in later years, as a military road from north to south, usable even
when Castello Branco was threatened by the French. But in 1810 he
had ordered it to be rendered impassable, and this had been done by
making several long cuttings at points where the track passed along
precipices, the whole roadway being blown or shovelled down into
the gulf below[157]. The French were, of course, unaware of this,
and Masséna is said by his confidant Foy to have taken the _Estrada
Nova_ into serious consideration, and to have decided against it
because of the necessity for forcing the passage of the Zezere when
the defiles were passed, and for laying siege to Abrantes[158].
A far more practical objection was its extreme wildness: it runs
along an absolutely uninhabited mountain-side, and the neighbourhood
is destitute not only of food but of water for great sections of
its length. This Masséna ought to have known, if his Portuguese
advisers had been competent. Apparently he was wholly unaware of its
character, just as he was necessarily ignorant of the fact that his
prescient adversary had blasted away huge sections of it, so that it
was absolutely impassable for guns or wagons, as also that earthworks
had been carefully constructed to cover the point where it debouches
on to the Zezere.