

  [159] There were some others thrown up on the extreme lower
  course of the Zezere, by Barca Nova and Punhete, to guard against
  a possible but unlikely use of the Castello Branco road by the
  enemy.

  [160] Wellington to Hill (_Disp._, vi. p. 441), Sept. 15.

  [161] Wellington to Chas. Stuart, Sept. 18.

The French invasion was bound to commence with a preliminary
clearance of the outlying fortresses still in the hands of the
Spaniards. These to some extent protected the Portuguese frontier
in 1810, though they had been built with the express purpose, not
of protecting, but of threatening it, and had never before been
attacked by an enemy coming from the east. Only three of these
fortresses were of any importance--Astorga, Ciudad Rodrigo, and
Badajoz. The other strongholds of Spanish Estremadura, Alcantara
(which had stood a siege in the War of the Spanish Succession),
Albuquerque, Olivenza, were either not in a state of defence at all,
or were hopelessly antiquated, and little suited to face modern
artillery and modern siegecraft.

Astorga lies so far to the north that it might have been neglected
without much peril to the French scheme of invasion. But the Emperor
had ordered that it should be reduced before the great enterprise
began: it gave the Spanish army of Galicia a foothold in the plains
of Leon, from which it might operate against Masséna’s rear, if he
should pass it by. Its capture, too, was considered a matter of
small difficulty, for it was but a mediaeval walled town, to which
some hasty outworks had been added during the last year. It will be
remembered that when Moore passed that way in January 1809, Astorga
had been treated by both sides as an open town, and no attempt had
been made to garrison or defend it. Since then La Romana had repaired
its dilapidated enceinte, stockaded its suburbs, and armed it with
guns brought from Ferrol. As late as January 11, 1810, Napoleon
seems hardly aware of this fact: in a dispatch of that date he
orders Loison to make his head quarters there, evidently under the
impression that it is not held by the Spaniards, or at least that
it is a place which they will evacuate at the first appearance of a
serious attack[162]. It is only in March that he writes to Junot that
Astorga must be besieged and taken, in order to occupy the attention
of the Galicians and to thrust them back into their mountains[163].

  [162] _Nap. Corresp._, xx. p. 117. Napoleon to Berthier.

  [163] Ibid., p. 271.

Ciudad Rodrigo was a more serious business. It was a regular
fortress, though only one of the second class; its prestige, as the
only Spanish stronghold on the Portuguese frontier, was great. It
commands the whole southern stretch of the plains of Leon, being
the only place out of the control of an invader who is superior in
cavalry, and therefore master of the defenceless _Tierra de Campos_.
There was also a small Spanish army depending upon it, and clinging
to the skirts of the Sierra de Gata. This was the division of Martin
de la Carrera, which had been left behind when the greater part
of Del Parque’s Army of the Left marched down into Estremadura in
January 1810, in order to replace there the troops which had gone
off to the defence of Cadiz. It was clear that Ciudad Rodrigo must
be taken, and Martin de la Carrera brushed away or destroyed, before
any serious attempt to invade Portugal was begun. If the Emperor
thought that such a remote place as Astorga was worth his notice,
it was obvious that he would regard Ciudad Rodrigo as absolutely
indispensable to his designs. It was for its reduction that he gave
Masséna the great battering train of fifty heavy guns, with 2,500
artillerymen and sappers, which was assigned to him, independent of
the artillery of the three corps of the Army of Portugal.