




SECTION XIX

THE PORTUGUESE CAMPAIGN OF 1810.

THE PRELIMINARIES: JANUARY-AUGUST 1810




CHAPTER I

THE MILITARY GEOGRAPHY OF PORTUGAL


The continual existence of Portugal down to the present day in
face of the persistent hostility and immensely superior force of
its neighbour Spain seems at first sight to be one of the most
inexplicable phenomena in modern history. It appears all the more
astounding when we remember that the lesser kingdom was once
conquered, and held down for sixty years, by the greater power.
Few states have won back and maintained their independence in such
masterful fashion as did Portugal, in the long ‘War of Independence’
that followed the insurrection of 1640 under the house of Braganza.
But intense national spirit and heroic obstinacy on the part of the
smaller people are not sufficient to account for the survival of the
Portuguese kingdom as a separate entity. Its geography, which at the
first sight seems hopelessly unfavourable to its defence, turns out
on investigation to be eminently suitable for resistance against an
attack from the east. On a first glance at the map it appears as if
Portugal was composed of no more than the lower valleys of three
great Spanish rivers, the Douro, the Tagus, and the Guadiana, so
that the state which owns three-quarters of the course of each of
these streams has but to send down its armies from the uplands of
Leon and New Castile, to conquer the narrow land which lies about
their estuaries. But nothing can be more deceptive than the map, when
the Iberian Peninsula is in question. As we observed in our earlier
volume[150], the rivers of Spain and Portugal are not highways, or
lines of communication, but barriers--torrents sunk in gorges cut
deep below the level of the face of the land. The chief roads, with
few exceptions, avoid, instead of courting, the neighbourhood of
the great streams. The leading routes which descend from Spain into
Portugal in no case follow the lines of the Douro or the Tagus.
Though the coast-plains, which form the heart of the kingdom of
Portugal, its most wealthy and populous regions, lie about the mouths
of those rivers, it is not by descending their banks that conquest
or trade arrives most easily at its goal. As a matter of fact, Spain
and Portugal turn their backs upon each other: the smaller realm
looks out upon the sea; her strength and wealth lie upon the Atlantic
coast: the inland that touches Spain is rugged and unpeopled, in many
parts a mere waste of rock and heath. Nor, on the other hand, do
Leon and New Castile look towards Portugal: the real ports of Madrid
are Valencia and Alicante, not Lisbon, and that not from political
reasons, but simply because those are the points where the sea can
be reached with the minimum of mountain and desert to be passed
through. The way down from the central tableland of Spain to the
Mediterranean is less difficult than the way down to the Atlantic.
Hence comes the fact that the high-roads leading from Spain into
Portugal are so surprisingly few, and that the two main alternative
routes from Madrid to Lisbon run, the one much further north, the
other much further south, than might have been expected. There is not
now, and never has been, any straight road down the Tagus between
the two capitals, obvious though the line looks upon the map. The
two main gates of Portugal are at Almeida and Elvas; at Alcantara,
which appears the natural point of approach, there is but the most
miserable of posterns--as Junot discovered in November 1807, much to
his discomfiture. Marshal Berwick had made the same experience in
1705, during the War of the Spanish Succession[151].