

  [150] See vol. i. pp. 75, 76.

  [151] A student of the War of the Spanish Succession is always
  surprised to see how much fighting took place on fronts which
  were left severely alone by the English and French in 1809-12.

In the old wars between Spain and Portugal the whole land frontier of
the smaller kingdom was exposed to attacks from the larger. But the
circumstances of 1810 differed from those of 1705 or 1762 or 1801,
in that the subsidiary campaigns in the extreme north and south,
which had always accompanied the main clash along the frontiers of
Beira and Alemtejo, could not on this occasion take place. The French
were no longer in possession of Galicia, from which the Spaniards had
been wont to demonstrate against Oporto, nor, at the other extremity
of the line, had they a firm grip on Huelva, and the Condado de
Niebla, from which alone an attack could be directed against the
remote southern province of Algarve.

Portugal presents three sections of frontier to an invader coming
from the side of Spain. The northernmost, that from the mouth of the
Minho to Miranda-de-Douro, was not within the scope of operations
in 1810. It can only be approached from Galicia; that province was
not subdued, nor had the French any intention of dealing with it
till after they should have dealt with Portugal. An invasion of
the Tras-os-Montes and the Entre-Douro-e-Minho would have been an
objectless operation: they would fall of themselves if once Lisbon
were captured and the English expelled from the Peninsula. A move
against Oporto by some flanking division of the invading army might
have been conceivable, but such an attempt would be made, if made at
all, from the south of the Douro, through northern Beira, and not
through the mountains of the Tras-os-Montes.

There remain two other sections of the Portuguese frontier: the
one from the Douro to the Tagus, and the other from the Tagus to
the Guadiana. Both of these were accessible to the French in 1810,
since they were in possession alike of the plains of Leon and of La
Mancha, and of northern Andalusia. It was open to them to choose one
or the other front for attack, or to attack both at once. Lisbon
being the objective, it was clear that an attack on the northern or
Beira frontier possessed a paramount advantage over an attack on
the southern or Alemtejo frontier. A successful advance north of
the Tagus brings the invader directly to the gates of Lisbon; one
south of the Tagus brings him only to the heights of Almada, where
he is separated from the Portuguese capital by the broad estuary of
the Tagus. Napoleon’s power, like that of the devil in mediaeval
legends, ended at the edge of the salt water; and in face of the
naval strength which the English always maintained at Lisbon, a
victorious French army camped on the heights of Almada would be
almost as far from final success as when it started from Spain. The
1,900 yards of strait which protected the Portuguese capital could
not be crossed. The most that the invader could accomplish would
be to worry the ships in the port, and the lower quarters of the
city, by a distant bombardment, if he could bring up heavy guns from
Spain[152]. For nearly twenty miles inland from Lisbon the estuary of
the Tagus expands into a broad brackish lagoon four to eleven miles
broad, a complete protection against any attack from the east. Only
at Alhandra does this inland sea contract, and for some further miles
northward from that point the eastern bank of the Tagus is formed
by broad salt-marshes (_lezirias_) cut up by countless channels of
water, and practically inaccessible. It is only at Salvaterra, thirty
miles north of Lisbon, that the Tagus assumes its ordinary breadth,
and becomes an ordinary military obstacle. From that point upwards
an invader from the Andalusian side might endeavour to cross it,
and it presents no more difficulties than any other broad river.
But, though even Rhines and Danubes may be passed in the face of
an enemy, the operation is not one which a prudent general courts,
and the Tagus is broad, absolutely bridgeless, and fickle in the
extreme in its alternations of high and low water. To fight one’s
way from the valley of the Guadiana in order to meet such a problem
at the end does not seem inviting. And even if the Tagus is passed,
there are still thirty miles of road, including some formidable
defensive positions, between the invader and Lisbon[153]. Yet there
was one contingency under which an advance on the left bank of the
river might be advantageous to the invader, and so possible was this
contingency that Wellington from the very first had declared that
he thought it probable that the French would move troops in that
direction. If the Anglo-Portuguese army were drawn away to the Beira
frontier, between Tagus and Douro, in order to resist a front attack
delivered from the plains of Leon, and if it became involved in an
active campaign somewhere far to the north, on the line of the Coa,
or the Mondego, or the Alva, a subsidiary French force, striking
south of the Tagus from the direction of Spanish Estremadura, might
give dreadful trouble. If it could cross the Tagus anywhere between
Abrantes and Salvaterra, it might get between the Anglo-Portuguese
army and its base, and either fall upon its rear or capture Lisbon.
For this reason Wellington, so far back as October 1809, had made
up his mind that, if the French had an army on foot anywhere in
the direction of Badajoz and Elvas, he must leave a considerable
proportion of his own forces to watch them, and to defend, if need
be, the line of the lower Tagus[154]. As long as the enemy had not
yet subdued Badajoz and the neighbouring fortresses, and while
there was still a strong Spanish army in that quarter, the need for
precaution was not so pressing. Nevertheless, all through the summer
of 1810 Wellington kept Hill with one English and one Portuguese
division at Portalegre, south of the Tagus, though he withdrew this
detachment when Masséna marched on Coimbra. Matters were much more
perilous after the battle of the Gebora and the fall of Badajoz in
February 1811. From that time onward, all through 1811 and 1812,
nearly a third of the Anglo-Portuguese army was kept in the Alemtejo,
first under Beresford, then under Hill, in order to guard against
the possible stab in the back from the French army of Andalusia.