

  [157] For the perilous adventure among these cuttings of a
  small French column which crossed the Estrada Nova, that which
  escorted Foy back to Santarem in Feb. 1811, see the autobiography
  of General Hulot, pp. 325-33. A considerable number of men and
  horses fell down these cuttings in a forced night-march, and in
  all several hundred men of Foy’s column perished, starved and
  storm-beaten on this inhospitable road. The survivors only got
  through by cutting a slippery foot-track along the precipices:
  nothing on wheels could have passed that way.

  [158] In Foy’s interesting minute of his conversation with
  Napoleon about the invasion, on Nov. 23, 1810, when he had taken
  home Masséna’s dispatches: ‘Montrez-moi les deux routes de Ponte
  de Murcella et de Castello Branco,’ says the Emperor. Then after
  a pause: ‘Et l’Estrada Nova? Pourquoi Masséna n’a-t-il pas
  débouché par l’Estrada Nova?’--‘Sire, à cause d’Abrantès et du
  Zézère.’--‘Oui, Masséna a bien fait; maintenant il faut prendre
  Abrantès: Elvas ne nous servirait de rien.’ See Foy’s _Mémoires_,
  p. 111.

The Castello Branco road, therefore, with this dependent by-road,
the Estrada Nova, was practically left out of consideration by
the Marshal. There remains the choice between the two northern
routes, Celorico-Vizeu-Coimbra, and Celorico-Chamusca-Ponte de
Murcella-Coimbra. Both traverse rough ground--but ground less rough
than that to be found on some parts of the Castello Branco road.
Along both there is an intermittent belt of cultivated land, and
not unfrequent villages. Both are intersected by many good military
positions, on which a defending army can offer battle to an invader
with advantage. In especial, the northern road strikes and climbs the
granite ridge of Bussaco with every disadvantage for the attacking
side, and the southern road is contracted into a difficult defile
at the passage of the Alva near Ponte de Murcella. On the whole,
however, this last is the better line for advance:--the strongest
testimonial to the fact is that Wellington expected Masséna to take
it, and erected at the passage of the Alva almost[159] the only
earthworks, save those of the lines of Torres Vedras, which he
constructed in his preparations for the reception of the invader.
When he first heard that the Marshal was moving forward from
Almeida to Celorico, and was clearly aiming at the Mondego valley,
he announced that he should endeavour to stop the invader on the
Alva[160], not apparently thinking it at all probable that Masséna
would move by Vizeu and the north bank of the Mondego. On realizing
that this was really his adversary’s design, he observed with some
exultation that, while there were certainly many bad roads in
Portugal, the enemy had taken decidedly the worst of those open to
him[161]; moreover, he had committed himself to attack the heights
of Bussaco, the most formidable position in the whole of northern
Portugal. How the French commander came to make this choice we shall
discuss in its proper place. Suffice it to say that Wellington had
not realized how bad was Masséna’s information, how worthless his
maps, and--what is most surprising of all--how entirely destitute of
local knowledge were the Portuguese traitors--Alorna, Pamplona, and
the other renegade officers--whom the Emperor had sent as guides and
advisers to the Marshal. And in truth, the unsuspected ignorance of
Masséna and his advisers added an incalculable element of chance to
the problem set before Wellington. He was obliged to make his plans
on the hypothesis that the enemy would make the correct move: and not
unfrequently the enemy, for reasons which the English general could
not possibly foresee, made the wrong one.