

  [152] See Map of the Lines of Torres Vedras, in Section xx of
  this volume, for the environs of Lisbon.

  [153] Eliot, in his very judicious remarks on p. 100 of his
  _Defence of Portugal_, published just before Masséna’s invasion,
  sums up the situation with--‘a passage may without any difficulty
  be forced to the left bank of the Tagus: but then the enemy is as
  far from the accomplishment of his project as before, the river
  forming an insuperable barrier if well defended.’

  [154] Wellington to Col. Fletcher, commanding Royal Engineers,
  Oct. 20, 1809 (_Dispatches_, v. 235): ‘The enemy will probably
  attack on two distinct lines, the one south, the other north of
  the Tagus, and the system of defence must be founded upon this
  general basis.... His object will be, by means of the corps south
  of the Tagus, to turn the positions which we shall take up in
  front of the corps north of that river, to cut off from Lisbon
  the corps opposed to him, and to destroy it by an attack in front
  and rear. This can be avoided only by the retreat of the right,
  centre, and left of the allies to a point at which (from the
  state of the river) they cannot be turned, by the passage of the
  Tagus by the enemy’s left corps.’

  Six days later (_Disp._ v. 245) Wellington wrote to Admiral
  Berkeley in similar terms: ‘It is probable that in the event
  of the enemy being enabled to invade this country in force, he
  will make his main attack by the right of the Tagus: but he
  will employ one corps on the left of the river, with the object
  of embarrassing, if not of preventing, the embarcation of the
  British army.’

But the attack south of the Tagus was in Wellington’s, and also, we
may add, in Napoleon’s conception[155], only a secondary operation.
The main invasion was almost inevitably bound to take place on the
Beira, not on the Alemtejo frontier. Between Fregeneda, where the
Portuguese border line quits the Douro, to the pass of Villa Velha
on the Tagus there is a distance of somewhat more than 100 miles.
The division between Portugal and Spain does not lie along any
well-marked natural feature, such as a mountain range or a broad
river--though two small sections of the frontier are coincident with
the insignificant streams of the Elga and the Agueda. It is rather
drawn, in a somewhat arbitrary and haphazard fashion, through the
midst of the desert upland, where Spain and Portugal turn their
backs to each other. For the only piece of flat plain-land on the
whole border is that from the Douro to Almeida, a mere ten or twelve
miles, and immediately behind the Coa, only three or four miles
from Almeida, the mountains begin. The rest of the frontier runs
through thinly-peopled, barren highlands, from which the Coa, the
Mondego, the Zezere, and the Ponçul fall away towards Portugal, and
the Agueda and the Alagon towards Spain. The mountains are not,
for the most part, very high--the culminating peak of the Serra da
Estrella is only 6,540 feet--but they are singularly rugged and
scarped, and much cleft by ravines, along whose sides the few roads
crawl miserably, in constant precipitous dips and rises. This broad
belt of upland, one long series of defiles for an invader, is some
hundred miles broad, and does not cease till Coimbra, on the one
side, or Abrantes, on the other, is reached: only then does the
plain-land begin, and the country-side become fertile and thickly
peopled. Only from those points onward is it possible for an army
to live on the local produce: in the upland it must carry its food
with it; for a single division would exhaust in a day the stores of
the poor villages of the mountains; and the small poverty-stricken
towns of Guarda, Celorico, Sabugal, Penamacor, and Idanha have few
resources. Castello Branco and Vizeu are the only two places in the
upland where there is a valley of some breadth and richness, which
can supply an army for many days. In this simple fact lies the
explanation of the difficulties of the Portuguese campaigns of 1810
and 1811. Both the invader and the defender must bring their food
with them, and protracted operations can only be kept up by means
of incessant convoys from the rear. The campaign not infrequently
became a starving-match, and the combatant who first exhausted his
provisions had to retire, and to disperse his divisions in search of
the wherewithal to live. Thanks to Wellington’s providence it was
always the French who were forced to this expedient.