

Badajoz, far to the south, in Spanish Estremadura, stood to the
defence of Southern Portugal exactly as Ciudad Rodrigo to the defence
of Northern Portugal. It possessed also in Elvas a counterpart to
Almeida. But Badajoz is immensely larger and stronger than Rodrigo,
just as Elvas is infinitely more formidable than Almeida. The two
fortresses on the frontier of Leon are small places crowning mere
mounds set in a plain. Badajoz and Elvas have towering citadels
set on rugged hills, and overlooking the whole country-side. They
have also strong detached forts on dominant positions: the circuit
of ground that must be taken up by an army that intends to besiege
them is very large, and at Badajoz there is a first-class river,
the Guadiana, which cuts in two the lines which the assailant must
occupy. It may be added that based on Badajoz there was a whole
Spanish army of 15,000 men, not a mere division of 3,000, like that
which lurked in the mountains above Rodrigo. Noting the strength of
Badajoz and Elvas, the Emperor had made up his mind that they should
be observed and ‘contained’ by troops from the Army of Andalusia,
but not attacked till Lisbon had been conquered and the English
expelled from Portugal. ‘Les Anglais une fois battus et rembarqués,
Badajoz et Elvas tombent d’eux-mêmes,’ he wrote in a holograph minute
addressed to Masséna, just before the advance across the Portuguese
frontier began[164]. It was only when the invasion had been brought
to a standstill before the lines of Torres Vedras, that he came to
the conclusion that pressure must be applied south of the Tagus, to
distract Wellington, and that Soult, as a preliminary to an attack
on the Alemtejo, must capture Badajoz and Elvas, and disperse the
Spanish Army of Estremadura. The idea came to him tardily: thanks to
Wellington’s careful starvation of the main French army, Masséna was
forced to retreat into Leon when Soult had only recently captured
Badajoz, and had not yet shown a man in front of Elvas. The scheme
was hatched, like so many of Napoleon’s Spanish plans, about three
months too late for effective realization. As late as November 1810
the orders to Soult are merely to demonstrate against Badajoz, and
to hinder the departure of La Romana’s army for the lines of Torres
Vedras, but not to besiege the Estremaduran fortress. Probably it was
Foy’s information as to the existence and strength of the unsuspected
lines of Torres Vedras, which reached him late in November, that made
the Emperor realize the advisability of that secondary attack by
the south bank of the Tagus which Wellington had foreseen and taken
means to meet a full year before. Fortunately a capable general on
the defensive always knows his own weak spots long before they are
discovered by the enemy. By the time that Soult had at last captured
Badajoz and the small dependent places--Olivenza, Albuquerque, Campo
Mayor--Wellington had got rid of Masséna from the neighbourhood of
Lisbon, and was preparing to chase him home across Northern Portugal.
Within a few weeks of its surrender by the traitor Imaz, Badajoz was
being besieged by a detachment of the British army, and Soult had
his hands full, as he strove at once to hold down Andalusia and to
relieve the beleaguered fortress.