

  [155] So much so that in _Corresp._, xx. p. 552, we find him
  informing Masséna that Badajoz and Elvas need not be touched till
  after Lisbon has fallen. The first contrary view, ordering a
  demonstration on the Lower Tagus, appears in the dispatch on p.
  273 of vol. xxi.

The Beira frontier is divided into two sections by the range of
mountains which crosses the border at right angles, half way between
Douro and Tagus: it is known as the Sierras de Gata and de Jarama
while in Spain, as the Serra da Estrella when it reaches Portugal.
Its central ganglion lies between the high-lying towns of Sabugal
and Penamacor in Portugal and the pass of Perales in Spain. From
this point run off the great spurs which separate the valleys of
the Ponçul, the Zezere, the Agueda, the Coa, and the Alagon. An
invader must make his choice whether he will advance into Portugal
south or north of the Serra da Estrella: to attempt to do so on both
sides of the range would be risking too much, if there is an enemy
of any strength in the field, since the columns to the right and to
the left would be hopelessly separated, and liable to be beaten in
detail. In the whole Peninsular War there was only one invasion made
by the southern route, that of Junot in the winter of 1807-8. It was
successful because it was absolutely unopposed. Nevertheless the
French lost many men, had to leave their artillery behind them, and
only arrived with the shadow of an army at Abrantes. It is true that
Junot chose absolutely the worst path that could be found between the
Serra da Estrella and the Tagus--the pass of Rosmarinhal, close above
the latter river--and that he would have fared not quite so badly if
he had marched from Zarza on Idanha and Castello Branco. But even at
the best this region is most inhospitable: there are points where
water is not procurable on stretches of eight or ten miles, others
where the main road is so steep that a six-pounder requires not
only a dozen horses but the assistance of fifty men to get it up the
slope. Except in the immediate neighbourhood of Castello Branco, the
country-side is almost uninhabited[156]. The whole ‘corregidoria,’
which took its name from that town, and extended from the Elga to the
Zezere, had only 40,000 souls in its broad limits--it was forty miles
long by thirty broad, the size of a large English county. Junot’s
experiences served as a warning to his successors, and no French
army during the rest of the war endeavoured to cross this corner of
Portugal when advancing on Lisbon. Castello Branco was seized once or
twice by a raiding force, but it was never used as the starting-point
of an army making a serious attempt to advance towards the Portuguese
capital.

  [156] The above notes on the Castello Branco country and its
  roads are mostly derived from Eliot’s _Defence of Portugal_.
  Eliot has marched all over the region; see his pages 78-81.

There remains to be considered only the section of the frontier
between the Douro and the Serra da Estrella, the front on which
Masséna’s great blow was delivered in the autumn of 1810. It was
a region which had from the earliest times been the battle-ground
of the Spanish and Portuguese. Half a dozen times since the Middle
Ages armies from the plains of Leon had invaded the Beira on this
front. Such campaigns always began with a siege of Almeida, the
sentinel-fortress pushed out in front of the mountains to face the
Spanish Ciudad Rodrigo. Almeida generally fell--it is too advanced a
position for safety, and (as Dumouriez remarked in his military study
of Portugal) its value would have doubled if it had only been placed
upon the west instead of the east bank of the Coa, close to the
friendly mountains, and not on the outskirts of the perilous plain.
But rare, indeed, were the occasions on which the Spaniard succeeded
in piercing the broad belt of tangled upland beyond Almeida, and
appearing at the gates of Coimbra or Oporto.