

We must now turn to the other end of Andalusia: King Joseph, when
departing to inspect the outworks of Cadiz, had left Mortier in
command in this quarter. The Marshal, after hunting the little force
of the Visconde de Gand out of the Condado de Niebla, had been
directed to deal a stroke at Badajoz. Accordingly, leaving a brigade
in Seville and another in the Condado, he marched with one infantry
division and his light cavalry into Estremadura. He reached Olivenza
with 9,000 men, and summoned Badajoz on February 12th, but he had
arrived too late. A considerable Spanish force was now before him,
the old host of Del Parque, which the Central Junta had called down
to the Guadiana when the original Army of Estremadura marched under
Albuquerque to succour Andalusia. How Mortier and La Romana, the
successor of Del Parque, dealt with each other in the months of the
spring must be told in a later chapter[148].

  [148] See Section xix, chapter iv of this volume.

The King, meanwhile, spent the months of February and March in a
circular tour through Andalusia, where he affected to perceive
nothing but friendly feeling among the inhabitants. He visited
Ronda, Malaga, Granada, Jaen, celebrating _Te Deums_, and giving
bull-fights and banquets. It is certain that a sufficient show of
submission was made to nourish his happy illusions as to the finality
of his conquest. Threats or bribes induced many notables to present
themselves at his receptions, and it seems that a considerable
portion of the Andalusians hoped to save themselves from the rapacity
of the military authorities by professing an enthusiasm for the
King. He, for his part, did his best to protect them--but he was
soon gone, and the native officials whom he appointed were powerless
against Sebastiani, the church plunderer, and Soult, the judicious
collector of works of art. ‘At the very moment when the King was
lavishing assurances and promises,’ writes his devoted servant Miot,
‘and everywhere extolling the thorough disinterestedness of France,
severe and crushing exactions were being laid on the provinces in our
occupation. An iron hand was grinding them to the dust. The King was
powerless to resist the open violation of the promises which he was
daily giving[149].’

  [149] Miot, ii. 432. Compare Joseph’s hysterical letter to
  the Emperor (Ducasse, vii. 236): ‘La pacification générale de
  l’Andalousie sera opérée.... Mais, sire, au nom du sang français
  et du sang espagnol rappelez Loison, Kellermann, Thouvenot! Ces
  hommes nous coûtent bien cher!’ It is curious that he, in the
  same letter, quotes as ‘hommes honnêtes,’ along with Mortier,
  Suchet, and Reynier, both Soult and Sebastiani, who were
  plunderers on as large a scale as Kellermann or Loison.

Open resistance, however, had ceased, save at Cadiz and in the
inaccessible recesses of the Sierra Nevada. Andalusia had been
subdued from end to end, and neither the King nor Soult yet realized
that a lamentable strategic mistake had been made when 70,000 veteran
troops had been pinned down to garrison the newly conquered realm,
while Portugal and Wellington’s army remained untouched. In their
conception, as in that of the Emperor, the conquest of Portugal was
to be sufficiently provided for by the new reinforcements which were
now pouring over the Ebro, to the number of over 100,000 sabres and
bayonets.