

The preparations which Wellington was making during the winter of
1809-10 and the ensuing spring, for the reception of the inevitable
French invasion, may be arranged, in the main, under three heads. We
must first treat of the complete reorganization of the Portuguese
military forces, not only the regulars but the militia, and the old
_levée en masse_ of the Ordenança. Second come the elaborate plans
for the construction of enormous field-works for the protection of
Lisbon, the famous lines of Torres Vedras, and the fortification of
certain other, and more advanced, points. The third, and in some
ways the most important of all, was the arrangement of the great
scheme for devastating the country-side in front of the invader, and
fighting him by the weapon of starvation, a device new to the French,
but not unprecedented in the earlier history of Portugal.

The Portuguese regular army had taken hardly any part in the
campaigns of 1809. The only sections of it that had been under fire
were Silveira’s two regiments, the four battalions that marched with
Wellington to Oporto in May, and Wilson’s Loyal Lusitanian Legion,
which had fought with more valour than success at the bridge of
Alcantara and the Pass of Baños[171]. Beresford, with the greater
part of the troops that were in a condition to take the field, had
been out on the border in July, and had remained for some days in
Spain, on the side of Coria and Zarza Mayor, but he had never been in
contact with the enemy[172]. The fighting power of the reorganized
Portuguese army was still a doubtful quantity.

  [171] See vol. ii. pages 440-1 and 620.

  [172] See vol. ii. pages 600-1. Beresford had some 18,000 men
  with him.

The field-strength of the Portuguese regular forces should have
been, according to its establishments, 56,000 men. In September 1809
there were only 42,000 men with the colours[173], and of these much
more than half were recruits, who had recently been thrust into the
depleted _cadres_ of the old army. There were many regiments which
had been practically destroyed by the French, and which showed,
when Beresford first marched out to the frontier, only 200 or 300
men instead of their normal 1,500[174]. Many others had less than
half their complement. The first thing that required to be done was
to fill up the gaps, and this was accomplished during the winter
of 1809-10 by a stringent use of the conscription law already
existing. The line regiments in the Bussaco campaign showed, with
hardly an exception, 1,200 or 1,300 effectives present--i.e. if the
sick and ‘details’ are added they were nearly or quite up to their
establishment of 1,500[175]. The cavalry was less effective: the
number of men could be filled up, but horses were hard to find,
and in the end Wellington sent four of the twelve regiments to do
dismounted duty in garrison, and served out their mounts to the
remaining eight, which nevertheless could never show more than 300
or 400 sabres present, out of their nominal 594. Portugal is not a
horse-breeding country, and the British cavalry was competing with
the native for the small supply of remounts that could be procured.
The artillery, on the other hand, was high in strength and very
satisfactory.