

  [183] Silveira was the despair of Beresford and his
  chief-of-the-staff D’Urban. The latter writes (Apr. 19, 1810):
  ‘This general is the most extraordinary of all the people in this
  extraordinary country. Perpetually fluctuating--incapable of
  standing still--always wishing to move backward or forward--all
  his movements to no purpose but that of harassing his troops. The
  man is either very weak or very designing--perhaps both. Anyhow
  he is a mischievous charlatan, and I wish the Marshal would not
  yield to the prejudices of the people by employing him.’

The second point of difficulty in the organization of the Portuguese
army was the commissariat. In the old days it had been a purely
civilian branch of the service, non-military intendants dealing with
contractors and merchants. For this had been substituted a _Junta de
Viveres_ mainly composed of officers, which proved as ineffective,
if not as corrupt, as the body which had preceded it. The British
government had taken over the responsibility of paying half the
Portuguese army[184], but not that of feeding it, and despite of
the handsome subsidies that it paid to the Regency for the general
purposes of the war, the native troops, especially those quartered
far from Lisbon, were often in a state of semi-starvation. ‘The
Portuguese corps ought to have a commissariat attached to them, and
I believe each brigade has a commissary,’ wrote Wellington, ‘but
they have no magazines and no money to purchase supplies[185].’ One
main difficulty arose from the fact that the Junta de Viveres shrank
from the heavy expense of organizing a proper transport train, and
tried to make shift with requisitioned carts and oxen, which were
difficult to get (since the British army was competing with the
Portuguese for draught animals) and still harder to retain--for the
peasant driver always absconded with his beasts when he found an
opportunity. Another difficulty was that the Junta tried to feed
the troops with requisitioned corn, instead of paying for it with
money down; hence it got grudging service. ‘I know from experience,’
observes Wellington, ‘that the Portuguese army could not be in the
distress under which it suffers, from want of provisions, if only
a part of the food it receives from the country were paid for.’
And he suggested as a remedy that the British ministers should
earmark part of the subsidy for use on the commissariat and no other
purpose[186]. It was long before this matter was set to rights.
Beresford’s correspondence in 1810 bristles with complaints as to the
inefficiency of the Junta de Viveres[187].

  [184] Viz. the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 7th, 10th, 11th, 13th, 14th,
  15th, 16th, 19th of the line, and the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Caçadores.

  [185] Wellington to Hill, Jan. 24, 1810.

  [186] Wellington to Villiers, Jan. 25, 1810.

  [187] D’Urban writes, May 4, ‘Such is the poverty, imbecility,
  and want of arrangement of the Portuguese government, that any
  regular system of supply is not to be expected. The whole civil
  branch of the army is in such a state of confusion, that I hold
  it impossible to carry on active operations for more than a few
  weeks.’