

  [173] See tables in vol. ii. pages 629-31.

  [174] On Sept. 15, 1809, the 22nd, which had been destroyed by
  Soult at Oporto, had only 193 men. The 8th had but 369, the 15th
  577, the 24th 505.

  [175] Ten regiments present at Bussaco had over 1,100 men each,
  only one less than 800. This was the 22nd, mentioned above as
  practically non-existent a year before. It had only recruited
  up to the strength of one battalion: all the rest had two. The
  strongest regiment was the 11th with 1,438 men.

Mere numbers are no test of the efficiency of a host. The weak
point of the old national army had been--as we mentioned in
another place--the effete and unmilitary character of its body of
officers--more especially of its senior officers[176]. The junior
ranks, filled up since the French invasion with young men who had
taken up the military career from patriotic motives, were infinitely
better. By the second year of the war there were many admirable
officers among them. But it was men capable of handling a battalion
or a regiment that were wanting. We saw how Beresford had been forced
to introduce many British officers into the service, though he was
aware that the personal pride of the Portuguese officers was bitterly
hurt thereby. His justification may be deduced from a confidential
memorandum written for him by his chief-of-the-staff, Benjamin
D’Urban[177], which is well worth quoting:--

  [176] See vol. ii. pages 210-15.

  [177] This unpublished document here quoted, along with the whole
  of Sir Benjamin’s journal and correspondence, has been placed at
  my disposal by his grandson, Mr. D’Urban. They are invaluable for
  the Portuguese aspect of the War.

‘There are yet among the field officers, captains, and older
subalterns a number of incorrigible officers of the old school, who
are a dead weight upon their respective regiments, and mischievous in
the way of example. Whenever it may be thought expedient, from time
to time, to get rid of them, there will be no difficulty in finding
excellent young men to replace them from the ranks respectively
below.... But I feel it incumbent upon me to give it you as my
decided opinion, resulting from a close investigation into the causes
of the defects of the Portuguese, that it will be utterly impossible
either to make a regiment fit for service, or to preserve it when
made so, without giving it an English commanding-officer and at least
two English captains.

‘The Portuguese soldier is naturally indolent. He falls with the
greatest facility into slouching and slovenly habits, unless he is
constantly roused and forced to exert himself. But many a Portuguese
officer, if not constantly spurred and urged to do his duty, is at
least as indolent as his men. Nothing (I am persuaded by experience)
will counteract this, and create activity among the officers and
consequent diligence and care among the men, but the strictness,
energy and vigilance of an English commanding-officer.