

‘Even supposing a sufficient energy of character in the native
officer, he does not and will not, if he be not a _Fidalgo_ himself,
exercise coercive or strong measures to oblige one of that class
to do his duty. He is aware that in doing so he makes a powerful
enemy, and all the habits of thought in which he has been educated
inspire him with such a dread of this, that no sense of duty will
urge him to encounter it. Thus, whenever a regiment is commanded by a
non-Fidalgo, it never fails to suffer extremely: for the noblemen are
permitted to do as they please, and afford a very bad example, for
they are at least as indolent as the ordinary Portuguese.

‘The English captains will be found invaluable, especially in the
hands of an English commandant. Their example is infinitely useful.
The Portuguese captains are piqued into activity and attention,
when they see their companies excelled in efficiency by those
of the English, and they do from emulation what a sense of duty
would perhaps never bring them to. There are a variety of by-paths
and oblique means by which the parts of a Portuguese corps are
constantly, and almost insensibly, endeavouring to return to the old
habits that they are so much attached to. To nip this, from time to
time, in the bud, it is necessary to be aware of it: without the
faithful surveillance of English subordinate officers (who, ever
mixing with the mass of the men, can’t well be ignorant of what is
going on) the commanding-officer can rarely be warned in time.’

Beresford replied that all this was true, but that ‘the national
feeling required management,’ and that to place every regimental
or brigade command in British hands would provoke such fierce
jealousy that he was ‘compelled to humour the prejudices and satisfy
the pride of the nation.’ His device for doing this was to make
a general rule that wherever a Portuguese officer was in chief
command he should have a British officer second in command under
him, and vice versa[178]. When a brigade was given to a Portuguese,
he managed that the two colonels of the regiments forming it should
be Englishmen; similarly, if a Portuguese commanded a regiment
his senior major was always an Englishman. By this means it was
secured that a fair half of the higher pieces of promotion should
be left to the native officers, but that every Portuguese placed
in a responsible position should have a British officer at his
back. In addition there were from two to four British captains in
each battalion, but no subalterns; for, to encourage good men to
volunteer into the Portuguese service, it was provided that all who
did so should receive a step of promotion, and a British lieutenant
became a Portuguese captain on exchange, and a British captain a
Portuguese major. The system seems to have worked well, and with
far less friction than might have been expected[179]. The better
class of native officers were piqued into emulation, just as D’Urban
had expected; the worst was gradually eliminated[180]. It must be
noted that to every battalion there were added one or two British
sergeants, whose services were needed for the drilling of the men in
the English exercises, which now superseded the old German system
left behind by La Lippe, the last reorganizer of the Portuguese army.
For the whole drill of the infantry was changed, and the British
formations and manœuvres introduced. Dundas’s ‘Eighteen Manœuvres’
were translated, and became the Bible of the Lusitanian no less than
the British officer[181]. The employment of the two-deep line, the
essential feature of the system, was made the base of all Portuguese
drill; at Bussaco it justified itself. The Caçadores were trained
on the ‘Rifle Regulations’ of Coote Manningham, and their uniform
was modified in cut, though not in colour, to a close resemblance
of that of the British rifleman[182]. The net result of all these
changes was that for the future the British and Portuguese units of
Wellington’s army could be moved by the same words of command, and in
the same formations, and that all the disadvantages resulting from
the coexistence of two different systems of drill disappeared.