

  [178] This rule I find definitely laid down in a letter of
  Hardinge, Beresford’s Quartermaster-general, written as late as
  1812, but the practice was already in full use by 1810.

  [179] For narratives of the daily life of a British officer in a
  Portuguese regiment see Bunbury’s _Reminiscences of a Veteran_,
  and Blakiston’s _Twelve Years of Military Adventure_. Both had
  their difficulties, but both, on the whole, got on well with
  their colleagues. D’Urban’s correspondence supplies a frequent
  commentary on regimental problems.

  [180] How this was done may be read in Blakiston.

  [181] See Bunbury, p. 54.

  [182] They were dressed in dark brown instead of in the rifle
  green. The shako, coat, and trousers were of the British model.

Two principal difficulties still remained in the administration of
the Portuguese army. The first was, what to do with the few senior
officers of undoubted patriotism but more doubtful capacity, who
were too important and influential to be placed upon the shelf,
yet might cause a disaster if placed in a critical position of
responsibility. The most notable of them was Silveira, who had
acquired much popularity by his obstinate, if ill-managed, resistance
to Soult in the spring of 1809. Wellington, with many searchings
of heart, placed him in command of the Tras-os-Montes, where it
was most unlikely that any serious irruption of the French would
take place[183]. He had a large force placed under him, but it did
not include a single regular regiment, and, with militia only at
his disposition, it was hoped that he would be discouraged from
attempting any hazardous experiments. Moreover, he was given a
British second-in-command, first John Wilson and afterwards Miller,
to curb his eccentricities so far as was possible. Baccelar, another
officer of doubtful merit, but more dangerous from torpidity than
from rashness, was given charge of the militia of the three northern
provinces, so that Silveira was technically under his orders--though
the nominal subordinate would seem to have paid little attention
to his superior. The most important post, however, assigned to a
Portuguese officer was the governorship of Elvas, the strongest
fortress of Portugal, and one which would stand in the forefront of
the battle if the French made the subsidiary invasion south of the
Tagus, which Wellington was inclined to expect. The command of this
great stronghold and the 6,000 men of its garrison (of whom half
were regulars) was given to General Leite, an active and ingenious
officer, and (what was more important) a man who obeyed orders. Of
all the Portuguese he was the one whom Wellington most trusted; every
British narrator of the war who came in contact with him has a word
of praise in his behalf. Of the other native generals, Lecor, in
command of a division, and Fonseca, in command of a brigade, were
with the field army. Miranda was given charge of the militia of
Northern Estremadura, who were likely to be in the thickest of the
trouble. But the other Portuguese units of the allied host were under
British officers: Pack, Archibald and Alexander Campbell, MacMahon,
Coleman, Harvey, Collins, and Bradford had charge of the regular
brigades of the field army. The native generals, save those above
mentioned, were placed in administrative posts, or in charge of
those sections of the militia which were probably destined to see no
service.