

If the regular army was badly fed, so that desertion and sickness
were both too prevalent in some corps, it was not to be expected
that the militia would fare better. Wellington had ordered, and
Beresford had arranged for, the embodiment of every one of the 48
militia regiments of the national establishment. They should properly
have given 70,000 men, but such a figure was never reached. Some of
the regimental districts were too thinly peopled to give the full
1,500 men at which each was assessed. In others the officers placed
in charge were incapable, or the local magistrates recalcitrant.
Many regiments could show only 500 or 600 bayonets in 1810, few over
1,000[188]. The total number under arms at the time of Masséna’s
invasion may have reached 45,000 bayonets. Of the 48 regiments eight
belonged to the lands south of the Tagus, and were never brought up
to the front; they furnished the garrisons of Elvas and Campo Mayor,
and a corps of observation on the lower Guadiana, destined to watch
the French in the direction of Ayamonte and the Condado de Niebla,
lest any unexpected raid might be made in that quarter[189]. The
five regiments from the district immediately round the capital were
at work on the ever-growing lines of Torres Vedras. One regiment
was in garrison at Peniche, two at Abrantes, three at Almeida. The
main force, consisting of the remaining units contributed by the
North and the Beira, was divided into five corps, destined partly
for active operations against the enemy’s flanks and rear, when
he should enter Portugal, partly for the defence of Oporto and
the Tras-os-Montes, if any assault should be threatened in that
direction. These divisions stood as follows:--three regiments under
Lecor were left in the Castello Branco country, to protect it against
raids from Spanish Estremadura. Seven under Trant, all corps from
the coast-land between the Douro and the Mondego, were to cover
Oporto from the south, or to operate against the rear of the invading
army, if it should leave that city alone and keep on the direct
road to Lisbon. Six under Silveira guarded the Tras-os-Montes, and
watched the French detachments in the northern part of the plains of
Leon. Eight under Miller lay around Oporto, ready to support either
Silveira or Trant if occasion should arise[190]. After the campaign
began, and Masséna’s intention to leave the North alone became
evident, half Miller’s division was placed under John Wilson (who had
originally been Silveira’s chief-of-the-staff and second-in-command)
and sent south into the Beira to co-operate with Trant. Finally,
four regiments under the Portuguese brigadier Miranda lay at Thomar,
apparently for the purpose of aiding Lecor or strengthening the
garrison of Abrantes. This division ultimately retreated into the
lines of Torres Vedras.

  [188] I note in D’Urban’s diary, when he was making an inspection
  tour with Beresford at the end of the winter, ‘At Sardão a very
  good regiment of militia, 1,100 strong, that of Maia.’ ‘Abrantes,
  two regiments of militia, Lousão 1,035, Soure 1,035, all armed.’
  But, on the other hand, ‘Vizeu, Arganil, Trancoso, ordered to be
  assembled at Almeida, have only--the first 867, the second 600,
  the last 505 firelocks, and the description of troops the very
  worst.’ Of course the numbers were somewhat higher by the next
  August.