

  [191] D’Urban to Wilson, and Trant to Wilson, after two
  unfortunate incidents in 1812, when the militia had been more or
  less under arms for two whole years. The former are in D’Urban’s,
  the latter in Wilson’s correspondence.

Over and above the regular army and the militia, the Portuguese
military system contemplated the utilization of the whole _levée
en masse_ of the nation under the name of the Ordenança. This was
no foreshadowing of the modern idea of universal service, but a
survival of the mediaeval practice which, in Portugal as in England,
made every freeman liable to be called out in time of extremity,
at his own cost and with his own weapons. Every peasant between
sixteen and sixty was theoretically supposed to be enrolled in one
of the companies of 250 which each group of villages was supposed
to possess. The organization had been effective enough in the old
mediaeval wars with Castile: it had even proved serviceable in the
‘War of Independence’ that followed the successful rising of 1640.
But against modern regular armies it was comparatively useless; when
called out in the war of 1762 the Ordenança had not justified its
old reputation. Little could be expected of mobs armed with pikes
and fowling-pieces, save that they should cut off a few convoys and
stragglers, or occasionally obstruct a defile. A French officer who
deeply studied this forgotten campaign wrote that, ‘whatever the
Spaniards may say to the contrary, this war of the peasantry is
by no means important, except against ignorant and undisciplined
troops[192].’

  [192] Dumouriez, _State of Portugal_, page 22. There was,
  however, one notable combat at Villa Pouca in the Tras-os-Montes
  where a whole Spanish column of 3,000 men was defeated by the
  Ordenança.

When Wellington resolved to call out the Ordenança in 1810 he was
ignorant of none of these facts. Nevertheless, he insisted that
the Regency should issue the old royal ‘Ordinance’ to call out the
levy. His object was threefold: from the political and moral point
of view it was necessary to take this measure, because it was the
ancient and established method of proclaiming that the country was
in danger. It was so understood by the peasantry, in whose memories
the traditions of the Spanish invasions were still fresh; they
expected to be summoned, and would have doubted the imminence of the
emergency if they had not been. The call was at once an appeal to
their patriotism, and equivalent to a proclamation of martial law.
Secondly, Wellington hoped to find assistance to a certain degree
for the work which he had set aside for the militia, by the aid of
the Ordenança. Pervading the whole country-side, and knowing every
goat-track and inaccessible fastness, their motley companies would
surround the invading army as it marched, prevent marauding by small
parties, and render inter-communication between columns impossible,
save by large detachments. French narrators of the campaign speak of
‘the cruel callousness with which Wellington exposed these half-armed
peasants to the wrath of the most efficient army in the world,’ and
wax sentimental over the miseries of the Portuguese. But sentiment
from such a quarter is suspicious: it is absurd to find old soldiers
writing as if the main duty of a general defending a country were
to spare its peasantry as much inconvenience as possible. Did not
Napoleon in 1814 make every endeavour to raise Lorraine and Champagne
_en masse_ in the rear of the Allies, and has any French critic
ever blamed him for doing so? Was the actual misery suffered by
the inhabitants of Beira so much greater than what they would have
endured if they had remained at home, and offered no resistance? The
country-side would have been stripped bare by an army forced to make
‘war support war,’ and one can hardly believe, judging from parallel
incidents in Spain, that outrages would have been conspicuous by
their absence.