

It is curious to find that in this most interesting dispatch to
Lord Liverpool Wellington distinctly asserts that his worst enemy
was the ghost of Sir John Moore[168]. ‘The great disadvantage under
which I labour is that Sir John Moore, who was here before me, gave
his opinion that Portugal could not be defended by the army under
his command. It is obvious that the country was in a very different
situation at that time from what it is at present, and that I am in a
very different situation from that in which he found himself ..., yet
persons who ought to be better acquainted with these facts entertain
a certain prejudice against the adoption of any plan for opposing
the enemy of which Portugal is to be the theatre. I have as much
respect as any man for the opinion and judgement of Sir John Moore,
and I should mistrust my own if it were opposed to his in a case
where he had had the opportunity of knowing and considering. But he
positively knew nothing about Portugal, and could know nothing about
its existing state[169].’

  [168] See also vol. ii. page 286, of this book.

  [169] All these quotations are from Wellington to Lord Liverpool,
  April 2, 1810, a long dispatch written from Vizeu, every word of
  which is well worth study.

The most vexatious thing for Wellington was that ‘the persons who
ought to have known better,’ yet were perpetually uttering melancholy
vaticinations as to the approach of disaster, included some of
his own senior officers. I have seen a letter from a general in
Portugal to his friend in England containing such phrases as this:
‘I most strongly suspect that before many months are over our heads
there will be no opportunity for this employment (that of a cavalry
brigadier) left to _any one_, on the Continent at least. The next
campaign will close the eventful scene in the Peninsula, as far as we
are concerned; for I am decidedly of opinion that neither (Marshal)
Wellington nor (Marshal) Beresford will prevent the approaching
subjugation of Portugal.’ Or again: ‘I am quite surprised at Lord
W.’s pliant disposition. I suspect he feels himself tottering on his
throne, and wishes to conciliate at any sacrifice[170].’ The frequent
complaints in Wellington’s correspondence as to the sort of letters
that were going home to England in the spring of 1810 sufficiently
show that these down-hearted views were not uncommon among his
subordinates. If the generals on the spot foresaw disaster, it is no
wonder that the ministers in London felt anxious, and refused to be
comforted by the confident dispatches of the Commander-in-Chief.

  [170] I found these passages in letters to Sir John Le Marchant,
  then in command at the Staff College at High Wycombe, from a
  highly-placed friend in Portugal. It is notable that other
  contemporary epistles from younger men, old pupils of Le
  Marchant, show a far more cheery spirit. The correspondence (from
  which I shall have many other passages to quote) was placed at my
  disposition by the kindness of Sir Henry Le Marchant, grandson of
  Sir John.