

  [189] These regiments were Lagos, Tavira, Beja, Evora,
  Villaviciosa, Portalegre, Alcazar do Sul, Setubal.

  [190] It may be well to name, once for all, the composition of
  these Militia Brigades. They were distributed as follows:--

    Garrison of Abrantes:
        Lousão
        Soure
    Garrison of Almeida:
        Vizeu
        Arganil
        Trancoso
    In the Lines:
        1, 2, 3, 4 of Lisbon
        Torres Vedras
    With Lecor about Castello Branco:
        Idanha
        Covilhão
        Castello Branco
    Under Miller about Oporto:
        Guimaraens
        Viana
        Braga
        Basto
        Villa do Conde
        Arcos
        Barcellos
        Barco
    With Trant, between the Douro and the Mondego:
        Aveiro
        Feira
        Coimbra
        Porto
        Maia
        Penafiel
        Oliveira do Azemis
    With Silveira about Braganza:
        Lamego
        Chaves
        Villa Real
        Braganza
        Miranda
        Moncorvo
    With Miranda about Thomar:
        Tondella
        Santarem
        Thomar
        Leiria

  Of Miller’s division, I think, but am not sure, that the last
  four were those detached under Wilson in September.

All these troops were entirely unfitted for a place in the line of
battle; Wellington refused to mix them with the regular brigades,
save in the garrisons of Almeida, Abrantes, and Elvas. He directed
the brigadiers never to risk them in battle, even against a much
inferior force of the French. Their sole purpose was to cut lines of
communication, to render marauding by the enemy’s small detachments
impossible, and to restrict his power of making reconnaissances far
afield. They were told that they might defend a pass or a ford for
a time, so as to delay the advance of a hostile column, but that
they were never to commit themselves to a serious combat with any
considerable body. Convoys, stragglers, small detachments, were the
game on which they must prey. The programme was not a brilliant
one to lay down before an ambitious officer, and more than once
Silveira, Trant, and Wilson disobeyed orders, and tried to withstand
a full French division in some chosen position. Such experiments
almost always ended in a disaster. It was not surprising, for the
militia were not troops from whom much could be expected. The best
men in every district had been taken for the regular army; all
the trained officers were also needed there. The militia _cadres_
were composed of civilians who had to learn their duties just as
much as the privates whom they were supposed to instruct. All the
patriotic and energetic young men of the governing classes had
sought commissions in the line; the less willing and active were
driven into the militia. Service therein brought neither much credit
nor much promotion. If the Regency half-starved the regulars, it
three-quarter-starved the militia, which was normally in a state
of destitution of clothing, shoes, and food. Hardly a regiment was
provided with uniforms; as a rule only the officers showed the
regulation blue and silver. As long as the corps was in its own
district it was fed somehow, but when moved to some strategical point
in the rugged mountains of the Beira, it was liable to go wholly
to pieces from sheer privation. Fortunately the Portuguese peasant
led a frugal life at all times, and expected little; the desertion,
though large, was not nearly so great as might have been expected.
The fact was that the men were essentially loyal, and hated the
French with a perfect hatred. They might be very poor soldiers, but
they were very bitter personal enemies of the invader. Nevertheless,
they were liable to panics on very slight provocation. ‘At the best
they are a very daily and uncertain sort of fighting people[191],’
remarked one of their leaders. Another wrote in a more forcible
language, ‘Scripture says, Put not your trust in princes--I say,
Fool is the man who puts his trust in a damnable militia.’ Each of
these sentences was indited the day after a disastrous and wholly
unnecessary rout.