

  [164] Napoleon to Masséna, July 29, 1810, _Corresp._, xx. p. 552.




SECTION XIX: CHAPTER II

WELLINGTON’S PREPARATIONS FOR DEFENCE


As far back as September 1809, while his army still lay at Badajoz
and the Talavera campaign was hardly over, Wellington had foreseen
the oncoming invasion of Portugal, which did not actually begin till
August 1810[165]. Writing to his brother, then on his special mission
to Seville, he had laid down his conclusions. Bonaparte would, in
consequence of the cessation of the Austrian war, be enabled to
pour unlimited reinforcements into Spain. The British army, even
if raised to 40,000 men, would not be strong enough to cover both
Seville and Lisbon. Considering the temper of the Spanish government
and the Spanish troops, he thought it would be most unadvisable to
commit himself to the defence of Andalusia. But he was prepared to
undertake the defence of Portugal. He implored the British Ministry
not to sacrifice its strong position on the Tagus in order to
embark upon a hazardous campaign in the South[166]. His views as to
Portugal were simply the development of those which he had drawn up
for Castlereagh’s eye on his first sailing for the Peninsula[167].
Portugal though ‘all frontier’ might be defended against any French
army of less than 100,000 men, if its resources were placed at his
disposal, and he were given a free hand to utilize them according
to his own plan. The Portland Cabinet, though much doubting whether
Wellington could carry out his pledge, and though reluctant to
abandon the idea that Andalusia might be defended and Cadiz made
secure by British troops, finally yielded to the General’s appeal.

  [165] For his views just after Talavera see vol. ii. of this
  work, pages 609-10.

  [166] ‘I strongly recommend to you, unless you mean to incur the
  risk of the loss of your army, not to have anything to do with
  Spanish warfare, on any ground whatever, in the existing state
  of things.... If you should take up Cadiz you must lay down
  Portugal.’ Wellington to Castlereagh, _Dispatches_, v. 90.

  [167] See vol. ii. pages 286-8.

But on December 2, 1809, the Portland Cabinet gave place to Spencer
Perceval’s new administration, and Wellington had to reiterate
the arguments which he had used to Castlereagh and Canning to new
correspondents, Lord Liverpool and Lord Bathurst. Fortunately the
incoming ministers resolved to adhere to the promises made by their
predecessors, and to persist in the defence of Portugal. It was of
immense value to Wellington that his brother Wellesley soon replaced
Lord Bathurst at the Foreign Office, so that he could command in
this Ministry a supporter as firm as Castlereagh had been in the
last. Nevertheless his position was not entirely fortunate: the
new administration was being fiercely assailed by the Whigs over
the general policy of risking British armies on the Continent. The
calamities of the Walcheren expedition supplied a text on which the
Opposition could preach interminable sermons. The men who were not
ashamed to allege, for party reasons, that Wellington was a rash
general, and that the Talavera campaign had been a disaster, were
continually harassing the Ministry, by their suggestions that when
the French Emperor marched in person to Spain the British army in the
Peninsula must inevitably be destroyed. It was probably to aid them
that Napoleon kept inserting in the _Moniteur_ articles in which it
was asserted that the maintenance of the incapable ‘Sepoy General’ at
the head of the British forces was the thing which France must most
desire. In Lord Liverpool’s correspondence with Wellington it is easy
to see that the idea that it might be necessary to evacuate Portugal,
when the French attack was delivered, almost preponderated over that
of preparing for the defence of that realm. While Wellington’s whole
mind is set on working out the details of a campaign from which he
hopes great things, his correspondent is always thinking of the
possibility of a disastrous embarkation at the end of it. The General
could not pledge himself that Portugal might be defended against any
odds whatever: it was possible that the Emperor might lead or send
against him an army of absolutely overpowering strength, though he
did not think such a contingency probable. But since he could not
say that his position was impregnable, he was being continually
worried with suggestions as to all the possible contingencies that
might occur to his discomfiture. The ministers dreaded that the
Peninsular venture might end in a fiasco, like the Duke of York’s
Dutch expedition of 1799, and thought that such a failure would lose
them their offices. Hence they were nervous about every false rumour
that reached them from France concerning the Emperor’s approaching
departure; and the more certain information about the immense numbers
of troops that were passing the Pyrenees filled them with dread.
It required all Wellington’s robust self-confidence to keep them
reassured. He had to be perpetually repeating to them that all his
preparations for retreat and embarkation, if the worst should happen,
had been already thought out--they might make up their minds that he
would do nothing rash. But he was inclined to think that there would
in the end be no need to depart. ‘I shall delay the embarkation,’ he
wrote, ‘as long as it is in my power, and shall do everything that is
in my power to avert the necessity of embarking at all. If the enemy
should invade this country with a force less than that which I should
think so superior to ours as to create a necessity for embarking, I
shall fight a battle to save the country, and for this I have made
the preparations.’ He did not think he could be beaten; but if, by
some mischance, the fortune of war went against him, he had still
no doubt that he could bring off the army in safety. ‘If we do go,
I feel a little anxiety to go like gentlemen, out of the hall door
(particularly after all the preparations I have made to enable us to
do so), and not out of the back door or by the area.’