

The plan for defeating the enemy by the system of devastation was
neither ‘dictated by the hard heart of a general trained in the
atrocious wars of the East,’ as certain French authors have written,
nor was it (as some of the English authors have supposed) suggested
to Wellington by the measures which had been taken in 1803-4 for
withdrawing all food and transport from the south coast of England,
if Napoleon should be successful in crossing from Boulogne. It was
an ancient Portuguese device, practised from time immemorial against
the Castilian invader, which had never failed of success. Nor had
it come to an end with the War of Independence of 1640, or the war
of the Spanish Succession of 1704. When Spain had made her last
serious assault on Portugal in 1762 (Godoy’s miserable mock-war of
1801 does not deserve to be counted), the plan had worked admirably.
When the Conde d’Aranda invaded the Beira ‘the country had been
“driven” in the most systematic style, and everything that could
not be carried off had been destroyed, so that the Spaniard found
himself in a desert, being unable to discover either provisions,
cars, or peasants: the inhabitants had abandoned their villages,
and carried off everything. The enemy had to be supplied with every
necessary from Spain: the infantry were harassed with fatigue in
remaking the roads, and the cavalry-horses destroyed in conducting
provisions. At last d’Aranda retreated, leaving his sick and wounded
at Castello Branco, with a letter commending them to the attention
of the allies[194].’ Of this same war Dumouriez wrote: ‘As soon as
the Spaniards enter Portugal the King publishes a declaration, by
which he enjoins on his subjects to fall upon the invaders, and the
national hatred always excites them to execute the “Ordinance.” As
the Spanish army pushes on, the villages are depopulated, and the
inhabitants fall back on the capital. The peasantry arrive there in
crowds with wives and children, so that the king at the end of three
months has 200,000 or 300,000 extra mouths to feed[195].’

  [194] Continuation of Vertot’s _History of Portugal_, ii. 51.

  [195] Dumouriez’s _State of Portugal_, p. 21, _n._

This sounds like a description of the great migration of 1810, but
was actually written in 1766. It is clear, then, that Wellington
did not invent the system of devastation, but simply utilized, and
carried out to its logical end, an old custom essentially national,
and familiar to the Portuguese from time immemorial. It was the
regular device of the weak against the strong in the Middle Ages,
and differed in nothing from ‘Good King Robert’s Testament,’ the
time-honoured system applied by the Scots to the English in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.

    ‘In strait placis gar hide all store,
    And byrnen ye plaineland thaim before,
    Thanne sall thei pass away in haist,
    When that thai find na thing but waist,
    So sall ye turn thaim with gret affrai,
    As thai were chasit with swerd awai.’