

  [196] For these officers and their duties see vol. ii. pp. 221-2.

  [197] Wellington to Beresford, Vizeu, Feb. 28, 1810, long before
  the actual invasion.

As to the displacement of the population, Wellington considered
that in many parts it would be sufficient if it took to the hills
for a few days, while the French army was passing. His military
arrangements were such that he thought it impossible that the enemy
would be able either to leave small posts behind him, or to maintain
his lines of communication with Spain. It would suffice, therefore,
that the peasantry in parts off the main roads, and remote from large
towns or points of strategical importance, should make ready for a
merely temporary migration. They must always, however, be ready to
flit again, if fresh columns of the enemy, advancing or retreating,
should come near their abodes. The townsfolk and the inhabitants
of the fertile coast plains of Estremadura and Western Beira were
recommended to retire either to Lisbon or to Oporto, according as
they were nearer to one or to the other. It was clear that the
problem of feeding them there would be a matter for the Government,
for individuals of the poorer classes could not be expected to carry
or to buy provisions for many weeks. Hence there was a need for the
accumulation of immense stores, over and above those required for
the army. The Portuguese Regency did what it could, but in its usual
slip-shod and inefficient fashion, and there is no doubt that much
misery and a certain amount of starvation fell to the lot of the
unhappy emigrants. Fortunately Lisbon and Oporto were great ports
and full of food; but despite of this, the position of the refugees
became deplorable, when Masséna tarried at Santarem two months longer
than Wellington had considered probable. But their suffering was not
in vain: the French were starved out, even if it was a few weeks
later than had been expected.

Having dealt with the organization of the military force of Portugal,
and the arrangements for the depopulation of the country, we have
still to explain the third section of Wellington’s great scheme of
defence--that consisting of fortifications. We have already mentioned
that Almeida and Elvas had been repaired and garrisoned, the former
with 5,000 men, consisting of one regiment of regulars and three of
militia, under the English general William Cox, the other by 8,000
men,--two regiments of regulars and five of militia,--under General
Leite. These were the outer bulwarks of the realm. Campo Mayor, a
small and antiquated fortress, a sort of outlying dependency of
Elvas, was held by one militia battalion under a Colonel Talaya,
a retired engineer officer. It was not expected to make a serious
resistance, but did so in the time of need, and detained a French
division before its walls for some precious days in the spring of
1811, to the great glory and credit of its governor.

Only two other of the ancient fortresses of Portugal were placed in
a state of defence, and made to play a notable part in Wellington’s
general scheme for checking the French. These were Peniche and
Abrantes. The former is a very strong isolated sea-fortress, on a
projecting headland in the Atlantic, forty miles north of Lisbon. It
commands several good creeks and landing-places, suitable for the
embarkation and disembarkation of troops, and is nearly impregnable,
because of the narrowness of the isthmus connecting it with the
mainland. Placed where it is, just in the rear of the position which
an enemy must take who is meditating an attack on Lisbon, it offers
unique opportunities for making incursions on his rear and his
communications. Moreover, it afforded a refuge and a safe point of
departure by sea, for any section of the allied troops which might
become isolated, and be pressed towards the water by the advancing
enemy. Some of Wellington’s officers considered that it was an even
better place for embarkation than Lisbon, if the French should
prove too strong, and the British should be compelled to abandon
Portugal. The Commander-in-Chief thought otherwise, but caused its
fortification to be carefully restored, and garrisoned it with a
picked regiment of militia[198].