

  [200] For these views of Aug. and Sept. 1809, see vol. ii. p. 610.

How the great scheme worked out, and how the works stood when
Masséna’s long-expected army at last appeared in front of them, will
be told in a later chapter, in its due place. Suffice it here to say
that all through the spring and summer of 1810 they were being urged
forward with feverish haste.

It must not be supposed that it was an easy matter to carry out all
these preparations. The Portuguese government ended by adopting
all Wellington’s suggestions: but it was not without friction that
he achieved his purpose. While he was planning works at the very
gates of Lisbon, and making provisions for the devastation of
whole provinces in view of the approaching invasion, he was often
met by suggestions that it would be possible to defend the outer
frontiers of the realm, and that his schemes were calculated to
dishearten the Portuguese people, rather than to encourage them to
a firm resistance. The Regency, moreover, had enough national pride
to resent the way in which a policy was dictated to them, without
any reference to their own views. The governing party in Portugal
had accepted the English alliance without reserve, but it often
winced at the consequences of its action. There was a view abroad
that the little nation was being set in the forefront of the battle
of European independence mainly for the benefit of Great Britain.
Fortunately the memory of Junot’s dictatorship and Soult’s ravages
was still fresh enough to overcome all other considerations. A
moment’s reflection convinced Wellington’s most ardent critics that
though the British yoke might sometimes seem hard, anything was
better than a return to French servitude. The Regency murmured, but
always ended by yielding, and issued the edicts necessary to confirm
all the orders of the general.

The state of the Portuguese government at this moment requires a
word of explanation. The original Regency confirmed by Sir Hew
Dalrymple in 1808 had been somewhat changed in its personnel. It
was now a more numerous body than at its first installation; of the
original members, only the Patriarch (Antonio de Castro, late bishop
of Oporto), and the Marquez de Olhão (Francisco de Mello e Menezes,
the Constable or Monteiro Mor, as he is more frequently called), now
survived. But four new members had been appointed in 1810. The most
important of them was José Antonio de Menezes e Sousa, generally
known as the ‘Principal Sousa,’ an ecclesiastic who was one of
the band of three Sousa brothers, who formed the backbone of the
anti-French party in Portugal. The eldest of them, Rodrigo de Sousa
Coutinho, Conde de Linhares, was prime minister of the Prince Regent
at Rio de Janeiro. The third, Domingos Antonio de Sousa Coutinho,
afterwards Conde de Funchal, was Portuguese minister in London. Thus
when the Principal entered the Regency, this busy and capable family
could pull the strings alike at Rio, London, and Lisbon, in the
interests of their relations and dependants. This they did without
scruple and without ceasing. Domestic politics in Portugal had always
been a matter of family alliances, as much as of principles. They
presented, indeed, a considerable resemblance to those of Great
Britain during the Whig domination of the eighteenth century. Hence
there was considerable danger that the policy of the alliance against
Napoleon might become identified in the eyes of the Portuguese nation
with the domination of the Sousa faction. That this peril was avoided
was not their fault: they did their best to keep all promotion,
civil and military, for their own adherents; hence came interminable
quarrels on petty personal questions both with Wellington and
Beresford. Fortunately the two Marshals could generally get their way
in the end, when large interests were at stake, because the Sousas
were pledged to the British alliance, and dared not break with it.
To do so would have brought other politicians to the front. But,
meanwhile, unending controversies wasted Wellington’s time and soured
his temper: more than once he is found writing in his dispatches
to Lord Liverpool that the ‘impatient, meddling, mischievous’[201]
Principal ought to be got out of the Regency and promoted to some
foreign embassy, or great civil post, where he could do less harm.
But the British government thought, and probably was right in
thinking, that it was better to bear with known evils than to quarrel
with the Sousa family, and thereby to break up the pro-British party
in Portugal. Wellington had to endure the Principal’s small intrigues
and petty criticism till the end.