

  [206] Same to same, Oct. 7, 1809.

Down to the month of December 1809, Napoleon’s correspondence
teems with allusions to his approaching departure for Spain. They
were not merely intended to deceive the public, for they occur in
letters to his most trusted ministers and generals. We might be
inclined to suspect an intention to cajole the English Ministry in
the magnificent phrases of the address to the Corps Législatif on
December 3, when the Emperor declares that ‘the moment he displays
himself beyond the Pyrenees the Leopard in terror will seek the Ocean
to avoid shame, defeat, and death.’ But business was certainly meant
when Berthier was advised to send forward his carriages and horses
to Madrid, and when the Old Guard’s departure for the frontier was
ordered[207]. Suddenly, in the third week of December, the allusions
to the Emperor’s impending departure cease. It would appear that his
change of purpose must be attributed not to the news of Ocaña, where
the last great Spanish army had perished, but to a purely domestic
cause: this was the moment at which the question of the Imperial
Divorce came into prominence. It would seem that when Napoleon had
conceived the idea of the Austrian marriage, and had learnt that
his offers were likely to be accepted, he gave up all intention of
invading Spain in the early spring in person. The divorce was first
officially mooted when the ‘protest’ was laid before a Privy Council
on December 15[208], and after that day there is no more mention of
a departure for the South. All through January, February, and March
the negotiations were in progress, and on April 1-2[209] the Emperor
married his new wife. The festivities which followed lasted many
days, and when they were over the Emperor conducted his spouse on a
long tour through the Northern Departments in May, and did not return
to the vicinity of Paris till June, when the army of invasion, which
had long since reached the Peninsula, had been already handed over to
a new chief.

  [207] Napoleon to Berthier, Nov. 28.

  [208] Napoleon to Clarke, Dec. 5. Minute for the Privy Council
  dated Dec. 15, in the _Correspondance_.

  [209] The civil ceremony took place on the first, the religious
  on the second of these two days.

In the months during which the marriage negotiations were in
progress, and the columns of reinforcements were pouring into
Navarre and Old Castile, it is not quite certain what were the
Emperor’s real intentions as to the allocation of the command.
Nothing clear can be deduced from an order given to Junot in the
middle of February ‘to spread everywhere the news of the arrival of
the Emperor with 80,000 men, in order to disquiet the English and
prevent them from undertaking operations in the South[210].’ This
is but a _ruse de guerre_; the marriage project was so far advanced
that the ratifications of the contract were signed only four days
later than the date of the dispatch[211], and Napoleon must have
known that he could not get away from Paris for another two months
at the least. But it was only on April 17 that an Imperial Decree,
dated at Compiègne, was published, announcing that not the whole
French force in Spain, but three army corps (the 2nd, 6th, and 8th),
with certain other troops, were to form the Army of Portugal and to
be placed under the command of Masséna, Duke of Rivoli and Prince of
Essling. After this it was certain that the Emperor would not cross
the Pyrenees. Five days later this was made still more clear by an
order to the Commandant of the Guard to recall the old Chasseur and
Grenadier regiments of that corps from the various points that they
had reached on the way to Bayonne, and to send on to Spain only the
Tirailleur and Voltigeur regiments recently raised in 1809, and
generally known as the ‘Young Guard’[212]. Napoleon never took the
field in person without the veteran portion of his body-guard.