

  [199] D’Urban has a long disquisition on Abrantes in his diary.
  Its weak points, he says, were an outlying hill on the Punhete
  road, which gave a favourable position for hostile batteries, and
  the friable nature of the gravelly soil, which did not bind well
  in trenches and outworks.

Almeida and Elvas, Peniche and Abrantes, were regular fortresses with
large garrisons. There were, however, other points where Wellington
ordered fortifications of a less permanent kind to be thrown up,
because he thought them of first-rate strategical importance. The two
most important were one on the northern line of advance which the
French might take, the other on the central or Castello Branco line.
The first was a line of redoubts behind the river Alva, just where it
joins the Mondego, on either side of the bridge and village of Ponte
de Murcella. It was here, he thought, that Masséna would choose his
road, along the south bank of the Mondego, if he marched on Lisbon
by the Beira line. But the Marshal moved by Vizeu, partly (as it
seems) because he had heard of the fortifications of this defile, and
the works were never used. Equally unprofitable (so it chanced) was
another important series of field-works, constructed to cover the
lowest reach of the Zezere against an invader who should come by the
Castello Branco road, and should have masked or taken Abrantes. This
was a line of redoubts and trenches, almost a fortified camp, on the
east bank of the river from Tancos to opposite Martinchel, blocking
both the roads which lead from Castello Branco into Estremadura.
Masséna, coming not by the route which was guarded against, but from
Leiria and Thomar, took the lines of Zezere in the rear, and they
proved useless.

Along with the precautions taken on the banks of the Alva and the
Zezere, two other pieces of engineering must be mentioned. The one,
the destruction of the _Estrada Nova_,--the mountain-road which leads
from Fundão and Belmonte to the lower Zezere without passing through
Castello Branco,--has already been noticed, when we were dealing
with the possible lines of invasion in Portugal. The other move was
constructive, not destructive, in character. Foreseeing that Abrantes
might be masked, or besieged on the northern bank of the Tagus, and
all the roads in that direction thereby blocked, while it might
still be very profitable to have free communication between Lisbon
and the Castello Branco region, he caused the road above the south
bank of the Tagus, from opposite Abrantes to the flying-bridge at
Villa Velha, to be thoroughly reconstructed. This route, by Gavião
and Niza, was so much easier in its slopes than the old high-road
Abrantes-Castello Branco, that, even when the latter was safe, troops
moving from east to west, along the Tagus often used it during the
next two years of the war, though it involved two passages of the
river instead of one.

But all the matters of engineering hitherto mentioned were
unimportant and merely subsidiary, when placed beside the one great
piece of work which formed the keystone of Wellington’s plan for
the defence of Portugal. His whole scheme depended on the existence
of an impregnable place of refuge, available both for his army, and
for the emigrant population of the country-side which he was about
to devastate. He must have a line on which the invader could be
finally checked and forced to halt and starve. If such a line had not
existed, his whole scheme would have been impracticable, and after
a lost battle he might have been driven to that hurried embarkation
which the ministers in London foresaw and dreaded. But his eye had
been fixed upon the ground in front of Lisbon ever since his second
landing in the Peninsula in April 1809, and there he thought that the
necessary stronghold might be found. A full year before Masséna’s
invasion he had informed the British cabinet that though he could not
undertake to defend all Portugal, ‘for the whole country is frontier,
and it would be difficult to prevent the enemy from entering by
some point or other,’ he yet conceived that he might protect the
essential part of the realm, the capital, against anything save the
most overwhelming odds[200]. The scheme had taken definite shape in
his head when, on October 20, 1809, he wrote his famous dispatch to
Colonel Fletcher, the commanding engineer at Lisbon, directing him to
draw up without delay a scheme for the construction of two successive
lines of trenches and redoubts, covering the whole stretch of country
from the Atlantic to a point on the estuary of the Tagus twenty miles
or more north of the capital. This was, in its essentials, the order
for the construction of the lines of Torres Vedras, for though the
front designated does not exactly tally with that ultimately taken
up, it only differs from it in points of detail. Fletcher is directed
to survey a line from the mouth of the Castanheira brook to the mouth
of the Zizandre, and another, a few miles behind, from Alhandra on
the Tagus by Bucellas and Cabeça de Montechique towards Mafra. These
roughly represent the two lines of defence ultimately constructed,
though in the end the extreme right flank was drawn back from the
Castanheira to the Alhandra stream. Fletcher is told that the works
will be on the largest scale: the fortified camp above Torres Vedras
is to hold 5,000 men, the works at Cabeça de Montechique alone will
require 5,000 workmen to be set to dig at once; great operations,
such as the damming up of rivers and the creation of marshes many
miles long, are suggested.