

  [201] Wellington to Lord Liverpool, _Dispatches_, vi. p. 435.

The other members who entered the Regency in 1810 were the Conde
de Redondo, Fernando Maria de Sousa Coutinho--another of the Sousa
clan--Doctor Raymundo Nogueira, a law professor of the University of
Coimbra[202] and--far the most important of all--the newly appointed
British Minister at Lisbon, Mr. Charles Stuart. The nomination of
a foreigner to such a post touched Portuguese pride to the quick,
and was looked upon by all enemies of the Sousa faction as an act
of miserable weakness on the part of the Conde de Linhares and the
Prince Regent. It was considered doubtful policy on the part of the
Perceval Cabinet to consent to the appointment, considering the
offence which it was certain to give. In their justification it must
be pleaded that both the Patriarch and the Principal Sousa were men
capable of causing any amount of difficulty by their ill-considered
plans and their personal intrigues, and that a colleague who could
be trusted to keep an eye upon their actions, and to moderate their
ambitions was much needed. Stuart was a man of moderate and tactful
bearing, but could be neither cajoled nor overruled. It was on his
influence in the Regency that Wellington relied most for support. At
this moment there were two questions in process of discussion which
rendered it most necessary that the Portuguese government should
not be left entirely to its own guidance. Taking advantage of the
unhappy condition of Spain, and the weakness of the newly appointed
executive at Cadiz, the Portuguese were pressing for the restoration
of Olivenza, Godoy’s old conquest of 1801, and for the recognition
of the Princess Carlotta of Spain, the wife of the Prince of the
Brazils, as the person entitled to act as Regent of Spain during the
captivity of her brothers at Valençay. Dom Pedro de Sousa Holstein,
the Portuguese minister at Cadiz--a kinsman of Linhares and the
Principal--was actively urging both these demands on the Spanish
government. If he had succeeded in imposing them on Castaños and
his colleagues there would have been desperate friction between the
allies. But by promising the active support of the Portuguese army
within the Spanish frontiers--which he had no power to guarantee, and
which Wellington had absolutely refused to grant--the minister won
some support at Cadiz. Extra pressure was brought to bear upon the
Spaniards by the massing of Brazilian troops on the South American
frontier, on the side of Rio Grande do Sul--a most unjustifiable act,
which might have led to an actual rupture, a thing which the British
government was bound to prevent by every means in its power. The
only way to prevent an open breach between Spain and Portugal was
to check the activity of Sousa Holstein, an end which Stuart found
much difficulty in accomplishing, because the objects for which the
minister was striving, and especially the restoration of Olivenza
to its old owners, were entirely approved by his colleagues in the
Regency. When it is added that there were numerous other points of
friction between the British and the Portuguese governments--such as
the question of free trade with Brazil, that of the suppression of
the slave trade, and that of the form to be adopted for the payment
of the subsidies which maintained the Portuguese army--it is easy
to understand that Stuart’s position on the Council of Regency was
no easy one. He often found himself in a minority of one when a
discussion started: he frequently had to acquiesce in decisions
which he did not approve, merely in order to avoid friction on
matters of secondary importance. But in matters of really primary
moment he generally succeeded in getting his way, owing to the simple
fact that Portugal was dependent on Great Britain for the continuance
of her national existence. Conscious of this, the other members of
the Regency would generally yield a reluctant assent at the last
moment, and Wellington’s plans, when set forth by Stuart, though
often criticized, delayed, and impeded, were in the end carried out
with more or less completeness.