

  [198] D’Urban says in his diary (Dec. 8, 1809): ‘Inspected
  Peniche. The isthmus over which the peninsula is approached is
  covered with water at high tide, and from the line of works
  describing a sort of arc, very powerful cross-fires may be
  established upon every part of it. There are nearly 100 good
  guns upon the work, the brass ones especially good. This is the
  most favourable position that can he conceived for embarking
  the British army, should it ever be necessary to do so. The
  circumference abounds with creeks and clefts in the rocks, inside
  which there is always smooth water, and easy egress for boats.
  They are out of the reach of fire from the mainland: indeed,
  there is sufficient room to encamp a large force perfectly beyond
  the range of the enemy. If it should be thought worth while, this
  peninsula could be held by England, even if Portugal otherwise
  were in the power of the enemy. There is abundance of water. If
  it be the wish of Lord Wellington he can retire upon Lisbon, give
  battle in front of it, and, if the day go against him, retreat
  upon Peniche and defend it so long as he pleases.’

Even more important than Peniche was Abrantes, the one great
crossing-place of the Tagus above Lisbon where there was a permanent
bridge, and free communication by good roads between Beira and
Alemtejo. It lies at the point where the road from Spain by way
of Castello Branco crosses the road from north to south down the
Portuguese frontier, from Almeida and Guarda to Evora and Elvas. An
invader who has advanced towards Lisbon through Beira has it on his
flank and rear, equally so an invader who has advanced on the same
objective from Badajoz and the Guadiana. It is the natural point
at which to move troops north and south along the frontier, though
Wellington had established an alternative temporary crossing-point at
Villa Velha, thirty miles higher up the river, by means of pontoons.
But this secondary passage was inferior in safety, since it was not
protected by a fortress like Abrantes. Orders were given to burn the
pontoons if ever a French force from the East should came near. At
Abrantes, on the other hand, the boat-bridge could be pulled up and
stacked under the city walls in the event of an attack, and did not
need to be destroyed. The town is situated on a lofty eminence upon
the north bank of the Tagus. Its fortifications were antiquated in
1809, but had been for many months in process of being rebuilt and
strengthened by the English engineer Patton. With new earthworks
and redoubts it had been made a strong place, which could not be
taken without a regular siege and plenty of heavy artillery. Here
Wellington had placed a garrison of two militia regiments under the
Portuguese general Lobo, whose orders were to resist to the last,
and to make sure of burning the boat-bridge, down to the last plank,
before surrendering. The French never put him to the test, since they
had no heavy guns with them, and therefore regarded it as hopeless
to attempt an attack on the place[199].