

  [202] A man of whom all Portuguese writers speak with
  respect; even Napier notes him (ii. 386) as ‘a man of talent
  and discretion.’ But Wellington seems to have disliked him.
  ‘The admission of Dr. Raymundo Nogueira to the Regency, and
  the reasons of his admission, were truly ludicrous ... his
  appointment is to be agreeable to the lower orders--from among
  whom he is selected!’ (Wellington to Charles Stuart, Celorico,
  Aug. 4, 1810.)




SECTION XIX: CHAPTER III

THE FRENCH PREPARATIONS: MASSÉNA’S ARMY OF PORTUGAL


During the summer campaign of 1809 the French Army of Spain had
received hardly any reinforcements from beyond the Pyrenees. Every
man that the Emperor could arm was being directed against Austria
in May and June. But when Wagram had been won, and the armistice
of Znaym signed, and when moreover it had been discovered that the
British expedition to the Isle of Walcheren need not draw off any
part of the Army of Germany, the Emperor began to turn his attention
to the Peninsula. The armistice with Austria had been signed on July
12: only six days later, on the 18th of the same month, Napoleon
was already selecting troops to send to Spain, and expressing
his intention of going there himself to ‘finish the business’ in
person[203]. But he had made up his mind that it was too late in the
year for him to transport any great mass of men to the Peninsula in
time for operations in the autumn, and had settled that the expulsion
of the English and the conquest of Cadiz, Seville, and Valencia must
be delayed to the spring of 1810. On September 7 he wrote[204] to
approve King Joseph’s decision that Soult should not be allowed to
make any attempt on Portugal in the autumn, and a month later he
advised his brother to defend the line of the Tagus, and drive back
Spanish incursions, but to defer all offensive movements till the
reinforcements should have begun to arrive[205].

  [203] ‘Faites-moi connaître la marche que vous faites faire aux
  66e, 82e, 26e, etc., etc.: _lorsque j’entrerai en Espagne_ cela
  me pourra faire une force de 18,000 hommes.’ Napoleon to Clarke,
  Schönbrunn, July 18.

  [204] Napoleon to Clarke, Schönbrunn, Sept. 7.

  [205] Napoleon to Clarke, memoranda for King Joseph, Oct. 3, 1809.

The composition of the new army that was to enter Spain was dictated
in a minute to the Minister of War on October 7, in which the
Emperor stated that the total force was to be about 100,000 men,
including the Guard, that it was all to be on the roads between
Orleans and Bayonne by December, and that he should take command
in person[206]. It may be noted that the troops designated in this
memorandum were actually those which took part in the campaign of
1810, with the exception of the Old Guard, which was held back when
Napoleon determined to remain behind, and to send a substitute as
commander-in-chief in Spain. Since the bulk of the immense column was
only directed to reach Bayonne at the end of the year, it was clear
that it would not be within striking distance of the enemy till March
1810.