

Fortunately for himself, for England, and for Europe, Wellington
had to deal with a peasantry almost as frugal, as tough, and as
stubborn in their hatred as the mediaeval Scot. They saw nothing
strange in the demand now made to them, and obeyed. The difficulty
lay with the townsfolk of large places, such as Coimbra, Thomar,
or Santarem, which lay far from the frontier, and had not the
old traditions of the peasantry, since the Spaniards had never
penetrated to their doors since the seventeenth century. Here
there was much recalcitrance, as was but natural; the burgher had
much to abandon where the peasant had little. Yet, as we shall see,
the scheme was carried out in the end, and those who stayed behind
to greet the French could be counted on one hand in places of the
size of Vizeu, Coimbra, or Leiria. That fanatical patriotism went
far towards producing such a result is true, but does not explain
the whole matter: quite as strong a motive was the unforgotten tale
of the horrors that had followed Soult’s entry into Oporto. To the
Portuguese citizens the approach of the French meant probable murder
and rape, hence came the readiness that they showed to depart. There
were exaggerated rumours abroad of the ruthlessness of the French:
was not Loison, the ‘Maneta’ of whom so many atrocious (and mostly
false) stories were told, known to be in high command?

Wellington’s scheme for the clearing of the country-side in face
of the enemy had long been thought out. It included not merely the
evacuation of the towns and villages, but the destruction of bridges,
mills, even ovens; the removal of all animals and means of transport,
the destruction of all food-stuff that could not be carried off, the
burning of all ferry-boats and other small craft on the navigable
rivers. ‘The moment that the enemy crosses the frontier,’ he wrote to
Beresford, ‘the governor of the province of Estremadura must be told
that it is necessary to order all carts, carriages, and other means
of conveyance, with all the provisions they can carry, away. He ought
to have all his arrangements prepared for ordering them off as soon
as the French approach. The Captains Mor[196] and their Ordenança
must be prepared to give the enemy all the opposition in their power,
not by assembling in large bodies, but by lying out in the mountains
and the strong parts of the roads, annoying their patrols and small
parties, and interrupting their communications[197].’ This comes from
an order of February: by August, when a new harvest had been gathered
in, the question of the destruction of food stuffs became more
difficult. The peasantry, as was natural, persisted in hiding rather
than burning what could not be carried off. By one means or another
a certain number of these concealed stores, even when buried in pits
or removed to remote ravines, were discovered by the French, and
enabled them to prolong their precarious stay in front of the Torres
Vedras lines.