

But it would seem that the third of Wellington’s reasons for calling
out the Ordenança was far more cogent, and lay nearer to the heart
of his scheme than the other two. Throughout Portuguese history the
summons to the levy _en masse_ had always been combined with another
measure, from which indeed it could not be disentangled--the order
to the whole population to evacuate and devastate the land in face
of the advancing enemy. The use of the weapon of starvation against
the French was an essential part of Wellington’s plan for defending
Portugal. When he told the British Ministry that he would undertake
the defence of the realm, this was one of the main conditions of his
pledge. He had realized the great fact that the conduct of the war
in the Peninsula depended on supplies: the old aphorism that ‘beyond
the Pyrenees large armies starve and small armies get beaten’ was
at the back of all his schemes for the year 1810. He calculated
that the French would find the greatest difficulty in accumulating
stores sufficient to feed an army of invasion large enough to attack
Portugal, and that, even if such stores could be gathered, there
would be a still greater difficulty in getting them to the front as
they were needed. For not only would it be hard to collect the mass
of transport required for an army of 70,000, 80,000, or 100,000 men,
but the convoys which it formed would find it impossible to move
over the vast stretch of bad roads between Salamanca and Lisbon,
when the communications were cut and the Militia and Ordenança were
infesting every pass and hillside. It was almost certain that the
invaders would make no such attempt to feed themselves from the
rear, but would start with a moderate train, carrying no more than
provisions for a week or two, and hoping to subsist (in the usual
French style) on the resources of the invaded country. Such resources
Wellington was determined that they should not find. They would ere
long be starved out, and forced to fall back on their magazines,
certainly losing a large proportion of their men from privations by
the way. If this scheme had been carried out with rigid perfection,
Masséna’s invasion would have amounted to no more than a promenade
to Torres Vedras, and a prompt return to the borders of Spain with
a famished army. Unfortunately the device, though it worked well
and was ultimately quite successful, was not perfectly executed in
every corner and by every subordinate, so that the French, showing
a magnificent obstinacy, and suffering untold privations, remained
before the Lines for three months before they retired. But retire
they did, and with a loss of a third of their army, and a deplorable
decadence of their morale, so that Wellington’s scheme was fully
justified[193].

  [193] Unlike the many French writers who content themselves
  with denouncing Wellington’s inhumanity, Pelet (Masséna’s
  chief confidant) confesses that the English general’s plan was
  perfectly logical. In his _Aperçu de la Campagne de Portugal_,
  he writes, ‘On a critiqué sans raison son système de guerre.
  Il était à peu près infaillible contre un ennemi inférieur en
  nombre. Mais peu de généraux oseront “sauver un pays” d’une telle
  manière.’