

  [216] Junot’s original corps was reinforced by the 22nd of the
  line (4 batts.) drawn from the Prussian fortresses, and by some
  units which had hitherto been doing garrison duty in Navarrese
  and Biscayan fortresses, where they were now replaced by the
  Young Guard. Among these were the Irish Brigade (2 batts.) and
  the Prussian regiment which had formed the original garrison of
  Pampeluna.

(2) Next in point of importance were the two divisions of the Young
Guard under Generals Roguet and Dumoustier, nineteen battalions,
with three provisional regiments of the Guard Cavalry, nearly 15,000
men in all. These units had been formed in 1809, just in time for
some of them to take their share in the bloody days of Essling and
Wagram. The Emperor did not make them over to the Army of Portugal,
but retained them in Biscay and Navarre, close under the Pyrenees.
Apparently he disliked sending any of his Guards so far afield as
to render it difficult to draw them back to France, in the event
(unlikely as it was at this moment) of further troubles breaking out
in Central Europe. The Guard divisions stayed in Spain two years, but
were never allowed to go far forward into the interior.

(3) Deeply impressed with the danger and difficulty of keeping up the
lines of communication between Bayonne and Madrid, since Mina and
his coadjutors had set the guerrilla war on foot in Navarre and Old
Castile, Napoleon had formed a corps whose special duty was to be
the keeping open of the roads, and the policing of the country-side
between the frontier and the Spanish capital. This was composed of
twenty squadrons of _Gendarmes_, all veterans and picked men, each
with a total strength of seven officers and 200 troopers. The decree
ordering their selection from among the _gendarmerie_ of Southern
and Central France was published on November 24, 1809: but the first
squadrons only began to pass the Pyrenees in February 1810, and many
did not appear till April and May. Yet 4,000 men were in line by the
summer[217].

  [217] For details of this corps and its services see the
  monograph, _La Gendarmerie en Espagne et Portugal_, by E. Martin,
  Paris, 1898.

(4) A few new regiments which had not hitherto been represented in
the Peninsula were moved down thither. Among these were the Neuchâtel
troops from Berthier’s principality, a German division from the minor
states of the Confederation of the Rhine under General Rouyer[218],
which went to Catalonia, the 7th, 13th, and 25th _Chasseurs à
Cheval_, with two battalions of Marines. The total did not amount to
more than some 10,000 men.

  [218] Nine battalions as follows: Two of Nassau, the others from
  Gotha, Weimar, Altenburg, Waldeck, Reuss, Schwarzburg, Anhalt,
  and Lippe; strength about 6,000 men.

(5) By far the largest item in the reinforcements was composed of
the 4th battalions of wellnigh every regiment which was already
serving in Spain. The army which had marched across the Pyrenees
in 1808 had been organized on the basis of three field-battalions
to the regiment, the 4th battalion being the dépôt battalion. But
Napoleon had now raised the standard to four (or in a few cases more)
field-battalions, over and above the dépôt. All the fourth battalions
were now existing and available; a few had served in the Austrian
War, many of the others had been lying in the camps which the
Emperor had formed at Boulogne, Pontivy, and elsewhere, to protect
his coasts against possible English descents. Those belonging to 40
regiments already in Spain, with the full complement of 840 men each,
were first ordered to cross the Pyrenees: they numbered 33,600 men:
these were all at the front by May 1810. The Emperor somewhat later
dispatched the fourth battalions of twenty-six regiments more to the
Peninsula, giving to the temporary organization the name of the 9th
Corps. This should have given another 21,840 men, and nearly did so;
their gross total, when all had reached Vittoria in September 1810,
was 20,231. But the 9th Corps should not be reckoned in the first
100,000 men which the Emperor set aside for the spring campaign of
1810, it was a supplementary addition[219].