

Of this total, as we have already said, the 2nd, 6th, and 8th Corps
and the troops under Kellermann and Bonnet occupying the provinces
of Toro, Palencia, Valladolid, and Santander formed the ‘Army of
Portugal’ assigned to Masséna; he was also given an extra unattached
division under Serras[221], and promised the use of the 9th Corps
when it should have crossed the Pyrenees. The gross total of this
force was in May, when the new Commander-in-Chief had taken up his
post, about 130,000 men, of whom some 86,000 were effective and
available for active operations at the moment. Serras, Kellermann,
and Bonnet were tied down to their local duties--the first had to
look after the Spanish army of Galicia, the second to keep the plains
of Valladolid quiet, the third to hold Santander and (when it was
fully subdued) to enter and overrun the Asturias. The 20,000 men of
the 9th Corps were not yet arrived in Spain[222]. The troops in the
provinces of Burgos, Biscay, and Navarre, though not placed under the
Marshal’s actual command, were yet in existence to cover his rear and
his communications with France. If they are added to the total of the
force which, directly or indirectly, was employed for the conquest
of Portugal, some 30,000 more must be taken into consideration. But,
though they were useful, indeed indispensable, for the conquest of
Portugal, it is fairer to leave them out of consideration.

  [221] This division had charge of the Provinces of Leon, Zamora,
  and Salamanca, which were not a ‘military government.’

  [222] Roughly, on May 15, 2nd Corps 20,000 men, 6th ditto 35,000,
  8th ditto 26,000, Cavalry reserve 5,000, effectives present under
  arms, besides the sick, who made up about 12,000 more, and some
  6,000 men detached. See Tables in Appendix.

But the exact total of an army is, after all, less important than
the character and capacity of its generals. The individuality of
Masséna was the most important factor in the problem of the invasion
of Portugal. He was fifty-two years of age--very nearly the eldest
of all the Marshals--and he was the only one of those on active
service, save Jourdan, who had achieved greatness in the days
before Napoleon arrived at supreme power. He had led an army of
60,000 men when, of the three corps-commanders now under him, Ney
was but a lieutenant-colonel, Junot a young captain, and Reynier a
brigadier-general. Like nearly all the men of the Revolution he had
risen from below; he sprang from a poor family in Genoa: according to
his enemies they were Jews, and his name was but Manasseh disguised.
His personal character was detestable; many of the marshals had an
evil reputation for financial probity, but Masséna’s was the worst
of all. ‘He plundered like a _condottiere_ of the Middle Ages,’
wrote one of his lieutenants. He had been in trouble, both with
the Republican government and with the Emperor, for his shameless
malversations in Italy, and had piled up a large private fortune by
surreptitious methods[223]. Avarice is not usually associated with
licentiousness, but he shocked even the easy-going public opinion
of the French army by the way in which he paraded his mistress at
unsuitable moments and in unsuitable company. He took this person,
the sister of one of his aides-de-camp, with him all through the
dangers of the Portuguese campaign, where her presence often caused
friction and delays, and occasionally exposed him to insults[224].
Masséna was hard, suspicious, and revengeful; an intriguer to the
finger-tips, he was always prone to suppose that others were
intriguing against himself[225]. Though an old Republican, who had
risen from the ranks early in the revolutionary war, he had done
his best to make himself agreeable to Napoleon by the arts of the
courtier. Altogether, he was a detestable character--but he was a
great general. Of all the marshals of the Empire he was undoubtedly
the most capable; Davoust and Soult, with all their abilities, were
not up to his level. As a proof of his boldness and rapid skill in
seizing an opportunity the battle of Zurich is sufficient to quote;
for his splendid obstinacy the defence of Genoa at the commencement
of his career has its parallel in the long endurance before the lines
of Torres Vedras at its end. His best testimonial is that Wellington,
when asked, long years after, which of his old opponents was the best
soldier, replied without hesitation that Masséna was the man, and
that he had never permitted himself to take in his presence the risks
that he habitually accepted when confronted with any of the other
marshals[226].