

  [223] The Emperor once confiscated 3,000,000 francs which Masséna
  had collected by selling licences to trade with the English at
  Leghorn and other Italian ports. See the Memoirs of General
  Lamarque, who carried out the seizure.

  [224] See Thiébault, iv. 375; Marbot, ii. 380-1; Duchesse
  d’Abrantes, viii. 50. All these may be called scandal-mongers,
  but the lady’s presence, and the troubles to which it gave rise,
  are chronicled by more serious authorities.

  [225] See Foy’s complaints on p. 114 of his _Vie Militaire_ (ed.
  Girod de L’Ain) as to the way in which the Marshal suspected him
  of undermining his favour with the Emperor.

  [226] See Lord Stanhope’s _Conversations with the Duke of
  Wellington_, p. 20.

[Illustration:
  ANDRÉ MASSÉNA, DUC DE RIVOLI PRINCE D’ESSLING,
  Né à Nice, en 1755,
  Mort à sa Terre près Paris, en Avril 1817.]

The fatigues of the late Austrian war, in which he had borne such
an honourable part, had tried Masséna’s health; it was not without
difficulty that the Emperor had persuaded him to undertake the
Portuguese campaign. When he first assembled round him at Salamanca
the staff which was to serve him in the invasion, he astonished
and somewhat disheartened his officers by beginning his greetings
to them with the remark, ‘Gentlemen, I am here contrary to my own
wish; I begin to feel myself too old and too weary to go on active
service. The Emperor says that I must, and replied to the reasons for
declining this post which I gave him, by saying that my reputation
would suffice to end the war. It was very flattering no doubt, but
no man has two lives to live on this earth--the soldier least of
all[227].’ Those who had served under the Marshal a few years back,
and now saw him after an interval, felt that there was truth in what
he said. Foy wrote in his diary, ‘He is no longer the Masséna of the
flashing eyes, the mobile face, and the alert figure whom I knew
in 1799, and whose head then recalled to me the bust of Marius. He
is only fifty-two, but looks more than sixty; he has got thin, he
is beginning to stoop; his look, since the accident when he lost
his eye by the Emperor’s hand[228], has lost its vivacity. The tone
of his voice alone remains unchanged.’ But if the Marshal’s bodily
vigour was somewhat abated, his will was as strong as ever. He needed
it at this juncture, for he had to command subordinates who were
anything but easy to deal with. Ney, though an honest man and an
admirable soldier, had the fault of insubordination in the highest
degree. He never obeyed any one save the Emperor in the true military
fashion. He quarrelled with every colleague that he met--notably
with Soult--and had an old and very justifiable personal dislike for
Masséna. Even before the latter appeared at the front, he had been
heard to use threatening language concerning him. Junot was almost as
bad; having held the chief command in the last Portuguese expedition
he had a strong, if a mistaken, belief that it was becoming that he
should be placed in charge of the second. His record rendered the
idea absurd, but this he was the last to understand, being of an
overweening and self-confident disposition. He was stupid enough to
regard Masséna as his supplanter, and to show sullen resentment. Of
the three chiefs of the army corps about to invade Portugal, Reynier
was the only one on decent terms with his Commander-in-Chief, but
even he was not reckoned his friend[229].