

  [227] This comes from an eye-witness with no grudge against
  Masséna, Hulot, commanding the artillery of the 8th Corps. See
  his _Mémoires_, p. 303.

  [228] Foy, p. 101. The Emperor, a notoriously bad shot, lodged
  some pellets in the Marshal’s left eye while letting fly at
  a pheasant. Napoleon turned round and accused his faithful
  Berthier of having fired the shot: the Prince of Neuchâtel was
  courtier enough to take the blame without a word, and in official
  histories appears as the culprit (see e. g. Amic’s _Masséna_,
  p. 272); for other notes see Guingret, p. 250. What is most
  astonishing is that Masséna was complaisant enough to affect to
  blame Berthier for the disaster.

  [229] See the admirable summary of all this in Foy’s diary (Girod
  de L’Ain), p. 101. Marbot gives the same views at bottom, but
  with his usual exaggeration, and with ‘illustrative anecdotes,’
  occasionally of doubtful accuracy.

Masséna’s chief of the staff was Fririon, a scientific soldier and
a man well liked by his colleagues; but it is said that he was not
so much in the Marshal’s confidence as Lieut.-Colonel Pelet, the
senior aide de camp of his staff. Complaints are found, in some
of the letters and memoirs of the time, that Masséna would talk
matters over with Pelet, and issue orders without letting even his
chief of the staff know of his change of plan or new inspiration.
Pelet’s own indiscreet statements on this point seem to justify the
complaints made by others against him[230]. There was friction,
therefore, even within the staff itself, and all that the Marshal
did, or said, was criticized by some of those who should have been
his loyal subordinates, under the notion that it had been inspired by
others, who were accorded a more perfect confidence by their common
chief. Exact knowledge of the disputes in the _État Major_ is hard
to obtain, because, when the campaign was over, every man tried to
make out that its failure had been due to the advice given to Masséna
by those of whom he was jealous. At the bottom, however, all this
controversy is not very important--there is no doubt that the Marshal
himself was responsible for all that had happened--he was not the man
to be led by the nose or over-persuaded by ambitious or intriguing
underlings.

  [230] Note Pelet’s _Aperçu sur la Campagne de Portugal_, nearly
  forty pages in the Appendix to _Victoires et Conquêtes_, vol.
  xxi: for his disputes with Baron Fririon see the _Spectateur
  Militaire_ for 1841. Pelet says, ignoring the chief of the staff
  entirely, ‘qu’il était investi de la confiance _absolue_ du
  maréchal: qu’il faisait _seul_ auprès de lui tout le travail
  militaire et politique, qu’il dirigeait la haute correspondance
  avec le major-général (Berthier) et les chefs de corps, etc.,
  etc.’ For Fririon’s comparative impotence see a story on p. 387
  of Marbot’s vol. ii, which may or may not be true--probably the
  former.