

  Pelet’s writings give a poor impression of his brain-power and
  his love of exact truth. He says, for example, in his _Aperçu_
  that Masséna had only 40,000 men in his army of invasion, when it
  is certain that he had 64,000. See Baron Fririon’s remarks on him
  in _Spectateur Militaire_, June 1841, pp. 1-5.

Failure or success is not the sole criterion of merit. Masséna’s
campaign was a disastrous business; yet on investigating the
disabilities under which he laboured, we shall be inclined in the
end to marvel that he did so much, not that he did no more. The
fundamental error was the Emperor’s, who gave him too few men for
the enterprise with which he was entrusted. Napoleon refused to
take the Portuguese troops into consideration, when he weighed the
needs of the expedition. He repeatedly wrote that ‘it was absurd
that his armies should be held in check by 25,000 or 30,000 British
troops,’ as if nothing else required to be taken into consideration.
He did not realize that Wellington had turned the Portuguese regular
army into a decent fighting machine, capable of holding back French
divisions in line of battle--as was shown at Bussaco. He had not
foreseen that the despised militia required to be ‘contained’ by
adequate numbers of troops on the line of communications. Still less
had he dreamed of the great scheme for the devastation of Portugal,
which was to be not the least effective of the weapons of its
defender. But of this more will be said in the proper place.




SECTION XIX: CHAPTER IV

THE MONTHS OF WAITING: SIEGE OF ASTORGA (MARCH-MAY 1810)


Masséna, as we have seen, was only appointed Commander-in-Chief
of the Army of Portugal on April 17, 1810, and did not appear at
Valladolid, to take up his charge, till May. The campaign, however,
had begun long before under the Emperor’s own directions. There
were preliminary operations to be carried out, which could be
finished before either the new General-in-Chief or the main body
of the reinforcements from beyond the Pyrenees had arrived. These
were the repression of the insurgent bands of Navarre, Biscay, and
Old Castile, the firm establishment of the line of communications
between Salamanca and Bayonne, and the capture of the outlying
Spanish fortresses, Astorga and Ciudad Rodrigo, which served as
external defences for the Portuguese frontier. ‘Les besoins en
Espagne sont successifs,’ wrote the Emperor early in the winter of
1809-10[231], ‘il faut d’abord un corps qui soumette les derrières.
Étant en Novembre il serait impossible de réunir tous les moyens
avant du commencement de janvier. Et dans cette presqu’île coupée de
montagnes les froids et les neiges de janvier ne permettront de rien
faire.’ All that he could do before spring would be to send forward
Junot’s corps, and the other earlier reinforcements, to positions
from which they should be ready to strike, the moment that the fine
weather began. With the coming of the new year, when these corps had
reached their destined positions, the imperial orders begin to abound
in elaborate directions for the extermination of the guerrillas of
the Upper Ebro and the Upper Douro[232], orders which led to much
marching and counter-marching of the newly arrived troops, but to
little practical effect in the way of repression, for skilled leaders
like Mina, the Empecinado, and Julian Sanchez, nearly always slipped
between the fingers of their pursuers, and on the few occasions when
they were pressed into a corner, simply bade their men disperse and
unite again at some distant rendezvous. These operations, however,
were wholly subsidiary: the actual advance against Portugal only
commences with the orders given to Junot in February to concentrate
his corps at Valladolid, to hand over the charge of Salamanca and Old
Castile to Kellermann’s dragoons and the divisions of the 6th Corps,
and then to subdue the whole of the plain-land of Leon, as far as the
foot of the Asturian and Galician mountains, including the towns of
Benavente, Leon, and Astorga. Bonnet and his division, now as always
based on Santander, were already advancing to invade the Asturias,
and to threaten Galicia from the east. Ney with the 6th Corps was
ordered to draw near to the frontier of Portugal on the side of
Ciudad Rodrigo, ‘to inundate all the approaches to that kingdom with
his cavalry, disquiet the English, and prevent them from dreaming
of transferring themselves back to the south.’ The news of the near
approach of the Emperor himself with 80,000 men was to be spread in
every direction[233].