

Long before Heudelet approached the Guadiana, Mortier had been
compelled, partly by want of supplies, partly by the threatening
attitude of La Romana, who began cautiously to turn his flanks, to
retire from in front of the walls of Badajoz. He gave back as far
as Zafra on the road to the south, and six days after marched for
Seville, leaving only a rearguard at Santa Ollala, on the extreme
border of Estremadura. Soult required his presence, for, on account
of a rising in Granada, and a threatening movement by the Spanish
army of Murcia, the French reserves in Andalusia had been moved
eastward, and its capital was almost stripped of troops. Hence when
the 2nd Corps reached Caçeres on March 8, and appeared in front of
Albuquerque on March 14, it found that the 5th Corps had departed,
and that it was nearly 100 miles from the nearest friendly post.
Heudelet, therefore, having all La Romana’s army in his front, and
no orders to execute (since the junction with Mortier had failed),
retired to Merida, where Reynier arrived from the north, superseded
him, and took command. Here the 2nd Corps remained practically
passive for the rest of the spring, keeping open, but with difficulty
and at long intervals, the communications between Madrid and Seville,
by means of detachments at Truxillo and Almaraz. To a certain
extent Reynier kept La Romana’s army in check, but he did not fully
discharge even that moderate task, for the Spanish general detached
southward two of his divisions, those of Contreras and Ballasteros,
to threaten the frontiers of Andalusia and stir up an insurrection
in the Condado de Niebla and the other regions west of Seville.
Ballasteros surprised the cavalry brigade of Mortier’s corps at
Valverde, at midnight on February 19, and scattered it, killing
Beauregard, the brigadier. He then advanced to Ronquillo, only twenty
miles from Seville, where, on March 25-6, he had an indecisive
engagement with one of Gazan’s brigades, after which he retired into
the Condado. Mortier, thereupon, came out against him from Seville at
the head of a whole division. Unwisely offering battle at Zalamea,
on the Rio Tinto, on April 15, Ballasteros was beaten, and retired
into the mountains. Thither, after some time, he was pursued by
Mortier’s columns, and again defeated at Araçena on May 26. But he
rallied his broken force in the Sierra de Araçena, where he remained
for long after, a thorn in the side of the Army of Andalusia, always
descending for a raid in the plains of Seville when he was left
unwatched. Soult was forced to keep a considerable part of the 5th
Corps in observation of him--a detachment that he was loth to spare.

La Romana’s central divisions, meanwhile, those of Charles O’Donnell
(brother of the Henry O’Donnell who had distinguished himself at
Gerona in the previous autumn), Mendizabal, and Contreras, bickered
with the 2nd Corps in the direction of Caçeres and Torresnovas,
without any notable advantage on either side. But as long as Reynier
lay at Merida, and Mortier might at any moment come up from Seville
to his aid, Wellington felt uneasy as to the possibility of a French
advance between Tagus and Guadiana, and, regarding La Romana’s army
as an insufficient security on this side, moved Hill with a force
of 12,000 men to Portalegre, close to the rear of Badajoz. Hill had
with his own British division, now consisting of three brigades[236],
another division composed of Portuguese, under General Hamilton[237],
the English heavy cavalry brigade of Slade, a weak Portuguese cavalry
brigade under Madden[238], and three batteries. He was ordered not
to countenance any offensive movements on the part of La Romana, but
to support him, and to endeavour to cover Badajoz, if the French
should unite the 2nd and 5th Corps, and make a serious move westward.
There was no need, as matters turned out, for any such support,
for Reynier, though he executed some rather useless feints and
counter-marches in April and May, undertook nothing serious. One of
his demonstrations drew Hill to Arronches, close to Elvas, on May 14,
but it turned out to be meaningless, and the British troops returned
to their usual head quarters at Portalegre a few days later. There
seems to have been some uncertainty of purpose in all this manœuvring
of the French in Estremadura. Reynier was not strong enough to offer
to fight La Romana and Hill combined; he might have done so with good
prospect of success if Mortier could have been spared from Andalusia;
but half the 5th Corps was usually detached far to the south,
hunting the insurgents of the Sierra de Ronda, and the other half
had to garrison Seville and watch Ballasteros. Hence Reynier, left
to himself, did no more for the common cause of the French in Spain
than detain Hill’s two divisions in the Alemtejo. That Wellington
was thus obliged to divide his army was no doubt a permanent gain
to the enemy: yet they obtained it by the very doubtful expedient of
leaving nothing on the Tagus; a push in the direction of Plasencia
and Almaraz by even a small Spanish force would have been a very
tiresome and troublesome matter for King Joseph, who would have been
forced either to bring down Ney from Salamanca, or to call Reynier
back from the Guadiana, for Madrid was entirely uncovered on the
West. But nothing of the sort happened; La Romana kept his main
body concentrated in front of Badajoz, and had the full approval of
Wellington for doing so.