

  [210] Napoleon to Berthier, Paris, Feb. 12.

  [211] On Feb. 16: see Napoleon to King Joseph, Paris, Feb. 23.

  [212] Napoleon to Clarke, April 22, 1810. Not in the
  _Correspondance_, but given at length by Ducasse in his _Memoirs
  of King Joseph_, vii. 275.

The non-appearance of the Emperor had one most important result. If
he had taken the field, every marshal and general in Spain would have
been subject to a single directing will, and would have been forced
to combine his operations with those of his neighbours, whether he
wished or no. On determining to devote the spring and summer of 1810
to nuptial feasts and state progresses, instead of to a campaign
on the Tagus, he did not nominate any single commander-in-chief
to take his place. Masséna, from his seniority and his splendid
military record, might have seemed worthy of such promotion. He was
not given it, but only placed in charge of three army corps, and of
certain parts of Old Castile and Leon and the garrison troops there
residing. This was a vast charge, embracing in all the command of
138,000 men. But it gave Masséna no control over the rest of the
armies of Spain, and no power to secure their co-operation, save
by the tedious method of appeals to Paris. Indeed, the Emperor had
chosen the precise moment of King Joseph’s conquest of Andalusia to
break up such hierarchical organization of command as existed in
the Peninsula. By a decree of February 8 he took the provinces of
Aragon and Catalonia, with the army corps there employed, completely
out of the sphere of the authority of King Joseph: Augereau and
Suchet were forbidden to hold any communication with Madrid, and
were directed to make every report and request to Paris. This would
not have been fatal to the success of the main operations of the
French army, for Aragon and Catalonia were a side-issue, whose
military history, all through the war, had little connexion with
that of Castile and Portugal. But their severance from the military
hierarchy dependent on the King was followed by that of Navarre,
the Basque provinces, Burgos, Valladolid, Palencia, and Toro, which
were formed into four ‘Military Governments’ under Generals Dufour,
Thouvenot, Dorsenne, and Kellermann. These governors were given
complete civil and military autonomy, with power to raise taxes,
administer justice, to name and displace Spanish functionaries, and
to move their troops at their own pleasure, under responsibility to
the Emperor alone. The ‘6th Government’ (Valladolid, Palencia, Toro)
was afterwards placed under the authority of Masséna; the others
remained independent Viceroyalties. Thus military authority in the
Peninsula was divided up for the future between (1) the Commander of
the Army of Portugal, who controlled not only his army but all the
regions which it occupied--Leon, the greater part of Old Castile, and
part of Estremadura; (2) the military governors of Catalonia, Aragon,
Navarre, Biscay, Burgos; (3) the King, who practically controlled his
Army of the Centre and the kingdom of New Castile alone, since Soult,
in Andalusia, though not formally created a ‘military governor,’
practically acted on his own responsibility, without any reference
to the King’s wishes. All the viceroys reported directly to Paris,
and kept the Emperor fully employed with their perpetual bickerings.
How Napoleon came to create and continue such a vicious system it
is hard to conceive. Apparently the explanation must be sought in
the fact that he feared servants with too great power, and acted on
the principle of _divide et impera_, despite of the fact that he
knew, as a soldier, that the want of a commander-in-chief is ruinous
in practical war. At the bottom was the idea that he himself could
manage everything, even when his armies were a thousand miles away,
and when it took three weeks or a month to transmit orders to them.
He sometimes acknowledged in a moment of self-realization that this
was a bad arrangement, and that it was impossible for him to conduct
or criticize the details of strategy at such a distance, or under
such conditions. But after a lucid moment he would fall back into
his usual ways of thought, and proceed to give orders and directions
which were obsolete before the dispatches that conveyed them could be
delivered to the hands of his marshals.