

  [236] Hill’s division, two brigades strong at Talavera in August,
  had received a third brigade in September under Catlin Craufurd,
  consisting of the 2/28th, 2/34th, and 2/39th.

  [237] Composed of the 2nd, 4th, 10th, and 14th regiments, each
  two battalions strong, with 4,500 bayonets.

  [238] 1st and 4th Portuguese cavalry.

At the extreme opposite flank of the French front, on the shores
of the Bay of Biscay, there was going on at this same time a
side-campaign conducted with a much greater degree of vigour, but
equally indecisive in the end. The Asturias had been almost stripped
of troops by Del Parque, in order to reinforce the army that fought
at Tamames and Alba de Tormes. When the Duke moved his main force
southward after the last-named fight, he carried off with him the
division of Ballasteros, which had been the core of the old Asturian
Army. General Antonio Arce was left in the principality with some
4,000 men, whom he kept at Colombres, behind the Deba, under General
Llano-Ponte, watching the French force in the province of Santander.
New levies, little more than 2,000 strong, were being collected
at Oviedo. In the end of January General Bonnet, whose division
at Santander had received its drafts, and had been strengthened
up to 7,000 men[239], thought himself strong enough to drive in
Arce’s weak line and to make a dash at the Asturian capital. On
the 25th he attacked the lines of Colombres, and carried them with
no difficulty. On the 31st he captured Oviedo, which was evacuated
by the Captain-General Arce and the local Junta without serious
fighting. But that active partisan Juan Porlier at once cut off his
communication with Santander, by seizing Infiesto and Gijon. Bonnet
at once evacuated Oviedo, and turned back to clear his rear. Porlier
escaped along the coast to Pravia, and meanwhile the main body of
the Asturians, under General Barcena, reoccupied the capital. Having
driven off Porlier, the French general marched westward once more,
beat Barcena at the bridge of Colleto on February 14, and again made
himself master of Oviedo. The Asturians rallied behind the Narcea,
where they were joined by a brigade of 2,000 men sent to their aid by
Mahy, the Captain-General of Galicia.

  [239] He had 7,094 men with the colours, besides sick and
  detached, by the imperial muster rolls of Jan. 15, 1810.

That province, like the Asturias, had been left almost ungarrisoned
by Del Parque, when he took the old ‘Army of Galicia’ across the
Sierra de Gata, and transferred it to Estremadura. Mahy had been left
behind with the skeleton of one division, which he was to recruit, as
best he could, by new levies. His main preoccupation at this moment
was the defence of the newly fortified stronghold of Astorga, which
was already threatened by the French troops in the plains of Leon.
But seeing his flank menaced by Bonnet’s advance, he lent what men he
could spare to aid in the defence of the Asturias.