

  [257] On Craufurd’s complaint that the 2nd Caçadores were badly
  commanded and too full of boys. He repeatedly asked for, and
  ultimately obtained, the 3rd battalion in place of the 2nd,
  because of his confidence in Elder.

Robert Craufurd, though only a brigadier, and junior of his rank,
had been chosen by Wellington to take charge of his outpost line
because he was one of the very few officers then in the Peninsula in
whose ability his Commander-in-Chief had perfect confidence. Nothing
is more striking than to compare the tone and character of the
letters which Wellington wrote to him with those which he dispatched
to most of his other general officers. Only with Craufurd, Hill,
and Beresford, did he ever condescend to enter into explanations
and state reasons. The rest receive orders without comment, which
they are directed to carry out, and are given no opportunity to
discuss[258]. The difference was noted and resented by the others:
when on March 8th Craufurd was formally given charge of the whole
outpost line of the army, and his seniors Picton and Cole were
told to conform their movements to his, without waiting for orders
from head quarters, some friction was engendered[259]. Picton and
Craufurd, in especial, were for the rest of the campaign in a state
of latent hostility, which more than once led to high words when they
met--a fact which was not without its dangers to the welfare of the
army[260].

  [258] Note especially Wellington’s explanatory dispatch to
  Craufurd of March 8, where he even goes so far as to give his
  subordinate a free hand as to the choice of his line: ‘You must
  be a better judge of the details of this question than I can be,
  and I wish you to consider them, in order to be able to carry
  the plan into execution when I shall send it to you.’ In another
  letter Wellington writes: ‘Nothing can be of greater advantage to
  me than to have the benefit of your opinion on _any_ subject.’

  [259] ‘I intend that the divisions of Generals Cole and Picton
  should support you on the Coa, without waiting for orders from
  me, if it should be necessary, and they shall be directed
  accordingly.’ 8th March, from Vizeu.

  [260] It should not be forgotten that Picton, no less than
  Craufurd, was at this time living down an old disaster. But
  Picton’s misfortune had not been military. It was the celebrated
  case of _Rex_ v. _Picton_. He had been tried for permitting
  the use of torture to extract evidence against criminals
  while governor of the newly conquered island of Trinidad, and
  convicted, though Spanish law (which was still in force in
  Trinidad) apparently permitted of the practice. After this Picton
  was a marked man. The story of Luisa Calderon, the quadroon
  girl who had been tortured by ‘picketing,’ had been appearing
  intermittently in the columns of every Whig paper for more than
  three years.

The celebrated commander of the Light Division was at this time well
known for his ability, but reckoned rather an unlucky soldier. He had
entered the army so far back as 1779, and had seen service in every
quarter of the globe, yet in 1809 was only a colonel. This was the
more astounding since he was one of the few scientific soldiers in
the British army when the Revolutionary War broke out. He had spent
some time at Berlin in 1782, studying the tactics of the army of
Frederick the Great, and had translated into English the official
Prussian treatise on the Art of War. His knowledge of German, a rare
accomplishment in the British army at the end of the eighteenth
century, caused him to be given the post of military attaché at
Coburg’s head quarters in 1794, and he followed the Austrian army
through all the disasters of that and the two following years. Again
in 1799 he went out to take the same post at the head quarters of
the army of Switzerland, but quitted it to serve on the staff of the
Duke of York, during the miserable Dutch expedition of that same
year. He seemed destined to witness nothing but disasters, and though
he was known to have done his duty with admirable zeal and energy
in every post that he occupied, promotion lingered. Probably his
caustic tongue and fiery temper were his hindrances, but it seems
astonishing that he took twenty-six years to attain the rank of
colonel, though he was not destitute of political influence, having
friends and relatives in Parliament, and even in the Ministry[261].
In 1801 he was a disappointed man, thought of retiring from the
army, and, having accepted a nomination borough, sat in the Commons
for five years. In 1805 he was at last made a colonel, and in the
following year went on active service with the expedition which,
sent originally to the Cape, was distracted in 1807 to the unhappy
Buenos Ayres campaign. This was the zenith of his misfortunes; it
was he who, placed in charge of a light brigade by the incapable
Whitelocke, was thrust forward into the midst of the tangled streets
of Buenos Ayres, surrounded in the convent of San Domingo, and forced
to capitulate for lack of support. At the ensuing court-martial he
was acquitted of all blame, but the fact that he had surrendered a
British brigade rankled in his mind for the rest of his life. The
unshaken confidence in his abilities felt by the Home authorities was
marked by the fact that he was sent out in October 1808 with Baird’s
corps, which landed at Corunna, and again in June 1809 to Lisbon,
each time in command of a brigade. But his bad luck seemed still
to attend him: he missed the victory of Corunna because Moore had
detached his brigade on the inexplicable march to Vigo. He failed to
be present at Talavera, despite of the famous forced march which he
made towards the sound of the cannon.