

The Asturian junta, having deposed General Arce for incapacity
and corruption, and appointed Cienfuegos to take over his troops,
ordered the resumption of offensive operations against Bonnet in
March. Porlier, their great partisan-hero, made a circuit along the
coast, and threatened the French communications with Santander.
At the same time their main force advanced against Oviedo by the
valley of the Nalon. Bonnet’s advanced brigade was driven in, after
a sharp skirmish at Grado on March 19, and disquieted by Porlier’s
simultaneous attack on his rear, he evacuated the Asturian capital
for the _third_ time, and gave back as far as Cangas de Onis, in the
valley of the Ona. He then called up all the reinforcements that
he could obtain from Santander, and marched--for the fourth time
in three months!--on Oviedo with his whole division; the Spaniards
retired without offering serious opposition, and took up a line
behind the Narcea [March 29]. This time Bonnet left them no time to
rally, but forced the passage of that river, whereupon the Asturians
ascended to Tineo in the mountains, while the Galician succours
gave back to Navia, almost on the edge of their own principality
[April 25-26]. After this, Bonnet’s offensive force was spent;
having to occupy Oviedo and its ports of Gijon and Aviles, as well
as all the central and eastern Asturias, and, moreover, to defend
his communication with Santander from new attacks of Porlier, his
strength sufficed for no more. His 7,000 men were immobilized for
the rest of the year: he had conquered two-thirds of the Asturias,
and barely succeeded in keeping it down. But he was quite unable to
spare a man to aid in French operations in the plains of Leon, or
even to make a serious attempt to threaten Galicia. Once or twice he
succeeded in communicating with the forces which Junot (and after him
Kellermann and Serras) commanded in the plains beyond the Cantabrian
range, by expeditions pushed down through the pass of Pajares on
to Leon; but the road was always closed again by the guerrillas,
and no co-operation could take place. In short, the Spaniards lost
the greater part of the Asturias, and the French lost the further
services of Bonnet’s division[240]. It had no power to threaten
Galicia, because it was forced to keep garrisons in Gijon, Aviles,
Lastres, Santona, and all the sea-ports, with a full brigade at
Oviedo in the centre, to support them. Any concentration of troops,
leading to the evacuation of the smaller garrisons, at once let loose
the guerrillas from their mountains. Bonnet had but 7,000 men in
all: of these, not more than half could be used for an expedition,
and such a force was too small to have any practical effect on the
general course of events in north-western Spain.

  [240] I cannot understand Napier’s narrative of this little
  campaign, on pages 352-4 of his vol. ii. It runs as follows,
  and seems to have no relation to the facts detailed by Belmas,
  Toreno, Arteche, or any other historian. No mention is made of
  the four captures of Oviedo!