

  [261] His elder brother, Sir Charles Craufurd, was
  Deputy-Adjutant-General, and M.P. for Retford. Windham, the
  Secretary for War, was his devoted friend.

In 1810 Craufurd was burning to vindicate his reputation, and to
show that the confidence which Wellington placed in him was not
undeserved. He still regarded himself as a man who had been unjustly
dealt with, and had never been given his chance. He could not forget
that he was four years older than Beresford, five years older than
Wellington, eight years older than Hill, yet was but a junior
brigadier-general in charge of a division[262]. He was full of a
consuming energy, on the look-out for slights and quarrels, a very
strict disciplinarian, restless himself and leaving his troops no
rest. He was not liked by all his officers: in the Light Division
he had many admirers[263] and many bitter critics. Nor was he at
first popular with the rank and file, though they soon began to
recognize the keen intelligence that guided his actions, and to see
that he was a just if a hard master[264]. In the matter of feeding
his troops, the most difficult task imposed on a general of the
Peninsular army, he had an unparalleled reputation for accomplishing
the impossible--even if the most drastic methods had to be employed.
The famous old story about Wellington and the commissary had Craufurd
(and not, as it is sometimes told, Picton) as its hero. As a sample
of his high-handed ways, it may be mentioned that he once seized
and impounded some church-plate till the villages to which it
belonged found him some corn for his starving division. Craufurd, on
one of his happy days, and they were many, was the most brilliant
subordinate that Wellington ever owned. His mistakes--and he
committed more than one--were the faults of an ardent and ambitious
spirit taking an immoderate risk in the hour of excitement.

  [262] Though senior in the date of his first commission to nearly
  all the officers of the Peninsular army, Craufurd was six years
  junior to Picton, and one year junior to Hope. Graham, much his
  senior in age, had only entered the army in 1793.

  [263] Such as Shaw-Kennedy, William Campbell, Kincaid, and Lord
  Seaton.

  [264] For Craufurd’s life and personality see his biography by
  his grandson the Rev. Alex. Craufurd, London, 1890. The most
  vivid picture of him is in Rifleman Harris’s chronicle of the
  Corunna retreat, a wonderful piece of narrative by a writer from
  the ranks, who admired his general despite of all his severity,
  and acknowledges that his methods were necessary. Though Napier
  as a historian is on the whole fairly just to his old commander,
  whose achievements were bound up indissolubly with the glories of
  the Light Division, as a man he disliked Craufurd: in one of his
  hooks which I possess (Delagrave’s _Campagne de Portugal_) he has
  written in the margin several bitter personal remarks about him,
  very unlike the language employed in his history. The unpublished
  Journal of Colonel McLeod of the 43rd is (as Mr. Alex. Craufurd
  informs me) written in the same spirit. So is Charles Napier’s
  _Diary_.