

  [304] For an interesting description of this incident, see George
  Napier’s autobiography, p. 131.

  [305] Thirty-six killed, 189 wounded, 83 missing. See Tables in
  Appendix.

  [306] Martinien’s invaluable lists show 7 officers killed and 17
  wounded, which at the normal rate of 22 men per officer, exactly
  corresponds to the actual loss of 117 killed and 410 wounded
  (Koch, vii. 118).

  [307] It is a curious fact that in the draft of Masséna’s
  dispatch in the _Archives du Ministère de la Guerre_, we actually
  catch him in the act of falsifying returns. There is first
  written ‘Nous leur avons pris 100 hommes et deux pièces de canon.
  Notre perte a été de près de 500 hommes tant tués que blessés.’
  Then the figures 100 are scratched out and above is inserted
  ‘un drapeau et 400 hommes,’ while for the French loss 500 is
  scratched out and 300 inserted. Ney, whose dispatch was lying
  before Masséna, had honestly written that Craufurd ‘a été chassé
  de sa position avec une perte considérable de tués et de blessés,
  nous lui avons fait en outre une centaine de prisonniers.’ Ney
  reported also a loss of about 500 men, which Masséna deliberately
  cut down to 300. Belmas (iii. 379) has replaced the genuine
  figures in his reprint of Masséna’s dispatch, though both the
  draft in the _Archives_ and the original publication in the
  _Moniteur_ give the falsifications. Masséna says nought of the
  check at the bridge, though Ney honestly wrote ‘au delà du Coa,
  une réserve qu’il avait lui permis de se reconnaître, et il
  continue sa retraite sur Pinhel la nuit du 24.’ As to the guns
  captured, it was perfectly true that some cannon were taken that
  day, but not in fighting, nor from Craufurd. The governor of
  Almeida was mounting two small guns (4-pounders) on a windmill
  some way outside the glacis. They had not been got up to their
  position, but were lying below--removed from their carriages,
  in order to be slung up more easily on to the roof. The mill
  was abandoned when Ney came up, and the dismounted cannon fell
  into his hands. He said not a word of them, any more than he
  did of the imaginary flag alleged by Masséna to have been
  captured. But the Prince of Essling brought in both, to please
  the imperial palate, which yearned for British flags and guns.
  His dispatch, published some weeks later in the _Moniteur_, came
  into Craufurd’s hands in November, and provoked him to write a
  vindication of his conduct, and a contradiction of ‘the false
  assertions contained in Marshal Masséna’s report of an action
  which was not only highly honourable to the Light Division,
  but positively terminated in its favour, notwithstanding the
  extraordinary disparity of numbers. For a corps of 4,000 men
  performed, in the face of an army of 24,000, one of the most
  difficult operations of war,--a retreat from a broken and
  extensive position over one narrow defile, and defended during
  the whole day the first defensible position that was to be found
  in the neighbourhood of the place where the action commenced.’
  For the whole letter see Alex. Craufurd’s _Life of Craufurd_, pp.
  140-1.