

  [290] Viz. three squadrons of the 14th, one (Krauchenberg’s)
  of the 1st Hussars K.G.L., and two of the 16th. The other two
  squadrons of the hussars, and the 4th squadron of the 14th, were
  holding the outpost line to right and left.

  [291] It is certain that both charged, and both were beaten off.
  But the regimental diarists of the two regiments each mention
  only the repulse of the squadron from the other corps. See
  Tompkinson (of the 16th), _Diary_, p. 31, and Von Linsingen’s
  letter (from the 1st Hussars), printed in Beamish, i. 279-80.

  [292] Von Grüben’s squadron of the K.G.L. Hussars, and the fourth
  squadron of the 14th Light Dragoons, neither of which formed part
  of Craufurd’s little expedition. The former had been watching
  Villa de Ciervo, the latter was on outpost duty.

  [293] Charles Napier in his diary [_Life_, i. p. 132] and
  Tomkinson [p. 31] accuse Craufurd of reckless haste. Harry Smith,
  in his autobiography [i. p. 22], holds that the Rifles could have
  got up in time to force the square to surrender. Leach [p. 142]
  makes much the same comment. All these were eye-witnesses. Yet it
  would have taken some time to bring up the guns or the infantry,
  and the French were near broken ground, over which they might
  have escaped, if not immediately assailed. See also Craufurd’s
  Life by his grandson, pp. 114-16.

  [294] Among these officers was General Stewart, the
  adjutant-general, see Wellington to Craufurd, from Alverca, July
  23, a very interesting letter, commented on in the _Life of
  Craufurd_, pp. 117-20.

  [295] Hulot (p. 36) says that he met the square retiring, and
  noticed that numbers of the bayonets and gun-barrels had been cut
  and bent by the blows of the English dragoons, as they tried to
  force their way in. See Masséna’s dispatch to Berthier of Aug.
  10, in Belmas’s _Pièces Justificatives_.




SECTION XIX: CHAPTER VI

COMBAT OF THE COA: SIEGE OF ALMEIDA (JULY-AUGUST 1810)


On July 10th the French had entered Ciudad Rodrigo, but ten days
more elapsed before they made any further advance. Masséna, who had
returned to the front, was resolved to follow his master’s orders
and to act ‘methodically.’ It was clearly incumbent on him to begin
the siege of Almeida as soon as possible, and, as that place is only
twenty-one miles from Ciudad Rodrigo, one long march would have
placed him before its walls. But since he had only a few thousand
rounds of ammunition left for his heavy guns, he refused to move on
till all the available reserves were on their way from Salamanca to
the front, and requisition for a further supply had been sent to
Bayonne. He had also to do his best to scrape together more food,
since the magazines that Ney had collected were nearly exhausted when
Rodrigo fell. Moreover, 1,500 draught animals had died during the
late siege, and it was necessary to replace them before the Great
Park could move forward.