

  [320] The First Portuguese Legion, which served against Austria
  in 1809, was composed of the troops drafted out of the Peninsula
  by Junot in 1808 during his domination at Lisbon.

  [321] D’Urban’s diary reports that 450 men and 18 officers of the
  24th of the Line came in between the 2nd and 4th of September to
  Silveira’s outposts; a still larger number reached Wellington’s.

  [322] D’Urban has most gloomy remarks on the subject in his
  diary, under the date Aug. 30.

  [323] To Chas. Stuart, from Celorico, Aug. 31.

  [324] To Chas. Stuart, from Celorico, Sept. 11.

  [325] Wellington to Masséna, Sept. 24. ‘Votre excellence
  s’est engagée que les officiers et les soldats de la milice
  retourneraient chez eux: malgré cet engagement vous en avez
  retenu 7 officiers et 200 soldats de chaque régiment, pour en
  faire un corps de pionniers. La capitulation d’Almeida est donc
  nulle, et je suis en droit d’en faire ce que je voudrais. Mais je
  puis vous assurer qu’il n’y a pas un seul soldat de la milice qui
  était en Almeida au service.’

  [326] For details of all this, including the curious terms of
  the Portuguese sentence for high treason, see Soriano da Luz,
  iii. 80-109, and 719-22. The attempts to exculpate Barreiros seem
  inadequate. Da Costa was shot, not for treason, but for cowardice
  and mutiny.

During the siege of Almeida, the British army had been held in a
position somewhat less advanced and more concentrated than that
which it had occupied in July. Wellington had brought back his head
quarters from Alverca to Celorico, where he had the Light Division
under his hand. A few miles behind, on the high-road running down
the south bank of the Mondego, was the 1st Division, at Villa
Cortes. Picton and the 3rd Division had been drawn back from Pinhel
to Carapichina, but Cole and the 4th remained firm at Guarda. The
Portuguese brigades of Coleman and A. Campbell were at Pinhanços,
that of Pack at Jegua. The whole of the cavalry had come up from the
rear to join the brigade that had recently operated under Craufurd’s
orders. They now lay in a thick line of six regiments from in front
of Guarda, through Alverca and Freixadas to Lamegal. Thus the whole
army was concentrated on a short front of fifteen miles, covering the
watershed between the Coa and the Mondego, and the bifurcation of the
roads which start from Celorico, down the two banks of the last-named
river. The French held back, close to Almeida, with a strong advance
guard at Pinhel, and occasionally raided the low country towards the
Douro, in the direction of Villanova de Fosboa and Castel Rodrigo.
About August 19 Wellington moved forward a day’s march, the front of
his infantry columns being pushed up to Alverca and Freixadas, on a
false rumour that Masséna was leaving the 6th Corps unsupported at
Almeida, and had drawn back Junot into the plains of Leon. If this
had been the case, Wellington intended to make a push to relieve
the besieged fortress. But he soon discovered that the report was
baseless, and that the 8th Corps was still on the Azava and the
Agueda, wherefore he halted, and was still lying twelve miles in
front of Celorico when the noise of the explosion at Almeida, and the
cessation of fire on the next day, betrayed the fact that the place
had fallen, and that there was no longer any reason for maintaining
a forward position. On the night of the 28th, therefore, the whole
army was drawn back once more to the strong line between Guarda and
Celorico, and arrangements were made for a further retreat, in case
the French should follow up the capture of Almeida by an instant and
general advance. Masséna seemed at first likely to make this move:
on September 2 a brigade of infantry and 1,200 horse drove in the
British cavalry outposts to Maçal de Chão only five miles in front
of Celorico. Looking upon this as the commencement of the serious
invasion of Portugal, Wellington sent back his infantry to Villa
Cortes, Pinhanços, and Moita, far down the high-road on the south of
the Mondego, and bade Cole draw in the 4th Division from Guarda to
San Martinho, under the north side of the Serra da Estrella. Only
cavalry were left at, and in front of, Celorico and Guarda. This
retreat shows that Wellington was fully convinced that the French
would advance along the high-road to the south of the Mondego, where
he intended to stand at bay on the Alva, behind the entrenchments of
Ponte de Murcella.