

The main point of interest at this moment was the movements of
the French 2nd Corps, which still lay in cantonments at Zarza and
Coria in front of Hill. Guarda being no longer held in force, it
was clear that Hill could not safely join the main army by the
road Atalaya-Fundão-Guarda, if Reynier moved up by the Pass of
Perales to Alfayates and Sabugal. Wellington began an anxious daily
correspondence with Hill, giving him a new line of march by Sobreira
Formosa, Villa d’el Rei and Espinhal, for his junction, but ordering
him to be sure that he did not move till Reynier had thoroughly
committed himself to the transference of his whole force to the north
of the Sierra de Gata. For it would be disastrous if feints should
induce the British detaining force to leave Villa Velha and Abrantes
uncovered, and Reynier should turn out to have selected them as his
objective, and to be meditating an invasion along the Castello Branco
line[327]. It was even possible, though not likely, that Masséna
might bring up the 6th and 8th Corps to join Reynier, instead of
bringing Reynier across the mountains to join them[328]. But every
contingency had to be provided against, the unlikely ones as well as
the likely. As a corollary to Hill’s march, that of Leith had also
to be arranged; he must wait at Thomar till it was certain that the
2nd Corps had moved, but the moment that certainty was obtained, must
march for Ponte de Murcella, and join the main army, if the French
had gone north, but support Hill on the Castello Branco road if they
had taken the other, and less probable, course.

  [327] See Wellington to Hill of Aug. 31, Sept. 1, Sept. 4, Sept.
  6. The Commander-in-Chief was much worried by a false rumour that
  Reynier was already in force at Sabugal on Aug. 31, and then by
  an equally false one that the whole 2nd Corps had marched south
  towards the Tagus, and was about to cross it near Alcantara (see
  the letter to La Romana of Sept. 6). As a matter of fact, Reynier
  made no definite move from Zarza till Sept. 10, though he had
  made feints, in both the directions indicated, with small forces.

  [328] That this possibility was in Wellington’s mind is shown
  by the letter to La Romana of Sept. 6, from Gouvea, in which he
  writes, ‘Vous aurez appris les mouvements du corps de Regnier de
  la part du Général Hill. Ou l’ennemi va faire le mouvement sur
  notre droite (dont je vous ai écrit) ou il va faire le siège de
  Badajoz. On dit que du canon a passé d’Almeida à Sabugal, et de
  là vers Regnier, mais je ne sais pas si c’est vrai, ou si c’est
  du canon de siège.... Vous savez ce qu’il faut faire si on se met
  entre nous deux, en passant le Tage à Villa Velha, ou au-dessous
  de la jonction.’


NOTE ON ALMEIDA AND THE BRIDGE OF THE COA

The small circular town of Almeida has never recovered from the
disaster of 1810. The population does not fill up the area within
the walls: open spaces are frequent, and some of the more important
buildings--especially the old palace of the governor--stand in ruins.
Others show solid seventeenth- or eighteenth-century masonry on
the ground floor, and flimsy modern repairs above, where the upper
stories were blown away by the explosion. The cathedral has never
been properly rebuilt, and is a mere fragment. The railway passes
twelve miles south of Almeida, so that the place has had no chance
of recovery, and remains in a state of decay. The walls stand just
as they were left after Wellington’s hasty repairs in 1811. The vast
bomb-proof shelters repeatedly mentioned in narratives of the siege
are still visible, damp but intact. The surrounding country-side is a
low, rolling, treeless upland--the edge of the vast plains of Leon.
It contrasts very strongly with the hilly and picturesque scenery
that is reached when once the Coa has been passed.