

  [356] Suchet says that he took 5,600 prisoners, a figure that
  appears quite impossible, as Schepeler rightly remarks (iii.
  649). Ibarrola’s division had only 4,000 bayonets, and of that
  of Pirez only the one Swiss battalion was seriously engaged.
  Moreover, Ibarrola’s division was not absolutely exterminated,
  for O’Donnell on April 26 issued an order of the day, in which he
  thanks the division for its courage, and praises the battalions
  which kept their ranks and re-formed behind those of Pirez,
  ‘returning in good order to occupy the position (Juneda), from
  which they had started at dawn.’ See the document, printed in
  Arteche’s Appendix, no. 12 of vol. viii. I should doubt if 2,000
  prisoners were not nearer the mark than 5,600.

  [357] Figures probably correct. Martinien’s lists show one
  officer killed and two wounded; of the latter, one was the
  cavalry general Boussard.

It is clear that O’Donnell must take the blame for the ruin that
fell upon his little field army. He should not have been caught with
his two divisions marching with an interval of four miles between
them. Nor ought he to have been ignorant of the return of Musnier’s
force, considering that he had 400 cavalry, who should have been
exploring the whole country-side for miles around, instead of riding
in a mass along with Ibarrola’s infantry. The carelessness shown was
unpardonable: relying, apparently, on Garcia Conde’s dispatch--now
two days old--concerning the weakness of the French beyond the Segre,
the Spanish general was caught moving as if for an unopposed entry
into Lerida, instead of in battle order. It may be added that he
would have done well to collect more men before advancing against
Suchet--8,000 bayonets and sabres were too small a force to tackle
the main body of the 3rd Corps, even if they were aided by a sortie
from Lerida, as O’Donnell had intended. It would have been well to
make some endeavour to get troops from the Valencian army, whose
12,000 men were absolutely idle at the moment. It is true that José
Caro and the Valencian Junta were very chary of sending their men
outside their own border. But for such a great affair as the relief
of Lerida a brigade or two might have been borrowed. There was a
considerable Valencian force, at the moment, in the neighbourhood of
Alcañiz.

After the combat of Margalef Suchet summoned Lerida for a second
time, and offered to allow the Governor to see the prisoners and
guns which he had taken from O’Donnell. Garcia Conde very rightly
answered that he relied on his own forces alone, and should fight
to the end. Accordingly, the regular siege began. The trenches were
opened opposite the north front of the town on April 29; several days
of heavy rain hindered the completion of the first parallel, but on
May 7 the breaching batteries were ready and the bombardment began.
The front attacked--the Carmen and Magdalena bastions--was weak: it
was not protected by any flanking fires, and had neither a ditch nor
a covered way. It was bound to succumb before the very heavy fire
directed against it, unless the defence should succeed in beating
down the fire of the breaching batteries. The Spaniards did their
best, bringing up every gun that could be mounted, and replacing each
injured piece as it was disabled. But the end was obvious from the
first: the walls were not strong enough to resist the attack.