

  [389] The 8th Corps had in its ranks the 4th battalions of the
  following regiments whose first three battalions were in the
  south of Spain, and belonged to the 1st, 4th, or 5th corps--the
  28th, 34th, and 75th. But the 9th Corps was almost entirely
  composed of 4th battalions of the corps of Victor, Sebastiani,
  and Mortier, including those of the 8th, 24th, 45th, 54th, 63rd,
  94th, 95th, 96th Line, and 16th and 27th Léger, of the 1st corps,
  and of the 17th Léger, and 40th, 88th, 100th and 103rd Line of
  the 5th Corps.

  [390] 28th and 75th, the remaining brigade of the 1st Division of
  the 4th Corps, which never joined Sebastiani in Andalusia.

  [391] 26th Chasseurs and 3rd Dutch Hussars.

  [392] 17th, 18th, 19th, and 27th Dragoons, only two squadrons
  each--only 1,300 men.

  [393] As a sample of their behaviour it may be mentioned that the
  whole guard of the south gate of Toledo once marched off to join
  the insurgents, officers and all.

But military sources of disquietude formed only the smaller half of
King Joseph’s troubles at this date. His political vexations, which
engrossed a much larger portion of his time and energy, must be dealt
with elsewhere. They will be relegated to the same chapter which
treats of the new development of Spanish politics consequent on the
long-delayed meeting of the Cortes in the winter of 1810-11.




SECTION XXI

BUSSACO AND TORRES VEDRAS (SEPTEMBER-DECEMBER 1810)




CHAPTER I

MASSÉNA’S ADVANCE TO BUSSACO (SEPTEMBER 1810)


After the fall of Almeida Masséna waited much longer than Wellington
had anticipated. The reasons for his delay were the usual ones
that were always forthcoming when a French army had to advance
in the Peninsula--want of transport and penury of supplies. The
Marshal had just discovered that the country-side in front of
him had already been depopulated by Wellington’s orders, and
that the only inhabitants that were to be met would be the armed
Ordenança, who were already shooting at his vedettes and attacking
his foraging parties. He was inclined to treat them as brigands;
his Provost-marshal, Colonel Pavetti, having been surprised and
captured along with five gendarmes of his escort by the villagers
of Nava d’Avel on September 5, he caused the place to be burned,
shot the one or two male inhabitants who could be caught, and
issued a proclamation stating that no quarter would be given to
combatants without uniforms. This provoked two stiff letters from
Wellington[394], who wrote to say that the Ordenança were an integral
part of the Portuguese military forces, and that, if they wore no
uniforms, the Marshal should remember that many of the revolutionary
bands which he had commanded in the old war of 1792-7 were no
better equipped: ‘vous devez vous souvenir que vous-même vous avez
augmenté la gloire de l’armée Française en commandant des soldats qui
n’avaient pas d’uniforme.’ If Ordenança were shot as ‘brigands and
highway robbers’ in obedience to the proclamation of September 7,
it was certain that French stragglers and foragers would be knocked
on the head, and not taken prisoners, by the enraged peasantry. At
present the number of them sent in to the British head quarters by
the Portuguese irregulars proved that the laws of war were being
observed. Masséna replied that Pavetti had been ambushed by men who
hid their arms, and ran in upon him and his escort while he was
peaceably asking his way. His letter then went off at a tangent, to
discuss high politics, and to declare that he was not the enemy of
the Portuguese but of the perfidious British government, &c., &c.
Finally he complained that the Arganil and Trancoso militia, whom he
had sent home after the fall of Almeida, had taken up arms again; if
caught, ‘leur sort sera funeste’[395]. The last statement Wellington
denied; he said that the capitulation had been annulled by the French
themselves, when they debauched the 24th regiment, and detained 600
of the militia to form a battalion of pioneers, but stated that as
a matter of fact the militia battalions had not been re-embodied.
The French continued to shoot the Ordenança, and the Ordenança soon
began to reply by torturing as well as hanging French stragglers;
Wellington forbade but could not prevent retaliation.