

  [430] Leith’s nephew and aide-de-camp, Leith Hay, had explored
  all the villages in this direction on the previous afternoon,
  with a squadron of Portuguese horse, see his _Narrative_, i. 381.

  [431] Picton and Leith each rather slur over the part taken by
  the other in their parallel narratives of the crisis. Picton
  says that he took command of Leith’s troops: ‘at this moment
  Major-General Leith’s aide-de-camp came up to report the arrival
  of that general and his division, on which I rode from the post
  of San Antonio to the road of communication, and directed the
  leading regiment of the brigade to proceed without loss of time
  to the left, as I had no occasion for assistance. General Leith’s
  brigade, in consequence, moved on and arrived in time to join the
  five companies of the 45th and the 8th Portuguese in repulsing
  the enemy’s last attempt.’ Leith, on the other hand, speaks of
  having taken command of some of Picton’s troops, as if the latter
  had not been present, and says nought of their conversation.
  ‘Major-General Leith thereupon directed a movement of succession,
  ordering Colonel Douglas with the right battalion of the 8th
  Portuguese to support the point attacked. He also directed the
  9th Portuguese under Colonel Sutton (belonging to Major-General
  Picton’s division) to move up to the support of General Picton’s
  division,’ and again, ‘He (General Leith) ordered the 8th and 9th
  Portuguese to support the point attacked, and where the enemy
  were fast gaining ground.’ Each general speaks as if he had been
  in command, and I fear that each is using undue reticence as to
  the other’s doings. See note at the end of this chapter.

Leith, realizing that there was still time to save the position--for
only the head of the French column had crowned the rocky
knoll,--deployed his leading battalion, the 9th, across the summit of
the plateau, while sending on his second, the 38th, to get between
the enemy and the reverse slope of the position. This last move
turned out to be fruitless, for the rear face of the knoll is so
steep and so thickly covered with large boulders[432], that the 38th
was unable to climb it, and came back to fall in on the right of
the 9th. But before it could get back, the senior regiment had done
its work. Leith had led it diagonally across the plateau, so as to
place it along the flank of the leading battalions of Foy’s column,
of which the first was now ensconced on the summit of the heights,
while the others were struggling up to join it. The 9th opened with
a volley at 100 yards, and then advanced firing, receiving hardly
any return from the enemy, who seemed entirely disconcerted by the
appearance of a new force parallel with its flank. At twenty yards
from the French, the 9th lowered its bayonets and prepared to charge,
Leith riding at its head waving his plumed hat. Then the enemy gave
way. ‘My heroic column,’ writes Foy, ‘much diminished during the
ascent, reached the summit of the plateau, which was covered with
hostile troops. Those on our left made a flank movement and smashed
us up by their battalion volleys; meanwhile those on our front,
covered by some rocks, were murdering us with impunity. The head of
my column fell back to its right, despite my efforts; I could not
get them to deploy, disorder set in, and the 17th and 70th raced
down-hill in headlong flight. The enemy pursued us half-way to the
foot of the heights, till he pulled up on coming under effective fire
from our artillery[433].’