

[Illustration: NEY’S ATTACK at BUSSACO.]

[Illustration: REYNIER’S ATTACK at BUSSACO.]

Then came the opportunity: the French, pulling themselves together,
were preparing to rush up the last twenty yards of the ascent and to
run in upon the guns, when Craufurd waved his hat to the battalions
lying in the road behind him, the appointed signal for action, and
(it is said) called to the men behind him ‘Now 52nd, revenge the
death of Sir John Moore.’ The crest was at once covered by the
long red line, and the fronts of the French brigades received such
a volley at ten paces as has been seldom endured by any troops in
war. The whole of the heads of their columns crumbled away in a
mass of dead and dying. The centre and rear stood appalled for
one moment; then Major Arbuthnot wheeled in three companies of the
52nd upon the right flank of Simon’s leading regiment, while Lloyd
of the 43rd did the same upon the extreme left, so as to produce a
semicircle of fire[435]. It was impossible to stand under it, and
the French broke and went hurtling down the hill, the wrecks of the
front battalions carrying the rear ones away with them. So steep was
the slope on their left that some are said to have lost their footing
and to have rolled down to the bottom of the ravine before they
could stop. The Light Division followed as far as Sula, and beyond,
not stopping till Loison’s people had taken refuge in the wooded
ground beyond that village, and the French guns by Moura had begun
to play upon their pursuers. The rush had carried away the whole
of the enemy, save one battalion upon Ferey’s extreme left, which
had moved so far down in the slope of the ravine that it had become
separated from the rest. This solitary column, pressing forward, came
to the sky-line not in front of Craufurd, but at the very head of the
ravine, below Cleeves’ battery. Here it was dealt with by the leading
unit of Coleman’s Portuguese brigade, which was standing in line
near the _chaussée_. The 1st battalion of the 19th regiment, under
Major McBean, charged it and rolled it back into the cleft, down
whose bottom it hastily recoiled, and joined the rest of the flying
division.

  [435] A passage of Napier’s account of the movements of the Light
  Division (iii. 27) has puzzled many readers. ‘Eighteen hundred
  British bayonets went sparkling over the brow of the hill. Yet
  so hardy were the leading French that every man of the first
  section raised his musket, and two officers and ten soldiers
  (of the 52nd) fell before them. Not a Frenchman had missed his
  mark!’ This passage looks as if the whole French division had
  been conceived by Napier as moving in a single column with a
  front of only twelve men. An eye-witness, Sir John Bell, of the
  52nd, who owned the copy of the book which I now have before
  me, has written Bosh! in the margin against the words. Of
  course the enemy was advancing with each battalion in column of
  companies, with a front of thirty at least. What Napier seems
  to have had in his head was an anecdote told by his brother
  George (_Autobiography_, p. 143). ‘My company met the very head
  of the French column, and immediately calling to my men to form
  column of sections, in order to give more force to our rush, we
  dashed forward. I was in front of my men a yard or two, when a
  Frenchman made a plunge at me with his bayonet, and at the same
  time received the contents of his musket under my hip and fell.
  At the same instant they fired upon my front section, consisting
  of about nine men in the front rank, all of whom fell, four dead,
  the rest wounded.’ But this does not imply that the French column
  was only twelve broad.