

  [450] I cannot resist quoting here Trant’s account of the
  engagement. He was a man of quaint humour, and the all too few
  letters from him to General J. Wilson, which have come into my
  hands by the courtesy of Wilson’s representative, Captain Bertram
  Chambers, R.N., inspire me with regret that I have not his whole
  correspondence. ‘I have once more been putting my fellows to a
  trial--my Caçadore battalion did not do as it ought, and had
  about thirty killed, wounded, and prisoners, without making
  scarcely any resistance--a pleasant business. On the 30th I was
  still at Agueda (Sardão and Agueda are one village, properly
  speaking, but divided by a bridge), though I was aware that
  the French principal force of cavalry was at Boyalva, only a
  league from Agueda, and I was completely cut off from the army.
  On that morning I had withdrawn the infantry to the Vouga, but
  placed my dragoons close to Agueda to observe the French, with
  the Caçadores at a half-way distance to support them. I put
  them in the most advantageous possible position, protected by a
  close pine wood, through which the French cavalry must pass. I
  had been from three in the morning till one o’clock, making my
  arrangements, and had just sat down to eat something, in a small
  village on the left of the Vouga, when a dragoon came flying to
  inform me that the French were coming on with two columns of
  cavalry in full speed. My coffee was not ready, and remained for
  the French to amuse themselves with. I had only time to get the
  Penafiel regiment over the bridge when the French arrived--five
  minutes sooner and I had been nabbed! I drew up in a good
  position, but the French did not cross the Vouga, and I returned
  to Oliveira without molestation--but not without a damned false
  alarm and panic on the part of the dragoons who were covering my
  rear. They galloped through the infantry, and carried confusion
  and all the comforts of hell to Oporto! Lieutenant-Colonel
  ‘Bravoure Bombasto,’ who commanded the Caçadores, ordered his men
  to fire, but thought that enough for his honour, as he instantly
  left them to shift for themselves, and never looked behind till
  he reached Oporto. I put this fellow, with four of the leading
  dragoons, into the common dungeon of this place, and am about
  to inflict some divisional punishment, for I daren’t report
  such conduct to the Marshal (Beresford), who does not punish by
  halves! My regiments of infantry--this is the brighter side of
  the picture--showed no agitation, notwithstanding the attack
  on their nerves. The enemy’s force, I now ascertain, was 800
  cavalry, two pieces, and two infantry regiments. The cavalry
  alone would have done my business if they had crossed the Vouga!
  But they contented themselves with driving in the dragoons and
  the Caçadore battalion from Agueda. God bless you. N.T.’

Meanwhile the city of Coimbra was full of distressing scenes. Though
Wellington had ordered the whole population of Western Beira to
leave their abodes as soon as the French reached Vizeu, yet only
the richest of the inhabitants of Coimbra had departed. The bulk
had still held to their houses, and the news of the victory of
Bussaco had encouraged them to hope that no evacuation would be
necessary. The Portuguese government, though it had consented to
carry out Wellington’s scheme of devastation, and had duly published
proclamations commanding its execution, had taken no great pains to
secure obedience to it. The sacrifice, indeed, that was demanded
of the citizens of a wealthy town such as Coimbra was a very great
one--far more bitter than that imposed on the peasantry, who were
told at the same moment to evacuate their flimsy cottages. It was
bitterly resented, and, despite of the proclamation, four-fifths
of the 40,000 inhabitants of Coimbra were still in their houses
when, on the night of the 28th-29th, arrived Wellington’s dispatch
stating that he was abandoning Bussaco, that the French would be in
the city by the 30th or on the 1st of October, and that force would
be used, if necessary, to expel people who still clung to their
dwellings. During the next two days the whole of the population of
Coimbra was streaming out of the place by the roads to the south, or
dropping down the Mondego in boats, to ship themselves for Lisbon
at the little port of Figueira. Even on the 1st of October, the day
when the French were reputed to be facing Fornos, only eight miles
away, all had not yet departed. Many of the poor, the infirm, and
the reckless remained behind to the last possible moment, and only
started when the distant cannonade on the northern side showed that
the British outposts were being driven in. Twenty miles of road were
covered by the dense column of fugitives, headed by those who had
started on the 29th and brought up behind by those who had waited
till the last moment. There was a great want of wheeled conveyances:
the richer folks had gone off with most of them, and others had been
requisitioned for the allied wounded. Hence, many could take off
nothing but what they could carry on their persons. An eye-witness
writes that he saw the whole _chaussée_ covered with respectable
families walking on foot with bundles on their heads, while in the
abandoned houses he noticed food of all sorts, table-linen, shirts,
and all manner of other property, which was left behind in disorder
because it was too heavy to be carried[451]. Another tells how ‘the
old and the infirm, no less than the young and robust, carrying with
them all their more valuable effects, covered the fields as well
as the road in every direction, and from time to time the weary
fugitives, unable to carry further the heavier articles that they
had endeavoured to save, dropped them by the wayside and struggled
onward, bereft of the remnant of their little property[452].’
Fortunately the weather for the first eight days after the evacuation
of Coimbra was warm and dry, so that the unhappy multitude had almost
reached Lisbon before they began to suffer any inconvenience from the
October rains.