

  [447] See Tomkinson, p. 44, and von Linsingen’s Diary, in
  Beamish, i. 292. Fririon and the other French narratives speak of
  the difficulties of transporting the wounded, but do not mention
  that any were abandoned.

  [448] Unless some of Reynier’s rearguard cavalry may have looked
  in at Bussaco on the 30th, when Craufurd had gone. This is
  possible. Trant’s Portuguese were back in the place on Oct. 4.

  [449] This seems proved by the ‘Table of Damages committed by the
  French Army in 1810-11,’ published by the Coimbra authorities
  in 1812, which gives the number of houses burnt and persons
  killed in each rural-deanery (arcyprestado) of the bishopric
  of Coimbra. Omitting the rural-deaneries south of the Mondego,
  where the damages were mainly done during the retreat of the
  French in March 1811, and taking only those north of the river,
  where no hostile column appeared after October 1810--the district
  having been protected by Trant and Wilson during Masséna’s return
  march,--we find the following statistics:--

  Deanery of Mortagoa     108 murders  19 villages and 47 isolated
                                            houses burnt.
      ”      Oliveirinha  102    ”    100 houses burnt.
      ”      Arazede       99    ”    124      ”
      ”      Coimbra city  14    ”      7      ”

  The figures for the deaneries south of Mondego (Soure, Arganil,
  Redinha, Miranda do Corvo, Sinde, Cea) are enormously higher. See
  Soriano da Luz, iii. 203.

Meanwhile, on the 29th and 30th of September, the French army
was executing its flank march, practically unopposed, though not
unobserved. Sainte-Croix’s division of dragoons was at the head of
the line of march: then came the infantry of the 8th Corps, which
had been put in the vanguard because it had not suffered at Bussaco.
Next came the reserve cavalry of Montbrun, followed by the Grand
Park and the massed baggage of the 6th and 8th Corps, mixed with a
convoy of over 3,000 wounded. Ney’s troops brought up the rear of
the main column. Reynier was a day’s march to the rear; having spent
the 29th opposite the Bussaco heights, he only reached Mortagoa that
evening. Sainte-Croix’s cavalry on this same day had passed the
watershed and reached Avellans de Cima, where they met a patrol of
De Grey’s dragoons, who had sent parties out in all directions, from
their head quarters at Mealhada in the coast-plain. From this time
onward the French advanced guard was watched by the four regiments
of Slade and De Grey, who were directed to hold back its exploring
cavalry, and not to permit it to reach Coimbra an hour sooner than
could be helped. There was also a clash on the afternoon of the 30th
between part of Sainte-Croix’s dragoons and the Portuguese militia
of Trant in front of Sardão. Trant had been ordered to be at that
place on September 27: he only arrived there on the afternoon of
the 28th, not by his own fault, but because his superior officer
Baccelar, commanding the whole militia of the North, had ordered him
to move from Lamego to Sardão by the circuitous road along the Douro,
and then from Feira southward, instead of taking the straight road
across, the mountains north of Vizeu, where he might possibly have
been stopped by some outlying French detachment. Trant had at the
moment only a squadron of dragoons and four militia regiments with
him (Porto, Penafiel, Coimbra, and a battalion of light companies),
and these, from hard marching, and from desertion, were in all less
than 3,000 strong. Knowing that he was expected to hold the debouch
of the Boialvo road against anything short of a strong force, Trant
made an attempt to stand his ground. But his vanguard bolted at
the first shot fired, and with the rest he had to make a hurried
retreat beyond the Vouga, leaving the road free to the French[450].
Sainte-Croix had already pushed in between him and the British
cavalry, who now began to make a slow retreat towards Mealhada. At
that place, early on the 30th, Slade and De Grey were joined by
Anson’s eight squadrons, who had come in at the tail of Craufurd’s
division after the rearguard evacuated the Bussaco position. On
this day the main column of the British infantry marched through
Coimbra, leaving the Light Division alone in the city. Wellington’s
head quarters that night were at Condeixa six miles south of the
Mondego. The three cavalry brigades retired, bickering with the
French advanced guard all day, as far as Fornos, eight miles north of
Coimbra. Masséna’s infantry, after emerging from the Boialvo pass,
were now pushing south, and bivouacked on the night of the 30th,
Ney and Junot’s corps at Mealhada, Reynier’s at Barreiro, ten miles
behind the others. The biscuit which the French army had taken with
it from Almeida was now almost exhausted, and it was a great relief
to the troops to find, in the deserted villages of the plain of
Coimbra, considerable quantities of maize and rice, with which they
could eke out or replace the carefully hoarded rations.