

  [437] This too in a dispatch to Berthier dated Coimbra, Oct. 4,
  three days after the returns had been placed before him.

  [438] For these returns, see Appendix, no. xiii. They are
  certainly incomplete, omitting (1) losses of the cavalry of the
  2nd Corps (where Martinien’s invaluable tables show that three
  officers were wounded), (2) losses of the 8th Corps, which
  caught a few shells as it stood on the heights by Moura and had
  (as again shown by Martinien’s tables) six officers hit, which
  must imply some hundred men. (3) Some casualties in the infantry
  omitted in the returns, for while the report accounts for 253
  killed and wounded officers, Martinien names 275. Deducting the
  cavalry and 8th Corps losses mentioned above, there are still
  fifteen officers (and therefore presumably 250 men) too few given
  in the reports sent in to Masséna; e.g. for the 2nd Léger the
  report has eighteen officers hit, Martinien gives the names of
  twenty-two.

Masséna must not be too much blamed for his experiment. He had still
to ascertain the fighting value of Wellington’s army--and estimated
it too low, because of the extreme prudence which his adversary
had hitherto displayed. He was handicapped by the impossibility of
using his artillery effectively, and the position in front of him
was strong--even stronger than he guessed, because of the road of
communication along the rear of the plateau--but not too strong
to be forced, if the defenders did not fight well. Moreover, it
was immensely long--nine miles from end to end, so that two blows
delivered with a corps each in the centre might have pierced the
line before the enemy’s distant reserves could get up. Favoured by
the fog--as we have seen--Reynier actually won the heights for a
moment, though Ney never got near the crest. The mistake lay not so
much in making the trial as in under-rating the warlike efficiency of
the enemy. Strokes like Wallace’s charge with the 45th and 88th, or
Craufurd’s masterly advance with the 43rd and 52nd, are beyond the
common experiences of war. Masséna put forty-five battalions[439]
into his fighting-line--they were repulsed by twenty-four, for that
was the number of Anglo-Portuguese battalions which engaged more than
their light-companies[440]. This could not have been foreseen. But
the lesson was learnt. Before the lines of Torres Vedras, a fortnight
later, Masséna refused to take any more risks of the kind, and the
campaign assumed a very different character, because the invader had
learnt to respect his enemy.

  [439] Viz. all Reynier’s Corps, save the 47th, twenty-two
  battalions; Marchand eleven battalions, Loison twelve
  battalions--total 26,000 men. See Tables in Appendix.

  [440] Viz. the brigades of Mackinnon and Champlemond of the 3rd
  Division: the 1st, 9th, 38th, British, and the 8th Portuguese of
  Leith, Craufurd’s five battalions, Pack’s five battalions, three
  battalions of Coleman--total 14,000 men. See Tables in Appendix.