

  [471] For Sousa’s arguments, see Soriano da Luz, iii. pp. 130-44.
  That author thinks the Principal’s arguments weighty, and sees no
  harm in the fact that he set them forth in public and private.
  Cf. Wellington, _Dispatches_, vi. 430.

  [472] See Wellington to Charles Stuart, Sept. 9, and to Lord
  Liverpool, Sept. 13, 1810, _Dispatches_, vol. vi. pp. 420-30.

  [473] See Soriano da Luz, iii. 90-9, for a list of them, and
  Wellington’s _Dispatches_, vi. 433, for the protest against the
  deportation; also ibid. 528-9.

‘All I ask from the Government,’ wrote Wellington, on October 6th, in
the midst of the retreat, ‘is tranquillity in the town of Lisbon, and
provisions for their own troops[474].’ These two simple requirements
were precisely those which he did not obtain. The capital of Portugal
was kept disturbed by arbitrary arrests, by proclamations which
often contained false news, and sometimes pledged the Regency to
measures which the Commander-in-Chief disapproved, and by senseless
embargoes laid on vehicles and commodities, which were never turned
to use[475]. At the same time the Portuguese troops were not fed, and
the tents which had been ordered forward to the positions behind the
lines never started from the magazines of Lisbon[476].

  [474] _Dispatches_, vi. p. 493.

  [475] _Dispatches_, vi. 521. ‘When they have got mules and
  carriages, by injudicious seizure, they do not employ them, but
  the animals and people are kept starving and shivering, while we
  still want provisions.’

  [476] Ibid., vi. p. 506.

Wellington’s temper, tried to the uttermost by these distractions,
when his mind was entirely engrossed by military problems, grew
sharp and irritable at this time. He went so far as to write to
the Prince Regent at Rio de Janeiro, to declare that either he or
Principal Sousa must leave the country. He suggested that some post
as ambassador or special envoy should be found for the man who
troubled him so. The Patriarch, as ‘a necessary evil,’ he did not
wish to displace, but only to scare. Unfortunately, an appeal to
Brazil was hopeless, since the Regent was entirely in the hands of
the Principal’s brother, the Conde de Linhares. Much acrimonious
correspondence, delayed by the vast time which was consumed in
getting letters to and from Rio, only led in the end to a proposal
from Linhares that his brother should leave the Regency, if Charles
Stuart, the British Ambassador, was also withdrawn from it, and if
the War-Minister, General Miguel Forjaz, whom Wellington considered
a necessary person and the ablest man in Portugal, should also be
removed from his post[477]. To this proposal neither Wellington
nor the British government would consent, and as it only came in
when Masséna’s invasion had already been foiled, and the French had
retired into Spain, the crisis was over. The Principal remained at
the Council Board, to talk much impracticable and mischievous stuff,
but to do little positive harm. When the invasion was past Wellington
could afford to disregard him.