

  [469] Readers interested in cavalry work should read Beamish, i.
  298-301, and Tomkinson, 52-3, who have admirable accounts of this
  rearguard fighting.

On the next day (Oct. 10) the whole of the British cavalry marched
from Alemquer to within the Lines, distributing themselves to the
cantonments which had been arranged for them. But Craufurd’s and
Pack’s infantry, which had hitherto been completely covered by
the horsemen, did not follow their example with quite sufficient
promptitude, and got engaged in an unnecessary skirmish. The Light
Division should have withdrawn at noon, but Craufurd, believing the
French infantry to be still far away, and despising the cavalry
which hovered around him, remained in Alemquer, intending to spend
another night in a dry cantonment, for the torrential rain which
was falling promised a fatiguing march to his men. At four o’clock
Taupin’s infantry came up, and engaged the pickets of the Light
Division in a skirmish. Having been strictly forbidden by Wellington
to get entangled in a rearguard action, and remembering perhaps
his experience at the Coa, Craufurd tardily and unwillingly moved
off. But dusk coming on, his column missed its road, and instead
of retiring into the section of the Lines which it was destined
to occupy, between the Monte Agraça and the valley of Calandriz,
went too far to the west, and came in upon the position of the 1st
Division in front of Sobral. This would have been dangerous if the
French had had any infantry to the front, to take advantage of the
unoccupied gap in the lines. But Montbrun’s advanced guard had
pressed more than thirty miles in front of the main body of Masséna’s
army, and this force contained nothing but cavalry, save the single
brigade of Taupin--less than 3,000 men[470]. This force, such as it
was, did not pass Alemquer that night--Craufurd, in his retreat on
Sobral, was followed by cavalry alone. It was not till next morning,
when Montbrun sent out reconnaissances in all directions, that he
found himself in front of fortifications drawn across every road,
and gradually realized that he was in front of the famous ‘Lines of
Torres Vedras.’

  [470] For this reason the dismal picture of the situation drawn
  by Napier (iii. 38-9) must be considered exaggerated. The French
  main army was further off than he imagines; it had not passed
  Alcoentre. The cavalry could have done nothing against the
  heights, and Taupin’s brigade would have been crushed if it had
  endeavoured to enter the gap. But it never came within ten miles
  of the exposed point on the 10th and 11th, not having passed
  Alemquer. The Light Division diarists do not treat seriously the
  position which Napier paints in such gloomy colours. See Leach,
  p. 172, and Simmons, p. 111. The Light Division countermarched
  from Sobral to Arruda and reached their proper post long before
  midnight. There they picked up a detachment of 150 convalescents
  and recruits from Lisbon, who, had been waiting for them. Among
  these were Harry Smith and Simmons, who have accounts of the
  arrival of the division ‘after dark,’ and of its relief at
  finding large fires already lighted and provisions prepared by
  the draft.