

[Illustration: LINES OF TORRES VEDRAS]

Lastly, in calculating the forces which Wellington accumulated within
the Lines, we must mention the two Spanish divisions from the Army
of Estremadura. Hearing that all was quiet for the moment on the
frontier of Andalusia, the British Commander had asked the Marquis
of La Romana, whether, in accordance with a promise made so long ago
as July, he could spare any troops to assist in the holding back of
the main French army of invasion. The Marquis, with a liberality of
which the Cadiz Regency would have disapproved, if its leave had been
asked, replied that he would bring up his two reserve divisions.
Leaving Ballasteros on the Andalusian border, and another division
under Imaz at Badajoz, in addition to the garrison and Madden’s
Portuguese cavalry, he marched for Aldea Gallega and Lisbon with the
troops of La Carrera[497] and Charles O’Donnell[498], about 8,000
men. On October 25th he had arrived at the cantonments behind Mafra,
on the second line of defence, which his ally had requested him to
occupy. Wellington defended the bringing up of these troops by the
plea ‘that he did not think himself justified in not bringing into
his positions all the force which was at his disposal’[499]. But it
is doubtful whether the advantage of getting 8,000 Spanish troops
within the Lines justified the danger incurred in Estremadura, when
it was possible that Soult might send out Mortier at any moment
to attack the depleted army that covered the approach to Badajoz.
Napoleon thought that he should have done so, and when he heard of
the arrival of La Romana at Lisbon, wrote to censure the Duke of
Dalmatia in the fiercest strain[500]. ‘It was a shame and a scandal
that he had retired to Seville: the 5th Corps had orders to be always
at La Romana’s heels, and to prevent him from moving into Portugal,
so that the news of its return to Seville roused the Emperor’s
surprise and anger.’ There can be no doubt that Napoleon did well to
be angry. The balance of affairs in Andalusia tended to stand at an
equipoise precisely because La Romana’s army was strong enough to
keep the 5th Corps employed. When 8,000 men had been withdrawn by the
Marquis to the Lisbon lines, Mortier was in a position to sweep all
before him as far as the gates of Badajoz, or to execute a raid into
the Alemtejo if that course seemed preferable. But Soult did not send
his lieutenant on this errand on his own initiative, but waited till
he received direct orders to do so from Paris. By that time it was
too late, and neither the disaster of the Gebora nor even the fall
of Badajoz had any influence on the course of events in Portugal.
Masséna was forced to retreat before a single patrol from the Army
of Andalusia had got into touch with his outposts. What might have
happened if Soult had launched his blow at Badajoz in October, and
had appeared on the left bank of the Lower Tagus in December, it is
impossible to say. Probably Wellington would have found some means of
averting disaster, but it is unquestionable that his task of defence
would have been made far more difficult.