

A mere mention must suffice for the eighth section of the defensive
works, the semicircle at St. Julian’s and Oyeras which was intended
to protect the embarkation of the army if the worst should come. It
was strongly entrenched, and could be held by a very few battalions,
while the rest were utilizing the numerous and solid piers alongside
of which the fleet of transports was to be moored.

Having described the Lines, it remains that we should describe the
garrison set to guard them, detailing separately each element,
regular and irregular. The forces at the disposition of Wellington
were materially increased at the moment of his arrival within
the Lines. On October 8 he found at his disposition a brigade of
three battalions newly arrived at Lisbon, the 1/50th, 1/71st, and
1/92nd, all old Corunna regiments which had served in the Walcheren
expedition, and were still none too healthy from their long sojourn
in the deadly marshes of Zeeland. There had also landed about the
same time the 94th regiment, and the Brunswick Oels Light Infantry,
a foreign battalion raised from the refugees who had fought under
the Duke of Brunswick in the abortive North German insurrection of
1809. Moreover, two battalions--the 2/30th and 2/44th--had just been
sent to Lisbon from Cadiz, where General Graham now thought that
the British contingent was larger than was absolutely necessary.
The 1/4th and 1/23rd came out a little later, and do not appear in
the fortnighty ‘general state’ of the army till November 15. Thus
the army was swelled by nine battalions, or some 6,500 men[489]. No
cavalry, however, had arrived.

  [489] About 5,800 rank and file, with 250 officers and 350
  sergeants and drummers, by mid-winter return.

Wellington used these new arrivals to form a new 6th Division of
infantry, and to complete to full strength the 5th Division, which
had hitherto possessed only one British brigade. He did not, however,
keep the lately landed units together: acting on the principle which
he always followed, of mixing veteran acclimatized battalions with new
arrivals, he formed the new 6th Division by adding Campbell’s brigade,
taken from Cole’s 4th Division, to two Portuguese regiments the 8th
and the Lusitanian Legion, both of which had been hitherto attached
to the 5th Division, and had served with Leith at Bussaco. In the 4th
Division, Campbell’s brigade was replaced by that of Pakenham, taken
from Spencer’s 1st Division, while compensation was made to Spencer,
by giving him the newly landed 1/50th, 1/71st, and 1/92nd, as a new
brigade under Erskine. The 5th Division under Leith got three more
of the fresh arrivals, the 1/4th, 2/30th, and 2/44th as its second
brigade. The 94th was given to Picton’s second brigade,--which had
hitherto consisted of only 2⅓ battalions,--to raise it to average
brigade-strength. The Brunswick Oels Jägers, being a light corps, were
partly divided up into separate companies and told off to different
brigades (as the 5/60th, a similar unit, had already been), though the
head quarters and six companies joined Pakenham’s brigade in the 4th
Division. But when the 1/23rd, the last of the reinforcements, came
out, it also joined Pakenham, while the Brunswickers were transferred
to the Light Division--where they did not long abide[490].