

(4) The fourth section of the outer or northern front was that from
the gorge of the Zizandre (or the pass of Runa, as it is sometimes
called) to the sea. It was about twelve miles long, but of this space
six miles and more was covered by the impassable bog formed by the
obstructed Zizandre, and another mile was formed by the formidable
entrenched camp of San Vincente, above the town of Torres Vedras, the
most complete and self-sufficing of all the works in the peninsula.
This stronghold lay outside the main line, beyond the river, covering
the bridge and the paved _chaussée_ from Leiria to Lisbon, the only
carriage-road on the western side of the Lines[486]. It was one
of the earliest of the fortifications commenced by Wellington’s
engineers, having been started on November 8, 1809, and was placed in
such a conspicuous point, and planned on such a large scale, that it
attracted public attention more than any other part of the works, and
gave its name to the whole in popular parlance[487]. The whole front
on both sides of Torres Vedras and its great fort was so strong and
inaccessible as to offer little temptation to the invader to select
it as a point of serious attack, all the more so because troops
brought opposite to it would be completely cut off from any left in
front of the eastern and central part of the lines. For the geography
of the peninsula at this point is peculiar: north of the gorge of
the Zizandre the great backbone range, the Serra de Barregudo and
the Serra de Monte Junta, extends for a distance of fifteen miles,
without being crossed by a single road practicable for horses, much
less for wheeled vehicles. There are nothing but goat-tracks across
the heights. If, therefore, any considerable body of troops had been
sent to observe or contain the western section of the lines, it
would have been separated by two days’ march from the rest of the
army, and liable to be crushed, ere succoured, by the defenders of
Lisbon, who had good cross-roads across the peninsula, by which they
could transfer themselves from point to point under the protection
of their works. As a matter of fact, nothing but flying parties of
French horse ever appeared in this direction. Masséna had not troops
to spare for any secondary attack, more especially for one on such an
unpromising part of the Lines. Wellington had foreseen this when he
distributed his field army behind the various sections of the front:
to support the garrisons of the twelve miles of redoubts about Torres
Vedras he only placed one division, while there were three behind
the eastern section, and more than four in the partially entrenched
central part[488].

  [486] By an astonishing blunder the camp of Torres Vedras is
  placed by Napier in his map (and apparently in his text also)
  _south_ of the river Zizandre, on the main line of heights,
  while in reality it was a great _tête-du-pont_ covering the only
  passage from north to south over the stream and its bogs.