

  [487] See note to that effect in Jones, p. 21.

  [488] The third division (Picton) only, behind Torres Vedras.
  Behind the Alhandra-Arruda section were the 2nd (Hill),
  Hamilton’s Portuguese, and the Light Division; in the central
  part the 1st, 4th, 5th, 6th Divisions and three unattached
  Portuguese brigades (Pack, Coleman, and Al. Campbell).

Passing on to the second line of defence, from Quintella on the Tagus
to the mouth of the Rio São Lourenço on the Atlantic, we find three
sections of defence, which, unlike those of the outer line, were all
completed by September 1810, and had no central gap.

(1) There was over a mile of impassable inundation at the eastern
end, between Quintella and Alverca. Above the first-named village
was an isolated hill, which was all fortress, for no less than six
redoubts had been placed upon it, to enfilade the high-road across
the inundated lower ground. Then came the Serra de Serves, three
miles of lofty and difficult hills, which had been scarped into
almost perfect inaccessibility. In a sudden dip west of this range
was the pass of Bucellas, through which runs one of the three great
high-roads that enter Lisbon. It was easily defensible, as it lies
between two high and steep mountain-sides, and is only a couple of
hundred yards broad. Redoubts were placed so as to rake it from end
to end, and to flank it on both sides. The _chaussée_ itself was
blocked with successive abattis, and the viaduct leading up to it was
mined.

(2) The second section of the inner line extended from the pass
of Bucellas to the Park of Mafra, a front of over six miles. The
eastern part of this was formed by the towering heights of the
Cabeça de Montechique, the most dominating mountain-summit in the
whole peninsula, almost steep enough to defend itself without
fortification; but three redoubts nevertheless had been reared upon
its summit. But from the pass of Montechique, at the left side of
the summit, down to Mafra the ground was less well marked, and here
the _chaussée_ from Sobral and Zibreira crossed the range. Much
fortification, therefore, was lavished on these four miles, along
which there were nine strong redoubts, connected with each other in
the rear by a military road passing along the southern crest of the
heights. There was a second and formidable ridge behind this line,
where further defence could be offered in the unlikely event of the
enemy forcing his way up the high-road.

(3) From Mafra to the sea, nearly ten miles, there was for the most
part a well-marked line of heights protected in front by the ravine
of the river of São Lourenço, a deep, rugged, and in many cases
inaccessible cleft, only crossed by a single road, that from Torres
Vedras to Mafra. Nevertheless, six redoubts were reared, to cover
this, and the few other points where the ravine was passable. The
eastern part of this section, that along the wall of the Royal Park
(Tapada) of Mafra, was its weakest portion, and for two miles at
this point the British engineers set all their ingenuity to work.
The outlying heights called the Serra de Chypre, in front of the
park, were covered by four redoubts, and turned into a first defence.
The wall of the Tapada itself was loopholed and furnished with a
banquette. The important road which passes its foot was obstructed
with cuts, enfiladed by the artillery of several works, and stockaded
at more than one point. There was another group of redoubts along the
south end of the Torres Vedras road, at the village of Morugueira;
and finally Mafra town, in the rear of all, was turned into a
defensive post by means of trenches and barricades. Altogether, what
was by nature the weakest point in the southern lines was made by
art one of the strongest. This too, in spite of the fact that, being
approachable only from Torres Vedras, it was on the whole not a
probable front on which to expect an attack.