

Meanwhile Masséna’s tired infantry of the main body had made hardly
any movement: the 2nd and 6th Corps still lay about Alcoentre. Junot
alone with the 8th Corps advanced as far as Moinho de Cubo, half way
between Alcoentre and Alemquer. Thus Wellington was given a whole
day more to arrange his troops in their positions along the Lines.
On this morning he was rather under the impression that the French
attack would be directed upon Alhandra and Hill’s corps, which, he
observed, would be a ‘tough job, defended as all the entrances of the
valleys are by redoubts, and the villages by abattis[501].’ Moreover,
the French ‘positively could not’ get guns up to attack the line west
of Hill, since, in the existing state of the weather, no cannon could
leave the paved roads, and the only path of that description leading
from the Sobral direction to the Tagus bank ran through Arruda, where
Craufurd and the Light Division were now comfortably installed.
Considering it likely, therefore, that Masséna would bring a heavy
attacking force, by circuitous roads from the rear, to Villafranca,
in order to make a frontal attack on Hill along the high-road by the
Tagus, Wellington warned Craufurd and Spencer to be ready to move in
eastward to the assistance of the extreme right wing of the Lines.
In the afternoon, however, he discovered that the force in front of
Sobral (Montbrun) seemed much larger than that in front of Alhandra
(Pierre Soult), and showed more signs of making wide-spreading
reconnaissances. He therefore drew up an alternative scheme, by
which, in the event of an attack on Spencer’s front at Zibreira,
Cole’s and Campbell’s (the new 6th) divisions were to support the
threatened point, and even Picton was to come in from the distant
Torres Vedras[502]. No French troops were reported from this last
direction, and De Grey’s cavalry pickets from Ramalhal (far outside
the Lines) reported that not the smallest party of the enemy’s horse
had been seen west of the Serra de Barregudo or the Monte Junta[503].

  [501] _Dispatches_, vi. 502, to Craufurd.

  [502] Wellington to Spencer, afternoon of Oct. 11, _Dispatches_,
  vi. 505.

  [503] Wellington to Craufurd, same day, _Dispatches_, vi. 504.

On the 12th Montbrun made a movement which seemed to justify
Wellington’s first idea, that Hill was to receive the French attack.
He moved Taupin’s brigade, the only hostile infantry which had yet
been seen, southward from Alemquer to Villafranca on the Tagus. This
was done, however, only because the whole 8th Corps was coming up on
this day from Moinho de Cubo by Alemquer to Sobral, which it reached
in the afternoon, replacing Taupin’s small force. Its arrival was
at once reported to Wellington, who saw that his second theory of
the intention of the enemy, not his first, had been correct, and
transferred his main attention to the side of Sobral. That village,
by some extraordinary blunder on the part of Sir Brent Spencer, had
been evacuated by the pickets of the 1st Division during the night of
the 11th-12th[504]. They were put back into it, by the special orders
of the Commander-in-Chief, in the early morning, for Wellington
wished to hold it as long as was safe, on account of the fine view
obtainable from its knoll over the routes from Alemquer by which
the enemy must approach. Hence, when Junot’s advanced guard came up
in the afternoon, there was a collision at Sobral. The troops of
Clausel finally succeeded in expelling the British outposts, which
belonged to Erskine’s and Löwe’s brigade, from the village. The
casualties were few on both sides--nineteen men only were lost by the
British[505]. The retiring pickets did not fall back into the Lines,
but clung to the other side of the ravine which separates Sobral from
the lower slopes of Monte Agraça. They were only 300 yards from the
village.