




SECTION XXI: CHAPTER V

MASSÉNA BEFORE THE LINES OF TORRES VEDRAS: HIS RETREAT TO SANTAREM
(OCTOBER-NOVEMBER 1810)


On the night of October 10, when Craufurd made his hasty retreat to
Sobral, and went within the Lines, Montbrun had his head quarters at
Alemquer, where he kept Taupin’s infantry brigade, and Lamotte’s and
Sainte-Croix’s cavalry. Pierre Soult’s light horse felt towards their
left, in the direction of the Tagus, and occupied Carregado, where
they failed to find any British outposts, Hill’s corps having been
withdrawn behind the brook which enters the Tagus near Castanheira.
The main body of the army was far to the rear, in one vast column:
Ney’s and Reynier’s corps lay that night in and about Alcoentre:
Junot’s bivouacked around the convent of Nossa Senhora de Maxeira,
a short distance to the south of Alcoentre. All the troops were
terribly fatigued by three days’ movement in torrential rain, and had
no more marching-power left in them.

It was only on the following morning (October 11) that Montbrun
discovered the Lines. His cavalry had been ordered to move forward on
the two roads across which they lay. Pierre Soult therefore pushed
for Villafranca, on the high road which skirts the Tagus; he found
Hill’s outlying pickets at Villafranca, drove them out of the town,
and on passing it came in sight of the line of redoubts and scarped
hillside above Alhandra, which was manned by the Portuguese militia
and backed by Hill’s British infantry. It was impossible to advance
further, so the brigadier, leaving an advanced post in Villafranca,
drew back his three regiments to Castanheira, and sent his report to
Montbrun.

That general himself, with the main body of his cavalry, had
followed the rough road from Alemquer to Lisbon. He drove in some
British dragoon pickets, and then arrived in front of the village
of Sobral, which he found occupied by the infantry outposts of
Spencer’s division. He did not attempt to push further that day,
as his flanking reconnaissance had come in sight of the sections
of the Lines behind Arruda and behind Zibreira, where redoubts and
solid lines of infantry were visible. Sobral itself was clearly
not held in force, nor did it form an integral part of the British
position. But Montbrun feared to attack it, when he had only a single
brigade of infantry to the front, while many thousands of British
troops might issue from the Lines to overwhelm him if he committed
himself to a serious attack. The village on its knoll was left alone
for the present, though it was tempting to contemplate the seizure
of a point which lay so far forward--less than two miles from the
front of Wellington’s chosen position. But Montbrun contented
himself with sending back word to Masséna that he had come upon a
continuous line of fortifications stretching from the Tagus bank to
some point westward, which was not yet discovered. For his furthest
reconnaissances towards Runa and the Upper Zizandre had found the
enemy in front of them, however far they pushed.