

Masséna’s first dream of masking the Lines by a close blockade was
absolutely impracticable, considering the present state of his
supplies. The troops were already living on the gleanings of the
hastily-evacuated villages of the Lisbon Peninsula, which could not
last them for long, and would not even have sufficed for a week’s
consumption if Wellington’s decrees had been properly carried out. If
he was to feed his army from the thin resources left behind by the
Portuguese, Masséna would soon find it necessary to spread it far
and wide; since, if he kept it concentrated in front of Wellington,
it would soon go to pieces, exposed in bivouacs to the November
rains, and forced to draw its nourishment by marauding from afar. It
seems from the instructions which he gave to Foy at the end of the
second week of his stay in front of Lisbon, that the Marshal actually
contemplated clinging to his present advanced position till he should
receive reinforcements. He hoped that the 9th Corps would come up to
his aid from Old Castile, and that Mortier and the 5th Corps would
join him from Andalusia. But these were mere hypotheses: he was not
in touch with either Drouet or Mortier. Indeed, he had been cut off
from all communication with his colleagues since the day that he
crossed the Mondego. The 9th Corps, as a matter of fact, was only at
Valladolid, and showed no signs of moving on. Mortier had retired to
the mountains in front of Seville, after his successes over the army
of La Romana in September. Almeida was in a state of close blockade
by Silveira’s detachments from beyond the Douro. Ciudad Rodrigo was
in hardly better case, being strictly watched by Julian Sanchez and
his mounted guerrilleros, so that no one could get to or from it
without a very strong escort. Gardanne’s regiment of dragoons, left
behind by Masséna, was worn out in the effort to keep open the road
between Rodrigo and Salamanca[519]. From the Army neither Almeida nor
Rodrigo received a word of news from the 18th of September to the
15th of November. So effectually was the road closed, that rumours
were current of such divers characters as that Masséna had forced
the English to embark, and that he had been completely foiled, and
was marching back to Spain via Castello Branco. Paris was hardly
better informed: the only news that the Emperor got was that dribbled
out, four or five weeks later, by the English papers[520]. Hence
came ludicrous notices in the _Moniteur_, of which the worst was
one published on November 28, which stated that Coimbra had been
occupied by Masséna without a battle, that the army on October 1
had only 200 sick and 500 wounded since it had left Almeida, and
that no general or colonel had been killed or even hurt since the
invasion began! And this after twelve such officers had fallen at
Bussaco. That battle, we may remark, was presented ultimately to
French readers as ‘a demonstration executed by the brigades of Simon
and Graindorge in order to mask the great flank-march of the Prince
of Essling. But they had gone beyond their instructions, and brought
on a combat in which 200 men had been killed and 1,200 wounded.’
Fririon, the historian of the campaign, cannot restrain himself from
adding, ‘This is how history was written at that time; it was by
reports of this lying description that an attempt was made to calm
anxious families. Did no one reflect that, by deceiving them in this
way, the government made enemies of all those who trusted for a time
in the exactitude of the _Bulletins_, and lost their illusion soon
after, when they learnt the melancholy ends of their sons and their
brothers[521]?’