

  [497] Who had now resigned the command of the cavalry, and gone
  back to his old infantry division.

  [498] The ‘Vanguard’ and 2nd Division of his army.

  [499] _Dispatches_, vi. p. 544.

  [500] _Correspondance_, xxi. pp. 273, 295.

For the full realization of the meaning of the Lines of Torres Vedras
there are two general facts which must be remembered. Firstly, they
were garrisoned by troops which formed no part of the field army.
Wellington’s sixty thousand regulars were not frittered away in the
garrisoning of redoubts, but were held in masses behind the lines,
ready to reinforce any threatened point, and to deliver a pitched
battle in the open, if the head of the French army were thrust
through the defences at some weak section. The generals of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, who so often built lines, and
were so easily evicted from them, suffered disaster because they drew
out their armies in one attenuated thread, and were therefore weak
at every point, and always inferior to the assailant at the place
where he made his assault. Wellington’s army was (with the exception
of the 3rd Division at Torres Vedras) gathered in two solid masses,
one facing Sobral, on the heights between Monte Agraça and Runa, the
second and smaller behind Alhandra. The one could reach the other in
half a day’s march, for the roads behind and parallel to the lines
had been put in good repair.

The whole of this vast system of redoubts was to be held by the
troops of the second line, and by them only. There were altogether
some 20,000 men of the second line in the fortifications, composed of
(1) the 8,000 (afterwards raised to 11,000) militia infantry. (2) Of
about 800 Portuguese regular artillery, aided by over 2,000 gunners
picked from the militia and Ordenança, trained by the regulars and
incorporated with them. (3) Of some 250 British artillerymen from
the batteries which had been lying in reserve at Lisbon. (4) Of
picked companies of the Lisbon Ordenança (atiradores) drilled into a
state of discipline not much worse than that of the militia. (5) Of
the landing force of 2,000 British marines, partly from the fleet,
partly brought specially from England to garrison the proposed lines
of embarkation at St. Julian’s. (6) Of the dépôts, convalescents and
recruits of the eight Line regiments of infantry raised from Lisbon
and Southern Estremadura--about 4,000 strong.

In all, therefore, there were about 20,000 men, mostly troops of
secondary quality, or 28,000 if the Spanish auxiliaries are counted,
ready to man the Lines, without a man being withdrawn from the ranks
of the field army. The outer lines were calculated to require about
18,000 men for the redoubts, the inner ones 14,000, but clearly both
did not require to be manned at once. If the outer line were broken,
the garrison-troops from the intact parts of it could fall back on
the second. Meanwhile the field army would be engaging any French
columns that might have broken through, and there would be ample
time to arrange for the manning of the second and stronger front.
But it must be repeated once more that it was not on the passive
defence of the redoubts by their garrisons that Wellington reckoned
for success, but on the fighting of the field army, who would tackle
the columns of attack that had committed themselves to the assault
of the section--whichever it might be--that Masséna might select as
his objective. All criticism based on general principles concerning
the weakness of long extended lines falls to the ground, when it is
remembered that Wellington had his army massed for a pitched battle
in and behind his defences, not strung out on an interminable front.