

Junot refused to renew his attack, and Masséna, who had arrived
while the skirmish was in progress, did not direct him to go forward
again. It was clear that there was a very strong force in front of
the 8th Corps, and that the redoubts visible along the Monte Agraça
on the one hand and the Portello heights on the other were of the
most formidable description. Masséna’s senior aide-de-camp and chief
confidant, Pelet[510], thus describes the psychological situation:
‘On arriving at Sobral, instead of the “undulating accessible
plateaux” that we had been told to expect, we saw steeply scarped
mountains and deep ravines, a road-passage only a few paces broad,
and on each side walls of rock crowned with everything that could
be accomplished in the way of field fortifications garnished with
artillery; then at last it was plainly demonstrated to us that we
could not attack the Lines of Montechique with the 35,000 or 36,000
men[511] that still remained of the army. For, even if we had
forced some point of the Lines, we should not have had enough men
left to seize and occupy Lisbon.... It was clear that we must wait
for reinforcements[512].’ Another eye-witness, Junot’s aide-de-camp
Delagrave, in his _Memoir on the Campaign of 1810-11_, expresses
the same view in his single sentence, explaining that ‘the prince,
seeing that the enemy was better prepared and stronger than had been
believed, put an end to the combat, and on each side the troops
took up once more their original positions[513].’ The loss in this
combat--insignificant enough in itself, but decisive in that it
revealed to Masséna the uselessness of a further advance--was 67 on
the British side, about 120 on that of the French[514].

  [510] For his position and character, see p. 209 of this volume.

  [511] This figure is, of course, a ludicrous exaggeration.
  Masséna had still more than 50,000 men. Even on Jan. 1, 1811,
  after suffering two months more of untold privation, the Army of
  Portugal was still 44,000 strong, plus sick and men detached.

  [512] Pelet’s _Appendice sur la Guerre d’Espagne_, p. 323 of vol.
  xxi of _Victoires et Conquêtes_.

  [513] Delagrave, p. 100.

  [514] Of the sixty-seven British casualties, thirty-eight were
  in the 71st, the rest in the neighbouring brigades of the
  1st Division. Noël--who had charge of the battery at Sobral,
  estimates the French loss at 120--very probably the correct one,
  as Martinien’s lists show one officer killed and six wounded,
  all in Ménard’s brigade. This should mean 120-150 casualties.
  Delagrave gives the higher figure of 200 killed and wounded,
  probably an overstatement.

After putting a stop to the combat of Sobral, Masséna rode away
eastward, along the slopes of the upland that faces the Monte Agraça,
and as far as the knoll facing Arruda in the front of the Light
Division. Here he pressed so near the British front that a single
shot was fired at his escort from the redoubt No. 120 to warn him to
trespass no further. He saluted the battery by lifting his hat to it,
and went up the hill out of range[515]. Some of his aides-de-camp
continued the exploration till they touched Reynier’s vedettes near
Villafranca, but the Marshal himself returned to his head quarters at
Alemquer to think over the situation. There some sort of a council of
war was held that same night: Junot, it is said, urged the Chief to
try the effect of a bold dash at the English army arrayed in front
of Sobral. But he was talked down by Ney and Reynier, who argued
that such an attack would be insane, considering the weakness of
their corps and the strength of Wellington’s fortifications. Without
doubt they were right: even if Masséna had brought his whole three
corps to bear on Sobral, he had 10,000 men less than at Bussaco,
and Wellington 10,000 men more, leaving the garrisons of the forts
out of the question. The allies had 30,000 bayonets concentrated on
the threatened point, and could have brought up Hill, Craufurd, and
Hamilton’s and Le Cor’s Portuguese--20,000 men more--from the east
end of the Lines, the moment that it was clear that Reynier was no
longer in front of them. The position, owing to the forts, was far
stronger than Bussaco, and the French cavalry would have been as
useless on October 15 as it had been on September 27. The report
which Foy drew up for Masséna and presented to the Emperor gives the
whole gist of the matter: ‘The Marshal Prince of Essling has come to
the conclusion that he would compromise the army of His Majesty if
he were to attack in force lines so formidable, defended by 30,000
English and 30,000 Portuguese, aided by 50,000 armed peasants[516].’