

  [519] For the miseries and dangers of life in Rodrigo, see the
  _Memoirs_ of the Duchesse d’Abrantes. Her letter to Junot,
  intercepted by Wellington, tells the same tale: it is to be found
  in D’Urban’s collection of documents.

  [520] See _Correspondance_, vol. xxi. pp. 262, 280, 338, &c.

  [521] See Fririon, pp. 57-8.

The dearth of news from the front was not Masséna’s own fault. He
had sent back several aides-de-camp to find their way to Almeida,
but all had either been captured by the Ordenança or forced to turn
back. The best known of these was the young Mascarenhas, one of the
Portuguese traitors on the Marshal’s staff. He started from Coimbra
on October 3, with the Bussaco dispatch, disguised as a shepherd, but
was detected by a band of Ordenança, and sent as prisoner to Lisbon.
The Regency had him tried by court-martial, and as he was caught
without a uniform, he was condemned as a spy as well as a traitor,
and executed by the garotte in December[522].

  [522] See above, p. 277.

There was a perfect cordon of Portuguese militia and irregulars
round Masséna’s rear in October and November. J. Wilson had come
down to Espinhal, and had his outposts in Leiria; Trant had returned
to Coimbra. They were in touch, by means of the Estrada Nova and
the garrison of Abrantes, with the Ordenança of Castello Branco,
and a Spanish detachment of three battalions under Carlos d’España,
which La Romana had sent to Villa Velha, at the same time that he
took his two divisions under La Carrera and Charles O’Donnell within
the Lines. On the side of the Atlantic the garrison of Peniche had
sent out a force of 300 men to Obidos, under Captain Fenwick, and
these joined hands with De Gray’s cavalry at Ramalhal, in front of
Torres Vedras. A few French parties which crossed the Monte Junta
to raid towards the sea coast were cut off either by Fenwick or by
the dragoons. But Masséna never sent any serious detachment in this
direction.

For just one month (October 14-November 14) Masséna maintained
his position in front of the Lines. The 8th Corps had thrown up
some earthworks on, and to the flanks of, the hill of Sobral, thus
assuming a defensive instead of an offensive position. The 2nd Corps
went back to Carregado, but left strong detachments in Villafranca.
By the dispositions of October 16 the 6th Corps remained with
its main body at Otta, far to the rear, and an advanced guard at
Alemquer. Ney was so placed that he could succour either of the other
corps if they were attacked. A brigade of Loison’s division was
pushed forward to the hill opposite Arruda[523]: in face of this last
Craufurd was adorning the front of his line with a luxury of abattis,
entanglements, and pitfalls, which would have made the hillside
inaccessible to even the most alert and vigorous person moving alone.
Formed troops could not have got past the first two or three traps.

  [523] Ferey’s brigade, which had already faced Craufurd at
  Bussaco.