

  [515] Masséna was clearly seen from the British Lines. Leith Hay,
  a staff-officer of the 5th Division, noted ‘a crowd of officers
  on horseback, dragoons with led horses, and all the cortége of
  a general-in-chief’ (_Narrative_, p. 249), and saw the Marshal
  dismount by the windmill above Sobral. He was watching from
  Pack’s redoubt, on the hill just opposite, through his telescope,
  about 2,000 yards from the French front. It is Jones who, on p.
  40 of his _Lines of Torres Vedras_, gives the anecdote about the
  Marshal’s salute.

  [516] See Foy’s _Vie Militaire_, Appendix, p. 343.

An open assault on the Sobral position was now, indeed, the thing
that the British most desired. Wellington wrote, with his usual
ironical moderation, to his trusted lieutenant, Craufurd, that
‘he thought his arrangements had now made the position tolerably
secure[517].’ Among these last arrangements, it may be remarked,
was the drawing back of the 71st and the light companies of the
1st Division from the barricades on the near side of the ravine of
Sobral. They were moved a few hundred yards to the rear, nearer
to Zibreira. This was probably intended to encourage the French
to sally out from Sobral up the road, where everything was now in
order to receive them. Their advance was hourly expected; D’Urban,
Beresford’s Chief of the Staff, wrote gleefully on October 15, ‘Each
individual division has now more than sufficient troops to occupy the
space allotted to it, and the overplus forms a first reserve for each
respectively. If the force thus posted beats the attacking enemy, of
which there can be little doubt, our telegraphic communications will
bring down Craufurd from Arruda and Hill from Alhandra on to their
flank--and the affair will be complete. There is much appearance that
the enemy _will_ attack this position with his whole force--Alhandra
is far too strong for him. He cannot well retire, and it is hoped
that his distress for provisions will compel him to bring matters to
a speedy decision[518].’

  [517] Wellington to Craufurd, _Dispatches_, vi. p. 517.

  [518] D’Urban’s _Journal_, under Oct. 15.

But both the cautious Commander-in-Chief and the eager head of the
Portuguese Staff were mistaken in estimating the position. They
had judged wrongly the character of Masséna, and his psychological
position of the moment. He would not attack; indeed, after October
14 he seems never to have had the least intention of doing so. The
lesson of Bussaco had not been lost, and he was no longer prepared
to assail, with a light heart, the Anglo-Portuguese Army posted
ready to receive him in a strong position. Probably the energetic
statement of Ney and Reynier that they dared not risk their men--that
the troops would be demoralized if ordered to advance for a second
slaughter--also had its effect on the Marshal. But Masséna was proud
and obstinate, and if he could not go forward, he shrank, for the
moment, from going back. On October 15 began the one phase of the
campaign which the British, from general down to subaltern, had least
expected. The French army began to show signs of intending to settle
down in front of the Lines, as if for a blockade. After a few more
attempts to feel the front of the Lines about Arruda and the valley
of Calandriz, which were so feeble that they did not even drive in
Craufurd’s outposts, the enemy began to fortify the front of his
position with field-works, and sent away the whole of his cavalry to
the rear--a sufficient sign that his offensive power was spent.