

  [508] For his dispositions for resisting the suspected attack see
  _Dispatches_, vi. pp. 507-9 of Oct. 13. The line running from
  right to left was (1) Pack’s Portuguese in the great redoubt
  facing Sobral, (2) 1st Division between the redoubt and Zibreira,
  (3) Picton touching Spencer’s left, (4) Cole touching Picton’s
  left, (5) Campbell (new 6th Division) on Cole’s left, reaching to
  the Portello redoubts. Each of these divisions had one brigade in
  reserve. A separate general reserve was formed by Leith behind
  the right, and Coleman’s and Alex. Campbell’s Portuguese behind
  the left.

  [509] I find in the note to Gachot’s excellent editions of
  Delagrave’s _Campagne de Portugal_ that the losses of the
  French on this day were 157 men, those of the allies 139.
  The last statement, one sufficiently probable in itself,
  cannot be verified from any British source that I have found:
  Wellington, annexed to the document on page 511 of vol. vi of
  the _Dispatches_, gives the loss of Cole’s British brigades in
  detail--they amount to twenty-five men only. But he does not
  give details of Hervey’s Portuguese, though he mentions that the
  brigadier was wounded, and that the two regiments (Nos. 11 and
  23 of the Line) distinguished themselves. They may well have
  lost the 124 men mentioned by Gachot, but I have no proof of
  it. Vere’s usually accurate ‘Marches of the 4th Division’ gives
  no figures for this day, nor does D’Urban’s _Diary_. Wellington
  remarks that ‘the attack of this day on General Cole’s pickets
  near Sobral was without much effect.’ It is certain, however,
  that the British lost a little ground in front of the heights.
  Martinien’s _Liste des officiers tués et blessés_, which I so
  often find of use, shows that Junot’s corps lost two officers
  killed and seven wounded. This, at the usual average, would imply
  150-180 casualties.

On the same afternoon Reynier, with somewhat over a battalion of
infantry, made a detailed reconnaissance of Hill’s position in front
of Alhandra. He pressed in close enough to draw the fire of the
nearer redoubts, but halted when he had realized the strength of the
line opposite him, and reported to Masséna that he considered the
right wing of the allied position hopelessly impracticable for an
attack.

Next morning (October 14) the French Commander-in-Chief came up in
person from the rear. It is astonishing that he had made no earlier
attempt to judge with his own eye of the strength of Wellington’s
line of defence. He arrived at Sobral in time to witness a bitter
skirmish, the most important of all the engagements that took place
during the crucial days of the campaign of 1810. Spencer’s outposts,
as has been already mentioned, had on the 12th retired only some 200
or 300 yards from Sobral, and had taken up their position on the
other side of the ravine that divides that village from the lower
slopes of the Monte Agraça. Across the high-road the main picket,
furnished by the 71st regiment, had thrown up a barricade. Junot
considered this lodgement, so close to his line, as a thing that
ought not to be permitted. Accordingly he brought up his artillery,
which had only arrived from the rear on the previous night, to the
front of Sobral, and, after cannonading the barricade for a short
time, sent against it the _compagnies d’élite_ of the 19th of the
Line, supported by other troops of Ménard’s brigade. The first rush
of the attack carried the barricade and the line of stone walls on
each side of it. But the whole of the 71st was ready to sustain the
pickets, and with a fierce rush swept the assailants back across
the barricade, down the slope, and into the outer houses of Sobral.
From thence, of course, they had to retire, as a whole division was
fronting them; but they resumed their old position without being
pursued.