

  [504] Wellington to Chas. Stuart, _Dispatches_, vi. 506.
  D’Urban’s invaluable diary has the note. ‘Oct. 11: ’Tis
  difficult to account for all this, which must be vexatious to
  the Commander-in-Chief, who, aware of the importance of the
  heights in front of Sobral, must have wished to keep them for the
  present.... Oct. 12: In the morning the enemy was no more to be
  seen, and what we should never have given up, we were fortunately
  permitted to re-occupy. But at nightfall the French, with about
  six battalions, retook the height and town of Sobral.’

  [505] Of the nineteen casualties, nine belonged to the
  newly-landed 71st, four to the German Legion, six to the company
  of the 5/60th attached to Erskine. See Return in Record Office.

While this skirmish was in progress the main body of the French were
at last set in motion from Alcoentre. The 6th Corps advanced this
day (October 12) to Moinho de Cubo and Otta; the 2nd Corps, taking
a road more to the east, so as to lean towards the Tagus, arrived
at Carregado. Junot’s corps was encamped behind Sobral, Clausel’s
division having its advanced posts (Brigade Ménard) in the village,
while Solignac lay two miles to the rear. The weather was still
abominable, and all the movements were accomplished with great
fatigue and delay.

On this afternoon the French army suffered the loss of its most
brilliant and energetic cavalry officer. General Sainte-Croix, while
exploring the Tagus bank, north of Villafranca, in search of deserted
boats, was cut in two by a cannon shot from a British gunboat which
was watching his cavalry from the estuary. He was held to be the only
officer, except Colonel Pelet, who had any personal influence with
Masséna[506], and as that influence was always exerted on the side
of daring action, it is probable that the many French diarists who
deplore his death are right in considering that it may have had some
positive effect on the conduct of the campaign[507].

  [506] Sainte-Croix had been the Marshal’s chief-of-the-staff
  during the Wagram campaign, and was generally reputed to have
  been responsible for some of the boldest moves made by Masséna’s
  army during that period.

  [507] That Fririon is correct in dating Sainte-Croix’s death
  on the 12th, and Delagrave and others wrong in placing it on
  the 16th, is proved by an entry in D’Urban’s diary of Oct. 15,
  stating that it had just been discovered that the general killed
  in front of Alhandra was called Sainte-Croix. Clearly then he was
  dead before the 16th.

On the night of the 12th-13th Wellington had become convinced, and
rightly, that the great mass of Junot’s corps, visible behind Sobral,
constituted the main danger to his position. He therefore drew in
troops from his right, even calling down from Torres Vedras Picton,
in whose front no enemy was yet visible. From Monte Agraça to the
Portello redoubts he put in line four British divisions--Spencer,
Cole, Picton, and Campbell, along with Pack’s independent Portuguese
brigade; this last was placed in the great redoubt on Monte Agraça,
which dominated Sobral and all the lower hills. In reserve were two
more divisions--the 5th under Leith, and a temporary Portuguese
division consisting of the brigades of Coleman and Alex. Campbell.
Altogether 30,000 men were concentrated on this comparatively short
front of about four miles, besides the militia and artillery who
garrisoned the minor forts[508]. Junot, whose corps did not now
muster more than 12,000 men, did wisely to refrain from making any
serious attack. He was not, however, wholly quiescent: attempting to
extend his troops more to the right, to the west of Sobral, along
the undulating ground in the direction of the Upper Zizandre, he
got into touch with the outlying pickets of Cole’s division, which
stood beyond those of Spencer and Picton in the British line. The
first attack fell on the light companies of the 7th Fusiliers and the
newly-arrived Brunswick Oels battalion. When they were driven in,
Cole fed his fighting-line with the light companies of Hervey’s [late
Collins’s] Portuguese brigade. Finding his voltigeurs outnumbered,
Junot, in a similar fashion, sent up Gratien’s brigade from his
second division to reinforce his advance. Hence there ensued some
sharp skirmishing, which lasted several hours, till Cole drew back
his outpost line from the lower plateaux north of Sobral to the foot
of his fighting-position, on the heights below the Portello redoubts.
Junot had thus gained a mile of ground, but not ground that was of
any service to him for a regular attack on the Lines, since it was
merely part of the rolling upland that was dominated by Wellington’s
main position. The 4th Division lost twenty-five British and a
much larger number of Portuguese in this long bicker. Hervey the
Portuguese brigadier was wounded. The French casualties were probably
a little the larger[509].