

The last point on which stress must be laid is that the most careful
arrangements for the transmission of orders and intelligence from end
to end of the Lines had been made. There were five signal-stations,
with semaphores worked by seamen on (1) the redoubt No. 30 near the
Atlantic, (2) the great redoubt of Torres Vedras, (3) the Monte de
Socorro above Wellington’s head quarters at Pero Negro, (4) the
summit of the Monte Agraça, (5) the hill behind Alhandra on the
Tagus. After some practice it was found that a message could be sent
from one end to the other of the 29 miles in _seven_ minutes, and
from No. 3, the head quarters semaphore, to either end of the Lines
in _four_ minutes. There was a similar line of four semaphores on
the second, or main, series of defences. Military roads had been
opened behind both the fronts, so that troops could be moved along
the shortest possible line. On the other hand, it was fortunate that
there existed no cross-road from sea to sea _outside_ the Lines,
which could be of any practical use to the invader. The only route of
this sort, that from Alemquer by Sobral to Runa, was commanded for
the whole length from Sobral to Runa by the British heights, whose
foot it hugs, while from Sobral to Alemquer it is separated from
the Lines by the steep and pathless ridge of Galaria, across which
nothing on wheels could pass. Nevertheless, here lay the invaders’
best chance--corps placed on this road, and screened by the ridge,
could be moved for some distance to left or right unseen from the
Lines. The road, however, was bad, rocky, and narrow: it is marked as
the ‘Calçada Arruinada’ or ‘ruined road’ in contemporary maps. The
other paved road in this direction, that from Sobral to Arruda and
Alhandra, passed through the line of ground occupied by the British
at two points, and was under fire from the redoubts at short range
for the rest of its course: it was absolutely impracticable.

It only remains to be added that the navy had been utilized for
auxiliary service: not only were its marines under orders to man the
St. Julian’s lines, but its seamen had fitted out all the gunboats
in the Lisbon arsenal. A flotilla of great strength infested the
Tagus estuary, and by the fire of its heavy guns prevented the French
from approaching the shore, or endeavouring to build boats at the
mouths of its creeks. If any attacks had been made upon either of the
extreme ends of the Lines, the columns delivering them would have
been under fire from the sea throughout their operations. But, as we
shall see, the French never contemplated this: the one temptation
which Masséna felt was to assault, far inland, the gap in front of
Sobral between the Monte Agraça and the Serra de Socorro. And there,
as we shall see, at the critical moment, prudence got the better of
ambition, and the invader turned back foiled. The high-water mark of
French conquest in Europe was reached on the knoll by Sobral on the
wet and gusty 14th of October, 1810.