

  [525] The first morning note of D’Urban’s diary in November is
  nearly always ‘more deserters arrived.’

  [526] See Wellington to Lord Liverpool, _Dispatches_, vi. 554.

  [527] See especially the longer dispatch of Nov. 3, on pp. 582-3
  ibid.

Here, as when we considered the reasons which determined Wellington
to evacuate the Coimbra country at the end of September, we are
bound to recognize that he adopted an attitude of caution which he
would not have assumed in 1812 and 1813, when he had thoroughly
proved his army. The temptations to assail Junot’s isolated and
advanced position at Sobral were enormous. The 8th Corps had been
thrust forward into a re-entering angle of the British lines, in
which it could be attacked from the left flank as well as from
the front. It was wasting away daily from its privations, and had
apparently not more than 10,000 bayonets left--the cavalry of the
corps (Sainte-Croix’s old division) had been sent off to Santarem,
save one regiment. To sustain Junot the 6th Corps could eventually
be used, but only one brigade of it (that of Ferey) was in the first
line, and this depleted unit, which had been so thoroughly routed
at Bussaco, had its old enemy, Craufurd’s Light Division, in its
front. Of the rest of the 6th Corps, one division was at Alemquer,
eleven miles behind Sobral, the other at Otta, six miles behind
Alemquer[528]. It would have taken the one four or five hours, the
other nearly the whole of a short November day, to assemble and to
come up. Reynier could not quit Hill’s front without freeing the
latter’s two strong divisions for action. Meanwhile Wellington had
disposable, in Junot’s immediate front, the divisions of Spencer,
Cole, Leith, and Alex. Campbell [Picton had been sent back to Torres
Vedras], plus the Portuguese brigades of Pack, Coleman, and A.
Campbell, with La Romana’s Spaniards also, if he should choose to
employ them--this, too, after leaving Craufurd to look after Ferey,
and Hill to keep Reynier in check. It is impossible not to conclude
that a sudden frontal and flank attack on Sobral with 30,000 men
must have enveloped and crushed the 8th Corps. Though its position
was good, its supports were too far off; Ney could not have come up
to Junot’s aid, before he was overwhelmed. Masséna was uneasy about
this possibility of disaster, and had issued orders on October 29
that if Junot and Ferey were attacked, they were to fall back on
Alemquer, while Ney was to bring up his reserves to that same place,
and Reynier to abandon his position in front of Alhandra and march
on Alemquer also[529]. But the weak point of this arrangement was,
that if Junot had been attacked at dawn, both in front and flank, by
an overwhelming force, he could never have got back to Alemquer, and
must have been cut off and battered to pieces close in the rear of
Sobral. The English frontal attack--Spencer, Leith, and Pack--would
have started at a distance of less than a mile from his position:
Cole and Campbell on the flank had only two miles to cover. Both
columns had a down-hill march before them till the line of rising
ground about Sobral was reached. How could the 8th Corps have got
away? Even an orderly retreat, with a fighting rearguard, would have
been impossible.