

But the most significant part of Masséna’s arrangements was to
be found in his rear: Montbrun’s cavalry reserve went back to
Santarem; thither also went the reserve artillery on the 17th, and
the hospitals on the 20th of October. At the same time each of the
corps was directed to send to Santarem all smiths, carpenters, and
other artificers that could be found in its ranks. They were told to
report to General Eblé, the officer commanding the artillery, who
had received from the Marshal a special mission--the construction of
boats and pontoons sufficient to bridge the Tagus or the Zezere. For,
if he were starved out in Estremadura, Masséna had it in his mind
that he might find it convenient either to cross into the Alemtejo,
or to force a way across the Zezere into the Castello Branco
district, in the hope of opening communication with Spain via Zarza
and Alcantara. Montbrun’s cavalry explored northward and eastward,
seeking for likely spots at which the Tagus might be bridged, and on
the other side reconnoitring the line of the Zezere, to see how it
was held. Not a boat could be found on the greater river; at Chamusca
a daring party of fifty men swam its broad current, for a dash at
some barks which were visible on the other side, but all were found
to have had their bottoms carefully knocked out and to be filled
with sand. Dejean, the officer who explored as far as Punhete on the
Zezere, found all the bridges broken, and the garrison of Abrantes
watching the fords, with strong detachments at Punhete and Martinchel.

Eblé found at Santarem that he had to create a pontoon equipage with
no materials at all to work from. There was raw iron in the bars and
balconies of houses, and raw timber in their floors and rafters, but
nothing else. His smiths had to start on the weary task of forging
saws and hammers, his carpenters had to turn housebreakers--in the
technical sense--to obtain planks and joists. His task was hard,
and would clearly take many weeks before it could be properly
accomplished.

Meanwhile time was all-important to Masséna, for every day the
country between Santarem and the Lines grew barer and yet more bare,
as the foragers of the three French corps worked their will upon it.
The men were already going into hospital by thousands, and dying
there. Junot’s conscript battalions, unsheltered from the rain in
their bleak bivouac above Sobral, suffered most--Ney’s and Reynier’s
men were (for the most part) housed if not fed. The Army, which had
65,000 men on leaving Almeida, and 55,000 after the loss of Coimbra,
had dwindled down to 50,000 effective sabres and bayonets by the
month of November[524].

  [524] According to _Fririon_, p. 98, the morning state of Nov. 1
  showed only 46,591 men effective. But the figures of that officer
  are always a little lower than what I have found in the official
  documents.

Wellington was already pondering on the possibility of taking the
offensive. He had received hundreds of deserters during the last
few weeks[525], and knew by their means of the miserable condition
of the enemy--of the fact that the cavalry had nearly all been sent
to the rear, and of the attempt that was being made to create a
bridge-equipage at Santarem[526]. His dispatches of October 27 and
November 3 to Lord Liverpool treat at length of the advantages and
disadvantages of assailing the French in their present position[527].
He sets forth the strength of his own army--29,000 British troops
present with the colours, after deducting sick and men detached,
24,000 Portuguese effective, and 5,000 of La Romana’s Spaniards,
making a total of 58,615. He refuses to contemplate the use of the
militia, infantry or artillery, in the field; considering their
behaviour at Bussaco and elsewhere, ‘I should deceive myself if I
could expect, or your Lordship if I should state, that any advantage
would be derived from their assistance in an offensive operation
against the enemy.’ On the other hand, he estimates Masséna’s
fighting force at 55,000 men--a slight miscalculation, for there
were only 50,000 effective at this moment, and of these 4,000
cavalry and one brigade of infantry were at Santarem and other
distant places, from which they could not have been withdrawn for a
battle suddenly forced upon their main corps. Masséna could really
have put no more than 44,000 men in line within twenty-four hours
of an alarm. Wellington then proceeds to argue that he must make a
frontal attack, for if he drew a very large force out of the Lines,
in order to assail the enemy’s flank by a wide encircling march,
‘the inevitable consequence of attempting such a manœuvre would be
to open some one or other of the great roads to Lisbon, and to our
shipping, of which the enemy would take immediate advantage to attain
his object.’ Accordingly ‘we must carry their positions by main
force, and in the course of the operation I must draw the army out
of their cantonments, and expose men and horses to the inclemencies
of the weather at this time of the year.’ Moreover, if Masséna were
defeated, it would cause Soult to evacuate Granada, raise the siege
of Cadiz, and come with 50,000 men to aid the army of Portugal.
‘So if I should succeed in forcing Masséna’s positions, it would
become a question whether I should be able to maintain my own, in
case the enemy should march another army into this country.’ Blake
and the garrison of Cadiz, when freed from Soult’s presence, would
certainly do nothing to help the general cause of the Allies. They
would neither come to Portugal, nor be able to make a serious advance
on Madrid, so as to draw off Soult in that direction. He therefore
concludes, that ‘When I observe how small the superiority of numbers
is in my favour, and know that the position will be in favour of the
enemy, I am of opinion that I act in conformity with the intentions
of His Majesty’s Government in waiting for the result of what is
going on, and in incurring no extraordinary risk.’ What he calls
‘the safe game’ is to keep on the strict defensive, hoping that the
enemy’s distress for provisions, and the operations of the militia
in his rear, may cause him either to make a desperate attack on the
Lines--in which he will be repulsed with awful loss--or else to make
such large detachments, to clear off the corps of Wilson, Trant, and
the rest, that it will become easy and safe to attack the remaining
army in its present position.