

  [534] This had been sent off the day before Foy arrived, Nov. 20,
  it is _Correspondance_, 17,146.

  [535] _Correspondance_, 17,172, dated Nov. 28.

It may be added that (as facts were to show ere long) the mere
sending up of Drouet to the front was not nearly sufficient to put
Masséna in a position to incommode Wellington, more especially when
the 9th Corps was told to drop detachments at short intervals at
every stage after Almeida. By following these orders, indeed, Drouet
brought to the main army a mere 6,000 men on December 26, having
left the rest of his corps beyond the Mondego. His arrival was of
absolutely no use to the Prince of Essling. The one thing which could
have saved Masséna was the arrival, not of a small field force such
as Drouet or Mortier commanded, but of a large army, on the Lower
Tagus, and on its southern side. Such an army, as the disposition of
the French troops in Spain then stood, could only have been produced
if Soult had consented to abandon Granada, raise the siege of Cadiz,
and march with the greater part of the Army of Andalusia into the
Alemtejo, masking Badajoz and Elvas, and leaving a division or two
in Seville to keep Blake and the Spanish troops from Cadiz in check.
But the Duke of Dalmatia could never be induced to abandon two-thirds
of his Andalusian viceroyalty, in order to execute a movement whose
results, if successful, would mainly redound to the glory of Masséna.
Nothing short of a definite and peremptory order from Paris would
have made him call in Victor and Sebastiani, and evacuate Eastern
and Southern Andalusia. Such an order the Emperor did not send. His
dispatch of Dec. 4 only ordered that a corps of 10,000 men should
advance to the Tagus in the direction of Villa Velha and Montalvão,
to communicate with Masséna[536]. Soult undertook instead a blow at
Badajoz, in January, with a force of 20,000 men, while leaving Cadiz
still blockaded and Granada still held. Napoleon, therefore, must
take the blame of the final failure of the invasion of Portugal.
As has been shown above, from his own words, he was conscious that
he was too far from the scene of operation, and that mere ordinary
directions to his lieutenants might not be carried out with zeal. ‘Je
donne l’ordre. L’exécutera-t-on? De si loin obéit qui veut[537].’
But if this were so, it was surely necessary either that he should go
to Spain in person, or else--the more obvious alternative--that he
should appoint a real Commander-in-Chief in the Peninsula, who should
have authority to order all the other marshals and generals to obey
his directions, without malingering or appeals to Paris. Napoleon had
deliberately created a divided authority beyond the Pyrenees when he
set up his military governments, and instructed Suchet, Kellermann,
and the other governors to report directly to himself, and to pay no
attention to commands emanating from Madrid[538]. King Joseph, as
a central source of orders, had been reduced to a nullity by this
ill-conceived decree. Even over the troops not included in the new
viceroyalties he had no practical authority. Not he and his chief of
the staff, but Masséna, ought to have been entrusted with a full and
autocratic power of command over all the armies of Spain, if a true
unity of purpose was to be achieved.