

  [532] échauffourée.

Then comes the Emperor’s conclusion upon the present state of
affairs. ‘Masséna must take Abrantes--Elvas would be of no good to
us. The only way to get Wellington to make a forward move will be to
force him to try to raise the siege of Abrantes. As long as Masséna
stays in position opposite Lisbon, nothing is lost; he is still a
terror to the English, and keeps the offensive. If he retreats, I
fear great disaster for him. But why did he not take up some regular
plan of operations? The very day after he reconnoitred the Lisbon
lines, it was clear that he would never attack them. I will send
immediate orders for the 5th Corps [Mortier] to invade the Alemtejo.
Will they be obeyed? At that distance only those who choose carry out
my directions. [A hint at Soult’s selfish policy.] I tremble lest
Masséna may call Drouet down to him, and then get his communications
cut again. By communications I mean sure points, at two or three
marches distance, properly garrisoned and provisioned, where convoys
can rest and be safe. An army without open communications loses heart
and gets demoralized.... All the hope of the English is in that army
of Wellington’s! If we could destroy it, it would be a terrible blow
to them.’

The Emperor, pleased with Foy’s intelligent explanations of the
situation, created him a general of division, and told him to
rest for a month, and then return to Portugal. He sent for him to
administer a second catechism on the 24th, and then condescended to
explain his view of the situation, and his orders for the future.
He quite approved of Masséna’s resolve to hold out in front of the
Lines, and had already given Drouet directions to assemble his corps
at Almeida, and open up communications with the Army of Portugal--in
fact, the order to do so had been sent off as early as November 3,
and its bearer must have crossed Foy somewhere on the road[533].
Soult had also been ordered, two days before Masséna’s appeal
came to hand, to create a diversion in the direction of Spanish
Estremadura[534]. He was now sent a sharp reproof for having done
nothing, and more especially for having allowed La Romana to slip
away with two divisions to Lisbon unmolested[535]. But it seems clear
that no orders to concentrate his whole army and invade the Alemtejo
were sent him, and these were the only measures that could have
helped Masséna. Napoleon’s _obiter dictum_ that it would be no use to
besiege and capture Elvas shows a misapprehension of the situation. A
mere demonstration in Spanish Estremadura might call back La Romana,
but would not help the Army of Portugal to any appreciable extent. It
was not La Romana’s 8,000 men who formed the strength of the defence
of Lisbon. Wellington could have spared them without harm, and,
indeed, sent them away long before Masséna quitted Portugal.

  [533] This is the order in _Correspondance_, 17,097. It goes on
  to give Drouet detailed orders as to what he should do ‘aussitôt
  que les Anglais seront rembarqués.’