

  [544] Fririon’s confidential report to Masséna, night of 8th-9th
  of November.

But Masséna had no intention of retiring on Spain when he began to
issue orders for a general movement to the rear. Profoundly sensible
of the difficulties of a November retreat through the mountains,
trusting that he might block the British army by maintaining a bold
attitude in its front, and still hoping that large reinforcements
might reach him ere long from Drouet and Mortier, he had resolved
only to evacuate the Lisbon peninsula, and to retire no further than
to the flat and fertile lands between Santarem and the Zezere. In
the Plain of Golegão, as it is sometimes called, he hoped to feed
his army for many weeks more, for the region was still comparatively
full of resources, since it had only been exploited as yet by the
garrison of Santarem and the flying columns which had marched to
the Zezere. It was now his cherished hope that Wellington might
follow him into the plain-land, abandoning his defensive system,
and consenting to give battle in the open. The English might even
be induced to attack the French army when it should have taken up a
new and a strong position. In somewhat rash confidence the Marshal
professed himself certain of the result, even with his depleted army
of under 50,000 men, if Wellington would consent to fight. At the
worst, if starved out again or beaten in the field, he would retreat
on Spain by Castello Branco, for which purpose he had sent up the
greater part of his boat-train from Santarem to build a bridge over
the Zezere. He had also pushed part of Loison’s brigade of infantry
across that river at Punhete, and was holding with it a point
suitable for a _tête-du-pont_. A regiment of dragoons was attached to
this force: it skirmished not unfrequently with parties sent out to
reconnoitre from Abrantes, but with no serious result. For General
Lobo, the governor, had no intention of coming out with a large
detachment, in order to push the French advanced guard back over the
river. He had been ordered to keep to the defensive, and only sent
out occasional reconnaissances to see whether the enemy were still in
position.

Loison’s troops were now no longer the only large force which had
quitted the army in front of the Lines. Not only was Montbrun, with
the main body of the cavalry, watching the roads from the north,
but six battalions of infantry had been sent up from the 6th Corps
on November 8 to occupy Torres Novas and Thomar. If Wellington had
attacked the enemy behind Sobral on any day after that date, he
would have found Ney short of fourteen battalions[545] out of the
thirty-four which formed his corps. There would have been only 10,000
infantry ready to support Junot in the direction of Alemquer. But
this fact, of course, was unknown to the English general, who had
already made up his mind not to take the offensive. If it had come
to his knowledge, he might have attacked, even at the last moment,
with an enormous probability of inflicting on the enemy not the mere
repulse that he disliked to contemplate--on account of its ulterior
effects--but a crushing defeat, which might have hurled them out of
Portugal.