

  [528] Loison, to whom Ferey’s brigade belonged, had gone to the
  rear with his other brigade.

  [529] The whole dispatch may be found in Fririon, pp. 96-7. That
  officer quite saw the danger of the position: see his comments on
  pp. 99-100.

But if Junot’s 10,000 men had been destroyed behind Sobral,
Wellington would then have been in the position to push in between
Ney and Reynier, whose columns would just have been beginning to
near Alemquer. He might easily have driven them apart, and have
forced them to retire on Santarem or some such distant point, in
order to complete their junction. Even had they succeeded in joining,
Masséna would have had a demoralized army of little over 30,000 men
remaining. It is certain that he must have refused to fight, and have
started on a disastrous retreat either by Castello Branco, or more
likely by Thomar. For the latter direction would have brought him
to his base at Almeida--the former would have taken him through an
almost uninhabited country, to a part of Spain, the mid-Tagus, where
no French army was ready to receive or succour him.

It is impossible, therefore, to doubt that Wellington had a great
opportunity before him. Yet it is easy to see why he refused to take
it. A mere victory of the second class--the thrusting of Junot out of
his positions, not followed by the complete annihilation of the 8th
Corps--would have done no more for him than he himself stated in the
above-quoted dispatch of November 3. If Junot got away with the main
body of his troops, and joined Ney and Reynier, and if their united
army took up a defensive position at Santarem or elsewhere, Masséna
might still hang on to Portugal, till Soult brought up to his aid
the whole Army of Andalusia, or great reinforcements arrived from
Castile. Any chance--a fog, heavy rain, the rashness or stupidity
of some subordinate--might prevent the complete and instantaneous
success of the attack on Sobral. These things being taken into
consideration, Wellington resolved to lie still in the Lines, and to
let the weapon of starvation play for some time longer on the French.
He expected them to retire within a few days from sheer necessity, or
else to deliver the much desired attack on his impregnable position.

Masséna had found that the preparation of his bridge equipage at
Santarem would be a long business. He knew that his numbers were
shrinking every day in the most appalling fashion, not only from
deaths and invaliding, but from desertion. Yet he stood still for
a fortnight longer than his adversary had expected, and meanwhile
made a last desperate appeal for help to the Emperor. He had guessed
that all his previous attempts to communicate with Spain had failed
because his messengers had been sent without a sufficient escort, and
had fallen by the way. Accordingly, he told off a body of more than
500 men to bear his next letter, and gave the command of them to an
officer of well-known intelligence and resource--Foy, who had served
in all the three Portuguese campaigns, Junot’s of 1808, Soult’s of
1809, and this last of his own. Moreover, it was known that Napoleon
had confidence in his ability, though he was an old Republican, and
had actually been one of the few who had refused to sign the address
which was drawn up to ask the First Consul to declare himself Emperor
in 1804. Foy was given a whole battalion of infantry--the 4th of the
47th of the Line--with 120 mounted men. He was told to avoid the main
roads, to cross the Zezere, pass north of Castello Branco, and to try
to reach Spain by way of Sabugal or Penamacor. This was obviously a
difficult task, since the Ordenança were known to be abroad, even
in this rugged and deserted region. To cover Foy’s start, Montbrun
marched, with a brigade of dragoons and a couple of battalions of
infantry, to make a demonstration against Abrantes, and draw the
attention of its garrison from the upper Zezere. Montbrun forced
the passage of the river at Punhete, after a sharp skirmish, and
established his vanguard on the further side. He thus attracted to
himself all the forces which Lobo, the governor of Abrantes, could
spare outside his walls. Meanwhile (October 31) Foy passed the Zezere
higher up, at an unguarded ford, and marched by Cardigos and Sobreira
Formosa along the Castello Branco road. But he abandoned it before
reaching that town, and turned north, crossing the Serra de Moradal
by Fundão and Belmonte. From thence he reached Sabugal, and finally
Ciudad Rodrigo on November 8. He had been unmolested save by a body
of Ordenança, who cut off some of his stragglers. The passage of
his column, whose strength was exaggerated by rumour, caused Carlos
d’España to burn the bridge of Villa Velha, under the impression that
Foy intended to seize it, and open up communication southward with
Soult. He and Lobo reported to Wellington that Foy and Montbrun were
the van of a great force, which was about to overrun and occupy the
Castello Branco country[530]. But Masséna’s messenger had no other
object than to reach Castile with as great rapidity as possible, and
without fighting.