

  [540] See for example those noted in _Dispatches_, vi. 545, and
  a whole series copied out in D’Urban’s journal in October and
  November, 1810.

  [541] A most modest estimate, for the returns of sick for the
  second half of October in a document at the _Archives de la
  Guerre_ give a total of 10,897 men in hospital.

  [542] An allusion to a phrase in one of the captured dispatches.

  [543] Wellington to Liverpool, October 27, pp. 545 and 555 of
  vol. vi.

There remained only one danger: it was just possible that Soult,
even though Masséna had not yet suffered any disaster great enough
to make the evacuation of Eastern Andalusia imperative, might
send Mortier and some additional divisions of his other corps to
Spanish Estremadura, and make a dash at the Lower Tagus. Masséna’s
boat-building at Santarem, of which every deserter spoke, might
be intended to give him the materials for a bridge by which he
might communicate across the Lower Tagus with Soult. Wellington
accordingly resolved to keep a strict watch beyond the Tagus, and
to have a flying force ready, which could hinder the construction
of a bridge or a bridge head. With this object on November 2 he
sent over the Tagus General Fane, with his 1,500 Portuguese horse,
a battalion of Caçadores, and a few guns. All the North Alemtejo
Ordenança were called out to watch the river banks, and to lend what
small assistance they could to the cavalry. Fane discovered the
French dockyard at Santarem, and tried to fire it with rockets on
November 13. He failed, but the mere appearance of his little force
on the further bank of the Tagus had some good effect, since it
warned Masséna that an attempt to pass the broad river would not be
unopposed, and therefore made him more chary of attempting it. Fane,
being in touch with Abrantes on his right hand and with Lisbon on
his left, now formed, as it were, a section of the blockading screen
which was thrown round the whole French army.

Wellington had miscalculated the time which the French could afford
to spend in front of the Lines, without suffering actual starvation,
by about a fortnight. On November 10 Masséna gave orders for the
evacuation of his whole position, and a general retreat on Santarem,
because it had become absolutely impossible to stay any longer on the
ground facing Zibreira and Alhandra, unless the whole army was to
perish. The report from the 8th Corps may suffice to give in a few
words the condition of affairs, ‘General Clausel wishes to observe
that during the daytime he cannot count on any other troops save
those actually guarding the outpost line. The majority of the men are
absent on raids to the rear, to seek for maize and cattle. The last
detachment which came back to camp had been nine days away. Generals
and soldiers agree in stating that for some time it has only been
possible to collect a little corn with extreme difficulty. For eight
days the troops have been living on polenta (boiled maize flour)
alone, and of this they have received only half a ration. During
the last four days the 1st Division has received only one ration of
meat, which amounted to six ounces of goat’s-flesh. If the corps had
to make a retreat, it would have to abandon its sick and wounded for
want of carts, which the intendant-generals will not furnish[544].’
The condition of the 2nd and 6th Corps was only so far better that
they had to send their foragers a less distance, when seeking for the
scanty store which could still be gleaned from the hidden granaries
of the Portuguese.