

  [545] Viz. 39th (3 batts.) and 69th (3 batts.) of Marchand’s
  division at Thomar and Torres Novas, with Loison’s 66th (3
  batts.), 82nd (2 batts.), and 26th (3 batts.). It will be
  remembered that Reynier was, at the same time, minus the 4/47th,
  sent as escort with Foy to Ciudad Rodrigo.

On November 10 Masséna ordered the hospitals of the 6th and 8th Corps
at Alemquer, and of the 2nd Corps at Azambuja, to be sent off to
Santarem. At the same time the intendants of the commissariat were
ordered to direct to the rear the meagre store of provisions which
was in their possession, loaded on the much depleted transport train
which still survived. On the 13th the reserve parks and the artillery
train of each corps were ordered to follow. On the 14th, at eight
o’clock in the evening, the infantry, many of whom lay in contact
with the British lines, acted on their marching directions. Ney’s
main body, which was out of sight of Wellington, was to move first;
then Junot and Ferey’s brigade, whose movement was most perilous--for
if their departure were discovered while they were on the hither side
of the defile of Alemquer, they ran a great risk of being enveloped
and destroyed. Reynier was to maintain his position at Villafranca
and Carregado, until it was reported to him that Junot and his corps
had passed Alemquer and reached Moinho de Cubo. For if the 2nd Corps
had gone off at an early hour, and its departure had been discovered,
Hill might have marched from Alhandra on Alemquer quickly enough to
intercept Junot at that point; and if Junot were being pursued at the
moment by the troops from his immediate front, the whole 8th Corps
might have been cut off.

On the night of the 14th, when the movement was commencing, Masséna
was favoured with the greatest piece of luck which had come to him
since the explosion of Almeida. A fog began to rise in the small
hours, and had become dense by the early morning. It caused some
difficulty to the retiring troops, and dragoons had to be placed at
every cross road to point out the right direction to the infantry
columns[546]. But it had the all-important result of permitting the
British outposts to see nothing at dawn. The limit visible to them
was less than 100 yards. It was only at ten o’clock in the morning
of the 15th that the mists were suddenly rolled up by an east wind,
and that the nearer outposts could see that the French sentinels
in front of them had disappeared. The first alarm was given by
Campbell’s 6th Division[547]. The news spread along the whole line
from west to east, and reached the Commander-in-Chief, who ascended
the hill in front of Sobral a few minutes later[548]. The ingenuity
of the enemy in concealing his departure had been great. Ferey’s
brigade, in front of Arruda, had erected a well-designed line of
dummy sentinels before the Light Division, which were not discovered
to be men of straw, topped with old shakos and bound to poles, till
the fog rolled off on the 15th[549].