

  [530] Wellington also, on Lobo’s report, thought (_Dispatches_,
  vi. 604) that Foy’s and Montbrun’s object had been to seize the
  bridge of Villa Velha.

Arrived at Rodrigo, Foy gave over his escort to General Gardanne,
with orders to him to collect all the convalescents of the Army of
Portugal, and to draw out the garrison of Rodrigo and Almeida, if
Drouet was now in condition to take charge of these fortresses. This
should give him a force of 6,000 men, with which he was ordered to
cut his way to join the main army, to whom he was to bring a convoy
of ammunition, which was running desperately low at the front. How
badly Gardanne executed his charge we shall presently see.

Foy meanwhile, with a fresh dragoon escort, rode for Salamanca and
Valladolid, at which last place he was disgusted to find Drouet
and the bulk of the 9th Corps, whom he had expected to meet at
Rodrigo[531]. He met the general, and passed on to him Masséna’s
request that he would collect the whole of his 16,000 men, and march
on Almeida, and from thence down the Mondego to Coimbra, after which
he was to open up communication with the main army by Leiria or
Thomar. Drouet, assuming some of the airs of a commander-in-chief,
did not show the eagerness to carry out these directions which Foy
had hoped to find.

  [531] Only part of Claparéde’s division had as yet even reached
  Salamanca. Foy to Masséna, Nov. 8, from Rodrigo.

From Valladolid Foy rode straight through by post, braving guerrilla
bands and swollen rivers, through Burgos and Bayonne to Paris,
which he reached on the night of November 21. On the next day he
delivered his dispatches to the Emperor, and was put through two
hours of sharp cross-questioning by his master. The notes of this
conversation, taken down the same afternoon by the general, are
one of the most interesting documents for the study of Napoleon’s
psychology. Striding up and down his study, pouring out strings of
queries, rapid judgements, rebukes and laudations, even anecdotes and
screeds of political philosophy, the Emperor presented a wonderful
picture of restless and far-reaching intellectual activity. Foy put
in his excuses and explanations in the gaps of the Emperor’s tirades.
‘Why the devil did Masséna thrust himself into that muddle[532]
at Bussaco? Even in a plain country columns do not break through
lines, unless they are supported by a superior artillery fire.’ ‘And
the disgrace at Coimbra, where he has let his hospitals be taken
by 1,500 ragged rascals! To lose your hospitals is as disgraceful
as to lose your flags! In a regularly organized country--England,
for example--Masséna would have gone to the scaffold for that job.
The English are full of courage and honour: they defend themselves
well. Masséna and Ney did not know them, but Reynier, whom they had
beaten twice or thrice [Alexandria and Maida], ought to know them!
Wellington has behaved like a clever man: his total desolation of the
kingdom of Portugal is the result of systematic measures splendidly
concerted. I could not do that myself, for all my power. Why did not
Masséna stop at Coimbra, after Bussaco?’ ‘Because,’ faltered Foy,
‘supposing he had done so, Your Majesty would have reproached him
by saying “If you had only pushed straight on Lisbon the English
would have embarked.”’ ‘Very possible, indeed,’ replied the Emperor,
breaking into a broad smile. ‘Well, I wanted to drive them into the
sea: I have failed. All right; then I will have a regular campaign
in Portugal, and use them up. I can wear them down in the nature of
things, because England cannot compete in mere numbers with me.’ Then
followed an excursus into the characters of French generals--Junot,
Ney, Soult especially. Then a curious confession that he had made a
miscalculation in taking up the Spanish war: ‘I thought the system
easier to change than it has proved in that country, with its corrupt
minister, its feeble king, and its shameless, dissolute queen. But
for all that, I don’t repent of what I did; I had to smash up that
nation: sooner or later they would have done me a bad turn.’