

  [536] Berthier to Soult, Dec. 4, 1810.

  [537] See above, p. 458.

  [538] See pp. 201 and 284 above.

This necessary arrangement the Emperor utterly refused to carry out:
he sent rebukes to Drouet for hesitating to obey the orders of the
Prince of Essling, and he jested at the absurd conduct of Ney and
Junot in conducting themselves like independent generals[539]. But
these officers were in command of troops definitely allotted to the
Army of Portugal. Over the other generals of Spain he refused to
allow Masséna any control, and he continued to send them his own
ever-tardy instructions, which had often ceased to be appropriate
long before the dispatch had reached its destination. If we seek the
reasons of this unwise persistence in his old methods, we find that
they were two. The first was his secret, but only half-disguised,
intention to annex all the Spanish provinces north of the Ebro to
France, an insane resolve which led him to keep Suchet and Macdonald
in Aragon and Catalonia, as well as the governors of Navarre and
Biscay, out of the control of any central authority that he might
set up in Spain. The second was his jealousy of entrusting the vast
army south of the Ebro, far more than 250,000 men at the moment,
to any single commander. He remembered Soult’s absurd strivings
after royalty in Portugal; he knew that Masséna, though the best of
soldiers, was false, selfish, and ambitious; and he refused to hand
over to either of them a full control over the whole of the forces in
the Peninsula. It was even better, in his estimation, to leave King
Joseph a shadow of power, than to take the risk of giving overmuch
authority to one of the two able, but not wholly trustworthy,
marshals to whom he must otherwise have entrusted it.

  [539] See the above-quoted conversation with Foy, in the latter’s
  _Vie Militaire_, p. 109.

The war in Portugal, therefore, went on as a mere section of the
great contest in the Peninsula; the other and less important episodes
were not made wholly subordinate to it. And if this system continued
Wellington was free from any real danger. He knew it himself; he
studied diligently both the political position and the details of the
emplacement of the imperial armies in the Peninsula. He was fortunate
enough to secure whole budgets of French dispatches captured by the
Ordenança[540], and all that he read confirmed him in his conclusion.
‘I calculate,’ he writes on October 27, ‘that a reinforcement of
15,000 men would not now give the enemy so good an army as they had
at Bussaco. He lost 2,000 killed or taken there: Trant took 5,000
at Coimbra: above 1,000 prisoners have gone through this army: many
have been killed by the peasantry. They cannot have less than 4,000
sick[541], after the march they have made, and the weather to which
they are exposed. The deserters tell us that almost every one is
sick. From this statement you may judge of the diminution of their
numbers; and you will see that I have not much reason to apprehend
anything from [Drouet’s] “_quinze beaux bataillons_ which fought
at Essling”[542], and which cannot be here before the middle of
November. I do not think I have much to apprehend even if Mortier is
added to them. However, we shall see how _that_ will be.... All the
accounts which I receive of the distresses of the enemy for want of
provisions would tend to a belief that their army cannot remain long
in the position in which it is placed, and it is astonishing that
they have been able to remain here so long as this[543].’ That they
have succeeded in staying even a fortnight in front of the Lines is,
he adds, entirely the fault of the Portuguese government, for not
carrying out thoroughly the work of devastation. But, for the reasons
stated on an earlier page, Wellington was resolved not to take the
offensive, even against a foe whose ranks were beginning to grow
thin. Famine should do the work, and no lives should be wasted.