

  [546] Delagrave, p. 123 and note.

  [547] Londonderry, ii. pp. 51-2.

  [548] His first dispatch, that to Craufurd, is dated at 10.20.

  [549] See Leach’s _Diary_, p. 178.

Meanwhile the French had accomplished the first stage of their
retreat absolutely unmolested. Ney had retreated as far as Alcoentre;
Junot had passed the defile of Alemquer, and passed through Moinho
de Cubo to Aveira de Cima. Reynier, who had waited till Junot was in
safety before he withdrew at eight in the morning, reached Cartaxo
before the day ended. The first and most difficult stage of the
retreat had been finished without a shot being fired. What would
have happened had the night of the 14th been clear and starry, and
the morning sun had shone out on the 15th, so that Junot would have
been detected as he was passing Alemquer, and Reynier would have
been visible still in line of battle behind Villafranca, the French
diarists of the campaign prefer not to contemplate. Yet they mostly
continued to speak of Wellington as a mediocre general, who had all
the luck on his side.

On the night of the 15th the British Commander-in-Chief had to draw
his deductions from the facts before him. Three things were possible:
Masséna might have been so thoroughly starved out and broken in
spirit, that he might be intending to retire on Spain, either via
Thomar and the Mondego, or by his new bridge on the Zezere and the
route of Castello Branco. Or he might be proposing to cross the Tagus
by means of the boats and pontoons still remaining at Santarem, to
seek unwasted fields in the Alemtejo and a junction with Mortier. Or,
again, he might merely be abandoning a position that was no longer
tenable, in order to take up a new one--perhaps at Santarem, perhaps
at Thomar, but very possibly at and about Abrantes, whose siege he
might be contemplating[550].

  [550] Wellington to Fane, Nov. 15: ‘The enemy retreated last
  night. He intends either to retire across the Zezere into Spain,
  or across the Tagus into Spain, or across the Zezere to attack
  Abrantes. The last is possible, as I last night received an
  account that on the 9th they had a considerable reinforcement
  coming on the frontier at Beira Alta.’

On the whole Wellington thought it probable that the last-named plan
was the one which Masséna intended to adopt. A retreat on Spain
would not only be difficult and dangerous, but inconsistent with the
Marshal’s obstinate and courageous temper. It was much more likely
that he would endeavour to hold out in Portugal, and meanwhile to
cover his partial discomfiture by a bold stroke, such as the siege of
Abrantes, which would still give an offensive air to his movements,
and would also throw on the British army the responsibility of
relieving the fortress. Such a course, it will be remembered, was
what Napoleon recommended to Foy[551]. ‘There is still a chance that
the enemy may take up and try to keep a position at Santarem,’ wrote
Wellington to Fane on the night of the 15th, ‘endeavouring to keep
his rear open, and to get a communication with Ciudad Rodrigo across
the Zezere.’ But he was inclined to think that Abrantes was Masséna’s
goal. He therefore directed Fane to transfer his cavalry to the point
opposite Abrantes on the south bank of the Tagus, and requested
Carlos d’España to enter the place and strengthen the garrison. He
intended to pass over Hill’s two divisions to strengthen Fane, and
for that purpose directed Admiral Berkeley to prepare all the boats
of the fleet to ferry Hill across to Salvaterra, on the south bank
of the Tagus, from whence his force could join Fane, and either
reinforce Abrantes, by means of its bridge of boats, or join in the
pursuit of Masséna if he were about (an unlikely chance) to retire on
Spain by way of his bridge over the Zezere[552] and Castello Branco.