

The blockade of the French army, therefore, remained still unbroken,
and its communication with the north was as absolutely interrupted
in the end of November as in the beginning of October. One attempt
to break through the screen of Portuguese irregulars had been made
in November, but of its failure Masséna had as yet no knowledge.
When Foy reached Rodrigo, on his way to Paris, he had handed
over his escort of one battalion of infantry and 120 horsemen to
General Gardanne, who was ordered to strengthen them with all the
convalescents of the Army of Portugal, and with the garrisons of
Almeida and Rodrigo also, if these last had now been relieved by
troops of Drouet’s 9th Corps. At the head of 6,000 men, as Masséna
calculated, he could cut his way to join the main army, escorting
a great train of munitions, of which both the artillery and the
infantry at the front were lamentably in need. Gardanne could not
gather in the Almeida garrison, as that place was still blockaded
by Silveira’s Portuguese. But with the two battalions from Rodrigo,
added to Foy’s late escort, and a mass of convalescents, he had
collected some 5,000 men by November 20[571], the day on which he
marched by the Sabugal-Belmonte-Fundão route towards Punhete and
the lower Zezere. He was cursed with dreadful weather, followed
and harassed by all the Ordenança of the Castello Branco country,
hampered by his heavy convoy, and much troubled by the disorderly
convalescents, who were largely professional malingerers. But he got
as far as Cardigos on the Sobreira-Formosa road, only fifteen miles
from Punhete, where Loison was awaiting him on the Zezere. Here he
was brought to a stand (November 27) by the flooded and bridgeless
stream of the Codes. No news had reached him from Masséna, while he
was assured by Portuguese deserters, who probably were sent out to
deceive him by the governor of Abrantes, that the Marshal had not
only evacuated his position before the Lines, but was retreating on
Spain via the Mondego. They added that Hill had just reached Abrantes
with 10,000 men, and was about to march against him. Thereupon
Gardanne hastily turned back, reached Penamacor by forced marches
on November 29, and from thence retired to Rodrigo, having lost 400
men and 300 horses by disease and fatigue during his ill-conducted
expedition. If he had pushed forward fifteen miles further on the
28th, he would have got into touch with Loison, and reached Masséna’s
head quarters in safety. Wellington, not without reason, professed
himself unable to comprehend this strange march and countermarch. ‘I
do not exactly understand this movement[572],’ and ‘if this march
was ordered by superior authority, and was connected with any other
arrangements, it had every appearance of, and was attended by all the
consequences of, a precipitate and forced retreat[573].’

  [571] Belmas’s figures (i. 137) given here must be about correct,
  not the 2,000 of Fririon, and _Victoires et Conquêtes_. For the
  two Rodrigo battalions were 1,500 strong, Foy’s escort 600, and
  Gardanne took with him some of his own dragoon regiment, beside the
  convalescents.