

  [562] Napier, however, dates the General’s escapade wrongly.
  It took place on the night of the 18th-19th, where it is duly
  related in the diary of George Simmons (p. 117), and not on the
  21st as Napier implies. I have a copy of Delagrave’s _Campagne
  de Portugal_, which once belonged to Napier; he has written a
  sarcastic note on the bottom of page 111, commenting on the
  ridiculous account of the event which appeared in the French
  narratives. He adds that the sergeant’s name was McCurry, and
  that ‘the sergeant had sense enough to hold his tongue, but
  Craufurd spoke out, and so drew the fire of the enemy’s picket.’

It was undoubtedly fortunate for the British Commander-in-Chief that
his habitual caution prevented him from making a serious attack
on the force at Santarem, under the impression that it was a mere
rearguard, left behind to detain him while the enemy’s main body
was pushing for Abrantes. Reynier’s position was very formidable.
The town of Santarem, surrounded by an old mediaeval wall, stands
on a lofty height above the Tagus, with a narrow suburb--where the
French dockyard had been established--along the lower edge of the
hill. But this was only the third and last line of the defensive
position. In front of it lay low alluvial ground, inundated by the
rain which had been falling during the last fortnight, and barely
passable save by the _chaussée_ from Lisbon. The plain was cut in
two by the Rio Mayor, a deep muddy stream at this time of the year,
and to reach Santarem a narrow bridge over this obstacle had to be
passed. Just where the _chaussée_ leaves the marsh, to climb towards
the town, was a long knoll, completely commanding the road: on this
Reynier had placed a battery with infantry supports. This force must
be driven in by the British, and the only practicable way to reach it
was by forcing a passage along the causeway, for the marsh between
the road and the Tagus turned out, when explored, to be practically
inaccessible to formed troops, though individuals might wade through
it in a few places. Behind the advanced French knoll were the
foot-hills of the lofty ridge on which Santarem lies. The enemy
were visible upon it, working hard at the construction of a line of
_abattis_ from the olive-trees which cover its slopes. Behind this,
again, was the town itself, hastily prepared for defence.

On the morning of November 19th the British advanced guard was on the
edge of the swampy plain; Craufurd’s Light Division occupied the near
end of the long bridge over the Rio Mayor, and skirmished with the
French outposts, who refused to retire from the further side. Spencer
came up more to the left, and further inland, Pack’s Portuguese
reached the upper course of the Rio Mayor. Neither Leith nor Cole had
yet arrived at the front, so that the force available for an attack
was no more than 16,000 men. Nevertheless, Wellington, still hoping
that he had only a rearguard in front of him, made dispositions for a
demonstration against the enemy’s front, which was to be turned into
a real attack if he showed want of strength. Craufurd was directed to
advance across the swamp near the Tagus, if he found it practicable.
Pack was to cross the upper Rio Mayor, and turn the hostile right.
Spencer was formed at the entrance of the bridge and causeway,
and ordered to charge up the _chaussée_ at the French centre, and
the battery commanding the road, so soon as he should see that
the flanking divisions were making good progress. Fortunately for
Wellington the attack was never delivered: more rain during the night
had made the marsh so waterlogged that Craufurd, who had crossed the
Rio Mayor by a narrow wooden bridge near Valle, came to a stand in
the slush, though a few of his skirmishers pushed far enough forward
to engage the enemy’s pickets on the other side. Pack’s Portuguese
on the left flank got across the river with much difficulty, but
their guns were absolutely stuck in the mud far to the rear, and the
brigadier sent back word to Wellington that he should advance no
further without special orders. The 1st Division had not yet begun
to move. Thereupon the Commander-in-Chief called back both Craufurd
and Pack, and gave up his plan. It is clear that he had nourished
some intention of attacking in earnest, for he wrote to Hill that
afternoon: ‘I did not attack Santarem this morning, as the artillery
of the left wing (Pack) had lost its way, and I am rather glad that
I did not attack, as the enemy have there undoubtedly a very strong
post, and we must endeavour to turn it. And if they [the main body]
have not retired across the Zezere or towards the Alva, they must be
too strong for us here.’