

It is obvious that both Wellington’s and Masséna’s strategy on the
18th and 19th November is exposed to criticism. Why had the British
General only 16,000 men to the front on these days, when he was
risking a general action with the French? One of two courses must
have been adopted by the enemy: either he must be marching hard for
the Zezere, and intending to retire into Spain, or he must be merely
changing his ground, and proposing to fight at Santarem, or in front
of Abrantes, or elsewhere. In either case it was strange tactics for
Wellington to take the field with 16,000 men (deducting Hill on the
other side of the Tagus), while he left Leith and Cole two or three
marches behind, and still kept the divisions of Picton, Campbell, and
Le Cor, and the unattached Portuguese brigade of Coleman and Alex.
Campbell--20,000 men--unmoved within the Lines. For if the enemy was
flying, there was no need to leave such a force of regulars to guard
positions which the French could not be intending to attack. While
if the other hypothesis was correct, and Masséna, with an army which
Wellington still reckoned at 50,000 men, was in a fighting mood,
and ready to give battle if he saw an advantageous opportunity, it
was still more inexcusable to leave behind 20,000 men, who would be
wanted for the decisive struggle.

On the other hand, the French Marshal was taking a terrible
risk also. Supposing Wellington had been leading his whole
force--deducting Hill--for a resolute attack on the Santarem
positions, which was the most probable course for him to adopt, he
might have had not only the 16,000 men that he had actually brought
forward, but Leith and Cole with 11,000 more, and Picton and the
other 20,000 men left in the Lines, a force, if the cavalry be thrown
in, of full 50,000 sabres and bayonets. If Wellington had left
Craufurd and Pack to block the marshy southern exit from Santarem,
which was as difficult for Reynier as for his adversaries, he might
have thrown 40,000 men into the empty space of twelve miles between
Reynier and Junot, have driven away the latter’s 11,000 men, and
surrounded Reynier’s 13,000 in Santarem. Ney could not have got up
in time to prevent this. The 2nd Corps would either have had to
surrender, for it had hardly any food, or to cut its way out with
disastrous losses[563].

  [563] The emplacement of the Anglo-Portuguese army is given as
  follows by Beresford’s Quarter-Master-General, D’Urban, on the
  night of the 18th-19th, showing its complete dislocation:--

    Light Division, Pack, and Slade’s and Anson’s cavalry--before
      Santarem.
    1st Division--Cartaxo.
    2nd Division--passing the Tagus at Vallada.
    5th Division--Alemquer.
    4th Division--Sobral.
    6th Division--Ribaldeira (in the Lines).
    3rd Division, and Coleman’s and Alex. Campbell’s
      Portuguese--Torres Vedras.
    Le Cor’s Division--Alhandra (in the Lines).

Reynier saw this perfectly, and was in an agony of mind on the 18th
and 19th. He wrote urgent appeals to Masséna, for permission to
abandon Santarem on the former day, pointing out that if his front
was practically inaccessible, because of the swamps, his right might
be turned by the upper Rio Mayor, where he had only a single regiment
in observation, to face what might be an overwhelming strength of
British troops, who might be preparing to cut in between him and
Junot. He sent all his train, sick, and wounded to Golegão[564],
and besought leave to follow them. When he received a peremptory
reply, to the effect that he was to hold Santarem to the last, he
came to the conclusion that he was to be sacrificed in order to
allow the other two corps to escape unmolested. When Pack advanced
on the 19th he sent the report that he was turned by 10,000 British
troops--Pack had but 3,000 Portuguese--and that Clausel with Junot’s
nearest division was too far off to succour him. He prepared to
suffer a disaster, and to die fighting[565]. He ordered his troops to
surround Santarem, in rear as well as in front, with a double line of
_abattis_, and continued to strengthen and repair its old walls.