

  [564] It was their march, visible from the other side of the Tagus,
  which helped to deceive Fane as to the general movements of the
  French army.

  [565] See Delagrave, 128-30, and Gachot’s excellent notes thereon.

Nothing, therefore, could exceed Reynier’s relief when Pack and
Craufurd halted, and Spencer did not move at all, after the firing
had begun upon the 19th. On the next morning the British army
was still stationary, save that a cavalry reconnaissance, pushed
northward from Pack’s position on the upper Rio Mayor, discovered
Junot’s outposts in the direction of Alcanhede and Pernes, and
reported to Wellington that the enemy was in strength, with all arms,
in this direction. Leith’s division came up this morning, raising
the British force to 21,000 men, but this, as the Commander-in-Chief
now saw, was not sufficient to enable him to deal with two corps
d’armée, of which one was in an inaccessible position and now
stockaded up to the eyes. He halted, and sent, very tardily, orders
for Cole to join in haste, and for Campbell’s division to come up
from the Lines. But even thus he was too weak to strike. Hill was now
at Almeirim, half way to Abrantes on the other side of the Tagus.
Fane had actually entered Abrantes, and sent news that the enemy was
making no forward movement from the Zezere. Thus at last Wellington
discovered that he must have practically the whole French army in his
front, while his own forces were in a state of terrible dispersion.

On the 21st he wrote a dispatch to Lord Liverpool which shows that
he had given up all intention of pushing Masséna further. ‘Although
the enemy have moved large bodies of troops eastward from Santarem,
I have not heard that any large body has crossed the Zezere....
Their army being collected between Santarem and the Zezere, they are
in a situation to be able to maintain themselves in their strong
position till the reinforcements, which I know are on the frontier,
can join them. For this reason, and because I am unwilling to expose
to the inclemencies of the weather a larger body of troops than is
absolutely necessary to press upon the enemy’s rear, and to support
my advanced guard, I have kept in reserve a considerable proportion
of the allied army--some of them still in their cantonments in the
Lines, our fortified position. I have ordered General Hill to halt
the head of his corps at Chamusca [on the other side of the Tagus,
fifteen miles south of Abrantes] till the enemy’s movements have
been decided.... The rain, which has been very heavy since the 15th,
has so completely filled the rivulets and destroyed the roads, that
I have hitherto found it impossible to dislodge the enemy from his
position at Santarem, by movements through the hills on his right
flank. Possibly the bad state of the roads has also been the cause
of his remaining at Santarem so long.... The enemy’s army may be
reinforced, and they may again induce me to think it expedient,
in the existing state of affairs in the Peninsula, to resume my
positions [the Lines]. But I do not believe that they have it in
their power to bring such a force against us as to render the contest
a matter of doubt[566].’