

  [566] Wellington to Liverpool, Nov. 26, 1810.

In a supplementary dispatch, dated the same day, Wellington adds:
‘At first I thought the enemy were off, and I am not quite certain
yet that they are not going.... I am convinced that there is no man
in his senses, who has ever passed a winter in Portugal, who would
not recommend them to go now, rather than to endeavour to maintain
themselves upon the Zezere during the winter, or than attack our
position, whatever may be the strength of their reinforcements.’

There were, indeed, men in the French camp who advised Masséna to
continue his retreat, but he had no intention of taking up a timid
policy after braving so many passed dangers. He had resolved to
maintain himself between Santarem and the Zezere, and to call down
Drouet and other reinforcements[567], in the hope that, ere the
winter was over, the Emperor might find means to strengthen him to
a force which, with the co-operation of Soult from Andalusia, would
enable him finally to resume the offensive, and make a second and
more formidable attack upon the Lines. In adopting this resolve he
was, though as yet he knew it not, carrying out the instructions
which the Emperor was at this very moment (November 22) dictating
to Foy at Paris. But Wellington had not written at random when he
reminded Lord Liverpool of the terrors of a Portuguese winter, and
in the end the Prince of Essling was forced to begin on the 1st of
March, with under 40,000 men of his original force, the retreat which
he might have commenced on November 20 with over 50,000[568].

  [567] Notably the column of Gardanne, of which we shall speak
  presently.

  [568] Including sick in each case, and excluding reinforcements
  received later.

The scheme for starving out the French, which Wellington had
devised early in 1810, and begun to execute in September, was now
transferred to a different area. Masséna had been able to endure
for a month in front of the Lisbon Lines: the question now was
whether he would be able to live so long in the land between the
Rio Mayor and the Zezere. Wellington could not be sure of his data,
in calculating the day when exhaustion would once more compel the
French to shift their ground. It was only certain that the plain of
Golegão, and the Thomar-Torres Novas country, had not been devastated
by the Portuguese government even with the same energy that they
had displayed in the Lisbon Peninsula. And there, as the British
Commander-in-Chief complained, not half the necessary work had been
done. Yet something had certainly been accomplished; the population
had nearly all been withdrawn, the mills destroyed, the corn buried
or sent over the Tagus. Trusting to these facts, and to the rains
and frosts of the oncoming winter, Wellington hoped that Masséna
would finally be reduced to a disastrous retreat by sheer privation.
‘Though it is certainly astonishing that the enemy have been able to
remain in this country so long, and it is an extraordinary instance
of what a French army can do[569].’