

  [569] _Dispatches_, vii. 59.

Resolved to take no further offensive action, and to let famine do
its work, Wellington, on November 24, gave orders for the army to
draw back and go into winter quarters, leaving only Craufurd and Pack
in touch with the enemy in front of Santarem, and Spencer in support
of them at Cartaxo. Of the other divisions, Hill remained behind the
Tagus at Chamusca and Almeirim, with his own troops and Hamilton’s
Portuguese. Picton and the 3rd Division retained their old post at
Torres Vedras, with Coleman and Alex. Campbell’s Portuguese near
them. Cole remained at Azambuja, in rear of Spencer. Leith was sent
back to Alcoentre, Campbell’s 6th Division was placed at Alemquer,
behind Leith. Le Cor’s Portuguese stayed at Alhandra, within the
Lines.

‘The army thus placed,’ writes D’Urban, the Quarter-Master-General,
on this day, ‘at once takes care of Abrantes (by means of Hill),
observes the enemy at Santarem (with Craufurd and Pack), has a
division on the higher Rio Mayor road to turn the enemy’s right, if
this become expedient (Leith’s to wit), and still “appuis” itself
on the Lines, its retreat into which is secured by its echelloned
position. Means are ready to pass General Hill back to the right bank
of the Tagus, with such celerity, that his divisions can be counted
upon for the order of march or battle on this side of the river as
certainly as if he were already there[570].’

  [570] D’Urban’s _Diary_, under Nov. 24.

Masséna, on the other hand, also remained nearly quiescent for many
days, the only important change which he made in the cantonments
of his army being that he moved in Clausel’s division closer to
Santarem, to fill the dangerous gap between the 2nd and 8th Corps,
which had existed on November 18. On the 22nd and 23rd he pushed
forward, against Pack’s Portuguese and Anson’s light cavalry, a
considerable force, consisting of Clausel’s whole division and six
squadrons from the 8th Corps, and General Pierre Soult with two
cavalry regiments and three battalions from the 2nd Corps. After some
lively but bloodless skirmishing, the allied troops retired behind
the Rio Mayor, evacuating the village of Calares beyond the stream,
and drawing in their cavalry pickets, which had hitherto held some
ground on the further bank. This affair confirmed Wellington in his
conclusion that nearly the whole French army was now concentrated on
the Santarem-Pernes line, and made him more reluctant than ever to
take the offensive.

Meanwhile Montbrun’s cavalry, supported by small detachments from
the infantry of Ney’s corps, had pressed somewhat further to the
north, in order to occupy a broader tract of land from which the army
might feed itself, a task that grew harder every day. From his head
quarters at Ourem and from Cabaços, on the Thomar-Coimbra road, he
continued to send out strong reconnaissances in every direction, of
which some occasionally pushed as far as Leiria on the road towards
Coimbra, and others scoured the left bank of the lower Zezere and
the Nabao. The limit of their excursions was fixed by the fact that
Wilson’s brigade of Portuguese militia still lay at Espinhal, and,
though it was reduced by desertion and sickness to 1,500 men, was
reported to Montbrun as a serious force, with which he had better not
meddle. Trant’s troops at Coimbra--a weak militia division--were also
estimated at much over their real strength. It was not till later
that sheer starvation drove the French further afield, and revealed
to them the weakness of the _cordon_ of inferior troops which hemmed
them in upon the northern side.