

Unfortunately for himself the British Commander-in-Chief received, on
the night of the 17th, confusing intelligence, which led him to the
false conclusion that the enemy was still retiring, and was aiming
either for Abrantes or for the borders of Spain. This news was sent
by Fane, who from the other bank of the Tagus had observed French
columns and convoys marching eastward from Santarem towards the
Zezere[560], and wrongly inferred that the main army was making for
this direction, and that only a rearguard had been left in Santarem.
He was also influenced by the fact, reported from Abrantes, that
Masséna had cast a second bridge over the Zezere near Punhete, as if
to give him a quicker chance of passing that river. In consequence
of this news, Wellington directed Hill to cross the Tagus at Vallada
with his own division, Hamilton’s Portuguese, and the 13th Light
Dragoons, in order to strengthen Abrantes if it were assailed, or to
fall on the flank of the French, if they were merely passing that
fortress on their retreat to Spain. Thus he deprived himself of
14,000 men on the right bank of the Tagus, where alone troops were
really needed. To make up for Hill’s absence, Leith’s and Cole’s
divisions were called out of the Lines, where they had rested till
this moment (18th November)[561]. But they were two marches off,
and Wellington had for the moment in his front line only Craufurd,
Spencer, Pack’s Portuguese, and Slade’s and Anson’s cavalry, a force
of some 16,000 men. Reynier was in his immediate front at Santarem,
with 13,000 men of all arms. Junot’s corps at Alcanhede and Pernes
was twelve miles away, and about 11,000 strong: the greater part of
his men could have been brought up in half a day’s march. Ney was too
distant to come up in less than 24 hours, and then only with half his
corps, as Loison and one of Marchand’s brigades were far away. But if
Wellington had attacked Santarem on the 19th the Duke of Elchingen
would have appeared next morning.

  [560] Probably Ferey’s brigade marching to join Loison and trains
  following it, and certainly Reynier’s trains which he had sent
  off towards Golegão. See _Dispatches_, vi. 629.

  [561] _The Diary of the Marches of the 4th Division_, by its
  Assistant Quarter-Master, Charles Vere, settles the date. For
  Leith’s start on the same morning, see Leith-Hay’s _Narrative_,
  i. p. 269.

Craufurd was as strongly convinced as his chief that there was
nothing in front of him but a rearguard on the night of the 18th, and
he even doubted whether the last of the French would not withdraw at
midnight. It was this that induced him to make the curious personal
exploration mentioned by Napier (iii. 63)[562], when, followed by
a single sergeant only, he pushed along the causeway in the small
hours of the morning, ran into the French picket, and escaped as if
by miracle the volley that was fired at him. The picket reported to
Reynier that they had been seriously attacked, had killed three of
their assailants, and had heard the groans of wounded dragged away
by the survivors. Craufurd and his sergeant retired, thoroughly
convinced that the causeway had not been evacuated.