

  [556] For a full description of the doings of the 16th on this
  day, see Tomkinson, pp. 59-60.

On the afternoon of the 17th the enemy’s rearguard was at last
discovered, drawn up on a heath outside the village of Cartaxo. It
consisted of one of Reynier’s divisions, which Craufurd was preparing
to attack, when the Commander-in-Chief came up, and refused him leave
to begin the combat, because neither Hill nor Spencer was within
supporting distance of him. Opinions differed as to whether an attack
would have led to a repulse by superior numbers, or to the capture
of the French division, which had a bridge and a long causeway--a
most dangerous defile--in its rear[557]. Probably Craufurd was not
in quite sufficient strength to be certain of success: he had but
six strong battalions[558], a battery, and the 16th Light Dragoons
in his company. The enemy had the eleven weak battalions of Merle’s
division, and two regiments of cavalry: probably 1,000 bayonets and
300 sabres in all more than Craufurd could command. But an attack
made with vigour, when half the French had begun to retire across
the defile, might have had considerable results. Merle’s division
was, however, allowed to retire unmolested in the evening, while the
Light Division took up quarters for the night at Cartaxo. Reynier
drew back the whole of his corps next morning to the environs of
Santarem, which he had been directed to defend. Meanwhile the 8th
Corps had reached Pernes with one division, and Alcanhede with the
other and its cavalry: these were the points at which Junot had been
ordered to stay his retreat. The bulk of the 6th Corps was at Thomar,
but Loison’s division had been kept in the neighbourhood of the
Zezere[559], and part of Marchand’s infantry and Ney’s corps-cavalry
were at Cabaços. The retreat was thus ended, for Masséna was in
possession of the new ground on which he intended to maintain himself
for the winter, and he was prepared to accept a defensive battle if
Wellington should push him any further. His left flank near the Tagus
(Reynier’s corps) was advanced: his right flank (Junot’s corps) much
‘refused.’ Ney was forming the central reserve.

  [557] Leach thinks, with William Napier (iii. 41), that
  Wellington acted wisely in refusing Craufurd leave to attack (p.
  180). Tomkinson, another eye-witness, thinks that an opportunity
  was missed (pp. 60, 61).

  [558] Having now received the Brunswick Oels Jägers, the Light
  Division was six battalions strong, not its usual five. Its
  strength about this time was some 4,000 bayonets. Merle’s
  division was about 5,000 strong: it had dwindled to 4,200
  effectives before December was out. Thus the English and Caçadore
  battalions averaged 650 men, the French 450 only, so that the
  strength was not very unequal. But only 2,500 of Craufurd’s
  troops were British.

  [559] There its main body was now joined by Ferey’s brigade,
  which had been detached for some weeks.