

  [551] See p. 457 above.

  [552] All from the orders issued at 10.30 in the morning ‘from
  the hill in front of Sobral’. _Dispatches_, vi. 623.

Meanwhile all was still uncertain, and it was Wellington’s first task
to find out what roads the enemy had taken in his retreat. He did
not on the 15th order his whole army to leave the Lines in headlong
pursuit. Only Spencer, Craufurd, and Hill were directed to march
that afternoon. The former, with a cavalry regiment out in his front,
occupied Sobral, and pushed its vanguard forward to Alemquer by the
high road. The second left Arruda, climbed the low hills in front of
him, where Ferey had been encamped for the last month, and felt his
way to Alemquer, by the bad road which his immediate adversary had
taken eighteen hours before. Hill followed the great _chaussée_ along
the Tagus bank, by Villafranca and Castanheira, and reached Carregado
before dark. He was warned to be in readiness to cross the river, by
means of Admiral Berkeley’s boats, at the earliest possible moment,
in case the French should have built a bridge at Santarem to enable
them to cross into the Alemtejo.[553]

  [553] All from the orders issued at 10.30 in the morning ‘from
  the hill in front of Sobral’. _Dispatches_, vi. 623.

The advancing troops found the French camps, and the villages where
the more fortunate battalions had been quartered under cover, in the
most dreadful condition. ‘The Alemquer road was covered with horses,
mules, and asses which had perished from want of forage. We passed
many French soldiers lying dead by the road-side, whose appearance
indicated that disease and want of food had carried them off. Every
house in every town or village was thoroughly ransacked[554].’
‘Alemquer had been entirely sacked, the windows and doors torn down
and burnt, as well as most of the furniture; china, pier-glasses, and
chandeliers all dashed to pieces with the objectless fury of savages.
They had left many miserable fellows behind, who were too ill to
march: these were, of course, put to death by the Portuguese whenever
we happened to miss finding them out. We found several peasants whom
the French had murdered and left upon the road, and also several
French killed by the Portuguese. It was a dreadful sight to see
so many fine towns and villages sacked, and without a creature in
them.’[555]

  [554] Leach’s _Journal_, p. 179.

  [555] George Simmons’s _Journal_, pp. 121-2.

On the 15th none of the enemy had been seen save the dead and the
abandoned sick. The traces of their retreat, however, showed that all
had gone off by the roads towards Santarem. On the 16th Wellington
moved more troops out of the Lines, to support Hill, Craufurd, and
Spencer, in the event of the enemy showing fight. Slade’s horse
followed Spencer, Pack’s Portuguese followed Craufurd; Picton, Leith,
Cole, and Campbell were left in the Lines, which Wellington still
disliked to leave wholly unguarded while he was not yet certain of
the ultimate intentions of the French. The advanced guard picked up
about 300 prisoners this day--partly marauders, partly debilitated
men who could not keep up with their regiments during a second stage
of hard marching. Next day (November 17) it was evident that the
enemy was being overtaken: Anson’s cavalry brigade, which had reached
the front on the preceding night, cut up a number of small parties
of the French rearguard--the 16th Light Dragoons alone captured two
officers and 78 men, not stragglers, but belated pickets and convoy
guards. One of their exploits was long remembered--Sergeant Baxter,
with five men only, came on an infantry outpost of 50 men, who had
stacked their arms and were cooking. Bursting in upon them, he
captured an officer and 41 men, though some of the Frenchmen had got
to their muskets and wounded one of his troopers.[556]