

  [590] Martinien’s lists show seven officers hit in the 44th Équipage
  de Marine, which joined Masséna in the next month, and six in the
  Bataillon D’Espagne, which was on its way to Cadiz.

  [591] See Arteche, ix. 241.

Northward from Old Castile, on the skirts of the mountains of
Santander and Biscay, the dominating personality among the
guerrilleros was Louga, who afterwards rose to some distinction as a
commander of regular troops. His special task was the cutting of the
communications between Burgos and Bilbao, and Bilbao and Santander;
but he often co-operated with Porlier, when that restless partisan
made one of his descents from the Asturian mountains, either on to
the coast region or on the southern skirts of the Cantabrian sierras.

On the whole, there were probably never more than 20,000 guerrilleros
in arms at once, in the whole region between the Sierra de Guadarrama
and the shore of the Bay of Biscay. They never succeeded in beating
any French force more than two or three battalions strong, and were
being continually hunted from corner to corner. Yet, despite their
weakness in the open field, their intestine quarrels, their frequent
oppression of the country-side, and their ferocity, they rendered
good service to Spain, and incidentally to Great Britain and to all
Europe, by pinning down to the soil twice their own numbers of good
French troops. Any one who has read the dispatches of the commandants
of Napoleon’s ‘military governments,’ or the diaries of the officers
who served in Reille’s or Dorsenne’s or Caffarelli’s flying columns,
will recognize a remarkable likeness between the situation of affairs
in Northern Spain during 1810 and 1811 and that in South Africa
during 1900 and 1901. Lightly moving guerrilla bands, unhampered by a
base to defend or a train to weigh them down, and well served as to
intelligence by the residents of the country-side, can paralyse the
action of an infinitely larger number of regular troops.

In the north-east of Spain, where the French were engaged not with
mere scattered bands of guerrilleros, but with two regular armies,
O’Donnell’s Catalans and Caro’s Valencians, the fortune of war took
no decisive turn during the autumn of 1810, though one dreadful blow
to the Spanish cause--the loss of Tortosa--was to fall in the winter
which followed.

We left Suchet in August 1810, established in his newly-conquered
positions at Lerida and Mequinenza, master of all the plain-land of
Aragon, as well as of a strip of Western Catalonia, and only waiting
for the co-operation of Macdonald and the 7th Corps to recommence
his operations[592]. That co-operation, however, was long denied
him. The Emperor’s last general orders, which had reached Suchet in
June, briefly prescribed to him that the conquest of the city and
kingdom of Valencia was his final object, but that he must first
break the Spanish line by capturing Tortosa, the great fortress
of the Lower Ebro, and Tarragona, the main stronghold of Southern
Catalonia[593]. For both these latter operations he was to count
on the aid of Macdonald and the Army of Catalonia[594]. Relying on
this support, Suchet, after less than a month had elapsed since the
capture of Mequinenza, had pushed his advanced guard down the Ebro,
till it was at the very gates of Tortosa. One detachment even passed
the town, and seized the ferry of Amposta, the only passage of the
Ebro near its mouth, actually cutting the great road from Tarragona
to Valencia, and only leaving the bridge of Tortosa itself open,
for the linking of the operations of Caro and O’Donnell. Meanwhile
Suchet was preparing his siege-train at Mequinenza, and waiting for a
rise in the Ebro, which would commence to become navigable with the
arrival of the autumn rains, in order to ship his guns down-stream to
their destined goal. He was at the same time making the land route to
Tortosa passable, by repairing the old military road from Caspe to
Mora and Tivisa, which had been constructed during the wars of the
Spanish Succession, but had long ago fallen into ruin.