

  [584] See pp. 10-11.

  [585] See for this verdict both Arteche and Toreno.

  [586] See p. 447.

Such was the effect of the sea-power, even when it was used sparingly
and by unskilful hands. The raids along the northern coast had kept
Bonnet and the troops in Santander and Biscay fully employed; they
had distracted Serras, Caffarelli, and even the garrisons of the
province of Burgos. They had saved Mahy and Silveira from attack,
and had lighted up a blaze of insurrection in the western hills of
Cantabria which, thanks to the energy of Porlier and his colleague
Louga, was never extinguished.

Meanwhile the mass of French troops between Burgos and Pampeluna--the
9th Corps, the Young Guard Divisions, and the garrison in
Navarre--had been ‘contained’ by an enemy of a different sort. Here
the influence of the British naval supremacy was little felt: it
was due to the energy of Spaniards alone that the 38,000 men under
Drouet, Roguet and Dumoustier, and Reille were prevented during the
months of September, October, and November from doing anything to
help Masséna. Old Castile, Navarre, and the lands of the Upper Ebro,
were kept in a constant turmoil by a score of guerrillero chiefs,
of whom the elder Mina was the leading figure. We have already had
occasion to speak of the exploits of his relative, ‘the Student’ as
he was called, to distinguish him from his uncle, and have noted his
final capture by Suchet[587]. Francisco Espoz y Mina had rallied the
relics of his nephew’s band, and began his long career of raids and
counter-marches in April 1810. His central place of refuge was the
rough country on the borders of Navarre and Aragon, where he kept his
main dépôt at the head of the valley of Roncal; but he often ranged
as far afield as Biscay and the provinces of Soria and Burgos. Almost
from his first appearance he obtained a mastery over the other chiefs
who operated on both sides of the Upper Ebro, having won his place by
the summary process of seizing and shooting one Echeverria, ‘who,’
as he writes, ‘was the terror of the villages of Navarre, which he
oppressed and plundered in a thousand ways, till they complained
to me concerning him. I arrested him at Estella on June 13, 1810,
caused him to be shot with three of his principal accomplices, and
incorporated his band (600 foot and 200 horse) with my own men[588].’
Mina was the special enemy of Reille, then commanding in Navarre,
but he also attracted the attention of Drouet, one of whose divisions
was entirely absorbed in hunting him during the autumn of 1810.
This was the main cause of the non-appearance of the 9th Corps at
Rodrigo and Salamanca, when Masséna was so anxiously awaiting its
arrival. Mina’s lot during this period was no enviable one: he was
beset on all sides by flying columns, and was often forced to bid his
band disperse and lurk in small parties in the mountains, till the
enemy should have passed on. Sometimes he was lurking, with seven
companions only, in a cave or a gorge: at another he would be found
with 3,000 men, attacking large convoys, or even surprising one of
the blockhouses with which the French tried to cover his whole sphere
of activity. The Regency, admiring his perseverance, gave him, in
September, the title of ‘Colonel and Commandant-General of all the
Guerrilleros of Navarre.’ He asserts with pride, in his memoir, that
he was at one and the same time being hunted by Dorsenne, commanding
at Burgos, Reille from Navarre, Caffarelli and his ‘division of
Reserve of the Army of Spain,’ by D’Agoult, Governor of Pampeluna,
Roguet, commanding the Young Guard, and Paris, one of Suchet’s
brigadiers from the Army of Aragon. Yet none of the six generals,
though they had 18,000 men marching through his special district,
succeeded in catching him, or destroying any appreciable fraction of
his band.