

  [572] _Dispatches_, vii. p. 20, to Craufurd.

  [573] Ibid., p. 36, to Lord Liverpool.

Here, then, we leave Masséna and his army, cantoned in the space
between the Rio Mayor and the Zezere, still destitute of news from
France, and still entirely ignorant whether or no any endeavour
was being made to relieve them. Of their further doings during the
three months that ended on March 1, 1811, we shall tell elsewhere.
Suffice it to say that, despite many dangers and risks, Wellington’s
scheme of starvation was played out to the end, and achieved complete
success. Of the privation and losses that the French suffered, and
the atrocities that they committed, of the difficulties of the
British Commander-in-Chief--with an obstinate enemy still in front of
him, a factious Regency and a half-starved population behind him in
Lisbon, and a disquieting prospect that Soult might take a hand in
the game--the fourth volume of this work will give full details.




SECTION XXII

END OF THE YEAR 1810




CHAPTER I

OPERATIONS IN THE NORTH AND EAST OF SPAIN (JULY-DECEMBER 1810)


While tracing the all-important Campaign of Portugal, down to
the deadlock in front of Santarem, which began about the 20th of
November, 1810, and was to endure till the 1st of March in the
succeeding year, we have been obliged to leave untouched events,
civil and military, in many other parts of the Peninsula during the
autumn. Only the Andalusian campaigns have been carried down to
November: in Northern Spain we have traced the course of affairs
no further than September[574]: in Eastern Spain no further than
August[575]. Moreover, little has been said of the general effect on
the French occupation caused by the division of supreme authority
which Napoleon sanctioned in the spring[576], or of the importance of
the long-deferred meeting of the Spanish Cortes, which assembled at
Cadiz in the autumn. With these points we must deal before proceeding
to narrate the campaigns of 1811.

  [574] See pp. 270-1.

  [575] See pp. 200-1 and 315-16.

  [576] See pp. 312-14.

The survey of the military operations, none of which were
particularly important, must precede the summary of the political
situation, with regard to King Joseph on the one side and the
Cortes on the other. For the acts of the King and the Cortes had an
influence extending far beyond the months in which they began, and
were, indeed, main factors in the Peninsular struggle for years to
come. But the doings of the armies in Galicia and Asturias on the
one flank, in Catalonia and Valencia on the other, can easily be
dismissed in a few pages: they were but preliminaries to the greater
operations in the spring of 1811.

We may first turn to the north-west. When Masséna plunged into
Portugal in September 1810, and was lost to the sight of his
colleagues and subordinates for nearly three months, the situation
left behind him was as follows:--Leon and Old Castile, as far as the
Galician foot-hills and the Cantabrian sierras, were held down by
Serras and Kellermann with some 12,000 men--a force none too great
for the task that lay before them. The latter general had charge
of the provinces of Valladolid, Toro, and Palencia, as one of the
‘military governors’ recently appointed by the Emperor. He gave
himself absurd airs of independent authority, and took little more
heed of the orders of Masséna than of those of King Joseph, for whom
he showed a supreme contempt. General Serras’s troops were more
definitely part of the Army of Portugal. They were in charge of the
provinces of Zamora, Leon, and Salamanca, thus covering Kellermann’s
government on the outer flank, and taking care of the borders both of
Galicia on the Spanish and of Tras-os-Montes on the Portuguese side.
To cover this long front Serras had only eleven battalions[577],
and two provisional regiments of dragoons--some 9,000 men. Out of
this force he had to find garrisons for Astorga, Leon, Benavente,
Zamora, and several smaller places. Kellermann, who was intended
to serve as a reserve for Serras, as well as to guard the central
dépôts at Valladolid, had only two regiments of dragoons (part of
his original division) and three infantry battalions, making 3,000
men in all[578]. Both of them were directed to keep in close touch
with Bonnet, who, at the head of his old troops, the four regiments
which never came south of the Cantabrian hills till the Salamanca
campaign[579], kept a precarious hold on Central and Eastern Asturias
with 9,000 men.