

  [581] Viz. Kellermann, 3,000; Serras, 9,000; Bonnet, 8,000; Young
  Guard, 11,500; Biscay, 8,000; Navarre, 8,500; Santander, 3,500; 9th
  Corps, 18,000; Masséna’s Garrisons, 2,500.

  [582] As being nephew to the Marquis of La Romana.

  [583] See pp. 270-1.

Pleased with the exploits of Porlier, the Cadiz Regency resolved
to keep up the game, and sent up to Corunna Colonel Renovales,
the officer who had for so long made head against Suchet in the
mountains of Aragon[584]. He was authorized to requisition a brigade
from Mahy’s army, and the more seaworthy ships from the arsenal of
Ferrol. Applications for naval assistance had also been made to the
British Admiralty, and Sir Home Popham came, with four frigates and a
battalion of marines, to assist in a systematic raid along the coasts
of Asturias and Biscay. The joint expedition started from Corunna on
October 14, with a landing force of 1,200 Spanish and 800 British
bayonets on board. On the 16th it drew in to land near the important
harbour of Gijon, where Bonnet kept a force of 700 men, who depended
for their succour on the main body of his division at Oviedo. But the
French general chanced to be hunting Porlier further to the east,
and had left the Asturian capital almost ungarrisoned. Hence, when
Porlier unexpectedly appeared before Gijon on the inland side, having
eluded his pursuer, and the ships threw the landing force ashore,
the French battalion had to fly. Several ships, both privateers and
merchantmen, with a considerable amount of military stores, fell
into the hands of Porlier and Renovales. This exploit drew down on
them the whole French force in the Asturias, for Bonnet concentrated
every man and musket on Gijon. But the Anglo-Spanish squadron, having
thus drawn him westward, sailed in the opposite direction, and,
after threatening Santona, was about to touch at Vivero, when it was
scattered by a hurricane from the Bay of Biscay. A Spanish frigate
and brig, an English brig, and several gunboats and transports were
dashed on the rocky coast, and lost with all hands. This disaster,
which cost 800 lives, compelled Renovales to return to Corunna
(November 2). But the raid had not been useless; it had compelled
Bonnet to evacuate many posts, distracted the garrisons of Santander
and Biscay, and even induced Caffarelli to march down to the coast
with his newly-arrived division, the ‘Reserve of the Army of Spain.’
Serras, too, had drawn up the greater part of his scattered division
to the north-west, thus leaving the borders of Galicia and the
Tras-os-Montes hardly watched. This enabled Mahy to send down troops
into the plain of Leon, and to establish something like a blockade
around Astorga. But all the operations of the Captain-General of
Galicia were feeble and tentative. He passed among his countrymen as
an easy-going man, destitute of energy or initiative[585]. Silveira,
in the Tras-os-Montes, a more active but a more dangerous man to
entrust with troops, took advantage of Serras’s absence to cross the
Douro, invest Almeida, and cut the communication between that place
and Ciudad Rodrigo[586].