

  [587] See p. 286.

  [588] See Mina’s _Extracto de su Vida_, published in London, during
  his exile, in 1825.

There is no exaggeration in this; his services were invaluable during
the campaign of Portugal, since he was wearing out a French force of
five times his own strength in fruitless marches, under winter rains,
and over roads that had become all but impassable. The archives of
the French War Office show lists of officers by the dozen killed or
wounded ‘dans une reconnaissance en Navarre,’ or ‘dans une rencontre
avec les bandes de Mina,’ or ‘en combat près de Pampelune,’ during
the later months of 1810. Wellington owed him no small gratitude,
and expressed it to him in 1813, when he entrusted him with much
responsible work during the Campaign of the Pyrenees. The suffering
inflicted on the provinces of the Upper Ebro by Mina’s activity
was of course terrible: the French destroyed every village that
sheltered him or furnished him with recruits, and were wont to shoot
every prisoner from his band that they caught, till he began to
retaliate by corresponding or greater numbers of executions from the
considerable number of prisoners in his hands. In 1811 this barbarous
system was in full swing on both sides, but it was put to an end by
mutual agreement in 1812. In addition to the woes that Navarre and
its neighbours suffered under the French martial law, and by the
monstrous requisitions imposed upon them to feed the mass of troops
forming the flying columns, they had also to maintain the patriotic
bands. Mina declares that he always took rations for his men, but
avoided levying money contributions on the peasantry, depending
on his booty, the rents of national and ecclesiastical property,
on which he laid hands, on fines inflicted on ‘bad Spaniards,’ i.
e. those who had done anything to help his pursuers, and on ‘the
custom-houses which I established upon the very frontier of France;
for I laid under contribution even the French custom-house at Irun,
on the Bidassoa, which engaged to deliver, and actually paid to my
delegates, 100 gold ounces (about £320) per month.’ By this strange
secret agreement private goods passing Irun and the other frontier
posts were guaranteed against capture in the district which Mina’s
bands infested[589].

  [589] Mina’s _Breve Extracto_, p. 39.

Eastward of Mina’s sphere of activity the guerrilleros were more
numerous but less powerful. Among the chief of them was Julian
Sanchez, who, with a mounted band of 300 to 500 lancers--infantry
would have been easily caught in the plain of Leon--busied himself
in cutting the communication between Salamanca, Ciudad Rodrigo,
Zamora, and Valladolid, and was Kellermann’s chief tormentor. He was
in regular communication with Wellington, and sent him many captured
dispatches and useful pieces of information. In Old Castile the
priest Geronimo Merino, generally known as ‘El Cura,’ was the most
famous and most active among many leaders. It was his band, aided by
that of Tapia, also a cleric, which on July 10, 1810, fought a most
daring and desperate action at Almazan, near Soria, with two French
battalions of marines, who were marching, the one to join Masséna
the other to join Soult. It cost the enemy no less than 13 officers
_hors de combat_, as the Paris archives show[590], and over 200
men, though the guerrilleros were finally beaten off. In October he
surprised and captured an enormous convoy of corn and munitions of
war, whose loss put the French garrison of Burgos in considerable
straits for some weeks. He waged with Dorsenne the same horrible
contest of retaliation in the shooting of prisoners which Mina was
at the same time carrying on with the generals in Navarre. There
were many other bands in Old Castile, those of Abril, Tenderin,
Saornil, Principe, and others, of whom some are accused by their own
colleagues of being more harmful to the country-side than to the
French, from their reckless and miscellaneous plundering, and their
refusal to combine for any systematic action[591]. Yet even the worst
of them contributed to distract the activity of the French garrisons,
and to retard the communication of dispatches and the march of
isolated detachments. Under the easy excuse that it was dangerous
to move any small body of men along the high-roads, the French
commanders of every small town or blockhouse detained for weeks,
and even months, drafts on their way to the south or the west, with
the result that the number of recruits received at Madrid, Seville,
or Salamanca never bore any proper proportion to the total that had
crossed the Bidassoa.