

  [592] See pp. 300-9.

  [593] _Correspondance_ under May 29.

  [594] _Correspondance_ under Sept. 16.

Suchet was quite aware that by thrusting a comparatively small
force--he had only brought up 12,000 men--into the near neighbourhood
of Tortosa, he was risking the danger of being attacked at once by
the Army of Valencia from the south and O’Donnell’s Catalans from
the north. But he trusted that Macdonald and the 7th Corps would
keep the latter--the more formidable enemy--employed, while he had
a well-founded contempt for the generalship of Caro, who had always
proved himself the most incompetent and timid of commanders. But
Macdonald arrived late, having been forced to spend the whole summer,
as has been already related[595], in his triple revictualling of
Barcelona, and meanwhile the Valencian army came to the front. Its
leading division, under Bassecourt, threatened Morella, on Suchet’s
flank, early in August, hoping to draw him away to defend this
outpost. But a single brigade under Montmarie sufficed to turn back
the Valencian detachment, and Suchet kept his positions. O’Donnell
meanwhile, vainly hoping for solid help from Caro, had joined the
division of his army which was kept at Falcet[596], and after
threatening Suchet’s head quarters at Mora on July 30, so as to
distract his attention, suddenly turned aside and entered Tortosa
with 2,500 men. Calling out all the troops available for a sortie,
he issued from the town on August 3, and beat up the outposts of the
division under Laval, which was in observation before his gates.
But though the Catalans fought fiercely, and drove in the first
French line, they were not strong enough to push the enemy away from
Tortosa. O’Donnell should have brought a heavier force if he intended
to accomplish his end. Shortly after he returned to Tarragona,
whither he was called by the movements of Macdonald.

  [595] See p. 311.

  [596] See p. 313.

Some days later than he had covenanted, Caro came up to Vinaros,
on the coast-road from Valencia, and to San Mateo on the parallel
inland road, with his whole army, including the force which
Bassecourt had been commanding. It consisted of no more than 10,000
ill-organized troops of the Line, who had been joined by nearly as
many unregimented peasants in loose guerrilla bands. The whole mass
was far from being formidable, as Suchet knew. Wherefore the French
general, cutting down to the smallest possible figure the containing
troops left before Tortosa, and at his head quarters at Mora, marched
with eleven battalions and a cavalry regiment--only 6,000 men in
all--to meet the Valencians. He drove their advanced cavalry from
Vinaros, and advanced against their positions at Calig and Cervera
del Maestre. Caro at once ordered a precipitate retreat, and did
not stop till he had placed thirty miles between himself and the
enemy. His obvious terror and dismay at the approach of the French
roused such anger that he was summoned to give up the command by his
own officers, and obeyed without hesitation[597]. He fled by sea to
Majorca, knowing, it is said, that he would have been torn to pieces
if he had shown his face before the populace at Valencia, over which
he had exercised a sort of dictatorship for more than a year. Suchet,
unable to catch such an evasive enemy, and regarding the routed army
as a negligible quantity, returned to Mora, where he received the
news that the long-expected Macdonald was at last about to appear
(August 20).