

O’Donnell’s march was perilous: he had to pass close to the front
of the garrisons of Barcelona, Hostalrich, and Gerona, through a
most difficult and mountainous country, without giving any signs
of his presence; for, if his movement were discovered, Baraguay
d’Hilliers might concentrate his scattered brigades, and crush him
by force of numbers. The march, however, was carried out with
complete success, and on September 13 O’Donnell lay with 6,000
infantry and 400 horse at Vidreras, south of Gerona, while the naval
force was hovering off Palamos, the nearest point on the coast.
The rough region between Gerona and the sea was at this moment
occupied by half Rouyer’s division of troops of the Confederation
of the Rhine, under Schwartz--the ever-unlucky general whose name
was connected with the disasters of Bruch[601] and Manresa[602].
He had with him four weak battalions of the 5th (Anhalt-Lippe)
and 6th (Schwartzburg-Waldeck-Reuss) regiments, and a squadron of
cuirassiers: a force which, owing to the sickliness of the autumn
season, did not amount to much more than 1,500 men in all. But he
was so close to Gerona[603], where lay Rouyer’s other two regiments,
and some French troops, that he was not considered in any danger by
his superiors. Schwartz’s main duty was to prevent any communication
between the somatenes of the inland and the cruisers which were
always passing up and down the coast. Provoked by a recent raid at
Bagur, on September 10, where an English landing-party had stormed
one of his coast batteries, and captured the garrison of 50 men,
Schwartz had just strengthened all his posts along the shore. He
had only 700 men at his head quarters at La Bispal; the rest were
dispersed between Bagur, San Feliu, Palamos, and the connecting post
at Calonje. On the morning of the fourteenth he was stricken with
horror when his outposts informed him that they had been driven in by
Spanish infantry and cavalry in overwhelming force. He sent orders,
too late, for his troops on the coast to concentrate, and prepared
to fall back on Gerona with his whole force. But his messenger had
hardly gone when he was attacked by O’Donnell, who drove him into
the indefensible castle of La Bispal, which was commanded by a
neighbouring hill and the church tower of the village. After losing
some men shot down from these points of vantage, Schwartz surrendered
at nightfall, when the Spaniards were preparing to storm his refuge.
His defence cannot have been very desperate, as he had lost only
one officer and four men killed, and three officers and sixteen men
wounded. But this was only part of the disaster which befell the
German brigade that day: by a careful timing of the attacks Doyle
and Fane stormed Palamos with the landing-force at the same moment
that La Bispal was being attacked, while Colonel Fleires, with a
detachment of O’Donnell’s land troops, surprised San Feliu, and
Colonel Aldea with another cut off the companies at Calonje. In
all the Spaniards captured on that day one general, two colonels,
fifty-six officers, and 1,183 rank and file, with seventeen guns.
Schwartz’s brigade was absolutely destroyed; only a few stragglers
reached Gerona, from which no help had been sent, because O’Donnell
had turned loose all the somatenes of the region to demonstrate
against the place[604].