

  [577] Viz. 113th Line (2 batts.), 4th of the Vistula (2 batts.),
  one battalion each of the 12th Léger and 32nd and 58th Line, four
  ‘provisional battalions’ (Nos. 2, 4, 5, 7), and two provisional
  regiments of dragoons. Total on Sept. 15, 9,524 men, of whom 1,000
  were cavalry.

  [578] Two Swiss battalions, one battalion of the Garde de Paris, and
  the 5th and 17th dragoons. Total, 1,300 cavalry and 1,700 infantry.

  [579] Line regiments (each of 4 batts.), Nos. 118, 119, 120, 122, and
  a squadron of the 21st Chasseurs, 9,298 men.

There were also present in the circumscription of Serras’s and
Kellermann’s command the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo (two battalions)
and Gardanne’s five squadrons of dragoons, which Masséna had left
behind, in the vain hope that they would keep the line clear between
Almeida and Salamanca. This force added 2,500 men to the total of the
French troops in Leon.

If the French were left rather weak in this direction, the same was
not the case in the region further east. From Burgos to the Bidassoa
the country-side was full of troops in the latter half of September,
when the Army of Portugal had gone westward. In the Government of
Burgos were the two infantry divisions of the Young Guard, under
Roguet and Dumoustier, with their two cavalry regiments, making
11,464 sabres and bayonets. Navarre was occupied by 8,733 men,
Biscay by 8,085. The little province of Santander was held by three
provisional battalions 3,500 strong. But this permanent garrison,
making over 31,000 men, was at the moment supplemented by Drouet’s
9th Corps, for whose arrival at the front Masséna had waited so long
and so vainly. On September 15 its commander, its head quarters, and
Claparéde’s division, were at Vittoria: Couroux’s division and the
cavalry brigade of Fournier were echelloned between Vittoria and
Bayonne. The whole corps mustered over 18,000 sabres and bayonets.
Fifty thousand men, therefore, adding the permanent garrisons to
the advancing corps of Drouet, were between Burgos and Bayonne, and
there were yet a few more troops to come forward from the interior of
France, for Caffarelli was bringing up another division, which had
the official title of the ‘Division of Reserve of the Army of Spain,’
and consisted of four provisional regiments of infantry and two
cavalry regiments, with a strength of 8,000 men[580]. It was ordered
to be at Bayonne by October 20, and formed the nucleus of the force
which in the next year was styled the ‘Army of the North’.

  [580] See _Correspondance_, xxi. 106. On Sept. 13, the date of the
  dispatch creating Caffarelli’s division, one of its regiments was
  forming at Limoges, another at Blois, another at Bordeaux, the fourth
  at Orleans.

Without counting this last unit, which was only in process of
formation in September, Napoleon had between the Galician frontier
and Bayonne no less than 72,000 men[581]. What had his enemies to
oppose to this formidable host, whose strength was considerably
greater than that of the force with which Masséna invaded Portugal?
Of regularly organized troops the number of Spaniards and Portuguese
opposed to them was absolutely insignificant. Silveira in the
Tras-os-Montes had six regiments of militia and one of the line--this
last being the 24th, the absconding garrison of Almeida. The whole
made under 7,000 men, including an incomplete cavalry regiment. Mahy
in Galicia had recruited up the depleted divisions which La Romana
had left with him in the spring to a strength of 12,000 men, mostly
raw and untrustworthy; for the best regiments had been destroyed at
the siege of Astorga. The remains of the army of Asturias, which had
suffered so many defeats at the hands of Bonnet during the spring and
summer, consisted of about 6,000 men, of whom half, under Barcena
and Losada, were holding the western end of the province, behind
the Navia river, with head quarters at Castropol, while the rest
lurked in the higher valleys of the Cantabrian Sierra, rendering
Bonnet’s communication with Serras in Leon insecure, and sometimes
descending to the coast, to make a sudden attack on one of the
small garrisons which linked the French garrison in Oviedo with
that at Santander. Of these roving bands the chief leader was the
adventurous Porlier, the _Marquesito_[582], as the Asturians called
him, who won a well-deserved reputation for his perseverance and
never-failing courage. The 25,000 men of Silveira, Mahy, and the
Asturian army were the only regular troops opposed to the 75,000
French in Northern Spain. How came it, then, that the enemy was held
in check, and never succeeded in pushing on to the support of Masséna
any force save the two divisions of Drouet? The answer is simple: the
French garrisons were fixed down to their positions partly because
of Napoleon’s entire lack of naval power, partly because of the
unceasing activity of the guerrilleros, who were far more busy in
1810 than at any preceding time. As to the first-named cause, it may
be said that the 20,000 French in Asturias, Santander, and Biscay
were paralysed by the existence of a small Anglo-Spanish squadron
based on Corunna and Ferrol. As long as this existed, every small
port along the whole northern coast of Spain had to be garrisoned,
under penalty of a possible descent from the sea, which might cut the
road from Oviedo to San Sebastian at any one of a hundred points, and
provide arms and stores for the guerrilla bands of the mountains.
Many such expeditions were carried out with more or less success in
1810. The first and most prosperous of them took place in July, when
Porlier, putting his free corps of some 1,000 men on transports, and
convoyed by the British commodore Mends, with a couple of frigates,
came ashore near the important harbour of Santona, drove out the
small garrison, and then coasted along in the direction of Biscay,
destroying shore-batteries and capturing as many as 200 men at one
point and another. Of the peasantry of the coast, some enlisted in
Porlier’s band, others took to the hills on their own account, when
they had been furnished with muskets from the ships. The Marquesito
repeated his raid in August, but this time stopped on shore, and put
himself at the head of the local insurgents, who made so strong a
head in the country about Potes and the upper Pisuerga, that Serras
marched against him with almost the whole of his division[583],
and spent September in hunting him along the sides of the sierras.
But though aided by troops lent by Bonnet, and by detachments from
Burgos, the French general could never catch the adroit partisan,
who, when too hard pressed, returned to the central mountains of the
Asturias.