

  [599] See Suchet’s _Mémoires_, i. 196-7, and the dispatch from
  Napoleon’s _Correspondance_ of July 25, 1810.

[Illustration: COINS CURRENT IN SPAIN AND PORTUGAL IN 1808-14]

While Suchet was moving southward and making ready for the siege, the
Duke of Tarentum established himself with head quarters at Cervera
on the Barcelona-Lerida road, and brigades at Lerida, Agramunt, and
Tarrega, all in the plain; he was ready to fall upon O’Donnell’s
flank if the Catalans should make any attempt to succour Tortosa, by
marching from Tarragona along the roads parallel to the sea coast.
Meanwhile he had completely lost touch both with the garrison of
Barcelona and with Baraguay d’Hilliers in the Ampurdam. This was
the regular state of things during the Catalan war; for if the
French left detachments to guard a line of communication, they were
invariably cut off by the enemy; while, if they did not, the roads
were blocked and no information came through. So vigorous were the
somatenes at this moment, that small parties moving from Tarrega to
Cervera,--places only twelve miles apart, and in the middle of the
cantonments of the 7th Corps,--were not unfrequently waylaid and
destroyed. Macdonald, despite his well-known humanity, was forced to
burn villages, and shoot road-side assassins caught red-handed. He
lay in the position which he had taken up on September 4-6 for the
greater part of that month and the succeeding October, concentrating
at intervals a part of his forces for an expedition into the hills,
when the Catalans pressed him too closely. At the commencement of
his sojourn in the plains, he sent Severoli with an Italian brigade
to collect provisions in the valley of the Noguera Palleresa. This
raid led to dreadful ravaging of the country-side, but Severoli
returned with no spoil and many wounded. He had pushed his advance
as far as Talarn, skirmishing the whole way, and driving the
somatenes before him, but could accomplish nothing save the burning
of poor villages evacuated by their inhabitants. A week later other
expeditions scoured the mountain sides eastward, with little more
success[600].

  [600] For details see Vacani, iv. pp. 307-8.

Meanwhile, though Macdonald imagined that he was not only protecting
Suchet’s northern flank, but also attracting the attention of
O’Donnell to himself, the enterprising Spanish general had contrived
an unwelcome surprise for him. He knew that he was not strong enough
to fight the 7th Corps in the open field, nor even to face Suchet
by making another attempt to relieve Tortosa--which place, for the
moment, was in no immediate danger. He therefore resolved to draw
Macdonald from his present position, by a blow at the corner of
Catalonia where the French were weakest.

The Marshal considered that Baraguay d’Hilliers was perfectly
safe in the northern region which he garrisoned, since no regular
Spanish force was now in arms in that direction. O’Donnell resolved
to undeceive him. Leaving the two divisions of Obispo and Eroles
to block the road from Macdonald’s post at Cervera to Barcelona,
with orders to retire into Tarragona if hard pressed, he ordered a
third division, that of Campoverde, to prepare for a forced march
to the north. At the same time a force, consisting of the British
frigate _Cambrian_ and the Spanish frigate _Diana_, convoying a
few transports with 500 men on board for disembarkation, sailed
from Tarragona, for a destination which was kept secret to the last
moment. The troops were under Doyle, the British commissioner in
Catalonia; Captain Fane of the _Cambrian_ was senior naval officer.