

  [597] For details see Arteche, ix. 267, Schepeler, iv. 659-60, and
  Suchet’s _Mémoires_, vol. i. p. 193. The dictator’s own brother,
  General Juan Caro, was one of those who deposed him.

The Duke of Tarentum had thrown the third and last of his great
convoys into Barcelona on the 18th of August, having brought with
him as its escort the French division of his army, which was now
commanded by Frère[598], and the Italian divisions of Severoli and
Pignatelli. He had left behind him General Baraguay d’Hilliers, in
the position which Reille had been wont to hold, as the defender of
the Ampurdam and Northern Catalonia as far as Hostalrich. Eighteen
thousand men were told off for this task, including all the German
brigades; but after garrisoning Gerona, Rosas, Figueras, and
Hostalrich, d’Hilliers had no great field-force left, and found
full employment in warding off the raids of Manso, Rovira, and
the other miquelete leaders upon the communication between Gerona
and Perpignan. Nearly 10,000 men had also been left in Barcelona,
including many sick, and the three divisions with which Macdonald
marched to join Suchet did not exceed 16,000 sabres and bayonets,
though the whole force of the 7th Corps was reckoned at over 50,000
men.

  [598] Vice Souham, wounded at Vich, and Augereau recalled.

On August 13 Macdonald forced the Pass of Ordal, after some
skirmishing with the somatenes, and entered the plain of Tarragona.
It was the news of his approach to the Catalan capital which brought
O’Donnell back in haste from Tortosa. He concentrated the greater
part of his troops, on the hypothesis that the 7th Corps might be
intending to lay siege to the place. He brought down Campoverde’s
division from the north to join those of Ibarrola, Sarsfield, and
the Baron de Eroles, which were already on the spot. It soon became
known, however, to the Spaniards that Macdonald could not be bent
on siege operations, for he was bringing with him neither the
heavy artillery nor the enormous train of provisions that would be
required in such a case. He marched past Reus and Valls to Momblanch,
skirmishing all the way with O’Donnell’s detachments, and thence
to Lerida, which he reached on August 29. There he found Suchet
awaiting him for a conference. The orders from Paris, on which both
were acting, seemed to prescribe that Tortosa and Tarragona should
both be attacked[599]. But the General and the Marshal agreed that
their joint strength was not more than enough for one siege at a
time. They agreed that the 3rd Corps should undertake the leaguer of
Tortosa, and ‘the containing’ of the Valencian army, while the 7th
should cover these operations by keeping O’Donnell and the Catalans
fully employed. Suchet therefore drew his detachments southward from
Lerida and the plains of the Segre, handing over all that tract to
Macdonald. From this fertile region alone could the Marshal have
fed his corps, Central Catalonia being barren, and so overrun by
O’Donnell’s detachments that it was impossible to forage freely
within its bounds. Suchet undertook to provide for his own corps
during the siege of Tortosa by bringing up stores from Saragossa
and the valley of the Ebro, via Mequinenza. Macdonald lent him,
meanwhile, the weakest of his three divisions, 2,500 Neapolitans
under Pignatelli, who were to escort the siege-train for Tortosa
along the Ebro, when the autumn rains made the river navigable from
Mequinenza to the sea.