

  [629] Doblado’s Letters, p. 392.

  [630] Motion by one Francisco Maria Riesco, deputy, and formerly
  Inquisitor, at Llerena in Estremadura. Argüelles’s _Las Cortes de
  Cadiz_, p. 209.

  [631] See below, p. 520.

When it is remembered that the form in which the Cortes had been
summoned was new and experimental, that the elections had been--even
according to that form--irregular, that no single member was
accustomed to parliamentary usages, that the parties represented in
it held views of the most divergent kinds, the wonder is not that
the assembly displayed many weaknesses, but that it did no worse.
Observers of a pessimistic frame of mind had feared that it would
break up altogether after a few stormy sittings. ‘It was too full,’
wrote the regent Lardizabal, ‘of youths, and of men who yesterday
were mere adventurers, without any practice in command, knowledge
of business, or experience of the world. Whole provinces were
represented by deputies whom they had not chosen, and were expected
to conform to a constitution, and to accept sweeping reforms, made
by men to whom they had given no mandate, faculty, or authority to
take such changes into consideration. For neither the Regency, nor
even the King, had the legal right to nominate deputies: no one could
choose them save the provinces or cities which were integral parts of
the nation, and no one could claim to represent a province save the
men to whom that same province had given powers, and instructions to
act in conformity with its wishes.’

This motley assembly, so many of whose members were of doubtful
legitimacy, held its opening session on September 24, 1810. The
meeting-place was not within the walls of Cadiz itself, but in the
large suburban town of La Isla, in the centre of the great island
of Leon, which forms the outwork of the city. It was hoped that
the six miles which separated its sitting-place from Cadiz would
prevent interruption by popular demonstrations, such as had been so
pernicious to the French chamber during the Revolution. The Cortes
had as their home the large but bare theatre of San Fernando, which
had been roughly fitted up with benches and tribunes. After high
mass had been celebrated by the old Cardinal Bourbon, the only male
member of the royal family who was not in captivity[632], the Regency
declared the session opened, and then withdrew, after a brief speech
by the Senior Regent, the Bishop of Orense, who bade the assembly
constitute itself in due form and elect its president and secretaries.

  [632] He was of the same branch as the Countess of Chinchon,
  Godoy’s wife, being son of Luis, youngest child of Philip V, by a
  quasi-morganatic marriage with a lady of the name of Vallabriga.

This was done with no delay; the president chosen was a Catalan,
Ramón Lazaro de Dou, while the two secretaries were Evaristo Perez de
Castro and Manuel Lujan. Both of them were well known to entertain
Liberal opinions, and their choice marked the predominance of their
party in the Cortes. Sitting till midnight was long past, the
assembly passed six decrees drawn up by Muñoz Torrero, one of the
few clerical deputies who held Liberal views, and Manuel Lujan. By
these the Cortes declared itself in possession of supreme power in
the State, but resolved that, of the three branches of authority--the
legislative, the executive, and the judicial--it intended to take
only the first-named under its own charge, handing over the executive
to the late Regency, and the judicial to the ordinary courts of law.
The Regency should be responsible to the Cortes for all its acts of
administration, and liable to be called to account. It was ordered
to make an instant oath of obedience to the assembly, ‘recognizing
the sovereignty of the nation represented by the deputies of this
general and extraordinary Cortes.’ This Castaños and the other
regents did with an ill grace, all save the Bishop of Orense, who
misliked the oath, contending that its terms spoke of the nation
as being sovereign in its own right, without consideration of the
King’s indefeasible majesty[633]. He would not swear, and so vacated
his place. He did not lose much by his early dismissal, for on
October 28 the Cortes abruptly deposed his four colleagues--Castaños,
Lardizabal, Saavedra, and Escaño--and replaced them by a new Regency
of three members. These were Joaquim Blake, that most unlucky of
generals; Admiral Cisgar, then commanding the Cartagena squadron,
who passed as an able administrator; and an obscure naval captain,
Pedro Agar, of whom little was known save that he was American born,
and might, therefore, theoretically represent the colonies. The
change in regents was decidedly for the worse as far as character and
ability went. Apparently the Cortes were jealous of an administration
whose power was older than their own, and had not originally been
created by them. They wished to have an executive more entirely
dependent on themselves. Some of the Liberals pretended that the
old regents were plotting to hold a sort of ‘Pride’s Purge’ of the
Cortes, and to restore themselves to power. But of this no proof
was ever given[634]. Considering the difficult times which they had
passed through, and their well-intentioned if rather feeble attempt
to serve the state, Castaños and his colleagues deserved a better
fate than arbitrary dismissal, without thanks, and with a tacit
accusation of treason laid to their charge.